Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antitumor activity of Chk1 inhibitor LY2606368 as a single agent
in SW1990 human pancreas orthotopic tumor model


ChK1 is a key kinase in the DNA damage response signaling network,
including cell cycle checkpoints, DNA repair, apoptosis and
transcription, thus emerging as an attractive target in anti-cancer
therapy. LY2606368, a potent and selective ATP competitive inhibitor of
the Chk1 protein kinase, is currently in clinical development. LY2606368
has been reported to inhibit Chk1 auto-phosphorylation activated by DNA
damaging agents, and induce phosphorylation of H2AX, a DNA damage maker
in multiple cancer cell lines in vitro. In addition, LY2606368 has
demonstrated potent single agent activity and potentiates the anti-tumor
activity of DNA damaging agents in vivo. Pancreatic cancer is one of the
least curable cancers, with an approximate 5% overall 5-year survival for
all patients. In the current study, we evaluated the efficacy of
LY2606368 (as its methanesulfonate salt, hydrate; LY2606368.MeSO3H.H2O =
LY2940930) in pancreatic cancer cell lines in vitro and xenograft tumors
(including subcutaneous and orthotopic models) in vivo. LY2606368 alone
significantly inhibited the cell proliferation in a variety of pancreatic
cell lines (SW1990, SU86.86, Bx-PC3, AsPC-1, CFPAC-1, Capan-2, HPAF-II)
with SW1990 being the most sensitive (IC50=1.5 nM). In SW1990
subcutaneous xenograft model, LY2606368 showed substantial dose-dependent
inhibition of tumor growth. In SW1990 pancreas orthotopic model, which
represents the local and metastatic growth pattern seen in pancreas
cancer patients, LY2606368 treatment resulted in over 92% inhibition of
primary tumor growth as well as 100% inhibition of metastasis to lymph
node, spleen and intestine. The anti-tumor effect of LY2606368 treatment
was further demonstrated in comparing with gemcitabine (the standard of
care for pancreas cancer patient) in SW1990 orthotopic model. The
anti-tumor and/or anti-metastasis mechanism of LY2606368 was also
investigated, including phosphorylation of H2AX, cell proliferation, cell
survival, and soft agar anchorage-independent growth. Together, our
findings demonstrate the therapeutic potential of LY2606368 as a single
agent in the treatment of pancreatic cancer patients.

