Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Subclassification of oral cancers using a miRNA-based
combinatorial approach


The majority of gene expression profiling studies in cancer research is
based on comparison of normal against cancerous tissues. Although these
comparisons identify general mechanisms underlying certain cancer types,
the heterogeneity of tumors contributes to challenges in the
interpretation of results. In this study, Agilent human miRNA microarrays
were used to analyze 3 normal tongue tissues and 17 oral squamous cell
carcinomas (OSCC) extracted from tongue tumors to identify deregulated
miRNAs. Our results showed that miRNA expression pattern provided more
precise information when cancers are subcategorized based on
clinicopathological parameters. Combinatorial analyses using 4 different
parameters (tumor primary site, tumor stage, histological subtype, and
human papillomavirus 16 status) revealed OSCC subtypes with specific
expressions of selected miRNAs. Nine significantly upregulated miRNAs
(miR-424, miR-15b, miR-196a, miR-21, miR-155, miR-9*, miR-9, miR-7-1*,
and miR-7) and one downregulated miRNA (miR-486-5p) were applied for this
analysis. Our study demonstrated the combine use of several miRNAs with
multiple clinicopathological parameters could subcategorize these oral
cancers. Kaplan-Meier survival analyses showed that advanced tumor stage
(hazard ratio = 3.36; 95% confidence interval, 1.08-10.49; p = 0.037),
and/or keratinization status (hazard ratio = 3.34; 95% confidence
interval, 1.10-10.12; p = 0.033) are related to poor prognosis of oral
cancer patients. Interestingly, all the tumors highly expressing miR-21
were keratinized tumors and the corresponding patients had poor survival
rate The majority of gene expression profiling studies in cancer research
is based on comparison of normal against cancerous tissues. Although
these comparisons identify general mechanisms underlying certain cancer
types, the heterogeneity of tumors contributes to challenges in the
interpretation of results. In this study, Agilent human miRNA microarrays
were used to analyze 3 normal tongue tissues and 17 oral squamous cell
carcinomas (OSCC) extracted from tongue tumors to identify deregulated
miRNAs. Our results showed that miRNA expression pattern provided more
precise information when cancers are subcategorized based on
clinicopathological parameters. Combinatorial analyses using 4 different
parameters (tumor primary site, tumor stage, histological subtype, and
human papillomavirus 16 status) revealed OSCC subtypes with specific
expressions of selected miRNAs. Nine significantly upregulated miRNAs
(miR-424, miR-15b, miR-196a, miR-21, miR-155, miR-9*, miR-9, miR-7-1*,
and miR-7) and one downregulated miRNA (miR-486-5p) were applied for this
analysis. Our study demonstrated the combine use of several miRNAs with
multiple clinicopathological parameters could subcategorize these oral
cancers. Kaplan-Meier survival analyses showed that advanced tumor stage
(hazard ratio = 3.36; 95% confidence interval, 1.08-10.49; p = 0.037),
and/or keratinization status (hazard ratio = 3.34; 95% confidence
interval, 1.10-10.12; p = 0.033) are related to poor prognosis of oral
cancer patients. Interestingly, all the tumors highly expressing miR-21
were keratinized tumors and the corresponding patients had poor survival
rate < 30 months after diagnosis ((hazard ratio = 12.46; 95% confidence
interval, 2.57-60.32; p = 0.0017) indicating the prognostic importance of
miR-21. The expression of the specific miRNAs (miR-21, miR-424, miR-7,
miR-7-1*, and miR-155) overexpressed in the keratinizing tumors was
significantly correlated to each other (0.438 The majority of gene
expression profiling studies in cancer research is based on comparison of
normal against cancerous tissues. Although these comparisons identify
general mechanisms underlying certain cancer types, the heterogeneity of
tumors contributes to challenges in the interpretation of results. In
this study, Agilent human miRNA microarrays were used to analyze 3 normal
tongue tissues and 17 oral squamous cell carcinomas (OSCC) extracted from
tongue tumors to identify deregulated miRNAs. Our results showed that
miRNA expression pattern provided more precise information when cancers
are subcategorized based on clinicopathological parameters. Combinatorial
analyses using 4 different parameters (tumor primary site, tumor stage,
histological subtype, and human papillomavirus 16 status) revealed OSCC
subtypes with specific expressions of selected miRNAs. Nine significantly
upregulated miRNAs (miR-424, miR-15b, miR-196a, miR-21, miR-155, miR-9*,
miR-9, miR-7-1*, and miR-7) and one downregulated miRNA (miR-486-5p) were
applied for this analysis. Our study demonstrated the combine use of
several miRNAs with multiple clinicopathological parameters could
subcategorize these oral cancers. Kaplan-Meier survival analyses showed
that advanced tumor stage (hazard ratio = 3.36; 95% confidence interval,
1.08-10.49; p = 0.037), and/or keratinization status (hazard ratio =
3.34; 95% confidence interval, 1.10-10.12; p = 0.033) are related to poor
prognosis of oral cancer patients. Interestingly, all the tumors highly
expressing miR-21 were keratinized tumors and the corresponding patients
had poor survival rate < 30 months after diagnosis ((hazard ratio =
12.46; 95% confidence interval, 2.57-60.32; p = 0.0017) indicating the
prognostic importance of miR-21. The expression of the specific miRNAs
(miR-21, miR-424, miR-7, miR-7-1*, and miR-155) overexpressed in the
keratinizing tumors was significantly correlated to each other (0.438 < r
The majority of gene expression profiling studies in cancer research is
based on comparison of normal against cancerous tissues. Although these
comparisons identify general mechanisms underlying certain cancer types,
the heterogeneity of tumors contributes to challenges in the
interpretation of results. In this study, Agilent human miRNA microarrays
were used to analyze 3 normal tongue tissues and 17 oral squamous cell
carcinomas (OSCC) extracted from tongue tumors to identify deregulated
miRNAs. Our results showed that miRNA expression pattern provided more
precise information when cancers are subcategorized based on
clinicopathological parameters. Combinatorial analyses using 4 different
parameters (tumor primary site, tumor stage, histological subtype, and
human papillomavirus 16 status) revealed OSCC subtypes with specific
expressions of selected miRNAs. Nine significantly upregulated miRNAs
(miR-424, miR-15b, miR-196a, miR-21, miR-155, miR-9*, miR-9, miR-7-1*,
and miR-7) and one downregulated miRNA (miR-486-5p) were applied for this
analysis. Our study demonstrated the combine use of several miRNAs with
multiple clinicopathological parameters could subcategorize these oral
cancers. Kaplan-Meier survival analyses showed that advanced tumor stage
(hazard ratio = 3.36; 95% confidence interval, 1.08-10.49; p = 0.037),
and/or keratinization status (hazard ratio = 3.34; 95% confidence
interval, 1.10-10.12; p = 0.033) are related to poor prognosis of oral
cancer patients. Interestingly, all the tumors highly expressing miR-21
were keratinized tumors and the corresponding patients had poor survival
rate < 30 months after diagnosis ((hazard ratio = 12.46; 95% confidence
interval, 2.57-60.32; p = 0.0017) indicating the prognostic importance of
miR-21. The expression of the specific miRNAs (miR-21, miR-424, miR-7,
miR-7-1*, and miR-155) overexpressed in the keratinizing tumors was
significantly correlated to each other (0.438 < r < 0.615, p The majority
of gene expression profiling studies in cancer research is based on
comparison of normal against cancerous tissues. Although these
comparisons identify general mechanisms underlying certain cancer types,
the heterogeneity of tumors contributes to challenges in the
interpretation of results. In this study, Agilent human miRNA microarrays
were used to analyze 3 normal tongue tissues and 17 oral squamous cell
carcinomas (OSCC) extracted from tongue tumors to identify deregulated
miRNAs. Our results showed that miRNA expression pattern provided more
precise information when cancers are subcategorized based on
clinicopathological parameters. Combinatorial analyses using 4 different
parameters (tumor primary site, tumor stage, histological subtype, and
human papillomavirus 16 status) revealed OSCC subtypes with specific
expressions of selected miRNAs. Nine significantly upregulated miRNAs
(miR-424, miR-15b, miR-196a, miR-21, miR-155, miR-9*, miR-9, miR-7-1*,
and miR-7) and one downregulated miRNA (miR-486-5p) were applied for this
analysis. Our study demonstrated the combine use of several miRNAs with
multiple clinicopathological parameters could subcategorize these oral
cancers. Kaplan-Meier survival analyses showed that advanced tumor stage
(hazard ratio = 3.36; 95% confidence interval, 1.08-10.49; p = 0.037),
and/or keratinization status (hazard ratio = 3.34; 95% confidence
interval, 1.10-10.12; p = 0.033) are related to poor prognosis of oral
cancer patients. Interestingly, all the tumors highly expressing miR-21
were keratinized tumors and the corresponding patients had poor survival
rate < 30 months after diagnosis ((hazard ratio = 12.46; 95% confidence
interval, 2.57-60.32; p = 0.0017) indicating the prognostic importance of
miR-21. The expression of the specific miRNAs (miR-21, miR-424, miR-7,
miR-7-1*, and miR-155) overexpressed in the keratinizing tumors was
significantly correlated to each other (0.438 < r < 0.615, p < 0.041). In
silico target prediction analyses using multiple bioinformatics tools
identified candidate genes containing multiple binding sites for these
miRNAs. The miRNA signatures are indicators for cancer diagnostics,
prognostics, and therapeutics and may lead eventually to individualized
clinical treatment.

