Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Paclitaxel selects and enriches for CD44+/MyD88+ ovarian cancer
stem cells


Background: Epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) is the most lethal
gynecologic malignancy. The current standard of care in the treatment of
EOC patients is surgical debulking and combination chemotherapy usually
with Carboplatin and Paclitaxel. Although effective in majority of the
cases, more than 20% of patients do not respond. Moreover, more than 80%
of patients present with recurrent disease within 5 years. Therefore,
there is an underlying biology that results in the differential response
to treatment as well as the occurrence of recurrent disease. Tumors are
heterogeneous and consist of multiple types of cancer cells, which
exhibit different chemoresponsiveness. Our group previously described the
characterization of CD44+/MyD88+ EOC stem cells and demonstrated their
tumor-initiating properties. An important characteristic of these cells,
which differentiate them from the CD44-/MyD88- EOC cells, is the presence
of a functional TLR4-MyD88-NFkB pathway. This pathway confers Paclitaxel
resistance to these cells. We hypothesize that a cause for recurrence
following Paclitaxel treatment is the selective survival of cancer stem
cells capable to recreate the tumor. In this study, we demonstrate that
Paclitaxel enriches for the CD44+/MyD88+ EOC stem cells thus promoting
recurrence. Methods: In vitro model: co-culture system consisting of
(50%:50%) GFP+ CD44+/MyD88+ and RFP+ CD44-/MyD88- cells treated with 0.2
uM Paclitaxel. In vivo model: Ovarian tumors implanted s.c in Nude mice
treated with 10 mg/kg Paclitaxel q3d for 21 days. Levels of GFP+ and
CD44+ cells were determined by flow cytometry. Klf-4, Nanog, MyD88, and
ALDH1 were determined by qPCR or western blot. Results: Control
co-cultures were characterized by overgrowth of CD44-/MyD88- EOC cells
while the Paclitaxel treated co-cultures had mainly CD44+/MyD88+ EOC stem
cells. Similarly in vivo results show enrichment in CD44+ cells with
Paclitaxel (49% CD44+ in control vs 88% CD44+ with treatment). Analysis
of genes associated with stemness showed upregulation of Klf-4, Nanog
ALDH1, and MyD88 in the cultures treated with Paclitaxel compared to
control. Conclusion: We demonstrate that Paclitaxel selectively induce
cell death in CD44-/MyD88- EOC cells but has a pro-survival effect and
enhances self-renewal in the pleuripotent and chemoresistant CD44+/MyD88+
EOC stem cells. Based on these data, we propose that the mode of
management for EOC patients should take into consideration the tumor's
molecular phenotype. Our results highlight the need to identify patients
that should not receive Paclitaxel - not only because they are resistant,
but more importantly, because it can enrich for the more aggressive
cancer stem cells.

