Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bevacizumab treatment hampers tumor uptake of antibodies in human
tumor bearing mice


Background: Extensive angiogenesis, defective vascular architecture,
impaired lymphatic drainage and increased vascular permeability are
characteristics unique for solid tumors. These characteristics result in
enhanced tumor permeability and retention (EPR) effect. The EPR effect
has been recognized as an important factor for intratumoral delivery of
macromolecular drugs, like antibodies. Rapid changes in tumor vasculature
and permeability due to antiangiogenic treatment could possibly restrain
the EPR effect and thereby lead to a decreased uptake of antibodies. This
would have implications for combining antiangiogenic therapy with
monoclonal antibodies. We therefore investigated the effect of
bevacizumab treatment on the tumor uptake of antibodies by means of
immunoPET imaging. Methods: The effect of bevacizumab treatment on the
antibody tumor uptake was studied with in vivo PET imaging of
89Zr-trastuzumab, 89Zr-bevacizumab and 89Zr-IgG in a SKOV-3 human
xenograft tumor model. PET images were made before and during bevacizumab
(5mg/kg; 2qw) or placebo (normal saline) treatment. All animals also
received trastuzumab, bevacizumab or IgG labeled with the near-infrared
fluorescence dye IRDye 800CW as a co-injection. Immunohistochemistry was
performed to determine the mean vascular density (MVD).
Immunofluorescence was used to visualize trastuzumab-800CW,
bevacizumab-800CW and IgG-800CW and to determine vessel normalization by
vessel pericyte coverage. Results: Bevacizumab treatment decreased
89Zr-trastuzumab, 89Zr-bevacizumab and 89Zr-IgG tumor uptake with 41 5%
(PBackground: Extensive angiogenesis, defective vascular architecture,
impaired lymphatic drainage and increased vascular permeability are
characteristics unique for solid tumors. These characteristics result in
enhanced tumor permeability and retention (EPR) effect. The EPR effect
has been recognized as an important factor for intratumoral delivery of
macromolecular drugs, like antibodies. Rapid changes in tumor vasculature
and permeability due to antiangiogenic treatment could possibly restrain
the EPR effect and thereby lead to a decreased uptake of antibodies. This
would have implications for combining antiangiogenic therapy with
monoclonal antibodies. We therefore investigated the effect of
bevacizumab treatment on the tumor uptake of antibodies by means of
immunoPET imaging. Methods: The effect of bevacizumab treatment on the
antibody tumor uptake was studied with in vivo PET imaging of
89Zr-trastuzumab, 89Zr-bevacizumab and 89Zr-IgG in a SKOV-3 human
xenograft tumor model. PET images were made before and during bevacizumab
(5mg/kg; 2qw) or placebo (normal saline) treatment. All animals also
received trastuzumab, bevacizumab or IgG labeled with the near-infrared
fluorescence dye IRDye 800CW as a co-injection. Immunohistochemistry was
performed to determine the mean vascular density (MVD).
Immunofluorescence was used to visualize trastuzumab-800CW,
bevacizumab-800CW and IgG-800CW and to determine vessel normalization by
vessel pericyte coverage. Results: Bevacizumab treatment decreased
89Zr-trastuzumab, 89Zr-bevacizumab and 89Zr-IgG tumor uptake with 41 5%
(P<0.0001), 43 4% (PBackground: Extensive angiogenesis, defective
vascular architecture, impaired lymphatic drainage and increased vascular
permeability are characteristics unique for solid tumors. These
characteristics result in enhanced tumor permeability and retention (EPR)
effect. The EPR effect has been recognized as an important factor for
intratumoral delivery of macromolecular drugs, like antibodies. Rapid
changes in tumor vasculature and permeability due to antiangiogenic
treatment could possibly restrain the EPR effect and thereby lead to a
decreased uptake of antibodies. This would have implications for
combining antiangiogenic therapy with monoclonal antibodies. We therefore
investigated the effect of bevacizumab treatment on the tumor uptake of
antibodies by means of immunoPET imaging. Methods: The effect of
bevacizumab treatment on the antibody tumor uptake was studied with in
vivo PET imaging of 89Zr-trastuzumab, 89Zr-bevacizumab and 89Zr-IgG in a
SKOV-3 human xenograft tumor model. PET images were made before and
during bevacizumab (5mg/kg; 2qw) or placebo (normal saline) treatment.
All animals also received trastuzumab, bevacizumab or IgG labeled with
the near-infrared fluorescence dye IRDye 800CW as a co-injection.
Immunohistochemistry was performed to determine the mean vascular density
(MVD). Immunofluorescence was used to visualize trastuzumab-800CW,
bevacizumab-800CW and IgG-800CW and to determine vessel normalization by
vessel pericyte coverage. Results: Bevacizumab treatment decreased
89Zr-trastuzumab, 89Zr-bevacizumab and 89Zr-IgG tumor uptake with 41 5%
(P<0.0001), 43 4% (P<0.0001) and 28 6% (P=0.0004) respectively. Placebo
treatment did not affect tumor uptake of 89Zr-IgG. Immunofluorescence
showed less accumulation of IgG-800CW in bevacizumab treated tumor
sections compared to placebo treated tumor sections. In all groups,
bevacizumab treatment decreased the MVD (PBackground: Extensive
angiogenesis, defective vascular architecture, impaired lymphatic
drainage and increased vascular permeability are characteristics unique
for solid tumors. These characteristics result in enhanced tumor
permeability and retention (EPR) effect. The EPR effect has been
recognized as an important factor for intratumoral delivery of
macromolecular drugs, like antibodies. Rapid changes in tumor vasculature
and permeability due to antiangiogenic treatment could possibly restrain
the EPR effect and thereby lead to a decreased uptake of antibodies. This
would have implications for combining antiangiogenic therapy with
monoclonal antibodies. We therefore investigated the effect of
bevacizumab treatment on the tumor uptake of antibodies by means of
immunoPET imaging. Methods: The effect of bevacizumab treatment on the
antibody tumor uptake was studied with in vivo PET imaging of
89Zr-trastuzumab, 89Zr-bevacizumab and 89Zr-IgG in a SKOV-3 human
xenograft tumor model. PET images were made before and during bevacizumab
(5mg/kg; 2qw) or placebo (normal saline) treatment. All animals also
received trastuzumab, bevacizumab or IgG labeled with the near-infrared
fluorescence dye IRDye 800CW as a co-injection. Immunohistochemistry was
performed to determine the mean vascular density (MVD).
Immunofluorescence was used to visualize trastuzumab-800CW,
bevacizumab-800CW and IgG-800CW and to determine vessel normalization by
vessel pericyte coverage. Results: Bevacizumab treatment decreased
89Zr-trastuzumab, 89Zr-bevacizumab and 89Zr-IgG tumor uptake with 41 5%
(P<0.0001), 43 4% (P<0.0001) and 28 6% (P=0.0004) respectively. Placebo
treatment did not affect tumor uptake of 89Zr-IgG. Immunofluorescence
showed less accumulation of IgG-800CW in bevacizumab treated tumor
sections compared to placebo treated tumor sections. In all groups,
bevacizumab treatment decreased the MVD (P<0.0003). Remaining vessels in
bevacizumab treated tumor sections showed an increase in the amount and
degree of vessel pericyte coverage compared to placebo. Conclusion:
Bevacizumab treatment reduces tumor uptake of trastuzumab, bevacizumab
and IgG possibly by restraining the EPR effect through vessel
normalization. This deserves attention in the design of clinical trials,
when combining antiangiogenic treatment with antibodies.

