Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The TNIK kinase is a potential target in non-small cell lung and
gastric cancer


Traf2- and Nck-interacting kinase (TNIK) is one of germinal centre kinase
(GCK) family members involved in cytoskeleton organization and neuronal
dendrite extension. Emerging evidence indicated that TNIK is essential in
activation of WNT pathway and colon cancer growth. To search for novel
genetic aberrations that drive carcinogenesis, we performed
microarray-based comparative hybridization (aGCH) to screen gene copy
number variations in primary tumor samples and found TNIK gene is
amplified in 19.2 % (29/151) of Chinese non-small cell lung cancer and 7
% (8/106) of Chinese gastric cancer patients. Interestingly, the
amplification in NSCLC is highly enriched in squamous NSCLC patients
(41.1%, 28/68). Theses amplifications were confirmed by fluorescence in
situ hybridization (FISH) analysis. To further understand the function of
TNIK gene amplification, PAMC82 human gastric cancer and T47D colon
cancer cell lines with TNIK amplification were identified.
RNA-interference-mediated silencing of TNIK resulted in significantly
reduced cell growth and increased cell death in the TNIK amplified, but
not in the non-amplified, tested cell lines. Together, our results
suggest that TNIK is a novel therapeutic target in NSCLC and gastric
cancer and TNIK amplification can be potentially used for patient
selection.

