Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Interaction between the rabphillin-3A-like gene and
phosphorylation of mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) in colorectal
cancer


Background: Recently, we demonstrated that, for colorectal carcinomas
(CRCs), genetic alterations in the rabphillin-3A-like (RPH3AL) gene are
associated with aggressive tumor phenotypes and poor patient survival.
The mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) pathway regulates tumor growth
by integrating diverse signals of growth factors, nutrients, and energy
sufficiency. Therefore, we determined the effects of wild-type (w+) and
mutated (67w-, 175w-, 290w-) RPH3AL on the mTOR signaling pathway in CRC
tissues and in a line of colon cancer cells (LoVo). Materials and
Methods: Ninety five prospectively collected, frozen CRC tissues and
their matching control tissues were analyzed for the mutational status of
RPH3AL using the cDNA polymerase chain reaction and direct sequencing.
Expression constructs of RPH3AL w+ and the mutant variants were developed
using eukaryotic expression vectors. LoVo cells were stably transfected
with the w+ and w- forms of RPH3AL. Western blot analyses were performed
on lysates of CRC tissues and LoVo cells to assess expression of p53,
p27, and PCNA and proteins in the mTOR pathway. Results: Mutational
analysis of RPH3AL detected four missense mutations: at codon 67 (Val >
Met) in 2 CRCs, at codon 175 (Pro > Ser) in 1 CRC, and at codon 290 (Arg
> Lys) in 1 CRC. Western blot analyses demonstrated that over-expression
of wt RPH3AL in LoVo cells or CRC tissues with wt RPH3AL led to decreases
in total mTOR and to phosphorylation of Rictor p-mTOR (S2481), Raptor
p-mTOR (S2448), p70S6K1, and p70S6K. In contrast, in CRC tissues or LoVo
cells with over-expression of mutant forms of RPH3AL, there were higher
levels of total mTOR and greater phosphorylation of the Rictor, raptor,
P70S6K1 and p70S6K. Additionally, CRC w+ RPH3AL and LoVo cells that
over-expressed w+ RPH3AL demonstrated higher levels of p27, and lower
levels of PCNA, and p53. In contrast, the CRC tissues or LoVo cells with
over-expression of RPH3AL mutants exhibited lower levels of p27 and
higher levels of PCNA. Conclusion: The results demonstrate that the
RPH3AL gene has a tumor-suppressing effect involving changes in the mTOR
pathway and suggest that these changes inhibit progression of CRCs. This
work was supported by grants from the NCI/NIH (2U54-CA118948-06,
R01-CA98932, and R03-CA139629).

