Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Heat shock protein 90 inhibition overcomes hepatocyte growth
factor-triggering resistance to EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors in EGFR
mutant lung cancer by decreasing client protein expression and
angiogenesis


The three major, clinically relevant mechanisms of acquired resistance to
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs)
in EGFR mutant lung cancer are a second mutation in the EGFR gene
(T790M), Met amplification, and increased expression of hepatocyte growth
factor (HGF). Heat shock protein90 (Hsp90) is a 90kDa molecular chaperone
for proteins that include EGFR, Met and EML4-ALK. Hsp90 inhibitors have
been reported to reverse resistance to EGFR-TKIs caused by EGFR T790M
mutation and Met amplification. Here, we determined whether inhibition of
Hsp90 could overcome HGF-triggered EGFR-TKI resistance in EGFR mutant
lung cancer cells. EGFR-TKI erlotinib inhibited the growth of PC-9,
HCC827, and Ma-1 cells, with deletions in exon19 of EGFR, but not
HGF-gene transfected Ma-1 (Ma-1/HGF) cells and H1975 cells, which contain
the EGFR L858R and T790M mutations, respectively. Erlotinib also did not
inhibit the growth of PC-9 and Ma-1 cells in the presence of HGF.
However, an Hsp90 inhibitor, 17-DMAG, induced apoptosis and markedly
inhibited the growth of these cell lines, even in the presence of HGF.
This inhibition by 17-DMAG was associated with decreased expression of
EGFR and Met, thereby decreasing Akt phosphorylation in tumor cells. In
an in vivo model of HGF-triggered erlotinib-resistance, using Ma-1/HGF
cells, 17-DMAG markedly suppressed tumor growth by decreasing
angiogenesis and increasing apoptosis. These results indicate that Hsp90
inhibitors may overcome HGF-triggered resistance to EGFR-TKIs and that
the use of Hsp90 inhibitors may result in more successful treatment of
EGFR mutant lung cancers.

