Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The epithelial-mesenchymal transition of gastric cancer cells was
stimulated by TGFR signaling in hypoxia


Introduction: Epithelial mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a cellular
process during which epithelial cells acquire mesenchymal properties
while losing cell-cell interactions and apicobasal polarity. EMT is
considered to be correlated with malignancy of cancer cells and
responsible for cancer invasion and metastasis. Patients with gastric
cancer show a poor prognosis because of frequent metastasis. We
previously reported that distant metastasis was associated with hypoxia
in gastric cancer. Therefore, we investigated the effect of hypoxic
condition on EMT of gastric cancer cells. Materials and Methods:Seven
gastric cancer cell lines derived from gastric cancer were used. Cells
were cultured in normoxia (21% O2) or hypoxia (1% O2) for 24h. EMT rate
was evaluated as the percentage of spindle-shaped cells of total cells.
The expression level of TGF and TGF receptor was evaluated by real time
RT-PCR. Effect of several inhibitors on the EMT was evaluated by cell
morphology. The TGF1 level of the cell culture supernate was measured by
a quantitative sandwich enzyme immunoassay technique. Results: Hypoxia
stimulated EMT of OCUM-2MD3 and OCUM-12 cells, but not that of other cell
lines. The level of TGF expression was increased significantly
(pIntroduction: Epithelial mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a cellular
process during which epithelial cells acquire mesenchymal properties
while losing cell-cell interactions and apicobasal polarity. EMT is
considered to be correlated with malignancy of cancer cells and
responsible for cancer invasion and metastasis. Patients with gastric
cancer show a poor prognosis because of frequent metastasis. We
previously reported that distant metastasis was associated with hypoxia
in gastric cancer. Therefore, we investigated the effect of hypoxic
condition on EMT of gastric cancer cells. Materials and Methods:Seven
gastric cancer cell lines derived from gastric cancer were used. Cells
were cultured in normoxia (21% O2) or hypoxia (1% O2) for 24h. EMT rate
was evaluated as the percentage of spindle-shaped cells of total cells.
The expression level of TGF and TGF receptor was evaluated by real time
RT-PCR. Effect of several inhibitors on the EMT was evaluated by cell
morphology. The TGF1 level of the cell culture supernate was measured by
a quantitative sandwich enzyme immunoassay technique. Results: Hypoxia
stimulated EMT of OCUM-2MD3 and OCUM-12 cells, but not that of other cell
lines. The level of TGF expression was increased significantly (p<0.01)
under hypoxia in comparison with normoxia. The level of TGF receptor
expression was increased in OCUM-2MD3 cells, but not OCUM-2M cells. TGFR
inhibitor, SB431542, significantly suppressed EMT of OCUM-2MD3 (p=0.03)
and OCUM-12 (pIntroduction: Epithelial mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a
cellular process during which epithelial cells acquire mesenchymal
properties while losing cell-cell interactions and apicobasal polarity.
EMT is considered to be correlated with malignancy of cancer cells and
responsible for cancer invasion and metastasis. Patients with gastric
cancer show a poor prognosis because of frequent metastasis. We
previously reported that distant metastasis was associated with hypoxia
in gastric cancer. Therefore, we investigated the effect of hypoxic
condition on EMT of gastric cancer cells. Materials and Methods:Seven
gastric cancer cell lines derived from gastric cancer were used. Cells
were cultured in normoxia (21% O2) or hypoxia (1% O2) for 24h. EMT rate
was evaluated as the percentage of spindle-shaped cells of total cells.
The expression level of TGF and TGF receptor was evaluated by real time
RT-PCR. Effect of several inhibitors on the EMT was evaluated by cell
morphology. The TGF1 level of the cell culture supernate was measured by
a quantitative sandwich enzyme immunoassay technique. Results: Hypoxia
stimulated EMT of OCUM-2MD3 and OCUM-12 cells, but not that of other cell
lines. The level of TGF expression was increased significantly (p<0.01)
under hypoxia in comparison with normoxia. The level of TGF receptor
expression was increased in OCUM-2MD3 cells, but not OCUM-2M cells. TGFR
inhibitor, SB431542, significantly suppressed EMT of OCUM-2MD3 (p=0.03)
and OCUM-12 (p<0.01). In OCUM-2MD3 and OCUM-12, the quantity of TGF1 in
cell culture supernatant significantly increased under hypoxia compared
to normoxia, but not OCUM-2Mcells. Conclusion: Hypoxia stimulates the EMT
of gastric cancer cells via TGF/ TGF receptor signaling. TGF receptor
inhibitor might be promising for the treatment of metastasis of gastric
cancer.

