Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Benzyl isothiocyanate inhibits prostate cancer development in the
transgenic adenocarcinoma mouse prostate model


Benzyl isothiocyanate (BITC) is a hydrolysis product of glucotropaeolin,
a compound found in cruciferous vegetables, and has also been shown to
have anti-tumor properties. In the present study, we attempted to
determine whether BITC inhibits the development of prostate cancer using
the transgenic adenocarcinoma mouse prostate (TRAMP) model. Male TRAMP
mice and their nontransgenic (normal) littermates at 5 wk of age were
randomly divided into control and BITC-treatment groups and gavage-fed
with 0 (vehicle), 5, or 10 mg/kg of BITC every other day. At the time of
sacrifice (24 wk of age), BITC did not affect body weight of normal or
transgenic animals. The genitourinary tract weight of TRAMP mice was
increased markedly as compared to normal mice, and this increase was
suppressed significantly via the oral administration of 5 or 10 mg/kg of
BITC. H&E staining of the dorsolateral lobes of the prostate demonstrated
that well-differentiated carcinoma (WDC) was a predominant feature in the
24 week old vehicle-fed TRAMP mice, whereas number of lobes with WDC was
reduced and the number of lobes with prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia
was increased by feeding with 5 or 10 mg/kg of BITC. BITC feeding reduced
the number of cells expressing the Ki67 (a proliferation marker) in the
prostatic tissue. Additionally, BITC feeding reduced the expression of
cyclin E, cyclin D1, cyclin A, and cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK)2. Our in
vitro cell culture results revealed that BITC decreased DNA synthesis and
CDK2 activity in TRAMP-C2 mouse prostate cancer cells. However, BITC did
not affect apoptosis either in transgenic mice in vivo or in TRAMP-C2
cells in vitro. These results indicate that inhibition of cell cycle
progression contributes to the inhibition of prostate cancer development
in animals treated with BITC.

