Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cord blood stem cells inhibit epidermal growth factor receptor
translocation to mitochondria in glioblastoma


Overexpression of EGFR is one of the most frequently diagnosed genetic
aberrations of glioblastoma multiforme (GBM). EGFR signaling is involved
in diverse cellular functions and is dependent on the type of preferred
receptor complexes. EGFR translocation to mitochondria has been reported
recently in different cancer types. However, mechanistic aspects of EGFR
translocation to mitochondria in GBM have not been evaluated to date. In
the present study, we analyzed the expression of EGFR in GBM-patient
derived specimens using immunohistochemistry, reverse-transcription based
PCR and Western blotting techniques. In clinical samples, EGFR
co-localizes with FAK in mitochondria. We evaluated this previous
observation in standard glioma cell lines and in vivo mice xenografts. We
further analyzed the effect of human umbilical cord blood stem cells
(hUCBSC) on the inhibition of EGFR expression and EGFR signaling in
glioma cells and xenografts. Treatment with hUCBSC inhibited the
expression of EGFR and its co-localization with FAK in glioma cells.
Also, hUCBSC inhibited the co-localization of activated forms of EGFR,
FAK and c-Src in mitochondria of glioma cells and xenografts. In
addition, hUCBSC also inhibited EGFR signaling mechanisms in glioma cells
both in vitro and in vivo. We have shown that hUCBSC treatments inhibit
phosphorylation of EGFR, FAK and c-Src forms. Our findings associate EGFR
expression and its localization to mitochondria with specific biological
functions in GBM cells and provide relevant preclinical information that
can be used for the development of effective hUCBSC-based therapies.

