Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of glucose transporter 3 in head and neck cancer
initiating cells


Background: Head and Neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is a lethal
cancer with clinical, pathological, phenotypical and biological
heterogeneity. Cancer initiating cells (CICs) exhibit self-renewal and
promote tumor progression capacity. We have also identified the
subpopulation of head and neck cancer initiating cells (HN-CICs), and
observed the upregulation of Glucose Transporter 3(Glut3) in HN-CICs by
differential systemic analyses. However, the role of Glut3 in HN-CICs
metabolism alternation remains unclear. Herein we determined the critical
role of Glut3, a novel CICs marker, in the maintenance of stemness
characteristics and tumorigenic phenotype of HN-CICs. Methods: Stable
overexpression and knockdown of Glut3 expression in HNSCCs and HN-CICs
was achieved by lentiviral-mediated system. Consequently, we elucidated
the stemness properties and tumorigenicity of HNSCCs and HN-CICs with
Glut3 down-regulation. Consequently, we investigated the role of Glut3 in
metabolism regulation of cancer initiation cells. Results: Lentiviral
knockdown of Glut3 significantly reduced the self-renewal ability and
cancer initiation cell marker Grp78 expression in HN-CICs. Additionally,
down-regulation of Glut3 enhanced the differentiation capability but
inversely diminished stemness gene expression of HN-CICs. Of note,
knockdown of Glut3 lessened tumorigenicity of HN-CICs both in vitro.
Conclusion: We showed that Glut3 contributes to the maintenance of
stemness and tumorigenicity of HN-CICs. In addition, the expression of
Glut3 was involved in HN-CICs metabolism. Overall, silencing Glut3 might
be a potential therapeutic target for HNSCC by eliminating CICs.

