Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Availability of a newly designed technique, triple-combination
array analysis: Identification of estrogen receptor 1 gene in
hepatocellular carcinoma using this method


Background: Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the top five causes
of cancer-related deaths worldwide. Recent developments in the treatment
of HCC have failed to treat completely or prevent HCC. Genome-wide
gene-expression profile analyses can now detect many candidate genes that
are modified by HCC. We have developed a new technique to identify
suppressor genes of HCC: triple-combination array analysis. Methods:
Triple-combination array analysis, which combines gene expression
profiles, single nucleotide polymorphism arrays and methylation arrays,
was performed on each HCC tissue sample. Subsequently, samples from 48
HCC patients were subjected to quantitative real-time
reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and
methylation-specific PCR. Results: Using this method, estrogen receptor 1
(ESR1) was detected as a candidate suppressor gene. Of the 48 clinical
samples, 40 (83.3%) showed ESR1 promoter hypermethylation. In 24 (50%)
HCC samples, the expression level of ESR1 gene was decreased by >90%,
which was significantly related to hepatitis B virus, high liver damage
score, and pathological invasion of the intrahepatic portal vein.
Conclusions: The present study indicates that triple-combination array is
an available and convenient technique for detecting the genes with
altered expression in disease, and we suggest that the ESR1 gene acts as
a suppressor gene in HCC.

