Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel tumor-suppressor role of MyoD, a muscle differentiation
factor, in mouse models of medulloblastoma


Medulloblastoma, an embryonal tumor of the cerebellum, is the most common
pediatric brain cancer. For decades, it has been known that a small
subset of medulloblastomas present with myogenic differentiation.
However, the mechanistic basis and significance of this biological
anomaly remain to be determined. We have identified hitherto unknown
expression of muscle differentiation factor, MyoD in cerebellar tumors
from mouse models of medulloblastoma as well as in a subset of human
medulloblastomas. At a cellular level, MyoD is expressed in mitotically
active cells and intriguingly, in mouse tumors does not activate its
canonical targets involved in the muscle differentiation program. To
understand the functional consequence of this finding in medulloblastoma
genesis, we have conducted genetic studies to assess tumor formation in
the SmoA1 and SmoA2 medulloblastoma models, on a MyoD-deficient
background. We demonstrate that MyoD acts as a haploinsufficient tumor
suppressor as the MyoD wt/-; SmoA1 and MyoD wt/-; SmoA2 mice have an
accelerated onset of tumors compared to MyoD wt/wt; SmoA1 or MyoD wt/wt;
SmoA2 mice respectively. Our findings suggest that the expression of MyoD
might be an oncogene-induced compensatory response in the cerebellum to
suppress tumor growth by restoring balance between proliferation and
differentiation, similar to the role of some other bHLH transcription
factors. Harnessing this latent tumor suppressor network to induce
differentiation or cell cycle arrest holds promise for future therapeutic
interventions.

