Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Downregulation of galectin-1 by OTX-008, a novel calyx[4]arene, is
associated with galectin-1 oxidation followed by proteosomal degradation
in human head and neck tumor cell lines


Background. Galectin-1 is a multifunctional protein involved in various
aspects of tumorigenesis and has been described as a promising cancer
target. It has been previously shown that galectin-1 has high sensitivity
to oxidative inactivation. During oxidation, galectin-1 may forms
disulfide bridges resulting in profound conformational changes, which
prevent galectin-1 dimerization and ligand recognition. OTX-008 is a
non-peptide chemical antagonist designed to bind galectin-1. We
previously showed that OTX-008 displays direct antiproliferative effects
and inhibits galectin-1 expression in cancer cell lines (AACR 2011,
Abstract n685). The aim of the present study was to further the
understanding on the molecular mechanism implicated on galectin-1
downregulation mediated by OTX-008 in cancer cells. Material and Methods.
Proliferative SQ20B cancer cells were exposed to 3M OTX-008 during 48h
with or without i) 10M N-acetylcysteine (an antioxidant agent), ii) 1mM
Tempol (an antioxidant agent), iii) 10M co-enzyme Q10 (a naturally
occurring antioxidant agent), iv) 55M -mercaptoethanol (a strong reducing
agent), or v) 10nM bortezomib (a proteasome inhibitor). Effects on
galectin-1 protein levels were assessed by western blot analysis.
Results. The head and neck SQ20B human cancer cell line is sensitive to
OTX-008 (GI50 = 3M). In this cell line, 48h-exposure to OTX-008 inhibits
galectin-1 protein level (40% inhibition respect to control cells)
without effect on galectin-1 mRNA levels. It has been described that
galectin-1 oxidation represents a mechanism by which galectin-1 activity
is regulated. SQ20B cells were exposed to OTX-008 for 48h with or without
co-treatment with well-known antioxidant or reducing agents.
Interestingly, these agents counteract the effects of OTX-008 on
galectin-1 expression (galectin-1 protein levels by densitometry
analysis: control SQ20B 100%, OTX-008 60%, N-acetylcystein+OTX-008 110%,
Tempol+OTX-008 120%, co-enzyme Q10 +OTX-008 140% and
-mercaptoethanol+OTX-008 120%), suggesting that oxidation plays a key
role in galectin-1 down-expression by OTX-008 in SQ20B cells. We further
observed that pre-treatment with bortezomib abrogated the decrease in
galectin-1 protein levels by OTX-008, pointing out that oxidized
galectin-1 is recognized and degradated by the proteasome system.
Conclusion. Our findings show that OTX-008 mechanism of action involves
galectin-1 oxidation followed by proteosomal degradation in SQ20B cells.
The mechanism by which OTX-008 can enhance the oxidation of galectin-1
will require further investigations.

