Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transforming growth factor beta signaling pathway variants and
breast cancer risk: results from the Shanghai Breast Cancer Genetics Study


The transforming growth factor beta (TGF-) signaling pathway is critical
for several important cellular functions, and plays dual roles in the
carcinogenic process. We systematically evaluated associations of common
variants in TGF- signaling pathway genes with breast cancer risk using a
multi-staged, population-based, case-control study among Chinese women.
In Stage I, 341 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) with MAFs 0.05
across 11 genes were evaluated among 2,926 cases and 2,380 controls. In
Stage II, 20 SNPs with promising associations were evaluated among an
additional 1,890 cases and 2,000 controls. Six SNPs from the TGFB2,
TGFBR1, TGFBR2 and TGFBR3 genes were found to have consistent and
significant associations in combined analyses with breast cancer risk in
combined analyses of Stage I and Stage II data. One variant, TGFBR2
rs1078985, had not only consistent, but also highly significant
associations with breast cancer risk in both study stages, as well as
promising results from in silico analysis, and so was further evaluated.
Results from additional genotyping in Stage III (2,475 cases and 2,343
controls) were also consistent; compared with the major allele
homozygotes (GG) of rs1078985, reduced breast cancer risks were
associated with AA(OR=0.75, 95%CI=0.60-0.94) and AG (OR=0.89,
95%CI=0.82-0.96) genotypes (Ptrend =0.0003). These data support a role
for common genetic variation in TGF- signaling pathway genes,
specifically for a variant in TGFBR2, in breast cancer susceptibility.

