Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oncogene-specific regulation of immune responses during
tumorigenesis


Oncogenes can induce inflammatory signaling, leading to the recruitment
of immune cells to tumor site. Immune cells can further influence tumor
development by either restraining or facilitating tumorigenesis. Here, we
investigated how distinct oncogenes shape the immune responses during
tumorigenesis in vivo. We utilized several established mouse models of
liver cancer in which tumorigenesis is driven by the overexpression of
MYC, MET, or AKT+RAS oncogenes. We evaluated the immune cells at early
vs. late stages of tumor development by immunohistochemical staining of
liver tissues using lineage-specific immune cell markers. In addition, we
assessed activation of the pro-inflammatory NFB pathway by immunoblot
detection of IkB and phospho-Ser(536)-NFB levels in liver lysates, as
well as by immunohistochemical analysis of NFB (p65) nuclear
localization. Histological analysis revealed leukocytic clustering around
hepatocytes in pre-neoplastic livers in MYC and AKT+RAS, but not in the
MET liver tumor model. Moreover, the leukocyte profiles identified in
pre-neoplastic livers and liver tumors were different in MYC vs. AKT+RAS
model. Finally, we found that the NFB pathway was inactive in MYC and
AKT+RAS tumors, but hyperactivated in MET tumors. In summary, our results
suggest that the type of tumor-initiating oncogenic lesion profoundly
influences the identity of recruited immune cells and activation of NFB
pathway in the course of tumorigenesis. We are currently in the process
of elucidating the mechanisms behind oncogene-mediated regulation of
immune responses, which may reveal novel targets for anti-cancer therapy.

