Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ubiquitous Brms1 expression is critical for mammary carcinoma
metastasis suppression via promotion of apoptosis


Morbidity and mortality in breast cancer patients are drastically
increased when primary tumor cells are able to spread to distant sites
and proliferate to become secondary lesions. Effective treatment of
metastatic disease has been limited; therefore, increased molecular
understanding to identify biomarkers and targets is needed. We have
previously shown that breast cancer metastasis suppressor 1 (Brms1) can
suppress development of pulmonary metastases when expressed in a variety
of cancer types, including metastatic mammary carcinoma. Our lab has
developed two transgenic Brms1 mouse models, one which expresses murine
Brms1 cDNA specifically in mammary tissue (expression by the mouse
mammary tumor virus (MMTV) promoter) and a ubiquitous Brms1 expression
model (expression by the chicken beta actin promoter). The goal of this
study was to investigate mechanisms of Brms1-mediated metastasis
suppression in transgenic mice that express Brms1 using a polyoma middle
T (PyMT) oncogene-induced model. Brms1 expression, either ubiquitously or
predominantly in the mammary gland, did not significantly alter growth of
the primary tumor, confirming earlier studies. When expressed
ubiquitously, Brms1 suppressed pulmonary metastasis and promoted tumor
cell apoptosis in the lung but not in the mammary gland. However,
selective expression of Brms1 in the mammary gland using the MMTV
promoter did not significantly block metastasis nor did it promote
apoptosis in mammary glands or lungs despite increased expression within
primary tumors and the lungs. These results suggest tissue- or cell-type
specific expression of Brms1 is a critical determinant for Brms1-mediated
metastasis suppression.

