Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PEDF binds to IL- 10 receptor in the absence of IL-10 and inhibits
melanoma tumor growth


Macrophages exist within the tumor microenvironment and play an important
role in influencing tumor cell growth, angiogenesis and cancer
progression. The interaction between macrophages, tumor cells, and
endothelial cells occurs largely through cytokine secretion and detection
by tumor associated macrophages (TAM). In this study, we investigate the
role of interleukin-10 (IL-10) and pigment epithelial derived factor
(PEDF) in the macrophage-tumor interaction. In an explant model of
melanoma, tumor growth was significantly reduced in IL-10 knockout mice.
Media from IL-10 deficient macrophages significantly inhibited tumor cell
proliferation when compared to media from wild-type macrophages.
Interestingly, expression of the anti-tumor and anti-angiogenic cytokine
PEDF was increased in IL-10 knockout macrophages. Media of IL-10 KO
macrophages treated with recombinant IL-10 (rIL-10) and anti-PEDF failed
to inhibit tumor cell proliferation. Neutralization of PEDF in IL-10 KO
mice restored tumor growth in these mice. To further explore the
molecular mechanisms of the interaction between PEDF, IL-10 and IL-10
receptor, IL-10 receptor binding of PEDF was evaluated in presence or
absence of rIL-10. PEDF binds to IL-10 receptor only in the absence of
competing rIL-10. Taken together these studies show a novel interaction
between PEDF and the IL-10 receptor and suggest that the anti-tumor
activity of PEDF can be significantly enhanced by reducing IL-10 levels.

