Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RKI-1447, a potent ROCK inhibitor with anti-tumor and
anti-invasive activities in breast cancer


Rho-associated kinases 1 and 2 (ROCKs) are intimately involved in
metastasis and this prompted the development of ROCK inhibitors (RKIs) as
anti-metastatic agents. Here, we describe the development of RKI-1447
which inhibits ROCK 1 and 2 potently in vitro (IC50s; 14 and 6 nM,
respectively) and suppresses the phosphorylation of ROCK substrates MLC2
and MYPT1 in human breast cancer cells (IC50; 100 nM). The crystal
structure of the RKI-1447-ROCK1 complex reveals that RKI-1447 binds the
hinge region in the ATP binding site. RKI-1447 is highly selective and
does not affect the phosphorylation levels of Akt, Erk, Mek and S6.
RKI-1447 is also highly selective at inhibiting ROCK-mediated
cytoskeleton re-organization (actin stress fiber formation) following LPA
stimulation, but does not affect PKA-meditated lamelipodia and filopodia
formation following PDGF and bradykinin stimulation, respectively.
RKI-1447 inhibits migration, invasion and anchorage-independent tumor
growth of breast cancer cells. A structurally-related analog RKI-1313
that is inactive against ROCKs in vitro (IC50 > 10 M) has little effects
on migration, invasion and anchorage-independent growth. Finally,
RKI-1447 is highly effective at inhibiting the growth of ErbB2-driven
breast tumors in a transgenic animal model.

