Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Detrimental effects of a histone deacetylase inhibitor on human
lymphocytes


Background:Histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACi) have been shown to
increase cancer-testing and melanomasomal tumor antigen expression, which
may allow their use as adjuvants to immunotherapy for melanoma. For this
use, a key question is to test the effects of HDACi on lymphocytes
compared to melanoma cells. Methods: We tested the effects on cell
viability, cell cycle, apoptosis and DNA damage of the pan-HDACi LBH589
on peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) from a healthy donor (HD),
four patients with metastatic melanoma (MM), two previously established
human melanoma cell lines (M229 and M370), and two bone marrow samples of
patients with multiple myeloma previously treated with GM-CSF. In
addition, phospho-flow cytometry was used to study the effects of the
HDACi on intracellular signalling in lymphocytes with or without pulsing
with IL2 (400IU) or IFN (10,000). For some experiments, HD PBMC were
genetically modified to express the T cell receptor (TCR) for the
melanoma antigen MART-1 using retroviral transduction for testing in in
vitro cytotoxicity assays. Results. In replicate experiments the 50%
inhibition concentration (IC50) of LBH589 for PBMC was low ( 600 nM).
LBH589 induced > 20% (10 nM) and > 40% (1-10 mM) apoptotic cell death
demonstrated by double presence of a sub-G0/G1 peak and cleaved poly
(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) in PBMC samples, while it was 600 nM).
LBH589 induced > 20% (10 nM) and > 40% (1-10 mM) apoptotic cell death
demonstrated by double presence of a sub-G0/G1 peak and cleaved poly
(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) in PBMC samples, while it was < 10% in
melanoma cell lines at these same concentrations. In a DNA damage assay,
there was around 2-fold increase in the phosphorylation of the histone
variant H2A.X in HD PBMC at 1 nM, while it required 10 nM for the similar
effect in the melanoma cell line M229. However, the phosphorylation of
H2A.X in PBMCs of three patients with MM (1 nM LBH589) was slightly
inhibited. The pH2A.X of the other cell line and one of the MM patients
was a 1.5- fold increase. The maximal effects on signaling pathways were
seen after 30 minutes of treatment. LBH589 slightly inhibited
phosphorylation of STATs 1, 3, 5 and 6 and MAPK proteins (p38, ERK), p53,
cyclin D3 and histone H3 in flow gated B and T cells from the HD. On the
contrary, the same phosphoproteins were activated up to six times higher
in the MM patient samples and in a bone marrow sample. Conclusions. The
HDACi LBH589 induced cytotoxic effects at nanomolar concentrations on
human lymphocytes and altered key signaling pathways involved in
lymphocyte activation. These effects are at lower concentrations than the
antitumor activity in melanoma in vitro, resulting in an adverse
therapeutic window. Therefore, LBH589 should be used with caution if
intended to sensitize melanoma to immunotherapy.

