Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Down-regulation of microRNA34 induces cell proliferation and
invasion of human mesothelial cells


Purpose: In the recent half-decade, many studies have shown that
microRNAs (miRNAs) can act as oncogenes or tumor suppressors and that the
widespread alteration of miRNA expression patterns is highly relevant to
various human malignancies. We previously reported that microRNA-34s
(miR-34s) are methylated and down-regulated in malignant pleural
mesothelioma and might play an important role in the carcinogenesis of
mesothelioma. In this study, in contrast to our previous study, we
down-regulated miR-34s in the human mesothelial cells to investigate
cellular effect of miR-34s knockdown. Material and methods: Two human
mesothelial cell lines, MeT-5A derived from human pleura and LP-9 derived
from human peritoneum, and three human primary cultured mesothelial cells
from pleura were used in this study. Antisense mimics of miR-34a, b, and
c (Anti-miR miRNA InhibitorR, Ambion) were transfected to these cells and
effect of proliferation and invasion was estimated. Control scramble
transfected cells were used as control. The protein expression status was
estimated using Western Blotting. Results: Antisense miR-34a, b, and c
down-regulated each miR-34s in introduced human mesothelial cells. Cell
proliferation significantly increased in each antisense of miR-34s
transfected human mesothelial cells than in control for all examined
cells (p Purpose: In the recent half-decade, many studies have shown that
microRNAs (miRNAs) can act as oncogenes or tumor suppressors and that the
widespread alteration of miRNA expression patterns is highly relevant to
various human malignancies. We previously reported that microRNA-34s
(miR-34s) are methylated and down-regulated in malignant pleural
mesothelioma and might play an important role in the carcinogenesis of
mesothelioma. In this study, in contrast to our previous study, we
down-regulated miR-34s in the human mesothelial cells to investigate
cellular effect of miR-34s knockdown. Material and methods: Two human
mesothelial cell lines, MeT-5A derived from human pleura and LP-9 derived
from human peritoneum, and three human primary cultured mesothelial cells
from pleura were used in this study. Antisense mimics of miR-34a, b, and
c (Anti-miR miRNA InhibitorR, Ambion) were transfected to these cells and
effect of proliferation and invasion was estimated. Control scramble
transfected cells were used as control. The protein expression status was
estimated using Western Blotting. Results: Antisense miR-34a, b, and c
down-regulated each miR-34s in introduced human mesothelial cells. Cell
proliferation significantly increased in each antisense of miR-34s
transfected human mesothelial cells than in control for all examined
cells (p < 0.0001 for miR-34s with all cells). Invasion ability also
increased in antisense transfected cells than in control for MeT-5A and
LP-9 (P Purpose: In the recent half-decade, many studies have shown that
microRNAs (miRNAs) can act as oncogenes or tumor suppressors and that the
widespread alteration of miRNA expression patterns is highly relevant to
various human malignancies. We previously reported that microRNA-34s
(miR-34s) are methylated and down-regulated in malignant pleural
mesothelioma and might play an important role in the carcinogenesis of
mesothelioma. In this study, in contrast to our previous study, we
down-regulated miR-34s in the human mesothelial cells to investigate
cellular effect of miR-34s knockdown. Material and methods: Two human
mesothelial cell lines, MeT-5A derived from human pleura and LP-9 derived
from human peritoneum, and three human primary cultured mesothelial cells
from pleura were used in this study. Antisense mimics of miR-34a, b, and
c (Anti-miR miRNA InhibitorR, Ambion) were transfected to these cells and
effect of proliferation and invasion was estimated. Control scramble
transfected cells were used as control. The protein expression status was
estimated using Western Blotting. Results: Antisense miR-34a, b, and c
down-regulated each miR-34s in introduced human mesothelial cells. Cell
proliferation significantly increased in each antisense of miR-34s
transfected human mesothelial cells than in control for all examined
cells (p < 0.0001 for miR-34s with all cells). Invasion ability also
increased in antisense transfected cells than in control for MeT-5A and
LP-9 (P < 0.0001 for 2 cell lines). Human primary cultured mesothelial
cells did not obtain invasion ability in this experiment. Western
blotting confirmed up-regulation of c-Met and p-c-Met protein.
Conclusion: We confirmed that down-regulation of miR-34s up-regulated
oncogenic phenotype of mesothelial cells. The present study together with
our previous report strongly suggests miR-34s play an important role in
early carcinogenic process of human mesothelial cells to malignant
mesothelioma.

