Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Micropapillary breast carcinoma is characterized by deregulation
of genes involved in cell division control


This study provides insight into the biological specificities of invasive
micropapillary carcinoma of the breast (IMPC), an entity characterized by
cell polarity inversion and frequent lymphovascular invasion and axillary
lymph node metastasis compared to invasive ductal carcinoma (IDC).
Morphological review was combined with copy number analyses, genotyping
(SNP6.0 Affymetrix), TP53 and PIK3CA sequencing and transcriptomic
analysis in a series of 39 pure IMPC and the results were compared to
those of 19 IDC with positive estrogen receptors, and positive axillary
lymph node and lymphovascular invasion (ER+, N+, LVI+). The presence of
numerous bi-nucleated cells was identified as a morphological pattern of
IMPC. This specific trait was underlined by deregulation of the
expression of genes involved in cell division. IMPC and IDC exhibit
common genomic alterations including 8p-, 8q+, 16q-, 17p13- and 22q- and
mutations of PIK3CA (10% for IMPC and 11% for IDC) and TP53 (13% in IMPC
vs 33% in IDC). In contrast, IMPC were specifically characterized by
frequent 17q23.2-q24.1 gains (54%), chromosomes 17q 23.1 (26%), 17q12
(22%), 8q22.1 (21%) amplifications and 6q16.1-q22.31 losses (43%). Within
the IMPC group, unsupervised analysis of genomic data distinguished two
distinct subsets: one subset (16 IMPC) exhibited a significant increase
in 16p gains associated with near-diploid cells and the second subset (19
IMPC) characterized by a high frequency of 8q, 17q and 20q amplifications
associated with near-tetraploid cells. This analysis showed that IMPC
constitutes a distinct entity from ER+ N+ LVI+ IDC with, in particular,
high frequencies of bi-nucleated cells, 17q gains and amplifications
associated with 6q losses of heterozygosity. This study also showed that
IMPC comprises two genomic subsets that may suggest the existence of
different oncogenic mechanisms giving rise to the same morphological
entity.

