Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Proteomic analysis of acute lymphoblastic leukemia: de novo versus
relapse


Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is a heterogeneous disease with
distinct biological and prognostic grouping. The initial response to
induction chemotherapy is the most important prognostic factor in
patients with acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Patients with rapid early
response (RER Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is a heterogeneous
disease with distinct biological and prognostic grouping. The initial
response to induction chemotherapy is the most important prognostic
factor in patients with acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Patients with rapid
early response (RER < 5% of blast in bone marrow at day 7 after induction
chemotherapy) have better event-free survival compared to slow early
responders (SER 25% of blast). However, no predictive marker for relapse
or treatment failure is currently available. This study aimed to find
plausible biomarkers of drug sensitivity in bone marrow mononuclear cells
(BMMNCs) of childhood ALL cases using 2-dimensional gel electrophoresis
and subsequent MALDI-TOF/mass spectrometry. The 714 spots in RER and 555
spots in SER were visualized in gels. Of these 28 up-regulated and 25
down-regulated proteins in SER_as compared to RER_were identified. The
detected proteins were 60-kDa heat shock protein, actin, lamin-B1,
heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein (hnRNP) K, and so on. HnRNPK,
down-regulated in SER was further verified by Western blot analysis. In
future studies, the roles of HnRNPK in drug sensitivity/resistance are
undergoing to elucidate as a potential biomarker for ALL therapy.
[Funding source: NRF grant (R13-2005-012-01003-0)].

