Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Impact of regulatory T cell depletion on dendritic cell-tumor
fusion vaccine immunotherapy


A promising branch of research in cancer immunotherapy is the development
of vaccines comprised of dendritic cells hybridized to tumor cells by
electrofusion. Studies in numerous murine models have shown the efficacy
of treatment with a dendritic cell-tumor fusion vaccine; however, this is
critically dependent on systemic administration of 3rd signals such as
IL-12 (Interleukin-12). Translation of these findings into the clinic
will be difficult due to toxicity, morbidity, and mortality associated
with IL-12 administration. Thus, alternative strategies to enhance the
efficacy of fusion vaccines are needed. Regulatory T cells (Tregs) are
known to suppress anti-tumor immunity. Treg depletion has been
demonstrated to improve tumor immunotherapy in murine tumor models as
well as some phase I clinical studies. We therefore investigated whether
Treg depletion with the anti-CD25 monoclonal antibody PC61 would
significantly improve dendritic cell - tumor fusion immunotherapy in a
murine melanoma model. Experiments were conducted using six groups of
animals: no treatment (negative control), isotypic monoclonal antibody
alone (Y13), Treg depletion alone (PC61), fusion vaccine with Y13 (Fusion
+ Y13), fusion vaccine with PC61 (Fusion + PC61), and fusion vaccine with
IL-12 (Fusion + IL12; positive control). Pulmonary metastases were
established through intravenous tail vein injection of 0.25x106 tumor
cells (Day 0). Three days later, an injection of 0.6x106 fusion hybrids
was delivered intranodally. 250 g of Y13 or PC61 monoclonal antibodies
were delivered one day prior to vaccine delivery. Starting on the day of
vaccination in the IL-12 group, 0.2 g of IL-12 was given daily for 4
days. Three weeks after tumor inoculation, mice were euthanized and the
pulmonary metastases were enumerated. The median number of metastases and
standard deviation [SD] per group were the following: no treatment= 204
[50]; Y13= 220 [59]; PC61= 211 [49]; fusion+Y13= 126 [67]; fusion + PC61=
72 [74]; fusion + IL12= 1 [11]. Using the Mann-Whitney U test, there was
a statistically significant reduction in the number of tumor metastases
between both the fusion vaccine + Y13 group and the fusion + PC61 group
(P=.0397) as well as PC61 alone group and fusion + PC61 group (P=.002).
This suggests that Treg depletion can significantly augment dendritic
cell-tumor cell fusion melanoma immunotherapy. Our results support the
development of novel therapeutic modalities that include Treg depletion,
or modulation, to enhance the efficacy of dendritic cell - tumor fusion
cancer immunotherapy.

