Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Use of statin and risk of prostate cancer recurrence among
patients who received radical prostatectomy


Background: HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors (statins) have shown
broad-spectrum anti-cancer properties in laboratory studies. In
epidemiologic studies, statin use has been linked to reduced risk of
advanced prostate cancer (PCa). We investigated whether statin use is
associated with reduced risk of recurrence in PCa patients who received
radical prostatectomy. Methods: All men with incident PCa diagnosed
between 2004-2005 who subsequently underwent radical prostatectomy in
Kaiser Permanente Southern California (KPSC) health plan were identified
using KPSC's accredited cancer registry. Exclusion criteria included 0.2
ng/ml; and (2) clinical disease progression, defined as diagnosis of
metastatic disease (identified using ICD-9 codes) or PCa-related death
(i.e., PCa as primary cause of death). Information on statin use,
demographics, co-morbid conditions, pathoclinical prognostic factors,
e.g., stage and Gleason score, and outcomes were obtained from cancer
registry and electronic medical records. The effects of statin use prior
to and after prostatectomy were both examined using bivariate and
multivariable Cox models, adjusting for known prognostic factors. For
post-operative statin exposure, a time-dependent Cox model was used.
Results: A total of 1192 men were included; 38% had pre-operative and 55%
had post-operative statin use. Neither pre- nor post-operative statin use
was associated with risk of any outcome, as there was no evidence of a
clear dose-response relationship (Table). Conclusion: These data suggest
that despite statin's protective effect in developing PCa, statin use may
not prevent PCa progression.


