Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pro-tumorigenic activity of plasminogen activtor inhibitor-1
through an anti-apoptotic function


Plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1) is a predictor of poor outcome
in cancer. An explanation for this paradoxical role of PAI-1 has been its
documented pro-angiogenic activity. The effect of PAI-1 on tumor cells
however has not been fully explored. Here we have examined the effect of
PAI-1 knockdown (KD) on the survival of four human cancer cell lines
(high PAI-1 expression: HT-1080 fibrosarcoma and MDA-MB-231 breast cancer
cells; low PAI-1 expression: A549 lung adenocarcinoma and HCT-116 colon
carcinoma cells) in vitro and in vivo. We first demonstrated a
statistically significant decrease in cell survival and a statistically
significant increase in apoptosis in all four cell lines upon PAI-1
downregulation by small interfering RNA (siRNA) or in the presence of
PAI-039 (Tiplaxtinin), a small molecule inhibitor of PAI-1 (P Plasminogen
activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1) is a predictor of poor outcome in cancer.
An explanation for this paradoxical role of PAI-1 has been its documented
pro-angiogenic activity. The effect of PAI-1 on tumor cells however has
not been fully explored. Here we have examined the effect of PAI-1
knockdown (KD) on the survival of four human cancer cell lines (high
PAI-1 expression: HT-1080 fibrosarcoma and MDA-MB-231 breast cancer
cells; low PAI-1 expression: A549 lung adenocarcinoma and HCT-116 colon
carcinoma cells) in vitro and in vivo. We first demonstrated a
statistically significant decrease in cell survival and a statistically
significant increase in apoptosis in all four cell lines upon PAI-1
downregulation by small interfering RNA (siRNA) or in the presence of
PAI-039 (Tiplaxtinin), a small molecule inhibitor of PAI-1 (P < 0.05).
Increased levels of cell-associated urokinase plasminogen activator (uPA)
and plasmin were also detected upon PAI-1 downregulation, and spontaneous
apoptosis was blocked by a caspase-8 inhibitor, Fas/FasL neutralizing
antibodies, and plasmin inhibitors, indicating that PAI-1 protects tumor
cells from Fas/FasL-mediated extrinsic apoptosis involving plasmin. Tumor
cells then were transduced with scramble (sc) short hairpin RNA (shRNA)
or PAI-1 shRNA lentivirus and were implanted into PAI-1 wildtype (WT) or
knockout (KO) mice, generating four experimental groups (group 1: sc
shRNA tumor cells in WT mice; group 2: PAI-1 shRNA tumor cells in WT
mice; group 3: sc shRNA tumor cells in KO mice; group 4: PAI-1 shRNA
tumor cells in KO mice). In the HT-1080 model, we observed a
statistically significant decrease in tumor growth, tumor take,
bromodeoxyuridine incorporation (P = 0.0036), and microvessel density (P
Plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1) is a predictor of poor outcome
in cancer. An explanation for this paradoxical role of PAI-1 has been its
documented pro-angiogenic activity. The effect of PAI-1 on tumor cells
however has not been fully explored. Here we have examined the effect of
PAI-1 knockdown (KD) on the survival of four human cancer cell lines
(high PAI-1 expression: HT-1080 fibrosarcoma and MDA-MB-231 breast cancer
cells; low PAI-1 expression: A549 lung adenocarcinoma and HCT-116 colon
carcinoma cells) in vitro and in vivo. We first demonstrated a
statistically significant decrease in cell survival and a statistically
significant increase in apoptosis in all four cell lines upon PAI-1
downregulation by small interfering RNA (siRNA) or in the presence of
PAI-039 (Tiplaxtinin), a small molecule inhibitor of PAI-1 (P < 0.05).
Increased levels of cell-associated urokinase plasminogen activator (uPA)
and plasmin were also detected upon PAI-1 downregulation, and spontaneous
apoptosis was blocked by a caspase-8 inhibitor, Fas/FasL neutralizing
antibodies, and plasmin inhibitors, indicating that PAI-1 protects tumor
cells from Fas/FasL-mediated extrinsic apoptosis involving plasmin. Tumor
cells then were transduced with scramble (sc) short hairpin RNA (shRNA)
or PAI-1 shRNA lentivirus and were implanted into PAI-1 wildtype (WT) or
knockout (KO) mice, generating four experimental groups (group 1: sc
shRNA tumor cells in WT mice; group 2: PAI-1 shRNA tumor cells in WT
mice; group 3: sc shRNA tumor cells in KO mice; group 4: PAI-1 shRNA
tumor cells in KO mice). In the HT-1080 model, we observed a
statistically significant decrease in tumor growth, tumor take,
bromodeoxyuridine incorporation (P = 0.0036), and microvessel density (P
< 0.001), associated with a statistically significant increase in
apoptosis (P = 0.0006) only in tumors from group 4 mice, but not from
group 2 or 3 mice, when compared to tumors from group 1 mice. A similar
statistically significant inhibition in tumor growth was also observed in
tumors from group 4 mice when compared with tumors from group 1 mice in
A549 and HCT-116 models. In all tumor-bearing group 4 mice, low levels of
human PAI-1 (5-10 ng/mL) were detected indicating an incomplete
inhibition of tumor-derived PAI-1 by shRNA. Five out of 15 group 4 mice
in the HT-1080 model and 2 out of 8 group 4 mice in the MDA-MB-231 model
never developed tumors, and in those mice human PAI-1 was never detected
in the plasma, suggesting that PAI-1 may be necessary for tumor growth.
In conclusion, PAI-1 exerts a protective effect against Fas/FasL-mediated
extrinsic apoptosis in tumor cells. Downregulation of PAI-1 in both tumor
and host cells is necessary for a significant inhibitory activity on
tumorigenesis through a dual effect on tumor cell and endothelial cell
apoptosis. Our data confirm PAI-1 as a therapeutic target in cancer and
support further investigation of PAI-1 inhibitors in cancer therapy.

