Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor detection and measurement of responses to chemotherapy using
human phosphatidylserine targeting antibody fragments


Phosphatidylserine (PS) is a phospholipid normally residing in the inner
leaflet of the plasma membrane and becomes exposed on tumor vascular
endothelial cells and tumor cells in response to chemotherapy,
irradiation and oxidative stresses in the tumor microenvironment. Binding
of antibodies targeting PS on the tumor endothelial cells and tumors
recruit immune cells and engage the immune system to destroy tumor
vasculature. The antibodies also enhance anti-tumor immunity by blocking
the immunosuppressive action of PS. A chimeric anti-PS antibody,
bavituximab, is being used in combination with chemotherapy to treat
patients with solid tumors in Phase II trials. In the present study, we
characterize the response to chemotherapy of human tumor xenografts in
mice using near-infrared dye labeled PGN650, a human F(ab)2 fragment that
targets PS expression. NIR-PGN650 bound human PC-3luc prostate, BT474
breast and A549luc non-small cell lung tumors in SCID or nude mice in the
absence of chemotherapy. Docetaxel treatment enhanced tumor targeting of
NIR-PGN650 approximately 2-3-fold compared to imaging signals prior to
chemotherapy. Peak tumor uptake of NIR-PGN650 was observed when docetaxel
was delivered 24 hours prior to injection of NIR-PGN650. Using these
parameters, NIR-PGN650 is able to detect responses to chemotherapy in
both the primary tumor and metastases.

