Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Convergence of protein kinase and caspase signaling: A mechanism
for pathological rewiring of survival pathways by protein kinase CK2


Crosstalk between protein kinases and caspases has become evident in
light of the observation that phosphorylation within the caspase cleavage
motif impairs proteolysis. Given that phosphorylation networks and
sensitivity to apoptotic cues are altered in cancer signaling, we sought
to investigate if the negative regulation of caspase-mediated degradation
by protein phosphorylation is a global mechanism that manifests in
changes to cancer cell survival. To systematically investigate the extent
to which phosphorylation regulates the caspase degradome, we employed a
combination of peptide cleavage assays, database mining, and
N-terminomics. These studies revealed that phosphorylation could
potentially regulate the cleavage of a significant proportion of caspase
substrates. One notable example of phosphorylation-regulated caspase
cleavage was the observation that pro-caspase-3 itself is phosphorylated
in a manner that prevents subsequent cleavage and activation by upstream
initiator caspases. To further examine the role of phosphorylation in
regulating the activation of caspase-3, we investigated the
phosphorylation of pro-caspase-3-FLAG in HeLa cells transfected with each
of the catalytic isoforms of protein kinase CK2 in the presence or
absence of the regulatory CK2 subunit. These studies suggest that the
activation of caspase-3 could be regulated by CK2 in cells. Coupled with
the observations that CK2 is constitutively activity and expressed at
elevated levels in a number of different cancers, our observations
suggest that increased levels of CK2 could lead to a pathological
phosphorylation of pro-caspase-3 to prevent its activation and promote
cancer cell survival.

