Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Breast cancer treatment decision-making: Are we asking too much of
patients


Background. Physicians are mandated to offer treatment choices to breast
cancer patients yet not all patients may want the responsibility that
entails. Prior studies show that breast cancer patients who are not given
enough responsibility for treatment decision-making have poorer treatment
knowledge and report worse quality of care. In contrast, few studies
explore potential adverse consequences for breast cancer patients who
feel they are given too much responsibility for treatment
decision-making. Methods. We sought to describe and compare women by
degree of responsibility they felt they had for making decisions about
their breast cancer treatment. Our sample includes women with early-stage
breast cancer treated surgically at 8 NYC hospitals, recruited for an RCT
of patient assistance to improve receipt of adjuvant treatment. In
multivariable analyses, we explored the association between treatment
decision-making responsibility and a) baseline knowledge of benefit of
surgical and adjuvant treatments discussed with doctor and b) regret of
treatment decisions after 6 months. Results. Of 368 women aged 28-89y
enrolled at baseline, 72% reported a reasonable amount, 21% too much, and
7% not enough responsibility for treatment decision-making. The majority
in the first group were White (53%), earned >$150,000/year (33%),
completed college (53%), had no health literacy problems (50%), and had a
great deal of self-efficacy (61%). In contrast, the majority with not
enough responsibility were Black (42%), earned Background. Physicians are
mandated to offer treatment choices to breast cancer patients yet not all
patients may want the responsibility that entails. Prior studies show
that breast cancer patients who are not given enough responsibility for
treatment decision-making have poorer treatment knowledge and report
worse quality of care. In contrast, few studies explore potential adverse
consequences for breast cancer patients who feel they are given too much
responsibility for treatment decision-making. Methods. We sought to
describe and compare women by degree of responsibility they felt they had
for making decisions about their breast cancer treatment. Our sample
includes women with early-stage breast cancer treated surgically at 8 NYC
hospitals, recruited for an RCT of patient assistance to improve receipt
of adjuvant treatment. In multivariable analyses, we explored the
association between treatment decision-making responsibility and a)
baseline knowledge of benefit of surgical and adjuvant treatments
discussed with doctor and b) regret of treatment decisions after 6
months. Results. Of 368 women aged 28-89y enrolled at baseline, 72%
reported a reasonable amount, 21% too much, and 7% not enough
responsibility for treatment decision-making. The majority in the first
group were White (53%), earned >$150,000/year (33%), completed college
(53%), had no health literacy problems (50%), and had a great deal of
self-efficacy (61%). In contrast, the majority with not enough
responsibility were Black (42%), earned <$50,000/year (58%), did not
finish high school (39%), had health literacy problems (68%), and had low
self-efficacy (69%). The majority with too much responsibility were
Hispanic (68%), earned Background. Physicians are mandated to offer
treatment choices to breast cancer patients yet not all patients may want
the responsibility that entails. Prior studies show that breast cancer
patients who are not given enough responsibility for treatment
decision-making have poorer treatment knowledge and report worse quality
of care. In contrast, few studies explore potential adverse consequences
for breast cancer patients who feel they are given too much
responsibility for treatment decision-making. Methods. We sought to
describe and compare women by degree of responsibility they felt they had
for making decisions about their breast cancer treatment. Our sample
includes women with early-stage breast cancer treated surgically at 8 NYC
hospitals, recruited for an RCT of patient assistance to improve receipt
of adjuvant treatment. In multivariable analyses, we explored the
association between treatment decision-making responsibility and a)
baseline knowledge of benefit of surgical and adjuvant treatments
discussed with doctor and b) regret of treatment decisions after 6
months. Results. Of 368 women aged 28-89y enrolled at baseline, 72%
reported a reasonable amount, 21% too much, and 7% not enough
responsibility for treatment decision-making. The majority in the first
group were White (53%), earned >$150,000/year (33%), completed college
(53%), had no health literacy problems (50%), and had a great deal of
self-efficacy (61%). In contrast, the majority with not enough
responsibility were Black (42%), earned <$50,000/year (58%), did not
finish high school (39%), had health literacy problems (68%), and had low
self-efficacy (69%). The majority with too much responsibility were
Hispanic (68%), earned <$15,000/year (54%), did not finish high school
(37%), and had health literacy problems (62%), despite having a great
deal of self-efficacy (64%). Only 29% of women had knowledge of treatment
benefits and 40% experienced decision regret at 6 months. Multivariable
analysis found that women with too much vs. a reasonable amount of
responsibility had less treatment knowledge ([OR] 0.46 [95% CI] 0.21,
0.99; model c=0.7301; pBackground. Physicians are mandated to offer
treatment choices to breast cancer patients yet not all patients may want
the responsibility that entails. Prior studies show that breast cancer
patients who are not given enough responsibility for treatment
decision-making have poorer treatment knowledge and report worse quality
of care. In contrast, few studies explore potential adverse consequences
for breast cancer patients who feel they are given too much
responsibility for treatment decision-making. Methods. We sought to
describe and compare women by degree of responsibility they felt they had
for making decisions about their breast cancer treatment. Our sample
includes women with early-stage breast cancer treated surgically at 8 NYC
hospitals, recruited for an RCT of patient assistance to improve receipt
of adjuvant treatment. In multivariable analyses, we explored the
association between treatment decision-making responsibility and a)
baseline knowledge of benefit of surgical and adjuvant treatments
discussed with doctor and b) regret of treatment decisions after 6
months. Results. Of 368 women aged 28-89y enrolled at baseline, 72%
reported a reasonable amount, 21% too much, and 7% not enough
responsibility for treatment decision-making. The majority in the first
group were White (53%), earned >$150,000/year (33%), completed college
(53%), had no health literacy problems (50%), and had a great deal of
self-efficacy (61%). In contrast, the majority with not enough
responsibility were Black (42%), earned <$50,000/year (58%), did not
finish high school (39%), had health literacy problems (68%), and had low
self-efficacy (69%). The majority with too much responsibility were
Hispanic (68%), earned <$15,000/year (54%), did not finish high school
(37%), and had health literacy problems (62%), despite having a great
deal of self-efficacy (64%). Only 29% of women had knowledge of treatment
benefits and 40% experienced decision regret at 6 months. Multivariable
analysis found that women with too much vs. a reasonable amount of
responsibility had less treatment knowledge ([OR] 0.46 [95% CI] 0.21,
0.99; model c=0.7301; p<0.001) and more decision regret at 6 months ([OR]
3.16 [CI] 1.59, 6.29; model c=0.7821; pBackground. Physicians are
mandated to offer treatment choices to breast cancer patients yet not all
patients may want the responsibility that entails. Prior studies show
that breast cancer patients who are not given enough responsibility for
treatment decision-making have poorer treatment knowledge and report
worse quality of care. In contrast, few studies explore potential adverse
consequences for breast cancer patients who feel they are given too much
responsibility for treatment decision-making. Methods. We sought to
describe and compare women by degree of responsibility they felt they had
for making decisions about their breast cancer treatment. Our sample
includes women with early-stage breast cancer treated surgically at 8 NYC
hospitals, recruited for an RCT of patient assistance to improve receipt
of adjuvant treatment. In multivariable analyses, we explored the
association between treatment decision-making responsibility and a)
baseline knowledge of benefit of surgical and adjuvant treatments
discussed with doctor and b) regret of treatment decisions after 6
months. Results. Of 368 women aged 28-89y enrolled at baseline, 72%
reported a reasonable amount, 21% too much, and 7% not enough
responsibility for treatment decision-making. The majority in the first
group were White (53%), earned >$150,000/year (33%), completed college
(53%), had no health literacy problems (50%), and had a great deal of
self-efficacy (61%). In contrast, the majority with not enough
responsibility were Black (42%), earned <$50,000/year (58%), did not
finish high school (39%), had health literacy problems (68%), and had low
self-efficacy (69%). The majority with too much responsibility were
Hispanic (68%), earned <$15,000/year (54%), did not finish high school
(37%), and had health literacy problems (62%), despite having a great
deal of self-efficacy (64%). Only 29% of women had knowledge of treatment
benefits and 40% experienced decision regret at 6 months. Multivariable
analysis found that women with too much vs. a reasonable amount of
responsibility had less treatment knowledge ([OR] 0.46 [95% CI] 0.21,
0.99; model c=0.7301; p<0.001) and more decision regret at 6 months ([OR]
3.16 [CI] 1.59, 6.29; model c=0.7821; p<0.001). The few women with not
enough responsibility also had less treatment knowledge, and more
decision regret, though results were not statistically significant in
this small group ([OR] 0.74 [CI] 0.23, 2.37 and [OR] 3.26 [CI] 0.93,
11.4). Conclusion. Overall, treatment knowledge is low and decision
regret common in this group of breast cancer patients. Among women with
too much responsibility for treatment decisions, low health literacy is
common and this has important negative consequences. Physicians must find
different ways to communicate with low health literacy patients to enable
breast cancer patients to achieve adequate levels of treatment decision
responsibility and reduce decision regret.

