Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hematopoietic chimerism in liver transplantation patients and
hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells in adult human liver


Liver transplantation (LT) is a cure for many liver diseases. Blood
chimerism of donor origin can develop after LT, which raises the
possibility of existence of hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells (HSPCs)
in liver. We characterized the blood chimerism in a large cohort of 226
LT patients and analyzed putative HSPCs in adult human livers. The
overall incidence of chimerism was 6.19%, of which 10.3% was among
short-term (one day to six months) and 3.6% was among long-term (six
months to eight years) LT patients. Hematopoietic LinCD34+CD38CD90+
population has been demonstrated to generate long-term multipotent grafts
in transplantations. In human adult livers, we detected LinCD34+CD38CD90+
population accounting for 0.056% 0.05% of the total single liver cells
and for 0.06% 0.05% of CD45+ liver cells. Both LinCD34+ and LinCD45+
liver cells from extensive perfused human liver graft were capable of
forming hematopoietic myeloid-lineage and erythroid-lineage
methylcellulose colonies. More importantly, LinCD45+ or CD45+ liver cells
could be engrafted into hematopoietic cells in an immunodeficient mouse
model. These results are the first evidence of presence of the putative
HSPC population in adult human liver, where liver is a good ectopic
niche. The discovery of existence of HSPCs in adult liver will have new
implications for understanding of extra-marrow hematopoiesis, liver
regeneration, mechanisms of tolerance in organ transplantation and de
novo cancer recurrence in LT patients. Conclusion: Human adult liver
contains small population of HSPCs. In LT patients, there are two types
of chimerism: transient chimerism resulting from mature leucocytes and
long-term chimerism deriving from putative HSPCs in the liver graft.

