Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cancer-type regulation of MIG-6 expression by
5-Aza-2-deoxycytidine and Trichostatin A


Mitogen inducible gene 6 (MIG-6) is a tumor suppressor gene located in
chromosome 1p36 which is frequently lost in many human cancers. It is
mainly viewed as a negative feedback regulator of epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) family members by directly binding to the receptors and
thereby negatively regulating the signaling. Mice with Mig-6 deficiency
are prone to develop epithelial hyperplasia or tumors in various tissues
including lung, gallbladder, bile duct, uterus and skin. Previously, we
reported a few mutations in MIG-6 gene in human lung cancer, but such
event is rare. To determine if MIG-6 is regulated by epigenetic
silencing, we identified a group of cancer cell lines with low or no
MIG-6 expression and investigated the status of DNA methylation and
histone deacetylation in MIG-6 promoter. We found that DNA methylation
inhibitor 5-Aza-2-deoxycytidine (5-Aza-dC) induced MIG-6 expression in
the melanoma but not in the lung cancer cell lines, while histone
deacetylase inhibitor Trichostatin A (TSA) induced MIG-6 expression in
lung cancer lines but not in melanoma cell lines. However, the MIG-6
promoter itself does not seem to be directly affected by methylation or
histone deacetylation, indicating they are indirectly regulated and most
likely mediated by transcription factor(s). Luciferase reporter assays
revealed that a short segment of exon-1 in MIG-6 gene is responsible for
the induction of its expression by TSA in the lung cancer cells. Our data
suggest that MIG-6 gene expression is differentially regulated by the
inhibitors of methylation and histone deacetylation in lung cancer and
melanoma cells respectively, without directly modifying the promoter.

