Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Frizzled-8 receptor is activated by the Wnt-2 ligant in non-small
cell lung cancer


Introduction: Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer-associated
mortality throughout the world. We previously showed that the Wnt
signaling pathway is aberrantly activated in lung cancer. In this report,
we investigated the role of interactions between different Frizzled
receptors and the Wnt-2 ligant in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
Methods: Quantitative RT-PCR was used to measure expression of Frz-8 and
Wnt-2 from fifty freshly resected lung tumors and matched normal lung
tissue. A human dominant-negative Wnt-2 mutant (dnhWnt-2) was designed to
target the interactions between Fzd-8 and Wnt-2 in vitro and in vivo.
pTOPflash/pFOPflash luciferase activity assay was used to detect
TCF/-catenine transcription activity. Crystal violet staining assay was
used to determine the colony formation. A mouse xenogrant model using
A549 cells transfected with dnhWnt-2 vector or control vector was used to
detect tumorigenic effects. Results: RT-PCR analysis showed that Wnt-2
overexpression is in correlation with overexpression of Fzd-8 in 45/50
(90%) tumor samples analyzed. Coexpression of the dnhWnt-2 construct
together with Wnt-2 and Fzd8 expression vectors in 293T, 293 and A549
cells strongly reduced TCF-dependent transcriptional activity (TOPflash
assay) as compared with cells transfected with control vectors. In lung
cancer cell line A549, naturally overexpressing both Wnt-2 and Fzd8, the
dnhWnt-2 construct induced cell death, inhibited cell proliferation.
Results from colony formation assay showed 50% reduction in colonies
formed from the dnhWnt-2 transfected cells as compared to control vector.
A tumor xenograft model of A549 cells expressing the dnhWnt-2 mutant,
demonstrated a marked reduction in tumor formation 43 days after cell
inoculation (pIntroduction: Lung cancer is the leading cause of
cancer-associated mortality throughout the world. We previously showed
that the Wnt signaling pathway is aberrantly activated in lung cancer. In
this report, we investigated the role of interactions between different
Frizzled receptors and the Wnt-2 ligant in non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC). Methods: Quantitative RT-PCR was used to measure expression of
Frz-8 and Wnt-2 from fifty freshly resected lung tumors and matched
normal lung tissue. A human dominant-negative Wnt-2 mutant (dnhWnt-2) was
designed to target the interactions between Fzd-8 and Wnt-2 in vitro and
in vivo. pTOPflash/pFOPflash luciferase activity assay was used to detect
TCF/-catenine transcription activity. Crystal violet staining assay was
used to determine the colony formation. A mouse xenogrant model using
A549 cells transfected with dnhWnt-2 vector or control vector was used to
detect tumorigenic effects. Results: RT-PCR analysis showed that Wnt-2
overexpression is in correlation with overexpression of Fzd-8 in 45/50
(90%) tumor samples analyzed. Coexpression of the dnhWnt-2 construct
together with Wnt-2 and Fzd8 expression vectors in 293T, 293 and A549
cells strongly reduced TCF-dependent transcriptional activity (TOPflash
assay) as compared with cells transfected with control vectors. In lung
cancer cell line A549, naturally overexpressing both Wnt-2 and Fzd8, the
dnhWnt-2 construct induced cell death, inhibited cell proliferation.
Results from colony formation assay showed 50% reduction in colonies
formed from the dnhWnt-2 transfected cells as compared to control vector.
A tumor xenograft model of A549 cells expressing the dnhWnt-2 mutant,
demonstrated a marked reduction in tumor formation 43 days after cell
inoculation (p<0.02) with reduced Wnt downstream target gene expressions
(Survivin, c-Myc, Dvl-3 and Cyclin- D1) compared to control tumors.
Conclusion: This report demonstrated a novel interaction between Frz-8
receptor and Wnt-2 ligant in non-small cell lung cancer. Inhibition of
this interaction may provide a new therapeutic avenue in targeting the
Wnt pathway in lung cancer.

