Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NSC 743380 induces apoptosis in sensitive cell lines through
activation of tyrosine kinase 2 (Tyk2)


Several indole-3-carbinol analogs are under preclinical evaluation at the
National Cancer Institute. One analog, NSC743380
(1-[(3-chlorophenyl)-methyl]-1H-indole-3-carbinol), is selectively toxic
to a subset of NCI 60 cell lines in vitro and has undergone extensive in
vivo testing. In vivo, NSC743380 produced complete regressions in A498
renal xenograft models at doses as low as 45 mg/kg when administered
intraperitoneally. Additional studies demonstrated that NSC743380 is
orally bioavailable. To extend knowledge regarding the mechanism of
action, two pairs of resistant and sensitive cell lines [A498/ACHN
(renal) and NCI-H226/A549 (NSCLC), sensitive/resistant, respectively]
were used. Results showed that 5-10 min following NSC743380 treatment,
phosphorylation of p38 and JNK were enhanced in sensitive but not
resistant lines. Two hrs of treatment resulted in an inhibition of
transcription and translation (45% and 75% inhibition, respectively) and
by 4 hrs NSC743380 induced caspase-dependent apoptosis with loss of
c-FLIP. Pathway-specific inhibitors were then used to gain mechanistic
insight. Diverse antioxidants and NSAIDs, inhibitors of JNK, RAS/RAF,
PPAR, lipid 2nd messenger signaling, transcription and actin
polymerization were shown to completely inhibit NSC743380 activity.
Microarray analysis of three sensitive cell lines using Affymetrix U133
Plus 2 chipset identified several trends in the transcriptome notably the
upregulation of diverse immediate-early genes (IEGs) including;
transcriptional regulators [EGR1, FOS/FOSB, HES1, MAFF and SOX9],
secreted factors [HBEGF, IL-8 and GDF-15] and several general IEGs [ARC,
ERRFI1, GADD45A/B, GEM and IER2]. A second noteworthy trend involved
increased expression of the IL-6 family members, IL-6, IL-11 and LIF.
These data led to an exploration as to whether enhanced JAK/STAT
signaling was responsible for the above effects. Short time course
lysates from 3 sensitive (A498, CAKI-1 and NCI-H226) cell lines and 1
resistant (A549) cell line showed that in sensitive lines only, NSC743380
rapidly (5 minutes) enhanced phosphorylation of the JAK family member
Tyk2 at Y1054/55 and STAT3 at Y705. Additionally several phosphostate
changes were observed in a subset of sensitive cell lines such as JAK1
phosphorylation in A498 cells and transient increase in pSTAT1 in A498
and CAKI-1 cell lines. Furthermore, two inhibitors of JAK/STAT signaling,
AG490 and resveratrol, completely inhibited NSC743380 activity and
p38/JNK phosphorylation. Subsequent siRNA knockdown experiments showed
that Tyk2 siRNA inhibited NSC743380 activity whereas STAT3 and JAK1 siRNA
along with scrambled siRNA had no effect. These data suggest that
signaling through the JAK family member Tyk2 contributes towards
NSC743380 activity and the data are being evaluated to determine how best
to move forward. Funded by NCI Contract No. HHSN261200800001E.

