Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epigenetic activation of miR-200a targets the Nrf2-dependent
chemoprevention pathway in breast cancer


NF-E2-related factor 2 (Nrf2) is an important transcription factor that
activates the expression of cellular detoxifying enzymes. Nrf2 expression
is largely regulated through Nrf2 association with Kelch-like
ECH-associated protein 1 (Keap1), which results in cytoplasmic Nrf2
degradation. Conversely, little is known concerning the regulation of
Keap1 expression. Until now, a regulatory role for microRNAs (miRs) in
controlling Keap1 gene expression had not been characterized. By using
miR array-based screening, we observed miR-200a silencing in breast
cancer cells and demonstrated that upon re-expression, miR-200a targets
the Keap1 3 untranslated region (3UTR) leading to Keap1 mRNA degradation.
Loss of this regulatory mechanism may contribute to the dysregulation of
Nrf2 activity in breast cancer. Previously, we have identified epigenetic
repression of miR-200a in breast cancer cells. Here, we find that
treatment with epigenetic therapy, the histone deacetylase (HDAC)
inhibitor suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA), restored miR-200a
expression and reduced Keap1 levels. This reduction in Keap1 levels
corresponded with Nrf2 nuclear translocation and activation of
Nrf2-dependent NAD(P)H-quinone oxidoreductase 1 (NQO1) gene
transcription. Moreover, we found that Nrf2 activation inhibited the
anchorage-independent growth of breast cancer cells. Finally, our in
vitro observations were confirmed in a model of carcinogen-induced
mammary hyperplasia in vivo. In conclusion, our study demonstrates that
miR-200a regulates the Keap1/Nrf2 pathway in mammary epithelium and we
find that epigenetic therapy can restore miR-200a regulation of Keap1
expression, therefore re-activating the Nrf2-dependent antioxidant
pathway in breast cancer.

