Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The identification and characterization of genetic variations in
lung adenocarcinomas in a Japanese population


Lung adenocarcinoma is a major histological subtype of non-small cell
lung cancer. Previous studies have revealed substantial clinical and
molecular differences between the Asian and Caucasian populations. Kinase
inhibitor-sensitive EGFR mutations are frequently detected in Asian,
female and non-smoker population. These findings suggest unique genetic
and/or environmental background of carcinogenesis of this tumor. In the
present study, we generated and analyzed a dataset of single-nucleotide
variants (SNVs) and small insertions and deletions (indels) in the entire
exon regions (exomes) in Japanese lung adenocarcinomas. We chose
consecutive 97 of surgically resected T2 cases registered to the database
containing clinicopathological and lifestyle information established at
National Cancer Center Hospital East. High integrity genomic DNA was
extracted from archived methanol fixed paraffin embedded tissue samples.
Whole exons were captured using Agilent SureSelect system and we
generated 76-base paired-end sequences with an Illumina GAIIx platform.
Approximately 30 million mapped sequences were obtained for each sample,
providing 75x coverage of the target regions and 93% of the target
regions also had 5x coverage. Using the sequence data, we identified SNVs
and indels by BWA, SAMtools and GATK. EGFR mutations were observed among
55 cases and Sanger sequencing validated them. As well, known lung
cancer-related gene mutations such as KRAS and TP53 were detected in
exome data. Detailed profiling of somatic mutations provided wide variety
of heterogeneity of known and novel gene mutations with both EGFR-mutant
and -wildtype background. These heterogenity might define the unique
signature of an individual tumor and be waited for further classification
suitable for understanding genetic mechanism of carcinogenesis.

