Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovery of novel checkpoint kinase 1 inhibitors by virtual
screening based on multiple crystal structures


Checkpoint kinase 1 (Chk1) is activated in response to DNA damage through
the ATM/ATR pathway, and plays an essential role in the regulation of the
G2/M checkpoint. Inhibition of Chk1 should abrogate this checkpoint in a
manner relevant to the treatment of cancer, and may induce apoptosis.
Currently about 50 crystal structures of Chk1 are available in RCSB
Protein Data Bank. The abundance of Chk1 structures offers the
opportunity not only to discover new inhibitors with receptor-based drug
design but also to explore the impact of receptor flexibility in ligand
docking. Here we describe a successful application of the docking of
multiple structures to discover novel and potent Chk1 inhibitors.
Forty-six Chk1 structures were first compared in single structure docking
by predicting the binding mode and recovering known ligands. Combinations
of different protein structures were then compared by recovery of known
ligands and an optimal ensemble of Chk1 structures were selected. The
chosen structures were used in the virtual screening of over 60,000
diverse compounds for Chk1 inhibitors. Six compounds ranked at the top of
the hits list were tested experimentally and two of these compounds
inhibited Chk1 activity-the best with an IC50 value of 9.6 M. Further
study indicated that achieving a better enrichment and identifying more
diverse compounds was more likely using multiple structures than using
only a single structure even when protein structures were randomly
selected.

