Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bitter melon juice induces apoptotic death of human pancreatic
carcinoma cells


Pancreatic cancer is one of the deadliest cancers. The prognosis of this
malignancy is extremely poor in general and especially at advanced stages
of the disease, suggesting that newer preventive/intervention strategies
are necessary to improve the outcome of this malignancy. Plant based
therapies are often used as alternative and complementary treatments for
various diseases including cancer. Bitter melon (Momordica Charantia) is
a fruit from the perennially growing climber of Cucurbitacae family. It
is a commonly consumed vegetable and is also used as a traditional
medicine for treating disease conditions such as diabetes, ulcers,
microbial and viral infections, etc. In recent years, the interest in its
anti-cancer potential has grown considerably in the scientific community;
however, literature still lacks detailed studies on this aspect. In the
present study, we assessed the efficacy and associated mechanisms of
bitter melon juice (BMJ) against pancreatic cancer. For this, we selected
two human pancreatic cancer cell lines, BxPC-3 and MiaPaCa-2, which
differ in K-ras status; a major genetic alteration in most pancreatic
cancer cases. We observed that treatment of these cells with BMJ (2-4%
v/v) significantly decreases the viability by 59-94% and 40-91% after 48h
in case of BxPC-3 and MiaPaCa-2 cells, respectively. Decrease in cell
viability was largely due to apoptosis induction as evidenced by cell
death ELISA and western blot analysis for cleaved caspases-9 and -3. A
significant increase in the release of cytochrome-c in the cytoplasmic
fraction was also observed, thereby indicating that BMJ activates the
intrinsic pathway of apoptosis in these cell lines. Additionally, BMJ
significantly increased the levels of pro-apoptotic protein Bak and
decreased the levels of anti-apoptotic protein Bcl-XL in both the cell
lines. In other studies, BMJ treatment down-regulated XIAP and survivin,
but increased p21 and Chop, and caused an activation of ERK and p38 in
both cell lines without any effect on JNK. Furthermore, BMJ treatment
resulted in significant up regulation in AMPK activation thereby
suggesting it might be impinging on additional pathways. In tumor
xenograft study, administration of lyophilized BMJ powder in diet (1.5%,
w/w) to athymic nude mice for 42 days caused a significant inhibition in
MiaPaca-2 xenograft growth in terms of a decrease in tumor volume by 43%
(PPancreatic cancer is one of the deadliest cancers. The prognosis of
this malignancy is extremely poor in general and especially at advanced
stages of the disease, suggesting that newer preventive/intervention
strategies are necessary to improve the outcome of this malignancy. Plant
based therapies are often used as alternative and complementary
treatments for various diseases including cancer. Bitter melon (Momordica
Charantia) is a fruit from the perennially growing climber of
Cucurbitacae family. It is a commonly consumed vegetable and is also used
as a traditional medicine for treating disease conditions such as
diabetes, ulcers, microbial and viral infections, etc. In recent years,
the interest in its anti-cancer potential has grown considerably in the
scientific community; however, literature still lacks detailed studies on
this aspect. In the present study, we assessed the efficacy and
associated mechanisms of bitter melon juice (BMJ) against pancreatic
cancer. For this, we selected two human pancreatic cancer cell lines,
BxPC-3 and MiaPaCa-2, which differ in K-ras status; a major genetic
alteration in most pancreatic cancer cases. We observed that treatment of
these cells with BMJ (2-4% v/v) significantly decreases the viability by
59-94% and 40-91% after 48h in case of BxPC-3 and MiaPaCa-2 cells,
respectively. Decrease in cell viability was largely due to apoptosis
induction as evidenced by cell death ELISA and western blot analysis for
cleaved caspases-9 and -3. A significant increase in the release of
cytochrome-c in the cytoplasmic fraction was also observed, thereby
indicating that BMJ activates the intrinsic pathway of apoptosis in these
cell lines. Additionally, BMJ significantly increased the levels of
pro-apoptotic protein Bak and decreased the levels of anti-apoptotic
protein Bcl-XL in both the cell lines. In other studies, BMJ treatment
down-regulated XIAP and survivin, but increased p21 and Chop, and caused
an activation of ERK and p38 in both cell lines without any effect on
JNK. Furthermore, BMJ treatment resulted in significant up regulation in
AMPK activation thereby suggesting it might be impinging on additional
pathways. In tumor xenograft study, administration of lyophilized BMJ
powder in diet (1.5%, w/w) to athymic nude mice for 42 days caused a
significant inhibition in MiaPaca-2 xenograft growth in terms of a
decrease in tumor volume by 43% (P<0.05) and tumor weight by 52%
(PPancreatic cancer is one of the deadliest cancers. The prognosis of
this malignancy is extremely poor in general and especially at advanced
stages of the disease, suggesting that newer preventive/intervention
strategies are necessary to improve the outcome of this malignancy. Plant
based therapies are often used as alternative and complementary
treatments for various diseases including cancer. Bitter melon (Momordica
Charantia) is a fruit from the perennially growing climber of
Cucurbitacae family. It is a commonly consumed vegetable and is also used
as a traditional medicine for treating disease conditions such as
diabetes, ulcers, microbial and viral infections, etc. In recent years,
the interest in its anti-cancer potential has grown considerably in the
scientific community; however, literature still lacks detailed studies on
this aspect. In the present study, we assessed the efficacy and
associated mechanisms of bitter melon juice (BMJ) against pancreatic
cancer. For this, we selected two human pancreatic cancer cell lines,
BxPC-3 and MiaPaCa-2, which differ in K-ras status; a major genetic
alteration in most pancreatic cancer cases. We observed that treatment of
these cells with BMJ (2-4% v/v) significantly decreases the viability by
59-94% and 40-91% after 48h in case of BxPC-3 and MiaPaCa-2 cells,
respectively. Decrease in cell viability was largely due to apoptosis
induction as evidenced by cell death ELISA and western blot analysis for
cleaved caspases-9 and -3. A significant increase in the release of
cytochrome-c in the cytoplasmic fraction was also observed, thereby
indicating that BMJ activates the intrinsic pathway of apoptosis in these
cell lines. Additionally, BMJ significantly increased the levels of
pro-apoptotic protein Bak and decreased the levels of anti-apoptotic
protein Bcl-XL in both the cell lines. In other studies, BMJ treatment
down-regulated XIAP and survivin, but increased p21 and Chop, and caused
an activation of ERK and p38 in both cell lines without any effect on
JNK. Furthermore, BMJ treatment resulted in significant up regulation in
AMPK activation thereby suggesting it might be impinging on additional
pathways. In tumor xenograft study, administration of lyophilized BMJ
powder in diet (1.5%, w/w) to athymic nude mice for 42 days caused a
significant inhibition in MiaPaca-2 xenograft growth in terms of a
decrease in tumor volume by 43% (P<0.05) and tumor weight by 52% (P<0.05)
without affecting body weight and food intake. Taken together, our
findings demonstrate the anti-cancer efficacy of BMJ towards the human
pancreatic carcinoma cells irrespective of their genetic background,
suggesting that more studies are needed to establish the translational
potential of BMJ in human pancreatic cancer control.

