Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phenotypic plasticity in glioma stem cells mediated by NFB
signaling


Here we report the identification of two major subtypes of glioma stem
cells (GSCs) that closely mirror previously described glioblastoma (GBM)
groups, namely proneural (PN) and mesenchymal (MES), based on gene
expression patterns. Using flow cytometry, we found that PN GSCs express
both CD15/SSEA1, a marker for neural stem cells, as well as CD44, a MES
marker. In contrast MES GSCs were CD15low/CD44high. MES GSCs and CD44high
subpopulations in PN GSCs showed increased expression of transcription
factors previously reported to induce the MES phenotype (STAT3, C/EBP-,
and TAZ), and were -resistant to -irradiation. By distilling cytokines
that can induce MES differentiation, we found that TNF- found in
patient-derived microglial conditioned media or conditioned media from
MES GSCs caused a PN-to-MES transition through activation of NFB
resulting in radio-resistance. We found that NFB mediates MES transition
indirectly by inducing the transcriptional circuitry of STAT3, C/EBP-,
and TAZ. Blockade of NFB activation using minocycline abrogated the MES
phenotype (both induced and constitutive), reduced tumor growth, and
rendered GSCs radio-sensitive. Taken together, our findings reveal that
phenotypic and surface marker plasticity is common in GSCs, and that the
NFB driven PN-to-MES transition provides an escape mechanism for GSCs to
evade cytotoxic treatment. Based on our studies, we propose that
minocycline, a commonly used antibiotic, could target GSCs and should be
further evaluated in preclinical studies.

