Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Overexpression of Rhotekin confers gastric cancer cells resistance
to interferon--mediated growth inhibition


Tumor infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) are frequently detected in a
variety of malignancies, including gastric cancer (GC). TILs are known to
produce high level of interferon-gamma (IFN-) in GC, but fail to suppress
tumor growth. We have previously shown that Rhotekin (RTKN), the gene
encoding the Rho effector RTKN, is overexpressed in human GC, and its
expression is correlated with disease progression. In this study, we show
that RTKN expression efficiently blocks IFN--mediated anti-growth and
immunologic responses, suggesting a role of RTKN in attenuating tumor
immunosurveillance during GC pathogenesis. We show that RTKN attenuates
STAT1 phosphorylation in response to IFN-, and confers increased
resistance to IFN--mediated growth suppression in GC cells through
inhibiting the expression of STAT1-dependent downstream target genes,
including cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p21 and antiapoptotic genes
BCL-2 and BCL-xL. Conversely, elimination of RTKN expression by knockdown
approach facilitates IFN--mediated STAT1 phosphorylation and promotes
IFN--mediated growth arrest and apoptosis. We further show that
RTKN-mediated inhibition of STAT1 phosphorylation can be reversed by the
treatment of sodium orthovanadate, a tyrosine phosphatase inhibitor,
suggesting the involvement of tyrosine phosphatases in RTKN-mediated
process. In support, our data show that RTKN suppresses IFN--mediated
STAT1 phosphorylation partly through facilitating the interactions of
SHP2 and STAT1. In summary, our data suggest that RTKN overexpression
confers growth advantages to GC by evading immunosurveillance through
suppression of IFN--mediated anti-tumor activity.

