Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Host ephrinB2 regulates T-cells in tumor microenvironments


Background: The tumor microenvironment consists of immune, stromal, and
vascular cells. Proteins known to play roles in vascular development
during embryogenesis also have been implicated in the control of
leukocyte migration. The vascular patterning ligand ephrinB2, for
example, influences T-cell migration in vitro. We therefore hypothesized
that host ephrinB2 signaling regulates tumor immune microenvironments.
Methods: EphrinB2+/lacZ mice were implanted with B16 melanoma, KR158
glioma, LLC lung, and EL4 T-lymphoma tumor cells. Macroscopic tumors were
harvested and ephrinB2 expression assayed using x-gal staining.
Mx1-cre/efnb2fl/fl mice were generated which allow for the post-natal
deletion of ephrinB2 after pIpC treatment. Mx1-cre/efnb2+/+ mice served
as controls. 1 million B16 or KR158 tumor cells were implanted in
hindlimbs and tumor volume measured (V= 0.52*L*W2) at least twice weekly.
Tumor tissues were stained with anti-CD3, F4/80, anti-CD34, and anti-NG2
antibodies. Experiments were repeated following T-cell depletion with
i.p. injections of anti-CD4 and anti-CD8 antibodies 3x week. Finally,
C57BL6 mice were transplanted with Mx1-cre/efnb2fl/fl or Mx1-cre/efnb2+/+
bone marrow and ephrinB2 was deleted after engraftment but prior to tumor
growth experiments. Results: EphrinB2 was expressed in vascular
structures all tumors. In addition we observed upregulation of ephrinB2
in microvascular structures in adjacent muscle during tumor invasion.
Inducible deletion of host ephrinB2 significantly reduced B16 tumor
growth (control tumor volume 2846 mm3 versus deleted tumor 869 mm3,
pBackground: The tumor microenvironment consists of immune, stromal, and
vascular cells. Proteins known to play roles in vascular development
during embryogenesis also have been implicated in the control of
leukocyte migration. The vascular patterning ligand ephrinB2, for
example, influences T-cell migration in vitro. We therefore hypothesized
that host ephrinB2 signaling regulates tumor immune microenvironments.
Methods: EphrinB2+/lacZ mice were implanted with B16 melanoma, KR158
glioma, LLC lung, and EL4 T-lymphoma tumor cells. Macroscopic tumors were
harvested and ephrinB2 expression assayed using x-gal staining.
Mx1-cre/efnb2fl/fl mice were generated which allow for the post-natal
deletion of ephrinB2 after pIpC treatment. Mx1-cre/efnb2+/+ mice served
as controls. 1 million B16 or KR158 tumor cells were implanted in
hindlimbs and tumor volume measured (V= 0.52*L*W2) at least twice weekly.
Tumor tissues were stained with anti-CD3, F4/80, anti-CD34, and anti-NG2
antibodies. Experiments were repeated following T-cell depletion with
i.p. injections of anti-CD4 and anti-CD8 antibodies 3x week. Finally,
C57BL6 mice were transplanted with Mx1-cre/efnb2fl/fl or Mx1-cre/efnb2+/+
bone marrow and ephrinB2 was deleted after engraftment but prior to tumor
growth experiments. Results: EphrinB2 was expressed in vascular
structures all tumors. In addition we observed upregulation of ephrinB2
in microvascular structures in adjacent muscle during tumor invasion.
Inducible deletion of host ephrinB2 significantly reduced B16 tumor
growth (control tumor volume 2846 mm3 versus deleted tumor 869 mm3,
p<0.01) and KR158 tumor growth (2028 mm3 versus 1403 mm3). EphrinB2
deletion did not affect CD34+ microvessel density, NG2+ pericyte or F4/80
macrophage infiltration. Rather, tumors grown in ephrinB2 deficient
microenvironments demonstrated a significant increase in infiltrating
CD3+ T-cells. In vivo depletion of T-cells abrogated the effect of
ephrinB2 deletion on tumor growth delay demonstrating a role for immune
cells in impairing tumor growth. EphrinB2 deletion in transplanted
hematopoietic cells did not lead to tumor growth delay demonstrating a
requirement for intact ephrinB2 signaling in vascular cells for T-cell
regulation. Conclusion: EphrinB2 is upregulated in tumor vasculature and
at sites of tumor invasion. Post-natal ephrinB2 deletion did not affect
tumor angiogenesis but led to tumor growth delay via a T-cell mediated
mechanism. These findings demonstrate a novel role for ephrinB2
specifically and vascular cells generally in regulating immune
microenvironments. Therefore this study identifies a novel therapeutic
strategy to increase the accumulation of T-cells in tumor tissues with
relevance to combination immunotherapeutic strategies.

