Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pharmacogenetic analysis of the weekly paclitaxel/IP carboplatin
combination therapy for ovarian and peritoneal cancers


Background: Suboptimal ovarian and peritoneal cancer patients with stage
II-IV are regularly received TC chemotherapy using 180 mg/m2 paclitaxel
(TXL) and AUC 5-6 of iv carboplatin (CBDCA) tri-weekly. The response rate
of the TC is 60% and thus a further improvement is urgently required. So
far, two modified TC regimens, i.e., 1) IP administration of CBDCA, and
2) application of dose-dense weekly 80 mg/m2 TXL have resulted in
favorable prognostics as compared with the authentic one. We then
commenced phase II clinical trials of weekly TXL/ IP CBDCA for these
patients since 2009 under approval of each IRB. Since weekly
administration of TXL has been reported to show higher rate of adverse
effects such as hematotoxicity, establishment of tailored-therapy is
needed for the regimen based on the individuals genetic background and
cancer characteristics. Methods: Plasma TXL concentrations at 0, 2, 8,
and 24 hrs after the administration were measured at a single laboratory,
SRL (Tokyo). Forty-seven Japanese patients who were eligible for the TXL
concentrations as of June 2011 were included for the analysis. Genotypes
of ABCB1 (rs3213619, rs1128503, rs2032582, rs1045642), ABCC1 (rs60782127,
rs4148356), ABCC2 (rs3740066), CYP1B1 (rs1056836), CYP2C8 (rs10509681,
rs11572080, rs1058930, rs11572093), CYP3A4 (rs12721627, rs4646438,
rs55951658, rs55901263, rs55785340), CYP3A5 (rs776746, rs10264272) and
GSTP1 (rs1695) were determined using TaqMan SNP genotyping assay (Applied
Biosystems). Deletion polymorphisms of GSTT1 and GSTM1 were analyzed
using PCR amplification and agarose gel electrophoresis. Results: Among
the tested polymorphisms, only absence of GSTM1 was associated with the
higher levels of TXL AUC (P=0.016) in the univariate analysis. When
stratified by the GSTM1 status, other SNPs also showed some associations:
In the presence of GSTM1, a combination of CYP2C8 rs11572093, CYP3A4
rs12721627 and CYP3A5 rs776746 enabled classification of patients with
altered levels of AUC and CL of TXL (P=0.0037 and 0.0003, respectively);
combined genotypes using ABCB1 rs11278503 and ABCC1 rs4148356 were useful
for identifying patients with higher AUC and Cmax (P=0.036, 0.0031,
respectively) in the absence of GSTM1. Conclusion: Stratification of
patients with GSTM1 status and combinations with certain SNPs of
cytochrome P450s and drug pumps were useful for identifying patients with
altered pharmacokinetics parameters for TXL. This finding suggested a
possible involvement of GSTM1 enzyme in the metabolism of TXL, though no
conjugate of TXL has been reported thus far.

