Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A high-throughput peptide array screen of H3K9 methyl effectors
identifies UHRF1 as an exception to the phospho/methyl switch.


Increasing evidence suggests that histone post-translational
modifications (PTMs) function in combination to regulate the diverse
activities associated with chromatin. However, the mechanisms through
which multiple histone PTMs influence the association of effector
proteins with chromatin is poorly understood. To address this problem, we
recently developed a histone peptide array platform containing singly-
and multiply-modified histone peptides to examine the binding of
chromatin-associated proteins. Using these arrays, we surveyed protein
domains that bound methylated H3K9, and uncovered a number of PTM
patterns that influenced the association with this mark. Interestingly,
while most H3K9 methyl binders were ejected by neighboring H3S10
phosphorylation (a PTM enriched in G2/M-phase chromatin), the tandem
Tudor domain (TTD) of UHRF1 was insensitive to this known phospho/methyl
switch. In agreement, structural and biophysical studies confirmed the
insensitivity of the UHRF1 TTD to H3S10 phosphorylation. Furthermore, we
found that UHRF1 remains bound to chromatin throughout the cell cycle in
contrast to HP1, which is ejected from chromatin during mitosis. These
results suggest an important role for this ubiquitin ligase during
mitosis. Significantly, we further find that the TTD of UHRF1 regulates
global DNA methylation, thus definitively linking H3K9me3 binding by
UHRF1 to the maintenance of DNA methylation. Taken together, our data
suggest that the regulation of DNA methylation by UHRF1 extends beyond
S-phase and requires H3K9me3 recognition during mitosis.

