Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Modulation of intracrine androgen signaling in bone metastatic
castrate resistant prostate cancer (bmCRPC) by MDV3100


Background Androgen signaling is a central driver in CRPC. We performed a
study to determine the effect of the antiandrogen MDV 3100 on bone marrow
infiltrating CRPC. Methods From February 2010 to June 2011, we performed
an open-label, observational study of 60 bmCRPC patients (pts), who
underwent transilial bone marrow biopsy (BMB) at baseline and 8 weeks of
treatment. Pts received MDV3100 160mg orally once daily. The primary
objective was to evaluate androgen signaling in bone marrow infiltrating
cancer and testosterone in blood (BT) and bone marrow (BMT) and correlate
findings with clinical observations. Androgen receptor (AR), CYP17 and
phospho Src (pSrc) expression were assessed by immunohistochemistry, and
BT and BMT by liquid chromatography mass spectrometry. Findings Maximal
PSA decline of 50% occurred in 29 (48%) of 60 pts, and 90% in 13 (22%).
Tumor involvement in BMB was detected in 28 (47%) pretreatment BMBs.
Paired tumor infiltrated BMBs were found in 23 (38%) pts. Pretreatment
androgen signaling and pSrc tumor expression is shown in Table 1.
Pretreatment intense nuclear AR expression combined with 10% CYP17 tumor
expression or increased BMT correlate with 50% PSA decline (p value
0.02). AR subcellular localization shift from dominant nuclear to
cytoplasmic correlate with 50% PSA decline (p value 0.05). Increased
pretreatment p-Src expression is associated with lack of PSA decline (p
value 0.002). Increase in BMT and BT is observed after 8 weeks of
MDV3100. (Mean Pretreatment BMT 0.03 ng/ml, Wk8 BMT 0.04 in 33pts, p
value 0.0009) (Pretreatment BT 0.05, wk8 BT 0.066 in 37 pts, p value
0.0001) Interpretation Pretreatment expression profile is consistent with
persistent androgen signaling in bmCRPC. MDV3100 induces pharmacodynamic
changes in Androgen Signaling. AR changes likely account for the reported
therapeutic effect of MDV3100. These data prompt exploratory combinations
of MDV3100 with Androgen Biosynthesis Inhibitors and src inhibitors.


