Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mutations of cysteine residues in Bcl-2 suppress hydrogen
peroxide-induced apoptosis of human lung cancer cells through ERK1/2
interaction


Bcl-2 is an essential antiapoptotic protein of the mitochondrial death
pathway whose expression is highly associated with apoptosis resistance
in cancer cells. Hydrogen peroxide is a signaling molecule mediating
apoptosis to various stimuli, e.g. cisplatin and lipoic acid, in lung
cancer cells. Direct treatment of the cells with hydrogen peroxide
induced oxidative stress and a concomitant increase in apoptosis of human
lung cancer H460 cells. Cysteine residues are likely targets of oxidative
modifications of proteins; however, their effects on apoptosis and
mechanisms of regulation are not known. To determine the role of cysteine
residues, we constructed Bcl-2 mutant plasmids replacing the two cysteine
residues Cys158 and Cys229 with alanines (Bcl-2-DM). Overexpression of
Bcl-2-DM strongly suppressed the apoptosis induced by hydrogen peroxide
in H460 cells as compared to that in control cells overexpressing
wild-type Bcl-2. We further found that Bcl-2 directly interacts with MAP
kinase ERK1/2 and that hydrogen peroxide disrupts such interaction.
However, hydrogen peroxide treatment had a minimal effect on Bcl-2 and
ERK1/2 interaction in Bcl-2-DM overexpressing cells, suggesting that
Cys158 and Cys229 are required for the oxidative signaling. These
findings identified a novel mechanism of oxidative regulation of
apoptosis via cysteine modifications of Bcl-2.

