Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mechanisms of acquired resistance to selective PI3K inhibitors in
breast cancer cell lines


GDC-0941 is a class I PI3 kinase inhibitor of all 4 isoforms currently in
phase II clinical trials in multiple indications, including ER+ breast
cancer. The PI3 kinase pathway plays an important role in proliferation
and survival and is known to be one of the most altered pathways in
cancer. These alterations include PI3 kinase amplification, PI3 kinase
mutations and PTEN loss, as well as numerous others. We have previously
shown in-vitro and in-vivo data that alterations in this pathway can
potentially help identify patients that are more likely to respond to a
PI3 kinase inhibitor. A major outstanding question is mechanisms of
intrinsic and acquired resistance to PI3K inhibitors. To address these
questions we have selected multiple breast cancer cell lines harboring
different pathway alterations (HER2, PIK3K mutations, PTEN loss) for
resistance to PI3 kinase inhibition. Some of the resistant lines show
cross resistance to inhibitors of mTOR and AKT (ie general pathway
resistance), while others show specific resistance to PI3K or PI3K/mTOR
inhibitors. We have characterized these resistant cell lines in detail at
the molecular level and in terms of signaling pathway activation.
Analyses performed include deep sequencing, reverse phase protein arrays,
as well as focused Western blots and RTK arrays. We will discuss these
results in detail and comment on candidate resistance mechanisms.

