Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Validation of potential therapeutic targeting of IL-6/JAK/STAT3
pathway by AZD1480 in neuroblastoma and other pediatric tumors


Neuroblastoma is the most deadly extra-cranial solid childhood tumor.
Despite advanced therapies, over 60% of high-risk NB patients have
aggressive tumors spreading to bone and bone marrow and die of
metastasis-related disease. IL-6 promotes the growth and survival of
metastatic NB cells via activation of STAT3 in the BM and is an
independent poor-prognosis marker in tumors from high-risk NB patients.
This suggests that blockade of IL6/JAK/STAT3 signaling may represent a
promising therapeutic strategy. We tested the anti-tumor effect of
inhibition IL6/JAK/STAT3 pathway by the JAK1/2 inhibitor AZD1480, which
is in Phase II clinical trials in adult tumors, in three highly
metastatic pediatric tumor types (Neuroblastoma, Ewing sarcoma and
rhabdomyosarcoma). AZD1480 (0.5uM) significantly blocked IL-6-induced
P-STAT3-Tyr705 in all tumor types tested. AZD1480 decreased cell
viability in the 6 NB, 5 RMS and 2 EWS cell lines tested (median IC50
1.17uM, ranging from 0.42-5.1uM). AZD1480 induced cell growth inhibition,
G2 arrest and apoptosis in vitro. Moreover, AZD1480 inhibited the
expression of identified direct STAT3 targets such as cell cycle
regulators CyclinD2, CyclinD3 and CDC25A, antiapoptotic proteins Bcl-2
and Survivin, metastasis-related protein TIMP-1 and c-myc consistent with
its repression of cell growth, induction of G2 arrest and apoptosis. In
in vivo Neuroblastoma xenograft models, AZD1480 suppressed growth of SY5Y
and KCNR xenografts and increased survival of mice bearing KCNR
xenografts (P=0.0001) and SY5Y xenografts (P=0.02). Altogether, these
data suggest the clinical blockade of IL6/JAK/STAT3 signaling by AZD1480
may represent a promising new therapy in NB and other pediatric tumors.
We thank Dennis Huszar and AstraZeneca for the AZD1480 and helpful
discussions. Key words: neuroblastoma, JAK2, STAT3, IL-6, targeted therapy

