Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The effect of comorbidity, smoking and alcohol on survival of head
and neck cancer anatomic subsites: A retrospective analysis of 4689
patients


Background: Increased age and greater comorbidity are independent
predictors of worse survival in nasopharyngeal and squamous cell cancers
of the head and neck (HNC). The Charlson Comorbidity Index (CCI) provides
a quantitative measure of comorbidity that can be abstracted from medical
charts. We evaluated the role of anatomic subsite, smoking, alcohol,
demographic and other variables on the impact of overall survival (OS) in
HNC. Methods: Retrospective chart review was performed for 4689 HNC
patients identified by the Princess Margaret Hospital and Ontario Cancer
Registries (Toronto, Canada), between 2000 and 2010. Demographic (age,
gender, occupation, marital status), and histologic variables were
abstracted in addition to smoking and drinking consumption (current,
former, never) and quantity (cigarettes: pack-years; alcohol usage:
non/light, moderate, and heavy). CCI were categorized as no comorbidities
(CCI 0), mild (CCI 1-2), moderate (CCI 3-4), and severe comorbidity (CCI
5+), respectively. HPV status in oropharyngeal tumors was assessed using
p16 immunohistochemistry. Results: The population was mostly male (73%),
married/common-law (71%), and median 63 years of age. Disease site
consisted of 35% oral cavity, 28% oropharynx, 29% larynx, 6% hypopharynx,
and 3% nasopharynx. Most tumors were stage III/IV (67%) and moderately
differentiated (65%). Patients were categorized with 7% severe, 17%
moderate, 47% mild, and 30% with no comorbidity. 79% of patients were
ever-smokers and 84% were ever-drinkers. 481/688 OPC tumors were HPV+.
Overall survival (OS) was better in younger patients (HR 1.03 per year, p
Background: Increased age and greater comorbidity are independent
predictors of worse survival in nasopharyngeal and squamous cell cancers
of the head and neck (HNC). The Charlson Comorbidity Index (CCI) provides
a quantitative measure of comorbidity that can be abstracted from medical
charts. We evaluated the role of anatomic subsite, smoking, alcohol,
demographic and other variables on the impact of overall survival (OS) in
HNC. Methods: Retrospective chart review was performed for 4689 HNC
patients identified by the Princess Margaret Hospital and Ontario Cancer
Registries (Toronto, Canada), between 2000 and 2010. Demographic (age,
gender, occupation, marital status), and histologic variables were
abstracted in addition to smoking and drinking consumption (current,
former, never) and quantity (cigarettes: pack-years; alcohol usage:
non/light, moderate, and heavy). CCI were categorized as no comorbidities
(CCI 0), mild (CCI 1-2), moderate (CCI 3-4), and severe comorbidity (CCI
5+), respectively. HPV status in oropharyngeal tumors was assessed using
p16 immunohistochemistry. Results: The population was mostly male (73%),
married/common-law (71%), and median 63 years of age. Disease site
consisted of 35% oral cavity, 28% oropharynx, 29% larynx, 6% hypopharynx,
and 3% nasopharynx. Most tumors were stage III/IV (67%) and moderately
differentiated (65%). Patients were categorized with 7% severe, 17%
moderate, 47% mild, and 30% with no comorbidity. 79% of patients were
ever-smokers and 84% were ever-drinkers. 481/688 OPC tumors were HPV+.
Overall survival (OS) was better in younger patients (HR 1.03 per year, p
< 0.0001), and those in married/common-law relationships (HR 1.48, p
Background: Increased age and greater comorbidity are independent
predictors of worse survival in nasopharyngeal and squamous cell cancers
of the head and neck (HNC). The Charlson Comorbidity Index (CCI) provides
a quantitative measure of comorbidity that can be abstracted from medical
charts. We evaluated the role of anatomic subsite, smoking, alcohol,
demographic and other variables on the impact of overall survival (OS) in
HNC. Methods: Retrospective chart review was performed for 4689 HNC
patients identified by the Princess Margaret Hospital and Ontario Cancer
Registries (Toronto, Canada), between 2000 and 2010. Demographic (age,
gender, occupation, marital status), and histologic variables were
abstracted in addition to smoking and drinking consumption (current,
former, never) and quantity (cigarettes: pack-years; alcohol usage:
non/light, moderate, and heavy). CCI were categorized as no comorbidities
(CCI 0), mild (CCI 1-2), moderate (CCI 3-4), and severe comorbidity (CCI
5+), respectively. HPV status in oropharyngeal tumors was assessed using
p16 immunohistochemistry. Results: The population was mostly male (73%),
married/common-law (71%), and median 63 years of age. Disease site
consisted of 35% oral cavity, 28% oropharynx, 29% larynx, 6% hypopharynx,
and 3% nasopharynx. Most tumors were stage III/IV (67%) and moderately
differentiated (65%). Patients were categorized with 7% severe, 17%
moderate, 47% mild, and 30% with no comorbidity. 79% of patients were
ever-smokers and 84% were ever-drinkers. 481/688 OPC tumors were HPV+.
Overall survival (OS) was better in younger patients (HR 1.03 per year, p
< 0.0001), and those in married/common-law relationships (HR 1.48, p <
0.001). Greater comorbidity was associated with poorer OS: HR 1.5 (p
Background: Increased age and greater comorbidity are independent
predictors of worse survival in nasopharyngeal and squamous cell cancers
of the head and neck (HNC). The Charlson Comorbidity Index (CCI) provides
a quantitative measure of comorbidity that can be abstracted from medical
charts. We evaluated the role of anatomic subsite, smoking, alcohol,
demographic and other variables on the impact of overall survival (OS) in
HNC. Methods: Retrospective chart review was performed for 4689 HNC
patients identified by the Princess Margaret Hospital and Ontario Cancer
Registries (Toronto, Canada), between 2000 and 2010. Demographic (age,
gender, occupation, marital status), and histologic variables were
abstracted in addition to smoking and drinking consumption (current,
former, never) and quantity (cigarettes: pack-years; alcohol usage:
non/light, moderate, and heavy). CCI were categorized as no comorbidities
(CCI 0), mild (CCI 1-2), moderate (CCI 3-4), and severe comorbidity (CCI
5+), respectively. HPV status in oropharyngeal tumors was assessed using
p16 immunohistochemistry. Results: The population was mostly male (73%),
married/common-law (71%), and median 63 years of age. Disease site
consisted of 35% oral cavity, 28% oropharynx, 29% larynx, 6% hypopharynx,
and 3% nasopharynx. Most tumors were stage III/IV (67%) and moderately
differentiated (65%). Patients were categorized with 7% severe, 17%
moderate, 47% mild, and 30% with no comorbidity. 79% of patients were
ever-smokers and 84% were ever-drinkers. 481/688 OPC tumors were HPV+.
Overall survival (OS) was better in younger patients (HR 1.03 per year, p
< 0.0001), and those in married/common-law relationships (HR 1.48, p <
0.001). Greater comorbidity was associated with poorer OS: HR 1.5 (p <
0.0001), 2.0 (p Background: Increased age and greater comorbidity are
independent predictors of worse survival in nasopharyngeal and squamous
cell cancers of the head and neck (HNC). The Charlson Comorbidity Index
(CCI) provides a quantitative measure of comorbidity that can be
abstracted from medical charts. We evaluated the role of anatomic
subsite, smoking, alcohol, demographic and other variables on the impact
of overall survival (OS) in HNC. Methods: Retrospective chart review was
performed for 4689 HNC patients identified by the Princess Margaret
Hospital and Ontario Cancer Registries (Toronto, Canada), between 2000
and 2010. Demographic (age, gender, occupation, marital status), and
histologic variables were abstracted in addition to smoking and drinking
consumption (current, former, never) and quantity (cigarettes:
pack-years; alcohol usage: non/light, moderate, and heavy). CCI were
categorized as no comorbidities (CCI 0), mild (CCI 1-2), moderate (CCI
3-4), and severe comorbidity (CCI 5+), respectively. HPV status in
oropharyngeal tumors was assessed using p16 immunohistochemistry.
Results: The population was mostly male (73%), married/common-law (71%),
and median 63 years of age. Disease site consisted of 35% oral cavity,
28% oropharynx, 29% larynx, 6% hypopharynx, and 3% nasopharynx. Most
tumors were stage III/IV (67%) and moderately differentiated (65%).
Patients were categorized with 7% severe, 17% moderate, 47% mild, and 30%
with no comorbidity. 79% of patients were ever-smokers and 84% were
ever-drinkers. 481/688 OPC tumors were HPV+. Overall survival (OS) was
better in younger patients (HR 1.03 per year, p < 0.0001), and those in
married/common-law relationships (HR 1.48, p < 0.001). Greater
comorbidity was associated with poorer OS: HR 1.5 (p < 0.0001), 2.0 (p <
0.0001), and 2.4 (p Background: Increased age and greater comorbidity are
independent predictors of worse survival in nasopharyngeal and squamous
cell cancers of the head and neck (HNC). The Charlson Comorbidity Index
(CCI) provides a quantitative measure of comorbidity that can be
abstracted from medical charts. We evaluated the role of anatomic
subsite, smoking, alcohol, demographic and other variables on the impact
of overall survival (OS) in HNC. Methods: Retrospective chart review was
performed for 4689 HNC patients identified by the Princess Margaret
Hospital and Ontario Cancer Registries (Toronto, Canada), between 2000
and 2010. Demographic (age, gender, occupation, marital status), and
histologic variables were abstracted in addition to smoking and drinking
consumption (current, former, never) and quantity (cigarettes:
pack-years; alcohol usage: non/light, moderate, and heavy). CCI were
categorized as no comorbidities (CCI 0), mild (CCI 1-2), moderate (CCI
3-4), and severe comorbidity (CCI 5+), respectively. HPV status in
oropharyngeal tumors was assessed using p16 immunohistochemistry.
Results: The population was mostly male (73%), married/common-law (71%),
and median 63 years of age. Disease site consisted of 35% oral cavity,
28% oropharynx, 29% larynx, 6% hypopharynx, and 3% nasopharynx. Most
tumors were stage III/IV (67%) and moderately differentiated (65%).
Patients were categorized with 7% severe, 17% moderate, 47% mild, and 30%
with no comorbidity. 79% of patients were ever-smokers and 84% were
ever-drinkers. 481/688 OPC tumors were HPV+. Overall survival (OS) was
better in younger patients (HR 1.03 per year, p < 0.0001), and those in
married/common-law relationships (HR 1.48, p < 0.001). Greater
comorbidity was associated with poorer OS: HR 1.5 (p < 0.0001), 2.0 (p <
0.0001), and 2.4 (p < 0.0001) for mild, moderate, and severe comorbidity,
respectively. Univariately, oropharyngeal cancer had superior OS than
cancers of the hypopharynx (HR 2.3, p Background: Increased age and
greater comorbidity are independent predictors of worse survival in
nasopharyngeal and squamous cell cancers of the head and neck (HNC). The
Charlson Comorbidity Index (CCI) provides a quantitative measure of
comorbidity that can be abstracted from medical charts. We evaluated the
role of anatomic subsite, smoking, alcohol, demographic and other
variables on the impact of overall survival (OS) in HNC. Methods:
Retrospective chart review was performed for 4689 HNC patients identified
by the Princess Margaret Hospital and Ontario Cancer Registries (Toronto,
Canada), between 2000 and 2010. Demographic (age, gender, occupation,
marital status), and histologic variables were abstracted in addition to
smoking and drinking consumption (current, former, never) and quantity
(cigarettes: pack-years; alcohol usage: non/light, moderate, and heavy).
CCI were categorized as no comorbidities (CCI 0), mild (CCI 1-2),
moderate (CCI 3-4), and severe comorbidity (CCI 5+), respectively. HPV
status in oropharyngeal tumors was assessed using p16
immunohistochemistry. Results: The population was mostly male (73%),
married/common-law (71%), and median 63 years of age. Disease site
consisted of 35% oral cavity, 28% oropharynx, 29% larynx, 6% hypopharynx,
and 3% nasopharynx. Most tumors were stage III/IV (67%) and moderately
differentiated (65%). Patients were categorized with 7% severe, 17%
moderate, 47% mild, and 30% with no comorbidity. 79% of patients were
ever-smokers and 84% were ever-drinkers. 481/688 OPC tumors were HPV+.
Overall survival (OS) was better in younger patients (HR 1.03 per year, p
< 0.0001), and those in married/common-law relationships (HR 1.48, p <
0.001). Greater comorbidity was associated with poorer OS: HR 1.5 (p <
0.0001), 2.0 (p < 0.0001), and 2.4 (p < 0.0001) for mild, moderate, and
severe comorbidity, respectively. Univariately, oropharyngeal cancer had
superior OS than cancers of the hypopharynx (HR 2.3, p < 0.0001) and oral
cavity (HR 1.2, p = 0.006) but not the larynx (HR 0.97, p = 0.59) and
worse OS than cancers of the nasopharynx (HR 0.54, p = 0.001). Advanced
overall TNM stage was associated with poorer OS (HR 2.42, p Background:
Increased age and greater comorbidity are independent predictors of worse
survival in nasopharyngeal and squamous cell cancers of the head and neck
(HNC). The Charlson Comorbidity Index (CCI) provides a quantitative
measure of comorbidity that can be abstracted from medical charts. We
evaluated the role of anatomic subsite, smoking, alcohol, demographic and
other variables on the impact of overall survival (OS) in HNC. Methods:
Retrospective chart review was performed for 4689 HNC patients identified
by the Princess Margaret Hospital and Ontario Cancer Registries (Toronto,
Canada), between 2000 and 2010. Demographic (age, gender, occupation,
marital status), and histologic variables were abstracted in addition to
smoking and drinking consumption (current, former, never) and quantity
(cigarettes: pack-years; alcohol usage: non/light, moderate, and heavy).
CCI were categorized as no comorbidities (CCI 0), mild (CCI 1-2),
moderate (CCI 3-4), and severe comorbidity (CCI 5+), respectively. HPV
status in oropharyngeal tumors was assessed using p16
immunohistochemistry. Results: The population was mostly male (73%),
married/common-law (71%), and median 63 years of age. Disease site
consisted of 35% oral cavity, 28% oropharynx, 29% larynx, 6% hypopharynx,
and 3% nasopharynx. Most tumors were stage III/IV (67%) and moderately
differentiated (65%). Patients were categorized with 7% severe, 17%
moderate, 47% mild, and 30% with no comorbidity. 79% of patients were
ever-smokers and 84% were ever-drinkers. 481/688 OPC tumors were HPV+.
Overall survival (OS) was better in younger patients (HR 1.03 per year, p
< 0.0001), and those in married/common-law relationships (HR 1.48, p <
0.001). Greater comorbidity was associated with poorer OS: HR 1.5 (p <
0.0001), 2.0 (p < 0.0001), and 2.4 (p < 0.0001) for mild, moderate, and
severe comorbidity, respectively. Univariately, oropharyngeal cancer had
superior OS than cancers of the hypopharynx (HR 2.3, p < 0.0001) and oral
cavity (HR 1.2, p = 0.006) but not the larynx (HR 0.97, p = 0.59) and
worse OS than cancers of the nasopharynx (HR 0.54, p = 0.001). Advanced
overall TNM stage was associated with poorer OS (HR 2.42, p < 0.0001),
but grade was not significantly associated with survival. In terms of
treatment, surgery alone (HR 0.63, p Background: Increased age and
greater comorbidity are independent predictors of worse survival in
nasopharyngeal and squamous cell cancers of the head and neck (HNC). The
Charlson Comorbidity Index (CCI) provides a quantitative measure of
comorbidity that can be abstracted from medical charts. We evaluated the
role of anatomic subsite, smoking, alcohol, demographic and other
variables on the impact of overall survival (OS) in HNC. Methods:
Retrospective chart review was performed for 4689 HNC patients identified
by the Princess Margaret Hospital and Ontario Cancer Registries (Toronto,
Canada), between 2000 and 2010. Demographic (age, gender, occupation,
marital status), and histologic variables were abstracted in addition to
smoking and drinking consumption (current, former, never) and quantity
(cigarettes: pack-years; alcohol usage: non/light, moderate, and heavy).
CCI were categorized as no comorbidities (CCI 0), mild (CCI 1-2),
moderate (CCI 3-4), and severe comorbidity (CCI 5+), respectively. HPV
status in oropharyngeal tumors was assessed using p16
immunohistochemistry. Results: The population was mostly male (73%),
married/common-law (71%), and median 63 years of age. Disease site
consisted of 35% oral cavity, 28% oropharynx, 29% larynx, 6% hypopharynx,
and 3% nasopharynx. Most tumors were stage III/IV (67%) and moderately
differentiated (65%). Patients were categorized with 7% severe, 17%
moderate, 47% mild, and 30% with no comorbidity. 79% of patients were
ever-smokers and 84% were ever-drinkers. 481/688 OPC tumors were HPV+.
Overall survival (OS) was better in younger patients (HR 1.03 per year, p
< 0.0001), and those in married/common-law relationships (HR 1.48, p <
0.001). Greater comorbidity was associated with poorer OS: HR 1.5 (p <
0.0001), 2.0 (p < 0.0001), and 2.4 (p < 0.0001) for mild, moderate, and
severe comorbidity, respectively. Univariately, oropharyngeal cancer had
superior OS than cancers of the hypopharynx (HR 2.3, p < 0.0001) and oral
cavity (HR 1.2, p = 0.006) but not the larynx (HR 0.97, p = 0.59) and
worse OS than cancers of the nasopharynx (HR 0.54, p = 0.001). Advanced
overall TNM stage was associated with poorer OS (HR 2.42, p < 0.0001),
but grade was not significantly associated with survival. In terms of
treatment, surgery alone (HR 0.63, p < 0.0001), surgery with
post-operative radiation (HR 0.82, p = 0.004), and surgery followed by
chemoradiotherapy (HR 0.76, p = 0.02) resulted in better OS than
radiation alone. Heavier smoking and alcohol consumption resulted in
poorer OS. For oropharyngeal cancer patients alone, HPV positivity
improved OS (HR 0.30, p Background: Increased age and greater comorbidity
are independent predictors of worse survival in nasopharyngeal and
squamous cell cancers of the head and neck (HNC). The Charlson
Comorbidity Index (CCI) provides a quantitative measure of comorbidity
that can be abstracted from medical charts. We evaluated the role of
anatomic subsite, smoking, alcohol, demographic and other variables on
the impact of overall survival (OS) in HNC. Methods: Retrospective chart
review was performed for 4689 HNC patients identified by the Princess
Margaret Hospital and Ontario Cancer Registries (Toronto, Canada),
between 2000 and 2010. Demographic (age, gender, occupation, marital
status), and histologic variables were abstracted in addition to smoking
and drinking consumption (current, former, never) and quantity
(cigarettes: pack-years; alcohol usage: non/light, moderate, and heavy).
CCI were categorized as no comorbidities (CCI 0), mild (CCI 1-2),
moderate (CCI 3-4), and severe comorbidity (CCI 5+), respectively. HPV
status in oropharyngeal tumors was assessed using p16
immunohistochemistry. Results: The population was mostly male (73%),
married/common-law (71%), and median 63 years of age. Disease site
consisted of 35% oral cavity, 28% oropharynx, 29% larynx, 6% hypopharynx,
and 3% nasopharynx. Most tumors were stage III/IV (67%) and moderately
differentiated (65%). Patients were categorized with 7% severe, 17%
moderate, 47% mild, and 30% with no comorbidity. 79% of patients were
ever-smokers and 84% were ever-drinkers. 481/688 OPC tumors were HPV+.
Overall survival (OS) was better in younger patients (HR 1.03 per year, p
< 0.0001), and those in married/common-law relationships (HR 1.48, p <
0.001). Greater comorbidity was associated with poorer OS: HR 1.5 (p <
0.0001), 2.0 (p < 0.0001), and 2.4 (p < 0.0001) for mild, moderate, and
severe comorbidity, respectively. Univariately, oropharyngeal cancer had
superior OS than cancers of the hypopharynx (HR 2.3, p < 0.0001) and oral
cavity (HR 1.2, p = 0.006) but not the larynx (HR 0.97, p = 0.59) and
worse OS than cancers of the nasopharynx (HR 0.54, p = 0.001). Advanced
overall TNM stage was associated with poorer OS (HR 2.42, p < 0.0001),
but grade was not significantly associated with survival. In terms of
treatment, surgery alone (HR 0.63, p < 0.0001), surgery with
post-operative radiation (HR 0.82, p = 0.004), and surgery followed by
chemoradiotherapy (HR 0.76, p = 0.02) resulted in better OS than
radiation alone. Heavier smoking and alcohol consumption resulted in
poorer OS. For oropharyngeal cancer patients alone, HPV positivity
improved OS (HR 0.30, p < 0.0001). Conclusion: In addition to stage,
other important factors including social, demographic, treatment,
histologic, and comorbidity variables also impact survival, and should be
considered as prognostic factors in analyses of HNC.

