Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Vaccination targeting IGF-IR sensitizes tumors to tamoxifen
therapy in an anti-estrogen resistant mouse model


Tamoxifen is a standard treatment for estrogen receptor (ER)-positive
breast cancer patients. However, acquired or de novo resistance to
therapy is a major clinical problem. In hormone-resistant tumors, there
is increased activation of insulin-like growth factor-1 receptor (IGF-IR)
and subsequent downstream signaling molecules, such as AKT. We have
determined that IGF-IR is immunogenic in breast cancer and is a potential
target for active immunization. It has been demonstrated that natural
immunogenic human epitopes can be predicted by high binding affinity
across multiple class II alleles, thus, we used a combined scoring system
from five algorithms for predicting class II binding to determine Th
epitopes of IGF-IR. Of the 20 potentially immunogenic peptides
identified, five peptides (p1166-1181, p1212-1227, p1301-1316, 1307-1322
and p1311-1326) in the C-terminal domain were determined to elicit a
predominantly inflammatory Th1 response compared to an immunosuppressive
Th2 response in human PBMC. Overexpression of AKT induces tamoxifen
resistance, while inhibition restores tamoxifen sensitivity. The tumor
suppressor, PTEN, actively inhibits AKT. Data we have generated has
demonstrated that vaccination restored PTEN activity in tumor cells. We
questioned if modulation of PTEN could render tumors in the
anti-estrogen-resistant MMTV-neu mouse model sensitive to tamoxifen
therapy. Vaccination demonstrated a robust Th1 response (pTamoxifen is a
standard treatment for estrogen receptor (ER)-positive breast cancer
patients. However, acquired or de novo resistance to therapy is a major
clinical problem. In hormone-resistant tumors, there is increased
activation of insulin-like growth factor-1 receptor (IGF-IR) and
subsequent downstream signaling molecules, such as AKT. We have
determined that IGF-IR is immunogenic in breast cancer and is a potential
target for active immunization. It has been demonstrated that natural
immunogenic human epitopes can be predicted by high binding affinity
across multiple class II alleles, thus, we used a combined scoring system
from five algorithms for predicting class II binding to determine Th
epitopes of IGF-IR. Of the 20 potentially immunogenic peptides
identified, five peptides (p1166-1181, p1212-1227, p1301-1316, 1307-1322
and p1311-1326) in the C-terminal domain were determined to elicit a
predominantly inflammatory Th1 response compared to an immunosuppressive
Th2 response in human PBMC. Overexpression of AKT induces tamoxifen
resistance, while inhibition restores tamoxifen sensitivity. The tumor
suppressor, PTEN, actively inhibits AKT. Data we have generated has
demonstrated that vaccination restored PTEN activity in tumor cells. We
questioned if modulation of PTEN could render tumors in the
anti-estrogen-resistant MMTV-neu mouse model sensitive to tamoxifen
therapy. Vaccination demonstrated a robust Th1 response (p<0.001) and
concomitant inhibition of tumor growth by 85% compared to adjuvant only
control animals (pTamoxifen is a standard treatment for estrogen receptor
(ER)-positive breast cancer patients. However, acquired or de novo
resistance to therapy is a major clinical problem. In hormone-resistant
tumors, there is increased activation of insulin-like growth factor-1
receptor (IGF-IR) and subsequent downstream signaling molecules, such as
AKT. We have determined that IGF-IR is immunogenic in breast cancer and
is a potential target for active immunization. It has been demonstrated
that natural immunogenic human epitopes can be predicted by high binding
affinity across multiple class II alleles, thus, we used a combined
scoring system from five algorithms for predicting class II binding to
determine Th epitopes of IGF-IR. Of the 20 potentially immunogenic
peptides identified, five peptides (p1166-1181, p1212-1227, p1301-1316,
1307-1322 and p1311-1326) in the C-terminal domain were determined to
elicit a predominantly inflammatory Th1 response compared to an
immunosuppressive Th2 response in human PBMC. Overexpression of AKT
induces tamoxifen resistance, while inhibition restores tamoxifen
sensitivity. The tumor suppressor, PTEN, actively inhibits AKT. Data we
have generated has demonstrated that vaccination restored PTEN activity
in tumor cells. We questioned if modulation of PTEN could render tumors
in the anti-estrogen-resistant MMTV-neu mouse model sensitive to
tamoxifen therapy. Vaccination demonstrated a robust Th1 response
(p<0.001) and concomitant inhibition of tumor growth by 85% compared to
adjuvant only control animals (p<0.001). Treatment with tamoxifen in
vaccinated tumor-bearing mice resulted in a further 38% reduction in
growth (p=0.02). Thus, active immunization targeting IGF-IR may induce
both immunologic and biologic effects resulting in the sensitization of
the tumor to tamoxifen therapy.

