Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: 5-Azacitydine augments the anti-glioma efficacy of Herpes-based
oncolytic virotherapy


Oncolytic virotherapy (OV) using modified Herpes simplex virus (HSV) type
1, is currently being evaluated for safety and efficacy in numerous phase
I-III clinical trials. However, the host innate immune response and a
compromised ability to counter cellular defense responses in order to
sustain efficient viral replication in tumor cells is still a major
obstacle to efficacious virotherapy. Sodium valporate (VPA) is a simple
branched-chain fatty acid FDA-approved medication used in treating
epilepsy. We previously demonstrated that pretreatment of cultured glioma
cells with VPA significantly increases OV replication. However, the
mechanism underlying VPA mediated increased virus replication has not
been fully elucidated. Understanding the mechanism of this effect can
lead to the development of better pharmacologic sensitizers for OV
therapy. We found that activation of STAT3 and inhibition of DNA
methylation are involved in VPA's ability to enhance virus replication.
Furthermore, we demonstrated that the combination of a DNA methylation
inhibitor, 5-Azacitydine (5-Aza), at a 1-2 uM concentration coupled with
IL-6-mediated (10ng/mL) STAT3 activation effectively enhanced OV
replication 125 fold when compared with OV alone. This combination was
comparable to what was previously observed when VPA alone was utilized to
increase OV replication. The combination also showed increased
anti-glioma activity (ED50 of 5-Aza: 2 uM; with IL-6, 0.3 uM) when
compared to only VPA treatment. Given these in vitro results, we are
currently performing experiments in mice assessing the effect of 5-Aza
pretreatment on enhancing OV therapy of gliomas. Oncolytic HSV in
combination with the DNA methylation inhibitor, 5-Aza, and activation of
STAT3 represents a promising strategy for treating human gliomas.

