Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Improved survival in AML by in vivo drug targeting of conserved
regulatory pathways in phenotypically distinct tumor-initiating
compartments


Increasing evidence suggests tumors are maintained by cancer stem cells,
however their nature remains controversial. In a HoxA9-Meis1 (H9M) driven
model of acute myeloid leukemia (AML), we found that tumor-initiating
activity existed in three, immunophenotypically distinct compartments,
corresponding to disparate lineages on the normal hematopoietic
hierarchystem/progenitor cells (Linkit+), and committed progenitors of
the myeloid (Gr1+kit+) and lymphoid lineages (Lym+kit+). Each compartment
clonally recapitulated the original range of tumor cell immunophenotypes
in vivo, including cells with a less-differentiated immunophenotype.
These distinct populations largely shared signaling networks, and in vivo
pharmacologic targeting of shared pathways (DNA methyltransferase and MEK
phosphorylation) significantly increased survival. Collectively, these
data show that H9M AML is organized as an atypical hierarchy that defies
the strict lineage marker boundaries and unidirectional differentiation
of normal hematopoiesis. Moreover, in some malignancies, tumor-initiation
ability (or cancer-stemness) can represent a targetable, cellular state
that can exithat exists independently of distinct immunophenotypic
definition.

