Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulatory network discovery using 3-way integration of
high-dimensional mRNA, miRNA and lncRNA expression data from the entire
NCI60 cancer cell line panel


With the discovery of different non-coding RNA species, the complexity of
the transcriptome and its regulation has increased dramatically. Next to
the well-studied small non-coding miRNAs, several thousands of long
non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) have recently been described. Like miRNAs,
lncRNAs appear to predominantly function as regulators of gene expression
and are implicated in various regulatory networks involving both miRNAs
and protein-coding genes. In order to facilitate the search for
miRNA-lncRNA-mRNA regulatory networks in cancer we have profiled the
expression of each of these RNA information layers using the
high-throughput SmartChip RT-qPCR technology on the entire NCI60 cancer
cell line panel. In total, three SmartChip Panels with 1050 miRNAs, 1250
cancer-focused mRNAs, and 1718 lncRNAs, respectively, were quantified
with a minimum of 3 technical replicates against each cell line. Here, we
present the results of an unprecedented integrated analysis aimed at
identifying networks of highly co-regulated miRNA-lncRNA-mRNA clusters.
In brief, individual clusters are annotated using a pathway enrichment
approach whereby network edges are evaluated using miRNA target, lncRNA
target, and transcription factor target predictions. MiRNA-lncRNA-mRNA
clusters centered around key cancer genes are annotated and the complex
interplay is described. This unique and extensive high quality dataset,
comprised of three major information layers of the NCI60 cell line
transcriptome offers numerous opportunities towards a better
understanding of complex regulatory networks in cancer.

