Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Aberrant methylation of the PTPRO gene in peripheral blood as a
potential biomarker in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma patients


Purpose: Compared with tyrosine kinases, our understanding of
protein-tyrosine phosphatases (PTPs) in cancer is limited, and further
knowledge could provide new therapeutic targets and diagnostic markers.
Inactivation of protein tyrosine phosphatase receptor-type O (PTPRO), a
new member of the PTP family, by hypermethylation has been described in
several forms of cancers. We evaluated PTPRO hypermethylation as a
potential epigenetic biomarker in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma
(ESCC). Experimental Design: In 36 primary ESCC tissue specimens and
matched peripheral plasma and buffy coat samples, we determined the
methylation status of PTPRO by performing methylation-specific PCR.
Correlations with PTPRO methylation and clinicopathologic features were
also examined. Results: PTPRO hypermethylation was observed in 27 (75%)
of 36 primary tumors and correlated significantly with depth of invasion
(T-stage, P = 0.013). Among matched peripheral blood samples from ESCC
patients, 13 (36.1%) of 36 had detectable methylated PTPRO in plasma, and
15 (41.7%) of 36 had it in the buffy coat. No methylated PTPRO was
observed in normal peripheral blood samples from 10 healthy individuals.
In addition, promoter methylation correlated with loss of PTPRO mRNA
expression, and demethylation by 5-aza-dC treatment led to gene
reactivation in PTPRO-methylated and -silenced ESCC cell lines.
Conclusions: This is the first report for detection of PTPRO as a
non-invasive biomarker for solid tumors in peripheral blood. Our findings
suggest that hypermethylated PTPRO occurs frequently in ESCC. Its
detection in the peripheral blood of ESCC patients illustrates its
potential clinical application as an epigenetic biomarker for noninvasive
diagnosis and disease monitoring.

