Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of effective genotype-selective drug combinations
in melanoma


Resistance and partial responses to individual therapeutic agents are
major obstacles in cancer treatment. In certain cases, combination
therapies are clearly more effective, but systematic approaches to the
identification of synergistic combinations of drugs are not well
established. Here we present a bioinformatics-guided, high-throughput
combinatorial screening platform that tests an array of small molecule
drug combinations. A panel of over one hundred fifty agents was curated
for compounds that inhibit receptors and signaling pathways active in
melanoma, and broader groups of conventional cell cycle-active and
genotoxic agents. Sixteen-point dose-effect curves were determined. Forty
of the compounds exhibiting activity and representing the major classes
tested were further analyzed. Three doses each were chosen, set up in all
pair-wise combinations using a hit-picking robot, and analyzed against
cell lines with activated BRAF, activated RAS, or neither mutation.
Several combinations were selectively effective for melanomas containing
activating mutations in BRAF, but were ineffective for mutant RAS
melanomas, which were most susceptible to a small group of other drug
combinations. Work is underway to validate the effective combinations in
animal models, and to mine transcriptome and phosphoproteomic data
associated with the cell lines to better predict sensitivity and
resistance.

