Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combined direct intratumoral adenoviral delivery and production of
Rheoswitch-regulated IL-12 and IFN enhances antitumor activity in lung
and breast cancer models


Current cancer immunotherapies have provided limited success in the
clinic and innovative strategies are required to further enhance the
effectiveness of an anti-tumor immune response.This study assessed
anti-tumor activity utilizing intratumoral (i.t.) administration of
adenovirus (Ad) with the novel Rheoswitch Therapeutic System(RTS), an
inducible promoter system, for regulated expression of murine IL-12 or
IFN. Oral administration of a small molecule activator ligand (AL),
INXN-1001, regulates the expression of IL-12 in Ad-RTS-mIL-12 and IFN in
Ad-RTS-mIFN. The regulated expression and therapeutic benefit of IL-12
and IFN from i.t. administered Ad-RTS-mIL-12 and Ad-RTS-mIFN, either
alone or in combination, was examined in syngeneic Lewis lung carcinoma
(LLC) and syngeneic mammary carcinoma (4T1) models. In the LLC model,
daily treatment with oral AL alone (administered in feed at 1000 ppm,
representing a daily dose of 225 mg/kg/day) or i.t. cytokine gene therapy
in the absence of AL did not result in significant inhibition of tumor
growth compared to control, untreated tumors. In contrast, i.t. injection
with 1010 vp Ad-RTS-mIL-12 or Ad-RTS-mIFN and daily oral AL led to
significant tumor growth inhibition by day 25 (72 and 71%, respectively;
pCurrent cancer immunotherapies have provided limited success in the
clinic and innovative strategies are required to further enhance the
effectiveness of an anti-tumor immune response.This study assessed
anti-tumor activity utilizing intratumoral (i.t.) administration of
adenovirus (Ad) with the novel Rheoswitch Therapeutic System(RTS), an
inducible promoter system, for regulated expression of murine IL-12 or
IFN. Oral administration of a small molecule activator ligand (AL),
INXN-1001, regulates the expression of IL-12 in Ad-RTS-mIL-12 and IFN in
Ad-RTS-mIFN. The regulated expression and therapeutic benefit of IL-12
and IFN from i.t. administered Ad-RTS-mIL-12 and Ad-RTS-mIFN, either
alone or in combination, was examined in syngeneic Lewis lung carcinoma
(LLC) and syngeneic mammary carcinoma (4T1) models. In the LLC model,
daily treatment with oral AL alone (administered in feed at 1000 ppm,
representing a daily dose of 225 mg/kg/day) or i.t. cytokine gene therapy
in the absence of AL did not result in significant inhibition of tumor
growth compared to control, untreated tumors. In contrast, i.t. injection
with 1010 vp Ad-RTS-mIL-12 or Ad-RTS-mIFN and daily oral AL led to
significant tumor growth inhibition by day 25 (72 and 71%, respectively;
p<0.05). Notably, combined treatment of the LLC tumors with Ad-RTS-mIL-12
and Ad-RTS-mIFN with oral AL resulted in significant anti-tumor effect
compared to either treatment alone (97% growth inhibition; pCurrent
cancer immunotherapies have provided limited success in the clinic and
innovative strategies are required to further enhance the effectiveness
of an anti-tumor immune response.This study assessed anti-tumor activity
utilizing intratumoral (i.t.) administration of adenovirus (Ad) with the
novel Rheoswitch Therapeutic System(RTS), an inducible promoter system,
for regulated expression of murine IL-12 or IFN. Oral administration of a
small molecule activator ligand (AL), INXN-1001, regulates the expression
of IL-12 in Ad-RTS-mIL-12 and IFN in Ad-RTS-mIFN. The regulated
expression and therapeutic benefit of IL-12 and IFN from i.t.
administered Ad-RTS-mIL-12 and Ad-RTS-mIFN, either alone or in
combination, was examined in syngeneic Lewis lung carcinoma (LLC) and
syngeneic mammary carcinoma (4T1) models. In the LLC model, daily
treatment with oral AL alone (administered in feed at 1000 ppm,
representing a daily dose of 225 mg/kg/day) or i.t. cytokine gene therapy
in the absence of AL did not result in significant inhibition of tumor
growth compared to control, untreated tumors. In contrast, i.t. injection
with 1010 vp Ad-RTS-mIL-12 or Ad-RTS-mIFN and daily oral AL led to
significant tumor growth inhibition by day 25 (72 and 71%, respectively;
p<0.05). Notably, combined treatment of the LLC tumors with Ad-RTS-mIL-12
and Ad-RTS-mIFN with oral AL resulted in significant anti-tumor effect
compared to either treatment alone (97% growth inhibition; p<0.05)
without overt toxicity as assessed by no change in body weight. In the
4T1 model, i.t. treatment with 1010 vp of Ad-RTS-mIL-12 plus AL or
Ad-RTS-mIFN plus AL led to 58 and 53% inhibition of tumor growth compared
to control untreated tumors by day 34 (pCurrent cancer immunotherapies
have provided limited success in the clinic and innovative strategies are
required to further enhance the effectiveness of an anti-tumor immune
response.This study assessed anti-tumor activity utilizing intratumoral
(i.t.) administration of adenovirus (Ad) with the novel Rheoswitch
Therapeutic System(RTS), an inducible promoter system, for regulated
expression of murine IL-12 or IFN. Oral administration of a small
molecule activator ligand (AL), INXN-1001, regulates the expression of
IL-12 in Ad-RTS-mIL-12 and IFN in Ad-RTS-mIFN. The regulated expression
and therapeutic benefit of IL-12 and IFN from i.t. administered
Ad-RTS-mIL-12 and Ad-RTS-mIFN, either alone or in combination, was
examined in syngeneic Lewis lung carcinoma (LLC) and syngeneic mammary
carcinoma (4T1) models. In the LLC model, daily treatment with oral AL
alone (administered in feed at 1000 ppm, representing a daily dose of 225
mg/kg/day) or i.t. cytokine gene therapy in the absence of AL did not
result in significant inhibition of tumor growth compared to control,
untreated tumors. In contrast, i.t. injection with 1010 vp Ad-RTS-mIL-12
or Ad-RTS-mIFN and daily oral AL led to significant tumor growth
inhibition by day 25 (72 and 71%, respectively; p<0.05). Notably,
combined treatment of the LLC tumors with Ad-RTS-mIL-12 and Ad-RTS-mIFN
with oral AL resulted in significant anti-tumor effect compared to either
treatment alone (97% growth inhibition; p<0.05) without overt toxicity as
assessed by no change in body weight. In the 4T1 model, i.t. treatment
with 1010 vp of Ad-RTS-mIL-12 plus AL or Ad-RTS-mIFN plus AL led to 58
and 53% inhibition of tumor growth compared to control untreated tumors
by day 34 (p<0.05). Notably, concomitant treatment with both
Ad-RTS-mIL-12 plus AL and Ad-RTS-mIFN plus AL resulted in enhanced
anti-tumor activity with 80% growth inhibition. These data indicate that
the combined treatment strategy using RTS-regulated IL-12 and IFN in Ad
vectors concomitant with AL induces effective therapeutic activity
against aggressive murine tumors. Future studies will investigate the
mechanism by which both IL-12 and IFN exert their anti-tumor effect in
the above tumor models.

