Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The expression of X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis in human oral
squamous cell carcinoma and its relationship with clinical factors


[Background] X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis (XIAP) is a member of the
inhibitor of apoptosis protein family, which is associated with cell
survival by blocking caspase-mediated apoptosis. XIAP is expressed in
various malignant tumors. The overexpression of XIAP has been reported to
be a poorer prognostic factor in various malignancies. However, the
prognostic value of XIAP expression in patients with oral cancer is not
still cleared. [Purpose] The aims of present study were to evaluate the
expression of XIAP protein in oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) and to
elucidate the relationships among the XIAP expression, clinical stages,
histological differentiation and classification of invasion mode.
[Materials and Methods] Four human OSCC cell lines, B88, CAL27, HNt, and
HSC3 cells were used in this study. Normal gingival epithelial cells
served as control. XIAP expression of cultured cells was detected by
western blot. Tissue specimens were obtains from 85 patients with OSCC
after surgery or biopsy. XIAP expression was detected by an
immunohistochemical method. [Results] The expression of XIAP was detected
in all cancer cells, but not in normal cells. Immunohistochemical
analysis of 85 cases of OSCC showed that 73 (86%) cases expressed XIAP.
There was no relationship between XIAP expression and clinical stages, or
classification of invasion mode. There were significant differences
between XIAP expression and histological differentiation. Most of
non-staining and weakly staining of cancer was well differentiated. In
contrast, intense and extensive staining was frequently found in poorly
differentiated cancer. [Conclusions] These findings suggested that the
expression of XIAP in OSCC could be related to histological
differentiation.

