Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The effect of a XIAP inhibitor, embelin, on apoptosis of thyroid
cancer cell lines


X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis protein (XIAP) is a member of the
inhibitor of apoptosis (IAP) protein family that selectively blocks
caspases-3, -7, -9 and inhibits cell death. Embelin, a XIAP inhibitor, is
known to exhibit anti-inflammatory and apoptotic activities. Recent
reports suggest that embelin interferes the signal transducer and
activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) pathway and nuclear factor-kB
(NF-kB) signal pathway. In this study, we investigated the anti-cancer
efficacy of embelin by measuring its effects on apoptosis of thyroid
cancer cell lines. We also explored the mechanism underlying these
effects. We found that embelin induced the apoptosis of human thyroid
cancer cell lines, such as FTC-133, CAL-62, KTC-1, and 8505C. The effect
was stronger in BRAF V600E-mutant thyroid cancer cell lines (KTC-1 and
8505C) than wild-type cell lines (FTC-133 and CAL-62). The effect of
embelin on cell apoptosis was associated with increased phosphorylation
of p38. SB203580 inhibited the embelin mediated induction of cleaved
caspase-3 activity in V600E mutant thyroid cancer cell lines.
Interestingly, embelin induced apoptosis in BRAF wild type cancer cell
lines, even after treatment of SB203580. These results indicated that
another signaling pathway, not a p38 pathway, might be existed for
embelin induced apoptosis in BRAF wild type thyroid cancer cell. In
conclusion, embelin-induced XIAP suppression resulted in an increase of
apoptosis via phosphorylation of p38 in BRAF V600E-mutant thyroid cancer
cell lines. Regulation of XIAP activity may be potentially useful as a
treatment of thyroid cancer, especially in BRAF V600E-mutant thyroid
cancer.

