Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Breast cancers with compromised DNA repair exhibit selective
sensitivity to elesclomol-induced oxidative DNA damage


Hereditary breast cancers due to germline mutations in BRCA1 and sporadic
breast cancers of the basal-like subtype are often triple-negative, i.e.
lack expression of estrogen and progesterone receptors and lack
overexpression/amplification of the HER2/neu oncogene. Given that the
triple-negative status of these cancers renders them relatively
insensitive to existing targeted therapy, improved treatment options are
needed. We tested a panel of cell lines that represent the different
molecular subtypes of breast cancer for sensitivity to elesclomol, an
experimental therapeutic that produces elevated levels of oxidative DNA
damage, using the MTT assay. We found that both BRCA1-mutated and
basal-like breast cancer cell lines with defective base-excision DNA
repair (BER) were markedly more sensitive to elesclomol than cell lines
that represent the normal breast or other subtypes of breast cancer with
proficient BER. We also assessed sensitivity to elesclomol in breast
cancer cell lines that were stably transduced with shRNA to OGG1, a BER
glycosylase required for the repair of the most common type of oxidative
DNA damage. Two different cell lines with decreased levels of OGG1
(shOGG1A, 50% knock-down; shOGG1B, 20% knock-down) were more sensitive to
elesclomol (IC50 = 0.04nM and 0.3nM, respectively) compared to two
different isogenic control cell lines (IC50 = 2nM and 3nM, respectively).
Taken together, these data suggest that compromised repair of oxidative
DNA damage by BER represents a functional target for elesclomol. Overall,
BRCA1-mutated and/or basal-like breast cancers may benefit from treatment
regimens that include elesclomol.

