Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Human neuroblastoma cells undergo TGF-beta mediated mesenchymal
change in the transition to drug resistance


Background: Hypoxia inducible factor 1-alpha (HIF1-alpha) is
overexpressed in doxorubicin-resistant neuroblastoma cell lines relative
to drug sensitive parental cells lines, and has been implicated in
inducing epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT). We hypothesized that
the transition of human neuroblastoma cells from a drug-sensitive to
drug-resistant phenotype involves mesenchymal change. Methods: A
doxorubicin resistant (DoxR) human neuroblastoma cell line was generated
by incubating parental wild type (WT) SK-N-Be(2)C cells in stepwise
concentrations of doxorubicin. Cells were deemed resistant after
surviving in a concentration of drug approximately 2 Log above the wild
type IC50, confirmed by MTT colorimetric survival assay. Cell migration
and capacity for invasion were assayed using the scratch test and
Matrigel invasion culture system. EMT pathway related genes
differentially expressed in the DoxR cells relative to the parental (WT)
lines were analyzed using the Ilumina Human HT-12 v4 Expression Beadchip.
Genes of interest with a fold change in expression >1.5 and an adjusted p
Background: Hypoxia inducible factor 1-alpha (HIF1-alpha) is
overexpressed in doxorubicin-resistant neuroblastoma cell lines relative
to drug sensitive parental cells lines, and has been implicated in
inducing epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT). We hypothesized that
the transition of human neuroblastoma cells from a drug-sensitive to
drug-resistant phenotype involves mesenchymal change. Methods: A
doxorubicin resistant (DoxR) human neuroblastoma cell line was generated
by incubating parental wild type (WT) SK-N-Be(2)C cells in stepwise
concentrations of doxorubicin. Cells were deemed resistant after
surviving in a concentration of drug approximately 2 Log above the wild
type IC50, confirmed by MTT colorimetric survival assay. Cell migration
and capacity for invasion were assayed using the scratch test and
Matrigel invasion culture system. EMT pathway related genes
differentially expressed in the DoxR cells relative to the parental (WT)
lines were analyzed using the Ilumina Human HT-12 v4 Expression Beadchip.
Genes of interest with a fold change in expression >1.5 and an adjusted p
< 0.1 are reported. Quantitative RT-PCR and western blot analysis were
used to confirm the results. Results: Western blot confirmed that
HIF1-alpha was up-regulated in BE(2)C/DoxR cells relative to WT. DoxR
cells also demonstrated increased migration and invasion typical of
mesenchymal cells. Up-regulation of TGF-beta dependent induction pathways
of EMT via RhoA, PI3K, and ILK and via SMADs was seen on microarray
pathway analysis in BE(2)C DoxR cells when compared to WT cells. Genes
involved in these EMT pathways that were up-regulated in DoxR cells
included TGFBRII, the gene encoding TGF beta-receptor II, TGFB3, the gene
for TGF beta 3, as well as other genes implicated in TGF-beta signaling,
including PAK1, LEF1, SMAD3, ZEB2, and NET1. EMT markers including
vimentin (VIM), and slug (SNAI2) were also up-regulated. Interestingly,
CDH2, the gene for N-cadherin, and TWIST1 were down regulated in DoxR
cells. CDH1, the gene for E-cadherin, and SNAI1, the gene for Snail-1,
were not differentially expressed. Conclusions: As SK-BE(2)C human
neuroblastoma cell lines acquire drug-resistance, they undergo
mesenchymal change via TGF-beta mediated pathways, displaying increased
invasion and migration.

