Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Reverse-engineered, forward-simulation of MEK-dependent molecular
networks reveal novel regulators of cell cycle and cancer cell survival


ABSTRACT Molecular networks governing responses to targeted therapies in
cancer cells are complex dynamic systems that demonstrate non-intuitive
behaviors. We applied a novel computational strategy to decipher causal
relationships between signaling network components. Gene networks were
constructed MEK from global gene expression profiles to model G1-S cell
cycle arrest as a consequence of inhibition of MEK, a key component of
the oncogenic RAF-MEK-ERK signal transduction pathway. Through
forward-simulation of reverse-engineered networks candidate MEK-dependent
regulators of the cell cycle were identified. The potential of the
approach to infer causality is demonstrated by confirmed predictions of
differential effects of two early-response transcription factors, IER2
and EGR1. Conventional linear regression analysis shows strong
correlation of expression of both with MEK inhibition and cell cycle
distribution, while only IER2 is predicted by our model and
experimentally validated to have a causal effect on G1-S transition.
Furthermore, we identify TRIB1 (tribbles homologue 1 drosophila) as a
potent and novel cell cycle regulator. TRIB1 also mediates cross-talk to
the NFkB pathway by enhancing p100 and IkBa-phosphorylation and
degradation thus regulating cell survival and expression of cytokines
crucial for tumor-stroma interaction. In agreement with this, knock-down
of TRIB1 results in induction of apoptosis and sensitizes cells to cell
killing induced by the death-receptor agonist TRAIL via upregulation of
TRAIL receptor, DR5. Thus TRIB1 is a central regulator of cell cycle and
survival and represents a potential therapeutic target.

