Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chitinase-3-like-1 protein overexpression in lung epithelial cells
enhances breast cancer metastasis to the lung


Breast cancer is the most common cancer in women in the US. Metastasis is
responsible for a majority of these deaths in spite of significant
improvements in diagnosis and treatments. Recently it was reported that
under conditions of asthma, metastasis to the lung is increased. Patients
with pulmonary inflammatory illnesses demonstrate higher levels of
chitinase-3-like-1 protein (CHI3L1) in their lungs and in circulation. We
have shown that there are elevated levels of CHI3L1 in circulation with
increased tumor growth, higher levels of metastasis to the lung with
shorter survival rates in mice with asthma. However, the direct role of
CHI3L1 in promoting metastasis is not clearly delineated. It is also
unknown if exposure to high levels of CHI3L1 previous to tumorigenesis
directly predisposes to accelerated metastasis. We hypothesize that
CHI3L1-induced pulmonary inflammation generates the proper environment
for recruiting circulating breast cancer cells, thus increasing the rate
of metastasis to the lung. To determine if inflammation associated with
CHI3L1 in the lung alters the pulmonary environment to attract
circulating breast tumor cells and accelerate metastatic growth,
pulmonary inflammation is induced by either ragweed allergen
sensitization or by locally expressing CHI3L1 in the lung using
AAV-CC10-CHI3L1 vector. The role of CHI3L1 in pulmonary metastasis is
delineated in CHI3L1 over-expressing lung epithelia by assessing the
effects on the host immune system and the downstream effects. The studies
proposed here will provide a greater understanding of the role of CHI3L1
in enhancing metastasis and the tissue-specific molecular signals that
act to exacerbate metastasis under conditions of chronic inflammation

