Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: GSK3 plays a crucial role in determining cell response to mTOR
inhibitors


The mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) exerts a critical role in the
regulation of cell growth and cell survival, primarily through forming
two complexes with raptor (mTOR complex 1; mTORC1) or rictor (mTOR
complex 2; mTORC2). The mTOR axis is dysregulated in many types of human
cancers, thus becoming an attractive cancer therapeutic target.
Accordingly, mTOR inhibitors including the conventional allosteric
inhibitors (rapamycin and its analogs; rapalogs) and novel mTOR kinase
inhibitors (e.g., INK128) have been developed. However, single-agent
activity of these inhibitors in the majority of cancer types is limited
or modest at best. Thus, it is crucial to identify determinants that
impact cell response to mTOR-targeted cancer therapy. In this study, we
found that inhibition of GSK3 with both a small molecule inhibitor (e.g.,
SB216765) and gene knockdown substantially antagonized the suppressive
effects of mTOR inhibitors (e.g., rapamycin and INK128) on the growth of
cancer cells, including G1 arrest. In agreement, activation of GSK3 by
expressing a constitutively activated form of GSK3[[Unsupported Character
- Symbol Font ?]] sensitized cells to mTOR inhibitors. Moreover, higher
basal levels of GSK3 activity from 14 lung cancer cell lines were
significantly associated with better cell responses to both rapamycin and
INK128 (P The mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) exerts a critical role
in the regulation of cell growth and cell survival, primarily through
forming two complexes with raptor (mTOR complex 1; mTORC1) or rictor
(mTOR complex 2; mTORC2). The mTOR axis is dysregulated in many types of
human cancers, thus becoming an attractive cancer therapeutic target.
Accordingly, mTOR inhibitors including the conventional allosteric
inhibitors (rapamycin and its analogs; rapalogs) and novel mTOR kinase
inhibitors (e.g., INK128) have been developed. However, single-agent
activity of these inhibitors in the majority of cancer types is limited
or modest at best. Thus, it is crucial to identify determinants that
impact cell response to mTOR-targeted cancer therapy. In this study, we
found that inhibition of GSK3 with both a small molecule inhibitor (e.g.,
SB216765) and gene knockdown substantially antagonized the suppressive
effects of mTOR inhibitors (e.g., rapamycin and INK128) on the growth of
cancer cells, including G1 arrest. In agreement, activation of GSK3 by
expressing a constitutively activated form of GSK3[[Unsupported Character
- Symbol Font ?]] sensitized cells to mTOR inhibitors. Moreover, higher
basal levels of GSK3 activity from 14 lung cancer cell lines were
significantly associated with better cell responses to both rapamycin and
INK128 (P < 0.05). These data together indicate that GSK3 plays a
critical role in determining cell response to mTOR inhibitors.
Interestingly, GSK3 inhibition did not alter the effects of mTOR
inhibitors on suppression of mTOR signaling and cap-dependent
translation, but rescued downregulation of cyclin D1 and c-Myc caused by
mTOR inhibitors, suggesting that mTOR inhibitors decrease cyclin D1 and
c-Myc levels independent of inhibition of mTOR-mediated protein
translation. Instead, we found that inhibition of mTOR (e.g., by INK128)
decreased the stabilities of both cyclin D1 and c-Myc. Moreover,
inhibition of proteasome (e.g., with MG132) prevented cyclin D1 and c-Myc
reduction by INK128. Hence it is apparent that mTOR inhibition
facilitates cyclin D1 and c-Myc degradation, leading to reduction of
cyclin D1 and c-Myc. Together, these findings suggest a novel mechanism
by which mTOR signaling positively regulates the stability of cyclin D1
and c-Myc. Our current findings thus warrant further investigation of the
potential impact of GSK3 inhibition on the efficacy of mTOR inhibitors in
the clinic. (This study was supported by the Georgia Cancer Coalition
Distinguished Cancer Scholar award and NIH/NCI R01 CA118450. SS
Ramalingam, FR Khuri and SY Sun are Georgia Cancer Coalition
Distinguished Cancer Scholars)

