Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Branching morphogenesis in the mammary gland is regulated by
sprouty-2


Branching morphogenesis is a conserved mechanism used by many species for
organogenesis and tissue maintenance. Receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs),
including the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), and their
intracellular regulators, the sprouty protein family is believed to be a
critical regulator of branching morphogenesis. In this study, we show
that, Sprouty-2 (Spry-2) is predominantly expressed in the luminal
epithelial cells both in ducts and lobuli in the human breast gland. We
have also analyzed the expression of Spry-2 and EGFR pathway in virgin,
lactating and pregnant mouse mammary gland. Spry-2 is expressed at
branching epithelial buds during pregnancy with increased expression
during lactation. The expression of phosphorylated EGFR (Y1068) shows a
similar expression pattern as Spry-2. Using D492 a breast epithelial cell
line with stem cell properties, that generate branching structures in 3D
laminin rich gel we show that Spry-2 expression increases during the
formation of branching. Immunostaining locates expression of Spry-2 and
active EGFR at the tip of lobular-like, branching ends. Interestingly,
knocking down (KD) spry-2 expression using shRNA resulted in increased
migration. Spry-2 knockdown also gives larger and more complex branching
structures indicating loss of negative feedback control of branching
morphogenesis. In co-culture with endothelial cells, D492 spry-2 KD cells
generate predominantly spindle like colonies reminiscent of epithelial to
mesenchymal tansition. In conclusion, these data indicate that Spry-2 is
an important regulator of branching morphogenesis and dysregulation of
sprouty expression can lead to aberrant development related to breast
cancer, such as epithelial to mesenchymal transition in the mammary gland.

