Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Magnetic resonance spectroscopic imaging of lactate in LDH-A
silenced metastatic breast tumors


Glucose and glutamine are the major carbon sources for rapidly
proliferating tumors. They provide the precursors for proteins, lipids,
and nucleic acids, and as well as metabolic-reducing capability (NADPH).
Pyruvate is mainly derived from glucose and glutamine metabolism and can
be converted to lactate by the lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) complex or
enter the TCA cycle for conversion to CO2 and ATP. Recently, a link
between tumor lactate levels (monitored by MRSI), LDH-A expression and
tumor phenotype has been demonstrated (Serganova I. et al., 2011). We
hypothesize that tumor lactate levels monitored by MRSI will reflect
LDH-A enzymatic activity, tumor aggressiveness and the propensity for
developing metastases. The current study employs 4T1 cells bearing the
stable produced LDH-A shRNA to down regulate the level of LDH-A
expression. LDH-A silenced and control 4T1 breast cancer cells were
injected into the mammary fat pad of athymic nu/nu female mice (5 mice
for each group). The in vivo growth rate of the LDH-A silenced tumors was
significantly slower than that of control tumors; the average doubling
time of the LDH-A silenced tumors was 1.5 fold higher than control tumors
(pGlucose and glutamine are the major carbon sources for rapidly
proliferating tumors. They provide the precursors for proteins, lipids,
and nucleic acids, and as well as metabolic-reducing capability (NADPH).
Pyruvate is mainly derived from glucose and glutamine metabolism and can
be converted to lactate by the lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) complex or
enter the TCA cycle for conversion to CO2 and ATP. Recently, a link
between tumor lactate levels (monitored by MRSI), LDH-A expression and
tumor phenotype has been demonstrated (Serganova I. et al., 2011). We
hypothesize that tumor lactate levels monitored by MRSI will reflect
LDH-A enzymatic activity, tumor aggressiveness and the propensity for
developing metastases. The current study employs 4T1 cells bearing the
stable produced LDH-A shRNA to down regulate the level of LDH-A
expression. LDH-A silenced and control 4T1 breast cancer cells were
injected into the mammary fat pad of athymic nu/nu female mice (5 mice
for each group). The in vivo growth rate of the LDH-A silenced tumors was
significantly slower than that of control tumors; the average doubling
time of the LDH-A silenced tumors was 1.5 fold higher than control tumors
(p<0.01). The lactate signal was acquired using a selective
multiple-quantum coherence transfer (SelMQC) editing sequence in
combination with chemical shift imaging (CSI) (He Q. et al., 1995). The
tumors were scanned at small (100 mm3) and larger (300 mm3) volumes and
in vivo lactate concentration was measured. The LDH-A silenced tumors
produce less lactate, 6 mM at small volumes and 3 mM at larger volumes,
whereas the control tumors produce 11 mM at small, and 7 mM at larger
volumes. Preliminary results suggest that high tumor lactate
concentrations are linked with a greater propensity to develop
metastases. Studies evaluating metastatic burden are ongoing. We suggest
that LDH-A expression and tumor lactate levels may be potential markers
of elevated metastatic potential. In addition, MRSI might offer a
noninvasive approach for assessing tumor progression and metastatic
potential.

