Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression of FOXO1 is associated with GATA3 and Annexin-1 and
predicts disease-free survival in breast cancer


Purpose: To determine the prognostic value of FOXO1, GATA3 and Annexin-1
expression in breast cancer. Methods: Tissue microarray and individual
paraffin tissue slides from 131 patients were used for the study. The
association of FOXO1, GATA3 and Annexin-1 expression with
clinicopathological features of breast cancer and disease outcome was
examined in retrospective samples. Kaplan-Meier survival curves and Cox
regression with multivariate analysis were used for assessing the
relative risk (RR) and disease-free survival (DFS). The expression of
FOXO1, GATA3 and Annexin-1 were determined by immunohistochemistry and
the association among the three proteins was analyzed by Logistic
regression analysis. Results: The nuclear expression of FOXO1 was
observed in most of the normal breast tissues and 51.3% of the malignant
breast tissues. GATA3 and Annexin-1 were expressed at 73% and 24.6%
respectively in breast cancer tissues. The expression of FOXO1, GATA3 and
Annexin-1 were all inversely correlated with lymph node-positive tumors.
Both FOXO1 and Annexin-1 expression were also inversely associated with
HER2-overexpressing tumors. FOXO1 expression was significantly associated
with both GATA3 and Annexin-1 expression. In addition, Multivariate
analyses confirm that only FOXO1 levels independently predict DFS.
Conclusion: FOXO1 expression in breast cancer is regulated by the
PI3K/Akt pathway. The expression of FOXO1 is also associated with GATA3
and/or Annexin-1. Restoring or targeting FOXO1 to the cell nucleus in
breast cancer tissues may improve response to therapy and disease
outcome. Further clinical studies are warranted to test this hypothesis.

