Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Induced dependency on amino acid metabolism in proliferating
cancer cells upon PKM2 activation


It is well recognized that proliferating tumor cells invariably utilize
aerobic glycolysis to support their high metabolic demands. Recent
studies have further elucidated the paradoxical observation that this
increase in glycolysis in proliferating tumor cells is often coupled with
a molecular switch from the constitutively high activity PKM1 isoform to
the modulated lower activity PKM2 isoform1,2, effectively constraining
lower glycolysis at the last pyruvate kinase step. Here, we report an
unanticipated link between glucose metabolism and amino-acid metabolic
pathways in cancer cells. We characterized the biochemical and cellular
effects of a small-molecule allosteric activator of the M2 isoform of
pyruvate kinase (AGX-257) in various cancer cell types. We demonstrate
that activation of PKM2 results in a metabolic rewiring of specific
cancer cells that results in a profound dependency on the presence of the
normally non-essential amino acid serine for continued cell
proliferation. The induced serine auxotrophy by PKM2 activation is
concomitant with reduced flux through the endogenous serine biosynthetic
pathway and increased levels of high affinity serine transporters. PKM2
activators, possibly in combination with agents that modulate the
cellular and extracellular serine pools, could form the basis for a new
approach toward developing therapy for treating cancer. References: 1
Christofk, H. R. et al. The M2 splice isoform of pyruvate kinase is
important for cancer metabolism and tumour growth. Nature 452, 230-233
(2008). 2 Clower, C. V. et al. The alternative splicing repressors hnRNP
A1/A2 and PTB influence pyruvate kinase isoform expression and cell
metabolism. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 107, 1894-1899 (2010).

