Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Aberrant DNA methylation of Shisa3 is a novel prognostic biomarker
for colorectal cancer


Shisa3, a newly identified tumor suppressor, inhibits invasion and
metastasis via regulation of epithelial-mesenchymal transition in
non-small cell lung cancer. We first screened 11 colorectal cancer (CRC)
cell lines as well as 10 pairs of primary tumors and matched normal
mucosas for Shisa3 expression by semi-quantitative RT-PCR. Shisa3 gene
was silenced or down-regulated in 8 (72.7%) cell lines and 8 (80%) CRC
tumors, suggesting that Shisa3 might be also involved in colorectal
tumorigenesis. Accordingly, we further confirmed Shisa3 expression was
significantly decreased in 59.6% (31/52) of colorectal carcinomas
compared with corresponding normal mucosas by real-time RT-PCR (P Shisa3,
a newly identified tumor suppressor, inhibits invasion and metastasis via
regulation of epithelial-mesenchymal transition in non-small cell lung
cancer. We first screened 11 colorectal cancer (CRC) cell lines as well
as 10 pairs of primary tumors and matched normal mucosas for Shisa3
expression by semi-quantitative RT-PCR. Shisa3 gene was silenced or
down-regulated in 8 (72.7%) cell lines and 8 (80%) CRC tumors, suggesting
that Shisa3 might be also involved in colorectal tumorigenesis.
Accordingly, we further confirmed Shisa3 expression was significantly
decreased in 59.6% (31/52) of colorectal carcinomas compared with
corresponding normal mucosas by real-time RT-PCR (P < 0.001). Using gene
copy number assay, we ruled out chromosomal instability pathway as the
major mechanism resulting in Shisa3 silencing in CRC. While Shisa3 mRNA
expression was restored in 66.7% (4/6) of CRC cell lines as exposure to
DNA methylation inhibitor 5-Aza-2-deoxycytidine. CpG islands spanning
around Shisa3 gene were predicted via MethPrimer program. Aberrant
methylation of 5 CpG loci in Shisa3 intron 1 was identified in CRC cell
lines and primary tumors by bisulfite sequencing, and their methylation
levels determined by pyrosequencing were inverse correlation with Shisa3
mRNA expression. In addition, among 127 pairs of CRC tissues, Shisa3
methylation levels in tumors were much higher than that in corresponding
normal mucosas (P Shisa3, a newly identified tumor suppressor, inhibits
invasion and metastasis via regulation of epithelial-mesenchymal
transition in non-small cell lung cancer. We first screened 11 colorectal
cancer (CRC) cell lines as well as 10 pairs of primary tumors and matched
normal mucosas for Shisa3 expression by semi-quantitative RT-PCR. Shisa3
gene was silenced or down-regulated in 8 (72.7%) cell lines and 8 (80%)
CRC tumors, suggesting that Shisa3 might be also involved in colorectal
tumorigenesis. Accordingly, we further confirmed Shisa3 expression was
significantly decreased in 59.6% (31/52) of colorectal carcinomas
compared with corresponding normal mucosas by real-time RT-PCR (P <
0.001). Using gene copy number assay, we ruled out chromosomal
instability pathway as the major mechanism resulting in Shisa3 silencing
in CRC. While Shisa3 mRNA expression was restored in 66.7% (4/6) of CRC
cell lines as exposure to DNA methylation inhibitor
5-Aza-2-deoxycytidine. CpG islands spanning around Shisa3 gene were
predicted via MethPrimer program. Aberrant methylation of 5 CpG loci in
Shisa3 intron 1 was identified in CRC cell lines and primary tumors by
bisulfite sequencing, and their methylation levels determined by
pyrosequencing were inverse correlation with Shisa3 mRNA expression. In
addition, among 127 pairs of CRC tissues, Shisa3 methylation levels in
tumors were much higher than that in corresponding normal mucosas (P <
0.001), and Shisa3 hypermethylation was significantly associated with
disease recurrence in stages B and C patients (P = 0.008). Kaplan-Meier
survival analysis showed that patients with Shisa3 hypermethylation
revealed significantly shortened overall survival (P Shisa3, a newly
identified tumor suppressor, inhibits invasion and metastasis via
regulation of epithelial-mesenchymal transition in non-small cell lung
cancer. We first screened 11 colorectal cancer (CRC) cell lines as well
as 10 pairs of primary tumors and matched normal mucosas for Shisa3
expression by semi-quantitative RT-PCR. Shisa3 gene was silenced or
down-regulated in 8 (72.7%) cell lines and 8 (80%) CRC tumors, suggesting
that Shisa3 might be also involved in colorectal tumorigenesis.
Accordingly, we further confirmed Shisa3 expression was significantly
decreased in 59.6% (31/52) of colorectal carcinomas compared with
corresponding normal mucosas by real-time RT-PCR (P < 0.001). Using gene
copy number assay, we ruled out chromosomal instability pathway as the
major mechanism resulting in Shisa3 silencing in CRC. While Shisa3 mRNA
expression was restored in 66.7% (4/6) of CRC cell lines as exposure to
DNA methylation inhibitor 5-Aza-2-deoxycytidine. CpG islands spanning
around Shisa3 gene were predicted via MethPrimer program. Aberrant
methylation of 5 CpG loci in Shisa3 intron 1 was identified in CRC cell
lines and primary tumors by bisulfite sequencing, and their methylation
levels determined by pyrosequencing were inverse correlation with Shisa3
mRNA expression. In addition, among 127 pairs of CRC tissues, Shisa3
methylation levels in tumors were much higher than that in corresponding
normal mucosas (P < 0.001), and Shisa3 hypermethylation was significantly
associated with disease recurrence in stages B and C patients (P =
0.008). Kaplan-Meier survival analysis showed that patients with Shisa3
hypermethylation revealed significantly shortened overall survival (P <
0.001) and disease-free survival (P = 0.006). In conclusion, Shisa3 gene
hypermethylation could serve as a molecular predictor of disease
recurrence and poor prognosis in CRC.

