Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A phase I study of lenalidomide in combination with bevacizumab,
sorafenib, temsirolimus, or 5-fluorouracil, leucovorin, oxaliplatin
(FOLFOX) in patients with advanced cancers


Introduction: Patients with advanced cancer have limited therapeutic
options. We conducted an investigator-initiated 4-arm phase I study of
lenalidomide (len) combined with bevacizumab (bev), sorafenib (soraf),
temsirolimus (tem), or 5-fluorouracil, leucovorin, oxaliplatin (FOLFOX)
in patients with advanced cancers. Patients and Methods: Patients were
treated with escalating doses of len (5, 10, 20 mg daily) combined with
bev (5, 7.5, 10 mg/m2 on days 1, 15); soraf (200, 400mg daily); tem (15,
20, 25mg on days 1, 8, 15, 22); or FOLFOX (oxaliplatin 65, 85 mg/m2 on
day 1). The escalation phase (3+3) was followed by an expansion phase per
arm. Response was assessed by RECIST v.1. Patients were to receive
enoxaparin prophylaxis. Results: Overall, 101 patients were enrolled; and
59 were treated in the dose escalation phase (4 arms) and are included in
this analysis (169 cycles to date). Diagnoses were colorectal cancer
(n=19), sarcoma (n=5), ovarian (n=4), lung (n=3), hepatocellular
carcinoma (n=3), melanoma (n=4), neuroendocrine (n=2), prostate (n=2) and
other (n=17). The median number of cycles/patient was 2 (range, 1-10).
Pretreatment characteristics and outcomes are shown in Table. Two DLTs
were noted: Grade 3 transient ischemic attack (TIA) while on enoxaparin
in the len + FOLFOX arm and Grade 3 acute renal failure (ARF) in the len
+ tem arm. Three pts (two on enoxaparin prophylaxis and one not) had
venous thrombosis while on study. Fifteen of 59 (25%) pts had prolonged
stable disease (SD) for > 4 months, including 7 (12%) for > 6 mos. The
len+soraf and len+tem arms have reached the maximum dose level tested;
currently, expansion phase). The lev+bev and len+FOLFOX arms are in the
dose escalation phase. Conclusion: Lenalidomide combined with bev, soraf,
tem or FOLFOX is well tolerated and it is associatd with antitumor
activity in patients with advanced solid tumors. Anticoagulation
phophylaxis is needed.


