Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discoidin domain receptor 1 contributes to tumorigenesis through
modulation of TGFBI expression


Discoidin domain receptor 1 (DDR1) is a member of the receptor tyrosine
kinase family. It is activated by binding to its ligand, collagen and
plays a key role in cell survival, adhesion, migration and invasion.
Although DDR1 is present in several normal tissues, it is overexpressed
in various cancer types, including lung, colon, ovary and breast tumors
as well as in gliomas, where it is known to be associated with poor
prognosis. The significance of DDR1 in cancer was illustrated using shRNA
silencing, which impaired tumor cell growth, both in vitro and in vivo.
Using microarray analysis of tumor cells with DDR1 knockdown, we
identified an upregulation of TGFBI expression, which was subsequently
confirmed at the protein level. TGFBI is a TGF induced extracellular
matrix protein secreted by tumor cells and has been reported to act as
either a tumor promoter or suppressor, depending upon tumor type.
Exogenous addition of recombinant TGFBI to tumor cells inhibited
clonogenic growth, recapitulating shRNA data. When grown in vivo as
xenografts, the DDR1 knockdown cell lines demonstrated a similar
phenotype of reduced growth and tumors exhibited an increase in TGFBI
protein levels. In summary, our data suggests that DDR1 expression levels
influences tumor growth in part through modulation of TGFBI expression.
Ongoing studies will help to understand how DDR1 and TGFBI are linked and
contribute to tumorigenesis.

