Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DYRK2-mediated phosphorylation of c-Jun and c-Myc is requisite for
proper control of the G1/S transition


Transcription factors c-Jun and c-Myc are indispensable regulators for
the G1/S transition and their expressions were tightly regulated at
transcriptional and post-translational levels. Dysregulation of these
expressions leads to tumor development and progression. Degradation of
c-Jun/c-Myc, a critical event for the G1/S transition, is triggered by
sequential phosphorylations by unknown priming kinase(s) and GSK3-beta.
Here we show that DYRK2 (dual-specificity
tyrosine-phosphorylation-regulated kinase 2) functions as a priming
kinase for c-Jun/c-Myc and modifies its expression at the by
post-translational level. In the absence of priming phosphorylation,
c-Jun and c-Myc escape from GSK-3-mediated sequential phosphorylation and
Fbw-7-mediated ubiquitination. Therefore, depletion of DYRK2 results in
aberrant expression of c-Jun and c-Myc. Furthermore, in DYRK2 knockdown
cells, up-regulated c-Jun and c-Myc facilitate cell proliferation and
shorten the length of the G1 phase and prompts the G1/S transition.
Furthermore, DYRK2 inactivation contributes to cell proliferation and
tumor progression in vitro and in vivo. Pathological analysis
demonstrated that DYRK2 expression is decreased in multiple cancerous
tissues. Taken together, DYRK2 controls cell cycle progression at G1/S
phase via phosphorylation of c-Jun and c-Myc

