Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mutation of EZH2 A677 in human B-cell lymphoma promotes
hyper-trimethylation of H3K27


Trimethylation of histone H3 on lysine 27 (H3K27me3) is a repressive
post-translational modification mediated by the histone methyltransferase
EZH2. EZH2 is a component of the Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 (PRC2) and
its expression and catalytic activity are dysregulated in cancers. While
EZH2 may be over-expressed as a result of multiple mechanisms in tumors,
only somatic mutation of the EZH2 Y641 residue has thus far been reported
to alter its substrate preference and enhance its catalytic efficiency to
generate H3K27me3. Herein, we report mutation of the A677 residue of EZH2
to a glycine (A677G) in a lymphoma cell line with aberrantly elevated
H3K27me3 levels. Additional EZH2 sequence analysis in 41 primary lymphoma
specimens identified another occurrence of this mutation. Biochemical
evaluation of recombinant EZH2 complexes revealed that A677G EZH2
possesses catalytic activity with substrate specificity that is novel and
distinct from those of wild-type and Y641 mutants. Whereas wild-type EZH2
displayed a preference for substrates with less methylation (i.e.
H3K27me0>me1>me2), the Y641 mutants exhibited greatly decreased activity
with H3K27me0 and increased activity with H3K27me2. The A677G EZH2, on
the other hand, exhibited nearly equal efficiency for all three
substrates. A677G EZH2, but not wild-type EZH2, was shown to be capable
of significantly increasing global H3K27me3 when transiently expressed in
an EZH2 wild-type cancer cell line. Finally, structural modeling suggests
that the mutation results in a larger lysine tunnel capable of
accommodating the H3K27me2 substrate while retaining the ability to
properly orient H3K27me0 and H3K27me1 with the Y641 residue. In addition,
functional and biochemical analyses are performed with reversible
SAM-competitive EZH2 inhibitors. Therefore, this mutation appears to
contribute to the aberrant epigenetic profile observed in certain
lymphomas.

