Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effect of carcinogen acrolein on DNA repair and mutagenic
susceptibility.


Lung cancer death is the number one cause of cancer death in the United
States. Cigarette smoking is the major cause of lung cancer. Cigarette
smoke (CS) contains more than 60 human carcinogens. Our early work has
demonstrated that acrolein (Acr), one of the most abundant aldehydes in
CS, reacts with DNA to form - and -hydroxy-1, N2-cyclic propano-dG
adducts (-Acr-dG and -Acr-dG). The distribution of Acr-dG in the p53 gene
coincides with lung cancer p53 mutational spectrum. Acr-dG adducts induce
mainly G to T and G to A mutations that are similar to the mutation
signature found in the p53 gene in lung cancer. We have also found that
Acr inhibits DNA repair. Therefore, we concluded that Acr is a major
etiological agent for CS related lung cancer. In this study, we found
that Acr-dG adducts are poorly repaired in Acr treated normal human
bronchial epithelial (NHBE) cells. Intriguingly, NHBE cell lysates are
competent in carrying out in vitro repair synthesis assay using
Acr-modified as well as UV-irradiated DNA as substrates. These results
indicate that Acr treatment impairs DNA repair function. We found that
Acr not only inhibits nucleotide excision repair (NER), it also inhibits
base excision repair (BER) and mismatch repair (MMR). Acr does not change
the expression of XPA, XPC, hOGG1, PMS2 or MLH1 genes. However, Acr
causes a reduction of XPA, XPC, hOGG1, PMS2 and MLH1 proteins and that
this effect can be neutralized by the proteosome inhibitor, MG132. We
further found that Acr treatment enhances both bulky and oxidative DNA
damage-induced mutagenesis. These results indicate that Acr not only
damages DNA, but can also modify DNA repair proteins and further cause
degradation of these modified repair proteins. We propose that these two
detrimental effects contribute to Acr mutagenicity and carcinogenicity.


