Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Lapatinib and obatoclax kill cns tumor cells through blockade of
erbb1 / 3 / 4 and through inhibition of bcl-xl and mcl-1


Previous studies in breast cancer cells have shown that Lapatinib (Lap)
and Obatoclax (GX) interact in a greater than additive manner to cause
cell death. The present studies sought to expand our analyses to CNS
(Glioblastoma & Medulloblastoma) tumor cells and to further advance our
understanding of the mechanisms of drug action. Combinational treatment
with Lap / GX resulted in enhanced tumor cell death in multiple CNS tumor
types. Moreover, it was discovered that cells lacking PTEN function were
resistant to drug combination lethality and re-expression of PTEN in PTEN
null cells restored drug sensitivity. Furthermore, PTEN expressing cancer
cells, sensitive to Lap / GX treatment, demonstrated drug resistance upon
knockdown of PTEN. Additionally, we established that inhibition of ERBB1
/ 3 / 4 receptors was most significant for enhancing GX lethality, and
that knockdown of BCL-XL and particularly MCL-1, interacted to facilitate
Lap lethality. Pre-treatment of tumor cells in vitro and in vivo with GX
enhanced the lethality of Lap to a greater extent than concomitant
treatment and suppressed tumor growth. Treatment of animals carrying
orthotopic CNS tumor isolates and those implanted with anoikis resistant
breast tumors in the brain with Lap / GX prolonged survival. Collectively
our data argues that combinational Lap / GX therapy could be of use in
the treatment of tumors located in the CNS. Further studies must be
carried out in order to elucidate whether autophagy or apoptosis plays
the most predominant role in cell death in response to Lap / GX treatment.

