Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Carfilzomib and ONX 0912 reduce the level of STAT3 phosphorylation
in human B-cell lymphoma cells in vitro and in vivo


BACKGROUND: Proteasome inhibitors, such as bortezomib and the
tetrapeptide ketoepoxide carfilzomib (CFZ), have shown strong antitumor
activity in patients with multiple myeloma and non-Hodgkin's lymphoma
(NHL). Anti-tumor responses are due to direct tumor cell cytotoxicity but
may also involve effects on transcription factors such as signal
transducers and activators of transcription (STATs). AIM: To evaluate the
effect on STAT phosphorylation in NHL by proteasome inhibitors as a
possible mechanism of antitumor activity. METHODS: The human lymphoma
cell lines HS-Sultan and Mino were used for this study. In vitro studies
involved overnight incubation of cells with DMSO, carfilzomib or ONX 0912
by flow cytometric analysis for STAT3 and STAT5 phosophorylation. In vivo
studies, utilized NIH III immunocompromised mice implanted with HS-Sultan
cells and single dose administration with carfilzomib or ONX 0912 when
tumors reached 200 mm3. Twenty four hours after dosing, tumor cells were
isolated by enzymatic digestion and analyzed by flow cytometry. RESULTS:
Carfilzomib and ONX 0912 resulted in suppressed STAT3 tyrosine
phosphorylation in both cell lines in vitro and in vivo. No effects on
the level of STAT5 phosphorylation were detected. CONCLUSION: These
findings suggest that carfilzomib and ONX 0912 exert an anti-tumor effect
against human B-cell lymphoma in part through alterations in STAT3
phosphorylation levels. This is the first report that proteasome
inhibitors can reduce STAT3 activation in human B-cell lymphomas in vivo.
These data support the further evaluation of carfilzomib and ONX 0912 as
novel therapeutic agents for the treatment of NHL.

