Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Active SHP2 mutant induces lung hyperproliferative lesions and
adenoma in transgenic mice


SHP2 is a protein tyrosine phosphatase encoded by the PTPN11 gene. SHP2
is normally auto-inhibited by its regulatory N-SH2 domain. It is
activated by several receptor tyrosine kinases and positively regulates
the RAS/ERK and other signaling pathways by mechanisms that remain
incompletely defined. Furthermore, gain-of-function activating SHP2
mutants have been found in human hematologic malignancies and solid
tumors, including lung, colon, and prostate cancer. Previous studies have
demonstrated the oncogenic activity of gain-of-function SHP2 mutants in
the hematopoietic system. To investigate the biological functions of
mutant SHP2 in vivo, we generated transgenic mice harboring a
tetO-SHP2E76K transgene for tetracycline-inducible expression of the
constitutively active SHP2E76K mutant. This allows us to examine the
roles of the cancer-associated, Glu-76 mutant SHP2 in various tissues in
bitransgenic mice. tetO-SHP2E76K mice were crossed with CCSP-rtTA or
SPC-rtTA mice for inducible expression of SHP2E76K in the lung type II
pneumocytes. Elevated levels of active Erk1/2 and Src were detected in
the lungs of bitransgenic mice induced with doxycycline. Focal
hyperplasia of bronchioloalveolar epithelial cells was observed within
one month of doxycycline induction in bitransgenic mice, which progressed
to more extensive atypical adenomous hyperplasia and adenoma after six
months. These results suggest that Shp2 is a proto-oncogene of lung
carcinoma.

