Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Human HER2 and PI3K H1047R cooperate to promote mammary
tumorigenesis in vivo


The HER2 oncogene is amplified in 20-25% of breast cancers and is
associated with poor patient outcome. Mutational activation of PIK3CA,
the gene encoding the p110 catalytic subunit of PI3K, occurs in 30% of
breast cancers. HER2 gene amplification and PIK3CA mutations often
co-occur in breast cancer, suggesting that these two oncogenes cooperate
to promote tumor growth. Whether mutant PI3K enhances HER2-induced
tumorigenesis and cancer progression in vivo has not yet been examined.
In addition, aberrant activation of the PI3K pathway has been implicated
in resistance to the HER2 inhibitors trastuzumab and lapatinib. We have
created a conditional mouse model of HER2-overexpressing (HER2+),
PI3K-mutant breast cancer bearing the following three transgenes:
MMTV-HER2 (human HER2), MMTV-rtTA, and
TetOp-HA-PIK3CA-H1047R-IRES-Luciferase (referred to as HER2.rtTA.PIK3CA
mice). The latter two transgenes allow for mammary-specific, doxycycline
(DOX)-inducible expression of PI3K with the hotspot H1047R kinase domain
mutation. We induced PI3K H1047R expression with DOX in female
HER2.rtTA.PIK3CA and rtTA.PIK3CA mice beginning at 4 weeks of age.
HER2.rtTA.PIK3CA + DOX mice developed mammary tumors with a significantly
shorter latency compared to mice expressing PI3K (p=0.0012) or HER2 (pThe
HER2 oncogene is amplified in 20-25% of breast cancers and is associated
with poor patient outcome. Mutational activation of PIK3CA, the gene
encoding the p110 catalytic subunit of PI3K, occurs in 30% of breast
cancers. HER2 gene amplification and PIK3CA mutations often co-occur in
breast cancer, suggesting that these two oncogenes cooperate to promote
tumor growth. Whether mutant PI3K enhances HER2-induced tumorigenesis and
cancer progression in vivo has not yet been examined. In addition,
aberrant activation of the PI3K pathway has been implicated in resistance
to the HER2 inhibitors trastuzumab and lapatinib. We have created a
conditional mouse model of HER2-overexpressing (HER2+), PI3K-mutant
breast cancer bearing the following three transgenes: MMTV-HER2 (human
HER2), MMTV-rtTA, and TetOp-HA-PIK3CA-H1047R-IRES-Luciferase (referred to
as HER2.rtTA.PIK3CA mice). The latter two transgenes allow for
mammary-specific, doxycycline (DOX)-inducible expression of PI3K with the
hotspot H1047R kinase domain mutation. We induced PI3K H1047R expression
with DOX in female HER2.rtTA.PIK3CA and rtTA.PIK3CA mice beginning at 4
weeks of age. HER2.rtTA.PIK3CA + DOX mice developed mammary tumors with a
significantly shorter latency compared to mice expressing PI3K (p=0.0012)
or HER2 (p<0.0001) alone. We confirmed that triple-transgenic tumors
expressed high levels of HER2 and HA-PI3K as well as downstream signal
transducers such as P-HER3, P-Akt, P-ERK, and P-S6 by immunoblot
analysis. Tumors expressing both oncogenes are histologically diverse and
display distinct histological phenotypes from mice expressing either
oncogene alone. Whereas HER2-driven tumors primarily expressed the
luminal cytokeratin (CK) 18, HER2.rtTA.PIK3CA + DOX and rtTA.PIK3CA + DOX
tumors expressed both basal CK 14 and luminal CK 18. Interestingly, by
microarray analysis, PIK3CA-driven tumors were associated with the
claudin-low subtype, HER2-driven tumors clustered with the luminal
subtype, and HER2.rtTA.PIK3CA + DOX tumors shared features of both
subtypes. Co-staining with trastuzumab (to detect only human HER2) and an
anti-HA antibody revealed that the majority of triple-transgenic,
DOX-treated tumors expressed both human HER2 and HA-PI3K. Of note, HER2
and PI3K colocalization in the same tumor cell was increased in
metastatic lesions. Experiments are underway to determine whether
DOX-treated HER2.rtTA.PIK3CA tumors are resistant to the HER2 antibody
trastuzumab. Taken together, these studies suggest that the co-expression
of HER2 and PI3K H1047R in the mouse mammary gland accelerates
tumorigenesis and promotes formation of tumors with claudin-low and
luminal features. We anticipate that this mouse model will be an
invaluable tool to investigate the underlying biology of HER2+,
PI3K-mutant breast cancers and for preclinical testing of therapeutic
strategies for this subtype of breast cancer.

