Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High expression of CKS1B antagonizes MLN4924, a nedd8-activating
enzyme inhibitor, that induces myeloma cell growth inhibition through
decreased neddylation of SCF complex


Background: MLN4924 binds to the NEDD8-activating enzyme (NAE), and
promotes neddylation of SCF (Skp1-Cul1 / Cdc53-F-box protein) complex
resulting in inhibition of proteasomal degradation of several substrates.
CKS1B acts as an adaptor of SCF complexes involved in cell cycle
progression and DNA damage repair in many cancers, including multiple
myeloma (MM). In this study, we investigate the functional role of CKS1B
expression on MLN4924 in myeloma and determine whether CKS1B can be used
as a potential biomarker for sensitivity to MLN4924 treatment in MM.
Methods: Three myeloma cell lines, KMS12, KMS28PE, and OCI-MY5 in which
CKS1B was artificially over-expressed (CKS1B-OE) as well as their empty
vector (EV) controls were treated with MLN4924 at different
concentrations. The IC50 and growth inhibition of cells were analyzed via
a fluorencent screeing assay. APC-labeled annexinV and PI were assessed
by flow cytometry to detect apoptosis and cell cycle changes. The
expression of Cullin-NEDD8 and a series of ubiquitined SCF substrates
were analyzed by non-reducing western blot. Results: MLN4924 effectively
inhibited cell growth and induced cell apoptosis in both CKS1B-OE and EV
MM cells. However, MM cells transfected with EV were more sensitive than
those transfected with CKS1B-OE as evidenced by the IC50 values (KMS28PE
OE vs. EV 99: 65 nM; KMS12 OE vs. EV 125: 72 nM; and OCI-MY5 OE vs. EV
106:89 nM). The cell viabilities at 100 nM were 49.6% vs. 26.7%, 54.5%
vs. 34.2%, and 53.6% vs. 36.8% in CKS1B-OE versus EV KMS28PE, KMS12, and
OCI-MY5 cells (PBackground: MLN4924 binds to the NEDD8-activating enzyme
(NAE), and promotes neddylation of SCF (Skp1-Cul1 / Cdc53-F-box protein)
complex resulting in inhibition of proteasomal degradation of several
substrates. CKS1B acts as an adaptor of SCF complexes involved in cell
cycle progression and DNA damage repair in many cancers, including
multiple myeloma (MM). In this study, we investigate the functional role
of CKS1B expression on MLN4924 in myeloma and determine whether CKS1B can
be used as a potential biomarker for sensitivity to MLN4924 treatment in
MM. Methods: Three myeloma cell lines, KMS12, KMS28PE, and OCI-MY5 in
which CKS1B was artificially over-expressed (CKS1B-OE) as well as their
empty vector (EV) controls were treated with MLN4924 at different
concentrations. The IC50 and growth inhibition of cells were analyzed via
a fluorencent screeing assay. APC-labeled annexinV and PI were assessed
by flow cytometry to detect apoptosis and cell cycle changes. The
expression of Cullin-NEDD8 and a series of ubiquitined SCF substrates
were analyzed by non-reducing western blot. Results: MLN4924 effectively
inhibited cell growth and induced cell apoptosis in both CKS1B-OE and EV
MM cells. However, MM cells transfected with EV were more sensitive than
those transfected with CKS1B-OE as evidenced by the IC50 values (KMS28PE
OE vs. EV 99: 65 nM; KMS12 OE vs. EV 125: 72 nM; and OCI-MY5 OE vs. EV
106:89 nM). The cell viabilities at 100 nM were 49.6% vs. 26.7%, 54.5%
vs. 34.2%, and 53.6% vs. 36.8% in CKS1B-OE versus EV KMS28PE, KMS12, and
OCI-MY5 cells (P<0.05). Western blots showed that over-expression of
CKS1B significantly decreased expression of cullin1, nedd8, and the
conjugated complex of cullin-nedd8 in MLN4924 treated cells (100 nM, 24h)
compared with EV in all tested three cell lines. We also found that high
expression of CKS1B was negatively correlated with SCF substrates
including p21, CDT-1, p27 and CDT-1. MLN4924 induced a dose-dependent
accumulation of these substrates in all three MM cell lines. Conclusion:
High expression of CKS1B induces SCF substrate ubiquitination and
degradation in MM cells. The NAE inhibitor MLN4924 induces cell apoptosis
through decreased neddylation of SCF complex resulting in increase of
p27, p21, CDT-1 and p130. CKS1B can be used as a marker of drug
resistance to MLN4924, suggesting that a combination of MLN4924 with
other drugs will be necessary to treat myeloma patients with high
endogenous expression of CKS1B.

