Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The expression of human equilibrative nucleoside transporter 1
(hENT1) is associated with overall survival in advanced biliary tract
carcinoma (BTC) treated with gemcitabine


[Introduction] The outcome of patients with unresectable and
postoperative recurrent biliary tract carcinoma (BTC) is mostly miserable
and most patients are possible candidates for palliative chemotherapy.
Gemcitabine is a pyrimidine nucleoside analogue that is commonly used
chemotherapeutic agent for advanced BTC. Gemcitabine is transported into
the cell mostly by human equilibrative nucleoside transporter 1(hENT1).
The hENT1 expression has been demonstrated to play an important role in
predicting clinical outcome after gemcitabine chemotherapy for several
types of cancer. The aim of the present study was to investigate a
predictive marker for good prognosis of gemcitabine chemotherapy for
unresectable and postoperative recurrent BTC. [Materials and methods] The
analysis was performed on samples from 25 patients with unresectable (6
patients) and postoperative recurrent (19 patients) BTC treated with
gemcitabine at the host institute between January 1997 and January 2011.
The hENT1 expression levels in tumors were evaluated by
immunohistochemistry. The clinical and histopathological variables were
analyzed to evaluate predictive values for survival. [Results] Of the 25
tumor specimens, 18 (72%) specimens had positive hNET1 immunostaing,
while 7 (28%) specimens were classified as negative. No statistical
significant differences were found between the expression of hENT1 and
patient characteristics (gender, age, tumor stage, lymph node stage,
lymph duct invasion, vascular invasion, perineural invasion). In the
univariate analysis, hENT1 expression was significantly correlated with
overall survival (OS). The median OS was 15.3 versus 4.2 months,
respectively in patients with positive versus negative hENT1 staining
(p=0.006). As a result of multivariate analysis, hENT1 expression was
useful as a predictive marker for good prognosis with significant
difference (p[Introduction] The outcome of patients with unresectable and
postoperative recurrent biliary tract carcinoma (BTC) is mostly miserable
and most patients are possible candidates for palliative chemotherapy.
Gemcitabine is a pyrimidine nucleoside analogue that is commonly used
chemotherapeutic agent for advanced BTC. Gemcitabine is transported into
the cell mostly by human equilibrative nucleoside transporter 1(hENT1).
The hENT1 expression has been demonstrated to play an important role in
predicting clinical outcome after gemcitabine chemotherapy for several
types of cancer. The aim of the present study was to investigate a
predictive marker for good prognosis of gemcitabine chemotherapy for
unresectable and postoperative recurrent BTC. [Materials and methods] The
analysis was performed on samples from 25 patients with unresectable (6
patients) and postoperative recurrent (19 patients) BTC treated with
gemcitabine at the host institute between January 1997 and January 2011.
The hENT1 expression levels in tumors were evaluated by
immunohistochemistry. The clinical and histopathological variables were
analyzed to evaluate predictive values for survival. [Results] Of the 25
tumor specimens, 18 (72%) specimens had positive hNET1 immunostaing,
while 7 (28%) specimens were classified as negative. No statistical
significant differences were found between the expression of hENT1 and
patient characteristics (gender, age, tumor stage, lymph node stage,
lymph duct invasion, vascular invasion, perineural invasion). In the
univariate analysis, hENT1 expression was significantly correlated with
overall survival (OS). The median OS was 15.3 versus 4.2 months,
respectively in patients with positive versus negative hENT1 staining
(p=0.006). As a result of multivariate analysis, hENT1 expression was
useful as a predictive marker for good prognosis with significant
difference (p<0.001). [Conclusions] Patients with positive hENT1
expression in BTC have a significantly longer survival after gemcitabine
chemotherapy than patients with negative hENT1 expression. Our results
suggest that hENT1 expression in advanced BTC patients treated with
gemcitabine is a prognostic predictive indicator and is useful to decide
gemcitabine chemotherapy.

