Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Circulating microRNAs as specific biomarkers for breast cancer


Background It has been reported that the cancer associated specific
microRNAs were detected in blood. The objective of this study was to
discover a panel of circulating microRNAs as potential ER+/HER2- breast
cancer biomarkers. Methods We compared the levels of circulating
microRNAs in blood samples from 11 ER+/HER2- advanced breast cancer
patients with age-matched 5 control subjects by using microarray-based
expression profiling, which was subsequently validated by real-time
quantitative polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR). We found that 4
microRNAs (miR-1280, miR-1260, miR-1274b, miR-720) were up-regulated in
blood from breast cancer patients (PBackground It has been reported that
the cancer associated specific microRNAs were detected in blood. The
objective of this study was to discover a panel of circulating microRNAs
as potential ER+/HER2- breast cancer biomarkers. Methods We compared the
levels of circulating microRNAs in blood samples from 11 ER+/HER2-
advanced breast cancer patients with age-matched 5 control subjects by
using microarray-based expression profiling, which was subsequently
validated by real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR).
We found that 4 microRNAs (miR-1280, miR-1260, miR-1274b, miR-720) were
up-regulated in blood from breast cancer patients (P<0.05, constrained by
at least two-fold expression change). We identified the levels of above 4
and additional three microRNAs (miR-21, miR-195, and let-7a) in 40
control subjects, 44 early breast cancer patients (EBC), and 22
metastatic breast cancer patients (MBC). The levels of miR-1280 and
miR-1260 in blood were significantly different by the disease status
(controlBackground It has been reported that the cancer associated
specific microRNAs were detected in blood. The objective of this study
was to discover a panel of circulating microRNAs as potential ER+/HER2-
breast cancer biomarkers. Methods We compared the levels of circulating
microRNAs in blood samples from 11 ER+/HER2- advanced breast cancer
patients with age-matched 5 control subjects by using microarray-based
expression profiling, which was subsequently validated by real-time
quantitative polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR). We found that 4
microRNAs (miR-1280, miR-1260, miR-1274b, miR-720) were up-regulated in
blood from breast cancer patients (P<0.05, constrained by at least
two-fold expression change). We identified the levels of above 4 and
additional three microRNAs (miR-21, miR-195, and let-7a) in 40 control
subjects, 44 early breast cancer patients (EBC), and 22 metastatic breast
cancer patients (MBC). The levels of miR-1280 and miR-1260 in blood were
significantly different by the disease status (control<EBCBackground It
has been reported that the cancer associated specific microRNAs were
detected in blood. The objective of this study was to discover a panel of
circulating microRNAs as potential ER+/HER2- breast cancer biomarkers.
Methods We compared the levels of circulating microRNAs in blood samples
from 11 ER+/HER2- advanced breast cancer patients with age-matched 5
control subjects by using microarray-based expression profiling, which
was subsequently validated by real-time quantitative polymerase chain
reaction (RT-qPCR). We found that 4 microRNAs (miR-1280, miR-1260,
miR-1274b, miR-720) were up-regulated in blood from breast cancer
patients (P<0.05, constrained by at least two-fold expression change). We
identified the levels of above 4 and additional three microRNAs (miR-21,
miR-195, and let-7a) in 40 control subjects, 44 early breast cancer
patients (EBC), and 22 metastatic breast cancer patients (MBC). The
levels of miR-1280 and miR-1260 in blood were significantly different by
the disease status (control<EBC<MBC) (Table 1). The level of let-7a was
higher in cancer patients (PBackground It has been reported that the
cancer associated specific microRNAs were detected in blood. The
objective of this study was to discover a panel of circulating microRNAs
as potential ER+/HER2- breast cancer biomarkers. Methods We compared the
levels of circulating microRNAs in blood samples from 11 ER+/HER2-
advanced breast cancer patients with age-matched 5 control subjects by
using microarray-based expression profiling, which was subsequently
validated by real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR).
We found that 4 microRNAs (miR-1280, miR-1260, miR-1274b, miR-720) were
up-regulated in blood from breast cancer patients (P<0.05, constrained by
at least two-fold expression change). We identified the levels of above 4
and additional three microRNAs (miR-21, miR-195, and let-7a) in 40
control subjects, 44 early breast cancer patients (EBC), and 22
metastatic breast cancer patients (MBC). The levels of miR-1280 and
miR-1260 in blood were significantly different by the disease status
(control<EBC<MBC) (Table 1). The level of let-7a was higher in cancer
patients (P<0.001), while there was no difference in the level of let-7a
between patients with EBC and those with MBC (P=0.422). Using receiver
operational curve (ROC) analysis, blood levels of miR-1280 could detect
patients with breast cancer with 85% specificity and 81% sensitivity;
while blood let-7a levels could discriminate cancer patients with 90%
specificity and 95.2% sensitivity. Conclusions These findings suggest
that blood microRNAs are differentially expressed in breast cancer
patients, which can be used as potential biomarkers for breast cancer.
Table 1. Mean expression levels (SD) of target microRNAs in blood from
breast cancer patients compared with blood from healthy controls.


