Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exploring the contribution of ubiquitin binding domain of Bcr-Abl
in chronic myelogenous leukemia


Chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) is invariably associated with the
expression of the p210 Bcr-Abl fusion protein. Although the Abl-encoded
tyrosine kinase activity is important for leukemogenesis, the emerging
problems of acquired resistance and minimal residual disease highlight
the need for new complementary targets for pharmacological intervention.
In our previous studies, we had identified a non-classical ubiquitin
binding domain (UBD) within the NH2-terminal of p210 Bcr-Abl. Deletion of
the UBD (p210 Bcr-Abl(UBD)) impairs the interaction between p210 Bcr-Abl
and p--catenin (ser33). Over-expression of p210 Bcr-Abl, but not p210
Bcr-Abl(UBD), leads to an accumulation of phosphorylated -catenin, and at
least two of its known transcriptional targets, cyclin D1 and c-Myc. The
interaction between p210 Bcr-Abl and -catenin is ubiquitination
dependent. -catenin is a central component of the Wnt pathway which plays
a critical role in the regulation of hematopoiesis. In a murine bone
marrow transplantation model for CML, mice transplanted with
hematopoietic cells that express p210 Bcr-Abl(UBD) have significantly
increased life spans compared to mice transplanted with p210 Bcr-Abl
expressing cells. Delayed disease progression is associated with
decreased levels of -catenin, and reduced numbers of granulocyte
macrophage progenitors (GMPs), in the bone marrow. Deletion of UBD also
impairs the transplantability of CML cells. Based on these observations
we propose a model in which p210 Bcr-Abl may influence the Wnt signaling
pathway, and leukemic expansion, by binding ubiquitinated -catenin, and
stabilizing it against degradation. Stabilized -catenin leads to
increased self-renewal of CML stem cells and progenitors. Importantly,
this activity is contained within Bcr sequences, and is independent of
tyrosine kinase activity.

