Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Survivin expression in patients with resected pancreatic
adenocarcinoma


Introduction: Pancreatic cancer remains highly refractory to treatment
and biomarkers of treatment responsiveness are urgently needed. Survivin
is an inhibitor of apoptosis and one such potential marker. Undetectable
in most normal differentiated and non-proliferating tissues, it is highly
expressed in cancer. We measured pancreatic cancer survivin expression
and examined its association with differential treatment response.
Methods: We constructed 4 pancreatic cancer tissue microarrays with 1mm
duplicate cores using tumor samples from 88 resected pancreatic cancer
patients at our center. They were then followed with 60 patients
receiving chemotherapy or radiation, both as adjuvant therapy and also
for palliative treatment upon recurrence. We measured survivin expression
using highly quantitative automated immunofluorescence via AQUA
R(HistoRx, Branford CT). Scores were individually reported for the
nuclear, cytoplasmic and total cellular compartments, and validated by
the pathologist. Results: Median survivin AQUA scores were: nuclear 5838
(range 2126-13728), cytoplasm 4177 (2173-9914) and total 4543
(2120-10344). Survivin expression was significantly higher in nodal
specimens compared to primary tumor in nucleus (p=0.02), cytoplasm
(p=0.006) and in total (p=0.0095). Higher cytoplasmic survivin correlated
with higher grade (p=0.03), and primary tumor location in head compared
to body or tail (p=0.03). There was a trend toward higher nuclear
survivin in younger (p=0.08) and female patients (p=0.08). Disease-free
survival (DFS) was significantly longer in patients with high compared to
low nuclear survivin (p=0.048), using median as the cut-off. This effect
was greater for patients treated with gemcitabine (p=0.0481) than those
treated with 5-FU (p=0.0698) or radiation therapy (p=0.094). Overall
survival for all patients was not different in the higher than median
group compared to lower group patients (p=0.300). There was a trend
toward longer overall survival (OS) for patients whose tumors had high
nuclear survivin in those treated with fluorouracil (p=0.0856),
gemcitabine (p=0.0868) or radiation therapy (p=0.0862). Discussion:
Survivin expression is higher in nodal metastases than primary resected
pancreatic cancer tumors and is associated with particular clinical and
pathologic characteristics. High nuclear survivin expression is
associated with longer DFS in patients with resected pancreatic cancer.
This effect is most pronounced in patients treated with gemcitabine.
Further examination of survivin in a larger series of pancreatic cancers
is warranted.

