Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The aging genome: Genetic mosaicism and its relationship to cancer


Genetic mosaicism, the coexistence of cells of distinct genetic
composition within an organism, has been associated with developmental
and somatic disorders. Recently, we reported on 1,991 individuals from a
population-based study of adult bladder cancer where we detected
autosomal mosaicism in 1.7% of study subjects, suggesting a higher
frequency than previously suspected, but did not reveal a significant
association with bladder cancer. We have now extended our analysis to
57,853 subjects, 31,717 cancer cases and 26,136 cancer-free controls,
using genome-wide SNP array data generated as part of 13 genome-wide
association studies drawn from 48 case-control and case-cohort studies.
Detection of autosomal mosaic events was based on assessment of allelic
imbalance and copy number changes. We found autosomal mosaicism in blood
or buccal mucosa DNA for chromosomal events of size >2 Mb on 641
chromosomes in 517 individuals for an overall frequency of individuals
with mosaicism of 0.87%. The most frequent type of event observed was
copy-neutral LOH (48.2%), while copy-gains and copy-losses were observed
for 15.1% and 34.8% of mosaic events, respectively. The strongest
predictor of autosomal mosaicism was age at DNA collection. In
cancer-free individuals, the frequency of having a mosaic event was 0.23%
for those under 50 and 1.91% between 75 and 79 (p=4.810-8). Mosaicism was
more frequent in males than females (OR=1.42, 1.14-1.80 95% CI, p=0.002)
and in individuals with non-hematologic cancer (0.97% versus 0.74% in
cancer-free individuals, OR=1.25, 1.04-1.50 95% CI, p=0.016), with a
stronger association in cases who had DNA collected prior to treatment
(OR=1.45, 1.18-1.80 95% CI, p=0.0005). Notable associations were observed
in stratified analyses of lung (OR=1.56, 1.18-2.08 95% CI, p=0.002) and
kidney (OR=1.98, 1.27-3.06 95% CI, p=0.002) cancers, both
tobacco-associated malignancies. There was no significant association in
non-hematological cancer cases overall between smoking (ever/never) and
frequency of mosaicism (OR=1.19, 0.92-1.54 95% CI, p=0.19) or when
stratified by cancer site. The frequency of mosaicism was higher in
individuals diagnosed with leukemia who had DNA collected at least one
year prior to diagnosis (overall OR=35.4, 14.7-76.6 95% CI, p=3.810-11);
15.8% had myeloid leukemia and 26.3% had lymphocytic leukemia. We
conclude that autosomal mosaicism is present in the population with
surprising frequency and particularly in the ageing genome. Further work
is required to begin to unravel the underlying mechanisms, particularly
as it relates to aging, the timing and expansion of distinct populations
of cells bearing markedly different structural events in one or more
chromosome. These findings underscore the importance of considering the
role and time-dependent nature of somatic events in the etiology of
cancer and other late-onset diseases.

