Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Simultaneous Chk1 and MEK1/2 inhibition circumvents Mcl-1
anti-apoptotic function and bortezomib resistance in human multiple
myeloma cells


Mcl-1, a critical survival factor for human multiple myeloma (MM) cells,
confers resistance to various conventional and novel anti-MM agents,
including bortezomib. We previously reported that a therapeutic strategy
combining Chk1 with MEK1/2 inhibitors is highly active in both MM cell
lines as well as primary MM cells, and that up-regulation of the BH3-only
protein Bim plays a critical role in lethality. However, whether this
strategy also targets Mcl-1 and/or circumvents bortezomib-resistance is
unknown. To address these questions, the specific Chk1 inhibitor CEP3891
was used in combination with the MEK1/2 inhibitor PD184352. Exposure to
CEP3891 triggered ERK1/2 activation and Bim phosphorylation/degradation
in multiple MM cell lines (e.g., U266, MM.1S, RPMI8226, and H929).
Blockade of ERK1/2 activation by PD184352 led to Bim upregulation,
accompanied by striking induction of apoptosis. Significantly, the
CEP3891/PD184352 regimen was highly active against primary CD138+ samples
(7 of 9), while sparing all CD138- samples (9 of 9) as well as normal
cord blood CD34+ cells. Notably, PD184352 +/ CEP3891 induced marked Mcl-1
downregulation in MM cell lines and primary CD138+ MM samples. This
regimen also blocked Mcl-1 up-regulation induced by IL-6 or IGF-1, a
mechanism responsible for the pro-survival function of these growth
factors in MM cells. Of note, ectopic expression of Mcl-1 conferred
marked resistance to bortezomib. However, in Mcl-1-overexpressing cells,
PD184352 retained its ability to block CEP3891-mediated ERK1/2 activation
as well as Bim degradation, and combined treatment resulted in marked
apoptosis equivalent to that observed in empty vector-transfected
controls. Co-immunoprecipitation showed a marked increase in the
association between Mcl-1 with Bim in MM cells exposed to PD184352 +/
CEP3891, while co-administration of these agents resulted in the release
of Bak from Mcl-1. Similar events occurred in Mcl-1-overexpressing MM
cells. Finally, PS-R cells, a bortezomib-resistant subline generated from
U266 cells continuously cultured in stepwise increases in bortezomib
concentrations exhibited increased Mcl-1 levels but markedly diminished
Bim expression. Co-treatment with PD184352/CEP3891 clearly down-regulated
Mcl-1 and increased Bim levels in these cells, leading to Bax
translocation to mitochondria, release of mitochondrial cytochrome c and
Smac/DIABLO, activation of caspase-3, and PARP cleavage. Collectively,
these findings demonstrate a mechanism wherein, in MM cells, a strategy
combining Chk1/MEK1/2 inhibitors targets Mcl-1 by a) directly
down-regulating Mcl-1 protein expression, and b) inactivating Mcl-1 by
increasing its binding to up-regulated Bim. They also raise the
possibility that the Chk1/MEK1/2 inhibitor regimen circumvents
bortezomib-resistance by disabling the cytoprotective actions of Mcl-1.

