Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Estrogen and breast cancer incidence and mortality in
postmenopausal women with hysterectomy


Background: In contrast to the predominance of observational studies, in
the Women's Health Initiative (WHI) trial postmenopausal women assigned
to estrogen alone had a lower risk of invasive breast cancer than did
those assigned placebo (LaCroix JAMA 2011;305:1305-14). Influence of
estrogen use on breast cancer mortality has not been previously reported.
Methods: We conducted extended follow-up of the WHI randomized,
placebo-controlled trial evaluating conjugated equine estrogen (0.625
mg/d) in 10739 postmenopausal women aged 50-79 years with prior
hysterectomy, to determine long term effects of estrogen use on
non-invasive and invasive breast cancer incidence, invasive breast cancer
characteristics and breast cancer mortality. Comprehensive breast cancer
risk assessment was conducted at entry. Screening mammography and
clinical breast examinations were performed at entry and yearly
thereafter. Breast cancers were confirmed by medical record and pathology
report review by centrally-trained physician adjudicators blinded to
randomization assignment. Analyses were by intention-to-treat. The study
is registered with clinical trials CT.govNCT00000611. Findings: After a
mean 10.7 years of follow-up, conjugated equine estrogen use for a median
of 5.9 years (range Background: In contrast to the predominance of
observational studies, in the Women's Health Initiative (WHI) trial
postmenopausal women assigned to estrogen alone had a lower risk of
invasive breast cancer than did those assigned placebo (LaCroix JAMA
2011;305:1305-14). Influence of estrogen use on breast cancer mortality
has not been previously reported. Methods: We conducted extended
follow-up of the WHI randomized, placebo-controlled trial evaluating
conjugated equine estrogen (0.625 mg/d) in 10739 postmenopausal women
aged 50-79 years with prior hysterectomy, to determine long term effects
of estrogen use on non-invasive and invasive breast cancer incidence,
invasive breast cancer characteristics and breast cancer mortality.
Comprehensive breast cancer risk assessment was conducted at entry.
Screening mammography and clinical breast examinations were performed at
entry and yearly thereafter. Breast cancers were confirmed by medical
record and pathology report review by centrally-trained physician
adjudicators blinded to randomization assignment. Analyses were by
intention-to-treat. The study is registered with clinical trials
CT.govNCT00000611. Findings: After a mean 10.7 years of follow-up,
conjugated equine estrogen use for a median of 5.9 years (range <1 to 10
years) was associated with lower invasive breast cancer incidence
compared to placebo (151 vs. 199 breast cancers; annualized rates, 0.27%
vs. 0.35%; hazard ratio [HR] 0.77; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.62 to
0.95, P=0.02) with no difference between intervention-phase and
post-intervention-phase effects (P=0.76). Sensitivity analyses adjusting
for non-adherence yielded a somewhat stronger association (HR 0.68; 95%
CI 0.49-0.95). Mammogram screening exams were comparable between
randomization groups throughout. In the estrogen alone group fewer women
died from breast cancer (6 vs. 16 deaths; annualized rates 0.009% vs.
0.024%; HR 0.37; 95% CI, 0.13 to 0.91, P=0.03) and fewer women died from
all causes after a breast cancer diagnosis (30 vs. 50 deaths; annualized
rate 0.046% vs. 0.076%; HR 0.62; 95% CI, 0.39 to 0.97,
P=0.04).Interpretation: Use of conjugated equine estrogen for a median of
5.9 years in postmenopausal women reduced the incidence of invasive
breast cancer and reduced breast cancer mortality.

