Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mapping of estrogen receptor-dependent and independent signaling
pathways for xeno- and phytoestrogens


Xenoestrogens (e.g. bisphenol A) and phytoestrogens (isoflavones) are
endocrine disrupting chemicals (EDC) that are capable of disrupting
hormonal signaling in mammary and reproductive systems. These compounds
are similar in structure to estrogen and bind to the estrogen receptors
(ER). Estrogen receptors are involved in the regulation of cell cycle,
proliferation, and apoptosis. It is likely that these compounds could
affect the same biological processes or have their own subsets of target
pathways. Here, we extensively identify target genes and signaling
pathways for selected xeno- and phytoestrogens. Dose response curves for
these compounds were measured using real-time PCR (RT-PCR) and
transactivation assays of known estrogen target genes. Gene expression
profilings for each EDC were performed on MCF-7 breast cancer cell lines
using dual-color comparative array. Validations of array results were
carried out using RT-PCR. Gene ontology and gene network mapping studies
were done to identify the mechanism of action of these compounds. Non-ER
mediated targets and the kinetics of each EDC were investigated in
detail. Results show that many target genes regulated by bisphenol A and
Genistein were involved in biological processes including cell cycle and
proliferation, similar to that of estrogen. This contributes to an
increased understanding of the mechanisms of EDC action, which may be
implicated in development of diseases such as breast cancer and
reproductive disorders, and would contribute to a more reliable risk
assessment of different EDC compounds.

