Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Stem cell-associated gene Lin-28B genotype and phenotype in
epithelial ovarian cancer and their associations with disease survival
outcomes


Several single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in lin-28B, a gene
encoding RNA binding protein that represses miRNA let-7 maturation and
acts as an oncogene, were found in the genome-wide association studies
(GWAS), to be associated with the risk of ovarian cancer and
cancer-related risk factors such as age at menarche, body mass index
(BMI) and height. However, whether these SNPs are functionally important
and can serve as prognostic markers in ovarian cancer remain unknown. The
purposes of this study were to investigate the genotype-phenotype
relationship in lin-28B and their associations with patient survivals in
epithelial ovarian cancer. To achieve these purposes, we analyzed five
lin-28B SNPs using Taqman assays and lin-28B expression using SYBR
green-based qPCR in tumor samples collected from 211 patients diagnosed
with primary epithelial ovarian cancer. Wilcoxon rank sum test was
performed to analyze cis-regulatory eQTL; Kaplan-Meir survival curves and
Cox proportional hazards regression models were used to assess the
associations of lin-28B SNPs and expression with the risks of relapse and
death. The results showed that three SNPs (rs314276, rs314277 and
rs7759938) were associated with lin-28B mRNA levels. Using mfold,
rs314276 and rs314277 were predicted to affect the secondary structures
of lin-28B mRNA. SNP rs7759938 is located at the 500 bp downstream of the
region with H3K4Me1 (an enhancer marker) enrichment restricted to stem
cells. However, these SNPs were not significantly associated with
clinical and pathological parameters including disease stage, tumor
grade, histological types, residual tumor size, and debulking results. No
SNPs alone were related to patient survivals. Among patients initially
responding to chemotherapy, those with high lin-28B expression had higher
risks of death (hazard ratio (HR)=3.27, 95% CI: 1.63-6.56), and relapse
(HR=2.53, 95% CI: 1.41-4.54) than those with low one. After adjustment
for patient age at surgery, disease stage, tumor grade, histological
types and residual tumor size, the associations were still statistically
significant. These findings suggest that 3 of the GWAS-hit SNPs in
lin-28B may affect gene expression, but these SNPs are not associated
with ovarian cancer survival. The results also indicate that lin-28B may
affect the outcome of chemotherapy.

