Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hepatocellular carcinoma and diabetes among Latinos: Implications
for prevention


Introduction. Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) has increased in the U.S.
from 1975-2006 while overall cancer has declined. Moreover, HCC among
South Texas Latinos is higher than other U.S. Latinos. In recent years a
number of risk factors have been associated with HCC including
hepatitis-C virus infection, heavy alcohol use, obesity, diabetes and
others. Of these, only diabetes exhibits characteristics which make it a
candidate for why HCC is increasing in the U.S. Latino population and
increasingly higher among South Texas Latinos. This study compares
incidence rates of HCC and prevalence rates of diabetes among U.S.
Latinos and South Texas Latinos. We hypothesize that these data implicate
diabetes in HCC and suggest a clear path to informed HCC prevention.
Methods. Data from the U.S. SEER (Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End
Results) Program, Texas Cancer Registry, and the Texas Department of
State Health Services (TDSHS) were obtained. Age-adjusted HCC incidence
rates were calculated using SEER*Stat and SPSS software and aggregated
over 3-year periods. Likewise, annual prevalence of diabetes was
calculated and aggregated over the same periods. For each measure values
for the mutually exclusive U.S. and South Texas populations were
compared. Trend slopes for both HCC and diabetes were calculated and
displayed graphically. Group differences were assessed at p Introduction.
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) has increased in the U.S. from 1975-2006
while overall cancer has declined. Moreover, HCC among South Texas
Latinos is higher than other U.S. Latinos. In recent years a number of
risk factors have been associated with HCC including hepatitis-C virus
infection, heavy alcohol use, obesity, diabetes and others. Of these,
only diabetes exhibits characteristics which make it a candidate for why
HCC is increasing in the U.S. Latino population and increasingly higher
among South Texas Latinos. This study compares incidence rates of HCC and
prevalence rates of diabetes among U.S. Latinos and South Texas Latinos.
We hypothesize that these data implicate diabetes in HCC and suggest a
clear path to informed HCC prevention. Methods. Data from the U.S. SEER
(Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results) Program, Texas Cancer
Registry, and the Texas Department of State Health Services (TDSHS) were
obtained. Age-adjusted HCC incidence rates were calculated using
SEER*Stat and SPSS software and aggregated over 3-year periods. Likewise,
annual prevalence of diabetes was calculated and aggregated over the same
periods. For each measure values for the mutually exclusive U.S. and
South Texas populations were compared. Trend slopes for both HCC and
diabetes were calculated and displayed graphically. Group differences
were assessed at p < .05 if confidence intervals did not overlap.
Results. U.S. (SEER) Latino HCC incidence averaged 6.1/100,000 during
1995-1997 and increased to 8.0 during 2004-2006 (slope m = 0.455). South
Texas Latino rates averaged 9.2 and 11.7 during the same periods (slope m
= 0.625) (incidence rate difference, p Introduction. Hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC) has increased in the U.S. from 1975-2006 while overall
cancer has declined. Moreover, HCC among South Texas Latinos is higher
than other U.S. Latinos. In recent years a number of risk factors have
been associated with HCC including hepatitis-C virus infection, heavy
alcohol use, obesity, diabetes and others. Of these, only diabetes
exhibits characteristics which make it a candidate for why HCC is
increasing in the U.S. Latino population and increasingly higher among
South Texas Latinos. This study compares incidence rates of HCC and
prevalence rates of diabetes among U.S. Latinos and South Texas Latinos.
We hypothesize that these data implicate diabetes in HCC and suggest a
clear path to informed HCC prevention. Methods. Data from the U.S. SEER
(Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results) Program, Texas Cancer
Registry, and the Texas Department of State Health Services (TDSHS) were
obtained. Age-adjusted HCC incidence rates were calculated using
SEER*Stat and SPSS software and aggregated over 3-year periods. Likewise,
annual prevalence of diabetes was calculated and aggregated over the same
periods. For each measure values for the mutually exclusive U.S. and
South Texas populations were compared. Trend slopes for both HCC and
diabetes were calculated and displayed graphically. Group differences
were assessed at p < .05 if confidence intervals did not overlap.
Results. U.S. (SEER) Latino HCC incidence averaged 6.1/100,000 during
1995-1997 and increased to 8.0 during 2004-2006 (slope m = 0.455). South
Texas Latino rates averaged 9.2 and 11.7 during the same periods (slope m
= 0.625) (incidence rate difference, p < .05). Simultaneously, the
prevalence rate of diabetes was 5.9% and 7.7% among U.S. SEER Latinos
(slope m = 0.450) and 7.6% and 9.6% among South Texas Latinos (slope m =
0.500) (prevalence rate difference, p Introduction. Hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC) has increased in the U.S. from 1975-2006 while overall
cancer has declined. Moreover, HCC among South Texas Latinos is higher
than other U.S. Latinos. In recent years a number of risk factors have
been associated with HCC including hepatitis-C virus infection, heavy
alcohol use, obesity, diabetes and others. Of these, only diabetes
exhibits characteristics which make it a candidate for why HCC is
increasing in the U.S. Latino population and increasingly higher among
South Texas Latinos. This study compares incidence rates of HCC and
prevalence rates of diabetes among U.S. Latinos and South Texas Latinos.
We hypothesize that these data implicate diabetes in HCC and suggest a
clear path to informed HCC prevention. Methods. Data from the U.S. SEER
(Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results) Program, Texas Cancer
Registry, and the Texas Department of State Health Services (TDSHS) were
obtained. Age-adjusted HCC incidence rates were calculated using
SEER*Stat and SPSS software and aggregated over 3-year periods. Likewise,
annual prevalence of diabetes was calculated and aggregated over the same
periods. For each measure values for the mutually exclusive U.S. and
South Texas populations were compared. Trend slopes for both HCC and
diabetes were calculated and displayed graphically. Group differences
were assessed at p < .05 if confidence intervals did not overlap.
Results. U.S. (SEER) Latino HCC incidence averaged 6.1/100,000 during
1995-1997 and increased to 8.0 during 2004-2006 (slope m = 0.455). South
Texas Latino rates averaged 9.2 and 11.7 during the same periods (slope m
= 0.625) (incidence rate difference, p < .05). Simultaneously, the
prevalence rate of diabetes was 5.9% and 7.7% among U.S. SEER Latinos
(slope m = 0.450) and 7.6% and 9.6% among South Texas Latinos (slope m =
0.500) (prevalence rate difference, p < .05). Although slope differences
could not be calculated, they indicate a greater rate of increase among
South Texas Latinos than U.S. SEER Latinos. Conclusion. Our findings
support observations that HCC and diabetes are increasing in the United
States. We have described an important relationship between increasing
rates of HCC and diabetes in the U.S. SEER and South Texas Latino
populations. We suggest this relationship may explain higher rates of HCC
among Latinos. There is a need to focus HCC etiological research to
account for this relationship while simultaneously on other attributable
risks for the disease as well as genetic, cultural and socioeconomic
predisposing features. We note that diabetes is preventable or treatable.
The potential contribution of this research can firmly establish
associations and inform HCC prevention. Acknowledgements. The San Antonio
Cancer Institute, San Antonio, Texas (P30-CA54174) and the National
Cancer Institute, Redes En Accin (U01-CA86117).

