Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Plasmonic gold nanostars: A potential agent for molecular imaging
and cancer therapy


Gold nanoparticles offer great potential for bioapplication due to their
biocompatibility, chemical stability, and plasmon tunability. Due to the
increased demand in custom-designed bioapplication, tailoring
nanoparticle's plasmon for a specific application remains an active area
of research. Plasmonic gold nanostars, with their sharp tips and small
cores, yield unique optical properties in the near infrared region
favorable for biological applications. We present a high-yield
biocompatible synthesis of gold nanostars, whose geometry is adjustable
such that the plasmon band can be tuned into the near-infrared tissue
diagnostic window. Nanostars offer several interesting plasmon properties
including intense surface-enhanced Raman scattering (SERS) for
ultrasensitive detection, strong two-photon photoluminescence (TPL) for
real-time particle tracking, and efficient photothermal transduction for
hyperthermic therapy. Here, we demonstrate nanostars tracking and
photothermal ablation both in vitro and in vivo. Using SKBR3 breast
cancer cells incubated with bare nanostars, photothermal ablation was
observed within 5 minutes of irradiation (980 nm CW laser, 15 W/cm2). On
a mouse preinfused systemically with PEGylated nanostars for 2 days,
extravasation of nanostars was observed and localized photothermal
ablation was demonstrated on a dorsal window chamber within 10 minutes of
irradiation (785 nm CW laser, 1.1 W/cm2). These preliminary results have
illustrated the theranostic potential of gold nanostars for the use in
molecular imaging and cancer therapy.

