Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of prosurvival autophagy by the BH3-mimetic obatoclax
sensitizes antiestrogen-resistant breast cancer cells to apoptosis


Antiestrogens (AEs) have long been a standard treatment for estrogen
receptor-positive (ER+) breast cancer patients. However, antiestrogen
resistance, either de novo or acquired, is a major hurdle for effective
therapy in breast cancer patients. To address this, the underlying
mechanisms of antiestrogen resistance must be understood. One common
mechanism by which AE resistant cells thrive is by overexpressing BCL2
and its antiapoptotic family members, which allows cancer cells to
survive under conditions that would normally cause apoptosis. We
discovered that the BH3-mimetic, obatoclax (GX15-070), significantly
reduces cell proliferation and, in combination with fulvestrant or
tamoxifen, results in a synergistic inhibition of cell growth in AE
resistant breast cancer cells. Obatoclax exhibits potency against BCL2,
BCL-XL, BCLW, MCL1, and A1 and is currently being used in clinical trials
directed at lymhomas and leukemia. However, the molecular mechanisms of
cell death by obatoclax are unclear. We show that obatoclax induces
apoptosis and autophagosome formation in AE-resistant breast cancer
cells. To compensate for the increase in autophagosomal formation as
measured by LC3, obatoclax also induces lysosome formation to prepare for
cellular breakdown. This study is the first to show that obatoclax
inhibits prosurvival autophagy by preventing the degradation of LC3 and
p62 through a cathepsin-dependent mechanism. Furthermore, overexpression
of BCL2 in breast cancer cells primes the cells with BH3-only proteins
and renders the cancer cell sensitive to treatment with obatoclax.
Collectively, these data support exploration of clinical trials combining
an AE and the BCL2 inhibitor, obatoclax, for the treatment of
AE-resistant breast cancer.

