Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Spectroscopy imaging platform differentiates pathology diagnoses
in breast surgical specimens


Optical spectroscopy probes increasingly have been employed for
diagnostic sensing during breast conserving surgery to aid surgeons in
complete resection while minimizing damage to healthy tissues; however,
traditional fiber probe-based systems rely on the assumption that
ultra-structural changes associated with malignancy yield
disease-specific contrast in a single, volume-averaged measure. A
scanning-beam spectroscopy platform was designed to efficiently realize
the imaging extension of probe-based spectroscopy methods and to
selectively sample the scattering response of breast surgical specimens.
The imaging system employs dark-field illumination and confocal detection
to rapidly sample broadband spectra at 100m lateral resolution over a
1cm2 field of view. Optical scattering is exquisitely sensitive to the
morphological features observed in pathology, the diagnostic gold
standard, and has not been studied sufficiently in thick tissues in a
waveband that avoids absorption. In this study, 29 fresh breast tissue
specimens procured during conservative surgery were imaged and returned
to pathology for standard histological processing. A protocol was
developed for accurate co-registration between the imaged field and
histology. Over 300,00 broadband spectra were sampled and parameterized
according to an empirical approximation to Mie theory. Further, the
gray-level co-occurrence matrix representation of texture features was
used to mathematically represent intensity-level spatial dependence in
the scattering images. Spatially, the intra and inter-patient scattering
response is quite heterogeneous; but imaging accounts for this natural
variance so that diagnostic classification improved. The average
scattering power per 100x100 pixel field of view was sufficient to
discriminate between benign and malignant pathologies with a positive and
negative predictive value of 1.00 and 0.90 respectively, using a simple,
threshold-based classification. As compared to classification on a
per-spectrum basis, which yielded positive and negative predictive values
of just 0.71 and 0.75 respectively. Further, textural features yielded
discriminated between invasive and in situ carcinomas with pOptical
spectroscopy probes increasingly have been employed for diagnostic
sensing during breast conserving surgery to aid surgeons in complete
resection while minimizing damage to healthy tissues; however,
traditional fiber probe-based systems rely on the assumption that
ultra-structural changes associated with malignancy yield
disease-specific contrast in a single, volume-averaged measure. A
scanning-beam spectroscopy platform was designed to efficiently realize
the imaging extension of probe-based spectroscopy methods and to
selectively sample the scattering response of breast surgical specimens.
The imaging system employs dark-field illumination and confocal detection
to rapidly sample broadband spectra at 100m lateral resolution over a
1cm2 field of view. Optical scattering is exquisitely sensitive to the
morphological features observed in pathology, the diagnostic gold
standard, and has not been studied sufficiently in thick tissues in a
waveband that avoids absorption. In this study, 29 fresh breast tissue
specimens procured during conservative surgery were imaged and returned
to pathology for standard histological processing. A protocol was
developed for accurate co-registration between the imaged field and
histology. Over 300,00 broadband spectra were sampled and parameterized
according to an empirical approximation to Mie theory. Further, the
gray-level co-occurrence matrix representation of texture features was
used to mathematically represent intensity-level spatial dependence in
the scattering images. Spatially, the intra and inter-patient scattering
response is quite heterogeneous; but imaging accounts for this natural
variance so that diagnostic classification improved. The average
scattering power per 100x100 pixel field of view was sufficient to
discriminate between benign and malignant pathologies with a positive and
negative predictive value of 1.00 and 0.90 respectively, using a simple,
threshold-based classification. As compared to classification on a
per-spectrum basis, which yielded positive and negative predictive values
of just 0.71 and 0.75 respectively. Further, textural features yielded
discriminated between invasive and in situ carcinomas with p<0.05,
suggesting potential to discriminate between these surgically
undifferentiable pathologies. The scanning spectroscopy platform was
designed to strike a balance between sensitivity to tissue
ultra-structure and imaging the macroscopic fields encountered during
surgery. It allows for high throughput imaging of light scattering from
the surface of breast surgical specimens, and the sheer number of spectra
collected dramatically improves diagnostic classification.

