Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Induction of steroid sulfatase expression by bacterial
lipopolysaccharides in human prostate cancer cells: Possible role of STS
in tumor cell migration


Steroid sulfatase (STS) is responsible for the conversion of estrone
sulfate to estrone that can stimulate growth in endocrine-dependent
tumors such as breast and prostate cancer. Although STS is considered as
a therapeutic target for the estrogen-dependent diseases, cellular
function of STS are still not clear. Previously, we found that tumor
necrosis factor (TNF)- significantly enhances steroid sulfatase
expression in PC-3 human prostate cancer cells through PI3K/Akt-dependent
pathways. Here, we studied whether bacterial lipopolysaccharides (LPS)
which are known to induce TNF- may increase STS expression. Treatment
with LPS in PC-3 cells induces STS mRNA and protein in concentration- and
time-dependent manners. Because LPS-induced STS mRNA expression was
strongly suppressed by NF-B inhibitors such as Bay 11-7082 and
bortezomib, the involvement of NF-B pathways on STS expression was
suggested. To determine whether IkB is involved in NF-B-dependent STS
expression, the effect of IKK siRNA was elucidated. IKK siRNA
significantly suppressed STS mRNA and protein expression. Interestingly,
overexpression of STS by transfecting expression vector induced wound
healing effect whereas knockdown of STS by siRNA significantly decreased
wound healing effect in PC-3 cells. Moreover, treatment with LPS in STS
knockdowned cells recovered wound healing effect. Taken together, these
results strongly suggest that STS may contribute tumor cell migration.

