Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Use of triple combination array analysis to identify STEAP family
member 4 (STEAP4), a novel tumor related gene in hepatocellular carcinoma


Background: Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the most common
cancers world-wide, but the molecular mechanisms underlying
hepatocarcinogenesis are not clear. Array technology has made it possible
to identify novel genes with alterations in liver cancer. In this study,
we performed triple combination array analysis, expression profiling,
karyotyping analysis using SNP array, and array-based DNA methylation
profiling in the same HCC sample and attempted to find a novel tumor
related gene as a prognostic marker. Materials & Methods: A 68-year-old
woman with chronic hepatitis C was diagnosed with HCC. The excised tumor
and corresponding normal tissues were used for extraction of DNA and RNA.
SNP array experiments were performed using the DNA. mRNA expression
profiles were determined using the total RNA by Affimetrix HGU133A and B
Gene-Chips. Bisulphite-converted genomic DNA was analyzed using
Illumina's Infinium Human Methylation27 Beadchip Kit. We consequently
analyzed the identified gene using quantitative RT-PCR, methylation and
un-methylation-specific PCR in nine HCC cell lines and in 48 primary HCC
tissues and corresponding non-cancerous tissues collected at Nagoya
University Hospital, and then compared these results with
clinico-pathological data. Results: STEAP4 gene, is located on 7q21.12,
and expression was decreased at a Log2 ratio of 4.2 to 2.0 in cancerous
tissue. There were two copies of 7q21.12, indicating no loss of
heterozygosity (LOH) in the SNP array. The methylation value (0-1.0) in
the tumor sample was 0.870 compared to 0.160 in non-cancerous tissue,
indicating high methylation in tumor tissue in the Methylation array.
Re-activation of STEAP4 expression was seen after 5-aza-dC treatment in
HCC cell lines. Moreover, we found that 32 of 48 (67%) HCC samples showed
promoter hypermethylation. In 32 methylated cases, the expression values
of STEAP4 gene in tumor tissues by real-time RT-PCR were significantly
decreased compared to corresponding normal samples (pBackground:
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the most common cancers
world-wide, but the molecular mechanisms underlying hepatocarcinogenesis
are not clear. Array technology has made it possible to identify novel
genes with alterations in liver cancer. In this study, we performed
triple combination array analysis, expression profiling, karyotyping
analysis using SNP array, and array-based DNA methylation profiling in
the same HCC sample and attempted to find a novel tumor related gene as a
prognostic marker. Materials & Methods: A 68-year-old woman with chronic
hepatitis C was diagnosed with HCC. The excised tumor and corresponding
normal tissues were used for extraction of DNA and RNA. SNP array
experiments were performed using the DNA. mRNA expression profiles were
determined using the total RNA by Affimetrix HGU133A and B Gene-Chips.
Bisulphite-converted genomic DNA was analyzed using Illumina's Infinium
Human Methylation27 Beadchip Kit. We consequently analyzed the identified
gene using quantitative RT-PCR, methylation and un-methylation-specific
PCR in nine HCC cell lines and in 48 primary HCC tissues and
corresponding non-cancerous tissues collected at Nagoya University
Hospital, and then compared these results with clinico-pathological data.
Results: STEAP4 gene, is located on 7q21.12, and expression was decreased
at a Log2 ratio of 4.2 to 2.0 in cancerous tissue. There were two copies
of 7q21.12, indicating no loss of heterozygosity (LOH) in the SNP array.
The methylation value (0-1.0) in the tumor sample was 0.870 compared to
0.160 in non-cancerous tissue, indicating high methylation in tumor
tissue in the Methylation array. Re-activation of STEAP4 expression was
seen after 5-aza-dC treatment in HCC cell lines. Moreover, we found that
32 of 48 (67%) HCC samples showed promoter hypermethylation. In 32
methylated cases, the expression values of STEAP4 gene in tumor tissues
by real-time RT-PCR were significantly decreased compared to
corresponding normal samples (p<0.0001). In addition, methylated cases
were significantly correlated with worse recurrence free survival
(pBackground: Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the most common
cancers world-wide, but the molecular mechanisms underlying
hepatocarcinogenesis are not clear. Array technology has made it possible
to identify novel genes with alterations in liver cancer. In this study,
we performed triple combination array analysis, expression profiling,
karyotyping analysis using SNP array, and array-based DNA methylation
profiling in the same HCC sample and attempted to find a novel tumor
related gene as a prognostic marker. Materials & Methods: A 68-year-old
woman with chronic hepatitis C was diagnosed with HCC. The excised tumor
and corresponding normal tissues were used for extraction of DNA and RNA.
SNP array experiments were performed using the DNA. mRNA expression
profiles were determined using the total RNA by Affimetrix HGU133A and B
Gene-Chips. Bisulphite-converted genomic DNA was analyzed using
Illumina's Infinium Human Methylation27 Beadchip Kit. We consequently
analyzed the identified gene using quantitative RT-PCR, methylation and
un-methylation-specific PCR in nine HCC cell lines and in 48 primary HCC
tissues and corresponding non-cancerous tissues collected at Nagoya
University Hospital, and then compared these results with
clinico-pathological data. Results: STEAP4 gene, is located on 7q21.12,
and expression was decreased at a Log2 ratio of 4.2 to 2.0 in cancerous
tissue. There were two copies of 7q21.12, indicating no loss of
heterozygosity (LOH) in the SNP array. The methylation value (0-1.0) in
the tumor sample was 0.870 compared to 0.160 in non-cancerous tissue,
indicating high methylation in tumor tissue in the Methylation array.
Re-activation of STEAP4 expression was seen after 5-aza-dC treatment in
HCC cell lines. Moreover, we found that 32 of 48 (67%) HCC samples showed
promoter hypermethylation. In 32 methylated cases, the expression values
of STEAP4 gene in tumor tissues by real-time RT-PCR were significantly
decreased compared to corresponding normal samples (p<0.0001). In
addition, methylated cases were significantly correlated with worse
recurrence free survival (p<0.0001) and overall survival (p=0.0093).
Conclusion: The Promoter hypermethylation of STEAP4 gene was a marker of
worse prognosis in HCC. The triple combination array was a useful
technique to identify the novel tumor related gene in HCC.

