Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Confirmation of peroxiredoxin II as a driver gene for doxorubicin
sensitivity identified from drug-induced expression profiling of the
NCI-60 cell lines using Reverse Engineering (REFS) network models


Analysis of expression profiling data from the NCI-60 cell line panel,
designed to detect transcripts whose expression levels change in response
to doxorubicin (Dox) treatment (100nM and 1000nM) for 2, 6 and 24 h,
identified peroxiredoxin II (PRDX2) as a modulator of Dox sensitivity.
The antitumor activity of Dox is pleiotropic but has been attributed in
part to generation of reactive oxygen species which may also be an
important factor in myocardial toxicity. Variation in the gene expression
data produced by the increasing Dox concentrations together with the
variation in response to Dox across the NCI-60 panel was used to
construct causal gene expression network models of the mechanism of
efficacy of Dox using the REFS platform from GNS Healthcare. REFS is a
scalable, super computer-enabled framework for discovering causal network
models directly from experimental data that requires highly optimized
machine-learning algorithms run on massively parallel cloud-based
supercomputers. REFS extracts information in two steps; Reverse
Engineering to identify causal relationships followed by Forward
Simulation to simulate interventions in silico. In this case, network
models were used to simulate the predicted effect of a gene knockdown for
each transcript in the NCI-60 cell lines on Dox sensitivity. PRDX2, which
encodes for peroxiredoxin 2, an antioxidant enzyme that reduces hydrogen
peroxide and has been demonstrated to have a role in protecting against
reactive oxygen damage, was identified as a causal driver gene
responsible for Dox sensitivity in the renal cell line, ACHN. Validation
of the in silico predictions required RNAi to knock down PRDX2 gene
expression (75 - 90% inhibition of expression) with 2 siRNA's in the ACHN
and HCT-116 cell lines. Replicate experiments (n=3) demonstrated a
significant (pAnalysis of expression profiling data from the NCI-60 cell
line panel, designed to detect transcripts whose expression levels change
in response to doxorubicin (Dox) treatment (100nM and 1000nM) for 2, 6
and 24 h, identified peroxiredoxin II (PRDX2) as a modulator of Dox
sensitivity. The antitumor activity of Dox is pleiotropic but has been
attributed in part to generation of reactive oxygen species which may
also be an important factor in myocardial toxicity. Variation in the gene
expression data produced by the increasing Dox concentrations together
with the variation in response to Dox across the NCI-60 panel was used to
construct causal gene expression network models of the mechanism of
efficacy of Dox using the REFS platform from GNS Healthcare. REFS is a
scalable, super computer-enabled framework for discovering causal network
models directly from experimental data that requires highly optimized
machine-learning algorithms run on massively parallel cloud-based
supercomputers. REFS extracts information in two steps; Reverse
Engineering to identify causal relationships followed by Forward
Simulation to simulate interventions in silico. In this case, network
models were used to simulate the predicted effect of a gene knockdown for
each transcript in the NCI-60 cell lines on Dox sensitivity. PRDX2, which
encodes for peroxiredoxin 2, an antioxidant enzyme that reduces hydrogen
peroxide and has been demonstrated to have a role in protecting against
reactive oxygen damage, was identified as a causal driver gene
responsible for Dox sensitivity in the renal cell line, ACHN. Validation
of the in silico predictions required RNAi to knock down PRDX2 gene
expression (75 - 90% inhibition of expression) with 2 siRNA's in the ACHN
and HCT-116 cell lines. Replicate experiments (n=3) demonstrated a
significant (p<0.01) increase in sensitivity to Dox in both cell lines
after PRDX2 knockdown. Additional cell lines were selected and
preliminary data indicated that p53WT (n=4), and not p53mutant (n=7)
cells (p=0.005) were susceptible to increased Dox sensitivity in response
to RNAi of PRDX2 expression, consistent with these p53WT lines being
amongst the most responsive to Dox. However, the relationship between
PRDX2 knockdown and altered sensitivity was not correlated with the level
of Dox-induced increase in PRDX2 expression, which was up-regulated after
24 h treatment to levels that were comparable in p53WT and several of the
p53mutant cell lines. Our data indicates that REFS can predict genes that
may be important modulators of doxorubicin sensitivity. Funded by NCI
Contract No. HHSN261200800001E.

