Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Loss of hCLCA4 promotes EMT in breast cancer


The epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a developmental program
in which epithelial cells downregulate their cell-cell junctions, acquire
spindle cell morphology and exhibit cellular motility. In breast cancer,
EMT facilitates invasion of surrounding tissues and correlates closely
with cancer metastasis and relapse. Previous studies in our lab showed
that the candidate tumor suppressor hCLCA2 is expressed in
differentiated, growth-arrested mammary epithelial cells but is
downregulated during tumor progression and EMT. We further showed that
hCLCA2 is a p53-inducible growth inhibitor whose loss indicates an
increased risk of metastasis. Subsequent studies have revealed that
another member of the CLCA gene family, hCLCA4, is also expressed in
mammary epithelial levels, albeit at lower levels than hCLCA2. We find
that hCLCA4 is also induced by stress and is similarly downregulated in
breast cancer cell lines. Like hCLCA2, hCLCA4 is downregulated when EMT
is induced by TGF beta, ectopic expression of mesenchymal transcription
factors, or dilution of immortalized cells. Furthermore, knockdown of
hCLCA4 in HMLE by shRNAs caused EMT. RNA and protein profiling for EMT
markers showed that knockdown cells have lower expression epithelial
marker E-cadherin and higher expression level of mesenchymal markers
vimentin and fibronectin. Moreover, we found that hCLCA4 is co-regulated
with hCLCA2 in HMLE cells. Knockdown of hCLCA2 led to down-regulation of
hCLCA4 and vice versa. These findings suggest that hCLCA4 is, like
hCLCA2, a marker of epithelial differentiation whose loss contributes to
EMT and possibly metastasis.

