Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: microRNA-29a* is a predictor for early recurrence hepatitis B
virus-related hepatocellular carcinoma after surgical resection


Purpose: Early tumor recurrence after liver resection for hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC) was mainly due to intrahepatic tumor spreading. In this
study, we set out to identify specific microRNA (miRNA) which might be
used in predicting the possibility of early recurrence after HCC
resection. Experimental Design: Taqman low density arrays were used to
detect the miRNA expression levels in both the microdissected tumorous
and adjacent non-tumorous liver tissues from 20 HCC patients.
Quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR) was used to verify the findings in
106 patients, and to develop a predictive assay. The identified miRNAs
were further validated in an independent cohort of 112 patients. Results:
Thirty seven selected miRNAs were validated in 106 HCC patients using
qRT-PCR. A significant association was found between miR-29a* level in
HCC tissues and early recurrence (P=0.0002). This association was further
confirmed in the independent testing set of 112 patients (P=0.0154), in
which miR-29a* level was significantly associated with both time to tumor
recurrence (TTR) (P=0.0015) and overall survival (OS) (P=0.0079) of
patients. In the univariate and multivariate analyses, miR-29a* was
identified as an independent factor for TTR, particularly for those
patients with early stage of HCC. The sensitivity and specificity of
miR-29a* for the prediction of early HCC recurrence in an independent
blinded validation set reached 74.2% and 68.2%, respectively. Conclusion:
MiR-29a* might be a useful marker for prediction of early recurrence of
HCC, particularly for those with early stage of HCC.

