Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Protease nexin 1 modulates prostate adenocarcinoma by regulating
the Hedgehog pathway in humans and mice


Prostate adenocarcinoma is the most frequent cancer and is the second
leading cause of cancer death of men in the Western world. Aberrant
activation of the Hedgehog (Hh) pathway is implicated in the growth and
progression of prostate cancer. We show that the Hh pathway is inhibited
by the serine protease inhibitor, protease nexin 1 (PN1), an
extracellular matrix (ECM) protein highly expressed in normal prostate.
We demonstrate here that PN1 regulates Hh signalling by reduction of the
Hh ligand, Sonic (SHH), and its downstream effectors in tissue culture
and in vivo. Conversely, matrix metalloproteinase 9 (MMP9) enhances Hh
signalling through degradation of PN1. MRI imaging was used to determine
variation in tumour formation in an orthotopic prostate tumour model
using PN1 and MMP9 knock-out mice. In PN1-/- animals, SHH was increased
and tumor growth was stimulated. In contrast, PN1 levels were elevated in
MMP9-/- mice while Hh signalling was reduced with concomitant decreased
tumor growth. Finally, genetic alterations in Hh pathway genes identified
by comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) from intermediate risk
prostate cancer patients correlated with a worse clinical outcome
(HR=2.67, p=0.00067), indicating the importance of this pathway in human
cancer. Our data identify PN1 as a novel regulator of SHH and its
downstream targets allowing PN1 levels to influence prostate tumor
growth. Regulation of the PN1-Hh pathway could constitute a significant
therapeutic advance in treating cancers that exhibit high expression of
Hh markers. These data also provide a mechanism through which MMP-9 can
regulate hedgehog pathway signalling in tissues rich in PN1.

