Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of a novel flavonoid enriched in ocimum sanctum linn for
prostate cancer chemoprevention and therapy


The present study was conducted to determine the efficacy of novel
flavonoid vicenin-2 (VCN-2), an active constituent of the medicinal herb
Ocimum Sanctum Linn or Tulsi, as a single agent and in combination with
docetaxel (DTL) in carcinoma of prostate (CaP). VCN-2 effectively induced
anti-proliferative, anti-angiogenic and pro-apoptotic effect in CaP cells
(PC-3, DU-145 and LNCaP) irrespective of their androgen responsiveness or
p53 status. VCN-2 inhibited EGFR/Akt/mTOR/ p70S6K pathway along with
decreasing c-Myc, cyclin D1, cyclin B1, CDK4, PCNA and hTERT in vitro.
VCN-2 reached a level of 2.6 + 0.3 M in serum after oral administration
in mice which reflected that VCN-2 is orally absorbed. The i.v.
administration of docetaxel (DTL), current drug of choice in
androgen-independent CaP, is associated with dose-limiting toxicities
like febrile neutropenia which has lead to characterization of alternate
routes of administration and potential combinatorial regimens. In this
regard, VCN-2 in combination with DTL synergistically inhibited the
growth of prostate tumors in vivo with a greater decrease in the levels
of AR, pIGF1R, pAkt, PCNA, cyclin D1, Ki67, CD31, and increase in
E-cadherin. VCN-2 has been investigated for radio-protection and
anti-inflammatory properties. This is the first study on the anti-cancer
effects of VCN-2. In conclusion, our investigations collectively provide
strong evidence that VCN-2 is effective against CaP progression along
with indicating that VCN-2 and DTL co-administration is more effective
than either of the single agents in androgen-independent prostate cancer.
(Supported in part by NIH grant CA 77495)

