Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel biomarker for gliomas, ELTD1


Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is characterized by its diffuse, invasive
and highly angiogenic nature, and has a very poor prognosis. Early
diagnosis of gliomas is an important goal to increase the survival rates
of this devastating cancer which has limited treatment options and low
survival rates. Identification of new biomarkers could help in the
further diagnosis of GBM. Our goal in this study was to determine whether
or not ELTD1 could be used as a marker for glioma-related processes, and
use immunohistochemistry (IHC) and molecular magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) to validate its presence in human and rodent gliomas, respectively.
We used advanced data mining and a novel bioinformatics method to predict
ELTD1 as a novel biomarker that is associated with gliomas. A global
meta-analysis (GAMMA) of all human genes was conducted to identify
gene-gene co-expression patterns that were consistent and specific across
heterogeneous microarray experiments. Using the Human Proteome Reference
Database (HPRD) and other experimental sources on protein cellular
localizations, we screened this list of predicted glioma-associated
proteins for those that were extracellular or membrane-bound, because
these proteins were thought to be ideal targets for molecular imaging
probes and targeting therapies since they are more likely to be
accessible to injected antibodies. Validation of this marker was done
with IHC which was used to detect levels of ELTD1 in human high-grade
gliomas and rat F98 glioma tumors ex vivo. In vivo levels of ELTD1 in rat
F98 gliomas were assessed using molecular MRI (mMRI). Dextran-coated NH2
base iron oxide nanoparticles underwent conjugation with an
ELTD1-specific Ab. For determination of T2* values of the iron oxide
nanoprobes in gliomas, a multiple gradient echo (MGE) method was used. In
this study we identified ELTD1 as a putative glioma-associated marker via
a bioinformatic method, and experimentally validated its presence in both
rodent and human gliomas via IHC and molecular MRI analyses in a rodent
glioma model. For IHC, ELTD1 was compared to traditional IHC markers for
gliomas including VEGF (vascular endothelial growth factor), GLUT-1
(glucose transporter 1), CAIX (carbonic anhydrase IX), and HIF-1 (hypoxia
inducible factor-1). ELTD1 was found to be significantly higher (P=.03)
in high-grade gliomas (50 patients) compared to low-grade gliomas (21
patients), and compared well to traditional IHC markers including VEGF,
GLUT-1, CAIX and HIF-1. Significantly high (PGlioblastoma multiforme
(GBM) is characterized by its diffuse, invasive and highly angiogenic
nature, and has a very poor prognosis. Early diagnosis of gliomas is an
important goal to increase the survival rates of this devastating cancer
which has limited treatment options and low survival rates.
Identification of new biomarkers could help in the further diagnosis of
GBM. Our goal in this study was to determine whether or not ELTD1 could
be used as a marker for glioma-related processes, and use
immunohistochemistry (IHC) and molecular magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
to validate its presence in human and rodent gliomas, respectively. We
used advanced data mining and a novel bioinformatics method to predict
ELTD1 as a novel biomarker that is associated with gliomas. A global
meta-analysis (GAMMA) of all human genes was conducted to identify
gene-gene co-expression patterns that were consistent and specific across
heterogeneous microarray experiments. Using the Human Proteome Reference
Database (HPRD) and other experimental sources on protein cellular
localizations, we screened this list of predicted glioma-associated
proteins for those that were extracellular or membrane-bound, because
these proteins were thought to be ideal targets for molecular imaging
probes and targeting therapies since they are more likely to be
accessible to injected antibodies. Validation of this marker was done
with IHC which was used to detect levels of ELTD1 in human high-grade
gliomas and rat F98 glioma tumors ex vivo. In vivo levels of ELTD1 in rat
F98 gliomas were assessed using molecular MRI (mMRI). Dextran-coated NH2
base iron oxide nanoparticles underwent conjugation with an
ELTD1-specific Ab. For determination of T2* values of the iron oxide
nanoprobes in gliomas, a multiple gradient echo (MGE) method was used. In
this study we identified ELTD1 as a putative glioma-associated marker via
a bioinformatic method, and experimentally validated its presence in both
rodent and human gliomas via IHC and molecular MRI analyses in a rodent
glioma model. For IHC, ELTD1 was compared to traditional IHC markers for
gliomas including VEGF (vascular endothelial growth factor), GLUT-1
(glucose transporter 1), CAIX (carbonic anhydrase IX), and HIF-1 (hypoxia
inducible factor-1). ELTD1 was found to be significantly higher (P=.03)
in high-grade gliomas (50 patients) compared to low-grade gliomas (21
patients), and compared well to traditional IHC markers including VEGF,
GLUT-1, CAIX and HIF-1. Significantly high (P<0.001) in vivo levels of
ELTD1 were found in F98 tumors, compared to normal brain tissue. These
results strongly suggest that the associative analysis method used in
this study was able to accurately identify ELTD1 as a glioma-associated
biomarker, and may serve as an additional biomarker for gliomas in
pre-clinical and clinical diagnosis of gliomas.

