Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Progesterone and estrogen affect the expression and secretion of
heparin binding epidermal growth factor like growth factor (HB-EGF) in
RL95-2 cells, an endometrial cancer cell line


Endometrial cancer is one of the most common gynecological cancers.
Heparin Binding Growth Factor-like Growth Factor exerts acute effects on
cancer cells; in that it induces and promotes proliferation and hence the
pathogenesis and progression of endometrial cancer. Steroid hormones
directly or indirectly affect the expression of HB-EGF and may thus play
a role in the malignant transformation of endometrial cells. The aim of
this project is therefore to evaluate the effects of progesterone (P4)
and estrogen (E2) treatments on the expression and secretion of HB-EGF in
endometrial cancer cells. We hypothesized that P4 will reduce HB-EGF
expression and secretion while E2 will increase its expression and
secretion. To test our hypothesis, an endometrial cell line, RL95-2, was
treated for four days asfollows: (1) 108M E2, (2)106M P4, (3) 108M E2 +
106M P4 (4) 108M E2 in two days followed by 106M P4 and (5) Control.
Immunocytochemistry (ICC), ELISA and western blot analysis were performed
to evaluate the secretion and expression of HB-EGF in RL95-2 cells.
Western blot analysis and ICC showed a consistently enhanced expression
of HB-EGF in cells treated with E2 and in cells treated with E2 followed
by P4 relative to the control groups. Alternatively, cells treated with
P4 showed a down-regulation of HB-EGF expression relative to the control
group. ELISA analysis showed high secretion of HB-EGF in cells treated
with E2 and cells treated with E2 followed by P4 relative to the control
groups. The secretion of HB-EGF was lower in cells treated with P4 alone
compared to the control. In sum, there is an acute effect of E2 and P4 on
the expression and secretion of HB-EGF and thus consequently may affect
endometrial cancer cell proliferation.

