Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical evaluation of the AKT inhibitor MK2206 in
nasopharyngeal carcinoma cell lines


MK2206 is an allosteric inhibitor of AKT with potent activity in cancer
cell lines that exhibit genetic aberrations in the PI3K-AKT-PTEN pathway.
AKT is frequently activated in nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC), while
PIK3CA amplification is found in 40-70% of NPC tissues. The preclinical
activity of MK2206 was evaluated in NPC cell lines: HONE-1-EBV, HONE-1,
CNE-2, HNE-1, and 2 cell lines with PIK3CA amplifications, HK-1 and
C666-1. All 6 cell lines showed increased basal level of activated
(p-)AKT(ser473), p-GSK3, p-mTOR, pi-p70S6K and p-4EBP1, except in C666-1
cells where p-70S6K and p-4EBP1 were weakly expressed. Basal expression
of p-MAPK was most pronounced in HK-1, CNE-2 and HONE-1-EBV, and weakly
expressed in C666-1 and HONE-1. The effect on cell growth was evaluated
by exposing cells to increasing concentrations (conc) of MK2206 (100pM,
2nM, 20nM, 0.2M, 2M, 30M) for up to 72 hrs followed by MTT assay. Over
95% of growth inhibition was achieved in all cell lines with respective
IC50 values of: CNE-2=0.39M, HK-1 = 0.48M, HONE-1= 1.51M, C666-1= 1.64M,
HNE-1= 1.92M, HONE1-EBV= 2.36M. CNE-2, HONE-1-EBV and C666-1 were
selected for assessing the effect on AKT signaling, apoptosis, cell cycle
and synergism with chemotherapy. Treatment of these cells with MK2206 at
IC50 conc for 15 and 24 hours, resulted in G1 arrest in CNE-2 and
HONE-1-EBV, and G2 arrest in C666-1 cells. Apoptosis (increased cleaved
PARP) was detected in CNE-2 cells only. MK2206 reduced the expression of
p-AKT, p-mTOR, p-BAD, p-FKHD and p-GSK3 in CNE-2, HONE-1-EBV and C666-1
cells, while the level of p-4EBP1 level was significantly reduced in
C666-1 and CNE-2 cells only. The effect on p-70S6K expression in all 3
cell lines was minimal. MK2206 increased expression of p-MAPK in
HONE1-EBV-1 and C666-1 cells, but not CNE-2 cells. A supra-additive
effect on cell growth was observed when cisplatin was added to MK2206,
while the effect of adding paclitaxel to MK2206 was minimal in all 3 cell
lines. Our result suggests that MK2206 has activity in NPC in vitro. The
increased expression of p-MAPK observed in some cell lines suggests the
presence of compensatory MAPK activation as described with mTOR
inhibitors in other cancers. MK-2206 is currently under clinical
investigation in recurrent NPC.

