Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Microtubule-targeting agents induce differential myelinated axon
degeneration in a mouse model of peripheral neuropathy


Microtubule-targeting agents (MTAs) have proven useful in treating many
types of cancers. However, their efficacy continues to be limited by
peripheral neuropathy, a painful and potentially dose-limiting side
effect. While the mechanisms of MTA-induced neuropathy remain unclear,
evidence suggests that peripheral nerve degeneration contributes to
altered nerve activity and neuropathic pain. Recent electrophysiological
studies in mice revealed that paclitaxel and ixabepilone reduced
peripheral nerve conduction velocity and amplitude, while eribulin, an
MTA with a lower incidence of severe peripheral neuropathy, showed no
change in these parameters. Here, we sought to test the hypothesis that
MTA-induced peripheral neuropathy in mice positively correlates with axon
degeneration. We compared the effects of four MTAs with varying
incidences of severe neuropathic symptoms (vincristine > ixabepilone =
paclitaxel > eribulin). Nave adult mice were treated at their maximum
tolerated dose of each drug (or vehicle) on a Q2Dx3 schedule for 2 weeks.
Sciatic nerves were extracted, fixed, sectioned, and visualized by
immunofluorescence confocal microscopy. Morphological changes were
quantified using Imaris software. Paclitaxel and eribulin resulted in
significantly lower myelinated axon densities of 172 14.5 and 264 18.0
axons per 100 m2 compared to vehicle controls of 371 14.2 and 366 19.3
respectively (mean SEM, P Microtubule-targeting agents (MTAs) have proven
useful in treating many types of cancers. However, their efficacy
continues to be limited by peripheral neuropathy, a painful and
potentially dose-limiting side effect. While the mechanisms of
MTA-induced neuropathy remain unclear, evidence suggests that peripheral
nerve degeneration contributes to altered nerve activity and neuropathic
pain. Recent electrophysiological studies in mice revealed that
paclitaxel and ixabepilone reduced peripheral nerve conduction velocity
and amplitude, while eribulin, an MTA with a lower incidence of severe
peripheral neuropathy, showed no change in these parameters. Here, we
sought to test the hypothesis that MTA-induced peripheral neuropathy in
mice positively correlates with axon degeneration. We compared the
effects of four MTAs with varying incidences of severe neuropathic
symptoms (vincristine > ixabepilone = paclitaxel > eribulin). Nave adult
mice were treated at their maximum tolerated dose of each drug (or
vehicle) on a Q2Dx3 schedule for 2 weeks. Sciatic nerves were extracted,
fixed, sectioned, and visualized by immunofluorescence confocal
microscopy. Morphological changes were quantified using Imaris software.
Paclitaxel and eribulin resulted in significantly lower myelinated axon
densities of 172 14.5 and 264 18.0 axons per 100 m2 compared to vehicle
controls of 371 14.2 and 366 19.3 respectively (mean SEM, P < 0.001).
Paclitaxel and eribulin also increased the percentage of collapsed nerve
fibers, which were identified by fragmented and/or contracted myelin
sheaths coupled with a loss of phospho-neurofilament protein signal from
the associated axons. The percent of collapsed nerve fibers was 2.2% for
eribulin (vs. 0.32% vehicle; P Microtubule-targeting agents (MTAs) have
proven useful in treating many types of cancers. However, their efficacy
continues to be limited by peripheral neuropathy, a painful and
potentially dose-limiting side effect. While the mechanisms of
MTA-induced neuropathy remain unclear, evidence suggests that peripheral
nerve degeneration contributes to altered nerve activity and neuropathic
pain. Recent electrophysiological studies in mice revealed that
paclitaxel and ixabepilone reduced peripheral nerve conduction velocity
and amplitude, while eribulin, an MTA with a lower incidence of severe
peripheral neuropathy, showed no change in these parameters. Here, we
sought to test the hypothesis that MTA-induced peripheral neuropathy in
mice positively correlates with axon degeneration. We compared the
effects of four MTAs with varying incidences of severe neuropathic
symptoms (vincristine > ixabepilone = paclitaxel > eribulin). Nave adult
mice were treated at their maximum tolerated dose of each drug (or
vehicle) on a Q2Dx3 schedule for 2 weeks. Sciatic nerves were extracted,
fixed, sectioned, and visualized by immunofluorescence confocal
microscopy. Morphological changes were quantified using Imaris software.
Paclitaxel and eribulin resulted in significantly lower myelinated axon
densities of 172 14.5 and 264 18.0 axons per 100 m2 compared to vehicle
controls of 371 14.2 and 366 19.3 respectively (mean SEM, P < 0.001).
Paclitaxel and eribulin also increased the percentage of collapsed nerve
fibers, which were identified by fragmented and/or contracted myelin
sheaths coupled with a loss of phospho-neurofilament protein signal from
the associated axons. The percent of collapsed nerve fibers was 2.2% for
eribulin (vs. 0.32% vehicle; P < 0.05) and 6.6% for paclitaxel (vs. 0.21%
vehicle; PMicrotubule-targeting agents (MTAs) have proven useful in
treating many types of cancers. However, their efficacy continues to be
limited by peripheral neuropathy, a painful and potentially dose-limiting
side effect. While the mechanisms of MTA-induced neuropathy remain
unclear, evidence suggests that peripheral nerve degeneration contributes
to altered nerve activity and neuropathic pain. Recent
electrophysiological studies in mice revealed that paclitaxel and
ixabepilone reduced peripheral nerve conduction velocity and amplitude,
while eribulin, an MTA with a lower incidence of severe peripheral
neuropathy, showed no change in these parameters. Here, we sought to test
the hypothesis that MTA-induced peripheral neuropathy in mice positively
correlates with axon degeneration. We compared the effects of four MTAs
with varying incidences of severe neuropathic symptoms (vincristine >
ixabepilone = paclitaxel > eribulin). Nave adult mice were treated at
their maximum tolerated dose of each drug (or vehicle) on a Q2Dx3
schedule for 2 weeks. Sciatic nerves were extracted, fixed, sectioned,
and visualized by immunofluorescence confocal microscopy. Morphological
changes were quantified using Imaris software. Paclitaxel and eribulin
resulted in significantly lower myelinated axon densities of 172 14.5 and
264 18.0 axons per 100 m2 compared to vehicle controls of 371 14.2 and
366 19.3 respectively (mean SEM, P < 0.001). Paclitaxel and eribulin also
increased the percentage of collapsed nerve fibers, which were identified
by fragmented and/or contracted myelin sheaths coupled with a loss of
phospho-neurofilament protein signal from the associated axons. The
percent of collapsed nerve fibers was 2.2% for eribulin (vs. 0.32%
vehicle; P < 0.05) and 6.6% for paclitaxel (vs. 0.21% vehicle; P<0.001).
For paclitaxel, nerve fiber collapse occurred more frequently in distal
than in proximal nerve sections (P Microtubule-targeting agents (MTAs)
have proven useful in treating many types of cancers. However, their
efficacy continues to be limited by peripheral neuropathy, a painful and
potentially dose-limiting side effect. While the mechanisms of
MTA-induced neuropathy remain unclear, evidence suggests that peripheral
nerve degeneration contributes to altered nerve activity and neuropathic
pain. Recent electrophysiological studies in mice revealed that
paclitaxel and ixabepilone reduced peripheral nerve conduction velocity
and amplitude, while eribulin, an MTA with a lower incidence of severe
peripheral neuropathy, showed no change in these parameters. Here, we
sought to test the hypothesis that MTA-induced peripheral neuropathy in
mice positively correlates with axon degeneration. We compared the
effects of four MTAs with varying incidences of severe neuropathic
symptoms (vincristine > ixabepilone = paclitaxel > eribulin). Nave adult
mice were treated at their maximum tolerated dose of each drug (or
vehicle) on a Q2Dx3 schedule for 2 weeks. Sciatic nerves were extracted,
fixed, sectioned, and visualized by immunofluorescence confocal
microscopy. Morphological changes were quantified using Imaris software.
Paclitaxel and eribulin resulted in significantly lower myelinated axon
densities of 172 14.5 and 264 18.0 axons per 100 m2 compared to vehicle
controls of 371 14.2 and 366 19.3 respectively (mean SEM, P < 0.001).
Paclitaxel and eribulin also increased the percentage of collapsed nerve
fibers, which were identified by fragmented and/or contracted myelin
sheaths coupled with a loss of phospho-neurofilament protein signal from
the associated axons. The percent of collapsed nerve fibers was 2.2% for
eribulin (vs. 0.32% vehicle; P < 0.05) and 6.6% for paclitaxel (vs. 0.21%
vehicle; P<0.001). For paclitaxel, nerve fiber collapse occurred more
frequently in distal than in proximal nerve sections (P < 0.01). We also
observed a unique myelin halo morphology in eribulin treated nerves that
was not found in any other condition. Surprisingly, vincristine and
ixabepilone did not induce detectable nerve degeneration, even though
both drugs exhibit a high incidence of severe peripheral neuropathy. Our
results indicate that although significant nerve degeneration is present
after two weeks of treatment with some MTAs, the extent of these changes
does not correlate with the clinical incidence of severe neuropathy.
Therefore, although degenerative changes in peripheral nerves may
contribute to nerve dysfunction in MTA-induced peripheral neuropathy,
especially in the cases of paclitaxel and eribulin, they do not appear to
be the only factor underlying this condition. We conclude that additional
mechanisms of MTA-induced peripheral neuropathy likely exist which may
not be directly related to axonal degeneration. We gratefully thank Eisai
Inc for support of this research.

