Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Overexpression of anillin in colorectal cancer promotes the cell
proliferation, cell mobility and cell invasion


Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the third most prevalent cancer in the
developed countries, accounting for more than 50,000 cancer deaths per
year. We used microarray to analyze gene expression in patients with
different stages of colorectal cancer. Among the 157 metastasis-related
genes, RT-PCR and quantitative real-time PCR (qPCR) were used to verify
11 genes. The roles of anillin (ANLN), one of 11 metastasis-associated
genes, in colorectal cancer are not clear. Therefore, we focused on ANLN
in this study. We found that the expression levels of anillin are higher
in tumor specimens, even in metastasis tumor grade compared with those of
adjacent normal tissues by real-time PCR. In order to understand the
roles of anillin in tumorigenesis and metastasis of colorectal cancer, we
used anillin overexpressed HT29 and shRNA-knockdowned SW480. Our data
indicated that anillin overexpressed HT29 showed faster replication
kinetics probably due to prolonged G2/M phase. Next, we found that the
number and size of colony were increased in anillin over expressed cells
in soft agar assay suggesting a role of anillin in tumorgenesis of
colorectal cancer. Notably, anillin overexpressed SW480 and HT29 lines
demonstrated increased migration and invasion. This increased mobility in
anillin overexpressed SW480 and HT29 lines partially correlated with
reduced E-cadherin levels. By confocal analysis of philloidin stained
cells, we also found increased F-actin bundles accumulation in anillin
overexpressed HT29 cells. We hypothesize that anillin may promote partial
EMT and cell migration through induced cytoskeleton remodeling. Taken
together, we suggest that anillin is involved in enhancement of
proliferation, mobility, invasion of colorectal cancer cell lines, which
may lead to enhanced tumorgenesis and metastasis potential.

