Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeted VHL activation by RNAa inhibits renal cell carcinoma


Von Hippel Lindau (VHL) is a tumor suppressor protein classically known
to target the subunit of hypoxia inducible factor (HIF) for proteasomal
degradation. Emerging evidence has underscored a novel role for VHL in
both cell cycle regulation and extracelluar matrix assembly. Recent
studies have reported that chemically synthesized small duplex RNAs
complementary to target promoter sequence, also known as small activating
RNA (saRNA), can specifically induce gene expression in cancer cells,
which might be associated with epigenetic changes and exhibited
long-lasting gene activation for nearly 2 weeks. In the present study, we
designed 5 candidate dsRNAs (dsVHL-58, dsVHL-93, dsVHL-395, dsVHL-515 and
dsVHL-675) targeted for the VHL promoter at sites ranging from -675 to
-58 relative to the transcription start site. Compared with controls,
dsVHL-675 induced VHL expression by approximately 10-fold in renal cell
carcinoma 769-P (VHL methylated) cells. Transfection of a dsVHL-675 into
769-P cells significantly inhibited cell proliferation in dose dependent
manner. In addition, single transfection of dsVHL-675 induced VHL gene
expression for 14 days. Functional analysis of dsVHL-675 transfected
cells revealed that dsVHL-675 induced apoptosis by activating caspase 3
in dose dependent manner. Knockdown experiments confirmed that induction
of apoptosis by dsVHL-675 required Ago2 and TNRC6A. This study suggests
that targeted activation of VHL by dsVHL-675 may be explored as a novel
therapy for the treatment of renal cell carcinoma.

