Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CUL7 promotes non-small cell lung cancer cells migration and
invasion


Cullin7 (CUL7) is a scaffold protein of the CUL7 E3 ubiquitin ligase
containing Fbxw8, Skp1 and ROC1. Germ line mutations of the CUL7 are
linked to 3-M syndrome and Yakuts short stature syndrome, both of which
are characterized by growth retardation and few bone abnormalities. We
have previously shown that CUL7 promotes trophoblast cells migration and
invasion. However, the role of CUL7 on cancer invasion and metastasis
remains unknown. It has been reported that CUL7 mRNA is overexpressed in
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). In this study, we investigated the
effects of CUL7 on NSCLC cells migration and invasion. Firstly, we
evaluated CUL7 expression on tissue microarray slides by
immunohistochemical staining. We found that CUL7 significantly
overexpressed in NSCLC and its expression was associated with advanced
TNM stage, nodal or bone metastasis and poor overall survival. Next, we
determined CUL7, CUL1 and Fbxw8 expression in different NSCLC cell lines
by real-time PCR and western blot. Higher level of CUL7 was observed in
H1299, H358, H1437, and H1792 cells which derived from metastatic sites
compared to H460 and human bronchial epithelial cells (BEAS2B). Knockdown
CUL7 expression in NSCLC cells decreased cell motility and invasive
ability using wound healing and matrigel invasion assay. Real-time PCR
revealed that knockdown of CUL7 significantly decreased expression of
CCL2, IL-6 and CXCL16. However, the expression of uPA, MMP-2 and MMP-9
were not changed. Furthermore, Knockdown of CUL7 in NSCLC cells decreased
secretion of CCL2, CXCL16 and IL-6. This study indicates that CUL7 may be
a potential biomarker as well as a novel therapeutic target in NSCLC
progression. Supported by National Natural Sciences Foundation (NSFC)
projects (81201669, 81171993 and 81272415); NSFC key project
(81130046).Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

