Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Overexpression of ECT2 promotes proliferation and metastasis of
UPSC


Introduction: UPSC is a rare but aggressive malignancy that accounts for
no more than 5 to 10% of uterine cancers, but more than 40% of associated
uterine cancer deaths. The molecular events responsible for the poor
clinical outcomes observed with UPSC are largely unknown. Epithelial cell
transforming sequence 2 oncogene (ECT2) is a guanine nucleotide exchange
factor (Rho-GEF) that catalyzes the exchange of GDP for GTP by Rho family
GTPases. High levels of ECT2 expression have been reported in brain, lung
and breast cancers, where they were shown promote metastasis. However,
the role of ECT2 in UPSC has not been previously explored.Methods: After
obtaining IRB permission, ECT2 mRNA and protein expression were measured
in flash frozen specimens of normal proliferative endometrium (n=8) and
UPSC (n =8) by quantitative real-time PCR (qPCR) and Western blot.
Established cultures of UPSC cell lines (UPSC-ARK1, UPSC-ARK2) were
transfected with either an siRNA targeting ECT2 or a non-targeting
control (Dharmacon) using Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen). Reduced
expression of ECT2 following transfections with ECT2 siRNAs was confirmed
by qPCR and Western blot. Standard MTS and Caspase 3/7 assays (Promega)
were utilized to measure proliferation and apoptosis. Colony formation
and Boyden chamber assays were used to measure metastatic capacity,
migration and invasion in vitro.Results: Our data indicate that ECT2 is
overexpressed >4-fold in nearly all UPSC specimens tested (n=8,
pIntroduction: UPSC is a rare but aggressive malignancy that accounts for
no more than 5 to 10% of uterine cancers, but more than 40% of associated
uterine cancer deaths. The molecular events responsible for the poor
clinical outcomes observed with UPSC are largely unknown. Epithelial cell
transforming sequence 2 oncogene (ECT2) is a guanine nucleotide exchange
factor (Rho-GEF) that catalyzes the exchange of GDP for GTP by Rho family
GTPases. High levels of ECT2 expression have been reported in brain, lung
and breast cancers, where they were shown promote metastasis. However,
the role of ECT2 in UPSC has not been previously explored.Methods: After
obtaining IRB permission, ECT2 mRNA and protein expression were measured
in flash frozen specimens of normal proliferative endometrium (n=8) and
UPSC (n =8) by quantitative real-time PCR (qPCR) and Western blot.
Established cultures of UPSC cell lines (UPSC-ARK1, UPSC-ARK2) were
transfected with either an siRNA targeting ECT2 or a non-targeting
control (Dharmacon) using Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen). Reduced
expression of ECT2 following transfections with ECT2 siRNAs was confirmed
by qPCR and Western blot. Standard MTS and Caspase 3/7 assays (Promega)
were utilized to measure proliferation and apoptosis. Colony formation
and Boyden chamber assays were used to measure metastatic capacity,
migration and invasion in vitro.Results: Our data indicate that ECT2 is
overexpressed >4-fold in nearly all UPSC specimens tested (n=8, p<0.001).
We also found that ECT2 is robustly expressed in both the UPSC-ARK1 and
UPSC-ARK2 cell lines. Utilizing these 2 cell lines, we found that
knockdown of ECT2 significantly decreased proliferation (UPSC-ARK1:
0.62-fold versus control; n=3, pIntroduction: UPSC is a rare but
aggressive malignancy that accounts for no more than 5 to 10% of uterine
cancers, but more than 40% of associated uterine cancer deaths. The
molecular events responsible for the poor clinical outcomes observed with
UPSC are largely unknown. Epithelial cell transforming sequence 2
oncogene (ECT2) is a guanine nucleotide exchange factor (Rho-GEF) that
catalyzes the exchange of GDP for GTP by Rho family GTPases. High levels
of ECT2 expression have been reported in brain, lung and breast cancers,
where they were shown promote metastasis. However, the role of ECT2 in
UPSC has not been previously explored.Methods: After obtaining IRB
permission, ECT2 mRNA and protein expression were measured in flash
frozen specimens of normal proliferative endometrium (n=8) and UPSC (n
=8) by quantitative real-time PCR (qPCR) and Western blot. Established
cultures of UPSC cell lines (UPSC-ARK1, UPSC-ARK2) were transfected with
either an siRNA targeting ECT2 or a non-targeting control (Dharmacon)
using Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen). Reduced expression of ECT2
following transfections with ECT2 siRNAs was confirmed by qPCR and
Western blot. Standard MTS and Caspase 3/7 assays (Promega) were utilized
to measure proliferation and apoptosis. Colony formation and Boyden
chamber assays were used to measure metastatic capacity, migration and
invasion in vitro.Results: Our data indicate that ECT2 is overexpressed
>4-fold in nearly all UPSC specimens tested (n=8, p<0.001). We also found
that ECT2 is robustly expressed in both the UPSC-ARK1 and UPSC-ARK2 cell
lines. Utilizing these 2 cell lines, we found that knockdown of ECT2
significantly decreased proliferation (UPSC-ARK1: 0.62-fold versus
control; n=3, p<0.05; UPSC-ARK2: 0.34-fold versus control, pIntroduction:
UPSC is a rare but aggressive malignancy that accounts for no more than 5
to 10% of uterine cancers, but more than 40% of associated uterine cancer
deaths. The molecular events responsible for the poor clinical outcomes
observed with UPSC are largely unknown. Epithelial cell transforming
sequence 2 oncogene (ECT2) is a guanine nucleotide exchange factor
(Rho-GEF) that catalyzes the exchange of GDP for GTP by Rho family
GTPases. High levels of ECT2 expression have been reported in brain, lung
and breast cancers, where they were shown promote metastasis. However,
the role of ECT2 in UPSC has not been previously explored.Methods: After
obtaining IRB permission, ECT2 mRNA and protein expression were measured
in flash frozen specimens of normal proliferative endometrium (n=8) and
UPSC (n =8) by quantitative real-time PCR (qPCR) and Western blot.
Established cultures of UPSC cell lines (UPSC-ARK1, UPSC-ARK2) were
transfected with either an siRNA targeting ECT2 or a non-targeting
control (Dharmacon) using Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen). Reduced
expression of ECT2 following transfections with ECT2 siRNAs was confirmed
by qPCR and Western blot. Standard MTS and Caspase 3/7 assays (Promega)
were utilized to measure proliferation and apoptosis. Colony formation
and Boyden chamber assays were used to measure metastatic capacity,
migration and invasion in vitro.Results: Our data indicate that ECT2 is
overexpressed >4-fold in nearly all UPSC specimens tested (n=8, p<0.001).
We also found that ECT2 is robustly expressed in both the UPSC-ARK1 and
UPSC-ARK2 cell lines. Utilizing these 2 cell lines, we found that
knockdown of ECT2 significantly decreased proliferation (UPSC-ARK1:
0.62-fold versus control; n=3, p<0.05; UPSC-ARK2: 0.34-fold versus
control, p<0.05) and increased rates of apoptosis (UPSC-ARK1: 1.3-fold;
n=3, pIntroduction: UPSC is a rare but aggressive malignancy that
accounts for no more than 5 to 10% of uterine cancers, but more than 40%
of associated uterine cancer deaths. The molecular events responsible for
the poor clinical outcomes observed with UPSC are largely unknown.
Epithelial cell transforming sequence 2 oncogene (ECT2) is a guanine
nucleotide exchange factor (Rho-GEF) that catalyzes the exchange of GDP
for GTP by Rho family GTPases. High levels of ECT2 expression have been
reported in brain, lung and breast cancers, where they were shown promote
metastasis. However, the role of ECT2 in UPSC has not been previously
explored.Methods: After obtaining IRB permission, ECT2 mRNA and protein
expression were measured in flash frozen specimens of normal
proliferative endometrium (n=8) and UPSC (n =8) by quantitative real-time
PCR (qPCR) and Western blot. Established cultures of UPSC cell lines
(UPSC-ARK1, UPSC-ARK2) were transfected with either an siRNA targeting
ECT2 or a non-targeting control (Dharmacon) using Lipofectamine 2000
(Invitrogen). Reduced expression of ECT2 following transfections with
ECT2 siRNAs was confirmed by qPCR and Western blot. Standard MTS and
Caspase 3/7 assays (Promega) were utilized to measure proliferation and
apoptosis. Colony formation and Boyden chamber assays were used to
measure metastatic capacity, migration and invasion in vitro.Results: Our
data indicate that ECT2 is overexpressed >4-fold in nearly all UPSC
specimens tested (n=8, p<0.001). We also found that ECT2 is robustly
expressed in both the UPSC-ARK1 and UPSC-ARK2 cell lines. Utilizing these
2 cell lines, we found that knockdown of ECT2 significantly decreased
proliferation (UPSC-ARK1: 0.62-fold versus control; n=3, p<0.05;
UPSC-ARK2: 0.34-fold versus control, p<0.05) and increased rates of
apoptosis (UPSC-ARK1: 1.3-fold; n=3, p<0.05; UPSC-ARK2: 2.2-fold, n=3,
pIntroduction: UPSC is a rare but aggressive malignancy that accounts for
no more than 5 to 10% of uterine cancers, but more than 40% of associated
uterine cancer deaths. The molecular events responsible for the poor
clinical outcomes observed with UPSC are largely unknown. Epithelial cell
transforming sequence 2 oncogene (ECT2) is a guanine nucleotide exchange
factor (Rho-GEF) that catalyzes the exchange of GDP for GTP by Rho family
GTPases. High levels of ECT2 expression have been reported in brain, lung
and breast cancers, where they were shown promote metastasis. However,
the role of ECT2 in UPSC has not been previously explored.Methods: After
obtaining IRB permission, ECT2 mRNA and protein expression were measured
in flash frozen specimens of normal proliferative endometrium (n=8) and
UPSC (n =8) by quantitative real-time PCR (qPCR) and Western blot.
Established cultures of UPSC cell lines (UPSC-ARK1, UPSC-ARK2) were
transfected with either an siRNA targeting ECT2 or a non-targeting
control (Dharmacon) using Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen). Reduced
expression of ECT2 following transfections with ECT2 siRNAs was confirmed
by qPCR and Western blot. Standard MTS and Caspase 3/7 assays (Promega)
were utilized to measure proliferation and apoptosis. Colony formation
and Boyden chamber assays were used to measure metastatic capacity,
migration and invasion in vitro.Results: Our data indicate that ECT2 is
overexpressed >4-fold in nearly all UPSC specimens tested (n=8, p<0.001).
We also found that ECT2 is robustly expressed in both the UPSC-ARK1 and
UPSC-ARK2 cell lines. Utilizing these 2 cell lines, we found that
knockdown of ECT2 significantly decreased proliferation (UPSC-ARK1:
0.62-fold versus control; n=3, p<0.05; UPSC-ARK2: 0.34-fold versus
control, p<0.05) and increased rates of apoptosis (UPSC-ARK1: 1.3-fold;
n=3, p<0.05; UPSC-ARK2: 2.2-fold, n=3, p<0.05) in both cell lines tested.
Decreased ECT2 expression targeted by transfection with siRNAs led to
decreased rates of colony formation in UPSC-ARK1 and UPSC-ARK2 cell
lines. Knockdown of ECT2 also significantly reduced rates of migration
and invasion observed in vitro with both cell lines.Conclusions:
Overexpression of ECT2 plays a critical role in promoting the growth and
metastasis of UPSC. Targeting ECT2 expression may provide an effective
strategy for improving outcomes for UPSC and other human cancers where
hyperactivation of metastasis-promoting Rho GTPases are observed.

