Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel small molecule inhibitor of IRE1alpha reverses endocrine
resistance in breast cancer cells


Over two-thirds of all breast cancer patients are estrogen receptor alpha
positive (ER+). However, almost 50% of all ER+ breast tumors do not
respond or respond and later fail on endocrine therapy. Resistance to
endocrine therapy remains a significant clinical problem and advanced ER+
breast cancer is largely an incurable disease. The mechanisms of
resistance to endocrine therapy remain unclear. We have reported that the
unfolded protein response (UPR), a stress-induced cellular adaptive
mechanism, acts as a switch controlling the balance between cell death
and cell survival in response to these therapies. UPR is activated by
three molecular sensors: IRE1alpha, ATF6, PERK. Several components of the
UPR, including IRE1alpha, are up-regulated in endocrine resistant cells.
We now report a novel small molecule inhibitor of IRE1alpha:
N-(4-Phenoxy-phenyl)-2-(5-pyridin-3-yl-2H-[1,2,4]triazol-3-ylsulfanyl)-acet
amide (NPPTA). We show that NPPTA interacts with IRE1alpha in vitro and
can decrease IRE1alpha protein levels. NPPTA treatment alone inhibits
cell proliferation in antiestrogen resistant ER+ breast cancer cells more
effectively than in sensitive cells, and in a dose- and time-dependent
manner. Normal breast epithelial cells are unaffected by NPPTA. In
addition, NPPTA and TAM synergistically inhibit cell proliferation in TAM
resistant breast cancer cells. NPPTA's activities are associated with
induced G1 cell cycle arrest, increased apoptosis/necrosis, and
inhibition of anti-apoptotic signaling. Targeting IRE1alpha may be a new
and effective strategy to reverse endocrine resistance in breast cancer.

