Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular subclasses of human hepatocellular carcinoma predict
sensitivity to fibroblast growth factor receptor inhibition


Background: A recent gene expression classification of hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC) includes two poor survival subclasses, termed S1 and S2.
S1 cells are more locally invasive, while S2 cells express E-cadherin and
secrete AFP. As the expression of fibroblast growth factor receptors
(FGFRs) differs between the S1 and S2 gene signatures, this study
investigated whether molecular subclasses of HCC could predict
sensitivity to FGFR inhibition. Methods: The effects of AZD4547 and
BGJ398, two small molecule inhibitors of FGFR1-4, were assessed in four
S1 and five S2 human HCC cell lines. Western blotting was performed for
FGFR1-4 and phosphorylated p42/44 as a marker of MAPK signaling. Small
interfering RNA (siRNA) transfection was used to assess the effects of
individual FGFR knockdown. Results: Cell proliferation was inhibited at
least two-fold more in S2 than in S1 cell lines at all doses tested above
1 uM of BGJ398 and AZD4547 (pBackground: A recent gene expression
classification of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) includes two poor
survival subclasses, termed S1 and S2. S1 cells are more locally
invasive, while S2 cells express E-cadherin and secrete AFP. As the
expression of fibroblast growth factor receptors (FGFRs) differs between
the S1 and S2 gene signatures, this study investigated whether molecular
subclasses of HCC could predict sensitivity to FGFR inhibition. Methods:
The effects of AZD4547 and BGJ398, two small molecule inhibitors of
FGFR1-4, were assessed in four S1 and five S2 human HCC cell lines.
Western blotting was performed for FGFR1-4 and phosphorylated p42/44 as a
marker of MAPK signaling. Small interfering RNA (siRNA) transfection was
used to assess the effects of individual FGFR knockdown. Results: Cell
proliferation was inhibited at least two-fold more in S2 than in S1 cell
lines at all doses tested above 1 uM of BGJ398 and AZD4547 (p<0.002).
BGJ398 also decreased MAPK signaling in S2 but not in S1 cell lines. In
xenografts from the S2 cell line HuH-7, BGJ398 reduced tumor volume by
70% over 14 days and this effect was associated with decreased MAPK
signaling and a 36% decline in the number of Ki67 positive cells. BGJ398
had no effect on xenografts from the S1 cell line SK-Hep. All cell lines
expressed FGFR1 and FGFR2, but only S2 cell lines expressed FGFR3 and
FGFR4. FGFR4 siRNA decreased proliferation by 59 12% in all five S2 cell
lines (pBackground: A recent gene expression classification of
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) includes two poor survival subclasses,
termed S1 and S2. S1 cells are more locally invasive, while S2 cells
express E-cadherin and secrete AFP. As the expression of fibroblast
growth factor receptors (FGFRs) differs between the S1 and S2 gene
signatures, this study investigated whether molecular subclasses of HCC
could predict sensitivity to FGFR inhibition. Methods: The effects of
AZD4547 and BGJ398, two small molecule inhibitors of FGFR1-4, were
assessed in four S1 and five S2 human HCC cell lines. Western blotting
was performed for FGFR1-4 and phosphorylated p42/44 as a marker of MAPK
signaling. Small interfering RNA (siRNA) transfection was used to assess
the effects of individual FGFR knockdown. Results: Cell proliferation was
inhibited at least two-fold more in S2 than in S1 cell lines at all doses
tested above 1 uM of BGJ398 and AZD4547 (p<0.002). BGJ398 also decreased
MAPK signaling in S2 but not in S1 cell lines. In xenografts from the S2
cell line HuH-7, BGJ398 reduced tumor volume by 70% over 14 days and this
effect was associated with decreased MAPK signaling and a 36% decline in
the number of Ki67 positive cells. BGJ398 had no effect on xenografts
from the S1 cell line SK-Hep. All cell lines expressed FGFR1 and FGFR2,
but only S2 cell lines expressed FGFR3 and FGFR4. FGFR4 siRNA decreased
proliferation by 59 12% in all five S2 cell lines (p<0.00001), a
significantly greater decrease than seen with knockdown of FGFR1, FGFR2
or FGFR3. FGFR4 knockdown also decreased MAPK signaling in S2 cell lines.
Conclusions: The S2 molecular subclass of HCC is sensitive to FGFR
inhibition. FGFR4-MAPK signaling plays an important role in driving
proliferation of S2 cells. This classification system may help identify
those patients who are most likely to benefit from inhibition of the FGFR
pathway.

