Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nuclear morphometry measures progressive atypia in the development
of pancreatic carcinoma


Pancreatic lesions that are not clearly benign are often treated as
malignant despite uncertainty in the true diagnosis due to the nearly
universally fatal nature of pancreatic carcinoma (PC). Nuclear
morphometry is a technique to quantify nuclear features too complex for
the human eye to discern. We hypothesized that nuclear atypia can be
quantified with morphometry in order to distinguish between chronic
pancreatitis, IPMN, and PC. We retrospectively analyzed 14 specimens of
chronic pancreatitis, 16 IPMN lesions, and 19 PC lesions.
Clinicopathologic data were obtained. Nuclear morphometry determined
overall atypia based on the average nuclear abnormality of 95 distinct
nuclear features (a nuclear signature). For PC lesions, 5 nuclear
features defined a classification score (CS) representing the proportion
of aggressive nuclei in a given PC lesion. Statistical significance was
determined with ANOVA and the Kruskal-Wallis test. The average age for
all patients was 63 15 years while 62% were male; there were no
differences between the 3 groups. The follow up was approximately 4 years
in all groups as well. The average nuclear atypia of chronic pancreatitis
was 0.80, 0.99 for IPMN, and 1.08 for PC (P = 0.02). Importantly, based
on 5 nuclear features, the CS for PC lesions that recurred was 87% while
it was only 56% for those PC lesions that did recur (P = 0.04). The
research describes a precise, accurate, and objective method to
distinguish IPMN from PC. The CS and overall atypia score provides a
method to not only objectively describe a given lesion, but it
importantly describes where in the progression from benign to malignant
lesion an unknown lesion exists. Clinically, this may be of great utility
in risk stratifying unknown pancreatic lesions at the time of diagnosis
or tissue biopsy.

