Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Olaparib increases the effectiveness of radiation in hypoxic tumor
cells in xenograft models of human non-small-cell lung cancer


Purpose: Poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) detects DNA single strand
breaks and facilitates their repair. Recently, PARP inhibitors have been
shown to potentiate radiotherapy in mouse models of human non-small-cell
lung cancer (NSCLC) by compromising DNA repair and increasing tumor
vascular perfusion. This study examined radiosensitization by PARP
inhibition in xenograft models of NSCLC with differing levels of
hypoxia.Methods: For in vitro studies, human NSCLC cell lines Calu-6 and
Calu-3 were treated with olaparib (5 M) or vehicle prior to ionizing
radiation (IR). Cytotoxicity was evaluated by clonogenic survival assays
and DNA damage repair was assessed by H2AX foci immunofluorescence
staining. For in vivo efficacy studies, Calu-6 or Calu-3 subcutaneous
xenografts (100 mm3) were established in 6-8 week old female BALB/c nude
mice. Animals (n=48) were then randomized into four groups (i) control,
(ii) olaparib (50 mg/kg, d1-3), (iii) IR (10 Gy, d1) and (iv) combination
treatment. Subsequent tumor growth was monitored for up to 42 days. In
parallel, for pharmacodynamic studies, tumor bearing animals were
sacrificed 24h and 72h after treatment (n=3 for each treatment and time
point). Tumor sections were evaluated by immunohistochemistry
(IHC).Results: In vitro, both NSCLC cell lines were significantly
radiosensitized by olaparib. Sensitization enhancement ratios were 1.9
(Calu-6) and 2.2 (Calu-3). Furthermore, olaparib markedly inhibited DNA
damage repair in both Calu-6 and Calu-3 cells 24h post-IR (pPurpose: Poly
(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) detects DNA single strand breaks and
facilitates their repair. Recently, PARP inhibitors have been shown to
potentiate radiotherapy in mouse models of human non-small-cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) by compromising DNA repair and increasing tumor vascular
perfusion. This study examined radiosensitization by PARP inhibition in
xenograft models of NSCLC with differing levels of hypoxia.Methods: For
in vitro studies, human NSCLC cell lines Calu-6 and Calu-3 were treated
with olaparib (5 M) or vehicle prior to ionizing radiation (IR).
Cytotoxicity was evaluated by clonogenic survival assays and DNA damage
repair was assessed by H2AX foci immunofluorescence staining. For in vivo
efficacy studies, Calu-6 or Calu-3 subcutaneous xenografts (100 mm3) were
established in 6-8 week old female BALB/c nude mice. Animals (n=48) were
then randomized into four groups (i) control, (ii) olaparib (50 mg/kg,
d1-3), (iii) IR (10 Gy, d1) and (iv) combination treatment. Subsequent
tumor growth was monitored for up to 42 days. In parallel, for
pharmacodynamic studies, tumor bearing animals were sacrificed 24h and
72h after treatment (n=3 for each treatment and time point). Tumor
sections were evaluated by immunohistochemistry (IHC).Results: In vitro,
both NSCLC cell lines were significantly radiosensitized by olaparib.
Sensitization enhancement ratios were 1.9 (Calu-6) and 2.2 (Calu-3).
Furthermore, olaparib markedly inhibited DNA damage repair in both Calu-6
and Calu-3 cells 24h post-IR (p<0.01). Growth of Calu-6 and Calu-3
xenografts was reduced by IR alone, but unaffected by olaparib treatment
alone. Surprisingly, although olaparib significantly increased
radiation-induced growth delay in Calu-6 xenografts (pPurpose: Poly
(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) detects DNA single strand breaks and
facilitates their repair. Recently, PARP inhibitors have been shown to
potentiate radiotherapy in mouse models of human non-small-cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) by compromising DNA repair and increasing tumor vascular
perfusion. This study examined radiosensitization by PARP inhibition in
xenograft models of NSCLC with differing levels of hypoxia.Methods: For
in vitro studies, human NSCLC cell lines Calu-6 and Calu-3 were treated
with olaparib (5 M) or vehicle prior to ionizing radiation (IR).
Cytotoxicity was evaluated by clonogenic survival assays and DNA damage
repair was assessed by H2AX foci immunofluorescence staining. For in vivo
efficacy studies, Calu-6 or Calu-3 subcutaneous xenografts (100 mm3) were
established in 6-8 week old female BALB/c nude mice. Animals (n=48) were
then randomized into four groups (i) control, (ii) olaparib (50 mg/kg,
d1-3), (iii) IR (10 Gy, d1) and (iv) combination treatment. Subsequent
tumor growth was monitored for up to 42 days. In parallel, for
pharmacodynamic studies, tumor bearing animals were sacrificed 24h and
72h after treatment (n=3 for each treatment and time point). Tumor
sections were evaluated by immunohistochemistry (IHC).Results: In vitro,
both NSCLC cell lines were significantly radiosensitized by olaparib.
Sensitization enhancement ratios were 1.9 (Calu-6) and 2.2 (Calu-3).
Furthermore, olaparib markedly inhibited DNA damage repair in both Calu-6
and Calu-3 cells 24h post-IR (p<0.01). Growth of Calu-6 and Calu-3
xenografts was reduced by IR alone, but unaffected by olaparib treatment
alone. Surprisingly, although olaparib significantly increased
radiation-induced growth delay in Calu-6 xenografts (p<0.01), there was
no significant effect in Calu-3 xenografts, in contrast to the in vitro
data. IHC staining for vascularity (CD31) and hypoxia (CA9) showed that
Calu-3 xenografts were well-oxygenated without evidence of necrotic
tissue, whereas Calu-6 xenografts had large areas of hypoxia surrounding
regions of necrosis. RAD51 expression (a protein involved in homologous
recombination, HR) was selectively down-regulated in hypoxic regions of
Calu-6 tumors. 24h and 72h after IR, olaparib treated Calu-6 xenografts
displayed significantly higher levels of H2AX (DNA double strand breaks)
and cleaved caspase 3 (apoptosis) staining in CA9 positive (hypoxic)
cells compared with the hypoxic regions in xenografts treated with IR
alone.Conclusion: Our data identify a novel mechanism that contributes to
radiosensitization by PARP inhibition in NSCLC. Olaparib selectively
increased DNA damage and apoptosis in radioresistant hypoxic tumor cells
with decreased HR potential. Our data also suggest that tumor hypoxia may
be a potential biomarker of differential benefit from the combination of
olaparib with radiotherapy.

