Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PKR cooperates with an MDS driver mutation to worsen cytopenias
and promote acute leukemia


The interferon-inducible, dsRNA-dependent protein kinase, PKR, is
activated by cellular stresses to inhibit protein synthesis and initiate
apoptosis. Recently, we reported that expressing human PKR (TgPKR) in
mouse hematopoietic tissues induced peripheral blood cytopenias and
dysplastic changes in the bone marrow. Additionally, these findings were
associated with reduced numbers of hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells
(HSPCs) consistent with a myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS)-like phenotype.
We have now tested whether TgPKR expression in HSPCs may cooperate with
the Nup98-HoxD13 (NHD13) driver transgene. This NHD13 transgene induces a
highly penetrant form of MDS with progression to acute leukemia in mice.
TgPKR or PKR knockout (PKRKO) mice were crossed with the NHD13 transgenic
mouse to generate TgPKR-NHD13 and PKRKO-NHD13 mice that were aged. The
development of pancytopenia/MDS and evolution to acute leukemia were
compared to NHD13 mice or to normal WT control mice.Beginning at 5 months
and persisting through 8 months of age, the TgPKR-NHD13 mice developed
reduced WBC and platelet counts compared to NHD13 controls (WBC mean 2.6
vs. 3.5 x103 cells/l, [p: The interferon-inducible, dsRNA-dependent
protein kinase, PKR, is activated by cellular stresses to inhibit protein
synthesis and initiate apoptosis. Recently, we reported that expressing
human PKR (TgPKR) in mouse hematopoietic tissues induced peripheral blood
cytopenias and dysplastic changes in the bone marrow. Additionally, these
findings were associated with reduced numbers of hematopoietic
stem/progenitor cells (HSPCs) consistent with a myelodysplastic syndrome
(MDS)-like phenotype. We have now tested whether TgPKR expression in
HSPCs may cooperate with the Nup98-HoxD13 (NHD13) driver transgene. This
NHD13 transgene induces a highly penetrant form of MDS with progression
to acute leukemia in mice. TgPKR or PKR knockout (PKRKO) mice were
crossed with the NHD13 transgenic mouse to generate TgPKR-NHD13 and
PKRKO-NHD13 mice that were aged. The development of pancytopenia/MDS and
evolution to acute leukemia were compared to NHD13 mice or to normal WT
control mice.Beginning at 5 months and persisting through 8 months of
age, the TgPKR-NHD13 mice developed reduced WBC and platelet counts
compared to NHD13 controls (WBC mean 2.6 vs. 3.5 x103 cells/l, [p: <
0.01], and mean platelet counts of 576.9 vs. 814.3 x103 platelets/l).
Both cell types were significantly lower than WT controls. By contrast,
PKRKO-NHD13 mice maintained higher WBC counts beginning at age 6 months
(n=4) compared to NHD13 controls (n=13) (mean 7 vs. 2.5 x103 cells/l, [6
mos.], 11.6 vs. 3.7 x103 cells/l [7 mos.], 9.62 vs. 3.5 x103 cells/l [8
mos.], p: The interferon-inducible, dsRNA-dependent protein kinase, PKR,
is activated by cellular stresses to inhibit protein synthesis and
initiate apoptosis. Recently, we reported that expressing human PKR
(TgPKR) in mouse hematopoietic tissues induced peripheral blood
cytopenias and dysplastic changes in the bone marrow. Additionally, these
findings were associated with reduced numbers of hematopoietic
stem/progenitor cells (HSPCs) consistent with a myelodysplastic syndrome
(MDS)-like phenotype. We have now tested whether TgPKR expression in
HSPCs may cooperate with the Nup98-HoxD13 (NHD13) driver transgene. This
NHD13 transgene induces a highly penetrant form of MDS with progression
to acute leukemia in mice. TgPKR or PKR knockout (PKRKO) mice were
crossed with the NHD13 transgenic mouse to generate TgPKR-NHD13 and
PKRKO-NHD13 mice that were aged. The development of pancytopenia/MDS and
evolution to acute leukemia were compared to NHD13 mice or to normal WT
control mice.Beginning at 5 months and persisting through 8 months of
age, the TgPKR-NHD13 mice developed reduced WBC and platelet counts
compared to NHD13 controls (WBC mean 2.6 vs. 3.5 x103 cells/l, [p: <
0.01], and mean platelet counts of 576.9 vs. 814.3 x103 platelets/l).
Both cell types were significantly lower than WT controls. By contrast,
PKRKO-NHD13 mice maintained higher WBC counts beginning at age 6 months
(n=4) compared to NHD13 controls (n=13) (mean 7 vs. 2.5 x103 cells/l, [6
mos.], 11.6 vs. 3.7 x103 cells/l [7 mos.], 9.62 vs. 3.5 x103 cells/l [8
mos.], p: <0.05).To date, 1 of 13 of the NHD13 mice, aged 7-10 months,
has developed acute leukemia. Of the TgPKR-NHD13 mice, 7 of 18 have died
due to either acute leukemia (4/7), MDS with anemia requiring euthanasia
(1/7), or due to unknown causes (2/7). By contrast, none of the
PKRKO-NHD13 (n = 19) or WT mice (n= 11), both aged up to 9 months, have
developed symptomatic MDS requiring euthanasia or acute leukemiaThese
data indicate that PKR may cooperate with the NHD13 driver oncogenic
mutation to create a more aggressive MDS-like phenotype characterized by
deeper peripheral blood cytopenias and an increased rate of evolution to
AML. Alternatively, inhibition of PKR expression/activation may delay or
forestall evolution of MDS/AML in the NHD13 background.These findings
suggest that PKR may be a potential novel therapeutic target in the
treatment of MDS and its evolution to acute leukemia.

