Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Biomarker development for lung cancer diagnosis using integrative
microRNA and gene expression networks


Introduction: We have previously shown that smoking creates a molecular
field of injury throughout the epithelial cells that line the respiratory
tract and that gene-expression alterations in the cytologically-normal
mainstem bronchus epithelium can serve as an early detection biomarker
for lung cancer. We hypothesize that microRNAs (miRNAs) regulate these
airway gene expression changes and that miRNA expression differences in
this tissue can be used as biomarkers for lung cancer diagnosis.Methods:
We profiled miRNA expression via small RNA sequencing in bronchial
epithelial brushes collected from the mainstem bronchus of 230 subjects
undergoing bronchoscopy for suspect lung cancer and gene expression
(mRNA) via microarray for 201 matched samples.Bilal et al. (2013) have
shown that incorporating biological knowledge into model building
improves prediction. Therefore, we sought to test the hypothesis that
including information about the expression levels of the predicted mRNA
targets of miRNA may improve miRNA feature selection and aid in
interpretation of signatures. We used mirConnX which combines miRNA with
mRNA data to create disease-specific, genome-wide regulatory
networks.Results: First, we show that there is a miRNA expression signal
for cancer: across many combinations of feature selection methods,
predictive models and different parameters within 100 bootstraps to
predict cancer phenotype, we find the AUC values obtained are
consistently higher compared to the random control procedure where we
randomly shuffle the class labels (p Introduction: We have previously
shown that smoking creates a molecular field of injury throughout the
epithelial cells that line the respiratory tract and that gene-expression
alterations in the cytologically-normal mainstem bronchus epithelium can
serve as an early detection biomarker for lung cancer. We hypothesize
that microRNAs (miRNAs) regulate these airway gene expression changes and
that miRNA expression differences in this tissue can be used as
biomarkers for lung cancer diagnosis.Methods: We profiled miRNA
expression via small RNA sequencing in bronchial epithelial brushes
collected from the mainstem bronchus of 230 subjects undergoing
bronchoscopy for suspect lung cancer and gene expression (mRNA) via
microarray for 201 matched samples.Bilal et al. (2013) have shown that
incorporating biological knowledge into model building improves
prediction. Therefore, we sought to test the hypothesis that including
information about the expression levels of the predicted mRNA targets of
miRNA may improve miRNA feature selection and aid in interpretation of
signatures. We used mirConnX which combines miRNA with mRNA data to
create disease-specific, genome-wide regulatory networks.Results: First,
we show that there is a miRNA expression signal for cancer: across many
combinations of feature selection methods, predictive models and
different parameters within 100 bootstraps to predict cancer phenotype,
we find the AUC values obtained are consistently higher compared to the
random control procedure where we randomly shuffle the class labels (p <
0.001).Second, using a training set of 106 samples, we built networks
separately for cancer and non-cancer samples, using 10-fold cross
validation in order to determine robust cancer and non-cancer specific
features. The disease-state specific networks are then aggregated by
taking the overlapping features across the ten folds. Next, we select the
non-overlapping features (miRNAs and genes) between cancer and non-cancer
as those that capture the difference between the two phenotypes. The
selected genes are enriched for relevant cancer related pathways,
including KEGG pathways in cancer (p = 0.0003), cell cycle (p = 0.008),
WNT signaling (p = 0.0001), basal cell carcinoma (p = 0.023), MAPK
signaling pathway (p = 0.024), TGF-beta signaling pathway (p = 0.00014),
p53 signaling pathway (p = 0.087) etc. Most importantly, the miRNA
features from these disease specific networks are found to have higher
predictive power (highest AUC 0.72) compared to all miRNA features
(highest AUC 0.57), on a second set of 68 samples in
cross-validation.Conclusion: Using novel integrative analysis, we
improved miRNA biomarker prediction. This is the first report of
cancer-associated miRNA expression differences in cytologically normal
bronchial epithelium, for lung cancer diagnosis, and it extends our
previous work focused on mRNA biomarkers from this tissue.

