Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of fibroblast growth factor receptors in esophageal squamous
cell carcinoma


Introduction:MicroRNA-210 regulates cancer cell proliferation by
targeting fibroblast growth factor receptor-like 1 (FGFRL1) in esophageal
squamous cell cancer (ESCC) (JBC 2011). The expression of FGFRL1 has been
associated with tumor growth and lymph node metastasis. In the present
study, we analyzed and compared the expression of FGFR1, FGFR2, FGFR3,
and FGFR4 with that of FGFRL1 using a tissue microarray. We also examined
whether antibodies for FGFRL1 inhibited the growth and motility of ESCC
cells.Material and Methods:A squamous cell carcinoma tissue microarray
established in Toyama University was used to evaluate the expression of
the 5 FGFRs. Sixty-nine specimens of ESCC were obtained from 62 male and
7 female patients, with an average age of 64.4 years old, that underwent
surgery between 1990 and 2008. The TNM stages of these patients were as
follows; stage 1: 7, stage 2a; 10, stage 2b; 10, stage 3; 35, stage 4; 7.
The immunohistochemical results of these patients were scored according
to intensity and distribution after a careful examination by two
independent researchers. The ESCC cell line KYSE520 was used for
experimental analyses. Polyclonal and monoclonal antibodies for FGFRL1
were used to evaluate the function of FGFRL1.Results:The percentage of
patients who tested positive for the expression of the different FGFRs
was as follows: FGFRL-1, 81% (56/69); FGFR1, 65% (37/57); FGFR2, 36%
(22/61); FGFR3, 21% (12/57); FGFR4, 39% (22/56). The prognosis of FGFRL1
positive patients was significantly worse than that of FGFRL1 negative
patients. (P=0.0311). Both polyclonal and monoclonal antibodies inhibited
the growth (50% reduction) and motility (25% reduction) of ESCC cells.
However, no association was observed between the expression of the other
FGFRs and patient prognosis. Regarding combination analysis of the
expression of each FGFR, patients that co-expressed FGFRL1 and FGFR1 had
the worst prognosis, while patients who tested negative for the
expression of both FGFRL1 and FGFR4 had the best
prognosis.Conclusions:Among the 5 FGFRs, the expression of FGFRL1 was the
main oncogenic driving factor in ESCC patients. The expression of FGFR1
and FGFR4 may be a sub-driving factor of ESCC.

