Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BNip3 connects energy sensing to hepatic lipid metabolism and
mitophagy


BNip3 is a hypoxia-inducible member of the Bcl-2 family that integrates
into the outer mitochondrial membrane as stable homodimers where it acts
as a receptor for mitochondrial engulfment through a conserved LC3
interacting region. Hepatic BNip3 levels are constitutively elevated
relative to other tissues, and dramatically increase upon nutrient
deprivation or glucagon stimulation, suggesting a key role for BNip3 in
the fasting response. We have determined that the fasting-induced
increase in hepatic BNip3 protein levels is not solely attributable to
transcriptional induction and have identified post-translational
modification of BNip3 that affects protein stability and function. In a
mouse model of BNip3 loss, we observe metabolic defects including
increased hepatic lipid synthesis and reduced fatty acid oxidation.
Consistent with BNip3's role in mitophagy, defects in liver metabolism
were linked to increased mitochondrial mass, but decreased mitochondrial
function, including reduced oxygen consumption and loss of mitochondrial
membrane potential. Delivery of a mitophagy deficient mutant BNip3 to the
BNip3 null liver indicates that defects in lipid metabolism are not
simply due to the accumulation of defective mitochondria, but rather
BNip3 has another role to regulate lipid metabolism based on nutrient
status. Of relevance, BNip3 is epigenetically silenced in the more
aggressive and common form of HCC (sub-type A) and thus this work
identifies potential mechanisms by which this protein may act as a tumor
suppressor.

