Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of kallikrein-related peptidase-4 by SPINK1


Serine protease inhibitor Kazal type-1 (SPINK1), also known as TATI
(tumor-associated trypsin inhibitor), is a 56 amino acid trypsin
inhibitor, whose levels are elevated in several cancers, including those
of ovaries, prostate, bladder and colon. Some mutations in SPINK1, such
as N34S, are associated with pancreatitis. Furthermore, SPINK1 was
recently found to be associated with ETS rearrangement-negative prostate
cancers and to stimulate the invasion of prostate cancer cells, perhaps
by activating the EGF-receptor. Recently, SPINK3, the mouse ortholog of
SPINK1, was identified as a potent inhibitor of human kallikrein-related
peptidases (KLKs) -2, -3 (PSA) and -5. We studied the effect of human
SPINK1 on KLK2, -3 and -4. Synthetic cDNAs encoding wild-type and mutant
forms of 56 amino acid SPINK1 without signal peptide were expressed in E.
coli. The SUMOstar E. coli Expression System was used for expression and
purification of recombinant SPINK1. Final purification was done using an
antibody affinity column and HPLC. Enzyme activities were measured using
chromogenic substrates and recombinant human KLK2 and -4, and KLK3
purified from seminal fluid. SPINK1 was found to efficiently inhibit
KLK4, while KLK2-inhibition was less pronounced. KLK3 was not inhibited
at all. SPINK1 mutant (K41Y), which does not inhibit trypsins, did not
inhibit KLK4 either, while pancreatitis associated mutant (N34S) showed
strong inhibition. It is possible that SPINK1 has a dual role in cancer,
i.e., it induces tumor growth by stimulating the EGF-receptor, while by
inhibiting the activity of trypsin and KLKs it suppress metastasis and
activation of protease-activated receptors (PARs), which promote tumor
growth.

