Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of genomic alterations associated with metastasis
in clear cell renal cell carcinoma


Clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC) is the most abundant and lethal
form of RCC and about one third of patients exhibit metastasis with poor
prognosis. At the molecular level, metastasis is accompanied by multiple
genetic and epigenetic alterations including genomic copy number changes.
Identification of novel genomic markers and underlying mechanisms
associated with metastasis could result in better therapeutic management
of ccRCC patients. In this study, aCGH was performed using Agilent 244K
arrays on DNA from 83 primary and 64 metastatic unmatched ccRCC
fresh-frozen specimens and profiles were compared using Fisher's Exact
test (FDR, p-value 0.05), with a minimum threshold difference of 15%.
Significant copy number changes were found at 15 loci between primary and
metastatic lesions, after excluding loci enriched in normal CNVs. Loss of
2p16.1-p15, 2q33.1-q33.3, 3q11.1-q13.2, 3q22.3, 10q21.3-q22.1 and 11p15.4
were more frequent in primary lesions, while nine aberrations (gain of
5q23.3-q31.1, 7q21.3-q22.1, 16p11.2, 20q11.1-q13.12, 21p11.2-q11.1 and
loss of 4p15.2-p14, 4q, 9p24.3-p13.3 and 18q21.2-q21.31) were more
frequent in metastatic lesions. While some of these aberrations have
previously been implicated in metastasis, nine were novel. In order to
further examine the association of these aberrations with metastasis, the
frequencies of the 15 aberrations were determined in primary ccRCCs
publicly available from TCGA, stratified into low (stages I and II,
n=287) and high stage groups (III and IV, n=202). Eight of the nine
aberrations that were more frequent in metastatic lesions, were also
observed at a higher frequency in high stage TCGA primary ccRCC (four
were significantly higher between Stages I and IV). Little or no trend
was observed for the six aberrations more frequent in primary lesions.In
order to identify alterations associated with specific metastatic sites,
aCGH profiles were compared across metastatic lesions at sites
represented by at least 6 specimens: 15 lung, 7 bone, 6 lymph node, 6
pancreas and 6 brain metastatic ccRCC specimens. Gain of 7q11 and
8p12-p11, and loss of 6q14-q22 and 10q were specifically observed in lung
metastases. Gain of chr12 and loss of chr22 were frequent in bone, loss
of 1q32-q41 and gain of 22q11 in lymph node, and loss of 2p22.3, 8p12,
8q12-q13 and 8q24 in pancreatic lesions. No specific aberrations were
found in brain lesions.In conclusion, this study has confirmed known and
identified novel genomic loci associated with metastasis in ccRCC.
Determination of candidate genes of the aberrations will further our
understanding of metastatic progression of ccRCC and together with
examination of metastatic site-specific alterations, may assist in
selecting patients with metastatic disease for appropriate targeted
therapy and lead to improved overall survival.

