Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comparison of variant calling from whole exome and transcriptome
sequencing using CLC Cancer Research Workbench


The now commonplace application of whole exome and genome sequencing in
cancer research and diagnostics has allowed for rapid identification of
SNPs and InDels in protein coding regions, but neither method is able to
reveal situations of incomplete penetrance. That is, while possible
cancer causing allele variants can be detected with these methods, this
does not mean these alleles are actually expressed. Reasons for this are
various and include epigenetic effects and changes, transcription
regulation mechanisms, mRNA degradation and epistasis. By contrast,
transcriptome sequencing (RNA-seq) can be used to identify the alleles
being expressed. This method has the additional benefits of providing
insight into the transcript expression levels, expressed allele isoforms
and offers the possibility of identifying instances of fusion
transcripts. Such knowledge about variants expressed in tumor cells is
crucial for the identification of effective drug targets.Here, we
illustrate the benefits of combining whole exome sequencing with RNA-seq
by analyzing whole exome and RNA-seq datasets from uveal melanoma samples
with our newly developed CLC Cancer Research Workbench. This software
suite enables the complete analysis of both approaches, including variant
calling, followed by the comparison of the called variants. The analysis
will be carried out using user-friendly, automated workflows distributed
with the CLC Cancer Research Workbench. In this work, we discuss and
compare variants identified in the exome and RNA-seq datasets using our
algorithms, and focus particularly on variants identified in the exome
data that appear not to be expressed in the tumor samples.

