Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DNA repair protein Rev7 is required for primordial germ cell
maintenance in the mouse


REV7 is involved in DNA repair, cell cycle regulation, gene expression
and carcinogenesis. In vitro studies show that REV7 interacts with
several proteins and regulates their function, and that downregulation of
REV7 expression in human cancer cells results in enhancement of
sensitivity to DNA damaging agents. It has been reported that human REV7
is highly expressed in the adult testis by northern blot analysis.
However, the significance of REV7 in mammalian development has not been
elucidated. Here, we present analyses of Rev7-deficient (Rev7-/-) mice to
clarify the significance of Rev7 in mouse development. In wild-type mice
(Rev7+/+), Rev7 expression was ubiquitously observed in the embryo and
confined to germ cells in the testes after birth. Rev7-/- mice exhibited
growth retardation and a partial embryonic lethal phenotype. Mice that
survived to adulthood were infertile in both sexes and showed germ cell
aplasia in the testes and ovaries. Analyses of Rev7-/- embryos revealed
that primordial germ cells (PGCs) were present at embryonic day 8.5
(E8.5). However, progressive loss of PGCs was observed during migration,
and PGCs were absent in the genital ridges at E13.5. An increase of
apoptotic cells was detected not only among PGCs but also in the
forebrain of the Rev7-/- embryo, while cell proliferation was unaffected.
Gene expression analysis of E8.5 embryos showed upregulation of Oct4 and
Nanog and downregulation of c-Kit and Rev3 in Rev7-/- embryos compared
with those in Rev7+/- embryos. These findings indicate that Rev7 is
essential for PGC maintenance by prevention of apoptotic cell death in
the mouse.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

