Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ABT-737 and ABT-199 complement the multikinase inhibitor TG02 to
induce apoptosis in acute myeloid leukemia cells


TG02 is a novel multikinase inhibitor currently in Phase 1 trials for AML
and CLL, with a unique spectrum of molecular targets. We have previously
shown that TG02 significantly downregulates MCL1 but not BCL2 or BCL2L2
in AML cells at nanomolar concentrations. ABT-737 is a BH3 mimetic which
inhibits BCL2, but its effects are impaired in cells which over-express
MCL1. Both these agents are documented to target dormant as well as
proliferating leukaemia cells and thus have the potential to reduce
relapse risk, but cellular responses are heterogeneous. In primary AML
samples, BCL-2 expression correlated with that of BCL-XL but not of
MCL-1. The response at 48 hours to 100 nM TG02 was measured in primary
samples. (This concentration did not inhibit clonogenic growth of
haematopoietic stem cells from healthy donors). We show that resistance
to TG02 is significantly associated with BCL2 over-expression (P=0.001)
but not with MCL1. In CD34+CD38- KG1-a cells, using TG02 with ABT-737 or
with the novel and more specific BCL-2 inhibitor ABT-199 at a fixed dose
ratio of 1(TG02):20, the combination indices for drug interactions were
calculated. For TG02 with ABT-737 and ABT-199 respectively these were
IC50 0.59 and 0.26; IC90 0.13 and 0.14, indicating strong synergy,
particularly at the IC90. We also show that the OCI-AML-3 cell line,
which is resistant to both ABT compounds, was sensitive to TG02 (TG02
IC50 43 nM, IC90 97 nM; ABT-737/199 IC50>4,000nM). All three agents
exposed activation-specific epitopes of bax, reduced mitochondrial
membrane potential, cleaved caspase 3 and induced phosphatidylserine
exposure. 50 nM TG02 + 50 nM ABT199 or ABT-737 was significantly (PTG02
is a novel multikinase inhibitor currently in Phase 1 trials for AML and
CLL, with a unique spectrum of molecular targets. We have previously
shown that TG02 significantly downregulates MCL1 but not BCL2 or BCL2L2
in AML cells at nanomolar concentrations. ABT-737 is a BH3 mimetic which
inhibits BCL2, but its effects are impaired in cells which over-express
MCL1. Both these agents are documented to target dormant as well as
proliferating leukaemia cells and thus have the potential to reduce
relapse risk, but cellular responses are heterogeneous. In primary AML
samples, BCL-2 expression correlated with that of BCL-XL but not of
MCL-1. The response at 48 hours to 100 nM TG02 was measured in primary
samples. (This concentration did not inhibit clonogenic growth of
haematopoietic stem cells from healthy donors). We show that resistance
to TG02 is significantly associated with BCL2 over-expression (P=0.001)
but not with MCL1. In CD34+CD38- KG1-a cells, using TG02 with ABT-737 or
with the novel and more specific BCL-2 inhibitor ABT-199 at a fixed dose
ratio of 1(TG02):20, the combination indices for drug interactions were
calculated. For TG02 with ABT-737 and ABT-199 respectively these were
IC50 0.59 and 0.26; IC90 0.13 and 0.14, indicating strong synergy,
particularly at the IC90. We also show that the OCI-AML-3 cell line,
which is resistant to both ABT compounds, was sensitive to TG02 (TG02
IC50 43 nM, IC90 97 nM; ABT-737/199 IC50>4,000nM). All three agents
exposed activation-specific epitopes of bax, reduced mitochondrial
membrane potential, cleaved caspase 3 and induced phosphatidylserine
exposure. 50 nM TG02 + 50 nM ABT199 or ABT-737 was significantly (P<0.05)
more toxic than 100 nM of any of the 3 agents individually in a cohort of
12 patient samples treated in vitro for 48 hours. Moreover samples which
were sensitive to ABT-199 alone clustered separately from samples
sensitive to TG02 alone (p=0.03), indicating that in this heterogeneous
disease, the combinatorial approach broadens the range of samples that
can be targeted as well as enhancing individual toxicities. We conclude
that the cytotoxic actions of TG02 and ABT-737 /ABT-199 are complementary.

