Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analysis of the salivary proteome of the
prolactin-inducible-protein knockout mouse


The human Prolactin-Inducible-Protein (PIP)/Gross Cystic Disease Fluid
Protein 15 (GCDFP-15) gene is abnormally expressed in human invasive
breast cancer and gross cystic disease of the breast. In healthy
individuals PIP is highly expressed in salivary, sweat and lacrimal
glands, and the secreted protein abundantly found in saliva as well as
other bodily fluids which bathe various ports of entry. PIP has been
shown to bind numerous bacterial strains as well as a number of
immunoregulatory molecules including the CD4-T cell receptor and IgG and
is therefore implicated to play an immune role in host defense. In the
present study we interrogated the salivary proteome of the PIP knockout
(Pip KO) mouse by mass spectrometry to determine protein changes that
occur in saliva in the absence of PIP. Proteomic analysis identified 165
proteins in the mouse saliva which had a minimum of 2 unique peptides at
the 99% confidence level. Nineteen proteins, including 2 proposed markers
of disease, S100A9 and adenosine deaminase, were significantly
differentially expressed in the saliva of the Pip KO mouse, compared to
the saliva of the wild type counterparts. Functional and biological
determinations revealed that the differentially expressed proteins were
associated with processes that include inflammatory responses, immunity
and cell death. This study provides evidence that a number of proteins
associated with host defense are affected by the loss of PIP, and lends
support for an immunomodulatory role for PIP.

