Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Investigation of HMGB1 as a potential marker for radiation
response in muscle invasive bladder cancer


Purpose: Radical cystectomy remains the standard treatment for invasive
Bladder Cancer (BC). Radiotherapy is an attractive alternative; however
lack of local control of the disease and toxicity associated with it
remain problematic. As HMGB1 plays a major role in the cancer associated
radio-resistance pathways, our objective is to evaluate its role as a
predictive marker for radiation response in BC.Methods: Expression of
HMGB1 was characterized in a panel of eight BC cell lines via RT-PCR and
Western Blotting. Knockdown of HMGB1 was carried out via shRNA lentiviral
system. Correlation of HMGB1 expression and radiation response was done
using clonogenic assays in control and shRNA transduced cell lines.
Alkaline Comet Assay was used to measure the extent of DNA damage and
repair in different cell lines 24hr post 5Gy radiation. Olive Tail moment
was used as to quantify the DNA Damage.Results: All cell lines expressed
different levels of HMGB1, with BV and UC3 having the lowest and the
highest expression of HMGB1 simultaneously. Clonogenic assay results
showed that UC3 was resistant to radiation while BV was sensitive.
Knockdown of HMGB1 caused the radio-resistant UC3 cells to become highly
radio-sensitive, with more than 60% cells dying at 2Gy. Comet assay
suggest the involvement of HMGB1 in DNA repair, as a significant DNA
damage post radiation was observed in the HMGB1 knockdown cell
line.Conclusion: Our results demonstrate that high levels of HMGB1
protein are linked to a more radio-resistant outcome and HMGB1 knockdown
leads to an increase in radio-sensitivity. Hence HMGB1 could potentially
be used as a radiation response marker in invasive BC.

