Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pegylated recombinant human hyaluronidase PH20 (PEGPH20) enhances
cetuximab efficacy in BxPC-3/HAS3 human pancreatic cancer xenografts


Hyaluronan (HA) over-accumulation in the extracellular matrix (ECM) of
many solid tumors is associated with tumor progression and poor prognosis
(Tammi 2008). In preclinical animal models, enzymatic removal of ECM HA
with pegylated recombinant human hyaluronidase PH20 (PEGPH20) is
associated with remodeling of the tumor stroma, reduction of tumor
interstitial fluid pressure, expansion of tumor blood vessels and
facilitated delivery of chemotherapy (Thompson 2010, Jacobetz 2012,
Provenzano 2012). Additionally, epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR),
a tyrosine kinase essential for cell division and tumor growth, has been
implicated in multiple epithelial malignancies and is over expressed in
60% of human pancreatic carcinomas (Frolov 2007). Cetuximab (CET), a
chimeric monoclonal antibody (mAb), targets EGFR preventing tyrosine
kinase mediated phosphorylation and subsequent signal transduction
(Enrique 2012). As pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA) has been
identified as a cancer type that expresses high levels of HA (87%; Jiang
2010), studies were conducted to evaluate PEGPH20 enhancement in
anti-tumor activity of CET in an EGFR positive HA-overexpressing PDA
BxPC3/HAS3 xenograft model (Kultti 2013). In brief, NCr nu/nu mice were
inoculated with PDA BxPC3/HAS3 cells adjacent to the tibial periosteum,
and tumor growth was monitored with 3D high resolution ultrasonography.
When tumors reached 200 mm3, mice were treated with: (1) vehicle control;
(2) PEGPH20 alone, 1 mg/kg; (3) CET alone, 0.03 mg; (4) CET alone, 0.1
mg; (5) PEGPH20 plus CET, 0.03 mg; or (6) PEGPH20 plus CET, 0.1 mg.
Vehicle control or PEGPH20 was given intravenously while CET was
administered intraperitoneally starting on study day 0, and then dosed
twice weekly for 3 weeks (BIWx3). At study termination, the average tumor
growth inhibition (TGI) of CET (0.03 mg) was not significantly different
from vehicle-treated animals; however, PEGPH20 alone (78%, pHyaluronan
(HA) over-accumulation in the extracellular matrix (ECM) of many solid
tumors is associated with tumor progression and poor prognosis (Tammi
2008). In preclinical animal models, enzymatic removal of ECM HA with
pegylated recombinant human hyaluronidase PH20 (PEGPH20) is associated
with remodeling of the tumor stroma, reduction of tumor interstitial
fluid pressure, expansion of tumor blood vessels and facilitated delivery
of chemotherapy (Thompson 2010, Jacobetz 2012, Provenzano 2012).
Additionally, epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), a tyrosine kinase
essential for cell division and tumor growth, has been implicated in
multiple epithelial malignancies and is over expressed in 60% of human
pancreatic carcinomas (Frolov 2007). Cetuximab (CET), a chimeric
monoclonal antibody (mAb), targets EGFR preventing tyrosine kinase
mediated phosphorylation and subsequent signal transduction (Enrique
2012). As pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA) has been identified as a
cancer type that expresses high levels of HA (87%; Jiang 2010), studies
were conducted to evaluate PEGPH20 enhancement in anti-tumor activity of
CET in an EGFR positive HA-overexpressing PDA BxPC3/HAS3 xenograft model
(Kultti 2013). In brief, NCr nu/nu mice were inoculated with PDA
BxPC3/HAS3 cells adjacent to the tibial periosteum, and tumor growth was
monitored with 3D high resolution ultrasonography. When tumors reached
200 mm3, mice were treated with: (1) vehicle control; (2) PEGPH20 alone,
1 mg/kg; (3) CET alone, 0.03 mg; (4) CET alone, 0.1 mg; (5) PEGPH20 plus
CET, 0.03 mg; or (6) PEGPH20 plus CET, 0.1 mg. Vehicle control or PEGPH20
was given intravenously while CET was administered intraperitoneally
starting on study day 0, and then dosed twice weekly for 3 weeks (BIWx3).
At study termination, the average tumor growth inhibition (TGI) of CET
(0.03 mg) was not significantly different from vehicle-treated animals;
however, PEGPH20 alone (78%, p<0.05) and CET alone at 0.1 mg (61%,
pHyaluronan (HA) over-accumulation in the extracellular matrix (ECM) of
many solid tumors is associated with tumor progression and poor prognosis
(Tammi 2008). In preclinical animal models, enzymatic removal of ECM HA
with pegylated recombinant human hyaluronidase PH20 (PEGPH20) is
associated with remodeling of the tumor stroma, reduction of tumor
interstitial fluid pressure, expansion of tumor blood vessels and
facilitated delivery of chemotherapy (Thompson 2010, Jacobetz 2012,
Provenzano 2012). Additionally, epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR),
a tyrosine kinase essential for cell division and tumor growth, has been
implicated in multiple epithelial malignancies and is over expressed in
60% of human pancreatic carcinomas (Frolov 2007). Cetuximab (CET), a
chimeric monoclonal antibody (mAb), targets EGFR preventing tyrosine
kinase mediated phosphorylation and subsequent signal transduction
(Enrique 2012). As pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA) has been
identified as a cancer type that expresses high levels of HA (87%; Jiang
2010), studies were conducted to evaluate PEGPH20 enhancement in
anti-tumor activity of CET in an EGFR positive HA-overexpressing PDA
BxPC3/HAS3 xenograft model (Kultti 2013). In brief, NCr nu/nu mice were
inoculated with PDA BxPC3/HAS3 cells adjacent to the tibial periosteum,
and tumor growth was monitored with 3D high resolution ultrasonography.
When tumors reached 200 mm3, mice were treated with: (1) vehicle control;
(2) PEGPH20 alone, 1 mg/kg; (3) CET alone, 0.03 mg; (4) CET alone, 0.1
mg; (5) PEGPH20 plus CET, 0.03 mg; or (6) PEGPH20 plus CET, 0.1 mg.
Vehicle control or PEGPH20 was given intravenously while CET was
administered intraperitoneally starting on study day 0, and then dosed
twice weekly for 3 weeks (BIWx3). At study termination, the average tumor
growth inhibition (TGI) of CET (0.03 mg) was not significantly different
from vehicle-treated animals; however, PEGPH20 alone (78%, p<0.05) and
CET alone at 0.1 mg (61%, p<0.05) inhibited tumor growth. The addition of
PEGPH20 to the 0.03 mg and 0.1 mg CET groups increased TGI to 88%
(pHyaluronan (HA) over-accumulation in the extracellular matrix (ECM) of
many solid tumors is associated with tumor progression and poor prognosis
(Tammi 2008). In preclinical animal models, enzymatic removal of ECM HA
with pegylated recombinant human hyaluronidase PH20 (PEGPH20) is
associated with remodeling of the tumor stroma, reduction of tumor
interstitial fluid pressure, expansion of tumor blood vessels and
facilitated delivery of chemotherapy (Thompson 2010, Jacobetz 2012,
Provenzano 2012). Additionally, epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR),
a tyrosine kinase essential for cell division and tumor growth, has been
implicated in multiple epithelial malignancies and is over expressed in
60% of human pancreatic carcinomas (Frolov 2007). Cetuximab (CET), a
chimeric monoclonal antibody (mAb), targets EGFR preventing tyrosine
kinase mediated phosphorylation and subsequent signal transduction
(Enrique 2012). As pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA) has been
identified as a cancer type that expresses high levels of HA (87%; Jiang
2010), studies were conducted to evaluate PEGPH20 enhancement in
anti-tumor activity of CET in an EGFR positive HA-overexpressing PDA
BxPC3/HAS3 xenograft model (Kultti 2013). In brief, NCr nu/nu mice were
inoculated with PDA BxPC3/HAS3 cells adjacent to the tibial periosteum,
and tumor growth was monitored with 3D high resolution ultrasonography.
When tumors reached 200 mm3, mice were treated with: (1) vehicle control;
(2) PEGPH20 alone, 1 mg/kg; (3) CET alone, 0.03 mg; (4) CET alone, 0.1
mg; (5) PEGPH20 plus CET, 0.03 mg; or (6) PEGPH20 plus CET, 0.1 mg.
Vehicle control or PEGPH20 was given intravenously while CET was
administered intraperitoneally starting on study day 0, and then dosed
twice weekly for 3 weeks (BIWx3). At study termination, the average tumor
growth inhibition (TGI) of CET (0.03 mg) was not significantly different
from vehicle-treated animals; however, PEGPH20 alone (78%, p<0.05) and
CET alone at 0.1 mg (61%, p<0.05) inhibited tumor growth. The addition of
PEGPH20 to the 0.03 mg and 0.1 mg CET groups increased TGI to 88%
(p<0.05) for both treatments, relative to vehicle. In a second study,
when tumors reached 200 mm3, mice were treated with: (1) vehicle control;
(2) PEGPH20 alone, 37.5 g/kg (3 g/kg human equivalent dose); (3) CET
alone, 0.03 mg; or (4) PEGPH20 plus CET. Animals were dosed as described
above. At study termination, the average TGI of CET alone was not
significantly different from vehicle-treated animals; however, PEGPH20
alone significantly inhibited tumor growth (47%, pHyaluronan (HA)
over-accumulation in the extracellular matrix (ECM) of many solid tumors
is associated with tumor progression and poor prognosis (Tammi 2008). In
preclinical animal models, enzymatic removal of ECM HA with pegylated
recombinant human hyaluronidase PH20 (PEGPH20) is associated with
remodeling of the tumor stroma, reduction of tumor interstitial fluid
pressure, expansion of tumor blood vessels and facilitated delivery of
chemotherapy (Thompson 2010, Jacobetz 2012, Provenzano 2012).
Additionally, epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), a tyrosine kinase
essential for cell division and tumor growth, has been implicated in
multiple epithelial malignancies and is over expressed in 60% of human
pancreatic carcinomas (Frolov 2007). Cetuximab (CET), a chimeric
monoclonal antibody (mAb), targets EGFR preventing tyrosine kinase
mediated phosphorylation and subsequent signal transduction (Enrique
2012). As pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA) has been identified as a
cancer type that expresses high levels of HA (87%; Jiang 2010), studies
were conducted to evaluate PEGPH20 enhancement in anti-tumor activity of
CET in an EGFR positive HA-overexpressing PDA BxPC3/HAS3 xenograft model
(Kultti 2013). In brief, NCr nu/nu mice were inoculated with PDA
BxPC3/HAS3 cells adjacent to the tibial periosteum, and tumor growth was
monitored with 3D high resolution ultrasonography. When tumors reached
200 mm3, mice were treated with: (1) vehicle control; (2) PEGPH20 alone,
1 mg/kg; (3) CET alone, 0.03 mg; (4) CET alone, 0.1 mg; (5) PEGPH20 plus
CET, 0.03 mg; or (6) PEGPH20 plus CET, 0.1 mg. Vehicle control or PEGPH20
was given intravenously while CET was administered intraperitoneally
starting on study day 0, and then dosed twice weekly for 3 weeks (BIWx3).
At study termination, the average tumor growth inhibition (TGI) of CET
(0.03 mg) was not significantly different from vehicle-treated animals;
however, PEGPH20 alone (78%, p<0.05) and CET alone at 0.1 mg (61%,
p<0.05) inhibited tumor growth. The addition of PEGPH20 to the 0.03 mg
and 0.1 mg CET groups increased TGI to 88% (p<0.05) for both treatments,
relative to vehicle. In a second study, when tumors reached 200 mm3, mice
were treated with: (1) vehicle control; (2) PEGPH20 alone, 37.5 g/kg (3
g/kg human equivalent dose); (3) CET alone, 0.03 mg; or (4) PEGPH20 plus
CET. Animals were dosed as described above. At study termination, the
average TGI of CET alone was not significantly different from
vehicle-treated animals; however, PEGPH20 alone significantly inhibited
tumor growth (47%, p<0.05). The combination of PEGPH20 and CET increased
TGI to 70% (pHyaluronan (HA) over-accumulation in the extracellular
matrix (ECM) of many solid tumors is associated with tumor progression
and poor prognosis (Tammi 2008). In preclinical animal models, enzymatic
removal of ECM HA with pegylated recombinant human hyaluronidase PH20
(PEGPH20) is associated with remodeling of the tumor stroma, reduction of
tumor interstitial fluid pressure, expansion of tumor blood vessels and
facilitated delivery of chemotherapy (Thompson 2010, Jacobetz 2012,
Provenzano 2012). Additionally, epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR),
a tyrosine kinase essential for cell division and tumor growth, has been
implicated in multiple epithelial malignancies and is over expressed in
60% of human pancreatic carcinomas (Frolov 2007). Cetuximab (CET), a
chimeric monoclonal antibody (mAb), targets EGFR preventing tyrosine
kinase mediated phosphorylation and subsequent signal transduction
(Enrique 2012). As pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA) has been
identified as a cancer type that expresses high levels of HA (87%; Jiang
2010), studies were conducted to evaluate PEGPH20 enhancement in
anti-tumor activity of CET in an EGFR positive HA-overexpressing PDA
BxPC3/HAS3 xenograft model (Kultti 2013). In brief, NCr nu/nu mice were
inoculated with PDA BxPC3/HAS3 cells adjacent to the tibial periosteum,
and tumor growth was monitored with 3D high resolution ultrasonography.
When tumors reached 200 mm3, mice were treated with: (1) vehicle control;
(2) PEGPH20 alone, 1 mg/kg; (3) CET alone, 0.03 mg; (4) CET alone, 0.1
mg; (5) PEGPH20 plus CET, 0.03 mg; or (6) PEGPH20 plus CET, 0.1 mg.
Vehicle control or PEGPH20 was given intravenously while CET was
administered intraperitoneally starting on study day 0, and then dosed
twice weekly for 3 weeks (BIWx3). At study termination, the average tumor
growth inhibition (TGI) of CET (0.03 mg) was not significantly different
from vehicle-treated animals; however, PEGPH20 alone (78%, p<0.05) and
CET alone at 0.1 mg (61%, p<0.05) inhibited tumor growth. The addition of
PEGPH20 to the 0.03 mg and 0.1 mg CET groups increased TGI to 88%
(p<0.05) for both treatments, relative to vehicle. In a second study,
when tumors reached 200 mm3, mice were treated with: (1) vehicle control;
(2) PEGPH20 alone, 37.5 g/kg (3 g/kg human equivalent dose); (3) CET
alone, 0.03 mg; or (4) PEGPH20 plus CET. Animals were dosed as described
above. At study termination, the average TGI of CET alone was not
significantly different from vehicle-treated animals; however, PEGPH20
alone significantly inhibited tumor growth (47%, p<0.05). The combination
of PEGPH20 and CET increased TGI to 70% (p<0.05) relative to vehicle. In
conclusion, PEGPH20 treatment of HA-overexpressing tumors potentiates the
subsequent anti-tumor activity of mAbs, such as CET.

