Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: One size does not fit all: Fingerprinting advanced carcinoma of
unknown primary through comprehensive profiling identifies aberrant
activation of the PI3K and MAPK signaling cascades in concert with
impaired cell cycle arrest


Background: Carcinoma of unknown primary (CUP) represents a heterogeneous
group of cancers without an identifiable primary disease site where
staining for a vast array of immunohistochemical markers is undertaken to
identify tumor lineage. Given rapid advances in characterizing cancer
genomes, we sought to describe the molecular profiles of patients with
advanced CUP treated with novel targeted therapies on phase I clinical
trials to identify pathways of interest to drive future therapeutic
strategies.Methods: Of patients with advanced malignancies seen in the
Phase I clinic, we identified 16 CUP patients on whom adequate tissue was
available to perform next-generation sequencing (NGS) from FFPE sections
using a targeted NGS assay in a CLIA laboratory (Foundation One, MA).
Over 2000 exons of 186 cancer-related genes plus over 30 introns from 14
genes often rearranged in cancer were fully sequenced for point
mutations, insertions/deletions, copy number alterations (CNAs) and
select gene fusions.Results: Of 16 tumor specimen, 14 demonstrated
genomic alterations with a median of 4 aberrations within each specimen
(range 0 - 10, total of 69 alterations); two patients did not demonstrate
any tested changes. All patients with detected mutations possessed an
exclusive unique molecular profile of aberrations with no two patients
demonstrating an identical panel of mutations. A total of 69 alterations
were identified of which 18 (26%) led to aberrant cell signaling within
the PI3K/AKT/MTOR (including 4 with PIK3CA mutations) or the MAPK
signaling cascades, primarily KRAS mutations in 3 patients. Also noted
were 13 (19%) alterations impairing cell cycle arrest most commonly
affecting cyclin dependent kinases, 10 (14%) impacting epigenetic
regulation and DNA methylation, 10 (14%) affecting known tumor suppressor
genes including TP53 in 8 patients, and 10 (14%) unique alternations in
transcriptional regulators.Conclusion: With thorough molecular profiling,
we can identify the unique fingerprint of potential actionable
aberrations in a subset of advanced CUP patients. Herein we identified
activation of the PI3K/AKT/MTOR and RAS/RAF/MEK signaling pathways
combined with impaired cell cycle arrest in 8 of 16 (50%) tested
patients, suggesting that a combination of PI3K and MAPK cascade
inhibitors in combination with a cell cycle inhibitor may be of
therapeutic value to these patients. Further matching patients to these
actionable aberrations is underway, thereby translating these therapeutic
targets to the bedside with the development of novel targeted
therapies.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

