Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: 3D extracellular stiffness cues drive localized changes in gene
expression


The stiffness of the extracellular matrix (ECM) stimulates
mechanotransduction pathways that regulate tissue development and tumor
progression. We previously showed that a stiff ECM potentiates cell
growth and survival, enhances cell migration to drive tumor cell
invasion, and drives malignant progression of the mammary gland in
culture and in vivo, but the specific transcriptional and molecular
events that occur as cells acquire these phenotypic changes are not well
understood. To clarify this process, we used expression microarrays,
tandem mass spectrometry, and RNA sequencing to identify changes in gene
expression levels, isoform usage, and protein abundance that occur as
intact ascini respond to distinct stiffness environments. We found that
in stiffer ECM conditions ascini acquire consistent changes in gene
expression related to cell adhesion and mRNA splicing, and specifically
induce the expression of a set of genes involved in epithelial cell
differentiation that includes multiple SPRR and S100 proteins.
Remarkably, these genes map to an apparent stiffness-mediated
transcriptional hotspot on chromosome 1q21, a region containing elevated
transcription in many cancers but whose activity has not been related to
mechanotransduction. We then used a heuristic approach to identify
additional candidate force-mediated transcriptional hotspots throughout
the genome that contain multiple genes that are coordinately activated or
silenced in response to elevated ECM stiffness. Provocatively, we find
that genes whose expression levels are responsive to ECM stiffness cues
are disproportionately located within chromosomal regions that associate
with the nuclear lamina, suggesting that these transcriptional changes
may be due in part to force-dependent alteration of genomic contacts with
the nuclear envelope. These studies provide biological insight into the
divergent cellular responses to distinct stiffness environments and
suggest that genome regulatory responses to the force environment may
specifically target distinct chromosomal regions via a mechanism that
remains to be elucidated.

