Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Large scale gene expression analysis identifies key oncogenic
pathways across hematological malignancies


Hematological malignancies, consisting of all the subtypes of leukemia
and lymphoma together with multiple myeloma, constitute a diverse
assembly of cancers manifesting primarily in the circulatory or immune
systems. Common to all of them is their developmental origin in the
hematopoietic cell lineage, which normally produces mature blood cells.
For this reason, numerous transcriptomic aberrations, along with their
underlying mutations, are shared by different subtypes of hematological
malignancies.To enable concurrent gene expression analysis across a
comprehensive range of leukemias, lymphomas and multiple myeloma, we
compiled a hematological dataset from gene expression microarray data
publicly available in the Gene Expression Omnibus data repository. This
manually curated collection includes over six thousand neoplastic and
nearly nine hundred healthy samples of multiple lineages descending from
the hematopoietic stem cell. The cancer samples were manually
re-annotated in a congruent manner into categories with three
hierarchical levels so as to allow analysis at various levels of
specificity. For instance, an early B cell acute lymphocytic leukemia
(ALL) sample is classified first as leukemia, secondly as ALL, and in the
third, most specific level, as early B-ALL.The power of the dataset lays
not only in its extensiveness in terms of subtypes of hematological
malignancies, but also in the sheer number of samples within these
categories. This enables the discovery of expression signatures with high
statistical significance, as well as identification of key oncogenic
pathways and regulatory networks within different subtypes. To
demonstrate these analyses, we used our database to search for any
specific expression patterns of small nucleolar RNAs (snoRNAs) in acute
leukemias. Among thousands of leukemia patients, we identified a specific
signature of SNORD114 in acute promyelocytic leukemia, previously
revealed in a very restricted cohort of patients.

