Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of CTLA-4 blockage with sequential metronomic
chemotherapy for the treatment of preclinical breast cancer


The targeting of the CTLA-4 protein with the antibody ipilimumab has been
a success in terms of producing an increase in the survival of patients
with unresectable melanoma, and clinical trials are ongoing to evaluate
this strategy in other tumor types. Our aim in this study was to evaluate
the combination of CTLA-4 blocking with metronomic chemotherapy regimens.
To that end, we subcutaneously implanted murine EMT-6 breast tumor cells
into syngeneic Balb/c mice (n=6-8/group) and evaluated therapies on the
established tumors. Murine CTLA-4 blocking was achieved using anti-mouse
CD152 (CTLA-4), clone 9H10, injected on day 1 (100ug/mouse) and on day 6
(35ug/mouse) of therapy. Anti-CTLA-4 therapy was administered on its own
or combined with metronomic regimens. These included; a) Bolus (150mg/kg,
i.p.) cyclophosphamide (CTX) followed by metronomic CTX (20mg/kg/day,
p.o.), b) metronomic CTX, and c) sequential gemcitabine therapy (160mg/kg
every 3 days, i.p.) given to the tumors relapsing after the anti-CTLA-4
therapy. We observed that control (saline) treated tumors, or tumors
treated with Bolus CTX plus metronomic CTX, grew rapidly and had to be
sacrificed 4 weeks after tumor implantation. Anti-CTLA-4 monotherapy
produced an initial tumor regression followed by tumor relapses, 2-3
weeks later, in 5/6 mice. Surprisingly, the Bolus CTX plus metronomic CTX
hindered the effective CTLA-4 therapy, failed to produce tumor
regression, and resulted in rapidly growing tumors. The combination of
anti-CTLA-4 plus metronomic CTX also produced tumor regression and
resulted in a longer delay in the appearance of relapsing tumors (pThe
targeting of the CTLA-4 protein with the antibody ipilimumab has been a
success in terms of producing an increase in the survival of patients
with unresectable melanoma, and clinical trials are ongoing to evaluate
this strategy in other tumor types. Our aim in this study was to evaluate
the combination of CTLA-4 blocking with metronomic chemotherapy regimens.
To that end, we subcutaneously implanted murine EMT-6 breast tumor cells
into syngeneic Balb/c mice (n=6-8/group) and evaluated therapies on the
established tumors. Murine CTLA-4 blocking was achieved using anti-mouse
CD152 (CTLA-4), clone 9H10, injected on day 1 (100ug/mouse) and on day 6
(35ug/mouse) of therapy. Anti-CTLA-4 therapy was administered on its own
or combined with metronomic regimens. These included; a) Bolus (150mg/kg,
i.p.) cyclophosphamide (CTX) followed by metronomic CTX (20mg/kg/day,
p.o.), b) metronomic CTX, and c) sequential gemcitabine therapy (160mg/kg
every 3 days, i.p.) given to the tumors relapsing after the anti-CTLA-4
therapy. We observed that control (saline) treated tumors, or tumors
treated with Bolus CTX plus metronomic CTX, grew rapidly and had to be
sacrificed 4 weeks after tumor implantation. Anti-CTLA-4 monotherapy
produced an initial tumor regression followed by tumor relapses, 2-3
weeks later, in 5/6 mice. Surprisingly, the Bolus CTX plus metronomic CTX
hindered the effective CTLA-4 therapy, failed to produce tumor
regression, and resulted in rapidly growing tumors. The combination of
anti-CTLA-4 plus metronomic CTX also produced tumor regression and
resulted in a longer delay in the appearance of relapsing tumors (p<0.05
compared to anti-CTLA-4 alone), which also eventually appeared in 5/6
mice. A Kaplan Meier plot showed that the anti-CTLA-4 plus metronomic CTX
regimen significantly improved survival compared to the anti-CTLA-4
monotherapy (pThe targeting of the CTLA-4 protein with the antibody
ipilimumab has been a success in terms of producing an increase in the
survival of patients with unresectable melanoma, and clinical trials are
ongoing to evaluate this strategy in other tumor types. Our aim in this
study was to evaluate the combination of CTLA-4 blocking with metronomic
chemotherapy regimens. To that end, we subcutaneously implanted murine
EMT-6 breast tumor cells into syngeneic Balb/c mice (n=6-8/group) and
evaluated therapies on the established tumors. Murine CTLA-4 blocking was
achieved using anti-mouse CD152 (CTLA-4), clone 9H10, injected on day 1
(100ug/mouse) and on day 6 (35ug/mouse) of therapy. Anti-CTLA-4 therapy
was administered on its own or combined with metronomic regimens. These
included; a) Bolus (150mg/kg, i.p.) cyclophosphamide (CTX) followed by
metronomic CTX (20mg/kg/day, p.o.), b) metronomic CTX, and c) sequential
gemcitabine therapy (160mg/kg every 3 days, i.p.) given to the tumors
relapsing after the anti-CTLA-4 therapy. We observed that control
(saline) treated tumors, or tumors treated with Bolus CTX plus metronomic
CTX, grew rapidly and had to be sacrificed 4 weeks after tumor
implantation. Anti-CTLA-4 monotherapy produced an initial tumor
regression followed by tumor relapses, 2-3 weeks later, in 5/6 mice.
Surprisingly, the Bolus CTX plus metronomic CTX hindered the effective
CTLA-4 therapy, failed to produce tumor regression, and resulted in
rapidly growing tumors. The combination of anti-CTLA-4 plus metronomic
CTX also produced tumor regression and resulted in a longer delay in the
appearance of relapsing tumors (p<0.05 compared to anti-CTLA-4 alone),
which also eventually appeared in 5/6 mice. A Kaplan Meier plot showed
that the anti-CTLA-4 plus metronomic CTX regimen significantly improved
survival compared to the anti-CTLA-4 monotherapy (p<0.05). The regimen
involving first line anti-CTLA4 therapy followed by a second line
gemcitabine therapy, produced a sustained tumor regression that continued
for over 100 days. In this group, 5/7 mice did not show a tumor regrowth;
1 mouse showed a tumor regrowth under continuous gemcitabine therapy with
concomitant development of lung metastasis. Tumor cells lines were
derived from the relapsing tumor and from the lung metastasis.
Collectively our data shows that Bolus plus metronomic CTX may compromise
anti-CTLA-4 therapy. Furthermore, anti-CTLA-4 therapy may be effectively
combined with metronomic CTX, or with a sequential gemcitabine therapy,
in a preclinical model of breast cancer.

