Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: 53BP1 facilitates the ATM-dependent phosphorylation of APLF in the
DNA damage response


Aprataxin and polynucleotide kinase-like factor (APLF) is a DNA repair
factor which facilitates DNA repair in part through interactions with its
forkhead-associated (FHA) domain. The APLF FHA domain mediates
interactions with specific threonine phosphorylated epitopes via a
functionally conserved and essential arginine residue (Arg-27). In the
context of DNA double-strand break (DSB) repair, substitution of APLF
amino acid residue Arg-27 to alanine abolishes interactions with the DSB
repair scaffold protein XRCC4, and impairs DSB repair. APLF is also a
component of the ATM-dependent DNA damage response (DDR), which also
includes 53BP1, and undergoes ionizing-radiation induced phosphorylation
at Ser-116 facilitating its role in DSB repair. Here we demonstrate that
the APLF FHA domain is essential for Ser-116 phosphorylation and for the
association with 53BP1, which collectively enhance the accumulation of
APLF at sites of DNA damage. The level of 53BP1 expression, but not
XRCC4, was found to correlate with the phosphorylation of APLF by ATM,
and disruption of the APLF-53BP1 interaction was associated with impaired
cell survival following DNA damage. These results suggest that the APLF
FHA domain directs interactions with multiple partners in the DNA damage
response, and that 53BP1 facilitates the ATM-dependent phosphorylation of
APLF.

