Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The use of biospecimens in cancer population science research


Background: Over the past two decades, researchers have increasingly used
human biospecimens to help evaluate hypotheses related to disease risk,
outcomes and treatment options. We conducted an analysis of the
population science cancer research grants funded by NCI in order to gain
a more comprehensive understanding of the biospecimens involved in those
studies. Recognizing that there are many pre-existing collections of
biospecimens, we investigated the cost and time efficiencies observed
with studies involving the use of existing biospecimens versus collecting
new specimens. Methods: Data available for 1,018 extramural,
peer-reviewed grants (active as of July 2012) supported by the Division
of Cancer Control and Population Sciences, (NCI Division that supports
cancer control and population science extramural research grants) were
analyzed. Results: 455 of the grants were determined to involve
biospecimens. The most common specimen types included were DNA (66% of
grants involved DNA), whole blood (51%), serum or plasma (40%), and
tissue (39%). Grants that involved the use of existing biospecimens
resulted in greater cost (serum/plasma studies were 4.2 times less
expensive) and time efficiencies (1.4 times more publications per year
resulted) than grants that collected new biospecimens. Conclusions:
Clearly, there is an opportunity for NCI to promote future sharing. We
are currently working to better catalogue our funded resources and make
data available to the extramural community. Further work is being done to
investigate possible trends based on year of grant award.

