Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Profilin-1 overexpression downregulates phosphorylation of p27kip1
leading to its nuclear accumulation in breast cancer cells


Profilin-1 is a ubiquitously expressed actin-binding protein that is
downregulated in human breast cancer. Overexpression of profilin-1 in
human breast cancer cells suppresses their tumorigenic potential. We had
previously shown that profilin-1 overexpression elevates the expression
level of p27kip1 leading to cell-cycle arrest in G1 phase. In the present
work, we explore the underlying mechanism. Our studies showed that
profilin-1-induced accumulation of p27kip1 in breast cancer cells occurs
most dramatically in the nuclear compartment and this is due to impaired
protein degradation. Consistent with these observations, we found that
phosphorylation of p27kip1 at T187 (a prerequisite for p27kip1
degradation by SCF-Skp2 complex in the nucleus) and S10 (a
post-translational event that promotes nuclear export of p27kip1)
residues are both significantly inhibited by profilin-1 overexpression.
Elevating profilin-1 level suppresses AKT activation, and
hyper-activating AKT through overexpression of a constitutively active
mutant relieves profilin-1-induced inhibition of T187 phosphorylation and
elevation of p27kip1. These data demonstrate that profilin-1 can control
the cellular level of p27kip1 in breast cancer cells through affecting
its post-translational modification in an AKT-dependent pathway. These
findings may provide mechanistic insights underlying the
tumor-suppressive action of profilin-1.

