Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cancer cell adhesion and degradome interact to metastasize


Background: Adhesion molecules of cancer cells interact with the cancer
cell degradome. This is evident from (i) co-localized expression of
adhesion molecules such as integrins and degradative enzymes such matrix
metalloproteases (MMPs), (ii) regulation of degradome activity by
integrin signaling, (iii) key integrins and MMPs binding to the same
extracellular matrix (ECM) components, and (iv) interaction between
integrins and membrane-bound MMPs in cell-ECM communication in several
types of cancer (1-8). Integrins and the degradome have both been
implicated in breast cancer metastasis. We are testing for the first time
the hypothesis that it is the interactome between these two molecular
networks that is critical for breast tumor metastasis to
occur.Experimental Design: We performed comparative studies with a panel
of non-metastatic (BT-474, T47D, MCF7, SKBr3) versus metastatic
(MDA-MB-231, SUM149, SUM159, MDA-MB-468) human breast cancer cell lines
and xenografts. All cell lines stably expressed tdTomato fluorescent
protein for optical tracking. Comparative immunoblotting, zymography,
migration and invasion assays were performed. Enzymatically activatable
optical imaging probes IntegriSense (integrins), MMPSense (MMP), and
Angiosense (blood vessels) from PerkinElmer were used in our in vivo
imaging studies. Primary tumor sizes of 200 mm3 and 600 mm3 were used to
account for different stages of tumors growth.Results: Analysis of 1,144
genes from a panel of 28 human breast cancer cell lines from publicly
available data bases (9) showed that metastatic breast cancer cells have
significantly (pBackground: Adhesion molecules of cancer cells interact
with the cancer cell degradome. This is evident from (i) co-localized
expression of adhesion molecules such as integrins and degradative
enzymes such matrix metalloproteases (MMPs), (ii) regulation of degradome
activity by integrin signaling, (iii) key integrins and MMPs binding to
the same extracellular matrix (ECM) components, and (iv) interaction
between integrins and membrane-bound MMPs in cell-ECM communication in
several types of cancer (1-8). Integrins and the degradome have both been
implicated in breast cancer metastasis. We are testing for the first time
the hypothesis that it is the interactome between these two molecular
networks that is critical for breast tumor metastasis to
occur.Experimental Design: We performed comparative studies with a panel
of non-metastatic (BT-474, T47D, MCF7, SKBr3) versus metastatic
(MDA-MB-231, SUM149, SUM159, MDA-MB-468) human breast cancer cell lines
and xenografts. All cell lines stably expressed tdTomato fluorescent
protein for optical tracking. Comparative immunoblotting, zymography,
migration and invasion assays were performed. Enzymatically activatable
optical imaging probes IntegriSense (integrins), MMPSense (MMP), and
Angiosense (blood vessels) from PerkinElmer were used in our in vivo
imaging studies. Primary tumor sizes of 200 mm3 and 600 mm3 were used to
account for different stages of tumors growth.Results: Analysis of 1,144
genes from a panel of 28 human breast cancer cell lines from publicly
available data bases (9) showed that metastatic breast cancer cells have
significantly (p<0.01) higher levels of cell adhesion (integrin
-1,4,5,6,v, integrin -1, CD44) and ECM degrading enzymes
(MMP-2,3,11,14,16,19). Metastatic human breast cancer cell lines
expressed elevated protein levels of MMP-1 and MMP-14 compared to
nonmetastatic lines. Zymography demonstrated that metastatic breast
cancer cells secreted increased amounts of active MMP-2 and MMP-9
compared to non-metastatic cell lines. Metastatic tumor xenografts
displayed significantly higher combined MMP-1,-2,-3,-9,-13 activity along
with increased integrin expression compared to non-metastatic tumors in
vivo.Conclusion: Our results show that elevated activity and expression
levels of integrins and MMPs coincide in metastatic breast cancer cell
lines and xenografts, which indicates that they may cooperate and
interact to enable cancer cell escape from the primary tumor and
metastasis. We will perform additional studies to further test our
hypothesis by combining cancer cell and tumor studies.References: 1.
Knoblauch et al, FASEB J 2007. 2. Friedl et al, Nat Rev Cancer 2003. 3.
Birkedal et al, Biol Med 1993. 4. Deryugina et al, Exp Cell Res 2001. 5.
Brooks et al, Cell 1996. 6. Mitchell et al, Cancer Res 2010. 7. Gonzalo
et al, Biofactors 2008. 8. Chapman et al, Thromb Haemost 2001. 9.
Hollestelle et al, Cancer Res Treat 2009.

