Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential MMAE delivery from ADCs utilizing the
valine-citrulline-PAB and -glucuronide cleavable linker systems


The previously described -glucuronide linker system (Jeffrey S.C. et al,
Bioconj. Chem. 17, 831-840, 2006) was designed to release the toxic
payload from an antibody-drug conjugate via the activity of
-glucuronidase, a known lysosomal enzyme. This linker system was shown to
be suitable for the generation of potent ADCs utilizing the microtubule
disrupting agent monomethylauristatin E (MMAE) as the delivered payload,
and is thus an alternative to the protease-cleavable linker
valine-citrulline-p-amino benzyl alcohol (vc-PAB). We have recently
observed that ADCs utilizing the -glucuronide linker system to deliver an
MMAE payload exhibit potent cytotoxic activity in some cell lines that
are resistant to conjugates utilizing the vc-PAB linker to deliver the
same drug. To better understand this phenomenon, we have used mass
spectrometry to compare the concentration and distribution of MMAE
released from both glucuronide and vc-PAB linked ADCs in cell culture.
Our data demonstrate that cellular accumulation of released MMAE is
considerably greater when delivered by a glucuronide ADC relative to a
vc-PAB ADC. We have also employed live-cell fluorescence microscopy to
monitor the process of enzymatic cleavage of glucuronide and vc-PAB
conjugates. The results of these studies suggest that the two linker
systems deliver drug via distinct cellular mechanisms, possibly due to
unique intracellular locations of drug release. We propose a model for
how these unique linker systems can lead to differences in cellular
accumulation of free drug and ultimately increased cytotoxicity.

