Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tetrandrine induces expression of growth/differentiation factor-15
and promoted terminal differentiation of PCa cells


Tetrandrine (Tet) is a naturally derived bis-benzylisoquinoline alkaloid,
from S tenrandra, a herb that has been used in Chinese medicine for its
anti-inflammatory, immunologic and antiallergenic effects. Results from
our laboratory show that Tetrandarine blocks prostate cancer growth,
promotes cell cycle arrest and induces apoptosis in a time and
concentration dependent manner. In the present study we performed
un-biased gene expression analysis of LNCaP cells following treatment
with Tet. Analysis of gene expression revealed that GDF-15 was one of the
most highly expressed cytokines following treatment of LNCaP cells with
Tet. The gene expression results were further confirmed in relative
quantitative PCR and Real time PCR assays, as was protein expression of
GDF-15 confirmed by Western blot analysis. Our results, in light of the
role of GDF-15 as a macrophage inhibitory factor as well as prostate
epithelial differentiating factor, suggest that Tet may serve as a useful
agent to promote prostate epithelial differentiation and inhibit tumor
macrophage infiltration. Additional studies revealed that Treatment of
PCa cells with Tet inhibited cell migration and invasion and suppressed
EMT. Taken together we conclude that Tet by regulating GDF-15 expression
may serve as an inhibitor of Prostate cancer cell progression and
metastasis.(Financial Support: Supported in part by NIH/NCI R01CA161880
(PI:H.Koul); VA Merit Award 01BX001258 (PI:H.Koul); Carroll W. Feist
endowed Cahir and LSUHSC Chair Commitment Funds)

