Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Triple-negative breast cancer displays a unique subset of
macrophages dependent on CCL5 signaling


Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) is the most aggressive form of
breast cancer. While five-year survival rates have reached 98% in
patients treated with anti-ER or anti-HER2 therapies, patients with TNBC
have a five-year survival rate of only 24%. Currently, the only form of
therapy for these patients is surgery and platinum based chemotherapy.
However, patient outcome is generally poor. Additionally, this disease
disproportionately affects African-American women and lower income women,
with rates seen approximately three times higher in African-American
women compared to the rest of the population.An alternative strategy for
treating TNBC patients involves targeting the tumor stroma. Here we have
used an RNA sequencing approach that utilizes species information to
precisely resolve tumor- and stroma-specific gene expression in a
xenograft system. We employed a triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC)
model in which primary tumor invasiveness is controlled by the metastasis
suppressor Raf Kinase Inhibitory Protein (RKIP). RKIP expression, which
converts invasive tumors to noninvasive tumors, dramatically inhibits
macrophage infiltration. The mechanism, which is dependent on Let-7
suppression of HMGA2, involves decreased expression of the chemokine
CCL5. Furthermore, overexpression of CCL5 partially rescued the
infiltration of macrophages into the tumor and intravasation of tumor
cells into the blood stream. MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry was used to
characterize the TNBC-infiltrating macrophages. Together, these studies
identify targetable pathways involving tumor-macrophage crosstalk that
potentiate TNBC cell invasion and metastasis.

