Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Akt1 and Akt3 exert opposing roles in the regulation of vascular
tumor growth


Vascular tumors are endothelial cell neoplasms with a wide spectrum of
clinical presentations, ranging from benign infantile hemangiomas in
children to low-grade malignant hemangioendotheliomas and highly
aggressive angiosarcomas in adults. To date, the cellular and molecular
mechanisms leading to vascular tumor formation are poorly understood, and
current therapies, particularly those for malignant vascular tumors, have
not significantly improved the clinical outcome.We examined the growth
regulatory pathways in vascular tumors, and showed that human vascular
tumors have increased Akt activation, and constitutive activation of Akt1
in endothelial cells is sufficient to drive de novo vascular tumor
formation in a transgenic mouse model. Importantly, we have uncovered the
opposing functions of Akt isoforms in this regulation, in which Akt1
promotes, whereas Akt3 inhibits tumor endothelial cell migration and
growth in in vitro and in vivo tumor models. Consistent with these
findings, we observed reduced levels of Akt3 expression in human vascular
tumors. Mechanistically, Akt3 blocks tumor cell migration and growth by
inhibiting p70 S6-Kinase (S6K) activation, and Akt3 does so in part by
modulating the levels of Rictor, a component of the mammalian target of
rapamycin complex-2. S6K in turn exerts negative feedback regulation on
Akt3 expression. Moreover, vascular tumor cells with Akt3 knockdown have
increased S6K signaling, and are sensitized to a novel S6K inhibitor. Our
findings provide a new perspective on Akt signaling, in which there are
check-and-balance functions by different Akt isoforms to modulate the
overall Akt signaling output. These studies also highlight the potential
clinical utility of treating malignant vascular tumors, such as
angiosarcomas, with agents that effectively block the S6K pathway.

