Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antitumor activities of FGFR inhibitors in FGFR1-overexpressing
hepatocellular carcinoma patient-derived xenograft tumor models


Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is intrinsically resistant to conventional
chemotherapies. Developing effective therapeutics becomes critical to
tackle the unmet medical need. The fibroblast growth factor/fibroblast
growth factor receptor (FGF/FGFR) signaling axis plays an important role
in liver development and homeostasis in adults. Deregulation of the
FGF/FGFR signaling pathway through genetic modification or overexpression
of the receptors (or their ligands) has been increasingly recognized in
HCC. Accordingly, therapeutic intervention of the pathway has been
extensively explored.In this study, analysis of a panel of
patient-derived xenograft (PDX) HCC models by Affymetrix human gene
expression arrays revealed overexpression of FGFR1 in 13 out of 43 (30%)
models. Antitumor activities of FGFR inhibitors, including lenvatinib,
dovitinib, ENMD-2076, and LY2874455, were then tested in five models.
Lenvatinib exhibited the most potent activity in all models, whereas
LY2874455 failed to show the effect in one of models. IC50s for FGFR1
inhibition of ENMD-2076, lenvatinib, dovitinib and LY2874455 were 145 nM,
134.5 nM, 53.5 nM and 0.6 nM, respectively. In SNU-16 and NCI-H520 cell
lines, IC50s of dovitinib, lenvatinib, ENMD-2076, and LY2874455 were
76/1355 nM, 94/4770 nM, 306/2280 nM, and 0.3/664 nM, respectively.
Furthermore, analyses of PDX tissues by Affymetrix SNP Array 6.0 arrays
revealed no amplification of FGFR1/2 genes in four models except for
amplifications of FGFR3 gene in two models. Whole exome sequencing did
not detect nonsynonymous genetic alterations, including SNPs and indels,
in FGFR1/2 genes in these xenografts except for a few genetic variations
in FGFR3/4 genes.Overall, due to the multi-targeting mechanisms of these
inhibitors, in vitro inhibitory effects of the compounds on FGFR1 enzyme
and cell proliferation may not correlate with the in vivo anti-tumor
activities. Overexpression of FGFR1 gene may serve as a predictive
biomarker for therapeutic intervention of the FGF/FGFR pathway in HCC by
using lenvatinib, dovitinib and ENMD-2076. Further studies are required
to define additional biomarkers for LY2874455. Thus, our findings provide
the rationale for the clinical development of FGFR inhibitors in a subset
of HCC patients expressing a high level of FGFR1 gene.

