Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TNFAIP8 protein expression in normal, inflammatory and neoplastic
pancreatic tissues: Correlation with endocrine phenotype and advanced
stage in ductal adenocarcinomas


Background: Tumor necrosis factor alpha induced protein 8 (TNFAIP8) is a
transcription factor NF-kB inducible antiapoptotic and oncogenic
molecule. This gene was initially discovered by comparison of expression
profiles of primary and metastatic head and neck squamous cell carcinoma
(hence earlier referred to as SCC-S2). Positive correlation between
TNFAIP8 expression and cancer progression/poor prognosis has been
suggested in a few human solid cancers including pancreatic and
esophageal primaries. We were the first to publish the adverse prognostic
implication of TNFAIP8 expression in prostatic adenocarcinomas. In this
study, we evaluated the significance of this protein in normal, inflamed
and neoplastic pancreatic tissues.Design: A total of 184 formalin-fixed,
paraffin-embedded pancreatic tissues were analyzed; 151 samples in tissue
microarray format [79 primary ductal carcinomas (PDC), 5 ductal
adenocarcinomas from distant metastatic sites not matched to primary
tumors (MDAC), 9 islet cell tumors (ICT) (one carcinoma), 2 chronic
pancreatitis (CP), 29 normal adjacent to cancer, 8 normal adjacent to
inflammation, and 19 normal pancreatic tissues] and 19 primary tumor
resections [19 primary ductal adenocarcinomas (PDAC), 14 of these with
normal tissue adjacent to the cancer]. All samples were immunostained by
a manual method using a custom made anti-TNFAIP8 antibody as described
earlier (Zhang et al., Int J Cancer, 133: 31-42, 2013). The staining
pattern was semiquantitatively assessed based on staining intensity and
distribution and the results were correlated with clinicopathologic
variables.Results: Immunoreactivity for TNFAIP8 was predominantly
cytoplasmic. TNFAIP8 protein overexpression was noted in 44/184 (24%)
samples and correlated with tumor type [9/98 (9%) PDC/PDAC 2/5 (40%)
unmatched distant MDAC, 5/9 (56%) (ICT) (1/1 carcinoma), 1/2 (50%) (CP),
15/43 (35%) normal adjacent to cancer, 5/8 (63%) normal adjacent to
inflammation, and 7/19 (37%) normal pancreatic tissues, pBackground:
Tumor necrosis factor alpha induced protein 8 (TNFAIP8) is a
transcription factor NF-kB inducible antiapoptotic and oncogenic
molecule. This gene was initially discovered by comparison of expression
profiles of primary and metastatic head and neck squamous cell carcinoma
(hence earlier referred to as SCC-S2). Positive correlation between
TNFAIP8 expression and cancer progression/poor prognosis has been
suggested in a few human solid cancers including pancreatic and
esophageal primaries. We were the first to publish the adverse prognostic
implication of TNFAIP8 expression in prostatic adenocarcinomas. In this
study, we evaluated the significance of this protein in normal, inflamed
and neoplastic pancreatic tissues.Design: A total of 184 formalin-fixed,
paraffin-embedded pancreatic tissues were analyzed; 151 samples in tissue
microarray format [79 primary ductal carcinomas (PDC), 5 ductal
adenocarcinomas from distant metastatic sites not matched to primary
tumors (MDAC), 9 islet cell tumors (ICT) (one carcinoma), 2 chronic
pancreatitis (CP), 29 normal adjacent to cancer, 8 normal adjacent to
inflammation, and 19 normal pancreatic tissues] and 19 primary tumor
resections [19 primary ductal adenocarcinomas (PDAC), 14 of these with
normal tissue adjacent to the cancer]. All samples were immunostained by
a manual method using a custom made anti-TNFAIP8 antibody as described
earlier (Zhang et al., Int J Cancer, 133: 31-42, 2013). The staining
pattern was semiquantitatively assessed based on staining intensity and
distribution and the results were correlated with clinicopathologic
variables.Results: Immunoreactivity for TNFAIP8 was predominantly
cytoplasmic. TNFAIP8 protein overexpression was noted in 44/184 (24%)
samples and correlated with tumor type [9/98 (9%) PDC/PDAC 2/5 (40%)
unmatched distant MDAC, 5/9 (56%) (ICT) (1/1 carcinoma), 1/2 (50%) (CP),
15/43 (35%) normal adjacent to cancer, 5/8 (63%) normal adjacent to
inflammation, and 7/19 (37%) normal pancreatic tissues, p<0.0001], with
advanced tumor stage within PDC/PDAC [0/24 (0%) Stage I vs 3/44 (7%)
Stage II vs 6/23 (26%) Stage III vs 0/7 (0%) Stage IV, p=0.010], and
overall with gender [34/107 (32%) male vs 10/77 (13%) female, p=0.003].
Islets were present in 63 cases, all (100%) showing TNFAIP8 protein
overexpression.Conclusion: TNFAIP8 immunohistochemical expression
correlates with endocrine phenotype and portends poor prognosis in
pancreatic ductal carcinomas. This protein may represent both a novel
pathway in endocrine differentiation and a therapeutic target in the
management of aggressive PDC, warranting further study.

