Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analysis of a protein expression biomarkers in HPV negative SCCHN


Background: Human papillomavirus negative (HPV) (-) squamous cell head
and neck cancer (SCCHN) is associated with a poor prognosis and decreased
response to treatment. We sought to study the correlation between
protein-based biomarkers related to DNA repair, mitotic regulators and
apoptosis in a tissue microarray (TMA) of HPV(-) SCCHN.Methods: TMAs were
constructed with SCCHN samples from patients treated at Fox Chase Cancer
Center from 1990-2002. The TMA contained 85 p16 -surgical specimens from
predominantly oral cavity tumors; 72 received adjuvant radiation. Slides
were stained by a modified indirect immunofluorescence method. Sections
were incubated with antibodies against ERCC1 (HPA029773, Sigma), Aurora
A, (Bethyl Laboratory, IHC-00062), pAuroraA ( Bethyl Laboratory,
IHC-00067), survivin (Novus Biological, NB100-56168) and a wide-spectrum
screening mouse cytokeratin ab (Dako M3515). Prolong Gold mounting medium
(P36931; Molecular Probes) containing 4,6-Diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI)
defined nuclei. A tumor mask (TM) image was created from the cytokeratin
stain of each histospot. ERCC1 levels were measured using fluorescent IHC
on the HistoRx PM-2000 image analysis platform and data analyzed using
AQUA algorithms. We assessed relationships between markers using
Spearman's correlation, explored associations between markers and overall
survival using Kaplan-Meier curves, and tested significance using the
t-statistic. Parallel analysis of The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA)
resources was used to establish whether correlative relationships
observed at the protein level reflected commensurate changes in mRNA
expression, in an independent study cohort. For this purpose, mRNA
expression values were imported from the (provisional) TCGA data set
encompassing 295 SCCHN samples, and Spearman's correlation coefficients
were calculated.Results: Correlation coefficients indicated a significant
positive association between nuclear expression of the following markers:
ERCC1 and AuroraA (pBackground: Human papillomavirus negative (HPV) (-)
squamous cell head and neck cancer (SCCHN) is associated with a poor
prognosis and decreased response to treatment. We sought to study the
correlation between protein-based biomarkers related to DNA repair,
mitotic regulators and apoptosis in a tissue microarray (TMA) of HPV(-)
SCCHN.Methods: TMAs were constructed with SCCHN samples from patients
treated at Fox Chase Cancer Center from 1990-2002. The TMA contained 85
p16 -surgical specimens from predominantly oral cavity tumors; 72
received adjuvant radiation. Slides were stained by a modified indirect
immunofluorescence method. Sections were incubated with antibodies
against ERCC1 (HPA029773, Sigma), Aurora A, (Bethyl Laboratory,
IHC-00062), pAuroraA ( Bethyl Laboratory, IHC-00067), survivin (Novus
Biological, NB100-56168) and a wide-spectrum screening mouse cytokeratin
ab (Dako M3515). Prolong Gold mounting medium (P36931; Molecular Probes)
containing 4,6-Diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) defined nuclei. A tumor
mask (TM) image was created from the cytokeratin stain of each histospot.
ERCC1 levels were measured using fluorescent IHC on the HistoRx PM-2000
image analysis platform and data analyzed using AQUA algorithms. We
assessed relationships between markers using Spearman's correlation,
explored associations between markers and overall survival using
Kaplan-Meier curves, and tested significance using the t-statistic.
Parallel analysis of The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) resources was used to
establish whether correlative relationships observed at the protein level
reflected commensurate changes in mRNA expression, in an independent
study cohort. For this purpose, mRNA expression values were imported from
the (provisional) TCGA data set encompassing 295 SCCHN samples, and
Spearman's correlation coefficients were calculated.Results: Correlation
coefficients indicated a significant positive association between nuclear
expression of the following markers: ERCC1 and AuroraA (p<0.0001); ERCC1
and pAurora (p=0.0027); Aurora A and pAurora (pBackground: Human
papillomavirus negative (HPV) (-) squamous cell head and neck cancer
(SCCHN) is associated with a poor prognosis and decreased response to
treatment. We sought to study the correlation between protein-based
biomarkers related to DNA repair, mitotic regulators and apoptosis in a
tissue microarray (TMA) of HPV(-) SCCHN.Methods: TMAs were constructed
with SCCHN samples from patients treated at Fox Chase Cancer Center from
1990-2002. The TMA contained 85 p16 -surgical specimens from
predominantly oral cavity tumors; 72 received adjuvant radiation. Slides
were stained by a modified indirect immunofluorescence method. Sections
were incubated with antibodies against ERCC1 (HPA029773, Sigma), Aurora
A, (Bethyl Laboratory, IHC-00062), pAuroraA ( Bethyl Laboratory,
IHC-00067), survivin (Novus Biological, NB100-56168) and a wide-spectrum
screening mouse cytokeratin ab (Dako M3515). Prolong Gold mounting medium
(P36931; Molecular Probes) containing 4,6-Diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI)
defined nuclei. A tumor mask (TM) image was created from the cytokeratin
stain of each histospot. ERCC1 levels were measured using fluorescent IHC
on the HistoRx PM-2000 image analysis platform and data analyzed using
AQUA algorithms. We assessed relationships between markers using
Spearman's correlation, explored associations between markers and overall
survival using Kaplan-Meier curves, and tested significance using the
t-statistic. Parallel analysis of The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA)
resources was used to establish whether correlative relationships
observed at the protein level reflected commensurate changes in mRNA
expression, in an independent study cohort. For this purpose, mRNA
expression values were imported from the (provisional) TCGA data set
encompassing 295 SCCHN samples, and Spearman's correlation coefficients
were calculated.Results: Correlation coefficients indicated a significant
positive association between nuclear expression of the following markers:
ERCC1 and AuroraA (p<0.0001); ERCC1 and pAurora (p=0.0027); Aurora A and
pAurora (p<0.0001); survivin and Aurora A (p=0.0064); and survivin and
ERCC1 (p=0.0084). Review of mRNA levels of Aurora A and survivin in the
TCGA database indicated a highly significant correlation between these
two markers (r=0.59, p=0.0002). This striking correlation did not
represent common amplification of a chromosomal locus, given distinct
chromosomal locations of Aurora A (20q13), and survivin (17q25). The
relation of elevated expression of the biomarkers to prognosis was
analyzed, considering biomarkers alone and in combination. A particularly
important role for survivin was established, independent of other
variables.Conclusions: ERCC1, Aurora A, and survivin displayed
significantly correlated expression in HPV (-) SCCHN, supporting linked
function in SCCHN. This works suggests a cluster of biomarkers worthy of
future study.

