Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: VEGFR2 expression and vascular phenotyping demonstrate different
patterns of tumor angiogenesis in human gastric and breast cancers


Although some human gastric carcinomas (GCs) can have prominent tumor
stroma, abundant desmoplastic tumor stroma is more typical of human
invasive breast carcinomas (IBCs). Based on these pathologic differences,
we hypothesized that these cancers may also have different tumor
angiogenic response and tumor vascular phenotypes. We used a reference
CD34 IHC assay and a novel VEGFR2 IHC assay to stain sections from
customized human gastric (n=38) and breast (n=40) cancer tissue
microarrays (TMAs). The absolute numbers of discrete VEGFR2+ and CD34+
tumor vessels were quantified in each TMA core. We also normalized the
absolute VEGFR2 positive tumor vessel counts with the corresponding
CD34-positive vessel counts, as VEGFR2 vascular positivity index
(VEGFR2-VPI). Any case with Although some human gastric carcinomas (GCs)
can have prominent tumor stroma, abundant desmoplastic tumor stroma is
more typical of human invasive breast carcinomas (IBCs). Based on these
pathologic differences, we hypothesized that these cancers may also have
different tumor angiogenic response and tumor vascular phenotypes. We
used a reference CD34 IHC assay and a novel VEGFR2 IHC assay to stain
sections from customized human gastric (n=38) and breast (n=40) cancer
tissue microarrays (TMAs). The absolute numbers of discrete VEGFR2+ and
CD34+ tumor vessels were quantified in each TMA core. We also normalized
the absolute VEGFR2 positive tumor vessel counts with the corresponding
CD34-positive vessel counts, as VEGFR2 vascular positivity index
(VEGFR2-VPI). Any case with <50% tissue in TMA core, no invasive
carcinoma tissue or any technical issue with accurate vascular vessel
counts was excluded. Gastric adenocarcinomas (38 evaluable cores; 33
intestinal type, 4 diffuse, 1 mucinous): mean patient age was 58.4 years
(range 35-81), mean VEGFR2 and CD34+ vascular counts were 42 (0-145) and
109 (11-216) respectively, and mean VEGFR2-vascular positivity index was
41 (0-97). Invasive breast carcinomas (40 evaluable cores; 33 invasive
ductal, 7 invasive lobular): mean patient age was 67.9 years (40-76),
mean VEGFR2 and CD34+ vascular counts were 20 (0-81) and 58 (8-162)
respectively, and mean VEGFR2-vascular positivity index was 39 (0-97).
Invasive ductal carcinomas: mean VEGFR2 and CD34+ vascular counts were 21
(3-81) and 55 (8-152) respectively, and mean VEGFR2-vascular positivity
index was 41 (7-97). Invasive lobular carcinomas: mean VEGFR2 and CD34+
vascular counts were 17 (0-33) and 74 (39-162) respectively, and mean
VEGFR2-vascular positivity index was 31 (0-62). Based on quantitative
analysis of CD31+ and CD34+ tumor blood vessels on a fluorescence-based
platform (iCys), we found more immature vascular phenotypes in human GCs,
while many tumor blood vessels in IBCs exhibited a more mature vascular
phenotype. Using a vascular contouring analyses, we found higher CD31+,
CD34+ vascular counts and higher CD34/CD31 ratio in GCs compared to IBCs.
Overall, human gastric carcinomas show more pronounced tumor angiogenesis
than invasive breast carcinomas. Although we found more tumor blood
vessels expressing VEGFR2 in gastric than breast cancer tissues, the
ratio of VEGFR2 vessels normalized with CD34+ vascular counts were
comparable. However, based on CD34 staining, gastric cancer tissues
showed more of an immature vascular phenotype, as compared to breast
cancer tissues which contained more mature vascular phenotypes. These
findings merit further validation in independent cohorts.

