Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: On the way to specialized cancer rehabilitation in Switzerland:
Preliminary results of a naturalistic controlled comparative cohort study


IntroductionVarious international studies show the effectiveness of
cancer rehabilitation programs. In Switzerland, however, as compared to
other Western countries, only little is known about physical health and
Quality of life (QoL) in patients who undergo cancer rehabilitation
programs. Cancer patients are at increased risk to develop both poor
physical conditions and psychological distress leading to negative QoL.
Thus, research indicates social support and self-efficacy as personal
resources with positive effects on QoL. The aim of this study is to
compare the state and change of physical health and QoL of cancer
patients with and without rehabilitation.MethodsWe perform a multicenter
naturalistic, comparative cohort study on quality of life and distress
using standardized questionnaires and including patients aged 18 years
with a diagnosis of carcinoma, lymphoma, sarcoma or melanoma. A dementia
screening by the MMSE (Mini Mental Status Examination) is performed in
patients aged 50 years to ensure ability for completing the
questionnaires. Allocation to rehabilitation is decided by the physician
of the acute management in agreement with the patient. The intervention
group undergoes rehabilitation and is compared to two control groups:
Control group 1 consists of patients with medical indication for
rehabilitation but will not undergo rehabilitation, whereas in control
group 2 there is no indication for rehabilitation. Data are collected at
the beginning (T1) and end of hospitalization (T2), at the end of
rehabilitation (T3), and three months after (T4).ResultsWe included 44
patients (28 female and 16 male) with the major groups consisting of
breast and head and neck cancer and plan to expand up to a number of 132
patients. Preliminary analysis showed that values for QoL varied
significantly with impairment between T1 and T2 (p IntroductionVarious
international studies show the effectiveness of cancer rehabilitation
programs. In Switzerland, however, as compared to other Western
countries, only little is known about physical health and Quality of life
(QoL) in patients who undergo cancer rehabilitation programs. Cancer
patients are at increased risk to develop both poor physical conditions
and psychological distress leading to negative QoL. Thus, research
indicates social support and self-efficacy as personal resources with
positive effects on QoL. The aim of this study is to compare the state
and change of physical health and QoL of cancer patients with and without
rehabilitation.MethodsWe perform a multicenter naturalistic, comparative
cohort study on quality of life and distress using standardized
questionnaires and including patients aged 18 years with a diagnosis of
carcinoma, lymphoma, sarcoma or melanoma. A dementia screening by the
MMSE (Mini Mental Status Examination) is performed in patients aged 50
years to ensure ability for completing the questionnaires. Allocation to
rehabilitation is decided by the physician of the acute management in
agreement with the patient. The intervention group undergoes
rehabilitation and is compared to two control groups: Control group 1
consists of patients with medical indication for rehabilitation but will
not undergo rehabilitation, whereas in control group 2 there is no
indication for rehabilitation. Data are collected at the beginning (T1)
and end of hospitalization (T2), at the end of rehabilitation (T3), and
three months after (T4).ResultsWe included 44 patients (28 female and 16
male) with the major groups consisting of breast and head and neck cancer
and plan to expand up to a number of 132 patients. Preliminary analysis
showed that values for QoL varied significantly with impairment between
T1 and T2 (p < 0.001) and improvement between T2 and T3 (p = 0.002). T3
values stay significantly below T1 values (p IntroductionVarious
international studies show the effectiveness of cancer rehabilitation
programs. In Switzerland, however, as compared to other Western
countries, only little is known about physical health and Quality of life
(QoL) in patients who undergo cancer rehabilitation programs. Cancer
patients are at increased risk to develop both poor physical conditions
and psychological distress leading to negative QoL. Thus, research
indicates social support and self-efficacy as personal resources with
positive effects on QoL. The aim of this study is to compare the state
and change of physical health and QoL of cancer patients with and without
rehabilitation.MethodsWe perform a multicenter naturalistic, comparative
cohort study on quality of life and distress using standardized
questionnaires and including patients aged 18 years with a diagnosis of
carcinoma, lymphoma, sarcoma or melanoma. A dementia screening by the
MMSE (Mini Mental Status Examination) is performed in patients aged 50
years to ensure ability for completing the questionnaires. Allocation to
rehabilitation is decided by the physician of the acute management in
agreement with the patient. The intervention group undergoes
rehabilitation and is compared to two control groups: Control group 1
consists of patients with medical indication for rehabilitation but will
not undergo rehabilitation, whereas in control group 2 there is no
indication for rehabilitation. Data are collected at the beginning (T1)
and end of hospitalization (T2), at the end of rehabilitation (T3), and
three months after (T4).ResultsWe included 44 patients (28 female and 16
male) with the major groups consisting of breast and head and neck cancer
and plan to expand up to a number of 132 patients. Preliminary analysis
showed that values for QoL varied significantly with impairment between
T1 and T2 (p < 0.001) and improvement between T2 and T3 (p = 0.002). T3
values stay significantly below T1 values (p < 0.001). This was similar
when physical and functional well-being was analyzed. Post rehabilitation
assessments are currently ongoing.ConclusionsEvaluation of the natural
trajectory of cancer treatment course and comparison of cohorts with and
without rehabilitation will provide outcome and effect data that are not
known up so far in Switzerland. The results may help to improve and
specify cancer rehabilitation interventions and to develop appropriate
guidelines for referral to post-acute management. (Supported by the
Zurzach Rehabilitation Foundation SPA, Bad Zurzach, Switzerland).

