Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sepantronium is a DNA damaging agent that potentiates PLK1
inhibitor volasertib


In a search for novel agents that boost the anti-neoplastic effects of
polo-like kinase 1(PLK1) inhibitor volasertib, we found that a
sepantronium and volasertib combination at the nano mole concentration
potently inhibited growth of various non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
cell lines than either drug alone in vitro. Combination use of volasertib
with sepantronium inhibited adaptation of cells to polo arrest. Addition
of sepantronium to volasertib prevented accumulation of survivin and
cyclin B protein at a concentration causing no appreciable survivin down
regulation. Sepantronium, was originally developed as a survivin
inhibitor. However, sepantronium induced cell cycle arrest from G1 or
G2/M phase. Further studies demonstrated DNA damage of cancer cells when
they are treated with sepantronium, which is evidenced by induction of
phospho-gammaH2AX. In line with induction of a DNA damage response in
cancer cells, known DNA damage response sensors and transducers ATM, ATR,
CHK1, CHK2, p53 are phosphorylated following drug treatment. Meanwhile,
expression of CDKN1A, BAX and XRCC5 are induced at the mRNA level as
determined by quantitative real time PCR. A single cell electrophoresis
assay (Comet assay) of cells treated with sepantronium revealed severe
DNA strand breaks. M-phase arrest does not increase the lethality of DNA
damage by sepantronium as compared to G1 phase arrest. Knock down of
survivin did not cause DNA damage. Hence, sepantronium is a DNA damaging
agent that synergizes with volasertib and down- regulation of survivin is
likely the consequence of DNA damage induced by sepantronium.

