Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A small molecule glycomimetic antagonist of E-selectin (GMI-1271)
prevents pancreatic tumor metastasis and offers a novel treatment for
improved efficacy of chemotherapy


The processes of intra- and extravasation of tumor cells into and out of
the blood and lymphatic systems are crucial steps during metastasis to
distant organ sites. These processes are tightly regulated by the initial
binding of sialyl Lewis A and sialyl Lewis X (sialyl Le A/X) carbohydrate
moeities found on tumor cells to the adhesion protein E-selectin
expressed on the activated endothelium. GMI-1271 is a small molecule
glycomimetic rationally designed based on the bioactive conformation of
sialyl Lea/x and is a potent and specific antagonist of E-selectin. In
vitro treatment of human lymphatic endothelial cells with GMI-1271
resulted in a decrease in the number of sialyl Lewis A-expressing
pancreatic cancer cells (S2.013 and BxPC-3) binding to the endothelium in
a dose-dependent manner. GMI-1271 treatment also inhibited the
transendothelial migration of S2.013 and BxPC-3 cells through a lymphatic
cell monolayer.We evaluated the in vivo efficacy of GMI-1271 following
orthotopic implantation of pancreatic tumor cell line S2.013, which
expresses high levels of sialyl Lewis A (CA19-9), into nude mice.
Following 2 weeks of tumor growth, mice were treated by intraperitoneal
injections for 4 weeks with either PBS once daily, once daily with
40mg/kg GMI-1271 (low dose), twice daily with 40mg/kg GMI-1271 (high
dose), twice a week with 60mg/kg gemcitabine injections, combination low
dose GMI-1271 and gemcitabine injections, or combination high dose
GMI-1271 and gemcitabine injections. Co-treatment of either low or high
dose GMI-1271 with gemcitabine resulted in a significant decrease in the
number of metastasis to the lymph nodes (p=0.02 low dose; p=0.04 high
dose). In addition, compared with gemcitabine alone, low dose GMI-1271
plus gemcitabine was found to be effective at reducing the number of
metastatic lesions (per histological section) in the liver (p=0.001),
lung (p=0.026) and diaphragm (p=0.01). Based on the significant effects
of combination therapy on tumor metastasis, the small molecule
glycomimetic antagonist to E-selectin, GMI-1271, offers great promise in
preventing pancreatic tumor cell entry into the blood and lymphatic
systems and offers a novel treatment for the improved efficacy of
standard chemotherapy.

