Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular target identification of quinolinone based anticancer
compounds


Quinolinones, compounds derived from quinolone antibiotics, are well
known for their antibacterial, antiprotozoal, cytotoxic and
immunosuppressive effects. Screening of collection of small molecules
revealed 2-phenyl-3-hydroxy-4(1H)-quinolinones as molecules with highly
selective cytotoxic activity against tumor cell lines. Moreover, in vivo
activity assessment of the most active compounds against mouse tumor
hollow fibre model of CCRF-CEM cells, showed anticancer activity
comparable to doxorubicin. Furthermore, cell biology tests revealed that
DNA/RNA synthesis was inhibited together with block of tumor cells in G1
phase within the cell cycle.With these promising results, we decided to
continue to identify molecular target and mechanism of action of these
compounds and based on such understanding to further improve its
biological activity and pharmacological properties.As a first step, the
biotinylated molecules of original derivatives were synthesized, which
were used for immunoafinity pull down target identification. By mass
spectrometry analysis we have reproducibily identified complex of
proteins, which are involved in glucose metabolism, translational
regulation and are building blocks of cytoskeleton. Involvement of these
pathways was further supported by metabolomics, proteomics profiling and
by microarray expressional analysis. Identified molecular targets were
further validated by western blots, in reporter cell lines and in the
cell-free system by measurement of enzymatic activity and monitoring of
complex interaction of identified partners, suggesting new mechanisms of
regulation. Currently, we are working on the state-of-art proof by
structural analysis of target and chinolinone ligand. Acknowledgement:
This work was supported by internal grant of Palacky University
(LF_2013_016) and BIOMEDREG (CZ.1.05/2.1.00/ 01.0030).

