Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: 96-Well CometChip validation for simultaneous treatment and
measurement of DNA damage in a single platform


The 96-Well CometChip System is a high-throughput platform to
simultaneously treat and measure DNA damage induced by different
treatments, or among different cell types on a single slide using the
comet assay. The CometChip is a consumable consisting of specifically
sized micron pores patterned into agarose layered on a treated microscope
slide. Ninety-six (96) separate wells are created by inserting the
CometChip into a reusable 96-Well CometChip System, a magnetically-sealed
cassette suitable for tissue culture incubators. Cells added to each well
are captured by gravity into micropores and excess cells aspirated
leaving an array of non-overlapping cells. Multiple experimental
conditions are performed in parallel by the addition of different
chemicals to respective wells. Once treatment is complete the CometChip
is removed from the cassette and processed using standard alkaline comet
conditions and imaging systems.A distributable CometChip requires
precision manufacturing to ensure robust and reproducible performance.
CometChip tolerances were investigated and compared to normal comet using
cryopreserved comet control cells with known levels of DNA damage. After
setting specifications, 96-Well CometChips with 30 micron pores were
distributed to evaluate both intra and inter-chip variations between
laboratories. To assure experimental consistency between labs,
magnetically sealable cassettes, cryopreserved control cells and
identical electrophoresis systems were provided to each lab. Data is
presented to demonstrate the feasibility of manufacturing the CometChip
for reproducible results based on the coefficients of variance (CVs)
obtained between different wells and laboratories. In addition, data will
be presented demonstrating the absence of cross talk between CometChip
wells using the 96-Well CometChip System. (Work was supported by
R44ES021116).

