Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeted enrichment and next generation sequencing of non-small
cell lung carcinoma FFPE samples


Targeted enrichment is a powerful tool used for identifying genetic
variations that underlie cancer and complex diseases. Current
methodologies utilize hybridization probes or PCR to enrich for protein
coding regions of a genome followed by deep sequencing. Most of these
targeting methods fail to achieve the specificity, coverage and
uniformity that are critical for accurate detection and analysis of
genetic variability. Nested Patch PCR was developed to overcome these
pitfalls with highly specific on-target sequence interrogation across
hundreds of genomic regions in a single-tube format. This novel
technology enables rapid detection of various genetic variations (i.e.
SNPs, indels) across a large number of samples, including FFPE
(formalin-fixed paraffin embedded) samples which are typically difficult
to analyze due to low yield and quality of DNA. To show the utility of
TargetRich technology, an enrichment panel was designed targeting NRAS,
PTEN, KRAS, ALK, PIK3CA, KIT, BRAF and EGFR to interrogate 250 non-small
cell lung carcinoma FFPE samples. The panel was designed against 19.8kb,
134 exons, with 99.9% coverage. A minimum of 50ng FFPE DNA were run for
each sample on an Illumina Miseq and the resulting data was comparable to
high molecular weight DNA in uniformity and performance; supporting
TargetRich as a sensitive and robust platform to analyze FFPE samples.

