Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: International Cancer Genome Consortium (ICGC)


The International Cancer Genome Consortium (ICGC) was established to
bring together researchers from around the globe to comprehensively
analyze the genomic, transcriptomic, and epigenomic changes in 50
different tumor types or subtypes that are of clinical and societal
importance across the globe (International network of cancer genome
projects. Nature 464, 993-998 (15 April 2010)).As of December 2013, the
ICGC has received commitments from researchers and funding organizations
in Asia, Australia, Europe, North America, and South America for 69
project teams in 17 jurisdictions to study more than 25,000 tumor
genomes.Over 27,552 tumors that meet ICGC requirements for consent have
been obtained, and research pathologists have approved over 24,160
samples with project-confirmed diagnosis as meeting ICGC
standards.Processed data is available via the Data Coordination Centre
(http://dcc.icgc.org) based at the Ontario Institute for Cancer Research
and is updated bimonthly. The latest data release (Version 14) in
September 2013 includes datasets from 8532 donors participating in 41
ICGC project teams. The ICGC Data Portal has been improved to provide
enhanced support to the research community browsing this vast
dataset.ICGC researchers plan to undertake a suite of studies called the
Pan-Cancer Analysis Project (PCAP). The analyses will begin in early 2014
using whole genome sequencing (WGS) datasets from approximately 2,000
matched tumour-normal specimen pairs representing more than a dozen
different tumour types. It is expected that this effort will lead to the
identification of driver mutations outside coding regions including those
that affect cis-regulatory regions and non-coding RNAs, and
identification of gene regulatory pathways altered by non-coding
mutations. Because the projected size of the pan-cancer dataset, i.e.
4,000 WGS, is very large, PCAP will need to use a compute cloud
environment (involving multiple computing centers in the USA, Europe, and
Asia) that will meet technical requirements of the project and the
bioethical framework of ICGC and its member projects.More information can
be found on www.icgc.org.

