Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dual phosphoinositide 3-kinase/Mammalian target of rapamycin
inhibitors, GSK2126458 and PKI-587, suppress tumor progression and
increase radiosensitivity in nasopharyngeal carcinoma


PurposeAlthough combined chemo-radiotherapy has provided considerable
improvements for nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC), recurrence and
metastasis are still frequent. The phosphoinositide 3-kinase
(PI3K)/Akt/mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) pathway plays a critical
role in tumor formation and tumor cell survival after radiation-induced
DNA damage. In the present study, we evaluated whether inhibition of
PI3K/mTOR by two novel dual inhibitors, GSK2126458 and PKI-587, could
suppress tumor progression and sensitize NPC cells to
radiation.Experimental DesignFour NPC cell lines (CNE-1, CNE-2, 5-8F and
6-10B) were used to analyze the effects of GSK216458 and PKI-587 on cell
proliferation, migration, invasion, clonogenic survival, amount of
residual -H2AX foci, cell cycle and apoptosis after radiation. A 5-8F
xenograft model was used to evaluate the in vivo effects of the two
compounds in combination with ionizing radiation (IR).ResultsBoth
GSK216458 and PKI-587 effectively inhibited cell proliferation and
motility in NPC cells and suppressed phosphorylation of Akt, mTOR, S6 and
4EBP1 proteins in a dose- and time-dependent manner. Moreover, both
compounds sensitized NPC cells to ionizing radiation (IR) by increasing
DNA damage, enhancing G2/M cell cycle delay and inducing apoptosis. In
vivo, the combination of IR with GSK2126458 or PKI-587 significantly
inhibited tumor growth. Tumor regression was correlated with induction of
apoptosis and suppression of the phosphorylation of mTOR, Akt, and
4EBP1.ConclusionsGSK2126458 and PKI-587 inhibit tumor progression and
increase radiosensitivity by inhibiting PI3K/Akt/mTOR signaling in NPC.
Combining IR with a dual PI3K/mTOR inhibitor, either GSK2126458 or
PKI-587, might be a promising therapeutic strategy for NPC.

