Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Enhanced shedding of extracellular vesicles from amoeboid prostate
cancer cells: Potential effects on the tumor microenvironment


The gene encoding the cytoskeletal regulator DIAPH3 is lost at high
frequency in metastatic prostate cancer, and silencing of DIAPH3 evokes a
transition to an amoeboid phenotype in multiple tumor cell backgrounds.
This amoeboid transformation is accompanied by increases in plasma
membrane deformations (blebbing), cell migration, invasion, and
metastasis. DIAPH3 silencing also promotes the shedding of atypically
large (>1m) extracellular vesicles (EV) containing bioactive cargo.
Whether loss of DIAPH3 also stimulates the release of bioactive
nano-sized EV (exosomes) is not established. Here we examined the
mechanism of release and potential biological functions of EV shed from
DIAPH3-silenced and other prostate cancer cells. We observed that
stimulation of LNCaP cells with the prostate stroma-derived growth factor
heparin-binding EGF-like growth factor (HB-EGF), combined with p38MAPK
inhibition caused exosome shedding, a process mediated by ERK1/2
hyperactivation. DIAPH3 silencing in DU145 cells also increased rates of
exosome production. EV isolated from DIAPH3-silenced cells activated AKT1
and androgen signaling, increased proliferation of recipient tumor cells,
and suppressed proliferation of human macrophages and peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMC). DU145-derived EV contained miR-125a, which
suppressed AKT1 expression and proliferation in recipient human
peripheral blood mononuclear cells and macrophages. Our findings suggest
that EV across a wide size range (70nm to >1um) are produced by amoeboid
prostate cancer cells as a result of DIAPH3 loss and/or growth factor
stimulation. These EV may condition the tumor microenvironment through
multiple mechanisms, including promoting the growth of cancer cells and
suppression of tumor-infiltrating immune cells.

