Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transcend, a protein vector for brain delivery, allows trastuzumab
to reach the brain at effective concentration after incorporation to form
BT2111


Trastuzumab, a monoclonal antibody against HER2, is an effective therapy
for the treatment of peripheral HER2+ breast cancer. However a
significant number of patients eventually succumb to metastases of the
brain because the endothelial tight junctions of the blood-brain barrier
prevent distribution of trastuzumab to the metastatic tumors. Improving
distribution of trastuzumab to HER2+ brain tumors represents a major
hurdle in the treatment of metastatic HER2+ breast cancer. Previous
studies have shown that doxorubicin conjugated to melanotransferrin (MTf)
increased significantly the survival of mice bearing intracranial tumors,
while doxorubicin alone was not effective. In this study we examine the
potential of MTf-trastuzumab conjugates (BT2111) to penetrate the
blood-brain barrier. BT2111 and trastuzumab were labeled with fluorescent
markers, either Cy5.5 or rhodamine. The cellular uptakes of these labeled
proteins were studied with fluorescence microscopy in cultures of primary
human brain endothelial cells (HBEC) and in HER2+ (A172, SKBR3, and
BT474), and HER2- (MDA-MB-468) breast cancer cell lines. The fluorescent
conjugates were also injected IV into mice and the distribution of BT2111
and trastuzumab to endothelial cells and brain parenchyma was compared
with laser scanning confocal microscopy. To aid in the co-localization of
BT2111 and trastuzumab to the brain vasculature, mice were injected with
tomato lectin-FITC or anti CD31 IgG-FITC prior to sacrifice. The results
showed that primary human brain endothelial cells (HBEC) took up BT2111
suggesting that BT2111 can interact with the MTf receptor and transport
BT2111 into the intracellular compartment. In contrast, no specific
staining associated with trastuzumab was observed, either on the surface
or in the interior of HBECs. Uptake of both BT2111 and trastuzumab was
observed on the surface of A172, SKBR3, and BT474 cells but not on
MDA-MB-468 cells confirming that BT2111 retains HER2 binding activity.
When BT2111 and trastruzumab were injected into mice, laser scanning
confocal microscopy showed increased distribution of BT2111 in the brain
parenchyma when compared to trastuzumab. 10 to 15 times more trastuzumab
was delivered in the brain parenchyma when conjugated to MTf.Using a mice
model characterized by the formation of brain metastasis after
intracardiac administration of MDA-MB 231BR we show that BT2111 is
homogenously distributed in normal brain and can reach therapeutical
concentration in the brain using 10% of the predicted therapeutic IV dose
when trastuzumab was administered as BT2111.These results indicate that
BT2111 has the potential to become a new anti-cancer agent for treatment
of HER2+brain metastases.

