Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Immune repertoire amongst subpopulations of tumor infiltrating
lymphocytes (TILs) in colorectal cancer: Oligoclonality is predominantly
observed in cytotoxic CD8+ TILs


Introduction: The immunophenotype and density of immune cell infiltrates
in colorectal cancer (CRC) has consistently been shown to correlate with
patient prognosis suggesting that the immune microenvironment plays an
important role in regulating tumor progression. However, the immune
repertoire of these tumor infiltrating lymphocytes has not been well
characterized.Methods: In this pilot study, we characterized the immue
repertoire through TCR sequencing of T lymphocytes in the CRC tumor
microenvironment and normal adjacent colonic mucosa. We collected fresh
tumor and adjacent normal colonic mucosal tissue specimens from 2
patients who underwent surgery for CRC. A part of the tumor specimen was
dissociated and sorted for collection of CD4+ and CD8+ T lymphocytes
using FACSAria III cell sorter. 4 samples consisting of fresh frozen
tumor, sorted CD4+ and CD8+ TILs and fresh frozen adjacent normal colonic
mucosal tissue of each of the 2 patients were then sent for T-cell
receptor (TCR) complementarity-determining region 3 (CDR3) amplification
and high-throughput next generation sequencing using the ImmunoSEQ
platform at Adaptive Biotechnologies. The TCR CDR3 regions were then
determined based on the definitions established by the ImMunoGeneTics
Collaboration.Results: The median total number of unique TCR CDR3
sequences identified in each of the 8 specimens evaluated was 5726 (range
475 to 54699), with an average of 78.3% of each specimen being productive
sequences (range 75.1% to 81.9%). We next evaluated the diversity of T
cell repertoire in terms of abundance and distribution of the T cell
populations. There were more unique T cell clones present in the adjacent
normal colonic mucosa (54699 and 24255) than in the tumor (7026 and
20887). Amongst the sorted TILs, there were less unique CD8+ T cell
clones (561 and 475) compared to unique CD4+ T cell clones (2913 and
4426). There were fewer numbers of dominant clones making up 50% of total
CDR3 reads in the CD8+ sorted TILs (15 and 29) compared to sorted CD4+
TILs (150 and 179), tumor tissue (390 and 668) and adjacent normal mucosa
(1125 and 185).Conclusion: Preliminary data from this pilot study
suggests an oligoclonal population of cytotoxic T cells within the tumor
microenvironment. We hypothesize that clonal expansion of these cytotoxic
T cells were in response to specific tumor antigen stimulation. We have
expanded the T cells and generated patient derived CRC cell lines.
Further analysis of this population of expanded tumor infiltrating
lymphocytes against their specific tumor cell lines are ongoing to
evaluate T cell recognition and cytotoxic activity.

