Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Constitutively active androgen receptor variants upregulate
expression of mesenchymal markers in prostate cancer cells


Androgen receptor (AR) signaling pathway remains the main target of novel
therapeutics for castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC). However,
constitutively active AR variants lacking the carboxy-terminal region in
CRPC lead to therapy inefficacy. Moreover, recent studies suggest that AR
variants are expressed in primary prostate tumors and may contribute to
tumor progression. The aim of this study was to investigate the impact of
AR variants on tumor progression.N-cadherin expression was analyzed in
LNCaP cells overexpressing the wild type AR or a constitutively active AR
variant by qRT-PCR, Western blot and immunofluorescence. We showed here
for the first time that N-cadherin expression was increased in the
presence of constitutively active AR variants. Moreover, this increased
expression of N-cadherin in LNCaP overexpressing AR variants was
negatively regulated by androgens.Although N-cadherin expression is often
associated with a downregulation of E-cadherin, this phenomenon was not
observed in our model. Nevertheless, in addition to the increased
expression of N-cadherin, an upregulation of other mesenchymal markers
expression such as Vimentin, SNAIL and ZEB1 was observed in the presence
of constitutively active AR variants.In conclusion, our findings
highlight novel consequences of constitutively active AR variants on the
regulation of mesenchymal markers in prostate cancer.

