Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exome and transcriptome profiling of lung adenocarcinoma in female
never-smokers


Background: Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer-related mortality
in the world. TCGA projects for lung adenocarcinoma and squamous cell
carcinoma are the largest datasets publicly available so far. They
include diverse subtypes and population groups and thus small population
groups such as female never-smokers in Asian are under-represented.
Female never-smokers are an important population cohort where mutations
due to genetic factors are enriched rather than environmental factors
such as smoking. We applied the high throughput deep sequencing strategy
to catalog somatic mutations and to profile gene expression levels for
Korean patients.Results: Deep sequencing data of exome and transcriptome
were generated for tumor and matched normal tissues from 100
non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients in female never-smokers. The
mutational catalogue includes numerous somatic mutations, indels, and
gene-fusion events. Comparison with TCGA lung cancer data shows that our
patients harbor much less and homogeneous somatic mutations as expected.
Mutational frequency and driver gene analyses identified many novel
candidates of causal genetic variations. For example, our mutation
spectrum reveals 5 key modules of enriched somatic mutations such as
EGFR, p53, Wnt signaling pathways, ECM organization, and cell cycle
checkpoints. Furthermore, network analysis of integrating mutation and
expression data illustrates the detailed mechanism of dysregulation in
tumorigenesis of lung adenocarcinoma.Conclusion: Our study elucidates
clinically important mutations and regulatory elements in NSCLC. It is
expected that our dataset would serve as an important resource for lung
cancer research especially in Asian populations.

