Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epithelial to mesenchymal transition might be induced via CD44
isoform switch in colorectal cancer


Backgrounds: The epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) is well known
to play a crucial role in cancer invasion and metastasis and has been
actively investigated in colorectal cancer (CRC). In recent years, the
isoform switch of CD44, which is recognized to be a cancer stem cell
marker, has been reported to associate with EMT, especially in breast
cancer and hepatocellular carcinoma. However, the clinical impact of CD44
isoform switch to EMT in CRC is still unknown.Methods: E-cadherin,
vimentin, CD44 standard (CD44s) and CD44 variant9 (CD44v9) expression
were measured in 14 CRC cell lines and 150 CRC patients by real-time PCR.
EMT status and CD44 status was determined by calculating
vimentin/E-cadherin and CD44s/CD44v9 expression ratio, respectively. The
CRC cell lines and patients were divided into two groups based on the EMT
and CD44 status. We examined the association between the EMT status and
CD44 isoform switch, and analyzed the correlation with
clinicopathological factors and prognosis. Finally, we evaluated the
effect of CD44 knockdown by siRNA in CRC cell lines by measuring the
proliferation, migration and invasion ability.Results: 1. The CRC cell
lines were classified into 8 epithelial, 4 mesenchymal and 2 intermediate
type. Of these cell lines, CD44s was highly expressed in mesenchymal type
cell lines, whereas, CD44v9 was highly expressed in epithelial type cell
lines.2. The 150 CRC patients were divided into 115 epithelial group and
35 mesenchymal group based on vimentin/E-cadherin expression ratio.
Mesenchymal group showed significantly poorer survival than epithelial
group (5-year survival rate; epithelial: 85.5% vs. mesenchymal: 62.1%, P
= 0.009). EMT status was significantly correlated with invasion depth of
tumor (P = 0.036), lymphatic vessel involvement (P = 0.034) and
histological grade (P = 0.001).3. High CD44 status group showed poorer
prognosis than low CD44 status group (5- year survival rate; low group:
85.0% vs. high group: 62.1%, P = 0.025). There was a significant
correlation between EMT status and CD44 status (r = 0.298, P Backgrounds:
The epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) is well known to play a
crucial role in cancer invasion and metastasis and has been actively
investigated in colorectal cancer (CRC). In recent years, the isoform
switch of CD44, which is recognized to be a cancer stem cell marker, has
been reported to associate with EMT, especially in breast cancer and
hepatocellular carcinoma. However, the clinical impact of CD44 isoform
switch to EMT in CRC is still unknown.Methods: E-cadherin, vimentin, CD44
standard (CD44s) and CD44 variant9 (CD44v9) expression were measured in
14 CRC cell lines and 150 CRC patients by real-time PCR. EMT status and
CD44 status was determined by calculating vimentin/E-cadherin and
CD44s/CD44v9 expression ratio, respectively. The CRC cell lines and
patients were divided into two groups based on the EMT and CD44 status.
We examined the association between the EMT status and CD44 isoform
switch, and analyzed the correlation with clinicopathological factors and
prognosis. Finally, we evaluated the effect of CD44 knockdown by siRNA in
CRC cell lines by measuring the proliferation, migration and invasion
ability.Results: 1. The CRC cell lines were classified into 8 epithelial,
4 mesenchymal and 2 intermediate type. Of these cell lines, CD44s was
highly expressed in mesenchymal type cell lines, whereas, CD44v9 was
highly expressed in epithelial type cell lines.2. The 150 CRC patients
were divided into 115 epithelial group and 35 mesenchymal group based on
vimentin/E-cadherin expression ratio. Mesenchymal group showed
significantly poorer survival than epithelial group (5-year survival
rate; epithelial: 85.5% vs. mesenchymal: 62.1%, P = 0.009). EMT status
was significantly correlated with invasion depth of tumor (P = 0.036),
lymphatic vessel involvement (P = 0.034) and histological grade (P =
0.001).3. High CD44 status group showed poorer prognosis than low CD44
status group (5- year survival rate; low group: 85.0% vs. high group:
62.1%, P = 0.025). There was a significant correlation between EMT status
and CD44 status (r = 0.298, P < 0.001). On multivariate analysis,
pathological T4 stage (P = 0.011), liver metastasis positive (P = 0.001),
high CA19-9 level (37) (P = 0.003) and CD44 status (P = 0.001) were
independent prognostic factors for CRC patients.4. In COL-3-JCK, which is
identified to be mesenchymal type, CD44 knockdown by siRNA decreased the
vimentin expression at protein level. When the functional analysis were
performed, CD44 knockdown significantly reduced the abilities of cell
proliferation (P Backgrounds: The epithelial to mesenchymal transition
(EMT) is well known to play a crucial role in cancer invasion and
metastasis and has been actively investigated in colorectal cancer (CRC).
In recent years, the isoform switch of CD44, which is recognized to be a
cancer stem cell marker, has been reported to associate with EMT,
especially in breast cancer and hepatocellular carcinoma. However, the
clinical impact of CD44 isoform switch to EMT in CRC is still
unknown.Methods: E-cadherin, vimentin, CD44 standard (CD44s) and CD44
variant9 (CD44v9) expression were measured in 14 CRC cell lines and 150
CRC patients by real-time PCR. EMT status and CD44 status was determined
by calculating vimentin/E-cadherin and CD44s/CD44v9 expression ratio,
respectively. The CRC cell lines and patients were divided into two
groups based on the EMT and CD44 status. We examined the association
between the EMT status and CD44 isoform switch, and analyzed the
correlation with clinicopathological factors and prognosis. Finally, we
evaluated the effect of CD44 knockdown by siRNA in CRC cell lines by
measuring the proliferation, migration and invasion ability.Results: 1.
The CRC cell lines were classified into 8 epithelial, 4 mesenchymal and 2
intermediate type. Of these cell lines, CD44s was highly expressed in
mesenchymal type cell lines, whereas, CD44v9 was highly expressed in
epithelial type cell lines.2. The 150 CRC patients were divided into 115
epithelial group and 35 mesenchymal group based on vimentin/E-cadherin
expression ratio. Mesenchymal group showed significantly poorer survival
than epithelial group (5-year survival rate; epithelial: 85.5% vs.
mesenchymal: 62.1%, P = 0.009). EMT status was significantly correlated
with invasion depth of tumor (P = 0.036), lymphatic vessel involvement (P
= 0.034) and histological grade (P = 0.001).3. High CD44 status group
showed poorer prognosis than low CD44 status group (5- year survival
rate; low group: 85.0% vs. high group: 62.1%, P = 0.025). There was a
significant correlation between EMT status and CD44 status (r = 0.298, P
< 0.001). On multivariate analysis, pathological T4 stage (P = 0.011),
liver metastasis positive (P = 0.001), high CA19-9 level (37) (P = 0.003)
and CD44 status (P = 0.001) were independent prognostic factors for CRC
patients.4. In COL-3-JCK, which is identified to be mesenchymal type,
CD44 knockdown by siRNA decreased the vimentin expression at protein
level. When the functional analysis were performed, CD44 knockdown
significantly reduced the abilities of cell proliferation (P < 0.001),
migration (P = 0.004) and invasion (P = 0.025).Discussion: EMT was a
critical prognostic factor and CD44 isoform switch might contribute to
EMT induction in CRC. These results could support a better understanding
of the relationship between EMT and cancer stem cell. Therefore, further
investigation of the specific splice isoform of CD44 might lead to novel
therapeutic intervention for CRC patients.

