Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Enhanced expression of HMGA1 and THY1 in human hepatocellular
carcinoma correlates with poor prognosis


Background and aim: Mounting evidence suggest that hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC) contains a subset of cells possessing some functional
properties similar to normal tissue stem cells, usually referred as
cancer stem cells (CSCs). THY1 (aka CD90) is involved in tumor-genesis
and is commonly acknowledged as a maker of CSC in HCC. HMGA1, an HMG
(high mobility group) chromatin-remodelling protein, has been recently
highlighted as a key player in stem cell biology. HMGA1 overexpression
induces malignant transformation in vitro and is deregulated in many
cancer entities. This study aims to address the interrelated role of
HMGA1 and THY1 in HCC.Methods: Using a global transcriptomic profiling
(Affymetrix), validated by RT-qPCR, we analysed HMGA1 and THY1 expression
levels in a cohort of HCC needle biopsy matched with corresponding
non-neoplastic liver (total n=118) and normal liver (n=5). Using tissue
microarray (TMA) technology, we evaluated by immunohistochemical staining
HMGA1 and THY1 protein levels in a large collective of liver specimens
(n=434, of which n=216 were HCCs).Results: We observed that both HMGA1
and THY1 expression is significantly up regulated in a subset of HCC
specimens, correlating with metastatic disease and histological grading.
Additionally, we demonstrate that high HMGA1 protein levels along with
THY1 positivity in HCC samples results in unfavorable patients' outcome
and disease progression.Conclusion: With this work we provide new
evidence for HMGA1 and THY1 involvement in HCC progression and disease
outcome and set the basis for further studies aiming to address their
role in CSC biology of HCC.

