Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Luminol-based in situ photodynamic therapy for breast
adenocarcinoma


Photodynamic therapy (PDT) is a cancer treatment that uses a
photosensitizer and a specific wavelength of light. When tumor cells
which have absorbed photosensitizer are exposed to the correct wavelength
of light, reactive oxygen species are generated, resulting in tumor cell
death. Poor tissue penetration of light is a major limitation in PDT,
restricting its use to treatment of localized tumors. Light generation at
the tumor area might increase the effectiveness of PDT and can expand its
use for metastatic tumors. Infiltration of tumor-activated
polymorphonuclear neutrophils (PMNs) produces luminescence in the
presence of luminol; this bioluminescence has been used for tumor
detection in pre-clinical trials. Based on this rationale, we
hypothesized that luminol-based bioluminescence can cause targeted PDT in
breast adenocarcinoma tumors in the presence of the photosensitizer
5-aminolevulinic acid (ALA). To test this hypothesis, BALB/c mice were
transplanted with 4T1 mammary adenocarcinoma cells to establish a breast
adenocarcinoma model. After tumor formation, ALA and luminol were
administered to mice through intraperitoneal and intravenous routes,
respectively. This treatment regimen was repeated six times and ALA
alone/luminol alone/saline treated tumor-bearing mice were used as
controls. Relative differences in the increase of tumor volume and final
tumor weights were analyzed to test the treatment hypothesis. Analysis of
the data showed that treatment with a combination of luminol and ALA as
well as treatment with luminol alone results in breast adenocarcinoma
tumor growth attenuation. This study gives evidence for the antitumor
activity of luminol on breast adenocarcinoma, possibly through PDT.

