Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Small molecule inhibitor of Stat3 induces antitumor cell effects
in vitro and antitumor effects in vivo against human glioma or breast
cancer model


Aberrant activation of signal transducer and activator of transcription 3
(Stat3) is prevalent in many human cancers. Compelling evidence shows
that constitutively-active Stat3 constitutes a point of convergence in
oncogenic tyrosine kinase signaling, functioning as a master regulator of
events crucial for tumorigenesis and malignant progression. We show
herein that the small-molecule, SH5-07 abrogates constitutive activation
of Stat3 and Stat3-dependent functions in human glioma and breast cancer
cells. SH5-07 inhibits in vitro Stat3 DNA-binding activity with an IC50
value of 3.9 M. Treatment of human glioma U251MG and breast cancer
MDA-MB-231 cells that harbor aberrantly-active Stat3 with low micromolar
SH5-07 blocks Stat3 phosphorylation, DNA-binding, and transcriptional
activities in a time and dose-dependent manner. By contrast, SH5-07 shows
little or no effect on the induction of pJAK2, pSrc, pErk1/2, and pShc in
glioma and breast cancer cells. SH5-07 preferentially inhibited viability
of human glioma and breast cancer cells that harbor aberrant Stat3
activity, with IC50 of 1.1-5.2 M, compared to IC50 of 6.0-10.8 M for
cells that do not. Inhibition of aberrantly-active Stat3 by SH5-07
preferentially suppresses the anchorage-dependent and independent growth,
induces apoptosis, and blocks migration and invasion in vitro of human
glioma and breast cancer cells that harbor constitutively-active Stat3.
Moreover, oral administration of SH5-07 inhibits the growth of human
breast tumor xenografts in mice. Data together indicates SH5-07 is a
promising small-molecule Stat3 inhibitor and a suitable drug candidate
for clinical development.

