Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A ARMS-PNA PCR assay for detection of EGFR mutations in FFPE tumor
samples


The activating mutations of Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) are
the predictive markers for response to tyrosine kinase inhibitors
gefitinib and erlotinib in non-small cell lung cancer(NSCLC). Therefore
detection of EGFR mutations will guide effective therapeutical options
for patients with NSCLC. Here we developed a new method for the rapid and
reliable detection of EGFR mutations by using a combination of modified
mutation-specific ARMS primers and peptide nucleic acid (PNA) clamping
system, named ARMS-PNA assay. In this real-time PCR system, the wild-type
EGFR DNA is completely blocked by PNA with a higher annealing
temperature, and the mutant gene is selectively amplified by the modified
ARMS primers and the amplicon extending signals are collected by the
taqman-probe at the same time. The ARMS-PNA assay could detect 29
mutations on EGFR gene with a sensitivity of 0.5% under the background of
a total of 10ng wild-type genomic DNA. By using this assay, we analyzed
the EGFR mutations in 1033 Chinese NSCLC FFPE samples in comparison with
Sanger sequencing. Our results showed that the positive rates were 50.1%,
which were higher than that measured by Sanger sequencing (48.3%). The
coincidence rates of the two methods were 99.0% for the positive samples
and 95.5% for the negative samples. The total coincidence rate was 97.2%.
In conclusion, our study provides a basis for the detection of somatic
mutations in EGFR in a routine clinical setting. The ARMS-PNA PCR assay
allows the detection of the activating EGFR mutations in FFPE samples
with better sensitivity and feasibility than the current assays used in
clinic.

