Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The regulatory subunit of PI3K, p85, induces cellular
transformation, enhanced cell proliferation and increased PI3K signaling


We have expressed the human p85 in chicken embryo fibroblasts (CEF) using
the RCAS retroviral vector. At low concentrations, RCAS-p85 induces the
formation of distinct foci of transformed cells. CEF transfected with
high concentrations of RCAS-p85 show enhanced cell proliferation and PI3K
signaling. RCAS-p85 shares this growth promoting potential with the
cancer-derived mutants of p85, but the wild type p85 protein expressed by
the RCAS vector lacks this potential. The transforming and signaling
activities of p85 depend on the PI3K catalytic subunit p110. We have used
p110 isoform-specific inhibitors to show that the transforming and
signaling activities of p85 can be mediated by p110 or p110 or both. This
is in contrast to the transforming mutants of p85 which depend almost
exclusively on p110 for their growth-promoting effect. p85 can be
phosphorylated at Y655. Mutations of the phosphorylation site Y655A or
Y655E lose almost all of their transforming and enhanced signaling
activity. This result indicates that p85 could be subject to control by
tyrosine kinases. Our data document important differences between p85 and
p85 and suggest that p85 could carry out special functions in signaling
and in cancer.This work was supported by NIH Grant R01 CA078230. This is
abstract 26049 of The Scripps Research Institute.

