Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hepatocyte growth factor activator inhibitor type 1 suppresses
invasion of pancreatic adenocarcinoma cells through inhibition of
matriptase/protease-activated receptor-2 axis


Previously, we reported that S2-CP8 cells, a metastatic variant of SUIT-2
pancreatic adenocarcinoma cell line, showed markedly decreased expression
of hepatocyte growth factor activator inhibitor type 1 (HAI-1) compared
to SUIT-2 and acquired EMT phenotype. Matrigel invasion assay revealed
that S2-CP8 cells show enhanced invasion compared to SUIT-2 cells in
vitro and forced HAI-1 expression alleviate the invasion. Consequently,
in vivo study using a nude mouse orthotopic xenograft model showed
reduced spontaneous metastasis by the forced HAI-1 expression. This study
aimed to clarify molecular mechanisms underlying the HAI-1-mediated
suppression of invasion of S2-CP8 cells. In S2-CP8 cells, activity of
matriptase, a cognate protease of HAI-1, was clearly suppressed by forced
expression of HAI-1. As matriptase is known to activate
protease-activated receptor-2 (PAR-2) and PAR-2 agonist enhanced
migration and invasion of S2-CP8, we analyzed the role of PAR-2 in HAI-1
loss-induced enhanced invasion of S2-CP8 in vitro. The HAI-1 loss-induced
enhanced migration and invasion were significantly alleviated by PAR-2
antagonist, as well as by PAR-2 silencing. Moreover, knock down of
matriptase also showed similar suppressive effects on the invasion of
S2-CP8 cells. These results indicated that HAI-1 may have a suppressive
role in the invasion of pancreatic cancer cells through its regulatory
function on matriptase/PAR-2 axis.

