Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNA (miR) 199a-5p regulates mitogen-activated protein kinase
3-11 (MAP3K11) expression in esophageal cancer cells by modulating mRNA
stability


Introduction: The MAP kinase signaling pathway regulates several targets
involved in proliferation, migration, and apoptosis. MAP3K11 is a
critical component of this pathway, whose overexpression has been
demonstrated in multiple malignancies. To date, scant information is
available on its expression or regulation in esophageal cancer cells. MiR
199a-5p has been shown to post-transcriptionally regulate targets
involved with proliferation and apoptosis. Based on sequence analysis,
miR 199a-5p is predicted to interact with MAP3K11 with high binding
affinity. We hypothesize that miR199a-5p plays a clinically relevant role
in regulating proliferative and metastatic properties of esophageal
cancer cells through regulation of MAP3K11. The purpose of this study is
to measure expression of MAP3K11 and miR-199a-5p in esophageal cancer
cells and determine whether miR-199a-5p directly interacts with MAP3K11
mRNA.Methods: Studies were conducted in human esophageal epithelial
(hESO) cells and in TE7 and TE10 human esophageal carcinoma cells. Global
microRNA expression in these cell lines was determined by microarray
analysis and confirmed by real-time PCR. Levels of protein expression
were measured by Western blot. MiR-199a-5p function was tested through
its overexpression and silencing. mRNA levels were determined using
real-time PCR. MAP3K11 mRNA stability was determined by measuring
half-life after exposure to Actinomycin D. Binding of miR-199a-5p to
MAP3K11 mRNA was examined using a biotinylated RNA pull-down
assay.Results: Levels of miR-199a-5p in TE7 and TE10 esophageal cancer
cells are reduced by approximately 4,000 log-fold, as compared to hESO
cells. MAP3K11 protein expression is markedly elevated in TE7 and TE10
cells compared to hESO cells. MAP3K11 mRNA and protein expression levels
decreased in a time-dependent manner following miR-199a-5p overexpression
in TE7 and TE10 cells. In reciprocal experiments, silencing miR-199a-5p
in hESO resulted in increased MAP3K11 mRNA and protein levels. MAP3K11
mRNA stability is also reduced by 75% following overexpression of
miR-199a-5p in TE7 cells. Binding of miR-199a-5p to MAP3K11 mRNA was
confirmed by biotinylated RNA-pull down assay.Conclusions: MiR-199a-5p
expression is significantly reduced in TE7 and TE10 esophageal cancer
cells relative to hESO cells, while MAP3K11 is markedly over-expressed in
TE7 and TE10 cells. MiR-199a-5p directly binds MAP3K11 mRNA and leads to
its destabilization. Overexpression of miR-199a-5p in TE7 and TE10 cells
results in decreased expression of MAP3K11. Taken together, these results
support the supposition that the loss of miR-199a-5p in esophageal
epithelial cells contributes to the esophageal oncogenesis.

