Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Zyflamend, a multi-herbal product, selectively inhibits the growth
of triple negative breast cancer cells in vitro


Triple negative breast cancer (TNBC), a subpopulation of breast cancer
that has a high mortality rate, recently has been shown to be quite
diverse with approximately 7 different molecular subtypes. As a result,
treatment with an agent that can potentially target multiple pathways
might be an effective approach. Zyflamend (Zy), a unique herbal
preparation consisting of 10 concentrated herbal extracts, has been shown
to suppress the proliferation of various cancer cells including prostate,
melanoma, and bladder cancers. However, its role in TNBC has not been
investigated. To examine its anticancer activity in TNBC, we utilized a
crystal violet staining assay to determine the proliferation of cells,
FACS analysis for cell cycle and apoptosis and gene/protein expression
analysis to delineate the plausible mechanism of action. Among a number
of breast cancer cell lines including MCF-7, SUM149, MDMB231, BT549 and
HCC1937, Zy exerted stronger inhibitory effect in all TNBC cells with
IC50 values ranging between 400-800g/ml (0.5-1 l/ml) whereas MCF-7, an
estrogen/progesterone receptor positive cell line, required 1000g/ml
(1.5l/ml). Similarly, the morphologies of SUM149, MDAMB231, and BT549
cell lines were notably disrupted by Zy treatment (400g/ml) when these
cells were cultured using three dimensional techniques. FACS analysis
showed that there was a dramatic shift to subG1 phase, suggesting cells
might undergo apoptosis. Reverse Phase Proteomic Array indicated that
proteins affecting the cell cycle progression, cell junction regulation,
and cell signaling were altered in BT549 and HCC1937 by 24 hr Zy
treatment (800g/ml).. When compared to the vehicle control, gene
expression analysis showed that several inflammatory genes were
downregulated by at least 50% and these included 5- and 12-lipooxygenase,
leukotriene receptors, TNF receptor, and NF-B in HCC1937 (800g/ml),
MDAMB231(800g/ml) and SUM149 (400g/ml) cells. Taken together, our
preliminary data suggests that Zy inhibits TNBC proliferation by
inhibiting inflammation, regulating cell cycle, and inducing cell death.
Further studies are ongoing to evaluate these effects in in vivo triple
negative breast cancer models.

