Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Outcome disparities in breast cancer of the young: Is young age at
diagnosis associated with unique disease biology


Background: Although breast cancer in young women (YW) only accounts for
7% of cases diagnosed annually, tumors in young patients have more
aggressive characteristics and higher mortality rates. The cost of breast
cancer increases significantly with more aggressive tumors in terms of
treatment costs, physical and psychosocial effects on the patient and her
family, and lost productivity. Improved understanding of factors
associated with etiology and outcome of breast cancer in YW is critical
to developing more effective prevention strategies and improved
treatments, reducing the burden of breast cancer in this
population.Methods: The Clinical Breast Care Project (CBCP) database was
queried to identify all female patients with invasive breast cancer
diagnosed before 40 years (YW) and between 50-65 years (post-menopausal
women, PMW). Pathological characteristics from both groups were compared
using chi-square analysis with PBackground: Although breast cancer in
young women (YW) only accounts for 7% of cases diagnosed annually, tumors
in young patients have more aggressive characteristics and higher
mortality rates. The cost of breast cancer increases significantly with
more aggressive tumors in terms of treatment costs, physical and
psychosocial effects on the patient and her family, and lost
productivity. Improved understanding of factors associated with etiology
and outcome of breast cancer in YW is critical to developing more
effective prevention strategies and improved treatments, reducing the
burden of breast cancer in this population.Methods: The Clinical Breast
Care Project (CBCP) database was queried to identify all female patients
with invasive breast cancer diagnosed before 40 years (YW) and between
50-65 years (post-menopausal women, PMW). Pathological characteristics
from both groups were compared using chi-square analysis with P<0.05
defining significance. Gene expression data was generated using U133 2.0
arrays from tumors from a subset of 76 patients matched by subtype, grade
and stage. ANOVA analysis was used to detect differentially expressed
genes with a False Discovery Rate Background: Although breast cancer in
young women (YW) only accounts for 7% of cases diagnosed annually, tumors
in young patients have more aggressive characteristics and higher
mortality rates. The cost of breast cancer increases significantly with
more aggressive tumors in terms of treatment costs, physical and
psychosocial effects on the patient and her family, and lost
productivity. Improved understanding of factors associated with etiology
and outcome of breast cancer in YW is critical to developing more
effective prevention strategies and improved treatments, reducing the
burden of breast cancer in this population.Methods: The Clinical Breast
Care Project (CBCP) database was queried to identify all female patients
with invasive breast cancer diagnosed before 40 years (YW) and between
50-65 years (post-menopausal women, PMW). Pathological characteristics
from both groups were compared using chi-square analysis with P<0.05
defining significance. Gene expression data was generated using U133 2.0
arrays from tumors from a subset of 76 patients matched by subtype, grade
and stage. ANOVA analysis was used to detect differentially expressed
genes with a False Discovery Rate <0.05, 2-fold difference used to define
significance.Results: YW represented 6% (89/1434) of the female invasive
cancer population of the CBCP. YW were significantly more likely to be of
African American ancestry (27%) compared to PMW (14%). Tumors from YW
were significantly more likely to be hormone receptor negative, higher
stage and grade, larger and more likely to have positive lymph node
status and significantly less likely to be ER+/HER2-. Cancer mortality
rates were significantly higher in YW (12%) compared to PMW (3%). Gene
expression analysis, however, failed to identify any differentially
expressed genes in subtype, grade and stage-matched tumors between YW and
PMW.Conclusions: Outcomes in YW with breast cancer are less favorable
than those in PMW. Gene expression analysis suggests that tumors from YW
are not molecularly different from those from PMW and thus tumors from YW
do not represent a unique disease entity. Rather, higher stage and tumor
size at diagnosis due to lack of screening in combination with increased
incidence of more aggressive subtypes is likely driving higher mortality
rates. Identification of epidemiological and/or genetic factors
contributing to the etiology of aggressive tumors in conjunction with
evaluation of possible treatment differences may reduce outcome
disparities by decreasing the incidence of and improving treatment for
breast cancer in young women.

