Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DNA methylation patterns are associated with subpopulations of
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma


Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) comprises two predominant molecular
subtypes: germinal-center B-cell-like (GCB) and activated B-cell-like
(ABC). These subtypes were initially identified by their gene expression
profiles, which are reminiscent of the cell of origin of the lymphoma.
Though histologically indistinguishable, these subtypes are associated
with distinct clinical outcomes and may be predictive for response to
novel therapies. The development of improved diagnostic biomarkers for
these DLBCL subtypes could therefore inform clinical decision-making by
enabling selection of patients likely to respond to such novel
therapies.To investigate regulatory mechanisms potentially responsible
for the differential gene expression patterns seen in the DLBCL subtypes
and to identify potential biomarkers for these subtypes, we performed
whole genome methylation profiling of 15 DLBCL cell lines and 21 DLBCL
patient tissues and identified distinct DNA methylation patterns
associated with the two DLBCL molecular subtypes.Analysis of the
methylation patterns of several DLBCL classifier genes known to be
differentially expressed in ABC compared to GCB revealed the classic DNA
methylation correlation pattern: high mRNA expression was associated with
low methylation in the vicinity of the transcriptional start site (TSS),
and vice versa. Furthermore, comparison of differential methylation
profiles with corresponding RNA-seq data further supports the notion that
DNA methylation profiles underlie the gene expression patterns that are
currently used to classify ABC and GCB DLBCL subtypes. Collectively,
these data suggest that DNA methylation may contribute to the regulation
of expression of key ABC and GCB DLBCL classifier genes and further, that
the DNA methylation state at these loci could potentially serve as useful
diagnostic biomarkers for the DLBCL subtypes.

