Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Primary human breast tumor explant platform for integrated
profiling and target validation


Primary explant culture preserves three-dimensional architecture of tumor
tissue, intra-tumoral heterogeneity and aspects of tumor
microenvironment, including interactions between tumor cells and the
adjacent tissue cells. For these reasons, it is believed that the explant
cultures capture tumor-specific pathways and their complexities better
than possibly any other in vitro or ex vivo tumor model. We are
developing a primary human breast tumor explant platform allowing
integration of rapid, small-scale genome profiling with validation of
tumor specific targets. We show that the explants, processed to 100 uM
fragments and cultured on a 3D matrix, contain both epithelial and
stromal cells and maintain the viability for up to 12 days. To
characterize the explant phenotype and similarity to the original tumor,
we have examined explants and the original tumors side-by-side by
immunohistochemistry (IHC), immunocytochemistry (ICC) and genome
profiling. The biomarkers analyzed by IHC and/or ICC include hormone
receptors, cytokines, epithelial and stromal cell markers as well as
proliferation and apoptosis markers. A small-scale genome profiling
analysis was performed with TruSeq Amplicon Cancer panel. Cancer-related
missense mutations were identical in 60% of original tumor/ explant pairs
and had minor differences in 40% of original tumor/ explant pairs.
Compared to original tumors, proliferation was increased in explants but
clear correlation in the level of proliferation between original tumor/
explant was observed. In conclusion, our preliminary findings suggest
surprisingly similar genetic landscapes between breast tumor explants and
the cognate primary tumors. Therefore, breast tumor explant platforms
could predict well the efficacy of molecular targeted and personalized
therapies.

