Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Socs3 deficiency in myeloid cells promotes prostate tumor
development


Suppressor Of Cytokine Signaling (SOCS) proteins are negative regulators
of the JAK/STAT pathway, and have been implicated as functioning as tumor
suppressors, particularly SOCS3. We have previously demonstrated that
specific deletion of SOCS3 in myeloid cells leads to heightened
activation of STAT3 and downstream STAT3 target gene expression. STAT3
activation has been strongly implicated in contributing to prostate
cancer progression and metastasis. STAT3 signaling in myeloid cells has
been demonstrated to attenuate anti-tumor immunity. Thus, we evaluated
the impact of SOCS3 deletion in myeloid cells in a murine prostate tumor
model. We demonstrate that prostate tumor growth is significantly
enhanced in myeloid-specific SOCS3-deficient mice, which correlates with
elevated levels of Myeloid Derived Suppressor Cells (MDSC) in both the
spleen and tumor microenvironment, and less CD8+ T-cell infiltration in
tumors. Furthermore, SOCS3-deficient bone-marrow-derived mononuclear
cells exhibit heightened STAT3 activation and are preferentially
differentiate into MDSC phenotype. Importantly, we identify
granulocyte-colony stimulating factor (G-CSF) as a critical factor
secreted by the prostate tumor microenvironment that promotes development
of Gr-1+CD11b+ cells via a STAT3-depentent pathway. Abrogation of
tumor-derived G-CSF reduced the proliferation and accumulation of
Gr-1+CD11b+ cells and inhibited prostate tumor growth. Therefore, the
tumor-derived cytokine, G-CSF, is a prospective candidate upstream of the
STAT3/SOCS3 pathway in MDSC differentiation from the bone marrow. These
findings highlight the critical function of SOCS3 as a negative regulator
of MDSC development and function, which may contribute to tumor
suppressor attributer of SOCS3.

