Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antiangiogenic and immunomodulatory effects of metronomic
cyclophosphamide (CPM) treatment in prostate cancer patients with PSA
failure


Background: After curative local therapy, patients (pts) will experience
rising PSA as an early indicator of recurrent prostate cancer and no
standard of care exists. Previous studies demonstrated the clinical
interest of cyclophosphamide metronomic chemotherapy (CMC) in several
cancers. Multifactorial modes of action including immunological and
anti-angiogenic effects have been well described by Kerbel et al and
Ghiringhelli et al (Cancer Research 2006 and European Journal of
immunology 2004, respectively). In the current study, we investigated the
safety and immuno-modulatory effects of CMC in prostate cancer patients
with PSA failure (biochemical relapse).Methods: We conducted a
prospective phase II study to characterize the clinical and immunological
interest of CMC in histologically proven prostate cancer patients
previously treated by prostatectomy and with biochemical relapse (defined
as PSA > 1 and 50% decline in the serum PSA (3%), and 11 pts (32%) had
PSA progression before 6 months. The immuno-monitoring performed in all
pts who completed 6 months CMC. A decrease of immunosuppressive
regulatory T cells (Treg) was observed in 56% (10/18). In addition, high
rate of activated HLA-DR+ cytotoxic CD8 T cells was also detected in
these pts. Furthermore, serum VEGF level decreased at month 1 but it
returned to baseline level at the end of treatment in 9/17 pts evaluated
(52%). In some patients the correlation was observed between the control
of PSA level, the decrease of Treg and VEGF parameters.Conclusions: This
study demonstrated the clinical benefit and the ability of CMC to promote
the blockage of angiogenesis and immuno-modulatory effect in prostate
cancer patients treated for a biochemical relapse. It will be of interest
to combine CMC to vaccination in these patients.

