Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Actions of nanoparticulate tetraiodothyroacetic acid (Nanotetrac)
on human prostate carcinoma xenograft growth, vascularity and integrin
response to radiation


Tetraiodothyroacetic acid (tetrac) covalently bound to a nanoparticle
(poly[lactic-co-glycolic acid]) (= Nanotetrac) has anti-cancer and
anti-angiogenic properties that are initiated exclusively at a cell
surface receptor on integrin v3 of cancer cells and dividing blood vessel
cells. The anti-cancer activities are pro-apoptotic by multiple
mechanisms, disorder gene expression in multiple cancer cell survival
pathways and are radiosensitizing. The anti-angiogenic effects involve
disruption of actions of VEGF, bFGF, PDGF and EGF. In the present
studies, susceptibility of human prostate cancer cell xenografts to
activity of Nanotetrac was determined in grafts in the nude mouse or to
the chick chorioallentoic membrane (CAM) model and radiosensitivity was
estimated in the CAM system. Androgen-sensitive LNCaP cell xenografts in
the CAM exposed to Nanotetrac (1 g/CAM) showed 40% decreases in tumor
weight and vascular branch points and 50% reduction in hemoglobin content
at 7 d (P Tetraiodothyroacetic acid (tetrac) covalently bound to a
nanoparticle (poly[lactic-co-glycolic acid]) (= Nanotetrac) has
anti-cancer and anti-angiogenic properties that are initiated exclusively
at a cell surface receptor on integrin v3 of cancer cells and dividing
blood vessel cells. The anti-cancer activities are pro-apoptotic by
multiple mechanisms, disorder gene expression in multiple cancer cell
survival pathways and are radiosensitizing. The anti-angiogenic effects
involve disruption of actions of VEGF, bFGF, PDGF and EGF. In the present
studies, susceptibility of human prostate cancer cell xenografts to
activity of Nanotetrac was determined in grafts in the nude mouse or to
the chick chorioallentoic membrane (CAM) model and radiosensitivity was
estimated in the CAM system. Androgen-sensitive LNCaP cell xenografts in
the CAM exposed to Nanotetrac (1 g/CAM) showed 40% decreases in tumor
weight and vascular branch points and 50% reduction in hemoglobin content
at 7 d (P < 0.01). LNCaP xenograft volumes in the male mouse were reduced
by 50% at 5 days (P Tetraiodothyroacetic acid (tetrac) covalently bound
to a nanoparticle (poly[lactic-co-glycolic acid]) (= Nanotetrac) has
anti-cancer and anti-angiogenic properties that are initiated exclusively
at a cell surface receptor on integrin v3 of cancer cells and dividing
blood vessel cells. The anti-cancer activities are pro-apoptotic by
multiple mechanisms, disorder gene expression in multiple cancer cell
survival pathways and are radiosensitizing. The anti-angiogenic effects
involve disruption of actions of VEGF, bFGF, PDGF and EGF. In the present
studies, susceptibility of human prostate cancer cell xenografts to
activity of Nanotetrac was determined in grafts in the nude mouse or to
the chick chorioallentoic membrane (CAM) model and radiosensitivity was
estimated in the CAM system. Androgen-sensitive LNCaP cell xenografts in
the CAM exposed to Nanotetrac (1 g/CAM) showed 40% decreases in tumor
weight and vascular branch points and 50% reduction in hemoglobin content
at 7 d (P < 0.01). LNCaP xenograft volumes in the male mouse were reduced
by 50% at 5 days (P < 0.01), approximating the volume of the tumor cell
implant. In vivo imaging system (IVIS) scans of orthotopic
androgen-independent PC3 cell xenografts in the nude mouse showed
substantial reduction in tumor size vs. control (PBS) at 7 d (50%
reduction) and at 17 d (75% reduction) post-implantation. Radiation
studies in PC3 cell tumors established in the CAM system demonstrated
that within 1 h of exposure to 1-2 Gy radiation, there was apparently
defensive activation (assumption of open conformation) of v3. Receptor
activation response to radiation was blocked by Nanotetrac. We have shown
in other cancer cell lines that Nanotetrac inhibits repair of
radiation-induced double-stranded DNA breaks and propose that, based on
the current observations, this DNA repair effect is due to inhibition of
radiation-caused activation of v3. In summary, examined in two models and
acting at the cell surface, Nanotetrac substantially reduces
volume/weight and vascularity of human prostate cancer xenografts. The
agent also inhibited activation of integrin v3 that is induced by
radiation exposure and is seen to be a component of the radioresistance
response.

