Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The SMAC-mimetic birinapant regulates autocrine TNF production by
caspase-8:RIPK1 complex via p38MAPK pathway


Birinapant (TL32711), a SMAC-mimetic currently in clinical trials,
antagonizes multiple members of the inhibitor of apoptosis (IAP) protein
family to promote apoptosis in cancer cells through the formation of a
caspase-8:RIPK1 complex and induction of autocrine tumor necrosis factor
(TNF). Evidently, birinapant-resistant cells do not produce TNF upon drug
treatment. However, the mechanism by which birinapant-sensitive cells
produce TNF is not clear. Owing to the fact that mitogen-activated
protein kinases (MAPKs) regulate a variety of cellular processes, we
explored the role of MAPKs in birinapant-induced TNF production. Western
blot analyses on a panel of birinapant-sensitive (SK-OV-3, EVSA-T,
TOV-21G: all with an IC50 10M) cell lines showed that birinapant induced
rapid and robust phosphorylation of p38MAPK in sensitive cells, which
corresponded to increased TNF production as assessed by ELISA. However,
resistant cells were not affected at multiple time points. The p38MAPK
inhibitor, LY2228820, reduced the levels of birinapant-induced TNF
(2-fold with 5nM birinapant after 24h) in birinapant-sensitive cancer
cells (SK-OV-3), whereas inhibitors of Erk1/2 (PD98059) and JNK
(SP600125) had no effect on TNF production. Interestingly, RNAi-mediated
inhibition of p38 (MAPK14) isoform significantly inhibited
birinapant-induced TNF production (3-fold with 5nM birinapant after 24h)
in SK-OV-3 cells while inhibition of p38 (MAPK11) isoform upregulated TNF
production (3-fold), suggesting that there may be a balance between
p38MAPK isoforms to regulate TNF production. Pharmacological and
RNAi-mediated inhibition of RIPK1 and caspase-8 activities in SK-OV-3
cells resulted in reduced birinapant-induced p38MAPK phosphorylation and
TNF production. Furthermore, commercially available pooled siRNAs
targeting different isoforms of cFLIP, a catalytically-inactive homologue
of caspase-8, upregulated p38MAPK phosphorylation (4-fold) and TNF
production (8 to 26-fold) in birinapant-resistant cancer cell lines (T24,
HT1376 & IGROV-1), and conferred differential sensitivity to the drug
treatment (T24-IC50: 7nM; HT1376-IC50: >10nM; IGROV-1-IC50: >1M).
Experiments involving cFLIP long (cFLIP-L) and short (cFLIP-S)
isoform-specific siRNAs showed that inhibition of cFLIP-L, but not
cFLIP-S, in T24 & HT1376 cells induced p38MAPK phosphorylation and TNF
production, and conferred sensitivity to birinapant. However, the
combined inhibition of cFLIP-L and cFLIP-S in IGROV-1 cells was required
to induce p38MAPK phosphorylation, TNF production and apoptosis.
Collectively, these observations indicate that birinapant-induced
autocrine TNF production is triggered by the activation of the
caspase-8/RIPK1/p38MAPK axis, and that cFLIP isoforms may confer a
context-dependent negative regulatory effect.

