Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of drugs with eribulin combinatorial activity that
kill both eribulin-sensitive and eribulin-insensitive tumor cells


Eribulin mesylate, a nontaxane microtubule dynamics inhibitor with a
mechanism distinct from most other antitubulin therapeutics, is
clinically used in the United States for treatment of certain patients
with locally advanced or metastatic breast cancer. Eribulin has broad
anticancer activity in a wide variety of preclinical cancer models; as a
result, numerous clinical trials are ongoing to investigate efficacy in
other non-breast tumor types. We have examined eribulin sensitivity in a
panel of 25 human cancer cell lines representing a variety of tumor types
albeit with a preponderance of breast and lung cancer cell lines. As
expected, the cell lines vary in sensitivity to eribulin at clinically
relevant concentrations. To identify combination drugs capable of
increasing anticancer effects in patients already responsive to eribulin,
as well as inducing de novo anticancer effects in non-responders, we
performed a combinatorial high throughput screen to identify drugs that
combine with eribulin to selectively kill tumor cells. Among other
observations, we found that inhibitors of ErbB1/ErbB2 (lapatinib,
BIBW-2992, erlotinib), MEK (E6201, trametinib), PI3K (BKM-120), mTOR (AZD
8055, everolimus), and PI3K/mTOR (BEZ 235), and a BCL2 family antagonist
(ABT-263) show combinatorial activity with eribulin. In addition,
antagonistic pairings with other agents, such as topoisomerase I
inhibitors (topotecan hydrochloride), an HSP-90 inhibitor (17-DMAG), and
gemcitabine and cytarabine, were also identified. In summary, the
preclinical studies described here have identified several combination
drugs that have the potential to either augment or antagonize eribulin's
anticancer activity. Further elucidation of the mechanisms responsible
for such interactions may be important for identifying valuable
therapeutic partners for eribulin.

