Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Do cation-selective transporters help or hurt the antitumor
efficacy of metformin in breast cancer


IntroductionMetformin is effective against many cancers including breast
cancer. Activation of intracellular adenosine monophosphate-activated
protein kinase (AMPK) is implied in metformin anticancer efficacy. Due to
its hydrophilicity and positive charge, metformin relies on
cation-selective transporters for cellular uptake. Accordingly, metformin
cellular uptake, AMPK activation and anti-proliferative effects increased
when organic cation transporter 3 (OCT3) was expressed in BT20 cells
(BT20-OCT3) that have very low levels of cation-selective transporters
(Cai et al., AAPS Abstract W4368, 2013). Our previous studies showed that
human breast cancer cell lines and tumors exhibit wide variability in
expression of metformin transporters, e.g. OCT1-3, plasma monoamine
transporter (PMAT), and multidrug and toxin extrusion (MATE) transporters
1-2 (Zhang et al., AACR Abstract 9800, 2012). This study aims to assess
the pivotal role of transporters in metformin antitumor effects using
xenograft mice with tumors from BT20 and OCT3-BT20 cells.MethodsBT20
cells stably transfected with OCT3 were produced, and OCT3 activity
verified by [14C]metformin (50M) uptake in presence/absence of 50M
famotidine (OCT3 and MATE1 inhibitor) or 500 M quinidine (pan transporter
inhibitor). Optimum metformin dose for tumor study was assessed by a
dose-range pharmacokinetic study in mice dosed intraperitoneally (IP)
with 15, 30, 50, 100, and 150mg/kg [14C]metformin. Xenograft mice were
produced using 2106 BT20/OCT3-BT20 cells. Doxorubicin (DOX; 4mg/kg) or
DOX + 100mg/kg metformin was given IP every 5 days, and tumor volumes
measured over 25 days.ResultsMetformin plasma AUC0-24hr was linear up to
100 mg/kg (AUC0-24hr of 95, 160, 366, 770 and 510 mol*hr/L at 15, 30, 50,
100 and 150 mg/kg, respectively); hence, this dose was used for antitumor
efficacy study. Surprisingly, tumors were larger in DOX + metformin group
compared to DOX (45.3 vs. 23.5 mm3) in mice with OCT3-BT20 tumors. In
mice with BT20 tumors, tumors were smaller in DOX + metformin group
compared to DOX (20.5 vs. 61.8 mm3). Since BT20 tumors grew slowly, tumor
measurements were possible in only 2 mice/group. Hence, the more
aggressive MCF-7 human breast cancer cell was used to develop an
OCT3-expressing (OCT3-MCF7) clone in which metformin uptake was 4.5-fold
higher than in MCF-7 cells (65.66 vs. 15.17 pmol/mg protein/min).
Metformin antitumor effect in xenograft mice with MCF-7 and OCT3-MCF7
tumors is under evaluation.ConclusionIn vitro data imply that OCT3
expression in human breast cancer cells enhances metformin cellular
uptake and anti-proliferative effect. In vivo xenograft mice studies show
that BT20 tumors over-expressing OCT3 are less responsive to metformin +
DOX than native BT20 tumors; however, further studies are needed to show
statistical significance.

