Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combining Afatinib and Cetuximab synergistically increases their
cytotoxicity for EGFR T790M-harboring cells


Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is an important therapeutic
target for non-small cell lung cancers (NSCLCs). Tyrosine kinase
inhibitors (TKIs), such as gefitinib and erlotinib, are effective for
patients with EGFR-activating mutations. However, these patients
eventually develop resistance, usually through a secondary EGFR mutation,
T790M: substitution of methionine for threonine at position 790 in the
kinase domain. While second-generation irreversible TKIs have higher
affinities for the double-mutant EGFRs, their therapeutic effect leaves
room for improvement. Combining a second-generation TKI like afatinib
with an anti-EGFR monoclonal antibody has been shown to improve clinical
outcomes, although the mechanism is not fully understood. To investigate
this mechanism, we used human erythroleukemia K562 cells, which are
EGFR-negative, to establish cells with known EGFR mutations. Two
activating EGFR mutations, Ex19del and L858R, were sensitive to
first-generation TKIs. Acquisition of resistance to these TKIs was
confirmed by adding the second EGFR mutation, T790M. Double-mutant EGFRs
were moderately sensitive to afatinib, but were only minimally affected
by the monoclonal anti-EGFR antibody cetuximab. Combining afatinib and
cetuximab synergistically increased cytotoxity for K562 cells carrying
double-mutant EGFRs. Apoptosis in these cells was preceded by induction
of the pro-apoptotic protein BIM (Bcl2L11) and activation of Caspase-3
and PARP. Afatinib induced autophagy in these cells correlated with AKT
and ERK1/2 signaling in the course of treatment. Accordingly, we found
that cetuximab enhanced the afatinib-induced cytotoxicity through the
autophagic cell death pathway. Our results indicate that two distinct
mechanisms contribute to the synergistic effect exerted by afatinib and
cetuximab against NSCLCs.

