Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of a novel hypermethylated tumor suppressor gene in
human bladder cancer


Bladder cancer is the sixth most common cancer in the world and the
incidence is particularly high in southwestern Taiwan. Although bladder
cancer patients have a low mortality rate, long term follow-up with
repeated cystoscopy is required due to the high recurrence nature of the
tumor. Therefore, a non-invasive detection assay is urgently required for
bladder cancer patients. Aberrant promoter hypermethylation which is
considered as a hallmark of cancer for over a decade, plays an important
role in controlling cancer progression. Nevertheless, detection of
promoter hypermethylation in bodily fluid has been implicated as a
non-invasive and sensitive tool for cancer diagnosis. We aim to identify
novel markers that are hypermethylated in bladder cancer. In this regard,
by using illumina 27K CpG island methylation array, we identified several
novel targets that are hypermethylated in 7 bladder cancer patient
samples but not in primary normal human urothelim. Combined bisulfite
restriction analysis (COBRA) and bisulphite pyrosequencing confirmed the
array result in bladder cancer cell lines. Further, bisulphite
pyrosequencing demonstrated that a significantly higher methylation level
of those targets in cancer samples with higher histological grade (P
Bladder cancer is the sixth most common cancer in the world and the
incidence is particularly high in southwestern Taiwan. Although bladder
cancer patients have a low mortality rate, long term follow-up with
repeated cystoscopy is required due to the high recurrence nature of the
tumor. Therefore, a non-invasive detection assay is urgently required for
bladder cancer patients. Aberrant promoter hypermethylation which is
considered as a hallmark of cancer for over a decade, plays an important
role in controlling cancer progression. Nevertheless, detection of
promoter hypermethylation in bodily fluid has been implicated as a
non-invasive and sensitive tool for cancer diagnosis. We aim to identify
novel markers that are hypermethylated in bladder cancer. In this regard,
by using illumina 27K CpG island methylation array, we identified several
novel targets that are hypermethylated in 7 bladder cancer patient
samples but not in primary normal human urothelim. Combined bisulfite
restriction analysis (COBRA) and bisulphite pyrosequencing confirmed the
array result in bladder cancer cell lines. Further, bisulphite
pyrosequencing demonstrated that a significantly higher methylation level
of those targets in cancer samples with higher histological grade (P <
0.05) and pathological stage (P Bladder cancer is the sixth most common
cancer in the world and the incidence is particularly high in
southwestern Taiwan. Although bladder cancer patients have a low
mortality rate, long term follow-up with repeated cystoscopy is required
due to the high recurrence nature of the tumor. Therefore, a non-invasive
detection assay is urgently required for bladder cancer patients.
Aberrant promoter hypermethylation which is considered as a hallmark of
cancer for over a decade, plays an important role in controlling cancer
progression. Nevertheless, detection of promoter hypermethylation in
bodily fluid has been implicated as a non-invasive and sensitive tool for
cancer diagnosis. We aim to identify novel markers that are
hypermethylated in bladder cancer. In this regard, by using illumina 27K
CpG island methylation array, we identified several novel targets that
are hypermethylated in 7 bladder cancer patient samples but not in
primary normal human urothelim. Combined bisulfite restriction analysis
(COBRA) and bisulphite pyrosequencing confirmed the array result in
bladder cancer cell lines. Further, bisulphite pyrosequencing
demonstrated that a significantly higher methylation level of those
targets in cancer samples with higher histological grade (P < 0.05) and
pathological stage (P < 0.05). The potential of non-invasive diagnosis of
bladder cancer detection by using the methylation of these targets in
voided urine samples is under-way. The tumor suppressive function of
these methylated targets in bladder cancer deserves further investigation.

