Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High level of nuclear heat-shock factor 1 is associated with
aggressive disease and suggests targets for therapy in endometrial
carcinoma


Background: The transcriptional regulator heat-shock transcription factor
1 (HSF1) has recently been linked to progression of breast cancer
(Santagata, PNAS 2011). HSF1 is a regulator of cellular response to
stress and drives the production of heat shock proteins (HSPs). The role
of HSF1 to promote tumor cell survival has been demonstrated in hsf1
knockout mice (Dai, Cell 2007). Furthermore, recent identification of a
specific role of HSF1 in cancer progression has led to new relevance of
HSF1 as a marker both for prognosis and as a predictive marker. The role
of HSF1 in endometrial cancer has so far been unexplored.Methods: A total
of 823 lesions from endometrial carcinoma precursors, primary tumors and
metastases were prospectively collected and explored for HSF1 protein
expression in relation to established markers for aggressive disease and
survival. Transcriptional alterations related to HSF1 protein level were
investigated by microarray analysis for 224 freshly frozen samples in
parallel.Results: High expression of HSF1 protein in endometrial
carcinoma is significantly associated with non-endometrioid histology,
high grade, ER loss and poor survival (all p-values 0.02). Also among
ER-positive patients presumed to have good prognosis, high expression of
HSF1 is correlated with poor survival (p=0.02). HSF1 mRNA and protein
levels increase significantly from primary tumors to metastases
(pBackground: The transcriptional regulator heat-shock transcription
factor 1 (HSF1) has recently been linked to progression of breast cancer
(Santagata, PNAS 2011). HSF1 is a regulator of cellular response to
stress and drives the production of heat shock proteins (HSPs). The role
of HSF1 to promote tumor cell survival has been demonstrated in hsf1
knockout mice (Dai, Cell 2007). Furthermore, recent identification of a
specific role of HSF1 in cancer progression has led to new relevance of
HSF1 as a marker both for prognosis and as a predictive marker. The role
of HSF1 in endometrial cancer has so far been unexplored.Methods: A total
of 823 lesions from endometrial carcinoma precursors, primary tumors and
metastases were prospectively collected and explored for HSF1 protein
expression in relation to established markers for aggressive disease and
survival. Transcriptional alterations related to HSF1 protein level were
investigated by microarray analysis for 224 freshly frozen samples in
parallel.Results: High expression of HSF1 protein in endometrial
carcinoma is significantly associated with non-endometrioid histology,
high grade, ER loss and poor survival (all p-values 0.02). Also among
ER-positive patients presumed to have good prognosis, high expression of
HSF1 is correlated with poor survival (p=0.02). HSF1 mRNA and protein
levels increase significantly from primary tumors to metastases (p<0.03).
HSF1-related gene signatures were explored. Such signatures increase from
complex atypical hyperplasias through primary tumors to metastatic lesion
and were also found to have prognostic value. HSF1 immunohistochemistry
suggests the use of HSP90 inhibitiors as potential novel therapeutic
approach in cases with high protein expression of HSF1.Conclusion: We
demonstrate for the first time in endometrial cancer that high expression
of HSF1 and measures for transcriptional activation of HSF1 associates
with poor outcome, progression from precursor lesions through primary
tumors to metastatic lesions. Also, HSP90 inhibitors are suggested as
potential new targeted therapeutics for cases with high HSF1 levels in
particular.1. Santagata,S., et al., High levels of nuclear heat-shock
factor 1 (HSF1) are associated with poor prognosis in breast cancer. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A, 2011. 108(45):p. 18378-83.2. Dai,C., et al., Heat
shock factor 1 is a powerful multifaceted modifier of carcinogenesis.
Cell, 2007. 130(6): p. 1005-18.

