Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of progesterone-dependent genes regulated by
ablation of mitogen-inducible gene-6 (Mig-6) in the murine uterus


Mitogen-inducible gene-6 (Mig-6) is an important mediator of progesterone
signaling to inhibit estrogen signaling in the uterus. Ablation of Mig-6
in the murine uterus leads to the development of endometrial hyperplasia
and estrogen-induced endometrial cancer. Although Mig-6 is an important
tumor suppressor in endometrial cancer, relatively little is known about
the molecular mechanisms of Mig-6 in endometrial cancer. To identify the
molecular pathways regulated by Mig-6 in a steroid-hormone dependent
manner, we performed microarray analysis on the uterus of ovariectomized
PRcre/+Mig-6f/f (Mig-6d/d) mice treated with progesterone for 6 hours. In
the analysis of GeneChip Mouse Genome 430 2.0 Array, 2,034 genes, 1,062
genes were up-regulated and 972 genes were down-regulated, were altered
by P4 treatment. To determine which pathways are regulated by P4
treatment, we performed pathway analysis using Ingenuity Systems
Software. Genes that involved in Estrogen Receptor, IGF-1, PI3K/AKT,
JAK/Stat, ERK/MAPK, ILK, p53, PTEN, and Wnt/-catenin signaling were found
to be P4 response. In addition, genes that regulated the molecular
mechanisms of cancer were disproportionated. And in microarray, 2,236
genes, 1,883 genes were up-regulated and 356 genes were down-regulated,
were regulated by Mig-6 ablation on P4 treatment. Genes involved in ILK,
p53, PTEN, PI3K/AKT, and Wnt/-catenin signaling were found to be
deregulated upon Mig-6 ablation on P4 response. Furthermore 324 genes of
the 2,034 genes were regulated by P4 treatment were dys-regulated in
Mig-6d/d mice treated with P4 compared to Mig-6f/f control mice. These
results showed that gene expression pattern was altered by the deletion
of Mig-6 and the change of these genes was dependent on P4 in uterus.
Thus the further investigation should be completed to identify molecules
associated with Mig-6 and the identification of relation between these
responsive genes will contribute to define the molecular pathways
regulated by Mig-6 in uterine biology.(This work was supported by NIH,
R01 HD057873 and American Cancer Society Research Grant,
RSG-12-084-01-TBG to J.W.J.)

