Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Resistance to a MEK inhibitor (AZD6244): Its association with
increased expression of transcription factor 4


The important role of Ras/Raf/MEK/ERK pathway in carcinogenesis has led
to clinical development of MEK inhibitors for treatment of various
cancers. Although recent studies have demonstrated impressive antitumor
activities of the agents, many tumors show intrinsic and acquired
resistance to MEK inhibitors. We tried to find biomarkers that were
associated with intrinsic or acquired resistance to a MEK inhibitor
(AZD6244) by public microarray data acquisition and development of
AZD6244-resistance cell lines. First, we analyzed a set of genome-wide
gene expression profiling data from 6 sensitive and 6 resistant cell
lines of various tissue origins to identify candidate genes whose
expression changes are associated with resistant or sensitive responses
to AZD6244. Of 62 differentially expressed genes, we selected
Transcription Factor 4 (TCF4) gene as a potential drug resistance marker
for further analysis because degree of increased expression of TCF4 in
resistance cell lines was relatively high and a previous study suggests
that TCF4 functions as an oncogene in human colon cancers. The mRNA
levels of TCF4 in AZD6244 resistant cell lines were significantly
elevated than those in sensitive cell lines. The siRNA was used for the
targeted silencing of TCF4 to elucidate the role of increased expression
of TCF4 in intrinsic resistance to AZD6244. TCF4 siRNA significantly
enhanced susceptibility of a AZD6244-resistant cell line, LOXIMVI, to
AZD6244. Next, we established AZD6244-resistant cell lines, using
originally AZD6244-senstive cell lines, M14 and COLO-205. The half
maximal inhibitory concentration (IC50) values for AZD6244 in two
acquired resistant cell lines were 34 fold and 200 fold higher than those
of their parent cell lines, respectively. Protein levels of TCF4 in the
acquired resistant cell lines were higher than those in the sensitive
parent cell lines. Our study results suggest that increase expression of
TCF4 may be associated with both intrinsic and acquired resistance to MEK
inhibitors.

