Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Causal effects of delaying smoking initiation on subsequent lung
cancer risk


Background: Methods that report relative risks when describing the
association between age at smoking initiation and lung cancer adjust for
variables unknown or unpredictable at the time of initiation (smoking
duration, pack-years etc.). Such methods do not provide valid estimates
of the causal effect of smoking initiation. Also, relative risks are not
informative for assessing the effects of youth smoking prevention
programs or describing the impact of individuals' decisions to start
smoking. Applying a causal modelling framework, we estimate absolute lung
cancer risk - a metric more relevant to public health than relative risk
- given variables fixed at the age of smoking initiation and averaging
over subsequent smoking behaviors.Methods: We used the Environment And
Genetics in Lung cancer Etiology (EAGLE) study (1942 lung cancer cases,
2116 controls), a population-based case-control study in Lombardy, Italy.
We classified risk factors as fixed at smoking initiation (gender,
childhood exposure to tobacco smoke [CETS], lung cancer family history
[FH], birth cohort) and as causally related to the initiation age
(pack-years, cigarettes per day, quitting, nicotine dependency). Using
the sampling fractions for controls selection, we reconstructed the
original study cohort and estimated absolute lung cancer risks overall
and conditionally on fixed factors. We predicted lung cancer rates for
different ages at smoking initiation as number of cases per 100,000
person-years (PY) using a binomial linear model and estimated
corresponding risk differences (RD) and 95% confidence intervals (CI).
Instead of adjusting for the effects of smoking behaviors that happen
after initiation, we averaged over them. We show how assumptions about
factors unknown at smoking initiation affect the estimates.Results:
Delaying smoking initiation from age 16 to age 20 reduces estimated lung
cancer rate in men from 149 to 78 cases per 100,000 PY with a RD=71 (95%
CI 25 to 120), but there is apparently no corresponding effect in women
(RD= -1 [95% CI -50 to 48] from 26 to 27 cases per 100,000 PY). The
effect of delaying initiation is larger for those without CETS (RD=113
[95% CI 52 to 174] cases per 100,000 PY from 156 to 43) than those with
CETS (RD=45 [95% CI -2 to 92] cases per 100,000 PY from 92 to 47). For
those with FH RD was 214 (95% CI -106 to 534) cases per 100,000 PY from
282 to 68, and for those without FH it was 44 (95% CI 3 to 85) cases per
100,000 PY from 85 to 41). RDs were greater for early birth cohorts.
There was heterogeneity among individuals with same initiation age but
different subsequent smoking behaviors.Conclusion: We estimated absolute
lung cancer risk from a case-control study using information fixed at the
initiation age and averaging over subsequent smoking behaviors. Our
estimates show substantial impact of delaying initiation in men, even if
the person eventually smokes. Extrapolation to current youths and young
adults requires integration of data on contemporary smoking patterns.

