Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combination of Pirfenidone and Cisplatin as a potential
therapeutic strategy in NSCLC


Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer death in the United States.
Due to limited efficacy of current conventional chemotherapy, the
majority of patients face poor prognosis and eventually succumb the
disease. Therefore, the study of combination therapy using traditional
anticancer drugs with novel therapeutic approaches is needed. Pirfenidone
is a small molecule that is being used in Phase II and III clinical
trials for idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF). Although it has already
been approved for IPF in Europe, there is no known mechanism of action
known for the drug. Recently we discovered that Pirfenidone has a
detrimental effect on cancer associated fibroblasts (CAFs) as well as in
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cells. Our hypothesis is that
Pirfenidone, in combination with standard chemotherapy, will act
synergistically and proffer a more potent therapeutic strategy for NSCLC.
Our studies show that in a co-culture model there is a decrease in
viability on CAFs and NSCLC cells when the combination of Pirfenidone and
Cisplatin is used. Furthermore, Pirfenidone and Cisplatin were able to
have an anti-tumor effect in a xenograft model of NSCLC and CAFs. In
addition, insights in the mechanism by which Pirfenidone and Cisplatin
induce synergy in NSCLC cells are being elucidated. Our studies show that
the combination of drugs leads to an increase in phosphorylated ERK as
well as a decrease in phosphorylated Akt. Thus, involving the PI3K and
MAPK/ERK pathways in Pirfenidone/Cisplatin induced cell death. Our lab is
the first to recognize the therapeutic potential of combining Pirfenidone
and Cisplatin, as well as elucidating the mechanism of action for both
drugs in NSCLC.

