Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor spheres growing from circulating tumor cells exhibit stem
cell features


Background: Among the cells that are disseminated from a malignant tumor
some are capable of resettling in distant organs and growing into
life-threatening metastases. Therefore, the question arises how and
whether such cells which have the potential to grow into metastases can
be detected.Materials and Methods: Using a nondissipative approach with
only one enrichment step of red blood cell lysis, cells were cultured
under conditions favoring the growth of epithelial cells. At 7, 14 and
21days the cell cultures were inspected for the appearance of spheroids
staining with anti-EpCAM, anti-CD24 and anti-CD44 antibody and.expressing
ALDH1.Results: Tumorspheres from peripherally circulating cells from
patients with malignant tumors in different stages of disease could so
far be grown from 79% of 100 patients in whom more than 1000 epithelial
tumor suspect cells per ml were detected. Numbers of tumorspheres
correlated with the aggressiveness of the tumor and were highest in
patients after surgery who had not yet received any systemic therapy. The
size of the spheres increased from day 7 to day 21. They were negative
for CD24 and positive for CD44. They highly express ALDH1 and thus
exhibite typical features of stem cells.Conclusion: Here, we demonstrate
that the circulating tumor cells, detected in our approach contain a
subpopulation with stem cell-like properties capable of growing into
tumorspheres.The frequency in peripheral blood of cells capable of
forming tumor spheres seems to be dependent on the aggressiveness of the
primary tumor.

