Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: II-spectrin(SPTBN1) suppresses tumor progression by inhibiting Wnt
signaling via kallistatin in hepatocellular carcinoma


II-spectrin(SPTBN1, 2SP), the most common nonerythrocytic member of the
-spectrin gene family, functions as an adapter protein for Smad3/Smad4
complex formation during TGF- signal transduction, and is required for
EMT during embryonic liver development. Moreover, 2SP is emerging as a
tumor suppressor. We have reported that Loss of 2SP enhances the
stem-like traits and invasiveness of HCC cells. The canonical Wnt
pathway, known to be a critical regulator of self-renewal in stem cell,
is also constitutively activated and implicated in the induction of EMT
in cancer. Kallistatin (a serine protease inhibitor, SERPINA4), which was
identified as a unique inhibitor of the Wnt pathway, is expressed primly
in the liver. In this study, we investigated the mechanism by which 2SP
influences stem cell traits and aggressive behavior of HCC cell lines. We
found that cells with decreased 2SP have decreased -catenin
phosphorylation and increased -catenin nuclear localization, indicative
of activation of Wnt signaling. Furthermore, loss of 2SP results in the
decease of Kallistatin expression, the Wnt inhibitor. Restore of
kallistatin reversed the Wnt activation in HCC cells from decreased 2SP
level. Our study provides evidence for the first time that loss of 2SP
activates Wnt signal through suppressing kallistatin expression.Note:
This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

