Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Lipid droplets and associated proteins in hepatocellular carcinoma
tumour cells


Introduction: Fatty acids are a major source of energy but can be toxic.
Cells avoid cytotoxicity by esterifying fatty acids into neutral lipids
and packaging them into lipid droplets (LDs). The perilipins (PLINs) are
a family of the 5 most abundant LD-associated proteins coating and
regulating the LDs1. Numerous studies have shown links between
deregulated lipid metabolism and a wide variety of diseases, including
diabetes, obesity, and cancer2. Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) arising
from a background of fatty liver disease accounts for 15%-50% of HCC
cases in the United States3. As it has been proposed that an imbalance of
lipid composition may disrupt cellular functions and lead to the onset of
cancer4, and as it was found that deregulated cancer pathways such as the
mTOR pathway lead to increased lipogenesis5, it is crucial to consider
the impact of the expression levels of specific PLINs in the development
and progression of HCC.We hypothesize that understanding the PLIN
expression and lipid profile of the tumor and the target organ will allow
us to further understand the role of lipid metabolism in HCC. To address
this we are manipulating PLIN expression levels in an in vitro system,
and using human samples obtained through the Liver Disease Biobank (Dr.
Metrakos: IRB approved protocol) to evaluate PLIN function ex
vivo.Preliminary Results:Knock-down of PLINs - Lentiviral constructs
containing shRNA sequences for RNA-interference of PLINs 2, 3, and 5
(which were found to be most highly expressed in HCC6) were generated.
Knock-Down (KD) lines of PLINs 2 and 3 were successfully created in
HepG2. The PLIN 5 KD line has proved difficult to identify due to
antibody specificity.Understanding the role of PLINs - Assessment of cell
proliferation in PLIN 2 and 3 KD lines has shown a decrease in growth
compared to the Scrambled shRNA control, with no significant difference
in proliferation between PLIN 2 and 3 KD lines. When challenged with
Oleic Acid, proliferation is further reduced compared to the control
line, and PLIN 3 KD cell growth is comparably less than that of PLIN 2 KD
cells.Next steps: Having identified a correlation between PLIN 2 and 3
expression levels and cancer cell proliferation, we are now using the
Fluorescent Activated Cell Sorting system to further characterize these
cell lines. We are also analyzing human blood and tissue (cancerous and
normal) to broaden our understanding of the impact of the PLINs in cancer
development and progression. These studies may allow for potential
targeting of PLINs in cancer therapy, and as biomarkers for liver
disease.References: (1)Brasaemle, L.(2007) J Lipid Res.48(12):2547-59
(2)Baffy, G. et al.(2012) J. of Hepat.56:1384-91 (3)Sanyal, A. et
al.(2010) Curr. Med. Research & Opinion.26(9):2183-2191 (4)Fernandis, A.
et al.(2009) J of Chromat.877(26):2830-35 (5)Chakrabarti, P. et al.(2010)
Diabetes.59(4):775-781 (6)Straub, B. et al.(2010) Modern. Pathol.23:480-92

