Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Isatin analog as bruton tyrosine kinase inhibitor: A promising
novel agent for multiple myeloma treatment


Multiple myeloma (MM) is a clonal malignancy of plasma cells accumulating
in the bone marrow. MM cells are highly dependent on the bone marrow (BM)
microenvironment for growth and survival through interactions
particularly with BM stromal cells (BMSCs), which secrete important MM
growth factors and cytokines. Understanding and defining these BM factors
are critical to provide the rationale to functionally target these
factors and/or kinases as novel biologically based therapeutics for MM.
Bruton tyrosine kinase (Btk), a non-receptor tyrosine kinase resembling
the Src family, plays a key role in the development and function of
normal B cells through activation of the B-cell antigen receptor
signaling pathway on binding to antigens. Btk further phosphorylates
PLC-, leading to activation of MAPK, NF-B, and AKT signaling pathways.
Earlier our group synthesized a novel series of 5,7-dibromoisatin
analogs. Analogs 6, 11 and 13 were potential anti-cancer agents. In the
present study, through docking studies we predicted that bromo isatin
analog-11 directly interacts with Btk. We found that Isatin-11 inhibits
Btk activity in a dose- and time-dependent manner. Isatin-11
down-regulates the expression of Bcl-2, Bcl-xL on MM cells. Isatin-11
also activates caspase-3 and PARP-cleavage in MM cells. Taken together,
these results suggest that targeting of Btk by Isatin-11 may represent a
new therapeutic strategy to treat MM.

