Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comparison of high-resolution 3D X-ray microCT and tomosynthesis
imaging: A breast phantom study


We have demonstrated the feasibility of imaging a mammographic
accreditation phantom using high-resolution 3D X-ray microCT as an
alternative to tomosynthesis. While both X-ray microCT and tomosynthesis
produce high-resolution 3D images, tomosynthesis requires compression of
the specimen and yields asymmetrical voxels, resulting in high spatial
resolution along two axes and more limited resolution along the third
axis. MicroCT imaging, however, does not require compression and provides
uniform, high resolution in all directions. The limited angular range of
tomosynthesis is advantageous for pre-operative screening tasks, while
the increased spatial and full angular range of microCT has been
increasingly applied to the assessment of surgically excised breast
tissue during breast conserving surgery. Rapid and accurate assessment of
excised tissues is desirable to minimize risk of recurrence, which is
highest in the first two years after surgery.We employed a 35-80 kV,
7.6-15W scan protocol in X-ray microCT to image the breast phantom. We
also tested the ability to detect the phantom target features (2.00-0.16
mm) in long (25 minute) and short (5-6 minute) scans. The phantom was
designed to simulate the X-ray attenuation of a slab of compressed human
breast consisting of glandular and adipose tissue. Both X-ray microCT and
tomosynthesis were able to capture the smallest features (0.16 mm) of the
phantom. Both long- and short-duration microCT scans enabled detection of
the smallest (0.16mm) features of the phantom. The results obtained here
suggest that (1) microCT could be used, as an alternative to
tomosynthesis, to identify and localize features on the order of 100-200
microns in ex vivo tumor specimens and (2) microCT could be used to
detect features of this size on an intra-operative basis (in 5-6 minute
scans).This study shows the feasibility of using microCT for
intra-operative 3D examination of surgical specimens, an application
which could aid clinical decision-making in assessment of excision
margins. Additionally, if high-resolution 3D imaging techniques can
distinguish between features of tumor and non-tumor areas of tissues, as
is suggested by these results, then these imaging modalities could hold
promise for identification of biomarkers and elucidation of the gross
anatomy of breast tumor types, such as ductal carcinoma in situ. There is
not yet an accepted phantom for testing the detection limits of 3D
high-resolution X-ray imaging. The phantom used here is a validated tool
for calibration of mammography instruments, but it seems that digital
X-ray imaging technologies, such as microCT, can quite easily capture the
features of this phantom. Therefore, while microCT performed as well as
tomosynthesis in detection of features in this breast phantom study,
there is a need for the development and validation of new phantoms to
assess the ability of tomosynthesis and microCT to resolve features in
the We have demonstrated the feasibility of imaging a mammographic
accreditation phantom using high-resolution 3D X-ray microCT as an
alternative to tomosynthesis. While both X-ray microCT and tomosynthesis
produce high-resolution 3D images, tomosynthesis requires compression of
the specimen and yields asymmetrical voxels, resulting in high spatial
resolution along two axes and more limited resolution along the third
axis. MicroCT imaging, however, does not require compression and provides
uniform, high resolution in all directions. The limited angular range of
tomosynthesis is advantageous for pre-operative screening tasks, while
the increased spatial and full angular range of microCT has been
increasingly applied to the assessment of surgically excised breast
tissue during breast conserving surgery. Rapid and accurate assessment of
excised tissues is desirable to minimize risk of recurrence, which is
highest in the first two years after surgery.We employed a 35-80 kV,
7.6-15W scan protocol in X-ray microCT to image the breast phantom. We
also tested the ability to detect the phantom target features (2.00-0.16
mm) in long (25 minute) and short (5-6 minute) scans. The phantom was
designed to simulate the X-ray attenuation of a slab of compressed human
breast consisting of glandular and adipose tissue. Both X-ray microCT and
tomosynthesis were able to capture the smallest features (0.16 mm) of the
phantom. Both long- and short-duration microCT scans enabled detection of
the smallest (0.16mm) features of the phantom. The results obtained here
suggest that (1) microCT could be used, as an alternative to
tomosynthesis, to identify and localize features on the order of 100-200
microns in ex vivo tumor specimens and (2) microCT could be used to
detect features of this size on an intra-operative basis (in 5-6 minute
scans).This study shows the feasibility of using microCT for
intra-operative 3D examination of surgical specimens, an application
which could aid clinical decision-making in assessment of excision
margins. Additionally, if high-resolution 3D imaging techniques can
distinguish between features of tumor and non-tumor areas of tissues, as
is suggested by these results, then these imaging modalities could hold
promise for identification of biomarkers and elucidation of the gross
anatomy of breast tumor types, such as ductal carcinoma in situ. There is
not yet an accepted phantom for testing the detection limits of 3D
high-resolution X-ray imaging. The phantom used here is a validated tool
for calibration of mammography instruments, but it seems that digital
X-ray imaging technologies, such as microCT, can quite easily capture the
features of this phantom. Therefore, while microCT performed as well as
tomosynthesis in detection of features in this breast phantom study,
there is a need for the development and validation of new phantoms to
assess the ability of tomosynthesis and microCT to resolve features in
the <100 micron range.

