Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential gene expression analysis by RNA-seq of primary
tumors, circulating tumor cells, and metastases from a mouse xenograft
model of cancer dissemination


Tumor dissemination and metastasis is the root cause of cancer mortality,
and informative models are needed to identify key drivers of this
process. We developed a tractable mouse xenograft model of cancer
dissemination, wherein GFP-labeled pure primary tumor (PT) cells,
circulating tumor cells (CTCs) and lung metastasis (LM) cells can be
isolated from the same host and studied to map drivers of cancer
progression.GFP-labeled SCC351 human squamous cell carcinoma cells were
inoculated subcutaneously into NOD/SCID/IL2r-null (NSG) mice. When
subcutaneous xenografts approximately 1cm in diameter were palpable (4-8
weeks), 500-1000 l of blood was collected by intracardiac puncture and
Ficoll-centrifuged to remove red blood cells. At the same time, PT and LM
were resected and digested into single cell suspensions. An XYZ
micromanipulator was used to pick up individual GFP+ CTCs, PTs and LMs
for RNA extraction, amplification with Ovation RNA-Seq System V2 (Nugen),
and library generation for RNA-Seq on a HiSeq2000 (Illumina). RNA-Seq
data was analyzed with Partek Flow and mapped to human genome (Ensembl
GRCh37) using TopHat2. Gencode V17 annotation was used to quantify the
aligned reads to genes using Partek E/M, and read counts per gene were
analyzed for differential expression using DESeq2. Gene expression
validation was accomplished by qPCR.Comparing CTC gene expression to PT
and to LM, a differential expression of at least 2x (with BH adjusted
p-value Tumor dissemination and metastasis is the root cause of cancer
mortality, and informative models are needed to identify key drivers of
this process. We developed a tractable mouse xenograft model of cancer
dissemination, wherein GFP-labeled pure primary tumor (PT) cells,
circulating tumor cells (CTCs) and lung metastasis (LM) cells can be
isolated from the same host and studied to map drivers of cancer
progression.GFP-labeled SCC351 human squamous cell carcinoma cells were
inoculated subcutaneously into NOD/SCID/IL2r-null (NSG) mice. When
subcutaneous xenografts approximately 1cm in diameter were palpable (4-8
weeks), 500-1000 l of blood was collected by intracardiac puncture and
Ficoll-centrifuged to remove red blood cells. At the same time, PT and LM
were resected and digested into single cell suspensions. An XYZ
micromanipulator was used to pick up individual GFP+ CTCs, PTs and LMs
for RNA extraction, amplification with Ovation RNA-Seq System V2 (Nugen),
and library generation for RNA-Seq on a HiSeq2000 (Illumina). RNA-Seq
data was analyzed with Partek Flow and mapped to human genome (Ensembl
GRCh37) using TopHat2. Gencode V17 annotation was used to quantify the
aligned reads to genes using Partek E/M, and read counts per gene were
analyzed for differential expression using DESeq2. Gene expression
validation was accomplished by qPCR.Comparing CTC gene expression to PT
and to LM, a differential expression of at least 2x (with BH adjusted
p-value <0.05) was seen in 166 genes. Of these, 135 genes encoded known
proteins and 31 corresponded to pseudogenes and lincRNAs. The 166
candidate genes were further ranked based on their degree of differential
expression, read depth, and functional analysis (using Next Bio for
annotated genes) suggesting involvement in pathways of cell survival,
proliferation or tumor growth. Based on this analysis flow, 17 genes were
chosen for validation by qPCR: 8 with an expression level that went up
from PT to CTCs and then down in LM, 6 that went down from PT to CTCs and
then up in LMs, and 3 that were lincRNAs. To date, differential
expression has been validated for five of these genes by qPCR, and
additional validation currently is ongoing.Here we leveraged new
techniques for rare CTC capture, whole transcriptome amplification and
next generation sequencing to identify and validate new candidate drivers
of dissemination and metastasis in a tractable xenograft mouse model of
cancer progression. This model holds the potential to uncover novel
functions of lincRNAs, in addition to new roles for known genes in the
context of cancer dissemination. Functional analysis of these candidates
in vitro and in vivo is planned, with the goal of identifying and
characterizing new drivers of cancer progression for therapeutic
targeting.

