Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Application of PDX models in mimic clinical trials for anticancer
drug development


The utilization of patient derived xenograft (PDX) models has recently
gained huge recognition in anticancer drug research and development.
Based on molecular profiling the resemblance between patient tumor and
PDX is significantly closer than that between patient tumor and
traditional cell lines. Therefore, new initiatives are proposed to apply
PDX models in in vivo target validation, clinical relevant MOA study,
tumor addiction and heterogeneity characterization, sensitivity and
resistance to chemotherapeutics and targeted therapeutics, and even mimic
clinical trials for cancer type indication. In order to evaluate the
efficacious and pharmacodynamic responses in PDX models and support the
rationale for mimic clinical trials, we freshly established PDX models
from the patients with colorectal (CRC), lung, pancreatic, gastric, liver
cancers. The tumor take rate was very high for CRC and lung cancer
patient, 90% and 70% respectively. Irinotecan and Cetuximab for
colorectal PDX model, Docetaxel and Tarceva for lung PDX model were
organized as mimic clinical trials. The high tumor take-rate (9 of 10
colorectal; 7 of 10 lung cancer) will ascertain pharmacologic
significance when tested in mimic clinical trials. To illustrate the
usefulness of this platform, we first evaluate the responders and
non-responders based on efficacious trials. Then we will further continue
with single dose for pharmacodynamic (PD) biomarker evaluation from
selected drug targets or related pathway regulators. Efficacy results and
corresponding PD biomarkers confirmed in this approach have potential to
be used for cancer indication and patient stratification in later phase
II clinical trials.

