Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Autophagic degradation of granzyme B impairs NK-mediated killing
of hypoxic tumor cells


Natural killer (NK) cells are effectors of the innate immune system, able
to kill cancer cells through the release of the cytotoxic protease
granzyme B. NK-based therapies have recently emerged as promising
anticancer strategies. However, it is well established that hypoxic tumor
microenvironment interferes with the antitumor function of immune cells
and constitutes a major obstacle for defining cancer immunotherapies.
Recent studies demonstrated that autophagy regulates the innate immune
response by mechanisms which are not fully understood. In this study, we
showed that hypoxia decreases breast cancer cell susceptibility to
NK-mediated lysis by a mechanism involving the activation of autophagy in
tumor cells. Targeting autophagy was sufficient to restore NK-mediated
tumor cell killing. We showed that the resistance of hypoxic tumor cells
was neither related to a defect in their recognition by NK cells, nor to
a defect in the cytolytic function of NK cells toward hypoxic cells. We
provided evidence that autophagy activation degrades NK-derived granzyme
B in lysosomes of hypoxic cells making them less sensitive to NK-mediated
killing. Genetic and pharmacological inhibition of autophagy restored
granzyme B levels and reverted the resistance of hypoxic cells in vitro.
Our results highlight autophagy as a critical factor in modulating
NK-mediated anti-tumor immune response. We have validated this concept in
vivo by showing that targeting autophagy significantly improved
NK-mediated tumor shrinking in breast and melanoma models. This study
provides a cutting-edge advance in our understanding of how
hypoxia-induced autophagy impairs NK-mediated lysis and paves the way for
formulating more effective NK-based antitumor therapy by combining
autophagy inhibitors.

