Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transcription of angiogenin and ribonuclease 4 is regulated by RNA
polymerase III elements and a CTCF-dependent intragenic chromatin loop


Angiogenin (ANG) and ribonuclease 4 (RNASE4), two members of the secreted
and vertebrate-specific ribonuclease superfamily, play important roles in
cancers and neurodegenerative diseases. The ANG and RNASE4 genes share
the same promoters but their structure and regulation are unknown. We
have characterized the promoters, defined the transcription start site,
and identified a mechanism of transcription regulation that involves both
RNA polymerase III (Pol III) elements and CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF)
sites. We found that two Pol III elements within the promoter regulate
ANG and RNASE4 expression in a position- and orientation-dependent
manner. We also provide evidence for the presence of an intragenic
chromatin loop between the two CTCF binding sites located in two introns
flanking the ANG coding exon. We found that formation of this intragenic
loop preferentially enhances ANG transcription. These results suggest a
multilayer transcriptional regulation of ANG and RNASE4 gene locus. These
data also add more direct evidence to the notion that Pol III elements
are able to directly regulate Pol II gene transcription. Furthermore, our
data indicate that a CTCF-dependent chromatin loop is able to
differentially regulate transcription of genes that share the same
promoters.

