Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CCR4+ regulatory T cells progressively accumulate in the presence
of leukocyte-derived CCL22/CCL17 in an experimental model of glioblastoma
multiforme


Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most common malignant primary brain
tumor in adults. One hallmark of GBM is the accumulation of infiltrating
regulatory T cells (Tregs), a highly immunosuppressive T cell subset that
suppresses T cell-mediated GBM rejection. Previous work has demonstrated
that the Treg-recruiting chemokine, CCL22, is expressed by
patient-resected GBM. Importantly, the number of Tregs expressing CCR4,
the cognate chemokine receptor for CCL22 and CCL17, is increased in the
peripheral blood of GBM patients. To investigate the therapeutic
potential of targeting the CCR4 chemokine-receptor axis in brain tumors,
we performed FACS analysis to determine the level of CCR4-expressing
Tregs and other T cell populations. In addition, we analyzed the mRNA
expression levels of the Treg-recruiting chemokines CCL22 and CCL17 in
different cellular populations by Percoll gradient isolation followed by
qRT-PCR. Using the orthotopic GL261 model of GBM, we found a progressive
accumulation of CCR4+ Tregs in the brain tumor. Coincidently, the
expression of CCL17 and CCL22 was predominantly localized to the
tumor-infiltrating leukocytes, rather than the tumor tissue itself.
Finally, we tested the potential impact of a CCR4 antagonist on Treg
recruitment and CD8+/Foxp3+ T cell ratio. We found that CCR4 antagonist
treatment was able to increase the CD8+/Foxp3+ T cell ratio during the
early time points post-GL261 injection. These results implicate the
chemokine receptor CCR4 as a therapeutic target for further investigation
as a potential strategy to target Treg trafficking to GBM.

