Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A first-in-human phase I study of SAR650984, a humanized anti-CD38
antibody in patients with CD38+ hematological malignancies: Preliminary
PK and PD results of escalation phase


SAR650984 is a novel humanized monoclonal antibody specifically targeting
the CD38. , A phase 1 dose escalation study is being conducted in
patients with confirmed CD38+ hematological malignancies to determine
safety of SAR650984, to establish the MTD and the biologically active
dose, and to characterize the PK and PD after repeated IV
administration.Methods:The study design was composed of 2 parts. The
first one was an accelerated phase with 1 to 3 patients per dose cohort
from 0.0001 mg/kg to 0.1 mg/kg and the second phase includes 3 to 7
patients per dose cohort between 0.3 and 20 mg/kg every 2 weeks. An
additional 6 patient cohort was added at 10 mg/kg every week.Results: 34
out of the 39 treated patients were Relapsed Refractory Multiple Myeloma
(MM) patients. SAR650984 was well tolerated. Overall Response Rate (CR +
PR) for dosing cohorts of 1mg/kg is 32% (2 MR, 5 PR, 2 CR of
28).Pharmacodynamics were evaluated by measuring CD38 density and its
occupancy by the drug in bone marrow on cancer cells, using a validated
quantitative flow cytometry method. This parameter has been correlated
with the dose and exposure levels. Receptor Occupancy (RO) could be
detected starting from the 1 mg/kg dose. From 5 mg/kg dose level,
preliminary results demonstrated receptor occupancy greater than 70%
(maximum observed: 97.7%).From 0.0001 to 0.01 mg/kg doses, no or limited
PK parameters could be calculated. The PK profile was not linear with a
decrease in clearance when the dose was increased suggesting target
mediated clearance. Based on individual modeling, a moderate to high
variability (CV% = 49 to 130%) was observed on estimated systemic total
clearance, regardless of the dose group.At the10 mg/kg Q2W, the shape of
the PK profile suggests saturation of the target. All MM patients (N=6)
at cycle 1 had SAR650984 plasma trough levels consistently above the 10
g/ml level which is associated with anti-tumor activity in mouse
xenograft studies (Cssmin of the lowest pharmacological active dose). At
20 mg/kg Q2W, in 2/3 MM patients, SAR650984 plasma trough levels from
cycle 2 were above the concentration needed to eradicate the tumor (129
g/mL) in the same animal model, based on the Simeoni et al modelling
approach.These preliminary phase 1 safety and efficacy results are
associated with a favorable PK/PD profile and justify the progression of
the program to phase 2.NCT : NCT01084252

