Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metabolic reprogramming by an epigenetic mechanism in endocrine
therapy resistance of breast cancer


Metabolic reprogramming is a major mechanism of fueling cancer cell
growth and proliferation. However, how tumor metabolism is altered to
confer therapeutic resistance is poorly understood. Gene expression
profiling of tamoxifen sensitive and resistant breast cancer cells
revealed that transition to the resistance was associated with a specific
expression reprogramming of genes involved in glucose/energy metabolism,
which was accompanied by aberration of specific epigenetic regulators
such as the histone methyltransferase NSD2/MMSET/WHSC1. In cell and
xenograft tumor models, NSD2 overexpression alone was sufficient to
confer tamoxifen resistance. Analysis of clinical specimens indicates
that NSD2 was a strong predictive factor for early relapse of tamoxifen
therapy. NSD2 wild type, but not its methylase-defective mutant form,
coordinately stimulated the expression and enzymatic activity of HK2,
TIGAR and G6PD and strongly augmented the pentose phosphate pathway (PPP)
production of NADPH for ROS reduction and survival of tamoxifen treated
cells and tumors. Further mechanistic studies demonstrated that elevated
NSD2 stimulates the metabolic gene expression through H3K36 methylation
at the target chromatin. Pharmacological targeting aberrant NSD2 by
DZNeP, an S-adenosylhomocysteine (AdoHcy) hydrolase inhibitor,
effectively blocked the growth of tamoxifen-resistant tumor. The study
reveals a novel mechanism of cancer metabolic reprogramming and suggests
targeting the key metabolic re-programmer as a viable option for
effective treatment of endocrine resistant tumors.Note: This abstract was
not presented at the meeting.

