Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synthesis of [11C]onapristone for clinical investigation


Background: Onapristone is a type I anti-progestin, which prevents the
progesterone receptor (PR) monomers from dimerizing, inhibits
ligand-induced phosphorylation and prevents association of the PR with
its co-activators, thus preventing PR-induced transcription. Onapristone
has the potential to treat patients with endometrial cancer, breast
cancer, uterine sarcomas, a potential subset of ovarian cancer, prostate
cancer and other tumors in which the progesterone receptor plays a role
in growth, proliferation and metastasis. [11C]-radiolabeled onapristone
and its visualization via PET-scan, coupled with pharmacokinetic (PK)
studies, has the potential to determine tissue-specific and blood PK
parameters including tumor/tissue and plasma concentrations, whole body
distribution and half-life of onapristone. The aim of this study is the
development of a rapid Good Manufacturing Product (GMP) synthesis of
parentally administered [11C]onapristone.Methods: The production of
[11C]-labeled radiopharmaceuticals used a Tracerlab FX c-Pro (GEMS)
synthesis module. Carbon-11 was produced at Institut Curie-Hpital Ren
Huguenin via the 14N(p,)11C nuclear reaction using a PETTrace cyclotron
(GEMS) equipped with a carbon-11 target. Carbon-11 is delivered from the
cyclotron as [11C]CO2 in the synthesis module, and reduced to [11C]CH4.
Methane is halogenated to [11C]CH3I and converted to [11C]methyl triflate
(CH3OTf). To prepare [11C]onapristone, the module was loaded with 1mg of
N-desmethyl-onapristone (Arno Therapeutics) and 500L of DMSO in the
reaction vessel (Sigma). [11C]CH3OTf was bubbled into the reaction vessel
and heated at +50C for 10 minutes. The reaction mixture was then diluted
with 1 ml of mobile phase and purified using a semi-preparative HPLC
column: Sunfire C18 5m 250X10mm (Waters), mobile phase: acetonitrile
(Sigma)/water (Waters) 50/50 v/v; flow rate 4 mL/min. The product
fraction was collected in 40mL of sterile water and was passed through a
C18 SEP PAK (Waters). This fraction was eluted with isotonic saline
(Braun) and ethanol (Sigma). The resulting formulation was passed through
a 0.22m sterilizing filter into a sterile dose vial.Results: 10 tests
were performed. Time of synthesis was 50 minutes. The amount of carbon-11
delivered was 12-14GBq for the irradiation parameters as follows: 10 min;
10A. The decay-corrected yield of reducing [11C]CO2 to [11C]CH4 was >99%.
The yields of preparing [11C]CH3I were 27-29%. Time retention of
[11C]onapristone was 8.5-9.5 minutes and the non-decay-corrected
radiolabelling yields were 1-2%.Conclusions: We have successfully
developed a fully-automated production of [11C]onapristone ready for use
in clinical trials.

