Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: XCE853: A novel PDI inhibitor that inhibits proliferation of human
tumor cells in vitro, ex-vivo and in vivo


XCE853 was originally identified within a family of synthetic compounds
displaying a preferential antiproliferative activity on drug resistant
human cancer cells (Gutmann et al, AACR annual meeting, 2013). XCE853
induced an irreversible cytolysis of human tumor cells after a short in
vitro exposure independently of efflux pumps leading to a tumor cell
death by autophagy and particles release (vesicles or protein
aggregates).The interest for XCE853 has been reinforced by three in vitro
observations: 1) XCE853 inhibits the recombinant human enzyme PDI
recognized as one novel target linked to drug resistance 2) XCE853 has a
unique antiproliferative profile compared to the NCI database compounds
when using the NCI Compare assay and 3) XCE853 has no activity on human
normal prostate cells even at high concentrations whereas XCE shows an
IC50 in the nanomolar range on human tumoral cells.In addition, the
ex-vivo approach using fresh human tumor explants cultivated in 3
dimensions with low concentrations of XCE853 has shown a strong decrease
of the proliferation (KI-67 labeling) with an apoptosis induction
(Caspase-3 labeling) of Head & Neck cancers following 24h of
exposure.Finally, XCE853 which displayed an excellent oral
bioavailability in mouse is able to block growth of human ovarian cancer
using in vivo xenograft model leading to a complete tumor growth arrest
even after the stop of the treatment.Altogether, these data support
further efforts on this drug candidate to initiate the preclinical
studies and to define the most relevant human tumor types.

