Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeted Hi-C and integrative analyses reveal functionality of
colorectal cancer risk loci


Genetic risk factors identified by genome-wide association studies (GWAS)
are thought to function through allele-specific regulation of gene
expression. Long-range chromatin looping interactions, as revealed by
chromosome conformation capture (3C)-based techniques, bring risk
variants into spatial proximity with loci otherwise distal on the linear
genome. Hi-C, using next generation sequencing (NGS), allows for
genome-wide agnostic characterization of chromatin contacts, however,
detection of functional enhancer-promoter interactions is precluded by
its limited resolution. Here we apply Targeted Hi-C, a novel technique
combining the unbiased coverage of Hi-C with target sequence capture to
identify functional chromatin interactions for 15 colorectal cancer risk
loci at high resolution. We depicted the CRC risk interactome as a set of
generic highly significant genome-wide interactions, predominantly
overlaying the strongest risk association signals. Integrative analyses
involving profiles for epigenetic marks, evolutionary conservation and
transcription factor binding, revealed regulatory function of long-range
chromatin interactions. At the 8q24.21 risk locus, we could extend a
previously reported contact between rs6983267 and the MYC promoter to a
network of interactions involving CCAT1 (colorectal cancer associated
transcript 1). At other risk loci, our data supports the central role of
TERC, BMP4, GREM1, BMP2, SMAD7 and in CRC pathogenesis. Additionally,
distal to the risk loci we identified contacts with the genes such as
TRPS1, TPO, ETS1, VEZT and RAN, previously implicated in cancer and
mutated in CRC. Our results demonstrate the capability of high resolution
chromatin interaction analyses in conjunction with combinatorial
integrative analyses to decipher disease risk loci.

