Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A highly cytotoxic EGFRvIII/CD3 TandAb recruits T cells to
specifically and potently kill several types of solid tumor cancers


To harness the cytotoxic capacity of T cells for the treatment of
EGFRvIII+ cancers, we developed a humanized bispecific tetravalent
antibody, with two binding sites for CD3 (or CD16A) and EGFRvIII, the
EGFRvIII/CD3 (and EGFRvIII/CD16A) RECRUIT-TandAb. EGFR dysregulation has
been linked to numerous cancers, and both small molecules and EGFR
targeting antibodies have successfully reached the clinic. The deletion
variant III (EGFRvIII), the most common mutant form of EGFR is expressed
exclusively in cancer tissues contributing to oncogenic transformation.
The restricted EGFRvIII expression on various solid tumor types provides
an opportunity to develop cytotoxic antibodies that solely target cancer,
sparing normal tissues, and substantially reduce the side effects
associated with EGFR therapy.Using phage display libraries, we identified
scFvs that selectively bound to the mutated and not the native form of
EGFR. T cells are potent tumor-killing effector cells that cannot be
recruited by native antibodies; hence we engineered a panel of bispecific
EGFRvIII/CD3 TandAbs, capable of T cell-recruitment, with a broad range
of binding and cytotoxic properties. The TandAbs' binding properties, T
cell-mediated cytotoxic activity, and target-mediated T cell activation
were characterized in a panel of in vitro assays. They exhibited
exquisite specificity towards EGFRvIII in ELISA and FACS assays, with no
wild-type EGFR binding observed, up to the maximally evaluated TandAb
concentration of 1 M. The most potent TandAbs displayed cytotoxicity
towards EGFRvIII expressing F98 glioma and CHO cells with EC50 = 25 pM.
We also assayed the cytotoxicity of these TandAbs towards EGFR+ cells as
a more sensitive probe of residual binding to the native form. No
cytotoxicity was observed up to the maximally evaluated TandAb
concentration of 0.5 M. The cytotoxic potency of the EGFRvIII/CD3 TandAb
was higher than that of a comparator bivalent bispecific antibody,
constructed from different anti-EGFRvIII/CD3 moieties or of
EGFRvIII/CD16A TandAbs, which recruit NK cells instead of cytotoxic T
cells. EGFRvIII/CD3 TandAbs with high affinity binding to CD3 were most
efficacious for T cell recruitment and tumor cell killing and yet, in the
absence of EGFRvIII+ target cells in vitro, TandAbs did not elicit T cell
activation, as measured by their lack of proliferation, contributing to a
good preclinical safety profile. In vivo EGFRvIII/CD3 TandAbs
demonstrated a robust dose-dependent growth retardation of EGFRvIII+
subcutaneous Xenograft tumors in NOD/scid mice reconstituted with human
PBMC; this tumor growth inhibition was more pronounced than that
associated with cetuximab. In summary, our data demonstrate the strict
specificity and high potency of the anti-tumor cytotoxicity mediated by
the EGFRvIII/CD3 TandAb, a novel highly potent drug candidate for the
treatment of EGFRvIII+ malignancies.

