Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor vasculature targeting using cell-specific thioaptamer
decorated chitosan nanoparticle


Anti-angiogenesis targeted therapy using RNA interference is a powerful
tool to inhibit tumor growth and metastasis Here, we developed
chitosan/thioaptamer nanoparticles that are capable of cell-type specific
binding and delivery of siRNA into tumor-associated endothelial cells
Thioaptamer (TA) was created by partial substitution of oxygen with
sulfur on the aptamer phosphate backbone at the 5dA position to enhance
binding affinity and stability A combinatorial DNA aptamer library was
established for cell-based selection method known as SELEX (systematic
evolution of ligands by exponential enrichment) Endothelial cells
isolated from both human ovarian tumors and normal human ovarian tissues
were used to screen for selective thioaptamers After 10 cycles of
cell-SELEX, two candidates, Endo28 and Endo31 showed highly specific
binding to both human microvascular endothelial cells (HMVEC) and
vasculature of human ovarian cancer tissue Endo28 decorated chitosan
nanoparticles (CH/TA-siRNA) were 200 nm, positively charged (22mV), and
spherical in shape The incorporation of thioaptamer Endo28 and siRNA to
chitosan was confirmed using 1HNMR and PCR CH/TA-siRNA nanoparticles were
intact and stable in the presence of serum at 37 C Intravenous
administration of CH/TA nanoparticles into mice with HeyA8 ovarian tumors
resulted in successful binding of aptamer to endothelial cells as well as
delivery of siRNA into tumors TEM7 is a tumor biomarker found on the
surface of endothelial cells TEM7 silencing using siRNA reduced
endothelial tube formation and migration In orthotopic mouse models of
ovarian cancer, murine TEM7 siRNA loaded nanoparticles showed substantial
reduction in tumor growth as well as reduced angiogenesis These data have
implications for new anti-angiogenesis approaches

