Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The anti-hepcidin Spiegelmer Lexaptepid Pegol (NOX-H94) as
treatment of anemia of chronic disease in patients with multiple myeloma,
low grade lymphoma, and CLL: A phase II pilot study


Lexaptepid pegol (LP) is a PEGylated L-stereoisomer RNA aptamer that
binds and neutralizes hepcidin. Hepcidin, a 25 amino acid peptide induced
by inflammatory stimuli is a pivotal regulator of iron resorption and
iron release from intracellular stores, which are severely impaired in
anemia of chronic disease. Disturbances in iron metabolism resulting in
functional iron deficiency are a key component of anemia of chronic
disease which frequently complicates malignant disease. We evaluated the
pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics, safety and efficacy of hepcidin
blockade by LP as sole treatment of anemia of chronic disease in patients
with multiple myeloma, low grade Non-, or Hodgkin lymphoma.Twelve
patients with functional iron deficiency anemia with the following
baseline characteristics, presented as median (range), were enrolled: age
64 years (35-77), Hb 9.6 g/dL (8.0-10.7), serum ferritin 317 g/L
(193-2805), serum iron 29 g/dL (18-97), TSAT 12% (6-46). LP was injected
i.v. at a dose of 1.2 mg/mg, TIW for 4 weeks. Blood counts, serum
biochemistry, and iron status were evaluated weekly until two weeks post
treatment and at week four after the end of therapy. The primary endpoint
was increase in Hb by 1 g/dL at any time between start of therapy until 1
week after end of treatment. The study has the clinicaltrials.gov
identifier NCT 01691040.Five of the 12 patients reached the target Hb
increase of 1 g/dL, 3 patients achieved this goal within 2 weeks. Four of
the 5 responding patients had hypochromic anemia (MCH 22-26 pg) and
moderately increased baseline ferritin levels (200-350 g/L). Median serum
ferritin decreased from 317 to 232 g/L (p=0.014) in the entire cohort of
patients, and from 253 to 203 g/L in responders (p=n.s). Reticulocyte
hemoglobin increased from 22.0 to 25.2 pg (p=0.019) in responding
patients, while in non-responders no increase was noted (30.0 to 30.1
pg). Similarly, a trend to increased reticulocyte index was observed in
the responding patients (median: 0.9 to 1.3, p=n.s.) only. Soluble
transferrin receptor levels (sTFR) showed a trend to decrease in
responders (10.6 to 10.3 mg/L, p=n.s.), but remained unchanged in
non-responders. Treatment with LP was well tolerated without major
adverse reactions.In conclusion, LP induced a significant increase in Hb
levels (1 g/dL) in 5 of 12 patients. Responding patients showed an
increase in red cell and reticulocyte hemoglobin, and decrease in sTFR.
These results support the concept of hepcidin inhibition for treatment of
cancer associated anemia with functional iron deficiency. Patients with
signs of iron deficiency as documented by hypochromic anemia, no
excessive increase in ferritin and high sTFR levels showed a higher
likelihood to respond to LP.

