Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Translational implications of the 19q12 bladder cancer GWAS signal
for aggressive bladder cancer


Background: A genome-wide association study (GWAS) of bladder cancer
identified a genetic marker rs8102137 within the 19q12 region as a novel
susceptibility variant. This marker is located upstream of the CCNE1
gene, which encodes cyclin E, a cell cycle protein.Methods: Genetic fine
mapping analysis of the CCNE1 region was performed using data from two
bladder cancer GWAS, which included a total of 5,942 cases and 10,857
controls. Cyclin E protein expression was evaluated by
immunohistochemistry analysis in 265 bladder tumors in relation to CCNE1
genetic variants and tumor characteristics. Functional effects of cyclin
E over-expression were evaluated with cell cycle assays.Findings: The
original GWAS marker rs8102137 represents a group of 47 linked SNPs (with
r20.7) associated with increased bladder cancer risk. From this group we
selected a functional promoter variant rs7257330, which showed strong
allele-specific binding of nuclear proteins in several cell lines. In
both GWAS, rs7257330 was associated only with aggressive bladder cancer
(muscle-invasive or high-grade non-muscle-invasive cancer), with a
per-allele odds ratio (OR) =1.18 (95%CI=1.09-1.27, p=4.6710-5). Cyclin E
protein expression was increased in aggressive bladder tumors (p=0.013)
and, independently, with each rs7257330-A risk allele (ptrend=0.024).
Over-expression of recombinant cyclin E in cell lines caused significant
acceleration of cell cycle. Conclusions: Molecular mechanisms linking the
CCNE1 GWAS signal and aggressive bladder cancer risk are related to
cyclin E over-expression and cell cycle regulation. In combination with
other genetic and clinical markers, CCNE1 genetic variants may be
translationally useful for early prediction of aggressive bladder cancer.

