Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combining tyrosine kinase inhibitors and isoflavones to target
metastatic activity in prostate cancer cells


Background: Efforts to impede early steps in the metastatic cascade have
led to the development of promising small molecule targeting agents. The
purpose of this study was to evaluate the use of Src tyrosine kinase
inhibitors known to interfere with cell migration and invasion, in
combination with a cytostatic soy isoflavone extract (ISFs) on metastatic
activity in prostate cancer cells. Methods: PC-3ML cells (a gift from A.
Fatatis, Drexel University), and LNCaP cells treated with a Src
inhibitor, ISFs, or a combination, were evaluated for clonogenic cell
survival, cell cycle progression, and transwell migration and invasion
activity. Results: Src inhibitors and ISFs induced an accumulation of
cells in the G1 and G2/M phases of the cell cycle, respectively, with
little change in cell viability or survival. Invasion studies with PC-3
ML and LNCaP cells suggest that ISFs can reduce metastatic activity by
39% and 35%, respectively. In addition, ISFs enhance the effectiveness of
the Src inhibitors to reduce invasiveness. This may indicate that
including ISFs in treatment regimens may allow a lower dose of the
targeting agent to be used to achieve optimal response and decrease
toxicity. Conclusions: In vitro studies suggested that combining a Src
inhibitor and ISFs resulted in greater inhibition of metastatic activity
than either alone.

