Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of glycolysis and proliferation of colon cancer cells
by 3-(3-pyridinyl)-1-(4-pyridinyl)-2-propen-1-one (3PO) an inhibitor of
6-phosphofructo-2-kinase (PFKFB3)


In human colon cancer cells, glycolytic activity shows a positive
correlation with proliferation. PFKFB3 is an important enzyme regulating
glycolysis in many tumor cells. We have studied the action of an
established inhibitor of PFKFB3,
3-(3-pyridinyl)-1-(4-pyridinyl)-2-propen-1-one (3PO) as a single agent
and in combination with other molecules that affect glycolysis and
proliferation in four colon cancer cell lines (Caco-2, HCT116, HT29 and
SW1116). Glucose uptake and cell proliferation were inhibited by 3PO and
butyrate and additive effects were seen with 10 M 3PO and 1 mM butyrate.
Induction of alkaline phosphatase activity serves as a marker of
differentiation in colon cancer cells. The large induction of alkaline
phosphatase activity by butyrate seen in most colon cancer cell lines was
not observed with 3PO. Similar contrasting effects on induction of
alkaline phosphatase activity were seen with rat Morris hepatoma 7777
cells where 2-3 fold induction was seen with 1 M vorinostat or 1 mM
butyrate but no significant effect was seen with 3PO in the range of 5-30
M. The biguanides, metformin and phenformin, increase glycolysis but
inhibit proliferation of colon cancer cells. After combination treatment
with 3PO, glycolysis was inhibited, as judged by glucose uptake and
acidification of the medium, and additive inhibitory effects on cell
proliferation could be observed. For example, after a 72 hour incubation
of Caco-2 cells with 10 M 3PO, 25 M phenformin or 1 mM metformin, as
single agents, proliferation relative to controls was decreased 20%, 17%
and 34%, respectively. For combinations of 3PO and phenformin or 3PO and
metformin the decreases relative to controls were 48% and 58%,
respectively. In conclusion, 3PO was an inhibitor of proliferation of
colon cancer cells, especially the rapidly growing HCT116 and HT29 cell
lines. 3PO may be a useful agent in combination with other drugs that
inhibit colon cancer cell proliferation.

