Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: miR-100 mediates resistance to paclitaxel in cervical cancer cells


Objectives: Hypoxia occurs during development of cervical cancer and is
considered to correlate with its resistance to chemotherapy. We found
that hypoxia induced miR-100 whose expression was low in cervical cancer.
We sought to determine the regulators of the paclitaxel response during
hypoxia in cervical cancer. Methods and Results: We found that the
expression of miR-100 was significantly higher under hypoxic condition
(1% O2) by realtime RT-PCR. According to the results of in silico
analysis, miR-100 targeted human ubiquitin-specific protease (USP) 15.
Hypoxia and overexpression of miR-100 respectively decreased the activity
of luciferase-reporter containing the 3-untranslated region (UTR) of
USP15 with the predicted miR-100-binding site in cervical cancer cell
lines, SiHa and HeLa. By western blot analysis, hypoxia enhanced the
endogenous USP15 protein expression. USP15 mRNA level was also
up-regulated by hypoxia using realtime RT-PCR. Overexpression of miR-100
induced paclitaxel resistance reducing apoptosis using MTT assays and
annexin V staining. Conclusions: Our results provide evidence that
regulation of USP15 expression by miR-100 represents a mechanism for
paclitaxel resistance in cervical cancer. Our results suggest that
miR-100 and USP15 could be a therapeutic target in paclitaxel-resistant
cervical cancer.

