Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Decitabine impact on immunohistochemistry scores for tumor
suppressor genes FHIT, WWOX, FUS1 and PTEN in human tumor samples


Purpose: Since tumor suppressor gene (TSG) expression may be lost through
promoter hypermethylation, we assessed whether the demethylating agent
decitabine could increase TSG expression in tumor tissues of patients
receiving decitabine therapeutically.Experimental Design: Patients on a
phase I trial received intravenous 1-hour infusions of decitabine 2.5, 5,
or 10 mg/m2/day on days 1-5 and 8-12 each 4-week cycle or 15 or 20
mg/m2/day on days 1-5 each cycle, with filgrastim added at higher doses.
Tumor biopsies were done pre day 1 and on day 12 of the first cycle. For
the putative TSGs FHIT, WWOX, FUS1 and PTEN, immunohistochemistry (IHC)
scores (0-300) were calculated by multiplying the % tumor cells staining
by the intensity (0-3+) of staining. IHC scores were correlated with
methylation of the LINE-1 repetitive element (as a marker of global DNA
methylation, determined by pyrosequencing) and with tumor
regression.Results: Twenty-five patients had at least one pre- or
post-decitabine biopsy evaluable for expression of at least 1 TSG,
including 4 patients with breast cancers, 3 kidney, 3 head & neck, 4
melanomas, 3 thymic and 8 others. With negative staining pre-decitabine
(score = 0), number of patients converting to positive staining
post-decitabine was 1 of 1 for FHIT, 3 of 6 for WWOX, 2 of 3 for FUS1 and
1 of 10 for PTEN. In tumors with low pre-decitabine TSG scores (0 (58
observations) (median 61.6% vs 45.4%, p=0.0481). TSG expression change
did not correlate with LINE-1 methylation change, although tumors
converting from negative to positive had a median decrease in LINE-1
methylation of 24%, compared to 6% in those not converting (p=0.069).
Five of 15 fully evaluable patients had reductions in tumor diameter (by
0.2% to 33.4%). Of these, 3 had simultaneous increases in 3 TSGs
(including the 2 patients with the greatest tumor regression) compared to
2 of 10 with tumor growth (p=0.25).Conclusions: In tumors with low TSG
expression, decitabine may be associated with increased expression for
the TSGs FHIT, WWOX & FUS1, but not PTEN. Further study will be needed to
determine if increased TSG expression is associated with reduced DNA
methylation and to determine if increased TSG expression may contribute
to any decitabine therapeutic effect.

