Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation of urothelial bladder cancer by nicotine and stress
neurotransmitters


Urothelial bladder cancer (UBC) is the 7th most common cancer in men and
the 17th most common cancer in women. Smoking is an established risk
factor for UBC. However, the mechanisms how smoking induces bladder
cancer are poorly understood. Using two established human urothelial
bladder cancer cell lines, our data show that nicotine significantly
increased the proliferation of both cell lines. Both cell lines produced
the stress neurotransmitters norepinephrine and epinephrine and nicotine
further enhanced this activity. The broad-spectrum beta-blocker
propranolol strongly inhibited base level and nicotine-induced
proliferation in both cell lines, identifying beta-adrenergic receptors
as mediators. Proliferation in response to exogenous addition of
epinephrine, norepinephrine or the selective -adrenergic agonist
isoproterenol and complete blockage of these responses by propranolol
support this interpretation. Treatment with the inhibitory
neurotransmitter -aminobutyric acid (GABA), that inhibits beta-adrenergic
receptor-mediated proliferation of other cancer types via inhibition of
cAMP formation, was less effective. These findings suggest that
urothelial bladder cancer cells are stimulated in their growth via
beta-adrenergic receptor signaling independent of cAMP by nicotine or
psychological stress. Additional investigations are underway to further
dissect the signal transduction pathways involved.Supported by the State
of Tennessee Center of Excellence in Livestock Diseases and Human Health.

