Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Investigation of telomere shortening caused by dyskeratosis
congenita-associated heterozygous TIN2 mutations


The ends of eukaryotic chromosomes are composed of repetitive telomere
sequences bound by the shelterin protein complex. Telomerase, a reverse
transcriptase complex, is known to express in highly proliferative
tissues and cells in humans to maintain a constant telomere length and to
sustain their proliferative potential. Heterozygous missense mutations
within one of the shelterin proteins, TIN2, have been identified in
patients with Dyskeratosis Congenita (DC), a multiple stem-cell failure
syndrome characterized by extremely short telomeres in affected patients.
Our study aims to elucidate the mechanism by which TIN2 mutations shorten
telomeres in human cells.TIN2 is an essential protein that tethers the
shelterin complex together. We generated HCT 116 colorectal cancer cell
lines containing heterozygous TIN2 R282H mutation, one of the most common
DC-related TIN2 mutations, by zinc-finger-nuclease facilitated gene
editing. Clones with heterozygous TIN2 mutation showed progressive
telomere shortening, while the wild-type (WT) clones showed no change in
telomere length over extended cell proliferation. The progressive
telomere shortening phenotype in TIN2 mutants can be rescued by exogenous
expression of WT TIN2. However, TIN2 mutant clones do not contain
elevated levels of deprotected telomeres, suggesting that the TIN2
mutation does not lead to overall telomere deprotection. We are currently
investigating whether the DC-related TIN2 mutation induces telomere
shortening by inhibiting telomerase or by accelerating telomere attrition
through telomerase-independent mechanisms.

