Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clinical and demographic comparison between bladder cancer and
upper urinary tract urothelial carcinoma in Taiwan


Objective Urothelial carcinoma (UC) which is derived from the urothelium
of the urinary tract includes cancers of bladder, renal pelvis and
ureter. The aim of this study was to compare clinical and demographic
features between bladder and upper urinary tract urothelial carcinoma in
Taiwan.Material and methods The present study recruited a total of 736
histopathological confirmed UC cases, which consisted of 470 bladder
cancer and 266 upper urinary tract UC (UTUC) cases. Clinical and
demographic characteristics were collected by structured question
interview and medical chart review. This study was approved by the
institutional review boards of the collaborated hospitals. The effects of
risk factors on UC risk were estimated by odds ratios (ORs) and its 95%
confidence intervals (CIs) using unconditional logistic regression. All
statistical analyses were performed using Statistical Analysis Software
for Windows, version 9.1 (SAS Institute, Cary, NC).Results The
frequencies of cigarette smoking and alcohol consumption in bladder
cancer cases were significantly higher than that in UTUC cases. Compared
with bladder cancer cases, UTUC cases also had a significantly higher
frequencies of advanced tumor stage (T2-4) and poorly differentiation
(G3). In a multivariate- adjusted logistic regression, we found the
advanced stage (T2-4) was a significant prognostic factor of overall
survival for bladder cancer and UTUC cases, especially the risk of the T4
stage in UTUC cases.Conclusion Our results showed that some clinical and
demographic features between bladder and UTUC cases were different in
Taiwan.Keywords: bladder cancer; ueothelial carcinoma; upper urinary tract

