Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dasatinib accelerates valproic acid-induced acute myeloid leukemia
cells death by regulation of differentiation capacity


Dastinib (BMS-354825) is a FDA-approved small compound that was developed
for chronic myeloid leukemia as a multi-targeted kinase inhibitor of
wild-type BCR-ABL and SRC family kinases. Valproic acid (VPA; Orfiril)
has been a well-known anti-epileptic drug worldwidely, and belong to the
class I histone deacetylase inhibitor. The aim of this research is to
determine the anti-leukemic effects of combination of dasatinib and VPA
or their mechanism in acute myeloid leukemia (AML) cells. In this study,
dasatinib showed potent inhibitory effects on VPA-treated AML cells that
were associated with induced G1 phase cell cycle arrest and also
apoptosis including the cleavage of PARP, caspase-3, -7 and -9. Moreover,
inhibitors of caspase-3 and -9 (Z-DEVD-FMK and LEHD-CHO) efficiently
inhibited dasatinib-induced apoptosis in VPA-treated AML cells.
Therefore, dasatinib/VPA-induced cell death occurred via
caspase-dependent apoptosis. Also, inhibitors of MEK/ERK (U0126 and
PD98059) and p38 MAPK (SB203580) efficiently inhibited
dasatinib/VPA-induced apoptosis. The combination of dasatinib and VPA
differentiation capacity of AML cells is more powerful than each drug
alone. So the combination is enough to push AML cells to death strongly
by G1 cell cycle arrest and caspase-dependent apoptosis. In addition,
MEK/ERK and p38 MAPK controls dasatinib/VPA-induced apoptosis as an
upstream regulator. Finally, co-treatment of dasatinib and VPA is
contributed to AML cell death by regulation of differentiation capacity.
Taken together, these results indicate that dasatinib and VPA together
have a potential for anti-leukemic therapy.

