Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Drug repositioning with a bioinformatics platform that integrates
the TCGA, cMap and CCLE


Cancer In silico Drug Discovery Tools (CIDD) is a drug discovery platform
that enables researchers to generate hypotheses for the following three
general problems: 1) to determine if clinical phenotypes or gene
mutations for a cancer are functional, inducing unique gene expression
alterations, 2) to find candidate drugs to treat, or repress, these
expression changes, and 3) to identify cell lines that resemble the
tumors being studied for subsequent in vitro experimentation. CIDD
integrates clinical and experimental data from The Cancer Genome Atlas
(TCGA), the Connectivity Map (cMap) and the Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia
(CCLE) to perform in silico drug discovery experiments. CIDD generates
gene expression signatures representative of the phenotypes or mutations
being studied, characterizes the signatures using MSigDB, identifies
candidate drugs to repress these signatures using data from the cMap, and
finds optimal cell lines for in vitro drug testing using experimental
data from the CCLE. The primary results of a CIDD execution are a
biologically interpretable candidate drug list and a list of cell lines
for subsequent drug experimentation. We applied CIDD for the
identification of candidate drugs to treat BRAF V600E colorectal cancer
(CRC). CIDD identified EGFR and proteasome inhibitors as candidate drugs,
while proposing 7 large intestine cell lines from the CCLE for potential
in vitro testing. CIDD is a command-line based tool written in Python and
depends on R. We have developed a companion Python-based data management
utility, tcga_util, which provides automated downloading and querying of
TCGA data from the command-line, which we feel will be of substantial and
independent interest to researchers wishing to use data from the TCGA.
CIDD and tcga_util are available for download at
http://scheet.org/software.

