Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Functional Study of DCC Gene in multiple myeloma mell lines


Functional Study of DCC Gene in Multiple Myeloma Cell
LinesABSTRACTINTRODUCTION: Multiple Myeloma (MM) is an incurable
hematological malignancy characterized by multiorgan dysfunction as a
result of bone marrow infiltration by malignant cells and the systemic
damage of monoclonal circulating protein. Despite considerable progress
in understanding MM biology, the molecular basis of this disease still
remains open to debate. Previous data showed that DCC gene
hypermethylation is significantly correlated with poor prognosis of MM
patients. However, the involvement of DCC in the tumorigenesis process of
MM remains unclear. PURPOSE: To better understand the role of DCC in this
pathology through gene silencing in MM cell lines and evaluation of its
interference in different tumorigenic processes. METHODS: The DCC gene
expression was evaluated in three MM cell lines (RPMI-8226 and U266) and
promoter methylation profile of this gene in the three cell lines was
determined. The presence of DCC protein was confirmed by Western blotting
(WB). The DCC expression was silenced by esiRNA and transfections were
performed by electroporation. RESULTS: We detected the presence of
aberrant methylation in DCC promoter in RPMI-8226, a cell line with
undetectable expression of DCC. On the other hand, DCC was not methylated
in U266, which present expression of DCC at mRNA and protein level. For
this reason, DCC was silenced in U266 with esiRNA and its impact in the
apoptosis, cell viability, proliferation and cell cycle processes was
evaluated in this cell line.Support by FAPESP

