Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HOXD10 suppresses mammary tumor growth and metastasis coincident
with decreased CD11b+Gr1+ leukocyte infiltration and angiogenesis


The tumor suppressor gene HOXD10 is frequently lost in breast cancer, and
we have previously shown that restoring expression of this master
transcriptional regulator can revert mammary tumor cells to a normal,
polarized phenotype and inhibit their growth in nude mice (Carrio et al.,
Cancer Res., 2005). In addition, we showed that restoring HOXD10 also
reduced VEGFA expression and decreased endothelial cell migration in
vitro (Chen et al., Cancer Res., 2009). Considering the critical role of
the immune system in mammary tumor progression and metastasis, we
investigated whether Hoxd10 could also prevent breast tumor progression
in an immunocompetent model. Metastatic 4T1 cell lines were transduced
with Hoxd10 and were either orthotopically or intravenously injected into
four to eight week old, female Balb/c mice. We observed a significant
reduction in tumor burden at both primary at metastatic sites in tumors
expressing Hoxd10. Immunohistochemical staining for CD31 of primary
tumors expressing Hoxd10 revealed decreased angiogenesis. Flow cytometry
and immunohistochemical staining also revealed a decrease in infiltrating
Cd11b+Gr1+ leukocytes in Hoxd10-expressing tissues. Gene and protein
analysis revealed that in addition to decreased VEGFA, HOXD10 also
reduced expression of CCL2, a key chemokine linked to recruitment of
Cd11B+Gr1+ leukocytes. Using an in vitro migration assay, we confirmed
that the HOXD10-mediated reduction in CCL2 expression was directly linked
to reduced recruitment of monocytes to tumor cells. Together, these data
show that HOXD10 can stabilize the tumor microenvironment by coordinately
reducing tumor cell growth, angiogenesis, leukocyte recruitment, and
metastasis, and suggest a novel and comprehensive therapeutic approach to
treat mammary tumors.

