Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MiR-449a promotes breast cancer progression by activating the NF-B
pathway


INTRODUCTIONMicroRNAs (miRs) have been implicated in various human
malignancies and are being developed as diagnostic, predictive, and
prognostic biomarkers. Our previous global profiling studies found
miR-449a to be over-expressed in archival lymph node-negative invasive
ductal breast carcinoma samples (n=74) when compared to normal tissues.
Furthermore, miR-449a expression level was significantly associated with
relapse. The mechanism(s) by which miR-449a functions remains unknown,
and the aim of the current study was therefore to elucidate the roles and
mRNA targets of miR-449a in breast cancer.MATERIAL AND METHODSMiR-449a
expression was evaluated in six human breast cancer cell lines (T47D,
MDA-MB-468, MDA-MB-231, MCF-7, MDA-MB-453, and ZR75-1). Three of these
cell lines, T47D, MMDA-MB-468, and MDA-MB-231, were selected and used to
assess the biological effects of miR-449a on cell viability,
clonogenicity, cell migration, and invasion. Downstream target genes were
identified by combining in silico miRWalk prediction and cell
line/patient sample microarray data. Targets were validated using qRT-PCR
and luciferase reporter assays.RESULTSConsistent with our global
profiling work, several (4/6) of the tested breast cancer cell lines
over-expressed miR-449a. CDC20B, the miR-449a host gene and an essential
regulator of cell division, was also over-expressed. Knockdown of
miR-449a resulted in significantly decreased cell viability, clonogenic
survival, migration, and invasion. MiR-449a candidate targets were then
identified by integrating in silico prediction algorithms, cell line mRNA
expression profiling (Affymetrix Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0), and
clinical specimen mRNA expression data. Two genes, CRIP2 (Cysteine rich
protein 2, a transcription factor) and PRKAG1 (Protein Kinase,
AMP-Activated, Gamma 1 Non-Catalytic), were verified as miR-449a targets
using qRT-PCR. Moreover, direct interactions between miR-449a and the
3-UTRs of both CRIP2 and PRKAG1 were confirmed using luciferase reporter
assays. Inhibition of CRIP2 by miR-449a allowed for NF-B-induced
transcription of survival, proliferation, and growth-related genes,
providing further evidence for the role of miR-449a in breast cancer
progression.CONCLUSIONSMiR-449a is over-expressed in breast cancer cells,
promoting cellular proliferation, migration, and invasion. One mechanism
by which miR-449a functions is to down-regulate CRIP2, leading to NF-kB
activation and possible cancer progression. Further investigations into
gene regulation by miR-449a may reveal other promising targets for the
management of breast cancer.

