Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: p62/sequestosome 1, a potent prognostic factor, enhance cell
proliferation in human colorectal carcinoma


p62/sequestosome 1 (p62) is a multi-domain protein implicated in the
selective degradation of ubiquitinated protein by autophagy, and it also
functions as a scaffold protein in cell signaling pathways. p62 was
recently reported to be accumulated in several types of human cancer
cells, but the clinical significance and biological roles of p62 have
remained largely unknown in colorectal carcinoma. p62 immunoreactivity
was examined in 118 surgical specimens of human colorectal carcinomas
using immunohistochemistry. p62 immunoreactivity was detected in about
one third of the carcinoma cases, while it was negligible in the adjacent
non-neoplastic epithelium. The immunohistochemical p62 status was
significantly associated with synchronous liver metastasis in the
carcinoma cases, and multivariate analysis further revealed the p62
status as an independent adverse prognostic factor for overall survival
in the patients. We used 4 colon carcinoma cells in the in vitro studies
to evaluate the functional roles of p62. The colon carcinoma cells
transfected with p62-specific small interfering RNAs showed significantly
decreased cell proliferation activities, and the colon carcinoma cells
transfected with p62 expression plasmid showed significantly increased
the cell proliferation activity. Results of in vitro studies indicated
that p62 significantly promoted the cell proliferation of colorectal
carcinoma cells, but the autophagic activity was not linked to the
p62-mediated cell proliferation. These findings suggest that p62 promotes
the proliferation of colon carcinoma cells mainly as a scaffold protein.
The p62 status is a potent prognostic factor in human colorectal cancer
patients, and could be an important specific therapeutic target of
colorectal carcinoma that could improve the clinical outcome in the
future.

