Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Upregulation of KLF4 and inhibition of HDAC activity by
methylseleninic acid in human esophageal squamous cells


In the present study, we investigated the potential mechanisms of the
inhibition of cell growths induced by methylseleninic acid, MSA. Our
result showed that MSA could induce cell growth inhibition and apoptosis
in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) cells and inhibit tumor
growth measured by xenograft volume in nude mice. Upon treated with MSA,
HDACs activity was decreased and GCN5, one of histone acetyltransferases,
upregulated as well in human esophageal squamous cell lines. Meanwhile a
significant increase of H3K9 acetylation (H3K9ac) was detected.
Notably,upregulation of KLF4, which has been wildly reported usually
downregulated expression in cell lines and tumor tissues of ESCC, was
also observed after MSA treatment. Additionally the acetylated histone H3
could locate more at KLF4 promoter region than non-acetylated one did,
showed by chromatin immunoprecipitation assay. Moreover knockdown of GCN5
reduced the protein levels of both H3K9ac and KLF4, along with less cell
growth inhibition. Taken all, our result indicates that MSA can exert its
anti-tumor effects, at least in part, by up-regulation KLF4, probably via
inhibiting the HDAC activity and up-regulation GCN5. By our best of
knowledge, this is the first report of selenium-induced selective,
post-translational acetylation of histone H3 at Lys9, which may depend on
the activities of and the balance between HDACs and HATs.Note: This
abstract was not presented at the meeting.

