Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Suppression of hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 by nuclear factor B in
hepatoma cells


BACKGROUND & AIMS: HCC predominantly arises from cirrhotic liver where
there usually has been repeated wound-healing response upon chronic
inflammation. However, the mechanistic link between hepatic inflammation
and carcinogenesis remains largely unknown.METHODS: Expression of HNF4,
RelA(p65) or microRNAs in human HCCs was determined by Real-time PCR,
western blot or immunohistochemistry. 3UTR reporter assay was conducted
to determine the regulation of HNF4 by microRNAs. The recombinant
adenoviruses carrying HNF4 gene were injected into
diethylinitrosamine(DEN)-administrated Wistar rats through tail vein.
Tissue microarray was utilized to assess the expression of HNF4 and RelA
HCC tissues.RESULTS: Overexpression or interference of RelA remarkably
decreased or increased HNF4 expression in hepatoma cells respectively,
suggesting a negative regulation of HNF4 by NF-B. Interestingly, ecotopic
RelA expression dramatically reduced the activation of HNF4-3UTR
indicating microRNA could be involved in the feedback regulation. MiR-21
was predicted to be regulated by NF-B using Targetscan analysis, and
overexpression of RelA evidently enhanced the miR-21 expression. Delivery
of miR-21 mimic notably suppressed HNF4-3UTR activity and HNF4
expression. Moreover, treatment of miR-21 inhibitor increased HNF4 levels
and attenuated the down-regulation of HNF4 by RelA. Consistently,
downregulation of HNF4 and upregulation of RelA was detected during
DEN-induced rat hepatocarcingenesis, negative correlation of HNF4 and
RelA was also observed in human HCCs. CONCLUSIONS: These findings not
only broaden the knowledge on hepatic inflammation and cancer initiation,
but also indicates novel strategy in HCC prevention.Note: This abstract
was not presented at the meeting.

