Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: 6,7,4-Trihydroxyisoflavone, a daidzein metabolites, regulated
glycogen synthase kinase 3/-catenin signaling and inhibited cell
proliferation in MCF10DCIS.com human breast cancer cells


Recent studies have demonstrated that hepatic daidzein metabolites
exerted significant activities in regulating different types of cancer
including skin and colon. However, the role of daidzein metabolites on
breast cancer has not been extensively studied. In this study, we found
that 6,7,4-trihydroxyisoflavone exerted the strongest inhibitory effect
on the proliferation of MCF10DCIS.com human breast cancer cells among the
daidzein metabolites we tested. Cell cycle at S and G2/M phase were
arrested by 6,7,4-trihydroxyisoflavone, which were derived from
regulating cyclins and cyclin dependent kinases (CDKs) including cyclin
B, CDK1 and CDK2, as well as CDK inhibitor, p27 in a dose dependent
manner. Furthermore, 6,7,4-trihydroxyisoflavone increased the GSK3
activity through inhibiting the phosphorylation at Ser9, which was caused
by the enhancement of phosphatase activity. These effects of
6,7,4-trihydroxyisoflavone led to inhibition of the nuclear translocation
of -catenin, and regulation of cell cycle related proteins, cyclinB and
CDK2. Taken together, 6,7,4-trihydroxyisoflavone regulated GSK3/-catenin
signaling, and arrested at S and G2/M phase in MCF10DCIS.com human breast
cancer cells, and it suggests that the hepatic metabolite of daidzein,
6,7,4-trihydroxyisoflavone, may be a potent agent in inhibiting
MCF10DCIS.com human breast cancer growth.

