Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Specific miRNA signatures characterize different metastatic sites
in clear cell renal cell carcinoma


Background: MiRNAs are regulators of gene expression in tumorigenesis and
progression. To identify miRNAs associated with metastasis miRNA
expression in distant metastases was compared to primary clear cell renal
cell carcinoma (ccRCC).Material and methods: Total RNA of 27 primary
ccRCC samples and 25 distant metastases (lung, bone and brain) was
isolated from formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) samples Microarray
analyses were performed for a global miRNA expression profiling. Results
were validated by qPCR. For miRNA target identification a ccRCC cell line
(786-O) was transfected with miRNAs differently expressed in metastatic
primary tumors and metastases.Results: We identified 9 miRNAs (including
miR-30c and miR-126) with a similar expression in metastatic primary
ccRCC and distant metastases from different metastatic sites compared to
non-metastatic primary ccRCC. 11 miRNAs (including miR-10b and miR-204)
were differently expressed in distant metastases compared to primary
ccRCC. Furthermore, each metastatic site is characterized by a specific
miRNA signature. Results were verified on selected miRNAs using qPCR. In
vitro studies identified potential miRNA targets and associated
metastasis related pathways.Discussion: These data suggest that miRNAs
play an important role in metastatic processes of ccRCC. Furthermore, our
results regarding different metastatic sites suggest two important
statements. Specific miRNAs characterize distant metastases in general.
On the other hand, miRNA expression is associated with specific
conditions at different metastatic sites. Thus, the data presented in
this study give the base for a better understanding of the involvement of
miRNAs as regulators of metastasis which opens new possibilities for new
targeted therapy options.

