Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel orphan G-protein-coupled receptor is oncogenic and mediates
anti-estrogen resistance in human mammary carcinoma


Alterations in cellular pathways related to both endocrine and angiogenic
factors may contribute to breast cancer progression. Inhibition of the
elevated levels of these pathways is associated with clinical benefits.
However, underlying mechanisms by which endocrine-related pathways and
angiogenic factor signaling cooperatively promote breast cancer
progression remain unclear. In this study, we report that novel orphan
G-protein-coupled receptor (GPCR), GPR YJ, is oncogenic and mediates
anti-estrogen resistance in breast cancer. GPR YJ is overexpressed in
breast cancer cells and tissues, where elevated expression correlates
with high tumor grade. Also, GPR YJ induces the expression of several
angiogenic factors (VEGF, bFGF and IL-8), as well as ErbB (amphiregulin,
epiregulin and neuregulins), which activate their respective pathways,
leading to increased cell proliferation and survival, enhanced
anchorage-independent growth, and promoted migration and invasion. In
vivo, GPR YJ promotes the formation of large, well-vascularized tumors
that metastasize to distant organs such as lymph nodes, lung and liver.
Thus, deregulated expression of GPR YJ contributes to breast cancer
progression and metastasis by inducing several growth factors that alter
tumor-specific cell fates and the tumor stromal microenvironment.

