Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of Interleukin (IL)-22 on the UVB-induced proliferation
and inflammation of human keratinocyte cell line, HaCaT


Interleukin 22 (IL-22), a member of IL-10 family, is a potent mediator of
inflammatory responses. It is produced by activated CD4+ T cells and
natural killer (NK) cells, but IL-22R expression is restricted to
nonhematopoietic cells in the skin, pancreas, intestine, liver, lung and
kidney. IL-22 suppresses IL-4 production from Th2 cells and induces acute
phase proteins in liver and pancreas. It is recently found that IL-22
plays a critical role in the maintenance of epidermal homeostasis by
controlling cell cycle of keratinocytes. Therefore, we investigated that
role of IL-22 on the proliferation and inflammation of ultraviolet B
(UVB)-irradiated human keratinocytes, HaCaT. First, we found the
expression of IL-22R mRNA and protein level was increased in HaCaT by UVB
(100 J/m2) irradiation. Interestingly, the translocation of IL-22R from
cytosol to membrane was increased by UVB irradiation. When UVB-irradiated
HaCaT was cultured in the presence of recombinant IL-22 (rIL-22), the
suppressed proliferation of HaCaT by UVB was rescued. In addition, we
found that the production of UVB-induced pro-inflammatory cytokines, such
as IL-1, IL-6 and IL-18, was increased by the treatment of rIL-22. Taken
together, IL-22 plays a critical role in inflammation by UVB irradiation.
And it suggests that UVB-induced skin inflammation could effectively be
controlled by the regulation of IL-22 production and its action on
keratinocytes.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

