Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A patient derived xenograft tumor model platform for mouse trials


From Chinese cancer patients, close to 600 patient derived xenograft
(PDX) tumor models have been established (> P3, three passages in mice)
at GenenDesign through serial passages in the immune-compromised nude
mice. The major collection of GenenDesign PDX tumor model platform
represents cancer types that are prevalent in Asian patients, including
gastric cancer (> 200 models), esophageal cancer (>100 models), liver
cancer (50 models), pancreatic cancer (>60 models) and lung cancer (> 80
models). Establishment of variant PDX models from the same patient tumor
is on-going to support translational studies of tumor
heterogeneity.Initial characterization indicates that the mouse PDX
models have captured the major histopathological characteristics of the
original human tumors. Reproducible growth curves for PDX models (>P3)
support their usage in efficacy analysis of anti-cancer therapeutic
agents. Response curves to SoC (standard of care) chemotherapies such as
Paclitaxel for lung cancer, FOLFOX for gastric cancer and Sorafenib for
liver cancer have been established in the PDX tumor models, providing a
baseline for further investigation of novel therapies in a combination
setting.On-going molecular characterization including oncogene mutational
analysis and target specific IHC and FISH analysis has identified panels
of PDX tumor models with aberrations in key oncogenic signaling pathways,
including lung panels with EGFR overexpression or KRAS mutations, gastric
panels with FGFR2 amplification or being HER2 positive, lung and gastric
panels with cMET overexpression. Testing of Herceptin in the gastric HER2
positive tumor panel resulted in observations similar to that from the
ToGA trial. At the same time, Herceptin resistant PDX tumor variants (de
novo or acquired) were identified or established. The PDX tumor model
panels facilitate translational studies in a mouse trial format in a
setting similar to clinical trials to test patient stratification
strategies and drug response predictive biomarkers for emerging
therapeutic modalities.

