Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nanoliposomal c-MYC-siRNA inhibits in vivo tumor growth of
cisplatin-resistant ovarian cancer


Ovarian cancer is the deadliest of gynecological cancers in the United
States. With fewer than 15% of cases diagnosed early, ovarian cancer
continues to be characterized by late-stage presentation. Treatment for
ovarian cancer usually involves surgical cytoreduction followed by
platinum-based chemotherapy. Unfortunately, despite initial respond, more
than 70% of ovarian cancer patients develop cisplatin resistance, relapse
and therapeutic failure. Therefore, there is a need of novel therapies
focused on targets within cancer cell survival pathways for advanced
stage drug resistant ovarian cancer. Evidence indicates that activation
of the oncogenic transcription factor c-MYC is involved in drug
resistance. Our previous findings indicate that cisplatin-resistant
ovarian cancer cells express higher c-MYC protein levels when compared to
their sensitive counterparts. Importantly, targeting c-MYC with small
interfering RNA (siRNA) in the cisplatin-resistant ovarian cancer cell
line, A2780CP20, induced a significant cell growth arrest and inhibition
of cell proliferation. Apoptosis and arrest of cell cycle progression
were also observed after siRNA-based silencing of c-MYC. These results
were confirmed by Western blot analysis. Furthermore, in vivo delivery of
c-MYC-siRNA in a murine xenograft model of cisplatin-resistant ovarian
cancer was achieved by using DOPC/PEG-2000-based nanoliposomes. A single
weekly injection of nanoliposomal c-MYC-siRNA, during a four week period,
decreased tumor weight and number of tumor nodules compared with a
liposomal-negative control siRNA. These data propose c-MYC as a potential
therapeutic target for cisplatin-resistant ovarian cancer.

