Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Restoration of LKB1 defect in EKVX cells leads to resistance to
microtubule targeting agents


LKB1 is frequently inactivated in non-small cell lung cancers, probably
because of its role in suppressing tumor metastasis. Here, we identified
a novel LKB1 mutation in the EKVX lung adenocarcinoma cell line, where
serine216 in the kinase domain was mutated to phenylalanine. Genomic
sequencing revealed this change to be homozygous, suggesting that the
other allele was probably eliminated through a loss of heterozygosity
mechanism. We also demonstrated that EKVX cells are defective in
energetic stress-induced AMPK phosphorylation, which can be restored by
the re-establishment of wild-type but not mutant LKB1 expression. This is
consistent with the role of LKB1 as an upstream kinase for AMPK in
energetic stress conditions. Interestingly, expression of wild-type LKB1
in EKVX cells was found to be resistant to microtubule targeting agents,
such as paclitaxel or vinblastine by SRB analysis. Cell cycle analysis
indicated that while the parental or LKB1-mutant expressing cells enter
mitotic arrest after 25nM paclitaxel treatment, EKVX-LKB1 cells failed to
enter G2/M arrest. Immunofluorescence analysis also revealed a decrease
in microtubule bundling after 50nM paclitaxel treatment in EKVX cells
with wild-type LKB1 expression. This phenomenon, however, was not
observed in other natural LKB1-null A549 or H460 cells. Therefore, our
data suggest that the re-establishment of LKB1 expression might lead to
resistance to microtubule targeting agents in a subset of non-small cell
lung cancer cells with LKB1 mutation.

