Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Do cancer patients with better quality of life report higher
satisfaction with the quality of care they receive


Background: Patient satisfaction with quality of care is being
increasingly recognized and reported as an important outcome measure in
oncology. However, it has been argued by some that patients with greater
satisfaction with care quality might be the ones with better
self-reported quality of life (QoL). In other words, patient satisfaction
has been simply purported to be a marker of underlying patient QoL. We
asked the question if cancer patients who report higher satisfaction with
quality of their care are indeed the ones with better QoL.Methods: 6,914
returning cancer patients treated at four Cancer Treatment Centers of
America hospitals completed a patient satisfaction survey between July
2011 and March 2013. All patients who had not responded to a service
quality questionnaire within the preceding 60 days of treatment were
eligible. Overall QoL (How would you rate your overall health during the
last week?) was measured on a 7-point Likert scale ranging from very poor
to excellent. Overall patient satisfaction (considering everything, how
satisfied are you with your overall experience?) was also measured on a
7-point Likert scale ranging from completely dissatisfied to completely
satisfied. Spearman correlation was used to investigate the association
between patient satisfaction and QoL.Results: A total of 8,642 eligible
cancer patients were contacted to participate in the survey. 6,914
patients responded. As a result, the response rate for this study was
80%. The median time duration between the date first seen and the date of
first survey was 7.5 months. The mean age at the time of survey was 56.6
years. 4,116 patients were newly diagnosed while 2,798 had been
previously treated. 2,778 were males and 4,136 were females. The most
common cancer types were breast (27.6%), prostate (13.3%), lung (11.3%),
colorectal (8.9%) and pancreas (5.2%). 20%, 28%, 24% and 28% patients had
stage I, II, III and IV disease respectively. 1,916 (27.7%) patients
reported excellent QoL while 5,553 (80.3%) patients were completely
satisfied with their care. Spearman correlation coefficient between QoL
and patient satisfaction for the entire patient population was 0.20
(pBackground: Patient satisfaction with quality of care is being
increasingly recognized and reported as an important outcome measure in
oncology. However, it has been argued by some that patients with greater
satisfaction with care quality might be the ones with better
self-reported quality of life (QoL). In other words, patient satisfaction
has been simply purported to be a marker of underlying patient QoL. We
asked the question if cancer patients who report higher satisfaction with
quality of their care are indeed the ones with better QoL.Methods: 6,914
returning cancer patients treated at four Cancer Treatment Centers of
America hospitals completed a patient satisfaction survey between July
2011 and March 2013. All patients who had not responded to a service
quality questionnaire within the preceding 60 days of treatment were
eligible. Overall QoL (How would you rate your overall health during the
last week?) was measured on a 7-point Likert scale ranging from very poor
to excellent. Overall patient satisfaction (considering everything, how
satisfied are you with your overall experience?) was also measured on a
7-point Likert scale ranging from completely dissatisfied to completely
satisfied. Spearman correlation was used to investigate the association
between patient satisfaction and QoL.Results: A total of 8,642 eligible
cancer patients were contacted to participate in the survey. 6,914
patients responded. As a result, the response rate for this study was
80%. The median time duration between the date first seen and the date of
first survey was 7.5 months. The mean age at the time of survey was 56.6
years. 4,116 patients were newly diagnosed while 2,798 had been
previously treated. 2,778 were males and 4,136 were females. The most
common cancer types were breast (27.6%), prostate (13.3%), lung (11.3%),
colorectal (8.9%) and pancreas (5.2%). 20%, 28%, 24% and 28% patients had
stage I, II, III and IV disease respectively. 1,916 (27.7%) patients
reported excellent QoL while 5,553 (80.3%) patients were completely
satisfied with their care. Spearman correlation coefficient between QoL
and patient satisfaction for the entire patient population was 0.20
(p<0.001). These correlations in different patient subgroups were as
follows: males (0.21), females (0.20), early-stage disease (0.19),
late-stage disease (0.22), newly diagnosed (0.19), previously treated
(0.20), breast (0.17), colorectal (0.24), lung (0.23), pancreas (0.18),
prostate (0.20); with p Background: Patient satisfaction with quality of
care is being increasingly recognized and reported as an important
outcome measure in oncology. However, it has been argued by some that
patients with greater satisfaction with care quality might be the ones
with better self-reported quality of life (QoL). In other words, patient
satisfaction has been simply purported to be a marker of underlying
patient QoL. We asked the question if cancer patients who report higher
satisfaction with quality of their care are indeed the ones with better
QoL.Methods: 6,914 returning cancer patients treated at four Cancer
Treatment Centers of America hospitals completed a patient satisfaction
survey between July 2011 and March 2013. All patients who had not
responded to a service quality questionnaire within the preceding 60 days
of treatment were eligible. Overall QoL (How would you rate your overall
health during the last week?) was measured on a 7-point Likert scale
ranging from very poor to excellent. Overall patient satisfaction
(considering everything, how satisfied are you with your overall
experience?) was also measured on a 7-point Likert scale ranging from
completely dissatisfied to completely satisfied. Spearman correlation was
used to investigate the association between patient satisfaction and
QoL.Results: A total of 8,642 eligible cancer patients were contacted to
participate in the survey. 6,914 patients responded. As a result, the
response rate for this study was 80%. The median time duration between
the date first seen and the date of first survey was 7.5 months. The mean
age at the time of survey was 56.6 years. 4,116 patients were newly
diagnosed while 2,798 had been previously treated. 2,778 were males and
4,136 were females. The most common cancer types were breast (27.6%),
prostate (13.3%), lung (11.3%), colorectal (8.9%) and pancreas (5.2%).
20%, 28%, 24% and 28% patients had stage I, II, III and IV disease
respectively. 1,916 (27.7%) patients reported excellent QoL while 5,553
(80.3%) patients were completely satisfied with their care. Spearman
correlation coefficient between QoL and patient satisfaction for the
entire patient population was 0.20 (p<0.001). These correlations in
different patient subgroups were as follows: males (0.21), females
(0.20), early-stage disease (0.19), late-stage disease (0.22), newly
diagnosed (0.19), previously treated (0.20), breast (0.17), colorectal
(0.24), lung (0.23), pancreas (0.18), prostate (0.20); with p <0.001 for
all.Conclusions: Self-reported QoL has a low correlation with patient
satisfaction with care quality. Contrary to what one might expect, higher
levels of self-reported QoL do not translate into higher satisfaction
with oncology care. This analysis shows that self-reported QoL and
satisfaction with care are weakly related dimensions of the larger cancer
care quality umbrella.

