Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel peptidic CXCR4 antagonist LY2510924 disrupts the SDF-1/CXCR4
axis resulting in anti-AML efficacy in vivo


Disruption of the SDF-1/CXCR4 axis by CXCR4 inhibitors has been proven to
be an attractive investigational therapeutic approach for acute myeloid
leukemia (AML). Moreover, the addition of CXCR4 inhibitor plerixafor to
cytotoxic chemotherapy in a phase 1/2 study was associated with increased
response rates in relapsed AML (Blood 2012:119;3917). However, plerixafor
as a single agent induces only 2- to 4-fold mobilization of leukemic
blasts, and this is thought to be due to incomplete inhibition of the
SDF-1/CXCR4 axis and short half-life.LY2510924 is a selective peptidic
CXCR4 antagonist that blocks SDF-1 from binding to the receptor. Flow
cytometry using OCI-AML3 cells showed that LY2510924 inhibited binding of
anti-CXCR4 antibody 12G5 to surface CXCR4 in a concentration-dependent
fashion. LY2510924 was 100 times more potent compared to plerixafor
(normalized surface expression, LY2510924 at 1 nM, 10.70.27%; plerixafor
at 1 nM and 100 nM, 74.61.23% and 11.00.29%, respectively). The action of
LY2510924 started as early as 1 minute and continued up to 72 hours at 10
nM. SDF-1 induced migration of OCI-AML3 and primary AML cells, which was
abolished by 1 nM LY2510924 but not suppressed by 1 nM plerixafor.
LY2510924 inhibited SDF-1-induced AKT and/or ERK phosphorylation in AML
cell lines (OCI-AML3 and U937) and primary AML cells as shown by
immunoblotting and multi-parameter phospho-flow cytometry.To test the
efficacy of LY2510924 in vivo, we injected OCI-AML3/luc/mCherry cells
into sub-lethally irradiated NSG mice. Twelve days after cell injection,
mice were randomized into 4 groups: control, cytarabine, LY2510924, and
LY2510924 plus cytarabine. On day 21 after cell injection, we observed a
3.41.4-fold increase of circulating leukemic cells at 3 hours and a
24.115.4-fold mobilization at 24 hours after LY2510924 injection.
Bioluminescence imaging demonstrated that mice treated with LY2510924 had
lower leukemia burden than cytarabine-treated and control mice. On day
39, the combination group showed less luciferase activity than the
LY2510924 group (P=0.034). Hematoxylin-eosin and immunohistochemical
staining with human CD45 antibody demonstrated that the LY2510924-treated
groups had a significant decrease in leukemic infiltration of bone
marrow, spleen, liver, and lung. This anti-leukemia effect translated
into a significant prolongation of survival in LY2510924-treated mice (40
days vs. 26 days, PDisruption of the SDF-1/CXCR4 axis by CXCR4 inhibitors
has been proven to be an attractive investigational therapeutic approach
for acute myeloid leukemia (AML). Moreover, the addition of CXCR4
inhibitor plerixafor to cytotoxic chemotherapy in a phase 1/2 study was
associated with increased response rates in relapsed AML (Blood
2012:119;3917). However, plerixafor as a single agent induces only 2- to
4-fold mobilization of leukemic blasts, and this is thought to be due to
incomplete inhibition of the SDF-1/CXCR4 axis and short
half-life.LY2510924 is a selective peptidic CXCR4 antagonist that blocks
SDF-1 from binding to the receptor. Flow cytometry using OCI-AML3 cells
showed that LY2510924 inhibited binding of anti-CXCR4 antibody 12G5 to
surface CXCR4 in a concentration-dependent fashion. LY2510924 was 100
times more potent compared to plerixafor (normalized surface expression,
LY2510924 at 1 nM, 10.70.27%; plerixafor at 1 nM and 100 nM, 74.61.23%
and 11.00.29%, respectively). The action of LY2510924 started as early as
1 minute and continued up to 72 hours at 10 nM. SDF-1 induced migration
of OCI-AML3 and primary AML cells, which was abolished by 1 nM LY2510924
but not suppressed by 1 nM plerixafor. LY2510924 inhibited SDF-1-induced
AKT and/or ERK phosphorylation in AML cell lines (OCI-AML3 and U937) and
primary AML cells as shown by immunoblotting and multi-parameter
phospho-flow cytometry.To test the efficacy of LY2510924 in vivo, we
injected OCI-AML3/luc/mCherry cells into sub-lethally irradiated NSG
mice. Twelve days after cell injection, mice were randomized into 4
groups: control, cytarabine, LY2510924, and LY2510924 plus cytarabine. On
day 21 after cell injection, we observed a 3.41.4-fold increase of
circulating leukemic cells at 3 hours and a 24.115.4-fold mobilization at
24 hours after LY2510924 injection. Bioluminescence imaging demonstrated
that mice treated with LY2510924 had lower leukemia burden than
cytarabine-treated and control mice. On day 39, the combination group
showed less luciferase activity than the LY2510924 group (P=0.034).
Hematoxylin-eosin and immunohistochemical staining with human CD45
antibody demonstrated that the LY2510924-treated groups had a significant
decrease in leukemic infiltration of bone marrow, spleen, liver, and
lung. This anti-leukemia effect translated into a significant
prolongation of survival in LY2510924-treated mice (40 days vs. 26 days,
P<0.001).In summary, in vitro data showed that a novel peptidic CXCR4
antagonist, LY2510924, could effectively disrupt the SDF-1/CXCR4 axis in
AML cells and was more potent than plerixafor. In vivo data showed
anti-leukemia effects of LY2510924 as a single agent. LY2510924's
stronger potency than plerixafor, rapidity of action, and prolonged
CXCR4-inhibitory effects will likely translate into a higher
anti-leukemia potency than that of plerixafor in future clinical
applications.

