Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A computational method for somatic versus germline variant status
determination from targeted next-generation sequencing of clinical cancer
specimens without a matched normal control


Background: A key constraint in genomic testing in oncology is that
matched normal specimens are not commonly obtained in clinical practice.
Thus, while most clinically relevant genomic alterations have been
previously characterized and do not require normal tissue for
interpretation, interpretation of novel variants whose somatic status is
unknown is limited. We describe our approach to predicting somatic status
of genomic alterations from tumor tissue alone in a CLIA-certified,
NGS-based test that interrogates 236 cancer-related genes.Methods: For
each sample, we obtain a genome-wide CGH profile based on coverage and
allele frequencies (AF) at >3,500 SNPs, which is segmented and modeled to
estimate the tumor purity (p), copy number (C), and minor allele count
(M) at each segment. A variant's measured AF is compared to expectation:
AFgermline = (pM+1-p)/(pC+2(1-p)) versus AFsomatic = pM/(pC+2(1-p)) and
prediction is made with statistical confidence based on read depth and
local variability of SNP AF.Results: For validation, we examined samples
from 30 lung & colon cancer patients, where we sequenced tumors and
matched-normal tissue. More broadly, we examined predictions for 17
somatic hotspot mutations and 20 common germline SNPs in 2,578 clinical
cancer specimens. Finally, to assess the impact of stromal admixture, we
examined 3 cell lines, which were titrated with their matched normal to 6
levels (10% to 75%). Overall, predictions were made in up to 85% of
cases, with 95%-99% of variants predicted correctly:
Conclusions: This method leverages deep NGS to predict variant somatic
status without a matched-normal control. It supports functional
prioritization and interpretation of alterations discovered on routine
testing and can indicate additional work-up if germline risk variants are
found. When optimized and fully validated, it may inform clinical
decision making and expand treatment choices for cancer patients.

