Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NanoChannel-mediated communication between tumor cells and
endothelium mediates metastatic parasitism


Uncovering mechanisms underlying metastasis is the final frontier in
cancer biology. Metastasis is a complex process with many discrete
stages. While there has been much research on the seed (metastatic tumor
cells) and the soil (colonized host tissue) hypothesis, limited knowledge
exists on the interaction between metastatic cells and vascular
endothelial cells, prerequisite for the development of metastatic
disease.Here we describe nanoscale tubular structures, or nanoChannels
(nCs), which mediate early intercellular communication between tumor
epithelial cells and the endothelium in vitro and in vivo. These
structures were examined in a 3D in vitro co-culture model system
capturing molecular and physical interactions between metastatic cells
and the endothelium. Unlike classical modes of cell-cell communication
(i.e. paracrine, endocrine, and autocrine signaling), nCs allow for both
rapid and directed transfer of intracellular contents from metastatic
breast cancer cells to the endothelium. The ability to form nanoChannels
correlates with metastatic potential of the tumor cells and enables
direct tracking of both synthetic materials (chemicals and nanoparticles)
and bioorganic macromolecules (proteins and miRNAs). As one specific
example, we show that miR-132, which is implicated in pathological
angiogenesis, can translocate from tumor cells to the endothelial cells
through nCs, resulting in decreased p120RasGAP and activation of AKT in
the recipient endothelial cells. Furthermore, nC-mediated communication
resulted in upregulation of pathological angiogenesis markers, such as
CD137 (26x, pUncovering mechanisms underlying metastasis is the final
frontier in cancer biology. Metastasis is a complex process with many
discrete stages. While there has been much research on the seed
(metastatic tumor cells) and the soil (colonized host tissue) hypothesis,
limited knowledge exists on the interaction between metastatic cells and
vascular endothelial cells, prerequisite for the development of
metastatic disease.Here we describe nanoscale tubular structures, or
nanoChannels (nCs), which mediate early intercellular communication
between tumor epithelial cells and the endothelium in vitro and in vivo.
These structures were examined in a 3D in vitro co-culture model system
capturing molecular and physical interactions between metastatic cells
and the endothelium. Unlike classical modes of cell-cell communication
(i.e. paracrine, endocrine, and autocrine signaling), nCs allow for both
rapid and directed transfer of intracellular contents from metastatic
breast cancer cells to the endothelium. The ability to form nanoChannels
correlates with metastatic potential of the tumor cells and enables
direct tracking of both synthetic materials (chemicals and nanoparticles)
and bioorganic macromolecules (proteins and miRNAs). As one specific
example, we show that miR-132, which is implicated in pathological
angiogenesis, can translocate from tumor cells to the endothelial cells
through nCs, resulting in decreased p120RasGAP and activation of AKT in
the recipient endothelial cells. Furthermore, nC-mediated communication
resulted in upregulation of pathological angiogenesis markers, such as
CD137 (26x, p<0.001) and CD276 (2x, pUncovering mechanisms underlying
metastasis is the final frontier in cancer biology. Metastasis is a
complex process with many discrete stages. While there has been much
research on the seed (metastatic tumor cells) and the soil (colonized
host tissue) hypothesis, limited knowledge exists on the interaction
between metastatic cells and vascular endothelial cells, prerequisite for
the development of metastatic disease.Here we describe nanoscale tubular
structures, or nanoChannels (nCs), which mediate early intercellular
communication between tumor epithelial cells and the endothelium in vitro
and in vivo. These structures were examined in a 3D in vitro co-culture
model system capturing molecular and physical interactions between
metastatic cells and the endothelium. Unlike classical modes of cell-cell
communication (i.e. paracrine, endocrine, and autocrine signaling), nCs
allow for both rapid and directed transfer of intracellular contents from
metastatic breast cancer cells to the endothelium. The ability to form
nanoChannels correlates with metastatic potential of the tumor cells and
enables direct tracking of both synthetic materials (chemicals and
nanoparticles) and bioorganic macromolecules (proteins and miRNAs). As
one specific example, we show that miR-132, which is implicated in
pathological angiogenesis, can translocate from tumor cells to the
endothelial cells through nCs, resulting in decreased p120RasGAP and
activation of AKT in the recipient endothelial cells. Furthermore,
nC-mediated communication resulted in upregulation of pathological
angiogenesis markers, such as CD137 (26x, p<0.001) and CD276 (2x,
p<0.001). The increase in these pathological angiogenesis markers could
be reduced by pharmacological inhibition of nC formation. Combination of
500pM Docetaxel with 30nM Latrunculin A or 50nM Cytoclasin D resulted in
a 3x (pUncovering mechanisms underlying metastasis is the final frontier
in cancer biology. Metastasis is a complex process with many discrete
stages. While there has been much research on the seed (metastatic tumor
cells) and the soil (colonized host tissue) hypothesis, limited knowledge
exists on the interaction between metastatic cells and vascular
endothelial cells, prerequisite for the development of metastatic
disease.Here we describe nanoscale tubular structures, or nanoChannels
(nCs), which mediate early intercellular communication between tumor
epithelial cells and the endothelium in vitro and in vivo. These
structures were examined in a 3D in vitro co-culture model system
capturing molecular and physical interactions between metastatic cells
and the endothelium. Unlike classical modes of cell-cell communication
(i.e. paracrine, endocrine, and autocrine signaling), nCs allow for both
rapid and directed transfer of intracellular contents from metastatic
breast cancer cells to the endothelium. The ability to form nanoChannels
correlates with metastatic potential of the tumor cells and enables
direct tracking of both synthetic materials (chemicals and nanoparticles)
and bioorganic macromolecules (proteins and miRNAs). As one specific
example, we show that miR-132, which is implicated in pathological
angiogenesis, can translocate from tumor cells to the endothelial cells
through nCs, resulting in decreased p120RasGAP and activation of AKT in
the recipient endothelial cells. Furthermore, nC-mediated communication
resulted in upregulation of pathological angiogenesis markers, such as
CD137 (26x, p<0.001) and CD276 (2x, p<0.001). The increase in these
pathological angiogenesis markers could be reduced by pharmacological
inhibition of nC formation. Combination of 500pM Docetaxel with 30nM
Latrunculin A or 50nM Cytoclasin D resulted in a 3x (p<0.01) disruption
of TNT structures, reducing TNT-mediated communication by 42%
(pUncovering mechanisms underlying metastasis is the final frontier in
cancer biology. Metastasis is a complex process with many discrete
stages. While there has been much research on the seed (metastatic tumor
cells) and the soil (colonized host tissue) hypothesis, limited knowledge
exists on the interaction between metastatic cells and vascular
endothelial cells, prerequisite for the development of metastatic
disease.Here we describe nanoscale tubular structures, or nanoChannels
(nCs), which mediate early intercellular communication between tumor
epithelial cells and the endothelium in vitro and in vivo. These
structures were examined in a 3D in vitro co-culture model system
capturing molecular and physical interactions between metastatic cells
and the endothelium. Unlike classical modes of cell-cell communication
(i.e. paracrine, endocrine, and autocrine signaling), nCs allow for both
rapid and directed transfer of intracellular contents from metastatic
breast cancer cells to the endothelium. The ability to form nanoChannels
correlates with metastatic potential of the tumor cells and enables
direct tracking of both synthetic materials (chemicals and nanoparticles)
and bioorganic macromolecules (proteins and miRNAs). As one specific
example, we show that miR-132, which is implicated in pathological
angiogenesis, can translocate from tumor cells to the endothelial cells
through nCs, resulting in decreased p120RasGAP and activation of AKT in
the recipient endothelial cells. Furthermore, nC-mediated communication
resulted in upregulation of pathological angiogenesis markers, such as
CD137 (26x, p<0.001) and CD276 (2x, p<0.001). The increase in these
pathological angiogenesis markers could be reduced by pharmacological
inhibition of nC formation. Combination of 500pM Docetaxel with 30nM
Latrunculin A or 50nM Cytoclasin D resulted in a 3x (p<0.01) disruption
of TNT structures, reducing TNT-mediated communication by 42% (p<0.0001)
and 56.6% (pUncovering mechanisms underlying metastasis is the final
frontier in cancer biology. Metastasis is a complex process with many
discrete stages. While there has been much research on the seed
(metastatic tumor cells) and the soil (colonized host tissue) hypothesis,
limited knowledge exists on the interaction between metastatic cells and
vascular endothelial cells, prerequisite for the development of
metastatic disease.Here we describe nanoscale tubular structures, or
nanoChannels (nCs), which mediate early intercellular communication
between tumor epithelial cells and the endothelium in vitro and in vivo.
These structures were examined in a 3D in vitro co-culture model system
capturing molecular and physical interactions between metastatic cells
and the endothelium. Unlike classical modes of cell-cell communication
(i.e. paracrine, endocrine, and autocrine signaling), nCs allow for both
rapid and directed transfer of intracellular contents from metastatic
breast cancer cells to the endothelium. The ability to form nanoChannels
correlates with metastatic potential of the tumor cells and enables
direct tracking of both synthetic materials (chemicals and nanoparticles)
and bioorganic macromolecules (proteins and miRNAs). As one specific
example, we show that miR-132, which is implicated in pathological
angiogenesis, can translocate from tumor cells to the endothelial cells
through nCs, resulting in decreased p120RasGAP and activation of AKT in
the recipient endothelial cells. Furthermore, nC-mediated communication
resulted in upregulation of pathological angiogenesis markers, such as
CD137 (26x, p<0.001) and CD276 (2x, p<0.001). The increase in these
pathological angiogenesis markers could be reduced by pharmacological
inhibition of nC formation. Combination of 500pM Docetaxel with 30nM
Latrunculin A or 50nM Cytoclasin D resulted in a 3x (p<0.01) disruption
of TNT structures, reducing TNT-mediated communication by 42% (p<0.0001)
and 56.6% (p<0.0001), respectively.In summary, we describe a novel form
of heterotypic intercellular communication between cancer cells and the
host endothelium, where tumor cells can physically hijack and transform
normal endothelial cells to a pathological angiogenesis phenotype. We
define this process as metastatic parasitism. NanoChannel-mediated
transfer of microRNAs may emerge as a new signaling mechanism in
metastasis, which may function to prime the endothelium to facilitate
transmigration of tumor cells and/or recruitment of vasculature to
growing metastases. Elucidation of microRNAs transported through the
nanoChannels presents a powerful opportunity to explain mechanisms
underlying pathological angiogenesis and for the development of
metastasis-specific therapeutics. Targeting the formation of these nCs
and the resulting metastatic parasitism may potentially emerge as a new
therapeutic opportunity in the management of metastatic cancer.

