Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RFX1-dependent activation of SHP-1 inhibits STAT3 signaling in
hepatocellular carcinoma cells


Obatoclax is under clinical trial currently. Previously, we have
demonstrated that SC-2001, an obatoclax analogue, has potent anti-tumor
effect in HCC cells through the SHP-1/p-STAT3 cascade. However, the
molecular mechanism by which SC-2001 activates SHP-1 is still elusive.
Regulatory factor X (RFX) 1 is a transcription factor that has been
linked to negative regulation of tumor progression. Nevertheless, its
biological function in HCC cells is far from clear. In this study, by
modulating its expression, we demonstrated that RFX1 is important in
regulating SHP-1 in HCC cells. Ectopic expression of RFX1 can lead to
activation of SHP-1 and inhibition of colony forming in HCC cells.
Importantly, in a xenograft mouse model, RFX-1 overexpression obviously
inhibited the growth rate of HCC tumors, indicating its tumor suppressor
role. In addition, we found that SC-2001-induced apoptosis effect is
regulated by RFX1. We showed that SC-2001 enhanced RFX1 nuclear
translocation and binded to SHP-1 promoter to activate SHP-1
transcription. Moreover, knockdown of RFX1 reversed the anti-tumor effect
of SC-2001 in vivo. Most important, we proved that SC-2001 displayed more
potent anti-tumor effect than sorafenib, a clinically approved drug for
HCC, in in vitro and in vivo assays. Furthermore, combination treatment
of SC-2001 and sorafenib showed synergistic effect in HCC cells.
Collectively, our study confirmed that RFX1 acts as a tumor suppressor in
HCC and might be a new target for HCC therapy. The findings of this study
also provide a new lead compound for target therapy via the activation of
the RFX1/SHP-1 pathway. (Supported by NSC-102-2325-B-010-007)

