Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Blood parameters in renal cell carcinoma patients can have
prognostic impact and differ from those of healthy blood donors


The aim of this study was to evaluate the clinical relevance of blood
parameters as circulating tumor cells (CTCs) and HLA subtype in renal
cell carcinoma (RCC) patients.233 peripheral blood samples from 154 RCC
patients were tested for the presence of disseminated tumor cells (DTCs)
by using the autoMACS technique and immunocytochemical (ICC) staining of
cytokeratin. The frequency of CTCs was analyzed statistically and
correlated with relevant clinical data. In addition, HLA subtype was
analysed for 91 out of the 154 RCC patients and for 203 healthy blood
donors. A statistical comparison was performed.After following the CD45
autoMACS depletion protocol, we identified CTCs in 96 out of 233
peripheral blood samples (41%), which originated from 81 out of 154 (53%)
RCC patients. Besides a significant correlation between the detection of
CTCs before and after primary tumor resection a significant association
with prognosis was found (p The aim of this study was to evaluate the
clinical relevance of blood parameters as circulating tumor cells (CTCs)
and HLA subtype in renal cell carcinoma (RCC) patients.233 peripheral
blood samples from 154 RCC patients were tested for the presence of
disseminated tumor cells (DTCs) by using the autoMACS technique and
immunocytochemical (ICC) staining of cytokeratin. The frequency of CTCs
was analyzed statistically and correlated with relevant clinical data. In
addition, HLA subtype was analysed for 91 out of the 154 RCC patients and
for 203 healthy blood donors. A statistical comparison was
performed.After following the CD45 autoMACS depletion protocol, we
identified CTCs in 96 out of 233 peripheral blood samples (41%), which
originated from 81 out of 154 (53%) RCC patients. Besides a significant
correlation between the detection of CTCs before and after primary tumor
resection a significant association with prognosis was found (p < 0.002;
X2-test). RCC patients with CK+ CTCs in their peripheral blood had a 5
times increased risk of tumor-related death compared to patients without
these cells. In a Kaplan-Meier-Analysis these results were confirmed (p
The aim of this study was to evaluate the clinical relevance of blood
parameters as circulating tumor cells (CTCs) and HLA subtype in renal
cell carcinoma (RCC) patients.233 peripheral blood samples from 154 RCC
patients were tested for the presence of disseminated tumor cells (DTCs)
by using the autoMACS technique and immunocytochemical (ICC) staining of
cytokeratin. The frequency of CTCs was analyzed statistically and
correlated with relevant clinical data. In addition, HLA subtype was
analysed for 91 out of the 154 RCC patients and for 203 healthy blood
donors. A statistical comparison was performed.After following the CD45
autoMACS depletion protocol, we identified CTCs in 96 out of 233
peripheral blood samples (41%), which originated from 81 out of 154 (53%)
RCC patients. Besides a significant correlation between the detection of
CTCs before and after primary tumor resection a significant association
with prognosis was found (p < 0.002; X2-test). RCC patients with CK+ CTCs
in their peripheral blood had a 5 times increased risk of tumor-related
death compared to patients without these cells. In a
Kaplan-Meier-Analysis these results were confirmed (p < 0.001). On one
hand, RCC patients had less alleles HLA-Cw*07 (p The aim of this study
was to evaluate the clinical relevance of blood parameters as circulating
tumor cells (CTCs) and HLA subtype in renal cell carcinoma (RCC)
patients.233 peripheral blood samples from 154 RCC patients were tested
for the presence of disseminated tumor cells (DTCs) by using the autoMACS
technique and immunocytochemical (ICC) staining of cytokeratin. The
frequency of CTCs was analyzed statistically and correlated with relevant
clinical data. In addition, HLA subtype was analysed for 91 out of the
154 RCC patients and for 203 healthy blood donors. A statistical
comparison was performed.After following the CD45 autoMACS depletion
protocol, we identified CTCs in 96 out of 233 peripheral blood samples
(41%), which originated from 81 out of 154 (53%) RCC patients. Besides a
significant correlation between the detection of CTCs before and after
primary tumor resection a significant association with prognosis was
found (p < 0.002; X2-test). RCC patients with CK+ CTCs in their
peripheral blood had a 5 times increased risk of tumor-related death
compared to patients without these cells. In a Kaplan-Meier-Analysis
these results were confirmed (p < 0.001). On one hand, RCC patients had
less alleles HLA-Cw*07 (p < 0.05; X2-test) and HLA-DRB1*04 (p The aim of
this study was to evaluate the clinical relevance of blood parameters as
circulating tumor cells (CTCs) and HLA subtype in renal cell carcinoma
(RCC) patients.233 peripheral blood samples from 154 RCC patients were
tested for the presence of disseminated tumor cells (DTCs) by using the
autoMACS technique and immunocytochemical (ICC) staining of cytokeratin.
The frequency of CTCs was analyzed statistically and correlated with
relevant clinical data. In addition, HLA subtype was analysed for 91 out
of the 154 RCC patients and for 203 healthy blood donors. A statistical
comparison was performed.After following the CD45 autoMACS depletion
protocol, we identified CTCs in 96 out of 233 peripheral blood samples
(41%), which originated from 81 out of 154 (53%) RCC patients. Besides a
significant correlation between the detection of CTCs before and after
primary tumor resection a significant association with prognosis was
found (p < 0.002; X2-test). RCC patients with CK+ CTCs in their
peripheral blood had a 5 times increased risk of tumor-related death
compared to patients without these cells. In a Kaplan-Meier-Analysis
these results were confirmed (p < 0.001). On one hand, RCC patients had
less alleles HLA-Cw*07 (p < 0.05; X2-test) and HLA-DRB1*04 (p < 0.05;
X2-test) compared to healthy blood donors. On the other hand, RCC
patients showed an increased occurrence of the allele HLA-Cw*12 compared
to healthy blood donors. However, this difference was not significant.In
summary, for RCC patients the presence of CTCs was associated with a poor
overall survival and significantly correlated with an increased risk of
tumor-related death. Detection of CK+ CTCs in peripheral blood is a
significant and independent prognostic factor for renal cell carcinoma
patients. Occurrence of the alleles HLA-Cw*07, and HLA-DRB1*04 was
significantly reduced in RCC patients compared to healthy blood donors
and may reduce the risk to suffer from a RCC.

