Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting cancer cells and antitumor effects of brucine
immunonanoparticles on hepatocellular carcinoma in vivo


Background: In vitro and in vivo studies have showed that brucine can
inhibit the growth of liver cancer cells and animals with bearing cancer
, and may be a promising anti-cancer drugs. However, high toxicity, poor
water solubility, short half-life, narrow therapeutic window, close
therapeutic and toxic dose limit its clinical application in malignant
tumor treatment. In this study, we report on the preparation , in vivo
distribution and antitumor effect of the brucine immuno-nanoparticles.
Methods: Anionic polymerization and chemical modification technology was
used to prepare carboxylated polyethylene glycol-poly lactic acid
copolymer carrier material, phacoemulsification technology was employed
to prepare carboxylated polyethylene glycol-polylactic acid copolymer
brucine nanoparticles and chemical coupling technology was utilized to
develop anti-human AFP McAb-polyethylene glycol-poly lactic acid
copolymer brucine immuno-nanoparticles. The nude mice in situ
transplanted liver cancer model was established by surgical technique,
and the brucine immuno-nanoparcitles was injected by caudal vein at
indicated time. The liver and kidney function and AFP level were assayed
, and the anti-tumor effect was observed after intravenous administration
of the brucine immuno-nanoparticles.Results:This results showed that in
vivo application of brucine immuno-nanoparticles caused temporary liver
and kidney functions damage and significantly reduced AFP secretion.
Brucine immuno-nanoparticles had good slow releasing and tumor targeting
properties. The brucine immuno-nanoparticles inhibited CD34 expression
and angiogenesis of tumor tissues, induced tumor apoptosis, and inhibited
tumor growth.Conclusions: The brucine immuno-nanoparticles has good tumor
targeting and obvious anti-tumor effects , and is a promising targeted
drug for liver cancer therapy in the future.Note: This abstract was not
presented at the meeting.

