Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Application of the EGFR in squamous lung cancer and its
relationship between p63


OBJECTIVE: Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutations are rarely
found in squamous cell carcinoma (SQC).METHODS: Between J February 2010
and March 2013, we investigated the incidence of EGFR activating
mutations in SQC of the lung using the automated direct sequencing of
polymerase chain reaction products method. The efficacies of formal
therapy, observation, targeting therapy (EGFR-tyrosine kinase inhibitors
[TKIs]) were retrospectively evaluated in patients with EGFR-mutated SQC.
Further pathologic analyses were performed using
immunohistochemistry.RESULTS: Sixteen of the 282 patients with SQC
(5.67%) had EGFR mutations, including exon 19 deletion (7 of 16 patients,
44%), L858R point mutation in exon 21 (9 of 16, 56%). The patients'
median progression-free survival (PFS) and median overall survival (OS)
in formal therapy, observation and targeting therapy were 6.28 and 9.03,
5.23 and 6.17, and 4.20 and 10.57 months. The median OS of 4 EGFR-mutated
patients received p63 (partly +) was 11.28 months (95% confidence
interval [CI], 6.33-16.23months) verse that of 11 EGFR-mutated patients
received p63 (+) was 3.57 months (95%CI, 1.75- 5.39 months)
(p=0.039).CONCLUSION: EGFR-TKIs for EGFR-mutated SQC are generally
inferior to that for EGFR-mutated ADC. Chemotherapy or radiation therapy
seemed to be less inferior to TKI therapy considering the PFS and OS
results and the economy when patients are in good status. Patients
presenting partly + of p63 had longer OS than p63 + patients. EGFR and
p63 might be two separate factors which affected the proliferation of
squamous tumor cells and result remained to be confirmed by large
samples.KEYWORDS: squamous lung cancer, SQC,epidermal growth factor
receptor, EGFR, P63Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

