Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Significance of HIV viral load and CD4 count on Kaposi sarcoma in
the era of highly active antiretroviral therapy


Background: Approximately 20% of patients with HIV will have Kaposi
Sarcoma (KS) and about half will die within 3 months of diagnosis.
Incidence and outcomes of KS have traditionally been linked to CD4 counts
Background: Approximately 20% of patients with HIV will have Kaposi
Sarcoma (KS) and about half will die within 3 months of diagnosis.
Incidence and outcomes of KS have traditionally been linked to CD4 counts
<350. More recently, KS has been increasingly described in higher CD4
counts and variable presentations in the era of
Highly-Active-Antiretroviral-Therapy (HAART). No studies have established
the role of Viral Load (VL) on KS.Objective: To determine the effect of
CD4 count and HIV VL on KS presentation and outcomes.Methods:
Retrospective review of KS patients with HIV admitted over 12 years
(2000-2012). KS patients without HIV infection were excluded. Patients
were divided into 4 groups based on CD4 count (200 or 100,000 or 100,000
(85%) and CD4 counts 100,000 had a statistically significant increased
incidence for visceral involvement (96%, p100,000 ((66.7% with good
risk), increased survival (59.4% survived >6months) and less use of HAART
(20%). Although, these differences were statistically
insignificant.Conclusion: HIV VL of >100,000 is correlated with increased
severity and extent of KS. Though statistically insignificant, CD4 counts
100,000 (85%) and CD4 counts 100,000 had a statistically significant
increased incidence for visceral involvement (96%, p100,000 ((66.7% with
good risk), increased survival (59.4% survived >6months) and less use of
HAART (20%). Although, these differences were statistically
insignificant.Conclusion: HIV VL of >100,000 is correlated with increased
severity and extent of KS. Though statistically insignificant, CD4 counts
<200 showed a trend for less severe disease and increased survival
despite less use of HAART. Larger prospective studies are warranted to
elucidate on these differences.

