Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation of c-Myc and p53 by splicing factor SRp20


SRp20 is a member of the highly conserved SR protein family of splicing
regulators. Our previous study found that SRp20 was overexpressed in
ovarian and breast tumors compared to corresponding normal tissues and
knockdown of SRp20 expression inhibited tumor cell growth. Suppression of
SRp20 by 90% triggered apoptosis of tumor cells through intrinsic
pathway, which was accompanied by a downregulation of anti-apoptotic
protein, Bcl-2. However, it is unclear what mechanism mediates the
induction of apoptosis and downregulation of Bcl-2 by SRp20 knockdown. To
address this question, we conducted microarray analysis to identify the
genes whose expression or splicing are altered in SRp20-knockdown A2780
cells. Among hundreds of identified genes, the expression of c-Myc and
p53 was downregulated. The downregulation was further validated by
quantitative PCR. Because of the fundamental importance of p53 and c-Myc
in cancer biology and apoptosis, we further examined the expression of
these two genes at protein levels. Western blotting showed that p53 is
upregulated at protein level in SRp20 knockdown cells, contradictory to
its expression at the mRNA level, while the expression of c-Myc is
consistent at the protein level and at the mRNA level. These results
suggest that SRp20 knockdown-induced apoptosis could be mediated by
upregulated p53 protein or reduced c-Myc or both, given already
established connection between these two proteins and apoptosis. How
SRp20 is involved in the regulation of p53 and c-Myc remains to be
determined and is currently under investigation.

