Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Telomerase modulation in a human cancer stem cell syndrome with
loss of TGF- signaling is a promising treatment strategy in liver and
gastrointestinal cancers


Background: Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome (BWS) is a hereditary human
cancer stem cell syndrome with an 800 fold risk of multiple cancers, is
currently linked to deregulated imprinting at chromosome 11p15, IGF2,
CDKN1C and others. Yet, causal molecular defects and genetic models of
this overgrowth syndrome have remained elusive to date in the majority of
cases. CCCTC-Binding Factor CTCF is a highly conserved zinc finger
protein that has diverse regulatory functions, including transcriptional
ctivation/repression/imprinting of molecules such as TERT, IGF-2 and
c-Myc.Recent studies demonstrate a high frequency of TERT promoter
mutations in early stage of multiple cancers, suggesting that these
promoter mutations may function as driver events that contribute to
oncogenesis through TERT deregulation. However, telomerase remains a
challenge to target effectively. We have recently discovered identified a
mouse model for BWS with loss of TGF- signaling with multiple liver and
GI cancers. CTCF expression is markedly decreased, with concomitantly
high TERT levels in these cancers. Therefore, we hypothesize that
TGF-/2SP/Smad3/ signaling regulates CTCF and TERT regulation. Rescuing
TGF- signaling may successfully reduce tumor burden with inhibition of
telomerase.Materials & Methods: Generation of 2SP+/-/Smad3+/- mice and
genotype analysis. Database of Genomics (COSMIC) and transcriptomics
(TCGA) were analyzed. BWS tumors and mice liver, pancreas and stomach
tissue specimens were immunostained with anti-TERT antibody. ChIP assays
were to demonstrate the recruitment of 2SP/Smad3/CTCF at the promoter of
TERT.Results: (1) 2SP+/-/Smad3+/- heterozygote mice spontaneously develop
visceromegaly, multiple cancers, phenocopy a hereditary human cancer stem
cell syndrome BWS. (2) Genomics and transcriptomics analyses revealed
aberrant TGF- signaling in 2SP+/-/Smad3+/- mice and human BWS. (3)
Increased TERT expression in 2SP+/-/Smad3+/- mice is similar to that
observed in human BWS. (4) CTCF levels are markedly decreased in
2SP+/-/Smad3+/- mice tissues. (5) CTCF interacts with 2SP/Smad3 in cell
nucleus in a TGF--dependent manner. (6) TGF- promotes the complex of
2SP/Smad3/CTCF at TERT promoter region. Conclusions: Loss of TGF-
signaling pathway leads to dysfunctional chromosome modulation through
TERT deregulation. Smad3/2SP/CTCF complex regulates TERT transcriptional
activity. Our results provide a better mechanistic understanding of this
dysfunctional stem cells cancer syndrome. Importantly, this study may
lead to identify new treatment strategies and functional markers for the
early detecting lethal cancers.

