Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Human colorectal cancer marker PC(16:0/16:1) induces cell growth
by activating Akt and Erk pathways


The identification of cancer biomarkers is critical for target-linked
cancer therapy. Numerous protein, glycoprotein, and nucleic acids markers
are known, but there has been a limitation to pickup a lipid marker in
tumor tissues due to difficulty in surveillance of lipid molecules in
tissues. The overall level of phosphatidylcholine (PC) is elevated in
colorectal cancer (CRC), buy the exact nature of PC change in CRC remains
to be elucidated. In our previous literature, to investigate which
species of PC is overexpressed in colorectal cancer, an imaging mass
spectrometry (MS) was performed using a panel of non-neoplastic mucosal
and CRC tissues. We had performed principal component analysis (PCA) of
the mass spectrum data and successfully differentiate CRC to adjacent
non-neoplastic colorectal mucosal cells. Using PCA, a novel biomarker,
phosphatidylcholine (PC)(16:0/16:1), had been also identified in CRC.
Specifically, elevated levels of PC(16:0/16:1) expression had been
observed in a more advanced stage of CRC. Our data further showed that
PC(16:0/16:1) was specifically localized in the cancer region when
examined using imaging mass spectrometry. Notably, because the ratio of
PC(16:0/16:1) to lyso-PC(16:0) had been higher in CRC, we had postulated
that lyso-PC acyltransferase (LPCAT) activity is elevated in CRC. In an
in vitro analysis, we had shown that LPCAT4 is involved in the
deregulation of PC(16:0/16:1) in CRC. That study had indicated the
potential usefulness of PC(16:0/16:1) for the clinical diagnosis of CRC
and implicate LPCAT4 in the elevated expression of PC(16:0/16:1) in CRC.
To investigate usefullness and the molecular mechanism regarding the
PC(16:0/16:1) upregulation in CRC, we next focused on the responses of
cells when PC(16:0/16:1) was administrated in vitro.To further analyze
the effects of PC(16:0/16:1) on the growth of several culture cells, we
added PC(16:0/16:1) to the culture media of HCT116 colorectal cancer cell
line and NIH3T3 non-cancerous cell line. For the analysis of the
signaling pathway of the cells, western blotting were carried out using
various phosphorylation specific antibodies when NIH3T3 cells were
subjected to PC(16:0/16:1). We also tried to specify the target genes
affected by the addition of PC(16:0/16:1) into the NIH3T3
cell.PC(16:0/16:1) induced the increase in the growth rate of NIH3T3 cell
line but not HCT116 cell line by about two fold. Phosphorylations of Akt
and Erk were increased by the administration of PC(16:0/16:1) by about
1.5 and 3 fold, respectively. We expected some genes may be listed as
PC(16:0/16:1) target ones by microarray analysis. The result using
3D-gene chip microarray will be presented.PC(16:0/16:1) induce cell
growth by activating Akt and Erk pathway. Possible PC(16:0/16:1) target
genes will be shown.

