Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High stromal S100A9 expression serves an early oral cancer
recurrence marker possibly through enhancing cancer cell invasivenes,
angiogenesis, and differentially recruiting infiltrating immune cells


S100A9 belongs to S100 family with Ca+2-binding EF-hands in both N- and
C-termini and is frequently deregulated in several cancer types.
Consistent with this notion, we identified the increase of S100A9 mRNA
expression by 2.6 fold (pS100A9 belongs to S100 family with Ca+2-binding
EF-hands in both N- and C-termini and is frequently deregulated in
several cancer types. Consistent with this notion, we identified the
increase of S100A9 mRNA expression by 2.6 fold (p<0.01) in oral cancer
cells when compared to normal oral keratinocytes using DNA microarray
analysis. The increase of S100A9 protein validated in clinical tissue
specimens was also detected in the adjacent tumor stroma, especially in
CD15+ or CD68+ immune infiltrates. High S100A9 expression in the stroma
was positively associated not only with the poor differentiation of tumor
but also tumor recurrence. Moreover, high stromal S100A9 expression in
early-stage patients had shorter recurrence-free survival, suggesting a
role of S100A9 in oral cancer recurrence. Although altering the
expression of S100A9 affected cell proliferation depending on the cell
lines, S100A9 functioned as a promoting molecule for cell migration and
invasion. Moreover, S100A9 secreted from oral cancer cells inhibited
anti-inflammatory IL-10 production and acted as positive regulator in
angiogenesis. Ectopic S100A9 expression promoted subcutaneous
tumorigenesis in vivo with the enhanced recruitment of a CD11c+ myeloid
cells and production of several inflammatory cytokines. The serum
concentration of S100A9, a secretable protein, was significantly
increased in early-stage but not late stage oral cancer patients.
Together, stromal S100A9 plays a tumor-promoting role in oral
carcinogenesis and serum S100A9 may serve as an early marker for cancer
recurrence. Understanding the potential role of S100A9 in oral cancer and
stromal cells should facilitate the development of new therapeutic
approaches for oral cancer treatment.

