Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effectiveness of the combined treatment with hsp90 inhibitor and
heavy ion irradiation


Hsp90 inhibitors have been studied as effective sensitizers for radiation
therapy. Some encouraging results have been observed and the mechanism of
radio-sensitization has also been investigated mostly with X-or
gamma-rays. There has not been any study for Hsp90 inhibitors with heavy
ion radiation. In this report we show the data with the combined effect
with hsp90 inhibitors including 17AAG and PU-H71 with high linear energy
transfer (LET) heavy ion radiation. As in proton radiation treatment,
heavy ions can be targeted to tumor tissues due to its physical
properties, while significantly lower radiation doses are delivered in
surrounding normal tissues. In addition, with heavy ions higher
biological effectiveness, i.e, more tumor cell killing, can be attained
than with proton or conventional photon radiation. We are finding that if
tumor cells were pre-treated with an hsp90 inhibitor and then exposed to
heavy ion (carbon) radiation, very effective cell killing were observed
using SQ5 human lung tumor cells. Another interesting feature of hsp90
inhibitors is that normal cells are not much influenced by the drug. Our
in vivo mouse xenograft studies using nude mice also indicate a better
tumor control with the combination of hsp90 inhibitor and local carbon
irradiation as compared with carbon irradiation alone. Further studies
show that the mechanism behind this radio-sensitization may be attributed
to inhibition of DNA double strand breaks (DSBs) by hsp90 inhibitors;
particularly homologous recombination pathway of DSB repair might be
affected. Our flow cytometry study also reveals some new aspect of tumor
cell killing by this combination therapy. Our data suggest that hsp 90
inhibitors are good candidates for the combined cancer therapy using
heavy ion irradiation.

