Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genome-wide gene-diabetes and gene-obesity interaction scan in the
pancreatic cancer case control consortium


IntroductionPancreatic cancer is a highly lethal malignancy due to late
diagnosis and aggressiveness of the tumor. Characterization of high-risk
populations for monitoring, intervention and early detection remains
challenging. Obesity and diabetes are potentially modifiable contributors
to pancreatic cancer. Genetic factors modifying the risk of obesity- and
diabetes-induced pancreatic cancer have previously not been fully
investigated at the genome-wide level.HypothesisThere are potential
genetic factors modifying the associations between obesity/diabetes and
pancreatic cancer.MethodsIntegrating genotype with risk factor data from
a GWAS for the Pancreatic Cancer Case Control Consortium, we performed a
genome-wide gene-environment interaction (G x E) scan for 457,688 SNPs in
a discovery study of 2,028 cases and 2,109 controls using
state-of-the-art methods including case-only (CO), case-control (CC),
Empirical Hierarchical Bayes (EHB), Empirical-Bayes test (EB) and three
2-step approaches (DG2, EG2, DGEG2).ResultsWe detected a genome-wide
significant (P IntroductionPancreatic cancer is a highly lethal
malignancy due to late diagnosis and aggressiveness of the tumor.
Characterization of high-risk populations for monitoring, intervention
and early detection remains challenging. Obesity and diabetes are
potentially modifiable contributors to pancreatic cancer. Genetic factors
modifying the risk of obesity- and diabetes-induced pancreatic cancer
have previously not been fully investigated at the genome-wide
level.HypothesisThere are potential genetic factors modifying the
associations between obesity/diabetes and pancreatic
cancer.MethodsIntegrating genotype with risk factor data from a GWAS for
the Pancreatic Cancer Case Control Consortium, we performed a genome-wide
gene-environment interaction (G x E) scan for 457,688 SNPs in a discovery
study of 2,028 cases and 2,109 controls using state-of-the-art methods
including case-only (CO), case-control (CC), Empirical Hierarchical Bayes
(EHB), Empirical-Bayes test (EB) and three 2-step approaches (DG2, EG2,
DGEG2).ResultsWe detected a genome-wide significant (P < 1.09 x 10-7 )
interaction of diabetes with rs13061928 (in CNTN4) in CO (P = 8.8 x 10-8
), which was independent of diabetes in control group (P = 0.08). The
minor allele was in a synergism with diabetes on the cancer risk:
diabetics carrying GA/AA genotype had a 3.39-fold (95% CI: 2.47-4.65)
increased disease risk compared with non-diabetics carrying GG genotype.
Consistently, the SNP-diabetes interaction had a high ranking statistic
in EHB (No.1) and high p-value ranks for EG2 and DGEG2 methods (No.1, P=
5.44 x 10-5).ConclusionsThese observations, once validated/confirmed, may
help define at-risk subpopulation and initiate targeted intervention and
prevention of pancreatic cancer. Genome-wide G x E analysis requires
larger sample size than genetic main effects scan; combining the CO
method with alternative methods may be the optimal scheme for genome-wide
G x E analysis.

