Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pri-let-7a-2 rs629367 associated with increased risk and poor
survival of gastric cancer in Chinese by up-regulated let-7a expression


Abstract:Aim:Variant in pri-miRNA could affect miRNA expression and
mature process or splicing efficiency, thus altering the hereditary
susceptibility and prognosis of cancer. We aimed to assess miRNA-let-7
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) associated with the risk and
prognosis of gastric cancer (GC) as predicting biomarkers, and
furthermore, its possible mechanisms. Method:We designed a two-stage
case-control study to screen four miRNA SNPs (pri-let-7a-2 rs629367 and
rs1143770, pri-let-7a-1 rs10739971, pri-let-7f-2 rs17276588) in 107 GC
patients, 107 atrophic gastritis (AG), and matched 124 controls using
PCR-RFLP. Two promising SNPs (pri-let-7a-2 rs629367 and pri-let-7a-1
rs10739971) were validated in another independent 1949 samples (including
579 GC patients, 649 AG and 721 controls) using Sequenom MassARRAY
platform and sequencing. Results: We found that pri-let-7a-2 rs629367 CC
variant genotype was associated with increased risks of GC and AG by
1.83-fold and 1.86-fold, respectively. For GC prognosis, patients with
rs629367 CC genotype had significantly poorer survival than patients with
AA genotype (log-rank P=0.004). We further investigated the let-7a
expression levels in serum and found that let-7a expression elevated
gradually for rs629367 AA, CA, CC genotype in the AG group (P=0.043).
Furthermore, we confirmed these findings in vitro study by overexpressing
let-7a carrying pri-let-7a-2 wild-type A or polymorphic-type C allele
(PAbstract:Aim:Variant in pri-miRNA could affect miRNA expression and
mature process or splicing efficiency, thus altering the hereditary
susceptibility and prognosis of cancer. We aimed to assess miRNA-let-7
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) associated with the risk and
prognosis of gastric cancer (GC) as predicting biomarkers, and
furthermore, its possible mechanisms. Method:We designed a two-stage
case-control study to screen four miRNA SNPs (pri-let-7a-2 rs629367 and
rs1143770, pri-let-7a-1 rs10739971, pri-let-7f-2 rs17276588) in 107 GC
patients, 107 atrophic gastritis (AG), and matched 124 controls using
PCR-RFLP. Two promising SNPs (pri-let-7a-2 rs629367 and pri-let-7a-1
rs10739971) were validated in another independent 1949 samples (including
579 GC patients, 649 AG and 721 controls) using Sequenom MassARRAY
platform and sequencing. Results: We found that pri-let-7a-2 rs629367 CC
variant genotype was associated with increased risks of GC and AG by
1.83-fold and 1.86-fold, respectively. For GC prognosis, patients with
rs629367 CC genotype had significantly poorer survival than patients with
AA genotype (log-rank P=0.004). We further investigated the let-7a
expression levels in serum and found that let-7a expression elevated
gradually for rs629367 AA, CA, CC genotype in the AG group (P=0.043).
Furthermore, we confirmed these findings in vitro study by overexpressing
let-7a carrying pri-let-7a-2 wild-type A or polymorphic-type C allele
(P<0.001). Conclusion: pri-let-7a-2 rs629367 CC genotype could increase
the risks of GC as well as AG and was also associated with poor survival
of GC, which possibly by affecting the mature let-7a expression, and
could serve as a predicting biomarker for high-risk and poor prognosis of
GC.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

