Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Optimization of an assay for the detection of phosphorylated FAK
by immunohistochemistry in formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded human tissue
and cell lines


Focal adhesion kinase (FAK) is a non-receptor protein tyrosine kinase
with elevated expression in most human cancers, most notably in invasive
metastasis. FAK is involved in cell adhesion, motility, and apoptosis,
and it is a target for oncology therapeutics. FAK activation occurs by
phosphorylation at Tyr397 in response to integrin clustering caused by
cell adhesion. The development of a sensitive and specific
immunohistochemical assay for phosphorylated FAK (pFAK) is important for
pharmacodynamic biomarker studies. The purpose of this study was to
investigate 4 commercially available anti-pFAK antibodies in human
tissues and cell lines. Antibodies included 3 rabbit monoclonals
(EP2160Y, 141-9, and 31H5L17) and 1 rabbit polyclonal. Antibody
specificity was evaluated in a variety of cell lines (BxPC3, HCT-116,
LOVO, MDA-MB-231, and MiaPaca2) treated with 2 FAK inhibitors: TAE226
(NVP-TAE226) and PF-562271. Decreased immunohistochemical staining for
pFAK was observed in post-treatment samples of cell lines with baseline
pFAK expression. TAE226 was more potent at inhibiting pFAK staining.
Membrane staining was observed with the rabbit polyclonal and rabbit
clone EP2160Y only. Each of the 4 antibodies was tested in human breast
cancer tissues using tissue microarrays created by Mosaic Laboratories.
The percentage of breast cancer samples that were pFAK positive was 96%
with clone EP2160Y, 83% with clone 141-9, 92% with clone 31H5L17 and 96%
with the polyclonal. The percentage of cells that were positive within
each breast cancer sample ranged from 63% to 83%, depending on the
antibody used (standard deviations between 30% and 44%).
Immunohistochemistry with the polyclonal and clone EP2160Y antibodies
demonstrated membrane and cytoplasmic staining, while clones 141-9 and
31H5L17 demonstrated primarily cytoplasmic staining. Based on reduction
of pFAK staining in treated cells and acceptable performance in human
cancer tissues, pFAK immunohistochemistry is fit for purpose for
evaluation of FAK inhibitor activity in pre- and post-treatment clinical
trial tissue biopsies.

