Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Frequent H3F3A K27M mutations in thalamic gliomas from young adult
patients


Introduction. Mutations in the H3F3A gene, which encodes histone H3.3,
were recently reported in cases of pediatric glioblastoma. H3F3A K27M
mutations occur in gliomas that arise at midline locations, including the
pons, thalamus, and spine; moreover, this particular mutation is found
mainly in tumors in children and adolescents. In this study, we aimed to
determine the association between H3F3A mutations and adult thalamic
glioma.Methods. Genomic H3F3A was sequenced from 20 separate thalamic
gliomas. Of the 20 tumors, 18 were high-grade thalamic gliomas, and of
these 18, 11 were from patients under 50 years of age (median age, 38
years; range, 17 - 46), and seven were from patients more than 50 years
of age. Additionally, for 14 of the 20 gliomas, 639 genes_including
cancer-related genes and chromatin-modifier genes_were sequenced, and the
Infinium HumanMethylation450K BeadChip was used to examine DNA
methylation across the genome.Results. The H3F3A K27M mutation was
present in 10 of (91%) of the 11 younger patients, and absent from all
seven older patients. Additionally, H3F3A K27M was not detected in the
two diffuse astrocytomas. By additional sequencing, recurrent mutations
were identified in TP53, ATRX, NF1, and EGFR. In addition, a KDM6A
mutation was found in one case of diffuse astrocytoma and a CREBBP
mutation was identified in one case of glioblastoma with the H3F3A K27M
mutation. Gliomas with H3F3A K27M from pediatric or young-adult patients
had similar, characteristic DNA methylation profiles. In contrast,
thalamic gliomas with wild-type H3F3A had DNA methylation profiles
similar to those of hemispheric glioblastomas.Conclusion. We found that
high-grade thalamic gliomas from young adults, like those from children
and adolescents, frequently have the H3F3A K27M mutation.

