Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Reproducible copy number variation patterns among single
circulating tumor cells of lung cancer patients


Circulating tumor cells (CTCs) enter peripheral blood from primary tumors
and seed metastases. The genome sequencing of CTCs could offer
noninvasive prognosis or even diagnosis, but has been hampered by the low
single-cell genome coverage of scarce CTCs. Here, we report the use of
the recently developed multiple annealing and looping-based amplification
cycles for whole genome amplification of single CTCs from lung cancer
patients. We observed characteristic cancer-associated single-nucleotide
variations and insertions/deletions in exomes of CTCs. These mutations
provided information needed for individualized therapy, such as drug
resistance and phenotypic transition, but were heterogeneous from cell to
cell. In contrast, every CTC from an individual patient, regardless of
the cancer subtypes, exhibited reproducible copy number variation (CNV)
patterns, similar to those of the metastatic tumor of the same patient.
Interestingly, different patients with the same lung cancer
adenocarcinoma (ADC) shared similar CNV patterns in their CTCs. Even more
interestingly, patients of small-cell lung cancer have CNV patterns
distinctly different from those of ADC patients. Our finding suggests
that CNVs at certain genomic loci are selected for the metastasis of
cancer. The reproducibility of cancer-specific CNVs offers potential for
CTC-based cancer diagnostics.

