Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Non-invasive diagnostic testing for lung cancer in a prospective
cohort


Monoclonal antibody Adnab-9 recognizes the p87 antigen, a constituent of
putatively activated pulmonary type 2 pneumocytes. p87 shed into sputum
and swallowed may be a potential tumor marker detectable by the Adnab-9
stool test. We describe prospectively collected stool and colonic
effluent ELISA results in a cohort of urban patients enrolled in a
colorectal cancer screening study. Methods: Prospectively, 1,132 American
patients in Metropolitan Detroit submitted stool in a CRC prospective
screening study from 1996 to 2013. Eleven patients free of any
significant colorectal neoplasia or other cancer, but who had died from
non-cancer-related causes, served as controls. Patients and controls were
approximately 50-80 years old and the male to female ratios were similar
(30:1 and 10:1). Sixty-seven percent of patients and 45 % of controls
were African American. Results: 64 patients of 1,132 contracted lung
cancer during the 17 year period of follow-up (5.7%). Of these 64
patients, 34 (52%) had stool or effluent Adnab-9 binding tests on
retrospective review. We found that over half the patients ultimately
diagnosed with lung cancer had either stool/effluent ELISA or Western
blot positivity for Adnab-9 compared to only 1 of 11 controls (OR = 11.3,
CI 1.3-97.9, p=0.014). The median time from stool submission to diagnosis
of lung cancer was 4.4 (0.7-10.3) years. Lung Cancer Tumor types were
adenocarcinoma in 23%; squamous in 33%; other in 20%; large cell cancer
in 9%; small cell cancer in 8%; and unknown in 7%. At the last time of
follow-up, 70% of patients subsequently diagnosed with lung cancer were
deceased. Median survival time was 2.1 years from the time of clinical
diagnosis. Conclusion: Adnab-9 sensitivity in this cohort was 52% with
specificity of 90.9% for lung cancer and could lead to the diagnosis of
lung cancer 4.4 years before clinical diagnosis was made. This supports
the notion that accessible, early non-invasive testing combined with
effective follow-up studies may lead to earlier diagnosis and treatment
of lung cancer, the World's most frequent cancer.

