Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Vascular endothelial growth factor A - a systematic review and
meta-analysis of expression patterns in breast cancer


BackgroundVascular Endothelial Growth Factor-A (VEGF-A), pivotal for
neo-angiogenesis, is an interesting target for breast cancer molecular
imaging. To assess its potential clinical value, we performed a
systematic review and meta-analysis of VEGF-A expression rates in normal
breast tissue, benign and (pre-)invasive breast disease, and investigated
associations with clinicopathological characteristics.MethodsWe
systematically searched EMBASE and MEDLINE for articles describing VEGF-A
expression in breast disease assessed by immunohistochemistry (IHC) or
Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay (ELISA). We pooled IHC expression rates
with random-effects models and applied meta-regression to identify
associations with clinicopathological characteristics. We summarized
findings for ELISA results.ResultsOf 2,711 unique articles retrieved, 157
studies described IHC results (16,046 tissue samples). Pooled expression
rates were lower in studies applying antibody clone VG1 (-21%, p=0.018)
or C-1 (-24%, p=0.016), compared to A-20. Expression compared to invasive
carcinoma was lower in normal tissue (-51%, pBackgroundVascular
Endothelial Growth Factor-A (VEGF-A), pivotal for neo-angiogenesis, is an
interesting target for breast cancer molecular imaging. To assess its
potential clinical value, we performed a systematic review and
meta-analysis of VEGF-A expression rates in normal breast tissue, benign
and (pre-)invasive breast disease, and investigated associations with
clinicopathological characteristics.MethodsWe systematically searched
EMBASE and MEDLINE for articles describing VEGF-A expression in breast
disease assessed by immunohistochemistry (IHC) or Enzyme-Linked
Immunosorbent Assay (ELISA). We pooled IHC expression rates with
random-effects models and applied meta-regression to identify
associations with clinicopathological characteristics. We summarized
findings for ELISA results.ResultsOf 2,711 unique articles retrieved, 157
studies described IHC results (16,046 tissue samples). Pooled expression
rates were lower in studies applying antibody clone VG1 (-21%, p=0.018)
or C-1 (-24%, p=0.016), compared to A-20. Expression compared to invasive
carcinoma was lower in normal tissue (-51%, p<0.001) and benign breast
diseases (-34%, pBackgroundVascular Endothelial Growth Factor-A (VEGF-A),
pivotal for neo-angiogenesis, is an interesting target for breast cancer
molecular imaging. To assess its potential clinical value, we performed a
systematic review and meta-analysis of VEGF-A expression rates in normal
breast tissue, benign and (pre-)invasive breast disease, and investigated
associations with clinicopathological characteristics.MethodsWe
systematically searched EMBASE and MEDLINE for articles describing VEGF-A
expression in breast disease assessed by immunohistochemistry (IHC) or
Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay (ELISA). We pooled IHC expression rates
with random-effects models and applied meta-regression to identify
associations with clinicopathological characteristics. We summarized
findings for ELISA results.ResultsOf 2,711 unique articles retrieved, 157
studies described IHC results (16,046 tissue samples). Pooled expression
rates were lower in studies applying antibody clone VG1 (-21%, p=0.018)
or C-1 (-24%, p=0.016), compared to A-20. Expression compared to invasive
carcinoma was lower in normal tissue (-51%, p<0.001) and benign breast
diseases (-34%, p<0.001), but comparable for carcinoma in situ (+5%,
p=0.289). Expression rates increased with tumour grade (II: +14%,
pBackgroundVascular Endothelial Growth Factor-A (VEGF-A), pivotal for
neo-angiogenesis, is an interesting target for breast cancer molecular
imaging. To assess its potential clinical value, we performed a
systematic review and meta-analysis of VEGF-A expression rates in normal
breast tissue, benign and (pre-)invasive breast disease, and investigated
associations with clinicopathological characteristics.MethodsWe
systematically searched EMBASE and MEDLINE for articles describing VEGF-A
expression in breast disease assessed by immunohistochemistry (IHC) or
Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay (ELISA). We pooled IHC expression rates
with random-effects models and applied meta-regression to identify
associations with clinicopathological characteristics. We summarized
findings for ELISA results.ResultsOf 2,711 unique articles retrieved, 157
studies described IHC results (16,046 tissue samples). Pooled expression
rates were lower in studies applying antibody clone VG1 (-21%, p=0.018)
or C-1 (-24%, p=0.016), compared to A-20. Expression compared to invasive
carcinoma was lower in normal tissue (-51%, p<0.001) and benign breast
diseases (-34%, p<0.001), but comparable for carcinoma in situ (+5%,
p=0.289). Expression rates increased with tumour grade (II: +14%,
p<0.001; III: +25%, pBackgroundVascular Endothelial Growth Factor-A
(VEGF-A), pivotal for neo-angiogenesis, is an interesting target for
breast cancer molecular imaging. To assess its potential clinical value,
we performed a systematic review and meta-analysis of VEGF-A expression
rates in normal breast tissue, benign and (pre-)invasive breast disease,
and investigated associations with clinicopathological
characteristics.MethodsWe systematically searched EMBASE and MEDLINE for
articles describing VEGF-A expression in breast disease assessed by
immunohistochemistry (IHC) or Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay (ELISA).
We pooled IHC expression rates with random-effects models and applied
meta-regression to identify associations with clinicopathological
characteristics. We summarized findings for ELISA results.ResultsOf 2,711
unique articles retrieved, 157 studies described IHC results (16,046
tissue samples). Pooled expression rates were lower in studies applying
antibody clone VG1 (-21%, p=0.018) or C-1 (-24%, p=0.016), compared to
A-20. Expression compared to invasive carcinoma was lower in normal
tissue (-51%, p<0.001) and benign breast diseases (-34%, p<0.001), but
comparable for carcinoma in situ (+5%, p=0.289). Expression rates
increased with tumour grade (II: +14%, p<0.001; III: +25%, p<0.001),
stage (II: +11%, pBackgroundVascular Endothelial Growth Factor-A
(VEGF-A), pivotal for neo-angiogenesis, is an interesting target for
breast cancer molecular imaging. To assess its potential clinical value,
we performed a systematic review and meta-analysis of VEGF-A expression
rates in normal breast tissue, benign and (pre-)invasive breast disease,
and investigated associations with clinicopathological
characteristics.MethodsWe systematically searched EMBASE and MEDLINE for
articles describing VEGF-A expression in breast disease assessed by
immunohistochemistry (IHC) or Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay (ELISA).
We pooled IHC expression rates with random-effects models and applied
meta-regression to identify associations with clinicopathological
characteristics. We summarized findings for ELISA results.ResultsOf 2,711
unique articles retrieved, 157 studies described IHC results (16,046
tissue samples). Pooled expression rates were lower in studies applying
antibody clone VG1 (-21%, p=0.018) or C-1 (-24%, p=0.016), compared to
A-20. Expression compared to invasive carcinoma was lower in normal
tissue (-51%, p<0.001) and benign breast diseases (-34%, p<0.001), but
comparable for carcinoma in situ (+5%, p=0.289). Expression rates
increased with tumour grade (II: +14%, p<0.001; III: +25%, p<0.001),
stage (II: +11%, p<0.001; III: +22%, pBackgroundVascular Endothelial
Growth Factor-A (VEGF-A), pivotal for neo-angiogenesis, is an interesting
target for breast cancer molecular imaging. To assess its potential
clinical value, we performed a systematic review and meta-analysis of
VEGF-A expression rates in normal breast tissue, benign and
(pre-)invasive breast disease, and investigated associations with
clinicopathological characteristics.MethodsWe systematically searched
EMBASE and MEDLINE for articles describing VEGF-A expression in breast
disease assessed by immunohistochemistry (IHC) or Enzyme-Linked
Immunosorbent Assay (ELISA). We pooled IHC expression rates with
random-effects models and applied meta-regression to identify
associations with clinicopathological characteristics. We summarized
findings for ELISA results.ResultsOf 2,711 unique articles retrieved, 157
studies described IHC results (16,046 tissue samples). Pooled expression
rates were lower in studies applying antibody clone VG1 (-21%, p=0.018)
or C-1 (-24%, p=0.016), compared to A-20. Expression compared to invasive
carcinoma was lower in normal tissue (-51%, p<0.001) and benign breast
diseases (-34%, p<0.001), but comparable for carcinoma in situ (+5%,
p=0.289). Expression rates increased with tumour grade (II: +14%,
p<0.001; III: +25%, p<0.001), stage (II: +11%, p<0.001; III: +22%,
p<0.001), size (T3/4: +11%, p=0.004), HER2-positivity (+14%,
pBackgroundVascular Endothelial Growth Factor-A (VEGF-A), pivotal for
neo-angiogenesis, is an interesting target for breast cancer molecular
imaging. To assess its potential clinical value, we performed a
systematic review and meta-analysis of VEGF-A expression rates in normal
breast tissue, benign and (pre-)invasive breast disease, and investigated
associations with clinicopathological characteristics.MethodsWe
systematically searched EMBASE and MEDLINE for articles describing VEGF-A
expression in breast disease assessed by immunohistochemistry (IHC) or
Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay (ELISA). We pooled IHC expression rates
with random-effects models and applied meta-regression to identify
associations with clinicopathological characteristics. We summarized
findings for ELISA results.ResultsOf 2,711 unique articles retrieved, 157
studies described IHC results (16,046 tissue samples). Pooled expression
rates were lower in studies applying antibody clone VG1 (-21%, p=0.018)
or C-1 (-24%, p=0.016), compared to A-20. Expression compared to invasive
carcinoma was lower in normal tissue (-51%, p<0.001) and benign breast
diseases (-34%, p<0.001), but comparable for carcinoma in situ (+5%,
p=0.289). Expression rates increased with tumour grade (II: +14%,
p<0.001; III: +25%, p<0.001), stage (II: +11%, p<0.001; III: +22%,
p<0.001), size (T3/4: +11%, p=0.004), HER2-positivity (+14%, p<0.001),
lymph node positivity(+11%, pBackgroundVascular Endothelial Growth
Factor-A (VEGF-A), pivotal for neo-angiogenesis, is an interesting target
for breast cancer molecular imaging. To assess its potential clinical
value, we performed a systematic review and meta-analysis of VEGF-A
expression rates in normal breast tissue, benign and (pre-)invasive
breast disease, and investigated associations with clinicopathological
characteristics.MethodsWe systematically searched EMBASE and MEDLINE for
articles describing VEGF-A expression in breast disease assessed by
immunohistochemistry (IHC) or Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay (ELISA).
We pooled IHC expression rates with random-effects models and applied
meta-regression to identify associations with clinicopathological
characteristics. We summarized findings for ELISA results.ResultsOf 2,711
unique articles retrieved, 157 studies described IHC results (16,046
tissue samples). Pooled expression rates were lower in studies applying
antibody clone VG1 (-21%, p=0.018) or C-1 (-24%, p=0.016), compared to
A-20. Expression compared to invasive carcinoma was lower in normal
tissue (-51%, p<0.001) and benign breast diseases (-34%, p<0.001), but
comparable for carcinoma in situ (+5%, p=0.289). Expression rates
increased with tumour grade (II: +14%, p<0.001; III: +25%, p<0.001),
stage (II: +11%, p<0.001; III: +22%, p<0.001), size (T3/4: +11%,
p=0.004), HER2-positivity (+14%, p<0.001), lymph node positivity(+11%,
p<0.001), and decreased in hormone receptor positive (PR-positive: -7%,
pBackgroundVascular Endothelial Growth Factor-A (VEGF-A), pivotal for
neo-angiogenesis, is an interesting target for breast cancer molecular
imaging. To assess its potential clinical value, we performed a
systematic review and meta-analysis of VEGF-A expression rates in normal
breast tissue, benign and (pre-)invasive breast disease, and investigated
associations with clinicopathological characteristics.MethodsWe
systematically searched EMBASE and MEDLINE for articles describing VEGF-A
expression in breast disease assessed by immunohistochemistry (IHC) or
Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay (ELISA). We pooled IHC expression rates
with random-effects models and applied meta-regression to identify
associations with clinicopathological characteristics. We summarized
findings for ELISA results.ResultsOf 2,711 unique articles retrieved, 157
studies described IHC results (16,046 tissue samples). Pooled expression
rates were lower in studies applying antibody clone VG1 (-21%, p=0.018)
or C-1 (-24%, p=0.016), compared to A-20. Expression compared to invasive
carcinoma was lower in normal tissue (-51%, p<0.001) and benign breast
diseases (-34%, p<0.001), but comparable for carcinoma in situ (+5%,
p=0.289). Expression rates increased with tumour grade (II: +14%,
p<0.001; III: +25%, p<0.001), stage (II: +11%, p<0.001; III: +22%,
p<0.001), size (T3/4: +11%, p=0.004), HER2-positivity (+14%, p<0.001),
lymph node positivity(+11%, p<0.001), and decreased in hormone receptor
positive (PR-positive: -7%, p<0.001; ER-positive:-8%, pBackgroundVascular
Endothelial Growth Factor-A (VEGF-A), pivotal for neo-angiogenesis, is an
interesting target for breast cancer molecular imaging. To assess its
potential clinical value, we performed a systematic review and
meta-analysis of VEGF-A expression rates in normal breast tissue, benign
and (pre-)invasive breast disease, and investigated associations with
clinicopathological characteristics.MethodsWe systematically searched
EMBASE and MEDLINE for articles describing VEGF-A expression in breast
disease assessed by immunohistochemistry (IHC) or Enzyme-Linked
Immunosorbent Assay (ELISA). We pooled IHC expression rates with
random-effects models and applied meta-regression to identify
associations with clinicopathological characteristics. We summarized
findings for ELISA results.ResultsOf 2,711 unique articles retrieved, 157
studies described IHC results (16,046 tissue samples). Pooled expression
rates were lower in studies applying antibody clone VG1 (-21%, p=0.018)
or C-1 (-24%, p=0.016), compared to A-20. Expression compared to invasive
carcinoma was lower in normal tissue (-51%, p<0.001) and benign breast
diseases (-34%, p<0.001), but comparable for carcinoma in situ (+5%,
p=0.289). Expression rates increased with tumour grade (II: +14%,
p<0.001; III: +25%, p<0.001), stage (II: +11%, p<0.001; III: +22%,
p<0.001), size (T3/4: +11%, p=0.004), HER2-positivity (+14%, p<0.001),
lymph node positivity(+11%, p<0.001), and decreased in hormone receptor
positive (PR-positive: -7%, p<0.001; ER-positive:-8%, p<0.001) and
lobular cancers (-14%, pBackgroundVascular Endothelial Growth Factor-A
(VEGF-A), pivotal for neo-angiogenesis, is an interesting target for
breast cancer molecular imaging. To assess its potential clinical value,
we performed a systematic review and meta-analysis of VEGF-A expression
rates in normal breast tissue, benign and (pre-)invasive breast disease,
and investigated associations with clinicopathological
characteristics.MethodsWe systematically searched EMBASE and MEDLINE for
articles describing VEGF-A expression in breast disease assessed by
immunohistochemistry (IHC) or Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay (ELISA).
We pooled IHC expression rates with random-effects models and applied
meta-regression to identify associations with clinicopathological
characteristics. We summarized findings for ELISA results.ResultsOf 2,711
unique articles retrieved, 157 studies described IHC results (16,046
tissue samples). Pooled expression rates were lower in studies applying
antibody clone VG1 (-21%, p=0.018) or C-1 (-24%, p=0.016), compared to
A-20. Expression compared to invasive carcinoma was lower in normal
tissue (-51%, p<0.001) and benign breast diseases (-34%, p<0.001), but
comparable for carcinoma in situ (+5%, p=0.289). Expression rates
increased with tumour grade (II: +14%, p<0.001; III: +25%, p<0.001),
stage (II: +11%, p<0.001; III: +22%, p<0.001), size (T3/4: +11%,
p=0.004), HER2-positivity (+14%, p<0.001), lymph node positivity(+11%,
p<0.001), and decreased in hormone receptor positive (PR-positive: -7%,
p<0.001; ER-positive:-8%, p<0.001) and lobular cancers (-14%, p<0.001).
Substantial heterogeneity was observed in study results. Furthermore,
expression rates strongly depended on VEGF-A positivity threshold. VEGF-A
levels assessed by ELISA (42 studies, 8,498 samples) were highly
variable.ConclusionAlthough reported VEGF-A expression rates in breast
cancer were variable, we found significant correlations with
clinicopathological characteristics indicating aggressive disease. Also,
expression rates were low in normal breast tissue and benign breast
disease. As expression rates strongly depended on VEGF-A positivity -
arguing against an on/off phenomenon - applicability of VEGF-A for
molecular imaging purposes will depend on sensitivity of the molecular
imaging modality, target population, and envisioned
applications.AcknowledgmentThis research was supported by the Center for
Translational Molecular Medicine (MAMMOTH).

