Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synergistic effects of CBL0137 and gemcitabine against non-small
cell lung and pancreatic cancer xenografts


CBL0137 represents a novel class of small molecules that simultaneously
activate p53 and inhibit cancer-associated stress response pathways, such
as NF-B and HSF-1. The effects of CBL0137, culminating in tumor cell
death, are mediated by the inhibition of FACT, a chromatin remodelling
factor complex composed of SSRP1 and SPT16 subunits, that is involved in
the transcription of genes with highly ordered chromatin structure,
replication, and mitosis. FACT is expressed during early embryogenesis
and in undifferentiated progenitors and stem cells of adult tissues while
protein levels of both FACT subunits are almost undetectable in
differentiated cells and tissues. FACT is expressed in several tumor
types compared to equivalent normal tissues. In particular, SSRP1 is
expressed in a high proportion of lung and pancreatic cancers (45-63%).
FACT positive tumors are associated with an aggressive malignant
phenotype (high grade, metastatic disease, worse overall survival).
Therefore, FACT represents a potentially important target for cancer
therapy. We investigated the effect of CBL0137 and its combination with
gemcitabine a nucleoside analog used in treatment of non-small lung
cancer (NSCLC) and pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA). We found that
CBL0137 had significant antitumor activity against a H1975 NSCLC
xenograft model (89.6% growth inhibition) as well as a patient-derived
PDA (PDA#2) model (70.4% growth inhibition). Furthermore, CBL0137 acted
synergistically with gemcitabine against both tumor types as evidenced by
increased median survival time compared to each drug administered as a
single agent (increase in survival time: H1975- >47 days combination vs
24 days CBL0137 only, 32.5 days gemcitabine only; PDA#2- >42 days
combination vs 28 days CBL0137 only, 30.5 days gemcitabine only).
Preliminary investigation into the mechanism underlying the synergy of
this combination suggest that CBL0137 may enhance gemcitabine activity in
part by abrogating the expression of modulators of gemcitabine response,
such as cytidine deaminase and ribonucleotide reductase. Together, these
data indicate that CBL0137 may provide a clinical benefit for the
treatment of both NSCLC and PDA when combined with standard agent
gemcitabine.

