Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of p73 di-nucleotide polymorphism in prostate cancer and p73
protein isoform balance


The p73 gene is a member of the p53 tumor suppressor family. Compared to
p53, the molecular consequences of and risk factors associated with
variants of the p73 gene are not well understood. Prostate cancer (PCa)
is the most frequently occurring cancer in men, and the second leading
cause of cancer mortality among US men. Available molecular markers for
PCa risk of incidence or aggressiveness are currently lacking. Though the
mechanism of PCa progression is not well understood, several lines of
evidence support a role for a di-nucleotide polymorphism (DNP) in the p73
gene as a risk factor for several cancer types. However, results are
inconsistent. We investigated a DNP linked pair of transition changes,
G4C14-to-A4T14 (rs1801173), located in the 5-UTR portion of exon 2 of the
p73 gene. The goals of this study were to address the potential
associations between p73 DNP (rs1801173) and PCa risk and/or progression,
and to discern any detectable disruption of p73 protein isoforms in cells
harboring the p73 DNP allele. We have analyzed 1,292 PCa patients and 682
healthy control men. Although we detected no association between p73 DNP
and PCa risk (OR =1.02, 95%CI=0.86-1.21), a significant inverse
relationship between p73 DNP and PCa aggressiveness (OR = 0.55,
95%CI=0.31-0.99) was detected.Several p73 protein isoforms have been
identified and can be grouped into two major categories, TAp73 and Np73,
which differ in their N-termini and are transcribed from different
promoters. The transcriptionally active TAp73 isoforms are transcribed
from the P1 promoter and include the full-length N-terminal sequence
encompassing exons 1 through 3. However, the Np73 isoforms are
transcribed from promoter P2 and do not contain the N-terminal
trans-activation (TA) domain. Therefore, the Np73 protein isoform is
dominate negative toward TAp73 because Np73 isoforms are able to form
tetramers with TAp73, as well as p53, but do not activate transcription
of p73- or p53-target genes. The balance between TAp73 and Np73 is
disrupted in many cancer types. In this study, Western Blot analyses of
eleven cancer cell lines for p73 protein isoforms indicate that the two
cell lines with heterozygous genotype for p73 DNP have higher TAp73/Np73
ratios (TAp73/Np73 = 1.39 and 1.4) than the other wild-type cell lines
not harboring the p73 DNP allele (TAp73/Np73 = 0.68 to 0.97). Our
combined findings are consistent with an association between the p73 DNP
allele and lower risk for PCa aggressiveness by increasing the expressed
TAp73/Np73 protein isoform ratio.

