Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cytotoxic effects of hypericum extracts on breast and colorectal
tumors


The risk of acquiring certain types of cancers has many causes which
include age, environment and genetics. There have been advances in the
primary treatment options available, which include surgery, radiation
therapy, and chemotherapy. However, the survival prognosis for many
cancer patients remains low. Cancer treatments may involve chemotherapy,
which often cause harsh side effects. The Plant kingdom may provide
alternative therapy that may have less side effects and possibly more
effective. Hypericum perforatum possesses hypericin, which has been been
shown to have antitumor effects with invitro studies on specific cell
lines. In other Hypericum species, hypericin makes up a smaller
percentage of the extract. However, these species contain other
phytochemical compounds that may also exert an antitumor effect. The
objective of the present study was to assess the cytotoxic potential of
H. perforatum cv. topas, H. olympicum, and H. calycinum on breast and
colorectal adenocarcinoma cell lines. MCF7, SW480, and SW620 cells were
treated with varying concentrations dosages of methanolic crude extracts
from the plant species. Cytotoxicity was determine by measuring the
reduction of Alamar Blue after a 24 hour exposure period of 10,000 cells
in 96 well fluorescent plates. The reduction was determine using the
Molecular Devices fluorescent spectrophotometer. At the lowest comparable
concentrations, H. perforatum cv. topas had a greater reduction in tumor
growth than MCF7 and SW40 cells lines. Whereas, H. olympicum demonstrated
a greater decrease in SW620 cell growth at the lowest comparable
concentration. These results suggest a difference in the phytochemical
composition of these plants, which should be evaluated in order to
determine what metabolite(s) are having the antitumor effect and their
target.

