Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Induction of autophagy and apoptosis with polyamine synthesis
inhibition and metformin in human melanoma and colon cancer cells


We have previously reported inhibition of cell migration and
proliferation induced by difluoromethylornithine (DMFO) and metformin
(Met) combination in human melanoma and colon cancer cells. We further
investigated the mechanism of cell death with the combination treatment
in melanoma and colon cancer cells. The in vivo effect of the combination
in melanoma was also determined.Human colon cancer (HCT 116, HT 29) and
melanoma (MEL1861, SK-23) were treated with Met, DFMO, or combination.
Western blotting was performed to determine the expression of AMP kinase,
mTOR, p70S6K and 4E-BP1. Apoptosis was measured by Annexin V assay.
Autophagy was determined by fluorescence microscopy staining for LC3A/B
and Western blot analysis of LC3A/B and Beclin-1 expression. For in vivo
evaluation, SK-23 cells were injected SQ into BALB/c nu mice. After tumor
nodule was established, 4 groups of 6 mice : group 1 - IP injections of
vehicle and normal drinking water, group 2 - 2% (w/v) DFMO in drinking
water; group 3 - IP Met (250 mg/kg/day), group 4 - DFMO plus Met. Mice
body weight and tumor volume were measured every 3 days. Tumor weight was
measured on Day 20 at necropsy. For comparison between groups, the
student's t test was used and pWe have previously reported inhibition of
cell migration and proliferation induced by difluoromethylornithine
(DMFO) and metformin (Met) combination in human melanoma and colon cancer
cells. We further investigated the mechanism of cell death with the
combination treatment in melanoma and colon cancer cells. The in vivo
effect of the combination in melanoma was also determined.Human colon
cancer (HCT 116, HT 29) and melanoma (MEL1861, SK-23) were treated with
Met, DFMO, or combination. Western blotting was performed to determine
the expression of AMP kinase, mTOR, p70S6K and 4E-BP1. Apoptosis was
measured by Annexin V assay. Autophagy was determined by fluorescence
microscopy staining for LC3A/B and Western blot analysis of LC3A/B and
Beclin-1 expression. For in vivo evaluation, SK-23 cells were injected SQ
into BALB/c nu mice. After tumor nodule was established, 4 groups of 6
mice : group 1 - IP injections of vehicle and normal drinking water,
group 2 - 2% (w/v) DFMO in drinking water; group 3 - IP Met (250
mg/kg/day), group 4 - DFMO plus Met. Mice body weight and tumor volume
were measured every 3 days. Tumor weight was measured on Day 20 at
necropsy. For comparison between groups, the student's t test was used
and p< 0.05 was considered to be significant.DFMO and Met induced
apoptosis in colon cancer and melanoma cells in a dose- and
time-dependent manner. Significant increase in apoptosis was noted in the
combined treatment group compared with either one alone. Increased number
of autolysosomes was observed in the combination group under fluorescence
microscopy. Up-regulation of Beclin-1 and LC3A/B expression were also
increased with combination treatment compared with either treatment
alone. Increased expression of phosphor-AMPK, decreases expression of
p70S6 and 4EBP1 were observed with the combination treatment. Both DFMO
and Met alone have significant in vivo anti-proliferative effect on human
melanoma cells compared with control. However, the anti-proliferative
effect of the combination treatment was significantly better than either
regimen alone (pWe have previously reported inhibition of cell migration
and proliferation induced by difluoromethylornithine (DMFO) and metformin
(Met) combination in human melanoma and colon cancer cells. We further
investigated the mechanism of cell death with the combination treatment
in melanoma and colon cancer cells. The in vivo effect of the combination
in melanoma was also determined.Human colon cancer (HCT 116, HT 29) and
melanoma (MEL1861, SK-23) were treated with Met, DFMO, or combination.
Western blotting was performed to determine the expression of AMP kinase,
mTOR, p70S6K and 4E-BP1. Apoptosis was measured by Annexin V assay.
Autophagy was determined by fluorescence microscopy staining for LC3A/B
and Western blot analysis of LC3A/B and Beclin-1 expression. For in vivo
evaluation, SK-23 cells were injected SQ into BALB/c nu mice. After tumor
nodule was established, 4 groups of 6 mice : group 1 - IP injections of
vehicle and normal drinking water, group 2 - 2% (w/v) DFMO in drinking
water; group 3 - IP Met (250 mg/kg/day), group 4 - DFMO plus Met. Mice
body weight and tumor volume were measured every 3 days. Tumor weight was
measured on Day 20 at necropsy. For comparison between groups, the
student's t test was used and p< 0.05 was considered to be
significant.DFMO and Met induced apoptosis in colon cancer and melanoma
cells in a dose- and time-dependent manner. Significant increase in
apoptosis was noted in the combined treatment group compared with either
one alone. Increased number of autolysosomes was observed in the
combination group under fluorescence microscopy. Up-regulation of
Beclin-1 and LC3A/B expression were also increased with combination
treatment compared with either treatment alone. Increased expression of
phosphor-AMPK, decreases expression of p70S6 and 4EBP1 were observed with
the combination treatment. Both DFMO and Met alone have significant in
vivo anti-proliferative effect on human melanoma cells compared with
control. However, the anti-proliferative effect of the combination
treatment was significantly better than either regimen alone (p< 0.001).
Average SK-23 tumor weight was 100 mg for control group compared with 45
mg for group 2 (pWe have previously reported inhibition of cell migration
and proliferation induced by difluoromethylornithine (DMFO) and metformin
(Met) combination in human melanoma and colon cancer cells. We further
investigated the mechanism of cell death with the combination treatment
in melanoma and colon cancer cells. The in vivo effect of the combination
in melanoma was also determined.Human colon cancer (HCT 116, HT 29) and
melanoma (MEL1861, SK-23) were treated with Met, DFMO, or combination.
Western blotting was performed to determine the expression of AMP kinase,
mTOR, p70S6K and 4E-BP1. Apoptosis was measured by Annexin V assay.
Autophagy was determined by fluorescence microscopy staining for LC3A/B
and Western blot analysis of LC3A/B and Beclin-1 expression. For in vivo
evaluation, SK-23 cells were injected SQ into BALB/c nu mice. After tumor
nodule was established, 4 groups of 6 mice : group 1 - IP injections of
vehicle and normal drinking water, group 2 - 2% (w/v) DFMO in drinking
water; group 3 - IP Met (250 mg/kg/day), group 4 - DFMO plus Met. Mice
body weight and tumor volume were measured every 3 days. Tumor weight was
measured on Day 20 at necropsy. For comparison between groups, the
student's t test was used and p< 0.05 was considered to be
significant.DFMO and Met induced apoptosis in colon cancer and melanoma
cells in a dose- and time-dependent manner. Significant increase in
apoptosis was noted in the combined treatment group compared with either
one alone. Increased number of autolysosomes was observed in the
combination group under fluorescence microscopy. Up-regulation of
Beclin-1 and LC3A/B expression were also increased with combination
treatment compared with either treatment alone. Increased expression of
phosphor-AMPK, decreases expression of p70S6 and 4EBP1 were observed with
the combination treatment. Both DFMO and Met alone have significant in
vivo anti-proliferative effect on human melanoma cells compared with
control. However, the anti-proliferative effect of the combination
treatment was significantly better than either regimen alone (p< 0.001).
Average SK-23 tumor weight was 100 mg for control group compared with 45
mg for group 2 (p<0.05), 35mg for group 3 (pWe have previously reported
inhibition of cell migration and proliferation induced by
difluoromethylornithine (DMFO) and metformin (Met) combination in human
melanoma and colon cancer cells. We further investigated the mechanism of
cell death with the combination treatment in melanoma and colon cancer
cells. The in vivo effect of the combination in melanoma was also
determined.Human colon cancer (HCT 116, HT 29) and melanoma (MEL1861,
SK-23) were treated with Met, DFMO, or combination. Western blotting was
performed to determine the expression of AMP kinase, mTOR, p70S6K and
4E-BP1. Apoptosis was measured by Annexin V assay. Autophagy was
determined by fluorescence microscopy staining for LC3A/B and Western
blot analysis of LC3A/B and Beclin-1 expression. For in vivo evaluation,
SK-23 cells were injected SQ into BALB/c nu mice. After tumor nodule was
established, 4 groups of 6 mice : group 1 - IP injections of vehicle and
normal drinking water, group 2 - 2% (w/v) DFMO in drinking water; group 3
- IP Met (250 mg/kg/day), group 4 - DFMO plus Met. Mice body weight and
tumor volume were measured every 3 days. Tumor weight was measured on Day
20 at necropsy. For comparison between groups, the student's t test was
used and p< 0.05 was considered to be significant.DFMO and Met induced
apoptosis in colon cancer and melanoma cells in a dose- and
time-dependent manner. Significant increase in apoptosis was noted in the
combined treatment group compared with either one alone. Increased number
of autolysosomes was observed in the combination group under fluorescence
microscopy. Up-regulation of Beclin-1 and LC3A/B expression were also
increased with combination treatment compared with either treatment
alone. Increased expression of phosphor-AMPK, decreases expression of
p70S6 and 4EBP1 were observed with the combination treatment. Both DFMO
and Met alone have significant in vivo anti-proliferative effect on human
melanoma cells compared with control. However, the anti-proliferative
effect of the combination treatment was significantly better than either
regimen alone (p< 0.001). Average SK-23 tumor weight was 100 mg for
control group compared with 45 mg for group 2 (p<0.05), 35mg for group 3
(p< 0.05), and 25mg for the combination group (pWe have previously
reported inhibition of cell migration and proliferation induced by
difluoromethylornithine (DMFO) and metformin (Met) combination in human
melanoma and colon cancer cells. We further investigated the mechanism of
cell death with the combination treatment in melanoma and colon cancer
cells. The in vivo effect of the combination in melanoma was also
determined.Human colon cancer (HCT 116, HT 29) and melanoma (MEL1861,
SK-23) were treated with Met, DFMO, or combination. Western blotting was
performed to determine the expression of AMP kinase, mTOR, p70S6K and
4E-BP1. Apoptosis was measured by Annexin V assay. Autophagy was
determined by fluorescence microscopy staining for LC3A/B and Western
blot analysis of LC3A/B and Beclin-1 expression. For in vivo evaluation,
SK-23 cells were injected SQ into BALB/c nu mice. After tumor nodule was
established, 4 groups of 6 mice : group 1 - IP injections of vehicle and
normal drinking water, group 2 - 2% (w/v) DFMO in drinking water; group 3
- IP Met (250 mg/kg/day), group 4 - DFMO plus Met. Mice body weight and
tumor volume were measured every 3 days. Tumor weight was measured on Day
20 at necropsy. For comparison between groups, the student's t test was
used and p< 0.05 was considered to be significant.DFMO and Met induced
apoptosis in colon cancer and melanoma cells in a dose- and
time-dependent manner. Significant increase in apoptosis was noted in the
combined treatment group compared with either one alone. Increased number
of autolysosomes was observed in the combination group under fluorescence
microscopy. Up-regulation of Beclin-1 and LC3A/B expression were also
increased with combination treatment compared with either treatment
alone. Increased expression of phosphor-AMPK, decreases expression of
p70S6 and 4EBP1 were observed with the combination treatment. Both DFMO
and Met alone have significant in vivo anti-proliferative effect on human
melanoma cells compared with control. However, the anti-proliferative
effect of the combination treatment was significantly better than either
regimen alone (p< 0.001). Average SK-23 tumor weight was 100 mg for
control group compared with 45 mg for group 2 (p<0.05), 35mg for group 3
(p< 0.05), and 25mg for the combination group (p< 0.001).Our findings
suggest that combination of DFMO and Met induced cancer cell death via
apoptosis and autophagy though activation of AMPK pathway and suppression
of the Akt/mTOR signaling pathway. DFMO and Met combination can have
significant anti-tumor effect in vivo.

