Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A therapeutic strategy combining the Wee1 inhibitor MK1775 with
HDAC inhibitors targets both p53 wild-type or mutant AML cells


Wee1 is an essential component of the G2-M cell cycle checkpoint
machinery, providing a target for Wee1 inhibitors (e.g., MK1775) designed
to potentiate the anti-tumor activity of genotoxic agents via mitotic
lethality. In this setting, Wee1 inhibitor actions are primarily
p53-dependent. However, recent studies have identified novel S-phase
functions of Wee1 that operate independently of p53 status. Such findings
present a rationale for combining Wee1 inhibitors with other targeted
agents such as HDAC inhibitors (HDACIs) which interrupt DNA replication
and repair. To test this hypothesis, interactions between MK1775 and the
HDACIs SBHA or vorinostat were investigated in AML cells. Significantly,
MK1775 interacted highly synergistically with either HDACI in both p53
wild type (wt) or mutant AML cells, manifested by pronounced apoptosis
induction and attenuation of clonogenic survival. Consistent with these
findings, shRNA knock-down of Wee1 significantly sensitized cells to
HDACIs. Immunobloting revealed that HDACIs markedly enhanced Wee1
inhibition by MK1775, reflected by diminished Wee1 S642 phosphorylation
and protein levels, as well as cdc2/Cdk1 Y15 phosphorylation, a direct
downstream Wee1 kinase target. In p53-null (U937) or -mutant (MV-4-11)
cells, MK1775 triggered S-phase arrest, whereas HDACI co-administration
resulted in early S-phase accumulation accompanied by a marked increase
in sub-G1 cells. In sharp contrast, in p53 wt MOLM-13 cells, HDACIs
clearly induced G2/M arrest, an event abrogated by MK1775, arguing for
context-specific cell cycle effects of this strategy. Interestingly,
while MK1775/HDACI synergism persisted, shRNA p53 knock-down in p53 wt
AML-3 cells partially attenuated lethal effects of combined treatment.
Nevertheless, MK1775/HDACI co-treatment strikingly increased DNA damage,
manifested by dramatically increases in H2A.X generation, in both p53 wt
and mutant cells. This event was associated with profound caspase
activation and PARP cleavage. Notably, the MK1775/HDACI regimen was
highly active against patient-derived AML cells harboring either wt or
mutant p53, as well as various other mutations in cancer hotspot genes
including FLT3, NRAS, KRAS, BRAF, PDGFRA, MET, STK11, SMARCB1, and APC.
Furthermore, the CD34+/CD123+/CD38- population, enriched for
leukemia-initiating progenitors, but not normal CD34+ hematopoietic
cells, was highly susceptible to the Wee1/HDAC inhibition strategy.
Finally, co-administration of MK1775 with vorinostat substantially
suppressed tumor growth and significantly prolonged animal survival in a
murine AML xenograft model. Together, these findings indicate that a
strategy combining Wee1 inhibition (e.g., by MK1775) with HDACIs is
highly active towards AML cells, including primitive progenitors, through
context-specific p53-dependent and -independent mechanisms.

