Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Rapamycin sensitizes cancer cells to growth inhibition by the PARP
inhibitor olaparib


Poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase inhibitors (PARPi) have been developed and
tested in a context of combining them with drugs that inhibit
double-stranded (ds) DNA repair, because PARPi impair single-stranded
(ss) DNA break repair, resulting in activation of dsDNA break repair
machinery. Rapamycin, an mTOR inhibitor, has been widely prescribed for
more than a decade, and recent studies revealed its ability to inhibit
dsDNA break repair. The combination of the PARPi, olaparib, and rapamycin
synergistically inhibited cell proliferation in non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) cells, as well as triple negative breast cancer (TNBC)
cells that have BRCA1 mutations. Rad51, which forms a polymer on ssDNA
upon dsDNA breaks, plays an essential role in homologous recombination.
Olaparib induced Rad51 focus formation and rapamycin successfully
inhibited it both in vivo and in vitro, suggesting this combination
worked through blocking both ssDNA break repair and dsDNA break repair,
resulting in cells that cannot go through G2/M checkpoint. The protein
level of PARP was predictive for both PAR activity and Rad51 focus
formation with this combination. Collectively, these data suggest that
this combination could have a therapeutic potential to inhibit cancer
with high PARP expression, or in combination with cytotoxic chemotherapy
or radiation.

