Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Androgen receptor splice variants activating the full-length
receptor in mediating resistance to androgen-directed therapy


Androgen deprivation therapy, which disrupts androgen receptor (AR)
signaling through androgen ablation or AR antagonists, is the first-line
treatment for disseminated prostate cancer. While this regimen is
effective initially, progression to the presently incurable and lethal
stage, termed castration-resistant prostate cancer, invariably occurs.
Upregulation of constitutively-active AR splice variants (AR-Vs) has been
implicated in AR-driven tumor progression in castration-resistant
prostate cancer. To date, functional studies of AR-Vs have been focused
mainly on their ability to regulate gene expression independent of the
full-length AR (AR-FL). Here, we showed that AR-V7 and ARv567es, two
major AR-Vs, both facilitated AR-FL nuclear translocation in the absence
of androgen and mitigated the ability of the antiandrogen enzalutamide to
inhibit AR-FL nuclear trafficking. AR-V bound to the promoter of its
specific target without AR-FL, but when dimerized with AR-FL, co-occupied
the promoter of canonical AR target with AR-FL in a mutually-dependent
manner. AR-V expression attenuated both androgen and enzalutamide
modulation of AR-FL activity/cell growth, and mitigated the in vivo
antitumor efficacy of enzalutamide. Furthermore, AR-V levels were
upregulated in xenograft tumors that had acquired enzalutamide
resistance. Collectively, this study highlights a dual function of AR-Vs
in mediating castration resistance. In addition to trans-activating
target genes independent of AR-FL, AR-Vs can serve as a rheostat to
control the response of AR-FL to androgen-directed therapy via activating
AR-FL in an androgen-independent manner. The findings shed new insights
into the mechanisms of AR-V-mediated castration resistance and have
significant therapeutic implications.

