Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The predictive role of tumor-associated macrophages in stage IIIA
pN2 non-small cell lung cancer after neoadjuvant chemotherapy and surgery


Introduction: Neoadjuvant chemotherapy improves survival in patients with
pN2 stage IIIA non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). However, the majority
relapse eventually even with mediastinal downstaging. Our study
investigated the predictive role of tumor-associate macrophages (TAMs) in
these patients.Methods: Between 2005 and 2008, twenty-two pN2 stage IIIA
NSCLC patients underwent cisplatin/docetaxel neoadjuvant chemotherapy and
surgery were retrospectively enrolled. Immunohistochemical staining of
CD68 was used to identify macrophages in stored tissues.Results: The
objective response rate was 68%, overall median disease-free survival
(DFS) was 13.1 months (95% CI 6.1-20.2 months) and median overall
survival (OS) 48.0 months (95% CI 24.0-72.1 months). Multiple Cox
regression analysis showed mediastinal downstaging to pN0 (HR=0.039, 95%
CI 0.004-0.349, p=0.004) and high total macrophage numbers (HR=1.01, 95%
CI 1.002-1.017, p=0.012) were independent factors for DFS. In the 16
patients downstaged to pN0, those with low total macrophage numbers had
longer DFS (median 33.4 months), compared with those with high numbers
(13.4 months, p=0.037).Conclusions: Low total macrophage numbers were
also an independent factor for better DFS in pN2 stage IIIA NSCLC
patients receiving neoadjuvant chemotherapy and surgical resection, which
association was kept in patients downstaged to pN0. Further prospective
study is warranted to confirm the predictive role of TAM in these
patients.

