Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vitro characterization of EGF816, a third-generation
mutant-selective EGFR inhibitor


EGFR is a major oncogene in NSCLC. Patients with the oncogenic mutations
L858R and Ex19Del are responsive to the first generation pan-EGFR
tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) erlotinib and gefitinib. The associated
dose-limiting toxicities (DLTs) are severe rash and GI tolerability due
to WT EGFR inhibition. However, therapy is universally limited by the
development of acquired drug resistance where EGFR gatekeeper mutation
T790M accounts for 50% of incidence. Second generation irreversible
pan-EGFR TKI afatinib was developed to overcome T790M resistance. Though
effective in animal models, the efficacy of afatinib on T790M patients is
largely limited by its DLTs due to potent inhibition of WT EGFR. A strong
medical need still exists for better tolerated therapy to treat NSCLC
patients harboring EGFR mutations. Here we report the discovery and
development of a potent third generation, irreversible mutant-selective
EGFR TKI that is expected to improve/maintain efficacy on oncogenic EGFR
mutant patients while demonstrating reduced side effects. EGF816 potently
inhibits both activating (L858R and Ex19Del) and T790M resistant
mutations in various cellular assays; it is selective against a large
panel of kinases in both Ambit and BaF3 profiling, and more importantly
is selective against WT EGFR. EGF816 is efficacious in mutant EGFR-driven
xenograft models, is well tolerated in IND-enabling toxicology studies,
and is entering phase 1 trials.

