Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Small molecule phenotypic targeting of aggressive B-cell lymphomas


Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) is a heterogeneous disease.
Combination of gene expression and metabolic profiling of DLBCLs
uncovered two biologically relevant entities: BCR-DLBCL (60% of DLBCL
pts) characterized by a glycolytic metabolism and B-cell receptor (BCR)
signaling activation; and OXPHOS-DLBCL characterized by enhanced
mitochondrial energy transduction and increased glutathione levels. To
identify small molecules that can serve as biological probes and
potential therapeutics for these subgroups, we conducted a phenotypic
screening in BCR-DLBCLs vs. OXPHOS-DLBCLs. We first tested cell growth
inhibition capacity of 84,000 drug-like small molecules in one BCR
(OCI-Ly7) vs. OXPHOS (Toledo) cell lines for 48 h at 20 M. We identified
3,684 compounds that inhibited >90% the growth of either or both cell
lines. In a secondary screening we selected compounds that showed a
dose-response effect lower than 10 M. We identified 31 BCR-selective, 8
OXPHOS-selective and 5 non-selective compounds. We then determined
potency and phenotypic-selectivity of active compounds in an expanded
panel of BCR-glycolytic (OCI-Ly1, OCI-Ly3, OCI-Ly7, OCI-Ly10, SU-DHL6)
vs. OXPHOS (OCI-Ly4, Karpas422, Toledo, WSU-DLCL2) cell lines. Five
compounds were validated as BCR-glycolytic specific and 3 as bi-specific
and their GI50 values (50% growth inhibition) were determined. We further
characterized the most selective (>5-fold) and potent (low M)
BCR-glycolytic specific small molecules, termed LI-2 and LI-5. These
compounds showed GI50 between 500 nM - 3 M in BCR-glycolytic vs 9-20 M in
OXPHOS DLBCLs. LI-2 and LI-5 selectively induced 60-80% caspase-dependent
apoptosis (p0.05) after 24 h at 2.5 M in BCR-glycolytic but not in
OXPHOS. To determine phenotypic changes upon treatment with LI-2 and
LI-5, we performed RNA-sequencing on BCR-glycolytic DLBCL OCI-Ly7 and
SUDHL-6 cells. LI-2 signature included 91 up- and 76 down-regulated
transcripts (FC>1.2, FDR adjusted pDiffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL)
is a heterogeneous disease. Combination of gene expression and metabolic
profiling of DLBCLs uncovered two biologically relevant entities:
BCR-DLBCL (60% of DLBCL pts) characterized by a glycolytic metabolism and
B-cell receptor (BCR) signaling activation; and OXPHOS-DLBCL
characterized by enhanced mitochondrial energy transduction and increased
glutathione levels. To identify small molecules that can serve as
biological probes and potential therapeutics for these subgroups, we
conducted a phenotypic screening in BCR-DLBCLs vs. OXPHOS-DLBCLs. We
first tested cell growth inhibition capacity of 84,000 drug-like small
molecules in one BCR (OCI-Ly7) vs. OXPHOS (Toledo) cell lines for 48 h at
20 M. We identified 3,684 compounds that inhibited >90% the growth of
either or both cell lines. In a secondary screening we selected compounds
that showed a dose-response effect lower than 10 M. We identified 31
BCR-selective, 8 OXPHOS-selective and 5 non-selective compounds. We then
determined potency and phenotypic-selectivity of active compounds in an
expanded panel of BCR-glycolytic (OCI-Ly1, OCI-Ly3, OCI-Ly7, OCI-Ly10,
SU-DHL6) vs. OXPHOS (OCI-Ly4, Karpas422, Toledo, WSU-DLCL2) cell lines.
Five compounds were validated as BCR-glycolytic specific and 3 as
bi-specific and their GI50 values (50% growth inhibition) were
determined. We further characterized the most selective (>5-fold) and
potent (low M) BCR-glycolytic specific small molecules, termed LI-2 and
LI-5. These compounds showed GI50 between 500 nM - 3 M in BCR-glycolytic
vs 9-20 M in OXPHOS DLBCLs. LI-2 and LI-5 selectively induced 60-80%
caspase-dependent apoptosis (p0.05) after 24 h at 2.5 M in BCR-glycolytic
but not in OXPHOS. To determine phenotypic changes upon treatment with
LI-2 and LI-5, we performed RNA-sequencing on BCR-glycolytic DLBCL
OCI-Ly7 and SUDHL-6 cells. LI-2 signature included 91 up- and 76
down-regulated transcripts (FC>1.2, FDR adjusted p<0.05), whereas LI-5
comprised 493 up- and 248 down-regulated genes. Computational analysis
revealed that both compounds affected survival and cell cycle pathways
(p=5.2x10-7) as well as amino acid and glucose metabolism pathways
(p=2.4x10-8). LI-2 specifically affected DNA mismatch repair and
replication pathways (p=3.9x10-5), and LI-5 specifically affected
cytokine and growth factors signaling pathways (p=2.4x10-24). When
compared to other known drug effects, LI-2 showed an expression signature
similar to valinomycin (an OXPHOS uncoupler) and to pyrvinium (that kills
cancer cells upon glucose starvation), suggesting that activity of TCA
and glycolytic pathways are both critical for BCR-glycolytic cells
survival. LI-5 relates to the protein synthesis inhibitor anisomycin and
the cell cycle inhibitor podophyllotoxin. In sum, phenotypic screening
provides a basis for discovery of distinct susceptibilities of DLBCL
subtypes that could be capitalized towards individualized therapies.

