Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: AXL receptor tyrosine kinase is associated with the prognosis of
patients with esophageal squamous cell carcinoma


PURPOSE:The AXL receptor tyrosine kinase has been suggested as a
prognostic factor and a therapeutic target in esophageal adenocarcinoma.
Whether AXL play some role in the prognosis of esophageal squamous cell
carcinoma (ESCC) is unknown. We aim to investigate the association of AXL
expression in tumor tissues with the prognosis of patients with
ESCC.PATIENTS AND METHODS:The study was analyzed retrospectively. A total
of 57 patients diagnosed with ESCC were enrolled in the study. AXL
expression in esophageal timorous tissues was detected by
immunnohistochemisty (IHC), and was correlated with the overall survival
(OS) or progression-free survival (PFS) of patients by multivariate Cox
regression analysis and Kaplan-Meier survival function.RESULTS:AXL could
be detected in 38 patients (66.7%). Elevated expression of AXL was
associated with increased risk of both death and recurrence (HR[95 %
CI]=1.46 [1.05-2.04], Ptrend=0.026 in death and HR[95 %
CI]=1.75[1.24-2.48], Ptrend=0.002 in recurrence). Patents expressing high
levels of AXL (n=25, 43.9 %) exhibited a 2.15 fold increased risk of
recurrence compared to those absence or with low level of AXL (HR[95 %
CI]=2.15[1.08-4.28], P=0.029). Kaplan-Meier survival function
demonstrated that the progression-free duration was significantly
different among the patients expressing different levels of AXL (log-rank
P=0.029).CONCLUSION:Expression of AXL in esophageal tumor tissues is a
prognostic predictor of ESCC. The results revealed AXL could also be a
therapeutic target of ESCC.

