Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Alcohol and dietary folate intake and gene promoter methylation in
clear-cell renal cell cancer


Introduction: High intake of alcohol and low intake of folate have been
associated with gene promoter methylation. Increased promoter methylation
of tumor suppressor genes plays an important role in renal cell cancer
(RCC). On the other hand, however, alcohol intake is associated with a
decreased risk of RCC risk in most prospective studies. We therefore
investigated whether alcohol and dietary folate intakes were associated
with gene promoter methylation in RCC.Methods: The Netherlands Cohort
Study (NLCS) with case-cohort design included 120,852 subjects aged 55-69
years in 1986. Diet was measured with a food-frequency questionnaire.
After 20.3 years of follow-up, paraffin-embedded tumor blocks were
collected from 454 incident RCC cases, of which 80% had clear cell (cc)
histology. Methylation-specific PCR (MSP) was used to analyze promoter
CpG island methylation in tumor DNA. Genes were selected that were known
to be involved in ccRCC. Furthermore, genes were selected exhibiting 1)
promoter CpG island methylation in ccRCC cell lines and not in normal
kidney tissue in a genome-wide methylation screen (MBD-affinity massive
parallel sequencing) and 2) ccRCC-specific down-regulation in the TCGA
data. In total, we identified 14 genes (CDO1, CFTR, CSPG4, FST, FZD10,
GAL, GRE1, LAD1, NEFH, NEURL, RASGFR2, SFN, SFRP1, VHL) as candidate
markers. We computed a sum score of methylated genes and divided the
ccRCC cases into those with low- (0-18% of the genes methylated),
intermediate- (20-45%) and high- (46-100%) methylated tumors.
Multivariable analyses were conducted using Cox regression analyses,
stratified according to methylation sum score and included 4,439
subcohort members and 300 ccRCC cases.Results: Prevalence of gene
promoter methylation was on average 36%, but varied from 7.8% (VHL) to
96.5% (SFN).Increasing intakes of alcohol were associated with decreased
risk in all ccRCC cases, but not statistically significant: multivariable
adjusted HR (95% CI) for 15g alcohol/day vs. 0 g/day 0.79 (0.54-1.16),
and p for trend 0.44. In strata of ccRCC according to methylation sum
score no significant heterogeneity was observed, although the HR for 15g
alcohol/day versus 0 g/day was significantly decreased in ccRCC with a
high methylation sum score: 0.36 (95% CI 0.14-0.93), p for trend,
0.14.Dietary intake of folate was not associated with ccRCC risk: HR for
the quintile of highest intake versus lowest intake: 1.07 (CI, 0.70-1.64)
and p for trend, 0.59. Between strata of ccRCC cases according to
methylation sum score no significant heterogeneity was observed. There
was no effect-modification of alcohol and dietary folate intake on
overall ccRCC risk, nor in strata according to methylation sum
score.Conclusion: Our findings show that alcohol and dietary folate
intake are not associated with ccRCC risk, neither overall nor in strata
according to methylation sum score.

