Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of novel prognostic signatures in rhabdomyosarcoma
by whole transcriptome expression profiling: A discovery and validation
study


INTRODUCTION: Pediatric rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) has varying outcomes,
especially in intermediate-risk disease (IR-RMS) due to the inherent
inability of clinical staging to accurately risk-stratify a large
proportion of patients. This study aimed to identify prognostic
signatures in IR-RMS, the clinical subgroup with the most heterogeneous
outcomes, which can potentially provide better risk stratification than
routine clinicopathologic parameters. Signature performance was validated
on an independent set of RMS patients. METHODS: Prospectively-obtained
primary tumors from 80 IR-RMS patients on Children's Oncology Group
clinical trial protocols formed the training set. Tumors from 19, 15 and
20 patients with low-risk, high-risk and IR-RMS formed the validation
set. Annotated and unannotated transcripts were profiled by Affymetrix
Human Exon microarrays employing 1,393,765 probe selection regions (PSRs)
and used to derive weighted signatures. Potentials of coding and
non-coding signatures to predict survival were compared using areas under
receiver operating characteristic curves that provided a measure of
predictive accuracy. Associated biological processes were analyzed using
curated pathway analysis tools. RESULTS: Histologic subtype (p=0.94) and
PAX-FKHR fusion status (p=0.66) were unable to predict survival in the
training set of IR-RMS. Tumor site was the only clinical predictor of
outcome in this set (p=0.041). Cox regression on 17,045 coding
transcripts identified a prognostic 30-gene meta-feature (30gMF,
p=0.001). Analysis of unannotated transcripts identified a 39-PSR
meta-feature (39ncMF) that also predicted survival (pINTRODUCTION:
Pediatric rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) has varying outcomes, especially in
intermediate-risk disease (IR-RMS) due to the inherent inability of
clinical staging to accurately risk-stratify a large proportion of
patients. This study aimed to identify prognostic signatures in IR-RMS,
the clinical subgroup with the most heterogeneous outcomes, which can
potentially provide better risk stratification than routine
clinicopathologic parameters. Signature performance was validated on an
independent set of RMS patients. METHODS: Prospectively-obtained primary
tumors from 80 IR-RMS patients on Children's Oncology Group clinical
trial protocols formed the training set. Tumors from 19, 15 and 20
patients with low-risk, high-risk and IR-RMS formed the validation set.
Annotated and unannotated transcripts were profiled by Affymetrix Human
Exon microarrays employing 1,393,765 probe selection regions (PSRs) and
used to derive weighted signatures. Potentials of coding and non-coding
signatures to predict survival were compared using areas under receiver
operating characteristic curves that provided a measure of predictive
accuracy. Associated biological processes were analyzed using curated
pathway analysis tools. RESULTS: Histologic subtype (p=0.94) and PAX-FKHR
fusion status (p=0.66) were unable to predict survival in the training
set of IR-RMS. Tumor site was the only clinical predictor of outcome in
this set (p=0.041). Cox regression on 17,045 coding transcripts
identified a prognostic 30-gene meta-feature (30gMF, p=0.001). Analysis
of unannotated transcripts identified a 39-PSR meta-feature (39ncMF) that
also predicted survival (p<0.001). Multiple PSRs interrogating the same
genomic locus were then replaced by a single PSR that reduced ncMF size
to 34 PSRs (34ncMF), which could still predict outcome (pINTRODUCTION:
Pediatric rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) has varying outcomes, especially in
intermediate-risk disease (IR-RMS) due to the inherent inability of
clinical staging to accurately risk-stratify a large proportion of
patients. This study aimed to identify prognostic signatures in IR-RMS,
the clinical subgroup with the most heterogeneous outcomes, which can
potentially provide better risk stratification than routine
clinicopathologic parameters. Signature performance was validated on an
independent set of RMS patients. METHODS: Prospectively-obtained primary
tumors from 80 IR-RMS patients on Children's Oncology Group clinical
trial protocols formed the training set. Tumors from 19, 15 and 20
patients with low-risk, high-risk and IR-RMS formed the validation set.
Annotated and unannotated transcripts were profiled by Affymetrix Human
Exon microarrays employing 1,393,765 probe selection regions (PSRs) and
used to derive weighted signatures. Potentials of coding and non-coding
signatures to predict survival were compared using areas under receiver
operating characteristic curves that provided a measure of predictive
accuracy. Associated biological processes were analyzed using curated
pathway analysis tools. RESULTS: Histologic subtype (p=0.94) and PAX-FKHR
fusion status (p=0.66) were unable to predict survival in the training
set of IR-RMS. Tumor site was the only clinical predictor of outcome in
this set (p=0.041). Cox regression on 17,045 coding transcripts
identified a prognostic 30-gene meta-feature (30gMF, p=0.001). Analysis
of unannotated transcripts identified a 39-PSR meta-feature (39ncMF) that
also predicted survival (p<0.001). Multiple PSRs interrogating the same
genomic locus were then replaced by a single PSR that reduced ncMF size
to 34 PSRs (34ncMF), which could still predict outcome (p<0.001).
Predictive accuracy of 39ncMF was higher than 34gMF (96.4% vs. 70.8%,
pINTRODUCTION: Pediatric rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) has varying outcomes,
especially in intermediate-risk disease (IR-RMS) due to the inherent
inability of clinical staging to accurately risk-stratify a large
proportion of patients. This study aimed to identify prognostic
signatures in IR-RMS, the clinical subgroup with the most heterogeneous
outcomes, which can potentially provide better risk stratification than
routine clinicopathologic parameters. Signature performance was validated
on an independent set of RMS patients. METHODS: Prospectively-obtained
primary tumors from 80 IR-RMS patients on Children's Oncology Group
clinical trial protocols formed the training set. Tumors from 19, 15 and
20 patients with low-risk, high-risk and IR-RMS formed the validation
set. Annotated and unannotated transcripts were profiled by Affymetrix
Human Exon microarrays employing 1,393,765 probe selection regions (PSRs)
and used to derive weighted signatures. Potentials of coding and
non-coding signatures to predict survival were compared using areas under
receiver operating characteristic curves that provided a measure of
predictive accuracy. Associated biological processes were analyzed using
curated pathway analysis tools. RESULTS: Histologic subtype (p=0.94) and
PAX-FKHR fusion status (p=0.66) were unable to predict survival in the
training set of IR-RMS. Tumor site was the only clinical predictor of
outcome in this set (p=0.041). Cox regression on 17,045 coding
transcripts identified a prognostic 30-gene meta-feature (30gMF,
p=0.001). Analysis of unannotated transcripts identified a 39-PSR
meta-feature (39ncMF) that also predicted survival (p<0.001). Multiple
PSRs interrogating the same genomic locus were then replaced by a single
PSR that reduced ncMF size to 34 PSRs (34ncMF), which could still predict
outcome (p<0.001). Predictive accuracy of 39ncMF was higher than 34gMF
(96.4% vs. 70.8%, p<0.001). However, predictive accuracy of the former
was comparable to the 34ncMF (96.7%, p=0.54). When applied to the
validation set, the 34gMF, 39ncMF and 34ncMF were able to predict
outcomes (p=0.022, 0.006, 0.012, respectively). Analysis of biological
processes using 34gMF showed enrichment for functions/disorders
associated with musculoskeletal development and signaling pathways.
Similar analysis of non-coding signatures revealed enrichment for
cellular assembly, cell cycle, apoptosis and cancer-associated functions.
CONCLUSIONS: A concise non-coding RNA meta-feature was able to better
predict outcome in IR-RMS than a coding gene meta-feature, where most
standard clinical prognosticators failed. The meta-features were
independently validated in IR and non-IR RMS. This suggests that
non-coding transcripts can regulate and determine RMS biology and
aggressiveness, and be used as novel prognostic indicators.

