Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Profiling immune cells within the tumor microenvironment for
optimal model selection for pre-clinical investigations


Infiltrating host immune cells can have a significant impact on the
growth and outcome of many tumor types. Several leukocyte populations
have been implicated in establishing an immune suppressive
microenvironment (e.g. myeloid derived suppressor cells [MDSCs) and
regulatory T cells [Treg cells]) and thus making it harder for anti-tumor
immune effector cells to function (e.g. CD8 cytotoxic T cells).
Immune-Mediated Therapy (IMT) is emerging as a key strategy for the
treatment of cancer through by enhancing a patient's anti-tumor immune
response. In order to maximise the potential of IMT strategies it is
important to understand the immune status within the tumor
microenvironment as well as systemically. Therefore, fully
immune-competent preclinical models are valuable tools to enable the
study of the immune system, both locally within the tumor and
systemically, to understand the mechanism of action of IMT monotherapies
and combination therapies in vivo. Consequently, we have profiled the
immune status of a panel of syngeneic mouse tumor models to assist
optimal model selection to aid these investigations. We developed
multi-parameter flow cytometry techniques to identify specific immune
subsets in both the tumor microenvironment and the periphery. These
investigations revealed a number of tumor infiltrating immune cell
end-points that can be used to correlate with response to IMT depending
on the syngeneic model being used. For example, we observed differences
in the MDSC and Treg cell populations across the models investigated,
which will influence optimal model selection depending on the mechanism
of action of the IMT being tested.

