Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor-targeted delivery of siRNA using stabilized calcium
phosphate nanoparticles based on bio-inspired hyaluronic acid conjugate


Purpose : Low cytotoxicity and high cellular gene delivery capability are
among the most important prerequisites for the selection of a non-viral
carrier. In this study, we report the development of calcium phosphate
(CAP) nanoparticles stabilized by a conjugate of the biological adhesive
molecule, 3,4-dihydroxy-L-phenylalanine (dopa), and a nontoxic
hydrophilic natural polymer, hyaluronic acid (HA), for targeted siRNA
delivery to cancer cells.Methods : Dopa-conjugated HA (dopa-HA) was
synthesized by EDC/NHS chemistry and analyzed by spectrometry and 1H-NMR.
Stabilized calcium phosphate nanoparticles containing siRNA
(CAP/siRNA/dopa-HA) was prepared by simply mixing CaCl2 solution
containing siRNA with a HEPES buffer containing Na2HPO4 and subsequent
addition of a solution containing dopa-HA. The particles were
characterized by using light scattering method and transmission electron
microscope (TEM). The gene silencing and cancer cell-targeting ability of
CAP/siRNA/dopa-HA was evaluated by monitoring cellular reporter activity
(luciferase) in human colon carcinoma cells permanently expressing
firefly luciferase. Confocal microscopy and FACS analysis were performed
to assess CD44-specific cellular delivery. Bio-distribution and in vivo
gene silencing of CAP/siRNA/dopa-HA nanoparticles were studied in an
animal model bearing tumor xenograft.Results : CAP/siRNA/dopa-HA can form
compact nanoparticles that effectively protect siRNA from enzymatic
degradation despite the structural drawbacks of siRNA, such as low charge
density and short and rigid structure. In addition, stabilized CAP
nanoparticles were able to maintain their colloidal stability in a
physiological salt condition for over a week. The superior ability of
CAP/siRNA/dopa-HA to maintain the integrity of encapsulated siRNA and the
stability in solution of the nanoparticles allow this formulation to
achieve improved intratumoral accumulation of siRNA and a high level of
target gene silencing in solid tumors after systemic
administration.Conclusion Considering its biocompatibility, transfection
efficacy, and tumor targeting capability, this stabilized
organic-inorganic hybrid gene delivery platform should be considered a
promising candidate carrier for systemic siRNA delivery and targeted
cancer therapy.

