Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clinicopathologic characteristics for elevated microsatellite
alterations at selected tetranucleotie repeats (EMAST) in colorectal
cancer of Korean patients


Microsatellite instability (MSI) is a hallmark of tumors with mismatch
repair deficiency. Recently, a different type of instability, elevated
microsatellite alterations at selected tetranucleotide repeats (EMAST)
has been reported in colorectal cancers. EMAST was reported to be
associated with various clinicopathologic characteristics, including MSI
status, race, tumor progression, and morphology and differentiation of
tumor. However, contrary to MSI status which is well known prognostic and
predictive marker in CRC, clinical implication of EMAST in CRC is still
unclear. We evaluated EMAST and MSI status in 88 sporadic CRC cases using
five markers (MYCL1, D9S242, D20S85, D8S321, and D20S82) for EMAST and
Bethesda panel for MSI status, respectively. Clinicopathologic data of
the patients were collected and analyzed. Tumors showing frameshifts in
at least two or more EMAST markers were classified as EMAST-positive.
Among 88 tumors, EMAST-positive tumors were 22 (25.0%) and MSI-H tumors
were 32 (36.4%). EMAST-positive tumors showed proximal location of tumor
(90.9% vs. 66.7%, p=0.029), less frequent loss of thymidylate synthase
expression (4.5% vs. 34.8%, p=0.005), MSI-H (81.8% vs. 21.2%,
pMicrosatellite instability (MSI) is a hallmark of tumors with mismatch
repair deficiency. Recently, a different type of instability, elevated
microsatellite alterations at selected tetranucleotide repeats (EMAST)
has been reported in colorectal cancers. EMAST was reported to be
associated with various clinicopathologic characteristics, including MSI
status, race, tumor progression, and morphology and differentiation of
tumor. However, contrary to MSI status which is well known prognostic and
predictive marker in CRC, clinical implication of EMAST in CRC is still
unclear. We evaluated EMAST and MSI status in 88 sporadic CRC cases using
five markers (MYCL1, D9S242, D20S85, D8S321, and D20S82) for EMAST and
Bethesda panel for MSI status, respectively. Clinicopathologic data of
the patients were collected and analyzed. Tumors showing frameshifts in
at least two or more EMAST markers were classified as EMAST-positive.
Among 88 tumors, EMAST-positive tumors were 22 (25.0%) and MSI-H tumors
were 32 (36.4%). EMAST-positive tumors showed proximal location of tumor
(90.9% vs. 66.7%, p=0.029), less frequent loss of thymidylate synthase
expression (4.5% vs. 34.8%, p=0.005), MSI-H (81.8% vs. 21.2%, p<0.001),
nuclear heterogeneity of hMSH3 expression (77.3% vs. 51.5%, p=0.046) when
compared with non-EMAST tumor. The other variables including age, gender,
gross type and differentiation of tumor, a presence of stromal reaction,
and tumor stage were not associated with EMAST status. In addition,
overall and disease-free survival rate were similar between EMAST and
non-EMAST tumor. In this study, MSI-H tumors showed very high frequency
of EMAST-positive and clinical characteristics of EMAST and non-EMAST
tumor were definitely different.

