Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: miR-211 is contributive to the progression of oral carcinoma
through targeting transcription factor 12 (Tcf12)


Oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) is one of the prevalent malignancies
worldwide. MicroRNAs are short RNA molecules that regulate pathogenesis,
including OSCC carcinogenesis, by post-transcriptional down-regulation of
target genes. Our previous study has identified a relationship between
high miR-211 expression and the invasion of OSCC. This study further
dissects the molecular mechanisms underlying the progression of OSCC as
affected by miR-211. Tcf12 is a helix-loop-helix transcription factor
with unclear implications in oral malignancies. MiR-211 was predicted to
target the 3UTR of transcription factor 12 (Tcf12). Reporter assays
confirmed the direct targeting of miR-211 on Tcf12. MiR-211 expression
decreased both endogenous and exogenous Tcf12 expression. Exogenous Tcf12
expression suppressed proliferation, migration and anchorage-independent
colony formation of OECM-1 OSCC cells. On the contrary, knockdown of
endogenous Tcf12 expression enhanced these oncogenic phenotypes.
Furthermore, in tumor cells with miR-211 overexpression, Tcf12 can reduce
its oncogenic potential; whereas miR-211 can also rescue the suppression
of Tcf12 to tumor cells. Down-regulation of Tcf12 was identified in 75%
(27/36) human OSCC samples. To elucidate the in vivo oncogenic roles of
miR-211 in OSCC carcinogenesis, K14 promoter driven murine miR-211
transgenic mouse lines (K14-GFP- miR-211) were established. The Tcf12
expression in squamous epithelium was down-regulated in transgenic mice
relative to wild type mice. After tumor induction by 4-nitroquinoline
1-oxide treatment, the transgenic mice exhibited more advanced tongue and
esophageal tumorigenesis comparing to wild type mice. In summary, this
study reveals that Tcf12 is suppressive to OSCC. MiR-211 regulates OSCC
progression by targeting Tcf12. The K14-GFP-miR-211 transgenic mice will
help future investigation of the pathogenic mechanisms underlying OSCC
progression and the development of therapeutic strategy.

