Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Capacity building in cancer management in Africa: Envisioning a
future from past challenges


Sub-Saharan African institutions, especially the Uganda Cancer Institute
in Kampala, Uganda, led in the development of chemotherapy (CMT) for
lymphoma subtypes between 1950 and 1980. Recent WHO emphasis on global
non-communicable diseases indicates a need for regional HC paradigm shift
in a region long inundated with communicable diseases. Expected barriers
in capacity building in medical oncology there are illustrated with
challenges of experimental management of Burkitt's lymphoma (BL) at the
University College Hospital, Ibadan, Nigeria (UCHIN), where from 1/1984
to 12/1985, a study of tolerability and practicability of high dose
cytosine arabinoside (HDAC) CMT was initiated. Included were children
(chd) with a diagnosis of BL Ziegler's Stage C or D with or without CNS
involvement (CNS), and life expectancy of at least one month, whose
parents/guardians were willing to give oral consent. 60 chd were to be
assigned randomly to either the standard treatment (RII) or the
investigational (RI) protocol. RI was: Cyclophosphamide (CTX) 1000mg/m2
IV day 1, Vincristine (VCR) 2.0mg/m2 IV day 1, cytosine arabinoside (AC)
50mg/m2 q12hr x 6 doses in cycles 1 and 4, and 1000mg/m2 q12hr x 4 doses
and 50mg/m2 q12hr x 2 doses for cycles 2 and 3 cycles q14days x 4cycles.
R II was: CTX 1000mg/m2 IV day 1, VCR 2.0mg/m2 IV day 1, AC 50mg/m2 q12hr
x 6 doses q14days x 4 cycles. AC 50mg/m2 was given intrathecally days 1
and 5 of each cycle. See Table for results. *MDI: Mean dose intensity.
HDAC based CMT was well tolerated with more effective control of systemic
and CNS disease compared to conventional CMT. Challenges encountered
included ethical issues of medical research in the midst of
socio-economic deprivation, technical and manpower inadequacies,
unreliable drug supply leading to CMT modifications, communication, lack
of compliance and unreliable accessibility to follow-up. Persistence of
these problems after >2 decades signals a need for cultural change at all
community levels: government, HC administration and among categories of
providers.


