Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Shift of Cx43 isoform expression by PQ1 in SW480 human colorectal
cancer cells


Colorectal cancer is one of the most common cancers in men and women in
the United States. On average, the risk of developing colorectal cancer
is about 1 in 20 over an individuals' lifetime. Cancer cells exhibit many
deficiencies in cell-to-cell communication, particularly gap junctional
intercellular communication (GJIC). GJIC has been reported to diminish as
cancer cells progress. Gap junctions are intercellular channels composed
of connexin proteins, which mediate the direct passage of small molecules
from one cell to the next. They are involved in the regulation of cell
cycle, cell differentiation, and cell signaling. Previously, a class of
substituted quinolines, known as PQs, demonstrated to increase GJIC in
cancer cells and subsequently attenuated tumor growth. The goal of this
study is to determine whether the mode of PQ1 is by directly regulating
the connexin protein. The results show that the low expression of
connexin 43 (Cx43) in SW480 human colorectal cancer cells remains
constant in the presence of PQ1. However, PQ1 caused a change in isoform
expression of Cx43 in which there was a shift of Cx43 expression from P0
to P1 and P2 isoforms. This suggests that the trafficking of Cx43 from
the Golgi to the membrane occurs in the presence of PQ1. Furthermore, the
results show that Cx43 interacts with PKC in SW480 cells; however, PQ1
does not affect the interaction of Cx43 and PKC, suggesting that the
shift in Cx43 isoforms is not due to PKC phosphorylation. These findings
provide in part that the increase of GJIC by PQ1 is due to the shift in
Cx43 from P0 to P1 and P2 isoforms in SW480 colorectal cancer cells.

