Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TARBP1, a member of the SPOUT methyltransferase family, is
involved in human carcinogenesis


It has recently been recognized that protein methylation plays a critical
role in many biological processes, and its deregulation has been observed
in various kinds of diseases, including cancer. To date, a number of
protein methyltransferases have already been reported to be associated
with human carcinogenesis. Although many protein methyltransferases
belong to the SET-domain containing protein family or the protein
arginine methyltransferase (PRMT) family, a series of other
methyltransferase families have also been discovered by
bioinformatics-based approaches. On the contrary, physiological functions
of these methyltransferases, especially, the significance in human
disease like cancer, still remains unknown. In this study, we
demonstrated that expression levels of TARBP1 (TAR RNA-Binding Protein
1), a member of the SPOUT methyltransferase family, are significantly
up-regulated in many types of cancer tissues compared to corresponding
non-tumor tissues. In addition, knockdown of TARBP1 resulted in the
suppression of cancer cell growth, indicating that TARBP1 seems to
regulate the proliferation of cancer cells. Since expression levels of
TARBP1 in normal tissues are significantly low, TARBP1 may be a good new
target for anti-cancer therapy.

