Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: LAG3 and PD1 co-inhibitory molecules directly interact to limit
CD8+ T cell signaling


Increasing evidence indicate that dual blockade of Lymphocyte Activation
Gene-3 (LAG3) and programmed cell death 1 (PD1) synergistically enhances
autoimmunity and anti-tumor immunity. Despite the fact that these
co-inhibitory receptors individually attenuate T cell receptor signaling,
it is not clear whether they interact at the physical, biochemical and/or
molecular levels, to regulate the functional fate of T cells. To answer
these questions, we first simulated possible direct interaction of LAG3
and PD1 using in-silico molecular docking techniques. Using confocal
microscopy and ImageStream analyses, we demonstrated that LAG3 and PD1
molecules co-localized in a subset of activated murine CD8+ T cells. The
co-localization occurred at the trans-Golgi vesicles, early/recycling
endosomal compartments, lysosomes, and microtubule organizing center
(MTOC). Importantly, LAG3 and PD1 cluster with pLck at the immunological
synapse of CD8+ T cell and dendritic cell conjugates. Reciprocal
immunoprecipitation of the T cell extracts with specific antibodies for
LAG3 and PD1 revealed a physical association between LAG3 and PD1 and
this interaction was absent in T cells isolated from LAG3 and PD1
knockout mice. Finally, LAG3 protein was also associated with Src family
tyrosine phosphatase-2 (SHP2) that is recruited by PD1 during T cell
signaling. The recruitment of phosphatases is additively reduced in CD8+
T cells deficient in both LAG3 and PD1. Taken together, our data suggest
that LAG3 interacts and collaborates with PD1, following T cell
activation, for rapid translocation from early/recycling endosomal
compartments to the immunological synapse, leading to a synergistic
inhibitory effect on T cell signaling.

