Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: B-cell expression of AICDA and MME [CALLA, CD10] is predictive of
a subsequent non-Hodgkin lymphoma diagnosis


Background: Mounting evidence from epidemiologic studies of serum
biomarkers highlights the importance of inflammation and immune
activation preceding the diagnosis of B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL).
Although chronic B-cell hyperactivation is likely involved in the
pathogenesis of NHL, an important gap in knowledge remains present as the
source and targets of these inflammatory and immune activation associated
factors are mainly undefined. Targeted studies of B-cell gene expression
can help fill this gap, further define the immune environment from which
these tumors arise, and assist in identifying biomarkers for early
detection of B-cell NHLs.Methods: This study was based in a large
national cohort of HIV+ men, the Multicenter AIDS Cohort Study, who are
at increased risk for developing NHL. 144 HIV+ B-cell NHL cases were
matched to 144 HIV+ controls on follow-up time and sample availability.
B-cells isolated from viably frozen peripheral blood mononuclear cells,
collected 2 to 13 years (median 4.7 years) prior to NHL diagnosis or
control match date, were used to measure messenger RNA (mRNA) levels of
16 molecules that are associated with B-cell activation, using the
Quantigene Plex 2.0 Assay Kit (Affymetrix) on the Luminex platform.
Expression levels were normalized by the geomean of five housekeeping
genes. Adjusted odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) were
calculated by conditional logistic regression for gene expression
categorized as detectable versus undetectable.Results: Activation-induced
cytidine deaminase (AICDA) was detected in 8.3% of cases and 2.8% of
controls, OR=3.7, 95% CI=1.0-13.1. Membrane metallo-endopeptidase (MME)
was detected in 59.7% of cases and 29.9% of controls, OR=3.9, 95%
CI=2.2-6.8. The AICDA and MME associations with NHL were similar across
subgroups of site, EBV tumor status, and lag time between sample
collection and NHL diagnosis date. AICDA, but not MME, was more strongly
associated with NHL among those who were the least immunosuppressed
(higher CD4+ T cell count and low HIV RNA levels). In subgroup analyses,
CD40 ligand (CD40LG) expression was associated with NHL with a time lag
time of Background: Mounting evidence from epidemiologic studies of serum
biomarkers highlights the importance of inflammation and immune
activation preceding the diagnosis of B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL).
Although chronic B-cell hyperactivation is likely involved in the
pathogenesis of NHL, an important gap in knowledge remains present as the
source and targets of these inflammatory and immune activation associated
factors are mainly undefined. Targeted studies of B-cell gene expression
can help fill this gap, further define the immune environment from which
these tumors arise, and assist in identifying biomarkers for early
detection of B-cell NHLs.Methods: This study was based in a large
national cohort of HIV+ men, the Multicenter AIDS Cohort Study, who are
at increased risk for developing NHL. 144 HIV+ B-cell NHL cases were
matched to 144 HIV+ controls on follow-up time and sample availability.
B-cells isolated from viably frozen peripheral blood mononuclear cells,
collected 2 to 13 years (median 4.7 years) prior to NHL diagnosis or
control match date, were used to measure messenger RNA (mRNA) levels of
16 molecules that are associated with B-cell activation, using the
Quantigene Plex 2.0 Assay Kit (Affymetrix) on the Luminex platform.
Expression levels were normalized by the geomean of five housekeeping
genes. Adjusted odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) were
calculated by conditional logistic regression for gene expression
categorized as detectable versus undetectable.Results: Activation-induced
cytidine deaminase (AICDA) was detected in 8.3% of cases and 2.8% of
controls, OR=3.7, 95% CI=1.0-13.1. Membrane metallo-endopeptidase (MME)
was detected in 59.7% of cases and 29.9% of controls, OR=3.9, 95%
CI=2.2-6.8. The AICDA and MME associations with NHL were similar across
subgroups of site, EBV tumor status, and lag time between sample
collection and NHL diagnosis date. AICDA, but not MME, was more strongly
associated with NHL among those who were the least immunosuppressed
(higher CD4+ T cell count and low HIV RNA levels). In subgroup analyses,
CD40 ligand (CD40LG) expression was associated with NHL with a time lag
time of <6 years, OR=3.0, 95% CI=1.0-9.3, and Interleukin-6 (IL6)
expression was associated with NHL among those with a CD4+ T cell count
Background: Mounting evidence from epidemiologic studies of serum
biomarkers highlights the importance of inflammation and immune
activation preceding the diagnosis of B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL).
Although chronic B-cell hyperactivation is likely involved in the
pathogenesis of NHL, an important gap in knowledge remains present as the
source and targets of these inflammatory and immune activation associated
factors are mainly undefined. Targeted studies of B-cell gene expression
can help fill this gap, further define the immune environment from which
these tumors arise, and assist in identifying biomarkers for early
detection of B-cell NHLs.Methods: This study was based in a large
national cohort of HIV+ men, the Multicenter AIDS Cohort Study, who are
at increased risk for developing NHL. 144 HIV+ B-cell NHL cases were
matched to 144 HIV+ controls on follow-up time and sample availability.
B-cells isolated from viably frozen peripheral blood mononuclear cells,
collected 2 to 13 years (median 4.7 years) prior to NHL diagnosis or
control match date, were used to measure messenger RNA (mRNA) levels of
16 molecules that are associated with B-cell activation, using the
Quantigene Plex 2.0 Assay Kit (Affymetrix) on the Luminex platform.
Expression levels were normalized by the geomean of five housekeeping
genes. Adjusted odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) were
calculated by conditional logistic regression for gene expression
categorized as detectable versus undetectable.Results: Activation-induced
cytidine deaminase (AICDA) was detected in 8.3% of cases and 2.8% of
controls, OR=3.7, 95% CI=1.0-13.1. Membrane metallo-endopeptidase (MME)
was detected in 59.7% of cases and 29.9% of controls, OR=3.9, 95%
CI=2.2-6.8. The AICDA and MME associations with NHL were similar across
subgroups of site, EBV tumor status, and lag time between sample
collection and NHL diagnosis date. AICDA, but not MME, was more strongly
associated with NHL among those who were the least immunosuppressed
(higher CD4+ T cell count and low HIV RNA levels). In subgroup analyses,
CD40 ligand (CD40LG) expression was associated with NHL with a time lag
time of <6 years, OR=3.0, 95% CI=1.0-9.3, and Interleukin-6 (IL6)
expression was associated with NHL among those with a CD4+ T cell count
<300, OR=3.9, 95% CI=0.9-17.Interpretation & Conclusions: AICDA
expression is essential for antibody specificity and diversity but its
aberrant expression has been implicated in lymphomagenesis. MME is a
signature marker of B-cell NHLs of germinal center origin and has
previously been associated with NHL survival. We found that AICDA and MME
expression precedes the clinical diagnosis of NHL in an HIV+ cohort.
Additionally, late CD40LG expression and IL6 expression among the more
severely immunosuppressed individuals were associated with NHL risk in
this study. These molecules should be studied further for possible early
detection and clinical utility.

