Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of cell proliferation by
(R,R')-4-methoxy-1-naphthylfenoterol in breast cancer cell lines


(R,R')-4-methoxy-1-naphthylfenoterol (MNF) is a bitopic ligand that acts
as an agonist of the 2-adrenergic receptor and an antagonist of the
orphan G-protein-coupled receptor GPR55. Activation of GPR55 is
pro-oncogenic through cannabinoid-related signal transduction and MNF
treatment inhibits proliferation of different tumor cell lines,
representing cancers of the liver, pancreas and brain. Of significance,
MNF exerts antitumor activity in a xenograft glioma model in nude mice.
In the current study, the anti-proliferative response mediated by MNF has
been examined in human breast cancer cell lines. In this study, MCF-7 and
MDA-MB-231 cells were screened for the presence of epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR) and GPR55 proteins by Western blotting. The EGFR
in such cancer cells plays a key role in the control of growth and
proliferation. When compared to MCF-7 cells, MDA-MB-231 cells contained
high levels of EGFR and GPR55 and showed exquisite sensitivity to MNF as
evidenced by the significant reduction in constitutive phosphorylation of
the extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK1/2), with an IC50 of 0.08
nM. [3H]-Thymidine incorporation assay was performed and revealed that
MNF elicited a 2-fold higher growth inhibition in MDA-MB-231 cells as
compared to MCF-7 cells (50% vs. 24.9% inhibition at 10 M of MNF;
p(R,R')-4-methoxy-1-naphthylfenoterol (MNF) is a bitopic ligand that acts
as an agonist of the 2-adrenergic receptor and an antagonist of the
orphan G-protein-coupled receptor GPR55. Activation of GPR55 is
pro-oncogenic through cannabinoid-related signal transduction and MNF
treatment inhibits proliferation of different tumor cell lines,
representing cancers of the liver, pancreas and brain. Of significance,
MNF exerts antitumor activity in a xenograft glioma model in nude mice.
In the current study, the anti-proliferative response mediated by MNF has
been examined in human breast cancer cell lines. In this study, MCF-7 and
MDA-MB-231 cells were screened for the presence of epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR) and GPR55 proteins by Western blotting. The EGFR
in such cancer cells plays a key role in the control of growth and
proliferation. When compared to MCF-7 cells, MDA-MB-231 cells contained
high levels of EGFR and GPR55 and showed exquisite sensitivity to MNF as
evidenced by the significant reduction in constitutive phosphorylation of
the extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK1/2), with an IC50 of 0.08
nM. [3H]-Thymidine incorporation assay was performed and revealed that
MNF elicited a 2-fold higher growth inhibition in MDA-MB-231 cells as
compared to MCF-7 cells (50% vs. 24.9% inhibition at 10 M of MNF;
p<0.001). Evidence for the altered expression and/or signaling pathway
activation triggered by EGFR and GPR55 in response to MNF will be
presented. We conclude that MDA-MB-231 cells represent a suitable model
for the study of possible crosstalk between two classes of pro-oncogenic
cell surface receptors and the analysis of MNF as novel therapeutic agent
for the management of cancer. This work was supported entirely by the
Intramural Research Program of the National Institute on Aging, NIH.

