Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Vitamin D sufficiency slows the progression of dysplasic lesions
in the NTCU mouse model of lung squamous cell carcinoma


Progress has recently been made in identifying populations at risk for
lung cancer using genetic, clinical and demographic information. The
N-nitroso-tris-chloroethylurea (NTCU) mouse model, in which animals
develop premalignant histopathology similar to that seen in humans, is
used to examine the potential efficacy of chemoprevention agents to be
utilized in at risk populations. We identified 25 l of 40 mM NTCU /week
as the optimal dosing regimen in SWR/J mice for chemoprevention
studies.At this dose, topical treatments of NTCU induce predominantly
low-grade dysplastic lesions by 15 weeks (w) and high-grade dysplastic
(HGD) lesions by 25 w in the large airways. Additionally we found that
NTCU stimulates a state of chronic inflammation associated with the
development of dysplasias.Epidemiologic studies indicate that there is an
inverse relationship between vitamin D and the risk and prognosis of lung
cancer. Vitamin D acts through the vitamin D receptor to promote cellular
differentiation and inhibit proliferation and inflammation. The effect of
vitamin D on cancer progression was tested in the NTCU model, using
dietary vitamin D3 (0 or 2000 IU/kg) alone and in combination with
intraperitoneal injections of the active metabolite of vitamin D,
calcitriol (80 ug/kg). Female mice were randomized to 6 treatment groups
(n=15 mice/group/time point (15 and 25 w)). Disease was evaluated by
enumerating the percentage of HGD lesions, per the total area in serial
H&E sections of the lung. The percentage of HGD lesions in the large
airways was reduced in the vitamin D sufficient mice (SN) (8.72%,
PProgress has recently been made in identifying populations at risk for
lung cancer using genetic, clinical and demographic information. The
N-nitroso-tris-chloroethylurea (NTCU) mouse model, in which animals
develop premalignant histopathology similar to that seen in humans, is
used to examine the potential efficacy of chemoprevention agents to be
utilized in at risk populations. We identified 25 l of 40 mM NTCU /week
as the optimal dosing regimen in SWR/J mice for chemoprevention
studies.At this dose, topical treatments of NTCU induce predominantly
low-grade dysplastic lesions by 15 weeks (w) and high-grade dysplastic
(HGD) lesions by 25 w in the large airways. Additionally we found that
NTCU stimulates a state of chronic inflammation associated with the
development of dysplasias.Epidemiologic studies indicate that there is an
inverse relationship between vitamin D and the risk and prognosis of lung
cancer. Vitamin D acts through the vitamin D receptor to promote cellular
differentiation and inhibit proliferation and inflammation. The effect of
vitamin D on cancer progression was tested in the NTCU model, using
dietary vitamin D3 (0 or 2000 IU/kg) alone and in combination with
intraperitoneal injections of the active metabolite of vitamin D,
calcitriol (80 ug/kg). Female mice were randomized to 6 treatment groups
(n=15 mice/group/time point (15 and 25 w)). Disease was evaluated by
enumerating the percentage of HGD lesions, per the total area in serial
H&E sections of the lung. The percentage of HGD lesions in the large
airways was reduced in the vitamin D sufficient mice (SN) (8.72%,
P<0.05), SN + calcitriol (SN+C) (6.59%, PProgress has recently been made
in identifying populations at risk for lung cancer using genetic,
clinical and demographic information. The N-nitroso-tris-chloroethylurea
(NTCU) mouse model, in which animals develop premalignant histopathology
similar to that seen in humans, is used to examine the potential efficacy
of chemoprevention agents to be utilized in at risk populations. We
identified 25 l of 40 mM NTCU /week as the optimal dosing regimen in
SWR/J mice for chemoprevention studies.At this dose, topical treatments
of NTCU induce predominantly low-grade dysplastic lesions by 15 weeks (w)
and high-grade dysplastic (HGD) lesions by 25 w in the large airways.
Additionally we found that NTCU stimulates a state of chronic
inflammation associated with the development of dysplasias.Epidemiologic
studies indicate that there is an inverse relationship between vitamin D
and the risk and prognosis of lung cancer. Vitamin D acts through the
vitamin D receptor to promote cellular differentiation and inhibit
proliferation and inflammation. The effect of vitamin D on cancer
progression was tested in the NTCU model, using dietary vitamin D3 (0 or
2000 IU/kg) alone and in combination with intraperitoneal injections of
the active metabolite of vitamin D, calcitriol (80 ug/kg). Female mice
were randomized to 6 treatment groups (n=15 mice/group/time point (15 and
25 w)). Disease was evaluated by enumerating the percentage of HGD
lesions, per the total area in serial H&E sections of the lung. The
percentage of HGD lesions in the large airways was reduced in the vitamin
D sufficient mice (SN) (8.72%, P<0.05), SN + calcitriol (SN+C) (6.59%,
P<0.05) and the vitamin D deficient + calcitriol (DN+C) (12.3% PProgress
has recently been made in identifying populations at risk for lung cancer
using genetic, clinical and demographic information. The
N-nitroso-tris-chloroethylurea (NTCU) mouse model, in which animals
develop premalignant histopathology similar to that seen in humans, is
used to examine the potential efficacy of chemoprevention agents to be
utilized in at risk populations. We identified 25 l of 40 mM NTCU /week
as the optimal dosing regimen in SWR/J mice for chemoprevention
studies.At this dose, topical treatments of NTCU induce predominantly
low-grade dysplastic lesions by 15 weeks (w) and high-grade dysplastic
(HGD) lesions by 25 w in the large airways. Additionally we found that
NTCU stimulates a state of chronic inflammation associated with the
development of dysplasias.Epidemiologic studies indicate that there is an
inverse relationship between vitamin D and the risk and prognosis of lung
cancer. Vitamin D acts through the vitamin D receptor to promote cellular
differentiation and inhibit proliferation and inflammation. The effect of
vitamin D on cancer progression was tested in the NTCU model, using
dietary vitamin D3 (0 or 2000 IU/kg) alone and in combination with
intraperitoneal injections of the active metabolite of vitamin D,
calcitriol (80 ug/kg). Female mice were randomized to 6 treatment groups
(n=15 mice/group/time point (15 and 25 w)). Disease was evaluated by
enumerating the percentage of HGD lesions, per the total area in serial
H&E sections of the lung. The percentage of HGD lesions in the large
airways was reduced in the vitamin D sufficient mice (SN) (8.72%,
P<0.05), SN + calcitriol (SN+C) (6.59%, P<0.05) and the vitamin D
deficient + calcitriol (DN+C) (12.3% P<0.05) groups compared to the DN
(22.67%) group after 15 w of NTCU. The percentage of HGD lesions in the
SN groups remained significantly less than the DN (35.5%) and DN+C
(21.3%) groups, with little increase in the SN (8.43% PProgress has
recently been made in identifying populations at risk for lung cancer
using genetic, clinical and demographic information. The
N-nitroso-tris-chloroethylurea (NTCU) mouse model, in which animals
develop premalignant histopathology similar to that seen in humans, is
used to examine the potential efficacy of chemoprevention agents to be
utilized in at risk populations. We identified 25 l of 40 mM NTCU /week
as the optimal dosing regimen in SWR/J mice for chemoprevention
studies.At this dose, topical treatments of NTCU induce predominantly
low-grade dysplastic lesions by 15 weeks (w) and high-grade dysplastic
(HGD) lesions by 25 w in the large airways. Additionally we found that
NTCU stimulates a state of chronic inflammation associated with the
development of dysplasias.Epidemiologic studies indicate that there is an
inverse relationship between vitamin D and the risk and prognosis of lung
cancer. Vitamin D acts through the vitamin D receptor to promote cellular
differentiation and inhibit proliferation and inflammation. The effect of
vitamin D on cancer progression was tested in the NTCU model, using
dietary vitamin D3 (0 or 2000 IU/kg) alone and in combination with
intraperitoneal injections of the active metabolite of vitamin D,
calcitriol (80 ug/kg). Female mice were randomized to 6 treatment groups
(n=15 mice/group/time point (15 and 25 w)). Disease was evaluated by
enumerating the percentage of HGD lesions, per the total area in serial
H&E sections of the lung. The percentage of HGD lesions in the large
airways was reduced in the vitamin D sufficient mice (SN) (8.72%,
P<0.05), SN + calcitriol (SN+C) (6.59%, P<0.05) and the vitamin D
deficient + calcitriol (DN+C) (12.3% P<0.05) groups compared to the DN
(22.67%) group after 15 w of NTCU. The percentage of HGD lesions in the
SN groups remained significantly less than the DN (35.5%) and DN+C
(21.3%) groups, with little increase in the SN (8.43% P<0.05) and SN+C
(11.81% not significant (NS)) groups after 25 w.Furthermore, there was a
significant increase in proliferation associated with increased HGD.
Following 25 w of NTCU treatment there was a 2-fold increase in Ki-67
staining all groups compared all groups after 15 w of NTCU. However, the
was 30% more Ki-67staining in the DN (PProgress has recently been made in
identifying populations at risk for lung cancer using genetic, clinical
and demographic information. The N-nitroso-tris-chloroethylurea (NTCU)
mouse model, in which animals develop premalignant histopathology similar
to that seen in humans, is used to examine the potential efficacy of
chemoprevention agents to be utilized in at risk populations. We
identified 25 l of 40 mM NTCU /week as the optimal dosing regimen in
SWR/J mice for chemoprevention studies.At this dose, topical treatments
of NTCU induce predominantly low-grade dysplastic lesions by 15 weeks (w)
and high-grade dysplastic (HGD) lesions by 25 w in the large airways.
Additionally we found that NTCU stimulates a state of chronic
inflammation associated with the development of dysplasias.Epidemiologic
studies indicate that there is an inverse relationship between vitamin D
and the risk and prognosis of lung cancer. Vitamin D acts through the
vitamin D receptor to promote cellular differentiation and inhibit
proliferation and inflammation. The effect of vitamin D on cancer
progression was tested in the NTCU model, using dietary vitamin D3 (0 or
2000 IU/kg) alone and in combination with intraperitoneal injections of
the active metabolite of vitamin D, calcitriol (80 ug/kg). Female mice
were randomized to 6 treatment groups (n=15 mice/group/time point (15 and
25 w)). Disease was evaluated by enumerating the percentage of HGD
lesions, per the total area in serial H&E sections of the lung. The
percentage of HGD lesions in the large airways was reduced in the vitamin
D sufficient mice (SN) (8.72%, P<0.05), SN + calcitriol (SN+C) (6.59%,
P<0.05) and the vitamin D deficient + calcitriol (DN+C) (12.3% P<0.05)
groups compared to the DN (22.67%) group after 15 w of NTCU. The
percentage of HGD lesions in the SN groups remained significantly less
than the DN (35.5%) and DN+C (21.3%) groups, with little increase in the
SN (8.43% P<0.05) and SN+C (11.81% not significant (NS)) groups after 25
w.Furthermore, there was a significant increase in proliferation
associated with increased HGD. Following 25 w of NTCU treatment there was
a 2-fold increase in Ki-67 staining all groups compared all groups after
15 w of NTCU. However, the was 30% more Ki-67staining in the DN (P<0.001)
group and addition of calcitriol reduced proliferation by 12% and 6% in
the DN+C (PProgress has recently been made in identifying populations at
risk for lung cancer using genetic, clinical and demographic information.
The N-nitroso-tris-chloroethylurea (NTCU) mouse model, in which animals
develop premalignant histopathology similar to that seen in humans, is
used to examine the potential efficacy of chemoprevention agents to be
utilized in at risk populations. We identified 25 l of 40 mM NTCU /week
as the optimal dosing regimen in SWR/J mice for chemoprevention
studies.At this dose, topical treatments of NTCU induce predominantly
low-grade dysplastic lesions by 15 weeks (w) and high-grade dysplastic
(HGD) lesions by 25 w in the large airways. Additionally we found that
NTCU stimulates a state of chronic inflammation associated with the
development of dysplasias.Epidemiologic studies indicate that there is an
inverse relationship between vitamin D and the risk and prognosis of lung
cancer. Vitamin D acts through the vitamin D receptor to promote cellular
differentiation and inhibit proliferation and inflammation. The effect of
vitamin D on cancer progression was tested in the NTCU model, using
dietary vitamin D3 (0 or 2000 IU/kg) alone and in combination with
intraperitoneal injections of the active metabolite of vitamin D,
calcitriol (80 ug/kg). Female mice were randomized to 6 treatment groups
(n=15 mice/group/time point (15 and 25 w)). Disease was evaluated by
enumerating the percentage of HGD lesions, per the total area in serial
H&E sections of the lung. The percentage of HGD lesions in the large
airways was reduced in the vitamin D sufficient mice (SN) (8.72%,
P<0.05), SN + calcitriol (SN+C) (6.59%, P<0.05) and the vitamin D
deficient + calcitriol (DN+C) (12.3% P<0.05) groups compared to the DN
(22.67%) group after 15 w of NTCU. The percentage of HGD lesions in the
SN groups remained significantly less than the DN (35.5%) and DN+C
(21.3%) groups, with little increase in the SN (8.43% P<0.05) and SN+C
(11.81% not significant (NS)) groups after 25 w.Furthermore, there was a
significant increase in proliferation associated with increased HGD.
Following 25 w of NTCU treatment there was a 2-fold increase in Ki-67
staining all groups compared all groups after 15 w of NTCU. However, the
was 30% more Ki-67staining in the DN (P<0.001) group and addition of
calcitriol reduced proliferation by 12% and 6% in the DN+C (P<0.01) and
SN+C (NS) groups. Moreover, vitamin D deficiency was associated with an
increased systemic and local inflammation marked by a 3-fold increase in
circulating white blood cells (WBCs) (PProgress has recently been made in
identifying populations at risk for lung cancer using genetic, clinical
and demographic information. The N-nitroso-tris-chloroethylurea (NTCU)
mouse model, in which animals develop premalignant histopathology similar
to that seen in humans, is used to examine the potential efficacy of
chemoprevention agents to be utilized in at risk populations. We
identified 25 l of 40 mM NTCU /week as the optimal dosing regimen in
SWR/J mice for chemoprevention studies.At this dose, topical treatments
of NTCU induce predominantly low-grade dysplastic lesions by 15 weeks (w)
and high-grade dysplastic (HGD) lesions by 25 w in the large airways.
Additionally we found that NTCU stimulates a state of chronic
inflammation associated with the development of dysplasias.Epidemiologic
studies indicate that there is an inverse relationship between vitamin D
and the risk and prognosis of lung cancer. Vitamin D acts through the
vitamin D receptor to promote cellular differentiation and inhibit
proliferation and inflammation. The effect of vitamin D on cancer
progression was tested in the NTCU model, using dietary vitamin D3 (0 or
2000 IU/kg) alone and in combination with intraperitoneal injections of
the active metabolite of vitamin D, calcitriol (80 ug/kg). Female mice
were randomized to 6 treatment groups (n=15 mice/group/time point (15 and
25 w)). Disease was evaluated by enumerating the percentage of HGD
lesions, per the total area in serial H&E sections of the lung. The
percentage of HGD lesions in the large airways was reduced in the vitamin
D sufficient mice (SN) (8.72%, P<0.05), SN + calcitriol (SN+C) (6.59%,
P<0.05) and the vitamin D deficient + calcitriol (DN+C) (12.3% P<0.05)
groups compared to the DN (22.67%) group after 15 w of NTCU. The
percentage of HGD lesions in the SN groups remained significantly less
than the DN (35.5%) and DN+C (21.3%) groups, with little increase in the
SN (8.43% P<0.05) and SN+C (11.81% not significant (NS)) groups after 25
w.Furthermore, there was a significant increase in proliferation
associated with increased HGD. Following 25 w of NTCU treatment there was
a 2-fold increase in Ki-67 staining all groups compared all groups after
15 w of NTCU. However, the was 30% more Ki-67staining in the DN (P<0.001)
group and addition of calcitriol reduced proliferation by 12% and 6% in
the DN+C (P<0.01) and SN+C (NS) groups. Moreover, vitamin D deficiency
was associated with an increased systemic and local inflammation marked
by a 3-fold increase in circulating white blood cells (WBCs) (P<0.05), a
20% increase in IL-6 levels (PProgress has recently been made in
identifying populations at risk for lung cancer using genetic, clinical
and demographic information. The N-nitroso-tris-chloroethylurea (NTCU)
mouse model, in which animals develop premalignant histopathology similar
to that seen in humans, is used to examine the potential efficacy of
chemoprevention agents to be utilized in at risk populations. We
identified 25 l of 40 mM NTCU /week as the optimal dosing regimen in
SWR/J mice for chemoprevention studies.At this dose, topical treatments
of NTCU induce predominantly low-grade dysplastic lesions by 15 weeks (w)
and high-grade dysplastic (HGD) lesions by 25 w in the large airways.
Additionally we found that NTCU stimulates a state of chronic
inflammation associated with the development of dysplasias.Epidemiologic
studies indicate that there is an inverse relationship between vitamin D
and the risk and prognosis of lung cancer. Vitamin D acts through the
vitamin D receptor to promote cellular differentiation and inhibit
proliferation and inflammation. The effect of vitamin D on cancer
progression was tested in the NTCU model, using dietary vitamin D3 (0 or
2000 IU/kg) alone and in combination with intraperitoneal injections of
the active metabolite of vitamin D, calcitriol (80 ug/kg). Female mice
were randomized to 6 treatment groups (n=15 mice/group/time point (15 and
25 w)). Disease was evaluated by enumerating the percentage of HGD
lesions, per the total area in serial H&E sections of the lung. The
percentage of HGD lesions in the large airways was reduced in the vitamin
D sufficient mice (SN) (8.72%, P<0.05), SN + calcitriol (SN+C) (6.59%,
P<0.05) and the vitamin D deficient + calcitriol (DN+C) (12.3% P<0.05)
groups compared to the DN (22.67%) group after 15 w of NTCU. The
percentage of HGD lesions in the SN groups remained significantly less
than the DN (35.5%) and DN+C (21.3%) groups, with little increase in the
SN (8.43% P<0.05) and SN+C (11.81% not significant (NS)) groups after 25
w.Furthermore, there was a significant increase in proliferation
associated with increased HGD. Following 25 w of NTCU treatment there was
a 2-fold increase in Ki-67 staining all groups compared all groups after
15 w of NTCU. However, the was 30% more Ki-67staining in the DN (P<0.001)
group and addition of calcitriol reduced proliferation by 12% and 6% in
the DN+C (P<0.01) and SN+C (NS) groups. Moreover, vitamin D deficiency
was associated with an increased systemic and local inflammation marked
by a 3-fold increase in circulating white blood cells (WBCs) (P<0.05), a
20% increase in IL-6 levels (P<0.05) and a 4 -fold increase in WBCs in
bronchial lavages (PProgress has recently been made in identifying
populations at risk for lung cancer using genetic, clinical and
demographic information. The N-nitroso-tris-chloroethylurea (NTCU) mouse
model, in which animals develop premalignant histopathology similar to
that seen in humans, is used to examine the potential efficacy of
chemoprevention agents to be utilized in at risk populations. We
identified 25 l of 40 mM NTCU /week as the optimal dosing regimen in
SWR/J mice for chemoprevention studies.At this dose, topical treatments
of NTCU induce predominantly low-grade dysplastic lesions by 15 weeks (w)
and high-grade dysplastic (HGD) lesions by 25 w in the large airways.
Additionally we found that NTCU stimulates a state of chronic
inflammation associated with the development of dysplasias.Epidemiologic
studies indicate that there is an inverse relationship between vitamin D
and the risk and prognosis of lung cancer. Vitamin D acts through the
vitamin D receptor to promote cellular differentiation and inhibit
proliferation and inflammation. The effect of vitamin D on cancer
progression was tested in the NTCU model, using dietary vitamin D3 (0 or
2000 IU/kg) alone and in combination with intraperitoneal injections of
the active metabolite of vitamin D, calcitriol (80 ug/kg). Female mice
were randomized to 6 treatment groups (n=15 mice/group/time point (15 and
25 w)). Disease was evaluated by enumerating the percentage of HGD
lesions, per the total area in serial H&E sections of the lung. The
percentage of HGD lesions in the large airways was reduced in the vitamin
D sufficient mice (SN) (8.72%, P<0.05), SN + calcitriol (SN+C) (6.59%,
P<0.05) and the vitamin D deficient + calcitriol (DN+C) (12.3% P<0.05)
groups compared to the DN (22.67%) group after 15 w of NTCU. The
percentage of HGD lesions in the SN groups remained significantly less
than the DN (35.5%) and DN+C (21.3%) groups, with little increase in the
SN (8.43% P<0.05) and SN+C (11.81% not significant (NS)) groups after 25
w.Furthermore, there was a significant increase in proliferation
associated with increased HGD. Following 25 w of NTCU treatment there was
a 2-fold increase in Ki-67 staining all groups compared all groups after
15 w of NTCU. However, the was 30% more Ki-67staining in the DN (P<0.001)
group and addition of calcitriol reduced proliferation by 12% and 6% in
the DN+C (P<0.01) and SN+C (NS) groups. Moreover, vitamin D deficiency
was associated with an increased systemic and local inflammation marked
by a 3-fold increase in circulating white blood cells (WBCs) (P<0.05), a
20% increase in IL-6 levels (P<0.05) and a 4 -fold increase in WBCs in
bronchial lavages (P< 0.05) in the DN group. In conclusion this study
indicates that vitamin D deficiency promotes the development of
dysplasia, increases proliferation and inflammation, which is likely
promote the development of frank squamous cell carcinoma. Supported by
NIH/NCCAM F31AT0006487 (Mazzilli) NIH/NCI CA067267 (Johnson)

