Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel Tie2 inhibitor with in vivo efficacy in disseminated
hematological tumor models in mice


The receptor tyrosine kinase Tie2 is predominantly expressed in the
endothelium but has also been identified on primitive hematopoietic stem
cells, monocyte and macrophage subclasses, as well as on glioma or
hematological tumor cells. Based on its expression in many
patient-derived leukemic blasts inhibition of the Tie2 pathway may
provide an attractive opportunity for therapeutic intervention in
leukemias.In this study we report the pharmacological profile of a novel,
highly potent and orally available Tie2 inhibitor (BAY-Tie2). The
discovery and design process leading to BAY-Tie2 was performed with the
goal of sparing other angiogenic RTKs, such as VEGFRs, FGFRs or PDGFRs.
BAY-Tie2 is based on a novel imidazopyrazole core, combined with a
SF5-substituted phenyl ring that fills the deep DFG-out pocket. BAY-Tie2
binds to Tie2 with a Kd value of 1.6 nM and is selective against VEGFR2
(Kd of 1600 nM), FGFR1 (The receptor tyrosine kinase Tie2 is
predominantly expressed in the endothelium but has also been identified
on primitive hematopoietic stem cells, monocyte and macrophage
subclasses, as well as on glioma or hematological tumor cells. Based on
its expression in many patient-derived leukemic blasts inhibition of the
Tie2 pathway may provide an attractive opportunity for therapeutic
intervention in leukemias.In this study we report the pharmacological
profile of a novel, highly potent and orally available Tie2 inhibitor
(BAY-Tie2). The discovery and design process leading to BAY-Tie2 was
performed with the goal of sparing other angiogenic RTKs, such as VEGFRs,
FGFRs or PDGFRs. BAY-Tie2 is based on a novel imidazopyrazole core,
combined with a SF5-substituted phenyl ring that fills the deep DFG-out
pocket. BAY-Tie2 binds to Tie2 with a Kd value of 1.6 nM and is selective
against VEGFR2 (Kd of 1600 nM), FGFR1 (<30% inhibition at 1 M), FGFR2/3/4
(The receptor tyrosine kinase Tie2 is predominantly expressed in the
endothelium but has also been identified on primitive hematopoietic stem
cells, monocyte and macrophage subclasses, as well as on glioma or
hematological tumor cells. Based on its expression in many
patient-derived leukemic blasts inhibition of the Tie2 pathway may
provide an attractive opportunity for therapeutic intervention in
leukemias.In this study we report the pharmacological profile of a novel,
highly potent and orally available Tie2 inhibitor (BAY-Tie2). The
discovery and design process leading to BAY-Tie2 was performed with the
goal of sparing other angiogenic RTKs, such as VEGFRs, FGFRs or PDGFRs.
BAY-Tie2 is based on a novel imidazopyrazole core, combined with a
SF5-substituted phenyl ring that fills the deep DFG-out pocket. BAY-Tie2
binds to Tie2 with a Kd value of 1.6 nM and is selective against VEGFR2
(Kd of 1600 nM), FGFR1 (<30% inhibition at 1 M), FGFR2/3/4 (<10%
inhibition at 1 M) and PDGFR/ (The receptor tyrosine kinase Tie2 is
predominantly expressed in the endothelium but has also been identified
on primitive hematopoietic stem cells, monocyte and macrophage
subclasses, as well as on glioma or hematological tumor cells. Based on
its expression in many patient-derived leukemic blasts inhibition of the
Tie2 pathway may provide an attractive opportunity for therapeutic
intervention in leukemias.In this study we report the pharmacological
profile of a novel, highly potent and orally available Tie2 inhibitor
(BAY-Tie2). The discovery and design process leading to BAY-Tie2 was
performed with the goal of sparing other angiogenic RTKs, such as VEGFRs,
FGFRs or PDGFRs. BAY-Tie2 is based on a novel imidazopyrazole core,
combined with a SF5-substituted phenyl ring that fills the deep DFG-out
pocket. BAY-Tie2 binds to Tie2 with a Kd value of 1.6 nM and is selective
against VEGFR2 (Kd of 1600 nM), FGFR1 (<30% inhibition at 1 M), FGFR2/3/4
(<10% inhibition at 1 M) and PDGFR/ (<30% inhibition at 100 nM). BAY-Tie2
potently inhibits Tie2 autophosphorylation in recombinant CHO-Tie2 and
primary human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC) with IC50 values
of 0.7 and 1.3 nM. Consistently, BAY-Tie2 was shown to inhibit Tie2
phosphorylation in vivo by analyzing angiopoietin-1 induced Tie2
phosphorylation status in extracts of murine lungs from BAY-Tie2-treated
mice.In subcutaneous xenograft models of highly angiogenic tumors,
BAY-Tie2 reduced tumor growth and showed evidence for potential
combination benefit with anti-VEGF therapy. In order to explore the
potential of a Tie2 inhibitor beyond affecting angiogenesis, we
established disseminated leukemia models, using Tie2-expressing cell
lines, such as the CML cell lines MEG-01 and EM-2. Both cell lines
engrafted predominantly in bone marrow and spleen. Treatment started 3
days after i.v. cell implantation with either BAY-Tie2 or cytarabine and
was well tolerated. Efficacy was monitored by a) inhibition of disease
progression, b) weekly fluorescence-based in vivo imaging (IVI) using an
Alexa750-labeled anti-human CD33 antibody, and c) q-RT-PCR specific for
BCR-ABL and hCD45 in murine peripheral blood. BAY-Tie2 inhibited disease
progression comparable to cytarabine. Tumor load measured by IVI was
reduced in BAY-Tie2 treated groups by 45% in the MEG-01 and by 65% in the
EM-2 model compared with the untreated control, very similar to the
cytotoxic treatment with cytarabine. Quantitative RT-PCR on peripheral
blood revealed that BAY-Tie2 and cytarabine delayed the appearance of
circulating tumor cells in both CML models.These data demonstrate that
BAY-Tie2 is an orally active Tie2 inhibitor that may have therapeutic
benefit not only in angiogenic tumors but also in hematological,
Tie2-expressing malignancies.

