Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of TGF as a strategy to convert the irradiated tumor
into in situ individualized vaccine


Accumulating data support the concept that ionizing radiation therapy
(RT) has the potential to convert the tumor into an in situ,
individualized vaccine; however this potential is rarely realized by RT
alone. Transforming growth factor (TGF) is an immunosuppressive cytokine
that is activated by RT and inhibits the antigen-presenting function of
dendritic cells and the differentiation of effector CD8+ T cells. Here we
tested the hypothesis that TGF hinders the ability of RT to promote
anti-tumor immunity. Development of tumor-specific immunity was examined
in two pre-clinical models of metastatic breast cancer and analyzed in
patients with metastatic breast cancer treated with local radiotherapy
and the TGF-neutralizing antibody Fresolimumab.Mice bearing established
4T1 and TSA mouse mammary carcinomas treated with pan-isoform specific
TGF neutralizing antibody, 1D11, showed significantly improved control of
the irradiated tumor and non-irradiated metastases, but no effect in the
absence of RT. Notably, whole tumor transcriptional analysis demonstrated
the selective upregulation of genes associated with immune-mediated
rejection only in tumors of mice treated with RT+TGF blockade. Mice
treated with RT+TGF blockade exhibited cross-priming of CD8+ T cells
producing IFN in response to three tumor-specific antigens in
tumor-draining lymph nodes, which was not evident for single modality
treatment. Likewise, HLA-A2.1+ metastatic breast cancer patients (n=8)
enrolled in NCT01401062 trial of local RT and fresolimumab were examined
for CD8+ T cells specific for the tumor antigen survivin by tetramer
staining. Three patients developed increased frequencies of
survivin-specific CD8+ T cells in the blood during treatment, while two
patients negative at baseline became positive.Analysis of the immune
infiltrate in mouse tumors showed a significant increase in CD4+ and CD8+
T cells only in mice treated with the combination of RT+TGF blockade.
Depletion of CD4+ or CD8+ T cells abrogated the therapeutic benefit of
RT+TGF blockade.These data identify TGF as a master inhibitor of the
ability of RT to generate an in situ tumor vaccine, which supports
testing inhibition of TGF during radiotherapy to promote therapeutically
effective anti-tumor immunity.Supported by DOD BCRP Multi-Team Award
BC100481.

