Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Licofelone, a dual COX-LOX inhibitor prevents transitional cell
carcinoma of urinary bladder in UPII-SV40T transgenic mice


Urinary bladder cancer is the sixth most commonly diagnosed cancer and
significant proportion of the patients diagnosed with bladder cancer have
high-grade tumors that are at potential risk for post-surgical recurrence
and metastasis, where 5-year survival is very low. Hence it is important
to identify and develop regimens that prevent urothelial tumorigenesis.
Inflammatory pathways particularly, cyclooxygenase (COX-2) and
lipoxygenase (5-LOX) mediated metabolites are known to play important
role in bladder tumor progression. Consistent with that epidemiological
and clinical observations suggest that use of anti-inflammatory agents is
associated with reduced risk for bladder cancer. Here we determined the
chemopreventive efficacy of a Licofelone, a dual COX-LOX inhibitor, in a
transgenic UPII-SV40T mouse model of bladder transitional cell carcinoma
(TCC). Six-week old transgenic UPII-SV40T mice (n=30/group) were fed
control (AIN-76A) or experimental diets containing 150 or 300 ppm
licofelone for 34 weeks. At 40 weeks of age, all mice were euthanized;
urinary bladders were collected to determine urothelial tumor weights and
histopathological grading. Results suggest that bladders of the control
diet fed transgenic mice weighed 3-5 fold more than that of the wild type
mice. However, treatment of transgenic mice with licofelone led to a
significant, dose dependent inhibition of the urothelial tumor weights
(65.2 - 82.7%, pUrinary bladder cancer is the sixth most commonly
diagnosed cancer and significant proportion of the patients diagnosed
with bladder cancer have high-grade tumors that are at potential risk for
post-surgical recurrence and metastasis, where 5-year survival is very
low. Hence it is important to identify and develop regimens that prevent
urothelial tumorigenesis. Inflammatory pathways particularly,
cyclooxygenase (COX-2) and lipoxygenase (5-LOX) mediated metabolites are
known to play important role in bladder tumor progression. Consistent
with that epidemiological and clinical observations suggest that use of
anti-inflammatory agents is associated with reduced risk for bladder
cancer. Here we determined the chemopreventive efficacy of a Licofelone,
a dual COX-LOX inhibitor, in a transgenic UPII-SV40T mouse model of
bladder transitional cell carcinoma (TCC). Six-week old transgenic
UPII-SV40T mice (n=30/group) were fed control (AIN-76A) or experimental
diets containing 150 or 300 ppm licofelone for 34 weeks. At 40 weeks of
age, all mice were euthanized; urinary bladders were collected to
determine urothelial tumor weights and histopathological grading. Results
suggest that bladders of the control diet fed transgenic mice weighed 3-5
fold more than that of the wild type mice. However, treatment of
transgenic mice with licofelone led to a significant, dose dependent
inhibition of the urothelial tumor weights (65.2 - 82.7%, p<0.0001 in
males; 35.0 - 49.0%, pUrinary bladder cancer is the sixth most commonly
diagnosed cancer and significant proportion of the patients diagnosed
with bladder cancer have high-grade tumors that are at potential risk for
post-surgical recurrence and metastasis, where 5-year survival is very
low. Hence it is important to identify and develop regimens that prevent
urothelial tumorigenesis. Inflammatory pathways particularly,
cyclooxygenase (COX-2) and lipoxygenase (5-LOX) mediated metabolites are
known to play important role in bladder tumor progression. Consistent
with that epidemiological and clinical observations suggest that use of
anti-inflammatory agents is associated with reduced risk for bladder
cancer. Here we determined the chemopreventive efficacy of a Licofelone,
a dual COX-LOX inhibitor, in a transgenic UPII-SV40T mouse model of
bladder transitional cell carcinoma (TCC). Six-week old transgenic
UPII-SV40T mice (n=30/group) were fed control (AIN-76A) or experimental
diets containing 150 or 300 ppm licofelone for 34 weeks. At 40 weeks of
age, all mice were euthanized; urinary bladders were collected to
determine urothelial tumor weights and histopathological grading. Results
suggest that bladders of the control diet fed transgenic mice weighed 3-5
fold more than that of the wild type mice. However, treatment of
transgenic mice with licofelone led to a significant, dose dependent
inhibition of the urothelial tumor weights (65.2 - 82.7%, p<0.0001 in
males; 35.0 - 49.0%, p<0.0001 in females) compared to the control group.
Importantly, mice fed licofelone diet significantly reduced development
of invasive tumors. Urothelial tumor progression to invasive TCC was
inhibited in both male (up to 50%; pUrinary bladder cancer is the sixth
most commonly diagnosed cancer and significant proportion of the patients
diagnosed with bladder cancer have high-grade tumors that are at
potential risk for post-surgical recurrence and metastasis, where 5-year
survival is very low. Hence it is important to identify and develop
regimens that prevent urothelial tumorigenesis. Inflammatory pathways
particularly, cyclooxygenase (COX-2) and lipoxygenase (5-LOX) mediated
metabolites are known to play important role in bladder tumor
progression. Consistent with that epidemiological and clinical
observations suggest that use of anti-inflammatory agents is associated
with reduced risk for bladder cancer. Here we determined the
chemopreventive efficacy of a Licofelone, a dual COX-LOX inhibitor, in a
transgenic UPII-SV40T mouse model of bladder transitional cell carcinoma
(TCC). Six-week old transgenic UPII-SV40T mice (n=30/group) were fed
control (AIN-76A) or experimental diets containing 150 or 300 ppm
licofelone for 34 weeks. At 40 weeks of age, all mice were euthanized;
urinary bladders were collected to determine urothelial tumor weights and
histopathological grading. Results suggest that bladders of the control
diet fed transgenic mice weighed 3-5 fold more than that of the wild type
mice. However, treatment of transgenic mice with licofelone led to a
significant, dose dependent inhibition of the urothelial tumor weights
(65.2 - 82.7%, p<0.0001 in males; 35.0 - 49.0%, p<0.0001 in females)
compared to the control group. Importantly, mice fed licofelone diet
significantly reduced development of invasive tumors. Urothelial tumor
progression to invasive TCC was inhibited in both male (up to 50%;
p<0.01) and females mice (up to 46%; pUrinary bladder cancer is the sixth
most commonly diagnosed cancer and significant proportion of the patients
diagnosed with bladder cancer have high-grade tumors that are at
potential risk for post-surgical recurrence and metastasis, where 5-year
survival is very low. Hence it is important to identify and develop
regimens that prevent urothelial tumorigenesis. Inflammatory pathways
particularly, cyclooxygenase (COX-2) and lipoxygenase (5-LOX) mediated
metabolites are known to play important role in bladder tumor
progression. Consistent with that epidemiological and clinical
observations suggest that use of anti-inflammatory agents is associated
with reduced risk for bladder cancer. Here we determined the
chemopreventive efficacy of a Licofelone, a dual COX-LOX inhibitor, in a
transgenic UPII-SV40T mouse model of bladder transitional cell carcinoma
(TCC). Six-week old transgenic UPII-SV40T mice (n=30/group) were fed
control (AIN-76A) or experimental diets containing 150 or 300 ppm
licofelone for 34 weeks. At 40 weeks of age, all mice were euthanized;
urinary bladders were collected to determine urothelial tumor weights and
histopathological grading. Results suggest that bladders of the control
diet fed transgenic mice weighed 3-5 fold more than that of the wild type
mice. However, treatment of transgenic mice with licofelone led to a
significant, dose dependent inhibition of the urothelial tumor weights
(65.2 - 82.7%, p<0.0001 in males; 35.0 - 49.0%, p<0.0001 in females)
compared to the control group. Importantly, mice fed licofelone diet
significantly reduced development of invasive tumors. Urothelial tumor
progression to invasive TCC was inhibited in both male (up to 50%;
p<0.01) and females mice (up to 46%; p<0.003). Molecular analysis of
urothelial tumors by immuno-histochemisty, qPCR and/or western
immunoblotting for the expression of various markers that effect tumor
growth and progression showed an increase in apoptosis (p53, p21, Bax,
Caspase3, Annexin V) with a decrease in proliferation and angiogenesis
(PCNA, COX2, 5LOX, mPGES2, VEGF) in the licofelone diet fed mice tumors.
These results suggest that licofelone can serve as potential
chemopreventive for bladder TCC. (Supported in part by NCI-CN53300)

