Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DMH1, a small molecule inhibitor of BMP type I receptors,
suppresses growth and invasion of lung cancer


Bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) are members of the TGF- superfamily
and their biological activity is mediated by the formation of
heterodimeric complexes of BMP type I and type II receptors of
serine/threonine kinases. BMPs play an important role in regulating cell
proliferation, differentiation and migration, processes that are involved
in carcinogenesis of many types of cancer. BMP-2 has been shown
overexpressed in human non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and enhances
lung tumorigenesis, suggesting that blocking the BMP signaling may be an
effective therapeutic approach for NSCLC. Although previous work
demonstrated that known protein-based BMP antagonists such as Noggin may
reduce lung tumor growth, their clinical application could be limited by
short half-lives and poor intra-tumor delivery. In a previous zebrafish
embryo-based structure and activity study, we identified DMH1, a highly
selective small molecule inhibitor which specifically antagonize the
intracellular kinase domains of BMP type I receptors, the critical
mediators of BMP signaling. In the present study, we found that DMH1
potently reduced lung cell proliferation, promoted cell death, and
decreased cell migration and invasion in vitro by blocking the BMP
signaling, as indicated by the reduction of Smad 1/5/8 phosphorylation
and gene expression of Id1, Id2 and Id3 in A549 and H460 cells. In an in
vivo study, treatment by intraperitoneal injection of DMH1 (5 mg/kg) for
four weeks significantly reduced the growth of A549-derived xenograft in
SCID mice. In conclusion, our study indicates that small molecule
inhibitors of BMP type I receptors may offer a promising novel
therapeutic strategy for lung cancer.

