Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Plasma Fetuin-a concentration, genetic variation in the AHSG gene
and risk of colorectal cancer


Background: Fetuin-a, also referred to as 2-Heremans-Schmid glycoprotein
(AHSG) is a liver protein that inhibits insulin actions. High circulating
fetuin-a concentrations have been associated with insulin resistance and
hyperinsulinemia, which pose risk factors for colorectal cancer.
Experimental studies have also shown that fetuin-a mediates the adhesion
of tumor cells, an important step in tumor growth through which fetuin-a
could influence colorectal cancer risk independent of the insulin axis.
With this study, we aimed to investigate the prospective association
between circulating fetuin-a and risk of colorectal cancer. In addition,
we examined potential causality of observed associations by using single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the AHSG gene as relatively unbiased
proxies for fetuin-a levels in a Mendelian Randomization
approach.Methods: Fetuin-a levels were measured in plasma samples from a
nested case-control study within the European Prospective Investigation
into Cancer and Nutrition (EPIC) comprising 1367 cases and 1367 matched
controls (matching variables included age, sex, study center and fasting
status). In a subset of 456 case-control pairs, five tagging SNPs in the
AHSG gene (rs2248690, rs2070633, rs2070635, rs4917 and rs6787344) were
genotyped. The association between circulating fetuin-a and risk of
colorectal cancer was investigated using conditional logistic regression
models (controlled for matching factors and multivariable adjusted for
education, physical activity, smoking, alcohol consumption, dietary
factors and body fatness) estimating incidence rate ratios (RRs) and 95%
confidence intervals (CI). The association between genetically raised
fetuin-a and risk of colorectal cancer was estimated by instrumental
variable analysis using two-stage least squares regression.Results:
Higher fetuin-a concentrations were associated with a moderately higher
risk of colorectal cancer: The estimated RRs (95% CI) per 40 g/mL higher
fetuin-a were 1.11 (1.01, 1.22) overall, 1.18 (1.03, 1.37) in men, 1.05
(0.92, 1.21) in women, 1.11 (0.99, 1.25) for colon cancer and 1.10 (0.92,
1.30) for rectal cancer. In the subset of participants with available
data on both plasma fetuin-a and AHSG SNPs, the AHSG allele score
explained 21% of the inter-individual variation in plasma fetuin-a. When
using the AHSG-score as instrumental variable in a Mendelian
randomization approach, there was no association between genetically
determined fetuin-a and risk of colorectal cancer: RR (95% CI) per 40
g/mL genetically determined higher fetuin-a was 0.98 (0.73, 1.33)
overall, 1.04 (0.68, 1.60) in men and 0.93 (0.62, 1.42) in
women.Conclusion: This is the first prospective study relating
circulating fetuin-a to risk of colorectal cancer. Our findings suggest
that high fetuin-a concentrations are associated with a moderately higher
risk of colorectal cancer, but that fetuin-a is probably not a causal
factor.

