Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Coexpression of Delta16 isoform and full-length HER-2 in F1 hybrid
transgenic mice: effects on tumor growth and malignancy


HER-2 gene products found in human breast cancer include the full-length
p185 oncoprotein and various shorter isoforms that lack C-terminal,
N-terminal or internal portions.Delta16 isoform lacks exon 16 and
displays the properties of an activated oncogene. Transgenic mice
expressing Delta16 in the mammary gland develop more mammary carcinomas,
and at a younger age than mice transgenic for full-length HER-2.Human
breast cancers, unlike transgenic mice, co-express Delta16 and
full-length HER-2. To study mammary carcinogenesis in a mouse model that
mimics the human situation, we obtained hybrid mice bearing heterozygous
copies of both human transgenes (Delta16/HER-2 mice), and we compared
them to parental mice (referred to as Delta16 and HER-2 transgenic mice,
respectively).In Delta16/HER2 hybrid mice, mammary carcinogenesis was
similar to that of Delta16 mice, with a median latency time of 17 weeks
and a mean of 7 tumors per mouse, thus indicating a dominant expression
of Delta16 over HER-2.However, after tumor onset, tumor growth rate and
metastatic spread were similar in the three mouse lines, thus suggesting
that Delta16 was mainly involved in neoplastic transformation and in the
early phases of mammary carcinogenesis, rather than in advanced tumor
progression. This could result from cancer cell intrinsic activity of the
oncogene or from interactions with the microenvironment, in particular
with vasculogenesis.Using isoform-specific PCR analysis we found that
most tumors expressed only Delta16, some expressed both Delta16 and
HER-2, and some expressed only HER-2. The level of Delta16 surface
protein expression, as detected by FACS analysis with cross-reactive
antibodies, was generally lower than that of HER-2.We established
representative cell lines for in vitro studies. Exposure of these cells
to trastuzumab, lapatinib, or their combination showed that Delta16 did
not confer resistance to HER-2-targeted drugs in comparison to
full-length HER-2.In conclusion, the study of Delta16/HER-2 double
transgenic mice suggests that the activated isoform Delta16 plays a
dominant role in the early phases of mammary carcinogenesis.Supported by
grants from the Italian Association for Cancer Research (AIRC)

