Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identifying somatic mutation hotspots across protein family
alignments


In cancer, somatic driver mutations often target hotspots of paralogous
residues across evolutionarily related members of a single protein
family. These hotspots usually confer a dominant oncogenic function, such
as constitutive catalytic activity or binding. These hotspots generally
represent the most druggable genetic alterations. Examples of protein
families targeted in such a manner include the Ras and receptor Tyrosine
Kinase family. Protein family hotspots are not directly assessed by
standard computational approaches for statistically nominating genes
under positive somatic selection, such as MutSig, InVex, or MuSic. These
methods only assess single genes for statistical enrichment of total
mutation burden or the presence of mutation hotspots. As a result, such
approaches are only powered to detect protein family hotspots in cases
where each (or at least one) protein family member is very frequently
mutated (e.g. KRAS, NRAS, HRAS). They are not powered to detect hotspots
in highly functionally redundant families, of which each member may be
only mutated in In cancer, somatic driver mutations often target hotspots
of paralogous residues across evolutionarily related members of a single
protein family. These hotspots usually confer a dominant oncogenic
function, such as constitutive catalytic activity or binding. These
hotspots generally represent the most druggable genetic alterations.
Examples of protein families targeted in such a manner include the Ras
and receptor Tyrosine Kinase family. Protein family hotspots are not
directly assessed by standard computational approaches for statistically
nominating genes under positive somatic selection, such as MutSig, InVex,
or MuSic. These methods only assess single genes for statistical
enrichment of total mutation burden or the presence of mutation hotspots.
As a result, such approaches are only powered to detect protein family
hotspots in cases where each (or at least one) protein family member is
very frequently mutated (e.g. KRAS, NRAS, HRAS). They are not powered to
detect hotspots in highly functionally redundant families, of which each
member may be only mutated in <In cancer, somatic driver mutations often
target hotspots of paralogous residues across evolutionarily related
members of a single protein family. These hotspots usually confer a
dominant oncogenic function, such as constitutive catalytic activity or
binding. These hotspots generally represent the most druggable genetic
alterations. Examples of protein families targeted in such a manner
include the Ras and receptor Tyrosine Kinase family. Protein family
hotspots are not directly assessed by standard computational approaches
for statistically nominating genes under positive somatic selection, such
as MutSig, InVex, or MuSic. These methods only assess single genes for
statistical enrichment of total mutation burden or the presence of
mutation hotspots. As a result, such approaches are only powered to
detect protein family hotspots in cases where each (or at least one)
protein family member is very frequently mutated (e.g. KRAS, NRAS, HRAS).
They are not powered to detect hotspots in highly functionally redundant
families, of which each member may be only mutated in <<1% of a tumor
type. To directly identify such protein-family hotspots, we have
developed a computational framework, MutPfam. This framework superimposes
mutation data onto Pfam (http://pfam.sanger.ac.uk/) (protein family and
subfamily multiple sequence alignments and identifies statistically
significant hotspots. We demonstate our method on protein families
involved in the catalysis of small-molecular catabolism using the TCGA
Pan-Cancer dataset (https://tcga-data.nci.nih.gov/) comprising somatic
mutation calls for 4608 whole-exome sequenced patients and 21 tumor
types. As we demonstrate, our framework enables the de novo discovery of
mutation hotspots across protein families. Though developed for somatic
mutation analysis, this framework could also be applied to the analysis
of inherited mutations. Computational issues meriting future
investigation include (1) alternate definitions of protein alignments and
sub-families (e.g. involving three dimensional structure, biophysical
constraints) (2) improved statistical modeling of the local background
mutation rate (incorporating local genomic covariates that mediate
heterogeneity) (3) incorporation of variant functional impact scores for
missense variants.

