Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: p53MVA therapy in patients with refractory gastrointestinal
malignancies primes robust CD8+ T cell responses


PURPOSE: To conduct a Phase I safety trial of a Modified Vaccinia Ankara
vaccine delivering wild type human p53 (p53MVA) in patients with
refractory gastrointestinal malignancies.EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Three
patients were vaccinated with 108 pfu p53MVA followed by nine patients at
5.6 x 108 pfu. Toxicity was classified using the NCI Common Toxicity
Criteria and clinical responses were assessed by CT scan. Peripheral
blood samples were collected pre vaccine and post vaccination for
immunophenotyping and assessment of p53MVA induced immune
response.RESULTS: p53MVA immunization was well tolerated at both doses,
with no adverse events above grade 2. Induction of strong T cell and
antibody responses to the MVA backbone were apparent. CD4+ and CD8+ T
cells showing enhanced recognition of a p53 overlapping peptide library
were detectable after the first immunization, particularly in the CD8+ T
cell compartment (p=0.03). However in most patients this did not expand
further with the second and third immunization. Some patients exhibited a
decline in myeloid-derived suppressor cells post vaccine, but this was
not statistically significant. The frequency of PD-1+ T cells detectable
in patients PBMC was significantly higher than healthy controls.
Furthermore, the frequency of PD-1+ CD8+ T cells showed an inverse
correlation with the peak CD8+ T cell response to p53
(p=0.02).CONCLUSION: p53MVA was well tolerated and induced robust CD8+ T
cell responses. Combination of p53MVA with immune checkpoint inhibition
could improve sustained immune responses and lead to clinical benefit.

