Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Real-time in vivo imaging of osteosarcoma angiogenesis


We report here real-time color-coded imaging of osteosarcoma-induced
angiogenesis in vivo. Gelfoam (55 mm) treated with fibroblast growth
factor (bFGF) was initially transplanted subcutaneously in the flank of
transgenic nestin-driven green fluorescent protein (ND-GFP) nude mice
(n=12). In ND-GFP mice, nascent blood vessels are labeled with GFP,
including those growing in Gelfoam. Seven days after transplantation of
Gelfoam, skin flaps were made and human 143B osteosarcoma cells
expressing GFP in the nucleus and red fluorescent protein (RFP) in the
cytoplasm were injected into the transplanted Gelfoam. The control group
had only Gelfoam transplanted without subsequent cancer-cell inoculation.
Skin flaps were made at days 14, 21, 28 after transplantation of the
Gelfoam to allow observation of vascularization of the Gelfoam using
fluorescence imaging after both with and without cell inoculation. ND-GFP
expressing nascent blood vessels penetrated and spread into the Gelfoam
in both the non-cellular control and after cancer-cell inoculation. The
mean length of ND-GFP expressing blood vessels of mice with osteosarcoma
cells seeded on the Gelfoam increased compared to the Gelfoam-only
control at days 14, 21, 28 after transplantation of the Gelfoam (at day
14, 21 ; pWe report here real-time color-coded imaging of
osteosarcoma-induced angiogenesis in vivo. Gelfoam (55 mm) treated with
fibroblast growth factor (bFGF) was initially transplanted subcutaneously
in the flank of transgenic nestin-driven green fluorescent protein
(ND-GFP) nude mice (n=12). In ND-GFP mice, nascent blood vessels are
labeled with GFP, including those growing in Gelfoam. Seven days after
transplantation of Gelfoam, skin flaps were made and human 143B
osteosarcoma cells expressing GFP in the nucleus and red fluorescent
protein (RFP) in the cytoplasm were injected into the transplanted
Gelfoam. The control group had only Gelfoam transplanted without
subsequent cancer-cell inoculation. Skin flaps were made at days 14, 21,
28 after transplantation of the Gelfoam to allow observation of
vascularization of the Gelfoam using fluorescence imaging after both with
and without cell inoculation. ND-GFP expressing nascent blood vessels
penetrated and spread into the Gelfoam in both the non-cellular control
and after cancer-cell inoculation. The mean length of ND-GFP expressing
blood vessels of mice with osteosarcoma cells seeded on the Gelfoam
increased compared to the Gelfoam-only control at days 14, 21, 28 after
transplantation of the Gelfoam (at day 14, 21 ; p<0.05, at day 28 ; pWe
report here real-time color-coded imaging of osteosarcoma-induced
angiogenesis in vivo. Gelfoam (55 mm) treated with fibroblast growth
factor (bFGF) was initially transplanted subcutaneously in the flank of
transgenic nestin-driven green fluorescent protein (ND-GFP) nude mice
(n=12). In ND-GFP mice, nascent blood vessels are labeled with GFP,
including those growing in Gelfoam. Seven days after transplantation of
Gelfoam, skin flaps were made and human 143B osteosarcoma cells
expressing GFP in the nucleus and red fluorescent protein (RFP) in the
cytoplasm were injected into the transplanted Gelfoam. The control group
had only Gelfoam transplanted without subsequent cancer-cell inoculation.
Skin flaps were made at days 14, 21, 28 after transplantation of the
Gelfoam to allow observation of vascularization of the Gelfoam using
fluorescence imaging after both with and without cell inoculation. ND-GFP
expressing nascent blood vessels penetrated and spread into the Gelfoam
in both the non-cellular control and after cancer-cell inoculation. The
mean length of ND-GFP expressing blood vessels of mice with osteosarcoma
cells seeded on the Gelfoam increased compared to the Gelfoam-only
control at days 14, 21, 28 after transplantation of the Gelfoam (at day
14, 21 ; p<0.05, at day 28 ; p<0.01). The results demonstrate that the
osteosarcoma cells stimulated angiogenesis within the Gelfoam. This model
enables facile imaging of cancer-cell-induced angiogenesis and the study
of its mechanism and inhibition.

