Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dissecting the dynamics of anti-PD1 immunotherapy in preclinical
tumor models


MK-3475 is an antagonistic humanized IgG4 anti-PD1 antibody currently in
late stage clinical development for the treatment of cancer. MK-3475
exerts its anti-tumor effect through blocking the interaction of the
immune inhibitory molecule PD-1 with its ligands. MK-3475 does not bind
to mouse PD-1. Therefore, we generated a surrogate antibody, mDX400 for
use in preclinical rodent models. In multiple syngeneic tumor models,
treatment with mDX400 murinized anti-mouse antibody results in complete
and durable tumor regression. We have used mDX400 as a mouse equivalent
of MK-3475 to aid in our understanding of the cellular and molecular
dynamics of anti-PD1 immunotherapy.In the current study, we examined
peripheral and intratumoral lymphoid compartments pre- and post-mDX400
treatment. The data indicated that:1. Anti-tumor efficacy was primarily
driven by the level of PD-1 receptor blockade in tumor, but not blood.2.
An altered molecular signature, including significant upregulation of
genes involved in monocyte, B- and T-cell activation and differentiation,
was observed post-treatment in the tumors, but not peripheral blood or
draining lymph nodes, of responding animals.3. Tumor-specific immune
memory was evident, as assessed by ultrahigh-throughput DNA sequencing of
TCR CDR3 region, following successful treatment with mDX400.These data
provide insights into the molecular dynamics following anti-PD1
immunotherapy and will guide hypothesis generation for biomarkers to
inform our clinical strategy. In addition, the cellular and molecular
pathways that predominate in preclinical tumor models insensitive to
anti-PD1 immunotherapy are being evaluated. These types of studies may
inform us on potential therapies that can be combined with MK-3475 to
expand the therapeutic benefit of this biologic.

