Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: -catenin silencing enhances radiation sensitivity through
antagonizing effect of AMPK against Ku70/80 in head and neck cancer cells


The Wnt/-catenin pathway regulates the cell growth and survival following
radiation in various types of cancer cells. Our previous report show that
activation of the Wnt/-catenin signaling pathway is a key radioprotective
mechanism in irradiated head and neck cancer (HNC) cells. However, the
molecular mechanisms by which -catenin regulates radiation sensitivity
are not clear. Here we attempted to elucidate the mechanism of cell death
following radiation by studying how -catenin silencing controls the
radiation sensitivity of radioresistant HNC cells.Of nine cell lines
examined, the most radioresistant cell line (AMC-HN-9) were selected for
this experiments. -catenin silencing using small interfering RNA(siRNA)
down-regulated -catenin expression up to 72 h, which was confirmed by
western blot analysis. The sensitivity to radiation was anlayzed by
clonogenic analysis and MTT assay. As a result, -catenin silencing
remarkably decreased the survival of irradiated AMC-HN-9 cells and the
cell viability also significantly reduced more by the combination
treatment with -catenin siRNA and radiation (0.370.034 fold) than when
treated with -catenin siRNA or radiation alone (0.680.055 fold and
0.900.043 fold, respectively). Interestingly, whereas expression of
Ku70/80 was up regulated in AMC-HN-9 cells following irradiation (4Gy),
in the cells treated with combination of radiation and -catenin siRNA,
Ku70/80 expression was dramatically decreased. In additionally, when
exposed to radiation after -catenin silencing, the up-regulation of
irradiation-induced Ku80 completely was prevented by -catenin
silencing-induced AMPK.Taken together, these results suggest that
suppression of Ku70/80 expression through -catenin silencing-induced AMPK
is associated with its radio-sentitizing effect in AMC-HN-9 cells, thus
supporting a novel radiosensitive mechanism of radioresistant HNC cells.

