Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Immune modulating agent ibrutinib blocks T-helper 17 activation
and release of IL-17A while preserving T-regulatory cell function


T-helper 17 (Th17) cells play a causal role in the pathogenesis of
autoimmune and chronic inflammatory diseases. Chronic inflammation has
been linked to various malignancies including gastrointestinal cancers,
endometrial cancer, and non-Hodgkin lymphoma. Th17 cells secrete effector
cytokines that are distinct from other divergent T-cell subsets. The
namesake cytokine IL-17A is particularly pro-inflammatory and
pro-fibrotic,driving the recruitment, activation, and migration of
fibroblasts,endothelial cells, neutrophils, monocytes, and macrophages.
Increases in IL-17A have been seen in patients with rheumatoid arthritis,
Crohn's disease, multiple sclerosis, systemic lupus erythematosus,
psoriasis, and encephalomyelitis. Dysregulated Th17 activity has also
been linked to chronic graft versus host disease after allogeneic stem
cell transplantation. Studies have shown that Th17 cells and T-regulatory
(T-reg) cells are reciprocally regulated in the human body. T-regs
produce anti-inflammatory cytokines that play an essential role in the
prevention of autoimmune disease. At the molecular level Th17 cells rely
upon ITK for T-cell receptor (TCR) induced activation. T-regs, however,
utilize both ITK (IL2-inducible kinase) and RLK (resting lymphocyte
kinase) establishing compensatory signaling cascades downstream of the
TCR. Ibrutinib represents a first-in-class irreversible ITK inhibitor
(Dubovsky et al: Blood July 25, 2013) with the established capacity to
inhibit the activation of ITK dependent T-cells. Given our understanding
of ITK and RLK expression in immune cell subsets we sought to determine
whether ibrutinib could block Th17 cellular activation while preserving
the functionality of T-regs. Our studies confirm that ibrutinib
significantly blocks the TCR-induced activation of Th17 cells by up to
40% (pT-helper 17 (Th17) cells play a causal role in the pathogenesis of
autoimmune and chronic inflammatory diseases. Chronic inflammation has
been linked to various malignancies including gastrointestinal cancers,
endometrial cancer, and non-Hodgkin lymphoma. Th17 cells secrete effector
cytokines that are distinct from other divergent T-cell subsets. The
namesake cytokine IL-17A is particularly pro-inflammatory and
pro-fibrotic,driving the recruitment, activation, and migration of
fibroblasts,endothelial cells, neutrophils, monocytes, and macrophages.
Increases in IL-17A have been seen in patients with rheumatoid arthritis,
Crohn's disease, multiple sclerosis, systemic lupus erythematosus,
psoriasis, and encephalomyelitis. Dysregulated Th17 activity has also
been linked to chronic graft versus host disease after allogeneic stem
cell transplantation. Studies have shown that Th17 cells and T-regulatory
(T-reg) cells are reciprocally regulated in the human body. T-regs
produce anti-inflammatory cytokines that play an essential role in the
prevention of autoimmune disease. At the molecular level Th17 cells rely
upon ITK for T-cell receptor (TCR) induced activation. T-regs, however,
utilize both ITK (IL2-inducible kinase) and RLK (resting lymphocyte
kinase) establishing compensatory signaling cascades downstream of the
TCR. Ibrutinib represents a first-in-class irreversible ITK inhibitor
(Dubovsky et al: Blood July 25, 2013) with the established capacity to
inhibit the activation of ITK dependent T-cells. Given our understanding
of ITK and RLK expression in immune cell subsets we sought to determine
whether ibrutinib could block Th17 cellular activation while preserving
the functionality of T-regs. Our studies confirm that ibrutinib
significantly blocks the TCR-induced activation of Th17 cells by up to
40% (p<0.0001). Moreover, ibrutinib pretreatment significantly limits the
production of profibrotic IL-17A after ex-vivo TCR stimulation (p=0.030).
Comprehensive and longitudinal murine in-vivo analysis revealed that up
to four months of daily ibrutinib at 25mg/kg preserves T-reg numbers.
Additional ex-vivo functional analysis demonstrated that the direct
immunosuppressive capacity of highly purified(CD4+CD25hiCD127dimFoxP3+)
human T-regs to limit activation and proliferation of healthy autologous
CD4 or CD8 T-cells was not altered by ibrutinib. Our previously published
and currently reported cumulative data along with an impressive clinical
safety profile indicate that ibrutinib may therapeutically inhibit Th2
CD4 T-cell function and Th17 driven inflammation and autoimmunity while
preserving the anti-inflammatory effects of T-reg cells, thereby
justifying its investigation as an immune modulating therapy for cancer
and graft versus host disease.

