Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: AKT-mediated phosphorylation is responsible for TWIST1-mediated
tumor growth and metastasis


Cancer cells show epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) during cell
migration, invasion and dissemination. Although it has been shown by
numerous publications that the evolutionary conserved basic
helix-loop-helix (b-HLH) transcription factor TWIST1 plays pivotal role
during EMT the molecular mechanism responsible for TWIST1 function is not
fully understood. Here we show that Twist1 binds to and phosphorylated by
AKT/protein kinase-B at S42, T121 and S123. While conversion of S42, T121
and S123 to phosphorylation-mimicking Aspartic or glutamic acids created
active Twist1, Alanin mutants of the same sites diminished the
DNA-binding and transctivating functions of Twist1. In line with this,
Glutamic Acids mutants suppressed the expression of E-Cadherin, whose
expression is negatively regulated by active TWIST1, Alanin mutants
induced the expression of E-Cadherin. Similarly, we tested the impact of
above mentioned mutants on cell migration and proliferation. Our results
demonstrated that while Glutamic acid mutants accelerated, Alanin mutants
suppressed the migration and proliferation of 293T cells. Our in vitro
results prompted us to test our mutants under in vivo conditions using
breast cancer as a model. We transfected non-metastatic mouse mammary
tumor cell line, 67NR, with Glutamic acid mutants, and metastatic mouse
mammary tumor cell line, 4T1, with Alanin mutants of mouse TWIST1 and
selected the Neo-resistant populations. We injected 1 million 67NR cells
over-expressing wild type or Glutamic acid mutants of Twist1, and 100.000
4T1 cells over-expressing wild type or Alanin mutants of Twist1 into the
breast tissue of female inbred BalBC mice, and animals were monitored for
metastasis. At the end of the 4th week, we sacrifised and examined the
animals for tumor growth and metastasis. Although 67NR cells
over-expressing wild type Twist1 did not show any metastasis, cells
over-expressing 1E (S42E) and 2E (S42E, T121E) mutants of Twist1 showed
15-20 macroscopic metastasis to liver and Lungs. Paralel to this, 4T1
cells expressing 1A (S42A) and 2A (S42A, T121A) mutants of TWIST1 showed
no macroscopic metastasis. Our results clearly indicate that
phosphorylation of S42 and T121 by AKT is essential for TWIST1-mediated
tumor growth and metastasis.

