Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CYP26C1 gene is highly methylated and correlated with
chemoradiation therapy in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma


Background: Systemic chemo- and chemoradiation- therapy is widely
accepted in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) patients. However
resistance to these therapies remaining pretty high and multicentric
occurrence of ESCC often can see after treatment. Multiple studies have
shown that promoter methylation of tumor suppressor genes underlie
esophageal carcinogenesis. But, we still do not know that epigenetic
changes after chemoradiation therapy (CRT) in ESCC. Our aim is to
identify how change DNA methylation in tumor site (T) but also adjacent
normal site (ADJ) before/after CRT. Methods: Tumor and adjacent normal
biopsy specimens were obtained before/after treatment from 34 patients
(124 samples) enrolled in a uniform CRT protocol. Genomewide DNA
methylation analysis was performed using 12 non-treated test samples (T
and matched ADJ: 6 each) by methylated CpG island amplification and
microarray (MCAM) method (4x44K, Agilent custom array), and selected
candidate genes that were highly methylated in T than ADJ. We next
analyzed one of the candidate genes CYP26C1 (cytochrome P450, family 26,
subfamily C, polypeptide 1) DNA methylation using 112 validation samples
by quantitative bisulfate pyrosequencing. Results: CYP26C1 was selected
by unsupervised hierarchical clustering after MCAM in test samples.
CYP26C1 DNA methylation was significantly high in T than ADJ in both test
and validation samples (pBackground: Systemic chemo- and chemoradiation-
therapy is widely accepted in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC)
patients. However resistance to these therapies remaining pretty high and
multicentric occurrence of ESCC often can see after treatment. Multiple
studies have shown that promoter methylation of tumor suppressor genes
underlie esophageal carcinogenesis. But, we still do not know that
epigenetic changes after chemoradiation therapy (CRT) in ESCC. Our aim is
to identify how change DNA methylation in tumor site (T) but also
adjacent normal site (ADJ) before/after CRT. Methods: Tumor and adjacent
normal biopsy specimens were obtained before/after treatment from 34
patients (124 samples) enrolled in a uniform CRT protocol. Genomewide DNA
methylation analysis was performed using 12 non-treated test samples (T
and matched ADJ: 6 each) by methylated CpG island amplification and
microarray (MCAM) method (4x44K, Agilent custom array), and selected
candidate genes that were highly methylated in T than ADJ. We next
analyzed one of the candidate genes CYP26C1 (cytochrome P450, family 26,
subfamily C, polypeptide 1) DNA methylation using 112 validation samples
by quantitative bisulfate pyrosequencing. Results: CYP26C1 was selected
by unsupervised hierarchical clustering after MCAM in test samples.
CYP26C1 DNA methylation was significantly high in T than ADJ in both test
and validation samples (p<0.04, T: 60.77.6, ADJ: 44.511.5). However some
ADJ also showed high methylation in validation samples. Moreover, CYP26C1
methylation in both T and ADJ were significantly depressed after CRT (T:
pBackground: Systemic chemo- and chemoradiation- therapy is widely
accepted in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) patients. However
resistance to these therapies remaining pretty high and multicentric
occurrence of ESCC often can see after treatment. Multiple studies have
shown that promoter methylation of tumor suppressor genes underlie
esophageal carcinogenesis. But, we still do not know that epigenetic
changes after chemoradiation therapy (CRT) in ESCC. Our aim is to
identify how change DNA methylation in tumor site (T) but also adjacent
normal site (ADJ) before/after CRT. Methods: Tumor and adjacent normal
biopsy specimens were obtained before/after treatment from 34 patients
(124 samples) enrolled in a uniform CRT protocol. Genomewide DNA
methylation analysis was performed using 12 non-treated test samples (T
and matched ADJ: 6 each) by methylated CpG island amplification and
microarray (MCAM) method (4x44K, Agilent custom array), and selected
candidate genes that were highly methylated in T than ADJ. We next
analyzed one of the candidate genes CYP26C1 (cytochrome P450, family 26,
subfamily C, polypeptide 1) DNA methylation using 112 validation samples
by quantitative bisulfate pyrosequencing. Results: CYP26C1 was selected
by unsupervised hierarchical clustering after MCAM in test samples.
CYP26C1 DNA methylation was significantly high in T than ADJ in both test
and validation samples (p<0.04, T: 60.77.6, ADJ: 44.511.5). However some
ADJ also showed high methylation in validation samples. Moreover, CYP26C1
methylation in both T and ADJ were significantly depressed after CRT (T:
p<0.01 (45.118.3 to 31.614.9), ADJ: pBackground: Systemic chemo- and
chemoradiation- therapy is widely accepted in esophageal squamous cell
carcinoma (ESCC) patients. However resistance to these therapies
remaining pretty high and multicentric occurrence of ESCC often can see
after treatment. Multiple studies have shown that promoter methylation of
tumor suppressor genes underlie esophageal carcinogenesis. But, we still
do not know that epigenetic changes after chemoradiation therapy (CRT) in
ESCC. Our aim is to identify how change DNA methylation in tumor site (T)
but also adjacent normal site (ADJ) before/after CRT. Methods: Tumor and
adjacent normal biopsy specimens were obtained before/after treatment
from 34 patients (124 samples) enrolled in a uniform CRT protocol.
Genomewide DNA methylation analysis was performed using 12 non-treated
test samples (T and matched ADJ: 6 each) by methylated CpG island
amplification and microarray (MCAM) method (4x44K, Agilent custom array),
and selected candidate genes that were highly methylated in T than ADJ.
We next analyzed one of the candidate genes CYP26C1 (cytochrome P450,
family 26, subfamily C, polypeptide 1) DNA methylation using 112
validation samples by quantitative bisulfate pyrosequencing. Results:
CYP26C1 was selected by unsupervised hierarchical clustering after MCAM
in test samples. CYP26C1 DNA methylation was significantly high in T than
ADJ in both test and validation samples (p<0.04, T: 60.77.6, ADJ:
44.511.5). However some ADJ also showed high methylation in validation
samples. Moreover, CYP26C1 methylation in both T and ADJ were
significantly depressed after CRT (T: p<0.01 (45.118.3 to 31.614.9), ADJ:
p<0.0001 (43.810.3 to 30.513.8)). Conclusions: CYP26C1 has a CpG island
in promoter area and was highly methylated in T of ESCC patients. And,
some ADJ showed high CYP26C1 methylation, suggesting possibility of
multicentric occurs of ESCC. Moreover, CYP26C1 methylation depress after
CRT both T and ADJ, suggesting potential clinical application of CRT
sensitive biomarker.

