Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification and characterization of L524-0366 as a small
molecule inhibitor that disrupt TWEAK-Fn14 signaling in glioblastoma


Deregulation of the TWEAK-Fn14 signaling pathway is observed in many
diseases including inflammation, autoimmune diseases, and cancer, notably
glioblastoma. Activation of Fn14 signaling by TWEAK binding triggers
glioma cell invasion and survival and therefore represents an attractive
pathway for therapeutic intervention. Based on structural studies of the
TWEAK-binding cysteine rich domain of Fn14, several homology models of
TWEAK were built to investigate plausible modes of TWEAK-Fn14
interaction. Two promising models, centered on different anchoring
residues of TWEAK [Tyrosine 176 (Y176) and Tryptophan 231 (W231)], were
prioritized using a data-driven strategy. Site-directed mutagenesis of
TWEAK at Y176, but not W231, resulted in the loss of TWEAK binding to
Fn14 substantiating Y176 as the anchoring residue. Importantly, mutation
of TWEAK at Y176 did not disrupt TWEAK trimerization, but failed to
induce Fn14 mediated nuclear factor kappa-light-chain-enhancer of
activated B cells (NF-B) signaling. The validated structural models were
utilized in a virtual screen to design a targeted library of small
molecules predicted to disrupt the TWEAK-Fn14 interaction. 129 small
molecules were screened iteratively, with identification of molecules
producing up to 37% inhibition of TWEAK-Fn14 binding. One specific
compound, L524-0366 binds specifically to the Fn14 receptor and disrupt
TWEAK-Fn14 interaction. Treatment of L524-0366 suppresses TWEAK-induced
cell migration and survival in glioblastoma cells. In summary, we present
a data-driven in silico study revealing key structural elements of the
TWEAK-Fn14 interaction, followed by experimental validation, serving as a
guide for the design of small molecule inhibitors of the TWEAK-Fn14
ligand-receptor interaction. Our results provide the foundation for
further exploration utilizing L524-0366 as a small molecule inhibitor to
the TWEAK-Fn14 signaling axis.

