Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ethnic differences in CYP19A1 intronic SNPs and haplotype
distributions among African American and Caucasian populations


Ethnicity and gender variability in estrogen metabolism is an important
consideration for assessing cancer risk and therapeutic efficacy in
clinical medicine. Aromatase, encoded by the CYP19A1 gene, is a key
enzyme that facilitates the bioconversion of estrogens from androgens.
Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of CYP19A1 influence the
expression and activity of the enzyme and may also confer susceptibility
to estrogen-dependent diseases and/or modulate the genotype-phenotype
relationship among certain ethnic groups. In the present study, we
evaluated SNPs within the intron region of the CYP19A1 gene and
determined the allele and genotype frequencies of ten functionally
relevant, tagged CYP19A1 SNPs in a total of 407 healthy African American
(AA) and Caucasian (CA) subjects from Arkansas using Taqman SNP assays.
The observed frequencies of the CYP19A1 minor alleles for the SNPs
rs10459592 (T), rs12591359 (A), rs12908960 (A), rs11856927 (G), rs749292
(A), rs2470152 (A), rs1902584 (T), rs2470144 (T), rs1961177 (T), and
rs6493497 (T) are 49.3, 39.2, 37.3, 43.5, 50, 48.7, 12, 38, 22, and 17,
respectively. Gender-specific assessment showed significant differences
in the genotype frequency for only rs1902584; however, significant
inter-ethnic variability between the two groups was detected in the
distribution of the majority of the CYP19A1 variants, including
rs10459592 (p Ethnicity and gender variability in estrogen metabolism is
an important consideration for assessing cancer risk and therapeutic
efficacy in clinical medicine. Aromatase, encoded by the CYP19A1 gene, is
a key enzyme that facilitates the bioconversion of estrogens from
androgens. Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of CYP19A1 influence
the expression and activity of the enzyme and may also confer
susceptibility to estrogen-dependent diseases and/or modulate the
genotype-phenotype relationship among certain ethnic groups. In the
present study, we evaluated SNPs within the intron region of the CYP19A1
gene and determined the allele and genotype frequencies of ten
functionally relevant, tagged CYP19A1 SNPs in a total of 407 healthy
African American (AA) and Caucasian (CA) subjects from Arkansas using
Taqman SNP assays. The observed frequencies of the CYP19A1 minor alleles
for the SNPs rs10459592 (T), rs12591359 (A), rs12908960 (A), rs11856927
(G), rs749292 (A), rs2470152 (A), rs1902584 (T), rs2470144 (T), rs1961177
(T), and rs6493497 (T) are 49.3, 39.2, 37.3, 43.5, 50, 48.7, 12, 38, 22,
and 17, respectively. Gender-specific assessment showed significant
differences in the genotype frequency for only rs1902584; however,
significant inter-ethnic variability between the two groups was detected
in the distribution of the majority of the CYP19A1 variants, including
rs10459592 (p <0.001), rs12908960 (pEthnicity and gender variability in
estrogen metabolism is an important consideration for assessing cancer
risk and therapeutic efficacy in clinical medicine. Aromatase, encoded by
the CYP19A1 gene, is a key enzyme that facilitates the bioconversion of
estrogens from androgens. Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of
CYP19A1 influence the expression and activity of the enzyme and may also
confer susceptibility to estrogen-dependent diseases and/or modulate the
genotype-phenotype relationship among certain ethnic groups. In the
present study, we evaluated SNPs within the intron region of the CYP19A1
gene and determined the allele and genotype frequencies of ten
functionally relevant, tagged CYP19A1 SNPs in a total of 407 healthy
African American (AA) and Caucasian (CA) subjects from Arkansas using
Taqman SNP assays. The observed frequencies of the CYP19A1 minor alleles
for the SNPs rs10459592 (T), rs12591359 (A), rs12908960 (A), rs11856927
(G), rs749292 (A), rs2470152 (A), rs1902584 (T), rs2470144 (T), rs1961177
(T), and rs6493497 (T) are 49.3, 39.2, 37.3, 43.5, 50, 48.7, 12, 38, 22,
and 17, respectively. Gender-specific assessment showed significant
differences in the genotype frequency for only rs1902584; however,
significant inter-ethnic variability between the two groups was detected
in the distribution of the majority of the CYP19A1 variants, including
rs10459592 (p <0.001), rs12908960 (p<0.001), rs1902584 (p = 0.0157),
rs2470144 (pEthnicity and gender variability in estrogen metabolism is an
important consideration for assessing cancer risk and therapeutic
efficacy in clinical medicine. Aromatase, encoded by the CYP19A1 gene, is
a key enzyme that facilitates the bioconversion of estrogens from
androgens. Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of CYP19A1 influence
the expression and activity of the enzyme and may also confer
susceptibility to estrogen-dependent diseases and/or modulate the
genotype-phenotype relationship among certain ethnic groups. In the
present study, we evaluated SNPs within the intron region of the CYP19A1
gene and determined the allele and genotype frequencies of ten
functionally relevant, tagged CYP19A1 SNPs in a total of 407 healthy
African American (AA) and Caucasian (CA) subjects from Arkansas using
Taqman SNP assays. The observed frequencies of the CYP19A1 minor alleles
for the SNPs rs10459592 (T), rs12591359 (A), rs12908960 (A), rs11856927
(G), rs749292 (A), rs2470152 (A), rs1902584 (T), rs2470144 (T), rs1961177
(T), and rs6493497 (T) are 49.3, 39.2, 37.3, 43.5, 50, 48.7, 12, 38, 22,
and 17, respectively. Gender-specific assessment showed significant
differences in the genotype frequency for only rs1902584; however,
significant inter-ethnic variability between the two groups was detected
in the distribution of the majority of the CYP19A1 variants, including
rs10459592 (p <0.001), rs12908960 (p<0.001), rs1902584 (p = 0.0157),
rs2470144 (p<0.001), rs1961177 (pEthnicity and gender variability in
estrogen metabolism is an important consideration for assessing cancer
risk and therapeutic efficacy in clinical medicine. Aromatase, encoded by
the CYP19A1 gene, is a key enzyme that facilitates the bioconversion of
estrogens from androgens. Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of
CYP19A1 influence the expression and activity of the enzyme and may also
confer susceptibility to estrogen-dependent diseases and/or modulate the
genotype-phenotype relationship among certain ethnic groups. In the
present study, we evaluated SNPs within the intron region of the CYP19A1
gene and determined the allele and genotype frequencies of ten
functionally relevant, tagged CYP19A1 SNPs in a total of 407 healthy
African American (AA) and Caucasian (CA) subjects from Arkansas using
Taqman SNP assays. The observed frequencies of the CYP19A1 minor alleles
for the SNPs rs10459592 (T), rs12591359 (A), rs12908960 (A), rs11856927
(G), rs749292 (A), rs2470152 (A), rs1902584 (T), rs2470144 (T), rs1961177
(T), and rs6493497 (T) are 49.3, 39.2, 37.3, 43.5, 50, 48.7, 12, 38, 22,
and 17, respectively. Gender-specific assessment showed significant
differences in the genotype frequency for only rs1902584; however,
significant inter-ethnic variability between the two groups was detected
in the distribution of the majority of the CYP19A1 variants, including
rs10459592 (p <0.001), rs12908960 (p<0.001), rs1902584 (p = 0.0157),
rs2470144 (p<0.001), rs1961177 (p<0.001), and rs6493497 (p=0.0029).
Haplotype analysis identified 3 CYP19A1 SNPs (rs10459592, rs12591359,
rs12908960) that were in strong linkage disequilibrium (LD) and resulted
in one LD block. In addition, CYP19A1 mRNA expression tended to be lower
among subjects who were either homozygous or heterozygous for the CYP19A1
minor allele compared to those homozygous for the common allele, except
for rs12591359, rs2470144, and rs1961177. In summary, our results provide
evidence of ethnic differences in the frequency of CYP19A1 intronic SNPs
between African American and Caucasian populations, suggesting that
contributions of CYP19A1 SNPs in multiethnic epidemiological studies
should be considered for translation of pharmacogenetics of aromatase
inhibitors and for accessing risk of estrogen-dependent diseases across
ethnic groups.

