Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Disruption of the MDM2-p53 interaction synergizes with MEK
inhibition to induce cell death and promote tumor regression in p53
wild-type, Ras or Raf-mutant tumor models


Disruption of the interaction between p53 and MDM2 with small molecules,
and subsequent reactivation of p53, is an attractive treatment strategy
for p53 wild-type tumors that has shown striking pre-clinical activity in
models exhibiting genomic amplification of the MDM2 gene. However, MDM2
amplified tumors represent only a small proportion of the p53 wild-type
tumor population, and single agent regressions may be limited outside of
the MDM2 amplified context. In order to increase the potential clinical
benefit of MDM2-p53 protein-protein interaction (PPI) inhibitors beyond
tumors exhibiting amplification of MDM2, we performed an enhancer library
combination screen to identify optimal combination partners for MDM2-p53
PPI inhibitors in p53 wild-type, MDM2 non-amplified tumor cells.The
MDM2-p53 PPI inhibitor SAR405838 and a related molecule were examined in
combination with an enhancer library of 200 oncology drugs representing a
broad molecular diversity of targets across a panel of twenty p53
wild-type cancer cell lines. Analysis results showed that MEK inhibitors
were the most statistically significant synergistic combination partners
in this screen, with synergy observed in cell lines harboring mutations
that activated MAP kinase pathway signaling. These synergy results were
validated in independent experiments using the ray design methodology,
and extended to multiple K-ras, N-ras and B-raf mutant contexts in vitro.
In K-ras, N-ras or B-raf mutant cell lines, the combination of SAR405838
with the MEK inhibitor pimasertib resulted in p53 pathway activation,
inhibition of pERK levels, induction of the apoptotic mediators PUMA and
BIM, induction of phosphatidyl serine exposure, and induction of caspase
activity. In the Ras/Raf wild-type cell line MCF7, no synergy was
observed. In cell line and patient-derived xenografts in vivo, the
combination of SAR405838 and pimasertib resulted in greater anti-tumor
activity than single agents and induced regression in K-ras, N-ras and
B-raf mutant tumor models derived from different tissue types, including
complete regressions in multiple models.These data indicate that MEK
inhibitors synergize with MDM2-p53 PPI inhibitors in tumor models that
exhibit activated MAP kinase pathway signaling and p53 wild-type status.
Given the relative lack of overlapping clinically significant toxicities
of MDM2-p53 PPI inhibitors and MEK inhibitors, such a combination merits
further investigation for the treatment of K-ras, N-ras, or B-raf mutant,
p53 wild-type tumors, representing a large patient population with
significant unmet medical need.

