Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A natural copy number variant in the GAEC1 oncogene is associated
with breast cancer susceptibility


The recently discovered GAEC1 oncogene, located at 7q22, has been found
to be amplified in esophageal and colorectal cancers and is associated
with altered clinical characteristics in those diseases. Amplification
studies in these cancers showed variation in copy number in normal
tissues, indicating a potential natural copy number variant (CNV) of
GAEC1. In this research, the presence of such a CNV and its association
with sporadic breast cancer development was tested in a population of 190
Caucasian women with breast cancer and a population of age, sex and
ethnicity matched controls. Data produced by qPCR confirmed the presence
of a CNV for GAEC1 in both cancer and control populations, with three
common copy number types and several uncommon values, representing up to
a 64-fold difference in GAEC1 copies. In addition, Chi-square analysis of
copy number types indicated that increased GAEC1 copy number is
associated with cancer development. This includes analysis using only the
common copy number types (p=0.05) as well as considering all genotypes on
a High/Low gene dosage basis (p=0.03). Overall risk for breast cancer was
found to be slightly increased in high dose individuals (OR 1.552 (95% CI
1.035-2.338)). These results indicate that GAEC1 may be an important gene
in the development of breast cancer, and that examination of its copy
number in patient DNA may be a useful addition to genetic risk markers in
sporadic cases.

