Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mycoplasma arginini infection shifts the energy catabolism ratio
of metastatic macrophages towards fermentation and is associated with an
increase in primary tumor size, metastasis and malignancy


Mycoplasma are the smallest self-replicating prokaryotes and are burdened
by their notoriety. It is widely unknown that mycoplasma are readily
detected in many primary human cancer tissues and can influence
tumorigenesis. Some mycoplasma species such as M. fermentans and M.
hyorhinis can transform normal murine and human cell lines into
tumorigenic cells. Mycoplasma infection can inactivate tumor suppressor
genes and activate oncogenes. These observations suggest that mycoplasma
can be both carcinogenic and or onco-modulators. We found that M.
arginini was present in the metastatic macrophage cell line VM-M3
(referred to as M3myco+). Antibiotic was used to eradicate M. arginini
(verified by mycoplasmal 16S rDNA PCR amplification) from the M3 cells
(M3myco- cells). Oxygen consumption rate was higher in the than the
M3myco- cells than in the M3myco+ cells, whereas lactate production was
similar in both the M3myco+ and M3myco- cells. Glucose suppressed oxygen
consumption in both cell lines indicating a Crabtree effect. The in-vitro
proliferation rate was similar in both cell lines when seeded at low
density, but was higher in the M3myco+ cells than in the M3myco- cells at
higher cell densities. Tumor size at the primary inoculation site in
flank was notably smaller and systemic metastasis in the syngeneic inbred
VM mouse host was qualitatively less for the M3myco- cells than for the
M3myco + cells, respectively. Survival was also longer in VM mice
inoculated with the M3myco- cells compared to the M3myco+ cells. Our data
indicate that M. arginini is an onco-modulator that might influence tumor
growth through an effect tumor cell energy metabolism. (Supported by
Boston College Research Expense fund).

