Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Meausuring PIP3 reveals the unexpected role of p110B in luminal
breast cancers


The phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) family of lipid kinases plays a
prominent role in the growth and survival of several types of cancer,
including breast cancers where the PI3K pathway is altered in up to 70%
of cases. Due to the technical challenges of measuring the PI3K product,
PIP3 directly, the phosphorylation of the downstream effector AKT has
historically been used to indirectly assess the activity of class I PI3K.
While this approach has proven to be rather useful, it is based on the
assumption that this readout is proportional to the levels of PIP3, which
is likely to apply only to a limited range of activation levels and
within specific contexts. Indeed, evaluation of the efficacy of PI3K
inhibitors with such indirect measurements may approximate and
oversimplify the complex transduction mechanism of PI3K. During time
course experiments using the p110A selective inhibitor, BYL719, we
observed that both PIP3 and p-AKT levels were similarly restored after 24
hours in HER2 amplified breast cancer cells, while the rebound of p-AKT
was minimal and did not correlate with increased PIP3 levels in PIK3CA
mutant breast cancer models. Both p110B inhibition and p110B depletion
were effective in blocking the PIP3 rebound observed. Consistent with
this, the combination of p110A and p110B inhibitors decreased cell growth
and induced a better apoptotic response compared to BYL719 alone. We
further demonstrated that only the combination of p110A and p110B
inhibitors induced tumor regression. Importantly, PIP3 levels correlated
with efficacy more reliably than p-AKT in a PIK3CA mutant model in vivo.
These data suggest that measurement of PIP3 levels following treatment
may serve as a more effective biomarker than p-AKT levels to predict
response to PI3K inhibitors within this subset of breast cancers.

