Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The cellular thermal shift assay as a tool for setting indivual
treatment schemes


Many cancers respond insufficiently to existing therapies and acquired
drug resistance often develops. To address this challenge, a range of
different therapeutic strategies is currently in development. Many of
these are based on the concept of targeted therapies, where target
proteins are drivers of cancer processes or synthetic vulnerabilities of
cancer cells. In this project we have used the newly developed CETSA
method to monitor levels of drug binding to specific target proteins in
tumors and primary cells from breast cancer patients. CETSA is a generic
method for evaluating drug binding to target proteins in cells and
tissues. The technique is based on the physical phenomenon of
ligand-induced thermal stabilization of target proteins. Using this
technique, it is possible to look at interactions between a drug and
protein of interest without having to label them. Previously, we have
validated drug binding in mammalian cancer cell lines for a set of
important clinical targets and shown that a range of critical factors
that are important for drug development can be identified at the target
engagement level, including drug transport and activation, off-target
effects, drug resistance as well as drug distribution in animal
tissues.By using different drugs and amounts we now have preliminary data
suggesting that CETSA could be used as a tool for optimizing treatment
schemes for individual care and for detecting resistance development at
an early stage.

