Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Circulating microRNAs in association with colorectal neoplasia


Purpose: MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are non-coding regulatory RNAs that are
stable in circulation and implicated in the etiology of many cancers
including colorectal cancer (CRC). In this study we investigated whether
candidate miRNAs could serve as blood-based biomarkers of colorectal
adenoma.Methods: We conducted a colonoscopy-based case-control study of
men and women ages 50-79; this report includes data from 48 polyp-free
controls, 43 advanced adenoma, 73 non-advanced adenomas, and 8 CRC cases.
We selected 12 miRNA candidates that are highly expressed in adenoma
tissue and have low expression in blood cells, in addition to miRNAs
previously reported as biomarkers of adenoma. miRNAs were extracted from
stored plasma samples, and copy number assessed with qRT-PCR. Odds ratios
(ORs) and area-under-the-curve (AUC) from receiver-operator
characteristic curves were estimated to quantify the association between
plasma copy-number of these candidate miRNAs and each case group.Results:
No miRNA transcripts were associated with risk of adenoma or advanced
adenomas, or with an AUC significantly above 0.5 that would indicate
usefulness in discriminating either category of adenoma cases from
controls. In contrast, statistically significant and strong associations
(ORs>5) with CRC were observed for 6 miRNA candidates, with corresponding
AUCs significantly greater than 0.5.Conclusions: Our results suggest that
these candidate miRNAs, assayed with qRT-PCR, are unlikely to have
clinical utility as blood-based screening biomarkers of adenomas.
However, strong associations were observed with CRC. Circulating miRNAs
may therefore have promise as potential early detection biomarkers to
augment current CRC screening methods, but an optimal screening biomarker
would detect pre-malignant colorectal adenomas as well as frank CRC.

