Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation of HIF1a by Set9 lysine methyltransferase


HIF-1 is consisted of an oxygen-sensitive HIF-1 and a constitutive HIF-1
subunit. The activity of HIF-1 is implicated in human cancer development.
In normoxia, the HIF-1 subunit is constantly synthesized, but rapidly
degraded by the oxygen-dependent mechanism. In hypoxia due to tumor
growth and anti-angiogenic therapy, HIF-1 is stabilized and dimerizes
with HIF-1 to form HIF-1, which transactivates genes promoting cancer
hallmarks, including angiogenesis, metabolic reprogramming, migration and
invasion. Notably, HIF-1 increases multiple genes on the glycolytic
pathway, which mediates the metabolic adaptation of hypoxic stress.
Therefore, HIF-1 is an intriguing anticancer target. However, how HIF-1
is regulated in hypoxia is poorly understood. Here, we report that the
histone methyltransferase Set9 promotes HIF-1 protein stability in
hypoxia and plays an important role in cancer cell glycolytic adaptation.
Specifically, Set9 interacts with HIF-1 to maintain its stability in
hypoxia. Silencing of Set9 by siRNA in hypoxia significantly reduces
HIF-1 protein level, reduces HIF-1 transcriptional activity, and
attenuates expressions of HIF-1-responsive glycolytic genes as well as
hypoxia-induced glycolysis. Further, we have found that Set9 binds to the
chromatins of hypoxia response elements within HIF-1-responsive
glycolytic genes. The results suggest that Set9 epigenetically
contributes to the glycolytic phenotype of cancer through HIF-1.

