Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcriptional factor ATOH8
promotes the stemness of breast cancer cells via Oct4 and Nanog


Breast cancer is the leading cause of cancer mortality in women with a
high incidence of recurrence and eventual treatment failure. The last
decade has yielded substantial evidence that cancer stem cells (CSCs)
contribute to tumor relapse, metastasis and chemoresistance. CSCs are
regulated by complex interactions with the components of the tumor
microenvironment through networks of cytokines and growth factors,
including the IL6-STAT3 signaling pathway. Although the IL6 signaling
pathway has been extensively characterized, the network of effector genes
and proteins that regulates the CSC population remains poorly understood.
Here, we show that ATOH8 is a downstream effector of IL6-STAT3 signaling
which promotes the stemness of breast cancer cells. ATOH8 is
significantly increased after IL6 stimulation and can be directly
regulated by STAT3. Ectopic expression of ATOH8 in 4T1 or T-47D cells is
sufficient to increases the CSC sub-population and enhances tumorogenesis
in mice. Mechanistically, ATOH8 promotes the expression of Oct3/4 and
Nanog, key regulators of CSC renewed. Accordingly, Knock-down of ATOH8 in
EMT6 or MDA-MB-231 cells is associated with decreased expression of
Oct3/4 and Nanog and reduces the CSC sub-population. In patients, ATOH8
expression is a negative prognostic indicator for overall survival.
Together, the results identify ATOH8 as a downstream effector of
IL6-STAT3 signaling that compromises long-term surviving in breast cancer.

