Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The Biospecimen Methodological Study (BMS): Identifying best
practices for tissue preservation and maintenance of RNA integrity


Researchers may use a number of traditional methods for human tissue
preservation and stabilization such as liquid nitrogen (LN2) or dry ice,
and yet the effectiveness of newer methods remains unclear. The National
Cancer Institute's Biorepositories and Biospecimen Research Branch (BBRB;
formerly known as OBBR) conducted a study to better understand such
tissue preservation methods to inform BBRB's biospecimen collection
efforts for the NIH Genotype-Tissue Expression (GTEx) program. The
Biospecimen Methodological Study (BMS) was developed to provide an
evidence-based structure to support future tissue collection and data
analysis methods by comparing features of three different preservation
methods: PAXgene Tissue (Qiagen); LN2; and dry ice. In preliminary
studies, use of PAXgene Tissue has proven highly successful in
preservation and maintenance of RNA quality. Another critical aspect of
the BMS was to determine the degree to which the time between cardiac
cessation and tissue preservation alters RNA integrity; such changes in
molecular integrity could result in changes in molecular profiles upon
gene expression analysis. The results of this study will provide valuable
information about tissue processing parameters by identifying artifacts
associated with different preservation methods and timing post cardiac
cessation. Identifying and utilizing superior biospecimen preservation
methods for RNA analysis will help identify patient-specific changes in
gene expression and ultimately contribute to the development of targeted
molecular medicine.

