Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: 3D nuclear telomeric signatures define circulating tumor cells
(CTCs) and characterize CTC subpopulations in intermediate risk prostate
cancer patients


Intermediate risk prostate cancer is a current medical challenge since
the patients in this group can either be stable or progress, and there is
no predictor for individual risk. Stratifying these patients would spare
the patients unnecessary treatment or indicate the start of treatment
immediately without losing precious time. Currently, prostate specific
antigen (PSA) is used as evidence for biochemical progression. A more
sensitive biomarker is needed to detect disease progression earlier and
more reliably.We have isolated circulating tumor cells (CTCs) using a
filtration-based device (ScreenCell). We subsequently performed the
genetic characterization of the captured CTCs on a single cell basis.
Using three-dimensional (3D) nuclear telomere imaging and quantitative
analysis of 3D telomeric signatures of CTCs, we have characterized CTCs
in the blood of the patients and have identified patient subgroups with
one or more groups of CTCs. 380 samples of intermediate risk prostate
cancer all revealed the presence of CTCs. However, the CTCs found were
not genetically identical. Marked heterogeneity was seen, and three main
groups of CTC profiles were defined based on TeloView software our group
developed earlier. Repeat samples taken 6 months intervals define stable,
mildly changing and significantly altered 3D profiles indicative of
disease stability vs. progression.

