Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Microsatellite stable colorectal cancers stratified by the BRAF
V600E mutation show distinct patterns of chromosomal instability


The BRAF (V600E) mutation in colorectal cancers that are microsatellite
stable (MSS) confers a very poor patient prognosis, whereas BRAF mutant
microsatellite-unstable (MSI) colorectal cancers have an excellent
prognosis. BRAF wild type cancers are typically MSS and display
chromosomal instability (CIN). CIN is associated with a poor prognosis
but has not been extensively studied on a genome-wide basis in relation
to BRAF mutational status in colorectal cancer.BRAF mutant/MSS
(BRAFmut/MSS) cancers (n=33) and BRAF mutant/MSI (BRAFmut/MSI) cancers
(n=30) were compared for presence of copy number aberrations (CNAs)
indicative of CIN, with BRAF wild type/MSS (BRAFwt/MSS) cancers (n=18)
using Illumina CytoSNP-12 arrays.BRAFmut/MSS and BRAFwt/MSS cancers
showed comparable numbers of CNAs per cancer at 32.8 and 29.8
respectively. However there were distinct differences in patterns of CNA
length between MSS cohorts, with BRAFmut/MSS cancers having a
significantly greater proportion of focal CNAs compared to BRAFwt/MSS
cancers (pThe BRAF (V600E) mutation in colorectal cancers that are
microsatellite stable (MSS) confers a very poor patient prognosis,
whereas BRAF mutant microsatellite-unstable (MSI) colorectal cancers have
an excellent prognosis. BRAF wild type cancers are typically MSS and
display chromosomal instability (CIN). CIN is associated with a poor
prognosis but has not been extensively studied on a genome-wide basis in
relation to BRAF mutational status in colorectal cancer.BRAF mutant/MSS
(BRAFmut/MSS) cancers (n=33) and BRAF mutant/MSI (BRAFmut/MSI) cancers
(n=30) were compared for presence of copy number aberrations (CNAs)
indicative of CIN, with BRAF wild type/MSS (BRAFwt/MSS) cancers (n=18)
using Illumina CytoSNP-12 arrays.BRAFmut/MSS and BRAFwt/MSS cancers
showed comparable numbers of CNAs per cancer at 32.8 and 29.8
respectively. However there were distinct differences in patterns of CNA
length between MSS cohorts, with BRAFmut/MSS cancers having a
significantly greater proportion of focal CNAs compared to BRAFwt/MSS
cancers (p<0.0001); whereas whole chromosomal arm CNAs were more common
in BRAFwt/MSS cancers (pThe BRAF (V600E) mutation in colorectal cancers
that are microsatellite stable (MSS) confers a very poor patient
prognosis, whereas BRAF mutant microsatellite-unstable (MSI) colorectal
cancers have an excellent prognosis. BRAF wild type cancers are typically
MSS and display chromosomal instability (CIN). CIN is associated with a
poor prognosis but has not been extensively studied on a genome-wide
basis in relation to BRAF mutational status in colorectal cancer.BRAF
mutant/MSS (BRAFmut/MSS) cancers (n=33) and BRAF mutant/MSI (BRAFmut/MSI)
cancers (n=30) were compared for presence of copy number aberrations
(CNAs) indicative of CIN, with BRAF wild type/MSS (BRAFwt/MSS) cancers
(n=18) using Illumina CytoSNP-12 arrays.BRAFmut/MSS and BRAFwt/MSS
cancers showed comparable numbers of CNAs per cancer at 32.8 and 29.8
respectively. However there were distinct differences in patterns of CNA
length between MSS cohorts, with BRAFmut/MSS cancers having a
significantly greater proportion of focal CNAs compared to BRAFwt/MSS
cancers (p<0.0001); whereas whole chromosomal arm CNAs were more common
in BRAFwt/MSS cancers (p<0.0001). This related to a reduced average CNA
length in BRAFmut/MSS compared to BRAFwt/MSS cancers (20.7Mb vs 33.4Mb;
pThe BRAF (V600E) mutation in colorectal cancers that are microsatellite
stable (MSS) confers a very poor patient prognosis, whereas BRAF mutant
microsatellite-unstable (MSI) colorectal cancers have an excellent
prognosis. BRAF wild type cancers are typically MSS and display
chromosomal instability (CIN). CIN is associated with a poor prognosis
but has not been extensively studied on a genome-wide basis in relation
to BRAF mutational status in colorectal cancer.BRAF mutant/MSS
(BRAFmut/MSS) cancers (n=33) and BRAF mutant/MSI (BRAFmut/MSI) cancers
(n=30) were compared for presence of copy number aberrations (CNAs)
indicative of CIN, with BRAF wild type/MSS (BRAFwt/MSS) cancers (n=18)
using Illumina CytoSNP-12 arrays.BRAFmut/MSS and BRAFwt/MSS cancers
showed comparable numbers of CNAs per cancer at 32.8 and 29.8
respectively. However there were distinct differences in patterns of CNA
length between MSS cohorts, with BRAFmut/MSS cancers having a
significantly greater proportion of focal CNAs compared to BRAFwt/MSS
cancers (p<0.0001); whereas whole chromosomal arm CNAs were more common
in BRAFwt/MSS cancers (p<0.0001). This related to a reduced average CNA
length in BRAFmut/MSS compared to BRAFwt/MSS cancers (20.7Mb vs 33.4Mb;
p<0.0001); and a smaller average percentage of CIN affected genomes in
BRAFmut/MSS compared to BRAFwt/MSS cancers (23.9% vs 34.9% respectively).
BRAFmut/MSI cancers were confirmed to have low CNA rates (5.4 per cancer)
and minimal CIN-affected genomes (average of 4.5%) compared to MSS
cohorts (pThe BRAF (V600E) mutation in colorectal cancers that are
microsatellite stable (MSS) confers a very poor patient prognosis,
whereas BRAF mutant microsatellite-unstable (MSI) colorectal cancers have
an excellent prognosis. BRAF wild type cancers are typically MSS and
display chromosomal instability (CIN). CIN is associated with a poor
prognosis but has not been extensively studied on a genome-wide basis in
relation to BRAF mutational status in colorectal cancer.BRAF mutant/MSS
(BRAFmut/MSS) cancers (n=33) and BRAF mutant/MSI (BRAFmut/MSI) cancers
(n=30) were compared for presence of copy number aberrations (CNAs)
indicative of CIN, with BRAF wild type/MSS (BRAFwt/MSS) cancers (n=18)
using Illumina CytoSNP-12 arrays.BRAFmut/MSS and BRAFwt/MSS cancers
showed comparable numbers of CNAs per cancer at 32.8 and 29.8
respectively. However there were distinct differences in patterns of CNA
length between MSS cohorts, with BRAFmut/MSS cancers having a
significantly greater proportion of focal CNAs compared to BRAFwt/MSS
cancers (p<0.0001); whereas whole chromosomal arm CNAs were more common
in BRAFwt/MSS cancers (p<0.0001). This related to a reduced average CNA
length in BRAFmut/MSS compared to BRAFwt/MSS cancers (20.7Mb vs 33.4Mb;
p<0.0001); and a smaller average percentage of CIN affected genomes in
BRAFmut/MSS compared to BRAFwt/MSS cancers (23.9% vs 34.9% respectively).
BRAFmut/MSI cancers were confirmed to have low CNA rates (5.4 per cancer)
and minimal CIN-affected genomes (average of 4.5%) compared to MSS
cohorts (p<0.0001). BRAFmut/MSS cancers had more frequent deletion CNAs
compared to BRAFwt/MSS cancers on 17q and 6p at loci not typically
correlated with colorectal cancer, and more frequent amplification CNAs
on 8q and 18q compared to BRAFwt/MSS cancers.These results indicate that
although comparable rates of CIN occur between MSS subgroups, significant
differences in their patterns of instability exist as BRAFmut/MSS cancers
display a focal pattern and BRAFwt/MSS cancers have more a whole arm
pattern' of CIN. This and the genomic loci more frequently affected in
BRAFmut/MSS cancers may warrant extended studies to ascertain
correlations with clinical data.Overall this investigation has identified
that differing patterns of genomic instability exist between the two MSS
colorectal subgroups and provides further evidence of the biological
distinctions of the aggressive BRAFmut/MSS cancers.

