Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Interaction between bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells and
tumor cells induces expression of fibronectin in human colon cancer cells


Bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) have been reported to
contribute to the formation of tumor stroma. We reported recently that in
an orthotopic nude mouse model of human colon cancer, MSCs migrated to
tumor stroma, where they differentiated into carcinoma-associated
fibroblast (CAF)-like cells and promoted tumor growth and metastasis.
However, the molecular mechanisms of this phenomenon have not been
elucidated. We performed microarray analysis of gene expression in KM12SM
cells and found that expression of fibronectin (FN) mRNA was increased
markedly by direct co-culture of KM12SM cells with MSCs. FN, a
glycoprotein in extracellular matrix and also a maker of
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), has been implicated in the
development of several types of human cancer. Many reports indicate that
EMT is an important step during the cascade of tumor progression.
However, the potential role of FN in carcinogenesis is not fully
elucidated. We examined FN expression in surgical specimens of human
colon cancer and colon adenoma by immunohistochemistry. A total of 87
tumors were analyzed. Levels of FN expression in tumor cells correlated
with disease stage, and FN immunoreactivity was detected in invasive
cancers, especially at the invasive edge, but less in mucosal cancers or
adenomas. Furthermore, in an orthotopic nude mouse model of colon cancer,
mRNA expression levels of FN were shown to be higher in the tumors
produced by KM12SM cells mixed with MSCs than in the tumors produced by
KM12SM cells alone.These findings suggest that the interaction between
cancer cells and MSCs recruited into tumor stroma may play a role in
tumor growth and metastasis via induction of FN expression in invasive
colon cancer.

