Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Netrin-4/Integrin beta-4 interaction promotes glioblastoma cell
proliferation and protects from temozolomide induced cellular senescence
via activating PI3K/AKT pathway


Netrin-4 (NTN4) is a secreted laminin-related protein, which was
originally observed to guide neuronal axons during neuronal development.
Recently, it has been found to be expressed in many other tissues and
tumor types, and to contribute to the regulation of cell adhesion,
migration, proliferation, and apoptosis. Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is
the most common primary tumor of central nervous system (CNS). Although
there is no remedy for this fatal disease, the efficacy of temozolomide
(TMZ) -an orally taken alkylating agent- has been demonstrated in the
treatment of glioblastoma. However, the sensitivity of GBM cells to TMZ
is interfered by many factors such as MGMT expression, AKT activation,
etc. Here we have explored the functions and molecular mechanisms of NTN4
in GBM.The suppression of NTN4 expression in GBM cell lines significantly
reduced cell proliferation and motility and increased serum
deprivation-induced apoptosis. By using tandem affinity purification and
mass spectrometric analysis, we identified the physical interaction
between integrin beta-4 (ITGB4) and NTN4. This interaction mediates AKT
phosphorylation and concomitant mitogenic effects. Furthermore, silencing
either NTN4 or ITGB4 in GBM cell induced cellular senescence.
Temozolomide induces cellular senescence in MGMT devoid glioma cell
lines. Addition of exogenous recombinant NTN4 protein rescued TMZ induced
senescence and AKT dephosphorylation in GBM cells in an ITGB4 dependent
manner.Current data suggest that the NTN4-ITGB4 interaction promotes GBM
cell proliferation and protects GBM cell from TMZ triggered cellular
senescence via activating PI3K/AKT pathway.

