Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Wnt-beta-catenin-Rac1 signaling axis regulates
metastasis-associated phenotypes in TNBC


Background: RAC1-GTPase controls many cellular phenotypes including
integrin-directed migration via its control over the actin-cytoskeleton.
We and others have established the upregulation of Wnt-beta-catenin
pathway (WP) in triple negative breast cancer (TNBC), the most aggressive
subtype of breast cancer (Dey et al., 2013, BMC Cancer; Dey et al., 2013,
PLOS ONE). Here we report for the first time that metastasis-associated
phenotypes in TNBC are controlled by Wnt-beta-catenin-RAC1signaling axis.
Methodology: The involvement of WP was tested using (1) WP modulators
(CHIR99021, Wnt-C59, XAV939), (2) sulindac sulfide and (3) beta-catenin
SiRNA. We studied metastasis-associated phenotypes including, (1)
proliferation (CelltiterGLO) (2) clonogenic growth (3D On-TOP assay) (3)
fibronectin-directed migration (4) matrigel invasion (5) vascular mimicry
(6) actin dynamics (confocal-microscopy and podia-parameters) (7) protein
expression (WB) (8) real-time imaging for migration and vascular mimicry
and (9) adhesion in the context of RAC1 activation in a panel of 3-4 TNBC
cell lines. Results: Sulindac sulfide as well as transient transfection
of beta-catenin SiRNA (1) decreased cellular levels of beta-catenin,
inhibited proliferation, attenuated metastasis-associated different
phenotypes and blocked fibronectin-mediated RAC1 as well as Cdc42
activities and (2) altered actin dynamics and inhibited podia-parameters
(lamellopodia and fillopodia). Both Wnt-antagonists and RAC1 inhibitor
(NSC23766) blocked fibronectin-induced RAC1 activation and inhibited the
metastasis-associated phenotypes, while Wnt-activator enhanced phenotypes
like vascular mimicry. Conclusion: Results of our experiments show that
upregulation of WP regulates metastasis-associated phenotypes in TNBC via
activation of RAC1 GTP-ase. The functional link between WP, metastasis
and the activation of RAC1 is being currently worked out using RAC1SiRNA
and pharmacological inhibitor of RAC1 in brain metastasizing MDA-MB231BR
cells to specifically address the role of Wnt-beta-catenin-RAC1 signaling
axis in the context of distant metastasis, the results of which will be
presented at the meeting.

