Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Rotating night shift work and cancer mortality in the nurses'
health study


Rotating night-shift work is common in western societies, but
epidemiological studies on shift work and cancer mortality are limited.In
a prospective closed cohort of 74,914 registered US nurses, the Nurses'
Health Study, we examined the impact of rotating night-shift work on
total-cancer and cancer-specific mortality. Rotating night-shift work was
defined as having worked at least 3 nights per month. Cox proportional
hazards models adjusting for age, smoking, BMI, and other important
confounders, were used to estimate hazard ratios (HRs) and 95% confidence
intervals (CIs).During 22 years of follow-up, we documented 5,123 cancer
deaths. Overall, we observed no association between rotating night-shift
work and total-cancer mortality (HR15+years=1.07; 95% CI, 0.97-1.19;
Ptrend=0.17). However, women with 15 or more years of night-shift work
had a significant increase in lung cancer mortality (multivariable
HR=1.25; 95% CI, 1.04-1.50) and a borderline significant increase in
colorectal cancer mortality (MV HR=1.32; 95% CI, 0.97-1.81). The increase
in lung cancer mortality was limited to current smokers. We observed no
increase in breast cancer mortality (HR15+years=1.03; 95%CI, 0.76-1.38;
Ptrend=0.97). For cancers with fewer than 200 deaths, we observed a
non-significant increase in mortality from kidney cancer, myeloma and
leukemia among women with 6-14 and 15+ years of rotating night-shift
work: the HRs were 1.58 (95% CI, 0.92-2.71) and 1.36 (95% CI, 0.72-2.56)
for kidney cancer, 1.66 (95% CI, 0.98-2.81) and 1.47 (95% CI, 0.79-2.77)
for myeloma, 1.25 (95% CI, 0.70-2.23) and 1.53 (95% CI, 0.83-2.83) for
leukemia, respectively.We conclude that after adjusting for important
confounders, the impact of rotating night-shift work on cancer mortality
appears modest. Women working rotating night-shifts for more than 15
years had modestly increased colorectal and lung cancer mortality but the
increase in lung cancer mortality was largely limited to current smokers
and it is possible that these observations remain residually confounded
by smoking. Additional studies are warranted to confirm our findings.

