Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Induction of KLF4 by LOR-253 as an innovative therapeutic approach
to induce apoptosis in acute myeloid leukemia


LOR-253, a small molecule anticancer agent that acts through induction of
the tumor suppressor Krppel-like factor 4 (KLF4), has demonstrated
antitumor activity as a single agent in a Phase I study in patients with
advanced or metastatic solid tumors. Recently, the vast majority of
patients with acute myeloid leukemia (AML) were shown to inappropriately
express the embryonic CDX2 gene in bone marrow stem and progenitor cells,
resulting in down-regulation of KLF4 expression as the leukemogenic
event. Consequently, we examined the antitumor activity and mechanism of
action for LOR-253 in AML cells and cells representing other
hematological malignancies. Indeed, LOR-253 was found to inhibit
proliferation of various human leukemia and lymphoma cell lines in vitro
with low nM IC50 values. Further LOR-253 induced high levels of KLF4 mRNA
expression in AML cells and a resultant significant increase in
expression of p21, a cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor that is
transcriptionally regulated by KLF4. Consistent with these findings, in
AML cells we found that LOR-253 induced G1/S cell cycle arrest and
apoptosis, based on positive Annexin V staining, activated caspase-3, and
increased BAX mRNA expression. Studies are underway to further
characterize the pathway that mediates KLF4 induction by LOR-253, to
characterize the effects of LOR-253 in combination with approved
chemotherapies for AML, and to assess the efficacy of LOR-253 in animal
models of AML. Induction of KLF4 represents a novel approach to the
treatment of AML and other hematologic malignancies, and LOR-253 is the
only clinical stage agent to act through this mechanism of action.

