Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of Runx3 as a gatekeeper of lung adenocarcinoma


It is thought that SP-C/CC10 double positive cells, which normally
contribute to the renewal of lung epithelial cells, are the origin
adenocarcinoma (ADC) of the lung. The present study shows that postnatal
disruption of Runx3 in the mouse lung results in dedifferentiation of
bronchiolar epithelial cells into SP-C/CC10 double positive cells. The
double positive cells differentiate into SP-C single positive cells and
adenoma (median survival, longer than 1 year). When Adenovirus-Cre was
infected, LSL-K-RasG12D mice induced ADC in prolonged latency (median
survival, 220 days) and Runx3f/f/LSL-K-RasG12D mice rapidly induced ADC
(median survival, 79 days), indicating a strong tumor suppressor activity
of Runx3. When Cre was activated in a limited number of cells through a
leaky activation of Cretm/ERT in the absence of tamoxifen,
K-RasLSL-G12D/+/Cretm/ERT mice did not induce lung ADC. In contrast,
simultaneous inactivation of Runx3 and activation of K-Ras
(Runx3f/f/K-RasLSL-G12D/+/Cretm/ERT) induced lung ADC with striking
morphological similarities to human lung ADC in all mice (median
survival, 48 days after birth). We also found that Runx3 forms a complex
with BRD2 (a relative of TAF250) in a K-Ras activity-dependent manner and
the complex transiently induces p14ARF and p21. When K-Ras was
constitutively activated, the Runx3-BRD2 complex was maintained for long
time and the expressions of p14ARF and p21 was continued. Disruption of
the Runx3-BRD2 complex abolished expression of these two genes. These
results suggest that cells recognize oncogenic K-Ras through a monitoring
system composed of Runx3-BRD2 complex and Runx3-inactivation leads to
abrogation of the monitoring system as well as dedifferentiation of lung
epithelial cells.

