Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of health locus of control and self-efficacy beliefs in
sunscreen use: Evidence from 2012 Health Information National Trends
Survey


Sun exposure has been identified as a cause of skin cancer (Armstrong &
Kricker, 2001). Extensive empirical evidence shows that sunscreen use was
associated with lower skin cancer incidence (Green et al., 1999, 2011).
However, only 32% U.S. adults used sunscreen regularly (NCI, 2010); the
percentage was even lower (21.7%) among adolescents (Eaton et al., 2012).
To reduce skin cancer burden, sunscreen use promotion should be
enhanced.Locus of control, the extent to which people believe they have
control over their lives with external and internal dimensions (Rotter,
1954), is a significant predictor of behavioral changes (Bundek et al.,
1993). Internal locus of control, i.e., beliefs that reinforcements are
dependent upon one's own behavior, is positively related with behavioral
changes, e.g., weight loss (O'Bryan, 1972) and health information seeking
(Wallston & Maides, 1976), etc. Self-efficacy, the extent to which one
believes to be capable of performing the recommended behavior (Bandura,
1977), is a robust predictor for behavioral changes including smoking
cessation (Norman, 1994) and AIDS prevention (Yzer, 1998), etc.However,
little research focuses on the role of locus of control and self-efficacy
in promoting sunscreen use by using nationally representative
cross-sectional data. The present study bridges this gap by examining the
following two hypotheses:H1: People with high external locus of control
were less likely to use sunscreen.H2: People with high health
self-efficacy were more likely to use sunscreen.Results show that people
high in external locus of control were less likely to use sunscreen
(B=-0.160, p=0.001) and people high in health self-efficacy were more
likely to use sunscreen (B= 0.331, p=0.046), both of which were
statistically significant. Males, Pacific Islanders, homemakers, and
non-immigrants were more likely to use sunscreen. The findings attest to
the necessity of enhancing people's internal locus of control and
self-efficacy with the purpose of promoting sunscreen use. Public health
efforts could be allocated based on the socio-demographic findings.

