Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clinical validation of a multiplexed ChemoPlex SRM assay in FFPE
human tumor tissue


Background: Current cancer treatment regimens rely on the use of
chemotherapy agents that inhibit DNA replication and repair machinery.
Several proteins are involved in this mechanism, such as TOPO1, TOPO2A,
RRM1, FR-alpha and hENT1. The expression levels and activities of these
proteins can greatly affect the success of chemotherapy; however current
treatment indications are not based on tumor expression levels of these
proteins. We have developed a quantitative, multiplexed ChemoPlex SRM
method to evaluate these markers in a host of solid tumors from a limited
amount of FFPE biopsy tissue using our Liquid Tissue-SRM (LT-SRM)
platform. Use of this method will enable a physician to understand
individual tumor molecular machinery and ultimately could lead to
individualized treatment decisions leading to better patient
care.Methods: We used trypsin digestion mapping of recombinant proteins
to identify optimal quantitative peptides for the ChemoPlex SRM assay.
Standard curves were generated to determine the LOD, LOQ, accuracy,
precision and linearity of the assay. The assay was pre-clinically
validated on 14 cell lines with known expression levels of these
Chemo-targets, and the assay was then run on microdissected archived FFPE
human tissue samples from lung, gastro-esophageal cancer (GEC), breast,
liver, colorectal, and ovarian tumors.Results: The peptides chosen for
the 5 Chemo-Plex targets had LOD values of 150, 50, 300, 200, and 100
amol (CVBackground: Current cancer treatment regimens rely on the use of
chemotherapy agents that inhibit DNA replication and repair machinery.
Several proteins are involved in this mechanism, such as TOPO1, TOPO2A,
RRM1, FR-alpha and hENT1. The expression levels and activities of these
proteins can greatly affect the success of chemotherapy; however current
treatment indications are not based on tumor expression levels of these
proteins. We have developed a quantitative, multiplexed ChemoPlex SRM
method to evaluate these markers in a host of solid tumors from a limited
amount of FFPE biopsy tissue using our Liquid Tissue-SRM (LT-SRM)
platform. Use of this method will enable a physician to understand
individual tumor molecular machinery and ultimately could lead to
individualized treatment decisions leading to better patient
care.Methods: We used trypsin digestion mapping of recombinant proteins
to identify optimal quantitative peptides for the ChemoPlex SRM assay.
Standard curves were generated to determine the LOD, LOQ, accuracy,
precision and linearity of the assay. The assay was pre-clinically
validated on 14 cell lines with known expression levels of these
Chemo-targets, and the assay was then run on microdissected archived FFPE
human tissue samples from lung, gastro-esophageal cancer (GEC), breast,
liver, colorectal, and ovarian tumors.Results: The peptides chosen for
the 5 Chemo-Plex targets had LOD values of 150, 50, 300, 200, and 100
amol (CV<20%) for FR alpha, hENT1, TOPO1, TOPO2A, and RRM1, respectively.
Fourteen cell lines were assayed for the Chemo-target expressions by
LT-SRM, and regression analysis between protein and mRNA analysis for
each target demonstrated varying correlations (R2=0.91(FR alpha); 0.78
(hENT1); 0.16 (TOPO1); 0.56 (TOPO2A); 0.59 (RRM1)) suggesting that RT-PCR
measurements of mRNA levels would not be representative of cellular
protein levels and therefore not useful for biomarker analysis for
physicians. Our initial clinical analysis shows that FR alpha was
detectable only in certain lung tumors (especially adenocarcinoma) and
ovarian tumors; breast cancer tumors were found to have a wide range of
hENT1 expression (LOD -1,284 amol/ug) while hENT1 expression in other
tissues ranged from 90 to 377 amol/ug. TOPO1 had fairly ubiquitous
expression (359 -1,300 amol/ug) except for one GEC and one breast cancer
tissue. TOPO2A was identified in all tissue types (227-1,057 amol/ug).
All samples except 1 GEC tissue express RRM1 (160 - 958
amol/ug)Discussion: We describe the development and initial clinical
validation of a quantitative proteomic ChemoPlex SRM assay which
accurately measures the expression of five chemotherapy targets in FFPE
tumor tissue. When multiplexed along with other druggable biomarkers, the
ChemoPlex SRM assay will allow more accurate identification of patients
that are likely to benefit from the combination of chemotherapy and
targeted therapies.

