Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Structure-based design, synthesis and biological testing of highly
potent semi-synthetic epipodophyllotoxin-derived hybrid etoposide analogs


Drugs that target DNA topoisomerase II and interact with DNA represent
two mechanistically distinct and clinically important classes of
anticancer drugs. Using a structure-based design approach a series of
epipodophyllotoxin-derived hybrid etoposide analogs were designed,
synthesized and biologically characterized. It was hypothesized that
combining an epipodophyllotoxin moiety that could interact with specific
protein residues on topoisomerase II and DNA-interacting moieties in the
same molecule would produce much stronger binding and yield more potent
and wide spectrum cytotoxic anticancer drugs. Because the hybrids have
unique dual targeting mechanisms, cancer cells should be much less able
to develop resistance. The most potent hybrid had a mean GI50 in the
NCI-60 cell screen much lower than etoposide. The compounds were much
less cross-resistant to a K562-derived etoposide-resistant cell line. All
of the hybrids tested targeted topoisomerase II as evidenced by their
ability to inhibit kDNA decatenation, to produce linear DNA in a DNA
cleavage assay and to form covalent topoisomerase II-DNA covalent
complexes in a cellular ICE assay. The DNA double strand breaks the
hybrids produced in a cellular H2AX assay and the G2/M cell cycle blocks
were also characteristic of topoisomerase II-targeted drugs. Cell cycle
analysis was also used to characterize the targets. A COMPARE analysis
indicated that the hybrids had NCI 60-cell growth inhibition profiles of
both etoposide and the DNA-interacting moieties from which they were
derived. This data supports the conclusion that the hybrids displayed
characteristics that were consistent with having targeted both
topoisomerase II and DNA. Support: CIHR and a Canada Research Chair in
Drug Development.

