Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A simple multiplex PCR approach for target enrichment in next-gen
sequencing


Multiplexing PCR is a simple way to extract genomic regions of interest
for various medical and genetic tests. Somatic mutations lead to various
diseases including cancer. These mutations are unlikely to be best
detected using regular whole genome sequencing. Clinical samples often
consist of disease cells, e.g. cancer cells, surrounded by normal cells.
Thus, deep sequencing of hundreds to thousands fold coverage is required
to detect the mutations. In clinical research many doctors are interested
in specific genes or genomic regions and they want to extract the regions
from genomic DNA or RNA before sequencing. Many current clinical,
forensic, and heretical genetic test workflows start with multiplexing
PCR to extract genetic marker carrying regions from whole genomes before
running hybridization, sequencing, or electrophoresis tests to identify
the markers. Personal medicine and prognosis mostly involve examining
sequence variations of a number of targeted genes and metabolic pathway
genes so as to predict drug efficacies and drug toxicities.We have
developed a new multiplexing PCR approach with a significantly simplified
workflow and significantly improved robustness. When applied to
sequencing target enrichment application, the workflow for producing
amplified targets involves only one hands-on step and one PCR run. The
approach is designed to require low sample input and to produce superior
amplicon uniformity and sequence specificity. The approach involves a
novel primer design and a proprietary reaction composition. A PCR run
consists of two functionally separated reaction phases, namely target
capture and library amplification, without any hands-on step in between.
The performance of the new approach will be demonstrated by a caner panel
data.

