Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ImmunoPET and fluorescence imaging with Zirconium-89 and IRDye
800CW labeled glycoengineered epidermal growth factor receptor antibody
GA201


Background:GA201 is a novel epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
monoclonal antibody (mAb), glycoengineered for enhanced antibody
dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC). ADCC response is influenced
by the amount of antibody bound to the membrane. Therefore we
investigated specific accumulation and membrane binding of GA201 on tumor
cells in vitro and in human cancer xenografts in vivo using Zirconium-89
(89Zr) and IRDye 800CW (800CW ) labeled GA201. Furthermore, 89Zr-GA201
and 800CW-GA201 were tested in human tumor bearing mice in order to
visualize EGFR tumors expression in vivo.Methods:GA201 was conjugated
with N-Suc-TFP-desferal and labeled with 89Zr or 800CW-NHS. EGFR membrane
binding and internalization of GA201 was determined in vitro using
800CW-GA201 immunofluorescence microscopy and radio-immuno assay (RIA)
with 89Zr-GA201 during 4 h at 37 C on the human cancer cell line A431
(epidermoid; EGFR overexpressing). 89Zr-GA201 and 800CW-GA201 were
validated in human tumor bearing mice for quantification and
visualization of EGFR-driven tumor uptake and biodistribution using micro
positron emission tomography (microPET), near infrared (NIR) imaging and
microscopic evaluation of tumor distribution. Biodistribution of
89Zr-GA201 was performed 6 days post injection (pi) using 10, 25 and 100
g doses (1 MBq) in A431 subcutaneous(s.c.) xenografts. Serial micro
positron emission tomography (microPET) scans were made on day 1, 3 and 6
pi in A431 s.c. xenografts, followed by biodistribution. All mice were
co-injected with an equal dose of 111In-DTPA-ITC-IgG (1 MBq) as aspecific
control. NIR imaging in A431 s.c. xenografts was performed daily up to 6
days pi using 100 g 800CW-GA201, co-injected with 100 g IRDye 680RD-IgG
as aspecific control. At 1, 3 and 6 days pi mice were sacrificed for
microscopic assessment.Results:Immunofluorescence shows membrane binding
and internalization of 800CW-GA201. RIA showed 41.8 3.3 % of 89Zr-GA201
internalized after 4 h incubation. Biodistribution showed tumor uptake of
89Zr-GA201 (specific) vs 111In-IgG (aspecific) of 9.5 4.5 vs 6.4 2.5 (ns,
10 g dose), 13.5 5.5 vs 5.7 1.2 (p Background:GA201 is a novel epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR) monoclonal antibody (mAb), glycoengineered
for enhanced antibody dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC). ADCC
response is influenced by the amount of antibody bound to the membrane.
Therefore we investigated specific accumulation and membrane binding of
GA201 on tumor cells in vitro and in human cancer xenografts in vivo
using Zirconium-89 (89Zr) and IRDye 800CW (800CW ) labeled GA201.
Furthermore, 89Zr-GA201 and 800CW-GA201 were tested in human tumor
bearing mice in order to visualize EGFR tumors expression in
vivo.Methods:GA201 was conjugated with N-Suc-TFP-desferal and labeled
with 89Zr or 800CW-NHS. EGFR membrane binding and internalization of
GA201 was determined in vitro using 800CW-GA201 immunofluorescence
microscopy and radio-immuno assay (RIA) with 89Zr-GA201 during 4 h at 37
C on the human cancer cell line A431 (epidermoid; EGFR overexpressing).
89Zr-GA201 and 800CW-GA201 were validated in human tumor bearing mice for
quantification and visualization of EGFR-driven tumor uptake and
biodistribution using micro positron emission tomography (microPET), near
infrared (NIR) imaging and microscopic evaluation of tumor distribution.
Biodistribution of 89Zr-GA201 was performed 6 days post injection (pi)
using 10, 25 and 100 g doses (1 MBq) in A431 subcutaneous(s.c.)
xenografts. Serial micro positron emission tomography (microPET) scans
were made on day 1, 3 and 6 pi in A431 s.c. xenografts, followed by
biodistribution. All mice were co-injected with an equal dose of
111In-DTPA-ITC-IgG (1 MBq) as aspecific control. NIR imaging in A431 s.c.
xenografts was performed daily up to 6 days pi using 100 g 800CW-GA201,
co-injected with 100 g IRDye 680RD-IgG as aspecific control. At 1, 3 and
6 days pi mice were sacrificed for microscopic
assessment.Results:Immunofluorescence shows membrane binding and
internalization of 800CW-GA201. RIA showed 41.8 3.3 % of 89Zr-GA201
internalized after 4 h incubation. Biodistribution showed tumor uptake of
89Zr-GA201 (specific) vs 111In-IgG (aspecific) of 9.5 4.5 vs 6.4 2.5 (ns,
10 g dose), 13.5 5.5 vs 5.7 1.2 (p < 0.05, 25 g dose) and 10.2 3.5 vs 4.7
1.0 (p Background:GA201 is a novel epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR) monoclonal antibody (mAb), glycoengineered for enhanced antibody
dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC). ADCC response is influenced
by the amount of antibody bound to the membrane. Therefore we
investigated specific accumulation and membrane binding of GA201 on tumor
cells in vitro and in human cancer xenografts in vivo using Zirconium-89
(89Zr) and IRDye 800CW (800CW ) labeled GA201. Furthermore, 89Zr-GA201
and 800CW-GA201 were tested in human tumor bearing mice in order to
visualize EGFR tumors expression in vivo.Methods:GA201 was conjugated
with N-Suc-TFP-desferal and labeled with 89Zr or 800CW-NHS. EGFR membrane
binding and internalization of GA201 was determined in vitro using
800CW-GA201 immunofluorescence microscopy and radio-immuno assay (RIA)
with 89Zr-GA201 during 4 h at 37 C on the human cancer cell line A431
(epidermoid; EGFR overexpressing). 89Zr-GA201 and 800CW-GA201 were
validated in human tumor bearing mice for quantification and
visualization of EGFR-driven tumor uptake and biodistribution using micro
positron emission tomography (microPET), near infrared (NIR) imaging and
microscopic evaluation of tumor distribution. Biodistribution of
89Zr-GA201 was performed 6 days post injection (pi) using 10, 25 and 100
g doses (1 MBq) in A431 subcutaneous(s.c.) xenografts. Serial micro
positron emission tomography (microPET) scans were made on day 1, 3 and 6
pi in A431 s.c. xenografts, followed by biodistribution. All mice were
co-injected with an equal dose of 111In-DTPA-ITC-IgG (1 MBq) as aspecific
control. NIR imaging in A431 s.c. xenografts was performed daily up to 6
days pi using 100 g 800CW-GA201, co-injected with 100 g IRDye 680RD-IgG
as aspecific control. At 1, 3 and 6 days pi mice were sacrificed for
microscopic assessment.Results:Immunofluorescence shows membrane binding
and internalization of 800CW-GA201. RIA showed 41.8 3.3 % of 89Zr-GA201
internalized after 4 h incubation. Biodistribution showed tumor uptake of
89Zr-GA201 (specific) vs 111In-IgG (aspecific) of 9.5 4.5 vs 6.4 2.5 (ns,
10 g dose), 13.5 5.5 vs 5.7 1.2 (p < 0.05, 25 g dose) and 10.2 3.5 vs 4.7
1.0 (p < 0.05, 100 g dose) %ID/g. The optimal dose was selected as 25 g.
Preferential tumor uptake of 89Zr-GA201 was seen on microPET scans.
800CW-GA201 (specific) vs 680RD-IgG (aspecific) NIR Imaging 6 days pi
resulted in a tumor-to-background ratio (TBR) of 2.9 0.3 vs 2.1 0.4 (P
Background:GA201 is a novel epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
monoclonal antibody (mAb), glycoengineered for enhanced antibody
dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC). ADCC response is influenced
by the amount of antibody bound to the membrane. Therefore we
investigated specific accumulation and membrane binding of GA201 on tumor
cells in vitro and in human cancer xenografts in vivo using Zirconium-89
(89Zr) and IRDye 800CW (800CW ) labeled GA201. Furthermore, 89Zr-GA201
and 800CW-GA201 were tested in human tumor bearing mice in order to
visualize EGFR tumors expression in vivo.Methods:GA201 was conjugated
with N-Suc-TFP-desferal and labeled with 89Zr or 800CW-NHS. EGFR membrane
binding and internalization of GA201 was determined in vitro using
800CW-GA201 immunofluorescence microscopy and radio-immuno assay (RIA)
with 89Zr-GA201 during 4 h at 37 C on the human cancer cell line A431
(epidermoid; EGFR overexpressing). 89Zr-GA201 and 800CW-GA201 were
validated in human tumor bearing mice for quantification and
visualization of EGFR-driven tumor uptake and biodistribution using micro
positron emission tomography (microPET), near infrared (NIR) imaging and
microscopic evaluation of tumor distribution. Biodistribution of
89Zr-GA201 was performed 6 days post injection (pi) using 10, 25 and 100
g doses (1 MBq) in A431 subcutaneous(s.c.) xenografts. Serial micro
positron emission tomography (microPET) scans were made on day 1, 3 and 6
pi in A431 s.c. xenografts, followed by biodistribution. All mice were
co-injected with an equal dose of 111In-DTPA-ITC-IgG (1 MBq) as aspecific
control. NIR imaging in A431 s.c. xenografts was performed daily up to 6
days pi using 100 g 800CW-GA201, co-injected with 100 g IRDye 680RD-IgG
as aspecific control. At 1, 3 and 6 days pi mice were sacrificed for
microscopic assessment.Results:Immunofluorescence shows membrane binding
and internalization of 800CW-GA201. RIA showed 41.8 3.3 % of 89Zr-GA201
internalized after 4 h incubation. Biodistribution showed tumor uptake of
89Zr-GA201 (specific) vs 111In-IgG (aspecific) of 9.5 4.5 vs 6.4 2.5 (ns,
10 g dose), 13.5 5.5 vs 5.7 1.2 (p < 0.05, 25 g dose) and 10.2 3.5 vs 4.7
1.0 (p < 0.05, 100 g dose) %ID/g. The optimal dose was selected as 25 g.
Preferential tumor uptake of 89Zr-GA201 was seen on microPET scans.
800CW-GA201 (specific) vs 680RD-IgG (aspecific) NIR Imaging 6 days pi
resulted in a tumor-to-background ratio (TBR) of 2.9 0.3 vs 2.1 0.4 (P <
0.05). 800CW-GA201 was mainly detected on the cell membrane in tumor
tissue slices.Conclusion:GA201 binds to the outer cell membrane and
internalizes in vitro. 89Zr-GA201 effectively accumulates in and
visualizes EGFR expressing tumors, whereas 800CW-GA201 can be used to
visualize EGFR expressing tumors locally.Acknowledgments:Supported by ERC
Advanced Grant, OnQview and Hoffmann-La Roche AG.

