Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: G-protein coupled receptors for cholecystokinin regulate
transactivation of EGF receptors in lung cancer cells


Cholecystokinin (CCK) receptors (CCK-AR and CCK-BR) are G-protein coupled
receptors (GPCR) which are present on lung cancer cells (Yoder and Moody,
Peptides 1987; 8: 103). CCK stimulates the proliferation of NCI-H345
cells, whereas the CCK-B receptor antagonist CI-988 inhibits
proliferation (Moody et al., JPET 2001; 299: 1154). Peptide receptors for
some gastrointestinal hormones/neurotransmitters mediate lung cancer
growth by causing EGFR transactivation, but it is unknown if this occurs
with CCK-BR. CCK-BR mRNA was detected in NCI-H345 and H727 lung cancer
cells. Addition of CCK-8 or gastrin I (100 nM) to NCI-H345 or H727 cells,
which have wild type EGFR, increased EGFR Tyr1068 phosphorylation after 5
min. The ability of CCK-8 to cause EGFR or ERK tyrosine phosphorylation
was blocked by CI-988 (CCK-BR antagonist), gefitinib (EGFR tyrosine
kinase inhibitor), PP2 (Src inhibitor), GM6001 (matrix metalloprotease
inhibitor), tiron (superoxide scavenger) and U-73122 (phospholipase C
inhibitor) but not H89 (protein kinase A inhibitor). U-73122 or CI-988
inhibited the ability of CCK to cause phosphatidylinositol turnover and
elevate cytosolic Ca2+. CI-988 or gefitinib inhibited the growth of
NCI-H345 or H727 cells. CI-988 and gefitinib synergistically inhibited
the growth of lung cancer cells. The results indicate that the CCK-BR
regulates lung cancer proliferation in an EGFR-dependent mechanism
through activation of Src, MMP and reactive oxygen species.

