Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SIRT2 is a modulator of response to targeted therapies through
regulation of MEK kinase activity


Resistance to targeted therapies is a major problem in cancer treatment.
The Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor (EGFR) antibody drugs are effective
in a subset of colorectal cancers, but the molecular mechanisms of
resistance are understood poorly. Genes involved in epigenetic regulation
are frequently deregulated in cancer, raising the possibility that such
genes also contribute to drug resistance. To address this question, we
compiled an shRNA library for chromatin modifying enzymes, chromatin
remodelers, and many other factors associated with chromatin regulation.
Using this library, we performed a loss of function genetic screen in
colon cancer cell lines sensitive to EGFR inhibitors. We identified
SIRT2, a NAD+ dependent deacetylase, as a modulator of the response to
EGFR inhibitors in colon and lung cancer. Mechanistically, loss of SIRT2
expression enhanced MEK acetylation, resulting in increased ERK activity.
Conversely, overexpression of SIRT2 led to reduced phospho ERK and
inhibition of growth. SIRT2 loss also conferred resistance to BRAF and
MEK inhibitors in BRAF mutant melanoma and KRAS mutant colon cancers,
respectively. These results warrant a further investigation into a
potential role of SIRT2 in resistance to drugs that act in the Receptor
Tyrosine Kinase-RAS-RAF-MEK-ERK signaling pathway.

