Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Biomarker search using gene expression databases in a phase III,
controlled clinical trial of postoperative adjuvant chemotherapy for
stage III colon cancer (acts-cc): Correlation between gene expression and
DNA copy number


Background: The ACTS-CC trial is a randomized, controlled phase III study
designed to validate the noninferiority of S-1 to UFT/LV as adjuvant
chemotherapy for stage III colon cancer and rectosigmoid cancer. A
prospective biomarker search was performed as an auxiliary study of the
ACTS-CC trial, using formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) specimens
obtained from 892 patients. The gene expression levels of 5-FU
metabolizing enzymes and folate metabolizing enzymes and alterations of
genome-wide copy numbers in tumor have been reported (2012 and 2013
Annual Meetings of AACR). In the present study, we performed correlation
analyses of gene expression and DNA copy number data to characterize
colorectal cancer and to prepare for a pre-planned analysis of predictive
or prognostic biomarkers.Methods: FFPE specimens for this biomarker study
were obtained after receiving informed consent from 892 (gene expression
analysis) or 795 (DNA copy number analysis) of 1535 patients enrolled
between April 2009 and January 2010. Macro-dissections were performed to
extract total RNA and genomic DNA from 10-m-thick FFPE specimens of colon
cancer. Gene expression levels of 11 enzymes (TS, DPD, TP, OPRT, FPGS,
GGH, DHFR, MTHFR, MTHFD, FOLRA, GART) related to 5-FU and folic acid
metabolism were studied according to the Danenberg Tumor ProfileTM method
(Shirota, Y. JCO 2001). Somatic copy-number alterations in cancer were
analyzed by high-density SNP array analysis (Human 250K StyI array,
Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA). To detect copy-number alterations, the
scanned image CEL files were imported into Partek Genomics Suite v6.6
(Partek Inc., St. Louis, MO, USA). We compared mRNA level, gene copy
number and genome-wide segment copy number across a total of 161
colorectal cancers. Results: Gene expression levels were successfully
estimated in 521-808 samples (84.0-90.0%, median 89.4%). Genome-wide DNA
copy numbers profiles of 161 samples were obtained by GeneChip. Extracted
genomic DNA from 616 of 777 samples that were not subjected to microarray
analysis served as validation samples. Frequencies of copy number gain
(>2.3) ranged from 0% to 57% for 11 genes, whereas frequencies of copy
number loss (Background: The ACTS-CC trial is a randomized, controlled
phase III study designed to validate the noninferiority of S-1 to UFT/LV
as adjuvant chemotherapy for stage III colon cancer and rectosigmoid
cancer. A prospective biomarker search was performed as an auxiliary
study of the ACTS-CC trial, using formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded
(FFPE) specimens obtained from 892 patients. The gene expression levels
of 5-FU metabolizing enzymes and folate metabolizing enzymes and
alterations of genome-wide copy numbers in tumor have been reported (2012
and 2013 Annual Meetings of AACR). In the present study, we performed
correlation analyses of gene expression and DNA copy number data to
characterize colorectal cancer and to prepare for a pre-planned analysis
of predictive or prognostic biomarkers.Methods: FFPE specimens for this
biomarker study were obtained after receiving informed consent from 892
(gene expression analysis) or 795 (DNA copy number analysis) of 1535
patients enrolled between April 2009 and January 2010. Macro-dissections
were performed to extract total RNA and genomic DNA from 10-m-thick FFPE
specimens of colon cancer. Gene expression levels of 11 enzymes (TS, DPD,
TP, OPRT, FPGS, GGH, DHFR, MTHFR, MTHFD, FOLRA, GART) related to 5-FU and
folic acid metabolism were studied according to the Danenberg Tumor
ProfileTM method (Shirota, Y. JCO 2001). Somatic copy-number alterations
in cancer were analyzed by high-density SNP array analysis (Human 250K
StyI array, Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA). To detect copy-number
alterations, the scanned image CEL files were imported into Partek
Genomics Suite v6.6 (Partek Inc., St. Louis, MO, USA). We compared mRNA
level, gene copy number and genome-wide segment copy number across a
total of 161 colorectal cancers. Results: Gene expression levels were
successfully estimated in 521-808 samples (84.0-90.0%, median 89.4%).
Genome-wide DNA copy numbers profiles of 161 samples were obtained by
GeneChip. Extracted genomic DNA from 616 of 777 samples that were not
subjected to microarray analysis served as validation samples.
Frequencies of copy number gain (>2.3) ranged from 0% to 57% for 11
genes, whereas frequencies of copy number loss (<1.7) ranged from 24.8%
to 87%. Among 11 genes, the DNA copy numbers of GART, GGH, MTHFD1, and
FPGS most strongly correlated with mRNA expression: correlation
coefficients of these genes were 0.48, 0.45, 0.42, and 0.41,
respectively. Gene expressions of OPRT or TP were influenced not only by
their own DNA copy numbers but also by other genomic segments of 20q or
18q on genome-wide analysis. Conclusions: Gene expression of folate
metabolizing enzymes positively correlated with DNA copy numbers in
patients with stage III colorectal cancer. Such correlations may merit
further evaluation to identify potential biomarkers.

