Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Lapatinib inhibits CIP2A/PP2A/p-Akt signaling and induces
apoptosis in triple negative breast cancer cells


Background: Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) is a subtype with
aggressive behaviors and poor prognosis. Our previous study has shown
that CIP2A, cancerous inhibitor of PP2A, may be a novel target in breast
cancer cells (Breast Cancer Research 2012). Here, we tested efficacy of
lapatinib, a dual tyrosine kinase inhibitor which interrupts the HER2/neu
and epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) pathways, in a panel of TNBC
cell lines and examined the drug mechanism.Methods: TNBC cell lines
(HCC-1937, MDA-MB-468, MDA-MB-231) were used for in vitro studies.
Apoptosis was examined by both flow cytometry and Western blot. Signal
transduction pathways in cells were assessed by Western Blot.
Quantitative RT-PCR was used for assessing gene transcription. In vivo
efficacy of lapatinib was tested in nude mice with breast cancer
xenografts.Results: Lapatinib showed anti-proliferative effect in HCC
1937, MDA-MB-468, and MDA-MB-231 cell lines. Lapatinib induced
significant apoptosis in dose-dependent and time-dependent manners in the
three tested TNBC cell lines. Importantly, lapatinib inhibited CIP2A and
p-Akt in a dose-dependent manner in all sensitive TNBC cells.
Overexpression of CIP2A protected MDA-MB-468 cells from lapatinib-induced
apoptosis. In addition, lapatinib increased PP2A activity (in relation to
CIP2A inhibition) in sensitive cells. Moreover, lapatinib-induced
apoptosis as well as lapatinib-induced p-Akt downregulation, was
attenuated by PP2A antagonist okadaic acid in sensitive cells. Lapatinib
downregulated CIP2A mRNA. Importantly, lapatinib showed anti-tumor
activity in mice bearing MDA-MB-468 xenograft tumors, and downregulated
CIP2A as well as p-Akt in these xenografted tumors.Conclusions:
Inhibition of CIP2A determines the effects of lapatinib-induced apoptosis
in TNBC cells. Our data suggest that in addition to a dual tyrosine
kinase inhibitor of HER2/neu and EGFR, lapatinib can be a novel CIP2A
inhibitor and that CIP2A can be a potential target for TNBC.(Supported by
Yen Tjing Ling Medical Foundation; NSC 101-2325-B-075-006,
NSC-102-2325-B-075-006 and NSC 100-2325-B-010-007; and V100-D-005-4)

