Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of STAT3 sensitizes neuroblastoma xenografts cells to
Etoposide


Neuroblastoma (NB) is the most common extracranial solid tumor in
childhood, accounting for more than 7% of malignancies in patients
younger than 15 years and causing 10% of all pediatric oncology deaths.
Chemoresistance remains a major obstacle to the successful treatment of
high-risk NB patients. Since STAT3 is a determinant of chemoresistance
and associated with tumor recurrence in several adult tumor model
systems, we investigated the biologic consequences of targeting STAT3 in
neuroblastoma. Using a Tet-inducible STAT3 shRNA in 3 representative NB
cell line models (AS, NGP and IMR32), inhibition of constitutively
activated STAT3 (P-STAT3) in NB cells statistically decreased cell
proliferation, colony formation and motility as defined by a wound
healing assay. NB cell lines with decreased P-STAT3 exhibited increased
sensitivity to cisplatin and etoposide-induced cell death (EC50 in each
cell line decreased 52% to 80% compared with parental cell lines) which
could be partially rescued by caspase inhibitor Z-VAD. In vivo, STAT3
inhibition by Tet-inducible STAT3 shRNA in AS had little effect on tumor
growth and survival in tumor-bearing mice, however the combination of
STAT3 inhibition with etoposide significantly decreased tumor growth and
increased the survival of tumor-bearing mice (P=0.009). Our study
supports the development of strategies targeting STAT3 inhibition in
combination with conventional cytotoxic therapy for patients with
high-risk NB.

