Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A transducer module consisting of Toll-like receptor 9 and
Bruton's tyrosine kinase triggers acute myeloid leukemia blast
proliferation


Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is a genetically heterogeneous disease and
mutations occur in various genes including those encoding for signaling
molecules. A well characterized example is the tyrosine kinase Flt3,
which harbours internal tandem duplications in about one third of AML
patients that render the kinase constitutively active. AML cells often
become addicted to such constitutively activated survival inducing
signaling pathways that can be therapeutically exploited by using small
molecule kinase inhibitors.By screening bone marrow biopsies of AML
patients for kinase expression profiles, we detected Bruton's tyrosine
kinase (Btk) in AML blasts in 26 out of 30 analyzed cases. Btk acts as an
oncogene in chronic lymphocytic leukemia as well as in certain B-cell
lymphoma subtypes. As compared to diseases of lymphoid origin far less is
known about the role of Btk in myeloid neoplasias.Here, we show that Btk
is often constitutively activated in AML and moreover, that genetic as
well as pharmacological inhibition of Btk in AML cell lines as well as
primary patient-derived AML cultures strongly diminishes AML cell growth.
By applying quantitative mass spectrometry, we identified a signalosome
consisting of Btk and Toll-like receptor 9 that is needed to
constitutively transduce proliferation signals through the NFkB pathway.
This newly identified TLR9/Btk signaling axis is of clinical interest as
it is effectively druggable by Btk inhibitors which have so far only
indications for the treatment of lymphoid malignancies.

