Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Retrospective analysis of direct inpatient charges and mortality
of leukemia pediatric patients with Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus
aureus, Candida, or Aspergillus infections in the United States


Objective: The purpose of this study was to assess risk factors that are
associated with inpatient charges and mortality rates with
Methicilin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA), Aspergillus, and
Candida in children with leukemia. We hypothesize that MRSA and
opportunistic fungal infections are associated with higher inpatient
charges and worse outcomes relative to those without infections.
Identifying the risk factors that affect mortality and inpatient charges
of these infections should add to the current knowledge of treating and
preventing these infections in immune compromised patients.Methods:
Retrospective cohort study using the Agency for Healthcare Research
Quality's Healthcare Cost and Utilization Project 2009 KIDS database.
Overall, 33,020 individual hospital visits were analyzed for pediatric
leukemia patients.Results: Predictors of increased mortality were: Age
(OR=1.1, SE=0.02), MRSA (OR=7.2, SE=5.2), Aspergillus (OR=6.3, SE=2.1),
Candida (OR=5.7, SE=1.3), and Deyo-Charlson comorbidity scores (OR=1.7,
SE=0.13). Significant predictors of increased inpatient charges were:
MRSA (OR=2.2, SE=0.35), Aspergillus (OR=2.7, SE=0.25), Candida (OR=2.3,
SE=0.15), Female Sex (OR=1.1, SE=0.04), Deyo-Charlson comorbidity scores
(OR=1.2, SE=0.04), Urban Hospitals (OR=1.9, SE=0.24), and the Southern
Region (OR=0.84, SE=0.2=07). Significant predictors of increased length
of stay were similar to predictors of inpatient charges.Conclusions:
Although uncommon in leukemia cases involving pediatrics or young adults,
risks of higher mortality, length of stay, and inpatient charges were
noted in cases involving MRSA, Aspergillus, and Candida. The burden of
these illnesses requires further attention in order to improve outcomes
among patients with leukemia.

