Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The multitargeted kinase inhibitor dasatinib induces DNA damage,
Hippo pathway engagement and senescence in lung cancer cell lines that
possess kinase-inactivating BRAF mutations


Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is the leading cause of cancer-related
death. Therapies that target specific genetic aberrations are very
effective in a subset on NSCLC. An effective approach for discovering
novel therapeutic targets is to characterize responsive tumors. In this
regard, we discovered a novel, kinase-inactivating BRAF mutation in the
tumor of a patient with a marked and durable response to the
multi-targeted kinase inhibitor dasatinib. Likewise, dasatinib induces
senescence in NSCLC cells with endogenous kinase-inactivating BRAF
mutations (KIBRAF). To identify the mechanism underlying this effect, we
used reverse phase protein array, Western blotting and gene expression
analysis on NSCLC cell lines with KIBRAF or WTBRAF incubated with
dasatinib. We found that ATM, ATR, Rad 51, pH2AX, CDC6, CHEK1 (Chk1),
pLATS and TAZ, were differentially regulated in mutant vs. WT cell lines.
Quantitative real-time PCR analysis revealed that CHEK1, TAZ and TAZ's
downstream targets were decreased following incubation with dasatinib in
KIBRAF cells. Overexpression of CHEK1 or TAZ in KIBRAF NSCLC cells
resulted in dasatinib resistance and decreased dasatinib-induced
senescence. Given the differential effect on CHEK1 and pH2AX, we studied
the effect of dasatinib on DNA damage using the COMET assay and found
that dasatinib induces a significant increase in COMET-positive KIBRAF
NSCLC cells. These data suggest that the inhibition of Chk1 along with
inhibition of Hippo pathway results in the dasatinib sensitivity in NSCLC
with KIBRAF.

