Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genome-wide association study identifies new susceptibility loci
of epithelial ovarian cancer in Han Chinese


Ovarian cancer is the leading cause of cancer death of gynecological
malignancies in the world. To identify risk genetic variants for
epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC), we performed a three-stage genome-wide
association study (GWAS) in Han Chinese women. We scanned 900,015 single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in 1,057 EOC cases and 1,191 controls of
Chinese women. Forty-one promising SNPs were selected for replication in
an independent sample set of 960 EOC cases and 1,799 controls of Chinese
women. We further evaluated four significant loci in an additional
replication population (492 EOC cases and 1,004 controls of Chinese
women) and finally identified two new susceptibility loci at 9q22.33
(rs1413299 in COL15A1, Pmeta = 1.88 10-8) and 10p11.21 (rs1192691 near
ANKRD30A, Pmeta = 2.62 10-8). In addition, two other loci at 12q14.2
(rs11175194 in SRGAP1, Pmeta = 1.14 10-7) and 9q34.2 (rs633862 near ABO
and SURF6, Pmeta = 8.57 10-7) were consistently replicated (POvarian
cancer is the leading cause of cancer death of gynecological malignancies
in the world. To identify risk genetic variants for epithelial ovarian
cancer (EOC), we performed a three-stage genome-wide association study
(GWAS) in Han Chinese women. We scanned 900,015 single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) in 1,057 EOC cases and 1,191 controls of Chinese
women. Forty-one promising SNPs were selected for replication in an
independent sample set of 960 EOC cases and 1,799 controls of Chinese
women. We further evaluated four significant loci in an additional
replication population (492 EOC cases and 1,004 controls of Chinese
women) and finally identified two new susceptibility loci at 9q22.33
(rs1413299 in COL15A1, Pmeta = 1.88 10-8) and 10p11.21 (rs1192691 near
ANKRD30A, Pmeta = 2.62 10-8). In addition, two other loci at 12q14.2
(rs11175194 in SRGAP1, Pmeta = 1.14 10-7) and 9q34.2 (rs633862 near ABO
and SURF6, Pmeta = 8.57 10-7) were consistently replicated (P<0.05 in all
three stages). These results advance our understanding of the genetic
susceptibility to EOC in Han Chinese.

