Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comparison of overall survival of Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia
(CLL) patients referred or not referred to a specialized CLL clinic: A
Canadian population-based study


Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia (CLL) patients in Manitoba are either
referred to the CancerCare Manitoba (CCMB) CLL clinic or receive care
from other hematologists/general practitioners. However, it is unknown
whether referral to the CLL-specialized clinic alters patients'
outcome.All CLL/SLL diagnoses in Manitoba 2007-2011 were obtained from
the Manitoba Cancer Registry to create an immunophenotipically confirmed
population-based cohort. Referred patients to the CLL-specialized clinic
were identified from the CCMB charts. Association between age and
treatment was measured by chi-squared test. Hazard ratio (HR) was
determined using Cox Proportional Hazard Regression model.Of 555 CLL/SLL
diagnoses, 281 (51%) were referred to the CLL-specialized clinic. For
referred and non-referred patients the median age was 68y (39-99) and 72y
(45-96), treated patients were 77 (27%) and 31 (11%), time to first
treatment was 5m (0-5.5y) and 3m (0-2.5y), respectively. M:F was 1.7:1
for both groups. CLL was the primary cause of death in both referred and
non-referred patients (57% and 35%, respectively). Comorbidities such as
cardiovascular diseases had equal contributions to mortality in both
populations (7% and 9.5% in referred and non-referred patients,
respectively). When patients older than 70 years were investigated,
elderly patients that were referred to the clinic were more likely to
receive treatment (p = 0.0002).When adjusted for age (80y HR 10.79, p:
>0.0001; 71-79y HR 5.44, p: 0.0007; 62-70y HR 4.07, p: 0.0051; 2-fold
increased OS compared to non-referred patients (HR 2.39, p: 0.0003) in
the Manitoba population. In the non-referred population, there was a
striking correlation between advancing age and decreasing OS. This
correlation was almost eliminated in the referred population.Thus,
patients seen in a specialized clinic have an improved survival compared
to non-referred patients and this appears to be primarily related to
improved OS in the elderly. Whether this observation is related to
improved therapy/supportive care in the specialized clinic or to referral
bias is under investigation.

