Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: GATA2: Potential role as a prostate cancer metastasis-driving gene


Metastasis is thought to result from changes in the expression of
specific metastasis-driving genes leading to a cascade of activated
downstream genes that set the metastatic process in motion. The present
study was aimed at identifying such metastasis-driving genes in prostate
cancer for potential therapy and identification of primary prostate
cancers that are likely to metastasize. To this end, a differential gene
expression profile was established of metastatic LTL-313H and
non-metastatic LTL-313B prostate cancer tissue xenografts, derived from
one patient's specimen using sub-renal capsule grafting technology. The
profile was then subjected to integrative analysis using the Ingenuity
Upstream Regulator Analysis tool. Six candidate master regulatory genes
were identified, including GATA2, a gene encoding a pioneer factor in
prostate cancer. Elevated GATA2 expression in clinical metastatic
prostate cancer tissues was found to correlate with poor patient
prognosis. Furthermore, GATA2 gene silencing in human prostate cancer
LNCaP cells led to a marked reduction in cell migration, tissue invasion,
focal adhesion disassembly and to a drastic change in cell transcriptome.
Furthermore, 582 genes were identified that are (i) differentially
expressed after GATA2 gene silencing in LNCaP cells and (ii) whose
changes in gene expression significantly correlated with changes in GATA2
expressions in a MSKCC prostate cancer patient cohort. Taken together,
the data suggest that GATA2 could represent a prostate cancer
metastasis-driving gene and that the expression patterns of GATA2 and its
associated-genes could serve as signatures (biomarkers) for poor
prognosis in prostate cancer.

