Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Association of high obesity with PAM50 breast cancer intrinsic
subtypes and gene expression


Background: Obesity is associated with breast cancer (BC) in
postmenopausal women, but its relationship with intrinsic subtype is
unclear. We examined associations of body mass index (BMI) with intrinsic
subtype and expression of selected genes among women with invasive
BC.Methods: A case-cohort of 1,676 BC patients was sampled from two
prospective Kaiser Permanente Northern California cohorts: LACE (AJCC
stage I (1 cm), II, IIIA diagnosed 1997-2000) and Pathways (invasive
stage 0.5 cm diagnosed 2006-2008). The PAM50 quantitative reverse
transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR) assay was used to: a)
classify tumors into intrinsic subtype (Luminal A, Luminal B, Basal-like,
HER2-E, Normal-like) and b) assess gene expression levels for ESR1, PGR,
ERBB2, and a composite of 10 proliferation genes. BMI was from
self-reported weight and height within one year prior to BC diagnosis and
categorized as: normal (Background: Obesity is associated with breast
cancer (BC) in postmenopausal women, but its relationship with intrinsic
subtype is unclear. We examined associations of body mass index (BMI)
with intrinsic subtype and expression of selected genes among women with
invasive BC.Methods: A case-cohort of 1,676 BC patients was sampled from
two prospective Kaiser Permanente Northern California cohorts: LACE (AJCC
stage I (1 cm), II, IIIA diagnosed 1997-2000) and Pathways (invasive
stage 0.5 cm diagnosed 2006-2008). The PAM50 quantitative reverse
transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR) assay was used to: a)
classify tumors into intrinsic subtype (Luminal A, Luminal B, Basal-like,
HER2-E, Normal-like) and b) assess gene expression levels for ESR1, PGR,
ERBB2, and a composite of 10 proliferation genes. BMI was from
self-reported weight and height within one year prior to BC diagnosis and
categorized as: normal (<25 kg/m2), overweight (25-29 kg/m2), obese
(30-34 kg/m2), and highly obese (35 kg/m2). Using multinomial logistic
regression, we evaluated associations of BMI with non-Luminal A intrinsic
subtypes. Linear regression models were used to evaluate associations
with gene expression. Models were stratified by menopausal status and
adjusted for age at diagnosis, race/ethnicity, and stage.Results: The
cohort was comprised of 52% Luminal A, 21% Luminal B, 10% Basal-like, 14%
HER2-E, and 3% Normal-like subtypes. Basal-like was more prevalent in the
highly obese (19%), compared with the other BMI groups (8%-10%), whereas
Luminal A was less common in the highly obese (36%), compared with the
other groups (49%-57%). Greater expression of proliferation genes was
seen with increasing BMI (pBackground: Obesity is associated with breast
cancer (BC) in postmenopausal women, but its relationship with intrinsic
subtype is unclear. We examined associations of body mass index (BMI)
with intrinsic subtype and expression of selected genes among women with
invasive BC.Methods: A case-cohort of 1,676 BC patients was sampled from
two prospective Kaiser Permanente Northern California cohorts: LACE (AJCC
stage I (1 cm), II, IIIA diagnosed 1997-2000) and Pathways (invasive
stage 0.5 cm diagnosed 2006-2008). The PAM50 quantitative reverse
transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR) assay was used to: a)
classify tumors into intrinsic subtype (Luminal A, Luminal B, Basal-like,
HER2-E, Normal-like) and b) assess gene expression levels for ESR1, PGR,
ERBB2, and a composite of 10 proliferation genes. BMI was from
self-reported weight and height within one year prior to BC diagnosis and
categorized as: normal (<25 kg/m2), overweight (25-29 kg/m2), obese
(30-34 kg/m2), and highly obese (35 kg/m2). Using multinomial logistic
regression, we evaluated associations of BMI with non-Luminal A intrinsic
subtypes. Linear regression models were used to evaluate associations
with gene expression. Models were stratified by menopausal status and
adjusted for age at diagnosis, race/ethnicity, and stage.Results: The
cohort was comprised of 52% Luminal A, 21% Luminal B, 10% Basal-like, 14%
HER2-E, and 3% Normal-like subtypes. Basal-like was more prevalent in the
highly obese (19%), compared with the other BMI groups (8%-10%), whereas
Luminal A was less common in the highly obese (36%), compared with the
other groups (49%-57%). Greater expression of proliferation genes was
seen with increasing BMI (p<0.01). In the postmenopausal group, compared
to normal weight women, those who were highly obese had an increased odds
of Basal-like vs. Luminal A tumors (OR=4.14; 95% CI: 2.08, 8.23) and
Luminal B vs. Luminal A tumors (OR=3.17; 95% CI: 1.54, 6.54). However,
these elevated odds were largely non-significant and attenuated among
obese and overweight women. In the postmenopausal group, highly obese
women had tumors with higher expression of proliferation genes compared
with normal weight women (=0.48; 95% CI: 0.16, 0.79), yet obese (=0.14;
95% CI: -0.09, 0.37) and overweight (=0.11; 95% CI: -0.10, 0.33) women
did not. In contrast, being highly obese was associated with lower ESR1
expression (=-0.51; 95% CI: -1.09, 0.06) compared with normal weight,
whereas obese (=0.28; 95% CI: -0.16, 0.71) and overweight (=0.04; 95% CI:
-0.32, 0.39) were not. These reported associations, except for ESR1
expression, were not evident in premenopausal women.Discussion: Among
postmenopausal women with breast cancer, those who were highly obese, but
not mildly obese, had increased odds of Basal-like and Luminal B subtypes
and had tumors with greater expression of proliferation genes. Tumor
subtypes may vary by level of obesity.

