Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effects of benzo(a)pyrene-7,8-dione and cadmium on Akt/protein
kinase B, MAPK and p53-MDM2 activity in primary human bronchial/tracheal
epithelial cells


Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons and heavy metals are widely distributed
in the environment. Among these, benzo(a)pyrene and cadmium are two of
the known human carcinogens. Despite their ubiquitous occurrence little
is known about their specific effects on intracellular signaling events.
Here, we investigate the effects of benzo[a]pyrene-7,8-dione (BaPD), a
genotoxic metabolite of benzo(a)pyrene, and cadmium on human
bronchial/tracheal epithelial cells (hBEC). The mitogen-activated protein
kinases (MAPKs), a family of serine/threonine kinases, transduce signals
that lead to diverse cellular responses such as cell growth,
differentiation, proliferation, apoptosis, and stress responses to
environmental stimuli. Apoptosis is an important protective response to
DNA damage. Caspase-3 and caspase-7 are major executioners of apoptosis,
with caspase-3 being reported as the primary regulator of apoptotic DNA
fragmentation. The p53 tumor suppressor gene is the most important
inducer of apoptosis and plays an important role in DNA repair and cell
cycle arrest. The modulation of p53 tumor suppressor function is a
universal step in the development of human cancer. Akt/protein kinase B
is frequently hyperactivated to ensure cell survival. Here, we propose
that the exposure of hBEC to benzo(a)pyrene-7,8-dione (BaPD) and cadmium
chloride (CdCl2) induce caspase mediated apoptosis, disrupt MAP kinase
signaling and p53 functions, and cause cell cycle arrest.Methods: hBEC
were exposed to a range of BaPD and CdCl2 concentrations (1.25-100 g/ml)
for 6 and 24h. Levels of caspase 3/7 were quantified using caspase 3/7
glo assay. Phosphorylation of P38-MAPK (Thr180/Y182), Erk1/2
(Thr202/Tyr204), p53 (Ser15), Akt (Ser473) and MDM2 (Ser166) were
performed by western blotting. Statistical tests were conducted using
GraphPad Prism software at a significance level of 0.05.Results: We
observed that both CdCl2 and BaPD initiated caspase 3/7 activity at 1h,
but maximum activity was noticed at 4h for CdCl2 and 6h for BaPD followed
by reductions at 24h. A dose dependent phosphorylation of p38MAPK was
noticed for both CdCl2 and BaPD at 6h, followed by a decrease at 24h.
While Erk1/2 and Akt were activated during the first 6h after treatment
with CdCl2, this effect was not observed in cells treated with BaPD. Both
BaPD and CdCl2 induced p53 accumulation and cell cycle arrest at
sub-G0/G1 phase. An apparent inverse correlation was observed between
MDM2 phosphorylation and total p53 levels.Conclusion: Our results suggest
that CdCl2 and BaPD modulate Akt, MAPKs, p53-MDM2 activity and cause cell
cycle arrest in hBEC.

