Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Multi-point targeting of the synthetic lethal interactions between
Myc, ribosome biogenesis and ribosome function cooperates to treat B-cell
lymphoma


We recently demonstrated that transcription of the ribosomal genes (rRNA)
by RNA Polymerase I (Pol I) can be therapeutically targeted with a novel
small molecule, CX-5461, to selectively kill B-lymphoma cells in vivo
while maintaining a viable wild-type B-cell population (Bywater et al
Cancer Cell 2012; Bywater et al Nature Reviews Cancer 2013). The
therapeutic effect was a consequence of nucleolar disruption, activation
of ribosomal protein (Rp)-MDM2-P53 nucleolar stress response and
apoptosis. We have recently launched a first-in-human clinical trial of
CX-5461 in patients with hematological malignancies and although our
pre-clinical data indicate immense potential of Pol I targeting for
cancer therapy, some cancers still develop resistance. We hypothesized
that simultaneously targeting the ribosome at multiple steps will extend
survival. Thus we tested pharmacological inhibitors of PI3K/AKT/mTOR
signalling in combination with CX-5461 as the former pathway is known to
potently regulate both translational activity (Jefferies et al EMBO J,
1997; Pourdehnad M et al PNAS 2013) and ribosome biogenesis (Chan et al
Science Signaling 2011; Devlin et al FEBS J 2013; Wall et al Cancer
Discovery 2013).Using the E-Myc model of B-cell lymphoma we demonstrate
that multiple pharmacological inhibitors of the PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway
suppress transcription of the rRNA genes and induce cell death similar to
CX-5461. Unexpectedly however, PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway blockade is not
associated with nucleolar disruption, or activation of the Rp/MDM2/p53
nucleolar stress pathway. This is because inhibition of PI3K/AKT/mTOR
signalling suppresses both rRNA synthesis and ribosomal protein synthesis
equally and therefore does not increase the pool of free Rps necessary to
suppress MDM2 E3 ligase that regulates p53 stability. Furthermore, we
demonstrate that combined treatment of E-Myc tumor-bearing mice with
CX-5461 and Everolimus delayed relapse compare to single agent and
significantly extended survival of tumor bearing mice.These data
demonstrate that dual targeting of the ribosome by selectively inhibiting
Pol I transcription and inhibition of key signaling molecules regulating
ribosome synthesis and function combine to potently treat MYC driven
tumors. It therefore provides a rationale to combine such drugs in the
clinic for the treatment of MYC driven cancer.

