Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antagonizing pathways leading to differential dynamics in colonic
carcinogenesis in azoxymethane (AOM)-treated Sgo1
(Shugoshin1)-haploinsufficient chromosome instability (CIN) model mice


(a) Colon cancer is the second most lethal cancer and is predicted to
claim 50,830 lives in 2013. Chromosome Instability (CIN) is observed in
80-90% of colon cancers and is thought to contribute to colon cancer
progression and recurrence. For drug development, animal models that
reflect cancer-specific etiology is necessary. However, animal models
focusing on CIN have not been validated for colon cancer development and
for drug testing. In this study, we set out to validate a mitotic
error-induced CIN model mice, Shugoshin1 (Sgo1) haploinsufficient mice,
as a colon cancer study model.(b) We treated control and Sgo1-/+ mice
with colonic carcinogen Azoxymethane (AOM), and tracked colon cancer
development over 12, 24 and 36 weeks after AOM treatments. The three
endpoints provided information regarding the time course for colon cancer
development.(c) Although we predicted an increase in colon tumors in
Sgo1-/+ mice at a later (24 or 36 weeks) endpoint, precancerous lesions
the Aberrant Crypt Foci (ACF) did not develop to larger tumors
straightforwardly. Unexpectedly, the numbers of gross colon tumors showed
no difference (P>0.05). Immunohistological analyses indicated IL6, Bcl2
and p16INK4A were differentially expressed in Sgo1-/+ mice.(d) We propose
that formation of ACF in Sgo1-/+ mice are facilitated by IL6-STAT3-SOCS3
oncogenic pathway and Bcl2-anti-apoptotic pathway, yet further
development of the ACF to tumors are inhibited by p16INK4A tumor
suppressor pathway. Manipulating these pathways would be beneficial for
inhibiting development of colon cancer with CIN. The CIN mice may be
useful for investigating carcinogenesis in earlier stage and tumor
regression in later stage.

