Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: LPA stimulates EMT of ovarian cancer cells via gip2 and gep
oncogenes


Ovarian cancer is currently the most fatal gynecological cancer with a
5-year survival rate of only 45%. Recent studies have identified a
critical role for lysophosphatidic acid (LPA) in the genesis and the
progression of ovarian cancer. In order to identify transcription factors
that are induced by LPA, a commercial pathway reporter array was used.
Hypoxia induced factor 1 (HIF-1) induction was the most prominent
response showing more than 150 fold transcriptional activation compared
with control. LPA treatment under normoxic and hypoxic (1% O2) conditions
increased HIF-1 protein level, which leads to epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) in the ovarian cancer cell line OVCA432. We also found
that stimulation of the OVCA432 cells with LPA at normoxic and hypoxic
conditions led to a significant increase of the mRNA and protein
expression of the EMT transcription factor Twist. Immunofluorescent
imaging confirmed that Twist levels were significantly up-regulated and
that Twist was translocated to the nucleus as early as 4 hours after
stimulation with LPA in both a normoxic and hypoxic environment.
Additionally, immunofluorescent imaging showed that expression of
E-cadherin on the periphery of the cell as well as in the whole cell was
greatly reduced when cells were stimulated with LPA in normoxic and
hypoxic conditions. Finally, our study demonstrated that LPA-mediated
induction of EMT required both gip2 and gep oncogenes. Overall, our study
indicated that the downstream components regulated by oncogenic
G-proteins could potentially be targeted in the future to prevent EMT in
ovarian cancer.

