Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: LncRNA-21a is a potential tumor suppressor in breast cancer


Long non-coding RNA (lncRNA)-21A is a polymerase III driven non-coding
RNA consisting of 324 nucleotides in length. LncRNA-21A was originally
identified through in silico analysis and its expression was then
confirmed in human cell lines. Further study suggested that lncRNA-21A
can control the proliferation of human tumor cell lines, possibly through
regulation of CENP-F expression. However, little is known whether
lncRNA-21A plays a role in breast cancer. In this study, we reported that
lncRNA-21A is downregulated in breast cancer, as detected by RT-PCR
analysis of breast cancer tissue scan, suggesting its possible role as a
tumor suppressor. In consistent with this finding, lncRNA-21A promotes
apoptosis and attenuates cell invasion ability in breast cancer cells.
Western blot revealed that overexpression of lncRNA-21A can reduce the
phosphorylation of Akt in MCF-7 cells. To determine its underlying
mechanism, we performed RNA precipitation assays with the synthetic
biotin labeled lncRNA-21A RNA probe followed by mass spectrometry
analysis, and we identified hnRNP U and EWS as binding partners for
lncRNA-21A. Suppression of EWS by RNAi leads to a reduced level of
phosphorylated Akt, suggesting its role in lncRNA-21A-medited Akt
activity. Of great interest, we found that like microRNAs, lncRNA-21A can
also be secreted through exosomes into conditioned medium. Furthermore,
the secreted lncRNA-21A from normal breast epithelial cells can be
functionally taken up by recipient metastatic breast cancer cells,
suppressing the cell invasion. Together, these results suggest that as a
potential tumor suppressor, lncRNA-21A may be used by the host through
exosome-mediated gene transfer as a defense mechanism against invasive
tumor cells.

