Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Insight of 3D multicellular tumor spheroids for innovative culture
models of potential relevance for the screening of anti-CRC compounds


OBJECTIVE - Multicellular tumor spheroid is a well-known method for 3D
in-vitro culture that better represent in-vivo condition. We exploited
this system to culture human established colorectal cell lines to
investigate how the presence or absence of hypoxic and/or necrotic area
can influence the gene expression profile and the responsiveness to drugs
compared to 2D-culture and in-vivo xenografted cells.METHODS - HT29 cell
line was cultured as MCTS by hanging-drop method. At size-defined
time-point spheroids were analyzed for the presence of hypoxic and
necrotic areas. The expression of a panel of genes related to tumor
progression, metastatic behavior, and drug resistance was evaluated by
real time PCR on MCTS at different growth stages in comparison to
conventional 2D cultures and xenografts generated upon injection of HT29
cells in immunodeficient mice.RESULTS - Based on the absence or presence
of hypoxic and/or necrotic core, we identified three different MCTS
growth stages: stage 1 (MCTS diameter size 500m) identified by the
presence of both hypoxic and necrotic areas. The expression of a panel of
genes, including putative cancer stem cell markers CD133, CD44, CD24 was
found to be upregulated in stage 1 MCTS, as compared to 2D cultures. Most
interestingly a further upregulation of these genes was detected in stage
2 and especially in stage 3. Importantly, expression levels in stage 3
were the most similar to those detected in xenografts.CONCLUSION - Our
results showed that culture of CRC cell lines offer the opportunity to
investigate in standardized condition different MCTS stages possibly
proving an improved model of in-vivo tumor growth. The next generation
sequencing and drug-responsiveness of tumor cells cultured in 2D and 3D
at different spheroid maturation stages is currently being evaluated.

