Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Rational targeting of inhibitor of apoptosis proteins (IAPs) for
effective therapy of colorectal cancer


BackgroundInhibitor of Apoptosis Proteins (IAPs) are anti-apoptotic
proteins which suppress the activation of caspases. IAP proteins have
been shown to be overexpressed in several cancers, including colorectal
cancer and correlate with poor prognosis. SMAC mimetics are a class of
apoptosis inducing drugs that target IAPs by mimicking the N-terminal
IAP-binding motif of SMAC. Colorectal cancer has a pro-inflammatory
microenvironment with high levels of TNF. The aims of this study were to
assess the efficacy of SMAC mimetic treatment in colorectal
cancer.MethodsColorectal cell lines were treated with SMAC mimetics and
cell viability was determined using MTT assays. Apoptosis was assessed by
Western blotting for caspase activation and PARP cleavage and Flow
Cytometry using Annexin V/PI staining. Protein-protein interactions were
assessed using co-immunoprecipitation experiments. The pro-inflammatory
microenvironment was modelled by addition of exogenous TNF and also media
transfer from and direct co-cultures with macrophages (THP-1, monocytic
cell line).ResultsColorectal cell lines were resistant to SMAC mimetic
treatment alone unless co-cultured with TNF. Pretreatment of colorectal
cancer cells with 5-FU and oxaliplatin sensitised the cells to SMAC
mimetic treatment. THP-1 cells were found to secrete soluble TNF and
media transfer experiments and also co-culture with colorectal cell
lines, sensitised the cancer cells to SMAC mimetic mediated cell death.
Cell death under these conditions was found to be dependent on soluble
TNF through the utilisation of neutralising antibodies.ConclusionOur
results to date suggest that the pro-inflammatory microenvironment of
colorectal cancer could be exploited to target overexpressed IAP proteins
leading to cell death.

