Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterizing the role of heterochromatin protein 1 gamma in
normal intestinal homeostasis and tumorigenesis


Background: Epigenetic modifications are being increasingly recognized to
contribute to colorectal cancer formation. Heterochromatin Protein 1
gamma (HP1gamma) has an important role in carcinogenesis and
tumorigenesis by regulating several mechanisms, such as heterochromatin
formation, gene silencing and DNA replication and repair. The aim of this
study was to characterize the role of HP1gamma in normal intestinal
homeostasis, tumorigenesis and cancer progression.Methods: The Cbx3 gene
(encoding the HP1gamma protein) was conditionally deleted in the murine
small intestinal epithelium under normal intestinal homeostasis and in
the context of aberrant Wnt signaling using transgenic mouse models.
Furthermore, the effect of CBX3 depletion on Wnt activation was
investigated using an in vitro system.Results: The level of Cbx3 was
significantly up-regulated in small intestinal cancer tissues of mouse
models, consistent with our preliminary observations that CBX3 was highly
expressed in tumor samples of colorectal cancer patients compared to
matched normal tissues. We found a dramatic increase in the lifespan of
our colorectal cancer mouse model following the loss of Cbx3. Both in
vivo and in vitro studies demonstrated that depletion of Cbx3 leads to
decreased transcription of a subset of Wnt target genes and Wnt signaling
activity, respectively. Furthermore, marked epigenetic alternations were
observed in association patterns of HP1gamma and the heterochromatin
markers (H3K9me2, H3K9me3 and H4K20me3) in wild-type and mouse model of
colorectal cancer.Conclusions: HP1gamma may play direct or indirect roles
in regulating Wnt target gene expression by binding H3K9me3 or H4K20me3
and altering heterochromatin formation. These data provide stepping
stones for further investigation of the mechanistic role of HP1gamma in
normal intestinal homeostasis, tumor initiation and progression.

