Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Renca RCC syngeneic model to evaluate efficacy of novel antisense
oligonucleotides targeting TGF- isoforms


Transforming growth factor beta (TGF- represents a family of cytokines,
which function as the primary mediators for TGF- signaling via TGF-
receptor type II (TIIR) and both non-canonical and canonical downstream
signaling pathways. TGF- is associated with a wide range of biological
processes in oncology, including tumor cell invasion, migration,
angiogenesis, immunosuppression, as well as regulation of tumor stem cell
properties. Hence, optimal preclinical evaluation of efficacy of TGF-
antagonists is challenging. Isarna Therapeutics has designed and
developed selective and potent LNA-modified antisense oligonucleotides
targeting the various TGF- isoforms. In order to adequately evaluate
selected preclinical development candidates, Oncodesign has developed
customized experimental Renca tumor models in syngeneic and/or
immunodeficient mice. The Renca cell line was established from a murine
transplantable renal adenocarcinoma of spontaneous origin, and has been
used under various experimental conditions: (1) subcutaneous tumor model
by inoculating cells into the flanks of the animals; (2) the pulmonary
metastatic tumor model by an intravenous injection of cells into the tail
vein; and (3) the orthotopic tumor model by injecting cells into the
renal subcapsule (and subsequent pulmonary metastasis). Outcome of this
development program and preliminary results for selected TGF- antisense
oligonucleotides will be presented and discussed.

