Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel class of selective estrogen receptors degraders regresses
tumors in pre-clinical models of endocrine-resistant breast cancer


80% of all breast cancers express the estrogen receptor alpha (ER) and
thus are treated with anti-hormonal therapies that directly block ER
function (e.g.Tamoxifen) or hormone synthesis (Aromatase Inhibitors).
While these therapies are initially effective, acquired resistance
invariably emerges and disease progression ensues. Importantly, the
majority of these tumors continue to depend on ER for growth and survival
via both ligand-dependent and ligand-independent pathways. The emerging
evidence that ER can be activated in the absence of estrogens via point
mutations in ER or cellular signaling pathways supports the development
of agents that are not only competitive ER antagonists but also reduce
steady state levels of the receptor and thus limit both ligand dependent
and independent signaling.We have identified two novel series of
non-steroidal ER antagonists, series I exemplified by ARN-810, now in
clinical trials for treatment of endocrine resistant breast cancer, and
series II, both of which induce degradation of ER at picomolar
concentrations resulting in significant reduction in steady state ER
protein levels in breast cancer cell lines. Using peptide-based
conformational profiling, we show that both series induce ER
conformations that are distinct from both fulvestrant and tamoxifen
indicating novel mechanism of action. In vitro, both ligand series are
active on wild-type and the constitutively active ER mutants found in
endocrine resistant breast cancer patients. Importantly, these compounds
yield tumor regression in both tamoxifen-sensitive and -resistant models
of breast cancer in vivo. Based on their unique in vitro profile, and
good pharmacokinetics following oral dosing, these compounds represent a
novel class of Selective Estrogen Receptor Degraders (SERDs) that hold
promise as a next generation therapy for the treatment of ER+ breast
cancer as monotherapy, as well as in combination with agents that target
other pathways involved in both intrinsic and acquired endocrine
resistance.

