Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Design and discovery of PWT33597 (VDC-597), a dual inhibitor of
PI3-kinase alpha and mTOR


Phosphoinositide-3-kinase (PI3K) is an important mediator of tumor cell
growth, survival and proliferation. In particular, PI3K alpha is
important for signaling downstream of receptor tyrosine kinases and is
also frequently amplified or mutationallyactivated in tumors, suggesting
that selective inhibitors of this isoform may have therapeutic utility in
the treatment of cancer. Downstream of PI3K, the mTOR kinase also plays a
critical role in cellular growth and metabolism, and inhibitors of mTOR
have demonstrated clinical benefit in several tumor types. We report here
the design, discovery and characterization of PWT33597 (VDC-597), a dual
inhibitor of PI3K alpha and mTOR, which entered human clinical trials in
2011. Starting with the known pan-Class I PI3-kinase inhibitor ZSTK474,
we identified the methanesulfonylpiperazine analogue,
2-(difluoromethyl)-1-[4-[4-(methylsulfonyl)-1-piperazinyl]-6-(4-morpholinyl
)-1,3,5-triazin-2-yl]-1H-benzimidazole as a promising lead compound with
activity against both PI3K alpha (IC50 = 21 nM) and PI3K delta (IC50 = 18
nM). The addition of a methoxy group at the 4-position of the
benzimidazole group led to a more selective inhibitor of PI3K alpha (IC50
= 6 nM versus 41 nM for PI3K delta), although with reduced solubility. A
search for more soluble analogues identified SN 32976 as a selective
inhibitor of PI3K alpha (IC50 = 28 nM) over both PI3K delta (IC50 = 287
nM) and mTOR (IC50 = 227 nM), with good aqueous solubility. SN 32976
displayed good oral bioavailability and was significantly more active
than ZSTK474 against a U87 MG human tumor xenograft model in mice. A
search for more metabolically stable analogues subsequently identified
PWT33597, which maintained the selectivity for PI3K alpha (IC50 = 26 nM)
over PI3K delta (IC50 = 291 nM) but now also displayed activity against
mTOR in biochemical assays (IC50 = 21 nM). PWT33597 had good
pharmacokinetic properties in multiple preclinical species, was not
extensively metabolized in vivo and showed little potential for
interaction with cytochrome P450 enzymes. Human clinical trials of
PWT33597 were completed in 2012, and it is now undergoing further studies
in veterinary cancers (as VDC-597).

