Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RHOA, RAC1 and PAK1 evaluation in paired stromal fibroblasts of
breast cancer primary and of lymph node metastasis: Importance of these
biomarkers in lymph node invasion


The importance of tumor-stromal cells interactions in breast tumor
progression and invasion has been recognized; therefore modifications in
the stromal fibroblasts can play a significant role in overall cancer
development and progression, the presence of fibroblasts in the breast
cancer microenvironment metastatic lymph nodes was described, suggesting
its role in invasion process. Here after having evaluated the
differential genomic profile of carcinoma associated fibroblasts (CAFs)
when compared to fibroblasts derived from tissues adjacent to
fibroadenomas (NAFs), we depicted focal adhesion as an altered prominent
pathway in microarray studies; we validated these data through confocal
assays. In order to verify possible role of fibroblasts in lymph node
invasion we constructed a tissue microarray consisting of primary BC
samples and corresponding lymph node metastasis and compared the
expression of some adhesion markers in fibroblasts of the two locations.
For the in vitro part of this work stromal fibroblasts were isolated from
four invasive breast carcinoma samples and from four women with benign
breast disorders. RNA was extracted from low-passage cultures and
analyzed with the CodeLink Human Whole Genome cDNA Microarray platform to
assess the genomic differential expression. For evaluation of
Rho-GTPases: RhoA and Rac1 and a Rho-GTPase effector PAK1 (P21-activated
kinase 1), two distinct TMAs were constructed from stromal component of
43 primary tumors and from matched lymph node samples, respectively,
fibroblasts were characterized by the expression of -SMA and vimentin.
Our immunohistochemistry revealed 83,7% RhoA positivity in fibroblasts of
primary tumors and 71,4% of respective metastatic lymph nodes (p=0,271);
71,8% of fibroblasts of primaries presented Rac1 positive staining,
whereas the frequency of positivity in same cells of lymph nodes was
55,3% (p=0,16). With respect to Pak1 50% of patients were positive in the
primary tumor against 73,7% in lymph nodal fibroblasts (p=0,039). Our
data point to the importance of focal adhesion factors in stromal cells.
Since we did not found significant changes between primary and metastatic
lymph nodes, we highlight fibroblasts as an active participant in the
invasion to lymph nodes, supporting the idea that metastatic tumor cells
continue to be dependent of their microenvironment.Supported by Fapesp

