Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of aurora kinase a as an unfavorable prognostic
factor and potential treatment target for metastatic gastrointestinal
stromal tumors


Purpose: Although imatinib mesylate (IM) has revolutionized the
management of gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GISTs), drug resistance
remains a challenge. Previous studies have shown that the expression of
aurora kinase A (AURKA) predicts recurrence in patients with primary
surgically-resected GISTs. The current study aims to evaluate the
significance of AURKA as an unfavorable prognostic marker for advanced
GISTs, and provides evidence that AURKA could be a potential treatment
target of GISTs.Experimental Design: The prognostic significance of
AURKA, along with other clinicopathological factors, was analyzed in a
cohort of 99 IM-treated patients with advanced GISTs using
immunohistochemistry. The potential use of an AURKA inhibitor as
therapeutic agent against GISTs was also tested in GIST cell
lines.Results: Among 99 enrolled patients, poor performance status, large
tumor size, drug response, and AURKA overexpression were independent poor
prognostic factors for progression-free survival (PFS). For overall
survival (OS), only large tumor size and AURKA overexpression were
identified as independent unfavorable factors. In an in vitro study,
MLN8237, an AURKA inhibitor, was demonstrated to inhibit growth of both
IM-sensitive and IM-resistant GIST cells in a concentration-dependent
manner. The inhibitory effect of MLN8237 on GIST cells could be
attributed to the induction of G2/M arrest, apoptosis, and senescence,
possibly through up-regulation of pro-apoptotic proteins.Conclusions: Our
study showed that AURAK is an independent poor prognostic factor for both
PFS and OS in patients with advanced GISTs treated with IM. AURKA
inhibitor could be used as therapeutic agent for both IM-sensitive and
IM-resistant GISTs.

