Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RNF5 mediates ER stress-induced degradation of SLC1A5 in breast
cancer


Tumor cells have an altered metabolism that distinguishes it from their
normal counterpart. Intriguingly, tumor cells show increased use of
glutamine to fuel catabolic processes. Therefore, altered metabolic
tumors have been considered as a good target for anticancer therapy. Ring
finger protein 5 (RNF5) is an ER membrane-associated ubiquitin E3 ligase.
RNF5 expression has been associated with breast cancer progression. We
identified solute carrier family 1 member 5 (SLC1A5) as a possible RNF5
regulated protein using a MS analysis of breast cancer cells. SLC1A5 is a
high affinity L-glutamine transporter, which is highly expressed in
tumors such as breast, liver and lung. RNF5 promotes
ubiquitination-mediated degradation of SLC1A5 in response to
chemotherapeutic drugs known to induce ER stress. RNF5-mediated SLC1A5
instability attenuated mTOR signaling, leading to inhibition of tumor
cell proliferation and promotion of apoptosis/autophagy. The loss of RNF5
in PyMT-MMTV crossed with RNF5 mutant animals developed less
differentiated mammary tumors, which exhibit increased levels of SLC1A5.
TMA analysis of human breast cancer tumors identified a fraction that
exhibited an inverse correlation between RNF5 and SLC1A5 expression.
Notably, reduced expression of SLC1A5 exhibited a strong association with
improved prognosis of breast cancer. Taken together, our observations
identify mechanisms underlying the control of SLC1A5 stability, and the
implications of such regulation for mTOR signaling and breast cancer
survival in response to therapy.

