Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Understanding the roles of Choline kinase- in lipid metabolism of
breast cancer cells


Phosphatidylcholine (PtdCho) has important roles in membrane structure
and cell signaling. Increased levels of choline kinase (Chk)-, the enzyme
that converts choline to phosphocholine (PC) in the PtdCho biosynthesis,
and PC are consistently observed in aggressive cancers including breast
cancer [1-3]. Understanding the roles of Chk- in cancer can result in new
therapies. We previously showed that the Chk- protein, but not PC was
essential for cell survival of two triple negative breast cancer cell
lines, MDA-MB-231 and SUM149. A Chk- inhibitor, V-11-0711 (Vertex
Pharmaceuticals (Europe) Ltd), reduced the function of Chk- by binding to
the active site and inhibiting the catalytic activity but did not affect
Chk- protein levels. Here we have investigated lipid metabolism in these
breast cancer cells and identified PtdCho as an important factor in
breast cancer cell survival.Immunoblot analysis showed a slight increase
of Chk- protein after 48 h treatment with V-11-0711 in MDA-MB-231 cells.
In SUM149 cells, Chk- protein level did not change after V-11-0711
treatment. There was no significant reduction of % cell number in
MDA-MB-231 cells treated with up to 10M V-11-0711 compared with vehicle
control (0.1% DMSO). In SUM149, 0.1M V-11-0711 treatment did not affect %
cell number, but 1M V-11-0711 treatment significantly reduced % cell
number. 1H NMR spectroscopy of the lipid-soluble phase showed that fatty
acid and PtdE levels did not change significantly after V-11-0711
treatment in both cell lines. PtdCho levels decreased slightly in
MDA-MB-231, which was not significant. In SUM149 PtdCho levels decreased
dose dependently and significantly following treatment with 1M V-11-0711.
We previously showed that significant reduction of PC under these
conditions did not markedly affect proliferation of breast cancer cells
if Chk- protein levels were not reduced. Our results here show that cells
can survive if PtdCho levels are not reduced significantly even if PC
levels are low. The two cell lines we used showed different effects
against V-11-0711. MDA-MB-231 cells were more resistant to V-11-0711 and
showed no significant reduction of PtdCho levels. This may be partly due
to different homeostatic regulation of related enzymes such as Chk- in
these cells that increased Chk- protein level slightly after treatment.
Taken together, these data demonstrate that reduction of PC has little
affect on the proliferation of breast cancer cells as long as Chk-
protein levels and PtdCho levels are not reduced. Chk- protein and
PtdCho, but not PC, may be essential in cancer cell proliferation. These
data support the development of strategies that destabilize or
downregulate Chk- protein and PtdCho.[1] Aboagye E et al, Cancer Res, 59,
80 (1999); [2] Ackerstaff E et al, Cancer Res, 61, 3599 (2001); [3]
Ramirez de M et al, Oncogene, 21,4317 (2002). This work was supported by
NIH R01 CA73850 and P50 CA103175.

