Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cellular dormancy in residual disease following oncogene inhibition


Tumor recurrence is the primary cause of cancer-related mortality.
Recurrent tumors arise from residual cancer cells surviving treatment of
the primary tumor. It remains unclear whether residual tumor cells are
quiescent, or whether they are proliferative but tumor recurrence is
limited by a countervailing level of cell death, due to insufficient
vascularization or an inhospitable microenvironment. Using inducible
models for HER2/neu and Wnt1 mammary tumorigenesis, we found that
residual tumor cells surviving oncogene inhibition are quiescent, and
reside in a desmoplastic and well-vascularized microenvironment. We
confirmed these results by performing gene expression analysis on
residual tumor cells, primary tumor cells, recurrent tumor cells, and
stromal cells. Gene ontology analysis identified dramatic downregulation
of gene clusters associated with proliferation in dormant residual tumor
cells compared to all other cell types. Genes we identified as up- or
downregulated in dormant residual disease were identified in other models
of dormancy, suggesting generalizable mechanisms underpinning dormancy in
different contexts. Dormancy-specific changes in additional genes further
suggest a role for both EMT and stem cell-related signaling in dormant
residual disease which survives targeted therapy. Finally, we
demonstrated quiescent residual disease in a xenograft model of breast
cancer treated with clinically relevant targeted therapies. In summation,
these results suggest both that residual disease may exhibit cellular
dormancy following targeted therapy, and that some mechanisms regulating
cellular quiescence may be similar across different contexts.

