Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dissect the clinical utility of TCGA genomic data across tumor
types


A central question for the cancer research community is how to use
genomic and proteomic data to guide cancer care. We investigated two
potential clinical applications of The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) data:
predicting patient prognosis and identifying clinically actionable
alterations. For four TCGA cohorts, we systematically evaluated the power
of molecular data with or without clinical variables in predicting
patient survival; and to facilitate further community efforts, we
established an open-access model evaluation platform. We demonstrate that
incorporating molecular data with clinical variables can improve
predictive power. Interestingly, one model derived from ovarian cancer
can predict outcomes in kidney cancer, suggesting the potential utility
of cross-tumor analysis. Across 12 cancer types, we identified 10,281
somatic alterations in clinically relevant genes in 2,928 out of 3,277
patients (89.4%), revealing recurrent and potentially targetable
alterations not revealed in single-tumor datasets. Our study represents
the first systematic and comprehensive analysis evaluating the prognostic
power of different types of molecular data across multiple cancer types.
In addition, the clinically actionable alterations we identified may
inform novel clinical trial design and treatment choice.

