Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Vascular based strategies for enhancing tumour response to
radiation administered in a stereotactic schedule


Background: Various agents that influence tumour vasculature have been
shown to be capable of enhancing tumour response to radiation
administered as single treatments or in limited fractionated schedules.
The aim of this pre-clinical study was to investigate the potential of
such agents to improve tumour response to a clinically relevant
stereotactic radiation schedule.Material and methods: A C3H mammary
carcinoma grown in the right rear foot of female CDF1 mice was used in
all experiments. Treatments were performed in restrained
non-anaesthetised animals when tumours had reached 200 cubic mm in size.
Tumours were locally irradiated (230 kV x-rays) with 3 x 15 Gy (each
fraction given with an interval of 2-3 days over a one week period). The
vascular based strategies were the drug OXi4503 (10 mg/kg
intraperitoneally injected 1 hour after irradiating) or mild temperature
hyperthermia (MTH; 41.5 degrees C for 60 minutes starting 4 hours after
irradiating). OXi4503 or MTH were given either with each of the 3 x 15 Gy
irradiations or only the final 15 Gy treatment. Three days after the
final irradiation the tumours were subjected to a clamped top-up dose
which involved giving graded radiation doses with the tumour bearing leg
clamped for 5 minutes before and during irradiation. The percentage of
mice in each treatment group showing local tumour control 90 days after
irradiating was recorded and the TCD50 values (radiation dose to control
50% of tumours) estimated from the clamped top-up radiation dose response
curves. A Chi-squared test (pBackground: Various agents that influence
tumour vasculature have been shown to be capable of enhancing tumour
response to radiation administered as single treatments or in limited
fractionated schedules. The aim of this pre-clinical study was to
investigate the potential of such agents to improve tumour response to a
clinically relevant stereotactic radiation schedule.Material and methods:
A C3H mammary carcinoma grown in the right rear foot of female CDF1 mice
was used in all experiments. Treatments were performed in restrained
non-anaesthetised animals when tumours had reached 200 cubic mm in size.
Tumours were locally irradiated (230 kV x-rays) with 3 x 15 Gy (each
fraction given with an interval of 2-3 days over a one week period). The
vascular based strategies were the drug OXi4503 (10 mg/kg
intraperitoneally injected 1 hour after irradiating) or mild temperature
hyperthermia (MTH; 41.5 degrees C for 60 minutes starting 4 hours after
irradiating). OXi4503 or MTH were given either with each of the 3 x 15 Gy
irradiations or only the final 15 Gy treatment. Three days after the
final irradiation the tumours were subjected to a clamped top-up dose
which involved giving graded radiation doses with the tumour bearing leg
clamped for 5 minutes before and during irradiation. The percentage of
mice in each treatment group showing local tumour control 90 days after
irradiating was recorded and the TCD50 values (radiation dose to control
50% of tumours) estimated from the clamped top-up radiation dose response
curves. A Chi-squared test (p<0.05) was used to determine significant
differences between TCD50 values.Results: The clamped top-up TCD50 value
(with 95% confidence intervals) following 3 x 15 Gy was 30 Gy (23-38).
This was significantly reduced to 12 Gy (8-19) if OXi4503 was given with
all three 15 Gy irradiations and to the same 12 Gy (6-25) value when
injected with only the last radiation treatment. Similar effects were
seen with 3 or 1 MTH treatments; the respective TCD50 values being 9 Gy
(5-17) and 10 Gy (7-15). Combining OXi4503 with MTH, but only
administering them with the final 15 Gy irradiation, gave the greatest
enhancement with the TCD50 value being 2 Gy (1-9).Conclusions: Vascular
based strategies are very effective at improving the efficacy of
radiation given in a stereotactic schedule. Surprisingly, this
enhancement was independent of the frequency at which these vascular
modifiers were administered. The greatest effect was observed by
combining complimentary vascular modifying agents.Supported by grants
from the Danish Cancer Society and the Danish Council for Independent
Research: Medical Sciences.

