Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hypoxia-induced miR-372 targets p62 to affect the progression of
oral carcinoma


Oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) is one of the prevalent neoplasms
worldwide. Recent studies have shown that miRNAs were involved in the
pathogenesis of various human malignancies, which function by
post-transcriptional down-regulation of target genes. Also, hypoxia is a
feature of most tumors and plays an important role in regulating tumor
progression and resistance to therapy. In our previous study, we found
that miR-372 was highly expressed in OSCC tissues. Other studies have
shown the oncogenic roles of miR-372 in regulating the cell cycle and
apoptosis in tumor cells by targeting different targets. This study
identified that miR-372 was up-regulated by hypoxia in OSCC cells. The
plasma level of miR-372 in OSCC patients significantly increased with the
advance of OSCC. p62 is a multidomain protein that interacts with key
components to drive diverse impacts on signaling regulation including
detoxification pathway. Using in silico prediction modules, qRT-PCR
analysis, Western blot analysis, reporter assay and exogenous expression
construct, we discovered that p62 was a novel target of miR-372. Ectopic
miR-372 expression and knockdown of p62 both enhanced the migration of
OSCC cells, but it did not affect the proliferation of OSCC cells.
Furthermore, we demonstrated that p62 was able to induce the expression
of phase II enzyme NQO1, which resulted in the attenuation of reactive
oxygen species and migration in OSCC cells. Furthermore, correlation
among the expression of miR-372, p62 and NQO1 was found in OSCC tissues.
This study concludes that hypoxia-induced miR-372 expression modulates
the progression of OSCC by targeting p62, which disrupts the ROS
homeostasis in tumor cells.

