Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Obesity and risk of colorectal cancer: A Mendelian randomization
study


Background: Obesity has been consistently linked to higher risk of
colorectal cancer (CRC) in men, whereas the association is generally
lower in women. Although these findings come from well conducted
epidemiologic studies, it is difficult to exclude all other explanations
for associations in observational studies, such as measurement error and
other forms of bias, reverse causality and confounding. Mendelian
randomization studies, using instrumental variables (IVs), can overcome
some of the inherent limitations of observational studies and provide an
unbiased and unconfounded estimate of the causal association between an
exposure and outcome.Objective: We used genetic variants that are
associated with body mass index (BMI) or waist-hip ratio (WHR) to examine
the causal association between obesity and CRC.Methods: We used
epidemiologic and genetic data from 10 226 CRC cases and 10 286 controls
of European ancestry from the Genetics and Epidemiology of Colorectal
Cancer Consortium (GECCO) or the Colon Cancer Family Registry (CCFR). The
primary Mendelian randomization analysis was performed using a genetic
risk score, derived from 77 established BMI-increasing genetic variants,
as an instrumental variable for higher BMI. We additionally derived a
risk score for WHR using 47 variants for WHR. We compared the IV odds
ratio (OR) with the OR obtained using a traditional multivariable
logistic regression model adjusted for age, sex, smoking status, family
history, aspirin use, and HRT use (women).Results: For men and women
combined, in traditional multivariable analysis, each 5 kg/m2 increase in
BMI was associated with a 24% (95% confidence interval [CI]: 1.17-1.32)
increase in risk of CRC. In the IV analysis, the OR was higher (IV-OR per
5 kg/m2=1.54, 95% CI: 1.15-2.06); however, the two estimates were not
statistically significantly different (Pdifference=0.07). For men, there
was a statistically significant association between BMI and CRC in
traditional multivariable analysis (OR per 5kg/m2=1.33, 95% CI:
1.21-1.46), but no association in the IV analysis (IV-OR per 5
kg/m2=1.13, 95% CI: 0.70-1.83). The estimates however were not
significantly different (Pdifference=0.56). In contrast, for women, the
IV estimate (IV-OR per 5 kg/m2=1.94, 95% CI: 1.33-2.82) was significantly
higher than the estimate from the traditional multivariable analysis (OR
per 5 kg/m2=1.18, 95% CI: 1.11-1.25; Pdifference=0.01). In secondary
analysis, we found a positive association between WHR and CRC in men
(IV-OR per 0.1 unit increase=1.84, 95% CI: 1.02-3.31) but no
statistically significant association in women (IV-OR per 0.1 unit
increase=1.22, 95% CI: 0.75-1.98).Conclusions: Obesity is independently
associated with risk of CRC and may confer greater risk of CRC in women
than previously reported. The mechanisms remain largely unknown; however
these results suggest that visceral abdominal fat may be particularly
important for promoting CRC in men.

