Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovery of AMG 232, an inhibitor of the MDM2-p53 interaction:
From lead to a clinical candidate


The p53 tumor suppressor is controlled by MDM2, which binds p53 and
negatively regulates its transcriptional activity and stability. Many
tumors overproduce MDM2 to impair p53 function. Therefore, restoration of
p53 activity by inhibiting the p53-MDM2 binding represents an attractive
novel approach to cancer therapy. We previously reported the discovery
AM-8553, a potent and selective piperidinone inhibitor of the MDM2-p53
interaction (Rew et al. J. Med. Chem. 2012, 55, 4936). We report here
continued research on the N-alkyl substituent of this series, focused in
particular on a previously underutilized interaction in a shallow cleft
on the MDM2 surface that led to the discovery of variety of sulfonamides
and sulfones which gave rise to substantial improvements in biochemical
and cellular potency. Further work led to discovery of AMG 232, which is
currently being evaluated in human clinical trials for the treatment of
cancer. AMG 232 is an extremely potent MDM2 inhibitor (SPR KD = 0.045 nM,
SJSA-1 EdU IC50 = 9.1 nM), with remarkable pharmacokinetic properties.
The compound interacts specifically with the p53-binding pocket of MDM2
and releases the p53 protein from negative control. Treatment of cancer
cells expressing wild-type p53 with AMG 232, stabilizes p53 and activates
the p53 pathway, leading to cell cycle arrest and apoptosis. The compound
showed excellent efficacy in a number of mouse tumor xenograft models and
was well tolerated in preclinical toxicology studies at therapeutically
relevant dosages.

