Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mechanism of action of Ibrutinib in mantle cell lymphoma


Mantle cell lymphoma (MCL), accounting for about 5-6% of non-Hodgkin
lymphoma (NHL), is one of the lymphomas with very poor prognosis (median
survival 3-5years).Ibrutinib, a newly approved Bruton's tyrosine kinase
(BTK) inhibitor, showed remarkable clinical benefits in MCL. However, the
mechanism underlining the clinical activity is not well understood. In
this study, we identified MCL cell lines that were sensitive and
resistant to ibrutinib. We showed that ibrutinib induced G1 cell cycle
arrest in sensitive cell lines at 3-day treatment and eventually led to
cell death after prolonged compound incubation. Physiologically relevant
low concentration of ibrutinib inhibited phosphorylation of IKB(S32),
p65/RelA(S536) and nuclear translocation of NF-B components. Inhibition
of NF-B signaling decreased IRF4 and c-Myc level, which was accompanied
with decrease of CDK6 and phosphor-RB (S807/811) level, meanwhile
elevated p27/Kip1. Activation of NF-B pathway with PKC agonist rescued
ibrutinib induced G1 cell cycle arrest and eventually attenuated the cell
killing effect. IRF4 phospho-RB and CDK6 level were also rescued by PKC
agonist. BTK/PKC/NF-B pathway and PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway showed
compensatory effect in MCL cell lines. Activating NF-B pathway with PKC
agonist compensated the cell killing effects of idelalisib or everolimus.
Additionally, we showed that ibrutinib synergized with idelalisib or
everolimus on cell killing of MCL cell lines, suggesting combination
therapeutic strategies for MCL.

