Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of mir-21 and Let-7a in HMGA2 associated colorectal
cancer pathogenesis with different APC/k-ras status


Colorectal cancer (CRC) is one of the leading causes of cancer death in
both the Western world and Taiwan. Although CRC can be inherited, most
CRCs are sporadic. The possible causes of colorectal cancer include a
high fat diet, low fiber intake, obesity and sedentary lifestyle. A
relatively limited number of oncogenes and tumor-suppressor genes_most
prominently the APC, KRAS, and p53 genes are mutated in a sizeable
fraction of CRCs. Even though numerous genes have been reported to be
associated with tumorigenesis in CRC, only a few of them have been
validated and used as biomarkers for predicting metastasis and treatment
response in clinical applications. Our published paper showed that
overexpression of high-mobility group AT-hook 2 (HMGA2) is associated
with metastasis and unequivocally occurred in parallel with reduced
survival rates of patients with CRC, and thus HMGA2 may potentially serve
as a biomarker for predicting aggressive CRC with poor survivability and
as an indicator of better response to radiotherapy. The Let-7a miRNA is a
tumor suppressing miRNA that targets oncogenes, including HMGA2. Previous
reports show that Let-7a miRNA may regulate miR-21 expression in
cholesteatoma. The benign nature of cholesteatoma may be due to a balance
between Let-7a and miR-21. The miR-21 has oncogene-like activity and is
highly expressed in several types of cancers. Our present study also
found that patients with high miR-21 expression had poor survival. In
this study, we demonstrated the association of mir-21 and Let-7a in HMGA2
regulation in the pathogenesis of colorectal cancer and how the
expression of these genes is associated with the clinical outcomes and
radiotherapy response of CRC patients.

