Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phosphatidylserine-specific phospholipase A1 (PSPLA1) expression
in colorectal cancer correlates with tumor invasion and hematogenous
metastasis


Background: Although the physiological functions of various
phospholipases, such as lysophospholipase D (Autotaxin), has been
extensively investigated, those of Phosphatidylserine-Specific
Phospholipase A1 (PSPLA1), a kind of phospholipase involved in allergic
reactions, has not been fully elucidated yet. Here, we evaluated the role
of PSPLA1 in oncogenesis and tumor metastasis of colorectal
cancer.Materials and Methods: Surgical specimens of 85 consecutive
patients with colorectal cancer who received surgery in our department
between January 2005 and December 2005 were immunostained with a
monoclonal antibody to PSPLA1. The correlation between PSPLA1 expression
and the clinico-pathological variables was analyzed by univariate and
multivariate analyses. The impact of PSPLA1 expression on the prognosis
of the patients was assessed, in comparison with the other
clinico-pathological variables.Results: PSPLA1 expression significantly
correlated with tumor size, tumor depth and hematogenous metastasis in
univariate analysis, and tumor depth and hematogenous metastasis were
independent variables in multivariate analysis. The disease-free survival
(DFS) of patients with high-PSPLA1 expression was significantly shorter
compared to those with low expression. The presence of hematogenous
metastasis, however, was the only independent factor associated with poor
DFS.Conclusion: PSPLA1 expression in colorectal cancer was associated
with tumor invasion and metastasis.

