Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Activity of the PARP inhibitor olaparib in ATM-deficient gastric
cancer: from preclinical models to the clinic


Olaparib is an oral inhibitor of the Poly-(ADP-ribose)-polymerases
(PARP-1, -2 and -3), and has demonstrated clinical activity in trials of
patients with BRCA-deficient tumors. The BRCA1 and BRCA2 proteins are
both important for the repair of DNA double strand breaks (DSBs) by
homologous recombination repair (HRR) and sensitivity to olaparib has
further been shown preclinically to extend to other DNA DSB repair factor
deficiencies, including those in the ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM)
protein.We have demonstrated that a high proportion of gastric cancer
(GC) cell lines (50%) are responsive (IC50 Olaparib is an oral inhibitor
of the Poly-(ADP-ribose)-polymerases (PARP-1, -2 and -3), and has
demonstrated clinical activity in trials of patients with BRCA-deficient
tumors. The BRCA1 and BRCA2 proteins are both important for the repair of
DNA double strand breaks (DSBs) by homologous recombination repair (HRR)
and sensitivity to olaparib has further been shown preclinically to
extend to other DNA DSB repair factor deficiencies, including those in
the ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) protein.We have demonstrated that
a high proportion of gastric cancer (GC) cell lines (50%) are responsive
(IC50 <500 nM) to single agent olaparib and that characterization of
their DNA repair status reveals that, as in breast and ovarian cancer,
HRR deficiencies (HRD) can account at least in part for this. However,
unlike breast and ovarian cancer cell lines, there is no strong
correlation with platinum sensitivity, suggesting alternative drivers of
response in the GC panel to HRD. Here, we demonstrate that low levels of
ATM protein expression correlate with sensitivity of GC cell lines to
olaparib, and moreover can be observed in approximately 15-20% of
clinical gastric cancer samples when evaluated using ATM
immunohistochemistry (IHC).Based on these data, a Phase II GC trial has
been carried out that enriches for patients with tumors having low or
undetectable ATM IHC scores (H-score equivalent less than or equal to
10). Data from this clinical trial confirm activity (overall survival
[OS] benefit HR=0.56, 95% CI: 0.35-0.87; P=0.010) in the overall
population, which includes ATM tumor positive patients, and importantly,
a substantially better OS benefit in the ATM-negative population
(HR=0.35, 95% CI: 0.17-0.71; P=0.003). Together, these data provide an
important example of a PARP inhibitor demonstrating both preclinical and
clinical activity in a well defined but non-BRCA DNA repair deficient
background.

