Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Noninvasive analysis of acquired resistance to EGFR-TKI


BACKGROUNDEpidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) T790M mutation is
associated with EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKIs) resistance in
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). However, the tissue availability
limits the genotyping of EGFR T790M mutation in the clinical setting. The
aims of this study are to develop a blood-based, non-invasive approach to
detect the EGFRT790M mutation in advanced NSCLC patients. Additionally,
plasma concentrations of HGF, MET and amphiregulin which are also
resistant factors of EGFR-TKIsEXPERIMENTAL DESIGNPlasma sample were
collected from NSCLC patients with activating EGFR mutations, who had
resistant to EGFR-TKIs treatment. EGFR T790M mutations were detected
using droplet-digital PCR (ddPCR) system from plasma DNA at resistance to
EGFR-TKI. Plasma concentrations of HGF, soluble MET (sMET) and
amphiregulin were determined using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. The
relationships between the EGFR T790M mutation status and the plasma
concentrations, progression-free survival (PFS) overall survival (OS)
were analyzed.RESULTSTwenty-one (35%) of the patients had EGFR T790M
mutation in plasma DNA using ddPCR system. The levels amphiregulin tended
to be increased at the resistance in the patients with EGFR T790M
mutation. The PFS and OS of the patients with EGFR T790M mutation was
significantly shorter than that of the patients without EGFR T790M
mutation (P =0.03 and 0.04). The PFS of the patients who had high
amphiregulin at the resistance and the OS of the patients who had high
amphiregulin at pre-treatment were shorter than these of t low
amphiregulin (P = 0.05 and 0.05)CONCLUSIONSThe ddPCR system is a
detectable method for determining the plasma EGFR T790M mutation status.
The combination of EGFR T790M mutation status by ddPCR and the
amphiregulin levels may aid in monitoring drug resistance and in
predicting a prognosis.

