Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cadmium induces cytotoxicity in human bronchial epithelial cell in
a p53-independent, nuclear factor NF-kappaB-dependent manner


Cadmium (Cd) and Cd compounds are widely-distributed in the environment
and well known carcinogens. Here, we report that in CdCl2-exposed human
bronchial epithelial cells (BEAS-2B), the level of p53 is dramatically
decreased in a time- and dose-dependent manner, suggesting that the
observed Cd-induced cytotoxicity is not likely due to the pro-apoptotic
function of p53. Therefore, this prompted us to further study the
responsive pro-apoptotic factors by proteomic approaches. Interestingly,
we identified that high levels (20 or 30 M) of Cd can up-regulate the
protein levels of eukaryotic translation initiation factor 5A-1
(eIF-5A-1) and redox-sensitive transcription factor NF-B p65 in a time-
and dose-dependent manner. Moreover, there is an enhanced NF-B nuclear
translocation as well as chromatin-binding in Cd-treated BEAS-2B cells.
We also show that small interfering RNA-specific knockdown of eIF-5A-1 in
Cd-exposed cells attenuated the Cd cytotoxicity, indicating the potential
role of eIF-5A-1 in Cd cytotoxicity. As eIF-5A-1 is reported to be
related with cell apoptosis but little is known about its transcriptional
control, we hypothesize that NF-B might likely modulate eIF-5A-1 gene
expression. Notably, by bioinformatic analysis, several potential NF-B
binding sites on the upstream promoter region of eIF-5A-1 gene can be
found. Subsequent chromatin immunoprecipitation assay revealed that
indeed there is enhanced NF-B binding on eIF-5A-1 promoter region of
Cd-treated cells. Taken together, our findings report for the first time
a regulatory mechanism for the pro-apoptotic protein eIF-5A-1 in which
its level is controlled in an NF-B-dependent manner.

