Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Disparities in colon cancer survival according to payer status:
Findings from national cancer data bank


BACKGROUND:The objective of the current study was to examine the impact
of payer status on relative survival outcomes in colon cancer
patients.METHODS:A population-based analysis of National Cancer Data Bank
(NCDB) records for invasive colon cancer was done using data from
patients diagnosed between 1998 and 2006 and followed up to 2011. The
cohort consisted of colon cancer patients of analytic stage I to stage
IV. Information regarding age, race, gender, stage of cancer at the time
of diagnosis, year of diagnosis, insurance status, income, treatment
received and diagnostic facility, and type of treating facility were
included in this study. Age, sex, race, calendar year specific US life
table between 1970 and 2007 were used to compute expected survival.
Multivariate Poisson modeling was used to estimate relative survival for
payer status adjusting for other factors.RESULTS:436,235 colon cancer
patients who met the inclusion criteria were included in the study. The
mean age at diagnosis was 68.9 years. The stage distribution among the
variables listed above is statistically significant. The 5-year
cumulative relative survivals are 0.76, 0.84, 0.93, 1.74 and 1.10 for
uninsured, Medicaid, private insurance, Medicare, and unknown payer
status respectively. In multivariate analysis of relative survival,
adjusting for other factors, the excess hazard ratios (EHR) were 1.74,
1.14, 0.89 and 1.29 for uninsured, Medicaid, Medicare, and unknown payer
status versus private insurance respectively (PBACKGROUND:The objective
of the current study was to examine the impact of payer status on
relative survival outcomes in colon cancer patients.METHODS:A
population-based analysis of National Cancer Data Bank (NCDB) records for
invasive colon cancer was done using data from patients diagnosed between
1998 and 2006 and followed up to 2011. The cohort consisted of colon
cancer patients of analytic stage I to stage IV. Information regarding
age, race, gender, stage of cancer at the time of diagnosis, year of
diagnosis, insurance status, income, treatment received and diagnostic
facility, and type of treating facility were included in this study. Age,
sex, race, calendar year specific US life table between 1970 and 2007
were used to compute expected survival. Multivariate Poisson modeling was
used to estimate relative survival for payer status adjusting for other
factors.RESULTS:436,235 colon cancer patients who met the inclusion
criteria were included in the study. The mean age at diagnosis was 68.9
years. The stage distribution among the variables listed above is
statistically significant. The 5-year cumulative relative survivals are
0.76, 0.84, 0.93, 1.74 and 1.10 for uninsured, Medicaid, private
insurance, Medicare, and unknown payer status respectively. In
multivariate analysis of relative survival, adjusting for other factors,
the excess hazard ratios (EHR) were 1.74, 1.14, 0.89 and 1.29 for
uninsured, Medicaid, Medicare, and unknown payer status versus private
insurance respectively (P<0.05). The EHRs for blacks and other races
versus whites were 1.07 and 1.53 respectively (pBACKGROUND:The objective
of the current study was to examine the impact of payer status on
relative survival outcomes in colon cancer patients.METHODS:A
population-based analysis of National Cancer Data Bank (NCDB) records for
invasive colon cancer was done using data from patients diagnosed between
1998 and 2006 and followed up to 2011. The cohort consisted of colon
cancer patients of analytic stage I to stage IV. Information regarding
age, race, gender, stage of cancer at the time of diagnosis, year of
diagnosis, insurance status, income, treatment received and diagnostic
facility, and type of treating facility were included in this study. Age,
sex, race, calendar year specific US life table between 1970 and 2007
were used to compute expected survival. Multivariate Poisson modeling was
used to estimate relative survival for payer status adjusting for other
factors.RESULTS:436,235 colon cancer patients who met the inclusion
criteria were included in the study. The mean age at diagnosis was 68.9
years. The stage distribution among the variables listed above is
statistically significant. The 5-year cumulative relative survivals are
0.76, 0.84, 0.93, 1.74 and 1.10 for uninsured, Medicaid, private
insurance, Medicare, and unknown payer status respectively. In
multivariate analysis of relative survival, adjusting for other factors,
the excess hazard ratios (EHR) were 1.74, 1.14, 0.89 and 1.29 for
uninsured, Medicaid, Medicare, and unknown payer status versus private
insurance respectively (P<0.05). The EHRs for blacks and other races
versus whites were 1.07 and 1.53 respectively (p<0.05). The EHRs for
follow-up year of 2, 3, 4, 5 versus year 1 were 1.17, 0.21, 0.18, and
0.54 respectively (P BACKGROUND:The objective of the current study was to
examine the impact of payer status on relative survival outcomes in colon
cancer patients.METHODS:A population-based analysis of National Cancer
Data Bank (NCDB) records for invasive colon cancer was done using data
from patients diagnosed between 1998 and 2006 and followed up to 2011.
The cohort consisted of colon cancer patients of analytic stage I to
stage IV. Information regarding age, race, gender, stage of cancer at the
time of diagnosis, year of diagnosis, insurance status, income, treatment
received and diagnostic facility, and type of treating facility were
included in this study. Age, sex, race, calendar year specific US life
table between 1970 and 2007 were used to compute expected survival.
Multivariate Poisson modeling was used to estimate relative survival for
payer status adjusting for other factors.RESULTS:436,235 colon cancer
patients who met the inclusion criteria were included in the study. The
mean age at diagnosis was 68.9 years. The stage distribution among the
variables listed above is statistically significant. The 5-year
cumulative relative survivals are 0.76, 0.84, 0.93, 1.74 and 1.10 for
uninsured, Medicaid, private insurance, Medicare, and unknown payer
status respectively. In multivariate analysis of relative survival,
adjusting for other factors, the excess hazard ratios (EHR) were 1.74,
1.14, 0.89 and 1.29 for uninsured, Medicaid, Medicare, and unknown payer
status versus private insurance respectively (P<0.05). The EHRs for
blacks and other races versus whites were 1.07 and 1.53 respectively
(p<0.05). The EHRs for follow-up year of 2, 3, 4, 5 versus year 1 were
1.17, 0.21, 0.18, and 0.54 respectively (P <0.05). Compared to
academic/research program facility type, the EHRs for community cancer
program, comprehensive community cancer program, and other specified
types of cancer programs were 1.02,0.77 and 25.9 respectively (P
BACKGROUND:The objective of the current study was to examine the impact
of payer status on relative survival outcomes in colon cancer
patients.METHODS:A population-based analysis of National Cancer Data Bank
(NCDB) records for invasive colon cancer was done using data from
patients diagnosed between 1998 and 2006 and followed up to 2011. The
cohort consisted of colon cancer patients of analytic stage I to stage
IV. Information regarding age, race, gender, stage of cancer at the time
of diagnosis, year of diagnosis, insurance status, income, treatment
received and diagnostic facility, and type of treating facility were
included in this study. Age, sex, race, calendar year specific US life
table between 1970 and 2007 were used to compute expected survival.
Multivariate Poisson modeling was used to estimate relative survival for
payer status adjusting for other factors.RESULTS:436,235 colon cancer
patients who met the inclusion criteria were included in the study. The
mean age at diagnosis was 68.9 years. The stage distribution among the
variables listed above is statistically significant. The 5-year
cumulative relative survivals are 0.76, 0.84, 0.93, 1.74 and 1.10 for
uninsured, Medicaid, private insurance, Medicare, and unknown payer
status respectively. In multivariate analysis of relative survival,
adjusting for other factors, the excess hazard ratios (EHR) were 1.74,
1.14, 0.89 and 1.29 for uninsured, Medicaid, Medicare, and unknown payer
status versus private insurance respectively (P<0.05). The EHRs for
blacks and other races versus whites were 1.07 and 1.53 respectively
(p<0.05). The EHRs for follow-up year of 2, 3, 4, 5 versus year 1 were
1.17, 0.21, 0.18, and 0.54 respectively (P <0.05). Compared to
academic/research program facility type, the EHRs for community cancer
program, comprehensive community cancer program, and other specified
types of cancer programs were 1.02,0.77 and 25.9 respectively (P <0.05).
The relative survival rates for stage II, III, IV versus stage I were
0.95, 0.82, and 0.70 respectively (PBACKGROUND:The objective of the
current study was to examine the impact of payer status on relative
survival outcomes in colon cancer patients.METHODS:A population-based
analysis of National Cancer Data Bank (NCDB) records for invasive colon
cancer was done using data from patients diagnosed between 1998 and 2006
and followed up to 2011. The cohort consisted of colon cancer patients of
analytic stage I to stage IV. Information regarding age, race, gender,
stage of cancer at the time of diagnosis, year of diagnosis, insurance
status, income, treatment received and diagnostic facility, and type of
treating facility were included in this study. Age, sex, race, calendar
year specific US life table between 1970 and 2007 were used to compute
expected survival. Multivariate Poisson modeling was used to estimate
relative survival for payer status adjusting for other
factors.RESULTS:436,235 colon cancer patients who met the inclusion
criteria were included in the study. The mean age at diagnosis was 68.9
years. The stage distribution among the variables listed above is
statistically significant. The 5-year cumulative relative survivals are
0.76, 0.84, 0.93, 1.74 and 1.10 for uninsured, Medicaid, private
insurance, Medicare, and unknown payer status respectively. In
multivariate analysis of relative survival, adjusting for other factors,
the excess hazard ratios (EHR) were 1.74, 1.14, 0.89 and 1.29 for
uninsured, Medicaid, Medicare, and unknown payer status versus private
insurance respectively (P<0.05). The EHRs for blacks and other races
versus whites were 1.07 and 1.53 respectively (p<0.05). The EHRs for
follow-up year of 2, 3, 4, 5 versus year 1 were 1.17, 0.21, 0.18, and
0.54 respectively (P <0.05). Compared to academic/research program
facility type, the EHRs for community cancer program, comprehensive
community cancer program, and other specified types of cancer programs
were 1.02,0.77 and 25.9 respectively (P <0.05). The relative survival
rates for stage II, III, IV versus stage I were 0.95, 0.82, and 0.70
respectively (P<0.05). Diagnosis before or after 2002 and the type of
treatment facility lead to a marginal difference in the relative
survival.CONCLUSIONS:Our study shows the impact of payer status on the
relative survival of patients with colon cancer and demonstrated
increased mortality for uninsured patients in contrast to survival
benefit for patients with Medicare and private insurance.

