Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The development of therapeutic inhibitors of the KDM5 histone
demethylases


Histone methyl marks contribute to the regulation of chromatin
architecture and of DNA-based processes such as replication, repair and
gene transcription. There is increasing evidence for alterations in
histone methylation patterns in cancer and other human diseases.
Importantly, aberrant methylation can contribute to deregulated gene
expression and thereby to excessive proliferation, survival and
metastasis of cancer cells.Histone methyl transferases and demethylases
establish a dynamic equilibrium of histone modifications, and the
expression and activity of several members of these enzyme families are
deregulated in human cancer. The jumonji C-domain histone H3K4me3/2
demethylase KDM5B/PLU1/JARID1B as well as its close relative
KDM5A/JARID1A are potential oncogenes. Both proteins are overexpressed in
human tumors and the gene encoding KDM5B is e.g. amplified in invasive
breast cancer cells. Results obtained with RNA interference and targeted
deletions in mice have provided additional support for a critical role of
KDM5 demethylases in cancer cells.EpiTherapeutics is developing novel
cancer drugs targeting the enzymatic activity of histone demethylases.
Here we present our recent progress in obtaining selective, potent, and
cell-permeable inhibitors of the KDM5 demethylases. Biochemical and
cellular activities, pharmacological data, and in vivo antitumor activity
will be discussed.

