Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exosomes derived from mesenchymal stem cells suppress angiogenesis
by down-regulating VEGF expression in breast cancer cells


Exosomes are small membrane vesicles released by a variety of cell types.
Exosomes contain genetic materials, such as mRNAs and microRNAs (miRNAs),
implying that they may play a pivotal role in cell-to-cell communication.
Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs), which potentially differentiate into
multiple cell types, can migrate to the tumor sites and have been
reported to exert complex effects on tumor progression. To elucidate the
role of MSCs within the tumor microenvironment, previous studies have
suggested various mechanisms such as immune modulation and secreted
factors of MSCs. However, the paracrine effects of MSC-derived exosomes
on the tumor microenvironment remain to be explored. The hypothesis of
this study was that MSC-derived exosomes might reprogram tumor behavior
by transferring their molecular contents. To test this hypothesis,
exosomes from MSCs were isolated and characterized. MSC-derived exosomes
exhibited different protein and RNA profiles compared with their donor
cells and these vesicles could be internalized by breast cancer cells.
The results demonstrated that MSC-derived exosomes significantly
down-regulated the expression of vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF) in tumor cells, which lead to inhibition of angiogenesis in vitro
and in vivo. Additionally, miR-16, a miRNA known to target VEGF, was
enriched in MSC-derived exosomes and it was partially responsible for the
anti-angiogenic effect of MSC-derived exosomes. The collective results
suggest that MSC-derived exosomes may serve as a significant mediator of
cell-to-cell communication within the tumor microenvironment and suppress
angiogenesis by transferring anti-angiogenic molecules.

