Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Predictive factors of anthracycline or taxan based chemotherapy:
Analysis from a randomized phase II trial comparing docetaxel plus
cyclophosphamide with epirubicin plus cyclophosphamide followed by
docetaxel as neoadjuvant chemotherapy for hormone receptor-negative
breast cancer


Background: Taxane-based regimens have been developed and used widely to
treat breast cancer. It has therefore become important to identify
subgroups of patients in which anthracyclines are indispensable. Thus, we
had conducted a randomized phase II NAC study to compare a taxane with
and without an anthracycline in hormone receptor (HR) negative
breast-cancer subtypes and examined predictive factors for each
regimen.Aim: To examine the predictive factors for six cycles of
docetaxel and cyclophosphamide (TC6) compared with 5-fluorouracil,
epirubicin, and cyclophosphamide followed by docetaxel (FEC-D).Methods:
Eligibility criteria were operable HR-negative breast cancer, age younger
than 75 years and ECOG PS0-1. According to HER2 status, 103 patients were
randomly assigned to TC (75/600 mg/m2) every 3 weeks 6 or FEC
(500/100/500 mg/m2) every 3 weeks 3 followed by D (100 mg/m2) every 3
weeks 3. Triple-negative (TN) breast cancer was subdivided by cytokeratin
5/6 and epidermal growth factor receptor into basal- and non-basal
subtypes. The association of grade 3 pathological complete response (pCR)
was examined with Ki-67, p53, aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH) 1 and
topoisomerase 2A (TOP2A) by immunohistochemistry and TOP2A by
fluorescence in situ hybridization) for each regimen.Results:
Ninety-seven of 103 patients were analyzed successfully (50 for FEC-D and
47 for TC6). The pCR rate tended to be higher in FEC-D-treated patients
compared with TC6-treated patients (pCR: 36.0 vs. 25.5%, n.s.). FEC-D
treatment was significantly more effective than TC6 in basal-type
(p=0.033) but not in non-basal and HER2 subtypes. ALDH1 was associated
with resistance to both regimens (FEC-D: p=0.047, TC6:
p=0.085)Conclusions: TC6 was not more effective than FEC-D in HR negative
breast cancer. TC6 was significantly less active than FEC-D in basal
subtype, and equivalent to FEC-D in HER2 and non-basal subtypes. ALDH1
could provide a marker for novel strategies such as stem cell-based
therapies for breast cancer. The association of BRCAness with pCR is
being investigated and will be presented at the meeting.

