Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Quantifying vascular biomarkers with contrast-enhanced molecular
ultrasound imaging


Introduction: Molecular imaging has the potential to dramatically impact
all facets of patient care, from early disease detection to treatment
monitoring and follow-up, as a tool for the characterization and
measurement of key biomolecules in vivo. In ultrasound, functional and
molecular imaging is possible through the use of microbubbles (MB), a
contrast agent that can be transformed into targeting agents that bind to
vascular biomarkers of interest. In this study, we evaluate whether
targeted ultrasound contrast enhanced imaging can provide a quantitative
measure of surface receptor expression in endothelial cell
populations.Methods: The biomarker endoglin (Eng) was selected for
targeting due to its involvement in the processes of development,
vascular regulation and disease, including tumor angiogenesis. Endoglin
wildtype (Eng+/+), heterozygous null (Eng+/-) and null (Eng-/-) mouse
embryonic endothelial cells were cultured on glass slides and mounted in
parallel plate flow chambers. MicroMarker microbubbles (endoglin
targeted: MBE, isotype control: MBC or untargeted: MBU at 1x107 MB/mL in
PBS) were perfused across the cells at 4 mL/min, corresponding to a shear
stress of 2 dynes/cm2. Cell and bubble numbers were determined from
bright field and phase images (Nikon, 40x), with adhesion quantified as
the number of MB/cell. Binding of microbubbles was also assessed in
late-gestational stage, isolated, living embryos (Eng+/+, Eng+/-). The
highly regulated and controlled activities of normal angiogenesis and
vasculogenesis in the mouse embryo make it an excellent surrogate for
complex and heterogeneous tumor microenvironments, while genetic
manipulation enables the generation of a variety of useful transgenic
models. Nonlinear contrast-specific ultrasound imaging, performed at
21MHz with a Vevo-2100 scanner (VisualSonics Inc.), was used to collect
contrast mean power ratios (CMPR, representative measure of MB binding)
within the brains of each embryo 4 minutes after a bolus injection of
MBE, MBC or MBU.Results: Expression levels in cells and embryos were
significantly different across genotypes, with endoglin reduced by half
in Eng+/- and totally absent in Eng-/- samples. In vitro, microbubble
adhesion was found to vary significantly (pIntroduction: Molecular
imaging has the potential to dramatically impact all facets of patient
care, from early disease detection to treatment monitoring and follow-up,
as a tool for the characterization and measurement of key biomolecules in
vivo. In ultrasound, functional and molecular imaging is possible through
the use of microbubbles (MB), a contrast agent that can be transformed
into targeting agents that bind to vascular biomarkers of interest. In
this study, we evaluate whether targeted ultrasound contrast enhanced
imaging can provide a quantitative measure of surface receptor expression
in endothelial cell populations.Methods: The biomarker endoglin (Eng) was
selected for targeting due to its involvement in the processes of
development, vascular regulation and disease, including tumor
angiogenesis. Endoglin wildtype (Eng+/+), heterozygous null (Eng+/-) and
null (Eng-/-) mouse embryonic endothelial cells were cultured on glass
slides and mounted in parallel plate flow chambers. MicroMarker
microbubbles (endoglin targeted: MBE, isotype control: MBC or untargeted:
MBU at 1x107 MB/mL in PBS) were perfused across the cells at 4 mL/min,
corresponding to a shear stress of 2 dynes/cm2. Cell and bubble numbers
were determined from bright field and phase images (Nikon, 40x), with
adhesion quantified as the number of MB/cell. Binding of microbubbles was
also assessed in late-gestational stage, isolated, living embryos
(Eng+/+, Eng+/-). The highly regulated and controlled activities of
normal angiogenesis and vasculogenesis in the mouse embryo make it an
excellent surrogate for complex and heterogeneous tumor
microenvironments, while genetic manipulation enables the generation of a
variety of useful transgenic models. Nonlinear contrast-specific
ultrasound imaging, performed at 21MHz with a Vevo-2100 scanner
(VisualSonics Inc.), was used to collect contrast mean power ratios
(CMPR, representative measure of MB binding) within the brains of each
embryo 4 minutes after a bolus injection of MBE, MBC or MBU.Results:
Expression levels in cells and embryos were significantly different
across genotypes, with endoglin reduced by half in Eng+/- and totally
absent in Eng-/- samples. In vitro, microbubble adhesion was found to
vary significantly (p<0.05) across genotype populations, with minimal
attachment of MBC and MBU compared to MBE. Endoglin-targeted binding was
approximately two-fold higher (median = 0.96 MBE/cell) in Eng+/+ compared
to Eng+/- (median = 0.42 MBE/cell) cells. In embryo studies, we observed
minimal signal from MBC and MBU, while MBE binding was found to be
significantly higher in Eng+/+ embryos (CMPR+/+ = 9.71 + 0.66, 95% CI)
compared to Eng+/- embryos (CMPR+/- = 5.51 + 0.64, 95% CI). In
conclusion, these results suggest that molecular ultrasound is capable of
reliably differentiating between molecular genotypes and relating
receptor densities to quantifiable molecular ultrasound levels.

