Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Iqgap2 is downregulated in colorectal cancer (crc) and involved in
cellular migration


IQGAP2 is a member of three IQGAP scaffolding proteins and involved in
cytoskeletal reorganization and adhesion of cells. It has been described
as a putative tumor suppressor affecting tumor development and
progression. Our aim in this study was to analyze the role of IQGAP2 in
colorectal cancer (CRC).By means of microarray analyses we previously
found IQGAP2 expression to be downregulated in CRC and suppressed by
Maspin. Here we measured IQGAP2 expression by RT-qPCR in 17 MSI-H (high
microsatellite instability) and 19 MSS (microsatellite stable) CRCs as
well as in three MSI and three MSS CRC cell lines, respectively.
Furthermore, we analyzed the methylation status of the IQGAP2 promoter
and studied the subcellular localization of the IQGAP2 protein. Using an
in vitro system for overexpressing and silencing IQGAP2 we investigated
the effect of IQGAP2 on cellular migration applying Real-Time Cell
Analyzer (RTCA) technology.Stably overexpressing Maspin transfected CRC
cell line SW480 showed IQGAP2 loss on mRNA and protein level. IQGAP2
expression was reduced in 86% (30/36) of tumors compared to normal tissue
(pIQGAP2 is a member of three IQGAP scaffolding proteins and involved in
cytoskeletal reorganization and adhesion of cells. It has been described
as a putative tumor suppressor affecting tumor development and
progression. Our aim in this study was to analyze the role of IQGAP2 in
colorectal cancer (CRC).By means of microarray analyses we previously
found IQGAP2 expression to be downregulated in CRC and suppressed by
Maspin. Here we measured IQGAP2 expression by RT-qPCR in 17 MSI-H (high
microsatellite instability) and 19 MSS (microsatellite stable) CRCs as
well as in three MSI and three MSS CRC cell lines, respectively.
Furthermore, we analyzed the methylation status of the IQGAP2 promoter
and studied the subcellular localization of the IQGAP2 protein. Using an
in vitro system for overexpressing and silencing IQGAP2 we investigated
the effect of IQGAP2 on cellular migration applying Real-Time Cell
Analyzer (RTCA) technology.Stably overexpressing Maspin transfected CRC
cell line SW480 showed IQGAP2 loss on mRNA and protein level. IQGAP2
expression was reduced in 86% (30/36) of tumors compared to normal tissue
(p<0.001) and lower in MSS tumors compared to MSI tumors (p=0.039).
Consistently, IQGAP2 mRNA levels were also downregulated in CRC cell
lines. None of the cell lines, tumor or normal tissue samples analyzed
showed IQGAP2 promoter methylation. Immunofluorescence analysis of CRC
cells revealed IQGAP2 distribution in plasma membranes and more intensely
in areas of cell-cell contacts. Migration assays showed increased
cellular migration after IQGAP2 knockdown and impaired migration after
overexpression of IQGAP2.We provide evidence that IQGAP2 expression is
regulated by Maspin and may have an important effect on cellular
migration in colorectal cancer.

