Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genomic index is a strong predictor of metastatic outcome in
intermediate gastrointestinal stromal tumors and an inclusion criteria
for imatinib adjuvant therapy


Gastrointestinal stroma tumors (GISTs) harboring a cKIT / PDGFRA
activating mutation in 90% of cases benefit from the Imatinib mesylate
(Glivec) targeted therapy. Patients eligibility to imatinib adjuvant
therapy is based, in Europe, on histological grading of tumor
aggressiveness and no standard is currently available for tumor
classified as intermediate risk (40% of patients).We recently validated
that genomic index (GI), a measure of the number and type of genomic copy
number alterations, constitutes a strong predictor of clinical outcome in
GIST, making it a possible prognostic factor for the intermediate GIST
subgroup. To definitively clarify whether this genomic grading system
would permit to categorize intermediate-risk patients into good and poor
prognosis, we selected a cohort of 82 intermediate patients based on the
Armed Forces Institute of Pathology (AFIP) classification and performed
genomic profiling from formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) samples
using a microarray-based comparative genomic hybridization (array CGH)
approach.Data revealed that even if studied samples generally harbored a
combination of the typical genetic aberrations found in GIST, i.e. 1p,
14q, 22q deletions and frequently lost CDKN2A locus on chromosome 9, they
profoundly differed from each other on the total number of genomic
changes and GI value, ranging, in the whole series, from 0 to 37 and 0 to
115.6, respectively. More interestingly, Kaplan-Meier analyses of
metastatic-free survival unveiled that stratification of the tumors by
the GI value at a cutoff of 10 (GI110) separated the good (GI1) from the
poor (GI2) prognosis patients (p10) separated the good (GI1) from the
poor (GI2) prognosis patients (p<10-3), undoubtedly proven that
metastatic-risk in GIST intermediate patients is strongly associated with
high GI values and genome complexity. In conclusion, GI is validated here
as a robust marker to predict the clinical outcome of patients diagnosed
with GIST and classified as intermediate by the current histologic method
for risk assessment. Applicable in numerous Pathology Laboratories
already using aCGH with FFPE samples for routine diagnostic tests, this
assay currently stands as the best tool to determine which intermediate
GIST-patients are likely to benefit from imatinib therapy and constitutes
as such a novel advance in the clinical management of GISTs.

