Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RIP1-mediated sensitivity to SN38 induced by TNF in colon
adenocarcinoma cell lines


BACKGROUND: TNF is a dual role cytokine involved both in cell death and
survival that is expressed in the tumor microenvironment. However, little
is known about the molecular events that mark the biological outcomes of
such opposite biological events. Recently, the protein kinase RIP1 has
been identified as a new intermediate involved in the responses activated
after DNA damage induction.PURPOSE: In this study we investigated how TNF
modulates the sensitivity to SN38 in colon cancer cell lines. We focused
further on HT29- and HCT116-derived cell lines in which RIP1 or RIP3
proteins expression were stably downregulated.RESULTS: We found that TNF
increases cellular sensitivity to different chemotherapeutic drugs under
both normoxic and hypoxic conditions over a panel of different colon
adenocarcinoma cell lines. Combinations with SN38 were highly
synergistic. In HT29 and HCT116 cell lines (TNF resistant and TNF
sensitive respectively), we analyzed this interaction by studying P-H2-AX
induction, cell proliferation (clonogenic assays and BrdU incorporation)
and cell cycle distribution. To study the role of RIP1 and RIP3 on the
biological responses triggered by SN38, HT29- and HCT116-derived cell
lines expressing low levels of RIP1 and RIP3 were analyzed. While
knockdown of RIP3 had no effect on SN38 cytotoxicity, RIP1 down
regulation produced a 2.5-fold increased resistance to SN38 under hypoxic
conditions. This change in SN38 sensitivity also correlated with a
reduction in the levels of P-H2-AX in the presence of TNF, suggesting
dependence of DNA damage induction by SN38 on RIP1.CONCLUSIONS: These
data suggest that RIP1 may be a key intermediate in determining cell
death following SN38 treatment. Additional studies in tumor samples are
in progress.

