Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Autophagy is required for focal adhesion turnover, tumor cell
motility and metastasis


Macro-autophagy is a catabolic process important for degradation of
damaged organelles, protein aggregates and intracellular recycling of
proteins and lipids. Autophagy is thought to suppress tumor initiation by
promoting genome stability and limiting necrosis and inflammation, but
conversely is utilized by tumor cells to survive nutrient stress,
hypoxia, and cytotoxic therapies, promoting growth of established tumors.
However, whether autophagy impacts the metastatic process is not well
understood.To examine the role of autophagy in breast cancer metastasis,
essential autophagy genes atg5 and atg7 were stably knocked down the
aggressive and metastatic 4T1 mouse mammary tumor cell line using shRNA.
Inhibition of autophagy did not reduce cell proliferation or survival
under stress in vitro or primary tumor growth in vivo, but markedly
reduced metastasis to the lungs and liver. Surprisingly, this was not due
reduced survival in the circulation or at the secondary site, as atg5 and
atg7-deficient cells were able to colonize the lungs to the same extent
as control cells when injected into the circulation in a tail vein
experimental metastasis assay, suggesting that inhibition of autophagy
impairs escape from the primary tumor in this model.Indeed, inhibition of
autophagy prevented cell spreading, migration and invasion through
collagen in transwell assays of 4T1 cells, MDA-MB-231 human breast cancer
cells, and B16.F10 melanoma cells. This was associated with failure of
RhoA-mediated protrusion, impaired focal adhesion disassembly, and
accumulation of the key focal adhesion component paxillin. We show that
paxillin is degraded by autophagy, and siRNA-mediated knockdown of
paxillin in autophagy-deficient cells rescued their spreading and
motility, suggesting that impaired focal adhesion disassembly and
migration in autophagy-deficient cells was the result of failure of
autophagic degradation of paxillin. Intriguingly, active RhoA is
localized at autophagosomes, and inhibition of RhoA activity inhibits not
only cellular protrusion but also autophagic flux in metastatic cells,
suggesting that RhoA may be involved in upstream regulation of autophagic
degradation of paxillin to promote focal adhesion disassembly.In sum, we
have identified a novel and unexpected function for autophagy in focal
adhesion disassembly and tumor cell motility that is required for
metastasis in vivo. This suggests that while autophagy may also promote
the survival of disseminating tumor cells during metastasis, autophagy is
in fact required for escape from the primary tumor.

