Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of differentially expressed genes and somatic
mutations in esophageal adenocarinoma cancer patients


High throughput sequencing technologies are currently revolutionizing the
cancer research area with rapid improvements in sequencing capacity and
time consumption. As a result the most time consuming step has moved from
being the sequencing process itself to being the bioinformatic data
analysis.RNA sequencing (RNA-Seq) is used in an increasing number of
transcriptomic studies. The great advantage of using RNA-Seq is its
ability to precisely quantify transcript levels and identify novel
transcripts, isoforms, and splice junctions, while further providing
information of the mutational landscape down to single base resolution.
To ease the hurdles associated with RNA-Seq data analysis there is an
increasing demand for tools that are specifically tailored to RNA-Seq
data.Here we describe how the newly developed CLC Cancer Research
Workbench can be used to analyze and visualize RNA-Seq data with
ready-to-use workflows that automatically map, quantify, and annotate
transcriptomes. We identify differentially expressed genes and
transcripts in Illumina HiSeq transcriptomic data from matched tumor and
normal samples from four esophageal adenocarinoma cancer patients, and
compare the mutational patterns in the samples with the expression values
of the corresponding genes.Results are visualized in a track based genome
browser view, which provides the means for quick and easy navigation as
well as allowing the user to simultaneously view and annotate multiple
samples and different data types (e.g. genes, transcript expression
levels, and detected variants).

