Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Crosstalk initiated by endothelial cells endows head and neck
cancer stem cells with an invasive phenotype


Head and neck squamous cell carcinomas contain a sub-population of
uniquely tumorigenic cells (named cancer stem cells) that are thought to
participate in metastatic dissemination. We have previously shown that
head and neck cancer stem cells (HNCSC) can be identified as
ALDHhighCD44high and reside within the perivascular niche, in close
proximity to blood vessels. Therefore, it is possible that a crosstalk
between HNCSC and endothelial cells plays a functional role in metastatic
spread. Here, we hypothesize that factors secreted by endothelial cells
enhance motility and invasiveness of HNCSC. We observed that endothelial
cell-derived factors induced epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) of
unsorted head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) cells, as
demonstrated by decreased expression of epithelial markers (e.g.
Desmoplakin), enhanced expression mesenchymal cell markers (e.g.
Vimentin) and transcriptional regulators of EMT (e.g. Snail), and
enhanced migration of these cells. Further, endothelial cell-secreted
factors enhanced the orosphere forming-ability of HNSCC plated in
ultra-low attachment plates, enhanced the fraction of ALDHhighCD44high
cells, and expression of Bmi-1. Similarly, HNCSC had increased number of
orospheres and enhanced motility in the presence of endothelial
cell-derived factors. Taken together, these data indicate that a
crosstalk initiated by endothelial cells endows head and neck cancer
cells with high motility and a stem-like phenotype, and suggest that
endothelial cells may play an active role in the initial steps of
metastatic spread. Support for this work was provided by grant
R01-DE21139 from the NIH/NIDCR, and grant P50-CA97248 (University of
Michigan Head Neck SPORE) from the NIH/NCI.

