Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of oral carcinoma miRNA signature and control OSCC
tumorigenesis through Wnt/-catenin signaling


Aberrant microRNAs (miRNAs) expressions are often happened in cancer. In
order to identify miRNAs altered in oral carcinogenesis, we investigated
miRNAs and cDNA expression profiles in 40 pair-wise oral squamous cell
carcinoma (OSCC) specimens. Eighty-four miRNAs were differentially
expressed in the OSCC specimens compared to the matched tissue.
Interestingly, 19 down-regulated miRNAs are clustered in DLK-1/Meg3
imprinted domain of chromosome 14q32.2 region. Loss of 14q32.2-miRNAs
expression also raised the 14q32.2-miRNA targets expression in OSCC. We
identified one target protein, Wnt-7b, was highly expressed in OSCC and
regulated by miR-329 and -410. Wnt-7b increased the Wnt/-catenin
signaling activity and promoted OSCC tumor progression. Furthermore we
also identify the regulation mechanism that down-regulated 14q32.2
miRNAs. Hyper-methylation in meg-3 differential methylated region (DMR)
was confirmed by bisulfate sequencing. The hyper-methylation of meg-3 DMR
was also induced by betel nuts extract exposure. In summary, we
identified the expression signature of aberrant miRNAs in OSCC and
provide a novel molecular insight how betel quid contribute to oral
carcinogenesis through the epigenetic silencing of tumor suppressor
miRNAs targeting the Wnt/-catenin signaling pathway.Note: This abstract
was not presented at the meeting.

