Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HCA519/TPX2: a potential T-cell tumor-associated antigen for human
hepatocellular carcinoma


Immunotherapy for human hepatocellular cancer (HCC) is slowly making
progress towards treating these fatal cancers. The identification of new
antigens can improve this approach. We describe a possible new antigen,
Hepatocellular Carcinoma-associated Antigen-519/ Targeting Protein for
Xklp-2 [HCA519/Tpx2], for HCC that might be beneficial for T cell
specific HCC immunotherapy. HCC was studied for the expression for 15
tumor-associated antigens considered useful for immunotherapy within
three HCC cell lines (HepG2, Hep3B and PLC/PRF/5), lymphocytes,
non-cancerous livers and clinical HCC. The expression of Tumor Antigenic
Precursor Proteins (TAPPs) mRNA was first screened by quantitative real
time PCR. Four antigens (alpha fetoprotein, aspartyl/asparaginyl
-hydroxylase, glypican-3 and HCA519/Tpx2) proved to be the best expressed
TAPPs within the HCC specimens by molecular analyses. HCA519/Tpx2 was
detected by intracellular cell flow cytometry within HCC cell lines by
using a specific antibody towards this TAPP. This antibody also detected
the protein within primary HCCs. We synthesized two HCA519/Tpx2 peptides
(HCA519464-472 and HCA519351-359) which can bind to HLA-A*0201. Dendritic
cells pulsed with these peptides stimulated cytolytic T lymphocytes
(CTLs). These killer T cells lysed HLA-A*0201+ T2 cells exogenously
loaded with the correct specific peptide. The CTLs killed HepG2 (HLA-A2+
and HCA519+), but not the Hep3B and PLC/PRF/5 cell lines, which are
HCA519+ but HLA-A2-negative. In silico analysis reveals that HCA519/Tpx2
has the inherent ability to bind to a very wide variety of HLA antigens.
HCA519/Tpx2 is a viable immunotarget that should be further investigated.

