Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Immune-tolerant elastin-like polypeptide (iTEP) particles promote
peptide vaccine presentation by dendritic cells


T cell epitope-based peptide vaccines are promising experimental
therapeutics for cancer and infection due to their unparalleled
specificity, yet their presentations by dendritic cells (DCs) are
hindered by their intrinsic limitations: short half-lives, non-typical
antigen sizes for DCs to take in and process, lack of intrinsic
adjuvants, and poor cross-presentation efficiencies. We aimed to boost
the presentation by fabricating an immune-tolerant elastin-like
polypeptide (iTEP) nanoparticle (NP) to resolve the limitations. The
properties of iTEPs that render them as ideal vaccine carriers include
their non-immunogenic and non-inflammatory natures, their simple
purification method through phase transition, and their ability to fuse
the vaccines and peptide adjuvants together.We first fused a cytotoxic T
lymphocyte (CTL) epitope vaccine, SIINFEKL, from ovalbumin to an iTEP
amphiphilie and found the fusion is able to self-assemble into NPs. The
NP was turned into a size similar to virus-like particles by modulating
the iTEP sequences. The NP enhanced the presentation of SIINFEKL with H2b
on the surface of DC2.4 cells in comparison with free peptide, ovalbumin,
or soluble vaccine-iTEP fusions. Interestingly, another iTEP-vaccine
fusion which forms larger, micrometer-sized aggregates led to even
stronger vaccine presentation, an observation still under investigation.
Moreover, our preliminary data showed that co-delivering the vaccines and
an adjuvant peptide from flagellin by iTEPs also augmented the peptide
vaccine presentation. Lastly, the iTEP NPs that deliver tumor antigen
Kras- and hTERT-derived peptide vaccines were also generated and are
currently under study with a hope to improve the efficacy of these
vaccines.In summary, iTEP particles enhanced peptide vaccine
presentation. The underlying mechanisms of the enhancing effects of iTEP
particles on the vaccine presentation will be studied next.Supported by
the University of Utah Start-up fund and the University of Utah SEED grant

