Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Rab11 regulates E-cadherin expression and induces cell
transformation in colorectal carcinoma


In the process of epithelial mesenchymal transition EMT, the disassembly
of junctional adhesion complexes such as E-cadherin is a remarkable sign
during changes in cell morphology and polarity. However, E-cadherin
expression is dynamic, and is regulated by the cellular endocytic system;
it is also involved in cell signaling mechanisms. In this study, we
investigated the role of E-cadherin in colorectal tumors and the
relationship with recycling endosome protein Rab11 in colon cell
transformation. For tissue screening, the expressions of E-cadherin and
Rab11 in colorectal tumors were identified by immunohistochemistry in 113
patients with colorectal carcinoma. For the in vitro cell experiment,
GFP-tagged Rab11 plasmid was transfected into HT29 colon cells,
E-cadherin expression and cell transformation were monitored by Western
blot and confocal microscopy. In immunohistochemistry, the mean score of
E-cadherin in tumor and normal tissues was 1.41 0.06 and 1.08 0.06 (p In
the process of epithelial mesenchymal transition EMT, the disassembly of
junctional adhesion complexes such as E-cadherin is a remarkable sign
during changes in cell morphology and polarity. However, E-cadherin
expression is dynamic, and is regulated by the cellular endocytic system;
it is also involved in cell signaling mechanisms. In this study, we
investigated the role of E-cadherin in colorectal tumors and the
relationship with recycling endosome protein Rab11 in colon cell
transformation. For tissue screening, the expressions of E-cadherin and
Rab11 in colorectal tumors were identified by immunohistochemistry in 113
patients with colorectal carcinoma. For the in vitro cell experiment,
GFP-tagged Rab11 plasmid was transfected into HT29 colon cells,
E-cadherin expression and cell transformation were monitored by Western
blot and confocal microscopy. In immunohistochemistry, the mean score of
E-cadherin in tumor and normal tissues was 1.41 0.06 and 1.08 0.06 (p <
0.05). The mean score of Rab11 in tumor and normal tissues was 0.51 0.05
and 0.18 0.02 (p In the process of epithelial mesenchymal transition EMT,
the disassembly of junctional adhesion complexes such as E-cadherin is a
remarkable sign during changes in cell morphology and polarity. However,
E-cadherin expression is dynamic, and is regulated by the cellular
endocytic system; it is also involved in cell signaling mechanisms. In
this study, we investigated the role of E-cadherin in colorectal tumors
and the relationship with recycling endosome protein Rab11 in colon cell
transformation. For tissue screening, the expressions of E-cadherin and
Rab11 in colorectal tumors were identified by immunohistochemistry in 113
patients with colorectal carcinoma. For the in vitro cell experiment,
GFP-tagged Rab11 plasmid was transfected into HT29 colon cells,
E-cadherin expression and cell transformation were monitored by Western
blot and confocal microscopy. In immunohistochemistry, the mean score of
E-cadherin in tumor and normal tissues was 1.41 0.06 and 1.08 0.06 (p <
0.05). The mean score of Rab11 in tumor and normal tissues was 0.51 0.05
and 0.18 0.02 (p < 0.05). Synchronous overexpression of E-cadherin and
Rab11 was noted in 74 patients (66.5%) with colorectal carcinoma. When
GFP-tagged Rab11 plasmid was overexpressed in cultured colon cell line
HT-29, the E-cadherin expression was up-regulated, and a fibroblast-like
cell polarity was induced, which resulted in cell transformation. This
study demonstrated the importance of the overexpression of Rab11 and
E-cadherin in colorectal cancer. The results indicated that Rab11
together with E-cadherin might be potential markers for colorectal cancer
progression and treatment.

