Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: New insights in the induction of cell death by the imidazolium
based compound YM155


The inhibitor of apoptosis protein (IAP) Survivin is robustly
over-expressed in a variety of cancers including prostate carcinomas, and
has been shown to play pivotal roles in cancer progression and resistance
to chemotherapy. The imidazolium based small molecule YM155, which was
first identified as a robust suppressor of the Survivin promoter of PC-3
prostate carcinoma and under clinical investigation for the treatment of
multiple cancers, is a potent apoptosis inducer of castration-resistant
prostate cancer (CRPC) cells. However, the mechanisms by which it
inhibits the expression of Survivin and kills cancer cells remain
unclear. Here we studied early signaling responses to YM155 in a panel of
prostate and kidney cancer cell lines in standard cell culture conditions
and showed that YM155 rapidly decreases the expression of cyclin Ds 1, 2
and 3, and activates the retinoblastoma protein (Rb), leading to the
downregulation of the Survivin promoter. However, despite the robust lost
of cyclin Ds, YM155 promotes an S-phase arrest rather than arrests cells
at either G1 or G2/M. This suggests cell killing by YM155 involves
S-phase arrest, consistent with a DNA damage response. In addition, we
show that YM155 also downregulates the expression of the anti-apoptotic
protein Mcl-1 and induces the expression of proapoptotic proteins Bad and
Bim followed by the activation of caspases -3 and -8. Moreover, early
time course experiments show that YM155 induces rapid (10 - 60 min) but
transient activation of Akt and Erk1/2 followed by a marked suppression
by 4 to 8 h likely via the induced expression of phosphatases 1 and 5
(DUSP1 and 5). Taken together we suggest YM155 induces apoptosis of
prostate epithelial cells through a complex mechanism involving Akt,
Erk1/2, DUSPs, cyclin Ds, Rb, S-phase arrest, Bim, Bad, Mcl-1,Survivin,
and activation of caspases -3 and -8.

