Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNA-193a-5p suppresses tumor proliferation and enhances
radio-sensitivity through ERBB2 in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma


Esophageal cancer is the ninth leading cause of cancer death in Taiwan.
Esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) is usually managed with
combined modalities, but the prognosis for ESCC patients is still dismal.
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) have been implicated in a variety of human cancers
progression, and their expression signatures can provide insight into the
diagnosis and prognosis of human cancers. However, the dysregulated
miRNAs promoted tumor progression in ESCC remain unclear. To address this
goal, 1097 miRNAs were analyzed in nine pairs of ESCC and corresponding
normal parts with microarray. Tumor suppressive miRNA, miR-193a-5p, was
characterized and inversely correlated with poor prognosis of ESCC
patients. Manipulating miR-193a-5p in ESCC cell lines and mouse tumor
model, the cell proliferation was decreased and the radio-sensitivity was
increased. We further used reporter assay to identify ERBB2 as the target
of miR-193a-5p. Restored the ERBB2 expression abolished the effects of
miR-193a-5p on cell proliferation and radio-sensitivity. These results
indicated that miR-193a-5p played a tumor suppressive role through
suppressing ERBB2, expression in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma.Key
words: miR-193a-5p, esophageal squamous cell carcinoma, radiotherapyNote:
This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

