Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Suppression of lung cancer malignancy by peptides targeting MARCKS
phosphorylation site domain: A comparative study


We have recently reported elevated MARCKS phosphorylation (p-MARCKS) in
lung cancer tissues but not in their adjacent normal non-cancer tissue
sections. We have extended this study to a tumor tissue array from a
cohort of 110 human patients with lung cancer. Immunohistochemistry
results have shown a significant association of elevated p-MARCKS with
advanced-stage, lymph node metastasis and malignant phenotypes of lung
cancer, confirming the importance of p-MARCKS in lung cancer progression.
To see if this newly discover biomarker can be a target for therapeutic
treatment for the suppression of lung cancer malignancy, we have employed
two peptides for this potential; one is the MANS peptide developed by our
collaborator many years ago to target myristoylated N-terminal amino acid
region for the control of airway mucus granule secretion, the other
peptide is MPS that directly targets the MARCKS phosphorylation site
domain. For MANS peptide, our recent publication has shown it is
effective in blocking lung cancer cell migration and invasiveness in
vitro as well as in vivo metastasis. A similar observation was seen for
MPS peptide treatment. However, in contrast to MANS peptide, MPS
treatment can directly block PIP3-dependent AKT signaling and repress
lung tumor growth in vivo in addition to the suppression of metastasis,
while MANS can only reduce cancer metastasis. These results support the
initial notion on the involvement of p-MARCKS as a biomarker in lung
cancer and the potential to target the phosphorylation site domain for
controlling cancer progression. Our data have also suggested a direct
targeting MARCKS phosphorylation site domain by MPS peptide is more
effective in the suppression of lung cancer malignancy.

