Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Heterogeneity of triple-negative breast cancer response to
neoadjuvant treatment: tumor EGFR, HER3 and MET expressions can provide
clues for therapy tailoring


Background: We have recently demonstrated (AACR 2013, abstract 4669) that
antibody (Ab)-based EGFR targeting, sequentially combined with cytotoxic
agents, can achieve pathologic complete response in almost 50% of
triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) patients (pts). However, the pts
left with a residual tumor (RT), need a modification of treatment
approach. We investigated whether expression of EGFR and two of its major
cooperators, HER3 and MET, can offer a simple and practical base for
neoadjuvant therapy (NAT) improvement in TNBC.Methods: The study included
pts with a post-NAT RT in 2 pilot clinical trials of anti-EGFR Abs in
TNBC, conducted from 2009 to 2011 by our team. One trial combined
panitumumab with standard fluorouracil-epirubicin-cyclophosphamide and
docetaxel (P-FEC-T) while another applied cetuximab with docetaxel (C-T).
EGFR, HER3 and MET were assessed by immunohistochemistry (IHC) on pre-
and post-NAT BC tissue. Expressions were evaluated by Quick score (% of
positive cells x stain intensity as 0, 0.5, 1, 1.5, 2, 2.5 or 3; score
range 0-300). At least 30 points of difference qualified the post-NAT
score as changed, compared to the pre-NAT level.Results: 44 pts were
eligible (P-FEC-T: 26 pts, C-T: 18 pts). Using 150 (the middle of the
score range) as cut-off, we separated the tumors in each study on pre-NAT
EGFR-high (score 150) and EGFR-low (score Background: We have recently
demonstrated (AACR 2013, abstract 4669) that antibody (Ab)-based EGFR
targeting, sequentially combined with cytotoxic agents, can achieve
pathologic complete response in almost 50% of triple-negative breast
cancer (TNBC) patients (pts). However, the pts left with a residual tumor
(RT), need a modification of treatment approach. We investigated whether
expression of EGFR and two of its major cooperators, HER3 and MET, can
offer a simple and practical base for neoadjuvant therapy (NAT)
improvement in TNBC.Methods: The study included pts with a post-NAT RT in
2 pilot clinical trials of anti-EGFR Abs in TNBC, conducted from 2009 to
2011 by our team. One trial combined panitumumab with standard
fluorouracil-epirubicin-cyclophosphamide and docetaxel (P-FEC-T) while
another applied cetuximab with docetaxel (C-T). EGFR, HER3 and MET were
assessed by immunohistochemistry (IHC) on pre- and post-NAT BC tissue.
Expressions were evaluated by Quick score (% of positive cells x stain
intensity as 0, 0.5, 1, 1.5, 2, 2.5 or 3; score range 0-300). At least 30
points of difference qualified the post-NAT score as changed, compared to
the pre-NAT level.Results: 44 pts were eligible (P-FEC-T: 26 pts, C-T: 18
pts). Using 150 (the middle of the score range) as cut-off, we separated
the tumors in each study on pre-NAT EGFR-high (score 150) and EGFR-low
(score < 150). The P-FEC-T trial had 13 EGFR-high tumors (median score
220) and 13 EGFR-low ones (median score 0). After NAT, the pre-NAT
EGFR-high BC most frequently showed EGFR decrease (9/13), HER3 increase
(6/10) and MET decrease (7/12). However, the pre-NAT EGFR-low tumors
showed no change in EGFR (7/13) and HER3 (6/11) post-NAT, but most of
them increased MET (7/11).The C-T trial had 7 EGFR-high (median score
210) and 11 EGFR-low cases (median score 70). The EGFR-high BC from that
trial showed a similar pattern of score changes as the same group from
the P-FEC-T trial: frequent EGFR decrease (4/7), HER3 increase (5/7) and
MET decrease (4/7). The EGFR-low BC were more heterogeneous than in
P-FEC-T: most frequently EGFR, HER3 and MET were increased (4/11, 5/11,
5/11 respectively) or unchanged (4/11, 4/11, 3/11 resp.).Conclusion: Our
results indicate that: a) there is a TNBC subgroup with relatively high
EGFR expression (score 150, median around 200) which resist to anti-EGFR
treatment mainly by downregulating EGFR and upregulating HER3; b) TNBC
with low EGFR expression (score Background: We have recently demonstrated
(AACR 2013, abstract 4669) that antibody (Ab)-based EGFR targeting,
sequentially combined with cytotoxic agents, can achieve pathologic
complete response in almost 50% of triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC)
patients (pts). However, the pts left with a residual tumor (RT), need a
modification of treatment approach. We investigated whether expression of
EGFR and two of its major cooperators, HER3 and MET, can offer a simple
and practical base for neoadjuvant therapy (NAT) improvement in
TNBC.Methods: The study included pts with a post-NAT RT in 2 pilot
clinical trials of anti-EGFR Abs in TNBC, conducted from 2009 to 2011 by
our team. One trial combined panitumumab with standard
fluorouracil-epirubicin-cyclophosphamide and docetaxel (P-FEC-T) while
another applied cetuximab with docetaxel (C-T). EGFR, HER3 and MET were
assessed by immunohistochemistry (IHC) on pre- and post-NAT BC tissue.
Expressions were evaluated by Quick score (% of positive cells x stain
intensity as 0, 0.5, 1, 1.5, 2, 2.5 or 3; score range 0-300). At least 30
points of difference qualified the post-NAT score as changed, compared to
the pre-NAT level.Results: 44 pts were eligible (P-FEC-T: 26 pts, C-T: 18
pts). Using 150 (the middle of the score range) as cut-off, we separated
the tumors in each study on pre-NAT EGFR-high (score 150) and EGFR-low
(score < 150). The P-FEC-T trial had 13 EGFR-high tumors (median score
220) and 13 EGFR-low ones (median score 0). After NAT, the pre-NAT
EGFR-high BC most frequently showed EGFR decrease (9/13), HER3 increase
(6/10) and MET decrease (7/12). However, the pre-NAT EGFR-low tumors
showed no change in EGFR (7/13) and HER3 (6/11) post-NAT, but most of
them increased MET (7/11).The C-T trial had 7 EGFR-high (median score
210) and 11 EGFR-low cases (median score 70). The EGFR-high BC from that
trial showed a similar pattern of score changes as the same group from
the P-FEC-T trial: frequent EGFR decrease (4/7), HER3 increase (5/7) and
MET decrease (4/7). The EGFR-low BC were more heterogeneous than in
P-FEC-T: most frequently EGFR, HER3 and MET were increased (4/11, 5/11,
5/11 respectively) or unchanged (4/11, 4/11, 3/11 resp.).Conclusion: Our
results indicate that: a) there is a TNBC subgroup with relatively high
EGFR expression (score 150, median around 200) which resist to anti-EGFR
treatment mainly by downregulating EGFR and upregulating HER3; b) TNBC
with low EGFR expression (score < 150) are a heterogeneous subgroup,
which will frequently upregulate HER3 and/or MET after exposure to the
anti-EGFR agents. The IHC assessment of EGFR, HER3 and MET before and
on-NAT can help improving TNBC treatment by introduction of currently
available anti-EGFR/HER3, anti-HER3 and anti-MET agents.

