Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor derived peptide from a2 isoform of Vacuolar ATPase
immunomodulates tumor associated neutrophils


It has been recently discovered that tumor associated neutrophils (TAN)
develop N2 polarization similar to tumor associated macrophages (TAM). It
is believed that the tumor microenvironment can provoke the wound repair
response from TAN and TAM which in turn promotes tumor progression.
Transforming growth factor- (TGF-) plays a key role in N2 polarization,
however, other regulatory mechanisms are still unclear. a2 isoform
Vacuolar ATPase (a2V) are highly expressed on tumors and macrophages.
Recent evidence showed that a cleaved peptide from the N-terminal domain
of a2V (a2NTD) is secreted in the microvesicles collected from various
tumor cell lines. This peptide promotes the pro-tumorigenic
characteristics in macrophages. Moreover, priming neutrophils with tumor
conditioned media (TCM) collected from breast cancer cell lines promotes
the pro-tumorigenic properties in neutrophils. In this study, we are
evaluating the in vitro immune-modulatory effect of a2NTD on
polymorphnuclear leukocytes (PMN) in order to explore the role of the a2V
in the sterile inflammation associated with tumor progression. We
isolated PMN from heparin anti-coagulated blood collected from healthy
adult volunteers. TCM were collected from MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cell
line. PMN were stimulated with either recombinant a2NTD or with TCM to
simulate the tumor microenvironment. In both a2NTD and TCM cultures,
distinctive morphological changes were revealed by microscopical
examination and significant elevation of ROS levels were detected by flow
cytometry (p-value It has been recently discovered that tumor associated
neutrophils (TAN) develop N2 polarization similar to tumor associated
macrophages (TAM). It is believed that the tumor microenvironment can
provoke the wound repair response from TAN and TAM which in turn promotes
tumor progression. Transforming growth factor- (TGF-) plays a key role in
N2 polarization, however, other regulatory mechanisms are still unclear.
a2 isoform Vacuolar ATPase (a2V) are highly expressed on tumors and
macrophages. Recent evidence showed that a cleaved peptide from the
N-terminal domain of a2V (a2NTD) is secreted in the microvesicles
collected from various tumor cell lines. This peptide promotes the
pro-tumorigenic characteristics in macrophages. Moreover, priming
neutrophils with tumor conditioned media (TCM) collected from breast
cancer cell lines promotes the pro-tumorigenic properties in neutrophils.
In this study, we are evaluating the in vitro immune-modulatory effect of
a2NTD on polymorphnuclear leukocytes (PMN) in order to explore the role
of the a2V in the sterile inflammation associated with tumor progression.
We isolated PMN from heparin anti-coagulated blood collected from healthy
adult volunteers. TCM were collected from MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cell
line. PMN were stimulated with either recombinant a2NTD or with TCM to
simulate the tumor microenvironment. In both a2NTD and TCM cultures,
distinctive morphological changes were revealed by microscopical
examination and significant elevation of ROS levels were detected by flow
cytometry (p-value <0.05). Moreover, we have observed an upregulation in
PMN gene expression of CCL2, CXCL-1, CXCL-2, TNF, VEGF, MMP-9, neutrophil
elastase as well as a2V when it is cultured with either a2NTD or TCM
using quantitative real time PCR. In accordance with Queen M., et al,
flow cytometry showed delayed PMN apoptosis in cultures with TCM while
upon inhibiting V-ATPase, PMN survival decreased significantly (p-value
It has been recently discovered that tumor associated neutrophils (TAN)
develop N2 polarization similar to tumor associated macrophages (TAM). It
is believed that the tumor microenvironment can provoke the wound repair
response from TAN and TAM which in turn promotes tumor progression.
Transforming growth factor- (TGF-) plays a key role in N2 polarization,
however, other regulatory mechanisms are still unclear. a2 isoform
Vacuolar ATPase (a2V) are highly expressed on tumors and macrophages.
Recent evidence showed that a cleaved peptide from the N-terminal domain
of a2V (a2NTD) is secreted in the microvesicles collected from various
tumor cell lines. This peptide promotes the pro-tumorigenic
characteristics in macrophages. Moreover, priming neutrophils with tumor
conditioned media (TCM) collected from breast cancer cell lines promotes
the pro-tumorigenic properties in neutrophils. In this study, we are
evaluating the in vitro immune-modulatory effect of a2NTD on
polymorphnuclear leukocytes (PMN) in order to explore the role of the a2V
in the sterile inflammation associated with tumor progression. We
isolated PMN from heparin anti-coagulated blood collected from healthy
adult volunteers. TCM were collected from MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cell
line. PMN were stimulated with either recombinant a2NTD or with TCM to
simulate the tumor microenvironment. In both a2NTD and TCM cultures,
distinctive morphological changes were revealed by microscopical
examination and significant elevation of ROS levels were detected by flow
cytometry (p-value <0.05). Moreover, we have observed an upregulation in
PMN gene expression of CCL2, CXCL-1, CXCL-2, TNF, VEGF, MMP-9, neutrophil
elastase as well as a2V when it is cultured with either a2NTD or TCM
using quantitative real time PCR. In accordance with Queen M., et al,
flow cytometry showed delayed PMN apoptosis in cultures with TCM while
upon inhibiting V-ATPase, PMN survival decreased significantly (p-value
<0.05).This suggests that the delayed apoptosis observed in TCM primed
PMN is mediated at least partially by V-ATPase. In addition, a2NTD
increased significantly the PMN survival but to a lesser extent compared
with TCM. Interestingly, we observed significant surface over-expression
of a2V on PMN in both cultures using flow cytometry (p-value It has been
recently discovered that tumor associated neutrophils (TAN) develop N2
polarization similar to tumor associated macrophages (TAM). It is
believed that the tumor microenvironment can provoke the wound repair
response from TAN and TAM which in turn promotes tumor progression.
Transforming growth factor- (TGF-) plays a key role in N2 polarization,
however, other regulatory mechanisms are still unclear. a2 isoform
Vacuolar ATPase (a2V) are highly expressed on tumors and macrophages.
Recent evidence showed that a cleaved peptide from the N-terminal domain
of a2V (a2NTD) is secreted in the microvesicles collected from various
tumor cell lines. This peptide promotes the pro-tumorigenic
characteristics in macrophages. Moreover, priming neutrophils with tumor
conditioned media (TCM) collected from breast cancer cell lines promotes
the pro-tumorigenic properties in neutrophils. In this study, we are
evaluating the in vitro immune-modulatory effect of a2NTD on
polymorphnuclear leukocytes (PMN) in order to explore the role of the a2V
in the sterile inflammation associated with tumor progression. We
isolated PMN from heparin anti-coagulated blood collected from healthy
adult volunteers. TCM were collected from MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cell
line. PMN were stimulated with either recombinant a2NTD or with TCM to
simulate the tumor microenvironment. In both a2NTD and TCM cultures,
distinctive morphological changes were revealed by microscopical
examination and significant elevation of ROS levels were detected by flow
cytometry (p-value <0.05). Moreover, we have observed an upregulation in
PMN gene expression of CCL2, CXCL-1, CXCL-2, TNF, VEGF, MMP-9, neutrophil
elastase as well as a2V when it is cultured with either a2NTD or TCM
using quantitative real time PCR. In accordance with Queen M., et al,
flow cytometry showed delayed PMN apoptosis in cultures with TCM while
upon inhibiting V-ATPase, PMN survival decreased significantly (p-value
<0.05).This suggests that the delayed apoptosis observed in TCM primed
PMN is mediated at least partially by V-ATPase. In addition, a2NTD
increased significantly the PMN survival but to a lesser extent compared
with TCM. Interestingly, we observed significant surface over-expression
of a2V on PMN in both cultures using flow cytometry (p-value <0.05) and
confocal microscopy. Our study demonstrates the potential
immune-modulatory effect of tumor associated a2NTD on PMN which may
indicate its involvement in tumor progression.

