Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: OncoPanel 3D: High-content characterization of 240
three-dimensional tumor spheroids for drug response profiling and
biomarker discovery


While drug response profiling of cancer cells in two-dimensional culture
has been a mainstay of predictive biomarker discovery and anti-cancer
drug development, there are aspects of tumor biology that are not
replicated in a two-dimensional cell culture environment. This is
particularly true for solid tumor models where the three-dimensional
organization of the tumor creates distinct, regional microenvironments
that influence drug response. For example, as the radius of solid tumors
approaches the diffusion limit of oxygen and other nutrients, the tumor
core becomes hypoxic and accumulates metabolic waste products, resulting
in cell death through mechanisms involving apoptosis and necrosis.
Moreover, without proper vascularization, the tumor interior also
exhibits increased interstitial pressure, which limits drug penetration
into the tumor. We have characterized the three-dimensional growth of 240
cancer cell lines from various tumor origins by high-content imaging.
This characterization involves the growth of tumor spheroids over 14 days
and an assessment of tumor hypoxia in each model. The genomic traits
associated with spheroid formation are also defined through genomic
analysis. Finally, we provide validation and drug response data for
several standard-of-care cancer therapeutics in pre-formed,
three-dimensional tumor spheroid models. Drug profiling of this
three-dimensional cell line panel offers new insights into drug response
and can be used to prioritize drugs with improved tumor penetration or
those with otherwise improved activity in three-dimensional models.

