Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: IGM-55.5, a novel monoclonal human recombinant IgM antibody with
potent activity against B cell leukemia and lymphoma


IGM-55.5 is an engineered monoclonal human recombinant IgM antibody that
was derived from a natural monoclonal antibody 216 isolated at Stanford
University from the splenocytes of a patient with Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma.
HuMab 216 was previously used in a B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia
phase I trial and was demonstrated to be well tolerated with significant
decrease in peripheral blasts observed (Liedtke et al, Haematologica,
2012). IGM-55.5 has been engineered to be mono-reactive and recognizes a
carbohydrate determinant as an epitope on normal human B cells as well as
B-cell lymphoma and B-progenitor lymphoblasts.Here, we report new
preclinical studies that describe the mechanism of action and potent
activity of IGM-55.5. In-vitro analysis of IGM-55.5 was found to have
high surface binding on a broad panel of B cell leukemia and lymphoma
cells lines by flow cytometry. IGM-55.5 binding leads to the disruption
of the plasma membrane and formation of large membrane pores resulting in
cell lysis. This non-classical apoptosis occurs in the absence of
complement fixation but in vitro cytotoxicity is increased in assays in
the presence of human complement. Studies with aggressive disseminated
tumor xenograft models (Namalwa, Granta, & Nalm-6) demonstrate that
IGM-55.5 significantly prolongs survival and reduces circulating tumor
cells. Peripheral blood samples from chronic lymphocytic leukemia
patients demonstrated the potent activity of IGM-55 in eliminating B cell
lymphoblasts in comparison with Rituxan when treated in-vitro. These data
taken together highlight the potent activity of IGM-55.5 as therapeutic
for advanced B cell malignancies, especially indicated for Rituxan
resistant or refractory patients.

