Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The relationship between LINE-1 hypomethylation and fibrosis
status in noncancerous liver tissues of hepatocellular carcinoma patients


Background: The DNA methylation alterations that occur in human cancers
include global DNA hypomethylation and site-specific CpG island promoter
hypermethylation. Global DNA hypomethylation plays an important role in
genomic instability, leading to cancer development. Since LINE-1 or the
L1 retrotransposon constitutes a substantial portion of the human genome,
LINE-1 methylation status reflects global DNA methylation. Our previous
study has revealed that LINE-1 methylation level is a potential surrogate
marker for epigenetic field defects induced by tobacco smoking in
esophageal cancer patients. Given that liver fibrosis can be one
phenomena of field cancerization theory in hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC), we examined the relationship between LINE-1 methylation level and
fibrosis status in noncancerous liver tissues of HCC patients.Methods:
Using histologically normal liver tissue samples and matched tumor tissue
samples from 89 HCC cases, we measured LINE-1 methylation levels by
pyrosequencing technology.Results: LINE-1 methylation of noncancerous
liver tissues range was 35.8-97.3 of a 0-100 scale (mean: 78.1; median:
81.0; standard deviation: 11.9). HCC tissues showed significantly lower
levels of LINE-1 methylation than matched normal tissue (PBackground: The
DNA methylation alterations that occur in human cancers include global
DNA hypomethylation and site-specific CpG island promoter
hypermethylation. Global DNA hypomethylation plays an important role in
genomic instability, leading to cancer development. Since LINE-1 or the
L1 retrotransposon constitutes a substantial portion of the human genome,
LINE-1 methylation status reflects global DNA methylation. Our previous
study has revealed that LINE-1 methylation level is a potential surrogate
marker for epigenetic field defects induced by tobacco smoking in
esophageal cancer patients. Given that liver fibrosis can be one
phenomena of field cancerization theory in hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC), we examined the relationship between LINE-1 methylation level and
fibrosis status in noncancerous liver tissues of HCC patients.Methods:
Using histologically normal liver tissue samples and matched tumor tissue
samples from 89 HCC cases, we measured LINE-1 methylation levels by
pyrosequencing technology.Results: LINE-1 methylation of noncancerous
liver tissues range was 35.8-97.3 of a 0-100 scale (mean: 78.1; median:
81.0; standard deviation: 11.9). HCC tissues showed significantly lower
levels of LINE-1 methylation than matched normal tissue (P<0.01). LINE-1
methylation of noncancerous liver tissues was not associated with age,
sex, Hepatitis B Virus infection, or Hepatitis C Virus infection.
Interestingly, LINE-1 methylation level of noncancerous liver tissues
with severe fibrosis (score 2-4) was significantly lower than that with
mild fibrosis (score 0-1) (P=0.013).Conclusion: Liver fibrosis in
noncancerous liver tissues of HCC patients was significantly associated
with LINE-1 hypomethylation. This result supports the potential of LINE-1
methylation level as an indicator of epigenetic field for HCC
cancerization.

