Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transcriptional basis for loss of cellular differentiation in
colon cancer


Background:Colon cancer is a leading cause of cancer related death. Colon
cancer arises due to uncontrolled cell proliferation, failure of cells to
undergo apoptosis and loss of cellular differentiation. While the
pathways which drive the uncontrolled proliferation of colon cancer cells
are relatively well understood, the mechanistic basis for loss of cell
differentiation is less well characterized. The aim of this study was to
identify novel transcription factors that regulate the differentiation
status of colon cancer cells.Methods:Affymetrix microarrays were used to
identify transcription factors which are significantly differentially
expressed between well differentiated and poorly differentiated colon
cancer cell lines. Differential gene expression was confirmed by q-RT-PCR
in 40 colon cancer cell lines. The well differentiated colon cancer cell
line SW948 was transfected with siRNAs using
lipofectamine.Results:Microarray analysis of well and poorly
differentiated colon cancer cell lines identified the EHF transcription
factor to be significantly downregulated in expression in poorly
differentiated cell lines. Q-RT-PCR analysis demonstrated that while both
EHF variants were expressed in a panel of 40 colon cancer cells, variant
2 was the isoform differentially expressed between well and poorly
differentiated cell lines. Basal expression of EHF correlated
significantly with expression of the differentiation markers villin and
KRT20 across the 40 cell line panel. Knockdown of EHF in the well
differentiated colon cancer cell line SW948, reduced expression of villin
and KRT20 by 82% and 64% respectively. Knockdown of EHF also reduces
expression of Cdx1 suggesting it may be act upstream of this known
differentiation regulator.Conclusion:This study identifies the
transcription factor EHF as a novel regulator of cell differentiation in
colon cancer.

