Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combined PI3K-AKT and MEK-ERK pathway inhibition provides broad
antitumor efficacy in HER2+ breast tumor models


Background: The PI3K-AKT-mTOR and the RAS-RAF-MEK-ERK pathways are
thought to be the central transducers of oncogenic signals in cancer.
Combined targeting of these two pathways may be necessary for optimal
therapeutic activity in solid tumors. This study evaluated the PI3K
inhibitor GDC-0941, the MEK1/2 inhibitor GDC-0973 and the combination of
both in different HER2+ breast cancer cell lines. Methodology: Growth
inhibition/survival, apoptosis, signal transduction and antitumor
efficacy were examined using MTT assays, 3D-ON-TOP assays, annexinV
staining and mouse xenografts respectively, in BT474 (trastuzumab
sensitive), BT474HR (trastuzumab-resistant) and HCC1954 (PIK3CA mutated)
breast cancer cell lines. Results: (1) GDC-0941 and GDC-0973 exhibited in
vitro cell killing activity in MTT assays with IC50's ranging from 0.35 M
to 1 m and from 8 M to 20 M respectively, (2) the initiation of apoptotic
activity (annexin V) in GDC-0941 plus GDC-0973 was significantly superior
to that of either drug alone, (3) inhibition of phosphorylation of
AKT(S473, T308), P70S6K, S6RP, and 4EBP1(T37/46) was observed following
GDC-0941 treatment, and the combination of GDC-0941 plus GDC-0973 more
effectively blocked p-S6RP and p-4EBP1, especially in BT474HR and HCC1954
cells, (4) GDC-0973 abrogated activation of ERK, and this ERK
inactivation was sustained when combined with GDC-0941, (5) a combination
of GDC-0941 and GDC-0973 more effectively blocked 3D-ON-TOP clonogenic
growth of HER2+ cells than either agent alone, and (6) xenograft data
show that the combination of GDC-0941 and trastuzumab has an enhanced
anti-tumor effect in both sensitive (almost 100%) and resistant models
(85%), and tumor regression was observed in both sensitive and resistant
models when mice were treated with GDC-0941 plus GDC-0973 plus
trastuzumab. Conclusions: Therapy with dual PI3K and MEK combination is
more efficient than with either drug alone in all three cell lines. Our
data provide stronger evidence that the addition of MEK inhibitor along
with pan-PI3K inhibitor to HER2-directed treatment could augment the
clinical benefit in breast cancer patients.

