Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mutation signature of TP53 gene in H. pylori-associated inflamed
gastric mucosa during gastric carcinogenesis


Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori) infection and the resultant chronic
gastric inflammation is an important etiologic factor for gastric cancer
development. To explore the genetic basis of gastric cancer that develops
in inflamed gastric mucosa, we investigated genetic aberrations that
latently accumulate in non-tumorous gastric epithelium with H. pylori
infection. Whole exome sequencing on gastric cancer, non-cancerous
gastritis tissues and peripheral lymphocytes of 5 patients revealed that
somatic mutations accumulated in various genes in inflamed gastric
tissues. Additional deep sequencing analyses of selected tumor-related
genes in 34 gastritis mucosa samples from patients with, or without,
gastric cancer revealed non-synonymous low-abundance mutations in TP53 in
15 cases (44.1%) and ARID1A in 5 cases (14.7%). The mutation signature of
whole exome sequences in gastric cancer genomes as well as low-abundance
TP53 mutations latently accumulated in H. pylori-inflamed gastritis
mucosa were predominantly biased to C:G>T:A transitions in the context of
GpCpX motifs, the typical footprints of cytidine deamination triggered by
activation-induced cytidine deaminase (AID). In vivo studies with a human
TP53 knock-in mouse model revealed that constitutive AID expression in
the gastric mucosa caused the emergence of human TP53 mutations at the
amino acid positions identical to those detected in human gastric
cancers. These findings provide novel evidence that somatic mutations
latently accumulated in various genes in inflamed gastric mucosa with H.
pylori infection, and cytidine deaminase activity might provide a
putative genetic basis for the increased susceptibility to gastric
carcinogenesis in patients with H. pylori infection.

