Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mcl-1 protects prostate cancer cells from chemotherapy-induced DNA
damage


Mcl-1 (myeloid cell leukemia sequence 1 [Bcl2-related]) is predominantly
localized in the cytoplasm and protects cells from apoptosis by blocking
mitochondrial outer membrane permeabilization. There is evidence that
nuclear localization of Mcl-1 has pleiotropic effects independent of
apoptosis, including functional roles in DNA damage response. Mcl-1 is
highly expressed in castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC),
resulting in resistance to apoptosis and association with poor prognosis.
The role of nuclear Mcl-1 in mediating sensitivity to
chemotherapy-induced DNA damage and apoptotic cell death in prostate
cancer (PCa) is not known. The novel antimitotic agent ENMD-1198 is a
more stable and potent derivative of 2-methoxyestradiol (2ME2). We
confirmed that 1198 was a more potent inhibitor of androgen-dependent
LNCaP and castration-resistant DU145 and PC3 PCa cell viability compared
to 2ME2 and induced apoptotic cell death in docetaxel-resistant PC3 cells
that overexpress the multi-drug resistance protein (MDR). The ability of
1198 to increase the proteasomal-mediated degradation of Mcl-1 correlated
with enhanced apoptotic cell death and shRNA knockdown of Mcl-1 further
sensitized LNCaP and PC3 cells to 1198-mediated cell death. We then
showed that the combination of 1198 with betulinic acid (BA, a
plant-derived small molecule that can increase apoptosis specifically in
cancer but not in normal cells) reduced nuclear Mcl-1, increased a
pro-death Mcl-1 isoform, increased gamma histone 2AX (marker of DNA
damage), and enhanced apoptotic cell death in human PC3 CRPC cells. In
the TRAMP mouse model of PCa, the 1198 (75 mg/kg) + BA (10 mg/kg)
combination significantly reduced PCa weights compared to 1198, BA alone,
and vehicle controls. However, the reduced PCa weights between the 1198 +
BA combination and BA alone was more associated with decreased Mcl-1 and
increased gamma-H2AX (DNA damage) immunostaining compared to cleaved
caspase-3 (apoptosis), CD31(angiogenesis), or Ki67 (proliferation).
Furthermore, our results showed that blocking the DNA damage response
signaling pathway with an ATM kinase (KU55933) or DNA-PK (NU7441)
inhibitor lowered apoptotic cell death induced by the 1198 + BA
combination in PC3 cells. Overall, our results demonstrate that nuclear
Mcl-1 has an important role in protecting PCa cells from DNA damage and
that agents such as 1198 and BA that reduce total/nuclear Mcl-1 and
increase pro-death Mcl-1 isoforms will sensitize PCa cells to antimitotic
DNA damaging agents.

