Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ERK1/2 targeting with magnolin as a chemopreventive agent


Mitogen activated protein kinases (MAPKs) play a key role in cell
proliferation, cell cycle progression and cell transformation, and
activated Ras/ERKs/RSK2 signaling pathways have been widely identified in
many solid tumors. In this study, we found that magnolin, a compound
found in Magnolia species, directly targeted and inhibited ERK1 and ERK2
kinase activities with IC50 values of 87 nM and 16.5 nM by competing with
ATP in an active pocket, respectively. Further, we demonstrated that
magnolin inhibited EGF-induced p90RSKs phopshorylation at Thr359/Ser363,
but not ERKs phosphorylation at Thr202/Tyr204, resulted in inhibition of
cell proliferation by suppression of G1/S cell cycle transition.
Additionally, p38 kinases, Jun N-terminal kinases, and Akts did not
involved magnolin-mediated inhibitory signaling. Magnolin targeting on
ERK1 and 2 activities suppressed the phosphorylation of RSK2 and
downstream target proteins including ATF1 and c-Jun and AP-1, a dimer of
Jun/Fos, and the transactivation activities of ATF1 and AP-1. Notably,
ERKs inhibition by magnolin suppressed EGF-induced anchorage-independent
cell transformation and colony growth of RasG12V- harboring A549 human
lung cancer cells and NIH3T3 cells stably expressing RasG12V in soft
agar. Taken together, these results demonstrated that magnolin might be a
naturally occurring chemoprevention and therapeutic agent capable of
inhibiting cell proliferation and transformation by targeting ERK1 and
ERK2.

