Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: LKB1 regulates COX-2 transcription via CRTCs dependent pathway


Inactivation of the liver kinase B1 (LKB1) gene by somatic mutation is a
common event in lung adenocarcinoma. LKB1 was first identified as a tumor
suppressor responsible for Peutz-Jeghers syndrome (PJS) and up regulation
of cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) was detected in a significant percentage of
human PJS polyps. In addition, COX-2 has been proposed as a therapeutic
target for lung cancer although clinical trial using COX-2 inhibitors
have been disappointing.In the current study, we identified a novel
LKB1/CRTC/COX-2 molecular pathway in human lung cancer cells and provided
new information for clinical use of COX-2 inhibitors. The Kaye lab cloned
the CREB-regulated transcription co-activators (CRTCs) and showed
aberrant phosphorylation and activation of CRTC1 exclusively in non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC) samples carrying LKB1 null mutations. We have
now demonstrated that CRTC directly regulates COX-2 expression via
evolutionarily conserved CRE sites within the promoter. In addition, we
observed that ectopic expression of LKB1 resulted in nuclear export of
phosphorylated CRTC with attenuation of COX-2 expression. Alternatively,
LKB1 knock-down results in CRTC activation and promotes COX-2 expression
in NSCLC cells. Importantly, LKB1 null lung cancer cells were
preferentially sensitive to COX-2 inhibitors. In summary, our data
defines a CRTCs-mediated transcriptional regulatory mechanism for COX-2
activity in cancer and proposes a possible clinical application of COX-2
inhibitors in patients with lung tumors carrying somatic LKB1 null
mutations.

