Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pharmacological inhibition of the DNA damage response kinases, ATR
(Ataxia telangiectasia and Rad3 related) and ATM (Ataxia telangiectasia
mutated), broadly sensitizes diverse subtypes of gynecological cancer
cells to ionizing radiation


Objectives:The management of gynecological malignancies includes exposure
of tumor cells to genotoxic insults, such as ionizing radiation (IR), and
focuses on damaging cellular DNA and inducing subsequent cell death. As
cells possess innate mechanisms to repair DNA damage, this study focused
on combining IR with pharmacological inhibition of key mediators of DNA
repair, ATR (Ataxia telangiectasia and Rad3 related) and ATM (Ataxia
telangiectasia mutated), to further sensitize gynecological cancer cells
to this mode of genotoxic stress.Methods:Clonogenic survival assays: A
panel of human cell line models of ovarian, endometrial and cervical
cancer were treated with drug vehicle, 5.0 M ATR inhibitor (ETP-46464),
10.0 M ATM inhibitor (KU55933) or a combination of ATRi and ATMi, prior
to exposure to IR doses up to 6.0 Gy. Drug was removed four hours later
and resulting colonies were counted when mean colony size was 50 cells.
Western blot: ATM, ATR and downstream canonical signaling effectors were
assessed in cell lysates harvested from representative cell line models
of ovarian (A2780), endometrial (HEC1B) and cervical (HELA) cancers, one
hour following treatment with inhibitors and IR exposure (2.0 Gy only) as
described above.Results:Clonogenic survival assays revealed that
inhibition of ATR and ATM increased sensitization to IR across all cell
line models of gynecological cancer assessed. This effect was further
increased with combined ATR and ATM inhibitor treatments. Western blot
analyses revealed activation of ATM and ATR signaling in response to IR
via increases in phospho-ATM (Ser1981), p-Chk1 (Ser345) and p-Chk2 (T68)
levels. Activation of Chk1, a downstream effector of ATR, was attenuated
in ATRi-treated conditions and activation of Chk2, a downstream effector
of ATM, were reduced in ATMi-treated conditions.Conclusions:These studies
revealed that inhibition of the DNA damage response kinases, ATR and ATM,
markedly sensitizes diverse gynecological cancer subtypes to IR. They
provide evidence to support further consideration of therapies pairing
modulation of DNA damage signaling with IR in the treatment of
gynecological malignancies.

