Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Downregulation of hnRNP A1 by miRNAs as a new mechanism of
survival in ovarian cancer


Background. Posttranscriptional regulation is a critical control point
for the expression of genes that promote or retard tumor growth. The
mRNA-binding protein hnRNP A1 is required for the processing of miR-18a,
an inhibitor of k-ras expression. In this study we hypothesized that
downmodulation of hnRNP A1 by miR-25 and miR-15a controls the expression
of miR-18a and k-ras by modulating nuclear and cytoplasmic miRNA
processing at the posttranscriptional level. Methods. In this study, we
determined the expression of hnRNP A1 at mRNA and protein levels in three
parental ovarian cancer cells lines (Skov3ip1, HeyA8, and A2780) and
their chemotherapy-resistant derivatives (Skov3-TR, HeyA8 MDR, and A2780
cp20). We also predicted in silico which miRNAS can target hnRNP A1 and
confirmed the miRNA expression by real-time PCR. Moreover, we inhibited
miR-25 and mir-15a to determine their tumorigenic potential in vitro. We
also correlated the expression of miR-25 and miR-15a and/or miR-18a and
k-ras expression in the TCGA data. Results. Downregulation of hnRNP A1 at
the RNA and protein levels was observed in the taxane-resistant cell
lines but not in the cisplatin-resistant cell line. Furthermore, we
predicted in silico that miR-25and miR-15a can target hnRNP A1 and
confirmed the overexpression of these microRNAs in SKOV3-TR (5- and
3-fold, respectively) and HeyA8 MDR (3-fold) by real-time PCR. We also
analyzed overall survival, trying to find a correlation between k-ras and
miR-15a (high 23.77, low 33.97 months), k-ras and miR-25 (high 16.95, low
35.21 months), and the combination of k-ras, miR-25, and miR18a (k-ras
high, miR25 high, mir18a low, 20.73 months; k-ras low, miR25 low, mir18a
high, 31.49 months). Comparison of these data with a validation set
yielded similar results. Conclusion. These results underscore the
importance of a previously uncharacterized circuit of posttranscriptional
regulation between miR-25 or -15a and RNA-binding protein hnRNP A1 that
regulates miR-18a and k-ras expression. This circuit represents a unique
opportunity for novel therapeutics approaches.

