Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Investigating stress-response pathways in pancreatic cancer cells
using novel PERK inhibitors


An adaptive stress response mechanism, termed the unfolded protein
response (UPR), is highly activated in a variety of tumor types to cope
with ER stress and maintain protein homeostasis. PERK (PKR-like
endoplasmic reticulum kinase) is one of the key components of the UPR.
PERK is a Ser/Thr protein kinase whose active homodimer phosphorylates
and inactivates eukaryotic initiation factor 2 (eIF2), thereby inhibiting
protein translation globally and reducing the load of newly synthesized
proteins entering the ER. Previous studies demonstrated that cells with a
compromised PERK signaling pathway are sensitive to hypoxic stress in
vitro and form tumors that grow more slowly in vivo. Thus, selective
inhibitors of PERK activity may be useful therapeutic candidates for the
treatment of cancer. Using an HTS approach a number of lead compounds
were identified with demonstrated ability to inhibit PERK kinase activity
in vitro. The potent PERK inhibitors were further tested in pancreatic
cancer cells to evaluate the modulation of the PERK-eIF2-ATF4-CHOP
signaling pathway. The effect of PERK inhibitors on cell viability was
determined by an MTS assay. PERK inhibitors had dose-dependent effects on
suppression of pancreatic cancer cell proliferation. Inhibitor-mediated
PERK inhibition is associated with the down-regulation of PERK signaling
and with the suppression of pancreatic cancer cell proliferation,
suggesting their potential anticancer activities. Here we present new
findings implicating additional inputs into this stress response.

