Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ki67 is an independent prognostic marker in breast cancer even
after accounting for molecular subtype


Ki67 labeling index (LI) has been demonstrated to be a prognostic marker
in invasive breast cancer; a high Ki67 LI is associated with poorer
survival among breast cancer patients. The goal of these analyses was to
examine the extent to which Ki67 was associated with specific breast
cancer subtypes, and whether it could serve as an additional prognostic
marker above and beyond breast cancer subtype, in an ethnically diverse
sample of 287 patients (86 Non-Hispanic White, 84 Hispanic and 116
African American).IHC analysis was performed on tissue microarrays
constructed from invasive breast cancer samples obtained from the Breast
Cancer Care in Chicago study (patients diagnosed between 2005-2008).
Tissue samples were tested for the expression of estrogen receptor (ER),
progesterone receptor (PR), HER2, EGFR and CK5/6. From these results,
breast cancers were classified as Luminal A (ER+/PR+/HER2-), Luminal B
(ER+/PR+/HER2+), HER2 enriched (ER-/PR-/HER2+), and triple negative (TN)
(ER-/PR-/HER2-). TN tumors were subclassified into basal like (BL) if
they expressed either EGFR or CK5/6 or otherwise classified as
unspecified (US) if negative for both EGFR and CK5/6. Ki67 LI was
classified as low (Ki67 labeling index (LI) has been demonstrated to be a
prognostic marker in invasive breast cancer; a high Ki67 LI is associated
with poorer survival among breast cancer patients. The goal of these
analyses was to examine the extent to which Ki67 was associated with
specific breast cancer subtypes, and whether it could serve as an
additional prognostic marker above and beyond breast cancer subtype, in
an ethnically diverse sample of 287 patients (86 Non-Hispanic White, 84
Hispanic and 116 African American).IHC analysis was performed on tissue
microarrays constructed from invasive breast cancer samples obtained from
the Breast Cancer Care in Chicago study (patients diagnosed between
2005-2008). Tissue samples were tested for the expression of estrogen
receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR), HER2, EGFR and CK5/6. From
these results, breast cancers were classified as Luminal A
(ER+/PR+/HER2-), Luminal B (ER+/PR+/HER2+), HER2 enriched
(ER-/PR-/HER2+), and triple negative (TN) (ER-/PR-/HER2-). TN tumors were
subclassified into basal like (BL) if they expressed either EGFR or CK5/6
or otherwise classified as unspecified (US) if negative for both EGFR and
CK5/6. Ki67 LI was classified as low (<14%) or high (14%). We used
multivariable logistic regression to examine associations between Ki67,
breast cancer subtype, and histological grade, controlling for
race/ethnicity and age at diagnosis in all models.In adjusted models, the
proportion of tumors with a high Ki67 LI was much lower for luminal A
(28%) than for luminal B, HER2, TN-US, and TN-BL subtypes (91,66, 77 and
89%, respectively, pKi67 labeling index (LI) has been demonstrated to be
a prognostic marker in invasive breast cancer; a high Ki67 LI is
associated with poorer survival among breast cancer patients. The goal of
these analyses was to examine the extent to which Ki67 was associated
with specific breast cancer subtypes, and whether it could serve as an
additional prognostic marker above and beyond breast cancer subtype, in
an ethnically diverse sample of 287 patients (86 Non-Hispanic White, 84
Hispanic and 116 African American).IHC analysis was performed on tissue
microarrays constructed from invasive breast cancer samples obtained from
the Breast Cancer Care in Chicago study (patients diagnosed between
2005-2008). Tissue samples were tested for the expression of estrogen
receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR), HER2, EGFR and CK5/6. From
these results, breast cancers were classified as Luminal A
(ER+/PR+/HER2-), Luminal B (ER+/PR+/HER2+), HER2 enriched
(ER-/PR-/HER2+), and triple negative (TN) (ER-/PR-/HER2-). TN tumors were
subclassified into basal like (BL) if they expressed either EGFR or CK5/6
or otherwise classified as unspecified (US) if negative for both EGFR and
CK5/6. Ki67 LI was classified as low (<14%) or high (14%). We used
multivariable logistic regression to examine associations between Ki67,
breast cancer subtype, and histological grade, controlling for
race/ethnicity and age at diagnosis in all models.In adjusted models, the
proportion of tumors with a high Ki67 LI was much lower for luminal A
(28%) than for luminal B, HER2, TN-US, and TN-BL subtypes (91,66, 77 and
89%, respectively, p<0.0001). The proportion of tumors that were high
histologic grade was also much lower for luminal A (29%) than for luminal
B, HER2, TN-US, and TN-BL subtypes (85, 86, 94 and 68%, respectively,
pKi67 labeling index (LI) has been demonstrated to be a prognostic marker
in invasive breast cancer; a high Ki67 LI is associated with poorer
survival among breast cancer patients. The goal of these analyses was to
examine the extent to which Ki67 was associated with specific breast
cancer subtypes, and whether it could serve as an additional prognostic
marker above and beyond breast cancer subtype, in an ethnically diverse
sample of 287 patients (86 Non-Hispanic White, 84 Hispanic and 116
African American).IHC analysis was performed on tissue microarrays
constructed from invasive breast cancer samples obtained from the Breast
Cancer Care in Chicago study (patients diagnosed between 2005-2008).
Tissue samples were tested for the expression of estrogen receptor (ER),
progesterone receptor (PR), HER2, EGFR and CK5/6. From these results,
breast cancers were classified as Luminal A (ER+/PR+/HER2-), Luminal B
(ER+/PR+/HER2+), HER2 enriched (ER-/PR-/HER2+), and triple negative (TN)
(ER-/PR-/HER2-). TN tumors were subclassified into basal like (BL) if
they expressed either EGFR or CK5/6 or otherwise classified as
unspecified (US) if negative for both EGFR and CK5/6. Ki67 LI was
classified as low (<14%) or high (14%). We used multivariable logistic
regression to examine associations between Ki67, breast cancer subtype,
and histological grade, controlling for race/ethnicity and age at
diagnosis in all models.In adjusted models, the proportion of tumors with
a high Ki67 LI was much lower for luminal A (28%) than for luminal B,
HER2, TN-US, and TN-BL subtypes (91,66, 77 and 89%, respectively,
p<0.0001). The proportion of tumors that were high histologic grade was
also much lower for luminal A (29%) than for luminal B, HER2, TN-US, and
TN-BL subtypes (85, 86, 94 and 68%, respectively, p<0.0001). Before
accounting for subtype, 68% of high Ki67 tumors were high grade, compared
with only 26% of low Ki67 tumors (pKi67 labeling index (LI) has been
demonstrated to be a prognostic marker in invasive breast cancer; a high
Ki67 LI is associated with poorer survival among breast cancer patients.
The goal of these analyses was to examine the extent to which Ki67 was
associated with specific breast cancer subtypes, and whether it could
serve as an additional prognostic marker above and beyond breast cancer
subtype, in an ethnically diverse sample of 287 patients (86 Non-Hispanic
White, 84 Hispanic and 116 African American).IHC analysis was performed
on tissue microarrays constructed from invasive breast cancer samples
obtained from the Breast Cancer Care in Chicago study (patients diagnosed
between 2005-2008). Tissue samples were tested for the expression of
estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR), HER2, EGFR and CK5/6.
From these results, breast cancers were classified as Luminal A
(ER+/PR+/HER2-), Luminal B (ER+/PR+/HER2+), HER2 enriched
(ER-/PR-/HER2+), and triple negative (TN) (ER-/PR-/HER2-). TN tumors were
subclassified into basal like (BL) if they expressed either EGFR or CK5/6
or otherwise classified as unspecified (US) if negative for both EGFR and
CK5/6. Ki67 LI was classified as low (<14%) or high (14%). We used
multivariable logistic regression to examine associations between Ki67,
breast cancer subtype, and histological grade, controlling for
race/ethnicity and age at diagnosis in all models.In adjusted models, the
proportion of tumors with a high Ki67 LI was much lower for luminal A
(28%) than for luminal B, HER2, TN-US, and TN-BL subtypes (91,66, 77 and
89%, respectively, p<0.0001). The proportion of tumors that were high
histologic grade was also much lower for luminal A (29%) than for luminal
B, HER2, TN-US, and TN-BL subtypes (85, 86, 94 and 68%, respectively,
p<0.0001). Before accounting for subtype, 68% of high Ki67 tumors were
high grade, compared with only 26% of low Ki67 tumors (p<0.0001); after
controlling for breast cancer subtype these percentages were 58% and 37%,
respectively, p=0.001).In this multi-ethnic sample of breast cancer
patients, we found that Ki67 was a significant independent predictor of
more aggressive, higher grade disease, even after accounting for
molecular subtype. Ki67 might serve as a useful additional marker for the
classification of breast cancer into molecular subtypes.

