Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Assessment of ABT-263 activity across a comprehensive cancer cell
line collection leads to a novel, potent combination therapy for small
cell lung cancer


BH3 mimetics like ABT-263 induce apoptosis in subsets of cancer. However,
they have shown limited clinical efficacy as single agents, and rational
combination strategies remain underexplored. Toward the development of a
novel combined therapy, we examined efficacy of ABT-263 across 331 cancer
cell lines. Cell lines with high expression levels of the pro-apoptotic
gene BIM were more sensitive to ABT-263 activity. This was particularly
evident in small cell lung cancer (SCLC), which tends to have higher BIM
levels and is among the most sensitive to ABT-263. However, MCL-1
expression mitigated the impact of ABT-263-induced apoptosis by
sequestering BIM released from BCL-2 and BCL-XL. Since MCL-1 expression
is dependent on TORC1 activity in some cancers, we attempted to overcome
the apoptotic block in SCLC by combining ABT-263 with the TORC1/2
inhibitor AZD8055. AZD8055 treatment alone downregulated MCL-1
expression; combination AZD8055 and ABT-263 induced marked apoptosis and
growth arrest in vitro, as well as tumor regressions in multiple SCLC
xenograft models. Strikingly, low-dose AZD8055 was sufficient to promote
tumor regressions in the combination strategy. Therefore, addition of a
TORC1/2 inhibitor offers a therapeutic strategy to markedly improve
single-agent ABT-263 activity in SCLC.

