Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A-kinase anchoring protein 2 is required for calcitonin
receptor-stimulated invasion of prostate cancer cells


Expression of neuropeptide calcitonin (CT) and its receptor (CTR) is
frequently elevated in prostate cancers (PCs) and activation of CT-CTR
axis in non-invasive PC cells induces an invasive phenotype.
CTR-stimulated invasion of prostate cancer cells, which is abolished by
specific, cell-permeable inhibitors of protein kinase A. Since PKA is
ubiquitously distributed in cells, present study examined the
mechanism(s) by which CTR-stimulated PKA activity is regulated in time
and space.CT reduced cell adhesion but increased invasion of prostate
cancer cells, both actions were abolished by AKAP St-Ht31 inhibitor
peptide suggesting the involvement of an AKAP in CT action. Next, we
identified the AKAP associated with CT action by subtraction of AKAP
candidates using siRNAs. Knock-down of AKAP2, but not other AKAPs,
abolished CT stimulated invasion. AKAP2 was localized to the plasma
membrane. Stable knock-down of AKAP2 in PC3-CTR cells remarkably
decreased cell proliferation, invasion, clonogenicity and their ability
to form orthotopic tumors and distant metastases in nude mice.
Reexpression of AKAP2-wt restored these characteristics. Primary prostate
cancer specimens displayed remarkable up-regulation of CTR/AKAP2
expression as compared to benign prostates. Metastatic cancers displayed
significantly higher CTR/AKAP2 expression than localized cancers.These
results for the first time demonstrate that AKAP2 is expressed in human
prostates, its expression is elevated in metastatic prostate cancer, and
the knock-down of its expression remarkably decreased tumorigenicity and
metastatic ability of prostate cancer cells. AKAP2 may serve as a
critical component of CTR-mediated oncogenic actions.

