Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dietary n-6 fatty acids and risk of hepatocellular carcinoma among
Chinese in Singapore: The Singapore Chinese Health Study


Prospective epidemiologic data showed aspirin use was associated with a
49% reduction in the risk of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Aspirin
inhibits the COX-2 enzymatic pathway that converts arachidonic acid [an
n-6 polyunsaturated fatty acid (FA) derived from other dietary n-6 FA
including gamma-linolenic and linoleic acids] to prostaglandins, and the
latter have in turn been implicated in chronic inflammation underlying
carcinogenesis. Recent work on the lipidomic signature of lipid
metabolism also suggests that long chain n-6 FA may play a role in HCC.
However, little is known about the relation between dietary n-6 FA and
risk of HCC. We examined this association using the Singapore Chinese
Health Study, a population-based prospective cohort of 63,257 middle-aged
and older Chinese men and women enrolled between 1993 and 1998. Detailed
information on current diet, assessed via a validated food frequency
questionnaire, medical history and lifestyle factors were obtained
through in-person interview at enrollment. As of 31 December 2010, after
an average of 14 years of follow-up, we identified 486 subjects who had
developed incident HCC via linkage with the Singapore Cancer Registry. We
used the Cox regression methods to examine intake of energy-adjusted
dietary FA in relation to HCC risk with adjustment for age at baseline,
dialect, education, smoking status, intake of alcohol and coffee, daily
energy intake and history of diabetes. Among all the dietary fat
components examined, which included saturated, monounsaturated, total
polyunsaturated, n-3 and n-6 FA, only n-6 fatty acid intake displayed a
significant dose-dependent, positive association with HCC risk (p for
trend=0.02). Compared to those in the lowest quartile, the hazard ratios
[95% confidence interval (CI)] in quartiles 2, 3 and 4 were 1.23
(0.95-1.58), 1.32 (1.02-1.71), and 1.35 (1.04-1.76), respectively. Ration
of n-6 to n-3 fatty acid intake was also positively associated with HCC
risk although result was not statistically significant. When examined
within a case-control set of 92 cases and 274 controls with serological
biomarkers of hepatitis B and C infection nested within this cohort, the
association between n-6 fatty acid and HCC risk was seen only in those
negative for serology markers of hepatitis B or C infection (38 cases and
221 controls). Compared to less than median intake, those with higher
intake had an odds ratio (95% CI) of 2.64 (1.19-5.88). Conversely, the
association was null among subjects positive for serologic markers of
hepatitis B or C infection [odds ratio of 0.94 (0.39-2.29)]. The result
for the n-6 to n-3 fatty acid intake ratio was similar, compared to those
with less than median value, those with higher ratios had an odds ratio
(95% CI) of 2.79 (1.26-6.16) for HCC risk. Results from this study
supports the hypothesis that n-6 fatty acid is implicated in the
carcinogenesis of non-viral hepatitis related HCC.

