Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synergistic effect of JQ1 and rapamycin for treatment of human
osteosarcoma


Bromodomain and extra terminal domain (BET) proteins are important
epigenetic regulators facillitating the transcription of genes in
chromatin areas linked to acetylated histones. JQ1, a BET protein
inhibitor, has antiproliferative activity againts many hematological and
solid cancers, mainly through inhibition of c-myc and upregulation of
p21. In this research, we investigated the use of JQ1 for human
osteosarcoma (OS) treatment, due to the frequent copy number gain and
overexpression of c-myc in OS cells. JQ1 significantly inhibited the
proliferation and survival of seven OS cells (U2OS, G292, MG-63, HT-161,
MNNG/HOS, SAOS-2, SJSA), at a relatively higher dose than other cancers
(median IC50 = 7.35 M). JQ1 induced G1 cell cycle arrest and premature
senescence of OS cells, but produced little apoptosis. Interestingly,
c-myc protein levels in JQ1-treated cells remained unchanged, whereas the
upregulation of p21 protein was still observable, as noted by Western
blots. Although effective in vitro, JQ1 failed to reduce the size of the
MNNG/HOS xenografts in immunocompromised mice in vivo.To overcome the
resistance of OS cells to JQ1 treatment, we tested JQ1 in combination
with rapamycin. Rapamycin inhibits the assembly of mTOR complexes which
is one of the important growth signaling pathways in many cancers
including OS. JQ1 and rapamycin synergistically inhibited the growth and
survival of OS cells in vitro. The drug combination nearly abrogated
expression of c-myc protein, enhanced levels of p21, and induced
apoptosis in OS cells in vitro. After 24 days of treatment in vivo, JQ1
(50mg/kg body weight) or rapamycin (1.5 mg/kg body weight) alone showed
little effect on the size of human OS xenografts in nude mice. However,
combination of both drugs significantly inhibited tumor growth by 85% and
73% (pBromodomain and extra terminal domain (BET) proteins are important
epigenetic regulators facillitating the transcription of genes in
chromatin areas linked to acetylated histones. JQ1, a BET protein
inhibitor, has antiproliferative activity againts many hematological and
solid cancers, mainly through inhibition of c-myc and upregulation of
p21. In this research, we investigated the use of JQ1 for human
osteosarcoma (OS) treatment, due to the frequent copy number gain and
overexpression of c-myc in OS cells. JQ1 significantly inhibited the
proliferation and survival of seven OS cells (U2OS, G292, MG-63, HT-161,
MNNG/HOS, SAOS-2, SJSA), at a relatively higher dose than other cancers
(median IC50 = 7.35 M). JQ1 induced G1 cell cycle arrest and premature
senescence of OS cells, but produced little apoptosis. Interestingly,
c-myc protein levels in JQ1-treated cells remained unchanged, whereas the
upregulation of p21 protein was still observable, as noted by Western
blots. Although effective in vitro, JQ1 failed to reduce the size of the
MNNG/HOS xenografts in immunocompromised mice in vivo.To overcome the
resistance of OS cells to JQ1 treatment, we tested JQ1 in combination
with rapamycin. Rapamycin inhibits the assembly of mTOR complexes which
is one of the important growth signaling pathways in many cancers
including OS. JQ1 and rapamycin synergistically inhibited the growth and
survival of OS cells in vitro. The drug combination nearly abrogated
expression of c-myc protein, enhanced levels of p21, and induced
apoptosis in OS cells in vitro. After 24 days of treatment in vivo, JQ1
(50mg/kg body weight) or rapamycin (1.5 mg/kg body weight) alone showed
little effect on the size of human OS xenografts in nude mice. However,
combination of both drugs significantly inhibited tumor growth by 85% and
73% (p<0.05 for both) compared to either JQ1 or rapamycin alone,
respectively.In conclusion, JQ1 inhibited proliferation and survival of
OS cells in vitro but failed to reduce growth of OS xenografts in
immunodeficient mice. When combined with rapamycin, JQ1 synergistically
inhibited proliferation of OS cells both in vitro and in vivo.

