Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PI-1840, a novel non-covalent and rapidly reversible proteasome
inhibitor with anti-tumor activity


Non-covalent proteasome inhibitors that are less toxic and more effective
against solid tumors than currently used proteasome inhibitors are
desirable. Through HTS and hit-to-lead optimization efforts we have
identified PI-1840, a potent and selective inhibitor for
chymotrypsin-like (CT-L) (IC50 value = 27 0.14 nM) over T-L and PGPH
(IC50 values >100 M) activities of the proteasome. Furthermore, PI-1840
is over 100-fold more selective for the constitutive proteasome over the
immunoproteasome. Dialysis and mass spectrometry studies demonstrate that
PI-1840 is a non-covalent and rapidly reversible CT-L inhibitor. PI-1840
inhibits CT-L activity, induces the accumulation of proteasome substrates
p27, Bax and IB-, inhibits survival pathways and proliferation, and
induces apoptosis in human cancer cells. The mdm2/p53 disruptor, nutlin,
sensitizes cancer cells to PI-1840 in a p53-dependent manner.
Furthermore, the pan Bcl-2 antagonist BH3-M6 also sensitizes cancer cells
to PI-1840. Finally, in vivo, PI-1840 but not Bortezomib (clinically used
proteasome inhibitor) suppresses the growth in nude mice of human breast
xenografts. These results warrant further evaluation of non-covalent and
rapidly reversible proteasome inhibitor as potential anticancer agents
against solid tumors.

