Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The HSP90 inhibitor, AT13387, combined with erlotinib improves
response in EGFR-driven xenograft models of NSCLC


Background: Although Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor (EGFR)-driven
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) can be successfully treated with EGFR
inhibitors such as erlotinib, relapse is common due to the development of
resistance. Methods to improve response and delay resistance are
therefore of value. Inhibition of the chaperone, HSP90, leads to the
depletion of many client proteins, including EGFR, and has the capacity
to simultaneously affect many signalling pathways, offering an
alternative strategy for targeting EGFR-driven disease. AT13387 is a
potent, second generation HSP90 inhibitor currently being tested in Phase
II clinical trials. Here we investigated the effects of combining AT13387
and erlotinib in models of EGFR-driven NSCLC.Results: AT13387
single-agent treatment was effective in EGFR-driven NSCLC xenograft
models, significantly inhibiting tumor growth of both HCC827 and
NCI-H1650 xenograft tumors when dosed once weekly (see table). As
expected, treatment with erlotinib caused significant tumor regression in
all HCC827 tumors, but was less effective in the NCI-H1650 model; its
PTEN status conferring a reduction in sensitivity. However, combination
of AT13387 with erlotinib led to a further enhancement of tumor growth
inhibition over either of the monotherapies in both of these models. All
HCC827 tumors treated with the combination regressed further (by at least
80%), and regression was also now observed in all NCI-H1650 tumors. These
data demonstrate that combination with AT13387 has the potential to
increase response, despite the differing initial sensitivities to
erlotinib of these models. The combination was well tolerated.
Conclusions: AT13387 was shown to improve response when combined with
erlotinib in EGFR-driven xenograft models. These data suggest that there
is therapeutic potential in an upfront combination of an HSP90 inhibitor,
such as AT13387, with erlotinib and support clinical investigation of
such a combination.

