Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Temporally and spatially inducible mouse model of aneuploidy


Aneuploidy, the state in which cells have an abnormal number of
chromosomes, is a hallmark of most human cancers. Despite aneuploidy's
near-ubiquitous presence in tumors, it is unknown whether aneuploidy is a
driver or passenger in cancer progression. Aneuploidy is normally
prevented by the spindle assembly checkpoint (SAC), a critical cellular
mechanism which blocks chromosomal missegregation by inhibiting premature
sister chromatid separation during mitosis. Although transgenic mouse
models with defective SAC proteins exist, the dysfunctional proteins are
expressed constitutively from birth in all tissues, a milieu that differs
from that of an in vivo human tumor in which cancer cells develop
aneuploidy de novo in the context of a euploid organism. In order to
generate a mouse model that more closely approximates this tumor
environment, we will insert single copies of shRNA hairpins that target
SAC proteins BubR1 or Mad2 into the mouse genome at the Col1A1 locus
using recombination mediated cassette exchange. shRNA expression will be
under the control of a tetracycline responsive element in tissues that
co-express rtTA, leading to temporally and spatially inducible disruption
of the SAC, and thus aneuploidy. In vitro shRNA construct validation
experiments indicate our shRNAs successfully knockdown target RNA and
protein levels, as well as functionally promote mitotic slippage after
nocodazole arrest, which is indicative of an impaired SAC. We will use
this mouse model to investigate the role of increased chromosomal
missegregation on tumor initiation and evolution, as well as the impact
of increased aneuploidy on normal organ function.[Daniel Eichberg is a
Howard Hughes Medical Institute Medical Research Fellow.]

