Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SRI-28731, a highly potent and selective MAP4K4 (HGK) inhibitor
for cancer therapy


MAP4K4, a Ser/Thr kinase, was identified as an important pro-migratory
kinase in an siRNA screen, targeting 5,234 human genes for modulators of
tumor cell motility. MAP4K4 siRNA potently suppressed cell invasion and
migration of multiple cancer cell lines, indicating a broad role in cell
motility. There are no drugs in the clinic that are known to specifically
target MAP4K4 for cancer therapy.We have successfully developed an orally
active, highly effective and selective MAP4K4 inhibitor (SRI-28731) with
potent in vitro and in vivo anticancer activity. SRI-28731 is more potent
than Paclitaxel (Taxol) against most of the breast cancer cell lines
tested. SRI-28731 exhibits more potent activities against triple negative
(MDA-MB-231, BT549 and Hs578T) than estrogen-dependent (T47D and MCF-7)
breast cancer cell lines, and its potency is positively correlated with
MAP4K4 expression in cancer cell lines. SRI-28731 is also more potent
than Docetaxel against both androgen-dependent (LNCaP) and -independent
(PC-3 and DU-145) prostate cancer cell lines. In vitro mechanistic
studies showed that SRI-28731 induced apoptosis and a time-dependent M
phase arrest. Treatment with SRI-28731 (12.5, 25 and 50 mg/kg/day) caused
a significant dose-dependent growth reduction of PC-3 tumors (30%, 61%
and 88% growth inhibition, respectively), while Docetaxel at its MTD (7.5
mg/kg; Q3Dx2) produced only 10-15% growth inhibition. At the end of PC-3
tumor xenograft studies, we conducted an ex vivo invasion assay using
PC-3 tumor cells isolated from tumor-bearing mice. SRI-28731
significantly reduced ex vivo tumor cell invasion by 80%. Pharmacokinetic
studies showed that SRI-28731 could be detected in plasma up to 8 hours
after oral dosing, and drug plasma concentrations remained above the IC50
values needed to inhibit prostate or breast cancer proliferation.To
quantitatively define the kinase selectivity of SRI-28731, we tested the
interaction of SRI-28731 with 456 kinase protein kinases (KINOMEscan),
followed by in vitro pharmacology studies. Our data indicated that
SRI-28731 is a highly selective Type-II MAP4K4 inhibitor. Type II kinase
inhibitors bind to both the ATP site and an adjacent hydrophobic site
exposed in the non-activated kinase state. Generally, type II inhibitors
show higher selectivity for targets, and act primarily by locking the
equilibrium switch between conformational states in a way that prevents
kinase activation, rather than directly inhibiting it. Elevated MAP4K4
expression is strongly associated with higher rate of metastasis, and is
regarded as an independent predictor of overall survival in cancer
patients. Since MAP4K4 is overexpressed in many human cancer cell lines
but is undetectable in non-transformed epithelial cells, targeting MAP4K4
may provide effective anti-metastatic therapy with limited side effects
on normal tissues.

