Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The long intergenic noncoding RNA LINC00340 is a neuroblastoma
susceptibility gene


Background: Neuroblastoma is a clinically heterogeneous childhood tumor
that presents as high-risk disease in 40% of diagnoses, and is fatal in
roughly half of these patients despite aggressive multi-modal therapy. In
an effort to understand the etiology of high-risk neuroblastoma, our lab
previously undertook a genome-wide association study (2101 cases, 4202
controls), which identified a cluster of single-nucleotide polymorphisms
on chromosome 6p that correlated with a significantly increased chance of
developing of high-risk disease (p Background: Neuroblastoma is a
clinically heterogeneous childhood tumor that presents as high-risk
disease in 40% of diagnoses, and is fatal in roughly half of these
patients despite aggressive multi-modal therapy. In an effort to
understand the etiology of high-risk neuroblastoma, our lab previously
undertook a genome-wide association study (2101 cases, 4202 controls),
which identified a cluster of single-nucleotide polymorphisms on
chromosome 6p that correlated with a significantly increased chance of
developing of high-risk disease (p < 1e-15). Here we present evidence
that these polymorphisms fall within a long intergenic non-coding RNA
(LINC00340) termed cancer-associated susceptibility 15 gene (CASC15),
which we hypothesize plays a critical role in the development of
high-risk neuroblastoma through the dysregulation of neuronal growth and
differentiation pathways.Methods: CASC15 expression from patient samples
(n=251) was obtained via Affymetrix Human Exon 1.0ST arrays, whereas
expression in cell lines was assessed by qRT-PCR. CASC15 isoform
sequences were validated through the use of 5 and 3 RACE, and subcellular
localization was visualized using RNA-FISH. CASC15 depletion was carried
out using both siRNA and shRNA constructs, and cell viability and growth
kinetics were measured using the CellTiter-Glo and Xcelligence platforms.
Gene expression analyses of neuroblastoma cell lines stably silenced for
CASC15 was done through hybridization to Human Transcriptome 2.0 arrays
followed by gene set enrichment and Ingenuity pathway analysis.Results:
Our data demonstrates that patients with high-risk neuroblastoma express
significantly less CASC15 than do those with low-risk disease (p
Background: Neuroblastoma is a clinically heterogeneous childhood tumor
that presents as high-risk disease in 40% of diagnoses, and is fatal in
roughly half of these patients despite aggressive multi-modal therapy. In
an effort to understand the etiology of high-risk neuroblastoma, our lab
previously undertook a genome-wide association study (2101 cases, 4202
controls), which identified a cluster of single-nucleotide polymorphisms
on chromosome 6p that correlated with a significantly increased chance of
developing of high-risk disease (p < 1e-15). Here we present evidence
that these polymorphisms fall within a long intergenic non-coding RNA
(LINC00340) termed cancer-associated susceptibility 15 gene (CASC15),
which we hypothesize plays a critical role in the development of
high-risk neuroblastoma through the dysregulation of neuronal growth and
differentiation pathways.Methods: CASC15 expression from patient samples
(n=251) was obtained via Affymetrix Human Exon 1.0ST arrays, whereas
expression in cell lines was assessed by qRT-PCR. CASC15 isoform
sequences were validated through the use of 5 and 3 RACE, and subcellular
localization was visualized using RNA-FISH. CASC15 depletion was carried
out using both siRNA and shRNA constructs, and cell viability and growth
kinetics were measured using the CellTiter-Glo and Xcelligence platforms.
Gene expression analyses of neuroblastoma cell lines stably silenced for
CASC15 was done through hybridization to Human Transcriptome 2.0 arrays
followed by gene set enrichment and Ingenuity pathway analysis.Results:
Our data demonstrates that patients with high-risk neuroblastoma express
significantly less CASC15 than do those with low-risk disease (p <
0.0001), and that CASC15 expression inversely correlates with overall
survival (bonf p = 3.1e-05). Expression of CASC15 is variable amongst
neuroblastoma cell lines (n= 21), and is predominantly nuclear. Depletion
of CASC15 increases the rate of substrate-dependent adherent cellular
growth, but has no effect on overall cell number or viability. In
contrast, ectopic overexpression of CASC15 in neuroblastoma cell lines is
not tolerated. Subsequent observation of cells with stable CASC15
depletion shows overt morphological changes suggestive of a less neuronal
phenotype. Gene set expression and pathway analyses confirm that these
cells undergo a significant downregulation of neuronal markers, while
upregulating cell adhesion molecules.Conclusions: These data suggest that
CASC15 may be integral for proper neuronal development, and that loss of
CASC15 may leads to a less differentiated cell type, thereby contributing
to the tumorigenesis of high-risk neuroblastoma.

