Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Generalizability of established prostate cancer risk variants in
men of African ancestry


Background: Genome-wide association studies have identified more than
eighty risk variants for prostate cancer, mainly in European or Asian
populations. The generalizability of these variants in other
racial/ethnic populations needs to be understood before the loci can be
utilized widely in risk modeling.Methods: We examined 82 previously
reported risk variants in 5,096 prostate cancer cases and 4,972 controls
of African ancestry. Association testing was performed using logistic
regression adjusted for age, study and global ancestry. Cumulative
effects were assessed through a multi-SNP genetic risk score.Results:
Among the 82 known risk alleles, 68 (83%) were positively associated with
prostate cancer risk in men of African ancestry and 30 (37%) were
minimally replicated at pBackground: Genome-wide association studies have
identified more than eighty risk variants for prostate cancer, mainly in
European or Asian populations. The generalizability of these variants in
other racial/ethnic populations needs to be understood before the loci
can be utilized widely in risk modeling.Methods: We examined 82
previously reported risk variants in 5,096 prostate cancer cases and
4,972 controls of African ancestry. Association testing was performed
using logistic regression adjusted for age, study and global ancestry.
Cumulative effects were assessed through a multi-SNP genetic risk
score.Results: Among the 82 known risk alleles, 68 (83%) were positively
associated with prostate cancer risk in men of African ancestry and 30
(37%) were minimally replicated at p<0.05, with the most statistically
significant variants being rs6983561 (p=1.110-16) and rs13254738
(p=1.810-15) at 8q24, as well as rs10896449 at 11q13 (p=5.510-7). With
80% statistical power, 27 variants failed to replicate at pBackground:
Genome-wide association studies have identified more than eighty risk
variants for prostate cancer, mainly in European or Asian populations.
The generalizability of these variants in other racial/ethnic populations
needs to be understood before the loci can be utilized widely in risk
modeling.Methods: We examined 82 previously reported risk variants in
5,096 prostate cancer cases and 4,972 controls of African ancestry.
Association testing was performed using logistic regression adjusted for
age, study and global ancestry. Cumulative effects were assessed through
a multi-SNP genetic risk score.Results: Among the 82 known risk alleles,
68 (83%) were positively associated with prostate cancer risk in men of
African ancestry and 30 (37%) were minimally replicated at p<0.05, with
the most statistically significant variants being rs6983561 (p=1.110-16)
and rs13254738 (p=1.810-15) at 8q24, as well as rs10896449 at 11q13
(p=5.510-7). With 80% statistical power, 27 variants failed to replicate
at p<0.05. An aggregate score comprised of 79 unlinked alleles was
strongly and equally associated with overall prostate cancer risk
(per-allele odds ratio (OR)=1.06; p=1.210-47) and aggressive prostate
cancer risk (OR=1.06; p=1.210-22).Conclusions: The consistent directions
of effect for the vast majority of variants in men of African ancestry
indicate common functional alleles that are shared across populations.
Some variants that failed to replicate may not be the best markers of
prostate cancer risk for men of African ancestry, and thus further
exploration of these loci through sequencing and fine-mapping is needed.

