Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PKA/AMPK signaling is a mediator of the anti-proliferative effect
of adiponectin on multiple myeloma cells


Obesity increases the risk of developing multiple myeloma (MM).
Adiponectin is a cytokine produced primarily by adipocytes, but
paradoxically decreased in obesity, that has been implicated in
progression of multiple myeloma. Herein, we evaluated the effects of
prolonged exposure to adiponectin on the survival of MM cells as well as
putative signaling mechanisms. We found that adiponectin activates PKA,
which leads to decreased AKT activity and increased AMPK activation.
AMPK, in turn, induces cell cycle arrest and apoptosis.
Adiponectin-induced apoptosis may be mediated, at least in part, by the
PKA/AMPK-dependent decline in the expression of the enzyme
acetyl-CoA-carboxylase (ACC), which is critical to lipogenesis and thus
cell survival. Importantly, supplementation with palmitic acid, the
preliminary end product of fatty acid synthesis, rescues MM cells from
adiponectin-induced apoptosis. Furthermore, 5-(tetradecyloxy)-2-furan
carboxylic acid (TOFA), an ACC inhibitor, exhibited potent
anti-proliferative effects on MM cells that could also be inhibited by
fatty acid supplementation. Thus, the effect of adiponectin to reduce
survival of MM cells appear to be mediated via its ability to suppress
lipogenesis. Our findings suggest that activators of the PKA/AMPK
pathway, or inhibitors of ACC, may be useful adjuvants in the treatment
of MM. Moreover, the anti-myeloma effect of adiponectin supports the
concept that decreased circulating levels of the adipokine, as occurs in
obesity, promotes MM tumor progression.

