Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combination of metformin plus orlistat prevents tumor progression:
novel role of the metabolic hormone fibroblast growth factor 21 (FGF21)


Caloric Restriction (CR) is known to be the only model to consistently
increase the lifespan and postpone age-related diseases in all species.
CR increases glycogenolysis, lipolysis with fatty acid and ketone body
utilization and accelerates protein catabolism. We previously reported
that CR induces metabolic and signaling changes that affect the tumor
microenvironment preventing the growth of 4T1 mammary tumors and their
metastases. 4T1 is a highly metastatic mouse breast cancer model which
resembles breast cancer in patients. Obesity causes subclinical
inflammation in adipose tissue that contributes to insulin resistance and
cancer progression. Chronic inflammation predisposes to different forms
of cancer and diabetes, and is correlated with increased risk of breast
cancer. CR reduces insulin resistance, adiposity and inflammation and the
anti-diabetic drug metformin (MET) is a CR mimetic agent. In this study,
we evaluated whether the combination of MET with the anti-obesity drug
orlistat (OR) enhances the CR mimetic and anti-cancer properties of MET
on 4T1 mammary tumor cells. Female 8 week-old BALB/c mice received:
vehicle, MET (in drinking water, 3mg/ml), OR i.p. injection
(240mg/kg/day) or MET + OR. After 3 weeks on drugs, 4T1 cells (105) were
injected into mice and drugs continued till the end of the experiment.
Treated-mice had a reduced adiposity (pCaloric Restriction (CR) is known
to be the only model to consistently increase the lifespan and postpone
age-related diseases in all species. CR increases glycogenolysis,
lipolysis with fatty acid and ketone body utilization and accelerates
protein catabolism. We previously reported that CR induces metabolic and
signaling changes that affect the tumor microenvironment preventing the
growth of 4T1 mammary tumors and their metastases. 4T1 is a highly
metastatic mouse breast cancer model which resembles breast cancer in
patients. Obesity causes subclinical inflammation in adipose tissue that
contributes to insulin resistance and cancer progression. Chronic
inflammation predisposes to different forms of cancer and diabetes, and
is correlated with increased risk of breast cancer. CR reduces insulin
resistance, adiposity and inflammation and the anti-diabetic drug
metformin (MET) is a CR mimetic agent. In this study, we evaluated
whether the combination of MET with the anti-obesity drug orlistat (OR)
enhances the CR mimetic and anti-cancer properties of MET on 4T1 mammary
tumor cells. Female 8 week-old BALB/c mice received: vehicle, MET (in
drinking water, 3mg/ml), OR i.p. injection (240mg/kg/day) or MET + OR.
After 3 weeks on drugs, 4T1 cells (105) were injected into mice and drugs
continued till the end of the experiment. Treated-mice had a reduced
adiposity (p<0.05) without any signs of toxicity. At 30 days, MET + OR
co-treatment reduced tumor volume (pCaloric Restriction (CR) is known to
be the only model to consistently increase the lifespan and postpone
age-related diseases in all species. CR increases glycogenolysis,
lipolysis with fatty acid and ketone body utilization and accelerates
protein catabolism. We previously reported that CR induces metabolic and
signaling changes that affect the tumor microenvironment preventing the
growth of 4T1 mammary tumors and their metastases. 4T1 is a highly
metastatic mouse breast cancer model which resembles breast cancer in
patients. Obesity causes subclinical inflammation in adipose tissue that
contributes to insulin resistance and cancer progression. Chronic
inflammation predisposes to different forms of cancer and diabetes, and
is correlated with increased risk of breast cancer. CR reduces insulin
resistance, adiposity and inflammation and the anti-diabetic drug
metformin (MET) is a CR mimetic agent. In this study, we evaluated
whether the combination of MET with the anti-obesity drug orlistat (OR)
enhances the CR mimetic and anti-cancer properties of MET on 4T1 mammary
tumor cells. Female 8 week-old BALB/c mice received: vehicle, MET (in
drinking water, 3mg/ml), OR i.p. injection (240mg/kg/day) or MET + OR.
After 3 weeks on drugs, 4T1 cells (105) were injected into mice and drugs
continued till the end of the experiment. Treated-mice had a reduced
adiposity (p<0.05) without any signs of toxicity. At 30 days, MET + OR
co-treatment reduced tumor volume (p<0.01) and displayed a range of
cellular alterations such as decreased proliferative index (pCaloric
Restriction (CR) is known to be the only model to consistently increase
the lifespan and postpone age-related diseases in all species. CR
increases glycogenolysis, lipolysis with fatty acid and ketone body
utilization and accelerates protein catabolism. We previously reported
that CR induces metabolic and signaling changes that affect the tumor
microenvironment preventing the growth of 4T1 mammary tumors and their
metastases. 4T1 is a highly metastatic mouse breast cancer model which
resembles breast cancer in patients. Obesity causes subclinical
inflammation in adipose tissue that contributes to insulin resistance and
cancer progression. Chronic inflammation predisposes to different forms
of cancer and diabetes, and is correlated with increased risk of breast
cancer. CR reduces insulin resistance, adiposity and inflammation and the
anti-diabetic drug metformin (MET) is a CR mimetic agent. In this study,
we evaluated whether the combination of MET with the anti-obesity drug
orlistat (OR) enhances the CR mimetic and anti-cancer properties of MET
on 4T1 mammary tumor cells. Female 8 week-old BALB/c mice received:
vehicle, MET (in drinking water, 3mg/ml), OR i.p. injection
(240mg/kg/day) or MET + OR. After 3 weeks on drugs, 4T1 cells (105) were
injected into mice and drugs continued till the end of the experiment.
Treated-mice had a reduced adiposity (p<0.05) without any signs of
toxicity. At 30 days, MET + OR co-treatment reduced tumor volume (p<0.01)
and displayed a range of cellular alterations such as decreased
proliferative index (p<0.05); increased apoptotic rate (pCaloric
Restriction (CR) is known to be the only model to consistently increase
the lifespan and postpone age-related diseases in all species. CR
increases glycogenolysis, lipolysis with fatty acid and ketone body
utilization and accelerates protein catabolism. We previously reported
that CR induces metabolic and signaling changes that affect the tumor
microenvironment preventing the growth of 4T1 mammary tumors and their
metastases. 4T1 is a highly metastatic mouse breast cancer model which
resembles breast cancer in patients. Obesity causes subclinical
inflammation in adipose tissue that contributes to insulin resistance and
cancer progression. Chronic inflammation predisposes to different forms
of cancer and diabetes, and is correlated with increased risk of breast
cancer. CR reduces insulin resistance, adiposity and inflammation and the
anti-diabetic drug metformin (MET) is a CR mimetic agent. In this study,
we evaluated whether the combination of MET with the anti-obesity drug
orlistat (OR) enhances the CR mimetic and anti-cancer properties of MET
on 4T1 mammary tumor cells. Female 8 week-old BALB/c mice received:
vehicle, MET (in drinking water, 3mg/ml), OR i.p. injection
(240mg/kg/day) or MET + OR. After 3 weeks on drugs, 4T1 cells (105) were
injected into mice and drugs continued till the end of the experiment.
Treated-mice had a reduced adiposity (p<0.05) without any signs of
toxicity. At 30 days, MET + OR co-treatment reduced tumor volume (p<0.01)
and displayed a range of cellular alterations such as decreased
proliferative index (p<0.05); increased apoptotic rate (p<0.01) and
altered intra-tumor collagen deposit. MET + OR treatment reduced total
vessel length (pCaloric Restriction (CR) is known to be the only model to
consistently increase the lifespan and postpone age-related diseases in
all species. CR increases glycogenolysis, lipolysis with fatty acid and
ketone body utilization and accelerates protein catabolism. We previously
reported that CR induces metabolic and signaling changes that affect the
tumor microenvironment preventing the growth of 4T1 mammary tumors and
their metastases. 4T1 is a highly metastatic mouse breast cancer model
which resembles breast cancer in patients. Obesity causes subclinical
inflammation in adipose tissue that contributes to insulin resistance and
cancer progression. Chronic inflammation predisposes to different forms
of cancer and diabetes, and is correlated with increased risk of breast
cancer. CR reduces insulin resistance, adiposity and inflammation and the
anti-diabetic drug metformin (MET) is a CR mimetic agent. In this study,
we evaluated whether the combination of MET with the anti-obesity drug
orlistat (OR) enhances the CR mimetic and anti-cancer properties of MET
on 4T1 mammary tumor cells. Female 8 week-old BALB/c mice received:
vehicle, MET (in drinking water, 3mg/ml), OR i.p. injection
(240mg/kg/day) or MET + OR. After 3 weeks on drugs, 4T1 cells (105) were
injected into mice and drugs continued till the end of the experiment.
Treated-mice had a reduced adiposity (p<0.05) without any signs of
toxicity. At 30 days, MET + OR co-treatment reduced tumor volume (p<0.01)
and displayed a range of cellular alterations such as decreased
proliferative index (p<0.05); increased apoptotic rate (p<0.01) and
altered intra-tumor collagen deposit. MET + OR treatment reduced total
vessel length (p<0.01) and the number of spontaneous lung metastases
(pCaloric Restriction (CR) is known to be the only model to consistently
increase the lifespan and postpone age-related diseases in all species.
CR increases glycogenolysis, lipolysis with fatty acid and ketone body
utilization and accelerates protein catabolism. We previously reported
that CR induces metabolic and signaling changes that affect the tumor
microenvironment preventing the growth of 4T1 mammary tumors and their
metastases. 4T1 is a highly metastatic mouse breast cancer model which
resembles breast cancer in patients. Obesity causes subclinical
inflammation in adipose tissue that contributes to insulin resistance and
cancer progression. Chronic inflammation predisposes to different forms
of cancer and diabetes, and is correlated with increased risk of breast
cancer. CR reduces insulin resistance, adiposity and inflammation and the
anti-diabetic drug metformin (MET) is a CR mimetic agent. In this study,
we evaluated whether the combination of MET with the anti-obesity drug
orlistat (OR) enhances the CR mimetic and anti-cancer properties of MET
on 4T1 mammary tumor cells. Female 8 week-old BALB/c mice received:
vehicle, MET (in drinking water, 3mg/ml), OR i.p. injection
(240mg/kg/day) or MET + OR. After 3 weeks on drugs, 4T1 cells (105) were
injected into mice and drugs continued till the end of the experiment.
Treated-mice had a reduced adiposity (p<0.05) without any signs of
toxicity. At 30 days, MET + OR co-treatment reduced tumor volume (p<0.01)
and displayed a range of cellular alterations such as decreased
proliferative index (p<0.05); increased apoptotic rate (p<0.01) and
altered intra-tumor collagen deposit. MET + OR treatment reduced total
vessel length (p<0.01) and the number of spontaneous lung metastases
(p<0.01). In addition, combinations of MET (1-2.5mM) + OR (2.5-5M)
decreased in vitro 4T1 mammary cell proliferation (pCaloric Restriction
(CR) is known to be the only model to consistently increase the lifespan
and postpone age-related diseases in all species. CR increases
glycogenolysis, lipolysis with fatty acid and ketone body utilization and
accelerates protein catabolism. We previously reported that CR induces
metabolic and signaling changes that affect the tumor microenvironment
preventing the growth of 4T1 mammary tumors and their metastases. 4T1 is
a highly metastatic mouse breast cancer model which resembles breast
cancer in patients. Obesity causes subclinical inflammation in adipose
tissue that contributes to insulin resistance and cancer progression.
Chronic inflammation predisposes to different forms of cancer and
diabetes, and is correlated with increased risk of breast cancer. CR
reduces insulin resistance, adiposity and inflammation and the
anti-diabetic drug metformin (MET) is a CR mimetic agent. In this study,
we evaluated whether the combination of MET with the anti-obesity drug
orlistat (OR) enhances the CR mimetic and anti-cancer properties of MET
on 4T1 mammary tumor cells. Female 8 week-old BALB/c mice received:
vehicle, MET (in drinking water, 3mg/ml), OR i.p. injection
(240mg/kg/day) or MET + OR. After 3 weeks on drugs, 4T1 cells (105) were
injected into mice and drugs continued till the end of the experiment.
Treated-mice had a reduced adiposity (p<0.05) without any signs of
toxicity. At 30 days, MET + OR co-treatment reduced tumor volume (p<0.01)
and displayed a range of cellular alterations such as decreased
proliferative index (p<0.05); increased apoptotic rate (p<0.01) and
altered intra-tumor collagen deposit. MET + OR treatment reduced total
vessel length (p<0.01) and the number of spontaneous lung metastases
(p<0.01). In addition, combinations of MET (1-2.5mM) + OR (2.5-5M)
decreased in vitro 4T1 mammary cell proliferation (p<0.01), adhesion
(pCaloric Restriction (CR) is known to be the only model to consistently
increase the lifespan and postpone age-related diseases in all species.
CR increases glycogenolysis, lipolysis with fatty acid and ketone body
utilization and accelerates protein catabolism. We previously reported
that CR induces metabolic and signaling changes that affect the tumor
microenvironment preventing the growth of 4T1 mammary tumors and their
metastases. 4T1 is a highly metastatic mouse breast cancer model which
resembles breast cancer in patients. Obesity causes subclinical
inflammation in adipose tissue that contributes to insulin resistance and
cancer progression. Chronic inflammation predisposes to different forms
of cancer and diabetes, and is correlated with increased risk of breast
cancer. CR reduces insulin resistance, adiposity and inflammation and the
anti-diabetic drug metformin (MET) is a CR mimetic agent. In this study,
we evaluated whether the combination of MET with the anti-obesity drug
orlistat (OR) enhances the CR mimetic and anti-cancer properties of MET
on 4T1 mammary tumor cells. Female 8 week-old BALB/c mice received:
vehicle, MET (in drinking water, 3mg/ml), OR i.p. injection
(240mg/kg/day) or MET + OR. After 3 weeks on drugs, 4T1 cells (105) were
injected into mice and drugs continued till the end of the experiment.
Treated-mice had a reduced adiposity (p<0.05) without any signs of
toxicity. At 30 days, MET + OR co-treatment reduced tumor volume (p<0.01)
and displayed a range of cellular alterations such as decreased
proliferative index (p<0.05); increased apoptotic rate (p<0.01) and
altered intra-tumor collagen deposit. MET + OR treatment reduced total
vessel length (p<0.01) and the number of spontaneous lung metastases
(p<0.01). In addition, combinations of MET (1-2.5mM) + OR (2.5-5M)
decreased in vitro 4T1 mammary cell proliferation (p<0.01), adhesion
(p<0.05) and migration (pCaloric Restriction (CR) is known to be the only
model to consistently increase the lifespan and postpone age-related
diseases in all species. CR increases glycogenolysis, lipolysis with
fatty acid and ketone body utilization and accelerates protein
catabolism. We previously reported that CR induces metabolic and
signaling changes that affect the tumor microenvironment preventing the
growth of 4T1 mammary tumors and their metastases. 4T1 is a highly
metastatic mouse breast cancer model which resembles breast cancer in
patients. Obesity causes subclinical inflammation in adipose tissue that
contributes to insulin resistance and cancer progression. Chronic
inflammation predisposes to different forms of cancer and diabetes, and
is correlated with increased risk of breast cancer. CR reduces insulin
resistance, adiposity and inflammation and the anti-diabetic drug
metformin (MET) is a CR mimetic agent. In this study, we evaluated
whether the combination of MET with the anti-obesity drug orlistat (OR)
enhances the CR mimetic and anti-cancer properties of MET on 4T1 mammary
tumor cells. Female 8 week-old BALB/c mice received: vehicle, MET (in
drinking water, 3mg/ml), OR i.p. injection (240mg/kg/day) or MET + OR.
After 3 weeks on drugs, 4T1 cells (105) were injected into mice and drugs
continued till the end of the experiment. Treated-mice had a reduced
adiposity (p<0.05) without any signs of toxicity. At 30 days, MET + OR
co-treatment reduced tumor volume (p<0.01) and displayed a range of
cellular alterations such as decreased proliferative index (p<0.05);
increased apoptotic rate (p<0.01) and altered intra-tumor collagen
deposit. MET + OR treatment reduced total vessel length (p<0.01) and the
number of spontaneous lung metastases (p<0.01). In addition, combinations
of MET (1-2.5mM) + OR (2.5-5M) decreased in vitro 4T1 mammary cell
proliferation (p<0.01), adhesion (p<0.05) and migration (p<0.01) compared
to vehicle and drugs alone. Interestingly, we found that levels of
fibroblast growth factor 21 (FGF21), an endocrine factor that regulates
glucose and lipid metabolism, were significantly increased with MET + OR
treatment (pCaloric Restriction (CR) is known to be the only model to
consistently increase the lifespan and postpone age-related diseases in
all species. CR increases glycogenolysis, lipolysis with fatty acid and
ketone body utilization and accelerates protein catabolism. We previously
reported that CR induces metabolic and signaling changes that affect the
tumor microenvironment preventing the growth of 4T1 mammary tumors and
their metastases. 4T1 is a highly metastatic mouse breast cancer model
which resembles breast cancer in patients. Obesity causes subclinical
inflammation in adipose tissue that contributes to insulin resistance and
cancer progression. Chronic inflammation predisposes to different forms
of cancer and diabetes, and is correlated with increased risk of breast
cancer. CR reduces insulin resistance, adiposity and inflammation and the
anti-diabetic drug metformin (MET) is a CR mimetic agent. In this study,
we evaluated whether the combination of MET with the anti-obesity drug
orlistat (OR) enhances the CR mimetic and anti-cancer properties of MET
on 4T1 mammary tumor cells. Female 8 week-old BALB/c mice received:
vehicle, MET (in drinking water, 3mg/ml), OR i.p. injection
(240mg/kg/day) or MET + OR. After 3 weeks on drugs, 4T1 cells (105) were
injected into mice and drugs continued till the end of the experiment.
Treated-mice had a reduced adiposity (p<0.05) without any signs of
toxicity. At 30 days, MET + OR co-treatment reduced tumor volume (p<0.01)
and displayed a range of cellular alterations such as decreased
proliferative index (p<0.05); increased apoptotic rate (p<0.01) and
altered intra-tumor collagen deposit. MET + OR treatment reduced total
vessel length (p<0.01) and the number of spontaneous lung metastases
(p<0.01). In addition, combinations of MET (1-2.5mM) + OR (2.5-5M)
decreased in vitro 4T1 mammary cell proliferation (p<0.01), adhesion
(p<0.05) and migration (p<0.01) compared to vehicle and drugs alone.
Interestingly, we found that levels of fibroblast growth factor 21
(FGF21), an endocrine factor that regulates glucose and lipid metabolism,
were significantly increased with MET + OR treatment (p<0.05). It has
been shown that increased circulating levels of FGF21 correlated with
decreased obesity and increased sensitivity to insulin; but up to date
the role of FGF21 in tumor progression was not elucidated. We found that
treatment of 4T1 cells with MET + OR increased the secretion of FGF21
(pCaloric Restriction (CR) is known to be the only model to consistently
increase the lifespan and postpone age-related diseases in all species.
CR increases glycogenolysis, lipolysis with fatty acid and ketone body
utilization and accelerates protein catabolism. We previously reported
that CR induces metabolic and signaling changes that affect the tumor
microenvironment preventing the growth of 4T1 mammary tumors and their
metastases. 4T1 is a highly metastatic mouse breast cancer model which
resembles breast cancer in patients. Obesity causes subclinical
inflammation in adipose tissue that contributes to insulin resistance and
cancer progression. Chronic inflammation predisposes to different forms
of cancer and diabetes, and is correlated with increased risk of breast
cancer. CR reduces insulin resistance, adiposity and inflammation and the
anti-diabetic drug metformin (MET) is a CR mimetic agent. In this study,
we evaluated whether the combination of MET with the anti-obesity drug
orlistat (OR) enhances the CR mimetic and anti-cancer properties of MET
on 4T1 mammary tumor cells. Female 8 week-old BALB/c mice received:
vehicle, MET (in drinking water, 3mg/ml), OR i.p. injection
(240mg/kg/day) or MET + OR. After 3 weeks on drugs, 4T1 cells (105) were
injected into mice and drugs continued till the end of the experiment.
Treated-mice had a reduced adiposity (p<0.05) without any signs of
toxicity. At 30 days, MET + OR co-treatment reduced tumor volume (p<0.01)
and displayed a range of cellular alterations such as decreased
proliferative index (p<0.05); increased apoptotic rate (p<0.01) and
altered intra-tumor collagen deposit. MET + OR treatment reduced total
vessel length (p<0.01) and the number of spontaneous lung metastases
(p<0.01). In addition, combinations of MET (1-2.5mM) + OR (2.5-5M)
decreased in vitro 4T1 mammary cell proliferation (p<0.01), adhesion
(p<0.05) and migration (p<0.01) compared to vehicle and drugs alone.
Interestingly, we found that levels of fibroblast growth factor 21
(FGF21), an endocrine factor that regulates glucose and lipid metabolism,
were significantly increased with MET + OR treatment (p<0.05). It has
been shown that increased circulating levels of FGF21 correlated with
decreased obesity and increased sensitivity to insulin; but up to date
the role of FGF21 in tumor progression was not elucidated. We found that
treatment of 4T1 cells with MET + OR increased the secretion of FGF21
(p<0.05) measured by ELISA assays. To elucidate the role of FGF21; we
initially demonstrated that addition of recombinant protein FGF21
(0-10nM) did not change 4T1 cell proliferation. In contrast, the reduced
cell proliferation and adhesion induced by MET + OR, were abolished by
the pre- and co-treatment with anti-FGF21 neutralizing antibody;
indicating that FGF21 may play an important role. Our results provide a
new rationale basis for the use of MET plus OR as cancer therapy.

