Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effects of carbon ion beam, alone or in combination with
cisplatin, on triple-negative breast cancer stem-like cells


AimsTo investigate whether a carbon ion beam alone or in combination with
cisplatin has beneficial effects compared to X-ray by targeting putative
triple negative (TN) breast cancer stem cells (CSCs).Materials and
MethodsHuman breast CSCs sorted from MDA MB231 cells were treated with
carbon ion or X-ray irradiation alone or in combination with cisplatin,
and then colony, spheroid and tumor formation assays, RT-PCR Array
analysis as well as immunofluorescence H2AX foci assay were
performed.ResultsThe colony, spheroid formation as well as tumorigenicity
assays confirmed that CD44+/CD24- and CD44+/ESA+ cells exactly have CSC
properties compared to CD44-/CD24- and CD44-/ESA- cells. CSCs were more
highly enriched after X-ray or cisplatin compared to carbon ion beam.
Carbon ion beam combined with cisplatin significantly suppressed colony
and spheroid formation compared to that of X-ray combined with cisplatin
as well as carbon ion alone. RT-PCR Array analysis showed that expression
of DNA repair, apoptosis and autophagy related genes were differently
altered between carbon ion beam and X-ray irradiation alone or in
combination with cisplatin, and carbon ion beam combined with cisplatin
more highly induced apoptosis and autophagy compared to X-ray combined
with cisplatin. Immunofluorescence assay showed that not only the number
but also the size of H2AX foci in CSCs were lager 24 h after carbon ion
beam combined with cisplatin compared to that of X-ray combined with
cisplatin as well as carbon ion alone.ConclusionCarbon ion beam combined
with cisplatin has superior potential to kill TN breast CSCs with
unrepairable severe DNA damage and enhanced apoptosis as well as
autophagy.

