Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HPV detection by PCR in real time in peruvian women


Background. In Per Cervical cancer is a significant public health
problem, according Globocan, it is the most frequent cancer among women
in Peru, the incidence of this cancer is 34.5 and the mortality 16.3. In
2004, cervical cancer was responsible of 66,771 DALYs in Peru, 18.2% of
the total. The human papillomavirus (HPV) is a well-known cause of
cervical cancer. HPV tests are used as an adjunct test to decrease the
false-negative rate of cytological screening. The HPV test will permit to
separate the population in two groups, women with high risk to cancer
cervical (HPV+) and women with low risk to cancer cervical
(HPV-).Objective. To identify the prevalence of the genotypes of Human
Papillomavirus (HPV) in Peruvian women from marginal urban area of Lima
according age.Methodology. Samples of 5460 women aged 18 to 63 years were
studied for analysis by the automated Roche Cobas 4800 system that
detects genotypes 16 and 18 specifically and 12 other genotypes (31, 33,
35, 39, 45, 51, 52, 56, 58, 59, 68, 66) considered high risk HPV, for
this purpose the system uses specific primers for the L1 region of the
viral genome and control the system using B globin gene.Results and
Conclusions. According PCR screening the total samples were 5,460 (100%),
855 (15.62%) were positive by PCR, of the PCR positive 319 were positive
by CBL (5.84%), 16 of them were LIE-AG (0.29%) and 0 carcinomas. The
genotypes of PVH more frequent was 16 (16%), genotype 16 plus others high
risk virus was 69 (8%), PVH 18 was 8 (3%). Of the 853 women that were
positive for PCR, 149 of them had the highest risk HPV genotype 16 and
the age group that most often present for this genotype was 30 to 39
years, this group is consider as high risk population. In general, PCR
have been demonstrated an adequate prevalence rate of women in high risk
according of other literature and we consider as an important test to
cervical cancer control.Ilustracin 1. Frequency of HPV in Peruvian
women.Illustration 2. HPV Genotypes in peruvian womenIllustration 3.
Distribution of CBL (+)Ilustracin 3. Genotipos de PVH y distribucin por
grupo etreo. / HPV genotype distribution per age group.

