Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The monocyte lineage is required for production of clinically
relevant interleukin-6 (IL-6) during chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) T
cell cytotoxicity


BACKGROUND CARs combine a single chain variable fragment (scFv) of an
antibody with intracellular signaling domains into a single chimeric
protein. We previously reported on CAR T cells (CTL019) recognizing CD19
combined with the CD137 and CD3zeta intracellular activation domain,
including 1 sustained CR in a patient with ALL (Grupp, et al. NEJM 2013).
This CR was associated with significant cytokine release syndrome (CRS)
characterized by high IL-6, and toxicity was reversed promptly with
targeted IL-6 blockade via tocilizumab. We investigated the mechanism of
this unexpected CRS using clinical samples.METHODS T cells were
transduced with a CAR composed of anti-CD19 scFv/4-1BB/CD3,
activated/expanded ex-vivo with anti-CD3/anti-CD28 beads. NSG mice were
given 106 of a primary pediatric leukemia IV on Day 0 followed by 107
CTL019 cells from the clinical product of the patient reported in the
NEJM (CHP100) or a normal donor (ND). We gave tocilizumab at 100 mcg IP
before or after CTL019 infusion and examined human cytokine production in
the mouse serum by Luminex.For the in vitro experiment, CTL019 cells were
mixed with Nalm-6 target cells and either autologous monocytes, immature
dendritic cells (iDC), mature dendritic cells (mDC) or macrophages and
cytokines measured by Luminex at 18 and 48 hours.RESULTS The xenograft
model showed efficacy with CTL019 cells extending overall survival in
whether from CHP100 or a ND. Cytokines significantly elevated in mouse
serum (pBACKGROUND CARs combine a single chain variable fragment (scFv)
of an antibody with intracellular signaling domains into a single
chimeric protein. We previously reported on CAR T cells (CTL019)
recognizing CD19 combined with the CD137 and CD3zeta intracellular
activation domain, including 1 sustained CR in a patient with ALL (Grupp,
et al. NEJM 2013). This CR was associated with significant cytokine
release syndrome (CRS) characterized by high IL-6, and toxicity was
reversed promptly with targeted IL-6 blockade via tocilizumab. We
investigated the mechanism of this unexpected CRS using clinical
samples.METHODS T cells were transduced with a CAR composed of anti-CD19
scFv/4-1BB/CD3, activated/expanded ex-vivo with anti-CD3/anti-CD28 beads.
NSG mice were given 106 of a primary pediatric leukemia IV on Day 0
followed by 107 CTL019 cells from the clinical product of the patient
reported in the NEJM (CHP100) or a normal donor (ND). We gave tocilizumab
at 100 mcg IP before or after CTL019 infusion and examined human cytokine
production in the mouse serum by Luminex.For the in vitro experiment,
CTL019 cells were mixed with Nalm-6 target cells and either autologous
monocytes, immature dendritic cells (iDC), mature dendritic cells (mDC)
or macrophages and cytokines measured by Luminex at 18 and 48
hours.RESULTS The xenograft model showed efficacy with CTL019 cells
extending overall survival in whether from CHP100 or a ND. Cytokines
significantly elevated in mouse serum (p<0.05) included interferon-gamma
(IFNg), tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFa), granulocyte-macrophage colony
stimulating factor (GM-CSF) and interleukin-2 (IL-2). No IL-6 was
detected in any mouse and pre or post-CTL019 tocilizumab had no effect on
survival. Given the lack of IL-6 in a model that includes only ALL
targets and CTL019, we investigated in vitro the role of the monocyte
lineage in IL-6 secretion. When CTL019 and Nalm-6 targets are
co-cultured, IFNg, TNFa, IL-2 and GM-CSF are again elevated but not IL-6.
When any monocyte lineage is present, the IL-2 was elevated 100-fold.IL-6
rose from BACKGROUND CARs combine a single chain variable fragment (scFv)
of an antibody with intracellular signaling domains into a single
chimeric protein. We previously reported on CAR T cells (CTL019)
recognizing CD19 combined with the CD137 and CD3zeta intracellular
activation domain, including 1 sustained CR in a patient with ALL (Grupp,
et al. NEJM 2013). This CR was associated with significant cytokine
release syndrome (CRS) characterized by high IL-6, and toxicity was
reversed promptly with targeted IL-6 blockade via tocilizumab. We
investigated the mechanism of this unexpected CRS using clinical
samples.METHODS T cells were transduced with a CAR composed of anti-CD19
scFv/4-1BB/CD3, activated/expanded ex-vivo with anti-CD3/anti-CD28 beads.
NSG mice were given 106 of a primary pediatric leukemia IV on Day 0
followed by 107 CTL019 cells from the clinical product of the patient
reported in the NEJM (CHP100) or a normal donor (ND). We gave tocilizumab
at 100 mcg IP before or after CTL019 infusion and examined human cytokine
production in the mouse serum by Luminex.For the in vitro experiment,
CTL019 cells were mixed with Nalm-6 target cells and either autologous
monocytes, immature dendritic cells (iDC), mature dendritic cells (mDC)
or macrophages and cytokines measured by Luminex at 18 and 48
hours.RESULTS The xenograft model showed efficacy with CTL019 cells
extending overall survival in whether from CHP100 or a ND. Cytokines
significantly elevated in mouse serum (p<0.05) included interferon-gamma
(IFNg), tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFa), granulocyte-macrophage colony
stimulating factor (GM-CSF) and interleukin-2 (IL-2). No IL-6 was
detected in any mouse and pre or post-CTL019 tocilizumab had no effect on
survival. Given the lack of IL-6 in a model that includes only ALL
targets and CTL019, we investigated in vitro the role of the monocyte
lineage in IL-6 secretion. When CTL019 and Nalm-6 targets are
co-cultured, IFNg, TNFa, IL-2 and GM-CSF are again elevated but not IL-6.
When any monocyte lineage is present, the IL-2 was elevated 100-fold.IL-6
rose from <10 pg/mL to 250 to 300 pg/mL, and was highest with
mDC.Controls pairing monocyte lineages with T cells or Nalm-6 only
produced no cytokines.CONCLUSIONS:CTL019 cells can undergo robust in-vivo
expansion and can persist for 18 mo or longer in pts with relapsed ALL,
and is associated with a significant CRS that responds rapidly to
IL-6-targeted anticytokine treatment.These data using a clinical product
shows the importance of host factors in the CRS, and indicates the
monocyte lineage is required for IL-6 secretion and maintenance of a
feedback loop that is key for toxicity. Further study into models that
include the monocyte lineage will be needed to fully address the
importance of IL-6 blockade in the therapeutic efficacy of CTL019 and the
timing of blockade to alleviate or prevent toxicity.

