Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combination simvastatin and metformin induces cell death by
autophagy and secondary necrosis in osseous metastatic
castration-resistant prostate cancer cells


Limited chemotherapeutic options exist for metastatic
castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC). We have previously
demonstrated that 1:500 combination simvastatin (SIM) and metformin (MET)
synergistically inhibits cell viability, invasion, migration, and
adhesion-independent cell growth of the C4-2B3 and C4-2B4 in vitro model
of osseous metastatic CRPC, and inhibits primary ventral prostate tumor
growth, incidence of cachexia and metastasis to femurs and spinal column,
and prevents biochemical failure in an orthotopic C4-2B4 mouse model of
osseous metastatic CRPC, more effectively than docetaxel, the
standard-of-care chemotherapy for metastatic CRPC. Autophagy, apoptosis,
and necrosis have all been reported as mechanisms by which SIM or MET
induce cell death in prostate cancer cells; however, the mechanism of
cell death remains unclear in combination. Therefore, the purpose of this
study was to determine the mechanism of cell death associated with the
synergistic effect of SIM/MET combination chemotherapy in CRPC cells.
Treatment of C4-2B3 and C4-2B4 cells, in vitro models of osseous
metastatic CRPC, with 4M SIM and 2mM MET combination treatment led to an
earlier (24h treatment) and more pronounced (>90%) G1-phase cell cycle
arrest, which was sustained through 96h treatment. 4M SIM and 2mM MET
treatment, individually or in combination, for up to 96h, does not induce
cell death by apoptosis in C4-2B3 and C4-2B4 cells, as determined by
Limited chemotherapeutic options exist for metastatic
castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC). We have previously
demonstrated that 1:500 combination simvastatin (SIM) and metformin (MET)
synergistically inhibits cell viability, invasion, migration, and
adhesion-independent cell growth of the C4-2B3 and C4-2B4 in vitro model
of osseous metastatic CRPC, and inhibits primary ventral prostate tumor
growth, incidence of cachexia and metastasis to femurs and spinal column,
and prevents biochemical failure in an orthotopic C4-2B4 mouse model of
osseous metastatic CRPC, more effectively than docetaxel, the
standard-of-care chemotherapy for metastatic CRPC. Autophagy, apoptosis,
and necrosis have all been reported as mechanisms by which SIM or MET
induce cell death in prostate cancer cells; however, the mechanism of
cell death remains unclear in combination. Therefore, the purpose of this
study was to determine the mechanism of cell death associated with the
synergistic effect of SIM/MET combination chemotherapy in CRPC cells.
Treatment of C4-2B3 and C4-2B4 cells, in vitro models of osseous
metastatic CRPC, with 4M SIM and 2mM MET combination treatment led to an
earlier (24h treatment) and more pronounced (>90%) G1-phase cell cycle
arrest, which was sustained through 96h treatment. 4M SIM and 2mM MET
treatment, individually or in combination, for up to 96h, does not induce
cell death by apoptosis in C4-2B3 and C4-2B4 cells, as determined by <3%
of cells staining PI(-)/AV(+), Limited chemotherapeutic options exist for
metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC). We have
previously demonstrated that 1:500 combination simvastatin (SIM) and
metformin (MET) synergistically inhibits cell viability, invasion,
migration, and adhesion-independent cell growth of the C4-2B3 and C4-2B4
in vitro model of osseous metastatic CRPC, and inhibits primary ventral
prostate tumor growth, incidence of cachexia and metastasis to femurs and
spinal column, and prevents biochemical failure in an orthotopic C4-2B4
mouse model of osseous metastatic CRPC, more effectively than docetaxel,
the standard-of-care chemotherapy for metastatic CRPC. Autophagy,
apoptosis, and necrosis have all been reported as mechanisms by which SIM
or MET induce cell death in prostate cancer cells; however, the mechanism
of cell death remains unclear in combination. Therefore, the purpose of
this study was to determine the mechanism of cell death associated with
the synergistic effect of SIM/MET combination chemotherapy in CRPC cells.
Treatment of C4-2B3 and C4-2B4 cells, in vitro models of osseous
metastatic CRPC, with 4M SIM and 2mM MET combination treatment led to an
earlier (24h treatment) and more pronounced (>90%) G1-phase cell cycle
arrest, which was sustained through 96h treatment. 4M SIM and 2mM MET
treatment, individually or in combination, for up to 96h, does not induce
cell death by apoptosis in C4-2B3 and C4-2B4 cells, as determined by <3%
of cells staining PI(-)/AV(+), <2% of cells staining Apo-BrdU(+), and no
presence of activated cleaved caspase-3 protein expression, in comparison
to 2M camptothecin positive control. Treatment of C4-2B3 and C4-2B4 cells
with 1:500 SIM and MET combination led to autophagy by 48h, sustained
through 96h, ascertained by significantly increased LC3B-II/LC3B-I ratio,
quantity of acidic vesicular organelles, and number of autophagic
structures, both in the presence and absence of lysosomal inhibitor
chloroquine, compared to untreated CRPC cells. SIM/MET-induced autophagy
led to secondary necrosis by 96h which was determined by PI-Annexin V
flow cytometry; 67% of C4-2B3 and 64% of C4-2B4 osseous metastatic CRPC
cells were PI(+)/AV(-) or PI(+)/AV(+) necrotic following 96h of SIM and
MET combination treatment. The caspase-independent necrotic cell death
was confirmed by receptor interacting protein kinase-1 and -3 (RIP1 and
RIP3) protein expression following 96h SIM/MET combination treatment, in
the presence or absence of necrostatin-1 inhibitor. Taken together,
combination SIM and MET causes pronounced G1-phase cell cycle arrest in
osseous metastatic CRPC cells by 24h, which culminates in cell death by
autophagy and secondary necrosis by 48-96h of treatment.

