Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phase I pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of a novel
indenoisoquinoline topoisomerase 1 (TOP1) inhibitor, LMP400, administered
on a daily x 5 schedule


Introduction: Indenoisoquinoline LMP 400: 1) forms stable DNA-TOP1
cleavage complexes; 2) binds to unique DNA cleavage sites relative to
approved top1 poisons; 3) is not a substrate for ABC transporters. Here
we report the plasma pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics and optimal
sampling of LMP400 administered IV daily x 5 in a phase I trial
(NCI#8273).Methods: Eligibility included: refractory solid tumors or
lymphoma, 18 yrs old; KPS > 70%; adequate organ function. Dose levels
(DL) explored were 2.5, 5, 10, 20, 40, 60 and 80 mg/m2/day, following an
accelerated titration design transitioning to 3+3 design after one DLT or
2 gr 2 toxicities during cycle 1. LMP400 was administered over 1 h iv
daily x 5, q28d. LMP400 was quantitated with a validated LC-MS/MS assay
(PMID: 20236781), and pharmacokinetic parameters determined
non-compartmentally with PK Solutions and compartmentally with ADAPT5
through iterative two-stage (ITS) and maximum likelihood expectation
maximization (MLEM). Exposure metrics were correlated with decreases in
neutrophil counts. Optimal sampling strategies were explored with
D-optimality.Results: Twenty subjects had useable pharmacokinetic data.
Non-compartmental analysis suggested linear relationships between Cmax
and AUCobs vs dose. Given the long half-life and daily administration,
substantial plasma accumulation was observed. Compartmental modeling with
a 2-compartment linear model resulted in a good fit to the data.
Population means (population CV%) of CLt, Vc, CLd, and Vp were 1.54
(24.9%) L/h/m2, 29.7 (35.3%) L/m2, 11.4 (35.8%) L/h/m2, and 66.3 (34.7%)
L/m2. Distribution and terminal elimination half-lives were 1.17 (25.9%)
h and 46.0 (36.3%) h. %decrease in neutrophil counts was correlated with
AUC and C24h. C24h was highly correlated with AUC (R2=0.92). Optimal
sampling to determine CLt (expected SE 7.96%) required a single sample at
168 h (day 8). To determine all parameters with an expected
SEIntroduction: Indenoisoquinoline LMP 400: 1) forms stable DNA-TOP1
cleavage complexes; 2) binds to unique DNA cleavage sites relative to
approved top1 poisons; 3) is not a substrate for ABC transporters. Here
we report the plasma pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics and optimal
sampling of LMP400 administered IV daily x 5 in a phase I trial
(NCI#8273).Methods: Eligibility included: refractory solid tumors or
lymphoma, 18 yrs old; KPS > 70%; adequate organ function. Dose levels
(DL) explored were 2.5, 5, 10, 20, 40, 60 and 80 mg/m2/day, following an
accelerated titration design transitioning to 3+3 design after one DLT or
2 gr 2 toxicities during cycle 1. LMP400 was administered over 1 h iv
daily x 5, q28d. LMP400 was quantitated with a validated LC-MS/MS assay
(PMID: 20236781), and pharmacokinetic parameters determined
non-compartmentally with PK Solutions and compartmentally with ADAPT5
through iterative two-stage (ITS) and maximum likelihood expectation
maximization (MLEM). Exposure metrics were correlated with decreases in
neutrophil counts. Optimal sampling strategies were explored with
D-optimality.Results: Twenty subjects had useable pharmacokinetic data.
Non-compartmental analysis suggested linear relationships between Cmax
and AUCobs vs dose. Given the long half-life and daily administration,
substantial plasma accumulation was observed. Compartmental modeling with
a 2-compartment linear model resulted in a good fit to the data.
Population means (population CV%) of CLt, Vc, CLd, and Vp were 1.54
(24.9%) L/h/m2, 29.7 (35.3%) L/m2, 11.4 (35.8%) L/h/m2, and 66.3 (34.7%)
L/m2. Distribution and terminal elimination half-lives were 1.17 (25.9%)
h and 46.0 (36.3%) h. %decrease in neutrophil counts was correlated with
AUC and C24h. C24h was highly correlated with AUC (R2=0.92). Optimal
sampling to determine CLt (expected SE 7.96%) required a single sample at
168 h (day 8). To determine all parameters with an expected SE<25%, and
limiting samples to within 6 h on the first day, the following 5 time
points were optimal: 1) 15 min into day 1 infusion, 2+3) approximately
2.3 h after day 1 infusion [2 samples], 4) day 2 trough before infusion,
and 5) 168 h.Conclusion: LMP400 displays biphasic plasma pharmacokinetic
behavior, a relatively low total body clearance at 1.54 L/h/m2, and a
long terminal half-life at 46 h. Exposure was correlated with %decrease
in neutrophils, the DLT of LMP400. The optimal sampling times will aid
the design of future phase II studies aimed at further documenting the
exposure response relationships of LMP400. The long half-life and
accumulation of LMP400 in plasma led to the initiation of a phase I study
where LMP400 is dosed once weekly. These studies should further define
which exposure metric best correlates with toxicity and anti-tumor
activity.Support: N01-CM-2011-00015, U01-CA-099168, P30-CA-47904

