Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development and pharmacological properties of PEGylated
glucuronide-auristatin linkers


Antibody-drug conjugates (ADCs) are an emerging therapeutic modality for
the treatment of cancer, exemplified by the recent clinical success of
brentuximab vedotin and ado-trastuzumab emtansine. The majority of ADCs
currently in development include functionalities that are hydrophobic,
resulting in increased plasma clearance. Consequently, there has been
significant interest in generating new linkers that compensate for this
potential liability. In an attempt to mitigate the pharmacokinetic impact
of monomethylauristatin E (MMAE) when conjugated to an antibody, we
prepared drug-linkers incorporating a polyethylene glycol (PEG) polymer.
Initial work demonstrated that incorporation of a discrete PEG24 polymer
into the cleavable -glucuronide-MMAE linker system could either increase
or decrease the plasma clearance of the resulting ADCs, depending upon
the configuration of the PEG. When inserted into the drug-linker as a
stretcher unit between the maleimide and the cleavage site, PEG24
elicited increased ADC plasma clearance. Conversely, incorporation of the
PEG24 as a side chain from a modified lysine residue adjacent to the
maleimide resulted in ADCs with slower clearance. These differences in
ADC pharmacokinetics translated into corresponding differences in
antitumor activity in two xenograft models. Thus, incorporation of PEG24
into ADC linkers impacts both pharmacokinetics and activity in a
structure-dependent manner.

