Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vitro activities of the cationic antitumoral peptide LTX-315
against human melanoma cells


The LTX-315 peptide is a lactoferricin-derived short antitumor peptide
which was designed to treat solid tumors with intra-tumoral injections
through a two-stage mode of action. First, the collapse of the tumor
itself, then the released DAMPs from the dying tumor cell, could induce a
subsequent immune protection against recurrences and metastastis. In the
present study, we investigate the mechanisms behind the killing of A375
melanoma cells by LTX-315. The peptide kills the tumor cells within a few
minutes by direct plasma membrane attack, but at lower concentration
internalizes- and can be associated with mitochondria, ultimately leading
to a lytic cell death. We show that a fluorescence-labeled peptide was
internalized and localized in cytoplasmic vacuoles and accumulated around
the mitochondria with subsequent rapid lysis of cells as shown by
confocal live cell imaging and transmission electron microscopy.
Furthermore we detected the secretion of DAMPs into the extracellular
compartment minutes after peptide exposure using ELISA assay, ATP
luciferase assay and western blot. Taken together, these findings suggest
that LTX-315 has the ability to cause immunogenic cell death in cancer
cells, and thus might have a potential as an in situ therapeutic
vaccination agent

