Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tp53 mutation screening in adult acute myeloid leukemia (AML)
patients shows a strong association with complex karyotype and poor
outcome


Introduction: AML is a heterogeneous disease with various chromosomal
aberrations. The karyotype at diagnosis provides important prognostic
information that influences therapy and outcome. The TP53 gene is the
most frequently mutated gene in human tumors. The reported TP53 mutation
rate in AML is low (2.1%). In contrast, the incidence of TP53 mutations
in AML with a complex aberrant karyotype (CK-AML) is higher
(69-78%).Aims: to investigate the frequency and the prognostic role of
TP53 mutations in adult AML patients (pts) focusing the screening on
subgroups of pts with chromosome abnormalities.Patients and Methods: 106
adult AML pts with FAB-M0, M1, M2, M3, M4, M5, miscellaneous cytogenetic
abnormalities and normal karyotype (nK-AML, 14/106 pts) were examined.
Forty-four pts (41.1%) showed 3 or more chromosome abnormalities
(CK-AML), 42 (39.6%) presented one or two cytogenetic abnormalities
(other-AML) and in 6 cases the karyotype was not available. Genomic DNA
and/or cDNA were isolated from mononuclear AML blast cells. TP53 mutation
screening was performed on all 106 AML pts, in particular in 42 from exon
(ex) 2 to 11, in 48 from ex 4 to 11 and in 16 pts from ex 2 to 8.
Analysis was focused on coding sequences (RefSeq GRCh37/hg19
NG_017013.2).Results: By PCR and subsequent Sanger sequencing, mutations
of TP53 were detected in 23 pts (21.1%). Seven pts revealed 2 mutations.
83% of all mutated pts had CK (19/23) by contrast the frequency of
mutations was very low in no CK-AML pts (6.5%). Overall, mutated patients
included 19/44 with CK-AML (43.2%); 1/6 (16.7%) with nK and 3/42 (7.1%)
with other-AML. 26 TP53 point mutations [19 missense, 1 silent, 5 intron
and 1 3 untranslated region (UTR)] and 4 TP53 deletions were found.
Twenty-six out of 30 mutations/deletions (86.6%) were located in the DNA
binding domain, 2 in the carboxyl-terminal tetramerization and regulatory
domains and 2 in the transcriptional activation domain. All mutations in
coding regions were classified by the IARC database
(http://p53.iarc.fr/TP53GeneVariations.aspx) as deleterious. Of note,
alterations of TP53 were significantly associated with poor outcomes in
terms of overall survival and disease free-survival (P Introduction: AML
is a heterogeneous disease with various chromosomal aberrations. The
karyotype at diagnosis provides important prognostic information that
influences therapy and outcome. The TP53 gene is the most frequently
mutated gene in human tumors. The reported TP53 mutation rate in AML is
low (2.1%). In contrast, the incidence of TP53 mutations in AML with a
complex aberrant karyotype (CK-AML) is higher (69-78%).Aims: to
investigate the frequency and the prognostic role of TP53 mutations in
adult AML patients (pts) focusing the screening on subgroups of pts with
chromosome abnormalities.Patients and Methods: 106 adult AML pts with
FAB-M0, M1, M2, M3, M4, M5, miscellaneous cytogenetic abnormalities and
normal karyotype (nK-AML, 14/106 pts) were examined. Forty-four pts
(41.1%) showed 3 or more chromosome abnormalities (CK-AML), 42 (39.6%)
presented one or two cytogenetic abnormalities (other-AML) and in 6 cases
the karyotype was not available. Genomic DNA and/or cDNA were isolated
from mononuclear AML blast cells. TP53 mutation screening was performed
on all 106 AML pts, in particular in 42 from exon (ex) 2 to 11, in 48
from ex 4 to 11 and in 16 pts from ex 2 to 8. Analysis was focused on
coding sequences (RefSeq GRCh37/hg19 NG_017013.2).Results: By PCR and
subsequent Sanger sequencing, mutations of TP53 were detected in 23 pts
(21.1%). Seven pts revealed 2 mutations. 83% of all mutated pts had CK
(19/23) by contrast the frequency of mutations was very low in no CK-AML
pts (6.5%). Overall, mutated patients included 19/44 with CK-AML (43.2%);
1/6 (16.7%) with nK and 3/42 (7.1%) with other-AML. 26 TP53 point
mutations [19 missense, 1 silent, 5 intron and 1 3 untranslated region
(UTR)] and 4 TP53 deletions were found. Twenty-six out of 30
mutations/deletions (86.6%) were located in the DNA binding domain, 2 in
the carboxyl-terminal tetramerization and regulatory domains and 2 in the
transcriptional activation domain. All mutations in coding regions were
classified by the IARC database
(http://p53.iarc.fr/TP53GeneVariations.aspx) as deleterious. Of note,
alterations of TP53 were significantly associated with poor outcomes in
terms of overall survival and disease free-survival (P < 0.0001).
Conclusions: Our data demonstrated that mutations of TP53 occur in 21.7%
of AML with a higher frequency in the subgroup of CK-AML (pIntroduction:
AML is a heterogeneous disease with various chromosomal aberrations. The
karyotype at diagnosis provides important prognostic information that
influences therapy and outcome. The TP53 gene is the most frequently
mutated gene in human tumors. The reported TP53 mutation rate in AML is
low (2.1%). In contrast, the incidence of TP53 mutations in AML with a
complex aberrant karyotype (CK-AML) is higher (69-78%).Aims: to
investigate the frequency and the prognostic role of TP53 mutations in
adult AML patients (pts) focusing the screening on subgroups of pts with
chromosome abnormalities.Patients and Methods: 106 adult AML pts with
FAB-M0, M1, M2, M3, M4, M5, miscellaneous cytogenetic abnormalities and
normal karyotype (nK-AML, 14/106 pts) were examined. Forty-four pts
(41.1%) showed 3 or more chromosome abnormalities (CK-AML), 42 (39.6%)
presented one or two cytogenetic abnormalities (other-AML) and in 6 cases
the karyotype was not available. Genomic DNA and/or cDNA were isolated
from mononuclear AML blast cells. TP53 mutation screening was performed
on all 106 AML pts, in particular in 42 from exon (ex) 2 to 11, in 48
from ex 4 to 11 and in 16 pts from ex 2 to 8. Analysis was focused on
coding sequences (RefSeq GRCh37/hg19 NG_017013.2).Results: By PCR and
subsequent Sanger sequencing, mutations of TP53 were detected in 23 pts
(21.1%). Seven pts revealed 2 mutations. 83% of all mutated pts had CK
(19/23) by contrast the frequency of mutations was very low in no CK-AML
pts (6.5%). Overall, mutated patients included 19/44 with CK-AML (43.2%);
1/6 (16.7%) with nK and 3/42 (7.1%) with other-AML. 26 TP53 point
mutations [19 missense, 1 silent, 5 intron and 1 3 untranslated region
(UTR)] and 4 TP53 deletions were found. Twenty-six out of 30
mutations/deletions (86.6%) were located in the DNA binding domain, 2 in
the carboxyl-terminal tetramerization and regulatory domains and 2 in the
transcriptional activation domain. All mutations in coding regions were
classified by the IARC database
(http://p53.iarc.fr/TP53GeneVariations.aspx) as deleterious. Of note,
alterations of TP53 were significantly associated with poor outcomes in
terms of overall survival and disease free-survival (P < 0.0001).
Conclusions: Our data demonstrated that mutations of TP53 occur in 21.7%
of AML with a higher frequency in the subgroup of CK-AML (p<
0.0001-Fischer's exact test). Since TP53 mutations have predicted to be
deleterious and significantly correlated with prognosis, TP53 mutation
screening should be recommended in CK-AML pts.Supported by:
EuropeanLeukemiaNet, AIL, AIRC, PRIN 2010-2011, Fondazione del Monte di
Bologna e Ravenna, European UnionSeventh Framework Programme
[FP7/2007-2013].

