Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: GWAS identifies risk variants for mucinous ovarian carcinoma


Background Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) previously identified 8
new risk loci for all subtypes of epithelial ovarian carcinoma (EOC) and
one specific to invasive serous EOC. One locus, at 2q31, was also
associated with invasive mucinous EOC (mEOC) at P=7.3 x 10-7 (Nat Genet
2010:874). Here, we report new risk loci for mEOC, which is thought to
develop from a borderline mucinous tumor. These loci may provide clues to
the molecular basis of the disease.Methods We used genotype data from 4
GWAS of EOC and from multiple case-control studies in the Ovarian Cancer
Association Consortium that had been genotyped using the iCOGS custom SNP
panel (210k SNPs) developed for the Collaborative Oncological
Gene-environment Study. We imputed genotypes of common variation across
the genome using the 1000 Genomes Project reference panel and tested for
association using log-additive unconditional regression models.Results
Genotypes were available for 1,643 combined invasive and borderline mEOC
and for 1,002 invasive-only mEOC of European ancestry. Three loci in new
regions, and one locus in a previously published region, with minor
allele frequency (MAF) > 1% and P 10-7 were found. The imputed SNP
rs72831838 (imputation r2=0.67, MAF=0.15) is located at 2q13 in an intron
of the PAX8 (paired box 8) gene (all mEOC OR=1.35, P=4.2 x 10-8 and
invasive-only OR=1.43, P=9.6 x 10-8). PAX8 is a transcription factor and
may be a Mllerian lineage marker that distinguishes carcinomas of
gynecologic origin from other sites. The imputed variant at
chr19:39745695 (imputation r2=0.61, MAF=0.32) is an insertion/deletion
polymorphism located at 19q13.2 and falls within the MSRB1P1 (methionine
sulfoxide reductase B1 pseudogene 1). This locus was associated with
decreased risk (all mEOC OR=0.74, P = 2.1 x 10-9 and invasive-only
OR=0.79, P = 8.1 x 10-5) and is enriched with the H3K27Ac histone mark
that identifies active enhancers of gene expression. The imputed SNP
rs6425050 (imputation r2=0.45, MAF=0.19) is located at 1q25 (all mEOC
OR=1.38, P=4.7 x 10-8 and invasive-only OR=1.41, P=1.6x10-6). This SNP is
intronic to PLA2G4A (phospholipase A2, group IVA), which encodes an
enzyme that hydrolyzes membrane phospholipids for eicosanoid metabolism
and signaling. None of these loci were associated with other EOC
histological subtypes at P 10-7. The genotyped SNP, rs711830 (MAF=0.32),
is located at 2q31.1 in the 3 region of the HOXD3 homeobox gene (all mEOC
OR=1.30, P=7.5 x 10-12 and invasive-only OR=1.26, P=7.8 x 10-7). This SNP
is highly correlated (r2=0.99) with rs2072590, which is located 5.3kb
upstream and previously reported by us to be associated with mEOC and
invasive serous EOC (Nat Genet 2010:874). The HOXD3 locus is highly
conserved and may also be a marker of Mllerian cell type
origin.Conclusions The 3 new loci for mEOC require confirmation by
genotyping. Fine mapping and functional analysis of all loci is needed in
order to determine their likely target genes.

