Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of metadherin in a complex with RACK1/PP2A in
mammary epithelial cells


Protein Phosphatase 2A (PP2A) is a major serine/threonine phosphatase in
cells. It consists of a catalytic (C), structural (A) and
regulatory/variable B-type subunits. PP2A has a critical role to play in
homeostasis where it functions as a tumour suppressor. Changes in the
activity of PP2A have a direct role in maintaining the transformed
phenotype in cancer. However, the mechanism of action of PP2A during this
process is poorly understood. Our understanding is limited because of the
complex nature of PP2A holoenzyme assembly, and because it acts through a
wide variety of signalling pathways. We have identified the scaffolding
protein RACK1 as a PP2A interacting protein and we showed that RACK1
regulates PP2A activity to mediate crosstalk between growth factor and
adhesion signalling by an IGF-I-independent mechanism(1, 2) . Our
hypothesis is that RACK1 plays a critical role in determining how PP2A
functions in signalling pathways. Using a series of truncation mutations
and peptide array technology, we have identified and mapped the binding
sites between RACK1 and the catalytic subunit of PP2A. Using a series of
specific point mutations of these PP2A sites, we show that the RACK1/PP2A
interaction is critical to maintain PP2A activity. Disruption of the
RACK1/PP2A interaction has dramatic consequences for cell adhesion,
proliferation and migration in MCF-7 cells. Our hypothesis is that RACK1
regulates the cellular distribution of PP2A and scaffolds PP2A to a
specific subset of cellular targets. Using 3D in vitro breast cancer
models and mass spectroscopy approaches, we have identified several
proteins that interact with the RACK1/PP2A complex. One of these
proteins, Metadherin has been shown to play a role in drug resistance(3).
It has also been linked to the progression of many cancers(4). Using a
series of novel approaches we have mapped the Metadherin interaction site
on RACK1 and PP2A and confirmed that RACK1 and Metadherin colocalise at
the cell membrane. Overexpression of Metadherin promotes IGF-I-mediated
cell migration and invasion. Taken together, our data suggest that RACK1
scaffolds PP2A to Metadherin where it regulates Metadherin activity and
cell migration in breast cancer.1. Kiely, PA., et al. Tyrosine 302 in
RACK1 is essential for insulin-like growth factor-I-mediated competitive
binding of PP2A and 1 integrin and for tumor cell proliferation and
migration. Journal of Biological Chemistry 283.34 (2008): 22952-22961.2.
Kiely, PA., et al. Insulin-like growth factor I controls a mutually
exclusive association of RACK1 with protein phosphatase 2A and 1 integrin
to promote cell migration. Molecular and cellular biology 26.11 (2006):
4041-4051.3. Wei, Yong, Guohong Hu, and Yibin Kang. Metadherin as a link
between metastasis and chemoresistance. Cell Cycle 8.14 (2009):
2131-2137.4. Brown, DM., and Erkki R. Metadherin, a cell surface protein
in breast tumors that mediates lung metastasis. Cancer cell 5.4 (2004):
365-374.

