Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Deregulated TS promotes tumor progression in diverse hematopoietic
and mesenchymal cell lineages


Our laboratory recently showed that elevated TS plays a direct causal
role in tumorigenesis of NIH3T3 cells in vitro and in the development of
endocrine pancreatic mouse tumors in vivo. This observation changed the
paradigm of TS as a passive biomarker and has significance for cancer
treatment as it refocuses attention on the importance of TS as a
tumor-promoting signal. To address whether TS plays an early role in
tumorigenesis that is restricted to specific tumor types or if TS plays a
late role associated with enhanced progression of established tumors of
diverse histologic origin, we have now cross-bred human TS (hTS)
transgenic mice with Ink4a/Arf null mice, a common somatic mutation
frequently found in adult human cancers. Median survival of
hTS/Ink4a/Arf+/- (n=15) mice was reduced 24% (313 vs. 411 days, p Our
laboratory recently showed that elevated TS plays a direct causal role in
tumorigenesis of NIH3T3 cells in vitro and in the development of
endocrine pancreatic mouse tumors in vivo. This observation changed the
paradigm of TS as a passive biomarker and has significance for cancer
treatment as it refocuses attention on the importance of TS as a
tumor-promoting signal. To address whether TS plays an early role in
tumorigenesis that is restricted to specific tumor types or if TS plays a
late role associated with enhanced progression of established tumors of
diverse histologic origin, we have now cross-bred human TS (hTS)
transgenic mice with Ink4a/Arf null mice, a common somatic mutation
frequently found in adult human cancers. Median survival of
hTS/Ink4a/Arf+/- (n=15) mice was reduced 24% (313 vs. 411 days, p <0.05).
Both hTS/Ink4a/Arf+/- and hTS/Ink4a/Arf-/- mice (n=16) showed an increase
in lymphoma, histiocytic sarcoma (HS) and soft tissue sarcoma (SS). For
example, the incidence of HS in hTS/Ink4a/Arf-/- male mice was 31% versus
12% in Ink4a/Arf-/- minus (pOur laboratory recently showed that elevated
TS plays a direct causal role in tumorigenesis of NIH3T3 cells in vitro
and in the development of endocrine pancreatic mouse tumors in vivo. This
observation changed the paradigm of TS as a passive biomarker and has
significance for cancer treatment as it refocuses attention on the
importance of TS as a tumor-promoting signal. To address whether TS plays
an early role in tumorigenesis that is restricted to specific tumor types
or if TS plays a late role associated with enhanced progression of
established tumors of diverse histologic origin, we have now cross-bred
human TS (hTS) transgenic mice with Ink4a/Arf null mice, a common somatic
mutation frequently found in adult human cancers. Median survival of
hTS/Ink4a/Arf+/- (n=15) mice was reduced 24% (313 vs. 411 days, p <0.05).
Both hTS/Ink4a/Arf+/- and hTS/Ink4a/Arf-/- mice (n=16) showed an increase
in lymphoma, histiocytic sarcoma (HS) and soft tissue sarcoma (SS). For
example, the incidence of HS in hTS/Ink4a/Arf-/- male mice was 31% versus
12% in Ink4a/Arf-/- minus (p<0.01), and tumor cells had spread to
multiple tissues (as many as 9 different organs) as compared to hTS minus
mice where tumors were localized in lymph nodes and spleen. Strikingly,
the tumor burden was markedly increased in hTS/Ink4a/Arf-/- mice: average
spleen weight 1.11 vs. 0.49 g, pOur laboratory recently showed that
elevated TS plays a direct causal role in tumorigenesis of NIH3T3 cells
in vitro and in the development of endocrine pancreatic mouse tumors in
vivo. This observation changed the paradigm of TS as a passive biomarker
and has significance for cancer treatment as it refocuses attention on
the importance of TS as a tumor-promoting signal. To address whether TS
plays an early role in tumorigenesis that is restricted to specific tumor
types or if TS plays a late role associated with enhanced progression of
established tumors of diverse histologic origin, we have now cross-bred
human TS (hTS) transgenic mice with Ink4a/Arf null mice, a common somatic
mutation frequently found in adult human cancers. Median survival of
hTS/Ink4a/Arf+/- (n=15) mice was reduced 24% (313 vs. 411 days, p <0.05).
Both hTS/Ink4a/Arf+/- and hTS/Ink4a/Arf-/- mice (n=16) showed an increase
in lymphoma, histiocytic sarcoma (HS) and soft tissue sarcoma (SS). For
example, the incidence of HS in hTS/Ink4a/Arf-/- male mice was 31% versus
12% in Ink4a/Arf-/- minus (p<0.01), and tumor cells had spread to
multiple tissues (as many as 9 different organs) as compared to hTS minus
mice where tumors were localized in lymph nodes and spleen. Strikingly,
the tumor burden was markedly increased in hTS/Ink4a/Arf-/- mice: average
spleen weight 1.11 vs. 0.49 g, p<0.001, lymph nodes, 1.06 g vs. 0.42 g,
pOur laboratory recently showed that elevated TS plays a direct causal
role in tumorigenesis of NIH3T3 cells in vitro and in the development of
endocrine pancreatic mouse tumors in vivo. This observation changed the
paradigm of TS as a passive biomarker and has significance for cancer
treatment as it refocuses attention on the importance of TS as a
tumor-promoting signal. To address whether TS plays an early role in
tumorigenesis that is restricted to specific tumor types or if TS plays a
late role associated with enhanced progression of established tumors of
diverse histologic origin, we have now cross-bred human TS (hTS)
transgenic mice with Ink4a/Arf null mice, a common somatic mutation
frequently found in adult human cancers. Median survival of
hTS/Ink4a/Arf+/- (n=15) mice was reduced 24% (313 vs. 411 days, p <0.05).
Both hTS/Ink4a/Arf+/- and hTS/Ink4a/Arf-/- mice (n=16) showed an increase
in lymphoma, histiocytic sarcoma (HS) and soft tissue sarcoma (SS). For
example, the incidence of HS in hTS/Ink4a/Arf-/- male mice was 31% versus
12% in Ink4a/Arf-/- minus (p<0.01), and tumor cells had spread to
multiple tissues (as many as 9 different organs) as compared to hTS minus
mice where tumors were localized in lymph nodes and spleen. Strikingly,
the tumor burden was markedly increased in hTS/Ink4a/Arf-/- mice: average
spleen weight 1.11 vs. 0.49 g, p<0.001, lymph nodes, 1.06 g vs. 0.42 g,
p<0.001. We also detected an increase in size and extent of tumor mass of
SS (average weight 5.8 g). We detected increased aneuploidy in
hTS/Ink4a/Arf-/- HS cell lines as compared to Ink4a/Arf-/- HS cell lines:
chromosomal loss 32.1% vs. 16.7%, pOur laboratory recently showed that
elevated TS plays a direct causal role in tumorigenesis of NIH3T3 cells
in vitro and in the development of endocrine pancreatic mouse tumors in
vivo. This observation changed the paradigm of TS as a passive biomarker
and has significance for cancer treatment as it refocuses attention on
the importance of TS as a tumor-promoting signal. To address whether TS
plays an early role in tumorigenesis that is restricted to specific tumor
types or if TS plays a late role associated with enhanced progression of
established tumors of diverse histologic origin, we have now cross-bred
human TS (hTS) transgenic mice with Ink4a/Arf null mice, a common somatic
mutation frequently found in adult human cancers. Median survival of
hTS/Ink4a/Arf+/- (n=15) mice was reduced 24% (313 vs. 411 days, p <0.05).
Both hTS/Ink4a/Arf+/- and hTS/Ink4a/Arf-/- mice (n=16) showed an increase
in lymphoma, histiocytic sarcoma (HS) and soft tissue sarcoma (SS). For
example, the incidence of HS in hTS/Ink4a/Arf-/- male mice was 31% versus
12% in Ink4a/Arf-/- minus (p<0.01), and tumor cells had spread to
multiple tissues (as many as 9 different organs) as compared to hTS minus
mice where tumors were localized in lymph nodes and spleen. Strikingly,
the tumor burden was markedly increased in hTS/Ink4a/Arf-/- mice: average
spleen weight 1.11 vs. 0.49 g, p<0.001, lymph nodes, 1.06 g vs. 0.42 g,
p<0.001. We also detected an increase in size and extent of tumor mass of
SS (average weight 5.8 g). We detected increased aneuploidy in
hTS/Ink4a/Arf-/- HS cell lines as compared to Ink4a/Arf-/- HS cell lines:
chromosomal loss 32.1% vs. 16.7%, p<0.05, gain 24.5% vs. 0%, pOur
laboratory recently showed that elevated TS plays a direct causal role in
tumorigenesis of NIH3T3 cells in vitro and in the development of
endocrine pancreatic mouse tumors in vivo. This observation changed the
paradigm of TS as a passive biomarker and has significance for cancer
treatment as it refocuses attention on the importance of TS as a
tumor-promoting signal. To address whether TS plays an early role in
tumorigenesis that is restricted to specific tumor types or if TS plays a
late role associated with enhanced progression of established tumors of
diverse histologic origin, we have now cross-bred human TS (hTS)
transgenic mice with Ink4a/Arf null mice, a common somatic mutation
frequently found in adult human cancers. Median survival of
hTS/Ink4a/Arf+/- (n=15) mice was reduced 24% (313 vs. 411 days, p <0.05).
Both hTS/Ink4a/Arf+/- and hTS/Ink4a/Arf-/- mice (n=16) showed an increase
in lymphoma, histiocytic sarcoma (HS) and soft tissue sarcoma (SS). For
example, the incidence of HS in hTS/Ink4a/Arf-/- male mice was 31% versus
12% in Ink4a/Arf-/- minus (p<0.01), and tumor cells had spread to
multiple tissues (as many as 9 different organs) as compared to hTS minus
mice where tumors were localized in lymph nodes and spleen. Strikingly,
the tumor burden was markedly increased in hTS/Ink4a/Arf-/- mice: average
spleen weight 1.11 vs. 0.49 g, p<0.001, lymph nodes, 1.06 g vs. 0.42 g,
p<0.001. We also detected an increase in size and extent of tumor mass of
SS (average weight 5.8 g). We detected increased aneuploidy in
hTS/Ink4a/Arf-/- HS cell lines as compared to Ink4a/Arf-/- HS cell lines:
chromosomal loss 32.1% vs. 16.7%, p<0.05, gain 24.5% vs. 0%, p<0.001 and
translocations 9.4% vs. 0%, pOur laboratory recently showed that elevated
TS plays a direct causal role in tumorigenesis of NIH3T3 cells in vitro
and in the development of endocrine pancreatic mouse tumors in vivo. This
observation changed the paradigm of TS as a passive biomarker and has
significance for cancer treatment as it refocuses attention on the
importance of TS as a tumor-promoting signal. To address whether TS plays
an early role in tumorigenesis that is restricted to specific tumor types
or if TS plays a late role associated with enhanced progression of
established tumors of diverse histologic origin, we have now cross-bred
human TS (hTS) transgenic mice with Ink4a/Arf null mice, a common somatic
mutation frequently found in adult human cancers. Median survival of
hTS/Ink4a/Arf+/- (n=15) mice was reduced 24% (313 vs. 411 days, p <0.05).
Both hTS/Ink4a/Arf+/- and hTS/Ink4a/Arf-/- mice (n=16) showed an increase
in lymphoma, histiocytic sarcoma (HS) and soft tissue sarcoma (SS). For
example, the incidence of HS in hTS/Ink4a/Arf-/- male mice was 31% versus
12% in Ink4a/Arf-/- minus (p<0.01), and tumor cells had spread to
multiple tissues (as many as 9 different organs) as compared to hTS minus
mice where tumors were localized in lymph nodes and spleen. Strikingly,
the tumor burden was markedly increased in hTS/Ink4a/Arf-/- mice: average
spleen weight 1.11 vs. 0.49 g, p<0.001, lymph nodes, 1.06 g vs. 0.42 g,
p<0.001. We also detected an increase in size and extent of tumor mass of
SS (average weight 5.8 g). We detected increased aneuploidy in
hTS/Ink4a/Arf-/- HS cell lines as compared to Ink4a/Arf-/- HS cell lines:
chromosomal loss 32.1% vs. 16.7%, p<0.05, gain 24.5% vs. 0%, p<0.001 and
translocations 9.4% vs. 0%, p<0.05 by spectral karyotyping analysis.
Treatment of TS positive HS tumor cells with lenti-TS shRNAs
downregulated TS expression and resulted in tumor growth inhibition in
vitro as well as in mouse orthotopically transplanted xenograft. In
addition, combined TS shRNAs with gemcitabine or pemetrexed treatment
showed synergistic inhibition of HS tumor cell growth. These data
demonstrate that deregulated TS enhanced genome instability and promote
tumor progression in diverse hematopoietic and mesenchymal tumor cells.

