Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular farming and molecular engineering of cancer vaccines


Human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2)+ cancers are aggressive,
have poor prognoses, high rate of metastasis and relapse. Immunotherapy
(e.g. trastuzumab) has shown improvement in outcome for HER2+ patients.
Development of drug resistance and short half-lives limiting the duration
of the therapy, are barriers in the development of effective therapeutic
strategies. Furthermore, while passive immunotherapy provides treatment,
it does not reduce the risk of recurrence of the disease. Therefore, we
propose a HER2 vaccine to mount an active HER2-specific immune response,
with long lasting immunological memory to overcome the limitations of
passive immunotherapy and prevent tumor progression, metastasis, and
relapse.We hypothesize that integration of HER2 epitopes on the
plant-produced vaccination platform potato virus X (PVX) will overcome
immunological tolerance against HER2. We have shown that PVX naturally
targets dendritic and B-cells stimulating Th1 biased immunity, important
for successful tumor prevention. The carrier acts as an adjuvant,
improves stability of epitopes, and increases circulation time, therefore
ensuring a sustained stimulus post vaccination and production of
HER2-specific antibodies that could act against HER2+ tumors via a
variety of effector mechanisms. Immunizations of FBV/N mice resulted in
the production of HER2-specific antibodies, as shown by ELISA and
confocal microscopy using HER2+ human cancer cell lines. Vaccination
studies using animals pre-disposed to HER2+ cancer are currently ongoing.
Our long-term goal is to produce the vaccine through molecular farming in
edible plant tissue and make it available globally, especially in
underdeveloped countries where repeated administration of costly
immunotherapies is not affordable or unavailable.

