Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Buformin, an anti-diabetic biguanide, inhibits proliferation,
invasion and adhesion, and acts synergistically with paclitaxel in
endometrial cancer cell lines


Objectives: Epidemiologic and pre-clinical studies suggest that
anti-diabetic biguanide drugs, such as metformin and buformin, may have
anti-tumorigenic effects and behave as chemosensitizers. Thus, we
evaluated the effects of buformin alone and in combination with
paclitaxel on proliferation in human endometrial cancer (EC) cell lines
as well as the impact of buformin on apoptosis and
adhesion/invasion.Methods: The ECC-1 and Ishikawa EC cell lines were
treated with varying doses of buformin alone and in combination with
paclitaxel. Cell growth was determined by MTT assay. Cell cycle
progression was assessed by Cellometer. Apoptosis was evaluated by
Annexin V-FITC assay. Invasion was demonstrated by transwell invasion
assay. Adhesion was assessed by ELISA. Effects on AMPK and S6 expression
were documented by Western blotting.Results: Buformin inhibited
proliferation in a dose-dependent manner in the EC cell lines (IC50 1000
M for ECC-1, 10M for Ishikawa, p=0.00001-0.0010). Treatment with buformin
resulted in G1 arrest in the ECC-1 cell line and G2 arrest in the
Ishikawa cell line. Buformin induced apoptosis in the Ishikawa cell line,
but not in the ECC-1 cell line. Treatment with buformin resulted in
inhibition of adhesion (p=0.42-0.0009) and invasion (p=0.00001-0.227) in
both EC cell lines. Western blotting analysis demonstrated that buformin
increased phosphorylation of AMPK and decreased phosphorylation of S6.
Paclitaxel inhibited proliferation in a dose-dependent manner in both
cell lines with IC50 values of 0.1-0.5 nM and 1-5 nM for Ishikawa and
ECC-1 cells, respectively. To assess synergy of paclitaxel and buformin,
the combination index (CI) was calculated by the method of Chou and
Talalay. Simultaneous exposure of cells to various doses of paclitaxel in
combination with buformin (0.1-1 M) resulted in a significant synergistic
anti-proliferative effect (CI Objectives: Epidemiologic and pre-clinical
studies suggest that anti-diabetic biguanide drugs, such as metformin and
buformin, may have anti-tumorigenic effects and behave as
chemosensitizers. Thus, we evaluated the effects of buformin alone and in
combination with paclitaxel on proliferation in human endometrial cancer
(EC) cell lines as well as the impact of buformin on apoptosis and
adhesion/invasion.Methods: The ECC-1 and Ishikawa EC cell lines were
treated with varying doses of buformin alone and in combination with
paclitaxel. Cell growth was determined by MTT assay. Cell cycle
progression was assessed by Cellometer. Apoptosis was evaluated by
Annexin V-FITC assay. Invasion was demonstrated by transwell invasion
assay. Adhesion was assessed by ELISA. Effects on AMPK and S6 expression
were documented by Western blotting.Results: Buformin inhibited
proliferation in a dose-dependent manner in the EC cell lines (IC50 1000
M for ECC-1, 10M for Ishikawa, p=0.00001-0.0010). Treatment with buformin
resulted in G1 arrest in the ECC-1 cell line and G2 arrest in the
Ishikawa cell line. Buformin induced apoptosis in the Ishikawa cell line,
but not in the ECC-1 cell line. Treatment with buformin resulted in
inhibition of adhesion (p=0.42-0.0009) and invasion (p=0.00001-0.227) in
both EC cell lines. Western blotting analysis demonstrated that buformin
increased phosphorylation of AMPK and decreased phosphorylation of S6.
Paclitaxel inhibited proliferation in a dose-dependent manner in both
cell lines with IC50 values of 0.1-0.5 nM and 1-5 nM for Ishikawa and
ECC-1 cells, respectively. To assess synergy of paclitaxel and buformin,
the combination index (CI) was calculated by the method of Chou and
Talalay. Simultaneous exposure of cells to various doses of paclitaxel in
combination with buformin (0.1-1 M) resulted in a significant synergistic
anti-proliferative effect (CI <1, range 0.009-0.85).Conclusions: Buformin
inhibited proliferation in EC cell lines, via AMPK activation and mTOR
pathway inhibition. Inhibition of adhesion/invasion was also seen with
buformin. Buformin acted synergistically with paclitaxel to inhibit cell
proliferation. More work is needed to determine if buformin and other
biguanides alone or in combination with cytotoxic agents will be
beneficial in the treatment of women with EC.

