Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differentiation and apoptosis induced by all-trans retinoic acid
is associated with downregulation of peroxiredoxin 1 in myeloid leukemia
cells


All-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) based differentiation therapy with
potentially curative outcome in acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL), has
limited benefit in non-APL acute myeloid leukemia (AML). Thus,
identifying key mediators of ATRA-induced differentiation/apoptosis in
AML cells may reveal new putative therapeutic targets. Previously, we
reported (Leukemia 20: 1809, 2006) that the therapeutic efficacy of ATRA
is enhanced in topoisomerase 2 (TOP2)-deficient AML cell lines, both APL
(HL-60, AP-1060) and non-APL (KG-1), in part due to decreased expression
of the antioxidant enzyme, peroxiredoxin (PRDX) 2 and increased
accumulation of reactive oxygen species (ROS). Based on preliminary
observations that (a) ATRA leads to down-regulation of a related
antioxidant protein, PRDX1 (RNA array analysis), and (b) PRDX1 mRNA
expression relative to PRDX2 mRNA is significantly higher in HL-60, KG-1,
and leukemic blast cells from 20 AML patients (qRT-PCR analysis), we
evaluated the role of PRDX1 in sensitizing the apoptotic effects of ATRA.
Specifically, we tested the hypothesis that ATRA induced growth
arrest/apoptosis is associated with decreased PRDX1 levels and increased
ROS, which can be modulated by TOP2. Accordingly, downregulation of TOP2
can enhance apoptosis by increasing ROS, whereas overexpression of TOP2
can inhibit PRDX1 downregulation by ATRA and attenuate ROS-induced
apoptosis. Treatment of HL-60, KG-1 and patient AML blast cells with 1 M
ATRA in the absence or presence of 0.1 M ICRF193 (TOP2 catalytic
inhibitor) led to a 3 to 4-fold decrease in PRDX1 mRNA and protein. No
effect of ICRF193, which leads to degradation of TOP2, was observed on
PRDX1 levels. Interestingly, while treatment with ATRA + ICRF 193 did not
enhance PRDX1 down regulation compared to ATRA alone, it did lead to
significantly (pAll-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) based differentiation
therapy with potentially curative outcome in acute promyelocytic leukemia
(APL), has limited benefit in non-APL acute myeloid leukemia (AML). Thus,
identifying key mediators of ATRA-induced differentiation/apoptosis in
AML cells may reveal new putative therapeutic targets. Previously, we
reported (Leukemia 20: 1809, 2006) that the therapeutic efficacy of ATRA
is enhanced in topoisomerase 2 (TOP2)-deficient AML cell lines, both APL
(HL-60, AP-1060) and non-APL (KG-1), in part due to decreased expression
of the antioxidant enzyme, peroxiredoxin (PRDX) 2 and increased
accumulation of reactive oxygen species (ROS). Based on preliminary
observations that (a) ATRA leads to down-regulation of a related
antioxidant protein, PRDX1 (RNA array analysis), and (b) PRDX1 mRNA
expression relative to PRDX2 mRNA is significantly higher in HL-60, KG-1,
and leukemic blast cells from 20 AML patients (qRT-PCR analysis), we
evaluated the role of PRDX1 in sensitizing the apoptotic effects of ATRA.
Specifically, we tested the hypothesis that ATRA induced growth
arrest/apoptosis is associated with decreased PRDX1 levels and increased
ROS, which can be modulated by TOP2. Accordingly, downregulation of TOP2
can enhance apoptosis by increasing ROS, whereas overexpression of TOP2
can inhibit PRDX1 downregulation by ATRA and attenuate ROS-induced
apoptosis. Treatment of HL-60, KG-1 and patient AML blast cells with 1 M
ATRA in the absence or presence of 0.1 M ICRF193 (TOP2 catalytic
inhibitor) led to a 3 to 4-fold decrease in PRDX1 mRNA and protein. No
effect of ICRF193, which leads to degradation of TOP2, was observed on
PRDX1 levels. Interestingly, while treatment with ATRA + ICRF 193 did not
enhance PRDX1 down regulation compared to ATRA alone, it did lead to
significantly (p<.05) more apoptosis and greater ROS than either
treatment alone. Since, expression of TOP2 correlates with that of PRDX1
in blast cells of AML patients, both of which are expressed at relatively
high levels, we tested whether overexpression of TOP2 affects
ATRA-induced decrease in PRDX1, ROS accumulation and apoptosis.
Transfection of TOP2 in an amsacrine-resistant HL-60 cell line (AR),
which lacks TOP2, leads to overexpression of TOP2 and abrogation of
ATRA-induced downregulation of PRDX1, ROS accumulation and apoptosis. In
summary, the present study demonstrates that PRDX1 is an ATRA regulated
protein, which plays an important role in modulating ATRA-induced
differentiation/apoptosis in myeloid leukemia cells. Furthermore, down
regulation of PRDX1 levels by ATRA can be manipulated by overexpression
of TOP2. Since overexpression of TOP2 is observed in patient AML blasts,
the increased PRDX1 levels may partly explain the resistance of non-APL
acute myeloid leukemia cells to ATRA induced differentiation and
ROS-mediated apoptosis.

