Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Interleukin 32 is an independent prognostic biomarker of human
gastric cancer correlated with tumor progression and metastasis


Background: The pro-inflammatory cytokine, interleukin 32 (IL-32), is a
novel tumor marker highly expressed in various human carcinomas including
gastric cancer (GC).Materials and Methods: A total of 120 patients with
gastric cancer undergoing gastrectomy were enrolled into this study.
Real-time quantitative RT-PCR, western blot analysis and
immunohistochemistry (IHC) on resected specimens were used to confirm the
IL-32 overexpression in surgical patients. The clinicopathological
correlation and survival outcome of IL-32 were analysed for clinical
significance in these patient. In vitro study, using ectopic
overexpression and knockdown of IL-32 in GC cell lines, was established
to investigate the invasiveness and the signaling pathway of IL-32 in
GC.Results: IL-32 was significantly upregulated in GC and positively
correlated with aggressiveness of cancer and poor prognosis. Stable
suppression or overexpression of IL-32 revealed marked influence of cell
migration and invasion by modulating phosphorylation of AKT and glycogen
synthase kinase 3 (GSK3), leading to activation of -catenin. Expression
of IL-32 was accompanied by the induction of interleukin 8 (IL-8),
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), matrix metalloproteinase 2
(MMP2) and 9 (MMP9) in vitro and in vivo.Conclusion: Our results clearly
suggest that IL-32 is an important mediator for GC metastasis and an
independent prognostic predictor of GC.

