Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: New serum biomarkers for prostate cancer diagnosis


Prostate-specific antigen (PSA) is currently used as a biomarker for the
early diagnosis and management of prostate cancer (CaP). However, PSA
generally lacks the sensitivity and specificity desired of an effective
diagnostic biomarker. The goal of this study was to identify an
additional biomarker or a panel of biomarkers that is more sensitive and
specific than PSA in differentiating benign vs. malignant prostate
disease and/or localized CaP vs. metastatic CaP.Concurrent measurements
of circulating IL-8, TNF-alpha (TNF-) and sTNFR1 were obtained from four
groups of men: (1) controls (2) men with elevated PSA with a negative
prostate biopsy (eIPSA_negBx) (3) men with clinically localized CaP and
(4) men with castration resistant CaP (CRPC). TNF- (AUC=0.93) and sTNFR1
(AUC=0.97) were strong predictors of elPSA_negBx vs CaP). The best
predictor of elPSA_negBx vs prostate cancer was sTNFR1 and IL8 combined
(AUC=0.997). The strongest single predictors of localized versus
metastatic CaP were TNF- (AUC=0.992) and PSA (AUC=0.963) levels.
Conclusions: The specificity and sensitivity of a PSA-based CaP diagnosis
can be significantly enhanced by concurrent serum measurements of IL-8,
TNF- and sTNFR1. In view of the concerns about the ability of PSA to
distinguish clinically relevant CaP from indolent disease, assessment of
these biomarkers in larger cohort consisting of Caucasians and African
Americans is warranted.

