Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Design and antiproliferative evaluation of cell-penetrating
TPM-Dox conjugates as prodrugs


Doxorubicin (Dox) is well-known anthracycline widely used anticancer
agent for the treatment of a wide variety of cancers. The major
limitations of cancer chemotherapy treatment are low cellular uptake,
high efflux rate and the development of resistance to a certain dose of
anticancer drugs, such as Dox. Improving of cellular uptake and duration
of action of Dox is very demanding. This will improve its therapeutic
index and decrease its side effects. The biological activity of Dox can
potentially be enhanced by increasing and optimizing its hydrophobicity
using appropriate hydrophobic linker attachment to the Dox using
triphenylmethanol (TPM) which led to higher cellular uptake. In this
regard, TPM-Dox prodrugs were designed to deliver and release Dox into
cells. The attachment of TPM analogs along with fatty alcohol
significantly enhanced the lipophilicity and thus the cellular uptake of
these multifunctional conjugates. In this study, a number of TPM
derivatives of Dox were synthesized by the reaction of 2-substituted
methoxy benzenes and 1,3,5-trioxane in glacial acetic acid in 72-87%
yield. The reaction of TPM derivatives with tosylated fatty diol
continued with conjugation to Dox to afford eight TPM-Dox conjugates with
different hydrophobicity in 44-67% overall yield. Comparative
antiproliferative assays between TPM-Dox conjugates and the corresponding
noncovalent physical mixtures of the TPM derivatives and Dox were
performed. TPM-Dox conjugates inhibited the cell proliferation of human
leukemia (CCRF- CEM), ovarian adenocarcinoma (SK-OV-3), colorectal
carcinoma (HCT-116), and breast carcinoma (MDA-MB-468) cells by 63-94% at
a concentration of 1 M after 72-120 h of incubation. These data suggest
that TPM-Dox derivatives can be used as a potential prodrug for improving
the cellular delivery and retention of Dox.

