Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Fisetin inhibits p90RSK/YB-1 signaling and downregulates
chemoresistance associated P-glycoprotein in A375 melanoma cells


Malignant melanoma is notoriously difficult to treat due to lack of
targeted systemic therapies and emergence of resistance to BRAF
inhibitors, currently the treatment of choice for metastatic melanoma.
The p90 ribosomal S6 kinase (RSK), an important effector of RAF/ERK
signaling promotes melanoma growth and contributes to melanoma
chemoresistance by altering response to chemotherapeutic agents. Y-box
binding protein-1 (YB-1) is an oncogenic transcription/translation factor
involved in multiple cellular functions including proliferation,
migration, and epithelial mesenchymal transition (EMT). Recent studies
show that RSK1/2 can activate YB-1 through phosphorylation at its Ser102
residue. We found YB-1 expression to be significantly upregulated in
metastatic melanoma cell lines when compared to normal human melanocytes.
Treatment of A375 human melanoma cells with the dietary flavonoid fisetin
(20-60M) resulted in inhibition of phosphorylation of YB-1 at Ser102,
with subsequent decrease in nuclear translocation and activation. We
further studied the effect of fisetin on YB-1 signaling in a 3-D melanoma
skin equivalent model, comprising of A375 melanoma cells, cultured with
epidermal keratinocytes and dermal fibroblasts that closely simulates the
human skin. Studies in the 3-D model showed that fisetin treatment
resulted in reduction in melanocytic lesions and tumor progression
(pMalignant melanoma is notoriously difficult to treat due to lack of
targeted systemic therapies and emergence of resistance to BRAF
inhibitors, currently the treatment of choice for metastatic melanoma.
The p90 ribosomal S6 kinase (RSK), an important effector of RAF/ERK
signaling promotes melanoma growth and contributes to melanoma
chemoresistance by altering response to chemotherapeutic agents. Y-box
binding protein-1 (YB-1) is an oncogenic transcription/translation factor
involved in multiple cellular functions including proliferation,
migration, and epithelial mesenchymal transition (EMT). Recent studies
show that RSK1/2 can activate YB-1 through phosphorylation at its Ser102
residue. We found YB-1 expression to be significantly upregulated in
metastatic melanoma cell lines when compared to normal human melanocytes.
Treatment of A375 human melanoma cells with the dietary flavonoid fisetin
(20-60M) resulted in inhibition of phosphorylation of YB-1 at Ser102,
with subsequent decrease in nuclear translocation and activation. We
further studied the effect of fisetin on YB-1 signaling in a 3-D melanoma
skin equivalent model, comprising of A375 melanoma cells, cultured with
epidermal keratinocytes and dermal fibroblasts that closely simulates the
human skin. Studies in the 3-D model showed that fisetin treatment
resulted in reduction in melanocytic lesions and tumor progression (p<
.01) associated with decreased expression of YB-1, and its downstream
targets c-Myc and MTA-1. Fisetin suppressed the expression of EMT markers
N-cadherin and Vimentin, with a concomitant increase in E-cadherin in
melanoma cells. In addition, a significant decrease in the protein
expression of matrix-metalloproteinases -2 and -9 was observed. Next we
investigated whether fisetin interfered with RSK signaling involved in
YB-1 activation. Immunoblot studies revealed that fisetin inhibited the
phosphorylation of p90RSK at the Thr359/Ser363 residue but not at Ser380.
Notably, the MDR-1 gene product, P-glycoprotein (P-gp), was markedly
decreased in fisetin-treated cells in a dose-dependent manner.
Fisetin-mediated increase in the phosphorylation of ERK1/2 at
Thr202/Tyr204 residues suggests that diminished P-gp expression is linked
to suppression of RSK/YB-1 signaling in fisetin treated cells. Together,
our results suggest that fisetin is a potent inhibitor of the p90RSK/YB-1
pathway and may be used to modulate chemosensitivity, which is one of the
major obstacles to melanoma treatment.

