Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combination therapy of oncolytic herpes virus HF10 and bevacizumab
against experimental model of human breast carcinoma xenograft


Background: Breast cancer is one of the most common and feared cancers in
women. Multimodal therapy with a more specific and effective strategy is
urgently needed. Oncolytic HSV is a good candidate because of broad host
range and tumor selective viral distribution. In our study, the
combination effect of oncolytic herpes virus HF10 and Bevacizumab in the
treatment of experimental model of human breast carcinoma xenograft is
evaluated.Method: The VEGFA gene transcription and protein expression was
measured in three human breast cancer cell lines (MCF-7,T47D and
MDA-MB-231) by RT-PCR, Western blot and ELISA. The MTT analysis was
performed to evaluate the efficiency of combination therapy in vitro. The
effect on viral replication was evaluated by PCR and titering of the
virus replicating under various doses of Bevacizumab. The advanced tumor
model was formed by 12 female BALB/c nude mice which were implanted 4
pieces of 5 mm x 5mm MDA-MB-231 tumor to the flank site. The single tumor
model was made by 28 female BALB/c nude mice which were implanted 1 piece
of 5 mm x 5mm MDA-MB-231 tumor to the right flank site. Control group
received no treatment. The HF10 group of advanced tumor model received
two single injections of 10^6 pfu/dose intratumorally on Day 1 and Day
14. The HF10 group of single tumor model received one single injection of
10^6 pfu/dose intratumorally on Day 1. Bevacizumab group received 5mg/kg
Bevacizumab intra-peritoneally twice a week for 2 weeks. Combination
group received both intratumoral HF10 and intraperitoneally Bevacizumab
at the same dose. The tumor diameter was measured weekly. On Day 2 and
Day 35 following the last dose of the treatment tumors were collected.
Histopathological parameters were HIF1A, VEGFA, Thrombospondin 1, CD31
driven microvascular density, CD4, CD8, Caspase 3, Cyr61 and HSV-1
antigen.Results: Among the three candidate cell lines, MDA-MB-231 has the
highest level of VEGFA expression, while T47D has the lowest level of
VEGFA expression. The cytotoxic effect of HF10 is time- and dose-
dependent in vitro. Combination therapy does not affect viral replication
in vitro. In the in vivo study, combination group had the smallest tumor
volume comparing with other groups in both animal models (PBackground:
Breast cancer is one of the most common and feared cancers in women.
Multimodal therapy with a more specific and effective strategy is
urgently needed. Oncolytic HSV is a good candidate because of broad host
range and tumor selective viral distribution. In our study, the
combination effect of oncolytic herpes virus HF10 and Bevacizumab in the
treatment of experimental model of human breast carcinoma xenograft is
evaluated.Method: The VEGFA gene transcription and protein expression was
measured in three human breast cancer cell lines (MCF-7,T47D and
MDA-MB-231) by RT-PCR, Western blot and ELISA. The MTT analysis was
performed to evaluate the efficiency of combination therapy in vitro. The
effect on viral replication was evaluated by PCR and titering of the
virus replicating under various doses of Bevacizumab. The advanced tumor
model was formed by 12 female BALB/c nude mice which were implanted 4
pieces of 5 mm x 5mm MDA-MB-231 tumor to the flank site. The single tumor
model was made by 28 female BALB/c nude mice which were implanted 1 piece
of 5 mm x 5mm MDA-MB-231 tumor to the right flank site. Control group
received no treatment. The HF10 group of advanced tumor model received
two single injections of 10^6 pfu/dose intratumorally on Day 1 and Day
14. The HF10 group of single tumor model received one single injection of
10^6 pfu/dose intratumorally on Day 1. Bevacizumab group received 5mg/kg
Bevacizumab intra-peritoneally twice a week for 2 weeks. Combination
group received both intratumoral HF10 and intraperitoneally Bevacizumab
at the same dose. The tumor diameter was measured weekly. On Day 2 and
Day 35 following the last dose of the treatment tumors were collected.
Histopathological parameters were HIF1A, VEGFA, Thrombospondin 1, CD31
driven microvascular density, CD4, CD8, Caspase 3, Cyr61 and HSV-1
antigen.Results: Among the three candidate cell lines, MDA-MB-231 has the
highest level of VEGFA expression, while T47D has the lowest level of
VEGFA expression. The cytotoxic effect of HF10 is time- and dose-
dependent in vitro. Combination therapy does not affect viral replication
in vitro. In the in vivo study, combination group had the smallest tumor
volume comparing with other groups in both animal models (P<0.05).
Combination therapy induced synergistic effect in vivo in both animal
models. Viral distribution was significantly enhanced in the combination
group when compared to HF10 group on both Day 2 and Day 35.Conclusion:
Enhanced angiogenesis effect following viral treatment remains as an
obstacle of oncolytic viral therapy. Anti-angiogenesis reagent is
effective to achieve better antitumor effect. Our result shows that
Bevacizumab enhances the viral distribution by antagonizing vascular
permeability and decreasing tumor interstitial pressure and therefore
promotes the oncolytic effect. It can be a promising virus-associated
agent in the anticancer treatment.

