Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Validation and utilization of next generation sequencing in the
clinical assessment of gliomas


Background. Identifying prognostic and potentially therapeutic genetic
alterations in gliomas is crucial to improve clinical outcome and guide
future targeted therapies in this devastating disease. Here, we establish
the feasibility of next generation sequencing (NGS) profiling of glioma
samples in a clinical setting.Methods. We optimized and validated a 47
gene panel for use on both fresh and Formalin Fixed Paraffin embedded
(FFPE) tissue specimens in a CLIA-certified laboratory. Validation was
performed in 27 samples by comparing mutation detection on two different
NGS platforms, and we have since incorporated routine molecular tumor
profiling into the standard workup of glioma patients seen at our
institution.Results. From analysis of 120 clinical samples, we found
disease-associated changes in 90 patients (75%). Overall 184 changes
including disease-associated point mutations and variants of unclear
significance were identified across 98 samples, resulting in an average
of 1.85 mutations per sample and a range of 1- 6 mutations. This included
49 amplifications across several genes (EGFR, PDGFRA and
KIT).Conclusions. The final validated assay allows for a cost effective
and efficient analysis of a spectrum of clinically relevant and
actionable biomarkers including point mutations, insertions, deletions
and gene amplifications. Given the high fraction of tumors presenting
with known disease associated changes, routine genomic profiling has the
promise of improving patient outcomes and allow for access to targeted
therapies.

