Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combination immunotherapy with PD-L1 blockade and Poly I:C in a
murine breast cancer model


Background: Programmed death ligand 1 (PDL1) is commonly expressed on the
surface of many tumor cells, including breast cancer. The activity of
tumor infiltrating lymphocytes (TIL) is inhibited by PDL1. Blocking PDL1
with monoclonal antibodies can prevent this immune suppression and
enhance anti-tumor activity. Polyinosinic-polycytidylic acid (Poly I:C)
is a Toll like receptor 3 (TLR3) agonist which was shown to synergize
with anti-PDL1 antibodies in a B16 melanoma model (Celis et. al, Blood
2010). We sought to investigate if synergy could be demonstrated in a
murine breast cancer model.Methods: Five week old female BALB/c mice were
injected with 3x106 4T1 cells in a mammary fat pad and divided into 4
groups with ten mice/group (PBS control, 200g anti-PDL1 antibody (10F.9G2
Bioxcell) D1,5 IP, 50g Poly I:C (Invivogen) D1,6,11,16 IV, anti-PDL1+Poly
I:C). Treatment started when tumors were palpable and measured twice
weekly. The mice were sacrificed 20 days later with tumors, spleens, and
lymph nodes harvested. Tumors were measured twice weekly. All experiments
were carried out under approved IACUC #4277R per institutional
guidelines. Statistical analysis performed using Prism Graphpad.Results:
Mean tumor measurements (mm2) at day 20 for control=207.5,
anti-PDL1=188.5, Poly I:C=182.6, anti-PDL1+Poly I:C=149.4. Two way ANOVA
was statistically significant at pBackground: Programmed death ligand 1
(PDL1) is commonly expressed on the surface of many tumor cells,
including breast cancer. The activity of tumor infiltrating lymphocytes
(TIL) is inhibited by PDL1. Blocking PDL1 with monoclonal antibodies can
prevent this immune suppression and enhance anti-tumor activity.
Polyinosinic-polycytidylic acid (Poly I:C) is a Toll like receptor 3
(TLR3) agonist which was shown to synergize with anti-PDL1 antibodies in
a B16 melanoma model (Celis et. al, Blood 2010). We sought to investigate
if synergy could be demonstrated in a murine breast cancer model.Methods:
Five week old female BALB/c mice were injected with 3x106 4T1 cells in a
mammary fat pad and divided into 4 groups with ten mice/group (PBS
control, 200g anti-PDL1 antibody (10F.9G2 Bioxcell) D1,5 IP, 50g Poly I:C
(Invivogen) D1,6,11,16 IV, anti-PDL1+Poly I:C). Treatment started when
tumors were palpable and measured twice weekly. The mice were sacrificed
20 days later with tumors, spleens, and lymph nodes harvested. Tumors
were measured twice weekly. All experiments were carried out under
approved IACUC #4277R per institutional guidelines. Statistical analysis
performed using Prism Graphpad.Results: Mean tumor measurements (mm2) at
day 20 for control=207.5, anti-PDL1=188.5, Poly I:C=182.6, anti-PDL1+Poly
I:C=149.4. Two way ANOVA was statistically significant at p<.0001. Mean
tumor weight (gm) at day 20 of anti-PDL1+Poly I:C=.99 vs control=1.23
p=.002 using t test.Conclusions: The combination of anti-PDL1 and Poly
I:C TLR3 agonist demonstrates improved anti-tumor activity against
established 4T1 orthotopic murine breast tumors compared to control or
either agent alone. Characterization of TIL infiltrates in tumor
specimens and immune activation in harvested lymphocytes is ongoing and
will be presented. This data provides preliminary evidence supporting
continued investigation of the combination of PDL1 and Poly I:C
immunotherapy for breast cancer.

