Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Establishment and characterization of a paired human non-small
cell lung cancer cell lines from primary cancer and metastasis lymph node


Objective: Lung cancer has become one of the leading causes of
cancer-related mortality in the world. Metastasis remains the
overwhelming causes of death for lung cancer patients. 80-90% of lung
cancer deaths are caused by metastasis. However, an ideal in vitro model
to explore the regulation and the molecules that control the lymph node
metastasis of lung cancer is required.Methods: A gene expression
profiling for both of the cell lines were generated by microarray.
Further investigations were carried out in the lung cancer cell lines and
paired tissues by migration and invasion assays and
immunohistochemistry.Results: Firstly, we established a paired human lung
adenocarcinoma cell lines from primary tumor site (named DC cells) and
metastatic paratracheal lymph nodes (named DL cells). The two cell lines
have different biological characteristics which DC cells grow clump
easily and DL cells grow more scattered. The doubling time of DC and DL
cell lines were 32.6h and 45.2h, respectively. The detection of the human
D1S80 and D17S30 VNTR locus verified the same individual for DC and DL
cell lines. Secondary, Microarray analysis revealed 232 upregulated probe
sets and 739 downregulated probe sets in DL cell line compared to DC cell
line. Compared to DC cells, the transcriptional expression of 27 genes
were dramatically increased (p Objective: Lung cancer has become one of
the leading causes of cancer-related mortality in the world. Metastasis
remains the overwhelming causes of death for lung cancer patients. 80-90%
of lung cancer deaths are caused by metastasis. However, an ideal in
vitro model to explore the regulation and the molecules that control the
lymph node metastasis of lung cancer is required.Methods: A gene
expression profiling for both of the cell lines were generated by
microarray. Further investigations were carried out in the lung cancer
cell lines and paired tissues by migration and invasion assays and
immunohistochemistry.Results: Firstly, we established a paired human lung
adenocarcinoma cell lines from primary tumor site (named DC cells) and
metastatic paratracheal lymph nodes (named DL cells). The two cell lines
have different biological characteristics which DC cells grow clump
easily and DL cells grow more scattered. The doubling time of DC and DL
cell lines were 32.6h and 45.2h, respectively. The detection of the human
D1S80 and D17S30 VNTR locus verified the same individual for DC and DL
cell lines. Secondary, Microarray analysis revealed 232 upregulated probe
sets and 739 downregulated probe sets in DL cell line compared to DC cell
line. Compared to DC cells, the transcriptional expression of 27 genes
were dramatically increased (p < 0.05), including AIM2, IGFBP4, IL6 and
IL6R in DL cells, while expression of 55 genes was clearly decreased (p
Objective: Lung cancer has become one of the leading causes of
cancer-related mortality in the world. Metastasis remains the
overwhelming causes of death for lung cancer patients. 80-90% of lung
cancer deaths are caused by metastasis. However, an ideal in vitro model
to explore the regulation and the molecules that control the lymph node
metastasis of lung cancer is required.Methods: A gene expression
profiling for both of the cell lines were generated by microarray.
Further investigations were carried out in the lung cancer cell lines and
paired tissues by migration and invasion assays and
immunohistochemistry.Results: Firstly, we established a paired human lung
adenocarcinoma cell lines from primary tumor site (named DC cells) and
metastatic paratracheal lymph nodes (named DL cells). The two cell lines
have different biological characteristics which DC cells grow clump
easily and DL cells grow more scattered. The doubling time of DC and DL
cell lines were 32.6h and 45.2h, respectively. The detection of the human
D1S80 and D17S30 VNTR locus verified the same individual for DC and DL
cell lines. Secondary, Microarray analysis revealed 232 upregulated probe
sets and 739 downregulated probe sets in DL cell line compared to DC cell
line. Compared to DC cells, the transcriptional expression of 27 genes
were dramatically increased (p < 0.05), including AIM2, IGFBP4, IL6 and
IL6R in DL cells, while expression of 55 genes was clearly decreased (p <
0.05), including FGF13, FGF19, IL1A, IL1B, MCAM, MMP15, MMP7, and TGFB2
by real-time PCR analysis. Furthermore, we selected 32 genes and screened
the expression of those genes in 10-paired human NSCLC primary lung
cancer tissues and matched metastasis lymph nodes tissues by real-time
PCR. The results showed: 8 out of 10 metastasis lymph node tissues got
up-regulated of RGS7, VNN2, and 7 out of 10 metastasis lymph node tissues
got up-regulated of PECAM1, VNN1, CLIC2 expression. On the other hand, 8
of 10 metastasis lymph node tissues got down-regulated expression of
CEACAM6, and 7 out of 10 got down-regulated expression of PIAS3. At mean
time, none of metastasis lymph node tissues got decreased expression of
TNFRSF9, which only was seen in DL cells. The further study in other lung
cancer cell lines indicated that CLIC2, PECAM1, RAB38, BCL9 and RGS7
genes influenc lung cancer cell migration ability in vitro. And these
genes were also analyzed in more lung cancer tissues by
immunohistochemistry staining.Conclusion: We established a paired human
lung adenocarcinoma cell lines from primary tumor site and metastatic
paratracheal lymph nodes. The CLIC2, PECAM1, RAB38, BCL9 and RGS7 genes
involve in the lung cancer metastasis.Note: This abstract was not
presented at the meeting.

