Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The host genomic environment of the provirus determines the
abundance of BLV-infected clones


Human T-lymphotropic Virus 1 (HTLV-1) induces a persistent infection that
remains generally asymptomatic. Nevertheless, in a small proportion of
individuals and after a long latency, HTLV-1 infection leads to leukemia
or lymphoma. Onset of clinical manifestations correlates with a
persistently elevated number of infected cells. Because the vast majority
of cells are infected at early stages, primary infection is a crucial
period for HTLV-1 persistence and pathogenesis. Since HTLV-1 is
transmitted through breast feeding and because systematic population
screenings are rare, there is a lack of available samples at early
infection. Therefore, we addressed this question in a closely related
animal model by inoculating cows with Bovine Leukemia Virus (BLV).
Initial BLV provirus insertion is not random but occurs nearby
transcribed genomic regions (genes and CpG islands). This pattern of
integration is highly similar to the observed pattern in HTLV-1 in vitro
experiments. Later on, the proportion of clone carrying a provirus in
transcribed regions decreases to reach levels comparable to those
observed in asymptomatic HTLV-1 carriers. The negative selection against
BLV clones carrying a provirus nearby transcribed regions is more
efficient in animals that will subsequently present low proviral load set
point. Finally, like for HTLV-1 infected people, the abundance of the BLV
infected clones correlates with the integration of the provirus in
transcribed regions. These observations highlight the high similarities
between BLV and HTLV-1 clonality and suggest a key role exerted by the
host immune system during primary infection.

