Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Efficacy of trifluridine for 5-fluorouracil-resistant human
gastric cancer cell lines and their mechanisms


Background: TAS-102 is a novel oral nucleoside antitumor agent consisting
of trifluridine (FTD) and tipiracil hydrochloride (TPI). TAS-102 was
found to significantly improve the overall survival of patients with
metastatic colorectal cancer who were refractory to treatment with a
fluoropyrimidine, irinotecan, and oxaliplatin in a double-blind
randomized phase II study. Although significant survival benefits from
5-fluorouracil (5-FU)-based chemotherapy have also been reported in
patients with gastric cancer, many patients experience recurrences after
several courses of 5-FU-based chemotherapy. The resistance of gastric
tumors to 5-FU therapy is thus a major clinical problem. In this study,
the efficacy of FTD against 5-FU-resistant human gastric cancer cell
lines was investigated. Method: 5-FU-resistant cell lines established by
continuously exposing the parent cell lines (MKN-45, MKN-74, and KATOIII)
to escalating concentrations (1-5 M) of 5-FU over a 1-year period were
used. The sensitivities of the cell lines to FTD were evaluated using a
crystal violet staining assay. To elucidate the mechanism by which
resistance is overcome, the mRNA levels of TK1, which converts FTD into
an active monophosphate form, and hENT1, which is involved in the
cellular uptake of FTD, were determined using RT-PCR. Results: The
resistant cell lines KATOIII/5FU, MKN74/5FU, and MKN45/5FU exhibited a
2.0-fold, 4.8-fold, and 14.2-fold resistance to 5-FU, compared with their
parent cell lines, respectively. MKN-45/5FU also showed a 3.7-fold
resistance to FTD, whereas MKN-74/5FU (1.0-fold) and KATOIII/5FU
(1.2-fold) showed no cross-resistance to FTD. The TK1 mRNA level was
decreased by 40% in the MKN-45/5FU cells, compared with the parent cell
line. Furthermore, this cell line showed a 60% decrease in the mRNA level
for hENT1. In contrast, the hENT1 mRNA level increased by 1.6-fold in the
KATOIII/5FU cells, with a 50% decrease in the TK1 mRNA level. The TK1 and
hENT1 mRNA levels in MKN-74/5FU were increased by 1.9-fold and 1.7-fold,
respectively. Conclusion: FTD was able to overcome the resistance to 5-FU
in 2 out of 3 resistant cell lines in vitro, with MKN45/5FU exhibiting a
partial cross-resistance to FTD. These results suggest that TAS-102 might
be a promising chemotherapeutic agent for the treatment of gastric cancer
relapses after 5-FU-based treatment. Furthermore, TK1 and hENT1 might be
involved in FTD-related cytotoxicity.

