Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dll4 inhibition plus aflibercept markedly reduces ovarian tumor
burden and ascites


Purpose: To determine the effects of Dll4 blockade with and without
aflibercept on ovarian tumor burden and ascites in preclinical
models.Methods: Using Dll4-Fc and anti-Dll4 antibodies, we evaluated the
biological effects of Dll4 inhibition combined with aflibercept in vivo
(orthotopic mouse models of ovarian cancer). Reverse phase protein array
(RPPA) analysis was used to identify potential biomarkers of treatment
response.Results: To address the biological significance of Dll4
expression in tumor cells versus endothelial cells, we used human and
mouse anti-Dll4 antibodies in vivo. In the A2780 model, treatment with
mouse (REGN1035) or human (REGN421) anti-Dll4 antibodies reduced tumor
weight by 61.5% and 82.4%, respectively, compared to the controls (P
Purpose: To determine the effects of Dll4 blockade with and without
aflibercept on ovarian tumor burden and ascites in preclinical
models.Methods: Using Dll4-Fc and anti-Dll4 antibodies, we evaluated the
biological effects of Dll4 inhibition combined with aflibercept in vivo
(orthotopic mouse models of ovarian cancer). Reverse phase protein array
(RPPA) analysis was used to identify potential biomarkers of treatment
response.Results: To address the biological significance of Dll4
expression in tumor cells versus endothelial cells, we used human and
mouse anti-Dll4 antibodies in vivo. In the A2780 model, treatment with
mouse (REGN1035) or human (REGN421) anti-Dll4 antibodies reduced tumor
weight by 61.5% and 82.4%, respectively, compared to the controls (P <
0.05 for both). Aflibercept alone reduced tumor weight by 90% (p Purpose:
To determine the effects of Dll4 blockade with and without aflibercept on
ovarian tumor burden and ascites in preclinical models.Methods: Using
Dll4-Fc and anti-Dll4 antibodies, we evaluated the biological effects of
Dll4 inhibition combined with aflibercept in vivo (orthotopic mouse
models of ovarian cancer). Reverse phase protein array (RPPA) analysis
was used to identify potential biomarkers of treatment response.Results:
To address the biological significance of Dll4 expression in tumor cells
versus endothelial cells, we used human and mouse anti-Dll4 antibodies in
vivo. In the A2780 model, treatment with mouse (REGN1035) or human
(REGN421) anti-Dll4 antibodies reduced tumor weight by 61.5% and 82.4%,
respectively, compared to the controls (P < 0.05 for both). Aflibercept
alone reduced tumor weight by 90% (p < 0.05). The combinations of
REGN1035 plus aflibercept, and REGN421 plus aflibercept resulted in the
greatest inhibition of tumor growth, reducing respective tumor weight by
95.8% and 93.9%, compared to the controls (P Purpose: To determine the
effects of Dll4 blockade with and without aflibercept on ovarian tumor
burden and ascites in preclinical models.Methods: Using Dll4-Fc and
anti-Dll4 antibodies, we evaluated the biological effects of Dll4
inhibition combined with aflibercept in vivo (orthotopic mouse models of
ovarian cancer). Reverse phase protein array (RPPA) analysis was used to
identify potential biomarkers of treatment response.Results: To address
the biological significance of Dll4 expression in tumor cells versus
endothelial cells, we used human and mouse anti-Dll4 antibodies in vivo.
In the A2780 model, treatment with mouse (REGN1035) or human (REGN421)
anti-Dll4 antibodies reduced tumor weight by 61.5% and 82.4%,
respectively, compared to the controls (P < 0.05 for both). Aflibercept
alone reduced tumor weight by 90% (p < 0.05). The combinations of
REGN1035 plus aflibercept, and REGN421 plus aflibercept resulted in the
greatest inhibition of tumor growth, reducing respective tumor weight by
95.8% and 93.9%, compared to the controls (P < 0.05). The anti-tumor
effects were related to decreased angiogenesis and increased apoptosis.
RPPA analysis revealed that caspase3 and GATA3 were significantly
increased; cyclin D1, Bcl-2 and pS6-s240_s244 were decreased in response
to Dll4 Inhibition plus aflibercept. Among these, GATA3, a transcription
factor for E-cadherin, was significantly induced by Dll4 Inhibition plus
aflibercept, resulting in the up-regulation of E-cadherin expression in
human cancer cells. Furthermore, GATA3 and E-cadherin expression might be
useful as potential biomarkers of response.Conclusions: Dual targeting of
Dll4 and VEGF shows promise for inhibiting ovarian tumor growth and may
have important clinical implications.

