Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DNA repair capacity, gene expression and epigenomic profiles in
bladder cancer


In Europe, bladder cancer (BC) is the sixth most commonly diagnosed tumor
and the second most common cause of death among patients with
genitourinary tract malignancies. The ability to repair DNA damage is
strongly associated with the risk of cancer and inter-individual
variation in DNA repair capacity (DRC) might account for different
susceptibility of developing cancer. DRC represents a complex marker
comprising the sum of several factors such as gene variants, gene
expression, stability of gene products, and effect of
inhibitors/stimulators. Individuals with low DRC will tend to accumulate
more damage than those who have a better ability to repair such damage.
This variability is modulated by the genetic background to which
SNPs/haplotype combinations in DNA repair genes, as well as epigenetic
regulation are likely to contribute. Phenotypic assays to evaluate DNA
repair activity (in particular NER comet assay, H2AX phosphorylation and
micronucleus assay) were performed on cryopreserved lymphocytes from 159
cases (collected before treatment) and 159 controls matched by age and
smoking habits, enrolled in Turin Bladder Cancer Study (TBCS). We aimed
at studying the relationship between DRC (evaluated by comet assay,
micronuclei and H2AX phosphorylation assay) and bladder cancer
integrating, gene expression and epigenetic profile data (methylation
levels and microRNA expression). In particular, we performed an
integrated analysis on the genotype/phenotype correlation in a population
of bladder cancer cases and controls provided with detailed description
of the follow-up for response to therapy/recurrence/survival. This
integrated approach will help in elucidating the role of DRC (and its
determinants) as predictive and prognostic marker and to identify
combined biomarkers to be measured in blood cells as non-invasive
predictive method.

