Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Network-based identification of gene signatures of
epithelial-mesenchymal transition in breast cancer


Metastasis is a major cause of death in breast cancer patients. Breast
cancer cells at the primary site gain metastatic ability through
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). During the process, cancer cells
lose cell-cell adhesion mediated by E-cadherin repression and gain
motility and invasive properties to penetrate the basement membrane and
enter the bloodstream or lymphatic system in order to travel to distant
metastatic sites. To investigate the underlying gene regulation mechanism
of EMT, we established an EMT gene regulatory network. We first built and
validated an EMT signal pathway by Ingenuity Knowledge Base, a repository
of expertly curated biological interactions and functional annotations
from literatures. Based on gene profiling data of 590 breast cancer
patients from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) and over 370 breast cancer
patients from Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO), we modeled the gene
regulation mechanism of each gene and its expression regulators in the
EMT signal pathway in a stochastic Markov Chain model. In order to
identify biomarkers and to determine the dynamical transition process at
molecular level during EMT, it is important to identify the corresponding
gene expression patterns of epithelial and mesenchymal cells. Several
studies have already demonstrated that stable gene expression patterns
correspond to stable cell phenotypes. In this study, we reported a
cost-efficient computational algorithm developed to identify these stable
gene signatures and validate them with gene expression profiles of human
mammary epithelial cells and transduced mesenchymal cells.

