Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oncogenic mutant KRAS modulates EZH2 expression through MEK-ERK
signaling by remodeling gene expression in NSCLC


Abstract:Background. EZH2 overexpression occurs in lung cancer and is
associated with a poor outcome. The mechanisms driving EZH2 expression in
lung cancer are not fully understood. In this study, we investigated
whether pharmacological disruption of signaling MEK-ERK pathway would
affect EZH2 expression in a panel of NSCLC cell lines with and without
KRAS mutation. Moreover, we analyzed the transcriptome expression
following knockdown of EZH2 expression in NSCLC cell lines with different
types of KRAS mutations.Methods. NSCLC cell lines were treated with
different doses of MEK inhibitor AZD6244 (0, 0.5 and 1M) and the
expressions of EZH2, MEK and MAPK were determined by Western-blots. Cell
lines were transfected with gene-specific EZH2 siRNA and control siRNA.
Gene expression profiling was performed using the Illumina Human HT-12 v
4.0 platform. Functional pathway analysis was conducted using the
software Ingenuity Pathways Analysis.Result. We found that
pharmacological disruption of signaling MEK-ERK pathways with AZD6244
decreases the expression of MAPK p44/42 and phospho-MAPK p44/42 in all
NSCLC cell lines analyzed wild-type and of KRAS mutant status. However,
after AZD6244 treatment, EZH2 expression in NSCLC cell lines varied
according to the KRAS mutation status: strong reduction only in NSCLC
cell lines harboring GtoC mutation, a partial reduction in cells with
GtoS and GtoR mutation, and no change in cell lines with GtoD or GtoV
mutation and with wild-type KRAS. The gene expression analysis revealed
that 3,235 genes were similarly regulated for mutant KRAS GtoC, GtoD and
GtoV in NSCLC following EZH2 knockdown compared with KRAS wild-type (P
Abstract:Background. EZH2 overexpression occurs in lung cancer and is
associated with a poor outcome. The mechanisms driving EZH2 expression in
lung cancer are not fully understood. In this study, we investigated
whether pharmacological disruption of signaling MEK-ERK pathway would
affect EZH2 expression in a panel of NSCLC cell lines with and without
KRAS mutation. Moreover, we analyzed the transcriptome expression
following knockdown of EZH2 expression in NSCLC cell lines with different
types of KRAS mutations.Methods. NSCLC cell lines were treated with
different doses of MEK inhibitor AZD6244 (0, 0.5 and 1M) and the
expressions of EZH2, MEK and MAPK were determined by Western-blots. Cell
lines were transfected with gene-specific EZH2 siRNA and control siRNA.
Gene expression profiling was performed using the Illumina Human HT-12 v
4.0 platform. Functional pathway analysis was conducted using the
software Ingenuity Pathways Analysis.Result. We found that
pharmacological disruption of signaling MEK-ERK pathways with AZD6244
decreases the expression of MAPK p44/42 and phospho-MAPK p44/42 in all
NSCLC cell lines analyzed wild-type and of KRAS mutant status. However,
after AZD6244 treatment, EZH2 expression in NSCLC cell lines varied
according to the KRAS mutation status: strong reduction only in NSCLC
cell lines harboring GtoC mutation, a partial reduction in cells with
GtoS and GtoR mutation, and no change in cell lines with GtoD or GtoV
mutation and with wild-type KRAS. The gene expression analysis revealed
that 3,235 genes were similarly regulated for mutant KRAS GtoC, GtoD and
GtoV in NSCLC following EZH2 knockdown compared with KRAS wild-type (P <
0.05). Functional pathways analysis showed that EZH2 knockdown modulated
differentially pathways commonly activated in cancer as growth factor
signaling, molecular mechanism of cancer and cellular growth,
proliferation and development, between cell lines that harbor mutant KRAS
GtoC, GtoD or GtoV compared with KRAS wild-type.Conclusion. Our findings
suggest that oncogenic mutant KRAS GtoC, GtoS and GtoR modulate EZH2
expression through MEK-ERK signaling contributing to changes of the
expression of genes frequently altered in cancer (Grant support: 5 R01
CA155196 and P50CA70907)

