Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Reactive oxygen species in Sonic hedgehog-driven proliferation of
cerebellar granule neuron precursors


Medulloblastoma is the most common solid malignant pediatric brain tumor.
These tumors arise in the cerebellum and can be molecularly subdivided
into 4 consensus subgroups, one of which is marked by amplification and
activation of Sonic hedgehog (Shh) pathway components and downstream
targets. This subclass is proposed to arise from oncogenic transformation
of cerebellar granule neuron precursors (CGNPs), whose expansion during
post-natal brain development is driven by and requires activation of the
Shh pathway. These tumors often demonstrate similarities with normal
cerebellar development at the molecular level, thus allowing us to use
primary CGNP cultures as a model system for the Sonic hedgehog (Shh)
driven subclass of medulloblastoma.In addition to mitogens driving
proliferation, it has been shown in the past that low levels of
intracellular reactive oxygen species (ROS) are required for
proliferation, through mechanisms as diverse as inhibition of receptor
tyrosine phosphatases, stabilization of proliferation proteins, and
modifications of metabolites, thus indicating additional roles for ROS in
proliferation and perhaps tumor growth beyond their known capacity to
cause DNA damage, thereby contributing to genomic instability and
apoptosis.Although the Shh ligand does not bind to a receptor tyrosine
kinase (RTK), it is known that Shh signaling cooperates with RTK-
activated pathways such as the insulin-like growth factor pathway to
drive proliferation. To determine whether intracellular ROS play a role
in Shh-driven CGNP proliferation, we treated CGNPs with the ROS scavenger
lipoic acid (LA) in the presence of Shh, and observed a significant
decrease in proliferation. Conversely, addition of the ROS inducer
tert-Butyl hydroperoxide to Shh treated CGNPs led to enhanced
proliferation over Shh treatment alone. These results indicate that a
certain level of ROS are required to support Shh-driven CGNP
proliferation, and enhancing their levels can increase proliferation.To
investigate whether Shh signaling may affect expression of ROS regulatory
genes we carried out a qPCR analysis. We identified up-regulation of
sod2, gstm1, and gsto1: genes known to respond to ROS and whose products
neutralize ROS, over vehicle-treated CGNPs. Paradoxically, when we
examined ROS regulatory enzyme expression in Shh-driven mouse
medulloblastomas, we noted sharp drop in the expression of gstm1, gsto1,
and sod2 compared to the adjacent cerebellum suggesting a reduced ability
to inactivate ROS, which could be contributing to proliferation or DNA
damage in this transgenic model. These findings suggest that normal Sonic
hedgehog pathway activation contributes to the production and tight
regulation of ROS via downstream effectors in addition to synergizing
with ROS to drive proliferation, a highly regulated balance that may be
lost in medulloblastoma.

