Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genetic and intermediate phenotypic susceptibility markers of
gastric cancer in Hispanic-Americans: A case control study


Background: Hispanics are the largest non-white ethnic group in the U.S.
and account for approximately 17% of U.S. population. Hispanics have
higher incidence and mortality rates for gastric cancer than whites or
Asians. Association studies have identified several genetic
susceptibility loci and intermediate phenotypic biomarkers for gastric
cancer in whites and Asians. However, no studies have evaluated genetic
susceptibility and intermediate phenotypic biomarkers in Hispanics.
Methods: In a case-control study of 132 Hispanic gastric cancer patients
and 125 Hispanic controls, we evaluated the association of 5 previously
identified, single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) predisposing to
gastric cancer in whites and/or Asians. In addition, two intermediate
phenotypic markers in peripheral blood leukocytes, i.e., telomere length
and mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) copy number, were examined with respect to
risk for gastric cancer.Results: The variant C allele of the SNP
rs2294008 in PSCA gene was associated with a significantly reduced risk
of gastric cancer (per allele OR=0.60, 95%CI, 0.41-0.88; P=0.009) after
adjusting for age, gender, and smoking status. Low mtDNA copy number was
associated with a significantly increased risk of gastric cancer
(OR=6.83; 95%CI, 3.33-14.00; P Background: Hispanics are the largest
non-white ethnic group in the U.S. and account for approximately 17% of
U.S. population. Hispanics have higher incidence and mortality rates for
gastric cancer than whites or Asians. Association studies have identified
several genetic susceptibility loci and intermediate phenotypic
biomarkers for gastric cancer in whites and Asians. However, no studies
have evaluated genetic susceptibility and intermediate phenotypic
biomarkers in Hispanics. Methods: In a case-control study of 132 Hispanic
gastric cancer patients and 125 Hispanic controls, we evaluated the
association of 5 previously identified, single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) predisposing to gastric cancer in whites and/or Asians. In
addition, two intermediate phenotypic markers in peripheral blood
leukocytes, i.e., telomere length and mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) copy
number, were examined with respect to risk for gastric cancer.Results:
The variant C allele of the SNP rs2294008 in PSCA gene was associated
with a significantly reduced risk of gastric cancer (per allele OR=0.60,
95%CI, 0.41-0.88; P=0.009) after adjusting for age, gender, and smoking
status. Low mtDNA copy number was associated with a significantly
increased risk of gastric cancer (OR=6.83; 95%CI, 3.33-14.00; P <0.01).
Telomere length was not significantly associated with the risk of gastric
cancer (OR=1.25, 95% CI, 0.70-2.24; P=0.450).Conclusion: Hispanics share
certain genetic susceptibility loci and intermediate phenotypic
biomarkers with whites and Asians, but may also have distinct genetic
susceptibility factors related to risk for gastric cancer

