Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The MEK inhibitor trametinib delays tumor outgrowth and prolongs
survival in a patient-derived mouse model of occult hepatic metastatic
pancreatic cancer


Background: Survival for patients with pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma
(PDAC) remains dismal and the majority of patients succumb to metastatic
disease. Even for those with localized PDAC, most will die from
metastatic disease despite margin-negative resection and adjuvant
therapy. Therefore, these patients must harbor occult metastatic PDAC at
presentation. We have developed a PDAC model of occult liver metastases
using patient-derived xenografts (PDXs) to study the growth of PDAC
within the metastatic microenvironment of the liver and evaluated the
role of KRAS-MEK-ERK signaling on tumor progression.Methods and Results:
Extensively characterized low passage, patient-derived KRAS-mutant
(Tumors 608, 366, and 654) and wild-type (Tumors 738 and 215) PDAC cells
expressing luciferase were injected into the spleens of athymic, nude
mice and allowed to circulate for 10 minutes, after which a splenectomy
was performed. To evaluate metastatic cell growth kinetics in the liver,
tumor burden was monitored by sequential bioluminescent imaging. Each of
the PDX tumors exhibited a characteristic and reproducible time to
proliferative outgrowth ranging from 20 days (Tumor 608) to greater than
100 days (Tumor 654). To evaluate the role of KRAS signaling in
maintaining dormant cell survival and proliferative outgrowth, tumor 608
cells were injected and mice were treated with the MEK inhibitor
trametinib (0.3 mg/kg, daily) or control beginning 48 hours
post-injection. Trametinib significantly reduced metastatic tumor burden,
delayed time to proliferative outgrowth, and greatly prolonged survival
as compared to control (med. survival: 114 vs. 43 days, pBackground:
Survival for patients with pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC)
remains dismal and the majority of patients succumb to metastatic
disease. Even for those with localized PDAC, most will die from
metastatic disease despite margin-negative resection and adjuvant
therapy. Therefore, these patients must harbor occult metastatic PDAC at
presentation. We have developed a PDAC model of occult liver metastases
using patient-derived xenografts (PDXs) to study the growth of PDAC
within the metastatic microenvironment of the liver and evaluated the
role of KRAS-MEK-ERK signaling on tumor progression.Methods and Results:
Extensively characterized low passage, patient-derived KRAS-mutant
(Tumors 608, 366, and 654) and wild-type (Tumors 738 and 215) PDAC cells
expressing luciferase were injected into the spleens of athymic, nude
mice and allowed to circulate for 10 minutes, after which a splenectomy
was performed. To evaluate metastatic cell growth kinetics in the liver,
tumor burden was monitored by sequential bioluminescent imaging. Each of
the PDX tumors exhibited a characteristic and reproducible time to
proliferative outgrowth ranging from 20 days (Tumor 608) to greater than
100 days (Tumor 654). To evaluate the role of KRAS signaling in
maintaining dormant cell survival and proliferative outgrowth, tumor 608
cells were injected and mice were treated with the MEK inhibitor
trametinib (0.3 mg/kg, daily) or control beginning 48 hours
post-injection. Trametinib significantly reduced metastatic tumor burden,
delayed time to proliferative outgrowth, and greatly prolonged survival
as compared to control (med. survival: 114 vs. 43 days, p<0.001). In
contrast, in an orthotopic model with 250-500 mm3 tumors trametinib led
to limited inhibition in tumor growth for Tumor 608. To characterize
these PDAC cells, we isolated Tumor 608 cells from the liver 48 and 72
hours, 10 and 28 days after splenic injection using magnetic column
separation with human EpCAM (CD326)-targeted magnetically labeled
microbeads. Flow cytometric analyses of retrieved cells revealed that
decreased cellular markers of proliferation and increased PARP cleavage
correlated with decreased tumor burden observed at these timepoints in
mice treated with trametinib.Conclusions: Using a model of occult liver
metastatic PDAC, patient-derived tumors exhibited characteristic, albeit
different growth kinetics in the liver microenvironment. Further,
inhibition of KRAS-MEK-ERK signaling with the MEK inhibitor trametinib
decreased metastatic cellular proliferation, increased apoptosis,
prolonged metastatic tumor outgrowth, and significantly increased
survival. Further investigation into factors promoting PDAC cell survival
within the hepatic microenvironment will lead to development of rational
therapeutic strategies for patients with occult metastatic PDAC.

