Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prognostic stratification of naturally occurring canine triple
negative invasive mammary carcinoma according to IGF1-R and AR expression


Triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) lacking ER-Estrogen Receptor and
PR-Progesterone Receptor expression and HER2-Human Epidermal Growth
Factor Receptor 2 overexpression, is a highly aggressive and
heterogeneous disease for which better understanding and targeted
treatments are needed. Insulin-like growth factor-1 receptor (IGF-1R) and
androgen receptor (AR) are frequently expressed in TNBC and correlate
with prognosis, making them potential candidates for new therapeutic
pathways. Dogs spontaneously develop invasive mammary carcinoma with a
high prevalence of the triple negative subtype (TNCMC). We therefore
aimed to quantify AR and IGF-1R expression in naturally occurring TNCMC
and assess their combined prognostic value in terms of overall (OS),
specific (SS) and disease-free survivals (DFS). 104 TNCMC were included
(ERTriple negative breast cancer (TNBC) lacking ER-Estrogen Receptor and
PR-Progesterone Receptor expression and HER2-Human Epidermal Growth
Factor Receptor 2 overexpression, is a highly aggressive and
heterogeneous disease for which better understanding and targeted
treatments are needed. Insulin-like growth factor-1 receptor (IGF-1R) and
androgen receptor (AR) are frequently expressed in TNBC and correlate
with prognosis, making them potential candidates for new therapeutic
pathways. Dogs spontaneously develop invasive mammary carcinoma with a
high prevalence of the triple negative subtype (TNCMC). We therefore
aimed to quantify AR and IGF-1R expression in naturally occurring TNCMC
and assess their combined prognostic value in terms of overall (OS),
specific (SS) and disease-free survivals (DFS). 104 TNCMC were included
(ER<10%, PRTriple negative breast cancer (TNBC) lacking ER-Estrogen
Receptor and PR-Progesterone Receptor expression and HER2-Human Epidermal
Growth Factor Receptor 2 overexpression, is a highly aggressive and
heterogeneous disease for which better understanding and targeted
treatments are needed. Insulin-like growth factor-1 receptor (IGF-1R) and
androgen receptor (AR) are frequently expressed in TNBC and correlate
with prognosis, making them potential candidates for new therapeutic
pathways. Dogs spontaneously develop invasive mammary carcinoma with a
high prevalence of the triple negative subtype (TNCMC). We therefore
aimed to quantify AR and IGF-1R expression in naturally occurring TNCMC
and assess their combined prognostic value in terms of overall (OS),
specific (SS) and disease-free survivals (DFS). 104 TNCMC were included
(ER<10%, PR<10%, HER2Triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) lacking
ER-Estrogen Receptor and PR-Progesterone Receptor expression and
HER2-Human Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor 2 overexpression, is a highly
aggressive and heterogeneous disease for which better understanding and
targeted treatments are needed. Insulin-like growth factor-1 receptor
(IGF-1R) and androgen receptor (AR) are frequently expressed in TNBC and
correlate with prognosis, making them potential candidates for new
therapeutic pathways. Dogs spontaneously develop invasive mammary
carcinoma with a high prevalence of the triple negative subtype (TNCMC).
We therefore aimed to quantify AR and IGF-1R expression in naturally
occurring TNCMC and assess their combined prognostic value in terms of
overall (OS), specific (SS) and disease-free survivals (DFS). 104 TNCMC
were included (ER<10%, PR<10%, HER2<3+ by IHC-immunohistochemistry).
Female dogs were followed for at least 2 years after mastectomy. 71 TNCMC
were basal-like (CK5/6-Cytokeratin and/or EGFR-Epidermal Growth Factor
Receptor positive) and 33 non basal-like (CK5/6 and EGFR negative).
IGF-1R expression (clone G11) was quantified using the same scoring
system as for HER2 in breast cancer. AR expression (clone SP107) was
considered positive if there were at least 1% positive tumor nuclei.
47/104 (45%) TNCMC overexpressed IGF-1R (3+ IHC score). 40/104 (38%)
TNCMC were AR positive. IGF-1R overexpression positively correlated with
lymphovascular invasion (LVI) (p=0.01). AR expression negatively
correlated with LVI (pTriple negative breast cancer (TNBC) lacking
ER-Estrogen Receptor and PR-Progesterone Receptor expression and
HER2-Human Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor 2 overexpression, is a highly
aggressive and heterogeneous disease for which better understanding and
targeted treatments are needed. Insulin-like growth factor-1 receptor
(IGF-1R) and androgen receptor (AR) are frequently expressed in TNBC and
correlate with prognosis, making them potential candidates for new
therapeutic pathways. Dogs spontaneously develop invasive mammary
carcinoma with a high prevalence of the triple negative subtype (TNCMC).
We therefore aimed to quantify AR and IGF-1R expression in naturally
occurring TNCMC and assess their combined prognostic value in terms of
overall (OS), specific (SS) and disease-free survivals (DFS). 104 TNCMC
were included (ER<10%, PR<10%, HER2<3+ by IHC-immunohistochemistry).
Female dogs were followed for at least 2 years after mastectomy. 71 TNCMC
were basal-like (CK5/6-Cytokeratin and/or EGFR-Epidermal Growth Factor
Receptor positive) and 33 non basal-like (CK5/6 and EGFR negative).
IGF-1R expression (clone G11) was quantified using the same scoring
system as for HER2 in breast cancer. AR expression (clone SP107) was
considered positive if there were at least 1% positive tumor nuclei.
47/104 (45%) TNCMC overexpressed IGF-1R (3+ IHC score). 40/104 (38%)
TNCMC were AR positive. IGF-1R overexpression positively correlated with
lymphovascular invasion (LVI) (p=0.01). AR expression negatively
correlated with LVI (p<0.01).IGF-1R and AR IHC expression stratified
TNCMC into 3 groups with different outcomes: AR positivity defined the TN
Luminal-AR group (n=40); among AR-negative cases, IGF-1R scores 2+ and 3+
defined the TN IGF-1R+ group (n=54); other cases were defined as all
negative: TN All-Neg group (n=10).By univariate analysis, OS
significantly differed (p=0.02) among groups with hazard ratio (HR) of
0.8 (95% CI 0.3-1.6) for the TN All-Neg group and 1.7 (1.1-2.6) for the
TN IGF1R+ group compared to the TN Luminal-AR group. SS was also
significantly different (pTriple negative breast cancer (TNBC) lacking
ER-Estrogen Receptor and PR-Progesterone Receptor expression and
HER2-Human Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor 2 overexpression, is a highly
aggressive and heterogeneous disease for which better understanding and
targeted treatments are needed. Insulin-like growth factor-1 receptor
(IGF-1R) and androgen receptor (AR) are frequently expressed in TNBC and
correlate with prognosis, making them potential candidates for new
therapeutic pathways. Dogs spontaneously develop invasive mammary
carcinoma with a high prevalence of the triple negative subtype (TNCMC).
We therefore aimed to quantify AR and IGF-1R expression in naturally
occurring TNCMC and assess their combined prognostic value in terms of
overall (OS), specific (SS) and disease-free survivals (DFS). 104 TNCMC
were included (ER<10%, PR<10%, HER2<3+ by IHC-immunohistochemistry).
Female dogs were followed for at least 2 years after mastectomy. 71 TNCMC
were basal-like (CK5/6-Cytokeratin and/or EGFR-Epidermal Growth Factor
Receptor positive) and 33 non basal-like (CK5/6 and EGFR negative).
IGF-1R expression (clone G11) was quantified using the same scoring
system as for HER2 in breast cancer. AR expression (clone SP107) was
considered positive if there were at least 1% positive tumor nuclei.
47/104 (45%) TNCMC overexpressed IGF-1R (3+ IHC score). 40/104 (38%)
TNCMC were AR positive. IGF-1R overexpression positively correlated with
lymphovascular invasion (LVI) (p=0.01). AR expression negatively
correlated with LVI (p<0.01).IGF-1R and AR IHC expression stratified
TNCMC into 3 groups with different outcomes: AR positivity defined the TN
Luminal-AR group (n=40); among AR-negative cases, IGF-1R scores 2+ and 3+
defined the TN IGF-1R+ group (n=54); other cases were defined as all
negative: TN All-Neg group (n=10).By univariate analysis, OS
significantly differed (p=0.02) among groups with hazard ratio (HR) of
0.8 (95% CI 0.3-1.6) for the TN All-Neg group and 1.7 (1.1-2.6) for the
TN IGF1R+ group compared to the TN Luminal-AR group. SS was also
significantly different (p<0.01) with respective HR of 0.6 (0.2-1.9) in
the AllNeg group and 2.3 (1.3-4.0) in the IGF-1R+ group. DFS, defined as
the interval from mastectomy to the first local recurrence or lymph node
metastasis, was shorter in the TN IGF-1R+ group (HR=2.3; 95% CI 1.2-4.1;
p=0.02) than in the TN Luminal-AR group.By multivariate analysis, the
stratification of TNCMC according to AR and IGF-1R expression was an
independent prognostic factor associated with DFS and SS with grade, LVI
and completeness of excision as covariates.IGF-1R overexpression and AR
positivity are common in canine triple-negative invasive mammary
carcinoma. Our result revealed the value of using a combination of IGF-1R
and AR for the prognostic stratification of TNCMC with a potential
translational application to human triple negative breast cancer.

