Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Significant increase in survival of triple negative breast cancer
animal model in response to BPM31510 alone or in combination with
standard of care: BPM31510 mediated dynamic metabolic (Warburg) shift in
breast cancer as potential mechanism


This study demonstrates that BPM 31510, a Coenzyme Q10 containing
proprietary formulation to influences cellular metabolism that is
deregulated in cancers and is now considered to be a hallmark of cancer.
These studies demonstrate that BPM 31510 alone or in combination with
standard of care significantly improved survival of triple negative
breast cancer (TNBC) animal model. To further tease out beneficial
effects of BPM31510, human breast cancer cells of varying receptor status
(SKBR3, MDA-MB231) were subjected to either (a) pretreatment with BPM
31510 (6 h) followed co-incubation with chemotherapeutic agents for 48-72
h or (b) co-treatment with BPM 31510 and chemotherapeutic agents, and
cancer cell responses were compared to non-tumorigenic mammary cells
(MCF12A). Cellular bioenergetics profiling revealed that BPM 31510
shifted cellular metabolism from glycolysis to mitochondrial metabolism,
and this metabolic shift was associated with significant increases in
reactive oxygen species (ROS). Both BPM 31510 alone or pretreatment and
cotreatment strategies with BPM 31510 plus standard of care resulted in
significant decreases in viable breast cancer cells when compared to
chemotherapeutic agents; however, minimal effects were observed in MCF12A
cells. In contrast, BPM 31510 in combination with chemotherapeutic agents
amplified caspase 3 activation and apoptotic cell death, indicating BPM
31510 enhances apoptotic signaling. Taken together, these data
demonstrate that BPM 31510 is a novel agent that reengages the cellular
metabolic and apoptotic machinery of cancer cells independent of genetic
make-up underlying malignancy. In addition, BPM 31510 enhances the
cytotoxicity of standard-of-care chemotherapeutic agents in breast cancer
cells through regulation of mitochondrial metabolism and oxidative
stress. These findings confirm that BPM 31510 is a novel, paradigm
shifting agent with multiple utility (as a single agent or in
combination) in breast cancer including TNBCs that otherwise have poor
prognosis and limited therapeutic options.

