Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNA-203 enhances radiosensitivity of human malignant glioma
cells


Glioblastoma multiform (GBM) is the most common, lethal and aggressive
type of primary brain tumor. Despite the improvement of surgical and
chemo/radiotherapeutic techniques, the prognosis for GBM is still poor,
with median survival of 9-12 months. The occurrence of radio-resistance
is one of the major obstacles to treat the GBM. Aberrant expression of
miRNAs has been demonstrated to be involved in the initiation,
progression, and metastasis of cancers. miRNA expression profiling
studies revealed that a number of miRNA were dysregulated in GBM. Here,
we investigated the potential role of miR-203, which is one of the
downregulated miRNAs, in the modulation of radio-sensitivity in GBM.
Transiently overexpressed miR-203 sensitized U251 malignant glioma cells
to radiation concurrent with the downregulation of AKT activity.
Overexpression of miR-203 prolonged radiation-induced H2AX foci formation
and downregulation of DNA-dependent protein kinases, suppressed invasion,
migration potential and vasculogenic mimicry formation. In contrast,
antisense-mediated inhibition of miR-203 expression results in decreased
radio-sensitivity and features of Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition
(EMT). Taken together, our findings suggest that the miR-203 could be a
useful target for overcoming the radio-resistance of GBM.

