Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: JNJ-47117096, a selective small molecule inhibitor of the MELK
oncogene decreases DNA damage tolerance in highly proliferating cancer
cells


Maternal embryonic leucine zipper kinase (MELK, hMP38, pEG3), a Ser/Thr
protein kinase, is highly overexpressed in stem cells and cancer cells.
The oncogenic role of MELK is attributed to disabling critical cell cycle
check points as well as enhancing replication. Most functional studies
have relied on the use of siRNA/shRNA mediated gene silencing, but this
often can be associated with off-target effects.Here we want to present a
novel, potent and selective small molecule inhibitor JNJ-47117096 that
has enabled us to validate the biological function of MELK
kinase.Outcome: MELK inhibition in cancer cells with an intact p53
signaling pathway is linked to a replicative senescence phenotype. This
phenotype correlates with a rapid ATM activation and phosphorylation of
CHK2 without any effects on the alternative ATR/ CHK1 DNA damage
pathways. Furthermore, JNJ-47117096 induces strong phosphorylation of p53
and prolonged up-regulation of p21 without the induction of apoptosis.
Strikingly, MELK inhibition in several p53 disabled cancer cells showed
induction of a mitotic catastrophe phenotype followed by prominent cell
killing.Finally, JNJ-47117096 triggers a rapid degradation of cellular
MELK protein, independent of the cell cycle phase and its regulation by
the E2F pathway. This observation can clearly be linked to a direct
binding effect of JNJ-47117096 to cellular MELK protein confirmed by
chemical proteomics.Conclusion: Our data generated with JNJ-47117096,
confirmed by selective siRNAs, indicate MELK as a key stimulator of
proliferation and replication by its ability to increase the threshold
for DNA damage tolerance. Targeting MELK function by selective small
molecule inhibitors might sensitise tumors to DNA-damaging agents or
radiation therapy.

