Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of cancer-specific COPI inhibitors and their
associated apoptotic cell death pathways


The COPI complex is a heptameric complex involved in multiple aspects of
intravesicular transport. Recently, Shtutman et al. identified the 1
subunit of the COPI complex as a potential target for cancer therapy1.
The subunit of COPI is coded for by two genes, COPZ1 and COPZ2. In normal
tissue, both COPZ genes are expressed and the protein products are
functional isoforms within the COPI complex. In numerous different
cancers, COPZ2 is silenced and the cells must depend on the 1 isoform for
COPI function. When 1 is inhibited by siRNAs, cancer cells undergo
apoptotic cell death while normal cells, which retain the 2 isoform,
survive. Thus, the 1 subunit of the COPI complex is a potential target
for cancer therapy. Here we present our work to develop and test small
molecule inhibitors of 1-containing COPI complexes, as well as the
identification of the apoptotic cell death pathways activated upon 1
depletion with siRNAs. We have identified a small molecule which disrupts
the formation of COPI vesicles in biochemical and immunofluorescence
studies, and also kills cells in a 1-specific manner. In addition we have
shown that the unfolded protein response (UPR) is activated by 1
depletion but that it is not the primary activator of apoptotic cell
death in cancer cells. The identification of small molecules which can
inhibit 1-containing COPI will be a valuable tool for cancer therapy as
well as the study of COPI biology. In addition, elucidation of the
mechanism of activation and execution of apoptosis upon COPI depletion
will provide insight into methods for combination therapy.

