Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Association of Interferon-induced protein with tetratricopeptide
repeats 1 and 3 expression with regional metastasis and drug resistance
in oral squamous cell carcinoma


Interferon-induced protein with tetratricopeptide repeats 1 (IFIT1) gene
family, consisting of 4 members (IFIT1, IFIT2, IFIT3, and IFIT5) in
humans, is one of most responsive interferon-stimulated gene families. We
have previously demonstrated that IFIT2 silencing activates atypical PKC
signaling and induces epithelial-mescenchymal transition, cell migration,
invasion, and metastasis of oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) cells in
cultured or animal models. These results implicate that IFIT2 is
potentially a prognosis biomarker of patients with OSCC. In the present
study, we further explore the roles of other IFIT1 family proteins
involved in the regulatory mechanism of metastasis and drug resistance in
OSCC cells. We determined the expression levels of IFIT1 gene family
proteins in 82 patients with OSCC by immunohistochemical technique. Our
present results revealed a close association between IFIT1 and IFIT3
protein expression in OSCC patient-derived tumor specimens (p
Interferon-induced protein with tetratricopeptide repeats 1 (IFIT1) gene
family, consisting of 4 members (IFIT1, IFIT2, IFIT3, and IFIT5) in
humans, is one of most responsive interferon-stimulated gene families. We
have previously demonstrated that IFIT2 silencing activates atypical PKC
signaling and induces epithelial-mescenchymal transition, cell migration,
invasion, and metastasis of oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) cells in
cultured or animal models. These results implicate that IFIT2 is
potentially a prognosis biomarker of patients with OSCC. In the present
study, we further explore the roles of other IFIT1 family proteins
involved in the regulatory mechanism of metastasis and drug resistance in
OSCC cells. We determined the expression levels of IFIT1 gene family
proteins in 82 patients with OSCC by immunohistochemical technique. Our
present results revealed a close association between IFIT1 and IFIT3
protein expression in OSCC patient-derived tumor specimens (p < 0.001).
However, the expression levels of IFIT1 or IFIT3 did not have a
correlation with that of IFIT2 in tumor tissues. Intriguingly, IFIT5 was
the only member of IFIT1 family displayed a well correlation with HPV E6
protein expression. Furthermore, we found that the expression levels of
IFIT1 and IFIT3 were positively associated with age as well as regional
lymph node metastasis status, whereas they were marginally and inversely
associated with the differentiation features. We further demonstrated
that IFIT1 and IFIT3 protein expression-induced by pre-treatment or
co-treatment with IFN- in Ca9-22 cells increased their resistance to
Cisplatin and 5-flurouracil (5-FU). Silencing of IFIT1 and IFIT3 protein
expression in SCC-25 cells by its specific shRNA, respectively, increased
their susceptibility to Cisplatin and 5-FU. Since our present studies
reveal that enhanced IFIT1 and IFIT3 expression associate with regional
lymph node metastasis and drug resistance to Cisplatin and 5-FU, the
roles of IFIT1 and IFIT3 expression associated with the clinicopathologic
development in OSCC patients warrant our further investigation.

