Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Biomarkers of thyroid function and autoimmunity associated with
thyroid cancer risk: A nested case-control study


Background & Objective: The incidence of thyroid cancer has been
increased in several countries. However, the markers to predict for
high-risk group have not been fully established. We aim to investigate
the potential association between the biomarkers of thyroid
function/autoimmunity and the risk of thyroid cancer in Korean
population, where the incidence rate of thyroid cancer is one of the
highest in the world.Design: This study was a nested case-control study
within the Cancer Screenee Cohort study, which consisted of 257 incident
thyroid cancer patients who were ascertained during mean of 2.2 years of
follow-up and 257 controls. Total triidothyronine (TT3), free thyroxine
(FT4), thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), and thyroglobulin (Tg), and two
markers of thyroid autoimmunity (anti-thyroperoxidase [TPOAb] and
anti-thyroglobulin [TgAb] antibodies) were measured. Logistic regression
models were used to examine the association between these biomarkers and
thyroid cancer risk. Stratified analyses were conducted by sex, BMI, and
smoking status.Results: When the markers were categories by tertile
distribution of the levels of controls group, highest tertile of FT4 (OR
[95% CI] = 1.73[1.11, 2.69]) and middle tertile of TSH (OR [95% CI] =
1.77[1.14, 2.74]) were associated with thyroid cancer risk in
multivariate analyses. In addition, normal (30-60 U/mL) (OR [95% CI] =
8.47 [5.39, 13.33]) or elevated levels (60 > U/mL) (OR [95% CI] = 4.48
[2.59, 7.76]) of TPOAb showed an elevated risk for thyroid cancer.
Stratified analyses implied that some of these associations could be
differed by sex, BMI, or smoking status.Conclusions: This study
represented that the levels of biomarkers of thyroid
function/autoimmunity, particularly the presence of TPOAb, may be used as
diagnostic adjuncts for predicting thyroid cancer risk.

