Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The tumor suppressor, calcium sensing receptor, regulates
proliferation and promotes differentiation in colon cancer


There is increasing evidence highlighting an inverse correlation between
high dietary calcium intake and reduced risk of colorectal cancer. The
classical role of the calcium sensing receptor (CaSR), a G protein
coupled receptor, is regulation of calcium homeostasis in the parathyroid
and kidney. In other tissue types, CaSR regulates different cellular
processes like proliferation, differentiation, and apoptosis. We have
demonstrated that CaSR expression is downregulated in colorectal cancer
(CRC) leading us to hypothesize that loss of CaSR might provide a growth
advantage to transformed cells, conferring them resistance to
calcium-mediated growth inhibition. Therefore the aim of this study was
to understand the role of CaSR in CRC.In vitro, HT29 (moderately
differentiated) and Caco-2/15 (well differentiated) colon cancer cells
were stably transfected with constructs to overexpress either the wild
type CaSR (CaSRWT) or a dominant negative CaSR mutant (CaSRDN). The cells
transfected with the CaSRWT construct grew significantly slower than the
cells overexpressing the CaSRDN (Caco2-15: 40% slower; HT29: 50% slower;
pThere is increasing evidence highlighting an inverse correlation between
high dietary calcium intake and reduced risk of colorectal cancer. The
classical role of the calcium sensing receptor (CaSR), a G protein
coupled receptor, is regulation of calcium homeostasis in the parathyroid
and kidney. In other tissue types, CaSR regulates different cellular
processes like proliferation, differentiation, and apoptosis. We have
demonstrated that CaSR expression is downregulated in colorectal cancer
(CRC) leading us to hypothesize that loss of CaSR might provide a growth
advantage to transformed cells, conferring them resistance to
calcium-mediated growth inhibition. Therefore the aim of this study was
to understand the role of CaSR in CRC.In vitro, HT29 (moderately
differentiated) and Caco-2/15 (well differentiated) colon cancer cells
were stably transfected with constructs to overexpress either the wild
type CaSR (CaSRWT) or a dominant negative CaSR mutant (CaSRDN). The cells
transfected with the CaSRWT construct grew significantly slower than the
cells overexpressing the CaSRDN (Caco2-15: 40% slower; HT29: 50% slower;
p<0.001) as assessed by cell counting. This effect was much more
pronounced when cells were treated with the calcimimetic NPS R568, an
allosteric modulator of the CaSR. Treating the cells with the calcilytic
NPS 2143, a negative allosteric modulator of the receptor, we could
reverse the antiproliferative effect. Furthermore, CaSRWT cells were more
differentiated than CaSRDN cells as shown by the high Alkaline
Phosphatase activity in culture (3-fold higher in Caco2-15; pThere is
increasing evidence highlighting an inverse correlation between high
dietary calcium intake and reduced risk of colorectal cancer. The
classical role of the calcium sensing receptor (CaSR), a G protein
coupled receptor, is regulation of calcium homeostasis in the parathyroid
and kidney. In other tissue types, CaSR regulates different cellular
processes like proliferation, differentiation, and apoptosis. We have
demonstrated that CaSR expression is downregulated in colorectal cancer
(CRC) leading us to hypothesize that loss of CaSR might provide a growth
advantage to transformed cells, conferring them resistance to
calcium-mediated growth inhibition. Therefore the aim of this study was
to understand the role of CaSR in CRC.In vitro, HT29 (moderately
differentiated) and Caco-2/15 (well differentiated) colon cancer cells
were stably transfected with constructs to overexpress either the wild
type CaSR (CaSRWT) or a dominant negative CaSR mutant (CaSRDN). The cells
transfected with the CaSRWT construct grew significantly slower than the
cells overexpressing the CaSRDN (Caco2-15: 40% slower; HT29: 50% slower;
p<0.001) as assessed by cell counting. This effect was much more
pronounced when cells were treated with the calcimimetic NPS R568, an
allosteric modulator of the CaSR. Treating the cells with the calcilytic
NPS 2143, a negative allosteric modulator of the receptor, we could
reverse the antiproliferative effect. Furthermore, CaSRWT cells were more
differentiated than CaSRDN cells as shown by the high Alkaline
Phosphatase activity in culture (3-fold higher in Caco2-15; p<0.001). We
also evaluated the tumor formation ability of these cells in hanging drop
cultures. Indeed, CaSRDN formed large spheroids, whereas CaSRWT cells
formed irregular shaped aggregates demonstrating a possible role of the
CaSR in inhibiting tumor formation (in HT29 cells, CaSRDN spheroids had
10-fold increased volume compared with control cells; pThere is
increasing evidence highlighting an inverse correlation between high
dietary calcium intake and reduced risk of colorectal cancer. The
classical role of the calcium sensing receptor (CaSR), a G protein
coupled receptor, is regulation of calcium homeostasis in the parathyroid
and kidney. In other tissue types, CaSR regulates different cellular
processes like proliferation, differentiation, and apoptosis. We have
demonstrated that CaSR expression is downregulated in colorectal cancer
(CRC) leading us to hypothesize that loss of CaSR might provide a growth
advantage to transformed cells, conferring them resistance to
calcium-mediated growth inhibition. Therefore the aim of this study was
to understand the role of CaSR in CRC.In vitro, HT29 (moderately
differentiated) and Caco-2/15 (well differentiated) colon cancer cells
were stably transfected with constructs to overexpress either the wild
type CaSR (CaSRWT) or a dominant negative CaSR mutant (CaSRDN). The cells
transfected with the CaSRWT construct grew significantly slower than the
cells overexpressing the CaSRDN (Caco2-15: 40% slower; HT29: 50% slower;
p<0.001) as assessed by cell counting. This effect was much more
pronounced when cells were treated with the calcimimetic NPS R568, an
allosteric modulator of the CaSR. Treating the cells with the calcilytic
NPS 2143, a negative allosteric modulator of the receptor, we could
reverse the antiproliferative effect. Furthermore, CaSRWT cells were more
differentiated than CaSRDN cells as shown by the high Alkaline
Phosphatase activity in culture (3-fold higher in Caco2-15; p<0.001). We
also evaluated the tumor formation ability of these cells in hanging drop
cultures. Indeed, CaSRDN formed large spheroids, whereas CaSRWT cells
formed irregular shaped aggregates demonstrating a possible role of the
CaSR in inhibiting tumor formation (in HT29 cells, CaSRDN spheroids had
10-fold increased volume compared with control cells; p<0.001).To
translate these findings in vivo, we investigated the effects of global
knock down of CaSR. Global ablation of CaSR in mice led to lethality
within 1-2 weeks; therefore we analyzed the colon of rescued CaSR-/PTH-
double knockout mice, and compared them to colons of CaSR+/PTH- mice.
CaSR-/PTH- mice had increased expression of proliferation related markers
(for instance, 1.5-fold cell cycle division 6 (Cdc6) expression, pThere
is increasing evidence highlighting an inverse correlation between high
dietary calcium intake and reduced risk of colorectal cancer. The
classical role of the calcium sensing receptor (CaSR), a G protein
coupled receptor, is regulation of calcium homeostasis in the parathyroid
and kidney. In other tissue types, CaSR regulates different cellular
processes like proliferation, differentiation, and apoptosis. We have
demonstrated that CaSR expression is downregulated in colorectal cancer
(CRC) leading us to hypothesize that loss of CaSR might provide a growth
advantage to transformed cells, conferring them resistance to
calcium-mediated growth inhibition. Therefore the aim of this study was
to understand the role of CaSR in CRC.In vitro, HT29 (moderately
differentiated) and Caco-2/15 (well differentiated) colon cancer cells
were stably transfected with constructs to overexpress either the wild
type CaSR (CaSRWT) or a dominant negative CaSR mutant (CaSRDN). The cells
transfected with the CaSRWT construct grew significantly slower than the
cells overexpressing the CaSRDN (Caco2-15: 40% slower; HT29: 50% slower;
p<0.001) as assessed by cell counting. This effect was much more
pronounced when cells were treated with the calcimimetic NPS R568, an
allosteric modulator of the CaSR. Treating the cells with the calcilytic
NPS 2143, a negative allosteric modulator of the receptor, we could
reverse the antiproliferative effect. Furthermore, CaSRWT cells were more
differentiated than CaSRDN cells as shown by the high Alkaline
Phosphatase activity in culture (3-fold higher in Caco2-15; p<0.001). We
also evaluated the tumor formation ability of these cells in hanging drop
cultures. Indeed, CaSRDN formed large spheroids, whereas CaSRWT cells
formed irregular shaped aggregates demonstrating a possible role of the
CaSR in inhibiting tumor formation (in HT29 cells, CaSRDN spheroids had
10-fold increased volume compared with control cells; p<0.001).To
translate these findings in vivo, we investigated the effects of global
knock down of CaSR. Global ablation of CaSR in mice led to lethality
within 1-2 weeks; therefore we analyzed the colon of rescued CaSR-/PTH-
double knockout mice, and compared them to colons of CaSR+/PTH- mice.
CaSR-/PTH- mice had increased expression of proliferation related markers
(for instance, 1.5-fold cell cycle division 6 (Cdc6) expression, p<0.01).
Histological examination has revealed the presence of aberrant crypt foci
in the colon of the double knockout mice. This suggests that loss of CaSR
expression gives colon cancer cells a growth advantage during
tumorigenesis.These data further our understanding of the molecular
mechanism by which the CaSR protects colon epithelial cells from
malignant transformation. These mechanisms, in part, account for the
anti-neoplastic effects of calcium in the colon.

