Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Thromboxane-A2 receptor -isoform regulates the activity of the
tumor suppressor FOXO3 via phosphorylation by ERK in urothelial cancer


The tumor suppressor FOXO3 is a transcription factor whose activity and
stability are regulated by phosphorylation on S294 via extracellular
regulated kinases (ERK1/2). Previous data by our group has demonstrated
overexpressing the thromboxane A2 isoform- receptor (TP) increased ERK
activation and induced malignant transformation of immortalized bladder
cells. These data describe a novel mechanism of TP mediated regulation of
FOXO3 via phosphorylation by ERK. Immunohistochemical studies revealed
increased expression of nuclear pFOXO3-S294 in late stage bladder tumors,
whereas total FOXO3 nuclear expression was reduced in high grade tumors.
Both cytoplasmic and nuclear pFOXO3-S294 staining scores positively
correlated with TP staining scores. Overexpressing TP in non-transformed
urothelial cell lines, UROsta and SV-HUC, induced phosphorylation of
FOXO3 at -S294. Knockdown of FOXO3 expression by shRNA increased cell
migration and invasion. Conversely, overexpression of mutated FOXO3 that
is resistant to ERK phosphorylation reduced the overall and TP agonist
(U46619) mediated increase in malignant UMUC3 cell migration and
invasion. Stimulation of UMUC3 cells with U46619 increased pFOXO3-S294
expression which could be attenuated with TP antagonist (PTXA2)
pre-treatment. A dual luciferase assay demonstrated that U46619
stimulation decreased overall FOXO3 transcriptional activity.
Additionally, U46619 stimulation initially caused nuclear accumulation of
pFOXO3-S294, but prolonged stimulation increased FOXO3 cytoplasmic
localization. In summary, the data describe a novel mechanism of TP
signaling in bladder cancer that results in the ERK mediated regulation
of FOXO3 activity, which could contribute to tumor progression.

