Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Treatment-associated changes in whole-body metabolic tumor volume
on 18F-fluorocholine PET/CT: potential prognostic value in
castrate-resistant prostate cancer


Background: Fluorine-18 fluorocholine (FC) positron emission tomography/
computed tomography (PET/CT) is a promising molecular imaging technique
for whole-body detection of prostate cancer that is under investigational
status in the United States. This study explores the potential prognostic
value of globally measuring metabolic tumor burden using FC PET/CT in
castrate-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC).Methods: Following written
informed consent, 30 patients with CRPC were enrolled into
clinicaltrials.gov registered trials of FC PET/CT (NCT00928252 and
NCT00928174). Whole-body FC PET/CT scans were obtained before and during
treatment. The average time interval to follow-up FC PET/CT was 67 days,
with intervening treatments consisting of chemotherapy in 11 patients and
second-line androgen manipulation in 19 patients. Kaplan Meier analysis
was applied to evaluate interval changes in prostate specific antigen
(PSA) level, net metabolically active tumor volume (net MATV, calculated
using automated image segmentation), and maximum standardized uptake
value of the most active tumor found on each scan (matSUVmax) as survival
factors. Declines of > 30% were prospectively evaluated as definitions of
treatment response for these measures.Results: Baseline net MATV (range
0.12 cc to 1543.9 cc, median 52.6 cc) correlated significantly with
baseline PSA level (r = 0.65, p = 0.0001) and matSUVmax (r = 0.42, p =
0.02). Baseline PSA level did not correlate with baseline matSUVmax (r =
0.11, p = 0.55). Change in net MATV (range +1294.93 to -1233.86 cc,
median -2.59 cc), reflecting changes in whole body tumor volume ranging
from 181% increase to 100% decrease, correlated significantly with change
in matSUVmax (r = 0.41, p = 0.02) but not change in PSA (r = 0.17 , r =
0.36). Median duration of follow-up in surviving patients was 23 months
(range 6 - 38 months). Longer overall survival was associated with
treatment response based on net MATV (log-rank p = 0.04), but not PSA
(log-rank p = 0.16) or SUV (log-rank p = 0.19).Conclusion: Whole-body
quantification of the change in metabolically-active tumor volume using
FC PET/CT may have therapeutic predictive value in CRPC.Translational
Significance:Survival rates in CRPC may vary as a function of metastatic
disease burden. FC PET/CT can globally depict the distribution of
metastatic disease in CRPC and enables whole-body volumetric measurements
of metastatic tumor activity. This preliminary study suggests that
changes in overall tumor burden as depicted by this non-FDA approved PET
tracer may have prognostic value in CRPC.

