Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Weight change in relation to early breast cancer events in breast
cancer patients


Background: Weight change may influence breast cancer prognosis. The aim
was to investigate whether weight change between the preoperative and
1-year postoperative visit was associated with risk of early breast
cancer events in a population-based cohort of breast cancer patients in
Sweden.Methods: Weight was measured by research nurses at the
preoperative and the 1-year follow-up visits from 849 primary breast
cancer patients operated between 2002 and 2011 in Lund, Sweden. Tumor
characteristics, clinical data, and date of death were obtained from
pathology reports, patient charts, and population registries.Results: The
median follow-up was three years and 79 early breast cancer events
occurred during the follow-up period. In all patients, there was a
non-significant tendency towards decreased risk of early events with
weight loss (Ptrend = 0.11). Weight loss was significantly associated
with lower risk of early events compared to stable weight or weight gain
in patients with axillary nodal involvement (Ptrend = 0.012), but not in
patients without axillary nodal involvement. Further analysis showed that
weight loss was only significantly associated with lower risk of early
events among patients younger than 70 years with axillary nodal
involvement, while patients who had gained more than 5% of the
preoperative weight had significantly earlier events compared to those
with stable weight. The results remained significant after adjustment for
age at diagnosis, natural logarithm of the preoperative weight, invasive
tumor size, axillary nodal involvement, and ER status. Further
adjustments for smoking and alcohol abstinence, ever use of hormone
therapy, or for treatments did not materially change the
result.Conclusion: Weight loss was associated with significantly lower
risk for early breast cancer events in patients younger than 70 years
with axillary nodal involvement compared to stable weight or weight gain.
If these results are confirmed, weight management may be incorporated in
post-diagnosis management of breast cancer patients with axillary nodal
involvement and have a significant beneficial impact on short-term
prognosis.

