Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Aberrant expression of Plastin3 (PLS3) induces liver metastasis
via enhancing the epithelial-mesenchymal transition and stemness in
colorectal cancer (CRC)


BackgroundPLS3 gene, located on chromosome Xq23, encodes a protein 10
product (PLS3) that reduces F-actin disassembly and inhibits
cofilin-mediated depolymerization of actin fibers. We previously reported
that PLS3 is a novel marker for circulating tumor cells in colorectal
cancer (CRC), and the high expression of PLS3 in tumor tissue is
associated with a poor prognosis in patients with primary CRC. In this
study, we investigated its role in functional significance for metastatic
potential of CRC performing in vitro and in vivo studies.MethodFour
patients with surgically resected both primary CRC and liver metastasis
were included in this study. Those tissues were performed with the
PLS3-immunohistochemical examination (PLS3-IHC). In vitro, we cultured
LOVO, DLD-1 and HCT116 which caused no liver metastasis by injecting them
into the spleen of NOD/SCID mice. We stably enhanced the expression of
PLS3 in the cells by transfecting the lentiviral vector expressing PLS3.
The expression levels of EMT-related genes were examined with real time
RT-PCR. The migration, invasion and sphere formation assay were also
performed. In vivo, NOD/SCID mice were divided into two groups, which
included mice transplanted with only PLS3-transfected cells and mice
transplanted with PLS3-transfected and PLS3-attenuated cells together, by
injecting into the spleen. We calculated the established primary splenic
tumors and liver metastasis. PLS3-IHC was also performed to the
sacrificed tissues.Result(1) In the PLS3-IHC of four CRC samples, all the
liver metastasis tissues included stained areas, but only one primary
tissue showed PLS3-staining. This was the evidence that cancer cells
expressing PLS3 had metastatic properties.(2) PLS3-transfected cells had
the significant decrease of E-cadherin, while the expression levels of
TWIST, ZEB and vimentin were significantly higher in PLS3-transfected
than PLS3-attenuated cells. PLS3-transfected LOVO significantly induced
invasion and migration, compared to PLS3-attenuatd LOVO. In the sphere
formation assay, the high expression of PLS3 significantly increased the
proportion of sphere generating cells (DLD-1) (pBackgroundPLS3 gene,
located on chromosome Xq23, encodes a protein 10 product (PLS3) that
reduces F-actin disassembly and inhibits cofilin-mediated
depolymerization of actin fibers. We previously reported that PLS3 is a
novel marker for circulating tumor cells in colorectal cancer (CRC), and
the high expression of PLS3 in tumor tissue is associated with a poor
prognosis in patients with primary CRC. In this study, we investigated
its role in functional significance for metastatic potential of CRC
performing in vitro and in vivo studies.MethodFour patients with
surgically resected both primary CRC and liver metastasis were included
in this study. Those tissues were performed with the
PLS3-immunohistochemical examination (PLS3-IHC). In vitro, we cultured
LOVO, DLD-1 and HCT116 which caused no liver metastasis by injecting them
into the spleen of NOD/SCID mice. We stably enhanced the expression of
PLS3 in the cells by transfecting the lentiviral vector expressing PLS3.
The expression levels of EMT-related genes were examined with real time
RT-PCR. The migration, invasion and sphere formation assay were also
performed. In vivo, NOD/SCID mice were divided into two groups, which
included mice transplanted with only PLS3-transfected cells and mice
transplanted with PLS3-transfected and PLS3-attenuated cells together, by
injecting into the spleen. We calculated the established primary splenic
tumors and liver metastasis. PLS3-IHC was also performed to the
sacrificed tissues.Result(1) In the PLS3-IHC of four CRC samples, all the
liver metastasis tissues included stained areas, but only one primary
tissue showed PLS3-staining. This was the evidence that cancer cells
expressing PLS3 had metastatic properties.(2) PLS3-transfected cells had
the significant decrease of E-cadherin, while the expression levels of
TWIST, ZEB and vimentin were significantly higher in PLS3-transfected
than PLS3-attenuated cells. PLS3-transfected LOVO significantly induced
invasion and migration, compared to PLS3-attenuatd LOVO. In the sphere
formation assay, the high expression of PLS3 significantly increased the
proportion of sphere generating cells (DLD-1) (p<0.001).(3) In vivo,
PLS3-transfected cells (DLD-1 and HCT116) significantly induced the
growth of liver metastasis. The volumes of liver metastasis of mice
transplanted with the mixtures were significantly smaller than those of
only PLS3-transfected cells. The liver metastasis tissues showed only
stained areas in both groups in PLS3-IHC. However, the established
splenic tumor of mice transplanted with the mixtures displayed not only
the stained but also the nonstained areas in PLS3-IHC.ConclusionIn
conclusion, our study suggests experimental evidence to support the
functional significance of PLS3 to induce epithelial-mesenchymal
trandition, stemness and liver metastasis of human CRC.

