Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vitro evaluation of OTX015, a novel pan-BET-bromodomain
(BET-BRD) inhibitor, as single agent and in combination with standard
chemotherapy drugs in human leukemic cell lines


Background: The human BET family bromodomains, including BRD2-4 and BRDT
proteins, has become a druggable target for the development of specific
gene transcription inhibitors. Here, we report the preclinical
anti-leukemic activity of OTX015 (OncoEthix SA, Switzerland), a novel
pan-BET-BRD inhibitor, as single agent and in combination with different
drugs.Material and Methods: Eight established human cell lines from acute
and chronic myeloid leukemia (AML, i.e. HL-60 and U-937; CML, i.e. K-562
and NALM-1) and acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL, i.e. Jurkat, CCRF-CEM,
MOLT-3 and -4) were treated by increasing doses of OTX015. The growth
inhibition 50% (GI50) values of OTX015 were evaluated by MTT the assay at
72 h. Protein levels were analyzed by Western blot using commercial
antibodies. RNA was extracted using the Qiagen RNAEasy and RT-PCR was
performed using Fast SYBR Green on a StepOnePlus Real-Time PCR System.
Combination effects were evaluated in HL60, U937, Jurkat and K562 cell
lines; OTX015 was administered with daunorubicin, azacytidine,
dexamethasone, cytarabine or methotrexate. The 48-h combination index
(CI) was determined by median effect plot analysis using CalcuSyn
software expressed as the median and range of CI values among cell lines
(Chou & Talalay analysis). CI1: antagonism.Results: Firstly, the
anti-proliferative effect of OTX015 was assessed. In HL60, U937 and
Jurkat cells, GI50s values were between 230 and 384 nM, while 1,000 nM
for the remaining cell lines. Both OTX015-sensitive and -resistant cells
showed similar basal expression levels of BRD2-4, c-MYC, BCL-2, p21 and
Cyclin D1 proteins. In sensitive cell lines, OTX015 caused cell cycle
arrest in G1 in a time-dependent manner without induction of apoptosis.
Likewise, c-MYC mRNA and protein levels were down-regulated after 6-h and
up to 72-h treatments with 500 nM OTX015. In Jurkat cells, OTX015 induced
up-regulation of BRD2 and 4 mRNA without modifying protein levels. On the
other hand, although the OTX015-resistant cell line K562 showed decreased
levels of c-MYC mRNA after 4-h and 24-h exposure, protein levels were
constant even after 72 h of treatment. Synergy was observed with
daunorubicin in OTX015-sensitive and -resistant cell lines
(CI=0.8;0.4-0.9). The combination of OTX015 with azacytine or cytarabine
was synergistic (CI=0.6;0.6-0.7 and CI=0.8;0.4-0.9, respectively) despite
primary resistance of Jurkat and K562 lines to either of the individual
drugs. Methotrexate, dexamethasone and panobinostat exerted synergistic
effects with OTX015 in 3 out of 4 cell lines (CI=0.5;0.2-0.9;
CI=0.3;0.1-0.7 and CI=0.6;0.5-0.7).Conclusion: Our findings indicate that
OTX015 enhances in vitro anti-proliferative effects of standard
antileukemic agents supporting combination therapy as an important aspect
of the clinical development plan.

