Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Resistance to 1 integrin inhibition in HER2 amplified cancers is
mediated by HER3


Our previous work focused on investigating 1 integrin as a target for BC,
alone and with radiation therapy. It is well recognized that there is
significant cross talk between the EGFR family of receptors and 1
integrin signaling, and a relative resistance of HER2+ BC to 1 integrin
inhibitory agents. In 2006, we published our findings that 1 integrin
inhibition enhanced the effect of trastuzumab in HER2+ BC. Subsequently,
others and we reported that 1 integrin inhibition enhanced the cytostatic
effect of multiple HER2-targeted therapies in HER2+ BC. However, the
nature of cross talk between 1 integrins and HER2, and the role of 1
integrin in HER2+BC resistance remains unknown. In addition, HER2+BCs
have higher rates of local recurrence after radiotherapy, consistent with
previous work showing relative radioresistance in HER2+BC. The most
potent mitogenic HER2 signaling in HER2+BC occurs upon heterodimerization
with HER3. We hypothesized that HER3 could mediate significant resistance
to 1 integrin targeting in HER2+BC.To test this, we correlated 1 integrin
and HER3 expression levels in SKBR3 cells over several time points using
WB. Inhibitions of 1 integrin activity or shRNA knockdown of HER3 lead to
upregulation of HER3 and 1 integrin, respectively. To test whether HER3
knockdown enhanced 1 integrin inhibition, we estimated proliferation by
quantitating Ki-67 expression in SKBR3 cells in response to treatment. 1
integrin inhibition lead to a 50% reduction in Ki-67 positive cells
(48%-22%), which was further enhanced by 50% with HER3 knockdown (12%),
pOur previous work focused on investigating 1 integrin as a target for
BC, alone and with radiation therapy. It is well recognized that there is
significant cross talk between the EGFR family of receptors and 1
integrin signaling, and a relative resistance of HER2+ BC to 1 integrin
inhibitory agents. In 2006, we published our findings that 1 integrin
inhibition enhanced the effect of trastuzumab in HER2+ BC. Subsequently,
others and we reported that 1 integrin inhibition enhanced the cytostatic
effect of multiple HER2-targeted therapies in HER2+ BC. However, the
nature of cross talk between 1 integrins and HER2, and the role of 1
integrin in HER2+BC resistance remains unknown. In addition, HER2+BCs
have higher rates of local recurrence after radiotherapy, consistent with
previous work showing relative radioresistance in HER2+BC. The most
potent mitogenic HER2 signaling in HER2+BC occurs upon heterodimerization
with HER3. We hypothesized that HER3 could mediate significant resistance
to 1 integrin targeting in HER2+BC.To test this, we correlated 1 integrin
and HER3 expression levels in SKBR3 cells over several time points using
WB. Inhibitions of 1 integrin activity or shRNA knockdown of HER3 lead to
upregulation of HER3 and 1 integrin, respectively. To test whether HER3
knockdown enhanced 1 integrin inhibition, we estimated proliferation by
quantitating Ki-67 expression in SKBR3 cells in response to treatment. 1
integrin inhibition lead to a 50% reduction in Ki-67 positive cells
(48%-22%), which was further enhanced by 50% with HER3 knockdown (12%),
p<0.05. In addition, HER3 knockdown enhanced the cytostatic effect of
ionizing radiation (IR) by 50% (32% to 14%), pOur previous work focused
on investigating 1 integrin as a target for BC, alone and with radiation
therapy. It is well recognized that there is significant cross talk
between the EGFR family of receptors and 1 integrin signaling, and a
relative resistance of HER2+ BC to 1 integrin inhibitory agents. In 2006,
we published our findings that 1 integrin inhibition enhanced the effect
of trastuzumab in HER2+ BC. Subsequently, others and we reported that 1
integrin inhibition enhanced the cytostatic effect of multiple
HER2-targeted therapies in HER2+ BC. However, the nature of cross talk
between 1 integrins and HER2, and the role of 1 integrin in HER2+BC
resistance remains unknown. In addition, HER2+BCs have higher rates of
local recurrence after radiotherapy, consistent with previous work
showing relative radioresistance in HER2+BC. The most potent mitogenic
HER2 signaling in HER2+BC occurs upon heterodimerization with HER3. We
hypothesized that HER3 could mediate significant resistance to 1 integrin
targeting in HER2+BC.To test this, we correlated 1 integrin and HER3
expression levels in SKBR3 cells over several time points using WB.
Inhibitions of 1 integrin activity or shRNA knockdown of HER3 lead to
upregulation of HER3 and 1 integrin, respectively. To test whether HER3
knockdown enhanced 1 integrin inhibition, we estimated proliferation by
quantitating Ki-67 expression in SKBR3 cells in response to treatment. 1
integrin inhibition lead to a 50% reduction in Ki-67 positive cells
(48%-22%), which was further enhanced by 50% with HER3 knockdown (12%),
p<0.05. In addition, HER3 knockdown enhanced the cytostatic effect of
ionizing radiation (IR) by 50% (32% to 14%), p<0.05. Enhanced cytostasis
was correlated with a significant down modulation of p-HER2 and p-473 Akt
on WB. In conclusion, our data indicate that HER3 plays a role in
mediating resistance to 1 integrin inhibition in HER2+BC. Further
mechanistic and in vivo validation are on going.

