Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vivo modeling identifies RB1 suppression and inactivation as
being responsible for acquired PD0332991 resistance in glioblastoma


The observation of glioblastoma (GBM) acquiring resistance to treatment
is a well-established clinical reality. Increased understanding of GBM
adaptive mechanisms to specific therapies is important for achieving
improved treatment outcomes for patients, by targeting adaptive responses
of tumors. Herein, we investigated GBM xenograft adaptation to sustained
cdk4/6 inhibition, which we have previously shown to inhibit the growth
of p16 deficient GBM xenografts. To understand GBM adaptation to
sustained cdk4/6 inhibition, mice with intracranial U87 xenografts were
administered daily PD0332991. Resected tumors from three mice, at time of
required euthanasia from tumor burden, were transplanted subcutaneously
into the flanks of mice that continued to receive daily PD0332991. At 34
to 145 days of continuously daily treatment, subcutaneous tumors began to
grow rapidly, suggesting tumor adaptation to sustained treatment. One of
the subcutaneous tumors, beginning to grow rapidly while being subjected
to daily PD0332991 treatment, was resected and used in developing a cell
suspension that was intracranially injected in a series of mice for
analysis of tumor response to PD0332991 by bioluminescence imaging and
survival analysis. Cells from resected, PD0332991-resistant tumor were
used for in vitro propagation and associated analysis of cell cycle
distributions, and for the activation state of cell proliferation. Mice
intracranially injected with PD0332991-resistant U87 cells, and receiving
continued daily treatment with PD0332991, experienced no survival benefit
relative to untreated mice bearing the same tumors, supporting our
development of a PD0332991 resistant derivative of U87. Interestingly,
tumors established from PD0332991 resistant cells showed more rapid
intracranial growth than tumors established from previously untreated U87
cells, resulting in significantly reduced survival of mice bearing
PD0332991 resistant tumors. In vitro, PD0332991-resistant cells did not
exhibit growth arrest upon exposure to PD0332991, whereas previously
untreated U87 cells arrested when treated with PD0332991. Expression
analysis of cell cycle regulatory proteins by western blotting revealed
that PD0332991 resistant cells were deficient in Rb protein expression,
in contrast to control U87, being positive for Rb expression. FISH and
PCR revealed deletion of RB gene as being responsible for the lack of Rb
protein in PD0332991 resistant U87. Furthermore, PD0332991 resistant
cells were examined using RTK arrays, revealing PD0332991 resistance as
being accompanied by increased activation of Akt signaling. Our results
suggest the potential of p16 deficient tumors to adapt to sustained
PD0332991 treatment by genetic inactivation of RB. Moreover, concurrent
inhibition of Akt, in treating p16 deficient tumors, could possibly
prevent tumor adaptation to cdk4/6 inhibitor therapy.

