Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Non-random genetic rearrangements driven highly malignant
tumor-cell population dictates the development of high-risk neuroblastoma


Ascertaining the driving factors and molecular flow through that
confiscate favorable to aggressive high-risk disease has momentous
importance in neuroblastoma cure. Herein, we investigated the cytogenetic
and tumorigenic/metastatic physiognomies of distinct population of highly
malignant (NBP4) cells established from multi-site aggressive tumors
after parental (SH-SY5Y) cell xenotransplantation. Karyotyping
(G-banding) NBP4 revealed 47 (XX) with six novel non-random chromosomal
rearrangements on 1q32, 8p23, 9q34, 15q24, 22q13 (additions), and 7q32
(deletion). Compared to the parental cells, high-resolution array CGH
analysis of NBP4 cells and aggressive tumors revealed genetic alterations
in chromosomes 1, 7, 8 and 22 corresponding to gain in coding regions of
LOC100288142, CD1C, CFHR3, FOXP2, MDFIC, RALYL, CSMD3, SAMD12-AS1, MAL2
and loss in coding regions of ADAM5, LOC400927, APOBEC3B, RPL3, MGAT3,
SLC25A17, EP300, L3MBTL2, SERHL, POLDIP3, A4GALT and TTLL1. Compared to
SH-SY5Y cells, aggressive NBP4 cells exert stem-like phenotype and under
stem-cell-growth conditions demonstrated a profound tumorosphere forming
capabilities. Moreover, xenotransplantation of NBP4 cells exhibited high
tumor forming capacity and metastatic potential in vivo. Together, these
data demonstrate the clonal enrichment of select highly malignant cells
drives neuroblastoma progression, and further implies that observed
genetic alterations could mediate phenotypic transformation and
functional response.

