Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pharmacodynamic evaluation of ADCC mediated effects in humanized
IL2 or IL15 NOG mice models


Humanized mice (i.e. immunodeficient NOG mice engrafted with human
hematopoietic stem cells (HSC)) have demonstrated their usefulness for
studying the human immune system. These models should help recapitulating
some pathology such as viral infection and then are suitable system to
evaluate new human specific therapies. Nevertheless, one issue of these
models is the incomplete maturation of natural killer (NK) cell
subpopulation.This lake of NK cell functionality was solved by the
Central Institute for Experimental Animals (CIEA) with the second
generation of transgenic NOG mice expressing human IL2 or IL15 (NK-NOG).
The serum levels of hIL-2 and hIL-15 in mice were 1-2 and 0.1-0.2 ng/mL,
respectively. In these mice, human NK cells differentiated from HSC are
well distributed in the mouse body (peripheral blood, bone marrow,
spleen). They expressed various NK receptors such as NKp30, NKp44, NKp46,
etc., granzyme A and perforin, indicating their maturity in the mice.
They are also fully functional as evidenced using an ex vivo 51Cr release
assay demonstrating lysis properties of human NK cells from collected
spleen of HSC-humanized mice.In vivo proof of concept studies were
successfully performed with humanized NK-NOG mice xenografted with either
human Burkitt's disseminated lymphoma cells or with human solid tumors
treated with humanized therapeutic antibodies. Prediction of
ADCC-mediated antitumor activity of humanized antibodies is now routinely
feasible for preclinical evaluation using these new in vivo NK-NOG models.

