Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: IKK bridges central tolerance to innate immunity and inflammation


IKK has emerged as a tumor suppressor in squamous cell carcinomas (SCCs)
of skin, head and neck, and lung. Our recent studies indicate that
inflammation is involved in lung SCCs in kinase-dead knock-in IkkKA/KA
mice. However, how IKK prevents inflammation has not been fully
understood yet. In the present studies, we showed that IkkKA/KA mice
developed reduced thymic medullary regions, systemic inflammation, and
severe skin damage, indicating that IKK plays an essential role linking
central tolerance to innate immunity and inflammation. In line with
previous studies of the role of NF-B pathway in thymic medulla formation
and the establishment of central tolerance, we found that NF-B pathway
was inactivated in the presence of kinase inactive form of IKK in thymic
epithelial cells. Depleting the lymphocytes, thymus, T cells,
macrophages, and/or reintroducing transgenic IKK into the skin or thymus
rescued the severe skin phenotypes. Transferring IkkKA/KA T cells, but
not wild-type T cells, reconstituted the severe skin phenotypes and SCCs
in the lungs and forestomach of IkkKA/KA/Rag-/- mice. We found that the
self-reactive T cells provided TGF signaling, which enhanced the
expression of monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1) in
keratinocytes. As a result, increased level of MCP-1 led to robust
recruitment of macrophages to the skin, resulting in skin inflammation
and hyperproliferation. This study reveals an important IKK/TGF/MCP-1
signaling axis that orchestrates central tolerance and inflammation in
the maintenance of tissue homeostasis.

