Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel roles of receptor tyrosine kinase AXL in the control of stem
cell pluripotency and reprogramming


The extensive molecular characterization of human pluripotent stem cells
(hPSCs), human embryonic stem cells (hESCs), and human induced
pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs) is required Binnbefore they can be
applied in the future for personalized medicine and drug discovery.
Despite the efforts that have been made with kinome analyses, we still
lack in-depth insights into the molecular signatures of receptor tyrosine
kinases (RTKs) that are related to pluripotency. Here, we present the
first detailed and distinct repertoire of RTKs characteristic for hPSC
pluripotency by determining both the expression and phosphorylation
profiles of RTKs in hESCs and hiPSCs using RT-PCR with degenerate primers
that target conserved tyrosine kinase domains and phospho-RTK array,
respectively. Among the RTKs tested, the up-regulation of EPHA1, ERBB2,
FGFR4, and VEGFR2 and the down-regulation of AXL, EPHA4, PDGFRB, and
TYRO3 in terms of both their expression and phosphorylation levels were
predominantly related to the maintenance of hPSC pluripotency. Notably,
the specific inhibition of AXL was significantly advantageous in
maintaining undifferentiated hESCs and hiPSCs and for the overall
efficiency and kinetics of hiPSC generation. Additionally, a global
phosphoproteomic analysis showed that approximately 30% of the proteins
(293 of 970 phosphoproteins) showed differential phosphorylation upon AXL
inhibition in undifferentiated hPSCs, revealing the potential
contribution of AXL-mediated phosphorylation dynamics to
pluripotency-related signaling networks. Our findings provide a novel
molecular signature of AXL in pluripotency control that will complement
existing pluripotency-kinome networks.

