Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNA delivery by bionanoparticles: regulation of the liver
cancer susceptibility gene MICA expression in hepatocytes


Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is an important issue to public health of
the world. We recently reported by genome wide association study (GWAS)
analyses that a single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in the promoter
region of the MHC class I polypeptide-related sequence A (MICA) gene that
is significantly associated with the risk of hepatitis-virus-related HCC.
Because there was a correlation between the expression levels of MICA in
the serum depending on the different alleles at the SNP site and the risk
of HCC, regulation of MICA expression levels may be useful in the
prevention of HCC. Here we show that MICA protein expression in HCC cells
can be regulated by the microRNA (miR) 25-93-106b cluster. By use of
luciferase assay and FACS analyses, it was confirmed that forced
expression of the miR 25-93-106b cluster significantly suppressed MICA
expression, whereas inhibition of this miR cluster increased MICA
expression in cells that stably express MICA. Furthermore, to deliver
efficiently miRNAs into hepatocytes specifically, we developed
bio-nanocapsules containing miR93 inside, utilizing hepatitis B virus
envelope L-protein. MICA expression levels were indeed suppressed after
the delivery of miR93 by these bionanoparticles into hepatocytes.
Besides, the binding ability of NKG2D (a receptor of MICA) and in vivo
cell-killing by NK cells were changed proportionally to miRNA-induced
MICA expression levels. These results suggest that the modulation of MICA
expression levels in hepatocytes by delivering miRNAs using these
bionanocapsules may be a novel and effective approach to prevent
hepatitis-virus-related HCC.

