Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification and characterization of stromal factors with
clinical significance in the ovarian tumor microenvironment


Ovarian cancer is the most lethal gynecologic malignancy in the United
States. While the tumor microenvironment has been shown to play important
roles in cancer pathogenesis, large-scale transcriptome profiles of the
stromal component of ovarian tumors and the identification of stromal
prognostic markers and therapeutic targets are lacking. This study seeks
to identify secreted stromal factors and evaluate their clinical
significance.Transcriptome profiling and clustering analysis on
microdissected ovarian cancer associated fibroblasts (CAFs) samples from
83 patients revealed a heterogeneous gene expression pattern. Since CAFs
can be derived from mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs), we compared
transcriptome profiles of MSC samples obtained from healthy individuals
with those from CAFs. Results showed that CAF expression profiles could
be classified into two major subtypes. The MSC subtype, which has gene
expression pattern highly resembling to that of undifferentiated MSCs, is
significantly associated with poorer patient survival when compared to
the non-MSC subtype. Further analyses identified two expression clusters
within the MSC subtype: 1) the CAF-C cluster which expressed high level
of MSC chondrogenic differentiation associated genes including CSPG2,
SFRP2 and COMP, and 2) the CAF-O cluster which expressed high level of
osteogenic differentiation associated genes including RUNX2 and BGN.
Survival analysis showed that patients with the CAF-O expression subtype
had overall survival rates comparable to those with the non-MSC subtypes,
while the CAF-C subtype is associated with worst clinical outcomes.
Pathway analyses revealed strong interactions among these stromal genes.
Among them, SFRP2, which has been shown to inhibit osteogenic
differentiation of MSCs by inhibiting Wnt signaling and subsequently
suppress RUNX2 expression, was selected for further validation studies.
Stromal SFRP2 and RUNX2 protein expression levels were evaluated by
immunohistochemistry on paraffin tissue sections from 94 patients.
Results showed that high levels of stromal SFRP2 were significantly
associated with poor patient survival (p Ovarian cancer is the most
lethal gynecologic malignancy in the United States. While the tumor
microenvironment has been shown to play important roles in cancer
pathogenesis, large-scale transcriptome profiles of the stromal component
of ovarian tumors and the identification of stromal prognostic markers
and therapeutic targets are lacking. This study seeks to identify
secreted stromal factors and evaluate their clinical
significance.Transcriptome profiling and clustering analysis on
microdissected ovarian cancer associated fibroblasts (CAFs) samples from
83 patients revealed a heterogeneous gene expression pattern. Since CAFs
can be derived from mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs), we compared
transcriptome profiles of MSC samples obtained from healthy individuals
with those from CAFs. Results showed that CAF expression profiles could
be classified into two major subtypes. The MSC subtype, which has gene
expression pattern highly resembling to that of undifferentiated MSCs, is
significantly associated with poorer patient survival when compared to
the non-MSC subtype. Further analyses identified two expression clusters
within the MSC subtype: 1) the CAF-C cluster which expressed high level
of MSC chondrogenic differentiation associated genes including CSPG2,
SFRP2 and COMP, and 2) the CAF-O cluster which expressed high level of
osteogenic differentiation associated genes including RUNX2 and BGN.
Survival analysis showed that patients with the CAF-O expression subtype
had overall survival rates comparable to those with the non-MSC subtypes,
while the CAF-C subtype is associated with worst clinical outcomes.
Pathway analyses revealed strong interactions among these stromal genes.
Among them, SFRP2, which has been shown to inhibit osteogenic
differentiation of MSCs by inhibiting Wnt signaling and subsequently
suppress RUNX2 expression, was selected for further validation studies.
Stromal SFRP2 and RUNX2 protein expression levels were evaluated by
immunohistochemistry on paraffin tissue sections from 94 patients.
Results showed that high levels of stromal SFRP2 were significantly
associated with poor patient survival (p < 0.001), while high levels of
stromal RUNX2 were significantly associated with improved patient
survival (p Ovarian cancer is the most lethal gynecologic malignancy in
the United States. While the tumor microenvironment has been shown to
play important roles in cancer pathogenesis, large-scale transcriptome
profiles of the stromal component of ovarian tumors and the
identification of stromal prognostic markers and therapeutic targets are
lacking. This study seeks to identify secreted stromal factors and
evaluate their clinical significance.Transcriptome profiling and
clustering analysis on microdissected ovarian cancer associated
fibroblasts (CAFs) samples from 83 patients revealed a heterogeneous gene
expression pattern. Since CAFs can be derived from mesenchymal stem cells
(MSCs), we compared transcriptome profiles of MSC samples obtained from
healthy individuals with those from CAFs. Results showed that CAF
expression profiles could be classified into two major subtypes. The MSC
subtype, which has gene expression pattern highly resembling to that of
undifferentiated MSCs, is significantly associated with poorer patient
survival when compared to the non-MSC subtype. Further analyses
identified two expression clusters within the MSC subtype: 1) the CAF-C
cluster which expressed high level of MSC chondrogenic differentiation
associated genes including CSPG2, SFRP2 and COMP, and 2) the CAF-O
cluster which expressed high level of osteogenic differentiation
associated genes including RUNX2 and BGN. Survival analysis showed that
patients with the CAF-O expression subtype had overall survival rates
comparable to those with the non-MSC subtypes, while the CAF-C subtype is
associated with worst clinical outcomes. Pathway analyses revealed strong
interactions among these stromal genes. Among them, SFRP2, which has been
shown to inhibit osteogenic differentiation of MSCs by inhibiting Wnt
signaling and subsequently suppress RUNX2 expression, was selected for
further validation studies. Stromal SFRP2 and RUNX2 protein expression
levels were evaluated by immunohistochemistry on paraffin tissue sections
from 94 patients. Results showed that high levels of stromal SFRP2 were
significantly associated with poor patient survival (p < 0.001), while
high levels of stromal RUNX2 were significantly associated with improved
patient survival (p < 0.001). A significant inverse correlation between
SFRP2 and RUNX2 expression levels was also observed (r = -0.279, p =
0.037), suggested that the interactions among these genes may generate
different landscapes in the tumor microenvironment, which modulate MSC
differentiation and subsequently cancer cell aggressiveness.This study
presents a new paradigm of which osteogenic-like and chondrogenic-like
CAF signatures are associated with better and poorer patient survival
respectively. Understanding the relationship between the expression
patterns of stromal factors and MSC differentiation would provide us with
new insights into ovarian cancer pathogenesis.

