Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hepatic oxidative stress activates the Gadd45b gene via
degradation of the transcriptional repressor STAT3


Growth arrest and DNA damage-inducible beta (GADD45b) plays an important
role in many intracellular events, such as cell cycle arrest, DNA repair,
cell survival, apoptosis, and senescence. However, its mechanism of
transcriptional regulation remains unclear. In this study the mechanism
of proliferator-activated receptor a (PPARa) ligand induction of the
Gadd45b gene in mouse liver was investigated. Gadd45b messenger RNA
(mRNA) was markedly induced by the PPARa agonist, Wy-14,643, in wild-type
mice but not in Ppara-null mice. Signal transducer and activator of
transcription 3 (STAT3) was found to be a repressor of the Gadd45b gene
through binding to upstream regulatory elements. The role of STAT3 in
control of Gadd45b was confirmed using liverspecific Stat3-null mice.
Wy-14,643 treatment stimulated STAT3 ubiquitination leading to activation
of the Gadd45b gene as a result of loss of Gadd45b repression by
STAT3.STAT3 degradation was induced by forced overexpression of the PPARa
target geneencoded enzyme ACOX1, which produces increased H2O2 as a
byproduct of fatty acid b-oxidation. H2O2 also stimulated expression of
Gadd45b in cultured cells. In conclusion, these studies revealed that
PPARa indirectly induces the Gadd45b gene in liver through promoting
degradation of the repressor STAT3 as a result of elevated oxidative
stress.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

