Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Deficient double strand breaks repair of bone marrow plasma cells
correlates with better clinical outcome of multiple myeloma patients


DNA interstrand crosslinks (ICLs) are complex DNA lesions generated by
bi-functional alkylating agents, a class of compounds extensively used in
cancer chemotherapy. During ICL repair, replication forks stall at the
ICL, inducing the formation of a lethal form of DNA damage termed DNA
double-strand breaks (DSBs), which are repaired mainly by homologous
recombination (HR) and non-homologous end joining (NHEJ). In this study
we applied the properties of the ICL-inducing agent melphalan as a model,
to elucidate the underlying mechanisms in processing and repair of
ICLs.We studied two human multiple myeloma (HMCLs) cell lines
(melphalan-sensitive RPMI-8226 and -resistant LR5) and CD138+ bone marrow
plasma cells (BMPCs) from 15 newly diagnosed MM patients (8M/7F; median
age 61 years) before they receive high-dose melphalan therapy supported
by ASCT. HMCLs and BMPCs were treated with melphalan alone or in
combination with RI-1 (selective inhibitor of HR) or SCR7 (selective
inhibitor of NHEJ) and the extent of the N-ras-specific ICLs using a
quantitative PCR assay and DSBs (intermediates of ICL repair) using H2Ax
foci measurements by confocal microscopy were evaluated. The induction of
the melphalan-induced apoptosis using a photometric enzyme-assay was also
evaluated.The ICLs repair efficiency correlated with response to
treatment and could identify 2 groups of patients: non-responders (DNA
interstrand crosslinks (ICLs) are complex DNA lesions generated by
bi-functional alkylating agents, a class of compounds extensively used in
cancer chemotherapy. During ICL repair, replication forks stall at the
ICL, inducing the formation of a lethal form of DNA damage termed DNA
double-strand breaks (DSBs), which are repaired mainly by homologous
recombination (HR) and non-homologous end joining (NHEJ). In this study
we applied the properties of the ICL-inducing agent melphalan as a model,
to elucidate the underlying mechanisms in processing and repair of
ICLs.We studied two human multiple myeloma (HMCLs) cell lines
(melphalan-sensitive RPMI-8226 and -resistant LR5) and CD138+ bone marrow
plasma cells (BMPCs) from 15 newly diagnosed MM patients (8M/7F; median
age 61 years) before they receive high-dose melphalan therapy supported
by ASCT. HMCLs and BMPCs were treated with melphalan alone or in
combination with RI-1 (selective inhibitor of HR) or SCR7 (selective
inhibitor of NHEJ) and the extent of the N-ras-specific ICLs using a
quantitative PCR assay and DSBs (intermediates of ICL repair) using H2Ax
foci measurements by confocal microscopy were evaluated. The induction of
the melphalan-induced apoptosis using a photometric enzyme-assay was also
evaluated.The ICLs repair efficiency correlated with response to
treatment and could identify 2 groups of patients: non-responders (<PR,
n=6), with higher ICLs repair efficiency (t1/2 23h) and responders (PR,
n=9) with lower efficiency (t1/2 48h). Moreover, using -H2AX foci
formation/removal measurement, we found that the repair efficiency of
DSBs in BMPCs was significantly higher in non-responders (t1/2 9h) than
in responders (t1/2 12h) (all pDNA interstrand crosslinks (ICLs) are
complex DNA lesions generated by bi-functional alkylating agents, a class
of compounds extensively used in cancer chemotherapy. During ICL repair,
replication forks stall at the ICL, inducing the formation of a lethal
form of DNA damage termed DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs), which are
repaired mainly by homologous recombination (HR) and non-homologous end
joining (NHEJ). In this study we applied the properties of the
ICL-inducing agent melphalan as a model, to elucidate the underlying
mechanisms in processing and repair of ICLs.We studied two human multiple
myeloma (HMCLs) cell lines (melphalan-sensitive RPMI-8226 and -resistant
LR5) and CD138+ bone marrow plasma cells (BMPCs) from 15 newly diagnosed
MM patients (8M/7F; median age 61 years) before they receive high-dose
melphalan therapy supported by ASCT. HMCLs and BMPCs were treated with
melphalan alone or in combination with RI-1 (selective inhibitor of HR)
or SCR7 (selective inhibitor of NHEJ) and the extent of the
N-ras-specific ICLs using a quantitative PCR assay and DSBs
(intermediates of ICL repair) using H2Ax foci measurements by confocal
microscopy were evaluated. The induction of the melphalan-induced
apoptosis using a photometric enzyme-assay was also evaluated.The ICLs
repair efficiency correlated with response to treatment and could
identify 2 groups of patients: non-responders (<PR, n=6), with higher
ICLs repair efficiency (t1/2 23h) and responders (PR, n=9) with lower
efficiency (t1/2 48h). Moreover, using -H2AX foci formation/removal
measurement, we found that the repair efficiency of DSBs in BMPCs was
significantly higher in non-responders (t1/2 9h) than in responders (t1/2
12h) (all p<0.001). Also, the melphalan-induced apoptosis in BMPCs
inversely correlated with the repair efficiencies of ICLs and DSBs, with
the toxicity being higher in responders than in non-responders.
Furthermore, LR5 cells showed higher repair efficiency of both ICLs and
DSBs and lower toxicity than RPMI-8226 cells. Interestingly, in all
cellular populations analysed, significant correlation between ICL and
DSBs levels was observed.To further elucidate the mechanism of
drug-induced DSBs repair, HMCLs and BMPCs were treated with melphalan in
combination with nontoxic doses of RI-1 or SCR7. We found that the
combined treatment of melphalan with RI-1 or SCR7 significantly increased
the induction of the melphalan-only phosphorylation of H2AX, delayed the
repair of ICLs and strongly enhanced the cytotoxic activity of melphalan
(all pDNA interstrand crosslinks (ICLs) are complex DNA lesions generated
by bi-functional alkylating agents, a class of compounds extensively used
in cancer chemotherapy. During ICL repair, replication forks stall at the
ICL, inducing the formation of a lethal form of DNA damage termed DNA
double-strand breaks (DSBs), which are repaired mainly by homologous
recombination (HR) and non-homologous end joining (NHEJ). In this study
we applied the properties of the ICL-inducing agent melphalan as a model,
to elucidate the underlying mechanisms in processing and repair of
ICLs.We studied two human multiple myeloma (HMCLs) cell lines
(melphalan-sensitive RPMI-8226 and -resistant LR5) and CD138+ bone marrow
plasma cells (BMPCs) from 15 newly diagnosed MM patients (8M/7F; median
age 61 years) before they receive high-dose melphalan therapy supported
by ASCT. HMCLs and BMPCs were treated with melphalan alone or in
combination with RI-1 (selective inhibitor of HR) or SCR7 (selective
inhibitor of NHEJ) and the extent of the N-ras-specific ICLs using a
quantitative PCR assay and DSBs (intermediates of ICL repair) using H2Ax
foci measurements by confocal microscopy were evaluated. The induction of
the melphalan-induced apoptosis using a photometric enzyme-assay was also
evaluated.The ICLs repair efficiency correlated with response to
treatment and could identify 2 groups of patients: non-responders (<PR,
n=6), with higher ICLs repair efficiency (t1/2 23h) and responders (PR,
n=9) with lower efficiency (t1/2 48h). Moreover, using -H2AX foci
formation/removal measurement, we found that the repair efficiency of
DSBs in BMPCs was significantly higher in non-responders (t1/2 9h) than
in responders (t1/2 12h) (all p<0.001). Also, the melphalan-induced
apoptosis in BMPCs inversely correlated with the repair efficiencies of
ICLs and DSBs, with the toxicity being higher in responders than in
non-responders. Furthermore, LR5 cells showed higher repair efficiency of
both ICLs and DSBs and lower toxicity than RPMI-8226 cells.
Interestingly, in all cellular populations analysed, significant
correlation between ICL and DSBs levels was observed.To further elucidate
the mechanism of drug-induced DSBs repair, HMCLs and BMPCs were treated
with melphalan in combination with nontoxic doses of RI-1 or SCR7. We
found that the combined treatment of melphalan with RI-1 or SCR7
significantly increased the induction of the melphalan-only
phosphorylation of H2AX, delayed the repair of ICLs and strongly enhanced
the cytotoxic activity of melphalan (all p<0.01).Collectively, our study
demonstrates that significant changes in the repair efficiency of DSBs
occur in MM. These changes affect the repair of ICLs, modify drug
sensitivity of malignant BMPCs, and correlate with clinical outcome.
Specific inhibition of HR and/or NHEJ might be an effective strategy to
enhance sensitivity of cancer cells in MM.

