Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inter-individual variation in allele specific expression of
catalase (CAT) in normal bronchial epithelial cells and association of
putative cis-regulatory CAT SNP rs12807961 with lung cancer risk


Background: Catalase (CAT) is a key antioxidant gene expressed at high
levels in most human tissues, including normal bronchial epithelial cells
(NBEC). NBEC CAT expression is more disperse (more high and low extreme
values) among subjects with cancer compared to controls. CAT shares this
property with 14 other antioxidant and DNA repair genes comprised by the
Lung Cancer Risk Test (LCRT) reported from this laboratory. We
hypothesize that inter-individual variation in CAT regulation in NBEC is
in part due to inter-individual variation at one or more cis-regulatory
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). If so, this should manifest as
inter-individual variation in allele-specific CAT expression in NBEC.
Through funding in part from RC2 CA148572 and HL108016 we collected NBEC
samples from over 500 subjects at risk for lung cancer. In this pilot
study, we assessed allele-specific and total expression of multiple genes
in NBEC samples from 85 subjects and assessed the genotype at putative
cis-regulatory CAT SNP rs12807961 in gDNA from 95 subjects. Methods: RNA
extracted from normal bronchial airway brush specimens of 85 subjects (26
cancer cases and 59 non-cancer controls) was reverse transcribed. Using
next generation sequencing (NGS), allele-specific expression (ASE) was
measured as allelic imbalance in each cDNA at three marker SNPs in the
CAT coding region (rs1049982, rs769217, and rs704724) and one putative
regulatory SNP (rs12807961) that was 4364 bases upstream of transcription
start site, using gDNA as control. Specifically, each cDNA and matched
peripheral blood cell gDNA sample was subjected to targeted competitive
template multiplex PCR amplicon library generation followed by NGS
(Blomquist et al, PLOS one, 2013) on Illumina Hiseq platform. The
genotype at putative cis-regulatory SNP rs12807961 was assessed in gDNA
from 95 subjects including those assessed for ASE (a total of 31 cancer
cases and 64 non-cancer controls) using a TaqMan SNP Genotyping Assay.
Results: Among heterozygotes, there was significant inter-individual
variation in cDNA allelic imbalance at rs1049982 (pBackground: Catalase
(CAT) is a key antioxidant gene expressed at high levels in most human
tissues, including normal bronchial epithelial cells (NBEC). NBEC CAT
expression is more disperse (more high and low extreme values) among
subjects with cancer compared to controls. CAT shares this property with
14 other antioxidant and DNA repair genes comprised by the Lung Cancer
Risk Test (LCRT) reported from this laboratory. We hypothesize that
inter-individual variation in CAT regulation in NBEC is in part due to
inter-individual variation at one or more cis-regulatory single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). If so, this should manifest as
inter-individual variation in allele-specific CAT expression in NBEC.
Through funding in part from RC2 CA148572 and HL108016 we collected NBEC
samples from over 500 subjects at risk for lung cancer. In this pilot
study, we assessed allele-specific and total expression of multiple genes
in NBEC samples from 85 subjects and assessed the genotype at putative
cis-regulatory CAT SNP rs12807961 in gDNA from 95 subjects. Methods: RNA
extracted from normal bronchial airway brush specimens of 85 subjects (26
cancer cases and 59 non-cancer controls) was reverse transcribed. Using
next generation sequencing (NGS), allele-specific expression (ASE) was
measured as allelic imbalance in each cDNA at three marker SNPs in the
CAT coding region (rs1049982, rs769217, and rs704724) and one putative
regulatory SNP (rs12807961) that was 4364 bases upstream of transcription
start site, using gDNA as control. Specifically, each cDNA and matched
peripheral blood cell gDNA sample was subjected to targeted competitive
template multiplex PCR amplicon library generation followed by NGS
(Blomquist et al, PLOS one, 2013) on Illumina Hiseq platform. The
genotype at putative cis-regulatory SNP rs12807961 was assessed in gDNA
from 95 subjects including those assessed for ASE (a total of 31 cancer
cases and 64 non-cancer controls) using a TaqMan SNP Genotyping Assay.
Results: Among heterozygotes, there was significant inter-individual
variation in cDNA allelic imbalance at rs1049982 (p<0.001, n=40) and
rs769217 (pBackground: Catalase (CAT) is a key antioxidant gene expressed
at high levels in most human tissues, including normal bronchial
epithelial cells (NBEC). NBEC CAT expression is more disperse (more high
and low extreme values) among subjects with cancer compared to controls.
CAT shares this property with 14 other antioxidant and DNA repair genes
comprised by the Lung Cancer Risk Test (LCRT) reported from this
laboratory. We hypothesize that inter-individual variation in CAT
regulation in NBEC is in part due to inter-individual variation at one or
more cis-regulatory single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). If so, this
should manifest as inter-individual variation in allele-specific CAT
expression in NBEC. Through funding in part from RC2 CA148572 and
HL108016 we collected NBEC samples from over 500 subjects at risk for
lung cancer. In this pilot study, we assessed allele-specific and total
expression of multiple genes in NBEC samples from 85 subjects and
assessed the genotype at putative cis-regulatory CAT SNP rs12807961 in
gDNA from 95 subjects. Methods: RNA extracted from normal bronchial
airway brush specimens of 85 subjects (26 cancer cases and 59 non-cancer
controls) was reverse transcribed. Using next generation sequencing
(NGS), allele-specific expression (ASE) was measured as allelic imbalance
in each cDNA at three marker SNPs in the CAT coding region (rs1049982,
rs769217, and rs704724) and one putative regulatory SNP (rs12807961) that
was 4364 bases upstream of transcription start site, using gDNA as
control. Specifically, each cDNA and matched peripheral blood cell gDNA
sample was subjected to targeted competitive template multiplex PCR
amplicon library generation followed by NGS (Blomquist et al, PLOS one,
2013) on Illumina Hiseq platform. The genotype at putative cis-regulatory
SNP rs12807961 was assessed in gDNA from 95 subjects including those
assessed for ASE (a total of 31 cancer cases and 64 non-cancer controls)
using a TaqMan SNP Genotyping Assay. Results: Among heterozygotes, there
was significant inter-individual variation in cDNA allelic imbalance at
rs1049982 (p<0.001, n=40) and rs769217 (p<0.001, n=28) as measured by
F-test using matched gDNA controls. In this cohort there was insufficient
number of heterozygotes at rs704724 (n=2) to assess ASE. Among all 95
subjects assessed for rs12807961 genotype, nine were homozygous minor
allele at the rs12807961 CAT SNP. Of these, 7/31 cancer cases and 2/64
non-cancer controls were homozygous minor allele. This difference was
significant by two-tailed Fisher exact test (PBackground: Catalase (CAT)
is a key antioxidant gene expressed at high levels in most human tissues,
including normal bronchial epithelial cells (NBEC). NBEC CAT expression
is more disperse (more high and low extreme values) among subjects with
cancer compared to controls. CAT shares this property with 14 other
antioxidant and DNA repair genes comprised by the Lung Cancer Risk Test
(LCRT) reported from this laboratory. We hypothesize that
inter-individual variation in CAT regulation in NBEC is in part due to
inter-individual variation at one or more cis-regulatory single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). If so, this should manifest as
inter-individual variation in allele-specific CAT expression in NBEC.
Through funding in part from RC2 CA148572 and HL108016 we collected NBEC
samples from over 500 subjects at risk for lung cancer. In this pilot
study, we assessed allele-specific and total expression of multiple genes
in NBEC samples from 85 subjects and assessed the genotype at putative
cis-regulatory CAT SNP rs12807961 in gDNA from 95 subjects. Methods: RNA
extracted from normal bronchial airway brush specimens of 85 subjects (26
cancer cases and 59 non-cancer controls) was reverse transcribed. Using
next generation sequencing (NGS), allele-specific expression (ASE) was
measured as allelic imbalance in each cDNA at three marker SNPs in the
CAT coding region (rs1049982, rs769217, and rs704724) and one putative
regulatory SNP (rs12807961) that was 4364 bases upstream of transcription
start site, using gDNA as control. Specifically, each cDNA and matched
peripheral blood cell gDNA sample was subjected to targeted competitive
template multiplex PCR amplicon library generation followed by NGS
(Blomquist et al, PLOS one, 2013) on Illumina Hiseq platform. The
genotype at putative cis-regulatory SNP rs12807961 was assessed in gDNA
from 95 subjects including those assessed for ASE (a total of 31 cancer
cases and 64 non-cancer controls) using a TaqMan SNP Genotyping Assay.
Results: Among heterozygotes, there was significant inter-individual
variation in cDNA allelic imbalance at rs1049982 (p<0.001, n=40) and
rs769217 (p<0.001, n=28) as measured by F-test using matched gDNA
controls. In this cohort there was insufficient number of heterozygotes
at rs704724 (n=2) to assess ASE. Among all 95 subjects assessed for
rs12807961 genotype, nine were homozygous minor allele at the rs12807961
CAT SNP. Of these, 7/31 cancer cases and 2/64 non-cancer controls were
homozygous minor allele. This difference was significant by two-tailed
Fisher exact test (P<0.05) following Bonferroni adjustment for multiple
testing. Conclusions: These data support the hypothesis that
cis-regulatory DNA variants contribute to inter-individual variation in
CAT regulation in NBEC and that this is associated with lung cancer risk.

