Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterizing breast cancer CTCs for brain metastasis competence


Mechanisms causing fatal breast cancer brain metastasis (BCBM) remain
largely unknown as well as functionalities of brain-colonizing
circulating tumor cells (CTCs) in BCBM disease.We have characterized CTCs
isolated from peripheral blood mononuclear cells of patients with breast
cancer by multi-parametric flow cytometry. In epithelial cell adhesion
molecule (EpCAM)-negative CTCs, we identified a brain metastasis selected
marker (BMSM) profile or HER2+/EGFR+, HPSE+ and Notch1+ CTCs. These CTCs,
which are not captured by the CellSearchTM (Veridex, LLC)platform because
of their EpCAM negativity, were analyzed for cell invasiveness and
metastatic competency in vivo. CTCs expressing the BMSM profile were
highly invasive and capable of generating metastases when xenografted in
nude mice. Notably, increased brain metastatic capabilities, frequency
and quantitation were detected in EpCAM CTCs overexpressing the BMSM
profile. The presence of proteins of this profile was also verified in
the metastatic lesions of animals. Further, investigations of viable BMSM
CTCs were carried out using the DEPArrayTM, a dielectrophoresis-based
platform able to detect and sort pure CTCs which were investigated by
whole genome amplification and proteomic content. CTC subsets were
derived possessing combinatorial levels of the BMSM profile and distinct
abilities to generate BCBM.Collectively, we provide evidence of
isolation, culture and characterization of human breast cancer CTCs
leading to the description of a BMSM protein profile that is considered
necessary for CTC metastatic competency to brain. Studies are presently
undergoing to capture multiple CTC subsets and validate the presence of
the BMSM profile in longitudinal studies of populations of breast cancer
patients with the objective to not only better understand BCBM onset but
also to predict disease course for improved and informed clinical
treatment.

