Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Activation of HER2 changes the cetuximab sensitivity in
radioresisitant head and neck cancer cells


Background: For patients with recurrent head and neck cancer after
radiation therapy (RT), there are limited therapeutic selections. There
is great interest in mechanisms of resistance to RT. To investigate these
mechanisms, we established RT-resistant clones from head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) cells.Methods: To develop cell lines with
acquired resistance to RT, we utilized the human HNSCC cell line AMC-HN3
and UDSCC-2. We irradiatied clinically relevant cumulative irradiation to
cell lines and characterized for the molecular changes in the
radioresistant lines relative to the parent cell lines.Results: A
comparative analysis revealed that acquired resistance to RT was
associated consistently with the overexpression of HER2 and
cross-resistance to cetuximab. To examine the role of HER2, we knocked
down HER2 in both radio-resistant and -sensitive parental cells and found
an increase in sensitivity to cetuximab. Conversely, inhibition of HER2
in RT-resistant cells was sufficient in resensitizing them to cetuximab
in vitro. Further studies indicated that HER2 may diminish sensitivity to
cetuximab via activation of the phosphatidyl-inositol-3-kinase (PI3K)/AKT
pathway.Conclusion: Taken together, these findings suggest a central role
of HER2 in the development of acquired resistance to RT and prompt
consideration to apply HER2 inhibition strategies in future clinical
trials of recurrent HNSCC after RT.

