Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Fine-mapping of common genetic variants associated with colorectal
tumor risk identified potential functional variants


Background: Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have identified many
common single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) associated with colorectal
cancer risk. These SNPs may tag correlated variants with biological
importance. Fine-mapping around GWAS loci facilitates detection of
functional candidates and additional independent risk variants.Methods:
We analyzed 11,900 cases and 14,311 controls in the Genetics and
Epidemiology of Colorectal Cancer Consortium and the Colon Cancer Family
Registry. To fine-map genomic regions containing all known common risk
variants, we imputed high-density genetic data from the 1000 Genomes
Project. We tested associations with colorectal tumor risk for all
variants spanning genomic regions 250-kb upstream or downstream of 31
GWAS-identified SNPs (index SNPs). We queried the University of
California, Santa Cruz Genome Browser to examine evidence for biological
function.Results: Index SNPs did not show the strongest association
signals with colorectal tumor risk in their respective genomic regions.
However, in most regions the SNP showing the smallest P-value was
correlated (r20.2) with the index SNP. Bioinformatics analysis of SNPs
showing smaller P-values in each region revealed 21 functional candidates
in 12 loci (5q31.1, 8q24, 11q13.4, 11q23, 12p13.32, 12q24.21, 14q22,2,
15q13, 18q21, 19q13.1, 20p12.3, and 20q13.33). We observed evidence for
an additional independent association signal in 8q24 located between
POU5F1B and MYC (rs28629385; minor allele frequency=0.06; per-allele odds
ratio=1.37; P=7.9E-06).Conclusions: Our results support the utility of
integrating data from comprehensive fine-mapping with expanding publicly
available genomic databases to help clarify GWAS associations and
identify functional candidates for laboratory follow-up. Such efforts may
aid the eventual discovery of disease-causing variant(s).

