Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of a novel small molecule MER tyrosine kinase
inhibitor with therapeutic activity in cell culture and mouse models of
acute lymphoblastic leukemia


In children, acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is treated with an
intense regimen of chemotherapy yielding cure rates near 85%, yet
significant hurdles remain, including decreasing toxicity and improving
patient outcome in relapsed or refractory disease. Alternative strategies
using available drugs are unlikely to provide significant improvements
while more targeted therapies may reduce the risk of severe toxicities
including infertility, organ damage, and secondary malignancy. We
previously demonstrated ectopic expression of MER, a member of the
TAM-family of receptor tyrosine kinases, in pediatric B- and T-cell ALL.
Using shRNA-mediated MER knockdown, we also demonstrated anti-leukemia
effects of MER inhibition in B- and T-ALL models, implicating MER as a
novel therapeutic target. Here we report preclinical testing of a novel,
first-in-class MER-selective small molecule tyrosine kinase inhibitor
(UNC TKI) as a potential therapy for MER-expressing ALL. UNC TKI mediates
potent inhibition of MER in enzymatic assays (IC50= 0.74 nM), has 10-fold
selectivity for MER over other TAM-family members, and has limited
off-target activity against other tyrosine kinases, with the exception of
FLT3. In 697 B-ALL cells, UNC TKI inhibited phosphorylation/activation of
MER with an IC50of 2.6 nM and decreased downstream signaling through the
ERK and AKT pathways, leading to induction of apoptosis and reduced
colony-formation in methylcellulose in MER-expressing ALL cell lines. In
mouse models, UNC TKI is orally bioavailable and inhibits MER
phosphorylation/activation in leukemic blasts in the bone marrow. In an
orthotopic B-ALL xenograft model of minimal residual disease, treatment
with UNC TKI resulted in a dose-dependent reduction in tumor burden and
increased median survival from 27 days after inoculation with tumor cells
to 70 days (p In children, acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is treated
with an intense regimen of chemotherapy yielding cure rates near 85%, yet
significant hurdles remain, including decreasing toxicity and improving
patient outcome in relapsed or refractory disease. Alternative strategies
using available drugs are unlikely to provide significant improvements
while more targeted therapies may reduce the risk of severe toxicities
including infertility, organ damage, and secondary malignancy. We
previously demonstrated ectopic expression of MER, a member of the
TAM-family of receptor tyrosine kinases, in pediatric B- and T-cell ALL.
Using shRNA-mediated MER knockdown, we also demonstrated anti-leukemia
effects of MER inhibition in B- and T-ALL models, implicating MER as a
novel therapeutic target. Here we report preclinical testing of a novel,
first-in-class MER-selective small molecule tyrosine kinase inhibitor
(UNC TKI) as a potential therapy for MER-expressing ALL. UNC TKI mediates
potent inhibition of MER in enzymatic assays (IC50= 0.74 nM), has 10-fold
selectivity for MER over other TAM-family members, and has limited
off-target activity against other tyrosine kinases, with the exception of
FLT3. In 697 B-ALL cells, UNC TKI inhibited phosphorylation/activation of
MER with an IC50of 2.6 nM and decreased downstream signaling through the
ERK and AKT pathways, leading to induction of apoptosis and reduced
colony-formation in methylcellulose in MER-expressing ALL cell lines. In
mouse models, UNC TKI is orally bioavailable and inhibits MER
phosphorylation/activation in leukemic blasts in the bone marrow. In an
orthotopic B-ALL xenograft model of minimal residual disease, treatment
with UNC TKI resulted in a dose-dependent reduction in tumor burden and
increased median survival from 27 days after inoculation with tumor cells
to 70 days (p < 0.0001). In a similar model of existent disease in which
leukemia was established for 14 days prior to initiation of treatment,
median survival increased from 27.5 to 45 days in response to treatment
with UNC TKI (p In children, acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is
treated with an intense regimen of chemotherapy yielding cure rates near
85%, yet significant hurdles remain, including decreasing toxicity and
improving patient outcome in relapsed or refractory disease. Alternative
strategies using available drugs are unlikely to provide significant
improvements while more targeted therapies may reduce the risk of severe
toxicities including infertility, organ damage, and secondary malignancy.
We previously demonstrated ectopic expression of MER, a member of the
TAM-family of receptor tyrosine kinases, in pediatric B- and T-cell ALL.
Using shRNA-mediated MER knockdown, we also demonstrated anti-leukemia
effects of MER inhibition in B- and T-ALL models, implicating MER as a
novel therapeutic target. Here we report preclinical testing of a novel,
first-in-class MER-selective small molecule tyrosine kinase inhibitor
(UNC TKI) as a potential therapy for MER-expressing ALL. UNC TKI mediates
potent inhibition of MER in enzymatic assays (IC50= 0.74 nM), has 10-fold
selectivity for MER over other TAM-family members, and has limited
off-target activity against other tyrosine kinases, with the exception of
FLT3. In 697 B-ALL cells, UNC TKI inhibited phosphorylation/activation of
MER with an IC50of 2.6 nM and decreased downstream signaling through the
ERK and AKT pathways, leading to induction of apoptosis and reduced
colony-formation in methylcellulose in MER-expressing ALL cell lines. In
mouse models, UNC TKI is orally bioavailable and inhibits MER
phosphorylation/activation in leukemic blasts in the bone marrow. In an
orthotopic B-ALL xenograft model of minimal residual disease, treatment
with UNC TKI resulted in a dose-dependent reduction in tumor burden and
increased median survival from 27 days after inoculation with tumor cells
to 70 days (p < 0.0001). In a similar model of existent disease in which
leukemia was established for 14 days prior to initiation of treatment,
median survival increased from 27.5 to 45 days in response to treatment
with UNC TKI (p < 0.0001). In both models, tumor burden measured by
bioluminescent imaging was significantly decreased in mice treated with
UNC TKI relative to mice treated with vehicle, even after the development
of advanced disease in the control animals. In addition, treatment with
UNC TKI in combination with methotrexate, a chemotherapy that is
currently in clinical use for treatment of pediatric ALL, resulted in
reduced tumor burden and increased tumor-free survival relative to mice
treated with either agent alone. The very high potency, relative
selectivity, oral bioavailability, and demonstrated target inhibition and
therapeutic efficacy in murine ALL models, both alone and in combination
with chemotherapy, identify UNC TKI as an excellent candidate for
clinical development in patients with MER-expressing ALL.

