Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of HER2 and IGF2 triggers cell death in
trastuzumab-resistant HER2 positive JIMT1 cells


Breast cancer is the second leading cause of death in women.
Overexpression of Human Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor 2 (HER2) is
detected in 20-30% of breast cancers. Increased levels of HER2 are linked
to poor prognosis, more aggressive phenotype, and resistance to
chemotherapy and hormonal treatment. HER2 is part of a four member family
of cell surface receptors that are implicated in transmission of signals
controlling cell growth and differentiation. HER2 has an intracellular
domain with tyrosine kinase catalytic activity and dimerization of HER2
activates the MAP kinase and AKT pathways. HER2 receptor also
heterodimerizes with the IGF1 receptor(IGF1R) in trastuzumab-resistant
cell lines. The insulin-like growth factor 2 (IGF2) has an important role
in fetal and cancer development signaling through the IGF1R, insulin
receptor (InsR), and cross-talk with the estrogen receptor alpha and beta
(ER, ER). Previous findings in our lab demonstrate an increased
expression of IGF2 in trastuzumab-resistance cell line JIMT1 when
compared to trastuzumab-sensitive cell lines BT474, SKBR3, and ZR75-30.
We hypothesis that to overcome trastuzumab-resistance in JIMT1 cell
lines, dual inhibition of HER2 and IGF2 is necessary to induce cell
death. When JIMT1 cells were treated with resveratrol, both HER2 and IGF2
mRNA and protein levels were reduced and a decrease in cell viability was
observed. We also analyzed the phosphorylation levels of HER2 and IGF1R.
Our studies suggest that blocking both HER2 and IGF2 is necessary to
decrease cell viability in trastuzumab-resistant JIMT1 cells.

