Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of prostaglandin signaling in primary
neuroblastoma


Neuroblastoma (NB) is an embryonic childhood tumor of the sympathetic
nervous system. Despite intensive treatment patients in the high-risk
group of NB shows a poor prognosis.We have shown the importance of
inflammation in NB development and progression and that the
pro-inflammatory lipid mediator prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) acts as a
paracrine survival factor in NB. We have also shown that mPGES-1,
essential for PGE2 synthesis, promotes growth and survival of several
malignancies.In this study we focus on the abundance of prostaglandins
and their specific enzymes in primary NB of different biological and
clinical subsets in the aim of finding a more specific and targeted NB
treatment.Levels of prostaglandins were assayed in 40 primary human NB
tumors by mass spectrometry (MS) showing elevated levels of PGE2 in high
risk 11q-deleted NB compared to low-risk NB whereas elevated levels of
prostaglandin D2 (PGD2) could be coupled to NB with favorable clinical
outcome.The expression of COX-1, COX-2, mPGES-1, L-PGDS, H-PGDS and
15-PGDH were analyzed in tumors by immunohistochemistry (IHC). Expression
of mPGES-1 and L-PGDS was found in all analyzed tumors.Double stainings
of mPGES-1 and the specific NB cell marker GD2 were performed on tumors
with different biology using immunofluorescence. In low-risk tumors
mPGES-1 is not expressed by the tumor cells whereas co-localization were
found in 11q deleted high-risk tumors. To consider the level of
inflammation and PGE2 signaling in these tumors we analyzed cell markers
of both the innate and adaptive immune system together with mPGES-1. In
all tumors mPGES-1 expressing cells are found in clusters closely
together with T-cells, B-cells, dendritic cells and M1/M2
macrophages.Together this suggests an involvement of inflammatory
prostaglandins in neuroblastoma development and tumor progression opening
up new strategies for targeted therapies.

