Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: mRNA spike-in control materials for cancer fusion gene detection
assays


Oncogenic fusion genes underlie the mechanism of several common cancers
and also constitute or encode important diagnostic and therapeutic
targets. Studies using next-generation sequencing technologies,
particularly RNA sequencing (RNA-seq), have revealed a growing number of
recurrent fusions in a variety of cancers. As such, establishing analytic
parameters, including the limit of detection, sensitivity, and
specificity of detecting fusions in tumor RNA specimens is important. We
have developed reference materials useful in assessing the ability to
detect fusion events in RNA or DNA samples. These consist of a set of
nine synthetic poly-adenylated RNA transcripts that correspond to common
cancer fusion gene sequences. These synthetic fusion RNAs can be spiked
at known concentrations into total RNA in the first stage of the mRNA
sample prep and used as in-line controls to evaluate the sensitivity and
specificity of the detection of these mutations. As a demonstration of
the utility of these controls, we performed a series of spike-in
experiments to investigate performance characteristics of three commonly
used fusion-detection software algorithms. Our results show all three
algorithms to be capable of detecting fusions in a dose-dependent manner.
The results also show differences in performance among the algorithms for
detecting specific fusions.

