Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The clinical effects of dendritic cell and cytokine-induced killer
cell therapy for lung cancer after surgery


Objective:The aim of the study was to evaluate the safety and therapeutic
efficacy of autologous dendritic cells co-cultured with cytokine-induced
killer cells (DC-CIK) for the treatment of lung cancer
patients.Methods:In the present study, we recruited a group of 40 lung
cancer patients after surgery registered in the Biotherapy Center during
2005-2011 and randomly divided patients into two groups: Twenty patients
treated with DC-CIK therapy as the treatment group and the other twenty
patients served as controls.Subjects were administrated with 1106 units
of IL-2 daily for 5 days before mononuclear cell isolation from
peripheral blood. For the treatment group, after primary tumors were
removed by surgery, 1-3 doses of DCs and CIKs were perfused via
peripheral veins. The immunologic function,short-term therapeutic
effects, 5-years overall survival rate (OS), and disease free survival
rate (DFS) were compared between the two groups.In addition, the
peripheral blood samples were extracted from all patients before and
after DC-CIK therapy,analyzed for T cell subsets by flow cytometry,and
the intracellular cytokines of T cells were detected
simultaneously.Results:OS for 1, 3, and 5 years of DC-CIK therapy group
were 100%, 88%, and 88% respectively which contrasted with 78%,66%, and
25% in the control group. DFS 1, 3, and 5 years of DC-CIK therapy groups
were 100%, 85%,65% respectively compared to 73%,58%, 23% in the control
groups. Although there were no changes in the subsets of T cells in
peripheral blood before and after DC-CIK therapy, the intrace1lular
cytokines IFN-,IL-2,IL-4, and IL-6 of the immune cells were noticeably
improved in the treatment group.Conclusion:DC-CIK therapy is a potential
effective therapeutic modality to improve OS and DFS in post-surgical
lung cancer patients.

