Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Imaging of UVB and UVC-induced DNA damage repair in cancer cells
in Gelfoam histoculture and minimal cancer in mice


We compared the DNA damage repair response of cancer cells after UVB or
UVC irradiation. The DNA-damage repair response to UV irradiation was
imaged in tumors growing in 3D Gelfoam histoculture and in superficial
tumors grown in mice. UV-induced DNA damage repair was imaged with GFP
fused to the DNA damage response (DDR)-related chromatin-binding protein
53BP1 in MiaPaCa-2 human pancreatic cancer cells. 53BP1 forms foci during
DNA damage repair. A clonogenic assay initially showed that UVC and UVB
inhibited MiaPaCa-2 cell proliferation in a dose-dependent manner, with
UVC having more efficacy. Gelfoam histocultures and confocal imaging
enabled 53BP1-GFP nuclear foci to be observed within 1 h after UV
irradiation, indicating the onset of DNA damage repair response.
Induction of UVB-induced 53BP1-GFP focus formation was observed up to a
depth of 120 m in MiaPaCa-2 cells on Gelfoam, while UVC induced foci only
to a depth of 40 m. The MiaPaCa-2 cells irradiated by both UVB and UVC
light in a skin-flap mouse model had a significant decrease in tumor
growth compared to untreated controls. Moreover, UVB-treatment had
greater inhibition of tumor growth compared to UVC. Our results
demonstrate that both UVB and UVC are useful tools for the treatment of
residual cancer, and UVB was more effective than UVC in vivo, possibly
due to greater tissue penetration of UVB because of its longer wavelength.

