Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Consumption of a high-fat diet abrogates inhibitory effects of
selenium on spontaneous metastasis of Lewis lung carcinoma in mice


The present study investigated the effects of dietary supplementation
with selenium (Se) on spontaneous metastasis of Lewis lung carcinoma
(LLC) in mice fed a high-fat diet using a 2x2 design. Three-week-old male
C57BL/6 mice were fed the AIN93G diet or that diet modified with 45%
calories from fat supplemented with or without 2.5 mg Se/4029 kcal as
methylseleninic acid for 6 weeks, at which time they were injected
subcutaneously with 2.5x105 LLC cells. The resulting primary tumor was
removed surgically 10 days later, and the experiment was terminated after
an additional 10 days. Consumption of the high-fat diet significantly
increased the body fat mass, regardless of Se supplementation, compared
to the AIN93G diet (pThe present study investigated the effects of
dietary supplementation with selenium (Se) on spontaneous metastasis of
Lewis lung carcinoma (LLC) in mice fed a high-fat diet using a 2x2
design. Three-week-old male C57BL/6 mice were fed the AIN93G diet or that
diet modified with 45% calories from fat supplemented with or without 2.5
mg Se/4029 kcal as methylseleninic acid for 6 weeks, at which time they
were injected subcutaneously with 2.5x105 LLC cells. The resulting
primary tumor was removed surgically 10 days later, and the experiment
was terminated after an additional 10 days. Consumption of the high-fat
diet significantly increased the body fat mass, regardless of Se
supplementation, compared to the AIN93G diet (p<0.01). The high-fat diet
increased lung metastases by 17% compared to the AIN93G diet (pThe
present study investigated the effects of dietary supplementation with
selenium (Se) on spontaneous metastasis of Lewis lung carcinoma (LLC) in
mice fed a high-fat diet using a 2x2 design. Three-week-old male C57BL/6
mice were fed the AIN93G diet or that diet modified with 45% calories
from fat supplemented with or without 2.5 mg Se/4029 kcal as
methylseleninic acid for 6 weeks, at which time they were injected
subcutaneously with 2.5x105 LLC cells. The resulting primary tumor was
removed surgically 10 days later, and the experiment was terminated after
an additional 10 days. Consumption of the high-fat diet significantly
increased the body fat mass, regardless of Se supplementation, compared
to the AIN93G diet (p<0.01). The high-fat diet increased lung metastases
by 17% compared to the AIN93G diet (p<0.01). Selenium supplementation
reduced the metastases by 11% compared to non-supplemented controls (pThe
present study investigated the effects of dietary supplementation with
selenium (Se) on spontaneous metastasis of Lewis lung carcinoma (LLC) in
mice fed a high-fat diet using a 2x2 design. Three-week-old male C57BL/6
mice were fed the AIN93G diet or that diet modified with 45% calories
from fat supplemented with or without 2.5 mg Se/4029 kcal as
methylseleninic acid for 6 weeks, at which time they were injected
subcutaneously with 2.5x105 LLC cells. The resulting primary tumor was
removed surgically 10 days later, and the experiment was terminated after
an additional 10 days. Consumption of the high-fat diet significantly
increased the body fat mass, regardless of Se supplementation, compared
to the AIN93G diet (p<0.01). The high-fat diet increased lung metastases
by 17% compared to the AIN93G diet (p<0.01). Selenium supplementation
reduced the metastases by 11% compared to non-supplemented controls
(p<0.05); however, the reduction was greater in AIN93G-fed mice (18%)
than in mice fed the high-fat diet (5%). Supplemental Se reduced plasma
concentrations of proteolytic proteases (uPA, pThe present study
investigated the effects of dietary supplementation with selenium (Se) on
spontaneous metastasis of Lewis lung carcinoma (LLC) in mice fed a
high-fat diet using a 2x2 design. Three-week-old male C57BL/6 mice were
fed the AIN93G diet or that diet modified with 45% calories from fat
supplemented with or without 2.5 mg Se/4029 kcal as methylseleninic acid
for 6 weeks, at which time they were injected subcutaneously with 2.5x105
LLC cells. The resulting primary tumor was removed surgically 10 days
later, and the experiment was terminated after an additional 10 days.
Consumption of the high-fat diet significantly increased the body fat
mass, regardless of Se supplementation, compared to the AIN93G diet
(p<0.01). The high-fat diet increased lung metastases by 17% compared to
the AIN93G diet (p<0.01). Selenium supplementation reduced the metastases
by 11% compared to non-supplemented controls (p<0.05); however, the
reduction was greater in AIN93G-fed mice (18%) than in mice fed the
high-fat diet (5%). Supplemental Se reduced plasma concentrations of
proteolytic proteases (uPA, p<0.01; MMP-9, pThe present study
investigated the effects of dietary supplementation with selenium (Se) on
spontaneous metastasis of Lewis lung carcinoma (LLC) in mice fed a
high-fat diet using a 2x2 design. Three-week-old male C57BL/6 mice were
fed the AIN93G diet or that diet modified with 45% calories from fat
supplemented with or without 2.5 mg Se/4029 kcal as methylseleninic acid
for 6 weeks, at which time they were injected subcutaneously with 2.5x105
LLC cells. The resulting primary tumor was removed surgically 10 days
later, and the experiment was terminated after an additional 10 days.
Consumption of the high-fat diet significantly increased the body fat
mass, regardless of Se supplementation, compared to the AIN93G diet
(p<0.01). The high-fat diet increased lung metastases by 17% compared to
the AIN93G diet (p<0.01). Selenium supplementation reduced the metastases
by 11% compared to non-supplemented controls (p<0.05); however, the
reduction was greater in AIN93G-fed mice (18%) than in mice fed the
high-fat diet (5%). Supplemental Se reduced plasma concentrations of
proteolytic proteases (uPA, p<0.01; MMP-9, p<0.05) and angiogenic factors
(VEGF, pThe present study investigated the effects of dietary
supplementation with selenium (Se) on spontaneous metastasis of Lewis
lung carcinoma (LLC) in mice fed a high-fat diet using a 2x2 design.
Three-week-old male C57BL/6 mice were fed the AIN93G diet or that diet
modified with 45% calories from fat supplemented with or without 2.5 mg
Se/4029 kcal as methylseleninic acid for 6 weeks, at which time they were
injected subcutaneously with 2.5x105 LLC cells. The resulting primary
tumor was removed surgically 10 days later, and the experiment was
terminated after an additional 10 days. Consumption of the high-fat diet
significantly increased the body fat mass, regardless of Se
supplementation, compared to the AIN93G diet (p<0.01). The high-fat diet
increased lung metastases by 17% compared to the AIN93G diet (p<0.01).
Selenium supplementation reduced the metastases by 11% compared to
non-supplemented controls (p<0.05); however, the reduction was greater in
AIN93G-fed mice (18%) than in mice fed the high-fat diet (5%).
Supplemental Se reduced plasma concentrations of proteolytic proteases
(uPA, p<0.01; MMP-9, p<0.05) and angiogenic factors (VEGF, p<0.01;
TIMP-1, pThe present study investigated the effects of dietary
supplementation with selenium (Se) on spontaneous metastasis of Lewis
lung carcinoma (LLC) in mice fed a high-fat diet using a 2x2 design.
Three-week-old male C57BL/6 mice were fed the AIN93G diet or that diet
modified with 45% calories from fat supplemented with or without 2.5 mg
Se/4029 kcal as methylseleninic acid for 6 weeks, at which time they were
injected subcutaneously with 2.5x105 LLC cells. The resulting primary
tumor was removed surgically 10 days later, and the experiment was
terminated after an additional 10 days. Consumption of the high-fat diet
significantly increased the body fat mass, regardless of Se
supplementation, compared to the AIN93G diet (p<0.01). The high-fat diet
increased lung metastases by 17% compared to the AIN93G diet (p<0.01).
Selenium supplementation reduced the metastases by 11% compared to
non-supplemented controls (p<0.05); however, the reduction was greater in
AIN93G-fed mice (18%) than in mice fed the high-fat diet (5%).
Supplemental Se reduced plasma concentrations of proteolytic proteases
(uPA, p<0.01; MMP-9, p<0.05) and angiogenic factors (VEGF, p<0.01;
TIMP-1, p<0.01) compared to non-supplemented controls. The high-fat diet
significantly increased plasma concentrations of adipokines PAI-1, MCP-1,
TNF- and leptin regardless of the level of dietary Se; however,
supplemental Se reduced plasma PAI-1 (p0.05) and MCP-1 (p0.05) in
AIN93G-fed mice. These results demonstrate that consumption of a high-fat
diet abrogated the anti-metastatic effects of Se, and that such an
abrogation may involve adipose-derived inflammatory cytokines.

