Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Serum inflammatory biomarkers predict esophageal and lung cancer
risk two years prior to diagnosis in a prospective cohort


Background: Cancer-associated inflammation drives the progression,
growth, and metastasis of many established tumors, including those of the
head & neck, esophagus, and lung. Limited evidence from non-aerodigestive
cancers suggests that quantifiable immunologic dysfunction may precede
the emergence of some clinically detectable tumors. The Golestan region
of Iran provides a unique opportunity to further study the relationship
between chronic inflammation and aerodigestive cancer risk, as it
features a very high incidence of esophageal squamous cell carcinoma
despite remarkably low prevalence of typical confounders, including
tobacco and alcohol use. This study tests the hypothesis that a
comprehensive panel of cancer-associated serum inflammatory biomarkers
can accurately predict risk of head & neck, esophageal, and lung cancers
in a prospective, high-risk cohort.Methods: This is a nested case-control
pilot study of subjects enrolled in the Golestan Cohort Study, an ongoing
epidemiologic project assessing cancer trends in Golestan, Iran. We
measured a broad panel of cytokines, chemokines, and inflammatory
molecules using Luminex technology in serum samples collected two or more
years before cancer diagnosis in 78 aerodigestive cancer cases and 81
controls. Data was analyzed using Wilcoxon rank-sum test, ROC areas of
discrimination, and multivariate analysis.Results: Mean age of 159 study
subjects was 60 years. Median levels (pg/ml) of several biomarkers were
profoundly elevated in future esophageal and lung cancer patients,
respectively, as compared to controls, including FGF-2 (341.9 and 306.7
versus 139.6, pBackground: Cancer-associated inflammation drives the
progression, growth, and metastasis of many established tumors, including
those of the head & neck, esophagus, and lung. Limited evidence from
non-aerodigestive cancers suggests that quantifiable immunologic
dysfunction may precede the emergence of some clinically detectable
tumors. The Golestan region of Iran provides a unique opportunity to
further study the relationship between chronic inflammation and
aerodigestive cancer risk, as it features a very high incidence of
esophageal squamous cell carcinoma despite remarkably low prevalence of
typical confounders, including tobacco and alcohol use. This study tests
the hypothesis that a comprehensive panel of cancer-associated serum
inflammatory biomarkers can accurately predict risk of head & neck,
esophageal, and lung cancers in a prospective, high-risk cohort.Methods:
This is a nested case-control pilot study of subjects enrolled in the
Golestan Cohort Study, an ongoing epidemiologic project assessing cancer
trends in Golestan, Iran. We measured a broad panel of cytokines,
chemokines, and inflammatory molecules using Luminex technology in serum
samples collected two or more years before cancer diagnosis in 78
aerodigestive cancer cases and 81 controls. Data was analyzed using
Wilcoxon rank-sum test, ROC areas of discrimination, and multivariate
analysis.Results: Mean age of 159 study subjects was 60 years. Median
levels (pg/ml) of several biomarkers were profoundly elevated in future
esophageal and lung cancer patients, respectively, as compared to
controls, including FGF-2 (341.9 and 306.7 versus 139.6, p<0.0001),
GM-CSF (63.7 and 63.3 versus 21.3, pBackground: Cancer-associated
inflammation drives the progression, growth, and metastasis of many
established tumors, including those of the head & neck, esophagus, and
lung. Limited evidence from non-aerodigestive cancers suggests that
quantifiable immunologic dysfunction may precede the emergence of some
clinically detectable tumors. The Golestan region of Iran provides a
unique opportunity to further study the relationship between chronic
inflammation and aerodigestive cancer risk, as it features a very high
incidence of esophageal squamous cell carcinoma despite remarkably low
prevalence of typical confounders, including tobacco and alcohol use.
This study tests the hypothesis that a comprehensive panel of
cancer-associated serum inflammatory biomarkers can accurately predict
risk of head & neck, esophageal, and lung cancers in a prospective,
high-risk cohort.Methods: This is a nested case-control pilot study of
subjects enrolled in the Golestan Cohort Study, an ongoing epidemiologic
project assessing cancer trends in Golestan, Iran. We measured a broad
panel of cytokines, chemokines, and inflammatory molecules using Luminex
technology in serum samples collected two or more years before cancer
diagnosis in 78 aerodigestive cancer cases and 81 controls. Data was
analyzed using Wilcoxon rank-sum test, ROC areas of discrimination, and
multivariate analysis.Results: Mean age of 159 study subjects was 60
years. Median levels (pg/ml) of several biomarkers were profoundly
elevated in future esophageal and lung cancer patients, respectively, as
compared to controls, including FGF-2 (341.9 and 306.7 versus 139.6,
p<0.0001), GM-CSF (63.7 and 63.3 versus 21.3, p<0.0001), IFN-2 (245.3 and
251 versus 67.6, pBackground: Cancer-associated inflammation drives the
progression, growth, and metastasis of many established tumors, including
those of the head & neck, esophagus, and lung. Limited evidence from
non-aerodigestive cancers suggests that quantifiable immunologic
dysfunction may precede the emergence of some clinically detectable
tumors. The Golestan region of Iran provides a unique opportunity to
further study the relationship between chronic inflammation and
aerodigestive cancer risk, as it features a very high incidence of
esophageal squamous cell carcinoma despite remarkably low prevalence of
typical confounders, including tobacco and alcohol use. This study tests
the hypothesis that a comprehensive panel of cancer-associated serum
inflammatory biomarkers can accurately predict risk of head & neck,
esophageal, and lung cancers in a prospective, high-risk cohort.Methods:
This is a nested case-control pilot study of subjects enrolled in the
Golestan Cohort Study, an ongoing epidemiologic project assessing cancer
trends in Golestan, Iran. We measured a broad panel of cytokines,
chemokines, and inflammatory molecules using Luminex technology in serum
samples collected two or more years before cancer diagnosis in 78
aerodigestive cancer cases and 81 controls. Data was analyzed using
Wilcoxon rank-sum test, ROC areas of discrimination, and multivariate
analysis.Results: Mean age of 159 study subjects was 60 years. Median
levels (pg/ml) of several biomarkers were profoundly elevated in future
esophageal and lung cancer patients, respectively, as compared to
controls, including FGF-2 (341.9 and 306.7 versus 139.6, p<0.0001),
GM-CSF (63.7 and 63.3 versus 21.3, p<0.0001), IFN-2 (245.3 and 251 versus
67.6, p<0.0001), and IL-1R (415 and 413.2 versus 116.2, p69% as compared
to controls. Among data-linked controls, biomarker levels tended to be
higher with older age, Turkmen ethnicity, and cigarette smoking, but
these correlations were non-significant.Conclusions: This study provides
the first direct evidence that multiple inflammatory biomarkers are
coordinately elevated in future lung and esophageal cancer patients at
least two years before cancer diagnosis, suggesting that baseline serum
levels of certain cancer-associated biomarkers may represent a useful
adjunctive screening measure to determine aerodigestive cancer risk.

