Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of the secretory pathway calcium ATPase 1 (SPCA1) in
MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells and the effect on protein expression


SPCA1 is a Ca2+ pump located on the membrane of the Golgi apparatus and
is involved in controlling calcium levels within the Golgi. We have
previously shown that SPCA1 is upregulated in some basal-like breast
cancers. Given the role of the Golgi in protein trafficking and
processing, we hypothesised that SPCA1 may be involved in regulating the
expression of proteins important in cancer. To address this hypothesis we
used 2D-DIGE to identify proteins that are altered when SPCA1 is silenced
in MDA-MB-231 basal cancer cells. MDA-MB-231 cells were seeded into
6-well plates (75,000 cells/well) and treated with SPCA1 or non-targeting
siRNA. Protein was isolated 72 h post siRNA treatment, and SPCA1
silencing was confirmed by immunoblotting. 2D-DIGE and MS/MS were used to
identify proteins with differential expression with SPCA1 silencing. Heat
shock protein 60 (HSP60) was identified as a protein potentially
sensitive to SPCA1 silencing using 2D-DIGE. Immunoblotting and real time
RT-PCR showed that SPCA1 silencing reduced HSP60 protein and mRNA
expression by 812% and 607% (n=3, PSPCA1 is a Ca2+ pump located on the
membrane of the Golgi apparatus and is involved in controlling calcium
levels within the Golgi. We have previously shown that SPCA1 is
upregulated in some basal-like breast cancers. Given the role of the
Golgi in protein trafficking and processing, we hypothesised that SPCA1
may be involved in regulating the expression of proteins important in
cancer. To address this hypothesis we used 2D-DIGE to identify proteins
that are altered when SPCA1 is silenced in MDA-MB-231 basal cancer cells.
MDA-MB-231 cells were seeded into 6-well plates (75,000 cells/well) and
treated with SPCA1 or non-targeting siRNA. Protein was isolated 72 h post
siRNA treatment, and SPCA1 silencing was confirmed by immunoblotting.
2D-DIGE and MS/MS were used to identify proteins with differential
expression with SPCA1 silencing. Heat shock protein 60 (HSP60) was
identified as a protein potentially sensitive to SPCA1 silencing using
2D-DIGE. Immunoblotting and real time RT-PCR showed that SPCA1 silencing
reduced HSP60 protein and mRNA expression by 812% and 607% (n=3, P<0.05),
respectively. Given the role of HSP60 in cell death pathways, we also
assessed the consequences of SPCA1 silencing on heat shock and
staurosporine-induced cell death. SPCA1 silencing had no effect on heat
shock-induced cell death but reduced the sensitivity of MDA-MB-231 breast
cancer cells to staurosporine. Although further studies are required to
fully characterize the functional consequences of HSP60 downregulation
upon SPCA1 silencing, this work suggests that SPCA1 is a complex
regulator of proteins important in cancer pathways.

