Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cetuximab-induced testicular toxicity


Background:Cetuximab, an anti-EGFR monoclonal antibody, is the only
targeted therapy approved for the treatment of head and neck squamous
cell carcinoma (HNSCC) in patients with locally advanced tumors, in
association with radiotherapy, and in patients with recurrent or
metastatic disease, in association with cisplatin-based chemotherapy. We
aimed to study the effect of cetuximab on testicular function and
reserve.Methods:Male mice were injected intraperitoneally with cetuximab
(1mg), or cisplatin (8mg/kg) or the combination of both and sacrificed
either 1 week or 6 weeks later. Saline-injected mice served as controls.
Testes were excised, weighed and further processed. Glutathione and
apoptosis assays were performed on 6 weeks samples for determination of
oxidative stress. Immunohistochemistry and confocal microscopy were used
to study the effect of cetuximab, cisplatin and their combination on the
testis histology as well as on the spermatogonial
reserve.Results:Cetuximab induced mild apoptosis in the testis. Cisplatin
induced enhanced apoptosis and depleted spermatogonial reserve, reflected
by reduced DAZL staining (early spermatocyte marker). The combined
treatment resulted in further decline in testicular weight compared with
cisplatin-only treated mice at 1-month post treatment
(pBackground:Cetuximab, an anti-EGFR monoclonal antibody, is the only
targeted therapy approved for the treatment of head and neck squamous
cell carcinoma (HNSCC) in patients with locally advanced tumors, in
association with radiotherapy, and in patients with recurrent or
metastatic disease, in association with cisplatin-based chemotherapy. We
aimed to study the effect of cetuximab on testicular function and
reserve.Methods:Male mice were injected intraperitoneally with cetuximab
(1mg), or cisplatin (8mg/kg) or the combination of both and sacrificed
either 1 week or 6 weeks later. Saline-injected mice served as controls.
Testes were excised, weighed and further processed. Glutathione and
apoptosis assays were performed on 6 weeks samples for determination of
oxidative stress. Immunohistochemistry and confocal microscopy were used
to study the effect of cetuximab, cisplatin and their combination on the
testis histology as well as on the spermatogonial
reserve.Results:Cetuximab induced mild apoptosis in the testis. Cisplatin
induced enhanced apoptosis and depleted spermatogonial reserve, reflected
by reduced DAZL staining (early spermatocyte marker). The combined
treatment resulted in further decline in testicular weight compared with
cisplatin-only treated mice at 1-month post treatment (p<0.05). Cetuximab
enhanced cisplatin-induced oxidative stress, and further depletion of
spermatogonial reserve (pBackground:Cetuximab, an anti-EGFR monoclonal
antibody, is the only targeted therapy approved for the treatment of head
and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) in patients with locally
advanced tumors, in association with radiotherapy, and in patients with
recurrent or metastatic disease, in association with cisplatin-based
chemotherapy. We aimed to study the effect of cetuximab on testicular
function and reserve.Methods:Male mice were injected intraperitoneally
with cetuximab (1mg), or cisplatin (8mg/kg) or the combination of both
and sacrificed either 1 week or 6 weeks later. Saline-injected mice
served as controls. Testes were excised, weighed and further processed.
Glutathione and apoptosis assays were performed on 6 weeks samples for
determination of oxidative stress. Immunohistochemistry and confocal
microscopy were used to study the effect of cetuximab, cisplatin and
their combination on the testis histology as well as on the
spermatogonial reserve.Results:Cetuximab induced mild apoptosis in the
testis. Cisplatin induced enhanced apoptosis and depleted spermatogonial
reserve, reflected by reduced DAZL staining (early spermatocyte marker).
The combined treatment resulted in further decline in testicular weight
compared with cisplatin-only treated mice at 1-month post treatment
(p<0.05). Cetuximab enhanced cisplatin-induced oxidative stress, and
further depletion of spermatogonial reserve
(p<0.05).Conclusions:Cetuximab has a mild effect on testicular reserve.
Nevertheless, the addition of cetuximab to cisplatin exacerbates
cisplatin-induced testicular toxicity.

