Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovery of novel and selective reversible inhibitors of EGFR
containing the T790M drug resistance mutation with activity in vitro and
in vivo


Activating mutations in the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
characterize a subset of non-small cell lung cancers (NSCLC) with
exquisite sensitivity to tyrosine kinase inhibitors like erlotinib or
gefitinib. However, after an initial dramatic response, patients
harboring these mutations progress within 8-14 months on therapy. In
approximately 60% of patients, the resistance to TKIs is associated with
the acquisition of a secondary mutation within the EGFR kinase domain.
The mutation in the kinase domain leads to the substitution of a bulky
methionine for threonine at position 790 (T790M) also referred to as the
gatekeeper residue.Using structure based-design we identified and
optimized a series of non-covalent, and highly selective
pyridinyl-aminopyrimidine inhibitors of EGFR containing the T790M drug
resistant mutation that spared the wild-type EGFR enzyme. These
pyridinyl-aminopyrimidine compounds potently inhibited phosphorylation of
T790M containing EGFR in enzymatic assays and cell based assays. Strong
inhibition of enzyme activity resulted in anti-proliferative activity in
H1975 and PC9 erlotinib resistant cells but treatment with these
molecules did not affect cell lines containing wild-type EGFR. Moreover,
oral dosing of mice bearing either H1975 or PC9_erlotinib resistant
xenograft tumors resulted in robust inhibition of tumor growth that was
accompanied by profound and dose-dependent inhibition of EGFR activity as
well as downstream signaling molecules such as ERK1/2 and AKT.These
results suggest that these pyridinyl-aminopyrimidine inhibitors have the
potential to benefit NSCLC patients who have developed resistance to
first-generation EGFR inhibitors due to the acquisition of the T790M
mutation, without the skin rash and gastrointestinal toxicity associated
with wild-type EGFR inhibition.*EJH and GS contributed equally to this
work.

