Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mathematical models for cellular response to radiochemotherapy


To optimize radiochemotherapy, several clinically adjustable factors must
be considered: sequence order (drug administered before, during, or after
radiation exposure); time interval between the agents; dose of each
agent; and fractionation. Because the combined effects of all these
factors are complex, mathematical modeling can provide a useful framework
for discerning the role of each individual factor and can be applied to
predict response to future experimental protocols. To date, there has
been scant effort devoted to mathematical models for cellular response to
radiochemotherapy. One widely-used model is based on the assumption that
the two modalities act completely independently; the total cell survival
fraction is the product of survival fractions for each agent acting
alone. However, an examination of a number of dose-response data sets for
paclitaxel followed by radiation exposure shows that the independent cell
kill model consistently underestimates cell kill. The additive damage
model, which is based on the assumption that cell kill depends on a
quantity called cellular damage, is constructed as the sum of terms from
each agent and is shown to better describe some data sets for ascorbate
and paclitaxel. Cellular dose-response data sets for radiochemotherapy
have shown complex interactions between therapies, with strong
dose-dependent antagonism in some cases, and significant, non-monotonic
dependence on the time interval between the modalities in others. We
present generalizations of the additive damage model, which include
either dose-dependent cell-cycle blocking or transport kinetics, and show
that they can describe some of these experimentally-observed complex
behaviors. In conclusion, the generalized additive damage model is a
promising tool to describe cellular pharmacodynamics of radiochemotherapy
and is expected to have application to the optimization of dosage and
schedule.

