Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combining PI3K and 5alpha-reductase inhibitors improves the
treatment response in a mouse model of PTEN-deficient prostate cancer


Testosterone is converted to dihydrotestosterone (DHT) by the enzymes
5alpha-reductase types 1 and 2. Inhibition of both 5alpha-reducatase
enzymes with dutasteride was effective in reducing the incidence of
prostate cancer in high risk patients. This suggests that suppression of
DHT with dutasteride may have a potential therapeutic effect on prostate
cancer. In this study, we examined the antitumor effects of dutasteride
in vivo using a preclinical model of prostate cancer that is based on the
PSA-Cre mediated inactivation of PTEN. Our findings show that monotherapy
with dutasteride significantly inhibited prostate tumor growth by
approximately 25%. Furthermore, the combination of dutasteride with the
mTOR inhibitor, everolimus, improved tumor growth suppression compared to
monotherapy with either drug. Treatment with dutasteride had a minimal
effect on tumor cell proliferation; however, it significantly increased
the apoptotic rate in tumors. Interestingly, treatment with dutasteride
resulted in increased activation of PI3K/mTOR signaling and a reduction
of STAT3 pathway activation. Moreover, increased activation of MAPK,
which occurs after treatment with mTOR inhibitors, was effectively
reduced with the co-administration of dutasteride. The findings from our
study suggest that inhibitors of 5alpha-reductase types 1 and 2 enzymes
may have a potential therapeutic value in PTEN deficient prostate
cancers, in particular when co-administered with PI3K inhibitors.

