Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Salmonella break tumor immune tolerance by downregulation tumor
indoleamine 2, 3-dioxygenase 1 expression


Over past decades, bacteria have been proven the capability of inhibiting
tumor growth. It can specifically target tumor and due to its facultative
anaerobe property, can be more penetrative than other drug therapies.
However, the molecular mechanism that bacteria inhibit tumor growth is
still incompletely known. Here we used Salmonella choleraesuis to
investigate the mechanism. The antitumor therapeutic effect mediated by
Salmonella is associated with an inflammatory immune response at tumor
site and T helper 1-type immune response. Many tumors have been proven
high expression of indoleamine 2, 3-dioxygenase 1 (IDO), which is a
rate-limiting enzyme that catalyzes tryptophan to kynurenine thus causing
immunotolerance within tumor microenvironment. Our previous studies
elucidated that Salmonella can also upregulate connexin 43 (CX43) to
inhibit tumor progression and even enhance tumor chemosensitivity.
Herein, we demonstrated that Salmonella can inhibit IDO expression
through upregulation of CX43 in melanoma cells. Furthermore, we can also
find the same phenomena in CX43 knock-down 4T1 and B16F10 cells. In
brief, we point out that Salmonella-induced CX43 expression is a
modulator of IDO expression and may play a crucial role in anti-tumor
therapy, which combined with immunotherapy and Salmonella may be a
prospective anti-tumor strategy.

