Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Y-box protein-associated acidic protein promotes breast cancer
progression and is a potential molecular target


The Y-Box protein- associated acidic protein (YBAP1), also known as
Complement component 1, q subcomponent binding protein, is a
multifunctional protein which is involved in in the regulation of
complement activation, pre-mRNA splicing and mitochondrial function. As
YBAP1 has been implicated in tumorigenesis, this study evaluates its role
in breast cancer metastasis. YBAP1 mRNA expression was analysed by
quantitative real time RT-PCR and YBAP1 protein by Western blot,
immunocytochemical and immunofluorescence staining in a panel of breast
cancer cell lines. Down-regulation of the YBAP1 gene in MDA-MB-231 breast
cancer cells was performed by siRNA-mediated silencing and overexpression
of the gene by transfection with the pCI-neo-YBAP1 plasmid, before
analysis of the effects on cell migration and invasion. YBAP1 gene
profiling was also performed in samples from the commercially available
TissueScan Human Breast Cancer Panel 1 (Origene, Rockville, MD). YBAP1
immunohistochemical staining was carried out in breast cancer tissue
microarrays constructed from 168 patients diagnosed with invasive ductal
breast carcinoma. The YBAP1 immunostaining was performed using rabbit
polyclonal anti-YBAP1 (RIKEN) at a dilution of 1:500. The percentage and
intensity of YBAP1 immunopositive staining in malignant epithelial cells
were recorded. YBAP1 was observed to be expressed in all the breast
cancer cell lines (MCF-7, ZR-75, T47D and MDA-MB-231) examined. The
protein was observed to be localized in the cytoplasm of breast cancer
cells. Overexpression of YBAP1 increased cell migration and invasion in
the highly malignant MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells. Conversely silencing
of the YBAP1 gene had the opposite effect, resulting in reduced cell
migration and invasion. YBAP1 gene expression was also found to be
up-regulated in the more advanced stages of breast cancer (grouped as
Stage 0, I and IIa and compared with Stage II b, IIIa and IIIc; P The
Y-Box protein- associated acidic protein (YBAP1), also known as
Complement component 1, q subcomponent binding protein, is a
multifunctional protein which is involved in in the regulation of
complement activation, pre-mRNA splicing and mitochondrial function. As
YBAP1 has been implicated in tumorigenesis, this study evaluates its role
in breast cancer metastasis. YBAP1 mRNA expression was analysed by
quantitative real time RT-PCR and YBAP1 protein by Western blot,
immunocytochemical and immunofluorescence staining in a panel of breast
cancer cell lines. Down-regulation of the YBAP1 gene in MDA-MB-231 breast
cancer cells was performed by siRNA-mediated silencing and overexpression
of the gene by transfection with the pCI-neo-YBAP1 plasmid, before
analysis of the effects on cell migration and invasion. YBAP1 gene
profiling was also performed in samples from the commercially available
TissueScan Human Breast Cancer Panel 1 (Origene, Rockville, MD). YBAP1
immunohistochemical staining was carried out in breast cancer tissue
microarrays constructed from 168 patients diagnosed with invasive ductal
breast carcinoma. The YBAP1 immunostaining was performed using rabbit
polyclonal anti-YBAP1 (RIKEN) at a dilution of 1:500. The percentage and
intensity of YBAP1 immunopositive staining in malignant epithelial cells
were recorded. YBAP1 was observed to be expressed in all the breast
cancer cell lines (MCF-7, ZR-75, T47D and MDA-MB-231) examined. The
protein was observed to be localized in the cytoplasm of breast cancer
cells. Overexpression of YBAP1 increased cell migration and invasion in
the highly malignant MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells. Conversely silencing
of the YBAP1 gene had the opposite effect, resulting in reduced cell
migration and invasion. YBAP1 gene expression was also found to be
up-regulated in the more advanced stages of breast cancer (grouped as
Stage 0, I and IIa and compared with Stage II b, IIIa and IIIc; P <0.05).
For the tissue microarrays, a positive correlation was observed between
YBAP1 immunostaining and axillary lymph node status. YBAP1 augments the
spread of breast cancer by enhancing cell migration and invasion. Hence,
YBAP1 is a potential metastatic biomarker and targeting YBAP1 could be a
strategy to combat breast cancer metastasis.

