Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mesenchymal stem cells play crucial roles in the generation of
osteogenic prostate to bone metastases


The skeleton is a common target for prostate metastases. In bone,
prostate cancer cells induce extensive bone formation/osteogenesis by
promoting osteoblast differentiation. This results in painful bony
lesions that are incurable. The precise mechanisms through which prostate
cancer cells induce bone formation are not well understood. Analysis of
human and mouse specimens of prostate to bone metastasis demonstrate the
presence of MSCs (smooth muscle actin positive). Given that MSCs are
precursors of osteoblasts, we hypothesizes that MSC recruitment to the
bone microenvironment would contribute to the formation of osteoblastic
lesions and enhance tumor progression. Methodology: Using in-vitro and
in-vivo studies we aim to elucidate the effects of MSC's on prostate
tumor progression in bone. To determine the effect of the MSCs on the
growth of the prostate cancer cells, mouse MSCs were directly co-cultured
at various ratios with luciferase expressing PAIII prostate cancer cells
for 24-96 hours. In-vivo, mice were intratibially inoculated with either
PAIIIs, PAIIIs/MSCs (1:1), or MSCs (n=8/group, 104 total cells in 20l).
Tumor growth was measured over 15 days using luminescence imaging.
Subsequently the tibias were collected for x-ray, micro CT, and
histological analysis. Results: In-vitro MSCs inhibited the growth of the
PAIII cells from 24 to 96 hours. At a 1:1 ratio, MSCs inhibited PAIII
growth by up to 55% at 96 hours (pThe skeleton is a common target for
prostate metastases. In bone, prostate cancer cells induce extensive bone
formation/osteogenesis by promoting osteoblast differentiation. This
results in painful bony lesions that are incurable. The precise
mechanisms through which prostate cancer cells induce bone formation are
not well understood. Analysis of human and mouse specimens of prostate to
bone metastasis demonstrate the presence of MSCs (smooth muscle actin
positive). Given that MSCs are precursors of osteoblasts, we hypothesizes
that MSC recruitment to the bone microenvironment would contribute to the
formation of osteoblastic lesions and enhance tumor progression.
Methodology: Using in-vitro and in-vivo studies we aim to elucidate the
effects of MSC's on prostate tumor progression in bone. To determine the
effect of the MSCs on the growth of the prostate cancer cells, mouse MSCs
were directly co-cultured at various ratios with luciferase expressing
PAIII prostate cancer cells for 24-96 hours. In-vivo, mice were
intratibially inoculated with either PAIIIs, PAIIIs/MSCs (1:1), or MSCs
(n=8/group, 104 total cells in 20l). Tumor growth was measured over 15
days using luminescence imaging. Subsequently the tibias were collected
for x-ray, micro CT, and histological analysis. Results: In-vitro MSCs
inhibited the growth of the PAIII cells from 24 to 96 hours. At a 1:1
ratio, MSCs inhibited PAIII growth by up to 55% at 96 hours (p<0.05). A
cleaved caspase 3 western blot of the lysates of PAIIIs treated with MSC
CM provides evidence that soluble factors from the MSCs are inducing
caspase dependent apoptosis. Consistent with our in vitro observations,
we observed in vivo that at day 11, the average tumor size in the
PaIII/MSC (1:1 ratio) group was 57.7% significantly smaller than the
PAIII group alone (pThe skeleton is a common target for prostate
metastases. In bone, prostate cancer cells induce extensive bone
formation/osteogenesis by promoting osteoblast differentiation. This
results in painful bony lesions that are incurable. The precise
mechanisms through which prostate cancer cells induce bone formation are
not well understood. Analysis of human and mouse specimens of prostate to
bone metastasis demonstrate the presence of MSCs (smooth muscle actin
positive). Given that MSCs are precursors of osteoblasts, we hypothesizes
that MSC recruitment to the bone microenvironment would contribute to the
formation of osteoblastic lesions and enhance tumor progression.
Methodology: Using in-vitro and in-vivo studies we aim to elucidate the
effects of MSC's on prostate tumor progression in bone. To determine the
effect of the MSCs on the growth of the prostate cancer cells, mouse MSCs
were directly co-cultured at various ratios with luciferase expressing
PAIII prostate cancer cells for 24-96 hours. In-vivo, mice were
intratibially inoculated with either PAIIIs, PAIIIs/MSCs (1:1), or MSCs
(n=8/group, 104 total cells in 20l). Tumor growth was measured over 15
days using luminescence imaging. Subsequently the tibias were collected
for x-ray, micro CT, and histological analysis. Results: In-vitro MSCs
inhibited the growth of the PAIII cells from 24 to 96 hours. At a 1:1
ratio, MSCs inhibited PAIII growth by up to 55% at 96 hours (p<0.05). A
cleaved caspase 3 western blot of the lysates of PAIIIs treated with MSC
CM provides evidence that soluble factors from the MSCs are inducing
caspase dependent apoptosis. Consistent with our in vitro observations,
we observed in vivo that at day 11, the average tumor size in the
PaIII/MSC (1:1 ratio) group was 57.7% significantly smaller than the
PAIII group alone (p<0.05). However by day 15 the tumors were growing at
comparable rates. Tumor bearing tibias were X-rayed and an overall
decrease in tumor-induced osteolysis was observed between the PAIII/MSC
and PAIII groups. CT scans of tumor bearing bones show an increase in
bone volume in bones injected with MSCs alone and PaIII/MSCs when
compared to PAIIIs, a finding that was consistent with X-ray and
hisotmorphometrical data. Conclusions: In conclusion we have found that
in-vitro and in-vivo MSCs have an early inhibitory effect on the growth
of prostate tumor cells. This impact on growth is coupled to an apparent
decrease in tumor-induced osteolysis and increase in osteogenesis.
Currently, we are examining 1) the impact of the MSCs on tumor-induced
osteogenesis and 2) identifying the MSC derived factors that are
inhibiting prostate cancer growth. Understanding the role of MSCs in the
prostate tumor-bone microenvironment will lead to the identification of
new therapeutic targets to treat the disease.

