Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BAP1 mutation in mesothelioma and BAP1 Cancer Syndrome


Malignant mesothelioma (MM) is a lethal cancer whose pathogenesis results
from complex interactions between host genetics and environmental
carcinogens, such as asbestos and erionite fibers. Recently, BAP1 (BRCA
associated protein 1) has been identified as a novel MM tumor suppressor
gene located at 3p21, a region frequently deleted in MM, which encodes
for a deubiquitinase enzyme known to target histones and other
proteins.We discovered that germline BAP1 mutations cause a novel cancer
syndrome characterized by a significant excess of both pleural and
peritoneal MM, uveal and cutaneous melanoma and possibly other tumors. In
the same study, we reported that 22% sporadic MM tumors, among the
Caucasian population, harbored somatic BAP1 mutations. Several other
studies supported a relevant role of BAP1 in MM. However, a significant
variation in the frequency of BAP1 mutation was found across different
studies and populations. In fact, one research group found BAP1 gene
altered in 61% of tumor samples from a Japanese cohort, pointing out to a
possible influence of ethnicity on the prevalence of BAP-1 alterations
among MM patients. However, the limitations in tumor sample sizes and
methodological differences across studies do not allow for conclusive
associations. We are now further analyzing BAP1 status and possible
clinicopathological associations using different and more sensitive
methods, such as MPLA, DNA and RNA sequencing, DNA copy number and
methylation. Our preliminary results indicate that, regardless of
ethnicity, BAP1 plays a crucial role in MM pathogenesis. More experiments
are urgently needed to see whether BAP1 expression could be used in
diagnostic, prognostic, or therapeutic settings. The impact of this work
will extend to other cancers with BAP1 mutations.

