Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Isolation and identification of disseminated tumor cells from bone
marrow


Background: Disseminated tumor cells (DTCs), detected by
immunohistological staining for cytokeratins, found in the bone marrow
(BM) of breast cancer patients portend a poor prognosis. Study of these
cells has been hindered by their rarity in BM specimens. We have tested a
microfiltration technique for the enrichment of DTCs.Methods: BM
aspirates from healthy volunteers were collected and mixed with defined
numbers SKBR3 breast cancer cells at a concentration of 1,000 to 10,000
tumor cells per 1x10^6 nucleated BM cells., BM was then diluted 1:10 with
PBS and 7 ml was placed in CellSaveTM tubes to simulate a patient BM
collection. Each specimen was processed within 24 hours of collection.
Specimens were pre-filtered using a 70 m mesh sieve (BD cat#352350) to
remove large particles. The effluent was filtered through CellSieveTM
microfilters, which have 7 m diameter pores in a uniform array, of
160,000 pores in a 9 mm diameter area. Filters containing cells were
post-fixed, cells permeabilized, and stained with DAPI and fluorescent
antibodies specific to epithelial cytokeratins 8, 18, and 19 (FITC),
EpCAM (PE), and CD45, a negative control (Cy5). Five representative 1%
areas of each filter were imaged and used to estimate total cell and
tumor cell counts, based on fluorescent DAPI and cytokeratin antibody
staining.Results: From each BM specimen (7 ml) containing a total of
14x10^6 nucleated BM cells, post filtration samples contained only
17-21x10^3 residual, nucleated BM cells. For specimens spiked at 10 tumor
cells per 1,000 BM cells, approximately 30x10^3 positively staining tumor
cells were recovered (20% tumor cell recovery with approximately 170 fold
enrichment). For specimens spiked at 1 tumor cell per 1,000 BM cells,
approximately 7x10^3 total tumor cells were recovered (50% tumor cell
recovery with approximately 400-fold enrichment). Captured cells
co-stained with cytokeratins and EpCAM, but not CD45. Control BM
specimens with no added tumor cells demonstrated only rare, staining
cells (4 per sample), likely due to background or epithelial cell
contamination.Conclusions: We have tested a microfiltration technique for
enrichment of BM DTCs. Microfiltration of BM is rapid without filter
clogging. Recovered DTCs can be immuno-stained, and are easily identified
and distinguished from BM cells. The DTC capture efficiency varied with
cancer cell concentration and ranged from 20-50% with up to 400 fold
enrichment when samples contained lower numbers of tumor cells. The
microfiltration enrichment assay continues to be optimized for isolation
and molecular characterization of DTCs from patient BM samples, where the
concentration of DTCs seldom exceeds 10 cells per 1x10^6 BM cells.

