Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Relevance of Sp1 and survivin expression in epithelial ovarian
cancer patients and their usefulness as potential therapeutic targets


Objectives: Specificity protein 1 (Sp1) is a transcription factor that is
over-expressed in several cancers and is inversely associated with
survival. Survivin is known to cause resistance to chemo- and radiation
therapy. Herein, we evaluated the correlation of Sp1 and survivin
expression in epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) patients and tested a
pre-clinical strategy to target these candidates using tolfenamic acid
(TA) for enhancing the efficacy of a chemotherapeutic agent, Cisplatin
(Cis).Methods: Expression of Sp1 and survivin in clinical specimens was
determined by qPCR and Western blot analysis. Anti-proliferative response
of EOC cell lines (ES2 and OVCAR-3) was assessed in the presence of Cis,
TA or Cis+TA using CellTiter-Glo. Apoptosis was determined by flow
cytometry using annexin-V staining, measuring the effector caspases
activity using caspase3/7 Glo kit. Cell cycle analysis was carried out
using flow cytometry. Matrigel coated ranswell chambers were used to
assess cell migration/invasion. Proteomics nalysis was performed at
Agilent Technologies, Inc.Results: qPCR showed an increase in the
expression of urvivin (5-fold) and Sp1 (2-fold) in clinical specimens,
which was corroborated by Western blot analysis [Sp1 (>2.6-fold) and
survivin >100-fold)]. TA and Cis showed a dose- and time-dependent
inhibition of cell viability in EOC cell lines [50 M TA caused 50% (ES2)
and 40% (OVCAR-3) cell growth inhibition; Cis (5 M) caused 60% (ES2) and
40% (OVCAR-3) inhibition at 48 h post-treatment]. Combination of TA (50
M) and Cis (5 M) resulted in a synergistic response causing higher growth
inhibition (ES2: 80%, pObjectives: Specificity protein 1 (Sp1) is a
transcription factor that is over-expressed in several cancers and is
inversely associated with survival. Survivin is known to cause resistance
to chemo- and radiation therapy. Herein, we evaluated the correlation of
Sp1 and survivin expression in epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) patients
and tested a pre-clinical strategy to target these candidates using
tolfenamic acid (TA) for enhancing the efficacy of a chemotherapeutic
agent, Cisplatin (Cis).Methods: Expression of Sp1 and survivin in
clinical specimens was determined by qPCR and Western blot analysis.
Anti-proliferative response of EOC cell lines (ES2 and OVCAR-3) was
assessed in the presence of Cis, TA or Cis+TA using CellTiter-Glo.
Apoptosis was determined by flow cytometry using annexin-V staining,
measuring the effector caspases activity using caspase3/7 Glo kit. Cell
cycle analysis was carried out using flow cytometry. Matrigel coated
ranswell chambers were used to assess cell migration/invasion. Proteomics
nalysis was performed at Agilent Technologies, Inc.Results: qPCR showed
an increase in the expression of urvivin (5-fold) and Sp1 (2-fold) in
clinical specimens, which was corroborated by Western blot analysis [Sp1
(>2.6-fold) and survivin >100-fold)]. TA and Cis showed a dose- and
time-dependent inhibition of cell viability in EOC cell lines [50 M TA
caused 50% (ES2) and 40% (OVCAR-3) cell growth inhibition; Cis (5 M)
caused 60% (ES2) and 40% (OVCAR-3) inhibition at 48 h post-treatment].
Combination of TA (50 M) and Cis (5 M) resulted in a synergistic response
causing higher growth inhibition (ES2: 80%, p<0.001; OVCAR-3: 60%,
pObjectives: Specificity protein 1 (Sp1) is a transcription factor that
is over-expressed in several cancers and is inversely associated with
survival. Survivin is known to cause resistance to chemo- and radiation
therapy. Herein, we evaluated the correlation of Sp1 and survivin
expression in epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) patients and tested a
pre-clinical strategy to target these candidates using tolfenamic acid
(TA) for enhancing the efficacy of a chemotherapeutic agent, Cisplatin
(Cis).Methods: Expression of Sp1 and survivin in clinical specimens was
determined by qPCR and Western blot analysis. Anti-proliferative response
of EOC cell lines (ES2 and OVCAR-3) was assessed in the presence of Cis,
TA or Cis+TA using CellTiter-Glo. Apoptosis was determined by flow
cytometry using annexin-V staining, measuring the effector caspases
activity using caspase3/7 Glo kit. Cell cycle analysis was carried out
using flow cytometry. Matrigel coated ranswell chambers were used to
assess cell migration/invasion. Proteomics nalysis was performed at
Agilent Technologies, Inc.Results: qPCR showed an increase in the
expression of urvivin (5-fold) and Sp1 (2-fold) in clinical specimens,
which was corroborated by Western blot analysis [Sp1 (>2.6-fold) and
survivin >100-fold)]. TA and Cis showed a dose- and time-dependent
inhibition of cell viability in EOC cell lines [50 M TA caused 50% (ES2)
and 40% (OVCAR-3) cell growth inhibition; Cis (5 M) caused 60% (ES2) and
40% (OVCAR-3) inhibition at 48 h post-treatment]. Combination of TA (50
M) and Cis (5 M) resulted in a synergistic response causing higher growth
inhibition (ES2: 80%, p<0.001; OVCAR-3: 60%, p<0.001) compared to
single-agent. This is accompanied by cell-cycle arrest (G2/M phase), an
increase in apoptosis, as determined by Caspase 3/7 activity, annexin-V
staining, PARP cleavage, and inhibition of ES2 cell invasion and
migration. Global proteomic profiling of ES2 cells indicated that the
combination treatment up-regulated proteins associated with oxidative
phosphorylation, apoptotic execution, and electron transport chain and
down-regulated ribosomal proteins, translational actors, DNA damage and
cell cycle proteins.Conclusions: Elevated expression of Sp1 and survivin
suggests a strong association of these two agents in EOC. Our
pre-clinical results confirmed that targeting these candidates with small
molecule (TA) potentially sensitizes EOC cells to chemotherapy.

