Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of nuclear HER3 in breast cancer resistance


HER3 is reported to be overexpressed in 18-29% of human breast cancers
and suggested to be a marker of reduced disease-specific survival in
4,406 patients with invasive breast carcinoma. Overexpression and
subcellular localization of HER3 may be a negative predictive marker for
targeted therapies, and HER3 status may play a role in the development of
drug resistance and metastasis. Translocation of ERBB family members
EGFR, HER2 and HER4 into nucleus for regulating gene transcription have
been reported, but only a few studies about nuclear HER3 have been
reported and the biological role of nuclear HER3 is still unknown. HER3
was detected in the nucleus of 57% in Japanese lung cancers, and has also
been detected in the nuclei of prostate cancers and other cancer cell
lines. A study suggested that nuclear HER3 by IHC is associated with
favorable overall survival in 128 uveal melanoma patients. The potential
mechanism of HER3 translocation and its role on drug resistance was
intensively studied in the work. According to our observation, nuclear
HER3 was found to be significantly increased in HER2-positive breast
cancer cells SKBr3 during an EGFR-targeted therapy Iressa, and increased
sub-band of HER3 was detected by Western blot in the Iressa-resistant
SKBr3 cells. The Iressa-induced HER3 nuclear localization in SKBr3 and
BT474 cells can be inhibited by the application of ADAM17 and
gamma-secretase inhibitors or siRNA, the additional inhibitors can
sensitize the cells to Iressa treatment which may be a new target for
preventing HER3-mediated drug resistance. If the HER3 subcellular
localization is important for cancer development and drug resistance,
inhibitor for this pathway will enhance the efficiency of recent
therapies on breast cancer.

