Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Increased sensitivity to Wnt/beta-catenin inhibitors in
hepatocellular carcinoma cells harboring activating mutation of
beta-catenin


[Background] The WNT/-catenin signaling pathway is a major oncogenic
pathway of human hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). More than 50% of HCCs
have aberrant activation of WNT/-catenin signaling, which are caused by
genetic alterations, ligand activation, or cross-activation by other
signaling pathways. We hypothesized that activating mutation of CTNNB1,
the coding gene of -catenin, may confer sensitivity to WNT/-catenin
inhibitors in HCC cells.[Materials and Methods] SNU398 is a human HCC
cell line harboring a missense somatic mutation in exon 3 of CTNNB1 gene,
resulting in S37C mutation. Huh7, HepG2, PLC5, and Hep3B are HCC cells
containing no somatic mutations in exon 3 of CTNNB1 gene. HCC cells were
treated with various types of WNT/-catenin pathway inhibitors, including
ICG-001 which down-regulates -catenin/TCF transcriptional activity by
interfering the binding of -catenin with its transcriptional activation
complex, XAV939 which targets tankyrases and facilitates degradation of
-catenin, and LGK974 which inhibits Porcupine, an acyltransferase
responsible for palmitoylation and secretion of Wnt ligands, and
evaluated for in vitro viability by MTT.[Results] ICG-001 as a single
agent showed significantly greater anti-proliferation effect in SNU398
than other HCC cells. The 50%-inhibitory concentrations (IC50s) of
ICG-001 were 5 M and >10 M for SNU398 and other HCC cells, respectively.
ICG-001 also induced a more potent suppression of colony- formation, and
a more significant increase of subG1 fraction detected by flow cytometry
in SNU398 cell than other HCC cells. XAV939 up to 20 M induced only
modest anti-proliferative effect in all HCC cells. However, SNU398
remained the one showing the greatest sensitivity to the growth
suppression induced by XAV939. The anti-proliferative effect of LGK974
was modest and showed no significant difference among different HCC
cells.[Conclusion] The activating mutation of -catenin may confer
sensitivity to certain WNT/-catenin pathway inhibitors, such as ICG-001,
in HCC cells. (This study was supported by grants NRPB-100CAP1020-2).

