Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: G12 overexpression in hepatocellular carcinoma promotes
epithelial-mesenchymal transition through microRNAs deregulation


Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) has a poor prognosis due to its aggressive
nature. Ligand activation of G-protein coupled receptor with enhanced
G-protein activity may contribute to tumorigenesis and tumor progression
in microenvironments. Here, we report the overexpression of G12 in HCC
and its effect on deregulation of microRNAs in association with
epithelial-mesenchymal transition. G12 expression levels were higher in
human HCC than surrounding normal tissue. Array analyses using Huh7 cells
stably transfected with an active mutant of G12 (G12QL) enabled us to
extract down-regulated microRNAs. Of them, decreases of miR-200b/a, -192
and -215 contributed to ZEB induction through the up-regulation of MDM2.
Transfection with miR-200b, -192 or miR-215 mimic antagonized HCC cell
migration and invasion facilitated by G12QL. In tumor xenograft studies,
sustained knockdown of G12 decreased the overall growth rate and average
volume of tumors derived from SK-Hep1, a mesenchymal liver tumor cell
line. In human HCC samples, levels of the identified microRNAs were all
decreased, and correlated with the induction of mesenchymal markers.
Moreover, decreases of the miRNAs discriminated microvascular invasion
versus non-microvascular invasion of HCC. Conclusion: Increase of G12 in
HCC deregulates a set of miRNAs promoting epithelial-mesenchymal
transition of HCC and may be responsible for tumor microvascular
invasion, implying that G12 signaling and the downstream mediators may be
utilized as therapeutic targets and/or prognostic markers.

