Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Investigating resistance to AZD9291


First- and second-generation EGFR TKIs are established first line therapy
for patients with NSCLC with activating mutations in EGFR. Unfortunately,
patients ultimately develop disease progression with acquisition of a
second-site EGFR T790M mutation in more than half of cases. This has led
to the development of third generation EGFR TKIs which inhibit both the
EGFRm+ and T790M mutations in preclinical models and are showing activity
in TKI-resistant patients in Phase I studies. Despite the potential
improvements brought by third generation EGFR-TKIs, advanced EGFRm+ tumor
cells will still remain highly adaptable and the inevitability of further
resistance will limit the effectiveness of these drugs. As such, the
identification of resistance mechanisms to these agents is essential to
guide future therapeutic strategies and identify novel:novel
combinations.To interrogate resistance to AZD9291, we have generated
panels of EGFRm+ cell lines resistant to gefitinib (first generation TKI)
and EGFRm+ and EGFRm+/T790M cell lines resistant to afatinib and AZD9291
(second and third generation TKIs, respectively). Subsequently, we
characterised the cell lines using a variety of molecular profiling
techniques including Next Generation Sequencing (NGS), Affymetrix gene
expression analysis, and phenotypic profiling following pharmacological
modulation by small molecule inhibitors of canonical signaling
pathways.The effects on cell survival across the range of resistant
models by a panel of pathway inhibitors indicated that resistance to the
EGFR inhibitors, in particular AZD9291, is frequently associated with
increased sensitivity to selumetinib (AZD6244; ARRY-142886) (MEK1/2
inhibitor), suggesting that ERK signaling is commonly reactivated to
circumvent inhibition of the EGFR pathway. Molecular characterisation of
the panel of cell lines suggests a range of different resistance
mechanisms may be responsible for reactivation of ERK signaling,
including a decrease in negative regulators of ERK such as DUSP6 or an
epithelial to mesenchymal transition consistent with previous
observations.Collectively, these data suggest that combining an EGFR TKI
with a MEK inhibitor could prevent or delay resistance and drive superior
duration of benefit from these agents.

