Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The effects of the global loss of DNA methylation on the
functional organization of the epigenome


Aberrant epigenetic changes which include alterations in DNA methylation,
nucleosome positioning and histone modifications have been studied
extensively in the context of tumorigenesis. The role of DNA methylation
in the organization of genome-wide chromatin structure and its
interaction with other epigenetic modifiers in cancer, however, remains
unclear. Here, we use the Nucleosome Occupancy and Methylation
whole-genome sequencing (NOMe-seq) assay to compare a colorectal cancer
cell line, HCT116, with its derivatives that carry homozygous deletions
of DNMT3B and are hypomorphic for DNMT1, DKO1, to examine the role of DNA
methylation in the functional organization of the cancer epigenome. Upon
the global loss of DNA methylation, we observe a widespread chromatin
remodeling where specifically, DKO1 cells gain nucleosome depleted
regions (NDRs) and/or well-phased nucleosome that are not present in the
parent HCT116 cells. Interestingly, this genome-wide nucleosome
repositioning in DKO1 cells is accompanied by significant histone
modification changes and low level expression increase only in CpG
islands (CGI), where promoters may gain permissive histone marks H2A.Z,
H3K4me3 and H3K4me1 as well as the polycomb repressive mark, H3K27me3.
Non-CGI promoters on the other hand, do not gain permissive or repressive
histone modifications despite dramatic nucleosome reorganization, which
suggests that distinct mechanisms regulate the equilibrium between DNA
methylation, nucleosome and gene expression in CGI and non-CGI promoters.
Taken together, our study demonstrates the cross-talk between epigenetic
mechanisms wherein DNA methylation may directly control the organization
of chromatin architecture.

