Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Uncommon CHEK2 missense variant and reduced risk of pancreatic
cancer


CHEK2 is a cell cycle control gene encoding for checkpoint kinase 2,
which acts as a tumor suppressor by causing arrest or apoptosis in
response to unrepaired DNA damage. Inherited mutations in the CHEK2 gene
have been reported to increase the risk of several cancers, although a
paradoxical decrease in risk of tobacco-related lung and head and neck
cancers was reported. An association between CHEK2 mutations and
pancreatic cancer risk has not been reported. Missense variant rs17879961
(replacement of T by C, resulting in the change of Isoleucine by
Threonine at position 157 of the protein [I157T]) has been shown to be
very rare in the US and western Europe populations (CHEK2 is a cell cycle
control gene encoding for checkpoint kinase 2, which acts as a tumor
suppressor by causing arrest or apoptosis in response to unrepaired DNA
damage. Inherited mutations in the CHEK2 gene have been reported to
increase the risk of several cancers, although a paradoxical decrease in
risk of tobacco-related lung and head and neck cancers was reported. An
association between CHEK2 mutations and pancreatic cancer risk has not
been reported. Missense variant rs17879961 (replacement of T by C,
resulting in the change of Isoleucine by Threonine at position 157 of the
protein [I157T]) has been shown to be very rare in the US and western
Europe populations (<1%) while more common in central Europe countries
(5%). We genotyped 585 pancreatic cancer cases and 664 controls recruited
in central Europe (Czech Republic and Slovakia). The heterozygous (T/C)
genotype was observed in 2.1% of cases and 4.4% of controls. After
adjustment for age, sex, and center of recruitment, T/C genotype was
associated with a significantly lower incidence of pancreatic cancer than
the common T/T genotype (odds ratio [OR]=0.41, 95% confidence interval
[CI] 0.20-0.83, p=0.0132). ORs were of similar magnitude by smoking
status, diabetes history, and body mass index categories, while an
apparent difference by drinking status with observed: OR=0.24 (95% CI
0.09-0.64) for non-drinkers versus OR=0.88 (95%CI 0.31-2.53), p for
heterogeneity=0.078. This counter-intuitive halving of the pancreatic
cancer risk for CHEK2 rs17879961 T/C carriers warrants replication and
functional studies to elucidate mechanisms involved.

