Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting c-Myc in pediatric sarcoma xenografts with the BET
bromodomain inhibitor, JQ1, disrupts angiogenesis


Histone acetylation regulates activation and repression of multiple
angiogenesis and inflammatory genes known to play critical roles in the
pathogenesis of various diseases. The current study was designed to
elucidate the therapeutic potential of JQ1, an inhibitor of the BET class
of human bromodomain proteins (readers of histone acetylation marks), in
pediatric sarcomas. Surprisingly, our results demonstrated that in-vivo
xenografts showed similar sensitivity to JQ1, despite their cell lines
showing >20 fold differences in sensitivity in-vitro. cMYC expression
significantly down regulated in most rhabdomyosarcoma cell lines after
JQ1 treatment, however there was no significant down regulation of cMYC
in Ewings sarcoma lines, despite similar sensitivities to JQ1. When
administered to mice bearing human sarcoma xenografts, JQ1 (50mg/kg/d)
significantly retarded tumor growth. Whereas Ki67 staining remained
unchanged in treated tumors, CD34-positive staining decreased after 2
weeks of treatment. Microvessel density (CD34-positive cells) in tumors
of JQ1-treated animals was reduced by at least 60% compared with controls
(P Histone acetylation regulates activation and repression of multiple
angiogenesis and inflammatory genes known to play critical roles in the
pathogenesis of various diseases. The current study was designed to
elucidate the therapeutic potential of JQ1, an inhibitor of the BET class
of human bromodomain proteins (readers of histone acetylation marks), in
pediatric sarcomas. Surprisingly, our results demonstrated that in-vivo
xenografts showed similar sensitivity to JQ1, despite their cell lines
showing >20 fold differences in sensitivity in-vitro. cMYC expression
significantly down regulated in most rhabdomyosarcoma cell lines after
JQ1 treatment, however there was no significant down regulation of cMYC
in Ewings sarcoma lines, despite similar sensitivities to JQ1. When
administered to mice bearing human sarcoma xenografts, JQ1 (50mg/kg/d)
significantly retarded tumor growth. Whereas Ki67 staining remained
unchanged in treated tumors, CD34-positive staining decreased after 2
weeks of treatment. Microvessel density (CD34-positive cells) in tumors
of JQ1-treated animals was reduced by at least 60% compared with controls
(P < 0.01) indicating anti-angiogenic activity. Assay of angiogenic
factors in JQ1 treated tumor xenografts showed that 7 factors were
significantly downregulated compared to control tumors in all four
sarcoma lines. To test the anti-angiogenic activity of JQ1 directly we
exposed primary cultured human umbilical vascular endothelial cells
(HUVEC) to JQ1 (500 nM). JQ1 significantly inhibited vascular endothelial
growth factor (VEGF) induced proliferation, migration, invasion, adhesion
and capillary-like structure formation by HUVECs in a
concentration-dependent manner. Furthermore, JQ1 (50 mg/kg/d) abrogated
VEGF-induced vascular formation and reduced hemoglobin levels in the
mouse Matrigel plug assay in vivo. To understand the molecular mechanism
of these activities, we next examined the signaling pathways in HUVECs
treated with JQ1 using a proteome based angiogenesis array as well as
transcription factor activation assay. JQ1 treatment considerably
decreased various angiogenic factors as well as dramatically decreasing
AP1 expression and it transcriptional activity. This study provides
evidence that JQ1 induces a wide range of effects on endothelial cells
that lead to inhibition of tumor angiogenesis and demonstrate that the
role of BRD4 inhibitors as a therapeutic strategy to target vasculature.
Supported by a grant from SARC.

