Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Collagen degradation products measured in serum can separate
ovarian and breast cancer patients from healthy controls


Background: The hallmarks of breast and ovarian cancer include increased
matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) activity, increased collagen deposition
(desmoplasia) and breakdown, as well as invasion of the basement membrane
and extracellular matrix. The combination of these processes result in
the release of specific protein (e.g. collagens) fragments to the
circulation, which when measured may reflect disease pathogenesis.Aim: To
investigate if biomarkers measuring MMP-degraded collagen could
differentiate ovarian and breast cancer patients from healthy controls
when measured in serum.Methods: The levels of markers reflecting
MMP-mediated degradation of type I (C1M), type III (C3M) and type IV
(C4M, C4M12) collagen were assessed in serum from female ovarian cancer
patients (n=10, stage I-III, age 37-74), breast cancer patients (n=14,
stage II-III, age 41-79) and healthy controls (n=49, age 31-83) using
characterized and validated competitive ELISAs. The levels of the
individual markers were compared using one way ANOVA on log transformed
data and AUROC was calculated.Results: The levels of the markers (table)
were significantly elevated in serum from ovarian cancer patients
(pBackground: The hallmarks of breast and ovarian cancer include
increased matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) activity, increased collagen
deposition (desmoplasia) and breakdown, as well as invasion of the
basement membrane and extracellular matrix. The combination of these
processes result in the release of specific protein (e.g. collagens)
fragments to the circulation, which when measured may reflect disease
pathogenesis.Aim: To investigate if biomarkers measuring MMP-degraded
collagen could differentiate ovarian and breast cancer patients from
healthy controls when measured in serum.Methods: The levels of markers
reflecting MMP-mediated degradation of type I (C1M), type III (C3M) and
type IV (C4M, C4M12) collagen were assessed in serum from female ovarian
cancer patients (n=10, stage I-III, age 37-74), breast cancer patients
(n=14, stage II-III, age 41-79) and healthy controls (n=49, age 31-83)
using characterized and validated competitive ELISAs. The levels of the
individual markers were compared using one way ANOVA on log transformed
data and AUROC was calculated.Results: The levels of the markers (table)
were significantly elevated in serum from ovarian cancer patients
(p<0.0001) and breast cancer patients (pBackground: The hallmarks of
breast and ovarian cancer include increased matrix metalloproteinase
(MMP) activity, increased collagen deposition (desmoplasia) and
breakdown, as well as invasion of the basement membrane and extracellular
matrix. The combination of these processes result in the release of
specific protein (e.g. collagens) fragments to the circulation, which
when measured may reflect disease pathogenesis.Aim: To investigate if
biomarkers measuring MMP-degraded collagen could differentiate ovarian
and breast cancer patients from healthy controls when measured in
serum.Methods: The levels of markers reflecting MMP-mediated degradation
of type I (C1M), type III (C3M) and type IV (C4M, C4M12) collagen were
assessed in serum from female ovarian cancer patients (n=10, stage I-III,
age 37-74), breast cancer patients (n=14, stage II-III, age 41-79) and
healthy controls (n=49, age 31-83) using characterized and validated
competitive ELISAs. The levels of the individual markers were compared
using one way ANOVA on log transformed data and AUROC was
calculated.Results: The levels of the markers (table) were significantly
elevated in serum from ovarian cancer patients (p<0.0001) and breast
cancer patients (p<0.04-0.0001) compared to healthy controls. All the
markers were able to differentiate ovarian (AUROC 88%-95%) and breast
cancer patients (AUROC 70%-88%) from healthy controls, with C1M being the
strongest differentiator of disease vs. controls.Conclusions: Four serum
biomarkers measuring altered MMP-mediated collagen turnover were able to
differentiate ovarian and breast cancer patients from healthy controls in
this small cancer cohort study. As these markers reflect altered disease
pathogenesis they may increase the understanding of disease mode of
action and, if validated in larger clinical studies, provide an improved
and additional clinical tool for stratifying and monitoring patients
according to subtype/ disease severity.


