Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of DNA repair in breast cancer risk and recurrence


BACKGROUND: Breast cancer (BC) is a complex disease that is caused by
multiple factors. Deficits in DNA repair capacity (DRC) are known to
cause certain familial BC, and dysregulation of DRC develops with
progressive carcinogenesis. However, the effect of DRC on carcinogenesis
of sporadic breast tumors has not been well characterized_and the factors
associated with DRC variability are still poorly understood. DNA repair
is integral to maintain genomic integrity, and carcinogenesis occurs when
efficient, effective DNA repair is impaired. Our laboratory has just
finished the recruitment of nearly 1,200 women in a seven-year molecular
epidemiology study focused on the role of DRC as a risk factor for BC.
OBJECTIVE: Our aim is to present key findings on the role of DRC as a
risk factor for BC and its potential association with BC recurrence.
METHODS: A personal interview was conducted for soliciting information on
BC risk factors. Among the 493 BC cases and 683 controls the DRC was
measured in lymphocytes using a host cell reactivation assay with a
luciferase reporter gene. We stratified the women with BC using the
median of the DRC level and selected 70 women with a low DRC level
(BACKGROUND: Breast cancer (BC) is a complex disease that is caused by
multiple factors. Deficits in DNA repair capacity (DRC) are known to
cause certain familial BC, and dysregulation of DRC develops with
progressive carcinogenesis. However, the effect of DRC on carcinogenesis
of sporadic breast tumors has not been well characterized_and the factors
associated with DRC variability are still poorly understood. DNA repair
is integral to maintain genomic integrity, and carcinogenesis occurs when
efficient, effective DNA repair is impaired. Our laboratory has just
finished the recruitment of nearly 1,200 women in a seven-year molecular
epidemiology study focused on the role of DRC as a risk factor for BC.
OBJECTIVE: Our aim is to present key findings on the role of DRC as a
risk factor for BC and its potential association with BC recurrence.
METHODS: A personal interview was conducted for soliciting information on
BC risk factors. Among the 493 BC cases and 683 controls the DRC was
measured in lymphocytes using a host cell reactivation assay with a
luciferase reporter gene. We stratified the women with BC using the
median of the DRC level and selected 70 women with a low DRC level
(<2.8%) who had been enrolled in the study for at least 5 years in order
to assess the BC recurrence. RESULTS: Our 7 year study of DRC of female
cohorts in Puerto Rico has shown that women with BC have aDRC that, on
average, is 51% lower than women without BC (P BACKGROUND: Breast cancer
(BC) is a complex disease that is caused by multiple factors. Deficits in
DNA repair capacity (DRC) are known to cause certain familial BC, and
dysregulation of DRC develops with progressive carcinogenesis. However,
the effect of DRC on carcinogenesis of sporadic breast tumors has not
been well characterized_and the factors associated with DRC variability
are still poorly understood. DNA repair is integral to maintain genomic
integrity, and carcinogenesis occurs when efficient, effective DNA repair
is impaired. Our laboratory has just finished the recruitment of nearly
1,200 women in a seven-year molecular epidemiology study focused on the
role of DRC as a risk factor for BC. OBJECTIVE: Our aim is to present key
findings on the role of DRC as a risk factor for BC and its potential
association with BC recurrence. METHODS: A personal interview was
conducted for soliciting information on BC risk factors. Among the 493 BC
cases and 683 controls the DRC was measured in lymphocytes using a host
cell reactivation assay with a luciferase reporter gene. We stratified
the women with BC using the median of the DRC level and selected 70 women
with a low DRC level (<2.8%) who had been enrolled in the study for at
least 5 years in order to assess the BC recurrence. RESULTS: Our 7 year
study of DRC of female cohorts in Puerto Rico has shown that women with
BC have aDRC that, on average, is 51% lower than women without BC (P <
0.001, Mann Whitney U-test). Women with low DRC have 6.8 (95%CI 5.2, 9.0)
times the odds for BC when compared with women with high DRC level. So
far, the overall BC recurrence was 17% and the 5-year mortality was 10%.
Recurrence was primarily in the lung, liver, bone, or occurred as
generalized metastatic disease. CONCLUSIONS: Using a large sample size
(n=1,183 participants), we show that women with BC had on an average a
51% lower DRC than controls (PBACKGROUND: Breast cancer (BC) is a complex
disease that is caused by multiple factors. Deficits in DNA repair
capacity (DRC) are known to cause certain familial BC, and dysregulation
of DRC develops with progressive carcinogenesis. However, the effect of
DRC on carcinogenesis of sporadic breast tumors has not been well
characterized_and the factors associated with DRC variability are still
poorly understood. DNA repair is integral to maintain genomic integrity,
and carcinogenesis occurs when efficient, effective DNA repair is
impaired. Our laboratory has just finished the recruitment of nearly
1,200 women in a seven-year molecular epidemiology study focused on the
role of DRC as a risk factor for BC. OBJECTIVE: Our aim is to present key
findings on the role of DRC as a risk factor for BC and its potential
association with BC recurrence. METHODS: A personal interview was
conducted for soliciting information on BC risk factors. Among the 493 BC
cases and 683 controls the DRC was measured in lymphocytes using a host
cell reactivation assay with a luciferase reporter gene. We stratified
the women with BC using the median of the DRC level and selected 70 women
with a low DRC level (<2.8%) who had been enrolled in the study for at
least 5 years in order to assess the BC recurrence. RESULTS: Our 7 year
study of DRC of female cohorts in Puerto Rico has shown that women with
BC have aDRC that, on average, is 51% lower than women without BC (P <
0.001, Mann Whitney U-test). Women with low DRC have 6.8 (95%CI 5.2, 9.0)
times the odds for BC when compared with women with high DRC level. So
far, the overall BC recurrence was 17% and the 5-year mortality was 10%.
Recurrence was primarily in the lung, liver, bone, or occurred as
generalized metastatic disease. CONCLUSIONS: Using a large sample size
(n=1,183 participants), we show that women with BC had on an average a
51% lower DRC than controls (P<0.001). We also present the first data on
the potential between a low DRC and risk of BC recurrence. With a larger
sample size, we will test the hypothesis that low DRC can predict risk of
BC recurrence. Supported by grants from the NCI Center to Reduce Health
Disparities through the NIH-MBRS Program grants S06 GM008239-20,
9SC1CA182846-04 to PSMHS through JM and MBRS-RISE GM082406 through CO.

