Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sorafenib increases numbers and functions of tumor-infiltrated T
cells and enhances therapeutic outcomes of adoptive T cell therapy by
modifying tumor microenvironment


Purpose: Many chemotherapeutic agents are known to have immunomodulatory
activity to improve the effectiveness of adoptive T-cell therapy. We
hypothesized that sorafenib could reverse the immunosuppression of tumor
microenvironment to enhance T-cell mediated tumor regression.Experimental
design: OVA-specific CD8+ T cells were co-cultured with
sorafenib-pretreated OVA-overexpressing E.G7 mouse lymphoma cells to
evaluate their function using flow cytometry, 51Cr-release assay, and
transwell assay. The underlying mechanism of sorafenib-mediated
immunomodulation was also explored by Western blotting. In animal
studies, the activation of OVA-specific CD8+ T cells transduced with a
granzyme B promoter-driven imaging reporter was monitored by
bioluminescence imaging and the levels of regulatory T cells (Tregs) and
myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) were assessed by flow
cytometry.Results: We found that sorafenib suppressed the expression of
critical immunosuppressive components, including TGF- , IL-10, VEGF,
indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase (IDO) and CCL2/MCP-1, in E.G7 cells through
the inhibition of STAT3 signaling pathway and decreased the percentage of
Tregs and MDSCs in tumors. Surprisingly, the anti-tumor effect of small
numbers of CD8+ T cells was substantially enhanced when combined with
sorafenib in vivo.

