Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: 6-Shogaol from dried ginger inhibits growth of prostate cancer
cells both in vitro and in vivo


Prostate cancer (PCa) is the most common non-cutaneous neoplasm and is
the second leading cause of cancer death in American men. Approximately 1
in 6 men will be diagnosed with PCa during their lifetime and about 1 in
36 will die of PCa. It is estimated that approximately 238,590 new cases
of PCa will be diagnosed and 29,720 PCa-related deaths will occur in the
United States in 2013. 6-Shogaol (6-SHO), a potent bioactive compound in
ginger (Zingiber officinale Roscoe), has been shown to possess
anti-inflammatory and anticancer activity. In the present study, the
effect of 6-SHO on the growth of PCa cell lines was investigated. 6-SHO
effectively reduced survival and induced apoptosis of cultured human
(LNCaP, DU145 and PC3) and mouse (HMVP2) PCa cell lines. Mechanistic
studies revealed that 6-SHO reduced constitutive and IL-6 induced STAT3
activation and inhibited both constitutive and TNF- induced NF-B activity
in these cell lines. In addition, 6-SHO decreased the level of several
STAT3 and NF-B regulated target genes at the protein level (including
cyclin D1, survivin and cMyc) and modulated mRNA levels of chemokine,
cytokine, cell cycle and apoptosis regulatory genes (IL-7, CCL5, BAX,
BCL2, p21 and p27). 6-SHO was more effective than two other compounds
found in ginger, 6-gingerol and 6-paradol, at reducing survival of PCa
cell lines and reducing STAT3 and NF-B signaling. 6-SHO also showed
significant tumor growth inhibitory activity in an allograft model using
HMVP2 cells. Overall, the current results lead us to suggest that 6-SHO
may have potential as a chemopreventive and/or therapeutic agent for PCa
and that further study of this compound is warranted

