Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: p53 gene expression is epigenetically regulated during replicative
senescence in keratinocytes


Cancer is one of the most prevalent age-associated diseases in elderly
populations and is largely attributed to accumulation of genetic
mutations secondary to the loss of tumor suppressive functions. p53 is a
potent tumor suppressor that is implicated in organismal aging in vivo
and replicative senescence in vitro; however, its transcriptional
regulation during replicative senescence in cells remain unclear. The
current study was undertaken to examine the epigenetic regulation of p53
transcription during replicative senescence in normal human
keratinocytes. Normal human oral keratinocytes (NHOKs) undergoing
senescence upon serial subcultures exhibited a decrease in p53 gene
expression. Methylation status of two CpG islands in the p53 promoter was
evaluated by treating with 5-aza-CdR, a demethylating agent, and by using
bisulfite methylation sequencing analysis. Status of histone modification
was evaluated using Chromatin Immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay with
anti-H3K27me3, a repressive mark, and anti-H3Ac, an active mark at the 5
different sites of the p53 promoter regions. In the presence of
5-aza-CdR, there was no increase in p53 expression in senescent NHOK at
both mRNA and protein level. Bisulfite-sequencing analysis revealed no
methylation changes at the CpG islands in the p53 promoters from young
and senescent NHOK. However, during replicative senescence in NHOK, there
were notable enrichment of anti-H3K27me3 occupancy and significant
decrease in anti-H3Ac occupancy in the p53 promoter regions, indicating
that chromatin at the p53 locus undergo compaction during replicative
senescence. Our study demonstrates that the diminution of p53 during
replicative senescence is epigenetically regulated in human keratinocytes.

