Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PLK1 promotes epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition, confers
oncogenic potential, and targets metastasis in prostate cancer


Polo-like kinase 1 (PLK1) has been well characterized as a master cell
cycle regulator and implicated in the initiation and progression of
different types of cancer and subsequently highlighted as a promising
target for cancer therapy. It is canonically regarded that PLK1
deregulation promotes cancer development via catastrophic cell cycle
events such as centrosome replication disturbance and chromosome
instability. Recently, PLK1 has been shown to act as a regulator of
cancer cell invasion, however, mechanisms underlying the effects of PLK1
on cell motility remain elusive. PLK1 is frequently upregulated in
prostate cancer (PCa) and its expression level positively correlates with
tumor grade and prognosis. Whether and how PLK1 contributes to the
development and dissemination of PCa are still need to be investigated.
Here, we showed PLK1 induces EMT in prostate epithelial cells and is
required for prostate cancer cell lines to keep mesenchymal properties.
We demonstrated that enhanced PLK1 expression transforms prostate
epithelial cells to malignancy. Moreover, we found that PLK1 promotes
invasion and is required for the metastasis of prostate cancer cells. Our
data indicate that PLK1 is an EMT player and acts as an oncogene. These
findings provide new sights into the non-mitotic function of PLK1 and
suggest PLK1 as a potential target for intervention of the metastasis of
prostate cancer.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

