Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ADAM9 regulates microRNAs expression for lung cancer metastasis


Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer death worldwide, and brain
metastasis is a major cause of morbidity and mortality in lung cancer.
Currently, it is not clear which molecules or what mechanisms mediate
lung cancer brain metastasis. To explore this question, we compared our
established brain-metastatic lung cancer sublines with their parental
cancer cells, and identified ADAM9 (a disintegrin and metalloprotease 9)
was overexpressed in metastatic sublines. Knocking down ADAM9 expression
in lung cancer cells also showed significant reduction of lung cancer
brain metastasis in vitro and in vivo. Furthermore, using a genome-wide
approach to screen ADAM9-related mRNAs and microRNAs involved in brain
metastasis, we identified that CDH2, encoding N-cadherin, was
up-regulated by ADAM9 in brain-metastatic lung cancer sublines, and the
3UTR of CDH2 contains the predicted binding sites of several microRNAs
that were down-regulated in ADAM9-overexpressed cancer cells. Luciferase
assays and western blot analysis showed that CDH2 is a target gene of
microRNAs. The up-regulation of microRNAs, in turn, reduced the
expression of its target gene and further inhibited the migration ability
of aggressive lung adenocarcinoma cells. This study revealed that ADAM9
activates CDH2 through the release of microRNA inhibition of CDH2 in lung
adenocarcinoma and plays a role in lung cancer metastasis.

