Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: JMJD3 promotes the survival of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma
subtypes via distinct mechanisms


Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL), the most common form of
non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, comprises multiple biologically and clinically
distinct subtypes including germinal centre B-cell-like (GCB) and
activated B-cell-like (ABC) DLBCL. Dysreguation of genes related with B
cell differentiation contributes to the tumorigenesis of DLBCL; the.
Jumonji domain containing-3 (JMJD3), a histone 3 Lys27 (H3K27)
demethylase, plays a known role in antigen-driven B-cell differentiation
in GCB cells. But the mechanism of JMJD3 in DLBCL progression remains
poorly uncerstood. Here we show that JMJD3 exerts an anti-apoptotic
effect in both ABC and GCB subtypes of DLBCL. The downregulation of JMJD3
increased apoptosis among DLBCL cells. In the ABC subtype, JMJD3
regulates the interferon regulatory factor 4 (IRF4) in a demethylase
activity-dependent fashion. Interestingly, IRF4 could reciprocally
regulate the expression of JMJD3, forming a positive feedback regulation
loop. The expression of IRF4 was sufficient to rescue survival induced by
the JMJD3 suppression selectively in the ABC type. In the GCB subtype,
JMJD3-mediated survival was dependent upon increased expression of the
anti-apoptotic protein BCL2. Treatment with JMJD3 siRNA could also reduce
tumor volume concordant with increased apoptosis of DLBCL cells. Our
results demonstrate a previously unrecognized role of JMJD3 in the
survival of both the ABC and GCB subtype of DLBCL and provide molecular
insight into the mechanisms by which the JMJD3-IRF4 or JMJD3-BCL2 axis
controls this process.Key words:DLBCL, apoptosis, JMJD3, IRF4, BCL2

