Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genome-wide microarray expression and genomic alteration by
array-CGH analysis in neuroblastoma stem-like cells


Neuroblastoma, the most common extracranial malignant solid tumor in
childhood has a very diverse clinical behaviour: from spontaneous
regression to a very aggressive malignant progression and resistance to
chemotherapy. This heterogeneous clinical behaviour might be due to
molecular differences in tumor cell subpopulations. The cancer stem cells
(CSC) model proposes the existence of a subpopulation within the tumor
with stem-like cell properties: a significant proliferation capacity, a
unique self-renewal capacity, and therefore, a higher ability to form new
tumors.We enriched the stem-like cell population content of two
commercial neuroblastoma cell lines (SKNDZ and SIMA) by the use of
conditioned cell culture media for neurospheres, and compared genome
expression and genomic gains and losses appearing in neurospheres versus
the alterations appearing in standard tumor cells, by microarray analysis
and array-CGH, respectively.Array-CGH did not show any significant
differences between standard and neurosphere-forming cell lines, both in
SKNDZ and in SIMA. The microarray expression analysis highlighted some of
the most relevant biological processes and molecular functions that might
be responsible for the stem-cell like phenotype. As expected, some
signalling pathways detected were involved in self-renewal of normal
tissues (Wnt, Notch, Hedgehog and TGF-) and seem to contribute to CSC
phenotype when deregulated. Among them, we focused on the aberrant
activation of Hedgehog and TGF- signalling pathways. We confirmed the
inhibition of repressors of TGF- pathway, as SMAD6 and SMAD7 by
quantitative PCR. The analysis of the Sonic Hedgehog pathway showed
overexpression of PTCH1, GLI1 and SMO. We analyzed two CSC surface
markers, and found overexpression of CD133 and CD15 in SIMA neurospheres,
confirming that this cell line was particularly enriched in stem-like
cells.This work shows a cross-talk of different pathways in
neuroblastoma, and the importance of it in stem-like cells, as confirmed
by the overexpression observed in JAG1, one of the targets of TGF- and
also the main activator of Notch signalling pathway.Further analysis
based on this work could identify possible new targets for molecular CSC
therapies against neuroblastoma, highlighting the importance of
redirecting current cancer treatments towards CSC to achieve total
elimination of tumor cell population and improve treatment effectiveness.

