Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting miR-124 inhibits growth of prostate cancer xenografts
and sensitized prostate cancer cells to anti-androgen


Increasing evidence has shown that miR-124 is a tumor suppressor and
plays an important role in pathogenesis of many types of human cancer. We
previously found that miR-124 directly targets the androgen receptor (AR)
and is significantly downregulated in clinical prostate cancer (CaP)
samples. Moreover, overexpression of miR-124 induced apoptosis and
inhibited cell proliferation and xenograft growth of CaP. In this study,
we determined whether restoration of miR-124 may represent an
adjunctively therapeutic option for CaP treatment. For this purpose,
WST-1 and clonogenic assays were performed to evaluate the effects of
miR-124 or miR-124 plus enzalutamide (one new androgen antagonist) on CaP
cell proliferation. In animal experiment, male nude mice were inoculated
s.c with CWR22 CaP cell suspensions. When tumor sizes reached 50 mm3,
mice were treated with polyethylenimines (PEI)-complexed miR-124 (i.v.,
10g/day, thrice a week for 4 weeks) or PEI-miR-124 (i.v.) plus
enzalutamide (p.o., 10mg/kg/day for 5 weeks). PEI can increase
internalization and facilitate miRNA release into cytoplasm. After
treatment, tumors were harvested for analyzing apoptosis and measuring
miR-124 target levels. In in vitro experiment, 22Rv1 cells were
separately treated with miR-124, enzalutamide or both. It was found that
the combined treatment significantly increased growth inhibition of 22Rv1
cells. In addition, we established enzalutamide-resistant 22Rv1 subline
(22Rv1-MDVR) by clone-selection in gradually increased doses (from 5M to
40M within four months). Treatment with miR-124 obviously inhibited clone
formation of 22Rv1-MDVR cells. In mice receiving miR-124 or enzalutamide
treatment, we observed tumor-inhibitory effects. However, the combination
of miR-124 and enzalutamide exhibited more significant inhibition of
tumor growth when compared to the single treatment. We examined the
expression of AR and its variant 7 (AR-V7) that are targets of miR-124.
Reduced levels of AR and AR-V7 were found in miR-124-treated tumors,
indicating that PEI facilitates entry of miR-124 into the tumor cells. We
also observed increased apoptosis in miR-124-treated tumors. Data from in
vitro and in vivo studies show that miR-124 inhibited growth of CaP cells
and sensitized CaP cells to anti-androgens, suggesting that miR-124 can
be used as an adjunctively therapeutic agent for improved CaP treatment.

