Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tcfap2c regulates growth and oncogenesis in neu-activated breast
cancer


TFAP2C and mouse homolog tcfap2c are transcription factors that play a
critical role in mammary gland development and in maintaining the luminal
breast cancer phenotype. Interestingly, several human HER2-positive
breast cancer cell lines display genetic dependency on TFAP2C. However,
the role of TFAP2C in carcinogenesis and progression in neu-activated
breast cancer remains unknown. We examined the role of tcfap2c in mammary
gland carcinogenesis by examining tumor formation in mice expressing an
activated rat neu gene using MMTV-neu with and without mammary gland
conditional knockout (KO) of tcfap2c using MMTV-Cre. The time until
spontaneous palpable tumor formation was measured in mice harboring the
neu oncogene with and without tcfap2c. Mice with homozygous conditional
deletion of tcfap2c demonstrated a significant delay in tumor formation
compared to littermate controls that retained tcfap2c expression (42 vs.
25 weeks, pTFAP2C and mouse homolog tcfap2c are transcription factors
that play a critical role in mammary gland development and in maintaining
the luminal breast cancer phenotype. Interestingly, several human
HER2-positive breast cancer cell lines display genetic dependency on
TFAP2C. However, the role of TFAP2C in carcinogenesis and progression in
neu-activated breast cancer remains unknown. We examined the role of
tcfap2c in mammary gland carcinogenesis by examining tumor formation in
mice expressing an activated rat neu gene using MMTV-neu with and without
mammary gland conditional knockout (KO) of tcfap2c using MMTV-Cre. The
time until spontaneous palpable tumor formation was measured in mice
harboring the neu oncogene with and without tcfap2c. Mice with homozygous
conditional deletion of tcfap2c demonstrated a significant delay in tumor
formation compared to littermate controls that retained tcfap2c
expression (42 vs. 25 weeks, p<0.004). Immunohistochemistry of the tumors
demonstrated a luminal phenotype; cytokeratin 8 (CK8), a luminal marker,
was more strongly expressed compared to cytokeratin 5 (CK5), a basal
marker, in tumors from both control (883 vs. 0.1 cells/HPF, pTFAP2C and
mouse homolog tcfap2c are transcription factors that play a critical role
in mammary gland development and in maintaining the luminal breast cancer
phenotype. Interestingly, several human HER2-positive breast cancer cell
lines display genetic dependency on TFAP2C. However, the role of TFAP2C
in carcinogenesis and progression in neu-activated breast cancer remains
unknown. We examined the role of tcfap2c in mammary gland carcinogenesis
by examining tumor formation in mice expressing an activated rat neu gene
using MMTV-neu with and without mammary gland conditional knockout (KO)
of tcfap2c using MMTV-Cre. The time until spontaneous palpable tumor
formation was measured in mice harboring the neu oncogene with and
without tcfap2c. Mice with homozygous conditional deletion of tcfap2c
demonstrated a significant delay in tumor formation compared to
littermate controls that retained tcfap2c expression (42 vs. 25 weeks,
p<0.004). Immunohistochemistry of the tumors demonstrated a luminal
phenotype; cytokeratin 8 (CK8), a luminal marker, was more strongly
expressed compared to cytokeratin 5 (CK5), a basal marker, in tumors from
both control (883 vs. 0.1 cells/HPF, p<0.0005) and KO animals (845 vs. 0,
pTFAP2C and mouse homolog tcfap2c are transcription factors that play a
critical role in mammary gland development and in maintaining the luminal
breast cancer phenotype. Interestingly, several human HER2-positive
breast cancer cell lines display genetic dependency on TFAP2C. However,
the role of TFAP2C in carcinogenesis and progression in neu-activated
breast cancer remains unknown. We examined the role of tcfap2c in mammary
gland carcinogenesis by examining tumor formation in mice expressing an
activated rat neu gene using MMTV-neu with and without mammary gland
conditional knockout (KO) of tcfap2c using MMTV-Cre. The time until
spontaneous palpable tumor formation was measured in mice harboring the
neu oncogene with and without tcfap2c. Mice with homozygous conditional
deletion of tcfap2c demonstrated a significant delay in tumor formation
compared to littermate controls that retained tcfap2c expression (42 vs.
25 weeks, p<0.004). Immunohistochemistry of the tumors demonstrated a
luminal phenotype; cytokeratin 8 (CK8), a luminal marker, was more
strongly expressed compared to cytokeratin 5 (CK5), a basal marker, in
tumors from both control (883 vs. 0.1 cells/HPF, p<0.0005) and KO animals
(845 vs. 0, p<0.0005). Cleaved caspase-3 (CC3) showed that apoptosis was
increased in tumors from KO compared to control animals (5 vs. 0.3
CC3-positive cells/HPF, pTFAP2C and mouse homolog tcfap2c are
transcription factors that play a critical role in mammary gland
development and in maintaining the luminal breast cancer phenotype.
Interestingly, several human HER2-positive breast cancer cell lines
display genetic dependency on TFAP2C. However, the role of TFAP2C in
carcinogenesis and progression in neu-activated breast cancer remains
unknown. We examined the role of tcfap2c in mammary gland carcinogenesis
by examining tumor formation in mice expressing an activated rat neu gene
using MMTV-neu with and without mammary gland conditional knockout (KO)
of tcfap2c using MMTV-Cre. The time until spontaneous palpable tumor
formation was measured in mice harboring the neu oncogene with and
without tcfap2c. Mice with homozygous conditional deletion of tcfap2c
demonstrated a significant delay in tumor formation compared to
littermate controls that retained tcfap2c expression (42 vs. 25 weeks,
p<0.004). Immunohistochemistry of the tumors demonstrated a luminal
phenotype; cytokeratin 8 (CK8), a luminal marker, was more strongly
expressed compared to cytokeratin 5 (CK5), a basal marker, in tumors from
both control (883 vs. 0.1 cells/HPF, p<0.0005) and KO animals (845 vs. 0,
p<0.0005). Cleaved caspase-3 (CC3) showed that apoptosis was increased in
tumors from KO compared to control animals (5 vs. 0.3 CC3-positive
cells/HPF, p<0.0008). Ki-67 showed that proliferation was decreased in KO
compared to control (348 vs. 142 cells/HPF, pTFAP2C and mouse homolog
tcfap2c are transcription factors that play a critical role in mammary
gland development and in maintaining the luminal breast cancer phenotype.
Interestingly, several human HER2-positive breast cancer cell lines
display genetic dependency on TFAP2C. However, the role of TFAP2C in
carcinogenesis and progression in neu-activated breast cancer remains
unknown. We examined the role of tcfap2c in mammary gland carcinogenesis
by examining tumor formation in mice expressing an activated rat neu gene
using MMTV-neu with and without mammary gland conditional knockout (KO)
of tcfap2c using MMTV-Cre. The time until spontaneous palpable tumor
formation was measured in mice harboring the neu oncogene with and
without tcfap2c. Mice with homozygous conditional deletion of tcfap2c
demonstrated a significant delay in tumor formation compared to
littermate controls that retained tcfap2c expression (42 vs. 25 weeks,
p<0.004). Immunohistochemistry of the tumors demonstrated a luminal
phenotype; cytokeratin 8 (CK8), a luminal marker, was more strongly
expressed compared to cytokeratin 5 (CK5), a basal marker, in tumors from
both control (883 vs. 0.1 cells/HPF, p<0.0005) and KO animals (845 vs. 0,
p<0.0005). Cleaved caspase-3 (CC3) showed that apoptosis was increased in
tumors from KO compared to control animals (5 vs. 0.3 CC3-positive
cells/HPF, p<0.0008). Ki-67 showed that proliferation was decreased in KO
compared to control (348 vs. 142 cells/HPF, p<0.009). To validate the
effects of tcfap2c, we established a cell line from a tumor obtained from
an animal expressing activated neu with homozygous floxed tcfap2c lacking
Cre expression. Paired cell lines with differential expression of tcfap2c
were established by infecting the cells with Adenovirus-Cre (Ad-Cre) or
Adenovirus-Empty (Ad-Empty). Proliferation was assessed by MTT and
demonstrated that loss of tcfap2c expression resulted in a 30% decrease
in proliferation rate (pTFAP2C and mouse homolog tcfap2c are
transcription factors that play a critical role in mammary gland
development and in maintaining the luminal breast cancer phenotype.
Interestingly, several human HER2-positive breast cancer cell lines
display genetic dependency on TFAP2C. However, the role of TFAP2C in
carcinogenesis and progression in neu-activated breast cancer remains
unknown. We examined the role of tcfap2c in mammary gland carcinogenesis
by examining tumor formation in mice expressing an activated rat neu gene
using MMTV-neu with and without mammary gland conditional knockout (KO)
of tcfap2c using MMTV-Cre. The time until spontaneous palpable tumor
formation was measured in mice harboring the neu oncogene with and
without tcfap2c. Mice with homozygous conditional deletion of tcfap2c
demonstrated a significant delay in tumor formation compared to
littermate controls that retained tcfap2c expression (42 vs. 25 weeks,
p<0.004). Immunohistochemistry of the tumors demonstrated a luminal
phenotype; cytokeratin 8 (CK8), a luminal marker, was more strongly
expressed compared to cytokeratin 5 (CK5), a basal marker, in tumors from
both control (883 vs. 0.1 cells/HPF, p<0.0005) and KO animals (845 vs. 0,
p<0.0005). Cleaved caspase-3 (CC3) showed that apoptosis was increased in
tumors from KO compared to control animals (5 vs. 0.3 CC3-positive
cells/HPF, p<0.0008). Ki-67 showed that proliferation was decreased in KO
compared to control (348 vs. 142 cells/HPF, p<0.009). To validate the
effects of tcfap2c, we established a cell line from a tumor obtained from
an animal expressing activated neu with homozygous floxed tcfap2c lacking
Cre expression. Paired cell lines with differential expression of tcfap2c
were established by infecting the cells with Adenovirus-Cre (Ad-Cre) or
Adenovirus-Empty (Ad-Empty). Proliferation was assessed by MTT and
demonstrated that loss of tcfap2c expression resulted in a 30% decrease
in proliferation rate (p<0.006). The difference in proliferation was
confirmed in vivo through xenograft experiments of these paired cell
lines inoculated into athymic (nude) mice. Mice xenografted with the
paired cell lines demonstrated that KO of tcfap2c resulted in a
significant delay in tumors reaching a 2 cm threshold requiring
euthanasia (27.8 vs. 19.8 days post-inoculation, pTFAP2C and mouse
homolog tcfap2c are transcription factors that play a critical role in
mammary gland development and in maintaining the luminal breast cancer
phenotype. Interestingly, several human HER2-positive breast cancer cell
lines display genetic dependency on TFAP2C. However, the role of TFAP2C
in carcinogenesis and progression in neu-activated breast cancer remains
unknown. We examined the role of tcfap2c in mammary gland carcinogenesis
by examining tumor formation in mice expressing an activated rat neu gene
using MMTV-neu with and without mammary gland conditional knockout (KO)
of tcfap2c using MMTV-Cre. The time until spontaneous palpable tumor
formation was measured in mice harboring the neu oncogene with and
without tcfap2c. Mice with homozygous conditional deletion of tcfap2c
demonstrated a significant delay in tumor formation compared to
littermate controls that retained tcfap2c expression (42 vs. 25 weeks,
p<0.004). Immunohistochemistry of the tumors demonstrated a luminal
phenotype; cytokeratin 8 (CK8), a luminal marker, was more strongly
expressed compared to cytokeratin 5 (CK5), a basal marker, in tumors from
both control (883 vs. 0.1 cells/HPF, p<0.0005) and KO animals (845 vs. 0,
p<0.0005). Cleaved caspase-3 (CC3) showed that apoptosis was increased in
tumors from KO compared to control animals (5 vs. 0.3 CC3-positive
cells/HPF, p<0.0008). Ki-67 showed that proliferation was decreased in KO
compared to control (348 vs. 142 cells/HPF, p<0.009). To validate the
effects of tcfap2c, we established a cell line from a tumor obtained from
an animal expressing activated neu with homozygous floxed tcfap2c lacking
Cre expression. Paired cell lines with differential expression of tcfap2c
were established by infecting the cells with Adenovirus-Cre (Ad-Cre) or
Adenovirus-Empty (Ad-Empty). Proliferation was assessed by MTT and
demonstrated that loss of tcfap2c expression resulted in a 30% decrease
in proliferation rate (p<0.006). The difference in proliferation was
confirmed in vivo through xenograft experiments of these paired cell
lines inoculated into athymic (nude) mice. Mice xenografted with the
paired cell lines demonstrated that KO of tcfap2c resulted in a
significant delay in tumors reaching a 2 cm threshold requiring
euthanasia (27.8 vs. 19.8 days post-inoculation, p<0.003). In order to
identify a potential mechanism accounting for the differences in
proliferation and delay in carcinogenesis, we identified tcfap2c target
genes by comparing the binding sites of tcfap2c by
chromatin-immunoprecipitation-sequencing (ChIP-seq) and differential
expression by microarray/RT-PCR. We identified erbb3 and egfr as two
tcfap2c target genes by ChIP-seq. KO of tcfap2c resulted in a 3-fold and
12-fold reduction in erbb3 and egfr expression, respectively (pTFAP2C and
mouse homolog tcfap2c are transcription factors that play a critical role
in mammary gland development and in maintaining the luminal breast cancer
phenotype. Interestingly, several human HER2-positive breast cancer cell
lines display genetic dependency on TFAP2C. However, the role of TFAP2C
in carcinogenesis and progression in neu-activated breast cancer remains
unknown. We examined the role of tcfap2c in mammary gland carcinogenesis
by examining tumor formation in mice expressing an activated rat neu gene
using MMTV-neu with and without mammary gland conditional knockout (KO)
of tcfap2c using MMTV-Cre. The time until spontaneous palpable tumor
formation was measured in mice harboring the neu oncogene with and
without tcfap2c. Mice with homozygous conditional deletion of tcfap2c
demonstrated a significant delay in tumor formation compared to
littermate controls that retained tcfap2c expression (42 vs. 25 weeks,
p<0.004). Immunohistochemistry of the tumors demonstrated a luminal
phenotype; cytokeratin 8 (CK8), a luminal marker, was more strongly
expressed compared to cytokeratin 5 (CK5), a basal marker, in tumors from
both control (883 vs. 0.1 cells/HPF, p<0.0005) and KO animals (845 vs. 0,
p<0.0005). Cleaved caspase-3 (CC3) showed that apoptosis was increased in
tumors from KO compared to control animals (5 vs. 0.3 CC3-positive
cells/HPF, p<0.0008). Ki-67 showed that proliferation was decreased in KO
compared to control (348 vs. 142 cells/HPF, p<0.009). To validate the
effects of tcfap2c, we established a cell line from a tumor obtained from
an animal expressing activated neu with homozygous floxed tcfap2c lacking
Cre expression. Paired cell lines with differential expression of tcfap2c
were established by infecting the cells with Adenovirus-Cre (Ad-Cre) or
Adenovirus-Empty (Ad-Empty). Proliferation was assessed by MTT and
demonstrated that loss of tcfap2c expression resulted in a 30% decrease
in proliferation rate (p<0.006). The difference in proliferation was
confirmed in vivo through xenograft experiments of these paired cell
lines inoculated into athymic (nude) mice. Mice xenografted with the
paired cell lines demonstrated that KO of tcfap2c resulted in a
significant delay in tumors reaching a 2 cm threshold requiring
euthanasia (27.8 vs. 19.8 days post-inoculation, p<0.003). In order to
identify a potential mechanism accounting for the differences in
proliferation and delay in carcinogenesis, we identified tcfap2c target
genes by comparing the binding sites of tcfap2c by
chromatin-immunoprecipitation-sequencing (ChIP-seq) and differential
expression by microarray/RT-PCR. We identified erbb3 and egfr as two
tcfap2c target genes by ChIP-seq. KO of tcfap2c resulted in a 3-fold and
12-fold reduction in erbb3 and egfr expression, respectively (p<0.05).
Taken together, these findings indicate that tcfap2c plays critical roles
in oncogenesis and progression of HER2-positive mammary cancer.

