Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: C-seco taxanes with 7, 9-linkages exhibit better activity in
drug-resistant tumor cells


Taxanes are a group of very successful MT stabilizing agents in cancer
chemotherapy, although they suffer from tumor drug resistance, which
compromises clinical efficacy. Many efforts were made in our labs to the
structural modification of paclitaxel to improve efficacy against tumor
drug resistance mediated by multiple mechanisms, with the emphasis on two
clinically relevant ones: P-glycoprotein (Pgp) and -III tubulin
overexpression. While Pgp mediated multidrug resistance has been
extensively explored and applied to the drug discovery projects, -III
tubulin overexpression related drug resistance was much less explored.The
-III tubulin isotype was found to play an important role in conferring
resistance to MT stabilizing agents only in recent decade. It has also
been identified as a survival factor in several types of cancers, thus
conferring resistance to various anticancer agents, such as MT
destabilizing agents and DNA interacting agents.We have found some high
affinity taxanes (e.g. LX2-32C, Yg-3-46a) exhibited their activity toward
Pgp efflux pump and also -III tubulin mediated drug resistance. However,
they did not show greater specificity for the -III tubulin isotype. Based
on a C-seco taxane IDN5390 which was reported to be more selectively
interacted with -III tubulin than paclitaxel, we have succeeded in the
design and synthesis of 7,9-O-linked C-seco taxanes with different
linkages. Some of them exhibited better activity than IDN5390, and the
activities were found sensitive to the structural changes of the linkers.

