Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vivo antitumor activity of PM060184 in patient-derived
xenografted tumors (avatar)


Background: PM060184 is a synthetic marine-derived compound originally
isolated from the marine sponge Lithoplocamia lithistoides. PM060184
induces disorganization and disruption of the microtubule network as well
as aberrant mitotic spindle multipolarization and chromosome
missegregation. These effects give rise to prometaphase arrest and
formation of multinucleated cells. Then, cells enter to caspase-driven
apoptosis or are arrested in a pseudo-senescent state. PM060184 is
currently under evaluation in Phase I clinical studies in patients with
advanced cancer diseases.Material and Methods: Athymic female nu/nu mice
were subcutaneously implanted with different patient-derived tumors:
NSCLC (N=4)), pancreas (N=5), colon (N=4) and gastric (N=2). Tumor (ca.
300 mm3) bearing animals (N=6-10/group) were randomly allocated to
receive PM060184 (16 mg/kg) or placebo. Treatments were administered
weekly for 5 consecutive weeks. Antitumor effect was calculated using T/C
(%), defined as a percentage of the change in tumor size for treated (T)
and placebo (C) groups during the placebo-treated survival time (D).
Complete tumor regression (CR) was defined when tumor volume Background:
PM060184 is a synthetic marine-derived compound originally isolated from
the marine sponge Lithoplocamia lithistoides. PM060184 induces
disorganization and disruption of the microtubule network as well as
aberrant mitotic spindle multipolarization and chromosome missegregation.
These effects give rise to prometaphase arrest and formation of
multinucleated cells. Then, cells enter to caspase-driven apoptosis or
are arrested in a pseudo-senescent state. PM060184 is currently under
evaluation in Phase I clinical studies in patients with advanced cancer
diseases.Material and Methods: Athymic female nu/nu mice were
subcutaneously implanted with different patient-derived tumors: NSCLC
(N=4)), pancreas (N=5), colon (N=4) and gastric (N=2). Tumor (ca. 300
mm3) bearing animals (N=6-10/group) were randomly allocated to receive
PM060184 (16 mg/kg) or placebo. Treatments were administered weekly for 5
consecutive weeks. Antitumor effect was calculated using T/C (%), defined
as a percentage of the change in tumor size for treated (T) and placebo
(C) groups during the placebo-treated survival time (D). Complete tumor
regression (CR) was defined when tumor volume < 63 mm3 for 2 or more
consecutive measurements.Results: The treatment with PM060184 produced
lowest T/C values summarized as follows:
During the treatment, complete remissions (CR) of tumors were also seen
in animals bearing the following xenografts: Pulm-005 (7 CR/7 mice),
Pulm-016 (10 CR/10 mice) and Gastric-010 (9 CR/9 mice).Conclusion: The
treatment with PM060184 demonstrated significant in vivo antitumor
activity in patient-derived xenografts of human NSCLC, pancreas, colon
and gastric tumors.

