Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BRG1-inactivating mutations as potential predictive markers for
Aurora kinase A-targeted therapies in non-small cell lung cancers (NSCLCs)


Purpose: Here, we sought to identify critical genes whose depletion and
inhibition cause differential cytotoxicity in NSCLCs with BRG1 loss in
comparison to the cells harboring wild-type BRG1.Background: The SWI/SNF
complex is a master regulator of gene expression, affecting at least 10%
of the transcriptome. Because of its crucial role in controlling cell
cycle, development, differentiation and transcription, the SWI/SNF
complex components function as tumor suppressor genes. For that reason,
not surprisingly, the ATPases BRM and BRG1 are frequently down regulated
in many cancers and mutations of BRG1 are frequently present in lung
cancer cell lines.To identify BRG1-inactivating mutation-related
targetable gene products, we developed and applied a high throughput
cell-based one-well/one-gene screening platform with a genome wide
synthetic library of chemically synthesized small interfering RNAs. Using
this approach, we have identified a molecular target (BRG1) frequently
present in lung cancer cells whose loss leads to increased sensitivity to
a class of Aurora kinase A inhibitors.Materials, Methods and Results:
BRG1-mutant NSCLC cell line H1819 was screened with the Dharmacon
genome-wide library of 22,000 pools of 4 siRNA oligonucleotides,
identifying 38 pools that were 50% more toxic than the median toxicity in
the screen, and were not toxic for wild-type BRG1-expressing HBEC30-KT
cells. Among our high-priority toxic siRNAs, a number of targeted genes
encode proteins important for the cell cycle, including RAN, and TPX2.
RAN is required for TPX2 to function in mitosis and TPX2 binds to
microtubules and activates Aurora kinase A. Individual siRNA
oligonucleotides targeting these hits in the primary screen, as well as
siRNA to Aurora kinase A, were tested and shown to inhibit the growth of
H1819 but not HBECs. In addition, H1819 cells were hypersensitive to
VX-680, an inhibitor of Aurora kinases.We then tested a panel of other
NSCLC cell lines that either expressed or did not express wild-type BRG1
for sensitivity to siRNA targeting Aurora kinase A, or VX-680. The cell
lines with loss of BRG1 were more sensitive to loss of AURKA or to VX-680
than NSCLC or HBEC cells expressing BRG1.Our current efforts focus to
expand our observations with xenograft mouse models and to deeply
understand the relationship between BRG1 and AURKA.Conclusions:
BRG1-inactivating mutations make cells dependent to RAN/TPX2-mediated
mitotic spindle assembly machinery and create targetable mitotic
vulnerabilities in NSCLCs.BRG1-mutant NSCLCs are sensitive to Aurora
kinase A-targeted treatments due to its crucial role on
RAN/TPX2-dependent mitotic spindle formation.Our current data, thus far,
suggest that wild-type BRG1-expressing cells tolerate the inhibition of
AURKA due to properly regulated and, therefore, functionally normal
centrosomes whereas BRG1 loss leads to centrosomal defects.

