Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Alternative NF-B pathway activation enhanced by deficient TRAF3 in
human papillomavirus (HPV)-associated head and neck cancer


Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) arises from the oral
cavity, pharynx and larynx, and is the 6th most common cancer worldwide.
The incidence of oropharyngeal SCC (OSCC) due to HPV is rising despite a
decline in tobacco related HNSCC. However, the molecular mechanisms
promoting HPV+ OSCC has not been clearly established. Recently, The
Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) HNSCC project revealed a higher frequency of
homozygous and heterozygous deletions in chromosome 14q32.32 associated
with lower expression of the TNF receptor-associated factor 3 (TRAF3)
gene, unique to HPV+ tumors. Deleterious nonsense and frame shift
mutations of TRAF3 are also exclusively observed in HPV+ HNSCC.
Structural interactions of TRAF3 with other signaling molecules were
modeled three dimensionally using the PRISM algorithm (PRotein
Interactions by Structural Matching). The interactions revealed that
these TRAF3 mutations abolished key inhibitory interactions at the
interface between receptors and NF-B inducing kinase (NIK) in the
alternative NF-B pathway. Consistent with TCGA findings, we found varying
TRAF3 expression in HPV+ HNSCC cell lines. Overexpression of TRAF3 in
HPV+ cell lines suppressed the alternative NF-B pathway and p52/p100
nuclear localization, and key target genes, while increasing expression
of IFN genes implicated in anti-viral immunity. Further, overexpression
of TRAF3 inhibited cell growth, colony formation, and migration, as well
as sensitized cells to TNF- and cisplatin induced cell death. Our data
reveal that decreased TRAF3 promotes the malignant phenotype via
alternative NF-B signaling, and attenuates antiviral IFN expression,
important in pathogenesis of HPV+ HNSCC.Supported by NIDCD intramural
project ZIA-DC-000016, 73, 74

