Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Circulating tumor cells in metastatic lung cancer enriched by
EpCAM expression and physical characteristics


Introduction: Circulating tumor cells (CTC) measured with the CellSearch
system in patients with metastatic carcinomas are associated with poor
survival. The frequency of CTC detected by the CellSearch system in
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients is relatively low, raising
the question whether some CTC are not detected by the CellSearch system.
To investigate this, additional antibodies were added to broaden the
coverage of cytokeratins and leukocytes. Additionally, a device was
designed that collects the sample material of the individual samples that
are discarded by CellSearch. This collected waste is filtered for CTC
isolation based on physical characteristics and the CTC are stained with
a cocktail of antibodies.Methods: A device was designed that uses optical
sensing to detect the presence of blood in the waste tube of the
CellTracks Autoprep. It collects the waste of individual samples in a 50
mL conical tube. After collection the blood is passed with 100 mbar
pressure through a 8x8 mm2 microfabricated silicon microsieve containing
300,000 pores of 5 m in diameter (VyCAP, Deventer, The Netherlands). The
performance was tested using four pre-stained cell lines: Colo320 (size
11 m, 1,616 EpCAM antigens), SW480 (size 11 m, 63,233 EpCAM antigens),
T24 (size 16 m, 2,167 EpCAM antigens) and SKBR3 (size 16 m, 445,000 EpCAM
antigens). Cells are spiked in 7.5 mL of blood collected in CellSave
tubes from healthy volunteers. Spiked blood samples from healthy donors
and patients with NCSLC and small cell lung cancer (SCLC) (enrollment is
ongoing) were processed on the CellSearch and filtration system between
24 and 96 hours of collection. The cells on the microsieves were stained
with a nucleic acid dye, antibodies recognizing leukocytes and all
cytokeratins. Additional antibodies were added to the CellSearch test to
cover all cytokeratins and broaden the coverage of leukocytes.Results:
The recovery percentage of the CellSearch system for the different cell
lines used was: 2% of COLO320, 91% of SW480, 2% of T24 and 87% of SKBR3.
Additional recovery on the microsieves after filtration of the CellSearch
waste was: 18% of COLO320, 6% of SW480, 59% of T24 and 2% of SKBR3. The
combined recovery accounts for 20% of COLO320, 97% of SW480, 61% of T24
cells and 89% of SKBR3. In patients with NSCLC and SCLC either no CTC
were detected at all, or in various proportions in the CellSearch
cartridge, on the microsieves after filtration of the CellSearch waste or
with the additional antibodies that were added.Conclusions: We combined
the CellSearch system with a device for collecting and filtering the
CellSearch waste. On cell lines this demonstrated that a low EpCAM
expression results in the presence of CTC in the waste that would not be
detected by the CellSearch system. In both NSCLC and SCLC additional CTC
can be detected but it still remains to be determined whether the CTC not
detected by the original CellSearch approach are also of clinical
relevance.

