Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cycloartane anticancer activity


New cancer diagnoses remain on the rise despite significant improvements
in early detection and treatment. The role of Kinases in cancer onset and
progression has made kinases a target for the control of some cancers.
The MRCK/ kinases have recently been implicated in cancer onset and
progression and as such could serve as a potential drug target. The
discovery that kinases are most effectively inhibited by small molecules
has also resulted in an increased search for small molecule kinase
inhibitors. Cycloartanes are small molecules found in many medicinal
plants including the Jamaican Ball Moss (Tillandsia recurvata). Recent
studies on T. recurvata have demonstrated that it possesses significant
anticancer activity. Cycloartane-3,24,25-triol, an analog of a
cycloartane identified in Ball moss was also shown to have inhibitory
activity against MRCK kinase. This study was as such set up to determine
the MRCK/ kinase inhibition activity of other cycloartanes in Ball Moss
and their analogs. The kinase inhibitory activity of 6 cycloartanes was
investigated using the ligand-kinase binding assay while the WST-1
reagent assay was used to determine the antiproliferative activity of the
cycloartanes against some prostate and breast cancer cell lines.
Cycloart-23-ene-3,25-diol (1), Cycloartane-3,24,25-triol (2),
Cycloart-25-ene-3,24-diol (3), 3,23-Dioxo-9,19-cyclolanost-24-en-26-oic
acid (4), 24,25-Dihydroxycycloartan-3-one (5) inhibited the MRCK kinase
with Kd of 0.21 M, 0.25M, 0.36 M, 3.0 M, and 2.1 M respectively.
Hydroxycycloart-23-en-3-one,25, (6) showed no inhibition against the MRCK
kinase. Compounds 1, 3, 4, 5 inhibited the MRCK kinase with Kd of 4.7 M,
1.10 M, 3.2 M, and 9.8 M, respectively. Three of the six cycloartanes
exhibited antiproliferation activity against two prostate and breast
cancer cell lines each.In conclusion, cycloart-23-ene-3,25-diol (1)
showed the most promising activity against the MRCK/ kinase out of the 6
cycloartanes screened demonstrating an interesting structure activity
relationship profile when compared with the other molecules.
Cycloart-23-ene-3,25-diol (1) deserves further studies to determine its
in vivo efficacy and safety.

