Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of a sensitive assay for measuring pharmacodynamic
modulation of c-Met in biopsies


Introduction: MSC2156119J, a highly selective, potent, reversible,
ATP-competitive c-Met inhibitor currently under clinical testing,
efficiently inhibits c-Met phosphorylation and downstream signaling in
vivo and induces regression of established tumors in xenograft models in
preclinical studies (Bladt et al. Clin Cancer Res. 2013;19:2941-51). One
initial event following c-Met activation is Y1234/35 phosphorylation in
the activation loop of the kinase domain. This results in kinase
activation and triggers phosphorylation of tyrosine residues in the c-Met
C-terminal tail (eg, Y1349), creating multifunctional docking sites for
intracellular adapters. The development of an assay allowing the
measurement of these phospho-c-Met epitopes in tumor biopsies will be
crucial for establishing an optimal biologic dose for MSC2156119J.
Methods: We describe here the development of a highly sensitive Luminex
assay that can reliably and reproducibly measure the phosphorylation
state of Y1234/35 and Y1349 residues of the c-Met receptor. The high
sensitivity of the assay was confirmed by measuring the phospho-c-Met
levels in biopsies from patients before and during MSC2156119J treatment.
Results: We first assessed the stability of phosphorylated Y1234/35 and
Y1349 epitopes in preclinical tumor samples. Analyses revealed that the
total c-Met protein is rather stable over time, while the phospho-c-Met
epitopes Y1234/35 and Y1349 are relatively unstable; their detection
requires rapid processing of tumor samples derived from preclinical
tumors or from patients. In tumor samples derived from human xenografts
treated with MSC2156119J, Y1349 phosphorylation inhibition varied in
different tumor models and did not show strong dose dependence. In
contrast, phosphorylation of Y1234/35 residues was effectively inhibited
by MSC2156119J in all tumor models tested. Based on these findings,
phosphorylation of c-Met Y1234/35 was also assessed in tumor biopsies
from patients treated with MSC2156119J in the first-in-man trial
(NCT01014936; Falchook et al. J Clin Oncol. 2013;31(suppl):2506). When
compared to pretreatment tumor biopsies, on-treatment samples showed
effective, dose-dependent inhibition of >90% of c-Met Y1234/35
phosphorylation. Conclusions: We successfully developed an assay capable
of detecting phosphorylation of the c-Met Y1234/35 epitope, which is
crucial for c-Met activation. Using this assay on tumor samples from
xenograft models and on patient-derived tumor biopsies, we demonstrated
that MSC2156119J inhibits phosphorylation of c-Met Y1234/35 in a
dose-dependent fashion. Therefore, phosphorylation of c-Met Y1234/35 can
be used as a pharmacodynamic biomarker of c-Met inhibition and will be an
important and valuable element for the selection of the optimal biologic
dose of MSC2156119J.

