Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: N-acetylcysteine chemoprotection without decreased cisplatin
antitumor efficacy in pediatric tumor models


PURPOSE. Cisplatin chemotherapy is used in the treatment of many
pediatric cancers, but has significant toxicities that impact patient
quality of life. Decreasing oxidative damage with the anti-oxidant agent
N-acetylcysteine (NAC) can reduce cisplatin side effects; however its use
is limited by concerns about decreased anti-tumor efficacy. This study
evaluated the effect of the timing of NAC on cisplatin efficacy in vitro
and in rat models of human pediatric cancers. METHODS. Female athymic
nude rats received subcutaneous implantation of human SK-N-AS
neuroblastoma cells or intra-cerebellar implantation of human D283-MED
medulloblastoma cells. Rats were untreated or treated with cisplatin (3
or 4 mg/kg IV) with or without NAC (1000 mg/kg IV) 30 min before or 4 h
after cisplatin treatment. Blood urea nitrogen (BUN) and tumor volumes
were measured. Viability and apoptosis were assessed in vitro in both
cell types. RESULTS. NAC was protective against cisplatin toxicity in
both SK-N-AS and D283-MED cells in vitro if added within 2 h after
chemotherapy. Untreated SK-N-AS neuroblastoma subcutaneous tumor volumes
increased by 17.7 4.9 fold over 2 weeks, with final tumor weight of 4.3
1.6 g. Cisplatin decreased relative tumor growth to 6.4 2.5 fold over
baseline (PPURPOSE. Cisplatin chemotherapy is used in the treatment of
many pediatric cancers, but has significant toxicities that impact
patient quality of life. Decreasing oxidative damage with the
anti-oxidant agent N-acetylcysteine (NAC) can reduce cisplatin side
effects; however its use is limited by concerns about decreased
anti-tumor efficacy. This study evaluated the effect of the timing of NAC
on cisplatin efficacy in vitro and in rat models of human pediatric
cancers. METHODS. Female athymic nude rats received subcutaneous
implantation of human SK-N-AS neuroblastoma cells or intra-cerebellar
implantation of human D283-MED medulloblastoma cells. Rats were untreated
or treated with cisplatin (3 or 4 mg/kg IV) with or without NAC (1000
mg/kg IV) 30 min before or 4 h after cisplatin treatment. Blood urea
nitrogen (BUN) and tumor volumes were measured. Viability and apoptosis
were assessed in vitro in both cell types. RESULTS. NAC was protective
against cisplatin toxicity in both SK-N-AS and D283-MED cells in vitro if
added within 2 h after chemotherapy. Untreated SK-N-AS neuroblastoma
subcutaneous tumor volumes increased by 17.7 4.9 fold over 2 weeks, with
final tumor weight of 4.3 1.6 g. Cisplatin decreased relative tumor
growth to 6.4 2.5 fold over baseline (P<0.0001) with final tumor weight
of 1.7 0.9 g. Pretreatment with NAC significantly decreased cisplatin
efficacy (tumor volume 15.0 4.8 fold over baseline, not different from
untreated control), while 4 h delayed NAC did not significantly affect
cisplatin anti-tumor effects (relative tumor volume 6.8 2.0 fold
baseline, PPURPOSE. Cisplatin chemotherapy is used in the treatment of
many pediatric cancers, but has significant toxicities that impact
patient quality of life. Decreasing oxidative damage with the
anti-oxidant agent N-acetylcysteine (NAC) can reduce cisplatin side
effects; however its use is limited by concerns about decreased
anti-tumor efficacy. This study evaluated the effect of the timing of NAC
on cisplatin efficacy in vitro and in rat models of human pediatric
cancers. METHODS. Female athymic nude rats received subcutaneous
implantation of human SK-N-AS neuroblastoma cells or intra-cerebellar
implantation of human D283-MED medulloblastoma cells. Rats were untreated
or treated with cisplatin (3 or 4 mg/kg IV) with or without NAC (1000
mg/kg IV) 30 min before or 4 h after cisplatin treatment. Blood urea
nitrogen (BUN) and tumor volumes were measured. Viability and apoptosis
were assessed in vitro in both cell types. RESULTS. NAC was protective
against cisplatin toxicity in both SK-N-AS and D283-MED cells in vitro if
added within 2 h after chemotherapy. Untreated SK-N-AS neuroblastoma
subcutaneous tumor volumes increased by 17.7 4.9 fold over 2 weeks, with
final tumor weight of 4.3 1.6 g. Cisplatin decreased relative tumor
growth to 6.4 2.5 fold over baseline (P<0.0001) with final tumor weight
of 1.7 0.9 g. Pretreatment with NAC significantly decreased cisplatin
efficacy (tumor volume 15.0 4.8 fold over baseline, not different from
untreated control), while 4 h delayed NAC did not significantly affect
cisplatin anti-tumor effects (relative tumor volume 6.8 2.0 fold
baseline, P<0.001). For the D283-MED medulloblastoma brain tumors,
cisplatin decreased final tumor volume to 3.9 2.3 mm3 compared to
untreated tumor volume of 45.9 38.7 (P = 0.008). When NAC was given prior
to cisplatin tumor volume did not differ from untreated control (13.3
23.1 mm3, P = 0.060). Delayed NAC was not significantly different than
cisplatin alone (tumor volume 6.8 8.1 mm3, P = 0.014 versus control). Two
doses of cisplatin increased BUN levels to 57.3 19.9 mg/dL at 7 days
after treatment, compared to 18.9 2.0 in untreated control rats
(PPURPOSE. Cisplatin chemotherapy is used in the treatment of many
pediatric cancers, but has significant toxicities that impact patient
quality of life. Decreasing oxidative damage with the anti-oxidant agent
N-acetylcysteine (NAC) can reduce cisplatin side effects; however its use
is limited by concerns about decreased anti-tumor efficacy. This study
evaluated the effect of the timing of NAC on cisplatin efficacy in vitro
and in rat models of human pediatric cancers. METHODS. Female athymic
nude rats received subcutaneous implantation of human SK-N-AS
neuroblastoma cells or intra-cerebellar implantation of human D283-MED
medulloblastoma cells. Rats were untreated or treated with cisplatin (3
or 4 mg/kg IV) with or without NAC (1000 mg/kg IV) 30 min before or 4 h
after cisplatin treatment. Blood urea nitrogen (BUN) and tumor volumes
were measured. Viability and apoptosis were assessed in vitro in both
cell types. RESULTS. NAC was protective against cisplatin toxicity in
both SK-N-AS and D283-MED cells in vitro if added within 2 h after
chemotherapy. Untreated SK-N-AS neuroblastoma subcutaneous tumor volumes
increased by 17.7 4.9 fold over 2 weeks, with final tumor weight of 4.3
1.6 g. Cisplatin decreased relative tumor growth to 6.4 2.5 fold over
baseline (P<0.0001) with final tumor weight of 1.7 0.9 g. Pretreatment
with NAC significantly decreased cisplatin efficacy (tumor volume 15.0
4.8 fold over baseline, not different from untreated control), while 4 h
delayed NAC did not significantly affect cisplatin anti-tumor effects
(relative tumor volume 6.8 2.0 fold baseline, P<0.001). For the D283-MED
medulloblastoma brain tumors, cisplatin decreased final tumor volume to
3.9 2.3 mm3 compared to untreated tumor volume of 45.9 38.7 (P = 0.008).
When NAC was given prior to cisplatin tumor volume did not differ from
untreated control (13.3 23.1 mm3, P = 0.060). Delayed NAC was not
significantly different than cisplatin alone (tumor volume 6.8 8.1 mm3, P
= 0.014 versus control). Two doses of cisplatin increased BUN levels to
57.3 19.9 mg/dL at 7 days after treatment, compared to 18.9 2.0 in
untreated control rats (P<0.001). Both pretreatment or delayed treatment
with NAC decreased BUN compared to cisplatin alone (25.3 6.8 and 27.9 7.5
respectively, PPURPOSE. Cisplatin chemotherapy is used in the treatment
of many pediatric cancers, but has significant toxicities that impact
patient quality of life. Decreasing oxidative damage with the
anti-oxidant agent N-acetylcysteine (NAC) can reduce cisplatin side
effects; however its use is limited by concerns about decreased
anti-tumor efficacy. This study evaluated the effect of the timing of NAC
on cisplatin efficacy in vitro and in rat models of human pediatric
cancers. METHODS. Female athymic nude rats received subcutaneous
implantation of human SK-N-AS neuroblastoma cells or intra-cerebellar
implantation of human D283-MED medulloblastoma cells. Rats were untreated
or treated with cisplatin (3 or 4 mg/kg IV) with or without NAC (1000
mg/kg IV) 30 min before or 4 h after cisplatin treatment. Blood urea
nitrogen (BUN) and tumor volumes were measured. Viability and apoptosis
were assessed in vitro in both cell types. RESULTS. NAC was protective
against cisplatin toxicity in both SK-N-AS and D283-MED cells in vitro if
added within 2 h after chemotherapy. Untreated SK-N-AS neuroblastoma
subcutaneous tumor volumes increased by 17.7 4.9 fold over 2 weeks, with
final tumor weight of 4.3 1.6 g. Cisplatin decreased relative tumor
growth to 6.4 2.5 fold over baseline (P<0.0001) with final tumor weight
of 1.7 0.9 g. Pretreatment with NAC significantly decreased cisplatin
efficacy (tumor volume 15.0 4.8 fold over baseline, not different from
untreated control), while 4 h delayed NAC did not significantly affect
cisplatin anti-tumor effects (relative tumor volume 6.8 2.0 fold
baseline, P<0.001). For the D283-MED medulloblastoma brain tumors,
cisplatin decreased final tumor volume to 3.9 2.3 mm3 compared to
untreated tumor volume of 45.9 38.7 (P = 0.008). When NAC was given prior
to cisplatin tumor volume did not differ from untreated control (13.3
23.1 mm3, P = 0.060). Delayed NAC was not significantly different than
cisplatin alone (tumor volume 6.8 8.1 mm3, P = 0.014 versus control). Two
doses of cisplatin increased BUN levels to 57.3 19.9 mg/dL at 7 days
after treatment, compared to 18.9 2.0 in untreated control rats
(P<0.001). Both pretreatment or delayed treatment with NAC decreased BUN
compared to cisplatin alone (25.3 6.8 and 27.9 7.5 respectively,
P<0.001). We conclude that NAC protects against kidney toxicity without
impacting cisplatin therapy, if delayed until 4 h after chemotherapy.
These data support a clinical trial of delayed NAC to reduce chemotherapy
toxicities in children with cancer.

