Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Recurrent DICER1 hotspot mutations in endometrial cancer and their
impact on microRNA biogenesis


Alternation in genes associated with microRNA (miRNA) biogenesis pathway
may lead to miRNA dysregulation, and is implicated in a variety of human
malignancies. Previously our group identified recurrent somatic hotspot
mutations (E1705, D1709, D1810, E1813) in a critical miRNA-processing
gene, DICER1, in rare sex cord-stromal tumors. During miRNA biogenesis,
the two RNase III domains of DICER1 form an intramolecular dimer, which
leads to the cleavage of the precursor miRNA (pre-miRNA) hairpin and
generate mature 5p and 3p miRNAs from 5 and 3 arms of the precursor
hairpin respectively. Studies have shown that the hotspot mutations in
the RNase IIIb metal binding domain could impair DICER1's ability to
generate mature 5p miRNAs, leading to global loss of 5p miRNAs.Recently,
in collaboration with The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA), we identified
DICER1 hotspot mutations in a small subset of endometrial cancer from
TCGA cohort (6/248) as well as our own tumor bank (6/307), suggesting
disruption of DICER1 is implicated in a common malignancy. We also found
an additional recurrent mutation G1809R and demonstrated that it has
similar detrimental effects on miRNA biogenesis as hotspot mutations
through deep sequencing and realtime PCR. Using Illumina Miseq targeted
resequencing and Sanger sequencing, we observed biallelic DICER1
mutations in RNase IIIb domain in some but not all cases. miRNA deep
sequencing confirmed that 5p miRNAs are decreased in both cell line
models and endometrial tumors with hotspot mutations. Bioinformatic
analysis of RNA sequencing profiles from TCGA dataset predicted hotspot
DICER1 mutations to have greater functional impact than non-hotspot
DICER1 mutations on gene expression. The oncogenic properties of DICER1
hotspot mutations are currently under investigation.

