Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The Mdm2 inhibitor, NVP-CGM097, in combination with the BRAF
inhibitor NVP-LGX818 elicits synergistic antitumor effects in melanoma


RAF kinase inhibitors have shown substantial therapeutic effects in
patients with BRAF-mutant melanoma. However, despite impressive initial
responses, therapeutic effects are often temporary due to acquired
resistance. This resistance highlights the need to identify therapeutic
approaches to improve the durability of responses to RAF inhibitors. In
this study, we demonstrate that a novel inhibitor of p53-Mdm2
interaction, NVP-CGM097, causes marked reduction of melanoma cell
viability. The activation of p53 signaling and consequent reduction in
cell viability required wild-type p53, but was independent of BRAF
status. Moreover, combined inhibition of Mdm2, using NVP-CGM097, and BRAF
using NVP-LGX818, synergistically inhibited the viability of BRAF mutant
melanoma cells in vitro and tumor growth in vivo. NVP-CGM097 caused
induction of p21 and Bax, while NVP-LGX818 did not. Instead, NVP-LGX818
caused induction of p27 and Bim. Therefore, together they induced a
complementary set of anti-proliferative and apoptosis stimulating
molecules, which resulted in strong synergistic antitumor effects. In
vivo, the combination treatment resulted in sustained tumor regressions
and markedly prolonged survival relative to either single agent.
Collectively, these data show that activation of p53, through inhibition
of Mdm2, leads to antitumor effects in melanoma. Furthermore, the data
show that concomitant activation of tumor suppressor p53 and inhibition
of BRAF synergistically suppresses melanoma growth. Therefore, combined
inhibition of Mdm2 and BRAF in melanoma may provide an effective
therapeutic modality capable of overcoming the resistance observed with
the BRAF inhibitor monotherapy and thus lead to more durable responses in
the clinic.

