Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vitro and in vivo evaluation of SNG1153, a synthetic modulator
of ER-36


Background: ER-36, a novel truncated variant of estrogen receptor , was
recently discovered and extensively studied as a potential therapeutic
target. ER-36 was found to be overexpressed in many cancers including
estrogen-positive and negative breast cancer, lung cancer, prostate
cancer, endometrial cancer, liver cancer and other cancers. This suggests
that ER-36 is potentially a promising target for the development of novel
anticancer agents with broader clinical applications. This study aims to
evaluate the in vitro and in vivo performance of SNG1153, an orally
available, synthetic modulator of ER-36. Methods: the viabilities of
ER-36 overexpressed cancer cells were evaluated using a CCK-8 assay after
exposure to SNG1153. Pharmacokinetic study was conducted in rat and
SNG1153 was administered orally in escalated doses. In-vivo efficacies of
SNG1153 were evaluated in Bcap-37 xenograft model, Ishikawa xenograft
model and SPC-A-1 xenograft model. Results: SNG1153 showed significant
inhibition at low micromolar concentrations in ER-36 overexpressed cell
lines including the one resistant to tamoxifen. SNG1153 exhibited a
linear PK profile with a bioavailability of more than 55% in the rat PK
study. In the in-vivo efficacy studies, 3 doses were investigated and
SNG1153 showed dose-dependent inhibition. The tumor growth inhibition at
high dose was 57% in the breast cancer Bcap-37 xenograft model, 65% in
the endometrial cancer Ishikawa xenograft model and 52% in lung
adenocarcinoma SPC-A-1 xenograft model. No signs of toxicity were
observed in these models. Conclusion: SNG1153, as a synthetic ER-36
modulator, showed promising activities in many in vitro and in vivo
models. It is currently in preclinical development stage.

