Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Connexin 43 suppresses tumor angiogenesis by downregulation of
vascular endothelial growth factor


Gap junction intercellular communication (GJIC), which is performed by
connexins, is crucial in the regulation of cellular functions. Connexin
43 (Cx43) is a general isoform expressed in most epithelial tissues
especially in astrocytes. There were some studies indicated that Cx43
played a tumor suppressor which has been found in human tumors compared
with adjacent normal tissues. Otherwise, there were some evidences showed
that Cx43 overexpression affected metastasis. However, Cx43 plays a
controversial role in tumor progression. Hypoxia, a hallmark of many
solid tumors, is associated with angiogenesis and tumor progression. It
activates a signal cascade that culminates in the stabilization of
hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF-1) transcription factor and activation of
genes that possess hypoxia response elements (HRE). Herein, the loss of
Cx43 was shown to stabilize HIF-1, which is overexpressed in a majority
of cancers and its overexpression correlates with poor prognosis and
treatment failure. Meanwhile, we examined HIF-1 expression and activities
in cancer cells with various Cx43 statuses. Loss of Cx43 expression in
cancer cells resulted in increased HIF-1-dependent transcriptional
activity and protein expression. In this study, we also found that Cx43
down-regulated VEGF and inhibited endothelial cell proliferation. Further
work is warranted to understand the molecular mechanism leading to Cx43
effects by antiangiogenic signal pathway.

