Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Carbon ion radiotherapy for recurrent basal cell carcinoma:
preliminary report of six cases and review of the literature


AbstractBackground: Basal cell carcinoma (BCC) is the most common
malignant skin carcinoma. Although mortality is low as BCC rarely
metastasizes, this malignancy has a tendency for local recurrence. As
such, it is of great practical utility to assess which is the best
therapeutic choice in the management of BCC recurring after different
treatments. Here, we describe six cases of recurrent BCC treated with
carbon ion radiotherapy and review the cases previously reported in the
literature.Methods: Case records of six patients with biopsy-proved,
recurrent BCC, who were given total doses of 60-70 GyE, administered in
6-11 fractions over 6-11 days, with a fraction dose of 7-10 GyE in the
therapy terminal at Heavy Ion Research Facility in Lanzhou (HIRFL) at the
Institute of Modern Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences (IMP-CAS),
China, were retrospectively reviewed.Results: Tumor response rate was
100%, including 6 CR, at 12 months after completion of carbon ion
radiation. In a minimum follow-up period of 55 months, overall survival
and no recurrence were achieved. No grade 3 or higher toxicity and
complication occurred.Conclusions: Carbon ion radiotherapy is well
tolerated and should be considered as a potential salvage modality for
recurrent BCC in certain cases.Note: This abstract was not presented at
the meeting.

