Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Met target inhibition-guided efficacy in preclinical models


Background: A direct comparison of drug efficacy for the multiple agents
currently in clinical development targeting MET-driven cancers would be
useful for the selection of optimal treatment options. Previously, we
utilized validated MET pharmacodynamic (PD) assays to compare the time
course of phosphorylated-MET (pMET) suppression for five MET inhibitors
(ASCO 2013). In the current study, we selected three candidates that
demonstrated potent MET inhibition to compare anti-tumor
efficacy.Methods: PD time course and tumor PK data were utilized to
simulate a dosing schedule anticipated to produce >90% pMET suppression
in a SNU5 gastric cancer xenograft model. From these data, dosing
schedules of 44 mg/kg (Q12H) cabozantinib, 12.5 mg/kg (Q12H) EMD1214063,
and 16.5 mg/kg (QD) foretinib were chosen to achieve necessary tumor
exposure to suppress pMET. Once tumors reached a 15050 mm3 size, drugs
were administered continuously for 21 days and tumor volumes were
measured intermittently for 62 days. To measure pMET suppression, tumor
quadrants were collected at 4, 12, and 24 hrs from all treatment groups
after dose 1 (day 1) and on day 8 (after dose 8 of foretinib or dose 14
of cabozantinib and EMD1214063).Results: Intact MET levels (pM/g protein)
were approximately 70% lower than vehicle controls at all day 8
collection points for all three drugs. The pY1234/35MET/MET ratios were
89%-99% (pBackground: A direct comparison of drug efficacy for the
multiple agents currently in clinical development targeting MET-driven
cancers would be useful for the selection of optimal treatment options.
Previously, we utilized validated MET pharmacodynamic (PD) assays to
compare the time course of phosphorylated-MET (pMET) suppression for five
MET inhibitors (ASCO 2013). In the current study, we selected three
candidates that demonstrated potent MET inhibition to compare anti-tumor
efficacy.Methods: PD time course and tumor PK data were utilized to
simulate a dosing schedule anticipated to produce >90% pMET suppression
in a SNU5 gastric cancer xenograft model. From these data, dosing
schedules of 44 mg/kg (Q12H) cabozantinib, 12.5 mg/kg (Q12H) EMD1214063,
and 16.5 mg/kg (QD) foretinib were chosen to achieve necessary tumor
exposure to suppress pMET. Once tumors reached a 15050 mm3 size, drugs
were administered continuously for 21 days and tumor volumes were
measured intermittently for 62 days. To measure pMET suppression, tumor
quadrants were collected at 4, 12, and 24 hrs from all treatment groups
after dose 1 (day 1) and on day 8 (after dose 8 of foretinib or dose 14
of cabozantinib and EMD1214063).Results: Intact MET levels (pM/g protein)
were approximately 70% lower than vehicle controls at all day 8
collection points for all three drugs. The pY1234/35MET/MET ratios were
89%-99% (p<0.001) lower than vehicle controls on day 8 at 4 and 12 hrs
post-dose for all three drugs. Compared to pretreatment levels, tumor
volumes were reduced by 80-90% for all three drugs within 10-15 days post
therapy and remained regressed until 13-20 days after treatment was
stopped. Tumors then slowly regrew, but remained approximately 80%
smaller than the vehicle group on day 62 (end of study).Conclusions:
These studies demonstrate that PD response-guided regimens delivered drug
doses that were lower than efficacious doses described previously (except
cabozantinib), but effectively reduced tumor volume in SNU5 xenografts.
The three MET inhibitors showed comparable anti-tumor efficacy when
accompanied by equivalent pMET inhibition. Our data also affirms the
utility of the MET PD assays to guide dose ranging studies. Funded by NCI
Contract No HHSN261200800001E.

