Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: 6-c-(e-phenylethenyl)-naringenin suppresses colorectal cancer
growth by inhibiting cyclooxygenase-1


Recent clinical trials raised concerns regarding the cardiovascular
toxicity of selective cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) inhibitors therefore COX-1
is now being reconsidered as a target for chemoprevention. Our aim was to
examine whether selective COX-1 inhibition could delay or prevent cancer
development and clarify the underlying mechanisms. Data clearly showed
that COX-1 was required for maintenance of malignant characteristics of
colon cancer cells or tumor promoter(s)-induced transformation of
pre-neoplastic cells. We also successfully applied a ligand docking
computational method to identify a novel selective COX-1 inhibitor,
6-C-(E-phenylethenyl)-naringenin (designated herein as 6CEPN). 6CEPN
could bind to COX-1 and specifically inhibit its activity both in vitro
and ex vivo. In colorectal cancer cells, it suppressed
anchorage-independent growth by inhibiting COX-1 activity. 6CEPN also
effectively suppressed tumor growth in a 28-day colon cancer xenograft
model without any obvious systemic toxicity. Taken together, COX-1 plays
a critical role in human colorectal carcinogenesis, and the specific
COX-1 inhibitor merits further investigation as a potential preventive
agent against colorectal cancer.Keywords: colon cancer; natural product;
cyclooxygenases; signal transductionNote: This abstract was not presented
at the meeting.

