Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TF-FVIIa activates VEGF-A secretion in ovarian epithelial cancer
cell line via a PAR-2-dependent mechanism


Background and Objective: Venous thromboembolism (VTE) is intrinsic to
the biology of EOC. Progression of malignancy is associated with
increased tissue factor (TF) expression. Formation of the TF-factor VIIa
(FVIIa) complex triggers local thrombin generation, with thrombin
activating protease activated receptor-1 (PAR-1). The TF-FVIIa complex
also triggers intracellular signaling via phosphorylation of the TF
C-terminus and activation of PAR-2. Although PAR-2 analysis in ovarian
cancer has been limited, PAR-2 activation in renal cell carcinoma is
associated with MAPK signaling pathway activation and induction of growth
factor release. We hypothesize that TF-FVIIa dependent activation of
PAR-2 on EOC cells up-regulates expression of angiogenic mediators
(VEGF-A) that modify the peritoneal microenvironment, enhancing vascular
leakage and ascites formation.Methods: TF antigen expression in EOC cell
lines (CaOV-3, SKOV-3 & OvCAR-3) was determined by western blot (WB)
analysis. TF-bearing microparticles were isolated from conditioned media
by differential centrifugation (20,800 g) and TF coagulant activity was
detected by factor X activation. VEGF-A levels in conditioned media were
determined by ELISA. Proliferation of the SKOV-3 and OVCAR-3 cell lines
in response to thrombin (PAR-1 agonist) was determined via direct cell
count.Results: WB analysis of EOC cell line lysates demonstrated PAR-2
expression (CaOV-3>OvCAR-3>>SKOV-3), and exposure of SKOV-3 and OVCAR-3
cells to 50 nM FVIIa resulted in 3-fold induction of VEGF-A release over
48 hr relative to untreated cells (pBackground and Objective: Venous
thromboembolism (VTE) is intrinsic to the biology of EOC. Progression of
malignancy is associated with increased tissue factor (TF) expression.
Formation of the TF-factor VIIa (FVIIa) complex triggers local thrombin
generation, with thrombin activating protease activated receptor-1
(PAR-1). The TF-FVIIa complex also triggers intracellular signaling via
phosphorylation of the TF C-terminus and activation of PAR-2. Although
PAR-2 analysis in ovarian cancer has been limited, PAR-2 activation in
renal cell carcinoma is associated with MAPK signaling pathway activation
and induction of growth factor release. We hypothesize that TF-FVIIa
dependent activation of PAR-2 on EOC cells up-regulates expression of
angiogenic mediators (VEGF-A) that modify the peritoneal
microenvironment, enhancing vascular leakage and ascites
formation.Methods: TF antigen expression in EOC cell lines (CaOV-3,
SKOV-3 & OvCAR-3) was determined by western blot (WB) analysis.
TF-bearing microparticles were isolated from conditioned media by
differential centrifugation (20,800 g) and TF coagulant activity was
detected by factor X activation. VEGF-A levels in conditioned media were
determined by ELISA. Proliferation of the SKOV-3 and OVCAR-3 cell lines
in response to thrombin (PAR-1 agonist) was determined via direct cell
count.Results: WB analysis of EOC cell line lysates demonstrated PAR-2
expression (CaOV-3>OvCAR-3>>SKOV-3), and exposure of SKOV-3 and OVCAR-3
cells to 50 nM FVIIa resulted in 3-fold induction of VEGF-A release over
48 hr relative to untreated cells (p<0.05). TF-FVIIa complex was a more
potent inducer of VEGF-A when compared to the PAR-2 peptide agonist
(SKIGKL-NH2). Pre-incubation with the PAR-2 antagonist ENMD-1068 reduced
VEGF-A to basal levels in the presence of TF-FVIIa; further supporting
PAR-2 dependent induction of VEGF-A. Pan-expression of PAR-1 was observed
in EOC cell lines by WB. Thrombin (0.1-1U/mL), an established PAR-1
agonist, induced dose-dependent proliferation of SKOV-3 and OVCAR-3 cell
lines under serum free conditions (pBackground and Objective: Venous
thromboembolism (VTE) is intrinsic to the biology of EOC. Progression of
malignancy is associated with increased tissue factor (TF) expression.
Formation of the TF-factor VIIa (FVIIa) complex triggers local thrombin
generation, with thrombin activating protease activated receptor-1
(PAR-1). The TF-FVIIa complex also triggers intracellular signaling via
phosphorylation of the TF C-terminus and activation of PAR-2. Although
PAR-2 analysis in ovarian cancer has been limited, PAR-2 activation in
renal cell carcinoma is associated with MAPK signaling pathway activation
and induction of growth factor release. We hypothesize that TF-FVIIa
dependent activation of PAR-2 on EOC cells up-regulates expression of
angiogenic mediators (VEGF-A) that modify the peritoneal
microenvironment, enhancing vascular leakage and ascites
formation.Methods: TF antigen expression in EOC cell lines (CaOV-3,
SKOV-3 & OvCAR-3) was determined by western blot (WB) analysis.
TF-bearing microparticles were isolated from conditioned media by
differential centrifugation (20,800 g) and TF coagulant activity was
detected by factor X activation. VEGF-A levels in conditioned media were
determined by ELISA. Proliferation of the SKOV-3 and OVCAR-3 cell lines
in response to thrombin (PAR-1 agonist) was determined via direct cell
count.Results: WB analysis of EOC cell line lysates demonstrated PAR-2
expression (CaOV-3>OvCAR-3>>SKOV-3), and exposure of SKOV-3 and OVCAR-3
cells to 50 nM FVIIa resulted in 3-fold induction of VEGF-A release over
48 hr relative to untreated cells (p<0.05). TF-FVIIa complex was a more
potent inducer of VEGF-A when compared to the PAR-2 peptide agonist
(SKIGKL-NH2). Pre-incubation with the PAR-2 antagonist ENMD-1068 reduced
VEGF-A to basal levels in the presence of TF-FVIIa; further supporting
PAR-2 dependent induction of VEGF-A. Pan-expression of PAR-1 was observed
in EOC cell lines by WB. Thrombin (0.1-1U/mL), an established PAR-1
agonist, induced dose-dependent proliferation of SKOV-3 and OVCAR-3 cell
lines under serum free conditions (p<0.001). Pre-incubation with the
PAR-1 antagonist vorapaxar reduced proliferation to basal levels in the
presence of thrombin.Conclusion: TF expression and coagulant activity is
up regulated in EOC. FVIIa triggers a PAR-2 dependent induction of VEGF-A
release from EOC cell lines. Similarly, the PAR-1 agonist thrombin
triggered a significant increase in EOC cell proliferation. These results
suggest that interaction of EOC with the coagulation system in the tumor
microenvironment may enhance both PAR-1 dependent cellular proliferation
and PAR-2 dependent release of VEGF, a potent regulator of angiogenesis.
Thus, PAR-1 and PAR-2 may represent pharmacologically relevant drug
targets to block ovarian cancer progression via inhibition of growth and
angiogenesis.

