Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Contribution of MMP13 to tumor development in the steatotic liver
microenvironment


With the rising prevalence of obesity there has been a marked increase in
the incidence of non alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD).
Epidemiologically, NAFLD has been linked to an increased risk for
development of primary liver cancer (HCC), however the mechanisms
involved are not known. The liver is also a frequent site of metastasis
for several types of cancers. To determine the effect of steatosis (fatty
liver) on tumor metastasis to the liver, we used a mouse model of diet
induced steatosis coupled with the splenic injection model of metastasis
to the liver and found a significant increase in the number of tumors in
the steatotic livers. To evaluate what molecular changes distinguish the
steatotic liver from normal liver, microarray analysis was performed and
demonstrated that MMP13, a member of the Matrix Metalloproteinase family
recognized to be involved in liver disease and cancer progression, is
significantly upregulated in the steatotic liver compared to normal
livers of mice. We evaluated MMP13 expression in human patients with
NAFLD and found that MMP13 is elevated with the progression of NAFLD. We
hypothesize that increased MMP13 levels in the steatotic liver contribute
to a more permissive microenvironment for the establishment of liver
tumors. To test this hypothesis, mice genetically deficient in MMP13 or
control wildtype mice, with and without steatosis, were injected with
syngeneic MC38 colon cancer cells. Examination of the two groups
demonstrated a significant decrease in the number of tumors in the MMP13
null mice (P With the rising prevalence of obesity there has been a
marked increase in the incidence of non alcoholic fatty liver disease
(NAFLD). Epidemiologically, NAFLD has been linked to an increased risk
for development of primary liver cancer (HCC), however the mechanisms
involved are not known. The liver is also a frequent site of metastasis
for several types of cancers. To determine the effect of steatosis (fatty
liver) on tumor metastasis to the liver, we used a mouse model of diet
induced steatosis coupled with the splenic injection model of metastasis
to the liver and found a significant increase in the number of tumors in
the steatotic livers. To evaluate what molecular changes distinguish the
steatotic liver from normal liver, microarray analysis was performed and
demonstrated that MMP13, a member of the Matrix Metalloproteinase family
recognized to be involved in liver disease and cancer progression, is
significantly upregulated in the steatotic liver compared to normal
livers of mice. We evaluated MMP13 expression in human patients with
NAFLD and found that MMP13 is elevated with the progression of NAFLD. We
hypothesize that increased MMP13 levels in the steatotic liver contribute
to a more permissive microenvironment for the establishment of liver
tumors. To test this hypothesis, mice genetically deficient in MMP13 or
control wildtype mice, with and without steatosis, were injected with
syngeneic MC38 colon cancer cells. Examination of the two groups
demonstrated a significant decrease in the number of tumors in the MMP13
null mice (P <0.01). Additionally, since the tumor cells themselves
express MMP13, wildtype mice were injected with either shRNA control or
MMP13 knockdown MC38 colon cancer cells to determine the role of tumor
cell derived MMP13. Using transwell migration assay and the platypus
invasion system with parental and MMP13 shRNA knockdown MC38 cells we
found that loss of MMP13 decreases the invasive and migratory properties
of the metastatic cancer cells in vitro. In conclusion, we found that
MMP13 is elevated in the setting of steatosis and that loss of both
stromal and tumor derived MMP13 lead to decreased number of metastatic
foci in the liver. Tumor derived MMP13 effects tumor cell migration and
invasion invitro. MMP13 may thus be a potential target to control
initiation and growth of metastatic cancer of the liver.

