Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: KDM3A tyrosine phosphorylation by Ack1 promotes
tamoxifen-resistance in breast cancer


Hormone therapy with the selective estrogen-receptor modulator tamoxifen
(TAM) provides palliative benefit for patients with breast cancer.
However, estrogen receptor (ER hereafter) positive breast tumors with
high expression of HER2 receptor tyrosine kinase often develop
significant resistance to tamoxifen therapy. Thus, precise understanding
of activation of Estrogen (E2)-independent ER regulated gene
transcription in tamoxifen-resistant breast tumors could open new
therapeutic avenues to target drug-resistance and ameliorate poor
prognosis. The non-receptor tyrosine kinase, Ack1 (also known as TNK2)
has emerged as a major integrator of signaling from various receptor
tyrosine kinases including HER2. Here we demonstrate that heregulin
promoted ER activity at Estrogen Response Element (ERE) in the presence
of tamoxifen, which was significantly downregulated upon Ack1 knockdown.
We observed that Ack1 phosphorylated the ER co-activator, KDM3A, a H3K9
demethylase, at evolutionary conserved tyrosine 1114 in heregulin
dependent manner in the presence of tamoxifen. KDM3A demethylates H3
mono- and dimethyl-K9 in vitro and in vivo. Heregulin mediated Ack1
activation resulted in significant decrease in the level of
monomethyl-H3K9, while, monomethyl-H3K27 levels remained unchanged.
Further, inhibition of Ack1 by small molecule inhibitor AIM-100 or
Dasatinib resulted in significant increase in the level of
monomethyl-H3K9. Therefore by its ability to regulate the activity of ER
co-activator such as KDM3A, activated Ack1 may modulate ER target gene
expression in the absence of estrogen and confer TAM-resistance to cancer
cells. Thus, Ack1 inhibitors hold the potential as novel therapeutics to
treat a subset of tamoxifen resistant breast cancers.

