Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of BET bromodomain proteins as a therapeutic approach
in prostate cancer


BET (bromodomain and extra-terminal) family proteins are epigenetic
regulators known to control expression of genes involved in cell growth
and oncogenesis. Selective small molecule BET inhibitors prevent binding
of BET proteins to acetylated histones and inhibit transcriptional
activation of BET target genes. BET inhibitors attenuate cell growth and
survival in a number of hematologic cancer models, partially through
down-regulation of the critical oncogene, MYC. We hypothesized that BET
inhibitors will similarly regulate expression of MYC family genes (MYC,
MYCN, MYCL1) in solid tumor models characterized by MYC family
amplification or over-expression. We and others have recently shown
activity for BET inhibitors in MYCN-amplified neuroblastoma models, with
concomitant down-regulation of MYCN expression. Here we describe the
effects of the highly specific BET inhibitor, I-BET762, on MYC expression
and cell growth in prostate cancer models. I-BET762 treatment inhibited
MYC expression accompanied by growth inhibition and decreased survival in
prostate cancer cell lines that over-express MYC. In addition to MYC
signatures, gene expression profiling in cell lines identified numerous
cell cycle-associated genes as being significantly down-regulated by
I-BET762. Importantly, our data suggests that I-BET762 effects are
partially driven by MYC down-regulation and underlines the critical
importance of additional mechanisms of I-BET762 induced phenotypes.
Consistent with our in vitro observations, BET inhibition reduces MYC
expression and tumor burden in a primary model of castration resistant
prostate cancer that expresses high levels of MYC. Taken together, our
data highlight the potential of BET inhibitors as a novel therapeutic
approach to treat prostate tumors driven by MYC over-expression.

