Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel sequencing method for genome-wide profiling of
5-hydroxymethylcytosine with single-base resolution


5-hydroxymethylcytosine (5hmC) is an epigenetic mark abundant in embryo
stem cells and brain tissues. The exact biological functions of 5hmC are
still under close investigation although several lines of evidence have
indicated it could be involved in active DNA demethylation. Meanwhile,
extensive studies have been carried out to determine its genomic
distribution. A number of approaches have been developed using either
affinity based enrichment, such as hMeDIP, that rely on antibody and
other specific binding proteins to target 5hmC, or modified bisulfite
sequencing, namely oxidative bisulfite sequencing (OxBS) and TET assisted
bisulfite sequencing (TAB-sequencing). However, all those methods have
limitations which hamper their application. For example, affinity based
methods lack single base resolution while modified bisulfite sequencing
methods require efficient chemical or enzymatic oxidation which cannot be
easily achieved or guaranteed. As an alternative, we have developed a
novel genome-wide sequencing method that utilizes an enzyme based
modification approach coupled with bisulfite-sequencing for detecting
5hmC. This methodology allows quantification of 5hmC levels with single
CpG resolution and can also be employed for locus-specific assays. Using
this method, we were able to map and quantify 5hmC sites at the genomic
scale for several different biological samples. This novel method can
determine the exact location and abundance of 5hmC, which will facilitate
our understanding of 5hmC in regulating gene expression in different
biological contexts.

