Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: FoxM1 transactivates PTTG1 and promotes colorectal cancer cell
migration and invasion


Previous studies have shown that both Forkhead Box M1 (FoxM1) and
pituitary tumor transforming gene 1 (PTTG1) were associated with cancer
development and metastases. This study aims to investigate the relation
between FoxM1 and PTTG1 and its role in colorectal cancer cell
behavior.The microarray data of colorectal cancer were analyzed to
determine the association of FoxM1 and PTTG1 expression. Luciferase
reporter assay, ChIP and EMSA were used to identify the regulatory
mechanisms between FoxM1 and PTTG1. PTTG1 mRNA and protein levels were
examined using real-time PCR and western blot after knocking down or over
expressing FoxM1. The roles of FoxM1 and PTTG in tumor metastasis were
investigated by cell migration and invasion assays.Gene expression
microarray data indicated that FoxM1 and PTTG1 are concordantly
up-regulated in colorectal cancer tissues. Over-expression of FoxM1
up-regulated PTTG1 expression and knock-down of FoxM1 did the opposite,
indicating that PTTG1 was regulated by FoxM1. Luciferase reporter assay
indicated that -391 to +50 bps of PTTG1 promoter are important for FoxM1
to enhance PTTG1 promoter activity. Sequence analysis identified two
potential FoxM1 binding sites. EMSA indicated that FoxM1 directly binds
to PTTG1 promoter at the -350 to -343 binding motif. This binding was
confirmed by chromatin immunoprecipitation in HCT116 and SW620 cells.
Boyden chamber assay indicated that FoxM1 and PTTG1 concordantly regulate
migration and invasion of HCT116 and SW620 colorectal cancer cells.In
summary, our results elucidate that FoxM1 up-regulates PTTG1
transcription through binding to PTTG1 promoter. PTTG1 likely mediates
effects of FoxM1 on colorectal cancer cell migration and invasion.

