Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An EGFR-Stat3-IL6 pathway contributes to NF1 tumor initiation and
maintenance


Neurofibromas are incurable peripheral nerve tumors characteristic of
Neurofibromatosis type 1. Development of effective neurofibroma therapies
has been hindered by limited understanding of mechanisms underlying
neurofibroma formation and growth. We used unbiased insertional
mutagenesis screening to identify genes and signaling pathways that drive
neurofibroma initiation and growth, and identified Stat3.
Immunohistochemistry confirmed phosphorylated STAT3(P-Y705) in all human
and mouse neurofibromas. Targeted genetic deletion of Stat3 in Schwann
cell precursors (SCPs) and Schwann cells (SCs) significantly delayed
neurofibroma formation, and in vitro analysis identified a role for Stat3
in SCP self-renewal and tumor initiation after xenografting. In vivo
gain- and loss-of-function studies identified EGFR as the major upstream
regulator of SCP P-Stat3. Downstream of P-Stat3, EGFR+ SCPs secreted
IL-6, which activated SCPs and mature neurofibroma Schwann cells.
Therefore, Stat3 plays a critical role in early SC lineage cells,
promoting neurofibroma initiation. Jak/Stat might also play a role in
neurofibroma maintenance, as a pharmacological Jak2/Stat3 inhibitor
reduced Schwann cell and neurofibroma growth. The data support Jak/Stat
as a novel neurofibroma driver pathway and JAK/STAT inhibition as a
potential neurofibroma therapeutic strategy.

