Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of exosomes in tumor growth and metastasis of lung cancer


There will be an estimated 228,190 new cases, and 159,480 deaths, from
lung cancer in the United States in 2013. Cancer burdens and death are
largely due to metastasis in several cancer types, including lung. Much
effort has been put into study how cancer cells metastasize. Emerging
evidence implicates cancer cells undergo epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) leading to enhanced cell migration and invasion
abilities. Exosomes are endosome-derived 30-100 nm biological
nanoparticles released from all types of cells but in abundance from
tumor cells. Exosomes are released into the extracellular environment and
have diverse biological functions. Contents of exosomes consist of
proteins and genetic material (mRNA, DNA and miRNA) from the cell of
origin. Exosomes are taken up by other cells and induce both genetic and
epigenetic changes. Tumor-derived exosomes have been reported to
facilitate tumor growth, metastasis and drug resistance. Therefore,
understanding the role of tumor-derived exosomes in cellular process
would probably enable better management of cancer metastasis. With an aim
to prove that exosomes carry the cargo essential for EMT transition
leading to cancer metastasis, we treated non-metastatic lung cancer cells
with exosomes from metastatic cancers and examined if it would increase
growth rate, migratory behavior, and invasiveness of the non-aggressive
cancer cells. Our findings suggested: i) exosomes isolated from the lung
cancer cell lines, H1299, A549 and H522 had a mean size of 94 - 162 nm;
ii) the invasive and metastatic potential of these lung cancer cell
lines, as observed by wound healing, migration and invasion assays, was
in the following order: H1299 > A549 >> H522; iii) non-invasive H522 lung
cancer cells could uptake the PKH-67 labeled exosomes from highly
invasive A549 and H1299 cells as reflected by an increased fluorescent
signal; iv) the H522 cells treated with A549 or H1299 exosomes exhibited
faster wound healing rate, increased migratory behavior, and
invasiveness, indicating that exosomes carry the cargo essential for EMT;
v) the H522 cells treated with A549 exosomes showed a greater metastatic
shift than H1299 treatment; vi) analysis of key EMT-associated proteins
in H522 cells treated with exosomes from A549 and H1299 cells indicated
changes in expression levels favoring EMT. Expression levels of
epithelial markers E-Cadherin, ZO-1, ZEB1, and -Catenin were
downregulated, whereas mesenchymal markers vimentin and Snail were
upregulated. Our findings provide insights of a possible role of exosomes
in EMT of lung cancer cells. These findings make exosomes a promising
platform for future research of EMT (Supported byDuggan Endowment,
Helmsley Funds and USPHS grant R25-CA-134283).

