Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Aberrant DNA methylation of DLX4 and SIM1 is a predictive marker
for disease progression of uterine cervical low-grade squamous
intraepithelial lesion


Background: Cervical cancer is the second-most common cancer in women
worldwide. In Japan, it was the 11th leading cause of death from cancer
for women in 2008 but there has been a unique increase of cervical cancer
incidence among women in the 20-39-year age group in spite of the
decrease of it among women over age 40. High-risk (hr) HPV infection
initiates an early event through which an accumulation of genetic and
epigenetic aberrations follows. Aberrant DNA methylation (abMet) is shown
to provide disease biomarkers with great potential applicable to clinical
specimens. The authors undertook a prospective cohort study, as the first
trial in the world up to our knowledge, to examine the relationship
between the abMet of DLX4 and SIM1 genes and progression of LSIL.Methods:
A total of 113 patients were selected from the Comparative Study on
Conventional Pap smear and Liquid-based Cytology (ThinPrep) for Uterine
Cervix (CCLBC), in which 11,039 samples were enrolled between October
2007 and March 2010 to compare the cytological features of conventional
Pap smears and liquid-based cytology specimens using the ThinPrep method.
They were classified into 4 groups according to their cervical cytology,
hrHPV infection and follow up. Cytology samples were examined for abMet
of DLX4 and SIM1 genes and their protein expressions. CaSki cells were
treated with 5-Aza-2-deoxycytidine (5-aza-dC).Results: 40 samples in
group 1 were negative for intraepithelial lesion or malignancy. 21 LSILs
in group 2 showed a continuance of LSIL for longer than 365 days, and 12
LSILs in group 3 showed an up-grading to high-grade (H) SIL+ within 365
days after the diagnosis of LSIL. 40 in group 4 were squamous cell
carcinoma. All but group 1 were infected with hrHPV. Significant
difference existed in frequency of abMet between groups 2 and 3
(p=0.044), between groups 3 and 4 (p=0.020) for DLX4, and between groups
1 and 3 (p=0.0003), as well as between groups 2 and 3 (p=0.005) for SIM1
gene. DLX4 protein expression was significantly reduced in the DLX4 abMet
positive tissues, as compared to the negative tissues (p=0.008), and
5-aza-dC treatment extracted DLX4 protein expression of CaSki cells in a
dose-dependent manner (pBackground: Cervical cancer is the second-most
common cancer in women worldwide. In Japan, it was the 11th leading cause
of death from cancer for women in 2008 but there has been a unique
increase of cervical cancer incidence among women in the 20-39-year age
group in spite of the decrease of it among women over age 40. High-risk
(hr) HPV infection initiates an early event through which an accumulation
of genetic and epigenetic aberrations follows. Aberrant DNA methylation
(abMet) is shown to provide disease biomarkers with great potential
applicable to clinical specimens. The authors undertook a prospective
cohort study, as the first trial in the world up to our knowledge, to
examine the relationship between the abMet of DLX4 and SIM1 genes and
progression of LSIL.Methods: A total of 113 patients were selected from
the Comparative Study on Conventional Pap smear and Liquid-based Cytology
(ThinPrep) for Uterine Cervix (CCLBC), in which 11,039 samples were
enrolled between October 2007 and March 2010 to compare the cytological
features of conventional Pap smears and liquid-based cytology specimens
using the ThinPrep method. They were classified into 4 groups according
to their cervical cytology, hrHPV infection and follow up. Cytology
samples were examined for abMet of DLX4 and SIM1 genes and their protein
expressions. CaSki cells were treated with 5-Aza-2-deoxycytidine
(5-aza-dC).Results: 40 samples in group 1 were negative for
intraepithelial lesion or malignancy. 21 LSILs in group 2 showed a
continuance of LSIL for longer than 365 days, and 12 LSILs in group 3
showed an up-grading to high-grade (H) SIL+ within 365 days after the
diagnosis of LSIL. 40 in group 4 were squamous cell carcinoma. All but
group 1 were infected with hrHPV. Significant difference existed in
frequency of abMet between groups 2 and 3 (p=0.044), between groups 3 and
4 (p=0.020) for DLX4, and between groups 1 and 3 (p=0.0003), as well as
between groups 2 and 3 (p=0.005) for SIM1 gene. DLX4 protein expression
was significantly reduced in the DLX4 abMet positive tissues, as compared
to the negative tissues (p=0.008), and 5-aza-dC treatment extracted DLX4
protein expression of CaSki cells in a dose-dependent manner (p<0.005).
The LSIL cases with abMet of SIM1 gene or both genes progressed faster to
HSIL+ than others (p = 0.033 or p=0.048).Conclusion: AbMet of DLX4 and
SIM1 genes should be a useful and novel progression marker of uterine
cervical LSIL with hrHPV infection.

