Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transcriptional activation of Thioredoxin interacting protein by
small activating RNA exerts cell growth inhibition in A549 human lung
cancer cells


TXNIP (also known as VDUP1 or TBP-2) has been identified as a tumor
suppressor gene (TSG) and downregulated in various solid tumors and
hematological malignancies. In recent years, a therapeutic application of
small activating RNA for cancer treatment has been suggested. Therefore,
we designed small activating RNA targeting TXNIP promoter (hsaTXNIP-834)
and investigated the effect of hsaTXNIP-834 on cell growth inhibition in
A549 human lung carcinoma. Transfection of hsaTXNIP-834 induced
transcriptional activation of TXNIP gene and protein expression in a dose
dependent manner in A549 cells. Transfection of hsaTXNIP-834 also
stimulated demethylation of CpG island region of TXNIP gene promoter. In
addition, hsaTXNIP-834 leaded to cell growth inhibition in a dose
dependent manner. Further study demonstrated that hsaTXNIP-834 induces
G0/G1 and G2/M phase cell cycle arrest. Moreover, hsaTXNIP-834 induced
p53 expression and reduced phosphorylation of RB protein. However,
co-transfection of TXNIP or Ago2 siRNA reversed cell growth inhibition by
hsaTXNIP-834. Collectively, our results suggest that hsaTXNIP-834
inhibits the growth of A549 lung carcinoma cells by inducing G0/G1 and
G2/M phase cell cycle arrest and this is mediated, at least in part, by
transcriptional activation of TXNIP by hsaTXNIP-834.

