Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epidermal growth factor-induced expression of PTX3 regulates
metastasis of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma


Overexpression of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and production
of proinflammatroy cytokines are common in head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma (HNSCC) and correlates with enhanced invasion and metastasis.
However, molecular mechanisms associated with activation of EGFR and
productions of cytokines in regulating metastasis of HNSCC remain poorly
understood. Here, we identified PTX3 as a metastasis-promoting factor in
HNSCC to regulate EGF-induced metastasis. We found that EGF induced the
expression of PTX3, and was mediated through transcriptional activation,
but not through mRNA stability. The involvement of Akt/NF-B and AP-1
signaling pathways in the EGF-induced PTX3 gene expression was confirmed
by knockdown of RelA and c-Jun, respectively. The expression of dominant
negative IB also repressed the activation of NF-B and inhibited
EGF-induced PTX3 expression. Furthermore, EGF increased the binding of
NF-B and c-Jun to the AP-1 binding site of the PTX3 promoter through the
activation of the Akt/NF-B pathway, which resulted in activating PTX3
promoter activity. In addition, EGF stimulated the secretion of PTX3 from
cancer cells, resulting in enhancing cancer metastasis and the
interaction between cancer cells and endothelial cells. EGF-enhanced
metastasis-related molecules, such as fibronectin and MMP-9, and
reduction of E-cadherin were reversed in PTX3 knockdown cells. These
findings suggest that autocrine production of EGF-induced PTX3 regulates
metastasis of HNSCC by mediating the expression levels of metastatic
molecules fibronectin, MMP-9 and E-cadherin. The EGF-induced PTX3 could
be a potential diagnostic marker and target for metastasis in the cancer
therapy.

