Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Perceptions related to breast cancer prevention and behavioral
practices in underserved women participated in a CBPR intervention


Objective: To assess perceptions, knowledge, behavioral practices in
breast cancer screening among uninsured and underinsured women in Leon
and Gadsden Counties in Florida.Methods: Women recruited through
Community Outreach and Preventive Services (COPS) Core of a P20 Center of
Excellence for Cancer Research, Training and Community Service were
surveyed as a part of preliminary evaluation (N=107).Results:
Participants ranged in age from 25 to 72 years, predominantly 50-59 years
old (33%). Among these women 76% reported having a previous mammogram;
however, only 21.7% have reported having a mammogram one year ago. Though
83% reported having a Clinical Breast Examination (CBE), about 24%
reported having a CBE three years ago. About 66% women had a recent
health care visit and about 10% reported health care visit one to two
years ago. Perceived Barriers appeared to be significant factor in
screening decision making process. Majority women considered not having
enough money as a barrier (49%), however, 97% women agreed that no matter
how expensive it is they would receive a mammogram if her doctor had
ordered them. Women's knowledge about breast cancer and screening
mammogram was relatively poor (mean score = 8 /17).Conclusion: Though
prevalence of screening mammogram has increased, however, financial
barrier is still a significant factor in women's decision making process
for screening mammogram. Intervention should target social disparity
areas to improve screening utilization in underserved women.

