Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nanoconjugates for inhibition of laminin-411-integrin
1-Dll4-Notch1 pathway to treat glioblastoma multiforme


Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is an aggressive tumor with 14.6 months
median survival rate. We have previously shown that laminin-411, a
vascular basement membrane (BM) protein is a marker of tumor blood
vessels that correlates with aggressiveness of GBMs.The laminin-411
pathway involving its 1 chain-containing integrin receptors, and ligand
Dll4 for cancer stem cell (CSC) Notch1 was studied in mouse xenograft
models to better understand glial tumor growth and new vasculature system
development.To confirm the importance of laminin-411 expression for GBM
progression and outcome prediction, sections from formalin-fixed paraffin
embedded human brain tumors were studied. Immunohistochemical analysis of
107 GBM samples has revealed 87% cases with overexpression of
laminin-411, whereas it was only 34% for high-grade (III) and 10.6% for
low-grade (I/II) gliomas. The median survival for patients with GBM
overexpressing laminin-411 was 10 months, compared to 20.2 months for
those expressing normal laminin-421. The median recurrence rate was 5.6
and 9.3 months respectively. Morphometric analysis of CSC Notch1, nestin,
CD133, and c-myc was correlated with laminin-411 overexpression in
patients with high-grade gliomas.Nanobioconjugate PolycefinTM was
synthesized to block BM laminin-411 in mice bearing intracranial human
U87MG-derived GBM. Two antisense oligonucleotides against laminin-411 4
and 1 chains were covalently attached on polymalic acid nanoplatform. The
nanodrug, PolycefinTM, was able to cross blood brain tumor barrier and
delivered drugs into cancer cells (Ding et al. 2010, 2013) using
pH-dependent endosome releasing unit Leu-Leu-Leu. Evidence of cross talk
was observed between BM, CSCs and tumor proliferation when mice were
treated with PolycefinTM. It is shown that blocking synthesis of
laminin-411 leads to significally lower tumor expression of integrin 1
chain, Notch ligand Dll4, and Notch1. The CSC markers nestin, CD133, and
c-myc that are known indicators of glial tumor progression also showed
quantitative reduction by morphometric analysis in tumors of mice treated
with anti-laminin-411 Polycefin compared to PBS-treated animals. The data
point to the importance of laminin-411-integrin 1-Dll4-Notch1 pathway in
GBM development and to the ability of Polycefin to negatively impact CSC
as a possible mechamism of GBM inhibition. The results provide new
insights in glioma microenvironment and tumor endothelial and parenchymal
cell signaling suggesting a novel approach for future therapeutics to
target CSCs in vivo through inhibition of laminin-411 to treat highly
infiltrating GBMs.

