Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pathway-based approach to genome-wide gene-environment interaction
analysis for occupational exposures in lung cancer susceptibility


Background: Occupational exposures are known risk factors for lung cancer
with asbestos, silica, polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons and heavy metals
being the major contributors. Few studies have addressed the role of
genetically determined host factors in the pathogenesis of lung cancer
associated with exposure to these agents. We used data from a genome-wide
association (GWA) analysis to identify gene-occupation interactions and
related pathways associated with increased lung cancer risk.Methods: For
our analysis, we used data from a previously published GWA analysis based
on a case-control study conducted in six countries in Central and Eastern
Europe from 1998 to 2002. Genotyping on samples from study participants
was performed using Illumina Sentrix HumanHap300 BeadChip. Occupational
exposure data was collected by trained interviewers and coders using
semi-structured questionnaires. Single marker association analysis was
performed using PLINK 1.07 for each exposure using logistic regression
after adjusting for age, gender, smoking history, country/center and risk
score calculated using history of exposure to other occupational
exposures. Interaction term for genotypes and exposure was included in
this model. Pathway analysis was performed using gene-set enrichment
analyses approach. False discovery rate (FDR) was calculated to adjust
for multiple comparisons. We analyzed 312,605 SNPs and occupational
exposure to 70 agents from 1802 lung cancer cases and 1725 cancer-free
controls.Results: Mean age of study participants was 60.1 9.1 years and
75% were male. We found SNPs showing gene-environment interaction
p-values Background: Occupational exposures are known risk factors for
lung cancer with asbestos, silica, polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons and
heavy metals being the major contributors. Few studies have addressed the
role of genetically determined host factors in the pathogenesis of lung
cancer associated with exposure to these agents. We used data from a
genome-wide association (GWA) analysis to identify gene-occupation
interactions and related pathways associated with increased lung cancer
risk.Methods: For our analysis, we used data from a previously published
GWA analysis based on a case-control study conducted in six countries in
Central and Eastern Europe from 1998 to 2002. Genotyping on samples from
study participants was performed using Illumina Sentrix HumanHap300
BeadChip. Occupational exposure data was collected by trained
interviewers and coders using semi-structured questionnaires. Single
marker association analysis was performed using PLINK 1.07 for each
exposure using logistic regression after adjusting for age, gender,
smoking history, country/center and risk score calculated using history
of exposure to other occupational exposures. Interaction term for
genotypes and exposure was included in this model. Pathway analysis was
performed using gene-set enrichment analyses approach. False discovery
rate (FDR) was calculated to adjust for multiple comparisons. We analyzed
312,605 SNPs and occupational exposure to 70 agents from 1802 lung cancer
cases and 1725 cancer-free controls.Results: Mean age of study
participants was 60.1 9.1 years and 75% were male. We found SNPs showing
gene-environment interaction p-values < 1 x 10-5 for asbestos, diesel and
kerosene, coal products, silica, oil mists and metals/alloys. Pathway
analysis identified pathways related to response to environmental
information processing via signal transduction as being most significant.
More than 15 occupational exposures including asbestos, chromate,
gasoline and diesel/kerosene showed significant gene-occupation
interactions with signal transduction pathways (pBackground: Occupational
exposures are known risk factors for lung cancer with asbestos, silica,
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons and heavy metals being the major
contributors. Few studies have addressed the role of genetically
determined host factors in the pathogenesis of lung cancer associated
with exposure to these agents. We used data from a genome-wide
association (GWA) analysis to identify gene-occupation interactions and
related pathways associated with increased lung cancer risk.Methods: For
our analysis, we used data from a previously published GWA analysis based
on a case-control study conducted in six countries in Central and Eastern
Europe from 1998 to 2002. Genotyping on samples from study participants
was performed using Illumina Sentrix HumanHap300 BeadChip. Occupational
exposure data was collected by trained interviewers and coders using
semi-structured questionnaires. Single marker association analysis was
performed using PLINK 1.07 for each exposure using logistic regression
after adjusting for age, gender, smoking history, country/center and risk
score calculated using history of exposure to other occupational
exposures. Interaction term for genotypes and exposure was included in
this model. Pathway analysis was performed using gene-set enrichment
analyses approach. False discovery rate (FDR) was calculated to adjust
for multiple comparisons. We analyzed 312,605 SNPs and occupational
exposure to 70 agents from 1802 lung cancer cases and 1725 cancer-free
controls.Results: Mean age of study participants was 60.1 9.1 years and
75% were male. We found SNPs showing gene-environment interaction
p-values < 1 x 10-5 for asbestos, diesel and kerosene, coal products,
silica, oil mists and metals/alloys. Pathway analysis identified pathways
related to response to environmental information processing via signal
transduction as being most significant. More than 15 occupational
exposures including asbestos, chromate, gasoline and diesel/kerosene
showed significant gene-occupation interactions with signal transduction
pathways (p<0.001, FDRBackground: Occupational exposures are known risk
factors for lung cancer with asbestos, silica, polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbons and heavy metals being the major contributors. Few studies
have addressed the role of genetically determined host factors in the
pathogenesis of lung cancer associated with exposure to these agents. We
used data from a genome-wide association (GWA) analysis to identify
gene-occupation interactions and related pathways associated with
increased lung cancer risk.Methods: For our analysis, we used data from a
previously published GWA analysis based on a case-control study conducted
in six countries in Central and Eastern Europe from 1998 to 2002.
Genotyping on samples from study participants was performed using
Illumina Sentrix HumanHap300 BeadChip. Occupational exposure data was
collected by trained interviewers and coders using semi-structured
questionnaires. Single marker association analysis was performed using
PLINK 1.07 for each exposure using logistic regression after adjusting
for age, gender, smoking history, country/center and risk score
calculated using history of exposure to other occupational exposures.
Interaction term for genotypes and exposure was included in this model.
Pathway analysis was performed using gene-set enrichment analyses
approach. False discovery rate (FDR) was calculated to adjust for
multiple comparisons. We analyzed 312,605 SNPs and occupational exposure
to 70 agents from 1802 lung cancer cases and 1725 cancer-free
controls.Results: Mean age of study participants was 60.1 9.1 years and
75% were male. We found SNPs showing gene-environment interaction
p-values < 1 x 10-5 for asbestos, diesel and kerosene, coal products,
silica, oil mists and metals/alloys. Pathway analysis identified pathways
related to response to environmental information processing via signal
transduction as being most significant. More than 15 occupational
exposures including asbestos, chromate, gasoline and diesel/kerosene
showed significant gene-occupation interactions with signal transduction
pathways (p<0.001, FDR<0.05), especially for MAPK, GPCR, TNFR and WNT
signaling. Gasoline and diesel/kerosene gene-interaction analysis also
showed enrichment in pathways related to immune processes (Toll-like
receptor signaling pathway, FDR 0.05 and T cell activation, FDR 0.07).
Diesel and petrol engine emissions showed significant gene interaction
association with xenobiotic metabolism pathway, which regulates
metabolism of carcinogens (FDR 0.008 and 0.04 respectively).Conclusion:
Our findings suggest that pathways involved in signal transduction,
immune process and xenobiotic metabolism may be involved in lung cancer
pathogenesis in interaction with occupational carcinogens. Further
studies are needed to elucidate these molecular pathways.

