Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BAL101553 (prodrug of BAL27862): A unique microtubule destabilizer
active against drug refractory breast cancers alone and in combination
with trastuzumab


Background: BAL101553 is a highly soluble prodrug of BAL27862, a novel,
small molecule, microtubule (MT)-depolymerizing agent with a broad in
vitro anti-proliferative activity against human tumor lines refractory to
standard microtubule-targeting agents (MTAs). The BAL27862 MT phenotype
is distinct from standard MTAs (eg taxanes; vinca-alkaloids) and the
prodrug has antitumor activity in diverse mouse tumor models when given
orally or iv. In this study, activity was assessed in experimental breast
cancer models alone and in combination with the ErbB2-targeted
therapeutic antibody trastuzumab.Methods: Anti-proliferative activity was
analyzed using monolayer or soft agar assays, MT phenotypes by
immunofluorescence for -tubulin and efficacy in mouse xenograft models of
human breast tumors.Results: Potent anti-proliferative activity was
observed in 8 of 9 breast cancer lines (IC50 range of sensitive lines: 8
- 25 nM) associated with the characteristic BAL27862 MT phenotype (tiny
MT asters in G2/M arrested cells). Interestingly, 2 breast cancer lines
were sensitive to BAL27862 in a clonogenic assay (IC50/IC70 - MAXF 401:
13/18 nM; MX1: 22/46 nM) despite one being relatively resistant to
paclitaxel (MX1: 127/>3500 nM). Moreover, BAL27862 retained activity in 2
Pgp drug efflux pump-expressing breast cancer lines, 50 - 100-fold
resistant to paclitaxel and vinblastine (MT-3/ADR, MCF7/TxT50), as well
as in MCF7/TxTP50 cells 8-fold resistant to paclitaxel through
non-Pgp-related mechanisms. When administered iv to mice at well
tolerated doses, BAL101553 elicited statistically significant antitumor
activity (pBackground: BAL101553 is a highly soluble prodrug of BAL27862,
a novel, small molecule, microtubule (MT)-depolymerizing agent with a
broad in vitro anti-proliferative activity against human tumor lines
refractory to standard microtubule-targeting agents (MTAs). The BAL27862
MT phenotype is distinct from standard MTAs (eg taxanes; vinca-alkaloids)
and the prodrug has antitumor activity in diverse mouse tumor models when
given orally or iv. In this study, activity was assessed in experimental
breast cancer models alone and in combination with the ErbB2-targeted
therapeutic antibody trastuzumab.Methods: Anti-proliferative activity was
analyzed using monolayer or soft agar assays, MT phenotypes by
immunofluorescence for -tubulin and efficacy in mouse xenograft models of
human breast tumors.Results: Potent anti-proliferative activity was
observed in 8 of 9 breast cancer lines (IC50 range of sensitive lines: 8
- 25 nM) associated with the characteristic BAL27862 MT phenotype (tiny
MT asters in G2/M arrested cells). Interestingly, 2 breast cancer lines
were sensitive to BAL27862 in a clonogenic assay (IC50/IC70 - MAXF 401:
13/18 nM; MX1: 22/46 nM) despite one being relatively resistant to
paclitaxel (MX1: 127/>3500 nM). Moreover, BAL27862 retained activity in 2
Pgp drug efflux pump-expressing breast cancer lines, 50 - 100-fold
resistant to paclitaxel and vinblastine (MT-3/ADR, MCF7/TxT50), as well
as in MCF7/TxTP50 cells 8-fold resistant to paclitaxel through
non-Pgp-related mechanisms. When administered iv to mice at well
tolerated doses, BAL101553 elicited statistically significant antitumor
activity (p<0.05 vs. controls) in chemo-sensitive (MT-3) and
chemo-refractory (MT-3/ADR) mammary xenografts, resulting in a final %T/C
(ratio of mean tumor volume of treated and control group x 100) superior
to comparator cytotoxics (MT-3: 35 % BAL101553, 54% paclitaxel, 104%
vincristine; MT-3/ADR: 38% BAL101553, 118% paclitaxel, 103% vincristine).
Antitumor activity was also observed in trastuzumab-sensitive (BT474)
and-refractory (MaCa3366) ErbB2-overexpressing breast cancer xenografts,
and in bulky BT474 tumors insensitive to trastuzumab treatment. Moreover,
combination of BAL101553 and trastuzumab was well tolerated, with a
striking enhancement of antitumor activity in the trastuzumab refractory
MaCa336 model (% T/C - 56% BAL101553, 97% trastuzumab, 32% combination;
pBackground: BAL101553 is a highly soluble prodrug of BAL27862, a novel,
small molecule, microtubule (MT)-depolymerizing agent with a broad in
vitro anti-proliferative activity against human tumor lines refractory to
standard microtubule-targeting agents (MTAs). The BAL27862 MT phenotype
is distinct from standard MTAs (eg taxanes; vinca-alkaloids) and the
prodrug has antitumor activity in diverse mouse tumor models when given
orally or iv. In this study, activity was assessed in experimental breast
cancer models alone and in combination with the ErbB2-targeted
therapeutic antibody trastuzumab.Methods: Anti-proliferative activity was
analyzed using monolayer or soft agar assays, MT phenotypes by
immunofluorescence for -tubulin and efficacy in mouse xenograft models of
human breast tumors.Results: Potent anti-proliferative activity was
observed in 8 of 9 breast cancer lines (IC50 range of sensitive lines: 8
- 25 nM) associated with the characteristic BAL27862 MT phenotype (tiny
MT asters in G2/M arrested cells). Interestingly, 2 breast cancer lines
were sensitive to BAL27862 in a clonogenic assay (IC50/IC70 - MAXF 401:
13/18 nM; MX1: 22/46 nM) despite one being relatively resistant to
paclitaxel (MX1: 127/>3500 nM). Moreover, BAL27862 retained activity in 2
Pgp drug efflux pump-expressing breast cancer lines, 50 - 100-fold
resistant to paclitaxel and vinblastine (MT-3/ADR, MCF7/TxT50), as well
as in MCF7/TxTP50 cells 8-fold resistant to paclitaxel through
non-Pgp-related mechanisms. When administered iv to mice at well
tolerated doses, BAL101553 elicited statistically significant antitumor
activity (p<0.05 vs. controls) in chemo-sensitive (MT-3) and
chemo-refractory (MT-3/ADR) mammary xenografts, resulting in a final %T/C
(ratio of mean tumor volume of treated and control group x 100) superior
to comparator cytotoxics (MT-3: 35 % BAL101553, 54% paclitaxel, 104%
vincristine; MT-3/ADR: 38% BAL101553, 118% paclitaxel, 103% vincristine).
Antitumor activity was also observed in trastuzumab-sensitive (BT474)
and-refractory (MaCa3366) ErbB2-overexpressing breast cancer xenografts,
and in bulky BT474 tumors insensitive to trastuzumab treatment. Moreover,
combination of BAL101553 and trastuzumab was well tolerated, with a
striking enhancement of antitumor activity in the trastuzumab refractory
MaCa336 model (% T/C - 56% BAL101553, 97% trastuzumab, 32% combination;
p<0.05 vs. control or trastuzumab alone) which was associated with a
significant delay in tumor growth over an extended time period (p=0.002
vs. controls).Conclusions: BAL101553 is currently undergoing Phase 1
clinical evaluation in advanced cancer patients with solid tumors. Potent
antitumor activity alone and in combination with trastuzumab in
preclinical chemo-refractory models of breast cancer supports clinical
evaluation in breast cancer patients.

