Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The depletion of LRP5, unlike that of LRP6, promotes apoptosis in
triple-negative breast cancer cells, making it an interesting therapeutic
target


Treatment of patients with triple-negative breast cancers (TNBCs) remains
a major challenge for oncologists and alternative treatments to
conventional chemotherapies are needed to improve their survival. The
Wnt/beta-catenin signaling, recently reported to be activated in TNBCs,
may represent an interesting pathway to target. We report that both LRP5
and LRP6 Wnt coreceptors are more strongly expressed in TNBCs than in
other breast tumor subtypes. As very few studies have explored potential
differences between LRP5 and LRP6, we investigated the effects of
modulating specifically LRP5 or LRP6 expression on Wnt signaling, cell
viability and tumorigenesis in HCC38 and MDA-MB-468 TNBC cells. We found
that these two cell lines are more similar to TNBC biopsy specimens in
terms of Wnt pathway gene expression profiles than any other tested cell
line. Unlike LRP5, LRP6 was involved in activating the canonical Wnt
pathway in response to Wnt3a. LRP5 knockdown induced caspase-dependent
apoptosis, whereas LRP6 knockdown had no such effect. Importantly,
LRP5-depleted cells were more sensitive to conventional chemotherapy than
cells depleted of LRP6. The knockdown of LRP5 or LRP6 decreased
tumorigenesis both in vitro and in vivo. Overall, these data suggest that
the LRP5 and LRP6 coreceptors have different functions in TNBCs, with
LRP5 playing a preponderant role in survival control. Our data suggest
that both LRP5 and LRP6 are potential treatment targets in TNBCs, but
that LRP5 may be the most useful target, given the impact of its
depletion on cell survival as well as on the response to anti-cancer
drugs.

