Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differentiation induced apoptosis in AML cells: The role of p73 in
p53-independent versus p53-mediated apoptosis


Human acute myeloid cell lines can be induced to differentiate into
macrophage-like cells by phorbol esters. Differentiation is accompanied
by cessation of cell proliferation and initiation of apoptosis. Many of
these cell lines, like HL-60, are p53 deficient and therefore execute a
differentiation-induced, p53-independent program of cell death.
Evaluating changes in gene expression during a time course of PMA-induced
HL-60 cell differentiation by DNA microarray analyses and RT-qPCR reveals
up-regulation of several pro-apoptotic genes (ex. TNF, MCL1, EGR2, BCL3)
and down-regulation of several anti-apoptotic genes (ex. BCL2, ANXA3,
TSC22D3). Interestingly, RNA levels of p73 are unchanged, suggesting p73
does not substitute for the missing p53 function via activation of p73
gene transcription, however, we report here that p73 protein levels
increase dramatically during the differentiation time course. By
reintroducing p53 into HL-60 cells, we compare the changing gene
expression profile during p53-mediated apoptosis versus that which occurs
during phorbol ester-induced p73 accumulation through protein
stabilization. Common and unique gene expression changes define the
putative p73-dependent apoptosis program compared to p53-dependent
apoptosis.

