Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovery of NVP-CGM097, a highly potent and optimized small
molecule inhibitor of Mdm2 under evaluation in a Phase I clinical trial


Activation of p53 by blocking the p53-Mdm2 interaction using non-peptidic
small-molecule inhibitors is being pursued as a promising cancer
therapeutic strategy. In the present study, we show the identification of
NVP-CGM097, a novel, highly optimized, and selective inhibitor of the
p53-Mdm2 interaction. NVP-CGM097 binds to human Mdm2 protein with a Ki
value of 1.3 nM, activates p53 in human cells and induces robust
p53-dependent cell cycle arrest and apoptosis in human p53 wild-type
tumor cells. Its activity and selectivity has been tested and confirmed
across a large panel of cancer cell lines from the Cancer Cell Line
Encyclopedia. Importantly, NVP-CGM097 displays desirable pharmacokinetic
and pharmacodynamic profiles in animals together with excellent oral
bioavailability, which triggers rapid and sustained activation of
p53-dependent pharmacodynamic biomarkers resulting in tumor regression in
multiple xenografted models of p53 wild-type human cancer. The validation
and understanding of its mechanism of action, the overall favorable
drug-like properties and the characterization of its on-target
toxicological profile in preclinical species strongly supported the
initiation of Phase I clinical trials with NVP-CGM097 in pre-selected
patients with p53 wild-type tumors.

