Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preserved histological and molecular phenotypes following serial
in vivo propagation of patient-derived xenografts of small cell lung
cancer


Background: Limited availability of tissue samples is a major impediment
to small cell lung cancer (SCLC) research but patient-derived xenograft
(PDX) offers a potential alternative. The high genomic instability of
SCLC necessitates the need to establish whether the molecular
characteristics of PDXs are preserved across serial propagation in
mice.Method: PDX were raised using biopsy samples from patients with
relapsed SCLC under an IRB-approved protocol. Image guided or
bronchoscopic biopsies were directly implanted subcutaneously into SCID
mice within 60 minutes of collection and without in vitro culture. Tumor
growth was monitored and animals were sacrificed while overall tumor size
remained A[p.Cys141Tyr]; c.913A>T[p.Lys305Ter], c.488A>G[p.Tyr163Cys],
c.892G> [p.Glu298Ter]) detected in tumor samples from the first
generation mice were preserved across all subsequent generations tested.
Additionally, there were no new aberrations detected in this panel of 17
genes when comparing early to later generations of PDX. Conclusions:
Despite the high degree of genomic instability expected in SCLC, serially
propagated PDX of SCLC maintained histologic and molecular
characteristics across many generations. Our finding that original tumor
characteristics remain well preserved in PDX supports future use of this
resource as reliable platform for translational research in
SCLC.Supported through the Georgia Cancer Coalition Distinguished Scholar
Award and NIH/NCI 5K23CA164015 grant to TK Owonikoko

