Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SPR965: an oral PI3K/ mTOR C1/C2 inhibitor for the treatment of
solid tumors


BackgroundThe discovery and development of inhibitors for the
PI3K/AKT/mTOR signaling pathway is an attractive area of research due to
its association with several oncogenic malignancies. This signaling
pathway controls cellular growth as well as survival via regulation of
widely divergent physiological processes, i.e. cell cycle progression,
differentiation, transcription, translation and apoptosis. Constitutive
activation of the PI3 kinase alpha and/or the downstream protein mTOR has
been implicated in the progression of a large variety of solid tumors.
Literature reports suggest the importance of developing combined and
specific inhibitor of both PI3K and mTOR kinases.Described herein is the
discovery of a novel small molecule, SPR965, a potent, and orally
bioavailable inhibitor for class 1 PI3 Kinase and mTOR kinases with the
potential for the clinical treatment of various solid tumors,
specifically prostate, ovarian and colon cancers. The complete
preclinical profile of SPR965 is presented in detail.MethodsDrug
candidates were evaluated in an in vitro enzyme assays to determine their
inhibitory activity PI3 and mTOR C1/ C2 kinases. Promising candidates
were then evaluated in proliferation assays using various human cancer
cell lines (PC3 - prostate, SKOV3 - ovarian, HCT-116 - colon and A2780 -
ovarian). The most promising leads were then evaluated against a panel of
456 kinases to determine the level of selectivity for our primary targets
- PI3K and mTOR C1/C2. Compounds meeting the desired threshold of potency
and selectivity were evaluated for their in vivo pharmacokinetic profile
(iv/ po) in rodents followed by studies in mouse xenograft models (SKOV3
and HCT-116).ResultsSPR965 is a potent inhibitor of PI3K alpha and mTOR
with an IC50 of 24 and 25 nM respectively. SPR965 is also a highly
selective inhibitor of PI3 and mTOR C1/C2 kinases when evaluated in a
screen against 456 kinases. Further studies demonstrated that SPR965 is a
potent inhibitor of proliferation in a multiple cell lines and in several
xenograft models. The proliferation inhibition activity (EC50) in A2780
is 17 nM, PC3 is 30 nM, SKOV3 is 74 nM, and HCT-116 is 163 nM. SPR965 is
one of the most efficacious PI3/mTOR kinase inhibitor yet reported, with
ED50 = 0.5 mg/Kg as determined in a SKOV3 xenograft mouse model and ED50
= 0.6 mg/ Kg in HCT-116 xenograft mouse model. This dose level is
markedly lower than those reported for other reported inhibitors of this
pathway. Pharmacokinetic studies in Sprague Dawley rats and in NUDE mice
indicated that the oral bioavailability of SPR965was 100% and 75%
respectively.ConclusionSPR965 is one of the most efficacious inhibitor of
the PI3 and mTOR kinases when compared to the reported ED50s of other
reported compounds. It also is one of the most selective and highly
bioavailable inhibitor of the PI3 and mTOR kinases. Further studies are
underway to support first-in-human trials with SPR965 where we hope to
demonstrate its unique therapeutic benefits.

