Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibitory effects of liensinine and nuciferine on breast
cancer-associated bone loss


Breast cancer is the most common cause of cancer death in women and has a
propensity to metastasize to bone. Once tumor cells become lodged in the
skeleton, they interact with bone microenvironment establishing the
vicious cycle that accelerates both tumor growth and bone destruction.
Therefore, the vicious cycle between metastatic cancer cells and bone
cells can be a possible target for cancer therapy.Nelumbo nucifera
(Lotus) has been used for various medicinal purposes in some parts of the
world for treatment of several disorders including skin disease, cough,
inflammation, fever. Liensinine and nuciferine are active components in
Lotus but it is still unknown whether they can effectively inhibit breast
cancer associated bone destruction.In this study, we found that
liensinine and nuciferine inhibited the receptor activator of nuclear
factor kappa-B ligand (RANKL)-induced osteoclast formation in mouse bone
marrow macrophage cells at non-cytotoxic concentrations. In addition,
liensinine and nuciferine inhibited cell proliferation and induced
apoptosis in MDA-MB-231 human breast cancer cells. Liensinine also
displayed an inhibitory effect on the migration and invasion ability of
MDA-MB-231 cells compared with nuciferine. Furthermore, liensinine and
nuciferine may modulate cell cycle distribution and expression of
apoptosis-related proteins in MDA-MB-231 cells and inhibit breast
cancer-induced bone resorption in vivo. Therefore, liensinine and
nuciferine can possess the potential to prevent breast cancer-mediated
osteolysis.

