Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combined blockade of Aurora A and JAK2 kinase is highly effective
at inhibiting malignant transformation


Our ongoing efforts to validate kinases for cancer therapy led to the
novel finding that ectopic expression of JAK2 and Aurora A together is
more effective than each alone at inducing normal cells to grow in an
anchorage-independent manner and to invade. In addition, siRNA silencing
or pharmacological inhibition of JAK2 and Aurora A with Ruxolitinib and
Alisertib, respectively, is more effective than blocking each kinase
alone at suppressing anchorage-dependent and -independent growth and
invasion as well as at inducing apoptosis. This led us to develop dual
Aurora and JAK inhibitors, AJI-214 and AJI-100, which potently inhibit
the activities of Aurora A, Aurora B and JAK2 in vitro. In human cancer
cells, these dual inhibitors block the auto-phosphorylation of Aurora A
(Thr-288) and the phosphorylation of the Aurora B substrate histone H3
(Ser-10) and the JAK2 substrate STAT3 (Tyr-705). Furthermore, AJI-214 and
AJI-100 inhibit anchorage dependent and independent cell growth and
invasion and induce G2/M cell cycle accumulation and apoptosis. Finally,
the more soluble AJI-100 was effective at inducing tumor regression of
human xenografts in mice. Taken together, our genetic and pharmacological
studies indicate that targeting Aurora A and JAK2 together is a more
effective approach than each alone at inhibiting malignant transformation
and warrant further advanced pre clinical investigations of dual Aurora
A/JAK2 inhibitors as potential anti tumor agents.

