Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nuclear expression of BCL10 has a role in the regulation of cell
growth and progression of pancreatic cancer through the activation of
NF-B-related signaling


Background:We previously reported that activation of TNF- results in
upregulation of NF-B and nuclear translocation of BCL3 and BCL10 in
breast cancer cell line and lymphoma cell line (J Biol Chem
2006;281:167-75, Blood 2008;112:2927-34). Furthermore, we recently
demonstrated that BCL10 plays an important role in controlling the growth
of cervical cancer cells through NF-B dependent cyclin D1 regulation
(Gynecol Oncol 2012;126:245-51). Since NF-B activation has been shown to
occur in the pathogenesis of pancreatic cancer, we sought to investigate
whether BCL10-signaling possesses clinical significance in relation to
pancreatic cancer.Methods:Three pancreatic cancer cell lines (PANC-1,
AsPC-1, and BxPC-3) were used in this study. Cell cycle was analyzed by
flow cytometry. The expression of protein and mRNA of BCL10- and NF-B-
related signaling was assessed by immunoblotting and quantitative
real-time polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR), respectively. The
DNA-binding activity of NF-B was determined by the luciferase assay. The
expression of BCL10, and NF-B in tumor cells from recurrent, locally
advanced, and metastatic pancreatic patients who received chemotherapy
was examined using immunohistochemical staining.Results:We transfected
three pancreatic cancer cell lines with BCL10 small interfering RNA
(siRNA), and discovered that the down-regulation of BCL10 inhibited the
viability of these pancreatic cancer cells through the G1 arrest. BCL10
siRNA treatment inhibited the expression of p-IKK and p-IB, and nuclear
BCL3 translocation, and also down-regulated NF-B activation and its
downstream cell cycle proteins, c-Myc, and cyclin B1. The results of
qRT-PCR showed that BCL10 siRNA treatment inhibited the mRNA expression
levels of BCL10, BCL3, c-Myc, and cyclin B1. Our results reveal that
patients with nuclear BCL10 expression had a worse median overall
survival than those without (7.9 months versus 16.9 months, p = 0.007).
Furthermore, nuclear expression of BCL10 was closely associated with
nuclear BCL3 expression (p Background:We previously reported that
activation of TNF- results in upregulation of NF-B and nuclear
translocation of BCL3 and BCL10 in breast cancer cell line and lymphoma
cell line (J Biol Chem 2006;281:167-75, Blood 2008;112:2927-34).
Furthermore, we recently demonstrated that BCL10 plays an important role
in controlling the growth of cervical cancer cells through NF-B dependent
cyclin D1 regulation (Gynecol Oncol 2012;126:245-51). Since NF-B
activation has been shown to occur in the pathogenesis of pancreatic
cancer, we sought to investigate whether BCL10-signaling possesses
clinical significance in relation to pancreatic cancer.Methods:Three
pancreatic cancer cell lines (PANC-1, AsPC-1, and BxPC-3) were used in
this study. Cell cycle was analyzed by flow cytometry. The expression of
protein and mRNA of BCL10- and NF-B- related signaling was assessed by
immunoblotting and quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction
(qRT-PCR), respectively. The DNA-binding activity of NF-B was determined
by the luciferase assay. The expression of BCL10, and NF-B in tumor cells
from recurrent, locally advanced, and metastatic pancreatic patients who
received chemotherapy was examined using immunohistochemical
staining.Results:We transfected three pancreatic cancer cell lines with
BCL10 small interfering RNA (siRNA), and discovered that the
down-regulation of BCL10 inhibited the viability of these pancreatic
cancer cells through the G1 arrest. BCL10 siRNA treatment inhibited the
expression of p-IKK and p-IB, and nuclear BCL3 translocation, and also
down-regulated NF-B activation and its downstream cell cycle proteins,
c-Myc, and cyclin B1. The results of qRT-PCR showed that BCL10 siRNA
treatment inhibited the mRNA expression levels of BCL10, BCL3, c-Myc, and
cyclin B1. Our results reveal that patients with nuclear BCL10 expression
had a worse median overall survival than those without (7.9 months versus
16.9 months, p = 0.007). Furthermore, nuclear expression of BCL10 was
closely associated with nuclear BCL3 expression (p < 0.001), and NF-B
activation (p Background:We previously reported that activation of TNF-
results in upregulation of NF-B and nuclear translocation of BCL3 and
BCL10 in breast cancer cell line and lymphoma cell line (J Biol Chem
2006;281:167-75, Blood 2008;112:2927-34). Furthermore, we recently
demonstrated that BCL10 plays an important role in controlling the growth
of cervical cancer cells through NF-B dependent cyclin D1 regulation
(Gynecol Oncol 2012;126:245-51). Since NF-B activation has been shown to
occur in the pathogenesis of pancreatic cancer, we sought to investigate
whether BCL10-signaling possesses clinical significance in relation to
pancreatic cancer.Methods:Three pancreatic cancer cell lines (PANC-1,
AsPC-1, and BxPC-3) were used in this study. Cell cycle was analyzed by
flow cytometry. The expression of protein and mRNA of BCL10- and NF-B-
related signaling was assessed by immunoblotting and quantitative
real-time polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR), respectively. The
DNA-binding activity of NF-B was determined by the luciferase assay. The
expression of BCL10, and NF-B in tumor cells from recurrent, locally
advanced, and metastatic pancreatic patients who received chemotherapy
was examined using immunohistochemical staining.Results:We transfected
three pancreatic cancer cell lines with BCL10 small interfering RNA
(siRNA), and discovered that the down-regulation of BCL10 inhibited the
viability of these pancreatic cancer cells through the G1 arrest. BCL10
siRNA treatment inhibited the expression of p-IKK and p-IB, and nuclear
BCL3 translocation, and also down-regulated NF-B activation and its
downstream cell cycle proteins, c-Myc, and cyclin B1. The results of
qRT-PCR showed that BCL10 siRNA treatment inhibited the mRNA expression
levels of BCL10, BCL3, c-Myc, and cyclin B1. Our results reveal that
patients with nuclear BCL10 expression had a worse median overall
survival than those without (7.9 months versus 16.9 months, p = 0.007).
Furthermore, nuclear expression of BCL10 was closely associated with
nuclear BCL3 expression (p < 0.001), and NF-B activation (p <
0.001).Conclusions:Our findings indicate that nuclear BCL10 plays an
important role in controlling the growth and progression of pancreatic
cancer cells through NF-B-related signaling pathway.

