Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Overexpressed TYRO3 in colorectal cancer regulates tumorigenesis
and metastasis


Colon cancer is a multiple-step disease with less 10% survival rate at
late stage. To achieve improvement of colon cancer therapy, we aim to
find novel oncogenes that contribute to colon cancer progression. By our
in-house bioinformatic tool prediction, we identified TYRO3 to be a
potential oncogene. TYRO3, a receptor tyrosine kinase, was reported to be
overexpressed in melanoma via genomic screening; however, its role in
cancer initiation, progression, and malignancy remains largely unknown.
Herein, we showed that compared to normal colon tissue, TYRO3 is
overexpressed in polyps and colon cancer tissue. The expression level in
colon cancer is significantly associated with cancer malignancy.
Overexpression of TYRO3 increased cell proliferation, motility, and
anchorage-independent colony formation in vitro. Furthermore, we
confirmed TYRO3 tumorigenic potential by xenograft model and metastatic
assay in vivo. To investigate novel mechanisms mediated by TYRO3, we
performed next generation sequencing (RNS-seq) to identify genes that
were upregulated under TYRO3 overexpression. Results showed that TYRO3
significantly enriched genes involved in epithelial-mesenchymal
transition and tumorigenesis, which is consistent with our hypothesis and
finding. Taken together, these data provide evidence to support that
TYRO3 plays an important role in malignant process of colon cancer
progression likely through its novel functions in the nucleus.

