Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hypermethylation of a TGF- regulated micro-RNA, miR-193a, predicts
prognosis in ovarian cancer


Ovarian cancer is one of the most lethal cancers in the female
reproductive system. One of the hypotheses suggests that ovarian cancer
arises from cancer stem/progenitor cell with surface antigen CD117 (or
c-kit). In order to identify microRNAs (miRNAs) that can regulate the
expression of c-kit, bioinformatic prediction was performed and
identified miR-193a as one of the regulators. Expression analysis showed
that miR-193a was up-regulated upon TGF- treatment in immortalized
ovarian surface epithelial cells (IOSE) cells. On the contrary,
expression of miR-193a cannot be detected in a panel of ovarian cancer
cell lines (SKOV3, A2780, CP70, MCP2, MCP3). Bisulphite pyrosequencing
revealed that promoter CpG island of miR-193a was not methylated in IOSE
cell but hypermethylated in the ovarian cancer cells showing
down-regulation of miR-193a. Treatment of 5azaDC, a DNMT inhibitor,
partially restored miR-193a expression in the ovarian cancer cells, thus
suggesting DNA hypermethylation may be responsible for the
down-regulation of miR-193a in ovarian cancer. Further clinical studies
using bisulphite pyrosequencing found that promoter region of miR-193a
was heavily methylated in 109 ovarian cancer patient samples but not in
normal OSE samples. Kaplan-meier analysis revealed that patients with
higher methylation of miR-193a was significantly associated with shorter
overall survival and progression-free survival. Taken together, miR-193a
may be a TGF- regulated tumor suppressor micro-RNA and is epigenetically
silenced in ovarian cancer. Methylation of miR-193a may be able to
predict prognosis in ovarian cancer patients.

