Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mechanism of field cancerization


We developed a strategy that combines histologic and genetic mapping that
permits interrogation of the chronology of genetic changes associated
with cancer development on a whole-organ scale. By using this approach,
we analyzed the sequence of genetic alterations contiguous to the tumor
suppressor RB1 and identified a set of alternative target genes that we
term forerunner (FR) genes whose silencing was associated with
development of clonal plaque-like mucosal field effects initiating
bladder carcinogenesis.Expression and methylation studies identified five
candidate FR genes (ITM2B, LPAR6, MLNR, CAB39L, and ARL11). In vitro
mechanistic studies demonstrated that three of these genes (ITM2B, LPAR6
and ARL11) control cell survival and proliferation consistent with their
loss of function being contributory to tumorigenesis, and in vivo genetic
ablation of Lpar6 in a mouse model resulted in activation of basal/stem
cell transcriptional programs involving STAT3 and NFB causing
proliferative expansion of the basal layer of the urothelium. Whole
genome analyses of the field effects in a representative whole-organ map
revealed a sequential accumulation of alterations in RHO/RAC/Cdc42
pathways that control invasion and cell motility.These studies identify
FR genetic alterations in tissue fields as one of the earliest events in
carcinogenesis and provide comprehensive description of field
cancerization in a primary human tumor. The results have important
implications for the development of novel detection markers and
chemoprevention therapeutic strategies.

