Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrated therapeutic antibody development at the National
Research Council of Canada


Advances in genomics and antibody engineering have enabled the
development of an innovative class of targeted therapies, namely
therapeutic antibodies, for the treatment of diseases with significant
unmet medical needs such as cancer. Therapeutic antibodies represent one
of the largest and fastest growing classes of medications. The National
Research Council of Canada (NRC) has built a chain of cutting edge
technology platforms needed to discover, engineer and produce therapeutic
monoclonal antibodies with the goal of partnering with industrial and
academic centers to advance research and development of this important
class of therapeutics.Target Identification- Tumor targets were
identified using a combination of proteomics, transcriptomics and
bioinformatic approaches. Out of these lists, approximately 40 tumor
targets were selected and over 3,000 antibodies of mouse and camelid
origin were generated against these targets.Antibody generation can be
done conventionally, using the recombinant target protein produced using
NRC's high efficiency cell expression platforms in CHO or HEK293 cells or
by direct immunization with plasmid DNA constructs. Clone selection is
carried out by ELISA and typically 50 antibodies/target are identified
for further characterization.Antibody characterization and validation-
The affinities of the antibodies are determined by SPR biosensor
analysis. Epitope mapping can be carried out so that representative
antibodies can be selected for further validation in appropriate
cell-based assays (many of which are established at NRC) and animal
models.Therapeutic antibody Optimization, Bioprocessing and
Biomanufacturing- Therapeutic antibodies selected for development can be
further optimized using antibody engineering technologies to humanize
them and/or modify their glycosylation patterns to improve their effector
function, pharmacokinetics, solubility and stability as well as reduce
their immunogenicity. The NRC platform for large scale protein production
has the capacity to manufacture up to 500 g of commercial grade antibody
in a cGMP certified CHO cell line which is ready for transfer to CMOs .

