Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TGF- insensitivity promotes the proliferation of human CD8+ T
cells in metastatic castration resistant prostate cancer (MCRPC) patients


Introduction: Tumor derived TGF- is a potent immunosuppressant molecule
which promotes prostate cancer (CaP) progression. We previously reported
that tumor derived TGF- can suppress the growth of human CD8+ T cells.
Here we report a preclinical study on the antitumor response and growth
of human CD8+ T cells which were rendered insensitive to TGF-.Methods:
Whole blood (50 ml/each pt) was collected from three human pts who
previously had MCRPC and docetaxel chemotherapy. CD8+ T cells were
isolated using the EasySep CD8+ T cells enrichment kit, and then cultured
in the presence of clinical grade IL-2 (100unit/ml, Prometheus Labs) and
CD-3 Biotin/CD28/Anti-Biotin beads (1:1, Miltenyi Biotec). We developed
an TRIIDN-TK-IRES-anti-PSMA chimeric T cell receptor construct
(TRIIDN-TK-IRES-PZ-1) using an anti-PSMA IgTCR() gene (provided by Dr.
Sadelain) and a dominant negative TGF- type II receptor (TRIIDN) and
Thymidine kinase (TK). Infection with a retroviral vector encoding this
construct could induce T cells to be PSMA reactive, TGF- insensitive, and
undergo TK inducible cell suicide. The purification of CD8 T cells was
confirmed by immunofluorescence assay. The transfection of
TRIIDN-TK-IRES-PZ-1 into the packaging cell line GP2-293 was performed by
using lipofectamine 2000, and the retrovirus particles were infected into
CD8+ T cells. Three days after infection, the expression of TK, anti-PSMA
IgTCR() in CD8+ T cells were evaluated by PCR and RT-PCR. The growth of
the CD8+ T cells were evaluated by cell counter every 3 days, and [3H]
Thymidine incorporation assay was used to evaluate cell growth under the
treatment of TGF- (10ng/ml, 48hours).Results: Highly purified CD8+ T
cells were isolated from each pt (CD3+: 94.5%; CD8+: 98.6%). Group 1:
CD8+ T cells infected with TRIIDN-TK-IRES-PZ-1 strongly express anti-PSMA
IgTCR() gene and TK gene compared with the uninfected control group
(Group 2). On the 7th day after transfection, the infected cells in Group
1 increased 4 fold (from 0.045x106/ml to 0.18x106/ml); however, Group 2
only increased Introduction: Tumor derived TGF- is a potent
immunosuppressant molecule which promotes prostate cancer (CaP)
progression. We previously reported that tumor derived TGF- can suppress
the growth of human CD8+ T cells. Here we report a preclinical study on
the antitumor response and growth of human CD8+ T cells which were
rendered insensitive to TGF-.Methods: Whole blood (50 ml/each pt) was
collected from three human pts who previously had MCRPC and docetaxel
chemotherapy. CD8+ T cells were isolated using the EasySep CD8+ T cells
enrichment kit, and then cultured in the presence of clinical grade IL-2
(100unit/ml, Prometheus Labs) and CD-3 Biotin/CD28/Anti-Biotin beads
(1:1, Miltenyi Biotec). We developed an TRIIDN-TK-IRES-anti-PSMA chimeric
T cell receptor construct (TRIIDN-TK-IRES-PZ-1) using an anti-PSMA
IgTCR() gene (provided by Dr. Sadelain) and a dominant negative TGF- type
II receptor (TRIIDN) and Thymidine kinase (TK). Infection with a
retroviral vector encoding this construct could induce T cells to be PSMA
reactive, TGF- insensitive, and undergo TK inducible cell suicide. The
purification of CD8 T cells was confirmed by immunofluorescence assay.
The transfection of TRIIDN-TK-IRES-PZ-1 into the packaging cell line
GP2-293 was performed by using lipofectamine 2000, and the retrovirus
particles were infected into CD8+ T cells. Three days after infection,
the expression of TK, anti-PSMA IgTCR() in CD8+ T cells were evaluated by
PCR and RT-PCR. The growth of the CD8+ T cells were evaluated by cell
counter every 3 days, and [3H] Thymidine incorporation assay was used to
evaluate cell growth under the treatment of TGF- (10ng/ml,
48hours).Results: Highly purified CD8+ T cells were isolated from each pt
(CD3+: 94.5%; CD8+: 98.6%). Group 1: CD8+ T cells infected with
TRIIDN-TK-IRES-PZ-1 strongly express anti-PSMA IgTCR() gene and TK gene
compared with the uninfected control group (Group 2). On the 7th day
after transfection, the infected cells in Group 1 increased 4 fold (from
0.045x106/ml to 0.18x106/ml); however, Group 2 only increased <2 fold
(from 0.064x106/ml to 0.12x106/ml). On the 17th day, the cells in Group 1
were expanded 11.5 fold (from 0.675x106 to 7.8x106) and Group 2 only 3.43
fold (from 0.96x106 to 3.3x106). Thymidine incorporation assay
demonstrated that under the treatment of TGF-, there was no significant
change in Group 1, while the growth of cells in Group 2 were suppressed
by 46.7%.Conclusion: We have reported that tumor derived TGF- suppresses
functioning and proliferation of CD8+ T cells, which results in immune
escape and progression of CaP. Our results indicate that CD8+ T cells
rendered insensitive to TGF- can enhance the proliferation of CD8+ T
cells in human samples obtained from pts. In addition, it is possible
that in combination with an anti-PSMA IgTCR() and TK inducible gene, this
construct may offer a novel immunotherapy for CaP and men with advanced
disease.

