Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting of phosphatidylserine by monoclonal antibodies enhances
activity of immune checkpoint inhibitors in tumors


Phosphatidylserine (PS) is a phospholipid normally residing in the inner
leaflet of the plasma membrane and becomes exposed on tumor vascular
endothelial cells (ECs) and tumor cells. PS exposure becomesenhanced in
response to chemotherapy, irradiation, and oxidative stresses in the
tumor microenvironment. PS exposure in tumors promotes an
immunosuppressive microenvironment which includes the recruitment of
myeloid derived suppressor cells (MDSCs), immature dendritic cells, and
M2-like macrophages as well as the production of anti-inflammatory
cytokines. Binding of PS targeting antibodies on tumor endothelial cells,
tumor cells and their secreted microparticles triggers an Fc-FcR mediated
pro-inflammatory cellular and cytokine response that reverses the
immunosuppressive PS meditated checkpoint, thereby enhancing anti-tumor
immunity. A chimeric PS-targeting antibody, bavituximab, is being used in
combination with chemotherapy to treat patients with solid tumors in
multiple late-stage clinical trials. Using multiple syngeneic tumors in
immune competent mice, we demonstrate PS targeting antibodies enhance the
anti-tumor activity of anti-CTLA-4 and anti-PD-1 antibodies. Tumor growth
inhibition correlates with infiltration of immune cells in tumors and
induction of adaptive immunity. The combination of these mechanisms
promotes strong, localized, anti-tumor responses without the side-effects
of systemic immune activation.

