Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Autophagy mediates HIF2 degradation and suppresses renal
tumorigenesis


Autophagy is a conserved process involved in lysosomal degradation of
protein aggregates and damaged organelles. The role of autophagy in
cancer is a topic of intense debate, and the underlying mechanism is
still not clear. Here we reported that the hypoxia inducible factor 2
(HIF2), an oncogenic transcription factor implicated in renal
tumorigenesis, was in part constitutively degraded by autophagy. HIF2
interacts with autophagy protein LC3, autophagy receptor p62, and
lysosome protein LAMP1. Inhibition of autophagy results in HIF2
accumulation, while induction of autophagy promotes HIF2 degradation. The
E3 ubiquitin ligase activity of the von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) is required
for autophagic degradation of HIF2. There is a complementary interaction
between the proteasome and autophagy in HIF2 degradation. Autophagy
inactivation in ATG5 knockout cells redirects HIF2 to proteasomal
degradation, while proteasome inhibition induced autophagy and favored
the HIF2-p62 interaction. Importantly, we reported that clear cell renal
cell carcinoma (ccRCC) was frequently associated with mono-allelic loss
and/or mutation of autophagy related gene ATG7, and low expression level
of autophagy genes correlated with ccRCC progression. This study sheds
light on the anticancer role for autophagy in ccRCC tumorigenesis, and
reveals constitutive autophagic degradation of HIF2 as a novel tumor
suppression mechanism.

