Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ISC-4, a novel inhibitor of hedgehog-Gli signaling, inhibits
growth of CSC and CTC of melanoma patients


Melanoma is one of the most aggressive cancers, and its incidence and
mortality rate are on rise since no treatment options are available for
metastatic disease. Recent evidences from in vitro and in vivo studies
have demonstrated that aberrant reactivation of the Sonic Hedgehog (SHH)
signaling pathway regulates genes that promote cellular proliferation in
various human cancer stem cells (CSC) 36118-45. In melanoma cells,
RAS-MEK and AKT signaling has also been shown to regulate the nuclear
localization and transcriptional activity of Gli-1. Therefore, the agents
that inhibit activation of Gli transcription factors have emerged as
promising novel therapeutic drugs for pancreatic cancer. Through
extensive structure-activity studies in our laboratory, based on
naturally occurring isothiocyanates (ITCs) and their isosteric selenium
analogs, we have recently identified phenylbutyl isoselecynate (ISC-4) as
a promising agent that significantly retarded melanoma tumor growth
without any systemic toxicity. We demonstrate here the effect of ISC-4 on
the proliferation of CSC and 36118-45CTC (circulating tumor cell) cells
isolated from a melanoma patient. ISC-4 treatments resulted in a
dose-dependent inhibition of SHH signaling (SMO, PTCH-1, Gli1, Gli2, and
Gli3) and induced significant growth inhibition of CSC and CTC cells. The
data demonstrate that Hh signaling regulates proliferation of CSC and CTC
of human melanoma and treatment with agents like ISC-4 might be a novel
approach to prevent growth and metastasis of human melanoma.

