Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Serum-vascular endothelial growth factors (sVEGF) A and C have a
potential as predictive tests for neoadjuvant bevacizumab in primary
breast cancer


Background: Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is the major
angiogenic factor in human cancer; VEGF-A is the most studied cytokine;
VEGF-C is also involved in lymphatic development and both can act through
binding to VEGFR2. Bevacizumab (Bev) is a humanized antibody directed
towards VEGF with a modest effect in unselected HER2-negative breast
cancer (BC). Patients & Methods: These VEGFs were determined in the
randomized GeparQuinto trial investigating Bev as neoadjuvant treatment
for HER2-negative BC (von Minckwitz et al N Eng J Med 2012). Patients
were randomized to neoadjuvant chemotherapy with ECx4 and docetaxelx4
with or without concomitant Bev. VEGF-A, VEGF-C and VEGFR2 (VEGFs) were
determined in serum samples prior to any treatment by use of commercial
enzyme-linked immuno assays (Quantikine, R & D Systems, Minneapolis,
USA). Serum levels of VEGF-A; -C and R2 were analyzed as dichotomized
variables and correlated with pathological complete response (pCR, ypT0
ypN0) at surgery. Results: The VEGFs were determined in 830 (43%) trial
participants of which 289 had triple negative (TN) and 541 hormone
receptor positive (HR+) BC. The median age was 48 years (range 42-56),
81% had a ductal cancer and 44% were grade III. Median levels were 295.0
range 160-497 pg/mL for VEGF-A; 2102 range 1576-2588 pg/mL for VEGF-C;
and 2328 range 1887-2913 pg/mL for VEGFR2, respectively.STEPP
(subpopulation treatment effect pattern plot) analyses revealed a
potential predictive value for all 3 VEGF's. In dichotomized analyses,
TNBC patients with high VEGF-C had a higher chance of pCR with Bev in
univariate analysis [interaction OR=4.4; p= 0.010] and multivariate
analysis (interaction OR=6.5; p= 0.005) adjusted for age ( 50y vs.
Background: Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is the major
angiogenic factor in human cancer; VEGF-A is the most studied cytokine;
VEGF-C is also involved in lymphatic development and both can act through
binding to VEGFR2. Bevacizumab (Bev) is a humanized antibody directed
towards VEGF with a modest effect in unselected HER2-negative breast
cancer (BC). Patients & Methods: These VEGFs were determined in the
randomized GeparQuinto trial investigating Bev as neoadjuvant treatment
for HER2-negative BC (von Minckwitz et al N Eng J Med 2012). Patients
were randomized to neoadjuvant chemotherapy with ECx4 and docetaxelx4
with or without concomitant Bev. VEGF-A, VEGF-C and VEGFR2 (VEGFs) were
determined in serum samples prior to any treatment by use of commercial
enzyme-linked immuno assays (Quantikine, R & D Systems, Minneapolis,
USA). Serum levels of VEGF-A; -C and R2 were analyzed as dichotomized
variables and correlated with pathological complete response (pCR, ypT0
ypN0) at surgery. Results: The VEGFs were determined in 830 (43%) trial
participants of which 289 had triple negative (TN) and 541 hormone
receptor positive (HR+) BC. The median age was 48 years (range 42-56),
81% had a ductal cancer and 44% were grade III. Median levels were 295.0
range 160-497 pg/mL for VEGF-A; 2102 range 1576-2588 pg/mL for VEGF-C;
and 2328 range 1887-2913 pg/mL for VEGFR2, respectively.STEPP
(subpopulation treatment effect pattern plot) analyses revealed a
potential predictive value for all 3 VEGF's. In dichotomized analyses,
TNBC patients with high VEGF-C had a higher chance of pCR with Bev in
univariate analysis [interaction OR=4.4; p= 0.010] and multivariate
analysis (interaction OR=6.5; p= 0.005) adjusted for age ( 50y vs. <
50y), histological type (ductal vs. lobular vs. others), grade (III vs.
I-II), tumor stage (stage 4 vs. 1-3) and nodal status (node-negative vs.
node positive). High VEGFR2 was correlated with pCR in univariate
analysis [interaction OR=7.9; p= 0.017] whilst no effect was seen in
multivariate analysis. HR+BC patients with high VEGF-A had an increased
chance of pCR in univariate analysis [interaction OR=25.7; pBackground:
Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is the major angiogenic factor
in human cancer; VEGF-A is the most studied cytokine; VEGF-C is also
involved in lymphatic development and both can act through binding to
VEGFR2. Bevacizumab (Bev) is a humanized antibody directed towards VEGF
with a modest effect in unselected HER2-negative breast cancer (BC).
Patients & Methods: These VEGFs were determined in the randomized
GeparQuinto trial investigating Bev as neoadjuvant treatment for
HER2-negative BC (von Minckwitz et al N Eng J Med 2012). Patients were
randomized to neoadjuvant chemotherapy with ECx4 and docetaxelx4 with or
without concomitant Bev. VEGF-A, VEGF-C and VEGFR2 (VEGFs) were
determined in serum samples prior to any treatment by use of commercial
enzyme-linked immuno assays (Quantikine, R & D Systems, Minneapolis,
USA). Serum levels of VEGF-A; -C and R2 were analyzed as dichotomized
variables and correlated with pathological complete response (pCR, ypT0
ypN0) at surgery. Results: The VEGFs were determined in 830 (43%) trial
participants of which 289 had triple negative (TN) and 541 hormone
receptor positive (HR+) BC. The median age was 48 years (range 42-56),
81% had a ductal cancer and 44% were grade III. Median levels were 295.0
range 160-497 pg/mL for VEGF-A; 2102 range 1576-2588 pg/mL for VEGF-C;
and 2328 range 1887-2913 pg/mL for VEGFR2, respectively.STEPP
(subpopulation treatment effect pattern plot) analyses revealed a
potential predictive value for all 3 VEGF's. In dichotomized analyses,
TNBC patients with high VEGF-C had a higher chance of pCR with Bev in
univariate analysis [interaction OR=4.4; p= 0.010] and multivariate
analysis (interaction OR=6.5; p= 0.005) adjusted for age ( 50y vs. <
50y), histological type (ductal vs. lobular vs. others), grade (III vs.
I-II), tumor stage (stage 4 vs. 1-3) and nodal status (node-negative vs.
node positive). High VEGFR2 was correlated with pCR in univariate
analysis [interaction OR=7.9; p= 0.017] whilst no effect was seen in
multivariate analysis. HR+BC patients with high VEGF-A had an increased
chance of pCR in univariate analysis [interaction OR=25.7; p< 0.001] and
multivariate analysis [OR=29.4; pBackground: Vascular endothelial growth
factor (VEGF) is the major angiogenic factor in human cancer; VEGF-A is
the most studied cytokine; VEGF-C is also involved in lymphatic
development and both can act through binding to VEGFR2. Bevacizumab (Bev)
is a humanized antibody directed towards VEGF with a modest effect in
unselected HER2-negative breast cancer (BC). Patients & Methods: These
VEGFs were determined in the randomized GeparQuinto trial investigating
Bev as neoadjuvant treatment for HER2-negative BC (von Minckwitz et al N
Eng J Med 2012). Patients were randomized to neoadjuvant chemotherapy
with ECx4 and docetaxelx4 with or without concomitant Bev. VEGF-A, VEGF-C
and VEGFR2 (VEGFs) were determined in serum samples prior to any
treatment by use of commercial enzyme-linked immuno assays (Quantikine, R
& D Systems, Minneapolis, USA). Serum levels of VEGF-A; -C and R2 were
analyzed as dichotomized variables and correlated with pathological
complete response (pCR, ypT0 ypN0) at surgery. Results: The VEGFs were
determined in 830 (43%) trial participants of which 289 had triple
negative (TN) and 541 hormone receptor positive (HR+) BC. The median age
was 48 years (range 42-56), 81% had a ductal cancer and 44% were grade
III. Median levels were 295.0 range 160-497 pg/mL for VEGF-A; 2102 range
1576-2588 pg/mL for VEGF-C; and 2328 range 1887-2913 pg/mL for VEGFR2,
respectively.STEPP (subpopulation treatment effect pattern plot) analyses
revealed a potential predictive value for all 3 VEGF's. In dichotomized
analyses, TNBC patients with high VEGF-C had a higher chance of pCR with
Bev in univariate analysis [interaction OR=4.4; p= 0.010] and
multivariate analysis (interaction OR=6.5; p= 0.005) adjusted for age (
50y vs. < 50y), histological type (ductal vs. lobular vs. others), grade
(III vs. I-II), tumor stage (stage 4 vs. 1-3) and nodal status
(node-negative vs. node positive). High VEGFR2 was correlated with pCR in
univariate analysis [interaction OR=7.9; p= 0.017] whilst no effect was
seen in multivariate analysis. HR+BC patients with high VEGF-A had an
increased chance of pCR in univariate analysis [interaction OR=25.7; p<
0.001] and multivariate analysis [OR=29.4; p< 0.001].A total 37.7% of the
TNBC were classified as having high VEGFC and 31.2% obtained a pCR; 44.8%
with Bev vs. 15.7% without Bev. A total of 89.3% of the TN patients were
classified as high VEGFR2 with a pCR rate of 31.4%; 39.5% with Bev vs.
23.9% without Bev. In the HR+ group, 41.6% were classified as having high
VEGFA with a pCR rate of 6.7%; 11% with Bev vs. 2.6% without
Bev.Conclusions: Results from the prospective GeparQuinto study
demonstrate that VEGFs determined in serum can function as predictive
tests for chemotherapy+/-Bev in the neoadjuvant setting. Prominent
findings were a predictive value for bevacizumab for VEGF-C in TNBC and
for VEGF-A in HR+BC.

