Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of Src, HER2, and EGFR by the multi-kinase inhibitor
KD019 overcomes trastuzumab resistance in breast cancer


KD019 (previously EXEL-7647) is an orally bioavailable spectrum selective
small molecule kinase inhibitor of Src family nonreceptor tyrosine
kinases (Src) as well as HER2, EGFR, and VEGFR2/KDR. Because of its
complement of targets KD019 is able to disrupt multiple components of
tumor pathology and, in earlier studies, KD019 demonstrated robust
activity in multiple in vivo tumor models.In recent years Src has emerged
as a critical convergent node downstream of multiple signaling cascades
initiated by transmembrane receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs), most notably
HER2, EGFR and IGF-1R. Crosstalk between Src and RTKs facilitates
RTK-dependent tumor growth and, in patients with HER2-amplified (HER2+)
breast cancer, where Src is upregulated, may confer resistance to
anti-HER2 therapies.Based on the target specificity of KD019, including
Src, we hypothesized that KD019 may prove to be an effective treatment in
overcoming trastuzumab resistance in HER2+ breast cancer. Here we present
data showing that KD019 effectively inhibited growth of several
trastuzumab resistant cell lines with IC50 of 0.3 uM in vitro. Not only
did KD019 potently inhibit HER2 and EGFR phosphorylation in these cells,
but it also efficiently inhibited the phosphorylation of c-Met through
receptor hetero-oligomerization mechanism, thus downregulating another
pathway by which tumors may escape HER2 targeted therapies. Further, we
demonstrate that once daily dosing of KD019 strongly inhibited tumor
growth in xenograft models of trastuzumab resistance and that Src
activity was inhibited in KD019 treated tumors even 24 hrs after drug
administration. The significance of inhibiting the specific combination
of targets is underscored by the fact that KD019 was 10 fold more potent
when compared to saracatinib (a selective Src inhibitor) in inhibiting
growth of trastuzumab resistant cells, which are also insensitive to
blockade of individual RTKs. Together, these results provide a rational
for clinical investigation of KD019 in patients whose tumors are
resistant to anti-HER2 therapies.

