Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pre-clinical investigation of the wee1 inhibitor MK-1775 using
pharmacodynamic and mechanistic markers in diverse cancer models in vivo


Wee1 kinase is a critical regulator of the G2/M checkpoint by initiating
inhibitory phosphorylation of the conserved tyrosine-15 residue of
cdk1/cdc2. Wee1 also phosphorylates tyrosine 15 of cdk2 and plays a
crucial role in maintaining genome integrity during S-phase. MK1775 (NSC
754352) is a small molecule selective inhibitor of Wee1 kinase that is
currently under clinical evaluation. We have developed a quantitative
immunofluorescence assay to measure inhibition of Wee1 by detection of
pY15 of cyclin-dependent kinases. A full analysis of the pharmacodynamic
(PD) effects of Wee1 inhibition by MK1775, as well as the downstream
mechanistic consequences of Wee1 inhibition on DNA repair, apoptosis, and
premature mitotic entry markers was performed using two xenograft models:
A673 Ewing sarcoma and U87-MG glioblastoma. Four DNA repair markers
(pNbs1, H2AX, Rad51, and pATR) were examined as well as the mitotic
marker pHistone H3. Advanced quantitative image analysis was performed
using Definiens software to measure changes in PD markers by two
approaches: total nuclear area measurements and foci per nucleus.
Definiens software enables enhanced analysis of the markers by
enumeration of the nuclei in the imaged xenograft tissues over an entire
data set with high-content capacity. Our data demonstrate greater than
80% inhibition of pY15-cdk in vivo at the clinically relevant dose of 60
mg/kg (180 mg/m2) MK1775 in two xenograft models. In addition, H2AX
induction was observed after multiple doses of MK1775 as a single agent.
A PD biomarker time course was determined for MK1775 and gemcitabine (NSC
750927) as single agents to develop a drug administration schedule for
combination studies in a Ewing sarcoma model. The time point at which the
DNA damage response peaked following administration of the maximum
tolerated dose of gemcitabine in the mouse was determined. This study
elucidates a broad profile of PD marker response, as well as the
corresponding levels of MK1775 in the xenografts. Funded by NCI Contract
No. HHSN261200800001E.

