Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Increased expression of cancer stem cells markers (CD44, CD90 and
CD133) contributes to disease progression and reduced survival in
hepatoblastoma patients from Egypt: four years survival data


Background: Hepatoblastoma (HB) is an embryonal tumor of the liver that
occurs in infants and young children. Complete surgical resection and
cisplatin-containing chemotherapy are crucial for cure in HB. Cancer stem
cells (CSCs) constitute a newly identified subpopulation, which may
differentiate into heterogeneous progenies of malignant cells. The aim of
this study is to assess the prognostic and predictive values of CSCs
markers (CD133, CD90 and CD44) in a cohort of HB patients from
Egypt.Methods: Disease status was evaluated for 43 HB patients at the
main checkpoints of therapy and during follow-up. Protein and RNA
expressions of CD44, CD 90 and CD 133 were assessed by
immunohistochemistry and quantitative real time (qPCR).Results: OS for
all patients at 4 years was 58.2. OS significantly correlated with
disease stages (stage I&II versus III&IV 81.9% and 30%, pBackground:
Hepatoblastoma (HB) is an embryonal tumor of the liver that occurs in
infants and young children. Complete surgical resection and
cisplatin-containing chemotherapy are crucial for cure in HB. Cancer stem
cells (CSCs) constitute a newly identified subpopulation, which may
differentiate into heterogeneous progenies of malignant cells. The aim of
this study is to assess the prognostic and predictive values of CSCs
markers (CD133, CD90 and CD44) in a cohort of HB patients from
Egypt.Methods: Disease status was evaluated for 43 HB patients at the
main checkpoints of therapy and during follow-up. Protein and RNA
expressions of CD44, CD 90 and CD 133 were assessed by
immunohistochemistry and quantitative real time (qPCR).Results: OS for
all patients at 4 years was 58.2. OS significantly correlated with
disease stages (stage I&II versus III&IV 81.9% and 30%, p<0.001); tumor
response (pBackground: Hepatoblastoma (HB) is an embryonal tumor of the
liver that occurs in infants and young children. Complete surgical
resection and cisplatin-containing chemotherapy are crucial for cure in
HB. Cancer stem cells (CSCs) constitute a newly identified subpopulation,
which may differentiate into heterogeneous progenies of malignant cells.
The aim of this study is to assess the prognostic and predictive values
of CSCs markers (CD133, CD90 and CD44) in a cohort of HB patients from
Egypt.Methods: Disease status was evaluated for 43 HB patients at the
main checkpoints of therapy and during follow-up. Protein and RNA
expressions of CD44, CD 90 and CD 133 were assessed by
immunohistochemistry and quantitative real time (qPCR).Results: OS for
all patients at 4 years was 58.2. OS significantly correlated with
disease stages (stage I&II versus III&IV 81.9% and 30%, p<0.001); tumor
response (p<0.001); CD44, CD 90, CD 133 expression (pBackground:
Hepatoblastoma (HB) is an embryonal tumor of the liver that occurs in
infants and young children. Complete surgical resection and
cisplatin-containing chemotherapy are crucial for cure in HB. Cancer stem
cells (CSCs) constitute a newly identified subpopulation, which may
differentiate into heterogeneous progenies of malignant cells. The aim of
this study is to assess the prognostic and predictive values of CSCs
markers (CD133, CD90 and CD44) in a cohort of HB patients from
Egypt.Methods: Disease status was evaluated for 43 HB patients at the
main checkpoints of therapy and during follow-up. Protein and RNA
expressions of CD44, CD 90 and CD 133 were assessed by
immunohistochemistry and quantitative real time (qPCR).Results: OS for
all patients at 4 years was 58.2. OS significantly correlated with
disease stages (stage I&II versus III&IV 81.9% and 30%, p<0.001); tumor
response (p<0.001); CD44, CD 90, CD 133 expression (p<0.001) versus
treatment modality (total surgical resection versus incomplete or no
resection, 83.8% versus 25.2 %; pBackground: Hepatoblastoma (HB) is an
embryonal tumor of the liver that occurs in infants and young children.
Complete surgical resection and cisplatin-containing chemotherapy are
crucial for cure in HB. Cancer stem cells (CSCs) constitute a newly
identified subpopulation, which may differentiate into heterogeneous
progenies of malignant cells. The aim of this study is to assess the
prognostic and predictive values of CSCs markers (CD133, CD90 and CD44)
in a cohort of HB patients from Egypt.Methods: Disease status was
evaluated for 43 HB patients at the main checkpoints of therapy and
during follow-up. Protein and RNA expressions of CD44, CD 90 and CD 133
were assessed by immunohistochemistry and quantitative real time
(qPCR).Results: OS for all patients at 4 years was 58.2. OS significantly
correlated with disease stages (stage I&II versus III&IV 81.9% and 30%,
p<0.001); tumor response (p<0.001); CD44, CD 90, CD 133 expression
(p<0.001) versus treatment modality (total surgical resection versus
incomplete or no resection, 83.8% versus 25.2 %; p<0.001). Reduced DFS
was associated with CD44 and CD133 expression (pBackground:
Hepatoblastoma (HB) is an embryonal tumor of the liver that occurs in
infants and young children. Complete surgical resection and
cisplatin-containing chemotherapy are crucial for cure in HB. Cancer stem
cells (CSCs) constitute a newly identified subpopulation, which may
differentiate into heterogeneous progenies of malignant cells. The aim of
this study is to assess the prognostic and predictive values of CSCs
markers (CD133, CD90 and CD44) in a cohort of HB patients from
Egypt.Methods: Disease status was evaluated for 43 HB patients at the
main checkpoints of therapy and during follow-up. Protein and RNA
expressions of CD44, CD 90 and CD 133 were assessed by
immunohistochemistry and quantitative real time (qPCR).Results: OS for
all patients at 4 years was 58.2. OS significantly correlated with
disease stages (stage I&II versus III&IV 81.9% and 30%, p<0.001); tumor
response (p<0.001); CD44, CD 90, CD 133 expression (p<0.001) versus
treatment modality (total surgical resection versus incomplete or no
resection, 83.8% versus 25.2 %; p<0.001). Reduced DFS was associated with
CD44 and CD133 expression (p<0.001) only.Conclusion: Complete surgical
resection and systemic chemotherapy significantly improve outcome in HB
with a significantly higher survival rates among patients with early
stage disease. Expression of CSCs markers (CD133, 44, and 90) can predict
poor outcome in HB patients with reduced OS and DFS rates. However
further studies are required to confirm their prognostic and potential
targeted therapy value.

