Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNA mir-93 activates oncogenic c-Met/PI3K/Akt pathway
targeting PTEN in hepatocellular carcinoma


Background; The incidence rate of hepatocellular cellular carcinoma (HCC)
has been rapidly increasing globally; however, no effective systemic
therapy has been established for advanced HCC after first line therapy
with Sorafenib fails. Combining the immediate need for more effective
therapy and emerging reports on epigenetic events in HCC, we aimed to
identify specific micro RNA (miR) regulating oncogenic pathways in HCC to
serve as potential therapeutic targets.Materials and Methods; We
performed initial screening by miR array analysis in 6 HCC cell lines, as
well as stage I-IV HCC paraffin-embedded archival tissue (PEAT) specimens
(n=47) which were compared to normal livers and liver cirrhosis specimens
(n=74). IHC staining analysis of c-Met and miRs expression by qRT-PCR
were performed using cell lines and PEAT specimens. The effect on miR
levels on recombinant HGF treatment of HCC cells was assessed. We
performed functional miR assays by luciferase-vectors with 3 untranslated
sequences (3UTR) targeted to specific miR binding regions transfected to
HCC cells. c-Met/PI3K/Akt pathway analysis was examined using qRT-PCR and
western blot analysis. Biological functional activities of miR in HCC
were assessed using proliferation, migration, invasion, and 3D sphered
colony assays. Chemosensitivity of HCC kinase inhibitors, Sorafenib and
Tivantinib on HCC cell lines were examined using a cell viability
assay.Results; We identified that miR-93 was expressed over 10-fold in
HCC cell lines compared to normal liver cells via screening by miR array
analysis. miR-93 expression was significantly upregulated in HCC PEAT
specimens compared to normal and cirrhosis liver specimens (p=0.002).
miR-93 expression was shown to have a significant correlation with IHC
staining of c-Met protein in HCC PEAT. In vitro studies demonstrated that
the HCC cells treated with recombinant HGF (50 M; 24 hr) induced
overexpression of miR-93. Focusing on miR-93 target genes, miR-93 was
demonstrated to interfere with the PTEN expression through binding of
specific 3 UTR regions. miR-93 oncogenic effects were shown to regulate
phosphorylation of Akt by suppressing PTEN. We demonstrated that miR-93
was silencing tumor-related pathway genes, whereby its function is
controlling c-Met/PI3K/Akt signal transduction. It was confirmed that
inhibiting miR-93 expression (anti-miR) would suppress proliferation,
migration, and invasion of HCC cells. Anti-miR treatment of HCC cell
lines significantly enhanced chemosensitivity against kinase inhibitors,
Sorafenib (p=0.021) and Tivantinib (pBackground; The incidence rate of
hepatocellular cellular carcinoma (HCC) has been rapidly increasing
globally; however, no effective systemic therapy has been established for
advanced HCC after first line therapy with Sorafenib fails. Combining the
immediate need for more effective therapy and emerging reports on
epigenetic events in HCC, we aimed to identify specific micro RNA (miR)
regulating oncogenic pathways in HCC to serve as potential therapeutic
targets.Materials and Methods; We performed initial screening by miR
array analysis in 6 HCC cell lines, as well as stage I-IV HCC
paraffin-embedded archival tissue (PEAT) specimens (n=47) which were
compared to normal livers and liver cirrhosis specimens (n=74). IHC
staining analysis of c-Met and miRs expression by qRT-PCR were performed
using cell lines and PEAT specimens. The effect on miR levels on
recombinant HGF treatment of HCC cells was assessed. We performed
functional miR assays by luciferase-vectors with 3 untranslated sequences
(3UTR) targeted to specific miR binding regions transfected to HCC cells.
c-Met/PI3K/Akt pathway analysis was examined using qRT-PCR and western
blot analysis. Biological functional activities of miR in HCC were
assessed using proliferation, migration, invasion, and 3D sphered colony
assays. Chemosensitivity of HCC kinase inhibitors, Sorafenib and
Tivantinib on HCC cell lines were examined using a cell viability
assay.Results; We identified that miR-93 was expressed over 10-fold in
HCC cell lines compared to normal liver cells via screening by miR array
analysis. miR-93 expression was significantly upregulated in HCC PEAT
specimens compared to normal and cirrhosis liver specimens (p=0.002).
miR-93 expression was shown to have a significant correlation with IHC
staining of c-Met protein in HCC PEAT. In vitro studies demonstrated that
the HCC cells treated with recombinant HGF (50 M; 24 hr) induced
overexpression of miR-93. Focusing on miR-93 target genes, miR-93 was
demonstrated to interfere with the PTEN expression through binding of
specific 3 UTR regions. miR-93 oncogenic effects were shown to regulate
phosphorylation of Akt by suppressing PTEN. We demonstrated that miR-93
was silencing tumor-related pathway genes, whereby its function is
controlling c-Met/PI3K/Akt signal transduction. It was confirmed that
inhibiting miR-93 expression (anti-miR) would suppress proliferation,
migration, and invasion of HCC cells. Anti-miR treatment of HCC cell
lines significantly enhanced chemosensitivity against kinase inhibitors,
Sorafenib (p=0.021) and Tivantinib (p<0.001).Conclusion: Our results
indicated that miR-93 is targeting PTEN involved in tumorigenesis of HCC
through the oncogenic c-Met/PI3K/Akt pathway. We demonstrated that
anti-miR-93 enhances chemosensitivity against Sorafenib and Tivantinib in
HCC. miR-93 is a potential therapeutic target to mitigate
chemosensitivity to kinase inhibitors in HCC.Note: This abstract was not
presented at the meeting.

