Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Quiescence induced checkpoint activation in the absence of CIZ1


The CIZ1 protein is required for timely entry to S phase following exit
from quiescence (1). We show here that CIZ1 is also required for accurate
entry into quiescence. Analysis of quiescence entry following contact
inhibition in a CIZ1-deletion model has revealed a role in dampening a
previously unreported quiescence checkpoint, evidenced by ubiquitous
post-replicative phosphorylation of histone H2AX and activation of
checkpoint kinases ATM and CHK1. Subsequent emergence of proliferating
colonies indicates escape from checkpoint-mediated arrest, and begins to
implicate inappropriate response to contact induced signaling as a novel
endogenous driver of oncogenesis. Unscheduled checkpoint activation was
also observed in bone marrow cells from juvenile CIZ1 null mice, and high
frequency B-cell lymphoma in young adults in the absence of any
additional oncogenic stimulation, supporting the idea that CIZ1 plays a
very early role in tumorigenesis.Analysis of cell cycle progression using
immunofluorescence and flow cytometry of primary fibroblasts from
post-natal CIZ1 null mice revealed cell cycle elongation, with extended
expression of cyclins D2 and E1, increased cyclin A2, and altered p21,
p27 and CDK2, but no checkpoint activation. Thus, CIZ1 null cells can
tolerate altered expression, targeting and recruitment of multiple cell
cycle regulators. Checkpoint activation occurs only after exit from the
cell cycle, reflecting aberrant response to contact induced signaling and
failure to accurately transition into a stable quiescent
state.Inappropriate expression of CIZ1 splice variants has been
previously linked with both adult and pediatric cancers (2-4), and shown
to play a proliferation-promoting role in lung (4) and breast (5) tumor
models. Furthermore, CIZ1 b-variant has biomarker capability for the
early detection of lung cancer (4). Despite these advances, the precise
role of CIZ1 in the cell is not yet understood. The CIZ1 knock out mouse
model described here, and a related model (6), indicate a tumor
suppressor function, which is apparently at odds with the DNA
replication- and proliferation-promoting roles reported previously. The
current work helps to reconcile these observations by showing that CIZ1s
established activity in the promotion of cyclin A-mediated initiation of
DNA replication (1) is as a coordinator. This in fact, influences
multiple cyclins and CDKis, however, impairment of this capability during
cell cycle progression may not underlie CIZ1s role in tumorigenesis. Our
central finding is that altered cell cycle homeostasis in CIZ1 null cells
does not lead to checkpoint activation, until they are driven to contact
induced quiescence.1 Copeland et al (2010) J Cell Sci 123, 1108-152
Warder & Keherly (2003) J Biomed Sci.10, 406-173 Rahman et al (2007)
Human Mutation 28, 993-10044 Higgins et al (2012) Proc Natl Acad Sci U S
A 109, E3128-355 den Hollander et al (2006) Cancer Research 66, 11021-306
Nishibe et al (2013) FEBS Lett 587, 1529-35

