Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: FOXM1 regulates doxorubicin resistance through the non homologous
end joining pathway and is associated with recurrence of bladder cancer


Non-muscle invasive bladder cancer (NMIBC) remains a very troublesome
cancer to care because of high recurrence rates. In the previous study,
we characterized a gene expression dataset from 102 NMIBC patients of the
Korean cohort to identify a signature associated with disease recurrence.
In recurrent bladder cancers, the expression of FOXM1 (Forkhead Box M1)
was increased compared to primary cancers. Although there is a
relationship between DNA repair pathway and FOXM1, it remains unclear
whether FOXM1 is associated with DNA repair mediated cancer recurrence.
To investigate this association, we used five different human bladder
cancer cell lines to examine the expression level of FOXM1. Two cancer
cell lines (5637 and EJ cells) showed the increased level of FOXM1 than
other three cancer cell lines (UC5, LD611 and UC9 cells). We examined the
chemoresistance with chemotherapy reagent (Doxorubicin) and checked the
possible regulation of DNA repair pathway by FOXM1 in these cell lines.
The cell lines which elevated FOXM1 expression showed high expression
levels of Non-homologous end joining (NHEJ) pathway genes (Ku70, Ku80,
LIG4 and XRCC4). To examine the direct interaction between the FOXM1 and
NHEJ pathway genes, the binding activity was checked by a promoter assay
and chromatin immunoprecipitation. We revealed that the expression levels
of NHEJ pathway genes are elevated on activation of exogenous FOXM1.
Therefore, we suggest a novel activity of FOXM1 has a role in cancer
recurrence through the NHEJ pathway in bladder cancer cells.

