Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel image-based cytometry method for autophagy detection in
living cells


Autophagy is an important cellular catabolic process that plays a variety
of important roles, including maintenance of the amino acid pool during
starvation, recycling of damaged proteins and organelles, and clearance
of intracellular microbes. Currently employed autophagy detection methods
include fluorescence microscopy, biochemical measurement, SDS-PAGE, and
Western blotting, but they are time-consuming, labor-intensive, and
require much experience for accurate interpretation. More recently,
development of novel fluorescent probes have allowed the investigation of
autophagy via standard flow cytometry. However, flow cytometers remain
relatively expensive and require a considerable amount of maintenance.
Previously, image-based cytometry has been shown to perform automated
fluorescence-based cellular analysis comparable to flow cytometry. In
this study, we developed a novel method using the Cellometer image-based
cytometer in combination with Cyto-ID Green dye for autophagy detection
in live cells. The method is compared to flow cytometry by measuring
macroautophagy in nutrient-starved Jurkat cells. Results demonstrate
similar trends of autophagic response, but different magnitude of
fluorescence signal increases, which may arise from different analysis
approaches characteristic of the two instrument platforms. The
possibility of using this method for drug discovery applications is also
demonstrated through the measurement of dose-response kinetics upon
induction of autophagy with rapamycin and tamoxifen. The described
image-based cytometry/fluorescent dye method should serve as a useful
addition to the current arsenal of techniques available in support of
autophagy-based drug discovery relating to various pathological disorders.

