Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Establishment of a patient-derived orthotopic xenograft (PDOX)
model of patient cervical cancer


We implanted a tumor resected from a patient with metastatic
HER-2-positive cervical cancer from 8 NOD/SCID mice (F1; NOD/SCID-sc) and
10 nude mice (F1; Nude-sc) subcutaneously, and 8 nude mice (F1; Nude-soi)
orthotopically. Five out of 8 NOD/SCID mice died within 7 days after
implantation. Infections around the surgical wound, loss of weight and of
lethargy were observed in post-operatively in other mice. We examined the
tumor-take rate of each model 8 weeks after implantation. Tumors grew in
3 out of 3 mice in F1; NOD/SCID-sc (100 %); 7 out of 10 mice in F1;
nude-sc (70 %) and 6 out of 8 mice in F1; nude-soi group (75 %),
respectively. The metastatic tumors (peritoneal dissemination, liver
metastasis, lung metastasis or lymph node metastasis) were detected in 4
mice in F1; nude-soi mice (50 %). We found all xenografts including the
metastatic tumors had histological structures similar to the original
tumor and were stained by anti-human HER-2 antibody. Next, we implanted
the small fragments of subcutaneous tumors from F1; Nude-sc mice (F2;
sc-sc) or the primary tumors of F1; nude-soi mice (F2; soi-sc) to another
set of nude mice (20 mice each) subcutaneously, and examined the
tumor-take rate of each group 4 weeks and 8 weeks after implantation.
Eight mice in the F2; sc-sc group (40 %) and 16 mice in the F2; soi-sc
group (80 %) had tumors at week 4, and 15 mice in the F2; sc-sc group (75
%) and 19 mice in the F2; soi-sc group (95 %) had tumors at week 8. These
results suggest that PDOX in nude mouse model recapitulates the
biological behaviors of the original tumor and has the sufficient
tumor-take rate.

