Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of immunocytotoxic RNA therapeutics for human melanoma


Pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) are a pivotal component of
anti-infectious immunity, and selective induction of PRR-mediated
apoptosis in cancer cells represents a novel therapeutic strategy.
Retinoic acid inducible gene-I (RIG-I) is a cytoplasmic PRR that
recognizes virus-associated molecular patterns, such as uncapped
5triphosphate (5ppp) RNA. RIG-I activation triggers innate immune
response and apoptosis in infected cells, resulting in the inhibition of
viral spread. Interestingly, certain cancer cells are highly sensitive to
RIG-I-mediated apoptosis, and treatment with RIG-I-stimulating RNAs can
selectively kill cancer cells and facilitate the induction of anti-cancer
immunity. Therefore, RIG-I-stimulating RNAs may prove valuable as
immunostimulatory and anti-cancer agents. Because RNAs are extremely
sensitive to serum nucleases, modified RNAs have been employed to
increase the stability of RNA-based therapeutics. Such modifications,
however, often abrogate the immunostimulatory activity of RNAs, which
hinders their development as immunostimulatory agents. Herein, we
demonstrate that short single-stranded RNAs (ssRNAs) (23-93 nucleotides)
with 5ppp and stem-loop structure(s) are a potent stimulus for type I
interferon (IFN) production and apoptosis of human melanoma and prostate
cancer cells. 2fluoro (2F) modification of these 5ppp ssRNAs not only
improves serum stability, but also enhances the ability of the RNAs to
induce IFN production and apoptosis of human cancer cells, compared to
their unmodified counterparts, while 2 O-methyl modification abrogates
the anti-cancer and IFN-inducing activities of 5ppp ssRNAs. These 5ppp 2F
ssRNAs elicit RIG-I- and mitochondrial antiviral-signaling
protein-mediated IFN production and cytotoxic effects. This study
suggests that such modified RNAs may represent a novel and effective
anti-cancer therapeutic.

