Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genetically encoded chimeric polypeptide nanoparticles for
gemcitabine delivery to solid tumors


Gemcitabine (2,2-difluorodeoxycytidine) (dFdC) is a chemotherapeutic drug
indicated for the treatment of pancreatic, bladder, NSCLC, breast and
ovarian cancers. The use of gemcitabine for the treatment of other
cancers, including gallbladder cancer, cervical cancer, colorectal
cancer, non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, and Kaposi's sarcoma, has been clinically
investigated. The cytotoxic effect of gemcitabine is due to inhibition of
DNA synthesis by two mechanisms of action: (i) dFdCTP directly competes
with dCTP for incorporation into DNA, inhibiting further DNA synthesis
via masked chain termination; (ii) dFdCDP inhibits ribonucleotide
reductase (which catalyses reactions that produce deoxynucleoside
triphosphates for DNA synthesis). However, the major fraction of the
administered drug undergoes rapid metabolism into dFdU by deamination,
primarily in blood and then in other major organs. Therefore, the plasma
half-life of gemcitabine following intravenous administration is short,
ranging from 8-17 min in human plasma and 9 min in murine plasma. Like
other drugs, Gemcitabine also shows a lack of selectivity towards tumor
cells, sub-optimal pharmacokinetics and bio-distribution, leading to
limited efficacy and significant systemic toxicity. Finally, the rapid
metabolism of gemcitabine generates the need for high doses of drug,
which in turn exhibits dose-limiting systemic side effects, such as
hematological (myelosuppression, neutropenia, anemia, thrombocytopenia)
and other toxicities (edema, cutaneous toxicity, pulmonary toxicity,
dyspnea).In an effort to overcome the limited efficacy and systemic
toxicity of current Gemcitabine formulations, we have designed a novel
polypeptide drug delivery system where Gemcitabine is covalently attached
to a genetically engineered chimeric polypeptide (CP) through a pH
sensitive linker such that covalent conjugation of multiple copies of
Gemcitabine at one end of the CP triggers the formation of sub 100 nm
size nanoparticles that are ideal for targeting solid tumors through the
enhanced permeability and retention (EPR) effect.We found that upon
conjugation, CP-Gemcitabine conjugate form nanoparticles with a diameter
of 40 nm and narrow size distribution (Gemcitabine
(2,2-difluorodeoxycytidine) (dFdC) is a chemotherapeutic drug indicated
for the treatment of pancreatic, bladder, NSCLC, breast and ovarian
cancers. The use of gemcitabine for the treatment of other cancers,
including gallbladder cancer, cervical cancer, colorectal cancer,
non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, and Kaposi's sarcoma, has been clinically
investigated. The cytotoxic effect of gemcitabine is due to inhibition of
DNA synthesis by two mechanisms of action: (i) dFdCTP directly competes
with dCTP for incorporation into DNA, inhibiting further DNA synthesis
via masked chain termination; (ii) dFdCDP inhibits ribonucleotide
reductase (which catalyses reactions that produce deoxynucleoside
triphosphates for DNA synthesis). However, the major fraction of the
administered drug undergoes rapid metabolism into dFdU by deamination,
primarily in blood and then in other major organs. Therefore, the plasma
half-life of gemcitabine following intravenous administration is short,
ranging from 8-17 min in human plasma and 9 min in murine plasma. Like
other drugs, Gemcitabine also shows a lack of selectivity towards tumor
cells, sub-optimal pharmacokinetics and bio-distribution, leading to
limited efficacy and significant systemic toxicity. Finally, the rapid
metabolism of gemcitabine generates the need for high doses of drug,
which in turn exhibits dose-limiting systemic side effects, such as
hematological (myelosuppression, neutropenia, anemia, thrombocytopenia)
and other toxicities (edema, cutaneous toxicity, pulmonary toxicity,
dyspnea).In an effort to overcome the limited efficacy and systemic
toxicity of current Gemcitabine formulations, we have designed a novel
polypeptide drug delivery system where Gemcitabine is covalently attached
to a genetically engineered chimeric polypeptide (CP) through a pH
sensitive linker such that covalent conjugation of multiple copies of
Gemcitabine at one end of the CP triggers the formation of sub 100 nm
size nanoparticles that are ideal for targeting solid tumors through the
enhanced permeability and retention (EPR) effect.We found that upon
conjugation, CP-Gemcitabine conjugate form nanoparticles with a diameter
of 40 nm and narrow size distribution (<10%). In a human colon cancer
cell (HCT-116), the CP-Gemcitabine conjugate showed substantial
cytotoxicity that was similar to free drug. These results are promising
because they demonstrate the potential of rationally engineered
nanoparticle drug carriers to greatly improve the efficacy of currently
approved cytotoxic agents for the treatment of solid tumors. In ongoing
work that will be presented at the AACR meeitng, the efficacy of
CP-Gemcitabine nanoparticles in a number of tumor models in mice will be
reported.

