Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrated functional proteomic profiling in myelodysplastic
syndrome (MDS) and acute myeloid leukemia (AML): MDS-like signature is
associated with favorable outcome in patients with AML


Background: One third of MDS cases transforms into AML. MDS and AML are
considered one spectrum of myeloid stem cell disease. We have previously
reported MDS and AML specific proteomic signatures associated with
different survival outcomes. However, there exists no study that
integrated both MDS and AML cases to explore common proteomic signatures
that harbor prognostic implications.Methods: We collected bone marrow and
peripheral blood CD34+ samples from 116 MDS patients and 511 AML
(non-APL) patients newly diagnosed at the MD Anderson Cancer Center from
1998 till 2006. Reverse phase protein array (RPPA) platform was used for
functional proteomic profiling on 119 proteins and phospho-proteins for
cell-cycle, apoptosis, and several signal transduction pathways known to
play a role in hematologic malignancies. Each antibody was validated with
Western blotting. We integrated the RPPA data between MDS and AML
patients via normalization. Kaplan-Meier method was used for survival
analysis performed on 90 MDS patients and 415 AML patients who received
treatments.Results: Among 627 patients with MDS or AML, six distinct
functional proteomic signatures were identified; signature 1 (21.0% of
total patients), 2 (15.6%), 3 (15.6%), 4 (16.0%), 5 (24.0%), and 6
(7.7%). Most of patients in signature group 6 had MDS compared with
patients in other groups (chi-square test pBackground: One third of MDS
cases transforms into AML. MDS and AML are considered one spectrum of
myeloid stem cell disease. We have previously reported MDS and AML
specific proteomic signatures associated with different survival
outcomes. However, there exists no study that integrated both MDS and AML
cases to explore common proteomic signatures that harbor prognostic
implications.Methods: We collected bone marrow and peripheral blood CD34+
samples from 116 MDS patients and 511 AML (non-APL) patients newly
diagnosed at the MD Anderson Cancer Center from 1998 till 2006. Reverse
phase protein array (RPPA) platform was used for functional proteomic
profiling on 119 proteins and phospho-proteins for cell-cycle, apoptosis,
and several signal transduction pathways known to play a role in
hematologic malignancies. Each antibody was validated with Western
blotting. We integrated the RPPA data between MDS and AML patients via
normalization. Kaplan-Meier method was used for survival analysis
performed on 90 MDS patients and 415 AML patients who received
treatments.Results: Among 627 patients with MDS or AML, six distinct
functional proteomic signatures were identified; signature 1 (21.0% of
total patients), 2 (15.6%), 3 (15.6%), 4 (16.0%), 5 (24.0%), and 6
(7.7%). Most of patients in signature group 6 had MDS compared with
patients in other groups (chi-square test p<0.001, proportion of MDS
patients in group 1 (7.5%), 2 (0%), 3 (15.2%), 4 (9.9%), 5 (28.9%), and 6
(69.2%); thus, group 1 to 5: AML-like signature vs. group 6: MDS-like
signature). Among MDS patients, 10.3% of patients in group 6 later
transformed into AML while 1.8% of patients in other groups did so. Among
AML patients, 1.0% of patients in group 6 had history of MDS while 4.4%
of patients in other groups did so.Six groups demonstrated differences in
complete remission (CR) rate (chi-square test p=0.03). Among patients
with MDS or AML who received treatment, CR rate in patients in group 6
was 61.5% while that in patients in other groups was 51.1%. However, six
groups did not differ in CR duration. Among MDS patients, there were no
statistically significant differences in overall survival between group 6
and other groups (log-rank test p=0.63, HR=0.87). However, among AML
patients, patients in group 6 was associated with superior overall
survival compared with patients in other groups (log-rank test p=0.02,
HR=0.39).Conclusion: Integrated functional proteomic profiling revealed
six common distinct signature groups that are associated with CR rate and
overall survival outcome. In AML patients, MDS-like signature (group 6)
was linked with favorable survival outcome and possibly higher CR rate.

