Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Acetylation of alteration/deficiency in activation 3 (Ada3) is
essential for its stability and function


In eukaryotes histone acetylation is one of the major epigenetic
modifications by which gene expression is regulated. Acetylation of
histones is mediated by histone acetyl transferases (HATs) that exist as
multisubunit complex. The alteration/deficiency in activation 3 (Ada3)
protein was discovered as an essential component of various HAT complexes
and later on we identified Ada3 as a novel human papilloma virus E6
oncoprotein binding protein. We have previously demonstrated that Ada3
regulates the function of p53 by mediating its acetylation and recent
findings from our laboratory show that Ada3 is a novel cell cycle
regulator and is crucial for maintaining the genomic stability.Although
Ada3 is an essential mediator of histone acetylation it does not have HAT
activity per se and how Ada3 performs its function remains unresolved.
Our recent studies demonstrate that Ada3 itself is acetylated by GCN5 and
p300 both in in-vitro and in-vivo assays. Significantly, inhibition of
acetylation by garcinol dramatically decreases Ada3 protein levels,
suggesting that acetylation stabilizes Ada3 protein. Current studies are
directed towards identification of potential acetylation sites in Ada3
through mutational analyses. Notably, inhibition of class III but not
class I and II histone deacetylases (HDACs) enhanced Ada3 acetylation.
Further investigation reveals that Ada3 specifically interacts with
SIRT1, a member of class III HDAC, indicating that SIRT1 might
deacetylate Ada3. Overall our findings suggest that Ada3 exists in
dynamic balance of acetylation and deacetylation, and its cell cycle
regulatory function may depend on Ada3 acetylation and deacetylation.

