Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: IL-6 primes melanoma cells from early stages to statin induced
apoptosis


Introduction: Statins trigger apoptosis in tumour cells in vitro and,
particularly, melanoma cells are susceptible to statin induced
apoptosis.Growth of normal melanocytes and early stage melanoma can be
inhibited by IL-6, whereas metastatic melanoma cells are mostly resistant
to the anti-proliferative effects of IL-6. It has been shown that nearly
50% of metastatic melanoma secrete IL-6 into the supernatant.
Nevertheless until now the stage dependant effects of IL-6 on melanoma
cells are not fully understood.Methods: The secretion of IL-6 by A375,
518A2 human metastatic melanoma cells was compared with WM 35 cells which
derive from an early lesion (radial growth phase) and investigated with
ELISA. The sensitivity toward statin induced caspase 3 activation was
investigated in these cells in the absence and presence of IL-6 or an
anti IL-6 receptor antibody (tocilizumab). Apoptosis was also confirmed
by FACS analyses for AnnexinV/PI staining and proliferation by cell cycle
analysis using PI staining in such treated cells. Phosphorylation of
Stat3 and the regulation of pro- (Bax, Bak) and anti-apoptotic proteins
(Bcl-2, Bxl-XL) were studied by Western blot.Results: Melanoma cells
derived from late stage lesions (A375, 518A2) secrete high amounts of
IL-6 in contrast to WM35 cells. IL-6 signalling is intact in A375, 518A2
and WM 35 cells indicated by IL-6 triggered phosphorylation of
Stat-3.Most interestingly, the A375 and 518A2 cells show a high
sensitivity to simvastatin induced apoptosis with EC50 of 0,52 M (518A2)
and 1,7 M (A375) in contrast to WM35 cells which are more resistant (EC50
16 M). Co-treatment with IL-6 leads to an augmentation of the statin
induced apoptosis in WM35 cells. Statin induced apoptosis can be mediated
by the intrinsic apoptotic pathway which requires the loss of
mitochondrial membrane potential. This is often alleviated by a
downregulation of antiapoptotic Bcl-2 family members. Interestingly IL-6
treatment led to a marked decrease in the amount of Bcl-2 and Bcl-XL in
WM35 cells which may explain the increased activation of apoptosis.Since
A375 and 518A2 secrete high amounts of IL-6 we investigated the effects
of the anti IL-6 receptor antibody tocilizumab. Conversely interruption
of the IL-6 signalling with tocilizumab had no effect on the
proliferation of 518A2 and A375 cells. Moreover the simvastatin induced
caspase 3 activation was not decreased by blockage of the IL-6
signalling.Conclusion: Taken together our data prove different
sensitivities of melanoma cells from various stages to statin induced
apoptosis. Moreover, IL-6 facilitates apoptosis in early stage melanoma
cells by the down-regulation of anti-apoptotic proteins. Nevertheless,
these pro-apoptotic effects of IL-6 are not observed in metastatic
melanoma cells indicating a stage specific role of IL-6 in the
development and tumorigenesis of melanoma.

