Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antibody-mediated blockade of phosphatidylserine combined with
radiation improves survival and tumor eradication in a rat model of
non-small cell lung cancer


Stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT) uses image guidance to deliver
very high doses of radiation, in no more than 5 fractions, to tumors.
SBRT has shown remarkable benefit in patients with peripheral lung tumors
but can cause severe toxicity to central organs when the tumor is
proximally located if full potency doses are used (18 Gy x 3 fractions,
for example). Bavituximab, a therapeutic monoclonal antibody that is
headed to Phase III clinical trials, recognizes the immunosuppressive
lipid, phosphatidylserine (PS), which becomes exposed on both tumor blood
vessels and tumor cells subjected to SBRT. We hypothesized that treatment
with the antibody 2aG4 (a murine version of bavituximab) would synergize
with SBRT and allow tolerable doses of radiation to be used to treat
centrally-located NSCLC without sacrificing efficacy. Nude rats bearing
established orthotopic A549-luc NSCLC were treated with 3x12 Gy of
radiation alone or combined with 2aG4 (4mg/kg) injected twice per week.
Tumor growth was followed by bioluminescence. Rats treated with radiation
and 2aG4 had a 100% survival rate 106 days after implantation and tumors
were completely eradicated in 44% of these animals. In contrast, rats
treated with radiation had a survival rate of 17% while only 11% of
untreated rats survived. A toxicity study was conducted in which 3x12 Gy
of radiation was delivered to central organs of tumor-free rats. This
treatment does not appear to cause severe toxicity. These results suggest
that bavituximab with radiation may result in improved clinical outcome
in patients with centrally-located Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer (NSCLC).

