Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular subtypes of breast cancer in Algeria: a population-based
study of 3014 women


Background:Breast cancer is currently the leading cause of cancer
morbidity and mortality among Algerian women. Molecular classification of
breast cancer is an important factor for prognosis and clinical
outcome.To our best knowledge,few studies have been reported on molecular
subtypes of female breast cancer in Algeria.The objective of the present
study was to evaluate age at diagnosis,distribution,prevalence, and
association with menopausal status, histological type and histological
grade of molecular subtypes of breast cancer in Algerian women.In
addition, we screened for the prevalence of BRCA1 mutations in TNBC
patients with and without family history of breast cancer.Methods: We
analyzed breast cancers from cancer registries of academic medical
oncology service of public hospital of Rouiba, anticancer center of
Blida, and anticancer center of Batna.Breast cancers were diagnosed
between 2008 and July 2013. ER (oestrogen receptor), PR (progesterone
receptor) and HER2 (human epidermal growth factor receptor-2) status were
obtained from medical records for 3014 patients.Breast cancer subtypes
definitions were as follow:Luminal A (ER+ and/or PR+,HER2-), Luminal B
(ER+ and/or PR+,HER2+),TNBC(ER-,PR-,HER2-), HER2+ (ER-,PR-,HER2+). 20
TNBC patients with family history of breast cancer and 33 sporadic TNBC
women were screened by using PCR-direct sequencing for 3 common BRCA1
mutations c.83_84delTG, c181T>G and c.798_799delTT detected in previous
studies in Algerian population.Results: The median age at diagnosis of
3014 patients with breast cancer was 48.5 years. The prevalence of the
Luminal A, TNBC, Luminal B and HER2+ were 50.59%,20.80%, 19.67% and
8.92%,respectively.Luminal A, Luminal B, TNBC and HER2+ subtypes were
more prevalent among premenopausal women (29.24%, 13.26%, 12.19% and
4.80%) compared with postmenopausal women (21.74%, 7.31%, 7.89% and
3.87%). Invasive Ductal Carcinoma was the most prevalent histological
type in all breast cancer subtypes at any age. Tumors with histological
grade 2 were more prevalent in younger patients for the four breast
cancer subtypes. High prevalence of histological grade 3 was showed in
older patients. The BRCA1 mutation c.83_84delTG was detected in one young
TNBC patient with a family history of cancer.Conclusion: For the first
time, we report the distribution of molecular subtypes of breast cancer
and some clinical characteristics in a large cohort of Algerian women. In
our current study, the median age of diagnosis for all breast cancer
subtypes was younger than the average age in Europe and
America.Interestingly, TNBC subtype was the second most prevalent in our
patients,and the prevalence of luminal subtype was lesser than reported
in white women with breast cancer in Europe and America. The high
prevalence of TNBC reported here could be linked to Sub-Saharan African
genetic elements of Algerian population.Screening for BRCA1 mutations in
large series of TNBC patients is ongoing.

