Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The PROFILE feasibility study: Genetic prostate cancer risk
stratification for targeted screening


Introduction & Objectives: Prostate cancer (PC) screening is
controversial and a better assessment of individualized PC risk is
needed. Several single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) conferring a
cumulative risk of PC have been identified. We have explored the
potential role of genetic markers for targeted screening in a population
with increased risk of PC due to family history (FH).Material & Methods:
PROFILE was developed as a pilot study to determine the feasibility of
targeted PC screening using prostatic biopsy (PB) and its association
with specific genetic profiles in men with FH. We also evaluated the role
of PSA and Diffusion Weighted MRI (DW-MRI) as screening tools. 116 men
aged 40-69 with FH of PC were enrolled between October 2009 and December
2012. Cumulative SNP risk scores were calculated by summing 59 risk
alleles for each locus using the weighted effect (log-additive model).
DW-MRI was performed in 50 patients. Participants were asked to undergo a
10 core PB regardless of baseline PSA.Results: Median age 53 yrs (40-69)
and median PSA was 1.15. One hundred and two men accepted to undergo a PB
as primary PC screening. Twenty-three tumours were found (22.5% of
biopsies) as well as seven men diagnosed with atypical small acinar
proliferation (ASAP) (6.8%) and 8 men with high-grade prostatic
intraepithelial neoplasia (HG-PIN) (7.8%). In total 37.1% received an
abnormal result. Of those diagnosed with PC, 41% were intermediate or
high risk and required treatment (compared to 24% in general population
screening). The predictive performance of DW-MRI, PSA, genetic model and
genetic model plus PSA measured by AUC were: 0.85, 0.73, 0.57 and 0.74,
respectively. The genetic model performed best in men with a normal PSA
(Introduction & Objectives: Prostate cancer (PC) screening is
controversial and a better assessment of individualized PC risk is
needed. Several single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) conferring a
cumulative risk of PC have been identified. We have explored the
potential role of genetic markers for targeted screening in a population
with increased risk of PC due to family history (FH).Material & Methods:
PROFILE was developed as a pilot study to determine the feasibility of
targeted PC screening using prostatic biopsy (PB) and its association
with specific genetic profiles in men with FH. We also evaluated the role
of PSA and Diffusion Weighted MRI (DW-MRI) as screening tools. 116 men
aged 40-69 with FH of PC were enrolled between October 2009 and December
2012. Cumulative SNP risk scores were calculated by summing 59 risk
alleles for each locus using the weighted effect (log-additive model).
DW-MRI was performed in 50 patients. Participants were asked to undergo a
10 core PB regardless of baseline PSA.Results: Median age 53 yrs (40-69)
and median PSA was 1.15. One hundred and two men accepted to undergo a PB
as primary PC screening. Twenty-three tumours were found (22.5% of
biopsies) as well as seven men diagnosed with atypical small acinar
proliferation (ASAP) (6.8%) and 8 men with high-grade prostatic
intraepithelial neoplasia (HG-PIN) (7.8%). In total 37.1% received an
abnormal result. Of those diagnosed with PC, 41% were intermediate or
high risk and required treatment (compared to 24% in general population
screening). The predictive performance of DW-MRI, PSA, genetic model and
genetic model plus PSA measured by AUC were: 0.85, 0.73, 0.57 and 0.74,
respectively. The genetic model performed best in men with a normal PSA
(<3 ng/ml - AUC 0.63). Analyses of a 78 SNP profile incorporating the new
23 recently identified SNPs is underway.Conclusions: Our results indicate
that PB used for PC screening in men with FH of PC identified a higher
proportion of clinically significant PCs. The high AUC for DW-MRI would
warrant a larger study. The incidence of ASAP is higher in this group
than the general population.The SNP risk score was more predictive in men
with PSAIntroduction & Objectives: Prostate cancer (PC) screening is
controversial and a better assessment of individualized PC risk is
needed. Several single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) conferring a
cumulative risk of PC have been identified. We have explored the
potential role of genetic markers for targeted screening in a population
with increased risk of PC due to family history (FH).Material & Methods:
PROFILE was developed as a pilot study to determine the feasibility of
targeted PC screening using prostatic biopsy (PB) and its association
with specific genetic profiles in men with FH. We also evaluated the role
of PSA and Diffusion Weighted MRI (DW-MRI) as screening tools. 116 men
aged 40-69 with FH of PC were enrolled between October 2009 and December
2012. Cumulative SNP risk scores were calculated by summing 59 risk
alleles for each locus using the weighted effect (log-additive model).
DW-MRI was performed in 50 patients. Participants were asked to undergo a
10 core PB regardless of baseline PSA.Results: Median age 53 yrs (40-69)
and median PSA was 1.15. One hundred and two men accepted to undergo a PB
as primary PC screening. Twenty-three tumours were found (22.5% of
biopsies) as well as seven men diagnosed with atypical small acinar
proliferation (ASAP) (6.8%) and 8 men with high-grade prostatic
intraepithelial neoplasia (HG-PIN) (7.8%). In total 37.1% received an
abnormal result. Of those diagnosed with PC, 41% were intermediate or
high risk and required treatment (compared to 24% in general population
screening). The predictive performance of DW-MRI, PSA, genetic model and
genetic model plus PSA measured by AUC were: 0.85, 0.73, 0.57 and 0.74,
respectively. The genetic model performed best in men with a normal PSA
(<3 ng/ml - AUC 0.63). Analyses of a 78 SNP profile incorporating the new
23 recently identified SNPs is underway.Conclusions: Our results indicate
that PB used for PC screening in men with FH of PC identified a higher
proportion of clinically significant PCs. The high AUC for DW-MRI would
warrant a larger study. The incidence of ASAP is higher in this group
than the general population.The SNP risk score was more predictive in men
with PSA<3 where PB would not normally be undertaken, therefore an
expanded study to investigate the role of genetic profiling in directing
PB in PC screening is indicated.

