Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Body mass index and non-Hodgkin lymphoma survival in an ethnically
diverse population: The Multiethnic Cohort study


Introduction: Obesity increases the risk of death for several
malignancies including breast and colon cancer. However, for
non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL), the association between pre-diagnostic body
mass index (BMI) and survival is unclear. We examined the association
between BMI before diagnosis and overall and NHL-specific survival in the
Multiethnic Cohort (MEC) study of African Americans, Native Hawaiians,
Japanese Americans, Latinos, and Caucasians.Methods: MEC participants
free of NHL at cohort entry and diagnosed with NHL as identified through
linkages to SEER cancer registries and the National Death Index during
follow-up were included in the current analyses (N=1348). Body mass index
(BMI) was based on self-reported weight and height at cohort entry. Cox
proportional hazards regression was used to calculate hazard ratios (HR)
and 95% confidence intervals (CI) for pre-diagnostic BMI categories in
relation to all-cause and NHL-specific mortality while adjusting for
known confounders.Results: The mean time from cohort entry to NHL
diagnosis was 7.23.9 years (range: 0.0-15.0 years). The mean age at NHL
diagnosis was 70.6 (range 45-89) years and the mean BMI at cohort entry
was 26.54.7 kg/m2. After a mean follow-up of 4.33.5 years, 679 deaths
including 457 NHL-specific deaths occurred. In multivariable models,
obese patients (BMI 30.0) had higher all-cause (HR = 1.55, 95%CI =
1.21-2.00) and NHL-specific (HR = 1.84, 95%CI = 1.35-2.52) mortality
compared to patients with high-normal BMI (22.5-24.9 kg/m2). For
overweight patients (BMI 25.0-29.9), the respective HRs were 1.29 (95%CI
= 1.05-1.58) and 1.47 (95%CI = 1.14-1.89). A 35% higher risk of all-cause
mortality was also observed in patients with low-normal BMI. When BMI was
included in the model as a continuous variable, the risk of NHL-specific
mortality increased by 3.3% for every increase in one unit of BMI (HR =
1.03, 95% CI = 1.01-1.06, ptrend = 0.004). Stratification by NHL type
suggested a higher NHL-specific mortality risk for chronic lymphocytic
leukemia/small lymphocytic lymphoma than for diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma and follicular lymphoma. The interaction of BMI with ethnicity
(p=0.83) was not significant.Conclusions: Pre-diagnostic obesity may be
related to poorer overall and NHL-specific survival in NHL patients.
Therefore, prediagnostic BMI may be a suitable prognostic marker for NHL
patients.

