Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Studies on growth response of a panel of human ovarian tumor cell
lines to treatment with afatinib, erlotinib, crizotinib and cytotoxic
drugs


Ovarian cancer is one of the most aggressive and fatal types of
gynaecological cancer. To reduce mortality, it is considered important to
discover the underlying molecular mechanisms and various cell signalling
pathways which are altered in ovarian cancer. This study investigated the
sensitivity of a panel of human ovarian cancer cell lines (OVCAR3, SKOV3,
CAOV3, COV318, ES2, PA1, SW626, A2780, A2780CIS and A2780ADR) to
treatment with the irreversible ErbB family blocker afatinib, the
reversible EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) erlotinib, the c-MET and
Anaplastic Lymphoma Kinase (ALK) TKI crizotinib, and various cytotoxic
agents, using the SRB colorimetric assay in 2D cell culture. We also
determined the expression of HER family members, ALK and c-MET in these
cancer cell lines using FACS analysis and investigated whether there was
any association between the expression level of these growth factor
receptors and response to treatment with these agents. Of the 10 ovarian
cancer cell lines studied, ES2, SKOV3, CAOV3, COV318 and SW626 were EGFR
positive with mean fluorescence intensity (MFI) values of 10, 21, 45, 34
and 11 respectively. Four of the cell lines were also HER-2 positive,
with MFI values of 368 (SKOV3), 12 (CAOV3), 13 (A2780) and 16 (A2780CIS)
respectively. In contrast, all ovarian tumor cell lines expressed very
low levels, or were negative for both HER-3 and HER-4. With the
exceptions of COV318 and SW626, which were c-MET and ALK positive, and
SKOV3 and CAOV3 cells, which were c-MET positive, all the remaining
ovarian cancer cell lines were negative for both ALK and c-MET
expression. Of the HER inhibitors, afatinib inhibited the growth of
ovarian cancer cell lines with IC50 values ranging from 52nM (CAOV3) to
1.8M (A2780ADR).Erlotinib also inhibited the growth of these cancer cell
lines with IC50 values ranging from 152nM (CAOV3) to 9.6M (A2780ADR). The
growth of ovarian cancer cell lines was also inhibited by crizotinib with
IC50 values ranging from 162nM (PA1) to 2.7M (A2780ADR). Of the three
cytotoxic drugs used in this study, paclitaxel was most effective at
inhibiting proliferation of ovarian cancer cell lines [IC50 range: 102pM
(CaOv3) to 278nM (OVCAR3)], followed by doxorubicin. Interestingly, most
ovarian cancer cells were relatively resistant to treatment with
cisplatin and had an IC50 above 20M. We did not find any significant
association between the expression levels of individual members of the
HER family, co-expression of HER family members, the expression of ALK or
c-Met in ovarian cancer cells and response to treatment with the pan-HER
inhibitor afatinib, erlotinib, critizinib, and cytotoxic drugs. Our
results support the need for further in vitro and in vivo investigations
on the therapeutic potential of co-targeting of the HER family of
receptors and c-MET and ALK in ovarian cancer cells using a combination
of these targeted agents and chemotherapy.

