Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cell-based screening identify gene expression signature correlated
with sensitivity to an MEK1/2 inhibitor


The mitogen-activated extracellular signal-regulated kinase (MEK) family
is one of the key kinase regulators involved in tumor oncogenic growth
and progression. Multiple MEK inhibitors are currently under clinical
investigation for cancer treatment and more agents targeting MEK are
under preclinical development. The mechanisms underlying resistance to
MEK inhibitor are unclear. Here we examined the anti-proliferation
activity of a new small molecule MEK inhibitor in a panel of cell lines
harboring either ras or raf mutation. We found 23 lines that are
sensitive to the inhibitor and 24 lines are resistant. We compared gene
expression by Affymetrix U219 arrays and gene copy number by Affymetrix
SNP6.0 arrays in these two cell line groups. With a p-value cutoff set
at0.01, we identified 549 genes differentially expressed and 328 genes
demonstrated different copy numbers between the two groups. 23 genes were
both detected by gene expression profiling and gene copy number data.
These genes include MEK family members MAP2K3 and MAP2K7, as well as
other important molecule markers in cancer biology, including PIK3R2 and
BRCA2. The results suggested a potential genomic signature that could be
predictive of response to the MEK inhibitor in vitro. Further
investigation and validation in patient-derived xenograft (PDX) models
will undoubtfully provide valuable information for selecting patients
that are likely to receive clinical benefit.

