Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Interaction between genetic variants in mTOR and body size on
breast cancer risk in African-American and European-American women


Mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR), a key protein in the
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/Akt/mTOR (PI3K-AKT-mTOR) pathway promoting
cell proliferation and angiogenesis, can be activated by overfeeding in
animal models. However, epidemiological data on the mTOR pathway and
breast cancer risk are very limited. We investigated the association of
13 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in mTOR with breast cancer and
potential effect modification of body size in the Women's Circle of
Health Study (WCHS), a large case-control study in New York and New
Jersey. Participants included 658 incident cases and 649 controls of
European American background (EA) and 621 African-American (AA) cases and
744 matched controls, aged 20-75 y. Body size was approximated by body
mass index (BMI) at recruitment measured by trained interviewers or
obtained from self-report if the measurement was unavailable. Because
allele frequencies varied between AAs and EAs, multivariable logistic
regression was performed separately within groups, adjusting for age,
family history, education, history of benign breast disease, cigarette
smoking, proportion of European ancestry, and BMI (for main effects
only). We observed higher risks of breast cancer associated with 3 SNPs
in high linkage disequilibrium (r2 = 1) (rs2536 [3-UTR], p=0.08;
rs12116957 [intron], p=0.09; rs12125777 [intron], p=0.018) under a
dominant genetic model among EA women. For rs12125777, variant allele
carriers had a 71% higher breast cancer risk (odds ratio [OR]=1.71, 95%
confidence interval (CI)=1.10-2.66) compared to non-carriers. The risk
was more prominent among women who were overweight/obese (i.e., BMI 25
kg/m2; OR=3.34, 95% CI=1.67-6.69), compared to that among those with
normal weight (OR=0.89, 95% CI=0.48-1.68; p-interaction=0.009). Compared
to estrogen receptor (ER) positive cancers, the increased risk was more
noticeable for ER negative cancers: the ORs comparing variant allele
carriers to non-carriers were 2.68 (95% CI=1.24-5.79) overall, 8.49 (95%
CI=2.85-25.3) among overweight/obese women, and 0.94 (95% CI=0.26-3.38)
among normal-weight women; p-interaction=0.018. No association of genetic
variants in mTOR with breast cancer was observed among AA women at a
significant level of 0.1. Our findings suggest an etiologic role of
overweight/obesity via promoting the mTOR pathway in breast
carcinogenesis among EA women.

