Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Deubiquitinases Usp9x and Usp5 control tumorigenicity and
apoptotic responsiveness in malignant melanoma


Melanoma is an aggressive skin cancer characterized by gene mutations,
high metastatic potential and few clinically effective systemic
therapies. BRAF, MEK1 kinase inhibitors and CTLA4 antagonist have
improved patient survival, but only a subset of patients respond or
derived long-lasting clinical benefit, illustrating the need for
discovery of additional targets and pathways that may be inhibited with
small molecules. Given the clinical impact of inhibitors of the
ubiquitin-proteasome system in other cancers, we explored the potential
for aberrant deubiquitinase (DUB) activity to play a role in the
tumorigenic properties of melanoma. We also assessed whether specific
DUBs play a role in apoptotic responsiveness and resistance to kinase
inhibitors. Initially, we noted that the activity of several DUBs,
including Usp9x and Usp5, was elevated in melanoma compared to normal
melanocytes. Further, Usp9x and Usp5 expression and activity were
up-regulated by expression of BRAFV600E in 293T cells and kinase
inhibition partially suppressed both Usp9x and Usp5 activity in
vemurafenib sensitive, but not resistant cells. Usp9x knockdown (KD) in
BRAF mutant or wild-type melanoma did not affect 2-dimensional cell
growth or survival but significantly amplified the apoptotic activity of
BRAF or MEK1 inhibitors, respectively. Usp5 KD in melanoma suppressed
cell growth by reinforced the S/G2-M checkpoint, enhanced extrinsic
caspase activation through modulation of p53 and FAS levels and amplified
the apoptotic activity of kinase inhibitors (and other chemotherapeutic
agents) and overcame vemurafenib resistance in A375R cells. To further
assess the clinical relevance of activated DUBs in melanoma, primary
human melanoma explants characterized for their metastatic efficiency in
patients and NSG mice demonstrated that Usp9x and Usp5 expression and
activity were elevated in efficient metastasizers, but only a subset of
inefficient metastasizers, suggesting a potential role for DUBs in the
regulation of metastatic potential. To investigate that possibly, control
and Usp9x KD cells were grown in Matrigel or suspension culture and
colony growth and survival, as well as Usp9x activity were examined.
Usp9x KD significantly suppressed melanoma colony growth and fully
reduced survival of highly metastatic SK-Mel147 cells in 3D culture.
Growth in 3D conditions resulted in activation of Usp9x, but also
increased their sensitivity (IC50 Melanoma is an aggressive skin cancer
characterized by gene mutations, high metastatic potential and few
clinically effective systemic therapies. BRAF, MEK1 kinase inhibitors and
CTLA4 antagonist have improved patient survival, but only a subset of
patients respond or derived long-lasting clinical benefit, illustrating
the need for discovery of additional targets and pathways that may be
inhibited with small molecules. Given the clinical impact of inhibitors
of the ubiquitin-proteasome system in other cancers, we explored the
potential for aberrant deubiquitinase (DUB) activity to play a role in
the tumorigenic properties of melanoma. We also assessed whether specific
DUBs play a role in apoptotic responsiveness and resistance to kinase
inhibitors. Initially, we noted that the activity of several DUBs,
including Usp9x and Usp5, was elevated in melanoma compared to normal
melanocytes. Further, Usp9x and Usp5 expression and activity were
up-regulated by expression of BRAFV600E in 293T cells and kinase
inhibition partially suppressed both Usp9x and Usp5 activity in
vemurafenib sensitive, but not resistant cells. Usp9x knockdown (KD) in
BRAF mutant or wild-type melanoma did not affect 2-dimensional cell
growth or survival but significantly amplified the apoptotic activity of
BRAF or MEK1 inhibitors, respectively. Usp5 KD in melanoma suppressed
cell growth by reinforced the S/G2-M checkpoint, enhanced extrinsic
caspase activation through modulation of p53 and FAS levels and amplified
the apoptotic activity of kinase inhibitors (and other chemotherapeutic
agents) and overcame vemurafenib resistance in A375R cells. To further
assess the clinical relevance of activated DUBs in melanoma, primary
human melanoma explants characterized for their metastatic efficiency in
patients and NSG mice demonstrated that Usp9x and Usp5 expression and
activity were elevated in efficient metastasizers, but only a subset of
inefficient metastasizers, suggesting a potential role for DUBs in the
regulation of metastatic potential. To investigate that possibly, control
and Usp9x KD cells were grown in Matrigel or suspension culture and
colony growth and survival, as well as Usp9x activity were examined.
Usp9x KD significantly suppressed melanoma colony growth and fully
reduced survival of highly metastatic SK-Mel147 cells in 3D culture.
Growth in 3D conditions resulted in activation of Usp9x, but also
increased their sensitivity (IC50 <400 nM) to our partially selective
Usp9x inhibitor, EOAI3402143 (G9). G9 inhibits both Usp9x and Usp5
activity and phenocopied the activities of both Usp9x and Usp5 KD cells.
G9 was safely administered to NSG mice, with complete block of melanoma
growth. We conclude that targeted inhibition of specific DUBs will
suppress metastatic melanoma and amplify existing melanoma therapies.

