Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: De novo EGFR T790M mutation in lung cancer patients harboring
sensitive EGFR mutations


BackgroundEGFR T790M mutation drives acquired drug resistance to EGFR
tyrosine kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKI) in EGFR-mutant lung cancer.
However, it was reported that this mutation may exist before drug
exposure. This study aimed to evaluate whether the clinical outcomes are
affected by the proportion of preexisting T790M mutations within a
tumor.MethodsWe collected pretreatment tissues from 124 advanced
non-small cell lung cancer patients with sensitizing EGFR mutations that
were detected by direct sequencing. Genotyping for EGFR T790M was further
performed using matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization-time of
flight/mass spectrometry. T790M-positive patients were divided to two
subgroups according to T790M mutant signal frequency.ResultsThe T790M
mutation was found in 31 (25.0%) patients. The T790M mutation frequency
at which the risk of progression to EGFR-TKI begins to increase was
estimated to be 2.0%. The patients with T790M-positive tumor had shorter
time to progression (TTP) after EGFR-TKI (median 6.3 months vs. 11.5
months; P BackgroundEGFR T790M mutation drives acquired drug resistance
to EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKI) in EGFR-mutant lung cancer.
However, it was reported that this mutation may exist before drug
exposure. This study aimed to evaluate whether the clinical outcomes are
affected by the proportion of preexisting T790M mutations within a
tumor.MethodsWe collected pretreatment tissues from 124 advanced
non-small cell lung cancer patients with sensitizing EGFR mutations that
were detected by direct sequencing. Genotyping for EGFR T790M was further
performed using matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization-time of
flight/mass spectrometry. T790M-positive patients were divided to two
subgroups according to T790M mutant signal frequency.ResultsThe T790M
mutation was found in 31 (25.0%) patients. The T790M mutation frequency
at which the risk of progression to EGFR-TKI begins to increase was
estimated to be 2.0%. The patients with T790M-positive tumor had shorter
time to progression (TTP) after EGFR-TKI (median 6.3 months vs. 11.5
months; P < 0.001) and overall survival (OS) (median 16.1 months vs. 26.5
months; P = 0.065) than those with T790M-negative tumor. Among the
T790M-positive patients, the patients with high T790M frequency (n= 9)
had shorter TTP (median 2.4 months vs. 6.7 months; P = 0.009) and OS
(median 9.1 months vs. 18.7 months; P = 0.018) than those with low T790M
frequency (n= 22).ConclusionsPreexisting EGFR T790M mutation was noted in
25% of patients with EGFR-mutant lung cancer. Patients with high T790M
mutation frequency had worse clinical outcomes to EGFR-TKI than patients
with low T790M mutation frequency.

