Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression of lumican is negatively associated with the risk of
biochemical recurrence in human prostate cancer


We used DNA chip technology in a genetically engineered mouse model of
prostate cancer, and identified lumican as a candidate biomarker in
prostate cancer progression. Lumican is a small leucine-rich
extracellular matrix protein that has been shown to modulate cell
migration and proliferation during embryonic development, and tissue
repair. Expression and distinct glycosylation patterns of lumican in
several tumor and stromal tissues has been shown to play important roles
in vascular invasion, differentiation, proliferation, and invasion. Our
goal was to determine the clinical value of lumican as a biomarker for
human prostate cancer. In order to do so, we examined gene expression in
publicly available databases and confirmed the protein expression in
tissue microarrays constructed from prostatectomy cases. Protein
expression was examined by immunohistochemistry and expression scores
were compared with clinicopathological features and disease progression.
Our analysis shows that in human prostate cancer, stromal expression of
lumican correlated inversely with clinicopathological features associated
with disease progression. In addition, biochemical recurrence was
significantly longer for patients with high expression of stromal
lumican. Our findings suggest that lumican may be a strong candidate
prognostic biomarker and warrants prospective validation.

