Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chemopreventive effects of black raspberries in endometrial cancer


Endometrial cancer is the most common type of gynecologic cancer and
annually comprises 3% of all cancer deaths of women in the United States.
Additionally, 80% of cases are type I endometrial cancer, mainly
associated with Pten abnormalities. It was estimated that up to 90% of
type I endometrial cancer patients are overweight/obese. Therefore, a
regimen to prevent obesity associated tumorigenesis is the most important
for type I endometrial cancer. In the current study, the Pten
heterozygous (+/-) female mice were used as the model, to study the
potentially chemopreventive effects by black raspberries (BRBs). At 3-4
weeks old, Pten (+/-) and wild type female mice were divided into four
treatment groups, fed with either AIN-93G control diet (CD), CD with 5%
BRBs, 58% fat to induce obesity (HF),or HF with 5% BRBs. All of mice were
euthanized at 28 weeks old. In wild type mice, no malignant lesion was
identified. In Pten (+/-) mice, HF diet increased 10% focal glandular
hyperplasia with atypia lesions when compared with CD diet. Dietary
administration of BRBs decreased 19% focal glandular hyperplasia with
atypia lesions when compared with CD group. Specifically, BRBs in HF diet
inhibited 32% obesity-induced endometrial malignant lesions and
significantly lowed lesion multiplicity. Furthermore, cytokine profiles
in plasma by Bio-Plex Assay revealed dietary BRBs decreased IL-1 and
IL-17A, and lowed TNF- and GM-CSF when compared with CD and HF group,
respectively. In conclusion, this study for the first time suggested BRBs
are chemopreventive for obesity-induced endometrial tumorigenesis.

