Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cooperative effects of programmed cell death-1 blockade and
radiation in a model of a poorly immunogenic breast carcinoma


We have previously shown that radiation therapy (RT) converts poorly
immunogenic tumors resistant to antibodies (mAbs) against the checkpoint
receptor CTLA-4 into susceptible ones. Importantly, RT induced the
upregulation of PDL-1 and PDL-2 on the tumor cells and infiltrating
myeloid cells in the TSA mouse breast cancer, suggesting that PD-1
ligands may limit rejection of the irradiated tumor by T cells. PD-1 is a
checkpoint receptor upregulated on T cells shortly after activation and
expressed at high levels on exhausted T cells. To test the hypothesis
PD-1 blockade can promote the ability of RT to induce effective
anti-tumor immunity we employed BALB/c mice inoculated s.c. with the
syngeneic poorly immunogenic TSA breast cancer cells. When tumors became
palpable mice were randomly assigned to one of 4 treatment groups
(N=6-7): (1) control, (2) RT, (3) anti-PD-1 mAb and (4) RT+anti-PD-1 mAb.
RT was delivered exclusively to the primary tumor in 8 Gy fractions on
days 13, 14 and 15 post tumor inoculation. PD-1 blocking mAb RMP1-14 was
given on day 15 and every 4 days thereafter, and mice were followed for
tumor growth. In a separate experiment, mice were euthanized on day 20 to
characterize tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) and development of
CD8+ T cells specific for the tumor epitope AH1 by pentamer analysis.TSA
tumors were resistant to PD-1 blockade. RT significantly delayed tumor
growth (pWe have previously shown that radiation therapy (RT) converts
poorly immunogenic tumors resistant to antibodies (mAbs) against the
checkpoint receptor CTLA-4 into susceptible ones. Importantly, RT induced
the upregulation of PDL-1 and PDL-2 on the tumor cells and infiltrating
myeloid cells in the TSA mouse breast cancer, suggesting that PD-1
ligands may limit rejection of the irradiated tumor by T cells. PD-1 is a
checkpoint receptor upregulated on T cells shortly after activation and
expressed at high levels on exhausted T cells. To test the hypothesis
PD-1 blockade can promote the ability of RT to induce effective
anti-tumor immunity we employed BALB/c mice inoculated s.c. with the
syngeneic poorly immunogenic TSA breast cancer cells. When tumors became
palpable mice were randomly assigned to one of 4 treatment groups
(N=6-7): (1) control, (2) RT, (3) anti-PD-1 mAb and (4) RT+anti-PD-1 mAb.
RT was delivered exclusively to the primary tumor in 8 Gy fractions on
days 13, 14 and 15 post tumor inoculation. PD-1 blocking mAb RMP1-14 was
given on day 15 and every 4 days thereafter, and mice were followed for
tumor growth. In a separate experiment, mice were euthanized on day 20 to
characterize tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) and development of
CD8+ T cells specific for the tumor epitope AH1 by pentamer analysis.TSA
tumors were resistant to PD-1 blockade. RT significantly delayed tumor
growth (p<0.01), but tumor regression was seen only in 1 of 6 mice. In
contrast, when RT was combined with anti-PD-1 mAb, all of the mice
completely rejected tumors by day 25. AH1-specific CD8+ T-cells were
markedly increased (5.5%) in the spleen of mice treated with RT+anti-PD-1
compared to control (1.7%) and anti-PD-1 (1.9%) or RT (3.7%) treated mice
(pWe have previously shown that radiation therapy (RT) converts poorly
immunogenic tumors resistant to antibodies (mAbs) against the checkpoint
receptor CTLA-4 into susceptible ones. Importantly, RT induced the
upregulation of PDL-1 and PDL-2 on the tumor cells and infiltrating
myeloid cells in the TSA mouse breast cancer, suggesting that PD-1
ligands may limit rejection of the irradiated tumor by T cells. PD-1 is a
checkpoint receptor upregulated on T cells shortly after activation and
expressed at high levels on exhausted T cells. To test the hypothesis
PD-1 blockade can promote the ability of RT to induce effective
anti-tumor immunity we employed BALB/c mice inoculated s.c. with the
syngeneic poorly immunogenic TSA breast cancer cells. When tumors became
palpable mice were randomly assigned to one of 4 treatment groups
(N=6-7): (1) control, (2) RT, (3) anti-PD-1 mAb and (4) RT+anti-PD-1 mAb.
RT was delivered exclusively to the primary tumor in 8 Gy fractions on
days 13, 14 and 15 post tumor inoculation. PD-1 blocking mAb RMP1-14 was
given on day 15 and every 4 days thereafter, and mice were followed for
tumor growth. In a separate experiment, mice were euthanized on day 20 to
characterize tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) and development of
CD8+ T cells specific for the tumor epitope AH1 by pentamer analysis.TSA
tumors were resistant to PD-1 blockade. RT significantly delayed tumor
growth (p<0.01), but tumor regression was seen only in 1 of 6 mice. In
contrast, when RT was combined with anti-PD-1 mAb, all of the mice
completely rejected tumors by day 25. AH1-specific CD8+ T-cells were
markedly increased (5.5%) in the spleen of mice treated with RT+anti-PD-1
compared to control (1.7%) and anti-PD-1 (1.9%) or RT (3.7%) treated mice
(p<0.01). Analysis of TILs showed a significant increase in mice treated
with RT compared to control in CD8+ T cells expressing high levels of
PD-1 (CD8+PD-1hi) (67% versus 36%, pWe have previously shown that
radiation therapy (RT) converts poorly immunogenic tumors resistant to
antibodies (mAbs) against the checkpoint receptor CTLA-4 into susceptible
ones. Importantly, RT induced the upregulation of PDL-1 and PDL-2 on the
tumor cells and infiltrating myeloid cells in the TSA mouse breast
cancer, suggesting that PD-1 ligands may limit rejection of the
irradiated tumor by T cells. PD-1 is a checkpoint receptor upregulated on
T cells shortly after activation and expressed at high levels on
exhausted T cells. To test the hypothesis PD-1 blockade can promote the
ability of RT to induce effective anti-tumor immunity we employed BALB/c
mice inoculated s.c. with the syngeneic poorly immunogenic TSA breast
cancer cells. When tumors became palpable mice were randomly assigned to
one of 4 treatment groups (N=6-7): (1) control, (2) RT, (3) anti-PD-1 mAb
and (4) RT+anti-PD-1 mAb. RT was delivered exclusively to the primary
tumor in 8 Gy fractions on days 13, 14 and 15 post tumor inoculation.
PD-1 blocking mAb RMP1-14 was given on day 15 and every 4 days
thereafter, and mice were followed for tumor growth. In a separate
experiment, mice were euthanized on day 20 to characterize
tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) and development of CD8+ T cells
specific for the tumor epitope AH1 by pentamer analysis.TSA tumors were
resistant to PD-1 blockade. RT significantly delayed tumor growth
(p<0.01), but tumor regression was seen only in 1 of 6 mice. In contrast,
when RT was combined with anti-PD-1 mAb, all of the mice completely
rejected tumors by day 25. AH1-specific CD8+ T-cells were markedly
increased (5.5%) in the spleen of mice treated with RT+anti-PD-1 compared
to control (1.7%) and anti-PD-1 (1.9%) or RT (3.7%) treated mice
(p<0.01). Analysis of TILs showed a significant increase in mice treated
with RT compared to control in CD8+ T cells expressing high levels of
PD-1 (CD8+PD-1hi) (67% versus 36%, p<0.01), as detected by a mAb
non-cross-reactive with RMP1-14. Interestingly, in mice receiving
anti-PD-1 mAb there was a significant decrease in CD8+PD-1hi (14% RMP1-14
versus 36% control, pWe have previously shown that radiation therapy (RT)
converts poorly immunogenic tumors resistant to antibodies (mAbs) against
the checkpoint receptor CTLA-4 into susceptible ones. Importantly, RT
induced the upregulation of PDL-1 and PDL-2 on the tumor cells and
infiltrating myeloid cells in the TSA mouse breast cancer, suggesting
that PD-1 ligands may limit rejection of the irradiated tumor by T cells.
PD-1 is a checkpoint receptor upregulated on T cells shortly after
activation and expressed at high levels on exhausted T cells. To test the
hypothesis PD-1 blockade can promote the ability of RT to induce
effective anti-tumor immunity we employed BALB/c mice inoculated s.c.
with the syngeneic poorly immunogenic TSA breast cancer cells. When
tumors became palpable mice were randomly assigned to one of 4 treatment
groups (N=6-7): (1) control, (2) RT, (3) anti-PD-1 mAb and (4)
RT+anti-PD-1 mAb. RT was delivered exclusively to the primary tumor in 8
Gy fractions on days 13, 14 and 15 post tumor inoculation. PD-1 blocking
mAb RMP1-14 was given on day 15 and every 4 days thereafter, and mice
were followed for tumor growth. In a separate experiment, mice were
euthanized on day 20 to characterize tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes
(TILs) and development of CD8+ T cells specific for the tumor epitope AH1
by pentamer analysis.TSA tumors were resistant to PD-1 blockade. RT
significantly delayed tumor growth (p<0.01), but tumor regression was
seen only in 1 of 6 mice. In contrast, when RT was combined with
anti-PD-1 mAb, all of the mice completely rejected tumors by day 25.
AH1-specific CD8+ T-cells were markedly increased (5.5%) in the spleen of
mice treated with RT+anti-PD-1 compared to control (1.7%) and anti-PD-1
(1.9%) or RT (3.7%) treated mice (p<0.01). Analysis of TILs showed a
significant increase in mice treated with RT compared to control in CD8+
T cells expressing high levels of PD-1 (CD8+PD-1hi) (67% versus 36%,
p<0.01), as detected by a mAb non-cross-reactive with RMP1-14.
Interestingly, in mice receiving anti-PD-1 mAb there was a significant
decrease in CD8+PD-1hi (14% RMP1-14 versus 36% control, p<0.01; and 30%
RT+RMP1-14 versus 67% RT, pWe have previously shown that radiation
therapy (RT) converts poorly immunogenic tumors resistant to antibodies
(mAbs) against the checkpoint receptor CTLA-4 into susceptible ones.
Importantly, RT induced the upregulation of PDL-1 and PDL-2 on the tumor
cells and infiltrating myeloid cells in the TSA mouse breast cancer,
suggesting that PD-1 ligands may limit rejection of the irradiated tumor
by T cells. PD-1 is a checkpoint receptor upregulated on T cells shortly
after activation and expressed at high levels on exhausted T cells. To
test the hypothesis PD-1 blockade can promote the ability of RT to induce
effective anti-tumor immunity we employed BALB/c mice inoculated s.c.
with the syngeneic poorly immunogenic TSA breast cancer cells. When
tumors became palpable mice were randomly assigned to one of 4 treatment
groups (N=6-7): (1) control, (2) RT, (3) anti-PD-1 mAb and (4)
RT+anti-PD-1 mAb. RT was delivered exclusively to the primary tumor in 8
Gy fractions on days 13, 14 and 15 post tumor inoculation. PD-1 blocking
mAb RMP1-14 was given on day 15 and every 4 days thereafter, and mice
were followed for tumor growth. In a separate experiment, mice were
euthanized on day 20 to characterize tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes
(TILs) and development of CD8+ T cells specific for the tumor epitope AH1
by pentamer analysis.TSA tumors were resistant to PD-1 blockade. RT
significantly delayed tumor growth (p<0.01), but tumor regression was
seen only in 1 of 6 mice. In contrast, when RT was combined with
anti-PD-1 mAb, all of the mice completely rejected tumors by day 25.
AH1-specific CD8+ T-cells were markedly increased (5.5%) in the spleen of
mice treated with RT+anti-PD-1 compared to control (1.7%) and anti-PD-1
(1.9%) or RT (3.7%) treated mice (p<0.01). Analysis of TILs showed a
significant increase in mice treated with RT compared to control in CD8+
T cells expressing high levels of PD-1 (CD8+PD-1hi) (67% versus 36%,
p<0.01), as detected by a mAb non-cross-reactive with RMP1-14.
Interestingly, in mice receiving anti-PD-1 mAb there was a significant
decrease in CD8+PD-1hi (14% RMP1-14 versus 36% control, p<0.01; and 30%
RT+RMP1-14 versus 67% RT, p<0.01). In contrast, CD8+ T cells expressing
activation markers CD69 and CD137 and low levels of PD-1 were increased
significantly in the tumors of mice treated with RT (64%) compared to
control (42%) (pWe have previously shown that radiation therapy (RT)
converts poorly immunogenic tumors resistant to antibodies (mAbs) against
the checkpoint receptor CTLA-4 into susceptible ones. Importantly, RT
induced the upregulation of PDL-1 and PDL-2 on the tumor cells and
infiltrating myeloid cells in the TSA mouse breast cancer, suggesting
that PD-1 ligands may limit rejection of the irradiated tumor by T cells.
PD-1 is a checkpoint receptor upregulated on T cells shortly after
activation and expressed at high levels on exhausted T cells. To test the
hypothesis PD-1 blockade can promote the ability of RT to induce
effective anti-tumor immunity we employed BALB/c mice inoculated s.c.
with the syngeneic poorly immunogenic TSA breast cancer cells. When
tumors became palpable mice were randomly assigned to one of 4 treatment
groups (N=6-7): (1) control, (2) RT, (3) anti-PD-1 mAb and (4)
RT+anti-PD-1 mAb. RT was delivered exclusively to the primary tumor in 8
Gy fractions on days 13, 14 and 15 post tumor inoculation. PD-1 blocking
mAb RMP1-14 was given on day 15 and every 4 days thereafter, and mice
were followed for tumor growth. In a separate experiment, mice were
euthanized on day 20 to characterize tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes
(TILs) and development of CD8+ T cells specific for the tumor epitope AH1
by pentamer analysis.TSA tumors were resistant to PD-1 blockade. RT
significantly delayed tumor growth (p<0.01), but tumor regression was
seen only in 1 of 6 mice. In contrast, when RT was combined with
anti-PD-1 mAb, all of the mice completely rejected tumors by day 25.
AH1-specific CD8+ T-cells were markedly increased (5.5%) in the spleen of
mice treated with RT+anti-PD-1 compared to control (1.7%) and anti-PD-1
(1.9%) or RT (3.7%) treated mice (p<0.01). Analysis of TILs showed a
significant increase in mice treated with RT compared to control in CD8+
T cells expressing high levels of PD-1 (CD8+PD-1hi) (67% versus 36%,
p<0.01), as detected by a mAb non-cross-reactive with RMP1-14.
Interestingly, in mice receiving anti-PD-1 mAb there was a significant
decrease in CD8+PD-1hi (14% RMP1-14 versus 36% control, p<0.01; and 30%
RT+RMP1-14 versus 67% RT, p<0.01). In contrast, CD8+ T cells expressing
activation markers CD69 and CD137 and low levels of PD-1 were increased
significantly in the tumors of mice treated with RT (64%) compared to
control (42%) (p<0.001) irrespective of the treatment with
anti-PD-1.Overall, data suggest that the IgG2a anti-PD-1 mAb RMP1-14
selectively depletes CD8+PD-1hi TILs, possibly by ADCC, while enhancing
the RT-elicited priming and activation of tumor-specific CD8+ T cells. We
propose that this represents a novel mechanism of anti-tumor activity of
anti-PD-1 mAb and supports testing its combination with
radiotherapy.Supported by the Breast Cancer Alliance (Exceptional Project
Award).

