Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effect of route and dosing regimen on efficacy of SH7139 in mouse
Burkitt's lymphoma xenografts


SH7139, our most advanced small molecule therapeutic for non-Hodgkin's
lymphoma, was designed to bind to a unique site on HLA-DR10, a cell
surface receptor found on B-cell lymphocytes and over-expressed on B-cell
derived malignancies. Studies conducted with lymphoma and other cell
lines have shown that SH7139 binds selectively and is highly cytotoxic
only to tumor cells expressing HLA-DR10. A previous study also showed
SH7139 to be highly effective in treating human Burkitt's lymphoma (Raji)
in a mouse xenograft model. We have used this same mouse model to compare
the efficacy of SH7139 delivered by different routes and using different
treatment regimens. The results show that the greatest survival times
were achieved with mice given SH7139 by i.p. injection on days 0, 7 and
14. Doses delivered i.p. on days 0, 2 and 4 and orally on days
0,7,14,21,28 and 35 were slightly less effective, and a single dose
delivered i.p. on day 0 and three doses delivered orally on days 0, 7,
and 14 were the least effective. The concentration of SH7139 that
achieved these effects in vivo, which was determined by measuring
xenograft uptake of 111-In-labeled SH7139, was found to be in the
sub-nanomolar range. In addition to identifying the best route and dosing
regimen for future studies and confirming the drug works in vivo at
concentrations similar to those found to be effective in cells cultured
in vitro, these studies also show the drug can be effective when
administered orally.

