Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Efficacy, pharmacokinetics and tissue distribution of celastrol
analogues SBI 064601, SBI 0640599 and SBI 0069272 in C.B-17 SCID mice
bearing Daudi Burkitt's lymphoma xenografts


Introduction: c-Myc plays an important role in cellular proliferation,
differentiation, apoptosis and cell cycle progression and its
overexpression is associated with aggressiveness and poor prognosis in
many cancers. Three celastrol analogues, SBI 064601(601), SBI
0640599(599) and SBI 0069272(272) are potent c-Myc inhibitors. We have
evaluated the ability of these celastrol analogues to inhibit Daudi
lymphoma cells in vitro and in vivo and characterized the
pharmacokinetics of these celastrol analogues in C.B-17 SCID mice bearing
Daudi xenografts.Methods: Inhibition of Daudi cell growth by three
celastrol analogues was assessed by MTT assay after 72 h of incubation.
For the efficacy study, the mice bearing Daudi xenografts were treated
with 20 mg/kg iv of 601, 599, 272 qdx5, or with 50 mg/kg of 601(iv) and
272 (iv and po), respectively on a qdx5 for two weeks schedule. For
pharmacokinetic studies, the mice were administered all three analogues
iv at 20 mg/kg and 272 was also given at 50 mg/kg iv and po. Plasma and
tissues were collected between 5 and 1440 min. Concentrations of the
analogues were determined by LC-MS/MS and non-compartmental analysis was
performed using PK solutions.Results: The IC50's of 601, 599 and 272
against Daudi cells in vitro were 2.9 M, 25.4 M and 10.6 M, respectively.
The mean tumor time to two doublings for 601, 599 or 272 at 20 mg/kg iv
were 16.50.9 , 12.73.3 and 14.53.8 days, respectively, compared with
control (11.73.9 days). At 50 mg/kg, the mean tumor time to two doublings
for 601(iv), or 272 (iv or po) were 10.76.0, 6.72.6 and 5.31.6 days,
respectively, compared with control (7.12.9 days). Following a single iv
dose with 20 mg/kg of the analogues or 50 mg/kg of 272, plasma and tumor
Cmax occurred at 5 min. Plasma and tumor Cmax occurred at 30 min for 272
po. AUC0-t for 601, 599 and 272 at 20 mg/kg iv were 1219, 5417, and 9411
gmin/ml, respectively. AUC0-t for 272 at 50 mg/kg iv and po were 21908
and 7184 gmin/ml, respectively. Plasma t1/2 of 601, 599 and 272 at 20
mg/kg iv were approximately 165, 38, and 454 min respectively. Plasma
t1/2 of 272 at 50 mg/kg iv or po were 763 and 239 min, respectively.
Clearances for 601, 599 at 20 mg/kg iv and 272 at 50 mg/kg iv or po in
plasma were 15.3, 3.7, 2.1, 2.5 and 7.0 ml/min/kg,
respectively.Conclusion: 601 had the lowest IC50 against Daudi cells in
vitro and resulted in a significant delay in tumor time to two doublings
after 20 mg/kg iv. There were no significant effects of the other
celastrol analogues on Daudi lymphoma growth in vivo at 20 mg/kg and 50
mg/kg iv or po. 601 is under further preclinical evaluation against other
human tumor xenografts.Support: R01-CA078039 and P30-CA47904

