Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The histone demethylase JMJD1A induces cell migration and invasion
by up-regulating the expression of the long noncoding RNA MALAT1


Patients with neuroblastoma due to N-Myc oncogene-amplification die of
tumor metastasis. However, it is not clear how N-Myc induces cell
migration, invasion and metastasis. The histone demethylase JMJD1A
activates target gene transcription by demethylating the lysine 9 residue
of histone H3 (H3K9) at target gene promoters, and the long noncoding RNA
MALAT1 induces lung cancer cell migration and plays a pivotal role in
lung cancer metastasis. Here we demonstrated that N-Myc up-regulated the
expression of JMJD1A in N-Myc oncogene-amplified human neuroblastoma
cells by directly binding to JMJD1A gene promoter. Affymetrix gene array
studies revealed that the gene second most significantly up-regulated by
JMJD1A was MALAT1. Consistent with this finding, RT-PCR, chromatin
immunoprecipitation and luciferase assays showed that JMJD1A bound to
MALAT1 gene promoter, demethylates histone H3K9 at MALAT1 gene promoter
and activates MALAT1 promoter activity. Moreover, JMJD1A and MALAT1
induce, while the small molecule JMJD1A inhibitor DMOG suppresses,
neuroblastoma cell migration and invasion. Taken together, our data
identify a novel pathway through which N-Myc causes neuroblastoma cell
migration, invasion and potentially metastasis, and provide important
evidence for further development of more potent JMJD1A/MALAT1 inhibitors
for the prevention of tumor metastasis.Note: This abstract was not
presented at the meeting.

