Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sunitinib withdrawal uncovers complementary stromal- and
tumor-mediated mechanisms of resistance and rebound growth in metastatic
mouse models


Background: Despite the clinical approval of VEGF pathway targeted agents
in the treatment of late-stage metastatic disease, sustained benefits are
not seen in the majority of patients, and eventual relapse occurs.
Understanding mechanisms of intrinsic and acquired drug resistance has
taken on increasing importance as both host- and tumor-mediated pathways
may contribute to treatment failure. However, few studies have aimed to
assess resistance in clinically-relevant spontaneous metastatic disease
after surgical resection of the primary tumor.Methods: Here we describe
the derivation of spontaneous metastatic human kidney, breast, and
melanoma cell lines following long-term in vivo sunitinib treatment.
Re-exposure of selected tumor and stromal cells to drug in vitro for
extended periods allowed evaluation of reversible and irreversible gene
expression changes. Cells were implanted orthotopically and then
surgically removed to assess primary and metastatic growth potential
following treatment cessation.Results: Our results show that metastatic
sunitinib-resistant cells retained treatment sensitivity when
re-implanted orthotopically regardless of in vitro drug exposure
conditions, suggesting a predominant host-mediated role in treatment
failure. However, sunitinib treatment withdrawal elicited significant
increases in tumor growth and metastatic potential, a finding which was
enhanced when non-tumor bearing mice were conditioned with drug prior to
i.v. tumor cell inoculation. Parallel studies in vitro show increased
proliferation and migration following therapy removal. Results from gene
and protein expression analysis of cells in different sunitinib treatment
conditions will be presented showing that coordinated tumor and host
reactions can contribute to changes in metastatic phenotype upon therapy
removal.Conclusions: Taken together, clinically relevant models of
drug-resistant spontaneous metastatic disease may have the potential to
distinguish tumor- and stromal-responses to treatment that can alter in
vivo disease progression both on (and off) therapy.

