Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RSK isoform regulation of migration and invasion in glioblastoma


Glioblastoma (GBM) is associated with high mortality in patients due in
large part to the highly migratory and invasive nature of glioma cells.
The 90kDa ribosomal S6 Kinases (RSKs) are a family of serine/theronine
kinases that are an integral component of the extracellular signal
regulated kinase (ERK)/ mitogen activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway,
which is highly active in many types of cancer. The RSK family contains
four human isoforms (RSK1-4) that regulate a variety of cellular
processes including cell proliferation, survival, and motility, however a
role for individual RSK isoforms in GBM cell invasion has not clearly
been defined. Here, we analyze the roles of RSK1-4 in glioblastoma cell
invasion. Using transwell assays and a novel three-dimensional tumor
spheroid assay, we found that the highly specific RSK inhibitor,
BI-D1870, decreases glioblastoma cell motility and invasion. To identify
which RSK isoform was associated with this decrease in invasion, we
knocked down each RSK isoform using lentiviral mediated shRNA
transduction and found that different RSK isoforms could decrease
invasion depending on the cell line, without significantly affecting
proliferation. Additionally, RSK2 knockdown in primary patient-derived
glioblastoma cells decreased cell migration, and Kaplan-Meier analysis
revealed that patients overexpressing RSK2 had a poorer prognosis
compared to those expressing normal levels of RSK2. Our studies support a
differential role for individual RSKs in glioblastoma invasion,
suggesting that targeting RSKs may provide an effective means for the
treatment of glioblastoma.

