Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: IMGN289, an EGFR-targeting antibody-drug conjugate, is effective
against tumor cells that are resistant to EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors


EGFR is one of the oncogenic drivers in non-small-cell lung
adenocarcinoma (NSCLC AC). EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs), such
as erlotinib, gefitinib and afatinib, show remarkable single agent
activity in NSCLC AC with EGFR mutations. However, a majority of the
tumors develop resistance within twelve months. T790M secondary EGFR
mutation and activation of alternative signaling pathways, such as MET,
are the two most common resistance mechanisms.To address this clinical
challenge, we developed IMGN289, an EGFR antibody-drug conjugate
consisting of the novel J2898A antibody (Ab), which selectively binds to
and inhibits EGFR-driven tumor cell growth, conjugated to the
maytansinoid DM1, a potent anti-microtubule agent, via the SMCC thioether
linker. IMGN289 showed significantly enhanced cytotoxic activity,
relative to cetuximab or unconjugated J2898A, against tumor cell line
models that are dependent on EGFR signaling (Chittenden et al., AACR
2013). To evaluate the ability of IMGN289 to overcome mechanisms of EGFR
TKI resistance, IMGN289 activity was tested in erlotinib-resistant
EGFR-mutant cell lines which overexpressed MET (HCC827-ER) or carry the
T790M EGFR mutation (HCC827-EPR) (Suda et al., Clin Cancer Res 2010).
Despite variable levels of EGFR expression in these cell lines, (193,000,
32,500 and 422,000 antigens per cell in HCC827, HCC827-ER and HCC827-EPR,
respectively), IMGN289 showed comparable cytotoxic activities against
these cell lines in vitro. In addition to MET overexpression, the MET
pathway can also be activated by HGF, the MET ligand. While addition of
HGF made the HCC827 cell line resistant to EGFR TKIs (Yano et al., Cancer
Res 2008) and decreased growth inhibition by cetuximab, IMGN289 activity
was unaffected. Additionally, we generated an erlotinib-resistant
HCC827-ER-E4 cell line by exposing the EGFR-mutant HCC827 cells to
increasing concentrations of erlotinib for 6 months, followed by
subcloning. The HCC827-ER-E4 cell line expressed mesenchymal markers and
acquired a mesenchymal phenotype. It expressed lower levels of EGFR, HER3
and MET compared to the parental cell line and showed no loss of PTEN. In
the presence of erlotinib, HCC827-ER-E4 cells retained high levels of
pAKT and pERK, suggesting that activation of alternative signaling
pathways may be responsible for the erlotinib resistance. In vitro
cytotoxic assays showed that IMGN289 was equally cytotoxic to the
parental and the HCC827-ER-E4 cell line.In conclusion, IMGN289
demonstrated EGFR-targeted cytotoxicity against NSCLC cell lines that
harbor some of the most common mechanisms of resistance to EGFR TKIs.
IMGN289 represents a promising novel candidate for treatment of
EGFR-expressing NSCLC AC that has acquired resistance to EGFR TKIs.

