Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bevacizumab (BEV) and risk of arterial (ATE) and venous
thromboembolism (VTE) in metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer
(mCRPC) patients treated on CALGB 90401(ALLIANCE)


Background BEV is associated with an increased risk of ATE, however, its
effect on VTE remains controversial. We investigated the association of
BEV treatment and clinical risk factors with the incidence of ATE and VTE
in a large randomized phase III study.Methods mCRPC patients were
randomized to receive docetaxel and prednisone with or without BEV once
every 21 days. Competing risks cycle-to-event Cox regression models were
used to investigate the association of BEV on the incidence of grade 3 or
higher (3+) ATE (cardiac ischemia/infarction or CNS ischemia) and VTE
(thrombosis/thrombus/embolism). Age, prior ATE/VTE, baseline
antiplatelet/anticoagulant and VTE risk score were evaluated in
univariable and multivariable analyses.Results The analysis included 800
patients. The odds of experiencing grade 3+ ATE was significantly greater
in BEV treated patients compared to placebo (OR 4.16, P=0.006; 4.02%
[16/398] and 1.00% [4/402], respectively). The odds of experiencing grade
3+ VTE was lower in BEV treated patients compared to placebo (OR=0.57,
P=0.08; 4.52% [18/398] and 7.71% [31/402], respectively). In the
multivariable analysis, BEV treatment (HR=4.28; P=0.009) and prior ATE
(HR=2.71; P=0.047) were associated with increased ATE, while age
(HR=1.05; P=0.009) and VTE risk score (HR=2.24; P=0.007), but not BEV
treatment (HR=0.62; P=0.11), were associated with increased VTE (Table
1).Conclusion Due to the lack of survival benefit noted in the clinical
trial, these results further reinforce the recommendation for not using
BEV in this patient population, as it also placed patients at a
significantly greater risk for ATE. However, the influence on VTE, if
any, was a decreased risk. Understanding the risk factors for ATE and VTE
is essential to mitigate risks and reduce the burden of these prevalent
complications in cancer care.Table 1 Risk of ATE and VTE by treatment arm
and clinical risk factorsRisk of ATE and VTE by treatment arm and
clinical risk factors

