Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of MMP2 expression enhances the efficacy of radiation
therapy for a murine astrocytoma


Radiation therapy (RT) remains the front-line treatment for high-grade
gliomas; however, tumor recurrence remains the main obstacle for the
clinical success of RT. Using a murine astrocytoma tumor cell line,
ALTS1C1, we have previously shown that RT can effectively reduce primary
tumor volume and increase mice surviving time, but the mice eventually
died associated with increased tumor infiltration. In this study, we
explore the role of MMP2 (Matrix metalloproteinase-2), a reported
molecule associated with brain tumor invasion, on ALTS1C1 tumor response
to RT. In this study, the MMP2 expression was inhibited by specific
lentiviral-shRNA construct. Eight Gray of whole brain irradiation could
only prolong the median survival days of brain tumor-bearing mice from 25
days to 28 days, but the inhibition of MMP2 expression by siRNA prolonged
the median survival days of tumor bearing mice from 25 days to 42 days.
The median survival days were further prolonged to 53 days when 8 Gy of
radiation and MMP2 inhibition were concurrently applied.
Immunohistochemical (IHC) results showed that the synergistic effect as a
result of RT-caused vessel density decrease (inadequate vasculature) and
the retardation of vessel maturation as a result of MMP2
inhibition-caused the decrease of pericyte-covered vessels (insufficient
vessel function). This study provides a new treatment option for treating
invasive brain tumors. (This study was supported by NHRI-EX103-10132BI
and NSC 102-2314-B-007-003-MY3 grants)

