Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Potent anti-tumor activity of the MEK1/2 inhibitor MEK162 in human
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and squamous cell carcinoma of the
head and neck (SCCHN) cell lines


BACKGROUND: MAPK pathway dysregulation is frequently seen in cancer. For
NSCLC, this may be due to driver mutations or gene amplification in EGFR,
KRAS, or BRAF, though tumors without such mutations frequently display
pathway hyperactivity. Aberrant EGFR signaling in SCCHN may lead to
hyperactivity of the MAPK or PI3K pathways. MEK162 (ARRY-438162) is a
potent, tight binding, uncompetitive MEK inhibitor currently in clinical
development for treatment of solid tumors. MEK162 has an IC50 of 10nM
against purified MEK1/2. We evaluated whether MEK162 would inhibit NSCLC
and SCCHN cell lines and whether specific molecular alterations predicted
anti-tumor activity. We also evaluated the combination of MEK162 in
combination with BYL719, a potent PI3K alpha inhibitor.METHODS: The 50%
inhibitory concentration (IC50) of MEK162, alone or in combination with
BYL719, was determined in 40 human NSCLC and 30 SCCHN cell lines in
vitro. Effects on MAPK and PI3K/AKT pathway signaling were studied by
western blot analysis. Effects of MEK162 alone or in combination with
BYL719 on cell cycle progression were also determined by flow
cytometry.RESULTS: Using previously published cut-offs for sensitivity in
cell lines, among NSCLC cell lines, 20/40 (50%) were sensitive to MEK162
(IC50 500nM), 9/40 were intermediately sensitive (IC50 500nM-1M), and
11/40 were resistant (IC50 1m). Using the same cut-offs, 80% (24/30) of
SCCHN cell lines were sensitive, 2/30 were intermediately sensitive, and
4/30 were resistant to MEK162. MEK162 exposure resulted in increased
cells in G0/G1 and decreased cells in S-phase. MEK162 decreased
phosphorylated ERK (p-ERK) in all cell lines treated and resulted in an
increase in phosphorylated AKT (p-AKT), presumably as a compensatory
result from MAPK pathway inhibition. Combined treatment with MEK162 and
BYL719 resulted in synergistic growth inhibition for all cell lines and
decreased levels of both p-ERK and p-AKT levels at 24 hours.CONCLUSION:
MEK162 potently inhibited growth of human NSCLC and SCCHN cell lines in
most cell lines tested and led to synergistic inhibition when combined
with BYL719. The compensatory increase in pAKT seen with MEK162 was
abrogated with dual treatment with MEK162 and BYL719, demonstrating that
synergy may be mediated by simultaneous blockade of MAPK and PI3K/AKT
pathways. These data provide a preclinical rationale for evaluating
MEK162, alone or in combination with BYL719, in metastatic NSCLC and
SCCHN.Supported by 1K23CA149079, P50 CA090440, V Foundation for Cancer
Research, Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center, Wolfen Family Lung Cancer
Research Program, Stiles Program in Oncology, National Lung Cancer
Partnership and One Ball Matt Memorial Golf Tournament.

