Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Coiled-coil domain 68 (CCDC68) plays a tumor suppressive role in
pancreatic adenocarcinoma


Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is driven by somatic alterations.
Recent studies revealed that most genetic alterations are represented by
rare mutations in many genes that are either drivers or passengers of
PDAC. Using integrative genomics and functional screenings we identified
coiled-coil domain 68 (CCDC68) as a putative tumor suppressor (TSG) in
PDAC. Combination of Q-RT-PCR and FISH analysis revealed CCDC68 allelic
losses in 50% of PDAC cell lines and 44% of primary patient xenografts.
21% of PDAC cell lines and primary patient xenografts also showed
decreased levels of CCDC68 mRNA and protein. We also report the discovery
of an unstable novel alternate splice variant (SNP rs. 1344011) of CCDC68
expressed by 30% of PDAC patients. Overexpression of full length CCDC68
(CCDC68wt) in PANC-1 and Hs.766T cell lines significantly decreased their
cell proliferation, anchorage-independent growth and in vivo
tumorigenicity in scid mice. However, the overexpression of novel
transcript CCDC68 variant did not affect the cell proliferation or
tumorigenicity potential of PANC-1 cells. Finally, we identified that
CCDC68 negatively regulates MAPK signalling independently of KRAS status.
In conclusion, CCDC68 loss-of-function through copy loss, mRNA
downregulation and truncated protein expression suppresses the
tumorigenicity of PDAC cell lines suggesting that CCDC68 is a candidate
novel TSG in PDAC.

