Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CD44s is required for EMT and stemness properties via ZEB1
activation


Invasion and metastasis of carcinomas are often promoted by the aberrant
epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) program at the invasive front
of the tumor. The transcription factor ZEB1 is a crucial promotor of
metastasis formation by inducing EMT and tumor initiating capacity. CD44,
a cell surface protein, is used as marker to identify tumor initiating
cells in many cancer types. It is involved in cell-cell interactions,
cell adhesion and migration. Through alternative splicing, controlled by
the epithelial splicing factor ESRP1, CD44 is differentially regulated
during EMT, resulting in a switch from the variable exon-containing CD44v
isoforms to the standard isoform CD44s, which is devoid of all CD44
variable exons.We examine the reciprocal interaction of CD44s and ZEB1 in
their function as tumor initiation markers. CD44s and ZEB1 are
co-expressed in poorly differentiated human cancer cells.Transient down
regulation of CD44s results in decrease of ZEB1, which in turn leads to
reduced sphere formation ability. Likewise, inhibition of CD44s increases
ESRP1. Knockdown of ESRP1 decreases expression of CD44v isoforms,
increases CD44s and ZEB1 and the sphere forming capacity. Additional
knockdown of CD44s reduces the sphere formation. Furthermore, ZEB1
inhibits ESRP1 expression, which leads to upregulation of CD44s.In
summary we identified a positive feedback loop maintaining stemness and
mesenchymal features in cancer cells: CD44s activates expression of ZEB1,
which suppresses transcription of the splicing factor ESRP1, resulting in
further increase in CD44s expression.

