Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression of ST6Gal-1 in colorectal cancer and patient prognosis


Background: ST6Gal-1 sialyltransferase, a type II membrane protein that
catalyzes the transfer of sialic acid to the N-glycans of certain
receptors, is upregulated in several cancers, including colorectal
cancers (CRCs), and its levels correlate with metastatic potential.
Therefore, we investigated its prognostic value in CRCs.Methodology:
Formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded CRC tissues from African Americans
(Blacks) (n=50) and non-Hispanic Caucasians (Whites) (n=51) patients were
evaluated for immunohistochemical (IHC) expression of ST6Gal-1. IHC
expression was assessed using an anti-human ST6Gal-1 polyclonal antibody
(R&D Systems) with antigen retrieval. The antibody-antigen complex was
detected by the Immpact NovaRed system (Vector Labs). A semiquantitative
immunostaining scoring system (ISS) on a scale of 0-4 was developed to
assess the ST6Gal-1 expression, and a cutoff value (1.2 ISS) was
determined by the bootstrap method. This value was used to classify
tumors as low- or high-ST6Gal-I expressors. Previously, these tissues
were evaluated for p53 nuclear accumulation (p53nac), an indicator of
abnormal p53, by IHC. ST6Gal-1 expression levels were correlated with
demographic and clinicopathologic features and with patient
survival.Results: Increased ST6Gal-1 expression was observed in all CRCs
as compared to their corresponding normal tissues. The overall frequency
of CRCs with increased ST6Gal-1 expression was 80%; it was more commonly
found in Blacks (88%, 44 of 50) than in Whites (70%, 36 of 51) (X2
p=0.031). Also, increased expression was associated with p53nac, and
ST6Gal-1 expression was higher in CRCs that exhibited p53nac (87%, 42 of
48) relative to CRCs without p53nac (70%, 35 of 50) (X2 p = 0.034).
Moreover, patients with CRCs with high ST6Gal-1 had lower median survival
(29.3 months) relative to those with low ST6Gal-1 expression (58.5
months).Conclusions: These preliminary findings suggest that increased
expression of ST6Gal-1 expression, found predominantly in Blacks patients
and in CRCs with abnormal p53, is associated with poor patient survival.

