Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterizing growth features, allograft generation and
transcriptomes of cultured conditionally reprogrammed cells (CRC)
prepared from primary triple negative cancer from Brca1-mutant mice


Background: Efficient acquisition of primary cancer cells for genetic and
pharmacological testing is a means towards individualized cancer
treatment. Genetically engineered mouse models of triple negative mammary
cancer were used to compare culture conditions conditionally reprogrammed
cell culture CRC with a rho kinase inhibitor (Y-27632) and irradiated J2
feeder cells, EpiCult, DMEM for establishment efficiency,
differentiation, fibroblast contamination, and allograft generation.
Goals: 1) Evaluate mammary cancer progenitor cells by allograft and
secondary culture 2) Compare RNA-seq transcriptomes in cells and
allografts with different Brca1 gene dosages (100%, 50%, 0%) Methods:
Triple negative invasive adenocarcinomas from 4 mouse genotypes, all
carrying a p53-null allele, were analyzed: A) 1 mutant Brca1 allele; B) 2
mutant Brca1 alleles; C) 1 mutant Brca1 allele and 1 human aromatase
transgene; D) human aromatase transgene. Cancers were divided and growth
assessed in CRC, EpiCult and DMEM cultures. Illumina (V2scriptseq)
RNA-seq libraries were prepared from cell pellets and allografts. One
million cells injected into mammary gland fat pads of nude mice generated
allografts divided for histology/DNA analyses, secondary culture and
RNAseq. Transcript abundance and differentially expressed genes were
determined after assembling transcriptomes with Cufflinks. Results: CRC
was the most efficient methodology based on rapidity and percentage
cancer specimens successfully cultured and paucity of fibroblasts. Brca1
gene dosage made no difference in culture efficiency. Differentiation
markers were expressed at significantly higher levels in CRC whereas
markers of epithelial mesenchymal transition were expressed higher in
EpiCult. Allografts were derived from CRC and EpiCult but not DMEM.
Genetic testing confirmed allografts were derived from original
endogenous cancer cells. Some individual allografts derived from the same
culture exhibited different growth curves and histology, suggesting tumor
cell heterogeneity within cultures. Overall, palpable EpiCult allografts
appeared significantly earlier than CRC allografts (pBackground:
Efficient acquisition of primary cancer cells for genetic and
pharmacological testing is a means towards individualized cancer
treatment. Genetically engineered mouse models of triple negative mammary
cancer were used to compare culture conditions conditionally reprogrammed
cell culture CRC with a rho kinase inhibitor (Y-27632) and irradiated J2
feeder cells, EpiCult, DMEM for establishment efficiency,
differentiation, fibroblast contamination, and allograft generation.
Goals: 1) Evaluate mammary cancer progenitor cells by allograft and
secondary culture 2) Compare RNA-seq transcriptomes in cells and
allografts with different Brca1 gene dosages (100%, 50%, 0%) Methods:
Triple negative invasive adenocarcinomas from 4 mouse genotypes, all
carrying a p53-null allele, were analyzed: A) 1 mutant Brca1 allele; B) 2
mutant Brca1 alleles; C) 1 mutant Brca1 allele and 1 human aromatase
transgene; D) human aromatase transgene. Cancers were divided and growth
assessed in CRC, EpiCult and DMEM cultures. Illumina (V2scriptseq)
RNA-seq libraries were prepared from cell pellets and allografts. One
million cells injected into mammary gland fat pads of nude mice generated
allografts divided for histology/DNA analyses, secondary culture and
RNAseq. Transcript abundance and differentially expressed genes were
determined after assembling transcriptomes with Cufflinks. Results: CRC
was the most efficient methodology based on rapidity and percentage
cancer specimens successfully cultured and paucity of fibroblasts. Brca1
gene dosage made no difference in culture efficiency. Differentiation
markers were expressed at significantly higher levels in CRC whereas
markers of epithelial mesenchymal transition were expressed higher in
EpiCult. Allografts were derived from CRC and EpiCult but not DMEM.
Genetic testing confirmed allografts were derived from original
endogenous cancer cells. Some individual allografts derived from the same
culture exhibited different growth curves and histology, suggesting tumor
cell heterogeneity within cultures. Overall, palpable EpiCult allografts
appeared significantly earlier than CRC allografts (p<0.05 Chi Square).
RNAseq analyses distinguished gene expression patterns dependent upon
culture condition as distinct from those determined by underlying
genetics. Summary: CRC technology was an efficient means of generating
primary cancer cell cultures, maintained epithelial cell differentiation
better than other methods, had no fibroblast contamination, and preserved
cancer progenitor cells.

