Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting Epstein-Barr virus oncoprotein LMP1-mediated glycolysis
sensitizes nasopharyngeal carcinoma to radiation therapy


Our goal in this work was to illustrate the Epstein-Barr Virus
(EBV)-modulated global biochemical profile and provide a novel
metabolism-related target to improve the therapeutic regimen of
nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC). We used a metabolomics approach to
investigate EBV-modulated metabolic changes, and found that the exogenous
overexpression of the EBV encoded latent membrane protein 1 (LMP1)
significantly increased glycolysis. The deregulation of several
glycolytic genes, including hexokinase 2 (HK2), was determined to be
responsible for the reprogramming of LMP1-mediated glucose metabolism in
NPC cells. The up-regulation of HK2 elevated aerobic glycolysis and
facilitated proliferation by blocking apoptosis. More importantly, HK2
was positively correlated with LMP1 in NPC biopsies, and high HK2 levels
were significantly associated with poor overall survival of NPC patients
following radiation therapy. Knockdown of HK2 effectively enhanced the
sensitivity of LMP1-overexpressing NPC cells to irradiation. Finally,
c-Myc was demonstrated to be required for LMP1-induced up-regulation of
HK2. The LMP1-mediated attenuation of the PI3-K/Akt-GSK3beta-FBW7
signaling axis resulted in the stabilization of c-Myc. These findings
indicate a close relationship between EBV and glycolysis in NPC. Notably,
LMP1 is the key regulator of the reprogramming of EBV-mediated glycolysis
in NPC cells. Given the importance of EBV-mediated deregulation of
glycolysis, anti-glycolytic therapy might represent a worthwhile avenue
of exploration in the treatment of EBV-related cancers.Note: This
abstract was not presented at the meeting.

