Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Longitudinal bioluminescence imaging of primary versus abdominal
metastatic tumor growth in orthotopic pancreatic tumor models in
NOD/SCID(-/-) mice


Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) has a very poor prognosis and is
currently the fourth leading cause of cancer death in the United States.
The lethal nature of PDAC is strongly associated with metastases to
distant organs. The purpose of the present study was to develop and
validate noninvasive bioluminescence imaging methods for differentially
monitoring the kinetics of primary and abdominal metastatic tumor growth
in mouse orthotopic models of pancreatic cancer. A semiautomated maximum
entropy segmentation method was implemented for the primary tumor
region-of-interest (ROI), and a rule-based method for manually drawing an
ROI for the abdominal metastatic region also was developed. The two ROI
methods were first validated by having two observers independently
construct ROIs for the tumors of animals implanted orthotopically with
Panc-1 cells, and the results compared with the number of mesenteric
lymph node metastatic nodules counted upon necropsy. The findings were
extended to orthotopic tumors of the more metastatic MIA PaCa-2 and
AsPC-1 cells where different groups of animals were implanted with
different numbers of cells. When the data were expressed as the total
photon flux (Ph/sec) in the ROIs for the primary tumor and metastases,
the total flux within the metastasis ROI was larger in magnitude than the
total flux from the primary tumor ROI, at times by as much as several
orders of magnitude. However, when the data were expressed as the average
flux density (Ph/sec*mm2) within the ROIs, the density of the flux within
the smaller primary tumor ROI was larger in magnitude than the density of
the flux from the larger metastasis ROI, by as much as several orders of
magnitude. Interobserver assessments for total flux and flux density from
ROIs for both the primary tumors and metastatic region were highly
concordant, with correlation coefficients of r > 0.98, coefficients of
variation of 0.02, and limits of agreement within Pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma (PDAC) has a very poor prognosis and is currently the
fourth leading cause of cancer death in the United States. The lethal
nature of PDAC is strongly associated with metastases to distant organs.
The purpose of the present study was to develop and validate noninvasive
bioluminescence imaging methods for differentially monitoring the
kinetics of primary and abdominal metastatic tumor growth in mouse
orthotopic models of pancreatic cancer. A semiautomated maximum entropy
segmentation method was implemented for the primary tumor
region-of-interest (ROI), and a rule-based method for manually drawing an
ROI for the abdominal metastatic region also was developed. The two ROI
methods were first validated by having two observers independently
construct ROIs for the tumors of animals implanted orthotopically with
Panc-1 cells, and the results compared with the number of mesenteric
lymph node metastatic nodules counted upon necropsy. The findings were
extended to orthotopic tumors of the more metastatic MIA PaCa-2 and
AsPC-1 cells where different groups of animals were implanted with
different numbers of cells. When the data were expressed as the total
photon flux (Ph/sec) in the ROIs for the primary tumor and metastases,
the total flux within the metastasis ROI was larger in magnitude than the
total flux from the primary tumor ROI, at times by as much as several
orders of magnitude. However, when the data were expressed as the average
flux density (Ph/sec*mm2) within the ROIs, the density of the flux within
the smaller primary tumor ROI was larger in magnitude than the density of
the flux from the larger metastasis ROI, by as much as several orders of
magnitude. Interobserver assessments for total flux and flux density from
ROIs for both the primary tumors and metastatic region were highly
concordant, with correlation coefficients of r > 0.98, coefficients of
variation of 0.02, and limits of agreement within <5%. Further, there
were statistically significant differences in the growth kinetics of
AsPC-1 and MIA PaCa-2 orthotopic tumors when mice were implanted with
different numbers of cells for each cell line. The present results
demonstrated that the segmentation methods were highly reliable,
reproducible and robust, and allowed statistically significant
discrimination in the growth kinetics of primary and abdominal metastatic
tumors of different cell lines implanted with different cell numbers.
Thus, primary tumors and abdominal metastatic foci in orthotopic
pancreatic cancer models can be reliably monitored separately and
noninvasively over time with bioluminescence imaging. The novel
segmentation methods reported here will facilitate investigations of the
biology of primary and metastatic tumor growth, as well as the effects of
novel treatments, over time, in individual animals.

