Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HMGA2 promotes invasion and stemness in glioblastoma


Glioblastoma Multiforme (GBM) causes the majority of brain tumor-related
deaths in the United States. The high invasiveness of GBM prevents
complete surgical resection, allowing tumor recurrence. The lack of
curative treatment highlights a dire need to develop specific targeted
therapeutics. Identifying and targeting novel molecular markers in glioma
stem-like cells (GSCs), one of the major causes of tumor invasion and
recurrence, could lead to development of better therapies. HMGA2, a
non-histone transcriptional modulator, is a regulator of normal and
cancer stem cells. The significance of HMGA2 as a potential therapeutic
target in GBM has not been investigated. To elucidate the role of HMGA2
in GBM, we have used a combination of in vitro and in vivo techniques. We
found increased HMGA2 expression in the mesenchymal subgroup of GBM
tumors in the The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) database and in a subset of
primary human GBM tumors. HMGA2 is expressed in multiple patient-derived
GBM neurosphere lines with increased expression in CD133+ neurospheres
compared to CD133- neurospheres. Lentiviral short hairpin RNA
(shRNA)-mediated reduction of HMGA2 significantly inhibited invasion of
GBM neurosphere lines (040821, 62% reduction with HMGA2 shRNA vs. control
shRNA, PGlioblastoma Multiforme (GBM) causes the majority of brain
tumor-related deaths in the United States. The high invasiveness of GBM
prevents complete surgical resection, allowing tumor recurrence. The lack
of curative treatment highlights a dire need to develop specific targeted
therapeutics. Identifying and targeting novel molecular markers in glioma
stem-like cells (GSCs), one of the major causes of tumor invasion and
recurrence, could lead to development of better therapies. HMGA2, a
non-histone transcriptional modulator, is a regulator of normal and
cancer stem cells. The significance of HMGA2 as a potential therapeutic
target in GBM has not been investigated. To elucidate the role of HMGA2
in GBM, we have used a combination of in vitro and in vivo techniques. We
found increased HMGA2 expression in the mesenchymal subgroup of GBM
tumors in the The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) database and in a subset of
primary human GBM tumors. HMGA2 is expressed in multiple patient-derived
GBM neurosphere lines with increased expression in CD133+ neurospheres
compared to CD133- neurospheres. Lentiviral short hairpin RNA
(shRNA)-mediated reduction of HMGA2 significantly inhibited invasion of
GBM neurosphere lines (040821, 62% reduction with HMGA2 shRNA vs. control
shRNA, P<0.001) in transwell invasion assays. Conversely,
lentiviral-mediated overexpression of HMGA2 in GBM neurosphere lines
increased invasion (GBM1 and 040821, 100-130% increase with HMGA2
overexpression vs. control vector, PGlioblastoma Multiforme (GBM) causes
the majority of brain tumor-related deaths in the United States. The high
invasiveness of GBM prevents complete surgical resection, allowing tumor
recurrence. The lack of curative treatment highlights a dire need to
develop specific targeted therapeutics. Identifying and targeting novel
molecular markers in glioma stem-like cells (GSCs), one of the major
causes of tumor invasion and recurrence, could lead to development of
better therapies. HMGA2, a non-histone transcriptional modulator, is a
regulator of normal and cancer stem cells. The significance of HMGA2 as a
potential therapeutic target in GBM has not been investigated. To
elucidate the role of HMGA2 in GBM, we have used a combination of in
vitro and in vivo techniques. We found increased HMGA2 expression in the
mesenchymal subgroup of GBM tumors in the The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA)
database and in a subset of primary human GBM tumors. HMGA2 is expressed
in multiple patient-derived GBM neurosphere lines with increased
expression in CD133+ neurospheres compared to CD133- neurospheres.
Lentiviral short hairpin RNA (shRNA)-mediated reduction of HMGA2
significantly inhibited invasion of GBM neurosphere lines (040821, 62%
reduction with HMGA2 shRNA vs. control shRNA, P<0.001) in transwell
invasion assays. Conversely, lentiviral-mediated overexpression of HMGA2
in GBM neurosphere lines increased invasion (GBM1 and 040821, 100-130%
increase with HMGA2 overexpression vs. control vector, P<0.001) in
transwell invasion assays. In addition, overexpression of HMGA2 increased
clonogenicity of GBM neurosphere lines in vitro in soft agar and
methylcellulose colony formation assays (40-60% increase with HMGA2
overexpression vs. control vector, PGlioblastoma Multiforme (GBM) causes
the majority of brain tumor-related deaths in the United States. The high
invasiveness of GBM prevents complete surgical resection, allowing tumor
recurrence. The lack of curative treatment highlights a dire need to
develop specific targeted therapeutics. Identifying and targeting novel
molecular markers in glioma stem-like cells (GSCs), one of the major
causes of tumor invasion and recurrence, could lead to development of
better therapies. HMGA2, a non-histone transcriptional modulator, is a
regulator of normal and cancer stem cells. The significance of HMGA2 as a
potential therapeutic target in GBM has not been investigated. To
elucidate the role of HMGA2 in GBM, we have used a combination of in
vitro and in vivo techniques. We found increased HMGA2 expression in the
mesenchymal subgroup of GBM tumors in the The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA)
database and in a subset of primary human GBM tumors. HMGA2 is expressed
in multiple patient-derived GBM neurosphere lines with increased
expression in CD133+ neurospheres compared to CD133- neurospheres.
Lentiviral short hairpin RNA (shRNA)-mediated reduction of HMGA2
significantly inhibited invasion of GBM neurosphere lines (040821, 62%
reduction with HMGA2 shRNA vs. control shRNA, P<0.001) in transwell
invasion assays. Conversely, lentiviral-mediated overexpression of HMGA2
in GBM neurosphere lines increased invasion (GBM1 and 040821, 100-130%
increase with HMGA2 overexpression vs. control vector, P<0.001) in
transwell invasion assays. In addition, overexpression of HMGA2 increased
clonogenicity of GBM neurosphere lines in vitro in soft agar and
methylcellulose colony formation assays (40-60% increase with HMGA2
overexpression vs. control vector, P<0.001). Importantly, log-rank
analysis of Kaplan-Meier plots showed increased survival of mice injected
with GBM neurosphere lines transduced with HMGA2 shRNA compared to
control shRNA (PGlioblastoma Multiforme (GBM) causes the majority of
brain tumor-related deaths in the United States. The high invasiveness of
GBM prevents complete surgical resection, allowing tumor recurrence. The
lack of curative treatment highlights a dire need to develop specific
targeted therapeutics. Identifying and targeting novel molecular markers
in glioma stem-like cells (GSCs), one of the major causes of tumor
invasion and recurrence, could lead to development of better therapies.
HMGA2, a non-histone transcriptional modulator, is a regulator of normal
and cancer stem cells. The significance of HMGA2 as a potential
therapeutic target in GBM has not been investigated. To elucidate the
role of HMGA2 in GBM, we have used a combination of in vitro and in vivo
techniques. We found increased HMGA2 expression in the mesenchymal
subgroup of GBM tumors in the The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) database and
in a subset of primary human GBM tumors. HMGA2 is expressed in multiple
patient-derived GBM neurosphere lines with increased expression in CD133+
neurospheres compared to CD133- neurospheres. Lentiviral short hairpin
RNA (shRNA)-mediated reduction of HMGA2 significantly inhibited invasion
of GBM neurosphere lines (040821, 62% reduction with HMGA2 shRNA vs.
control shRNA, P<0.001) in transwell invasion assays. Conversely,
lentiviral-mediated overexpression of HMGA2 in GBM neurosphere lines
increased invasion (GBM1 and 040821, 100-130% increase with HMGA2
overexpression vs. control vector, P<0.001) in transwell invasion assays.
In addition, overexpression of HMGA2 increased clonogenicity of GBM
neurosphere lines in vitro in soft agar and methylcellulose colony
formation assays (40-60% increase with HMGA2 overexpression vs. control
vector, P<0.001). Importantly, log-rank analysis of Kaplan-Meier plots
showed increased survival of mice injected with GBM neurosphere lines
transduced with HMGA2 shRNA compared to control shRNA (P<0.05) in an in
vivo, orthotopic, intracranial mouse xenograft model. To elucidate the
molecular mechanism by which HMGA2 promotes invasion and stemness in GBM,
we performed mRNA expression profiling on GBM neurosphere lines
lentivirally transduced to express HMGA2 or empty vector control. We
found increased CD44 expression in HMGA2-overexpressing GBM neurosphere
lines compared to control. Together, our results suggest an oncogenic
role of HMGA2 in promoting GBM tumorigenicity by increasing invasiveness
and a stem cell-like state, thereby suggesting that HMGA2 is a potential
therapeutic target in GBM.

