Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Elevation of oxidative expression proteins in human ovarian
epithelial carcinoma


Oxidative stress, which results from an imbalance between ROS and
antioxidant capacities, can cause a wide range of direct or indirect DNA
damage to ovarian epithelium mucosa that is exposed to immense
physiological changes, driven by cyclically altering hormone levels as a
result of ovulation. The influence of ovulation contributed to the cause
of increased oxidative stress in ovarian cells. In this study, we
monitored and compared the level of oxidized carbonyl proteins in two
subtypes of epithelial ovarian cancer, Serous and endometriod with normal
and normal surrounding tissue. We applied DNPH derivative colorimetric
and immuneblot assay, two dimension gel electrophoresis (2-D SDS-PAGE),
to identify and evaluate the level of oxidative modified protein in 100
snap-freeze epithelial ovarian tissues including, normal, normal
surrounding, cystoadenoma, borderline and carcinoma with age range of
6512, (56% Caucasian 44% Africa American. Our results showed that the
index of carbonyl proteins /total proteins increased by onset and
progression in both serous and endometriod ovarian malignancy. The
elevation of oxidized proteins among African American was significantly
higher than Caucasian in advanced stages of disease. SDS-PAGE profiles
and western blot analysis of oxidized proteins showed a distinct protein
expression pattern among cancerous and non-cancerous tissues. Our study
suggests that the level of oxidative stress may be involved in the
selective modification of some enzymes and structural proteins and could
play a role in etiological differences that may exist between stages of
benign and invasive epithelial ovarian tumors.

