Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ROCK inhibitor as a differentiation-inducing agent to target
glioma stem cells


Only 3% of patients diagnosed each year with Glioblastoma Multiforme
(GBM) survive longer than 5 years, making GBM one of the most lethal
forms of human cancer. It has been proposed that GBMs are driven by a
rare subset of tumor cells referred to as cancer stem cells (CSCs), which
have the ability to resist conventional radio- and chemotherapy and
initiate disease recurrence. Thus, the development of novel and effective
therapeutic strategies targeting CSCs is required and should
significantly improve the dismal prognosis for patients with GBM. A
possible viable strategy to effectively target glioma stem cells (GSCs)
is the use of bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) as differentiation
inducers. Our results suggest that Rho-associated protein kinase (ROCK)
could work as a pharmacological negative regulator of BMPs. Our
preliminary data indicate that: i) Fasudil, a ROCK1 inhibitor, induces
BMP2 and BMP4 expression both in vitro and in vivo in different
human-derived glioma xenograft models; ii) Fasudil-induced BMPs can
increase the expression of differentiation markers and decrease stemness
in these glioma models; iii) temozolomide, a chemotherapeutic agent,
converts glioma cells to a GSC phenotype, while Fasudil blocks this
interconversion; iv) co-administration of Fasudil with temozolomide
inhibits the invasive characteristics of GBM in an orthotropic glioma
xenograft model; and v) the analysis of BMP expression in human-derived
GBM samples from the Repository of Molecular Brain Neoplasia Database
(REMBRABDT) reveals that patients with higher BMP2 expression survived
four times longer than those with low or intermediate BMP2 expression
(pOnly 3% of patients diagnosed each year with Glioblastoma Multiforme
(GBM) survive longer than 5 years, making GBM one of the most lethal
forms of human cancer. It has been proposed that GBMs are driven by a
rare subset of tumor cells referred to as cancer stem cells (CSCs), which
have the ability to resist conventional radio- and chemotherapy and
initiate disease recurrence. Thus, the development of novel and effective
therapeutic strategies targeting CSCs is required and should
significantly improve the dismal prognosis for patients with GBM. A
possible viable strategy to effectively target glioma stem cells (GSCs)
is the use of bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) as differentiation
inducers. Our results suggest that Rho-associated protein kinase (ROCK)
could work as a pharmacological negative regulator of BMPs. Our
preliminary data indicate that: i) Fasudil, a ROCK1 inhibitor, induces
BMP2 and BMP4 expression both in vitro and in vivo in different
human-derived glioma xenograft models; ii) Fasudil-induced BMPs can
increase the expression of differentiation markers and decrease stemness
in these glioma models; iii) temozolomide, a chemotherapeutic agent,
converts glioma cells to a GSC phenotype, while Fasudil blocks this
interconversion; iv) co-administration of Fasudil with temozolomide
inhibits the invasive characteristics of GBM in an orthotropic glioma
xenograft model; and v) the analysis of BMP expression in human-derived
GBM samples from the Repository of Molecular Brain Neoplasia Database
(REMBRABDT) reveals that patients with higher BMP2 expression survived
four times longer than those with low or intermediate BMP2 expression
(p<0.001). Based on this, we propose that, by blocking ROCK signaling
with the FDA approved pharmacological inhibitor Fasudil, one can modulate
BMP expression in human-derived gliomas. Fasudil, therefore, may redirect
cellular signals regulating GSCs' stemness, fate, and initiate their
differentiation. Such an agent will allow us to develop a more effective
anti-glioma therapy through its combination with other conventional
anti-cancer drugs.

