Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Managing stress: Discovery of inhibitors of the atypical kinase
eEF2K and the class III PI3K, VPS34


Adaptation to nutrient deprivation in the tumour microenvironment was
recently shown to be dependent on the appropriate regulation of protein
elongation rate through activation of the atypical kinase, eukaryotic
elongation factor 2 kinase (eEF2K) (Leprivier et al., 2013, Cell
153(5):1064-79). We have solved the crystal structure of the kinase
domain of eEF2K, and used structure-based design as well as screening
approaches to optimize a chemical series into single-digit nM inhibitors
of eEF2K, with remarkable selectivity across the protein kinome (only
5-10 kinases out of 400 tested are inhibited to more than 50% at 1 M).
These compounds inhibit the phosphorylation of eEF2 in nutrient-starved
or metabolically stressed cells, and increase protein elongation rates
through stabilization of the ribosomal elongation complex under stress.
Evotec's Cellular Target Profiling of these compounds in cell lysates,
revealed that a subset of the eEF2K inhibitors also bind with low nM
affinity to the class III phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase, VPS34, but not
to class I or II PI3Ks, and pull down the entire beclin-UVRAG-VPS34
complex. Proteomic and biochemical screening of the compound set enabled
deconvolution of potent EF2K versus VPS34 inhibitors. Inhibition of VPS34
results in abrogation of autophagic flux, as indicated by rapid and
massive accumulation of p62, and impairs survival in specific subsets of
tumor cell lines, consistent with a pro-survival role for autophagy in
those models (Cheng et al., 2013, Pharmacol Rev 65(4):1162-97).
Interestingly, a whole-genome pooled shRNA screen in a KRAS/PI3KCA mutant
colorectal cancer cell line revealed that reduction of beclin levels
significantly increased sensitivity to VPS34 inhibition. In contrast,
inhibition of eEF2K does not appear to be anti-proliferative across a
wide panel of cancer cell lines under standard cell culture
conditions.Our work has provided the first potent inhibitors to unravel
the functional relevance of eEF2K and VPS34 in adaptation to cellular
stress, and to examine the utility of inhibiting these kinases in
nutrient-deprived and/or autophagy-addicted tumours.

