Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PKC412 (Midostaurin) is safe and highly effective in systemic
mastocytosis patients: Follow up of a single-center Italian compassionate
use


Introduction. Mastocytosis is a myeloid neoplasm characterized by
abnormal accumulation and frequent activation of mast cells (MCs) in
various organs. The recent WHO classification (2008) includes an indolent
form (ISM), an aggressive form (ASM) and a leukemic subvariant (MCL). The
c-kit mutation D816V is detectable in most adult patients with SM.
Treatment of SM usually focuses on symptom relief by histamine receptor
antagonists and other supportive therapy. However, in aggressive and
leukemic variants, cytoreductive and targeted drugs must be
applied.Methods. From 2008, 22 patients (male/female=11/11) affected by
SM have been referred to our Institution. Among these, 12 (55%) presented
with systemic symptoms associated with signs of organ involvement
(skeletal lesions, ascites, liver function impairment or bon marrow
disfunction), thus identifying an ASM. Therefore, since a first line
therapy (IFNalfa, Imatinib and 2CdA in 56%, 11% and 33% of the patients,
respectively) and supportive care with histamine receptor antagonists
werent followed by a significant benefit, a personalized use of PKC412
was asked and obtained for 9 out of 12 ASM patients. Thus, from March
2011 9 (M/F =3/9) patients with ASM have been treated with PKC412,
administered orally, at the dosage of 100 mg twice daily, without rest
periods. The median age was 60 years (range 39-75); the median time from
diagnosis was 6 months (range 2-53). Median serum tryptase level was 100
mcg/L(range 19.3-1160). C-kit mutation D816V was present in 8 out of 9
patients. Cytogenetic analysis was normal in all the patients.Results.
Seven out of nine patients were evaluable for response. The median
duration of therapy was 517 days (range 327-970+). According to European
Criteria, a Major response was observed in one patient, and a partial
response in 6 patients. Overall, the drug was well tolerated, and no
serious adverse events were observed. All the patients obtained a quick
and prolonged improvement of clinical symptoms, in terms of weight gain,
bowel function and skeletal pain. At the bone marrow evaluation, the
persistence of the D816V c-kit mutation was observed, despite a
significant decrease of mast cell marrow involvement.Conclusions.In a
small cohort of ASM patient, the prolonged therapy with PKC412 is safe
and effective, mainly on symptoms improvement and haematological profile.
Nevertheless, the persistence of the D816V c-kit mutation, despite
significant responses, suggests that many other oncogenic factors may be
responsible for the pathogenesis of the disease. UDS approaches are
needed in order to clarify this issue.Acknowledgments. Work supported by
European LeukemiaNet, AIRC, AIL, PRIN 2010-2011, University of Bologna,
FP7 NGS-PTL project.

