Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Understanding the mechanisms driving pancreatic neuroendocrine
tumorigenesis


A recent exome sequencing study of pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors
(PanNETs) provided valuable information about the genetic landscape of
these cancers and for the first time implicated DAXX and ATRX loss in
tumorigenesis. These interacting proteins are chaperones for the histone
variant H3.3 and contribute to chromatin homeostasis and telomere
maintenance. Mutually exclusive mutations in DAXX or ATRX occur in 43% of
PanNETs. To understand how loss of these epigenetic regulators
specifically contributes to tumorigenesis, we are developing genetically
engineered mouse models of PanNETs. While a mouse with a conditional Daxx
allele is publically available, subsequent sequencing and
characterization revealed a mutant loxP site, which renders recombination
extremely inefficient. We are, therefore, currently generating a new
conditional Daxx allele, as well as using an existing conditional Atrx
allele to specifically delete these genes in the endocrine pancreas.
Cohorts of mice are being built and followed for developmental and tumor
phenotypes. In addition, in vitro studies have also implicated a role for
DAXX as a negative regulator of the p53 tumor suppressor pathway.
Interestingly, p53 is rarely mutated in PanNETs. We are using a Daxx-null
allele, generated using the existing conditional Daxx mouse, to
investigate the relationship between DAXX and the p53 pathway in vivo.
Combined, this work aims to generate and characterize mouse models which
will lead to a better understanding of both the etiology of PanNETs and
how loss of DAXX and ATRX contribute to tumorigenesis.Note: This abstract
was not presented at the meeting.

