Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Axl overexpression drives migration and invasion in colon cancer


Receptor tyrosine kinases (RTK) of the TAM family have been described as
oncogenes. Axl and Mertk, two members of the TAM family, are also potent
negative regulators of the inflammatory response. Inflammation is an
enabling characteristic of cancer hallmarks and can promote tumorigenesis
and tumor progression. Genetic ablation of Axl and Mertk in mice, results
in heightened inflammation in the gut and increased susceptibility to
inflammation-driven colon cancer (azoxymethane/dextran sodium sulfate
treatment paradigm). We sought to understand the role of Axl and Mertk,
individually, in colon cancer cells to identify the key TAM oncogene in
this disease.Here we show that Axl, but not Mertk, was highly expressed
and correlated with grade of metastatic colon cancer. Silencing Axl
expression in RKO-AS45-1 and HCT116 colon cancer cells had no significant
effect on proliferation and survival, but markedly decreased migration
and invasion. R428, a selective Axl small molecule inhibitor, also
drastically reduced migration in these colon cancer cell lines. Analyses
of Axl knockout mice revealed that single, genetic ablation of this TAM
RTK does not increase susceptibility to DSS-induced colitis, in contrast
to that observed in Axl and Mertk double knockout mice.These results are
consistent with a redundant function of Axl and Mer in the regulation of
the inflammatory response. Our findings suggest that the selective
targeting of Axl in colon cancer might disable the oncogenic function of
TAM RTKs, while sparing the protective, anti-inflammatory function of
this RTK family in this disease.

