Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Fenretinide and safingol synergistic cytotoxicity in neuroblastoma
is, in part, mediated by increase of dihydroceramides


Introduction: N-(4-hydroxyphenyl)retinamide (fenretinide, 4-HPR) is a
clinical-stage synthetic retinoid cytotoxic to many cancer cell lines in
a dose- and time-dependent manner in vitro by mechanisms that include
reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation and increase of
D-erythro-dihydroceramides via de novo synthesis. The cytotoxicity of
4-HPR is synergistically increased by low, minimally cytotoxic
concentrations (1 - 4 M) of the stereochemical sphinganine analog,
safingol (C18-L-threo-sphinganine). Currently reported activities of
safingol include inhibition of sphingosine kinase 1 (SPHK1) and/or
protein kinase C's (PKCs) at higher concentrations (20 - 50 M) in vitro.
However, previous work done in our lab has shown that parent safingol is
substantially metabolized (90%) by +24 hrs, and as a result, activities
dependent on the presence of parental safingol would not be expected to
be maintained over time. Given these apparent discrepancies, we
hypothesized that safingol does not synergize 4-HPR cytotoxicity through
parental inhibition of SPHK1 or PKC's, but rather through a mechanism
dependent on the concurrent increase of normal and variant, D-erythro-
and L-threo-dihydroceramides. Methods: Human neuroblastoma (NB) cell
lines CHLA-15, CHLA-90, and SK-N-RA, which display synergistic
cytotoxicity to 4-HPR + safingol (H+S) were selected as a model system.
In our washout experiments cells were treated with 4-HPR (0 - 6 M) either
concurrently with a 4-hr safingol (4 M) exposure, or at later times after
safingol exposure (+4_ +48 hours), to allow for safingol metabolism.
Cytotoxicity was measured using a semi-automated, fluorescence-based
assay system (DIMSCAN). Flow cytometry experiments to analyze ROS levels
in response to H+S treatment have also been conducted. Subsequently,
liquid chromatography tandem mass spectroscopy (LC/MS/MS) is being
utilized to quantitate various ceramides, L-threo-, and
D-erythro-dihydroceramides in order to determine any possible correlation
between any particular species and cytotoxicity. Results and Conclusions:
Comparable cytotoxicity (PIntroduction: N-(4-hydroxyphenyl)retinamide
(fenretinide, 4-HPR) is a clinical-stage synthetic retinoid cytotoxic to
many cancer cell lines in a dose- and time-dependent manner in vitro by
mechanisms that include reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation and
increase of D-erythro-dihydroceramides via de novo synthesis. The
cytotoxicity of 4-HPR is synergistically increased by low, minimally
cytotoxic concentrations (1 - 4 M) of the stereochemical sphinganine
analog, safingol (C18-L-threo-sphinganine). Currently reported activities
of safingol include inhibition of sphingosine kinase 1 (SPHK1) and/or
protein kinase C's (PKCs) at higher concentrations (20 - 50 M) in vitro.
However, previous work done in our lab has shown that parent safingol is
substantially metabolized (90%) by +24 hrs, and as a result, activities
dependent on the presence of parental safingol would not be expected to
be maintained over time. Given these apparent discrepancies, we
hypothesized that safingol does not synergize 4-HPR cytotoxicity through
parental inhibition of SPHK1 or PKC's, but rather through a mechanism
dependent on the concurrent increase of normal and variant, D-erythro-
and L-threo-dihydroceramides. Methods: Human neuroblastoma (NB) cell
lines CHLA-15, CHLA-90, and SK-N-RA, which display synergistic
cytotoxicity to 4-HPR + safingol (H+S) were selected as a model system.
In our washout experiments cells were treated with 4-HPR (0 - 6 M) either
concurrently with a 4-hr safingol (4 M) exposure, or at later times after
safingol exposure (+4_ +48 hours), to allow for safingol metabolism.
Cytotoxicity was measured using a semi-automated, fluorescence-based
assay system (DIMSCAN). Flow cytometry experiments to analyze ROS levels
in response to H+S treatment have also been conducted. Subsequently,
liquid chromatography tandem mass spectroscopy (LC/MS/MS) is being
utilized to quantitate various ceramides, L-threo-, and
D-erythro-dihydroceramides in order to determine any possible correlation
between any particular species and cytotoxicity. Results and Conclusions:
Comparable cytotoxicity (P<.05) was observed whether 4-HPR was
administered concurrently with safingol or at various later time points.
These data support that cytotoxic synergy was not dependent on the
presence of parental safingol. Experiments quantitating ROS by flow
cytometry do not show changes in the levels of these species in H vs. H+S
groups, ruling out ROS generation as a mechanism of synergy between H+S.
Preliminary LC/MS/MS experiments paired with DIMSCAN cytotoxicity assays
indicate that certain sphingolipid species correlate with cytotoxicity in
our NB models. Alternative hypotheses include that
L-threo-dihydroceramides inhibit SPHK1 or PKC's activity. This
information will help inform the clinical delivery schedules of H+S to
decrease toxicities and maximize antitumor efficacy.

