Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CD24 promotes HER2 signaling pathways and CD24 inhibition
sensitizes anti-HER2 therapy in breast cancer


Human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2)-overexpressing breast
cancers are treated with HER2-targeted agents such as trastuzumab and
lapatinib, which suppress HER2-initiated activation of the
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) and mitogen-activated protein kinase
(MAPK) cascades. CD24 is a glycosyl phosphatidylinositol (GPI)-anchored
membrane protein and its overexpression is correlated with a poor
prognosis in breast cancer patients. It has been reported that CD24 tends
to be highly expressed in the HR-HER2+ breast cancer subgroup, which is
negative for the hormone receptors (HRs) and positive for HER2. To
determine the relationship between CD24 and HER2, we overexpressed HER2
in MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells, which were negative for CD24 and HER2.
We found that the expression of CD24 was increased by the overexpression
of HER2. Flow cytometry analysis showed that the expression of CD24 was
higher in the HER2-positive fraction than in the HER2-negative fraction.
Conversely, in BT474 cells which express both CD24 and HER2, CD24
knockdown reduced the expression of HER2, while the knockdown of HER2 did
not affect the expression of CD24. Furthermore, the knockdown of CD24
decreased the phosphorylation of Akt, which is known as a downstream
molecule of PI3K and is related to cell survival. Accordingly, CD24 plays
an important role in the regulation of the HER2-initiated signaling
pathway. Based on these findings, we speculated that the expression of
CD24 promotes a resistance to HER2-targeted therapies, leading to tumor
progression in HER2-overexpressing cancers. We found that the knockdown
of CD24 enhanced the sensitivity to lapatinib treatment. Consequently, we
suggest using an anti-CD24 therapy to enhance the HER2-targeted therapy.

