Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Macrophages mediate gemcitabine resistance of pancreatic
adenocarcinoma by up-regulating cytidine deaminase


Resistance to pharmacologic agents used in chemotherapy is common in most
human carcinomas, including pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA), which
is resistant to almost all drugs, including gemcitabine, a nucleoside
analog used as first-line treatment. Poor survival rates of PDA patients
have, therefore, not changed much over 4 decades. Recent data indicated
that tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs), which are abundant in the
microenvironment of several tumors, including PDA, secrete
pro-tumorigenic factors which contribute to cancer progression and
dissemination. In this study, we show for the first time that TAMs can
also induce chemoresistance of PDA by reducing gemcitabine-induced
apoptosis. Macrophages co-cultured with cancer cells or TAMs conditioned
medium significantly reduced apoptosis and activation of the caspase-3
pathway during gemcitabine treatment. In vivo PDA models of mice, which
have reduced macrophage recruitment and activation, demonstrated improved
response to gemcitabine compared to controls. Similarly, inhibition of
monocytes/macrophages trafficking by a CSF1-receptor antagonist GW2580
augmented the effect of gemcitabine in a transgenic mouse PDA model that
was resistant to gemcitabine alone. Analysis of multiple proteins
involved in gemcitabine delivery and metabolism revealed that TAMs
induced upregulation of cytidine deaminase (CDA), the enzyme that
metabolizes the drug following its transport into the cell. Decreasing
CDA expression by PDA cells blocked the protective effect of TAMs against
gemcitabine. These results provide the first evidence of a paracrine
effect of TAMs, which mediates acquired resistance of cancer cells to
chemotherapy. Modulation of macrophage trafficking or inhibition of CDA
may offer a new strategy for augmenting the response of PDA to
chemotherapy.

