Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Can MACC1 plasma transcripts in colon adenoma patients be used as
an early indicator of metastasis potential


Background: Several studies have reported the detection of Metastatic
Associated Colon Cancer 1 (MACC1) in colorectal cancer (CRC) patients
tissues and blood. However the expression of this marker in earlier
stages has not been investigated.Aim: To determine MACC1 expression in
colonic adenoma, CRC, and blood of African Americans (AA).Materials &
Methods: Three tissue microarrays of normal (n=32), adenoma (n=74) and
CRC (n=46) tissues from AA patients were constructed.
Immunohistochemistry (IHC) using an anti-MACC1 antibody was performed.
The stained slides were read by two pathologists who were blinded as to
the samples diagnosis. Both staining intensity and percentage were
established. The IHC results were analyzed in light of the demographic
and pathological characteristics of the patients. Plasma samples from
normal (n=45), hyperplastic (HPP; n=15) and tubular adenoma (n=33)
patients were tested for MACC1 transcripts. A Mann Whitney Rank Sum Test
was used to assess the statistical differences in MACC1 transcripts
detection.Results: The TMA staining revealed MACC1 expression in all
three TMAs including the normals. These normals correspond to adjacent
tissues to cancer samples which might explain the MACC1 staining. Male
gender showed an increase of MACC1 expression in all three TMA separately
or combined (pBackground: Several studies have reported the detection of
Metastatic Associated Colon Cancer 1 (MACC1) in colorectal cancer (CRC)
patients tissues and blood. However the expression of this marker in
earlier stages has not been investigated.Aim: To determine MACC1
expression in colonic adenoma, CRC, and blood of African Americans
(AA).Materials & Methods: Three tissue microarrays of normal (n=32),
adenoma (n=74) and CRC (n=46) tissues from AA patients were constructed.
Immunohistochemistry (IHC) using an anti-MACC1 antibody was performed.
The stained slides were read by two pathologists who were blinded as to
the samples diagnosis. Both staining intensity and percentage were
established. The IHC results were analyzed in light of the demographic
and pathological characteristics of the patients. Plasma samples from
normal (n=45), hyperplastic (HPP; n=15) and tubular adenoma (n=33)
patients were tested for MACC1 transcripts. A Mann Whitney Rank Sum Test
was used to assess the statistical differences in MACC1 transcripts
detection.Results: The TMA staining revealed MACC1 expression in all
three TMAs including the normals. These normals correspond to adjacent
tissues to cancer samples which might explain the MACC1 staining. Male
gender showed an increase of MACC1 expression in all three TMA separately
or combined (p<0.05). The diagnostic ability of MACC1 was good in the
adenoma samples when compared to the normal with an AUC=0.65 (95%CI:
0.55-0.74). The cytoplasmic staining percentage in adenomas had the best
combination of sensitivity (0.77) and specificity (0.56). This diagnostic
value was less significant in cancer samples (AUC=0.51 (95%CI:
0.43-0.58)). MACC1 transcripts were significantly more expressed in
colonic lesions samples when compared to normal patients plasma (normal
vs. (TA+HPP), p=0.014; normal vs. TA: p=0.011). However, MACC1
transcription in normal vs. HPP samples, was not statically significant
(P=0.239).Conclusion: Here we demonstrate that MACC1 is expressed very
early in the carcinogenic process since it was detected in adenoma tissue
from AA. Its correlation with male gender cannot be explained at this
time as there are no epidemiological data that support gender associated
metastatic phenotype. MACC1 plasma transcripts reveal that this marker is
not only detectable in preneoplastic lesions but also released in
patients circulation. This finding might be capitalized on to determine
colonic lesions with potential metastatic characteristics.[U.S. and H.A.
contributed equally to this work.]

