Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Post-treatment changes in levels of TNF family ligands and XIAP
may predict sensitivity to IAP antagonist CUDC-427


Inhibitors of apoptosis (IAP) proteins are a novel target for cancer
therapy. Antagonists of IAP proteins have been shown to synergize with
TNF receptor family signaling as well as with standard-of-care
chemotherapeutics and targeted therapies. CUDC-427 is a potent, oral,
monovalent IAP antagonist poised for more advanced clinical testing after
completion of phase 1 trials using two different dosing schedules.
Predictive biomarkers of response to CUDC-427 are expected to inform
clinical development as monotherapy and in combination with other agents.
In this study, we sought to identify potential markers of sensitivity to
single-agent CUDC-427. Screening of more than 100 breast, ovarian and
hematologic cancer cell lines using a viability assay identified several
that are sensitive to CUDC-427 treatment. This sensitivity to CUDC-427
was associated with treatment-induced expression of TNF or TRAIL in cell
lines lacking basal levels of these TNF family ligands. In sensitive cell
lines that express high basal levels of TNF family ligands prior to
CUDC-427 treatment, induction of apoptosis was independent of NFB
signaling but dependent on caspase 8. Our results also confirmed that the
addition of exogenous TNF sensitized some but not all cell lines to
CUDC-427 treatment, as previously reported by others. Interestingly,
co-culture with stromal cells also sensitized certain hematologic cancer
cell lines to CUDC-427 treatment. In addition, a decrease in XIAP levels
was detected in cell lines that were highly sensitive to CUDC-427. These
results suggest the potential for using TNF family ligand or XIAP levels
pre- and post-treatment as predictive biomarkers of response to CUDC-427.

