Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Investigating the role of CDC25B in inhibition of cellular
proliferation


CDC25B is a dual specificity phosphatase that activates cyclin-dependent
kinases to trigger entry into mitosis and is required for re-entry into
mitosis after DNA damage. As an oncogene, CDC25B is overexpressed in
multiple tumor types. It has been specifically associated with prostate
cancer, where overexpression is seen in prostate tumor tissues and higher
levels correlate with increased tumor grade. In the prostate, in addition
to its role as a cell cycle regulator, CDC25B acts as an androgen
receptor coactivator increasing the response of reporter genes to the
addition of androgen analogues. In a transgenic mouse model,
overexpression of CDC25B in the mammary glands led to accelerated mammary
epithelial proliferation resulting in hyperplasia, while in vitro,
co-transfection of CDC25B with Ras allows for transformation of
MEF's.Surprisingly, given the establishment of CDC25B as an oncogene,
colony formation assays using ectopic expression of CDC25B in transformed
cell lines reveal an anti-proliferative effect. Our data reveal a role
for Ras inhibition as a cause of this anti-proliferative effect.
Co-transfection of CDC25B and Ras results in a dose-dependent decrease in
expression of the ectopic Ras protein in several cell lines tested.
Preliminary experiments suggest that while mRNA levels remain stable,
CDC25B inhibits Ras protein expression. As Ras is pivotal in multiple
tumors, this effect of CDC25B may be broadly applicable. These data
therefore reveal a new role for CDC25B, which may need to be overcome to
allow transformation of tumor cells.

