Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Lysyl Oxidase a therapeutic target in pancreatic cancer


Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is one of the most lethal
malignancies, with a 5-year survival rate of only 6%. Despite advances in
conventional therapies and targeted therapies, survival has not improved
in the past three decades. We found that high expression of LOX (Lysyl
Oxidase) is a poor prognostic marker in PDAC, suggesting a role in this
disease. LOX is an amine oxidase that catalyzes the cross-linking of
collagens and elastin in the extracellular matrix (ECM) thus regulating
extracellular stiffness and contributing to desmoplasia (abundant
fibrotic stroma). LOX inhibition has been associated with decreased
phosphorylation of SRC (Proto-oncogene tyrosine-protein kinase Src) and
FAK (Focal Adhesion Kinase) as a result of decreased interaction of
integrins with the ECM. To further investigate the role of LOX in
pancreatic cancer, we obtained PDAC cells derived from a transgenic mouse
model that faithfully recapitulates the human disease. We found that LOX
was upregulated in tumor cells from Pdx1-Cre KrasG12D/+ Trp53R172H/+
(KPC) mice compared to Pdx1-Cre KrasG12D/+ (KC) mice. Using a genetic
approach we developed LOX-relevant models by silencing LOX in KPC cells
via shRNA and overexpressing LOX in KC cells. We characterized these
cells for their invasion ability and growth in a 3D environment. We then
confirmed these in vitro results in allograft models in mice.
Collectively, our results validate LOX as a therapeutic target in PDAC
and suggest that its inhibition represents a new therapeutic strategy for
PDAC patients.

