Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Biopharmaceutic studies of novel nucleoside transporter inhibitor
prodrugs that can protect against nucleoside drug-induced mitochondrial
toxicity


Nucleoside analog antimetabolites are used as chemotherapy agents to
treat cancer by interfering with DNA biosynthesis and therefore cell
division and the growth of tumors. However, nucleoside drugs, such as the
nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor antiviral agents and
gemcitabine, a drug approved for use against various solid tumors, have
been found to cause severe mitochondrial toxicities that can limit their
use. Nucleoside analogs cause toxicity by inhibiting mitochondrial DNA
(mtDNA) synthesis. Nucleoside drugs can be transported from cytoplasm
into mitochondrial by mitochondrial membrane nucleoside transporters
(NTs) where they form the active triphosphate analogs and incorporate
into mtDNA and inhibit mtDNA polymerase, Pol . Currently, there is no
proven general treatment or prevention strategy for nucleoside
drug-induced mitochondrial toxicity. Thus, the development of innovative
approaches to preempt or treat mitochondrial toxicity will be an
important advance in the field of nucleoside drug therapy.In our research
to overcome the mitochondrial toxicity, we developed a set of novel
nucleoside transporter inhibitor (NTI) prodrugs that lack of NT
inhibition but can release active drugs intracellularly to inhibit
mitochondrial nucleoside uptake. In vitro biopharmaceutics studies of
cell entry, in-cell hydrolysis profiles, and metabolic stability in human
liver S9 faction and human plasma were carried out on a set of novel
prodrugs that have shown protection against nucleoside drug-induced
mitochondrial toxicity. Financial support by NIH grant RO1GM10405 is
acknowledged.

