Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: GFR1 is required for GDNF-induced viability, migration, and
signaling through RET in breast cancer cells


Hormone resistance is a major challenge in treating breast cancer
patients. Although anti-estrogens, such as tamoxifen, are initially
successful controlling disease in estrogen receptor alpha positive (ER+)
tumors, patients with metastatic disease and as many as 40 % of patients
receiving adjuvant tamoxifen acquire resistance to treatment, relapse,
and die. The receptor tyrosine kinase, RET, its co-receptor, GFR1, and
their ligand, GDNF, are proteins that are emerging as potential
contributors to hormone resistance in breast cancer. RET and GFR1 were
recently shown to be overexpressed in a subset of ER+ breast cancer
tumors, and GFR1 expression was associated with lymphovascular invasion.
In vitro, silencing RET with siRNA increased MCF7 cells' sensitivity to
tamoxifen and, in the absence of estrogens, treatment of MCF7 cells with
GDNF induced upregulation of ER target genes. Additionally, GDNF
stimulation of MCF7 cells enhanced proliferation, survival, and cell
scattering. Together, clinical and preclinical data suggest that this
pathway plays an important role in driving breast cancer invasion,
metastasis, and hormone resistance. However, the role of GFR1 has not
been examined in tumor cell invasion and metastasis. In this study we
tested the functional consequences of silencing GFR1 in ER + MCF7 cells
on tumor cell migration, invasion, and RET signaling. We showed that
targeted reduction of GFR1 significantly inhibited GDNF-induced migration
in both a transwell (p=Hormone resistance is a major challenge in
treating breast cancer patients. Although anti-estrogens, such as
tamoxifen, are initially successful controlling disease in estrogen
receptor alpha positive (ER+) tumors, patients with metastatic disease
and as many as 40 % of patients receiving adjuvant tamoxifen acquire
resistance to treatment, relapse, and die. The receptor tyrosine kinase,
RET, its co-receptor, GFR1, and their ligand, GDNF, are proteins that are
emerging as potential contributors to hormone resistance in breast
cancer. RET and GFR1 were recently shown to be overexpressed in a subset
of ER+ breast cancer tumors, and GFR1 expression was associated with
lymphovascular invasion. In vitro, silencing RET with siRNA increased
MCF7 cells' sensitivity to tamoxifen and, in the absence of estrogens,
treatment of MCF7 cells with GDNF induced upregulation of ER target
genes. Additionally, GDNF stimulation of MCF7 cells enhanced
proliferation, survival, and cell scattering. Together, clinical and
preclinical data suggest that this pathway plays an important role in
driving breast cancer invasion, metastasis, and hormone resistance.
However, the role of GFR1 has not been examined in tumor cell invasion
and metastasis. In this study we tested the functional consequences of
silencing GFR1 in ER + MCF7 cells on tumor cell migration, invasion, and
RET signaling. We showed that targeted reduction of GFR1 significantly
inhibited GDNF-induced migration in both a transwell (p=<0.001) and
scratch wound assay (p=Hormone resistance is a major challenge in
treating breast cancer patients. Although anti-estrogens, such as
tamoxifen, are initially successful controlling disease in estrogen
receptor alpha positive (ER+) tumors, patients with metastatic disease
and as many as 40 % of patients receiving adjuvant tamoxifen acquire
resistance to treatment, relapse, and die. The receptor tyrosine kinase,
RET, its co-receptor, GFR1, and their ligand, GDNF, are proteins that are
emerging as potential contributors to hormone resistance in breast
cancer. RET and GFR1 were recently shown to be overexpressed in a subset
of ER+ breast cancer tumors, and GFR1 expression was associated with
lymphovascular invasion. In vitro, silencing RET with siRNA increased
MCF7 cells' sensitivity to tamoxifen and, in the absence of estrogens,
treatment of MCF7 cells with GDNF induced upregulation of ER target
genes. Additionally, GDNF stimulation of MCF7 cells enhanced
proliferation, survival, and cell scattering. Together, clinical and
preclinical data suggest that this pathway plays an important role in
driving breast cancer invasion, metastasis, and hormone resistance.
However, the role of GFR1 has not been examined in tumor cell invasion
and metastasis. In this study we tested the functional consequences of
silencing GFR1 in ER + MCF7 cells on tumor cell migration, invasion, and
RET signaling. We showed that targeted reduction of GFR1 significantly
inhibited GDNF-induced migration in both a transwell (p=<0.001) and
scratch wound assay (p=<0.001 at 24 hours). In addition, GDNF-induced
increases in viability were significantly decreased when MCF7 cells were
treated with neutralizing antibodies against GFR1 (p=Hormone resistance
is a major challenge in treating breast cancer patients. Although
anti-estrogens, such as tamoxifen, are initially successful controlling
disease in estrogen receptor alpha positive (ER+) tumors, patients with
metastatic disease and as many as 40 % of patients receiving adjuvant
tamoxifen acquire resistance to treatment, relapse, and die. The receptor
tyrosine kinase, RET, its co-receptor, GFR1, and their ligand, GDNF, are
proteins that are emerging as potential contributors to hormone
resistance in breast cancer. RET and GFR1 were recently shown to be
overexpressed in a subset of ER+ breast cancer tumors, and GFR1
expression was associated with lymphovascular invasion. In vitro,
silencing RET with siRNA increased MCF7 cells' sensitivity to tamoxifen
and, in the absence of estrogens, treatment of MCF7 cells with GDNF
induced upregulation of ER target genes. Additionally, GDNF stimulation
of MCF7 cells enhanced proliferation, survival, and cell scattering.
Together, clinical and preclinical data suggest that this pathway plays
an important role in driving breast cancer invasion, metastasis, and
hormone resistance. However, the role of GFR1 has not been examined in
tumor cell invasion and metastasis. In this study we tested the
functional consequences of silencing GFR1 in ER + MCF7 cells on tumor
cell migration, invasion, and RET signaling. We showed that targeted
reduction of GFR1 significantly inhibited GDNF-induced migration in both
a transwell (p=<0.001) and scratch wound assay (p=<0.001 at 24 hours). In
addition, GDNF-induced increases in viability were significantly
decreased when MCF7 cells were treated with neutralizing antibodies
against GFR1 (p=<0.001). Silencing GFR1 in GDNF-treated MCF7 cells led to
reduced invasion through collagen I, although this difference was not
significant. Lastly, siRNA targeted reduction of GFR1 in MCF7 cells
inhibited GDNF-induced phosphorylation of RET. Together the data
demonstrate that GFR1 is important in migration and cell viability as
well as RET signaling in breast cancer cells.

