Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dual function HDAC and PI3K inhibitor, CUDC-907 affects cancer
cells and the tumor microenvironment in hematological malignancies


Histone deacetylases (HDACs) and the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase
(PI3K)/AKT pathway are promising therapeutic targets in hematologic
cancers and evidence of synergistic anti-cancer activity has recently
emerged. CUDC-907, a small molecule drug candidate that is designed to
target HDACs and PI3Ks in a single chemical entity, is currently in Phase
1 clinical testing for the treatment of patients with lymphoma or
multiple myeloma. Preclinically, CUDC-907 has been shown to inhibit
activation of PI3K/AKT, JAK/STAT and MAPK pathways in hematologic cancer
cell lines such as Hodgkin's lymphoma, diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, and
multiple myeloma. In this study, we report that in the setting of
hematological malignancies, CUDC-907 targets not only the cancer cells
but also the tumor microenvironment. Cytotoxicity against primary CLL
cells was independent of the protective effects provided by stromal cells
when primary CLL cells were co-cultured with nurse-like cells. CUDC-907
was shown in vitro to impair cytokine and chemokine production by immune
cells in the tumor microenvironment and by Hodgkin's lymphoma cells. The
ongoing first-in-human Phase 1 clinical study of CUDC-907 has yielded
preliminary evidence of anti-cancer activity and impact on the tumor
microenvironment as measured by cytokine and chemokine levels (e.g.,
thymus and activation regulated chemokine [TARC]). Ongoing analyses are
probing the potential utility of selected cytokine and chemokine as
predictive markers of CUDC-907 activity.

