Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Kaempferol suppresses solar ultraviolet radiation-induced skin
cancers by targeting RSK2 and MSK1


Ultraviolet (UV) irradiation is the leading factor in the development of
skin cancer, which is the most common form of cancer in the United
States. Discovering novel chemopreventive agents against this disease is
extremely important. Kaempferol, a natural flavonol isolated from tea,
broccoli, grapes, apples and other plant sources, is known to have
anticancer activity, but its molecular mechanisms and direct target(s) in
cancer chemoprevention are still unclear. In this study, our pull-down
assay results showed that RSK2 and MSK1 directly interact with kaempferol
in both ex vivo and in vitro systems. ATP competition and in vitro kinase
assay data revealed that kaempferol interacts with RSK2 and MSK1 at the
ATP-binding pocket and inhibits their respective kinase activities.
Mechanistic investigations determined that kaempferol acts as an
inhibitor of RSK2 and MSK1 kinase activities to attenuate solar
UV-induced phosphorylation in mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling
cascades in JB6 P+ mouse skin epidermal cells. In a mouse skin
tumorigenesis study, kaempferol significantly suppressed solar UV-induced
skin carcinogenesis. Further analysis showed that the kaempferol-treated
group had a substantial reduction in solar UV-induced phosphorylation of
CREB and c-Fos in mouse skin. Taken together, our results identify
kaempferol as a safe and novel chemopreventive agent against solar
UV-induced skin carcinogenesis that acts by targeting RSK2 and MSK1.

