Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular photoacoustic imaging and serum diagnostics rapidly
detect response to angiopoietin 1 and 2 blockade in ovarian cancer


Introduction: There is an urgent clinical need to develop noninvasive
biomarkers that early detect tumor responses to anti-angiogenic therapy.
Treatment response in ovarian cancer patients is assessed with
transvaginal ultrasound imaging of tumor size and CA125 screening. We
hypothesized that combining photoacoustic (PA) imaging to non-invasively
visualize tumor vascular architecture, with serum diagnostics using
endothelial biomarkers, would yield a sensitive and readily translatable
approach for monitoring response to anti-angiogenic therapy.Methods:
Ovarian tumors were established in nude mice by orthotopic injection of
OV2008 cells at day 0. At day 10 mice were randomized into groups of at
least n = 10. Baseline PA imaging and submandibular blood draw were
performed, then repeated 24h after dosing with a peptibody that prevents
the interaction of secreted angiopoietin 1 (Ang1; agonist) and 2 (Ang2;
antagonist) with the receptor tyrosine kinase Tie2, or vehicle, on days
13, 16 and 19. Mice were then sacrificed and tumors excised for
histology.Results: PA imaging uses endogenous hemoglobin light absorption
to generate contrast. At 797nm, we found a 1.5-fold increase in
hemoglobin-weighted signal in vehicle mice by day 19, while treated mice
remained close to the baseline (n=9; p=0.008). The oxyhemoglobin-weighted
PA signal (837nm/797nm) was elevated by 20% in treated mice but decreased
15% in vehicle mice (n=9; pIntroduction: There is an urgent clinical need
to develop noninvasive biomarkers that early detect tumor responses to
anti-angiogenic therapy. Treatment response in ovarian cancer patients is
assessed with transvaginal ultrasound imaging of tumor size and CA125
screening. We hypothesized that combining photoacoustic (PA) imaging to
non-invasively visualize tumor vascular architecture, with serum
diagnostics using endothelial biomarkers, would yield a sensitive and
readily translatable approach for monitoring response to anti-angiogenic
therapy.Methods: Ovarian tumors were established in nude mice by
orthotopic injection of OV2008 cells at day 0. At day 10 mice were
randomized into groups of at least n = 10. Baseline PA imaging and
submandibular blood draw were performed, then repeated 24h after dosing
with a peptibody that prevents the interaction of secreted angiopoietin 1
(Ang1; agonist) and 2 (Ang2; antagonist) with the receptor tyrosine
kinase Tie2, or vehicle, on days 13, 16 and 19. Mice were then sacrificed
and tumors excised for histology.Results: PA imaging uses endogenous
hemoglobin light absorption to generate contrast. At 797nm, we found a
1.5-fold increase in hemoglobin-weighted signal in vehicle mice by day
19, while treated mice remained close to the baseline (n=9; p=0.008). The
oxyhemoglobin-weighted PA signal (837nm/797nm) was elevated by 20% in
treated mice but decreased 15% in vehicle mice (n=9; p<0.01). This
indicated treated mice had significantly lower tumor vessel density but
improved function of residual vessels. To gain insight into the mechanism
of drug action, we measured host serum angiopoietins over the treatment
time course. Ang1 in vehicle mice increased by 1.5-fold (n=10;
pIntroduction: There is an urgent clinical need to develop noninvasive
biomarkers that early detect tumor responses to anti-angiogenic therapy.
Treatment response in ovarian cancer patients is assessed with
transvaginal ultrasound imaging of tumor size and CA125 screening. We
hypothesized that combining photoacoustic (PA) imaging to non-invasively
visualize tumor vascular architecture, with serum diagnostics using
endothelial biomarkers, would yield a sensitive and readily translatable
approach for monitoring response to anti-angiogenic therapy.Methods:
Ovarian tumors were established in nude mice by orthotopic injection of
OV2008 cells at day 0. At day 10 mice were randomized into groups of at
least n = 10. Baseline PA imaging and submandibular blood draw were
performed, then repeated 24h after dosing with a peptibody that prevents
the interaction of secreted angiopoietin 1 (Ang1; agonist) and 2 (Ang2;
antagonist) with the receptor tyrosine kinase Tie2, or vehicle, on days
13, 16 and 19. Mice were then sacrificed and tumors excised for
histology.Results: PA imaging uses endogenous hemoglobin light absorption
to generate contrast. At 797nm, we found a 1.5-fold increase in
hemoglobin-weighted signal in vehicle mice by day 19, while treated mice
remained close to the baseline (n=9; p=0.008). The oxyhemoglobin-weighted
PA signal (837nm/797nm) was elevated by 20% in treated mice but decreased
15% in vehicle mice (n=9; p<0.01). This indicated treated mice had
significantly lower tumor vessel density but improved function of
residual vessels. To gain insight into the mechanism of drug action, we
measured host serum angiopoietins over the treatment time course. Ang1 in
vehicle mice increased by 1.5-fold (n=10; p<0.0001) and was significantly
higher than treated mice by day 19 (n=10; p=0.03). Ang2 was identical
between treatment groups and healthy control mice (n=10; p=0.65).
Elevated Ang1 in the circulation of vehicle mice is consistent with
excess Ang1 promoting vascular remodeling and plasticity in tumors, while
normalization in treated mice allows vessel stabilization.
Immunofluorescence (IF) confirmed this by indicating that CD31 positive
vessel density was 30% lower in treated mice but their tumor vessel
coverage of desmin-positive pericytes was 2.5-fold higher.Conclusions: We
have shown for the first time that PA imaging and serum angiopoietin
levels measure complementary parameters that indicate response to
angiopoietin blockade in ovarian cancer. PA imaging noninvasively
detected drug-induced vessel regression and normalization, giving a
functional readout of response. This modality can be readily combined
with transvaginal ultrasound. The drug action was mediated by
normalization of mAng1 levels, indicated by serum measures and IF.
Importantly, this work supports the combined use of in vitro and in vivo
diagnostics to monitor response to anti-angiogenic therapy in clinical
trials.

