Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Methylthioadenosine phosphorylase (MTAP)-deficient T-cell ALL
xenografts are sensitive to pralatrexate and 6-thioguanine alone and in
combination


In T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), the genes CDKN2A (p16 and
p14) and MTAP are homozygously co-deleted, with a frequency of 35 %. MTAP
cleaves the natural substrate, 5-deoxy-5-methylthioadenosine, to adenine
and 5-methylthioribose-1-phosphate, which are converted to adenine
nucleotides and methionine. Cells lacking MTAP are unable to salvage
adenine through this pathway and rely on the de novo pathway for purine
synthesis. This variation between normal MTAP+ cells and tumor MTAP-/-
cells led to several studies showing that MTAP -/- cells are more
sensitive to inhibitors of de novo purine synthesis.Pralatrexate (PDX) is
a second generation antifolate that targets dihydrofolate reductase and
via conversion to polyglutamylates, inhibits de novo purine synthesis.
6-Thioguanine (6TG), an antimetabolite analog of guanine, also target de
novo purine synthesis. MTAP-deficient ALL cells should be more sensitive
to these agents, remarkably so in combination. We tested single agent PDX
and 6TG as well as a combination treatment in MTAP+ (Molt4) and MTAP-/-
(CEM) ALL xenografts. CEM xenografts were more sensitive to PDX treatment
than MOLT4 xenografts. CEM xenografts were also much more sensitive to
6TG, while Molt4 xenografts were resistant to 6TG. Early results of the
combination of PDX and 6TG in vivo show promise as an effective therapy
of MTAP-/- T-cell ALL.

