Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ERK1/2 regulates hepatocellular carcinoma through proinflammatory
homeobox gene, ISX


Intestine-specific homeobox (ISX), a newly identified proto-oncogene,
regulated cell proliferation and drives hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC)
formation but the underlying mechanisms linking gene expression and tumor
formation remain obscure. In this study, we compared the expression of
MAPK (ERK1/2), E2F1 and homeobox gene ISX in 190 paired specimens of HCC
and adjacent normal tissues, and also in paired specimens from 11 non-HCC
patients. In pathological analysis, ERK1/2 and E2F1 , as ISX expression,
exhibited a tumor-specific expression pattern and a high correlation to
patient survival time, tumor size, tumor number and progression stage.
Enforced expression of ERK1/2 translocated cytoplasm ISX into nucleus and
increased cell proliferation by which increased downstream E2F1
expression in hepatoma cells through ISX induction. In contrast, dominant
negative ERK1/2 and shRNA-mediated attenuation of ERK1/2 in hepatoma
cells decreased nucleus translocation, cell proliferation and malignant
transformation in vitro and in vivo. A high positive correlation existed
in human hepatoma tumors between ISX and ERK1/2 expression. Together, our
results highlight ERK1/2 as an important regulator of ISX in hepatoma
progression with significant potential as a prognostic and therapeutic
target in HCC.

