Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metformin sensitizes anticancer effect of dasatinib through
AMPK-dependent ER stress in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma cells


Purpose: Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is an important
endemic disease in Taiwan with aggressive course and dismal outcome.
Dasatinib is a Bcr-bl and Src kinase inhibitor that has potential against
HNSCC. We recently disclosed that EGFR degradation is critical for
dasatinib-induced apoptosis. Here, we further demonstrate that
AMPK-dependent ER stress is responsible for this effect.Experimental
design: Dasatinib-induced ER stress and AMPK activation was investigated
in HNSCC cells including Ca9-22, HSC3, and SAS. The anti-cancer activity
of dasatinib in combination with AMPK activator was examined in vitro and
in vivo. EGFR expression and AMPK activation were correlated in human
specimens.Results: Dasatinib-induced ER stress was involved in
dasatinib-induced EGFR degradation and apoptosis, and ER stress mediated
EGFR degradation in a c-cbl-dependent manner. In addition,
dasatinib-induced AMPK activation led to dasatinib-induced ER stress and
EGFR degradation, and activation of AMPK might be due to ATP decrease
through the up-regulation of pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase 4 (PDK4)
induced by dasatinib. Furthermore, activation of AMPK by metformin
potentiated dasatinib-induced anti-cancer effect in vitro and in vivo.
The correlation of AMPK activation and EGFR expression was seen in HNSCC
cells and human tumor specimens.Conclusions: Our results disclose that
AMPK-dependent ER stress plays a crucial role in anti-cancer effect of
dasatinib on HNSCC and activation of AMPK might enhance dasatinib
efficacy.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

