Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PTEN dependent angiogenesis is mainly regulated by (tumor
secreted-) uPAR


Tumor stroma crucially influences the growth of most epithelial tumors
and is in focus of many therapeutic approaches. Several oncogenes and
tumor suppressors coordinate complex signaling cascades in the tumor and
its microenvironment. In this context, downregulation of the tumor
suppressor PTEN was shown to be indispensable for (tumor-)angiogenesis
and cancer outgrowth. However, the essential process leading to PTEN
downregulation, favouring a pro-angiogenic phenotype, in tumor
vasculature is unknown so far. Here we show that PTEN-dependent
angiogenesis is centrally affected by tumor- secreted soluble uPAR. In
detail, the presence of uPAR significantly influenced the levels of PTEN
in vitro and in vivo. Endothelial cell stimulation with tumor- derived
soluble uPAR remarkable decreased PTEN levels, which led to increased
cell migration, enhanced wound healing as well as capillary-sprouting in
vitro and enhanced endothelial cell invasion and functional vessel
formation in a directed-in vivo angiogenesis assay. uPAR- derived PTEN
regulation was not mediated via mRNA stability or decrease in PTEN
degradation, but via regulation of PTEN transcription as revealed by
actinomycin D experiments. uPAR thereby interacted with v integrins,
which enhanced FAK activation and - as a consequence - led to
NFkB-dependent PTEN repression. Finally, the biological relevance of
uPAR- dependent PTEN regulation was evaluated and confirmed via uPAR -/-
crossbreds with either PTEN +/- or PTEN +/+ mice. Our results provide
first evidence of the role of tumor-derived uPAR in regulation of the
central phosphatase PTEN in angiogenic cell behaviour. Our findings give
novel insights into the complex mechanism of the tumor-
microenvironmental interaction and might lead to new therapeutic
strategies in cancer.

