Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Long non-coding RNA RoR and microRNA-145 regulate tumor cell
invasion in triple-negative breast cancer via targeting of
ADP-ribosylation factor 6


Triple-negative (ER-, HER2-, PR-) breast cancer (TNBC) is an aggressive
disease with a poor prognosis. Currently, there is no available
molecularly targeted therapy for TNBC. MicroRNA-145 (miR-145) silencing
was identified as a defining marker of TNBC by molecular profiling using
deep sequencing. Previous reports indicate that miR-145 may function as a
growth suppressor in some breast cancers. However, we find that in TNBC
miR-145 does not regulate proliferation or apoptosis but instead, miR-145
regulates tumor cell invasion. Since metastatic breast cancer remains an
incurable disease we investigated miR-145 regulated pathways to identify
new potential biomarkers or therapeutic targets. Here we identify a novel
target of miR-145, the small GTPase ADP-ribosylation factor 6 (Arf6). We
find that ARF6, a known regulator of breast tumor cell invasion, is
dramatically upregulated in triple-negative and metastatic breast tumors.
We find that ARF6 can regulate E-cadherin localization and impact
cell-cell adhesion. Finally, we examined the molecular mechanism behind
miR-145 down-regulation in TNBC. We find that when compared to ER+
disease, TNBC shows dramatic downregulation of mature miR-145, but not
pri-miR-145 or pre-miR-145, indicating that loss of miR-145 is occurring
post-transcriptionally and following Drosha and Dicer processing. We find
that overexpression of the long non-coding RNA, lincRNA-ROR, functions as
a competitive endogenous RNA sponge in TNBC. We find that lincRNA-ROR is
dramatically upregulated in TNBC and in metastatic disease. Finally, we
find that knockdown of lincRNA-ROR restores miR-145 expression and
reduces breast tumor cell invasion. These results reveal a lincRNA-ROR /
miR-145 / ARF6 pathway that is a critical regulator of invasion in TNBCs.

