Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clinical utility of a plasma microRNA biomarker within lung cancer
screening


Recent screening trials indicate that low-dose computed tomography (LDCT)
reduces lung-cancer mortality in high risk subjects. However, high false
positive rates, costs and potential harms highlight the need for
complementary biomarkers. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are tissue and disease
specific molecules, actively released by cells in the circulatory system,
which are associated with protein complexes and/or packaged in exosomes
and microvesicles. Circulating miRNAs are rather stable and easily
detectable in body fluids suggesting the possibility of using miRNAs as a
new promising class of biomarkers.Sensitivity, specificity, positive and
negative predictive values (PPV and NPV, respectively) of a non-invasive
plasma miRNA signature classifier (MSC) to identify lung cancer
occurrence and mortality was retrospectively evaluated in samples
prospectively collected from smokers within the randomized Multicentre
Italian Lung Detection (MILD) trial. Plasma samples from 939 subjects
including 69 lung cancer patients and 870 disease-free individuals were
analyzed using a Real-Time quantitative PCR (qRT-PCR) based assay for
MSC. Combined sensitivity and specificity of plasma MSC and LDCT were
assessed in a blinded validation study.MSC correctly identified patients
with lung cancer at 87% sensitivity, 81% specificity, and 99% NPV, and 18
of 19 lung cancer deaths at 95% sensitivity 81% specificity, and 99.86%
NPV. MSC identified 43 of 49 (88%) LDCT-detected cancers, 8 of 9 (89%)
interval cancers in the LDCT arm, and 9 of 11 (82%) cancers in the
observational arm. Diagnostic performance of MSC was confirmed by time
dependency analysis. MSC fell to negative after lung cancer resection in
16 of 22 evaluable subjects. In lung cancer patients, there was a trend
in mortality across levels of MSC (p=0.0336) and survival rate
significantly differed according to MSC in all subjects (X21=49.53,
pRecent screening trials indicate that low-dose computed tomography
(LDCT) reduces lung-cancer mortality in high risk subjects. However, high
false positive rates, costs and potential harms highlight the need for
complementary biomarkers. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are tissue and disease
specific molecules, actively released by cells in the circulatory system,
which are associated with protein complexes and/or packaged in exosomes
and microvesicles. Circulating miRNAs are rather stable and easily
detectable in body fluids suggesting the possibility of using miRNAs as a
new promising class of biomarkers.Sensitivity, specificity, positive and
negative predictive values (PPV and NPV, respectively) of a non-invasive
plasma miRNA signature classifier (MSC) to identify lung cancer
occurrence and mortality was retrospectively evaluated in samples
prospectively collected from smokers within the randomized Multicentre
Italian Lung Detection (MILD) trial. Plasma samples from 939 subjects
including 69 lung cancer patients and 870 disease-free individuals were
analyzed using a Real-Time quantitative PCR (qRT-PCR) based assay for
MSC. Combined sensitivity and specificity of plasma MSC and LDCT were
assessed in a blinded validation study.MSC correctly identified patients
with lung cancer at 87% sensitivity, 81% specificity, and 99% NPV, and 18
of 19 lung cancer deaths at 95% sensitivity 81% specificity, and 99.86%
NPV. MSC identified 43 of 49 (88%) LDCT-detected cancers, 8 of 9 (89%)
interval cancers in the LDCT arm, and 9 of 11 (82%) cancers in the
observational arm. Diagnostic performance of MSC was confirmed by time
dependency analysis. MSC fell to negative after lung cancer resection in
16 of 22 evaluable subjects. In lung cancer patients, there was a trend
in mortality across levels of MSC (p=0.0336) and survival rate
significantly differed according to MSC in all subjects (X21=49.53,
p<0.0001). Combination of MSC and LDCT resulted in a 5-fold reduction of
LDCT false positive rate.This large validation study highlights the
clinical diagnostic and prognostic value of plasma MSC for lung cancer
screening in high-risk populations. The combined use of LDCT and MSC
could reduce the false positive rate of LDCT improving the efficacy of
lung cancer screening.

