Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting the insulin-like growth factor receptor/Insulin receptor
and Src signaling network for the treatment of non-small cell lung cancer


Insulin-like growth factor I receptor (IGF-1R)-mediated signaling plays
an important role in the proliferation, survival, and metastasis of
cancer cells. The IGF-1R-targeting anticancer agents including monoclonal
antibodies and small molecule tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) have been
developed, but their antitumor effects have been marginal and limited in
clinical trials. Therefore, the mechanism underlying resistance to the
IGF-1R-targeting therapies and the rational combination strategies to
overcome potential drug resistance need to be investigated. In this
study, we demonstrated the association of Src with the resistance to the
IGF-1R TKI in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). We found the
co-activation of IGF-1R/IR and Src in various human NSCLC cell lines, The
mRNA expression and phosphorylation of IGF-1R and Src were also
significantly correlated with each other in NSCLC databases from a public
dataset and a tissue microarray (n=353). Next, we found Src can be
activated through multiple pathways including EGFR and integrin 3
signaling and function as an alternative kinase for phosphorylation of
IGF-1R, especially at Tyr1135/36, but not Tyr1131. Src is activated in
lung cancer cells possessing both primary and acquired resistance to an
IGF-1R TKI. Consistent with the results, inhibition of Src significantly
attenuated activation of IGF-1R/IR and co-targeting of IGF-1R and Src
effectively suppressed cell proliferation, colony formation, and tumor
growth in vitro and in vivo. Taken together, these results suggest that
Src causes resistance to IGF-1R TKIs by functioning as a key downstream
modulator of multiple signaling pathways for IGF-1R phosphorylation and
thus co-targeting IGF-1R and Src could be an effective therapeutic
strategy for NSCLC.

