Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Superoxide mediated selective tyrosine nitration of protein
phosphatase 2A-B56 stabilizes Bcl-2 phosphorylation and its
anti-apoptotic activity


Our work over the years has provided strong evidence that an increase in
intracellular superoxide anion provides cancer cells with a survival
advantage and promotes tumor chemoresistance. The mechanisms underlying
superoxide-mediated pro-survival signaling are poorly understood. Here we
report that an increase in intracellular superoxide stabilizes the
anti-apoptotic activity of Bcl-2 by mechanisms that involve sustained
phosphorylation of Bcl-2 at serine 70. Of note, this effect on Bcl-2 S70
phosphorylation is a function of redox-dependent inactivation of Protein
Phosphatase 2A (PP2A), which is targeted to Bcl-2 via its B56 subunit;
superoxide induces the release of PP2A-AC catalytic core from Bcl-2-bound
B56, resulting in sustained phosphorylation of Bcl-2 at S70. Dissociation
of the PP2A heterotrimer results from the selective nitration (by
peroxynitrite derived from the reaction of superoxide with NO) of a
conserved tyrosine residue, which we identify as Y289 of B56 (B56 Y289).
Inhibition of B56Y289 nitration blocked the pro-survival effects of
superoxide. Furthermore, we provide evidence for clinical relevance of
these findings using primary tissue derived from human lymphoma biopsies.
Taken together, these data provide evidence for a novel mechanism in
which an increase in intracellular superoxide regulates PP2A function via
specific B56 subunit tyrosine nitration, and that PP2A-B56 nitration may
be a general mechanism for redox-regulated cellular signaling.

