Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combination hypoxia-specific chemotherapy and immunotherapy of
prostate cancer


Tumor hypoxia contributes to chemotherapy and radiotherapy resistance,
and helps foster metastasis. Hypoxia likely also supports tumor immune
resistance by supporting development of suppressive myeloid and T cell
populations by activating immunosuppressive signaling pathways in the
tumor and stroma, and by creating a metabolically hostile environment for
immune effector cells. TH-302 is a hypoxia-specific chemotherapeutic drug
which is activated only in the hypoxic cores of tumors and remains
harmless in the periphery. We hypothesized that concurrent combination
therapy with TH-302 and T cell checkpoint blockade would promote
inside-out tumor destruction with the drug killing at the core, releasing
antigen, and diminishing suppression, while the antibodies helped expand
and protect the T cells activated as a result. In the TRAMP-C2 prostatic
adenocarcinoma model, we found that antibody blockade of CTLA-4 and PD-1,
used in conjunction with TH-302 administration, promoted tumor rejection
in a significantly larger percentage of mice than either therapy alone.
The combination therapy promoted uniquely advantageous ratios of effector
T cells to MDSC within the prostate cancer microenvironment. This novel
combination of immunotherapy and hypoxia-specific chemotherapy has the
potential to offer profound anti-tumor responses to a much greater
percentage of patients than either chemotherapy or immunotherapy alone
with the same or fewer side effects.

