Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: bFGF induced VEGF expression and angiogenesis in human
chondrosarcoma


Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is a signal protein produced by
cells that stimulates vasculogenesis and angiogenesis. Solid cancers
cannot grow beyond a limited size without an adequate blood supply;
cancers that express VEGF are able to grow and metastasize. In normal
tissue, basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF) is present in basement
membranes and in the subendothelial extracellular matrix of blood
vessels. It has been found that bFGF increased the formation of new blood
vessels and angiogenesis during tumor growth and metastasis. However, the
effect of bFGF in VEGF expression in human chondrosarcoma is largely
unknown. In this study, we examined the effect of bFGF in VEGF expression
in human chondrosarcoma. We found that the expression of bFGF and VEGF
were correlated with tumor stage and significantly higher than that in
normal cartilage. bFGF increased the VEGF expression and subsequently
promoted migration and tub formation in endothelial progenitor cells
(EPCs). Pretreatment of cells with p38, c-Src, or NF-B inhibitor
antagonized bFGF-induced VEGF expression and EPC migration as well as
tube formation. Incubation with bFGF induced p38, c-Src and NF-B
phosphorylation. In addition knockdown bFGF decreased VEGF expression and
also abolished chondrosarcoma conditional medium-mediated angiogenesis in
vitro as well as angiogenesis effects in the chick chorioallantoic
membrane and matrigel-plug nude mice model in vivo. Furthermore, using
xenograft tumor angiogenesis model, knockdown bFGF significantly reduced
tumor growth and tumor-associated angiogenesis. Our results indicated
that bFGF enhances the VEGF expression of chondrosarcoma cells. One of
the mechanisms underlying bFGF-directed VEGF expression was through the
p38/c-Src/NF-B signal transduction pathway.

