Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synergistic effect of curcumin on FL118 efficacy in colon cancer


Colorectal cancer is the third most commonly diagnosed cancer in the
United States and may cause about 50,830 deaths in 2013. Therefore, there
is an unmet need for new therapeutic strategies. Combination of natural
compounds with pharmacological small molecular inhibitors to increase
anticancer efficacy while minimizing toxicity is an attractive approach
for management of cancer. Curcumin, a natural dietary compound, has been
shown to inhibit multiple cancer cell signaling pathways involved in
survival, proliferation, apoptosis, angiogenesis and metastasis. FL118, a
novel camptothecin derivative and an IAP (inhibitor of apoptosis)
inhibitor, significantly attenuates colon cancer cell growth in vitro and
tumor growth in vivo. In the current study, we report that curcumin
enhances FL118 anti-cancer efficiency in colon cancer cell models. MTT
and cell death detection ELISA assays were used for quantification of
cell viability and apoptosis, respectively, in colon cancer HCT8 and
SW620 cells. The synergistic effect of curcumin in combination with FL118
treatment on colon cancer growth inhibition was further analyzed by the
Combination Index (CI) equation developed by Chou-Talalay using a
CalcuSyn program (Biosoft, Cambridge, UK). Our data demonstrated that
curcumin shows a synergistic growth inhibitory effect with FL118 in
multiple colon cancer cells (pColorectal cancer is the third most
commonly diagnosed cancer in the United States and may cause about 50,830
deaths in 2013. Therefore, there is an unmet need for new therapeutic
strategies. Combination of natural compounds with pharmacological small
molecular inhibitors to increase anticancer efficacy while minimizing
toxicity is an attractive approach for management of cancer. Curcumin, a
natural dietary compound, has been shown to inhibit multiple cancer cell
signaling pathways involved in survival, proliferation, apoptosis,
angiogenesis and metastasis. FL118, a novel camptothecin derivative and
an IAP (inhibitor of apoptosis) inhibitor, significantly attenuates colon
cancer cell growth in vitro and tumor growth in vivo. In the current
study, we report that curcumin enhances FL118 anti-cancer efficiency in
colon cancer cell models. MTT and cell death detection ELISA assays were
used for quantification of cell viability and apoptosis, respectively, in
colon cancer HCT8 and SW620 cells. The synergistic effect of curcumin in
combination with FL118 treatment on colon cancer growth inhibition was
further analyzed by the Combination Index (CI) equation developed by
Chou-Talalay using a CalcuSyn program (Biosoft, Cambridge, UK). Our data
demonstrated that curcumin shows a synergistic growth inhibitory effect
with FL118 in multiple colon cancer cells (p<0.05). Furthermore,
combinational treatment can significantly enhance apoptotic cell death
induced in comparison with either FL118 or curcumin treatment alone
(pColorectal cancer is the third most commonly diagnosed cancer in the
United States and may cause about 50,830 deaths in 2013. Therefore, there
is an unmet need for new therapeutic strategies. Combination of natural
compounds with pharmacological small molecular inhibitors to increase
anticancer efficacy while minimizing toxicity is an attractive approach
for management of cancer. Curcumin, a natural dietary compound, has been
shown to inhibit multiple cancer cell signaling pathways involved in
survival, proliferation, apoptosis, angiogenesis and metastasis. FL118, a
novel camptothecin derivative and an IAP (inhibitor of apoptosis)
inhibitor, significantly attenuates colon cancer cell growth in vitro and
tumor growth in vivo. In the current study, we report that curcumin
enhances FL118 anti-cancer efficiency in colon cancer cell models. MTT
and cell death detection ELISA assays were used for quantification of
cell viability and apoptosis, respectively, in colon cancer HCT8 and
SW620 cells. The synergistic effect of curcumin in combination with FL118
treatment on colon cancer growth inhibition was further analyzed by the
Combination Index (CI) equation developed by Chou-Talalay using a
CalcuSyn program (Biosoft, Cambridge, UK). Our data demonstrated that
curcumin shows a synergistic growth inhibitory effect with FL118 in
multiple colon cancer cells (p<0.05). Furthermore, combinational
treatment can significantly enhance apoptotic cell death induced in
comparison with either FL118 or curcumin treatment alone (p<0.05). In
HCT8 colon cancer cells, a combination of 10M curcumin with 0.3-20 nM
FL118 treatment for 72 h showed a strong synergistic effect (CI
Colorectal cancer is the third most commonly diagnosed cancer in the
United States and may cause about 50,830 deaths in 2013. Therefore, there
is an unmet need for new therapeutic strategies. Combination of natural
compounds with pharmacological small molecular inhibitors to increase
anticancer efficacy while minimizing toxicity is an attractive approach
for management of cancer. Curcumin, a natural dietary compound, has been
shown to inhibit multiple cancer cell signaling pathways involved in
survival, proliferation, apoptosis, angiogenesis and metastasis. FL118, a
novel camptothecin derivative and an IAP (inhibitor of apoptosis)
inhibitor, significantly attenuates colon cancer cell growth in vitro and
tumor growth in vivo. In the current study, we report that curcumin
enhances FL118 anti-cancer efficiency in colon cancer cell models. MTT
and cell death detection ELISA assays were used for quantification of
cell viability and apoptosis, respectively, in colon cancer HCT8 and
SW620 cells. The synergistic effect of curcumin in combination with FL118
treatment on colon cancer growth inhibition was further analyzed by the
Combination Index (CI) equation developed by Chou-Talalay using a
CalcuSyn program (Biosoft, Cambridge, UK). Our data demonstrated that
curcumin shows a synergistic growth inhibitory effect with FL118 in
multiple colon cancer cells (p<0.05). Furthermore, combinational
treatment can significantly enhance apoptotic cell death induced in
comparison with either FL118 or curcumin treatment alone (p<0.05). In
HCT8 colon cancer cells, a combination of 10M curcumin with 0.3-20 nM
FL118 treatment for 72 h showed a strong synergistic effect (CI < 0.5) in
cell growth inhibition. Mechanistically, the combination
treatment-enhanced cell growth inhibition and apoptosis are associated
with alteration of the expression of cell death and cell cycle related
genes. In conclusion, we propose that combination of curcumin with FL118
might provide a novel therapeutic strategy in colon cancer treatment.

