Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Upregulation of miR-21 in cisplatin-resistant ovarian cancer via
JNK-1/c-Jun pathway


Cisplatin has been the most accepted drug for the treatment of ovarian
cancer for almost 40 years. Although the majority of patients with
ovarian cancer respond to front-line platinum combination chemotherapy,
many patients will develop cisplatin-resistance disease, which is
extremely rapid and fatal. Although various mechanisms of cisplatin
resistance have been postulated, the key molecules involved in such
resistance have not been identified. MiRNAs are endogenously expressed
small non-coding RNAs, which are evolutionarily conserved and function as
post-transcriptional regulators of gene expression. Dysregulation of
miRNAs have been associated with cancer initiation, progression and drug
resistance. The oncogenic miRNA-21, one of the best-studied miRNAs, is
upregulated in almost all human cancers. However, the regulation of
miR-21 in cisplatin resistant ovarian cancer cells has not been assessed.
In this study, we measured the miR-21 expression by real-time PCR and
found upregulation of miR-21 in cisplatin resistant compared with
cisplatin sensitive ovarian cancer cells. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
studies demonstrated the association of the c-Jun transcription factor to
the mir-21 DNA promoter regions. Blocking the JNK-1, the major activator
of c-Jun phosphorylation, reduced the expression of miR-21 and increased
the expression of its well-known target gene, PDCD4. Overexpression of
miR-21 in cisplatin sensitive cells decreased PDCD4 levels and increased
cell proliferation. Finally, targeting miR-21 reduced cell growth,
proliferation and invasion of cisplatin resistant ovarian cancer cells.
These results suggest that the JNK-1/c-Jun/miR-21 pathway contributes to
the cisplatin resistance of ovarian cancer cells and demonstrated that
miR-21 is a plausible target to overcome cisplatin resistance.

