Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Plumbagin, a medicinal plant-derived 1,4-napthoquinone, inhibits
prostate carcinogenesis in intact and castrated Pten knockout mice by
modulation of tumor microenvironment


Prostate specific Pten conditional knockout (PtenLoxP/LoxP:PB-Cre+4)
(Pten-KO)) mice are unique preclinical model to evaluate agents for
efficacy for both prevention and treatment of PCa. We present here for
the first time that dietary plumbagin (PL) inhibits tumor development in
intact as well as castrated Pten-KO mice. PL was mixed in an antioxidant
free basal powdered diet and was given at two dose levels (200 and 500
ppm). Mice (4 wks old) were divided into three groups (Control (n=40), PL
(200 ppm) (n=20), and PL (500 ppm) (n=40). Mice were sacrificed at 15 and
30 wks of age. To determine the prostate tumor volume, we carried out
micro-PET/CT analysis of control and PL treated groups mice at 30 wks
using a tumor selective radiopharmaceutical agent 124I-NM404. PL
treatment (200 and 500 ppm) resulted in a dose-dependent decrease
(pProstate specific Pten conditional knockout (PtenLoxP/LoxP:PB-Cre+4)
(Pten-KO)) mice are unique preclinical model to evaluate agents for
efficacy for both prevention and treatment of PCa. We present here for
the first time that dietary plumbagin (PL) inhibits tumor development in
intact as well as castrated Pten-KO mice. PL was mixed in an antioxidant
free basal powdered diet and was given at two dose levels (200 and 500
ppm). Mice (4 wks old) were divided into three groups (Control (n=40), PL
(200 ppm) (n=20), and PL (500 ppm) (n=40). Mice were sacrificed at 15 and
30 wks of age. To determine the prostate tumor volume, we carried out
micro-PET/CT analysis of control and PL treated groups mice at 30 wks
using a tumor selective radiopharmaceutical agent 124I-NM404. PL
treatment (200 and 500 ppm) resulted in a dose-dependent decrease
(p<0.01) in prostate tumor volume. PL treatment also resulted in a
significant (PProstate specific Pten conditional knockout
(PtenLoxP/LoxP:PB-Cre+4) (Pten-KO)) mice are unique preclinical model to
evaluate agents for efficacy for both prevention and treatment of PCa. We
present here for the first time that dietary plumbagin (PL) inhibits
tumor development in intact as well as castrated Pten-KO mice. PL was
mixed in an antioxidant free basal powdered diet and was given at two
dose levels (200 and 500 ppm). Mice (4 wks old) were divided into three
groups (Control (n=40), PL (200 ppm) (n=20), and PL (500 ppm) (n=40).
Mice were sacrificed at 15 and 30 wks of age. To determine the prostate
tumor volume, we carried out micro-PET/CT analysis of control and PL
treated groups mice at 30 wks using a tumor selective radiopharmaceutical
agent 124I-NM404. PL treatment (200 and 500 ppm) resulted in a
dose-dependent decrease (p<0.01) in prostate tumor volume. PL treatment
also resulted in a significant (P<0.001) decrease in weights of prostate
tumors and urogenital apparatus at 15 and 30 wks. Histopathological
analyses revealed inhibition of prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PIN)
to invasive adenocarcinoma at 15 and 30 wks. PL treated mice also showed
a significant (PProstate specific Pten conditional knockout
(PtenLoxP/LoxP:PB-Cre+4) (Pten-KO)) mice are unique preclinical model to
evaluate agents for efficacy for both prevention and treatment of PCa. We
present here for the first time that dietary plumbagin (PL) inhibits
tumor development in intact as well as castrated Pten-KO mice. PL was
mixed in an antioxidant free basal powdered diet and was given at two
dose levels (200 and 500 ppm). Mice (4 wks old) were divided into three
groups (Control (n=40), PL (200 ppm) (n=20), and PL (500 ppm) (n=40).
Mice were sacrificed at 15 and 30 wks of age. To determine the prostate
tumor volume, we carried out micro-PET/CT analysis of control and PL
treated groups mice at 30 wks using a tumor selective radiopharmaceutical
agent 124I-NM404. PL treatment (200 and 500 ppm) resulted in a
dose-dependent decrease (p<0.01) in prostate tumor volume. PL treatment
also resulted in a significant (P<0.001) decrease in weights of prostate
tumors and urogenital apparatus at 15 and 30 wks. Histopathological
analyses revealed inhibition of prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PIN)
to invasive adenocarcinoma at 15 and 30 wks. PL treated mice also showed
a significant (P<0.01) inhibition of small invasive adenocarcinoma with
cystic change at 30 wks. To determine the effects of PL in castrated
resistant prostate cancer (CRPC), we castrated 26 Pten-KO mice at 10 wks
and divided into 2 groups. PL treatment was started one wk after
castration and continued until 50 wks. At 50 wks, castrated control
Pten-KO mice illustrated atrophy of prostate tumors. PL treatment (500
ppm) further resulted in a significant decrease of prostate tumors weight
of castrated Pten-KO mice. Histopathological analysis of PL treated mice
prostate tumors showed significant decrease of both invasive
adenocarcinoma and cystic change. Biochemical analyses of Pten-KO mice
prostate tumors elicited a constitutive activation of AKT, protein kinase
C epsilon (PKC), signal transducer and activators of transcription 3
(Stat3) and increased COX2 expression compared to wild type mice. PL
treatment resulted in decreased expression of PKC, Stat3 and COX2
compared to control mice. We also observed that PL targets tumor
associated macrophages (TAM) in prostate tumors. Prostate tumors of PL
treated mice showed an increased infiltration of M1 macrophages and
inhibition of M2 macrophages, as analyzed by immunohistochemical staining
of F4/80, iNOS and L-arginase. PL treatment also inhibited the expression
of vimentin and slug, the markers of epithelial to mesenchymal transition
(EMT) in prostate tumors. In summary, the results indicate that dietary
PL inhibits growth of both primary and CRPC, which was accompanied
inhibition of EMT and modulation of tumor microenvironment. We conclude
that PL may be worthy of evaluation for the prevention and treatment of
human PCa (Support: CA138761).

