Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Small molecule SBI-601 inhibits Siah1/2 ubiquitin ligases,
attenuates HIF1 expression and growth of melanoma and prostate cancer
cells


The ubiquitin ligases Siah1/2 have been implicated in the control of key
cellular pathways, including hypoxia (through the control of prolyl
hydroxylase 1/3 stability), mitochondrial fission (through the control of
AKAP121 stability) and Ras/Raf signaling (through its control of Sprouty
2 stability). Expression or activity of Siah1/2 is upregulated in number
of cancer types and correspondingly, inhibition of Siah1/2 effectively
attenuates growth of prostate, melanoma, lung and pancreatic tumors. To
identify possibly Siah1/2 inhibitors, we have performed a HTS screen
using affinity selection-mass spectrometry (AS-MS). Using a select set of
32,000 drug-like molecules in mass-encoded mixtures of 400 compounds per
assay well, we identified 36 distinct clusters of structurally related
scaffolds that demonstrate high-binding affinity to full-length
bacterially produced purified and active Siah2. Of those, 9 out of 21
closely related analogs were evaluated in functional assays. One
compound, SBI-0640601, showed potent and reproducible inhibition of
Siah2, as measured by the reduction in HIF1 levels and activity, measured
by HRE-Luciferase assays in both melanoma and prostate cancer cultures.
SBI-0640601 is a natural product known as betulonic acid (BA) and is one
of a family of triterpenoid natural medicinal products derived from birch
trees (genera Betula). Independent binding studies (differential scanning
calorimetry) confirmed that SBI-0640601 binds to full-length bacterially
produced Siah2 and to a RING domain-deleted version of Siah1. In vitro,
SBI-0640601 attenuated the binding of PHD3 to Siah2, in keeping with the
observation that ubiquitination of most substrates requires binding to
the Siah2 substrate-binding domain. SBI-0640601 inhibited growth of
melanoma and prostate cancer cells in 2D and 3D cultures. Further,
SBI-0640601 effectively attenuated neuroendocrine differentiation
phenotype in adenocarcinoma cells, consistent with the effect seen upon
inhibition of Siah1/2 expression. RPPA analysis identified that
SBI-0640601 effectively attenuates AMPK and mTOR signaling pathways, in
addition to affecting MAPK signaling. Overall, SBI-0640601 appears to
inhibit key processes previously shown to be regulated by Siah1/2,
holding promise for further assessment in preclinical setting.Note: This
abstract was not presented at the meeting.

