Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exosomal miR-1290 and miR-375 as prognostic markers in metastatic
castrate resistant prostate cancer


PURPOSE: Cell free circulating microvesicles (in particular, exosomes)
contain proteins and nuclei acids that may serve as biomarkers for
disease diagnosis and prognosis. The goal of this study was to identify
exosomal microRNAs that may predict clinical outcome of patients with
castrate resistant prostate cancer (CRPC).EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: In
discovery stage, we performed RNA sequencing using plasma exosomal RNAs
derived from 36 patients with CRPC. We mapped the sequence reads to known
miRbase (Release 19, 2043 entries) and normalized the miRNA abundance by
sequence counts per million mappable reads. We applied Cox regression
analysis to identify the miRNAs that were associated with overall
survival of CRPC. In validation stage, we first examined an exosomal
small RNA sequencing dataset consisting of 192 individuals with various
health conditions. We used Normfinder and Bestkeeper to select most
stably expressed miRNAs as candidates for normalization references. We
then applied real-time qRT-PCR assays to test selected candidate
reference miRNAs and survival-related miRNAs in additional 100 CRPC
patients. From validated miRNAs, we constructed multivariate models to
predict overall survival for this group of patients.RESULTS RNA
sequencing generated over 6 million mappable reads per patient in the
initial discovery cohort. Among these reads, 45% were mapped to known
miRNAs for a total of 483 known and 275 novel miRNAs with normalized read
counts 5. The median follow-up time for the 36 CRPC patients was 35.6
months during which 10 patients had died. Cox regression analysis
identified four microRNAs (miR-1290, -1246, -375 and a predicted miRNA at
chromosome 12) that were associated with overall survival (FDRPURPOSE:
Cell free circulating microvesicles (in particular, exosomes) contain
proteins and nuclei acids that may serve as biomarkers for disease
diagnosis and prognosis. The goal of this study was to identify exosomal
microRNAs that may predict clinical outcome of patients with castrate
resistant prostate cancer (CRPC).EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: In discovery stage,
we performed RNA sequencing using plasma exosomal RNAs derived from 36
patients with CRPC. We mapped the sequence reads to known miRbase
(Release 19, 2043 entries) and normalized the miRNA abundance by sequence
counts per million mappable reads. We applied Cox regression analysis to
identify the miRNAs that were associated with overall survival of CRPC.
In validation stage, we first examined an exosomal small RNA sequencing
dataset consisting of 192 individuals with various health conditions. We
used Normfinder and Bestkeeper to select most stably expressed miRNAs as
candidates for normalization references. We then applied real-time
qRT-PCR assays to test selected candidate reference miRNAs and
survival-related miRNAs in additional 100 CRPC patients. From validated
miRNAs, we constructed multivariate models to predict overall survival
for this group of patients.RESULTS RNA sequencing generated over 6
million mappable reads per patient in the initial discovery cohort. Among
these reads, 45% were mapped to known miRNAs for a total of 483 known and
275 novel miRNAs with normalized read counts 5. The median follow-up time
for the 36 CRPC patients was 35.6 months during which 10 patients had
died. Cox regression analysis identified four microRNAs (miR-1290, -1246,
-375 and a predicted miRNA at chromosome 12) that were associated with
overall survival (FDR<0.05). Of six selected candidate miRNAs,
miR-30a/e-5p performed the best in their stability as endogenous
references for real-time qRT-PCR. When normalized by these internal
controls, we confirmed two of the three known miRs (miR-1290 and -375)
showing significant association with overall survival in the validation
cohort (pPURPOSE: Cell free circulating microvesicles (in particular,
exosomes) contain proteins and nuclei acids that may serve as biomarkers
for disease diagnosis and prognosis. The goal of this study was to
identify exosomal microRNAs that may predict clinical outcome of patients
with castrate resistant prostate cancer (CRPC).EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: In
discovery stage, we performed RNA sequencing using plasma exosomal RNAs
derived from 36 patients with CRPC. We mapped the sequence reads to known
miRbase (Release 19, 2043 entries) and normalized the miRNA abundance by
sequence counts per million mappable reads. We applied Cox regression
analysis to identify the miRNAs that were associated with overall
survival of CRPC. In validation stage, we first examined an exosomal
small RNA sequencing dataset consisting of 192 individuals with various
health conditions. We used Normfinder and Bestkeeper to select most
stably expressed miRNAs as candidates for normalization references. We
then applied real-time qRT-PCR assays to test selected candidate
reference miRNAs and survival-related miRNAs in additional 100 CRPC
patients. From validated miRNAs, we constructed multivariate models to
predict overall survival for this group of patients.RESULTS RNA
sequencing generated over 6 million mappable reads per patient in the
initial discovery cohort. Among these reads, 45% were mapped to known
miRNAs for a total of 483 known and 275 novel miRNAs with normalized read
counts 5. The median follow-up time for the 36 CRPC patients was 35.6
months during which 10 patients had died. Cox regression analysis
identified four microRNAs (miR-1290, -1246, -375 and a predicted miRNA at
chromosome 12) that were associated with overall survival (FDR<0.05). Of
six selected candidate miRNAs, miR-30a/e-5p performed the best in their
stability as endogenous references for real-time qRT-PCR. When normalized
by these internal controls, we confirmed two of the three known miRs
(miR-1290 and -375) showing significant association with overall survival
in the validation cohort (p<0.001) with a median follow up time of 12.5
(range: 1-41) months at which time 28 patients had died. The median
overall survival for patients with high (N=21) and low (N=40) expression
in both miR-1290 and -375 was 7.2 (1-26.7) months and 15.3 (1-41) months,
respectively (pPURPOSE: Cell free circulating microvesicles (in
particular, exosomes) contain proteins and nuclei acids that may serve as
biomarkers for disease diagnosis and prognosis. The goal of this study
was to identify exosomal microRNAs that may predict clinical outcome of
patients with castrate resistant prostate cancer (CRPC).EXPERIMENTAL
DESIGN: In discovery stage, we performed RNA sequencing using plasma
exosomal RNAs derived from 36 patients with CRPC. We mapped the sequence
reads to known miRbase (Release 19, 2043 entries) and normalized the
miRNA abundance by sequence counts per million mappable reads. We applied
Cox regression analysis to identify the miRNAs that were associated with
overall survival of CRPC. In validation stage, we first examined an
exosomal small RNA sequencing dataset consisting of 192 individuals with
various health conditions. We used Normfinder and Bestkeeper to select
most stably expressed miRNAs as candidates for normalization references.
We then applied real-time qRT-PCR assays to test selected candidate
reference miRNAs and survival-related miRNAs in additional 100 CRPC
patients. From validated miRNAs, we constructed multivariate models to
predict overall survival for this group of patients.RESULTS RNA
sequencing generated over 6 million mappable reads per patient in the
initial discovery cohort. Among these reads, 45% were mapped to known
miRNAs for a total of 483 known and 275 novel miRNAs with normalized read
counts 5. The median follow-up time for the 36 CRPC patients was 35.6
months during which 10 patients had died. Cox regression analysis
identified four microRNAs (miR-1290, -1246, -375 and a predicted miRNA at
chromosome 12) that were associated with overall survival (FDR<0.05). Of
six selected candidate miRNAs, miR-30a/e-5p performed the best in their
stability as endogenous references for real-time qRT-PCR. When normalized
by these internal controls, we confirmed two of the three known miRs
(miR-1290 and -375) showing significant association with overall survival
in the validation cohort (p<0.001) with a median follow up time of 12.5
(range: 1-41) months at which time 28 patients had died. The median
overall survival for patients with high (N=21) and low (N=40) expression
in both miR-1290 and -375 was 7.2 (1-26.7) months and 15.3 (1-41) months,
respectively (p<0.05). The miR-1290/-375-based prediction model
consistently showed better predictive performance with AUC=72% than
clinical variable-based model with AUC=64%.CONCLUSIONS: Plasma exosomal
miRNAs provide an easily accessible resource for biomarker development in
prognosis of advanced prostate cancer. Exosomal miR-1290 and miR-375 are
associated with overall survival in CRPC patients. miR-30a/e-5p,
especially the geometric mean of miR-30a/e-5p, are qualified endogenous
references for real-time qPCR. Further confirmation of these findings is
needed for prognostic and predictive biomarker in development of CRPC
stage.

