Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Methylation, copy number, and LOH analysis of Chr1q21.3 for
discovery of ovarian and breast cancer biomarkers


The association of genetic abnormalities and specific cancers is leading
to an increasing number of biomarkers that can be used for early
detection of cancers, determination of treatment protocols and predicted
prognoses. Additionally, the methylation state of an increasing number of
genes is also producing possible predictive biomarkers for specific
cancers and stages of cancer as well. To this end, we have analyzed both
breast and ovarian cancers and their normal adjacent tissue using both
DNA methylation analysis and genome wide array screening for LOH and copy
number variations. The combination of these two methods has yielded
several groupings of markers that are cancer specific as well as showing
specificity for the specific tumor type. Specifically, there are
increased copies in the chr1q21.3 region in both ovarian and breast tumor
DNA and differences in the methylation when one compares breast tumor to
ovarian tumor DNA's. Interestingly, in ovarian tumor samples where there
is no amplification of the region, the hypomethylation is greater than in
tumor samples in which there is amplification in the region. This
suggests that a greater degree of demethylation is needed to potentially
activate this region of the genome, where this may not be necessary in
regions where an increase in gene copy number may cause increased
expression.

