Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Colorectal cancer screening pilot: Comparative effectiveness
research using two screening modalities


Although several modalities are being used in colorectal cancer (CRC)
screening, only fecal occult blood testing (FOBT) and flexible
sigmoidoscopy (FS) have been subjected to randomized trials and long-term
follow-up. Both have been found to reduce CRC mortality compared to no
screening (18% and 28%, respectively), but a direct comparison between
the two has never been done with end-point CRC incidence and mortality.
Also, it is not clear which modality is the most cost-effective in any
given population. In Norway, a country with high colorectal cancer
incidence and little prior screening against the disease, the government
decided to start a comparative effectiveness research pilot in 2012 with
these two screening modalities.The pilot aims to randomize the entire
population aged 50-74 in a defined geographical area in South-East Norway
(approximately 140 000 individuals) to one of two screening modalities.
Half will be randomized to biennial screening with immunochemical FOBT
(OC-Sensor Diana, Eiken Ltd), and half to once only screening with FS.
The enrollment will take four years and the pilot includes a number of
sub-studies to determine how the screening is perceived in the target
population. We report the results from the enrollment in the main trial
after the first 18 months.A total of 35746 women and men have been
invited so far, 21495 to iFOBT and 14251 to FS. Participation rates have
been 49% in the FS arm, and 57% in the iFOBT arm, with slightly higher
rates among women than men. Positive FS was defined as advanced neoplasia
or three or more adenomas. A total of 10.6% of the FS patients have been
referred to colonoscopy. The cut-off value for positive iFOBT was set to
75 ug/L, and 780 patients (6.4%) have so far tested positive and referred
to colonoscopy.Forty-three cases of CRC have been detected in the FS
group so far, at a rate of 6/1000 examined, somewhat higher in men
(7.3/1000) than in women (5/1000). Thirty-nine cancers have been found in
the FOBT group after first screening round (3.1/1000 examined), with
4.6/1000 in men and 1.9/1000 in women. Overall the adenoma detection rate
at sigmoidoscopy is 14%. A total of 881 high-risk adenomas (adenomas >10
mm, or with high-grade dysplasia or villous features) have been detected.
Adenoma detection rate at colonoscopy in the referred population is
60.5%. Complications at sigmoidoscopy have so far been 14/1000 exams,
with the vast majority being vasovagal. At colonoscopy the complication
rate is currently 5.8/1000, the main ones being reported are bleeding or
vasovagal reactions.Conclusion: participation rates in both arms are
slightly below the expected 50% for FS and 60% for FOBT. Cancer rates
among those screened are higher in the once-only FS than after first
round of biennial iFOBT screening, but rates are within the expected
range.

