Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: LPP promotes ErbB2 overexpressing breast cancer cell migration,
invasion and metastasis


Metastatic breast cancer remains a major hurdle to the successful
treatment of this disease. Overexpression of the HER2/ErbB2 receptor
tyrosine kinase in breast cancer is associated with metastatic disease
and correlates with poor patient prognosis. Growing evidence demonstrates
that TGF can potentiate ErbB2 signaling to enhance the invasive and
metastatic behavior of breast cancer cells. Nonetheless, the mechanisms
underlying the synergy between TGF and ErbB2 signaling pathways remain to
be elucidated.We previously identified Lipoma Preferred Partner (LPP) as
an indispensable mediator of TGF-induced migration, invasion and focal
adhesion turnover of ErbB2-expressing breast cancer cells. Furthermore,
we established domains within LPP that are required for its localization
to focal adhesions and for its interaction with -Actinin, an actin
cross-linking protein, to promote cell migration and invasion.Herein, we
examine the requirement of LPP in tumorigenesis and metastasis formation.
We observe that LPP is dispensable for primary tumor growth. Nonetheless,
the loss of LPP leads to decrease in spontaneous lung metastasis
formation of ErbB2-expressing breast cancer cells injected into the
mammary fat pads of mice. Furthermore, we observe that LPP is a critical
determinant for efficient dissemination of breast cancer cells. We show
that shRNA-mediated reduction of LPP significantly impairs pulmonary
metastasis formation in experimental metastasis tail vein assay.Overall,
we have identified LPP as a novel mediator that integrates TGF and ErbB2
signaling to promote the migration, invasion and metastasis of breast
cancer cells. We identify LPP as a pro-metastatic mediator of ErbB2
overexpressing breast cancer cells and a potential new biomarker of
metastatic breast cancer.

