Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Assessing colorectal cancer risk using known genetic
susceptibility variants and family history accounting for endoscopy


Colorectal cancer (CRC) is one of the most commonly diagnosed cancers,
and remains the second leading cause of cancer death, despite the fact
that rates have declined and that being among the most preventable of
cancers. Current screening recommendations are based only on age, family
history of CRC, and previous screening results, whereas risk varies
substantially in the population and most cases occur in those without a
positive family history. The recent substantial progress in identifying
CRC associated common genetic variants has offered new opportunities to
refine risk-prediction models and provide more accurate risk
stratification for those at risk. We developed risk-prediction models for
men and women based on age, family history, and 28 CRC-associated common
genetic variants identified to date, accounting for history of endoscopy,
in 5,811 cases and 6,302 controls, and validated the models in an
independent study of 866 cases and 869 controls. The genetic risk score
derived from CRC-associated common variants provides an independent risk
predictor and significantly improves the discriminatory accuracy over the
model that includes only family history for both men (AUC = 0.60 vs.
0.51, p-value = 4.6e-6) and women (AUC=0.57 vs. 0.52, p-value=0.02).
Including the genetic risk score may also improve risk stratification.
Considering, for example, the average 10-year risks of 60-year-old men
(2.68%) and women (1.49%) in the absence of endoscopy as the thresholds
for screening, then the age to start screening for men with positive
family history would be 54, and 61 years old otherwise. For women the
starting age would be 57 and 61 years old, respectively. Including
additional genetic variants information leads to a wider range, from 51
years old for those with positive family history and the genetic risk
scores at the 90% to 68 years old for those without positive family
history and the genetic risk scores at the 10%. For women, the range
would be from 53 years old to 66 years old, respectively. We also derived
estimates of 10-year absolute risk for men and women given their age,
family history status, risk alleles carried, and endoscopy. To
illustrate, for a 60-year-old man who does not have positive family
history, but who carries 28 risk alleles (top 20%), and has not had an
endoscopy, risk for developing CRC is 5.49% (95% CI, 3.63 to 7.35);
however, if he has undergone endoscopy, his risk is reduced to 1.67% (95%
CI, 1.10 to 2.25). For a 60-year-old woman who has a similar profile,
risk of developing CRC is 2.41% (95% CI, 1.98 to 2.83) in the absence of
endoscopy and is reduced to 1.23% (95% CI, 1.00 to 1.46) if she has
undergone endoscopy. Our development and validation of a risk-prediction
model are first steps towards utilizing genetic information for more
tailored screening and prevention strategies, which should improve the
cost-effectiveness of screening and, perhaps, adherence.

