Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identifying a highly-aggressive DCIS subgroup by studying
intra-individual DCIS heterogeneity among invasive breast cancer patients


Background: Detection rates for ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) have
dramatically increased because of the widespread use of mammographic
screening. The heterogeneity among multiple DCIS lesions within the same
patient, also diagnosed with invasive ductal carcinoma (IDC), has not
been well evaluated, leaving clinical and research implications of this
intra-individual heterogeneity of DCIS yet to be explored. In the study
presented here, we tested the hypothesis that classification of
heterogeneous DCIS based on adjacent IDC and normal terminal duct lobular
units (TDLU) in patients concurrently diagnosed with IDC and DCIS helps
to identify DCIS subgroups which have different degrees of
aggressiveness.Experimental Designs and Results: Ten DCIS lesions from
each of 36 patients concurrently diagnosed with DCIS and IDC were
randomly selected and scored with IHC biomarkers. Our results showed that
expression of PR, HER2, Ki-67 and p16 varied significantly in DCIS
lesions from a single patient (P Background: Detection rates for ductal
carcinoma in situ (DCIS) have dramatically increased because of the
widespread use of mammographic screening. The heterogeneity among
multiple DCIS lesions within the same patient, also diagnosed with
invasive ductal carcinoma (IDC), has not been well evaluated, leaving
clinical and research implications of this intra-individual heterogeneity
of DCIS yet to be explored. In the study presented here, we tested the
hypothesis that classification of heterogeneous DCIS based on adjacent
IDC and normal terminal duct lobular units (TDLU) in patients
concurrently diagnosed with IDC and DCIS helps to identify DCIS subgroups
which have different degrees of aggressiveness.Experimental Designs and
Results: Ten DCIS lesions from each of 36 patients concurrently diagnosed
with DCIS and IDC were randomly selected and scored with IHC biomarkers.
Our results showed that expression of PR, HER2, Ki-67 and p16 varied
significantly in DCIS lesions from a single patient (P < 0.05 for PR; P
Background: Detection rates for ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) have
dramatically increased because of the widespread use of mammographic
screening. The heterogeneity among multiple DCIS lesions within the same
patient, also diagnosed with invasive ductal carcinoma (IDC), has not
been well evaluated, leaving clinical and research implications of this
intra-individual heterogeneity of DCIS yet to be explored. In the study
presented here, we tested the hypothesis that classification of
heterogeneous DCIS based on adjacent IDC and normal terminal duct lobular
units (TDLU) in patients concurrently diagnosed with IDC and DCIS helps
to identify DCIS subgroups which have different degrees of
aggressiveness.Experimental Designs and Results: Ten DCIS lesions from
each of 36 patients concurrently diagnosed with DCIS and IDC were
randomly selected and scored with IHC biomarkers. Our results showed that
expression of PR, HER2, Ki-67 and p16 varied significantly in DCIS
lesions from a single patient (P < 0.05 for PR; P < 1 10-8 for HER2,
Ki-67 and p16). In addition, seventy-two percent of the individuals had
heterogeneous expression in at least 2/6 markers (P Background: Detection
rates for ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) have dramatically increased
because of the widespread use of mammographic screening. The
heterogeneity among multiple DCIS lesions within the same patient, also
diagnosed with invasive ductal carcinoma (IDC), has not been well
evaluated, leaving clinical and research implications of this
intra-individual heterogeneity of DCIS yet to be explored. In the study
presented here, we tested the hypothesis that classification of
heterogeneous DCIS based on adjacent IDC and normal terminal duct lobular
units (TDLU) in patients concurrently diagnosed with IDC and DCIS helps
to identify DCIS subgroups which have different degrees of
aggressiveness.Experimental Designs and Results: Ten DCIS lesions from
each of 36 patients concurrently diagnosed with DCIS and IDC were
randomly selected and scored with IHC biomarkers. Our results showed that
expression of PR, HER2, Ki-67 and p16 varied significantly in DCIS
lesions from a single patient (P < 0.05 for PR; P < 1 10-8 for HER2,
Ki-67 and p16). In addition, seventy-two percent of the individuals had
heterogeneous expression in at least 2/6 markers (P < 10-18, vs.
hypothesized homogeneity baseline, 10%). Importantly, by comparing the
expression of promising DCIS risk biomarkers (Ki-67, p53 and p16) among
different DCIS subgroups, we found that DCIS lesions in subgroup IIb,
which had the same molecular subtypes as the adjacent IDC but not the
same subtypes as the adjacent TDLU, had a higher Ki-67 index (P 2.0,
P2.0, P<0.05]. A majority of genes were upregulated in type IIb DCIS and
more than 50% of genes are cancer-relevant (P 2.0, P<0.05]. A majority of
genes were upregulated in type IIb DCIS and more than 50% of genes are
cancer-relevant (P < 10-8-2). Importantly, a group of differentially
expressed genes in subgroup IIb including CD44, IFIT1, STAT1, MLH1, PARP9
and BRIP1 were confirmed by qPCR validation and likely play important
roles in DCIS progression based on previous findings, which further
support that Type IIb DCIS may represent a highly aggressive
subgroup.Conclusions: By using a systematic approach, our results clearly
demonstrate that intra-individual heterogeneity in DCIS is very common in
patients concurrently diagnosed with IDC. Our novel findings of a DCIS
subpopulation with high-aggressiveness will provide a new paradigm for
mechanistic studies of breast tumor progression and also have broad
implications for prevention research as heterogeneous pre-invasive
lesions are present in many other cancer types.This work was kindly
supported by the Susan G. Komen for the Cure (KG100274), and Eileen Stein
Jacoby Fund.

