Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Interrogating hedgehog pathway and smoothened inhibition by
PF-04449913 in patient-derived acute myeloid leukemia models


Aberrant activation of the Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway has been
implicated in a variety of cancers and a small molecule inhibitor of
Smoothened (SMO), Vismodegib, has been approved for the treatment of
basal cell carcinoma, a disease frequently driven by Hh pathway signaling
due to pathway mutations. SMO dependent Hh signaling has also been
implicated in models of myeloid leukemia, primarily CML, where genetic
loss of SMO or pharmacological inhibition limits disease progression in
part through targeting the leukemic stem cell (LSC). Outside of BCR-ABL
driven leukemia the role of Hh signaling and impact of SMO inhibition on
disease progression and the LSC remains unclear. To explore the role of
Hedgehog pathway signaling and interrogate responses to SMO inhibition in
AML, a panel of primary AML patient-derived models was utilized to
examine responses to PF-04449913, an oral small molecule SMO inhibitor
currently in early phase clinical trials targeting myeloid malignancies.
AML patient samples were characterized for Hh pathway expression levels
and screened for responses to PF-04449913. Ex vivo treatment of AML bone
marrow cells showed PF-04449913 was capable of inhibiting Hh pathway
activity, reducing expression of key LSC regulators and decreasing
populations of cells expressing LSC markers. Use of AML xenotransplant
models to assess in vivo responses to PF-04449913 as single agent and in
combination with Cytarabine have shown potential for combination efficacy
of the two agents in select models suggesting patient selection
strategies may be critical for SMO inhibitor-based therapies in AML.

