Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel modular polymer platform for the treatment of oral and
head and neck carcinoma


Objective: Head and neck Squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is difficult to
resect completely by surgery due to complicated context and therefore
exhibits high recurrence rate in the patient. To reduce tumor recurrence
after surgery, we developed a biodegradable polymer to deliver CCL21
cytokine and cisplatin, and evaluate its efficacy in a partially resected
xenograft animal model of HNSCC.Study Design: in vivo study.Setting:
Academic research laboratory.Subjects and Methods: After xenograft HNSCC
tumors were established by subcutaneous injection, C3H/HeJ mice underwent
surgery to debulk their tumors to a size of 0.5x0.5x0.5 cm3 and received
different polymer implantation. For cytokine studies, mice were grouped
into: (1) no polymer; (2) plain polymer; (3) plain polymer with
intratumoral injection of recombinant CCL21 twice a week; (4) polymer
containing parental dendritic cells; (5) polymer containing dendritic
cells secreting CCL21 (DC-CCL21). For cisplatin studies, mice were
randomized to receive implantation of (1) no polymer; (2) plain polymer;
(3) plain polymer with local cisplatin injection; (4) cisplatin polymer.
The two groups of mice implanted with cisplatin polymer or no polymer
were further randomized to receive (1) 4 Grays external beam radiation
for 4 days; (2) no radiation. Tumor size was measured until the mice were
euthanized. At necropsy, the tumors were excised and weighed.Results: Our
results using this novel polymer platform demonstrate a significant
reduction in tumor growth. The DC-CCL21 polymer reduced SCCVII/SF tumors
in the C3H/HeJ mice by over 41% compared to the control groups
(pObjective: Head and neck Squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is difficult
to resect completely by surgery due to complicated context and therefore
exhibits high recurrence rate in the patient. To reduce tumor recurrence
after surgery, we developed a biodegradable polymer to deliver CCL21
cytokine and cisplatin, and evaluate its efficacy in a partially resected
xenograft animal model of HNSCC.Study Design: in vivo study.Setting:
Academic research laboratory.Subjects and Methods: After xenograft HNSCC
tumors were established by subcutaneous injection, C3H/HeJ mice underwent
surgery to debulk their tumors to a size of 0.5x0.5x0.5 cm3 and received
different polymer implantation. For cytokine studies, mice were grouped
into: (1) no polymer; (2) plain polymer; (3) plain polymer with
intratumoral injection of recombinant CCL21 twice a week; (4) polymer
containing parental dendritic cells; (5) polymer containing dendritic
cells secreting CCL21 (DC-CCL21). For cisplatin studies, mice were
randomized to receive implantation of (1) no polymer; (2) plain polymer;
(3) plain polymer with local cisplatin injection; (4) cisplatin polymer.
The two groups of mice implanted with cisplatin polymer or no polymer
were further randomized to receive (1) 4 Grays external beam radiation
for 4 days; (2) no radiation. Tumor size was measured until the mice were
euthanized. At necropsy, the tumors were excised and weighed.Results: Our
results using this novel polymer platform demonstrate a significant
reduction in tumor growth. The DC-CCL21 polymer reduced SCCVII/SF tumors
in the C3H/HeJ mice by over 41% compared to the control groups (p<0.01).
The cisplatin secreting polymer effectively reduced SCCVII/SF tumors in
the C3H/HeJ mice by over 16-fold (P Objective: Head and neck Squamous
cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is difficult to resect completely by surgery due
to complicated context and therefore exhibits high recurrence rate in the
patient. To reduce tumor recurrence after surgery, we developed a
biodegradable polymer to deliver CCL21 cytokine and cisplatin, and
evaluate its efficacy in a partially resected xenograft animal model of
HNSCC.Study Design: in vivo study.Setting: Academic research
laboratory.Subjects and Methods: After xenograft HNSCC tumors were
established by subcutaneous injection, C3H/HeJ mice underwent surgery to
debulk their tumors to a size of 0.5x0.5x0.5 cm3 and received different
polymer implantation. For cytokine studies, mice were grouped into: (1)
no polymer; (2) plain polymer; (3) plain polymer with intratumoral
injection of recombinant CCL21 twice a week; (4) polymer containing
parental dendritic cells; (5) polymer containing dendritic cells
secreting CCL21 (DC-CCL21). For cisplatin studies, mice were randomized
to receive implantation of (1) no polymer; (2) plain polymer; (3) plain
polymer with local cisplatin injection; (4) cisplatin polymer. The two
groups of mice implanted with cisplatin polymer or no polymer were
further randomized to receive (1) 4 Grays external beam radiation for 4
days; (2) no radiation. Tumor size was measured until the mice were
euthanized. At necropsy, the tumors were excised and weighed.Results: Our
results using this novel polymer platform demonstrate a significant
reduction in tumor growth. The DC-CCL21 polymer reduced SCCVII/SF tumors
in the C3H/HeJ mice by over 41% compared to the control groups (p<0.01).
The cisplatin secreting polymer effectively reduced SCCVII/SF tumors in
the C3H/HeJ mice by over 16-fold (P < 0.01) as compared to control, plain
polymer group. We also observed a statistically significant lower tumor
weight among mice treated with cisplatin polymer and concomitant CCL21
compared to the control group.Conclusion: Herein we demonstrate the
efficacy of a novel polymer platform in delivering cisplatin and
cytokines to a partially resected SCC in a murine model. We also
demonstrate that we can effectively grow dendritic cells in the polymer
that can actively secrete CCL21. Our results indicate that this polymer
may represent a new therapeutic modality for patients with HNSCC. Once
this polymer platform is optimized we will plan for validation in the
context of a prospective trial in patients with unresectable advanced or
recurrent HNSCC.

