Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: 90K attenuates the development of colitis-associated colorectal
tumors through negative regulation of intestinal epithelial Toll-like
receptor 4


Background:Inflammation is a risk factor for colon cancer. TLR4
expression is upregulated in almost all colitis-associated cancer and
dysplasia. The molecular mechanisms linking inflammation and colon
carcinogenesis are incompletely understood. We found that tumor
associated antigen 90K antagonized TLR4/NF-kB signaling pathway in colon
cancer cells. We hypothesized that 90K is involved in TLR4 expression in
colitis-induced colon carcinogenesis.Methods:The effect of 90K against
TLR4 was analysed by cell cultures, NF-kB reporter assay, and
immunoprecipitation. C57BL/6 mice were treated with 3% dextran sodium
sulfate (DSS) for acute colitis model. Colitis was assessed by disease
activity index (DAI) including weight loss, stool consistency and rectal
bleeding, and histopathology.Results:90K interacts with TLR4, suppresses
the NF-kB signal in the MYD88-dependent pathway that is major adaptor
molecules in TLRs/NF-kB signal. Adenoviral 90K administration attenuated
the severity of acute DSS-induced colitis as assessed by DAI and
histopathologic scoring compared with the control group. 90K restored
body weight loss and the severity of acute DSS colitis through the
suppression of TLR4/MYD88/NF-kB signal.Conclusions:Tumor associated
antigen 90K is involved in negative regulation of inflammatory signaling
triggered by TLR4-induced NF-kB activation. The data suggest that 90K
might thereby suppress proliferation and progression of colon cancers.

