Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dinaciclib, an inhibitor of cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs),
impairs homologous recombination, abrogates G2 checkpoint arrest and
sensitizes myeloma cells to PARP inhibition


Background: Multiple myeloma (MM) is the second most common hematologic
malignancy, and yet remains incurable in the majority of patients. We
previously observed dysfunctional homologous recombination (HR) to
mediate genomic instability and progression of MM.CDKs are key components
of HR DNA repair and have been targeted by therapeutic drugs for MM. CDK1
phosphorylates BRCA1, and CDK5 (upregulated in MM and predictive of
patient survival) phosphorylates ATM, modifications considered essential
for checkpoint activation and HR repair. Poly(ADP-ribose)polymerase
(PARP) is required for single-strand break (SSB) repair and when
inhibited, SSBs accumulate and degenerate into double-strand breaks
(DSBs) during DNA replication, resulting in cell death if HR is
deficient. Dinaciclib (DC) is a potent inhibitor of CDK1, 2, 5 and 9,
currently in clinical trials for MM. Here, we show that DC disrupts HR
repair, abrogates G2 checkpoint arrest, and sensitizes MM cells to PARP
inhibition.Methods: We investigated effects of DC, doxorubicin
(topoisomerase II inhibitor), and veliparib (PARP inhibitor) on MM cell
lines and myeloma cells from MM patients. We used confocal
immunofluorescence microscopy to assess formation of H2AX, BRCA1 and
RAD51 foci, and western blotting to measure levels of phospho-BRCA1 (at
Ser1497,CDK1 phosphorylation site) in order to assess the effects of DC
on recruitment of HR proteins to DSBs. We measured DC effects on
HR-mediated DSB repair, following transient infection with adenovirus
encoding I-SceI, which forms DSBs within a DR-GFP reporter chromosomally
integrated in MM.1S myeloma cells. Cell viability was determined using
WST-1 and colony-formation assays. Flow cytometry after dual staining
with propidium iodide (PI)/RNaseA and anti-phospho-histone H3 (Ser10)
antibody was used to determine G2 checkpoint activation. In vivo
consequences of DC treatment are currently being examined in a
myeloma-xenograft mouse model.Results: We observed significant decreases
in the percentage of cells with 5 BRCA1 foci (46.7% to 5.7%, pBackground:
Multiple myeloma (MM) is the second most common hematologic malignancy,
and yet remains incurable in the majority of patients. We previously
observed dysfunctional homologous recombination (HR) to mediate genomic
instability and progression of MM.CDKs are key components of HR DNA
repair and have been targeted by therapeutic drugs for MM. CDK1
phosphorylates BRCA1, and CDK5 (upregulated in MM and predictive of
patient survival) phosphorylates ATM, modifications considered essential
for checkpoint activation and HR repair. Poly(ADP-ribose)polymerase
(PARP) is required for single-strand break (SSB) repair and when
inhibited, SSBs accumulate and degenerate into double-strand breaks
(DSBs) during DNA replication, resulting in cell death if HR is
deficient. Dinaciclib (DC) is a potent inhibitor of CDK1, 2, 5 and 9,
currently in clinical trials for MM. Here, we show that DC disrupts HR
repair, abrogates G2 checkpoint arrest, and sensitizes MM cells to PARP
inhibition.Methods: We investigated effects of DC, doxorubicin
(topoisomerase II inhibitor), and veliparib (PARP inhibitor) on MM cell
lines and myeloma cells from MM patients. We used confocal
immunofluorescence microscopy to assess formation of H2AX, BRCA1 and
RAD51 foci, and western blotting to measure levels of phospho-BRCA1 (at
Ser1497,CDK1 phosphorylation site) in order to assess the effects of DC
on recruitment of HR proteins to DSBs. We measured DC effects on
HR-mediated DSB repair, following transient infection with adenovirus
encoding I-SceI, which forms DSBs within a DR-GFP reporter chromosomally
integrated in MM.1S myeloma cells. Cell viability was determined using
WST-1 and colony-formation assays. Flow cytometry after dual staining
with propidium iodide (PI)/RNaseA and anti-phospho-histone H3 (Ser10)
antibody was used to determine G2 checkpoint activation. In vivo
consequences of DC treatment are currently being examined in a
myeloma-xenograft mouse model.Results: We observed significant decreases
in the percentage of cells with 5 BRCA1 foci (46.7% to 5.7%, p<0.001) or
5 RAD51 foci (26% to 4%, pBackground: Multiple myeloma (MM) is the second
most common hematologic malignancy, and yet remains incurable in the
majority of patients. We previously observed dysfunctional homologous
recombination (HR) to mediate genomic instability and progression of
MM.CDKs are key components of HR DNA repair and have been targeted by
therapeutic drugs for MM. CDK1 phosphorylates BRCA1, and CDK5
(upregulated in MM and predictive of patient survival) phosphorylates
ATM, modifications considered essential for checkpoint activation and HR
repair. Poly(ADP-ribose)polymerase (PARP) is required for single-strand
break (SSB) repair and when inhibited, SSBs accumulate and degenerate
into double-strand breaks (DSBs) during DNA replication, resulting in
cell death if HR is deficient. Dinaciclib (DC) is a potent inhibitor of
CDK1, 2, 5 and 9, currently in clinical trials for MM. Here, we show that
DC disrupts HR repair, abrogates G2 checkpoint arrest, and sensitizes MM
cells to PARP inhibition.Methods: We investigated effects of DC,
doxorubicin (topoisomerase II inhibitor), and veliparib (PARP inhibitor)
on MM cell lines and myeloma cells from MM patients. We used confocal
immunofluorescence microscopy to assess formation of H2AX, BRCA1 and
RAD51 foci, and western blotting to measure levels of phospho-BRCA1 (at
Ser1497,CDK1 phosphorylation site) in order to assess the effects of DC
on recruitment of HR proteins to DSBs. We measured DC effects on
HR-mediated DSB repair, following transient infection with adenovirus
encoding I-SceI, which forms DSBs within a DR-GFP reporter chromosomally
integrated in MM.1S myeloma cells. Cell viability was determined using
WST-1 and colony-formation assays. Flow cytometry after dual staining
with propidium iodide (PI)/RNaseA and anti-phospho-histone H3 (Ser10)
antibody was used to determine G2 checkpoint activation. In vivo
consequences of DC treatment are currently being examined in a
myeloma-xenograft mouse model.Results: We observed significant decreases
in the percentage of cells with 5 BRCA1 foci (46.7% to 5.7%, p<0.001) or
5 RAD51 foci (26% to 4%, p<0.001), in cells treated with veliparib plus
20 nM DC, relative to veliparib alone. DC elicited 8-fold decrease in
doxorubicin-induced phosphorylation of BRCA1 on S1497. In the DR-GFP
assay of HR, 23.9% of vehicle-treated cells and 4.2% of DC-treated cells
were GFP+, indicating that DC disrupts HR repair of DSBs. Cell viability
following 72h treatments with veliparib DC, or vehicle alone, implied
synergistic cytotoxicity between veliparib and DC. DC treatment
significantly inhibited doxorubicin- or veliparib-induced G2/M phase cell
accumulation and increased the fraction of mitotic cells in
G2/M.Conclusion: DC significantly impairs HR DNA repair and sensitizes
myeloma cells to PARP inhibition, and this combination may thus offer an
effective treatment strategy for MM.

