Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Age-related difference in the susceptibility phthalate-induced
injury in Sprague-Dawley rat


Di-2-ethylhexyl phthalate (DEHP), a commonly used plasticizer of
synthetic polymers causes liver tumorigenesis, and both short and
long-term effects on the reproductive system of male rats. Whether
initial exposures to DEHP in early developmental stage affect the
susceptibility to injury by subsequent exposures later in life remain
unknown. Pregnant dams of Sprague Dawley rats were gavage with vehicle,
100 or 750 mg/kg bw/day of DEHP from Gestational Day 14 (GND14) until
birth. After resting for twenty days, at postnatal day 21 (PND21) male
offspring were gavage with vehicle, DEHP (100 or 750 mg/Kg/d) for 14 days
(PND21-35). On PND35, offspring were sacrificed, serum testosterone (T)
levels, body and organ (testis, liver and kidney) weight were examined.
The data reveals that DEHP 750 mg/Kg/d but not 100mg/Kg/d treatment were
sufficient to cause damage to testis when exposures occurs during either
gestational or peripubertal (PND21-35) period. Interestingly, our data
also indicated that subsequent exposures to DEHP (100 mg/Kg/day) in utero
and at peri-pubertal stage were also effective to causing significant
injury to testis. The serum T levels were reduced in all DEHP treatment
groups. Next, we investigated the effects of peripubertal exposure to
DEHP on the susceptibility to injury by subsequent exposure during
adulthood. PND21 rats were subjected to oral administration of Oil, DEHP
(100mg/kg/day or 750mg/kg/day) for 14 days (PND21-35). The rats were
allowed to rest for 25 days until PND60. At PND60, rats were divided into
groups and subsequently exposed to oil or DEHP (100 or 750 mg/Kg/d) for
14days (PND60-74). At PND74 the rats were sacrificed, serum T levels,
body and organ weights were determined. Interestingly, no significant
injury was observed in any of the treatment groups. Instead, and enhanced
serum T levels were observed in DEHP-treated adult rats compared to
control. Together, this study shows that the susceptibility to injuries
following subsequent DEHP exposure is age-dependent, with immature male
rats more susceptible while adults are resistant. In addition, the data
also indicated that injuries sustained during peri-pubertal exposure are
at least in part reversible. This work was supported by NIH-NIGMS-SCORE 2
grant SC2GM099578.

