Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Reciprocal regulation of MYB and CXCR4 in pancreatic cancer cells:
Potential pathobiological implications


Pancreatic cancer remains one of the most lethal malignancies with a
median post-diagnosis survival of 3-8 months, and a 5 year survival of
6%. The poor outcome from pancreatic cancer is largely due to the
presence of locally advanced or metastatic disease at the time of
diagnosis. Therefore, it is imperative to identify novel molecular
targets driving aggressive and metastatic progression of pancreatic
cancer, and build up a better understanding of the underlying molecular
mechanisms. In this regard, we have identified that MYB, encoding for an
oncogenic transcription factor (a cellular progenitor of v-Myb
oncogenes), is overexpressed in majority of pancreatic cancer cases and
cell lines. Furthermore, our data from gain and loss of function studies
(in BxPC3 and MiaPaCa cells, respectively) show that MYB overexpression
is associated with pancreatic tumor growth and metastasis. From the
mechanistic standpoint, we observe that MYB regulates the expression of
CXCR4 through direct binding to its promoter. MYB-overexpressing BxPC3
cells exhibit significantly enhanced migration and invasion against a
CXCL12 (sole ligand for CXCR4) gradient, whereas it is suppressed in
MYB-silenced MiaPaCa cells as compared to their respective control cells.
Furthermore, MYB-overexpressing cells exhibit greater resistance to
serum-deprivation in CXCL12-supplemeted media, an effect that is
abrogated upon CXCR4 silencing. Interestingly, in parallel studies, we
have observed that treatment with CXCL12 also leads to MYB upregulation
in pancreatic cancer cells in a CXCR4 dependent manner. Together, these
data are suggestive of a novel positive feedback regulatory loop between
CXCR4 and MYB and hold important significance for pancreatic cancer
pathobiology.

