Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ICG-001 induces cell cycle arrest to inhibit in vitro and in vivo
pancreatic cancer growth


Wnt/-catenin signaling is an important mediator of pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma (PDAC) initiation and progression, warranting its
exploration as a target of therapeutic intervention. Wnt modulators with
acceptable in vivo bioavailability and efficacy as Wnt/-catenin
transcriptional inhibitors have only recently become available and
include the small molecule compound ICG-001. Discovered in a library
screen for inhibitors of Wnt/-catenin reporter activity, ICG-001
interacts with cyclic AMP-response element-binding protein (CBP) to block
its function as a co-transcriptional activator of -catenin/TCF-mediated
transcription. ICG-001 inhibits both in vitro and in vivo colon cancer
growth and has demonstrated efficacy in a variety of other in vivo
Wnt-driven disease models. Having recently shown subsets of PDAC tumors
are dependent on increased levels of Wnt ligand-dependent autocrine
signaling, we addressed the efficacy and function of ICG-001 on in vitro
and in vivo PDAC growth. As a single agent, ICG-001 significantly
inhibited anchorage-dependent and -independent growth of PDAC cell lines
in vitro and increased survival in an orthotopic xenograft model of PDAC
(HR=0.207, 95%CI: 0.079-0.543, P=0.001). ICG-001 also synergized with
gemcitabine to inhibit anchorage-dependent growth in vitro and improve
survival in the orthotopic xenograft model (HR= 0.074, 95%CI: 0.026,
0.212, PWnt/-catenin signaling is an important mediator of pancreatic
ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) initiation and progression, warranting its
exploration as a target of therapeutic intervention. Wnt modulators with
acceptable in vivo bioavailability and efficacy as Wnt/-catenin
transcriptional inhibitors have only recently become available and
include the small molecule compound ICG-001. Discovered in a library
screen for inhibitors of Wnt/-catenin reporter activity, ICG-001
interacts with cyclic AMP-response element-binding protein (CBP) to block
its function as a co-transcriptional activator of -catenin/TCF-mediated
transcription. ICG-001 inhibits both in vitro and in vivo colon cancer
growth and has demonstrated efficacy in a variety of other in vivo
Wnt-driven disease models. Having recently shown subsets of PDAC tumors
are dependent on increased levels of Wnt ligand-dependent autocrine
signaling, we addressed the efficacy and function of ICG-001 on in vitro
and in vivo PDAC growth. As a single agent, ICG-001 significantly
inhibited anchorage-dependent and -independent growth of PDAC cell lines
in vitro and increased survival in an orthotopic xenograft model of PDAC
(HR=0.207, 95%CI: 0.079-0.543, P=0.001). ICG-001 also synergized with
gemcitabine to inhibit anchorage-dependent growth in vitro and improve
survival in the orthotopic xenograft model (HR= 0.074, 95%CI: 0.026,
0.212, P<0.001). Mechanistically, ICG-001 treatment did not significantly
increase apoptosis in PDAC cell lines, but instead dramatically inhibited
cell cycle progression via G1 arrest. Although ICG-001 inhibited
-catenin/TCF-mediated transcription as measured by luciferase-based
reporter assays and endogenous target gene expression, these changes
occurred at concentrations above those seen to induce G1 cell cycle
arrest, suggesting ICG-001 growth inhibitory effects may be unrelated to
its specific effects as a Wnt pathway inhibitor. Gene expression
microarray analysis revealed ICG-001 treatment alters the expression of
known Wnt target genes, as well as a much larger number of genes involved
in DNA replication and cell cycle control. In conclusion, this study
indicates ICG-001 is a promising small-molecule therapeutic for
pancreatic adenocarcinoma and identifies numerous target genes whose
altered expression provide insights into mechanism of action and
candidate biomarkers for following therapeutic response..

