Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression and prognostic significance of microRNAs in Korean
patients with myelodysplastic syndrome


Introduction: MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are short non-coding RNAs that are
involved in post-transcriptional regulation of gene expression, which may
result in translational inhibition or destabilization of the target mRNA.
Various alterations of miRNA expression have been reported in
myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS). We aimed to investigate the unique
patterns and prognostic significance of miRNA expression in Korean
patients with MDS.Materials and Methods: Bone marrow mononuclear cells
were collected from 10 healthy controls and 26 MDS patients, and miRNAs
were isolated using a miRNeasy isolation kit (Qiagen) according to the
manufacturer's instructions. Quantitative real-time PCR for selected
miRNAs including miR-21, miR-124a, miR-126, miR-146b, miR-155, miR-200c,
miR-342-5p, miR-708, and Let-7a was performed using a miScript SYBR green
PCR kit (Qiagen). RNU6 was used to normalize the miRNA values of all RNA
samples. Calculations were made using the comparative Ct (2-Ct )
method.Results: Eleven patients with early stage MDS (2 RA, 1 RARS, and 8
RCMD), 10 patients with advanced MDS (3 RAEB-1 and 7 RAEB-2), 4 patients
with unknown subtype of MDS, and 1 patient with chronic myelomonocytic
leukemia were included in this study. Median age was 58.5 years (range,
13-76). MiR-124a, miR-155, miR-200c, miR-342-5p, and let-7a were
significantly under-expressed in MDS patients compared to healthy
controls. Levels of miR-124, miR-146b, and miR-155 transcripts were
significantly lower in patients with early stage MDS than in those with
advanced MDS. Secondary MDS patients (n=6) showed significantly
under-expressed MiR-146b and miR-342-5p transcript levels than de novo
MDS patients (n=19) (p=0.009 and p=0.043, respectively). We failed to
find statistically significant survival differences according to the
expression levels of miRNAs, although high expression of miR-124,
miR-126, miR-155 and low expression of miR-342-5p tended to be associated
with poor overall survival and leukemia free survival.Conclusion: We
first report under-expression of miR-200c in MDS patients. Expression of
miRNAs appears to be different according to the stage of MDS. Further
investigations are needed to evaluate genetic functions and prognostic
significances of miRNAs in MDS.

