Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TNFR1 is indispensable in the development of spontaneous lung
squamous cell carcinomas


We recently reported that kinase-dead IKK knockin mice, in which an ATP
binding site of IKK, Lys 44 was replaced by alanine (IkkKA/KA), develop
spontaneous lung SCCs that were closely associated with lung inflammatory
microenvironment. This mouse model resembles human lung SCCs, sheds light
on the mechanisms underlying lung malignancy development, and identifies
targets for therapy of lung SCCs (Xiao et al. Cancer Cell 23(4):527-40,
2013). To further elucidate what and how the inflammatory stimuli
contribute to the tumorigenesis, we generated bitransgenic mice harboring
IkkKA/KA and tnfrsf1-/- (KALTFR). It was identified that the KALTFR mice
display lung tumor-free even the lung inflammations are still severe,
while almost all of the littermate IkkKA/KA mice developed lung SCCs.
Interestingly, we found a noticeably increased TNFR1 expression in the
lung SCCs of IkkKA/KA mice compared to normal lung tissues. It has also
been detected that the TNFR1 expressions are significantly higher in both
transcript and protein levels in human lung SCCs with the compare to
their adjacent tissues. These findings indicate that TNFR1 may play a
crucial role in the development of lung SCC in either IkkKA/KA mice or
humans. Further investigation demonstrated that TNFR1 is a critical
factor to regulate nuclear transcriptional factors and oncogenes
including C-Myc, through one bromodomain (BRD) proteins- containing
complex. These findings broaden our understanding about how inflammatory
microenvironment contributes to tumorigenesis through TNF-TNFRs
engagements.

