Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Addition of biologic therapy to traditional disease-modifying
anti-inflammatory drugs and the risk of cancer in patients with
rheumatoid arthritis: a nationwide cohort study


Background: Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is associated with certain types of
cancer. The add-on effect of biologics on cancer occurrence in long-term
RA remains unknown. We aimed to investigate the relative risk of cancer
development among RA patients combining biologics with traditional
disease-modifying anti-rheumatic drugs (DMARDs).Methods: We conducted a
nationwide cohort study between March 2003 and December 2010 using the
Taiwan National Health Insurance Research Database (NHIRD). A total of
42,263 patients with RA who received long term DMARDs were identified.
The risk of newly diagnosed cancer was compared between patients taking
biologics in addition to DMARDs (biologics cohort, N=4,119) and four-fold
propensity score-matched control patients taking nonbiologic DMARDs only
(biologics-naive cohort, N=16,476). Cumulative incidences and hazard
ratios (HR) were calculated after adjusting for competing mortality.
Multivariate analyses were performed using Cox proportional hazards
model.Results: The incidence rates of cancer among biologics and
biologics-naive cohorts were 2.09 (95% confidence interval [CI]
1.31-2.86) and 3.25 (95% CI 2.76-3.74) per 1000 person-years,
respectively (p=0.03). On modified Cox proportional hazards analysis, the
risk of cancer was significantly reduced in subjects in biologics cohort
(adjusted HR 0.61, 95% CI 0.40-0.94, p=0.025) in comparison with subjects
in biologics-naive cohort, after adjusting for age, gender, disease
duration, major co-morbidities, and prior use of DMARDs and
corticosteroids. The effect of biologics was consistent across all
multivariate stratified analyses; and the association between biologics
use and cancer risk was independent of dosage of concomitant use of
non-biological DMARDs.Conclusion: RA patients taking biologics plus long
term traditional DMARDs therapy are associated with a lower risk of
cancer when compared with RA patients taking traditional DMARDs alone.

