Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A p53 activating mutation drives metastatic high-grade serous
ovarian cancer arising from the ovary in mice


The tumor suppressor p53 is the most frequently mutated gene in
high-grade serous ovarian cancer, or high-grade serous carcinoma (HGSC)
the most common and deadliest ovarian cancer. Yet it remains unknown
whether p53 mutation can drive HGSC. To address this, we have
incorporated a p53 activating mutation, p53R172H, into conditional
Dicer-Pten double-knockout (DKO) mice, generating triple-mutant (TKO)
mice. Like DKO mice, these TKO mice develop fallopian-tube-originated
HGSCs, aggressively metastasizing inside the abdominal cavity, inducing
ascites, and killing the mice. Then, unlike DKO mice, when both fallopian
tubes are surgically removed from TKO mice, TKO ovaries alone are capable
of developing HGSCs, which also metastasize to the abdominal cavity,
including the omentum, diaphragm, and mesentery. This finding indicates
that p53 mutation can drive HGSC in the ovary. To further examine the
ability of p53 mutation to drive ovarian HGSC, we have generated
p53R172H-Pten double-mutant mice (DMu), a control line for TKO mice.
Intriguingly, 30% of the DMu mice (12/40 mice) develop metastatic HGSCs
in the ovary, which spread to the abdominal cavity before killing the
mice, just like TKO mice with fallopian tubes removed. Unlike TKO and DKO
mice, however, DMu mice show no sign of tumor in the fallopian tube. Our
new mouse models of ovarian cancer therefore show that p53 mutation
indeed can initiate and drive metastatic HGSCs arising from the ovary.
Clinically, our study suggests that besides the fallopian tube, the ovary
can serve as a source of high-grade serous ovarian cancer. (Grant
support: Ovarian Cancer Research Fund (OCRF); Marsha Rivkin Ovarian
Cancer Challenge Grant; F32 NCI National Research Service Award (NRSA);
K99/R00 NCI Pathway to Independence Award)

