Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Coffee consumption and the risk of colorectal cancer


Coffee contains several bioactive components that are relevant to colon
physiology, and coffee consumption has been proposed as a protective
factor for colorectal cancer. However, epidemiologic evidence of an
association between coffee consumption and the risk of colorectal cancer
(CRC) remains inconclusive. We investigated the association between
coffee drinking and risk of CRC in 4,933 cases and 3,539 controls from
the Molecular Epidemiology of Colorectal Cancer (MECC) study, a
population-based case-control study of incident CRC in a
geographically-defined area of northern Israel. We also examined the
association by type of coffee (decaffeinated, boiled, espresso, instant,
and filtered), by ethnic sub-group (Ashkenazi Jews, Sephardi Jews, and
Arabs), and by cancer site (colon and rectum). Coffee consumption data
was collected by interview using a validated, semi-quantitative food
frequency questionnaire. Logistic regression analysis adjusted for known
risk factors including sex, age, ethnicity, vegetable consumption, sports
participation, statin use, and daily low-dose aspirin use in all
multivariable models. Mean coffee consumption in servings per day was 1.5
for Ashkenazi Jews, 1.9 for Sephardi Jews, 3.1 for Arabs, and 1.8
overall. Instant coffee was most common among Ashkenazi and Sephardi
Jewish coffee-drinkers, and boiled coffee was most common among Arabs.
Coffee consumption was associated with a 31% relative reduction in odds
of CRC [OR (drinkers of any amount versus non-drinkers): 0.69; 95% CI:
0.60-0.81; P = 2.2E-06] in a multivariable adjusted model. The inverse
association was also observed upon study of decaffeinated coffee
consumption in isolation (OR: 0.74; 95% CI: 0.61-0.89; P = 1.7E-03). A
strong, inverse dose-response relationship between coffee drinking and
risk of CRC was evident. Compared with drinkers of Coffee contains
several bioactive components that are relevant to colon physiology, and
coffee consumption has been proposed as a protective factor for
colorectal cancer. However, epidemiologic evidence of an association
between coffee consumption and the risk of colorectal cancer (CRC)
remains inconclusive. We investigated the association between coffee
drinking and risk of CRC in 4,933 cases and 3,539 controls from the
Molecular Epidemiology of Colorectal Cancer (MECC) study, a
population-based case-control study of incident CRC in a
geographically-defined area of northern Israel. We also examined the
association by type of coffee (decaffeinated, boiled, espresso, instant,
and filtered), by ethnic sub-group (Ashkenazi Jews, Sephardi Jews, and
Arabs), and by cancer site (colon and rectum). Coffee consumption data
was collected by interview using a validated, semi-quantitative food
frequency questionnaire. Logistic regression analysis adjusted for known
risk factors including sex, age, ethnicity, vegetable consumption, sports
participation, statin use, and daily low-dose aspirin use in all
multivariable models. Mean coffee consumption in servings per day was 1.5
for Ashkenazi Jews, 1.9 for Sephardi Jews, 3.1 for Arabs, and 1.8
overall. Instant coffee was most common among Ashkenazi and Sephardi
Jewish coffee-drinkers, and boiled coffee was most common among Arabs.
Coffee consumption was associated with a 31% relative reduction in odds
of CRC [OR (drinkers of any amount versus non-drinkers): 0.69; 95% CI:
0.60-0.81; P = 2.2E-06] in a multivariable adjusted model. The inverse
association was also observed upon study of decaffeinated coffee
consumption in isolation (OR: 0.74; 95% CI: 0.61-0.89; P = 1.7E-03). A
strong, inverse dose-response relationship between coffee drinking and
risk of CRC was evident. Compared with drinkers of <1 serving/day,
drinkers of 1 to 2.5 servings/day (OR: 0.41; 95% CI: 0.35-0.49; P 2.5
servings/day (OR: 0.41; 95% CI: 0.35-0.49; P < 2E-16), had statistically
significant lower odds of developing CRC. Findings were consistent in all
ethnic groups and were strongly statistically significant in the largest
ethnic subgroups in our study (Ashkenazi and Sephardi Jews). Also, the
statistically significant protective effect was observed in both colon
and rectal cancers. This investigation represents the case-control study
with the largest number of incident colorectal cancers to examine the
association between coffee consumption and risk of CRC. Overall, we
demonstrated that even a modest level of consumption, regardless of
caffeine status, is associated with a meaningful reduction in the risk of
colorectal cancer.

