Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BRAF mutation testing in cell-free DNA from plasma of patients
with advanced cancers using a novel, rapid, automated molecular
diagnostics prototype platform (IdyllaTM)


Background: Cell-free (cf) DNA from the plasma of cancer patients offers
an easily obtainable, low-risk, inexpensive and repeatedly applicable
source of biologic material for mutation analysis of druggable targets
and monitoring molecular changes in tumor(s) during and after therapeutic
interventions. Novel, fast, and accurate diagnostic systems are needed
for further development of plasma cfDNA testing in personalized
therapy.Methods: cfDNA from plasma samples of patients with advanced
cancers who progressed on systemic therapy was purified and 100 ng was
used for testing for V600 BRAF mutations using the prototype molecular
diagnostics (IdyllaTM) fully integrated real-time PCR-based prototype
platform (Biocartis, Mechelen, Belgium) with a quick turnaround time
(Background: Cell-free (cf) DNA from the plasma of cancer patients offers
an easily obtainable, low-risk, inexpensive and repeatedly applicable
source of biologic material for mutation analysis of druggable targets
and monitoring molecular changes in tumor(s) during and after therapeutic
interventions. Novel, fast, and accurate diagnostic systems are needed
for further development of plasma cfDNA testing in personalized
therapy.Methods: cfDNA from plasma samples of patients with advanced
cancers who progressed on systemic therapy was purified and 100 ng was
used for testing for V600 BRAF mutations using the prototype molecular
diagnostics (IdyllaTM) fully integrated real-time PCR-based prototype
platform (Biocartis, Mechelen, Belgium) with a quick turnaround time (<
90 minutes). The IdyllaTM platform and the BRAF V600 mutation prototype
assay were used for research purposes only. Results were compared to
mutation analysis of archival primary or metastatic tumor tissue from a
CLIA-certified laboratory if available.Results: cfDNA was extracted from
plasma samples of 81 patients with advanced cancers (colorectal, n=37;
melanoma, n=16; non-small cell lung, n=10; breast, n=4, Erdheim-Chester
histiocytosis, n=3; appendiceal, n=3; other cancers, n=8). BRAF mutations
were detected in 31% (25/81) of plasma samples and in 42% (30/72) of
available archival tumor samples, resulting in concordance for patients
who had plasma and tissue tested (N=72) in 90% (65/72) of cases
(kappa=0.80, 95% confidence interval 0.65- 0.94). In 6 of 7 discrepant
cases identical plasma cfDNA samples were tested using an alternative
cfDNA BRAF mutation PCR-based method (BEAMing, Sysmex Inostics,
Baltimore, MD), which yielded 100% agreement. Longitudinally collected
plasma samples were available in 3 patients (appendiceal, melanoma and
papillary thyroid cancer) treated with BRAF targeting combinations and
changes in the amount of BRAF-mutant cfDNA corresponded with changes in
tumor markers or subsequent responses to therapy visualized via
imaging.Conclusions: Detecting V600 BRAF mutations in cfDNA from plasma
using the IdyllaTM platform is a fast and noninvasive alternative to
mutation testing of tumor tissue with an acceptable level of concordance
and sensitivity, and should be investigated further for testing and
monitoring of BRAF mutation status in patients with cancer.

