Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Suppression of breast cancer cell migration by novel inhibitors
that target transient receptor potential-melastatin-like 7 (Trpm7) kinase
activity


TRPM7 (transient receptor potential melastatin 7) encodes a calcium
permeable non-selective cation channel implicated in cell adhesion and
magnesium homoeostasis. The TRPM7 gene encodes for a protein kinase whose
activity is linked to the control of actomyosin contractility. TRPM7
mediates adhesion and migration of MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells and
recently has been reported to promote breast tumor cell metastasis. The
lack of cell-permeable pharmacological inhibitors of the kinase domain
represents a barrier to fully understanding kinase function. Herein, we
describe the discovery of several compounds that target TRPM7 kinase
activity and which were shown to decrease the binding of Myosin IIB to
TRPM7 in HEK293 cells and MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells transfected with
pCMV6-TRPM7. Interestingly, two of the inhibitors potentially inhibited
MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells migration that have been reported to be
regulated by TRPM7 kinase activity. Finally, magnesium starvation, which
promotes TRPM7 kinase activity, induces phosphorylation of eEF2.
Treatment of cells with several of the compounds decreased eEF2
phosphorylation under conditions of magnesium starvation, consistent with
the notion that they inhibit TRPM7 kinase activity in cells.

