Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SerpinA1 promotes gastric cancer progression through regulation of
snail


In the previous study, we reported that serpin peptidase inhibitor clade
A member 1 (serpinA1) were upregulated in snail overexpressing gastric
cancer. Although the effect of serpinA1 has been studied in several
cancers, there is no report that the expression of serpinA1 correlates
with snail. In this study, we examined the relation between serpinA1 and
snail, and the role of serpinA1 in gastric cancer. Overexpression of
snail resulted in upregulation of serpinA1 in gastric cancer cells, AGS
and MKN45 cells. Meanwhile, knockdown of snail inhibited serpinA1
expression. ChIP analysis showed that snail bind to serpinA1 promoter.
Overexpression of snail increased snail recruitment to the serpinA1
promoter. Overexpression of serpinA1 increased the invasion and migration
of gastric cancer cells, while knockdown of serpinA1 decreased invasion
and migration. In addition, we validated the clinicopathological and
prognostic significance of serpinA1 expression in 400 gastric cancer
patients using immunohistochemistry analysis. SerpinA1 was observed in
the cytoplasm of the tumor cells and stroma. Overexpression of serpinA1
was significantly associated with increased tumor size (P = 0.03), tumor
progression (advanced T stage; P In the previous study, we reported that
serpin peptidase inhibitor clade A member 1 (serpinA1) were upregulated
in snail overexpressing gastric cancer. Although the effect of serpinA1
has been studied in several cancers, there is no report that the
expression of serpinA1 correlates with snail. In this study, we examined
the relation between serpinA1 and snail, and the role of serpinA1 in
gastric cancer. Overexpression of snail resulted in upregulation of
serpinA1 in gastric cancer cells, AGS and MKN45 cells. Meanwhile,
knockdown of snail inhibited serpinA1 expression. ChIP analysis showed
that snail bind to serpinA1 promoter. Overexpression of snail increased
snail recruitment to the serpinA1 promoter. Overexpression of serpinA1
increased the invasion and migration of gastric cancer cells, while
knockdown of serpinA1 decreased invasion and migration. In addition, we
validated the clinicopathological and prognostic significance of serpinA1
expression in 400 gastric cancer patients using immunohistochemistry
analysis. SerpinA1 was observed in the cytoplasm of the tumor cells and
stroma. Overexpression of serpinA1 was significantly associated with
increased tumor size (P = 0.03), tumor progression (advanced T stage; P <
0.0001), perineural invasion (P In the previous study, we reported that
serpin peptidase inhibitor clade A member 1 (serpinA1) were upregulated
in snail overexpressing gastric cancer. Although the effect of serpinA1
has been studied in several cancers, there is no report that the
expression of serpinA1 correlates with snail. In this study, we examined
the relation between serpinA1 and snail, and the role of serpinA1 in
gastric cancer. Overexpression of snail resulted in upregulation of
serpinA1 in gastric cancer cells, AGS and MKN45 cells. Meanwhile,
knockdown of snail inhibited serpinA1 expression. ChIP analysis showed
that snail bind to serpinA1 promoter. Overexpression of snail increased
snail recruitment to the serpinA1 promoter. Overexpression of serpinA1
increased the invasion and migration of gastric cancer cells, while
knockdown of serpinA1 decreased invasion and migration. In addition, we
validated the clinicopathological and prognostic significance of serpinA1
expression in 400 gastric cancer patients using immunohistochemistry
analysis. SerpinA1 was observed in the cytoplasm of the tumor cells and
stroma. Overexpression of serpinA1 was significantly associated with
increased tumor size (P = 0.03), tumor progression (advanced T stage; P <
0.0001), perineural invasion (P < 0.0001), lymphovascular invasion (P In
the previous study, we reported that serpin peptidase inhibitor clade A
member 1 (serpinA1) were upregulated in snail overexpressing gastric
cancer. Although the effect of serpinA1 has been studied in several
cancers, there is no report that the expression of serpinA1 correlates
with snail. In this study, we examined the relation between serpinA1 and
snail, and the role of serpinA1 in gastric cancer. Overexpression of
snail resulted in upregulation of serpinA1 in gastric cancer cells, AGS
and MKN45 cells. Meanwhile, knockdown of snail inhibited serpinA1
expression. ChIP analysis showed that snail bind to serpinA1 promoter.
Overexpression of snail increased snail recruitment to the serpinA1
promoter. Overexpression of serpinA1 increased the invasion and migration
of gastric cancer cells, while knockdown of serpinA1 decreased invasion
and migration. In addition, we validated the clinicopathological and
prognostic significance of serpinA1 expression in 400 gastric cancer
patients using immunohistochemistry analysis. SerpinA1 was observed in
the cytoplasm of the tumor cells and stroma. Overexpression of serpinA1
was significantly associated with increased tumor size (P = 0.03), tumor
progression (advanced T stage; P < 0.0001), perineural invasion (P <
0.0001), lymphovascular invasion (P < 0.0001), lymph node metastases (P
In the previous study, we reported that serpin peptidase inhibitor clade
A member 1 (serpinA1) were upregulated in snail overexpressing gastric
cancer. Although the effect of serpinA1 has been studied in several
cancers, there is no report that the expression of serpinA1 correlates
with snail. In this study, we examined the relation between serpinA1 and
snail, and the role of serpinA1 in gastric cancer. Overexpression of
snail resulted in upregulation of serpinA1 in gastric cancer cells, AGS
and MKN45 cells. Meanwhile, knockdown of snail inhibited serpinA1
expression. ChIP analysis showed that snail bind to serpinA1 promoter.
Overexpression of snail increased snail recruitment to the serpinA1
promoter. Overexpression of serpinA1 increased the invasion and migration
of gastric cancer cells, while knockdown of serpinA1 decreased invasion
and migration. In addition, we validated the clinicopathological and
prognostic significance of serpinA1 expression in 400 gastric cancer
patients using immunohistochemistry analysis. SerpinA1 was observed in
the cytoplasm of the tumor cells and stroma. Overexpression of serpinA1
was significantly associated with increased tumor size (P = 0.03), tumor
progression (advanced T stage; P < 0.0001), perineural invasion (P <
0.0001), lymphovascular invasion (P < 0.0001), lymph node metastases (P <
0.0001) and shorter survival (P = 0.001). In conclusion, serpinA1 induce
the invasion and migration of gastric cancer cells and the expression of
serpinA1 is associated with the progression of gastric cancer. These
results may provide a potential target to prevent gastric cancer invasion
and metastasis.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

