Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tamoxifen fails to induce regression of mammary preneoplasia in
mice lacking either one or two intact BRCA1 genes in combination with p53
haploinsufficiency but without evidence of in vivo agonist activity


Background: Reduced BRCA1 and/or p53 function in mammary tissue is
associated with tamoxifen resistance in vivo and in vitro. A shift
towards tamoxifen agonist activity with reduced BRCA1 function is found
in vitro. The goal of this study was to identify which combinations of
disrupted Brca1 and p53 gene(s) result in preneoplasia and test for
tamoxifen resistance and activity in vivo. Methods: Brca1 homozygous and
heterozygous conditional exon 11 knockout and wildtype mice all carrying
MMTV-Cre on a p53 wildtype or haploinsufficient background received a 25
mg 60-day constant release tamoxifen pellet (Innovative Research of
America, Sarasota, FL) or sham surgery at age 4m, euthanasia/necropsy at
age 6m and mammary glands taken for whole mount, histological and western
blot (pERK / ERK and pHistone/Histone ratios, cleaved PARP). Cohorts of
untreated Brca1f11/WT11/MMTV-Cre/p53+/- and Brca1f11/f11/MMTV-Cre/p53+/-
mice were observed to age 12m for mammary cancer. Fisher's exact and
Kruskal-Wallis tests were used for statistical analyses. Results:
Hyperplastic alveolar nodules at age 6m and cancer development at age 12m
were limited to Brca1f11/WT11/MMTV-Cre/p53+/- and
Brca1f11/f11/MMTV-Cre/p53+/- mice. Ductal hyperplasia was detected in
Brca1f11/WT11/MMTV-Cre/p53+/+, Brca1f11/f11/MMTV-Cre/p53+/+,
Brca1f11/WT11/MMTV-Cre/p53+/-, Brca1f11/f11/MMTV-Cre/p53+/- and
Brca1WT11/WT11/MMTV-Cre/p53+/- but not wildtype mice. Only
Brca1f11/WT11/MMTV-Cre/p53+/+ and Brca1f11/f11/MMTV-Cre/p53+/+ mice
showed significant reductions in ductal hyperplasia on tamoxifen. In
contrast prevalence of ductal hyperplasia and/or hyperplastic alveolar
nodules was not altered by tamoxifen in Brca1WT11/WT11/MMTV-Cre/p53+/-,
Brca1f11/WT11/MMTV-Cre/p53+/- or Brca1f11/f11/MMTV-Cre/p53+/- mice. No
evidence of tamoxifen activity was found as proliferation measures were
either reduced (percentage mammary epithelial cells with
nuclear-localized PCNA) or unchanged (pERK / ERK and pHistone/Histone
ratios) with tamoxifen treatment in all genotypes. Cleaved PARP was
detected in tamoxifen-treated but not control mice. Conclusions: p53
haploinsufficiency in combination with loss of either one or two copies
of intact Brca1 was sufficient to induce hyperplastic alveolar nodules
and cancer. Tamoxifen resistance was found in all p53 haploinsufficient
mice. There was no indication of a shift towards tamoxifen agonist
activity, that is, no increase in expression of any proliferative marker
with Brca1 deficiency, and apoptosis was activated. Alternative pathways
for tamoxifen resistance involving p53 may be responsible for the
tamoxifen resistance observed in Brca1 deficient preneoplastic mammary
epithelial cells.

