Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RNAi-mediated depletion of histone deacetylases highlights the
potential for isoform-specific inhibitors in B-cell lymphoma and acute
myeloid leukemia


Introduction: Histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors are a novel class of
drugs with demonstrated activity in hematological malignancies.
Vorinostat and romidepsin are FDA approved for treatment of cutaneous
T-cell lymphoma and inhibit HDACs1, 2, 3 and 6 or HDAC1, 2 and 3,
respectively. It is unknown which HDACs are most important for the
survival of hematological tumors, however a targeted approach using
HDAC-selective inhibitors could improve efficacy and reduce toxicity in
the clinic. Here we utilised RNAi technology and an HDAC-specific
inhibitor to investigate whether depletion/inhibition of individual or
multiple HDACs could phenocopy the effects of pan-HDACi in B-cell
lymphoma and acute myeloid leukemia (AML). Methods: HDACs were
individually knocked down in murine E-Myc (HDACs1, 2, 3, 6) and AML
(MLL-AF9+NrasG12D; HDACs 1-11) cells using constitutive (pLMS/pLMN) or
Tetracycline-inducible (pTRMPVIN) vectors in vitro and in vivo. E-Myc
cells were treated with HDAC3-specific inhibitor RGFP966. Cell
proliferation, apoptosis, cell cycle, protein expression and gene
knockdown were assessed by FACS, western blot and qRT-PCR. Global gene
expression was assessed using RNAseq technology.Results: Loss of HDACs1,
2 or 6 had no long term effects on cell growth, while E-Myc and AML cells
depleted of HDAC3 were reproducibly lost from culture in vitro and in
vivo. This phenotype was not prevented by Bcl-2 over-expression, caspase
inhibition or knockout of p21 in E-Myc but appeared dependent on Trp53
expression, including specific mutants of Trp53. HDAC3 knockdown altered
the transcription of Introduction: Histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors
are a novel class of drugs with demonstrated activity in hematological
malignancies. Vorinostat and romidepsin are FDA approved for treatment of
cutaneous T-cell lymphoma and inhibit HDACs1, 2, 3 and 6 or HDAC1, 2 and
3, respectively. It is unknown which HDACs are most important for the
survival of hematological tumors, however a targeted approach using
HDAC-selective inhibitors could improve efficacy and reduce toxicity in
the clinic. Here we utilised RNAi technology and an HDAC-specific
inhibitor to investigate whether depletion/inhibition of individual or
multiple HDACs could phenocopy the effects of pan-HDACi in B-cell
lymphoma and acute myeloid leukemia (AML). Methods: HDACs were
individually knocked down in murine E-Myc (HDACs1, 2, 3, 6) and AML
(MLL-AF9+NrasG12D; HDACs 1-11) cells using constitutive (pLMS/pLMN) or
Tetracycline-inducible (pTRMPVIN) vectors in vitro and in vivo. E-Myc
cells were treated with HDAC3-specific inhibitor RGFP966. Cell
proliferation, apoptosis, cell cycle, protein expression and gene
knockdown were assessed by FACS, western blot and qRT-PCR. Global gene
expression was assessed using RNAseq technology.Results: Loss of HDACs1,
2 or 6 had no long term effects on cell growth, while E-Myc and AML cells
depleted of HDAC3 were reproducibly lost from culture in vitro and in
vivo. This phenotype was not prevented by Bcl-2 over-expression, caspase
inhibition or knockout of p21 in E-Myc but appeared dependent on Trp53
expression, including specific mutants of Trp53. HDAC3 knockdown altered
the transcription of <0.05% genes in E-Myc cells. Importantly,
HDAC3-specific inhibitor RGFP966 reduced the growth rate of E-Myc cells
at low micromolar concentrations (0.5-1M) while inducing apoptosis above
2M, also partially dependent on Trp53 status. Conclusions: Our results
have revealed exquisite sensitivities of murine B cell lymphoma and AML
cells to depletion of HDAC3 in vitro and in vivo. This strongly suggests
that HDAC3-specific inhibitors could prove useful for the treatment of
various hematological malignancies. Further work investigating the
molecular events underpinning the loss of proliferation induced by HDAC3
knockdown/inhibition and the effects of depleting multiple HDACs are
currently underway. Ultimately, we aim to use this technology to discover
efficacious HDACi with the best toxicity profile for the treatment of
hematological malignancies.

