Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNAs miR-503 and -182 regulate FBXW7 contributing to the
malignant transformation to colon adenocarcinoma


Progression from adenoma to colon cancer is a multi-step process and the
role of microRNAs in this transformation is not completely understood.We
used both in vitro and in vivo approaches to demonstrate the role of
miRNAs in the transformation of adenoma to adenocarcinoma. Reporter
assays were used to show the direct interaction of miRNAs to target gene.
A Tet-inducible TripZ system and miRzips constructs were used in the in
vitro function and xenograft studies. Kaplan-Meier survival curves and
Cox regression were used to analyze the survival data in colon cancer
patients.Here, we show that the combination of miR-503 and miR-182
contributes to the transformation of colon adenoma to adenocarcinoma by
cooperatively regulating the tumor suppressor gene, FBXW7. We found that
miR-182 was upregulated in both colon adenoma and adenocarcinoma, whereas
miR-503 was upregulated only in adenocarcinoma, indicating a potential
hierarchical and stepwise expression of these miRNAs in the regulation of
FBXW7. Furthermore, we showed that colon adenoma derived non-tumorigenic
AAC1 cells were transformative and tumorigenic in mice when expressing
Tet-inducible miR-503. Finally, the combination of miR-503 and miR-182
transcript levels was predictive of poor outcome in colon cancer
patients. We conclude that a step-wise expression of miR-182 and miR-503
in benign adenoma synergistically regulates the driver gene FBXW7, thus
contributing to the progression of colon adenoma to adenocarcinoma.

