Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Desmoplasia in primary tumors and metastatic lesions of pancreatic
cancer


Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is a major cause of
cancer-related death in the United States. PDAC is characterized by high
levels of fibrosis, a feature termed desmoplasia. Desmoplasia is thought
to hamper the efficacy of therapeutics treating PDAC. Agents targeting
components of the tumor stroma have shown some enhancement of first-line
therapeutics targeting tumor cells. As metastatic burden is one of the
primary causes for mortality in PDAC, the question remains of whether
stromal targeting therapeutics will benefit patients with late stage,
metastatic disease. We sought to address this question by assessing the
extent of desmoplasia in both primary PDAC tumors and metastatic lesions
of pancreatic origin. Patient tissue staining using a pentachrome or
standard immunohistochemical technique demonstrates that extracellular
matrix components, such as collagen, are found in high levels in both
primary tumors and metastatic lesions. The difference in the level of
desmoplasia in primary tumors and metastatic lesions was statistically
insignificant. We also observed a significant correlation between patient
survival and extracellular matrix deposition. Kaplan-meier curves for
collagen I showed median survival of 527 days in low collagen patients,
and 176.5 in high level patients. Low level hyaluronan patients displayed
median survival times of 2107 days as compared to 385 days in high level
patients. Our results indicate that both primary tumors and metastases of
PDAC have highly fibrotic stroma. Thus, stromal targeting agents may
benefit PDAC patients, even those with metastatic disease.

