Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Continuing expression of SHP2E76K is required to maintain lung
tumors induced by the active SHP2E76K mutant in transgenic mice


The SHP2 protein tyrosine phosphatase is activated by growth factor
receptor oncogenes or by gain-of-function (GOF) missense mutations such
as SHP2E76K in human cancer. To study the oncogenic function of GOF SHP2
mutants and the dependency of SHP2 mutant-induced tumors, we established
transgenic mice containing the tetO-SHP2E76K transgene. tetO-SHP2E76K
mice were bred to CCSP-rtTA mice to direct expression of the transgene in
type II pneumocytes to assess the role of the SHP2 mutant in lung
adenocarcinoma. When the CCSP-rtTA/tetO-SHP2E76K bitransgenic mice were
induced with doxycycline (dox), they developed papillary adenomas that
progressed to adenocarcinoma in 6-9 months. This result demonstrates the
oncogenic activity of the GOF SHP2 mutant in our mouse model of lung
adenocarcinoma. Consistent with previous studies in cultured cells, lung
tissues from dox-induced CCSP-rtTA/tetO-SHP2E76K have elevated pGab1,
pErk, pSrc and c-Myc. Using magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), we were
able to detect lung tumors in the dox-induced CCSP-rtTA/tetO-SHP2E76K
bitransgenic mice. To determine if the SHP2E76K-induced lung tumors
require continuing expression of the SHP2 mutant for tumor maintenance,
dox was withdrawn from the CCSP-rtTA/tetO-SHP2E76K mice after detection
of lung tumors by MRI. When these mice were examined again by MRI one
month after dox withdrawal, the lung tumors were no longer detectable.
Histological evaluation of lung tissues revealed residual hyperplastic
lesions as well as evidence of necrosis, while biochemical analysis
showed that pGab1, pErk, pSrc and Myc returned to basal levels. Thus,
discontinuation of SHP2E76K expression resulted in tumor regression.
These data indicate that continuing expression of SHP2E76K is required
for maintenance of the SHP2 mutant-induced lung tumors.

