Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Fine-mapping the HOXB region detects common variants tagging a
rare coding allele: Evidence for synthetic association in prostate cancer


The HOXB13 gene has been implicated in prostate cancer susceptibility. We
performed a high resolution fine-mapping analysis to comprehensively
evaluate the association between common genetic variation across the HOXB
genetic locus at 17q21 and PrCa risk. This involved genotyping 700 SNPs
using a custom Illumina iSelect array (iCOGS) followed by imputation of
3195 SNPs in 20,440 prostate cancer cases and 21,469 controls in The
PRACTICAL consortium. We identified a cluster of highly correlated common
variants situated within or closely upstream of HOXB13 that were
significantly associated with prostate cancer risk, described by
rs117576373, OR 1.30, P = 2.6210-14. Additional genotyping, conditional
regression and haplotype analyses indicated that the newly identified
common variants tag a rare, partially correlated coding variant in the
HOXB13 gene, G84E, rs138213197, which has been identified recently as a
moderate penetrance prostate cancer susceptibility allele. The potential
for GWAS associations detected through common SNPs to be driven by rare
causal variants with higher relative risks has long been proposed;
however, to our knowledge this is the first experimental evidence for
this phenomenon of synthetic association contributing to cancer
susceptibility.

