Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Modulation of breast cancer stem cell marker CD44 by
all-trans-retinoic acid (ATRA)


Breast cancer stem cells (BCSCs), often characterized by cell surface
marker expression as being CD44+/CD24- or CD44+/CD24low phenotypes,
constitute a subpopulation of tumor cells that are highly tumorigenic.
With respect to CD44, it has been reported that its expression is
influenced by tumor microenvironment (TME) and that modulation of CD44 is
detrimental to breast cancer stem cell self-renewal and differentiation.
Interestingly, the factors that mitigate this effect are still unknown,
which has led us to hypothesize that factors within the TME, comprising
of differentiating agents, modulate the BCSC phenotype by regulating cell
surface markers. MDA-MB 231 showed presence of BCSCs as CD44 positive
cells were detected using immunofluorescence and Western blot analyses.
The expression of CD44 on MDA-MB 231 was not responsive to the
proinflammatory molecule IL-8 or estrogen. Both MDA-MB 231 and T47D were
responsive to IL-8 and estrogen with respect to migration and invasion as
examined in vitro using a Boyden Chamber assay suggesting that migration
and invasion was independent of CD44 expression. Alternatively IL-8
responsiveness may be on a select clonal population of CD44- cells. The
presence of differentiating agents within the TME has been explored. To
examine the effect of differentiating agents, we used the classical
all-trans-retinoic acid (ATRA) previously shown to promote tumor
regression. CD44 expression was highly responsive to ATRA as it was down
regulated following treatment. ATRA treatments also resulted in decreased
migration and invasion of breast cancer cells. Our results led us to
conclude that specific differentiating agents can affect breast cancer
stem cell activity by directly down regulating key adhesion cell surface
markers.

