Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cyclosporin-modulated intensified-dosage chemotherapy for saving
eyes with Group D intraocular retinoblastoma


PURPOSE: Cyclosporin (CSA) inhibits the multidrug resistance
P-glycoprotein. Since 2000, we tested increased carboplatin and increased
etoposide dosages in a cyclosporin-modulated
carboplatin-etoposide-vincristine protocol, followed by focal
laser/cryotherapy consolidation, to avoid elective radiation of newly
diagnosed retinoblastoma (RB) patients, since radiation increases the
secondary cancer risk in patients with heritable RB. We report the
results for International Classification Groups A, B, C and D intraocular
eyes (Ophthalmol Clinic North Am 2005; 18:41-53).METHOD: When Neupogen
support became available, we increased the predominantly myelotoxic
carboplatin to 28 mg/kg (from 18.7 mg/kg in our previous trial) and
etoposide to 12 mg/kg (from 7.7 mg/kg in our previous trial), but kept
the predominantly neurotoxic vincristine unchanged at 0.05 mg/kg,
modulated by the same cyclosporin schedule (33 mg/kg over 3 hours on each
of the 2 days per cycle). We treated 34 eyes in 23 patients: 2 A eyes, 11
B eyes, 6 C eyes and 15 D eyes. This report focuses only on the most
difficult to save Group D eyes, and compares results with a
non-cyclosporin carboplatin (26 mg/kg) and etoposide (10 mg/kg),
vincristine (0.05 mg/kg) regimen. Radiation or enucleation for recurrence
was considered failure.RESULTS: We report the long-term results of 15
Group D eyes in 10 patients, at mean followup of 11.1 years and median
followup of 10.8 years (range 5.7-13.4 years). Eye event-free rate was
53% for Group D (8/15) eyes. Seven D eyes failed, and 6 were enucleated
and 1 radiated. No child lost both eyes. Toxicity rates were acceptable
with 15.7% fever-and-neutropenia, 0.7% bacterial sepsis, 9.7% blood
transfusion and 27.6% platelet transfusion, and no long-term renotoxicity
or ototoxicity. In comparison, at mean followup of 4.5 years (range
0.4-9.8 years), in a previously reported (Pediatr Blood Cancer 2013;
60:688-693) non-cyclosporin regimen, the non-radiation eye event-free
rate was 47% for Group D (26/55) eyes, with 5 eyes enucleated, and 24
eyes radiated (19 irradiated eyes retained; 5 irradiated eyes required
enucleation).CONCLUSION: This cyclosporin-modulated intensified-dosage
protocol was well-tolerated, with a non-radiation eye salvage rate of
53%, and 60% overall if the one irradiated but retained eye was included,
in the most difficult to save Group D eyes. No child lost both eyes, and
most avoided radiation. This same protocol is being tested in a
multicenter trial.

