Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The genetic landscape of the childhood liver cancer hepatoblastoma


Hepatoblastoma (HB) is the most common malignant liver tumor in children
with a histology that resembles various stages of the developing liver.
To explore the genetic origin of this cancer, we performed whole-exome
sequencing of 8 tumors and matched germline tissue. In average, we
detected only three sequence variants per tumor, which is the lowest
mutation rate ever reported for any cancer. Mutations of -catenin
(CTNNB1) displayed the only recurrent event occurring in all tumors,
thereby underscoring the significance of activated Wnt signaling in the
genesis of HB. Gene ontology analysis revealed a predominance of
candidate genes involved in the regulation of gene expression and
transcription, including the nuclear factor (erythroid-derived 2)-like 2
(NFE2L2). Targeted resequencing of a cohort of 50 HB cases and cell lines
revealed NFE2L2 mutations in 10% of all tumors. Interestingly, all
mutations were located in or adjacent to the DLG and ETGE motifs of the
NFE2L2 protein that are known to be recognized from the KEAP1/CUL3
complex for proteasomal degradation. In line with this, cells transfected
with mutant NFE2L2 were insensitive to KEAP1-mediated downregulation of
NFE2L2 signaling. Clinically, overexpression of the NFE2L2 target gene
NQO1 in tumor tissues was significantly associated with high tumor stage,
metastasis, and poor outcome. These data suggest that activation of
NFE2L2-KEAP1 signaling through mutations in NFE2L2 is a prominent
characteristic in pediatric liver tumors, thereby advocating inhibition
of aberrant NFE2L2 activity as a therapeutic option, especially in
high-risk patients with advanced disease.

