Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of either LIN28A or ZCCHC11 (TUT4) provides distinct
effects on the expression of the let-7 miRNA family and tumor cell
proliferation


The LIN28A and LIN28B oncogenes are overexpressed in about 15% of human
cancers, and they selectively block the expression of the tumor
suppressor miRNA let-7 family, comprising twelve members (let-7a-1, -2,
-3, let-7b, let-7c, let-7d, let-7e, let-7f-1, -2, let-7g, let-7i and
miR-98) expressed from eight distinct loci. Upon binding to pre-let-7,
LIN28A recruits ZCCHC11, a 3 terminal uridylyl transferase, responsible
for let-7 poly-uridylation and subsequent targeting of poly-uridylated
let-7 miRNA for degradation.Expression of several let-7 miRNA family
members was measured using quantitative RT-PCR in LIN28-positive or
-negative tumor cell lines. In agreement with the inverse relationship
between LIN28A/B and let-7 expression already observed by others (1), the
lowest expression of let-7 miRNA was observed in LIN28A (e.g., IGROV-1
and T-47D) or LIN28B (e.g., NCI-H838, Hep-G2 and NCI-H1299) positive cell
lines, and the degree of let-7 miRNA repression in LIN28A or LIN28B
positive cell lines was particularly prominent for miR-98, let-7i and
let-7b family members.Although the proliferation of LIN28B-positive tumor
cell lines was sensitive to the 3 LIN28B siRNAs tested, the expression of
LIN28A was not required for the proliferation and survival of
LIN28A-expressing tumor cell lines, as demonstrated with one LIN28A siRNA
that displayed an efficient knock-down at low concentrations with minimal
impact on the proliferation of the T-47D tumor cell line. This LIN28A
siRNA was further demonstrated to significantly upregulate the expression
of several let-7 miRNAs such as miR-98 or let-7i, supporting an on-target
modulation of the pathway.We also tested several siRNAs against ZCCHC11
uridylyl transferase, and found that the growth of either LIN28A- or
LIN28B-positive tumor cell lines was inhibited by ZCCHC11 knockdown.
However, ZCCHC11 protein knock-down was not able to restore let-7 miRNA
expression, as it was seen for the LIN28A knock-down. These findings
suggest that the role of ZCCHC11 in tumor cell lines might be more
complex than just targeting poly-uridylated let-7 miRNA for
degradation.Overall, our results seems to indicate that in
LIN28A-positive tumor cell lines, LIN28A knock-down impacts let-7 miRNA
expression, but has not a significant antiproliferative effect, whereas
ZCCHC11 knock-down inhibits cell proliferation and this effect seems to
be disconnected from let-7 miRNAs modulation. This lack of apparent
effect on the expression of the miRNA let-7 expression might be related
to the dual role of uridylyl transferases recently described for group II
let-7 miRNAs, the mono- and poly-uridylation that leads to let-7
biogenesis and let-7 degradation respectively (2).1- Viswanathan SR,
Powers JT, Einhorn W, et al. Nat Genet 2009; 41: 843-848.2- Heo I, Ha M,
Lim J et al. Cell 2012; 151: 521-532.

