Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Her2 affects AR phosphorylation at serine 81 and suppresses cell
proliferation of breast cancer cell line MDA-MB-453


Breast cancer is a hormone-related carcinoma and the most commonly
diagnosed malignancy among women. Although human epidermal growth factor
receptor-2 (Her2), estrogen receptor (ER), and progesterone receptor (PR)
are the major diagnostic markers and therapeutic targets to breast
cancer, searching for additional molecular targets becomes an important
issue and one of the candidates is androgen receptor (AR). In recent
studies, AR expresses in 70% breast cancer cases and its expression
connects to low recurrence and high survival rate. Our previous study
shows that S81 phosphorylation is critical for AR protein stability and
modulated by Her2 in prostate cancer cells. In this study, we explore the
roles of AR and Her2 in proliferation of breast cancer cell line,
MDA-MB-453. The data show that AR which was activated by synthetic
androgen R1881 decreased proliferation of MDA-MB-453 cells. AR knockdown
increased both phosphorylation of Akt and ERK. Notably, AR activation
decreased protein level of Early growth response 1 (Egr1) and increased
protein level of cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p27, which suggests
the correlation of AR activation and proliferation suppression. Besides,
Her2 activation by Heregulin (HRG) decreased the levels of p-S81-AR. Her2
inhibition by small molecular inhibitor, Lapatinib, increased the levels
of p-S81-AR and p27. In summary, our results indicate that Her2 might
negatively regulate AR activation and contribute to suppressive
proliferation of MDA-MB 453 cells.

