Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nuclear receptor Nurr1 mediates cell proliferation and is involved
in a p53-microRNA-34 regulatory network


Nuclear receptor (NR) subfamily 4 member 2 (NR4A2), also known as Nurr1,
has been shown to have oncogenic properties, in which it can mediate cell
transformation, migration and drug resistance. However, the manner in
which Nurr1 mediates these cancer-promoting features is not completely
understood, but research implicates p53 as a potential intermediary. In
this study, we show that Nurr1 enhances the proliferative rate of
colorectal cancer cells. This increase in cell growth is accompanied by
an upregulation of cyclin D3, a putative target gene of Nurr1. To
understand how Nurr1 itself is regulated, we performed a reporter screen
to identify microRNA regulators of Nurr1's 3UTR. We identified miR-34c as
a putative regulator of Nurr1 and this direct regulation was confirmed
through site-directed mutagenesis of the predicted seed region. We next
determined if p53 activation could affect Nurr1 expression through
transcriptional activation of miR-34. Using Nutlin-3a to activate p53, we
found that Nurr1 expression decreased in a dose response manner. Lastly,
we sought to determine if Nurr1 could attenuate p53 activation. We found
that overexpression of Nurr1 in colorectal cancer cells caused an
attenuation of p53 transactivation of target genes following Nutlin-3a
treatment. Our results suggest that a p53-miR-34-Nurr1 regulatory network
exists, which would allow p53 to maintain Nurr1 in a suppressed state
through miR-34-mediated regulation and prevent tumorigenesis. In cases of
p53 mutation or Nurr1 overexpression, this network would be compromised,
allowing Nurr1 to enhance tumorigenesis or drug resistance.

