Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Systems pharmacogenomics approach identifies synergistic molecular
action of combined MTOR/HDAC inhibition on MYC


Multiple myeloma (MM) and murine plasmacytoma (PCT) are rare mature
B-lymphoid malignancies. Allelic variants of Mtor and Cdkn2a affect
susceptibility to PCT, and functional alterations in the PI3K/MTOR and
CYCLIN/CDK/CDKI/RB (RB) pathways are common to both malignancies. We
found that combining sirolimus (rapamycin), an inhibitor of mechanistic
target of rapamycin (MTOR), with entinostat (MS-275), a selective class I
histone deacytlase (HDAC) inhibitor, was synergistic in controlling 90%
of tested cell lines derived from B cell malignancies in vitro, effective
in limiting xenograft growth in vivo, and diminished cellular viability
in ex vivo patient samples. Similarly, the combination reduced tumor
burden and volume and increased survival in a long-term, in-vivo study in
C.B6-Bcl2l1 mice. To examine the core synergistic consequence of
combining entinostat with sirolimus, an integrated, systems-level
approach was used. Weighted gene co-expression analysis (WGCNA) of GEP
data from MM cells treated individually and in combination was used to
identify a distinct module of 126 genes cooperatively affected by both
drugs. Of the cooperatively affected genes, 37 were found to be
differentially expressed in MM and predictive of survival (pMultiple
myeloma (MM) and murine plasmacytoma (PCT) are rare mature B-lymphoid
malignancies. Allelic variants of Mtor and Cdkn2a affect susceptibility
to PCT, and functional alterations in the PI3K/MTOR and
CYCLIN/CDK/CDKI/RB (RB) pathways are common to both malignancies. We
found that combining sirolimus (rapamycin), an inhibitor of mechanistic
target of rapamycin (MTOR), with entinostat (MS-275), a selective class I
histone deacytlase (HDAC) inhibitor, was synergistic in controlling 90%
of tested cell lines derived from B cell malignancies in vitro, effective
in limiting xenograft growth in vivo, and diminished cellular viability
in ex vivo patient samples. Similarly, the combination reduced tumor
burden and volume and increased survival in a long-term, in-vivo study in
C.B6-Bcl2l1 mice. To examine the core synergistic consequence of
combining entinostat with sirolimus, an integrated, systems-level
approach was used. Weighted gene co-expression analysis (WGCNA) of GEP
data from MM cells treated individually and in combination was used to
identify a distinct module of 126 genes cooperatively affected by both
drugs. Of the cooperatively affected genes, 37 were found to be
differentially expressed in MM and predictive of survival (p<0.01).
Ingenuity upstream analysis identified MYC as a potential core regulator
of the synergistic transcriptional response. MYC protein, but not mRNA,
decreased in response to the drug combination when examined by Western
blot and NanoString analyses, respectively. Using tet-off, MYC-inducible
transformed P493 cells, the necessity of MYC for the drop in cellular
viability and response of the gene signature to the combination was
evident. Using the translational and proteasomal inhibitors,
cycloheximide and MG132, respectively, it was determined that MYC protein
half-life decreased with the combination, largely due to proteasomal
degradation. Utilizing a systems-level approach and biological filters,
an alternative route to MYC inhibition was determined. Biologically
relevant, this methodology can be used to define the molecular
underpinnings of drug combinations, applicable to many diseases.

