Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of a novel 3D tri-culture system in an in vitro
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) model


Introduction: Different molecular processes lead to metastatic spread and
the occurrence of tumor cell resistance to therapeutic interventions.
Among them, the stromal compartment of tumors plays a key role. We
describe the development of our 3D co-culture to a novel tri-culture
model, using non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cell lines in combination
with a lung fibroblast and two different endothelial cell lines in a
hanging drop technology.Methods: 96-well hanging drop microtiter plates
(InSphero AG, Zrich, Switzerland) were applied for the production of 3D
mono-, co- and tri-cultures including the human lung cancer cell lines
A549 or Colo699 alone or in combination with a human lung fibroblast cell
line (SV-80) and either the human umbilical vein endothelial cell line
(HUVEC) or the human lung microvascular endothelial cell line (HMVEC-L).
In addition, to conventional histology (H&E, PAS) tumor fibroblast
spheroid aggregation was displayed immunohistochemically (IHC) by protein
expression of e-cadherin, vimentin, Ki67, CD31 and -smooth muscle actin
(-SMA). Viability of each cell compartment of the microtissue was
determined by a modified AnnexinV/Propidium Iodide staining for flow
cytometry.Results: Endothelial cells aggregated either in small colonies
with Colo699 or as single cells mainly in the stromal compartment of A540
microtissues. Simultaneously an up-regulation of vimentin and a
downregulation of E-Cadherin was observed in co- and tri-cultures
compared to monocultures. Furthermore, Ki67 expression increased
significantly from mono- to co- and tri-cultures in both cancer cell
lines, indicating a high metabolic activity. In addition, a morphological
alteration of A549 tumor cells resembling signet ring cells was observed
for the first time in both endothelial tri-cultures with a significantly
increased glycoprotein expression demonstrated by a Periodic acid-Schiff
(PAS) stain.Conclusion: We demonstrate that our method is a promising
tool for the generation of multicellular tumor microtissues and reflects
in vivo conditions closer than traditional 2D cell culture. Furthermore,
it represents an appropriate alternative method to investigate
endothelial cell interactions with tumor and stromal cells.

