Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mef2C enhances 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3-induced monocytic
differentiation of human myeloid leukemia cells by regulating C/EBP
expression


Myogenic enhancer factors 2 (Mef2) are members of the family of MADS
(MCM1-agamous-deficiens-serum response factor)-box transcription factors
known to have multiple roles in morphogenesis of skeletal, cardiac and
smooth muscle cells. Recently, Mef2C was found to be also involved in
hematopoiesis. Bone marrow cells isolated from Mef2C knockout mice
demonstrated decreased monocytic differentiation in response to cytokine
stimulation, whereas constitutive expression of Mef2C promoted
monopoiesis. The above findings led us to examine the role of Mef2C in
1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 (1,25D)-induced monocytic differentiation. Human
acute myeloid leukemia (AML) cell lines, HL60 and U937, were used in this
study. We found that knockdown of Mef2C with small interfering RNA
(siRNA) significantly decreased the expression of the monocytic marker
CD14, as well as of nonspecific esterase (NSE), suggesting that Mef2C is
required for 1,25D-induced monocytic differentiation in AML cells. Our
laboratory has previously demonstrated that optimal monocytic
differentiation induced by 1,25D requires ERK5, and that ERK5 expression
shows positive correlation with Mef2C expression. Here we show that Mef2C
knockdown demonstrates similar inhibition of CD14 expression as ERK5
knockdown. CCAAT-enhancer-binding proteins (C/EBPs) and are two major
transcription factors that can directly regulate CD14 expression. Since
1,25D has been shown to increase both C/EBP and expression, and these two
transcription factors form heterodimers to enhance CD14 expression, we
used siRNA to knock down Mef2C and found decreased expression of
1,25D-induced C/EBP, but not C/EBP. Similar results were obtained using
an alternative method to titrate down Mef2C with dsDNA containing its DNA
binding sequence. We conclude that Mef2C is a functional downstream
target of ERK5, and that 1,25D-induced CD14 and NSE expression is
mediated through ERK5/Mef2C activation. (Supported by T32 CA134268
training grant and R01 CA044722 both from the National Cancer Institute,
NIH, and by the American Institute for Cancer Research grant 10A049)

