Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comparative studies on SIRT6 and SIRT7 interactomes: Implications
of important roles in cancer via associating with interacting partners


Sirtuins are NAD+-dependent deacetylases that regulate a range of
cellular processes. Although anti-aging effects of sirtuins have been
proposed, the proteins interacting with SIRT6 and SIRT7 remain elusive.
In the current study, we identified SIRT6- and SIRT7-interacting proteins
and compared their interactomes. Our data revealed 129 novel interacting
proteins for SIRT6 and 122 for SIRT7 while confirming 7 and 111
previously identified proteins for SIRT6 and SIRT7, respectively.
Comparison of the SIRT6 and SIRT7 interactomes under a same experimental
condition disclosed 111 shared proteins indicated that functional
associations. The functional networks of interactomes exhibited that the
binding partners are associated with important biological processes in
aging and age-related diseases including cancer. Two proteins, NPM1 and
NCL localized in the nucleus and interacted with SIRT6 and SIRT7. NPM1
was identified as a novel substrate and its acetylation level decreased
by both SIRT6 and SIRT7. Additionally, in senescent cells, the
acetylation level of NPM1 was increased in conjunction with decreased
level of SIRT6 and SIRT7, suggesting that acetylation of NPM1 is
regulated by SIRT6 and SIRT7 in the aging process. Our findings provide
insights on functional relationship between SIRT6 and SIRT7 as well as
their roles in DNA repair, chromatin assembly and cancer cell
proliferation, and aging.

