Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prognostic significance of miR-23b and miR-31 expression in
non-small-cell lung cancer


Background: Despite optimal and early surgical treatment of
non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC), many patients die of recurrent NSCLC.
In a recent study, we have undertaken an integrated genetic approach to
discover novel loci and miRNA that are deregulated in NSCLC. Here we
investigated the association between a panel of miRNA and
clinicopathological parameters of the tumor.Methods: To study association
between allelic imbalance/LOH and deregulation of miRNAs, we analyzed a
subset (8 pairs) of samples for miRNA expression and correlate the miRNA
expression profile with allelic imbalance data generated by SNP analysis.
Two types of analysis (The average expression ratio for each miRNA and
Mean tumor expression profile) were carried out to identify miRNA probes
which show differential expression between tumor and adjacent normal
tissues, and the findings were correlated with allelic imbalance area
determined by SNP array analysis. A set of 8 miRNA (miR-21, miR-23b,
miR-31, miR-126, miR-145, miR-150, miR-205, miR-296) were further
analyzed in two independent cohorts of samples to determine their
relationship with clinicopathological parameters including outcome. Each
of the samples of these cohorts has at least 10 years of follow-up.
Statistical analysis were performed the Mann-Whitney U-test, X2 test or
Fisher's exact test, where appropriate. Overall survival rates were
analyzed by the Kaplan-Meier and log-rank tests. The level of statistical
significance was set at P Background: Despite optimal and early surgical
treatment of non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC), many patients die of
recurrent NSCLC. In a recent study, we have undertaken an integrated
genetic approach to discover novel loci and miRNA that are deregulated in
NSCLC. Here we investigated the association between a panel of miRNA and
clinicopathological parameters of the tumor.Methods: To study association
between allelic imbalance/LOH and deregulation of miRNAs, we analyzed a
subset (8 pairs) of samples for miRNA expression and correlate the miRNA
expression profile with allelic imbalance data generated by SNP analysis.
Two types of analysis (The average expression ratio for each miRNA and
Mean tumor expression profile) were carried out to identify miRNA probes
which show differential expression between tumor and adjacent normal
tissues, and the findings were correlated with allelic imbalance area
determined by SNP array analysis. A set of 8 miRNA (miR-21, miR-23b,
miR-31, miR-126, miR-145, miR-150, miR-205, miR-296) were further
analyzed in two independent cohorts of samples to determine their
relationship with clinicopathological parameters including outcome. Each
of the samples of these cohorts has at least 10 years of follow-up.
Statistical analysis were performed the Mann-Whitney U-test, X2 test or
Fisher's exact test, where appropriate. Overall survival rates were
analyzed by the Kaplan-Meier and log-rank tests. The level of statistical
significance was set at P < 0.05. Functional studies were performed for
miR-23b.Results: We initially performed technical validation of 8 miRNAs
by quantitative RT-PCR (Q-RT-PCR). In general, miRNA expression pattern
determined by microarray and Q-RT-PCR are consistent. To determine cut
off values, we further analyzed all the 8 miRNAs in 19 tumor samples with
adjacent normal. By an optimal cut point, miR-21, miR-23b and miR 31 were
found to be overexpressed in tumor when compared to paired normal, while
miR-145 and MiR-150 were down-regulated. Using the same cut off point, we
then analyzed an additional independent cohort of 127 early stage NSCLC
samples and miR-23b and miR-31 were found to be overexpressed.
Kaplan-Meier analysis indicated that patients with high miR-23b and miR
31 expression had a poor overall survival in univariate analysis
(P=0.007, 0.012). Most importantly, multivariate analysis showed that
miR-23b was an independent significant prognostic factor in patients with
NSCLC (p=0.032). Overexpression of miR-23b facilitates NSCLC cell
proliferation in vitro while inhibition of miR-23b decreases the cell
viability.Conclusion: miR 23 b and miR-31 overexpression in patients with
early stage NSCLC treated with curative intent by means of surgery is
associated with poor survival. Larger independent confirmatory cohorts
with longitudinal follow-up will be required in future studies to define
the impact of these two miRNA overexpression in early stage NSCLC before
clinical application.

