Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PI3-kinase gamma controls the macrophage M1-M2 switch, thereby
promoting tumor immunosuppression and progression


Innate immune cells (macrophages, monocytes and neutrophils) rapidly
migrate to sites of tissue damage where they initially activate T cells
(M1 classical response). These cells gradually transition to suppress T
cell responses, while stimulating wound healing (M2 alternative
response). In tumors, however, the normal immune response is chronically
disrupted and an exaggerated immunosuppressive, wound healing,
tumor-promoting (M2) response prevails. In order to identify the
mechanisms regulating this M2 response in tumor inflammation and to
develop novel therapeutics to control it, we set out to explore the role
of macrophage signaling in control of the M1-M2 switch.Using RNA seq
analysis of gene expression patterns in M1 and M2 macrophages in vitro
and gene expression analysis of myeloid cells in spontaneous and
orthotopic mouse models of lung, pancreatic and breast cancer, we found
that myeloid cell PI3Kinase gamma controls the switch between the M1-M2
phenotype in human and murine macrophages. PI3Kinase gamma signaling
stimulates an immunosuppressive, wound healing gene expression program
exemplified by expression of immunosuppressive and pro-angiogenic
factors, such as Arginase1, TGFbeta1, PDGFBB, MMP9, and MMP13, and
suppression of pro-inflammatory factors such as IL12, iNos, and
interferon gamma. Blockade of this pathway by genetic or pharmacological
inhibition of PI3Kgamma blocks this immunosuppressive, wound healing gene
expression program and stimulates instead a T cell activating gene
expression program as well as T cell mediated tumor cell killing.
PI3Kgamma blockade inhibits tumor growth and metastasis in mouse models
of lung, pancreatic and breast carcinoma. Our studies demonstrate the
critical role of PI3Kgamma signaling in the control of the M1-M2
macrophage switch and demonstrate that this kinase is an important
therapeutic target to suppress tumor growth by targeting inflammation
that is associated with all solid tumors.

