Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A pilot study was initiated to determine if the immunomodulatory
protein, the progesterone-induced blocking factor (PIBF), is present in
higher quantity in the sera of patients with gynecologic cancer as
compared to controls without cancer


PIBF is a unique protein that is secreted by gamma/delta T cells and
precipitously rises in the sera following progesterone (P) exposure. The
34 kDa protein protects the fetal semi-allograft from immune surveillance
by reducing cytoxicity of natural killer (NK) cells by stabilizing
perforin granules. The parent 90 kDa form occupies a centrosomal position
close to BRCA-1. PIBF can be found in most rapidly dividing cells. One
study found an over-expression of the mRNA for the PIBF protein in all 29
leukemia cell lines tested. The P receptor antagonist mifepristone was
found to down-regulate PIBF protein. Mifepristone provided significant
palliative benefit to a large variety of spontaneous murine and human
cancers. P could also be responsible for converting the 90 kDa parent
form to a 34-36 kDa split variant in the cytoplasm which may be the
immunosuppressive form in cancer cells. Alternatively, some P-like
secretion by the tumor could influence gamma/delta T cells in the tumor
microenvironment to secrete PIBF and possibly spill over to the sera. The
aim of this study was to determine if there is any increase in serum PIBF
in women with gynecologic cancer as opposed to controls. Serum was
obtained from women about to have surgery for gynecologic problems
including malignant and benign disorders. The samples would then be
measured for PIBF using a new non-commercial enzyme linked
immunoabsorbent assay (ELISA) for PIBF and serum progesterone. The PIBF
levels (ng/mL) from lowest to highest in women with various gynecologic
cancers (in all cases serum progesterone (P) 800ng/mL.

