Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Yin Yang 1 is a target of miR-34 family and contributes to gastric
carcinogenesis


Gastric cancer is one of the most common cancers and the second leading
cause of cancer-related death worldwide. Transcription factor Yin Yang 1
(YY1) is a multi-functional protein and plays either oncogenic or
tumor-suppressive roles in tumor development and progression. Herein, we
investigated the role of YY1 in tumorigenesis of gastric cancer cells.
Results showed that the forced expression of YY1 contributed to gastric
carcinogenesis of SC-M1 cells. Whereas, the knockdown of endogenous YY1
suppressed tumorigenesis of SC-M1 cells. Additionally, the 3-untranslated
region (3-UTR) of YY1 mRNA was the target of microRNA-34 (miR-34) family
consisting of miR-34a, miR-34b, and miR-34c. The ectopic expression of
miR-34 family down-regulated YY1 levels in gastric cancer cells.
Endogenous YY1 expression was negatively correlated with miR-34b and
miR-34c levels in gastric cancer cells. The overexpression of miR-34
family suppressed gastric carcinogenesis through down-regulation of YY1
in gastric cancer cells. Alternatively, the knockdown of endogenous
miR-34 family promoted gastric carcinogenesis via up-regulation of YY1 in
gastric cancer cells. The miR-34 family also regulated the xenografted
tumor growth and lung metastasis of SC-M1 cells through YY1 in vivo.
Taken together, these results suggest that miR-34 family-YY1 axis plays
an important role in the control of gastric carcinogenesis.

