Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The formin, DIAPH3, regulates response to MT stabilizing drugs in
prostate and breast cancer


Diaphanous-related formin-3 (DIAPH3), a cytoskeletal regulator of the
formin family, is lost at high frequency in metastatic breast and
prostate cancers and has characteristics of a non-canonical metastasis
suppressor. We previously showed that DIAPH3 silencing evokes a
transition to an amoeboid phenotype, characterized by rapid motility,
RhoA/ROCK and ERK pathway activation, dynamic membrane blebbing and
increased shedding of microvesicles. Here we demonstrate that DIAPH3 loss
reduces microtubule (MT) stability in prostate and breast cancer cell
lines, and increases the cells' sensitivity to the taxanes, paclitaxel
and docetaxel and the non-taxane, epothilone B. DIAPH3 silencing reduces
membrane localization of the multidrug resistance-associated protein,
MRP1, a regulator of taxane efflux, and increases intracellular
accumulation of fluorescent paclitaxel. Baseline acetylation of tubulin,
which is proportional to the number of stable MT, is lower in
DIAPH3-silenced cells. In contrast, the fold-increase of tubulin
acetylation after treatment with MT stabilizing drugs is greater in
DIAPH3 knockdown compared to control cells. Further, cytotoxicity induced
by paclitaxel, docetaxel or epothilone B is enhanced by DIAPH3 silencing.
Analysis of gene expression profiles of breast cancer patients treated
with chemotherapeutic regimens containing taxanes in a neoadjuvant
phase-2 clinical trial revealed that low DIAPH3 expression is associated
with increased relapse free survival. Collectively, the data demonstrate
that DIAPH3 deficiency increases responsiveness to widely used MT
stabilizing drugs. These findings have implications for the inclusion of
DIAPH3 in biomarker panels that stratify patients for treatment with
taxanes, in particular in the neoadjuvant setting.

