Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CBL0137 demonstrates significant antitumor activity against
hepatocellular carcinoma alone and in combination with sorafenib


Primary hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the 6th most common malignancy
diagnosed worldwide with an incidence that continues to rise. Even with
the use of the current standard of care drug sorafenib, survival of
patients remains at 10-11 months and sorafenib toxicity results in dose
interruptions and delays. Therefore, tolerable, effective therapies
against HCC are greatly needed. CBL0137 represents a novel class of small
molecules that simultaneously activate p53 and inhibit cancer-associated
stress response pathways, such as NF-B and HSF-1, and has demonstrated
broad range antitumor activity against pre-clinical tumor models. The
effects of CBL0137 are mediated by the inhibition of the chromatin
remodelling factor FACT (FAcilitates Chromatin Transcription) comprised
of SSRP1 and SPT16 subunits. FACT is expressed in undifferentiated
progenitors and stem cells of adult tissues, but is almost undetectable
in differentiated cells. It is expressed in many tumor types, including
HCC, and is correlated with high grade and worse overall survival. Thus,
FACT represents a potentially important target for cancer therapy. We
investigated the effect of CBL0137 on HCC using HepG2 and Hep3B xenograft
models. Treatment of tumor bearing mice intravenously with 60-70 mg/kg
CBL0137 every 4th day resulted in 88-94% tumor growth inhibition in both
models, including tumor regression in 60-80% of tumors during the course
of treatment. Furthermore, combination of suboptimal doses of CBL0137
with sorafenib had greater efficacy compared to either drug alone (tumor
growth inhibition: HepG2- 87.9% combination vs 73.6% CBL0137 only
(P=0.0014), 75.7% sorafenib only (P=0.0006); Hep3B- 79.6% combination vs
38.2% CBL0137 only (P=0.003), 51.4% sorafenib only (P=0.032)). Although
the mechanism resulting in the combination effect is unknown, in vitro
analysis of markers of CBL0137 and sorafenib activity revealed that both
drugs caused a marked decrease in the basal and induced expression of
NF-B target genes (IL-8 and TNF). Furthermore, the combination of CBL0137
and sorafenib almost completely abolished the expression of these genes
in both HCC cell lines, suggesting that the combination effect may be in
part mediated through inhibition of the NF-B pathway. Together, these
data indicate that CBL0137 may provide a clinical benefit for the
treatment of HCC both alone and in combination with sorafenib.

