Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Detection in vivo of a novel endogenous etheno DNA adduct derived
from arachidonic acid and the effects of antioxidants on its formation


Previous studies showed that the 7-(1,2-dihydroxyheptyl) substituted
etheno DNA adducts are products from reactions with epoxide of
(E)-4-hydroxy-2-nonenal (HNE), an oxidation product of n-6
polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs). In this work, we report the
detection of 7-(1,2-dihydroxyheptyl)-1,N6-ethenodeoxyadenosine (DHHedA)
in rodent and human tissues by two independent methods: a
32P-postlabeling/HPLC method and an isotope dilution liquid
chromatography electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry method
(ID-LC-ESI-MS/MS). This study demonstrated for the first time that DHHedA
is a background DNA lesion in vivo. We showed that DHHedA can be formed
upon incubation of arachidonic acid (AA) with deoxyadenosine (dA),
supporting the notion that n-6 PUFAs are the endogenous source of DHHedA
formation. Because the cyclic adducts are derived from the oxidation of
PUFAs, we subsequently examined the effects of antioxidants, -lipoic
acid, polyphenon E and vitamin E on the formation of DHHedA and
-hydroxy-1,N2-propanodeoxyguanosine (-OHPdG), a widely studied
acrolein-derived cyclic adduct arisen from oxidized n-3 and n-6 PUFAs, in
the livers of Long Evans Cinnamon (LEC) rats. LEC rats are inflicted with
elevated lipid peroxidation and prone to the development of
hepatocellular carcinomas. The results showed that while the survival of
LEC rats was increased significantly by dietary -lipoic acid, none of the
antioxidants inhibited the formation of DHHedA and only polyphenon E
treatment decreased the formation of -OHPdG. In contrast, vitamin E
caused an increase in the formation of both -OHPdG and DHHedA in the
livers of LEC rats. This work was supported by the NCI grant:
RO1-CA-134892.

