Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prediagnostic smoking, alcohol intake, physical activity and
survival after colorectal cancer diagnosis in Western European populations


Background: Cigarette smoking, high intake of alcohol, and lack of
physical activity are associated with increased colorectal cancer (CRC)
risk, but little research has been conducted to investigate the
association between these modifiable lifestyle factors and survival after
CRC diagnosis.Methods: Therefore, we prospectively assessed the
association between smoking status and intensity, baseline alcohol
intake, lifetime pattern of alcohol intake, physical activity and
all-cause and CRC-specific death among 3,916 participants diagnosed with
colorectal cancer (colon = 2,454, rectum = 1,462) between 1992 and 2008
in the EPIC cohort. Multivariable Cox proportional hazards models were
used to calculate hazard ratios (HRs) and corresponding 95% confidence
intervals (CIs).Results: There were 1,303 deaths, 1,039 (80%) due to CRC.
Mean follow-up after CRC diagnosis was 4 years. In multivariable
analysis, current vs. never smokers had an increased risk of all-cause
death (HR = 1.22, 95% CI: 1.04-1.44). Greater intensity of smoking (26+
cigarettes per day) was associated with almost a doubling in the risk of
all-cause death when compared with never smokers (HR = 1.75, 95% CI:
1.12-2.73). Alcohol consumption was not statistically significantly
associated with survival (HR = 1.00, 95% CI: 0.98-1.02 per 6 g per day),
however former heavy drinkers had an increased risk of all-cause death
(HR = 2.68, 95% CI: 1.13-6.39). Total physical activity was not
statistically significantly associated with CRC survival. Additional
subgroup analyses were conducted by sex, age at diagnosis, cancer stage
and grade, location of tumor, time between blood collection and cancer
diagnosis, year of diagnosis, follow-up period, and body mass index.
Results for CRC-specific death were similar to those reported for
all-cause death.Conclusions: Our preliminary results suggest that
cigarette smoking and being a former heavy drinker before cancer
diagnosis are associated with worse survival among Western European
patients with CRC, but further research is needed to confirm these
results.

