Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Efficacy of diethyldihydroxyhomospermine against human pancreatic
adenocarcinoma using orthotopic implantation of human pancreatic L3.6pl
cells into the pancreas of nude mice


Purpose: To determine the anti-neoplastic effects of
(S,S)N1,N14-diethyl-3,12-dihydroxyhomospermine ([HO]2DEHSPM, SUN-101)
after subcutaneous (s.c.) administration after orthotopic transplantation
of human pancreatic cancer cells (L3.6pl) in the pancreas of nude
mice.Methods: L3.6pl cells were injected into the pancreas of nude mice
and seven to ten days later the treatment groups were:Study 1: mice
(n=10/group) with saline (control), SUN-101 (25 mg/kg), SUN-101 (50
mg/kg), and SUN-101 (100 mg/kg) QD for 4 to 6 weeks.Study 2: mice
(n=10/group) with saline (control), SUN-101 (25 mg/kg, QD), SUN-101 (25
mg/kg three times a week, QOD), SUN-101 (15 mg/kg, QOD), and SUN-101 (5
mg/kg, QOD) for 4 to 6 weeksStudy 3: mice (n=10/group) with saline
(control), Gemzar (100 mg/kg, intraperitoneal (i.p.), twice a week),
SUN-101 (25 mg/kg, QOD), and Gemzar plus SUN-101 for 4 to 6
weeks.Results: In study 1, the optimal dose of SUN-101 was determined to
be 25 mg/kg QD. This dose reduced up to 82.9% the weight of human
pancreatic tumors in mice. Treatment with 50 and 100 mg/kg doses resulted
in decreased body weight and proved to be toxic in mice. Histologic
changes in the liver included hepatocyte reparative change and in the
exocrine pancreas included a mild decrease of cytoplasmic granules in the
epithelium of the pancreatic acini.In study 2, the optimal dose of 25
mg/kg administrated QOD was less toxic than daily 25 mg/kg
administrations. The pancreatic weight and volume were decreased (47.8%
and 66.6%, respectively) with 25 mg/kg administrated QOD and dose related
decreases were observed at the 15 mg/kg QOD (20.1% and 52.6%,
respectively). No decrease in tumor weight or volume was noted with 5
mg/kg administrated QOD.In study 3, the treatment of Gemzar, SUN-101, and
Gemzar plus SUN-101 resulted in 18.7%, 35.6%, and 42.4% decreases in the
body weight, respectively. Compared with tumor-bearing control, the
treatment of Gemzar, SUN-101, and Gemzar plus SUN-101 resulted in 24.7%,
58.8%, and 67.2% decreases in the pancreas weight, respectively, and
37.8%, 58.4%, and 72.9% decreases in the tumor volumes, respectively.The
incidence of liver metastasis was also decreased with SUN-101, Gemzar,
and combination of Gemzar plus SUN-101.Conclusions: SUN-101 administered
QD or QOD 25 mg/kg inhibited the growth of human pancreatic carcinoma in
mice. SUN-101 demonstrated higher toxicity including disruption of the
digestive process at daily 50 and 100 mg/kg doses. Co-administration of
SUN-101 with gemcitabine appeared to have an additive or synergistic
effect on reduction in the pancreatic tumor.

