Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genistein downregulates onco-miR-1260b and inhibits Wnt-signaling
in renal cancer cells


Introduction and Objective: Wnt signaling plays an important role in
renal cancer and that is modulated by genistein in other cancers.
Recently microRNAs have emerged as new regulators of gene expression.
Thus we focused on microRNAs to examine the regulatory mechanism of
genistein on the Wnt signaling pathway in RCC.Methods: Initially we
investigated the effect of genistein on Wnt signaling (TCF reporter
assays) in renal cancer cells and using microarray identified candidate
miRNAs whose expression was decreased by genistein. We performed
functional analyses and investigated the relationship between miRNA
expression and renal cancer patient outcomes. We also did 3UTR luciferase
assays to look at direct miRNA regulation of Wnt signaling related
genes.Results: Genistein promoted apoptosis while inhibiting RCC cell
proliferation and invasion. Genistein also decreased TCF reporter
activity in RCC cells. We found that miR-1260b was highly expressed and
significantly down-regulated by genistein in RCC cells. The expression of
miR-1260b was significantly higher in renal cancer tissues compared to
normal and significantly related to over-all shorter survival.
Additionally miR-1260b promoted renal cancer cell proliferation and
invasion in RCC cells. The 3UTR luciferase activity of target genes
(sFRP1, Dkk2, Smad4) was significantly decreased and their protein
expression significantly up-regulated in miR-1260b inhibitor transfected
renal cancer cells.Conclusions: Our data suggests that genistein
inhibited Wnt signaling by regulating miR-1260b expression in renal
cancer cells.Source of Funding: Grants RO1CA138642, RO1CA130860,
RO1CA160079, I01BX001123, VA Merit Review and VA Program Project (PI: R.
Dahiya).

