Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pediatric osteosarcoma lung metastasis: variations in clinical
management


Background: Nearly 20% of patients with newly diagnosed osteosarcoma have
detectable metastatic disease at presentation, most of which is located
in the lungs. These patients have a poor prognosis with survival of
generally less than 30%. NCCN guidelines as well as many osteosarcoma
clinical trials endorse resection of metastases as part of standard
treatment. There are limited recommendations as to the timing or method
of resection.Methods: An anonymous online questionnaire was distributed
to establish practice patterns among members of the Connective Tissue
Oncology Society, a multi-disciplinary sarcoma focused organization.
Participants were asked about management of lung metastases in 3 clinical
scenarios (2 cm unilateral, 0.5 cm unilateral, and multiple bilateral
lung nodules). Questions evaluated timing of management, decision to
resect, technique of resection, and decision to explore the contralateral
lung.Results: 183 individuals completed the survey. Most report
initiating nodule management after neoadjuvant therapy. If the nodule
disappeared after neoadjuvant therapy or definitive surgery, most report
not performing surgical resection. Among nodules resected after
neodjuvant therapy or definitive surgery that were unchanged in size,
thoracotomy is the most commonly reported surgical technique. When only
unilateral nodules were present on imaging, few choose to explore the
contralateral lung (11% in 2.0cm and 10% in 0.5cm, compared to 70% in
multiple bilateral nodules). Pediatric Oncologists were more likely to
initiate management earlier than Medical Oncologists for 2.0cm nodule
(90% vs 63%, pBackground: Nearly 20% of patients with newly diagnosed
osteosarcoma have detectable metastatic disease at presentation, most of
which is located in the lungs. These patients have a poor prognosis with
survival of generally less than 30%. NCCN guidelines as well as many
osteosarcoma clinical trials endorse resection of metastases as part of
standard treatment. There are limited recommendations as to the timing or
method of resection.Methods: An anonymous online questionnaire was
distributed to establish practice patterns among members of the
Connective Tissue Oncology Society, a multi-disciplinary sarcoma focused
organization. Participants were asked about management of lung metastases
in 3 clinical scenarios (2 cm unilateral, 0.5 cm unilateral, and multiple
bilateral lung nodules). Questions evaluated timing of management,
decision to resect, technique of resection, and decision to explore the
contralateral lung.Results: 183 individuals completed the survey. Most
report initiating nodule management after neoadjuvant therapy. If the
nodule disappeared after neoadjuvant therapy or definitive surgery, most
report not performing surgical resection. Among nodules resected after
neodjuvant therapy or definitive surgery that were unchanged in size,
thoracotomy is the most commonly reported surgical technique. When only
unilateral nodules were present on imaging, few choose to explore the
contralateral lung (11% in 2.0cm and 10% in 0.5cm, compared to 70% in
multiple bilateral nodules). Pediatric Oncologists were more likely to
initiate management earlier than Medical Oncologists for 2.0cm nodule
(90% vs 63%, p<0.001), 0.5 cm nodule (77% vs. 47%, p Background: Nearly
20% of patients with newly diagnosed osteosarcoma have detectable
metastatic disease at presentation, most of which is located in the
lungs. These patients have a poor prognosis with survival of generally
less than 30%. NCCN guidelines as well as many osteosarcoma clinical
trials endorse resection of metastases as part of standard treatment.
There are limited recommendations as to the timing or method of
resection.Methods: An anonymous online questionnaire was distributed to
establish practice patterns among members of the Connective Tissue
Oncology Society, a multi-disciplinary sarcoma focused organization.
Participants were asked about management of lung metastases in 3 clinical
scenarios (2 cm unilateral, 0.5 cm unilateral, and multiple bilateral
lung nodules). Questions evaluated timing of management, decision to
resect, technique of resection, and decision to explore the contralateral
lung.Results: 183 individuals completed the survey. Most report
initiating nodule management after neoadjuvant therapy. If the nodule
disappeared after neoadjuvant therapy or definitive surgery, most report
not performing surgical resection. Among nodules resected after
neodjuvant therapy or definitive surgery that were unchanged in size,
thoracotomy is the most commonly reported surgical technique. When only
unilateral nodules were present on imaging, few choose to explore the
contralateral lung (11% in 2.0cm and 10% in 0.5cm, compared to 70% in
multiple bilateral nodules). Pediatric Oncologists were more likely to
initiate management earlier than Medical Oncologists for 2.0cm nodule
(90% vs 63%, p<0.001), 0.5 cm nodule (77% vs. 47%, p <0.005), and
multiple bilateral nodules (79% vs. 51%, p =0.008).Conclusion: There is
marked heterogeneity among treating clinicians in their management of
pulmonary metastases in osteosarcoma. Variation was also noted between
medical specialties. Prospective trials are needed to evaluate if these
differences have significant implications on outcomes for patients with
newly diagnosed metastatic osteosarcoma.

