Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: miR-645 inhibits apoptosis of AGEJ


Background: An increasing body of evidence indicates that miRNAs have a
critical role in carcinogenesis and cancer progression; however, the role
of miRNAs in the tumorigenesis of adencarcinoma of gastric esophageal
junction(AGEJ) remains largely unclear.Methods: The SGC7901 and BGC-823
gastric cancer cell lines were used. The expressions of miR-645 and IFIT2
were examined by qRT-PCR. The expressions of IFIT2 was examined by
western blotting and immunohistochemistry assay. The cell apoptosis was
determined by FACS. MiR-645 inhibitor, mimics and plasmid-IFIT2
transfections were performed to study the loss- and gain-function.
Caspase-3/7 activity was examined by caspase-3/7 assay. Results: In the
present study, we have reported an increased expression of miR-645 in
AGEJ clinical specimens compared with paired non-cancerous tissues. We
also observed a significant miR-645 up-regulation in two gastric cancer (
GC ) cell lines, SGC7901 and BGC-823, which were used as cell models
because there was no available AGEJ cell lines established to date. We
found that inhibition of miR-645 could sensitize dramatically SGC7901 and
BGC-823 cells to both serum starvation- and chemotherapeutic drug-induced
apoptosis by up-regulating IFIT2, a mediator of apoptosis via a
mitochondrial pathway, with a potential binding site for miR-645 in its
mRNA's 3UTR. Further investigation exhibited that IFIT2 expression
decreases in SGC7901 and BGC-823 cells and AGEJ tissues. IFIT2 ectopic
expression leads to promotion of cell apoptosis, indicating that IFIT2
may function as a suppressor in the development of AGEJ. Furthermore,
inhibition of miR-645 induces up-regulation of IFIT2 and increased
caspase-3/7 activity compared with control groups. Conclusions: Our data
suggest that miR-645 functions as an oncogene in human AGEJ by, at least
partially through, targeting IFIT2. Note: This abstract was not presented
at the meeting.

