Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Converging effectors of airway lineage specification and
metastasis in lung cancer


Lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD) is a deadly and heterogeneous subtype of
non-small cell lung cancer. During LUAD progression, the emergence of
alternate cell lineage traits in primary tumors correlates with poor
outcome. The underlying mechanisms and biological consequences of these
phenomena are poorly understood.Using an integrated approach, we examined
the molecular relationship between cell differentiation states, lung
cancer subtypes, and clinical outcome, to discover a role for
lineage-restricted genes in the pathogenesis of LUAD (1). Specifically,
we identified two airway selective lineage transcription factors, GATA6
and HOPX, as inhibitors of metastatic progression. Down-regulation of
their expression in a subset of human tumors correlates with aberrant
tumor differentiation and relapses. GATA6 and HOPX cooperatively restrict
the metastatic potential of LUAD cells, by modulating converging
transcriptional programs of airway epithelial differentiation and
malignant invasion.Our findings demonstrate that perturbation of
intrinsic cell lineage pathways is a determinant of metastasis in
specific lung cancers. The implications of these findings for the
origin(s) and treatment of LUAD metastasis will be discussed.(1) Cancer
Cell, 23 (6): 725-738. 2013.

