Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation of androgen receptor expression by andro-miRs in
prostate cancer


Androgen receptor (AR) is a member of the steroid receptor family which
plays a significant role in the regulation of both prostate cell
proliferation and growth suppression. The targeting of androgen- and AR-
signaling axis remains the primary therapeutic option for prostate cancer
(PCa) treatment. AR mRNA has a long 3UTR of 6.8 kb length and is
predicted to be a target of many miRNAs. The existence of long 3UTR
proposes a complex mechanism of regulation of AR gene expression through
miRNAs and other factors including RNA binding proteins and
polyadenylation signals. Differential expression of various miRNAs has
been reported to be associated with the progression of the disease to
harmone-independence and castration-resistant prostact cancer (CRPC).
However, the direct regulation of AR transcriptional activity through
miRNAs is not clearly understood. Our lab has discovered that AR is a
target of andro-miRs (miR-488*, miR-644, miR-149, miR-512-5p). These
andro-miRs bind to target sequences in the 3UTR of AR and downregulates
luciferase expression in the target-validation validation experiments as
well as endogeneous AR expression. Our ongoing study of andro-miRs also
indicates that, in addition to downregulation of AR gene expression by
the action of andro-miRs alone and synergistically, these miRNAs can
regulate AR signaling leading to androgen-independence and resistance.
This post transcriptional regulation of AR gene expression through
andro-miRs makes them an interesting candidate for miR-based adjunctive
treatment in CRPC treatment.Note: This abstract was not presented at the
meeting.

