Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Aberrant expression of HDAC6 sustains malignant progression by
preventing epidermal growth factor receptor degradation in gastric cancer


Cytoplasmic deacetylase, histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) is a critical
component of the lysomal protein degradation pathways. HDAC6 has been
shown to be involved in carcinogenic transformation and to modulate the
epithelial-mesenchymal transition in several cancers by way of the
regulations of several critical cellular functions, but the biological
roles in gastric carcinogenesis remains to be elucidated. In this study,
we observed that HDAC6 is aberrantly over-expressed in a subset of
gastric cancer, and that targeted-inactivation of HDC6 caused cell cycle
and cell death pathways-independent growth inhibition. Additional
experiments evidenced that ectopic overexpression of HDAC6 sustains
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) degradation in EGF-stimulated
gastric cancer cells. In addition, we found that HDAC6 inactivation
recovered rabaptin 5, a Rab5 interacting protein potentiating Rab5, a
small GTPase that regulates early endocytic events. These findings
suggest that aberrant overexpression of HDAC6 confers gastric cancer
cells to sustain EGF-signaling by retardation of EGFR degradation by way
of repression of rababtin-5, and HDAC6 is a bona fide target for
therapeutic intervention in gastric cancers.Note: This abstract was not
presented at the meeting.

