Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TGF regulates miR-182 control of BRCA1


Transforming growth factor beta (TGF) is a pluripotent cytokine whose
activity is significantly increased in epithelial cancers and induced by
radiation and chemotherapy. Downregulation of BRCA1 or alterations in
BRCA1 related pathways may contribute to response to therapy. However,
the mechanism(s) underlying BRCA1 downregulation is not well understood.
Our prior work indicated that inhibition of TGF canonical signaling
reduces BRCA1 mRNA levels (Maxwell et al., Cancer Res. 68(20):8304-11,
2008). Here, we used the non-malignant human epithelial MCF10A cell line
and murine Tgfb1 heterozygote (HT) and wildtype fibroblast cell lines to
investigate TGF regulation of BRCA1. Pharmaceutical inhibition of TGF
type I receptor kinase or incubation with pan-isoform neutralizing
antibody, 1D11, resulted in significant down regulation of both BRCA1
mRNA and protein levels in MCF10A. Likewise, Brca1 protein and mRNA was
decreased by >50% in cell cycle synchronized Tgfb1 HT fibroblasts
compared to wildtype fibroblasts. Consistent with decreased Brca1, Tgfb1
HT fibroblasts exhibited defective DNA damage response as measured by
53BP1 foci following UV radiation treatment. We next investigated
mechanisms regulating protein levels in MCF10A cells, which together
indicated that TGF signaling regulates BRCA1 protein stability, prevents
its degradation, and increases BRCA1 promoter activity. Surprisingly, TGF
treatment rapidly (Transforming growth factor beta (TGF) is a pluripotent
cytokine whose activity is significantly increased in epithelial cancers
and induced by radiation and chemotherapy. Downregulation of BRCA1 or
alterations in BRCA1 related pathways may contribute to response to
therapy. However, the mechanism(s) underlying BRCA1 downregulation is not
well understood. Our prior work indicated that inhibition of TGF
canonical signaling reduces BRCA1 mRNA levels (Maxwell et al., Cancer
Res. 68(20):8304-11, 2008). Here, we used the non-malignant human
epithelial MCF10A cell line and murine Tgfb1 heterozygote (HT) and
wildtype fibroblast cell lines to investigate TGF regulation of BRCA1.
Pharmaceutical inhibition of TGF type I receptor kinase or incubation
with pan-isoform neutralizing antibody, 1D11, resulted in significant
down regulation of both BRCA1 mRNA and protein levels in MCF10A.
Likewise, Brca1 protein and mRNA was decreased by >50% in cell cycle
synchronized Tgfb1 HT fibroblasts compared to wildtype fibroblasts.
Consistent with decreased Brca1, Tgfb1 HT fibroblasts exhibited defective
DNA damage response as measured by 53BP1 foci following UV radiation
treatment. We next investigated mechanisms regulating protein levels in
MCF10A cells, which together indicated that TGF signaling regulates BRCA1
protein stability, prevents its degradation, and increases BRCA1 promoter
activity. Surprisingly, TGF treatment rapidly (<30 minutes) increased
BRCA1 protein and mRNA, which led us to also consider control at the
level of mRNA stability since BRCA1 is known to be controlled by miR-182
(Moskwa et al., Mol Cell. 41(2):210-20, 2011). TGF treatment
downregulates miR-182, conversely, miR-182 increases when TGF is
inhibited by either small molecule inhibition of the type I receptor
kinase or by ligand capture with neutralizing antibody in human cells.
miR-182 increased 18-fold in Tgfb1 HT murine fibroblasts. Notably, MCF10A
do not show changes in other known miRNAs that target BRCA1 for
degradation, miRNA 146a and 146b (Garcia et al., EMBO Mol Med.
3(5):279-90, 2011), are not affected by TGF treatment or inhibition.
Transfection of Tgfb1 HT fibroblasts with a miR-182 antagomir restored
BRCA1 mRNA, protein and functional deficits. Further studies show that
addition of TGF for short periods of time affects miRNA processing by
decreasing pre-miR182 up to 50%, while TGF inhibition affects miR-182
translation. These data indicate that TGF exerts control over BRCA1 at
several levels: protein stability, transcriptional control of the
promoter, and translational control via miR-182. As many cancer cells
maintain the ability to respond to TGF and TGF inhibition is clinically
viable, we propose that TGF inhibition provides a therapeutic opportunity
by impeding BRCA1 dependent DNA damage responses.Note: This abstract was
not presented at the meeting.

