Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of POU5F1B in prostate cancer


POU5F1B is the one of the pseudogenes of POU5F1 (also known as Oct3,
Oct4) with protein-coding potential. It is localized on chromosome
8q24.21, inside of the 1.2 Mb gene desert between the FAM84B and the
c-MYC gene, which is closely associated with prostate cancer risk. Recent
studies shown that POU5F1B, but not POU5F1, is expressed in prostate
tissue and is overexpressed in prostatic carcinoma, compared to normal
prostatic tissue surrounding the carcinoma. However, the role of POU5F1B
in prostate cancer is still unknown. Through in silico analysis of
dataset HG-U95A, we found that POU5F1B expression is increased in
prostate tumor and markedly increased in metastatic tumors. Western blot
analysis revealed a marked increase in POU5F1B expression in prostate
cancer cells when compared to non-tumorigenic RWPE-1 cells. To study the
role of POU5F1B in prostate cancer, we cloned POU5F1B from prostate
cancer cells, sequenced the amplicons, and found several polymorphism. We
made pCDH-myc-POU5F1B constructs and expressed POU5F1B in prostate cancer
cell lines LNCaP, DU145, and PC-3. Prostate cancer cell lines that
ectopically overexpress POU5F1B form dramatically fewer cell-cell
junctions and exhibit significantly increased invasiveness in vitro.
Further, we found that E-Cadherin expression is downregulated in
DU145-POU5F1B cells. Methylation of the E- Cadherin locus is increased in
DU145-POU5F1B cells and methyltransferase inhibitors can partially
restore E-Cadherin expression. These data collectively suggest an
important role of POU5F1B in prostate tumor progression and metastasis.

