Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A systematic approach to the metastatically relevant microRNA
landscape


Distant metastasis is the major determinant of patient outcome in
colorectal cancer. By systematically analysing the miR expression
profiles of resected metastasis-, corresponding primary tumor and normal
tissues of colorectal cancer patients, we were able to delineate a
miR-signature indicative of the metastatically critical microRNA
landscape. This hot list of miRNAs, including established
metastasis-related miRs like the miR-34- and let -7 families, as well as
rather novel miR-candidates like miR-552, -218, -135, -210 and -654,
together with their putative common targets were bioinformatically
predicted to regulate the most significant metastasis-associated
signaling pathways currently known. We were able to show for the first
time that miR-135b, miR-210 and the loss of miR-218 constitute a novel
network that regulates both E- and N-cadherin expression, which is
achieved, in part, via several novel common targets such as the recently
described tumor suppressors SIAH1 and SETD2, and, most importantly, FOXN3
transcription factor. This is paralleled by a significant impact on
migration, invasion, in vivo intravasation and metastasis in chicken
embryo and mouse models. We conclude that miR-218 as a novel metastasis
suppressor, and pro-metastatic miR-135b and miR-210, constitute one
important novel network critical for metastasis, resulting from the first
study to systematically suggest the microRNA-driven master pathways of
metatasis from solid cancer tissues.

