Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comparative immunohistochemical study of basaloid and usual
squamous cell carcinoma of the esophagus


Basaloid squamous cell carcinoma (BSCC) is a rare epithelial malignancy
variant of the typical SCC, and it has been associated to an aggressive
behavior, with a high capacity for developing metastasis and low survival
rates. It has been reported that less than 12% of the primary esophageal
carcinoma have been diagnosed as BSCC. The study aimed to compare the
protein expression of HER-2, EGFR, Ki-67, Cyclins A, B1 and D1 between
usual SCC and BSCC. Immunohistochemistry of 94 usual ESCC and 17 EBSCC
cases were carried out using Tissue Microarray technique.
Immunohistochemical analysis of cyclins and growth factors receptors was
based on frequency and intensity of tumor cells in each sample; Ki-67
analysis was based on the frequency of tumor cells showing strong nuclear
positive staining. When the clinicopathological data were compared, only
histological grade (p=0.000) showed a significant difference between the
usual and basaloid SCC groups. No significant difference was found in
gender, age, lymphatic, venous, and perineural invasion, pT, pN, pM and
TNM staging when the two groups were compared. No significant difference
was found between the overall survival rates of both groups. In EBSCC
cases, cyclin A expression was positive in 94.1% of the cases, while 5.9%
showed no expression. Cyclin B1 expression showed positivity in 23.6% of
cases and 76.4% showed no staining. Most of the cases (70.6%) showed no
cyclin D1 expression, while 29.4% were considered positive. EGFR
expression was positive in 52.9% and negative in 47.1% of the cases.
Expression of HER2 was observed in a small proportion of the cases
(29.4%), when compared to those (70.6%) with no expression. Considering
the KI-67 labeling index, most of the cases (76.4%) were classified as
Low Proliferation, while only 11.8% were considered as High
Proliferation. Among the ESCC cases, 30.0% were considered negative for
cyclin A expression and 70.0% cases were positive. For cyclin B1, 18.4%
were positive and 81.6% showed no expression. Cyclin D1 showed no
staining in 85.4% of the cases, while 14.6% were positive. EGFR
expression was positive in 80.9% and negative in 19.1% of the cases. HER2
expression was negative in 52.8% and 44.7% were considered positive.
Analysis of Ki-67 expression showed that most of the cases (70.8%) were
classified as Low Proliferation, while 29.2% were considered as High
Proliferation. Comparing the markers expression between the two groups,
EGFR (p=0.025) and cyclin A (p=0.029) showed significant differences.
Positive EGFR expression was more frequent in the usual ESCC than in the
EBSCC group. For cyclin A, positivity was more frequent in the EBSCC
group, when compared to the usual ESCC cases. Regarding the other
markers, there was no significant difference between the two groups.
Although some observed differences did not achieve statistical
significance, this work has further highlighted possible differences
between the molecular pathogenesis of BSCC and SCC.

