Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Treatment resistance of colon cancer with low proteasome activity


Background and aims:Emerging evidence indicates that cancer stem cells
are resistant to chemotherapy and radiation therapy which result in
recurrence after curative intent treatment for solid tumor. Recently,
several reports have indicated that some cancer stem cells (CSCs) would
be characterized by low proteasome activity. And cell of low proteasome
activity could lead to new therapeutic targets.Material and methods:We
engineered human colorectal adenocarcinoma cells (HCT116, KM12SM, SW480,
LoVo, DLD1, HT29) to express a green fluorescent molecule fused to the
degron of ornithine decarboxylase (Gdeg) from a retroviral vector; the
fluorescent Gdeg supposed to be accumulated in CSC like cells as a result
of low activity of the 26S proteasome. The feature of Gdeghigh cells were
analyzed by sphere formation assay, surface marker analysis, reactive
oxygen species (ROS) analysis and assessment of chemotherapy and
radiation therapy sensitivity.Results:Population of Gdeghigh was
up-regurated by chemotherapy (5-FU and oxaliplatin) and radiation
therapy. Furthermore CSC markers were increased by chemotherapy and
radiation therapy. ROS activity of Gdeghigh was lower than
Gdeglow.Conclusions:Low proteasome activity cells suggested eatures of
CSCs. Mechanisms of chemotherapy and radiation therapy resistance should
be revealed to establish new therapeutic approach based on CSCs
hypothesis.

