Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel method for efficient and hands-free purification of
circulating DNA from human plasma


Circulating or Cell-Free DNA in plasma can be used to detect biomarkers
that show great promise for diagnosis and monitoring of cancer, and is
already being used as a non-invasive method to detect trisomy in fetuses.
There is currently great interest in the discovery of new cancer
biomarkers and their potential clinical application. However,
reproducible and efficient purification of these highly fragmented and
low-concentration species represents a major challenge. Here we will
present a novel method which is completely automated and allows parallel
purification of circulating nucleic acid from plasma and serum using a
medium-throughput robot. Sixteen samples can be processed simultaneously.
The method was optimized to produce high-quality DNA that is suitable for
use in quantitative PCR and next generation sequencing. In addition, the
absence of any pre-processing steps improves reproducibility and lowers
the risk of contamination.Initial characterization on plasma from
pregnant women showed that fetal DNA could be detected as early as 4
weeks into gestation and could be tracked throughout pregnancy. Further
characterization showed that the system was able to reliably detect less
than 25 copies/ml plasma of fragmented DNA that was spiked into the
sample. Subsequent work on plasma from patients with colorectal cancer
showed that the system was able to detect DNA containing both wild-type
and mutated EGFR, suggesting that this method can be a useful tool when
screening plasma samples for biomarkers of interest.

