Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effects of Debio 1143, a novel oral IAP inhibitor, in monotherapy
and in combination with platinum drugs in human SCCHN tumor specimens


Background: Resistance to radiotherapy and chemotherapy-induced apoptosis
is a hallmark of cancer. Inhibitors of apoptosis proteins (IAPs) are
negative modulators of apoptosis frequently expressed in various cancers,
and, as such, attractive targets to overcome resistance to cancer
therapy. The oral SMAC mimetic Debio 1143 (a.k.a AT-406), an antagonist
of multiple IAPs (cIAP1/2 and XIAP), is currently investigated in a Phase
I oncology clinical trial. This study evaluated Debio 1143 activity as a
single agent, and in combination with TNF-, TRAIL, cisplatin or
carboplatin, in various tumor models of squamous cell carcinoma of the
head and neck (SCCHN).Materials and Methods: The antiproliferative effect
of Debio 1143 was evaluated by MTT assay in human SCCHN cell lines SQ20B,
SCC61, Hep2 and Detroit 562. The extent of apoptotic cell death was
characterized by Western blot for cleaved caspase 3 and PARP. Tumor
samples from SCCHN patients were surgically resected and cut into 300 m
thick slices using a tissue slicer (TIPCAN). Each slice was exposed to 10
M Debio 1143 and/or 1 M of platinum-based drug for 48 hours. Tumor
explants from 9 SCCHN patients were analyzed by immunohistochemistry or
immunofluorescence to visualize the effects of treatment on various
biomarkers of cell apoptosis, proliferation and drug target
engagement.Results: Debio 1143 alone displayed limited antiproliferative
activity in SCCHN cell lines. The addition of TRAIL or TNF- potentiated
the antiproliferative effects of Debio 1143 in 1 cell line (SQ20B) and in
3 cell lines (SQ20B, SCC61 and Detroit 562), respectively. Combining
Debio 1143 with TNF- induced cleavage of caspase 3 and PARP, suggesting
induction of apoptosis. Exposure of fresh SCCHN tumor explants to Debio
1143 reduced c-IAP1 staining. Combination of Debio 1143 with cisplatin or
carboplatin induced caspase 3 activation, suggesting apoptosis. Large
necrotic areas were also found on tissue samples after combination
therapy.Conclusion: In 3 out of 4 SCCHN cell lines, Debio 1143
potentiated TNF- or TRAIL-induced antiproliferative effects. Debio 1143
combined with carboplatin and cisplatin induced caspase 3-dependent
apoptosis in SCCHN patient tumor samples. Debio 1143 in combination with
conventional chemotherapies could be a potential treatment for SCCHN
patients.

