Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dual role of MEK1/2 and MEK5 in the reversal of
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition


The mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway has well-established
roles in cellular processes including proliferation, differentiation, and
regulation of cell fate, namely survival and apoptosis. In breast cancer,
constitutive activation of the MAPK/extracellular signal-regulated
kinases (ERK) pathways have been linked to chemoresistance and metastatic
progression through distinct mechanisms including the activation of
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT). Our previous studies have
shown that overexpression of MEK5 promotes EMT markers and induces the
progression to a mesenchymal phenotype. Here, we tested the effects of a
novel MEK1/2 and MEK5 inhibitor, SC-1-151, and other known MAPK signaling
inhibitors (PD184,352 (MEK1/2), AZD6244 (MEK1/2), BIRB796 (p38)) on a
panel of mesenchymal and highly metastatic breast cancer cell lines.
While the MEK1/2 and p38 inhibitors decreased cell viability across cell
lines, only the dual inhibition of MEK1/2 and MEK5 though the use of
SC-1-151 demonstrated a change in cell morphology indicative of
mesenchymal-to-epithelial transition (MET). Furthermore, the cells
exhibited a significant decrease in migration potential following
SC-1-151 treatment.Further analysis of the effects of SC-1-151 in the
triple-negative breast cancer cell lines revealed an alteration of the
genes associated with EMT, notably a decrease in expression of Fra-1, a
transcription factor downstream of MAPK. Immuno-compromised mice
inoculated with the MDA-MD-231 cell line and treated with SC-1-151
demonstrated decreased tumor volumes compared to vehicle-treated animals
at day 30 post cell injection, implicating the role of MEK inhibition on
tumorigenesis. These data demonstrate the need for a better understanding
of the dual role of MEK1/2 and MEK5 signaling in breast cancer, and
suggest that inhibition of the MEK1/2 and MEK5 signaling pathways leads
to a decrease in EMT and cell migration.

