Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Extent of intranodal macrophage correlates with lymph node
metastasis of gastric cancer


BackgroundTumor-associated macrophages (TAM) plastically change their
polarity to M2macrophages (M2M) in the tumor microenvironment. It has
been reported correlation of tumor-infiltrating TAM with
lymphangiogenesis and lymph node (LN) metastasis of several types of
cancer including gastric cancer (GC). However, It is not sufficiently
elucidated that the role of intranodal TAM on tumor progression of GC.
The purpose of this study was to examine the distribution of intranodal
TAM in draining LNs and the association of M2M with spreading LN
metastasis of GC.MethodsWe assessed regional LN specimens from 49
patients with GC who are composed of pathologically diagnosed 31
node-positive and 18 node-negative cases. All specimens were examined by
immunohistochemistry staining of cytokeratin AE1/AE3 antibodies for tumor
cells and CD163 antibodies for M2M. The distributions of intranodal
macrophages were analyzed by calculating the number of M2M according to
the region of the cancer location. PBMC harvested from blood samples of
healthy subjects were ascertained to be differentiated into M1, M2a and
M2cM by appropriate cytokines. Vascular endothelial growth factor-C
(VEGF-C) concentrations of M supernatants were detected to compare the
ability of lymphangiogenesis.ResultsThe number of M2M infiltrating in the
LNs with metastasis were significantly higher than that of normal LNs
(pBackgroundTumor-associated macrophages (TAM) plastically change their
polarity to M2macrophages (M2M) in the tumor microenvironment. It has
been reported correlation of tumor-infiltrating TAM with
lymphangiogenesis and lymph node (LN) metastasis of several types of
cancer including gastric cancer (GC). However, It is not sufficiently
elucidated that the role of intranodal TAM on tumor progression of GC.
The purpose of this study was to examine the distribution of intranodal
TAM in draining LNs and the association of M2M with spreading LN
metastasis of GC.MethodsWe assessed regional LN specimens from 49
patients with GC who are composed of pathologically diagnosed 31
node-positive and 18 node-negative cases. All specimens were examined by
immunohistochemistry staining of cytokeratin AE1/AE3 antibodies for tumor
cells and CD163 antibodies for M2M. The distributions of intranodal
macrophages were analyzed by calculating the number of M2M according to
the region of the cancer location. PBMC harvested from blood samples of
healthy subjects were ascertained to be differentiated into M1, M2a and
M2cM by appropriate cytokines. Vascular endothelial growth factor-C
(VEGF-C) concentrations of M supernatants were detected to compare the
ability of lymphangiogenesis.ResultsThe number of M2M infiltrating in the
LNs with metastasis were significantly higher than that of normal LNs
(p<0.0001). In the histopathological examination, stage and degree of LN
metastasis positively correlated with the number of intranodal M2M. The
number of intranodal M2M was decreased distant from the primary tumor.
Importantly, M2M increased at LNs along root of the left gastric artery
and gastroepiploic arteries in patients with node positive. The VEGF-C
levels of the M2M culture supernatants were significantly higher than
that of control M. The result of flow cytometer revealed that M2a and M2c
cultured from PMBC expressed CD163.ConclusionThe number of intranodal M2M
significantly associated with LN metastasis and progression of GC.
Moreover, M2M infiltrated into LNs prior to formation of metastasis. The
findings indicated that M2M might migrate into LNs by chemotactic
activity of primary tumor. Our results suggested that molecules
associated with M2M could be one of the new biomarkers for LN metastasis
of GC.

