Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Using pharmacokinetic/efficacy modeling to identify the optimal
schedule for MLN0264, an anti- guanylyl cyclase C (GCC) antibody-drug
conjugate, in a range of xenograft models


MLN0264 is an investigational antibody-drug conjugate (ADC) that consists
of the human anti-guanylyl cyclase C (GCC) antibody linked to a
microtubule-disrupting agent (monomethyl auristatin). As ADCs have a very
long clearance half-life, the potential exists for a highly infrequent
dosing schedule. A quantitative understanding of the relationship between
exposure and preclinical antitumor biological activity is thus applied to
support dose schedule selection in the clinic.In this study, we develop a
pharmacokinetic/efficacy (PK/E) relationship in xenograft models to
evaluate the predictive contributions of exposure and xenograft
characteristics to MLN0264 biological activity. Single dose
pharmacokinetic (PK) data were obtained for a range of time points, and a
linear two-compartment PK model was built. Xenograft biological activity
studies were conducted in which MLN0264 was administered at various dose
levels and dosing schedules to mice bearing one of six different
xenograft models. We used multiple linear regression and tumor dynamic
modeling to understand the factors contributing to the biological
activity.First, the growth rate of each tumor under control and treatment
conditions was established by fitting the biological activity data within
the dosing period to an exponential growth function. Then, we assessed
the relationship of AUC to antitumor biological activity. Within each
xenograft model, AUC was strongly correlated with biological activity
across a range of schedules (R2>0.9, pMLN0264 is an investigational
antibody-drug conjugate (ADC) that consists of the human anti-guanylyl
cyclase C (GCC) antibody linked to a microtubule-disrupting agent
(monomethyl auristatin). As ADCs have a very long clearance half-life,
the potential exists for a highly infrequent dosing schedule. A
quantitative understanding of the relationship between exposure and
preclinical antitumor biological activity is thus applied to support dose
schedule selection in the clinic.In this study, we develop a
pharmacokinetic/efficacy (PK/E) relationship in xenograft models to
evaluate the predictive contributions of exposure and xenograft
characteristics to MLN0264 biological activity. Single dose
pharmacokinetic (PK) data were obtained for a range of time points, and a
linear two-compartment PK model was built. Xenograft biological activity
studies were conducted in which MLN0264 was administered at various dose
levels and dosing schedules to mice bearing one of six different
xenograft models. We used multiple linear regression and tumor dynamic
modeling to understand the factors contributing to the biological
activity.First, the growth rate of each tumor under control and treatment
conditions was established by fitting the biological activity data within
the dosing period to an exponential growth function. Then, we assessed
the relationship of AUC to antitumor biological activity. Within each
xenograft model, AUC was strongly correlated with biological activity
across a range of schedules (R2>0.9, p<0.03, for all models).
AUC-proportional biological activity was confirmed using dynamic modeling
with direct drug effect to simulate the tumor dynamics for different
dosing schedules.Although biological activity within a xenograft model
was strongly correlated with exposure, when the data from different
xenograft models were pooled together, the correlation was weaker (R2=
0.30, p= 0.0004). This result suggests that, although schedule is not a
major determinant of biological activity, other xenograft-specific
factors may be contributing to biological activity. To test the
contribution of some possible factors, we used multiple linear regression
to determine which covariates (such as GCC expression level and baseline
growth rate of xenograft models) are predictive of biological activity.
The results suggest baseline growth rate does not correlate with
biological activity while GCC expression is weakly correlated. This
finding formed the basis for the development of a mechanistic model of
GCC expression and biological activity.Taken together, this work
demonstrates the use of a PK/E framework to identify the scheduling
effect for a first-in-man protocol for an ADC. We have also demonstrated
that this PK/E framework can be further leveraged to assess the
contribution of other potential predictors of ADC biological activity in
xenograft models.

