Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: GSK3 phosphorylation at serine9 by RSK2 enhances calcium-induced
stress tolerance and cell survival


Our previous studies demonstrated that RSK2 plays a key role in cell
proliferation and transformation induced by tumor promoters such as
epidermal growth factor in mouse and human skin cells. However, no direct
evidence has been found regarding the relationship between RSK2 and cell
survival. In this study, we found that RSK2 interacted and phosphorylated
GSK3 at Ser9. Notably, GSK3 phosphorylation at Ser9 was suppressed in
RSK2/ MEFs compared with RSK2+/+ MEFs by stimulation of EGF and calcium
ionophore A23187, a cellular calcium stressor. In proliferation, we found
that RSK2 deficiency suppressed cell proliferation compared with RSK2+/+
MEFs. In contrast, GSK3/ MEFs induced the cell proliferation compared
with GSK3+/+ MEFs. Importantly, RSK2/ MEFs were induced severe cellular
morphology change by A23187 and enhanced G1/G0 and sub-G1 accumulation of
the cell cycle phase compared with RSK2+/+ MEFs. The sub-G1 induction in
RSK2/ MEFs by A23187 was correlated with increase of cytochrome c
release, caspase-3 cleavage and apoptotic DNA fragmentation compared with
RSK2+/+ MEFs. Notably, return back of RSK2 into RSK2/ MEFs restored
A23187-induced morphological change, and decreased apoptosis, apoptotic
DNA fragmentation and caspase-3 induction compared with RSK2/ /mock MEFs.
Taken together, our results demonstrated that RSK2 plays an important
role in stress-tolerance and cell survival, resulting in cell
proliferation and cancer development.

