Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An angiogenic function for E-cadherin in ovarian cancer


The loss of E-cadherin, a cell-cell adhesion molecule, is a
well-established marker for metastasis of cancer. Although E-cadherin is
synthesized as a transmembrane molecule, it can be cleaved of the
ectodomain and released in a soluble form (sE-cad), and this accounts a
key mechanism for a rapid reduction of functional E-cadherin at the cell
surface. Yet, very little is known about how this important protein
dictates the metastasis of these tumors. In ovarian cancer, a highly
metastatic tumor that is rapidly lethal, sE-cad is highly expressed in
the serum and metastatic ascites of ovarian carcinoma patients. Despite
many studies focused on the role of E-cadherin loss in weakening
cell-cell adhesion, whether sE-cad has biological activity in itself
remain virtually unknown. Here we show for the first time that sE-cad can
transduce angiogenic signals. sE-cad was also present in the culture
supernatant of ovarian cancer lines. sE-cad of supernatant and a
recombinant sE-cad-Fc chimera potently stimulated the migration of,
permeability, and tubulogenesis by human umbilical vein endothelial cells
in vitro. sE-cad also promoted functional neovascularization in a
Matrigel implant model in vivo. These effects could be reversed by
neutralizing anti-sE-cad, confirming that the effects were sE-cad
specific. In addition, we found that sE-cad bound to VE-cadherin, an
effect mediated through the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/Akt--catenin
pathway. These results unravel a new and important piece to the complex
biology of tumor angiogenesis and metastasis, and provide insights of
novel mechanisms regulating angiogenesis (This study was supported by RGC
grant HKU781013).

