Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Long non-coding RNA in situ hybridization signal patterns
correlate with breast tumor pathology


Background: Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) participate in a spectrum of
biological activities by diverse mechanisms. LncRNA dysregulation has
been reported for many cancers. Some lncRNAs may function as oncogenes
(OG) and others as tumor suppressor genes (TSG). To date, lncRNA has been
investigated primarily by qRT-PCR. In this study we have examined the
relationship of lncRNA expression patterns to breast tumor pathology by
chromogenic in situ hybridization (CISH).Methods: Expression of six
lncRNAs, HOTAIR (OG), H19 (OG), Kcnq1ot1 (OG), Meg3 (TSG), Malat1 (OG),
and ZFas1 (TSG), plus HER2 and MKI67 mRNAs was examined by RNAscope CISH
using tissue microarrays (TMAs) comprising normal epithelia, ductal
carcinoma in situ (DCIS), and invasive carcinoma (IC) from 45 patients.
HOTAIR/H19-mediated protein EZH2 was evaluated by immunohistochemistry
(IHC). CISH and IHC results were scored in terms of the percentage of
stained cells (50%=3) and staining intensity (low=1, medium=2, high=3).
Staining grade (SG) values were calculated as SG= proportion x intensity
(SG value range=1-9).Results: The TMAs contained 36 normal epithelia (N),
34 DCIS (D) and 43 IC tissue punches.HOTAIR expression was common: at
SG1, expression was detected in N:85%; D:97%; IC:100% (p>0.05). HOTAIR SG
mean values (N 4.0, D 5.7, IC 6.2) were significantly higher in DCIS and
IC than in normal tissues (N:D p50%=3) and staining intensity (low=1,
medium=2, high=3). Staining grade (SG) values were calculated as SG=
proportion x intensity (SG value range=1-9).Results: The TMAs contained
36 normal epithelia (N), 34 DCIS (D) and 43 IC tissue punches.HOTAIR
expression was common: at SG1, expression was detected in N:85%; D:97%;
IC:100% (p>0.05). HOTAIR SG mean values (N 4.0, D 5.7, IC 6.2) were
significantly higher in DCIS and IC than in normal tissues (N:D p<0.05;
N:IC p0.05). IC HOTAIR SGs correlated with Nottingham grade (p0.05). IC
HOTAIR SGs correlated with Nottingham grade (p<0.01), HER2 CISH (p0.05).
IC HOTAIR SGs correlated with Nottingham grade (p<0.01), HER2 CISH
(p<0.01) and MKI67 CISH (p0.05). IC HOTAIR SGs correlated with Nottingham
grade (p<0.01), HER2 CISH (p<0.01) and MKI67 CISH (p<0.05). HOTAIR
expression levels in DCIS were associated with MKI67 CISH (p0.05). IC
HOTAIR SGs correlated with Nottingham grade (p<0.01), HER2 CISH (p<0.01)
and MKI67 CISH (p<0.05). HOTAIR expression levels in DCIS were associated
with MKI67 CISH (p<0.01).H19 was rarely expressed in normal epithelial or
tumor cells but was strongly expressed especially in inter-lobular
stromal cells around invasive growths. At SG1 H19 was detected in N:38%;
D:55%; IC:90% (p0.05; N:IC p0.05; N:IC p<0.01; D:IC p0.05; N:IC p<0.01;
D:IC p<0.05). IC H19 expression showed a positive correlation with
Nottingham grade (p0.05; N:IC p<0.01; D:IC p<0.05). IC H19 expression
showed a positive correlation with Nottingham grade (p<0.05) and with
MKI67 expression (p0.05; N:IC p<0.01; D:IC p<0.05). IC H19 expression
showed a positive correlation with Nottingham grade (p<0.05) and with
MKI67 expression (p<0.01). H19 in DCIS showed a correlation with MKI67
CISH (p0.05; N:IC p<0.01; D:IC p<0.05). IC H19 expression showed a
positive correlation with Nottingham grade (p<0.05) and with MKI67
expression (p<0.01). H19 in DCIS showed a correlation with MKI67 CISH
(p<0.01).Kcnq1ot1 staining was more common in DCIS and IC than in normal
tissues: at SG1, N:77%; D:96%; IC:94% (p0.05; N:IC p<0.01; D:IC p<0.05).
IC H19 expression showed a positive correlation with Nottingham grade
(p<0.05) and with MKI67 expression (p<0.01). H19 in DCIS showed a
correlation with MKI67 CISH (p<0.01).Kcnq1ot1 staining was more common in
DCIS and IC than in normal tissues: at SG1, N:77%; D:96%; IC:94%
(p<0.01). Both the DCIS and IC SGs correlated with MKI67 expression
(p0.05; N:IC p<0.01; D:IC p<0.05). IC H19 expression showed a positive
correlation with Nottingham grade (p<0.05) and with MKI67 expression
(p<0.01). H19 in DCIS showed a correlation with MKI67 CISH
(p<0.01).Kcnq1ot1 staining was more common in DCIS and IC than in normal
tissues: at SG1, N:77%; D:96%; IC:94% (p<0.01). Both the DCIS and IC SGs
correlated with MKI67 expression (p<0.05). Meg3 expression was associated
with normal breast; at SG1, N:46%; D:2%; IC:0%, [p0.05; N:IC p<0.01; D:IC
p<0.05). IC H19 expression showed a positive correlation with Nottingham
grade (p<0.05) and with MKI67 expression (p<0.01). H19 in DCIS showed a
correlation with MKI67 CISH (p<0.01).Kcnq1ot1 staining was more common in
DCIS and IC than in normal tissues: at SG1, N:77%; D:96%; IC:94%
(p<0.01). Both the DCIS and IC SGs correlated with MKI67 expression
(p<0.05). Meg3 expression was associated with normal breast; at SG1,
N:46%; D:2%; IC:0%, [p<0.01]). Malat1 stained strongly in all cells in
all specimens. Zfas1 specimen staining was absent or weak.IC and DCIS
EZH2 IHC staining correlated positively with both HOTAIR and H19
expression (p0.05; N:IC p<0.01; D:IC p<0.05). IC H19 expression showed a
positive correlation with Nottingham grade (p<0.05) and with MKI67
expression (p<0.01). H19 in DCIS showed a correlation with MKI67 CISH
(p<0.01).Kcnq1ot1 staining was more common in DCIS and IC than in normal
tissues: at SG1, N:77%; D:96%; IC:94% (p<0.01). Both the DCIS and IC SGs
correlated with MKI67 expression (p<0.05). Meg3 expression was associated
with normal breast; at SG1, N:46%; D:2%; IC:0%, [p<0.01]). Malat1 stained
strongly in all cells in all specimens. Zfas1 specimen staining was
absent or weak.IC and DCIS EZH2 IHC staining correlated positively with
both HOTAIR and H19 expression (p<0.05).Conclusions: These data
demonstrate the utility of CISH for investigating and demonstrating
pathologic lncRNA expression. HOTAIR and H19 in particular and possibly
Kncq1ot1 and Meg3 are potential breast cancer biomarkers. H19 may be a
marker for DCIS at increased risk of progression to invasive cancer.

