Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genomic and molecular profiling of NSCLC formalin-fixed
paraffin-embedded tumors


Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer (NSCLC) is the most common form of lung
cancer, accounting for approximately 85% of all lung cancers worldwide.
Standard therapy options include surgical resection followed by radiation
and/or chemotherapy. More recently, analysis of the genomic profile of
NSCLC has led to the development of molecularly targeted treatment
strategies designed to enhance survival of select subsets of patients
containing pre-determined genetic alterations, including gene mutations
and aberrant gene expression profiles. In this study, we have developed a
TaqMan-based approach to evaluate the genomic profile of 339 NSCLC FFPE
tumors, consisting of 152 adenocarcinoma and 187 squamous cell carcinoma
(SCC), stages I-IV. Using a custom qRT-PCR somatic mutation array, we
have identified the frequencies of key mutations prevalent in NSCLC-
associated genes, including EGFR: 5% SCC , 29% adenocarcinoma, cMET: 6%
SCC, 4% adenocarcinoma, and KRAS: 3% SCC, 19% adenocarcinoma. Overall,
these frequencies are concordant with previous reports. Additionally, we
have evaluated the gene expression and IHC profiles of NSCLC-driver
signaling pathways including EGFR, cMET and HGF. Various levels of
expression for EGFR, cMET and HGF were observed across all samples, with
a significant association detected between the presence of EGFR mutation
and high EGFR expression in adenocarcinoma (p value = 0.0046). Overall,
our findings represent a comprehensive catalog of common genetic
aberrations with concurrent gene and protein expression profiles in
NSCLC. Furthermore, this data provides insight into correlations observed
across these molecular characteristics contributing to NSCLC tumor
development. These insights can provide guidance for patient
stratification and novel therapeutic strategies for select targeted
therapies in NSCLC.

