Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Screening more than 60 human SCLC lines with approved and
investigational agents indicates complex patterns of response:
Identification of HSP90 and HDACs as potential targets


Small cell lung cancer (SCLC) is an aggressive cancer with a 5-year
survival rate of 500 compounds against > 60 well characterized SCLC cell
lines in culture. Cells were exposed to 101 Approved Oncology Drugs (AOD)
and 433 Investigational Agents. By evaluating compounds at 9
concentrations (10uM to 1.5nM), using cell viability 96h post drug
exposure as the endpoint (Cell Titer Glo), we were able to obtain
concentration response curves and IC50 values for the compounds and rank
activity of these agents. In parallel studies, using Affymetrix exon ST1
arrays and miRNA profiling, we examined these same cell lines for
differences in gene expression patterns that may correlate with
sensitivity or resistance to select agents in the screen. The Myc
oncogene (cMyc, LMyc, or nMyc) is over-expressed in about 40% of SCLC
lines. Surprisingly, early analyses of the SCLC screen data have been
unable to correlate high Myc expression with response to drugs or
investigational agents (there is a trend with bromodomain inhibitors).
The large majority of SCLC lines were sensitive to compounds against
select target classes (e.g. HSP90 inhibitors and HDAC inhibitors).
Examining HSP70 and HSP90 levels by Western blot suggested a slight
reduction in HSP90 levels in cells resistant to the HSP90 inhibitor
Ganetespib with no change in HSP70 levels. Some inhibitors against these
targets showed broader cell activity than others. We are currently
determining whether such differential drug sensitivity is correlated with
specific changes in gene expression patterns in these cells. Further data
analyses from the screen combined with genomic profiling of the cells
will be presented.Funded by NCI Contract No. HHSN261200800001E.

