Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ETV4 promotes pancreatic cancer progression and metastasis


Pancreatic cancer is a highly metastatic disease with a 5 year survival
rate of 6.0% after diagnosis. The poor outcome of pancreatic cancer is
largely due to its highly aggressive nature and lack of effective
therapies against metastatic disease. Therefore, it is imperative to
identify novel molecular targets driving metastatic progression of
pancreatic cancer. ETV4, proto-oncogenic transcription factor, has been
shown to be expressed aberrantly in various cancers types and to play
important roles in pathobiology; however, its roles in pancreatic cancer
have not been defined. We investigated the pathological significance of
ETV4 in pancreatic cancer by its silencing in two highly metastatic
pancreatic cancer cell lines, Colo357 and ASPC1, and by forced
overexpression in weakly tumorigenic BXPC3 cells. Silencing of ETV4 led
to decreases in growth, clonogenicity, motility and invasiveness of
pancreatic cancer cells, whereas its overexpression had opposite effects.
Furthermore, our data demonstrate a correlation with changes in the
expression of mesenchymal (N-cadherin, Vimentin, Slug and Snail) and
epithelial (E-cadherin) markers upon ETV4 modulation, indicating its role
in epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT). More importantly, our in
vivo studies in an orthotopic mouse model of pancreatic cancer
demonstrated a direct association of ETV4 overexpression with
tumorigenicity and metastatic potential of pancreatic cancer cells. In
summary, our studies establish a functional role of ETV4 in pancreatic
cancer pathogenesis.

