Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The utility of FDG uptake as a surrogate biomarker to monitor
tumor cell metabolism in response to anticancer therapy


[18F]FDG-PET imaging has been emerging as a powerful clinical tool for
tumor diagnosis, staging and monitoring anticancer therapy. Due to some
physiologic variants and technical artifacts, one of the limitations for
[18F]FDG-PET imaging is the potential to show negative scans despite the
presence of malignant tumors. In this report, we aimed to gain insights
into the FDG tracer biology in different tumor models and subsequently to
validate the use of FDG tracer uptake for monitoring targeted therapy. To
measure the FDG tracer uptake in tumor cells, a LC/MS method was
established to monitor the FDG monophosphate; these results were compared
with the outcome of [18F]FDG-PET imaging. In a subset tumor models
including patient derived xenografts, not all growing tumors showed high
FDG tracer avidity. RT-PCR and IHC assays were performed to understand
the potential physiological factors that could impact the FDG tracer
avidity including the intrinsic glucose level, the exposure and
distribution of FDG, as well as the expressions of glucose transporters
and hexokinase. The results indicated that LC/MS analysis of FDG
monophosphate served as a cost-effective tool to provide a surrogate
measure of [18F]FDG-PET imaging. By using FDG tracer avid tumor models,
several anticancer agents including the PI3K/mTOR dual inhibitor
PF-04691502, crizotinib and the -Secretase inhibitor PF-03084014
demonstrated suppression in FDG tracer uptake after treatment, which
predicted their antitumor efficacies in the corresponding models. This
work provides insights into the FDG tracer biology and the utility of
[18F]FDG-PET imaging as a non-invasive biomarker for anticancer drug
discovery.

