Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A Monoclonal Antibody, MORAb-075, Targeting Claudin-3 & Claudin-4
Inhibits human ovarian, pancreatic and prostate cancer progression in mice


Claudin (CLDN) is a family of integral membrane proteins. They are
crucial for tight junction formation and functions. Studies have found
CLDN3 and CLDN4 proteins are overexpressed in majority of primary
ovarian, prostate, and pancreatic cancers.We have generated a rat-human
chimeric monoclonal antibody, MORAb-075, which binds to CLDN3 and CLDN4
with high affinity in vitro. In order to evaluate its therapeutic
potential in vivo, we have established a number of human cancer models
where the tumors are grown orthotopically in nude mice. These tumors were
confirmed positive for human CLDN3 or/and CLDN4 expressions via
immunohistochemistry staining. The models include a CLDN3/4-expressing
prostate cancer PC-3; a CLDN4-expressing pancreatic cancer, BxPc-3; a
CLDN3-expressing ovarian cancer, IGROV-1. In these orthotopic tumor
models, MORAb-075 demonstrated significant antitumor activities. When the
mAb was administered intravenously at 25 mg/kg, twice weekly for 4 weeks,
the tumor growth inhibition (TGI) of PC-3 tumors reached 50%; TGI of
BxPC-3 tumors was nearly 60% and TGI of IGROV-1 tumors was greater than
75%. Our findings demonstrate the potency of MORAb-075, as a single
agent, in inhibiting solid tumor growth in these models. These results
suggest that mAb therapy targeting CLDN3 & CLDN4 is a valuable option for
therapeutic application in cancer therapy that may be improved in
combination with standard of care chemotherapies for CLDN3 or CLDN4
positive cancers.

