Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting metabolic enzyme with locked nucleic acids in non-small
cell lung cancer


Despite advances in our knowledge of genetics of cancer and some progress
in cancer treatment over the last few decades, lung cancer remains the
leading cause of cancer mortality worldwide. Recently cancer metabolomics
have been widely applied into cancer research, including of cancer
diagnosis and therapy. Our recent work has identified tumor initiating
cells (TICs) derived from non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients and
shown that metabolic enzyme glycine decarboxylase (GLDC) is critical for
TICs in NSCLC. In the clinic, aberrant activation of GLDC correlates with
poorer survival in lung cancer patients. Those findings provide potential
diagnostic markers and/or therapeutic target for NSCLC. Locked nucleic
acids (LNAs) are novel high-affinity DNA analogs that can be used as
genotype-specific drugs. In this study we tested NSCLC patient-derived
xenograft tumor growth inhibition by GLDC LNAs antisense
oligonucleotides. These LNAs antisense oligonucleotides strongly reduce
GLDC protein levels. The osmotic minipumps were filled with GLDC LNAs
antisense oligonucleotides at 0.5,1 and 5 mg/kg/day dose and implanted
dorsally into tumor-bearing NOD/SCID Il2r-/- mice. Tumor growth was
inhibited at dosages from 1 mg/kg/day. LNAs antisense oligonucleotides
appeared to be non-toxic at dosages of 5 mg/kg/day. Furthermore, we found
significant changes of serum metabolomics in lung cancer patients
compared to normal donors. Our data show that GLDC LNAs antisense
oligonucleotides are potent genotype-specific drugs that can inhibit lung
tumor growth in vivo.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

