Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Matrix stiffening and 1 integrin promote fibroblast accumulation
in lung squamous cell carcinomas but not in adenocarcinomas


The mechanisms underlying the abundance of tumor associated fibrobasts
(TAFs) in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) remain poorly understood. To
address this gap of knowedge, we examined the relative contribution of
mechanical (i.e. matrix rigidity) and soluble biochemical (i.e. serum)
cues in the accumulation of primary TAFs from either adenocarcinoma (ADC)
or squamous cell carcinoma (SQC) NSCLC patients. For this purpose,
fibroblasts were cultured on collagen-I coated gels engineered to exhibit
either normal- or tumor-like stiffnesses at different serum
concentrations. In fibroblasts from non-malignant tissue, matrix
stiffening alone was sufficient to increase fibroblast accumulation by
20%. In addition, matrix stiffening-induced accumulation was dominant or
comparable to that due to soluble growth factors up to moderate serum
concentrations. These mechanical stimulatory effects were 1
integrin-dependent, and were associated with both increased integrin
mechanosensing through FAKpY397and a post-transcriptionally-driven rise
in 1 integrin expression. The latter mechanoregulatory circuit could be
extended to TAFs in a subtype-dependent fashion, since SQC-TAFs exhibited
higher FAKpY397 and 1 expression than ADC-TAFs. Remarkably, SQC-TAF
density was enhanced > 50% in response to matrix stiffening, whereas they
were largely desensitized to serum. Conversely, substantial accumulation
of ADC-TAFs required large serum concentration, whereas it was poorly
induced by either matrix stiffening or low serum concentration. These
results reveal that a therapeutic strategy aiming to inhibit soluble
growth factors may be effective against ADC-TAFs, whereas a strategy
aiming to rescue normal lung elasticity may be more efficient against
SQC-TAFs.

