Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: How can epidemiology become more effective in reducing the burden
of cancer in the 21st century? An analysis of NCI-funded grants and the
scientific literature


Background: Concurrent with an NCI sponsored 2012 workshop on the future
of cancer epidemiology, a set of drivers were identified to accelerate
the field of cancer epidemiology across the translational research
continuum in the 21st century: (i) emerging technologies; (ii)
multi-level analyses and interventions; (iii) knowledge integration from
basic, clinical and population sciences; and (iv) collaboration and team
science.Objective: To map the evolution of identified drivers and key
translational phases (T0-T4) in the past decade.Methods: We analyzed
grants funded by the NCI's Epidemiology and Genomics Research Program and
published literature for 2000, 2005, and 2010. For each year, we
evaluated the aims of all new and competing grants and randomly selected
100 cancer epidemiology articles from PubMed. We used two-sample t-tests
to compare differences between drivers and multivariate logistic
regression to investigate the relationship between multi-institutional
collaboration and the remaining drivers.Results: Our results show a
significant shift from single-institution studies that focused on
traditional questionnaire-based epidemiology studies to
technology-driven, multi-disciplinary consortia-driven studies for both
NCI grants and published literature. Compared to grants that were
single-institution-based, consortia grants were significantly more likely
to incorporate key contemporary technologies (OR= 3.53; 95% CI=1.44-8.61;
p-value = 0.005) and engaged in multi-level analyses (OR =2.27; 95%
CI=1.06-4.86, p-value=0.035). The vast majority of grants (82%) and
publications (86%) analyzed were discovery (T0) or characterization (T1)
research suggesting a critical need for more T2-T4 translational studies.
Our evaluation also indicates a dearth of research in two areas: 1)
multi-level analyses that takes into account the combination of
molecular, individual, social and environmental determinants and 2)
knowledge integration that evaluates the robustness and interpretation of
scientific evidence derived from basic, clinical and population
sciences.Summary: Cancer epidemiology is at the cusp of a paradigm
shiftpropelled by a need to accelerate the pace of translating scientific
discoveries to impart population health benefits. While
multi-institutional and technology-drive collaboration is happening, our
evaluation of funded grants and published literature in the first decade
of the 21st century provide concrete evidence that concerted efforts to
incorporate other key elements that influence the future of cancer
epidemiology are warranted for the discipline to meet the challenges of
this changing landscape.

