Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Adiponectin increases VEGF expression and promotes angiogenesis in
human chondrosarcoma


Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is an angiogenic mediator in
tumors and has been implicated in the pathogenesis and progression of
cancer. Adiponectin is a protein hormone secreted by adipose tissue. We
recently found that adiponectin increased metastasis in human
chondrosarcoma. However, the effect of adiponectin on VEGF expression and
angiogenesis in human chondrosarcoma cells is mostly unknown. Here we
found that adiponectin promoted VEGF expression in human chondrosarcoma
and subsequently increased migration and tube formation in endothelial
progenitor cells (EPCs). Pretreatment of cells for 30 min with PI3K
inhibitors (LY294002 and wortmannine), Akt inhibitor, mTOR inhibitor
(Rapamycin) or HIF-1 inhibitor abolished adiponectin-induced VEGF
expression, EPC migration and tube formation. In addition, transfection
of cells with PI3K, Akt, mTOR, or HIF-1 siRNA also reduced
adiponectin-induced VEGF expression, EPC migration and tube formation.
Knockdown adiponectin decreased VEGF expression in vitro as well as
angiogenesis effects the chick chorioallantoic membrane and matrigel-plug
nude mice model in vivo. In addition, using xenograft tumor angiogenesis
model, knockdown adiponectin significantly reduced tumor growth and tumor
angiogenesis. Finally, we analyzed from chondrosarcoma patients by
immunohistochemical staining and found that the expression of adiponectin
and VEGF was significantly higher in chondrosarcoma tissue than normal
cartilage. Taken together this study showed that adiponectin mediates
VEGF expression and angiogenesis of human chondrosarcoma cells. One of
the mechanisms underlying adiponectin induced VEGF expression and
angiogenesis was activation of PI3K, Akt, mTOR and HIF1- pathways.

