Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel candidate metastasis-associated protein, MAP40,
differentially expressed in highly metastatic breast cancer cells reveals
an essential role in tumor metastasis


Metastasis is the underlying cause of death in the majority of patients
with breast cancer who succumb to their disease, but the fundamental
mechanisms remain poorly understood. Here we have found a novel candidate
of metastasis-associated protein, MAP40, which is highly expressed
membrane protein in the metastatic breast cancer cell lines. Using the
public microarray datasets, we also found that MAP40 is significantly
increased in the basal type of breast tumors compared to the luminal
subtype. We undertook the lentivirus-based system to functionally silence
MAP40 gene in basal-like breast cancer cell lines. Knockdown of MAP40
results in a significant reduction of cell migration and invasiveness as
well as suppression of anchorage-independent growth in basal-like breast
cancer cells. Additionally, depletion of MAP40 induces E-cadherin
expression, while integrin 1 protein level is suppressed. Together with
results from studies in animal models suggest that MAP40 may promote
tumor formation and direct metastasis of breast cancer in vivo. Ongoing
studies to find interacting partners and downstream genes will allow us
to further understand its mechanism in metastasis.This work was supported
by a National Research Foundation grant of Korea (2009-0081756) funded by
the Korea government.

