Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dense and non-dense mammographic area and risk of breast cancer by
age and tumor characteristics


Introduction: We recently reported the percentage of mammographic density
(MD) to be a breast cancer risk factor across tumor characteristics and
age groups. Yet, we noted stronger associations for tumors of large size
and positive lymph nodes across all ages, and ER-negative status among
women ages Introduction: We recently reported the percentage of
mammographic density (MD) to be a breast cancer risk factor across tumor
characteristics and age groups. Yet, we noted stronger associations for
tumors of large size and positive lymph nodes across all ages, and
ER-negative status among women ages <55 years, suggesting high MD may
play an important role in tumor aggressiveness, especially in younger
women. We extend this initial study to investigate whether these
associations with aggressive disease are due to the underlying
associations of absolute dense or non-dense area, or both, with breast
cancer risk.Methods: Data were pooled from six studies including 3517
women with invasive breast cancer and 8558 without. Dense area and
non-dense area were assessed from digitized film-screen mammograms using
a computer-assisted threshold technique. We standardized dense and
non-dense area measurements made within each study and categorized into
quartiles based on the control distribution for pooled analyses. We used
polytomous logistic regression to calculate breast cancer odds according
to tumor type, histopathological characteristics, and receptor (ER, PR)
status by age (Introduction: We recently reported the percentage of
mammographic density (MD) to be a breast cancer risk factor across tumor
characteristics and age groups. Yet, we noted stronger associations for
tumors of large size and positive lymph nodes across all ages, and
ER-negative status among women ages <55 years, suggesting high MD may
play an important role in tumor aggressiveness, especially in younger
women. We extend this initial study to investigate whether these
associations with aggressive disease are due to the underlying
associations of absolute dense or non-dense area, or both, with breast
cancer risk.Methods: Data were pooled from six studies including 3517
women with invasive breast cancer and 8558 without. Dense area and
non-dense area were assessed from digitized film-screen mammograms using
a computer-assisted threshold technique. We standardized dense and
non-dense area measurements made within each study and categorized into
quartiles based on the control distribution for pooled analyses. We used
polytomous logistic regression to calculate breast cancer odds according
to tumor type, histopathological characteristics, and receptor (ER, PR)
status by age (<55, 55-64, and 65 years), adjusting for continuous age,
body mass index, and study site.Results: Absolute dense area was
associated with increased breast cancer risk [odds ratios (ORs) Q1 vs Q2:
0.67, Q3 vs Q2: 1.25, Q4 vs Q2: 1.62] and non-dense area was associated
with decreased breast cancer risk (ORs: Q1 vs Q2: 1.44, Q3 vs Q2: 0.89,
Q4 vs Q2: 0.71) overall and across all age groups. Positive associations
for absolute dense area were observed across all invasive tumor
characteristics. Stronger associations were noted for larger tumors
across all ages (p-trend Introduction: We recently reported the
percentage of mammographic density (MD) to be a breast cancer risk factor
across tumor characteristics and age groups. Yet, we noted stronger
associations for tumors of large size and positive lymph nodes across all
ages, and ER-negative status among women ages <55 years, suggesting high
MD may play an important role in tumor aggressiveness, especially in
younger women. We extend this initial study to investigate whether these
associations with aggressive disease are due to the underlying
associations of absolute dense or non-dense area, or both, with breast
cancer risk.Methods: Data were pooled from six studies including 3517
women with invasive breast cancer and 8558 without. Dense area and
non-dense area were assessed from digitized film-screen mammograms using
a computer-assisted threshold technique. We standardized dense and
non-dense area measurements made within each study and categorized into
quartiles based on the control distribution for pooled analyses. We used
polytomous logistic regression to calculate breast cancer odds according
to tumor type, histopathological characteristics, and receptor (ER, PR)
status by age (<55, 55-64, and 65 years), adjusting for continuous age,
body mass index, and study site.Results: Absolute dense area was
associated with increased breast cancer risk [odds ratios (ORs) Q1 vs Q2:
0.67, Q3 vs Q2: 1.25, Q4 vs Q2: 1.62] and non-dense area was associated
with decreased breast cancer risk (ORs: Q1 vs Q2: 1.44, Q3 vs Q2: 0.89,
Q4 vs Q2: 0.71) overall and across all age groups. Positive associations
for absolute dense area were observed across all invasive tumor
characteristics. Stronger associations were noted for larger tumors
across all ages (p-trend <0.01). Among women Introduction: We recently
reported the percentage of mammographic density (MD) to be a breast
cancer risk factor across tumor characteristics and age groups. Yet, we
noted stronger associations for tumors of large size and positive lymph
nodes across all ages, and ER-negative status among women ages <55 years,
suggesting high MD may play an important role in tumor aggressiveness,
especially in younger women. We extend this initial study to investigate
whether these associations with aggressive disease are due to the
underlying associations of absolute dense or non-dense area, or both,
with breast cancer risk.Methods: Data were pooled from six studies
including 3517 women with invasive breast cancer and 8558 without. Dense
area and non-dense area were assessed from digitized film-screen
mammograms using a computer-assisted threshold technique. We standardized
dense and non-dense area measurements made within each study and
categorized into quartiles based on the control distribution for pooled
analyses. We used polytomous logistic regression to calculate breast
cancer odds according to tumor type, histopathological characteristics,
and receptor (ER, PR) status by age (<55, 55-64, and 65 years), adjusting
for continuous age, body mass index, and study site.Results: Absolute
dense area was associated with increased breast cancer risk [odds ratios
(ORs) Q1 vs Q2: 0.67, Q3 vs Q2: 1.25, Q4 vs Q2: 1.62] and non-dense area
was associated with decreased breast cancer risk (ORs: Q1 vs Q2: 1.44, Q3
vs Q2: 0.89, Q4 vs Q2: 0.71) overall and across all age groups. Positive
associations for absolute dense area were observed across all invasive
tumor characteristics. Stronger associations were noted for larger tumors
across all ages (p-trend <0.01). Among women <55 years, stronger
associations were observed for ER+ vs ER- [p-heterogeneity (het) = 0.02]
and PR+ vs PR- tumors (p-het = 0.02). Non-dense area was inversely
associated with all tumor characteristics evaluated except for tumors
Introduction: We recently reported the percentage of mammographic density
(MD) to be a breast cancer risk factor across tumor characteristics and
age groups. Yet, we noted stronger associations for tumors of large size
and positive lymph nodes across all ages, and ER-negative status among
women ages <55 years, suggesting high MD may play an important role in
tumor aggressiveness, especially in younger women. We extend this initial
study to investigate whether these associations with aggressive disease
are due to the underlying associations of absolute dense or non-dense
area, or both, with breast cancer risk.Methods: Data were pooled from six
studies including 3517 women with invasive breast cancer and 8558
without. Dense area and non-dense area were assessed from digitized
film-screen mammograms using a computer-assisted threshold technique. We
standardized dense and non-dense area measurements made within each study
and categorized into quartiles based on the control distribution for
pooled analyses. We used polytomous logistic regression to calculate
breast cancer odds according to tumor type, histopathological
characteristics, and receptor (ER, PR) status by age (<55, 55-64, and 65
years), adjusting for continuous age, body mass index, and study
site.Results: Absolute dense area was associated with increased breast
cancer risk [odds ratios (ORs) Q1 vs Q2: 0.67, Q3 vs Q2: 1.25, Q4 vs Q2:
1.62] and non-dense area was associated with decreased breast cancer risk
(ORs: Q1 vs Q2: 1.44, Q3 vs Q2: 0.89, Q4 vs Q2: 0.71) overall and across
all age groups. Positive associations for absolute dense area were
observed across all invasive tumor characteristics. Stronger associations
were noted for larger tumors across all ages (p-trend <0.01). Among women
<55 years, stronger associations were observed for ER+ vs ER-
[p-heterogeneity (het) = 0.02] and PR+ vs PR- tumors (p-het = 0.02).
Non-dense area was inversely associated with all tumor characteristics
evaluated except for tumors <1.1 cm, for which no association was
present. The inverse association was stronger for larger tumors,
particularly for women Introduction: We recently reported the percentage
of mammographic density (MD) to be a breast cancer risk factor across
tumor characteristics and age groups. Yet, we noted stronger associations
for tumors of large size and positive lymph nodes across all ages, and
ER-negative status among women ages <55 years, suggesting high MD may
play an important role in tumor aggressiveness, especially in younger
women. We extend this initial study to investigate whether these
associations with aggressive disease are due to the underlying
associations of absolute dense or non-dense area, or both, with breast
cancer risk.Methods: Data were pooled from six studies including 3517
women with invasive breast cancer and 8558 without. Dense area and
non-dense area were assessed from digitized film-screen mammograms using
a computer-assisted threshold technique. We standardized dense and
non-dense area measurements made within each study and categorized into
quartiles based on the control distribution for pooled analyses. We used
polytomous logistic regression to calculate breast cancer odds according
to tumor type, histopathological characteristics, and receptor (ER, PR)
status by age (<55, 55-64, and 65 years), adjusting for continuous age,
body mass index, and study site.Results: Absolute dense area was
associated with increased breast cancer risk [odds ratios (ORs) Q1 vs Q2:
0.67, Q3 vs Q2: 1.25, Q4 vs Q2: 1.62] and non-dense area was associated
with decreased breast cancer risk (ORs: Q1 vs Q2: 1.44, Q3 vs Q2: 0.89,
Q4 vs Q2: 0.71) overall and across all age groups. Positive associations
for absolute dense area were observed across all invasive tumor
characteristics. Stronger associations were noted for larger tumors
across all ages (p-trend <0.01). Among women <55 years, stronger
associations were observed for ER+ vs ER- [p-heterogeneity (het) = 0.02]
and PR+ vs PR- tumors (p-het = 0.02). Non-dense area was inversely
associated with all tumor characteristics evaluated except for tumors
<1.1 cm, for which no association was present. The inverse association
was stronger for larger tumors, particularly for women <55 years (p-trend
Introduction: We recently reported the percentage of mammographic density
(MD) to be a breast cancer risk factor across tumor characteristics and
age groups. Yet, we noted stronger associations for tumors of large size
and positive lymph nodes across all ages, and ER-negative status among
women ages <55 years, suggesting high MD may play an important role in
tumor aggressiveness, especially in younger women. We extend this initial
study to investigate whether these associations with aggressive disease
are due to the underlying associations of absolute dense or non-dense
area, or both, with breast cancer risk.Methods: Data were pooled from six
studies including 3517 women with invasive breast cancer and 8558
without. Dense area and non-dense area were assessed from digitized
film-screen mammograms using a computer-assisted threshold technique. We
standardized dense and non-dense area measurements made within each study
and categorized into quartiles based on the control distribution for
pooled analyses. We used polytomous logistic regression to calculate
breast cancer odds according to tumor type, histopathological
characteristics, and receptor (ER, PR) status by age (<55, 55-64, and 65
years), adjusting for continuous age, body mass index, and study
site.Results: Absolute dense area was associated with increased breast
cancer risk [odds ratios (ORs) Q1 vs Q2: 0.67, Q3 vs Q2: 1.25, Q4 vs Q2:
1.62] and non-dense area was associated with decreased breast cancer risk
(ORs: Q1 vs Q2: 1.44, Q3 vs Q2: 0.89, Q4 vs Q2: 0.71) overall and across
all age groups. Positive associations for absolute dense area were
observed across all invasive tumor characteristics. Stronger associations
were noted for larger tumors across all ages (p-trend <0.01). Among women
<55 years, stronger associations were observed for ER+ vs ER-
[p-heterogeneity (het) = 0.02] and PR+ vs PR- tumors (p-het = 0.02).
Non-dense area was inversely associated with all tumor characteristics
evaluated except for tumors <1.1 cm, for which no association was
present. The inverse association was stronger for larger tumors,
particularly for women <55 years (p-trend <0.01). Also among women
Introduction: We recently reported the percentage of mammographic density
(MD) to be a breast cancer risk factor across tumor characteristics and
age groups. Yet, we noted stronger associations for tumors of large size
and positive lymph nodes across all ages, and ER-negative status among
women ages <55 years, suggesting high MD may play an important role in
tumor aggressiveness, especially in younger women. We extend this initial
study to investigate whether these associations with aggressive disease
are due to the underlying associations of absolute dense or non-dense
area, or both, with breast cancer risk.Methods: Data were pooled from six
studies including 3517 women with invasive breast cancer and 8558
without. Dense area and non-dense area were assessed from digitized
film-screen mammograms using a computer-assisted threshold technique. We
standardized dense and non-dense area measurements made within each study
and categorized into quartiles based on the control distribution for
pooled analyses. We used polytomous logistic regression to calculate
breast cancer odds according to tumor type, histopathological
characteristics, and receptor (ER, PR) status by age (<55, 55-64, and 65
years), adjusting for continuous age, body mass index, and study
site.Results: Absolute dense area was associated with increased breast
cancer risk [odds ratios (ORs) Q1 vs Q2: 0.67, Q3 vs Q2: 1.25, Q4 vs Q2:
1.62] and non-dense area was associated with decreased breast cancer risk
(ORs: Q1 vs Q2: 1.44, Q3 vs Q2: 0.89, Q4 vs Q2: 0.71) overall and across
all age groups. Positive associations for absolute dense area were
observed across all invasive tumor characteristics. Stronger associations
were noted for larger tumors across all ages (p-trend <0.01). Among women
<55 years, stronger associations were observed for ER+ vs ER-
[p-heterogeneity (het) = 0.02] and PR+ vs PR- tumors (p-het = 0.02).
Non-dense area was inversely associated with all tumor characteristics
evaluated except for tumors <1.1 cm, for which no association was
present. The inverse association was stronger for larger tumors,
particularly for women <55 years (p-trend <0.01). Also among women <55
years, a stronger inverse association with non-dense area was observed
for ER- vs. ER+ tumors (p-het = 0.02).Conclusion: These results suggest
the strong association we previously observed of high percent MD and
ER-negative disease in women Introduction: We recently reported the
percentage of mammographic density (MD) to be a breast cancer risk factor
across tumor characteristics and age groups. Yet, we noted stronger
associations for tumors of large size and positive lymph nodes across all
ages, and ER-negative status among women ages <55 years, suggesting high
MD may play an important role in tumor aggressiveness, especially in
younger women. We extend this initial study to investigate whether these
associations with aggressive disease are due to the underlying
associations of absolute dense or non-dense area, or both, with breast
cancer risk.Methods: Data were pooled from six studies including 3517
women with invasive breast cancer and 8558 without. Dense area and
non-dense area were assessed from digitized film-screen mammograms using
a computer-assisted threshold technique. We standardized dense and
non-dense area measurements made within each study and categorized into
quartiles based on the control distribution for pooled analyses. We used
polytomous logistic regression to calculate breast cancer odds according
to tumor type, histopathological characteristics, and receptor (ER, PR)
status by age (<55, 55-64, and 65 years), adjusting for continuous age,
body mass index, and study site.Results: Absolute dense area was
associated with increased breast cancer risk [odds ratios (ORs) Q1 vs Q2:
0.67, Q3 vs Q2: 1.25, Q4 vs Q2: 1.62] and non-dense area was associated
with decreased breast cancer risk (ORs: Q1 vs Q2: 1.44, Q3 vs Q2: 0.89,
Q4 vs Q2: 0.71) overall and across all age groups. Positive associations
for absolute dense area were observed across all invasive tumor
characteristics. Stronger associations were noted for larger tumors
across all ages (p-trend <0.01). Among women <55 years, stronger
associations were observed for ER+ vs ER- [p-heterogeneity (het) = 0.02]
and PR+ vs PR- tumors (p-het = 0.02). Non-dense area was inversely
associated with all tumor characteristics evaluated except for tumors
<1.1 cm, for which no association was present. The inverse association
was stronger for larger tumors, particularly for women <55 years (p-trend
<0.01). Also among women <55 years, a stronger inverse association with
non-dense area was observed for ER- vs. ER+ tumors (p-het =
0.02).Conclusion: These results suggest the strong association we
previously observed of high percent MD and ER-negative disease in women
<55 years could be explained by the low amount of non-dense area in these
women. Further research is warranted to clarify the possible differential
associations of absolute dense and non-dense area on breast cancer risk
according to tumor characteristics.

