Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Thermal ablative therapy with novel gold nanorods in an orthotopic
model of urinary bladder cancer


BackgroundThe use of nanoparticles has shown great therapeutic potential,
but delivery and clearance concerns have limited their use systemically.
Intravesical instillation of nanoparticles in the urinary bladder
provides a unique administration route to treat superficial bladder
cancer. We examined the anti-tumor effect of epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR)-directed gold nanorods combined with photothermal
treatment in a superficial bladder cancer model.MethodsA novel orthotopic
nu/nu murine xenograft model was established through intravesical
instillation of T24 human bladder cancer cells labeled with Luciferase.
After confirmation of positive tumor cell implantation via
bioluminescence, gold nanorods linked to the anti-EGFR antibody C225 were
instilled into the bladder cavity. The nanorods were specifically
fashioned to respond to near infrared (NIR) light, which was externally
administered via an 808 nm diode laser to the bladder. A safe and
effective regimen of in vivo photothermal ablation was determined by
optimizing the duration, power and distance from the tumor to the laser
source. The anti-cancer effect was monitored by an in vivo imaging system
in a non-invasive manner.ResultsThe tumor implantation rate with the T24
human cancer cell was approximately 90%. The optimized regimen of
photothermal treatment in this setting was laser power of 2.1 W/cm2 for
30 seconds at 2.5 centimeters from the skin. Using this in vivo tumor
model, and near-infrared energy combined with C225-conjugated gold
nanorods, we demonstrate significant therapeutic efficacy against the
implanted orthotopic bladder tumor (Table) with minimal systemic toxicity
using this regimen.ConclusionsPhotothermal ablation with EGFR-directed
gold nanorods is effective and well tolerated in an in vivo model of
urinary bladder cancer. Future clinical development would include NIR
light delivery via a cystoscope in a human application


