Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Polysialyltransferase ST8SiaII: a new target for the treatment of
metastatic tumors


Polysialic acid (polySia) is a carbohydrate polymer expressed on the
surface of NCAM (neuronal cell adhesion molecule) in many cancer cells
where it modulates cell-cell and cell-matrix adhesion, migration,
invasion and metastasis. PolySia-NCAM expression is strongly associated
with poor clinical prognosis and correlates with aggressive/invasive
disease in small cell lung cancer, pancreatic cancer, neuroblastoma and
many other tumors principally of neuroendocrine origin [1]. SiRNA
knockdown of polysialyltransferase ST8SiaII (STX), the enzyme primarily
responsible for polySia synthesis in tumors, has been shown to abolish
tumor cell migration [2]. Besides brain regions with persistent neuronal
plasticity, polySia is essentially absent from the adult body. STX
inhibition thus presents a novel, selective, highly attractive and
largely unexplored therapeutic opportunity to reduce dissemination of
polySia-expressing tumors [1]. Using cytidine monophosphate (CMP) as a
tool compound, we have validated a highly sensitive HPLC-based inhibition
assay, and demonstrated competitive inhibition of STX, leading to a
reduction in polySia expression [3]. Having demonstrated for the first
time that inhibition of STX by a small molecule leads to a reduction in
tumor cell migration and invasion, we have designed and synthesised
inhibitors of STX and the polysialylation process. The potency of these
compounds has been increased by chemical modification, resulting in
greater lipophilicity. Using an isogenic cell line system (rat glioma
cells C6-STX: polySia+/STX+ and C6-WT: polySia-/STX- [4]) and naturally
polySia expressing human neuroblastoma cells (SH-SY5Y, IMR-32) these
compounds were evaluated for their ability to reduce polySia expression
and to modulate cell migration in vitro. We have identified CMP-sialic
acid precursors, including compounds ICT-3172 and ICT-3176, which reduced
polySia expression and tumor cell migration by up to 70%. These effects
were only found in cell lines expressing STX and polySia. In summary, we
have identified a number of key modifications to polySia biosynthetic
precursors which dramatically decrease cell migration in cells
over-expressing STX through modulation of polySia assembly. The potential
of the polySia biosynthesis pathway, and in particular STX, as attractive
therapeutic targets in metastatic tumors is discussed.[1] Falconer, R.A.
et al., Curr. Cancer Drug Targets, 2012, 12, 925-939[2] Schreiber et
al.,Gastroenterology, 2008, 134, 1555-1566[3] Al-Saraireh YMJ et al.,
PLoS ONE, 2013, 8:e7336[4] Suzuki, M. et al., Glycobiology, 2005, 15,
887-894.

