Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Physical activity is associated with improved quality of life in
cancer survivors: A population-based analysis


Introduction: The CDC recommends cancer survivors engage in 150 minutes
of moderate- or 75 minutes of vigorous-intensity physical activity, along
with 2 sessions of strength training, every week. We sought to determine
whether meeting these guidelines was correlated with improved quality of
life in a large contemporary population-based sample of cancer
survivors.Methods: Data regarding quality of life, physical activity and
other covariates were obtained from the 2010 National Health Interview
Survey, the largest source of health information of people in the United
States. Quality of life was determined by the answer to the question, In
general, would you say your quality of life is, with potential responses
of excellent, very good, good, fair and poor. Correlation between meeting
CDC guidelines and self-reported quality of life was assessed with
univariate and multivariate analyses using SUDAAN software.Results: A
weighted total of 19,441,052 cancer survivors in the United States were
included in this analysis. Only 10.4% of cancer survivors met physical
activity guidelines. Meeting guidelines was significantly correlated with
White race, young age, cancer type, higher education, and private
insurance on univariate analysis (all pIntroduction: The CDC recommends
cancer survivors engage in 150 minutes of moderate- or 75 minutes of
vigorous-intensity physical activity, along with 2 sessions of strength
training, every week. We sought to determine whether meeting these
guidelines was correlated with improved quality of life in a large
contemporary population-based sample of cancer survivors.Methods: Data
regarding quality of life, physical activity and other covariates were
obtained from the 2010 National Health Interview Survey, the largest
source of health information of people in the United States. Quality of
life was determined by the answer to the question, In general, would you
say your quality of life is, with potential responses of excellent, very
good, good, fair and poor. Correlation between meeting CDC guidelines and
self-reported quality of life was assessed with univariate and
multivariate analyses using SUDAAN software.Results: A weighted total of
19,441,052 cancer survivors in the United States were included in this
analysis. Only 10.4% of cancer survivors met physical activity
guidelines. Meeting guidelines was significantly correlated with White
race, young age, cancer type, higher education, and private insurance on
univariate analysis (all p<0.01). Meeting guidelines was also correlated
with decreased fatigue and higher self-reported quality of life, physical
health, mental health status, and reported satisfaction with social
activities and relationships (all pIntroduction: The CDC recommends
cancer survivors engage in 150 minutes of moderate- or 75 minutes of
vigorous-intensity physical activity, along with 2 sessions of strength
training, every week. We sought to determine whether meeting these
guidelines was correlated with improved quality of life in a large
contemporary population-based sample of cancer survivors.Methods: Data
regarding quality of life, physical activity and other covariates were
obtained from the 2010 National Health Interview Survey, the largest
source of health information of people in the United States. Quality of
life was determined by the answer to the question, In general, would you
say your quality of life is, with potential responses of excellent, very
good, good, fair and poor. Correlation between meeting CDC guidelines and
self-reported quality of life was assessed with univariate and
multivariate analyses using SUDAAN software.Results: A weighted total of
19,441,052 cancer survivors in the United States were included in this
analysis. Only 10.4% of cancer survivors met physical activity
guidelines. Meeting guidelines was significantly correlated with White
race, young age, cancer type, higher education, and private insurance on
univariate analysis (all p<0.01). Meeting guidelines was also correlated
with decreased fatigue and higher self-reported quality of life, physical
health, mental health status, and reported satisfaction with social
activities and relationships (all p<0.01). On multivariate analysis
controlling for race, age, sex, cancer type, education, and insurance,
meeting physical activity guidelines remained significantly correlated
with higher quality of life (OR=3.69, 95% CI: 1.2-11.6,
p=0.03).Conclusions: Only 10.4% of cancer survivors meet physical
activity guidelines. Meeting guidelines is significantly associated with
improved quality of life, independent of other sociodemographic factors,
and should therefore be encouraged.


