Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genetic variations in acid phosphatase 1 (ACP 1) gene and cancer
risk


BACKGROUND: Human acid phosphatases are normally found in low
concentrations, but pronounced changes in their synthesis occur in
particular diseases where unusually high or low enzyme expression is seen
as part of the pathophysiological process,suggesting the clinical
relevance of ACP as a disease marker. Acid Phosphatase 1 (ACP1) is
considered to play a key role as a regulator of signaling pathways in
receptor-stimulated immune cells and is known to be widely expressed and
endowed with metabolic and proliferative activity. We hypothesized ACP1
could serve as a predictive marker in identifying cancer patients at an
earlier stage, especially when disease is treatable. Acid phosphatase
enzymes is generally correlated with the 3 co-dominant alleles A, B & C.
This is the first study screening two ACP1 gene polymorphisms and ACP
gene expressions in different cancer types. In this study, we exploit a
novel connection of enzymatic activity in correlations to these two ACP1
polymorphisms and with more specific quantification of acid phosphatase
in tumor tissues in primary and metastatic cancer patients.METHODS: All
study subjects were non-Hispanic Caucasians. The study sample was
comprised of 661 cancer patients (221 breast; 121 prostate;137 malignant
melanoma;196 other cancers) and 827 healthy controls. DNA & RNA was
isolated from all cancer patients & controls using standard
procedure.PCR-RFLP method was used. ACP1 alleles (i.e., ACP1*A, ACP1*B,
and ACP1*C) were determined with 2 of the selected SNPs: rs11553742 (C>T)
is a synonymous polymorphism located in the codon 44 (exon 3) and
rs7576247 (A/G) encodes an amino acid change in the codon 105 (exon 6)
from arginine, present in ACP1*A allele, to glutamine in ACP1*B and *C
alleles. Genotype and haplotype analysis was done using PASW 18 (SPSS
IBM). qPCR is performed in tumor tissues and comparisons were made among
cancer types and also in correlation with the haplotype based enzyme
activity.RESULTS: A very significant association of ACP haplotypes AA &
AB with cancers is observed (pBACKGROUND: Human acid phosphatases are
normally found in low concentrations, but pronounced changes in their
synthesis occur in particular diseases where unusually high or low enzyme
expression is seen as part of the pathophysiological process,suggesting
the clinical relevance of ACP as a disease marker. Acid Phosphatase 1
(ACP1) is considered to play a key role as a regulator of signaling
pathways in receptor-stimulated immune cells and is known to be widely
expressed and endowed with metabolic and proliferative activity. We
hypothesized ACP1 could serve as a predictive marker in identifying
cancer patients at an earlier stage, especially when disease is
treatable. Acid phosphatase enzymes is generally correlated with the 3
co-dominant alleles A, B & C. This is the first study screening two ACP1
gene polymorphisms and ACP gene expressions in different cancer types. In
this study, we exploit a novel connection of enzymatic activity in
correlations to these two ACP1 polymorphisms and with more specific
quantification of acid phosphatase in tumor tissues in primary and
metastatic cancer patients.METHODS: All study subjects were non-Hispanic
Caucasians. The study sample was comprised of 661 cancer patients (221
breast; 121 prostate;137 malignant melanoma;196 other cancers) and 827
healthy controls. DNA & RNA was isolated from all cancer patients &
controls using standard procedure.PCR-RFLP method was used. ACP1 alleles
(i.e., ACP1*A, ACP1*B, and ACP1*C) were determined with 2 of the selected
SNPs: rs11553742 (C>T) is a synonymous polymorphism located in the codon
44 (exon 3) and rs7576247 (A/G) encodes an amino acid change in the codon
105 (exon 6) from arginine, present in ACP1*A allele, to glutamine in
ACP1*B and *C alleles. Genotype and haplotype analysis was done using
PASW 18 (SPSS IBM). qPCR is performed in tumor tissues and comparisons
were made among cancer types and also in correlation with the haplotype
based enzyme activity.RESULTS: A very significant association of ACP
haplotypes AA & AB with cancers is observed (p<0.00001). Further analysis
of these haplotypes in cancer types controlling for age and sex showed
significant association mainly with Melanoma (pBACKGROUND: Human acid
phosphatases are normally found in low concentrations, but pronounced
changes in their synthesis occur in particular diseases where unusually
high or low enzyme expression is seen as part of the pathophysiological
process,suggesting the clinical relevance of ACP as a disease marker.
Acid Phosphatase 1 (ACP1) is considered to play a key role as a regulator
of signaling pathways in receptor-stimulated immune cells and is known to
be widely expressed and endowed with metabolic and proliferative
activity. We hypothesized ACP1 could serve as a predictive marker in
identifying cancer patients at an earlier stage, especially when disease
is treatable. Acid phosphatase enzymes is generally correlated with the 3
co-dominant alleles A, B & C. This is the first study screening two ACP1
gene polymorphisms and ACP gene expressions in different cancer types. In
this study, we exploit a novel connection of enzymatic activity in
correlations to these two ACP1 polymorphisms and with more specific
quantification of acid phosphatase in tumor tissues in primary and
metastatic cancer patients.METHODS: All study subjects were non-Hispanic
Caucasians. The study sample was comprised of 661 cancer patients (221
breast; 121 prostate;137 malignant melanoma;196 other cancers) and 827
healthy controls. DNA & RNA was isolated from all cancer patients &
controls using standard procedure.PCR-RFLP method was used. ACP1 alleles
(i.e., ACP1*A, ACP1*B, and ACP1*C) were determined with 2 of the selected
SNPs: rs11553742 (C>T) is a synonymous polymorphism located in the codon
44 (exon 3) and rs7576247 (A/G) encodes an amino acid change in the codon
105 (exon 6) from arginine, present in ACP1*A allele, to glutamine in
ACP1*B and *C alleles. Genotype and haplotype analysis was done using
PASW 18 (SPSS IBM). qPCR is performed in tumor tissues and comparisons
were made among cancer types and also in correlation with the haplotype
based enzyme activity.RESULTS: A very significant association of ACP
haplotypes AA & AB with cancers is observed (p<0.00001). Further analysis
of these haplotypes in cancer types controlling for age and sex showed
significant association mainly with Melanoma (p<0.0001); prostate ca
(pBACKGROUND: Human acid phosphatases are normally found in low
concentrations, but pronounced changes in their synthesis occur in
particular diseases where unusually high or low enzyme expression is seen
as part of the pathophysiological process,suggesting the clinical
relevance of ACP as a disease marker. Acid Phosphatase 1 (ACP1) is
considered to play a key role as a regulator of signaling pathways in
receptor-stimulated immune cells and is known to be widely expressed and
endowed with metabolic and proliferative activity. We hypothesized ACP1
could serve as a predictive marker in identifying cancer patients at an
earlier stage, especially when disease is treatable. Acid phosphatase
enzymes is generally correlated with the 3 co-dominant alleles A, B & C.
This is the first study screening two ACP1 gene polymorphisms and ACP
gene expressions in different cancer types. In this study, we exploit a
novel connection of enzymatic activity in correlations to these two ACP1
polymorphisms and with more specific quantification of acid phosphatase
in tumor tissues in primary and metastatic cancer patients.METHODS: All
study subjects were non-Hispanic Caucasians. The study sample was
comprised of 661 cancer patients (221 breast; 121 prostate;137 malignant
melanoma;196 other cancers) and 827 healthy controls. DNA & RNA was
isolated from all cancer patients & controls using standard
procedure.PCR-RFLP method was used. ACP1 alleles (i.e., ACP1*A, ACP1*B,
and ACP1*C) were determined with 2 of the selected SNPs: rs11553742 (C>T)
is a synonymous polymorphism located in the codon 44 (exon 3) and
rs7576247 (A/G) encodes an amino acid change in the codon 105 (exon 6)
from arginine, present in ACP1*A allele, to glutamine in ACP1*B and *C
alleles. Genotype and haplotype analysis was done using PASW 18 (SPSS
IBM). qPCR is performed in tumor tissues and comparisons were made among
cancer types and also in correlation with the haplotype based enzyme
activity.RESULTS: A very significant association of ACP haplotypes AA &
AB with cancers is observed (p<0.00001). Further analysis of these
haplotypes in cancer types controlling for age and sex showed significant
association mainly with Melanoma (p<0.0001); prostate ca (p<0.002);
breast ca (pBACKGROUND: Human acid phosphatases are normally found in low
concentrations, but pronounced changes in their synthesis occur in
particular diseases where unusually high or low enzyme expression is seen
as part of the pathophysiological process,suggesting the clinical
relevance of ACP as a disease marker. Acid Phosphatase 1 (ACP1) is
considered to play a key role as a regulator of signaling pathways in
receptor-stimulated immune cells and is known to be widely expressed and
endowed with metabolic and proliferative activity. We hypothesized ACP1
could serve as a predictive marker in identifying cancer patients at an
earlier stage, especially when disease is treatable. Acid phosphatase
enzymes is generally correlated with the 3 co-dominant alleles A, B & C.
This is the first study screening two ACP1 gene polymorphisms and ACP
gene expressions in different cancer types. In this study, we exploit a
novel connection of enzymatic activity in correlations to these two ACP1
polymorphisms and with more specific quantification of acid phosphatase
in tumor tissues in primary and metastatic cancer patients.METHODS: All
study subjects were non-Hispanic Caucasians. The study sample was
comprised of 661 cancer patients (221 breast; 121 prostate;137 malignant
melanoma;196 other cancers) and 827 healthy controls. DNA & RNA was
isolated from all cancer patients & controls using standard
procedure.PCR-RFLP method was used. ACP1 alleles (i.e., ACP1*A, ACP1*B,
and ACP1*C) were determined with 2 of the selected SNPs: rs11553742 (C>T)
is a synonymous polymorphism located in the codon 44 (exon 3) and
rs7576247 (A/G) encodes an amino acid change in the codon 105 (exon 6)
from arginine, present in ACP1*A allele, to glutamine in ACP1*B and *C
alleles. Genotype and haplotype analysis was done using PASW 18 (SPSS
IBM). qPCR is performed in tumor tissues and comparisons were made among
cancer types and also in correlation with the haplotype based enzyme
activity.RESULTS: A very significant association of ACP haplotypes AA &
AB with cancers is observed (p<0.00001). Further analysis of these
haplotypes in cancer types controlling for age and sex showed significant
association mainly with Melanoma (p<0.0001); prostate ca (p<0.002);
breast ca (p<0.013) and all other cancers (p 2fold). CONCLUSIONS:The
enzymatic activity from gene combination correlates with the gene
expression data. The primary cancer cases showed a low expression. Our
data also shows an over expression of ACP1(>2 fold) in metastatic cases
as compared to the primary cases. This data supports the previous report
on alkaline phosphatases (APs) catalyse and facilitate important
physiological changes within cells and their expression is altered in
many disease processes. It is clearly evident from this study that the
ACP1 gene can be a critical marker in screening patients who are deemed
low to high risk for cancer and metastasis.

