Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of metabotropic glutamate receptor 5 on the lymph node
metastases in oral cancer


We identified a metastasis-related gene, metabotropic glutamate receptor
(mGluR)-5, as a target gene of stromal cell-derived factor (SDF)-1/CXCR4
system in oral cancer. In this study, we examined the role of mGluR5 on
the lymph node metastasis of oral cancer. mGluR5-specific antagonists,
2-Methyl-6-(phenylethynyl)pyridine (MPEP) and
3-((2-Methyl-1,3-thiazol-4-yl)ethynyl)pyridine (MTEP) did not affect the
growth of oral cancer cells, but did inhibit the SDF-1/CXCR4
dependent-migration of the cells. When the CXCR4 expressing-oral cancer
cells were orthotopically transplanted into masseter muscle of nude mice,
these antagonists significantly inhibited lymph node metastases of the
cells. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed that there was a significant
association between CXCR4 and mGluR5 protein expression. Furthermore, the
mGluR5 protein expression in clinical specimen was significantly
associated with the lymph node metastases and the modes of invasion.
Moreover conditioned media derived from the oral cancer cells acquiring
SDF-1/CXCR4 system enhanced the migration of lymphatic endothelial cells,
which was significantly suppressed by the treatment with MPEP or MTEP.
Although SDF-1/CXCR4 dependent-production of angiogenic factors,
including interleukin-6, interleukin-8, and vascular endothelial growth
factor (VEGF)-A were observed, mGluR5 antagonists did not affect the
production of these factors. However, induction of a lymphangiogenic
factor, VEGF-C was specifically impaired by the treatment with these
mGluR5 antagonists. These results suggested that mGluR5 promotes the
lymph node metastases of oral cancer cells by the SDF-1/CXCR4 system via
enhancement of cancer cell migration and induction of lymphangiogenesis
by VEGF-C.

