Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hypoxia-inducible HIF1-miR-210 signaling axis enhances
chemoresistance in human hepatocellular carcinoma


Dysregulation of microRNA is implicated in many human malignancies
including hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), yet little is known regarding
the regulatory mechanisms of these small noncoding RNAs. Hypoxia is a
prevalent tumor microenvironment in HCC because of its rapid growth often
to large size, and plays a key role in modulating tumor aggressiveness.
Apart from insufficient neovascularization of HCC tumors, hepatic
ischemia induced during transarterial chemoembolization (TACE) also
resulted in development of hypoxic HCC tumors. Therefore, studying the
underlying mechanisms of hypoxia-induced chemoresistance may provide
treatment benefits for HCC patients. Previously, we investigated the
effects of hypoxia on microRNA expression in human HCCs, and
characterized hypoxia-inducible microRNA-210 (miR-210) as an important
player for the development of metastatic phenotypes. In the present
study, we sought to investigate whether hypoxia confers chemoresistance
to HCC cells, and whether hypoxic induction of hypoxia-inducible factor 1
(HIF1)-miR-210 signaling axis promoted cell survival against cytotoxic
treatments.Firstly, we treated human HCC cell line SMMC7721 with
cisplatin under both normoxic and hypoxic conditions, and examined
apoptosis of these cells by flow cytometry analysis after co-staining
with annexin V and propidium iodide. We found that hypoxic SMMC-7721
cells were more resistant to both cisplatin and 5-fluorouracil under
hypoxia when compared to normoxia. Moreover, we observed that HIF1
appears to play a detrimental role in mediating chemoresistance, as we
demonstrated that the population of annexin V positive cells was
significantly higher in HIF1 knockdown cells than in the non-targeted
control cells upon cisplatin treatment. Similar observation was also
obtained by in vivo subcutaneous tumor xenograft experiment, for which we
demonstrated that HIF1 knockdown xenografts were more susceptible to
cisplatin treatment. Finally, we also examined the importance of miR-210
in hypoxia-induced resistance to cisplatin using miR-210 LNA inhibitor.
Under hypoxic conditions, we found that the population of apoptotic cells
was higher in SMMC7721 transfected with miR-210 LNA inhibitor compared
with that of control LNA transfectant (Annexin-V positive: 23.6% in
negative control group at 1.0%O2 vs 28.0% in miR-210 LNA group at 1.0%O2;
PDysregulation of microRNA is implicated in many human malignancies
including hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), yet little is known regarding
the regulatory mechanisms of these small noncoding RNAs. Hypoxia is a
prevalent tumor microenvironment in HCC because of its rapid growth often
to large size, and plays a key role in modulating tumor aggressiveness.
Apart from insufficient neovascularization of HCC tumors, hepatic
ischemia induced during transarterial chemoembolization (TACE) also
resulted in development of hypoxic HCC tumors. Therefore, studying the
underlying mechanisms of hypoxia-induced chemoresistance may provide
treatment benefits for HCC patients. Previously, we investigated the
effects of hypoxia on microRNA expression in human HCCs, and
characterized hypoxia-inducible microRNA-210 (miR-210) as an important
player for the development of metastatic phenotypes. In the present
study, we sought to investigate whether hypoxia confers chemoresistance
to HCC cells, and whether hypoxic induction of hypoxia-inducible factor 1
(HIF1)-miR-210 signaling axis promoted cell survival against cytotoxic
treatments.Firstly, we treated human HCC cell line SMMC7721 with
cisplatin under both normoxic and hypoxic conditions, and examined
apoptosis of these cells by flow cytometry analysis after co-staining
with annexin V and propidium iodide. We found that hypoxic SMMC-7721
cells were more resistant to both cisplatin and 5-fluorouracil under
hypoxia when compared to normoxia. Moreover, we observed that HIF1
appears to play a detrimental role in mediating chemoresistance, as we
demonstrated that the population of annexin V positive cells was
significantly higher in HIF1 knockdown cells than in the non-targeted
control cells upon cisplatin treatment. Similar observation was also
obtained by in vivo subcutaneous tumor xenograft experiment, for which we
demonstrated that HIF1 knockdown xenografts were more susceptible to
cisplatin treatment. Finally, we also examined the importance of miR-210
in hypoxia-induced resistance to cisplatin using miR-210 LNA inhibitor.
Under hypoxic conditions, we found that the population of apoptotic cells
was higher in SMMC7721 transfected with miR-210 LNA inhibitor compared
with that of control LNA transfectant (Annexin-V positive: 23.6% in
negative control group at 1.0%O2 vs 28.0% in miR-210 LNA group at 1.0%O2;
P<0.05). Taken altogether, we demonstrated that induction of HIF1-miR-210
axis conferred chemoresistance to HCC cells under hypoxic conditions, and
inhibition of miR-210 re-sensitized hypoxic HCC cells to these cytotoxic
drugs. We are now underway to investigate the direct downstream cDNA
target that contributes to the pro-survival effects mediated by miR-210
under cytotoxic conditions.

