Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Stroma biology identifies heparins as differentiating agents in
neuroblastoma


The neuroblastoma tumor stroma is thought to suppress neuroblast growth
via release of soluble differentiating factors. Here we identify these
factors and design a novel therapy based on their mechanism of action. We
show that expression of heparan-sulfate proteoglycan co-receptors
(HSPGs), including TRIII, GPC1, GPC3, SDC3, and SDC4, is decreased in
neuroblasts, localized to the stroma and correlates with improved
prognosis. Treatment with soluble HSPGs promoted neuroblast
differentiation via FGFR1, Erk, and Id1. HSPGs also enhanced
differentiation from FGF2 released by the stroma. The anticoagulant
heparin had similar differentiating effects, leading to decreased
neuroblast proliferation. Dissection of individual sulfation sites
identified 2-O, 3-O-de-sulfated heparin (ODSH) as a differentiating agent
that suppressed orthotopic xenograft growth while avoiding
anticoagulation. These studies uncover the critical components of the
differentiating stroma secretome in neuroblastoma and the central
mechanism by which they act. We translate these biologic insights into
novel prognostic and therapeutic biomarkers, as well as therapeutic
differentiation strategies for clinical development. More generally, our
work demonstrates that tumor stroma biology can inform design of targeted
molecular therapeutics.

