Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An effective anti-EpCAM antibody EpAb2-6 for the treatment of
colon cancer and its underlying mechanisms


Epithelial cell adhesion molecule (EpCAM) is known to be overexpressed in
epithelial cancers associated with enhanced malignant potential,
particularly colorectal carcinoma (CRC) and head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma (HNSCC). However, it is yet to be determined whether targeting
EpCAM can directly inhibit the progression of malignance. Here, we have
generated six novel monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) against EpCAM; these
antibodies specifically bind to CRC and HNSCC cells, but not normal
cells. One EpCAM mAb, EpAb2-6, was found to induce cancer cell apoptosis
in vitro, inhibit tumor growth, and prolong the overall survival of mice
with human colon or oral carcinoma xenografts. EpAb2-6 also increases the
therapeutic efficacy of irinotecan, fluorouracil, and leucovorin (IFL)
therapy in tumor-bearing mice. Subsequent analysis suggested that EpAb2-6
can potentially inhibit the growth and proliferation of tumorspheres.
Investigation of the mechanism by which EpAb2-6 inhibits tumor growth
revealed that EpAb2-6 inhibits tumor-necrosis-factor converting enzyme
(TACE/ADAM17) and -secretase activation and blocks EpCAM intracellular
domain (EpICD) cleavage, thus preventing the nuclear localization of
EpICD. Furthermore, EpAb2-6, which binds to positions in the EGF-II/TY
domain of EpCAM, inhibits production of EpICD, thereby decreasing
translocation of -catenin into the nucleus and activation of p53 and p21
expression. Collectively, our results indicate that novel EpCAM mAbs can
potentially be used for cancer-targeted therapy.

