Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NOSH-aspirin and 5-fluorouracil demonstrate synergistic efficacy
in a xenograft model of colon cancer


Introduction: Work in cancer biology, epidemiology and preclinical models
has made it clear that non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) in
general and aspirin in particular can significantly affect the
development of several types of cancer, with colon cancer representing
the best-studied case. However, NSAIDs have significant side effects that
precludes there wide spread use. Notably, there are no chemotherapeutic
applications for NSAIDs in humans or animals. In our search for a better
NSAID, we developed NOSH-aspirin, a hybrid molecule that releases nitric
oxide (NO) and hydrogen sulfide (H2S), two gasotransmitters of
physiological relevance. Previously, we reported on the anti-inflammatory
properties of NOSH-aspirin and showed that it was in the order of 100,000
to 250,000-fold more potent than aspirin in inhibiting colon cancer cell
growth over a 24-72h-time period with negligible cyto-toxicity. Here we
report on the effects of NOSH-aspirin alone and in combination with
5-fluorouracil (5-FU) on treatment of established tumors in a xenograft
model of human colon cancer.Methods: NOSH-aspirin was synthesized and
purified by us. Cell line: HT-29 human adenocarcimoma. Xenografts: Female
nude mice (N=20) were implanted s.c. in the right flank with HT-29 (2 x
106) cells; when the tumor volumes reached 60-80 mm3, the animals were
randomly divided into 4 groups (N=5/gp) and treated with NOSH-aspirin
(po,100 mg/kg body wt/day), 5-FU (ip, 10 mg/kg x 2/week),
NOSH-aspirin+5-FU as above, or vehicle (po). Tumor volume and animal
weight were recorded every 3 days. After 3 weeks of treatment, mice were
sacrificed, tumors excised, weighed, and fixed in 10% buffered formalin
for IHC studies. We also weighed the livers and the kidneys.Results: In
vitro, NOSH-aspirin and 5-FU inhibited the growth of HT-29 cells with
IC50s of 483 and 20,0002000 nM at 24 hr, respectively. In presence of
5-FU at 0.25x, 0.5x, and 1x it's IC50, the IC50s for NOSH-aspirin was
reduced to 313, 15.52, and 0.750.2 nM, respectively. In vivo:
NOSH-aspirin reduced tumor volume more than 5-FU as a function of time;
however, the biggest reduction in tumor volume was in the combination
group. Tumor mass at sacrifice in each group was, vehicle (3.20.62g),
NOSH-aspirin (0.540.18g, 83% reduction, PIntroduction: Work in cancer
biology, epidemiology and preclinical models has made it clear that
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) in general and aspirin in
particular can significantly affect the development of several types of
cancer, with colon cancer representing the best-studied case. However,
NSAIDs have significant side effects that precludes there wide spread
use. Notably, there are no chemotherapeutic applications for NSAIDs in
humans or animals. In our search for a better NSAID, we developed
NOSH-aspirin, a hybrid molecule that releases nitric oxide (NO) and
hydrogen sulfide (H2S), two gasotransmitters of physiological relevance.
Previously, we reported on the anti-inflammatory properties of
NOSH-aspirin and showed that it was in the order of 100,000 to
250,000-fold more potent than aspirin in inhibiting colon cancer cell
growth over a 24-72h-time period with negligible cyto-toxicity. Here we
report on the effects of NOSH-aspirin alone and in combination with
5-fluorouracil (5-FU) on treatment of established tumors in a xenograft
model of human colon cancer.Methods: NOSH-aspirin was synthesized and
purified by us. Cell line: HT-29 human adenocarcimoma. Xenografts: Female
nude mice (N=20) were implanted s.c. in the right flank with HT-29 (2 x
106) cells; when the tumor volumes reached 60-80 mm3, the animals were
randomly divided into 4 groups (N=5/gp) and treated with NOSH-aspirin
(po,100 mg/kg body wt/day), 5-FU (ip, 10 mg/kg x 2/week),
NOSH-aspirin+5-FU as above, or vehicle (po). Tumor volume and animal
weight were recorded every 3 days. After 3 weeks of treatment, mice were
sacrificed, tumors excised, weighed, and fixed in 10% buffered formalin
for IHC studies. We also weighed the livers and the kidneys.Results: In
vitro, NOSH-aspirin and 5-FU inhibited the growth of HT-29 cells with
IC50s of 483 and 20,0002000 nM at 24 hr, respectively. In presence of
5-FU at 0.25x, 0.5x, and 1x it's IC50, the IC50s for NOSH-aspirin was
reduced to 313, 15.52, and 0.750.2 nM, respectively. In vivo:
NOSH-aspirin reduced tumor volume more than 5-FU as a function of time;
however, the biggest reduction in tumor volume was in the combination
group. Tumor mass at sacrifice in each group was, vehicle (3.20.62g),
NOSH-aspirin (0.540.18g, 83% reduction, P<0.005), 5-FU (1.170.37g, 63%
reduction, PIntroduction: Work in cancer biology, epidemiology and
preclinical models has made it clear that non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs (NSAIDs) in general and aspirin in particular can significantly
affect the development of several types of cancer, with colon cancer
representing the best-studied case. However, NSAIDs have significant side
effects that precludes there wide spread use. Notably, there are no
chemotherapeutic applications for NSAIDs in humans or animals. In our
search for a better NSAID, we developed NOSH-aspirin, a hybrid molecule
that releases nitric oxide (NO) and hydrogen sulfide (H2S), two
gasotransmitters of physiological relevance. Previously, we reported on
the anti-inflammatory properties of NOSH-aspirin and showed that it was
in the order of 100,000 to 250,000-fold more potent than aspirin in
inhibiting colon cancer cell growth over a 24-72h-time period with
negligible cyto-toxicity. Here we report on the effects of NOSH-aspirin
alone and in combination with 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) on treatment of
established tumors in a xenograft model of human colon cancer.Methods:
NOSH-aspirin was synthesized and purified by us. Cell line: HT-29 human
adenocarcimoma. Xenografts: Female nude mice (N=20) were implanted s.c.
in the right flank with HT-29 (2 x 106) cells; when the tumor volumes
reached 60-80 mm3, the animals were randomly divided into 4 groups
(N=5/gp) and treated with NOSH-aspirin (po,100 mg/kg body wt/day), 5-FU
(ip, 10 mg/kg x 2/week), NOSH-aspirin+5-FU as above, or vehicle (po).
Tumor volume and animal weight were recorded every 3 days. After 3 weeks
of treatment, mice were sacrificed, tumors excised, weighed, and fixed in
10% buffered formalin for IHC studies. We also weighed the livers and the
kidneys.Results: In vitro, NOSH-aspirin and 5-FU inhibited the growth of
HT-29 cells with IC50s of 483 and 20,0002000 nM at 24 hr, respectively.
In presence of 5-FU at 0.25x, 0.5x, and 1x it's IC50, the IC50s for
NOSH-aspirin was reduced to 313, 15.52, and 0.750.2 nM, respectively. In
vivo: NOSH-aspirin reduced tumor volume more than 5-FU as a function of
time; however, the biggest reduction in tumor volume was in the
combination group. Tumor mass at sacrifice in each group was, vehicle
(3.20.62g), NOSH-aspirin (0.540.18g, 83% reduction, P<0.005), 5-FU
(1.170.37g, 63% reduction, P<0.01), NOSH-aspirin+5-FU (0.170.056g
reduction 87% reduction PIntroduction: Work in cancer biology,
epidemiology and preclinical models has made it clear that non-steroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) in general and aspirin in particular can
significantly affect the development of several types of cancer, with
colon cancer representing the best-studied case. However, NSAIDs have
significant side effects that precludes there wide spread use. Notably,
there are no chemotherapeutic applications for NSAIDs in humans or
animals. In our search for a better NSAID, we developed NOSH-aspirin, a
hybrid molecule that releases nitric oxide (NO) and hydrogen sulfide
(H2S), two gasotransmitters of physiological relevance. Previously, we
reported on the anti-inflammatory properties of NOSH-aspirin and showed
that it was in the order of 100,000 to 250,000-fold more potent than
aspirin in inhibiting colon cancer cell growth over a 24-72h-time period
with negligible cyto-toxicity. Here we report on the effects of
NOSH-aspirin alone and in combination with 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) on
treatment of established tumors in a xenograft model of human colon
cancer.Methods: NOSH-aspirin was synthesized and purified by us. Cell
line: HT-29 human adenocarcimoma. Xenografts: Female nude mice (N=20)
were implanted s.c. in the right flank with HT-29 (2 x 106) cells; when
the tumor volumes reached 60-80 mm3, the animals were randomly divided
into 4 groups (N=5/gp) and treated with NOSH-aspirin (po,100 mg/kg body
wt/day), 5-FU (ip, 10 mg/kg x 2/week), NOSH-aspirin+5-FU as above, or
vehicle (po). Tumor volume and animal weight were recorded every 3 days.
After 3 weeks of treatment, mice were sacrificed, tumors excised,
weighed, and fixed in 10% buffered formalin for IHC studies. We also
weighed the livers and the kidneys.Results: In vitro, NOSH-aspirin and
5-FU inhibited the growth of HT-29 cells with IC50s of 483 and 20,0002000
nM at 24 hr, respectively. In presence of 5-FU at 0.25x, 0.5x, and 1x
it's IC50, the IC50s for NOSH-aspirin was reduced to 313, 15.52, and
0.750.2 nM, respectively. In vivo: NOSH-aspirin reduced tumor volume more
than 5-FU as a function of time; however, the biggest reduction in tumor
volume was in the combination group. Tumor mass at sacrifice in each
group was, vehicle (3.20.62g), NOSH-aspirin (0.540.18g, 83% reduction,
P<0.005), 5-FU (1.170.37g, 63% reduction, P<0.01), NOSH-aspirin+5-FU
(0.170.056g reduction 87% reduction P<0.001). NOSH-aspirin had no effect
on the weight of the mice whether alone or in combination with 5-FU,
there were no overt signs of toxicity. There was a 10% reduction in the
weight of animals in the 5-FU group, however, this difference was not
statistically significant. There were no differences in liver or kidney
masses amongst the groups.Conclusions: NOSH-aspirin has potent
anti-cancer properties and demonstrates synergistic properties with 5-FU.
It merits further evaluation as a chemotherapeutic agent.

