Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Blunting the radical scavenging property of mitochondria-targeted,
triphenylphosphonium-linked antioxidants failed to mitigate their
anti-proliferative and antitumor effects


Reactive oxygen species (ROS), including superoxide and hydrogen
peroxide, are implicated in cancer cell proliferation. Therefore,
strategies to mitigate ROS levels were proposed as a viable mechanism to
inhibit cancer cell proliferation. As mitochondria are believed to be a
major contributor to intracellular ROS production, mitochondria-targeted
antioxidants (MTAs) (e.g., Mito-Q, Mito-CP, Mito-Vitamin-E or
Mito-chromanol) were successfully used to stop proliferation and kill
cancer cells in vitro and attenuate tumor growth in vivo. MTAs also
inhibited mitochondrial oxygen consumption and ATP production. In this
study, we tested whether the antioxidant moiety and related antioxidant
function of MTAs or other mitochondrial mechanism is responsible for
inhibiting tumor cell proliferation and resulting cytotoxicity. To this
end, we compared the anti-proliferative and antitumor effects of Mito-CP,
a mitochondrially-targeted nitroxide exhibiting superoxide dismutase
(SOD)-like activity, and a synthetic analog of Mito-CP (Mito-CP
acetamide), lacking the nitroxide moiety and SOD-like activity. Both
Mito-CP and Mito-CP acetamide were equally potent in different cancer
cell types (breast, pancreatic, colon, skin, bladder and lung).
Additionally, both compounds inhibited mitochondrial function and
decreased intracellular ATP levels to the same extent. We conclude that
MTAs such as Mito-CP, Mito-Vitamin-E exert their antiproliferative
effects in cancer cells due to mitochondrial localization and targeting
cellular bioenergetics and not due to their antioxidative activity.
Results from this study strongly question the present dogma on
mitochondrial ROS involvement in cancer cell proliferation.

