Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ribonucleotide reductase promotes genomic instability and tumor
heterogeneity via increasing dUTP misincorporation into DNA


Regulation of enzymes in nucleotide synthesis plays a critical role in
DNA replication and repair. Ribonucleotide reductase (RNR), which is
composed of RRM1/ RRM2A or RRM2B, is the key enzyme that controls the de
novo synthesis of all four dNTPs, and the expression of RRM2A subunit is
cell cycle-dependent. It has been well established that the level of
RRM2A is often elevated in malignant tumor cells and RRM2A transgenic
mice develop lung cancer. The molecular mechanism of RRM2A in cancer
promotion is still unknown. In this study, we showed that constitutive
elevation of RRM2A promotes replication stress, chromosome instability
and cellular transformation, all of which are prevented by co-expression
of dUTPase that degrades dUTP. Knockdown of dUTPase in cancer cells
containing high levels of RRM2A and dUTPase also increased replication
stress. Immunohistochemistry staining of surgical tumors from colorectal
cancer (CRC) patients showed that high RRM2A/low dUTPase correlates with
poorer overall survival, suggesting the opportunity of using RRM2/dUTPase
as a prognostic indicator. We proposed that the cellular context of high
RRM2/low dUTPase causes chromatin instability to drive tumor evolution,
resulting in poor survival in patients. Our findings also imply that
tumor cells with elevation of RRM2A are vulnerable to inhibitors against
dTTP synthesis in conjunction with DNA damage agent in therapy.

