Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bisphosphonates: New strategies for targeting angiogenesis in
ovarian cancer


Objectives:Bisphosphonates, known to have beneficial effects on bone and
soft tissue metastases in breast cancer, are potent inhibitors of
macrophages, but effects on the microenvironment are not fully
understood. We investigated the biological effect of clodronate on
macrophage and endothelial cell-driven angiogenesis in ovarian
cancer.Methods:Using the FDA Adverse Event Reporting System (FAERS), we
examined the effects of bisphosphonate use on overall cancer mortality.
We examined the in vitro (endothelial cell migration, capillary formation
and cytokine secretion) and in vivo (orthotopic mouse models) effects of
clodronate on angiogenesis, macrophage infiltration, and tumor
growth.Results:Using (FAERS) data, out of 17,000 patients with a cancer
diagnosis co-medicated with a bisphosphonate, overall reported death rate
was 36% lower (17.6% vs 27.7%, pObjectives:Bisphosphonates, known to have
beneficial effects on bone and soft tissue metastases in breast cancer,
are potent inhibitors of macrophages, but effects on the microenvironment
are not fully understood. We investigated the biological effect of
clodronate on macrophage and endothelial cell-driven angiogenesis in
ovarian cancer.Methods:Using the FDA Adverse Event Reporting System
(FAERS), we examined the effects of bisphosphonate use on overall cancer
mortality. We examined the in vitro (endothelial cell migration,
capillary formation and cytokine secretion) and in vivo (orthotopic mouse
models) effects of clodronate on angiogenesis, macrophage infiltration,
and tumor growth.Results:Using (FAERS) data, out of 17,000 patients with
a cancer diagnosis co-medicated with a bisphosphonate, overall reported
death rate was 36% lower (17.6% vs 27.7%, p<0.0001) than those not
receiving bisphosphonates, independent of anti-tumor therapy. In vitro,
treatment with clodronate resulted in decreased endothelial cell
secretion of IL-6 (p Objectives:Bisphosphonates, known to have beneficial
effects on bone and soft tissue metastases in breast cancer, are potent
inhibitors of macrophages, but effects on the microenvironment are not
fully understood. We investigated the biological effect of clodronate on
macrophage and endothelial cell-driven angiogenesis in ovarian
cancer.Methods:Using the FDA Adverse Event Reporting System (FAERS), we
examined the effects of bisphosphonate use on overall cancer mortality.
We examined the in vitro (endothelial cell migration, capillary formation
and cytokine secretion) and in vivo (orthotopic mouse models) effects of
clodronate on angiogenesis, macrophage infiltration, and tumor
growth.Results:Using (FAERS) data, out of 17,000 patients with a cancer
diagnosis co-medicated with a bisphosphonate, overall reported death rate
was 36% lower (17.6% vs 27.7%, p<0.0001) than those not receiving
bisphosphonates, independent of anti-tumor therapy. In vitro, treatment
with clodronate resulted in decreased endothelial cell secretion of IL-6
(p < 0.001), IL-8 (p Objectives:Bisphosphonates, known to have beneficial
effects on bone and soft tissue metastases in breast cancer, are potent
inhibitors of macrophages, but effects on the microenvironment are not
fully understood. We investigated the biological effect of clodronate on
macrophage and endothelial cell-driven angiogenesis in ovarian
cancer.Methods:Using the FDA Adverse Event Reporting System (FAERS), we
examined the effects of bisphosphonate use on overall cancer mortality.
We examined the in vitro (endothelial cell migration, capillary formation
and cytokine secretion) and in vivo (orthotopic mouse models) effects of
clodronate on angiogenesis, macrophage infiltration, and tumor
growth.Results:Using (FAERS) data, out of 17,000 patients with a cancer
diagnosis co-medicated with a bisphosphonate, overall reported death rate
was 36% lower (17.6% vs 27.7%, p<0.0001) than those not receiving
bisphosphonates, independent of anti-tumor therapy. In vitro, treatment
with clodronate resulted in decreased endothelial cell secretion of IL-6
(p < 0.001), IL-8 (p < 0.001), and a 2.5-fold reduction in cell migration
compared to controls (p Objectives:Bisphosphonates, known to have
beneficial effects on bone and soft tissue metastases in breast cancer,
are potent inhibitors of macrophages, but effects on the microenvironment
are not fully understood. We investigated the biological effect of
clodronate on macrophage and endothelial cell-driven angiogenesis in
ovarian cancer.Methods:Using the FDA Adverse Event Reporting System
(FAERS), we examined the effects of bisphosphonate use on overall cancer
mortality. We examined the in vitro (endothelial cell migration,
capillary formation and cytokine secretion) and in vivo (orthotopic mouse
models) effects of clodronate on angiogenesis, macrophage infiltration,
and tumor growth.Results:Using (FAERS) data, out of 17,000 patients with
a cancer diagnosis co-medicated with a bisphosphonate, overall reported
death rate was 36% lower (17.6% vs 27.7%, p<0.0001) than those not
receiving bisphosphonates, independent of anti-tumor therapy. In vitro,
treatment with clodronate resulted in decreased endothelial cell
secretion of IL-6 (p < 0.001), IL-8 (p < 0.001), and a 2.5-fold reduction
in cell migration compared to controls (p < 0.001), with only partial
recovery after VEGF stimulation. Clodronate reduced capillary formation
by 1.5-fold compared to controls. In the ID8-VEGF model,
clodronate-treated mice had a 5-fold decrease in tumor weight (0.05g vs.
0.3g, p Objectives:Bisphosphonates, known to have beneficial effects on
bone and soft tissue metastases in breast cancer, are potent inhibitors
of macrophages, but effects on the microenvironment are not fully
understood. We investigated the biological effect of clodronate on
macrophage and endothelial cell-driven angiogenesis in ovarian
cancer.Methods:Using the FDA Adverse Event Reporting System (FAERS), we
examined the effects of bisphosphonate use on overall cancer mortality.
We examined the in vitro (endothelial cell migration, capillary formation
and cytokine secretion) and in vivo (orthotopic mouse models) effects of
clodronate on angiogenesis, macrophage infiltration, and tumor
growth.Results:Using (FAERS) data, out of 17,000 patients with a cancer
diagnosis co-medicated with a bisphosphonate, overall reported death rate
was 36% lower (17.6% vs 27.7%, p<0.0001) than those not receiving
bisphosphonates, independent of anti-tumor therapy. In vitro, treatment
with clodronate resulted in decreased endothelial cell secretion of IL-6
(p < 0.001), IL-8 (p < 0.001), and a 2.5-fold reduction in cell migration
compared to controls (p < 0.001), with only partial recovery after VEGF
stimulation. Clodronate reduced capillary formation by 1.5-fold compared
to controls. In the ID8-VEGF model, clodronate-treated mice had a 5-fold
decrease in tumor weight (0.05g vs. 0.3g, p < 0.001) compared to
controls. In the SKOV3ip1 model, clodronate treatment resulted in a
3-fold decrease in tumor weight (0.35g vs. 0.96g, p = 0.003) and tumor
nodules (5.2 vs. 16, p=0.005) compared to controls. Immunohistochemical
staining of clondronate-treated tumor sections showed a 2-fold and
1.5-fold (ID8-VEGF and SKOV3ip1, respectively) reduction in macrophage
density (p=0.001 and p Objectives:Bisphosphonates, known to have
beneficial effects on bone and soft tissue metastases in breast cancer,
are potent inhibitors of macrophages, but effects on the microenvironment
are not fully understood. We investigated the biological effect of
clodronate on macrophage and endothelial cell-driven angiogenesis in
ovarian cancer.Methods:Using the FDA Adverse Event Reporting System
(FAERS), we examined the effects of bisphosphonate use on overall cancer
mortality. We examined the in vitro (endothelial cell migration,
capillary formation and cytokine secretion) and in vivo (orthotopic mouse
models) effects of clodronate on angiogenesis, macrophage infiltration,
and tumor growth.Results:Using (FAERS) data, out of 17,000 patients with
a cancer diagnosis co-medicated with a bisphosphonate, overall reported
death rate was 36% lower (17.6% vs 27.7%, p<0.0001) than those not
receiving bisphosphonates, independent of anti-tumor therapy. In vitro,
treatment with clodronate resulted in decreased endothelial cell
secretion of IL-6 (p < 0.001), IL-8 (p < 0.001), and a 2.5-fold reduction
in cell migration compared to controls (p < 0.001), with only partial
recovery after VEGF stimulation. Clodronate reduced capillary formation
by 1.5-fold compared to controls. In the ID8-VEGF model,
clodronate-treated mice had a 5-fold decrease in tumor weight (0.05g vs.
0.3g, p < 0.001) compared to controls. In the SKOV3ip1 model, clodronate
treatment resulted in a 3-fold decrease in tumor weight (0.35g vs. 0.96g,
p = 0.003) and tumor nodules (5.2 vs. 16, p=0.005) compared to controls.
Immunohistochemical staining of clondronate-treated tumor sections showed
a 2-fold and 1.5-fold (ID8-VEGF and SKOV3ip1, respectively) reduction in
macrophage density (p=0.001 and p < 0.001, respectively) compared to
controls. Clodronate-treated tumor sections showed a 3-fold decrease in
capillary density (p Objectives:Bisphosphonates, known to have beneficial
effects on bone and soft tissue metastases in breast cancer, are potent
inhibitors of macrophages, but effects on the microenvironment are not
fully understood. We investigated the biological effect of clodronate on
macrophage and endothelial cell-driven angiogenesis in ovarian
cancer.Methods:Using the FDA Adverse Event Reporting System (FAERS), we
examined the effects of bisphosphonate use on overall cancer mortality.
We examined the in vitro (endothelial cell migration, capillary formation
and cytokine secretion) and in vivo (orthotopic mouse models) effects of
clodronate on angiogenesis, macrophage infiltration, and tumor
growth.Results:Using (FAERS) data, out of 17,000 patients with a cancer
diagnosis co-medicated with a bisphosphonate, overall reported death rate
was 36% lower (17.6% vs 27.7%, p<0.0001) than those not receiving
bisphosphonates, independent of anti-tumor therapy. In vitro, treatment
with clodronate resulted in decreased endothelial cell secretion of IL-6
(p < 0.001), IL-8 (p < 0.001), and a 2.5-fold reduction in cell migration
compared to controls (p < 0.001), with only partial recovery after VEGF
stimulation. Clodronate reduced capillary formation by 1.5-fold compared
to controls. In the ID8-VEGF model, clodronate-treated mice had a 5-fold
decrease in tumor weight (0.05g vs. 0.3g, p < 0.001) compared to
controls. In the SKOV3ip1 model, clodronate treatment resulted in a
3-fold decrease in tumor weight (0.35g vs. 0.96g, p = 0.003) and tumor
nodules (5.2 vs. 16, p=0.005) compared to controls. Immunohistochemical
staining of clondronate-treated tumor sections showed a 2-fold and
1.5-fold (ID8-VEGF and SKOV3ip1, respectively) reduction in macrophage
density (p=0.001 and p < 0.001, respectively) compared to controls.
Clodronate-treated tumor sections showed a 3-fold decrease in capillary
density (p < 0.001) compared to controls.Conclusions:Bisphosphonates
modulate tumor angiogenesis through effects on macrophages and
endothelial cells and are associated with overall decreased mortality in
cancer patients, independent of chemotherapeutic agents. Bisphosphonates
represent an unexplored, but attractive clinical strategy in ovarian
cancer, with potential for synergistic combination with other
anti-angiogenic agents.

