Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The HSP90 inhibitor 17-AAG improves chemoresistance of
cisplatin-resistant esophageal squamous cell carcinoma cell lines


[Background] Although cisplatin is a platinum drug that is widely used to
treat esophageal squamous cell carcinoma, acquired chemoresistance
develops during the course of treatment and is often the reason for
treatment failure. Overcoming chemoresistance is essential for improving
the outcomes of patients. Heat shock protein 90 (HSP90) is known to be
overexpressed in various cancer cells, and its inhibition by small
molecules, either alone or in combination, has shown promise in the
treatment of solid malignancies. In the present study, we evaluated the
synergistic effect of combining cisplatin with the HSP90 inhibitor,
17-N-allylamino-17-demethoxy geldanamycin (17-AAG), on two
cisplatin-resistant human esophageal squamous cancer cell lines, KYSE30
and KYSE150.[Results] The results obtained demonstrated the synergistic
inhibitory effects of cisplatin and 17-AAG on the growth of KYSE30 and
KYSE150 cells. Cell growth and cell number were more effectively reduced
by the combined treatment with cisplatin and 17-AAG than by the treatment
with either cisplatin or 17-AAG alone. Western blotting revealed that the
combined action of cisplatin and 17-AAG cleaved poly (ADP-ribose)
polymerase (PARP) and caspase 3. Time lapse imaging revealed that the
activations of caspase 3/7 preceded the cell death induced by the
combined treatment of cisplatin and 17-AAG. These demonstrated that the
reductions in both cell growth and cell number were mediated by
apoptosis. Time-course experiments showed that reductions in X-linked
inhibitor of apoptosis protein (XIAP) and phosphorylated Akt were
concomitant with apoptosis.[Discussion] The results of the present study
demonstrated that 17-AAG synergized with cisplatin and induced apoptosis
in cisplatin-resistant esophageal squamous cell carcinoma cell lines, and
also that modulation of the Akt/XIAP pathway may underlie this
synergistic effect.[Conclusion] Combination therapy with cisplatin and a
HSP90 inhibitor may represent a promising strategy to overcome cisplatin
resistance in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma.

