Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Androgen receptor is involved in the migration and invasion of
triple-negative breast cancer cells


Triple-negative breast cancer(TNBC)is a major world health problem,
accounting for more than 15% of breast cancer new cases each year. The
5-year survival rate for TNBC is approximately 54.5% and death usually
occurs as a result of local invasion and regional metastases. A complete
understanding of the molecular mechanisms that control the aggressive
behavior of triple-negative breast cancer cells is essential in order to
develop targeted therapies to manage the disease. Recent evidence has
suggested a role of Androgen receptor (AR)in cellular motility and
invasion. In this present study we examined the role of AR on the
migration and invasion of triple-negative breast cancer cells. Detect the
AR levels in 7 cell line of breast cancer cells including MCF-7,
MDA-MB-157, MDA-MB-231, MDA-MB-435, MDA-MB-468, MDA-MB-549, HS-578T by
Q-PCR, we demonstrate that AR is highly express in triple-negative breast
cancer cells; shRNAs specific to AR have been generated and delivered
into human breast cancer cells by lentiviral vectors. We showed that the
total levels of AR can be decreased by AR shRNA and inhibit MDA-MB-231
cellular motility and large focal adhesion (FA) formation, the cell
migration was determined by time-lapse cell migration assays, depletion
of endogenous AR significantly reduced the velocity and directionality of
cell migration, and strongly inhibited the net distance of cell
migration, indicating that AR modulates cell migration by controlling the
velocity and directionality of migration. We also showed that AR
activation and the migration and invasion of MDA-MB-231 , MDA-MB-435,
MDA-MB-468 can be strongly inhibited with commercially available AR
blocker Bicalutamide by cell migration and invasion assay. These results
suggest that AR in breast cancer cells is required for cellular migration
and invasion.

