Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of PERIOD2 for radioprotection against ionizing radiation
in mice bone marrow


Background: Circadian deregulation is associated with the development of
numerous diseases, including cancer, diabetes, and several neurological
disorders. A recent study shows that the onset of carcinogenicity is
specifically linked to the time of exposures (day or night) to
ultraviolet light and ionizing radiation in mice. This effect is believed
to be mediated through radiation-induced DNA damage and deregulation of
the WNT/-Catenin signaling pathway, hence affecting cell survival and
proliferation.Results: The current studies aim to elucidate the
contribution of a core circadian gene, Period2 (Per2), in the
radioprotective response of mice bone marrow. Epithelial cells and mice
bone marrow express PER2 in contrast to cancer cells. Bone marrow
isolated from Per2 knockout mice exhibit radioresistence to high doses of
ionizing radiation (HDIR; 2Gy) compared to wild-type mice controls
suggesting that Per2 expression was responsible for radiation-induced
cell death. This finding was translated by increased
granulocyte-macrophage (GM-CFUs) clonogenic survival and reduced cell
apoptosis. Mechanistic analysis showed that Per2 knockout mice bone
marrow expressed higher levels of procaspase3 and less expression of
active caspase3 after HDIR treatment compared to wild-type mice bone
marrow and sham irradiated controls. Furthermore, Per2 knockout mice
treated with 12Gy total body radiation (TBIR) showed an 80% survival
verses 30% survival in wild-type mice. Whole genome-wide sequencing
detected signal transduction pathways reflecting enhanced DNA damage
repair capacity in knockout mice bone marrow, hence defining the role of
PER2 in the radioresistant phenotype in vivo.Conclusions: This data is
the first evidence supporting the critical role of PER2 in protecting
mice hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) from HDIR via enhancement of genes
involved in DNA repair signaling networks.

