Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Monotherapy efficacy of catalytic and allosteric inhibitors of AKT
in breast cancer models with AKT1E17K mutations


AKT1E17K mutations occur at low frequency in a variety of solid tumors,
including those of the breast and urinary bladder. Although this mutation
has been shown to transform rodent cells in culture, it was found to be
less oncogenic than PIK3CA mutations in breast epithelial cells.
Moreover, the therapeutic potential of AKT inhibitors in human tumors
with an endogenous AKT1E17K mutation is not known. Expression of
exogenous copies of AKT1E17K in MCF10A breast epithelial cells increased
phosphorylation of AKT and its substrates, and induced colony formation
in soft agar. These effects were inhibited by the allosteric and
catalytic AKT inhibitors MK-2206 and AZD5363, respectively. We identified
two breast cancer explant models with AKT1E17K mutation (HBC-x2 and
HBCx-31). Dosing of AZD5363 at 150 mg/kg twice daily or MK-2206 at 120
mg/kg 3 times a week significantly inhibited tumor growth in both models,
but AZD5363 was significantly more active than MK-2206 at the dosing
schedules employed, in both models. Pharmacodynamics were assessed in the
HBC-x2 model at 2 h after the final dose. Both compounds significantly
inhibited phosphorylation of PRAS40 and S6, caused relocalisation of
FOXO3a to the nucleus, and reduced Ki67 staining. The data indicate that
breast cancers with AKT1E17K mutations are rational targets for
monotherapy treatment with AKT inhibitors.

