Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ink4a/Arf locus drives gastric tumorigenesis through induction of
parietal cell loss


Background: Cancer development is often preceded by the appearance of
preneoplastic lesions. In gastric carcinogenesis, chronic inflammation
and histopathologic progression of the stomach epithelium lead to the
development of metaplasia and eventually adenocarcinoma. Spasmolytic
polypeptide-expressing metaplasia (SPEM) is one of the preneoplastic
lesions in the stomach and is triggered by the loss of parietal cells
that secrete gastric acid. The Ink4a/Arf locus encodes two structurally
unrelated tumor suppressor proteins, p16(INK4a) and p19(ARF) in mice.
However, little is known regarding the role of these proteins encoded by
the INK4a/ARF locus in gastric tumorigenesis.Methods: To evaluate the
functional role of Ink4a/Arf locus, we crossed mouse gastric cancer
modelK19-Wnt1/C2mE mice with Ink4a/Arf (-/-) mouse and generated
Ink4a/Arf (-/-) K19-Wnt1/C2mE mice and evaluated the effect of deletion
of Ink4a/Arf locus on the parietal cell loss and formation of SPEM and
gastric tumor. Results: In K19-Wnt1/C2mE mice, accumulation of reactive
oxygen species (ROS) and the increase of p19 expression were observed in
gastric epithelium along with the parietal cells loss leading to SPEM
development. However, the parietal cells loss followed by formation of
SPEM and gastric tumor were drastically suppressed in Ink4a/Arf (-/-)
K19-Wnt1/C2mE mice. Furthermore, treatment of tamoxifen, an inducer of
parietal cells loss, in Ink4a/Arf (-/-) mice revealed that deletion of
Ink4a/Arf locus suppresses parietal cells loss in mice. Conclusion: These
results suggest that activation of p19(ARF) tumor suppressor protein by
ROS accumulation paradoxically play a key role in the parietal cells loss
leading to gastric tumorigenesis.

