Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chemerin and chemerin receptors in neuroblastoma tumor
microenvironment


Tumor promoting inflammatory cells as well as inflammatory mediators such
as chemokines are important contributors to the tumor microenvironment as
they can support tumor progression, angiogenesis and metastasis. Chemerin
(also known as TIG-2 or RARRES2) is a chemoattractant factor for
macrophages, immature DCs and NK-cells and a known adipokine involved in
inflammation, metabolism and adipogenesis. Synthesized as a 163aa
preproprotein, chemerin is N-terminally cleaved and secreted as inactive
prochemerin. Following secretion, chemerin can be cleaved at the
C-terminus by a variety of extracellular proteases resulting in several
isoforms with varying length and biological activity. During inflammation
initiation, maintenance and resolution the different chemerin isoforms
may function pro- and/ or anti- inflammatory. Chemerin is a natural
ligand for the G protein- coupled receptors CMKLR1 (Chem23) and GPR1. The
role of chemerin and CMKLR1 in the tumor microenvironment has not been
extensively studied.The aim of this work is to study the function of
chemerin and its receptors in neuroblastoma (NB). Screening of mRNA
expression arrays showed a correlation between high expression of CMKLR1
and GPR1 and a worsened prognosis in NB. Chemerin, CMKLR1 and GPR1
expression was detected in different neuroblastoma cell lines by RT-PCR,
immunocytochemistry and Western Blot. Stimulation with chemerin resulted
in rapid and transient ERK1/2 and Akt phosphorylation.TNF- and IL-1
treatment increased chemerin and CMKLR1 protein levels. The functional
significance of chemerin/ CMKLR1 in NB will be assessed by the use of NB
animal models using cell clones silenced for chemerin/ CMKLR1.

