Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Quantitative screening of protein biomarkers of hepatocellular
carcinoma by antibody array


Protein biomarkers can be key indicators for evaluating the presence or
progression of a human disease or therapeutic response to treatment. We
recently carried out a biomarker screening in hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC) using our antibody array platform. Using 25 pairs of HCC and
adjacent control tissue samples, the expression levels of 274 proteins
including growth factors, inflammation factors, angiogenesis, apoptosis
factors and adhesion molecules, were examined using an antibody arrays. A
panel of proteins demonstrating significant differences in expression
levels between HCC and adjacent control samples was identified by
significance analysis of microarrays (SAM) and Wilcoxon signed-rank test,
combined with fold-change determination. Additionally, proteomic analysis
algorithms were used to capture GO annotations and to construct signaling
pathways and protein-protein interaction networks for these proteins.
Proteins selected through these comprehensive analyses were designated as
potential biomarkers and were well able to distinguish hepatocellular
carcinoma tissue samples from paired, adjacent controls with cluster
tools. The expression levels of several proteins were further evaluated
by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Finally, we performed
follow-up verification studies on selected proteins (Nidogen-1 and
CEACAM-1) for detection of HCC in 164 pairs of serum samples from HCC
patients and normal subjects with reverse phase protein array (RPPA). Our
work reveals promising protein biomarkers for detection of HCC.

