Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MTHFR and health behaviors: A meta-analysis of epigenetic risks
for breast cancer prevention


Purpose: Breast cancer is the most common malignancy and the second
leading cause of cancer death among women worldwide.
Methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) is one of the most studied
low penetrant genes that are critical for methylation pathways for
deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) repair and normal cellular development.
Methylation pathways are affected by health behaviors such as folate
intake, alcohol consumption, and tobacco smoking. While there were
several meta-analyses on the associations of MTHFR gene variations and
BC, by far, no meta-analysis has been noted on the associations of health
behaviors and MTHFR gene variations, with breast cancer.Procedure: PubMed
databases were searched by using a combination of key words including
breast cancer, MTHFR, folate, alcohol, smoking, and health determinants.
Initial search resulted 135 articles from 1999 to 2013. Studies were
reviewed for case-control studies, and scored for quality using the
standard rating indicators from Quality of Reporting of Meta-analyses.
Repeated data from same authors and those with poor quality scores were
excluded. Inter-rater reliabilities on data coding and quality scores
were established for the selection of studies.Findings: Preliminary
results included 55 studies for a total of 22,077 breast cancer cases and
25,419 controls including 27 studies with Whites, 21 studies with Asians,
and 7 studies with mixed Euramericans. Twelve studies included MTHFR gene
counts with folate intake levels for 8,032 cases and 10,482 controls; 5
studies with alcohol consumption for 3,068 cases and 5,157 controls; and
5 studies with tobacco smoking status for 909 cases and 1233 controls.
Preliminary analysis indicated that MTHFR 677CT was associated with
increased risk of BC (P Purpose: Breast cancer is the most common
malignancy and the second leading cause of cancer death among women
worldwide. Methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) is one of the most
studied low penetrant genes that are critical for methylation pathways
for deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) repair and normal cellular development.
Methylation pathways are affected by health behaviors such as folate
intake, alcohol consumption, and tobacco smoking. While there were
several meta-analyses on the associations of MTHFR gene variations and
BC, by far, no meta-analysis has been noted on the associations of health
behaviors and MTHFR gene variations, with breast cancer.Procedure: PubMed
databases were searched by using a combination of key words including
breast cancer, MTHFR, folate, alcohol, smoking, and health determinants.
Initial search resulted 135 articles from 1999 to 2013. Studies were
reviewed for case-control studies, and scored for quality using the
standard rating indicators from Quality of Reporting of Meta-analyses.
Repeated data from same authors and those with poor quality scores were
excluded. Inter-rater reliabilities on data coding and quality scores
were established for the selection of studies.Findings: Preliminary
results included 55 studies for a total of 22,077 breast cancer cases and
25,419 controls including 27 studies with Whites, 21 studies with Asians,
and 7 studies with mixed Euramericans. Twelve studies included MTHFR gene
counts with folate intake levels for 8,032 cases and 10,482 controls; 5
studies with alcohol consumption for 3,068 cases and 5,157 controls; and
5 studies with tobacco smoking status for 909 cases and 1233 controls.
Preliminary analysis indicated that MTHFR 677CT was associated with
increased risk of BC (P < 0.005). The results also suggested that low
folate intake, heavy alcohol consumption, and tobacco smoking contributed
to increased risks for BC.Conclusion: Investigating the epigenetic risks
including healthy life style factors in relation to gene variations has
the potential to explain the influence of health behaviors on
carcinogenesis. Translating the results from the meta-analysis of health
behaviors in relation to epigenetics can provide meaningful insights on
the prevention of breast cancer. The findings from the meta-analysis per
various race-ethnicity groups can be useful for future development of
culturally sensitive and personalized interventions to prevent and
reverse breast cancer by promoting the healthy methylation pathways for
cancer prevention.

