Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel compound 1, 3-bis (3, 5-dichlorophenyl) urea inhibits lung
cancer progression


The successful clinical management of lung cancer is limited by frequent
loss-of-function mutations in p53 which cooperates with chronic
oxidant-stress induced adaptations in mercapturic acid pathway (MAP)
which in turn regulates critical intracellular signaling cascades that
determine therapeutic refractoriness. Hence, we investigated the
anti-cancer effects and mechanisms of action of a novel compound called
1, 3 bis (3, 5-dichlorophenyl) urea (COH-SR4) in lung cancer. Treatment
with COH-SR4 effectively inhibited the survival and clonogenic potential
along with inducing apoptosis in lung cancer cells. COH-SR4 treatment
caused the inhibition of GST activity and G0/G1 cell cycle arrest and
inhibited the expression of cell cycle regulatory proteins CDK2, CDK4,
cyclin A, cyclin B1, cyclin E1, and p27. The COH-SR4 activated AMPK
pathway and knock-down of AMPK partially reversed the cytotoxic effects
of COH-SR4 in lung cancer. COH-SR4 treatment lead to regression of
established xenografts of H358 lung cancer cells without any overt
toxicity. The histopathology of resected tumor sections revealed an
increase in pAMPK, a decrease in the nuclear proliferative marker Ki67
and angiogenesis marker CD31. Western-blot analyses of resected tumor
lysates revealed a decrease in pAkt and anti-apoptotic protein Bcl2 along
with an increase in pAMPK, pro-apoptotic protein Bax and cleaved PARP
levels. Importantly, COH-SR4 lead to decrease in the mesenchymal marker
vimentin and increase in the normal epithelial marker E-cadherin. The
results from our in-vitro and in-vivo studies reveal that COH-SR4
represents a novel candidate with strong mechanistic relevance to target
aggressive and drug-resistant lung tumors (Supported by NIH grant CA
77495 and Beckman Research Institute of the City of Hope).Note: This
abstract was not presented at the meeting.

