Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Correlation between worse prognosis and lower expression of the
TPPP gene in patients with hepatocellular carcinoma, detected by
multiarray analysis


Background. Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) patients who undergo liver
resection often suffer multicentric occurrence after surgery. Therefore,
understanding carcinogenesis in background liver is important.Methods.
Control liver samples (super normal [SN]), were taken from 11 cases of
metastatic liver cancer. We selected corresponding normal tissue from
typical cases of HCC with chronic hepatitis C (corresponding normal [CN])
for comparison. Expression profiling and methylation arrays were
performed to compare SN and CN. Array data showed that the tubulin
polymerization promoting protein (TPPP) gene showed differences in both
array analyses. The relationship between clinicopathological factors of
179 HCC patients and TPPP expression was investigated.Results. The
expression array showed that the TPPP gene was decreased by 2.236-fold
(log2 ratio) in CN compared with SN. The methylation array showed a
higher value of methylation for CN (0.730) than SN (0.384). We studied
TPPP gene expression by real-time reverse transcription PCR. When
compared expression level of TPPP (TPPP value 103/GAPDH), among SN
(n=11), normal liver tissue of HCC patients (n=179), and tumor tissue of
HCC (n=179), there were significant differences (median: 116, 4.60, and
2.63, respectively). The group with lower TPPP expression in tumors
compared with normal tissue showed a worse prognosis of overall survival
than that in the increased expression group (P=0.0317). Strongly reduced
TPPP expression in tumor tissue compared with normal tissue (ratio
Background. Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) patients who undergo liver
resection often suffer multicentric occurrence after surgery. Therefore,
understanding carcinogenesis in background liver is important.Methods.
Control liver samples (super normal [SN]), were taken from 11 cases of
metastatic liver cancer. We selected corresponding normal tissue from
typical cases of HCC with chronic hepatitis C (corresponding normal [CN])
for comparison. Expression profiling and methylation arrays were
performed to compare SN and CN. Array data showed that the tubulin
polymerization promoting protein (TPPP) gene showed differences in both
array analyses. The relationship between clinicopathological factors of
179 HCC patients and TPPP expression was investigated.Results. The
expression array showed that the TPPP gene was decreased by 2.236-fold
(log2 ratio) in CN compared with SN. The methylation array showed a
higher value of methylation for CN (0.730) than SN (0.384). We studied
TPPP gene expression by real-time reverse transcription PCR. When
compared expression level of TPPP (TPPP value 103/GAPDH), among SN
(n=11), normal liver tissue of HCC patients (n=179), and tumor tissue of
HCC (n=179), there were significant differences (median: 116, 4.60, and
2.63, respectively). The group with lower TPPP expression in tumors
compared with normal tissue showed a worse prognosis of overall survival
than that in the increased expression group (P=0.0317). Strongly reduced
TPPP expression in tumor tissue compared with normal tissue (ratio <0.3,
n=57) was detected as an independent prognostic factor by multivariate
analysis (P=0.0310).Conclusions. Expression of the TPPP gene in tumor and
non-cancerous liver tissue in HCC patients is significantly lower
compared with SN. HCC patients with this low TPPP expression show a poor
prognosis. This indicates that this gene is a new candidate of tumor
suppressor genes in HCC. Low TPPP expression in liver tissue might be a
predictor of HCC.

