Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Serum alpha-tocopherol, beta carotene and cancer survival in the
ATBC Study


Background: Tocopherols and carotenoids are naturally occurring
antioxidants found in foods that have been shown to affect cancer
incidence and progression in laboratory studies. Both -tocopherol and
-carotene have been studies in relation to cancer incidence but data
examining their associations with cancer survival are sparse.Methods: We
prospectively examined serum -tocopherol, -carotene and all cancer
survival in the Alpha-Tocopherol, Beta-Carotene Cancer Prevention (ATBC)
Study cohort of male smokers enrolled between 1985 and 1988. Fasting
serum -tocopherol and -carotene were assessed in baseline samples donated
prior to cancer diagnosis. As of 2010, there were 10,269 deaths in the
cohort of which 6,670 were cancer-related. All cancer survival as well as
site-specific cancer survival was examined using the Kaplan-Meier method
with deaths from other causes treated as censored events. Follow-up time
was calculated from the date of diagnosis to death or censoring date,
whichever came first. Cox proportional hazards regression was used to
evaluate the association between -tocopherol and -carotene and cancer
survival. Regression models included age at randomization, body mass
index, age at cancer diagnosis, smoking years, and serum total
cholesterol.Results: Higher baseline serum -tocopherol and -carotene were
significantly associated with improved overall cancer survival in a
dose-dependent manner. Compared to the lowest quintile (Q1), the hazards
ratio (HR) [95% confidence interval (CI)] for the highest quintile (Q5)
of -tocopherol was 0.81 (0.74, 0.89), PtrendBackground: Tocopherols and
carotenoids are naturally occurring antioxidants found in foods that have
been shown to affect cancer incidence and progression in laboratory
studies. Both -tocopherol and -carotene have been studies in relation to
cancer incidence but data examining their associations with cancer
survival are sparse.Methods: We prospectively examined serum -tocopherol,
-carotene and all cancer survival in the Alpha-Tocopherol, Beta-Carotene
Cancer Prevention (ATBC) Study cohort of male smokers enrolled between
1985 and 1988. Fasting serum -tocopherol and -carotene were assessed in
baseline samples donated prior to cancer diagnosis. As of 2010, there
were 10,269 deaths in the cohort of which 6,670 were cancer-related. All
cancer survival as well as site-specific cancer survival was examined
using the Kaplan-Meier method with deaths from other causes treated as
censored events. Follow-up time was calculated from the date of diagnosis
to death or censoring date, whichever came first. Cox proportional
hazards regression was used to evaluate the association between
-tocopherol and -carotene and cancer survival. Regression models included
age at randomization, body mass index, age at cancer diagnosis, smoking
years, and serum total cholesterol.Results: Higher baseline serum
-tocopherol and -carotene were significantly associated with improved
overall cancer survival in a dose-dependent manner. Compared to the
lowest quintile (Q1), the hazards ratio (HR) [95% confidence interval
(CI)] for the highest quintile (Q5) of -tocopherol was 0.81 (0.74, 0.89),
Ptrend<0.0001. Similarly, the HR (95% CI) Q5 vs. Q1 for -carotene was
0.72 (0.67, 0.78), PtrendBackground: Tocopherols and carotenoids are
naturally occurring antioxidants found in foods that have been shown to
affect cancer incidence and progression in laboratory studies. Both
-tocopherol and -carotene have been studies in relation to cancer
incidence but data examining their associations with cancer survival are
sparse.Methods: We prospectively examined serum -tocopherol, -carotene
and all cancer survival in the Alpha-Tocopherol, Beta-Carotene Cancer
Prevention (ATBC) Study cohort of male smokers enrolled between 1985 and
1988. Fasting serum -tocopherol and -carotene were assessed in baseline
samples donated prior to cancer diagnosis. As of 2010, there were 10,269
deaths in the cohort of which 6,670 were cancer-related. All cancer
survival as well as site-specific cancer survival was examined using the
Kaplan-Meier method with deaths from other causes treated as censored
events. Follow-up time was calculated from the date of diagnosis to death
or censoring date, whichever came first. Cox proportional hazards
regression was used to evaluate the association between -tocopherol and
-carotene and cancer survival. Regression models included age at
randomization, body mass index, age at cancer diagnosis, smoking years,
and serum total cholesterol.Results: Higher baseline serum -tocopherol
and -carotene were significantly associated with improved overall cancer
survival in a dose-dependent manner. Compared to the lowest quintile
(Q1), the hazards ratio (HR) [95% confidence interval (CI)] for the
highest quintile (Q5) of -tocopherol was 0.81 (0.74, 0.89),
Ptrend<0.0001. Similarly, the HR (95% CI) Q5 vs. Q1 for -carotene was
0.72 (0.67, 0.78), Ptrend<0.0001. When examining specific cancer sites,
higher serum -tocopherol at baseline was associated with improved
survival of: colorectal cancer, HR (95% CI) Q5: 0.62 (0.40, 0.97),
Ptrend=0.005, and pancreatic cancer, HR (95% CI) Q5: 0.76 (0.51, 1.13),
Ptrend=0.07. Higher baseline serum -carotene was significantly associated
with improved survival of: lung cancer, HR (95% CI) Q5: 0.83 (0.74,
0.93), Ptrend=0.0009; stomach cancer, HR (95% CI) Q5: 0.61 (0.38, 0.96),
Ptrend=0.01; and, liver cancer HR (95% CI) Q5: 0.53 (0.30, 0.95),
Ptrend=0.02. Serum -carotene was also associated with a marginally
significant improvement in survival of prostate cancer (Q5 HR (95% CI)
0.87 (0.66, 1.14), Ptrend=0.05) and bladder cancer (Q5 HR 0.63 (0.38,
1.05), Ptrend=0.03).Conclusion: Higher circulating concentrations of
-tocopherol and -carotene are related to improved cancer survival in this
cohort of male smokers. These results suggest higher dietary intake of
these micronutrients prior to cancer diagnosis may contribute to improved
survival. Replication of our findings and mechanistic studies are
warranted to shed light on the observed associations.

