Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Human ovarian cancer stem cells: In vitro cultivation and
characterization


Cancer stem cells (CSC) constitute a miniscule population within the
heterogeneous cells of cancer tissues, but they can self-renew,
differentiate and recapitulate the tumors. In the absence of serum, CSC
from some solid tumors are capable of proliferation in vitro under
sphere-forming conditions. We have now established spheroid culture
conditions for cultivating ovarian cancer cells derived from surgical
specimen. These spheroid cells are tumorigenic when explanted into
NOD/Shi-scid, IL-2Rnull mice, and immuno-histological analysis indicates
that the resulting tumors are indistinguishable from the originals. When
serum is added to the in vitro culture media, the spheroid cells
differentiate, which is associated with the down-regulation of the stem
cell-specific regulators Nanog, Sox2, and ALDH1A1 and the up-regulation
of cytokeratin. Expression of two of the regulators was essential for the
sphere cell maintenance because shRNA-mediated knockdown of either Sox2
or ALDH1A1 inhibited cell proliferation. The differentiated cells, when
returned to the sphere-forming serum-free conditions, were capable of
reforming spheroids and re-expression of the stem cell markers. Single
cell gene expression analysis of spheroid cells and the differentiated
cells revealed that these two cell populations were clearly different,
and that the reverting spheroid cells were similar to the original
spheroid population. These findings indicated that the differentiation of
the spheroid stem cells was highly reversible. Unexpectedly, the
serum-induced differentiation caused the cell population to become more
resistant to paclitaxel, one of the key ovarian cancer chemotherapy
drugs, whereas de-differentiation/reversion back to spheroids rendered
the cells paclitaxel-sensitive again. The intriguing clinical
implications of these findings will be discussed.

