Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Defining the determinants of sensitivity and resistance to BET
bromodomain inhibition


Selective inhibition of BET bromodomains by small molecule inhibitors has
emerged as a promising therapeutic strategy for the treatment of cancer.
Accordingly, we have recently initiated clinical trials to assess this
mechanism in patients. Recent evidence demonstrates that BET bromodomain
inhibition leads to anti-proliferative activity in pre-clinical models of
hematological malignancies and solid tumors. This anti-proliferative
activity involves down-regulation of the transcription factor MYC, among
other cancer-relevant pathways. However, heterogeneity exists in the
response to BET bromodomain inhibition at both the molecular and
phenotypic level. Given this complexity, the molecular determinants of
sensitivity and resistance to BET bromodomain inhibition remains poorly
understood. Current efforts are aimed at addressing this key issue by
integrating the following: (1) phenotypic endpoints observed upon BET
bromodomain inhibition with transcriptional changes, including
down-regulation of MYC and other transcription factors important for
regulating proliferation and cell death, such as MYB and BCL-2,(2)
transcriptional response with BET protein chromatin binding and eviction,
and (3) phenotypic endpoints and transcriptional response with genomic
context. Our data potentially stratify indications within hematologic
malignancies and solid tumors, and provide insight into patient selection
strategies.

