Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cd44s is of functional importance for hepatocellular carcinoma
(hcc) extra-hepatic metastases through activation of sdf-1a/cxcr4 axis


Background: CD44 has been reported as a promoter of metastasis in several
tumors, including HCC. In this study, we elucidated the critical role of
CD44 in HCC metastasis, especially in distant metastasis as well as the
underling mechanism.Methods: The expression of CXCR4, CD44 and their
associated cellular signaling cascades, involving Akt and MAP Kinases,
were determined by Western blotting. We also established CD44-deficient
MHCC-97H cell lines by transfection with miRNA-CXCR4 plasmids and
determined cell migration/invasion activity in a transwell assay.The
prognostic value of CD44 and it's combination with CXCR4 was further
evaluated.Results: HCC patients with higher CD44 have poor prognosis,
including reduced disease-free and overall survival, and individuals with
distinct metastasis have higher frequency expression of CD44. We found
that expression of CD44 was positively related to metastatic potential of
HCC cell lines, and modified cells with CD44high showed higher
aggressiveness in vitro, and higher metastatic ability in vivo.
Furthermore, the mechanism of CD44 improving the invasion activity of HCC
cells was though the SDF-1a/CXCR4 axis. CD44 can activate the PI-3K/Akt
pathway through binding HA, which can up-regulate the expression of
CXCR4. CD44 combined with CXCR4 is a promising independent predictor of
tumor recurrence and survival in hepatocellular carcinoma
patients.CONCLUSIONS: CD44s is a potent predictor for extra-hapatic
metastasis and overall survival of HCC patients. Our findings also
provided evidence that the process of HA/CD44-induced CXCR4 expression is
functional important for the invasiveness and metastasis of HCC.
Therefore, the CD44-SDF-1/CXCR4 system may be a new therapeutic target
for treating HCC metastasis.Note: This abstract was not presented at the
meeting.

