Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Secular trends in incidence and mortality of female cancers in
Shanghai, China (1973-2009)


Socioeconomic development and urbanization have resulted in dramatic
changes in cancer incidence and mortality in China. As one of the largest
and most developed cities in China, Shanghai's cancer rates reflect the
changing burden of cancer in China. This study was undertaken to evaluate
trends and quantify changes in the incidence and mortality of breast,
ovarian, endometrial, and cervical cancers among female residents of
urban Shanghai from 1973 to 2009. Data on cancer incidence and mortality
were collected by the Shanghai Cancer Registry. International
Classification of Disease version 10 codes for breast (C50), cervical
(C53), endometrial (corpus uteri and uterus unspecified; C54 and C55),
and ovarian cancer (C56) were included in the current analysis. Annual
population data was provided by the Department of Vital Statistics,
Shanghai Municipal Center for Disease Control and Prevention. A total of
73,755 female cancers and 28,274 related deaths were documented between
1973 and 2009. Age-standardized incidence and mortality rates were
calculated using the Segi/Doll 1960 world standard. Joinpoint regression
models were used to fit joined straight lines on a log-scale for annual
age-standardized rates and to calculate annual percent changes (APC).
Between 1973 and 2009, the incidence of breast, ovarian, and endometrial
cancers increased, with overall APCs of 2.93, 2.20, and 1.66,
respectively. Significant trends were found for breast cancer between
1979 and 1998 (APC 3.07) and for ovarian cancer between 1983 and 2009
(APC 2.83). For endometrial cancer a significant decrease occurred from
1973 to 1983 (APC -4.27), followed by a significant increase from 1983 to
1996 (APC 2.58). The incidence of cervical cancer decreased, with an
overall APC of -3.91; this included three significant decreasing trends
between 1973 and 1996, followed by a significant increase through 2009
(APC 8.49). The mortality of breast and ovarian cancers increased, with
overall APCs of 0.70 and 0.58, respectively. Significant trends were
found for breast cancer between 1982 and 2004 (APC 1.55) and for ovarian
cancer during the entire time period. The mortality of cervical and
endometrial cancers decreased, with overall APCs of -5.36 and -2.33,
respectively. For cervical cancer, this included a significant decrease
between 1973 and 1999 (APC -7.34), followed by a significant increase
through 2009 (APC 3.24). For endometrial cancer, this included a
significant decrease between 1973 and 1988 (APC -5.59). In summary,
increasing trends were found for breast, ovarian and endometrial cancer
incidence, and for breast and ovarian cancer mortality, while decreasing
trends were found for cervical cancer incidence and cervical and
endometrial cancer mortality among women in urban Shanghai. Additional
analyses to identify age-period-cohort effects in this data are underway.
This study lays the ground work for the establishment of cancer
prevention and control priorities in China.

