Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Vitronectin expression in primary lung cancers


RationaleVitronectin (Vn) plays a role in extracellular matrix (ECM)
remodeling during tumorigenesis. Vn is present in human bronchial
submucosal glands and it is secreted by A549 lung adenocarcinoma cell
line. However, whether Vn is differentially expressed in tissues of
primary lung cancer has not been explored.MethodsLung tissue from 22
primary lung carcinoma and 36 non-lung cancer subjects were obtained from
fibrobronchoscopy. Sections were analyzed by histo- immunohistochemical
methods. The total area occupied by ECM, surface and gland epithelium, as
well as the percentage area occupied by Vn at each of these localizations
were measured. Chi-square, t-student, U-Mann Whitney and ANOVA tests were
used in group comparisons. Statistical significance was tested at
PRationaleVitronectin (Vn) plays a role in extracellular matrix (ECM)
remodeling during tumorigenesis. Vn is present in human bronchial
submucosal glands and it is secreted by A549 lung adenocarcinoma cell
line. However, whether Vn is differentially expressed in tissues of
primary lung cancer has not been explored.MethodsLung tissue from 22
primary lung carcinoma and 36 non-lung cancer subjects were obtained from
fibrobronchoscopy. Sections were analyzed by histo- immunohistochemical
methods. The total area occupied by ECM, surface and gland epithelium, as
well as the percentage area occupied by Vn at each of these localizations
were measured. Chi-square, t-student, U-Mann Whitney and ANOVA tests were
used in group comparisons. Statistical significance was tested at
P<0.05.ResultsVn expression was observed in bronchial glandular and
surface epithelium, as well as in ECM . In total, the average area of
ECM, surface or glandular epithelium was 0.289mm2 ( 0.032), 0.043mm2
(0.009), 0.084mm2 (0.031), respectively. The percentage area occupied by
Vn in ECM, surface or glandular epithelium, was 4.899 (1.186), 7.279
(1.623), 3.285 (1.038), respectively; with not significant statistical
differences between lung cancer and non-cancer subjects or within
different types of primary lung cancer (Table 1).ConclusionThere were no
statistically significant differences in Vn expression between lung
cancer and non-cancer subjects, or within primary lung carcinomas.
Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

