Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Microenvironmental distribution of trastuzumab is heterogeneous
and decreases sharply when administered following a single dose of
bevacizumab in Her2+ve xenografts and metastases models


We have previously shown that trastuzumab distributes heterogeneously
within MDA-435-Her2 xenografts. Though peak accumulation occurs 24h after
administration & trastuzumab was detected greater than 150 m from many
vessels, there remained substantial Her2+ve areas that were negative for
bound drug.Methods: Her2+ve human carcinoma xenografts were grown in
NOD/SCID mice as solid tumors or as metastatic models following ip or iv
injection. Tumors were MR-imaged (T1-weighted) with a 500kDa Gd-labeled
hyperbranched polyglycerol (HPG) contrast agent (CA). Treatments included
bevacizumab (BvMAb, 10 mg/kg), trastuzumab (TsMab, 10 mg/kg) and human
IgG (10 mg/kg). Multiplexed staining and imaging of whole tumor sections
was used to evaluate the distribution of TsMAb in the context of the
tumor microenvironment.Findings: BT474, MDA361 and SKOV3 primary tumor
xenografts all show highly heterogeneous distribution of TsMAb at 24h,
where some areas are highly saturated with TsMAb and others contain
unbound Her2+ tissue. Small metastases in the peritoneal cavity and lung
also exhibit substantial proportions of tissue that are negative for
TsMAb. CD31-stained vessels dual-labeled for a perfusion marker are often
seen to have little or no bound TsMAb on perivascular tumor cells.
Pretreatment with BvMAb for 24-72h results in significant reductions in
tumor accumulation of TsMAb, with tumors showing 60-90% of bound TsMAb
relative to IgG-treated controls (pWe have previously shown that
trastuzumab distributes heterogeneously within MDA-435-Her2 xenografts.
Though peak accumulation occurs 24h after administration & trastuzumab
was detected greater than 150 m from many vessels, there remained
substantial Her2+ve areas that were negative for bound drug.Methods:
Her2+ve human carcinoma xenografts were grown in NOD/SCID mice as solid
tumors or as metastatic models following ip or iv injection. Tumors were
MR-imaged (T1-weighted) with a 500kDa Gd-labeled hyperbranched
polyglycerol (HPG) contrast agent (CA). Treatments included bevacizumab
(BvMAb, 10 mg/kg), trastuzumab (TsMab, 10 mg/kg) and human IgG (10
mg/kg). Multiplexed staining and imaging of whole tumor sections was used
to evaluate the distribution of TsMAb in the context of the tumor
microenvironment.Findings: BT474, MDA361 and SKOV3 primary tumor
xenografts all show highly heterogeneous distribution of TsMAb at 24h,
where some areas are highly saturated with TsMAb and others contain
unbound Her2+ tissue. Small metastases in the peritoneal cavity and lung
also exhibit substantial proportions of tissue that are negative for
TsMAb. CD31-stained vessels dual-labeled for a perfusion marker are often
seen to have little or no bound TsMAb on perivascular tumor cells.
Pretreatment with BvMAb for 24-72h results in significant reductions in
tumor accumulation of TsMAb, with tumors showing 60-90% of bound TsMAb
relative to IgG-treated controls (p<0.05). BvMAb -treated xenografts had
reduced fractions of perfused vessels and reduced measures of vascular
function assessed using DCE-MRI (49% reduction in CA, pWe have previously
shown that trastuzumab distributes heterogeneously within MDA-435-Her2
xenografts. Though peak accumulation occurs 24h after administration &
trastuzumab was detected greater than 150 m from many vessels, there
remained substantial Her2+ve areas that were negative for bound
drug.Methods: Her2+ve human carcinoma xenografts were grown in NOD/SCID
mice as solid tumors or as metastatic models following ip or iv
injection. Tumors were MR-imaged (T1-weighted) with a 500kDa Gd-labeled
hyperbranched polyglycerol (HPG) contrast agent (CA). Treatments included
bevacizumab (BvMAb, 10 mg/kg), trastuzumab (TsMab, 10 mg/kg) and human
IgG (10 mg/kg). Multiplexed staining and imaging of whole tumor sections
was used to evaluate the distribution of TsMAb in the context of the
tumor microenvironment.Findings: BT474, MDA361 and SKOV3 primary tumor
xenografts all show highly heterogeneous distribution of TsMAb at 24h,
where some areas are highly saturated with TsMAb and others contain
unbound Her2+ tissue. Small metastases in the peritoneal cavity and lung
also exhibit substantial proportions of tissue that are negative for
TsMAb. CD31-stained vessels dual-labeled for a perfusion marker are often
seen to have little or no bound TsMAb on perivascular tumor cells.
Pretreatment with BvMAb for 24-72h results in significant reductions in
tumor accumulation of TsMAb, with tumors showing 60-90% of bound TsMAb
relative to IgG-treated controls (p<0.05). BvMAb -treated xenografts had
reduced fractions of perfused vessels and reduced measures of vascular
function assessed using DCE-MRI (49% reduction in CA, p<0.05).
Corresponding parameter maps of MR-imaged high vascular function and
histological images of bound TsMAb do not consistently correlate.
Detailed maps of the tumor microenvironment show that even with VEGF
blockade, the distribution of TsMAb still does not correspond to vessels
that are perfused. Significant numbers of perfused vessels persist with
no perivascular bound TsMAb despite the presence of Her2+ cells;
saturation with bound TsMAb is also not consistently correlated with the
presence or absence of smooth muscle, collagen or ZO-1 stained tight
junctions, examined using immunohistochemistry.Summary: The extravascular
distribution of TsMAb in Her2-overexpressing xenografts, including
micrometastases, is heterogeneous and is not explained simply by the
presence or absence of vascular function. Pre-treatment with BvMAb for
even short exposures of 24-72h worsens the distribution of TsMAb within
the tumor microenvironment. The persistence of tissues that are unbound
for trastuzumab suggests the possibility of inadequate drug exposure as a
mechanism for drug resistance that may be exacerbated by pre-treatment
with a VEGF blockade.

