Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation of SRC kinases by microRNA-3607 located in a frequently
deleted locus in prostate cancer


Genomic studies suggest that deletions at chromosome (chr) 5q region
(particularly chr5q14-q23) are frequent in prostate cancer, implicating
this region in prostate carcinogenesis. However, the genes within this
region are largely unknown. Here we report for the first time, the
widespread attenuation of miR-3607 - a microRNA gene located at chr5q14
region- in prostate cancer. Expression analyses of miR-3607 in a clinical
cohort of prostate cancer (PCa) specimens showed that miR-3607 is
significantly attenuated and low miR-3607 partment of Urology, UCSF
School of Mediacinehip and guidance. his guidance. expression is
correlated with tumor progression and poor survival outcome in prostate
cancer. Our analyses suggest that miR-3607 expression may be a clinically
significant parameter with an associated diagnostic potential. We
examined the functional significance of miR-3607 in prostate cancer cell
lines and found that miR-3607 overexpression led to significantly
decreased proliferation, apoptosis induction and decreased invasiveness.
Further, our results suggest that miR-3607 directly represses oncogenic
SRC family kinases, LYN and SRC, in prostate cancer. In view of our
results, we propose that miR-3607 plays a tumor suppressive role in
prostate cancer by regulating SRC kinases that in turn regulates prostate
carcinogenesis. To our knowledge this is the first report that: (i)
identifies a novel role for miR-3607 located in a frequently deleted
region of prostate cancer and (ii) defines novel miRNA mediated
regulation of SRC kinases in prostate cancer. Since SRC kinases play a
central role in prostate cancer progression and metastasis and are
attractive targets, this study has potential implications in the design
of better therapeutic modalities for prostate cancer management.

