Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Homozygous deletion of the activin A receptor, type IB gene is
associated with an aggressive cancer phenotype in pancreatic cancer


Background: Transforming growth factor, beta (TGFB) signal is considered
to be a tumor suppressive pathway based on the frequent genomic deletion
of the SMAD4 gene in pancreatic cancer (PC); however; the role of the
activin signal, which also belongs to the TGFB superfamily, remains
largely unclear.Methods and Results: We found a homozygous deletion of
the activin A receptor, type IB (ACVR1B) gene in 2 out of 8 PC cell lines
using array-comparative genomic hybridization, and the absence of ACVR1B
mRNA and protein expression was confirmed in these 2 cell lines. Activin
A stimulation inhibited cellular growth and increased the phosphorylation
level of SMAD2 and the expression level of p21CIP1/WAF1 in the Sui66 cell
line (wild-type ACVR1B and SMAD4 genes) but not in the Sui68 cell line
(homozygous deletion of ACVR1B gene). Stable ACVR1B-knockdown using short
hairpin RNA cancelled the effects of activin A on the cellular growth of
the PC cell lines. In addition, ACVR1B-knockdown significantly enhanced
the colony formation abilities and cellular growth, compared with
controls. In a xenograft study, ACVR1B-knockdown resulted in a
significantly elevated level of tumorigenesis and a larger tumor volume,
compared with the control. Furthermore, in clinical samples, 6 of the 29
PC samples (20.7%) carried a deletion of the ACVR1B gene, while 10 of the
29 samples (34.5%) carried a deletion of the SMAD4 gene. Of note, 5 of
the 6 samples with a deletion of the ACVR1B gene also had a deletion of
the SMAD4 gene.Conclusion: We identified a homozygous deletion of the
ACVR1B gene in PC cell lines and clinical samples and proposed that the
deletion of the ACVR1B gene may mediate an aggressive cancer phenotype in
PC. Our findings provide novel insight into the role of the activin
signal in PC.

