Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeted inhibition of BRAF signaling in melanoma enhances the
activity of a multivalent immunotherapeutic vaccine


Development of a successful immunotherapeutic vaccine targeting melanoma
requires the use of multiple melanoma associated antigens (MAA).
Expression of several MAAs is regulated by the micropthalmia
transcription factor (MITF), which in turn is regulated by members of the
MAPK pathway, such as ERK. It is also known that 70% of melanomas express
the genetic lesion BRAFV600E. Based on this knowledge, we hypothesize
that the use of a specific BRAFV600E inhibitor would enhance MITF
mediated MAA expression and thus serve as a viable target for
immunotherapy. We have developed a vaccinia virus based melanoma vaccine
using patient derived primary melanoma cells that are rich in MAAs such
as gp100, tyrosinase, and TRP-1. Our results indicated that our cells
were either homozygous or heterozygous for the mutated BRAF gene. In
addition, our cells were responsive to treatment by PLX-4032, an FDA
approved treatment for melanoma, as evidenced by inhibition of
phosphorylation of MEK and ERK, two key players in the MAPK pathway.
Phenotypically, the migratory and invasive properties of our cell lines
were also altered by PLX-4032. Most interestingly was the observation
that upon treatment with PLX-4032, the expression of various MAAs was
altered. Specifically, the expression of gp100, MART-1, and tyrosinase
increased both on the RNA level as well as on the protein level. Our
results warrant further investigation into a combinatorial therapeutic
approach to treat melanoma by which increasing the expression of various
immunologically relevant MAAs, upon treatment with PLX-4032, followed by
vaccination may lead to a more robust and targeted anti-melanoma immune
response.

