Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CCN5/wisp-2 induced growth arrest of aggressive triple negative
breast cancer cells is promoted through accumulation and trafficking of
p27kip1


CCN5, a matricellular protein, represents promising treatment target in
triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) as treatment or induced activation
of CCN5 in TNBC cells promotes cell growth arrest at G0/G1 phase, reduces
cell proliferation and delays tumor growth in xenograft model. Our
studies found that p27Kip1 tumor suppressor protein is upregulated and
relocalized to the nucleus from cytoplasm by CCN5 in these cells and that
these two events (i.e., upregulation and relocalization) of p27Kip1 is
required for CCN5-induced growth inhibition of TNBC cells. In the absence
of CCN5, p27Kip1 remains mostly in the cytoplasm, a state of aggressive
nature of cancer cells. Mechanistically, CCN5 inhibits Skp2 expression,
which seems to stabilize p27Kip1 protein in these cells. On the other
hand, CCN5 also recruits FOXO3a to mediate transcriptional regulation of
p27Kip1. The recruitment of FOXO3a is achieved by the induction of its
expression and activity through shifting from cytoplasm to the nucleus.
Our data indicate that CCN5 blocks PI3K/AKT signaling to dephosphorylate
at S318, S253 and Thr32 in FOXO3a for nuclear relocalization and
activation of FOXO3a. Inhibition of 61 diminishes CCN5 action on p27Kip1
in TNBC cells. Collectively, CCN5 may have therapeutic potential for TNBC.

