Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Age at attainment of adult height and risk of primary brain tumors


Brain tumors represent a small fraction of primary cancers diagnosed each
year. However, the disproportionate mortality and morbidity burden
associated with brain tumors merits a greater understanding of their
cause. Beyond ionizing radiation, few environmental exposures are
confirmed to cause brain tumors in humans. A taller stature has been
linked to increased risk in several studies. Furthermore, we and others
have reported that risk varies with body weight at age 21 though not
later in life. These findings suggest a potential role for the myriad of
factors involved in adolescent growth with glioma risk. The purpose of
this analysis was to further elucidate the relation of height and
adolescent growth rate on primary brain tumor risk. The analysis included
1045 glioma cases, 274 meningioma cases and 1242 community controls
enrolled in a clinic-based case-control study. In a structured interview
participants reported height at age 21 and age at completion of linear
growth. Multivariate logistic regression was used to compute odds ratios
(OR) and 95% Confidence Intervals (CI) associated with age at attainment
of maximum adult height (age-HT) adjusted for age, race, gender,
education, and state of residence. Among controls, the median age at
height attainment was 17 in men (interdecile range: 15-19 years) and 16
in women (interdecile range: 13-18 years). Age-HT had no association with
the risk of meningioma (P= 0.284). However, we observed a statistically
significant positive association with the risk of glioma (PBrain tumors
represent a small fraction of primary cancers diagnosed each year.
However, the disproportionate mortality and morbidity burden associated
with brain tumors merits a greater understanding of their cause. Beyond
ionizing radiation, few environmental exposures are confirmed to cause
brain tumors in humans. A taller stature has been linked to increased
risk in several studies. Furthermore, we and others have reported that
risk varies with body weight at age 21 though not later in life. These
findings suggest a potential role for the myriad of factors involved in
adolescent growth with glioma risk. The purpose of this analysis was to
further elucidate the relation of height and adolescent growth rate on
primary brain tumor risk. The analysis included 1045 glioma cases, 274
meningioma cases and 1242 community controls enrolled in a clinic-based
case-control study. In a structured interview participants reported
height at age 21 and age at completion of linear growth. Multivariate
logistic regression was used to compute odds ratios (OR) and 95%
Confidence Intervals (CI) associated with age at attainment of maximum
adult height (age-HT) adjusted for age, race, gender, education, and
state of residence. Among controls, the median age at height attainment
was 17 in men (interdecile range: 15-19 years) and 16 in women
(interdecile range: 13-18 years). Age-HT had no association with the risk
of meningioma (P= 0.284). However, we observed a statistically
significant positive association with the risk of glioma (P<0.001): for
each additional year at which adult height was attained risk of glioma
was increased 14% in men (OR: 1.14; 95% CI: 1.06, 1.24) and 11% in women
(OR: 1.11; 95% CI: 1.04, 1.19). Persons with an age-HT 19 had nearly
twice the risk of glioma (OR: 1.94; 95% CI: 1.36, 2.75) when compared to
persons with age-HT 15, with similar results observed in men (OR: 2.11;
95% CI: 1.24, 3.60) and women (OR: 1.84; 95% CI: 1.07, 3.17), and in high
grade (OR: 1.77; 95% CI: 1.18, 2.64) and lower grade (OR: 2.72; 95% CI:
1.59, 4.65) tumors. Among controls, adult height and age-HT were
uncorrelated both in men (Pearson r = -0.03) and in women (Pearson r =
0.09). When we considered the association of age-HT by tertile of adult
height (defined by gender), a statistically significant positive
association was observed with increasing increment in age-HT in the
lowest (OR: 1.16; P = 0.003) and middle tertile (OR: 1.18; P Brain tumors
represent a small fraction of primary cancers diagnosed each year.
However, the disproportionate mortality and morbidity burden associated
with brain tumors merits a greater understanding of their cause. Beyond
ionizing radiation, few environmental exposures are confirmed to cause
brain tumors in humans. A taller stature has been linked to increased
risk in several studies. Furthermore, we and others have reported that
risk varies with body weight at age 21 though not later in life. These
findings suggest a potential role for the myriad of factors involved in
adolescent growth with glioma risk. The purpose of this analysis was to
further elucidate the relation of height and adolescent growth rate on
primary brain tumor risk. The analysis included 1045 glioma cases, 274
meningioma cases and 1242 community controls enrolled in a clinic-based
case-control study. In a structured interview participants reported
height at age 21 and age at completion of linear growth. Multivariate
logistic regression was used to compute odds ratios (OR) and 95%
Confidence Intervals (CI) associated with age at attainment of maximum
adult height (age-HT) adjusted for age, race, gender, education, and
state of residence. Among controls, the median age at height attainment
was 17 in men (interdecile range: 15-19 years) and 16 in women
(interdecile range: 13-18 years). Age-HT had no association with the risk
of meningioma (P= 0.284). However, we observed a statistically
significant positive association with the risk of glioma (P<0.001): for
each additional year at which adult height was attained risk of glioma
was increased 14% in men (OR: 1.14; 95% CI: 1.06, 1.24) and 11% in women
(OR: 1.11; 95% CI: 1.04, 1.19). Persons with an age-HT 19 had nearly
twice the risk of glioma (OR: 1.94; 95% CI: 1.36, 2.75) when compared to
persons with age-HT 15, with similar results observed in men (OR: 2.11;
95% CI: 1.24, 3.60) and women (OR: 1.84; 95% CI: 1.07, 3.17), and in high
grade (OR: 1.77; 95% CI: 1.18, 2.64) and lower grade (OR: 2.72; 95% CI:
1.59, 4.65) tumors. Among controls, adult height and age-HT were
uncorrelated both in men (Pearson r = -0.03) and in women (Pearson r =
0.09). When we considered the association of age-HT by tertile of adult
height (defined by gender), a statistically significant positive
association was observed with increasing increment in age-HT in the
lowest (OR: 1.16; P = 0.003) and middle tertile (OR: 1.18; P < 0.001),
whereas no association was observed in the highest (OR: 1.01; P = 0.881)
tertile of adult height. To our knowledge, this is the first report
linking age at completion of linear growth with subsequent risk of
glioma. A postulated mechanism is that a prolonged growth phase may
increase exposure to growth factors that enhance glioma risk. Null
findings in those attaining a tall stature, if not due to chance, suggest
complex interactions with the timing and intensity of risk-promoting
exposures. These findings warrant further study.

