Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ATAD2 overexpression indentifies aggressive endometrial carcinomas


BackgroundUpregulation of the gene ATAD2 has been implicated in cancer
development and progression in a number of tissues, and reported to be a
member of prognostic gene-signatures in breast (van 't Veer et al, 2002;
Wang et al, 2005) and endometrial cancers (Salvesen et al, 2009). We have
investigated ATAD2 protein expression in relation to prognosis and gene
expression alterations relevant for potential biological driver
mechanisms and treatment targets in endometrial cancer.Methods:A total of
564 endometrial carcinoma primary lesions were prospectively collected
and explored for ATAD2 protein expression in relation to survival and
established markers for aggressive disease. Transcriptional alterations
related to ATAD2 protein level were investigated by microarray analysis
for 236 freshly frozen samples in parallel. Differentially expressed
genes were identified using the significance analysis of microarray (SAM)
method, and GSEA analysis was performed using the MSigDB version 4.0 C2
collection
http://www.broadinstitute.org/gsea/msigdb/index.jsp).Results:High ATAD2
expression is significantly associated with the established
clinical-pathological variables for aggressive endometrial cancer high
FIGO stage, non-endometrioid subtype, high grade, aneuploidy, loss of
hormone receptors and poor overall survival (all P-values0.001), also in
the subset of ER positive tumors. mRNA and protein expression for ATAD2
was highly correlated (p
