Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel ligand-independent peptide inhibitor of TREM-1 attenuates
inflammation and suppresses tumor growth in mice


Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) comprises about 85% of all lung
cancers, accounting for over 1.5 million new cases annually. Despite
advances in therapy, the 5-year survival rate is as low as 15%. The
limitations in efficacy and safety associated with available treatments
for NSCLC highlight the need for new treatments. As found recently,
triggering receptor expressed on myeloid cells (TREM-1) plays a role in
NSCLC progression. Inhibition of TREM-1 by short hairpin RNA (shRNA) in
macrophages suppresses cancer cell invasion in vitro. In clinical
setting, high level of TREM-1 expression in tumor-associated macrophages
is associated with cancer recurrence and poor survival of patients with
NSCLC. However, the precise function of TREM-1 and the nature of its
ligand are not yet known. Here we show that TREM-1 can be specifically
silenced in vitro and in vivo using a novel ligand-independent peptide
inhibitor, which was designed using a new model of immune signaling, the
signaling chain homooligomerization (SCHOOL) model. Blockade of TREM-1
function using non-toxic and non-immunogenic SCHOOL peptide inhibitors:
1) delays tumor growth in xenograft models of human NSCLC and 2)
substantially decreases cytokine production in vitro and in vivo. In
addition, macrophage-targeted delivery of SCHOOL peptides utilizing
lipoprotein-mimicking nanoparticles significantly increased peptide
half-life and dosage efficacy. Together, the results suggest that
ligand-independent modulation of TREM-1 function using small synthetic
peptides might be a suitable treatment for NSCLC and possibly other types
of inflammation-associated cancers.

