Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integral role of the PI3K-AKT-mTOR pathway in DDR-mediated
antitumor actions of PARP inhibitor in triple-negative breast
carcinogenesis


Background: The PI3K pathway, in addition to its pro-proliferative and
anti-apoptotic effects on tumor cells, is known to contribute to
DNA-damage repair (DDR). We hypothesized that GDC-0980, a dual PI3K-mTOR
inhibitor, would potentiate an anti-tumor effect in BRCA-competent TNBC
cells when combined with the PARP inhibitor, ABT888 and carboplatin.
Methods: Athymic mice bearing BRCA-competent TNBC xenograft tumors were
treated with GDC-0980 alone or in combination with ABT888 and
carboplatin. Mechanism-based in vitro studies (MTT, CelltiterGLO, flow
cytometry-based live/dead cell, cell cycle analyses, anchorage
independent soft-agar, anchorage dependent 3D ON-TOP, apoptosis, cell
signaling markers assays) using a panel of 5-7 BRCA-wt /mutant TNBC cell
lines were performed. Results: GDC-0980 treatment led to DNA damage
(increased pgH2AX; WB, IF), gain in PAR and a subsequent sensitization of
BRCA-competent TNBC cells to ABT888 plus carboplatin in a time-dependent
manner. The treatment (1) decreased proliferation signals (pAKT, pP70S6K,
p4EBP1, pS6RP), PAR/PARP, PAR/pgH2AX, live/dead cell ratios, cell cycle
progression and clonogenic 3D growth, and (2) increased apoptosis markers
(cl-caspase3, 9, BIM, cl-PARP, and annexinV positivity). These effects
were more pronounced in PTEN-null MDA-MB468 than in RAS/RAF mutated
MDA-MB231 cells. Three-dimensional projection movie showed that (1)
GDC-0980 alone attenuated nuclear pH2AXS139 foci in MDA-MB468 cells at 24
hours and (2) cytoplasmic cl-caspase3 increased in
GDC-0980+ABT888+carboplatin treated MDA-MB468 cells at 72 hours. Finally,
GDC-0980 in combination with ABT888 plus carboplatin blocked the growth
of established xenograft tumors by 80-90% with a concomitant decrease in
tumor Ki67, cl-caspse3, pVEGFR, CD31, p4EBP1, and pS6RP IHC-levels.
Conclusion: This is the first mechanism-based study to demonstrate the
inhibition of DDR as another mode of action of GDC-0980. Our data
revealed that in a BRCA-competent model, GDC-0980 enhanced the antitumor
efficacy of ABT888 in the presence of carboplatin by inhibiting the DDR
system in conjunction with inhibition of the PI3K-mTOR pathway mediated
pro-proliferative and anti-apoptotic signals.

