Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Frequent BrafV637E mutation in hepatocarcinogenesis induced by
neonatal treatment with diethylnitrosamine (DEN) in B6C3F1 mice


The genetic event associated to the initiation process of
hepatocarcinogenesis has not been well elucidated. By whole-exome
analysis, we identified BrafV637E mutation, which is equivalent to human
BrafV600E mutation, in all the four DEN-induced mouse hepatic tumors
examined. By Sanger sequencing we validated that the BrafV637E mutation
is highly frequent in the hepatic tumors [17/18 (94.4%)] in 1 year-old
DEN-treated mice. Using DNA isolated by microscopic dissection we
detected the BrafV637E mutation in 14/16 (87.5%) and 7/9 (77.8%) small
preneoplastic hepatocyte foci respectively at 5 and 8 months after DEN
treatment, indicating that the BrafV637E mutation occurs in the early
stage. On the other hand, although the BrafV637E mutation was frequent in
hepatic tumors induced by neonatal DEN treatment followed by
weekly-administration of CCl4 [5/7 (71.4%)], none of 6 spontaneous and 24
CCl4-induced liver tumors showed the BrafV637E mutation, indicating that
the BrafV637E mutation is specific for DEN-induced tumors. Histological
analysis revealed that BrafV637E mutation was quite common in the lesions
consisted of basophilic cells, while it was much less frequent in the
lesions consisted of eosinophilic cells. We then investigated how the
BrafV637E mutation influences the properties of preneoplastic/neoplastic
hepatocytes. Firstly, the qPCR analysis revealed that p15Ink4b and p19ARF
were upregulated in the DEN-induced hepatic tumors as compared to the
surrounding non-tumor tissues, indicating that the Braf mutation leads to
oncogene induced senescence (OIS), which may be related to the dormancy
of preneoplastic lesions in the early stage. Secondly, when investigated
the intracellular signaling pathways, Akt phosphorylation was much
increased in the hepatic tumors as compared to the surrounding hepatic
tissue, while ERK1/2 phosphorylation was not increased, suggesting the
possible link between BrafV637E mutation and Akt activation. Thirdly,
vemurafenib suppressed proliferation of the BrafV637E-mutated liver tumor
cells both in vitro and in vivo, but not the proliferation of the
BrafV637E mutation negative cells, indicating that BrafV637E mutation is
related to the growth capacity. In summary, our results demonstrated that
BrafV637E mutation is an early event in DEN-induced hepatocarcinogenesis,
and may be related both to growth suppression via OIS and proliferation
through activation of intracellular signaling. (Supported by the grant
from the Japanese Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and
Technology)

