Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The transcriptional regulator TBX3 promotes progression of cells
representing early premalignant breast cancer


The transcriptional regulator TBX3 has been shown to be elevated in
metastatic breast cancer and is thought to be involved in promoting
malignancy of breast and other carcinomas. In a series of cell lines
derived from the same patient with breast cancer, we previously showed
that metastatic 21MT-1 cells express elevated levels of TBX3, while low
levels are expressed by the ductal carcinoma in situ-like 21NT cells.
Here we hypothesized that upregulation of TBX3 in 21NT cells would
promote their progression to a more malignant phenotype. We found that
21NT cells engineered to overexpress either isoform of TBX3 (iso1, iso2)
have an altered growth in 3D Matrigel, with increased colony-forming
ability, higher number of cells per colony and less spherical, more
irregular colonies, consistent with increased invasiveness. Transwell
assays through Matrigel showed increased invasiveness of 21NT cells
overexpressing either TBX3 isoform and in vivo assay in the chick embryo
similarly showed increased propensity of TBX3 over-expressing 21NT cells
for extravasation. These TBX3-induced changes were associated with
increased vimentin expression, but minimal change in e-cadherin
expression. Overall, these results indicate that TBX3 (iso1 or iso2)
expression can promote progression in a model of early breast cancer, by
altering cell properties involved in cell survival/colony formation and
invasiveness.

