Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The lipogenic phenotype of HER2/neu-positive breast cancer cells


15 - 30 % of all breast cancer cases are classified as HER2/neu-positive,
a very aggressive form of breast cancer that correlates with a poor
prognosis, reduced survival time and increased incidence of metastasis.
We have shown that the HER2-positive breast cancer cell line BT474 relies
on a unique Warburg-like metabolism for survival and aggressive behavior.
These cells are dependent on fatty acid synthesis, presumably as a means
to regenerate NAD+ for aerobic glycolysis. The cells show markedly
increased levels of stored fats compared to other breast cancer cell
lines and disruption of the synthetic process results in apoptosis.This
metabolic phenotype is operating at its limits in HER2-positive cells, as
addition of exogenous palmitate results in cell death, whereas
HER2-normal cells are not affected by this treatment. Microarray analysis
of palmitate-treated HER2/neu-positive SKBR3 cells and HER2-normal MCF7
cells suggests that palmitate induces an ER-stress response in the
HER2-positive cells. This is congruent with protein markers for
stress-related translational stalling, which ultimately result in
CHOP-dependent cell death. Palmitate distinctly reduces the expression of
the HER3 protein and combination treatments with palmitate and
HER2-targeted therapeutic compounds show synergistic effects and markedly
increase the cytotoxic effects of either compound alone.In addition to
these translational changes, palmitate treatment of HER2/neu-positive
SKBR3 cells results in AMPK activation and subsequent inhibition of fatty
acid synthesis. Transcriptome and global metabolite profiling analyses of
the effect of increased palmitate on these cells indicate that palmitate
alters the metabolic phenotype by re-routing the glucose carbon flux in
the cells.Supported by CDMRP Award W81XWH-11-1-0094 to Jan Baumann and
NCI Award 5R01CA136658-03 to Douglas Conklin.

