Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chemoprevention of tobacco carcinogen-induced lung cancer by DFMO
and Licofelone administered individually or in combination in female A/J
mice


Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer death among both men and women
in the US. Inflammatory eicosanoids and leukotrienes derived from
cyclooxygenase (COX)-2 and 5-lipoxygenase (LOX) pathway positively
influences lung tumor growth. Overexpression of ornithine decarboxylase
(ODC) enzyme activity and polyamines has been associated with
proliferation and progression of lung cancer. Thus, targeting both tumor
inflammatory molecules and polyamines synthesis may provide
additive/synergistic antitumor effects. To overcome clinical toxicity of
high dose difluoromethyl ornithine (DFMO), an inhibitor of ODC; and to
target both COX-2/5LOX, we tested low dose DFMO combined with Licofelone,
a novel dual inhibitor COX-2/5-LOX, in lung cancer model. At 7 weeks of
age, mice (25 mice/group) were treated with 10 mol
4-(methylnitrosamino)-1-(3-pyridyl)-1-butanone (NNK) /mouse to induce the
lung tumors. Three weeks after the NNK treatment, mice were fed either
control or experimental diets containing 200, 400 ppm licofelone or 1500
and 3000 ppm DFMO or low-dose combinations of both agents. Mice were
killed at 20 weeks (10 mice/group) and/or 36 weeks (15 mice/group) after
NNK-treatment for lung tumor evaluation. Administration of 200 and 400
ppm licofelone significantly suppressed lung tumor (adenoma +
adenocarcinoma) formation by >32 to 35% (p43 to 47% (p25 to 30% (p44%
(p53% (p60% (pLung cancer is the leading cause of cancer death among both
men and women in the US. Inflammatory eicosanoids and leukotrienes
derived from cyclooxygenase (COX)-2 and 5-lipoxygenase (LOX) pathway
positively influences lung tumor growth. Overexpression of ornithine
decarboxylase (ODC) enzyme activity and polyamines has been associated
with proliferation and progression of lung cancer. Thus, targeting both
tumor inflammatory molecules and polyamines synthesis may provide
additive/synergistic antitumor effects. To overcome clinical toxicity of
high dose difluoromethyl ornithine (DFMO), an inhibitor of ODC; and to
target both COX-2/5LOX, we tested low dose DFMO combined with Licofelone,
a novel dual inhibitor COX-2/5-LOX, in lung cancer model. At 7 weeks of
age, mice (25 mice/group) were treated with 10 mol
4-(methylnitrosamino)-1-(3-pyridyl)-1-butanone (NNK) /mouse to induce the
lung tumors. Three weeks after the NNK treatment, mice were fed either
control or experimental diets containing 200, 400 ppm licofelone or 1500
and 3000 ppm DFMO or low-dose combinations of both agents. Mice were
killed at 20 weeks (10 mice/group) and/or 36 weeks (15 mice/group) after
NNK-treatment for lung tumor evaluation. Administration of 200 and 400
ppm licofelone significantly suppressed lung tumor (adenoma +
adenocarcinoma) formation by >32 to 35% (p43 to 47% (p25 to 30% (p44%
(p53% (p60% (p<0.0001) respectively at 17 and 34 weeks exposure. These
results suggest that low-dose combinations of licofelone and DFMO inhibit
the NNK-induced lung adenocarcinoma formation synergistic/additive
manner. Immunohistochemistry analysis revealed that lung tumors from mice
exposed to licofelone plus DFMO showed significantly reduced
proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA)-positive index, increased
accumulation of TUNEL positive cells as compared to lung tumors from
NNK-treated mice fed with control diet. These results demonstrate the
targeting lung tumor COX-LOX with ODC may provide better efficacy when
compared to individual targets on tobacco carcinogen-induced lung
adenocarcinomas formation. {Supported by NIH, NCI grants NO1-CN-53300 and
Kerley-Cade Chair}.

