Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dissecting the cellular response to cisplatin from RNA
transcription to translation


Platinum-based antineoplastic drugs, such as cisplatin, are DNA damaging
agents typically utilized in cancer treatment. In ovarian cancer,
however, these drugs have a relatively low therapeutic index (which is a
measure of clinical benefit over toxicity of these drugs), thus even a
small change (reduction) in the cellular sensitivity to these
chemotherapeutic agents leads to clinical treatment failure, also known
as drug resistance. To increase the clinical efficacy of platinum-based
antineoplastic drugs, we need to develop therapies that are less likely
to result in drug resistance, or we need to modify the current therapies
to prevent or reduce drug resistance.To gain mechanistic insights into
the process of drug resistance that may help us to develop new or
modified therapies that are less prone to clinical drug resistance, we
have focused our studies on the comprehensive analysis of two still
poorly studied cisplatin-associated processes at genome-wide scale: the
processes of RNA nascent transcription and RNA translation. In
particular, we investigate by global run-on combined with next-generation
sequencing (GRO-seq) how cisplatin-sensitive A2780 ovarian cancer cells
and its cisplatin-resistance derivative, A2780cis cells, respond to acute
cisplatin treatment at the level of the nascent transcriptome. We also
investigate, in this case by ribosome profiling, how the same cells
respond to acute cisplatin treatment at the level of the
ribosome-associated transcriptome (also known as translatome). These two
massive analyses, complemented with conventional profiling of
steady-state RNA (profiled by RNA-seq) provide the first multidimensional
analysis of the actions induced by any chemotherapeutic agent at the
level of the three basic states of the transcriptome (nascent RNA,
steady-state RNA, and translated RNA). Interestingly, this analysis
reveals an unexpected large fraction of uncoupled events between these
three transcriptomic states, which challenges the conventional
one-dimensional approach based exclusively on RNA-seq for the study of
drug resistance.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

