Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sorafenib/regorafenib and phosphatidyl inositol 3 kinase/thymoma
viral proto-oncogene inhibition interact to kill tumor cells


The present study aimed to determine whether the multikinase inhibitors,
sorafenib/regorafenib, worked in conjunction with PI3K/AKT inhibitors to
enhance tumor cell death. It has been noted that combination of
sorafenib/regorafenib with a PI3K inhibitor acetic acid (PX-866) resulted
in tumor cell death, in a greater than additive fashion, in liver,
colorectal, lung, breast, kidney and brain cancer cells. Similar data was
obtained using AKT inhibitors perifosine and MK2206. Furthermore, even
cells lacking PTEN remained as sensitive to this combinational approach
as cells expressing PTEN. PX-866 treatment abolished AKT/GSK3
phosphorylation, with tumor cell death correlating with reduced activity
of AKT and mTOR. Expression of activated AKT and to a lesser extent
activated mTOR reduced drug combination lethality. Expression of B-cell
lymphoma-extra large or dominant negative caspase 9, but not cellular
FLICE-inhibitory protein short, protected cells from the drug
combination. Treatment of cells with PX-866 increased protein levels of
p62, LAMP2 and LC3/LC3II which correlated with the resulting increase in
LC3-GFP vesicle numbers. Exposure of PX-866 treated cells to sorafenib
reduced p62 and LAMP2 levels, decreased the ratio of LC3 to LC3II and
reduced LC3-GFP vesicle levels. Knockdown of Beclin1 or ATG5 suppressed
drug toxicity by 40%. In vivo, combination of either sorafenib and PX-866
or regorafenib and MK2206 cooperated to suppress the growth of
established HuH7 and HCT116 tumors, respectively. Collectively our data
demonstrates that the combination of sorafenib family kinase inhibitors
with inhibitors of the PI3K/AKT pathway kills tumor cells in vitro and in
vivo.

