Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: pH-responsive PEG-HPAH micelles for drug delivery and their
potential in cancer therapy


pH-responsive hyperbranched polymers have attracted much attention due to
their unique properties for tumor-targeted drug delivery. In this study,
we describe a pH-responsive drug carrier, poly (ethylene glycol)
(PEG)-hyperbranched polyacylhydrazone (HPAH), which can form nanoscale
micelles to be used as anti-cancer drug carriers with pH-controlled drug
release. The molecular structure of PEG-HPAH was confirmed by nuclear
magnetic resonance spectroscopy (NMR) and Fourier transform infrared
spectroscopy (FTIR). The drug-loaded micelles with a diameter of
approximately 190 nm, were prepared using a dialysis method against PBS
with a pH of 8.0. The drug-loaded micelles showed the desired
pH-dependent drug release properties. The drug release levels were low at
neutral and alkaline pH, but increased significantly with a decrease in
the pH of the medium. Intracellular uptake results indicated that the
PEG-HPAH-drug micelles could efficiently deliver chemotherapeutic drugs
into the cells. In addition, it was found that the subcellular
localization of the drug-loaded micelles was different from that of free
drugs, in which the drug-loaded micelles were mainly in the cytoplasm.
The docetaxel (DTX)-loaded PEG-HPAH micelles presented a high cytotoxic
activity against tumor cells in vitro. When combined with the
administration of glucose, the PEG-HPAH-DTX micelles exhibited a superior
anti-tumor efficacy and a lower systemic toxicity in vivo. The
biodistribution profile showed increased accumulated drug levels in tumor
tissue and plasma in micelles treated group. The results indicate that
the nanoscale PEG-HPAH-DTX micelles may serve as a novel selective
tumor-targeting drug delivery system.

