Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A cell-penetrating nucleolytic lupus autoantibody damages DNA and
is toxic to BRCA2-deficient cancer cells


Identification of therapeutic agents that are more toxic to malignant
cells than normal cells is a key goal in cancer research. Many tumor
cells harbor genetic defects that distinguish them from normal cells, and
some of these defects have the potential to be exploited in the
development of targeted therapies for cancer. Cancer cells with defects
in DNA repair are highly susceptible to DNA-damaging agents, but delivery
of therapeutic agents into cell nuclei can be challenging. A subset of
lupus autoantibodies is associated with nucleolytic activity, and some of
these antibodies are capable of nuclear penetration. We hypothesized that
such antibodies might be capable of damaging DNA in cell nuclei and
therefore have potential as therapeutic agents targeted towards DNA
repair-deficient malignancies, such as tumors that are BRCA2-deficient.
To test this hypothesis we screened a panel of cell-penetrating lupus
autoantibodies for nucleolytic activity, and we identified 5C6 as an
antibody of interest. 5C6 catalyzes degradation of single and
double-stranded DNA in vitro and induces phospho-H2AX formation in
BRCA2-deficient cells. When tested on a matched pair of BRCA2-proficient
and deficient cancer cells, 5C6 selectively suppressed the growth of and
was significantly more toxic to the BRCA2-deficient cells. These findings
demonstrate the potential utility of 5C6 in targeted therapy for DNA
repair-deficient malignancies and strengthen the rationale for studies of
additional lupus autoantibodies in order to identify the best candidates
for development as therapeutic agents. In addition, the toxicity of 5C6
for BRCA2-deficient cells provides further support for the hypothesis
that some lupus autoantibodies contribute to the unusual cancer risk
profile associated with systemic lupus erythematosus.

