Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Low merlin level as a biomarker for sensitivity of ovarian cancer
cell lines to FAK inhibition


Focal adhesion kinase (FAK) is a cytoplasmic tyrosine kinase that
undergoes gene amplification in >20% of serous ovarian cancers. In
addition to increased tumor growth and spread, ovarian cancer patients
with FAK amplification have a poorer prognosis with decreased overall
survival. Merlin, a product of the NF2 tumor suppressor gene, is being
evaluated as a biomarker for sensitivity to FAK inhibition in human
clinical trials for malignant mesothelioma. As it remains undetermined
whether linkages exist between merlin and FAK in other tumor types, we
evaluated nine human and two murine ovarian cancer cell lines with
sub-micromolar levels of FAK inhibitor (PF-271) for effects on
anchorage-independent cell growth. Cells were identified as sensitive
(OVCAR3, OVCAR8, HEY, ID8-IP), intermediate (A2780, IGROV1), or resistant
(OVCAR10, IGROV1-IP, SKOV3, SKOV3-IP, 5009) to FAK inhibition. Notably,
merlin protein levels were high in all resistant cell lines, moderate in
intermediate cell lines, and low or undetectable in sensitive cell lines.
Oral FAK inhibitor administration reduced orthotopic tumor growth of
sensitive (ID8-IP, low merlin) but not resistant (5009, high merlin)
murine ovarian carcinoma cells. However, stable knockdown of merlin
expression in resistant SKOV3-IP and OVCAR10 human ovarian carcinoma
cells did not induce sensitivity to FAK inhibition in vitro. These
results support the notion that high merlin expression is correlated with
a FAK-inhibitor resistant phenotype, likely through an indirect
mechanistic linkage. Nevertheless, merlin protein levels may serve as a
biomarker to predict ovarian cancer sensitivity or resistance to FAK
inhibitor treatment.Supported by NIH CA102310

