Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Harmonization of next generation sequencing data within consortia
for gene discovery in familial breast cancer


Massively parallel next generation sequencing data (NGS) has proved to be
useful in identification of rare Mendelian disorders. Efforts are
on-going to use NGS for discovery of novel rare variants in common
disease etiology. Distinguishing rare private mutations from causal
variants remains a major challenge in complex disorders. With decreasing
cost, investigators are generating NGS data for common cancers. However,
power and other considerations suggest that a consortia approach of
pooling data is more likely to succeed where individual efforts fail.
Combining data within such consortia brings its own level of challenges.
We enumerate these challenges and suggest recommendations based on our
experience of combining and harmonizing NGS data on 358 breast cancer
samples from four centers; (City of Hope n=8, Mayo Clinic n=221, MSKCC
n=96 and University of Pennsylvania n=33). Major concerns were ability of
individual datasets to discover known and novel variations, depth of
coverage across the exome, and quality of variants. Using pre- and
post-processed data, we demonstrate an increased power for detecting
variants when using a joint-calling method, quality control (QC) and
quality assurance pre- and post-merge, as well as the advantages of
combined annotations and filtering procedures. To generate a filtered
list of high confident calls, we subset the data on Depth per Allele
(DP), Genotyping Quality (GQ), Allele balance, Phred likelihood score
(PL) as well as using frequency filters on the alternate allele both
within the data and comparing against convenience control summaries. We
describe general principles and QC measures to be adopted when NGS data
is used from diverse sources, specifically applicable to large
consortia.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

