Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ovarian cancer survival by tumor subtype


Introduction: Epithelial ovarian cancer is heterogeneous, with subgroups
defined by cell of origin (ovary vs. fallopian tube), histology, and
carcinogenic pathway (the etiologic pathway through which tumors arise:
type I tumors develop on the ovarian surface and are low grade serous or
mucinous histology; type II tumors develop through endometriotic
implantation and are clear cell or endometrioid histology; type III
tumors originate in the fallopian tube and are high grade serous
histology). Although differences in associations have been observed with
risk of incident ovarian cancer, few studies have examined differences in
survival by subtype. In the New England Case-Control Study of ovarian
cancer (NECC), we examined differences in survival by tumor dominance (a
surrogate for cell of origin), histology, and carcinogenic
pathway.Methods: Among 2076 women with epithelial ovarian cancer
(1991-2008), 892 deaths were observed. Cox proportional hazards
regression was used to calculate hazards ratios (HRs) and 95% confidence
intervals (95% CI) for the association of ovarian cancer subtype with
overall survival, adjusting for age at diagnosis, study phase, year of
diagnosis (as a proxy for treatment), BMI, and smoking status.Results:
Serous invasive tumors were more likely to be non-dominant (likely
fallopian origin) and type III. Compared to serous invasive tumors, all
other tumor histologies had statistically significantly improved
survival. Similarly, dominant tumors (i.e., likely ovarian origin) had
greater survival than non-dominant tumors (HR: 0.38; 95% CI: 0.31-0.47).
Type I (mucinous and low grade serous) and type II (endometrioid and
clear cell) tumors had better survival than type III (high grade serous)
tumors (HR: 0.21; 95%CI: 0.16-0.28 and HR: 0.23; 95% CI: 0.18-0.29,
respectively).Conclusion: Regardless of how subtype was defined, high
grade, invasive serous tumors had worse survival compared to other tumor
subtypes. This underscores the need for prevention and treatment targeted
at these aggressive tumors.Associations between tumor subtype and overall
survival


