Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Fluorescence imaging using Clostridium Perfringens Enterotoxin
carboxi-terminal fragment (c-CPE) to target metastatic
chemotherapy-resistant human ovarian cancer in xenograft mice


Epithelial ovarian cancer is the most lethal gynecologic malignancy. It
is treated through up front surgery followed by chemotherapy or with
neoadjuvant chemotherapy before surgical debulking. Achieving complete or
optimal cytoreduction improves both progression free and overall
survival. In the operating room, no matter the care taken, there is the
potential for areas of macroscopic, microscopic and occult metastases to
remain unvisualized. The development of a sensitive and specific
intraoperative system for the visualization and removal or destruction of
metastatic disease may improve patient outcome. Fresh ovarian cancer
samples were recently analyzed by our group with genetic fingerprinting.
This analysis revealed high expression of claudin-3 and -4, the
epithelial receptors for Clostridium Perfringens Enterotoxin (CPE).
Although the administration of the full length CPE in mice is toxic, the
injection of the only carboxi-terminal fragment (c-CPE) avoids toxicity
while preserving the binding to the receptors. Our previous data showed
specific binding of FITC conjugated c-CPE (FITC-c-CPE) to primary ovarian
cancer cell lines in vitro as well as preferential accumulation of the
labeled peptide into ovarian cancer xenografts in vivo. This study
evaluates the in vivo distribution of FITC-c-CPE after intraperitoneal
(IP) injection of the peptide as well as the kinetics and tumor binding
capacity of c-CPE conjugated to the NearInfraRed Dye CW800 (CW800-c-CPE),
focusing on the ability of CW800-c-CPE to identify metastases of
chemotherapy-resistant ovarian cancer overexpressing claudin-3 and -4 in
vivo. We found that fluorescence uptake by the tumor starts 30 minutes
after FITC-c-CPE injection with negligible staining of healthy organs.
When the abdominal cavity of FITC-c-CPE injected mice was visualized
using a fluorescence microscope, strong signal was detected in near
microscopic metastatic nodules and in malignant tumor spheroids isolated
from the ascites. Similarly, CW800-c-CPE also accumulated in tumors in
vivo following IP or systemic (IV) injection. Ex vivo distribution
analysis demonstrated a significantly higher mean fluorescence intensity
(MFI) in tumor compared to healthy organs (MFI: mean STDV: 156.55 23.73,
95.72 18.19, 30.68 5.88, 23.33 4.05, 34.71 12.71, 28.16 6.1413.46 1.35,
19.78 5.43 in the tumor, kidney, liver, spleen, bowel, lungs and brain,
respectively; pEpithelial ovarian cancer is the most lethal gynecologic
malignancy. It is treated through up front surgery followed by
chemotherapy or with neoadjuvant chemotherapy before surgical debulking.
Achieving complete or optimal cytoreduction improves both progression
free and overall survival. In the operating room, no matter the care
taken, there is the potential for areas of macroscopic, microscopic and
occult metastases to remain unvisualized. The development of a sensitive
and specific intraoperative system for the visualization and removal or
destruction of metastatic disease may improve patient outcome. Fresh
ovarian cancer samples were recently analyzed by our group with genetic
fingerprinting. This analysis revealed high expression of claudin-3 and
-4, the epithelial receptors for Clostridium Perfringens Enterotoxin
(CPE). Although the administration of the full length CPE in mice is
toxic, the injection of the only carboxi-terminal fragment (c-CPE) avoids
toxicity while preserving the binding to the receptors. Our previous data
showed specific binding of FITC conjugated c-CPE (FITC-c-CPE) to primary
ovarian cancer cell lines in vitro as well as preferential accumulation
of the labeled peptide into ovarian cancer xenografts in vivo. This study
evaluates the in vivo distribution of FITC-c-CPE after intraperitoneal
(IP) injection of the peptide as well as the kinetics and tumor binding
capacity of c-CPE conjugated to the NearInfraRed Dye CW800 (CW800-c-CPE),
focusing on the ability of CW800-c-CPE to identify metastases of
chemotherapy-resistant ovarian cancer overexpressing claudin-3 and -4 in
vivo. We found that fluorescence uptake by the tumor starts 30 minutes
after FITC-c-CPE injection with negligible staining of healthy organs.
When the abdominal cavity of FITC-c-CPE injected mice was visualized
using a fluorescence microscope, strong signal was detected in near
microscopic metastatic nodules and in malignant tumor spheroids isolated
from the ascites. Similarly, CW800-c-CPE also accumulated in tumors in
vivo following IP or systemic (IV) injection. Ex vivo distribution
analysis demonstrated a significantly higher mean fluorescence intensity
(MFI) in tumor compared to healthy organs (MFI: mean STDV: 156.55 23.73,
95.72 18.19, 30.68 5.88, 23.33 4.05, 34.71 12.71, 28.16 6.1413.46 1.35,
19.78 5.43 in the tumor, kidney, liver, spleen, bowel, lungs and brain,
respectively; p<0.01). The accumulation of CW800-c-CPE was also noted in
small size tumor implants in the abdomen. These data suggest that c-CPE
has tremendous specificity for targeting metastatic
chemotherapy-resistant ovarian cancer in vivo. Furthermore, the c-CPE
peptide has the potential to be implemented into the operative setting to
allow for improved detection of residual tumor during staging and
cytoreductive surgery for ovarian cancer patients.

