Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: FOXC1 regulates cancer stem cells properties via inducing
SMO-independent Gli activation and confers anti-Hedgehog drug resistance
in basal-like breast cancer


Basal-like breast cancer (BLBC), an aggressive subtype of breast cancer,
are usually associated with high histologic grade, high recurrence rate,
short recurrence-free survival, younger patient age, poor outcome, and a
propensity to metastasize to the brain and lung. So far, developing
targeted therapies against BLBC still remains a great challenge.
Uncovering the underlying molecular events and identify therapeutic
target becomes highly urgent. Forkhead Box C1 (FOXC1), a biomarker for
BLBC, is associated with poor prognosis in patients with BLBC. Here, we
found that FOXC1 increases cancer stem cells (CSCs) properties in BLBC
cells in vitro and in vivo. FOXC1 activates SMO-independent non-canonical
Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway, which mediates the effects of FOXC1 on
CSCs properties in BLBC cells. Further study showed that the N-terminal
of FOXC1 bind directly to the Gli2 transcription factor, which has the
highest transcriptional activity in Hh signaling pathway. Here we also
found that the elevated expression of FOXC1 induces anti-Hh pathway drug
resistance. All of these data demonstrate a novel mechanism underlying
the regulation of CSC properties and the poor prognosis of BLBC patients,
and may provide new insight into anti-CSC therapy resistance. Thus, our
study provides a strong rationale for developing FOXC1-targeted therapy
for treating BLBC patients.

