Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Red meat, poultry, and fish intake, genetic risk variants, and
breast cancer risk among Hispanic and non-Hispanic white women: Results
from the Breast Cancer Health Disparities Study


Purpose: Breast cancer (BC) incidence rates are lower among US Hispanics
compared to non-Hispanic white (NHW) women, and the proportion of Native
American (NA) ancestry among Hispanic women is associated with BC risk.
Meat intake is inconsistently associated with BC risk, though few studies
have included Hispanic women. We investigated: a) the association between
various meats and BC risk among Hispanic/NA and NHW women, and b) the
potential interaction of meat intake with GWAS-identified risk variants.
Methods: The Breast Cancer Health Disparities consortium includes 3
population-based case-control studies conducted in the US and Mexico
(N=4410 NHW, N=6163 Hispanic/NA). BC risk factor data and dietary intake
were assessed by questionnaires. Five meat variables (gm/day) were
harmonized across the 3 studies: red meat, processed red meat, poultry,
fish, and tuna. We considered nutrient density variables, created with
study-specific cut-points based on intake distribution among controls.
Ten GWAS identified SNPs were genotyped, in addition to 104 Ancestry
Informative Markers that were used to categorize participants by percent
NA ancestry using STRUCTURE (Low: 0-28%; Intermediate: 29-70%; High:
>70%). Multivariable logistic regression models were used to estimate
odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) of the association
between meat variables and BC risk, stratified by menopause status,
ethnicity, and, within Hispanics/NA, by percent NA ancestry. Interaction
P values were obtained from likelihood ratio tests. Results: Among all
women, processed meat was positively associated with pre-menopausal BC
risk (Q3 vs. Q1 OR = 1.31; 95% CI = 1.08-1.55; trend p = 0.004;
heterogeneity p = 0.027). This association appeared restricted to
Hispanic/NA women, albeit a test of heterogeneity by ethnicity was not
statistically significant. We also observed a positive association
between tuna and BC risk only among pre-menopausal NHW women (Q3 vs. Q1
OR = 1.41; 95% CI = 1.06-1.87; trend p = 0.007; heterogeneity p = 0.007).
Among post-menopausal women a positive association between red meat and
BC risk only among Hispanic/NA women of low percent NA ancestry (Q3 vs.
Q1 OR = 2.06; 95% CI = 1.08-3.91; trend p = 0.037; heterogeneity p =
0.02) was observed. After multiple testing correction marginally
significant interactions among NHW women between intake of processed meat
and rs3803662-TOX3 (corrected int p = 0.06) and between intake of tuna
and rs2067980 (corrected int p = 0.06) were detected. Conclusion: Diets
high in processed meats and tuna are associated with elevated BC risk
among pre-menopausal Hispanic/NA and NHW women, respectively. Diets high
in red meat are associated with elevated BC risk among post-menopausal
Hispanic/NA women with low NA ancestry.

