Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ASS1, ANXA4 and MVP underlie acquired multicellular resistance of
mesothelioma 3D cell cultures


Cancer cells are usually studied in flat 2D monolayers however, solid
tumors, such as malignant mesothelioma, grow as 3D masses. When tumor
cells are grown as 3D structures, they acquire multi-cellular resistance
to apoptosis, resembling the stubborn chemoresistance seen in patients.
In this study, we have identified a gene expression signature that is
specific for 3D spheroids, possibly underlying multicellular resistance.
By comparing this signature with the data from two sets of
publicly-available gene expression datasets of patients specimens we have
identified three genes in common, genes that may play a role in
multicellular resistance: ASS1, ANXA4 and MVP. Moreover, we have studied
the levels of the proteins encoded by the three genes and have begun
investigating how their ablation by RNAi influences the response to
chemotherapy. Furthemore, by Connectivity Analysis, we have found two
safe and patent-free candidate drugs that can reduce the expression
levels of the three genes and undermine the acquired chemoresistance of
spheroids. Such drugs would have potential as adjuncts to chemotherapy.
These studies will not only clarify the role of ASS1, ANXA4 and MVP in
mesothelioma and provide therapeutic insights but also advance the use of
spheroids as a more realistic model for studying tumor biology.

