Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RPL18A as putative target of rigosertib


Rigosertib (ON 01910.Na) is clinical stage anti-mitotic cancer inhibitor
that causes spindle abnormalities in neoplastic cells. Rigosertib
inhibits PI3K and PLK1 signaling pathways, down regulates cyclin D1
expression and induces apoptosis. Previously we reported rigosertib led
to hyperphosphorylation of RanGAP1SUMO1, regulator of RanGTP/RanGDP
cycle, and hypothesized phosphatase inhibition [Cancer Res 2011; 71;
4968-76]. Using biotin-conjugated rigosertib and avidin-conjugated
agarose beads, we sought rigosertib molecular target from HeLa cell
lysates by pull-down assay. Long-linker 1910-biotin showed an IC50 for
cytotoxicity similar to unmodified rigosertib and efficient avidin
binding. Asynchronously grown HeLa cell lysates were incubated with
designated ligands and avidin beads. Bound lysate proteins were recovered
from beads, resolved on SDS-PAGE and stained. Specific protein band of 20
kDa was detected only with long-linker 1910-biotin. Identification of
proteins from the gel was performed by LC-ESI-MS/MS. Four ribosomal
proteins possessed Mascot score above cut-off level with RPL18A, score of
367, and other proteins scored 153 or less. Specific dose-dependent
binding of long-linker 1910-biotin to RPL18A was confirmed by Western
blot analysis in replicate pull-down experiments using HeLa or MOLT-3
cell lysates. Recombinant RPL18A possessed specific reactivity to
1910-biotin in the pull-down assay. Knock-down of RPL18A with siRNA
causes apoptosis in cancer cell lines [Sudo et al, Genomics 2010; 95;
210-6; and our data]. We propose that nucleocytoplasmic transport of
RPL18A is impaired when hyperphosphorylated RanGAP1SUMO1 fails to provide
RanGTP/GDP gradient for nuclear pore complex. Importin-9 (IPO-9) is a
major nucleocytoplasmic transporter for RPL18A. Among other cargos of
IPO-9 are HSP27 (important anti-apoptotic player), scaffold subunit A of
PP2A (major mitotic phosphatase), core histones and ribosomal proteins.
Considering the essential role of nucleocytoplasmic transport in general
and probable consequences of impeded transport of HSP27, PP2A and/or core
histones, that actually match those observed with rigosertib, we
hypothesize that binding with RPL18A in the presence of
hyperphosphorylated RanGAP1SUMO1 interferes with normal function of
IPO-9, resulting in a variety of malfunctions and apoptosis observed in
rigosertib treated cancer cells.

