Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Relative expression of miR200 microRNAs and ERBB family negative
regulator Mig6 in estimation of EMT status and erlotinib sensitivity


While sensitizing mutations in the tyrosine kinase domain of epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR) render tumors more sensitive to EGFR
tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs), these genetic alterations are present
in only a minority of patients who respond to treatment and are rare in
tumors other than NSCLCs. Thus, clinical benefit of TKIs in a subset of
patients with wild-type EGFR may be underestimated due to the lack of
appropriate predictive markers to stratify them from larger number of
patients who do not response. It has long been observed that the response
of anti-EGFR agents is associated with epithelial and mesenchymal
transition (EMT) in multiple types of tumors without known EGFR
mutations. However, little is known about the molecular mechanisms
underlying this association, and no EMT-associated biomarkers of clinical
utility have been successfully developed. Here we show that during the
TGF-induced EMT, upregulation of mitogen-inducible gene 6 (Mig6), a
negative regulator of EGFR, by microRNAs 200 (miR200) family is leading
to reduced EGFR dependence, initiation of kinase switch in mesenchymal
cells and subsequent insensitivity of these cells to EGFR inhibition.
Moreover, we found that the ratio between mRNA levels of Mig6 and miR200c
highly correlated with erlotinib sensitivity and EMT status in panel of
25 cancer cell lines of different tissue origins. Furthermore, analysis
of directly xenografted human lung and pancreatic tumors (tumorgrafts)
bearing wtEGFR demonstrated a higher response to EGFR inhibitor erlotinib
for models with low Mig6 (mRNA)/miR200 ratio. Collectively, our data
demonstrates that during the EMT-associated evolution of resistance to
EGFR inhibitors, Mig6 expression is highly correlated with EMT status and
identifies the ratio of Mig6 mRNA to miR200 as a novel, reliable and
cost-effective predictor of biologic and clinical response to TKIs.

