Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exploring the in vitro and in vivo activity of lucitanib in
FGFR1-amplified lung cancer models


Lucitanib (S80881, formerly E-3810) is a novel tyrosine kinase inhibitor
that selectively inhibits vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)
receptors 1-3 (VEGFR1-3) and fibroblast growth factor (FGF) receptor 1-2
(FGFR1-2). It exhibits a unique pharmacological profile and demonstrates
potent antitumor activity in xenograft models derived from multiple
oncology indications. The on-going phase I/II clinical study of lucitanib
has demonstrated objective RECIST responses in breast cancer patients
with FGF-aberrant (FGFR1 and/or FGF3/4/19 gene amplified) tumors and in
oncology indications anticipated to benefit from antiangiogenic agents
(e.g. renal cell and thyroid cancer patients).In an attempt to further
elucidate the mechanism of action of lucitanib, we evaluated the in vitro
and in vivo activity of lucitanib in lung cell lines with FGFR1
amplification. The FGFR1 gene is frequently amplified in lung cancer
tumors and FGFR1 copy number may provide a patient selection marker for
clinical trials of FGFR inhibitors. Lucitanib cytotoxic activity was
evaluated and compared to other FGFR inhibitors (Dovitinib, AZD4547 and
PD173074) in a panel of 11 lung cancer cell lines characterized for
FGFR1/2 gene copy number and FGFR1, FGFR2 and FGF2 mRNA expression level.
Lucitanib IC50 values ranged from 0.14 to 23 M; interestingly the two
most sensitive cells lines (NCI-H1581 and DMS114) harbored FGFR1
amplification, while cell lines with lower FGFR1 gene copy number (2)
displayed a higher drug IC50 value. In order to understand the
involvement of FGFR1 inhibition in the antitumor activity of lucitanib,
nude mice bearing FGFR1 amplified NCI-H1581 cell xenografts were treated
with escalating doses of lucitanib (2.5, 5, 10 and 20mg/kg/day PO)
continuously for 30 days. The antitumor activity of lucitanib at the dose
of 2.5mg/kg was marginal (tumor volume of treated / control (T/C%) = 46),
while at 5, 10 and 20mg/kg the drug was equally very active (T/C% = 24,
21 and 16, respectively). Pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic assessments
were undertaken at the same drug doses employed for the xenograft
efficacy experiments in NCI-H1581 tumor bearing mice treated for 12
continuous days. Tumor concentrations of lucitanib, measured by LC-MS/MS,
were related to the administered dose and ranged from 0.31-3.68 M and
from 0.26-2.52 M at 4 and 24hrs, respectively. Lucitanib drug
concentrations were higher in the tumor than in the plasma, with
tumor/plasma ratios at 4 and 24 hrs of 2.00.22 and 20.56, respectively.
In conclusion, these preclinical data indicate that lucitanib
demonstrates in vitro efficacy in lung cancer cell lines with FGFR1 gene
amplification and has a favorable drug distribution profile in tumor
models.

