Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression quantitative trait locus analysis of triple negative
breast cancer


Recent studies have shown that associations between common genetic
variation and gene expression in breast tumors provide insight into the
functional mechanisms underlying breast cancer risk loci. However, the
relationship between genetic variation, gene expression, and risk of
triple negative (TN) breast cancer remains largely unexplored. We
performed a genome-wide expression quantitative trait locus (eQTL)
analysis of TN breast cancer using 668 formalin-fixed paraffin embedded
TN tumors from the Triple Negative Breast Cancer Consortium (TNBCC) to
identify novel genes relevant to TN breast cancer risk and to further
explore the biology underlying known TN risk loci. Cis-eQTLs were defined
as correlations between single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) and
expression of genes within 1Mb, and trans-eQTLs were defined as the
remainder of all SNP-gene correlations. In a genome-wide analysis, we
identified 68,012 cis-eQTLs, representing correlations between 42,193
SNPs and 2,092 genes that were significant at a 10% false discovery rate
(FDR). We also identified 70 trans-eQTLs across two unique genes at the
same FDR threshold. Five cis-eQTLs involved SNPs previously associated
with TN breast cancer risk (pRecent studies have shown that associations
between common genetic variation and gene expression in breast tumors
provide insight into the functional mechanisms underlying breast cancer
risk loci. However, the relationship between genetic variation, gene
expression, and risk of triple negative (TN) breast cancer remains
largely unexplored. We performed a genome-wide expression quantitative
trait locus (eQTL) analysis of TN breast cancer using 668 formalin-fixed
paraffin embedded TN tumors from the Triple Negative Breast Cancer
Consortium (TNBCC) to identify novel genes relevant to TN breast cancer
risk and to further explore the biology underlying known TN risk loci.
Cis-eQTLs were defined as correlations between single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNP) and expression of genes within 1Mb, and trans-eQTLs
were defined as the remainder of all SNP-gene correlations. In a
genome-wide analysis, we identified 68,012 cis-eQTLs, representing
correlations between 42,193 SNPs and 2,092 genes that were significant at
a 10% false discovery rate (FDR). We also identified 70 trans-eQTLs
across two unique genes at the same FDR threshold. Five cis-eQTLs
involved SNPs previously associated with TN breast cancer risk
(p<5.0x10-5) in 3,700 TN cases and 4,700 controls from the TNBCC. Three
of these, located on chromosomes 5p (cis-eQTL p=4.8x10-34; risk
p=1.1x10-7), 7p (cis-eQTL p=6.1x10-10; risk p=1.3x10-7), and 17q
(cis-eQTL p=1.8x10-15; risk p=2.9x10-7), have previously been reported in
public databases of normal tissue. The remaining two TN breast cancer
cis-eQTLs, located on chromosomes 8q (cis-eQTL p=6.3x10-6, risk
p=8.3x10-6) and 14q (cis-eQTL p=3.1x10-6, risk p=1.2x10-5), have not been
reported as eQTLs in other tissues. In addition, 12 of 25 known TN breast
cancer risk loci (PEX14, MDM4, 2q31.1, ESR1, 11q13.1, 11q24.3, 12p13.1,
PTHLH, NTN4, 12q24, 19p13.1, MLK1), contained at least one significant
cis-eQTL. In summary, we have identified five cis-eQTLs that may identify
novel risk loci for TN breast cancer.

