Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of a novel, orally bioavailable, potent and
highly selective small molecule inhibitor of PERK: A tool to probe the
biphasic concentration-dependent induction of ER stress in models of
multiple myeloma and B-cell lymphoma


The unfolded protein response (UPR) is a signal transduction pathway that
coordinates cellular adaptation to microenvironmental stress and the
accumulation of malfolded proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). In
highly secretory malignancies, such as multiple myeloma (MM),
characteristically there is both an extensively developed ER and a
markedly elevated UPR to ensure a homeostatic balance between ER burden
and ER capacity - thus making components of the UPR attractive targets
for therapeutic intervention. One such target is PERK (PKR-like
endoplasmic reticulum kinase), a member of the eukaryotic initiation
factor (eIF)2 kinase family, that is activated during the UPR to chronic
ER stress.Here, we describe the identification and characterization of
compound (1) - a novel, orally bioavailable, potent and highly selective
small molecule inhibitor of PERK. (1) is a sub-nM inhibitor of PERK, with
a >100-fold window against other kinases (including other eIF2 kinases) -
targeting only 6 out of a 400 kinase panel with sub-M IC50's. It inhibits
phosphorylation of eIF2 at 10 nM (IC50) in HEK293 cells (incubated with
the ER stressor tunicamycin) and proves to be selectively
anti-proliferative in an ER-stressed epithelial cancer model (A549 cells
with tunicamycin) at nM concentrations, but to a lesser extent in the
absence of ER stress. Furthermore, in the absence of an exogenous ER
stressor, (1) induced excessive ER stress (eg, as evidenced by induction
of the pro-apoptotic CHOP gene), and decreased cell viability selectively
in MM cell lines and certain B-cell lymphoma lines at low nM
concentrations, but not in normal or malignant epithelial cells. However,
despite a sustained impact on eIF2 phosphorylation, interestingly
compound (1) elicited a biphasic concentration dependent induction of ER
stress (and consequent inhibition of cell viability) - with ER stress
induction maximal at inhibitor concentrations corresponding to circa
50-75 % inhibition of PERK, returning progressively to baseline with
concentrations rising to > IC90. Whole-genome expression profiling
revealed that all significant changes seen at 10-100 nM of (1), returned
to baseline levels at 1000 nM, suggesting a compensatory mechanism very
proximal to phosphorylation of eIF2. In summary, the highly selective
PERK inhibitor, (1), validated the unique sensitivity of subsets of
multiple myeloma and B-cell lymphoma to disruption of the UPR, but
unexpectedly revealed a compensatory mechanism associated with potent
PERK inhibition.

