Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TRPM7 channels regulate glioma stem cell through STAT3 and Notch
signaling pathways


A small fraction of cancer stem cells (CSC) initiate and maintain tumors
thus driving glioma tumorigenesis and are responsible for resistance to
classical chemo- and radio-therapies. It is desirable to identify
signaling pathways related to CSC to develop novel therapies to
selectively target them. TRPM7 is a ubiquitous Ca2+ and Mg2+ permeable
ion channel which contains a serine/threonine kinase. Recent studies have
demonstrated that TRPM7 plays an important role in the growth and
proliferation of various tumor cells. To determine the possibility of an
interaction among TRPM7, Notch, STAT3 and the ALDH1 signaling in the
context of brain tumors, we investigated the effects of TRPM7 pathway
activation on glioma cells and stem-like cells derived from them.
Methods: 1) We analyzed human stem cell signaling pathways using real
time RT2 Profile PCR arrays in the A172 glioma cells upon TRPM7 gene
silencing. 2) We then examined Notch and STAT3 pathway activation,
Aldehyde dehydrogenase 2 family, mitochondrial (ALDH1) and CD133
expressions in parental and glioma stem cell (GSC) populations using
quantitative real time-PCR, Western blot, and immunofluorence images. 3)
We conducted a ChIP analysis to examine the effects of STAT3 on ALDH1
promoter by introducing constitutive STAT3 (caSTAT3) and dominant STAT3
(dnSTAT3) into A172 cells. 4) Finally, we examined the role of TRPM7 in
glioma cell migration and invasion using transwell invasion assay and
wound healing assay. Results: 1) RT2 Profile PCR arrays showed that TRPM7
gene silencing down-regulated genes (2 fold-change) involved in Notch
pathway [Notch1, Jagged 1(JAG1) and Delta-like 1, Drosophila (DLL1)], Wnt
pathway, Wingless-type MMTV integration site family, member 1(WNT1) and
ALDH1. 2) STAT3 activation and Notch1 expression were decreased in
response to TRPM7 silencing. 3) Notch-regulated genes including Notch1,
Hey2, JAG1, and Survivin as well as ALDH1 were significantly expressed
higher in spheroid glioma CSCs when compared with monolayer cultures. 4)
ALDH1 promoter activity was activated by STAT3 in A172 cells. 5)
Knockdown of TRPM7 inhibited migration and invasion of A172 cells.
Conclusions: TRPM7 activates JAK2/STAT3 and/or Notch signaling pathways
and leads to increased cell proliferation and migration. These findings
for the first time demonstrate that TRPM7 (1) activates a previously
unrecognized STAT3ALDH1 pathway, and (2) promotes the induction of ALDH1
activity in glioma cells. (This work was supported by the National
Institutes of Health grant numbers NIH R01NS047506, R01NS066027, UL1
RR025008, U54 RR026137, AHA 0840132N, and ALZ IIRG-10-173350.)

