Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Selective killing of cancer cells with mitochondrial respiratory
dysfunction induced by activation of oncogenic Ras


Mitochondrial dysfunction is an important mechanism by which cancer cells
become resistant to chemotherapeutic agents. Oncogenic Ras activation is
often observed in human cancer and was reported to cause mitochondrial
dysfunction by compromising mitochondrial electron transport chain.
Therefore, identification of new agents capable of effectively killing
mitochondrial defective cancer cells would have important therapeutic
implications. Our previous work has discovered that mitochondrial
respiratory dysfunction could cause increased NADPH oxidase (NOX)
activity to support cell survival in the metabolic switch from
mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation to glycolysis. Mitochondrial
respiratory dysfunction can also cause profound redox alteration to adapt
ROS stress. Here, we report that targeted inhibition of NOX and
glutathione synthesis has synergy effect in killing mitochondrial
respiratory dysfunction cells, including cancer cells harboring oncogenic
Ras activation. Activation of NOX and increased glutathione antioxidants
are always observed in Ras activated cells. Treatment of these cancer
cells with DPI and BSO to inhibit NOX activity and antioxidant adaptation
function resulted in an elevated ROS stress, increased gamma-H2AX
expression, leading to massive death of the cancer cells, such as Panc-1
and HCT116 cells. Antioxidant NAC and catalase attenuated the BSO and DPI
induced cell death in mitochondrial respiratory dysfunction cells. The
synergistic effect of BSO and DPI to kill oncogenic Ras bearing HCT116
cells was further confirmed using colony formation assay. Our results
suggest that DPI, in synergy with BSO, is a promising compound capable of
killing cancer cells bearing oncogenic Ras mutations through a
ROS-mediated mechanism and warrants further investigations.

