Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metabolomic analysis of HER2-positive breast cancer cells


Purpose: HER2-positive breast cancer accounts for more than 20% of the
diagnosed cases and is characterized by aggressive growth, increased
disease recurrence, and poor prognosis. While much of the signaling
mechanism(s) have been elucidated, the impact of HER2 positivity on
cellular metabolism is not well understood. We examined (1) gene
expression profiles of mammalian breast cancer cell lines with increasing
HER2 expression levels (MCF10A, MDA-MB-468, MDA-MB-453, HCC1954, HCC2218)
and correlated changes to metabolic expression profiles and (2) the
effect of serum starvation and pervanadate treatment on the metabolic
profiles of these HER2-expressing cell lines.Methods: Our study used a
combination of 1H-NMR and 2D-NMR (TOCSY), bioinformatics analyses, and
protein expression validation in human breast cancer cell lines
(untreated, serum-starved, serum-starved with pervanadate
treatment).Results: We found that both gene and metabolic expression
profiles of HER2-positive cell lines correlated with leucine and
isoleucine biosynthesis (p-value Purpose: HER2-positive breast cancer
accounts for more than 20% of the diagnosed cases and is characterized by
aggressive growth, increased disease recurrence, and poor prognosis.
While much of the signaling mechanism(s) have been elucidated, the impact
of HER2 positivity on cellular metabolism is not well understood. We
examined (1) gene expression profiles of mammalian breast cancer cell
lines with increasing HER2 expression levels (MCF10A, MDA-MB-468,
MDA-MB-453, HCC1954, HCC2218) and correlated changes to metabolic
expression profiles and (2) the effect of serum starvation and
pervanadate treatment on the metabolic profiles of these HER2-expressing
cell lines.Methods: Our study used a combination of 1H-NMR and 2D-NMR
(TOCSY), bioinformatics analyses, and protein expression validation in
human breast cancer cell lines (untreated, serum-starved, serum-starved
with pervanadate treatment).Results: We found that both gene and
metabolic expression profiles of HER2-positive cell lines correlated with
leucine and isoleucine biosynthesis (p-value < 0.05). Comparative
analyses of profiles from untreated, serum-starved, and serum-starved
with pervanadate-treated cell samples revealed that lactate concentration
(p-value Purpose: HER2-positive breast cancer accounts for more than 20%
of the diagnosed cases and is characterized by aggressive growth,
increased disease recurrence, and poor prognosis. While much of the
signaling mechanism(s) have been elucidated, the impact of HER2
positivity on cellular metabolism is not well understood. We examined (1)
gene expression profiles of mammalian breast cancer cell lines with
increasing HER2 expression levels (MCF10A, MDA-MB-468, MDA-MB-453,
HCC1954, HCC2218) and correlated changes to metabolic expression profiles
and (2) the effect of serum starvation and pervanadate treatment on the
metabolic profiles of these HER2-expressing cell lines.Methods: Our study
used a combination of 1H-NMR and 2D-NMR (TOCSY), bioinformatics analyses,
and protein expression validation in human breast cancer cell lines
(untreated, serum-starved, serum-starved with pervanadate
treatment).Results: We found that both gene and metabolic expression
profiles of HER2-positive cell lines correlated with leucine and
isoleucine biosynthesis (p-value < 0.05). Comparative analyses of
profiles from untreated, serum-starved, and serum-starved with
pervanadate-treated cell samples revealed that lactate concentration
(p-value <0.05) dropped significantly with serum starvation and
pervanadate treatment consistent with reduced glycolytic metabolism and
potentially mediated through suppression of tyrosine phosphatase
activity.Conclusion: This study highlights important new metabolites that
are potential biomarkers of HER2-positive breast cancer and suggests
alternate/novel pathways to consider for future understanding and
treatment.

