Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clinical significance of SMAD4 expression in resectable pancreatic
cancer: correlation with tumor progression and recurrence pattern


[Background]SMAD4 is well recognized as contributing to pancreatic
carcinogenesis. The recent studies suggest that SMAD4 expression pattern
in pancreatic cancer is associated with tumor progression and eventual
failure pattern. The SMAD4 protein expression is thought to be associated
with a locally predominant progression pattern, whereas the loss of SMAD4
associated with distant metastases. In the current study, we validated
the clinical significance of SMAD4 expression status as a biomarker of
tumor progression and failure pattern in a large cohort of patients with
resectable pancreatic cancer.[Materials and Methods]Surgical specimens
were obtained from 174 pancreatic cancer patients who underwent resection
at Nagoya University Hospital, Japan, during the period from April 2004
to March 2010. SMAD4 immunohistochemistry was performed in 174 patients
and classified into SMAD4(+); staining or SMAD4(-); no staining. The
correlation between clinicopathological parameters, failure pattern and
prognosis was statistically analyzed.[Results]1. 59.8% of patients was
SMAD4(-) (104/174), whereas, 40.2% of patients was SMAD4(+) (70/174). The
disease-specific survival in SMAD4(+) patients was significantly better
than that in SMAD4(-) patients (median survival time; 36.2 months vs.
14.3 months, P [Background]SMAD4 is well recognized as contributing to
pancreatic carcinogenesis. The recent studies suggest that SMAD4
expression pattern in pancreatic cancer is associated with tumor
progression and eventual failure pattern. The SMAD4 protein expression is
thought to be associated with a locally predominant progression pattern,
whereas the loss of SMAD4 associated with distant metastases. In the
current study, we validated the clinical significance of SMAD4 expression
status as a biomarker of tumor progression and failure pattern in a large
cohort of patients with resectable pancreatic cancer.[Materials and
Methods]Surgical specimens were obtained from 174 pancreatic cancer
patients who underwent resection at Nagoya University Hospital, Japan,
during the period from April 2004 to March 2010. SMAD4
immunohistochemistry was performed in 174 patients and classified into
SMAD4(+); staining or SMAD4(-); no staining. The correlation between
clinicopathological parameters, failure pattern and prognosis was
statistically analyzed.[Results]1. 59.8% of patients was SMAD4(-)
(104/174), whereas, 40.2% of patients was SMAD4(+) (70/174). The
disease-specific survival in SMAD4(+) patients was significantly better
than that in SMAD4(-) patients (median survival time; 36.2 months vs.
14.3 months, P < 0.001). SMAD4(-) had significantly more portal vein
invasion, lymphatic invasion and neural invasion (P = 0.046, P = 0.029
and P = 0.035, respectively). Importantly, multivariate analysis revealed
that SMAD4(-) was the most significant independent prognostic factor for
pancreatic cancer.2. In terms of the local spread pattern, the ratio of
SMAD4(-) was 49.4% in the patients without vascular invasion, 61.9% in
those with portal vein invasion, 76.5% in those with common hepatic
artery invasion and 80.8% in those with superior mesenteric artery
invasion, which showed the statistical significance (P = 0.013).3. For
postoperative failure pattern, the ratio of SMAD4(-) was 59.0% in the
patients with local recurrence, 66.7% in those with both local and
distant recurrence and 73.7% in those with distant recurrence, which
showed that the patients who lost SMAD4 expression were more likely to
have distant metastasis (P = 0.318).[Discussion]Our study demonstrated
that the SMAD4 expression in resectable pancreatic cancer was a
prognostic factor. The pancreatic cancer with SMAD4(+) was more likely to
remain in local invasion, whereas, that with SMAD4(-) could develop to
distant metastases. Preoperative assessment of SMAD4 expression in
patients with resectable pancreatic cancer would support a treatment
paradigm, where the local treatment like chemoradiation would be favored
in patients harboring tumors with retained SMAD4 expression. On the
contrary, systemic chemotherapy would be appropriate for the patients
with absent SMAD4 expression.

