Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Blocking of p14/ARF and DX2 binding by novel small chemical can
improve the chemo-sensitivity of small cell lung cancer and non-small
cell lung carcinoma


In recent, it has been reported that alternative splicing variant of
AIMP2, AIMP2/DX2 (DX2), is frequently expressed in human lung cancer and
is related with p53-mediated tumor suppression pathway. Here we show that
DX2 can promote tumor progression and increase incidence, cooperatively
with oncogenic K-Ras in transgenic mouse model. Moreover, it can induce
small cell lung carcinoma (SCLC) as well as contribute to progression of
non-small cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC). In fact, DX2 expression is
elevated in human small cell lung cancer cell lines. Based on the
cellular localization and responsibility of si-DX2, we revealed that DX2
is an inhibitor of p14/ARF. Elimination of DX2 can induce p14/ARF
expression and DX2 Transgenic (Tg) mouse cells show the low expression of
p19/ARF. Since DX2, but not its original product AIMP2, is selectively
interacted with p14/ARF, we screened the specific binding inhibitor and
obtained the single compound (SLC36) from about 9000 chemicals. This
chemical can block the interaction of p14/ARF-DX2 and also AIMP2-DX2, but
not the binding of p14/ARF-p53 or AIMP2-p53. In addition, it can induce
p14/ARF expression and cell death in human lung cancer cell lines
including SCLC cell lines. In our in vivo study, treatment of SLC36,
combined with low dosage of adriamycin (1 mg/kg) can suppress the cancer
incidence as well as progression in K-RasLA2 and K-Ras/DX2 double Tg
model. These results indicate that DX2 can contribute to lung cancer
progression and development, including SCLC, through inhibition of
p14/ARF, and blocking of DX2-p14/ARF binding would be useful therapeutic
strategy of human lung cancers including SCLC as well as NSCLC.

