Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Supplementation with selenium-enriched yeast but not
selenomethionine reduces oxidative stress in healthy men in a randomized
clinical trial


Epidemiological and laboratory studies indicate that dietary selenium is
protective against prostate cancer. Results from clinical trials suggest
that selenium-enriched yeast (SY) but not selenomethionine (SeMet) may be
effective at reducing prostate cancer risk. Our objectives were to
directly compare for the first time the effects of SeMet and SY on
prostate cancer relevant biomarkers in men. We performed a randomized
double blind, placebo-controlled trial of SY (200 or 285 g/day) and SeMet
(200 g/day) administered for 9 months in 69 healthy adult males.
Biomarkers including blood selenium, glucose, PSA and glutathione (GSH)
and urine 8-hydroxy-2-deoxyguanosine (8-OHdG) and 8-iso-prostaglandin-F2
(8-iso-PGF2) were measured at baseline and various times thereafter.
Compliance was high in all groups (>95%). Plasma selenium levels were
increased 93%, 54%, and 86% after 9 months in the SeMet and low and high
dose SY groups, respectively, and returned to baseline levels after a 3
month washout (PEpidemiological and laboratory studies indicate that
dietary selenium is protective against prostate cancer. Results from
clinical trials suggest that selenium-enriched yeast (SY) but not
selenomethionine (SeMet) may be effective at reducing prostate cancer
risk. Our objectives were to directly compare for the first time the
effects of SeMet and SY on prostate cancer relevant biomarkers in men. We
performed a randomized double blind, placebo-controlled trial of SY (200
or 285 g/day) and SeMet (200 g/day) administered for 9 months in 69
healthy adult males. Biomarkers including blood selenium, glucose, PSA
and glutathione (GSH) and urine 8-hydroxy-2-deoxyguanosine (8-OHdG) and
8-iso-prostaglandin-F2 (8-iso-PGF2) were measured at baseline and various
times thereafter. Compliance was high in all groups (>95%). Plasma
selenium levels were increased 93%, 54%, and 86% after 9 months in the
SeMet and low and high dose SY groups, respectively, and returned to
baseline levels after a 3 month washout (P<0.05). Urinary biomarkers of
oxidative stress, 8-OHdG and 8-iso-PGF2, were decreased 34% and 28%,
respectively, after 9 months in the high dose SY group (PEpidemiological
and laboratory studies indicate that dietary selenium is protective
against prostate cancer. Results from clinical trials suggest that
selenium-enriched yeast (SY) but not selenomethionine (SeMet) may be
effective at reducing prostate cancer risk. Our objectives were to
directly compare for the first time the effects of SeMet and SY on
prostate cancer relevant biomarkers in men. We performed a randomized
double blind, placebo-controlled trial of SY (200 or 285 g/day) and SeMet
(200 g/day) administered for 9 months in 69 healthy adult males.
Biomarkers including blood selenium, glucose, PSA and glutathione (GSH)
and urine 8-hydroxy-2-deoxyguanosine (8-OHdG) and 8-iso-prostaglandin-F2
(8-iso-PGF2) were measured at baseline and various times thereafter.
Compliance was high in all groups (>95%). Plasma selenium levels were
increased 93%, 54%, and 86% after 9 months in the SeMet and low and high
dose SY groups, respectively, and returned to baseline levels after a 3
month washout (P<0.05). Urinary biomarkers of oxidative stress, 8-OHdG
and 8-iso-PGF2, were decreased 34% and 28%, respectively, after 9 months
in the high dose SY group (P<0.05). Decreases in oxidative stress
biomarkers were greatest in individuals with low baseline plasma levels
of selenium (Epidemiological and laboratory studies indicate that dietary
selenium is protective against prostate cancer. Results from clinical
trials suggest that selenium-enriched yeast (SY) but not selenomethionine
(SeMet) may be effective at reducing prostate cancer risk. Our objectives
were to directly compare for the first time the effects of SeMet and SY
on prostate cancer relevant biomarkers in men. We performed a randomized
double blind, placebo-controlled trial of SY (200 or 285 g/day) and SeMet
(200 g/day) administered for 9 months in 69 healthy adult males.
Biomarkers including blood selenium, glucose, PSA and glutathione (GSH)
and urine 8-hydroxy-2-deoxyguanosine (8-OHdG) and 8-iso-prostaglandin-F2
(8-iso-PGF2) were measured at baseline and various times thereafter.
Compliance was high in all groups (>95%). Plasma selenium levels were
increased 93%, 54%, and 86% after 9 months in the SeMet and low and high
dose SY groups, respectively, and returned to baseline levels after a 3
month washout (P<0.05). Urinary biomarkers of oxidative stress, 8-OHdG
and 8-iso-PGF2, were decreased 34% and 28%, respectively, after 9 months
in the high dose SY group (P<0.05). Decreases in oxidative stress
biomarkers were greatest in individuals with low baseline plasma levels
of selenium (<127 ng/ml). No changes in serum PSA or blood glucose and
GSH were observed. We showed for the first time reductions in biomarkers
of oxidative stress following supplementation with SY but not SeMet in
healthy men. These findings suggest that selenium-containing compounds
other than SeMet may be responsible for the decrease in oxidative stress
and possibly cancer risk. This work was supported a National Cancer
Institute grant (R01CA127729).

