Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Interrogation of NCI-60 patterns of growth inhibition in
conjunction with investigational oncology agents kinase profiling for the
elucidation of mechanistic targets


As oncology treatment moves toward personalized targeted therapeutic
agents, the NCI-60 human tumor cell line panel is an ideal community-wide
tool to further understanding of the disease and molecular targets of new
agents. The panel includes cell lines from nine tumor types, and is
extremely well characterized at the molecular level, enabling
interrogation of patterns of growth inhibition by a set of targeted
investigational oncology agents looking for characteristics of the cell
lines that determine sensitivity. We have used a number of online tools
to enable data analysis, including COMPARE
(http://dtp.nci.nih.gov/compare/), which provided the identification of
compounds and/or genes that have highly correlated response patterns for
any selected seed compound. These data enable comparisons between drug
sensitivity profiles that lead to the elucidation of common mechanistic
targets or pathways, associations with potential response biomarkers, the
confirmation of mechanism of action or identification of novel
mechanisms, and the uncovering of unexpected off-target activities. For
example, using the allosteric Akt inhibitor MK-2206 as the seed compound,
response patterns for the ATP-competitive Akt inhibitors PF-4173640
(0.84), GDC-0068 (0.80), AZD-5363 (0.83), GSK-690693 (0.67), and
CCT-128930 (0.69) are highly correlated. In addition, examination of the
response profile for vandetinib produced a set of highly correlative
agents including the corresponding EGFR inhibitors sapatinib (0.81) and
AEE-788 (0.83), as well as the recently FDA-approved BTK inhibitor,
ibrutinib (0.72) and the SRC inhibitor, AZD-0530 (0.74). Not
surprisingly, kinase profiling of these 5 agents (0.5 uM) showed >90%
inhibition of EGFR in all cases. In a third example, the BRAF V600E
mutated cell lines were found to be sensitive to the bcr-abl inhibitors
bafetinib and rebastinib, similarly to vemurafenib. This association
suggested BRAF inhibitory activity for the former agents, which was
confirmed through kinase profiling. Moreover, the NCI-60 response pattern
for the androgen receptor modulator AZD-3514 has a high correlation with
the BET bromodomain inhibitors JQ-1 (0.77), I-Bet-151 (0.80), and
I-Bet-762 (0.78), suggesting a commonality of target/pathway for these
compounds. Further correlations, associations and hypotheses generated
from interrogating the compound response patterns, gene expression
profiles, mutations and other characteristics will be presented. Funded
by NCI Contract No. HHSN261200800001E.

