Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SNP-SNP interaction analyses of NQO1 and NF-B signaling pathway
genes on breast cancer survival and treatment outcome


To improve individualized therapy, new prognostic and predictive markers
are needed to identify patients with expected poor breast cancer outcome
and patients who profit most from a given treatment. NF-B pathway plays a
pervasive role in the pathogenesis of cancer through its implication in
distinct hallmarks of tumorigenesis. Previous studies have indicated the
role of NF-B transcription factor in promoting cell survival and
resistance to chemotherapy in breast carcinoma. We have previously found
that NQO1-rs1800566 predicts poor survival among breast cancer patients,
particularly after anthracycline-based adjuvant chemotherapy and in
patients with p53-aberrant tumors. We have also reported the inverse
relationship between NQO1 protein expression and NF-B activation. We have
here analyzed the interaction of SNPs residing within the NF-B signaling
pathway genes, and NQO1-rs6499255 (tagging NQO1-rs1800566 with r2> 0.90)
on breast cancer patient survival and treatment outcome. The panel of
markers included the NF-B pathway SNPs available in a custom Illumina
iSelect genotyping array designed for Collaborative Oncological
Gene-Environment Study (iCOGS) as well as NQO1-rs6499255. For the SNP-SNP
interaction analysis on patient survival we conducted a likelihood ratio
test that compares Cox's regression model with and without an interaction
term to evaluate whether the interaction model is a better fit for the
prognostic data. The results obtained from this study will be reported.
Identification of interactive SNPs/genes contribute to the elucidation of
the mechanisms underlying complex diseases such as breast cancer.

