Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of tumor growth and angiogenesis by SP-2, an
anti-LGALS3BP antibody


Background: Accumulating evidence indicates that serum and tissue levels
of the lectin galactoside-binding soluble 3 binding protein (LGALS3BP), a
secreted glycoprotein, are elevated in human cancer. Recently, we have
identified LGALS3BP as a factor capable of stimulating angiogenesis of
microvascular endothelial cells in culture as well as in vivo. However,
the potential therapeutic implications of LGALS3BP function blockade, has
not been explored yet.Methods: Here we tested the ability of an
anti-LGALS3BP monoclonal antibody, named SP-2, to antagonize
LGALS3BP-induced angiogenesis and tumor growth.Results: SP-2
dose-dependently inhibited HUVEC tubulogenesis induced by either
conditioned medium of breast cancer and melanoma cells or purified
recombinant LGALS3BP. This was accompanied by inhibition of FAK, Akt and
ERKs phosphorylation as well as FAK recruitment to membrane sites and
actin remodeling. In vivo, SP-2 inhibited LGALS3BP-stimulated
angiogenesis and restrained growth of different xenograft models of human
cancer. Finally, the combination of SP-2 with low-dose Bevacizumab was
more effective than either agent alone in suppressing angiogenesis and
tumor growth.Conclusions: Targeting LGALS3BP with SP-2 could represent a
promising therapeutic approach for LGALS3BP expressing tumors.

