Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The clinicopathological features and prognostic impact of
ALK-positivity in resected gastric or gastro-esophageal cancer patients


Background: To determine the frequency and prognostic impact of
ALK-rearrangements in gastric cancer patients who underwent curative
surgical resection with extensive (D2) lymph node dissection.Patients and
methods: We concurrently analyzed the ALK-rearrangements and HER2
overexpression in whole tumor sections of 455 curatively resected gastric
cancers. We performed immunohistochemistry (IHC) and fluorescent in situ
hybridization (FISH), and analyzed the relationship between ALK
positivity and clinical survival outcome.Results: Of the 455 tumors that
were screened, 38 (8.4%) were ALK+ by IHC, which consisted of 1+ (24,
7.5%), 2+ (3, 0.7%), and 3+ (1, 0.2%), but no cases were confirmed by
FISH. ALK+ patients were significantly younger (57 vs. 61 years, P=0.02)
and showed similar patterns of ALK+ lung adenocarcinoma. ALK+ patients
were significantly more likely to have abundant signet ring cells
(defined as 10% of tumor cells). Moreover, as the ALK intensity (measured
by IHC) increased, so did the density of signet ring cell in tumors
(Ptrend = 0.02). Also, the disease free survival (DFS) and overall
survival (OS) of ALK+ patients in stages were shorter than ALK- patients
(DFS: 21.2 vs.100.5 months; P = 0.007, OS: 34.3 months vs. median
survival time unattainable; P=0.016)Conclusions: ALK+ is an independent
negative prognostic factor in surgically resected gastric cancers and is
associated with signet ring cell histology. Furthermore ALK+ might be a
relevant therapeutic target in gastric cancer patients.

