Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Acid suppression therapy impairs sunitinib efficacy in renal cell
cancer (RCC)


Background: Sunitinib, a tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI), is standard
therapy in metastatic RCC (mRCC). Developing side effects may be a marker
of sufficient treatment doses. But as an oral drug, a potential issue is
pH-dependent absorption. Recent evidence suggests TKI plasma levels can
be altered by concomitant use of acid suppression therapy. Given
gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) is a side effect of sunitinib and
has high prevalence, this study aims to determine if coadministration of
acid suppression therapy and sunitinib affected clinical outcomes in
mRCC.Methods: mRCC patients treated with sunitinib between two cancer
centres from 2007 to 2013 were retrospectively reviewed. Patients were
excluded if they received 1 week of treatment. Aside from demographics
and histologic subtype, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center (MSKCC)
and Heng prognostic scores were calculated. Sunitinib dose reductions
were noted to divide patients into those that received 50 mg, 37.5 mg, or
25 mg. Patients were identified as receiving acid suppression if their
pharmacy records included a proton pump inhibitor (PPI). Patients were
considered taking these medications concomitantly if dates for PPI
overlapped their sunitinib prescription by 20% of treatment duration.
Progression free survival (PFS) and overall survival (OS) were primary
endpoints.Results: Of 383 mRCC patients identified, 379 were eligible for
review. Median age was 62.7 years, 276 male, and 103 female. 286 had
clear-cell histology and 93 non-clear cell. 47 patients were identified
as continuously taking concomitant PPI, 146 intermittently, and 186 none
at all. Median PFS for continuous, intermittent and no-PPI therapy groups
were 4.3 months, 15.0 months, and 5.4 months, respectively (pBackground:
Sunitinib, a tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI), is standard therapy in
metastatic RCC (mRCC). Developing side effects may be a marker of
sufficient treatment doses. But as an oral drug, a potential issue is
pH-dependent absorption. Recent evidence suggests TKI plasma levels can
be altered by concomitant use of acid suppression therapy. Given
gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) is a side effect of sunitinib and
has high prevalence, this study aims to determine if coadministration of
acid suppression therapy and sunitinib affected clinical outcomes in
mRCC.Methods: mRCC patients treated with sunitinib between two cancer
centres from 2007 to 2013 were retrospectively reviewed. Patients were
excluded if they received 1 week of treatment. Aside from demographics
and histologic subtype, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center (MSKCC)
and Heng prognostic scores were calculated. Sunitinib dose reductions
were noted to divide patients into those that received 50 mg, 37.5 mg, or
25 mg. Patients were identified as receiving acid suppression if their
pharmacy records included a proton pump inhibitor (PPI). Patients were
considered taking these medications concomitantly if dates for PPI
overlapped their sunitinib prescription by 20% of treatment duration.
Progression free survival (PFS) and overall survival (OS) were primary
endpoints.Results: Of 383 mRCC patients identified, 379 were eligible for
review. Median age was 62.7 years, 276 male, and 103 female. 286 had
clear-cell histology and 93 non-clear cell. 47 patients were identified
as continuously taking concomitant PPI, 146 intermittently, and 186 none
at all. Median PFS for continuous, intermittent and no-PPI therapy groups
were 4.3 months, 15.0 months, and 5.4 months, respectively (p<0.0001). OS
for the three groups were 9.3 months, 34.3 months, and 12.1 months,
respectively (pBackground: Sunitinib, a tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI),
is standard therapy in metastatic RCC (mRCC). Developing side effects may
be a marker of sufficient treatment doses. But as an oral drug, a
potential issue is pH-dependent absorption. Recent evidence suggests TKI
plasma levels can be altered by concomitant use of acid suppression
therapy. Given gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) is a side effect of
sunitinib and has high prevalence, this study aims to determine if
coadministration of acid suppression therapy and sunitinib affected
clinical outcomes in mRCC.Methods: mRCC patients treated with sunitinib
between two cancer centres from 2007 to 2013 were retrospectively
reviewed. Patients were excluded if they received 1 week of treatment.
Aside from demographics and histologic subtype, Memorial Sloan Kettering
Cancer Center (MSKCC) and Heng prognostic scores were calculated.
Sunitinib dose reductions were noted to divide patients into those that
received 50 mg, 37.5 mg, or 25 mg. Patients were identified as receiving
acid suppression if their pharmacy records included a proton pump
inhibitor (PPI). Patients were considered taking these medications
concomitantly if dates for PPI overlapped their sunitinib prescription by
20% of treatment duration. Progression free survival (PFS) and overall
survival (OS) were primary endpoints.Results: Of 383 mRCC patients
identified, 379 were eligible for review. Median age was 62.7 years, 276
male, and 103 female. 286 had clear-cell histology and 93 non-clear cell.
47 patients were identified as continuously taking concomitant PPI, 146
intermittently, and 186 none at all. Median PFS for continuous,
intermittent and no-PPI therapy groups were 4.3 months, 15.0 months, and
5.4 months, respectively (p<0.0001). OS for the three groups were 9.3
months, 34.3 months, and 12.1 months, respectively (p<0.0001). In
multivariate analysis considering age, gender, histologic subtype, prior
nephrectomy, and Heng score, Cox proportional hazards ratios for PFS and
OS between continuous and no-PPI therapy groups were 2.08 (95% CI
1.43-3.05, p=0.0002) and 2.06 (95% CI 1.37-3.11, p=0.0006), respectively.
Switching Heng for MSKCC score found similar hazards ratios of 2.06 (95%
CI 1.41-3.01, p= 0.0002) and 2.09 (95% CI 1.39-3.14, p=0.0004),
respectively. Our study found a trend to improved PFS and OS for those
requiring a dose reduction (p=0.08). Effects of PPI therapy were still
significant considering dose reductions.Conclusion: This large population
based study demonstrates sunitinib outcomes are affected by gastric
acidity. Results lend further support that PPI therapy can alter TKI
absorption; particularly as the intermittent PPI therapy group performed
best suggesting that these patients were likely placed on PPI due to
sunitinib toxicity. Consequently, they were effectively dose reduced
using PPIs rather than decreasing administration dosage.

