Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Interaction between genetic variants in one-carbon metabolism and
folate biomarkers on colorectal cancer risk: The Women's Health
Initiative observational cohort


Folate-mediated one-carbon metabolism (FOCM) is important in the
development of colorectal cancer (CRC), but gene-nutrient interactions in
this relationship have not been comprehensively evaluated. We
investigated whether folate modified the association of genetic variants
of FOCM with CRC risk. Among 821 Caucasian case/control matched pairs in
the Women's Health Initiative observational cohort (1993-2008), we
genotyped 453 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) tagging 227
independent loci in 30 genes in FOCM pathways (AARS, ADH1B, ADH1C, BHMT,
BHMT2, CBS, DHFR, DNMT1, DNMT3A, DNMT3B, EHMT1, EHMT2, FOLH1, FOLR1, GGH,
GNMT, MAT1A, MAT2B, MTHFD1, MTHFD2, MTHFR, MTR, MTRR, PON1, PRDM2, SHMT1,
SHMT2, SLC19A1, TCN2, and TYMS). Folate concentrations in plasma and red
blood cell (RBC) were measured by radioassays. Multivariable conditional
logistic regression was used to estimate odds ratios, and likelihood
ratio tests were performed to test the differences in the associations of
SNPs with CRC among plasma/RBC folate tertile categories. Nominal
P-values were reported for non-synonymous and candidate SNPs. For
tagSNPs, we used the Benjamini and Hochberg method to control false
discovery rate (FDR) at the gene level. When comparing homozygous
variants with wild-types, we observed higher risks of CRC associated with
genetic variants in folate absorption and uptake in the presence of low
(tertile 1) plasma folate concentrations: GGH (rs16930073, flanking 3UTR,
P-interaction=0.006), FOLH1 (rs10839236, intron, candidate, P=0.018;
rs2299650, intron, P=0.016), and FOLR1 (rs651646, intron, P=0.021). In
other FOCM pathways (methionine/S-adenosylmethionine reactions, vitamin
B12 transport, and DNA methylation), plasma/RBC folate also modified
important non-synonymous and candidate SNPs in relation to CRC risk: MTRR
(C524T [p.S202L], P=0.045), CBS (rs1801181 [p.A360A], P=0.035), TCN2
(C776G [p.R232P], P=0.040), DNMT1 (A201G [p.I311L], P=0.016), DNMT3A
(rs11695471 [intron 22 A>T], candidate, P=0.002), and DNMT3B (283T>C, 5
near gene, p=0.043). In addition, interactions with plasma/RBC folate
were observed for several variants in paraoxonase 1 (PON1), an enzyme
generating homocysteine from homocysteine thiolactone: p.L55M (P=0.021),
rs8491 (3UTR, P=0.037), rs854548 (3 near gene, P=0.033), rs854551 (3UTR,
P=0.045), and rs3917527 (intron, P=0.006). All significant interactions
with tagSNPs remained as noteworthy at the FDR 25% level. In conclusion,
our observations highlight the importance of folate status when
investigating FOCM-related genetic influences on CRC risk in
postmenopausal women.

