Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vivo evaluation of regorafenib and liposomal-doxorubicin in a
panel of low passage uterine START-PDX tumor models


Background: Uterine and ovary cancers account for a majority of
gynecologic cancer-related deaths in Western countries. While initial
cure rates are high, recurrent disease is often chemoresistant with few
treatment options. Regorafenib is a recently approved multi-tyrosine
kinase targeting VEGFR2 and Tie2. As Tie2 has been implicated in the
pathogenesis of uterine cancers, we evaluated regorafenib as a potential
therapy in our panel of uterine PDX models and compared activity to the
approved therapy liposomal-doxorubicin.Methods: PDX uterine models were
established in immune-deficient mice from primary or metastatic patient
tissue and once established were confirmed by histologic comparative
analysis with patient tumor tissue, linked with patient treatment and
outcome data and characterized for activating mutations and known
amplifications. Drug sensitivity studies were performed in each model
evaluating daily oral regorafenib or weekly intravenous
liposomal-doxorubicin versus control; group sizes were n=2-3 for control
and n=1 for treatment arms. Study endpoints included a set day following
treatment initiation with tumor growth inhibition or delay and regression
reported at study completion.Results: For this project we evaluated
twenty-five uterine models. Statistically significant (pBackground:
Uterine and ovary cancers account for a majority of gynecologic
cancer-related deaths in Western countries. While initial cure rates are
high, recurrent disease is often chemoresistant with few treatment
options. Regorafenib is a recently approved multi-tyrosine kinase
targeting VEGFR2 and Tie2. As Tie2 has been implicated in the
pathogenesis of uterine cancers, we evaluated regorafenib as a potential
therapy in our panel of uterine PDX models and compared activity to the
approved therapy liposomal-doxorubicin.Methods: PDX uterine models were
established in immune-deficient mice from primary or metastatic patient
tissue and once established were confirmed by histologic comparative
analysis with patient tumor tissue, linked with patient treatment and
outcome data and characterized for activating mutations and known
amplifications. Drug sensitivity studies were performed in each model
evaluating daily oral regorafenib or weekly intravenous
liposomal-doxorubicin versus control; group sizes were n=2-3 for control
and n=1 for treatment arms. Study endpoints included a set day following
treatment initiation with tumor growth inhibition or delay and regression
reported at study completion.Results: For this project we evaluated
twenty-five uterine models. Statistically significant (p<0.05)
regorafenib activity was reported in a subset of evaluated endometrial
models; however, activity was not limited to a particular tumor subtype
or mutation profile. Liposomal-doxorubicin also demonstrated differential
but significant tumor growth inhibition towards models in the evaluated
panel.Conclusion: We have screened preclinical activity of regorafenib
and liposomal-doxorubicin towards a panel of uterine START-PDX models and
identified sensitive and resistant models. Additional genomic and
characterization studies are underway to better understand activity of
regorafenib with the goal of identifying a sensitivity profile for
patient stratification.

