Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of miRNA-loaded polymeric nanoformulation for
pancreatic cancer therapy


MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small (18-22 nucleotide long) non-coding RNAs that
play important roles in biological processes through post-transcriptional
regulation of gene expression. Their aberrant expression and functional
significance are reported in several human malignancies, including
pancreatic cancer (PC). Recently, we identified miR-150 as a novel tumor
suppressor microRNA in PC and demonstrated that its overexpression
inhibits growth and malignant behavior of PC cells suggesting that
restoration of miR-150 could serve as an effective therapeutic approach
for pancreatic cancer. In the present study, we have developed a
nanoparticle-based miR-150 delivery system and tested its therapeutic
efficacy by in vitro assays. Using double emulsion solvent evaporation
method, we developed a poly (D, L-lactide-co-glycolide) (PLGA)-based
nanformulation (NF) of miR-150 (miR-150-NF). Polyethyleneimine (a
cationic polymer) was incorporated in PLGA matrix to increase the
encapsulation of miR-150. Physical characterization of miR-150-NF
demonstrated that miR-150-loaded nanoparticles were spherical in shape,
had high encapsulation efficiency (>75%), were stable at room temperature
and exhibited sustained release profile. miR-150-NF efficiently delivered
miR-150 mimics to PC cells and led to the downregulation of its target
gene (MUC4) expression. Downregulation of MUC4 correlated with a
concomitant decrease in the expression of its interacting partner, HER2,
and repression of its downstream signaling. Furthermore, treatment of PC
cells with miR-NF suppressed their growth, clonogenicity, motility and
invasion. Together, these findings suggest that PLGA-based nanovector
platform could be a potential candidate for systemic delivery of miR-150
to the pancreatic tumor cells and can be a step forward in miRNA-based
cancer therapeutics.

