Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Rational dose optimization for multi-drug cocktails


The design of an optimal combination therapy can be thought of as a set
of tradeoffs designed to maximize the efficacy of the combination for a
given toxicity budget. As anticancer agents (even targeted ones) often
have overlapping toxicities, an efficient approach to making
efficacy-toxicity tradeoffs is critical. In this context, a major
impediment is that the search space grows exponentially with each
additional drug while in vivo studies have a fixed upper size limit.Here,
we model the efficacy and toxicity landscapes of multidrug cocktails, and
describe an approach to visualize and design efficient studies for
three-drug combinations. We further demonstrate the application of our
approach in a practical drug development context by showing its impact on
actual study design, and validation with in vivo datasets. As our
approach relies on equations from first principles, it is in theory
extensible to an arbitrary number of drugs, subject to the practical
constraints of drug dosing.First, we demonstrate an approach to visually
determine the optimal dose combination for a three-drug combination with
fully overlapping toxicity. Efficacy and toxicity isoboles visualized as
surfaces in three-drug space demonstrate the optimal dose combination,
which corresponds to the point of tangency between the MTD and efficacy
isobole surfaces.Next, we derive an analytical method to efficiently
estimate this point with a minimum of data, and without using graphical
methods (important for extending the work beyond three dimensions). The
combined efficacy and toxicity of a three-drug combination were modeled
from first principles using isobolograms as a sum of the single-agent
PK/Efficacy (PK/E) relationships and four combination terms (three binary
and one ternary) to account for potential interactions between the drugs.
Borrowing from Microeconomic Utility Theory, we found the point of
greatest efficacy along the Maximum Tolerated Dose (MTD) toxicity
contour, which corresponds to the efficacy isobole tangentially
intersecting the MTD contour. Through both analytical and numerical
approaches, we determined the the single- and double-agent efficacy
parameters uniquely determine the dose escalation path which provides the
best estimate of combination efficacy. Simulated experiments demonstrate
the optimal observation path up to MTD performs acceptably compared to a
uniformly-gridded exposure space.Finally, we demonstrate the application
of this approach in a proposed experimental design for three-drug
combinations, and validate it with experimental data.While developing
multi-drug cocktails poses many scientific and operational challenges,
the approach presented here provides a straightforward route to
preclinical testing and validation through the design of parsimonious
studies that can explicitly define the contribution of each individual
drug (and each two drug combination) to the overall efficacy and toxicity
landscape of the cocktail.

