Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: AZD6244 inhibits cisplatin induced ERK1/2 activation and
potentiates its cytotoxic effects in NSCLC preclinical models


Introduction; Lung cancer is still the leading cause of cancer death
worldwide, indicating that there are urgent needs for elucidating the
mechanisms of resistance and developments of strategies to overcome it.
Cisplatin is still one of the most commonly used drugs for the treatment
of advanced lung cancer and, however, the underlying mechanism of
activation of MAPK/ERK1/2 after cisplatin administration is still complex
and elusive. It is considered one of the main mechanisms mediating
resistance to cisplatin based doublet chemotherapy. In this study we
aimed to evaluate the effectiveness of combination of MAPK inhibitor,
AZD6244, with cisplatin in NSCLC models. Materials and Methods; NSCLC
cells harbouring oncogenic RAS mutation, NCI-H1299, -H2009, -H460, and
A549 cells, and LSL K-Ras G12D mouse model was used. Protein expression
was evaluated by immunoblotting and cytotoxicity was measured by FACS
followed by annexin-V and PI staining. LSL Kras G12D mouse were inhaled
5X 107 PFU AdCre virus at 8 weeks after birth and, in 24 weeks after
inhalation, were taken microCT, randomized into 4 groups, and then
treated with AZD6244 (25mg/kg bid by oral gavage) and/or cisplatin (5
mg/kg weekly) for two weeks. Results; There was a dose dependent increase
of pERK1/2, which is most prominent at 24 hr after cisplatin treatment.
Expression of proapoptotic protein, BIM, was decreased whereas that of
antiapoptotic proteins, BCL-2 and MCL-1, was increased with cisplatin
treatment. Treatment of AZD6244 prevented phosphorylation mediated
degradation of BIM after cisplatin treatment. AZD6244 itself did not show
cytotoxic effects up to 10 uM whereas combination of 1 uM of AZD6244
potentiates cytotoxic effects of cisplatin. Combined treatment of AZD6244
with cisplatin showed significant tumor reduction in 2 weeks in LSL K-ras
G12D mouse model when compared those treated with single agents or
vehicle. Conclusion; Combination of AZD6244 with cisplatin potentiates
cytotoxic effects and anti-tumor activities in NSCLC preclinical models.
These findings suggest that clinical trials using combination with
AZD6244 and cisplatin may be beneficial in advanced NSCLC patients.

