Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of neuronal predominant gene expression in breast cancer
brain metastasis


Breast cancer brain metastasis (BCBM) occur in about 10-30% of patients
with breast cancer. It has been established that breast cancer is a
heterogeneous disease with 3 predominant subtypes (1) ER/PR positive (3)
HER2 positive (4) Triple negative breast cancer (TNBC)/Basal subtype.
TNBC is associated with the highest incidence of metastasis to brain,
mechanism of which is poorly understood. Therefore, in order to
understand the proclivity of TNBC to the brain and identify potential
targets for treatment BCMB, we employed two widely used paired cell model
system, the MDA-MB-231/MDA-MB-231BrM2 and the CN-34/CN34BrM2. The levels
of brain predominant markers [ST6GALNAC5 (ST6), Nestin, Tubulin 3
(TUBB3)] in brain-derived clones were assesed by qRT-PCR and found to be
overexpressed in brain-derived MDA-MB-231BrM2 and CN34BrM2 in comparison
with parental breast cancer cell lines. We also identified hyperactivated
TGF- signaling in brain derived clones in comparison with parental cells.
Moreover, the treatment of parental cells with TGF- increased the
expression of ST6, Nestin and TUBB3 indicating that TGF- plays role in
the development of BCBM. To further delineate the role of these markers
in BCBM, knockdown experiments using two different shRNA specific to
TUBB3 (neuronal specific) were performed. TUBB3 knockdown resulted in a
dramatic reduction in tumorspheres formation, migration, invasion and the
ability to adhere to laminin in both MDA-MB-231BrM2. Furthermore, the
downregulation of expression of 1 and 3 integrins in TUBB3 knockdown
cells was discovered as assessed by qPCR and flow cytometry. These
results implicate that overexpression of brain specific TUBB3 provides
breast cancer cells with migration and invasion abilities and a possible
survival advantage in the brain microenvironment.

