Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Immunotherapy targeting folate receptor induces autophagy in
ovarian cancer


Objective Cancer cells are highly dependent on folate metabolism for
replication of DNA, making these cells susceptible to drugs that inhibit
folate metabolism. Herein, we investigated the functional mechanism
underlying blockade of folate receptor (FR) in human ovarian cancer with
MORAb-003 antibody, a humanized monoclonal antibody directly against
folate receptor 1 (FR).Methods We first used FACS analysis and real-time
PCR to compare the expression of FR in several human ovarian cancer
cells. We then examined the tumor growth in the orthotopic models of
human ovarian cancer cells SKOV3 and A2780. Consequently, we performed in
vitro genomic and proteomic profiling in these cells to identify the
functional mechanism of MORAb-003.Results Among 7 human ovarian cancer
cell lines, SKOV3ip1 cells have the highest levels of FR and A2780 cells
have the lowest. In vivo, MORAb-003 monotherapy led to significantly
decreased tumor growth in the SKOV3ip1 model, but not in the A2780 model.
Combination of MORAb-003 and docetaxel resulted in significantly greater
reduction in tumor growth in the SKOV3ip1 model, but not in the A2780
model. MORAb-003 reduced proliferation but had no significant effect on
apoptosis. Reverse-phase array analysis in SKOV3 cells revealed MORAb-003
up-regulated autophagic factors including PEA-15, Beclin-1, and ATG3 and
down-regulated mTOR. cDNA microarray further showed that MORAb-003
up-regulated the expression of BECN1, ATG8, ATG3 and LC3B. Levels of
Beclin-1 and LC3B were substantially increased in SKOV3 tumors treated
with MORAb-003 alone or in combination with docetaxel, but not in A2780
tumors. Using FACS analysis with acridine orange (AO) staining, we
observed significantly more AO positive population in SKOV3 cells treated
with MORAb-003 alone (16.9%) or MORAb-003+docetaxel (21.2%) than in cells
treated with control IgG (5.24%). Such differences were not observed in
A2780 cells. Finally, we measured conversion of LC3 from isoform I to
isoform II in cells treated with MORAb-003, and observed the
significantly increased LC3II in SKOV3 cells but not in A2780
cells.Conclusion Taken together, our results indicate that MORAb-003
results in prominent anti-tumor activity through inducing sustained
autophagy in ovarian cancer cells.

