Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: APG101 inhibits CD95-Ligand induced invasion of glioblastoma in
3D-models in vitro and ex vivo


CD95 (APO-1/Fas) is a receptor that belongs to the Tumor Necrosis Factor
Receptor Super Family (TNFRSF). Originally discovered as a death receptor
inducing apoptosis upon binding to its ligand CD178 (CD95L/FasL), recent
research indicates that CD95 also mediates non-apoptotic functions (e.g.
liver regeneration, neuronal development, inflammation and cellular
migration/invasion of tumor cells) depending on the cellular context. The
potential impact on multiple cellular processes classifies the CD95
pathway as an attractive target for pharmacological interference.
Apogenix developed APG101, a recombinant human fusion protein consisting
of the extracellular domain of CD95 and the Fc-domain of an IgG antibody
for the treatment of glioblastoma, a malignancy characterized by
aggressive and invasive growth. Preclinical development activities to
elucidate the mode of action of APG101 included the comparison of
3-dimensional in vitro and ex vivo models employing U87-MG and U373-MG
cells on murine organotypic brain tissue cultures. Expression of CD95L
and CD95 in these cells was reduced by semi-stable transfection of shRNA
vectors to assess contribution of the CD95/CD95L system to invasion and
proliferation of glioma cell lines and the anti-invasive effect of APG101
treatment. While knockdown of CD95 leads to death of U373-MG cells, we
observed significant reduction of proliferation rates in U87-MG cells.
The effect of CD95L knockdown on proliferation was only minor in U87-MG
and was absent in U373-MG cells. Consistently, we found that treatment of
glioma cells with APG101 had no effect on proliferation rates or cell
cycle regulation of either cell line. The main effect of CD95L knockdown
was a strongly reduced invasiveness of both cell lines in vitro and ex
vivo. Invasiveness could be restored by exogenous addition of recombinant
CD95L, and this induced invasion was inhibited in the presence of APG101.
In contrast, a CD95L binding defective CD95-Fc mutant APG122 did not have
an anti-invasive effect in our experimental models. We conclude that:
Results obtained from the in vitro and ex vivo assay models reflect each
other and are suitable to study the role of CD95 signaling in tumor cell
invasion activation of CD95 on glioma cells by CD95L contributes to
invasive spread of tumor cells to the surrounding brain tissue, and
Apogenix drug APG101 is able to block the pro-invasive activity of CD95L.
Based on these observations, an important mode of action for APG101 is
inhibition of CD95 ligand induced invasion of glioma cells.

