Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Senescence as a result of impaired ribosome biogenesis


Senescence is a stable arrest of cell proliferation in which the cells
remain viable and metabolically active but display a constitutive
activation of the DNA damage response and of the tumor suppressors p53
and RB. The senescent phenotype can be induced by multiple stresses
including short telomeres and oncogenes. We have shown that senescence,
involves the ERK-dependent degradation of selective proteins involved in
cell cycle progression and tumorigenesis. We call this process senescence
associated protein degradation (SAPD) and it involves many nucleolar
proteins that play a role in ribosome biogenesis. Using tritium pulse
labelling we found a strong decrease of rRNA synthesis in senescent cells
indicating that the degradation of nucleolar proteins is functionally
relevant. Because we know how exactly the human 47S precursor rRNA is
processed, it was possible to design primers on both sides of some
processing sites and study their maturation by QPCR. In this way we
showed defects in the processing of rRNA in senescent cells. Knocking
down some of the nucleolar proteins degraded in senescence was sufficient
to trigger the process indicating that a decrease in ribosome biogenesis
is causal to cellular senescence. Mechanistically, the degradation of
nucleolar proteins during senescence involves the ubiquitin-proteasome
system suggesting that E3 ligases link the oncogenic stress that trigger
senescence to nucleolar proteins degradation. We will discuss ongoing
efforts to identify these enzymes.

