Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TGF pathway alteration, body mass index, physical activity and
breast cancer outcomes: The Shanghai Breast Cancer Survival Study


Background: Cumulative evidence suggests that the transforming growth
factor-beta (TGF-) pathway may have prognostic significance in human
breast cancer. It also has been shown that the TGF- pathway may play a
role in glucose regulation and energy homeostasis. However, no previous
study has examined the potential modifying effects of obesity and
physical activity on associations between TGF- pathway biomarkers, such
as TGFRII and pSmad2, and breast cancer outcomes. Methods: Breast cancer
patients aged 20 to 75 years were recruited 6 months after diagnosis
between 2002 and 2005 and participated in in-person baseline and
follow-up surveys that collected information on cancer diagnosis,
treatment, lifestyle exposures, anthropometrics, and physical activity.
The expression of TGFRII and nuclear pSmad2 in breast cancer cells and
breast stromal tissue cells was evaluated immunohistochemically.
Five-year disease-free survival (DFS) and overall survival (OS) rates
were estimated by Kaplan Meier method. Cox proportional hazards models
were used to estimate hazard ratios (HRs) and 95% confidence intervals
(95% CIs) with adjustment for other prognostic variables and further
stratified by body mass index (BMI) or physical activity. Results: Breast
cancer cells exhibited either a membranous or a cytoplasmic expression
pattern of TGFRII. Compared with the membranous pattern, the cytoplasmic
pattern was more prevalent among patients with low BMI (PBackground:
Cumulative evidence suggests that the transforming growth factor-beta
(TGF-) pathway may have prognostic significance in human breast cancer.
It also has been shown that the TGF- pathway may play a role in glucose
regulation and energy homeostasis. However, no previous study has
examined the potential modifying effects of obesity and physical activity
on associations between TGF- pathway biomarkers, such as TGFRII and
pSmad2, and breast cancer outcomes. Methods: Breast cancer patients aged
20 to 75 years were recruited 6 months after diagnosis between 2002 and
2005 and participated in in-person baseline and follow-up surveys that
collected information on cancer diagnosis, treatment, lifestyle
exposures, anthropometrics, and physical activity. The expression of
TGFRII and nuclear pSmad2 in breast cancer cells and breast stromal
tissue cells was evaluated immunohistochemically. Five-year disease-free
survival (DFS) and overall survival (OS) rates were estimated by Kaplan
Meier method. Cox proportional hazards models were used to estimate
hazard ratios (HRs) and 95% confidence intervals (95% CIs) with
adjustment for other prognostic variables and further stratified by body
mass index (BMI) or physical activity. Results: Breast cancer cells
exhibited either a membranous or a cytoplasmic expression pattern of
TGFRII. Compared with the membranous pattern, the cytoplasmic pattern was
more prevalent among patients with low BMI (P<0.01) and was associated
with lower five-year DFS (91% vs. 83%, P=0.04; adjusted HR=1.66, 95% CI:
1.03-2.68). Compared with lower nuclear pSmad2 expression intensity,
higher expression intensity of nuclear pSmad2 in breast cancer cells was
associated with lower five-year DFS (87% vs. 82%, P=0.02; adjusted
HR=1.31, 95%CI: 0.96-1.79). This association was predominantly seen among
participants with moderate physical activity levels (Background:
Cumulative evidence suggests that the transforming growth factor-beta
(TGF-) pathway may have prognostic significance in human breast cancer.
It also has been shown that the TGF- pathway may play a role in glucose
regulation and energy homeostasis. However, no previous study has
examined the potential modifying effects of obesity and physical activity
on associations between TGF- pathway biomarkers, such as TGFRII and
pSmad2, and breast cancer outcomes. Methods: Breast cancer patients aged
20 to 75 years were recruited 6 months after diagnosis between 2002 and
2005 and participated in in-person baseline and follow-up surveys that
collected information on cancer diagnosis, treatment, lifestyle
exposures, anthropometrics, and physical activity. The expression of
TGFRII and nuclear pSmad2 in breast cancer cells and breast stromal
tissue cells was evaluated immunohistochemically. Five-year disease-free
survival (DFS) and overall survival (OS) rates were estimated by Kaplan
Meier method. Cox proportional hazards models were used to estimate
hazard ratios (HRs) and 95% confidence intervals (95% CIs) with
adjustment for other prognostic variables and further stratified by body
mass index (BMI) or physical activity. Results: Breast cancer cells
exhibited either a membranous or a cytoplasmic expression pattern of
TGFRII. Compared with the membranous pattern, the cytoplasmic pattern was
more prevalent among patients with low BMI (P<0.01) and was associated
with lower five-year DFS (91% vs. 83%, P=0.04; adjusted HR=1.66, 95% CI:
1.03-2.68). Compared with lower nuclear pSmad2 expression intensity,
higher expression intensity of nuclear pSmad2 in breast cancer cells was
associated with lower five-year DFS (87% vs. 82%, P=0.02; adjusted
HR=1.31, 95%CI: 0.96-1.79). This association was predominantly seen among
participants with moderate physical activity levels (<9.4 MET-hr/wk;
adjusted HR=2.05, 95% CI: 1.11-3.79 for five-year DFS) and lower BMI
(Background: Cumulative evidence suggests that the transforming growth
factor-beta (TGF-) pathway may have prognostic significance in human
breast cancer. It also has been shown that the TGF- pathway may play a
role in glucose regulation and energy homeostasis. However, no previous
study has examined the potential modifying effects of obesity and
physical activity on associations between TGF- pathway biomarkers, such
as TGFRII and pSmad2, and breast cancer outcomes. Methods: Breast cancer
patients aged 20 to 75 years were recruited 6 months after diagnosis
between 2002 and 2005 and participated in in-person baseline and
follow-up surveys that collected information on cancer diagnosis,
treatment, lifestyle exposures, anthropometrics, and physical activity.
The expression of TGFRII and nuclear pSmad2 in breast cancer cells and
breast stromal tissue cells was evaluated immunohistochemically.
Five-year disease-free survival (DFS) and overall survival (OS) rates
were estimated by Kaplan Meier method. Cox proportional hazards models
were used to estimate hazard ratios (HRs) and 95% confidence intervals
(95% CIs) with adjustment for other prognostic variables and further
stratified by body mass index (BMI) or physical activity. Results: Breast
cancer cells exhibited either a membranous or a cytoplasmic expression
pattern of TGFRII. Compared with the membranous pattern, the cytoplasmic
pattern was more prevalent among patients with low BMI (P<0.01) and was
associated with lower five-year DFS (91% vs. 83%, P=0.04; adjusted
HR=1.66, 95% CI: 1.03-2.68). Compared with lower nuclear pSmad2
expression intensity, higher expression intensity of nuclear pSmad2 in
breast cancer cells was associated with lower five-year DFS (87% vs. 82%,
P=0.02; adjusted HR=1.31, 95%CI: 0.96-1.79). This association was
predominantly seen among participants with moderate physical activity
levels (<9.4 MET-hr/wk; adjusted HR=2.05, 95% CI: 1.11-3.79 for five-year
DFS) and lower BMI (<25; adjusted HR=1.80, 95% CI: 1.17-2.77 for
five-year DFS), although the test for multiplicative interaction was only
significant for BMI (Pinteraction=0.02). Analyses of OS showed similar
patterns of association with a significant interaction between BMI and
pSmad2 (adjusted HR=2.09, 95% CI: 1.38-3.15 for patients with low BMI,
PinteractionBackground: Cumulative evidence suggests that the
transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-) pathway may have prognostic
significance in human breast cancer. It also has been shown that the TGF-
pathway may play a role in glucose regulation and energy homeostasis.
However, no previous study has examined the potential modifying effects
of obesity and physical activity on associations between TGF- pathway
biomarkers, such as TGFRII and pSmad2, and breast cancer outcomes.
Methods: Breast cancer patients aged 20 to 75 years were recruited 6
months after diagnosis between 2002 and 2005 and participated in
in-person baseline and follow-up surveys that collected information on
cancer diagnosis, treatment, lifestyle exposures, anthropometrics, and
physical activity. The expression of TGFRII and nuclear pSmad2 in breast
cancer cells and breast stromal tissue cells was evaluated
immunohistochemically. Five-year disease-free survival (DFS) and overall
survival (OS) rates were estimated by Kaplan Meier method. Cox
proportional hazards models were used to estimate hazard ratios (HRs) and
95% confidence intervals (95% CIs) with adjustment for other prognostic
variables and further stratified by body mass index (BMI) or physical
activity. Results: Breast cancer cells exhibited either a membranous or a
cytoplasmic expression pattern of TGFRII. Compared with the membranous
pattern, the cytoplasmic pattern was more prevalent among patients with
low BMI (P<0.01) and was associated with lower five-year DFS (91% vs.
83%, P=0.04; adjusted HR=1.66, 95% CI: 1.03-2.68). Compared with lower
nuclear pSmad2 expression intensity, higher expression intensity of
nuclear pSmad2 in breast cancer cells was associated with lower five-year
DFS (87% vs. 82%, P=0.02; adjusted HR=1.31, 95%CI: 0.96-1.79). This
association was predominantly seen among participants with moderate
physical activity levels (<9.4 MET-hr/wk; adjusted HR=2.05, 95% CI:
1.11-3.79 for five-year DFS) and lower BMI (<25; adjusted HR=1.80, 95%
CI: 1.17-2.77 for five-year DFS), although the test for multiplicative
interaction was only significant for BMI (Pinteraction=0.02). Analyses of
OS showed similar patterns of association with a significant interaction
between BMI and pSmad2 (adjusted HR=2.09, 95% CI: 1.38-3.15 for patients
with low BMI, Pinteraction<0.001). The expression of TGFRII and nuclear
pSmad2 in stromal cells was unrelated to breast cancer outcomes.
Conclusion: Expression levels of TGFRII and nuclear pSmad2 in cancer
cells were associated with breast cancer outcomes. These associations may
be modified by BMI.

