Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genetic and epidemiology characterization of head and neck cancers
by targeted sequencing


Oral and pharyngeal cancer, grouped together, is the sixth most common
cancer in the world. The annual estimated incidence is around 275,000 for
oral and 130,300 for pharyngeal cancers excluding nasopharynx, two-thirds
of these cases occurring in developing countries.The principal objective
of this work was to investigate the somatic genetic changes that
influence the risk of head and neck cancer occurrence and outcome, and
how they interact with environmental and host factors: HPV infection,
alcohol and Smoking.We selected 205 paired samples diagnosed as head and
neck SCC included in two multicenter studies in Europe and Brazil:
ARCAGE, a multi center case- control study, conducted between 2002-2005
involving 10 countries across Europe and the Gencapo case- control study
in the state of Sao Paulo from 2001 to 2010.Targeted sequencing was
performed independently on both germline DNA and the tumor material using
the PGM System at an average depth of 250X.Sequencing included the entire
coding region of 5 of the most frequently mutated genes in Head and Neck
cancer: TP53, NOTCH1, CDKN2A, CASP8, and PTEN. HPV status was achieved by
capsid protein serology and DNA genotyping. Statistical tests were
carried out in the R statistical programming environment or using STATA
statistic software. Kaplan-Meier analysis was used to determine overall
survival.Statistically significant differences in exposure status were
found between both series of patients with more prevalent cases of former
and current both smokers and alcohol drinkers in Brazil(p=0.001). 76% and
63% of the patients in each series had at least 1 mutation and there were
no significant differences in the percentage of mutations found. Most of
the mutations were found in TP53 (60%) and NOTCH1 (18%). Smoking status
was significantly associated to TP53 mutations (p=0.015). Positive
serology for HPV16 E6 oncoprotein was associated to Oropharyngeal tumors
all of which lack TP53 mutations.When comparing the survival of patients
according to the mutational profile we found a reduction in overall
survival for those patients carrying mutations in TP53 (p=0.002) and
CDKN2A (p=0.001).Combined molecular profiling and exposure data can be a
resource to assess the role of lifestyle habits on prognosis, and will
help to identify early markers of survival for head and neck cancer
patients.

