Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dual-label microdosing approach to identify chemoresistance to
carboplatin and gemcitabine combination chemotherapy


Gemcitabine is commonly given in combination with cisplatin or
carboplatin (GC therapy) as the first-line chemotherapy regimen for
several malignancies, including bladder cancer. Unfortunately, less than
half of patients respond to the therapy, generating a critical need for a
test that predicts tumor response to GC therapy. The goal of this project
is to measure drug-DNA adducts after administration of a single non-toxic
microdose of gemcitabine in combination with carboplatin and correlating
the degree of modification to chemotherapy sensitivity.We have previously
shown that resistance to carboplatin may be identified by using a
[14C]carboplatin microdose (1% of therapeutic dose), and subsequent
measurement of the [14C]-DNA adducts via accelerator mass spectrometry
(AMS), an ultrasensitive method used for detecting rare isotopes. We
postulate that adduct levels induced in tumors by GC microdoses are
proportional to those formed during full dose chemotherapy. Furthermore,
we hypothesize that there exists a threshold level of adducts above which
tumors respond to GC therapy.We used bladder cancer cell lines and the
nod scid gamma severe combined immunodeficient (NSG) mice containing
patient-derived tumor xenografts (PDX) from bladder cancer patients to
determine GC-DNA adduct levels using AMS. The NSG mouse is uniquely
capable of accepting and propagating tumor tissue engrafted directly from
patient biopsy samples. The resulting groups of mice each have identical
tumors, but can be treated in a variety of ways with replicate
experiments; characteristics that are impossible to achieve in normal
clinical studies. We will report progress on developing protocols and
preliminary GC microdosing data using the NSG-PDX mouse model of human
bladder cancer.

