Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CPAP contributes to HBx-mediated NF-B activation in hepatocellular
carcinoma


Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is a type of tumor that results from
chronic inflammation triggered by hepatotropic viruses or other toxic
chemicals. Constitutive activation of nuclear factor (NF)-B is an
important event involved in chronic inflammation of the liver. The HBV X
protein (HBx) is shown to activate NF-B by inducing phosphorylation of IB
and decreasing IB stability. Centrosomal protein P4.1-associated protein
(CPAP), which plays important roles in centrosomal functions, is
previously identified as the transcriptional co-activator of NF-B.
Herein, we demonstrate that CPAP can directly interact with HBx to
enhance HBx-mediated NF-B activation. Knockdown expression of CPAP
abolishes this effect, indicating that CPAP is required for HBx-mediated
NF-B activation. In addition, HBx cooperates with cyclic adenosine
monophosphate response element-binding protein (CREB) to increase the
expression of CPAP by up-regulating its promoter activity. Furthermore,
overexpression of CPAP enhances the protein stability of HBx. These
results suggest that a positive feedback regulation exists between CPAP
and HBx. The stable expression of CPAP in HCC cell lines increases cell
proliferation. In addition, the co-expression of CPAP and HBx more
greatly enhances the cell proliferation ability than either CPAP or HBx
alone. Taken together, our study indicates that CPAP can cooperate with
HBx and is important for HBx-induced NF-B activation.

