Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrative pathway analysis of molecular profiles of glioblastoma
multiforme for predicting patient survival


Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most common form of malignant brain
tumor in adults, characterized by median survival of one year and overall
poor prognosis. Subtypes based on gene expression signatures have been
reported; however, this classification varies based on molecular
characteristics of patient samples, and mostly lacks prognostic utility.
An important and challenging goal of stratifying patients by molecular
markers is to identify functionally relevant sets of genes that are
prognostically relevant. In this study we present a new computational
approach that integrates multiple datasets to group patients based on
their altered pathway characteristics and show prognostic differences
within GBM patients (pGlioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most common
form of malignant brain tumor in adults, characterized by median survival
of one year and overall poor prognosis. Subtypes based on gene expression
signatures have been reported; however, this classification varies based
on molecular characteristics of patient samples, and mostly lacks
prognostic utility. An important and challenging goal of stratifying
patients by molecular markers is to identify functionally relevant sets
of genes that are prognostically relevant. In this study we present a new
computational approach that integrates multiple datasets to group
patients based on their altered pathway characteristics and show
prognostic differences within GBM patients (p<0.05). We first enumerate
signaling paths from publicly available pathway databases, and calculate
a score for signaling pathway segments utilizing gene expression
profiles. Patient samples are clustered into groups based on these
scores, and Kaplan-Meier curves based on their survival are plotted.
Statistical assessment of the survival curves through a Log-Rank Test is
calculated to observe prognostic utility of the groups based on pathway
segments. We validated our approach on publicly available datasets (TCGA
and GSE4271), and showed prognostic differences in patient groups
(pGlioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most common form of malignant
brain tumor in adults, characterized by median survival of one year and
overall poor prognosis. Subtypes based on gene expression signatures have
been reported; however, this classification varies based on molecular
characteristics of patient samples, and mostly lacks prognostic utility.
An important and challenging goal of stratifying patients by molecular
markers is to identify functionally relevant sets of genes that are
prognostically relevant. In this study we present a new computational
approach that integrates multiple datasets to group patients based on
their altered pathway characteristics and show prognostic differences
within GBM patients (p<0.05). We first enumerate signaling paths from
publicly available pathway databases, and calculate a score for signaling
pathway segments utilizing gene expression profiles. Patient samples are
clustered into groups based on these scores, and Kaplan-Meier curves
based on their survival are plotted. Statistical assessment of the
survival curves through a Log-Rank Test is calculated to observe
prognostic utility of the groups based on pathway segments. We validated
our approach on publicly available datasets (TCGA and GSE4271), and
showed prognostic differences in patient groups (p<0.05). The two groups
we have identified are different than commonly defined two GBM subtypes,
namely proneural (PN) and mesenchymal (MES). While some PN tumors might
carry features that might favor better prognosis, such as IDH1 mutations,
these alterations are not generalizable. We performed gene set enrichment
analysis (GSEA) to further investigate the pathway consequences of
dysregulated genes in these patient groups, and identified differential
enrichment (pGlioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most common form of
malignant brain tumor in adults, characterized by median survival of one
year and overall poor prognosis. Subtypes based on gene expression
signatures have been reported; however, this classification varies based
on molecular characteristics of patient samples, and mostly lacks
prognostic utility. An important and challenging goal of stratifying
patients by molecular markers is to identify functionally relevant sets
of genes that are prognostically relevant. In this study we present a new
computational approach that integrates multiple datasets to group
patients based on their altered pathway characteristics and show
prognostic differences within GBM patients (p<0.05). We first enumerate
signaling paths from publicly available pathway databases, and calculate
a score for signaling pathway segments utilizing gene expression
profiles. Patient samples are clustered into groups based on these
scores, and Kaplan-Meier curves based on their survival are plotted.
Statistical assessment of the survival curves through a Log-Rank Test is
calculated to observe prognostic utility of the groups based on pathway
segments. We validated our approach on publicly available datasets (TCGA
and GSE4271), and showed prognostic differences in patient groups
(p<0.05). The two groups we have identified are different than commonly
defined two GBM subtypes, namely proneural (PN) and mesenchymal (MES).
While some PN tumors might carry features that might favor better
prognosis, such as IDH1 mutations, these alterations are not
generalizable. We performed gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) to
further investigate the pathway consequences of dysregulated genes in
these patient groups, and identified differential enrichment (p<0.01) of
various signaling pathways associated with GBM pathogenesis. Recently,
Krishna et al. (Cancer Cell, 2013) identified NFKB pathway in aggressive
GBM tumors that might have poor prognosis. Furthermore, our analysis
identified genes enriched for the longer survivor patient group in PTEN
dependent cell cycle arrest and apoptosis pathway, EGF Signaling Pathway,
PDGF Signaling Pathway, IL2 Signaling Pathway, and mTOR signaling
pathway. While some of key signaling genes (PTEN, PDGFRA, EGFR etc.)
included in these pathways were previously associated with GBM subtypes
and pathogenesis (Verhaak et al. Cancer Cell. 2010), we provide further
utility for their prognostic function within these pathways. These
results could serve as a means to improve prognosis and treatment options
for future GBM patients as well as to provide opportunities for
alternative interventions in multiple other cancers.

