Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Overexpressions of ALEX1 gene play a negative role in human
colorectal tumorigenesis


Background: Arm protein lost in epithelial cancers, on chromosome X
(ALEX) is a novel subgroup within the armadillo family which has several
ARM repeat domain. The role and the expression profile of ALEX1 gene in
colorectal tumor are not well examined. Our studies have revealed
overexpression of ALEX1 suppressed colony formation ability of stable
human colorectal carcinoma cell lines and clinical significance of ALEX1
expression in colorectal cancer patients. Materials and methods: Human
colon cancer cell lines (HCT116, SW480) and breast cancer cell line
(MCF-7) were used in this study. Human ALEX1 gene was amplified by PCR
and inserted into the XhoI site of pCAGIPuro plasmid. Colony formation
assay and Soft agar colony formation assay were performed to examine the
effect of overexpression of the ALEX1 on cancer cell proliferation.
Genomic DNA was purified by the phenol chloroform extraction and
bisulfite genomic sequencing was carried out with the EpiTect bisulfite
kit. We examined the expression level of ALEX1 mRNA in matched tissue
pairs of normal colorectal mucosa and colorectal tumor tissue by
Quantitative real-time RT-PCR Tumor specimens along with adjacent normal
tissues were obtained from 49 patients with primary colorectal cancer
undergoing complete surgical resection of tumors and lymph nodes. The
pathological stages of the patients were as follows: stage I, 9 patients;
stage II, 16 patients and stage III, 24 patients by pTNM classification.
The post-surgical observation period was from 277 to 3631 days (1625.0
1033.0 days). Results: Overexpression of ALEX1 in colorectal carcinoma
cells was capable of impairing colony formation and suppressed the
anchorage-dependent and -independent colony formation of human colorectal
carcinoma cell lines by the study of stable clones of HCT116 cells
expressing ALEX1 protein. Bisulfite genomic sequencing revealed that the
promoter region of ALEX1 gene was highly methylated in both HCT116 and I
SW480 cells in comparison to those in PANC-1 and MCF-7 cells which
express endogenous ALEX1 mRNA, indicating the capability of promoter
methylation to silence ALEX1 gene in HCT116 and SW480 cells. In 34 cases
out of 49 (69%) colorectal tumor tissues, greater than a 50% reduction of
the ALEX1 mRNA level was observed in comparison to adjacent normal mucosa
tissues. ALEX1 mRNA was significantly reduced in colorectal tumor tissues
than those in normal mucosa (P=0.01459, Mann-Whitney U-test). The 17
cases with higher ALEX1 gene expression (Tumor/normal value 0.20)
significantly revealed a better disease-free survival rate than the other
32 cases (Background: Arm protein lost in epithelial cancers, on
chromosome X (ALEX) is a novel subgroup within the armadillo family which
has several ARM repeat domain. The role and the expression profile of
ALEX1 gene in colorectal tumor are not well examined. Our studies have
revealed overexpression of ALEX1 suppressed colony formation ability of
stable human colorectal carcinoma cell lines and clinical significance of
ALEX1 expression in colorectal cancer patients. Materials and methods:
Human colon cancer cell lines (HCT116, SW480) and breast cancer cell line
(MCF-7) were used in this study. Human ALEX1 gene was amplified by PCR
and inserted into the XhoI site of pCAGIPuro plasmid. Colony formation
assay and Soft agar colony formation assay were performed to examine the
effect of overexpression of the ALEX1 on cancer cell proliferation.
Genomic DNA was purified by the phenol chloroform extraction and
bisulfite genomic sequencing was carried out with the EpiTect bisulfite
kit. We examined the expression level of ALEX1 mRNA in matched tissue
pairs of normal colorectal mucosa and colorectal tumor tissue by
Quantitative real-time RT-PCR Tumor specimens along with adjacent normal
tissues were obtained from 49 patients with primary colorectal cancer
undergoing complete surgical resection of tumors and lymph nodes. The
pathological stages of the patients were as follows: stage I, 9 patients;
stage II, 16 patients and stage III, 24 patients by pTNM classification.
The post-surgical observation period was from 277 to 3631 days (1625.0
1033.0 days). Results: Overexpression of ALEX1 in colorectal carcinoma
cells was capable of impairing colony formation and suppressed the
anchorage-dependent and -independent colony formation of human colorectal
carcinoma cell lines by the study of stable clones of HCT116 cells
expressing ALEX1 protein. Bisulfite genomic sequencing revealed that the
promoter region of ALEX1 gene was highly methylated in both HCT116 and I
SW480 cells in comparison to those in PANC-1 and MCF-7 cells which
express endogenous ALEX1 mRNA, indicating the capability of promoter
methylation to silence ALEX1 gene in HCT116 and SW480 cells. In 34 cases
out of 49 (69%) colorectal tumor tissues, greater than a 50% reduction of
the ALEX1 mRNA level was observed in comparison to adjacent normal mucosa
tissues. ALEX1 mRNA was significantly reduced in colorectal tumor tissues
than those in normal mucosa (P=0.01459, Mann-Whitney U-test). The 17
cases with higher ALEX1 gene expression (Tumor/normal value 0.20)
significantly revealed a better disease-free survival rate than the other
32 cases (< 0.20; P = 0.045, log-rank test), which showed significant
correlations between ALEX1 expression and better prognosis. Conclusions:
Our findings may support that ALEX1 functions as a tumor suppressor in
colorectal cancer progression. Examination of ALEX1 expression might be
helpful for predicting the prognosis of patients with curative resected
colorectal cancer.

