Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: APR-246, a clinical-stage mutant p53-reactivating compound,
resensitizes ovarian cancer cells to platinum compounds and doxorubicin


Background: Platinum-based drugs are since decades used as first-line
treatment for many solid tumors. Patients with ovarian cancer often
respond well to platinum compounds but a majority of patients rapidly
develop resistance and die of chemotherapy refractory disease. The
mechanisms underlying resistance are multifactorial, but two of the main
causes are mutations in the tumor suppressor p53 and elevated
intracellular glutathione (GSH) levels. Mutations in p53 occur in about
60% of ovarian tumors. APR-246 (PRIMA-1MET) is the first clinical-stage
compound that reactivates mutant p53. APR-246 is a prodrug that
accumulates in cancer cells and is converted to the active form MQ, a
Michael acceptor that binds to mutant p53, refolds it to wild type
conformation and triggers apoptosis (Lambert et al. Cancer Cell 15,
2009). APR-246 has been tested in a Phase I/IIa clinical trial with
promising results (Lehmann et al. J Clin Oncol 30, 2012), and a Phase
Ib/II study with platinum-based combination therapy in recurrent p53
mutant ovarian cancer is underway. Methods: Cell viability was assessed
with WST-1, MTT or FMCA assay. p53 gene status was determined by Sanger
sequencing and single strand conformation analysis, and p53 protein
expression by Western blotting. Intracellular GSH levels were assessed
with GSH kit (Cayman). Results: We have previously shown outstanding
synergistic anticancer effects with APR-246 in combination with platinum
compounds in p53 mutant solid cancer cell lines, including cisplatin
resistant ovarian cancer cells. Synergistic effects were also observed ex
vivo as well as in vivo in mice carrying human tumor xenografts. Here we
show that APR-246 not only reactivates mutant p53 but also decreases
intracellular GSH levels in a dose-dependent manner, presumably via
adduct formation between MQ and GSH. APR-246 resensitized cisplatin
resistant p53 mutant ovarian A2780-CP20 carcinoma cells to cisplatin, as
shown by a decrease in the IC50 value from 52 to 2.9 M, similar to the
IC50 in parental A2780 cells. APR-246 also restored the sensitivity of
resistant A2780ADR cells to doxorubicin. A2780-CP20 and A2780ADR were
developed from the parental A2780 line with wild type p53 by chronic
exposure to the respective drug. Moreover, APR-246 resensitized the p53
mutant OVCAR-3 cell line, established from a drug resistant patient, to
cisplatin. Conclusions: Our results show that APR-246 not only
reactivates mutant p53 but also decreases intracellular glutathione
levels. We propose that this unique dual mechanism of action accounts for
the resensitization and strong synergistic effects with APR-246 and
platinum drugs. Our results provide strong rationale for the planned
clinical study in ovarian cancer and suggest that combination treatment
with APR-246 and DNA damaging drugs could have broad applicability in the
treatment of drug resistant p53 mutant human tumors.

