Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Vemurafenib prodrugs suitable for oral and IV administration


Background: The oral therapy vemurafenib was approved by the U.S. FDA in
2011 for first-line treatment of metastatic melanomas. Patients whose
tumors carry the BRAF(V600E) mutation are treated with vemurafenib at
recommended dose of 960mg twice daily. One reason for such a high dose is
due to the poor oral bioavailability of vemurafenib. It was reported that
the crystalline formulation of vemurafenib provided only modest drug
exposures in animals and human (solubility limited absorption). To
increase its oral bioavailability, vemurafenib was subsequently
formulated as a micro-precipitated bulk powder (MBP). Despite this
special formulation, vemurafenib displayed marked accumulation after
repeat dosing at 960 mg BID with high inter-patient variability.Methods
and Results: To address the limitation of MBP formulation (e.g., high
cost to manufacture and high doses to reach desired drug exposure), we
developed prodrugs of vemurafenib, CT207 and CT317, with choices for both
oral and i.v. administration. The prodrugs are homologues and freely
soluble (>1g/mL) in water as their sodium salts. Both drugs are
well-absorbed in dogs and monkeys when dosed in 100% saline solution or
in capsule. For example, CT317 reached AUC(0-24) = 256 Mh and 429 Mh
(calculated in vemurafenib form) when dosed to dogs at 30 and 50 mg/kg QD
(equivalent to 1120 and 1890 mg/day adult dosage). The absolute oral
bioavailability of CT207 and CT317 in dogs was consistent at 80% in
dosing range of 10 to 100 mg/kg, which was approximately 4-times higher
than vemurafenib (formulated as MBP). Excellent drug exposure was also
observed when CT207 was given to monkeys orally at doses of 50 and 100
mg/kg QD (equivalent to 1120 and 2240 mg/day adult dosage), providing
AUC(0-24) = 506 Mh and 955 Mh, respectively. Both CT207 and CT317 showed
the same potent antitumor activity as vemurafenib in COLO205 xenograft
tumor model, demonstrating the equivalency of tumoricidal effects of the
prodrugs to vemurafenib.Conclusions: The consistent high oral
bioavailability across wide dosing range and great aqueous solubility of
CT207 and CT317 render them to have many advantages over vemurafenib:
choices for oral or intravenous administration, reduced daily dose and
frequency, and minimized inter-patient variability, among others.
Therefore, the prodrugs described here have the potential to complement
the clinic use of vemurafenib.

