Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Serum microRNAs reflect microRNA expression in tumor tissues as
well as systemic response to disease in HRAS-driven mouse models of HCC


Circulating microRNAs are promising candidates as minimally-invasive
biomarkers for tumor detection, disease monitoring, and patient
stratification. Increases in serum concentrations have been reported for
many microRNAs up-regulated in tumor cells. However, how well global
changes in tumor microRNA expression are reflected in circulating
microRNAs is less understood.To answer this question, we performed
experiments in a Tet-regulated mouse HRAS model of hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC). Male mice develop detectable HCC within a few weeks from
activation of the oncogenic HRAS allele. Matched serum and liver tissues
for microRNA profiling were collected at three timepoints: right before
HRAS activation (normal liver), 3 weeks after activation (moderate tumor
burden), and 6 weeks after activation (pervasive tumors). To emulate the
effect of targeted treatment, we inactivated the HRAS allele in a group
of animals 3 weeks after activation and collected serum and liver tissues
at the 6 weeks timepoint (3 weeks HRAS on, 3 weeks off). Global liver and
serum microRNA profiles were measured using the OpenArray TaqMan qPCR
Platform.The global microRNA profiling analysis revealed that the overall
number of detected serum microRNAs as well as the overall serum
expression increased with tumor progression and normalized after the HRAS
withdrawal. In the liver, 3 weeks after the HRAS activation we observed
small changes with just 7 differentially expressed microRNAs at FDR
Circulating microRNAs are promising candidates as minimally-invasive
biomarkers for tumor detection, disease monitoring, and patient
stratification. Increases in serum concentrations have been reported for
many microRNAs up-regulated in tumor cells. However, how well global
changes in tumor microRNA expression are reflected in circulating
microRNAs is less understood.To answer this question, we performed
experiments in a Tet-regulated mouse HRAS model of hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC). Male mice develop detectable HCC within a few weeks from
activation of the oncogenic HRAS allele. Matched serum and liver tissues
for microRNA profiling were collected at three timepoints: right before
HRAS activation (normal liver), 3 weeks after activation (moderate tumor
burden), and 6 weeks after activation (pervasive tumors). To emulate the
effect of targeted treatment, we inactivated the HRAS allele in a group
of animals 3 weeks after activation and collected serum and liver tissues
at the 6 weeks timepoint (3 weeks HRAS on, 3 weeks off). Global liver and
serum microRNA profiles were measured using the OpenArray TaqMan qPCR
Platform.The global microRNA profiling analysis revealed that the overall
number of detected serum microRNAs as well as the overall serum
expression increased with tumor progression and normalized after the HRAS
withdrawal. In the liver, 3 weeks after the HRAS activation we observed
small changes with just 7 differentially expressed microRNAs at FDR <
20%. The changes became much more pronounced at 6 weeks with 89 microRNAs
passing the FDR Circulating microRNAs are promising candidates as
minimally-invasive biomarkers for tumor detection, disease monitoring,
and patient stratification. Increases in serum concentrations have been
reported for many microRNAs up-regulated in tumor cells. However, how
well global changes in tumor microRNA expression are reflected in
circulating microRNAs is less understood.To answer this question, we
performed experiments in a Tet-regulated mouse HRAS model of
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Male mice develop detectable HCC within a
few weeks from activation of the oncogenic HRAS allele. Matched serum and
liver tissues for microRNA profiling were collected at three timepoints:
right before HRAS activation (normal liver), 3 weeks after activation
(moderate tumor burden), and 6 weeks after activation (pervasive tumors).
To emulate the effect of targeted treatment, we inactivated the HRAS
allele in a group of animals 3 weeks after activation and collected serum
and liver tissues at the 6 weeks timepoint (3 weeks HRAS on, 3 weeks
off). Global liver and serum microRNA profiles were measured using the
OpenArray TaqMan qPCR Platform.The global microRNA profiling analysis
revealed that the overall number of detected serum microRNAs as well as
the overall serum expression increased with tumor progression and
normalized after the HRAS withdrawal. In the liver, 3 weeks after the
HRAS activation we observed small changes with just 7 differentially
expressed microRNAs at FDR < 20%. The changes became much more pronounced
at 6 weeks with 89 microRNAs passing the FDR < 20% threshold. Most of
these changes reversed in the 3 weeks on/3 weeks off group and these
samples resembled the normal liver controls. Many microRNAs
differentially expressed in the liver were also altered in serum, albeit
with smaller average fold changes in serum compared to liver. The fold
changes were positively correlated between liver and serum samples
(Pearson R = 0.25, p Circulating microRNAs are promising candidates as
minimally-invasive biomarkers for tumor detection, disease monitoring,
and patient stratification. Increases in serum concentrations have been
reported for many microRNAs up-regulated in tumor cells. However, how
well global changes in tumor microRNA expression are reflected in
circulating microRNAs is less understood.To answer this question, we
performed experiments in a Tet-regulated mouse HRAS model of
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Male mice develop detectable HCC within a
few weeks from activation of the oncogenic HRAS allele. Matched serum and
liver tissues for microRNA profiling were collected at three timepoints:
right before HRAS activation (normal liver), 3 weeks after activation
(moderate tumor burden), and 6 weeks after activation (pervasive tumors).
To emulate the effect of targeted treatment, we inactivated the HRAS
allele in a group of animals 3 weeks after activation and collected serum
and liver tissues at the 6 weeks timepoint (3 weeks HRAS on, 3 weeks
off). Global liver and serum microRNA profiles were measured using the
OpenArray TaqMan qPCR Platform.The global microRNA profiling analysis
revealed that the overall number of detected serum microRNAs as well as
the overall serum expression increased with tumor progression and
normalized after the HRAS withdrawal. In the liver, 3 weeks after the
HRAS activation we observed small changes with just 7 differentially
expressed microRNAs at FDR < 20%. The changes became much more pronounced
at 6 weeks with 89 microRNAs passing the FDR < 20% threshold. Most of
these changes reversed in the 3 weeks on/3 weeks off group and these
samples resembled the normal liver controls. Many microRNAs
differentially expressed in the liver were also altered in serum, albeit
with smaller average fold changes in serum compared to liver. The fold
changes were positively correlated between liver and serum samples
(Pearson R = 0.25, p < 0.01). We detected additional significant changes
in serum microRNAs not reflected in liver tissues samples. The
serum-specific alteration included microRNAs linked to immune response,
liver injury and other systemic responses to the tumor burden. Similarly
to liver, the serum changes were most pronounced in the 6 weeks HRAS
group and partially reverted to normal-like profiles in the 3 weeks on/3
weeks off group.In conclusion, using a mouse model of HCC we found that
(1) deregulation of liver microRNA profiles increases with the tumor size
and (2) that serum microRNA profiles reflect both changes in the tumor
tissues and well systemic response to tumor burden. Importantly, most of
the changes in both liver and serum are reversed upon inhibition of the
driving oncogene. Thus circulating microRNAs are promising candidates for
tumor detection, disease monitoring, and monitoring of treatment response.

