Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Temozolomide resistance in human glioblastoma is associated with
marked increase in PDK1 and MGMT expression


Temozolomide has become the standard of care in glioblastoma (GBM)
treatment, but a significant number of patients despite optimal treatment
are met with recurrence. It is important to understand the molecular
mechanisms underlying TMZ resistance for the development of better
treatment strategies. In the present study, we evaluated the dynamic
relationship between MGMT and resistance to TMZ. We generated a
TMZ-resistant 5310R cell line by continuous treatment with 100 M
concentrations of TMZ (3 months) to parent 5310 cells. We tested the
efficacy of TMZ on 5310R cells by FACS analysis. 5310R cells showed
increased expression of MGMT when compared to parental controls. Also, we
observed that the 5310R cells showed alterations in cell morphology,
enhanced cell adhesion, increased migration and invasion capacities.
Moreover, we observed PDK1, MGMT and EGFR expression to be up-regulated
in 5310R cells compared to parental controls. Our previous data suggested
that inhibition of PDK1 reverses the Warburg effect, and here we
demonstrate that the acquired TMZ resistance in glioma may be associated
with promotion of the malignant phenotype. Furthermore, we observed a
significant correlation between PDK1, MGMT and EGFR expression in human
GBM specimens using immunohistochemistry and Western blot analysis. As
treatment with TMZ becomes more ubiquitous in GBM treatment, the
significance of the resistant 5310R cell line and an understanding of the
metabolic and epigenetic changes will become critical in the development
of targeted and effective therapies.

