Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CD14 gene polymorphisms associated with development of colorectal
cancer subtypes among atomic bomb survivors in Japan


Background: Epidemiological studies conducted among atomic bomb (A-bomb)
survivors by the Radiation Effects Research Foundation (RERF) have
indicated a significant radiation-dose-dependent increase in risks of
certain cancers among survivors. The mechanisms for different organ
susceptibilities to radiation have remained unclear. Epidemiological and
biological data show that colorectal cancer (CRC) risk factors may vary
by anatomic subsite. We categorized CRC into two subtypes: Proximal colon
cancer (cecum, ascending colon, and transverse colon) and distal CRC
(descending colon, sigmoid colon, rectosigmoid junction, and rectum).
CD14 is known to enhance the inflammatory response in the colorectum by
acting as a co-receptor to detect bacterial lipopolysaccharide and
activating the production of inflammatory cytokine. In this study, we
examined the association between polymorphisms of the cytokine CD14 gene
and risks of CRC subtypes.Methods: We analyzed the follow-up data from
the RERF Immunogenome Study Cohort of 4,673 A-bomb survivors at the
baseline covering 1981-2005: a total of 222 CRC cases, comprising 81
proximal colon cancer cases and 131 distal CRC cases. We focused on the
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the 5-untranstated region of
CD14 (CD14-C/A) and genotyped all cohort subjects. Relative risks (RRs)
for CRC and subtypes were estimated.Results: RRs of all-subtypes-combined
CRC or either of the subtypes significantly increased with increasing
radiation dose. When dividing the subjects into 2 groups by genotypes
(CD14-A/A homozygote and CD14-C/C homozygote combined with CD14-C/A
heterozygote), A-bomb survivors with CD14-A/A homozygote revealed
significantly higher RRs of all-subtype-combined CRC (1.52, 95%CI:
1.15-2.01) and distal CRC (1.76, 95% CI: 1.21-2.57) than those with
CD14-C/C homozygote combined with CD14-C/A heterozygote. However, there
was no significant difference between 2 genotype groups in proximal colon
cancer (RR=1.24, 95% CI: 0.79-1.95). When categorizing radiation dose
into 3 levels (700 mGy), A-bomb survivors with CD14-A/A who were exposed
to the highest radiation dose (>700 mGy) were at significantly higher
risk of all-subtype-combined CRC (RR=2.53, 95%CI: 1.58-4.04) and distal
CRC (RR=3.26, 95%CI: 1.71-6.23) than non-exposed survivors with CD14-C/C
combined with CD14-C/A.Conclusion: These results suggest the potential
involvement of a CD14-mediated inflammatory response in the development
of radiation-associated CRC, specifically distal CRC, but not proximal
colon cancer, among A-bomb survivors. This possibly contributes to the
different susceptibilities of the proximal colon and distal colorectum to
radiation exposure.

