Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The combination of JAK inhibitor, ruxolitinib, pan-PIM inhibitor,
LGH447, and CDK4/6 inhibitor, LEE011, in a preclinical mouse model of
myeloproliferative neoplasia


The JAK/STAT axis is a critical component downstream of multiple cytokine
and growth factor receptor signaling pathways. The genetic aberration of
JAK2V617F and the associated activation of STAT in myeloproliferative
neoplasia (MPN) is one example of the involvement of this pathway in
human cancer. Activated JAKs phosphorylate STAT proteins, which then
up-regulate the transcription of STAT target genes such as PIM1. Pim
kinases are involved in the regulation of cell cycle and proliferation.
The inhibition of JAK1/2 by the JAK inhibitor, ruxolitinib (RUX), results
in the suppression of the JAK-STAT pathway and promotes significant
clinical benefit in patients with myelofibrosis. Our previous preclinical
studies in a Ba/F3-JAK2V617F-driven MPN model demonstrate that the
combination of RUX and the pan-PIM inhibitor, LGH447, exhibits greater
inhibition of spleen weight and some reduction of JAK2V617F allele
burden, compared with the RUX monotherapy. Mutant JAK2V617F has been
shown to increase CDC25A transcription through activated STAT5. It also
regulates p27 at both the gene expression and phosphorylation levels. The
activation of CDC25A and the modulation of p27 have been postulated to
trigger the activation of cyclin dependent kinases (CDK), such as CDK4,
to initiate cell cycle progression. Additionally, activated STATs and
Pims have been shown to activate D cyclins that are upstream of CDK4/6.
Here, we explored the hypothesis that CDK4/6 inhibition, in conjunction
with JAK and PIM inhibition, would enhance therapeutic efficacy against
MPN. LEE011 is a potent and selective inhibitor of CDK4/6. The
combination of RUX and LEE011 was tested in an MPN model with Ba/F3 cells
harboring EPOR-JAK2V617F. While RUX monotherapy reduced spleen weight and
total tumor burden by more than 50%, it had marginal effect on JAK2V617F
allele burden in this model. The combination of RUX and LEE011 resulted
in an additional 2 to 3 fold reduction in spleen weight and total tumor
burden. Yet, no clear modulation of JAK2V617F allele burden was observed.
To further enhance the anti-tumor activity, we tested the triple
combination of RUX, LGH447 and LEE011 in this MPN model. This triple
combination resulted in >99% reduction of total tumor burden and a 96%
reduction of spleen weight. Furthermore, the triple combination of RUX,
LGH447 and LEE011 significantly down-modulated JAK2V617F allele burden by
> 80%. Our preclinical data indicate that the triple combination of RUX,
CDK4/6 inhibitor, LEE011, and pan-PIM inhibitor, LGH447, may
preferentially impact the JAK2V617F mutant MPN clones. This combination
also achieves greater reductions in tumor burden and spleen weight in our
preclinical MPN model. Therefore, potentially greater therapeutic benefit
in subgroups of MPN patients may be achieved with the triple combination
of RUX, LEE011 and LGH447.

