Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Induction of cancer cachexia by inflammatory molecules in directed
complementation tumor models


Cancer cachexia is a complex multi-factorial syndrome characterized by
anorexia, body weight loss that is primarily due to the loss of skeletal
muscle and adipose tissue, as well as systemic inflammation. It affects
the majority of advanced cancer patients, being the cause of death in 20%
to 40% of the cases. Although inflammation is recognized as an important
component of cancer cachexia, the role of individual cytokines is poorly
understood. Our analyses of inflammatory markers in two independent human
cancer cachexia plasma collections identified several cytokines (GDF-15,
Activin-A, IL-6 and IL-8) that are consistently upregulated in cancer
cachexia patients. To examine the ability of these cytokines to induce
cancer cachexia, we utilized an inducible breast cancer model as the
background in which to create a panel of genetically-engineered mouse
tumor models that overexpress targets of interests, namely GDF15, Activin
A and IL-6. Such complemented tumor models present a unique preclinical
opportunity for dissecting the role of candidate markers in vivo, in part
because they were generated on a genetically homogeneous background,
allowing the role of each individual target to be identified and
differentiated.Mice bearing tumors that overexpress each inflammatory
marker were characterized for phenotypic manifestation of cachexia. Mice
bearing tumors that overexpress GDF15 (or MIC-1, macrophage inhibitory
cytokine-1) developed severe cachexia with a rapid onset of body weight
loss as well as changes in body composition. Overexpression of Activin A
or IL-6 induced partial body weight loss with a milder cachexia phenotype
at concentrations significantly higher that seen in cachexic human
patients, while mice bearing control tumors without the engineered
expression of an inflammatory cytokine showed no detectable changes in
either body weight or body composition.These results indicate that the
elevated expression of GDF-15 and to a lesser extent Activin A, and IL-6
can result in the development of cancer cachexia and may represent
attractive therapeutic targets.

