Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation of Ras stability via inhibition of Wnt/-catenin pathway
as a potential therapeutic strategy to treat colorectal cancers


Ras is a well-characterized proto-oncogene, and its various mutations
contribute to transformation and tumorigenesis in a wide variety of human
cancers. Although the GTP/GDP loading switch is known as a major
regulatory mechanism of Ras, other mechanisms affecting Ras activity are
poorly understood. Here, we report a mechanism for controlling Ras
activity by regulating its degradation and describe this regulatory
mechanism in the suppression of cellular transformation and tumors
induced by Ras mutations. We found that negative regulators of
Wnt/-catenin signaling contributed to the polyubiquitin-dependent
degradation of Ras following phosphorylation by glycogen synthase kinase
3 (GSK3) and subsequent recruitment of -TrCP-E3 ligase. We found a
positive association between tumorigenesis and Ras stabilization due to
the aberrant activation of Wnt/-catenin signaling. Our results indicate
an essential role for phosphorylation and degradation of Ras and
suppression of Ras-induced transformation via the Wnt/-catenin pathway
and provide insight into the role of this novel regulatory mechanism for
Ras in tumorigenesis of colorectal cancers (CRCs). Because both Ras and
Wnt/-catenin pathways are frequently activated in CRCs, these results
suggest that the regulation of Ras stability through inhibition of the
Wnt/-catenin pathway could be an ideal therapeutic approach for treatment
of CRC.

