Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of IKK/NF-B impairs glioma stem cell function


Glioma, the most frequently occurring primary brain tumor, has a median
survival of less than 15 months, despite multimodal treatment combining
surgery, radiation, and chemotherapy. It has been suggested that the
presence of cancer stem cells (CSCs) within these tumors are responsible
for resistance to treatment and high probability of recurrence. As a
result, there is increasing interest in specifically targeting CSCs with
new therapies to improve treatment of this disease. NF-B has been
implicated in numerous forms of cancer, as its target genes regulate
hallmarks of cancer such as cell proliferation, survival, and invasion.
Both glioma cell lines and tumor samples show high levels of
phosphorylated p65, a marker of NF-B activation. When comparing
populations from tumor explants, NF-B is preferentially activated in the
CSC subset. We are examining the effects of IKK/NF-B inhibition on both
heterogeneous glioma explants and purified (CD133+) CSCs from these
explants. Inhibition of NF-B through either genetic or pharmacological
means abrogates neurosphere formation, an in vitro measure of stem cell
function. Additionally, real-time PCR analysis indicates that inhibition
of NF-B leads to a decrease in target genes implicated in glioma CSC
biology, such as A20 and IL-6. We have also studied our glioma explants
in both subcutaneous and intracranial xenografts to examine the role of
NF-B in vivo. We are utilizing microarrays to define the NF-B-dependent
gene expression signature in CD133+ cells. Our studies indicate a
significant role for the NF-B pathway in the biology of glioma CSCs, with
possible parallels in CSCs of other tumor types.

