Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: S100P increases Twist expression and triggers FAK/AKT signaling in
lung cancer


Lung cancer accounts for 12% of all new cases of cancers worldwide and is
the leading cause of cancer-related death. S100P, a calcium binding
protein, has been reported to involve in cancer metastasis. However, the
role of S100P is poorly known in lung cancer. This study first reports
that S100P enhances the migration and invasion ability of lung cancer
cells through the Twist1 upregulation and FAK (focal adhesion
kinase)/Src/AKT signaling pathway. Compared to low invasive CL1-0, the
expression of S100P is greater in that of high invasive CL1-5 cells.
Overexpression of S100P increases the migration and invasion in CL1-0
cells, whereas knockdown of S100P expression decreases the migration and
invasion of CL1-5 cells. Enhancement of S100P expression triggers FAK
activation, which in turn increases the activation of Src and AKT
signaling. Blockade of FAK by specific inhibitor prevents S100P-mediated
cell migration and invasion. In the other hand, S100P also increases
Twist1, which is responsible for epithelial-mesenchymal transition in
lung cancer. More important, elevated expression of S100P protein was
also found in human lung cancer specimen. This study demonstrates that
S100P may be a novel anticancer target gene for the prevention of
non-small cell lung cancer metastasis. In other way, it also can be a
biomarker for prognosis of lung cancer metastasis.

