Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Modulation of actin binding proteins by docosahexaenoic acid
reduces cancer cell migration


Cancer is the leading cause of death worldwide and all age groups,
including children, are at risk for cancer associated death. Disease
progression and metastasis are major contributors to cancer-associated
morbidity and mortality. Increased cell migration rate is characteristic
of tumor progression and metastasis. Actin binding proteins regulate
cytoskeletal remodeling at the leading edges of cancer cells, facilitate
invasive organelle (invadopodia) formation, and promote higher migration
rates. Docosahexaenoic acid (DHA), a poly unsaturated fatty acid, has
been shown to inhibit the cancer cell metastatic phenotype. Here, we test
the hypothesis that changes in actin binding proteins regulate cancer
cell migration and that supplementing cells with DHA will prevent these
changes. Non-cancer (MLE12) and cancer (A549, HCT116 and MCF7) cells were
treated with 8-Br-cAMP and/or DHA. F-actin content was measured using
confocal microscopy. Cell migration was estimated by wound assay and
transwell apparatus. Actin binding proteins, profilin, cofilin, vimentin
and gelsolin, were identified and quantified using confocal microscopy
and western blot to evaluate wound edges and actin co- munoprecipitate,
respectively. F-actin content and cell migration were increased by cAMP
in association with changes in profilin, cofilin, vimentin and gelsolin
levels. DHA treatment suppressed the increase in actin content and cell
migration in cancer cells but not in non-cancer cells in association with
altered levels of actin binding proteins. We postulate that DHA
specifically inhibits cancer cell migration via alterations in actin
binding proteins indicating a therapeutic potential against cancer cell
metastasis. The changes in actin binding proteins could serve as
biomarkers for cancer progression and as innovative therapeutic targets.

