Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Imaging and quantification of bombesin receptor expression in vivo
using a NIR-labeled bombesin peptide


Gastrin-releasing peptide (GRP) is one of the mammalian analogs of
bombesin-like peptides that function as growth factors in normal and
neoplastic tissues upon binding to a family of bombesin-binding G
protein-coupled receptors. Bombesin receptors are overexpressed in a
variety of cancers, particularly prostate, breast, and gastrointestinal
stromal tumors, and as such have been used to develop radiolabeled
imaging tracers. As a pre-clinical alternative to using radiolabeled
ligands, we developed a novel near infrared (NIR) fluorescent agent,
BombesinRSense 680 (BRS680), designed to target and quantify bombesin
receptors in vivo. BRS680 was produced from a modified 7 amino-acid GRP
analog peptide labeled with a NIR fluorophore (ex/em 660/680 nm) and a
pharmacokinetic modifier designed to improve its plasma availability
(plasma t1/2 = 1.5 hours). In vitro labeling of human colonic
adenocarcinoma HT-29 cells, which express GRP receptors, and blocking the
signal by addition of unlabeled native bombesin, demonstrated the
specificity of the agent by both fluorescence microscopy and flow
cytometry. In vivo receptor expression was quantified by fluorescence
tomography after BRS680 (2 nmol/mouse) was injected intravenously into
nude mice bearing HT-29 tumor xenografts. HT-29 tumors showed a high
level of receptor expression with approximately 30 pmol (1.5% injected
dose) of BRS680 quantified in the tumors at 24 hours, and lower
fluorescence in other tissues except for pancreas, a tissue known for
high receptor expression, and kidneys, indicating renal clearance. In
contrast to the fast clearance from circulation, the tumor tissue
half-life of BRS680 was shown to be approximately 42 hours. In vivo
targeting specificity was confirmed by collecting tumor tissue from
injected mice and co-localizing BRS680 fluorescent signal with an
anti-GRP receptor antibody on frozen sections. More importantly,
treatment of HT-29 tumor-bearing mice with a tumor growth-arresting
chemotherapy regime decreased in vivo BRS680 signal. Six days after
beginning treatment with 5-fluorouracil and oxaliplatin in mice with
established tumors, BRS680 fluorescent signal was significantly decreased
in treated mice as compared to control mice (21.55 + 4.89 versus 34.10 +
2.90 pmoles, p=0.043) paralleling the inhibition of tumor growth (74.25 +
7.65 versus 141 + 19.39 mm3, p=0.003). Interestingly, chemotherapy did
not consistently affect the fluorescent signal associated with ProSense
750 FAST, an agent that is specifically activated by the cathepsin family
of inflammatory proteases, co-injected in the same animals (6.99 +1.68
versus 10.91 + 1.73 pmoles, p=0.104). These studies demonstrate the
utility of BRS680 in tracking in vivo expression of bombesin receptors
and underscores its potential to serve as an in vivo real-time indicator
of anti-tumor treatment efficacy.

