Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor suppressor function of loc285194 in breast cancer


Accumulating studies have focused on the oncogenic and tumor suppressive
roles of the newly identified lncRNAs. LOC285194 was found to be
associated with poor survival of osteosarcoma patients and colorectal
cancer patients. Also loc285194 is reported to be a direct transcription
target of p53 and could suppress cell growth. However, its role in breast
cancer (BC) remains unknown. The aim of this study was to examine the
expression pattern of loc285194 in BC and to evaluate its biological role
and clinical significance in prediction of prognosis. In this study, we
examined expression of loc285194 in 20 pairs of BC cancer tissues and
adjacent noncancerous tissues (ANCT), also in 151 BC tissues, 14 BC cell
lines and one normal breast cell line. It showed that loc285194
expression was lower both in BC samples and in BC cell lines compared
with corresponding normal control. Loc285194 expression was correlated
with menopausal status. Postmenopausal patients had a lower loc285194
expression level comparing with premenopausal patients (p=0.040).
Moreover, low loc285194 expression was correlated with a relatively poor
survival status (p=0.023) and a poor tumor differentiation (p=0.035). The
Kaplan-Meier survival curves indicated that the overall survival (OS) was
significantly poor in BC patients who showed low loc285194 expression.
Furthermore, expression of loc285194 is significantly associated with
worse prognosis independent of prognostic markers in estrogen receptor
(ER) negative tumor samples (p = 0.05). Our studies indicate that
loc285194 may represent a new marker of prognosis and it is a potential
therapeutic target for breast cancer especially for ER negative breast
cancer.

