Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clonal evolution of tumor cell population in a patient with
repetitively recurrent dermatofibrosarcoma protuberance (DFSP)


It has been suggested that most tumors arise from a single cell of
origin, and tumor progression results from acquired genetic variability
within the original clone allowing sequential selection of more
aggressive sublines. We investigated clonal evolution of tumor cell
population with the tissues obtained from a sarcoma patient who
experienced recurrence 4 times (in 2007, 2009, 2010, and 2012). Along the
repetitive recurrences, we observed that the tumors which showed,
initially, benign morphology and behaviors turned to be malignant from
the 3rd recurrence. We performed whole exome sequencing to identify
somatic mutations occurred in each recurrent tumor, and traced the change
of tumor cell population. From the sequencing results, the COL1A1-PDGFB
fusion which is a well-known oncogenic driver of DFSP was detected in all
of the recurrent tumors, however, there was no other overlap of mutated
genes between the 1st recurred tumor and the following ones. It suggests
that there were at least two tumor cell populations which evolved
independently after acquisition of oncogenic driver mutation, and the
initial tumor cells which represented majority of the original tumor were
replaced by the other tumor cells which survived from the systemic
chemotherapy, and it finally led to a dramatic change in morphology and
behavior of the tumor. We expect that the mutated genes in each
population would give us a clue to understand the mechanism of malignancy
of DFSP.

