Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Src is activated in cervical adenocarcinoma


Src family tyrosine kinases are important factors for cell growth. Src is
reported to be activated in ovarian mucinous adenocarcinoma, and
correlates with oxaliplatin resistance. Cervical adenocarcinoma is
thought to have worse prognosis compared with squamous cell carcinoma due
to low response to chemotherapy and radiotherapy. So new therapy has been
expected for cervical adenocarcinoma. We examined src expression by
immunohistochemistry in cervical adenocarcinoma treated with surgery
during 2001 to 2011 and association with clinico pathological findings.
36 invasive cancers and 1 adenocarcinoma in situ (AIS) and 12 normal
cervical glands were examined. In invasive cancer, src was activated in
16/36 (44%) cases, especially in 9/15 (60%) of mucinous type. Src was
also activated in AIS, but not in normal cervical glands. The frequency
of parametrial invasion and lymphnode metastasis in Src positive and
negative cases were 1/15 (7%) versus 1/18 (6%) and 2/15 (13%) versus 3/20
(15%) in respectively. There were no statistical differences between src
positive and negative cases. 3 cases in src positive and 1 case in src
negative recurred. Moreover, src was activated in I case of AIS, but not
activated in adjacent normal gland. In summary, src activation is an
early event in the carcinogenesis of cervical adenocarcinoma, and has
possibility to be a new target in the treatment of cervical
adenocarcinoma.

