Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Non-coding RNA HOTAIR connects DNA damage signaling to NF-B
activation in cisplatin resistant ovarian cancer


The Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 (PRC2) has been implicated in cancer
and a role for PRC2 during DNA damage response (DDR) has recently been
reported. To examine changes in gene expression with DDR in cisplatin
(cddp)-resistant ovarian cancer (OC), we performed whole transcriptome
RNA-seq analysis of isogenic cddp-sensitive and -resistant OC cell lines
(A2780 and A2780-cp). Differential expression of PRC components (SUZ12,
EZH1, SIRT1, PHC1 &2) (PThe Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 (PRC2) has been
implicated in cancer and a role for PRC2 during DNA damage response (DDR)
has recently been reported. To examine changes in gene expression with
DDR in cisplatin (cddp)-resistant ovarian cancer (OC), we performed whole
transcriptome RNA-seq analysis of isogenic cddp-sensitive and -resistant
OC cell lines (A2780 and A2780-cp). Differential expression of PRC
components (SUZ12, EZH1, SIRT1, PHC1 &2) (P<0.05), NF-B pathway members
(NCAM, ABCB9, RAGE, IL4R, IL6R, BCL2L11) (PThe Polycomb Repressive
Complex 2 (PRC2) has been implicated in cancer and a role for PRC2 during
DNA damage response (DDR) has recently been reported. To examine changes
in gene expression with DDR in cisplatin (cddp)-resistant ovarian cancer
(OC), we performed whole transcriptome RNA-seq analysis of isogenic
cddp-sensitive and -resistant OC cell lines (A2780 and A2780-cp).
Differential expression of PRC components (SUZ12, EZH1, SIRT1, PHC1 &2)
(P<0.05), NF-B pathway members (NCAM, ABCB9, RAGE, IL4R, IL6R, BCL2L11)
(P<0.05), and long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) known to associate with PRC2
(PThe Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 (PRC2) has been implicated in cancer
and a role for PRC2 during DNA damage response (DDR) has recently been
reported. To examine changes in gene expression with DDR in cisplatin
(cddp)-resistant ovarian cancer (OC), we performed whole transcriptome
RNA-seq analysis of isogenic cddp-sensitive and -resistant OC cell lines
(A2780 and A2780-cp). Differential expression of PRC components (SUZ12,
EZH1, SIRT1, PHC1 &2) (P<0.05), NF-B pathway members (NCAM, ABCB9, RAGE,
IL4R, IL6R, BCL2L11) (P<0.05), and long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) known
to associate with PRC2 (P<0.05), including Hox transcript antisense
intergenic RNA or HOTAIR, was observed. In tumors from patients with high
grade serous OC at diagnosis, basal expression of HOTAIR was greater
(PThe Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 (PRC2) has been implicated in cancer
and a role for PRC2 during DNA damage response (DDR) has recently been
reported. To examine changes in gene expression with DDR in cisplatin
(cddp)-resistant ovarian cancer (OC), we performed whole transcriptome
RNA-seq analysis of isogenic cddp-sensitive and -resistant OC cell lines
(A2780 and A2780-cp). Differential expression of PRC components (SUZ12,
EZH1, SIRT1, PHC1 &2) (P<0.05), NF-B pathway members (NCAM, ABCB9, RAGE,
IL4R, IL6R, BCL2L11) (P<0.05), and long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) known
to associate with PRC2 (P<0.05), including Hox transcript antisense
intergenic RNA or HOTAIR, was observed. In tumors from patients with high
grade serous OC at diagnosis, basal expression of HOTAIR was greater
(P<0.01) compared to normal ovarian surface epithelium and marked
overexpression of HOTAIR was observed in tumors obtained from patients
who had developed platinum-resistant OC. Ablation of HOTAIR using dsiRNA
resensitized A2780-cp to cddp, while ectopic over-expression of HOTAIR
increased (PThe Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 (PRC2) has been implicated
in cancer and a role for PRC2 during DNA damage response (DDR) has
recently been reported. To examine changes in gene expression with DDR in
cisplatin (cddp)-resistant ovarian cancer (OC), we performed whole
transcriptome RNA-seq analysis of isogenic cddp-sensitive and -resistant
OC cell lines (A2780 and A2780-cp). Differential expression of PRC
components (SUZ12, EZH1, SIRT1, PHC1 &2) (P<0.05), NF-B pathway members
(NCAM, ABCB9, RAGE, IL4R, IL6R, BCL2L11) (P<0.05), and long non-coding
RNAs (lncRNAs) known to associate with PRC2 (P<0.05), including Hox
transcript antisense intergenic RNA or HOTAIR, was observed. In tumors
from patients with high grade serous OC at diagnosis, basal expression of
HOTAIR was greater (P<0.01) compared to normal ovarian surface epithelium
and marked overexpression of HOTAIR was observed in tumors obtained from
patients who had developed platinum-resistant OC. Ablation of HOTAIR
using dsiRNA resensitized A2780-cp to cddp, while ectopic over-expression
of HOTAIR increased (P<0.05) A2780 cell survival after cddp treatment
(3-fold vs. control). To further examine HOTAIR regulation, we conducted
a promoter analysis using bioinformatics tools and luciferase assays. We
identified a putative p65-NF-B binding site (906-GGGACACCCC-915) 906 bp
upstream of the HOTAIR transcription start site. Treatment of A2780 cells
with the NF-B activator TNF- induced HOTAIR (16-fold vs. control) and
NF-B enrichment (3-fold assessed by ChIP assays) at the HOTAIR promoter.
Furthermore, in A2780-cp compared to A2780, total I-B levels were reduced
(PThe Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 (PRC2) has been implicated in cancer
and a role for PRC2 during DNA damage response (DDR) has recently been
reported. To examine changes in gene expression with DDR in cisplatin
(cddp)-resistant ovarian cancer (OC), we performed whole transcriptome
RNA-seq analysis of isogenic cddp-sensitive and -resistant OC cell lines
(A2780 and A2780-cp). Differential expression of PRC components (SUZ12,
EZH1, SIRT1, PHC1 &2) (P<0.05), NF-B pathway members (NCAM, ABCB9, RAGE,
IL4R, IL6R, BCL2L11) (P<0.05), and long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) known
to associate with PRC2 (P<0.05), including Hox transcript antisense
intergenic RNA or HOTAIR, was observed. In tumors from patients with high
grade serous OC at diagnosis, basal expression of HOTAIR was greater
(P<0.01) compared to normal ovarian surface epithelium and marked
overexpression of HOTAIR was observed in tumors obtained from patients
who had developed platinum-resistant OC. Ablation of HOTAIR using dsiRNA
resensitized A2780-cp to cddp, while ectopic over-expression of HOTAIR
increased (P<0.05) A2780 cell survival after cddp treatment (3-fold vs.
control). To further examine HOTAIR regulation, we conducted a promoter
analysis using bioinformatics tools and luciferase assays. We identified
a putative p65-NF-B binding site (906-GGGACACCCC-915) 906 bp upstream of
the HOTAIR transcription start site. Treatment of A2780 cells with the
NF-B activator TNF- induced HOTAIR (16-fold vs. control) and NF-B
enrichment (3-fold assessed by ChIP assays) at the HOTAIR promoter.
Furthermore, in A2780-cp compared to A2780, total I-B levels were reduced
(P<0.05) and nuclear p65 levels were increased, indicating that
endogenous activation of NF-B contributes to cddp resistance and DDR.
Consistent with this observation, cddp treatment (20M for 0-24hrs) of
A2780 cells increased (PThe Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 (PRC2) has been
implicated in cancer and a role for PRC2 during DNA damage response (DDR)
has recently been reported. To examine changes in gene expression with
DDR in cisplatin (cddp)-resistant ovarian cancer (OC), we performed whole
transcriptome RNA-seq analysis of isogenic cddp-sensitive and -resistant
OC cell lines (A2780 and A2780-cp). Differential expression of PRC
components (SUZ12, EZH1, SIRT1, PHC1 &2) (P<0.05), NF-B pathway members
(NCAM, ABCB9, RAGE, IL4R, IL6R, BCL2L11) (P<0.05), and long non-coding
RNAs (lncRNAs) known to associate with PRC2 (P<0.05), including Hox
transcript antisense intergenic RNA or HOTAIR, was observed. In tumors
from patients with high grade serous OC at diagnosis, basal expression of
HOTAIR was greater (P<0.01) compared to normal ovarian surface epithelium
and marked overexpression of HOTAIR was observed in tumors obtained from
patients who had developed platinum-resistant OC. Ablation of HOTAIR
using dsiRNA resensitized A2780-cp to cddp, while ectopic over-expression
of HOTAIR increased (P<0.05) A2780 cell survival after cddp treatment
(3-fold vs. control). To further examine HOTAIR regulation, we conducted
a promoter analysis using bioinformatics tools and luciferase assays. We
identified a putative p65-NF-B binding site (906-GGGACACCCC-915) 906 bp
upstream of the HOTAIR transcription start site. Treatment of A2780 cells
with the NF-B activator TNF- induced HOTAIR (16-fold vs. control) and
NF-B enrichment (3-fold assessed by ChIP assays) at the HOTAIR promoter.
Furthermore, in A2780-cp compared to A2780, total I-B levels were reduced
(P<0.05) and nuclear p65 levels were increased, indicating that
endogenous activation of NF-B contributes to cddp resistance and DDR.
Consistent with this observation, cddp treatment (20M for 0-24hrs) of
A2780 cells increased (P<0.05) HOTAIR expression by 5- and 16-fold at 8
and 24 hrs and decreased (PThe Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 (PRC2) has
been implicated in cancer and a role for PRC2 during DNA damage response
(DDR) has recently been reported. To examine changes in gene expression
with DDR in cisplatin (cddp)-resistant ovarian cancer (OC), we performed
whole transcriptome RNA-seq analysis of isogenic cddp-sensitive and
-resistant OC cell lines (A2780 and A2780-cp). Differential expression of
PRC components (SUZ12, EZH1, SIRT1, PHC1 &2) (P<0.05), NF-B pathway
members (NCAM, ABCB9, RAGE, IL4R, IL6R, BCL2L11) (P<0.05), and long
non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) known to associate with PRC2 (P<0.05),
including Hox transcript antisense intergenic RNA or HOTAIR, was
observed. In tumors from patients with high grade serous OC at diagnosis,
basal expression of HOTAIR was greater (P<0.01) compared to normal
ovarian surface epithelium and marked overexpression of HOTAIR was
observed in tumors obtained from patients who had developed
platinum-resistant OC. Ablation of HOTAIR using dsiRNA resensitized
A2780-cp to cddp, while ectopic over-expression of HOTAIR increased
(P<0.05) A2780 cell survival after cddp treatment (3-fold vs. control).
To further examine HOTAIR regulation, we conducted a promoter analysis
using bioinformatics tools and luciferase assays. We identified a
putative p65-NF-B binding site (906-GGGACACCCC-915) 906 bp upstream of
the HOTAIR transcription start site. Treatment of A2780 cells with the
NF-B activator TNF- induced HOTAIR (16-fold vs. control) and NF-B
enrichment (3-fold assessed by ChIP assays) at the HOTAIR promoter.
Furthermore, in A2780-cp compared to A2780, total I-B levels were reduced
(P<0.05) and nuclear p65 levels were increased, indicating that
endogenous activation of NF-B contributes to cddp resistance and DDR.
Consistent with this observation, cddp treatment (20M for 0-24hrs) of
A2780 cells increased (P<0.05) HOTAIR expression by 5- and 16-fold at 8
and 24 hrs and decreased (P<0.05) I-B protein levels at similar time
points. Furthermore, inhibiting NF-B by either gliotoxin (5M) or Bay-11
(3M) completely abolished cddp-induced HOTAIR expression in A2780 cells,
demonstrating that NF-B is a HOTAIR transcriptional activator during
cddp-induced DDR. Importantly, EZH2 and histone H3 lysine-27
trimethylation (H3K27me3) levels were enriched (6- and 17-fold) in the
I-B promoter at 24 and 48 hours post cddp treatment, and HOTAIR depletion
using dsiRNA reduced the observed EZH2-H3K27me3 enrichment at the I-B
promoter, demonstrating that HOTAIR recruits PRC2 complex to the I-B
promoter to prolong NF-B activation during cddp-induced genotoxic stress.
Mouse xenograft studies with A2780 cells overexpressing HOTAIR are
ongoing. The results of this study support a role for HOTAIR as a
positive regulator of the NF-B pathway and PRC2 during cisplatin-induced
DNA damage. We further suggest that HOTAIR may serve as a therapeutic
target in cisplatin-resistant OC.

