Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Deciphering the effects of GNA13 mutations in B-cell lymphomas


G-proteins and their cognate G-protein coupled receptors (GPCRs) are
critical signal transduction molecules that regulate cell survival,
proliferation, motility and differentiation. The aberrant expression or
function of these molecules has been linked to growth, progression and
metastasis of various cancers. Recent genome-wide sequencing efforts have
unveiled numerous previously uncharacterized mutations in G-proteins and
GPCRs, which could have significant implications to cancer initiation and
progression. Of interest, recent analyses have demonstrated that there
are frequent mutations in GNA13 in Burkitt's lymphoma and Diffuse Large B
cell lymphomas (DLBCL) that are highly statistically significant over
background cancer gene mutation rate, and occur in 10-13% of patients
with these lymphomas. Mutations in the downstream target of G13, RhoA,
are also present in several Burkitt's lymphoma tumors, highlighting that
mutations in this G13-RhoA pathway may be key to the oncogenic potential
of these B cell lymphomas. Although G13 activity has previously been
linked cellular transformation and metastatic potential of epithelial
cancers, our data suggests that the mutations in GNA13 in these B cell
lymphomas are mostly inhibitory in nature. Thus, we have functionally
characterized several mutations in GNA13 and RHOA found in Burkitt's
lymphoma and DLBCL.

