Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Simultaneous detection of KRAS and TP53 mutations in human cancer
cell lines using multiplex qPCR


Genetic alterations in KRAS and TP53 genes are common in many cancers and
the understanding of their role in progression of cancer is vital for the
design of successful treatment approaches. Studies suggest that mutations
in KRAS and TP53 genes independently hindered the use of EGFR inhibiting
drugs like Cetuximab (Erbitux) for the treatment of colorectal cancer
(1). The genetic alterations in these genes are now routinely checked
before starting any expensive treatments. Here, we successfully
demonstrated use of duplex mutli-color SNP genotyping assays to detect
KRAS and TP53 mutation in human colon cancer cell lines. This method can
be potentially used to analyze samples with limited quantity and get as
much information as possible from a single sample. To study the impact of
these mutations, we generated gene expression profiles of 672 genes
related to signaling pathways by using the Human signal transduction
medium-throughput OpenArray Panel. Selected cancer genes like BRAC1, BAX,
CFLAR, MYC and others were evaluated using multiplexed single-tube PCR
simultaneously detecting four different targets in the same sample. These
results demonstrate that duplex SNP genotyping and multiplexed gene
expression profiling from a single sample increases research capacity in
situations when sample is limited.Reference:1. A Oden-Gangloff, F Di
Fiore, F Bibeau, A Lamy, G Bougeard, F Charbonnier, F Blanchard, D
Tougeron, M Ychou, F Boissire, F Le Pessot, J-C Sabourin, J-J Tuech, P
Michel and T Frebourg.TP53 mutations predict disease control in
metastatic colorectal cancer treated with cetuximab-based chemotherapy.
British Journal of Cancer (2009) 100, 1330-1335

