Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MutationValidator: A computational method for variant
cross-validation in next-generation sequencing data


Background:Massively parallel next-generation sequencing (NGS)
technologies already enable comprehensive genome-wide detection of
germline and somatic variants in thousands of individuals, and the pace
of data production keeps accelerating. However, with increased sequencing
techniques and variant calling algorithms, proper validation and
determination of ground truth is essential for benchmarking, comparisons,
and confirmation of novel discoveries. Datasets generated on different
sequencing platforms, derived from distinct biological samples and/or
using different library construction protocols can provide at least
partially independent sources for crosschecking variants. While methods
for validation exist to date, they fail to account for the inherent
variability in the datasets, and thereby propose biased estimates for the
validation rates.Results:Here we present a method for variant
cross-validation and present software implementation (written in Matlab)
that generates validation metrics and diagnostics to characterize a
mutation as true somatic, germline, or artifactual. Our method adjusts
for the power to observe variant-supporting evidence in the validation
dataset, which allows for accurate assessment of validation rates across
wide ranges of sequencing coverages and variant allelic fractions. When
this method is applied to a test cohort of 172 patients from The Cancer
Genome Atlas Lung Adenocarcenoma dataset, we observe a SNP and Indel
validation rate of 95% and 96% respectively with a 99% power for
detection. A previously implemented nave method of >8% supporting alleles
in the tumor and Background:Massively parallel next-generation sequencing
(NGS) technologies already enable comprehensive genome-wide detection of
germline and somatic variants in thousands of individuals, and the pace
of data production keeps accelerating. However, with increased sequencing
techniques and variant calling algorithms, proper validation and
determination of ground truth is essential for benchmarking, comparisons,
and confirmation of novel discoveries. Datasets generated on different
sequencing platforms, derived from distinct biological samples and/or
using different library construction protocols can provide at least
partially independent sources for crosschecking variants. While methods
for validation exist to date, they fail to account for the inherent
variability in the datasets, and thereby propose biased estimates for the
validation rates.Results:Here we present a method for variant
cross-validation and present software implementation (written in Matlab)
that generates validation metrics and diagnostics to characterize a
mutation as true somatic, germline, or artifactual. Our method adjusts
for the power to observe variant-supporting evidence in the validation
dataset, which allows for accurate assessment of validation rates across
wide ranges of sequencing coverages and variant allelic fractions. When
this method is applied to a test cohort of 172 patients from The Cancer
Genome Atlas Lung Adenocarcenoma dataset, we observe a SNP and Indel
validation rate of 95% and 96% respectively with a 99% power for
detection. A previously implemented nave method of >8% supporting alleles
in the tumor and <3% alternate allele in the normal for a validated event
would have yielded rates of 72% and 95% for SNPs and Indels, values we
claim to be underestimations of the true rates as they misclassify
underpowered sites as a false positives.Conclusions:Our proposed method,
MutationValidator, enables confident classification of mutations using
orthogonal next-generation sequencing technologies for validation as it
takes into consideration the variability in and across the datasets.

