Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anti-tumorigenic effects of phenformin in human endometrial cancer
cells


Introduction: The anti-diabetic drugs, metformin and phenformin, are
thought to have anti-tumorigenic benefits. Preclinical studies suggest
that phenformin may be more potent for inhibiting tumor growth than
metformin. Our objective was to assess the anti-tumorigenic effects of
phenformin in endometrial cancer (EC) cell lines and primary
cultures.Methods: The EC cell lines, ECC-1 and Ishikawa, were treated
with phenformin under low glucose (2 mM), normal glucose (5.5 mM) and
high glucose (25 mM) conditions. EC tumors were collected from consenting
patients, at the time of surgical staging for primary culture. Cell
proliferation was assessed by MTT assay. Apoptosis was analyzed by
Annexin V-FITC assay. Cellometer evaluated cell cycle progression.
Invasion was demonstrated by transwell invasion assay. Adhesion was
assessed by ELISA. Western blotting was performed to determine expression
of the downstream targets of phenformin.Results: Phenformin inhibited
proliferation in a dose-dependent manner in both EC cell lines, within
48-72 hrs of exposure (IC50=1 mM, p=0.0004-0.009). Inhibition of
proliferation was seen for all glucose concentrations, but greater
potency was observed under low glucose conditions. Treatment with
phenformin resulted in G1 arrest, induction of apoptosis (p=0.022-0.017)
and inhibition of adhesion (p=0.0053-0.0144) and invasion
(p=0.0063-0.05). Phenformin increased p21 and p27 and decreased cyclin D,
cyclin E2, CDK4 and CDK 6, corresponding with G1 arrest. Phenformin
significantly inhibited proliferation in 62% (8/13) of the EC primary
cultures, within 48-72 hrs of exposure (IC50 0.1-5mM, p=0.00001-0.016). 3
additional EC samples (23%) were significantly inhibited by phenformin
but did not reach an IC50 (p=0.0003-0.018), and 2/13 (15%) had no
response to phenformin. Western blot analysis demonstrated that
phenformin increased phosphorylation of AMPK and decreased
phosphorylation of S6 coincident with inhibition of proliferation in the
EC cell lines and primary cultures.Conclusion: Phenformin potently
inhibited cell growth via G1 arrest and induced apoptosis in EC cell
lines and the majority of primary cultures. Inhibition of
adhesion/invasion was also seen with phenformin. Continued work is needed
to explore whether phenformin has superior benefits over metformin.

