Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Smoking prevention intervention with school classes at a
university hospital by thoracic surgeon und pulmonologist


Purpose: Smoking prevention in schoolchildren with the aim to inform and
prevent smoking initiation has been widely studied and has shown variable
results. Interventions provided by physicians in a hospital setting have
been rarely reported. Here we show the feasibility and gain of knowledge
of our smoking prevention project in a hospital setting.Methods:
Interventions performed from November 2009 - February 2013 were
evaluated. Overall 470 children participated in our preventive
intervention. A 7-item questionnaire was provided to the school classes
(Grades 6 to 10) before and after a two-hour smoking prevention
intervention consisting of anatomical models, oral presentations, videos,
patient interviews and hands-on lung function tests. The goal was to show
the anatomical and physiological basics as well as age-based information
about the harms of smoking. During the intervention the children have
been motivated to be actively involved. Class selection has been
performed for groups of children in a highly vulnerable phase of age
before smoking initiation.Results: The baseline questionnaire was
completed by 457 children, the one after intervention by 426. The
knowledge about which organs are affected by smoking increased from
6.8-99.6% to 65.5-99.5% (pPurpose: Smoking prevention in schoolchildren
with the aim to inform and prevent smoking initiation has been widely
studied and has shown variable results. Interventions provided by
physicians in a hospital setting have been rarely reported. Here we show
the feasibility and gain of knowledge of our smoking prevention project
in a hospital setting.Methods: Interventions performed from November 2009
- February 2013 were evaluated. Overall 470 children participated in our
preventive intervention. A 7-item questionnaire was provided to the
school classes (Grades 6 to 10) before and after a two-hour smoking
prevention intervention consisting of anatomical models, oral
presentations, videos, patient interviews and hands-on lung function
tests. The goal was to show the anatomical and physiological basics as
well as age-based information about the harms of smoking. During the
intervention the children have been motivated to be actively involved.
Class selection has been performed for groups of children in a highly
vulnerable phase of age before smoking initiation.Results: The baseline
questionnaire was completed by 457 children, the one after intervention
by 426. The knowledge about which organs are affected by smoking
increased from 6.8-99.6% to 65.5-99.5% (p<0.01). While only 59.5% knew
that only a minority of people is able to quit smoking successfully,
94.1% answered the question correctly after intervention (pPurpose:
Smoking prevention in schoolchildren with the aim to inform and prevent
smoking initiation has been widely studied and has shown variable
results. Interventions provided by physicians in a hospital setting have
been rarely reported. Here we show the feasibility and gain of knowledge
of our smoking prevention project in a hospital setting.Methods:
Interventions performed from November 2009 - February 2013 were
evaluated. Overall 470 children participated in our preventive
intervention. A 7-item questionnaire was provided to the school classes
(Grades 6 to 10) before and after a two-hour smoking prevention
intervention consisting of anatomical models, oral presentations, videos,
patient interviews and hands-on lung function tests. The goal was to show
the anatomical and physiological basics as well as age-based information
about the harms of smoking. During the intervention the children have
been motivated to be actively involved. Class selection has been
performed for groups of children in a highly vulnerable phase of age
before smoking initiation.Results: The baseline questionnaire was
completed by 457 children, the one after intervention by 426. The
knowledge about which organs are affected by smoking increased from
6.8-99.6% to 65.5-99.5% (p<0.01). While only 59.5% knew that only a
minority of people is able to quit smoking successfully, 94.1% answered
the question correctly after intervention (p<0.001). Prior to the
intervention only 78.1% believed that minor tobacco consumption is not
damaging which increased to 89.4% after the teaching session (pPurpose:
Smoking prevention in schoolchildren with the aim to inform and prevent
smoking initiation has been widely studied and has shown variable
results. Interventions provided by physicians in a hospital setting have
been rarely reported. Here we show the feasibility and gain of knowledge
of our smoking prevention project in a hospital setting.Methods:
Interventions performed from November 2009 - February 2013 were
evaluated. Overall 470 children participated in our preventive
intervention. A 7-item questionnaire was provided to the school classes
(Grades 6 to 10) before and after a two-hour smoking prevention
intervention consisting of anatomical models, oral presentations, videos,
patient interviews and hands-on lung function tests. The goal was to show
the anatomical and physiological basics as well as age-based information
about the harms of smoking. During the intervention the children have
been motivated to be actively involved. Class selection has been
performed for groups of children in a highly vulnerable phase of age
before smoking initiation.Results: The baseline questionnaire was
completed by 457 children, the one after intervention by 426. The
knowledge about which organs are affected by smoking increased from
6.8-99.6% to 65.5-99.5% (p<0.01). While only 59.5% knew that only a
minority of people is able to quit smoking successfully, 94.1% answered
the question correctly after intervention (p<0.001). Prior to the
intervention only 78.1% believed that minor tobacco consumption is not
damaging which increased to 89.4% after the teaching session (p<0.05).
Smoking hookah was believed to be less harmful than cigarettes by 30.2%
of children decreasing to 7.7% after the intervention (pPurpose: Smoking
prevention in schoolchildren with the aim to inform and prevent smoking
initiation has been widely studied and has shown variable results.
Interventions provided by physicians in a hospital setting have been
rarely reported. Here we show the feasibility and gain of knowledge of
our smoking prevention project in a hospital setting.Methods:
Interventions performed from November 2009 - February 2013 were
evaluated. Overall 470 children participated in our preventive
intervention. A 7-item questionnaire was provided to the school classes
(Grades 6 to 10) before and after a two-hour smoking prevention
intervention consisting of anatomical models, oral presentations, videos,
patient interviews and hands-on lung function tests. The goal was to show
the anatomical and physiological basics as well as age-based information
about the harms of smoking. During the intervention the children have
been motivated to be actively involved. Class selection has been
performed for groups of children in a highly vulnerable phase of age
before smoking initiation.Results: The baseline questionnaire was
completed by 457 children, the one after intervention by 426. The
knowledge about which organs are affected by smoking increased from
6.8-99.6% to 65.5-99.5% (p<0.01). While only 59.5% knew that only a
minority of people is able to quit smoking successfully, 94.1% answered
the question correctly after intervention (p<0.001). Prior to the
intervention only 78.1% believed that minor tobacco consumption is not
damaging which increased to 89.4% after the teaching session (p<0.05).
Smoking hookah was believed to be less harmful than cigarettes by 30.2%
of children decreasing to 7.7% after the intervention
(p<0.001).Conclusion: Information on health effects provided by lung
specialists in the hospital leads to a statistically significant increase
in knowledge as assessed by a short questionnaire. The intervention is
feasible and well received. This kind of interventions might help to
prevent schoolchildren from smoking in a highly vulnerable phase of age.

