Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nanoparticle-delivered T7-synthesized siRNA enhances cell killing
in HER-2 (+) breast cancer


We have previously developed the recombinant fusion protein, HerPBK10,
for ligand-directed targeting and penetration of HER2+ breast cancer.
HerPBK10 contains a ten lysine (K10) carboxy [C] -terminal tail that
allows it to non-covalently bind anionic payloads, such as nucleic acids,
by electrophilic interaction. In this study, a modified siRNA capable of
both gene silencing and immunostimulation is the payload. Here, we test
the hypothesis that ligand-directed, protein-based nanoparticles
delivering siRNA launch a three-pronged attack on tumors by combining
missile-like targeting (known as transductional targeting) with
siRNA-mediated gene silencing, and cytokine-mediated cell death. The
latter effect will be accomplished by taking advantage of the normally
undesirable cytokine-mediated cytotoxicity induced by epigenetic
modifications on certain forms of siRNA, and delivering this to tumors.
Here we will deliver siRNA produced by T7 phage polymerase transcription,
which introduces a 5 triphosphate cap that triggers cytokine-mediated
toxicity within host cells. So far, in vitro data has shown that this
approach is more effective in reducing cell proliferation than synthetic
siRNA against the same gene. Furthermore, in vivo xenograft data shows
that this strategy can control and ablate the growth of HER2+ tumors.
Future directions include IHC investigation of resected tumors and
testing this hypothesis in an immunocompetent in vivo setting where we
envision this immune-sensitive strategy having even greater efficacy.

