Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Carcinogenesis by stem cell misplacementa novel cancer theory and
its implications


For rather a long period of time, it has been widely accepted that cancer
was caused by gene mutations which is termed somatic mutation theory
(SMT). But now the SMT theory has met with increasing doubts,
disbelieves, and been facing challenges from other alternative theories.
I here from a pathological perspective, and with the evidences from
molecular pathology, hisopathology, and epidemiology, show that the 80
year old paradigm of carcinogenesis process from atypia to in situ
carcinoma to invasive cancer is wrong. Since 90% of the human cancers are
epithelially derived carcinomas, the turnover of this paradigm naturally
negates the SMT theory for SMT sits on this model. The invasive cancer
grows out in the stroma de novo from misplaced stem cells rather than
deriving from the transformed in situ carcinoma cells. Also, I will show
evidences that cancer cells are not so-believed apoptosis-resistant, but
rather short-lived sick cells. In fact, it is the increased cell death
which makes the cancer cells proliferate ceaselessly to compensate for
the cell loss, and move to new locations for better chance of survival. I
design this novel cancer theory as SCMT, stem cell misplacement theory.
This theory is backed by huge amount of solid evidences and will bring
revolutionary conceptual changes to our understanding and treatment of
cancer, e.g., in situ carcinomas are not genuine cancer biologically,
thus should not be treated the same as cancer.

