Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Polymorphisms of GSTT1, APE1 and MUTYh gene and the risk of oral
squamous cell carcinoma


In Taiwan, oral cancer (including sub-sites in the oral cavity,
oropharynx and hypopharynx) is the fourth most common cancer in men.
According to the cancer registry report from the Ministry of Health and
Welfare of the Executive Yuan, the annual age-adjusted incidence for oral
cancer in males has shown a 1.55-fold increase in the past decade.
Cigarette smoking, areca quid (AQ) chewing and alcohol drinking have been
unveiled as the major risk factors. Previous studies have implicated that
oxidative stress generated from cigarette smoking, AQ chewing and alcohol
drinking contributed to oral cancer development. It is well known that
GSTM1 and GSTT1 are involved in the detoxification of oxidative free
radicals and nearly all oxidative DNA lesions are repaired via the DNA
base excision repair (BER) pathway. To investigate the role of GSTM1,
GSTT1 and BER genes (including OGG1, APE1, MUTYh, WRN and XRCC1) involved
in OSCC risk in Taiwan, a comprehensive study on evaluation of
polymorphisms of above genes was carried out in 1139 OSCC male cases and
1470 general males. A significant effect of AQ chewing or AQ chewing
combined with cigarette smoking or alcohol drinking on the risk of OSCC
was observed. GSTT1 null genotype was significantly associated with an
increased risk of OSCC (odds ratio (OR), 2.10; 95% confidence interval
(CI), 1.64-2.68, p = 0.000000003). After adjustment for cigarette
smoking, AQ chewing and alcohol drinking, GSTT1 null-type variant was
still significantly associated with an increased risk of OSCC (OR= 2.00;
95% CI, 1.42-2.81, p = 0.00007), while GSTM1 was not associated with OSCC
risk. Polymorphisms of OGG1 Ser326Cys, APE1 Asp148Glu, APE1 T-656G, MUTYh
Gln324His, WRN Cys1367Arg, and XRCC1 Arg399Gln were not associated with
OSCC risk in general. However, stratification analysis indicated that
polymorphisms of APE1 Asp148Glu and MUTYh Gln324His were associated with
OSCC risk in individuals with cigarette smoking combined with AQ chewing.
Furthermore, those individuals with either APE1 148 Asp/Asp or MUTYh 324
His/His genotype had an increased OSCC risks when compared to those with
APE1 148 Glu and MUTYh 324 Gln allele (OR = 1.48; 95% CI, 1.13-1.95, p =
0.005). In conclusion, our results demonstrated that polymorphisms of
genes involved in detoxification and BER of oxidative stress could
influence the OSCC risk especially for those have history of cigarette
smoking and AQ chewing.

