Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression, purification, and characterization of recombinant
TAT-SALL4B protein


SALL4 is an important transcription factor that supports expansion of
hematopoietic stem cells. Several recent studies reveal that SALL4 and
SALL4B (a major isoform) are heavily modified by post-translational
mechanisms and that these modifications are critical for their stability,
subcellular localization, and transcriptional activities. Given the
importance of SALL4 and SAL4B in supporting stem cell self-renewal and
expansion, we optimized a large scale expression and purification process
to obtain SALL4B. Sf9 insect cells were transduced with the recombinant
baculovirus expressing human SALL4B fused with 6His residues and a TAT
sequence in the N-terminus. Recombinant TAT-SALL4B was purified by nickel
affinity chromatography under native conditions. Immuno-blotting
confirmed that recombinant SALL4B was highly expressed and purified. As
the first step to test the biological activity of purified TAT-SALL4B, we
investigated whether TAT-SALL4B, directly supplemented to the culture
medium, was capable of entering into cells through the protein
transduction process. Immuno-fluorescence microscopy revealed that
recombinant TAT-SALL4B specifically localized to the nucleus in a
concentration- and time-dependent manner. To further test the
transcriptional activity of TAT-SALL4B protein, dual luciferase reporter
assay was performed, which showed that TAT-SALL4B protein was
transcriptionally active.Our results suggest that TAT-SALL4B may provide
a promising cellular factor for supporting ex vivo expansion of
hematopoietic stem cells.

