Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mbd3 localizes at promoters, gene bodies and enhancers of active
genes


The structure of chromatin is tightly regulated; its disregulation is
causal for developmental abnormalities and for cancer. The nucleosome
remodeling and deacetylase (NuRD) complex regulates chromatin structure
and gene expression via its nucleosome remodeling and histone deacetylase
activities. MBD3, a component of NuRD, has pleiotropic roles in embryonic
stem (ES) cells and tumor biology. However, the results of recent studies
are conflicting, resulting in an unclear model for NuRD function. Here,
we investigated the localization of MBD3 in two human breast cancer cell
lines (MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231) with two independent genomic technologies
(DamID and ChIP-seq). DamID and ChIP-seq data were in an excellent
agreement and led consistent conclusions in both cell lines. MBD3
localized not only at promoters and enhancers of active genes but also
accumulated at gene bodies; this previously undescribed localization
suggests an active role of MBD3 in transcription. MBD3 preferred
hypomethylated, CpG rich promoters marked by H3K4me3. We also noted a
subset of MBD3 that localized at silent promoters marked by H3K9me3 or
H3K27me3, consistent with biochemical studies. Another subset of MBD3
co-localized with H3K27ac and was in physiological proximity with
promoters, suggesting a role of MBD3 in the regulation of high-order
structure of the genome. Functional analysis of chromatin demonstrated
that MBD3 regulates nucleosome occupancy near promoters and in gene
bodies. These data suggest multiple roles of MBD3/NuRD in the regulation
of chromatin structure and gene expression for both active and silent
genes. The findings serve as an important initial step in defining
regulatory mechanism of MBD3/NuRD in ES cells and in tumor biology.

