Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting glutamine metabolism as a therapeutic strategy in
MYC-driven medulloblastoma


Medulloblastoma (MB) is the most common malignant pediatric brain tumor.
Currently, treatment consists of surgical resection, chemotherapy,
craniospinal radiation, and is associated with high morbidity. Of the
four molecular subgroups of MB, group 3 tumors are have the worst
clinical prognosis and are associated with elevated c-MYC levels. Because
MYC over-expression can lead to increased glutamine metabolism and
glutamine addiction in other cancer types, we hypothesized that
MYC-driven MB would exhibit increased glutamine metabolism and be
sensitive to inhibitors of glutamine metabolism. In MB cell lines, MYC
expression positively correlates with increased expression of enzymes
involved in glutamine metabolism as measured by western blot. To
investigate the hypothesis that inhibition of glutamine metabolism would
preferentially target MYC driven MB, we tested the effects of two
glutamine analogsacivicin and 6-diazo-5-L-norleucine (DON)that inhibit
glutaminolytic enzymes. Acivicin and DON significantly decreased the
growth of the high-MYC MB cell lines D425 and D283 as measured by MTS
assay (D425 pMedulloblastoma (MB) is the most common malignant pediatric
brain tumor. Currently, treatment consists of surgical resection,
chemotherapy, craniospinal radiation, and is associated with high
morbidity. Of the four molecular subgroups of MB, group 3 tumors are have
the worst clinical prognosis and are associated with elevated c-MYC
levels. Because MYC over-expression can lead to increased glutamine
metabolism and glutamine addiction in other cancer types, we hypothesized
that MYC-driven MB would exhibit increased glutamine metabolism and be
sensitive to inhibitors of glutamine metabolism. In MB cell lines, MYC
expression positively correlates with increased expression of enzymes
involved in glutamine metabolism as measured by western blot. To
investigate the hypothesis that inhibition of glutamine metabolism would
preferentially target MYC driven MB, we tested the effects of two
glutamine analogsacivicin and 6-diazo-5-L-norleucine (DON)that inhibit
glutaminolytic enzymes. Acivicin and DON significantly decreased the
growth of the high-MYC MB cell lines D425 and D283 as measured by MTS
assay (D425 p<0.05 vehicle vs acivicin, D283 pMedulloblastoma (MB) is the
most common malignant pediatric brain tumor. Currently, treatment
consists of surgical resection, chemotherapy, craniospinal radiation, and
is associated with high morbidity. Of the four molecular subgroups of MB,
group 3 tumors are have the worst clinical prognosis and are associated
with elevated c-MYC levels. Because MYC over-expression can lead to
increased glutamine metabolism and glutamine addiction in other cancer
types, we hypothesized that MYC-driven MB would exhibit increased
glutamine metabolism and be sensitive to inhibitors of glutamine
metabolism. In MB cell lines, MYC expression positively correlates with
increased expression of enzymes involved in glutamine metabolism as
measured by western blot. To investigate the hypothesis that inhibition
of glutamine metabolism would preferentially target MYC driven MB, we
tested the effects of two glutamine analogsacivicin and
6-diazo-5-L-norleucine (DON)that inhibit glutaminolytic enzymes. Acivicin
and DON significantly decreased the growth of the high-MYC MB cell lines
D425 and D283 as measured by MTS assay (D425 p<0.05 vehicle vs acivicin,
D283 p<0.05 vehicle vs 50uM acivicin; D425 pMedulloblastoma (MB) is the
most common malignant pediatric brain tumor. Currently, treatment
consists of surgical resection, chemotherapy, craniospinal radiation, and
is associated with high morbidity. Of the four molecular subgroups of MB,
group 3 tumors are have the worst clinical prognosis and are associated
with elevated c-MYC levels. Because MYC over-expression can lead to
increased glutamine metabolism and glutamine addiction in other cancer
types, we hypothesized that MYC-driven MB would exhibit increased
glutamine metabolism and be sensitive to inhibitors of glutamine
metabolism. In MB cell lines, MYC expression positively correlates with
increased expression of enzymes involved in glutamine metabolism as
measured by western blot. To investigate the hypothesis that inhibition
of glutamine metabolism would preferentially target MYC driven MB, we
tested the effects of two glutamine analogsacivicin and
6-diazo-5-L-norleucine (DON)that inhibit glutaminolytic enzymes. Acivicin
and DON significantly decreased the growth of the high-MYC MB cell lines
D425 and D283 as measured by MTS assay (D425 p<0.05 vehicle vs acivicin,
D283 p<0.05 vehicle vs 50uM acivicin; D425 p<0.05 vehicle vs DON, D283
pMedulloblastoma (MB) is the most common malignant pediatric brain tumor.
Currently, treatment consists of surgical resection, chemotherapy,
craniospinal radiation, and is associated with high morbidity. Of the
four molecular subgroups of MB, group 3 tumors are have the worst
clinical prognosis and are associated with elevated c-MYC levels. Because
MYC over-expression can lead to increased glutamine metabolism and
glutamine addiction in other cancer types, we hypothesized that
MYC-driven MB would exhibit increased glutamine metabolism and be
sensitive to inhibitors of glutamine metabolism. In MB cell lines, MYC
expression positively correlates with increased expression of enzymes
involved in glutamine metabolism as measured by western blot. To
investigate the hypothesis that inhibition of glutamine metabolism would
preferentially target MYC driven MB, we tested the effects of two
glutamine analogsacivicin and 6-diazo-5-L-norleucine (DON)that inhibit
glutaminolytic enzymes. Acivicin and DON significantly decreased the
growth of the high-MYC MB cell lines D425 and D283 as measured by MTS
assay (D425 p<0.05 vehicle vs acivicin, D283 p<0.05 vehicle vs 50uM
acivicin; D425 p<0.05 vehicle vs DON, D283 p<0.05 vehicle vs DON).
Treatment with acivicin and DON also decreased proliferation as measured
by BrdU incorporation. Apoptosis increased upon treatment with acivicin
and DON treatment as determined by cleaved caspase 3 immunofluorescence
positivity and an increased percentage of cells in the sub2N population
as measured by flow cytometry. In neurosphere models of MYC and non-MYC
driven MB, MYC-expressing cells showed a significant decrease in
proliferation after acivicin treatment as measured by BrdU incorporation
(pMedulloblastoma (MB) is the most common malignant pediatric brain
tumor. Currently, treatment consists of surgical resection, chemotherapy,
craniospinal radiation, and is associated with high morbidity. Of the
four molecular subgroups of MB, group 3 tumors are have the worst
clinical prognosis and are associated with elevated c-MYC levels. Because
MYC over-expression can lead to increased glutamine metabolism and
glutamine addiction in other cancer types, we hypothesized that
MYC-driven MB would exhibit increased glutamine metabolism and be
sensitive to inhibitors of glutamine metabolism. In MB cell lines, MYC
expression positively correlates with increased expression of enzymes
involved in glutamine metabolism as measured by western blot. To
investigate the hypothesis that inhibition of glutamine metabolism would
preferentially target MYC driven MB, we tested the effects of two
glutamine analogsacivicin and 6-diazo-5-L-norleucine (DON)that inhibit
glutaminolytic enzymes. Acivicin and DON significantly decreased the
growth of the high-MYC MB cell lines D425 and D283 as measured by MTS
assay (D425 p<0.05 vehicle vs acivicin, D283 p<0.05 vehicle vs 50uM
acivicin; D425 p<0.05 vehicle vs DON, D283 p<0.05 vehicle vs DON).
Treatment with acivicin and DON also decreased proliferation as measured
by BrdU incorporation. Apoptosis increased upon treatment with acivicin
and DON treatment as determined by cleaved caspase 3 immunofluorescence
positivity and an increased percentage of cells in the sub2N population
as measured by flow cytometry. In neurosphere models of MYC and non-MYC
driven MB, MYC-expressing cells showed a significant decrease in
proliferation after acivicin treatment as measured by BrdU incorporation
(p<0.005), while the proliferation of MYC-negative cells was unaffected.
MB neurosphere models expressing MYC also showed an increase in apoptosis
as measured by cleaved caspase 3 immunofluorescence positivity
(pMedulloblastoma (MB) is the most common malignant pediatric brain
tumor. Currently, treatment consists of surgical resection, chemotherapy,
craniospinal radiation, and is associated with high morbidity. Of the
four molecular subgroups of MB, group 3 tumors are have the worst
clinical prognosis and are associated with elevated c-MYC levels. Because
MYC over-expression can lead to increased glutamine metabolism and
glutamine addiction in other cancer types, we hypothesized that
MYC-driven MB would exhibit increased glutamine metabolism and be
sensitive to inhibitors of glutamine metabolism. In MB cell lines, MYC
expression positively correlates with increased expression of enzymes
involved in glutamine metabolism as measured by western blot. To
investigate the hypothesis that inhibition of glutamine metabolism would
preferentially target MYC driven MB, we tested the effects of two
glutamine analogsacivicin and 6-diazo-5-L-norleucine (DON)that inhibit
glutaminolytic enzymes. Acivicin and DON significantly decreased the
growth of the high-MYC MB cell lines D425 and D283 as measured by MTS
assay (D425 p<0.05 vehicle vs acivicin, D283 p<0.05 vehicle vs 50uM
acivicin; D425 p<0.05 vehicle vs DON, D283 p<0.05 vehicle vs DON).
Treatment with acivicin and DON also decreased proliferation as measured
by BrdU incorporation. Apoptosis increased upon treatment with acivicin
and DON treatment as determined by cleaved caspase 3 immunofluorescence
positivity and an increased percentage of cells in the sub2N population
as measured by flow cytometry. In neurosphere models of MYC and non-MYC
driven MB, MYC-expressing cells showed a significant decrease in
proliferation after acivicin treatment as measured by BrdU incorporation
(p<0.005), while the proliferation of MYC-negative cells was unaffected.
MB neurosphere models expressing MYC also showed an increase in apoptosis
as measured by cleaved caspase 3 immunofluorescence positivity (p<0.003)
and an increased percentage of cells in the sub2N population. Fewer mice
receiving acivicin treatment following D425 xenograft developed flank
tumors than untreated mice (40% treated mice vs 100% untreated mice).
Treated mice also had smaller tumors than untreated mice (80.9mm3 in
treated mice vs 273.8mm3 in untreated mice). Knocking down the expression
of the glutaminolytic enzyme glutaminase using a short hairpin resulted
in a significant decrease in growth in D425 (pMedulloblastoma (MB) is the
most common malignant pediatric brain tumor. Currently, treatment
consists of surgical resection, chemotherapy, craniospinal radiation, and
is associated with high morbidity. Of the four molecular subgroups of MB,
group 3 tumors are have the worst clinical prognosis and are associated
with elevated c-MYC levels. Because MYC over-expression can lead to
increased glutamine metabolism and glutamine addiction in other cancer
types, we hypothesized that MYC-driven MB would exhibit increased
glutamine metabolism and be sensitive to inhibitors of glutamine
metabolism. In MB cell lines, MYC expression positively correlates with
increased expression of enzymes involved in glutamine metabolism as
measured by western blot. To investigate the hypothesis that inhibition
of glutamine metabolism would preferentially target MYC driven MB, we
tested the effects of two glutamine analogsacivicin and
6-diazo-5-L-norleucine (DON)that inhibit glutaminolytic enzymes. Acivicin
and DON significantly decreased the growth of the high-MYC MB cell lines
D425 and D283 as measured by MTS assay (D425 p<0.05 vehicle vs acivicin,
D283 p<0.05 vehicle vs 50uM acivicin; D425 p<0.05 vehicle vs DON, D283
p<0.05 vehicle vs DON). Treatment with acivicin and DON also decreased
proliferation as measured by BrdU incorporation. Apoptosis increased upon
treatment with acivicin and DON treatment as determined by cleaved
caspase 3 immunofluorescence positivity and an increased percentage of
cells in the sub2N population as measured by flow cytometry. In
neurosphere models of MYC and non-MYC driven MB, MYC-expressing cells
showed a significant decrease in proliferation after acivicin treatment
as measured by BrdU incorporation (p<0.005), while the proliferation of
MYC-negative cells was unaffected. MB neurosphere models expressing MYC
also showed an increase in apoptosis as measured by cleaved caspase 3
immunofluorescence positivity (p<0.003) and an increased percentage of
cells in the sub2N population. Fewer mice receiving acivicin treatment
following D425 xenograft developed flank tumors than untreated mice (40%
treated mice vs 100% untreated mice). Treated mice also had smaller
tumors than untreated mice (80.9mm3 in treated mice vs 273.8mm3 in
untreated mice). Knocking down the expression of the glutaminolytic
enzyme glutaminase using a short hairpin resulted in a significant
decrease in growth in D425 (p<0.05 scramble control vs GLS hairpin) and
D283 (pMedulloblastoma (MB) is the most common malignant pediatric brain
tumor. Currently, treatment consists of surgical resection, chemotherapy,
craniospinal radiation, and is associated with high morbidity. Of the
four molecular subgroups of MB, group 3 tumors are have the worst
clinical prognosis and are associated with elevated c-MYC levels. Because
MYC over-expression can lead to increased glutamine metabolism and
glutamine addiction in other cancer types, we hypothesized that
MYC-driven MB would exhibit increased glutamine metabolism and be
sensitive to inhibitors of glutamine metabolism. In MB cell lines, MYC
expression positively correlates with increased expression of enzymes
involved in glutamine metabolism as measured by western blot. To
investigate the hypothesis that inhibition of glutamine metabolism would
preferentially target MYC driven MB, we tested the effects of two
glutamine analogsacivicin and 6-diazo-5-L-norleucine (DON)that inhibit
glutaminolytic enzymes. Acivicin and DON significantly decreased the
growth of the high-MYC MB cell lines D425 and D283 as measured by MTS
assay (D425 p<0.05 vehicle vs acivicin, D283 p<0.05 vehicle vs 50uM
acivicin; D425 p<0.05 vehicle vs DON, D283 p<0.05 vehicle vs DON).
Treatment with acivicin and DON also decreased proliferation as measured
by BrdU incorporation. Apoptosis increased upon treatment with acivicin
and DON treatment as determined by cleaved caspase 3 immunofluorescence
positivity and an increased percentage of cells in the sub2N population
as measured by flow cytometry. In neurosphere models of MYC and non-MYC
driven MB, MYC-expressing cells showed a significant decrease in
proliferation after acivicin treatment as measured by BrdU incorporation
(p<0.005), while the proliferation of MYC-negative cells was unaffected.
MB neurosphere models expressing MYC also showed an increase in apoptosis
as measured by cleaved caspase 3 immunofluorescence positivity (p<0.003)
and an increased percentage of cells in the sub2N population. Fewer mice
receiving acivicin treatment following D425 xenograft developed flank
tumors than untreated mice (40% treated mice vs 100% untreated mice).
Treated mice also had smaller tumors than untreated mice (80.9mm3 in
treated mice vs 273.8mm3 in untreated mice). Knocking down the expression
of the glutaminolytic enzyme glutaminase using a short hairpin resulted
in a significant decrease in growth in D425 (p<0.05 scramble control vs
GLS hairpin) and D283 (p<0.05 scramble control vs GLS hairpins). Our
laboratory is currently conducting in vivo orthotopic xenograft
experiments using a MB cell line where GLS expression has been
knocked-down using a short hairpin, and we predict that GLS knock-down
will prolong survival. Taken together, our data suggest that glutamine
metabolism may be a therapeutic target in MYC-driven MB and that
glutamine analogs may be useful therapeutic agents.

