Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel regulation of HER2 degradation and breast cancer cell
proliferation by junctional adhesion molecule-a (JAM-A)


Background: We have previously shown that the adhesion protein Junctional
Adhesion Molecule-A (JAM-A) is over-expressed in a population of
aggressive and metastatic breast tumours, and that it regulates the
migration of breast cells. JAM-dependent regulation of migration could
contribute to the likelihood of metastatic disease, since migration is an
early event in metastasis. Our objective was to further interrogate the
links between JAM-A signalling and markers of disease progression in
breast cancer.Approach and Results: Immunohistochemical analysis of JAM-A
in two breast cancer tissue microarrays (TMA) revealed that high JAM-A
expression correlated significantly with HER2 protein expression,
ERnegativity, high grade breast cancers and aggressive luminal B, HER2
and basal subtypes of breast cancer. Using LCC1 and MCF7-HER2 cells which
co-express high levels of JAM-A and HER2, we silenced the gene expression
of each one in order to examine potential consequences for protein
expression of the other. Knockdown of HER2 had no effect on JAM-A protein
levels, but knockdown of JAM-A significantly reduced the protein
expression of HER2 and its downstream pro-survival effector pAkt.
Accordingly, JAM-A knockdown increased apoptosis via a pathway involving
Akt activation, as evidenced by apoptosis normalisation upon
pharmacological inhibition of Akt. The expressional regulation of HER2
and pAkt by JAM-A was sensitive to inhibition by the proteasomal
inhibitor MG132, suggesting that JAM-A regulates the proteasomal
degradation of HER2. Finally, over-expression of wild-type JAM-A was
sufficient to significantly enhance proliferative and migratory behaviour
in breast cell lines.Conclusions: Our results are consistent with a model
whereby JAM-A expression inhibits the proteasomal degradation of HER2,
facilitating a pro-survival phenotype through increased Akt activity.
Therefore JAM-A antagonists may have future therapeutic value in the
treatment of breast tumours overexpressing HER2.

