Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Specific role of Mieap in Mieap-induced vacuole generation through
an interaction with UVRAG


Mieap, a p53-inducible protein, controls mitochondrial quality by
repairing or eliminating unhealthy mitochondria via Mieap-induced
accumulation of lysosome-like organelles within mitochondria (MALM) or
Mieap-induced vacuole (MIV), respectively (1-4). BNIP3 and NIX are
essential mediators of MALM. MIV generation is closely related to the
endocytic pathway. However, the mechanism of MALM and MIV function and of
their selection and regulation remains unclear. UVRAG was identified as a
Mieap-interacting protein. UVRAG plays a role in canonical autophagy
through the endocytic pathway. Interestingly, Mieap , but not Mieap ,
specifically interacts with UVRAG. Knockdown of UVRAG severely inhibited
MIV generation induced by Mieap . On the other hand, endogenous Mieap ,
but not Mieap , accumulated at and within mitochondria during the MALM
process. These results, taken together, suggest that Mieap has a specific
role in MIV generation through an interaction with UVRAG by regulating
the endocytic pathway. In addition, UVRAG and Mieap are inactivated in
human cancers including colorectal cancer patients, suggesting that the
MIV regulated by the interaction of Mieap and UVRAG may play a role in
tumor suppression. In this paper, we discuss several possible mechanisms
for the selection of MALM or MIV and the role of Mieap/UVRAG in
tumorigenesis on the basis of our recent data.1. Miyamoto Y et al. PLoS
ONE 6: e16054, 20112. Kitamura N et al. PLoS ONE 6: e16060, 20113.
Nakamura Y et al. PLoS ONE 7: e30767, 20124. Miyamoto T et al. Sci Rep 2:
379, 2012

