Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting BRCA1-deficient breast cancer by inhibition of the DEAD
box RNA helicase DDX3X


Introduction: The DEAD box RNA helicase DDX3X (DDX3) has been
demonstrated to have a pro-oncogenic role in breast cancer. Thus,
abrogating DDX3 activity was explored as a viable anti-cancer strategy
using a small molecule inhibitor of DDX3, referred to as RK-33. RK-33 was
found to inhibit non-homologous end joining (NHEJ), a DNA double strand
break (DSB) repair mechanism. Therefore, we set out to determine the
utility of RK-33 in breast cancers of BRCA1 mutation carriers, as they
exhibit deficiencies in homologous recombination, an additional DSB
repair mechanism. We hypothesized that BRCA1-deficient breast cancers
would be more dependent on NHEJ to maintain genomic stability and thus
inhibiting DDX3 activity by RK-33 would be an efficacious treatment
strategy.Methods: We evaluated DDX3 protein expression levels by
immunohistochemistry in 102 BRCA1 and 29 BRCA2 germline mutation carriers
and compared these to those of 345 sporadic breast cancer patients. In
addition, DDX3 expression in two BRCA1-deficient (SUM149PT and HCC1937)
and two BRCA1-proficient breast cancer cell lines (MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231)
was quantified by immunoblotting. Furthermore, we compared the cell
killing abilities of RK-33 in these BRCA1 pro- and deficient cell lines,
as well as in MCF-7 cells before and after knockdown of BRCA1 by
shRNA.Results: High cytoplasmic DDX3 expression is less frequent in BRCA1
(24.5%) and BRCA2 (20.7%) related breast cancer, when compared to
sporadic breast cancer (34.2%; OR 0.63; 95% CI 0.38-1.03; P = 0.065).
This difference is statistically significant when correcting for higher
grade and basal-like subtype in the group of BRCA1 mutation carriers (OR
0.33; 95% CI 0.14-0.77; P = 0.01). The BRCA1 pro- and deficient cell
lines expressed similar levels of DDX3 and had a comparable sensitivity
to RK-33 with IC-50 values ranging between 2 and 7 uM. Knockdown of BRCA1
in MCF-7 did not result in an increased sensitivity to RK-33.Conclusion:
DDX3 expression is lower in breast cancer in BRCA1 mutation carriers,
when compared to sporadic breast cancers of similar grade and molecular
subtype. BRCA1 pro- and deficient breast cancer cell lines are equally
sensitive to inhibition of DDX3 by RK-33. This indicates that abrogating
NHEJ activity by RK-33 results in cell death irrespective of additional
deficiencies in the DNA repair pathway. Given that RK-33 showed good in
vitro efficacy to kill all breast cancer cell lines, additional research
is required to evaluate the use of RK-33 as a targeted chemotherapy agent
for breast cancer.

