Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Afatinib, an irreversible ErbB family inhibitor, demonstrates
activity against HER2 mutated cervical cancer in vitro


Uterine cervical cancer (UCC) is the second leading cause of cancer
deaths among women worldwide and results in 275,000 deaths annually.
Functional characterization of cancer-associated genetic alterations may
lead to new therapeutic approaches using molecularly targeted therapies
which have the potential to improve patient outcomes. Consistent with
this view, whole exome sequencing studies in a variety of human tumors
including cervical cancer have recently identified somatic mutations in
genes that encode for the ErbB family receptors. Importantly, some of
these mutations have been shown to be drivers and to correlate with tumor
sensitivity to the exposure to ErbB tyrosine kinase inhibitors in vitro
as well as in vivo.In this study we have evaluated whether genetic
alterations in the c-erbB2 gene determine the sensitivity of UCC primary
cell lines to Afatinib, an EGFR, HER2, and HER4 irreversible tyrosine
kinase inhibitor.Ten primary UCC cell lines, (two harboring c-erbB2 gene
mutations in the extracellular HER2/neu domain [i.e., the S280F and E375D
mutations-ref genome hg18] and eight harboring wild type c-erbB2),
established as long term cultures in vitro, were analyzed in our study.
The effect of Afatinib on cell growth, cell-cycle distribution and
signaling were assessed using flow cytometry and western blot analysis
following incubation of primary UCC cell lines with scalar concentrations
of Afatinib for 72 hours in vitro.We found that despite similar ErbB2
mRNA expression levels by qRT-PCR in the mutated versus the wild type
c-erbB2 groups, IC50 values in response to Afatinib were significantly
lower in the group of mutated cell lines than in the non-mutated control
UCC (MEANSEM = 0.550.11 vs. 1.640.09 M, PUterine cervical cancer (UCC) is
the second leading cause of cancer deaths among women worldwide and
results in 275,000 deaths annually. Functional characterization of
cancer-associated genetic alterations may lead to new therapeutic
approaches using molecularly targeted therapies which have the potential
to improve patient outcomes. Consistent with this view, whole exome
sequencing studies in a variety of human tumors including cervical cancer
have recently identified somatic mutations in genes that encode for the
ErbB family receptors. Importantly, some of these mutations have been
shown to be drivers and to correlate with tumor sensitivity to the
exposure to ErbB tyrosine kinase inhibitors in vitro as well as in
vivo.In this study we have evaluated whether genetic alterations in the
c-erbB2 gene determine the sensitivity of UCC primary cell lines to
Afatinib, an EGFR, HER2, and HER4 irreversible tyrosine kinase
inhibitor.Ten primary UCC cell lines, (two harboring c-erbB2 gene
mutations in the extracellular HER2/neu domain [i.e., the S280F and E375D
mutations-ref genome hg18] and eight harboring wild type c-erbB2),
established as long term cultures in vitro, were analyzed in our study.
The effect of Afatinib on cell growth, cell-cycle distribution and
signaling were assessed using flow cytometry and western blot analysis
following incubation of primary UCC cell lines with scalar concentrations
of Afatinib for 72 hours in vitro.We found that despite similar ErbB2
mRNA expression levels by qRT-PCR in the mutated versus the wild type
c-erbB2 groups, IC50 values in response to Afatinib were significantly
lower in the group of mutated cell lines than in the non-mutated control
UCC (MEANSEM = 0.550.11 vs. 1.640.09 M, P<0.05). Furthermore, Afatinib
growth-inhibition was associated with a significant and dose-dependent
increase in the percentage of cells blocked in the G1 cell cycle phase as
well as a dose-dependent dephosphorylation of HER2, S6, AKT and ERK in
both c-erbB2 mutated and wild type UCC cell lines.Our data suggests that
Afatinib, a recently FDA approved drug, is highly effective against
c-erbB2 mutated UCC in vitro and could represent a valid therapeutic
option for patients harboring c-erbB2 mutated advanced/recurrent cervical
cancers unresponsive to radiation and/or chemotherapy.

