Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Enhanced pyruvate carboxylation is crucial to non-small cell lung
cancer proliferation and anabolism


Proliferating cancer cells require an active Krebs cycle for generating
anabolic precursors, in addition to energy production. Diversion of the
Krebs cycle intermediates to meet anabolic demands cannot be sustained
without anaplerosis. The two major anaplerotic pathways are the
deamidation of glutamine to form glutamate catalyzed by glutaminase (GLS)
or glutaminolysis, and the carboxylation of pyruvate to oxaloacetate by
pyruvate carboxylase (PC).We determined the expression of PC and GLS
proteins in fresh tumor tissue and paired adjacent benign tissue from 86
human NSCLC patients. PC was elevated (median 8-10 fold) in 94% of the
tumor tissues, whereas GLS expression did not differ significantly
between tumor and paired non tumorous lung tissue. Using 13C6 glucose as
tracer and stable isotope-resolved metabolomics (SIRM), we also observed
elevated PC activity in vivo in human patients with early stage NSCLC. To
examine the importance of PC in the growth and survival of NSCLC, 5 NSCLC
cell lines were transduced with a lentiviral vector containing an shRNA
against PC. PC knockdown slowed proliferation, induced multinucleation,
and reduced colony formation in soft agar. To validate attenuated PC
activity and to profile the metabolic effect of PC knockdown, A549 cells
were grown in 13C6 glucose or 13C5 glutamine and the incorporation of 13C
into various metabolic pathways was measured by NMR and MS by SIRM. We
found reduced entry of both glucose and glutamine carbon into the Krebs
cycle metabolites, fatty acyl chains of lipids, and nucleotides,
suggesting that both energy production and anabolic pathways were
hindered and blocking the PC pathway was not compensated by GLS activity.
In addition, glutathione biosynthesis and homeostasis were perturbed by
PC suppression, leading to compromised anti-oxidation capacity. We
further found that PC knockdown in A549 cells reduced their growth rate
in mouse xenografts, and recapitulate the metabolic perturbations seen
both in cell culture and in human patients. Together, these results
suggest that PC is indispensible for the growth and anabolism of
NSCLC.This work was funded by 5P20RR018733, 1R01CA118434-01A2,
1P01CA163223-01A1, 1R01ES022191-01, and 3R01CA118434-02S1; and the KLCRP,
CTSPGP, and the KY Challenge for Excellence.

