Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel and selective Axl inhibitors


Axl is a member of the TAM tyrosine kinase family and is activated by
products of Gas6 and Protein S genes. Axl is overexpressed or overactive
in breast, renal, endometrial, ovarian, thyroid, non-small cell lung
carcinoma, uveal melanoma as well as in myeloid leukemias. It has also
been demonstrated that Axl expression is upregulated in drug-resistant
cancer cells. Knock-down of Axl by RNAi repressed tumor formation in
MDA-231 breast carcinoma model. Downregulation of Axl expression by RNAi
led to a decrease of K562/ADR and MCF-7/ADR cells invasion,
proliferation, and increased cell chemosensitivity in vitro. In a
xenograft model of MDR cells, downregulation of Axl enhanced the
anticancer activity of chemotherapeutic drugs. Therefore, Axl is a
potential target for the development of chemotherapeutic agents for
cancer therapy. During our endeavor of discovering and developing Axl
kinase inhibitors for cancer therapy, we have discovered a series of
potent and selective Axl inhibitors. These new compounds have
demonstrated nM potency against Axl and good selectivity against other
kinases in a selected panel of kinases. Many of these new compounds can
reduce the pAkt levels in several cancer cell lines in a dose dependent
manner and demonstrated inhibition of cell proliferation at
sub-micromolar concentration in thymidine incorporation assay. Several
selected compounds have demonstrated efficacy in colony formation assays.
The most promising compounds are now being selected for in vivo
proof-of-concept studies. The pharmaceutical properties of these
compounds together with ADME profile were also evaluated and will be
reported. These new Axl inhibitors represent a new approach for cancer
therapy.

