Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Quantitative PET imaging of tissue factor expression using
18F-labeled active site inhibited factor VIIa


Objectives: Tissue factor (TF) is up regulated in many solid tumors and
its expression is linked to tumor angiogenesis, invasion, metastasis and
prognosis. Hence it would be of clinical relevance if one could assess
tumor TF expression status non-invasively. Here we report the development
of a new PET tracer for specific imaging of TF using a derivative of
factor VII, the natural ligand to TF, labeled with 18F.Methods: Active
site inhibited factor VIIa (ASIS) was radiolabeled with N-succinimidyl
4-18F-fluorobenzoate ([18F]SFB) and purified. Nude mice (n=5) with
subcutaneous human pancreatic xenograft tumors (BxPC-3) underwent small
animal PET/CT imaging 1, 2 and 4 hours after injection of 7.3-9.3 MBq
[18F]ASIS (37 g) in 160 L saline. Mice were euthanized following the last
imaging session, and their tumors and major organs were resected for ex
vivo gamma well counting. Tumor tissue was preserved for molecular
analysis. A blocking experiment was performed in a second set of mice.
The blocking group (n=3) received 500 g non-labeled ASIS before injection
of [18F]ASIS and was imaged after 4 hours. The expression pattern of TF
in the tumors was visualized by immunohistochemistry and the amount of TF
in tumor homogenates was measured by ELISA.Results: The PET images showed
high uptake of [18F]ASIS in the tumor regions with a mean uptake of 2.40
0.18, 2.56 0.20 and 2.54 0.27 %ID/g (Mean SEM) at 1, 2 and 4 hours after
injection of [18F]ASIS and with an average maximum uptake in the tumors
of 7.08 0.72 %ID/g at 4 hours. In comparison, the muscle uptake was 0.19
0.01 %ID/g at 4 hours. At 4 hours the tumors had the highest uptake of
any organ. Blocking with cold ASIS significantly reduced the uptake of
[18F]ASIS from 2.51 0.06 to 1.29 0.07 %ID/g (pObjectives: Tissue factor
(TF) is up regulated in many solid tumors and its expression is linked to
tumor angiogenesis, invasion, metastasis and prognosis. Hence it would be
of clinical relevance if one could assess tumor TF expression status
non-invasively. Here we report the development of a new PET tracer for
specific imaging of TF using a derivative of factor VII, the natural
ligand to TF, labeled with 18F.Methods: Active site inhibited factor VIIa
(ASIS) was radiolabeled with N-succinimidyl 4-18F-fluorobenzoate
([18F]SFB) and purified. Nude mice (n=5) with subcutaneous human
pancreatic xenograft tumors (BxPC-3) underwent small animal PET/CT
imaging 1, 2 and 4 hours after injection of 7.3-9.3 MBq [18F]ASIS (37 g)
in 160 L saline. Mice were euthanized following the last imaging session,
and their tumors and major organs were resected for ex vivo gamma well
counting. Tumor tissue was preserved for molecular analysis. A blocking
experiment was performed in a second set of mice. The blocking group
(n=3) received 500 g non-labeled ASIS before injection of [18F]ASIS and
was imaged after 4 hours. The expression pattern of TF in the tumors was
visualized by immunohistochemistry and the amount of TF in tumor
homogenates was measured by ELISA.Results: The PET images showed high
uptake of [18F]ASIS in the tumor regions with a mean uptake of 2.40 0.18,
2.56 0.20 and 2.54 0.27 %ID/g (Mean SEM) at 1, 2 and 4 hours after
injection of [18F]ASIS and with an average maximum uptake in the tumors
of 7.08 0.72 %ID/g at 4 hours. In comparison, the muscle uptake was 0.19
0.01 %ID/g at 4 hours. At 4 hours the tumors had the highest uptake of
any organ. Blocking with cold ASIS significantly reduced the uptake of
[18F]ASIS from 2.51 0.06 to 1.29 0.07 %ID/g (p<0.001). Importantly, the
uptake of [18F]ASIS measured in vivo by PET imaging correlated (r=0.72,
pObjectives: Tissue factor (TF) is up regulated in many solid tumors and
its expression is linked to tumor angiogenesis, invasion, metastasis and
prognosis. Hence it would be of clinical relevance if one could assess
tumor TF expression status non-invasively. Here we report the development
of a new PET tracer for specific imaging of TF using a derivative of
factor VII, the natural ligand to TF, labeled with 18F.Methods: Active
site inhibited factor VIIa (ASIS) was radiolabeled with N-succinimidyl
4-18F-fluorobenzoate ([18F]SFB) and purified. Nude mice (n=5) with
subcutaneous human pancreatic xenograft tumors (BxPC-3) underwent small
animal PET/CT imaging 1, 2 and 4 hours after injection of 7.3-9.3 MBq
[18F]ASIS (37 g) in 160 L saline. Mice were euthanized following the last
imaging session, and their tumors and major organs were resected for ex
vivo gamma well counting. Tumor tissue was preserved for molecular
analysis. A blocking experiment was performed in a second set of mice.
The blocking group (n=3) received 500 g non-labeled ASIS before injection
of [18F]ASIS and was imaged after 4 hours. The expression pattern of TF
in the tumors was visualized by immunohistochemistry and the amount of TF
in tumor homogenates was measured by ELISA.Results: The PET images showed
high uptake of [18F]ASIS in the tumor regions with a mean uptake of 2.40
0.18, 2.56 0.20 and 2.54 0.27 %ID/g (Mean SEM) at 1, 2 and 4 hours after
injection of [18F]ASIS and with an average maximum uptake in the tumors
of 7.08 0.72 %ID/g at 4 hours. In comparison, the muscle uptake was 0.19
0.01 %ID/g at 4 hours. At 4 hours the tumors had the highest uptake of
any organ. Blocking with cold ASIS significantly reduced the uptake of
[18F]ASIS from 2.51 0.06 to 1.29 0.07 %ID/g (p<0.001). Importantly, the
uptake of [18F]ASIS measured in vivo by PET imaging correlated (r=0.72,
p<0.02) with TF expression at the protein level measured ex vivo in tumor
homogenates by ELISA.Conclusion: PET/CT imaging with [18F]ASIS can be
used for specific, non-invasive imaging of TF expression.Research
Support: This work was supported by at grant from the Danish National
Advanced Technology Foundation.

