Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A central role for mTORC1 in CXCR4-mediated directional migration
and metastasis


Tumor cells can co-opt the promigratory activity of chemokines and their
cognate G protein-coupled receptors to disseminate to regional lymph
nodes and distant organs. Indeed, the migration to SDF-1 of tumor cells
expressing its receptor, CXCR4, is implicated in lymphatic and
organ-specific metastasis in multiple human malignancies. However, the
critical role of CXCR4 in bone marrow stem cell retention has hampered
the development of CXCR4 inhibitors for metastasis prevention. Therefore
the study of CXCR4 downstream signaling circuitry may provide new
opportunities for the treatment of many human malignancies that depend on
CXCR4 for their metastatic spread. The PI3K/mTOR pathway represents a
major player in normal and aberrant cell growth. Consistently, mTOR
inhibitors targeting its complex 1 (mTORC1) alone or mTORC1/mTORC2 have
already shown promising therapeutic responses in many tumor types. Our
data show that mTOR is activated upon SDF-1 stimulation of CXCR4 on
epithelial-derived cancer cells, and that the disruption of mTORC1 or
mTORC2 abrogates CXCR4-mediated directional migration. To study the
CXCR4/mTOR axis in vivo we developed a simple and robust model for
CXCR4-mediated spontaneous metastasis. Surprisingly, disruption of mTORC1
alone was sufficient to decrease tumor cell proliferation, angiogenesis,
lymphangiogenesis, and CXCR4-mediated metastasis, whereas mTORC2
impairment had no effect on tumor dissemination or growth in vivo. Taken
together, our data suggest that mTORC1 blockade could inhibit the
migration of CXCR4 expressing cancer cells to their secondary sites,
while disrupting the establishment of a permissive tumor microenvironment
thereby halting the spread of highly aggressive tumors that require CXCR4
to metastasize.

