Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Vacuolar ATPase subunit a2 is associated with immunosuppression in
cancer


Macrophage polarization contributes to distinct human pathologies. In
tumors, a polarized M2 phenotype called tumor-associated macrophages
(TAMs), are associated with promotion of invasion and angiogenesis. In
cancer cells, vacuolar ATPase (V-ATPase), a multi-subunit enzyme, is
expressed on the plasma/vesicular membranes and critically influences the
metastatic behavior. In addition, the soluble, cleaved N-terminal domain
of a2 isoform of V-ATPase (a2NTD) is associated with in vitro induction
of pro-tumorigenic properties in monocytes. Monocytes induced with
recombinant a2NTD showed polarization towards M2 macrophage subtype by
expressing high levels of mannose receptor-1, Arginase-1, IL-10, MMP-9,
VEGF and TGF-. Additionally, co-culture of these macrophages enhances
invasion and angiogenesis of tumor cells and suppression of T cell
activation. This activity of the a2 isoform of V-ATPase (a2V) caused us
to further investigate its role in cancer progression by evaluating the
effects of a2V knock down on tumor cells. In this study, we have
successfully deleted a2V gene in mouse 4T1 breast cancer cells using
shRNA mediated knock down. These knock down cell lines are co-cultured
with macrophages to evaluate previously observed immuno-modulatory effect
of a2NTD. In addition, a2V knock down cells are injected into the Balb/c
mice to generate tumors. The effect of a2V gene deletion on tumor
progression and immune responses are evaluated in mice. We show that in
the absence of a2V (finally a2NTD) growth and progression of tumor are
suppressed by dominated host immune responses.

