Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integration of GWAS, gene expression and protein interaction data
identifies a HOX-centric gene network associated with serous ovarian
cancer risk


GWAS have so far identified 12 loci associated with serous epithelial
ovarian cancer (sEOC) risk at genome-wide significance. Network-based
integration of other molecular data with GWAS is one way to elucidate the
functional basis of these loci. We hypothesized that some of these loci
may impact sEOC development via transcription factor (TF) genes encoded
at the locus and target genes of these TFs may also harbor weaker
association signals. Therefore, we began our multi-step network analysis
by selecting all known TF genes within 1 Mb of the top SNP at each of the
12 loci. Since 19/29 TF genes selected belonged to either the HOXB or
HOXD cluster, whose targets remain poorly characterized by other
approaches, we used co-expression to identify potential TF target genes.
Specifically, a mutual information algorithm with a strict threshold was
used to infer networks of genes highly co-expressed with each risk locus
TF gene in the 489-tumor TCGA high-grade sEOC unified expression
microarray data set. All genes in the genome that were also profiled in
TCGA data (11,864 genes) were then ranked according to their association
with sEOC. The rank was derived from the minimum p value among all SNPs
in each gene (adjusted for gene size, SNP density and intra- and
intergenic linkage) after mapping 2.5 million SNPs to genes from a GWAS
meta-analysis of sEOC risk (2,196 cases/4,396 controls). Gene set
enrichment analysis (GSEA) showed that genes in co-expression networks
centered on six TF genes, four at the 17q21.32 risk locus (HOXB2, HOXB5,
HOXB6, HOXB7) and two at the 2q31.1 locus (HOXD1, HOXD3) were
significantly over-represented (PGWAS have so far identified 12 loci
associated with serous epithelial ovarian cancer (sEOC) risk at
genome-wide significance. Network-based integration of other molecular
data with GWAS is one way to elucidate the functional basis of these
loci. We hypothesized that some of these loci may impact sEOC development
via transcription factor (TF) genes encoded at the locus and target genes
of these TFs may also harbor weaker association signals. Therefore, we
began our multi-step network analysis by selecting all known TF genes
within 1 Mb of the top SNP at each of the 12 loci. Since 19/29 TF genes
selected belonged to either the HOXB or HOXD cluster, whose targets
remain poorly characterized by other approaches, we used co-expression to
identify potential TF target genes. Specifically, a mutual information
algorithm with a strict threshold was used to infer networks of genes
highly co-expressed with each risk locus TF gene in the 489-tumor TCGA
high-grade sEOC unified expression microarray data set. All genes in the
genome that were also profiled in TCGA data (11,864 genes) were then
ranked according to their association with sEOC. The rank was derived
from the minimum p value among all SNPs in each gene (adjusted for gene
size, SNP density and intra- and intergenic linkage) after mapping 2.5
million SNPs to genes from a GWAS meta-analysis of sEOC risk (2,196
cases/4,396 controls). Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) showed that
genes in co-expression networks centered on six TF genes, four at the
17q21.32 risk locus (HOXB2, HOXB5, HOXB6, HOXB7) and two at the 2q31.1
locus (HOXD1, HOXD3) were significantly over-represented (P<0.05 and
FDRGWAS have so far identified 12 loci associated with serous epithelial
ovarian cancer (sEOC) risk at genome-wide significance. Network-based
integration of other molecular data with GWAS is one way to elucidate the
functional basis of these loci. We hypothesized that some of these loci
may impact sEOC development via transcription factor (TF) genes encoded
at the locus and target genes of these TFs may also harbor weaker
association signals. Therefore, we began our multi-step network analysis
by selecting all known TF genes within 1 Mb of the top SNP at each of the
12 loci. Since 19/29 TF genes selected belonged to either the HOXB or
HOXD cluster, whose targets remain poorly characterized by other
approaches, we used co-expression to identify potential TF target genes.
Specifically, a mutual information algorithm with a strict threshold was
used to infer networks of genes highly co-expressed with each risk locus
TF gene in the 489-tumor TCGA high-grade sEOC unified expression
microarray data set. All genes in the genome that were also profiled in
TCGA data (11,864 genes) were then ranked according to their association
with sEOC. The rank was derived from the minimum p value among all SNPs
in each gene (adjusted for gene size, SNP density and intra- and
intergenic linkage) after mapping 2.5 million SNPs to genes from a GWAS
meta-analysis of sEOC risk (2,196 cases/4,396 controls). Gene set
enrichment analysis (GSEA) showed that genes in co-expression networks
centered on six TF genes, four at the 17q21.32 risk locus (HOXB2, HOXB5,
HOXB6, HOXB7) and two at the 2q31.1 locus (HOXD1, HOXD3) were
significantly over-represented (P<0.05 and FDR<0.05, 10,000 permutations)
at the sEOC-associated end of the ranked list. To explore translational
conservation of these transcriptional relationships, we pooled the genes
driving the GSEA signal in each of the six significant co-expression
networks to yield a single module of 49 genes and overlaid them on a
database of 169,810 high confidence protein-protein interactions (PPIs).
The single largest connected component after overlay had 29/49 genes and
significantly more indirect connectivity than 10,000 random networks
permuted with similar topology (P=0.01). Finally, we further demonstrated
the context-specificity of the significant networks to sEOC in two
separate analyses using microarray data from an additional 245 sEOC
tumors (GSE9899) and non-cancer GWAS results. We will discuss the power
of our approach by highlighting the identification of both novel and
established sEOC genes in the final set of 49 obtained from the six seed
HOX genes. Thus by combining the largest available sEOC GWAS and gene
expression data sets and PPI data in a network paradigm, we adopted a
method more context-specific than conventional GWAS pathway analysis.
This identified a HOX-centric network contributing to sEOC susceptibility
and prioritized risk locus genes for ongoing follow-up.

