Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BRAF and KRAS mutation testing in plasma cell-free DNA with ICE
COLD-PCR in patients with advanced cancers


Background: Cell-free (cf) DNA in the plasma of cancer patients offers an
easily obtainable, low-risk, inexpensive, and repeatedly available source
of biologic material for mutation analysis and monitoring of molecular
changes throughout cancer therapy.Methods: DNA in plasma from patients
with advanced cancers who progressed on systemic therapy was tested for
BRAF V600 and KRAS G12 and G13 mutations using the ICE COLD-PCR platform.
ICE COLD-PCR, Improved and Complete Enrichment COamplification at Lower
Denaturation, selectively amplifies mutant DNA by exploiting differences
in denaturation temperatures between mutant DNA duplexes and normal
wild-type DNA duplexes. KRAS Exon 2 and BRAF Exon 15 ICE COLD-PCR was
performed on plasma samples. Amplicons were analyzed using Sanger
sequencing and results were compared to the mutation status of archival
primary or metastatic tumor tissue as determined in a CLIA-certified
laboratory during routine clinical care.Results: Plasma samples from 77
patients with advanced cancers and known tumor tissue BRAF and/or KRAS
mutation status (colorectal cancer, n=38; melanoma, n=17; non-small cell
lung cancer, n=7; other cancers, n=15) were obtained before treatment
and, if possible, sequentially during therapy and tested for BRAF (42),
KRAS (34) or BRAF and KRAS (1) mutations in cfDNA. BRAF mutations were
detected in 93% (40/43) of archival tumor samples compared to 70% (30/43)
of plasma cfDNA samples (agreement 77%). In addition, 20 patients treated
with systemic therapy had serial plasma samples collected and the change
in relative abundance of BRAF-mutant compared to wild-type cfDNA
corresponded with the clinical course of 15 patients and was discrepant
for 1 patient; in 5 patients no BRAF mutated cfDNA was detected at any
time point. KRAS mutations were detected in 83% (29/35) of archival tumor
samples compared to 74% (26/35) of plasma cfDNA samples (agreement 80%).
In addition, 12 patients treated with systemic therapy had serial plasma
collected and the change in relative abundance of KRAS-mutant compared to
wild-type cfDNA corresponded with clinical course in 10 patients; in 2
patients no KRAS mutated cfDNA was detected at any time
point.Conclusions: Detection of BRAF and KRAS mutations in cfDNA can
provide a fast and noninvasive alternative to mutation testing in tumor
tissue with a potential to be used for monitoring response to cancer
therapy.

