Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HPV16 detection by PCR in serum of HNSCC patients and comparison
with primary tumour tissue


Background: HPV16 in Head and Neck (HN) cancer is a prognostic marker for
positive oropharynx tumor (OT) patients. A lot of methods for direct and
indirect HPV16 detection in tissue and body fluids have been analysed.
Here we sought to determine the presence of HPV16 in serum collected at
diagnosis in locally advanced HN tumors and to compare serum with primary
tumor.Aim: Final aim is to establish the prognostic role of genomic HPV16
detection by PCR in serum of OT and in non-oropharynx tumor (non-OT)
patients and to compare sensitivity with overall survival (OS).Methods:
We analyzed HPV16 status in 18 OT and 32 non-OT patients (5F/45M; median
age 62, range 47-81) by qualitative PCR on genomic DNA extracted from
Formalin Fixed Paraffin Embedded tissues and serum samples, using
specific primer pairs for E1, E6 and L1 fragments. Pos and neg control
cell lines were added at each PCR session and amplicons were visualized
on 2% agarose gel. Serum and tissue DNAs were extracted using the QIAmp
Blood Midi Kit according to manufacturer's protocol and by proteinase K
and phenol, respectively. Overall survival was performed by Kaplan-Meier
curves using SPSS version 13.Results: HPV16 positive data on primary
tumors were 44.4% (N= 8) in OT and 3.1% (N= 1) in non-OT for E1, 50% (N=
9) and 21.9% (N= 7) for L1 and 61.2% (N= 11) and 53.1% (N= 17) for E6
fragments, respectively. We determined that in OT patients all the HPV16
negative tissues showed a full concordance with the corresponding serum
samples, on the contrary in non-OT patients we found 5 positive serum
samples with a correspondent HPV16 negative tissue (7% of discordance).
Concordance in HPV16 positive samples (tissue and serum) was higher in
OT, with 75% for E1 (6/8), 66.7% for L1 (6/9) and 54.5% for E6 (6/11)
fragments, than in non-OT, with 0% (0/1), 14.3% (1/7) and 41.2% (7/17),
respectively. Moreover, our previously data performed on 66 OT patients
reported that HPV16 pos tissues (13/66) for E1 showed a higher OS than in
the negative ones (p = 0.016; median OS = 161.8 in pos vs 15 months in
neg).Conclusions: The high concordance between sera and tissues for E1
could enable its determination on serum as an emerging marker for
prognosis in OT patients. Indeed, analysis on additional 100 serum
samples is ongoing with the aim of reaching statistical significance in
the correlation with OS. Moreover we are collecting sequential sera taken
at different times during patients' follow up in order to study HPV16
dynamical changes relevant in HN tumors.

