Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation of cellular apoptosis via a novel protein-protein
interaction of tumor suppressor p53 with the xenobiotic pregnane X
receptor (PXR) in colon cancer cells


The cellular response to DNA damage comprises of DNA repair, cell-cycle
checkpoint control and DNA damage-induced apoptosis to promote genomic
integrity and suppress tumorigenesis. However, cancer cells can modulate
the DNA damage response by suppressing DNA repair, altering cell cycle
checkpoint control and ultimately downregulating tumor suppressors that
contribute to apoptosis promoting genomic instability and avoidance of
apoptosis.Although PXR is well established as a xenobiotic nuclear
receptor that plays a central role in xenobiotic metabolism and
disposition, emerging evidence suggest PXR as a regulator of apoptosis,
promoting a malignant phenotype, both in vitro and in vivo. The tumor
suppressor p53 can be activated in the presence of DNA damage and can
induce cell cycle arrest to allow for DNA repair, or ultimately apoptosis
suppressing tumor formation. We hypothesized that the novel
protein-protein interaction between PXR and p53 contributes to the
oncogenic functions of PXR enhancing colon carcinogenesis. Using
immunoprecipitation, we found that PXR forms a protein-protein
interaction with p53, resulting in reduced p53 activation and expression
of downstream pro-apoptotic genes. In addition, utilizing the soft agar
assay, we found that PXR overexpression leads to increased malignant
transformation in colon cancer cells. Our findings show for the first
time that PXR can physically bind to p53, resulting in downregulation of
p53 activity and increased malignant transformation in colon cancer
cells. Thus, these results provide insight into the biological
significance of novel protein-protein interactions with PXR and how the
PXR-p53 protein-protein interaction influences p53-mediated mechanism of
tumor suppression.

