Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Polymorphisms in cancer-related genes and survival in early stage
non-small cell lung cancer


Background: This study was conducted to identify genetic polymorphisms
associated with the prognosis of patients with early stage non-small cell
lung cancer (NSCLC).Materials and Methods: We genotyped 1,969 potentially
functional single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of 1,151 genes using
the Affymetrix custom-made GeneChip, which were related to the
development and progression of cancer, in 166 NSCLC patients who
underwent curative surgical resection. A replication study was performed
on an independent cohort of 626 patients.Results: Fifty six SNPs which
were associated with both overall survival (OS) and disease-free survival
(DFS) with log-rank P values lower than 0.05 in a discovery set were
selected for validation. Among the 56 SNPs, five SNPs (guanine nucleotide
binding protein, beta polypeptide 2-like 1 [GNB2L1] rs1279736C>A and
rs3756585T>G, complement component 3 [C3] rs2287845T>C,
p300/CBP-associated factor [PCAF] rs17006625A>G, and pericentriolar
material 1 [PCM1] rs17691523C>G) were found to be significantly
associated with survival outcomes in the same direction as the discovery
set. In combined analysis, the rs1279736C>A and s3756585T>G were most
significantly associated with OS and DFS in multivariate analysis (P for
OS = 4x10-5 and 7x10-5, respectively; and P for DFS = 0.003, both; under
a codominant model).Conclusions: We identified five SNPs as markers for
prognosis of patients with surgically resected NSCLC.

