Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Plasma, tissue and tumor pharmacokinetics of PM060184 in NSCL
xenograft mouse model


Background: PM060184 is new marine derived tubulin-binding agent
originally isolated from the sponge Lithoplocamia lithistoides. PM060184
has shown potent antitumor activity in vivo against a panel of different
tumor xenografted models such as colon, gastric, NSCLC, prostate and
renal. Also, PM060184 has demonstrated to have a potent in vitro and in
vivo activity in P-gp overexpressing cells. PM060184 is currently under
evaluation in Phase I clinical studies in patients with advanced cancer
diseases.Material and Methods: Athymic female nu/nu mice were
subcutaneously implanted with H460 (NSCLC). Tumor bearing animals were
randomly allocated into experimental groups (efficacy or pharmacokinetics
-PK-). The animals belonging to the efficacy study received three iv
doses in a weekly (q7dx3) schedule of PM060184 at 16 mg/kg or placebo.
The antitumor activity was followed by the change in tumor volume for
treated and placebo groups. The PK group received a single dose of
PM060184 at 16 mg/kg. Then, plasma, tissue (brain, spleen, lung, muscle
and heart) and tumor samples (N=3-4/sampling time) were collected at
different times and up to 96 h post-administration. Tissue and tumor
samples were diluted and homogenized using Precellys24 bead beating
technology. Once homogenized the samples were processed as per plasma.
PM060184 was detected in plasma, tissue and tumor extracts by
electrospray ionization/tandem mass spectrometry after extraction by
supported liquid extraction (SLE).Results: The mean maximum plasma
concentration (Cmax) was 2,452.5 ng/mL. The area under curve (AUC) was
2,963 ng*hr/mL. The plasma clearance was 5,398.5 mL/hr/kg. The volume of
distribution at steady state was 880.7 mL/kg. The terminal half-life was
4.7 hr. The AUC0-tlast values for brain, spleen, lung, muscle and heart
were 216.2, 7,402.9, 3,857.7, 2,614.6 and 2,929.5 ng*hr/g, respectively;
however the AUC value for H460 xenografted tumors was 51,321.4 ng*hr/g
(tlast is 96 hours for tumor, 8 hours for brain and 24 hours for the
other tissues).Conclusion: PM060184 showed similar plasma and tissue
pharmacokinetics properties as well as preferential tumor distribution
until 96 h after an iv administration in mice bearing H460 xenografted
tumors.

