Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Multivitamins and cancer in the Physicians Health Study II:
Expanded analyses and insights


The Physicians Health Study (PHS) II, the only clinical trial testing a
daily multivitamin, recently reported a significant 8% reduction in the
primary endpoint of total cancer. We conducted expanded post hoc analyses
to test the effects of a common multivitamin (daily Centrum Silver) on
the risk of site-specific cancer in a randomized, double-blind,
placebo-controlled trial of 14,641 U.S. male physicians initially aged 50
years, including 1,312 with cancer at randomization. Treatment and
follow-up occurred from 1997 to 2011. Cancer endpoints were confirmed by
an Endpoints Committee of physicians blinded to randomized treatment. PHS
II maintained high rates of morbidity and mortality follow-up. Computing
hazard ratios (HRs) and 95% confidence intervals (95% CIs), we examined
the effect of a daily multivitamin on cancers grouped by anatomic site
(defined by ICD9 codes) and by previously unreported cancer sites. During
a median follow-up of 11.2 years among men with mean age of 64.3 y at
baseline, men taking a daily multivitamin had consistent, non-significant
reductions in cancers of the digestive organs and peritoneum (HR, 0.82;
95% CI, 0.67-1.00; P=.05) and respiratory and intrathoracic organs (HR,
0.81; 95% CI, 0.60-1.09; P=.17) (Table). Men with a history of cancer had
a significant reduction in genitourinary cancers (HR, 0.56; 95% CI,
0.35-0.89; P=.01). For individual cancer sites, there were strong but
nonsignificant reductions in brain, colon, esophageal, gallbladder,
kidney, liver, myeloid myeloma, small intestine, stomach, and thyroid
cancer, and nonsignificant increases in connective tissue, multiple
myeloma, other lymphoid, and rectum cancer. These expanded trial data in
middle-aged and older men indicate that daily multivitamin use may
benefit digestive and respiratory cancers, and genitourinary cancer among
men with a history of cancer. These results support the need to
understand the mechanisms and long-term effects of daily multivitamin use.


