Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of genetic loci associated with ovarian cancer
prognosis


Primary and acquired chemotherapy resistance remains a major challenge in
the treatment of ovarian cancer. We hypothesize that heritable
polymorphisms might be associated with clinical outcome. Through the
Ovarian Cancer Association Consortium, we have collected detailed
clinical data from a large number of ovarian cancer patients. We have
conducted association analyses of progression-free survival (PFS) and
overall survival (OS) for 2,901 European women with ovarian carcinoma for
8 million imputed SNPs with minor allele frequency 0.02 and good
imputation quality (imputation r2 0.3) from the iCOGS experiment (Pharoah
et al Nat Genet. 2013). Cox regression models adjusted for known
prognostic factors were used to assess the log-additive effects of SNPs
on PFS and OS in 2,825 patients who underwent cytoreductive surgery and
received any chemotherapy (all chemo) and in the subset of 1,098 patients
who underwent cytoreductive surgery followed by 4 cycles of carboplatin
AUC 5 or 6 and paclitaxel 175 or 135 mg/m2 intravenously (standard
chemo). We identified five SNPs at four loci that were significantly
associated with outcome (p 10-7) in at least one of four analyses
(Table). Analysis of expression data for genes within a 1Mb region
flanking each lead SNP indicates significant associations between nearby
genes and ovarian cancer survival. Of particular interest is the heat
shock protein crystalline B (CRYAB) at 11q23.1. We have also identified
significant associations with KIAA1598 and RAVER2. Further analysis of
these loci in a larger genotyped sample is necessary to definitively
identify SNP(s) associated with outcome. Our study adds to the growing
evidence that genetic variants are associated with ovarian cancer
prognosis.Table: SNPs associated with ovarian cancer outcome and gene
expression


