Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Distinct mutational patterns in liver fluke-related and
non-infection-related bile duct cancers revealed by whole exome sequencing


Cholangiocarcinoma, the second most common liver cancer, is known to be
caused by different etiologies such as liver fluke infection, choledochal
cyst and primary sclerosing cholangitis. Thus, this cancer provides a
good model to study the impact of different carcinogenic exposures on the
specific patterns of somatic mutations in human tumors. To address this
issue, we profiled 209 cholangiocarcinomas (CCAs) from Asia and Europe,
including 108 cases caused by liver fluke Opisthorchis viverrini (O.
viverrini)-infection and 101 cases due to non-O. viverrini etiologies.
Whole-exome (N = 15) and prevalence screening (N = 194) revealed
recurrent somatic mutations in BAP1 and ARID1A, neither of which has been
previously reported to be mutated in CCA. Comparisons between
intrahepatic O. viverrini and non-O. viverrini CCAs demonstrated
statistically significant different mutation patterns: BAP1 and IDH1/2
were more frequently mutated in non-O. viverrini CCAs, while TP53
displayed the reciprocal pattern. Functional studies demonstrated tumor
suppressive roles of BAP1 and ARID1A, establishing the role of chromatin
modulators in CCA pathogenesis. These findings indicate that different
causative etiologies may induce distinct somatic alterations even within
the same tumor type.

