Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Extracellular matrix-integrin B1 signaling is a major mediator of
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition and contributes to prostate cancer
invasion and metastasis


Within North America, prostate cancer is the most commonly diagnosed
cancer in men with devastating implications deriving from metastasis,
particularly those established in the bone. We have elucidated mechanisms
by which prostate cancer undergoes metastasis with particular focus on
the relationship between extracellular-matrix binding proteins, Integrin
B1 (ITGB1) and epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT). Previous
results in the laboratory suggested that prostate tumor cells depleted of
ITGB1 were unable to form colonies in soft agarose and were impaired in
their invasive abilities in vitro. In order to determine the possible
mechanisms by which ITGB1 controlled these phenotypes, we performed
numerous genetic techniques including siRNA targeted depletion of ITGB1
and subsequent profiling of pathway specific message RNA by RTqPCR to
monitor the effects ITGB1 depletion on factors known to control EMT which
is also associated with cell invasion. We found that prostate tumor cells
depleted of ITGB1 had altered expression of numerous genes associated
with EMT or cell invasion, many of which have been validated by RT-qPCR
and western blot. In particular, a protease inhibitor SERPINE1 also known
as Plasminogen Activator Inhibitor 1 (PAI-1) which is associated with EMT
has been established as a target of ITGB1 regulation, in part via the
ability of ITGB1 to regulate upstream factors associated with SERPINE1
expression such as TGFB2. Of particular interest to prostate cancer bone
metastasis, we further found that collagen I interacting with ITGB1
significantly upregulated this pathway, and given the known role of EMT
in mediating resistance to anti-cancer agents, this finding could help
elucidate novel targets for the development of new drugs to treat
prostate cancer bone metastasis.

