Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Quantitative protein profiling of tumor angiogenesis and
metastasis biomarkers in mouse and human models


Tumor and stromal cells secrete a variety of proteins acting as
extracellular signals and creating a supportive microenvironment for
tumor development, angiogenesis, and metastasis. We used the MILLIPLEX
MAP cytokine/chemokine, cancer, angiogenesis, metastasis, MMP, bone
metabolism, adipocyte, and cell signaling multi-pathway panels, based on
the Luminex xMAP technology, to quantitatively evaluate the protein
biomarker expression profiles on cultured mouse and human tumor cells and
stromal cells as well as in vivo mouse and human tumor tissues. In the
mouse system, biomarker profiling was performed to characterize secreted
protein levels in Lewis Lung carcinoma (LLC) cells, B16.10 melanoma
cells, b.End3 endothelial cells, and LLC tumors. The in vivo
characterization, using primary tumors from mice bearing metastatic LLC,
has identified differential expression of a panel of biomarkers,
including amphiregulin (AREG), EGF, PECAM-1, KC, MCP-1, MIP-2, MMP-12,
and resistin, between the high-fat (45% fat) and AIN-93G (15% fat) fed
mice (pTumor and stromal cells secrete a variety of proteins acting as
extracellular signals and creating a supportive microenvironment for
tumor development, angiogenesis, and metastasis. We used the MILLIPLEX
MAP cytokine/chemokine, cancer, angiogenesis, metastasis, MMP, bone
metabolism, adipocyte, and cell signaling multi-pathway panels, based on
the Luminex xMAP technology, to quantitatively evaluate the protein
biomarker expression profiles on cultured mouse and human tumor cells and
stromal cells as well as in vivo mouse and human tumor tissues. In the
mouse system, biomarker profiling was performed to characterize secreted
protein levels in Lewis Lung carcinoma (LLC) cells, B16.10 melanoma
cells, b.End3 endothelial cells, and LLC tumors. The in vivo
characterization, using primary tumors from mice bearing metastatic LLC,
has identified differential expression of a panel of biomarkers,
including amphiregulin (AREG), EGF, PECAM-1, KC, MCP-1, MIP-2, MMP-12,
and resistin, between the high-fat (45% fat) and AIN-93G (15% fat) fed
mice (p<0.05, 8 mice per group). These putative biomarkers may be
involved in molecular mechanisms of the high-fat enhanced metastasis.
Cell signaling pathway analysis revealed the activation of multiple
pathways (JNK, p38, ERK, and STAT) in this mouse LLC model. In the human
system, a heat map was generated to summarize the secreted protein
signatures and the soluble receptor tyrosine kinases (RTK) profile on a
series of the cultured human tumor cells (lung, brain, breast, prostate,
liver, and colon) and 3 other human cell lines, HUVEC (endothelial),
THP-1 (monocyte), and HFF-1 (fibroblast). Lastly, expression profiling of
tumor and adjacent normal tissues from 2 patients with metastatic breast
cancer was analyzed. Elevated levels of protein biomarkers, including
MDC, IL-1RA, IL-8, IP-10, MCP-1, MIP-1, OPG, OPN, SPARC, periostin,
endoglin, PLGF, VEGF-A, MMP-1, MMP-7, MMP-9, and MMP-12, were detected in
the breast tumors analyzed compared to their matched adjacent normal
breast tissue. In summary, our results demonstrated that multiplexing
using the Luminex xMAP bead-based platform for simultaneous quantitative
expression profiling is a useful proteomic research tool, providing
insights into biomarkers related to tumor progression and metastasis.

