Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Induction of Sp1 factor by CYP1B1 inhibits TRAIL-mediated
apoptotic pathway


Human cytochrome P450 1B1 (CYP1B1) belongs to the CYP1 family and is
known as a major enzyme for estradiol 4-hydroxylation. It has been
reported that CYP1B1 expression is higher in the tumor tissues than the
normal ones, especially in hormone-related cancers such as breast,
ovarian and prostate. Previously, we identified that CYP1B1 induces cell
proliferation by activation of Wnt/-catenin signal pathway. To explore
the role of CYP1B1 on cancer cell proliferation further, we investigated
whether CYP1B1 blocks apoptotic pathways. Using Western blot and RT-PCR,
the expression of TRAIL was examined in MCF-7 cells, and we found that
CYP1B1 overexpression or treatment with a CYP1B1 inducer, 7,
12-dimethylbenz[]anthracene (DMBA) caused suppression of TRAIL and its
receptors (DR4 and DR5) expression. However, when cells were treated with
CYP1B1 siRNA or a selective CYP1B1 inhibitor, tetramethoxystilbene (TMS),
expression of TRAIL and its receptors were significantly increased. Sp1,
a zinc finger-containing transcription factor, has been reported to
suppress TRAIL gene expression by binding TRAIL promoter. Interestingly,
CYP1B1 overexpression and DMBA induced Sp1 expression and TMS was able to
prevent DMBA-induced Sp1 expression. Sp1 knockdown with siRNA suppressed
c-FLIP, an inhibitor protein of TRAIL-mediated apoptosis while it
enhanced TRAIL and DR4 expression. These results were reversed by Sp1
overexpession. Moreover, attenuation of Sp1 DNA binding activity using
mithramycin A, a Sp1 binding inhibitor, resulted in recovery of TRAIL
expression suppressed by DMBA. Taken together, these data suggest that
CYP1B1 prevents apoptosis via TRAIL suppression and this is mediated by
Sp1 induction.

