Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tyr-phosphorylation of PDP1 toggles recruitment between ACAT1 and
SIRT3 to regulate pyruvate dehydrogenase complex and promote the Warburg
effect


Mitochondrial pyruvate dehydrogenase complex (PDC) is crucial for glucose
homoeostasis in mammalian cells. The current understanding of PDC
regulation involves serine phosphorylation of pyruvate dehydrogenase
(PDH) by PDH kinase (PDHK), which inhibits PDH and subsequently PDC,
whereas dephosphorylation of PDH by PDH phosphatase (PDP) activates PDC.
Here we report that lysine acetylation of PDHA1 and PDP1 is induced by
EGF-stimulation in human cells, and is common in diverse human cancer
cells. We found that K321 acetylation inhibits PDHA1 by recruiting PDHK1
and K202 acetylation inhibits PDP1 by dissociating its substrate PDHA1,
both of which are important for the metabolic switch to glycolysis in
cancer cells and promote tumor growth. Moreover, we identified
mitochondrial acetyl-CoA acetyltransferase 1 (ACAT1) as the upstream
acetyltransferase of PDHA1 and PDP1 using a novel shRNA library that
targets the majority of acetyltransferases in the human genome, and SIRT3
as the deacetylase. Knockdown of ACAT1 results in decreased cancer cell
proliferation and tumor growth. Furthermore, we found that EGFR and other
tyrosine kinases including FGFR1 that are frequently dysregulated in
human cancers phosphorylate PDP1 at Y381, which dissociates SIRT3 and
recruits ACAT1 to PDC.Our findings suggest a novel mechanism where lysine
acetylation of PDHA1 and PDP occurs in both normal and cancer cells, and
contributes to inhibitory regulation of PDC, providing complementary
insight into the current understanding of PDHA1 regulation. We also
demonstrate that hierarchical, distinct post-translational modifications
crosstalk to regulate PDC by controlling its molecular composition.
Moreover, our findings for the first time link a mitochondrial
acetyltransferase, ACAT1, to the Warburg effect and tumor growth,
suggesting that the ACAT1-PDP1-PDHA axis represents a promising
anti-cancer target.

