Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DNA hypermethylation or upregulated miRNA21 expression potentially
leads to decreased mRNA expression of COL1A2, SFRP2, SOCS3, BCL2, MAL and
PTGS2 in left-sided colorectal adenoma and cancer


Background: It is well known that beside genetic factors such as
mutations, epigenetic mechanisms can also contribute to colorectal cancer
formation and progression. Although several genes influenced by DNA
methylation and miRNA expression alteration have been identified, our
knowledge of the background of gene expression alterations during CRC
development remains incomplete.Aims: Our aims were to identify DNA
methylation markers and miRNAs playing role in left-sided CRC development
on the basis of gene expression alterations along the adenoma-carcinoma
formation.Materials & methods: Whole genome expression profiling was
performed by using HGU133 Plus 2.0 microarrays (Affymetrix) on healthy
colonic (n=49), colorectal adenoma (n=49) and left-sided CRC (n=49)
biopsy samples and also on laser microdissected (LCM) epithelial and
stromal cells from healthy (n=6) and CRC (n=6) samples. Methylation
status of genes with gradually decreasing or increasing expression along
the adenoma-carcinoma sequence were analyzed on macrodissected (n=10) and
LCM (n=5) healthy colonic, adenomatous biopsy (n=10) and LCM (n=5),
macrodissected (n=10) and LCM (n=5) left-sided colorectal cancer samples
using bisulfite-sequencing PCR (BS-PCR) followed by pyrosequencing. In
silico miRNA prediction for the selected genes with miRWALK algorithm,
miRNA expression was analyzed on colorectal cancers (n=3), adenomas (n=3)
and normal tissue adjacent to tumor (NAT)(n=3) samples using the Human
Panel I + II with the miRCURY Universal RT microRNA PCR protocol
(Exiqon). In order to investigate the potential impact of DNA methylation
on the protein levels PTGDR and SFRP1 immunohistochemistry experiments
were performed.Results: A set of transcripts (18 genes including MAL,
SFRP1, SULT1A1, PRIMA1, PTGDR) showed decreasing expression (p0,01) in
the biopsy samples along the adenoma-carcinoma sequence. COL1A2, SFRP2,
SOCS3 showed hypermethylation and THBS2 showed hypomethylation both in
the adenomas and tumor samples compared to NAT, while BCL2, PRIMA1 and
PTGDR showed hypermethylation only in the CRC group. miR-21 was found to
be significantly (pBackground: It is well known that beside genetic
factors such as mutations, epigenetic mechanisms can also contribute to
colorectal cancer formation and progression. Although several genes
influenced by DNA methylation and miRNA expression alteration have been
identified, our knowledge of the background of gene expression
alterations during CRC development remains incomplete.Aims: Our aims were
to identify DNA methylation markers and miRNAs playing role in left-sided
CRC development on the basis of gene expression alterations along the
adenoma-carcinoma formation.Materials & methods: Whole genome expression
profiling was performed by using HGU133 Plus 2.0 microarrays (Affymetrix)
on healthy colonic (n=49), colorectal adenoma (n=49) and left-sided CRC
(n=49) biopsy samples and also on laser microdissected (LCM) epithelial
and stromal cells from healthy (n=6) and CRC (n=6) samples. Methylation
status of genes with gradually decreasing or increasing expression along
the adenoma-carcinoma sequence were analyzed on macrodissected (n=10) and
LCM (n=5) healthy colonic, adenomatous biopsy (n=10) and LCM (n=5),
macrodissected (n=10) and LCM (n=5) left-sided colorectal cancer samples
using bisulfite-sequencing PCR (BS-PCR) followed by pyrosequencing. In
silico miRNA prediction for the selected genes with miRWALK algorithm,
miRNA expression was analyzed on colorectal cancers (n=3), adenomas (n=3)
and normal tissue adjacent to tumor (NAT)(n=3) samples using the Human
Panel I + II with the miRCURY Universal RT microRNA PCR protocol
(Exiqon). In order to investigate the potential impact of DNA methylation
on the protein levels PTGDR and SFRP1 immunohistochemistry experiments
were performed.Results: A set of transcripts (18 genes including MAL,
SFRP1, SULT1A1, PRIMA1, PTGDR) showed decreasing expression (p0,01) in
the biopsy samples along the adenoma-carcinoma sequence. COL1A2, SFRP2,
SOCS3 showed hypermethylation and THBS2 showed hypomethylation both in
the adenomas and tumor samples compared to NAT, while BCL2, PRIMA1 and
PTGDR showed hypermethylation only in the CRC group. miR-21 was found to
be significantly (p<0,01) upregulated in the adenoma and tumor samples
compared to the healthy colonic tissue controls that can potentially
influence the expression of genes without remarkable DNA methylation
alteration (e.g. BCL2, MAL, PTGS2). Decreasing protein levels of PTGDR
and SFRP1 could be observed along the adenoma-carcinoma
sequence.Conclusion: Genome-wide gene expression-based screening was
found to be a suitable approach for the identification of genes, that can
be potentially downregulated by DNA hypermethylation or miRNA
upregulation. Hypermethylation of the selected markers (COL1A2, SFRP2,
SOCS3) or miR21 upregulation might result in reduced expression and may
contribute to the formation of colorectal cancer.

