Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Resveratrol causes biphasic apoptotic and proliferative effects
and at higher/proapoptotic/anti-angiogenesis concentrations causes
suppression of nitric oxide/cGMP/protein kinase G signaling and decreased
expression of prosurvival proteins c-IAP1, c-IAP2, livin and XIAP in
human umbilical vein endothelial cells


Anti-cancer/anti-angiogenesis effects of resveratrol have been reported.
Resveratrol increases nitric oxide (NO) production via increased
expression of endothelial-form-NO-synthase (eNOS). However, the role of
cGMP/protein kinase G (PKG) signaling, a pathway activated by NO/eNOS, in
the anti-angiogenic effects of resveratrol is still unclear. In the
present study, involvement of endogenous NO/cGMP/PKG pathway and
downstream pro-survival proteins (Inhibitor of Apoptosis Proteins, IAPs)
are studied in relation to anti-angiogenic effects of resveratrol in
human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs). Our results show that
resveratrol at higher/anti-angiogenesis concentrations (>50 M) inhibits
tube formation and cell migration/invasion. Resveratrol stimulates
proliferation/DNA synthesis at lower concentration (10 M), but inhibits
proliferation/DNA synthesis at higher concentrations (100 and 500 M).
Moreover, resveratrol at lower concentrations (10, 20 and 50 M) protects
HUVECs against spontaneous apoptosis, but induces higher-level apoptosis
at higher concentration (500 M). ODQ
(1H-[1,2,4]oxadiazolo[4,3-a]quinoxalin-1-one), inhibitor of endogenous
NO-induced activation of soluble-guanylyl-cyclase and subsequent cGMP
biosynthesis, completely abolishes the anti-apoptotic/cytoprotective
effects of low-concentration resveratrol. 8-Br-cGMP, a direct stimulator
of PKG kinase-activity, protects against pro-apoptotic effects of
high-concentration resveratrol, establishing a cytoprotective role of
activated-PKG in HUVECs. Western blot analyses show that
higher/pro-apoptotic/anti-angiogenesis concentrations of resveratrol
cause suppression of PKG kinase-activity (indicated by decreased VASP
phosphorylation at Ser239) and decreased expression of eNOS and four
IAPs, c-IAP1, c-IAP2, livin and XIAP. Overall, our results suggest a
cytoprotective role of NO/cGMP/PKG signaling in HUVECs and further
suggest that resveratrol (>50 M)-induced anti-angiogenesis/pro-apoptosis
involves suppression of NO/cGMP/PKG signaling and decreased expression of
pro-survival proteins c-IAP1, c-IAP2, livin and XIAP.

