Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Potential of asparagine depletion for the treatment of bladder
cancer and other urological tumors


Due to asparagine synthetase (ASNS) deficiency, tumors cells auxotrophic
for L-asparagine lack capability to synthesize this amino acid and depend
to circulating L-asparagine for survival. Based on this rational,
L-asparaginase (L-Aspa), an enzyme depleting L-asparagine, is an
essential drug in the treatment of acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), as
these hematological cancer cells express low levels of ASNS.Recent
evidence suggests that some solid tumors are also deficient in ASNS
(Lorenzi, 2008; Dufour, 2012; Zhang, 2013), providing rationale for
testing L-Aspa treatment in other contexts.In this study, we investigated
the levels of ASNS expression in tumor tissues from patients with
urological cancers (bladder, prostate and kidney) and we investigated the
sensitivity to L-Aspa of bladder and prostate cell lines.Material &
Method:ASNS expression was evaluated by a validated immunohistochemistry
(IHC) method on tissue biopsie microarrays (USBiomax, Rockville, MD)
including 384 cases of bladder, 94 cases of prostate and 75 cases of
kidney tumors. A score was attributed to each tumor based on ASNS IHC
labeling intensity from 0 (no labeling) to 3 (strong labeling). Tumors
expressing no/low ASNS (scores 0 and 1) were considered potentially
sensitive to asparagine depletion.Sensitivity to L-Aspa (expressed as an
IC50) was assessed in vitro by measuring the cell viability of bladder
cancer cell lines (RT-4 and UM-UC-3) and prostate cancer cell line PC-3
in the presence of various concentrations of L-Aspa. ASNS expression in
cell lines was evaluated by western-blot.Results:ASNS expression was
low/null in 77.3% of bladder tumors, 86.2% of prostate tumors and 72% of
kidney tumors. In bladder tumors, no correlation was found between the
grade of the tumor and its expression of ASNS.Bladder and prostate cancer
cell lines were all sensitive to L-Aspa (IC50 = 0.31, 0.12 and 0.22 IU/mL
for RT-4, UM-UC-3 and PC-3 cell lines, respectively) at a level similar
to the sensitivity observed with the L-Aspa-sensitive MOLT-4 ALL cell
line (IC50=0.19 IU/mL). All cell lines displayed low basal expression of
ASNS.Conclusion:The sensitivity of bladder and prostate cancer cell lines
to L-Aspa and the low/no expression of ASNS in the majority of urological
tumor biopsies suggest that an extensive population of patients with
urological tumors may respond to asparagine depletion. However, L-Aspa is
accompanied with well known serious side-effects (hypersensitivity,
coagulation disorders, pancreatitis, liver failure) and this drug should
be used very carefully especially in older or frail patients. A new safer
formulation is requested to make easier the clinical development of
L-Aspa in urological cancer.

