Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combination of innate immune activators stimulates leukocyte
populations in the tumor microenvironment


Tumor microenvironment (TME) harbors a multitude of immune cells which
can comprise up to 50% of the tumor. The most abundant cells in the TME
often are tumor associated macrophages (TAM) and tumor associated
neutrophils (TAN). These cells potentially possess anti-tumoral cytotoxic
effects, and have the potential to induce a broad range of cellular
immune responses. However, in the developing tumor, due to elements
secreted by the tumor cells, TAM and TAN are altered to act in a
pro-tumor manner. The purpose of our study was the optimization and
characterization of a treatment aimed at inducing an anti-tumoral
response of innate immune cells in the TME. In a melanoma B16 mice model,
micro-particles carrying targeting and induction components were injected
intra-tumorally and the responses of the tumors, including immune cells
populations were monitored. Without treatment the CD45+ cells ratio of
total TME decreased as tumor progressed. Particles carrying Toll-like
receptor ligands inhibited tumor growth, inducing significant elevation
of CD45+ cells in the TME. Using different inducing molecules (inducers)
or simultaneous use of several inducers enabled the stimulation of
specific immune cell populations within the tumor. The current study
suggests that by using tumor targeted particles with adequate inducers,
one could change the tumor microenvironment innate immune cells toward an
anti-tumor response.

