Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Therapeutic efficacy of novel selenium-containing HDACi in acute
leukemia


Despite tremendous advances in treatment of leukemia that have resulted
in increased survival of patients with this disease, therapy for
high-risk and relapsed leukemia remains a clinical challenge. This
necessitates the development of novel, more potent therapeutic
modalities. Epigenetic therapy with various types of inhibitors of
histone deacetylases (HDACi), have demonstrated therapeutic efficacy in a
range of malignancies, often with minimal side effects. Dr. Shantu Amin's
group recently reported the development of a potent, novel,
selenium-containing HDAC inhibitor (SelSA-1), which showed efficacy
against Hodgkin's lymphoma and chronic myelogenous leukemia cells, as
well as against lung cancer and melanoma cell lines. Here we expand
efficacy studies of selenium-containing HDAC inhibitors to include a
broad range of hematopoietic malignancies and begin to address the drug
effects on cellular functions. We tested the therapeutic efficacy of two
novel HDAC inhibitors - SelSa-1 and SelSa-2 on acute lymphoblastic
leukemia, acute myelogenous leukemia and non-Hodgkin's B cell lymphoma.
Cell proliferation assays demonstrated sharp dose-dependent cytotoxic
effects in all the above cell lines at 96-hours post-treatment.
Quantitative analysis showed that SelSa-1 and SelSa-2 have distinct
effects in different types of hematopoietic malignancies. In T-cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) and in non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, both
SelSa-1 and Selsa-2 have similar therapeutic activity with IC50 = 1uM and
1-2uM, respectively. In B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia, SelSa-1 has
superior therapeutic activity compared to SelSa-2 with IC50 = 0.2 uM vs.
1.25, respectively. In acute promyelocytic leukemia (APML) without the
t:15:17 translocation, SelSa-1 was superior to SelSa-2 (IC50= 0.25uM and
1uM respectively), while APML with the t:15:17 translocation showed
similar sensitivity to both compounds with an IC50 of 1-2uM. Cell cycle
analysis performed by flow cytometry revealed that these agents induce
G1-cell cycle arrest in leukemia cells. Preliminary data suggest that
both SelSa-1 and SelSa-2 have a synergistic effect with standard
chemotherapeutic agents that induce DNA-damage. In summary, these results
demonstrate the effectiveness of two selenium-containing analogs of SAHA,
SelSA-1 and 2, on leukemia cells from multiple hematopoietic lineages.
Additional studies to identify detailed mechanisms of the effects of
these drugs on cellular function are underway.

