Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Thousands of published cancer signatures and pathways can be
collapsed into a handful of non-redundant gene programs: a TCGA
pan-cancer analysis


Background: The OMIC revolution has produced tens of thousands of
published gene expression signatures, pathways, and modules associated
with cancer biology or patient outcome. Thanks to the TCGA effort to
systematically collect molecular data from multiple cancer types, it is
now possible to compare these signatures within and across cancers, and
to collapse them into a smaller set of non-redundant features.Methods: We
scored 3602 TCGA samples representing 12 cancer types for expression of a
compendium of 6,898 published gene expression prognostic signatures,
co-expression modules, amplicons and pathways, using RNAseq expression
profiles. 6477 of these features were from the database MsigDB, and the
rest from the literature. To define non-redundant gene-programs, we
applied a bimodality filter and used Weighted Gene Correlation Network
Analysis (WGCNA) to aggregate the bimodal signatures and pathways into
coherent clusters. Associations were assessed using standard statistical
methods.Results: From the thousands of cancer signatures in our analysis
we identified 22 non-redundant gene-programs, defined as groups of gene
signatures with high correlation across the Pan-Cancer dataset. These
gene programs represent many of the hallmarks of cancer, including
sustained proliferative signaling and DNA repair; immune system
signaling; altered glycolytic and fatty acid metabolism yielding
resistance to stress; apoptosis evasion; epithelial to mesenchymal
transition; co-opted squamous and stemness developmental programs;
adhesion and cell-cell communication programs, some using plasma membrane
and lipid vesicles; and self-sufficiency in growth signals employing
estrogen, EGF, and MYC. More than a third of the original signatures
clustered together in the proliferation gene-program. In addition to cell
cycle and proliferation pathways, this program includes prognostic
signatures for lymphoma, bladder, lung, breast, ovarian and other
cancers, suggesting that most prognostic signatures are sensing a common
proliferative signal associated with cancer aggression. The presence of
two dominant immune signals showed a clear divergence in immune signaling
between T cell/B cell immune activation and interferon responsive
signaling, with the former correlated with immuno-modulatory treatment
targets like CTLA4 and PD1. Interestingly, basal, hypoxic, and squamous
differentiation programs were associated with poor outcome in many cancer
types; in addition, expression of a more novel program dominated by tumor
suppressing miRNA associated with good prognosis.Conclusion: The
compendium of gene expression signatures is correlated, and can be
reduced to a small set of non-redundant gene-programs that mirror the
cancer hallmarks and may provide opportunities for investigating cancer
heterogeneity and treatment approaches beyond tissue of origin.

