Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Intratumoral treatment of one tumor lesion with LTX-315 induces
complete tumor regression and long-term specific protective immune
responses in a metastatic rodent tumor model


Host defense peptides are naturally occurring peptides that have an
important function in innate immune responses in almost every life form.
Recently it has been documented that several host defense peptides have
anticancer activity. Based on a naturally occurring host defense peptide
we have do novo designed the short chemically modified peptide LTX-315.
We have demonstrated that LTX-315 induces an immunogenic type of cell
death with subsequent release of danger signals (e.g. HMBG1, ATP and
Cytochrome C) and tumor associated antigens (TAA`s). In addition LTX-315
also has the ability to directly modulate immune-responses.In a novel rat
mescenhymal sarcoma model (rTMSC) we demonstrate that LTX-315 induces a
complete tumor regression by intratumoral (i.t.) injection. Studies on
treated tumor tissue confirmed massive necrosis and infiltration of
immune cells. Successfully treated animals were protected against
re-challenge with the tumor cell type treated, but not against other
types of tumor cells. Moreover, tumor resistance could be adoptively
transferred by spleen cells from LTX-315-treated animals. The resistance
was abrogated by depletion of T-lymphocytes.To clarify whether
intratumoral injection of LTX-315 in one tumor lesion can have an effect
on metastatic disease, intraperitoneal tumor and two subcutaneous tumors
were established in the animals. Thereafter, LTX-315 was injected into
one of the subcutaneous lesion and tumor growth assessed by living
imaging. The results showed that LTX-315 eradicated all three lesions and
the animal went into durable complete remission.We propose that by
targeting tumor locally LTX-315 can be used for individualized
therapeutic in situ vaccination against cancer.

