Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oncogenic activation of LMO2 by EGFR signaling regulates STAT3
phosphorylation and transcriptional activity in human glioma


Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is a highly heterogeneous disease
characterized by multiple genetic abnormalities. Amplification and
mutation of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) gene represent
signature genetic abnormalities occurred in over 60% of GBM. The
successful application of EGFR-targeted therapy for the treatment of GBM
is thus dependent on a thorough understanding of the intricate signal
pathways cross-linkage that underlies the pathobiology of this disease.
The LIM-domain only factor 2 (LMO2) gene is a crucial oncogene involved
in hematopoietic development and leukemogenesis. Herein, we showed, from
the TCGA GBM data, that LMO2 is highly expressed in EGFR-aberrant GBM
samples and might serve as a downstream effector of EGFR signaling in
GBM. Depletion of LMO2 expression impairs the maintenance of glioma cell
proliferation in vitro and in vivo. In addition, EGFR signaling induces
LMO2 nuclear translocation and enables LMO2 to form a triplex with EGFR
and Signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3). More
importantly, LMO2 serves as a bridging molecule to promote the formation
of EGFR/STAT3 complex and to enhance EGFR-mediated STAT3 Y705
phosphorylation upon EGF stimulation, which in turn up-regulates the
expression of STAT3-responsive genes involved in the regulation of cell
proliferation and tumor development. In conclusion, these findings reveal
that LMO2 might serve as a critical effector of EGFR signaling in human
glioma and highlight the essential function of LMO2 in EGF-stimulated
STAT3 activation and tumorigenesis.

