Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The ATR inhibitor VE-821 in combination with the novel
topoisomerase I inhibitor LMP-400 selectively kills cancer cells by
disabling DNA replication initiation and fork elongation


Camptothecin, a specific topoisomerase I inhibitor is a potent anticancer
drug, especially against solid tumors. This agent produces
well-characterized double-strand breaks upon collision of replication
forks with topoisomerase I cleavage complexes. In an attempt to improve
its efficacy, we conducted a synthetic lethal siRNA screening using a
library that targets nearly 7000 human genes. Depletion of ATR, the main
transducer of replication stress-induced DNA damage response exacerbated
cytotoxic response to both camptothecin and the indenoisoquinoline
LMP-400, a novel class of topoisomerase inhibitors in clinical trial.
Inhibition of ATR by the recently developed specific inhibitor VE-821
induced synergistic antiproliferative activity when combined with either
topoisomerase inhibitor. Cytotoxicity induced by the combination with
LMP-400 was greater than with camptothecin. Using single cell analysis
and DNA fiber spread, we show that VE-821 abrogated the S-phase
checkpoint, restored origin firing and replication fork progression.
Moreover, the combination of a topoisomerase inhibitor with VE-821
inhibited the phosphorylation of ATR and ATR-mediated Chk1
phosphorylation but strongly induced H2AX. Single cell analysis revealed
that H2AX pattern changed overtime from well-defined focus to a
pan-nuclear staining. The change in H2AX pattern can be useful as a
predictive biomarker to evaluate the efficacy of therapy. The key
implication of our work is the clinical rationale it provides to evaluate
the combination of indenoisoquinoline topoisomerase I inhibitors with ATR
inhibitors.

