Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Response to cyclooxygenase-2 inhibition is regulated by collagen
dense stroma


Increased mammographic density correlates with over four-fold increase
risk for breast cancer, making it one of the greatest risk factors known
for this disease. High breast density is correlated to increased collagen
in the breast tissue, and we have found that increased collagen in the
Col1a1tm1jae mouse model promotes mammary tumor formation and
progression. Increased collagen density in vitro elevates expression of
PTGS2 (prostaglandin-endoperoxide synthase 2), the gene for
cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2), by over four fold. Because COX-2
over-expression is observed in 40% of invasive breast carcinoma cases and
correlates with poor prognosis, we hypothesized that inhibition of COX-2
may be an effective therapeutic in the context of mammary tumors arising
in dense tissue. Celecoxib is a selective non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
drug (NSAID) that specifically inhibits COX-2. To understand how COX-2
affects response to collagen matrix density, we made use of our
previously characterized mouse model of MMTV-PyVT tumors in a wild type
(wt) or Col1a1tm1jae background (HD). Col1a1tm1jae /+ or wild-type (+/+)
littermates were randomly assigned at 11 weeks of age to treatment with
vehicle or celecoxib at 0.2mg per mouse per day. Oral treatment was given
daily for 21 days. We found a link between matrix density and the role of
COX-2. Tumors that arose on the dense Col1a1tm1jae background (HD) were
larger and more invasive (p Increased mammographic density correlates
with over four-fold increase risk for breast cancer, making it one of the
greatest risk factors known for this disease. High breast density is
correlated to increased collagen in the breast tissue, and we have found
that increased collagen in the Col1a1tm1jae mouse model promotes mammary
tumor formation and progression. Increased collagen density in vitro
elevates expression of PTGS2 (prostaglandin-endoperoxide synthase 2), the
gene for cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2), by over four fold. Because COX-2
over-expression is observed in 40% of invasive breast carcinoma cases and
correlates with poor prognosis, we hypothesized that inhibition of COX-2
may be an effective therapeutic in the context of mammary tumors arising
in dense tissue. Celecoxib is a selective non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
drug (NSAID) that specifically inhibits COX-2. To understand how COX-2
affects response to collagen matrix density, we made use of our
previously characterized mouse model of MMTV-PyVT tumors in a wild type
(wt) or Col1a1tm1jae background (HD). Col1a1tm1jae /+ or wild-type (+/+)
littermates were randomly assigned at 11 weeks of age to treatment with
vehicle or celecoxib at 0.2mg per mouse per day. Oral treatment was given
daily for 21 days. We found a link between matrix density and the role of
COX-2. Tumors that arose on the dense Col1a1tm1jae background (HD) were
larger and more invasive (p < .0001) and expressed higher levels of COX-2
and PGE2. COX-2 (wt = p = 0.0025, HD = p Increased mammographic density
correlates with over four-fold increase risk for breast cancer, making it
one of the greatest risk factors known for this disease. High breast
density is correlated to increased collagen in the breast tissue, and we
have found that increased collagen in the Col1a1tm1jae mouse model
promotes mammary tumor formation and progression. Increased collagen
density in vitro elevates expression of PTGS2 (prostaglandin-endoperoxide
synthase 2), the gene for cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2), by over four fold.
Because COX-2 over-expression is observed in 40% of invasive breast
carcinoma cases and correlates with poor prognosis, we hypothesized that
inhibition of COX-2 may be an effective therapeutic in the context of
mammary tumors arising in dense tissue. Celecoxib is a selective
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) that specifically inhibits
COX-2. To understand how COX-2 affects response to collagen matrix
density, we made use of our previously characterized mouse model of
MMTV-PyVT tumors in a wild type (wt) or Col1a1tm1jae background (HD).
Col1a1tm1jae /+ or wild-type (+/+) littermates were randomly assigned at
11 weeks of age to treatment with vehicle or celecoxib at 0.2mg per mouse
per day. Oral treatment was given daily for 21 days. We found a link
between matrix density and the role of COX-2. Tumors that arose on the
dense Col1a1tm1jae background (HD) were larger and more invasive (p <
.0001) and expressed higher levels of COX-2 and PGE2. COX-2 (wt = p =
0.0025, HD = p < 0.0001) and PGE2 (wt = p Increased mammographic density
correlates with over four-fold increase risk for breast cancer, making it
one of the greatest risk factors known for this disease. High breast
density is correlated to increased collagen in the breast tissue, and we
have found that increased collagen in the Col1a1tm1jae mouse model
promotes mammary tumor formation and progression. Increased collagen
density in vitro elevates expression of PTGS2 (prostaglandin-endoperoxide
synthase 2), the gene for cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2), by over four fold.
Because COX-2 over-expression is observed in 40% of invasive breast
carcinoma cases and correlates with poor prognosis, we hypothesized that
inhibition of COX-2 may be an effective therapeutic in the context of
mammary tumors arising in dense tissue. Celecoxib is a selective
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) that specifically inhibits
COX-2. To understand how COX-2 affects response to collagen matrix
density, we made use of our previously characterized mouse model of
MMTV-PyVT tumors in a wild type (wt) or Col1a1tm1jae background (HD).
Col1a1tm1jae /+ or wild-type (+/+) littermates were randomly assigned at
11 weeks of age to treatment with vehicle or celecoxib at 0.2mg per mouse
per day. Oral treatment was given daily for 21 days. We found a link
between matrix density and the role of COX-2. Tumors that arose on the
dense Col1a1tm1jae background (HD) were larger and more invasive (p <
.0001) and expressed higher levels of COX-2 and PGE2. COX-2 (wt = p =
0.0025, HD = p < 0.0001) and PGE2 (wt = p < 0.0196, HD = p = 0.0002)
levels were both decreased in animals treated with celecoxib. Notably,
cell proliferation as determined by Ki-67 staining decreased only in HD
mice, and not in wt littermates, that received treatment with celecoxib
(p = 0.0003, p = 0.0007, respectively). Additionally, the cancer
associated fibroblast (CAF) population was diminished by celecoxib only
in HD mice and not wt littermates (p = 0.0002). Celecoxib treatment
altered collagen structure and the expression of the stromal protein,
syndecan, only in Col1a1tm1jae/+ animals. Other features were affected by
celecoxib in a non-density manner, as the total number of macrophages (wt
= p = 0.0052, HD = p Increased mammographic density correlates with over
four-fold increase risk for breast cancer, making it one of the greatest
risk factors known for this disease. High breast density is correlated to
increased collagen in the breast tissue, and we have found that increased
collagen in the Col1a1tm1jae mouse model promotes mammary tumor formation
and progression. Increased collagen density in vitro elevates expression
of PTGS2 (prostaglandin-endoperoxide synthase 2), the gene for
cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2), by over four fold. Because COX-2
over-expression is observed in 40% of invasive breast carcinoma cases and
correlates with poor prognosis, we hypothesized that inhibition of COX-2
may be an effective therapeutic in the context of mammary tumors arising
in dense tissue. Celecoxib is a selective non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
drug (NSAID) that specifically inhibits COX-2. To understand how COX-2
affects response to collagen matrix density, we made use of our
previously characterized mouse model of MMTV-PyVT tumors in a wild type
(wt) or Col1a1tm1jae background (HD). Col1a1tm1jae /+ or wild-type (+/+)
littermates were randomly assigned at 11 weeks of age to treatment with
vehicle or celecoxib at 0.2mg per mouse per day. Oral treatment was given
daily for 21 days. We found a link between matrix density and the role of
COX-2. Tumors that arose on the dense Col1a1tm1jae background (HD) were
larger and more invasive (p < .0001) and expressed higher levels of COX-2
and PGE2. COX-2 (wt = p = 0.0025, HD = p < 0.0001) and PGE2 (wt = p <
0.0196, HD = p = 0.0002) levels were both decreased in animals treated
with celecoxib. Notably, cell proliferation as determined by Ki-67
staining decreased only in HD mice, and not in wt littermates, that
received treatment with celecoxib (p = 0.0003, p = 0.0007, respectively).
Additionally, the cancer associated fibroblast (CAF) population was
diminished by celecoxib only in HD mice and not wt littermates (p =
0.0002). Celecoxib treatment altered collagen structure and the
expression of the stromal protein, syndecan, only in Col1a1tm1jae/+
animals. Other features were affected by celecoxib in a non-density
manner, as the total number of macrophages (wt = p = 0.0052, HD = p <
0.0001) and normal fibroblasts (wt = p = 0.0133, HD = p = 0.0003) were
diminished in animals treated with celecoxib in both Col1a1tm1jae /+ and
+/+ animals. Ongoing studies are aimed at identifying different
macrophage populations, and which stromal cell populations are expressing
COX-2 and PGE2. These findings suggest that COX-2 has a direct role in
modulating tumor progression in dense matrices, which in turn promote
more aggressive tumors. As dense breast tissue is a common occurrence,
these findings suggest that COX-2 may be an effective therapeutic target
for women with dense breast tissue.

