Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of an integrated analysis platform of circulating
melanoma cells for PD-L1 expression as a predictive biomarker


Novel therapies that target the PD-1/PD-L1 axis have shown great
potential to improve survival for patients with advanced melanoma.
However, there are limited predictive biomarkers to identify patients who
may respond to this class of agents. Previous studies suggest that a
subset of responders to PD-1/PD-L1 targeting therapies have expression of
PD-L1 in tumor biopsies. The development of these predictive biomarkers
is complicated by intratumoral heterogeneity across primary and
metastatic lesions for PD-L1 expression. Circulating tumor cells (CTCs)
are one potential source of tumor samples for serial analysis. An
integrated CTC capture and analysis technology known as the VERSA
(Versatile Exclusion-based Rare Sample Analysis) platform permits
evaluation of CTCs at the protein, DNA and mRNA level for biomarkers of
both therapeutic response and resistance. Using this platform, we have
developed a method to isolate circulating tumor cells from patients with
advanced melanoma. Using a cocktail of capture monoclonal antibodies
including targets of CD146, GD2 and NG2, we have recovered cells across
multiple cell lines with high efficiency. Using single antibody capture
of SK-Mel-28 cells, capture was 52%, 54%, and 45% with CD146, GD2 and NG2
targets respectively. However, when using a cocktail of capture
antibodies containing CD146, GD2 and NG2, capture increased to 92%.
Similar results were obtained with other melanoma cell lines including,
624 and M21 cell lines. Cells were also stained for PD-L1 as a potential
predictive biomarker of response to PD-L1 and PD-1 targeting
immunotherapies. We are now collecting patient samples with this capture
platform to identify CTCs expressing PD-L1 as a potential predictive
biomarker to PD-1/PD-L1 targeting therapies.

