Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel computational methods reveal subtle clonal mosaicism


Recent genome-wide surveys have revealed age-related genetic mosaicism
and established a link between clonal mosaicism and risk of hematological
and solid-tumor cancers (Laurie et al, 2012, Nat Genet, 44:642; Jacobs et
al, 2012, Nat Genet, 44:651; Forsberg et al, 2012, AJHG, 90:217).
Existing methods to identify chromosomal aberrations leading to mosaic
allelic imbalance (AI) rely on the detection of increased variance of the
estimated within-sample allele frequencies at heterozygous loci, ignoring
the dependence among allele frequencies in regions of an AI-inducing
event, such as a deletion or copy-neutral loss of heterozygosity (LOH),
expected from the loss or gain of a chunk of an inherited chromosome. As
a result, they break down when the proportion of DNA from an aberrant
source is below 10-15%. Here we present a suite of new methods (hapLOH,
J-LOH, hapLOHseq) that harness the important information contained in the
germline haplotypes to help distinguish signal from noise, accommodate
multiple samples of different tumor purities (to deconvolute aberration
type and tumor purity) and infer co-occurrence of aberrations in
heterogeneous mixtures. For example, our initial method, hapLOH
(Vattathil & Scheet, 2013, Gen Res 23:152), can identify 10 Mb regions
with just 4% of the signal coming from the tumor genome in data simulated
from a series of experiments from a 317K SNP microarray. Application of
hapLOH to data analyzed by Laurie et al (2012) indicates that we have
substantially greater sensitivity to detect clonal mosaicism,
particularly events harbored in a small proportion of cells (Recent
genome-wide surveys have revealed age-related genetic mosaicism and
established a link between clonal mosaicism and risk of hematological and
solid-tumor cancers (Laurie et al, 2012, Nat Genet, 44:642; Jacobs et al,
2012, Nat Genet, 44:651; Forsberg et al, 2012, AJHG, 90:217). Existing
methods to identify chromosomal aberrations leading to mosaic allelic
imbalance (AI) rely on the detection of increased variance of the
estimated within-sample allele frequencies at heterozygous loci, ignoring
the dependence among allele frequencies in regions of an AI-inducing
event, such as a deletion or copy-neutral loss of heterozygosity (LOH),
expected from the loss or gain of a chunk of an inherited chromosome. As
a result, they break down when the proportion of DNA from an aberrant
source is below 10-15%. Here we present a suite of new methods (hapLOH,
J-LOH, hapLOHseq) that harness the important information contained in the
germline haplotypes to help distinguish signal from noise, accommodate
multiple samples of different tumor purities (to deconvolute aberration
type and tumor purity) and infer co-occurrence of aberrations in
heterogeneous mixtures. For example, our initial method, hapLOH
(Vattathil & Scheet, 2013, Gen Res 23:152), can identify 10 Mb regions
with just 4% of the signal coming from the tumor genome in data simulated
from a series of experiments from a 317K SNP microarray. Application of
hapLOH to data analyzed by Laurie et al (2012) indicates that we have
substantially greater sensitivity to detect clonal mosaicism,
particularly events harbored in a small proportion of cells (< 5-10%). We
identify more than twice as many mosaic events, demonstrating the
potential role for our methods to aid in profiling cancer risk. Our suite
of tools is designed for both microarray and next-generation sequencing
data and is available at scheet.org.

