Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Target sequencing of papillary renal cell carcinoma, type 2, using
custom-made kidney cancer panel


Purpose: Papillary renal cell carcinoma type2 (PRCC2) is 2nd most common
kidney malignancy followed by clear cell renal cell carcinoma (CCRCC).
PRCC2 has poor prognosis, treatment strategy is not established and the
genetic alteration is poorly understood. We sequenced PRCC2 samples using
custom-made kidney cancer panel to figure out genetic alterations of
PRCC2.Methods: We have reviewed publications about the genetics of kidney
cancer including all subtypes and selected 55 candidate genes. This
cancer panel consisted of 1022 regions by Agilent SureSelect Target
Enrichment. We sequenced 12 PRCC2 tumor samples along with 6 paired
normal tissue samples. The patients' age were ranged from 26 to 82
year-old, and 3 patients were female (25%). Genomic DNA was isolated from
dissected tumor tissue samples (6 fresh, frozen and 6 formalin-fixed,
paraffin-embedded) and normal tissue samples. Sequencing was performed by
Illumina platform and aligned to H. sapiens, hg19, GRCh37. Total probe
number was 4103 and size was 283.494 kbp. Presumed germline variants,
which were present in matched normal tissue, were filtered out, and
manual curation was performed for each area of variants.Results:
Fifty-four of 55 target genes had 100% coverage, in spite of 92.7%
coverage of one target gene. We found two novel FH mutations (one single
nucleotide variant and one 5bp indel) and one novel NFE2L2 mutation. Two
out of 12 samples (17%) were altered in NRF2 pathway (1 NFE2L2 and 1
KEAP) which was already well-known as driver in PRCC2. Novel PBRM1
mutation in two samples and SETD2 mutation in one sample were identified.
In addition, PTEN, TSC1, KDM5C and AKT1 mutation are observed in one
case, respectively. No VHL mutation in PRCC2 was revealed.Conclusions: We
analyzed somatic mutation of PRCC2 with custom-made kidney cancer panel.
We found several candidate driver mutations of PRCC2. Our result reveals
that the genetics of PRCC2 is heterogeneous, therefore, the approach
using kidney cancer panel could be used to characterize individual PRCC2.


