Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TRIM59, a novel prognostic marker for gastric cancer, promotes
tumorigenesis via ubiquitination and degradation of the p53 tumor
suppressor


As a key tumor suppressor, p53 plays crucial roles in gastric cancer
initiation and progression. However, the underlying mechanisms for the
down-regulation of p53 in gastric cancer patients are not fully
understood. Several tripartite motif (TRIM) family proteins are
identified to be involved in the tumorigenesis of multiple cancer types,
but the significance and biological function of a new TRIM family
protein, TRIM59, in terms of whether and how it affects p53 signaling in
gastric cancer are largely unknown. We analyzed multiple microarray
datasets from the Oncomine database and tested the expression level of
TRIM59 in gastric tumors vs. their matched normal tissues and in gastric
carcinoma cell lines using quantitative-polymerase chain reactions
(Q-PCR) and immunohistochemical staining. We found Expression of TRIM59
was significantly up-regulated in gastric cancer and strongly associated
with poor prognosis. TRIM59 knockdown led to significantly attenuated
gastric cancer cell proliferation, clone formation, migration, and in
vivo xenograft tumorigenicity, whereas over-expression of TRIM59 showed
the opposite effects. Mechanistically, TRIM59 interacted with p53 and
enhanced ubiquitination and degradation of the p53 protein. In addition,
elevated expression of TRIM59 correlated with down-regulation of p53
target genes in human gastric tumors. In summary, TRIM59 is a novel
prognostic marker for gastric cancer and promotes tumorigenesis through
facilitating p53 ubiquitination and degradation.

