Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effect and mechanism of PF299804 alone and in combination with
STAT3 inhibitor in human sarcoma cell lines


Background: Curative treatment of sarcomas is achieved by surgical
resection, supplemented with neoadjuvant chemotherapy and postoperative
radiation. Approximately 50% of patients will eventually die. We
previously reported that 78% (36/46) of our cohort of patients with soft
tissue sarcoma were positive for total EGFR/HER1. The EGFR/HER1 pathway
is an important molecular target; its inhibition is now well established
clinically in several epithelial-origin tumors. No pan-HER inhibitors
have yet been tested in sarcomas. The principal aim of this project was
to investigate the effect and mechanism of PF299804 (an irreversible
pan-HER inhibitor) therapy alone and in combination with STAT3 inhibitor
in human sarcoma cell lines.Methods: PF299804 mono-therapy and in
combination with STAT3 inhibitor (S3I-201) were investigated in a panel
of 12 human sarcoma cell lines. Crystal-violet colorimetric and
clonogenic assays were used to measure drug effects. Soft agar colony
formation assay was used to evaluate anchorage-independent growth (the
ability to evade anoikis). For assessing potential mechanisms, we
investigated expression and activity of EGFR signalling by Western
blot.Results: HER family receptors (EGFR/HER1, HER2 and HER3) were
positively expressed in the sarcoma cell lines representing liposarcoma
(778 and 449b), fibrosarcoma (SW684 and HT1080), synovial sarcoma
(SW980), fibrous histocytoma (GCT) and osteosarcoma (143B, HOS, MG63,
SJSA, U2-OS and Saos-2). IC50 values of PF299804 were more than 1M in
these cell lines, which was about 1000-fold higher than the sensitive
control lung cell line PC9. Mechanism studies by Western blot assay found
that 200nM PF299804 (emulating total plasma exposure measured in human
clinical trial) dramatically suppressed the activation of both EGFR/HER1
and HER2, as well as their representative downstream signalling factors
Erk1/2, p38MAPK and SAPK/JNK in ras/raf/MAPK and AKT in PI3K/AKT
pathways, but not of STAT3. Combination therapy using PF299804 and STAT3
inhibitor S3I-201 achieved synergistic anti-proliferation in 3 out of 4
sarcoma cell lines (449B, 778, 143B and HOS), representing different
subtype, grade, recurrence and metastasis: 449B and 778 are primary
well-differentiated and its recurrent liposarcoma cell lines; HOS and
143B are low-metastatic and high- metastatic (HOS with k-ras oncogene
transformation) osteosarcoma cell lines, respectively. This synergistic
effect was associated with additional down-regulation of phosphorylated
STAT3.Conclusion: Although the second generation irreversible pan-HER
inhibitor PF299804 inactivated HER family and downstream pathways, it
encountered resistance at least partially due to the STAT3 activation.
Therefore, addition of STAT3 inhibitor in PF299804 therapy may block
STAT3 activation and achieve synergistic anti-proliferation in sarcoma
cell lines.

