Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: microRNA-196b induces epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition through
targeting HOXA9 in non-small cell lung cancer cells


MicroRNAs (miRNAs) play important roles as oncogenes or tumor suppressor
through modulation of expression of target genes as posttranscriptional
regulators. miR-196b has been previously reported dysregulation in
multiple tumor types including gastric cancer, colorectal cancer,
glioblastoma and breast cancer. However, there is unknown about the role
of miR-196b in lung cancer. There has been reported reduction of
invasiveness via Homeobox A9 (HOXA9) overexpression in non-small cell
lung cancer (NSCLC) cells. We identified an inverse expression between
miR-196b and HOXA9 in clinical samples compared to their corresponding
normal counterparts. We demonstrated that HOXA9 expression was
significantly regulated through alteration of miR-196b expression and
miR-196b overexpression or knockdown of HOXA9 induced invasion in NSCLC
cells. Moreover, the expression levels of matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)
9 and plasminogen activator, urokinase (uPA) associated with
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) was induced by miR-196b
overexpression or knockdown of HOXA9. In addition, the expression level
of N-cadherin (Cdh2) was increased by upregulation of miR-196b and
knockdown of HOXA9 decreased E-cadherin (Cdh1) expression. Therefore, our
findings suggest that miR-196b may be potential therapeutic target in
lung cancer.

