Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Leptin induces breast cancer metastasis through a Neuropilin-1
(NRP-1)/OBR complex


Several studies have demonstrated Neuropilin-1 (NRP-1) implication in
tumor progression independently of its known co-receptors. On the basis
of growing connections between breast cancer and obesity, we postulated
that leptin and its receptor OBR could be potential candidates. First,
using NRP-1 over-expression in NRP-1 negative T47D or NRP-1 silencing in
NRP-1 positive MDA-MB231 xenografts, we demonstrated that leptin induced
metastasis in lymph node only in NRP-1 positive cells. Second, we
demonstrated by co-immunoprecipitation, Proximity Ligation assay
(duolink) and BRET analysis that NRP-1 is a co-receptor of OBR. Upon
leptin exposure this complex is internalized to the nucleus. At this
level, NRP-1 Chip-Seq analysis generated from MDA-MB-231 led to identify
sequences of RNA polymerase II (Pol2) and transcription factor binding
sites of genes implicated in breast cancer metastasis. This finding was
confirmed by the detection of NRP-1/Pol2 interaction and by transcriptome
analysis of RNA extracts from T47D-NRP-1 xenografts that shows modulation
of these genes.In conclusion, we have demonstrated that NRP-1 is a
co-receptor of OBR and upon leptin exposure may play a role as a
transcription factor regulating genes involved in cancer progression.
Thus, NRP-1 might be a therapeutic target to prevent cancer metastasis
induced by leptin

