Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antagonism of sorafenib and regorafenib-mediated HCC growth
inhibition by platelet factors


Background. Circulating blood platelet numbers are frequently altered in
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) patients. Thrombocytopenia is associated
with smaller tumors and thrombocytosis with larger tumors (Oncology
2013;85:153-9). Recently, platelet extracts have been shown to enhance
HCC cell growth and have anti-apoptotic effects.Methods. Human HCC cell
lines were used to evaluate the actions of time-expired mixed human
platelet lysates on the inhibition of HCC growth by MTT assay, as well as
on migration and Matrigel invasion mediated by Sorafenib or Regorafenib
in vitro and Western blots were performed for cell signaling and
apoptosis.Results. Sorafenib or Regorafenib-mediated inhibition of cell
growth, migration and invasion was antagonized by platelet extracts. The
multi-kinase inhibitor-mediated induction of apoptosis and decrease in
phospho-ERK levels were both blocked by the platelet extracts, which also
increased anti-apoptotic phospho-STAT, Bax and Bcl-XL levels.Conclusions.
In addition to their effects on coagulation and wound healing, platelet
factors can antagonize growth inhibition and apoptosis induction by
multi-kinase inhibitors Sorafenib or Regorafenib. This could be due to
several growth factors or inflammatory cytokines that are produced by
platelets. Targeting platelets might be a novel approach to increasing
multi-kinase inhibitor actions.

