Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BL-011256 is a novel VEGFR3 selective inhibitor, which suppresses
tumor lymphatics and lymph node metastasis in an animal model of melanoma


The role of VEGFR3 in lymphangiogenesis has been well established.
Targeting VEGFR3 has been shown to curtail tumor progression mediated via
lymphatic dissemination. More recently VEGFR3 was shown to play an
important role in the mediation of tumor-induced immune cell tolerance.
We have identified BL-011256, a novel inhibitor of VEGFR3 that exhibits
17-fold selectivity over VEGFR2 and a narrow tyrosine kinase inhibition
spectrum. A 7-day b.i.d repeat oral dose study showed that BL-011256 is
well tolerated in mice. Mouse plasma exposure experiments demonstrated
that BL-011256 attains free drug plasma concentration levels that exceed
the concentration required for IC50 activity on VEGFR3 in vitro but are
considerably lower than the in vitro IC50 required for activity on
VEGFR2. In the B16F10 mouse melanoma model, animals bearing melanoma
tumors displayed considerably attenuated signs of tumor progression when
treated with BL-011256. BL-011256 caused a 70% reduction in primary
lesion growth and a 50% reduction in metastasis to the draining lymph
node. Furthermore, BL-011256 was active in reducing the number of
satellite in-transit metastases. Immunohistochemical whole mount analyses
on ears with primary tumor lesions derived from BL-011256 treated and
vehicle-treated mice using Lyve-1 for the identification of lymphatic
vessels and CD31 for the identification of blood vessels was conducted.
Tumors in vehicle-treated mice displayed a peri-tumoral area densely
populated by lymphatic vessels. In contrast, tumors derived from
BL-011256 treated mice were devoid of peri-tumoral lymphatic vessels.
Notably, both vehicle-treated and BL-011256-treated animals displayed
similar staining for peritumoral blood vessels, suggesting no effect on
blood vessels (this is consistent with no activity on VEGFR2).
Furthermore, PK sampling during the last day of dosing in a 14-day dosing
schedule demonstrated that there is no compound accumulation during the
repeat dosing schedule utilised in the B16F10 tumour efficacy experiment.
In conclusion BL-011256 has been identified as a selective inhibitor of
VEGFR3 that supresses both primary tumor growth and lymph node metastasis.

