Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Efficacy of Salmonella typhimurium A1-R and anti-VEGF therapy on a
patient-derived orthotopic xenograft (PDOX) pancreatic cancer model


We have previously developed the genetically-modified Salmonella
typhimurium A1-R (A1-R) strain that selectively targets tumors and
demonstrated that A1-R was able to eradicate primary and metastatic
tumors in monotherapy in nude mouse models of various cancers including
pancreatic cancer. The aim of this study was to examine the efficacy of
A1-R treatment on VEGF-positive human pancreatic cancer in a patient
derived orthotopic xenograft (PDOX) model in combination with anti-VEGF
therapy. A VEGF-positive human pancreatic cancer cell line
(MiaPaCa-2-GFP) and VEGF-positive pancreatic cancer PDOX were
orthotopically implanted in nude mice. The nude mice were treated in the
following groups: (1) gemcitabine (GEM) (80 mg/kg, ip, weekly, 4 weeks);
(2) GEM (80 mg/kg, ip, weekly, 4 weeks) + Bevacizumab (Bev) (5 mg/kg, ip,
twice a week, 4 weeks); (3) GEM (80 mg/kg, ip, weekly, 2 weeks) + Bev (5
mg/kg, ip, twice a week, 2 weeks) A1-R (1.5x108 CFU/body, ip, weekly, 2
weeks); and (4) saline (vehicle/control, ip, weekly, 4 weeks). The mean
tumor weight of each group in the MiaPaCa-2-GFP model was as follows: (1)
GEM; 775.9 273.8 mg; (2) GEM/Bev; 413.5 108.3 mg; (3) GEM/BevA1-R; 257.5
57.1 mg; and (4) Control; 2655.4 583.9 mg. GEM/BevA1-R significantly
reduced tumor weight compared to GEM/Bev treatment in the MiaPaCa-2-GFP
model (p=0.022). The tumor weight of each group in the PDOX model was as
follows: (1) GEM; 263.1 129.1 mg, (2) GEM/Bev; 65.9 41.9 mg, (3)
GEM/BevA1-R; 21.9 6.2 mg and (4) Control; 998.8 377.7 mg. GEM/BevA1-R
significantly reduced tumor weight compared to GEM/Bev treatment in the
PDOX model (p=0.029). These results demonstrate that A1-R is effective on
pancreatic cancer in combination with anti-VEGF, including the PDOX model
indicating the clinical potential of this combination.

