Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cytoplasmic galectin-7 has an antiapoptotic function by decreasing
p53 nuclear translocation in breast cancer cells


Resistance to apoptosis induced by anti-cancer drugs is a major obstacle
for the treatment of aggressive forms of breast cancer. Galectin-7 was
recently shown to be specifically expressed in basal-like and HER-2
positive but not in luminal subtypes of human breast cancer.
Overexpression of galectin-7 in breast cancer cells also increases lung
and bone metastases. However, the molecular mechanisms used by galectin-7
to increase the dissemination of breast cancer cells remain largely
unknown. Although galectins are best known for their ability to bind cell
surface receptors, there is increasing evidence that their intracellular
forms have important functions in cancer cells. This is particularly true
in the control of apoptosis. Up to now, regulation of apoptosis by
intracellular galectins has been largely attributed to their ability to
translocate to mitochondria, possibly following their interaction with
bcl-2. Here, we report that a mutant of galectin-7 that is unable to
translocate to mitochondria and nucleus induces resistance of human
breast cancer cells to apoptosis induced by etoposide or by
hypoxia-mimicking conditions. Surprisingly, this mutant and the wild-type
form of galectin-7 bind equally well to bcl-2 in vitro and in vivo.
Interestingly, both forms decreases the translocation of p53 to the
nucleus and reduce the expression of p21 following treatment with
doxorubicin. These results challenges the current paradigm that
mitochondrial galectins are important for resistance to apoptosis and
call for a greater focus on the role of cytosolic galectins in cancer
cells. Our data also indicate that targeting cytosolic galectin-7 could
improve the efficacy of anti-cancer drugs for the treatment of aggressive
forms of breast cancer.

