Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: miR-424(322)/503 cluster orchestrates remodeling of the epithelium
in the involuting mammary gland and plays a role in breast cancer
development


The mammary gland is a very dynamic organ that undergoes continuous
remodeling. The critical regulators of this process are not fully
understood. Here we identify the microRNA cluster miR-424(322)/503 as an
important regulator of epithelial involution after pregnancy and
tumorigenesis. Importantly, miR-424(322)/503 loci is deleted in 20% of
basal and luminal B tumors. Through the generation of a knock-out mouse
model, we found that regression of the secretory acini of the mammary
gland was compromised in the absence of miR-424(322)/503.
Mechanistically, we show that miR-424(322)/503 orchestrates cell life and
death decisions by targeting CDC25A, BCL-2 and IGF1R. Furthermore, we
demonstrate that the expression of this miR-cluster is regulated by TGF-,
a well characterized regulator of mammary involution. Overall, our data
suggest a model where activation of the TGF- pathway after weaning
induces the transcription of the miR-424(322)/503 which in turn
downregulates the expression of key genes. Here, we unveil a previously
unknown, multilayered-regulation of epithelial tissue remodeling
coordinated by the microRNA cluster miR-424(322)/503.Note: This abstract
was not presented at the meeting.

