Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Alcohol intake and breast cancer in the European Prospective
investigation into Cancer and Nutrition (EPIC) study


Context: Alcohol intake has been positively associated to breast cancer
among both pre and postmenopausal women; however results are inconclusive
with regards to tumor hormonal receptor status, and potential modifying
factors such as age at start drinking, and dietary fiber.Objective: To
investigate the relation between alcohol intake and the risk of breast
cancer using data from the European Prospective Investigation into Cancer
and Nutrition (EPIC).Design, Setting, and Participants: Prospective
observational study of 334,850 women mostly aged 35-70 years at baseline
enrolled in the ten countries of the EPIC study and followed up for 11.0
years on average. Information on alcohol intake at baseline and average
lifetime alcohol intake were calculated from country-specific dietary and
lifestyle questionnaires.Main Outcome Measures: Hazard ratios (HR) of
developing invasive breast cancer according to hormonal receptor
status.Results: During 3,670,439 person-years, 11,576 incident breast
cancer cases were diagnosed. Increasing alcohol intake was significantly
related to breast cancer risk, for each 10g/day increase in alcohol
intake the HR increased by 4.2% (95% CI, 2.7% -5.8%). Taking 0 to 5g/day
as reference, alcohol intake of >5 to 15 g/day was related to a 5.9%
increase of breast cancer risk (95% CI, 1% -11%). A significant
increasing trend was observed between alcohol intake for ER+/PR+,
ER-/PR-, HER2- and ER-/PR-/HER2-tumors. The risk of breast cancer
appeared stronger among women who started drinking prior to first
full-time pregnancy and among drinkers (>15g/day) with low intake of
fiber.Conclusions: Our results confirm the association between alcohol
intake and breast cancer risk, and suggest that some other risk factors
such as fiber intake, may modulate this association. Women should be
advised to control their alcohol intake, and increase their intake of
fiber.

