Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hepatitis C virus transcriptionally downregulates miR-181c for
promotion of hepatocyte growth towards hepatocellular carcinoma


Hepatitis C virus (HCV) induced chronic liver disease is one of the
leading causes for hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). The molecular events
leading to HCC following HCV infection remains poorly defined. MicroRNAs
(miRNAs) have been implicated in the control of many biological processes
and their deregulation associate with different viral infections. In this
study, we have identified a mechanism by which HCV suppresses miR-181c in
human hepatocytes and target pathways involved in cell proliferation. Our
results suggested that HCV infection transcriptionally downregulates
miR-181c expression by modulating C/EBP-. In silico prediction suggests
that HOXA1 is a direct target of miR-181c. Homeobox A1 (HOXA1) is a
member of homeodomain containing transcription factor family, and
possesses pivotal roles in normal growth, development and differentiation
of mammalian tissues. We have observed that HOXA1 expression is enhanced
in HCV infected hepatocytes, and overexpression of mimic miR-181c
inhibits HOXA1. Subsequently, exogenous expression of miR-181c inhibited
HOXA1 downstream molecules STAT3 and STAT5, important transcription
factors involved in HCV mediated cell survival and proliferation. Taken
together, our results suggested that miR-181c is downregulated during HCV
infection, which in turn, enhanced HOXA1 signaling pathway and promoted
hepatocyte growth towards HCC.

