Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transplacental arsenic exposure modifies the number of hair
follicle keratinocytes stem cells and alters their cell-cycle control


Drinking water contamination with arsenic is a worldwide problem and a
concern in some areas of the United States, especially in the West
(California, Nevada, Alaska and Utah) and small areas of New England.
Inorganic arsenic is considered a human carcinogen with many target
tissues such as the skin, urinary bladder and lung; and characterizing
its mechanisms of action is key to designing methods of intervention.
Arsenic has transplacental carcinogenic activity, and since their fetal
abundance, stem cells (SCs) seem to be a main target of arsenic exposure
during gestation. We have established that fetal arsenic exposure via the
maternal drinking water, leads to a decrease number of keratinocyte's
stem cells (KSC) in mouse epidermis of the offspring. Biochemical
analysis of these KSCs shows increased mRNA levels of the cell-cycle
regulators cyclin D1 and CDK4. Supporting this observation,
overexpression of CDK4 in KSCs mimics arsenic exposure as demonstrated by
the reduced number of KSCs, and the decreased number of benign skin
tumors, and severe rise in the rate of malignant conversion to squamus
cell carcinomas.We expect that these studies will enable to determine the
consequence of in utero arsenic exposure on the proliferative potential
of KSCs and the impact on the selection of KSCs that give origin to skin
tumors with high risk of malignant conversion. Therefore, these studies
will contribute to understanding how early alterations of somatic stem
cells results in functional changes that impact a late stage of
tumorigenesis such as malignant progression.

