Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Glucose transporter 1 positivity on primary lesions of esophageal
squamous cell carcinoma is associated with hematogenous recurrence


Purpose: Glucose transporter type 1 (Glut1) plays a crucial role in
cancer specific metabolism to adapt to the rapid growth and tumor
microenvironment in diverse malignant tumors. We recently reported the
relationship between Glut1 status and 18F-FDG uptake. PET-positive
lesions had higher Glut1 expression than PET-negative lesions in both
primary tumors and metastatic lymph nodes. In this study, it was showed
that the clinical, pathological and prognostic features of Glut1
expression on primary lesions of esophageal squamous cell
carcinoma.Methods: Immunohistochemical staining of Glut1 and CD34 was
performed using paraffin sections of tissues obtained from 145 resectable
esophageal squamous cell carcinoma patients without preoperative
treatment. Microvessel density was calculated from CD34 staining.Results:
Glut1 positivity was observed in 41 patients (28.2%) and associated with
depth of invasion (odds ratio (OR)=2.984; 95% confidence interval (CI):
1.208-7.371; P=0.018) and vascular invasion (OR=2.771; 95% CI:
1.118-6.871; P=0.028) in multivariate analysis. Glut1 positivity was a
significant disadvantage to both relapse-free survival (hazard ratio
(HR)=2.021; 95% CI: 1.100-3.712; P=0.023) and esophageal cancer-specific
survival (HR=2.223; 95% CI: 1.121-4.411; P=0.022) in univariate Cox
hazard analysis, but was not independently associated with relapse-free
survival or cancer-specific survival in multivariate analysis. The
relationship between Glut1 expression and first relapse site was
investigated. Glut1 positivity was not associated with lymph node
recurrence (HR 1.009; 95% CI: 0.402-2.530; P=0.985) but was significantly
associated with hematogenous recurrence (HR=3.701; 95% CI: 1.655-8.273;
P=0.001) in univariate Cox hazard analysis. Microvessel density was
calculated to evaluate angiogenesis and high microvessel density was
associated with invasion depth (P=0.044) and vascular invasion (P=0.016).
The median microvessel densities for Glut1-negative tumors and
Glut1-positive tumors were 38.0 and 54.0, respectively. The microvessel
density for Glut1-positive tumors was significantly higher than that of
Glut1-negative tumors (Mann-Whitney U-test: PPurpose: Glucose transporter
type 1 (Glut1) plays a crucial role in cancer specific metabolism to
adapt to the rapid growth and tumor microenvironment in diverse malignant
tumors. We recently reported the relationship between Glut1 status and
18F-FDG uptake. PET-positive lesions had higher Glut1 expression than
PET-negative lesions in both primary tumors and metastatic lymph nodes.
In this study, it was showed that the clinical, pathological and
prognostic features of Glut1 expression on primary lesions of esophageal
squamous cell carcinoma.Methods: Immunohistochemical staining of Glut1
and CD34 was performed using paraffin sections of tissues obtained from
145 resectable esophageal squamous cell carcinoma patients without
preoperative treatment. Microvessel density was calculated from CD34
staining.Results: Glut1 positivity was observed in 41 patients (28.2%)
and associated with depth of invasion (odds ratio (OR)=2.984; 95%
confidence interval (CI): 1.208-7.371; P=0.018) and vascular invasion
(OR=2.771; 95% CI: 1.118-6.871; P=0.028) in multivariate analysis. Glut1
positivity was a significant disadvantage to both relapse-free survival
(hazard ratio (HR)=2.021; 95% CI: 1.100-3.712; P=0.023) and esophageal
cancer-specific survival (HR=2.223; 95% CI: 1.121-4.411; P=0.022) in
univariate Cox hazard analysis, but was not independently associated with
relapse-free survival or cancer-specific survival in multivariate
analysis. The relationship between Glut1 expression and first relapse
site was investigated. Glut1 positivity was not associated with lymph
node recurrence (HR 1.009; 95% CI: 0.402-2.530; P=0.985) but was
significantly associated with hematogenous recurrence (HR=3.701; 95% CI:
1.655-8.273; P=0.001) in univariate Cox hazard analysis. Microvessel
density was calculated to evaluate angiogenesis and high microvessel
density was associated with invasion depth (P=0.044) and vascular
invasion (P=0.016). The median microvessel densities for Glut1-negative
tumors and Glut1-positive tumors were 38.0 and 54.0, respectively. The
microvessel density for Glut1-positive tumors was significantly higher
than that of Glut1-negative tumors (Mann-Whitney U-test:
P<0.001)Conclusions: Glut1 expression was associated with hematogenous
recurrence. The relationship between Glut1 expression and hematogenous
recurrence may stem from an acquired survival ability resulting from
upregulated Glut1 and angiogenesis to adapt to the tumor
microenvironment. The findings provide evidence of the significance of
Glut1 expression as a biomarker in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma.

