Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Direct down-regulation of eEF1A2 by Tumor suppressor p16INK4a
inhibits cancer cell growth


The tumor suppressor protein p16INK4a is a member of the INK4 family of
cyclin-dependent kinase (Cdk) inhibitors, which are involved in the
regulation of the eukaryotic cell cycle. However, the mechanisms
underlying the anti-proliferative effects of p16INK4a have not been fully
elucidated. Using yeast two-hybrid screening, we identified the
eukaryotic elongation factor (eEF)1A2 as a novel interacting partner of
p16INK4a. eEF1A2 is thought to function as an oncogene in cancers. The
p16INK4a protein interacted with all but the D2 (250-327 aa) domain of
eEF1A2. Computational docking study predicted that D24/D131 residues of
p16INK4a interacted with eEF1A2 and it was confirmed by pull-down assay
with mutant p16INK4a (D24A/D131E). Ectopic expression of p16INK4a
decreased the expression of eEF1A2 and inhibited cancer cell growth.
Furthermore, suppression of protein synthesis by expression of p16INK4a
ex vivo was verified by luciferase reporter activity. Microinjection of
p16INK4a mRNA into the cytoplasm of Xenopus embryos suppressed the
luciferase mRNA translation, whereas the combination of p16INK4a and
morpholino-eEF1A2 resulted in a further reduction in translational
activity. We conclude that the interaction of p16INK4a with eEF1A2, and
subsequent downregulation of the expression and function of eEF1A2 is a
novel mechanism explaining the anti-proliferative effects of p16INK4a.

