Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: nc886, a noncoding RNA of anti-proliferative role, is suppressed
by CpG DNA methylation in human gastric cancer


nc886, a novel type of non-coding RNA, was initially identified as a
microRNA precursor or a vault RNA, but it has been shown to be distinct
from them and rather to be a cellular RNA ligand and inhibitor of PKR
(Protein Kinase RNA-activated). PKR's roles in viral infection, cellular
stresses, and cancer are well documented. nc886 has also been suggested
to be a tumor suppressor, mainly inferred by its expression pattern as
well as its genomic location at human chromosome 5q31, a locus for a
tumor suppressor gene(s).Here we have investigated nc886 in gastric
cancer where its expression is suppressed due to CpG DNA hypermethylation
at its promoter region in a cohort of paired tumor/normal tissues from 88
gastric cancer patients and a battery of gastric cell lines. CpG
hypermethylation of nc886 and thus its diminished expression is
significantly associated with poor survival in these cancer patients.
nc886 inhibits cell proliferation when ectopically expressed in gastric
cancer cells. nc886's tumor suppressive role is corroborated by the
induction of well-known oncogenes such as FOS, NF-B, and MYC upon nc886
knockdown. All these activities of nc886 are undoubtedly independent of
mature microRNA or vault RNA, but presumably through PKR that is
typically activated by viral infection and cellular stresses upon which
those oncogenes are known to be induced. Our data indicate that nc886 is
a tumor suppressor and could potentially be used as a diagnostic marker
and a therapeutic agent in gastric cancer.

