Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vivo and in vitro generation and characterisation of EGFR-TKI
resistance in patient-derived xenograft (PDX) and cell line-derived
xenograft (CDX) models of NSCLC with activating EGFR mutations


Background: Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients that have
activating mutations in the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) gene
are treated with EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) e.g. Erlotinib
(Tarceva) and Gefitinib (Iressa). Most NSCLC patients with activating
EGFR mutations will respond to EGFR-TKIs; however, in about 50% of these
cases a secondary mutation in EGFR (T790M) subsequently occurs which
results in resistance to treatment. Other mechanisms of clinical
resistance can also occur such as amplification of c-MET kinase, Her-2
and EMT conversion; however, additional routes of resistance are poorly
defined. Using a novel NSCLC patient-derived xenograft (PDX) model,
driven by the L858R EGFR mutation, we set out to recapitulate the
reported clinical routes of resistance to EGFR inhibitors and to evaluate
if additional mechanism could also be identified.Methods: LU6422 is a
Caucasian NSCLC adenocarcinoma PDX model with an activating EGFR mutation
(L858R) which is maintained subcutaneously in vivo admixed with a human
stromal cell component. HCC827 is NSCLC adenocarcinoma cell line with an
activating EGFR mutation (exon 19 del E746-A750).Resistant models of
LU6422 and HCC827 were generated in vivo and in vitro (respectively)
through repeated dosing or exposure to EGFR-TKIs. Resistant tumour
material was characterised for further mutations in the EGFR gene by
direct sequencing and for c-MET, Axl and Her2 over-expression and genomic
amplification by quantitative PCR. Combination efficacy treatment (in
vitro and in vivo) was carried out to verify documented resistance
mechanisms.Results: Nave LU6422 and HCC827 tissue exhibited exquisite
sensitivity to EGFR-TKIs (100% reduction in pre-treatment tumour volume,
pBackground: Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients that have
activating mutations in the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) gene
are treated with EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) e.g. Erlotinib
(Tarceva) and Gefitinib (Iressa). Most NSCLC patients with activating
EGFR mutations will respond to EGFR-TKIs; however, in about 50% of these
cases a secondary mutation in EGFR (T790M) subsequently occurs which
results in resistance to treatment. Other mechanisms of clinical
resistance can also occur such as amplification of c-MET kinase, Her-2
and EMT conversion; however, additional routes of resistance are poorly
defined. Using a novel NSCLC patient-derived xenograft (PDX) model,
driven by the L858R EGFR mutation, we set out to recapitulate the
reported clinical routes of resistance to EGFR inhibitors and to evaluate
if additional mechanism could also be identified.Methods: LU6422 is a
Caucasian NSCLC adenocarcinoma PDX model with an activating EGFR mutation
(L858R) which is maintained subcutaneously in vivo admixed with a human
stromal cell component. HCC827 is NSCLC adenocarcinoma cell line with an
activating EGFR mutation (exon 19 del E746-A750).Resistant models of
LU6422 and HCC827 were generated in vivo and in vitro (respectively)
through repeated dosing or exposure to EGFR-TKIs. Resistant tumour
material was characterised for further mutations in the EGFR gene by
direct sequencing and for c-MET, Axl and Her2 over-expression and genomic
amplification by quantitative PCR. Combination efficacy treatment (in
vitro and in vivo) was carried out to verify documented resistance
mechanisms.Results: Nave LU6422 and HCC827 tissue exhibited exquisite
sensitivity to EGFR-TKIs (100% reduction in pre-treatment tumour volume,
p<0.0001). Following successive cycles of EGFR-TKI treatment several
resistant subtypes were generated, cloned and characterized. Combination
treatment of resistant HCC827 variants restored efficacy to nave
treatment levels.Conclusions: EGFR-TKI resistant subtypes were generated
in vivo and in vitro from a proprietary patient-derived xenograft model
(LU6422) and the HCC827 cell line and were characterised for their
resistance mechanisms.Pre-clinical modes of acquired resistance will be
invaluable in assessing novel agents targeting the EGFR pathway and the
development of new combination strategies which seek to prevent or
overcome resistance to EGFR-TKIs.

