Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel acetal and halogen oridonin analogues potently induce
apoptosis in prostate cancer cell lines via induction of p53/p73 and PUMA
expression


Isodon rubescens (a Chinese herb named Donglingcao) has been used as a
folk, botanical medicine for treatment of inflammatory diseases and
cancer for many years. Oridonin, a complex ent-kaurane diterpenoid that
was isolated from this herb, has been demonstrated as a promising
anti-cancer agent. However, the anti-cancer potency of oridonin and its
in vivo stability remains unsatisfactory for its clinical development.
Therefore, we have designed and synthesized a series of acetal and
halogen oridonin analogues at the 20 position of the chemical skeleton.
All these analogues have demonstrated improved potency over oridonin
against the growth of bladder, breast, colon, lung and prostate cancer
cell lines with low micromolar to submicromolar IC50 values. In
particular, compound 10 potently induces apoptosis in both
androgen-sensitive and castration-resistant prostate cancer cell lines,
including LAPC4, LNCaP, 22Rv1, PC3 and DU145. Compound 10 increased the
expression of YAP1 and its phosphorylation, as well as expression of p73
and p53, which further led to upregulation of p73/p53 target gene PUMA.
The apoptotic effect of compound 10 is at least in part dependent on the
existence of p53 and PUMA. These results demonstrated the potential of
compound 10 as a novel apoptosis inducer for treatment of prostate
cancer. The evaluation of the in vivo anti-tumor efficacy of compound 10
is in progress.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

