Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CD44 isoform variant 6 is associated with prostate cancer
progression, metastasis and chemo-/radio-resistance via PI3K/Akt/mTOR and
Wnt/-catenin signaling pathways in vitro


Aim: The role of CD44 variant 6 (CD44v6) in prostate cancer (CaP)
metastasis and progression remains unclear. The aim of this study was 1)
to examine the expression of CD44v6 in metastatic CaP cell lines, and
normal, benign hyperplastic, and CaP tissues in different stages and
lymph node metastases; 2) to investigate the role of CD44v6 in CaP
progression, metastasis and therapy resistance as well as underlying
pathways in vitro for a potential therapeutic target.Methods:
Immunohistochemical/immunocytochemical analysis using an anti-CD44V6
monoclonal antibody (MAb) was performed on metastatic CaP cell lines and
paraffin embedded specimens from patients (n=10) who underwent radical
prostatectomy (RP), lymph node metastases (n=10), benign prostatic
hyperplasia (BPH) (n=10), and normal prostate tissues (n=10). The
immunostaining results from CaP cell lines were further confirmed by
Western blot. The functional roles of CD44v6 in CaP metastasis and chemo-
and radio-sensitivity were examined by knocking down (KD) CD44v6 gene
using siRNAs in PC-3M, DU145 and LNCaP CaP cells, respectively and then
performing cell invasion, colony formation, proliferation rate, sphere
formation, chemo- and radio-sensitivity assays.Results: The expression of
CD44v6 was found moderately to strongly positive in androgen-responsive
(LNCaP, LNCaP-LN3) and androgen-nonresponsive (PC-3, PC-3M, DU145 and
LNCaP-C4B2) metastatic CaP cell lines. The expression of CD44v6 was found
negative in normal prostate and BPH tissues, and moderately to strongly
positive primary CaP tissues and lymph node metastases. Three CD44v6-KD
cell lines showed notable decreases in functions of invasion, colony
formation, proliferation, sphere formation, and an increase in chemodrug
and radiation sensitivity, compared to the parental cell lines,
respectively. Obvious down-regulation of PI3K/Akt/mTOR and Wnt/-catenin
signaling pathways were observed in three CD44v6-KD cell lines by Western
Blot.Conclusions: CD44v6 is a biomarker involved in CaP progression and
metastasis, associated with CaP chemo-/radio-resistance via PI3K/Akt/mTOR
and Wnt/-catenin signaling pathways and could be an ideal potential
therapeutic target for the treatment of castrate-resistant prostate
cancer (CRPC). The in vivo study of CD44v6 functions in CaP animal models
is ongoing in our laboratory.

