Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dual inhibition of TTK and HSPA9 functions to synergistically
decrease viability in triple-negative breast cancer cell lines


Background: Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) is an aggressive subtype
that is more likely to develop in African-American women and younger
females. TNBCs have higher rates of metastasis, recurrence, and mortality
and also lack effective targeted treatments. We have found that compared
to normal tissue, expression levels of the mitotic kinase TTK are
elevated in metastatic TNBC tumors, particularly in African-American
patients. We have demonstrated in TNBC cell lines that inhibiting TTK
reduces cell viability, proliferation, and survival. Unfortunately, none
of TTK inhibitors currently available are suitable for clinical use.
Therefore, in an effort to generate an accessible treatment, we targeted
an interaction between TTK and the chaperone protein, HSPA9. This events
leads to super-activation of TTK and we hypothesized that disrupting this
event may serve as an alternative and more effective method for targeting
TTK as a TNBC chemotherapeutic.Methods: We analyzed the effects of
individual and combined inhibition of TTK and HSPA9 on cell viability in
eight TNBC cell lines (i.e., BT-20, BT-549, CAL-51, HCC38, MDA-MB-231,
MDA-MB-436, MDA-MB-453, and MDA-MB-468). AZ3146 and MKT-077 were used to
inhibit TTK and HSPA9, respectively. The cells were first treated with
each agent individually to determine the dose response profile and IC50
values. Then, to achieve therapeutically relevant dose combinations,
cells were treated with IC20 doses of AZ3146 and sub-nanomolar
(Background: Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) is an aggressive
subtype that is more likely to develop in African-American women and
younger females. TNBCs have higher rates of metastasis, recurrence, and
mortality and also lack effective targeted treatments. We have found that
compared to normal tissue, expression levels of the mitotic kinase TTK
are elevated in metastatic TNBC tumors, particularly in African-American
patients. We have demonstrated in TNBC cell lines that inhibiting TTK
reduces cell viability, proliferation, and survival. Unfortunately, none
of TTK inhibitors currently available are suitable for clinical use.
Therefore, in an effort to generate an accessible treatment, we targeted
an interaction between TTK and the chaperone protein, HSPA9. This events
leads to super-activation of TTK and we hypothesized that disrupting this
event may serve as an alternative and more effective method for targeting
TTK as a TNBC chemotherapeutic.Methods: We analyzed the effects of
individual and combined inhibition of TTK and HSPA9 on cell viability in
eight TNBC cell lines (i.e., BT-20, BT-549, CAL-51, HCC38, MDA-MB-231,
MDA-MB-436, MDA-MB-453, and MDA-MB-468). AZ3146 and MKT-077 were used to
inhibit TTK and HSPA9, respectively. The cells were first treated with
each agent individually to determine the dose response profile and IC50
values. Then, to achieve therapeutically relevant dose combinations,
cells were treated with IC20 doses of AZ3146 and sub-nanomolar (<IC10)
doses of MKT-077.Results: For the single agent treatments, cells were
more sensitive to MKT-077 alone than AZ3146. MKT-077 IC50 values ranged
between 0.96-4.24M, while AZ3146 values were 1.55-52.4M. AZ3146+MKT-077
resulted in significantly lower viability compared to treatment with
either agent alone (p=0.04-2.0x10-10). The combination was particularly
effective in BT-549, MDA-MB-231, and MDA-MB-436 cells since they
exhibited little sensitivity to AZ3146 as a single agent (IC5022.8M).
However, when each of these cell lines was treated with an IC20 dose of
AZ3146 and 0.05-100nM of MKT-077, we observed a statistically significant
decease in cell viability (p = 0.03-8.5x10-10).Conclusions: Our findings
show that simultaneously treating TNBC cells with low doses of TTK and
HSPA9 inhibitors results in a substantially greater reduction in
viability. Although previous data suggest that TTK inhibitors cause
selective cancer cell death, none of these agents are clinically
available. Additionally, MKT-077 was shown to exhibit significant
antitumor activity in a variety of in vitro and in vivo model systems.
However, we have shown that TNBC cells can be effectively treated with a
TTK inhibitor combined with very low doses of MKT-077. More importantly,
since these proteins are both overexpressed in tumor cells, dual
inhibition of TTK and HSPA9 may be a selective, safe, and highly
effective chemotherapeutic strategy for TNBC.

