Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Multi-functional, miR-205 complexed, gemcitabine conjugated
nanomedicines for effective treatment of chemo-resistant pancreatic
adenocarcinoma


Aberrant expression of small, non-coding RNAs called miRNAs in tumor
tissues result in anomalous levels of genes and proteins which trigger
metastasis and chemoresistance, and aggravate stemness among the cancer
cells. We investigated one such miRNA, miR-205 identified through various
softwares (TARGETSCAN, miRDB and DIANACOT) and validated experimentally
as a potential target for treatment of advanced stage pancreatic cancer.
Most of the current attempts to deliver such potent biologically complex
molecules fail clinically owing to the challenges of structural and
functional stability involved in their formulation and in vivo delivery.
In this study, we constructed a multifunctional, self-assembling,
copolymer with carboxyl pendant groups (mPEG-PCC) which exhibited
efficient conjugation with gemcitabine (12.1% w/w) and simultaneously
formed stable complexes with miR-205 at N/P 16/1. Both the therapeutic
molecules which are otherwise known for plasma degradation demonstrated
long-term stability in plasma when delivered through our system.
Nanomedicines prepared using this polymer by film hydration method showed
a size of 72.9 nm and sustained gemcitabine release of 40% in 10 days
which was not affected by the co-presence of miRNA in the formulation. In
gemcitabine resistant MIA PaCa-2R pancreatic cancer cells, the
formulations showed a transfection efficiency of more than 90% (by flow
cytometry), reversal of chemo-resistance (cell viability assay) and
decrease in invasive and migratory ability of the cancer cells (Matrigel
invasion assays). In vivo evaluation in xenograft model developed using
MIA PaCa-2R cells indicated significantly diminished tumor growth in
miR-205/gemcitabine nanomedicines treated group.Note: This abstract was
not presented at the meeting.

