Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Efficacy of neoadjuvant chemotherapy in combination with
fluorescence-guided surgery on a pancreatic cancer patient-derived
orthotopic xenograft (PDOX)


The aim of this study is to determine the efficacy of neoadjuvant
chemotherapy (NAC) in combination with fluorescence-guided surgery (FGS)
on pancreatic cancer patient derived orthotopic xenograft (PDOX). We
established the PDOX from the patient suffering from metastatic
CA19-9-positive pancreatic cancer. Forty nude mice were implanted with
tumor using surgical orthotopic implantation (SOI) on the nude mouse
pancreas. Four weeks after implantation, the mice with tumor were
randomized into 4 treatment groups: (1) bright-light surgery (BLS) only;
(2) FGS; (3) NAC-BLS; (4) NAC-FGS. Gemcitabine (80 mg/kg, ip, weekly, 3
weeks) was used for NAC. Seven weeks after implantation, BLS was
performed on all tumor-bearing mice. A monoclonal anti-human CA19-9
antibody conjugated with Dylight 650 was delivered to tumor-bearing mice
in the FGS groups as a single intravenous dose 24 hours before BLS.
Postoperatively, the surgical resection bed of FGS mice were imaged with
the OV100 fluorescence imaging system to detect fluorescent residual
tumors. The fluorescent residual tumors of FGS groups were then resected
under fluorescence navigation. The average resected tumor weight of each
group was as follows: (1) BLS, 188.5 50.0 mg; (2) FGS, 278.0 111.4 mg;
(3) NAC-BLS, 84.5 48.7 mg; (4) NAC-FGS, 141.8 48.9 mg. The average
resected tumor weight of NAC groups was significantly less than the
non-NAC groups (113.1 57.0 mg and 235.6 94.3 mg, respectively; p>0.001).
The average resected tumor weight of the FGS groups was significantly
larger than the BLS groups (213.4 107.1 mg and 136.5 73.8 mg,
respectively; p=0.016). Eight weeks after resection, we performed
laparotomy to examine recurrence. The recurrence rate of each group was
as follows: (1) BLS, 9 / 9 (100%); (2) FGS, 4 / 8 (50%); (3) NAC-BLS, 6 /
9 (66.7%); (4) NAC-FGS, 2 / 8 (25%). The recurrence rate of FGS groups
was significantly lower than BLS groups (6 /16; 37.5% and 15 / 18; 83.3%,
respectively; p=0.012), whereas there was no significant difference
between FGS and NAC-FGS groups (p=0.608). There was no significant
difference in the total recurrence rate between NAC and non-NAC groups
(p=0.157). However NAC significantly reduced peritoneal recurrence (29.4
% and 0%, respectively; p=0.044). The results indicate that NAC in
combination with FGS might reduce or even eliminate the peritoneal
recurrence of pancreatic cancer.

