Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Akt-activated endothelium constitute the niche for residual
disease and resistance to bevacizumab in ovarian cancer


Ovarian cancer is the second leading cause of cancer-related death in
women worldwide. Despite optimal cytoreduction and adequate adjuvant
therapies, initial tumor response is often followed by relapse suggesting
the existence of a tumor niche. Targeted therapies have been evaluated in
ovarian cancer to overcome resistant disease. Among them anti-angiogenic
therapies inhibit new blood vessel growth, induce endothelial cell
apoptosis, and block the incorporation of haematopoietic and endothelial
progenitor cells into new blood vessels. Despite in vitro and in vivo
successes antivascular therapy with bevacizumab targeting VEGF has
limited efficacy in ovarian cancer. The precise molecular mechanisms
underlying clinical resistance to anti-VEGF therapies are not yet well
understood. Among them tumor and stromal heterogeneity might determine
the treatment outcomes. The present study investigates whether
abnormalities in the tumor endothelium may contribute to treatment
resistance to bevacizumab and promote a residual microscopic disease.
Here we showed that ovarian cancer cells (OCC) activate akt
phosphorylation in endothelial cells inducing resistance to bevacizumab
leading to an autocrine loop based on FGF2 secretion. Altogether our
results point out the role of an activated endothelium in the resistance
to bevacizumab and in the constitution of a niche for a residual disease.

