Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nef-M1, a peptide antagonist of CXCR4, inhibits tumor angiogenesis
by attenuating AKT and mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling in
colon cancer


Introduction: The Nef-M1 peptide competes effectively with the natural
ligand of CXCR4, SDF-1, to induce apoptosis and inhibit growth in colon
and breast cancers. Its mechanistic role in tumor angiogenesis, a key
step involved in tumor growth and metastasis, is unknown. In this study,
we evaluated the antiangiogenic effect of Nef-M1 and examined its role in
the AKT and Mitogen-Activated Protein Kinase (MAPK) signaling pathways in
colon cancer.Experimental Design: We studied HT29 and SW480 colon cancer
cells in vitro and tumor xenografts developed from HT29 cells were
propagated in severe combined immunodeficient mice in vivo. The mice were
treated intraperitoneally with the Nef-M1 peptide or sNef-M1 (scramble
peptide as control) starting at the time of tumor implantation. Sections
from tumors were evaluated for tumor angiogenesis, as measured by
microvessel density (MVD) based on immunostaining of endothelial markers
(CD31 and FVIII-RAg). MVD was determined by light microscopy in areas of
invasive tumor containing the highest numbers of microvessels per area.
Individual microvessel counts were made on a 200x field within the areas
of most intense tumor neovascularization. Western blot analyses were
performed on lysates of both colon cancer cell lines and HT-29 tumors to
assess the effect of Nef-M1 on the AKT, and MAPK signaling
pathways.Results: Immunostaining analyses indicated that control tumors
had well established vascularity, but Nef-M1 treated tumors had poor
vascularization. In addition, the average MVD was reduced in Nef-M1
treated tumors (n=5) compared to sNef-M1 control tumors (n=12)
(pIntroduction: The Nef-M1 peptide competes effectively with the natural
ligand of CXCR4, SDF-1, to induce apoptosis and inhibit growth in colon
and breast cancers. Its mechanistic role in tumor angiogenesis, a key
step involved in tumor growth and metastasis, is unknown. In this study,
we evaluated the antiangiogenic effect of Nef-M1 and examined its role in
the AKT and Mitogen-Activated Protein Kinase (MAPK) signaling pathways in
colon cancer.Experimental Design: We studied HT29 and SW480 colon cancer
cells in vitro and tumor xenografts developed from HT29 cells were
propagated in severe combined immunodeficient mice in vivo. The mice were
treated intraperitoneally with the Nef-M1 peptide or sNef-M1 (scramble
peptide as control) starting at the time of tumor implantation. Sections
from tumors were evaluated for tumor angiogenesis, as measured by
microvessel density (MVD) based on immunostaining of endothelial markers
(CD31 and FVIII-RAg). MVD was determined by light microscopy in areas of
invasive tumor containing the highest numbers of microvessels per area.
Individual microvessel counts were made on a 200x field within the areas
of most intense tumor neovascularization. Western blot analyses were
performed on lysates of both colon cancer cell lines and HT-29 tumors to
assess the effect of Nef-M1 on the AKT, and MAPK signaling
pathways.Results: Immunostaining analyses indicated that control tumors
had well established vascularity, but Nef-M1 treated tumors had poor
vascularization. In addition, the average MVD was reduced in Nef-M1
treated tumors (n=5) compared to sNef-M1 control tumors (n=12) (p<0.05).
In Nef-M1 treated tumors, the average microvessel size was significantly
decreased from 2.28m2 to 1.16m2. Western blot analyses of lysates of
colon cancer cells and tumors revealed that Nef-M1 effectively suppressed
the activation of p38 and extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) MAP
kinases. AKT activation was also inhibited in Nef-M1 treated samples of
colon cancer cells and tumor xenografts. This inhibition was accompanied
by down-regulation of phosphorylated glycogen synthase kinase-3
(p-GSK-3), a downstream target of p-AKT.Conclusions: Our data suggest
that Nef-M1 inhibits tumor angiogenesis by attenuating AKT and MAPK
signaling pathways and that, by targeting chemokine receptor CXCR4
mediated pathways, it may be a novel therapeutic agent for colon cancers.
This work was supported by NIH/NCI Workforce Diversity Grant R21-CA171251.

