Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preliminary results from the Reproducibility Project: Cancer
Biology - a replication of 50 high-impact cancer cell biology papers from
2010-2012


The lack of reproducibility of preclinical research is a significant and
growing problem which slows basic research and leads to fruitless
clinical trials. An increasing number of reports have found discrepancies
in published preclinical studies across scientific disciplines. For
example:* Amgen found that 47 of 53 landmark oncology publications could
not be reproduced.* Bayer found that their internal results contradicted
academic publications in 43 of 67 oncology and cardiovascular projects.*
Dr. John Ioannidis and his colleagues found that of 432 publications
purporting sex differences in hypertension, multiple sclerosis, or lung
cancer, only one data set was reproducible.These studies, and the many
others that report similar results, highlight a significant problem in
the development of new therapies to treat disease. With increasing
reports of discrepancies in preclinical publications, pharmaceutical
companies are being forced to re-evaluate their reliance on academic
research. In fact, Bayer recently decided to halt nearly two-thirds of
target-validation projects.In this session, we'll report the work we have
done to address this issue. We will bring together researchers and
representatives from funders and publishers to discuss the issue of
reproducibility. We will share funder and publisher initiatives to
promote reproducibility and also discuss research practices that lead to
more reproducible research such as using proper statistical tests,
reporting all experimental data, experimental blinding, and
identification and validation of research reagents. We'll also share
preliminary results from an Arnold Foundation-funded study to replicate
the 50 most high impact cancer biology studies from 2010-1012.
Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

