Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Enhanced antitumor efficacy of T-DM1 in combination with
pertuzumab in HER2-positive breast cancer models


Background: The HER2 oncogene is amplified in approximately 20-25% of
human breast cancers and is a well established therapeutic target.
HER2-targeted therapy by trastuzumab (T) has become increasingly
important for treating HER2+ breast cancers, and following the EMILIA
trial, T-DM1 is expected to serve as a suitable alternative to
trastuzumab. Pertuzumab (P), a HER2 targeted monoclonal antibody that
prevents HER2 dimerization, showed progression-free survival when used
with trastuzumab and docetaxel on HER2+ metastatic breast cancer
(CLEOPATRA trial). In this preclinical study, we investigated the effect
of combining T-DM1 and P on xenografted HER2+ breast tumors.Methodology:
Growth inhibition, apoptosis, and antitumor efficacy were examined using
the 3D-ON-TOP assay, annexinV staining and mouse xenografts respectively,
in BT474 (T- sensitive), BT474HR (T-resistant) and HCC1954 (PIK3CA
mutated) breast cancer cell lines.Results: Treatment of
HER2-overexpressing tumor cells (T-sensitive, T-resistant and PIK3CA
mutant) in vitro with T-DM1 plus pertuzumab resulted in synergistic
inhibition of cell proliferation (3D-ON-TOP and 2D clonogenic assays) and
induction of apoptotic cell death (annexinV positive cells). The
combination (T-DM1+P) also inhibited p-AKT (Ser473 and Thr308) in
HER2-overexpressing cells. T-sensitive and T-resistant xenografts
regressed completely after 6 weeks of therapy with T-DM1 plus P whereas
either single agent inhibited tumor growth partially in both groups. Mice
with HCC1954 (HER2+/PIK3CA mutated) xenograft treated with the same
combination exhibited significant tumor growth inhibition when compared
with vehicle treated mice after 6 weeks of treatment. Conclusions: Our in
vitro and in vivo data clearly demonstrated that dual-targeting HER2 with
a combination of T-DM1 plus P was highly efficacious both in
HER2+/T-resistant and HER2+/PIK3CA mutated xenograft models.

