Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MSK1 mediates PI3K inhibition resistance by induction of -catenin
phosphorylation in glioblastoma


Glioblastoma (GBM), the most common malignant brain tumor in adults,
represents a compelling disease for kinase inhibitor therapy because
majority of these tumors harbor genetic alterations that result in
aberrant activation of growth factor signaling pathways.
PI3K/mTOR-pathway is dysregulated in over 50% of human glioblastomas
(GBM) and represents an attractive target for therapy. One major
challenge for single pathway PI3K inhibition targeting therapy is
intrinsic resistance. To study the mechanism of intrinsic resistance to
PI3K inhibition, we analyzed the pre- and post-treatment reverse phase
protein arrays (RPPA) data of both giloma cells and giloma initiating
cells (GIC). Mitogen- and stress-activated protein kinase 1 (MSK1) was
markedly induced after PI3K inhibitor treatment and it was linked with
increase expression of -catenin. We further found that MSK1 directly
interacts with -catenin and stabilizes -catenin protein level. MSK1 also
regulates -catenin nuclear translocation and -catenin transcriptional
activity. More interestingly, using in vitro kinase assay, we identified
MSK1 is a kinase that phosphorylates -catenin. Finally, we showed that
depletion of -catenin potentiates PI3K inhibitors induced cytotoxity in a
series of GICs. Taken together, our results suggest that MSK1/-catenin
signaling may serve as an escape survival signaling upon PI3K inhibition,
and combination of PI3K inhibition and MSK1/-catenin inhibition is
required to induce lethal growth inhibition in human glioblastoma cells.

