Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrated microRNA network analyses identify a poor prognosis
subtype of gastric cancer characterized by the miR-200 family


Purpose:Our aim was to investigate whether microRNAs can predict the
clinical outcome of patients with gastric cancer (GC). We used integrated
analysis of microRNA and mRNA expression profiles to identify GC microRNA
subtypes and their underlying regulatory scenarios.Experimental
Design:MicroRNA-based GC subtypes were identified by consensus clustering
analysis of microRNA profiles of 90 GC tissues. Activated pathways in the
subtypes were identified by gene expression profiles. Further integrated
analysis was performed to model a microRNA regulatory network for each
subtype. RNA and protein expression were analyzed by RT-PCR and tissue
microarray, respectively, in a cohort of 385 GC cases (including the 90
cases for profiling) to validate the key microRNAs and targets in the
network. Both in vitro and in vivo experiments were performed to further
validate the findings.Results:MicroRNA profiles of 90 GC cases identified
two microRNA subtypes significantly associated with survival. The
poor-prognosis GC microRNA subtype was characterized by overexpression of
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) markers. This GC mesenchymal
subtype was further validated in a patient cohort comprising 385 cases.
Integrated analysis identified a key microRNA regulatory network likely
driving the GC mesenchymal subtype. Three of the microRNAs (miR-200c,
miR-200b, and miR-125b) targeting the most genes in the network were
significantly associated with survival. Functional experiments
demonstrated that miR-200b suppressed ZEB1, augmented E-cadherin,
inhibited cell migration, and suppressed tumor growth in a mouse
model.Conclusions: We have uncovered a key microRNA regulatory network
that defines the mesenchymal GC subtype significantly associated with
poor overall survival in GC.

