Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Co-regulation of srGAP1 by Wnt and androgen receptor signaling in
castration resistant prostate cancer


Androgen receptor (AR) and Wnt signaling both play a critical role during
prostate cancer progression to castration-resistance prostate cancer
(CRPC). Over expression of AR can activate transcriptional activities of
Wnt signaling pathway and promote CRPC. Recent data in our laboratory
showed a potential co-regulation of srGAP1 (Slit-Robo-GTPase activating
protein1) and active Wnt and AR signaling in CRPC. srGAP1 is a downstream
component of Slit-Robo signaling. Our data showed that srGAP1 is
overexpressed in CRPC cell lines (androgen-insensitive prostate cancer)
while absent in both androgen-sensitive cells and in normal prostate
epithelial cells. We also detected increased srGAP1 expression in human
CRPC tissues compared with normal epithelial prostate and androgen
sensitive prostate cancer tissues by immunohistochemistry analysis. When
androgen-sensitive LNCaP cells were grown under androgen deprived
condition, we observed induced expression of srGAP1. Interestingly,
srGAP1 expression was also increased when LNCaP cells were grown under
Wnt stimulated conditions. And, srGAP1 expression was decreased when Wnt
signaling was inhibited by a Wnt antagonist Wnt-inhibitory factor-1
(WIF-1) in CRPC cell lines. Functional studies using chromatin
immmunoprecipitation and luciferase assays were performed to examine
whether Wnt transcription factor LEF-1 or TCF-4 binds and activates the
srGAP1 promoter. Overexpression of WIF-1 inhibited the promoter activity
of srGAP1. Taken together, our results indicated that srGAP1 is
co-regulated by both Wnt and AR signaling and srGAP1 may be a new
potential Wnt target gene in castration-resistance prostate cancer.

