Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: 47 kda CXCR4: A marker for highly invasive neuroblastoma


Neuroblastoma; a pediatric cancer of the sympathetic nervous system,
which accounts for 15% of childhood cancer deaths, presents with
metastatic disease of the bone and the bone marrow at diagnosis in 70% of
the cases. Although studies have shown that the CXCL12 chemokine receptor
CXCR4 mediates the process of metastasis in many cancer types, its role
in the bone marrow metastasis of neuroblastoma is unclear. In an effort
to better understand the role of the CXCR4- CXCL12 axis in bone marrow
metastasis of neuroblsatoma, we screened 20 neuroblastoma cell lines for
their invasive potential, and expression of CXCR4, and sought to identify
a correlation between tumor invasiveness and CXCR4 expression. Western
blot analyses of cell lysates revealed the presence of multiple CXCR4
isoforms with 3 prominent species at about 35 kda, 47 kda and 62 kda.
Cell lines expressing the 47 kda isoform showed higher secretion of MMP9
in gelatin zymography and higher migration and invasion towards
mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) and MSC-conditioned-RPMI, in transwell
migration/invasion studies. Far western blot analysis with
immuno-precipitated CXCR4, showed that the 47kda protein bound with
CXCL12 at a higher rate. Blocking CXCR4 with AMD3100 or a neutralizing
antibody against the 47 Kda isoform decreased the secretion of MMP9, the
expression of integrin 3 and integrin 1 and the invasive potential of the
cell. These data suggest that the 47 kda CXCR4 plays a prominent role in
the bone marrow metastasis of neuroblastoma and could possibly be used as
a diagnostic marker for highly invasive neuroblastoma and the development
of minimal residual disease.

