Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Histamine dihydrochloride and interleukin-2 for relapse prevention
in AML: Initial results of the Re:MISSION phase IV trial


BACKGROUND AND METHODS. Immunotherapy with histamine dihydrochloride and
low-dose interleukin-2 (HDC/IL-2) has been approved within the EU for
relapse prevention in the post-consolidation phase of acute myeloid
leukemia (AML) (Blood 108:88). We have performed a phase IV trial
(Re:MISSION) to assess the immunomodulatory properties of this regimen
and to correlate potential biomarkers of immunity with outcome.
Eighty-nine patients (age 19-80) with AML in first complete remission
received HDC (0.5 mg sc bid) and human recombinant IL-2 (1MIU sc bid) in
ten repeated three-week cycles for 18 months or until relapse.
Mononuclear cells were analyzed for NK and T cell phenotypes by flow
cytometry at onset and during cycles 1 and 3.INDUCTION OF NK CELLS AND
NCR EXPRESSION DURING THERAPY. Treatment with HDC/IL-2 resulted in a
3-fold expansion of both CD56bright (CD56/CD16-) and CD16+ (CD56+/CD16+)
NK cells during cycle 1 (CD56+, P= 10-6, n=47; paired samples t-test).
During cycle 1, the median expression intensity of the natural
cytotoxicity receptors (NCRs) NKp46 and NKp30 on CD16+ NK cells increased
by 50% and 30%, respectively (P=6 x10-8 for NKp46; P=2 x10-7 for NKp30,
n=56). For CD56bright cells, the results were discordant for the NCRs
with pronounced induction of NKp30 (P=4 x10-13) during cycle 1 but no
induction of NKp46 (P=0.51, n=56).ROLE OF NCR EXPRESSION FOR MAINTENANCE
OF REMISSION. An interim analysis of immune markers vs. relapse-free
survival (RFS) revealed a strong impact of NK cell NKp46 expression.
Patients with NKp46 expression above the median after one 21-day cycle of
HDC/IL-2 thus showed significantly higher RFS than those with lower
expression (CD16+, P=0.003, HR=3.0, CI 1.4-6.4; CD56bright, P=0.002,
HR=3.3, CI: 1.5-7.0; logrank test). High NK cell expression of NKp46
after a treatment cycle also identified a population of elderly patients
(>60 years old) with favorable outcome (CD16+, P=0.002, HR=4.1, CI:
1.6-10.2; logrank test). We observed a pronounced expansion of
CD4+/CD25+/Foxp3+ regulatory T cells during cycles that did not impact on
relapse risk. CONCLUSION. These results highlight the role of NK cells
and NCR expression for relapse-free survival in AML.

