Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High frequency of fusion transcripts involving TCF7L2 in
colorectal cancer: Novel fusion partner and splice variants


VTI1A-TCF7L2 was reported as a recurrent fusion gene in colorectal cancer
(CRC), found to be expressed in three out of 97 primary cancers, and one
cell line, NCI-H508, where a genomic deletion joins the two genes (Bass
et al. Nature Genetics, 2011). To investigate this fusion further, we
analyzed high-throughput DNA and RNA sequencing data from seven CRC cell
lines in addition to publicly available data from the NCI-H508 cell line.
From both genome and transcriptome data, the gene RP11-57H14.3
(ENSG00000225292) was identified as a novel fusion partner for TCF7L2 in
the HCT 116 cell line. The originally reported fusion VTI1A-TCF7L2 was
identified as expected from the analysis of NCI-H508 data. By triplicate
nested RT-PCR, we tested both the novel fusion transcript and
VTI1A-TCF7L2 for expression in a series of 106 CRC tissues, 21 colon
cancer cell lines, 14 normal colonic mucosa, and 20 normal tissues from
miscellaneous anatomical sites. Altogether, 42% and 45% of the CRC
samples expressed VTI1A-TCF7L2 and TCF7L2-RP11-57H14.3 fusion
transcripts, respectively. The two fusion transcripts were both seen in
29% of the normal colonic mucosa samples, and in 25% and 75% of the
tested normal tissues from other organs. Seven different splice variants
were detected for the VTI1A-TCF7L2 fusion, of which three are novel. Four
different splice variants were detected for the TCF7L2-RP11-57H14.3
fusion.In conclusion, we have identified novel variants of VTI1A-TCF7L2
fusion transcripts, including a novel fusion partner gene, RP11-57H14.3.
We demonstrated detectable levels of TCF7L2 involving fusion transcripts
in a large fraction of CRC samples, as well as in normal colonic mucosa
and other normal tissue types, revealing that these fusions, at
transcript level, are neither specific to cancer nor to the colon and
rectum.

