Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Isolation and nanoscale visualization of glioblastoma stem-like
cells utilizing the Notch1 receptor


Tumor eradication is an elusive goal in modern medicine. This unmet goal
is in part due to the imprecise therapeutic targeting of a specific
population of cells having stem-like properties. These stem-like tumor
cells can remain almost senescent during chemotherapeutic interventions
to evade treatment and produce genetically different secondary tumor
lineages than their parental tumors. Here we develop a novel approach
that utilizes the Notch1 receptor, found on the surface of glioma cells,
to isolate a population of cells bearing stem-like properties. We
identified this population to be Nestin+GFAP-, capable of serum
differentiation into Nestin-GFAP+ cells, and self-regenerating. In
addition, this unique population of cells has increased stem-like
qualities compared to the CD133 marker. Utilizing affinity nanocapture
grids, we were able to visualize Notch1+ stem-like cells and the
perforation of their plasma membranes by unlabeled gold nanorods via
electron microscopy. Previous studies have shown that tumor stem-like
cells can exist within the larger tumor milieu, representing a potential
threat to recurrence. We propose that 1) Notch1 may serve as a novel
marker to define glioblastoma stem-like cells, capable of being used for
targeting chemotherapeutic approaches in the future, and 2) affinity
nanocapture grids represent a unique method for examining individual
living cells at the nanoscale.

