Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tissue miRNA as a predictive marker for recurrence of Dukes B
colorectal cancer


Background:Colorectal cancer (CRC) diagnosed at an early stage is
curable, thus, a standard treatment for Dukes B CRC which invades deeply
through the muscularis propria without lymph node metastasis and distant
metastasis is surgically resectable without any additional
chemotherapies. However, the recurrence rate of Dukes B after curative
resection is approximately 20%. Although clinical and pathological
factors have been investigated in order to characterize the high risk of
the recurrence in Dukes B CRC, there were no robust biomarkers suitable
for detecting the high risk group. Several microRNAs (miRNAs) have
appeared to be associated with CRC and some are under evaluation for a
biomarker to detect CRC in serum or fecal samples. In this study, miRNAs
isolated from CRC tissue were investigated for a proper biomarker for
extracting the high risk group in Dukes B CRC. Methods: Patients with
histologically confirmed Dukes B CRC were enrolled in this study. Tissue
miRNAs extracted from the cancer tissue and normal adjacent tissue of 5
patients with recurrence were compared with those from 5 patients without
recurrence, using a high-sensitivity miRNA chip, in order to select the
candidate miRNAs. The candidate miRNAs associated with recurrence were
then analyzed by real-time RT PCR using tissue miRNA of 14 patients with
recurrence and 66 patients without recurrence. The corresponding
relapse-free survival (RFS) was analyzed using the Kaplan-Meier method.
Results: From the comprehensive analysis, using a high-sensitivity miRNA
chip, the following 14 miRNAs were selected as candidates for further
study; let-7a, -7d, -7e, miR-18b, -23c, -128a, -146b-5p, -148b, -151-5p,
-181c, -221, -222, -361-5p, and -500a*. The expressions of let-7d,
miR-18b, -23c, -148b, -151-5p, -181c, and -361-5p in the recurrent group
were significantly higher than those in the recurrence-free group, using
univariate analysis (P Background:Colorectal cancer (CRC) diagnosed at an
early stage is curable, thus, a standard treatment for Dukes B CRC which
invades deeply through the muscularis propria without lymph node
metastasis and distant metastasis is surgically resectable without any
additional chemotherapies. However, the recurrence rate of Dukes B after
curative resection is approximately 20%. Although clinical and
pathological factors have been investigated in order to characterize the
high risk of the recurrence in Dukes B CRC, there were no robust
biomarkers suitable for detecting the high risk group. Several microRNAs
(miRNAs) have appeared to be associated with CRC and some are under
evaluation for a biomarker to detect CRC in serum or fecal samples. In
this study, miRNAs isolated from CRC tissue were investigated for a
proper biomarker for extracting the high risk group in Dukes B CRC.
Methods: Patients with histologically confirmed Dukes B CRC were enrolled
in this study. Tissue miRNAs extracted from the cancer tissue and normal
adjacent tissue of 5 patients with recurrence were compared with those
from 5 patients without recurrence, using a high-sensitivity miRNA chip,
in order to select the candidate miRNAs. The candidate miRNAs associated
with recurrence were then analyzed by real-time RT PCR using tissue miRNA
of 14 patients with recurrence and 66 patients without recurrence. The
corresponding relapse-free survival (RFS) was analyzed using the
Kaplan-Meier method. Results: From the comprehensive analysis, using a
high-sensitivity miRNA chip, the following 14 miRNAs were selected as
candidates for further study; let-7a, -7d, -7e, miR-18b, -23c, -128a,
-146b-5p, -148b, -151-5p, -181c, -221, -222, -361-5p, and -500a*. The
expressions of let-7d, miR-18b, -23c, -148b, -151-5p, -181c, and -361-5p
in the recurrent group were significantly higher than those in the
recurrence-free group, using univariate analysis (P < 0.05). These seven
miRNAs and two histopathological factors, namely pathological type and
tdepth of umor invasion, were studied using multivariate analysis. Three
miRNAs, miR-23c (P = 0.04, odds ratio [OR]: 21.0, 95% confidence interval
[CI]: 2.65-167.4), miR-151-5p (P = 0.01, OR: 7.8, 95% CI: 1.57-38.4), and
miR-181c (P = 0.006, OR: 10.0, 95% CI: 1.94-51.9), were detected as
independent predictive factors of recurrence. All patients with low
expression of these 3 miRNAs (N = 25) survived over 60 months without
recurrence. Meanwhile, recurrent tumor occurred within 36 months in all
patients with high expression of these 3 miRNAs (N = 3). Conclusion: The
miRNAs selected in the present study may be a operationally useful
predictors of CRC recurrence. Furthermore, there is a possibility to
improve prediction performance by combining several miRNA levels.

