Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Biomarker selection defines a subgroup of hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC) patients with poor prognosis who are candidates for MET inhibition
strategy


Background: In HCC, acquired resistance to receptor tyrosine kinase
receptors has been associated with an increased expression and activation
of the c-MET pathway. In addition, initial data suggest that carbonic
anhydrase 9 (CA9), a hypoxia marker, is associated with HCC development.
The aim of this study was to correlate c-MET and CA9 expression levels by
immunochemistry with clinicopathologic characteristics and disease-free
survival (DFS) in patients with HCC.Materials and Methods: One-hundred
HCC resection specimens were evaluated by immunohistochemistry. Staining
results were qualitatively and quantitatively assessed and correlated
with clinicopathologic parameters. We elaborated our own dedicated macro,
using ImageJ software, for automated evaluation. c-MET high and CA9 high
expression were defined as moderate to strong staining. Univariate
analyses were performed using Fisher's exact or chi square test, and
multivariate analyses using Cox regression model. Median DFS were
calculated by Kaplan-Meier method.Results: Patients were mainly males
(84%). Tumors were classified as BCLC A1 (92%), uninodular (53%),
low-AFP-expressing (82%), moderately differentiated (63%), and with
pathologic vascular invasion (71%). c-MET high expression was observed in
51% of tumors and was higher in patients with viral hepatitis-associated
HCC (p=0.02) and in patients with AFP>400UI/L (p=0.03). CA9 high
expression was observed in 41% of tumors and was correlated with viral
hepatitis (p=0.002), pathological vascular invasion (p=0.007), and poor
differentiation (p=0.007). c-MET and CA9 expression levels significantly
correlated with each other (p=0.008). Median DFS was shorter in the c-MET
high (12.9 months, vs >80 months in c-MET low patients; p=0.018) and CA9
high (10.2 months, vs 34.4 months in CA9 low patients; p=0.02)
populations. Comparison of c-MET and CA9 status discriminated 3 groups
with distinct prognosis. The shortest median DFS was 10.7 months in the
c-MET high / CA9 high group, whereas median DFS was not reached in the
c-MET low / CA9 low group (p=0.003). The group comprising c-MET high /
CA9 low and c-MET low/ CA9 high expressing patients was defined as an
intermediate risk populations (DFS=19 months). In a multivariate
analysis, smaller tumor size (p=0.025), uninodular morphology (p=0.004),
and CA9-low levels (p=0.007) were independently associated with a
prolonged DFS. In addition, c-MET high expression level was significantly
associated with shorter DFS when CA9 was excluded from the model
(p=0.024). Data on c-MET amplification will be added.Conclusion: c-MET
expression is a useful prognostic marker in HCC that could be used for
patient stratification. Patients with HCC overexpressing c-MET and CA9
represent a subgroup with a particularly poor prognosis who might benefit
from therapy with c-MET inhibitors.

