Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel heteroclitic XBP1 peptides induce antigen-specific memory
CD3+CD8+ T cells expressing critical T cell markers and transcription
regulators


Background: XBP1 is a critical transcriptional activator of the unfolded
protein response that enables tumors to survive prolonged endoplasmic
reticulum stress due to nutrient deprivation, hypoxia or accumulation of
unfolded/misfolded proteins. This provided us a rational to evaluate XBP1
as an antigen to develop a potential vaccine based immunotherapy against
different types of solid tumors.Methods: XBP1 gene expression was
investigated in a variety of primary tumor cells by searching the
canEvlove and Oncomine databases and examined its differential expression
level from normal cells. A cocktail of heteroclitic XBP1 unspliced
(US)184-192 (YISPWILAV) and heteroclitic XBP1 spliced (SP)367-375
(YLFPQLISV) peptides were used to evoke XBP1 specific cytotoxic T
Lymphocytes (XBP1-CTL) ex vivo to target breast, colon, and pancreatic
cancer cells. XBP1-CTL were also evaluated for critical T cell markers,
transcription regulators, and generation of specific memory CTL
subsets.Results: Significantly higher XBP1 gene expression was detected
in primary tumor cells from breast and colon cancer patients compared to
the corresponding normal cells from healthy donors. Using a cocktail of
immunogenic heteroclitic XBP1 US and SP peptides with improved HLA-A2
binding/stability as compared to their native counterparts, we induced
XBP1-specific CTL from normal HLA-A2+ individuals' CD3+ T cells. The
XBP1-CTL displayed an increased frequency of CD3+CD8+ T cells with
enhanced expression (% positive cells, mean fluorescence intensity) of
surface T cell markers including CD38, CD40L, CD69, 41BB (CD137), ICOS
(CD278) and TCR. In addition, the XBP1-CTL were enriched for central
memory (CM: CD45RO+CCR7+) and effector memory (EM: CD45RO+CCR7-) CD3+CD8+
T cells as compared to baseline (unstimulated) CD3+CD8+ T cells.
Functionally, the memory (CD45RO+) XBP1-CTL subsets showed increased
levels of cellular proliferation, IFN- production, IL-2 production, and
CD107a degranulation in response to HLA-A2+ breast (MB231), colon cancer
(LS180) or pancreatic cancer (Panc1) cell lines. Finally, memory
(CD45RO+) subset of XBP1-CTL expressed higher levels of Tbet and Eomes
transcription regulators as compared to non-memory (CD45RO-) XBP1-CTL,
with the highest frequencies of IFN- producing Tbet+, Eomes+ or Granzyme
B+ cells in the CM subset.Conclusions: These results provide the rational
for an immunotherapeutic vaccine comprised of a cocktail of heteroclitic
XBP1 US184-192 and XBP1 SP367-375 HLA-A2 peptides to induce XBP1-CTL
expressing critical T cell markers and transcription regulators as well
as distinct memory CTL subsets with specific anti-tumor activities
against breast, colon and pancreatic cancers.

