Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Radiation-induced immunogenic modulation of tumor enhances antigen
processing and calreticulin exposure, resulting in enhanced T-cell killing


Radiation therapy (RT) is used for local tumor control through direct
killing of tumor cells. Radiation-induced cell death can trigger tumor
antigen-specific immune responses, but these are often noncurative.
Radiation has been demonstrated to induce immunogenic modulation (IM) in
various tumor types by altering the biology of surviving cells to render
them more susceptible to T cell-mediated killing. Little is known about
the mechanism(s) underlying IM elicited by sub-lethal radiation dosing.
We have examined the molecular and immunogenic consequences of radiation
exposure in breast, lung, and prostate human carcinoma cells. Radiation
induced secretion of ATP and HMGB1 in both dying and surviving tumor
cells. In vitro and in vivo tumor irradiation induced significant
upregulation of multiple components of the antigen-processing machinery
and calreticulin cell-surface expression. Augmented CTL lysis specific
for several tumor-associated antigens was largely dictated by the
presence of calreticulin on the surface of tumor cells and constituted an
adaptive response to endoplasmic reticulum stress, mediated by activation
of the unfolded protein response.This study provides evidence that
radiation induces a continuum of immunogenic alterations in tumor
biology, from immunogenic modulation to immunogenic cell death. We also
expand the concept of immunogenic modulation, where surviving tumor cells
recovering from radiation-induced endoplasmic reticulum stress become
more sensitive to CTL killing. These observations offer a rationale for
the combined use of radiation with immunotherapy, including for patients
failing RT alone.

