Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Blockade of the CD39 immunoregulatory pathway by monoclonal
antibodies


The CD39/ CD73/ adenosine pathway is an important regulator of effector
immune cell response. We previously demonstrated that, in human cancer
specimen, CD39 is expressed by infiltrating regulatory T cells, tumor
cells and the tumor associated stroma. CD39 enzymatic activity decreases
peritumoral ATP, a potent tumor cell toxicity and immunogenic inducer,
and generates immunosuppressive adenosine that binds adenosine receptors
and inhibits CD4, CD8 T cell and NK cell responses. We and other
demonstrated that CD39-mediated decrease of extracellular ATP and
increase of adenosine promote tumor progression and immune escape as well
as resistance to chemotherapy-induced immune response. We therefore
generated several CD39 blocking monoclonal antibodies and present here
the latest developments of these antibodies. We provide evidence that
CD39 blocking antibodies restore the proliferation of CD4 and CD8 T cells
inhibited by melanoma cells expressing CD39 and increase the generation
of CD8 cytotoxic T cells against CD39+ melanoma cells. We also
demonstrated that CD39+ lymphoma cells are less sensitive to NK cell
cytotoxic activity than CD39- lymphoma cells, and that CD39-blocking
monoclonal antibodies increase NK-mediated lysis of CD39+ lymphoma cells
but not CD39- lymphoma cells. In conclusion, CD39 blocking antibodies may
represent a novel immunotherapy strategy for inhibiting regulatory T
cells and tumor cell-mediated immunosuppression. The results presented
here support the ongoing development of CD39 blocking monoclonal
antibodies as potential anticancer drugs to restore antitumor immune
response.

