Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effect of pretreatment, dose and route of administration of
BPM31510 (Coenyzme Q10 containing proprietary formulation) alone or in
combination with gemcitabine improves survival in pancreatic cancer


In-vitro studies have demonstrated the ability of BPM31510, a Coenzyme
Q10 (CoQ10) containing proprietary formulation to effectuate a metabolic
switch from glycolysis to mitochondrial OXPHOS resulting in the
activation of apoptotic pathways specifically in cancer cells. The
effectiveness of BPM31510 in combination with standard of care
chemotherapy agents in in-vitro and in-vivo models has been previously
established. The current study was to determine the effect of dose, route
of administration and combination with gemcitabine on survival in an
animal model of pancreatic cancer. BPM31510 administered in three divided
doses (50mg/kg vs 75mg/kg body weight daily, intravenous) was associated
with dose dependent increase in survival and was significantly better
when combined with gemcitabine. Continuous infusion of BPM31510
significantly improved survival rates compared to three divided doses
(50mg/kg or 75mg/kg body weight) of BPM31510, with best outcomes at
200mg/kg body weight dose. Sixty day pretreatment with BPM31510 alone
followed by combination with gemcitabine was also associated with
improved survival outcomes with either gemcitabine or BPM31510 alone. The
data suggests that dose and route of administration of BPM31510 alone or
in combination with standard of care chemotherapy agents influences and
improves survival in animal model of pancreatic cancer.

