Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: FP-1039/GSK3052230, an FGF ligand trap, enhances VEGF antagonist
therapy in preclinical models of RCC and HCC


An increasing body of evidence has implicated FGF2 as one of the drivers
of resistance to various inhibitors of VEGF-mediated angiogenesis. This
resistance may play a role as a key limitation to the efficacy of
therapies targeted at VEGF and its receptors. We investigated the
potential for FP-1039/GSK3052230, a ligand trap that sequesters FGFs and
inhibits their signaling, to enhance the activity of VEGF antagonist
therapies in certain preclinical models of renal cell (RCC) and
hepatocellular (HCC) carcinomas. First, we examined whether
FP-1039/GSK3052230 has single agent efficacy against human RCC and HCC
xenografts that express relatively high levels of FGF2, a profile that
would mimic FGF2-driven resistance to VEGF therapy. We determined that
this expression profile represents 34% of clear cell RCC (ccRCC) and 31%
of HCC patients, based on the cancer genome atlas (TCGA) data. Human
ccRCC xenografts with high FGF2 expression and low VEGFA expression
demonstrated a significant inhibition in tumor growth when treated with
FP-1039/GSK3052230 alone (TGI: 39-81%). In addition, we show that the
high FGF2 expression profile is similarly predictive for the anti-tumor
response of a human HCC model to single-agent FP-1039/GSK3052230 (TGI:
31-55%). In contrast, RCC models with low FGF2 expression, representing
66% of all ccRCC in the TCGA, are relatively insensitive to
FP-1039/GSK3052230 as a single-agent. However, combination therapy of
FP-1039/GSK3052230 with pazopanib in these tumors is significantly more
effective than either agent alone. FP-1039/GSK3052230 not only slows
tumor growth, but can induce 25% tumor regression when administered to
mice bearing ccRCC xenografts that have become resistant to pazopanib.
Together, our data demonstrate that FP-1039/GSK3052230 may be an
effective therapy against RCC and HCC, both as a single agent in disease
driven by FGF2 and in combination with VEGF antagonist therapies that
represent the current standards of care for advanced disease.

