Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Innovative rapid gene methylation analysis of surgical margin
tissues in head and neck cancer


Background: To secure negative surgical margins is the primary goal of
surgical cancer treatment. However, tumor recurrence sometimes occurs
even with histologically negative surgical margins. In order to detect
submicroscopic residual cancerous cells intra-operatively, a time saving
molecular biological approach is required.Methods: We established an
innovative rapid Quantitative methylation PCR (QMSP) assay, which
consists of remarkably time-minimized DNA extraction, bisulfite treatment
and QMSP quantification. In order to assess the feasibility of completing
the rapid assay during a surgical procedure, 10 serial specimens of
primary head and neck cancers were evaluated by both rapid QMSP and
conventional QMSP.Results: The DNA product quality of the most time
saving procedure was as good as that of a conventional procedure. In the
QMSP assay, target gene methylation and reference gene methylation were
equally detected by both rapid and conventional methods. Finally, two
frequently methylated genes in head and neck cancers, homeobox A9 (HOXA9)
and endothelin receptor type B (EDNRB) were analyzed in 10 head and neck
tumors, margin tissues and normal tissues. Relative QMSP values of rapid
and conventional QMSP were quite similar in almost all tumors, margins
and normal tissues. The average total time for the rapid QMSP procedure
was less than 3 hours. Although postoperative follow-up periods are less
than a year, local tumor recurrence occurred in one case whose margin
tissue was QMSP positive.Conclusion: This innovative rapid QMSP yields
acceptable levels of methylation detection and can be completed during
the operative window. The procedure promises to become a useful clinical
tool, if the methylated surgical margins are revealed to correlate with
the local tumor recurrence in a larger cohort.

