Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An evaluation of poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase inhibitor efficacy
in head and neck cancer


Background: Synthetic lethality induced by poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase
(PARP) inhibitors can occur in tumors without BRCA mutations. This
BRCAness phenomenon has been observed in ovarian and triple negative
breast cancers, but its role in other malignancies is not known. This
study aims to evaluate the potency of PARP inhibitors in head and neck
cancer, where BRCA mutations are rare.Methods: First, we compared three
PARP inhibitors (veliparib, olaparib and rucaparib). We subsequently
established dose response curves for rucaparib for ten head and neck
cancer cell lines and compared with two BRCA deficient breast cancer cell
lines. Furthermore, we used immunofluorescent staining for H2AX and RAD51
to study the capability for the DNA repair mechanism homologous
recombination.Results: We identified rucaparib as the most potent of the
three PARP inhibitors tested and found a subset of tumors that show high
rucaparib sensitivity (IC50 values: 7.0M, 10.3M and 11.7M) comparable to
a BRCA deficient breast cancer cell line (IC50 value: 8.9M). Foci
formation of the homologous recombination marker RAD51 did not serve as a
reliable post-treatment biomarker.Conclusion: In conclusion, we
demonstrate that PARP inhibitors are effective in a subset of head and
neck cancer cell lines, suggesting that these compounds could play a role
in the treatment of a subset of head and neck tumors that exhibit the
BRCAness phenotype. Further studies regarding the underlying mechanism of
this phenotype are warranted.

