Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oxidative DNA damage causes premature senescence in mouse
embryonic fibroblasts deficient for krppel-like factor 4


Krppel-like factor 4 (KLF4) is a zinc-finger-containing transcription
factor with tumor suppressor activity in various cancer types. Cells that
sustain double strand breaks (DSBs) in their DNA due to high levels of
reactive oxygen species (ROS) can develop genomic instability, which can
result in cancer formation. One protective response to increased levels
of ROS is the induction of cellular senescence. Recently, we found that
mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) null for Klf4 are genetically
unstable, as evidenced by the presence of DNA DSBs. However, it is yet
unknown whether KLF4 is involved in regulating oxidative stress-induced
DNA damage. Therefore, we sought to determine the mechanisms by which ROS
induce genomic instability in Klf4-deficient MEFs. With SA--Gal staining,
we show that Klf4-/- MEFs enter senescence earlier than Klf4+/+ MEFs, and
western blot shows accumulation of p21 and p53 with increasing passages.
In addition, immunostaining against -H2AX indicates that the increased
level of DNA damage in Klf4-/- MEFs positively correlates with ROS
accumulation. Consistent with ROS as a source of DSB in Klf4-/- MEFs,
treatment with NAC, reduced the accumulation of DNA damage. Our RT-PCR
result demonstrates that Klf4-/- MEFs have decreased expression of the
antioxidant gene, Gst4. The downregulation of the Gst4 correlates with
significant levels of ROS accumulation, as shown by DCFDA and FACS
analysis, and thus the oxidative stress-induced premature senescence.
Together these findings suggest a mechanism by which KLF4 protects
against DNA damage and oxidative stress at least in part through the
regulation of Gsta4 and likely related genes.Note: This abstract was not
presented at the meeting.

