Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mitochondrial priming of new targeted agents in acute myeloid
leukemia


As numerous molecularly targeted agents are entering clinical trials,
predictive testing is highly desirable. We investigated if response to
certain agents correlates with the recently reported method of BH3
profiling (Chonghaile TN et al, Science, 2011), a functional assay
developed by Letai's group that measures tumor cell mitochondrial priming
by measuring mitochondrial outer membrane permeabilization (MOMP)
following exposure to the peptide-mimicking BH3 domains of BH3-only
proteins. Mitochondrial priming has been reported to be correlated with
clinical responses to conventional chemotherapy in solid tumors and
hematological malignancies (Vo TT et al, Cell, 2012, Pierceall W et al,
Mol Cancer Ther, 2013).Twenty-two AML lines were tested. Cells were
permeabilized with digitonin and exposed to standardized doses of BH3
peptides (BIM, PUMA, NOXA, BAD, BMF, HRK, or PUMA2A). JC-1 was used for
detection of MOMP and served as a measure of sensitivity to each peptide
(reported as %[BH3 peptide]). Also, BCL-2, BCL-XL and MCL-1 expression
levels were determined by Western blot. In addition to studies of
untreated cells, treatment effects of different anti-leukemia drugs
(AraC, Nutlin-3a, KPT-330 [Selinexor] and ABT-199) were determined over a
wide dose range and denoted as ([specific apoptosis] = [(%Annexin V+
cells at each dose) - (%Annexin V+ cells at 0 M)]/[100- (%Annexin V+
cells at 0 M)]). Mixed linear models were used for analysis. As expected,
ABT-199 sensitivity positively correlated with %[BAD]-%[HRK] (|| = 3.22,
p As numerous molecularly targeted agents are entering clinical trials,
predictive testing is highly desirable. We investigated if response to
certain agents correlates with the recently reported method of BH3
profiling (Chonghaile TN et al, Science, 2011), a functional assay
developed by Letai's group that measures tumor cell mitochondrial priming
by measuring mitochondrial outer membrane permeabilization (MOMP)
following exposure to the peptide-mimicking BH3 domains of BH3-only
proteins. Mitochondrial priming has been reported to be correlated with
clinical responses to conventional chemotherapy in solid tumors and
hematological malignancies (Vo TT et al, Cell, 2012, Pierceall W et al,
Mol Cancer Ther, 2013).Twenty-two AML lines were tested. Cells were
permeabilized with digitonin and exposed to standardized doses of BH3
peptides (BIM, PUMA, NOXA, BAD, BMF, HRK, or PUMA2A). JC-1 was used for
detection of MOMP and served as a measure of sensitivity to each peptide
(reported as %[BH3 peptide]). Also, BCL-2, BCL-XL and MCL-1 expression
levels were determined by Western blot. In addition to studies of
untreated cells, treatment effects of different anti-leukemia drugs
(AraC, Nutlin-3a, KPT-330 [Selinexor] and ABT-199) were determined over a
wide dose range and denoted as ([specific apoptosis] = [(%Annexin V+
cells at each dose) - (%Annexin V+ cells at 0 M)]/[100- (%Annexin V+
cells at 0 M)]). Mixed linear models were used for analysis. As expected,
ABT-199 sensitivity positively correlated with %[BAD]-%[HRK] (|| = 3.22,
p < 0.001), which is compatible with BCL-2 dependency of ABT-199 (while
BAD is binding to BCL-2 and BCL-XL, HRK is binding to BCL-XL only and the
difference is therefore BCL-2-specific). This was supported by the
observed correlation between %[BAD]-%[HRK] and BCL-2 protein expression
levels (r=0.619; p = 0.018). AraC sensitivity showed a similar
correlation with %[BAD]-%[HRK] (|| = 1.61, P As numerous molecularly
targeted agents are entering clinical trials, predictive testing is
highly desirable. We investigated if response to certain agents
correlates with the recently reported method of BH3 profiling (Chonghaile
TN et al, Science, 2011), a functional assay developed by Letai's group
that measures tumor cell mitochondrial priming by measuring mitochondrial
outer membrane permeabilization (MOMP) following exposure to the
peptide-mimicking BH3 domains of BH3-only proteins. Mitochondrial priming
has been reported to be correlated with clinical responses to
conventional chemotherapy in solid tumors and hematological malignancies
(Vo TT et al, Cell, 2012, Pierceall W et al, Mol Cancer Ther,
2013).Twenty-two AML lines were tested. Cells were permeabilized with
digitonin and exposed to standardized doses of BH3 peptides (BIM, PUMA,
NOXA, BAD, BMF, HRK, or PUMA2A). JC-1 was used for detection of MOMP and
served as a measure of sensitivity to each peptide (reported as %[BH3
peptide]). Also, BCL-2, BCL-XL and MCL-1 expression levels were
determined by Western blot. In addition to studies of untreated cells,
treatment effects of different anti-leukemia drugs (AraC, Nutlin-3a,
KPT-330 [Selinexor] and ABT-199) were determined over a wide dose range
and denoted as ([specific apoptosis] = [(%Annexin V+ cells at each dose)
- (%Annexin V+ cells at 0 M)]/[100- (%Annexin V+ cells at 0 M)]). Mixed
linear models were used for analysis. As expected, ABT-199 sensitivity
positively correlated with %[BAD]-%[HRK] (|| = 3.22, p < 0.001), which is
compatible with BCL-2 dependency of ABT-199 (while BAD is binding to
BCL-2 and BCL-XL, HRK is binding to BCL-XL only and the difference is
therefore BCL-2-specific). This was supported by the observed correlation
between %[BAD]-%[HRK] and BCL-2 protein expression levels (r=0.619; p =
0.018). AraC sensitivity showed a similar correlation with %[BAD]-%[HRK]
(|| = 1.61, P < 0.05). KPT-330 sensitivity in p53 wild-type cell lines
positively correlated with %[PUMA] (|| = 0.92, P = 0.054), consistent
with the notion that KPT-330 induces PUMA through p53 activation.
Unexpectedly, Nutlin-3a activity did not correlate with any of the BH3
peptides. Results indicate that ABT-199, KPT-330 and Nutlin-3a show
different modes of action in terms of BH3 peptide dependency, supporting
potential combination effects of these agents. For ABT-199, increased
MCL1 levels were associated with diminished cytotoxicity (r=0.532;
p=0.05), as expected. For Ara-C, a similar correlation with MCL-1 was
noted (r=0.505; p=0.06), but no correlations were observed for Nutlin-3a
and KPT-330.In conclusion, BH3 profiling is a promising tool to predict
the BH3 peptide dependency of the BH3-mimetic ABT-199 and the
XPO1-inhibitor KPT-330. Functional BH3-profiling appears to be superior
to the static quantitation of Bcl-2 family protein levels in AML.
Furthermore, mitochondrial priming may be useful for the rational design
of new combination therapies.

