Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cancer cells with G/G mdm2 SNP309 have compromised transcriptional
elongation of p53 target genes


MDM2 protein is often found over-expressed in cancers with wild-type p53.
A single nucleotide polymorphism (T to G) near the mdm2 P2 promoter, mdm2
SNP309, leads to MDM2 overexpression. This polymorphism is associated
with accelerated tumor formation, decreased sensitivity to DNA damage
treatment and compromised p53 transcriptional activity. Two G/G SNP309
cell lines MANCA (Burkitt lymphoma) and A875 (melanoma) express wild-type
p53 protein not readily degraded by MDM2. This wild-type p53 does not
activate target genes even after DNA damage. During the blocked
transcription, MDM2 and p53 co-localize at p53 response elements on
chromatin. Therefore, we hypothesized that MDM2 localized with p53 on the
chromatin was the contributing factor for the compromised p53
transcriptional activity. We explored the mechanism for compromised p53
transcriptional activity in these G/G SNP309 cancer cell lines. When
compared to fully activated wild-type p53 in ML-1 cells treated with
etoposide, MANCA and A875 cell lines had comparable recruitment of total
and initiated RNA pol II at transcription start sites (TSS) for p21 and
puma genes. This indicated that G/G SNP309 cells had functional
transcription initiation at p53 target genes after DNA damage treatment.
We next assessed epigenetic modifications associated with active
transcriptional elongation. Using H3K36 trimethylation (H3K36me3) as a
hallmark for active elongation, we observed that ML-1 cells had a
substantial increase in H3K36me3 after etoposide treatment at p21 and
puma TSS that was not seen in MANCA or A875 cell lines. This lack of
H3K36me3 suggested an inhibition in early transcriptional elongation. To
address the participation of MDM2 in the elongation block we created a
stable MDM2 knockdown MANCA cell line. Interestingly, MDM2 knockdown
drastically increased MDMX protein levels and moderately increased
activation of p53 target genes implying MDMX played a redundant role for
MDM2. We are currently investigating the roles of MDM2 and MDMX in
blocking transcriptional elongation. Interestingly, we have found that
treatment of MANCA cells with low dose Actinomycin D reactivates the p53
pathway and studies are in progress to determine if this is through
activation of transcriptional elongation.This work was supported by The
Breast Cancer Research Foundation and The National Science Foundation
(grant MCB-0744316) to J.B. M.R. was supported by the MBRS-RISE Program
to Hunter College 3R25-GM060665.

