Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Vulnerability and resistance in glioblastoma to G2-specific drugs


Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most common and most lethal primary
malignant brain tumor, affecting 25,000 patients per year. Approximately
87% of GBMs have abnormalities in the p53 pathway that affects G2
checkpoint. In the absence of p53, Wee1 kinase has been shown to regulate
G2 checkpoint upon chemotherapeutic insult. Wee1 inhibits CDC2 function,
thereby promoting G2 phase cell cycle arrest, thus preventing damaged
cells from entering into premature mitosis without repairing the DNA. We
hypothesize that in p53-deficient tumor cells, inhibitors of Wee1 would
be effective to heighten DNA damage due to genetic and pharmacologic loss
of both the G1 and G2 checkpoints, respectively. MK-1775 (Merck) is a
potent and selective small molecule inhibitor of the Wee1 kinase that has
demonstrated enhanced cytotoxic effect in combination with several
chemotherapeutic agents in preclinical studies in vitro and in vivo.
Here, we selected an array of short term cultures of glioma patient
derived xenograft (PDX) models (GBM12, GBM43, GBM79, GBM84) and long term
established glioma cell lines (U87, SF767, T98G) with aberrant and wild
type G1 checkpoint pathways and investigated cytotoxic effects of MK-1775
as a single agent and in combination with Temozolomide (TMZ). Our results
demonstrated differential sensitivity to MK-1775 and TMZ as single agents
for different glioma cell lines in vitro. However, no correlation between
MK-1775, TMZ sensitivity and p53 status of the cell lines was observed.
Combination therapy with MK-1775 and TMZ showed a synergistic effect for
one PDX model, GBM43, with combination index (CI) of 0.4. Combination
therapy of all other glioma cell lines either showed an additive effect
or antagonistic effect with CI of >0.75 irrespective of their p53 status.
Our results demonstrated that synergistic effects of MK-1775 in
combination with chemotherapy (TMZ) are not solely dependent on p53
status of glioma cells and require a more comprehensivce understanding of
the molecular mechanism that dictates GBM's dependence on Wee1 for
escaping DNA damage therapy. Supported by the Ben & Catherine Ivy
Foundation

