Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tet family proteins and 5-hydroxymethylcytosine in esophageal
squamous cell carcinoma


Objective: DNA methylation is a fundamental epigenetic process that
modulates gene expression. Cancer cells exhibit two types of DNA
methylation alterations: global DNA hypomethylation and site-specific CpG
island promoter hypermethylation. Although the base 5-methylcytosine
(5mc) and the DNA methyltransferase (DNMT) family of enzymes that
catalyze DNA methylation are well-studied, the mechanisms of DNA
demethylation are poorly understood. The Ten-eleven translocation (Tet)
family of enzymes (Tet1, Tet2, and Tet3) has been implicated in DNA
demethylation. These enzymes possess the dioxygenase activity and convert
5-mC to 5-hydroxymethylcytosine (5-hmC). Frequent Tet mutational
inactivation or reduction has been reported to associate with decreased
5-hmC levels in various types of myeloid leukemia and melanoma. However,
the status of 5hmC and Tet expression in esophageal squamous cell
carcinoma (ESCC) remains still unknown.Method: We analyzed the 5-hmC
status in DNA from ESCC frozen tissues utilizing the ELISA test, and
5-hmC expression was evaluated by immunohistochemistry. We next examined
the expression levels of Tet family mRNA in both normal and tumor tissues
by RT-qPCR.Results: 5-hmC level was significantly lower in ESCC than in
paired normal tissue in ELISA test (n=33, PObjective: DNA methylation is
a fundamental epigenetic process that modulates gene expression. Cancer
cells exhibit two types of DNA methylation alterations: global DNA
hypomethylation and site-specific CpG island promoter hypermethylation.
Although the base 5-methylcytosine (5mc) and the DNA methyltransferase
(DNMT) family of enzymes that catalyze DNA methylation are well-studied,
the mechanisms of DNA demethylation are poorly understood. The Ten-eleven
translocation (Tet) family of enzymes (Tet1, Tet2, and Tet3) has been
implicated in DNA demethylation. These enzymes possess the dioxygenase
activity and convert 5-mC to 5-hydroxymethylcytosine (5-hmC). Frequent
Tet mutational inactivation or reduction has been reported to associate
with decreased 5-hmC levels in various types of myeloid leukemia and
melanoma. However, the status of 5hmC and Tet expression in esophageal
squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) remains still unknown.Method: We analyzed
the 5-hmC status in DNA from ESCC frozen tissues utilizing the ELISA
test, and 5-hmC expression was evaluated by immunohistochemistry. We next
examined the expression levels of Tet family mRNA in both normal and
tumor tissues by RT-qPCR.Results: 5-hmC level was significantly lower in
ESCC than in paired normal tissue in ELISA test (n=33, P<0.0001). The
similar result was observed in immunohistochemistry. We found that the
Tet2 mRNA expression was significantly lower in ESCCs than paired normal
tissues (n=32, PObjective: DNA methylation is a fundamental epigenetic
process that modulates gene expression. Cancer cells exhibit two types of
DNA methylation alterations: global DNA hypomethylation and site-specific
CpG island promoter hypermethylation. Although the base 5-methylcytosine
(5mc) and the DNA methyltransferase (DNMT) family of enzymes that
catalyze DNA methylation are well-studied, the mechanisms of DNA
demethylation are poorly understood. The Ten-eleven translocation (Tet)
family of enzymes (Tet1, Tet2, and Tet3) has been implicated in DNA
demethylation. These enzymes possess the dioxygenase activity and convert
5-mC to 5-hydroxymethylcytosine (5-hmC). Frequent Tet mutational
inactivation or reduction has been reported to associate with decreased
5-hmC levels in various types of myeloid leukemia and melanoma. However,
the status of 5hmC and Tet expression in esophageal squamous cell
carcinoma (ESCC) remains still unknown.Method: We analyzed the 5-hmC
status in DNA from ESCC frozen tissues utilizing the ELISA test, and
5-hmC expression was evaluated by immunohistochemistry. We next examined
the expression levels of Tet family mRNA in both normal and tumor tissues
by RT-qPCR.Results: 5-hmC level was significantly lower in ESCC than in
paired normal tissue in ELISA test (n=33, P<0.0001). The similar result
was observed in immunohistochemistry. We found that the Tet2 mRNA
expression was significantly lower in ESCCs than paired normal tissues
(n=32, P<0.0001). The expression level of Tet2 mRNA was significantly
associated with the 5hmC status (n=31, r=0.54, P=0.0085). Finally, 5-hmC
status did not correlate with overall survival (P = 0.65).Conclusion: The
5hmC expression was decreased in ESCC tissues, and was associated with
Tet2 expression level, suggesting that 5hmC and Tet2 might play a crucial
role in the development of ESCCs.

