Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development and characterization of a cell based assay for the
validation of mutant IDH1 inhibitors


Recurrent isocitrate dehydrogenase (IDH) mutations have recently been
identified in several cancer types. These point mutations specifically
affect IDH1 and IDH2 active site arginine residues and confer the ability
to reduce -ketoglutarate to R-2-hydroxyglutarate (2HG), an oncometabolite
that competitively inhibits -ketoglutarate-dependent enzymes, such as
histone and DNA demethylases. Accumulating evidence indicates that mIDH
enzymes are attractive targets for the development of novel cancer
therapeutics. To validate potential mIDH inhibitors in a cellular assay,
we acquired several cell lines that harbor mIDH1 R132H and R132C: HCT116
mIDH1 (colon cancer, mIDH1 R132H +/-, Horizon Discovery), U87 MG mIDH1
(glioma, m IDH1 R132H +/+, Japan), HT1080 (fibrosarcoma, mIDH1 R132C +/-)
and JJ012 (chondrosarcoma, mIDH1 R132C +/-, Rush University Medical
Center). Cell lines were sequenced to confirm the presence of mIDH1 and
2HG production was measured in cellular supernatants by GC-MS. We
observed that cells harboring mIDH1 R132C produce higher amounts of 2HG
compared to lines harboring mIDH1 R132H, in agreement with recent
reports. In addition, we show that accumulation of 2HG is time dependent
and that its half-life in cellular supernatant is over 48 hours.
Moreover, we demonstrate that 2HG is a stable analyte in media (through
five sample free-thaw cycles) and that our samples are within linear
range, providing a good intra-assay and inter-assay variability (CV
Recurrent isocitrate dehydrogenase (IDH) mutations have recently been
identified in several cancer types. These point mutations specifically
affect IDH1 and IDH2 active site arginine residues and confer the ability
to reduce -ketoglutarate to R-2-hydroxyglutarate (2HG), an oncometabolite
that competitively inhibits -ketoglutarate-dependent enzymes, such as
histone and DNA demethylases. Accumulating evidence indicates that mIDH
enzymes are attractive targets for the development of novel cancer
therapeutics. To validate potential mIDH inhibitors in a cellular assay,
we acquired several cell lines that harbor mIDH1 R132H and R132C: HCT116
mIDH1 (colon cancer, mIDH1 R132H +/-, Horizon Discovery), U87 MG mIDH1
(glioma, m IDH1 R132H +/+, Japan), HT1080 (fibrosarcoma, mIDH1 R132C +/-)
and JJ012 (chondrosarcoma, mIDH1 R132C +/-, Rush University Medical
Center). Cell lines were sequenced to confirm the presence of mIDH1 and
2HG production was measured in cellular supernatants by GC-MS. We
observed that cells harboring mIDH1 R132C produce higher amounts of 2HG
compared to lines harboring mIDH1 R132H, in agreement with recent
reports. In addition, we show that accumulation of 2HG is time dependent
and that its half-life in cellular supernatant is over 48 hours.
Moreover, we demonstrate that 2HG is a stable analyte in media (through
five sample free-thaw cycles) and that our samples are within linear
range, providing a good intra-assay and inter-assay variability (CV
<10%). Using this assay we evaluated the impact of five reference
compounds obtained from published structures (Agios Pharmaceuticals,
Cambridge MA), on the accumulation of 2HG in the supernatant of HT1080.
These compounds were reported to have different ranges of activity
against mIDH1 R132H and R132C enzymes in in vitro assays. Four of the
mIDH reference compounds significantly inhibited 2HG accumulation in
HT1080 supernatants in a dose dependent fashion, with potencies that were
comparable to enzyme inhibition values. In agreement with previous
reports, none of compounds affected HT1080 proliferation over a 48 hours
incubation. In conclusion, we have identified mIDH cellular models that
produce differing concentrations of 2HG, detectable by a GC/MS assay with
sensitivity sufficient to determine levels as low as 0.1g/ml. We have
tested several inhibitors of the mIDH enzyme and confirmed an association
between in vitro enzyme inhibition and a decrease in 2HG accumulation;
therefore this assay can be used for the cellular evaluation of novel
mIDH1 inhibitors.Funded by NCI Contract No. HHSN261200800001E. This
research was supported [in part] by the Developmental Therapeutics
Program in the Division of Cancer Treatment and Diagnosis of the National
Cancer Institute.

