Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The BARD1 BRCT domains are essential for maintenance of telomere
integrity


BARD1 has tumor suppressor functions by binding to BRCA1 and to p53 via
RING finger and ankyrin repeats, respectively. The BARD1-BRCA1 dimer has
E3 ligase activity, and BARD1-p53 interaction induces apoptosis. The
C-terminus of BARD1 is binding to many proteins that are targets of the
BRCA1-BARD1 ubiquitin ligase, and expression of N-terminally truncated
RING-less BARD1 isoforms was correlated with poor prognosis in various
cancers, consistent with their oncogenic functions by antagonistic
binding to target proteins.Expression and interaction assays showed that
the BARD1 BRCT domains were critically involved in telomere maintenance
and interacted with the telomere binding protein TRF2. Overexpression of
BARD1 or BRCA1 lead to TRF2 degradation, suggesting that TRF2 presents a
novel target of the BARD1-BRCA1 E3 ubiquitination ligase. Repression of
BARD1 or BRCA1 by siRNA leads to genetic instability, as shown before,
and telomere alterations.We observed distinct telomeric alterations in
blood cells of patients with a BARD1 germline mutation that causes a
translation stop and translation of a truncated protein lacking the BRCT
domains. Cells of carriers of a BRCA1 mutation that disrupts the
BARD1-BRCA1 interaction show similar telomere alterations. These in vitro
and in vivo observations suggest that BARD1 and BRCA1 play distinct roles
in maintaining telomere integrity in a dosage dependent manner.BARD1, an
isoform lacking RING and ankyrin motifs, but retaining the BRCT domains,
is abundantly expressed in all cancers investigated so far.
Overexpression of BARD1 in vitro blocked cell cycle progression and
induced chromosomal and telomere abnormalities, suggesting that BARD1
also affected telomere integrity.We conclude that the correct dose of
BARD1 and/ or its BRCT domains is critically important for maintaining
telomere integrity. Expression of BARD1 in cancer, or reduced expression
of BARD1 in mutation carriers causes chromosomal instability and promotes
carcinogenesis and tumor progression.

