Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oxidative damage in predicting early adverse skin reactions from
adjuvant radiotherapy in a tri-racial/ethnic breast cancer population


Adjuvant radiotherapy (RT) following breast conservation surgery has
significantly improved survival. However, may patients develop adverse
skin reactions, pain, breast edema and poor cosmetic results that impact
quality of life. Inter-individual variability in the development of
RT-induced adverse reactions in normal tissue is well-documented for both
acute and late effects. Therefore, we evaluated the first 161 patients in
an ongoing prospective study of conservatively managed breast cancer
patients using the NCI CTCAE v3.0 criteria. We recorded patient
characteristics, smoking history, body mass index (BMI), and treatments.
We pilot tested urinary 8-hydroxydeoxyguanosine (8-OHdG) as an oxidative
damage marker in predicting RT-induced skin toxicity. Women younger than
50 years of age had a significantly (p=0.016) higher post-RT skin
toxicity (grade 2); higher proportion of African Americans have grade 3
skin (p=0.008) compared to other races; and obesity (BMI>30) was
associated with worse skin toxicity. In multivariate analysis, women with
a higher pre-RT 8-OHdG had a significantly higher risk of worse skin
toxicity at week 3 (OR=11.77; 95C%CI=1.21-114.45; p=0.034). Obesity
(BMI>30) was associated with worse skin toxicity at the end of RT
(OR=2.27; 95C%CI=1.14-4.50; p=0.019). This is the first study evaluating
oxidative damage in RT-induced skin toxicity. We reported significant
racial/ethnic differences in urinary 8-OHdG levels and a significant
association between pre-RT 8-OHdG and worse skin toxicity at week 3. If
confirmed in our larger ongoing study of 1,255 patients, our study will
lead to effective treatment strategies and improve quality of life of
breast cancer patients undergoing RT.

