Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor budding and E-cadherin expression are useful predictors of
nodal involvement in T1 esophageal squamous cell carcinoma


Background The endoscopic treatment has been increasingly used for T1
esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC). However, this therapy is
sometimes incomplete if the depth of the T1 primary tumor reaches the
muscularis mucosae (MM) or submucosal layer (SM) because these tumors
have relatively high incidences of lymph node metastasis. However, no
previous report on the predictive factor of nodal metastasis determined
by evaluating primary tumor specimens of patients with ESCC is
available.Patients and Methods A total of 55 patients with T1 ESCC
invading as deep as the submucosal layer who underwent curative
esophagectomy were examined. We investigated the significance of the
immunohistochemical stainings of VEGF-C and E-cadherin in the primary
tumor and tumor budding for prediction of nodal metastasis.Results
Metastasis to the regional lymph nodes was observed in 26 cases (47.3%)
in this setting. VEGF-C expression and reduced E-cadherin expression in
the primary tumor was observed in 32 (58.1%) and 38 cases (69.1%),
respectively. High-grade tumor budding was observed in 29 cases (52.7%).
E-cadherin expression and tumor budding were closely correlated with
nodal metastasis (p = 0.039 and Background The endoscopic treatment has
been increasingly used for T1 esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC).
However, this therapy is sometimes incomplete if the depth of the T1
primary tumor reaches the muscularis mucosae (MM) or submucosal layer
(SM) because these tumors have relatively high incidences of lymph node
metastasis. However, no previous report on the predictive factor of nodal
metastasis determined by evaluating primary tumor specimens of patients
with ESCC is available.Patients and Methods A total of 55 patients with
T1 ESCC invading as deep as the submucosal layer who underwent curative
esophagectomy were examined. We investigated the significance of the
immunohistochemical stainings of VEGF-C and E-cadherin in the primary
tumor and tumor budding for prediction of nodal metastasis.Results
Metastasis to the regional lymph nodes was observed in 26 cases (47.3%)
in this setting. VEGF-C expression and reduced E-cadherin expression in
the primary tumor was observed in 32 (58.1%) and 38 cases (69.1%),
respectively. High-grade tumor budding was observed in 29 cases (52.7%).
E-cadherin expression and tumor budding were closely correlated with
nodal metastasis (p = 0.039 and <0.01 respectively), whereas VEGF-C
expression tended to correlate with lymph node metastasis (p = 0.055). In
addition, high-grade tumor budding was significantly correlated (p
Background The endoscopic treatment has been increasingly used for T1
esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC). However, this therapy is
sometimes incomplete if the depth of the T1 primary tumor reaches the
muscularis mucosae (MM) or submucosal layer (SM) because these tumors
have relatively high incidences of lymph node metastasis. However, no
previous report on the predictive factor of nodal metastasis determined
by evaluating primary tumor specimens of patients with ESCC is
available.Patients and Methods A total of 55 patients with T1 ESCC
invading as deep as the submucosal layer who underwent curative
esophagectomy were examined. We investigated the significance of the
immunohistochemical stainings of VEGF-C and E-cadherin in the primary
tumor and tumor budding for prediction of nodal metastasis.Results
Metastasis to the regional lymph nodes was observed in 26 cases (47.3%)
in this setting. VEGF-C expression and reduced E-cadherin expression in
the primary tumor was observed in 32 (58.1%) and 38 cases (69.1%),
respectively. High-grade tumor budding was observed in 29 cases (52.7%).
E-cadherin expression and tumor budding were closely correlated with
nodal metastasis (p = 0.039 and <0.01 respectively), whereas VEGF-C
expression tended to correlate with lymph node metastasis (p = 0.055). In
addition, high-grade tumor budding was significantly correlated (p <
0.01) with reduced E-cadherin expression. The accuracies of tumor budding
and E-cadherin expression for nodal metastasis were 67.3% and 65.4%
respectively, which were comparable with those of lymphatic involvement
(63%). Tumor budding (p Background The endoscopic treatment has been
increasingly used for T1 esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC).
However, this therapy is sometimes incomplete if the depth of the T1
primary tumor reaches the muscularis mucosae (MM) or submucosal layer
(SM) because these tumors have relatively high incidences of lymph node
metastasis. However, no previous report on the predictive factor of nodal
metastasis determined by evaluating primary tumor specimens of patients
with ESCC is available.Patients and Methods A total of 55 patients with
T1 ESCC invading as deep as the submucosal layer who underwent curative
esophagectomy were examined. We investigated the significance of the
immunohistochemical stainings of VEGF-C and E-cadherin in the primary
tumor and tumor budding for prediction of nodal metastasis.Results
Metastasis to the regional lymph nodes was observed in 26 cases (47.3%)
in this setting. VEGF-C expression and reduced E-cadherin expression in
the primary tumor was observed in 32 (58.1%) and 38 cases (69.1%),
respectively. High-grade tumor budding was observed in 29 cases (52.7%).
E-cadherin expression and tumor budding were closely correlated with
nodal metastasis (p = 0.039 and <0.01 respectively), whereas VEGF-C
expression tended to correlate with lymph node metastasis (p = 0.055). In
addition, high-grade tumor budding was significantly correlated (p <
0.01) with reduced E-cadherin expression. The accuracies of tumor budding
and E-cadherin expression for nodal metastasis were 67.3% and 65.4%
respectively, which were comparable with those of lymphatic involvement
(63%). Tumor budding (p < 0.01), but not E-cadherin and VEGF-C
expression, was significantly correlated with poor survival.Conclusion
After the endoscopic treatment, additional therapy, such as surgery or
chemoradiotherapy, may be required if reduced E-cadherin expression and
high-grade tumor budding are observed in the primary tumor specimen.

