Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Resveratrol regulates phospho-serine 81 androgen receptor and its
stability to inhibit growth of prostate cancer cells


Resveratrol, a polyphenol, has been reported as a cell growth inhibitor
of various types of cancer. The molecular mechanisms of resveratrol are
involved in different cellular signal transductions such as
anti-inflammation and anti-oxidation. Resveratrol inhibits growth of
prostate cancer cells through regulating cyclin-dependent kinases,
anti-apoptotic proteins, and pro-apoptotic proteins. Notably, resveratrol
may down-regulate androgen receptor (AR) and its downstream gene to
inhibit prostate cancer cell growth. In previous study, serine 81
phosphorylation of AR increases its protein stability and transcriptional
activity, which promotes prostate cancer cell growth. The aim of this
study is to investigate whether AR serine 81 phosphorylation would be a
target of resveratrol in prostate cancer cells. Our data indicate that
resveratrol inhibited the growth of prostate cancer cell line, LNCaP,
with the decrease of AR phospho-serine 81 levels. Moreover, AR protein
stability was declined by resveratrol without affecting AR mRNA
expression. Indeed, resveratrol inhibited AR transcriptional activity in
results of AR reporter assay and PSA level in LNCaP cells. In summary,
the results suggest that resveratrol might inhibit growth of LNCaP cells,
at least, via decreasing phospho-serine 81 of AR, AR protein stability,
and AR transcriptional activity.

