Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Virtualization of drug testing by predictive systems biology
modeling for optimal drug treatment of cancer cells and drug repositioning


Traditionally, tumors have been classified based on their tissue of
origin and their histopathological characteristics and consequently
patients are divided into groups where they are treated identically
despite substantial differences in genetic profiles. Identification of
genes causally implicated in cancer development has led to the
development of stratified medicine, which adjusts a patients therapy
based on biomarkers that identify some of the patients expected not
respond to a specific therapy. However, many tumor genome sequencing
projects have shown that many more gene mutations drive the development
of cancer than previously thought, making every tumor unique. These
results in low success rates and thereby high cost in drug approval as
the identified drugs are only effective for particular patient groups
while large patient cohorts have no clear clinical benefit. In the early
process of drug development, drugs are therefore screened on large cancer
cell line collections to define drug applicability and to determine
potential tumor targets.Here, we report the results of a computational
modeling platform, ModCell, allowing the prediction of individual drug
effects using large-scale genomic and transcriptomic data to virtualize
such cell line screening. We validated this approach two-fold: on
publicly available data from the cancer cell line encyclopedia, that
comprises pharmacological profiles for anti-cancer drugs across a library
of cancer cell lines as well as on cancer cell line culture experiments.
We provide evidence that ModCell is able to reproducibly predict the
effects of individual drugs with a confounding 80% accuracy, to predict
combinatory drug action and to identify new applications for existing
drugs. Thus, computational modeling using ModCell can improve todays drug
development by accelerating and partly replacing work which would have
otherwise be conducted in the laboratory and in the clinic.

