Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: STAT3beta suppresses tumorigenesis via modulating the
phosphorylation dynamics and transcription activity of STAT3alpha in
esophageal squamous cell carcinoma


While the oncogenic role of STAT3 is well-documented, a number of studies
have described that STAT3 carries tumor suppressor functions. We
hypothesized that the relative abundance of STAT3 and STAT3, the two
STAT3 isoforms, dictate its exact functional roles in cancer cells. Using
Western blots and a cohort of esophageal squamous cell carcinoma
(ESCC)(n=91), we found that STAT3 significantly correlated with a shorter
survival (P=0.030), whereas phospho-STAT3-Tyr705 and total STAT3 did not
carry significant prognostic value. Correlating with these observations,
STAT3 significantly suppressed the oncogenic effects of STAT3 in ESCC
cell lines in a soft-agar clonogenic assay. Interestingly, while STAT3
suppressed the transcriptional activity of STAT3, it enhanced the
phosphorylation of STAT3-Tyr705 and its nuclear translocation. STAT3 also
prolonged the phosphorylation of STAT3-Tyr705 and increased its
cytoplasmic localization following cytokine stimulation. Furthermore, the
substantial increase in phospho-STAT3-Tyr705 in this setting was related
to STAT3-mediated inhibition of dephosphorylation. Taken together, our
findings have highlighted the tumor suppressor roles of STAT3 via its
interactions with STAT3 at different levels. Our data also strongly
suggests that, an accurate interpretation of the oncogenic activity of
STAT3 in tumors based on the detection of nuclear STAT3 or
phospho-STAT3-Tyr705 requires the knowledge of the STAT3 expression
status.

