Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Impact of p53 impaired function on outcomes of multiple myeloma
patients carrying deleted TP53 and/or amplified MDM4


Background. The TP53 tumor-suppressor gene is mutated or functionally
inactivated in most human cancers. In MM, TP53 del on chr 17p13 defines a
pts group with a particularly poor prognosis, even if its prevalence at
diagnosis is quite low. One of the most potent inhibitor of p53 is MDM4,
whose locus is on chr1q32.1, a region frequently amplified in MM.Aim. To
investigate the possibility that both TP53 del and MDM4 amp might affect
similar pathways, thus finally leading to a poor prognosis MM pts
carrying at diagnosis at least one of them.Pts and methods. 89 pts
treated with bortezomib-thalidomide-dexamethasone (VTD) as induction
therapy prior to, and as consolidation after, double ASCT were analyzed
at diagnosis by unpaired analysis CNA (Affymetrix 6.0 SNP array) and GEP
(Affymetrix U133 Plus2.0 array); in 21 pts carrying MDM4 amp the p53
activity was explored both by deep sequencing of TP53 (Roche GS Junior
454 platform) and by immunoblotting assays of MDM4, p-p53 and p53.
Genomic results were evaluated in the clinical context.Results. CNA
analysis showed a 482 Kb minimal del region on chr17p13, including TP53,
in 8/89 pts (8,9%) and a 1.1 Mb minimal amp region on chr1q32.1 including
MDM4 in 27/89 pts (30,3%).GEP analysis performed in TP53 del and MDM4 amp
pts generated two lists, including genes differentially expressed among
pts carrying or not either amp MDM4 (4211 probes sets, pBackground. The
TP53 tumor-suppressor gene is mutated or functionally inactivated in most
human cancers. In MM, TP53 del on chr 17p13 defines a pts group with a
particularly poor prognosis, even if its prevalence at diagnosis is quite
low. One of the most potent inhibitor of p53 is MDM4, whose locus is on
chr1q32.1, a region frequently amplified in MM.Aim. To investigate the
possibility that both TP53 del and MDM4 amp might affect similar
pathways, thus finally leading to a poor prognosis MM pts carrying at
diagnosis at least one of them.Pts and methods. 89 pts treated with
bortezomib-thalidomide-dexamethasone (VTD) as induction therapy prior to,
and as consolidation after, double ASCT were analyzed at diagnosis by
unpaired analysis CNA (Affymetrix 6.0 SNP array) and GEP (Affymetrix U133
Plus2.0 array); in 21 pts carrying MDM4 amp the p53 activity was explored
both by deep sequencing of TP53 (Roche GS Junior 454 platform) and by
immunoblotting assays of MDM4, p-p53 and p53. Genomic results were
evaluated in the clinical context.Results. CNA analysis showed a 482 Kb
minimal del region on chr17p13, including TP53, in 8/89 pts (8,9%) and a
1.1 Mb minimal amp region on chr1q32.1 including MDM4 in 27/89 pts
(30,3%).GEP analysis performed in TP53 del and MDM4 amp pts generated two
lists, including genes differentially expressed among pts carrying or not
either amp MDM4 (4211 probes sets, p<0.05), or del TP53 (2725 genes,
pBackground. The TP53 tumor-suppressor gene is mutated or functionally
inactivated in most human cancers. In MM, TP53 del on chr 17p13 defines a
pts group with a particularly poor prognosis, even if its prevalence at
diagnosis is quite low. One of the most potent inhibitor of p53 is MDM4,
whose locus is on chr1q32.1, a region frequently amplified in MM.Aim. To
investigate the possibility that both TP53 del and MDM4 amp might affect
similar pathways, thus finally leading to a poor prognosis MM pts
carrying at diagnosis at least one of them.Pts and methods. 89 pts
treated with bortezomib-thalidomide-dexamethasone (VTD) as induction
therapy prior to, and as consolidation after, double ASCT were analyzed
at diagnosis by unpaired analysis CNA (Affymetrix 6.0 SNP array) and GEP
(Affymetrix U133 Plus2.0 array); in 21 pts carrying MDM4 amp the p53
activity was explored both by deep sequencing of TP53 (Roche GS Junior
454 platform) and by immunoblotting assays of MDM4, p-p53 and p53.
Genomic results were evaluated in the clinical context.Results. CNA
analysis showed a 482 Kb minimal del region on chr17p13, including TP53,
in 8/89 pts (8,9%) and a 1.1 Mb minimal amp region on chr1q32.1 including
MDM4 in 27/89 pts (30,3%).GEP analysis performed in TP53 del and MDM4 amp
pts generated two lists, including genes differentially expressed among
pts carrying or not either amp MDM4 (4211 probes sets, p<0.05), or del
TP53 (2725 genes, p<0.05). In both cases, an overall deregulation of
pathways related to the cell cycle, the DNA damage repair and the cell
adhesion and cytoskeleton remodeling was shown.In 21 pts carrying MDM4
amp the p53 activity was evaluated by p-p53 immunoblotting assays: the
absence of p-p53 protein was shown in 60% of them.The TP53 mutational
rate, as detected by deep sequencing of exons 4-11, was analyzed in 21
pts carrying MDM4 amp: point mutations were shown in 15 pts, with mutated
reads frequencies ranging from 1.03% to 16.9% (median coverage for each
amplicon = 1000 reads).The prognostic relevance of p53 pathway impaired
function was evaluated by stratifying pts into two subgroups according to
the presence or absence of MDM4 amp and/or TP53 del (group A: 34 pts,
38%, group B; 55 pts, 62%). Baseline clinical characteristics were
homogeneous, whereas groups A and B resulted clearly imbalanced with
respect to the genomic background: the t(4,14) frequency (38% vs. 14%
positive, p=0.0002) and the average number of CNAs (165 vs 103, p = 0.03)
were overall higher in group A. Despite the initially slightly higher
response rate after VTD (38% vs 20% near complete response), group A pts
showed a shorter PFS (40.13 months vs not reached, p=0.001) and OS (66.6
vs not reached, p=0.0006). The poorer impact associated with MDM4 amp was
retained also in the absence of TP53 del (PFS: 50.5 months vs not
reached, p=0.01).Conclusions. The involvement of the p53 pathway
alteration in MM might be wider than expected, possibly due to the
activation of negative regulators of p53.

