Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: INCB40093 is a selective PI3K inhibitor with potent
antiproliferative activity against human B-cell tumors


Phosphatidylinositol 3-kinases (PI3Ks) belong to a family of lipid
signaling kinases that phosphorylate
phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate, giving rise to
phosphatidylinositol-3,4,5-trisphosphate (PIP3). PIP3 functions as a
second messenger that controls a number of cellular processes, including
growth, survival, adhesion and migration. The delta isoform of PI3K
(PI3K) plays an essential role in B-cell development and functions by
mediating the signaling of key receptors on B cells including BCR,
BAFF-R, IL-4R, CD40 and TLRs. In addition, increased malignant B cell
proliferation and survival has been associated with aberrant activation
of PI3K, and data from recent clinical studies using idelalisib, a PI3K
specific inhibitor, indicate that the enzyme is a therapeutic target for
the treatment of B cell lymphomas.INCB40093 is a novel, potent small
molecule inhibitor of PI3K with 74 to > 900-fold selectivity over the
other PI3K family members. It also does not inhibit (Phosphatidylinositol
3-kinases (PI3Ks) belong to a family of lipid signaling kinases that
phosphorylate phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate, giving rise to
phosphatidylinositol-3,4,5-trisphosphate (PIP3). PIP3 functions as a
second messenger that controls a number of cellular processes, including
growth, survival, adhesion and migration. The delta isoform of PI3K
(PI3K) plays an essential role in B-cell development and functions by
mediating the signaling of key receptors on B cells including BCR,
BAFF-R, IL-4R, CD40 and TLRs. In addition, increased malignant B cell
proliferation and survival has been associated with aberrant activation
of PI3K, and data from recent clinical studies using idelalisib, a PI3K
specific inhibitor, indicate that the enzyme is a therapeutic target for
the treatment of B cell lymphomas.INCB40093 is a novel, potent small
molecule inhibitor of PI3K with 74 to > 900-fold selectivity over the
other PI3K family members. It also does not inhibit (< 30% inhibition) a
broad panel of 196 other kinases when tested at a concentration of 1 M.
INCB40093 blocks the proliferation of primary B cells induced by the
activation of PI3K-mediated signaling through several key receptors (e.g.
BCR, CD40). More importantly, INCB40093 is potent (IC50 values of 10-100
nM) in cell-based assays relevant to the pathogenesis of B cell
malignancies, such as PI3K-mediated signaling and growth of human B cell
lines. This effect is not due to general cytotoxicity because 10 M
INCB40093 had no significant effect on the growth of non-lymphoid cell
lines. Compared to the inhibition of primary B cell proliferation,
INCB40093 is at least 50 times less potent in assays that measure human T
cell or NK cell proliferation, and neutrophil and macrophage function,
suggesting that the impact of INCB40093 on the human immune system will
likely be restricted to B cells. In vivo, the effects of INCB40093 were
evaluated in two human hematological cancer xenograft models. In the
Pfeiffer model of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, oral administration of
INCB40093 inhibited tumor growth as a single agent. INCB40093 also
potentiated the anti-tumor effects of the clinically relevant
chemotherapeutic agent, bendamustine. The tumor growth inhibitory effects
of INCB40093 were also demonstrated in a myeloma tumor xenograft model,
INA-6.Tu1. Taken together, pharmacological data obtained in both in vitro
and in vivo model systems support the potential utility of orally
administered INCB40093 in the treatment of B cell malignancies.

