Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of FGFR3 as a potential therapeutic target gene for
human clear cell ovarian cancer by global genomic analysis


Clear cell ovarian cancer (CCOC) is the second most common subtype of
ovarian cancer after serous ovarian cancer. CCOC is more resistant to
standard chemotherapy and has a poorer prognosis than serous and
endometrioid histotypes. We attempted to identify genes that are
responsible for the aggressive behavior of CCOC and could be potential
therapeutic targets using genomic and expression profilings. To identify
gene amplification, genome-wide DNA copy number alterations were measured
in 13 CCOC cell lines using high-resolution oligonucleotide array CGH
(Agilent 105k Human Genome CGH Microarray). GISTIC analysis identified 16
amplified regions containing 391 genes. After comparison to our database
of differentially expressed genes between human CCOC specimens and normal
ovarian surface epithelium specimen (Affymetrix U133 Plus 2.0
microarrays), 45 of the amplified genes showed mRNA overexpression in
CCOC specimens. Among the 45 genes, fibroblast growth factor receptor 3
(FGFR3) was amplified in 9/13 CCOC cell lines and was overexpressed (12.9
folds) in CCOC specimens. Analysis using PathwayStudio software
identified FGFR3 mediated pathways for cell migration and cell
proliferation. Knockdown of FGFR3 by transfection with FGFR3 specific
shRNAs suppressed cell migration in KOC-7c and HAC-2 cells. Moreover,
knockdown of FGFR3 also suppressed anchorage-dependent cell proliferation
of KOC-7c and HAC-2 cells. The results from the present study therefore
suggested that FGFR3 may promote metastasis and growth of cancer cells
and may serve as a potential target gene for treatment of human clear
cell ovarian cancer.

