Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nutrition and breast cancer prevention: adipose tissue proton
magnetic resonance spectroscopy (1H-NMR) as biomarker of past dietary
intake of lipids


The prospect of a primary prevention of breast cancer by nutrition
implies that population at risk is individualized. Previous
identification of a composite indicator of the nutritional part
(modifiable) of the risk of breast cancer in breast white adipose tissue
theoretically offers this perspective (1), but the need for a biopsy and
tedious biochemical analyses hampers this approach. 1H-NMR of adipose
tissue lipids represents an attractive, non invasive approach, which
could circumvent these limitations. The aim of the study was to determine
whether 1H-NMR spectroscopy of adipose tissue may provide information on
the nature of the diet received. We carried out a dietary intervention in
rats with different enriched oils under isocaloric conditions, and
examined spectra of the lipid extract of their adipose tissue according
to diet. Two groups of Sprague-Dawley rats were fed a basal diet
containing 7% of a mixture of peanut and rapeseed oils enriched with 8%
of an oil without (palm oil) or with DHA (DHASCO, containing 40%
docosahexaenoic acid, DHA). This DHA group was subdivided into 3 groups
with low (1%), moderate (3%) or high (8%) DHASCO content. A third group
(control diet) had a diet containing 15% of the mixture of peanut and
rapeseed oils. All five groups (n=6 per group) received 15% lipids. At
the end of the experiment (6 months), rats were sacrificed and mammary
pad adipose tissue used for analysis of the lipid extract. 1H-NMR
analysis was carried out on a Bruker DRX500 spectrometer operating at
11.7 T. Fatty acids were analyzed by gas chromatography. The fatty acid
profile of adipose tissue differed among dietary groups. For example,
expressed as peak area %, mean values for DHA ranged from undetectable
(The prospect of a primary prevention of breast cancer by nutrition
implies that population at risk is individualized. Previous
identification of a composite indicator of the nutritional part
(modifiable) of the risk of breast cancer in breast white adipose tissue
theoretically offers this perspective (1), but the need for a biopsy and
tedious biochemical analyses hampers this approach. 1H-NMR of adipose
tissue lipids represents an attractive, non invasive approach, which
could circumvent these limitations. The aim of the study was to determine
whether 1H-NMR spectroscopy of adipose tissue may provide information on
the nature of the diet received. We carried out a dietary intervention in
rats with different enriched oils under isocaloric conditions, and
examined spectra of the lipid extract of their adipose tissue according
to diet. Two groups of Sprague-Dawley rats were fed a basal diet
containing 7% of a mixture of peanut and rapeseed oils enriched with 8%
of an oil without (palm oil) or with DHA (DHASCO, containing 40%
docosahexaenoic acid, DHA). This DHA group was subdivided into 3 groups
with low (1%), moderate (3%) or high (8%) DHASCO content. A third group
(control diet) had a diet containing 15% of the mixture of peanut and
rapeseed oils. All five groups (n=6 per group) received 15% lipids. At
the end of the experiment (6 months), rats were sacrificed and mammary
pad adipose tissue used for analysis of the lipid extract. 1H-NMR
analysis was carried out on a Bruker DRX500 spectrometer operating at
11.7 T. Fatty acids were analyzed by gas chromatography. The fatty acid
profile of adipose tissue differed among dietary groups. For example,
expressed as peak area %, mean values for DHA ranged from undetectable (<
0.1%, , control or palm groups) to 0.7, 1.9, 5.9 % in the 3 DHA groups.
Total monounsaturates (mainly oleic acid) were at 52.1% in the control
group, 56.1% in the palm group, and 54.7, 52.3 and 48.9 %, respectively,
for the 3 DHA groups. Total saturates (mainly palmitic and stearic acids)
were 16.9 and 24.1 % in the control and palm groups, and 24.7, 26.3 and
26 % for the 3 DHA groups. Total n-6 PUFA (mainly linoleic acid) were at
26.3 in the control, 13.9 in the palm groups, and 15.5, 14.6, 14.2 % in
the 3 DHA groups. Partial least squares (PLS) discriminant analysis was
carried out on 1H-NMR spectra of the lipid extracts from adipose tissue.
The integrated spectral regions showed separation between rat groups
suggesting a different NMR lipid profile according to dietary
interventions. The 1H-NMR spectroscopy approach used here was effective
for identification of the impact of dietary interventions targeting
lipids, and in turn, it could be tested for the evaluation of the lipid
profile of human adipose tissues in relation with dietary habits.1 -
Bougnoux et al,. Diet, cancer and the lipidome. Cancer Epidemiol,
Biomarkers & Prev 2006; 15(3):416-21.

