Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of a companion diagnostic IHC assay for the
biomarker-driven selection of C4.4a positive patients


C4.4a (LYPD3), a GPI-anchored cell surface protein, has been identified
previously as a cancer- and metastasis-associated cell surface protein.
It is expressed in a variety of cancer indications and, particularly, in
the squamous cell subtype of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and head
and neck cancer. Targeting C4.4a with a specific antibody-drug conjugate
showed a potent and selective antitumor activity in various human
xenograft models and in patient-derived NSCLC tumor models (Willuda J et
al., AACR 2014). Since it has been previously shown in vivo that the
expression of C4.4a is required for the response to anti-C4.4a treatment,
we initiated the development of an IHC assay that might be used to detect
C4.4a expression in patient tumor samples. For the development of this
companion diagnostic IHC assay, a novel monoclonal rabbit anti-C4.4a
antibody was generated. Since C4.4a is post-transcriptionally modified by
shedding, we aimed to identify an antibody that binds to a similar
epitope as the therapeutic C4.4a antibody. The immunizations of rabbits
with specific peptide sequences of C4.4a and with the full length C4.4a
recombinant protein produced several antibody candidates. Those antibody
candidates were characterized in regard to their staining
characteristics, domain binding, and specificity for C4.4a. Furthermore,
the staining pattern of the antibody candidates and the therapeutic C4.4a
antibody were compared side by side to ensure that stainings using the
newly generated antibodies are predictive for anti-C4.4a treatment. The
most promising antibodies were selected to set up and optimize an IHC
assay on the Ventana staining platform. In summary, we developed a
companion diagnostic IHC assay that might be used to detect C4.4a
expression in patient tumor samples.

