Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Whole exome mutation landscape of 70 commonly used colorectal
cancer cell lines


Human colorectal cancer (CRC) cell lines are an important model system
for studying the biology of this malignancy as well as therapeutic and
biomarker discovery. However, data on the degree to which established CRC
cell lines reflect the somatic diversity of primary cancers at the genome
level are limited. Using whole exome sequencing and SNP microarray
analysis we show that the profile of mutations and DNA copy-number
alterations in 70 widely-used CRC cell lines closely resembles that of
primary colorectal tumors published by The Cancer Genome Atlas Network.
We demonstrate presence of at least two hypermutation phenotypes,
consistent with defective DNA mismatch repair and DNA polymerase epsilon
(POLE) proof-reading deficiency, and similar mutation signatures in the
WNT, MAPK, PI3K, TGF-beta and TP53 pathways. Paired cell lines derived
from the same tumor are found to exhibit substantial mutation and DNA
copy-number differences, with in silico simulations suggesting that these
largely reflect pre-existing tumor cell heterogeneity, but these
differences do not obscure known driver genes. Our genome level data
indicate that CRC cell lines are representative models of the main
molecular subtypes of primary tumors, and will facilitate informed
selection of molecularly-defined models for preclinical investigations.

