Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Id-1 gene and protein as therapeutic target for head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma


Squamous cell carcinoma is one of the most common malignancies in head
and neck region. Primary tumors, especially derived from undifferentiated
cells, tend to have aggressive phenotypes, which are mainly characterized
by local recurrence and distant metastasis. In this study we found that
Id-1, a negative regulator of tissue specific transcription factors, is
highly expressed in head and neck squamous carcinoma cells (HNSCC), and
that the expression is correlated with the malignant phenotype, i.e.,
cell proliferation and invasion. Id-1 knockdown dramatically reduces
squamous cell invasion that is accompanied by profound morphologic
changes and robust reduction in expression levels of mesenchymal
markers.In addition, reduction in tumor growth and neoangiogenesis were
observed in vivo, indicating that knock-down of Id-1 drastically
suppresses VEGFA expression. Our results also suggested that
VEGFA-autocrine loop activates tylosine kinase pathways including Srk and
FAK, and therefore manifests invasive phenotype. With clinical materials
obtained from HNSCC patients, significant correlation was observed
between Id-1 and VEGFA. Furthermore, we demonstrated that a non toxic
compound, cannabidiol, significantly downregulates Id-1 gene expression
and associated squamous cell proliferation and invasiveness. Taken
together, these results suggest that Id-1 controls cancer cell phenotype
in culture and in vivo, and that drugs targeting Id-1 represent a novel
and promising strategy for improving the therapy and outcome of patients
with HNSCC.

