Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel aldehyde dehydrogenase inhibitors as potential
anti-chemoresistance drugs for head and neck cancers


The 19 human aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH) gene products are enzymes that
metabolize a wide range of reactive aldehydes, including those generated
by the metabolism of drugs, alcohol, cigarette smoke and organic
compounds. These toxic aldehydes are metabolized into respective
non-reactive, non-toxic acids. We reasoned that expression of high levels
of ALDH support cancer stem cells growth and chemoresistance by
detoxifying metabolic aldehydes and aldehydic intermediates of common
chemotherapy drugs. Thus, inhibitors of ALDHs (Aldis) may potentiate
current treatments. Many malignant cancer cells and cancer stem cells
(CSCs) are resistant to chemotherapy, which can lead to secondary
relapses. Further, because head and neck cancer (HNC) stem cells express
high levels of ALDHs, Aldis may be useful in increasing sensitivity of
these tumors to chemotherapy. Testing several different HNC cell lines
demonstrated that SCC4 cells are more resistant to cisplatin treatment
and PCI13 cells are less resistant (e.g., at 100M cisplatin, 302% of SCC4
cells survived vs. 156% of PCI13 cells; n=16). After cisplatin treatment
(15M for 8 days), ALDH activity increased in SCC4 more than in PCI13
(355% vs. 20.5% increase) as compared with non-treated cells measured.
Co-treatment of cisplatin with Aldi-6 reduced ALDH activity in SCC4 by
67% as measured by Aldefluor assay. When cells were treated with Aldi-6
(an ALDH1, 2 and 3 inhibitor) together with cisplatin, Aldi-6 increased
cell death by 30% in SCC4 and by 10% in PCI13 compared with cells treated
with cisplatin alone (n=8 each). ALDH3A1 protein levels (but not ALDH1 or
2) increased with cisplatin treatment by 100 fold and 25 fold,
respectively, in SCC4 and PCI13 as compared with non-treated cells
measured by Western blot. Based on this data, we tested the efficacy of
Aldi-6 in vivo. Tumor (SCC4)-bearing mice were divided into 4 groups and
were treated for two weeks with vehicle, Aldi-6 (8mg/kg/day, delivered
via an osmotic pump), cisplatin (2mg/kg/BW, ip injection, 2/week) or
cisplatin+Aldi-6. Aldi-6 alone resulted in smaller tumors (average tumor
volume (mm3): vehicle, 2,945112; Aldi6, 773481). Aldi-6 also enhanced
cisplatin reduction of tumor size by more than 60% as compared with
cisplatin treatment alone (average tumor volume (mm3): cisplatin, 1,560;
Aldi6+cisplatin, 597112; n=3-6). In conclusion, we found that increased
ALDH3A1 levels in HNCs following cisplatin treatment in culture and in
vivo may contribute to tumor growth and therefore, ALDH3A1 inhibitors may
be suitable as chemotherapeutic agents alone; ALDH3A1 inhibitors may also
reduce chemoresistance to cisplatin. Understanding the role of ALDH in
HNC not only provides insight into the chemoresistance of this disease,
but it may also provide novel strategies for therapy.

