Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prostaglandin E2 activates an okadaic acid-sensitive Ser/Thr
phosphatase that leads to transient inhibition of the ERK 1/2 pathway in
glioblastoma multiforme cells


Prostaglandin E2, the most abundant prostaglandin produced by tumor cells
and by the tumor microenvironment, plays a critical role in regulation of
tumor cell functions by activating signaling pathways that ultimately
lead to increased tumor growth, proliferation, invasion, and survival. We
previously demonstrated a growth regulatory role of PGE2 in the
established glioblastoma multiforme cell line U87-MG. Unexpectedly,
stimulation of U87-MG cells by PGE2 resulted in inhibition of the ERK 1/2
pathway. The present study was, therefore, undertaken to characterize
PGE2-induced inhibition of ERK 1/2 and elucidate the underlying signaling
mechanisms. We demonstrate that ERK 1/2 phosphorylation was transiently
inhibited by PGE2 in a time-dependent manner. Dephosphorylation of ERK1/2
was detected at 5 min exposure to PGE2, reached maximum levels between
20-180 min and was sustained for 6 h. Levels of phosphorylated ERK 1/2
increased thereafter and at 24-48 h were higher than those found in
unstimulated cells. Raf-1 phosphorylation was also transiently inhibited
by PGE2. Desphosphorylation of Raf-1 at Ser338 was detected at 10 min
exposure to PGE2 and followed thereafter kinetics identical to those of
ERK 1/2. Receptor tyrosine kinase dependent- (EGF) and independent (TPA)-
phosphorylation of ERK and Raf-1 were also attenuated by PGE2.
PGE2-induced dephosphorylation of ERK1/2 and Raf-1 was not unique to
U87-MG cells, as it was detected in other glioma cell lines, including
T98G, U118-MG, but not in primary astrocytes or brain endothelial cells.
Stimulation of U87-MG cells with other prostaglandins, including
prostaglandin D2, had no effect on Raf-1 and ERK dephosphorylation.
Pretreatment of U87-MG with okadaic acid (OA), an inhibitor of several
Ser/Thr phosphatases, including PP2A, PP2B, PP1 and PP5, rescued Raf-1
and ERK dephosphorylation detected at 20 min exposure to PGE2, while an
inactive analogue of OA had no effect. In contrast, fostriecin, a
selective inhibitor of PP2A and PP1, failed to rescue PGE2-induced ERK
1/2 and Raf-1 dephosphorylation. Sodium orthovanadate, a tyrosine
phosphatase inhibitor, had no effect on PGE2-induced ERK 1/2
dephosphorylation. RNAi-mediated silencing of PP5, but not PP2A, and
forced expression of the TPR domain of PP5, which acts as a dominant
negative PP5 construct, partially rescued PGE2-induced Raf-1 and
ERK-dephosphorylation. Taken together, these results demonstrate that
PGE2 transiently dephosphorylates Raf-1 and ERK 1/2 via an okadaic
acid-sensitive pathway involving activation of PP5 and suggest the
potential involvement or cooperation of additional Ser/Thr phosphatases.
We speculate that transient inhibition of Raf-1 and ERK 1/2 activation by
PGE2 could represent a mechanism by which glioma cells escape apoptosis
caused by sustained activation of the ERK 1/2 pathway. (Supported by NIH
Grant RO3 NS076765 to M.T.R).

