Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Association of sleep duration, daytime napping, and night shift
work with breast cancer risk


Sleep habit is closely related to melatonin which protect against breast
cancer (BC). Sleep duration, nap habit, and shift work have been
separately investigated to associate with BC risk, but the combination
has not been reported. In this study, we collected all the sleep habits
data from 712 women with incident invasive BC before their treatments and
742 age-matched female controls between July 2010 and January 2012 in
Guangzhou, China. We found that the women with either shorter or longer
sleep duration had increased BC risk compared to the women with normal
sleep time of 6.1-8.9h/day [OR (95%CI: 1.62 (1.18-2.24) and 1.55
(1.14-2.10), respectively]. Night shift work also increased the risk of
BC [1.36 (1.07-1.73)] and nap habits marginally associated a decreased
risk [0.83 (0.66-1.04)]. Women with night shift work and longer sleep
duration had an increased risk of BC [3.80 (1.99-7.26)] compared to the
women with normal sleep time and no night shift work. The interaction on
BC risk was significant (P for interaction=0.009). We conclude that
abnormal sleep increases BC risk and longer sleep duration may not
compensate the effect of night shift work on risk of BC.Age-adjusted and
multivariate-adjusted odds rations for the associations between sleep
habits and breast cancer risk


