Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Suppressor of Cytokine Signaling (SOCS)-3 and the C-X-C chemokines
CXCL1 and CXCL2 promote tumor aggessiveness and radiation resistance in
pancreatic cancer


Despite recent advances in our understanding of pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma (PDA), it remains a poorly understood, devastating disease
that is largely resistant to all standard treatment modalities. Much
effort has been made to identify novel tumor suppressor genes, biomarkers
of metastatic behavior, and targets for molecular therapeutics that can
improve prognosis and quality of life for PDA patients. Despite the
finding that the pro-inflammatory C-X-C family chemokines CXCL1 and CXCL2
are expressed in a significant fraction of human PDA tissues and are
known to promote metastasis in bladder and breast cancer, very little is
known of its regulation and its role in the progression of PDA. Our
laboratory has identified a mechanism by which CXCL1 expression is
regulated in human PDA. CXCL1/2 expression is repressed by the Signal
Transducer and Activator of Transcription (STAT)-3 and conversely, the
Suppressor of Cytokine Signaling (SOCS)-3, a STAT3 inhibitor, promotes
CXCL1/2 gene activation and pro-inflammatory signaling in murine
embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) and human PDA cell lines. Ectopic expression
of SOCS3 in the ASPC1 PDA cell line induces CXCL1 and CXCL2 expression
and drives resistance to radiation and gemcitibine treatment. Further,
using an orthotopic xenograft model of human PDA in immunodeficient mice,
we demonstrated the in vivo relevance of this pathway. We found that mice
injected with human SOCS3-positive human PDA cells have a survival time
compared and develop more aggressive disease compared to mice injected
with control cells. We hypothesize that CXCL1and CXCL2 promote human PDA
pathogenesis by two mechanisms: (i) autocrine activation of the CXCR2
receptor expressed on human pancreatic cancer cells and (ii)
pro-inflammatory recruitment of neutrophils to the tumor microenvironment.

