Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The Wnt-target Prox1 promotes colorectal cancer stem cell survival
to fuel tumor growth


Colorectal cancer (CRC) is one of the leading causes of cancer mortality
in the Western countries. In most of the CRC patients, an initial
mutation occurs in the APC or CTNNB1 genes, leading to the
ligand-independent activation of the canonical Wnt pathway. Besides
having a central role in the development of CRC, the Wnt pathway plays a
critical role also in the maintenance of the normal intestine. Attempts
at therapeutic inhibition of this pathway could thus lead to serious side
effects in CRC patients. We have previously shown that the Prox1
transcription factor is induced in the intestinal epithelium by mutations
activating the Wnt pathway and it critically contributes to CRC
progression via an unknown mechanism. Here we provide evidence that Prox1
expression is induced in the Lgr5+ adenoma stem cells early after Apc
deletion. Our in vivo models and ex vivo organoid experiments suggest
that Prox1 silencing or deletion restricts the expansion of the Lgr5+
adenoma stem cell population both in humans and in mice. Interestingly,
silencing the phospholipid binding protein Annexin A1 (Anxa1), a gene
suppressed by Prox1, is responsible for several of the effects of Prox1
on adenoma cells, such as the re-organization of the actin cytoskeleton,
enhanced stem cell activity and tumor growth. Furthermore, Prox1 deletion
abnormally increases the mTORC1 pathway activity, which results in
decreased survival of the adenoma stem cells. Since Prox1 is expressed at
low level only in rare neuroendocrine cells and in some Paneth cells in
the wild type intestinal epithelium, furthermore, its genetic deletion in
the adult gut does not lead to obvious phenotypes, Prox1 may serve as an
attractive therapeutic target for restricting the progression of early
intestinal adenomas.

