Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Vivo-Morpholino antisense oligomers decrease tumor growth in mice
by altering mVEGF mRNA splicing to knock down mVEGF expression


Vivo-Morpholino antisense oligomers can knock down gene expression by
altering splicing of the pre-mRNA and generating a translational
frameshift. VEGF overexpression is crucial for tumor growth and anti-VEGF
therapies are promising in the treatment of certain cancers. Decreasing
VEGF gene expression by exon deletion using Vivo-Morpholinos could
suppress tumor growth. We examine the efficiency of mVEGF exon 2 deletion
and tumor growth inhibition in mice injected with a Vivo-Morpholino
oligomer (VMO-e2i2), which is designed to specifically delete the mVEGF
exon 2 and cause downstream frameshifting in mVEGF protein. Mice bearing
s.c. Lewis lung carcinoma tumors are I.V. injected with the VMO-e2i2
oligomers at 15mg/kg twice weekly for 2 weeks. VEGF exon 2 deletions are
detected by RT-PCR in various tissues tested: approximately 100% exon 2
deletion in kidney, 80% in liver, 70% in skeletal muscles and 40% in s.c.
tumors. The tumor volumes decrease by 6 fold over 16 days in mice
injected with the VMO-e2i2 oligomers. Exon deletions are detected in
various tissues including liver, small intestine, colon, skeletal and
cardiac muscles, lung, stomach and kidney. The exon deletion mediated by
Vivo-Morpholinos is target specific, dose-dependent and is detectable for
more than 15 weeks after a single IV injection in mice. No significant
toxicity is observed in mice injected with the effective dosage.
Vivo-Morpholinos therefore represent a useful tool for cancer target
identification and validation in rodent models and a possible therapeutic
treatment.

