Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Serum MicroRNAs as biomarkers in early stage non-small cell lung
cancer


Lung cancer remains one of the most common and deadly diseases worldwide,
with a 5-year survival rate of 16%. It is still the leading cause of
cancer-associated mortality among both men and women, despite a
decreasing incidence rate over the past decade. MicroRNAs (miRNAs), a
class of small non-coding RNAs, may regulate the expression of one third
of all human genes and are related to carcinogenesis through their
function as oncogenes or tumor suppressors. Circulating serum miRNAs that
are differentially expressed between early stage lung cancer patients and
controls could serve as non-invasive biomarkers for the early detection
of lung cancer. In this study, we assessed a total of 89 candidate miRNAs
using a quantitative Real-Time PCR method in 200 Caucasian, early stage
lung cancer patients (stage I or II disease) and 200 Caucasian healthy
controls. We used the rank sum test to assess differential serum miRNA
expression levels between cases and controls. Odds ratios [OR] and 95%
confidence intervals [CI] were calculated using multivariate logistic
regression while adjusting for age, gender and smoking status. Of the 89
candidate miRNAs, 56 miRNAs were expressed in the serum of study subjects
and 4 miRNAs (mir409_3p, mir223star, mir152, mir378) exhibited
significant differential expression between cases and controls. The most
significant association was observed for mir409_3p with a rank-sum test
p-value at 0.008. In the stratified analysis, significant association was
observed for mir409_3p in younger individuals less than or equal to 65
years of age, mir223star, mir152, and mir378 in older individuals greater
than 65 years of age, mir409_3p and mir223star in males, mir152 in
females, and mir378 in ever smokers. After dichotomizing serum miRNAs
using the 1st quartile cut-off in the controls and comparing to the
lowest quartile, we also observed significant associations for mir409_3p,
mir223star, mir152, and mir378 with ORs (95% CI) of 0.47 (0.27-0.83),
2.00(1.03-3.88), 0.43(0.25-0.74), and 2.58(1.37-4.86), respectively. Risk
score analysis using these 4 miRNAs showed significant increased risk of
lung cancer with an increasing risk score (P = 1.64 X 10-6). Under
Receiver Operating Characteristic curve analysis, the area under the
curve (AUC) for age, gender, and smoking status is 0.76 while AUC
increased to 0.81 with the addition of the serum miRNA data. We further
downloaded the miRNA expression data from TCGA and found that mir378 and
mir152 were available. These two miRNAs exhibited consistent associations
(up-regulated for mi378 or down-regulated for mir152) while comparing
tumor and normal tissues in lung patients with pathological stage I and
II disease and comparing serum in lung cancer cases and controls. In
conclusion, serum miRNAs exhibited differential expression between early
stage lung cancer cases and controls and could be used for the early
detection of lung cancer.

