Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibiting the mitochondrial DNA polymerase gamma (POLG) with
2,3-dideoxycytidine reduces oxidative phosphorylation and increases
apoptosis in acute myeloid leukemia (AML) cells


Mitochondria contain their own genome and translation machinery, which
are required for aerobic energy production through oxidative
phosphorylation. A subset of AML patients are sensitive to inhibitors of
mitochondrial translation, likely due to increased mitochondrial mass,
increased mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) and reliance on oxidative
phosphorylation (Skrtic et. al., Cancer Cell, 20:674, 2011). In the
current study we addressed a complementary approach of inhibiting mtDNA
replication by targeting the mitochondrial DNA polymerase gamma (POLG).
POLG is encoded by the nuclear genome and is the only known DNA
polymerase in mammalian mitochondria. POLG indirectly controls electron
transport chain (ETC) function since it replicates the mitochondrial
genome that encodes 13 proteins essential for ETC activity.We explored
the impact of inhibiting POLG in AML cells with the nucleoside analogue
reverse transcriptase inhibitor 2,3-dideoxycytidine (ddC), an
FDA-approved antiviral drug that demonstrates off-target inhibition of
POLG. In OCI-AML2 and TEX leukemia cells, treatment with 0.2-2M ddC
reduced levels of mtDNA in a dose- and time-dependent manner, with >90%
depletion of mtDNA after 6 days of treatment with 0.2M ddC (p
Mitochondria contain their own genome and translation machinery, which
are required for aerobic energy production through oxidative
phosphorylation. A subset of AML patients are sensitive to inhibitors of
mitochondrial translation, likely due to increased mitochondrial mass,
increased mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) and reliance on oxidative
phosphorylation (Skrtic et. al., Cancer Cell, 20:674, 2011). In the
current study we addressed a complementary approach of inhibiting mtDNA
replication by targeting the mitochondrial DNA polymerase gamma (POLG).
POLG is encoded by the nuclear genome and is the only known DNA
polymerase in mammalian mitochondria. POLG indirectly controls electron
transport chain (ETC) function since it replicates the mitochondrial
genome that encodes 13 proteins essential for ETC activity.We explored
the impact of inhibiting POLG in AML cells with the nucleoside analogue
reverse transcriptase inhibitor 2,3-dideoxycytidine (ddC), an
FDA-approved antiviral drug that demonstrates off-target inhibition of
POLG. In OCI-AML2 and TEX leukemia cells, treatment with 0.2-2M ddC
reduced levels of mtDNA in a dose- and time-dependent manner, with >90%
depletion of mtDNA after 6 days of treatment with 0.2M ddC (p <0.01).
mtDNA depletion resulted in decreased protein expression of the
mtDNA-encoded cytochrome c oxidases (COX) 1 and 2, that form the
catalytic core of ETC complex IV. In contrast, levels of COX4, a
nuclear-encoded subunit of the same respiratory complex were unaltered by
ddC. Likewise, 0.2 and 2M ddC reduced mRNA transcript levels of all
mtDNA-encoded proteins. ddC (2 M, 3 days) also decreased the activity of
respiratory chain complex IV by greater than 50%.Importantly, AML cells
appear to have a large reserve in their mtDNA content; in both TEX and
OCI-AML2 cells, mtDNA depletion down to 5% of control was required for
levels of mtDNA-encoded transcripts or proteins to be significantly
reduced. ddC treatments (2M, 6-10 days) that depleted mtDNA beyond the
above threshold reduced the proliferation (pMitochondria contain their
own genome and translation machinery, which are required for aerobic
energy production through oxidative phosphorylation. A subset of AML
patients are sensitive to inhibitors of mitochondrial translation, likely
due to increased mitochondrial mass, increased mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA)
and reliance on oxidative phosphorylation (Skrtic et. al., Cancer Cell,
20:674, 2011). In the current study we addressed a complementary approach
of inhibiting mtDNA replication by targeting the mitochondrial DNA
polymerase gamma (POLG). POLG is encoded by the nuclear genome and is the
only known DNA polymerase in mammalian mitochondria. POLG indirectly
controls electron transport chain (ETC) function since it replicates the
mitochondrial genome that encodes 13 proteins essential for ETC
activity.We explored the impact of inhibiting POLG in AML cells with the
nucleoside analogue reverse transcriptase inhibitor 2,3-dideoxycytidine
(ddC), an FDA-approved antiviral drug that demonstrates off-target
inhibition of POLG. In OCI-AML2 and TEX leukemia cells, treatment with
0.2-2M ddC reduced levels of mtDNA in a dose- and time-dependent manner,
with >90% depletion of mtDNA after 6 days of treatment with 0.2M ddC (p
<0.01). mtDNA depletion resulted in decreased protein expression of the
mtDNA-encoded cytochrome c oxidases (COX) 1 and 2, that form the
catalytic core of ETC complex IV. In contrast, levels of COX4, a
nuclear-encoded subunit of the same respiratory complex were unaltered by
ddC. Likewise, 0.2 and 2M ddC reduced mRNA transcript levels of all
mtDNA-encoded proteins. ddC (2 M, 3 days) also decreased the activity of
respiratory chain complex IV by greater than 50%.Importantly, AML cells
appear to have a large reserve in their mtDNA content; in both TEX and
OCI-AML2 cells, mtDNA depletion down to 5% of control was required for
levels of mtDNA-encoded transcripts or proteins to be significantly
reduced. ddC treatments (2M, 6-10 days) that depleted mtDNA beyond the
above threshold reduced the proliferation (p<0.05) and increased
apoptosis (pMitochondria contain their own genome and translation
machinery, which are required for aerobic energy production through
oxidative phosphorylation. A subset of AML patients are sensitive to
inhibitors of mitochondrial translation, likely due to increased
mitochondrial mass, increased mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) and reliance on
oxidative phosphorylation (Skrtic et. al., Cancer Cell, 20:674, 2011). In
the current study we addressed a complementary approach of inhibiting
mtDNA replication by targeting the mitochondrial DNA polymerase gamma
(POLG). POLG is encoded by the nuclear genome and is the only known DNA
polymerase in mammalian mitochondria. POLG indirectly controls electron
transport chain (ETC) function since it replicates the mitochondrial
genome that encodes 13 proteins essential for ETC activity.We explored
the impact of inhibiting POLG in AML cells with the nucleoside analogue
reverse transcriptase inhibitor 2,3-dideoxycytidine (ddC), an
FDA-approved antiviral drug that demonstrates off-target inhibition of
POLG. In OCI-AML2 and TEX leukemia cells, treatment with 0.2-2M ddC
reduced levels of mtDNA in a dose- and time-dependent manner, with >90%
depletion of mtDNA after 6 days of treatment with 0.2M ddC (p <0.01).
mtDNA depletion resulted in decreased protein expression of the
mtDNA-encoded cytochrome c oxidases (COX) 1 and 2, that form the
catalytic core of ETC complex IV. In contrast, levels of COX4, a
nuclear-encoded subunit of the same respiratory complex were unaltered by
ddC. Likewise, 0.2 and 2M ddC reduced mRNA transcript levels of all
mtDNA-encoded proteins. ddC (2 M, 3 days) also decreased the activity of
respiratory chain complex IV by greater than 50%.Importantly, AML cells
appear to have a large reserve in their mtDNA content; in both TEX and
OCI-AML2 cells, mtDNA depletion down to 5% of control was required for
levels of mtDNA-encoded transcripts or proteins to be significantly
reduced. ddC treatments (2M, 6-10 days) that depleted mtDNA beyond the
above threshold reduced the proliferation (p<0.05) and increased
apoptosis (p<0.01) of OCI-AML2 and TEX cells. In addition, 2M ddC
diminished the basal oxygen consumption rate (pMitochondria contain their
own genome and translation machinery, which are required for aerobic
energy production through oxidative phosphorylation. A subset of AML
patients are sensitive to inhibitors of mitochondrial translation, likely
due to increased mitochondrial mass, increased mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA)
and reliance on oxidative phosphorylation (Skrtic et. al., Cancer Cell,
20:674, 2011). In the current study we addressed a complementary approach
of inhibiting mtDNA replication by targeting the mitochondrial DNA
polymerase gamma (POLG). POLG is encoded by the nuclear genome and is the
only known DNA polymerase in mammalian mitochondria. POLG indirectly
controls electron transport chain (ETC) function since it replicates the
mitochondrial genome that encodes 13 proteins essential for ETC
activity.We explored the impact of inhibiting POLG in AML cells with the
nucleoside analogue reverse transcriptase inhibitor 2,3-dideoxycytidine
(ddC), an FDA-approved antiviral drug that demonstrates off-target
inhibition of POLG. In OCI-AML2 and TEX leukemia cells, treatment with
0.2-2M ddC reduced levels of mtDNA in a dose- and time-dependent manner,
with >90% depletion of mtDNA after 6 days of treatment with 0.2M ddC (p
<0.01). mtDNA depletion resulted in decreased protein expression of the
mtDNA-encoded cytochrome c oxidases (COX) 1 and 2, that form the
catalytic core of ETC complex IV. In contrast, levels of COX4, a
nuclear-encoded subunit of the same respiratory complex were unaltered by
ddC. Likewise, 0.2 and 2M ddC reduced mRNA transcript levels of all
mtDNA-encoded proteins. ddC (2 M, 3 days) also decreased the activity of
respiratory chain complex IV by greater than 50%.Importantly, AML cells
appear to have a large reserve in their mtDNA content; in both TEX and
OCI-AML2 cells, mtDNA depletion down to 5% of control was required for
levels of mtDNA-encoded transcripts or proteins to be significantly
reduced. ddC treatments (2M, 6-10 days) that depleted mtDNA beyond the
above threshold reduced the proliferation (p<0.05) and increased
apoptosis (p<0.01) of OCI-AML2 and TEX cells. In addition, 2M ddC
diminished the basal oxygen consumption rate (p<0.05), a measure of
oxidative phosphorylation in OCI-AML2 cells and TEX cells without
altering mitochondrial mass.In summary, treatment of AML cells with ddC
depletes mtDNA, decreases mitochondrial bioenergetics and causes cell
kill. However, AML cells have large reserves in their mtDNA content and
can withstand depletion of up to 95% of their mtDNA without loss of
oxidative metabolism.

