Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovery of novel SMAC mimetics as selective IAP inhibitors


Inhibitor of apoptosis (IAP) proteins are widely considered as promising
cancer drug targets, especially for drug-resistant tumors. Mimicking the
IAP-binding motif of second mitochondria-derived activator of caspases
(SMAC) is a rational strategy to design potential IAP inhibitors. In this
report, we used the bioactive conformation of AVPI tetrapeptide in the
N-terminus of SMAC as a template and performed a shape-based virtual
screening against a drug-like compound library to identify novel IAP
inhibitors. Top hits were subsequently docked to available IAP crystal
structures as a secondary screening followed by validation using in vitro
biological assays. Four novel hit compounds were identified to potently
inhibit cell growth in two human melanoma (A375 and M14) and two human
prostate (PC-3 and DU145) cancer cell lines. The best compound, UC-112,
has IC50 values ranging from 0.7 to 3.4 M. UC-112 also potently inhibits
the growth of P-glycoprotein (P-gp) overexpressed multidrug-resistant
cancer cells, strongly activates capase-3/7 and caspase-9 activities, and
selectively down-regulates survivin level at a concentration as low as 1
M. Co-incubation of UC-112 with a known proteasome inhibitor (MG132)
rescued survivin inhibition, consistent with the anticipated mechanism of
action for UC-112. As a single agent, UC-112 strongly inhibits tumor
growth and reduces both XIAP and survivin levels in an A375 human
melanoma xenograft model. Overall, our study identified novel scaffolds,
especially UC-112, as new platforms on which potent and selective IAP
antagonists can be developed.

