Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HER2 upregulation induced by gemcitabine treatment augments
antitumor effect of trastuzumab emtansine against pancreatic cancer


[Background]Although human pancreatic cancer (PC) frequently expresses
human epidermal growth factor receptor type 2 (HER2), Trastuzumab has not
provided sufficient therapeutic effect on PC probably due to low HER2
expression level. Recently we discovered HER2 expression of human PC cell
lines was enhanced by gemcitabine (GEM) treatment. Furthermore,
Trastuzumab Emtansine (T-DM1), Trastuzumab conjugated with a cytotoxic
agent, showed promising results in breast cancer therapy. We investigated
the possibility of new molecular targeting therapy against PC by combined
treatment with GEM and T-DM1.[Materials and Methods]HER2 expression was
analyzed by quantitative Real Time-PCR, western blotting and
flowcytometry. The cell proliferation was examined by spectrophotometry
using the counting reagents. T-DM1 was provided by Genentech Inc. T-DM1
bindinig to HER2 on PC cell surface was analyzed by
flowcytometry.[Results]GEM treatment enhanced HER2 expression at around
two fold in three out of five human PC cell lines. GEM was the most
potent agent to enhance HER2 expression of PC cells among the standard
chemotherapeutic agents for PC treatment. T-DM1 binding to HER2 on
GEM-treated MiaPaca-2 cells was increased in accordance with the
up-regulation of HER2 expression. Combined treatment with GEM and T-DM1
synergistically inhibited the cell growth of MiaPaca-2, and this
cytotoxic effect was inhibited by adding to Trastuzumab which did not
show direct cytotoxic activity to PC cells.[Conclusions]GEM treatment
enhances HER2 expression of PC cells which promotes T-DM1 binding to HER2
on PC cells. Combined treatment with GEM and T-DM1 might become a
promising modality against HER2 positive PC.

