Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: 5-aza-2-deoxycytidine, a DNA demethylating agent, inhibits
metastatic melanoma invasiveness


Metastatic melanomas are the deadliest form of skin cancer and are very
aggressive tumors showing highly invasive properties and a rapid
chemoresistance to standard treatment (Dacarbazine) and to specific
BRAF-V600E kinase inhibitors (Vemurafenib). Thus, targeting these tumors
remains a major concern for novel therapeutic proposals.Abnormal patterns
of DNA methylation, an epigenetic modification that cells use to control
gene expression, have been described in these tumors. These epigenetic
modifications participate in melanoma formation and maintenance. The aim
of our project is to characterize the DNA methylation changes that occur
in the most aggressive form of melanoma and to reverse these changes by
using clinically active DNA methyltransferase inhibitors
(5-aza-2-deoxycytidine, 5-aza-dC). To date a limited number of datasets
have been published depicting the effects of inhibitors of DNA
methylation on invasive capacities of metastatic melanoma cells. The work
presented here, focuses on the study of the effects of DNA methylation
inhibition on metastatic melanoma invasiveness.We have set up an original
method to quantify DNA methylation by FACS and shown that non cytotoxic
nanomolar 5-aza-dC concentrations were able to demethylate DNA of
WM-266-4 metastatic melanoma cells. Then using an in vitro 3D spheroids
cell invasion assay and fluorescent microscopy to measure invasion
capacities of metastatic cell lines, we showed that 5-aza-dC was able to
inhibit invasion of WM-266-4 cells at these non-cytotoxic demethylating
concentrations.

