Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Favorable prognostic features at diagnosis along with young age,
early remission, high relapse rate and poor survival of TCF3-PBX1
positive adult ALL necessitates the need for differential genetic
diagnosis and treatment using pediatric ALL protocols


Introduction: ALL involves many genetic abnormalities, many of which lead
to formation of fusion oncogenes (FGs) causing leukemogenesis1. Role of
FGs in prognosis and drug selection is established in pediatric ALL but
is unclear in adult AL 2 except BCR-ABL and MLL-AF4. Therefore, objective
our was to find out the association of common FGs with clinical
pattern.Methods: We studied 5most common FGs by RT-PCR3 and interphase
FISH at diagnosis and their association with clinical features and
treatment outcome in 208 adult ALL patients (2002-2012) treated with MRC
UKALL XII protocol.Results: FGs were detected in 78.8% patients. Overall
survival (OS) was 26.17 months (mo) and relapse free survival (RFS) was
11.147 mo. SIL-TAL1+ ALL (35.36%) manifested lymphadenopathy, frequent
organomegaly, low platelets count and poor survival. BCR-ABL+ (20.3%) ALL
manifested high TLC, prominent spleenomegaly, low platelets count, poor
survival (OS & RFS 9.3 & 6.3 mo, respectively) and 10% less chances of
4-6 week remission as compared to BCR-ABL negative. MLL-AF4 (12.19%) was
associated with elevated TLC, organomegaly, frequent CNS involvement and
poor clinical outcome (OS 8.8 mo). ETV6-RUNX1 (t 12;21) (4.8%), was
associated with low TLC, uncommon organomegaly, high CR rates and with
higher OS (30.2 mo). Long term survival of ETV6-RUNX1 was negatively
affected by frequent late relapses.Unexpectedly, TCF3-PBX1 (16.3%) was
significantly higher than globally reported (3%). It was associated with
younger age (59% with 15-29 years), lower TLC (82%), platelet count
higher than 50109/l (71%), less common hepatomegaly (12%), less common
spleenomegaly (18%), early CR (65%), all indicative of good prognosis.
Despite that, very surprisingly, high relapse rate (76.1%) and shorter OS
(11.6 months) were observed in TCF3-PBX1+ patients.Discussion /
Conclusions: Favorable prognosis, younger age, high 4-week CR (65%),
higher relapse rates and shorter OS highlight in TCF3-PBX1+ ALL
necessitate differential genetic diagnosis and intensified and treatment
with pediatric protocols in this subgroup4,5. Lymphadenopathy in SIL-TAL1
can help in differential diagnosis of this subgroup (t-cell ALL) ALL in
poor countries. These findings along with lower ETV6-RUNX1 frequency and
higher MLL-AF4 reflect ethnic differences in disease biology and
treatment outcome of adult ALL5. Overall high percentage of poor
prognostic FGs may be the strongest reasons of overall poor outcome of
adult ALL in our country. Therefore, routine molecular testing for ALL
FGs at diagnosis and its implication in prognostic stratification and
drug selection during various phases of treatment are
recommended.References:1. Harrison & Foroni, 2002.2. Moorman et al.,
20073. Van Dongen et al, 1998.4. Foa et al., 2003.5. Burmeister et al.,
2010.

