Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NMS-P862, a novel orally available selective small molecule Cdc7
inhibitor with antitumor efficacy in breast cancer


Cdc7 is an essential serine/threonine protein kinase that licenses
initiation of DNA synthesis at replication origins, promotes cell cycle
checkpoint activation in response to replication stress and is involved
in additional aspects of DNA metabolism, including repair mechanisms.
Cdc7 is therefore a potential target for cancer therapy, with a distinct
mechanism of action from known drugs that inhibit DNA replication.
Overexpression of Cdc7 is found in various types of cancer, suggesting
that its deregulated activity may promote survival of cancer cells, as
well as tumor progression. In particular, its overexpression in breast
cancer is linked to triple negative, HER2 positive subtypes, genomic
instability, arrested tumor differentiation and enhanced survival.
Depletion through RNA silencing, or inhibition of the kinase activity of
Cdc7 induces S-phase arrest and apoptosis in cancer cell lines, while
non-transformed epithelial cells arrest in G1, remain viable, and are
able to resume cell proliferation on recovery of Cdc7 activity.We have
previously reported the identification of NMS-P354, an orally
bioavailable Cdc7 inhibitor which promotes tumor growth inhibition in
preclinical cancer models and was very helpful in validating Cdc7 as
potential target.Here, we describe the characterization of NMS-P862, a
follow -on, novel, potent (IC50: 9 nM) and more selective Cdc7 inhibitor.
Profiling of anti-proliferative activity against more than one hundred
human tumor cell lines indicated relatively high activity (IC50Cdc7 is an
essential serine/threonine protein kinase that licenses initiation of DNA
synthesis at replication origins, promotes cell cycle checkpoint
activation in response to replication stress and is involved in
additional aspects of DNA metabolism, including repair mechanisms. Cdc7
is therefore a potential target for cancer therapy, with a distinct
mechanism of action from known drugs that inhibit DNA replication.
Overexpression of Cdc7 is found in various types of cancer, suggesting
that its deregulated activity may promote survival of cancer cells, as
well as tumor progression. In particular, its overexpression in breast
cancer is linked to triple negative, HER2 positive subtypes, genomic
instability, arrested tumor differentiation and enhanced survival.
Depletion through RNA silencing, or inhibition of the kinase activity of
Cdc7 induces S-phase arrest and apoptosis in cancer cell lines, while
non-transformed epithelial cells arrest in G1, remain viable, and are
able to resume cell proliferation on recovery of Cdc7 activity.We have
previously reported the identification of NMS-P354, an orally
bioavailable Cdc7 inhibitor which promotes tumor growth inhibition in
preclinical cancer models and was very helpful in validating Cdc7 as
potential target.Here, we describe the characterization of NMS-P862, a
follow -on, novel, potent (IC50: 9 nM) and more selective Cdc7 inhibitor.
Profiling of anti-proliferative activity against more than one hundred
human tumor cell lines indicated relatively high activity (IC50< 0.5 M)
against triple negative or HER2 positive/double negative breast cancer
lines, as well as against prostate cancer cell lines. In vivo, oral
administration of NMS-P862 resulted in dose-dependent antitumor activity,
including for example tumor regression in a carcinogen
(7,12-dimethylbenz[]antracene) induced rat breast cancer model, for which
we observed 9/12 objective responses, assessed as per RECIST criteria.A
favorable ADME profile with high oral bioavailability, together with
permissive therapeutic safety margins in test species at efficacious
exposures, indicate that NMS-P862 is suitable for further development,
affording the possibility to target cancer via a novel mechanism which we
believe is suited to both single agent and opportune drug combination
approaches.

