Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Glutamine metabolism in MYC-driven antiestrogen resistant breast
cancer cells confers metabolic flexibility through the unfolded protein
response


Antiestrogens are used to treat estrogen receptor positive (ER+) breast
tumors that constitute 70% of all breast cancer cases. Unfortunately,
acquired resistance to antiestrogen therapy remains a critical clinical
obstacle. Here we show that human breast cancer cells and rat mammary
tumors that have acquired resistance to antiestrogens express increased
levels of MYC, a major regulator of both glutamine and glucose. Glutamine
metabolism and glucose uptake were elevated in ER+ antiestrogen resistant
cells (LCC9) compared with sensitive cells (LCC1). Inhibition of MYC,
with siRNA or small molecule inhibitor, reduced cell viability and uptake
of both glutamine and glucose in resistant cells. In resistant cells, MYC
expression controlled protein levels of glutamine, glutamate and glucose
transporters as well as GLUL and GLS, two enzymes that promote
glutamate-glutamine inter-conversion. Increased MYC function in resistant
cells correlated with increased cellular sensitivity to deprivation of,
and also inhibitors of, both glutamine and glucose. While apoptosis
eliminated all resistant cells in glucose-only conditions beyond 72 h, in
glutamine-only conditions, the unfolded protein response (UPR) via
GRP78-IRE1 and activating JNK and increased CHOP, induced apoptosis in
majority of the cells but promoted survival in some. The antiestrogen
faslodex (FAS; ICI 182,780) significantly reduced glucose uptake in
antiestrogen resistant cells compared with sensitive cells. Thus, our
findings reveal unique roles for MYC in promoting metabolic flexibility
in and promoting survival in antiestrogen resistant breast cancer cells
via the UPR. Targeting glutamine and glucose metabolism pathways,
therefore, may provide novel strategies in treating endocrine resistant
breast cancers.

