Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel investigation into chemotherapy-induced peripheral
neuropathy using iPSC-derived human neurons


Chemotherapy-induced peripheral neuropathy (CIPN) is the major
dose-limiting side effect of many anti-cancer drugs including taxanes,
vinca alkaloids and platinating agents. These drugs represent standard of
care for common cancers, however there are no effective treatments and no
means to identify patients at risk for CIPN. The mechanisms underlying
CIPN have not been precisely determined and few human neuronal models to
study CIPN exist. Recent technology has allowed for the differentiation
of induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSC) to human neurons. We have
utilized genetically diverse human neurons as a model to study the
effects on chemotherapy on neuronal health and on neurite morphology
including neurite outgrowth, processes and branching. Upon treatment of
human neurons with paclitaxel, vincristine or cisplatin (1 nM to 100 M)
for 72 hours, we identified reproducible decreases in cell median neurite
process length per magnitude of drug concentration of 12-14%, 6-18% and
2-4%, respectively. No decrease in neurite length was observed with
hydroxyurea, an agent that does not cause neuropathy. The morphological
changes differed across drugs, with vincristine treatment showing the
most dramatic effect on neurite outgrowth, paclitaxel showing an
intermediate effect, and cisplatin showing no effect up to 1 M of drug.
To determine whether the model could be used for evaluation of genes
important in CIPN, we used siRNA to decrease expression of TUBB2A, a gene
known to be associated with paclitaxel-induced neuropathy. Transient
knockdown of TUBB2A caused decreases of mean neurite process length
(interaction P = 2.2 x 10-8) and total neurite outgrowth (interaction P =
1.8 x 10-10) of neurons 48 hours post-paclitaxel treatment. We are using
this novel approach to screen agents that may be used to prevent or treat
CIPN.

