Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Absence of TGFBI favors tumor angiogenesis


TGFBI, a circulating extracellular matrix protein, modulates several
integrin-mediated cellular functions. The protein contains an N-terminal
EMI domain, four consecutive FAS1 domains, and the RGD motif in the
C-terminal domain. The fourth FAS1 domain of TGFBI exerts anti-angiogenic
activity through interactions with v3 integrin. Here, we used
TGFBI-deficient mice and TGFBI transgenic mice to investigate the role of
TGFBI in tumor growth in vivo. The absence of TGFBI led to enhanced tumor
angiogenesis and a 3.6-fold increase in tumor growth. In contrast, a
1.7-fold increase in circulating levels of TGFBI in TGFBI transgenic mice
induced a 2.4-fold decrease in tumor growth. We found that the binding
affinity (Kd) of TGFBI for v3 integrin was approximately 3.8 10 8 M, a
value 2300-fold higher than that of a single FAS1 domain, and
demonstrated that this greater affinity was due to the cooperative action
of four FAS1 domains and the RGD motif. Moreover, TGFBI exhibited potent
anti-angiogenic and anti-tumorigenic activities and specifically targeted
the tumor vasculature and accumulated at the tumor site. Collectively,
our results support the theory that TGFBI acts as a potent endogenous
anti-tumor and anti-angiogenic molecule by targeting v3 integrin, and
highlight the importance of physiological circulating TGFBI levels in
inhibiting tumor growth.

