Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comparison of CellSearch with polymeric microfluidic devices for
CTC isolation using EpCAM-negative tumor cell lines of malignant pleural
mesothelioma


Background. The CellSearch system is the most commonly used technique
approved by the FDA to isolate and quantify circulation tumor cells
(CTCs). However, in this system, the efficiency of CTC isolation is
influenced by the epithelial cell adhesion molecule (EpCAM). Therefore,
it is difficult to isolate CTCs in the setting of the epithelial to
mesenchymal transition (EMT), malignant pleural mesothelioma and so on.
We developed polymeric microfluidic devices for CTC isolation (CTC-chip)
and compared the efficacy of CellSearch with CTC-chip using
EpCAM-negative tumor cell lines of malignant pleural
mesothelioma.Methods. In order to evaluate the accuracy of the number of
CTCs, we used PBS samples and peripheral blood samples (blood samples)
collected from healthy donors to which spiking the tumor cell lines
ACC-MESO1 and ACC-MESO4. Both tumor cell lines (obtained from ATCC) were
derived from malignant pleural mesothelioma, positive for mesothelin and
podoplanin and negative for EpCAM. The recovery rate was evaluated using
two methods. CellSearch was performed according to the normal method,
while CTC-chip was performed using a two coating pattern with
anti-mesothelin antibody (chip1) and anti-podoplanin antibody
(chip2).Results. In the PBS samples, the recovery rate of captured
ACC-MESO1 was 8.6%/98%/99% (CellSearch/chip 1/chip 2), while those of
ACC-MESO4 was 21.1%/97%/99%, respectively. In the blood samples, the
recovery rate of captured ACC-MESO1 was 1.2%/6.2%/13.3% (CellSearch/chip
1/chip 2), while that of ACC-MESO4 was 6.0%/3.7%/11.6%,
respectively.Conclusions. Our experiments showed that the recovery rate
of each sample was higher using CTC-chip than that obtained with
CellSearch. Moreover, CTC-chip coated anti-podoplanin antibody exhibited
a higher recovery rate than coated anti-mesothelin antibody. Future
studies using experiments of CTC isolation in cancer patients with
malignant pleural mesothelioma are thus required.

