Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chemopreventive activity of BioBran/MGN-3, an arabinoxylan from
rice bran, against chemical induction of gastric dysplasia and
adenocarcinoma in rats


Objective: Gastric cancer is the second leading cause of cancer-related
mortality worldwide, suggesting the need to find new modalities to combat
this disease. BioBran/MGN-3 contains an arabinoxylan from rice bran, a
polysaccharide containing -1,4-xylopyronase hemicelluloses. Earlier
studies showed that BioBran/MGN-3 is a potent biological response
modifier, anti-oxidizing agent and inducer of apoptosis in cancer cells.
This study evaluated the use of BioBran/MGN-3 in the prevention of
gastric cancer in rats and elucidated the mechanisms behind its
action.Materials and Methods: N- methyl-N-nitro-N-nitrosoguanidine (MNNG)
was orally administered daily to rats for 2 weeks followed by NaCl once
every 3 days for 4 weeks. Rats were also given BioBran/MGN-3 daily for a
total of 33 weeks. Histopathology, body and organs weight, redox markers
were evaluated and the expression of Ki-67 and the
apoptosis/proliferation ratio of gastric tissues were also
determined.Results: Histopathological examination of MNNG-treated rats
showed 9/10 (90%) of the gastric tissues had dysplasia and
adenocarcinoma. Among these tissues, 70% showed dysplasia and 20% showed
adenocarcinoma. Conversely, rats treated with MNNG plus BioBran/MGN-3
showed lower incidences of dysplasia and adenocarcinoma (41.6%)
(pObjective: Gastric cancer is the second leading cause of cancer-related
mortality worldwide, suggesting the need to find new modalities to combat
this disease. BioBran/MGN-3 contains an arabinoxylan from rice bran, a
polysaccharide containing -1,4-xylopyronase hemicelluloses. Earlier
studies showed that BioBran/MGN-3 is a potent biological response
modifier, anti-oxidizing agent and inducer of apoptosis in cancer cells.
This study evaluated the use of BioBran/MGN-3 in the prevention of
gastric cancer in rats and elucidated the mechanisms behind its
action.Materials and Methods: N- methyl-N-nitro-N-nitrosoguanidine (MNNG)
was orally administered daily to rats for 2 weeks followed by NaCl once
every 3 days for 4 weeks. Rats were also given BioBran/MGN-3 daily for a
total of 33 weeks. Histopathology, body and organs weight, redox markers
were evaluated and the expression of Ki-67 and the
apoptosis/proliferation ratio of gastric tissues were also
determined.Results: Histopathological examination of MNNG-treated rats
showed 9/10 (90%) of the gastric tissues had dysplasia and
adenocarcinoma. Among these tissues, 70% showed dysplasia and 20% showed
adenocarcinoma. Conversely, rats treated with MNNG plus BioBran/MGN-3
showed lower incidences of dysplasia and adenocarcinoma (41.6%) (p<0.05).
Among these tissues, 33.3% (pObjective: Gastric cancer is the second
leading cause of cancer-related mortality worldwide, suggesting the need
to find new modalities to combat this disease. BioBran/MGN-3 contains an
arabinoxylan from rice bran, a polysaccharide containing
-1,4-xylopyronase hemicelluloses. Earlier studies showed that
BioBran/MGN-3 is a potent biological response modifier, anti-oxidizing
agent and inducer of apoptosis in cancer cells. This study evaluated the
use of BioBran/MGN-3 in the prevention of gastric cancer in rats and
elucidated the mechanisms behind its action.Materials and Methods: N-
methyl-N-nitro-N-nitrosoguanidine (MNNG) was orally administered daily to
rats for 2 weeks followed by NaCl once every 3 days for 4 weeks. Rats
were also given BioBran/MGN-3 daily for a total of 33 weeks.
Histopathology, body and organs weight, redox markers were evaluated and
the expression of Ki-67 and the apoptosis/proliferation ratio of gastric
tissues were also determined.Results: Histopathological examination of
MNNG-treated rats showed 9/10 (90%) of the gastric tissues had dysplasia
and adenocarcinoma. Among these tissues, 70% showed dysplasia and 20%
showed adenocarcinoma. Conversely, rats treated with MNNG plus
BioBran/MGN-3 showed lower incidences of dysplasia and adenocarcinoma
(41.6%) (p<0.05). Among these tissues, 33.3% (p<0.05) showed dysplasia,
and 8.3% showed gastric carcinoma. BioBran/MGN-3 protected against the
loss of body, liver and spleen weights due to treatment with MNNG. MNNG
caused marked elevation in total free radicals, MDA levels and
suppression in the antioxidant levels of GSH, SOD, CAT and GPx. Also, it
decreased the levels of total antioxidant capacity in both blood and
stomach tissue. In contrast, BioBran/MGN-3 counteracted free radicals,
up-regulated the redox status, down regulated Ki-67 expression and
markedly increased the apoptosis/proliferation ratio. BioBran/MGN-3
treated rats displayed normal life activity patterns.Conclusion:
BioBran/MGN-3 exhibited a significant chemopreventive activity against
the progression of gastric cancer by a mechanisms that involve its
ability to protect against oxidative stress, to inhibit cell
proliferation and to induce apoptosis. Our study suggests BioBran/MGN-3
is a non-toxic agent and may be an effective adjuvant for the treatment
of gastric cancers. BioBran/MGN-3 was provided by Daiwa Pharm. Ltd.
Tokyo, Japan.

