Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prospective mutational characterization of Japanese patients with
non-small cell lung cancer by next-generation sequencing


Background: Detection of tumor genetic alterations is critically needed
for lung cancer clinic as well as for the development of molecular
targeted therapeutics. Here we report the results of a broad spectrum of
genetic alterations identified in Japanese patients with non-small cell
lung cancer (NSCLC) by ultra-deep targeted sequencing.Material and
Methods: Highly multiplexed amplicon sequencing was performed using
genomic DNA extracted from snap-frozen tumor specimens. TruSeq amplicon
cancer panel was used for the detection of somatic mutations in 48 cancer
related genes followed by ultra-deep sequencing (Illumina) at an average
coverage of approximately 3,400x. ALK, ROS1 and RET translocations and
EGFR, MET, PIK3CA, FGFR1 and FGFR2 amplifications were also detected by
multiplex RT-PCR and quantitative PCR, respectively.Results: Between July
2011 and March 2013, 279 consecutive patients were enrolled in this
prospective study at Shizuoka Cancer Center: median age 69 years (range:
38-92); male 66%; never smoker 25.8%; histology: adenocarcinoma 70.6%,
squamous cell carcinoma (SQ) 25.1%, others 4.3%; pathological stage: I
58.1%, II 22.6%, III 15.4%, IV 3.9%. TP53 mutation was most frequently
detected (35.9%) in all patients, particularly in SQ (59.2%). Mutations
in genes such as CTNNB1 (4.0%), SMAD4 (1.5%), GNAS (1.0%), STK11 (1.0%),
HRAS (0.5%) and PTPN11 (0.5%) were also detected in addition to major
mutations in genes such as EGFR (44.8%), KRAS (18.4%) and PIK3CA (4.5%)
in adenocarcinoma. PIK3CA (19.7%), HRAS (2.8%), APC (1.4%), FGFR2 (1.4%),
FGFR3 (1.4%) and SMAD4 (1.4%) mutations were identified in SQ and
notably, 40.9% of SQ patients harbored concurrent gene mutations,
suggesting the genetic complexity of this histological subset. In EGFR
mutation, deletion in exon 19 (42.6%) and L858R point mutation in exon 21
(41.5%) were frequently observed. As for PIK3CA mutation, the majority
(92.8% of all PIK3CA mutant SQ cases) was detected in exon 9 (residues
E542 and E545) in SQ but in contrast, mutations in exon 1 and 20
(residues G106 and H1047, respectively) were more frequently detected
(33.3% combined of all PIK3CA mutant adenocarcinoma cases) in
adenocarcinoma.Conclusions: We managed to detect a wide range of genetic
alterations and to identify additional actionable mutations along with
popular driver mutations in NSCLC by next-generation sequencing
technology. These data should be incorporated into lung cancer clinic to
implement personalized cancer medicine.

