Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clinical significance of low frequency KRAS and BRAF subclones for
advanced colon cancer management


Alongside conventional chemotherapies, targeted treatments have
significantly improved the survival of patients with metastatic
colorectal cancer (mCRC) from 6 months with best supportive care
treatment, to 24 months with a combination of conventional and targeted
chemotherapies. However, patients with KRAS mutated tumors have little or
no benefit from these anti-EGFR antibodies based therapies (Panitumumab,
Cetuximab) as single agents or combined with chemotherapy. These findings
led to an amendment of the Marketing Authorization of these drugs that
are now restricted to patients with KRAS wild-type tumor. However, the
response of these patients ranged from 40 to 60%. Recent works have
demonstrated that secondary resistance to such therapies was associated
with emergence of KRAS mutated subclones in KRAS wild-type patients at
the diagnosis time. To understand the importance of KRAS mutant subclones
at the diagnosis time and to evaluate the consequence of their presence
in terms of management of mCRC patients, a highly sensitive and
quantitative procedure is required. Droplet-based digital PCR has
recently emerged as a highly sensitive and quantitative approach for rare
sequence detection.A retrospective study was set up where tumor samples
from 177 mCRC patients were analyzed using a multiplex highly sensitive
droplet-based procedures and ultra-deep sequencing using a new
droplet-based target enrichment. Results are compared with data obtained
by conventional qPCR. Sixty-two patients were classified as responders
according to RECIST criteria. All tumors (41) detected as positive using
conventional procedures were also positive with our procedure. Among the
samples detected as negative with conventional procedures, 23 presented a
KRAS or a BRAF mutation only detected by droplet-based procedures and 6
presented additional subclones. For 20 patients, additional biopsy
samples were available and presented comparable results. 167 samples were
also submitted to deep sequencing and, for alleles detected at fractions
superior to 1%, the mutational status of the sample were in agreement for
94% of the samples (157/167) and we observed a correlation with the
observed fraction of mutant alleles with the two procedures (R2= 0.7).We
observed an inverse correlation between the proportion of mutated DNA and
the frequency of anti-EGFR responses (PAlongside conventional
chemotherapies, targeted treatments have significantly improved the
survival of patients with metastatic colorectal cancer (mCRC) from 6
months with best supportive care treatment, to 24 months with a
combination of conventional and targeted chemotherapies. However,
patients with KRAS mutated tumors have little or no benefit from these
anti-EGFR antibodies based therapies (Panitumumab, Cetuximab) as single
agents or combined with chemotherapy. These findings led to an amendment
of the Marketing Authorization of these drugs that are now restricted to
patients with KRAS wild-type tumor. However, the response of these
patients ranged from 40 to 60%. Recent works have demonstrated that
secondary resistance to such therapies was associated with emergence of
KRAS mutated subclones in KRAS wild-type patients at the diagnosis time.
To understand the importance of KRAS mutant subclones at the diagnosis
time and to evaluate the consequence of their presence in terms of
management of mCRC patients, a highly sensitive and quantitative
procedure is required. Droplet-based digital PCR has recently emerged as
a highly sensitive and quantitative approach for rare sequence
detection.A retrospective study was set up where tumor samples from 177
mCRC patients were analyzed using a multiplex highly sensitive
droplet-based procedures and ultra-deep sequencing using a new
droplet-based target enrichment. Results are compared with data obtained
by conventional qPCR. Sixty-two patients were classified as responders
according to RECIST criteria. All tumors (41) detected as positive using
conventional procedures were also positive with our procedure. Among the
samples detected as negative with conventional procedures, 23 presented a
KRAS or a BRAF mutation only detected by droplet-based procedures and 6
presented additional subclones. For 20 patients, additional biopsy
samples were available and presented comparable results. 167 samples were
also submitted to deep sequencing and, for alleles detected at fractions
superior to 1%, the mutational status of the sample were in agreement for
94% of the samples (157/167) and we observed a correlation with the
observed fraction of mutant alleles with the two procedures (R2= 0.7).We
observed an inverse correlation between the proportion of mutated DNA and
the frequency of anti-EGFR responses (P< 0.0001). The mean percentage of
mutated DNA was 0.45% and 12.7% for responders and non-responders
respectively. Progression Free Survival of patients was significantly
different depending on the percentage of KRAS mutated allele within the
tumor. The Progression Free Survival of patients with tumor presenting
less than 5% of mutated KRAS was comparable to the one of non-mutated
patients. HRs were of 1.07 (CI95% 0.6-2, NS), 2.9 (CI95% 1.7-4.9,
PAlongside conventional chemotherapies, targeted treatments have
significantly improved the survival of patients with metastatic
colorectal cancer (mCRC) from 6 months with best supportive care
treatment, to 24 months with a combination of conventional and targeted
chemotherapies. However, patients with KRAS mutated tumors have little or
no benefit from these anti-EGFR antibodies based therapies (Panitumumab,
Cetuximab) as single agents or combined with chemotherapy. These findings
led to an amendment of the Marketing Authorization of these drugs that
are now restricted to patients with KRAS wild-type tumor. However, the
response of these patients ranged from 40 to 60%. Recent works have
demonstrated that secondary resistance to such therapies was associated
with emergence of KRAS mutated subclones in KRAS wild-type patients at
the diagnosis time. To understand the importance of KRAS mutant subclones
at the diagnosis time and to evaluate the consequence of their presence
in terms of management of mCRC patients, a highly sensitive and
quantitative procedure is required. Droplet-based digital PCR has
recently emerged as a highly sensitive and quantitative approach for rare
sequence detection.A retrospective study was set up where tumor samples
from 177 mCRC patients were analyzed using a multiplex highly sensitive
droplet-based procedures and ultra-deep sequencing using a new
droplet-based target enrichment. Results are compared with data obtained
by conventional qPCR. Sixty-two patients were classified as responders
according to RECIST criteria. All tumors (41) detected as positive using
conventional procedures were also positive with our procedure. Among the
samples detected as negative with conventional procedures, 23 presented a
KRAS or a BRAF mutation only detected by droplet-based procedures and 6
presented additional subclones. For 20 patients, additional biopsy
samples were available and presented comparable results. 167 samples were
also submitted to deep sequencing and, for alleles detected at fractions
superior to 1%, the mutational status of the sample were in agreement for
94% of the samples (157/167) and we observed a correlation with the
observed fraction of mutant alleles with the two procedures (R2= 0.7).We
observed an inverse correlation between the proportion of mutated DNA and
the frequency of anti-EGFR responses (P< 0.0001). The mean percentage of
mutated DNA was 0.45% and 12.7% for responders and non-responders
respectively. Progression Free Survival of patients was significantly
different depending on the percentage of KRAS mutated allele within the
tumor. The Progression Free Survival of patients with tumor presenting
less than 5% of mutated KRAS was comparable to the one of non-mutated
patients. HRs were of 1.07 (CI95% 0.6-2, NS), 2.9 (CI95% 1.7-4.9,
P<0.001), 3.6 (CI95% 2.2-5.8, PAlongside conventional chemotherapies,
targeted treatments have significantly improved the survival of patients
with metastatic colorectal cancer (mCRC) from 6 months with best
supportive care treatment, to 24 months with a combination of
conventional and targeted chemotherapies. However, patients with KRAS
mutated tumors have little or no benefit from these anti-EGFR antibodies
based therapies (Panitumumab, Cetuximab) as single agents or combined
with chemotherapy. These findings led to an amendment of the Marketing
Authorization of these drugs that are now restricted to patients with
KRAS wild-type tumor. However, the response of these patients ranged from
40 to 60%. Recent works have demonstrated that secondary resistance to
such therapies was associated with emergence of KRAS mutated subclones in
KRAS wild-type patients at the diagnosis time. To understand the
importance of KRAS mutant subclones at the diagnosis time and to evaluate
the consequence of their presence in terms of management of mCRC
patients, a highly sensitive and quantitative procedure is required.
Droplet-based digital PCR has recently emerged as a highly sensitive and
quantitative approach for rare sequence detection.A retrospective study
was set up where tumor samples from 177 mCRC patients were analyzed using
a multiplex highly sensitive droplet-based procedures and ultra-deep
sequencing using a new droplet-based target enrichment. Results are
compared with data obtained by conventional qPCR. Sixty-two patients were
classified as responders according to RECIST criteria. All tumors (41)
detected as positive using conventional procedures were also positive
with our procedure. Among the samples detected as negative with
conventional procedures, 23 presented a KRAS or a BRAF mutation only
detected by droplet-based procedures and 6 presented additional
subclones. For 20 patients, additional biopsy samples were available and
presented comparable results. 167 samples were also submitted to deep
sequencing and, for alleles detected at fractions superior to 1%, the
mutational status of the sample were in agreement for 94% of the samples
(157/167) and we observed a correlation with the observed fraction of
mutant alleles with the two procedures (R2= 0.7).We observed an inverse
correlation between the proportion of mutated DNA and the frequency of
anti-EGFR responses (P< 0.0001). The mean percentage of mutated DNA was
0.45% and 12.7% for responders and non-responders respectively.
Progression Free Survival of patients was significantly different
depending on the percentage of KRAS mutated allele within the tumor. The
Progression Free Survival of patients with tumor presenting less than 5%
of mutated KRAS was comparable to the one of non-mutated patients. HRs
were of 1.07 (CI95% 0.6-2, NS), 2.9 (CI95% 1.7-4.9, P<0.001), 3.6 (CI95%
2.2-5.8, P<0.001) for patients with tumor containing less than 5%,
between 5 and 25% or more than 25% of mutated DNA respectively.

