Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sustained adrenergic signaling promotes cervical cancer progression


Objective: Chronic stress and sustained adrenergic signaling promote
tumor progression. The underlying mechanisms behind this process are not
well understood. We examined the effects of sustained adrenergic
signaling on cervical cancer progression through increased expression of
HPV oncogenes, E6 and E7.Methods: Beta-adrenergic receptor (ADRB)
positive cervical cancer cell lines (CaSki and SiHa) were treated with
norepinephrine (NE) or isoproterenol (ISO) to analyze intracellular
responses. Migration, invasion and anoikis assays were performed to
elucidate the resultant biological effect of NE and ISO. ADRB expression
levels were examined from cervical cancer patient tumor samples.Results:
ADRB expression was determined for cervical cell lines (CaSki, SiHa, and
C33A) using qRT-PCR. CaSki and SiHa cells express ADRB1, ADRB2, and
ABRB3. Cells exposed to NE for 30 min showed elevated cyclic AMP
activity. After treatment with NE or ISO, mRNA levels from HPV oncogenes,
E6 and E7, were significantly elevated in the SiHa and CaSki cells. NE
exposure resulted in a significant increase in invasion and migration of
cervical cancer cells, while E6 siRNA abrogated these effects. After 48
hours of NE or ISO exposure, CaSki cells showed a 30% reduction in
anoikis. Among 166 tumor samples evaluated from cervical cancer patients,
85% had increased ADRB1 expression and 61% had increased ADRB2
expression. Tumor stage or grade was not related to ADRB expression.
ADRB1 expression was not correlated with patient survival outcomes (p =
0.86); however, patients with high ADRB2 expressed had decreased overall
survival (p=0.038).Conclusion: Increased adrenergic signaling promotes
cervical cancer progression. Disruption of this pathway could provide a
novel complement to current therapies.

