Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of tumor necrosis factor receptor II as a
regulatory T cell target for cancer immunotherapy using designed ankyrin
repeat protein phenotypic selections


Regulatory T cells (Treg cells) are observed within multiple tumor types
and contribute to immune evasion. Effective and specific targeting of
Treg cells by antibodies is hampered by the lack of a unique surface
marker. With the aim of identifying such a marker, human Treg cells were
isolated from peripheral blood, expanded in vitro and used as a source of
antigen in phage display selections with a diverse library of designed
ankyrin repeat proteins (DARPins). The resulting DARPins were screened
for binding to multiple cell-types, and approximately thirty with
preferential binding to Treg cells were identified. All of these DARPins
were determined to bind to the third and/or fourth cysteine-rich
extracellular domains of tumor necrosis factor receptor II (TNFRII, also
known as TNFRSF1B or CD120b). Expression of TNFRII has previously been
demonstrated on Treg cells, and TNFRII is shown here also to be expressed
on CD8+ T cells following exposure to cognate antigen and on the surface
of tumor-infiltrating T cells in the 4T1 mouse tumor model. Furthermore,
TNFRII mRNA was detected at increased levels in tumor-infiltrating
leukocytes isolated from cancer patients. Functional characterisation of
the anti-TNFRII DARPins and mAbs revealed an ability to enhance T-cell
activation in response to polyclonal and antigen specific stimuli, and in
Treg cell suppression assays. These studies demonstrate the utility of
DARPins for phenotypic selections to identify drug targets using primary
human lymphocytes and highlight TNFRII as a potential therapeutic target
enriched on Treg cells.

