Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Lifestyle factors are associated with late breast cancer outcomes
among 5-year survivors of estrogen-receptor positive breast cancer


Background: Estrogen-receptor (ER)+ breast cancers have a favorable
prognosis in the first several years after diagnosis, with adjuvant
endocrine therapies for treatment. However, in later years, ER+ breast
cancer is associated with poorer prognosis compared to ER- breast cancer.
Predictors of late recurrence in women with ER+ breast cancer, and in
particular lifestyle factors, have been little studied. Using data from a
pooling project of breast cancer survivor cohorts (After Breast Cancer
Pooling Project), we prospectively evaluated the association of
post-diagnosis lifestyle factors and comorbidities with late breast
cancer outcomes.Methods: Analyses included 6,129 women diagnosed with
stage I-III invasive ER+ breast cancer (1990-2004) from three US
prospective cohorts, who survived disease-free for five years. Pooled and
harmonized data were available for post-diagnosis lifestyle factors,
comorbidities, cancer treatment, tumor characteristics, and
socio-demographics. Late outcomes (defined as >5 years post-diagnosis)
included breast cancer recurrence, breast cancer specific-mortality
(BCSM), and all-cause mortality. Lifestyle factors and comorbidities were
assessed at a mean of about 2 years post-diagnosis. Study heterogeneity
was evaluated by the Q statistic. Adjusted hazard ratios (HRs) and 95%
confidence intervals (CIs) were estimated using Cox regression models
stratified by study.Results: After a median follow-up of 6.9 years (11.9
years post-diagnosis), 645 deaths and 564 recurrences were documented.
Five-year recurrence and all-cause mortality rates were 7.2% and 6.1%,
respectively. Ten-year recurrence and all-causes mortality rates were
12.1% and 15.4%, respectively. In multivariable models, recreational
physical activity (PA) of 10-MET h/wk was associated with reduced
all-cause mortality (HR: 0.71, 95% CI: 0.60-0.84) and BCSM (HR: 0.77, 95%
CI: 0.61-0.99), and non-significantly reduced recurrence risk (HR: 0.87,
95% CI: 0.73-1.03). Multivitamin and antioxidant vitamin supplement use
were inversely associated with recurrence (HRs (95% CIs): 0.74
(0.62-0.87) and 0.75 (0.61-0.91), respectively). Current smoking was
associated with increased risk of all-cause and BCSM ((HRs (95% CIs):
2.58 (1.99-3.35)) and 1.87 (1.22-2.88), respectively). Women with
diabetes had increased risk of late outcomes (HRs 95% CIs: 1.35
(0.95-1.92) for recurrence, 1.86 (1.45-2.40) for all-cause mortality, and
1.75 (1.12-2.73) for BCSM. Hypertension was significantly associated with
all-cause mortality only (HR: 1.42, 95% CI: 1.19-1.70). Obesity (BMI 30
kg/m2) was not associated with late outcomes.Conclusion: In this large
study, post-diagnosis lifestyle factors were important predictors of late
breast cancer outcomes. Our findings suggest PA and multivitamin use may
improve long-term prognosis for ER-positive breast cancer.

