Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exploiting the non-overlapping dysregulation of Notch and PI3K/AKT
signaling pathways as a guide for personalizing uterine cancer therapy


Objective: The Notch pathway plays a critical role in cell-to-cell
communication, proliferative signaling, and cell differentiation, but can
have oncogenic or tumor suppressive effects depending on the tissue type.
Dysregulation of the PI3K/AKT pathway has been implicated in a variety of
cancers and represents an attractive therapeutic target. We analyzed the
clinical significance and interplay of these two pathways in endometrial
cancer.Methods: We accessed clinical, somatic mutations, and Reverse
Phase Protein Array (RPPA) data from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) to
perform integrated analyses and determine the clinical significance of
Notch pathway aberrations in uterine cancer patients. In this cohort, we
also identified concomitant PI3K/AKT abnormalities. Clinical information
extracted included age, BMI, tumor histology, tumor grade, clinical
stage, estrogen(ER)/progesterone(PR) receptor status, and overall
survival.Results: A total of 232 samples were available for analysis.
Within the Notch pathway, 18.1% of evaluable samples had amplification or
upregulation of Notch2/Notch3 and/or DLL3 genes, which was significantly
correlated with worse overall survival (p=3.08e-7). Median ER, ER(pS118),
and PR RPPA levels were significantly higher for patients with no
abnormalities or mutations present in Notch2/Notch 3 and/or DLL3 than
those with amplification and/or upregulation of these genes (p=0.0016,
p=0.0002, and p=0.003, respectively). Of the 52 identified mutations in
Notch2/Notch3 and/or DLL3, 92.3% and 7.7% were missense and nonsense
mutations, respectively. PI3KCA represented the most frequently mutated
gene within this subset affecting 59% of patients; 159 mutations were
identified and 95% were missense mutations. Overexpression or
amplification of mRNA involved in the PI3K/AKT pathway was present in 108
(46.5%) of the evaluated endometrial tumors. Of these, only 35 tumors
(32.4%) had overlapping, concomitant Notch2/Notch3/DLL3 mRNA
overexpression or amplification.Conclusions: Upregulation or
amplification of Notch 2, Notch 3, and/or DLL3 genes predicted a more
aggressive clinical course for endometrial cancer patients. Given the
non-overlapping expression of PI3K/AKT and Notch pathways, personalized
options for targeted therapy could be considered for each group.

