Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Different miRNAs expression in leiomyosarcoma and undifferentiated
pleomorphic sarcoma


Rare and highly aggressive adult soft tissue sarcomas, leiomyosarcoma
(LMS) and undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcoma (UPS), contain complex
genomics characterized by a multitude of rearrangements, amplifications
and deletions. Since differential diagnosis between the two sarcoma
histotypes continues to remain a challenge, we attempted to identify a
specific signature useful for improving the differential diagnosis, and
we performed miRNA profiling on series of LMS and UPS samples stored at
Rizzoli biobank. First, we investigated the different miRNA expression
profile in 20 primary sarcoma samples, 10 high-grade LMS and 10 UPS,
MFH-like, using miRNA array technique. The top 5 differentially expressed
(pRare and highly aggressive adult soft tissue sarcomas, leiomyosarcoma
(LMS) and undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcoma (UPS), contain complex
genomics characterized by a multitude of rearrangements, amplifications
and deletions. Since differential diagnosis between the two sarcoma
histotypes continues to remain a challenge, we attempted to identify a
specific signature useful for improving the differential diagnosis, and
we performed miRNA profiling on series of LMS and UPS samples stored at
Rizzoli biobank. First, we investigated the different miRNA expression
profile in 20 primary sarcoma samples, 10 high-grade LMS and 10 UPS,
MFH-like, using miRNA array technique. The top 5 differentially expressed
(p<0.01) miRNAs (miR-199b-5p, miR-320a, miR-199a-3p, miR-126, miR-22)
were validated by RT-PCR on a series of further 27 UPS and 21 LMS.
Confirming our microarray data, an higher expression of miR-199-5p and a
lower expression of miR-320a was seen in UPS when compared to LMS. To
evaluate the potential role of the above selected miRNAs, the gene
targets recognized by three different target prediction databases
(miRBase, TargetScan , miRanda) were combined with a list of LMS- and
UPS-associated genes reported in literature. From an integrated analysis,
IMP3, ROR2, MDM2, CDK4, and UPA genes were identified. By
immunohistochemistry analysis, most of them showed strong protein
expression in LMS group. Our data suggest a potential role of miR-320a
and miR-199-5p in LMS and UPS development and expand our knowledge about
these complex sarcoma histotypes. Association analysis between expression
and chromosomal locations of miRNAs are ongoing to identify chromosomal
regions involved in these tumors.

