Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Alteration of mammary tumor cell behavior by FLIZ1


Fetal liver zinc finger protein (FLIZ1, ZC3H8) was previously described
as a negative regulator of GATA3 expression in T cells. GATA3 also is an
important determinant of mammary cell fate and breast tumor cell
behavior. We hypothesized that FLIZ1 also regulates GATA3 in the mammary
gland, thereby influencing normal and tumor cell processes controlled by
GATA3. We identified tumor cell lines with high levels of FLIZ1
expression, and transfected them with vectors driving expression of
FLIZ1-interfering RNAs. Stable transfectants (Flizout cells) were
evaluated for ability to migrate in a wound healing assay, and were found
to have decreased mobility. Flizout cells also grew more slowly and with
more pronounced epithelial morphology in media containing
charcoal-stripped serum, suggesting increased dependence on steroid
hormones. Flizout cells were compared to control cells in proliferation
assays, and were found to grow at equivalent rates in standard media, but
Flizout cells grew at decreased rates in the presence of tamoxifen. We
implanted Flizout cells and controls into the mammary glands of syngeneic
female mice, which were then treated with tamoxifen or peanut oil vehicle
alone. Flizout cells grew more slowly in tamoxifen-treated animals, and
tissue weights were significantly less than controls. In order to
determine if FLIZ1 plays a role in the normal mammary gland, we assessed
its expression during stages of mouse mammary gland development by
immunoblot, and found FLIZ1 expression increased during mammary
involution. These data are consistent with a role for FLIZ1 in regulation
of mammary cell growth and tumor cell behavior.

