Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Drug screen on six co-cultured GBM cell lines using a multiplex
luciferase assay


Despite the addition of temozolomide (TMZ) to the glioblastoma (GBM)
treatment regimen, disease outcome is still poor and additional
therapeutic options are necessary. One major obstacle in the GBM
treatment is TMZ resistance of the tumor cells resulting in relapse of
the disease with no alternative treatments known. In an effort to
discover additional treatment modalities we are performing drug screens
on GBM cell lines, using wild-type variants and acquired TMZ resistant
variants of these cell lines.To be able to screen a range of different
cells, we adapted a multiplex bioluminescence reporter assay developed in
our lab. This bioluminescent reporter assay is based on the Gaussia
luciferase (Gluc) fused to an epitope tag. Different cell lines can be
equipped with Gluc fused to different epitope tags (Gluc-tag) so that
each cell lines expresses Gluc and a cell line specific epitope tag.
Antibody immunoprecipitation allows us to separate the different
Gluc-tags and quantify the relative activities of the different cell
lines. Activity of each specific Gluc-tag represents the relative number
of a specific cell line in the mixed population. Since Gaussia luciferase
and the epitope tag is secreted by the cells, we can detect the cell line
specific reporters ex vivo in the culture medium or animal blood.Using
this novel method in a drug screen we aim to identify additional subtype
specific therapy strategies for GBM braintumors.

