Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: WISP-1 increases angiogenesis and VEGF-A expression in human oral
squamous cell carcinomas


Oral squamous cell carcinomas (OSCC) is most common metastasis to
cervical lymph nodes by angiogenesis. Wnt-1 induced secreted protein 1
(WISP-1) is a cysteine-rich protein that belongs to the CNN family (CTGF
/ CYR61 / NOV). However, the effects of WISP-1 on angiogenesis and
Vascular endothelial growth factor- A (VEGF-A) expression in human OSCC
are not clear. First, we found that the expression of WISP-1 in human
OSCC tissues were higher than in normal oral tissues. We also
demonstrated that WISP-1 enhanced angiogenesis and VEGF-A up-regulation
in human OSCC. WISP-1 induced VEGF-A expressio and angiogenesis through
v3 integrin, FAK, c-Src, EGFR, and ERK pathway. Knockdown WISP-1
decreased VEGF-A expression and also abolished human OSCC condition
medium-mediated angiogenesis in vitro as well as angiogenesis effects in
the chick chorioallantoic membrane (CAM) and matrix gel plug nude mice
model in vivo. In addition, in the xenograft tumor angiogenesis model,
knockdown of WISP-1 significantly reduced tumor growth and
tumor-associated angiogenesis. We characterized an important role for
WISP-1 which regulates angiogenesis by increasing VEGF-A expression in
human OSCC via the v3 integrin, FAK, c-Src, EGFR, ERK, and HIF1-
signaling pathway.

