Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Lenalidomide treatment enhances the anti-tumor activities of XBP1
specific cytotoxic T lymphocytes by increasing the frequency and
tumor-specific response of central memory CD3+CD8+ T cells


Introduction: Lenalidomide is an agent with immunomodulatory properties
with demonstrated direct effects on the immune system and tumor
microenvironment. The unfolded protein response (UPR) is a primary
cellular adaptive mechanism that allows tumor cell survival under
endoplasmic reticulum stress conditions by increasing its protein folding
capacity. Thus, targeting the UPR is a rational approach for selective
cancer cell killing. Here, we provide the basis for a novel
immunotherapeutic approach by combining the antigen specific CTL against
XBP1, an important transcriptional activator of the UPR, in combination
with Lenalidomide, to boost the immune targeting against a variety of
solid tumor cancer cells that over-express XBP1.Methods: XBP1
peptides-specific CTL (XBP1-CTL) were generated ex vivo from HLA-A2+
normal donors CD3+ T cells by repeated stimulation using a cocktail of
heteroclitic XBP1 unspliced (US)184-192 (YISPWILAV) and XBP1 spliced
(SP)367-375 (YLFPQLISV) peptides. XBP1-CTL were then incubated with or
without Lenalidomide (5 m), and evaluated for their immune responses and
anti-tumor activities against breast, colon or pancreatic cancer cells.
In addition, we characterized the XBP1-CTL, following lenalidamide
treatment, for their enhanced expression of key T cell markers and
transcriptional regulators, which are critical for immune function of
effector and memory T cells.Results: An increased number of CD45RO+
memory CD3+CD8+ T cells, but not CD45RO- non-memory CD3+CD8+ T cells nor
total CD3+CD8+ T cells, was observed within XBP1-CTL by Lenalidomide
treatment. The combination of XBP1-CTL with Lenalidomide consistently
enhanced the frequency and anti-tumor activity of the central memory CTL
subset (CM: CD45RO+CCR7+/CD3+CD8+ T cells) as compared to the effector
memory CTL subset (EM: CD45RO+CCR7-/CD3+CD8). In addition, Lenalidomide
increased the expression of critical T cell surface markers including
CD28, CD38, CD40L, CD69 and 41BB, but not ICOS nor TCR. Lenalidomide
treatment also enhanced anti-tumor activities of XBP1-CTL by increasing
the frequencies of T-bet+/IFN-+, Eomes+/IFN-+, and Akt+ CD3+CD8+ T cells
within both CM and EM subsets in response to HLA-A2+ breast (MB231),
colon (LS180) or pancreatic (Panc1) cancer cell lines. Finally, the
memory CD3+CD8+ T cells of XBP1-CTL displayed increased cytotoxicity
(Granzyme B+) and IFN- production against the respective solid tumor
cells when the XBP1-CTL were treated with Lenalidomide.Conclusions: This
study provides the framework for using heteroclitic XBP1 US184-192 and
XBP1 SP367-375 peptides as a vaccine to generate XBP1-CTL targeting a
variety of solid tumors. Finally, it provides support for combination of
the XBP1-based peptides vaccine with immunomodularoty drug Lenalidomide
to improve patient outcome.

