Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Risk prediction for late-stage ovarian cancer by meta-analysis of
1,525 patient samples


Background: Ovarian cancer causes over 15,000 deaths per year in the
United States. The survival of patients is quite heterogeneous, and
accurate prognostic tools would help with the clinical management of
these patients. However, existing ovarian cancer gene signatures did not
make it to the clinic so far. Expression data of thousands of patients
from a large number of different cohorts is now available in the public
domain. Harvesting all this information for building signatures is a
challenging big data problem, but has the potential to yield more robust
and accurate signatures.Methods: We developed and validated two gene
expression signatures of potential clinical relevance in advanced stage
serous ovarian cancer, the first for predicting survival and the second
for predicting the outcome of initial debulking surgery. We integrated 13
publicly available datasets totaling 1,525 subjects. We trained
prediction models using a meta-analysis variation on the Compound
Covariate method, tested models via a leave-one-dataset-out procedure,
and validated models in additional independent datasets. Selected genes
from the debulking signature were validated by immunohistochemistry and
qRT-PCR in two further independent cohorts of 179 and 78 patients,
respectively.Results: The survival signature stratified patients into
high- and low-risk groups (HR=2.19; 95% CI, 1.84 to 2.61) significantly
better than the best previously published overall survival signature (P =
0.039). POSTN, CXCL14, FAP, NUAK1, PTCH1, and TGFBR2) were validated by
qRT-PCR (P Background: Ovarian cancer causes over 15,000 deaths per year
in the United States. The survival of patients is quite heterogeneous,
and accurate prognostic tools would help with the clinical management of
these patients. However, existing ovarian cancer gene signatures did not
make it to the clinic so far. Expression data of thousands of patients
from a large number of different cohorts is now available in the public
domain. Harvesting all this information for building signatures is a
challenging big data problem, but has the potential to yield more robust
and accurate signatures.Methods: We developed and validated two gene
expression signatures of potential clinical relevance in advanced stage
serous ovarian cancer, the first for predicting survival and the second
for predicting the outcome of initial debulking surgery. We integrated 13
publicly available datasets totaling 1,525 subjects. We trained
prediction models using a meta-analysis variation on the Compound
Covariate method, tested models via a leave-one-dataset-out procedure,
and validated models in additional independent datasets. Selected genes
from the debulking signature were validated by immunohistochemistry and
qRT-PCR in two further independent cohorts of 179 and 78 patients,
respectively.Results: The survival signature stratified patients into
high- and low-risk groups (HR=2.19; 95% CI, 1.84 to 2.61) significantly
better than the best previously published overall survival signature (P =
0.039). POSTN, CXCL14, FAP, NUAK1, PTCH1, and TGFBR2) were validated by
qRT-PCR (P < 0.05) and POSTN, CXCL14 and phosphorylated Smad2/3 by
immunohistochemistry (P Background: Ovarian cancer causes over 15,000
deaths per year in the United States. The survival of patients is quite
heterogeneous, and accurate prognostic tools would help with the clinical
management of these patients. However, existing ovarian cancer gene
signatures did not make it to the clinic so far. Expression data of
thousands of patients from a large number of different cohorts is now
available in the public domain. Harvesting all this information for
building signatures is a challenging big data problem, but has the
potential to yield more robust and accurate signatures.Methods: We
developed and validated two gene expression signatures of potential
clinical relevance in advanced stage serous ovarian cancer, the first for
predicting survival and the second for predicting the outcome of initial
debulking surgery. We integrated 13 publicly available datasets totaling
1,525 subjects. We trained prediction models using a meta-analysis
variation on the Compound Covariate method, tested models via a
leave-one-dataset-out procedure, and validated models in additional
independent datasets. Selected genes from the debulking signature were
validated by immunohistochemistry and qRT-PCR in two further independent
cohorts of 179 and 78 patients, respectively.Results: The survival
signature stratified patients into high- and low-risk groups (HR=2.19;
95% CI, 1.84 to 2.61) significantly better than the best previously
published overall survival signature (P = 0.039). POSTN, CXCL14, FAP,
NUAK1, PTCH1, and TGFBR2) were validated by qRT-PCR (P < 0.05) and POSTN,
CXCL14 and phosphorylated Smad2/3 by immunohistochemistry (P < 0.001) as
independent predictors of debulking status. The sum of IHC intensities
for these three proteins provided a tool that classified 92.8% of samples
correctly in high- and low-risk groups for suboptimal debulking (AUC
0.89; 95% CI 0.84 to 0.93). We present the strongest evidence to date for
the existence of a biologic basis of suboptimal outcome of debulking
surgery.Conclusions: Our survival signature provides the most accurate
and validated prognostic model for early and advanced stage high-grade
serous ovarian cancer. The debulking signature accurately (92.8%)
predicts the outcome of cytoreductive surgery and will have clinical
utility if the accuracy of the immunohistochemistry tool observed in our
initial 179-patient validation cohort is confirmed in prospective
validation. This tool will potentially allow for the identification of
those patients who will not benefit from primary debulking surgery,
sparing them the toxicity of extensive surgery and the delay until the
initiation of chemotherapy. These patients can be triaged to neoadjuvant
chemotherapy with interval debulking.

