Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: GD2-specific genetically engineered NK cell therapy is effective
in a drug-resistant neuroblastoma xenograft mouse model


Background:Drug-resistant neuroblastoma remains a major challenge in
pediatric oncology. A human NK cell line NK-92-scFv(ch14.18)-z engineered
to express a GD2-specific chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) may help to
address this problem. We investigated the cytotoxicity of
NK-92-scFv(ch14.18)-z in a panel of GD2+ drug-resistant neuroblastoma
cell lines and analyzed the anti-tumor efficacy of NK-92-scFv(ch14.18)-z
in a drug-resistant neuroblastoma xenograft mouse model.MethodsCytotoxic
activity of GD2-specific NK-92-scFv(ch14.18)-z towards a panel of GD2+
cell lines (CHLA-20, SK-N-BE(2), CHLA-136, CHLA-79, LA-N-1, LA-N-5), some
of which exhibit partial or multidrug resistance, was analyzed in a 51Cr
release assay. We investigated the impact of GD2 recognition on
NK-92-scFv(ch14.18)-z-mediated lysis by blocking the CAR through the
addition of an anti-idiotype antibody (anti-IdAb) and also by
downregulating GD2 on target cells induced by the glucosylceramide
synthase (GCS) inhibitor PPPP. We then employed ELISA to determine the
production of effector molecules granzyme B and perforin in response to
activation with immobilized GD2. Anti-tumor efficacy of
NK-92-scFv(ch14.18)-z and IL-2 was analyzed in a drug-resistant GD2+
xenograft mouse model by peritumoral injections of the GD2-specific NK
cell line.ResultsNK-92-scFv(ch14.18)-z effectively lysed GD2+
drug-resistant NB cell lines. This effect was almost completely abrogated
by blocking the CAR with an anti-IdAb. Decreased GD2 expression on target
cells also resulted in diminished lysis mediated by
NK-92-scFv(ch14.18)-z. Quantification of granzyme B and perforin
production with ELISA revealed that the plate-bound antigen GD2 alone was
sufficient to induce activation of NK-92-scFv(ch14.18)-z. Importantly,
repeated peritumoral subcutaneous injections of a combination of
NK-92-scFv(ch14.18)-zeta and IL-2 significantly prolonged survival time
of mice challenged with aggressively growing subcutaneous CHLA-20 tumors
in a xenograft mouse model.ConclusionsThese encouraging results indicate
that GD2-directed immunotherapy with genetically engineered NK cells is
an appropriate treatment strategy especially in relapsed NB that exhibit
drug resistance.

