Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combination with the novel tumor-targeted CEA-IL2v immunocytokine
enhances the activity of ADCC-competent and glycoengineered antibodies in
vitro and in vivo


We recently described a novel monomeric tumor-targeted CEA-IL2v
immunocytokine. CEA-IL2v comprises a single IL-2 variant (IL2v) with
abolished CD25 binding that is fused to the C-terminus of a humanized CEA
antibody with a heterodimeric Fc devoid of FcR and C1q binding. CEA-IL2v
recognizes a membrane-proximal epitope of CEA. Here we show that
CEA-IL-2v is able to enhance the activity of ADCC competent antibodies
and glycoengineered IgG1 antibodies in vitro and in vivo.The combination
of CEA-IL2v with ADCC-competent IgG1 antibodies was investigated in vitro
in ADCC assays and in vivo in xenografts in hCD16a transgenic SCID mice
that express hFcRIII on NK cells and the homologous muFcRIV on
macrophages/monocytes. Antibodies tested include trastuzumab, cetuximab
and the ADCC-enhanced glycoengineered EGFR antibody GA201. In the
spontaneous genetically engineered BALB-neuT breast cancer mouse model a
surrogate tumor stroma Tenascin C A2 (TNCA2)-targeted IL2v immunocytokine
was used in combination with a ratHER2 antibody.PBMCs stimulated by
CEA-IL2v in co-cultures with tumor cells showed dose-dependent
elimination of tumor cells and activation of NK cells. Addition of
trastuzumab or cetuximab resulted in induction of activation markers and
enhanced killing of tumor cells. As a single agent, CEA-IL2v showed minor
tumor growth inhibition in orthotopic i.m.f.p. KPL4 BC and s.c. N87 GC
xenografts. The combination of CEA-IL2v (1 mg/kg, q7d3) with trastuzumab
(10 mg/kg in KPL4 and 25 mg/kg in N87, q7d3) resulted in superior
inhibition of tumor growth compared to the respective single-agent
treatments, combination therapy induced 6/9 complete tumor remissions in
N87 and 3/5 in KPL4. In the i.v. A549 lung cancer and i.s. LS174T CRC
xenografts, single-agent CEA-IL2v showed a moderate effect on median
survival, whereas the combination of CEA-IL2v (1 mg/kg, q7d3) with
cetuximab (25 mg/kg, q7d3) increased median/overall survival. Similarly,
in the i.v. A549 NSCLC and i.s. LS174T CRC xenografts, the combination of
CEA-IL2v (1 mg/kg for A549 and 2 mg/kg for LS174T, q7d3) with GA201 (25
mg/kg, q7d3) resulted in superior median survival compared to the
respective single-agent treatments with long term survival of 10/10
animals in the A549 model and survival of 2/8 animals in the LS174T
model. Finally in the spontaneous GEM BALB-neuT breast cancer model the
combination of TNCA2-IL2v with a ratHER2 IgG1 antibody resulted in a
strong and significant reduction of tumor formation in 6/7 animals as
compared to the respective single agents.Combining CEA-IL2v or TNCA2-IL2v
with ADCC competent/enhanced IgG1 antibodies results in enhanced
anti-tumor efficacy in xenografts and in a spontaneous immunocompetent
genetically engineered BALB-neuT mouse model. These data support the
clinical investigation of CEA-IL2v with ADCC competent/enhanced IgG1
antibodies.

