Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combinational Targeting of EGFR and ODC pathways by Gefitinib and
DFMO lead to complete blockade of PanIN progression to pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma


Pancreatic cancer (PC) is a devastating disease with almost uniform
lethality despite aggressive treatment (5-year survival rate of
Pancreatic cancer (PC) is a devastating disease with almost uniform
lethality despite aggressive treatment (5-year survival rate of <6%).
Developing novel strategies to prevent/delay/inhibit progression of PC is
currently of intense interest. Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is
over-expressed in 87% human pancreatic cancers and plays a pivotal role
in tumor cell proliferation. An interaction between ornithine
decarboxylase (ODC) overexpression and EGFR was suggested by the
elevation of EGFR Tyr-K activity. Clinical and preclinical studies have
clearly demonstrated chemopreventive potential of difloromethyl ornithine
(DFMO), an ODC inhibitor. Higher doses of gefitinib (EGFR inhibitor) and
DFMO has been associated with skin- and oto-toxicity respectively. Hence,
to target EGFR and ODC simultaneously, we tested the effects of lower
doses of gefitinib and DFMO individually and in combination on pancreatic
intraepithelial neoplasms (PanINs) and their progression to pancreatic
ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) in p48Cre/+-LSL-KrasG12D/+ transgenic
mice.Six-week old male and female KrasG12D/+ (24-34/group) mice were fed
(AIN-76A) diets containing 0%, 0.01% gefitinib, 0.1% DFMO or combination
of both for 38 weeks. Pancreata were collected, weighed, and evaluated
histopathologically for PanINs and PDAC. To understand molecular
mechanisms, we analyzed levels of proliferation, apoptosis and cell cycle
makers; PCNA, p21, -catenin, Cav-1, Bcl-XL, c-MYC, cyclin E and pERK
expressions by IHC, IHF, Western blotting, and/or RT-PCR methods. Results
suggest that control diet fed mice showed 80 and 65% incidence of PDAC in
male and female mice, respectively. Dietary gefitinib and DFMO
significantly inhibited incidence of PDAC in both male (90 & 87%,
respectively, pPancreatic cancer (PC) is a devastating disease with
almost uniform lethality despite aggressive treatment (5-year survival
rate of <6%). Developing novel strategies to prevent/delay/inhibit
progression of PC is currently of intense interest. Epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR) is over-expressed in 87% human pancreatic cancers
and plays a pivotal role in tumor cell proliferation. An interaction
between ornithine decarboxylase (ODC) overexpression and EGFR was
suggested by the elevation of EGFR Tyr-K activity. Clinical and
preclinical studies have clearly demonstrated chemopreventive potential
of difloromethyl ornithine (DFMO), an ODC inhibitor. Higher doses of
gefitinib (EGFR inhibitor) and DFMO has been associated with skin- and
oto-toxicity respectively. Hence, to target EGFR and ODC simultaneously,
we tested the effects of lower doses of gefitinib and DFMO individually
and in combination on pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasms (PanINs) and
their progression to pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) in
p48Cre/+-LSL-KrasG12D/+ transgenic mice.Six-week old male and female
KrasG12D/+ (24-34/group) mice were fed (AIN-76A) diets containing 0%,
0.01% gefitinib, 0.1% DFMO or combination of both for 38 weeks. Pancreata
were collected, weighed, and evaluated histopathologically for PanINs and
PDAC. To understand molecular mechanisms, we analyzed levels of
proliferation, apoptosis and cell cycle makers; PCNA, p21, -catenin,
Cav-1, Bcl-XL, c-MYC, cyclin E and pERK expressions by IHC, IHF, Western
blotting, and/or RT-PCR methods. Results suggest that control diet fed
mice showed 80 and 65% incidence of PDAC in male and female mice,
respectively. Dietary gefitinib and DFMO significantly inhibited
incidence of PDAC in both male (90 & 87%, respectively, p<0.0001) and
female (84 & 75%, respectively, pPancreatic cancer (PC) is a devastating
disease with almost uniform lethality despite aggressive treatment
(5-year survival rate of <6%). Developing novel strategies to
prevent/delay/inhibit progression of PC is currently of intense interest.
Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is over-expressed in 87% human
pancreatic cancers and plays a pivotal role in tumor cell proliferation.
An interaction between ornithine decarboxylase (ODC) overexpression and
EGFR was suggested by the elevation of EGFR Tyr-K activity. Clinical and
preclinical studies have clearly demonstrated chemopreventive potential
of difloromethyl ornithine (DFMO), an ODC inhibitor. Higher doses of
gefitinib (EGFR inhibitor) and DFMO has been associated with skin- and
oto-toxicity respectively. Hence, to target EGFR and ODC simultaneously,
we tested the effects of lower doses of gefitinib and DFMO individually
and in combination on pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasms (PanINs) and
their progression to pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) in
p48Cre/+-LSL-KrasG12D/+ transgenic mice.Six-week old male and female
KrasG12D/+ (24-34/group) mice were fed (AIN-76A) diets containing 0%,
0.01% gefitinib, 0.1% DFMO or combination of both for 38 weeks. Pancreata
were collected, weighed, and evaluated histopathologically for PanINs and
PDAC. To understand molecular mechanisms, we analyzed levels of
proliferation, apoptosis and cell cycle makers; PCNA, p21, -catenin,
Cav-1, Bcl-XL, c-MYC, cyclin E and pERK expressions by IHC, IHF, Western
blotting, and/or RT-PCR methods. Results suggest that control diet fed
mice showed 80 and 65% incidence of PDAC in male and female mice,
respectively. Dietary gefitinib and DFMO significantly inhibited
incidence of PDAC in both male (90 & 87%, respectively, p<0.0001) and
female (84 & 75%, respectively, p<0.0001) mice. Most importantly, the
combination drug treatment showed complete (100%, pPancreatic cancer (PC)
is a devastating disease with almost uniform lethality despite aggressive
treatment (5-year survival rate of <6%). Developing novel strategies to
prevent/delay/inhibit progression of PC is currently of intense interest.
Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is over-expressed in 87% human
pancreatic cancers and plays a pivotal role in tumor cell proliferation.
An interaction between ornithine decarboxylase (ODC) overexpression and
EGFR was suggested by the elevation of EGFR Tyr-K activity. Clinical and
preclinical studies have clearly demonstrated chemopreventive potential
of difloromethyl ornithine (DFMO), an ODC inhibitor. Higher doses of
gefitinib (EGFR inhibitor) and DFMO has been associated with skin- and
oto-toxicity respectively. Hence, to target EGFR and ODC simultaneously,
we tested the effects of lower doses of gefitinib and DFMO individually
and in combination on pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasms (PanINs) and
their progression to pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) in
p48Cre/+-LSL-KrasG12D/+ transgenic mice.Six-week old male and female
KrasG12D/+ (24-34/group) mice were fed (AIN-76A) diets containing 0%,
0.01% gefitinib, 0.1% DFMO or combination of both for 38 weeks. Pancreata
were collected, weighed, and evaluated histopathologically for PanINs and
PDAC. To understand molecular mechanisms, we analyzed levels of
proliferation, apoptosis and cell cycle makers; PCNA, p21, -catenin,
Cav-1, Bcl-XL, c-MYC, cyclin E and pERK expressions by IHC, IHF, Western
blotting, and/or RT-PCR methods. Results suggest that control diet fed
mice showed 80 and 65% incidence of PDAC in male and female mice,
respectively. Dietary gefitinib and DFMO significantly inhibited
incidence of PDAC in both male (90 & 87%, respectively, p<0.0001) and
female (84 & 75%, respectively, p<0.0001) mice. Most importantly, the
combination drug treatment showed complete (100%, p<0.0001) inhibition of
PDAC incidence in both genders of mice. Also, significant suppression of
PanIN 3 (carcinoma in-situ) was observed in mice fed by gefitinib, DFMO
and their combination. Importantly, 77% of the pancreas was free from
lesions and carcinoma in the combination treatment compared to only 4 %
in control and 39 and 23 % in gefitinib and DFMO fed mice respectively.
The pancreas of mice fed combination diets showed a significant
inhibition of PCNA, -catenin, Cav-1, Bcl-XL, c-MYC, cyclin E and pERK
expression levels (pPancreatic cancer (PC) is a devastating disease with
almost uniform lethality despite aggressive treatment (5-year survival
rate of <6%). Developing novel strategies to prevent/delay/inhibit
progression of PC is currently of intense interest. Epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR) is over-expressed in 87% human pancreatic cancers
and plays a pivotal role in tumor cell proliferation. An interaction
between ornithine decarboxylase (ODC) overexpression and EGFR was
suggested by the elevation of EGFR Tyr-K activity. Clinical and
preclinical studies have clearly demonstrated chemopreventive potential
of difloromethyl ornithine (DFMO), an ODC inhibitor. Higher doses of
gefitinib (EGFR inhibitor) and DFMO has been associated with skin- and
oto-toxicity respectively. Hence, to target EGFR and ODC simultaneously,
we tested the effects of lower doses of gefitinib and DFMO individually
and in combination on pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasms (PanINs) and
their progression to pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) in
p48Cre/+-LSL-KrasG12D/+ transgenic mice.Six-week old male and female
KrasG12D/+ (24-34/group) mice were fed (AIN-76A) diets containing 0%,
0.01% gefitinib, 0.1% DFMO or combination of both for 38 weeks. Pancreata
were collected, weighed, and evaluated histopathologically for PanINs and
PDAC. To understand molecular mechanisms, we analyzed levels of
proliferation, apoptosis and cell cycle makers; PCNA, p21, -catenin,
Cav-1, Bcl-XL, c-MYC, cyclin E and pERK expressions by IHC, IHF, Western
blotting, and/or RT-PCR methods. Results suggest that control diet fed
mice showed 80 and 65% incidence of PDAC in male and female mice,
respectively. Dietary gefitinib and DFMO significantly inhibited
incidence of PDAC in both male (90 & 87%, respectively, p<0.0001) and
female (84 & 75%, respectively, p<0.0001) mice. Most importantly, the
combination drug treatment showed complete (100%, p<0.0001) inhibition of
PDAC incidence in both genders of mice. Also, significant suppression of
PanIN 3 (carcinoma in-situ) was observed in mice fed by gefitinib, DFMO
and their combination. Importantly, 77% of the pancreas was free from
lesions and carcinoma in the combination treatment compared to only 4 %
in control and 39 and 23 % in gefitinib and DFMO fed mice respectively.
The pancreas of mice fed combination diets showed a significant
inhibition of PCNA, -catenin, Cav-1, Bcl-XL, c-MYC, cyclin E and pERK
expression levels (p<0.05-0.001); and increased p21 when compared to the
pancreatic cancer derived from control diet or individual drug fed mice.
In summary, targeting the EGFR and ODC pathways simultaneously may
provide synergistic and/or additive chemopreventive effects in
suppression of PC and has significant potential for undertaking clinical
trials of pancreatic cancer chemoprevention. {Supported by
NCI-CN-N01-53300}.

