Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNA expression profiling in MMTV-neu breast cancer mouse model


In addition to mRNA gene expression profiling, miRNA expression analyses
of human breast cancers have further demonstrated another layer of the
molecular diversity of this disease and may potentially be a useful
diagnostic and prognostic tool for breast cancer therapy and treatment.
The development and use of relevant mouse models that closely reflect
genetic alterations found in human breast cancers is critical to
understand malignant progression in this disease and to test
developmental therapeutics. The Mammary Tumour Virus (MMTV) Long Terminal
Repeat (LTR) promoter-driven HER2/neu transgenic mouse model was
developed to directly assess the effects of mammary gland specific
expression of the neu protooncogene.Global miRNA expression profiling was
performed on tumours derived from the MMTV-HER2/neu model. Normal mammary
glands from FVB wild-type mice, HER2 overexpressing mammary glands from
MMTV-HER2/neu transgenic mice and tumours derived from this model at
different stages of the tumourigenic process were collected and microRNA
expression profiling performed on them by Nanostring analysis.
Differential expression of selected miRNAs, obtained by Nanostring
screening, was further confirmed by quantitative Real Time analysis.By
analyzing global miRNA expression profile on tissues collected from
MMTV-HER2/neu mice at different stages of the tumourigenesis, we
identified significant differences in miRNA expression patterns between
tumours and normal mammary tissue and between non-metastatic and
metastatic tumours. miRNA expression characterization of tumours at
various stages of development along with gene expression in mouse models
would profoundly enhance our knowledge of progressive genetic changes
associated with oncogene-induced events in breast cancer.

