Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PSA splice variants and their expression in prostate cancer


IntroductionProstate cancer (PCa) is the second most common cancer in
American men, resulting in 32,000 deaths annually. Challenges for the
management of PCa include the inability to distinguish indolent from
aggressive and untreatable castration-resistant PCa. These challenges can
be addressed by understanding the molecular basis of cancer initiation
and progression. Prostate specific antigen (PSA) is widely used for
screening, diagnosing and monitoring of PCa, although it is also elevated
in other disorders and therefore lacks specificity and sensitivity.
Alternative splicing is a common mechanism used in nature to enhance
protein diversity. Alternative splicing of the PSA gene produces at least
15 transcripts of 0.7-6.1 kb (Heuz-Vourc'h et al 2003). Several variants
of PSA have been reported and are shown to be differentially expressed in
PCa compared to normal prostates or to benign prostatic hyperplasia
(BPH).Here we describe the identification of four variants of PSA with
the potential to improve on the specificity of the PSA test.Material and
MethodsHuman prostate cDNAs were from cryopreserved prostate tissues
collected after radical prostatectomies and have been described
previously (Mubiru et al. 2004). PCR was carried out using primers that
amplify the complete PSA mRNA and also those specific for the most common
splice variant (Heuz-Vourc'h et al. 2001). The PCR products were inserted
into the PCR2.1-TOPO vector (Life Technologies) and sequenced.ResultsWe
identified four novel splice variants of the PSA gene.
Results also indicate that some transcripts are differentially expressed
in tumors compared to non-tumors.References1.Mubiru JN, et al. (2004).
Gene 327: 89-98.2.Heuz-Vourc'h N, et al. (2003) Eur J Biochem 270:
706-714.3.Heuz-Vourc'h N, et al. (2001) Eur J Biochem 268: 4408-4413.

