Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Estrogen receptor-alpha promotes multi-centrosomes by inhibition
of BRCA1-Rad51 binding


Von Hippel Lindau gene (VHL) is frequently deleted in renal cell
carcinoma and known to be negative regulator of Hypoxia inducible
factor-1 (HIF-1). However, its tumor suppressive functions has not been
fully explained by HIF-1 suppression, because loss of pVHL is appeared in
initial stage of RCC tumorigenesis and induces the defect in cytokinesis
or centrosome instability. Concerning this, we previously revealed that
estrogen receptor-alpha is primary target of E3 ligase function of pVHL.
In this study, we demonstrate that ER- is responsible for mitotic defect
and drug resistance in VHL-deficient cells. Activated ER- can interact
with BRCA1 or Rad51 and disrupt the BRCA1-Rad51-mediated centrosome
maintaining. Thus, VHL-deficient cells, like as BRCA1-deficient cells,
possessed multi-centrosome and multi-nucleated phenotypes. In addition,
multi-centrosomal features rendered the resistance to Taxol. Since it is
mediated by ER- in nucleus, blocking of ER- translocation by specific
inhibitor, Faslodex, can ameliorate multi-centrosomes and induce Taxol
sensitivity in RCC and BRCA1-deficient breast cancers. These results
suggest that pVHL is critical for proper cell division and suppression of
ER- in RCC and BRCA1-deficient breast cancer is one of useful strategy
for improving the drug sensitivity.

