Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Colorectal cancer risk associated with alcohol intake is modified
by common genetic variants in one-carbon metabolism: the Multiethnic
Cohort Study


Background: Epidemiologic studies have observed that higher alcohol
intake is associated with an increased risk of colorectal cancer and that
the effects of alcohol may vary by common genetic polymorphisms in
one-carbon metabolism enzymes, most notably MTHFR. Experimental studies
demonstrated alcohol may impair the activity of some of the enzymes
involved in the pathway. We examined common functional genetic variants
in key one-carbon metabolism enzymes and their interactions with alcohol
intake in association with the risk of colorectal cancer in a prospective
study.Materials and Methods: We conducted a study within the Multiethnic
Cohort on 1,670 incident colorectal cancer (932 male, 738 female) cases
and 2,532 controls that were frequency-matched based on baseline age
(45-75), sex and race/ethnicity (African American, white, Japanese
American, Latino and Native Hawaiian). Alcohol intake was estimated from
a self-administered food frequency questionnaire. Reported functional
variants were genotyped in BHMT, CBS, CHDH, MTHFD1, MTHFR, MTR, MTRR,
PEMT, and TCN2, using TaqMan assays. Logistic regression was performed to
estimate odds ratios (OR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) for the
associations adjusted for age, sex, and race/ethnicity.Results: In the
nested case-control subset, as in the entire cohort, alcohol intake was
associated with an elevated risk of colorectal cancer [ORs for
Background: Epidemiologic studies have observed that higher alcohol
intake is associated with an increased risk of colorectal cancer and that
the effects of alcohol may vary by common genetic polymorphisms in
one-carbon metabolism enzymes, most notably MTHFR. Experimental studies
demonstrated alcohol may impair the activity of some of the enzymes
involved in the pathway. We examined common functional genetic variants
in key one-carbon metabolism enzymes and their interactions with alcohol
intake in association with the risk of colorectal cancer in a prospective
study.Materials and Methods: We conducted a study within the Multiethnic
Cohort on 1,670 incident colorectal cancer (932 male, 738 female) cases
and 2,532 controls that were frequency-matched based on baseline age
(45-75), sex and race/ethnicity (African American, white, Japanese
American, Latino and Native Hawaiian). Alcohol intake was estimated from
a self-administered food frequency questionnaire. Reported functional
variants were genotyped in BHMT, CBS, CHDH, MTHFD1, MTHFR, MTR, MTRR,
PEMT, and TCN2, using TaqMan assays. Logistic regression was performed to
estimate odds ratios (OR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) for the
associations adjusted for age, sex, and race/ethnicity.Results: In the
nested case-control subset, as in the entire cohort, alcohol intake was
associated with an elevated risk of colorectal cancer [ORs for <7g or 0.5
drink/day and 7g/day intake compared to non-drinking were 1.16 (95% CI:
0.99, 1.35) and 1.30 (1.11, 1.54), respectively; p-trend=0.001]. We found
an association of colorectal cancer with rs1801133 in MTHFR [OR=0.81
(0.66, 0.99) for TT vs. CC/CT], as reported earlier, and also with
rs1801131 [MTHFR; OR=1.36 (1.02, 1.86) for CC vs. AA/AC] and rs12676
[CHDH; OR=0.84 (0.70, 0.99) for AC/CC vs. AA]. There was a significant
interaction between alcohol intake and genetic variants rs1801133
(p-interaction=0.02) and rs1801131 (p-interaction=0.04) in MTHFR, rs12676
(CHDH; p-interaction=0.0002), and rs234706 (CBS; p-interaction=0.002).
Alcohol-associated colorectal cancer risk increases were observed only
among individuals with the following genotypes: rs1801133 TT [ORs for
Background: Epidemiologic studies have observed that higher alcohol
intake is associated with an increased risk of colorectal cancer and that
the effects of alcohol may vary by common genetic polymorphisms in
one-carbon metabolism enzymes, most notably MTHFR. Experimental studies
demonstrated alcohol may impair the activity of some of the enzymes
involved in the pathway. We examined common functional genetic variants
in key one-carbon metabolism enzymes and their interactions with alcohol
intake in association with the risk of colorectal cancer in a prospective
study.Materials and Methods: We conducted a study within the Multiethnic
Cohort on 1,670 incident colorectal cancer (932 male, 738 female) cases
and 2,532 controls that were frequency-matched based on baseline age
(45-75), sex and race/ethnicity (African American, white, Japanese
American, Latino and Native Hawaiian). Alcohol intake was estimated from
a self-administered food frequency questionnaire. Reported functional
variants were genotyped in BHMT, CBS, CHDH, MTHFD1, MTHFR, MTR, MTRR,
PEMT, and TCN2, using TaqMan assays. Logistic regression was performed to
estimate odds ratios (OR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) for the
associations adjusted for age, sex, and race/ethnicity.Results: In the
nested case-control subset, as in the entire cohort, alcohol intake was
associated with an elevated risk of colorectal cancer [ORs for <7g or 0.5
drink/day and 7g/day intake compared to non-drinking were 1.16 (95% CI:
0.99, 1.35) and 1.30 (1.11, 1.54), respectively; p-trend=0.001]. We found
an association of colorectal cancer with rs1801133 in MTHFR [OR=0.81
(0.66, 0.99) for TT vs. CC/CT], as reported earlier, and also with
rs1801131 [MTHFR; OR=1.36 (1.02, 1.86) for CC vs. AA/AC] and rs12676
[CHDH; OR=0.84 (0.70, 0.99) for AC/CC vs. AA]. There was a significant
interaction between alcohol intake and genetic variants rs1801133
(p-interaction=0.02) and rs1801131 (p-interaction=0.04) in MTHFR, rs12676
(CHDH; p-interaction=0.0002), and rs234706 (CBS; p-interaction=0.002).
Alcohol-associated colorectal cancer risk increases were observed only
among individuals with the following genotypes: rs1801133 TT [ORs for
<7g/day and 7g/day intake compared to non-drinking: 1.78 (1.11, 2.85),
2.11 (1.25, 3.56)], rs1801131 AA [ORs=1.18 (1.00, 1.30), 1.35 (1.14,
1.59)], rs12676 AA [ORs=1.23 (1.03, 1.47), 1.44 (1.20, 1.74) and rs234706
GG [ORs=1.21 (1.00, 1.46), 1.48 (1.21, 1.81)].Conclusions: Our findings
provide further support that alcohol intake may increase the risk of
colorectal cancer in part through its antagonistic effects on one-carbon
metabolism, especially among carriers of susceptibility genotypes for key
enzymes.

