Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CP-31398 prevents the progression of oral squamous cell carcinomas
from carcinogen-induced premalignant lesions


Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is an aggressive disease
with a poor prognosis if not detected and treated at the early stages.
P53 inactivation represents one of the most frequent molecular events in
HNSCC. Here we studied a p53-reactivating small molecule, CP-31398, to
prevent progression of premalignant oral squamous lesions to malignant
HNSCC. We treated a panel of HNSCC cell lines with CP-31398 which
resulted in a dose-dependent inhibition of cell proliferation as assessed
by [3H]-Thymidine incorporation and cell cycle analysis, including
induction of apoptotic cell death. These alterations were associated with
an increased expression of the cell cycle inhibitor CDKN1A (p21WAF1) upon
CP-31398 treatment. Interestingly, p53 function restoration by CP-31398
caused a marked decrease in activity of the PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway, which
is most frequently deregulated in HNSCC, and whose inhibition results in
decreased tumorigenicity in multiple preclinical models systems. Indeed,
CP-31398 treatment increased the expression of Sestrin 1/2 and REDD1;
three well established p53-regulated genes that exert inhibitory activity
over mTOR. Next, we evaluated the chemopreventive efficacy of CP-31398 in
a 4-Nitroquinoline oxide (4NQO)-induced HNSCC mouse model that we have
recently developed, which closely resembles development and progression
of human HNSCC, including the induction of tp53 mutations as revealed by
DNA sequencing. C57BL/6 mice were given 4NQO in the drinking water for a
period of 14 weeks, during which all the animals developed an array of
potential oral premalignant lesions. Upon 4NQO removal, mice were
randomized into two groups receiving a control diet or a diet containing
250 ppm of CP-31398 for 8 weeks, in which the development and progression
of tongue lesions were documented. At the conclusion of the study, 22
weeks, all mice were euthanized and subjected to full autopsies and
histopathological evaluations. While 100% of the animals in the control
group developed SCCs at the end of the study, there was a 70% reduction
in the number of SCCs in the CP-31398- treated group. These findings
suggest that the early, widespread alterations, of p53 during HNSCC
progression can make this tumor type particularly vulnerable to
intervention strategies, restoring p53 function by direct acting, p53
rescue agents. Hence, a large number of at risk patients exhibiting
potential oral premalignant lesions harboring p53 mutations could benefit
from the treatment with p53-reactivating small molecules such as
CP-31398, which can also restrict the uncontrolled activation of the mTOR
pathway. Overall, we present evidence of a novel chemopreventive
intervention approach that exploits the emerging crosstalk between p53
and the mTOR pathways, including pharmacologic activation of mutant p53,
individually and together with mTOR inhibitors, halting HNSCC progression.

