Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MELK enhances gastric cancer progression via the FAK/paxillin
pathway


Elevated MELK expression is a characteristic of multiple tumors and has
been correlated with tumorigenesis and tumor development. However, the
precise mechanism underlying this correlation is unclear. Here, we report
that there are pleiotropic effects associated with enhanced MELK
expression in gastric cancer, and this are mediated via the FAK/paxillin
pathway. We first show that MELK mRNA and protein expression are both
elevated in human gastric cancer, and this is associated with
chemoresistance to 5-FU. Knockdown of MELK significantly suppresses cell
proliferation, migration, and invasion of gastric cancer both in vitro
and in vivo, and decreases the percentages of cells in the G1/G0 phase
and increases those in the G2/M and S phases. Moreover, depletion of MELK
decreases the amount of actin stress fibers and reduces RhoA activity.
Finally, knockdown of MELK decreases the phosphorylation of molecular
components of the FAK/Paxillin pathway and prevents gastrin-mediated
FAK/paxillin phosphorylation. By contrast, MELK overexpression produces
the opposite results, although the differences are moderate. Together,
our work suggests that MELK plays an important role in the occurrence and
development of gastric cancer, implicates the FAK/Paxillin pathway as the
means by which it promotes these effects, and identifies MELK as a
potential target for treatment against gastric cancer.Note: This abstract
was not presented at the meeting.

