Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CITED2 as a molecular switch for hypoxia-mediated proliferation


Hypoxia, the reduction of oxygen levels in cells or tissues, elicits a
set of genes to adjust physiological and pathological demands during
normal development and cancer progression. Hypoxia-mediated stabilization
of hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF) 1 and 2 contributes to transcriptional
regulation of genes involved in hypoxia-mediated physiological
adaptation. Till now, the molecular mechanism of how HIF1 and HIF2
signaling regulates cancer cell proliferation and quiescence in hypoxic
microenvironment is little understood. Here, we reported that CITED2, a
cytokine inducible transcriptional modulator, is induced by HIF2 to
regulate cell proliferation and quiescence. We observed that HIF2
expression is induced by hypoxia in a subgroup of lung cancer cells,
proliferation of which is regulated via HIF2/CITED2 signaling.
Interestingly, HIF1-silencing promotes hypoxic-mediated cell
proliferation in the HIF2-positive lung cancer cells. In contrast,
knockdown of HIF2 as well as CITED2 attenuates cell growth, suggesting
that HIF2/CITED2 signaling functions as a molecular switch for cell
proliferation and quiescence. Soft-agar assay showed that HIF2 promotes
anchorage-independent growth of cancer cells, which can be inhibited by
CITED2-silencing. We observed that upon hypoxia induction, CITED2
enhances MYC-mediated transactivation of downstream target genes. Our
findings provide a novel oncogenic role of CITED2 in hypoxia with
potential as a biomarker and therapeutic targets for lung cancer.

