Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Structural activity relationship studies of aza-podophyllotoxin
derivatives on breast cancer cell line


Podophyllotoxin is a natural precursor for the semi-synthesis of novel
anticancer drugs and its an anti-tumor and antibacterial ligand derived
from Podophyllum peltatum and Podophyllum emodi (Berberidaceae).
Etoposide, etopophoside and tenoposide are anti-cancer drugs in
pharmaceutical clinics since 1989 derived from a natural lignin
podophyllotoxin. Synthesis of podophyllotoxin in a laboratory is one of
the tedious and biggest challenges. In our previous work we developed a
very simple method to synthesize extensively modified libraries of
several novel derivatives, which were previously impossible to synthesize
from podophyllotoxin (Kumar and Alegra, 2010). This method also allows us
to explore the synthesis and applications of novel aza-podophyllotoxin
derivatives which led to several new analogs with anti-cancer potential.
Most of the compounds were found very active against Colon cancer,
Melanoma, Ovarian, Renal, prostate and breast cancers at NCI upon a panel
of 60 types of human cancer cell lines (Kumar, et.al. 2011). Based on
structure activity relationship (SAR) of our compounds and their recent
unpublished extraordinary activity especially against colon cancer (COLO
205) cell lines, we designed and synthesized novel aza-podophyllotoxin
derivatives using microwave synthesis technique. We will be discussing
the synthesis, SAR and biological activity of our novel
2,3-didehyropodophyllotoxin derivatives.Keywords: Pharmacology, Organic
Chemistry and ToxicologyDisclosure of Chemical Structure: The complete
chemical structures of the compounds of the compounds used will be
disclosed at the time of presentation at the meeting.Funded by
INBRE-NIGMS-NIH gran #8 P20 GM 102475 and REU NSF 1262826

