Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: 19-Substituted benzoquinone ansamycin Hsp90 inhibitors: Effects on
Hsp90 co-chaperones and Hsp90-Hsf1 complexes in cellular systems


The 19-substituted benzoquinone ansamycin (BQA) class of Hsp90 inhibitors
were developed to decrease the off-target toxicity of their parent
unsubstituted BQAs, geldanamcyin, 17-AAG, and 17-DMAG. We have shown that
19-BQAs do not react with thiols and show decreased toxicity to liver
cell systems relative to parent BQAs. As a class, Hsp90 inhibitors
exhibit anti-cancer activity by decreasing the levels of Hsp90 client
proteins critical to cell growth and survival. Some Hsp90 inhibitors also
disrupt interaction with Hsp90 co-chaperones, including cdc37,
contributing to inhibited growth. Upon inhibition, the transcription
factor heat shock factor 1 (Hsf1) dissociates from Hsp90 leading to a
compensatory induction of other heat shock proteins, including Hsp70
which is commonly used as a molecular biomarker of cellular Hsp90
inhibition. We undertook a detailed study of the mechanism of action of
19-BQAs in HER2-positive breast cancer cells (BT474) using 19-phenyl- and
19-methyl-DMAG as model compounds. Their ability to disrupt association
of Hsp90 with the co-chaperones p23 and cdc37, the kinetics of decreased
Hsp90-Hsf1 levels, nuclear Hsf1 accumulation and increases in Hsp70
levels were defined. Both 19-phenyl- and 19-methyl -DMAG disrupted
Hsp90-p23 association, confirming binding of the compounds at the
N-terminal ATPase site of Hsp90. 19-Phenyl-DMAG and 19-methyl-DMAG also
disrupted association of Hsp90 with cdc37, although 19-phenyl-DMAG was
more potent. A detailed time course of decreased levels of Hsp90 client
proteins and Hsp induction showed that increased Hsp70 was a more
sensitive cellular marker as it could be detected at lower drug
concentrations. Increases in Hsp70 did not appear to be a generalized
stress response, since 19-substituted-BQAs caused dissociation of the
Hsp90-Hsf1 dimer, nuclear translocation of Hsf-1, and subsequent
increases in Hsp70 levels in a temporal manner. These data indicate that
19-substituted BQAs may exhibit their growth inhibitory effects in breast
cancer cells through disruption of Hsp90 and its co-chaperones,
particularly cdc37. The N-terminal ATPase site binding and Hsp90
inhibitory activity of these compounds was confirmed through disruption
of Hsp90-p23 and Hsp90-Hsf1 associations, respectively (Supported by NCI
grant CA51210).

