Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Whole slide image analysis quantification in a mouse lung
metastasis model


Digital whole slide imaging is the technique of digitizing a microscope
slide at the highest resolution to produce a digital virtual microscope
slide. This digital image can be viewed in three or four fields, from low
to high power fields, which can be commonly used to evaluate the tissue.
Many of these systems have a whole slide software image analysis
system.The goal of this study was to determine if the Aperio positive
pixel algorithm (image analysis) could effectively quantitate metastatic
mouse lung tumors in a lung section using a H&E stain.Lung sections from
a mouse lung metastasis model with 8 mice in each group were evaluated:
control, 50mg/kg, and 75mg/kg carboplatin. H&E and Ki67 immunostain
slides were scanned using the Aperio whole slide scanning system
(Scanscope CS). A single field of view from each slide representing a
whole lung lobe with multiple lung metastases was selected for image
analysis. The standard positive pixel algorithm was altered to read the
H&E slides. Various histology slides were used to validate the altered
algorithm. The immunostain (Ki67) was generated using the standard
positive pixel algorithm analysis.The Aperio automated positive pixel
count for a Ki67 immunostain was consistent with the H&E image analysis.
The values went down with a dose dependent treatment (control vs.
50mg/kg, and 75mg/kg Carboplatin) and were (H&E) 37%, 28%, 22%, and
(Ki67) 9%, 5%, 3%, respectively.The analysis had decreasing values for
both the H&E and Ki67 analysis on a dose dependent drug treatment. The
metastases decreased in both treatment groups compared to controls with
both the H&E and Ki67 analyses. The Aperio Image Analysis positive pixel
algorithm allows large areas of the lung tissue section to be examined
and NOT just a single 25x or 40x field like many common image analyses.

