Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: LKB1 loss sensitizes non-small cell lung cancer cells to
aggravation of ER stress


Five-year survival rates for non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) have seen
minimal improvement despite aggressive therapy with standard
chemotherapeutic agents, indicating a need for new treatment approaches.
Studies show inactivating mutations to the LKB1 tumor suppressor are
common in NSCLC and are concurrent with activating mutations to the KRas
oncogene. Genetic and mechanistic analyses of KRas/LKB1-null NSCLC tumors
suggest these tumors are a phenotypically distinct subpopulation of NSCLC
and the unique features of KRas/LKB1-null tumors have potential for
therapeutic gain. In the exploration of the mechanism(s) behind increased
cytotoxicity of KRas/LKB1-null NSCLC cells to 2-D-Deoxyglucose (2DG), we
find that loss of LKB1 in NSCLC cells imparts increased sensitivity to
pharmacological aggravation of ER stress. In a panel of NSCLC cell lines,
LKB1 expression status correlated to differential expression of the ER
stress markers, BiP and CHOP, with 2DG treatment. Treatment of isogenic
LKB1-null NSCLC cells ectopically expressing LKB1 or a nonfunctional LKB1
with the ER stress activators, tunicamycin (Tm) or brefeldin A (BFA),
revealed that expression of LKB1 increased cell viability and
phosphorylation of AMPK. Conversely, isogenic LKB1-null NSCLC cells
expressing nonfunctional LKB1 displayed increases in phosphorylation of
the ER stress marker, eif2 and markers of ER stress mediated cell death
(reactive oxygen species and cleaved caspase-9) following aggravation of
ER stress with 2DG, Tm or BFA. The use of 2DG was effective in
controlling the growth of KRas/LKB1-null tumors compared to
KRas/LKB1-expressing tumors in transgenic NSCLC models and 2DG-treated
KRas/LKB1-null NSCLC tumors displayed features consistent with 2DG
treatment of in vitro KRas/LKB1-null NSCLC cell lines. Based upon these
findings, we suggest that KRas/LKB1-null NSCLC tumors are more sensitive
to pharmacological aggravation of ER stress and this approach has
potential as a treatment for NSCLC patients whose tumors are defined as
KRas/LKB1-null.

