Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Luminescent cell health assays for tumor spheroid evaluation


Microtissues produced in 3D cell culture are much more representative of
actual living tissue compared to monolayers produced in 2D cell culture.
In fact, in the area of oncology research, multicellular tumor spheroids
are considered an excellent platform for testing drug delivery and
efficacy. As the necessity for established 3D cell culture models rises,
there is also a need for convenient assays that have been specifically
demonstrated to be effective for use with 3D microtissues. The more
complex architecture of 3D microtissues demands increased lytic
effectiveness and reagent penetration, characteristics that are often
only minor considerations for reagents designed for 2D cell culture. Here
we report on a variety of bioluminescent and fluorescent cell-based
assays applied to hanging-drop spheroids produced from HCT116 colon
cancer cells. The first assay to be described is an ATP detection reagent
for measuring cell viability. This reagent has both an improved
formulation and an optimized assay protocol and has clear advantages over
other viability assays. Other cell health assays will also be described,
including reagents that measure cell death, apoptosis, mechanistic
cytotoxicity, or reporter gene expression. These additional assays do not
require a change in formulation, but do require new protocols in order to
optimize their effectiveness when applied to 3D microtissues. As with
their application to cells in 2D culture, these add-mix-measure reagents
are robust and amenable to both low- and high-throughput applications.

