Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Docosahexaenoic acid enhances 2-deoxyglucose treatment in breast
and lung cancer cells in vitro


Increased aerobic glycolysis is a common phenotype of cancer cells and is
known as the Warburg effect. Recent studies have focused on targeting
cellular metabolism to impede cancer cell growth. Previous findings in
our laboratory have demonstrated that docosahexaenoic acid (DHA; C22:6
n-3), a long-chain omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acid (PUFA), can inhibit
cancer cell metabolism and reduce intracellular ATP levels. This study
investigated the effects of concurrent treatment with DHA with
2-deoxyglucose (2DG), an inhibitor of glucose metabolism, in multiple
cancer cell models in vitro, BT-474 human breast ductal carcinoma,
MDA-MB-231 human breast adenocarcinoma, and A549 human lung
adenocarcinoma. Dose-dependent decreases in intracellular ATP levels were
observed with DHA and 2DG, both alone and in combination. In addition to
the significant decreases in ATP levels, large decreases in extracellular
lactate concentrations were observed in all three cell lines as well,
suggesting that the combination of 2DG and DHA can augment treatment,
mimic glucose deprivation and play a role in reducing the Warburg effect.
Moreover, oxygen consumption rate (OCR) and extracellular acidification
rate (ECAR) were significantly reduced with the combination of DHA and
2DG, which suggests that the combination of DHA with other metabolic
inhibitors, like 2DG, may sensitize cells to current treatment. Our
findings show that combining DHA with 2DG enhances the efficacy of 2DG
treatment alone, which may help to reduce the cytotoxic effects by 2DG on
normal cells. Other metabolic inhibitors are being employed in
combination with DHA to determine the mechanisms behind the DHA-induced
sensitizing effects, which will provide additional treatment strategies
for oncologists and cancer patients.

