Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genetic variation in angiogenesis-related genes is associated with
colorectal cancer risk and prognosis


IntroductionAngiogenesis, the generation of new blood vessels, is crucial
in tumor growth, progression, and metastasis. The process involves a
variety of factors including signaling, adhesion and chemotactic
molecules, ECM (extracellular matrix) proteins, proteinases,
transcription factors, growth factors and receptors. Variation in genes
encoding these factors potentially influence angiogenic processes. We
thus evaluated the association between variants in angiogenesis-related
genes and risk as well as prognosis of colorectal cancer (CRC).ApproachIn
a candidate pathway approach, we investigated 437 variants in 36
angiogenesis-related genes for association with CRC risk and prognosis in
1800 patients and 1800 controls of the German DACHS/IMPACT study.
Patients were aged 30 years or older and diagnosed between 2003 and 2007.
CRC risk was estimated using conditional logistic regression based on the
co-dominant inheritance model. In addition, we investigated the
association between polymorphisms and overall survival using
multivariable Cox regression. Correction for multiple testing was
performed using false discovery rates (FDR).ResultsRiskSeveral of the
investigated variants in ANGTP1, ETS1, FLT4, MMP2, NOTCH4, PDGFRB, TGFB2
were associated with risk of CRC, and one variant in DLL1 (delta-like 1)
remained significant after accounting for multiple testing. DLL1
rs9348307 was associated with decreased risk of CRC (ORGC 0.81, 95% CI
0.68-0.96; ORCC 0.62, 95% CI 0.36-1.06, p=0.02).SurvivalAfter a median
follow up time of 5 years, variants in twelve genes (ANGPT1, EFNB2, ETS1,
FLT4, JAG1, KDR, MMP2, MMP9, NRP1, NRP2, PDGFRB, TGFB2) were associated
with overall survival in CRC patients. When accounting for multiple
testing, variants in EFNB2, JAG1 and MMP2 remained significant.Most of
the EFNB2 variants were associated with poorer survival, while one
variant in EFNB2 was associated with better survival (rs2391333: HRCT
0.88, 95% CI 0.74-1.05; HRTT 0.60, 95% CI 0.45-0.78,
pIntroductionAngiogenesis, the generation of new blood vessels, is
crucial in tumor growth, progression, and metastasis. The process
involves a variety of factors including signaling, adhesion and
chemotactic molecules, ECM (extracellular matrix) proteins, proteinases,
transcription factors, growth factors and receptors. Variation in genes
encoding these factors potentially influence angiogenic processes. We
thus evaluated the association between variants in angiogenesis-related
genes and risk as well as prognosis of colorectal cancer (CRC).ApproachIn
a candidate pathway approach, we investigated 437 variants in 36
angiogenesis-related genes for association with CRC risk and prognosis in
1800 patients and 1800 controls of the German DACHS/IMPACT study.
Patients were aged 30 years or older and diagnosed between 2003 and 2007.
CRC risk was estimated using conditional logistic regression based on the
co-dominant inheritance model. In addition, we investigated the
association between polymorphisms and overall survival using
multivariable Cox regression. Correction for multiple testing was
performed using false discovery rates (FDR).ResultsRiskSeveral of the
investigated variants in ANGTP1, ETS1, FLT4, MMP2, NOTCH4, PDGFRB, TGFB2
were associated with risk of CRC, and one variant in DLL1 (delta-like 1)
remained significant after accounting for multiple testing. DLL1
rs9348307 was associated with decreased risk of CRC (ORGC 0.81, 95% CI
0.68-0.96; ORCC 0.62, 95% CI 0.36-1.06, p=0.02).SurvivalAfter a median
follow up time of 5 years, variants in twelve genes (ANGPT1, EFNB2, ETS1,
FLT4, JAG1, KDR, MMP2, MMP9, NRP1, NRP2, PDGFRB, TGFB2) were associated
with overall survival in CRC patients. When accounting for multiple
testing, variants in EFNB2, JAG1 and MMP2 remained significant.Most of
the EFNB2 variants were associated with poorer survival, while one
variant in EFNB2 was associated with better survival (rs2391333: HRCT
0.88, 95% CI 0.74-1.05; HRTT 0.60, 95% CI 0.45-0.78, p<0.001).
Furthermore, two variants in JAG1 were associated with worse survival in
CRC patients (rs3748480: HRTG 1.27, 95% CI 1.05-1.53; HRGG 1.79, 95% CI
1.02-3.13, p=0.02; rs6040062: HRGA 1.26, 95% CI 1.04-1.52; HRAA 1.78, 95%
CI 1.02-3.12, p=0.02). Finally, three variants in MMP2 (rs11639960,
rs1561219, rs17301608) were associated with poorer survival, while one
MMP2 variant was associated with improved survival in CRC patients
(rs243847: HRTC 0.87, 95% CI 0.73-1.04, HRCC 0.60, 95% CI 0.46-0.78,
pIntroductionAngiogenesis, the generation of new blood vessels, is
crucial in tumor growth, progression, and metastasis. The process
involves a variety of factors including signaling, adhesion and
chemotactic molecules, ECM (extracellular matrix) proteins, proteinases,
transcription factors, growth factors and receptors. Variation in genes
encoding these factors potentially influence angiogenic processes. We
thus evaluated the association between variants in angiogenesis-related
genes and risk as well as prognosis of colorectal cancer (CRC).ApproachIn
a candidate pathway approach, we investigated 437 variants in 36
angiogenesis-related genes for association with CRC risk and prognosis in
1800 patients and 1800 controls of the German DACHS/IMPACT study.
Patients were aged 30 years or older and diagnosed between 2003 and 2007.
CRC risk was estimated using conditional logistic regression based on the
co-dominant inheritance model. In addition, we investigated the
association between polymorphisms and overall survival using
multivariable Cox regression. Correction for multiple testing was
performed using false discovery rates (FDR).ResultsRiskSeveral of the
investigated variants in ANGTP1, ETS1, FLT4, MMP2, NOTCH4, PDGFRB, TGFB2
were associated with risk of CRC, and one variant in DLL1 (delta-like 1)
remained significant after accounting for multiple testing. DLL1
rs9348307 was associated with decreased risk of CRC (ORGC 0.81, 95% CI
0.68-0.96; ORCC 0.62, 95% CI 0.36-1.06, p=0.02).SurvivalAfter a median
follow up time of 5 years, variants in twelve genes (ANGPT1, EFNB2, ETS1,
FLT4, JAG1, KDR, MMP2, MMP9, NRP1, NRP2, PDGFRB, TGFB2) were associated
with overall survival in CRC patients. When accounting for multiple
testing, variants in EFNB2, JAG1 and MMP2 remained significant.Most of
the EFNB2 variants were associated with poorer survival, while one
variant in EFNB2 was associated with better survival (rs2391333: HRCT
0.88, 95% CI 0.74-1.05; HRTT 0.60, 95% CI 0.45-0.78, p<0.001).
Furthermore, two variants in JAG1 were associated with worse survival in
CRC patients (rs3748480: HRTG 1.27, 95% CI 1.05-1.53; HRGG 1.79, 95% CI
1.02-3.13, p=0.02; rs6040062: HRGA 1.26, 95% CI 1.04-1.52; HRAA 1.78, 95%
CI 1.02-3.12, p=0.02). Finally, three variants in MMP2 (rs11639960,
rs1561219, rs17301608) were associated with poorer survival, while one
MMP2 variant was associated with improved survival in CRC patients
(rs243847: HRTC 0.87, 95% CI 0.73-1.04, HRCC 0.60, 95% CI 0.46-0.78,
p<0.001).ConclusionVariants in angiogenesis-related genes were associated
with CRC risk and overall survival in CRC patients. Two of the identified
genes (DLL1 and JAG1) are involved in NOTCH signaling, which is crucial
to cell differentiation, proliferation, apoptosis and angiogenesis,
underlining the importance of this oncogenic pathway in colorectal
carcinogenesis.

