Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Obinutuzumab (GA101) significantly increases overall survival
against CD20+ rituximab-sensitive and -resistant Burkitt (BL) and acute
lymphoblastic leukemia (B-ALL): potential targeted therapy in patients
with high risk BL and pre-B-ALL


Background: Patients who relapse with CD20+ B-NHL and B cell Acute
lymphoblastic leukemia (B-LL) have a dismal prognosis, which is often
associated with chemotherapy resistance and may require alternative
therapeutic strategies (Cairo et al. JCO, 2012, Barth/Cairo et al. BJH,
2013). Rituximab (RTX) in combination with FAB 96 chemotherapy is a safe
and well-tolerated and is associated with > 90% EFS in children with
newly diagnosed and advanced mature B-Cell NHL (Goldman/Cairo et al.
Leukemia, 2013). Resistance to RTX, however, may predispose patients with
CD20+ B-LL to an increase risk of relapse and/or disease progression
(Barth/Cairo et al. BJH, 2012; Tsai et al. Cl. Can. Res, 2012).
Obinutuzumab, a novel type II glycoengineered CD20 antibody, mediates
enhanced cell death and ADCC vs. RTX (Bologna L et al. JI, 2012), and was
recently approved by FDA for first line treatment of CLL in combination
with chlorambucil.Objective: To evaluate anti-tumor activity of
obinutuzumab vs RTX against RTX resistant and sensitive BL and pre-B-ALL
in xenografted NSG mice.Methods: Raji (CD20+) and Loucy (T-ALL, CD20-),
(ATCC, Manhass, VA), U698-M (CD20+, DSMZ, Germany) and Raji-4RH (provided
by M. Barth, Roswell Park Cancer Institute) were cultured in RPMI with
10% FBS. The lentiviral construct, pSico PolII-eGFP-Luc2, was transfected
into Raji, Raji 4RH (RTX resistant), U698M and Loucy. Six to 8 week old
female NSG (NOD.Cg-Prkdcscid Il2rgtm1Wjl/SzJ), mice were bred in house
under pathogen free conditions, NSG mice were divided into 5 groups: PBS
only (control), isotype control (IgG), obinutuzumab 10 mg/kg (generously
supplied by Christian Klein, PhD (Roche)), obinutuzumab (30 mg/kg), and
rituximab (30 mg/kg).Mice were xenografted with intravenous injections of
Luc+ Raji, Raji4RH, U698M and Loucy cells at 5x106 tumor cells/mouse. 6-8
days after tumor cell injection, mice were then injected every 7 days
with the respective therapy for 8 weeks. Mice were closely monitored for
tumor burden and survival for up to 12 weeks ( approx. 80 days) via
bioluminescent imaging (BLI) using the IVIS Spectrum system.Results: We
demonstrated that obinutuzumab was significantly more effective than RTX
when administered at the same doses in BL (RTX resistant/sensitive) and
pre-B-ALL xenografts. Overall survival in mice receiving 30 mg/kg of
obinutuzumab was significantly increased when compared to mice receiving
30 mg/kg of RTX in BL; Raji (p=0.0002), Raji4RH (p=0.01) and U698-M
(p=0.001), respectively.Conclusion: These preliminary studies demonstrate
that RTX sensitive/resistant BL and pre-B-ALL xenografted mice display
significantly increased survival when given 30 mg/kg of obinutuzumab and
decreased tumor burden in BL and Pre-B-ALL xenografts compared to equal
dose of RTX.

