Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TP53 codon 72 polymorphism association with prognosis in Puerto
Rican head and neck squamous cell carcinoma patients


Objective: The p53 gene has many polymorphic sites that result in an
altered activity of the protein, which may be associated to cancer risk.
The polymorphic site of p53 at exon 4 codon 72 is a base substitution
that produces an Arginine or a Proline (Arg72Pro). Each amino acid gives
a specific function to p53, which may be associated to cancer
susceptibility. This polymorphism is differentially dispersed among
different ethnic populations. It has been widely studied in cancer, but
still, epidemiologic findings relating p53 polymorphism and cancer risk
have been inconsistent. The objective of this study was to evaluate the
effect(s) of p53 polymorphism at exon 4 codon 72 on the prognosis of head
and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) in the Puerto Rican
population.Methods: p53 polymorphism Arg72Pro, (rs1042522), was
determined in a cohort of 131 HNSCC patients and 45 healthy controls.
Genotyping of p53 polymorphism was accomplished using PCR-based
restriction fragment polymorphism (PCR-RFLP). Associations between
clinicopathological parameters and p53 polymorphism were analyzed by
Fisher's exact test and chi-square when suitable. Survival analysis of
HNSCC patients, with each type of p53 genotype, was performed using
Kaplan-Meier test.Results: The frequencies for homozygote Arg allele were
38.1% in HNSCC cases and 31.1% in healthy controls. The Pro allele
carriers (Arg/Pro plus Pro/Pro) had a frequency of 61.9% in HNSCC cases
and 68.9% in healthy controls. The OR of HNSCC cancer-associated with the
Arg/Arg genotypes of codon 72 was 1.37 [95% CI: 0.63-2.82]. Kaplan-Meier
survival analysis showed that HNSCC patients with the Arg/Arg allele had
a poorer survival rate compared to patients with the Pro allele (Hazard
Ratio = 1.33, 95% CI: 0.87-2.03, P=0.041). Additionally, p53 genotype and
survival of HNSCC patients, classified by tumor site, was evaluated, and
showed that Arg/Arg allele had a poorer survival rate, specifically for
the larynx site (Hazard Ratio = 1.88, 95% CI: 0.98-3.60, P=0.035). In
contrast, no statistically significant association was found between p53
polymorphic variants and gender, age, risk factors and
staging.Conclusion: Our results suggest that homozygosity for Arg of p53
Arg72Pro may have a role in the progression of HNSCC in the Puerto Rican
population. Detection of the p53 polymorphic variants may be used as an
indicator of prognosis in HNSCC patients. Accurate prognosis in HNSCC
will help clinicians to establish proper treatment and increase the
survival of HNSCC patients.

