Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dual specificity phosphatase 4 gene expression in triple negative
breast cancer


BackgroundTriple negative breast cancer (TNBC) is an aggressive cancer
with limited treatment options. A recent report suggested that dual
specificity phosphatase 4 (DUSP4) may be a potential marker of
chemotherapy resistance for TNBC.MethodsWe measured the DUSP4 gene
expression levels in breast cancer tissue from 469 TNBC patients who
participated in the Shanghai Breast Cancer Survival Study and evaluated
their association with breast cancer recurrence/breast cancer mortality
and total mortality. Study participants were diagnosed with incident
breast cancer between March 2002 and April 2006 and aged between 20 and
75 years. Information on breast cancer diagnosis and treatment, as well
as demographic, lifestyle, and disease progression information, were
collected approximately 6 months after cancer diagnosis and reassessed at
18, 36, and 60 months after diagnosis in follow-up interviews. Expression
levels of transcript variant 1 (NM_001394) and transcript variant 2
(NM_057158) of DUSP4 gene were measured by the NanoString nCounter assay
using RNA obtained from formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue
sections. Cox regression analysis was applied in the data analyses with
adjustment for clinical and demographic factors.ResultsOf the 469 TNBC
participants in this study, 100 deaths and 92 recurrences/breast cancer
deaths were documented over a median follow-up of 5.3 years (range,
0.7-8.9 years). The expression of the two DUSP4 isoforms were highly
correlated (r=0.76). Low DUSP4, particularly variant 1 (NM_001394),
expression levels were associated with increased recurrence/breast cancer
mortality and overall mortality. After adjustment for age at diagnosis
and TNM stage, the hazard ratios comparing those with DUSP4 (variant 1)
expression levels below the median to those above the median were 1.97
(95% confidence interval (CI): 1.27, 3.05) for recurrence/breast cancer
mortality and 2.09 (95% CI: 1.38, 3.17) for overall mortality. Adjustment
for expression levels of MKI67 and TP53, common treatment types, breast
cancer subtype, or grade did not materially alter the observed
association.ConclusionLow DUSP4 expression levels predict recurrence and
mortality in TNBC patients independently from known clinical and
molecular predictors.

