Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A humanized bone model for preclinical monitoring of prostate
cancer lesions by intravital multiphoton microscopy


Bone metastases are the initial site of progression and account for many
of the complications experienced by men with metastatic prostate cancer
(PCa), including resistance to therapy. The purpose of our study is to
determine whether intravital multiphoton microscopy (iMPM) integrated
with a novel mouse model can better inform clinical development of
molecular therapeutics targeting bone metastases. iMPM can overcome
limitations of existing models by monitoring the dynamic reciprocal
cell-cell interplay at the center of PCa bone metastasis. To study
PCa-stromal cell interactions and therapy response in bone, we
established a humanized neo-bone in the mouse dermis, using grafted
electrospun polycaprolactone scaffolds functionalized with human
mesenchymal stem cells differentiated to osteoblasts. After in vivo
maturation, bone scaffolds served for co-implantation of human
fluorescent PCa cells (PC3) followed by multi-parameter iMPM through a
body window, including: collagen and bone matrix (second harmonic
generation), mineralized matrix (calcein blue), osteoblasts (H2B/mCherry
in human mesenchymal stem cells), adipocytes and bone surface (third
harmonic generation), blood vessels, stromal phagocytes and osteoclasts
(fluorescence-labeled dextran), and PC3 cells (nuclear H2B eGFP with
cytoplasmatic DsRed2). Using multi-parameter 3D reconstruction, tumor
growth and invasion, reactive remodeling of the stroma and neovessel
organization were monitored longitudinally, providing a baseline for
evaluating preclinical disease and therapy response. The model provides
new insight into PCa bone metastases and will be used to more efficiently
develop and prioritize biologically founded therapy for clinical
development.

