Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Induction of necroptosis in ovarian cancer cells as a therapeutic
strategy


The standard of care for ovarian cancer patients is carboplatin and
paclitaxel. While many tumors initially respond to these drugs, patients
often relapse with resistant disease. One of the mechanisms implicated in
this development of resistance is evasion of apoptosis. Exploiting
alternative death pathways, including necroptosis, is one strategy to
treat such recurrent disease. Overexpressed in many cancers, inhibitor of
apoptosis proteins (IAPs) represent one family of promising targets.
Treatment of cells with an IAP antagonist can activate apoptosis or, if
caspases are blocked, necroptosis. Among a panel of ovarian cancer cell
lines screened for sensitivity to an IAP antagonist in combination with a
pan-caspase inhibitor, only one (OVCAR3) was found to be sensitive, but
this sensitivity was also exhibited by serous ovarian cancer cells
isolated from patients. Combination treatment induces the formation of a
p62-associated necrosome (RIPK1/RIPK3/FADD/caspase-8), and death can be
rescued with inhibitors of RIPK1 and MLKL, two key proteins in the
necroptosis pathway. All sensitive cell lines, but no resistant lines,
express RIPK3 protein, and data from knockdown and ectopic expression
studies demonstrate the dependency of cell death on kinase-active RIPK3,
as well as caspase-8. Studies using a TNF neutralizing antibody suggest
that the combination elicits autocrine production of TNF, which likely,
in turn, activates the extrinsic death pathway in these cells. In
conclusion, these findings illustrate that necroptosis can be induced in
RIPK3-expressing ovarian cancer cells and indicate that in vivo studies
are warranted.

