Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Reactivation of growth/differentiation factor 1 contributes to the
chemopreventive effect of 5-aza-2deoxycytidine in gastric cancer


INTRODUCTION: Helicobacter pylori (HP) is a type 1 carcinogen for gastric
cancer (GC), the second most common cause of cancer-related death
worldwide. The limited benefit of HP eradication or nutritional
intervention in risk reduction and the dismal prognosis of GC underlie
the urgent need for new preventive strategies. We have recently shown
that Hp causes aberrant DNA methylation of tumor suppressor genes to
promote gastric carcinogenesis (Cheng et al. 2013). However, the
functional and mechanistic relationships between aberrant DNA methylation
and GC remain elusive.AIMS&METHODS: We investigated the effect of
5-aza-2-deoxycytidine (5Aza-dC), a FDA-approved demethylating agent in a
murine GC model induced by N-Nitroso-N-methylurea (MNU). Using
MethylCap-microarray, quantitative RT-PCR and Western blot, we identified
novel DNA methylation-controlled genes in paired GC tumors/adjacent
tissues (4), 5Aza-dC-treated (3) and -untreated (3) normal mucosa
samples, followed by pyrosequencing and gene expression validation in
human GC samples and cell lines. Gene functions were investigated by cell
cycle and colony formation assays.RESULTS: At 52 weeks-post MNU exposure,
GC was developed in 8 out of 19 mice. Administration of 5Aza-dC for 24
weeks significantly reduced GC incidence from 42.1 to 11.1% (2/18 mice;
pINTRODUCTION: Helicobacter pylori (HP) is a type 1 carcinogen for
gastric cancer (GC), the second most common cause of cancer-related death
worldwide. The limited benefit of HP eradication or nutritional
intervention in risk reduction and the dismal prognosis of GC underlie
the urgent need for new preventive strategies. We have recently shown
that Hp causes aberrant DNA methylation of tumor suppressor genes to
promote gastric carcinogenesis (Cheng et al. 2013). However, the
functional and mechanistic relationships between aberrant DNA methylation
and GC remain elusive.AIMS&METHODS: We investigated the effect of
5-aza-2-deoxycytidine (5Aza-dC), a FDA-approved demethylating agent in a
murine GC model induced by N-Nitroso-N-methylurea (MNU). Using
MethylCap-microarray, quantitative RT-PCR and Western blot, we identified
novel DNA methylation-controlled genes in paired GC tumors/adjacent
tissues (4), 5Aza-dC-treated (3) and -untreated (3) normal mucosa
samples, followed by pyrosequencing and gene expression validation in
human GC samples and cell lines. Gene functions were investigated by cell
cycle and colony formation assays.RESULTS: At 52 weeks-post MNU exposure,
GC was developed in 8 out of 19 mice. Administration of 5Aza-dC for 24
weeks significantly reduced GC incidence from 42.1 to 11.1% (2/18 mice;
p<0.05). Microarray analysis uncovered 12 significant and recurrent
hypermethylated genes exclusive in GCs. However, only
growth/differentiation factor 1 (Gdf1), a ligand for transforming growth
factor-beta (TGF-) signaling, had significantly lower mRNA expression in
tumors compared to both tumor-adjacent and normal tissues (p1.5-fold
increase compared to tumor-adjacent tissues) was observed in 58.3% (14
out of 24) cases, which was accompanied with significant GDF1
down-regulation in both mRNA (p1.5-fold increase compared to
tumor-adjacent tissues) was observed in 58.3% (14 out of 24) cases, which
was accompanied with significant GDF1 down-regulation in both mRNA
(p<0.005) and protein levels. Compared with normal mucosa, 7/8 GC cell
lines exhibited GDF1 silencing, which could be reactivated by genome
demethylation. Ectopic GDF1 expression increased SMAD2/3 phosphorylation
and significantly suppressed GC cell proliferation at least partially
through G1 phase cell cycle arrest.CONCLUSIONS: Epigenetic silencing of
GDF1 may abrogate the growth-inhibitory effects of TGF- signaling and
render selective growth advantage to gastric epithelial cells during
carcinogenesis. Our findings demonstrate a causal relationship between
DNA methylation and GC development and lend support to demethylating
drugs for GC chemoprevention trial. This study was supported by RFCID
(08070172) and CUHK Direct Grant.REFERENCE: Cheng AS, et al. Helicobacter
pylori causes epigenetic dysregulation of FOXD3 to promote gastric
carcinogenesis. Gastroenterology 2013;144:122-33.e9.

