Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The chemomodulatory effects of resveratrol and didox on herceptin
cytotoxicity in breast cancer cell lines


Herceptin is considered an essential treatment option for double negative
breast cancer. Resveratrol and didox are known chemopreventive agents
with potential anticancer properties. The aim of the current study is to
investigate the influence of resveratrol and didox on the cytotoxicity
profile of herceptin in her-2 receptor positive and her-2 receptor
negative breast cancer cell lines. The IC50's of herceptin in T47D and
MCF-7 were 0.1260.01 ng/ml and 26.711.85 ng/ml respectively. Equitoxic
combination of herceptin with resveratrol or didox in T47D significantly
reduced the IC50 to 0.050.01 and 0.0290.006 ng/ml, respectively and
similar results were obtained in MCF-7. The gene expression of Bcl-xl was
markedly decreased in T47D cells following treatment with
herceptin/resveratrol compared to herceptin alone. Immunocytochemical
staining of her-2 receptor in T47D cells showed a significant reduction
after treatment with herceptin/resveratrol combination compared to
herceptin alone. On the other hand, combination of herceptin and didox
had no significant effect on her-2 receptor expression. Cell cycle
analysis showed an arrest at G2/M phase for both cell lines following
treatment with herceptin alone and in either combinations regimen. In
conclusion the combination of herceptin with resveratrol and didox
improved the cytotoxic profile of herceptin in T47D (her-2 receptor
positive cell line) and to a lesser extent in MCF-7 (her-2 receptor
negative cell line).

