Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Angiomotin plays a tumor suppressor role by sequestering oncogenic
YAP/TAZ proteins and decreasing amphiregulin secretion in lung cancer


Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer death worldwide, with
metastasis underlying the majority of lung cancer-related deaths.
Angiomotin (AMOT), a scaffold protein, has been shown to interact with
oncogenic YAP/TAZ proteins, suggesting its potential role in tumor
suppression. However, the functional role of AMOT in lung cancer remains
unknown. We observed that the expression of AMOT was significantly
decreased in clinical lung cancer specimens. Knockdown of AMOT in a low
metastatic CL1-0 lung cancer cell line initiated cancer proliferation,
migration, invasion and epithelial-mesenchymal transition. The trigger of
cancer progression caused by AMOT loss was transduced by decreasing
cytoplasmic sequestration and increasing nuclear translocation of
oncogenic co-activators YAP/TAZ, resulting in an increased expression of
the growth factor amphiregulin. The tumor promotion by AMOT knockdown was
reversed when YAP/TAZ were absent or anti-amphiregulin antibodies were
present. Further, AMOT knockdown increased the spread of Lewis lung
carcinoma in vivo. Our findings suggest that AMOT is a crucial suppressor
of lung cancer metastasis. These observations highlight the critical role
of AMOT as a tumor suppressor, and the potential of AMOT as a prognostic
biomarker and potential therapy target for lung cancer.Note: This
abstract was not presented at the meeting.

