Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of microRNAs involved in shaping immune
surveillance and growth properties of tumors


Ligands of the natural killer (NK) cells and CD8+ cytotoxic T lymphocyte
(CTL) receptors, such as the inhibitory classical HLA-G antigen, are
often deregulated upon viral infection and neoplastic transformation
thereby allowing virus-infected or malignant-transformed cells to escape
NK and T cell-mediated immune surveillance. The underlying molecular
mechanisms controlling the aberrant HLA-G expression have been recently
identified suggesting that cellular microRNAs (miRs) target the 3UTR of
HLA-G mRNA thereby shaping the anti-tumoral immune response. Functional
analysis of these miRs demonstrated an inverse correlation of HLA-G and
miR expression, which was directly associated with tumor grading,
staging, disease progression and survival of renal cell carcinoma
patients. Furthermore, these miRs enable tumors to evade NK and T cell
cytotoxicity. Using 2DE-based proteome analysis in combination with
MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry of HLA-G-specific miR transfectants and
control cells lead to the identification of novel targets of these miRs
including the 14-3-3- protein (YWHAB). The miR-regulated YWHAB expression
not only alters tumor cell proliferation, but also the sensitivity to
apoptosis. Loss of HLA-G-specific miRs enhanced YWHAB expression, which
is accompanied by an inhibition of pro-apoptotic gene expression leading
to apoptosis resistance, enhanced proliferation, migration and tumor
progression. Furthermore, YWHAB expression and lack of HLA-G-specific miR
expression directly correlate with a worse clinical outcome of HLA-G+
tumors linking for the first time tumor immune escape mechanisms with the
malignant phenotype. Thus, the HLA-G-regulating miRs not only affect
immune surveillance, but also enhance tumorigenicity.

