Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metastasis prevention using fibroblast activation
protein-targeting prodrugs at the pre-metastatic niche


Metastasis is the major cause of cancer death, and therapies that
effectively target this process are required in order to improve patient
survival. Previous work by Kaplan et al demonstrated that activated
resident stromal cells and recruited bone marrow derived cells (BMDCs)
form an altered microenvironment at distant sites in response to the
primary tumor, termed the pre-metastatic niche, that promotes metastatic
progression. Current on-going studies in the laboratory focus on in-depth
investigations of the role, composition and mechanism of action by which
each cell population including the bone marrow-derived hematopoietic
cells and the activated stromal cells within the pre-metastatic niche
contribute to metastatic progression. Fibroblast activation protein (FAP)
is a serine protease that is overexpressed by tumor associated stromal
cells, including cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) and is implicated
in the suppression of tumor immunity. Using a mouse model that expresses
FAP promoter-driven mCherry and luciferase, we demonstrate that FAP gene
expression is up-regulated in both tumor-bearing mice in pre-metastatic
tissue at pre-metastatic time-points and in non-tumor-bearing mice
injected with tumor-conditioned media, suggesting that metastatic tumors
secrete factors that increases the number of FAP-expressing cells at the
pre-metastatic niche. The studies described herein investigate the
hypothesis that FAP-expressing cells at the pre-metastatic niche promote
metastasis, and FAP-targeted cytotoxic drug delivery will aid in
targeting tumor colonization and inhibiting metastatic progression.

