Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The parathyroid hormone-related peptide region likely features
seven discrete breast cancer susceptibility loci


Parathyroid hormone-related protein (PTHrP), the product of the PTHLH
gene, has long been implicated in the mechanism by which breast cancers
establish and grow as metastases in bone. Paradoxically, a prospective
clinical study clinical suggests that its production early in breast
cancer in a cancer is actually protective. Multiple recent Genome-Wide
Association Studies (GWAS) have confirmed a single susceptibility locus
immediately upstream of the PTHLH gene to be associated with breast
cancer. In this study we compare the findings of two GWAS, the ABCFS and
the MCCS, along with a large imputed meta-analysis combining the ABCFS,
BBCS, DFBBCS, MARIE, SASBAC, HEBCS, GC-HBOC, UK2, BPC3, BCFR and SardiNIA
data. To better discern the signals of association with common variant
Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms (SNPs) in the PTHLH gene region, we
compare results from a conventional marginal analysis performed by plink
with those from DepTH, a novel bootstrap permutation-based method that
considers multiple contiguous SNPs. These are plotted on the genome and
analysed in conjunction with hapmap, encode expression and regulation,
genome-wide epistasis, eQTLs, and genetic data. Whereas the classic
approach identifies only one SNP (top hit), our analysis suggests there
are at least 7 discrete regions in and around PTHLH in which there are
susceptibility variants, rare or common, with potentially independent
functions on disease risk. In addition, exhaustive genome-wide epistasis
demonstrates statistical interactions between PTHLH and multiple other
gene regions including calcitonin and the vitamin D receptor in breast
cancer.

