Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of CD45-/CD31+/CD105+ circulating cells in the
peripheral blood of patients with gynecological malignancies


Purpose: Circulating endothelial cells (CECs) have been widely used as a
prognostic biomarker and regarded as a promising strategy for monitoring
the response to treatment in several cancers. However, the presence and
biological roles of CECs have remained controversial for decades because
technical standards for the identification and quantification of CECs
have not been established. Here, we hypothesized that CECs detected by
flow cytometry might be monocytes rather than endothelial
cells.Experimental Design: The frequency of representative CEC subsets
(i.e., CD45-/CD31+, CD45-/CD31+/CD146+, CD45-/CD31+/CD105+) was analyzed
in the peripheral blood of gynecological cancer patients (n=56) and
healthy volunteers (n=44). CD45-/CD31+ cells, which are components of
CECs, were isolated and the expression of various markers (CD146, CD105,
vWF, and CD144 for endothelial cells; CD68 and CD14 for monocytes) was
examined by immunocytochemistry.Results: CD45-/CD31+/CD105+ cells were
significantly increased in the peripheral blood of cancer patients
whereas evaluation of CD45/CD31+/CD146+ cells was not possible both in
cancer patients and healthy controls due to the limited resolution of the
flow cytometry. Immunocytochemistry analyses showed that these
CD45-/CD31+/CD105+ cells did not express vWF and CD146 but rather CD144.
Furthermore, CD45-/CD31+/CD105+ cells uniformly expressed the
monocyte-specific markers CD14 and CD68. These results suggest that
D45/CD31+/CD105+ cells carry the characteristics of monocytes rather than
endothelial cells.Conclusions: Our data indicate that CD45-/CD31+/CD105+
circulating cells, which are significantly increased in the peripheral
blood of gynecological cancer patients, are monocytes rather than
endothelial cells. Further investigation is required to determine the
biological significance of their presence and function in relation with
angiogenesis.

