Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: p53-induced miR-15a/16-1 and AP4 form a double-negative feedback
loop to regulate epithelial-mesenchymal transition and metastasis in
colorectal cancer


The transcription factor AP4 mediates epithelial-mesenchymal transition
(EMT) in colorectal cancer (CRC) but its control in this setting is not
fully understood. Here we report the definition of a double-negative
feedback loop involving AP4 and miR-15a/16-1 that regulates EMT and
metastatic progression. In CRC cells, AP4 was downregulated by DNA damage
in a p53-dependent manner. AP4 downregulation by p53 was mediated
indirectly by the tumor suppressive microRNAs miR-15a and miR-16-1, which
targeted the 3-UTR of AP4 mRNA, induced mesenchymal-epithelial transition
(MET) and inhibited CRC cell migration and invasion. The downregulation
of AP4 was necessary for MET induction by miR-15a/16-1. In tumor
xenoplants, ectopic miR-15a/16-1 suppressed formation of lung metastases.
Furthermore, AP4 directly suppressed expression of miR-15a/16-1. In
clinical specimens of colorectal cancer, miR-15a levels inversely
correlated with AP4 protein levels shown previously to correlate with
distant metastasis and poor survival. In summary, our results define a
double-negative feedback loop involving miR-15a/16-1 and AP4 that
stabilizes epithelial and mesenchymal states, respectively, that may
determine metastatic prowess.

