Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Automated microRNA detection in formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded
tissue samples


The human genome encodes more than one thousand short (17-24 base)
non-coding microRNA molecules which regulate diverse cellular functions.
Several of these functions are also involved in tumorigenesis including
cell growth, motility, and immune surveillance. Not surprisingly,
numerous clinical studies suggest that microRNAs could serve as potent
prognostic and/or predictive biomarkers for a variety of diseases
including breast, colorectal, lung, and prostate cancers. However, due to
their short sequence length, technical obstacles exist for detection of
these potential biomarker targets particularly in FFPE tissue samples:
(i) limited target sequence limits probe length and subsequent target
specificity as well as (ii) detection sensitivity since short probes
require significant amplification technologies to generate a visible
signal; lastly, (iii) short microRNA targets may be less stable in tissue
(increased ribonuclease sensitivity and/or limited crosslinking to
cellular components). In the current study, new RNA detection
technologies, which include hapten-labeled oligonucleotide probes and
sensitive tyramide-hapten/Silver detection designed for detection of
longer RNA targets, were adopted for automated detection of microRNA
targets in formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissue.DNP-labeled
oligonucleotide probes, directed against four microRNA targets (miR-21,
miR-200c, miR-25, and miR-200b) plus sequence-scrambled negative control
were synthesized and combined with a modified VENTANA OptiView
amplification kit and silver detection. The probes and new detection
system catalyzed sensitive and specific detection of each microRNA target
in MCF-7 xenograft FFPE tissues, which correlates well with microarray
profiling data from MCF-7 cells by Fix et. al. (2010)*.In summary, this
study demonstrates a robust and fully automated ISH assay for microRNA
targets in FFPE tissue and enables potential microRNA biomarkers being
analyzed within tissue context.* Fix et. al. Cancer Genomics & Proteomics
(2010) 7:261-278.

