Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of the frequency of RNASE L in 462 and 541 variants in
Iranian prostate cancer patients


Introduction: Several genetic loci are suspected to be involved in
prostate cancer, including the hereditary prostate cancer. RNASEL
regulates cell proliferation and apoptosis through the IFN-regulated 2-5A
pathway that mediates anti proliferative activities and has been
suggested to be a candidate tumor suppressor gene. There are numerous
nucleotide variants identified in the RNASEL gene. The two most commonly
found variants in the U.S. non-Hispanic Caucasian population are the
non-synonymous variants: 1385 G>A; Arg462Gln; and 1623T>G; Asp 541 Glu
has been reported. The Arg 462 Gln variant reduces the ability of the
cell to cause apoptosis in response to activation by 2-5 (A) and also has
three times less enzymatic activity than normal, whereas the Asp 541 Glu
variant has no known effect on RNASEL protein function. There continues
to be much debate over whether these common variants increase the risk of
prostate cancer. It has been also reported that the Arg 462 Gln AA
genotype associated with both increased prostate cancer in U.S. Caucasian
sample groups and decreased prostate cancer risk in Caucasian and
Japanese sample groups Moreover, the Asp 541 Glu variant within RNASEL
has been reported that the GG and TT genotypes were associated with an
increased risk for prostate cancer in Japanese and European-American
samples, respectively. On the other hand, a significant negative
association of the TT genotype with prostate cancer in Swedish Caucasian
samples has been reported .However; the role of these common mutations is
debatable. The aim of this study was to investigate the role of common
variants of RNASE L gene; Arg 462 Gln and Asp 541 Glu in Iranian men with
prostate cancer. Patients and Methods:Blocks of paraffin-embedded tissue
from 46 patients with adenoma carcinoma prostate cancer and 50 patients
with hyperplasia prostate tissue and also fifty healthy blood controls
with PSAIntroduction: Several genetic loci are suspected to be involved
in prostate cancer, including the hereditary prostate cancer. RNASEL
regulates cell proliferation and apoptosis through the IFN-regulated 2-5A
pathway that mediates anti proliferative activities and has been
suggested to be a candidate tumor suppressor gene. There are numerous
nucleotide variants identified in the RNASEL gene. The two most commonly
found variants in the U.S. non-Hispanic Caucasian population are the
non-synonymous variants: 1385 G>A; Arg462Gln; and 1623T>G; Asp 541 Glu
has been reported. The Arg 462 Gln variant reduces the ability of the
cell to cause apoptosis in response to activation by 2-5 (A) and also has
three times less enzymatic activity than normal, whereas the Asp 541 Glu
variant has no known effect on RNASEL protein function. There continues
to be much debate over whether these common variants increase the risk of
prostate cancer. It has been also reported that the Arg 462 Gln AA
genotype associated with both increased prostate cancer in U.S. Caucasian
sample groups and decreased prostate cancer risk in Caucasian and
Japanese sample groups Moreover, the Asp 541 Glu variant within RNASEL
has been reported that the GG and TT genotypes were associated with an
increased risk for prostate cancer in Japanese and European-American
samples, respectively. On the other hand, a significant negative
association of the TT genotype with prostate cancer in Swedish Caucasian
samples has been reported .However; the role of these common mutations is
debatable. The aim of this study was to investigate the role of common
variants of RNASE L gene; Arg 462 Gln and Asp 541 Glu in Iranian men with
prostate cancer. Patients and Methods:Blocks of paraffin-embedded tissue
from 46 patients with adenoma carcinoma prostate cancer and 50 patients
with hyperplasia prostate tissue and also fifty healthy blood controls
with PSA<4 was enrolled in this current research study. ARMS-PCR
amplification was performed with specific primers. Results and
Conclusions: This is the first study that investigates the association of
prostate cancer risk with RNASEL variants in Iranian prostate cancer
patients. Our result indicated that the frequency of the AA, GG and AG
genotypes in the RNASEL 462 SNP in Tumors were 30%, 13.3% and 56.66%
respectively, in hyperplasia was 30.3% ,15.15% and 54.54% respectively
and in controls was 26%, 14% and 60% respectively .The frequency of the
TT, GG and TG genotypes in the RNASEL 541 SNP in Tumors were 3%, 0 % and
93.47% respectively, in hyperplasia were 10 %,0% and 90% and in blood
controls were 8%, 0% and 92% respectively. Our finding indicated that
these variations were not a significant association with prostate cancer
risk in Iranian patients and the other variations of this gene maybe
involve in Iranian prostate cancer patients.Note: This abstract was not
presented at the meeting.

