Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Repurposing antipsychotic drug Penfluridol for cancer treatment


Repurposing of old drugs as new anti-cancer drugs is important as it can
save time and cost of drug development. Penfluridol is a first
generation, highly potent antipsychotic drug. In this study, we
determined the anticancer effects of Penfluridol in pancreatic cancer
cells. Penfluridol treatment inhibited the growth of Panc-1, BxPC-3 and
AsPC-1 pancreatic cancer cells in a concentration-dependent manner.
Panc-1 , BxPC-3 and AsPC-1 cells treated with Penfluridol exhibited
apoptosis as evaluated by Annexin/FITC assay and cleavage of caspase-3
and PARP. Our results showed that Penfluridol treatment induced ER stress
in pancreatic cancer cells through the up regulation of ER stress markers
like Bip/Grp78, CHOP and IRE. Penfluridol treatment also induced
autophagy in pancreatic cancer cells as observed by acridine orange
assay. Western blot analysis of Panc-1, BxPC-3 and AsPC-1 cells treated
with Penfluridol exhibited up regulation of autophagy markers like LC3B,
and p62. Microscopic analysis revealed punctate LC3B after Penfluridol
treatment in pancreatic cancer cells confirming autophagy. Further
mechanistic studies are in progress to establish the role of ER stress
and autophagy in pancreatic cancer cells and correlate it with cell
growth suppression. [Supported in part by R01 grant CA129038 awarded by
NIH.]

