Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel designed small peptide enhances chemotherapy sensitivity
of leukemia cells in stromal microenvironment


Many types of leukemia cells highly express chemokine receptor (CXCR4)
that actively responses to CXCL12, a chemokine constitutively secreted by
stromal cells in bone marrow. Activation of CXCR4 induces leukemia cells
trafficking and homing to the marrow microenvironment, where CXCL12
retains these cells in close contact with marrow stromal cells that
provide growth, self-renewal, and drug resistance signals, which lead to
poor prognosis and relapse. We report here a novel designed peptide
targeting to CXCR4, named as XW1108-3. The patented sequence is
GGQGCRFRNTVDD WISITRAL. We use flow cytometry, cell migration and
adhesion assay to study the affinity of XW1108-3 to leukemia cells and
the inhibitory effect on CXCL12-induced cell behaviors. The XW1108-3
shows high affinity to different types of leukemia cell highly expressing
CXCR4 including HL-60, NB4, THP-1 and U937, the binding was maintained
for up to 4 hours. The XW1108-3 treatment significantly inhibited CXCL12-
or murine stromal cell MS-5-induced migration of leukemia cells in a
concentration dependent manner in the transwell assay and significantly
reduced the leukemia cells adhesion to MS-5 cell layer. Mechanistic study
with western blot and confocal microscopy assay demonstrates thatXW1108-3
treatment down regulates CXCL12-induced phosphorylation of Erk, Akt and
p38 and affects F-actin organization, resulting in the suppression of the
cell response to CXCL12 activation. It is notable that XW1108-3 treatment
did not induce apoptosis of leukemia cells or human fibroblasts and
endothelial cells even at 10 M, instead enhanced the level of 10-hydroxy
camptothecin-induced apoptosis of different leukemia cells co-incubated
with the stromal cell MS-5 layer, thereby exhibiting great clinical
implications in leukemia chemotherapies and immune therapies.

