Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An RNA aptamer-based approach for human glioma treatment


Gliomas are the most common primary central nervous system tumors with a
dismal prognosis. Despite recent advances in surgery, radiotherapy, and
chemotherapy, current treatment regimens have a modest survival
benefit.Due to a combination of its complex phenotype and organ-specific
clinical manifestations, efforts to refine glioma treatment with targeted
therapies have largely been frustrated. Hence, finding specific ligands
capable of detecting and measuring the altered pattern of gene expression
and to discriminate between different tumor phenotypes, is a strategic
and plausible objective for the diagnosis and therapy of glioma. To date,
antibody-based approaches have been developed for in vivo applications
but, in most cases, they show toxicity in vivo and do not reach adequate
sensitivity. Thanks to their unique characteristics (low size, good
affinity for the target, no immunogenicity, chemical structures that can
be easily modified to improve their in vivo applications),
single-stranded nucleic acid ligand molecules, named aptamers, represent
a valid alternative to antibodies for in vivo targeted recognition as
therapeutics or delivery agents for nanoparticles, small interfering
RNAs, chemotherapeutic cargos and molecular imaging probes.By applying
cell-SELEX on cancer cells we have generated and characterized different
nuclease resistant 2fluoro-pyrimidines RNA aptamers as high affinity
ligands and inhibitors of human receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) with a
crucial role in glioma, including EGFR, EGFRVIII, EphB3, Axl and PDGFR.
All the aptamers are able to efficiently and specifically inhibit tumor
growth in cell based assays and in animal models of human glioma.
Further, some of these aptamers strongly cooperates in inducing
inhibition of tumor growth thus providing the basis for further
development of antitumor combination therapies.

