Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Survival in familial breast cancer: Novel findings based on a
nationwide prospective cohort study


Objective: To find out whether breast cancer (BC) patients with positive
family history of concordant cancer are diagnosed at earlier TNM stages
and to explore the survival in familial breast cancer compared to
sporadic cases who were diagnosed at identical TNM status and
staging.Design: Nationwide prospective cohort study.Setting and method:
The nationwide Swedish Family-Cancer Database including all Swedes born
after 1931 and their biological parents, totaling >14.7 million
individuals. Hazard ratios (HR) were calculated for 4,709 women with BC
in a first-degree relative (FDR) versus 25,366 BC women without such a
family history.Results: Familial BC cases were not diagnosed at earlier
stages compared to sporadic cases. There was no difference in survival of
familial BC patients who were diagnosed at high TNM staging (T2-T4,
N1-N3, M1) compared to sporadic cases diagnosed at the same late stage.
Young BC patients (ageObjective: To find out whether breast cancer (BC)
patients with positive family history of concordant cancer are diagnosed
at earlier TNM stages and to explore the survival in familial breast
cancer compared to sporadic cases who were diagnosed at identical TNM
status and staging.Design: Nationwide prospective cohort study.Setting
and method: The nationwide Swedish Family-Cancer Database including all
Swedes born after 1931 and their biological parents, totaling >14.7
million individuals. Hazard ratios (HR) were calculated for 4,709 women
with BC in a first-degree relative (FDR) versus 25,366 BC women without
such a family history.Results: Familial BC cases were not diagnosed at
earlier stages compared to sporadic cases. There was no difference in
survival of familial BC patients who were diagnosed at high TNM staging
(T2-T4, N1-N3, M1) compared to sporadic cases diagnosed at the same late
stage. Young BC patients (age<40) in early stages (T0-T1, N0, M0, Stage
0-I) had the worst survival when their FDR were diagnosed with single
(HR: 2-3.7) or multiple (HR: 2.4-7.1) BC at any age.Conclusion: Young BC
patients (ageObjective: To find out whether breast cancer (BC) patients
with positive family history of concordant cancer are diagnosed at
earlier TNM stages and to explore the survival in familial breast cancer
compared to sporadic cases who were diagnosed at identical TNM status and
staging.Design: Nationwide prospective cohort study.Setting and method:
The nationwide Swedish Family-Cancer Database including all Swedes born
after 1931 and their biological parents, totaling >14.7 million
individuals. Hazard ratios (HR) were calculated for 4,709 women with BC
in a first-degree relative (FDR) versus 25,366 BC women without such a
family history.Results: Familial BC cases were not diagnosed at earlier
stages compared to sporadic cases. There was no difference in survival of
familial BC patients who were diagnosed at high TNM staging (T2-T4,
N1-N3, M1) compared to sporadic cases diagnosed at the same late stage.
Young BC patients (age<40) in early stages (T0-T1, N0, M0, Stage 0-I) had
the worst survival when their FDR were diagnosed with single (HR: 2-3.7)
or multiple (HR: 2.4-7.1) BC at any age.Conclusion: Young BC patients
(age<40), diagnosed at early stages (T0-T1, N0, M0, stage 0-I), whose FDR
were diagnosed with BC at any age had the higher risk of mortality
compared to sporadic cases at the same stages. Our results offer novel
information for personalized genetic counseling and treatment modalities
and urge the need for identifying the underling genetic component for
such a difference in survival of familial breast cancer.

