Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of focal adhesion kinase (FAK), PI3K/AKT and p53/mouse
double minute 2 homologue (MDM2) complex in the pathobiology of
Merlin-deficient tumors


Deficiency of the tumor suppressor merlin leads to the development of
schwannomas, meningiomas and ependymomas occurring spontaneously or as a
part of a hereditary disease Neurofibromatosis type 2 (NF2). Another
tumor suppressor/transcription factor p53 regulates proliferation,
survival and differentiation. P53 deficiency/inactivation correlates with
tumor development and can be negatively regulated by FAK, PI3K/AKT and
MDM2 and possibly positively by merlin and JNK in different models. The
function of p53 in merlin deficient tumors is not known. Using our in
vitro model of primary human schwannoma cells we demonstrated that FAK is
overexpressed/activated and localises to the nucleus in schwannoma cells
leading to increased proliferation. AKT is strongly activated via PDGF-
and IGF-I- receptors increasing survival. Here we investigated p53
regulation and its role in proliferation and survival of human primary
schwannoma cells. p53 is downregulated and MDM2 upregulated in human
schwannoma cells leading to increased proliferation and survival. p53 is
regulated by merlin involving JNK FAK, AKT and MDM2. Thus merlin
potentiates p53 activity and when using Nutlin-3 this increases p53
stability and total levels of p53 in schwannoma cells decreasing
proliferation and survival. These findings are important to dissect
mechanisms responsible for development of merlin-deficient tumors and
identification of therapeutic targets.

