Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development and preclinical characterization of an Fc-optimized
CD133 antibody for improved induction of NK cell reactivity against
myeloid leukemia


NK cells are cytotoxic lymphocytes that play a major role in anti-tumor
immunity and largely contribute to the efficacy of allogenic stem cell
transplantation (SCT) in leukemia. Another clinically important feature
of NK cells is their ability to mediate antibody-dependent cellular
cytotoxicity (ADCC) upon application of anti-tumor antibodies (mAb) such
as Rituximab. Modifications of the human IgG1 Fc-part of anti-tumor
antibodies may lead to markedly improved capability to recruit
Fc-receptor bearing effector cells. Here we report on the development and
preclinical characterization of an Fc-optimized mAb directed towards
CD133, a molecule expressed on a wide variety of malignant cell types.
Initially we evaluated binding of three different mouse anti-human CD133
mAbs (clones AC133, W6B3 and 293C3) to 20 AML and 6 CML samples to
identify a clone with optimal binding characteristics. Binding of AC133
and W6B3 to the leukemic cells in 11/20 AML and 5/6 CML samples was
comparable. In contrast, binding of 293C3 was observed in 18/20 AML cases
and 5/6 CML cases. This indicates that 293C3 recognizes a particular
epitope, which is expressed in a high proportion of AML cases. Therefore
mAb 293C3 was selected for generation of chimeric mAbs with either a
wildtype Fc part (293C3-WT) or a variant containing distinct
modifications (S239D/I332E) to enhance its affinity to the Fc receptor
CD16 (293C3-SDIE). The binding specificity of 293C3-WT and 293C3-SDIE was
validated in analyses with CD133 transfectants and the respective mock
controls. In cytotoxicity assays and analyses of NK cell degranulation,
293C3-WT clearly induced NK cell ADCC against primary leukemia cells.
However, ADCC activity of the Fc-optimized mAb 293C3-SDIE markedly
exceeded that of its counterpart containing the wild type Fc part.
Considering the expression of CD133 on healthy hematopoietic progenitor
cells, we presently evaluate potential toxicity of the antibodies towards
these cells and other healthy tissue. We envisage that 293C3-SDIE might
be an attractive immunotherapeutic reagent for the elimination of minimal
residual disease in CD133 expressing leukemia, particularly in the
context of allogenic SCT.

