Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Trojan horsing the blood-brain barrier with nanocarriers aided by
adenosine receptor agonists


Drug delivery to the central nervous system (CNS) is not easy compared to
other body systems due to the presence of the blood brain barrier (BBB).
It is essential that any delivery system to the CNS needs to be efficient
and non-toxic. These features are fulfilled through tailored
nanomicelles, non cross-linked and disulfide cross-linked micelles (NCM
and DCM, respectively) and Polyvinyl alcohol-based polymeric
nanoparticles. It has recently been reported that adenosine receptor
agonists can modulate the permeability of the BBB. For example
5-(N-Ethylcarboxamido)Adenosine (NECA) helps increase penetrability of
the BBB membrane to macromolecules. We were able to demonstrate that
similar strategy can be applied in mouse model for facilitating the
penetration of NCM, DCM, and PVA-nanoparticles through the BBB. In the
murine model we found that NECA stimulated the uptake of these
nanoparticles to organs expressing adenosine receptors, especially the
brain. DCM and NCM uptake was not seen in the brain without prior
administration of NECA. NECA has been previously shown to alter tight
junction adhesion molecules (Occludin) expressed on brain endothelial
cells. NECA at 5.3 mg/kg best facilitated the penetration of both DCM and
NCM at an optimal loading dosage of 33 mg/kg. NECA opened the BBB and
facilitated the penetration of nanoparticles through the BBB at a
constant rate. This allows potential for future drug-loading studies on a
diverse scale for chemotherapeutics, kinase inhibitors, and other drug
classes.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

