Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oncolytic adenovirus coated with stimuli responsive block
copolymer mPEG-b-poly(His) induces tumor microenvironment-specific
antitumor efficacy


Adenovirus (Ad) has shown great promise in cancer gene therapy. Ad coated
with cationic polymers have already been shown to enhance transduction,
but it showed nonspecific binding with cells, resulted in evoked side
effect. To overcome these hurdles, in this study adenovirus coated with
pH sensitive poly(His) polymer through ionic interaction for passive
tumor targeting. We have characterized the effect of polymer
concentration on particle size distribution, zeta potential, transduction
efficiency, and structural properties. Remarkable enhanced transduction
efficiency was observed in cells treated with Ad/poly(His) nanocomplex
compared to naked Ad at low pH. In addition, cellular trafficking using
time lapse total internal reflection fluorescence showed that the
Ad/poly(His) nanocomplex was significantly enhanced cellular uptake at
lower pH, in contrast to neutral pH. The biodistribution study confirmed
that the Ad/poly(His) nanocomplex can effectively accumulate at the tumor
site by the EPR effect and exhibited 3.3-fold higher luciferase
expressions in tumor than the naked Ad. Additionally, MTT assay and
cancer cell xenografts studies showed that polymer coated nanocomplex
exhibited high cancer cell killing effect and also inhibited the tumor
growth. Furthermore, poly(His)-coated Ad complex was not significantly
inhibited by serum, in contrast to naked Ad. Moreover, Ad/poly(His)
nanocomplex significantly reduced the innate immune response in contrast
to naked Ad, as assessed by interleukin-6 cytokine release from
macrophage cells in vivo. These results suggest that the
stimuli-responsive Ad/poly(His) nanocomplex has potential to targeting
tumors.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

