Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Modulation of estrogen receptor (ER) and androgen receptor (AR) by
a modified CRISPR-Cas9 system


Clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeat
(CRISPR)-CRISPR-associated (Cas) system is a bacterial adaptive immune
defense against foreign nucleic acids from viruses, plasmids, and other
mobile genetic elements. There are three types of CRISPR systems; type II
uses single effector enzyme, Cas9, to cleave double-stranded DNA (dsDNA).
Because of this unique feature, CRISPR/Cas9 system has been widely used
as a genetic engineering tool from bacteria to mammals. In this system,
Cas9 nuclease can bind and cleave genome directed by sequence-specific
guide RNA (gRNA). While the wild type Cas9 can cleave double stranded
DNA, the mutant Cas9 at D10A and H804A can only bind to but cannot cleave
the DNA. Given this unique feature, we tried to repurpose Cas9 as a gene
activation or suppression tool. To achieve this, we generated DMCas9
(double-mutant Cas9), and fused it with VP16AD (VP16 activation domain)
or VP64AD (VP64 activation domain) to explore its utility for gene
activation. To generate a Cas9-based gene silencing tool, we fused DMCas9
with Krab, a well-known protein domain with suppression function. Using a
reporter system carrying a specific sequence that was recognized by a
given gRNA and mCherry as a readout, we demonstrated that co-expression
of VP16AD-DMCas9 and specific gRNAs leads to a at least three-fold
induction of mCherry signal; in contrast, DMhCas9-Krab along with the
specific gRNA resulted in a significant suppression of mCherry activity.
Furthermore, we showed that DMCas9-Krab combined with gRNAs suppressed
endogenous expression of AR and ER in MCF-7 cells, causing cell growth
inhibition. Together, these results demonstrate the feasibility of
Cas9-based gene activation and gene suppression.

