Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Menstrual blood TAP1 I333V and D637G gene polymorphisms are
associated with less risk to develop high-grade cervical intraepithelial
neoplasia


Objectives:Recent evidence has shown that single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) in transporter associated with antigen processing 1 (TAP1) gene
includes TAP1 I333V and TAP1 D637G are significantly associated with a
protective effect for development of cervical cancer and its
pre-malignant states. Hence, TAP1 polymorphisms may potentially be useful
to identify women who have less chance to develop high-grade cervical
intraepithelial neoplasia (HGCIN) and cervical cancer. Our latest
breakthrough in detecting HPV genotypes in the menstrual blood (MB) from
patients with CIN and condyloma acuminatum has generated a new era in
non-invasive screening for HPV genotypes. Therefore, in this study, we
further develop a non-invasive method to predict HGCIN risk in patients
with CIN or HPV infection using MB collected in napkin by detecting TAP1
SNP. The information obtained would be important as cervical cancer and
CIN are still serious public health problems worldwide especially in
developing countries.Materials and Methods:Thirty-eight patients with
HGCIN (CIN 2 or 3) and 42 patients with LGCIN (CIN 1) or HPV infection
were recruited. MB collected in napkin was put inside ziplock plastic bag
which was sent to the laboratory by mail or by hand. Small piece of the
napkin was cut out (1 cm x 1 cm x 1 mm) using sterile scissor for DNA
extraction. Two SNPs in TAP1 gene (I333V and D637G) were genotyped using
polymerase chain reaction - restriction fragment length polymorphism
(PCR-RFLP) technique. The amplified TAP1 gene fragments for I333V and
D637G SNP detection were digested by BclI and AccI restriction enzymes,
respectively and 3 different genotypes which interpreted as AA (wild
type), AG (1 allele showed SNP), and GG (2 alleles showed SNP) were
detected at each polymorphic site. Reactions were performed in duplicates
and each result was confirmed by DNA sequencing.Results:Both TAP1
polymorphisms in the MB were successfully detected. Their patterns were
summarized as a) 3 genotypes at each polymorphic site were detected in
our patient cohort (Figure 1, Table 1A); b) the risk to develop HGCIN was
significantly reduced for AG and GG genotypes when compared to AA
genotype (TAP1 I333V: chi-square test, p = 0.003, odds ratio (OR) = 0.23,
95% confidence interval (CI) = 0.08 to 0.63; TAP1 D637G: chi-square test,
p = 0.01, OR = 0.30, 95% CI = 0.12 to 0.76); c) the risk to develop HGCIN
was significantly reduced for carriers with a G allele when compared to
those with an A allele (Table 1B, TAP1 I333V: chi-square test, p = 0.001,
OR = 0.27, 95% CI = 0.12 to 0.62; TAP1 D637G: chi-square test, p = 0.007,
OR = 0.36, 95% CI = 0.17 to 0.76).Conclusions:This study is the first to
show that MB TAP1 I333V and D637G gene polymorphisms are significantly
associated with less risk to develop HGCIN.Acknowledgements:This project
was supported by the Direct Grant 2010, The Chinese University of Hong
Kong.

