Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phosphodiesterase 10A: A novel target for selective inhibition of
colon tumor cell growth and Wnt/-catenin signaling


The cyclic nucleotide phosphodiesterase10A (PDE10) has been studied as a
therapeutic target for certain psychiatric and neurological conditions,
although a potential role in tumorigenesis has not been reported. Here we
report that PDE10 is elevated in human colon tumor cell lines compared
with normal colonocytes. Similarly, PDE10 is elevated in colon tumors
from human clinical specimens as well as intestinal tumors from the
ApcMin/+ mouse model compared with non-involved tissue or normal
intestinal mucosa, respectively. An isozyme and tumor-selective role of
PDE10 was evident by the ability of specific inhibitors and siRNA
knockdown to suppress colon tumor cell growth without significantly
affecting the growth of normal colonocytes. Stable knockdown of PDE10 by
shRNA also inhibits colony formation and increases doubling time of colon
tumor cells. Inhibition of PDE10 results in the selective activation of
cGMP/PKG signaling in colon tumor cells to suppress -catenin levels and
T-cell factor (TCF) transcriptional activity. Conversely, ectopic
expression of PDE10 in normal and precancerous colonocytes increases
proliferation and activates TCF transcriptional activity. These
observations demonstrate that PDE10 is essential for colon tumor cell
growth and suggest that inhibitors may have therapeutic potential for the
treatment or prevention of colorectal cancer.

