Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A genomic-transcriptomic-phosphoproteomic study to interrogate
lapatinib resistance in an HER2 over expressing SKBR3 human breast cancer
cell line model


Background: Lapatinib is a tyrosine kinase inhibitor that inhibits EGFR
and HER2 and is licensed to treat HER2-amplified breast cancer.
Understanding mechanisms of acquired resistance is an unmet clinical
need.Methods: SKBR3 cells were continuously exposed to increasing
concentrations of lapatinib over a 12-month period. The parent cell line
(SKBR3) and resulting lapatinib-resistant cell line (SKBR3LR) then
underwent a set of studies including: a) western blot analysis for PGP,
b) whole exome sequencing, c) whole genome expression microarray, d)
quantification of 587 phosphoproteins. All data were integrated using
Metacore software. Sensitivity of SKBR3 and SKBR3LR to a panel of drugs
based on the findings was carried out by 96-hr sulforhodamine
assays.Results: The GI50 values for lapatinib in SKBR3LR and SKBR3 cells
were 3582 nM (SD 241.6) and 10.3 nM (SD 1.1). There was no induction of
PGP protein or mRNA expression levels in SKBR3LR compared to SKBR3.
Somatic mutations in KIT and MEK3 which were not present in SKBR3 were
detected in SKBR3LR. There was a reduction in the levels of p-HER2 and
p-EGFR in SKBR3LR; however, no differences in the levels of p-HER3,
p-HER4, and p-KIT between the cell lines were observed. Analysis of
proteins downstream in the RAS-RAF-MEK and PI3K-AKT-m-TOR showed
increased levels of p-MEK but no significant changes in p38MAPK and no
differences in p-AKT levels, but an increase in p-P70S6K in SKBR3LR
compared to SKBR3. The phosphorylation network changes were integrated
with transcription factors that showed significant enrichment for binding
sites in the genes that were differentially expressed in SKBR3LR.
Deregulation of the MAPK signalling network was one of the proposed
mechanisms of resistance of SKBR3LR cells to lapatinib. Differential
sensitivity to small-molecule agents was used to interrogate the
mechanism of lapatinib resistance further. There was no significant
differential sensitivity of SKBR3 and SKBR3LR to imatinib, GI50 values
16.2 uM (SD 1.2) and 13.64 uM (SD1.1), respectively. SKBR3LR was more
resistant than SKBR3 to an AKT inhibitor AKT1/2i; GI50 values 8 uM (SD
0.45) vs 17.3 uM (SD 1.1) respectively. Interestingly, SKBR3LR was more
sensitive to the HSP90 inhibitor, AUY922; GI50 values 3.2 nM (SD 1.1) and
11.2 nM (SD 0.42) in SKBR3LR and SKBR3 cells, respectively. Experiments
are ongoing using targeted agents to understand the mechanism of
lapatinib resistance and suggest potential therapeutic strategies to
overcome these, including novel combinations, particularly the use of
HSP90 inhibitors.Conclusions: Integrating genomic-transcriptomic and
phosphoproteomic data provides useful insights into the mechanism of
resistance to lapatinib. The lapatinib-resistant cell line model was
sensitive to the HSP90 inhibitor, AUY922, suggesting HSP90 inhibitors
could be clinically effective in this setting.

