Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: 17-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1 is under negative
regulation from miR-210 and 518c in breast cancer


17-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (HSD) type 1 is an important mediator of
estrogen bioactivity in the breast tissue, both in healthy epithelium and
during breast cancer. The primary role of 17-HSD type 1 is in catalyzing
the NADH dependent reduction of estrone to the more potent estradiol. The
expression of 17-HSD type 1 has been shown to predict tamoxifen treatment
in breast cancer patients, but the regulatory mechanisms of 17HSD type 1
is not well known. In order to further elucidate the regulatory
mechanisms it was decided to study microRNA in relation to this protein
in breast cancer cell-lines. We studied the effect of microRNA mimics 210
and 518c after transient transfection upon the expression levels of
17-HSD type 1 mRNA in breast cancer epithelial cell-lines MCF-7 and
ZR75-1. The expression of 17-HSD type 1 was measured by semi-quantitative
RT-PCR. The endogenous expression of 17-HSD type 1 in MCF-7 is low while
ZR75-1 express moderate levels. We show that microRNA-210 down regulates
17-HSD type 1 mRNA levels to 75% of untreated cells in MCF-7, and to 85%
in ZR75-1. In addition, microRNA-518c was shown to down-regulate 17-HSD
type 1 to 90% compared to the endogenous expression. MicroRNA-210 is well
known adverse indicator of breast cancer outcome, impacting cell cycle,
mitochondrial oxidative metabolism, angiogenesis, DNA damage response,
and cell survival, and has been shown to be up-regulated by hypoxia. It
seems logical that while the cells recover from their excessive
proliferating and the ensuing hypoxia, local 17-HSD type 1 are
down-regulated to slow down the rate of proliferation thus giving the
cancer time to recover. Less is known about microRNA 518c in breast
cancer, and this modulation of 17-HSD type 1 levels is the first clear
indicator of its role in breast cancer. These findings indicate that
17-HSD type 1 is under microRNA control, and that this may be one
important mechanism by which its expression levels are regulated in
breast cancer.

