Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prognostic value of total lesion glycolysis from
18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography patients with gastric
neuroendocrine carcinoma


Background: Gastric neuroendocrine carcinomas (NET) are very rare,
aggressive tumors of the stomach. The objective of this study was to
examine the predictive role of pretreatment fluorine-18
fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (18F-FDG PET)-assessed
metabolic parameter of the whole-body and primary tumors in patients with
gastric NETMethod: We conducted a retrospective review of the 25 patients
with histopathologically confirmed poorly differentiated NETs of the
stomach at our hospital between January 2005 and December 2012. All of
the patients underwent 18F-FDG-PET examination at diagnosis. Metabolic
parameters [SUVmax, SUVmean, and total lesion glycolysis (TLG)] on
pretreatment 18F-FDG-PET were analyzed for survival.Results: Median
follow up duration was 39.4 months (95% CI, 20.0-58.1 months) and median
overall survival (OS) was 25.7 months (95% CI, 14.1-37.2 months). When
subjects were divided into two groups according to TLG with a cutoff
value of 500, the high TLG group showed significantly shorter OS compared
to the low TLG group (p=0.006). However, SUVmean and SUVmax had no
significant association OS (p = 0.258, and p = 0.52,
respectively).Conclusions: Our findings suggest that TLG may be more
useful than SUVmean and SUVmax for predicting OS in patient with NET. The
TLG measurement on 18F-FDG-PET imaging could be routinely recommended to
advanced gastric cancer with neuroendocrine carcinoma

