Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Revealing the complexity of cancer associated small non-coding
RNAs by next generation sequencing (NGS) and low-density array


Background. The recent development of high-throughput sequencing
technologies (Next Generation Sequencing - NGS) provided instruments to
reveal the complexity of nucleic acids, highlighting the existence of
numerous species of non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs) that play a significant
regulatory role in complex organisms, impacting on both physiology and
disease. In particular, microRNAs (miRNAs) have been proposed as
next-generation markers for their ability to unambiguously distinguish
cellular states, including SCs, progenitors and differentiated cells, as
well as tumour types, even among closely related cancers or in different
biological fluids. However, a comprehensive approach for the
identification and characterization of small non-coding RNAs from
pathological samples (blood, FFPE, primary cultures) has not been
established nor compared with current available methodologies (i.e.
QPCR).Aim: Our aim is to develop a simultaneous and comparative protocol
for the analysis of small non-coding RNAs from pathological samples,
which encompasses both high-throughput QPCR and sequencing analysis in
order to reveal the complexity of cancer associated small ncRNAs.Results:
An optimized protocol to analyse small ncRNAs from different pathological
samples has been developed and compared with high-throughput QPCR. Both
platforms resulted as highly efficient and quantitative, although NGS
manages to score many molecules and RNA species that could not be
analysed by current QPCR platforms, thus revealing a major complexity of
cancer associated non-coding RNAs.Conclusion: We propose that the
combined use of NGS and QPCR platforms would allow a wider and more
detailed analysis of ncRNAs, expanding our ability to fish out robust and
efficient molecular markers for diagnostic (early detection), prognostic
or therapeutic use.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

