Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Accurate quantitation of micro RNA by chip-based digital PCR


MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small non-coding RNAs that function to regulate
gene expression at transcriptional and post-transcriptional level. Mature
miRNAs are short, usually 18-23 nucleotides (nt) in length, with high
homology in the seed region (position 2-8 from the 5 end of a mature
miRNA) within each family. This presents a great challenge when designing
assays for quantitation by real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR).
Existing miRNA assays often trade in sensitivity and/or assay performance
for specificity. Comparison between two different mature miRNAs with
quantitative real-time PCR (qPCR) requires generating standard curves and
characterizing PCR efficiency and sensitivity. Here we report a
chip-based digital PCR technology. With this technology, we are able to
accurately quantitate mature miRNAs without characterizing and optimizing
the assay.Briefly, we input the same amount (ratio=1:1) of synthetic
hsa-miR-19b and hsa-miR-92a. We then quantitated the miRNAs using reverse
transcription followed by quantitative RT-PCR or chip-based QuantStudio
3D digital PCR (dPCR). Data from qPCR showed a delta Ct=2.58 between the
cDNAs. This converted to a 3.84 fold difference between the two mature
miRNAs, which deviated 284% from the input ratio, which equals 1.
However, the data from dPCR indicated that the ratio between the amounts
of the two mature miRNAs was 0.94 0.02 (SD). Although statistically
different, the results from dPCR deviated only 5% from the input ratio.
Compared to qPCR, dPCR significantly enhanced the precision in sample
quantitation.In summary, our study demonstrated that the chip-based dPCR
technology has greatly increased precision in quantitating miRNA samples.
The simplified workflow and improved output of dPCR are very useful
features in broad applications such as revealing small changes in the
miRNA expression levels.

