Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Impact of single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) on thymic
hyperplasia and tumors outcome


Background: Thymic Hyperplasia refers to an enlargement of the thymus,
while thymomas display significant heterogeneity from morphologic point
of view, clinical behaviour, expression of immunohistochemical markers
and molecular profiling. Therefore improving our understanding of the
molecular biology of thymic disorders represents a key challenge in the
treatment of these rare diseases.Methods:The genomic DNA of 93
consecutive patients undergoing total thymectomy at our Institution was
extracted from paraffin-embedded tissue.We selected the following SNPs:
Hypoxia Inducible Factor-1 alpha (HIF1a: rs2057482T>C, rs1951795A>C,
rs2301113C>A, rs10873142C>T, rs11158358G>C, rs12434438G>A, rs11549465C>T,
rs11549467G>A), Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor-A (VEGF-A:
rs2010963G>C, rs699947A>C), VEGF Receptor 2 (VEGFR-2: rs2305948C>T,
rs1870377T>A), VEGFR-3 (rs307826T>C, rs307821C>A), Platelet-Derived
Growth Factor-A (PDGFR-A: rs35597368C>T).Gene polymorphisms were
determined by Real-Time PCR using TaqMan assays.Results:93 patients were
included into the study, 58 females and 35 males.The patients underwent
surgery: 43 for thymomas, 14 for thymic carcinomas, 36 for thymic
hyperplasia.The frequency of PDGFRa rs35597368T (95.24%) was
significantly higher in thymic malignancies if compared with data
available for population (86%, p=0.012), thus suggesting that it may
represent a risk factor for this type of disease. On the other hand, the
frequency of several HIF-1a polymorphisms (rs2057482C, rs11549465C,
rs1951795C, rs2301113A, rs10873142T, rs11158358C, rs12434438A) resulted
lower in our study than in the general population (pBackground: Thymic
Hyperplasia refers to an enlargement of the thymus, while thymomas
display significant heterogeneity from morphologic point of view,
clinical behaviour, expression of immunohistochemical markers and
molecular profiling. Therefore improving our understanding of the
molecular biology of thymic disorders represents a key challenge in the
treatment of these rare diseases.Methods:The genomic DNA of 93
consecutive patients undergoing total thymectomy at our Institution was
extracted from paraffin-embedded tissue.We selected the following SNPs:
Hypoxia Inducible Factor-1 alpha (HIF1a: rs2057482T>C, rs1951795A>C,
rs2301113C>A, rs10873142C>T, rs11158358G>C, rs12434438G>A, rs11549465C>T,
rs11549467G>A), Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor-A (VEGF-A:
rs2010963G>C, rs699947A>C), VEGF Receptor 2 (VEGFR-2: rs2305948C>T,
rs1870377T>A), VEGFR-3 (rs307826T>C, rs307821C>A), Platelet-Derived
Growth Factor-A (PDGFR-A: rs35597368C>T).Gene polymorphisms were
determined by Real-Time PCR using TaqMan assays.Results:93 patients were
included into the study, 58 females and 35 males.The patients underwent
surgery: 43 for thymomas, 14 for thymic carcinomas, 36 for thymic
hyperplasia.The frequency of PDGFRa rs35597368T (95.24%) was
significantly higher in thymic malignancies if compared with data
available for population (86%, p=0.012), thus suggesting that it may
represent a risk factor for this type of disease. On the other hand, the
frequency of several HIF-1a polymorphisms (rs2057482C, rs11549465C,
rs1951795C, rs2301113A, rs10873142T, rs11158358C, rs12434438A) resulted
lower in our study than in the general population (p<0.05). In
particular, frequencies of HIF1a rs1951795C, rs2301113A, rs12434438A were
significantly lower in thymic malignancy than in thymic hyperplasia and
moreover these were lower than population, according to available
literature data on other types of tumors, suggesting a protective
role.Furthermore, VEGFR3 rs307821C polymorphism was higher in thymoma
than in thymic carcinoma (79.5% vs 72%, p=0.0371), and therefore it seems
to be related to a lower grade of malignancy.Finally, the following
factors were significantly correlated with a better overall survival:
VEGFR-3 rs307826C, VEGFR-2 rs1870377A, PDGFR-A rs35597368T/C, HIF1a
rs2301113C, rs2057482C/T, rs1951795C, rs11158358G/C and rs10873142T/C
(pBackground: Thymic Hyperplasia refers to an enlargement of the thymus,
while thymomas display significant heterogeneity from morphologic point
of view, clinical behaviour, expression of immunohistochemical markers
and molecular profiling. Therefore improving our understanding of the
molecular biology of thymic disorders represents a key challenge in the
treatment of these rare diseases.Methods:The genomic DNA of 93
consecutive patients undergoing total thymectomy at our Institution was
extracted from paraffin-embedded tissue.We selected the following SNPs:
Hypoxia Inducible Factor-1 alpha (HIF1a: rs2057482T>C, rs1951795A>C,
rs2301113C>A, rs10873142C>T, rs11158358G>C, rs12434438G>A, rs11549465C>T,
rs11549467G>A), Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor-A (VEGF-A:
rs2010963G>C, rs699947A>C), VEGF Receptor 2 (VEGFR-2: rs2305948C>T,
rs1870377T>A), VEGFR-3 (rs307826T>C, rs307821C>A), Platelet-Derived
Growth Factor-A (PDGFR-A: rs35597368C>T).Gene polymorphisms were
determined by Real-Time PCR using TaqMan assays.Results:93 patients were
included into the study, 58 females and 35 males.The patients underwent
surgery: 43 for thymomas, 14 for thymic carcinomas, 36 for thymic
hyperplasia.The frequency of PDGFRa rs35597368T (95.24%) was
significantly higher in thymic malignancies if compared with data
available for population (86%, p=0.012), thus suggesting that it may
represent a risk factor for this type of disease. On the other hand, the
frequency of several HIF-1a polymorphisms (rs2057482C, rs11549465C,
rs1951795C, rs2301113A, rs10873142T, rs11158358C, rs12434438A) resulted
lower in our study than in the general population (p<0.05). In
particular, frequencies of HIF1a rs1951795C, rs2301113A, rs12434438A were
significantly lower in thymic malignancy than in thymic hyperplasia and
moreover these were lower than population, according to available
literature data on other types of tumors, suggesting a protective
role.Furthermore, VEGFR3 rs307821C polymorphism was higher in thymoma
than in thymic carcinoma (79.5% vs 72%, p=0.0371), and therefore it seems
to be related to a lower grade of malignancy.Finally, the following
factors were significantly correlated with a better overall survival:
VEGFR-3 rs307826C, VEGFR-2 rs1870377A, PDGFR-A rs35597368T/C, HIF1a
rs2301113C, rs2057482C/T, rs1951795C, rs11158358G/C and rs10873142T/C
(p<0.05).Conclusion: To the best of our knowledge this is the largest
monocentric study analyzing the angiogenetic variants in thymic
hyperplasia and tumors representing a further asset in the definition of
high-risk patients after curative resection, also driving the selection
of more aggressive adjuvant treatment in this subgroup of patients. The
selection tool deriving from this analysis may allow an optimal use of
innovative treatment strategies in thymic malignancies including targeted
agents such as sunitinib, sorafenib or pazopanib.

