Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gene expression array and pathway profiling analyses distinguish
HGF/Met pathways driving cell proliferation from invasion and identify
events correlated with prostate cancer progression


Signaling by hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) via its cell surface
receptor, Met, drives cell survival, growth and motility, as well as
tumor growth and metastasis in several prevalent human cancers. HGF and
Met have become highly sought targets for cancer drug development: 165
clinical trials of 21 experimental agents have been completed or are in
progress. We reported previously that a selective HGF antagonist failed
to block growth of the human prostate adenocarcinoma derived cell line
PC3M as primary tumor xenografts in mice, but potently blocked
spontaneous PC3M tumor metastasis, as well as cell motility and invasion
in vitro. Thus partial activation of the Met pathway in PC3M cells by
murine HGF (mHGF) is capable of driving invasion but not proliferation,
whereas human HGF (hHGF) is capable of driving both activities.To
identify the signaling and gene modulation events critical for Met-driven
cell invasion and to distinguish them from Met-driven proliferation, mRNA
expression array and pathway profiling analyses of hHGF and mHGF-treated
PC3M cells were performed. Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) of 344
hHGF-specific statistically significant gene modulation events of 2-fold
or greater showed significant overlap with cell cycle progression and
proliferation pathways, cancer and upstream activation of the cyclin D1
and choriogonadotropin pathways. IPA analysis of 520 gene modulation
events associated with motility and invasion showed significant overlap
with cell migration and invasion pathways, upstream activation of the
MEK/MAPK and mir-155 pathways and upstream inhibition of PI3K and
pro-inflammatory cytokine pathways.HGF-specific blockade of spontaneous
PC3M metastasis in our model prompted us to further compare significant
gene modulation events related to cell invasion with those reported for
prostate cancer tumor samples as part of The Cancer Genome Atlas Project
(TCGA; MSKCC, 2010; 216 cases). Of 520 altered genes in PC3M, 345 were
also interrogated in TCGA: 150 of these (47%) were similarly modulated in
prostate cancer patient samples. Twenty-four gene modulation events (7%)
were associated with significant change in disease-free survival (DFS) in
88% of cases: 1 gene with increased DFS (logrank p: 0.002747, 56% of
cases affected) and 23 with decreased DFS (logrank p: 0.007542; 65% of
cases affected).Together these findings identify critical differences in
intracellular pathways downstream of HGF/Met interaction leading to cell
proliferation vs invasion and reveal that a substantial fraction of
prostate cancer patients who show gene modulation events associated with
increased tumor cell invasion and metastasis in the PC3M model described
here also experience significantly accelerated disease progression.

