Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Elucidating a novel role for inositol polyphosphate 4-phosphatase
type II (INPP4B) in mediating chemoresistance in acute myeloid leukemia


Acute myeloid leukaemia (AML) is an aggressive blood cancer that is
usually fatal within weeks without effective therapy. Treatment currently
involves standard chemotherapy agents such as cytarabine (Ara-C) and
anthracyclines but these drugs fail to elicit complete clinical responses
in 20-30% of cases. An understanding of the mechanisms in AML mediating
resistance to chemotherapy may uncover new oncoproteins amenable to
medicinal targeting. Activation of the phosphoinositide 3-kinase
(PI3-K)/AKT pathway is prevalent in AML and linked to chemotherapy
failure and poor outcomes. Homeostatic regulation of PI3K activity is
orchestrated by a triad of lipid phosphatases, categorized functionally
as 3-, 4-, or 5-phosphoinositide phosphatases (PIPs). We screened for
pathological expression of 3-, 4-, or 5-PIPs in AML using a quantitative
multiplexed MassArray platform (Sequenom) and found marked overexpression
of inositol polyphosphate 4-phosphatase II (INPP4B) in a subset of
primary AMLs compared to normal bone marrow. Immunohistochemical staining
of 120 primary AMLbone marrowsamples showed INPP4B was overexpressed
(>20% blasts positive) in 16% of cases. INPP4B overexpression was
associated with an inferior complete response rate to intensive
chemotherapy (33%), compared to AMLs low (5-20%; CR 66%) or negative
(Acute myeloid leukaemia (AML) is an aggressive blood cancer that is
usually fatal within weeks without effective therapy. Treatment currently
involves standard chemotherapy agents such as cytarabine (Ara-C) and
anthracyclines but these drugs fail to elicit complete clinical responses
in 20-30% of cases. An understanding of the mechanisms in AML mediating
resistance to chemotherapy may uncover new oncoproteins amenable to
medicinal targeting. Activation of the phosphoinositide 3-kinase
(PI3-K)/AKT pathway is prevalent in AML and linked to chemotherapy
failure and poor outcomes. Homeostatic regulation of PI3K activity is
orchestrated by a triad of lipid phosphatases, categorized functionally
as 3-, 4-, or 5-phosphoinositide phosphatases (PIPs). We screened for
pathological expression of 3-, 4-, or 5-PIPs in AML using a quantitative
multiplexed MassArray platform (Sequenom) and found marked overexpression
of inositol polyphosphate 4-phosphatase II (INPP4B) in a subset of
primary AMLs compared to normal bone marrow. Immunohistochemical staining
of 120 primary AMLbone marrowsamples showed INPP4B was overexpressed
(>20% blasts positive) in 16% of cases. INPP4B overexpression was
associated with an inferior complete response rate to intensive
chemotherapy (33%), compared to AMLs low (5-20%; CR 66%) or negative
(<5%; CR 93%) for INPP4B. Ectopic overexpression of INPP4B in MV4;11 and
HEL AML cells conferred resistance to in vitro cell death (flow-based
viability and colony forming capacity) when exposed to standard agents
used to treat AML, including cytarabine, daunorubicin and etoposide. High
levels of INPP4B in AML also limited the cytotoxic efficacy of drugs such
as cytarabine in vivo using human xenograft models of AML. Although
INPP4B phosphatase function was proven to be catalytically active in
primary AML, expression of a phosphatase inactive mutant (INPP4B C842A)
did not abrogate chemoresistance. Conversely, siRNA-mediated knockdown of
endogenous INPP4B expression in KG1 and OCI-AML3 AML increased leukemic
sensitivity to cytarabine. These findings infer 1) the presence of a
novel phosphatase-independent function for this protein and 2) a
previously unsuspected role for INPP4B overexpression in mediating
chemoresistance and poor clinical outcome in a subset of patients with
AML.

