Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pediatric preclinical testing program (PPTP) evaluation of BMN
673, an inhibitor of poly-adp ribose polymerase (PARP), with temozolomide
(TMZ)


Introduction: BMN 673 is a potent and selective inhibitor of PARP1/2.
Inhibitors of PARP such as BMN 673 show clinical activity against cancers
lacking homologous repair through mutations in BRCA1 and 2. PARP
inhibitors are of particular interest for Ewing sarcoma (ES) given
reports of ES cell lines being preferentially sensitive to PARP
inhibitors. However, BMN 673 and other PARP inhibitors have shown limited
single agent activity against Ewing sarcoma xenografts.Methods: BMN 673
(10 nM) was evaluated in combination with TMZ and topotecan against the
23 cell lines of the PPTP in vitro panel using 96 hour exposure. For in
vivo combination studies, two dose levels of BMN 673 (0.25 & 0.1 mg/kg
BID x 5 days) given with TMZ [12 & 30 mg/kg/day x 5 days, respectively]
were evaluated against ES xenografts. The combination regimen using the
lower dose (LD) of TMZ and higher dose of BMN 673 was studied against
other histotypes. Standard PPTP measures of in vivo antitumor activity
were employed to assess response.Results: BMN 673 markedly potentiated
TMZ activity in vitro, with the TMZ rIC50 reduced by a median of 10-fold
for PPTP cell lines, with ES cell lines showing a median 50-fold
reduction. BMN 673 potentiated topotecan to a lesser degree (median
2.8-fold reduction in rIC50), with no differential sensitivity by
histotype.In vivo, 10 ES xenografts showed little or no response to 5
days of treatment with single agent TMZ (30 mg/kg) or BMN 673 (0.25 mg/kg
BID), but 8 of 10 showed complete responses (CR) or maintained CR (MCR)
to BMN 673 and TMZ (LD), and 5 of 10 showed CR or MCR to BMN 673 and
higher-dose TMZ. The 10 ES xenografts could be separated into 2 groups
based on duration of response to the combinations, with 5 showing delayed
growth or brief objective responses (median time to event 30 days), and
with the other 5 showing prolonged time to regrowth (median > 77 days).
Among 5 neuroblastoma xenografts, all showed significant treatment
effects to BMN 673 plus TMZ(LD), with 1 achieving CR. Among 4
osteosarcoma xenografts, each showed significant tumor growth delay, but
no objective responses were noted. Among 3 glioblastoma xenografts, 2 of
3 achieved maintained CRs (MCR) to the BMN 673 plus TMZ(LD) combination.
Excessive toxicity was observed for ALL xenografts in NOD-SCID mice
treated with the combination.Conclusions: While BMN 673 shows limited
single agent activity against PPTP solid tumor and ALL models with
responses limited to models also highly sensitive to cisplatin, the BMN
673 plus TMZ(LD) combination shows dramatic activity for a subset of
Ewing sarcoma xenografts and for selected additional models. Based on
these results a pediatric phase 1 trial of BMN 673 plus TMZ with a phase
2 expansion for Ewing sarcoma is proceeding. Efforts are ongoing to
relate genomic alterations identified through exome sequencing to
responsiveness of ES xenografts to BMN 673 plus TMZ. (Supported by
NO1-CM-42216)

