Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: miR-34a, miR-93 and miR-200c - novel molecular regulators of
osteosarcoma dormancy


There is an increasing interest in elucidating the mechanisms of the
earlier stages in tumor progression, the point at which a dormant tumor
acquires the ability to grow and metastasize. Although the tumor dormancy
phenomenon has important implications for early detection and treatment
of cancer, its biology and genetic characteristics are poorly understood.
MicroRNAs (miRs), small non-coding RNA molecules which regulate gene
expression at the post-transcriptional level, are emerging as key
regulators in physiological and pathological processes, including
tumorigenesis. We hypothesized that specific miRs may also play a key
role in the regulation of tumor dormancy and the angiogenic switch. We
therefore established a pair of cell lines that generate dormant
avascular or fast-growing angiogenic osteosarcomas in SCID mice (Saos-2-D
and Saos-2-E respectively). Although these cells share similar growth
rate in vitro, when inoculated into mice, Saos-2-E cells generate
vascularized and palpable tumors within one month, while Saos-2-D cells
remain avascular and non-palpable for a year.Following our hypothesis,
miR arrays of Saos-2-D and Saos-2-E cells were performed. Several miRs
that were differentially-expressed in the dormant versus
fast-growing-tumor-generating cells were selected for further evaluation.
Out of those miRs, miR-34a, miR-93 and miR-200c, when administered
complexed with a polymeric nanocarrier, reverted several tumor cell lines
forming fast-growing tumors to a dormant non-angiogenic phenotype, both
in vitro and in vivo. We therefore propose that these three miRs play a
role in the switch from dormancy to progressive disease in human
osteosarcoma tumors. Uncovering new molecular targets involved in the
tumor dormancy phenomenon could provide important tools for novel
dormancy-directed tumor therapy strategies.

