Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression of miR-17-92 enhances antitumor activity of T cells
transduced with the anti-EGFRvIII chimeric antigen receptor in mice
bearing human GBM xenografts


BackgroundExpression of miR-17-92 confers type-1 phenotype and enhanced
survival of T-cells. We have previously reported that miR-17-92 is
down-regulated in T-cells derived from glioblastoma (GBM) patients. We
hypothesized that transgene-derived co-expression of miR17-92 and
chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) in T-cells improves the efficacy of
adoptive transfer therapy against GBM.MethodsWe constructed novel
lentiviral vectors for miR-17-92 (FG12-EF1a-miR-17/92) and a CAR
consisting of epidermal growth factor receptor variant III
(EGFRvIII)-specific single-chain variable fragment (scFv) coupled to the
T-cell receptor CD3 chain signaling module and co-stimulatory motifs of
CD137 (4-1BB) and CD28 in tandem (pELNS-3C10-CAR). Human T-cells were
transduced with these lentiviral vectors and their anti-tumor effects
were evaluated both in vitro and in vivo.ResultsIn addition to
antigen-specific and potent cytotoxic activities against U87 GBM cells
stably expressing EGFRvIII (U87-EGFRvIII), CAR-transduced T-cells
(CAR-T-cells) co-transduced with miR-17-92 exhibited improved survival in
the presence of temozolomide (TMZ) compared with CAR-T-cells without
miR-17-92 co-transduction. In mice bearing intracranial U87-EGFRvIII
xenografts, CAR-T-cells with or without transgene-derived miR-17-92
expression demonstrated similar levels of potent therapeutic effects
without demonstrating any uncontrolled growth of CAR-T-cells. However,
when these mice were re-challenged with U87-EGFRvIII cells in the brains,
mice receiving co-transduced CAR-T-cells exhibited improved protection
compared with mice treated with CAR-T-cells without miR-17-92
co-transduction.ConclusionThese results warrant development of novel
CAR-T-cell strategies by incorporation of miR-17-92 to improve the
therapeutic potency, especially in patients with GBM.

