Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Toca 511 gene therapy in combination with 5-fluorocytosine for
intratumoral production of 5-fluorouracil in a colon cancer metastasis
model


Despite advances in screening, colorectal cancer (CRC) remains the fourth
most commonly diagnosed cancer and the second leading cause of cancer
death for both men and women in the US. Approximately one half of
patients with CRC develop liver metastases (mCRC). The standard treatment
for mCRC is 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) based combination chemotherapy. 5-FU
combination chemotherapy has extended the median survival of these
patients from 6 to >20 months.We are pursuing a unique investigational
approach to treat cancer via intratumoral production of 5-FU. Patients
are first administered Toca 511 (vocimagene amiretrorepvec), a retroviral
replicating vector (RRV) which selectively replicates and spreads in
malignant cells and encodes an optimized yeast cytosine deaminase (CD)
gene. In infected cells, the CD enzyme is expressed and converts 5-FC
(flucytosine, an orally available anti-fungal drug) to the anti-cancer
drug 5-FU in situ.The combination of Toca 511 with oral extended release
5-FC (Toca FC) is currently in clinical trials for recurrent High Grade
Glioma (NCT01156584, NCT01470794, and NCT01985256). We tested the
suitability of this approach for the treatment of mCRC in a mouse
syngeneic liver metastasis model. CT-26-luciferase colon carcinoma cells
were delivered via intrasplenic injection producing multiple tumor foci
within the liver. Toca 511 was then delivered either by intrasplenic or
intravenous injection followed by courses of 5-FC. Vector delivery to
tumor was monitored by PCR. 5-FC and 5-FU were detected using LC/MS. The
effect of treatment with Toca 511 and 5-FC in this mouse model of mCRC
will be presented.

