Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Screening of extracts from ethnopharmacologically selected
peruvian plants in human hepatocarcinoma cell line Hep3B


Liver cancer, for which hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) represents the
most frequent primitive form, is ranked sixth and third in terms of
incidence and death respectively in the world. Its survival rate at 5
years is low (less than 10 %). There is no effective treatment to date,
surgical approaches excepted or sorafenib with a gain in survival of 3
months. In view of this limitation of therapeutic alternatives, the
search and identification of new molecules of natural origin remain an
important issue. In this study, the pharmacological properties of 63
extracts, prepared from Peruvian plants selected upon
ethnopharmacological investigations conducted in Peru, were analyzed.The
extracts were tested in an in vitro phenotypic screening approach on the
human hepatocellular carcinoma cell line, Hep3B, following a 3-step cell
analysis:1- the first step consisted in the determination of a screening
score which was defined according to 3 criteria : APE, MIT and OMM. APE
refers to the Anti-Proliferative Effect of the extract, MIT to the
ability of the extract to modify the MITotic events (by increasing or
decreasing the number of cells in mitosis), and OMM refers to the ability
of an extract to induce Original Morphological Modifications to the
treated cells. The score values ranged from 1 to 27 and a score value of
12 was defined as the threshold. Twenty five extracts exhibited a score
value > 12 and were selected for further analysis.2- the second step
consisted in the determination of the cytotoxic effect of the 25 extracts
selected from step 1, measured after a 48 hrs incubation time. Of these
extracts, 11 showed IC50 values > 50 g/ml, 10 with IC50 between 15 and 50
g/ml and 4 with IC50 Liver cancer, for which hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC) represents the most frequent primitive form, is ranked sixth and
third in terms of incidence and death respectively in the world. Its
survival rate at 5 years is low (less than 10 %). There is no effective
treatment to date, surgical approaches excepted or sorafenib with a gain
in survival of 3 months. In view of this limitation of therapeutic
alternatives, the search and identification of new molecules of natural
origin remain an important issue. In this study, the pharmacological
properties of 63 extracts, prepared from Peruvian plants selected upon
ethnopharmacological investigations conducted in Peru, were analyzed.The
extracts were tested in an in vitro phenotypic screening approach on the
human hepatocellular carcinoma cell line, Hep3B, following a 3-step cell
analysis:1- the first step consisted in the determination of a screening
score which was defined according to 3 criteria : APE, MIT and OMM. APE
refers to the Anti-Proliferative Effect of the extract, MIT to the
ability of the extract to modify the MITotic events (by increasing or
decreasing the number of cells in mitosis), and OMM refers to the ability
of an extract to induce Original Morphological Modifications to the
treated cells. The score values ranged from 1 to 27 and a score value of
12 was defined as the threshold. Twenty five extracts exhibited a score
value > 12 and were selected for further analysis.2- the second step
consisted in the determination of the cytotoxic effect of the 25 extracts
selected from step 1, measured after a 48 hrs incubation time. Of these
extracts, 11 showed IC50 values > 50 g/ml, 10 with IC50 between 15 and 50
g/ml and 4 with IC50 < 15 g/ml The 14 extracts which exhibited IC50
values lower than 50 g/ml were selected for the final step.3- the third
step consisted in studying the extracts inducing original phenotypic
changes. This led to the selection of 4 extracts : 2 extracts of
different families (Iridaceae and Asteraceae) induced blocking Hep3B
cells in prometaphase while 2 other extracts, from the same genus
(Asteraceae) induced cytoskeletal reorganization. This latter effect was
original since it occurred on cells in interphase and not on mitosis as
it can be seen with the classical tubulin inhibitors such as colchicine,
vinblastine or paclitaxel.Interestingly, the plants from which come the 4
extracts inducing original phenotypes have been little studied so far
either chemically or pharmacologically, suggesting that they may be a
source of new molecules of therapeutic interest and/or with original
structures.

