Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Osteoblasts-derived WISP-1 increases prostate cancer metastasis
through VCAM-1 upregulation


The skeleton is the most common metastatic site for prostate cancer, and
increases the risk of intractable bone pain. Therefore, study of the
interactions between prostate cancer and the bone microenvironment is
very important. Wnt-1 induced secreted protein 1 (WISP-1) belongs to the
CCN family (CTGF/CYR61/NOV), which plays an important role in bone
formation and many cellular processes. However, the effects of WISP-1 on
the prostate cancer metastasis are not clearly understood. First, we
found that WISP-1 presents in osteoblast-condition medium (OB-CM), which
increases prostate cancer cell migration and invasion. In addition, OBs
were infected with lentivirus containing human WISP-1 shRNA which reduced
OB-CM-mediated prostate cancer metastasis. We also demonstrated that
OB-derived WISP-1 enhanced cell migration via vascular cell adhesion
molecule 1(VCAM-1) up-regulation in prostate cancer. Transfection of
cells with VCAM-1 siRNA reduced OB-CM and WISP-1-mediated cell migration.
The incresing of prostate cancer cell migration by OB-derived WISP-1 is
associated with FAK and p38 activation, as well as mir-126
downregulation. Pretreatment of cells with FAK and p38 inhibitors reduced
WISP-1-mediated cell migration. In contrast, WISP-1-mediated migration
activity was inhibited by mir-126 mimic. Over all, we characterized an
important role for OB-derived WISP-1 which regulates cell migration and
invasion by increasing VCAM-1 expression in human prostate cancer via the
activation of FAK, p38 and downregulation of mir-126 signaling pathway.

