Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TAS-115, a novel MET + VEGFRs dual inhibitor, decreases the
cytotoxic anticancer drug resistance in lung cancer


c-Met is the receptor tyrosine kinase for hepatocyte growth factor (HGF).
c-Met/HGF signal stimulates the expression of many downstream genes,
which are associated with biological events such as oncogenesis, cancer
metastasis and drug resistance. The enhanced c-Met/HGF signal is detected
in various cancer cells containing lung cancer. Interestingly, recent
studies revealed this is a new mechanism of acquired resistance to
anticancer agents, especially epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine
kinase inhibitor (EGFR-TKI) gefitinib. TAS-115
[4-[2-fluoro-4-[[[(2-phenylacetyl)amino]thioxomethyl]amino]-phenoxy]-7-meth
oxy-N-methyl-6-quinolinecarboxamide] is identified as a novel potent
c-Met and VEGFR dual inhibitor. In biochemical assay, it was identified
to be a potent Adenosine Triphosphate (ATP) competitive inhibitor of both
c-Met and VEGFR that is equal or more potent than those of other known
inhibitors such as crizotinib. In this study, we investigate whether
c-Met inhibition by TAS-115 influence the resistance against cytotoxic
anticancer agents in several resistant cell lines harboring c-Met
activation. We found that the levels of c-Met expression and activation
in various drug resistances, including the 7-ethyl-10-hydroxycamptothesin
(SN-38) -resistant lung cancer cell lines (PC-6/SN-38 GEM) and
gemcitabine (GEM) -resistant lung cancer cell lines (PC-9/GEM) were
enhanced relative to the parental cells by western blotting (WB). We
confirmed that TAS-115 dose-dependently inhibits phoshorylation of c-Met
and downstream signals, ERK1/2 and AKT, in PC-6/SN-38 cells and PC-9/GEM
cells. MTS [3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-5-(3-carboxymethoxyphenyl)-
2-(4-sulfophenyl)-2H-tetrazolium, inner salt] assay was performed to
determine whether certain concentrations TAS-115 inhibit cell growths of
PC-6/SN-38 and PC-9/GEM cells. Cell growth of PC-6/SN-38 cells was not
affected by treatment with TAS-115 (2 or 4 M) for 72h. The same results
were observed in PC-9/GEM cells that were treated with TAS-115 (4 or 8
M). These results suggested that c-MET inhibition is not enough to
inhibit cell growth when treated with TAS-115 alone. Next, we exposed
PC-6/SN-38 cells to DMSO or TAS-115 (2 or 4 M) in combination with SN-38
(12.5 nM) for 72 h. Although PC-6/SN-38 cells were resistant to SN-38,
the combined treatment with TAS-115 resulted in growth inhibition in a
dose-dependent manner. We got the same results in PC-9/GEM cells when
combined treatment with GEM and TAS-115. These results show that
inhibition of c-Met signaling decrease the resistance of cytotoxic
anticancer agent resistant cells. In conclusion, TAS-115 might become to
overcome the resistance against cytotoxic anticancer agents by c-Met/HGF
signal.

