Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel human gastric primary cell culture system for modelling
Helicobacter pylori infection in vitro


The significance of bacterial infections in the initiation of human
cancers is increasingly being recognized. A well established example is
Helicobacter pylori, a causative agent of gastric adenocarcinoma. Current
research largely relies on the use of transformed human cell lines as in
vitro models of these infections. Obviously, this concept is largely
artificial and especially inappropriate when it comes to investigations
on the mechanisms of cancerogenesis. A primary cell system would be
preferable in order to approximate the in vivo situation, however,
previous attempts to establish such models are hampered by the limited
growth and reproducibility of normal human primary cell cultures. Here,
we report on the establishment of specific long-term culture conditions
that allow the formation of 3-dimensional human gastric organoids with
epithelial domains that have the capacity to self-renew and can be
maintained in culture indefinitely. Interestingly, these 3-dimensional
structures can be transferred into 2-dimensional primary cell layers,
which provide ideal conditions to study infections in vitro. We expect
that our novel human gastric primary cell model will facilitate
investigations on the mechanisms underlying infection and is suited to
open up avenues of approach to investigations on the initial processes of
cellular transformation from normal to a transformed cell stages
including the tumor-promoting capacity of the gastric pathogen H. pylori.

