Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dual mTOR/PI3K inhibitors induce ERK pathway overactivation in
pancreatic cell lines: Rationale for combinatory therapy


Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC), which comprises 90% of all human
pancreatic cancers, is a devastating disease, with overall 5-year
survival rate of only 3-5%. As the current therapies offer very limited
survival benefits, novel molecular therapeutic targets and strategies are
urgently needed to treat this aggressive disease. The complementary
activation of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)/Akt/mTORC1 and MEK/ERK
signaling pathways in many cancer cells, including PDAC, potently
stimulates their proliferation and survival. However, mTORC1 also
mediates negative feedback loops that restrain upstream signaling via
insulin/IGF receptor and other tyrosine kinase receptors. Suppression of
these feedback loops by selective mTORC1 inhibitors, e.g. by rapamycin
and its analogs, unleashes over-activation of the PI3K/Akt pathway that
potentially opposes the anti-proliferative effects of mTOR inhibitors.
This prompted the development of active-site mTORC1/2 kinase inhibitors
(TOR-KIs) and dual PI3K and mTOR inhibitors (PI3K/TOR-KIs). It is not
known whether PI3K/TOR-KIs induce any effect on the activity of the ERK
pathway in PDAC cells. Consequently, we treated serum-starved cultures of
PDAC cells (MiaPaca-2 and PANC-1) with increasing concentrations of the
dual PI3K/TOR-KI NPV-BEZ235 followed by stimulation with insulin and
neurotensin, a potent mitogenic combination for these cells. As expected,
prior exposure to NPV-BEZ235 potently inhibited mTORC1 activation (scored
by S6 phosphorylation at Ser-240/244) and mTORC2-mediated Akt
phosphorylation at Ser-473, in a concentration-dependent manner.
Strikingly, we also demonstrate, for the first time, that exposure to
NPV-BEZ235 markedly enhanced the phosphorylation of ERK at Thr-202 and
Tyr-204. Maximal ERK over-activation coincided with complete inhibition
of Akt phosphorylation at Ser-473 (produced at 100-500 M NPV-BEZ235). ERK
over-activation was also seen when PDAC cells were stimulated with 2%
fetal bovine serum and when a different PI3K/TOR-KI (PKI-587) was used
instead of NPV-BEZ235. Treatment with the MEK inhibitors U126 or
PD0325901 (1-5 M) prevented ERK over-activation induced by PI3K/TOR-KIs.
Crucially, a combination of NPV-BEZ235 and PD0325901 caused a more
pronounced inhibition of cell growth than that produced by each inhibitor
added individually. Thus, the elucidation of novel feedbacks loops and
crosstalk mechanisms can assist in developing rational and effective
strategies for developing combination therapies in PDAC.

