Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clonal expansion of Lkb1-deficient stromal cells underlies polyp
development in mouse models of Peutz-Jeghers syndrome


While the role of LKB1 mutations in the Peutz-Jeghers polyposis syndrome
(PJS) is uncontroversial, the originating cell type remains unclear as
Lkb1 mutations in both epithelial cells and stromal smooth muscle cells
(SMCs) have been proposed as tumor drivers. Since SMCs do not represent a
major fraction of stromal cells in polyps, altered signaling from
Lkb1-deficient SMCs to epithelium has been suggested as a possible
mechanism for polyposis. Here we investigate the cell type origin and
tumor development mechanism of PJS type polyps in mice by targeting Lkb1
in either early mesenchymal progenitors (Twist2-Cre) or in stromal
fibroblasts (Fsp1-Cre). Remarkably, both Twist2 (Twist2-Cre;Lkb1flox/+)
and Fsp1-driven (Fsp1-Cre;Lkb1flox/+ and Fsp1-Cre;Lkb1flox/flox) Lkb1
deletion led to formation of PJS-type gastrointestinal polyps
predominantly in the stomach, as noted before for Lkb1+/- mice.
Furthermore, lineage-tracing experiments demonstrated that Lkb1 deletion
results in early local expansion of Lkb1-deficient myofibroblast-like
alpha smooth muscle actin-expressing cells between gastric glands, and
subsequent clonal expansion filling the stroma of the forming polyps. The
simultaneous expansion of the adjacent epithelium seems to be secondary
to the stromal growth, based on lack of noticeable genetic alterations in
the epithelial cells. Immunohistochemical and mRNA analyses demonstrate
that the polyps arising from the stromal deletion models are
indistinguishable from Lkb1+/- mice and PJS patient polyps. These results
indicate that polyps in the Twist2-Cre and Fsp1-Cre mice represent
stromal tumors, and suggest that the identified tumorigenic mechanism is
shared in PJS syndrome.

