Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BPM 31510 exposure alters fluidity and molecular organization of
cancer cell membranes, influencing signaling and cell fate decisions


The dynamic state of membranes impinges on pathways critical for cancer
cell survival or death while influencing cancer cell metabolism. Here in,
we investigated the effects of BPM 31510, a proprietary ubidecarenone
formulation, on temporal alterations in membrane adaptation, proteomic
and lipidomic reorganization, initiation of key apoptotic signaling
pathways, bioenergetic integration, as well as cell fate decision
processes in in vitro models of representative cancers. This approach was
harvested to decipher a systems wide understanding of BPM 31510's effects
on various human cancer cell lines (prostate, pancreatic, skin, breast
and ovarian ) as well as effect on representative control cell lines. BPM
31510 exposure in vitro resulted in a stochastic shift in membrane
fluidity in various cancer cell lines. Global untargeted shotgun
lipidomics and proteomics revealed selective lipidomic and protein shifts
in a temporal manner across various cancer lines resultant from BPM 31510
exposure. Berg informatics suite comprising of Bayesian artificial
intelligence systems engineering framework linked specific pivot lipid
molecular species and proteins to the action of BPM 31510 based on
dynamic time course experiments and biological endpoints including
cellular metabolism and cell fate (apoptosis) across cancer cell lines.
Thus, the data presented within demonstrate that BPM 31510 affects the
cancer cell biomembrane structure, membrane lipid reorganization with
potential to influence intracellular signaling, cell fate decision making
processes and metabolism. The systems approach described within provides
novel insight into the pleiotropic effects of BPM 31510 on cancer cells.

