Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A prospective study of a repeat endoscopic biopsy to identify
HER2-positive tumors following an initial HER2-negative endoscopic biopsy
in unresectable or metastatic gastric cancer patients: GASTHER1 study


Background: The intratumoral heterogeneity of HER2 expression in gastric
cancer (GC) is a major challenge when identifying patients who will
benefit from HER2-targeting therapy. The aim of this study is to evaluate
the significance of re-evaluation of the HER2 status by repeat endoscopic
biopsy in GC patients with an initial, HER2-negative endoscopic
biopsy.Methods: Patients with unresectable or metastatic
gastric/gastroesophageal junction (GEJ) adenocarcinoma and who will
receive first-line chemotherapy, were eligible if the HER2 was negative
on the initial endoscopic biopsy. HER2 positivity was defined as
immunohistochemistry (IHC) 3+ or IHC 2+/fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH) + using the GC scoring system. A repeat endoscopic
biopsy was performed in 6 different primary tumor sites immediately after
obtaining initial HER2-negative results.Results: From May 2011 to April
2013, a total of 183 eligible patients were enrolled. Baseline
characteristics at the time of the initial biopsy were as follows: tumor
location, GEJfundus/body/antrum/diffuse
stomach=22(12.0%)/47(25.7%)/68(37.2%)/46(25.1%); Lauren classification,
intestinal/diffuse/mixed=53(29.0%)/111(60.7%)/19(10.4%); and HER2 IHC
score, 0/1/2=149(81.4%)/26(14.2%)/8(4.4%). The median number of biopsy
pieces per patient was 5 (range, 1-15) and 10 (range, 1-15) on the
initial and repeat biopsy, respectively (PBackground: The intratumoral
heterogeneity of HER2 expression in gastric cancer (GC) is a major
challenge when identifying patients who will benefit from HER2-targeting
therapy. The aim of this study is to evaluate the significance of
re-evaluation of the HER2 status by repeat endoscopic biopsy in GC
patients with an initial, HER2-negative endoscopic biopsy.Methods:
Patients with unresectable or metastatic gastric/gastroesophageal
junction (GEJ) adenocarcinoma and who will receive first-line
chemotherapy, were eligible if the HER2 was negative on the initial
endoscopic biopsy. HER2 positivity was defined as immunohistochemistry
(IHC) 3+ or IHC 2+/fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) + using the
GC scoring system. A repeat endoscopic biopsy was performed in 6
different primary tumor sites immediately after obtaining initial
HER2-negative results.Results: From May 2011 to April 2013, a total of
183 eligible patients were enrolled. Baseline characteristics at the time
of the initial biopsy were as follows: tumor location,
GEJfundus/body/antrum/diffuse
stomach=22(12.0%)/47(25.7%)/68(37.2%)/46(25.1%); Lauren classification,
intestinal/diffuse/mixed=53(29.0%)/111(60.7%)/19(10.4%); and HER2 IHC
score, 0/1/2=149(81.4%)/26(14.2%)/8(4.4%). The median number of biopsy
pieces per patient was 5 (range, 1-15) and 10 (range, 1-15) on the
initial and repeat biopsy, respectively (P<0.0001). There was no
difference in the median ratio of the number of cancer-containing
pieces/total pieces; 0.86 (range, 0.13-1) vs. 0.89 (range, 0.10-1)
(P=0.679). As the repeat biopsy identified 16 patients with HER2-positive
tumor, the rate of rescued HER2 positivity was 8.7% (95% CI 4.6-12.8%).
Rescued HER2 positivity was associated with tumor location (diffuse
stomach vs. others=0% vs. 11.7%, P=0.013), Bormann type (IV vs. others=0%
vs. 11.7%, P=0.013), and the HER2 IHC score on the initial biopsy (0 vs.
1 vs. 2 = 6.7% vs. 15.4% vs. 25.0%, P=0.028). In multivariate analysis,
the HER2 IHC score (1/2 vs. 0, odds ratio=3.78; P=0.016) was an
independent predictive factor for rescued HER2 positivity.Conclusions:
Repeat endoscopic biopsy is recommended in order to check the HER2 status
again even if the initial endoscopic biopsy is HER2 negative in
metastatic or unresectable GC.Note: This abstract was not presented at
the meeting.

