Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Obinutuzumab (GA101) significantly induces antiproliferative
effects and programmed cell death, and significantly downregulates cell
signaling pathways in primary mediastinal B-cell lymphoma (PMBL):
Obinutuzumab may be a future potential targeted agent for treatment of
PMBL


BACKGROUND: Primary Mediastinal large B-cell lymphoma (PMBL) is a rare
form of non-Hodgkin Lymphoma (NHL) representing 2% of mature B-cell NHL
in patients 18 years of age (Lones/Cairo et al., JCO, 2000). PMBL is
classified as a distinct mature B-Cell lymphoma and is considered midway
in the biologic spectrum between Diffuse Large B-Cell Lymphoma (DLBCL)
and classical HL (Abramson et al., Blood, 2005). We have recently
reported a significant decrease in EFS among children and adolescent PMBL
patients compared with other stage III non-PMBL pediatric DLBCL patients
following FAB/LMB 96 therapy, suggesting that children and adolescent
PMBL may be an inherently different B-NHL (Gerrard/Cairo et al., Blood,
2013). Since 98% of PMBL express CD20, targeting the CD20 receptor with a
CD20 antibody is of high clinical interest. Obinutuzumab (GA101) is a
novel, anti-CD20 targeted monoclonal antibody recognizing a unique CD20
type II epitope and has been demonstrated to have efficacy in reducing
tumor size and improving survival in other B-NHL xenograft models (Mssner
et al., Blood, 2010).OBJECTIVES: We hypothesize that obinutuzumab may be
a future potential targeted agent for the treatment of PMBL, and
therefore, we investigated the effect of obinutuzumab on cell
proliferation, programmed cell death, and cell signaling pathways in
PMBL.METHODS: CD20+ PMBL, Karpas-1106P cells (Karpas) were obtained from
the DSMZ, Germany and obinutuzumab was generously provided by C. Klein,
Roche. Cell proliferation and apoptotic rate were assessed using MTS and
FACS analysis, respectively. Statistical significance was determined by
one-tailed Student's t-test.RESULTS: There was a significant decrease of
cell proliferation in obinutuzumab-treated Karpas vs PBS-treated Karpas
(1.000 0.000) at 48 hours with 1ug/ml (0.723 0.005, p=0.0007), 10ug/ml
(0.688 0.025, p=0.0033), and 20ug/ml (0.627 0.042, p=0.0092) obinutuzumab
treatment. There was a significant increase in cell death in Karpas
following 10ug/ml obinutuzumab treatment (37.790 10.096, p=0.018) as
compared to IgG isotope (1.040 0.834, p=0.340) and PBS control (1.190
0.762) at 48 hours by FACS analysis. We also observed significant
decreases in the phosphorylation of Stat6 (0.730 0.005, p=0.0001), Akt
(0.691 0.002, pBACKGROUND: Primary Mediastinal large B-cell lymphoma
(PMBL) is a rare form of non-Hodgkin Lymphoma (NHL) representing 2% of
mature B-cell NHL in patients 18 years of age (Lones/Cairo et al., JCO,
2000). PMBL is classified as a distinct mature B-Cell lymphoma and is
considered midway in the biologic spectrum between Diffuse Large B-Cell
Lymphoma (DLBCL) and classical HL (Abramson et al., Blood, 2005). We have
recently reported a significant decrease in EFS among children and
adolescent PMBL patients compared with other stage III non-PMBL pediatric
DLBCL patients following FAB/LMB 96 therapy, suggesting that children and
adolescent PMBL may be an inherently different B-NHL (Gerrard/Cairo et
al., Blood, 2013). Since 98% of PMBL express CD20, targeting the CD20
receptor with a CD20 antibody is of high clinical interest. Obinutuzumab
(GA101) is a novel, anti-CD20 targeted monoclonal antibody recognizing a
unique CD20 type II epitope and has been demonstrated to have efficacy in
reducing tumor size and improving survival in other B-NHL xenograft
models (Mssner et al., Blood, 2010).OBJECTIVES: We hypothesize that
obinutuzumab may be a future potential targeted agent for the treatment
of PMBL, and therefore, we investigated the effect of obinutuzumab on
cell proliferation, programmed cell death, and cell signaling pathways in
PMBL.METHODS: CD20+ PMBL, Karpas-1106P cells (Karpas) were obtained from
the DSMZ, Germany and obinutuzumab was generously provided by C. Klein,
Roche. Cell proliferation and apoptotic rate were assessed using MTS and
FACS analysis, respectively. Statistical significance was determined by
one-tailed Student's t-test.RESULTS: There was a significant decrease of
cell proliferation in obinutuzumab-treated Karpas vs PBS-treated Karpas
(1.000 0.000) at 48 hours with 1ug/ml (0.723 0.005, p=0.0007), 10ug/ml
(0.688 0.025, p=0.0033), and 20ug/ml (0.627 0.042, p=0.0092) obinutuzumab
treatment. There was a significant increase in cell death in Karpas
following 10ug/ml obinutuzumab treatment (37.790 10.096, p=0.018) as
compared to IgG isotope (1.040 0.834, p=0.340) and PBS control (1.190
0.762) at 48 hours by FACS analysis. We also observed significant
decreases in the phosphorylation of Stat6 (0.730 0.005, p=0.0001), Akt
(0.691 0.002, p<0.0001), IkBa (0.706 0.006, p=0.0002) and Erk (0.578
0.001, pBACKGROUND: Primary Mediastinal large B-cell lymphoma (PMBL) is a
rare form of non-Hodgkin Lymphoma (NHL) representing 2% of mature B-cell
NHL in patients 18 years of age (Lones/Cairo et al., JCO, 2000). PMBL is
classified as a distinct mature B-Cell lymphoma and is considered midway
in the biologic spectrum between Diffuse Large B-Cell Lymphoma (DLBCL)
and classical HL (Abramson et al., Blood, 2005). We have recently
reported a significant decrease in EFS among children and adolescent PMBL
patients compared with other stage III non-PMBL pediatric DLBCL patients
following FAB/LMB 96 therapy, suggesting that children and adolescent
PMBL may be an inherently different B-NHL (Gerrard/Cairo et al., Blood,
2013). Since 98% of PMBL express CD20, targeting the CD20 receptor with a
CD20 antibody is of high clinical interest. Obinutuzumab (GA101) is a
novel, anti-CD20 targeted monoclonal antibody recognizing a unique CD20
type II epitope and has been demonstrated to have efficacy in reducing
tumor size and improving survival in other B-NHL xenograft models (Mssner
et al., Blood, 2010).OBJECTIVES: We hypothesize that obinutuzumab may be
a future potential targeted agent for the treatment of PMBL, and
therefore, we investigated the effect of obinutuzumab on cell
proliferation, programmed cell death, and cell signaling pathways in
PMBL.METHODS: CD20+ PMBL, Karpas-1106P cells (Karpas) were obtained from
the DSMZ, Germany and obinutuzumab was generously provided by C. Klein,
Roche. Cell proliferation and apoptotic rate were assessed using MTS and
FACS analysis, respectively. Statistical significance was determined by
one-tailed Student's t-test.RESULTS: There was a significant decrease of
cell proliferation in obinutuzumab-treated Karpas vs PBS-treated Karpas
(1.000 0.000) at 48 hours with 1ug/ml (0.723 0.005, p=0.0007), 10ug/ml
(0.688 0.025, p=0.0033), and 20ug/ml (0.627 0.042, p=0.0092) obinutuzumab
treatment. There was a significant increase in cell death in Karpas
following 10ug/ml obinutuzumab treatment (37.790 10.096, p=0.018) as
compared to IgG isotope (1.040 0.834, p=0.340) and PBS control (1.190
0.762) at 48 hours by FACS analysis. We also observed significant
decreases in the phosphorylation of Stat6 (0.730 0.005, p=0.0001), Akt
(0.691 0.002, p<0.0001), IkBa (0.706 0.006, p=0.0002) and Erk (0.578
0.001, p<0.0001) in 10ug/ml obinutuzumab-treated Karpas as compared to
control (1.000 0.000).CONCLUSIONS: Obinutuzumab significantly induced
antiproliferative effects and cell death in PMBL and may be a future
potential targeted agent for the treatment of PMBL. The effect(s) of
obinutuzumab will be evaluated in vivo in a NOD/SCID PMBL xenograft mouse
model.

