Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of Aurintricarboxylic Acid (ATA) as an inhibitor of
TWEAK-Fn14 signaling in glioblastoma cells


The long-term survival of patients with glioblastoma (GB) is compromised
by the proclivity for local invasion into the surrounding normal brain,
escaping surgical resection and contributing to therapeutic resistance.
Tumor necrosis factor-like weak inducer of apoptosis (TWEAK), a member of
the tumor necrosis factor superfamily, can stimulate glioma cell invasion
via binding to fibroblast growth factor-inducible 14 (Fn14) and
subsequent activation of the transcription factor NF-B. In order to
discover a small molecule inhibitors that disrupt Fn14-TWEAK signaling
axis and subsequently glioma cell invasion, we developed a cell-based
drug screening assay using HEK293 cells that overexpresses Fn14 and
harbors NF-B driven Firefly luciferase protein expression. In preliminary
drug screening assay using LOPAC1280 library of 1280 pharmacologically
active compound, Aurintricarboxylic Acid (ATA) showed suppression of NF-B
driven Firefly Luciferase activity downstreatm of TWEAK-Fn14 signaling.
Conversely, ATA did not show any suppression in NF-B driven Firefly
Luciferase activity downstream of TNF-TNFR1 signaling, suggesting that
ATA is a specific inhibitor of TWEAK-Fn14-NF-B signaling. In vitro, we
demonstrated that ATA suppresses TWEAK induced chemotactic migration of
glioma cells (T98G and A172) and display no general cytotoxicity. In
summary, this work reports a new small molecule inhibitor of TWEAK-Fn14
signaling that could be useful in enhancing the therapeutic targeting of
this deadly disease.

