Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Complex deregulation of p73 transcripts in breast tissues:
overexpression in benign breast fibroadenomas, and down-regulation in
breast cancers


p73, a p53-related gene, encodes two classes of isoforms with opposing
functions: (1) a full-length transactivation-competent p73 protein
(TAp73) with tumor suppressor activity; and (2) a group of NH2-terminally
truncated, transactivation-deficient p73 proteins, Ex2p73, Ex2-3p73, Np73
and N'p73 (collectively named DNp73) which exert oncogenic activity by
inactivating p53 and TAp73. In contrast to p53, p73 is essentially never
mutated in cancer. Some studies have focused on the analysis of p73
alterations in breast cancer, but the results are often contradictory.
However, it should be noted that there is no study on the comparative
analysis of the p73 levels in matched normal breast tissues-breast cancer
from the same patients, probably because of the difficulty of obtaining
such matched tissues. To study whether p73 is associated with breast
carcinogenesis, deregulations of TAp73 and DNp73 were assessed in 103
breast tissues including breast cancer (BC) exhibiting no inflammatory
symptoms, inflammatory BC (IBC), normal breast epithelium adjacent to BC
(N) and benign breast fibroadenomas (FA). IBC is a rare but aggressive
form of BC with a very poor prognosis. Tumor characteristics and the risk
of death and relapse were examined in each patient. Surprisingly, we
found that antiapoptotic Np73 transcripts and protein levels were
down-regulated in BC, compared to that found in normal adjacent tissue,
suggesting that this isoform could be associated with other processes
during breast carcinogenesis such as differentiation. In contrast with
this finding, Np73 was unchanged in FA. ex2p73 levels were upregulated in
BC and FA (p=0.06 and 0.04 respectively), but the level was higher in FA.
TAp73 and ex2-3p73 were unchanged in FA and BC. Intriguingly, TAp73 and
ex2-3p73 transcripts were higher in ER-negative BC, compared to
ER-positive BC (p=0.07 and 0.04 respectively). Taken together, our
results show that, surprisingly, both suppressor and oncogenic isoforms
of p73 were more deregulated in FA than in BC. Consequently, the reports
demonstrating upregulation of p73 isoforms in BC should be considered
with caution.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

