Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Multiparametric analysis of an ultra-large prostate cancer tissue
microarray with attached histo-pathological, clinical, and molecular
data: A tool for rapid evaluation of clinically relevant gene sets


A magnitude of candidate prognostic markers has been suggested in
prostate cancer during the last decade. However, virtually none of these
markers has been proven to be sufficiently reliable to justify
development a new routine diagnostic applications. It is hoped that
combinations of multiple markers will allow for an improved prediction of
the clinical behavior of theses tumors. In orderIn order to create a
platform for rapid validation of the clinical impact of a large number of
candidate prognostic markers and their combinations, we have constructed
a tissue microarray containing 12,427 individual prostate cancers
undergoing radical prostatectomy between 1992 and 2012, and assembled a
database with detailed histological, pathological, and clinical follow-up
data. More than 60 molecular parameters have been analyzed by means of
immunohistochemistry (IHC) and/or fluorescence in situ hybridization
(FISH) in this cancer set until today, including such that have been
suggested for candidate prognosticator before as well as novel markers.
Integrated analysis of these markers revealed prognostic relevant
patterns of specific alterations, including a 10-genes classifier that
predicted biochemical recurrence independently from established
prognostic factors pathological stage, nodal stage, pre-surgical prostate
specific antigen levels, Gleason grade, and status of the resection
margin. We also found that the number of deletions per cancer had strong
prognostic relevance.In summary, our data demonstrate the power of our
prostate cancer tissue microarray platform for long term analysis of
dozens of putative prognosticators on the DNA and protein level on the
same tissue set with detailed clinical characterization. Despite only one
tissue core per tumor has been sampled, this platform has proven to be
instrumental for validation of the clinical impact of known and suggested
prognosis markers. The very high number of individual samples even allows
for multiparametric analysis resulting in the identification of marker
sets that are superior to established prognostic parameters.

