Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting the root of cancer: a data-driven approach for
identification of lung cancer stem cell biomarkers


Cancer stem cells (CSCs) are a small group of cancer cells with stem
cell-like properties and have been revealed to be the drive force of
tumorigenesis, metastasis and drug resistance in many cancers. Current
CSC surface biomarkers, such as CD133, CD44 and CD166, have been used to
isolate CSC population. However, they are often not specific and
unassociated with tumor outcome. Here, we applied a data-driven approach
to identify new and functional biomarkers of CSC. We systematically
screened for genes whose expressions are statistically correlated with
CSC surface biomarkers. Normalized DNA microarray data of 160 cases of
squamous carcinoma and 33 cases of adenocarcinoma and 8 cases of normal
lung were analyzed for association with CD133, CD44 and CD166
respectively. Multiple hypothesis testing was corrected with the false
discovery rate (FDR) less than 1%. We find CD133, CD44 and CD166 each has
a different set of statistically associated genes in either adeno or
squamous subtypes. Moreover, correlated genes with each of the surface
marker are different between adeno and squamous subtypes. Among the
highly correlated receptor genes with CD133 in squamous subtype is a
hormone receptor of the reproduction regulator oxytocin (OXTR, r=0.4276,
p=1.699e-8). We experimentally validated the correlation between OXTR and
CD133 in human lung cancer tissues and cell lines. Further with
functional assays, we discovered a new role of OXTR in promoting the
self-renewal and differentiation of lung CSC. Our study suggests highly
heterogeneous molecular features of CSC in different lung cancer types
and demonstrates that association studies of CSC surface markers can be
applied to identify new CSC biomarkers, which can be potentially used for
development of probes for CSC imaging and targeting.

