Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An enhanced microRNA backbone for potent single-copy RNAi


Short-hairpin RNA (shRNA) technology enables stable and regulated gene
repression through RNA interference (RNAi). Synthetic shRNAs can be
embedded into the context of an endogenous microRNA (miRNA) to create
natural substrates of RNAi pathways and minimize cellular toxicities.
While such shRNAmir reagents provide an experimentally versatile RNAi
system, their design remains challenging due to our limited understanding
of miRNA processing factors. Consequently, shRNAmir reagents often fail
to trigger potent target knockdown, especially when expressed from a
single genomic integration (single-copy), a common scenario in pool-based
screens and other key applications. To tackle this issue, we recently
developed a high-throughput Sensor assay that enables functional
identification of effective shRNAs and has been used to establish
shRNA-specific prediction rules. Following these advances in design of
the synthetic shRNA stem, here we take a systematic approach to improve
the experimental miR-30 backbone. Among several sequence features
enhancing knockdown efficiency, we identify a conserved element 3 of the
basal stem that is critically required for optimal shRNAmir processing.
Implementation of this feature in an optimized backbone termed miR-E
results in a 10-30 fold increase in mature shRNA levels, and generally
boosts knockdown efficacy. Importantly, combination of the enhanced miR-E
backbone with Sensor-based design rules establishes a validated and
easily accessible platform for generating single-copy effective shRNAs
for pool-based RNAi screening and transgenic animals, and will facilitate
the functional annotation of the genome.

