Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pre-clinical evaluation of a novel DNA crosslinking agent,
Ureidomustin (BO-1055) in pediatric sarcomas


DNA crosslinking agents continue to be an important part of chemotherapy
for pediatric sarcomas. We tested potent analogues of phenyl
N-mustard-benzene conjugates in several tumor models. In this work, we
compared the efficacy of a novel water-soluble DNA alkylating agent,
Ureidomustin (BO-1055) in Ewing sarcoma, rhabdomyosarcoma, osteosarcoma,
desmoplastic small round cell tumor (DSRCT) cell lines and early cultures
derived from primary patient samples. We tested its toxicity in normal
human cells in vitro including the proliferation of mesenchymal stromal
cells, bone marrow-derived endothelial cells and purified cord blood
CD34+ cells in colony-forming assay (for hematopoietic progenitor cells)
and in cobblestone area forming assay (for hematopoietic stem cells). We
performed cell viability, cytotoxicity and caspase activation assays in a
dose-dependent and time-dependent manner. We also performed apoptosis,
cell cycle analyses using flow cytometry, immunoblot analysis and in vivo
experiments in nude mice using Ewing sarcoma (A673) cell line transduced
with GFP/luciferase for bioimaging. We evaluated cardiotoxicity in the
HL-1 cardiomyocyte line in vitro and noted a 227 fold less cytotoxicity
using BO-1055 compared to Doxorubicin. Based on MTD testing in nude mice,
we used 30mg/kg q2d for 5 doses after tumors reached 75-100mm3 and were
detected on luciferase bioimaging. Our results indicated that BO-1055 has
a significant therapeutic window in its activity (mean IC50SD M) for
rhabdomyosarcoma (0.160.11), Ewing sarcoma (0.480.29) and DSRCT
(3.070.94) but not for osteosarcoma (IC50>10M). The mean IC50 in benign
cells was >10M. Treatment with BO-1055 resulted in G2 arrest and
activation of caspases 3 and 7 in a dose dependent manner. A673
xenografts were significantly inhibited by BO-1055 compared to the
control mice injected with vehicle, based on mean fluorescence intensity
and size of the tumors. Our results suggest that BO-1055 has potent
activity against Ewing sarcoma and rhabdomyosarcoma and presents a strong
rationale for further development as a therapeutic agent.

