Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Low PU.1 expression not only attenuates neutrophil differentiation
of AML cells but also increases resistance to cytotoxic therapies


Inactivation of PU.1 results in a myeloid differentiation block and
contributes to the pathogenesis of acute myeloid leukemia (AML). A long
list of PU.1 transcriptional targets with a direct function in myeloid
development exits and clearly supports its role in cellular hematopoietic
differentiation processes. Furthermore, we and others showed that PU.1
positively affects cell survival, for example by directly activating the
anti-apoptotic genes BCL2A1 and BCL-XL. Recently, we demonstrated that
the novel PU.1 target Hexokinase 3 supports acute promyelocytic leukemia
(APL) cell survival. Surprisingly, our current data indicate that
knocking down PU.1 in NB4 APL significantly increased resistance in
apoptosis responses to anthracyclins. These findings were confirmed in
MOLM-3 AML cells. Both cell lines showed an induction of the
anti-apoptotic gene CFLAR (c-FLIP). c-FLIP blocks the activation of
procaspase-8 at the death-inducing signalling complex (DISC) and is
involved in AML chemotherapy resistance. Using PU.1 and c-FLIP double
knockdown APL cells, we could significantly restore the sensitivity to
anthracyclin treatment. This indicates that the PU.1 knockdown-dependent
increase of c-FLIP is responsible for the resistance towards anthracyclin
treatment. Moreover, we identified the pro-apoptotic kinase DAPK2 as
novel transcriptional target of PU.1 in APL cells. Interestingly, we
found that inhibiting DAPK2 in APL cells significantly attenuater arsenic
trioxide (ATO)-induced cell death. Together, we link PU.1 to apoptosis
and resistance against antracyclins and ATO via regulating c-FLIP and
DAPK2. Our data indicate that low PU.1 level found in AML patients not
only contribute to a block in differentiation but also increase
resistance to cytotoxic therapies in AML.

