Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The novel and contrasting roles of ATM and DNA-PK in the response
of cells to microtubule-targeting anticancer agents


Ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) and DNA-dependent protein kinase
(DNA-PK) are DNA-damage activated kinases that play vital roles in the
DNA double-strand break repair pathways homologous recombination (HR) and
non-homologous end joining (NHEJ), respectively. ATM and DNA-PK have both
been shown to have roles in addition to DNA repair, including localising
at the centrosome during mitosis and mitotic regulation. This latter role
led to the hypothesis that inhibition of ATM and DNA-PK, using the small
molecule inhibitors KU55933 and NU7441, respectively, will sensitise
cells to agents that interfere with formation of the mitotic spindle,
e.g. microtubule-targeting agents. Here we investigated the sensitisation
effects of the ATM inhibitor KU55933 to microtubule-targeting agents in
paired sensitive and multidrug-resistant cells.In growth inhibition
studies, KU55933 (10M) sensitised CCRF-CEM leukaemia cells 4-fold to
vincristine, and sensitised vincristine-resistant CCRF-CEM VCR/R cells
40-fold to vincristine. We have previously shown that inhibition of
DNA-PK sensitises parental and multidrug-resistant (MDR) cells to
microtubule-targeting agents and that DNA-PK is activated in response to
these agents (Mould E, Proc Ann Meet AACR 2013; 54: #3329). The DNA-PK
inhibitor increased vincristine-induced caspase 3/7 activation 2-fold
after 24 hours, similar to the increase seen in combination with the
positive control mitoxantrone. In contrast, KU55933 did not increase
vincristine-induced caspase 3/7-mediated apoptosis, indicating a
different mechanism of increased cell death. Vincristine-induced DNA-PK
autophosphorylation (ser2056) (Western blotting) was abrogated by NU7441.
However, the microtubule-targeting agents had no effect on ATM
autophosphorylation (ser1981). Ongoing studies include confocal
microscopy to determine localisation of ATM and DNA-PK during spindle
formation, and the effects of microtubule-targeting agents and ATM/DNA-PK
inhibitors on localisation, to further elucidate the novel roles of these
kinases.We have also demonstrated that 1M NU7441 induced a 2.1-fold
(p=0.04) increase in vincristine accumulation in MDR1-overexpressing
cells and that NU7441 is a dual DNA-PK MDR1 inhibitor. Due to the
increased sensitisation observed in MDR cells, the effect of KU55933 on
drug accumulation was investigated. LC-MS studies demonstrated that both
1M and 10M KU55933 increased intracellular vincristine accumulation
1.5-fold and 2.7-fold, respectively, in MDR1-overexpressing cells,
indicating that KU55933 acts as a dual ATM and MDR1 inhibitor.These
results highlight the complexity of the roles of ATM and DNA-PK and
extend the therapeutic potential of targeting these kinases in
combination with chemotherapeutic agents.

