Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel in vivo preclinical model for the study of human tumor
angiogenesis with human vessels


The preclinical assessment of anti-angiogenic drug efficacy is hampered
by the lack of availability of suitable model systems to study anti-human
therapies. Good in vitro assays exist for testing anti-human-specific
therapies but these are let down by the lack of robust translatable in
vivo models. Currently available preclinical models such as the matrigel
plug assay and the window chamber assay focus on the angiogenesis of
mouse vessels which may not be truly reflective of the influence of test
items on human vasculature, and in vivo models to study the angiogenesis
of human tumors by human vessels are unfortunately lacking. We have
developed a sophisticated model to address this using adult human skin
engrafted onto immunocompromised CB17-SCID mice. Angiogenesis of the skin
follows, with human and host vessels anastomosing, resulting in a viable
skin graft containing functioning human CD31-labelled vessels. This skin
graft can be intradermally injected with a cell line of interest, such as
the human melanoma cell line A375, and the ensuing tumors contain human
vessels as evidenced by immunohistochemistry with a human-specific
anti-CD31 antibody. Using the Aperio Scanscope and FDA-approved
microvessel analysis algorithm, 5-10 human vessels per mm2 of human tumor
are observed. Furthermore, the model has the potential to be used in
combination with non-invasive in vivo imaging techniques to assess tumor
growth inhibition in response to therapies in a longitudinal fashion.
This novel technique could potentially enable the rapid preclinical
testing of anti-angiogenic anti-human therapies to help provide a
go/no-go decision prior to costly clinical trials.

