Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Akt kinase-interacting protein1, a novel therapeutic target for
lung cancer with EGFR-activating and gatekeeper mutations


Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitors
(TKIs), such as gefitinib and erlotinib, show favorable effects in EGFR
mutant lung cancer. However, responders eventually develop acquired
resistance almost without exception, and secondary T790M mutations in
EGFR account for approximately 50% of the acquired resistance. Recent
studies indicated that EGFR mutant lung cancer cells are dependent on
EGFR/Akt signaling for survival even after acquired T790M secondary
mutation. Akt kinase-interacting protein1 (Aki1) is a scaffold protein
that binds to wild-type EGFR after EGF ligand stimulation, maintains
signaling specificity, and mediates activating signal to the
PI3K/PDK1/Akt pathway. We hypothesized that Aki1 may play important roles
in signal transduction in EGFR mutant lung cancer cells. Here, we showed
that Aki1 constitutively associates with mutant EGFR in lung cancer cells
with (H1975) or without (PC-9 and HCC827) T790M secondary mutation.
Silencing of Aki1 inhibited phosphorylation of Akt and S6, and induced
apoptosis of EGFR mutant lung cancer cells. Treatment with Aki1 siRNA
markedly inhibited growth of H1975 cells in a xenograft model. Moreover,
silencing of Aki1 inhibited H1975 cell growth in combination with new
generation EGFR-TKIs in vitro. Aki1 was frequently expressed in tumor
cells of EGFR mutant lung cancer patients (53/56 cases), including those
with acquired resistance to EGFR-TKI treatment (7/7 cases). Our data
suggest that Aki1 may be a key mediator of survival signaling from mutant
EGFR, and may therefore be an ideal target for EGFR mutant lung cancer
patients, especially those with acquired EGFR-TKI resistance due to EGFR
T790M secondary mutation.

