Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metrics other than potency reveal systematic variation in
responses to cancer drugs


Most analyses of cellular responses to anti-cancer drugs focus on
variation in potency (e.g. GI50 or IC50) under the assumption that
potency is the most important difference between effective and
ineffective drugs or sensitive and resistant cells. We took a
multi-parametric approach involving analysis of additional features such
as maximum effect (Emax), the slope of the dose-response curve (Hill
Slope; HS), and the area under the curve (AUC). We found that a subset of
these parameters varies in a systematic manner with cell line and another
subset with drug class. For cell cycle inhibitors, Emax generally
correlates with cell proliferation rate but this is not always true: Emax
0 for S-phase specific drugs such as cisplatin, carboplatin and
oxaliplatin across multiple cell lines. For drugs targeting the
Akt/PI3K/mTOR pathway the slope of the dose-response curve is unusually
shallow (HS Most analyses of cellular responses to anti-cancer drugs
focus on variation in potency (e.g. GI50 or IC50) under the assumption
that potency is the most important difference between effective and
ineffective drugs or sensitive and resistant cells. We took a
multi-parametric approach involving analysis of additional features such
as maximum effect (Emax), the slope of the dose-response curve (Hill
Slope; HS), and the area under the curve (AUC). We found that a subset of
these parameters varies in a systematic manner with cell line and another
subset with drug class. For cell cycle inhibitors, Emax generally
correlates with cell proliferation rate but this is not always true: Emax
0 for S-phase specific drugs such as cisplatin, carboplatin and
oxaliplatin across multiple cell lines. For drugs targeting the
Akt/PI3K/mTOR pathway the slope of the dose-response curve is unusually
shallow (HS <Most analyses of cellular responses to anti-cancer drugs
focus on variation in potency (e.g. GI50 or IC50) under the assumption
that potency is the most important difference between effective and
ineffective drugs or sensitive and resistant cells. We took a
multi-parametric approach involving analysis of additional features such
as maximum effect (Emax), the slope of the dose-response curve (Hill
Slope; HS), and the area under the curve (AUC). We found that a subset of
these parameters varies in a systematic manner with cell line and another
subset with drug class. For cell cycle inhibitors, Emax generally
correlates with cell proliferation rate but this is not always true: Emax
0 for S-phase specific drugs such as cisplatin, carboplatin and
oxaliplatin across multiple cell lines. For drugs targeting the
Akt/PI3K/mTOR pathway the slope of the dose-response curve is unusually
shallow (HS << 1). Classical pharmacology has no ready explanation for
this phenomenon but single-cell analysis showed that it correlated with
significant and heritable cell-to-cell variability in the extent of
target inhibition. We conclude that parameters other than potency should
be considered in the comparative analysis of drug response, particularly
at clinically relevant concentrations near and above IC50.

