Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel NUT translocation partner binds to BRD4 and is necessary
for the blockade of differentiation in NUT midline carcinoma


NUT midline carcinoma (NMC) is an aggressive type of squamous cell
carcinoma that typically harbors BRD4/3-NUT fusion oncogenes which encode
chimeric proteins that block differentiation and maintain tumor growth.
However, in 30% of cases NUT is fused to yet to be identified non-BRD
gene(s). Using RNA sequencing, we identified a novel gene fused to NUT in
a NMC cell line (1221), fusing a novel 5 coding sequence to the NUT gene.
Like Brd4/3, this gene encodes a protein that is also involved in
epigenetic regulation, and we find that siRNA knockdown of this protein
leads to differentiation of the 1221 cells as well as of three
BRD4-NUT-positive NMC cell lines. We have established that the novel NUT
fusion protein encoded by this translocated gene binds to BRD4. We have
mapped the regions of Brd4 and of the novel fusion protein involved in
complex formation and are exploring whether association of the novel
protein with Brd4 is required for the blockade of differentiation in NMC.
Differentiation of TC-797 cells induced by knockdown of BRD4-NUT is
abrogated by enforced expression of the novel NUT-fusion gene. Together,
these findings identify a novel BRD4-NUT-interacting protein whose
expression is required for the maintenance of the undifferentiated state
in NMC, and when fused to NUT, is oncogenic and can recapitulate the
function of BRD4-NUT to block differentiation.

