Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epigenetic derangements in histone and cytosine methylation are
unique to diffuse intrinsic pontine glioma (DIPG)


Diffuse intrinsic pontine glioma (DIPG) is a universally fatal tumor that
comprises approximately 10% of pediatric brain tumors. Eighty percent of
DIPG patients have a mutation in the H3F3A gene resulting in a lysine to
methionine conversion at position 27 of Histone 3.3 (H3K27M). This
mutation inhibits methylation at this site by enhancer of zeste homologue
2 (EZH2) methyltransferase and leads to global chromatin changes. DIPG is
also associated with global DNA hypomethylation. Recent evidence suggests
that 5-methylcytosine (5mC) can be converted to cytosine in a multistep
enzymatic process with 5-hydroxymethylcytosine (5hmC) being the initial
intermediate. 5hmC itself represents an important epigenetic mark and
together with 5mC and histone methylation plays a key role in neural
development. Due to the global hypomethylation noted in DIPGs, we
hypothesized that 5mC and 5hmC would be low. We expected H3K27
trimethylation (H3K27me3) to be low and associated with the H3F3A
mutation common in DIPGs. Tissue microarrays created from post mortem
tumor tissue from 24 pediatric DIPG cases were compared to adult and
pediatric glioblastoma (GBM) tissue arrays. Immunohistochemical (IHC)
assay using antibodies for H3K27me3, 5hmC, and 5mC was used to identify
epigenetic differences between the brain tumor groups. H-scores (H)
(0-200) were obtained by multiplying intensity of stain (0: no stain, 1:
weak stain, 2: strong stain) by percentage (0-100) of cells showing the
staining. We found H3K27me3 immunoreactivity was significantly lower for
DIPG compared to pediatric GBM (pDiffuse intrinsic pontine glioma (DIPG)
is a universally fatal tumor that comprises approximately 10% of
pediatric brain tumors. Eighty percent of DIPG patients have a mutation
in the H3F3A gene resulting in a lysine to methionine conversion at
position 27 of Histone 3.3 (H3K27M). This mutation inhibits methylation
at this site by enhancer of zeste homologue 2 (EZH2) methyltransferase
and leads to global chromatin changes. DIPG is also associated with
global DNA hypomethylation. Recent evidence suggests that
5-methylcytosine (5mC) can be converted to cytosine in a multistep
enzymatic process with 5-hydroxymethylcytosine (5hmC) being the initial
intermediate. 5hmC itself represents an important epigenetic mark and
together with 5mC and histone methylation plays a key role in neural
development. Due to the global hypomethylation noted in DIPGs, we
hypothesized that 5mC and 5hmC would be low. We expected H3K27
trimethylation (H3K27me3) to be low and associated with the H3F3A
mutation common in DIPGs. Tissue microarrays created from post mortem
tumor tissue from 24 pediatric DIPG cases were compared to adult and
pediatric glioblastoma (GBM) tissue arrays. Immunohistochemical (IHC)
assay using antibodies for H3K27me3, 5hmC, and 5mC was used to identify
epigenetic differences between the brain tumor groups. H-scores (H)
(0-200) were obtained by multiplying intensity of stain (0: no stain, 1:
weak stain, 2: strong stain) by percentage (0-100) of cells showing the
staining. We found H3K27me3 immunoreactivity was significantly lower for
DIPG compared to pediatric GBM (p<0.01), adult GBM (pDiffuse intrinsic
pontine glioma (DIPG) is a universally fatal tumor that comprises
approximately 10% of pediatric brain tumors. Eighty percent of DIPG
patients have a mutation in the H3F3A gene resulting in a lysine to
methionine conversion at position 27 of Histone 3.3 (H3K27M). This
mutation inhibits methylation at this site by enhancer of zeste homologue
2 (EZH2) methyltransferase and leads to global chromatin changes. DIPG is
also associated with global DNA hypomethylation. Recent evidence suggests
that 5-methylcytosine (5mC) can be converted to cytosine in a multistep
enzymatic process with 5-hydroxymethylcytosine (5hmC) being the initial
intermediate. 5hmC itself represents an important epigenetic mark and
together with 5mC and histone methylation plays a key role in neural
development. Due to the global hypomethylation noted in DIPGs, we
hypothesized that 5mC and 5hmC would be low. We expected H3K27
trimethylation (H3K27me3) to be low and associated with the H3F3A
mutation common in DIPGs. Tissue microarrays created from post mortem
tumor tissue from 24 pediatric DIPG cases were compared to adult and
pediatric glioblastoma (GBM) tissue arrays. Immunohistochemical (IHC)
assay using antibodies for H3K27me3, 5hmC, and 5mC was used to identify
epigenetic differences between the brain tumor groups. H-scores (H)
(0-200) were obtained by multiplying intensity of stain (0: no stain, 1:
weak stain, 2: strong stain) by percentage (0-100) of cells showing the
staining. We found H3K27me3 immunoreactivity was significantly lower for
DIPG compared to pediatric GBM (p<0.01), adult GBM (p<0.0001), and normal
brain (pDiffuse intrinsic pontine glioma (DIPG) is a universally fatal
tumor that comprises approximately 10% of pediatric brain tumors. Eighty
percent of DIPG patients have a mutation in the H3F3A gene resulting in a
lysine to methionine conversion at position 27 of Histone 3.3 (H3K27M).
This mutation inhibits methylation at this site by enhancer of zeste
homologue 2 (EZH2) methyltransferase and leads to global chromatin
changes. DIPG is also associated with global DNA hypomethylation. Recent
evidence suggests that 5-methylcytosine (5mC) can be converted to
cytosine in a multistep enzymatic process with 5-hydroxymethylcytosine
(5hmC) being the initial intermediate. 5hmC itself represents an
important epigenetic mark and together with 5mC and histone methylation
plays a key role in neural development. Due to the global hypomethylation
noted in DIPGs, we hypothesized that 5mC and 5hmC would be low. We
expected H3K27 trimethylation (H3K27me3) to be low and associated with
the H3F3A mutation common in DIPGs. Tissue microarrays created from post
mortem tumor tissue from 24 pediatric DIPG cases were compared to adult
and pediatric glioblastoma (GBM) tissue arrays. Immunohistochemical (IHC)
assay using antibodies for H3K27me3, 5hmC, and 5mC was used to identify
epigenetic differences between the brain tumor groups. H-scores (H)
(0-200) were obtained by multiplying intensity of stain (0: no stain, 1:
weak stain, 2: strong stain) by percentage (0-100) of cells showing the
staining. We found H3K27me3 immunoreactivity was significantly lower for
DIPG compared to pediatric GBM (p<0.01), adult GBM (p<0.0001), and normal
brain (p<0.0001) tissue. Surprisingly, 5hmC immunoreactivity was
significantly higher for DIPG compared to pediatric GBM (pDiffuse
intrinsic pontine glioma (DIPG) is a universally fatal tumor that
comprises approximately 10% of pediatric brain tumors. Eighty percent of
DIPG patients have a mutation in the H3F3A gene resulting in a lysine to
methionine conversion at position 27 of Histone 3.3 (H3K27M). This
mutation inhibits methylation at this site by enhancer of zeste homologue
2 (EZH2) methyltransferase and leads to global chromatin changes. DIPG is
also associated with global DNA hypomethylation. Recent evidence suggests
that 5-methylcytosine (5mC) can be converted to cytosine in a multistep
enzymatic process with 5-hydroxymethylcytosine (5hmC) being the initial
intermediate. 5hmC itself represents an important epigenetic mark and
together with 5mC and histone methylation plays a key role in neural
development. Due to the global hypomethylation noted in DIPGs, we
hypothesized that 5mC and 5hmC would be low. We expected H3K27
trimethylation (H3K27me3) to be low and associated with the H3F3A
mutation common in DIPGs. Tissue microarrays created from post mortem
tumor tissue from 24 pediatric DIPG cases were compared to adult and
pediatric glioblastoma (GBM) tissue arrays. Immunohistochemical (IHC)
assay using antibodies for H3K27me3, 5hmC, and 5mC was used to identify
epigenetic differences between the brain tumor groups. H-scores (H)
(0-200) were obtained by multiplying intensity of stain (0: no stain, 1:
weak stain, 2: strong stain) by percentage (0-100) of cells showing the
staining. We found H3K27me3 immunoreactivity was significantly lower for
DIPG compared to pediatric GBM (p<0.01), adult GBM (p<0.0001), and normal
brain (p<0.0001) tissue. Surprisingly, 5hmC immunoreactivity was
significantly higher for DIPG compared to pediatric GBM (p<0.0001) and
adult GBM (pDiffuse intrinsic pontine glioma (DIPG) is a universally
fatal tumor that comprises approximately 10% of pediatric brain tumors.
Eighty percent of DIPG patients have a mutation in the H3F3A gene
resulting in a lysine to methionine conversion at position 27 of Histone
3.3 (H3K27M). This mutation inhibits methylation at this site by enhancer
of zeste homologue 2 (EZH2) methyltransferase and leads to global
chromatin changes. DIPG is also associated with global DNA
hypomethylation. Recent evidence suggests that 5-methylcytosine (5mC) can
be converted to cytosine in a multistep enzymatic process with
5-hydroxymethylcytosine (5hmC) being the initial intermediate. 5hmC
itself represents an important epigenetic mark and together with 5mC and
histone methylation plays a key role in neural development. Due to the
global hypomethylation noted in DIPGs, we hypothesized that 5mC and 5hmC
would be low. We expected H3K27 trimethylation (H3K27me3) to be low and
associated with the H3F3A mutation common in DIPGs. Tissue microarrays
created from post mortem tumor tissue from 24 pediatric DIPG cases were
compared to adult and pediatric glioblastoma (GBM) tissue arrays.
Immunohistochemical (IHC) assay using antibodies for H3K27me3, 5hmC, and
5mC was used to identify epigenetic differences between the brain tumor
groups. H-scores (H) (0-200) were obtained by multiplying intensity of
stain (0: no stain, 1: weak stain, 2: strong stain) by percentage (0-100)
of cells showing the staining. We found H3K27me3 immunoreactivity was
significantly lower for DIPG compared to pediatric GBM (p<0.01), adult
GBM (p<0.0001), and normal brain (p<0.0001) tissue. Surprisingly, 5hmC
immunoreactivity was significantly higher for DIPG compared to pediatric
GBM (p<0.0001) and adult GBM (p<0.0001). Lastly, 5mC was significantly
lower in DIPGs compared to pediatric GBM (pDiffuse intrinsic pontine
glioma (DIPG) is a universally fatal tumor that comprises approximately
10% of pediatric brain tumors. Eighty percent of DIPG patients have a
mutation in the H3F3A gene resulting in a lysine to methionine conversion
at position 27 of Histone 3.3 (H3K27M). This mutation inhibits
methylation at this site by enhancer of zeste homologue 2 (EZH2)
methyltransferase and leads to global chromatin changes. DIPG is also
associated with global DNA hypomethylation. Recent evidence suggests that
5-methylcytosine (5mC) can be converted to cytosine in a multistep
enzymatic process with 5-hydroxymethylcytosine (5hmC) being the initial
intermediate. 5hmC itself represents an important epigenetic mark and
together with 5mC and histone methylation plays a key role in neural
development. Due to the global hypomethylation noted in DIPGs, we
hypothesized that 5mC and 5hmC would be low. We expected H3K27
trimethylation (H3K27me3) to be low and associated with the H3F3A
mutation common in DIPGs. Tissue microarrays created from post mortem
tumor tissue from 24 pediatric DIPG cases were compared to adult and
pediatric glioblastoma (GBM) tissue arrays. Immunohistochemical (IHC)
assay using antibodies for H3K27me3, 5hmC, and 5mC was used to identify
epigenetic differences between the brain tumor groups. H-scores (H)
(0-200) were obtained by multiplying intensity of stain (0: no stain, 1:
weak stain, 2: strong stain) by percentage (0-100) of cells showing the
staining. We found H3K27me3 immunoreactivity was significantly lower for
DIPG compared to pediatric GBM (p<0.01), adult GBM (p<0.0001), and normal
brain (p<0.0001) tissue. Surprisingly, 5hmC immunoreactivity was
significantly higher for DIPG compared to pediatric GBM (p<0.0001) and
adult GBM (p<0.0001). Lastly, 5mC was significantly lower in DIPGs
compared to pediatric GBM (p<0.001), adult GBM (pDiffuse intrinsic
pontine glioma (DIPG) is a universally fatal tumor that comprises
approximately 10% of pediatric brain tumors. Eighty percent of DIPG
patients have a mutation in the H3F3A gene resulting in a lysine to
methionine conversion at position 27 of Histone 3.3 (H3K27M). This
mutation inhibits methylation at this site by enhancer of zeste homologue
2 (EZH2) methyltransferase and leads to global chromatin changes. DIPG is
also associated with global DNA hypomethylation. Recent evidence suggests
that 5-methylcytosine (5mC) can be converted to cytosine in a multistep
enzymatic process with 5-hydroxymethylcytosine (5hmC) being the initial
intermediate. 5hmC itself represents an important epigenetic mark and
together with 5mC and histone methylation plays a key role in neural
development. Due to the global hypomethylation noted in DIPGs, we
hypothesized that 5mC and 5hmC would be low. We expected H3K27
trimethylation (H3K27me3) to be low and associated with the H3F3A
mutation common in DIPGs. Tissue microarrays created from post mortem
tumor tissue from 24 pediatric DIPG cases were compared to adult and
pediatric glioblastoma (GBM) tissue arrays. Immunohistochemical (IHC)
assay using antibodies for H3K27me3, 5hmC, and 5mC was used to identify
epigenetic differences between the brain tumor groups. H-scores (H)
(0-200) were obtained by multiplying intensity of stain (0: no stain, 1:
weak stain, 2: strong stain) by percentage (0-100) of cells showing the
staining. We found H3K27me3 immunoreactivity was significantly lower for
DIPG compared to pediatric GBM (p<0.01), adult GBM (p<0.0001), and normal
brain (p<0.0001) tissue. Surprisingly, 5hmC immunoreactivity was
significantly higher for DIPG compared to pediatric GBM (p<0.0001) and
adult GBM (p<0.0001). Lastly, 5mC was significantly lower in DIPGs
compared to pediatric GBM (p<0.001), adult GBM (p<0.01), and normal brain
(pDiffuse intrinsic pontine glioma (DIPG) is a universally fatal tumor
that comprises approximately 10% of pediatric brain tumors. Eighty
percent of DIPG patients have a mutation in the H3F3A gene resulting in a
lysine to methionine conversion at position 27 of Histone 3.3 (H3K27M).
This mutation inhibits methylation at this site by enhancer of zeste
homologue 2 (EZH2) methyltransferase and leads to global chromatin
changes. DIPG is also associated with global DNA hypomethylation. Recent
evidence suggests that 5-methylcytosine (5mC) can be converted to
cytosine in a multistep enzymatic process with 5-hydroxymethylcytosine
(5hmC) being the initial intermediate. 5hmC itself represents an
important epigenetic mark and together with 5mC and histone methylation
plays a key role in neural development. Due to the global hypomethylation
noted in DIPGs, we hypothesized that 5mC and 5hmC would be low. We
expected H3K27 trimethylation (H3K27me3) to be low and associated with
the H3F3A mutation common in DIPGs. Tissue microarrays created from post
mortem tumor tissue from 24 pediatric DIPG cases were compared to adult
and pediatric glioblastoma (GBM) tissue arrays. Immunohistochemical (IHC)
assay using antibodies for H3K27me3, 5hmC, and 5mC was used to identify
epigenetic differences between the brain tumor groups. H-scores (H)
(0-200) were obtained by multiplying intensity of stain (0: no stain, 1:
weak stain, 2: strong stain) by percentage (0-100) of cells showing the
staining. We found H3K27me3 immunoreactivity was significantly lower for
DIPG compared to pediatric GBM (p<0.01), adult GBM (p<0.0001), and normal
brain (p<0.0001) tissue. Surprisingly, 5hmC immunoreactivity was
significantly higher for DIPG compared to pediatric GBM (p<0.0001) and
adult GBM (p<0.0001). Lastly, 5mC was significantly lower in DIPGs
compared to pediatric GBM (p<0.001), adult GBM (p<0.01), and normal brain
(p<0.01). This data indicates that DIPGs are different from their GBM
counterparts and have a unique epigenetic landscape with derangements in
both histone and cytosine methylation. This may shift the normal neural
development of hindbrain progenitors into a pathological state and
promote tumorigenicity. The presence of high-levels of 5hmC in the
context of global hypomethylation may be a key indicator of epigenetic
derangement in DIPG and may provide an opportunity for therapeutic
intervention.

