Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting brain tumor initiating cells in atypical
teratoid/rhabdoid tumors: Aldehyde dehydrogenase inhibition with
disulfiram


Atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumors (AT/RT) are one of the most malignant
pediatric brain tumors with a dismal prognosis. Cells with high aldehyde
dehydrogenase (ALDH) activity from brain tumors have a number of
characteristics that are expected of brain tumor initiating cells
(BTICs). This study aimed to evaluate the therapeutic potential of ALDH
inhibition using disulfiram (DSF) against BTICs from AT/RT.Primary
cultured BTICs from AT/RT were stained with Aldefluor and isolated by
fluorescence activated cell sorting. Therapeutic effect of DSF against
BTICs from AT/RT was confirmed using in vitro and in vivo studies.AT/RT
showed high expression of ALDH. DSF significantly inhibited ALDH enzyme
activity of AT/RT cells. DSF decreased self-renewal ability, cell
viability, proliferation potential and induced apoptosis and cell cycle
arrest on ALDH+ AT/RT cells. DSF showed more potent cytotoxic effect to
ALDH+ AT/RT cells compared to standard anti-cancer agents including
ifosfamide, carboplatin and etoposide. Importantly, DSF reduced
metabolite (metabolism?) of ALDH+ AT/RT cells by increasing NAD+ ratio
and regulating SIRT1, NF-B, Lin28A/B and miRNA let-7g. Notably, treatment
with DSF did not have considerable effect on the normal neural stem cells
and fibroblasts. Animals in the DSF-treated group demonstrated a
significant survival benefit (105 days of median survival in the
DSF-treated group versus 91 days in the control group, p = 0.0219).Our
study demonstrated the therapeutic potential of DSF against BTICs from
AT/RT and suggested the possibility of ALDH inhibition for clinical
application.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

