Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Non-canonical role of TAM receptors in breast cancer


TAM receptors (Tyro-3, Axl, Mer) are a family of three homologous
receptor tyrosine kinases that play a role in the phagocytosis of
apoptotic cells (a process termed efferocytosis in recent years). TAM
receptors on the surface of epithelial cells bind to soluble ligands Gas6
and Protein S, which in turn, bind to phosphatidylserine-expressing
apoptotic cells. After epithelial cells phagocytose apoptotic cells, they
release anti-inflammatory cytokines (e.g. IL-10, TGF) to attenuate the
immune response. This non-canonical role of TAM receptors as
efferocytosis receptors is in addition to their well-studied canonical
role as tyrosine kinase receptors that activate cell proliferation
signaling pathways (e.g. PI3K, Ras, ERK). Therefore, overexpression of
TAM receptors on cancer cells has a dual effect on tumor progression. To
date, TAM receptors have been implicated in numerous cancers, including
breast cancer; and various family members have been shown to be
overexpressed in mouse and human mammary tumor cells. We propose that
efferocytosis is a unique and novel oncogenic event by virtue of its role
in the production of immunosuppressing factors into the tumor
microenvironment. To study this, we set up a unique 3D acini model, where
luminal apoptotic cells are engulfed by the basal cells of the acini.
Using this system along with 2D cultures, we demonstrated that
overexpression of Mer increased the rate of efferocytosis, but does not
act as a classical oncogene by filling in the luminal space. Additional
studies such as time-lapse studies of acini stained with caspases showed
that Mer increased the rate of clearance. This adapted method offers a
unique system to study cancer cell efferocytosis, and the role of TAM
receptors in cancer progression and immune evasion.

