Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A distinct DNA methylation signature defines breast cancer stem
cells and predict cancer outcome


Pluripotency of stem cells depends on epigenetic programs that regulate
self-renewal and differentiation. During oncogenesis, dysregulation of
these two programs leads to the development of cancer stem cells (CSCs).
Recent evidence suggests that CSCs are relatively resistant to
conventional therapies and responsible for metastasis formation.
Deciphering these processes will help gain insight into oncogenesis and
allow the development of new targeted therapies. We used a whole-genomic
promoter microarray to establish the DNA methylation portrait of breast
cancer stem cells (bCSC) and compared it to non-bCSC. bCSC from five
breast cancer cell lines were isolated using the ALDEFLUOR assay. We
identified a DNA methylation signature with 68 differentially methylated
regions (DMRs) that were hypomethylated in bCSCs as compared to
non-bCSCs. Using a differentiation assay we demonstrated that DMRs are
rapidly hypermethylated within the first six hours following induction of
CSC differentiation whereas the cells reached the steady-state within 6
days, suggesting that these DMRs are linked to early CSC epigenetic
regulation. DMRs were enriched in genes coding for TGF signaling-related
proteins. Interestingly, overexpression of TGF signaling genes was
correlated to DMRs hypomethylation in a series of 109 breast tumors.
Moreover, the tumors harboring the bCSC DMRs signature had a worse
evolution than the ones with the non-bCSC DMRs signature. Our results
provide evidence that bCSCs harbor a distinct DNA methylation landscape
with TGF signaling as a key epigenetic regulator of bCSCs
differentiation.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

