Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Downregulation of mortalin increased mitochondrial fragmentation
and dysfunctions


Mitochondria are essential organelles in the establishment of tumor
characteristics such as the resistance to cell death, high proliferative
capacity and adaptation to unfavorable cellular environment.
Mitochondrial dynamics greatly influence the function and morphology of
mitochondria. Until now various post-translational modifications for
mitochondrial dynamic proteins and several regulatory proteins have
explained complex mitochondrial dynamics. However, the precise mechanism
that coordinates these complex processes remains unclear. To further
understand the regulatory machinery of mitochondrial dynamics, we
screened a mitochondrial siRNA library and identified mortalin as a
potential regulatory protein. Mortalin is a heat-non-inducible member of
the heat shock protein 70 family and it binds to p53 and prevents p53
from entering the nucleus. Both genetic and chemical inhibition of
mortalin strongly induced mitochondrial fragmentation and increased
cytotoxicity as well as mitochondrial dysfunction. In contrast,
overexpression of mortalin significantly suppressed mitochondrial
fragmentation and cell death. Taken together, our results suggest that
down-regulation of mortalin potentiates mitochondrial fragmentation and
dysfunctionNote: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

