Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Initial PET imaging and pharmacokinetic results from a Phase I/II
study of Zr-89-labeled anti-STEAP1 antibody in metastatic
castrate-resistant prostate cancer (mCRPC) patients


Introduction: STEAP1 (Six Transmembrane Epithelial Antigen of Prostate 1)
is a cell-surface therapeutic target overexpressed in 85% of prostate
cancers. Zr-89 MSTP2109A, a humanized antibody targeting STEAP1
conjugated with desferrioxamine and radiolabeled with positron emitter
Zr-89 (T1/2 78 h) was developed to enable imaging of STEAP1 expressing
tumors.Methods: To evaluate safety, pharmacokinetics (PK),
biodistribution and tumor uptake a prospective Phase I/II PET imaging
study in mCRPC patients is ongoing. Patients with STEAP1 positive
immunohistochemistry (IHC) in archival tissue were studied following 5.0
+ 0.2 mCi IV injection of Zr-89 MSTP2109A (immunoreactivity 96 + 2%) .
PET/CT images were compared with contemporaneous bone, CT and when
available FDG scan findings on a lesional basis.Results: 15 patients have
been studied. Two drug related adverse events included mild rigors and/or
chills.The first 6 patients were imaged at four timepoints over a 7 day
period and showed that PET imaging tumor uptake increased over time and
was optimal at 6d (range 5-9). Based on this, all subsequent patients
were imaged on day 6. Median PK showed: Plasma concentration at zero time
(Co) 28.2%ID/L; T1/2 beta 197.8h; volume of distribution 3.543L;
clearance 19.7 ml/h.All patients had definite Zr-89 MSTP2109A uptake in
multiple sites of known disease (bone scan or CT standard-of-reference).
All patients had bone and 7 had soft tissue metastases on Zr-89
MSTP2109A. In 10 patients, the Zr-89 MSTP2109A and bone scans detected a
similar number of lesions; in 5 patients, the bone scan detected many
more lesions. This discordance may represent treated non viable disease,
as contemporaneous FDG PET scans tended to concur with the Zr-89
MSTP2109A scans rather than bone scans. In 4 of 7 pts Zr-89 MSTP2109A
detected more soft tissue lesions than CT. The mean maximal standardized
uptake values (SUVmax) in bone and soft tissue metastasis were 22.5 +
13.5 (range 4.4 to 59.3) and 16.4 + 5.6 (range 9.0 to 24.0) respectively.
Correlation of tumor SUVmax and IHC is in progress. 11 of 15 patients
underwent 11 biopsies within 30d of study (mean 18 + 9d), 7 were
performed in PET positive sites after Zr-89 MSTP2109A imaging, 4 were
performed prior to PET imaging; tumor was present in 10 of the 11
biopsies and they were all Zr-89 MSTP2109A positive.Conclusion: Zr-89
MSTP2109A is well tolerated. It shows high and progressively increasing
tumor contrast in patients with mCRPC. All sites biopsied (11/11) had
increased Zr-89 MSTP2109A uptake, only one biopsy was negative for tumor.
Given its excellent tumor uptake additional studies to further
characterize Zr-89 MSTP2109A may be pursued, for example, selecting
patients for STEAP1 directed therapies, assessing treatment response to
STEAP1 directed therapy, or as an early biomarker for metastatic disease.

