Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Alcohol and lung cancer risk: a pooled analysis using
International Lung Cancer Consortium studies


Background: Alcohol consumption is known to be associated with risk of
developing several cancers. It is unclear, however, whether alcohol
consumption is a risk factor for lung cancer. The relationship between
lung cancer and alcohol consumption is likely to be confounded by
smoking. To minimize potential confounding by tobacco consumption, we
conducted a pooled analysis to examine the association of alcohol
consumption with lung cancer risk in a large sample of
never-smokers.Methods: We pooled data from 22 case-control and cohort
studies from North America, Europe and Asia within the International Lung
Cancer Consortium (ILCCO) and SYNERGY Consortium. We examined the
association of average lifetime alcohol consumption (expressed as average
grams per day intake) with lung cancer risk in never smokers using
logistic regression to model categories of alcohol consumption
(0Background: Alcohol consumption is known to be associated with risk of
developing several cancers. It is unclear, however, whether alcohol
consumption is a risk factor for lung cancer. The relationship between
lung cancer and alcohol consumption is likely to be confounded by
smoking. To minimize potential confounding by tobacco consumption, we
conducted a pooled analysis to examine the association of alcohol
consumption with lung cancer risk in a large sample of
never-smokers.Methods: We pooled data from 22 case-control and cohort
studies from North America, Europe and Asia within the International Lung
Cancer Consortium (ILCCO) and SYNERGY Consortium. We examined the
association of average lifetime alcohol consumption (expressed as average
grams per day intake) with lung cancer risk in never smokers using
logistic regression to model categories of alcohol consumption (0<5g per
day, 5Background: Alcohol consumption is known to be associated with risk
of developing several cancers. It is unclear, however, whether alcohol
consumption is a risk factor for lung cancer. The relationship between
lung cancer and alcohol consumption is likely to be confounded by
smoking. To minimize potential confounding by tobacco consumption, we
conducted a pooled analysis to examine the association of alcohol
consumption with lung cancer risk in a large sample of
never-smokers.Methods: We pooled data from 22 case-control and cohort
studies from North America, Europe and Asia within the International Lung
Cancer Consortium (ILCCO) and SYNERGY Consortium. We examined the
association of average lifetime alcohol consumption (expressed as average
grams per day intake) with lung cancer risk in never smokers using
logistic regression to model categories of alcohol consumption (0<5g per
day, 5<10g per day, 10Background: Alcohol consumption is known to be
associated with risk of developing several cancers. It is unclear,
however, whether alcohol consumption is a risk factor for lung cancer.
The relationship between lung cancer and alcohol consumption is likely to
be confounded by smoking. To minimize potential confounding by tobacco
consumption, we conducted a pooled analysis to examine the association of
alcohol consumption with lung cancer risk in a large sample of
never-smokers.Methods: We pooled data from 22 case-control and cohort
studies from North America, Europe and Asia within the International Lung
Cancer Consortium (ILCCO) and SYNERGY Consortium. We examined the
association of average lifetime alcohol consumption (expressed as average
grams per day intake) with lung cancer risk in never smokers using
logistic regression to model categories of alcohol consumption (0<5g per
day, 5<10g per day, 10<20g per day, 20Background: Alcohol consumption is
known to be associated with risk of developing several cancers. It is
unclear, however, whether alcohol consumption is a risk factor for lung
cancer. The relationship between lung cancer and alcohol consumption is
likely to be confounded by smoking. To minimize potential confounding by
tobacco consumption, we conducted a pooled analysis to examine the
association of alcohol consumption with lung cancer risk in a large
sample of never-smokers.Methods: We pooled data from 22 case-control and
cohort studies from North America, Europe and Asia within the
International Lung Cancer Consortium (ILCCO) and SYNERGY Consortium. We
examined the association of average lifetime alcohol consumption
(expressed as average grams per day intake) with lung cancer risk in
never smokers using logistic regression to model categories of alcohol
consumption (0<5g per day, 5<10g per day, 10<20g per day, 20<30g per day,
30Background: Alcohol consumption is known to be associated with risk of
developing several cancers. It is unclear, however, whether alcohol
consumption is a risk factor for lung cancer. The relationship between
lung cancer and alcohol consumption is likely to be confounded by
smoking. To minimize potential confounding by tobacco consumption, we
conducted a pooled analysis to examine the association of alcohol
consumption with lung cancer risk in a large sample of
never-smokers.Methods: We pooled data from 22 case-control and cohort
studies from North America, Europe and Asia within the International Lung
Cancer Consortium (ILCCO) and SYNERGY Consortium. We examined the
association of average lifetime alcohol consumption (expressed as average
grams per day intake) with lung cancer risk in never smokers using
logistic regression to model categories of alcohol consumption (0<5g per
day, 5<10g per day, 10<20g per day, 20<30g per day, 30<45g per day, 45+ g
per day). To investigate the shape of the dose response relationship, we
applied restricted cubic spline models to examine the association for
lung cancer risk overall and by histological subtype. Additional analyses
examined wine, beer and liquor consumption in relation to risk, with
mutual adjustment for each alcoholic beverage. All analyses were adjusted
for age, sex, education, ethnicity and study.Results: A total of 2548
never-smoking cases and 9362 never-smoking controls were included in the
analysis. The results showed lower risk among consumers of alcohol with
strongest evidence found for moderate drinkers relative to non-drinkers
with ORs of 0.80 (95% CI 0.70-0.90) and 0.82 (95% CI 0.69-0.99) for
Background: Alcohol consumption is known to be associated with risk of
developing several cancers. It is unclear, however, whether alcohol
consumption is a risk factor for lung cancer. The relationship between
lung cancer and alcohol consumption is likely to be confounded by
smoking. To minimize potential confounding by tobacco consumption, we
conducted a pooled analysis to examine the association of alcohol
consumption with lung cancer risk in a large sample of
never-smokers.Methods: We pooled data from 22 case-control and cohort
studies from North America, Europe and Asia within the International Lung
Cancer Consortium (ILCCO) and SYNERGY Consortium. We examined the
association of average lifetime alcohol consumption (expressed as average
grams per day intake) with lung cancer risk in never smokers using
logistic regression to model categories of alcohol consumption (0<5g per
day, 5<10g per day, 10<20g per day, 20<30g per day, 30<45g per day, 45+ g
per day). To investigate the shape of the dose response relationship, we
applied restricted cubic spline models to examine the association for
lung cancer risk overall and by histological subtype. Additional analyses
examined wine, beer and liquor consumption in relation to risk, with
mutual adjustment for each alcoholic beverage. All analyses were adjusted
for age, sex, education, ethnicity and study.Results: A total of 2548
never-smoking cases and 9362 never-smoking controls were included in the
analysis. The results showed lower risk among consumers of alcohol with
strongest evidence found for moderate drinkers relative to non-drinkers
with ORs of 0.80 (95% CI 0.70-0.90) and 0.82 (95% CI 0.69-0.99) for
<5grams and 5-10 grams of alcohol per day respectively. Non-linear
restricted cubic splines showed reduced lung cancer risk among moderate
drinkers relative to non-drinkers with risk increasing towards the null
as consumption increased. Similar results were seen for adenocarcinoma
and squamous cell carcinoma. Associations with lung cancer differed for
wine and beer consumption. Reduced risk was observed for wine drinking
particularly at low levels of drinking, OR of 0.80 (95% CI=0.69-0.94) for
Background: Alcohol consumption is known to be associated with risk of
developing several cancers. It is unclear, however, whether alcohol
consumption is a risk factor for lung cancer. The relationship between
lung cancer and alcohol consumption is likely to be confounded by
smoking. To minimize potential confounding by tobacco consumption, we
conducted a pooled analysis to examine the association of alcohol
consumption with lung cancer risk in a large sample of
never-smokers.Methods: We pooled data from 22 case-control and cohort
studies from North America, Europe and Asia within the International Lung
Cancer Consortium (ILCCO) and SYNERGY Consortium. We examined the
association of average lifetime alcohol consumption (expressed as average
grams per day intake) with lung cancer risk in never smokers using
logistic regression to model categories of alcohol consumption (0<5g per
day, 5<10g per day, 10<20g per day, 20<30g per day, 30<45g per day, 45+ g
per day). To investigate the shape of the dose response relationship, we
applied restricted cubic spline models to examine the association for
lung cancer risk overall and by histological subtype. Additional analyses
examined wine, beer and liquor consumption in relation to risk, with
mutual adjustment for each alcoholic beverage. All analyses were adjusted
for age, sex, education, ethnicity and study.Results: A total of 2548
never-smoking cases and 9362 never-smoking controls were included in the
analysis. The results showed lower risk among consumers of alcohol with
strongest evidence found for moderate drinkers relative to non-drinkers
with ORs of 0.80 (95% CI 0.70-0.90) and 0.82 (95% CI 0.69-0.99) for
<5grams and 5-10 grams of alcohol per day respectively. Non-linear
restricted cubic splines showed reduced lung cancer risk among moderate
drinkers relative to non-drinkers with risk increasing towards the null
as consumption increased. Similar results were seen for adenocarcinoma
and squamous cell carcinoma. Associations with lung cancer differed for
wine and beer consumption. Reduced risk was observed for wine drinking
particularly at low levels of drinking, OR of 0.80 (95% CI=0.69-0.94) for
<5g per day. Risk for beer consumption increased from close to null among
occasional drinkers to 1.54 (95% CI 0.90-2.65) among consumers of 20-30g
of alcohol per day (test for trend P=0.09).Conclusions: These results
indicate an inverse association between moderate drinking and lung cancer
risk relative to never drinkers. However, the inverse association was
restricted to wine consumption, not consumption of beer. Lifestyle
differences between consumers of beer and wine may play a role in
differing patterns of risk found by alcohol type.

