Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cdt2-mediated XPG degradation promotes DNA repair synthesis
following DNA damage excision in nucleotide excision repair


Xeroderma pigmentosum group G (XPG) protein is a structure-specific
repair endonuclease, which cleaves DNA strands on the 3 side of the DNA
damage during nucleotide excision repair (NER). In addition, XPG plays a
crucial role in initiating DNA repair synthesis through recruitment of
PCNA to the repair sites. However, the fate of XPG protein subsequent to
the excision of DNA damage has remained unresolved. Here, we show that
XPG is degraded through proteasome-mediated proteolysis upon induction of
bulky lesions from exposures to UV irradiation and cisplatin. NER process
is required for XPG degradation because both UV and cisplatin
treatment-induced XPG degradation is compromised in NER-deficient XP-A,
XP-B, XP-C, and XP-F cells. In addition, the NER-related XPG degradation
requires Cdt2, a component of an E3 ubiquitin ligase, CRL4Cdt2. Micropore
local UV irradiation and in situ Proximity Ligation assays demonstrated
that Cdt2 is recruited to the UV-damage sites and interacts with XPG in
the presence of PCNA. Importantly, Cdt2-mediated XPG degradation is
crucial to the subsequent recruitment of DNA polymerase and DNA repair
synthesis. Collectively, our data supports the idea of PCNA recruitment
to damage sites in conjunction with XPG, recognition of the PCNA-bound
XPG by CRL4Cdt2 for specific ubiquitylation and protein degradation.
Thus, XPG removal clears the space needed at the damage site for the
subsequent recruitment of DNA pol and initiation of DNA synthesis. (This
work was supported by grants from NIH).Note: This abstract was not
presented at the meeting.

