Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrin-6 is required for transforming growth factor
(TGF)--mediated epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and promotes the
disease progression of intrahepatic cholangiocellular carcinoma


Background: Intrahepatic cholangiocellular carcinoma (ICC) is
characterized as a poor prognostic disease represented by the highly
invasiveness. Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) plays a pivotal
role in cancer invasion and metastasis, and then TGF- signaling is a
potent inducible factor of EMT. Integrin-6, which is an epithelial
restricted trans-membrane protein, promotes binding to extracellular
matrix proteins (fibronectin, vitronectin and tenascin) facilitating cell
migration and activates TGF1 via binding to the latency associated
peptide (LAP) of the TGF- complex during embryogenesis and wound healing.
In this study, we investigated the role of integrin-6 during
TGF--mediated EMT using ICC cell lines, and examined the
clinic-pathological significance of Integrin6 expression in ICC
patients.Material and Methods: We measured integrin-6 mRNA expression by
real time PCR using 7 ICC cell lines (Hucct1, HuH28, OZ, RBE, Ssp25,
TFK1, Ysccc). To examine the role of integrin-6 during TGF--mediated EMT
in ICC cell lines, we downregulated integrin-6 expression by RNAi during
TGF--medaited EMT. Furthermore, using 55 resected ICC specimens, we
evaluated integrin-6 expression by immunohistochemical staining.Results:
Of 7 ICC cell lines, Ysccc and OZ cell lines revealed high integrin-6
expressions. Addition of TGF- to Ysccc cell successfully induced EMT,
characterized by the upregulated vimentin expression, downregulated
E-cadherin expression, spindle-shaped morphology, and high invasiveness,
with the integrin-6 induction. The inhibition of integrin-6 expression
using RNAi abolished TGF--mediated EMT induction. In clinical setting,
high integrin-6 expression was significantly associated with Stage IV,
lymph node metastasis, and blood vessel invasion, and then resulted in
worse prognosis compared with low expression group.Conclusion :
Integrin-6 is required for TGF--mediated EMT and promotes the disease
progression of ICC.

