Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A gemini vitamin D analogue, BXL0124, represses mammosphere
formation and decreases expression of stem cell markers in MCF10DCIS
breast cancer cells


It has been suggested that cancer stem cells (CSCs), which represent a
subset of tumor cells, are responsible for the possible origination and
maintenance of tumors. Moreover, CSCs are believed to be the main cause
of progression to metastasis and recurrence of cancer because of their
tumor-initiating abilities and resistance to conventional therapies.
Ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) is an early precursor in breast
carcinogenesis which progresses to invasive ductal carcinoma (IDC). The
involvement of CSCs in the progression of DCIS to IDC has yet to be
elucidated. In order to investigate the role of CSCs in DCIS progression
to IDC, we utilized the MCF10DCIS.com cell line in the mammosphere cell
culture system, which enriches for mammary progenitor cells and mammary
CSCs. We have previously reported that a novel Gemini vitamin D analog,
1,25-dihydroxy-20R-21(3-hydroxy-3-deuteromethyl-4,4,4-trideuterobutyl)-23-y
ne-26,27-hexafluoro-cholecalciferol (BXL0124), inhibits the progression
of DCIS to IDC. Therefore, we have determined whether BXL0124 plays a
role in regulating the CSC or progenitor cell populations, resulting in
reduced tumorigenicity. MCF10DCIS.com cells were plated in ultra-low
attachment plates and treated with BXL0124 or 125(OH)2D3 over the course
of 1, 3 and 5 days. Starting at day 2, MCF10DCIS.com cells began to form
mammospheres of 100 m in size. MCF10DCIS.com mammospheres showed
enrichment in the CD44+/CD24- and the CD49f+/CD24- populations compared
to monolayer cell culture. The phenotype of MCF10DCIS.com mammospheres
showed a disorganized, undefined and irregular shape. However, when the
MCF10DCIS.com mammospheres were treated with BXL0124 or 125(OH)2D3,
mammospheres form a more organized, symmetrical and circular shape, which
is similar to the phenotype of the spheres formed by the non-malignant,
normal mammary epithelial cell line, MCF10A. In addition, the mammosphere
forming efficiency (MFE) was decreased upon BXL0124 and 125(OH)2D3
treatment, showing that there is an inhibitory effect on mammosphere
development. Treatment with BXL0124 repressed markers associated with the
stem cell-like phenotype, such as CD44, Notch1 and JAG1. Furthermore,
BXL0124 demonstrated the reduced expression of MMPs, such as MMP2, 9, 14,
15, and 16, in mammospheres, suggesting that BXL0124 reduces the
tumorigenicity and invasive potential of MCF10DCIS.com cells by targeting
the stem cell-like population. In conclusion, the Gemini vitamin D analog
BXL0124 represses the CSC population, potentially contributing to the
inhibition of the progression of DCIS to IDC. (This work was supported in
part by the National Institutes of Health National Cancer Institute
R01-CA127645 and the National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences
Grant ES005022).

