Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel candidate oncogenes with mutation hot spots in
microsatellite unstable colorectal cancer


Around 15% of colorectal cancers (CRCs) show microsatellite instability
(MSI). MSI CRCs are prone to repeat mutations due to defective mismatch
repair. The high background mutation frequency has discouraged systematic
mutations screens in this tumor type. However, these tumors might form a
sensitive system for generation and selection of oncogenic mutation hot
spots. The aim of this study is to identify novel oncogenes with mutation
hot spots that drive MSI CRC tumorigenesis.The exomes of 25 MSI tumors
and respective healthy tissues were sequenced as the discovery set. The
exome data was searched for mutation hot spots, with recurrent somatic
missense mutations in at least two tumors. Potential mutation hot spots
were observed in 43 genes and among these were the following known
oncogenes: BRAF (V600E), CTNNB1 (T41A) and PIK3CA (H1047R). Novel
potential mutation hot spots were identified in 40 genes and these were
validated by Sanger sequencing. Mutation hot spots in 33 genes were
confirmed and these were further screened in a validation set of 254 MSI
CRCs. Fourteen genes displayed hotspot mutations also in the validation
set with a total hot spot mutation frequency of 1.1-3.6 %. Many of the
validated genes encode for known cancer-related proteins and for proteins
with molecular and cellular functions relevant to cancer development and
progression.Further work is needed to clarify the functional role of the
identified hot spot mutations in MSI CRC tumorigenesis. The novel
mutation hotspots may be utilized to develop personalized tumor profiling
and therapy.

