Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The clinical behavior of endometrioid and serous endometrial
carcinomas is governed by distinct biological processes


Background: Endometrioid and serous carcinomas of the uterus, the two
most common histological types of endometrial carcinoma, have been shown
to have distinct clinicopathological characteristics and to be
underpinned by distinct constellations of molecular aberrations. We
sought to define the biological processes that govern the clinical
behavior of endometrial cancers based on their transcriptomic
characteristics as defined by RNA-sequencing.Material and Methods:
RNA-sequencing-based gene expression and clinicopathological data from
323 endometrial cancers were retrieved from The Cancer Genome Atlas
(TCGA). Sixteen prototype genes representative of different biological
processes that would likely play a role in endometrial and other
hormone-driven cancers were defined. TCGA RNA-sequencing data were used
to determine the transcription module of each prototype gene. The
expression of prototype genes and modules and their association with
outcome was assessed in univariate and multivariate survival models in
the whole cohort, and in specific subtypes, including endometrioid vs
serous, grade 1, 2 and 3 cancers, and the genomic subtypes as described
in the TCGA study.Results: The clinical behavior of endometrial cancers
was found to be associated with hormone receptor signaling, PI3K pathway
signaling and DNA mismatch repair processes. Furthermore, when adjusted
for the known prognostic clinicopathological parameters, we found that
MSH6 mRNA expression was independently associated with the outcome of
patients with endometrial cancer. At variance with other hormone-driven
tumors, such as breast cancer, the level of expression of
proliferation-related genes was not a predictor of outcome in patients
with endometrial cancers. The biological processes governing the outcome
of endometrioid and serous endometrial cancers were shown to be distinct;
whilst in endometrioid carcinomas hormone receptor, PI3K and DNA mismatch
repair modules were associated significantly with outcome in univariate
analysis, the clinical behavior of serous cancers was significantly
associated with the expression of the apoptosis-related gene CASP3 and
Wnt signaling (CTNNB1). When stratified according to grade, the PLAU
prototype gene and its invasion module were found to be significantly
associated with the survival of patients with grade 3 endometrial cancer,
but not of those with grade 1 or 2 cancers.Conclusion: Our data suggest
that stratification of endometrial cancers according to histological type
(i.e. endometrioid vs serous) and potentially grade may be of importance
for the design of clinical trials testing targeted therapeutics as these
parameters define subgroups of endometrial cancers that not only have
distinct genetic aberrations but also distinct molecular pathways that
define the outcome of patients with this disease.

