Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Rising rates of acute lymphocytic leukemia in Hispanic children: A
review of trends in childhood leukemia incidence from 1973-2010


Background: Childhood leukemia is the most common cancer in children
under 20 years of age in the United States, and incidence rates have
increased over the last few decades. The incidence rate for all childhood
leukemia is higher among Hispanic children [2006-2010 age-adjusted
incidence rate (AAIR)= 5.71; 95%CI: 5.47, 5.97] than among non-Hispanic
White children (2006-2010 AAIR=3.95; 95%CI: 3.81, 4.09). This analysis
aims to describe secular trends from 1992-2010 in the incidence of
childhood leukemia, independently for Hispanic and non-Hispanic
children.Methods: Surveillance, Epidemiology and End Results (SEER) data
were used to evaluate trends in the incidence of childhood leukemia
diagnosed in children less than 20 years of age between 1992-2010 by
ethnicity. Trends among Hispanic and non-Hispanic children were examined
overall and by age, gender, and histologic subtype. AAIRs, annual percent
change (APC) estimates, and 95% confidence intervals (95%CIs) were
calculated using SEER*stat v.8.0.4.Results: Hispanic children were more
likely than non-Hispanic children to be diagnosed with leukemia (all
subtypes combined), and with acute lymphocytic leukemia when examined by
gender and by age (0-4, 5-9, 10-14, 15-19 years at diagnosis). A greater
increase in AAIRs was observed for Hispanic children as compared to
non-Hispanic children for all types of leukemia from 1992-2010
(APCHispanic=1.16; 95%CI: 0.55, 1.76; APCnon-Hispanic=0.52; 95%CI: 0.01,
1.03). When restricting to acute lymphocytic leukemias (ALL),
statistically significant increases were observed for Hispanic children
(APC=1.31; 95%CI:0.68, 1.94), but not for non-Hispanic children
(APC=0.50; 95%CI: -0.19, 1.19). Among Hispanic children, the strongest
increase was found among children diagnosed from 10-19 years of age.
Incidence rates were higher for Hispanic males (AAIR=5.26; 95%CI: 4.93,
5.60;) than for Hispanic females (AAIR=4.07; 95%CI: 3.78,
4.39).Conclusion: Incidence rates of childhood leukemia rose from
1992-2010, with the greatest increase for ALL among older Hispanic
children (aged 10-19 years). In future studies aimed at evaluating
exposures responsible for increasing incidence rates of childhood ALL,
researchers should consider risk factors that may explain the rising
rates among Hispanic children.

