Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dual targeting of CDK4 and ARK5 using a novel kinase inhibitor
ON123300 is effective in vitro and in vivo in Multiple Myeloma


Multiple Myeloma (MM) is an incurable malignancy of plasma cells
afflicting over 21,000 patients and accounting for over 10,000 deaths in
the US each year. It is characterized by recurrent chromosomal
translocations resulting in the dysregulation of cyclinD1, cyclinD3,
c-Maf, MafB and MMSET. Despite cell cycle dysregulation being prominent
in myeloma pathogenesis, clinical efficacy of CDK4/CDK6 inhibitors has
been modest. We therefore developed ON123300, an orally available and
potent small inhibitor of CDK4/CDK6 and ARK5. ARK5 is a member of the
AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) catalytic subunit family and is
associated with increased tumor cell invasiveness in MM [Suzuki et al.,
Mol. Cell. Bio 2004] and transcriptionally regulated by oncogenes such as
MMSET, c-Maf and MafB. In this study, we evaluated the in vitro and in
vivo efficacy of ON123300 in MM cell lines.A panel of nine MM cell lines
was treated with varying doses of ON123300 and cell viability assessed
using the CellTitre Blue assay after 48 hours. ON123300 decreased cell
viability by approximately 30 to 70% (IC50:50-200nM) in 9/9 MM cell lines
examined. Based on IC50 of 50 nM, we could stratify the cell lines into
two groups: 6 cell lines (MM.1R, MM.1S, KMS11, U266, RPMI-8226 and ARP1)
had IC50 of 50-150 nm and three cell lines (EJM, JJN3 and NCI-H929) were
very sensitive (IC50 Multiple Myeloma (MM) is an incurable malignancy of
plasma cells afflicting over 21,000 patients and accounting for over
10,000 deaths in the US each year. It is characterized by recurrent
chromosomal translocations resulting in the dysregulation of cyclinD1,
cyclinD3, c-Maf, MafB and MMSET. Despite cell cycle dysregulation being
prominent in myeloma pathogenesis, clinical efficacy of CDK4/CDK6
inhibitors has been modest. We therefore developed ON123300, an orally
available and potent small inhibitor of CDK4/CDK6 and ARK5. ARK5 is a
member of the AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) catalytic subunit
family and is associated with increased tumor cell invasiveness in MM
[Suzuki et al., Mol. Cell. Bio 2004] and transcriptionally regulated by
oncogenes such as MMSET, c-Maf and MafB. In this study, we evaluated the
in vitro and in vivo efficacy of ON123300 in MM cell lines.A panel of
nine MM cell lines was treated with varying doses of ON123300 and cell
viability assessed using the CellTitre Blue assay after 48 hours.
ON123300 decreased cell viability by approximately 30 to 70%
(IC50:50-200nM) in 9/9 MM cell lines examined. Based on IC50 of 50 nM, we
could stratify the cell lines into two groups: 6 cell lines (MM.1R,
MM.1S, KMS11, U266, RPMI-8226 and ARP1) had IC50 of 50-150 nm and three
cell lines (EJM, JJN3 and NCI-H929) were very sensitive (IC50 <50nM).
ARK5 protein expression was confirmed by western blot in MM.1R, MM.1S,
RPMI-8226, ARP1, EJM and JJN3 and was significantly higher in the more
sensitive cell lines EJM and JJN3. Transcriptomic differences between
more sensitive cell lines EJM, JJN3, NCI-H929 as compared to the six less
sensitive cell lines were culled from RNA-seq and analyzed in different
databases Genego, IPA and DAVID. Cell cycle was the top KEGG pathway
identified in this analysis and included CDK6, a key target of ON123300.
Simultaneously a xenograft mouse model was used to evaluate the
therapeutic potential of ON123300 in vivo. ARK5 positive MM.1S myeloma
cells (with pcDNA-mCh-luc constitutively expressing luciferase) were
injected subcutaneously into SCID mice. Following tumor growth the mice
were grouped as- control/untreated (n=5) and ON123300 treated (n = 5).
ON123300 (100mg/kg) was administered by IP injection on alternative days
and tumor growth monitored using highly sensitive IVIS imaging system.
Mice in the treated group responded with 100 fold decrease in
bioluminescence intensity (Control- 3.7xE10p/sec/cm2/sr,
Treated-3.5xE08p/sec/cm2/sr) in their tumors as compared to untreated
control mice.Our results suggest that ON123300 to be a potent inhibitor
of tumor growth in vitro and in vivo and could be an effective agent for
myeloma treatment especially for patients with aggressive disease driven
by cytogenetic changes involving the MAF/ MMSET transcription factors. We
expect our studies to expand therapeutic options for patients with this
challenging disease.

