Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Histone deacetylase 8 is a novel chromatin modulator in
NAFLD-associated hepatocarcinogenesis


Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is the hepatic manifestation of
metabolic syndrome including obesity and diabetes which elevate the risk
of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Emerging evidence suggests that
epigenetics converts alterations in nutrient and metabolism into
heritable pattern of gene expression. However, the role of epigenetic
gene regulation in NAFLD-associated HCC remains to be defined (ref 1).
Here we identified and validated novel chromatin modulators in
NAFLD-associated hepatocarcinogenesis. Using customized real-time PCR
arrays that contain 117 chromatin remodeling factors and modification
enzymes, histone deacetylase 8 (Hdac8) mRNA expression was identified to
be significantly up-regulated in HCC compared to tumor-adjacent and
normal liver tissues in both diet- and genetic-induced obesity murine
models (pNon-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is the hepatic
manifestation of metabolic syndrome including obesity and diabetes which
elevate the risk of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Emerging evidence
suggests that epigenetics converts alterations in nutrient and metabolism
into heritable pattern of gene expression. However, the role of
epigenetic gene regulation in NAFLD-associated HCC remains to be defined
(ref 1). Here we identified and validated novel chromatin modulators in
NAFLD-associated hepatocarcinogenesis. Using customized real-time PCR
arrays that contain 117 chromatin remodeling factors and modification
enzymes, histone deacetylase 8 (Hdac8) mRNA expression was identified to
be significantly up-regulated in HCC compared to tumor-adjacent and
normal liver tissues in both diet- and genetic-induced obesity murine
models (p<0.01 and Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is the
hepatic manifestation of metabolic syndrome including obesity and
diabetes which elevate the risk of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).
Emerging evidence suggests that epigenetics converts alterations in
nutrient and metabolism into heritable pattern of gene expression.
However, the role of epigenetic gene regulation in NAFLD-associated HCC
remains to be defined (ref 1). Here we identified and validated novel
chromatin modulators in NAFLD-associated hepatocarcinogenesis. Using
customized real-time PCR arrays that contain 117 chromatin remodeling
factors and modification enzymes, histone deacetylase 8 (Hdac8) mRNA
expression was identified to be significantly up-regulated in HCC
compared to tumor-adjacent and normal liver tissues in both diet- and
genetic-induced obesity murine models (p<0.01 and <0.05 for high fat diet
and db/db models, respectively). Over-expression of Hdac8 was validated
by independent quantitative RT-PCR and Western blot analyses.
Immunohistochemistry revealed cytoplasmic Hdac8 localization in the
hepatocytes of normal liver tissue, while distinct nuclear Hdac8
expression was predominant in NAFLD-associated HCC. In human samples,
74.2% of NAFLD-associated HCC tissues displayed strong HDAC8 expression
compared to tumor-adjacent tissues (pNon-alcoholic fatty liver disease
(NAFLD) is the hepatic manifestation of metabolic syndrome including
obesity and diabetes which elevate the risk of hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC). Emerging evidence suggests that epigenetics converts alterations
in nutrient and metabolism into heritable pattern of gene expression.
However, the role of epigenetic gene regulation in NAFLD-associated HCC
remains to be defined (ref 1). Here we identified and validated novel
chromatin modulators in NAFLD-associated hepatocarcinogenesis. Using
customized real-time PCR arrays that contain 117 chromatin remodeling
factors and modification enzymes, histone deacetylase 8 (Hdac8) mRNA
expression was identified to be significantly up-regulated in HCC
compared to tumor-adjacent and normal liver tissues in both diet- and
genetic-induced obesity murine models (p<0.01 and <0.05 for high fat diet
and db/db models, respectively). Over-expression of Hdac8 was validated
by independent quantitative RT-PCR and Western blot analyses.
Immunohistochemistry revealed cytoplasmic Hdac8 localization in the
hepatocytes of normal liver tissue, while distinct nuclear Hdac8
expression was predominant in NAFLD-associated HCC. In human samples,
74.2% of NAFLD-associated HCC tissues displayed strong HDAC8 expression
compared to tumor-adjacent tissues (p<0.001). In contrast, no significant
HDAC8 up-regulation was found in hepatitis B virus-associated HCC,
suggesting an etiology-specific over-expression pattern. Functional
studies using both ectopic expression and pharmacological inhibition
demonstrated growth enhancing functions for HDAC8, establishing the role
of chromatin modulator in NAFLD-associated hepatocarcinogenesis.
Up-regulation of HDAC8 is associated with suppressed AKT activity which
is known to promote glucose production and insulin resistance in vitro
and in vivo, indicating that HDAC8 may aggravate NAFLD progression
through inhibiting insulin sensitivity. Further elucidation of the
epigenetic regulation by HDAC8 will lead to the discovery and development
of targeted therapies tailored to inhibit cancer-specific pathways in
NAFLD-associated HCC. This study was supported by a Focused Investments
Scheme - Scheme B (High Promise Initiatives) (Ref. No.:
fis1112/0674/12yc) of the Chinese University of Hong Kong, a National
Natural Science Foundation of China (Ref. No.: 373492), and a Theme-based
Research Scheme (Ref. No.: T12-403/11) of the Hong Kong Research Grants
Council.Reference: Tian Y, Wong VW, Chan HL, Cheng AS. Epigenetic
regulation of hepatocellular carcinoma in non-alcoholic fatty liver
disease. Semin Cancer Biol. 2013; 23:471-82.Note: This abstract was not
presented at the meeting.

