Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel Trop-2/CD3 trivalent bispecific antibody effectively
redirects T cells to kill target human pancreatic and gastric cancer cells


Background: Trop-2 is a type I transmembrane protein that is highly
expressed in diverse epithelial cancers, including lung, gastric,
colorectal, pancreatic, bladder, mammary, ovarian, uterine, and prostate
carcinomas, with limited presence on normal human tissues. Whereas
various formats of bispecific antibodies (bsAbs) for redirecting T cells
to cancers have shown promise in both pre-clinical and clinical studies,
efforts to prolong the circulating half-life of the scFv-based platforms
and to prevent the commonly observed cytokine release syndrome are
continuing. Herein, we describe a novel T-cell redirecting trivalent
bsAb, designated (E1)-3s, which comprises an anti-CD3 scFv covalently
conjugated to a stabilized dimer of a Trop-2-targeting Fab. Potential
advantages of (E1)-3s include high-level surface expression of Trop-2 on
various solid cancers, bivalent binding to tumor cells, a larger size
(130 kDa) to preclude rapid renal clearance, and potent T-cell mediated
cytotoxicity. Methods: DOCK-AND-LOCKTM was employed to site-specifically
link an anti-CD3 (Okt3) scFv to a stabilized Fab dimer of the humanized
anti-Trop-2 mAb, hRS7. LC-MS confirmed the mass of the conjugate, which
resolved as >90% of the desired monomeric peak by size-exclusion HPLC.
Purity was demonstrated by reducing SDS-PAGE, which resolved only the
three constituent polypeptide bands comprising (E1)-3s. Results:
Fluorescence microscopy showed that (E1)-3s, but not a control conjugate
[(19)-3s, anti-CD19/CD3], induced synapse formation between Jurkat (T)
and Capan-1 (human pancreatic cancer) cells. Using a 3-fold excess of
stimulated T cells in vitro, (E1)-3s induced a potent and specific
T-cell-mediated lysis in Capan-1 (115,000 Trop-2 copies/cell) pancreatic
cancer (IC50 = 29 pM, Lysismax = 60%), and NCI-N87 (383,000 Trop-2
copies/cell) human gastric cancer cells (IC50 = 0.85 pM, Lysismax> 90%).
In vivo efficacy was demonstrated with Capan-1 and NCI-N87 xenografts in
NOD-SCID mice by co-injection of purified human T cells and tumor cells
at an effector-to-target ratio of 2, followed by five daily injections of
(E1)-3s. With Capan-1, the control group reached the endpoint of disease
progression (tumors exceeding 1 cm3) on day 24, at which time, the
(E1)-3s group had significantly smaller tumors (0.257 0.102 cm3 versus
1.011 0.532 cm3; P=0.0092). For NCI-N87, the (E1)-3s group had
significantly smaller tumors than the control group (0.147 0.062 cm3
versus 0.824 0.342 cm3, respectively; P=0.0017) when the latter reached
the disease-progression endpoint on day 31. Conclusions: (E1)-3s
effectively induced T-cell-mediated killing of Trop-2-expressing
pancreatic and gastric cancer cells in vitro and in vivo. Additional cell
lines of different solid cancer types, and ones with higher and lower
Trop-2 antigen density, are under evaluation.

