Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Long non-coding RNA AK023948 enhances breast cancer progression by
activating AKT


The role of long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) in various physiological and
pathological conditions has been increasingly appreciated, however, given
the large number of lncRNAs, little is known for the vast majority of
lncRNAs for their potential role in breast cancer. In this study, using
real-time PCR-based lncRNA profiling array, we identified a set of
lncRNAs that were differentially expressed in breast cancer tissues of
patients as compared to the normal breast tissue. Among them, AK023948
was upregulated in breast cancer; it was also upregulated in breast
cancer cell lines (MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231) as compared to human mammary
epithelial cells (HMLE). This was further supported by breast cancer
tissue microarray by in situ hybridization. Moreover, ectopic expression
of AK023948 in MCF-7 cells promoted the proliferation and anchorage
independent cell growth, implying its potential oncogenic role in breast
cancer progression. In consistent with this finding, we found that while
ectopic expression of AK023948 activated, AK023948-siRNA suppressed Akt
activation. To determine the underlying mechanism of AK023948-mediated
activation of Akt, we performed RNA pull-down assay with biotin-labeled
AK023948 RNA probe. Mass spectrometry analysis of the pulled down
proteins identified ATP dependent RNA helicase A (RHA/DHX-9) as a
potential binding partner for AK023948, which was confirmed by western
blot. Gene silencing of DHX-9 in MCF-7 cells suppressed AKT
phosphorylation, suggesting that AK023948 may activate AKT activation
through interacting with DHX-9 and modulating its function. Together,
these results suggest that AK023948 may function as an oncogenic lncRNA
in breast cancer and thus, it may represent a novel target for breast
cancer therapy.

