Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cumulative risks of gastric cancer by PSCA polymorphism,
Helicobacter Pylori infection and smoking history in Japan


Appreciating lifetime risk of gastric cancer through established risk
factors is one simple way to promote preventive behavior. We have
estimated cumulative risks (CRs) of gastric cancer by genetic and
environmental risk factors, PSCA-rs2294008 polymorphism, Helicobacter
Pylori (HP) infection and smoking, based on a case-control study
involving 697 cases and 1372 controls at Aichi Cancer Center. We
estimated odds ratio (OR) and 95% confidence interval (CI) for groups by
these factors using logistic regression model after adjustment for age,
sex, family history of gastric cancer and intake of fruit and vegetable.
The ORs were combined with gastric cancer incidence rates in Japan to
calculate CRs using the Peto's method. The CRs by age of 75 varied
according to the risk groups, from 0.9% (95% CI, 0.3%-3.3%) for never
smokers without both HP infection and risk allele of rs2294008 to 13.4%
(95% CI, 13.3%-13.4%) for ever smokers with HP infection and 1-2 risk
alleles. Among those with 1-2 risk alleles, the CRs were reduced to 2.0%
(95% CI, 1.9%-2.0%) in those without both smoking history and HP
infection, 3.9% (95% CI, 3.8%-3.9%) for ever smokers without HP
infection, 9.4% (95% CI, 9.4%-9.5%) for never smokers with HP infection,
although it was 13.4% in those with both smoking history and HP
infection. In conclusion, the findings based on genetic and environmental
risk factors in this study would be important information for promoting
primary and secondary prevention of gastric cancer.

