Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tks adaptor proteins and invadopodia formation in the growth and
metastasis of melanoma


Invadopodia are actin-based proteolytic structures which facilitate
cancer cell invasion and metastasis. While it was previously believed
that invadopodia are not required for tumor cell growth, based on studies
in monolayer cell culture, more recently we have noted a role for
invadopodia proteins in growth in more physiological 3-dimensional (3D)
extracellular matrix contexts. From previous work in our lab, the Tks
adaptor proteins with 5 (Tks5) and 4 (Tks4) SH3 domains, respectively,
were identified as Src kinase substrates and both are essential molecules
for functional invadopodia formation in mouse and human cancer
cells.Here, we assess the roles of the Tks adaptors in melanoma tumor
growth and invasion both in vivo and in vitro. To address the mechanism
as to how the Tks adaptors control tumor growth and invasion, in vitro 3D
growth assays in collagen I were performed. Knockdown of either Tks4 or
Tks5 in C8161.9 or A375 melanoma cells decreased 3D growth in collagen I,
a process that also appeared to be dependent upon metalloproteinase (MMP)
activity. Interestingly, knockdown of either Tks4 or Tks5 in A375
melanoma cells decreased cell-surface expression of MT1-MMP, a key
protease involved in tumor growth and metastasis. In vivo tumor growth
and metastasis assays in mice using human and mouse melanoma cells
depleted of Tks4 or Tks5 by shRNA revealed roles for the Tks adaptors in
both the size and the number of lung metastases. Finally, analysis of a
human melanoma tissue array with a Tks5 antibody, and RNAseq data,
indicates that Tks5 expression is increased in lymph node and other
metastases in comparison to nevi and primary sites.These data suggest
that the Tks adaptors control melanoma tumor growth and invasion by
regulating invadopodia formation and perhaps also cell surface expression
of MT1-MMP, and thus contribute to melanoma progression.

