Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DHA may enhance proteasome activity in human cervical cancer
cells: Indirect modulation of proteasome by DHA


The omega-3 fatty acid, docosahexaenoic acid (DHA), has been shown to
induce the proteasomal degradation of various cancer-associated molecules
such as beta-catenin and estrogen receptor, implying its regulatory
effect on proteasome. To verify this possible link between DHA and
proteasome function, we explored the impacts of DHA on human
papillomavirus-positive HeLa cervical cancer cells that constitutively
express two known endogenous proteasome substrates E6 and E7 viral
proteins. Exposure HeLa cells to DHA resulted in elevated proteasome
activities along with decreased levels of E6/E7 viral proteins, and these
effects of DHA were remarkably reversed in the presence of proteasome
inhibitors, suggesting that DHA improves proteasome function in the cells
and thereby accelerates the degradation of proteasome substrates. The
DHA-induced increase in cellular proteasome activity was preceded by
reactive oxygen species (ROS) overproduction and could be blocked by
preincubation of the cells with ROS scavengers. Likewise, HeLa cells
treated with exogenous ROS, H2O2, also exhibited significantly improved
proteasome function. Unexpectedly, when the purified proteasome and
whole-cell lysates isolated from HeLa cells were directly exposed to DHA
or H2O2, such marked increases in proteasome activity were not seen.
Taken together, these findings indicate that DHA may induce proteasome
activation in cervical cancer cells mainly by indirect regulation of the
proteasome.

