Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Aberrant DNA methylation and expression of mRNA in EGFR-mutant
lung cancer cell line with long-term exposure to gefitinib


Many of the patients with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) who
initially responded well to epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) will eventually relapse. The mechanisms
of resistance to EGFR-TKIs is not yet fully clarified. The suppression of
genes by DNA methylation is reported to be involved in the mechanism of
tolerance to cytotoxic drugs. The purpose of this study is to identify
epigenetically regulated genes and to clarify the contribution of
epigenetic alteration to the acquired resistance to EGFR-TKI. We
established gefitinib-resistant PC-9, which was originally
gefitinib-sensitive lung cancer cell line, by serial long term exposure
to gefitinib. We collected RNA and DNA from both gefitinib-sensitive and
-resistant PC-9 cells and performed comprehensive analysis for DNA
methylation and mRNA expression using infinium array and cDNA microarray,
respectively. We identified 640 genes those DNA methylations were
increased in gefitinib-resistant cell line compared to parental cell
line. Then, we selected 29 candidate genes those mRNA expression were
decreased in resistant PC-9. We are currently underway to elucidate the
specific function of each gene and updated data will be presented at the
meeting.

