Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synergistic inhibition of ALK inhibitor-resistant lung cancer
cells by dual-targeting EGFR and ALK pathways


Background: Despite the excellent initial responses of ALK-rearranged
lung cancer to the ALK tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs), most patients
develop acquired resistance through several mechanisms, including ALK
amplification, mutation or activation of alternative signaling pathways.
In this study, we investigated the effect of dual-targeting EGFR and ALK
pathways in NSCLC cells that are resistant to ALK inhibitors.Methods: The
cell proliferation, apoptosis and cell cycle analysis were measured by
spectrophotometry and flow cytometry. The combination effect of EGFR TKI
(afatinib or dacomitinib) and ALK TKI (crizotinib or LDK378) was
evaluated using a combination index (CI). We analyzed EGFR ligand levels
by ELISA and expression of ALK, EGFR and its downstream molecules were
detected by Western blot assay after exposure to TKIs.Results:
NCI-H3122CR1 that was resistant to crizotinib and NCI-H3122 cell lines
became resistant to LDK378 through the step-wise increase of the drug,
resulting in H3122CR1LR1 and H3122LR1 cells, respectively. The resistant
cell lines exhibited 10-14-fold higher IC50 values for crizotinib or
LDK378 compared with parental cells. The genetic alterations of ALK or
EGFR genes were not found in H3122CR1, H3122LR1, and H3122CR1LR1 cells.
We analyzed EGFR signaling pathways in these cells to determine their
roles in mediating ALK inhibitor resistance. We observed that H3122CR1,
H3122LR1 and H3122CR1LR1 cells had higher phospho-EGFR than parental
cells. In these cells, mRNA and protein levels of amphiregulin and EGF
were up-regulated. Combined treatment with EGFR TKI and LDK378
synergistically inhibited cell growth (CIBackground: Despite the
excellent initial responses of ALK-rearranged lung cancer to the ALK
tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs), most patients develop acquired
resistance through several mechanisms, including ALK amplification,
mutation or activation of alternative signaling pathways. In this study,
we investigated the effect of dual-targeting EGFR and ALK pathways in
NSCLC cells that are resistant to ALK inhibitors.Methods: The cell
proliferation, apoptosis and cell cycle analysis were measured by
spectrophotometry and flow cytometry. The combination effect of EGFR TKI
(afatinib or dacomitinib) and ALK TKI (crizotinib or LDK378) was
evaluated using a combination index (CI). We analyzed EGFR ligand levels
by ELISA and expression of ALK, EGFR and its downstream molecules were
detected by Western blot assay after exposure to TKIs.Results:
NCI-H3122CR1 that was resistant to crizotinib and NCI-H3122 cell lines
became resistant to LDK378 through the step-wise increase of the drug,
resulting in H3122CR1LR1 and H3122LR1 cells, respectively. The resistant
cell lines exhibited 10-14-fold higher IC50 values for crizotinib or
LDK378 compared with parental cells. The genetic alterations of ALK or
EGFR genes were not found in H3122CR1, H3122LR1, and H3122CR1LR1 cells.
We analyzed EGFR signaling pathways in these cells to determine their
roles in mediating ALK inhibitor resistance. We observed that H3122CR1,
H3122LR1 and H3122CR1LR1 cells had higher phospho-EGFR than parental
cells. In these cells, mRNA and protein levels of amphiregulin and EGF
were up-regulated. Combined treatment with EGFR TKI and LDK378
synergistically inhibited cell growth (CI<1) and induced apoptosis in
H3122LR1 and H3122CR1LR1 cells. Similar results were observed in H3122CR1
and SNU-2535 harboring ALK G1269A mutation cells, when exposed to
afatinib and crizotinib. The combination of EGFR and ALK TKIs decreased
the phosphorylation of several downstream molecules in H3122LR1 and
H3122CR1LR1 cells, whereas EGFR or ALK TKI alone did not reduce the
phosphorylation levels.Conclusion: Our results suggest that dual
inhibition of ALK and EGFR effectively abrogate ALK and its downstream
signals and induce apoptosis in ALK TKIs-resistant, ALK-rearranged NSCLC
cells. Therefore, dual-targeting of EGFR and ALK might be a promising
strategy for ALK-rearranged NSCLC patients who showed acquired resistance
to crizotinib and/or LDK378.

