Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hypoxia induced TGF- regulates Semaphorin7A to promote a
pro-tumorigenic mesenchymal phenotype in mammary cells


The study of breast cancer relies heavily upon the identification of
tumor-associated proteins that are involved with tumor growth and
development. Our lab has discovered that mammary tumor cells express high
levels of a novel protein known as Semaphorin7A (SEMA7A). After analyzing
breast tissue samples collected at Boca Raton Regional Hospital, we have
found that normal human mammary epithelial cells express negligible mRNA
levels of SEMA7A, while the malignant mammary tumor cells express
elevated levels of SEMA7A. Additionally, our laboratory has established a
murine model of mammary cell lines that parallels our human findings.
Currently, we have correlated high levels of SEMA7A with increasing tumor
malignancy and metastasis. However, it is still unknown what factors
could induce the production of SEMA7A in mammary tumors. Recent studies
have proven that the expression and induction of SEMA7A in normal
endothelial cells is regulated under a hypoxic-response element in the
promoter of its gene. Although hypoxia is an established tumorigenic
factor, it is unknown if the increased hypoxic conditions in breast
tumors could induce SEMA7A. In this study we have investigated if
exposing mammary cells to hypoxia induces the expression of
pro-tumorgenic SEMA7A. Our results show that SEMA7A is up-regulated in
4T07 and 4T1 mammary tumor cells after hypoxic exposure via TGF-
activation of the PI3/AKT pathway. Furthermore, we have found that shRNA
silencing of the SEMA7A in 4T1 mammary cells attenuates the activation of
pro-angiogenic and mesenchymal genes even after hypoxic stimuli. In vivo,
these cells show a reduced proliferation and metastatic potential. We
therefore postulate an exciting new role for SEMA7A as a TGF- effector
that promotes tumorigenesis during breast cancer progression.

