Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CXCR7-mediated signaling axis regulates breast cancer growth and
metastasis by modulating tumor microenvironment


Chemokine CXCL12 has been shown to bind chemokine receptor CXCR4 and
CXCR7. Although extensive studies have been done to elucidate the role of
CXCL12/CXCR4 signalling axis in tumor growth and metastasis, not much is
known about the role of CXCL12/CXCR7 signalling axis in regulating breast
cancer growth and metastasis. In order to study the role of CXCR7 in
breast cancer growth and metastasis, we employed two models-i) 4T1 and
CXCR7 downregulated 4T1 (4T1 shRNA-CXCR7) and ii) highly metastatic
4T1.2. First we observed CXCL12 induced and CXCR7 dependent migration of
breast cancer cells and CXCL12 induced activation of ERK, STAT3 and
cyclin D1, a downstream target of STAT3. In orthotopic syngenic models of
breast cancer, we found reduced tumor growth and metastasis of breast
cancer cells genetically silenced or pharmacologically inhibited for
CXCR7 or its downstream target STAT3. The downregulation or inhibition of
CXCR7 or its downstream target reduced tumor proliferation, angiogenesis
and macrophage (M2) recruitment to the tumor site. Further analysis
revealed the role of CXCR7 in secretion of cytokines (GMCSF, M-CSF and
MCP-2), and expression of MMP-9, MMP-2 and VCAM-1. Moreover, we observed
that CXCR7 is highly expressed in breast cancer tissues and positively
correlates with disease progression from invasive ductal carcinoma (IDC)
to metastasis. These observations highlight the importance of the CXCR7
axis in regulating breast cancer growth and metastasis. Blocking the
CXCL12/CXCR7/STAT3 axis and macrophage recruitment to the tumor site with
CXCR7 or STAT3 inhibitor may lead to the development of novel therapeutic
strategies against breast cancer.

