Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Serum insulin growth factor/insulin growth factor receptor1
(IGF-I, IGF-I-1R) and VEGF-A as prognostic factors and surrogate
biomarkers in triple negative breast cancer patients (TNBC)


Background: We evaluated the prognostic and predictive values of serum
IGF-I, IGF-I-1R, VEGF and TGF-1 in triple-negative and
non-triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC&NTNBC) patients through
correlation with standard prognostic factors and survival.Methods: serum
expression of VEGF-A, TGF-1, IGF-I and IGF-I-1R proteins was measured in
of 43 TNBC, 53 NTNBC and 20 normal control (NC) by quantitative enzyme
linked immune-sorbant assay (ELISA). Results were correlated to patients
characteristics, disease free and overall survival (DFS&OS).Results: The
cutoff points that discriminate between TNBC and NTNBC were: 10.09 ng/ml,
412.54 pg/ml and 106.96 ng/ml for IGF-I-1R, VEGF-A, and IGF-I. VEGF,
IGF-I and IGF-I-1R differed significantly between groups (p Background:
We evaluated the prognostic and predictive values of serum IGF-I,
IGF-I-1R, VEGF and TGF-1 in triple-negative and non-triple-negative
breast cancer (TNBC&NTNBC) patients through correlation with standard
prognostic factors and survival.Methods: serum expression of VEGF-A,
TGF-1, IGF-I and IGF-I-1R proteins was measured in of 43 TNBC, 53 NTNBC
and 20 normal control (NC) by quantitative enzyme linked immune-sorbant
assay (ELISA). Results were correlated to patients characteristics,
disease free and overall survival (DFS&OS).Results: The cutoff points
that discriminate between TNBC and NTNBC were: 10.09 ng/ml, 412.54 pg/ml
and 106.96 ng/ml for IGF-I-1R, VEGF-A, and IGF-I. VEGF, IGF-I and
IGF-I-1R differed significantly between groups (p <0.001) whereas TGF-1
differed significantly between NC and the other groups (pBackground: We
evaluated the prognostic and predictive values of serum IGF-I, IGF-I-1R,
VEGF and TGF-1 in triple-negative and non-triple-negative breast cancer
(TNBC&NTNBC) patients through correlation with standard prognostic
factors and survival.Methods: serum expression of VEGF-A, TGF-1, IGF-I
and IGF-I-1R proteins was measured in of 43 TNBC, 53 NTNBC and 20 normal
control (NC) by quantitative enzyme linked immune-sorbant assay (ELISA).
Results were correlated to patients characteristics, disease free and
overall survival (DFS&OS).Results: The cutoff points that discriminate
between TNBC and NTNBC were: 10.09 ng/ml, 412.54 pg/ml and 106.96 ng/ml
for IGF-I-1R, VEGF-A, and IGF-I. VEGF, IGF-I and IGF-I-1R differed
significantly between groups (p <0.001) whereas TGF-1 differed
significantly between NC and the other groups (p<0.001). TNBC was
associated with positive lymph nodes (pBackground: We evaluated the
prognostic and predictive values of serum IGF-I, IGF-I-1R, VEGF and TGF-1
in triple-negative and non-triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC&NTNBC)
patients through correlation with standard prognostic factors and
survival.Methods: serum expression of VEGF-A, TGF-1, IGF-I and IGF-I-1R
proteins was measured in of 43 TNBC, 53 NTNBC and 20 normal control (NC)
by quantitative enzyme linked immune-sorbant assay (ELISA). Results were
correlated to patients characteristics, disease free and overall survival
(DFS&OS).Results: The cutoff points that discriminate between TNBC and
NTNBC were: 10.09 ng/ml, 412.54 pg/ml and 106.96 ng/ml for IGF-I-1R,
VEGF-A, and IGF-I. VEGF, IGF-I and IGF-I-1R differed significantly
between groups (p <0.001) whereas TGF-1 differed significantly between NC
and the other groups (p<0.001). TNBC was associated with positive lymph
nodes (p<0.001), relapse and metastasis (pBackground: We evaluated the
prognostic and predictive values of serum IGF-I, IGF-I-1R, VEGF and TGF-1
in triple-negative and non-triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC&NTNBC)
patients through correlation with standard prognostic factors and
survival.Methods: serum expression of VEGF-A, TGF-1, IGF-I and IGF-I-1R
proteins was measured in of 43 TNBC, 53 NTNBC and 20 normal control (NC)
by quantitative enzyme linked immune-sorbant assay (ELISA). Results were
correlated to patients characteristics, disease free and overall survival
(DFS&OS).Results: The cutoff points that discriminate between TNBC and
NTNBC were: 10.09 ng/ml, 412.54 pg/ml and 106.96 ng/ml for IGF-I-1R,
VEGF-A, and IGF-I. VEGF, IGF-I and IGF-I-1R differed significantly
between groups (p <0.001) whereas TGF-1 differed significantly between NC
and the other groups (p<0.001). TNBC was associated with positive lymph
nodes (p<0.001), relapse and metastasis (p<0.001). Response rate (RR) was
significantly lower in TNBC patients (pBackground: We evaluated the
prognostic and predictive values of serum IGF-I, IGF-I-1R, VEGF and TGF-1
in triple-negative and non-triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC&NTNBC)
patients through correlation with standard prognostic factors and
survival.Methods: serum expression of VEGF-A, TGF-1, IGF-I and IGF-I-1R
proteins was measured in of 43 TNBC, 53 NTNBC and 20 normal control (NC)
by quantitative enzyme linked immune-sorbant assay (ELISA). Results were
correlated to patients characteristics, disease free and overall survival
(DFS&OS).Results: The cutoff points that discriminate between TNBC and
NTNBC were: 10.09 ng/ml, 412.54 pg/ml and 106.96 ng/ml for IGF-I-1R,
VEGF-A, and IGF-I. VEGF, IGF-I and IGF-I-1R differed significantly
between groups (p <0.001) whereas TGF-1 differed significantly between NC
and the other groups (p<0.001). TNBC was associated with positive lymph
nodes (p<0.001), relapse and metastasis (p<0.001). Response rate (RR) was
significantly lower in TNBC patients (p<0.001) with high serum VEGF-A,
IGF-I-I/IGF-I-IR (p= 0.004, 0.001/0.003). Reduced DFS associated with
high tumor grade, high VEGF-A (pBackground: We evaluated the prognostic
and predictive values of serum IGF-I, IGF-I-1R, VEGF and TGF-1 in
triple-negative and non-triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC&NTNBC)
patients through correlation with standard prognostic factors and
survival.Methods: serum expression of VEGF-A, TGF-1, IGF-I and IGF-I-1R
proteins was measured in of 43 TNBC, 53 NTNBC and 20 normal control (NC)
by quantitative enzyme linked immune-sorbant assay (ELISA). Results were
correlated to patients characteristics, disease free and overall survival
(DFS&OS).Results: The cutoff points that discriminate between TNBC and
NTNBC were: 10.09 ng/ml, 412.54 pg/ml and 106.96 ng/ml for IGF-I-1R,
VEGF-A, and IGF-I. VEGF, IGF-I and IGF-I-1R differed significantly
between groups (p <0.001) whereas TGF-1 differed significantly between NC
and the other groups (p<0.001). TNBC was associated with positive lymph
nodes (p<0.001), relapse and metastasis (p<0.001). Response rate (RR) was
significantly lower in TNBC patients (p<0.001) with high serum VEGF-A,
IGF-I-I/IGF-I-IR (p= 0.004, 0.001/0.003). Reduced DFS associated with
high tumor grade, high VEGF-A (p<0.001), high IGF-I/ IGF-I-IR
(PBackground: We evaluated the prognostic and predictive values of serum
IGF-I, IGF-I-1R, VEGF and TGF-1 in triple-negative and
non-triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC&NTNBC) patients through
correlation with standard prognostic factors and survival.Methods: serum
expression of VEGF-A, TGF-1, IGF-I and IGF-I-1R proteins was measured in
of 43 TNBC, 53 NTNBC and 20 normal control (NC) by quantitative enzyme
linked immune-sorbant assay (ELISA). Results were correlated to patients
characteristics, disease free and overall survival (DFS&OS).Results: The
cutoff points that discriminate between TNBC and NTNBC were: 10.09 ng/ml,
412.54 pg/ml and 106.96 ng/ml for IGF-I-1R, VEGF-A, and IGF-I. VEGF,
IGF-I and IGF-I-1R differed significantly between groups (p <0.001)
whereas TGF-1 differed significantly between NC and the other groups
(p<0.001). TNBC was associated with positive lymph nodes (p<0.001),
relapse and metastasis (p<0.001). Response rate (RR) was significantly
lower in TNBC patients (p<0.001) with high serum VEGF-A, IGF-I-I/IGF-I-IR
(p= 0.004, 0.001/0.003). Reduced DFS associated with high tumor grade,
high VEGF-A (p<0.001), high IGF-I/ IGF-I-IR (P<0.001/ pBackground: We
evaluated the prognostic and predictive values of serum IGF-I, IGF-I-1R,
VEGF and TGF-1 in triple-negative and non-triple-negative breast cancer
(TNBC&NTNBC) patients through correlation with standard prognostic
factors and survival.Methods: serum expression of VEGF-A, TGF-1, IGF-I
and IGF-I-1R proteins was measured in of 43 TNBC, 53 NTNBC and 20 normal
control (NC) by quantitative enzyme linked immune-sorbant assay (ELISA).
Results were correlated to patients characteristics, disease free and
overall survival (DFS&OS).Results: The cutoff points that discriminate
between TNBC and NTNBC were: 10.09 ng/ml, 412.54 pg/ml and 106.96 ng/ml
for IGF-I-1R, VEGF-A, and IGF-I. VEGF, IGF-I and IGF-I-1R differed
significantly between groups (p <0.001) whereas TGF-1 differed
significantly between NC and the other groups (p<0.001). TNBC was
associated with positive lymph nodes (p<0.001), relapse and metastasis
(p<0.001). Response rate (RR) was significantly lower in TNBC patients
(p<0.001) with high serum VEGF-A, IGF-I-I/IGF-I-IR (p= 0.004,
0.001/0.003). Reduced DFS associated with high tumor grade, high VEGF-A
(p<0.001), high IGF-I/ IGF-I-IR (P<0.001/ p<0.001). Reduced OS associated
with relapse (pBackground: We evaluated the prognostic and predictive
values of serum IGF-I, IGF-I-1R, VEGF and TGF-1 in triple-negative and
non-triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC&NTNBC) patients through
correlation with standard prognostic factors and survival.Methods: serum
expression of VEGF-A, TGF-1, IGF-I and IGF-I-1R proteins was measured in
of 43 TNBC, 53 NTNBC and 20 normal control (NC) by quantitative enzyme
linked immune-sorbant assay (ELISA). Results were correlated to patients
characteristics, disease free and overall survival (DFS&OS).Results: The
cutoff points that discriminate between TNBC and NTNBC were: 10.09 ng/ml,
412.54 pg/ml and 106.96 ng/ml for IGF-I-1R, VEGF-A, and IGF-I. VEGF,
IGF-I and IGF-I-1R differed significantly between groups (p <0.001)
whereas TGF-1 differed significantly between NC and the other groups
(p<0.001). TNBC was associated with positive lymph nodes (p<0.001),
relapse and metastasis (p<0.001). Response rate (RR) was significantly
lower in TNBC patients (p<0.001) with high serum VEGF-A, IGF-I-I/IGF-I-IR
(p= 0.004, 0.001/0.003). Reduced DFS associated with high tumor grade,
high VEGF-A (p<0.001), high IGF-I/ IGF-I-IR (P<0.001/ p<0.001). Reduced
OS associated with relapse (p<0.001), high VEGF-A (p=0.001) and high
IGF-I/ IGF-I-IR (p= 0.012/p= 0.02). in multivariate analysis positive
nodes (PBackground: We evaluated the prognostic and predictive values of
serum IGF-I, IGF-I-1R, VEGF and TGF-1 in triple-negative and
non-triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC&NTNBC) patients through
correlation with standard prognostic factors and survival.Methods: serum
expression of VEGF-A, TGF-1, IGF-I and IGF-I-1R proteins was measured in
of 43 TNBC, 53 NTNBC and 20 normal control (NC) by quantitative enzyme
linked immune-sorbant assay (ELISA). Results were correlated to patients
characteristics, disease free and overall survival (DFS&OS).Results: The
cutoff points that discriminate between TNBC and NTNBC were: 10.09 ng/ml,
412.54 pg/ml and 106.96 ng/ml for IGF-I-1R, VEGF-A, and IGF-I. VEGF,
IGF-I and IGF-I-1R differed significantly between groups (p <0.001)
whereas TGF-1 differed significantly between NC and the other groups
(p<0.001). TNBC was associated with positive lymph nodes (p<0.001),
relapse and metastasis (p<0.001). Response rate (RR) was significantly
lower in TNBC patients (p<0.001) with high serum VEGF-A, IGF-I-I/IGF-I-IR
(p= 0.004, 0.001/0.003). Reduced DFS associated with high tumor grade,
high VEGF-A (p<0.001), high IGF-I/ IGF-I-IR (P<0.001/ p<0.001). Reduced
OS associated with relapse (p<0.001), high VEGF-A (p=0.001) and high
IGF-I/ IGF-I-IR (p= 0.012/p= 0.02). in multivariate analysis positive
nodes (P< 0.001), high VEGF-A (P = 0.02) and IGF-I/ IGF-I-1R (P= 0.03, P=
0.01) were independent factor for disease recurrence.Conclusions: TNBC
represents an aggressive subset of breast tumors. IGF-I, IGF-I-IR, VEGF-A
could be used as surrogate biomarkers for TNBC, as prognostic marker
since their expression level correlates with reduced OS and high
incidence of relapse. They also represent promising candidates for
targeted therapy in TNBC patients.

