Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The differential expression of miRNAs in breast cancer cell lines


Breast cancer is a heterogenous disease that is the second leading cause
of death amongst women in the United States. Triple negative breast
cancer (TNBC) is a very aggressive subtype of breast cancer characterized
by its loss of estrogen, progesterone and HER2 receptor expression which
limits its targets for effective drug therapies. Micro Ribonucleic Acids
(miRNAs) are a class of small, endogenous non-coding ribonucleic acids
that seem to play an essential role in gene regulation. Changes in the
patterns of miRNA expression profiles are serving as potential biomarkers
for tumor diagnosis, prognosis of disease-specific outcomes, and the
prediction of therapeutic responses in cancer. We analyzed miRNA array
(Agilent) expression profiles in triple negative breast cancer cell lines
(HCC70, HCC1806, MDA-MB-157) and non-cancerous (AG11132) African American
women breast cell lines. We revealed that the TNBC cells exhibited a
different miRNA expression pattern when compared to the normal breast
cancer cell line. We analyzed the hybridization data files using standard
Microsoft Excel techniques and verified our findings using PARTEK
Genomics Suite. We combined the data sets from the TNBC cell lines and
compared the miRNA array expression profiles to the normal control cell
line AG11132. We revealed that there were significant dysregulation of
miRNAs including those of the let-7 family, miR-16, miR-31, and
miR-25b-1, miR34a, and miR-95 in the triple negative cells as compared to
the normal cells. These miRNAs have been described in previous scientific
studies to be associated with tumorigenesis in breast cancer. These
studies are initial observations that we will follow up with molecular
techniques such as real-time PCR and siRNA to validate the results in
order to establish more direct correlations to miRNAs and their roles in
triple negative breast cancer.

