Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Involvement of Notch1 signaling pathway in medulloblastoma
metastasis


Medulloblastoma (MB) is a malignant brain tumor that originates in the
cerebellum in children and spreads via the cerebrospinal fluid to the
leptomeningeal spaces of the brain and of the spinal cord. MB is
stratified into four distinct groups, according to genetic and clinical
features, and patients from group 3 (also known as c-Myc-amplified group)
have the highest risk of developing metastatic disease and, consequently,
a poor prognosis. Treatment protocols involve surgery, craniospinal
radiation, and high-dose chemotherapy, which frequently cause disabling
neurotoxic effects in long-term survivors. We used MB cell lines and
primary cells isolated from patients from the c-Myc-amplified group to
develop a spontaneous spinal metastasis orthotopic xenograft model as a
tool to understand the cellular determinants of leptomeningeal and spinal
dissemination. Human cells isolated from the primary site tumors
expressed 10 fold higher NICD1 (Notch1 Intracellular Domain), the active
form of Notch1, than cells isolated from spinal metastatic sites (as
quantified by western blot and imunohistochemistry), suggesting the
downregulation of canonical Notch1 signaling pathway in MB metastasis.
Moreover, flow cytometry analyses revealed that a higher percentage of
cells isolated from metastatic sites expressed full-length surface Notch1
as compared to the primary site tumor. These differences cannot be
explained by enrichment in the stem cell population at primary tumor
sites, as we observed that MB cells isolated from primary tumors and
metastatic sites exhibit equivalent self-renewal potential and express
equivalent levels of CD133 and CD15. Our goal is to understand the role
of notch in regulating medulloblastoma metastasis.

