Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Wntless (GPR177) regulates WNT/NF-B signaling in leukemia cells,
and its expression correlates with poor prognosis in B-cell precursor
acute lymphoblastic leukemia


B-cell precursor acute lymphoblastic leukemia (BCP ALL) is the most
common childhood leukemia, with a cure rate of 80%. Nevertheless, disease
relapse is the most important prognostic factor for the disease outcome.
We aimed to elucidate the role of Wnt secretion-regulating protein,
Wntless (Wls)/GPR177, on disease outcome in pediatric patients with BCP
ALL, and assess its pathogenetic role in the regulation of the disease.
Wls expression was characterized and correlated with Wnt and NF-B pathway
signaling in the bone marrow leukemia cells isolated from 44 pediatric
patients with BCP ALL. The overexpression of Wls was detected in leukemia
cells and was significantly correlated with the disease relapse and poor
survival in the patients. The high expression of Wls also correlated with
the Wnt expression, particularly with the NF-B signaling activation. The
Wnt-activated NF-B signaling induced by Wls was shown to provide
essential proliferation, transformation, and anti-apoptotic activity
during leukemogenesis. These results indicated that Wls played an
essential role in disease relapse and poor survival in patients with BCP
ALL. Therefore, Wls may provide a potential future therapeutic target,
particularly for patients who do not respond to existing therapies and
suffer relapse.

