Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Protein tyrosine phosphatases PTP-1B, SHP-2 and PTEN facilitate
Rb/E2F-associated apoptotic signaling


To maintain tissue homeostasis, apoptosis is functionally linked to cell
proliferation via the retinoblastoma tumor suppressor (Rb)/E2F complex.
Rb/E2F-associated apoptosis is a robust apoptotic response initiated by
loss of constitutive Rb/E2F transcriptional repression and mediated by
caspase-8. It is characterized by inactivation of focal adhesion kinase
(FAK) through dephosphorylation by protein tyrosine phosphatase(s). In
the current work, we report that three protein tyrosine phosphatases,
PTP-1B, SHP-2, and PTEN, are involved in Rb/E2F-associated apoptosis.
Induction of apoptosis in an osteoscarcoma cell line that conditionally
expresses a dominant negative mutant of E2F-1 (ER-dnE2F-1) by treatment
with 4-hydroxytamoxifen (4-OHT) led to a significant increase in levels
of PTP-1B, SHP-2, and PTEN mRNA expression in comparison to untreated
cells. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays showed that E2F-1
specifically binds to putative E2F-1 binding sites identified within the
three PTP promoters. Knockdown of SHP-2, PTEN, or PTP-1B using siRNA
increased cell viability and decreased cell death in 4-OHT-treated
ER-dnE2F-1 cells compared to control. Consistent with this observation,
knockdown of SHP-2 or PTEN significantly inhibited caspase-8 activity in
4-OHT-treated ER-dnE2F1 cells in comparison to control while knockdown of
SHP-2, PTEN, or PTP-1B significantly inhibited caspase-3 activity in
4-OHT-treated ER-dnE2F-1 cells compared to control. Combined, our results
indicated PTP-1B, SHP-2, and PTEN are required to regulate
Rb/E2F-associated apoptotic signal transduction. Furthermore, our
findings suggest PTP-1B, SHP-2, and PTEN can contribute to tumor
suppression through an Rb/E2F-associated mechanism.

