Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chemopreventive and immune-modulatory effects of the Cucumaria
frondosa extract, Frondanol A5 in the APCMin/+ mice intestinal
tumorigenesis


Sea cucumbers have been used widely as a food source and for their health
benefits, which include treatment of various chronic inflammatory
conditions. We have shown previously that Cucumaria frondosa extract,
Frondanol A5 inhibits azoxymethane -induced colonic precursor lesions in
F344 rats. Experiments were designed to assess the chemopreventive
efficacy of Frondanol A5, for suppression of intestinal tumorigenesis in
male and female APCMin/+ mice. Six-week-old APCMin/+ mice were fed the
modified AIN-76A diets containing 0, 250 or 500 ppm Frondanol A5 for 14
weeks. To understand molecular mechanisms, we analyzed levels of
proliferation, inflammatory and angiogenesis makers; PCNA, inflammatory
cytokines, 5-lipoxygenase (5-LOX), Five Lox Activating Protein (FLAP) and
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) expressions by IHC, IHF, and/or
RT-PCR methods. To determine immuno-modulatory effects of Fondanol A5 on
intestinal tumorigenesis, number of macrophages was evaluated in the
blood, SI polyps and colon tumors by Giemsa staining, ex-vivo phagocytic
assay was performed on the peritoneal macrophages isolated from the
control and treated mice. Further, -interferon-inducible lysosomal
thiolreductase (GILT) mRNA expression was analyzed in the peritoneal
macrophages, SI polyps and colonic tumors. Dietary administration of 250
and 500 ppm of Frondanol A5 suppressed small intestinal polyp formation
up to 28 % (pSea cucumbers have been used widely as a food source and for
their health benefits, which include treatment of various chronic
inflammatory conditions. We have shown previously that Cucumaria frondosa
extract, Frondanol A5 inhibits azoxymethane -induced colonic precursor
lesions in F344 rats. Experiments were designed to assess the
chemopreventive efficacy of Frondanol A5, for suppression of intestinal
tumorigenesis in male and female APCMin/+ mice. Six-week-old APCMin/+
mice were fed the modified AIN-76A diets containing 0, 250 or 500 ppm
Frondanol A5 for 14 weeks. To understand molecular mechanisms, we
analyzed levels of proliferation, inflammatory and angiogenesis makers;
PCNA, inflammatory cytokines, 5-lipoxygenase (5-LOX), Five Lox Activating
Protein (FLAP) and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) expressions
by IHC, IHF, and/or RT-PCR methods. To determine immuno-modulatory
effects of Fondanol A5 on intestinal tumorigenesis, number of macrophages
was evaluated in the blood, SI polyps and colon tumors by Giemsa
staining, ex-vivo phagocytic assay was performed on the peritoneal
macrophages isolated from the control and treated mice. Further,
-interferon-inducible lysosomal thiolreductase (GILT) mRNA expression was
analyzed in the peritoneal macrophages, SI polyps and colonic tumors.
Dietary administration of 250 and 500 ppm of Frondanol A5 suppressed
small intestinal polyp formation up to 28 % (p<0.02) in males and up to
50 % (pSea cucumbers have been used widely as a food source and for their
health benefits, which include treatment of various chronic inflammatory
conditions. We have shown previously that Cucumaria frondosa extract,
Frondanol A5 inhibits azoxymethane -induced colonic precursor lesions in
F344 rats. Experiments were designed to assess the chemopreventive
efficacy of Frondanol A5, for suppression of intestinal tumorigenesis in
male and female APCMin/+ mice. Six-week-old APCMin/+ mice were fed the
modified AIN-76A diets containing 0, 250 or 500 ppm Frondanol A5 for 14
weeks. To understand molecular mechanisms, we analyzed levels of
proliferation, inflammatory and angiogenesis makers; PCNA, inflammatory
cytokines, 5-lipoxygenase (5-LOX), Five Lox Activating Protein (FLAP) and
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) expressions by IHC, IHF, and/or
RT-PCR methods. To determine immuno-modulatory effects of Fondanol A5 on
intestinal tumorigenesis, number of macrophages was evaluated in the
blood, SI polyps and colon tumors by Giemsa staining, ex-vivo phagocytic
assay was performed on the peritoneal macrophages isolated from the
control and treated mice. Further, -interferon-inducible lysosomal
thiolreductase (GILT) mRNA expression was analyzed in the peritoneal
macrophages, SI polyps and colonic tumors. Dietary administration of 250
and 500 ppm of Frondanol A5 suppressed small intestinal polyp formation
up to 28 % (p<0.02) in males and up to 50 % (p<0.01) in females; and
significantly decreased polyp size in both genders. Importantly, 250 and
500 ppm Frondanol A5 diet suppressed colon tumors multiplicities by 65%
(pSea cucumbers have been used widely as a food source and for their
health benefits, which include treatment of various chronic inflammatory
conditions. We have shown previously that Cucumaria frondosa extract,
Frondanol A5 inhibits azoxymethane -induced colonic precursor lesions in
F344 rats. Experiments were designed to assess the chemopreventive
efficacy of Frondanol A5, for suppression of intestinal tumorigenesis in
male and female APCMin/+ mice. Six-week-old APCMin/+ mice were fed the
modified AIN-76A diets containing 0, 250 or 500 ppm Frondanol A5 for 14
weeks. To understand molecular mechanisms, we analyzed levels of
proliferation, inflammatory and angiogenesis makers; PCNA, inflammatory
cytokines, 5-lipoxygenase (5-LOX), Five Lox Activating Protein (FLAP) and
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) expressions by IHC, IHF, and/or
RT-PCR methods. To determine immuno-modulatory effects of Fondanol A5 on
intestinal tumorigenesis, number of macrophages was evaluated in the
blood, SI polyps and colon tumors by Giemsa staining, ex-vivo phagocytic
assay was performed on the peritoneal macrophages isolated from the
control and treated mice. Further, -interferon-inducible lysosomal
thiolreductase (GILT) mRNA expression was analyzed in the peritoneal
macrophages, SI polyps and colonic tumors. Dietary administration of 250
and 500 ppm of Frondanol A5 suppressed small intestinal polyp formation
up to 28 % (p<0.02) in males and up to 50 % (p<0.01) in females; and
significantly decreased polyp size in both genders. Importantly, 250 and
500 ppm Frondanol A5 diet suppressed colon tumors multiplicities by 65%
(p<0.007) and 75% (pSea cucumbers have been used widely as a food source
and for their health benefits, which include treatment of various chronic
inflammatory conditions. We have shown previously that Cucumaria frondosa
extract, Frondanol A5 inhibits azoxymethane -induced colonic precursor
lesions in F344 rats. Experiments were designed to assess the
chemopreventive efficacy of Frondanol A5, for suppression of intestinal
tumorigenesis in male and female APCMin/+ mice. Six-week-old APCMin/+
mice were fed the modified AIN-76A diets containing 0, 250 or 500 ppm
Frondanol A5 for 14 weeks. To understand molecular mechanisms, we
analyzed levels of proliferation, inflammatory and angiogenesis makers;
PCNA, inflammatory cytokines, 5-lipoxygenase (5-LOX), Five Lox Activating
Protein (FLAP) and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) expressions
by IHC, IHF, and/or RT-PCR methods. To determine immuno-modulatory
effects of Fondanol A5 on intestinal tumorigenesis, number of macrophages
was evaluated in the blood, SI polyps and colon tumors by Giemsa
staining, ex-vivo phagocytic assay was performed on the peritoneal
macrophages isolated from the control and treated mice. Further,
-interferon-inducible lysosomal thiolreductase (GILT) mRNA expression was
analyzed in the peritoneal macrophages, SI polyps and colonic tumors.
Dietary administration of 250 and 500 ppm of Frondanol A5 suppressed
small intestinal polyp formation up to 28 % (p<0.02) in males and up to
50 % (p<0.01) in females; and significantly decreased polyp size in both
genders. Importantly, 250 and 500 ppm Frondanol A5 diet suppressed colon
tumors multiplicities by 65% (p<0.007) and 75% (p<0.0001) as compared to
control diet fed male APCMin/+ mice. Similarly, in female APCMin/+ mice,
dietary Frondanol A5 at both dose levels suppressed colon tumor
multiplicities up to 80% (pSea cucumbers have been used widely as a food
source and for their health benefits, which include treatment of various
chronic inflammatory conditions. We have shown previously that Cucumaria
frondosa extract, Frondanol A5 inhibits azoxymethane -induced colonic
precursor lesions in F344 rats. Experiments were designed to assess the
chemopreventive efficacy of Frondanol A5, for suppression of intestinal
tumorigenesis in male and female APCMin/+ mice. Six-week-old APCMin/+
mice were fed the modified AIN-76A diets containing 0, 250 or 500 ppm
Frondanol A5 for 14 weeks. To understand molecular mechanisms, we
analyzed levels of proliferation, inflammatory and angiogenesis makers;
PCNA, inflammatory cytokines, 5-lipoxygenase (5-LOX), Five Lox Activating
Protein (FLAP) and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) expressions
by IHC, IHF, and/or RT-PCR methods. To determine immuno-modulatory
effects of Fondanol A5 on intestinal tumorigenesis, number of macrophages
was evaluated in the blood, SI polyps and colon tumors by Giemsa
staining, ex-vivo phagocytic assay was performed on the peritoneal
macrophages isolated from the control and treated mice. Further,
-interferon-inducible lysosomal thiolreductase (GILT) mRNA expression was
analyzed in the peritoneal macrophages, SI polyps and colonic tumors.
Dietary administration of 250 and 500 ppm of Frondanol A5 suppressed
small intestinal polyp formation up to 28 % (p<0.02) in males and up to
50 % (p<0.01) in females; and significantly decreased polyp size in both
genders. Importantly, 250 and 500 ppm Frondanol A5 diet suppressed colon
tumors multiplicities by 65% (p<0.007) and 75% (p<0.0001) as compared to
control diet fed male APCMin/+ mice. Similarly, in female APCMin/+ mice,
dietary Frondanol A5 at both dose levels suppressed colon tumor
multiplicities up to 80% (p<0.0001). Frondanol A5 showed significant
colon tumor inhibitory dose-response effects in male APCMin/+ mice.
Intestinal tumors of Frondanol A5-fed mice showed significantly reduced
expression of PCNA, 5-LOX, its regulator molecule, FLAP and angiogenic
marker VEGF. Frondanol A5-fed-mice showed suppression of serum
inflammatory cytokines and increased expression of granulocyte-colony
stimulating factor (G-CSF) by ELISA. Importantly, mice treated with
Frondanol A5 diet showed enhanced phagocytic activity and increase in
number of macrophages (Control 24% Vs treated 50%; pSea cucumbers have
been used widely as a food source and for their health benefits, which
include treatment of various chronic inflammatory conditions. We have
shown previously that Cucumaria frondosa extract, Frondanol A5 inhibits
azoxymethane -induced colonic precursor lesions in F344 rats. Experiments
were designed to assess the chemopreventive efficacy of Frondanol A5, for
suppression of intestinal tumorigenesis in male and female APCMin/+ mice.
Six-week-old APCMin/+ mice were fed the modified AIN-76A diets containing
0, 250 or 500 ppm Frondanol A5 for 14 weeks. To understand molecular
mechanisms, we analyzed levels of proliferation, inflammatory and
angiogenesis makers; PCNA, inflammatory cytokines, 5-lipoxygenase
(5-LOX), Five Lox Activating Protein (FLAP) and vascular endothelial
growth factor (VEGF) expressions by IHC, IHF, and/or RT-PCR methods. To
determine immuno-modulatory effects of Fondanol A5 on intestinal
tumorigenesis, number of macrophages was evaluated in the blood, SI
polyps and colon tumors by Giemsa staining, ex-vivo phagocytic assay was
performed on the peritoneal macrophages isolated from the control and
treated mice. Further, -interferon-inducible lysosomal thiolreductase
(GILT) mRNA expression was analyzed in the peritoneal macrophages, SI
polyps and colonic tumors. Dietary administration of 250 and 500 ppm of
Frondanol A5 suppressed small intestinal polyp formation up to 28 %
(p<0.02) in males and up to 50 % (p<0.01) in females; and significantly
decreased polyp size in both genders. Importantly, 250 and 500 ppm
Frondanol A5 diet suppressed colon tumors multiplicities by 65% (p<0.007)
and 75% (p<0.0001) as compared to control diet fed male APCMin/+ mice.
Similarly, in female APCMin/+ mice, dietary Frondanol A5 at both dose
levels suppressed colon tumor multiplicities up to 80% (p<0.0001).
Frondanol A5 showed significant colon tumor inhibitory dose-response
effects in male APCMin/+ mice. Intestinal tumors of Frondanol A5-fed mice
showed significantly reduced expression of PCNA, 5-LOX, its regulator
molecule, FLAP and angiogenic marker VEGF. Frondanol A5-fed-mice showed
suppression of serum inflammatory cytokines and increased expression of
granulocyte-colony stimulating factor (G-CSF) by ELISA. Importantly, mice
treated with Frondanol A5 diet showed enhanced phagocytic activity and
increase in number of macrophages (Control 24% Vs treated 50%; p<0.01)
and caused a significant increase in GILT mRNA expression, in both
peritoneal macrophages as well as colonic tumors. These results suggest
that Frondanol A5 exhibits significant chemopreventive potential in FAP
model of SI and colon tumorigenesis. Frondanol A5 induced antitumor
activities in part mediated through modulation of inflammatory molecules
and stimulation of macrophage activity. Supported by NIH Grant
N01-CN-53300 and R01CA094962.

