Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of structural determinants of human proton-coupled
folate transporter oligomerization


The human proton-coupled folate transporter (hPCFT) is expressed in human
solid tumors and is active at pHs characterizing the human
microenvironment. hPCFT has 459 amino acids with 12 transmembrane domains
and cytosolic N- and C-termini. Recent attention has focused on
exploiting hPCFT for targeting solid tumors with novel cytotoxic
antifolates (Kugel Desmoulin et al., Cancer Biol Ther 13: 1355-1373,
2012). hPCFT forms homo-oligomers with functional significance (Hou et
al., J Biol Chem 287: 4982-4995, 2012). The hPCFT primary sequence
includes GXXXG motifs in transmembrane domain (TMD) 2 (G93XXXG97) and 4
(G155XXXG159) that are analogous to dimerization motifs in other
amphipathic proteins. To investigate the role of these GXXXG motifs in
hPCFT oligomerization, we mutated Gly to Leu to obtain single (G93L,
G97L, G155L, G159L) or multiple (G93L/G97L, G155L/G159L,
G93L/G97L/G155L/G159L) mutants. Only with the G159L and G93L mutants, was
[3H]methotrexate transport at pH 5.5 substantially preserved. Transport
activity correlated closely with surface hPCFT levels by
sulfo-NHS-SS-biotin labeling and Western blots. When hemagglutin
(HA)-tagged G-to-L hPCFT mutants were co-expressed with FLAG-His10-tagged
wild-type (WT) hPCFT in hPCFT-null HeLa cells, both mutant and WT
proteins were retained on nickel affinity columns, suggesting that the
hPCFT GXXXG motifs are not involved in protein oligomerization. This was
substantiated by fluorescent resonance energy transfer (FRET) with
N-terminal YFP-tagged and C-terminal CFP-tagged hPCFT constructs
ectopically expressed in hPCFT-null HeLa cells. The GXXXG motifs in hPCFT
are important for proper hPCFT folding and intracellular trafficking. A
functional Cys-less (CL) hPCFT construct was generated in which the 7 Cys
residues were replaced by Ser. Individual Cys insertion mutants were
generated in which Cys was inserted from positions 115-137 in TMD3, and
from positions 213-236 in TMD6. Constructs were transfected into
hPCFT-null HeLa cells, followed by cross-linking with MTS-6-MTS (TMD3) or
MTS-1-MTS (TMD6). Cross-links were detected for V118, A128, V132, Q136
and L137 in TMD 3, and for W213C, A227C, F228C, L234C, K235C, and E236C
in TMD6, establishing proximities between vicinal TMDs in separate hPCFT
monomers. These results strongly imply that TMD3 and TMD6 provide
critical polypeptide interfaces for the formation of hPCFT oligomers.
Identification of structural motifs or domains involved in hPCFT
oligomerization may lead to novel approaches for therapeutically rescuing
functionally impaired hPCFT mutants, or enhancing surface expression of
hPCFT in tumors treated with hPCFT-selective antifolates.Key words:
proton-coupled folate transporter, folate, oligomerization,
cross-linking, transporter.

