Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: N-terminal portion of -catenin is important in ISGylation of
-catenin by 90K glycoprotein in colorectal cancer cells


-catenin is a major transducer in Wnt signaling pathway, which is highly
expressed in colorectal and other cancers. Previously, we have shown that
-catenin is down-regulated in colorectal cancer cells by glycoprotein,
90K, through ISGylation-dependent ubiquitination. The aim of this study
is to further clarify a novel mechanism of -catenin down-regulation
pathway by 90K glycoprotein. To identify ISGylation site of -catenin,
deletion mutants of -catenin lacking N- or C-terminal domain were
employed. As only two lysine residues, K19 and K49, are reside in
N-terminus of -catenin, we sequenced cDNA of - catenin from paired human
colorectal cancer tissues to find the mutation and generated arginine
point-mutation. As a result, there is no mutation on K19 and/or K49 in
examined specimens and did not affect the 90K-mediated ISGylational
degradation. To rule out the possibility of involving non-lysine residue
in the ISG15 conjugation, such as serine or threonine, we constructed
several deletion mutants and found that none are responsible for the
ISG15 conjugation. Now, N-terminal portion of -catenin is under screening
for possible interactions with putative E3 ligases, and further detailed
studies delineating the complex formation among ISG15 and -catenin/E3
ligases are under way.

