Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Plasma and tumor pharmacokinetics of IV LMP400, a novel
indenoisoquinoline topoisomerase I inhibitor, in a canine phase I study


Introduction: LMP400 is one of 3 indenoisoquinolines that are being
evaluated in pet dogs with lymphoma to define their safety,
pharmacokinetics, and pharmacodynamic modulation (COTC007b). LMP400 forms
stable DNA-topoisomerase I (Top1) cleavable complexes and induces unique
DNA cleavage sites relative to approved Top1 poisons; LMP400 is not a
substrate for ABC transporters and does not have the stability issues
that most camptothecin analogs do. Here we report the plasma and
uncoupled tumor pharmacokinetics of LMP400 administered IV daily x 5 to
patient dogs.Methods: Eligibility included: dogs >15 kg with
histologically confirmed non-Hodgkin's lymphoma with nodal presentation
(stage 2 or greater) and minimal nodes size for biopsy of 3 cm in the
longest dimension, performance status of Grade 0 or 1 and informed owner
consent. Dose levels (DL) explored were 8, 16, 24, and 40 mg/m2/day
through a 3+3 dose escalation study design. LMP400 was administered over
1 h IV daily x 5, Q28D. LMP400 was quantitated with a validated LC-MS/MS
assay (PMID: 20236781), and plasma pharmacokinetic parameters determined
non-compartmentally with PK Solutions and plasma and tumor parameters
compartmentally with ADAPT5 through iterated two stage (ITS) and maximum
likelihood solution with the expectation maximization algorithm
(MLEM).Results: All fifteen dogs had useable pharmacokinetic data.
Non-compartmental analysis suggested linear relationships between plasma
Cmax and AUC vs. dose and tumor C2h vs. dose. Plasma terminal half-life
was 11.9 5.0 h and the CL was 26.7 L/h/m2. In line with the t1/2, slight
plasma accumulation was observed on this daily times 5 schedule.
Compartmental modeling with a 2 compartment linear model resulted in a
good fit to the data. The parameters and %CVs respectively for Ke, Vc,
Kcp, Kpc, Kct and Ktc were 0.181 h-1 (42.6%), 108 L/m2 (32.7%), 0.250 h-1
(30.1%), 0.0602 h-1 (67%), 0.0632 h-1 (3.65%), and 0.649 h-1 (42.2%).
Plasma compartmental CL and half-life were 19.5 L/h/m2 and 29.7
h.Conclusion: The plasma pharmacokinetics of LMP400 in dogs display
biphasic behavior, a relatively high total body clearance at 19.5 L/h/m2,
and a terminal half-life of 29.7 h. LMP400 distributed to the tumors and
mean tumor concentrations were at least 10-fold higher than plasma
concentrations at equivalent time points of 2, 6 and 120 h. This
favorable biodistribution to tumor (lymph node) may be a valuable
distinction to consider in the translation of this novel
indenoisoquinoline to the clinic.Support: N01-CM-2011-00015, N01-CM-42202
and P30-CA-47904

