Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HNF4 inhibits liver cancer metastasis via suppression of NF-B
activity


BACKGROUND & AIMS: Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 (HNF4) is a liver enriched
transcription factor and is indispensable for liver development. However,
the role of HNF4 in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) metastasis remains
largely unknown.METHODS: 429 HCC tissues were involved in the correlation
analysis of HNF4 levels with tumor features and patient outcomes. Effect
of HNF4 on HCC metastasis was monitored through in vivo imaging system.
Expression of HNF4, RelA(p65) or microRNAs in human HCCs was determined
by Real-time PCR, western blot or immunohistochemistry. Point mutation
and ChIP assay were performed to detect the interaction of HNF4 with the
promoter of target microRNA. 3UTR reporter assay was conducted to
determine the regulation of RelA by microRNAs.RESULTS: Reduced HNF4
expression correlated well with the aggressive clinicopathological
characteristics of HCC and predicted poor prognosis of patients. HNF4
levels were even lower in metastatic HCCs, and ectopic HNF4 expression
suppressed the metastasis of hepatoma cells both in vitro and in vivo.
HNF4 suppressed HCC metastasis through inhibiting RelA expression and NFB
activity. miR-7 and miR-124, which were transcriptionally up-regulated by
HNF4, repressed RelA expression via interaction with RelA-3UTR. Herein,
HNF4 suppresses NF-B activity and RelA expression via a miR-7 and
miR-124-dependent manner. Moreover, combination of HNF4 and NF-B
exhibited more powerful predictive efficiency of patient
prognosis.CONCLUSIONS: Considering the importance of HNF4 and NF-B in
chronic liver disease, the suppression of NF-B by HNF4 is not only
essential in connecting hepatic inflammation and tumorigenesis, but also
indicates novel strategy in HCC prevention and therapy.

