Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Yeast vector-encoding multiple MUC1 agonist epitopes (yeast-MUC1)
can induce MUC1-specific T-cell immune responses


The tumor-associated antigen MUC1 is overexpressed on various human
hematological and epithelial malignancies. The MUC1 molecule, which has
an N-terminal (MUC1-N) and a C-terminal (MUC1-C, which has been shown to
act as an oncogene), is an attractive target for cancer immunotherapy. We
have identified and reported 10 agonist epitopes (7 in the C-terminus, 2
in the N-terminus VNTR region, and 1 in the non-VNTR region) that enhance
production of CD8 cytotoxic T lymphocytes. These epitopes span HLA-A2,
HLA-A3, and HLA-A24 MHC class I alleles, thus encompassing the majority
of the North American population. Compared to native epitopes, these
agonist epitopes more efficiently generate MUC1-specific T cells, induce
production of IFN-gamma by MUC1-specific T cells, and lyse human tumor
cells expressing MUC1 native epitopes in an MHC-restricted manner. We
have previously shown that heat-killed recombinant Saccharomyces
cerevisiae yeast genetically modified to express carcinoembryonic antigen
can efficiently activate human dendritic cells (DCs) and stimulate
CEA-specific CD8+ T cells. Here, we investigated the ability of a
Saccharomyces cerevisiae vector containing the MUC1 transgene
(yeast-MUC1) and encoding MUC1 with 8 agonist epitopes to activate human
DCs, stimulate MUC1-N- and MUC1-C-specific T cells, and generate
MUC1-specific T cells. We show here for the first time that human DCs
treated with yeast-MUC1 vectors can activate MUC1-N and MUC1-C
agonist-specific T-cell lines and can act as antigen-presenting cells to
generate MUC1-N- and MUC1-C-specific T cells specific to each agonist
epitopes, and that these T cells are capable of lysing MUC1-expressing
tumor cells. Together, these findings provide a rationale for further
clinical evaluation of yeast-MUC1 constructs encoding MUC1 agonist
epitopes in cancer vaccine immunotherapy.

