Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical microPET/CT imaging of 89Zr-Df-SGN-35 in mice bearing
xenografted CD30 expressing and non-expressing tumors


Introduction: Positron emission tomography (PET) imaging is a
non-invasive tool to quantitatively describe the drug distribution in
vivo. To answer the question whether radiolabeled antibody-drug
conjugates (ADCs) can be utilized as PET imaging probes, and to explore
PET imaging sensitivity for detecting antigen expression, we conducted
preclinical microPET/CT imaging studies with radiolabeled SGN-35 in SCID
mice bearing tumors with varying levels of CD30 expression.Methods:
SGN-35 was either directly labeled with 124Iodine or conjugated with the
chelator desferrioxamine (DFO) and subsequently labeled with 89Zirconium.
Karpas 299, TF1-, and Daudi were selected as the representative high
(CD30high), low (CD30low) and negative (CD30neg) CD30 expressing tumor
cell lines, respectively. Expression of CD30 and receptor copy number on
each cell line was confirmed by quantitative FACS assay. One mouse from
each CD30 expression group was administered a single IV bolus dose of
either 124I-SGN-35 (0.5 mg/kg) or 89Zr-Df-SGN-35 (1 mg/kg), and serially
imaged 0 - 2 hours (dynamic scan), and at 4, 24, 48, 72, 96 and 144 hours
(10 min static scans). An additional 3 mice with CD30high and CD30low
tumors, and 2 mice with CD30neg tumors, were dosed and imaged at 72, 96
and 144 hours (10 min static scans). Blood samples (10 L) were taken from
mice at 0, 4, 24, 48, 72, 96 hours and by cardiac puncture at 144 hours
for pharmacokinetic (PK) analysis. Additional mice (n=4 per group) were
sacrificed at 72 and 144 hours to determine tissue biodistribution via
gamma counting.Results: The elimination of 124I-SGN-35 and 89Zr-Df-SGN-35
followed 2-compartment PK, and the calculated elimination T1/2 was
3.6-3.9 days. In mice bearing CD30high tumors with 291,000 CD30 copies
per cell, the tumor:blood ratio of 124I-radioactivity after a dose of
124I-SGN-35 fell from 1.24 after 72 hours to 0.78 after 144 hours,
whereas after a dose of 89Zr-Df-SGN-35, mean tumor:blood ratio of
89Zr-radioactivity increased from 7.38 at 72 hours to 15.05 (157.5 %ID/g)
at 144 hours. The 124I-radioactivity and 89Zr-radioactivity tumor:blood
ratio in the CD30neg tumors was 0.2 and 0.5 after 144 hours,
respectively. The tumor:blood ratio of 89Zr-radioactivity continued to
increase from 0.57 after 72 hours to 0.90 (13.4 %ID/g) at 144 hours after
a dose of 89Zr-Df-SGN-35 in TF1- (CD30low) tumor bearing
mice.Conclusions: These results indicate that 89Zr-Df-SGN-35 retains the
specific anti-CD30 immune-reactivity and PK of the parent SGN-35
molecule. 89Zr labeling generated superior imaging results compared with
124I labeling. With respect to specificity, a favorable tumor:blood ratio
was observed in the CD30high tumor bearing mice in contrast to the lack
of accumulation of 89Zr-radioactivity in the CD30 negative tumors. The
accumulation of 89Zr-radioactivity in CD30low TF1- tumors suggests that
89Zr-Df-SGN-35 is a very sensitive CD30 targeted PET/CT imaging agent.

