Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tamoxifen-resistant breast cancer: DNA methylation and expression
of MAGED1


Women who receive adjuvant tamoxifen for estrogen receptor (ER) positive
breast cancer may develop drug resistant tumors through several pathways.
DNA methylation of CpG islands in gene promoters is a mechanism of gene
silencing, which has been implicated in acquired tamoxifen resistance,
but remains poorly understand. Accordingly, we evaluated DNA methylation
and mRNA expression in tamoxifen resistant cell lines and clinical
specimens to elucidate markers and mechanisms that may be associated with
treatment failures.DNA methylation was assessed in tamoxifen-sensitive
MCF-7 cells and two derived cell lines (TMX2-11 and TMX2-28) rendered
tamoxifen-resistant by treatment for 6 months with 10-6 M tamoxifen.
Methylation profiling was performed using the Illumina HM450 BeadChip. We
identified 3,000 CpG sites in which methylation levels of both
ER-positive TMX2-11 and ER-negative TMX2-28 cells were significantly
increased compared with the parental MCF-7 cell line. This analysis
identified methylation of MAGED1, a tumor antigen and putative regulator
of p53 transcription, as a candidate marker of acquired tamoxifen
resistance.Using the HM450 BeadChip (which includes 5 CpG promoter sites
for MAGED1), DNA hypermethylation was found in all 5 CpGs in TMX2-28
cells and 4 CpGs in TMX2-11; which was confirmed by pyrosequencing.
Treatment with 2.5 M AZA for 96 hours decreased methylation levels by 10%
in TMX2-11 and 31% in TMX2-28 and increased gene expression in TMX2-28
(>400-fold).To assess whether DNA methylation of MAGED1 is associated
with decreased expression in human tumors, we analyzed Illumina HM27
BeadChip methylation data and paired expression array data for 208 frozen
primary breast cancers collected in the Polish Breast Cancer Study.
Analysis of MAGED1 showed a significant negative correlation between
expression and methylation in one of the two promoter CpG sites present
on the BeadChip (cg17991347: rho = -0.199, p = 0.004). This correlation
suggests the potential that promoter methylation may influence MAGED1
expression in breast cancers.To determine whether treatment with
tamoxifen results in increased methylation of MAGED1 in recurrent tumors,
we prepared DNA from 33 primary and 36 recurrent paired FFPE breast
tumors from patients at Baystate Medical Center (Springfield, MA) for
HM450 BeadChip methylation analysis. Results from the primary and
recurrent tumors from women who did and did not receive tamoxifen
treatment is ongoing to assess the role of MAGED1 in
tamoxifen-resistance. Functional studies in which MAGED1 is selectively
silenced in MCF-7 cells and overexpressed in the tamoxifen-resistant
lines are planned to evaluate the potential role of MAGED1 in tamoxifen
acquired resistance.

