Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation of cell cycle and NAD biosynthesis II pathways are
associated with differential response to preoperative radiotherapy in
locally advanced breast carcinoma


Human breast carcinomas have heterogeneous pathologies, molecular
profiles and different responses to therapy. For non-inflammatory
locally-advanced breast cancer patients (LABC), preoperative radiotherapy
(pRT) is currently indicated after neoadjuvant chemoherapy (CHT), if
there is no response to CHT. However, there are no predictive markers of
response to pRT in routine clinical practice. Furthermore, understanding
of the molecular mechanisms associated to radiotherapy response could
open new avenues for overcoming radio-resistance in these patients.In
this retrospective study, we have analyzed genes associated with
different response to pRT in a neo-adjuvant setting in LABC patients
treated with preoperative RT with a total dose of 45 Gy in 15 fractions
every second day to the breast and regional lymph nodes, without previous
or concomitant systemic therapy. Radical mastectomy was performed 6 weeks
after pRT, and adjuvant systemic therapy was administered as per
protocol. Response to pRT was classified as pathological complete
response (pCR) if there is no evidence of tumor in the breast after
mastectomy, partial response (PR) if regression of tumor was >30%, and no
response if regression was Human breast carcinomas have heterogeneous
pathologies, molecular profiles and different responses to therapy. For
non-inflammatory locally-advanced breast cancer patients (LABC),
preoperative radiotherapy (pRT) is currently indicated after neoadjuvant
chemoherapy (CHT), if there is no response to CHT. However, there are no
predictive markers of response to pRT in routine clinical practice.
Furthermore, understanding of the molecular mechanisms associated to
radiotherapy response could open new avenues for overcoming
radio-resistance in these patients.In this retrospective study, we have
analyzed genes associated with different response to pRT in a
neo-adjuvant setting in LABC patients treated with preoperative RT with a
total dose of 45 Gy in 15 fractions every second day to the breast and
regional lymph nodes, without previous or concomitant systemic therapy.
Radical mastectomy was performed 6 weeks after pRT, and adjuvant systemic
therapy was administered as per protocol. Response to pRT was classified
as pathological complete response (pCR) if there is no evidence of tumor
in the breast after mastectomy, partial response (PR) if regression of
tumor was >30%, and no response if regression was <30%. We have analyzed
global gene expression profiles by Agilent 8x60K microarray platform in a
set of 14 samples of formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) initial LABC
biopsies.Unsupervised clustering analysis (Pearson correlation,
un-centered metrics) over top 20% most variable genes revealed clear
differences in the gene expression profile between radio-resistant and
radio-sensitive tumors, despite the small sample size. We have found 165
genes significantly differentially expressed (FDR Human breast carcinomas
have heterogeneous pathologies, molecular profiles and different
responses to therapy. For non-inflammatory locally-advanced breast cancer
patients (LABC), preoperative radiotherapy (pRT) is currently indicated
after neoadjuvant chemoherapy (CHT), if there is no response to CHT.
However, there are no predictive markers of response to pRT in routine
clinical practice. Furthermore, understanding of the molecular mechanisms
associated to radiotherapy response could open new avenues for overcoming
radio-resistance in these patients.In this retrospective study, we have
analyzed genes associated with different response to pRT in a
neo-adjuvant setting in LABC patients treated with preoperative RT with a
total dose of 45 Gy in 15 fractions every second day to the breast and
regional lymph nodes, without previous or concomitant systemic therapy.
Radical mastectomy was performed 6 weeks after pRT, and adjuvant systemic
therapy was administered as per protocol. Response to pRT was classified
as pathological complete response (pCR) if there is no evidence of tumor
in the breast after mastectomy, partial response (PR) if regression of
tumor was >30%, and no response if regression was <30%. We have analyzed
global gene expression profiles by Agilent 8x60K microarray platform in a
set of 14 samples of formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) initial LABC
biopsies.Unsupervised clustering analysis (Pearson correlation,
un-centered metrics) over top 20% most variable genes revealed clear
differences in the gene expression profile between radio-resistant and
radio-sensitive tumors, despite the small sample size. We have found 165
genes significantly differentially expressed (FDR < 0.10) between
responders and non-responders to pRT. To explain the biological processes
and signaling pathways of radioresistance, a gene set enrichment using
Ingenuity Pathways Analysis was applied. Top scoring molecular functions
associated with this gene list included regulation of cellular
development, cellular growth and proliferation and cell cycle. Not
surprisingly, the most significantly enriched canonical pathways
(Fisher's exact p-valueHuman breast carcinomas have heterogeneous
pathologies, molecular profiles and different responses to therapy. For
non-inflammatory locally-advanced breast cancer patients (LABC),
preoperative radiotherapy (pRT) is currently indicated after neoadjuvant
chemoherapy (CHT), if there is no response to CHT. However, there are no
predictive markers of response to pRT in routine clinical practice.
Furthermore, understanding of the molecular mechanisms associated to
radiotherapy response could open new avenues for overcoming
radio-resistance in these patients.In this retrospective study, we have
analyzed genes associated with different response to pRT in a
neo-adjuvant setting in LABC patients treated with preoperative RT with a
total dose of 45 Gy in 15 fractions every second day to the breast and
regional lymph nodes, without previous or concomitant systemic therapy.
Radical mastectomy was performed 6 weeks after pRT, and adjuvant systemic
therapy was administered as per protocol. Response to pRT was classified
as pathological complete response (pCR) if there is no evidence of tumor
in the breast after mastectomy, partial response (PR) if regression of
tumor was >30%, and no response if regression was <30%. We have analyzed
global gene expression profiles by Agilent 8x60K microarray platform in a
set of 14 samples of formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) initial LABC
biopsies.Unsupervised clustering analysis (Pearson correlation,
un-centered metrics) over top 20% most variable genes revealed clear
differences in the gene expression profile between radio-resistant and
radio-sensitive tumors, despite the small sample size. We have found 165
genes significantly differentially expressed (FDR < 0.10) between
responders and non-responders to pRT. To explain the biological processes
and signaling pathways of radioresistance, a gene set enrichment using
Ingenuity Pathways Analysis was applied. Top scoring molecular functions
associated with this gene list included regulation of cellular
development, cellular growth and proliferation and cell cycle. Not
surprisingly, the most significantly enriched canonical pathways
(Fisher's exact p-value<0.05) within the gene list of significantly
differentially expressed genes between RT resistant and RT sensitive
tumors were cell cycle control of chromosomal replication and pathways
related to glucose metabolism and NAD biosynthesis II route. These
results set basis for further understanding of molecular response to
radiotherapy and highlight genes potentially useful as predictive markers
of response to preoperative radiation treatment. Further confirmatory
research of potentially RT sensitive/resistant genes and pathways is
warranted.

