Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Post-GWAS functional characterization of the 12p11.23 renal cancer
susceptibility locus implicates BHLHE41


Introduction. Two of common variants, rs718314 and rs1049380, were
associated with renal cell carcinoma (RCC) at the 12p11.23 locus.
Interestingly, rs718314 was also identified as being associated with
waist-hip ratio. The objective of the present study is to perform a
functional analysis of the 12p11.23 region in relation to RCC
risk.Materials and methods. We performed an imputation analysis within 1
Mb of rs718314 in three different study populations from a previously
published GWAS of RCC (4197 cases and 8527 controls). The genotyped and
high-quality imputed SNPs were tested for association with RCC. We
examined the significantly associated variants for sequence overlap with
potential regulatory sites by cross referencing them with ENCODE data.
Selected putatively functional SNPs were tested for enhancer activity
using a dual luciferase assay in 3 different renal cell lines (UO31,
SN12-C, 786-O) and electro-mobility shift assays (EMSA) were used to look
for binding of transcription factors to selected SNPs. In addition, the
RCC-associated variants present in the TCGA database were examined for an
effect on nearby gene expression (ITPR2, SSPN, BHLHE41).Results. After
meta-analysis, 499 of the total 13,159 genotyped and imputed SNPs had
association p-values with RCC less than 0.05. Within this group, 44 SNPs
demonstrated nominally significant association with RCC risk
(pIntroduction. Two of common variants, rs718314 and rs1049380, were
associated with renal cell carcinoma (RCC) at the 12p11.23 locus.
Interestingly, rs718314 was also identified as being associated with
waist-hip ratio. The objective of the present study is to perform a
functional analysis of the 12p11.23 region in relation to RCC
risk.Materials and methods. We performed an imputation analysis within 1
Mb of rs718314 in three different study populations from a previously
published GWAS of RCC (4197 cases and 8527 controls). The genotyped and
high-quality imputed SNPs were tested for association with RCC. We
examined the significantly associated variants for sequence overlap with
potential regulatory sites by cross referencing them with ENCODE data.
Selected putatively functional SNPs were tested for enhancer activity
using a dual luciferase assay in 3 different renal cell lines (UO31,
SN12-C, 786-O) and electro-mobility shift assays (EMSA) were used to look
for binding of transcription factors to selected SNPs. In addition, the
RCC-associated variants present in the TCGA database were examined for an
effect on nearby gene expression (ITPR2, SSPN, BHLHE41).Results. After
meta-analysis, 499 of the total 13,159 genotyped and imputed SNPs had
association p-values with RCC less than 0.05. Within this group, 44 SNPs
demonstrated nominally significant association with RCC risk (p<5.10-5).
The two initial GWAS SNPs, rs718314 and rs1049380, were strongly
associated with RCC (Padj = 3.44.10-6 and Padj = 5.27.10-6). All
nominally significant SNPs were in a non-coding region which contains the
3-UTR of ITPR2. Six of the 44 variants were in regions enriched for
H3K4me1 and H3K27ac, chromatin marks found in enhancers. Only one SNP,
rs7132434 which is highly correlated with the initial GWAS signal
(rs718314, r2=1), showed allele specific regulatory activity in
luciferase assays and allele specific differences in protein binding by
EMSA. Five SNPs associated with RCC were present in the TCGA database.
All of them were associated with BHLHE41 expression in tumor tissues
(pIntroduction. Two of common variants, rs718314 and rs1049380, were
associated with renal cell carcinoma (RCC) at the 12p11.23 locus.
Interestingly, rs718314 was also identified as being associated with
waist-hip ratio. The objective of the present study is to perform a
functional analysis of the 12p11.23 region in relation to RCC
risk.Materials and methods. We performed an imputation analysis within 1
Mb of rs718314 in three different study populations from a previously
published GWAS of RCC (4197 cases and 8527 controls). The genotyped and
high-quality imputed SNPs were tested for association with RCC. We
examined the significantly associated variants for sequence overlap with
potential regulatory sites by cross referencing them with ENCODE data.
Selected putatively functional SNPs were tested for enhancer activity
using a dual luciferase assay in 3 different renal cell lines (UO31,
SN12-C, 786-O) and electro-mobility shift assays (EMSA) were used to look
for binding of transcription factors to selected SNPs. In addition, the
RCC-associated variants present in the TCGA database were examined for an
effect on nearby gene expression (ITPR2, SSPN, BHLHE41).Results. After
meta-analysis, 499 of the total 13,159 genotyped and imputed SNPs had
association p-values with RCC less than 0.05. Within this group, 44 SNPs
demonstrated nominally significant association with RCC risk (p<5.10-5).
The two initial GWAS SNPs, rs718314 and rs1049380, were strongly
associated with RCC (Padj = 3.44.10-6 and Padj = 5.27.10-6). All
nominally significant SNPs were in a non-coding region which contains the
3-UTR of ITPR2. Six of the 44 variants were in regions enriched for
H3K4me1 and H3K27ac, chromatin marks found in enhancers. Only one SNP,
rs7132434 which is highly correlated with the initial GWAS signal
(rs718314, r2=1), showed allele specific regulatory activity in
luciferase assays and allele specific differences in protein binding by
EMSA. Five SNPs associated with RCC were present in the TCGA database.
All of them were associated with BHLHE41 expression in tumor tissues
(p<0.05). The most significant association was found with rs12814794
(p=1.10-8) which is in high linkage disequilibrium with rs718314
(r2=0.956) and rs7132434 (r2=0.956). There was no association between RCC
associated SNPs and SSPN or ITPR2 tissue expression. BHLHE41 is a gene
which has been recently been shown to be involved in the VHL/HIF pathway
in breast cancer. It is also known to regulate adipogenic differentiation
and could be a link between RCC and obesity, a known risk factor for
RCC.Conclusion. Our results suggest rs7132434 is the functional SNP
responsible for the GWAS signal and that this locus could act as an
enhancer of BHLHE41. Further investigations will be necessary to confirm
the link between rs7132434 and BHLHE41 and to understand the role of
BHLHE41 in renal carcinogenesis.

