Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DCVex(TM): A novel DC-targeted vector platform for cancer
immunotherapy


Dendritic cells (DCs) are essential for the initiation of T cell
responses and are therefore an attractive target for cancer
immunotherapy. The DC vaccine, Provenge, as well as a number of on-going
clinical trials, have in principle validated this concept. However, the
currently pursued strategy of ex vivo immunization of DCs is
time-consuming and costly. We have developed a 3rd generation,
integration-deficient lentivector platform, DCVex(TM), which is designed
to deliver tumor antigen-encoding genes directly to DCs in vivo by
targeting the DC-SIGN receptor. Mice immunized with DCVex(TM) vectors
expressing a variety of model antigens developed strong, dose-dependent
poly-functional and cytotoxic antigen-specific CD8 T cell responses, as
assessed by intracellular cytokine staining and in vitro cytotoxic T
lymphocyte assays. Repeated immunizations resulted in boosting of the T
cell responses, indicating the absence of induction of inhibitory
anti-vector immunity. Importantly, in stringent therapeutic tumor models
(e.g., B16F10 footpad melanoma and CT26 lung metastasis models),
immunization with tumor antigen-encoding vectors protected the majority
of animals from death in a dose-dependent manner. These findings
demonstrate the potential of DCVex(TM) as a novel cancer vaccine platform
suitable for in vivo DC immunization.

