Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting the CXCR4 chemokine receptor thwarts stromal cell
mediated drug resistance in B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (B-ALL)


CXCR4 inhibitors Plerixafor (small molecule) and BKT140 (peptide)
interfere with CXCR4 activation, signaling and bone marrow homing of
leukemia cells. Adhesion of B-ALL cells to bone marrow stromal cells
(BMSC) through CXCR4/CXCL12 protects leukemia cells from cytotoxic drugs,
and causes cell adhesion-mediated drug resistance (CAM-DR). Due to the
critical role of the CXCR4/CXCL12 axis in B-ALL cell adhesion to bone
marrow stromal cells (BMSC), we hypothesize that targeting CXCR4 will
attenuate CAM-DR in B-ALL.All tested B-ALL cell lines and xenografts were
found to be positive for surface expression of CXCR4, using 12G5 mAbs.
Pre-treatment with Plerixafor (10g/ml) or BKT140 (10g/ml) significantly
inhibited the spontaneous migration of B-ALL cells beneath BMSCs in vitro
(Pseudoemperipolesis/PEP) to levels that were 61.4 3.3% or 53.2 5.6%, of
respective controls (mean SEM, pCXCR4 inhibitors Plerixafor (small
molecule) and BKT140 (peptide) interfere with CXCR4 activation, signaling
and bone marrow homing of leukemia cells. Adhesion of B-ALL cells to bone
marrow stromal cells (BMSC) through CXCR4/CXCL12 protects leukemia cells
from cytotoxic drugs, and causes cell adhesion-mediated drug resistance
(CAM-DR). Due to the critical role of the CXCR4/CXCL12 axis in B-ALL cell
adhesion to bone marrow stromal cells (BMSC), we hypothesize that
targeting CXCR4 will attenuate CAM-DR in B-ALL.All tested B-ALL cell
lines and xenografts were found to be positive for surface expression of
CXCR4, using 12G5 mAbs. Pre-treatment with Plerixafor (10g/ml) or BKT140
(10g/ml) significantly inhibited the spontaneous migration of B-ALL cells
beneath BMSCs in vitro (Pseudoemperipolesis/PEP) to levels that were 61.4
3.3% or 53.2 5.6%, of respective controls (mean SEM, p<0.05). B-ALL cell
line and xenograft B-ALL cell chemotaxis towards CXCL12 (100ng/ml) was
also abrogated by pre-incubation with 10g/ml Plerixafor (mean SEM, 26.7
4.9% of control, pCXCR4 inhibitors Plerixafor (small molecule) and BKT140
(peptide) interfere with CXCR4 activation, signaling and bone marrow
homing of leukemia cells. Adhesion of B-ALL cells to bone marrow stromal
cells (BMSC) through CXCR4/CXCL12 protects leukemia cells from cytotoxic
drugs, and causes cell adhesion-mediated drug resistance (CAM-DR). Due to
the critical role of the CXCR4/CXCL12 axis in B-ALL cell adhesion to bone
marrow stromal cells (BMSC), we hypothesize that targeting CXCR4 will
attenuate CAM-DR in B-ALL.All tested B-ALL cell lines and xenografts were
found to be positive for surface expression of CXCR4, using 12G5 mAbs.
Pre-treatment with Plerixafor (10g/ml) or BKT140 (10g/ml) significantly
inhibited the spontaneous migration of B-ALL cells beneath BMSCs in vitro
(Pseudoemperipolesis/PEP) to levels that were 61.4 3.3% or 53.2 5.6%, of
respective controls (mean SEM, p<0.05). B-ALL cell line and xenograft
B-ALL cell chemotaxis towards CXCL12 (100ng/ml) was also abrogated by
pre-incubation with 10g/ml Plerixafor (mean SEM, 26.7 4.9% of control,
p<0.05) and 10g/ml BKT140 (mean SEM, 18.3 4.7% of control, pCXCR4
inhibitors Plerixafor (small molecule) and BKT140 (peptide) interfere
with CXCR4 activation, signaling and bone marrow homing of leukemia
cells. Adhesion of B-ALL cells to bone marrow stromal cells (BMSC)
through CXCR4/CXCL12 protects leukemia cells from cytotoxic drugs, and
causes cell adhesion-mediated drug resistance (CAM-DR). Due to the
critical role of the CXCR4/CXCL12 axis in B-ALL cell adhesion to bone
marrow stromal cells (BMSC), we hypothesize that targeting CXCR4 will
attenuate CAM-DR in B-ALL.All tested B-ALL cell lines and xenografts were
found to be positive for surface expression of CXCR4, using 12G5 mAbs.
Pre-treatment with Plerixafor (10g/ml) or BKT140 (10g/ml) significantly
inhibited the spontaneous migration of B-ALL cells beneath BMSCs in vitro
(Pseudoemperipolesis/PEP) to levels that were 61.4 3.3% or 53.2 5.6%, of
respective controls (mean SEM, p<0.05). B-ALL cell line and xenograft
B-ALL cell chemotaxis towards CXCL12 (100ng/ml) was also abrogated by
pre-incubation with 10g/ml Plerixafor (mean SEM, 26.7 4.9% of control,
p<0.05) and 10g/ml BKT140 (mean SEM, 18.3 4.7% of control, p<0.05). In
order to better dissect CXCR4 function in B-ALL, we established two CXCR4
knock out cell lines, TANOUE-CXCR4-KO and NALM6-CXCR4-KO, using Zinc
Finger Nuclease and CRISPR Cas9 technologies respectively. Chemotaxis to
100ng/ml CXCL12 and PEP beneath BMSCs for TANOUE-CXCR4-KO was 10.3 0.48%,
n=3 (pCXCR4 inhibitors Plerixafor (small molecule) and BKT140 (peptide)
interfere with CXCR4 activation, signaling and bone marrow homing of
leukemia cells. Adhesion of B-ALL cells to bone marrow stromal cells
(BMSC) through CXCR4/CXCL12 protects leukemia cells from cytotoxic drugs,
and causes cell adhesion-mediated drug resistance (CAM-DR). Due to the
critical role of the CXCR4/CXCL12 axis in B-ALL cell adhesion to bone
marrow stromal cells (BMSC), we hypothesize that targeting CXCR4 will
attenuate CAM-DR in B-ALL.All tested B-ALL cell lines and xenografts were
found to be positive for surface expression of CXCR4, using 12G5 mAbs.
Pre-treatment with Plerixafor (10g/ml) or BKT140 (10g/ml) significantly
inhibited the spontaneous migration of B-ALL cells beneath BMSCs in vitro
(Pseudoemperipolesis/PEP) to levels that were 61.4 3.3% or 53.2 5.6%, of
respective controls (mean SEM, p<0.05). B-ALL cell line and xenograft
B-ALL cell chemotaxis towards CXCL12 (100ng/ml) was also abrogated by
pre-incubation with 10g/ml Plerixafor (mean SEM, 26.7 4.9% of control,
p<0.05) and 10g/ml BKT140 (mean SEM, 18.3 4.7% of control, p<0.05). In
order to better dissect CXCR4 function in B-ALL, we established two CXCR4
knock out cell lines, TANOUE-CXCR4-KO and NALM6-CXCR4-KO, using Zinc
Finger Nuclease and CRISPR Cas9 technologies respectively. Chemotaxis to
100ng/ml CXCL12 and PEP beneath BMSCs for TANOUE-CXCR4-KO was 10.3 0.48%,
n=3 (p<0.05) and 50.06 2.5%, n=4 (pCXCR4 inhibitors Plerixafor (small
molecule) and BKT140 (peptide) interfere with CXCR4 activation, signaling
and bone marrow homing of leukemia cells. Adhesion of B-ALL cells to bone
marrow stromal cells (BMSC) through CXCR4/CXCL12 protects leukemia cells
from cytotoxic drugs, and causes cell adhesion-mediated drug resistance
(CAM-DR). Due to the critical role of the CXCR4/CXCL12 axis in B-ALL cell
adhesion to bone marrow stromal cells (BMSC), we hypothesize that
targeting CXCR4 will attenuate CAM-DR in B-ALL.All tested B-ALL cell
lines and xenografts were found to be positive for surface expression of
CXCR4, using 12G5 mAbs. Pre-treatment with Plerixafor (10g/ml) or BKT140
(10g/ml) significantly inhibited the spontaneous migration of B-ALL cells
beneath BMSCs in vitro (Pseudoemperipolesis/PEP) to levels that were 61.4
3.3% or 53.2 5.6%, of respective controls (mean SEM, p<0.05). B-ALL cell
line and xenograft B-ALL cell chemotaxis towards CXCL12 (100ng/ml) was
also abrogated by pre-incubation with 10g/ml Plerixafor (mean SEM, 26.7
4.9% of control, p<0.05) and 10g/ml BKT140 (mean SEM, 18.3 4.7% of
control, p<0.05). In order to better dissect CXCR4 function in B-ALL, we
established two CXCR4 knock out cell lines, TANOUE-CXCR4-KO and
NALM6-CXCR4-KO, using Zinc Finger Nuclease and CRISPR Cas9 technologies
respectively. Chemotaxis to 100ng/ml CXCL12 and PEP beneath BMSCs for
TANOUE-CXCR4-KO was 10.3 0.48%, n=3 (p<0.05) and 50.06 2.5%, n=4 (p<0.05)
respectively, in comparison to TANOUE wild type control without any drug
treatment. For NALM6-CXCR4-KO chemotaxis and PEP was 43.1%, n=1 and 41.8
1.9%, n=4 (pCXCR4 inhibitors Plerixafor (small molecule) and BKT140
(peptide) interfere with CXCR4 activation, signaling and bone marrow
homing of leukemia cells. Adhesion of B-ALL cells to bone marrow stromal
cells (BMSC) through CXCR4/CXCL12 protects leukemia cells from cytotoxic
drugs, and causes cell adhesion-mediated drug resistance (CAM-DR). Due to
the critical role of the CXCR4/CXCL12 axis in B-ALL cell adhesion to bone
marrow stromal cells (BMSC), we hypothesize that targeting CXCR4 will
attenuate CAM-DR in B-ALL.All tested B-ALL cell lines and xenografts were
found to be positive for surface expression of CXCR4, using 12G5 mAbs.
Pre-treatment with Plerixafor (10g/ml) or BKT140 (10g/ml) significantly
inhibited the spontaneous migration of B-ALL cells beneath BMSCs in vitro
(Pseudoemperipolesis/PEP) to levels that were 61.4 3.3% or 53.2 5.6%, of
respective controls (mean SEM, p<0.05). B-ALL cell line and xenograft
B-ALL cell chemotaxis towards CXCL12 (100ng/ml) was also abrogated by
pre-incubation with 10g/ml Plerixafor (mean SEM, 26.7 4.9% of control,
p<0.05) and 10g/ml BKT140 (mean SEM, 18.3 4.7% of control, p<0.05). In
order to better dissect CXCR4 function in B-ALL, we established two CXCR4
knock out cell lines, TANOUE-CXCR4-KO and NALM6-CXCR4-KO, using Zinc
Finger Nuclease and CRISPR Cas9 technologies respectively. Chemotaxis to
100ng/ml CXCL12 and PEP beneath BMSCs for TANOUE-CXCR4-KO was 10.3 0.48%,
n=3 (p<0.05) and 50.06 2.5%, n=4 (p<0.05) respectively, in comparison to
TANOUE wild type control without any drug treatment. For NALM6-CXCR4-KO
chemotaxis and PEP was 43.1%, n=1 and 41.8 1.9%, n=4 (p<0.05)
respectively in comparison to NALM6 wild type control without any drug
treatment.CAM-DR experiments with ICN12 xenograft-BMSC co-culture showed
significantly enhanced cytotoxicity when cells were treated with a
combination of 100nM Dexamethasone (DEX) and 10g/ml Plerixafor (66.1 5.6%
viability, n=3, pCXCR4 inhibitors Plerixafor (small molecule) and BKT140
(peptide) interfere with CXCR4 activation, signaling and bone marrow
homing of leukemia cells. Adhesion of B-ALL cells to bone marrow stromal
cells (BMSC) through CXCR4/CXCL12 protects leukemia cells from cytotoxic
drugs, and causes cell adhesion-mediated drug resistance (CAM-DR). Due to
the critical role of the CXCR4/CXCL12 axis in B-ALL cell adhesion to bone
marrow stromal cells (BMSC), we hypothesize that targeting CXCR4 will
attenuate CAM-DR in B-ALL.All tested B-ALL cell lines and xenografts were
found to be positive for surface expression of CXCR4, using 12G5 mAbs.
Pre-treatment with Plerixafor (10g/ml) or BKT140 (10g/ml) significantly
inhibited the spontaneous migration of B-ALL cells beneath BMSCs in vitro
(Pseudoemperipolesis/PEP) to levels that were 61.4 3.3% or 53.2 5.6%, of
respective controls (mean SEM, p<0.05). B-ALL cell line and xenograft
B-ALL cell chemotaxis towards CXCL12 (100ng/ml) was also abrogated by
pre-incubation with 10g/ml Plerixafor (mean SEM, 26.7 4.9% of control,
p<0.05) and 10g/ml BKT140 (mean SEM, 18.3 4.7% of control, p<0.05). In
order to better dissect CXCR4 function in B-ALL, we established two CXCR4
knock out cell lines, TANOUE-CXCR4-KO and NALM6-CXCR4-KO, using Zinc
Finger Nuclease and CRISPR Cas9 technologies respectively. Chemotaxis to
100ng/ml CXCL12 and PEP beneath BMSCs for TANOUE-CXCR4-KO was 10.3 0.48%,
n=3 (p<0.05) and 50.06 2.5%, n=4 (p<0.05) respectively, in comparison to
TANOUE wild type control without any drug treatment. For NALM6-CXCR4-KO
chemotaxis and PEP was 43.1%, n=1 and 41.8 1.9%, n=4 (p<0.05)
respectively in comparison to NALM6 wild type control without any drug
treatment.CAM-DR experiments with ICN12 xenograft-BMSC co-culture showed
significantly enhanced cytotoxicity when cells were treated with a
combination of 100nM Dexamethasone (DEX) and 10g/ml Plerixafor (66.1 5.6%
viability, n=3, p<0.05) or 10g/ml BKT140 (59.7 6.07% viability, n=3,
pCXCR4 inhibitors Plerixafor (small molecule) and BKT140 (peptide)
interfere with CXCR4 activation, signaling and bone marrow homing of
leukemia cells. Adhesion of B-ALL cells to bone marrow stromal cells
(BMSC) through CXCR4/CXCL12 protects leukemia cells from cytotoxic drugs,
and causes cell adhesion-mediated drug resistance (CAM-DR). Due to the
critical role of the CXCR4/CXCL12 axis in B-ALL cell adhesion to bone
marrow stromal cells (BMSC), we hypothesize that targeting CXCR4 will
attenuate CAM-DR in B-ALL.All tested B-ALL cell lines and xenografts were
found to be positive for surface expression of CXCR4, using 12G5 mAbs.
Pre-treatment with Plerixafor (10g/ml) or BKT140 (10g/ml) significantly
inhibited the spontaneous migration of B-ALL cells beneath BMSCs in vitro
(Pseudoemperipolesis/PEP) to levels that were 61.4 3.3% or 53.2 5.6%, of
respective controls (mean SEM, p<0.05). B-ALL cell line and xenograft
B-ALL cell chemotaxis towards CXCL12 (100ng/ml) was also abrogated by
pre-incubation with 10g/ml Plerixafor (mean SEM, 26.7 4.9% of control,
p<0.05) and 10g/ml BKT140 (mean SEM, 18.3 4.7% of control, p<0.05). In
order to better dissect CXCR4 function in B-ALL, we established two CXCR4
knock out cell lines, TANOUE-CXCR4-KO and NALM6-CXCR4-KO, using Zinc
Finger Nuclease and CRISPR Cas9 technologies respectively. Chemotaxis to
100ng/ml CXCL12 and PEP beneath BMSCs for TANOUE-CXCR4-KO was 10.3 0.48%,
n=3 (p<0.05) and 50.06 2.5%, n=4 (p<0.05) respectively, in comparison to
TANOUE wild type control without any drug treatment. For NALM6-CXCR4-KO
chemotaxis and PEP was 43.1%, n=1 and 41.8 1.9%, n=4 (p<0.05)
respectively in comparison to NALM6 wild type control without any drug
treatment.CAM-DR experiments with ICN12 xenograft-BMSC co-culture showed
significantly enhanced cytotoxicity when cells were treated with a
combination of 100nM Dexamethasone (DEX) and 10g/ml Plerixafor (66.1 5.6%
viability, n=3, p<0.05) or 10g/ml BKT140 (59.7 6.07% viability, n=3,
p<0.05) as compared to DEX alone (87.3 2.6% viability) at 48 hours.
Similarly, pre-incubation of NALM6 cells with 10g/ml Plerixafor/BKT140
showed significantly enhanced cytotoxicity (57.933.26%, n=3, pCXCR4
inhibitors Plerixafor (small molecule) and BKT140 (peptide) interfere
with CXCR4 activation, signaling and bone marrow homing of leukemia
cells. Adhesion of B-ALL cells to bone marrow stromal cells (BMSC)
through CXCR4/CXCL12 protects leukemia cells from cytotoxic drugs, and
causes cell adhesion-mediated drug resistance (CAM-DR). Due to the
critical role of the CXCR4/CXCL12 axis in B-ALL cell adhesion to bone
marrow stromal cells (BMSC), we hypothesize that targeting CXCR4 will
attenuate CAM-DR in B-ALL.All tested B-ALL cell lines and xenografts were
found to be positive for surface expression of CXCR4, using 12G5 mAbs.
Pre-treatment with Plerixafor (10g/ml) or BKT140 (10g/ml) significantly
inhibited the spontaneous migration of B-ALL cells beneath BMSCs in vitro
(Pseudoemperipolesis/PEP) to levels that were 61.4 3.3% or 53.2 5.6%, of
respective controls (mean SEM, p<0.05). B-ALL cell line and xenograft
B-ALL cell chemotaxis towards CXCL12 (100ng/ml) was also abrogated by
pre-incubation with 10g/ml Plerixafor (mean SEM, 26.7 4.9% of control,
p<0.05) and 10g/ml BKT140 (mean SEM, 18.3 4.7% of control, p<0.05). In
order to better dissect CXCR4 function in B-ALL, we established two CXCR4
knock out cell lines, TANOUE-CXCR4-KO and NALM6-CXCR4-KO, using Zinc
Finger Nuclease and CRISPR Cas9 technologies respectively. Chemotaxis to
100ng/ml CXCL12 and PEP beneath BMSCs for TANOUE-CXCR4-KO was 10.3 0.48%,
n=3 (p<0.05) and 50.06 2.5%, n=4 (p<0.05) respectively, in comparison to
TANOUE wild type control without any drug treatment. For NALM6-CXCR4-KO
chemotaxis and PEP was 43.1%, n=1 and 41.8 1.9%, n=4 (p<0.05)
respectively in comparison to NALM6 wild type control without any drug
treatment.CAM-DR experiments with ICN12 xenograft-BMSC co-culture showed
significantly enhanced cytotoxicity when cells were treated with a
combination of 100nM Dexamethasone (DEX) and 10g/ml Plerixafor (66.1 5.6%
viability, n=3, p<0.05) or 10g/ml BKT140 (59.7 6.07% viability, n=3,
p<0.05) as compared to DEX alone (87.3 2.6% viability) at 48 hours.
Similarly, pre-incubation of NALM6 cells with 10g/ml Plerixafor/BKT140
showed significantly enhanced cytotoxicity (57.933.26%, n=3, p<0.05 and
54.23.26%, n=3, pCXCR4 inhibitors Plerixafor (small molecule) and BKT140
(peptide) interfere with CXCR4 activation, signaling and bone marrow
homing of leukemia cells. Adhesion of B-ALL cells to bone marrow stromal
cells (BMSC) through CXCR4/CXCL12 protects leukemia cells from cytotoxic
drugs, and causes cell adhesion-mediated drug resistance (CAM-DR). Due to
the critical role of the CXCR4/CXCL12 axis in B-ALL cell adhesion to bone
marrow stromal cells (BMSC), we hypothesize that targeting CXCR4 will
attenuate CAM-DR in B-ALL.All tested B-ALL cell lines and xenografts were
found to be positive for surface expression of CXCR4, using 12G5 mAbs.
Pre-treatment with Plerixafor (10g/ml) or BKT140 (10g/ml) significantly
inhibited the spontaneous migration of B-ALL cells beneath BMSCs in vitro
(Pseudoemperipolesis/PEP) to levels that were 61.4 3.3% or 53.2 5.6%, of
respective controls (mean SEM, p<0.05). B-ALL cell line and xenograft
B-ALL cell chemotaxis towards CXCL12 (100ng/ml) was also abrogated by
pre-incubation with 10g/ml Plerixafor (mean SEM, 26.7 4.9% of control,
p<0.05) and 10g/ml BKT140 (mean SEM, 18.3 4.7% of control, p<0.05). In
order to better dissect CXCR4 function in B-ALL, we established two CXCR4
knock out cell lines, TANOUE-CXCR4-KO and NALM6-CXCR4-KO, using Zinc
Finger Nuclease and CRISPR Cas9 technologies respectively. Chemotaxis to
100ng/ml CXCL12 and PEP beneath BMSCs for TANOUE-CXCR4-KO was 10.3 0.48%,
n=3 (p<0.05) and 50.06 2.5%, n=4 (p<0.05) respectively, in comparison to
TANOUE wild type control without any drug treatment. For NALM6-CXCR4-KO
chemotaxis and PEP was 43.1%, n=1 and 41.8 1.9%, n=4 (p<0.05)
respectively in comparison to NALM6 wild type control without any drug
treatment.CAM-DR experiments with ICN12 xenograft-BMSC co-culture showed
significantly enhanced cytotoxicity when cells were treated with a
combination of 100nM Dexamethasone (DEX) and 10g/ml Plerixafor (66.1 5.6%
viability, n=3, p<0.05) or 10g/ml BKT140 (59.7 6.07% viability, n=3,
p<0.05) as compared to DEX alone (87.3 2.6% viability) at 48 hours.
Similarly, pre-incubation of NALM6 cells with 10g/ml Plerixafor/BKT140
showed significantly enhanced cytotoxicity (57.933.26%, n=3, p<0.05 and
54.23.26%, n=3, p<0.05 respectively) in comparison to DEX alone
(72.380.25%, n=3). BMSCs rescued NALM6 cells from DEX induced
cytotoxicity but failed to rescue NALM6-CXCR4-KO cells indicating that
CXCR4 is the central mechanism used by stromal cells to provide drug
resistance to ALL cells. Collectively, these findings provide a rationale
for clinical targeting of CXCR4 in patients with B-ALL.

