Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: GPNMB methylation: a new marker of potentially colonic adenoma in
African Americans


Background: Colorectal cancer (CRC) arises from epigenetic and genetic
alterations in a stepwise histological progression sequence. Aim: We
examined the role of glycoprotein non-metastatic melanoma protein B
(GPNMB) gene in normal, adenoma and CRC in African American (AA) patients
to elucidate epigenetic drivers of colon oncogenic
transformation.Patients and Methods: Methylation status of 13 CpG sites
(chr7: 23287345-23287426) in GPNMB gene's promoter, selected from IHM27
array methylation profiling, was analyzed by pyrosequencing in human CRC
cell lines (HCT116, SW480, and HT29) as well as paraffin embedded samples
with normal (n=20), non-advanced adenoma (NA; n=20), advanced adenoma
(AD; n=48), and cancer tissue (n=20). Furthermore, GPNMB expression was
analyzed by immunohistochemistry (IHC). Tumor suppressor functions of
GPNMB were examined by cell proliferation, migration and invasion assays
in HCT116 colon cell line that was stably transfected with a GPNMB cDNA
expression vector. In addition, correlations between the methylation
status of GPNMB and various clinicopathological features (age, location
and sex) were analyzed.Results: GPNMB methylation was lower in normal
mucosa compared to CRC samples (4/20 [20%] vs. 19/20 [95%]; PBackground:
Colorectal cancer (CRC) arises from epigenetic and genetic alterations in
a stepwise histological progression sequence. Aim: We examined the role
of glycoprotein non-metastatic melanoma protein B (GPNMB) gene in normal,
adenoma and CRC in African American (AA) patients to elucidate epigenetic
drivers of colon oncogenic transformation.Patients and Methods:
Methylation status of 13 CpG sites (chr7: 23287345-23287426) in GPNMB
gene's promoter, selected from IHM27 array methylation profiling, was
analyzed by pyrosequencing in human CRC cell lines (HCT116, SW480, and
HT29) as well as paraffin embedded samples with normal (n=20),
non-advanced adenoma (NA; n=20), advanced adenoma (AD; n=48), and cancer
tissue (n=20). Furthermore, GPNMB expression was analyzed by
immunohistochemistry (IHC). Tumor suppressor functions of GPNMB were
examined by cell proliferation, migration and invasion assays in HCT116
colon cell line that was stably transfected with a GPNMB cDNA expression
vector. In addition, correlations between the methylation status of GPNMB
and various clinicopathological features (age, location and sex) were
analyzed.Results: GPNMB methylation was lower in normal mucosa compared
to CRC samples (4/20 [20%] vs. 19/20 [95%]; P<0.001). AD also had a
significantly higher GPNMB methylation frequency than normal colon
samples (45/48 [94%] vs 4/20 [20%]; PBackground: Colorectal cancer (CRC)
arises from epigenetic and genetic alterations in a stepwise histological
progression sequence. Aim: We examined the role of glycoprotein
non-metastatic melanoma protein B (GPNMB) gene in normal, adenoma and CRC
in African American (AA) patients to elucidate epigenetic drivers of
colon oncogenic transformation.Patients and Methods: Methylation status
of 13 CpG sites (chr7: 23287345-23287426) in GPNMB gene's promoter,
selected from IHM27 array methylation profiling, was analyzed by
pyrosequencing in human CRC cell lines (HCT116, SW480, and HT29) as well
as paraffin embedded samples with normal (n=20), non-advanced adenoma
(NA; n=20), advanced adenoma (AD; n=48), and cancer tissue (n=20).
Furthermore, GPNMB expression was analyzed by immunohistochemistry (IHC).
Tumor suppressor functions of GPNMB were examined by cell proliferation,
migration and invasion assays in HCT116 colon cell line that was stably
transfected with a GPNMB cDNA expression vector. In addition,
correlations between the methylation status of GPNMB and various
clinicopathological features (age, location and sex) were
analyzed.Results: GPNMB methylation was lower in normal mucosa compared
to CRC samples (4/20 [20%] vs. 19/20 [95%]; P<0.001). AD also had a
significantly higher GPNMB methylation frequency than normal colon
samples (45/48 [94%] vs 4/20 [20%]; P<0.001). GPNMB was more frequently
methylated in AD than in matched normal mucosa from three patients (3/3
[100%] vs 1/3 [33.3%]; PBackground: Colorectal cancer (CRC) arises from
epigenetic and genetic alterations in a stepwise histological progression
sequence. Aim: We examined the role of glycoprotein non-metastatic
melanoma protein B (GPNMB) gene in normal, adenoma and CRC in African
American (AA) patients to elucidate epigenetic drivers of colon oncogenic
transformation.Patients and Methods: Methylation status of 13 CpG sites
(chr7: 23287345-23287426) in GPNMB gene's promoter, selected from IHM27
array methylation profiling, was analyzed by pyrosequencing in human CRC
cell lines (HCT116, SW480, and HT29) as well as paraffin embedded samples
with normal (n=20), non-advanced adenoma (NA; n=20), advanced adenoma
(AD; n=48), and cancer tissue (n=20). Furthermore, GPNMB expression was
analyzed by immunohistochemistry (IHC). Tumor suppressor functions of
GPNMB were examined by cell proliferation, migration and invasion assays
in HCT116 colon cell line that was stably transfected with a GPNMB cDNA
expression vector. In addition, correlations between the methylation
status of GPNMB and various clinicopathological features (age, location
and sex) were analyzed.Results: GPNMB methylation was lower in normal
mucosa compared to CRC samples (4/20 [20%] vs. 19/20 [95%]; P<0.001). AD
also had a significantly higher GPNMB methylation frequency than normal
colon samples (45/48 [94%] vs 4/20 [20%]; P<0.001). GPNMB was more
frequently methylated in AD than in matched normal mucosa from three
patients (3/3 [100%] vs 1/3 [33.3%]; P<0.001). Finally, the frequency of
GPNMB methylation in NA differs significantly from that in the normal
mucosa (16/21 [76%] vs 4/20 [20%]; P0.5). Gender, location, and age were
independent of GPNMB methylation. However, there was statistically
significant correlation of higher methylation at advanced stages and
lower methylation at stage 1 CRCs (PBackground: Colorectal cancer (CRC)
arises from epigenetic and genetic alterations in a stepwise histological
progression sequence. Aim: We examined the role of glycoprotein
non-metastatic melanoma protein B (GPNMB) gene in normal, adenoma and CRC
in African American (AA) patients to elucidate epigenetic drivers of
colon oncogenic transformation.Patients and Methods: Methylation status
of 13 CpG sites (chr7: 23287345-23287426) in GPNMB gene's promoter,
selected from IHM27 array methylation profiling, was analyzed by
pyrosequencing in human CRC cell lines (HCT116, SW480, and HT29) as well
as paraffin embedded samples with normal (n=20), non-advanced adenoma
(NA; n=20), advanced adenoma (AD; n=48), and cancer tissue (n=20).
Furthermore, GPNMB expression was analyzed by immunohistochemistry (IHC).
Tumor suppressor functions of GPNMB were examined by cell proliferation,
migration and invasion assays in HCT116 colon cell line that was stably
transfected with a GPNMB cDNA expression vector. In addition,
correlations between the methylation status of GPNMB and various
clinicopathological features (age, location and sex) were
analyzed.Results: GPNMB methylation was lower in normal mucosa compared
to CRC samples (4/20 [20%] vs. 19/20 [95%]; P<0.001). AD also had a
significantly higher GPNMB methylation frequency than normal colon
samples (45/48 [94%] vs 4/20 [20%]; P<0.001). GPNMB was more frequently
methylated in AD than in matched normal mucosa from three patients (3/3
[100%] vs 1/3 [33.3%]; P<0.001). Finally, the frequency of GPNMB
methylation in NA differs significantly from that in the normal mucosa
(16/21 [76%] vs 4/20 [20%]; P0.5). Gender, location, and age were
independent of GPNMB methylation. However, there was statistically
significant correlation of higher methylation at advanced stages and
lower methylation at stage 1 CRCs (P<0.05). In agreement with these
findings, GPNMB protein expression decreased in CRC tissues compared with
AD and NA colon mucosa, pBackground: Colorectal cancer (CRC) arises from
epigenetic and genetic alterations in a stepwise histological progression
sequence. Aim: We examined the role of glycoprotein non-metastatic
melanoma protein B (GPNMB) gene in normal, adenoma and CRC in African
American (AA) patients to elucidate epigenetic drivers of colon oncogenic
transformation.Patients and Methods: Methylation status of 13 CpG sites
(chr7: 23287345-23287426) in GPNMB gene's promoter, selected from IHM27
array methylation profiling, was analyzed by pyrosequencing in human CRC
cell lines (HCT116, SW480, and HT29) as well as paraffin embedded samples
with normal (n=20), non-advanced adenoma (NA; n=20), advanced adenoma
(AD; n=48), and cancer tissue (n=20). Furthermore, GPNMB expression was
analyzed by immunohistochemistry (IHC). Tumor suppressor functions of
GPNMB were examined by cell proliferation, migration and invasion assays
in HCT116 colon cell line that was stably transfected with a GPNMB cDNA
expression vector. In addition, correlations between the methylation
status of GPNMB and various clinicopathological features (age, location
and sex) were analyzed.Results: GPNMB methylation was lower in normal
mucosa compared to CRC samples (4/20 [20%] vs. 19/20 [95%]; P<0.001). AD
also had a significantly higher GPNMB methylation frequency than normal
colon samples (45/48 [94%] vs 4/20 [20%]; P<0.001). GPNMB was more
frequently methylated in AD than in matched normal mucosa from three
patients (3/3 [100%] vs 1/3 [33.3%]; P<0.001). Finally, the frequency of
GPNMB methylation in NA differs significantly from that in the normal
mucosa (16/21 [76%] vs 4/20 [20%]; P0.5). Gender, location, and age were
independent of GPNMB methylation. However, there was statistically
significant correlation of higher methylation at advanced stages and
lower methylation at stage 1 CRCs (P<0.05). In agreement with these
findings, GPNMB protein expression decreased in CRC tissues compared with
AD and NA colon mucosa, p<.05. GPNMB expression silencing through
promoter methylation was evident in AD and CRC. GPNMB overexpression in
HCT116 colon cancer cell line decreased cell proliferation [(24h,
P=0.026), (48h, PBackground: Colorectal cancer (CRC) arises from
epigenetic and genetic alterations in a stepwise histological progression
sequence. Aim: We examined the role of glycoprotein non-metastatic
melanoma protein B (GPNMB) gene in normal, adenoma and CRC in African
American (AA) patients to elucidate epigenetic drivers of colon oncogenic
transformation.Patients and Methods: Methylation status of 13 CpG sites
(chr7: 23287345-23287426) in GPNMB gene's promoter, selected from IHM27
array methylation profiling, was analyzed by pyrosequencing in human CRC
cell lines (HCT116, SW480, and HT29) as well as paraffin embedded samples
with normal (n=20), non-advanced adenoma (NA; n=20), advanced adenoma
(AD; n=48), and cancer tissue (n=20). Furthermore, GPNMB expression was
analyzed by immunohistochemistry (IHC). Tumor suppressor functions of
GPNMB were examined by cell proliferation, migration and invasion assays
in HCT116 colon cell line that was stably transfected with a GPNMB cDNA
expression vector. In addition, correlations between the methylation
status of GPNMB and various clinicopathological features (age, location
and sex) were analyzed.Results: GPNMB methylation was lower in normal
mucosa compared to CRC samples (4/20 [20%] vs. 19/20 [95%]; P<0.001). AD
also had a significantly higher GPNMB methylation frequency than normal
colon samples (45/48 [94%] vs 4/20 [20%]; P<0.001). GPNMB was more
frequently methylated in AD than in matched normal mucosa from three
patients (3/3 [100%] vs 1/3 [33.3%]; P<0.001). Finally, the frequency of
GPNMB methylation in NA differs significantly from that in the normal
mucosa (16/21 [76%] vs 4/20 [20%]; P0.5). Gender, location, and age were
independent of GPNMB methylation. However, there was statistically
significant correlation of higher methylation at advanced stages and
lower methylation at stage 1 CRCs (P<0.05). In agreement with these
findings, GPNMB protein expression decreased in CRC tissues compared with
AD and NA colon mucosa, p<.05. GPNMB expression silencing through
promoter methylation was evident in AD and CRC. GPNMB overexpression in
HCT116 colon cancer cell line decreased cell proliferation [(24h,
P=0.026), (48h, P<0.001), and (72h, P=0.007)], invasion
(p.05).Conclusion: Our data indicate a high methylation profile leading
to a lower GPNMB expression in adenoma and CRC samples. As such, GPNMB
might be useful as a biomarker of adenomas with high carcinogenic
potential in African Americans.

