Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Endostatin is a novel inhibitor of androgen receptor function in
prostate cancer


Abnormalities in androgen-androgen receptor (AR) axis have long been
recognized for their roles in promoting prostate tumor growth and
metastasis. Conventional therapies targeting androgen ablation show
transient tumor regression, however, when the tumor recurs during
castration-refractory metastatic stage, the current treatment options are
very limited. Although the precise mechanism by which prostate cancer
(PCa) cells circumvent the androgen deprivation is unclear, recurring
tumors have been shown to retain AR activity and upregulation of
AR-target gene expression such as prostate specific antigen (PSA),
suggesting that targeting AR remains a key component of developing novel
therapeutic strategies. Here, we show a profound effect of endostatin, an
endogenous angiogenesis inhibitor, on proliferation and invasion of
AR-positive PCa cells by targeting AR function. The present study
identified that intracellular trafficking of endostatin and direct
interaction with AR disrupts AR nuclear translocation and the consequent
transcriptional activation of PSA gene. In addition, our structural
modeling and site-directed mutagenesis studies suggest that the binding
mechanism may include the interaction of bulky side chains (F31 and F34)
present in endostatin with the co-activator binding interface (AF-2) in
AR ligand-binding domain (LBD). Regarding drug resistance to the
second-generation androgen antagonists in patients with metastatic PCa,
recent studies revealed that a missense mutation in AR LBD (F876L) and
the consequential antagonist-to-agonist switch confers continued AR
activity. In this context, our study suggests that endostatin can be
recognized as an endogenous AR inhibitor where its molecular interaction
with AR may prevent from agonistic switch of AR function by fully masking
the AF-2 subdomain. Overall, the current finding provides new insights
into endostatin whose anti-cancer activity is not only limited to
inhibiting angiogenesis, but can also be expanded to suppressing
AR-mediated PCa progression by disrupting AR transactivation.

