Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Fibroblast influence on keratinocyte tumorigenic and metastatic
potential in cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma


Skin cancer is the most common form of cancer in the United States, with
an estimated two million cases diagnosed annually. Tpl2 (Map3k8) is a
serine threonine protein kinase in the mitogen-activated protein kinase
(MAPK) signal transduction cascade. Tpl2 was identified by our laboratory
as having a tumor suppressive function in skin carcinogenesis, with Tpl2
knockout mice developing significantly more tumors than matched wildtype
controls and Tpl2 knockout keratinocytes having greater angiogenic and
metastatic potential. However, the microenvironmental contributions of
underlying fibroblasts to the cancerous behavior seen in Tpl2 knockout
keratinocytes has yet to be characterized. Therefore, we compared the
tumorigenic, invasive, and metastatic potential of H-ras infected
keratinocytes from wildtype and Tpl2 knockout mice with H-ras infected
keratinocytes co-cultured with fibroblasts from wildtype and Tpl2
knockout mice. Using various techniques, including protein microarray,
real-time polymerase chain reaction and Western blotting we found that
fibroblasts in the microenvironment of H-ras-infected Tpl2 knockout
keratinocytes contribute to an up-regulation of markers involved in
growth and progression of squamous cell carcinoma. Additionally, Tpl2
knockout keratinocytes cultured in fibroblast conditioned media (FCM)
have higher malignant conversion rates, colony formation and increased
angiogenesis compared to co-cultured wildtype keratinocytes. In summary,
our studies demonstrate that fibroblasts in the tumor microenvironment of
Tpl2 knockout mice play a major role in the more aggressive,invasive, and
metastatic character of knockout tumors than is seen in control animals.

