Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Recurrent somatic mutations of nitric oxide synthase NOS3, netrin
receptor UNC5C and DNA repair genes in muscle-invasive bladder carcinoma


Bladder cancer is the fourth most common cancer type in males and
approximately 72,500 individuals were diagnosed in the United States in
2012. Patients with superficial (low-grade papillary) tumors generally
have a good prognosis with a 5-year survival rate exceeding 90%, but
those with muscle-invasive or locally advanced disease at surgical
resection have a significant risk of recurrence with 5-year survival
rates of 30-60%. The systemic chemotherapy options for bladder cancer are
very limited, and no new drugs have been approved in the United States
for metastatic bladder cancer in over 20 years. Although a number of
newer, molecularly targeting drugs have been developed and approved for
multiple cancer types in the last two decades, no such drug has been
developed for the treatment of bladder cancer. This is likely due, in
part, to the relatively limited molecular understanding of invasive
bladder cancers and lack of knowledge about potential genetic drivers of
invasive forms of the disease. Hence, it is of priority to discover novel
genetic pathways involved in the carcinogenesis of muscle-invasive
bladder cancer for the assessment of risk stratification and for the
development of novel drugs. We analyzed exomes of 43 muscle-invasive
bladder carcinomas and identified two novel significantly mutated genes,
NOS3 (18.6%) and UNC5C (16.3%), in addition to previously reported
frequently mutated genes like TP53 (37.2%) and KDM6A (18.6%). Both NOS3
and UNC5C are known to be involved in the apoptotic pathways, with NOS3
encoding for endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS), and UNC5C for
netrin receptor, a member of the dependence receptor family. When we
correlated the mutational profiles with clinicopathological outcomes by
stratifying patients according to disease recurrence status and observing
for specific clustering of genetic mutations, we found that somatic
mutations in six DNA repair genes (ATM, ERCC2, FANCD2, RAD51AP1, PALB2,
BRCA2) were significantly associated with enhanced recurrence-free
survival (hazard ratio of 0.091 with 95% CI of 0.018 to 0.45; P=0.0034)
even after adjustment for pathologic TN staging, suggestive of their
mutations as favorable prognostic events in bladder cancer.

