Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The prediction of postoperative renal function from renal cortex
volumetry with preoperative multidetector computed tomography


INTRODUCTION: To predict the postoperative total renal function after
renal surgery, we measured preserved renal cortex volume and examined the
estimation of postoperative eGFR of from preoperative multidetector
CT.MATERIALS AND METHODS: From 2011 to 2013, 39 patients with
preoperative contrast enhanced multi detector CT were underwent renal
removal surgery at Teikyo University Hospital. Preoperative and
postoperative renal function were assessed by estimating glomerular
filtration rate (eGFR). The renal cortex volume (RCV) was calculated
automatically by imaging volumetry computer software. Addition of normal
side RCV and disease side RCV that was subtracted by tumor region
determined as total RCV. The postoperative RCV was defined as preserved
renal cortex volume (RCV preservation), which is normal side RCV. The
factors that affected the postoperative renal function were examined by
univariate and multivariate analysis. For developing the models to
estimate postoperative eGFR, we used stepwise (backward elimination)
method for identifying the predictors. To assess of the relative quality
of these statistical models, both Akaike information criterion (AIC) and
Root mean square error of the cross validation (RMSE CV) were calculated.
Then tour model was examined as the external validation with 10 patients
in Jyuntendo University Hospital.RESULTS: The postoperative eGFR value
was associated with age (P INTRODUCTION: To predict the postoperative
total renal function after renal surgery, we measured preserved renal
cortex volume and examined the estimation of postoperative eGFR of from
preoperative multidetector CT.MATERIALS AND METHODS: From 2011 to 2013,
39 patients with preoperative contrast enhanced multi detector CT were
underwent renal removal surgery at Teikyo University Hospital.
Preoperative and postoperative renal function were assessed by estimating
glomerular filtration rate (eGFR). The renal cortex volume (RCV) was
calculated automatically by imaging volumetry computer software. Addition
of normal side RCV and disease side RCV that was subtracted by tumor
region determined as total RCV. The postoperative RCV was defined as
preserved renal cortex volume (RCV preservation), which is normal side
RCV. The factors that affected the postoperative renal function were
examined by univariate and multivariate analysis. For developing the
models to estimate postoperative eGFR, we used stepwise (backward
elimination) method for identifying the predictors. To assess of the
relative quality of these statistical models, both Akaike information
criterion (AIC) and Root mean square error of the cross validation (RMSE
CV) were calculated. Then tour model was examined as the external
validation with 10 patients in Jyuntendo University Hospital.RESULTS: The
postoperative eGFR value was associated with age (P <0.01), preserved
Renal Parenchymal Volume, and preserved Renal Cortex Volume (P
INTRODUCTION: To predict the postoperative total renal function after
renal surgery, we measured preserved renal cortex volume and examined the
estimation of postoperative eGFR of from preoperative multidetector
CT.MATERIALS AND METHODS: From 2011 to 2013, 39 patients with
preoperative contrast enhanced multi detector CT were underwent renal
removal surgery at Teikyo University Hospital. Preoperative and
postoperative renal function were assessed by estimating glomerular
filtration rate (eGFR). The renal cortex volume (RCV) was calculated
automatically by imaging volumetry computer software. Addition of normal
side RCV and disease side RCV that was subtracted by tumor region
determined as total RCV. The postoperative RCV was defined as preserved
renal cortex volume (RCV preservation), which is normal side RCV. The
factors that affected the postoperative renal function were examined by
univariate and multivariate analysis. For developing the models to
estimate postoperative eGFR, we used stepwise (backward elimination)
method for identifying the predictors. To assess of the relative quality
of these statistical models, both Akaike information criterion (AIC) and
Root mean square error of the cross validation (RMSE CV) were calculated.
Then tour model was examined as the external validation with 10 patients
in Jyuntendo University Hospital.RESULTS: The postoperative eGFR value
was associated with age (P <0.01), preserved Renal Parenchymal Volume,
and preserved Renal Cortex Volume (P <0.01, P =0.03, respectively). With
univariate analysis, %GFR alternation significant correlated with % RCV
preservation (r = 0.58, p INTRODUCTION: To predict the postoperative
total renal function after renal surgery, we measured preserved renal
cortex volume and examined the estimation of postoperative eGFR of from
preoperative multidetector CT.MATERIALS AND METHODS: From 2011 to 2013,
39 patients with preoperative contrast enhanced multi detector CT were
underwent renal removal surgery at Teikyo University Hospital.
Preoperative and postoperative renal function were assessed by estimating
glomerular filtration rate (eGFR). The renal cortex volume (RCV) was
calculated automatically by imaging volumetry computer software. Addition
of normal side RCV and disease side RCV that was subtracted by tumor
region determined as total RCV. The postoperative RCV was defined as
preserved renal cortex volume (RCV preservation), which is normal side
RCV. The factors that affected the postoperative renal function were
examined by univariate and multivariate analysis. For developing the
models to estimate postoperative eGFR, we used stepwise (backward
elimination) method for identifying the predictors. To assess of the
relative quality of these statistical models, both Akaike information
criterion (AIC) and Root mean square error of the cross validation (RMSE
CV) were calculated. Then tour model was examined as the external
validation with 10 patients in Jyuntendo University Hospital.RESULTS: The
postoperative eGFR value was associated with age (P <0.01), preserved
Renal Parenchymal Volume, and preserved Renal Cortex Volume (P <0.01, P
=0.03, respectively). With univariate analysis, %GFR alternation
significant correlated with % RCV preservation (r = 0.58, p <0.01) and
with % RPV preservation (r = 0.54, p INTRODUCTION: To predict the
postoperative total renal function after renal surgery, we measured
preserved renal cortex volume and examined the estimation of
postoperative eGFR of from preoperative multidetector CT.MATERIALS AND
METHODS: From 2011 to 2013, 39 patients with preoperative contrast
enhanced multi detector CT were underwent renal removal surgery at Teikyo
University Hospital. Preoperative and postoperative renal function were
assessed by estimating glomerular filtration rate (eGFR). The renal
cortex volume (RCV) was calculated automatically by imaging volumetry
computer software. Addition of normal side RCV and disease side RCV that
was subtracted by tumor region determined as total RCV. The postoperative
RCV was defined as preserved renal cortex volume (RCV preservation),
which is normal side RCV. The factors that affected the postoperative
renal function were examined by univariate and multivariate analysis. For
developing the models to estimate postoperative eGFR, we used stepwise
(backward elimination) method for identifying the predictors. To assess
of the relative quality of these statistical models, both Akaike
information criterion (AIC) and Root mean square error of the cross
validation (RMSE CV) were calculated. Then tour model was examined as the
external validation with 10 patients in Jyuntendo University
Hospital.RESULTS: The postoperative eGFR value was associated with age (P
<0.01), preserved Renal Parenchymal Volume, and preserved Renal Cortex
Volume (P <0.01, P =0.03, respectively). With univariate analysis, %GFR
alternation significant correlated with % RCV preservation (r = 0.58, p
<0.01) and with % RPV preservation (r = 0.54, p <0.01). Age and
preoperative eGFR show poor statistically significant correlations. The
alteration of renal cortex volume is the strongest predictor for the
postoperative eGFR alteration rate.From the results, we identified the
independent predictors of eGFR. AIC and RMSE CV values were 198.7 and
60.4 respectively. Our developed regression model as follows:
postoperative eGFR=57.87 -0.55(Age)-15.01(BSA)+0.30(preoperative
eGFR)+52.92(% RCV preservation). A strong correlation was seen between
postoperative eGFR and estimation model (R=0.805, p INTRODUCTION: To
predict the postoperative total renal function after renal surgery, we
measured preserved renal cortex volume and examined the estimation of
postoperative eGFR of from preoperative multidetector CT.MATERIALS AND
METHODS: From 2011 to 2013, 39 patients with preoperative contrast
enhanced multi detector CT were underwent renal removal surgery at Teikyo
University Hospital. Preoperative and postoperative renal function were
assessed by estimating glomerular filtration rate (eGFR). The renal
cortex volume (RCV) was calculated automatically by imaging volumetry
computer software. Addition of normal side RCV and disease side RCV that
was subtracted by tumor region determined as total RCV. The postoperative
RCV was defined as preserved renal cortex volume (RCV preservation),
which is normal side RCV. The factors that affected the postoperative
renal function were examined by univariate and multivariate analysis. For
developing the models to estimate postoperative eGFR, we used stepwise
(backward elimination) method for identifying the predictors. To assess
of the relative quality of these statistical models, both Akaike
information criterion (AIC) and Root mean square error of the cross
validation (RMSE CV) were calculated. Then tour model was examined as the
external validation with 10 patients in Jyuntendo University
Hospital.RESULTS: The postoperative eGFR value was associated with age (P
<0.01), preserved Renal Parenchymal Volume, and preserved Renal Cortex
Volume (P <0.01, P =0.03, respectively). With univariate analysis, %GFR
alternation significant correlated with % RCV preservation (r = 0.58, p
<0.01) and with % RPV preservation (r = 0.54, p <0.01). Age and
preoperative eGFR show poor statistically significant correlations. The
alteration of renal cortex volume is the strongest predictor for the
postoperative eGFR alteration rate.From the results, we identified the
independent predictors of eGFR. AIC and RMSE CV values were 198.7 and
60.4 respectively. Our developed regression model as follows:
postoperative eGFR=57.87 -0.55(Age)-15.01(BSA)+0.30(preoperative
eGFR)+52.92(% RCV preservation). A strong correlation was seen between
postoperative eGFR and estimation model (R=0.805, p <0.001 and RMSE value
was 7.16). The results of external validation cohort, residual sum of
squares of our equation was calculated as 647.77, which show better
predictive value than the previous reported estimation
models.CONCLUSIONS: Preoperative MDCT based RCV measurements are
associated with postoperative renal function in patients undergoing renal
surgery. Computer aided image analysis system makes this procedure simple
and reproducible method. Combining CT renal volumetry and patient data
might be the important prediction tool for postoperative renal function
and risk assessment tool for the CKD after renal surgery.

