Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Circulating miRNAs as potential biomarkers for esophageal
adenocarcinoma risk and clinical outcomes


Esophageal adenocarcinoma (EAC) is a deadly disease with increased
incidence in Western countries. More than half of EAC patients are
diagnosed at an advanced stage, when curative surgery is not an option.
Platinum- and fluorouracil (FU)-based chemo-radiation are the mainstay of
treatments for advanced EAC with modest survival benefit but substantial
toxicity. The lack of effective early detection tool and the low rate of
treatment responses for advanced disease result in a dismal overall
5-year survival rate of Esophageal adenocarcinoma (EAC) is a deadly
disease with increased incidence in Western countries. More than half of
EAC patients are diagnosed at an advanced stage, when curative surgery is
not an option. Platinum- and fluorouracil (FU)-based chemo-radiation are
the mainstay of treatments for advanced EAC with modest survival benefit
but substantial toxicity. The lack of effective early detection tool and
the low rate of treatment responses for advanced disease result in a
dismal overall 5-year survival rate of <15%. Identification of minimally
invasive, blood-based biomarkers for early diagnosis and
prognosis/therapy response is essential to improve the overall outcome
for EAC patients. In this study, we aimed to identify serum miRNAs as
diagnostic and/or prognosis/predictive biomarkers for EAC. Firstly, a
global screening of human miRNAs was conducted using TaqMan Human
MicroRNA Microarray (754 miRNAs) in a pilot study. We selected 89 stably
detectable miRNAs and measured their expression in 349 serum samples (165
cases vs184 controls) from Caucasian population using a newly designed
Fluidigm BioMark customized panel. After quality control, 77 miRNAs were
included in the final analysis. Five miRNAs (miR-126, miR-142-3p,
miR-331-3p, miR-18a and miR-18) were significantly
differentially-expressed between cases and controls (PEsophageal
adenocarcinoma (EAC) is a deadly disease with increased incidence in
Western countries. More than half of EAC patients are diagnosed at an
advanced stage, when curative surgery is not an option. Platinum- and
fluorouracil (FU)-based chemo-radiation are the mainstay of treatments
for advanced EAC with modest survival benefit but substantial toxicity.
The lack of effective early detection tool and the low rate of treatment
responses for advanced disease result in a dismal overall 5-year survival
rate of <15%. Identification of minimally invasive, blood-based
biomarkers for early diagnosis and prognosis/therapy response is
essential to improve the overall outcome for EAC patients. In this study,
we aimed to identify serum miRNAs as diagnostic and/or
prognosis/predictive biomarkers for EAC. Firstly, a global screening of
human miRNAs was conducted using TaqMan Human MicroRNA Microarray (754
miRNAs) in a pilot study. We selected 89 stably detectable miRNAs and
measured their expression in 349 serum samples (165 cases vs184 controls)
from Caucasian population using a newly designed Fluidigm BioMark
customized panel. After quality control, 77 miRNAs were included in the
final analysis. Five miRNAs (miR-126, miR-142-3p, miR-331-3p, miR-18a and
miR-18) were significantly differentially-expressed between cases and
controls (P<0.05). Among the 165 EAC patients, five miRNAs were
significantly associated with survival and two with recurrence
(PEsophageal adenocarcinoma (EAC) is a deadly disease with increased
incidence in Western countries. More than half of EAC patients are
diagnosed at an advanced stage, when curative surgery is not an option.
Platinum- and fluorouracil (FU)-based chemo-radiation are the mainstay of
treatments for advanced EAC with modest survival benefit but substantial
toxicity. The lack of effective early detection tool and the low rate of
treatment responses for advanced disease result in a dismal overall
5-year survival rate of <15%. Identification of minimally invasive,
blood-based biomarkers for early diagnosis and prognosis/therapy response
is essential to improve the overall outcome for EAC patients. In this
study, we aimed to identify serum miRNAs as diagnostic and/or
prognosis/predictive biomarkers for EAC. Firstly, a global screening of
human miRNAs was conducted using TaqMan Human MicroRNA Microarray (754
miRNAs) in a pilot study. We selected 89 stably detectable miRNAs and
measured their expression in 349 serum samples (165 cases vs184 controls)
from Caucasian population using a newly designed Fluidigm BioMark
customized panel. After quality control, 77 miRNAs were included in the
final analysis. Five miRNAs (miR-126, miR-142-3p, miR-331-3p, miR-18a and
miR-18) were significantly differentially-expressed between cases and
controls (P<0.05). Among the 165 EAC patients, five miRNAs were
significantly associated with survival and two with recurrence (P<0.05).
Interestingly, higher miR-30c level was significantly associated with
decreased risk for both death (HR=0.28, 95%CI= 0.12- 0.65, P= 0.003) and
recurrence (HR= 0.49, 95%CI= 0.24- 0.99, P= 0.047). Among 118 patients
received chemo/chemoradiation, 93% and 84% have received 5FU or
platinum-agent, respectively. MiR-142-3p was associated with an increased
risk of recurrence in the platinum-based subgroup (HR=2.67, 95%CI= 1.09-
6.56, P=0.032). Higher levels of miR-30c was associated with decreased
risk of death in both treatment subgroups with a similar effect. MiR-26a
was significantly associated with an increased risk of death (HR=5.78,
95%CI= 1.59-21.06, P=0.008) and recurrence (HR=7.76, 95%CI= 2.30-26.18,
P=0.001) in the platinum subgroup, whereas miR-127-3p and miR-486-5p were
significantly associated with both survival and recurrence in the 5FU
subgroup. We further tested the expression of candidate serum miRNAs in
tissue samples (15 normal and 81 tumor). Interestingly, miR-26a, which
was significantly associated with increased risk of both death and
recurrence in platinum subgroup, was overexpressed in tumor as compared
to the normal tissue (PEsophageal adenocarcinoma (EAC) is a deadly
disease with increased incidence in Western countries. More than half of
EAC patients are diagnosed at an advanced stage, when curative surgery is
not an option. Platinum- and fluorouracil (FU)-based chemo-radiation are
the mainstay of treatments for advanced EAC with modest survival benefit
but substantial toxicity. The lack of effective early detection tool and
the low rate of treatment responses for advanced disease result in a
dismal overall 5-year survival rate of <15%. Identification of minimally
invasive, blood-based biomarkers for early diagnosis and
prognosis/therapy response is essential to improve the overall outcome
for EAC patients. In this study, we aimed to identify serum miRNAs as
diagnostic and/or prognosis/predictive biomarkers for EAC. Firstly, a
global screening of human miRNAs was conducted using TaqMan Human
MicroRNA Microarray (754 miRNAs) in a pilot study. We selected 89 stably
detectable miRNAs and measured their expression in 349 serum samples (165
cases vs184 controls) from Caucasian population using a newly designed
Fluidigm BioMark customized panel. After quality control, 77 miRNAs were
included in the final analysis. Five miRNAs (miR-126, miR-142-3p,
miR-331-3p, miR-18a and miR-18) were significantly
differentially-expressed between cases and controls (P<0.05). Among the
165 EAC patients, five miRNAs were significantly associated with survival
and two with recurrence (P<0.05). Interestingly, higher miR-30c level was
significantly associated with decreased risk for both death (HR=0.28,
95%CI= 0.12- 0.65, P= 0.003) and recurrence (HR= 0.49, 95%CI= 0.24- 0.99,
P= 0.047). Among 118 patients received chemo/chemoradiation, 93% and 84%
have received 5FU or platinum-agent, respectively. MiR-142-3p was
associated with an increased risk of recurrence in the platinum-based
subgroup (HR=2.67, 95%CI= 1.09- 6.56, P=0.032). Higher levels of miR-30c
was associated with decreased risk of death in both treatment subgroups
with a similar effect. MiR-26a was significantly associated with an
increased risk of death (HR=5.78, 95%CI= 1.59-21.06, P=0.008) and
recurrence (HR=7.76, 95%CI= 2.30-26.18, P=0.001) in the platinum
subgroup, whereas miR-127-3p and miR-486-5p were significantly associated
with both survival and recurrence in the 5FU subgroup. We further tested
the expression of candidate serum miRNAs in tissue samples (15 normal and
81 tumor). Interestingly, miR-26a, which was significantly associated
with increased risk of both death and recurrence in platinum subgroup,
was overexpressed in tumor as compared to the normal tissue (P<0.001),
suggesting a potential oncogenic feature for this miRNA. We are currently
validating these results. Our study provides strong evidence to support
the application of circulating miRNAs as minimally invasive early
diagnosis and prognosis/predictive biomarkers for EAC.

