Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Utilizing Bimolecular Fluorescent Complementation to Identify
Inhibitors of RAL and KRAS


We have identified RAL activity to be vital for NSCLC survival
independent of KRAS or EGFR mutation status in a large panel of
adenocarcinomas and have developed a novel high throughput screening
assay based on Bimolecular Fluorescent Complementation (BiFC) to identify
small molecules that impair RAL function. Coupling RALA and RALB to the
C-terminus of the Venus protein (VC) and coexpressing either with direct
binding effector RALBP1 fused to the N-terminus of the Venus protein (VN)
result in a fluorescent signal when RAL-RALBP1 binding occurs in cells.
This allows for the interrogation of small molecules that disrupt
RAL-RALBP1 binding interactions (resulting in loss of fluorescence) in a
real time, high throughput manner. Our preliminary screen with a natural
compound library identified 14 small molecules that demonstrated high
activity in disrupting both RALA- and RALB-RALBP1 binding and
fluorescence. We are currently investigating these compounds' mode of
action and have recently expanded our assay to screen for molecules that
impair mutant KRAS activity (VC-KRAS / RAF1-VN). BiFC provides a rapid,
more physiologic method to identify molecules that can disrupt
protein-protein interactions of targets considered undruggable, including
membrane bound small GTPases such as RAL and KRAS.

