Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gene mutations and deletions inactivates PTEN tumor suppressor in
Chilean colon cancer patients


Introduction. Tumor suppressor PTEN acts as a negative regulator of the
PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway, thus controlling cell survival and proliferation.
Mutations or deletions inactivating PTEN function lead to over-activation
of the PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway in cancer. PTEN gene alterations have been
described in different types of tumors. In colon cancer these mutations
range from 1% to 29% of the cases. The aim of this study was to determine
the prevalence of PTEN mutations and/or deletions in Chilean colon cancer
patients. Methods: ninety-one colon cancer patients were recruited for
this study. Genomic DNA from normal and tumor tissue was obtained, and
the deletion of PTEN locus was determined by PCR amplification of three
STR markers flanking PTEN, and two intragenic markers. To search point
mutations we amplified exons 7 and 8 by PCR, and sequenced. PTEN
expression was evaluated through immunohistochemistry. Results: We
observed deletion events in 9.8% (9/91) of tumors, and inactivating
mutations in 5.5% (5/91). Two tumors presented a deletion in one allele
and a mutation in the other. Immunohistochemistry detected a very weak
expression of PTEN in 55/76 tumors. Conclusions: 15.4 % (12/91) of tumors
have PTEN gene inactivated. We observed that deletion was a frequent
mechanism for PTEN inactivation in Chilean colon cancer patients.Note:
This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

