Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The pluripotency factor LIN28 promotes colorectal tumorigenesis
and tumor progression


LIN28A and LIN28B are RNA-binding protein paralogs expressed in embryonic
stem cells and in early developing tissues. Through blocking the terminal
processing of let-7 miRNAs and regulating the translation of a number of
mRNA binding targets, LIN28 controls an array of targets that mediate
proliferation, pluripotency, differentiation and metabolism. While highly
expressed in the early embryos, the levels of LIN28A/B are downregulated
as differentiation and development proceed. However, aberrant
overexpression of LIN28 is often observed in human malignancies
especially those with poor prognosis. We have demonstrated that LIN28
promotes cellular transformation in vitro, yet it is unknown how LIN28
regulates tumorigenesis in vivo. Here, we investigate the role of LIN28
in colorectal cancer (CRC) in humans and in mouse models. We first
investigated the status of LIN28A/B in 1000 CRC patients and observed
35-60% of the cancer samples express LIN28A and/or LIN28B. Furthermore,
we generated intestinal-specific LIN28 overexpressing mice, and observed
intestinal adenoma as well as invasive adenocarcinoma that highly
resemble the histology of human CRCs. Moreover, in Apcmin/+ animals,
additional LIN28 expression significantly increased tumor incidence and
accelerated disease onset, as their tumors are poorly differentiated and
more invasive compared with Apcmin/+ tumors. Together, our study shows
that LIN28 drives intestinal tumorigenesis and further promotes tumor
progression in vivo. CRC is one of the major contributors to
cancer-related mortality; however, current mouse models seldom progress
to later stages of the disease, which greatly impedes efforts to
developing more effective therapies. Based on the knowledge gained from
this research, we hope to provide novel insights into designing
therapeutics targeting late-stage CRC.

