Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BIN3 is a novel 8p21 tumor suppressor gene that regulates the
attachment checkpoint in epithelial cells


An important characteristic of multicellular organisms is the control
that the tissue architecture exerts on the fate of individual cells.
Epithelial cells sense their location through interactions with the
extracellular matrix (ECM) and remove themselves by programmed cell death
(anoikis) when those interactions are disturbed. Importantly, anoikis is
a line of defense that has to be circumvented by cancerous epithelial
cells to be able to leave their home environment and establish long
distance metastases. Here, by combining a genome-wide RNAi screen and a
novel algorithm to study copy number alterations (ISAR-DEL), we identify
the Bridging Integrator-3 (BIN3) as a novel 8p21 tumor suppressor gene
whose inactivation promotes escape from anoikis in epithelial cancers.
Mechanistically, we link the tumor suppression function of BIN3 to its
ability to relocate to the cell membrane after cell detachment and to
induce a proapoptotic cascade. This death signaling is mediated by CDC42
activation of the P38- stress pathway and the consequent accumulation of
the apoptotic facilitator BimEL. Our results identify BIN3 as a novel
epithelial tumor suppressor gene, provide novel insights on the
mechanisms of attachment tumor suppressor checkpoint and highlight the
importance of anoikis escape in driving cell transformation and
metastasis in human cancer.Note: This abstract was not presented at the
meeting.

