Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of PCDHB3 as a potential tumor suppressor in
colorectal cancer by exome sequencing


Colorectal cancer (CRC) is one of the most common cancers worldwide and
is believed to arise from combinations of genetic and epigenetic
disorders. However, besides APC, KRAS, and p53, which are highly targeted
by somatic mutations, other genes altered in mutations in CRC patients
are under interpreted in their effects and relevance with CRC
tumorigenesis.Out of the genes in which we identified 453 nonsynonymous
somatic mutations in this exome sequencing study, PCDHB3 was mutated in
30% exome-sequenced cases and was screened in another 104 CRC cases with
a 7.02% mutation rate. Meanwhile, PCDHB3 is lowly expressed in 83.7%
tumor of CRC patients and CRC cell lines compared to normal controls,
which is detected to be caused by loss of heterozygosity and CpG island
hypermethylation. In vitro and in vivo experiments revealed that
over-expression of wildtype PCDHB3 in DLD1 cells inhibited tumor cell
proliferation and migration (56.8% and 47.5% of control), whereas mutant
PCDHB3 lacked of the functions. Furthermore, SW480-shRNA cells, which
demonstrated a lower level of endogenous PCDHB3, exhibited a larger
growth and migration advantage (2.28-fold and 2.26-fold of control).In
summary, our study identified PCDHB3 as a tumor suppressor gene in CRC.
Loss of PCDHB3 suppressor function results from uncommon genetic
mutations affecting the protein sequence as well as decreased expression
of functional protein.

