Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Work history and cancer mortality risks in 90,268 United States
radiologic technologists


Objectives: There have been few studies on medical radiation work history
factors and cancer mortality. In this nationwide prospective cohort study
of United States radiologic technologists, we expanded our previous
evaluation of work history and cancer mortality risks, by extending
follow-up by 11 years and examining a broader range of cancers.Methods:
Using Cox proportional hazards models, we estimated cancer mortality
risks through 2008 according to work history and other data derived from
questionnaire responses provided during 1983-89 by 90,268 U.S. radiologic
technologists. We controlled for potential confounding by age, birth
year, pack-years of cigarettes smoked, body mass index, race, and
gender.Results: There were 9,564 deaths and 3,329 deaths from cancer.
After controlling for potential confounding factors, we found that
technologists who began working before 1950 had marginally increased risk
of dying from all cancers (p-trend=0.08), as well as increased risk of
dying from female breast cancer (p-trend=0.01) and stomach cancer
(p-trend=0.01) compared to those who began working in 1970 or later.
Other work history factors, including starting work at a younger age,
working greater number of years, or holding patients for x-rays more
often, were not consistently associated with increased cancer mortality
risks.Conclusions: We found that radiologic technologists who worked
before 1950 had increased risk of dying from certain cancers, which may
reflect higher occupational radiation exposures before the late
1950s.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

