Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Survival benefit of an add-on dendritic cell vaccine for patients
with inoperable pancreatic cancer receiving chemotherapy: a multicenter
study


Purpose: Dendritic cell (DC)-based cancer vaccine may have a significant
benefit to patients with advanced pancreatic cancer. However, variations
among clinical studies make it hard to detect its clinical outcome. Here
we statistically identified factors determining the clinical benefit
using data obtained at seven Japanese institutions that employed the same
DC preparation and treatment regimen.Patients and Methods: Among the 354
patients who met the inclusion criteria, 255 patients who received
standard chemotherapy combined with peptide-pulsed DC vaccines were
analyzed.Results: The mean survival time from diagnosis was 16.5 months
(95%CI=14.4-18.5), and that from the first vaccination was 9.9 months
(95%CI=8.0-12.9). Known prognostic baseline factors related to advanced
pancreatic cancer, namely ECOG-PS, peritoneal metastasis, liver
metastasis, and prognostic nutrition index (PNI) were also
representative. Importantly, erythema reaction after vaccination was an
independent and treatment-related predictive factor for better survival,
and that OK432 might be a good adjuvant enhancing the antitumor immunity
during DC vaccination.Conclusion: This is the first report of a
multicenter clinical study suggesting the feasibility and possible
clinical benefit of an add-on DC vaccine in patients with advanced
pancreatic cancer who are undergoing chemotherapy. These findings need to
be addressed in well-controlled prospective randomized trials.

