Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synergy between epithelial and mesenchymal cells in breast cancer:
from mammospheres to predicting patient outcomes


Targeting breast cancer stem cells promises to eliminate the root of
metastasis and recurrence and thus to eradicate the ultimate cause of
cancer-related death of patients. However, the identity of epithelial
cancer stem-like is still elusive; cancer stem-like and metastasis
initiating cells have been described to be either epithelial (E) or
mesenchymal (M), and thus their identity appears to critically depend on
the context of the analyzed cell line.Here, we have studied the
heterogeneous HMLER cell line to identify the relationships between
epithelial and mesenchymal cells while they are differentiated and
selected under suspension culture conditions. We find that CD24+/CD44-
epithelial cells and CD44+/CD24- mesenchymal cells synergize in causing
the proliferation of both sub-populations, increasing mammosphere
production, and causing the emergence of aggressive motile cells when
replated. We observed that when grown in suspension, isolated epithelial
as well as isolated mesenchymal cell populations converged towards a
hybrid E/M state characterized by coexpression of genes of both lineages,
from population down to the single cell level. For epithelial populations
convergence at the hybrid state during growth in suspension was thus
achieved by proliferation of the most mesenchymal cells resembling an
epithelial to mesenchymal transition at the population level. For
mesenchymal populations, the hybrid state was reached by the reverse,
MET, involving proliferation of the most epithelial cells in a context
dependent manner.We use these findings to resolve which genes are
predictive of poor outcome in primary human breast tumors. Here we show
for the first time that high expression of mesenchymal genes in luminal
B/epithelial tumors predicts poor outcome of patients, whereas expression
of epithelial genes in basal/mesenchymal tumors predicts poor outcome and
thus increased metastasis. Therefore, functional synergy between E and M
cells can explain how the tumor context determines whether a minority of
mesenchymal or epithelial cells can serve as metastatic stem cells.

