Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SilenciX, novel stable knock-down cellular models to screen new
molecular targets through the synthetic lethality approach


PARP inhibitors are promising therapeutic drugs for cancers harboring
BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations. PARP is involved in the Base Excision Repair
(BER) DNA repair pathway. Tumors with BRCA mutations are deficient in
Homologous Recombination (HR), another DNA repair pathway. To maintain
DNA integrity and prevent cell death, at least one one of the BER or HE
pathways must be functional, while the other may be inhibited or silenced
(eg. mutation, drug).In drug discovery, Synthethic Lethality (SL) used a
cancer mutation and a drug in combination to cause the tumor cell's
death. SL is thus a promising approach to find new druggable targets by
controlling the HR and BER DNA repair pathways in order to selectively
kill mutated cancer cells. However, the main technical hurdle in SL
approaches is to easily identify cancer-specific molecular interaction in
various cancer types, while using robust and validated experimental
cellular models.In this presentation we demonstrate how the SilenciX
technology meets SL experimental requirements. BRCA1 and BRCA2 Silencix
cells were treated with PARP1 inhibitors (Olaparib, Veliparib, Rucaparib)
and with Gemcitabine.All inhibitors except Gemcitabine were synthetic
lethal in BRCA1 SilenciX cell lines.To mimic the cancer
micro-environement, the model was tested under hypoxic conditions.We
conclude that SilenciX cell lines are ingenious gene-specific Knock Down
engineered cell lines using a new pEBV derived plasmid, avoiding
integration and off-target effects, suitable for a broad range of
synthetic lethality studies.

