Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of OATP1B1 by tyrosine kinase inhibitors: in vitro-in
vivo correlations


Background: Several tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) evaluated in
combination regimens with docetaxel, including axitinib, pazopanib, and
sorafenib, can increase the systemic exposure to taxane in cancer
patients by an unknown mechanism. We previously reported that
differential expression of organic anion transporting polypeptides of the
OATP1B-family in the human liver regulate the initial, rate-limiting step
in the elimination of docetaxel, in advance of metabolism. In the current
study, we tested the hypothesis that these interactions are mediated by
the hepatic uptake transporter OATP1B1 using in vitro and in vivo
models.Materials and Methods: The influence of 16 approved TKIs on
transport was studied in vitro using HEK293 cells expressing OATP1B1 or
its mouse equivalent OATP1B2, determined by assessing the effect of TKIs
on the intracellular accumulation of estradiol-17-D-glucuronide, or
docetaxel. Contribution of this process to an interaction with docetaxel
in vivo was determined by pharmacokinetic studies using mice that are
knock-out for OATP1B2 or knock-in for OATP1B1.Results: Axitinib,
nilotinib, pazopanib, and sorafenib were identified as potent inhibitors
of OATP1B1 (>90% inhibition) when using estradiol-17-D-glucuronide as a
prototypical model substrate. As a representative of this class of TKIs,
sorafenib was further evaluated and found to also potently inhibit
OATP1B1-mediated transport of docetaxel with a half-inhibitory maximum
concentration (IC50) of 6.96 nM, and almost completely inhibited the
function of OATP1B1 and OATP1B2 at a concentration readily achievable in
humans and mice. While OATP1B2-deficiency was associated with
significantly increased exposure to docetaxel, as measured by peak plasma
concentration (Cmax, PBackground: Several tyrosine kinase inhibitors
(TKIs) evaluated in combination regimens with docetaxel, including
axitinib, pazopanib, and sorafenib, can increase the systemic exposure to
taxane in cancer patients by an unknown mechanism. We previously reported
that differential expression of organic anion transporting polypeptides
of the OATP1B-family in the human liver regulate the initial,
rate-limiting step in the elimination of docetaxel, in advance of
metabolism. In the current study, we tested the hypothesis that these
interactions are mediated by the hepatic uptake transporter OATP1B1 using
in vitro and in vivo models.Materials and Methods: The influence of 16
approved TKIs on transport was studied in vitro using HEK293 cells
expressing OATP1B1 or its mouse equivalent OATP1B2, determined by
assessing the effect of TKIs on the intracellular accumulation of
estradiol-17-D-glucuronide, or docetaxel. Contribution of this process to
an interaction with docetaxel in vivo was determined by pharmacokinetic
studies using mice that are knock-out for OATP1B2 or knock-in for
OATP1B1.Results: Axitinib, nilotinib, pazopanib, and sorafenib were
identified as potent inhibitors of OATP1B1 (>90% inhibition) when using
estradiol-17-D-glucuronide as a prototypical model substrate. As a
representative of this class of TKIs, sorafenib was further evaluated and
found to also potently inhibit OATP1B1-mediated transport of docetaxel
with a half-inhibitory maximum concentration (IC50) of 6.96 nM, and
almost completely inhibited the function of OATP1B1 and OATP1B2 at a
concentration readily achievable in humans and mice. While
OATP1B2-deficiency was associated with significantly increased exposure
to docetaxel, as measured by peak plasma concentration (Cmax, P<0.05) and
area under the curve (AUC, PBackground: Several tyrosine kinase
inhibitors (TKIs) evaluated in combination regimens with docetaxel,
including axitinib, pazopanib, and sorafenib, can increase the systemic
exposure to taxane in cancer patients by an unknown mechanism. We
previously reported that differential expression of organic anion
transporting polypeptides of the OATP1B-family in the human liver
regulate the initial, rate-limiting step in the elimination of docetaxel,
in advance of metabolism. In the current study, we tested the hypothesis
that these interactions are mediated by the hepatic uptake transporter
OATP1B1 using in vitro and in vivo models.Materials and Methods: The
influence of 16 approved TKIs on transport was studied in vitro using
HEK293 cells expressing OATP1B1 or its mouse equivalent OATP1B2,
determined by assessing the effect of TKIs on the intracellular
accumulation of estradiol-17-D-glucuronide, or docetaxel. Contribution of
this process to an interaction with docetaxel in vivo was determined by
pharmacokinetic studies using mice that are knock-out for OATP1B2 or
knock-in for OATP1B1.Results: Axitinib, nilotinib, pazopanib, and
sorafenib were identified as potent inhibitors of OATP1B1 (>90%
inhibition) when using estradiol-17-D-glucuronide as a prototypical model
substrate. As a representative of this class of TKIs, sorafenib was
further evaluated and found to also potently inhibit OATP1B1-mediated
transport of docetaxel with a half-inhibitory maximum concentration
(IC50) of 6.96 nM, and almost completely inhibited the function of
OATP1B1 and OATP1B2 at a concentration readily achievable in humans and
mice. While OATP1B2-deficiency was associated with significantly
increased exposure to docetaxel, as measured by peak plasma concentration
(Cmax, P<0.05) and area under the curve (AUC, P<0.001), co-administration
of a single or multiple oral dose of sorafenib did not result in
statistically significantly altered exposure to docetaxel in either
wildtype or OATP1B2 (-/-) mice.Conclusion: These findings support a
direct contribution of OATP1B1 in previously recorded pharmacokinetic
interactions between TKIs and docetaxel, which can be predicted from a
simple in vitro experiment. Our failure to reproduce this interaction in
mice suggests that caution is warranted when attempting to extrapolate in
vivo findings to a clinical scenario.

