Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrating pan-molecular data sets by bimodality to nominate
synthetic lethal gene pairs and biomarkers of drug response


Large cancer genome profiling efforts are releasing pan-molecular
information for large numbers of patients into the public domain. A large
proportion of novel oncogenic events discovered through these efforts are
deleterious to gene/protein function. Recent clinical data from PARP
inhibitors has highlighted the promise of tumor cell selective killing
where loss of function of a tumor suppressor gene, in this case BRCA,
results in a targetable dependency. We sought to take advantage of the
pan-molecular information in these data sets to identify molecular
patterns indicative of the mutually exclusive loss of function expected
between synthetic lethal gene pairs. We have developed a toolkit
comprising BiSEp (BImodality Subsetting ExPression) and SLinG (Synthetic
Lethality in Genomics) with which we are able to identify instances of
genetic and/or gene expression loss that are mutually exclusive between
functionally redundant genes. We demonstrate the power of this toolkit to
identify known synthetic lethal gene pairings from cancer literature and
yeast based screens. We have also revealed a number of novel candidate
synthetic lethal gene pairings, and highlight the value of paired
biomarkers provided through this approach to select disease models for
hypothesis testing. Through a further adaptation, BEEP (Bimodal
Expression Exclusive with Pharmacology), we have gone on to identify
biomarkers of response to a number of clinical drug candidates. Here we
present these algorithms and supporting data for a number of candidate
target and biomarker hypotheses discovered, and discuss rationale for
their application in cancer drug research.

