Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of KITENIN in malignant gliomas in relation to tumor
invasiveness


Background: KAI1 C-terminal interacting tetraspanin (KITENIN) has been
reported to promote tumor invasion and metastasis in various cancers. The
aim of this study was to investigate the effect of KITENIN on biological
behaviors in human gliomas and in mouse glioma models.Methods: KITENIN
expression was examined using western blot, qRT-PCR and
immunohistochemistry on human samples. KITENIN expression rate was
compared in each histological grade, and survival rates were analyzed.
Tumor invasiveness was investigated both in vitro and in vivo using
stable cell lines after KITENIN-overexpression (GL261) and knock down
(U251).Results: Expression of KITENIN tended to be stronger in high-grade
gliomas than in low-grade gliomas by western blot & qRT-PCR on frozen
human tumor samples and by immunohistochemistry on paraffin-embedded
tissues as well. Proportions of strong KITENIN expression were 16.7%,
21.4%, 33.3%, and 56.8%, respectively, from grade I through IV (p=0.001).
However, survival analysis using the Kaplan-Meier method did not reveal
statistically significant difference between the high KITENIN expression
group and the low expression group in terms of overall survival and
progression free survival (p=0.55 and 0.807, respectively). In vitro
assays revealed that genetic modulation of KITENIN was significantly
related with tumor cell invasion & migration. Up-regulated KITENIN
expression significantly affected the survival rate possibly due to
increased invasiveness in orthotopic mouse glioma models.Conclusion:
Strong KITENIN expression was more likely to be observed in high-grade
gliomas and its up-regulation was associated with increased invasiveness
supported by shorter survival rates in orthotopic mouse glioma models.

