Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel model to study the stroma-induced drug resistance in
glioblastoma cells


Glioblastomas (GBMs) are lethal cancers with a limited response to
chemotherapies. In order to study whether stromal cells convey drug
resistance to glioma cells, we have established a 3 D glioma
cell-specific bioluminescence assay which mimics the growth of glioma in
vivo and allows for direct measurements of tumor cell viability. With
lentiviral transfection experiments we have provided a panel of human
glioma cell lines stably expressing the luciferase reporter gene.
Luciferase expression was proportional to the number of glioma cells, but
not influenced by the presence of stromal cells. This way, Luciferase
signal detection could be used to monitor glioma cell viability following
treatment. Glioma cells alone or cultured with stromal cells can form 3 D
spheroids, then treated with Temozolomide and Doxorubicin. Through
comparative analysis, stromal cells influenced the sensitivity of
different chemotherapy drugs in several glioma cell lines. Experiment
also proved bioluminescence assay was more sensitive than MTS assay in
co-culture system. This glioma cell-specific bioluminescence platform
possibly provided a tool to screen stroma-induced changes in anti-tumor
drug activity. Using the platform, we will be able to screen FDA-approved
drugs on different glioma cell lines and biopsies, which will potentially
guide the selection of tumor associated stromal specific targets for
therapeutic validation.

