Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: STAT3 network dissection in ALK positive Anaplastic Large Cell
Lymphomas


Anaplastic large cell lymphoma (ALCL) represents a category of T-cell
Non-Hodgkin Lymphomas characterized by marked cellular pleomorphism, and
expression of CD30. Two systemic forms of ALCL are defined by the
presence or absence of chromosomal translocations involving the
Anaplastic Lymphoma Kinase (ALK) gene at 2p23 locus. Among several
pathways triggered by ALK signaling, it has been widely shown that the
constitutive activation of STAT3 is strictly required for ALK-mediated
transformation and survival.To discover essential mediators of STAT3
oncogenic activity that may represent feasible targets for ALCL
therapies, we performed gene and miRNA expression profiling experiments
in association with functional validation approaches. The transcriptome
of STAT3 was analysed in ALK positive ALCL cell lines using a tightly
controlled time course experimental condition, in which the STAT3
signalling was abrogated by an inducible short hairpin RNA (shRNA).Gene
expression profiling analysis identified a selected number of genes
(1730) specifically modulated by STAT3 silencing. A significant
overrepresentation of putative STAT3 binding sites was found in
regulatory regions of early down-regulated genes. Functional studies
using a shRNA lentiviral library established that Interferon Regulatory
Factor-4 (IRF4) targeting specifically affect cell viability of ALK+ ALCL
cells. In contrast, forced expression of IRF4 partially rescued STAT3
knock-down sustaining the survival of ALK+ cells.In a parallel
experiment, genome-wide miRNA expression profiling identified 48 miRNAs
concordantly modulated by the inducible knock down of ALK and STAT3.
Among these, we demonstrated that expression of miR-1792 cluster
significantly reverted STAT3 deprivation, sustaining both proliferation
and survival of ALCL cells.In conclusion, genes and miRNA expression
profiling associated to functional screenings allowed the identification
of new biologically relevant targets for ALK+ALCL. We speculate that IRF4
and miR-1792 cluster are involved in the lymphomagenesis of STAT3+ ALCL,
and that their inhibition might represent an alternative avenue to
interfere with ALK signaling in Anaplastic Large Cell Lymphomas.

