Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genomic, transcriptomic, and epigenomic analyses of gastric cancer
stem cells


Cancer stem cells are a small population of tumor cells with self-renewal
and differentiation capacity, and have been isolated from many types of
cancers including stomach. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying
the self-renewal and tumorigenic potential of cancer stem cells are
poorly understood. To understand the molecular characteristics of gastric
cancer stem cells (GCSC), we performed five kinds of experiments
including genomic (Exome-seq and Affymetrix SNP 6.0 array),
transcriptomic (RNA-seq and small RNA-seq), and epigenomic (MBD-seq)
analyses on GCSC, non-gastric cancer stem cells (non-GCSC), and normal
tissues from three gastric cancer patients. Among the five data sets,
miRNA changes were most significant between GCSC and non-GCSC showing
that 39.4% of miRNAs were down-regulated and 1.25% of miRNAs were
up-regulated in GCSC compared with non-GCSC. In RNA-seq, 217 (0.93%)
genes were up-regulated while 470 (2.02%) genes were down-regulated.
Gene-set analysis revealed that development-associated biological
processes such as epidermis development and ectoderm development were
most enriched terms. In MBD-seq, there were 2.80% of hypermethylated and
2.38% of hypomethylated genes in GCSC compared with non-GCSC. Detailed
lists of genes, gene-sets and biological pathways that distinguish GCSC
from non-GCSC will be presented and discussed.

