Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Long-term metformin use reduces gastric cancer risk in type 2
diabetics without insulin treatment: a nationwide cohort study


Background: Metformin use has been associated with a decreased incidence
and mortality of various cancers.Aim: The aim of this study was to
evaluate the association between metformin use and gastric
cancer.Methods: We randomy selected 100,000 type 2 diabetic patients from
the 2004 Korean National Health Insurance claim database, and assessed
gastric cancer incidence among 39,989 patients (aged 30-97 years) who
were regularly treated with anti-diabetic drugs and followed-up from 2004
to 2010. In total, 26,690 patients had used metformin out of 32,978
diabetics who had not regularly used insulin (insulin non-users), and
5,855 patients had used metformin out of 7,011 regular insulin
users.Results: Patients who used metformin showed a lower incidence of
gastric cancer than those who did not use metformin, in insulin non-users
(P=0.047, log-rank test). However, in patients on regular insulin, there
was no difference of gastric cancer incidence according to metformin use.
In insulin non-users, the adjusted hazard ratio (AHR) for metformin use
was 0.73 (95% confidential interval [CI], 0.53-1.01) with borderline
statistical significance (P=0.059). Duration of metformin use was
associated with the reduction of gastric cancer risk (AHR, 0.88; 95% CI
0.81-0.96, P=0.003), especially in patients that used metformin for more
than 3 years (AHR, 0.57; 95% CI, 0.37-0.87; P=0.009).Conclusion:
Metformin use >3 years in type 2 diabetics who do not use insulin is
associated with significantly reduced gastric cancer risk.

