Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Glial origin for MYCN-driven medulloblastoma and targeted
prosenescence therapies


MYCN-amplified medulloblastoma is a poor-prognosis childhood brain tumor
with unknown cellular origin. Recently, we showed how MYCN overexpression
could generate tumors with high penetrance from a glutamate transporter
(GLT1) promoter in a transgenic model (GTML) of medulloblastoma. By using
Rosa26-lsl-LacZ reporters we also showed that GLT1-positive neural stem
cells represent presumed cells of tumor origin.Transgenic GTML mice
generate SHH-independent medulloblastoma 2-3 months after birth. Before
tumor onset GTML mice presented significantly more proliferation in
thalamic forebrain cells and in Bergmann glia in the cerebellum as
compared to corresponding normal brain. Strikingly, adult GTML mice also
show proliferative capacity in the Bergmann glia cell population in
response to MYCN oncogene activity, further connecting this population to
medulloblastoma development. Retroviral tagging using the RCAS/tv-a
system marked BLBP- or GFAP-positive tumor initiating cells and
expression analysis could further determine genetic profiles of glial
origin.Interestingly, MYCN levels and early proliferation of brain tumors
could be reduced by specific CDK2-inhibition by Milciclib or by using the
bromodomain inhibitor JQ1. Treatment studies revealed a need for
sustained treatment over 7-10 days to effectively abolish tumor cell
proliferation. Both treatment strategies induced tumor cell senescence as
seen by SA-beta-gal staining and by downregulated levels of Lamin B1. Our
data suggest that tumors generated arise from radial glia or Bergmann
glia in this medulloblastoma model and that dual inhibition of CDK2 and
bromodomains suppresses tumor growth by targeting MYCN.

