Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inter-individual variation in MUC5B allele specific expression in
normal bronchial epithelial cells and relationship to lung cancer


Background: Familial interstitial pneumonia and idiopathic pulmonary
fibrosis are associated with increased risk of lung cancer. Seibold et al
(NEJM, 2011) recently identified a common variant in the putative
promoter of MUC5B (rs35705950) associated with level of MUC5B expression
in lung tissue and also with development of these diseases. The goal of
this study was to determine whether the MUC5B rs35705950 variant is
associated with a) MUC5B allele-specific expression (ASE) or total
expression in normal bronchial epithelial cells (NBEC) or b) lung cancer
risk. Through funding in part from RC2 CA148572 and HL108016 we collected
NBEC samples from over 500 subjects with lung cancer or at risk for lung
cancer. Methods: This was a pilot study of 85 subjects (26 cancer cases
and 59 non-cancer controls). RNA was extracted from normal bronchial
airway brush NBEC specimens of 85 subjects and reverse transcribed. Using
next generation sequencing (NGS), allele-specific expression (ASE) was
measured as allelic imbalance in each cDNA at three marker SNPs in MUC5B
coding region (rs2075859, rs2943510, and rs4963059) selected for common
(>0.05) minor allele frequency, using matched peripheral blood cell gDNA
as a control. Specifically, each cDNA and matched gDNA sample was
subjected to targeted competitive template multiplex PCR amplicon library
generation followed by NGS (Blomquist et al, PLOS one, 2013) on Illumina
Hiseq platform. This NGS method controlled for inter-target variation in
PCR amplification during library preparation by measuring each transcript
native template relative to a known number of synthetic competitive
template internal standard copies. The genotype at putative
cis-regulatory SNP rs35705950 was assessed in gDNA from 95 subjects (31
cancer cases and 64 non-cancer controls) including those assessed for ASE
using a TaqMan SNP assay. Results: There was significant (p3 log) but not
associated with lung cancer. Conclusions: These results support previous
observations that there is significant inter-individual variation in
cis-regulation of MUC5B in NBEC and suggest that this variation also may
contribute to inherited lung cancer risk. Lack of association between
rs35705950 genotype and MUC5B ASE may have been due to role of other
cis-regulatory factors, and/or environmentally associated transfactors
that contributed to large inter-individual variation in total MUC5B
expression.

