Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RUNX2 rescues the inhibitory effect of FGFR-2 silencing and
increases the metastatic potential of IBH-6 human breast cancer xenografts


Carcinoma associated fibroblasts participate in the regulation of breast
cancer growth. We have shown that FGF2 is one of the growth factors
involved in tumor progression that activates FGFR-2 and progesterone
receptors (PR) increasing the proliferation of breast cancer cells
(Cerliani et al, Cancer Res 2011). In addition, we have also shown an
increased expression of RUNX2 in tumor cells with acquired hormone
independence. It has been suggested that RUNX2 regulates the expression
of FGFR2, and on the other hand that FGF2 increases RUNX2 expression. The
aim of this study was to evaluate the interplay between FGFR-2 and RUNX2
using a human breast cancer xenograft model. IBH-6 cells express ER, PR,
FGFR 1 to 4 and RUNX2 and grow in vivo in immunocompromised mice without
hormone supply giving rise to invasive carcinomas. IBH-6 cells were
stably transfected with a specific plasmid designed to knock down the
expression of FGFR-2 (shFGFR-2) or with a control plasmid (Scrambled,
SC). The decrease of FGFR-2 was confirmed by Western Blot and
immunohistochemistry. No differences were found between both cell lines
in the proliferation assays performed in vitro. For the in vivo
experiments, 3.106 cells were s.c. inoculated into the flank of nude mice
(nu/nu). The shFGFR-2 tumors were significantly smaller than control
tumors (pCarcinoma associated fibroblasts participate in the regulation
of breast cancer growth. We have shown that FGF2 is one of the growth
factors involved in tumor progression that activates FGFR-2 and
progesterone receptors (PR) increasing the proliferation of breast cancer
cells (Cerliani et al, Cancer Res 2011). In addition, we have also shown
an increased expression of RUNX2 in tumor cells with acquired hormone
independence. It has been suggested that RUNX2 regulates the expression
of FGFR2, and on the other hand that FGF2 increases RUNX2 expression. The
aim of this study was to evaluate the interplay between FGFR-2 and RUNX2
using a human breast cancer xenograft model. IBH-6 cells express ER, PR,
FGFR 1 to 4 and RUNX2 and grow in vivo in immunocompromised mice without
hormone supply giving rise to invasive carcinomas. IBH-6 cells were
stably transfected with a specific plasmid designed to knock down the
expression of FGFR-2 (shFGFR-2) or with a control plasmid (Scrambled,
SC). The decrease of FGFR-2 was confirmed by Western Blot and
immunohistochemistry. No differences were found between both cell lines
in the proliferation assays performed in vitro. For the in vivo
experiments, 3.106 cells were s.c. inoculated into the flank of nude mice
(nu/nu). The shFGFR-2 tumors were significantly smaller than control
tumors (p<0.001), showed a less aggressive phenotype, a lower
proliferation index (Ki67, pCarcinoma associated fibroblasts participate
in the regulation of breast cancer growth. We have shown that FGF2 is one
of the growth factors involved in tumor progression that activates FGFR-2
and progesterone receptors (PR) increasing the proliferation of breast
cancer cells (Cerliani et al, Cancer Res 2011). In addition, we have also
shown an increased expression of RUNX2 in tumor cells with acquired
hormone independence. It has been suggested that RUNX2 regulates the
expression of FGFR2, and on the other hand that FGF2 increases RUNX2
expression. The aim of this study was to evaluate the interplay between
FGFR-2 and RUNX2 using a human breast cancer xenograft model. IBH-6 cells
express ER, PR, FGFR 1 to 4 and RUNX2 and grow in vivo in
immunocompromised mice without hormone supply giving rise to invasive
carcinomas. IBH-6 cells were stably transfected with a specific plasmid
designed to knock down the expression of FGFR-2 (shFGFR-2) or with a
control plasmid (Scrambled, SC). The decrease of FGFR-2 was confirmed by
Western Blot and immunohistochemistry. No differences were found between
both cell lines in the proliferation assays performed in vitro. For the
in vivo experiments, 3.106 cells were s.c. inoculated into the flank of
nude mice (nu/nu). The shFGFR-2 tumors were significantly smaller than
control tumors (p<0.001), showed a less aggressive phenotype, a lower
proliferation index (Ki67, p<0.01), diminished ratio of pErk/Erk and
pAkt/Akt (pCarcinoma associated fibroblasts participate in the regulation
of breast cancer growth. We have shown that FGF2 is one of the growth
factors involved in tumor progression that activates FGFR-2 and
progesterone receptors (PR) increasing the proliferation of breast cancer
cells (Cerliani et al, Cancer Res 2011). In addition, we have also shown
an increased expression of RUNX2 in tumor cells with acquired hormone
independence. It has been suggested that RUNX2 regulates the expression
of FGFR2, and on the other hand that FGF2 increases RUNX2 expression. The
aim of this study was to evaluate the interplay between FGFR-2 and RUNX2
using a human breast cancer xenograft model. IBH-6 cells express ER, PR,
FGFR 1 to 4 and RUNX2 and grow in vivo in immunocompromised mice without
hormone supply giving rise to invasive carcinomas. IBH-6 cells were
stably transfected with a specific plasmid designed to knock down the
expression of FGFR-2 (shFGFR-2) or with a control plasmid (Scrambled,
SC). The decrease of FGFR-2 was confirmed by Western Blot and
immunohistochemistry. No differences were found between both cell lines
in the proliferation assays performed in vitro. For the in vivo
experiments, 3.106 cells were s.c. inoculated into the flank of nude mice
(nu/nu). The shFGFR-2 tumors were significantly smaller than control
tumors (p<0.001), showed a less aggressive phenotype, a lower
proliferation index (Ki67, p<0.01), diminished ratio of pErk/Erk and
pAkt/Akt (p<0.05) and a decrease in CCND1 and RUNX2 expression as
compared with control SC tumor samples. In order to evaluate if RUNX2 was
able to bypass the inhibitory effect of shFGFR-2, cells were
cotransfected with the expression plasmid for RUNX2 and were then
inoculated in mice as previously described. An increase in tumor size and
in aggressiveness associated with higher levels of CCND1 was observed in
shFGFR-2/RUNX2 as compared with control (pCarcinoma associated
fibroblasts participate in the regulation of breast cancer growth. We
have shown that FGF2 is one of the growth factors involved in tumor
progression that activates FGFR-2 and progesterone receptors (PR)
increasing the proliferation of breast cancer cells (Cerliani et al,
Cancer Res 2011). In addition, we have also shown an increased expression
of RUNX2 in tumor cells with acquired hormone independence. It has been
suggested that RUNX2 regulates the expression of FGFR2, and on the other
hand that FGF2 increases RUNX2 expression. The aim of this study was to
evaluate the interplay between FGFR-2 and RUNX2 using a human breast
cancer xenograft model. IBH-6 cells express ER, PR, FGFR 1 to 4 and RUNX2
and grow in vivo in immunocompromised mice without hormone supply giving
rise to invasive carcinomas. IBH-6 cells were stably transfected with a
specific plasmid designed to knock down the expression of FGFR-2
(shFGFR-2) or with a control plasmid (Scrambled, SC). The decrease of
FGFR-2 was confirmed by Western Blot and immunohistochemistry. No
differences were found between both cell lines in the proliferation
assays performed in vitro. For the in vivo experiments, 3.106 cells were
s.c. inoculated into the flank of nude mice (nu/nu). The shFGFR-2 tumors
were significantly smaller than control tumors (p<0.001), showed a less
aggressive phenotype, a lower proliferation index (Ki67, p<0.01),
diminished ratio of pErk/Erk and pAkt/Akt (p<0.05) and a decrease in
CCND1 and RUNX2 expression as compared with control SC tumor samples. In
order to evaluate if RUNX2 was able to bypass the inhibitory effect of
shFGFR-2, cells were cotransfected with the expression plasmid for RUNX2
and were then inoculated in mice as previously described. An increase in
tumor size and in aggressiveness associated with higher levels of CCND1
was observed in shFGFR-2/RUNX2 as compared with control (p<0.05) or
shFGFR-2 (pCarcinoma associated fibroblasts participate in the regulation
of breast cancer growth. We have shown that FGF2 is one of the growth
factors involved in tumor progression that activates FGFR-2 and
progesterone receptors (PR) increasing the proliferation of breast cancer
cells (Cerliani et al, Cancer Res 2011). In addition, we have also shown
an increased expression of RUNX2 in tumor cells with acquired hormone
independence. It has been suggested that RUNX2 regulates the expression
of FGFR2, and on the other hand that FGF2 increases RUNX2 expression. The
aim of this study was to evaluate the interplay between FGFR-2 and RUNX2
using a human breast cancer xenograft model. IBH-6 cells express ER, PR,
FGFR 1 to 4 and RUNX2 and grow in vivo in immunocompromised mice without
hormone supply giving rise to invasive carcinomas. IBH-6 cells were
stably transfected with a specific plasmid designed to knock down the
expression of FGFR-2 (shFGFR-2) or with a control plasmid (Scrambled,
SC). The decrease of FGFR-2 was confirmed by Western Blot and
immunohistochemistry. No differences were found between both cell lines
in the proliferation assays performed in vitro. For the in vivo
experiments, 3.106 cells were s.c. inoculated into the flank of nude mice
(nu/nu). The shFGFR-2 tumors were significantly smaller than control
tumors (p<0.001), showed a less aggressive phenotype, a lower
proliferation index (Ki67, p<0.01), diminished ratio of pErk/Erk and
pAkt/Akt (p<0.05) and a decrease in CCND1 and RUNX2 expression as
compared with control SC tumor samples. In order to evaluate if RUNX2 was
able to bypass the inhibitory effect of shFGFR-2, cells were
cotransfected with the expression plasmid for RUNX2 and were then
inoculated in mice as previously described. An increase in tumor size and
in aggressiveness associated with higher levels of CCND1 was observed in
shFGFR-2/RUNX2 as compared with control (p<0.05) or shFGFR-2 (p<0.01)
tumors. Interestingly, a high number of lung and liver metastases were
observed in all the shFGFR-2/RUNX2 animals. Our results indicate that
FGFR-2 is a key protein involved in mammary tumor growth. The fact that
no changes were registered between shFGFR-2 and control cells growing in
plastic lends support to our hypothesis postulating a paracrine effect
between stromal and parenchymal tissue involving FGFR-2. Since RUNX2
bypasses the inhibitory effect induced by shFGFR-2 we propose that the
signaling pathways involved are FGFR-2-independent supporting the
hypothesis that FGF2 activates FGFR-2 and in turn RUNX2. Currently we are
studying the signaling pathways involved in RUNX2 mediated tumor growth.
The results reported here emphasize the use of FGFR-2 inhibitors in
combination with standard therapy in breast cancer.

