Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genome-wide molecular characterization of CIMP positive stage III
colon cancer using cDNA microarray analysis


Background: The CpG island methylator phenotype (CIMP) is a distinctive
subtype of colon cancers, which leads to the loss of tumor suppressor
gene functions by epigenetic regulation. However, molecular
characteristics of CIMP+ cancers are not fully understood. Here, we aimed
to elucidate the different patterns of gene expression according to the
CIMP status.Method: 158 patients with stage III colon cancer were
enrolled for the analysis of CIMP status. Pyrosequencing was used to
examine the methylation status of 7 CpG island loci (p14, p16, MINT1,
MINT2, MINT31, hMLH1, and WNT5a) in DNA extracted from formalin-fixed
paraffin-enbedded specimens. Gene expression analyses of the same samples
were also performed using a human cDNA microarray to identify molecular
signatures.Result: Among the 158 patients, 31 (19.3%) were CIMP+.
Microarray results revealed distinctive gene expression profiles between
CIMP+ and CIMP- cancers. Among 57 genes which showed significant changes
between CIMP+ and CIMP- cancers, Axin2, the canonical Wnt suppressor,
displayed the strongest correlation with the CIMP status (p=0.007). Axin2
was downregulated in CIMP+ cancers compared to CIMP- cancers (p=0.005).
In terms of disease-free survival (DFS), tumors with low Axin2 expression
showed poor prognosis compared to tumors with high Axin2 expression in
microsatellite stable (MSS) patients (p=0.038), while there were no
significant changes in DFS of microsatellite instable (MSI) patients
(p=0.32). These findings indicate the clinical importance of epigenetic
silencing of Axin2 and the subsequent activation of Wnt signaling pathway
in MSS colon cancer patients.Conclusion: Axin2 is downregulated in CIMP+
stage III colon cancer patients and the consequent decreased expression
of Axin2 is a poor prognostic factor for the DFS in MSS patients.

