Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The ALK inhibitor LDK378 overcomes crizotinib resistance in
non-small cell lung cancer


Non-small cell lung cancers (NSCLC) harboring anaplastic lymphoma kinase
(ALK) gene rearrangements are sensitive to the ALK tyrosine kinase
inhibitor (TKI) crizotinib. However, these cancers invariably relapse due
to the development of resistance, and approximately 1/3 of such cancers
develop resistance mutations within the ALK tyrosine kinase domain. Here
we report the preclinical evaluation of the next-generation ALK TKI,
LDK378 in the setting of crizotinib resistance. Using EML4-ALK mutant
Ba/F3 cellular models, in vivo models of acquired resistance to
crizotinib, and novel cell lines established from biopsies of
crizotinib-resistant NSCLC patients, we have examined the efficacy of
LDK378 in crizotinib-nave and -resistant ALK-positive cancers. These
studies reveal that LDK378 is more potent than crizotinib and effectively
overcomes resistance in vitro and in vivo. In particular, LDK378 inhibits
ALK harboring crizotinib resistance mutations, including L1196M, G1269A,
I1171T and S1206Y. Cell lines derived from crizotinib-resistant biopsies
were sensitive to LDK378, including one that did not harbor an ALK
resistance mutation and was also sensitive to crizotinib, suggesting that
some crizotinib-resistant cancers with wildtype ALK are still sensitive
to complete ALK inhibition. We observed that LDK378 did not effectively
overcome two crizotinib-resistant ALK mutations, G1202R and F1174CALK,
and mutations in one of these residues was identified in 5 out of 11
biopsies from patients with acquired resistance to LDK378. Altogether our
results demonstrate that LDK378 can overcome many mechanisms of
crizotinib resistance, consistent with emerging clinical data showing
marked efficacy of LDK378 in patients with crizotinib-resistant disease.

