Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Disrupting p53:Mdm2 and p53:Mdm4 - Comparative cell-based assays
for drug screening


The important interconnected protein-protein interactions between the
tumor suppressor p53 and its regulatory binding partners Mdm2 and Mdm4 (=
MdmX/ HdmX) are implicated in pathogenesis of various cancers. However,
until now there is a lack of reversible cell-based assays for concurrent
analysis for both PPIs: p53/Mdm2 and p53/Mdm4. Our aim was to develop two
comparative assays based on the Fluorescent 2-Hybrid (F2H) assay
principle, which enable side-by-side analysis of antagonistic
compounds.The F2H assay is a fully reversible microscopy-assisted assay
for the direct intracellular analysis of PPIs. It offers a fast and
straight-forward readout: an interaction-dependent co-localization of two
fluorescent signals at a defined spot in the nucleus of mammalian
cells.With these assays we analyzed a set of newly developed stapled
peptides as potent p53:Mdm2 and/ or p53:Mdm4 inhibitors. Live cell data
generated by the F2H assays enabled us to discriminate and describe the
peptides according to their ability to penetrate into the cells, their
efficacy on the PPIs and their cytotoxic side effects in one single
assay.In parallel we performed a pilot F2H screen with a sub-set or 20
small molecule compounds (including Nutlin-3) that exhibited activity
against one or both interactions at various potencies in ELISAs before.
We could identify 5 potent compounds, which were dramatically reducing
the number of p53:Mdm2 interactions. However, none of the small
molecules, but only the stapled peptides exhibited an intracellular
activity on p53:Mdm4. Furthermore, we were able to expand these assays
and to identify mutants of Mdm2 resistant to Nutlin inhibition.In
summary, we show that the p53:Mdm2 and p53:Mdm4 F2H assays described
here,- enable side-by-side analysis of substances' dual Mdm2-Mdm4
activity- are suitable for screening and testing various types of
compounds, such as peptidic inhibitors or small molecules- concurrently
provide initial data on compound cell-permeability and cytotoxicity-
allow real-time visualization of PPI dynamics in living cells.

