Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A perfused 3D co-culture model of vemurafenib-resistant melanoma


Background: Vemurafenib(VF) is highly active against melanomas with a
BRAFV600E mutation. Although remarkable clinical responses occur,
progression ensues, in part due to innate resistance driven by the tumor
micro-environment (TME). 2D co-culture screens have demonstrated that the
cMet-HGF axis is an important mediator of TME-associated resistance.
However, many aspects of the TME including cell-extracellular matrix
(ECM), ligand-receptor interactions and signaling are different in 3D
versus 2D cultures, thus potentially limiting the clinical utility of a
2D co-culture screen. We report our initial results of a 3D perfused
co-culture model of VF-resistant melanoma as a clinically relevant screen
for identifying agents and combinations to revert VF resistance. Methods:
Media conditions, 3D hydrogel scaffolds and cell ratios were optimized
prior to establishing 3D co-cultures. Stromal components and tumor cells
were assessed for adaptation to 3D perfused conditions using the 3DKUBE
segregated co-culture plasticware. Multi-syringe pumps achieved flow
rates of 10ul/min. Analysis consisted of cell viability, dsDNA
quantification, confocal imaging and immunoassays (secreted HGF and
c-Met). Results: Fibroblast HGF production correlated with increasing
cell numbers in 3D perfusion, but not in 2D and there was significantly
more HGF produced by fibroblasts in 3D perfusion (2504 v 1639 pg/ml,
pBackground: Vemurafenib(VF) is highly active against melanomas with a
BRAFV600E mutation. Although remarkable clinical responses occur,
progression ensues, in part due to innate resistance driven by the tumor
micro-environment (TME). 2D co-culture screens have demonstrated that the
cMet-HGF axis is an important mediator of TME-associated resistance.
However, many aspects of the TME including cell-extracellular matrix
(ECM), ligand-receptor interactions and signaling are different in 3D
versus 2D cultures, thus potentially limiting the clinical utility of a
2D co-culture screen. We report our initial results of a 3D perfused
co-culture model of VF-resistant melanoma as a clinically relevant screen
for identifying agents and combinations to revert VF resistance. Methods:
Media conditions, 3D hydrogel scaffolds and cell ratios were optimized
prior to establishing 3D co-cultures. Stromal components and tumor cells
were assessed for adaptation to 3D perfused conditions using the 3DKUBE
segregated co-culture plasticware. Multi-syringe pumps achieved flow
rates of 10ul/min. Analysis consisted of cell viability, dsDNA
quantification, confocal imaging and immunoassays (secreted HGF and
c-Met). Results: Fibroblast HGF production correlated with increasing
cell numbers in 3D perfusion, but not in 2D and there was significantly
more HGF produced by fibroblasts in 3D perfusion (2504 v 1639 pg/ml,
p<.05). Melanoma spheres maintained cell viability better in Matrigel
versus Matrigel:Collagen mix and retained 3D structure in perfused
co-culture for 7 days. VF showed increased activity in melanoma spheroids
in 3D ECM-free static cultures versus 2D monolayer (IC50 0.016uM v
15.79M). There was a concentration-dependent response but reduced
activity of VF against perfused 3D melanoma spheroids embedded in ECM,
whereas there was no effect of VF against perfused melanoma spheroids in
co-culture. Conclusion: V600E melanoma cells are extremely sensitive to
BRAF targeting in 3D ECM free spheroids as compared with 2D monolayers.
Clinical resistance is mimicked by a more complex 3D TME comprising ECM,
perfusion and segregated co-culture of HGF-secreting fibroblasts in 3D.
Mechanistic studies are ongoing to identify specific factors critical for
VF resistance, including HGF/cMet axis interrogation. Future Direction:
The ultimate goal is to establish clinically relevant 3D perfused
co-culture models to identify novel agents or combinations which will
overcome TME-mediated resistance to VF and other targeted agents. Future
efforts are focused on incorporation of well characterized primary
malignant epithelial cells with defined stromal components in the 3D
perfused co-culture model in order to better identify combinations of
multitargeted agents in both the preclinical(lead compound selection) and
the co-clinical process (patient selection).

