Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PIK3CA hotspot mutations are present at a relatively high
frequency in CTCs of operable and metastatic breast cancer patients


Introduction: Molecular characterization of CTC is crucial for the
investigation of molecular targeted therapies. PIK3CA somatic mutations
play a crucial role in response to molecular targeted therapies. We
detected PIK3CA mutations at a high frequency in CTC after developing and
validating an ultra-sensitive methodology, based on a combination of
allele-specific, asymmetric rapid PCR and melting analysis.Patient and
Methods: After optimizing and validating our assay in terms of
sensitivity, specificity and robustness, we detected PIK3CA hotspot
mutations in EpCAM positive CTCs from 57 metastatic and 118 early breast
cancer patients, 26 healthy individuals and 76 corresponding primary
tumors. Rapid Real-PCR and melting were performed in triplicate for all
samples in the LightScanner32 (Idaho USA), in the presence of LC-Green
Plus saturating dye.Results: The assay could detect 0.05% of mutated
dsDNA in the presence of 99.95% wtDNA for both exons and was highly
specific (0/26 healthy). We identified PIK3CA mutations in EpCAM positive
CTC in 20/57(35.1%) metastatic and in 23/118(19.5%) operable breast
cancer patients. In corresponding primary tumors, 45/76(59.2%) samples
were positive. Patients with verified metastasis carrying PIK3CA
mutations on CTC had significant shorter OS than those
without.Conclusions: We report for the first time that PIK3CA hotspot
mutations are present at a relatively high frequency in CTC both in
metastatic and operable breast cancer. The presence of PIK3CA mutations
in CTC is associated with worse survival in patients with verified
metastasis. Evaluation of PIK3CA mutational status on CTCs is a strategy
with potential clinical application.

