Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dietary feeding of Kava root extract inhibits prostate
carcinogenesis in the transgenic adenocarcinoma of the mouse prostate
(TRAMP) model


Kava kava has been traditionally used to prepare beverages and herbal
medicines in the Pacific Islands. Men living in Fiji and drinking kava
have low incidence of prostate cancer (PCa). However, the PCa incidence
among Fijian men who had migrated to Australia, increased by 5.1-fold. To
determine the chemopreventive efficacy of kava root extracts, TRAMP mice
were fed with commercial kava root extract supplemented food. In the
prevention protocol, TRAMP mice were fed with 3 or 6 g (0.3% or 0.6%)
kava root extract /kg food starting at 6 weeks of age and ending at 12
weeks of age, resulting in decreased numbers of high-grade prostatic
intraepithelial neoplasia and moderately differentiated adenocarcinomas
in kava root extract fed mice compared to the mice fed with control food
(pKava kava has been traditionally used to prepare beverages and herbal
medicines in the Pacific Islands. Men living in Fiji and drinking kava
have low incidence of prostate cancer (PCa). However, the PCa incidence
among Fijian men who had migrated to Australia, increased by 5.1-fold. To
determine the chemopreventive efficacy of kava root extracts, TRAMP mice
were fed with commercial kava root extract supplemented food. In the
prevention protocol, TRAMP mice were fed with 3 or 6 g (0.3% or 0.6%)
kava root extract /kg food starting at 6 weeks of age and ending at 12
weeks of age, resulting in decreased numbers of high-grade prostatic
intraepithelial neoplasia and moderately differentiated adenocarcinomas
in kava root extract fed mice compared to the mice fed with control food
(p<0.01). In the intervention protocol, in which TRAMP mice were fed with
0.3% or 0.6% kava root extract food starting at 6 weeks of age and ending
at 24 weeks of age, the average genitourinary (GU) weight of 0.6% kava
root extract fed mice was significantly reduced when compared to control
food fed mice (1.982.07 gram vs.3.634.28 gram, p 0.9 gram) were also
decreased from 86.4% in the control group to 52.2% and 43.5% in 0.3 and
0.6 % kava food groups, respectively. In addition, we showed that kawain,
the main component of kava root extracts, inhibited LSD1 enzyme activity,
enhanced H3K9 dimethylation and decreased the mRNA expression of androgen
receptor target genes, including PSA and TMPRSS2, in LNCaP cells. Taken
together, these results suggested that dietary consumption of kava
products have the potential to reduce the risk of prostate cancer
development.

