Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Selective inhibition of mutant IDH1 via small molecule binding to
the dimer interface


Isocitrate dehydrogenases (IDHs) catalyze the oxidative decarboxylation
of isocitric acid to -ketoglutaric acid (KG). Point mutations in IDH1 and
IDH2 confer a neomorphic enzymatic activity: the reduction of KG to
D-2-hydroxyglutaric acid (2HG), which acts as an oncometabolite by
inducing hypermethylation of histones and DNA. IDH1 mutations
(predominantly R132H) have been found in 50-80% of grade II gliomas. To
find potential IDH1-targeted therapeutics, we conducted a full
small-molecule HTS and hit validation campaign using recombinant R132H
IDH1. This campaign identified Compound 1, which belongs to a
phenol-azole series, as a potent and selective inhibitor of mutant IDH1.
We investigated the mode of inhibition of Compound 1 and a published IDH1
mutant inhibitor with a different chemical scaffold (Compound 2).
Steady-state kinetics and biophysical studies showed that both inhibitors
reversibly interact with both free and substrate-bound enzyme at an
allosteric site. A crystal structure of Compound 1 complexed with R132H
demonstrates binding of the inhibitor at the dimer interface. A
competitive binding study showed that Compound 2 competes with Compound
1, suggesting that Compound 2 also binds at the dimer interface. This is
contrary to a previously published statement that Compound 2 is a
competitive inhibitor with respect to KG. In cancer cell lines engineered
to produce high levels of 2HG, both inhibitors penetrate cells
efficiently and inhibit 2HG production with minimal cell toxicity. This
study indicates that the dimer interface pocket is a druggable binding
site for IDH1 inhibitors, and suggests that Compound 1 is a promising new
starting point for future structure-based drug discovery efforts.

