Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ET-D5, first-in-class synthetic selective Protein Phosphatase 1
(PP1) inhibitor with anti-proliferative and anti-vascular activity


In this work we describe ET-D5, a synthetic small molecule
serine-threonine protein phosphatase inhibitor with proven in vivo
anti-mitotic and anti-vascular properties.The potential anti-cancer
properties of serine-threonine protein phosphatase inhibitors have been
identified since ancient times (extract from blister beetle mylabris was
used in China for cancer treatment as early as in 1264), and several,
mostly natural, inhibitors were evaluated in clinical trials. Their
development was, however, discontinued due to the toxic effects of these
non-selective (PP2A>>PP1) serine-threonine protein phosphatase
inhibitors.ET-D5 is a remarkably specific (PP1 versus PP2A) inhibitor
with potent anti-mitotic and anti-vascular activities. In vitro, ET-D5
display high efficacy against a wide range of human cancer cells (GI50
values determined were in low nM range for certain cell lines). In
addition, ET-D5 disrupts the in vitro preformed capillary tubes
(endothelial cells HMEC-1). In vivo experiments confirmed these
activities in numerous animal models of human cancer, such as cancer of
lung, brain, thyroid, kidney and ovaries.ET-D5 presents interesting
pharmacological properties, good toxicology profile and is also active
when administered per os. Contrary to many vascular-disrupting agents
(VDA) which target tubulin, ET-D5 exerts its activity by selectively
inhibiting in vivo protein-phosphatase I (PP1). We confirmed this
activity in classical pharmacodynamics experiments, showing PP1
inhibition in xenografted tumors after oral administration of ET-D5.Based
on all these results, ET-D5 is scheduled to enter clinical trials in
early 2015.

