Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HFE genotype affects tumor progression and macrophage behavior in
a mouse model


Introduction: Studies suggest that iron metabolism is associated with
tumor progression, but a mechanism and the relative importance of
different iron handling proteins still remain to be elucidated. We
investigated the effects of the frequently polymorphic high iron gene
(HFE), on tumor growth. This study is significant because of the ability
of HFE mutant protein to alter iron handling and because our previous
studies have shown the presence of this mutation is associated with
altered cancer phenotype in cells.Hypothesis: Mutations in the HFE
protein modify tumor progression and metastatic potential.Methods:
C57BL/6 mice possessing either H67D/H67D (H63D in humans) or WT/WT HFE
genotype, aged 18 months, were injected subcutaneously with 4x106 B16F10
cells. After 2 weeks, mice were sacrificed and the tumors were weighed
and prepared for analysis of RNA, protein, and histology. At the same
time, plasma was collected by cardiac puncture. Animal methods were
approved by our IACUC, protocol 04-166. RT-PCR analysis of tumors was
performed using the Mouse Cancer Pathwayfinder Array (SABiosciences). In
parallel, bone marrow derived macrophages were cultured to determine how
B16F10 cell cultures react to conditioned media from macrophages of each
genotype. ELISAs were performed for ferroportin and ferritin. Secreted
cytokine and chemokine content of macrophage media was assessed with an
ELISA array (Qiagen).Results: H67D mice had significantly smaller tumors
(t-test, P = 0.0166) after two weeks. The two-week time frame was
selected because rapid tumor growth affected animal survival at longer
incubations. Exploratory qRT-PCR analysis of tumors revealed that the
H67D host may promote epithelial phenotype and suppress angiogenesis and
growth. In culture, macrophages derived from H67D mice express higher
levels of MCP1 (p = 0.0169). Conditioned media from the H67D macrophages
was associated with significantly less B16F10 cell growth compared to WT
(p Introduction: Studies suggest that iron metabolism is associated with
tumor progression, but a mechanism and the relative importance of
different iron handling proteins still remain to be elucidated. We
investigated the effects of the frequently polymorphic high iron gene
(HFE), on tumor growth. This study is significant because of the ability
of HFE mutant protein to alter iron handling and because our previous
studies have shown the presence of this mutation is associated with
altered cancer phenotype in cells.Hypothesis: Mutations in the HFE
protein modify tumor progression and metastatic potential.Methods:
C57BL/6 mice possessing either H67D/H67D (H63D in humans) or WT/WT HFE
genotype, aged 18 months, were injected subcutaneously with 4x106 B16F10
cells. After 2 weeks, mice were sacrificed and the tumors were weighed
and prepared for analysis of RNA, protein, and histology. At the same
time, plasma was collected by cardiac puncture. Animal methods were
approved by our IACUC, protocol 04-166. RT-PCR analysis of tumors was
performed using the Mouse Cancer Pathwayfinder Array (SABiosciences). In
parallel, bone marrow derived macrophages were cultured to determine how
B16F10 cell cultures react to conditioned media from macrophages of each
genotype. ELISAs were performed for ferroportin and ferritin. Secreted
cytokine and chemokine content of macrophage media was assessed with an
ELISA array (Qiagen).Results: H67D mice had significantly smaller tumors
(t-test, P = 0.0166) after two weeks. The two-week time frame was
selected because rapid tumor growth affected animal survival at longer
incubations. Exploratory qRT-PCR analysis of tumors revealed that the
H67D host may promote epithelial phenotype and suppress angiogenesis and
growth. In culture, macrophages derived from H67D mice express higher
levels of MCP1 (p = 0.0169). Conditioned media from the H67D macrophages
was associated with significantly less B16F10 cell growth compared to WT
(p < 0.0001 MTT, p = 0.0008 BrdU). In macrophage cell lysates, H67D is
associated with higher levels of Ferroportin (p = 0.0297), and WT
macrophages showed higher iron levels in response to FAC (p =
0.0295).Conclusions: Tumors grown in H67D mice are significantly lower in
weight than control mice. Macrophages from H67D mice neither load iron
nor support tumor cell proliferation as well as WT controls. Our data
reveal the importance of HFE genotype on macrophage function and tumor
growth. The H63D HFE allele is seen in approximately 15% of the human
population so its impact on cancer studies is likely significant.

