Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of AMP-activated protein kinase in crosstalk between
apoptosis and autophagy in human colon cancer


Unresectable colorectal liver metastases remain major unsolved issues and
more effective regimens are urgently needed. During screening synergistic
drug combinations for colon cancer therapy, we identified a novel
multimodality treatment for colon cancer cells-chemotherapeutic agent
melphalan in combination with proteasome inhibitor bortezomib and mTOR
(mammalian target of rapamycin) inhibitor rapamycin. We showed in this
study that melphalan triggered apoptosis, bortezomib induced both
apoptosis and autophagy, rapamycin caused autophagy, and the
combinatorial treatment induced synergistic apoptosis which was mediated
through an increase in caspase activation. We observed that mitochondrial
dysfunction induced by the combination was linked with altered cellular
metabolism and induced AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) activation,
and thus resulted in Beclin-1 phosphorylated at Ser 93/96. Interestingly,
Beclin-1 phosphorylated at Ser 93/96 is sufficient to induce Beclin-1
cleavage by caspase 8 for switching off autophagy to achieve the
synergistic induction of apoptosis. The multimodality treatment-induced
Beclin-1 cleavage was abolished in Beclin-1 double mutant (D133A/D149A)
knock-in HCT116 cells, restoring the autophagy-promoting function of
Beclin-1 and suppressing the apoptosis induced by the combination
therapy. These observations provide a novel mechanism for AMPK induced
apoptosis through interplay between autophagy and apoptosis.

