Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Activation of tumor-initiated T cell priming and tumor destruction
with potent STING-activating cyclic dinucleotide derivatives


Cyclic dinucleotides (CDNs) are bacterial messengers that are sensed by
the host cytosolic surveillance pathway receptor, STING (Stimulator of
Interferon Genes). CDN binding to STING initiates a TLR-independent
signaling cascade through the TBK-1/IRF-3 axis, inducing type I
interferon (IFN) and other co-regulated genes central to host innate
defense. In response to binding cytosolic double-stranded DNA, a recently
discovered mammalian enzyme, cyclic GMP-AMP synthase (cGAS), synthesizes
CDNs that are structurally distinct from CDNs produced by bacteria. The
mammalian CDN has a phosphate bridge with 2-5 and 3-5 linkages that
increases its affinity for STING at least 10-fold. We show that mixed
linkage (ML) CDNs were more potent activators of human PBMCs as compared
to CDNs with canonical 3-5 phosphate linkages. Additionally, particular
ML CDN derivatives with sulfur atoms at non-bridging oxygens of the
internucleotide phosphate bridge were resistant to digestion by host cell
phosphodiesterases, and R,R di-thio CDN diastereomers demonstrated
increased potency in vitro and in vivo, as compared to either the R,S
di-thio CDN diastereomer, or unmodified CDNs. Strikingly, direct
injection of 2-week established flank B16 melanoma tumors with ML R,R
dithio-CDN derivatives significantly and profoundly inhibited tumor
growth, correlated with cytokine-mediated activation of NK and T
lymphocytes, induction of antigen-specific T cell immunity and long-term
survival. Anti-tumor efficacy was lost in mice encoding non-functional
STING. Similar results were observed in other tumor models. These results
demonstrate that CDNs have high translation potential for treatment
strategies to induce activation of the tumor microenvironment, leading to
effective tumor-initiated CD8+ T cell priming and anti-tumor efficacy.

