Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RUNX2 protects human neuroblastoma cells against apoptosis


Neuroblastoma is the most common extracranial pediatric solid tumor with
an undifferentiated status and is characterized by heterogeneous clinical
courses. The RUNX gene family comprises RUNX1, RUNX2, and RUNX3
transcription factors and is closely involved in a variety of cellular
processes including development, differentiation, and tumorigenesis.
Since RUNX genes play crucial roles in neuronal differentiation, we
studied the expression of RUNX mRNAs in human neuroblastoma NB1691 cells.
An increased RUNX2 mRNA expression was found in NB1691 cells compared
with RUNX1 and RUNX3 mRNAs. Hypoxia is known to be a significant
physiological stress in the tumor microenvironment and is associated with
tumor malignant phenotype. NB1691 cells exhibited an increased expression
of RUNX2 mRNA upon exposure to hypoxia compared with normoxic cells.
Knockdown of HIF-2, but not HIF-1, decreased hypoxia-induced up
regulation of RUNX2 mRNA in NB1691 cells. BothHIF-1 and HIF-2 mRNAs as
well as proteins were downregulated in hypoxic NB1691 cells treated with
RUNX2 siRNA compared with non-targeted control siRNA. GLUT1, a HIF-1
downstream target gene and Oct4, a HIF-2 downstream target gene were also
found to be decreased in RUNX2 siRNA-treated NB1691 cells exposed to
hypoxia. Runx2 knockdown using RNA interference in NB1691 cells resulted
in decreased cell proliferation under normoxic as well as hypoxic
conditions. An increased percentage of apoptotic cells was found in
NB1691 cells treated with RUNX2 siRNA, and this percentage further
increased in hypoxic NB1691 cells treated with RUNX2 siRNA. Further,
these observations were validated by TUNEL assay. Real-time PCR analysis
revealed elevated levels of Bax, Puma, Noxa and Nix in NB1691 cells
treated with RUNX2 siRNA compared with cells treated with non-targeted
control siRNA-treated cells under hypoxic conditions. In conclusion, our
study suggests that hypoxia up regulates RUNX2 in NB1691 cells in a HIF2-
dependent manner and RUNX2 protects neuroblastoma cells against apoptosis.

