Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Variations in the composition of inflammatory infiltrates are
associated with persistence or regression of bronchial dysplasia


INTRODUCTION: The clinical course of dysplastic bronchial lesions is
variable. While some regress, others progress to invasive carcinoma. We
sought to identify how variations in inflammatory infiltrates might
influence the clinical outcome of dysplastic bronchial lesions.METHODS
AND RESULTS: Gene expression microarray analyses identified 318 genes
that distinguish persistent from regressive bronchial dysplastic lesions.
Pathway analysis utilizing this genelist was performed using Ingenuity
software. Gene expression data showed several inflammation related
pathways with statistically different levels of activity in persistent
versus regressive lesions. Expression of genes associated with CD4
positive T-cells and HLA-DRA positive macrophages were both increased in
regressive lesions. To further investigate these findings, a similar set
of progressive and regressive lesions were selected for
immunohistochemical (IHC) analysis. For each biopsy, IHC for T-cell
markers CD3, CD4 and CD8 and macrophage marker CD68 was performed.
Immunohistochemically positive inflammatory cell subsets were counted in
a single high power field corresponding to the focus of maximum
inflammation. For each marker, separate counts for epithelium and
stroma-associated inflammation were performed. Preliminary IHC data (n=6)
shows a strong trend towards increased numbers of macrophages in the
dysplastic epithelium of regressive lesions (4.6 fold increase,
p=0.082).CONCLUSION: Our findings suggest that differences in
inflammatory cell subsets may distinguish persistent and regressive
bronchial dysplasia. Preliminary data points to CD4 positive T-cells and
intraepithelial macrophages as differentiating factors that correlate
with regression.

