Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PDGFR up-regulation mediated by Sonic Hedgehog Pathway activation
leads to BRAF inhibitor resistance in melanoma cells with BRAF mutation


Control of mutant BRAF(V600E) metastatic melanoma by BRAF inhibitor
(BRAF-I) is limited by intrinsic and acquired resistance. Up-regulation
of growth factor receptor such as platelet-derived growth factor receptor
(PDGFR) or insulin-like growth factor receptor (IGFR) is among the
mechanisms underlying BRAF-I resistance of melanoma cells. Here we
demonstrate for the first time that up-regulation of PDGFR, a growth
factor receptor which markedly differs in its functional properties from
its family member PDGFR, causes BRAF-I resistance in vitro and in vivo.
PDGFR inhibition by PDGFR-specific short hairpin RNA (shRNAs) and by
clinically available PDGFR inhibitors (sunitinib, imatinib and
crenolanib) restores and increases melanoma cells' sensitivity to BRAF-I
in vitro and in vivo. This effect reflects the inhibition of ERK and AKT
activation which is associated with BRAF-I resistance of melanoma cells.
PDGFR up-regulation is mediated by Sonic Hedgehog Homolog (Shh) pathway
activation which is induced by BRAF-I treatment. Similarly to PDGFR
inhibition, Shh inhibition by the novel small molecule LDE225 restores
and increases melanoma cells' sensitivity to BRAF-I in vitro and in vivo.
These effects are mediated by PDGFR down-regulation and by inhibition of
ERK and AKT activation. The clinical relevance of these data is indicated
by the association of PDGFR up-regulation in melanoma matched biopsies of
BRAF-I +/- MEK inhibitor treated patients with shorter time to disease
progression and less tumor regression. These findings suggest that
monitoring patients for early PDGFR up-regulation will facilitate the
identification of those who may benefit from the treatment with BRAF-I in
combination with clinically approved PDGFR or Shh inhibitors

