Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Detection of ALK, ROS1, and RET translocations in non-small cell
lung cancer (NSCLC) patients by intragenic differential expression
analysis


BACKGROUND: ALK, ROS1, and RET translocations are frequently detected in
NSCLC patients. Crizotinib, a tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI), was
approved by the FDA in 2011 to treat NSCLC in patients harboring ALK
translocations as detected by an FDA-approved assay. However, the
FDA-approved ALK FISH assay is technically challenging, with failures due
to pre-analytic variables. Another approach, intragenic differential
expression (IDE), detects translocations by comparing expression levels
of the 5 end with the 3 end of target gene transcripts. In this study we
developed and evaluated a rapid IDE assay to screen for ALK, ROS1, and
RET translocations, independent of the fusion partner.METHODS: A total of
419 samples (408 randomly-selected NSCLC clinical samples, ALK positive
and ROS1 positive cell lines (2 each), and 7 previously-tested
RET-positive clinical samples) were used to develop and evaluate
performance characteristics of the IDE assays. To determine IDE scores,
levels of ALK, ROS1, and RET expression were first determined by
quantitative RT-PCR measurement of the 5- and 3- ends of the respective
transcripts. The differences in expression levels were calculated as Ct
(Ct5 - Ct3). High Ct values indicate presumptive presence of gene
translocations. 212/408 NSCLC samples were analyzed by ALK FISH and
EML4-ALK RT-PCR, and 196/408 samples were analyzed by EML4-ALK
RT-PCR.RESULTS: Thirty-one of the 408 (7.6%) clinical samples tested
positive for ALK rearrangements by IDE. Among them, 20 were confirmed by
FISH and/or EML4-ALK (true positive, 64.5%), while 11 were negative by
FISH and/or EML4-ALK (false positive, 35.5%). One of 10 ALK FISH positive
samples tested negative by both ALK IDE and EML4-ALK RT-PCR analysis
(false negative), while one of 202 FISH-negative sample tested positive
by both EML4-ALK and ALK IDE. ALK IDE exhibited 94.5% (189/200)
concordance with ALK FISH and 96.0% (356/371) concordance with the
EML4-ALK assay. For ROS1, both ROS1-positive cell lines and 4/408 (1.0%)
NSCLC samples tested positive for ROS1 by IDE. Among the 4 IDE-positive
NSCLC samples, 1 was confirmed by ROS1 FISH. For RET, all 7 known
positives and 10/408 (2.5%) NSCLC samples tested positive by IDE. Three
of six RET IDE positive NSCLC samples were confirmed by RET FISH.
Overall, ALK, ROS1, and RET translocations were mutually exclusive in
NSCLC patients. The lung IDE assay had a failure rate of 3.7%.CONCLUSION:
These findings demonstrate the feasibility of using IDE to detect ALK,
ROS1, and RET gene translocations. These assays may have potential as a
screening tool to select patients for further confirmation by FISH for
TKI-targeted therapy. The IDE concept can be applied to a wide range of
somatic translocations.

