Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting vascular endothelial growth factor A and tumor hypoxia
combined with radiation eradicates sarcomas through destruction of tumor
vasculature and thwarting of the hypoxic response


Introduction: In a previous clinical trial, we demonstrated that
bevacizumab, an anti-vascular endothelial growth factor A (VEGF-A)
antibody, combined with radiation leads to >80% tumor necrosis in about
one-half of patients with soft tissue sarcomas. Sarcomas with a poor
response to this therapy had upregulation of hypoxia inducible factor 1
(HIF-1) and HIF-1 target genes. Here, we describe two trimodality
approaches to this problem: (1) blockade of HIF-1 using genetic or
pharmacologic inhibition and (2) destruction of hypoxic regions of tumors
using the hypoxia-activated chemotherapeutic, TH-302.Methods: Trimodality
therapies were used in a HT1080 fibrosarcoma xenograft model and the
LSL-KrasG12D/+/Trp53fl/fl genetically engineered mouse model of sarcoma.
Treated tumors were examined for effects on cancer cells and tumor
vasculature. Trimodality therapies were also studied in vitro on four
sarcoma cell lines and on two types of endothelial cells.Results: In both
mouse models, trimodality therapy with HIF-1 inhibition using low dose
doxorubicin or HIF-1 shRNA was significantly better than any bimodality
therapy in blocking tumor growth, with tumors growing to only 13-18% size
of controls. When hypoxic areas of tumors were targeted with TH-302, this
alternative trimodality therapy was again better than any bimodality
therapy in blocking sarcoma tumor growth (tumor size 9% of controls), and
tumors failed to grow after stopping treatment for more than 2 months.
Analysis of treated tumors demonstrated the predominant effect with both
trimodality therapies was through induction of endothelial cell apoptosis
(2.6-3.3 fold more than the best bimodality therapy) and destruction of
tumor vasculature (86-89% less microvessel density than controls). When
the effects of trimodality therapy were examined in vitro, decreases in
proliferation and colony formation and induction of apoptosis from
trimodality therapy were much more pronounced in tumor-derived
endothelial cells than in sarcoma cell lines.Conclusion: HIF-1 inhibition
or hypoxia-activated chemotherapy is effective when combined VEGF-A
inhibition and radiation in controlling sarcomas by maximizing
destruction of tumor vasculature and blocking the hypoxic response.
Clinical trials are currently in development using both these trimodality
strategies.

