Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CK2 inhibitor CX-4945 modulates AKT, NF-kB, TP53 and MEK inhibitor
PD-325901 targets AP1 mediated CK2 inhibitor drug resistance in head and
neck cancer


We previously identified upregulated kinase CK2 as an activator of NF-B
and repressor of TP53 in promoting the malignant phenotype of head and
neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC). Here, we investigate the anti-tumor
effects of a small molecule CK2 inhibitor CX-4945, alone and in
combination with MEK inhibitor PD-0325901 (PD-901), in human HNSCC models
in vitro and in vivo. CX-4945 IC50s ranged from 3.4 M to 11.9 M in 9
UMSCC cell lines. CX-4945 caused S and G2/M cell cycle arrest, and
induced sub-G0 DNA fragments, indicating cell death. CX-4945 inhibited
NF-B and BcL-XL prosurvival reporter genes in wild type (wt) TP53
(UMSCC1) and mutant (mt) TP53 (UMSCC46) cell lines, and concurrently
upregulated proapoptotic TP53, p21 and prosurvival AP-1 activity only in
the wtTP53 cell line. Correspondingly, CK2 phosphorylation of AKT S129 as
well as T308 and S473 prosurvival signaling was reduced in both cell
lines, but AP-1 inducing p-Erk1/2Thr202/204 was increased in the wtTP53
cell line. In the UMSCC1 xenografts, CX-4945 treatment significantly
decreased PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway signaling by immunostaining. While
CX-4945 increased TP53 and TUNEL apoptosis marker staining at early time
points (13 days after CX4945 treatment), an opposing increase in p-Erk,
FosL1, cJun, JunB, and proliferation (Ki67) were also observed.
Consistent with these opposing effects, no significant tumor reduction or
improvement in survival was observed by CX-4945 alone. However,
combination of CX-4945 with MEK/ERK inhibitor PD-901 exhibited
significant synergistic anti-proliferative effects in vitro. Significant
anti-tumor effects were observed with MEK inhibitor alone and in
combination with CX-4945 in vivo, further supporting a role for
MEK/ERK/AP-1 in resistance to CX-4945 in this HNSCC model.Supported by
NIH Medical Research Scholars Program and NIDCD intramural projects
ZIA-DC-000016, 73 and 74.

