Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synthesis and preclinical evaluation of novel 6-substituted
pyrrolo[2,3-d]pyrimidines as targeted antifolates


Reduced folates are essential cofactors for biosynthesis of purines and
pyrimidines. Since humans do not synthesize folate, it is necessary to
obtain these cofactors from dietary sources. In mammals, three
specialized systems exist that mediate membrane transport of folates and
antifolates across biological membranes. These include the reduced folate
carrier (RFC), the primary route for the uptake of folates and
antifolates in mammalian cells, folate receptors (FRs) and , and the
proton-coupled folate transporter (PCFT). Whereas RFC is ubiquitously
expressed, FRs and PCFT show a more narrow pattern of tissue expression.
Toxicity of clinically used antifolates occurs in part, to their lack of
selectivity for tumor cells over normal cells due to RFC transport.
Antifolates with tumor-specific FR and/or PCFT drug uptake would
circumvent major toxicities of currently used antifolates. Our analog
AG17F had shown selective FR and PCFT transport over RFC with excellent
cell inhibitory activity in KB tumor cell line (IC50 = 1.7 nM). On the
basis of AG17F, AG140F with sulfur in place of carbon at C10, AG182F with
oxygen in place of carbon at C10 and AG183F with nitrogen in place of
carbon at C10 were designed and synthesized. This isosteric replacement
of carbon with heteroatoms in the bridge provides compounds with
differentchain lengths, angles, conformations and extra hydrogen bond
donors and/or acceptors compared to the parent carbon chain analogues.
AG17F had shown inhibitory activity toward the growth of a CHO cell line
(hRFC) expressing human RFC (IC50 = 304 nM), the three heteroatom
analogues AG140F, AG182F and AG183F were inactive in the CHO cell line
expressing RFC transport at concentrations up to 1000 nM, but were highly
active in inhibiting CHO cell lines (RT16) expressing human FR (IC50s of
0.62, 1.10, and 2.3 nM respectively) and inhibiting PCFT-expressing CHO
cells (R2/PCFT4) (IC50s of 267, 57.3, and 87.4 nM respectively). AG140F,
AG182F, and AG183F were potently inhibitory toward KB tumor cells (IC50s
of 2, 0.32 and 0.34 nM respectively) and IGROV1 tumor cells (IC50s of
0.51, 0.58 and 0.48 nM respectively). AG140F, AG182F, and AG183F showed
binding affinities to FR in RT16 cells exceeding that for AG17F, and
comparable to folic acid. With R2/PCFT4 cells, all compounds showed high
affinities with binding (reflected in Ki values) in the order of
AG17F>AG182FAG183F>AG140F. In KB cells, adenosine and
5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide protected from growth inhibition
suggesting de novo purine biosynthesis and glycinamide ribonucleotide
formyltransferase (GARFTase) and the likely targets. By in situ assays in
KB cells, GARFTase inhibition was confirmed at concentrations similar to
those which inhibit cell proliferation. AG183F was further evaluated for
against early stage human IGROV tumor xenograft in female SCID mice
models and was found to be remarkably efficacious (T/C = 12%) without any
acute or long term toxicities.

