Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of lipolysis-stimulated lipoprotein receptor in directing
breast cancer cell behavior and subtype


The claudin-low molecular subtype of breast cancer is of particular
interest for clinically the majority of these tumors are poor prognosis,
triple negative, invasive ductal carcinomas. Claudin-low tumors are
characterized by low gene expression of cell junction and adhesion
proteins, and de-regulation of tight junction proteins is often been
implicated in tumorigenesis. Herein, we sought to define the role of
tricellular tight junction (tTJ) proteins in breast cancer and cancer
cell behavior with a focus on lipolysis-stimulated lipoprotein receptor
(LSR). LSR was expressed in epithelium, endothelium, adipose and stromal
cells within the healthy breast tissue, as well as in tumor epithelium.
LSR expression was significantly correlated with invasive ductal
carcinomas compared to invasive lobular carcinomas, and ER positive
tumors and breast cancer cell lines. Consistent with the role of LSR in
tTJs, LSR levels were significantly reduced in claudin-low breast cancer
cell lines. Functional studies illustrated that that re-introduction of
LSR into a claudin-low cell line suppressed the EMT phenotype and reduced
individual cell migration. However, our data suggest that LSR may direct
collective cell migration. Moreover, re-introduction of LSR in
claudin-low breast cancer cell lines reestablished a family of TJ
expression, thereby reverting claudin-low lines to other molecular
subtypes. Overexpression of LSR enhanced proliferation and survival in
anchorage independent conditions, suggesting that reestablishment of
tight junctions is not sufficient to inhibit aggressive cell behaviors in
vitro. Collectively, these data highlight an unanticipated role for the
tTJ protein, LSR in directing aggressive breast cancer behavior.

