Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Salmonella typhimurium A1-R inhibits surgically induced breast
cancer metastasis


We investigated the efficacy of tumor-targeting Salmonella typhimurium
A1-R in the perioperative period to eradicate micrometastatic disease.
Fifty female BALB/c mice were inoculated in the mammary fat pad with
metastatic murine mammary adenocarcinoma (4T1-RFP (3105/mouse), and
divided into five groups. Control group (n = 10) with no treatment;
surgery group (n = 10) in which the tumor was completely resected at day
21 after cell inoculation; Salmonella typhimurium A1-R (A1-R) (n = 10) in
which the primary tumor was treated with A1-R alone at day 10 after cell
inoculation; postoperative-administration of A1-R (n = 10) in which A1-R
was administrated only after the primary tumor was resected;
perioperative administration of A1-R (n = 10) in which A1-R was
administrated before and after the primary tumor was resected. Metastatic
tumor burden was assessed by quantitative fluorescence imaging of
metastasis. Efficacy was assessed by metastatic burden and survival. The
study showed that excision of the primary tumor was associated with
increased systemic metastatic burden, and postoperative metastases
exhibited increased proliferation (p We investigated the efficacy of
tumor-targeting Salmonella typhimurium A1-R in the perioperative period
to eradicate micrometastatic disease. Fifty female BALB/c mice were
inoculated in the mammary fat pad with metastatic murine mammary
adenocarcinoma (4T1-RFP (3105/mouse), and divided into five groups.
Control group (n = 10) with no treatment; surgery group (n = 10) in which
the tumor was completely resected at day 21 after cell inoculation;
Salmonella typhimurium A1-R (A1-R) (n = 10) in which the primary tumor
was treated with A1-R alone at day 10 after cell inoculation;
postoperative-administration of A1-R (n = 10) in which A1-R was
administrated only after the primary tumor was resected; perioperative
administration of A1-R (n = 10) in which A1-R was administrated before
and after the primary tumor was resected. Metastatic tumor burden was
assessed by quantitative fluorescence imaging of metastasis. Efficacy was
assessed by metastatic burden and survival. The study showed that
excision of the primary tumor was associated with increased systemic
metastatic burden, and postoperative metastases exhibited increased
proliferation (p < 0.05). A1-R alone treatment inhibited metastasis
compared to untreated control and surgery only (pWe investigated the
efficacy of tumor-targeting Salmonella typhimurium A1-R in the
perioperative period to eradicate micrometastatic disease. Fifty female
BALB/c mice were inoculated in the mammary fat pad with metastatic murine
mammary adenocarcinoma (4T1-RFP (3105/mouse), and divided into five
groups. Control group (n = 10) with no treatment; surgery group (n = 10)
in which the tumor was completely resected at day 21 after cell
inoculation; Salmonella typhimurium A1-R (A1-R) (n = 10) in which the
primary tumor was treated with A1-R alone at day 10 after cell
inoculation; postoperative-administration of A1-R (n = 10) in which A1-R
was administrated only after the primary tumor was resected;
perioperative administration of A1-R (n = 10) in which A1-R was
administrated before and after the primary tumor was resected. Metastatic
tumor burden was assessed by quantitative fluorescence imaging of
metastasis. Efficacy was assessed by metastatic burden and survival. The
study showed that excision of the primary tumor was associated with
increased systemic metastatic burden, and postoperative metastases
exhibited increased proliferation (p < 0.05). A1-R alone treatment
inhibited metastasis compared to untreated control and surgery only
(p<0.05). Post-operative A1-R treatment significantly inhabited
surgically-induced metastases (p0.05). Perioperative administration of
A1-R showed the best efficacy compared to all other treatments in
inhibiting surgery-induced metastasis (pWe investigated the efficacy of
tumor-targeting Salmonella typhimurium A1-R in the perioperative period
to eradicate micrometastatic disease. Fifty female BALB/c mice were
inoculated in the mammary fat pad with metastatic murine mammary
adenocarcinoma (4T1-RFP (3105/mouse), and divided into five groups.
Control group (n = 10) with no treatment; surgery group (n = 10) in which
the tumor was completely resected at day 21 after cell inoculation;
Salmonella typhimurium A1-R (A1-R) (n = 10) in which the primary tumor
was treated with A1-R alone at day 10 after cell inoculation;
postoperative-administration of A1-R (n = 10) in which A1-R was
administrated only after the primary tumor was resected; perioperative
administration of A1-R (n = 10) in which A1-R was administrated before
and after the primary tumor was resected. Metastatic tumor burden was
assessed by quantitative fluorescence imaging of metastasis. Efficacy was
assessed by metastatic burden and survival. The study showed that
excision of the primary tumor was associated with increased systemic
metastatic burden, and postoperative metastases exhibited increased
proliferation (p < 0.05). A1-R alone treatment inhibited metastasis
compared to untreated control and surgery only (p<0.05). Post-operative
A1-R treatment significantly inhabited surgically-induced metastases
(p0.05). Perioperative administration of A1-R showed the best efficacy
compared to all other treatments in inhibiting surgery-induced metastasis
(p<0.05) and prolonged survival (pWe investigated the efficacy of
tumor-targeting Salmonella typhimurium A1-R in the perioperative period
to eradicate micrometastatic disease. Fifty female BALB/c mice were
inoculated in the mammary fat pad with metastatic murine mammary
adenocarcinoma (4T1-RFP (3105/mouse), and divided into five groups.
Control group (n = 10) with no treatment; surgery group (n = 10) in which
the tumor was completely resected at day 21 after cell inoculation;
Salmonella typhimurium A1-R (A1-R) (n = 10) in which the primary tumor
was treated with A1-R alone at day 10 after cell inoculation;
postoperative-administration of A1-R (n = 10) in which A1-R was
administrated only after the primary tumor was resected; perioperative
administration of A1-R (n = 10) in which A1-R was administrated before
and after the primary tumor was resected. Metastatic tumor burden was
assessed by quantitative fluorescence imaging of metastasis. Efficacy was
assessed by metastatic burden and survival. The study showed that
excision of the primary tumor was associated with increased systemic
metastatic burden, and postoperative metastases exhibited increased
proliferation (p < 0.05). A1-R alone treatment inhibited metastasis
compared to untreated control and surgery only (p<0.05). Post-operative
A1-R treatment significantly inhabited surgically-induced metastases
(p0.05). Perioperative administration of A1-R showed the best efficacy
compared to all other treatments in inhibiting surgery-induced metastasis
(p<0.05) and prolonged survival (p<0.05).

