Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: mDX400, the murine analog against the anti-PD1 antibody MK-347 is
active in immunocompetent, autochthonous murine models of melanoma and
breast cancer


Although effective therapies exist for BRAF-mutant metastatic melanomas
(MM) and ER+/PR+/HER2+ breast cancers, fewer options are available for
the more aggressive triple negative breast cancers (TNBC) and Ras-mutant
MM. Immune infiltration is frequently observed in patient subsets with MM
or TNBC. An anti-tumor host immune response may be restrained by the
expression of immune checkpoint proteins, such as the programmed death 1
(PD1) protein. We evaluated mDX400, a murine version of the anti-PD-1
antibody MK-3475 that is currently in human clinical trials, in
genetically engineered murine models (GEMMs) of melanoma and breast
cancer (BC). PD1 antibody was used alone and in combination. Models
studied were for basal-like, TNBC (C3TAg), Claudin-Low breast cancer
p53null, luminal BC (MMTV-Her2/Neu), RAS-driven melanoma (Tyr-H-Ras and
null for Ink4a/Arf (TRIA)) and BRaf-mutant, Pten-deficient melanoma
(BRaf/Pten). Mice were housed, treated, and evaluated in the UNC
Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center Mouse Phase I Unit (MP1U). mDX400
and isotype antibody (10mg/kg IP qw) were supplied by Merck & Co., Inc.
Murine cohorts were assessed weekly and therapeutic intervention began
once tumors reached 40-64mm3. TNBC models were treated with Carboplatin
(C, 50mg/kg IP qwk) in combination with mDX400. mDX400 was administered
as a single agent in Melanoma GEMMs. Endpoints were maximal response at
21 days and median overall survival (OS). In the C3TAg BC model, mDX400
did not exhibit single-agent activity, but substantial synergy was
observed in combination with C [partial response (PR) or CR in 12 of 15
vs. 0 of 19 in non-treated animals, Fisher's exact p=0.006 or vs. C alone
5 of 13 animals, p=0.05] and prolonged OS (41 vs. 28 days in NT, log-rank
p=0.006 or C only 28 days, p=0.006) in the C3TAg model. Treatment with
single-agent mDX400 induced a marked response in the RAS-driven TRIA
melanoma model that is resistant to multiple systemic treatments.
mDX400-treated TRIA mice enjoyed an almost tripling of OS [median 56 vs.
21 days, p=0.006]. BRaf/Pten melanomas did not respond to mDX400.
Likewise mDX400 plus C provided no benefit to the p53null or
MMTV-Her2/Neu BC GEMMs vs. C alone. Our data show differential response
of PD-1 antibody therapies to various melanoma and BC models, the latter
in combination with C. The responsiveness of a RAS-driven melanoma model
to mDX400 is consistent with earlier reports about the clinical benefit
of patients with NRAS-mutant melanoma to Ipilimumab, and the lack of
PD-L1 expression and immune infiltrates of PTEN-deficient melanomas. At
the meeting we will report expression of PD-L1 and other immune
checkpoint proteins by cancer cells. The basis whereby carboplatin
potentiates the activity of anti-PD1 in TNBC is an area of ongoing study.

