Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The microRNA-218-survivin axis regulates cervical cancer cell
migration and invasion


MicroRNA (miR)-218 down-regulation has been reported in numerous human
malignancies. In cervical cancer, we identified that lower miR-218
expression was significantly associated with poorer overall survival,
disease-free survival, and pelvic/para-aortic lymph node recurrence.
Further analyses of cervical cancer data from The Cancer Genome Atlas
(TCGA) identified that this down-regulation was associated with a genomic
locus loss (hsa-mir-218-1:4p15.31, hsa-mir-218-2:5q34, n=105). The
objective of the current study was to elucidate the cellular and
molecular functions of miR-218. MiR-218 transfection into cervical cancer
cells (SiHa and ME-180) significantly reduced cell migration (by 66% and
89%, respectively), invasion (by 49% and 67%, respectively), and
clonogenic capacity (by 42% and 53%, respectively), relative to
control-transfected cells (PMicroRNA (miR)-218 down-regulation has been
reported in numerous human malignancies. In cervical cancer, we
identified that lower miR-218 expression was significantly associated
with poorer overall survival, disease-free survival, and
pelvic/para-aortic lymph node recurrence. Further analyses of cervical
cancer data from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) identified that this
down-regulation was associated with a genomic locus loss
(hsa-mir-218-1:4p15.31, hsa-mir-218-2:5q34, n=105). The objective of the
current study was to elucidate the cellular and molecular functions of
miR-218. MiR-218 transfection into cervical cancer cells (SiHa and
ME-180) significantly reduced cell migration (by 66% and 89%,
respectively), invasion (by 49% and 67%, respectively), and clonogenic
capacity (by 42% and 53%, respectively), relative to control-transfected
cells (P<0.05). In order to identify clinically relevant miR-218 target
genes, we used an integrated trimodal approach, incorporating DNA
microarray (Affymetrix Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0) analyses of 79
clinical samples, miR-218 transfection, and miRDB target prediction. The
most significant target was survivin (BIRC5); miR-218 transfection
confirmed a reduction in survivin mRNA and protein expression in both
SiHa and ME-180 cells. Furthermore, a direct interaction between the
survivin-3UTR and miR-218 was validated using a luciferase reporter
assay. siRNA knockdown of survivin in SiHa and ME-180 significantly
reduced cell migration (by 76% and 83%, respectively), invasion (by 79%
and 88%, respectively), and clonogenic capacity (by 98% and 97%,
respectively), relative to control cells (PMicroRNA (miR)-218
down-regulation has been reported in numerous human malignancies. In
cervical cancer, we identified that lower miR-218 expression was
significantly associated with poorer overall survival, disease-free
survival, and pelvic/para-aortic lymph node recurrence. Further analyses
of cervical cancer data from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) identified
that this down-regulation was associated with a genomic locus loss
(hsa-mir-218-1:4p15.31, hsa-mir-218-2:5q34, n=105). The objective of the
current study was to elucidate the cellular and molecular functions of
miR-218. MiR-218 transfection into cervical cancer cells (SiHa and
ME-180) significantly reduced cell migration (by 66% and 89%,
respectively), invasion (by 49% and 67%, respectively), and clonogenic
capacity (by 42% and 53%, respectively), relative to control-transfected
cells (P<0.05). In order to identify clinically relevant miR-218 target
genes, we used an integrated trimodal approach, incorporating DNA
microarray (Affymetrix Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0) analyses of 79
clinical samples, miR-218 transfection, and miRDB target prediction. The
most significant target was survivin (BIRC5); miR-218 transfection
confirmed a reduction in survivin mRNA and protein expression in both
SiHa and ME-180 cells. Furthermore, a direct interaction between the
survivin-3UTR and miR-218 was validated using a luciferase reporter
assay. siRNA knockdown of survivin in SiHa and ME-180 significantly
reduced cell migration (by 76% and 83%, respectively), invasion (by 79%
and 88%, respectively), and clonogenic capacity (by 98% and 97%,
respectively), relative to control cells (P<0.05). YM155, a
small-molecule survivin suppressant, effectively reduced survivin mRNA
and protein levels in a concentration- and time-dependent manner. This
compound correspondingly decreased cervical cancer cell proliferation and
clonogenic survival. Our results suggest that the miR-218-survivin axis
plays an important role in cervical cancer progression.

