Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The PI3K- inhibitor TGR-1202 in combination with Brentuximab
Vedotin (SGN-35) synergistically induces G2/M phase arrest and cell death
via inhibition of tubulin polymerization in Hodgkin lymphoma cell lines


Introduction: The phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) pathway is
consistently activated in relapsed/refractory Hodgkin lymphoma (HL),
suggesting that TGR-1202, a novel/selective inhibitor of the delta
isoform of PI3K (PI3K-), might represent an attractive therapeutic
option. The anti-CD30 monoclonal antibody, Brentuximab Vedotin (BV), has
recently been reported to induce an overall response rate of 75% in
relapsed/refractory HL, but is associated with limited response duration.
Combination therapies aimed at enhancing the anti-tumor activity of BV
may have significant clinical impact in the treatment of
relapsed/refractory HL. Our study was aimed at investigating the activity
and mechanism(s) of action of TGR-1202 in combination with BV in HL cell
lines.Methods and Results: The combination of TGR-1202 (10 M) and BV (10
ng/ml) synergistically inhibited the mean (SEM) growth of HL cells
(TGR-1202: -40 4%; BV: -30 2%; TGR-1202/BV: -85 1%). This finding was
associated with a 4-fold increase of G2/M phase (TGR-1202: 18 1%; BV: 18
1%; TGR-1202/BV: 72 3%), a 3-fold reduction of cells in S phase
(TGR-1202: 25 1%; BV: 23 1%; TGR-1202/BV: 9 1%), and a marked Cyclin B1
and p21 overexpression. Upon TGR-1202/BV treatment, cell death values
were increased 3-fold over single agents (TGR-1202: 27 2%; BV: 27 2%;
TGR-1202/BV: 75 2%). Analysis of caspase-3 and PARP cleavage and blocking
experiments with the pan-caspase inhibitor Z-VAD-FMK revealed a
caspase-dependent cell death mechanism. In addition, the anti-lymphoma
effects of TGR-1202 were associated with a marked time-dependent
inhibition of PI3K/Akt pathway and dephosphorylation of GSK-3, Aurora
kinases, and stathmin, suggesting that modulation of molecules associated
with microtubule polymerization are critically involved in
TGR-1202/BV-triggered cell death. To assess potential effects on
microtubule dynamics, -tubulin was detected by indirect
immunofluorescence microscopy in HL cells treated with TGR-1202 and/or
BV. Compared with controls, TGR-1202 and BV treatment alone led to an
average 10% loss of microtubules while the combined TGR-1202/BV treatment
resulted in a potent synergistic microtubule disruption, as shown by
values of -tubulin inhibition of 40% (P .0001) and the presence of
irregular microtubule fragments throughout the cytosol. Additionally,
TGR-1202/BV was found to interfere with the mitotic spindle integrity
which may suggest that the G2/M arrest and cytotoxicity of the combined
TGR-1202/BV treatment primarily arises from the inhibition of tubulin
polymerization.Conclusions: TGR-1202 enhances the anti-tumor activity of
BV by increasing drug-induced apoptosis and tubulin disruption in HL cell
lines. Our data provide a strong rationale for evaluating TGR-1202 in
combination with BV in patients with relapsed/refractory HL.

