Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epigenetic modification of LY6K in CGI shore and CGI regulates
LY6K gene activation and metastatic function in breast cancer


Lymphocyte antigen 6 complex locus K (LY6K) is associated with
development of the immune response and carcinogenesis. Elevated LY6K by
AP-1 activation induces cell invasion and metastasis through activating
the Raf-1/MEK/ERK signaling pathway. However, the exact epigenetic
mechanism of LY6K gene expression has yet to be clarified. To elucidate
the epigenetic mechanism of LY6K gene regulation and expression, CpG
island and 5CGI shore in the region around transcription start site of
the LY6K were predicted using UCSC genome browser and Methprimer
software. We performed MSP, bisulfite pyro-sequnecing, and bisulfite
sequencing to investigate the DNA methylation status of CpG sites from
-400 to +500 on the LY6K CGI and 5CGI shore. Breast cancer cells with low
LY6K expression were highly methylated in the both CGI and 5CGI shore
region, whereas high LY6K expression cell lines had low methylation
levels. Moreover, 5-Aza-dC, demethylaing agent, treatment of cells with
low LY6K expression caused elevation of LY6K expression and finally leads
wound healing. To further validate the inverse correlation between LY6K
5CGI shore methylation and LY6K expression in vivo seen in breast cancer
cell lines, we performed bisulfite pyro-sequencing and tissue microarray
using breast carcinoma samples. LY6K expression inversely correlates with
methylation status and histone modification of 5CGI shore in the LY6K
promoter in human breast cancers. An understanding of epigenetic changes
in LY6K may contribute to the diagnosis of carcinogenic risk and to
prediction of outcome in patients with breast cancer.

