Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Profiling of circulating miRNAs is a critical prognostic biomarker
tool for high-risk neuroblastoma


Circulating miRNAs has momentous clinical relevance and has been
correlated with disease progression in many solid tumors. In this study,
we investigated the circulating miRNAs' variations exploiting unique
mouse models of non-metastatic favorable and high-risk, aggressive human
neuroblastoma. Conditioned serum samples from animals bearing favorable
or high-risk disease were examined for alterations in circulating miRNAs
using whole genome human miRNA profiling approach. Serum from sham mice
were used as mouse-background false-positive controls. Data after
chip-to-chip normalization and mouse background subtraction were compared
by adopting favorable-to-high-risk animal(s) crisscross analysis.
Compared to favorable neuroblastoma, miRNA profiling revealed a
significant (>2 fold) upregulation of 33 miRNAs and complete suppression
of 42 miRNAs in animals with high-risk NB. Preferential exclusion of
mouse miRNA with sequence homology blast revealed 11 (off 33 upregulated)
unique human miRNA including miR-1261, miR-1268, miR-1280, miR-1304,
miR-1308, miR-1908, miR-198, miR-513a-5p, miR-513b, miR-548h, miR-580.
Consistently, homology blasting identified 13 (off 42 downregulated)
miRNAs including, miR-1206, miR-548a-5p, miR-548f, miR-576-5p, miR-600,
miR-639, miR-640, miR-641, miR-647, miR-662, miR-886-3p, miR-887,
miR-888. Expression pattern of select miRNAs were validated using QPCR.
Target analysis for these miRNAs revealed a signature pattern, mostly
pertaining to stemness and tumor progression flow-through signaling viz.,
NKX3.2, MEGF10, GRB10, GPX8, ZEB1, SIX-1, ZIC2, MMP-2, SMAD4, KRAS,
NFkB1, CD24, CD44. Together, these data identifies unique circulating
miRNA signature of high-risk neuroblastoma and further implies that these
miRNAs may play functional role in the progression of the disease.

