Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Total loss of HLA class I expression by two sarcomatoid
hepatocellular carcinoma cell lines sHCC29 and sHCC63 was caused by a
49-kbp deletion at chromosome 15q15 across the 2m gene locus


Scanty information is available concerning the abnormalities in HLA class
I antigen presentation in sarcomatoid hepatocellular carcinoma (sHCC),
although this information can improve our understanding of sHCC-host
interactions and assist in a rational design of T cell immunotherapy. In
this study, we have established three sarcomatoid HCC cell lines, namely
sHCC29, sHCC63, and sHCC74, from the tumor lesions in three patients; two
of them were HBV carriers from which sHCC29 and sHCC63 were derived,
while the other was a HCV carrier from which sHCC74 was generated. No
viral DNA was detected in the culture supernatants or cell extracts from
any of the three HCC cell lines by COBAS AmpliPre/TaqMan qPCR. In
monolayer cell culture, both sHCC29 and sHCC74 showed similar elongated
fibroblastic morphology, while sHCC63 exhibited a short-spindle shape and
expanded in a density-sensitive manner. HLA class I molecules were
abundantly expressed on sHCC74, but were not detected on sHCC29 and
sHCC63 by cytofluorometric analysis. Cytoplasmic 2-microglobulin (2m) was
also undetected in the latter two cell lines, in spite of their baseline
level of low-moderate cytoplasmic HLA class I heavy chain expression,
which was 33-50% of that expressed by sHCC74 in terms of % positive
cells. The observed HLA class I-loss phenotype was IFN- (300 g/ml, 48
h)-uncorrectable. Inactivation of the 2m genes in both sHCC29 and sHCC63
was supported by the failure to detect their 2m mRNA transcripts and by
the identification of a large (49,187 bp) deletion across the 2m gene
locus at chromosome 15q15. This deletion, the largest reported to date,
explains the loss of 2m protein and lack of assembly of HLA class I
molecules in the sHCC29 and sHCC63 cell lines. Mapping of the deletion
breaking point and validation by immunohistochemistry of 2m loss in the
corresponding tumor lesions from which sHCC29 and sHCC63 were derived are
currently underway.

