Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synthesis of targeted docetaxel-polymer conjugate and its
anti-tumor efficacy


Over the last decade, it has been shown that nanopolymer therapeutics can
be engineered to target cancer cells specifically and can deliver the
cancer agent in a time-release fashion, thereby leaving normal healthy
cells unaffected by toxic drugs such as docetaxel. Docetaxel has been
used to treat several types of cancers, but it has provided
pharmaceutical challenges due to its poor solubility and toxicities
associated with the co-solvents. Given that nanotechnology can enhance
the specificity, efficacy and safety of cancer agents and with the need
of a new alternative formulation for docetaxel delivery, we developed a
poly N-(2-hydroxypropyl) methacrylamide (HPMA)-Docetaxel (Doc) conjugate
with Folate (FA) targeting ligand and evaluated the effect of the product
in both in vitro human cancer cell lines and in vivo mice xenograft tumor
models. Analysis of the product displayed the incorporation of 7.9% of
docetaxel and 2.1% of folate with 38.6kDa MW and 1.92 of polydispersity,
and an improvement in water solubility. The product inhibited the
proliferation of a variety of human cancer cells in nM ranges in in vitro
study. The maximal tolerated dose (MTD) of the product in mice was more
than 150 mg/kg (as a docetaxel amount), which is much higher than that of
free docetaxel (25 mg/kg). In mice bearing tumor xenografts, treatment
with the polymer-conjugate strongly inhibited the growth of various human
tumors, extended survival, and enhanced tumor regression significantly
without effects on body weight compared to control animals. The results
clearly demonstrate that our new polyHPMA-docetaxel-folate conjugate
compound is a promising candidate for anti-tumor chemotherapeutics with
reduced toxicity and prolonged survival.

