Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Androgen resistance in prostate cancer is associated with an
enrichment of stem-like cells


Cancer Stem cells (CSCs) or tumor initiating cells (TICs) have recently
been identified in solid tumors; however, the role of CSCs/TICs in
metastasis remains poorly understood. In this study, we developed a
pre-clinical model to study stem-like cells in prostate cancer
metastasis. CS-5 and CS-10 cells were derived by growing parental LNCaP
cells in androgen-depleted media for five and ten generations. The growth
rate of CS-10 cells was similar to parenteral LNCaP cells while CS-5 cell
growth was diminished. Interestingly, CS10 cells were the sole cells
observed with CD44 expression, which also had the highest 21 expression.
In addition, none of the cell lines expressed CD133. In contrast to
parenteral LNCaP cells, CD44+ CS-10 cells displayed an increase in 5 min
collagen-I attachment, cell migration, invasion, colony formation and
sphere formation in an anchorage-independent environment, all attributes
of TICs. Additional evidence for stemness was that CS-10 cells were
capable of self-renewal in the secondary and tertiary spheroid assays.
CS-10 cells expressed neuroendocrine and EMT markers and demonstrated
resistance to anti-androgen drugs and most chemotherapeutic drugs
compared to parenteral LNCaP cells.In summary, the novel findings
presented here provide evidence that castrate resistance may result in
selection of CD44+/ 21+/CD24low/CD133 cells, which possesses stem cell
properties. This cell line may serve as a model for evaluation of new
targeted treatments in prostate CSCs.

