Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Progesterone inhibits endometrial cancer growth and invasiveness
by modulating the TGF- pathway


Objectives: Our group has shown previously that progesterone may exert a
chemoprotective effect against endometrial cancer through modulation of
TGF- signaling and concomitant activation of apoptosis in the
endometrium. In addition, it has been shown that increased expression of
TGF- isoforms in human endometrial cancer correlates with decreased
survival and poor prognosis. These data suggest that the TGF- pathway may
be an attractive target for chemoprevention strategies. The goal of this
study was to further characterize the effect of progesterone on TGF-
signaling pathway components (TGF- isoform and Smads) and on TGF-
-induced pro-tumorigenic activities in endometrial cancer cell
lines.Methods: The expression levels of TGF- ligands (TGF-1, TGF-2 and
TGF-3), TGF- receptors (TGF-R1, TGF-R2, and TGF-R3) and SMADs (pSMAD2/3,
SMAD2/3 and SMAD-4) were determined by immunoblotting in HEC-1B
endometrial cancer cells exposed to progesterone for 24, 72 and 120 h.
Proliferation and cellular invasion assays were used to access the
functional effects of progestin exposure in the HEC-1B and Ishikawa
endometrial cancer cell lines.Results: A marked decrease in TGF-1and
TGF-3 expression was observed at 72 h after treatment with progesterone.
Expression of TGF-R1, TGF-R2, SMAD2/3 and pSMAD2/3 were substantially
reduced at 72 h while levels of SMAD4 and TGF-2 expression were reduced
at 120 h following progesterone. TGF-R3 expression levels were not
affected by any treatment at any time point. Furthermore, TGF-1-induced
cancer cell proliferation and invasion was effectively inhibited by
progesterone. Cellular proliferation and invasion were significantly
reduced by progestin compared to controls even in the presence of
exogenous TGF-.Conclusions: These results suggest that the
down-regulation of TGF- signaling may be a key mechanism underlying
progestin inhibition of endometrial carcinogenesis.

