Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Angiopoietin-like protein 2, a driver of cancer cell metastasis,
is a novel serum biomarker for the diagnosis and prognosis in patients
with gastric cancer


Background: Gastric carcinogenesis is regarded as a multistep process
with an intestinal metaplasia-dysplasia-carcinoma sequence, which is
initiated by Helicobacter pylori infection that causes a chronic active
inflammation in the gastric mucosa. Angiopoietin-like protein 2 (ANGPTL2)
is known to act as a causative mediator of chronic inflammation and
inflammatory carcinogenesis. However, the biological role and clinical
significance of ANGPTL2 expression remains poorly understood in human
cancer. We investigated the functional role of ANGPTL2 and evaluated the
clinical significance of its expression in both primary tumor and matched
serum specimens in patients with gastric cancer (GC).Methods: The
function of ANGPTL2 in GC was investigated by siRNA using GC cell lines
(MKN1 and KATO III). Next, we examined ANGPTL2 expression in GC tissues
(n=192) by immunohistochemistry (IHC) to evaluate associations between
its expression and various clinicopathological features. Finally, we
determined serum ANGPTL2 levels from 32 GC and 23 normal controls (NC),
and validated its expression levels using 194 serum samples from GC and
45 from NC to evaluate its utility as a biomarker by ELISA.Results:
Knockdown of ANGPTL2 resulted in significant induction of anoikis
(pBackground: Gastric carcinogenesis is regarded as a multistep process
with an intestinal metaplasia-dysplasia-carcinoma sequence, which is
initiated by Helicobacter pylori infection that causes a chronic active
inflammation in the gastric mucosa. Angiopoietin-like protein 2 (ANGPTL2)
is known to act as a causative mediator of chronic inflammation and
inflammatory carcinogenesis. However, the biological role and clinical
significance of ANGPTL2 expression remains poorly understood in human
cancer. We investigated the functional role of ANGPTL2 and evaluated the
clinical significance of its expression in both primary tumor and matched
serum specimens in patients with gastric cancer (GC).Methods: The
function of ANGPTL2 in GC was investigated by siRNA using GC cell lines
(MKN1 and KATO III). Next, we examined ANGPTL2 expression in GC tissues
(n=192) by immunohistochemistry (IHC) to evaluate associations between
its expression and various clinicopathological features. Finally, we
determined serum ANGPTL2 levels from 32 GC and 23 normal controls (NC),
and validated its expression levels using 194 serum samples from GC and
45 from NC to evaluate its utility as a biomarker by ELISA.Results:
Knockdown of ANGPTL2 resulted in significant induction of anoikis
(p<0.05) and inhibition of cell proliferation (pBackground: Gastric
carcinogenesis is regarded as a multistep process with an intestinal
metaplasia-dysplasia-carcinoma sequence, which is initiated by
Helicobacter pylori infection that causes a chronic active inflammation
in the gastric mucosa. Angiopoietin-like protein 2 (ANGPTL2) is known to
act as a causative mediator of chronic inflammation and inflammatory
carcinogenesis. However, the biological role and clinical significance of
ANGPTL2 expression remains poorly understood in human cancer. We
investigated the functional role of ANGPTL2 and evaluated the clinical
significance of its expression in both primary tumor and matched serum
specimens in patients with gastric cancer (GC).Methods: The function of
ANGPTL2 in GC was investigated by siRNA using GC cell lines (MKN1 and
KATO III). Next, we examined ANGPTL2 expression in GC tissues (n=192) by
immunohistochemistry (IHC) to evaluate associations between its
expression and various clinicopathological features. Finally, we
determined serum ANGPTL2 levels from 32 GC and 23 normal controls (NC),
and validated its expression levels using 194 serum samples from GC and
45 from NC to evaluate its utility as a biomarker by ELISA.Results:
Knockdown of ANGPTL2 resulted in significant induction of anoikis
(p<0.05) and inhibition of cell proliferation (p<0.05),
invasion(pBackground: Gastric carcinogenesis is regarded as a multistep
process with an intestinal metaplasia-dysplasia-carcinoma sequence, which
is initiated by Helicobacter pylori infection that causes a chronic
active inflammation in the gastric mucosa. Angiopoietin-like protein 2
(ANGPTL2) is known to act as a causative mediator of chronic inflammation
and inflammatory carcinogenesis. However, the biological role and
clinical significance of ANGPTL2 expression remains poorly understood in
human cancer. We investigated the functional role of ANGPTL2 and
evaluated the clinical significance of its expression in both primary
tumor and matched serum specimens in patients with gastric cancer
(GC).Methods: The function of ANGPTL2 in GC was investigated by siRNA
using GC cell lines (MKN1 and KATO III). Next, we examined ANGPTL2
expression in GC tissues (n=192) by immunohistochemistry (IHC) to
evaluate associations between its expression and various
clinicopathological features. Finally, we determined serum ANGPTL2 levels
from 32 GC and 23 normal controls (NC), and validated its expression
levels using 194 serum samples from GC and 45 from NC to evaluate its
utility as a biomarker by ELISA.Results: Knockdown of ANGPTL2 resulted in
significant induction of anoikis (p<0.05) and inhibition of cell
proliferation (p<0.05), invasion(p<0.05) and migration (pBackground:
Gastric carcinogenesis is regarded as a multistep process with an
intestinal metaplasia-dysplasia-carcinoma sequence, which is initiated by
Helicobacter pylori infection that causes a chronic active inflammation
in the gastric mucosa. Angiopoietin-like protein 2 (ANGPTL2) is known to
act as a causative mediator of chronic inflammation and inflammatory
carcinogenesis. However, the biological role and clinical significance of
ANGPTL2 expression remains poorly understood in human cancer. We
investigated the functional role of ANGPTL2 and evaluated the clinical
significance of its expression in both primary tumor and matched serum
specimens in patients with gastric cancer (GC).Methods: The function of
ANGPTL2 in GC was investigated by siRNA using GC cell lines (MKN1 and
KATO III). Next, we examined ANGPTL2 expression in GC tissues (n=192) by
immunohistochemistry (IHC) to evaluate associations between its
expression and various clinicopathological features. Finally, we
determined serum ANGPTL2 levels from 32 GC and 23 normal controls (NC),
and validated its expression levels using 194 serum samples from GC and
45 from NC to evaluate its utility as a biomarker by ELISA.Results:
Knockdown of ANGPTL2 resulted in significant induction of anoikis
(p<0.05) and inhibition of cell proliferation (p<0.05), invasion(p<0.05)
and migration (p<0.05) in GC cells. ANGPTL2 was overexpressed in GC
tissues compared to normal gastric mucosa, and high ANGPTL2 expression
was significantly associated lymph node metastasis (p=0.0001), distant
metastasis (p=0.01), early recurrence (p=0.003) and poor prognosis
(p=0.007) in GC patients. Serum ANGPTL2 levels in GC patients were
significantly higher compared to NC (pBackground: Gastric carcinogenesis
is regarded as a multistep process with an intestinal
metaplasia-dysplasia-carcinoma sequence, which is initiated by
Helicobacter pylori infection that causes a chronic active inflammation
in the gastric mucosa. Angiopoietin-like protein 2 (ANGPTL2) is known to
act as a causative mediator of chronic inflammation and inflammatory
carcinogenesis. However, the biological role and clinical significance of
ANGPTL2 expression remains poorly understood in human cancer. We
investigated the functional role of ANGPTL2 and evaluated the clinical
significance of its expression in both primary tumor and matched serum
specimens in patients with gastric cancer (GC).Methods: The function of
ANGPTL2 in GC was investigated by siRNA using GC cell lines (MKN1 and
KATO III). Next, we examined ANGPTL2 expression in GC tissues (n=192) by
immunohistochemistry (IHC) to evaluate associations between its
expression and various clinicopathological features. Finally, we
determined serum ANGPTL2 levels from 32 GC and 23 normal controls (NC),
and validated its expression levels using 194 serum samples from GC and
45 from NC to evaluate its utility as a biomarker by ELISA.Results:
Knockdown of ANGPTL2 resulted in significant induction of anoikis
(p<0.05) and inhibition of cell proliferation (p<0.05), invasion(p<0.05)
and migration (p<0.05) in GC cells. ANGPTL2 was overexpressed in GC
tissues compared to normal gastric mucosa, and high ANGPTL2 expression
was significantly associated lymph node metastasis (p=0.0001), distant
metastasis (p=0.01), early recurrence (p=0.003) and poor prognosis
(p=0.007) in GC patients. Serum ANGPTL2 levels in GC patients were
significantly higher compared to NC (p<0.05), and successfully
distinguished GC patients from NC with high accuracy (AUC=0.814).
Finally, validation of these results in an independent patient cohort
revealed that serum ANGPTL2 levels in GC patients were significantly
higher compared to NC (pBackground: Gastric carcinogenesis is regarded as
a multistep process with an intestinal metaplasia-dysplasia-carcinoma
sequence, which is initiated by Helicobacter pylori infection that causes
a chronic active inflammation in the gastric mucosa. Angiopoietin-like
protein 2 (ANGPTL2) is known to act as a causative mediator of chronic
inflammation and inflammatory carcinogenesis. However, the biological
role and clinical significance of ANGPTL2 expression remains poorly
understood in human cancer. We investigated the functional role of
ANGPTL2 and evaluated the clinical significance of its expression in both
primary tumor and matched serum specimens in patients with gastric cancer
(GC).Methods: The function of ANGPTL2 in GC was investigated by siRNA
using GC cell lines (MKN1 and KATO III). Next, we examined ANGPTL2
expression in GC tissues (n=192) by immunohistochemistry (IHC) to
evaluate associations between its expression and various
clinicopathological features. Finally, we determined serum ANGPTL2 levels
from 32 GC and 23 normal controls (NC), and validated its expression
levels using 194 serum samples from GC and 45 from NC to evaluate its
utility as a biomarker by ELISA.Results: Knockdown of ANGPTL2 resulted in
significant induction of anoikis (p<0.05) and inhibition of cell
proliferation (p<0.05), invasion(p<0.05) and migration (p<0.05) in GC
cells. ANGPTL2 was overexpressed in GC tissues compared to normal gastric
mucosa, and high ANGPTL2 expression was significantly associated lymph
node metastasis (p=0.0001), distant metastasis (p=0.01), early recurrence
(p=0.003) and poor prognosis (p=0.007) in GC patients. Serum ANGPTL2
levels in GC patients were significantly higher compared to NC (p<0.05),
and successfully distinguished GC patients from NC with high accuracy
(AUC=0.814). Finally, validation of these results in an independent
patient cohort revealed that serum ANGPTL2 levels in GC patients were
significantly higher compared to NC (p<0.0001), demonstrated high AUC
(0.831) values with 73.0% sensitivity and 82.2% specificity to
distinguish GC patients from NC. In addition, serum ANGPTL2 levels also
discriminated early GC patients (stage I) from NC (AUC=0.8). High ANGPTL2
in serum rather than in tissues were significantly associated with tumor
progression, and consequently emerged as an independent predictor of
tumor recurrence (HR=5.05, p=0.0004) and prognosis (HR=3.6, p=0.01) in
patients with GC. Of interest, serum ANGPTL2 levels closely correlated
with IHC scores in matched GC tissues (r= 0.16, p=0.02).Conclusion: Our
study first reports that overexpression of ANGPTL2 in GC cells results in
increased malignant potential and metastasis. SerumANGPTL2 expression
emerged as a novel, non-invasive biomarker for the earlier diagnosis,
recurrence and prognosis in patients with gastric cancer.

