Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Latent transforming growth factor beta-binding protein-3 interacts
with midkine


Midkine (MK) is a multifunctional heparin-binding growth factor with a
molecular weight of 13 kDa, which plays important roles in
carcinogenesis. In order to study the action mechanism of MK,we employed
a yeast two-hybrid system to screen a human liver cDNA library to
determine the putative MK-interacting proteins. cDNA clones containing
nucleotide sequences which encode latent transforming growth factor -beta
binding protein-3 (LTBP-3) were obtained. The MK/LTBP-3 interaction was
confirmed by fluorescence resonance energy transfer analysis.
Furthermore, the interaction was analyzed in detail by yeast two-hybrid
assay and GST pull down assay. The binding site of MK in LTBP-3 was
mapped to the center of the protein, a tandem array of EGF-like repeats,
by a fragment deletion analysis in yeast two-hybrid system. The eighth
EGF-like domain of LTBP3 plays a critical role in the MK/LTBP-3
interaction in GST pull down assay. On the other hand, four basic amino
acids (K-79, R-81, K-86 and K-87) present within the heparin-binding
cluster I and II of MK are necessary for the two proteins binding
process. These results indicate that MK can bind to LTBP-3, and locate to
the eighth EGF-like domain. The heparin-binding clusters of MK are a
multifunctional domain, which provide a potential mechanism whereby MK
may participate in the TGF-beta system to interfere in
carcinogenesis.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

