Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dynamic expression of 5-alpha reductase 2 in aging prostate is
regulated by DNA methyltransferase 1


BACKGROUND:5-alpha reductase type 2 (SRD5A2), an enzyme that is critical
for prostatic development and growth, is utilized as an inhibitory target
by Finasteride for patients with BPH. However, we have found that many
aging benign prostate tissues do not express the enzyme. Since the SRD5A2
promoter contains a CpG island, we hypothesized that somatic methylation
of the promoter may account for absence of SRD5A2
expression.METHODS:Benign prostatic tissues from wild-type mice at 3, 6
and 12 months of age were used. In addition, prostate samples from human
male patients who were treated by TURP for bladder outlet obstruction
secondary to BPH were used. Methylation of SRD5A2 promoter was assessed
using Methylated CpG Island Recovery Assay (MIRA). DNMT1 siRNA and
5-AZA-C were used to determine the methylation status of SRD5A2 in benign
prostatic cells (BPH-1). SRD5A2 promoter-luciferase constructs were
methylated in vitro using M.SssI methylase.RESULTS:Benign prostatic
tissues from wild-type mice of different ages (3 months, 6 months and 12
months, n=6 per group) were harvested. We found that expression of SRD5A2
and DNMT1, 3a, 3b were not significantly changed in mice at the age of 3
and 6 months. However, 33% of mice at age of 12 months (2/6) had low
levels of SRD5A2 with concomitant high DNMT1 protein levels. Consistent
with reduced expression of SRD5A2 and increased DNMT1, the methylation of
SRD5A2 promoter was increased as assayed by MIRA. Moreover, silencing
DNMT1 with siRNA or exposure of BPH-1 cells to 5-AZA-C led to
re-expression of SRD5A2. We used SRD5A2 promoter-luciferase constructs
that were methylated in vitro using M.SssI methylase. When the methylated
SRD5A2 promoter constructs were ectopically expressed in BPH-1 cells, we
found that methylation of the SRD5A2 promoter caused reduction of
luciferase expression by 80%, suggesting that methylation of the SRD5A2
promoter regulates the expression of SRD5A2. Since age-associated
increased IL-6 has been shown to regulate DNMT1, we next evaluated
expression of IL-6 in aging prostate tissue. We found that expression of
IL-6 and its downstream molecule, phosphorylated-STAT3, correlated with
expression of DNMT1. Concurrent with our animal and in-vitro studies, we
analyzed 80 benign human prostate samples from TURPs and found that 24/80
(30%) of did not express the SRD5A2 protein with concurrent methylation
of SRD5A2 promoter, suggesting that methylation and absence of of SRD5A2
protein expression are closely linked (p=0.0006, Fisher's exact test).
This data suggests that expression of SRD5A2 is highly variable in human
adult prostate tissue.CONCLUSIONS:Expression of SRD5A2 in aging prostates
is a dynamic process that is regulated by methylation of SRD5A2 promoter.
DNMT1 regulates the methylation and expression of SRD5A2. Dynamic and
variable expression of SRD5A2 has implications for management of BPH and
chemopreventive strategies for prostate cancer.

