Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Wnt pathway antagonist OMP-54F28 (FZD8-Fc) inhibits tumor growth
and reduces tumor-initiating cell frequency in patient-derived
hepatocellular carcinoma and ovarian cancer xenograft models


The Wnt/beta-catenin pathway, which signals through the Frizzled (FZD)
receptor family and several co-receptors, has long been implicated in
cancer. We have developed OMP-54F28, a recombinant fusion protein
consisting of the ligand-binding domain of FZD8 and a human IgG1 Fc
fragment. OMP-54F28 acts as a decoy receptor in sequestering Wnts and
preventing them from binding to FZD receptors and thereby inhibiting Wnt
signaling. The Wnt pathway is important for stem cell self renewal,
differentiation, tumorigenicity, and epithelial-mesenchymal transition
(EMT). Using minimally passaged human patient-derived xenograft tumors,
we demonstrate that OMP-54F28 is efficacious as a single agent and in
combination with standard of care in four hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC)
and two ovarian cancer models. In the HCC models, OMP-54F28 shows tumor
growth inhibition (TGI) as a single agent (average of 46%, pThe
Wnt/beta-catenin pathway, which signals through the Frizzled (FZD)
receptor family and several co-receptors, has long been implicated in
cancer. We have developed OMP-54F28, a recombinant fusion protein
consisting of the ligand-binding domain of FZD8 and a human IgG1 Fc
fragment. OMP-54F28 acts as a decoy receptor in sequestering Wnts and
preventing them from binding to FZD receptors and thereby inhibiting Wnt
signaling. The Wnt pathway is important for stem cell self renewal,
differentiation, tumorigenicity, and epithelial-mesenchymal transition
(EMT). Using minimally passaged human patient-derived xenograft tumors,
we demonstrate that OMP-54F28 is efficacious as a single agent and in
combination with standard of care in four hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC)
and two ovarian cancer models. In the HCC models, OMP-54F28 shows tumor
growth inhibition (TGI) as a single agent (average of 46%, p<0.05 vs.
control) and displays additive TGI in combination with Sorafenib (average
of 78%, pThe Wnt/beta-catenin pathway, which signals through the Frizzled
(FZD) receptor family and several co-receptors, has long been implicated
in cancer. We have developed OMP-54F28, a recombinant fusion protein
consisting of the ligand-binding domain of FZD8 and a human IgG1 Fc
fragment. OMP-54F28 acts as a decoy receptor in sequestering Wnts and
preventing them from binding to FZD receptors and thereby inhibiting Wnt
signaling. The Wnt pathway is important for stem cell self renewal,
differentiation, tumorigenicity, and epithelial-mesenchymal transition
(EMT). Using minimally passaged human patient-derived xenograft tumors,
we demonstrate that OMP-54F28 is efficacious as a single agent and in
combination with standard of care in four hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC)
and two ovarian cancer models. In the HCC models, OMP-54F28 shows tumor
growth inhibition (TGI) as a single agent (average of 46%, p<0.05 vs.
control) and displays additive TGI in combination with Sorafenib (average
of 78%, p<0.05; 48% Sorafenib alone). Also, in the ovarian cancer models,
treatment with OMP-54F28 results in TGI as a single agent (average of 32%
vs. control) and shows additive TGI in combination with Paclitaxel
(average of 78%, pThe Wnt/beta-catenin pathway, which signals through the
Frizzled (FZD) receptor family and several co-receptors, has long been
implicated in cancer. We have developed OMP-54F28, a recombinant fusion
protein consisting of the ligand-binding domain of FZD8 and a human IgG1
Fc fragment. OMP-54F28 acts as a decoy receptor in sequestering Wnts and
preventing them from binding to FZD receptors and thereby inhibiting Wnt
signaling. The Wnt pathway is important for stem cell self renewal,
differentiation, tumorigenicity, and epithelial-mesenchymal transition
(EMT). Using minimally passaged human patient-derived xenograft tumors,
we demonstrate that OMP-54F28 is efficacious as a single agent and in
combination with standard of care in four hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC)
and two ovarian cancer models. In the HCC models, OMP-54F28 shows tumor
growth inhibition (TGI) as a single agent (average of 46%, p<0.05 vs.
control) and displays additive TGI in combination with Sorafenib (average
of 78%, p<0.05; 48% Sorafenib alone). Also, in the ovarian cancer models,
treatment with OMP-54F28 results in TGI as a single agent (average of 32%
vs. control) and shows additive TGI in combination with Paclitaxel
(average of 78%, p<0.05; 48% with Paclitaxel alone). We also performed in
vivo serial transplantation assays and found that OMP-54F28 as a single
agent and in combination with standard of care reduces tumor-initiating
cell frequency in both HCC and ovarian cancer xenografts. The anti-tumor
effect was associated with a decrease in cell proliferation, induction of
cell differentiation, and modulation of target Wnt pathway genes. Our
data demonstrate the potential therapeutic benefit of targeting Wnt
signaling in HCC and ovarian cancer. OMP-54F28 is being tested in Phase
1b clinical studies in these indications.

