Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ibrutinib can reverse established chronic graft-versus-host
disease, which is dependent upon IL-2 inducible T-cell kinase (ITK) and
Bruton's tyrosine kinase (BTK)-driven lymphocyte activation


Chronic graft versus host disease (cGVHD) is a life threatening
impediment to the otherwise curative potential of allogeneic
hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (allo-HSCT). Intensive study has
unveiled the lymphoid subsets that drive multifaceted autoimmune and
fibrotic cascades which disrupt healthy tissues. Clinical and in-vivo
data implicate B-cells and certain subsets of CD4 helper T-cells in the
development and progression of cGVHD. These specific immune subsets are
unique in their singular dependence upon the TEC-family kinases BTK or
ITK for receptor driven activation. Ibrutinib is an irreversible
inhibitor of BTK and ITK that has produced durable remissions in B-cell
malignancies with minimal toxicity. We sought to examine ibrutinib's
potential to attenuate B-cell and CD4 T-cell driven anti-host immunity in
the setting of cGVHD. We utilized two complementary murine models
independently focused on interrogating sclerodermatous T-cell driven
cGVHD (LPJC57BL/6) or alloantibody driven bronchiolar obliterans (BO) and
multi-organ system disease without skin involvement (C57BL/6B10.BR). We
examined therapeutic administration of 25mg/kg/day ibrutinib initiated
when mice first develop signs of cGVHD (25-28 days after allo-HSCT). In
the minor-MHC mismatch LPJC57BL/6 model, ibrutinib significantly extended
median time to cGVHD progression by 14 days and 33% (6 of 18) of
ibrutinib treated mice remained progression free as compared to 12% (2 of
18) of mice receiving vehicle and 10% (1 of 11) of mice receiving
cyclosporine 10mg/kg/day (pChronic graft versus host disease (cGVHD) is a
life threatening impediment to the otherwise curative potential of
allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (allo-HSCT). Intensive
study has unveiled the lymphoid subsets that drive multifaceted
autoimmune and fibrotic cascades which disrupt healthy tissues. Clinical
and in-vivo data implicate B-cells and certain subsets of CD4 helper
T-cells in the development and progression of cGVHD. These specific
immune subsets are unique in their singular dependence upon the
TEC-family kinases BTK or ITK for receptor driven activation. Ibrutinib
is an irreversible inhibitor of BTK and ITK that has produced durable
remissions in B-cell malignancies with minimal toxicity. We sought to
examine ibrutinib's potential to attenuate B-cell and CD4 T-cell driven
anti-host immunity in the setting of cGVHD. We utilized two complementary
murine models independently focused on interrogating sclerodermatous
T-cell driven cGVHD (LPJC57BL/6) or alloantibody driven bronchiolar
obliterans (BO) and multi-organ system disease without skin involvement
(C57BL/6B10.BR). We examined therapeutic administration of 25mg/kg/day
ibrutinib initiated when mice first develop signs of cGVHD (25-28 days
after allo-HSCT). In the minor-MHC mismatch LPJC57BL/6 model, ibrutinib
significantly extended median time to cGVHD progression by 14 days and
33% (6 of 18) of ibrutinib treated mice remained progression free as
compared to 12% (2 of 18) of mice receiving vehicle and 10% (1 of 11) of
mice receiving cyclosporine 10mg/kg/day (p<0.02). Overall survival was
also highest in the ibrutinib treatment cohort. Mice receiving ibrutinib
showed restoration of external cGVHD criterion including body weight,
posture, skin lesions, hair loss, and mobility. There was significant
ablation of lymphohistiocytic T- and B-cell pulmonary and renal
infiltration in ibrutinib treated animals. Data from the C57BL/6B10.BR
model confirmed the efficacy of ibrutinib in significantly restoring
pulmonary compliance, elastance, and resistance to levels
indistinguishable from that of a healthy animal and significantly better
than cGVHD vehicle treated controls (n=12/group)(pChronic graft versus
host disease (cGVHD) is a life threatening impediment to the otherwise
curative potential of allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation
(allo-HSCT). Intensive study has unveiled the lymphoid subsets that drive
multifaceted autoimmune and fibrotic cascades which disrupt healthy
tissues. Clinical and in-vivo data implicate B-cells and certain subsets
of CD4 helper T-cells in the development and progression of cGVHD. These
specific immune subsets are unique in their singular dependence upon the
TEC-family kinases BTK or ITK for receptor driven activation. Ibrutinib
is an irreversible inhibitor of BTK and ITK that has produced durable
remissions in B-cell malignancies with minimal toxicity. We sought to
examine ibrutinib's potential to attenuate B-cell and CD4 T-cell driven
anti-host immunity in the setting of cGVHD. We utilized two complementary
murine models independently focused on interrogating sclerodermatous
T-cell driven cGVHD (LPJC57BL/6) or alloantibody driven bronchiolar
obliterans (BO) and multi-organ system disease without skin involvement
(C57BL/6B10.BR). We examined therapeutic administration of 25mg/kg/day
ibrutinib initiated when mice first develop signs of cGVHD (25-28 days
after allo-HSCT). In the minor-MHC mismatch LPJC57BL/6 model, ibrutinib
significantly extended median time to cGVHD progression by 14 days and
33% (6 of 18) of ibrutinib treated mice remained progression free as
compared to 12% (2 of 18) of mice receiving vehicle and 10% (1 of 11) of
mice receiving cyclosporine 10mg/kg/day (p<0.02). Overall survival was
also highest in the ibrutinib treatment cohort. Mice receiving ibrutinib
showed restoration of external cGVHD criterion including body weight,
posture, skin lesions, hair loss, and mobility. There was significant
ablation of lymphohistiocytic T- and B-cell pulmonary and renal
infiltration in ibrutinib treated animals. Data from the C57BL/6B10.BR
model confirmed the efficacy of ibrutinib in significantly restoring
pulmonary compliance, elastance, and resistance to levels
indistinguishable from that of a healthy animal and significantly better
than cGVHD vehicle treated controls (n=12/group)(p<0.01). These results
were associated with significantly decreased alloantibody deposition and
decreased fibrosis in the lungs of ibrutinib treated mice. Germinal
center (GC) reactions, required for multi-organ system pathology in this
model, were also significantly reduced within the spleens of mice
receiving therapeutic ibrutinib (pChronic graft versus host disease
(cGVHD) is a life threatening impediment to the otherwise curative
potential of allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation
(allo-HSCT). Intensive study has unveiled the lymphoid subsets that drive
multifaceted autoimmune and fibrotic cascades which disrupt healthy
tissues. Clinical and in-vivo data implicate B-cells and certain subsets
of CD4 helper T-cells in the development and progression of cGVHD. These
specific immune subsets are unique in their singular dependence upon the
TEC-family kinases BTK or ITK for receptor driven activation. Ibrutinib
is an irreversible inhibitor of BTK and ITK that has produced durable
remissions in B-cell malignancies with minimal toxicity. We sought to
examine ibrutinib's potential to attenuate B-cell and CD4 T-cell driven
anti-host immunity in the setting of cGVHD. We utilized two complementary
murine models independently focused on interrogating sclerodermatous
T-cell driven cGVHD (LPJC57BL/6) or alloantibody driven bronchiolar
obliterans (BO) and multi-organ system disease without skin involvement
(C57BL/6B10.BR). We examined therapeutic administration of 25mg/kg/day
ibrutinib initiated when mice first develop signs of cGVHD (25-28 days
after allo-HSCT). In the minor-MHC mismatch LPJC57BL/6 model, ibrutinib
significantly extended median time to cGVHD progression by 14 days and
33% (6 of 18) of ibrutinib treated mice remained progression free as
compared to 12% (2 of 18) of mice receiving vehicle and 10% (1 of 11) of
mice receiving cyclosporine 10mg/kg/day (p<0.02). Overall survival was
also highest in the ibrutinib treatment cohort. Mice receiving ibrutinib
showed restoration of external cGVHD criterion including body weight,
posture, skin lesions, hair loss, and mobility. There was significant
ablation of lymphohistiocytic T- and B-cell pulmonary and renal
infiltration in ibrutinib treated animals. Data from the C57BL/6B10.BR
model confirmed the efficacy of ibrutinib in significantly restoring
pulmonary compliance, elastance, and resistance to levels
indistinguishable from that of a healthy animal and significantly better
than cGVHD vehicle treated controls (n=12/group)(p<0.01). These results
were associated with significantly decreased alloantibody deposition and
decreased fibrosis in the lungs of ibrutinib treated mice. Germinal
center (GC) reactions, required for multi-organ system pathology in this
model, were also significantly reduced within the spleens of mice
receiving therapeutic ibrutinib (p<0.05). Using in-vivo genetic ablation
models, we demonstrate the critical nature of BTK and ITK respectively in
the development of cGVHD pathognomonic BO. Our data support ibrutinib as
a promising therapeutic direction for the treatment of cGVHD by virtue of
its ability to suppress BTK and ITK signaling.

