Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clec12a: A new AML stem cell-associated antigen


Introduction: Acute myeloid leukemias (AML), a heterogeneous and complex
group of diseases, is a clonal malignant disorder derived from a small
number of leukemic stem cells (LSCs), which are sustained by
self-renewing and responsible for the propagation of leukemic blasts
(LBs). Monoclonal antibodies have emerged as effective targeted therapies
for the treatment of human malignancies and their mechanisms of action
are able to deliver the therapeutic effects with minimal toxicity.Aim:
The challenge is the identification of cell surface antigens which could
be preferentially expressed on AML LSC compared with normal
hematopoietics stem cells and that could be helpful to target
therapies.Materials and methods: On 16 AML patients (pts) at diagnosis
(peripheral blood of 12 pts and bone marrow of 4 pts) myeloblast leukemic
cells were identified using a FACSCanto flow cytometer (Becton
Dickinson), based on low expression of CD45 and low side scatter (SSC)
properties (CD45 low/SSC low). On these subpopulation we used an antibody
panel against cell surface antigens, for the detection of immature
markers and potential leukemia-associated antigens: CD34, CD38, CD90,
CLEC12A (C-type lectin domain family 12 member A), CD44, CD99, TIM-3 (T
cell immunoglobulin mucin-3), CD32, CD133, CD74, CD47, CD58, CD25, CD22,
CD96.Results:. The proportion of LBs was positively correlated with CD45
low/SSC low (median 51,8 %). This gated population of LBs were positive
for CD34 (median 44,65%), CD38 (median 18,75%), CD90 (median 0,90%),
CLEC12A (median 93,7%), CD44 (median 99,9%), CD99 (median 96,6%), TIM-3
(median 84,4%), CD32 (median 14%), CD123 (29,15%), CD133 (median (8,95%),
CD58 (median 97,5%), CD47 (median 99,9%), CD74 (median 3,2%), CD25
(median 0,6%), CD96 (median 87%), CD22 (median 0,55%).Conclusion: The
expression of CD34 and CD38 antigens is heterogeneous in LBs. In
particular we found that the 50% of patients were CD34+ and 50% were
CD38+. CLEC12A, CD44, CD99, TIM-3, CD58, CD47 and CD96 were highly
expresses in LCSs. CD90, CD32, CD123, CD133,CD74, CD25 and CD22 were low.
Interestingly we identified that the expression of CLEC12A distinguished
two different populations: the CLEC12Ahigh cells correlated with the
blast cells CD45low/SSClow; on the other hand, CLEC12Alow cells could be
compared with CD45high/SSChigh population, representing normal
hematopoietic cells. In conclusion, this marker is a good candidate to
target therapies against leukemic stem cells. However further studies
with an higher number of patients must be carried out to confirm that
CLEC12A is an appropriate antigen for a new monoclonal antibody-based
therapy.Acknowledgements: European LeukemiaNet, AIL, AIRC, PRIN
2010-2011, FP7 NGS-PTL project.

