Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: GSK3 mediated arsenite induction of spindle abnormalities


Arsenite induces centrosome amplification and spindle abnormalities,
leading to chromosome missegregation and consequently resulting in
mitotic cell apoptosis or aneuploidy. However, the underlying mechanism
of how arsenite disrupts mitotic spindles is not known. In this study, we
showed that CGL2 cells treated with arsenic trioxide (ATO) were arrested
at mitotic stage in company with the formation of substantial spindle
abnormalities and significant reduction of acetylated- and
detyrosinated-tubulin, characteristics of decreased MT stability.
Immunofluorescence staining of EB1, a plus-end microtubule-binding
protein, revealed discrete EB1 spots distributing along microtubule (MT)
nucleated from the two spindle poles in untreated mitotic cells. However,
it showed a disorganized pattern in ATO-arrested mitotic cells with the
spot-like EB1 clusters splashing all over the cells. In addition,
immunoblotting and immunofluorescence staining revealed that the
mitosis-specific inhibitory phospho-GSK3 was diminished in ATO-arrested
mitotic cells. Pharmacological inhibition of GSK3 could prevent ATO
induction of spindle abnormalities, mitotic arrest, and cell death. Since
GSK3 has been reported to reduce MT stability by phosphorylating several
microtubule-associated proteins, our current results indicated that GSK3
may mediate ATO induction of spindle abnormalities.

