Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The potential role of CXCR4 in cisplatin associated resistance in
esophageal carcinoma


IntroductionCXC chemokine receptor 4 was found dys-regulated in many
different types of human cancers and correlated with poor prognosis of
tumor metastasis and resistance to chemotherapy. Limited data show the
effect of CXCR4 on the esophageal carcinoma cells, especially with
influence of chemotheraputuc reagent-cisplatin.MethodsCXCR4 was detected
by FACs analysis in esophageal cell lines OE19, OE21, OE33, PT1590 and
LN1590. Corronsponding cisplatin resistant cells were established after
selection of cisplatin treatment and further confirmed by IC50 and ERCC1.
SDF-1 and AMD3100 were used as CXCR4 stimulattion or inhibition.
Subcutanous model of OE19 injection in Balb/c nude mice was established
and followed by treatment with cisplatin twice a week via i.p injection.
Tumors were collected for the further evaluation.ResultsEsophageal cell
line OE19, PT1590 and LN1590 have detetable amount of CXCR4+
subpopulation cells as high as 2.8%0.9, 0.7% 0.9 and 1.0%0.6,
respectively. OE19, PT1590 and LN1590 cisplatin resistant subline
displayed increased IC50 value of 48h cisplatin treatment from 6.01.3 to
12.21.0, 1.40.7 to 9.10.7 and 1.40.6 to 7.20.6 ug/ml along with a
significant overexpression of ERCC1. Interestingly only OE19 and LN1590
cisplatin resistant cell lines showed a significant enreichment of CXCR4+
cells ( 12.1% 2.5 Vs 2.8%0.9; 4.2% 1.1 Vs1.0%0.6, pIntroductionCXC
chemokine receptor 4 was found dys-regulated in many different types of
human cancers and correlated with poor prognosis of tumor metastasis and
resistance to chemotherapy. Limited data show the effect of CXCR4 on the
esophageal carcinoma cells, especially with influence of chemotheraputuc
reagent-cisplatin.MethodsCXCR4 was detected by FACs analysis in
esophageal cell lines OE19, OE21, OE33, PT1590 and LN1590. Corronsponding
cisplatin resistant cells were established after selection of cisplatin
treatment and further confirmed by IC50 and ERCC1. SDF-1 and AMD3100 were
used as CXCR4 stimulattion or inhibition. Subcutanous model of OE19
injection in Balb/c nude mice was established and followed by treatment
with cisplatin twice a week via i.p injection. Tumors were collected for
the further evaluation.ResultsEsophageal cell line OE19, PT1590 and
LN1590 have detetable amount of CXCR4+ subpopulation cells as high as
2.8%0.9, 0.7% 0.9 and 1.0%0.6, respectively. OE19, PT1590 and LN1590
cisplatin resistant subline displayed increased IC50 value of 48h
cisplatin treatment from 6.01.3 to 12.21.0, 1.40.7 to 9.10.7 and 1.40.6
to 7.20.6 ug/ml along with a significant overexpression of ERCC1.
Interestingly only OE19 and LN1590 cisplatin resistant cell lines showed
a significant enreichment of CXCR4+ cells ( 12.1% 2.5 Vs 2.8%0.9; 4.2%
1.1 Vs1.0%0.6, p<0.05) as compared to parental cells. Meanwhile, side
population cells were also increased in those cisplatin resistant
variants. There is no difference on tumor weight in control group and
cisplatin treatment group in vivo. The relative expression of CXCR4 will
be further evaluated by realtime PCR on mRNA level and IHC on protein
level.ConclusionOverexpression of CXCR4 is significantly associated with
cisplatin-based chemotherapy resistance and might be a prognostic factor
in esophageal cancer. Inhibition of CXCR4 might be a strategy to address
the chemoresistance of EAC cell lines.

