Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HER3 activation by MET contributes to trastuzumab resistance in
HER2-positive breast cancer


Background: Trastuzumab is a standard therapy for HER2-positive breast
cancer patients. Majority of the patients treated with trastuzumab in
metastatic disease experience relapse. MET has been reported as one
possible candidate of trastuzumab resistance however, detailed mechanism
is unclear.Methods: Using panel of HER2-positive cell lines, pHER3 level
was assessed with trastuzumab treatment by western blot.
Co-immunoprecipitation and siRNA knockdown were used to assess the
interaction between HER3 and MET.Results: Phospho-HER3 as well as pAKT
levels were decreased after trastuzumab treatment in trastuzumab
sensitive cell lines, while there were no deactivation in the resistant
cell lines. In the primary trastuzumab resistant cell lines, 5 of 6 cells
expressed MET while only one of 4 cells expressed MET in the sensitive
cell lines. BT474 cells were found to have increased MET level when the
cells acquired resistance to trastuzumab. HCC1954 cells, MET
overexpressing and primary trastuzumab cell line, were sensitized to
trastuzumab when MET was knocked down. MET knockdown led to a decrease of
phosphor-HER3 level in HCC1954, BT474, and BT474 trastuzumab resistant
(BT-TR) cells. The paraffin-embedded tumor samples from BT474 xenograft
treated with trastuzumab and HER2-positive breast cancer patients will be
stained for MET expression to assess its prognostic and predictive values
sin HER2 positive breast cancer.Conclusion: MET may play a key role in
maintaining HER3 phosphorylation during trastuzumab treatment and
resistance in HER2 positive breast cancer.

