Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comparing protein pathway activation mapping portraits between
gliobastoma patient-matched primary tumor, xenografts and neurospheres:
implications for precision medicine


Background: Most current targeted therapeutics are directed against the
activated protein kinase-driven signaling pathway architecture. While
guiding therapy selection based on protein phosphorylation is
biochemically rational given these proteins represent the direct drug
targets it is not certain which protein networks/signaling protein
targets are the causal driver of any patient's tumor. Thus, the
availability of a system that recapitulates the human in vivo setting and
allows for credentialing and identification of which activated signaling
networks are causally necessary for tumor viability would be extremely
important.Methods: To test two such systems and determine how they
resemble the cell signaling architecture of the human primary tumor we
compared eight snap-frozen laser capture microdissected (LCM) primary
glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) samples with tumor-matching LCM mouse
xenografts as well as matching neurospheres (NP). Reverse phase protein
microarrays were utilized wherein the total level or phosphorylated level
of 70 key signal transduction proteins known to be the direct targets for
a number of important targeted therapies and implicated in GBM tumor
biology were measured.Results: Overall, the signaling architecture of the
xenografts more closely resembled the matched primary LCM tumors in this
study set. However, unsupervised hierarchical clustering of the data
revealed instances where pathway information such as total c-MET, phospho
RAF (S259), phospho GSK3 (S21/9) and total EGFR was retained across
matched LCM primary tumor, xenografts and NP. In addition there were a
number of instances where the signaling architecture of the primary human
tumor did not resemble the matched NP and xenograft signature.Conclusion:
These pilot data indicate that 3D cell culture conditions may effectively
recapitulate in vivo signaling network activation in certain instances,
although these preliminary results also suggest that xenografts more
closely resemble the cell architecture of matching primary GBM tumors.
These data highlight the importance and impact of the microenvironment
and culture conditions on tumor cell signal transduction network
activation. However, two caveats to this approach remain: (a) drug
studies in GBM xenografts and NP are limited to those targeting signaling
pathways that are faithfully reproduced from the human in vivo setting
and (b) the time required to develop a patient matched xenograft model
for individualized drug testing may be too long for a fast-progressing
disease such as GBM.

