Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genetic cancer incidence


Objective: Hereditary Breast Ovarian Cancer (HBOC) is genetic malignancy
associated with BRCA1/2 genes. Selecting confirmative tests for target
population are not clearly defined and expensive. We undertook this study
to find the detection rate of HBOC among Korean ovarian carcinoma
patients based on family history and immunohistochemistry right after by
surgeon.Methods: This study examined 22 patients diagnosed with ovarian
carcinomas by single surgeon and counselor. All patients were provided
genetic counseling based on immunohistochemistry (IHC) of mismatch repair
genes (BRCA1, BRCA2) and 1st, 2nd 3 rd relatives' family history of
cancer. Additionally, direct full sequencing to verify germ line
mutations was performed to all patients after consent.Results: Median age
was 54.Preop CA 125 was 1824(37.7116009). There were 3 refusals after
counseling. Patients with family cancer history were 3/21(14%). The
number of patients with negative IHC results for BRCA1/BRCA2 was 9 and
6.Both negative patients were 3/21(14%). Both normal staining patients
were 4/21(19%).There were 3/19 patients (16%) with germ line mutations
(two BRCA1 and one BRCA2).Variation of unknown significance mutation
patients were 5/19(26%).Conclusion: Our data indicate approximately 17%
of patients have a germ line mutation in this study group. Active genetic
counseling by surgeon with IHC and family history can help detect HBOC
among ovarian carcinoma patients.

