Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An AR-regulated kinase CCRK activates a tumor-initiating circuitry
through dual regulation of EZH2


Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the commonest and deadliest
cancers worldwide with a striking gender prevalence observed in men.
Androgen receptor (AR) is a ligand-activated nuclear receptor that
regulates the development of male sexual phenotype. Aberrant AR
signaling, however, has detrimental consequences in the development of
male-predominant cancers. Using genome-wide location analysis, we have
recently uncovered cell cycle-related kinase (CCRK) as an AR direct
transcriptional target that drives aberrant hepatocellular proliferation
and tumorigenicity through -catenin/T cell factor signaling (Feng et al.
2011). We also found that the Polycomb protein EZH2 promotes
-catenin-dependent hepatocarcinogenesis through concordant repression of
Wnt antagonists via histone H3 lysine 27 trimethylation (Cheng et al.
2011). Recent studies have revealed the Polycomb-independent role of EZH2
in gene activation via AKT-mediated phosphorylation, however, the
regulation and signaling network of EZH2 in HCC are poorly-understood.
Here we show that the AR-regulated kinase CCRK activates a
tumor-initiating circuitry by dual regulation of EZH2. Activation of CCRK
phosphorylates glycogen synthase kinase 3 (GSK-3) and AKT leading to
transcriptional up-regulation and phosphorylation of EZH2 at Ser21
(pEZH2Ser9), respectively. pEZH2Ser9 in turn physically interacts with AR
and cooperatively activate CCRK transcription via direct binding to the
CCRK promoter, thus forming a feedback circuitry. In a chemical-induced
murine HCC model, activation of the AR/CCRK/EZH2 regulatory loop precedes
HCC formation, which is significantly reduced (>80%) by
lentiviral-mediated knockdown of CCRK. In human HCC tissues, these
proteins are highly up-regulated, starting from the adjacent precancerous
liver tissues. Most importantly, hyper-activation of this loop is
significantly associated with shorter overall (pHepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC) is one of the commonest and deadliest cancers worldwide with a
striking gender prevalence observed in men. Androgen receptor (AR) is a
ligand-activated nuclear receptor that regulates the development of male
sexual phenotype. Aberrant AR signaling, however, has detrimental
consequences in the development of male-predominant cancers. Using
genome-wide location analysis, we have recently uncovered cell
cycle-related kinase (CCRK) as an AR direct transcriptional target that
drives aberrant hepatocellular proliferation and tumorigenicity through
-catenin/T cell factor signaling (Feng et al. 2011). We also found that
the Polycomb protein EZH2 promotes -catenin-dependent
hepatocarcinogenesis through concordant repression of Wnt antagonists via
histone H3 lysine 27 trimethylation (Cheng et al. 2011). Recent studies
have revealed the Polycomb-independent role of EZH2 in gene activation
via AKT-mediated phosphorylation, however, the regulation and signaling
network of EZH2 in HCC are poorly-understood. Here we show that the
AR-regulated kinase CCRK activates a tumor-initiating circuitry by dual
regulation of EZH2. Activation of CCRK phosphorylates glycogen synthase
kinase 3 (GSK-3) and AKT leading to transcriptional up-regulation and
phosphorylation of EZH2 at Ser21 (pEZH2Ser9), respectively. pEZH2Ser9 in
turn physically interacts with AR and cooperatively activate CCRK
transcription via direct binding to the CCRK promoter, thus forming a
feedback circuitry. In a chemical-induced murine HCC model, activation of
the AR/CCRK/EZH2 regulatory loop precedes HCC formation, which is
significantly reduced (>80%) by lentiviral-mediated knockdown of CCRK. In
human HCC tissues, these proteins are highly up-regulated, starting from
the adjacent precancerous liver tissues. Most importantly,
hyper-activation of this loop is significantly associated with shorter
overall (p<0.0001) and disease-free survival rates (pHepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC) is one of the commonest and deadliest cancers worldwide
with a striking gender prevalence observed in men. Androgen receptor (AR)
is a ligand-activated nuclear receptor that regulates the development of
male sexual phenotype. Aberrant AR signaling, however, has detrimental
consequences in the development of male-predominant cancers. Using
genome-wide location analysis, we have recently uncovered cell
cycle-related kinase (CCRK) as an AR direct transcriptional target that
drives aberrant hepatocellular proliferation and tumorigenicity through
-catenin/T cell factor signaling (Feng et al. 2011). We also found that
the Polycomb protein EZH2 promotes -catenin-dependent
hepatocarcinogenesis through concordant repression of Wnt antagonists via
histone H3 lysine 27 trimethylation (Cheng et al. 2011). Recent studies
have revealed the Polycomb-independent role of EZH2 in gene activation
via AKT-mediated phosphorylation, however, the regulation and signaling
network of EZH2 in HCC are poorly-understood. Here we show that the
AR-regulated kinase CCRK activates a tumor-initiating circuitry by dual
regulation of EZH2. Activation of CCRK phosphorylates glycogen synthase
kinase 3 (GSK-3) and AKT leading to transcriptional up-regulation and
phosphorylation of EZH2 at Ser21 (pEZH2Ser9), respectively. pEZH2Ser9 in
turn physically interacts with AR and cooperatively activate CCRK
transcription via direct binding to the CCRK promoter, thus forming a
feedback circuitry. In a chemical-induced murine HCC model, activation of
the AR/CCRK/EZH2 regulatory loop precedes HCC formation, which is
significantly reduced (>80%) by lentiviral-mediated knockdown of CCRK. In
human HCC tissues, these proteins are highly up-regulated, starting from
the adjacent precancerous liver tissues. Most importantly,
hyper-activation of this loop is significantly associated with shorter
overall (p<0.0001) and disease-free survival rates (p<0.01) of the HCC
patients. This study not only advances our fundamental understanding of
the gender disparity in HCC, but also provides a new paradigm for nuclear
receptor regulation of cancer epigenome. Elucidating the detailed
signaling network of AR/CCRK/EZH2 will lead to the discovery and
development of targeted therapies tailored to inhibit cancer-specific
pathways. This study was supported by a CUHK Focused Investments Scheme -
Scheme B (fis1112/0674/12yc), a National Natural Science Foundation of
China (373492), a Health and Medical Research Fund (12110532) and a
General Research Fund (462710).References:1. Feng H, et al. Cell
cycle-related kinase is a direct androgen receptor-regulated gene that
drives -catenin/T cell factor-dependent hepatocarcinogenesis. J Clin
Invest. 2011;121:3159-75.2. Cheng AS, et al. EZH2-mediated concordant
repression of Wnt antagonists promotes -catenin-dependent
hepatocarcinogenesis. Cancer Res. 2011;71:4028-39.

