Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel combinations of nano-formulated ferulic acid and aspirin
show high potential for chemoprevention of pancreatic cancer


Pancreatic cancer ranks as the fourth most deadly form of cancer in the
United States with about 37,000 deaths each year. This study evaluated
the chemopreventive potential of combinations of free and
nano-encapsulated mixtures of ferulic acid (FA) and aspirin (ASP) in low
doses to human pancreatic cancer cells, MIA PaCa-2 and Panc-1. Cell lines
were tested according to published protocols wherein cells were seeded in
96-well microplates and incubated with the unmodified and modified
combinations for 72 h and analyzed using MTS cell viability assay method.
Apoptosis was measured by flow cytometry. Results demonstrated that free
FA (200 M) and ASP (1 mM) combinations on average reduced cell viability
by 60% (PPancreatic cancer ranks as the fourth most deadly form of cancer
in the United States with about 37,000 deaths each year. This study
evaluated the chemopreventive potential of combinations of free and
nano-encapsulated mixtures of ferulic acid (FA) and aspirin (ASP) in low
doses to human pancreatic cancer cells, MIA PaCa-2 and Panc-1. Cell lines
were tested according to published protocols wherein cells were seeded in
96-well microplates and incubated with the unmodified and modified
combinations for 72 h and analyzed using MTS cell viability assay method.
Apoptosis was measured by flow cytometry. Results demonstrated that free
FA (200 M) and ASP (1 mM) combinations on average reduced cell viability
by 60% (P<0.001), and also induced cell apoptosis by 47% (PPancreatic
cancer ranks as the fourth most deadly form of cancer in the United
States with about 37,000 deaths each year. This study evaluated the
chemopreventive potential of combinations of free and nano-encapsulated
mixtures of ferulic acid (FA) and aspirin (ASP) in low doses to human
pancreatic cancer cells, MIA PaCa-2 and Panc-1. Cell lines were tested
according to published protocols wherein cells were seeded in 96-well
microplates and incubated with the unmodified and modified combinations
for 72 h and analyzed using MTS cell viability assay method. Apoptosis
was measured by flow cytometry. Results demonstrated that free FA (200 M)
and ASP (1 mM) combinations on average reduced cell viability by 60%
(P<0.001), and also induced cell apoptosis by 47% (P<0.001) on the two
cell lines. However, when individual agents (FA 200 M; ASP 1mM) were
tested, they were virtually ineffective in reducing cell viability, thus
indicating an additive/synergistic effect of the two agents in
combination. Subsequently, nano-formulations of FA and ASP (nano-FA and
nano-ASP) were prepared by encapsulating the agents within solid lipid
nanoparticles (SLNs) and tested on the same cell lines. Prior to this,
nano-FA and nano-ASP were evaluated for particle sizes and encapsulation
efficiencies. Initial particle sizes were 183 46 nm (nano-FA) and 22967
nm (nano-ASP), respectively. Furthermore, the encapsulation efficiencies
were high for both nano-FA (86%) and nano-ASP (78%). The combination
mixture of nano-FA (25 M) and nano-ASP (25 M) reduced the cell viability
of MIA PaCa-2 and Panc-1 cells by 70% (PPancreatic cancer ranks as the
fourth most deadly form of cancer in the United States with about 37,000
deaths each year. This study evaluated the chemopreventive potential of
combinations of free and nano-encapsulated mixtures of ferulic acid (FA)
and aspirin (ASP) in low doses to human pancreatic cancer cells, MIA
PaCa-2 and Panc-1. Cell lines were tested according to published
protocols wherein cells were seeded in 96-well microplates and incubated
with the unmodified and modified combinations for 72 h and analyzed using
MTS cell viability assay method. Apoptosis was measured by flow
cytometry. Results demonstrated that free FA (200 M) and ASP (1 mM)
combinations on average reduced cell viability by 60% (P<0.001), and also
induced cell apoptosis by 47% (P<0.001) on the two cell lines. However,
when individual agents (FA 200 M; ASP 1mM) were tested, they were
virtually ineffective in reducing cell viability, thus indicating an
additive/synergistic effect of the two agents in combination.
Subsequently, nano-formulations of FA and ASP (nano-FA and nano-ASP) were
prepared by encapsulating the agents within solid lipid nanoparticles
(SLNs) and tested on the same cell lines. Prior to this, nano-FA and
nano-ASP were evaluated for particle sizes and encapsulation
efficiencies. Initial particle sizes were 183 46 nm (nano-FA) and 22967
nm (nano-ASP), respectively. Furthermore, the encapsulation efficiencies
were high for both nano-FA (86%) and nano-ASP (78%). The combination
mixture of nano-FA (25 M) and nano-ASP (25 M) reduced the cell viability
of MIA PaCa-2 and Panc-1 cells by 70% (P<0.001), and also induced cell
apoptosis by 30% (PPancreatic cancer ranks as the fourth most deadly form
of cancer in the United States with about 37,000 deaths each year. This
study evaluated the chemopreventive potential of combinations of free and
nano-encapsulated mixtures of ferulic acid (FA) and aspirin (ASP) in low
doses to human pancreatic cancer cells, MIA PaCa-2 and Panc-1. Cell lines
were tested according to published protocols wherein cells were seeded in
96-well microplates and incubated with the unmodified and modified
combinations for 72 h and analyzed using MTS cell viability assay method.
Apoptosis was measured by flow cytometry. Results demonstrated that free
FA (200 M) and ASP (1 mM) combinations on average reduced cell viability
by 60% (P<0.001), and also induced cell apoptosis by 47% (P<0.001) on the
two cell lines. However, when individual agents (FA 200 M; ASP 1mM) were
tested, they were virtually ineffective in reducing cell viability, thus
indicating an additive/synergistic effect of the two agents in
combination. Subsequently, nano-formulations of FA and ASP (nano-FA and
nano-ASP) were prepared by encapsulating the agents within solid lipid
nanoparticles (SLNs) and tested on the same cell lines. Prior to this,
nano-FA and nano-ASP were evaluated for particle sizes and encapsulation
efficiencies. Initial particle sizes were 183 46 nm (nano-FA) and 22967
nm (nano-ASP), respectively. Furthermore, the encapsulation efficiencies
were high for both nano-FA (86%) and nano-ASP (78%). The combination
mixture of nano-FA (25 M) and nano-ASP (25 M) reduced the cell viability
of MIA PaCa-2 and Panc-1 cells by 70% (P<0.001), and also induced cell
apoptosis by 30% (P<0.01), thus reducing the dosage of FA by 8-fold and
that of ASP by 40-fold to elicit a comparable response as the mixture of
the free FA and ASP. Finally, a trans-AM NF-B transcription factor assay
kit was used to help understand the mechanism. Our results demonstrate
that nano-FA and nano-ASP combinations significantly down-regulated NF-B
DNA binding activity in MIA PaCa-2 and Panc-1 cells. In conclusion,
convincing evidence is provided of the chemopreventive potential of
combinations of FA and ASP against pancreatic cancer, especially when
formulated within a nanotechnology-based delivery system.

