Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression of PRMT5 in lung adenocarcinoma and its significance in
epithelial-mesenchymal transition


Although protein arginine methyltransferase 5 (PRMT5) has been implicated
in various cancers, its expression pattern in lung adenocarcinoma cell
lines and tissue samples has not yet been elucidated in detail. In this
study, microarray data analysis of 40 non-small cell lung carcinoma cell
lines showed that PRMT5 was a candidate histone methyltransferase gene
that correlated with epithelial-mesenchymal transition.
Immunocytochemical analysis of these cell lines indicated that the
expression of PRMT5 was frequently localized to the cytoplasm of
E-cadherin-low and vimentin-high cell lines, while it was predominant in
the nucleus and faint in the cytoplasm of E-cadherin-high and
vimentin-low cell lines. Immunohistochemical analysis of 130 cases of
lung adenocarcinoma revealed that the expression of PRMT5 was high in the
cytoplasm of 47 cases (36%) and the nuclei of 34 cases (26%). The high
cytoplasmic expression of PRMT5 was frequently observed in high grade
subtypes such as the solid adenocarcinoma component with low expression
of thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1, the master regulator of lung)
and low expression of cytokeratin 7 and E-cadherin (two markers for
bronchial epithelial differentiation), while the high nuclear expression
of PRMT5 was frequently noted in the lepidic growth component, a
low-grade subtype. The cytoplasmic expression of PRMT5 was correlated
with vessel invasion and poor prognosis. We herein highlighted the
importance of PRMT5 expression, especially its cytoplasmic expression, in
the process of epithelial-mesenchymal transition and loss of the
bronchial epithelial phenotype of lung adenocarcinoma.

