Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: VBIM technology identifies beta-catenin-like protein (BCLP) as a
novel negative regulator of NF-kB


Colon cancer is the second leading cause of cancer related deaths in the
United States. The nuclear factor kB (NF-kB) is an important family of
transcription factors whose aberrant activation has been found in many
types of cancer, including colon cancer. Therefore, understanding the
regulation of NF-kB is of ultimate importance for cancer therapy. The
purpose of this study is to use a novel validation-based insertional
mutagenesis (VBIM) strategy to identify novel regulators of NF-kB, and
further evaluate their roles in the regulation of NF-kB signaling in
colon cancer cells. We infected D1 cells (293 derived cells with hyper
active NF-kB activity) with VBIM virus to cause the overexpression of
negative regulators of NF-kB, and then further selected the mutant cells
with low NF-kB activity under ganciclovir (GCV) treatment. Targeted gene
was then identified by using VBIM specific primers. In a preliminary
screen, we identified the novel beta-catenin like protein (BCLP) gene as
a negative regulator of NF-kB. Overexpression of BCLP led to decreased
NF-kB activity by kB reporter assay, while knocking it down had the
opposite effect. Furthermore, we found that overexpression of BCLP in
HT29 colon cancer cells greatly reduced both the number and the size of
colonies that were formed in a soft agar assay, while sh-RNA mediated
knockdown resulted in an opposite effect, confirming that BCLP is a tumor
suppressor in HT29 cells. Our future experiments aim to further assess
the role of BCLP in colon tumor formation in a mouse xenograft model. In
summary, by using the novel VBIM technique, we identified BCLP as a novel
negative regulator of NF-kB. This discovery could lead to the
establishment of BCLP as a potential biomarker and therapeutic target in
colon cancer.

