Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNA-6734 induces p21 gene expression by targeting a
complementary p21 promoter sequence and inhibits colon cancer cells


MicroRNAs (miRNAs) regulate gene expression by binding to the cellular
transcript leading to translational repression or degradation of the
target mRNA. However, miRNA have also been shown to induce gene
expression by targeting promoter in a phenomenon referred to as RNA
activation (RNAa). Recently, p21 promoter targeted small activating RNA,
dsP21-322, has been shown to inhibit the growth of various cancer cells.
The purpose of this study was to investigate the effects of miR-6734,
which has a sequence homology with dsP21-322, on p21 gene activation and
cell growth inhibition in HCT116 human colon cancer cells. miR-6734
induced p21 gene expression and the induction of p21 was decreased by
treatment with miR-6734-5P inhibitor or p21 siRNAs. Furthermore, single
transfection of miR-6734 induced p21 gene expression for 12 days which is
an interesting feature of RNAa. Knockdown experiments revealed that
induction of p21 by miR-6734 required the miRNA maturation protein Ago2
and nuclear transport protein TNRC6A. Functionally, miR-6734 suppressed
cellular growth initiated G0/G1 phase arrest and increased the percentage
of apoptotic cells by increasing caspase-3/7 activity in dose dependent
manner. In addition, miR-6734-mediated cell cycle arrest and apoptosis
was significantly suppressed by miR-6734-5P inhibitor, p21 siRNAs, Ago2
siRNAs and TNRC6A siRNA. These results suggest that endogenous miRNA may
facilitate RNAa in cancer for specific gene expression and manipulate
cancer cell phenotype.

