Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ARID1A expression and its relation with microsatellite instability
and clinicopathological characteristics in colorectal and gastric cancers
of Korean patients


AT-rich interactive domain-containing protein 1A (ARID1A) is a subunit of
the SWI-SNF chromatin-remodeling complex, which is considered to perform
a tumor suppressor function. Somatic mutations of ARID1A were reported to
be detected in about 50% of colorectal cancer (CRC), but loss of
expression seems vary according to tissue type and microsatellite
instability (MSI) status. So, we designed this study to identify the
frequency of loss of ARID1A expression and its clinical relevance in CRC
and gastric cancer (GC) of Korean patients. Immunohistochemistry for
ARID1A was performed using tissue microarray blocks containing 197 CRCs
and 275 SCs, and paired normal mucosa. Data on MSI status were available
in 178 of 197 CRCs and 233 of 275 GCs. Clinicopathological data of the
patients were collected and analyzed. We identified 12 (12/197, 6.1%)
CRCs showing loss of ARID1A expression, all of which were microsatellite
stable. In 178 CRCs with identified MSI status, 3 (1.7%) MSI-H and 6
(3.4%) MSI-L tumors showed normal expression of ARID1A, contrary to MSS
tumors (ARID1A loss: 10/169, 5.9%). Among GCs, 8.0% (22/275) showed loss
of ARID1A expression and 6.4% (15/233) were MSI-H. Tumors with loss of
ARID1A expression accounted for 13.3% (2/13) of GCs with MSI-H whereas
5.0% (11/207) of GCs with MSS. However, there was no association between
ARID1A expression and MSI status in both CRCs (p=0.754) and SCs
(p=0.200). Expression of ARID1A in paired normal mucosal epithelial cells
was normal in all patients. Clinicopathological factors were not
associated with ARID1A expression in both cancers except that CRCs with
loss of ARID1A expression showed less frequent lymphatic invasion than
those with normal expression (25.0% vs. 69.0%, p=0.003). There was no
association between ARID1A expression and 3-year disease-free survival or
5-year overall survival in both cancers. In this study population, loss
of ARID1A expression was uncommon and not relevant to MSI-H tumors. Its
clinical implication for the prognosis of CRC and GC patients seems to
need further studies with more accumulated data.

