Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The landscape of mitochondrial DNA mutations in human cancer


Recent sequencing studies have extensively explored the somatic
alterations present in the nuclear genomes of human cancers. Although
mitochondria in cancer cells have important roles in energy metabolism
and survival, the origins and impact of somatic mutations in
mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) are unclear. Here, we provide a comprehensive
analysis of somatic alterations in cancer mitochondria from 1,675 genome
sequences across 31 tumor types. We identified 1,907 somatic
substitutions which were mainly C:G>T:A and T:A>C:G. These mutations
exhibited dramatic replicative strand bias, being almost all C>T and A>G
on the mitochondrial heavy strand. This strand-asymmetric mitochondrial
mutational signature is different from those found in nuclear cancer
genomes but is similar to processes shaping human mtDNA sequence over
evolutionary time. The number of mtDNA mutations showed considerable
heterogeneity across tumor types, being significantly higher in tumors
from gastrointestinal and hepatobiliary systems. With respect to
selection, observed missense mutations were nearly neutral and often
gradually drifted towards homoplasmy over time. In contrast, mutations
resulting in protein truncation showed evidence of negative selection and
were more frequently heteroplasmic. Our findings indicate that the
endogenous mutational mechanism has far greater impact than any other
external mutagens in mitochondria, and is fundamentally linked to mtDNA
replication.

