Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The BET Bromodomain inhibitor OTX015 targets the NFKB, TLR and
JAK/STAT pathways and shows pre-clinical activity as single agent and in
combination in mature B-cell tumors


Background:Lymphomas are still incurable in many patients and novel
active compounds are actively being sought. We previously reported single
agent activity of the BET bromodomain OTX015 in lymphoma cell lines and
in vivo (AACR 2012; ICML 2013). Here, we report a study of the mechanism
of action of OTX015 and its activity in combination with other
anti-cancer compounds.Methods:Cell lines: 22 diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma (DLBCL), 4 mantle cell lymphomas, 3 multiple myelomas, 3 splenic
marginal zone lymphoma and 1 prolymphocytic leukemia. Anti-proliferative
of OTX015 (OncoEthix SA, Switzerland) was assessed by MTT and its
cytotoxic activity by Annexin V staining and gene expression profiling
(GEP) with Illumina HumanHT-12 Expression BeadChips. Data mining was done
with LIMMA, GSEA, Metacore. Synergy was assessed in cells (2-5 cell
lines) exposed for 72 h to increasing doses of OTX015 alone or in
combination with increasing doses of other agents. MTT assays were
performed and Chou-Talalay combination index (CI)
calculated.Results:OTX015 (500 nM, 72h) showed cytostatic activity in
29/33 (88%) cell lines and apoptosis in 3/22 (14%). Mutations in genes
coding for MYD88 and components of BCR (P=0.027), and ABC signaling
phenotypes (P=0.008) were significantly associated with apoptosis
induction. We performed GEP on 2 cell lines (SU-DHL-6, SU-DHL-2), treated
with DMSO or OTX015 (500 nM) for 1, 2, 4, 8 or 12 hours. Most upregulated
genes were histones. MYC target genes were highly significantly enriched
among all OTX015 regulated transcripts and MYC was the most frequently
downregulated gene. OTX015 also downregulated MYD88, IRAK1, TLR6, IL6,
STAT3, and TNFRSF17, members of the NFKB, TLR and JAK/STAT pathways. NFKB
target genes (IRF4, TNFAIP3 and BIRC3) were also downregulated (PCR).
Immunoblotting and immunohistochemistry showed a reduction of
transcriptionally active pSTAT3 in 2 ABC cell lines, and a reduction in
nuclear localization of p50 (NFKB1), indicating an inhibitory effect of
OTX015 on the canonical NFKB pathway. Finally, IL10 and IL4 production
was reduced after 24 hours OTX015 treatment.Synergy was observed with
everolimus (median CI=0.1; range 0.1-0.2), ibrutinib in ABC-DLBCL
(CI=0.04; 0.02-0.1), idelalisib (CAL101) (CI=0.5; 0.04-2.4), vorinostat
(CI=0.5; 0.3-0.6), rituximab (CI=0.5; 0.4-0.5), decitabine (CI=0.6;
0.6-0.7), lenalidomide (CI=0.7; 0.6-0.7), and all-trans retinoic acid
(CI=0.4; .1-1.6). Additive effects were observed for combinations with
romidepsin (CI=1.08; 1-1.22), bendamustine (CI=0.92; 0.83-1.1), and
doxorubicin (CI=0.83; 0.71-0.96).Conclusions:OTX015 is a promising
candidate for targeted combination therapies. A phase I study
(NCT01713582) in patients with hematological neoplasias is underway and
together with our preclinical data, may support further clinical
investigations.

