Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Autophagic pathways and activity in breast and pancreatic cancer


Autophagy is induced as a homeostatic process by energy shortage and
cellular stress but can also be influenced by drugs. Poor autophagic
function contributes to carcinogenesis but autophagy also promotes
survival of tumours. We performed immunohistochemistry for LC3, pAMP
kinase, p62, p53 on 15 samples from breast cancer and 14 from pancreatic
cancer. P53 mutations were detected using CDGE. Autophagy was active (LC3
puncta in 30% of cells) in 5/15 breast carcinomas and 7/14 pancreatic
carcinomas. This was associated with energy shortage (strong pAMP kinase
expression) in 4/5 in breast samples and 5/7 in those from pancreas,
often clearly colocalized when expression was variable. In contrast,
activation of AMP kinase was not associated with autophagy in 4/8 breast
and 2/7 pancreatic cancers. In 2/5 breast samples and 2/7 from pancreas
impaired autophagic flux was suggested by absent cytoplasmic LC3 staining
and strong expression of p62. Nuclear expression of p53 was seen in 10/15
breast cancer samples and of those 3 were mutated, 11/14 pancreas samples
showed nuclear staining for p53, none mutated. Three out of 7 non-mutated
p53-protein-positive breast cancers had low autophagy. Autophagy was thus
often associated with energy shortage, can clearly also be induced by
other pathways, but p53 appears not to be involved. Lack of autophagy in
the presence of energy shortage suggests defects in induction. There is,
therefore, considerable variability in autophagic pathways and activity
in cancer and this will have to be taken into account when considering
therapeutic intervention in the autophagic process.

