Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A HSP90 inhibitor, AUY922, is effective to overcome the MET- and
AXL-mediated resistance to EGFR-TKI in lung cancer


Activation of bypass signals such as MET and AXL has been identified as
one of possible resistant mechanisms to EGFR-TKI. Since various
oncoproteins are dependent on HSP90 for its maturation and stability, we
investigated the effect of AUY922, a newly developed HSP90 inhibitor of
non-geldanamycin class, in lung cancer cells with MET- and AXL-mediated
resistance. We established resistant cell lines with HCC827 harboring the
deletion mutation on exon 19 of EGFR gene by long-term exposure to
increasing concentrations of gefitnib and erlotinib (designated as
HCC827/GR and HCC827/ER, respectively). The resistance of HCC827/GR was
mediated by MET activation, whereas AXL activation caused resistance in
HCC827/ER. AUY-922 treatment effectively suppressed the proliferation and
induced cell death in both resistant cell lines. Accordingly,
down-regulation of MET and AXL leading to decreased activation of Akt was
noted. The inhibitory effect of AUY-922 on AXL and MET was also confirmed
in AXL or MET-transfected LK-2 cells. In addition, AUY-922 led to reduced
capability of invasion and migration of resistant cells. AUY-922 was
effective to control the tumor growth in xenograft mouse models of
HCC827/GR and HCC827/ER. Our study showed AUY-922 is one of promising
therapeutic options for the MET- and AXL-mediated resistance to EGFR-TKI
in lung cancer.

