Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dynamics of HER-2 loss in mammary carcinoma of human HER-2
trangenic mice


Progression of HER-2+ breast cancer can result in the emergence of
HER-2-negative tumor variants that activate alternative mitogenic
pathways, either spontaneously or after therapy. We found that HER-2 loss
occurs even in transgenic mouse models in which the oncogene is driven by
viral promoters, thus mammary carcinoma of human HER-2 transgenic mice
(huHER-2 mice) can be used to study not only the early phases of
HER-2-driven mammary carcinogenesis, but also tumor progression beyond
HER-2 addiction. Primary mammary carcinomas of huHER-2 mice express high
levels of the oncogene, with a marked intratumoral heterogeneity. Cell
lines grown from HER-2+ mammary carcinomas frequently undergo a
progressive loss of expression. We have established a model system
consisting of cell lines, clones and variants that exhibit one of three
phenotypes: a) high and stable HER-2 expression in vitro and in vivo, b)
high but labile HER-2 expression which is lost either during in vitro
culture, after tumor growth in mice or after in vitro treatment with
trastuzumab, and c) complete loss of HER-2 expression After HER-2 loss,
most variants displayed a transition to an elongated, motile phenotype
(epithelial to mesenchymal transition), an increased ability to generate
mammospheres, a reduced expression of CD24 and an increased expression of
CD44 (denoting mammary cancer stem cells). Tumorigenic and metastatic
ability of HER-2-negative cells was increased in comparison to HER-2+
cells. As expected, HER-2 loss was accompanied by resistance to HER-2
targeted monoclonal antibodies and small molecule inhibitors. The study
of therapeutic agents directed against downstream targets showed that
HER-2-loss was accompanied by a loss of sensitvity to a Src inhibitor,
whereas a PI3K inhibitor was highly effective regardless of HER-2
expression. Our results indicate that human HER-2 transgenic mice are a
useful model to study the dynamics of HER-2 loss in advanced HER-2+
mammary carcinoma, and to analyze alternative therapeutic
strategies.Supported by grants from the Italian Association for Cancer
Research (AIRC).

