Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Germline genetic variants in ANGPT1 & 2 and FGF2 are associated
with pathologic complete response to bevacizumab in breast cancer patients


Purpose: Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is a central mediator
of angiogenesis in cancer and may be targeted by the monoclonal antibody
bevacizumab (B). We have conducted a prospective phase II study using
neoadjuvant B and chemotherapy (CT) in breast cancer patients and showed
improved pathologic complete response (pCR) with the combination compared
to the expected pCR with CT alone (41% vs. 25%, p=0.029 one sided). We
evaluated baseline serum levels of ten angiogenesis-related proteins
(ANG1, ANG2, bFGF, IL-1a, MMP-9, PDGF-BB, PECAM-1, Tie-2, VEGF and
VEGFR2) and found that baseline Tie-2 and bFGF serum levels were
associated with pCR. The goal of the current study is to explore the
association of germline single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) to pCR
obtained with bevacizumab therapy.Methods: Our original patient
population consisted of 27 whites (EA) and 12 African Americans (AA) who
received docetaxel/cyclophosphamide/bevacizumab and doxorubicin. Only 22
EA and 11 AA had buffy coat samples available for genotyping with the
Illumina HumanOmni2.5-8v1-1 BeadChip. We tested 555 SNPs with a minor
allele frequency (MAF) of at least 5%, located in 10 angiogenesis-related
genes.Results: Univariate analysis revealed that 73% AA patients achieved
pCR compared to 27% EA (p=0.012) and that 54% of the patients with ductal
carcinomas achieved pCR compared to 11% with lobular or poorly
differentiated tumors (p=0.021). We therefore included race and cancer
type as covariates in a logistic regression model testing for association
between pCR and each of the 555 SNPs. There were five SNPs in ANGPT1,
five in ANGPT2, and four in FGF2 that were associated with pCR (pPurpose:
Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is a central mediator of
angiogenesis in cancer and may be targeted by the monoclonal antibody
bevacizumab (B). We have conducted a prospective phase II study using
neoadjuvant B and chemotherapy (CT) in breast cancer patients and showed
improved pathologic complete response (pCR) with the combination compared
to the expected pCR with CT alone (41% vs. 25%, p=0.029 one sided). We
evaluated baseline serum levels of ten angiogenesis-related proteins
(ANG1, ANG2, bFGF, IL-1a, MMP-9, PDGF-BB, PECAM-1, Tie-2, VEGF and
VEGFR2) and found that baseline Tie-2 and bFGF serum levels were
associated with pCR. The goal of the current study is to explore the
association of germline single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) to pCR
obtained with bevacizumab therapy.Methods: Our original patient
population consisted of 27 whites (EA) and 12 African Americans (AA) who
received docetaxel/cyclophosphamide/bevacizumab and doxorubicin. Only 22
EA and 11 AA had buffy coat samples available for genotyping with the
Illumina HumanOmni2.5-8v1-1 BeadChip. We tested 555 SNPs with a minor
allele frequency (MAF) of at least 5%, located in 10 angiogenesis-related
genes.Results: Univariate analysis revealed that 73% AA patients achieved
pCR compared to 27% EA (p=0.012) and that 54% of the patients with ductal
carcinomas achieved pCR compared to 11% with lobular or poorly
differentiated tumors (p=0.021). We therefore included race and cancer
type as covariates in a logistic regression model testing for association
between pCR and each of the 555 SNPs. There were five SNPs in ANGPT1,
five in ANGPT2, and four in FGF2 that were associated with pCR (p<0.05).
Because of the modest sample size, none of these SNPs reached levels of
significance after adjusting for multiple comparisons.Conclusion: ANGPT1,
ANGPT2 and FGF2 are promising targets for future research. SNP analysis
results support our hypothesis that the interaction of the host's
angiogenic profile and the type of cancer explains differences in
clinical response to VEGF inhibition. Specifically, our work showed that
variants of the ANGPT1, ANGPT2, and FGF2 genes or their respective
proteins might render certain tumors more susceptible to targeting of
VEGF..

