Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ameloblastoma driver mutations revealed by next-generation
sequencing of formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded specimens


Rare cancer types are not only understudied, but are typically
represented by formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) (rather than
freshly-frozen) specimens that are suboptimal for genomic analysis.
Ameloblastoma is one such rare tumor type, thought to arise from
ameloblasts, the cells that deposit enamel during tooth development.
Though typically benign, ameloblastomas are locally destructive to the
jaw and face, and new non-surgical interventions are needed. To discover
novel driver mutations and therapeutic targets, we optimized methods and
performed whole-transcriptome sequencing and/or targeted exon sequencing
(TruSeq Cancer Panel) of 8 FFPE cases. Identified mutations were
verified, and then evaluated on a larger, independent set of 21 FFPE
cases by PCR and Sanger sequencing. From the analysis, we identified
recurrent somatic mutations in three key developmental or signaling
pathways, including Hedgehog, fibroblast growth factor, and MAP kinase
pathways. Functional interrogation of a novel Hedgehog pathway mutation
confirmed increased basal pathway activity, and defined the response
profile to various pharmacologic Hedgehog inhibitors. Together, our
results define new ameloblastoma drivers and nominate new
molecularly-directed therapies for this rare but disfiguring disease.
More generally, our findings validate a robust approach for discovering
driver mutations in rare cancers.

