Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Overexpression of 14-3-3 contributes to chromosomal instability in
human lung cancer


Lung cancer is the most common cause of cancer-related deaths, and nearly
all lung cancers exhibit genomic instability which results in an abnormal
number of chromosomes known as aneuploidy. In many lung cancers, 14-3-3
proteins have been shown to be aberrantly activated or suppressed, which
implies that these proteins have potential roles in tumorigenesis. Our
lab has demonstrated that over expression of one 14-3-3 family member,
14-3-3, in a non-small cell lung cancer cell line leads to an increase in
the number of cells that exhibit polyploidy, suggesting that this 14-3-3
protein can disrupt normal chromosome segregation. Additionally,
overexpression of 14-3-3 leads to atypical DNA replication and cell cycle
progression. Further evaluation of the polyploid population induced by
overexpressing 14-3-3 revealed that a majority of the cells were
multinucleated, often with two or more nuclei of unequal size and
morphology. Live cell microscopy shows that this nonlinear marked
increase in nuclear content is due to unequal distribution of DNA to the
daughter cells upon cellular division, promoting chromosomal instability.
Our data indicates that 14-3-3 may play an important role in maintaining
normal diploidy, but when overexpressed, as seen in many lung cancers,
can lead to increased levels of chromosomal instability and progression
into aneuploidy.

