Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNA miR-17-92 impairs TGF signaling responsiveness in BRAF
oncogene-activated thyroid cells


Background: Thyroid follicular cells proliferation is regulated by TGF
anti-mitogenic signal. However, thyroid cancer cells become refractory to
this inhibitory signal. TGF signaling deregulation is observed in thyroid
cancer, which shows high frequence of MAPK genetic alteration. BRAF
mutation (BRAFT1799A), the most prevalent alteration in thyroid cancer,
induces MAPK activtion and thyroid oncogenesis. In this process,
deregulation of microRNAs potentiates oncogene activation. MicroRNAs are
small non-coding RNAs that regulate protein levels by pairing to 3-UTR of
mRNA and blocking translation. miR-17-92 cluster of microRNAs,
miR-17-5p/3p, miR-18a, miR-19a/b, miR20a and miR-92a, regulates several
tumor-suppressor genes and is predicted to target TGF pathway components.
Therefore, we aim at analyzing the influence of miR-17-92 in TGF
signaling during oncogene activation in thyroid follicular cells and its
implication for thyroid cancer biology. Methods: The BRAF9-6 cells,
derived from normal rat thyroid follicular cell PCCl3, express BRAFT1799A
under doxicyclin (dox) stimulation. The PCCl3-miR-17-92 cells, derived
from PCCl3 cells, over-express miR-17-92 cluster (pCDNA3.1-Neo). PCCl3-
is the control cell transfected with empty plasmid. MiR-17-92 expression
was detected by real-time qPCR. Cell viability was measured using MTT
assay and proliferation by cell counting (24-72h). TGF signaling
components, Smad4 and Tgfbr2, protein levels was analyzed by
Western-blotting. TGF responsiveness assay was analyzed by luciferase
gene reporter assay after transfection of 3TP-lux plasmid and treatment
with 1-2ng/mL recombinant TGF for 24 hours. Results: BRAF-oncogene
activation (dox) in thyroid follicular cells induced a high expression of
miR-17-92 cluster components and reduced Smad4 and Tgfbr2 protein levels.
In order to analyze the particular influence of miR-17-92 in TGF
signaling, we constructed a cell line, PCCl3-miR-17-92, that
over-expressed miR-17-92 in normal thyroid follicular cells.
Over-expression of miR-17-92 inhibited Tgfbr2 and Smad4 protein levels
that reflected in impaired responsiveness to recombinant TGF inhibitory
signal. Using the 3TP-lux reporter gene assay, that contains TGF
signaling activation responsive sequences, we observed that recombinant
TGF treatment in PCCl3- cells resulted in a 8.0 and 12.3-fold increase in
luciferase activity at concentrations of 1ng/ml and 2ng/mL of recombinant
TGF, respectively, while a 4.3 and 5.6-fold increase is observed in
PCCl3-miR-17-92 cells. Moreover, PCCl3-miR-17-92 showed increases cell
proliferation and cell viability in 18% and 9%, respectively, in
comparison to PCCL3-. Conclusion: miR-17-92 over-expression impairs
normal thyroid follicular cells responsiveness to TGF and increases cell
proliferation and viability, which could imply in TGF inhibitory signal
refractoriness observed in thyroid cancer cells.

