Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Interplay of YB-1 and IL-6 in the acquisition of EMT-like
characteristics


An important step towards tumor progression and metastasis is the
activation of the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) program. This
complex process confers cancer cells traits such as enhanced motility,
invasiveness and resistance to therapy. EMT can be triggered by the
convergence of intrinsic factors and signals from the tumor
microenvironment, such as aberrant expression of cytokines. Recently, the
multifunctional oncoprotein YB-1 has been shown to play an important role
in malignant tumors facilitating many of the hallmarks of cancer proposed
by Hanahan and Weinberg. In this project we focused on the alliance
between YB-1 and the cytokine IL-6, which has been implicated in
tumor-cell metastasis and is a well known EMT inducer. Overexpression or
direct addition of IL-6 up-regulates and activates YB-1 in the epithelial
breast cancer cell line MCF7, leading to an upregulation of mesenchymal
markers (Snail1, N-cadherin), increased cell migration and invasion, as
well as morphological changes associated with an EMT-like phenotype.
Conversely, in the mesenchymal-like breast cancer cell line MDA-MB-231,
RNAi-mediated downregulation of YB-1 resulted in decreased IL-6
expression and an increase in epithelial-like cell characteristics.Our
results describe a novel interplay whereby IL-6 regulates YB-1 and vice
versa creating a positive feed-forward loop driving EMT during breast
cancer progression. In the future we aim to delineate the exact
signalling pathways linking IL-6 and YB-1, and how they converge to
orchestrate important processes such as growth, invasion and metastasis.
The understanding of this interplay will set the stage for new
combinatorial treatments of aggressive breast cancers.Acronyms: EMT,
epithelial to mesenchymal transition; YB-1, Ybox binding protein-1; IL-6
, Interleukin-6.

