Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The landscape of somatic hypermutation in human cancer


Somatic hypermutation is present in the tumor genomes of a subset of
human cancers. Nevertheless, the extent as well as the biological and
clinical impact of hypermutation in cancer patients is unknown. Moreover,
in an age of precision oncology, there is a pressing need to understand
the catastrophic mutational burden of sporadically hypermutated tumors to
ensure an accurate clinical interpretation of candidate actionable
lesions thereby facilitating genomically driven oncology in these
patients. To explore these questions, we assembled a curated repository
of cancer genome data consisting of the sequenced tumor exomes and whole
genomes of 10,852 patients representing 36 tumor types from 90 unique
cohorts. Through integrative genomic analyses of mutational and DNA copy
number profile data, we identified 395 hypermutated tumors, representing
3.6% of all cancers. Of these, 47% of patient tumors possessed somatic
hypermutation that could not be explained by an established exogenous
mutagen, environmental exposure, or known defect in DNA repair. Our
analysis of this unknown class of hypermutated cancers revealed six
distinct mutational signatures, which may be associated with specific
mechanisms driving hypermutation. From allelic abundance data, the
temporal sequence of multiple mutational processes accumulated over the
lifespan of a tumor was apparent. Our analyses also revealed that despite
a high mutational burden, abnormalities cluster to reveal biologic and
therapeutic dependencies. Overall, we exploit big data to explore
uncommon cancer phenotypes like somatic hypermutation, bridging the gap
between complex mutational landscapes and rational therapeutic choices
for molecularly defined cancer patients.

