Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Acid-sensing ion channel 1a (ASIC1a) contributes to cell
proliferation and migration caused by acidic environment in human glioma
cells


Due to an increased metabolic rate, an acidic environment is commonly
observed in tumor tissues. The acidic environment likely has a
significant impact on the viability and proliferation of tumor cells.
Acid-sensing ion channel (ASIC)1a is the key proton receptor expressed in
nervous systems, which regulates acidosis-induced neuronal injury in
various neurological diseases, such as ischemic stroke.
Glioblastomamultiforme (GBM) is the most common and aggressive primary
brain tumor in adults with median survival time of 14.6 months. Since GBM
are characterized by chronic hypoxia and poor perfusion that is likely to
result in acidosis, acidosis may influence the growth behavior and
response to cytotoxic therapy. In the present study, we examined the
effects of acidosis on growth and migration of cultured human malignant
glioma cells A172, and the role of ASIC1a in the cell death induced by
extracellular acid. Methods: 1) We detected ASIC1a mRNA using
reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). 2) We then
determined the presence of ASIC1a in A172 cells using
electrophysiological recording (patch-clamp technique). 3) We assessed
the effects of acidic environment on cell proliferation and maintenance
of clonogenic capability using MTT assay and colony formation assay
respectively. 4) Finally, we examined the effects of acidic environment
on glioma cell migration by transwell invasion assay. Results: 1) RT-PCR
detected the presence of ASIC1a and ASIC4 mRNA in A172 cells. 2) The
inward current was recorded when treated with pH5.0 solution indicating
the expression of functional ASIC1a in A172 cells. 3) Acidic environment
decreased the number of surviving A172 cells, the colony formation, and
also inhibited A172 cell migration. 4) Inhibition of ASIC currents by
nonspecific inhibitor of ASICs amiloride or specific inhibitor PcTX1
protected A172 cell from death. Conclusions: Extracellular acid reduces
proliferation and migration in glioma cells. Extracellular acid induces
death of glioma cells via ASIC1a mechanisms. These results indicate the
presence of ASIC1a in glioma cells and may play significant role in
glioma progression. This work was supported by the National Institutes of
Health grant numbers NIH R01NS047506, R01NS066027, UL1 RR025008, U54
RR026137, AHA 0840132N, and ALZ IIRG-10-173350.

