Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical antitumor activity of SST0116CL1, a novel heat shock
protein 90 (HSP90) inhibitor


Hsp90 is a component of a molecular chaperone complex, involved in the
folding, maturation and stabilisation of key signaling molecules which
control cell proliferation, survival and transformation. It works by a
modulation of a set of cancer-associated proteins, collectively referred
to as clients'. Inhibition of Hsp90 causes simultaneous destabilization
and eventual degradation of client proteins that result in suppression of
tumor growth, and a number of novel synthetic HSP90 inhibitors are
currently under oncology clinical investigations for the treatment of a
wide variety of tumor types. SST0116CL1 (property of sigma-tau Research
Switzerland S.A.) is a potent, second generation, small-molecule HSP90
inhibitor, with a chemical structure (4-amino substituted
resorcino-isoxazole) unrelated to the first generation ansamycin family
of HSP90 inhibitors. SST0116CL1 binds to the ATP binding pocket of HSP90,
and interferes with HSP90 chaperone function thus resulting in client
protein degradation and tumor growth inhibition. In in vitro studies,
SST0116CL1 was shown to inhibit recombinant HSP90 and to induce the
degradation of the oncogenic Her2 tyrosine kinase in BT-474 human breast
cancer cells. Moreover, it was able to induce the destabilization and
depletion of different client proteins, often overexpressed and
constitutively activated in numerous types of hematological or solid
human tumors. These results correlated well with those obtained from the
cell proliferation assay as well as with the HSP90 competitive binding
assay, and clearly suggested that target modulation of HSP90 was
achieved. In preclinical in vivo studies, in different solid and
hematological tumor xenograft models, such as A431 epidermoid carcinoma
with EGFR overexpression, GTL-16 gastric carcinoma with c-Met
overexpression, MV4;11 B-myelomonocytic leukemia with flt3 mutation,
A2780/Dx multidrug resistant ovarian carcinoma with P-glycoprotein
overexpression, SST0116CL1 delivered intravenously or intraperitoneally
revealed a potency at least comparable or higher than that found with the
HSP90 inhibitor NVP-AUY922, under Phase II clinical trials investigation,
or chemotherapeutic drugs currently used in cancer therapy. SST0116CL1
showed to be a manageable compound when given according to different
schedules (qd5x/w; q4d/w; q2dx3/w), since it was well-tolerated and
active to inhibit the tumor growth. A modulation of PD biomarkers in
terms of down-regulation of EGFR, AKT and CDK4 was reached in tumor
lesions of A431 tumor bearing mice treated with SST0116CL1 and a
down-regulation of c-Met, AKT and CDK4 was observed in tumors collected
from GTL-16 tumor bearing mice. PK parameters demonstrated a rapid
clearance of SST0116CL1 from normal tissues and a blood compartment with
prolonged retention in tumors. On the complex, these results strongly
encourage the selection of SST0116CL1 as a promising candidate for
clinical trial.

