Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clinical and molecular genetic analysis of squamous cell carcinoma
of the oral tongue


Squamous cell carcinoma of tongue (SCCT) is a common form of head and
neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) in developing countries, mainly in
India. In the last few decades, a steady increase in incidence rate of
SCCT has been reported across the world. More importantly, though SCCT is
considered to be a tobacco-related late-onset cancer, recent reports
indicate an increase in incidence of SCCT in the young and in
non-smokers. We analyzed the status of known tumorigenic pathways/genes
including TP53, epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), microsatellite
instability (MSI), CDKN2A, FHIT and human papilloma virus (HPV) infection
in 120 surgically resected primary oral SCCT (SCCOT) samples and
correlated with clinico-pathological variables and disease specific
survival. 78 of 121 (65%) samples exhibited p53 nuclear stabilization
confirming earlier reports. Interestingly, p53 nuclear stabilization was
more common in young (36/46; 78%) than in older (44/75; 56%) patients (p
= 0.0184). Further, PCR based mutation screening of exons 5-8 (encoding
the DNA binding domain of p53) revealed mutations in ten of nineteen
samples (52.6%) that exhibited p53 nuclear stabilization and in three of
fifteen tumors (20%) that did not. We identified a novel 33bp deletion,
c.616-648del33, located in exon 5 in a p53 positive tumor from a chronic
tobacco chewer. Case control analysis revealed that Proline at TP53 codon
72 increased the risk of SCCOT. Majority of samples (97/121; 80%)
exhibited significant EGFR expression though HPV infection was rare
(14/106; 13%). MSI was observed in 14/106 (13%) samples, a frequency
higher than reported for other populations. Loss of Heterozygosity (LOH)
was more frequently observed in CDKN2A (28%) and FHIT (26%). In addition,
LOH at FHIT locus was significantly associated with p53 nuclear
stabilization (p = 0.0508), especially in non-smokers. A significant
difference in survival rate between p53 positive and negative group (p =
0.0056) (Hazard ratio 2.5595) was observed. Though associated with p53
stabilization, FHIT loss did not exhibit significant effect on patient
survival. Interestingly, patients exhibiting p53 nuclear stabilization as
well as FHIT loss exhibited worse survival. We performed genome-wide DNA
copy number and transcript profiling in several SCCOT samples.
Interestingly, there was no significant difference in extent and profile
of chromosomal instability in p53 positive and negative tumors.
Amplifications were detected at chromosomal regions 3q26.1 (PIK3CA), 5p,
8q22 (MYC, RUNX1T1), 11q13 (CCND1) and 20q13 (HNF). Genome-wide
transcript profiling identified novel pathways that appear to drive
tumorigenesis in tumors not exhibiting p53 inactivation. Our
comprehensive analysis has therefore revealed important insights into the
molecular basis for SCCOT and identified prognostic indicators in
patients not associated with tobacco use.

