Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Heat shock protein gp96 regulates LRP6-Wnt-Survivin pathway and
myeloma progression


Multiple myeloma (MM) is an incurable plasma cell neoplasm whose
pathogenesis is closely linked to dysregulated unfolded protein response
(UPR) in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). Constitutive activation of UPR
in mice causes myeloma, as demonstrated by transgenic expression of a
master UPR transcription factor XBP1s. However, the underlying mechanism
remains unknown. Heat shock protein gp96 (grp94) is an ER paralogue of
the cytosolic HSP90 and its expression can be induced by the accumulation
of misfolded proteins. As one of the most abundant proteins in the ER
lumen, gp96 is a key downstream chaperone in the ER to mediate UPR.
However, the roles of individual ER HSPs in plasma cell and myeloma have
not been reported. In this study, we demonstrated that the persistence of
plasma cells as well as the development of myeloma in XBP1s-transgenic
mice is critically dependent on gp96 in vivo. Furthermore, we
demonstrated that gp96 silencing in human MM cells led to significant
reduction of surface expression of Wnt coreceptor LRP6 and the downstream
canonical Wnt signaling. gp96 knockdown causes severe compromise in MM
cell growth which can be significantly rescued by GSK3 inhibitors. In the
absence of gp96, MM cells undergo mitotic catastrophe and apoptosis which
correlated with decreased expression of survivin, a downstream molecule
of Wnt in controlling cell survival. This is the first study to uncover
the critical roles of gp96 in the initiation and progression of multiple
myeloma, suggesting that blockade of gp96 is a novel therapeutic strategy
against multiple myeloma.

