Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A kinome screen identifies SRPK1 to mediate breast cancer
metastasis


Tumor cell migration plays key role in cancer cell dissemination and
metastasis and is controlled by signaling-mediated cytoskeletal and
cell-matrix adhesion remodeling. Using a phagokinetic track (PKT) assay
with migratory H1299 cells, we performed a siRNA screen of almost 1,500
genes encoding kinases/phosphatases, adhesome-related and
migration-related proteins, with the aim of identifying genes that
determine tumor cell migration speed, and persistence. Thirty candidate
genes, showing significant effect were validated in live tumor cell
migration assays, and eight of those had a significant association with
metastasis free survival in breast cancer patients, ITGB3BP, MAP3K8,
NEK2, SHC1 and SRPK1 being most significant .Further examination
indicated that the expression of SRPK1, the most interesting gene
identified in this screen , was highest in basal-like breast cancer and
its expression level was correlated with poor disease outcome and
preferred metastasis to the lungs and brain. In two independent breast
tumor metastasis models, stable shRNA-based SRPK1 knockdown suppressed
metastasis to distant organs, including lung, liver and spleen and
inhibited focal adhesion reorganization. We provide here a comprehensive
information resource on the molecular determinants of tumor cell
migration and identify SRPK1 as a potential candidate drug target
associated with breast cancer metastasis.

