Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prediction of cancer progression in Barrett's esophagus patients
using miRNA profiling


Background: Barrett's esophagus (BE) is a metaplastic disease with risk
to develop esophageal adenocarcinoma (EAC). Current screening method for
BE patients (endoscopy and biopsy) is discomfort, expensive and
relatively risky for patients. Moreover, the procedure is complicated by
subjective histopathological examination. Approximately only 2% of BE
patients annually progress to adenocarcinoma. The aim of our study was to
identify miRNA profiles in order to predict cancer progression in
high-risk BE patients.Methods and patients: FFPE samples were obtained
from 68 patients (10 EAC, 4 high-grade and 21 low-grade dysplasia of
esophagus, and 33 BE). There were 49 males and 19 females; median age was
58 years, range 27 - 97 years. Total RNA was purified from FFPE biopsy
samples using Proteinase K treatment followed by RNeasy kit (Qiagen).
Microarray analysis was performed using the GeneChip miRNA 3.0 Array
(Affymetrix). The data were analyzed using R software and the
Bioconductor package.Results: In total, 68 GeneChip miRNA 3.0 Arrays were
performed in 68 patients (8 poor quality arrays were excluded).
Expression profiles of 1733 human miRNAs, 1658 human pre-miRNAs and 2216
human sno-RNAs and sca-RNAs were analyzed. In supervised clustering
analysis we found 29 differentially expressed miRNAs, 7 pre-miRNAs and 9
sno-RNAs (pBackground: Barrett's esophagus (BE) is a metaplastic disease
with risk to develop esophageal adenocarcinoma (EAC). Current screening
method for BE patients (endoscopy and biopsy) is discomfort, expensive
and relatively risky for patients. Moreover, the procedure is complicated
by subjective histopathological examination. Approximately only 2% of BE
patients annually progress to adenocarcinoma. The aim of our study was to
identify miRNA profiles in order to predict cancer progression in
high-risk BE patients.Methods and patients: FFPE samples were obtained
from 68 patients (10 EAC, 4 high-grade and 21 low-grade dysplasia of
esophagus, and 33 BE). There were 49 males and 19 females; median age was
58 years, range 27 - 97 years. Total RNA was purified from FFPE biopsy
samples using Proteinase K treatment followed by RNeasy kit (Qiagen).
Microarray analysis was performed using the GeneChip miRNA 3.0 Array
(Affymetrix). The data were analyzed using R software and the
Bioconductor package.Results: In total, 68 GeneChip miRNA 3.0 Arrays were
performed in 68 patients (8 poor quality arrays were excluded).
Expression profiles of 1733 human miRNAs, 1658 human pre-miRNAs and 2216
human sno-RNAs and sca-RNAs were analyzed. In supervised clustering
analysis we found 29 differentially expressed miRNAs, 7 pre-miRNAs and 9
sno-RNAs (p<0.001 or logFC 2) in EAC patients compared to BE patients.
One of the dominant findings was decreased expression of miR-22 in EAC
samples, which is known to function as a tumor suppressor and histone
deacetylase 4 regulator.Conclusion: We have identified miRNA profiles
allowing for better diagnostics of cancer progression in BE patients,
which, however, will require further validation.Acknowledgment: This work
was financially supported by IGA MZ CR NT13585-3/202, IGA UP LF 2013_015,
CZ.1.05/2.1.00/01.0030 and CZ.1.07/2.3.00/30.0004.

