Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNAs encoded at the 14q32 cluster are associated with poor
outcome in lung adenocarcinoma


The aim of this study was to determine whether different histologic
subtypes of lung adenocarcinoma have distinct microRNA (miR) expression
profiles and to identify miRs associated with aggressive subgroups of
surgically-resected lung adenocarcinoma (AC). We profiled the miR
expression of 91 surgically-resected lung adenocarcinomas and 10 matched
nonmalignant lung tissues using TaqMan OpenArray Human microRNA panel.
The top 3 prognostic miRs (miR-411, miR-370 and miR-376a) were validated
by quantitative PCR in an independent cohort of 60 lung AC. To determine
potential underlying biological processes associated with selected miRs,
we used Affymetrix U133A gene expression microarray data from 51 miR
profiled lung AC tumors. Two lung AC cells (SK-LU-1 and NCI-H2228)
overexpressing miR-411 were transfected with miRCURY LNA microRNA power
inhibitors for miR-411 or non-target using Lipofectamine RNAimax and
plated into Boyden chambers for assessing cell migration. No significant
differences in clinical characteristics were observed among the training
(n=91) and the test set (n=60). Patients' characteristics: 45% male; 86%
smokers; 52% stage I, 25% stage II, 19% stage III and 3% stage IV; 26%
adjuvant treatment. Unsupervised hierarchical clustering of 356 expressed
miRs identified 3 major clusters of lung AC that correlated with stage (P
= 0.023), tumor differentiation (P The aim of this study was to determine
whether different histologic subtypes of lung adenocarcinoma have
distinct microRNA (miR) expression profiles and to identify miRs
associated with aggressive subgroups of surgically-resected lung
adenocarcinoma (AC). We profiled the miR expression of 91
surgically-resected lung adenocarcinomas and 10 matched nonmalignant lung
tissues using TaqMan OpenArray Human microRNA panel. The top 3 prognostic
miRs (miR-411, miR-370 and miR-376a) were validated by quantitative PCR
in an independent cohort of 60 lung AC. To determine potential underlying
biological processes associated with selected miRs, we used Affymetrix
U133A gene expression microarray data from 51 miR profiled lung AC
tumors. Two lung AC cells (SK-LU-1 and NCI-H2228) overexpressing miR-411
were transfected with miRCURY LNA microRNA power inhibitors for miR-411
or non-target using Lipofectamine RNAimax and plated into Boyden chambers
for assessing cell migration. No significant differences in clinical
characteristics were observed among the training (n=91) and the test set
(n=60). Patients' characteristics: 45% male; 86% smokers; 52% stage I,
25% stage II, 19% stage III and 3% stage IV; 26% adjuvant treatment.
Unsupervised hierarchical clustering of 356 expressed miRs identified 3
major clusters of lung AC that correlated with stage (P = 0.023), tumor
differentiation (P < 0.003) and histological type of lung AC based on
IASLC-based classification (P The aim of this study was to determine
whether different histologic subtypes of lung adenocarcinoma have
distinct microRNA (miR) expression profiles and to identify miRs
associated with aggressive subgroups of surgically-resected lung
adenocarcinoma (AC). We profiled the miR expression of 91
surgically-resected lung adenocarcinomas and 10 matched nonmalignant lung
tissues using TaqMan OpenArray Human microRNA panel. The top 3 prognostic
miRs (miR-411, miR-370 and miR-376a) were validated by quantitative PCR
in an independent cohort of 60 lung AC. To determine potential underlying
biological processes associated with selected miRs, we used Affymetrix
U133A gene expression microarray data from 51 miR profiled lung AC
tumors. Two lung AC cells (SK-LU-1 and NCI-H2228) overexpressing miR-411
were transfected with miRCURY LNA microRNA power inhibitors for miR-411
or non-target using Lipofectamine RNAimax and plated into Boyden chambers
for assessing cell migration. No significant differences in clinical
characteristics were observed among the training (n=91) and the test set
(n=60). Patients' characteristics: 45% male; 86% smokers; 52% stage I,
25% stage II, 19% stage III and 3% stage IV; 26% adjuvant treatment.
Unsupervised hierarchical clustering of 356 expressed miRs identified 3
major clusters of lung AC that correlated with stage (P = 0.023), tumor
differentiation (P < 0.003) and histological type of lung AC based on
IASLC-based classification (P < 0.005). Cluster 1 was enriched in lepidic
and mucinous invasive AC while cluster 3 included the most solid AC.
Patients classified in cluster 3 had a shorter median overall survival
(16.8 months) as compared to the other clusters (60 months for cluster 1
and 2, Log-rank P = 0.002). We identified 22 miRs significantly
overexpressed in cluster 3 and associated with poor survival. Strikingly,
11 out of 22 were structurally associated by their genomic location on
the long arm of chromosome 14 (14q32). The top prognostic miRs encoded at
14q32.2 (miR-370) and 14q32.31 (miR-411 and miR-376a) were validated by
qPCR in an independent cohort of 60 lung AC. In the multivariate
analysis, higher levels of these 3 miRs had significantly worse overall
survival (HR = 3.12, 95% CI 1.32 - 7.34, P = 0.009) after adjusting by
age, gender and stage. Gene Ontology enrichment analysis based on genes
significantly correlated with miR-411, miR-370 and miR-376a expression
revealed an association with cell migration and cell adhesion. MiR-411
knockdown significantly reduced cell migration (P The aim of this study
was to determine whether different histologic subtypes of lung
adenocarcinoma have distinct microRNA (miR) expression profiles and to
identify miRs associated with aggressive subgroups of surgically-resected
lung adenocarcinoma (AC). We profiled the miR expression of 91
surgically-resected lung adenocarcinomas and 10 matched nonmalignant lung
tissues using TaqMan OpenArray Human microRNA panel. The top 3 prognostic
miRs (miR-411, miR-370 and miR-376a) were validated by quantitative PCR
in an independent cohort of 60 lung AC. To determine potential underlying
biological processes associated with selected miRs, we used Affymetrix
U133A gene expression microarray data from 51 miR profiled lung AC
tumors. Two lung AC cells (SK-LU-1 and NCI-H2228) overexpressing miR-411
were transfected with miRCURY LNA microRNA power inhibitors for miR-411
or non-target using Lipofectamine RNAimax and plated into Boyden chambers
for assessing cell migration. No significant differences in clinical
characteristics were observed among the training (n=91) and the test set
(n=60). Patients' characteristics: 45% male; 86% smokers; 52% stage I,
25% stage II, 19% stage III and 3% stage IV; 26% adjuvant treatment.
Unsupervised hierarchical clustering of 356 expressed miRs identified 3
major clusters of lung AC that correlated with stage (P = 0.023), tumor
differentiation (P < 0.003) and histological type of lung AC based on
IASLC-based classification (P < 0.005). Cluster 1 was enriched in lepidic
and mucinous invasive AC while cluster 3 included the most solid AC.
Patients classified in cluster 3 had a shorter median overall survival
(16.8 months) as compared to the other clusters (60 months for cluster 1
and 2, Log-rank P = 0.002). We identified 22 miRs significantly
overexpressed in cluster 3 and associated with poor survival. Strikingly,
11 out of 22 were structurally associated by their genomic location on
the long arm of chromosome 14 (14q32). The top prognostic miRs encoded at
14q32.2 (miR-370) and 14q32.31 (miR-411 and miR-376a) were validated by
qPCR in an independent cohort of 60 lung AC. In the multivariate
analysis, higher levels of these 3 miRs had significantly worse overall
survival (HR = 3.12, 95% CI 1.32 - 7.34, P = 0.009) after adjusting by
age, gender and stage. Gene Ontology enrichment analysis based on genes
significantly correlated with miR-411, miR-370 and miR-376a expression
revealed an association with cell migration and cell adhesion. MiR-411
knockdown significantly reduced cell migration (P < 0.05) in 2 lung AC
cells. This study demonstrated that different histological types of lung
AC have distinct miRNA expression profiles. We identified and validated 3
prognostic miRNAs (miR-411, miR-370 and miR-376a) which are encoded at
14q32. These miRNAs associated with aggressive subtypes of lung
adenocarcinoma may have potential to be actionable targets in the future.

