Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: bcl-xL protein overexpression enhances tumor progression of human
melanoma cells in zebrafish xenograft model: Involvement of CXCL8
chemokine


The anti-apoptotic protein bcl-xL, whose expression is associated with
melanoma progression, enhances metastatic potential in different tumor
hystotypes and promotes tumor angiogenesis through enhancing
pro-inflammatory chemokine interleukin 8 (CXCL8) expression. Using the
derivative clones of human melanoma M14 cell line stably overexpressing
bcl-xL protein, we evaluated the impact of bcl-xL/CXCL8 axis in promoting
melanoma angiogenesis and aggressiveness in vivo using zebrafish as
experimental model. Implantation of M14 trasfectants overexpressing
bcl-xL protein into the yolk sac of 2 days post-fertilization (dpf)
zebrafish embryos resulted in higher significant dissemination from
primary site of injection and metastatization to distal parts of the
larvae when compared to control cell line. Since the enhanced
invasiveness showed by bcl-xL overexpressing cells might be due to their
enhanced CXCL8 protein secretion, we tested the capability of human
recombinant CXCL8 protein to induce angiogenesis in zebrafish. When
injected in the yolk sac of 2dpf transgenic fli1:EGFP embryos, increasing
doses of human CXCL8 protein induced a significant increased percentage
of larvae positive for subintestinal veins (SIVs) sprouting at 24 hours
post-injection (hpi). Moreover, while the proinflammatory activity of
CXCL8 is conserved between humans and zebrafish, there are no evidences
that this chemokine elicits pro-angiogenic activity in zebrafish. To this
aim, we injected zebrafish recombinant Cxcl8-L2 in the yolk sac of 2dpf
transgenic fli1:EGFP zebrafish embryos, demonstrating that it is able to
induce SIVs sprouting at 24hpi, but at a lesser extent than human CXCL8.
However when comparing the capability of human and zebrafish CXCL8 to
induce neutrophils recruitment after injection in the yolk sac, we found
that human CXCL8 is not able to induce the recruitment to the zebrafish
compartment, in contrast to its zebrafish homologue. Next, through the
use of morpholino-mediated depletion, we will investigated the
involvement of CXCL8 receptors Cxcr1 and Cxcr2, highly conserved between
humans and zebrafish, in the capability of bcl-xL protein to enhance
melanoma cell invasion in zebrafish larvae and with the aim of
elucidating the signaling pathways involved in the proangiogenic activity
of human CXCL8 chemokine in zebrafish.These data elucidate the
involvement of CXCL8 signalling in bcl-xL-induced melanoma progression,
supporting future studies for developing new therapeutic approaches for
tumors characterized by high bcl-xL expression. Moreover the conservation
of pro-angiogenic activity of CXCL8 molecule in zebrafish establishes the
possible use of this experimental model to study the efficacy of novel
compounds inhibiting CXCL8 axis to counteract tumor progression.Note:
This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

