Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: USP7 deubiquitinates XPC in response to ultraviolet light
irradiation


Ultraviolet light (UV)-induced Xeroderma pigmentosum complementation
group C (XPC) protein ubiquitination is mediated by an E3 ubiquitin
ligase complex containing UV damaged-DNA binding protein. Here, we report
that ubiquitin specific protease 7 (USP7) deubiquitinates XPC during NER.
We have demonstrated that transiently compromising cellular USP7, by
siRNA or specific inhibitor HBX41108, leads to accumulation of
ubiquitinated forms of XPC. However, complete USP7 disruption causes an
ubiquitin-mediated XPC degradation upon cellular irradiation. We show
that USP7 interacts with XPC in vitro and in vivo. Overexpression of
wild-type USP7, but not its catalytically inactive or
interaction-defective mutants, reduces ubiquitinated forms of XPC.
Importantly, USP7 efficiently deubiquitinates XPC-ubiquitin conjugates in
deubiquitination assays in vitro. We further showed that
valosin-containing protein (VCP)/p97 is required for UV-induced XPC
degradation in USP7-deficient cells. VCP/p97 is readily recruited to DNA
damage sites and co-localizes with XPC. Inhibition of VCP/p97 causes an
accumulation of ubiquitinated XPC on DNA damaged chromatin. Moreover,
USP7 disruption severely impairs the repair of cyclobutane pyrimidine
dimers (CPD) and, to a lesser extent, affects the repair of 6-4
photoproducts (6-4PP). Taken together, our findings have uncovered an
important role of USP7 in regulating NER via deubiquitinating XPC and by
preventing its VCP/p97-regulated proteolysis (This work was supported by
grants from NIH).

