Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Childhood BMI is associated with risk of adult pancreatic cancer


The incidence and death rate for pancreatic cancer, the fourth leading
cause of cancer death in the U.S., have been increasing. Excess weight
through adulthood is one of the few modifiable risk factors for
pancreatic cancer. Childhood obesity rates have increased more rapidly
that adulthood obesity in the U.S, but its effects on pancreatic cancer
risk are not clear.Hence, the objective of this study is to test the
hypothesis that childhood weight is associated with pancreatic cancer
risk later in life.We evaluated the association of body mass index (BMI)
measured at ages 7-13 with risk of pancreatic cancer later in life in
288,423 children from the Copenhagen School Health Records Register who
were born between 1930-1981. These data were linked with the Danish
Cancer Registry to identify incident pancreatic cancer cases from
1977-2011. Follow-up ended on the date of pancreatic cancer diagnosis,
death, emigration, 70th birthday, or December 31st 2010, whichever came
first.Hazard Ratios (HR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) were
calculated for age specific BMI z-scores using Cox proportional hazards
stratified on birth cohort and gender. Restricted cubic splines analysis
was used to test for linearity. There were 1163 pancreatic cancer cases
during the 6,918,420 person-years of follow up. Childhood BMI was
associated with pancreatic cancer risk in males and females. At age 10,
for example, HR per one unit increase in BMI z-scores was 1.17 (CI: 1.08,
1.26). The observed association did not deviate from linearity.Our
results support the hypothesis that higher childhood body weight is
associated with increased pancreatic cancer risk later in life.

