Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prognostic roles of DDB2 and XPC mRNA expressions in treatment
responses and overall survivals of head and neck cancer patients


Background:DNA repair genes function in the maintenance of genome
integrity and prevent tumorigenesis. On another hand, DNA repair genes
modulate cancer cell responses to DNA-damaging therapeutics. We
hypothesize that altered expression of DNA repair genes are correlated
with therapeutic outcomes of head and neck cancer patients.Patients and
methods:Messenger RNA (mRNA) expressions of DDB2 and XPC were examined in
specimens of 95 head and neck cancer patients using real-time
quantitative RT-PCR. Patients were dichotomized by ROC curve analysis
based on their DDB2 and XPC mRNA levels. Overall survival (OS) rates were
measured using Kaplan-Meier estimates and the log-rank tests. The
adjusted hazard rate ratios (HRRs) were computed by multivariate Cox
regressions.Results:The levels of DDB2 and XPC mRNA expression in tumor
tissues were reduced (tumor/normal Background:DNA repair genes function
in the maintenance of genome integrity and prevent tumorigenesis. On
another hand, DNA repair genes modulate cancer cell responses to
DNA-damaging therapeutics. We hypothesize that altered expression of DNA
repair genes are correlated with therapeutic outcomes of head and neck
cancer patients.Patients and methods:Messenger RNA (mRNA) expressions of
DDB2 and XPC were examined in specimens of 95 head and neck cancer
patients using real-time quantitative RT-PCR. Patients were dichotomized
by ROC curve analysis based on their DDB2 and XPC mRNA levels. Overall
survival (OS) rates were measured using Kaplan-Meier estimates and the
log-rank tests. The adjusted hazard rate ratios (HRRs) were computed by
multivariate Cox regressions.Results:The levels of DDB2 and XPC mRNA
expression in tumor tissues were reduced (tumor/normal < 0.9) in 84 and
80 cases, respectively, when compared with those in adjacent normal
parts. Lower DDB2 (tumor/normal Background:DNA repair genes function in
the maintenance of genome integrity and prevent tumorigenesis. On another
hand, DNA repair genes modulate cancer cell responses to DNA-damaging
therapeutics. We hypothesize that altered expression of DNA repair genes
are correlated with therapeutic outcomes of head and neck cancer
patients.Patients and methods:Messenger RNA (mRNA) expressions of DDB2
and XPC were examined in specimens of 95 head and neck cancer patients
using real-time quantitative RT-PCR. Patients were dichotomized by ROC
curve analysis based on their DDB2 and XPC mRNA levels. Overall survival
(OS) rates were measured using Kaplan-Meier estimates and the log-rank
tests. The adjusted hazard rate ratios (HRRs) were computed by
multivariate Cox regressions.Results:The levels of DDB2 and XPC mRNA
expression in tumor tissues were reduced (tumor/normal < 0.9) in 84 and
80 cases, respectively, when compared with those in adjacent normal
parts. Lower DDB2 (tumor/normal < 0.24) and XPC (tumor/normal
Background:DNA repair genes function in the maintenance of genome
integrity and prevent tumorigenesis. On another hand, DNA repair genes
modulate cancer cell responses to DNA-damaging therapeutics. We
hypothesize that altered expression of DNA repair genes are correlated
with therapeutic outcomes of head and neck cancer patients.Patients and
methods:Messenger RNA (mRNA) expressions of DDB2 and XPC were examined in
specimens of 95 head and neck cancer patients using real-time
quantitative RT-PCR. Patients were dichotomized by ROC curve analysis
based on their DDB2 and XPC mRNA levels. Overall survival (OS) rates were
measured using Kaplan-Meier estimates and the log-rank tests. The
adjusted hazard rate ratios (HRRs) were computed by multivariate Cox
regressions.Results:The levels of DDB2 and XPC mRNA expression in tumor
tissues were reduced (tumor/normal < 0.9) in 84 and 80 cases,
respectively, when compared with those in adjacent normal parts. Lower
DDB2 (tumor/normal < 0.24) and XPC (tumor/normal < 0.36) mRNA expressions
were correlated with larger tumor, positive lymph node invasion, advanced
stage, and poor 5-yr OS rates (26.7% vs. 54.3%, and 28.1% vs. 53.0%,
respectively). Multivariate Cox model showed that, in addition to T and N
stages, lower XPC mRNA level (Background:DNA repair genes function in the
maintenance of genome integrity and prevent tumorigenesis. On another
hand, DNA repair genes modulate cancer cell responses to DNA-damaging
therapeutics. We hypothesize that altered expression of DNA repair genes
are correlated with therapeutic outcomes of head and neck cancer
patients.Patients and methods:Messenger RNA (mRNA) expressions of DDB2
and XPC were examined in specimens of 95 head and neck cancer patients
using real-time quantitative RT-PCR. Patients were dichotomized by ROC
curve analysis based on their DDB2 and XPC mRNA levels. Overall survival
(OS) rates were measured using Kaplan-Meier estimates and the log-rank
tests. The adjusted hazard rate ratios (HRRs) were computed by
multivariate Cox regressions.Results:The levels of DDB2 and XPC mRNA
expression in tumor tissues were reduced (tumor/normal < 0.9) in 84 and
80 cases, respectively, when compared with those in adjacent normal
parts. Lower DDB2 (tumor/normal < 0.24) and XPC (tumor/normal < 0.36)
mRNA expressions were correlated with larger tumor, positive lymph node
invasion, advanced stage, and poor 5-yr OS rates (26.7% vs. 54.3%, and
28.1% vs. 53.0%, respectively). Multivariate Cox model showed that, in
addition to T and N stages, lower XPC mRNA level (< 0.36) was an
independent risk factor for patient's survival (HRR = 2.68, 95% CI
1.12-6.40). Concurrent chemotherapy and radiotherapy (CCRT) did not
improve OS of patients with lower XPC mRNA (Background:DNA repair genes
function in the maintenance of genome integrity and prevent
tumorigenesis. On another hand, DNA repair genes modulate cancer cell
responses to DNA-damaging therapeutics. We hypothesize that altered
expression of DNA repair genes are correlated with therapeutic outcomes
of head and neck cancer patients.Patients and methods:Messenger RNA
(mRNA) expressions of DDB2 and XPC were examined in specimens of 95 head
and neck cancer patients using real-time quantitative RT-PCR. Patients
were dichotomized by ROC curve analysis based on their DDB2 and XPC mRNA
levels. Overall survival (OS) rates were measured using Kaplan-Meier
estimates and the log-rank tests. The adjusted hazard rate ratios (HRRs)
were computed by multivariate Cox regressions.Results:The levels of DDB2
and XPC mRNA expression in tumor tissues were reduced (tumor/normal <
0.9) in 84 and 80 cases, respectively, when compared with those in
adjacent normal parts. Lower DDB2 (tumor/normal < 0.24) and XPC
(tumor/normal < 0.36) mRNA expressions were correlated with larger tumor,
positive lymph node invasion, advanced stage, and poor 5-yr OS rates
(26.7% vs. 54.3%, and 28.1% vs. 53.0%, respectively). Multivariate Cox
model showed that, in addition to T and N stages, lower XPC mRNA level (<
0.36) was an independent risk factor for patient's survival (HRR = 2.68,
95% CI 1.12-6.40). Concurrent chemotherapy and radiotherapy (CCRT) did
not improve OS of patients with lower XPC mRNA (< 0.36) and showed even
worse outcomes within 5 years for patients with lower DDB2 expression (
0.24) and XPC (> 0.36) mRNA levels had improved 5-yr OS rates if they
received CCRT (64.4% vs. 41.8% and 73.3% vs. 39.2%).Conclusion:mRNA
expressions of XPC and DDB2 might be useful biomarkers for prognosis and
efficacy of CCRT medication in head and neck cancer patients.

