Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Androgen receptor splice variant-7 predicts resistance to
enzalutamide in patients with castration-resistant prostate cancer


Background: Androgen receptor splice variant-7 (AR-V7) is a truncated
form of the androgen receptor (AR) protein which lacks the ligand-binding
domain, the target of enzalutamide, but remains constitutively active as
a transcription factor. Following from preclinical studies implicating
AR-V7 as a mechanism of resistance to novel AR-directed therapies, we
hypothesized that the presence of AR-V7 in circulating tumor cells (CTCs)
from men with advanced prostate cancer would be associated with primary
resistance to enzalutamide.Methods: We used quantitative
reverse-transcription polymerase-chain-reaction (qRT-PCR) analysis to
interrogate CTCs for the presence or absence of AR-V7 from prospectively
enrolled patients with metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer
initiating treatment with enzalutamide. We examined associations between
AR-V7 status and PSA response rates (the primary clinical endpoint of the
study), PSA-progression-free-survival (PSA-PFS), and
clinical/radiographic-progression-free-survival (PFS). Multivariable Cox
regressions were performed to determine the independent effect of AR-V7
status on clinical outcomes to enzalutamide treatment. A prespecified
sample size of 30 patients would yield 85% power to detect a difference
in PSA response rates from 10% (in AR-V7-positive men) to 60% (in
AR-V7-negative men), using a two-sided =0.10.Results: Thirty-one (31)
enzalutamide-treated patients were enrolled in the study, of which 38.7%
(12/31) had detectable AR-V7 mRNA from CTCs. Compared to AR-V7-negative
patients, AR-V7-positive men had worse PSA response rates (0% [0/12] vs
52.6% [10/19], P=0.004); in fact, no patient with detectable AR-V7
achieved a PSA response. Furthermore, AR-V7-positive patients had shorter
PSA-PFS (median: 1.4 vs 5.9 months, HR 7.4, 95%CI 2.7-20.6, log-rank
PBackground: Androgen receptor splice variant-7 (AR-V7) is a truncated
form of the androgen receptor (AR) protein which lacks the ligand-binding
domain, the target of enzalutamide, but remains constitutively active as
a transcription factor. Following from preclinical studies implicating
AR-V7 as a mechanism of resistance to novel AR-directed therapies, we
hypothesized that the presence of AR-V7 in circulating tumor cells (CTCs)
from men with advanced prostate cancer would be associated with primary
resistance to enzalutamide.Methods: We used quantitative
reverse-transcription polymerase-chain-reaction (qRT-PCR) analysis to
interrogate CTCs for the presence or absence of AR-V7 from prospectively
enrolled patients with metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer
initiating treatment with enzalutamide. We examined associations between
AR-V7 status and PSA response rates (the primary clinical endpoint of the
study), PSA-progression-free-survival (PSA-PFS), and
clinical/radiographic-progression-free-survival (PFS). Multivariable Cox
regressions were performed to determine the independent effect of AR-V7
status on clinical outcomes to enzalutamide treatment. A prespecified
sample size of 30 patients would yield 85% power to detect a difference
in PSA response rates from 10% (in AR-V7-positive men) to 60% (in
AR-V7-negative men), using a two-sided =0.10.Results: Thirty-one (31)
enzalutamide-treated patients were enrolled in the study, of which 38.7%
(12/31) had detectable AR-V7 mRNA from CTCs. Compared to AR-V7-negative
patients, AR-V7-positive men had worse PSA response rates (0% [0/12] vs
52.6% [10/19], P=0.004); in fact, no patient with detectable AR-V7
achieved a PSA response. Furthermore, AR-V7-positive patients had shorter
PSA-PFS (median: 1.4 vs 5.9 months, HR 7.4, 95%CI 2.7-20.6, log-rank
P<0.001), and shorter PFS (median: 2.1 vs 6.1 months, HR 8.5, 95%CI
2.8-25.4, log-rank PBackground: Androgen receptor splice variant-7
(AR-V7) is a truncated form of the androgen receptor (AR) protein which
lacks the ligand-binding domain, the target of enzalutamide, but remains
constitutively active as a transcription factor. Following from
preclinical studies implicating AR-V7 as a mechanism of resistance to
novel AR-directed therapies, we hypothesized that the presence of AR-V7
in circulating tumor cells (CTCs) from men with advanced prostate cancer
would be associated with primary resistance to enzalutamide.Methods: We
used quantitative reverse-transcription polymerase-chain-reaction
(qRT-PCR) analysis to interrogate CTCs for the presence or absence of
AR-V7 from prospectively enrolled patients with metastatic
castration-resistant prostate cancer initiating treatment with
enzalutamide. We examined associations between AR-V7 status and PSA
response rates (the primary clinical endpoint of the study),
PSA-progression-free-survival (PSA-PFS), and
clinical/radiographic-progression-free-survival (PFS). Multivariable Cox
regressions were performed to determine the independent effect of AR-V7
status on clinical outcomes to enzalutamide treatment. A prespecified
sample size of 30 patients would yield 85% power to detect a difference
in PSA response rates from 10% (in AR-V7-positive men) to 60% (in
AR-V7-negative men), using a two-sided =0.10.Results: Thirty-one (31)
enzalutamide-treated patients were enrolled in the study, of which 38.7%
(12/31) had detectable AR-V7 mRNA from CTCs. Compared to AR-V7-negative
patients, AR-V7-positive men had worse PSA response rates (0% [0/12] vs
52.6% [10/19], P=0.004); in fact, no patient with detectable AR-V7
achieved a PSA response. Furthermore, AR-V7-positive patients had shorter
PSA-PFS (median: 1.4 vs 5.9 months, HR 7.4, 95%CI 2.7-20.6, log-rank
P<0.001), and shorter PFS (median: 2.1 vs 6.1 months, HR 8.5, 95%CI
2.8-25.4, log-rank P<0.001) than AR-V7-negative patients. In
multivariable Cox regression analysis, presence of AR-V7 (HR 3.5, 95%CI
1.2-10.5, P=0.027), baseline PSA level (HR 1.01, 95%CI 1.00-1.01,
P=0.042), and prior abiraterone treatment (HR 5.4, 95%CI 1.1-26.5,
P=0.039) were all independently predictive of PSA-PFS. Similarly,
presence of AR-V7 (HR 3.7, 95%CI 1.2-11.9, P=0.026) and prior abiraterone
use (HR 8.7, 95%CI 1.0-75.6, P=0.049) were both independently predictive
of PFS in multivariable analysis.Conclusions: Detection of AR-V7 mRNA in
circulating tumor cells from patients with metastatic
castration-resistant prostate cancer may be associated with primary
resistance to enzalutamide. If confirmed by other investigators in
larger-scale prospective studies, this could be used as a biomarker to
predict enzalutamide resistance (and to direct AR-V7-positive patients
away from further AR-targeting therapies).

