Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential effects of PIK3CA mutations and PTEN loss in patients
with advanced endometrial cancers on matched therapy


Purpose: To evaluate whether PIK3CA mutations and/or PTEN loss predict
better clinical outcomes to phase I trials of PI3K/AKT/mTOR
inhibition-based therapies in patients with metastatic, recurrent or
refractory endometrial cancers.Methods: Outcome analyses were conducted
on 73 patients with advanced endometrial cancers who were seen in a
designated Phase I clinic at MD Anderson Cancer Center from 1/1/2006 to
4/30/2013, and tested for PIK3CA mutations and/or PTEN loss (an
immunoreactive score of 3 or less) in a CLIA-certified molecular
diagnostic laboratory, in accordance with the IRB guidelines. All data
were obtained from patients' electronic medical records.Results: All
patients (n=73) had received at least one systemic therapy before the
referral (median = 2). Approximately 24% of tested patients (n=13/55)
harbored PIK3CA mutations. Of the 13 patients with PIK3CA mutations, 12
(92%) were treated in clinical trials including a PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway
inhibitor with or without chemotherapy (matched therapy). Matched therapy
led to a total of 54% PR/SD6months (23% PR and 31% SD6months) and a
median PFS of 7.9 months. The response rate and PFS are much lower in the
17 patients who did not have PIK3CA and PTEN tested; 17.6% SD6months and
median PFS of 1.9 months (p=0.037and p=0.013, respectively). Of those who
had PTEN tested (n=41), 21 patients (51%) had PTEN loss. All 21 patients
with PTEN loss received matched therapies, which led to a total of 38%
PR/SD6months (14% PR and 24% SD6months) and a median PFS of 5 months.
That is not significantly different from therapy in patients who do not
have PIK3CA and PTEN tested (p=0.167and p=0.076, respectively). Of 30
patients with PIK3CA mutations and/or PTEN loss (n=30), matched therapy
led to a significantly longer median PFS of 4.8 months (p=0.03) but
similar response rate (15% PR and 25% SD6months) to those in patients
without PIK3CA and PTEN tests (p=0.114). Patients with unknown PIK3CA and
PTEN status received significantly fewer regimens targeting at PIK3CA
pathway compared to those with known status (pPurpose: To evaluate
whether PIK3CA mutations and/or PTEN loss predict better clinical
outcomes to phase I trials of PI3K/AKT/mTOR inhibition-based therapies in
patients with metastatic, recurrent or refractory endometrial
cancers.Methods: Outcome analyses were conducted on 73 patients with
advanced endometrial cancers who were seen in a designated Phase I clinic
at MD Anderson Cancer Center from 1/1/2006 to 4/30/2013, and tested for
PIK3CA mutations and/or PTEN loss (an immunoreactive score of 3 or less)
in a CLIA-certified molecular diagnostic laboratory, in accordance with
the IRB guidelines. All data were obtained from patients' electronic
medical records.Results: All patients (n=73) had received at least one
systemic therapy before the referral (median = 2). Approximately 24% of
tested patients (n=13/55) harbored PIK3CA mutations. Of the 13 patients
with PIK3CA mutations, 12 (92%) were treated in clinical trials including
a PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway inhibitor with or without chemotherapy (matched
therapy). Matched therapy led to a total of 54% PR/SD6months (23% PR and
31% SD6months) and a median PFS of 7.9 months. The response rate and PFS
are much lower in the 17 patients who did not have PIK3CA and PTEN
tested; 17.6% SD6months and median PFS of 1.9 months (p=0.037and p=0.013,
respectively). Of those who had PTEN tested (n=41), 21 patients (51%) had
PTEN loss. All 21 patients with PTEN loss received matched therapies,
which led to a total of 38% PR/SD6months (14% PR and 24% SD6months) and a
median PFS of 5 months. That is not significantly different from therapy
in patients who do not have PIK3CA and PTEN tested (p=0.167and p=0.076,
respectively). Of 30 patients with PIK3CA mutations and/or PTEN loss
(n=30), matched therapy led to a significantly longer median PFS of 4.8
months (p=0.03) but similar response rate (15% PR and 25% SD6months) to
those in patients without PIK3CA and PTEN tests (p=0.114). Patients with
unknown PIK3CA and PTEN status received significantly fewer regimens
targeting at PIK3CA pathway compared to those with known status
(p<0.001).Conclusions: Matched therapy using PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway
inhibitor -based regimens led to higher clinical response rate including
CR/PR/SD 6months and PFS in patients with PI3Kinase mutation but not PTEN
loss, indicating that different biological mechanisms are involved in
these molecular aberrations. Further evaluation in patients with advanced
endometrial cancers may require dissect individual molecular aberration
for personalized cancer therapy.

