Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Third hit genetic changes and clonal heterogeneity in a
genetically engineered mouse lung cancer model


Background: Cancer cells may undergo mutations beyond their original
causal changes, resulting in clonal expansion, and potentially driving
tumor heterogeneity and evolution. Our hypothesis was that additional,
third hit genetic changes in clonally derived tumors, originally
generated by the same oncogenic stimulus, would have different
phenotypes.Methods: Epithelial cells were isolated from
LSL-KrasG12D+/-/Trp53fl/fl/Rosa-CAG-LSL-tdTomato+/- and C57BL/6 control
mouse tracheas and were cultured on plastic. On day 3, cells were treated
with an adenovirus expressing Cre recombinase. After 7 days, single
EPCAM+, 7-aminoactinomycin D (7-AAD)-, and tdTomato+ cells from the
LSL-KrasG12D+/-/Trp53fl/fl/Rosa-CAG-LSL-tdTomato+/- mouse, and EPCAM+/
7-AAD- cells from the control mouse were FACS sorted, and individually
seeded in 96-well plates. Clones developing in each well were passaged
separately and characterized using growth curves on plastic, staining for
lineage markers, and colony forming efficiency (CFE) and colony
morphology in 3D culture. Selected clones were further investigated in
vivo after subcutaneous injection into the flanks of NOD/SCID mice.
Agilent SureSelect targeted exome sequencing was used to evaluate genetic
variations in cells derived from each cell clone.Results: Thirty-five
LSL-KrasG12D+/-/Trp53fl/fl/Rosa-CAG-LSL-tdTomato+/- transformed clones
and 2 control mouse clones were serially passaged, and 4 transformed cell
lines representing distinct phenotypes (named MT1, 2, 3, and 4), were
identified based on growth rates, lineage marker staining, CFE, and 3D
colony morphology. All 4 clones were pancytokeratin+, 3 were thyroid
trasnscription factor-1 (TTF-1)+ and one was p63+. All 4 cell lines
generated tumors in NOD/SCID mice, which exhibited variable histology and
marker expression. Exome sequencing revealed unique copy number profiles.
Specifically, MT1 had gains and losses in chromosome 3, MT2 had losses in
chromosome 9, MT3 had losses in chromosomes 7 and 14, and MT4 had losses
in chromosome 7. Mutations potentially representing third hits were
identified in each cell line, particularly Ss18l1 (synovial sarcoma
translocation gene on chromosome 18-like 1) and Gas7 (growth arrest
specific 7) in MT1, Runx1 (runt related transcription factor 1) and
Dicer1 (dicer 1, ribonuclease type III) in MT2, Apc (adenomatous
polyposis coli) in MT3, and Csmd1 (CUB and Sushi multiple domains 1) in
MT4.Conclusions: Multiple single cell derived mouse tracheal epithelial
tumor cell clones were generated from a single
LSL-KrasG12D+/-/Trp53fl/fl/Rosa-CAG-LSL-tdTomato+/- mouse. Selected
clones exhibited unique growth rates, lineage marker expression patterns,
CFE, 3D cell morphology and variable in vivo tumor histology and marker
expression. Unique copy number aberrations and third hit mutations likely
generate distinct clone phenotypes, driving tumor heterogeneity and
evolution.

