Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Snail modulates stemness properties in hypoxic Glioblastoma


Introduction: Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most aggressive form of glioma
characterized by hypoxic regions with surrounding areas of necrosis.
Hypoxia is responsible for inducing cancer invasiveness via
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), thereby promoting tumor
aggressiveness and therapeutic resistance. HIF-1 is known to upregulate
Snail in various cancers. Snail over expression correlates with cancer
stem cell-like properties in cancers. The association of EMT and stemness
properties plays a vital role in tumors progression and might helps in
therapeutic targeting. We have, therefore, investigated the correlation
of EMT and Stem cell markers in hypoxic GBM.Method: mRNA expression of 5
EMT, 3 stemness and 5 hypoxia markers were analyzed in the 31 GBM samples
and U373MG glioma cell line maintained under normoxia (20% O2) and severe
hypoxia (0.2% O2) conditions for 24, 48 and 72 hrs. Correlation and
cluster analysis were applied using SPSS 11.5, Cluster 3.0 software etc
and R-software.Result: In tumors, spearman correlation was found to be
significant (p0.05) between EMT markers and Hypoxia markers. Of all EMT
markers, Snail correlated significantly with the maximum hypoxia markers,
including HIF-1. In addition, Snail was significantly correlated with
Stem cell markers SOX2 (pIntroduction: Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most
aggressive form of glioma characterized by hypoxic regions with
surrounding areas of necrosis. Hypoxia is responsible for inducing cancer
invasiveness via epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), thereby
promoting tumor aggressiveness and therapeutic resistance. HIF-1 is known
to upregulate Snail in various cancers. Snail over expression correlates
with cancer stem cell-like properties in cancers. The association of EMT
and stemness properties plays a vital role in tumors progression and
might helps in therapeutic targeting. We have, therefore, investigated
the correlation of EMT and Stem cell markers in hypoxic GBM.Method: mRNA
expression of 5 EMT, 3 stemness and 5 hypoxia markers were analyzed in
the 31 GBM samples and U373MG glioma cell line maintained under normoxia
(20% O2) and severe hypoxia (0.2% O2) conditions for 24, 48 and 72 hrs.
Correlation and cluster analysis were applied using SPSS 11.5, Cluster
3.0 software etc and R-software.Result: In tumors, spearman correlation
was found to be significant (p0.05) between EMT markers and Hypoxia
markers. Of all EMT markers, Snail correlated significantly with the
maximum hypoxia markers, including HIF-1. In addition, Snail was
significantly correlated with Stem cell markers SOX2 (p<0.01) and Nestin
(pIntroduction: Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most aggressive form of glioma
characterized by hypoxic regions with surrounding areas of necrosis.
Hypoxia is responsible for inducing cancer invasiveness via
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), thereby promoting tumor
aggressiveness and therapeutic resistance. HIF-1 is known to upregulate
Snail in various cancers. Snail over expression correlates with cancer
stem cell-like properties in cancers. The association of EMT and stemness
properties plays a vital role in tumors progression and might helps in
therapeutic targeting. We have, therefore, investigated the correlation
of EMT and Stem cell markers in hypoxic GBM.Method: mRNA expression of 5
EMT, 3 stemness and 5 hypoxia markers were analyzed in the 31 GBM samples
and U373MG glioma cell line maintained under normoxia (20% O2) and severe
hypoxia (0.2% O2) conditions for 24, 48 and 72 hrs. Correlation and
cluster analysis were applied using SPSS 11.5, Cluster 3.0 software etc
and R-software.Result: In tumors, spearman correlation was found to be
significant (p0.05) between EMT markers and Hypoxia markers. Of all EMT
markers, Snail correlated significantly with the maximum hypoxia markers,
including HIF-1. In addition, Snail was significantly correlated with
Stem cell markers SOX2 (p<0.01) and Nestin (p<0.05). Gene Cluster
analysis in 31 GBM arranged in decreasing order of Snail expression
showed significant upregulation of SOX2 and Nestin in the high Snail
expressing tertile. This correlation of gene expression in tumors was
validated by in-vitro expression analysis of the molecules in U373MG
cells, where we assessed significant increase in the expression of
hypoxia markers (HIF-1, VEGF and CA9), EMT (Snail and LOX) and SC markers
(SOX2 and OCT4) were significantly increased under severe hypoxic
conditions.Interpretation & conclusions: Our finding for the first time
suggests the role of Snail in provoking stemness of cancer cells in
hypoxic GBM, thereby promoting aggressiveness of GBM.Note: This abstract
was not presented at the meeting.

