Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BRM/SMARCA2 is a critical synthetic lethal target in
BRG1-deficient cancers


The mammalian SWI/SNF complexes (mSWI/SNF) regulate chromatin structure
through ATP-dependent nucleosome remodeling and thereby control key
cellular processes. Recent cancer genome studies have revealed a
significant frequency of mutations in several components of the mSWI/SNF
complexes including the catalytic subunit BRG1. Emerging evidence is
supportive of tumor suppressor roles for mSWI/SNF subunits, yet the
inactivating nature of these mutations presents a challenge for devising
targeted therapeutic strategies against cancers harboring such mutations.
In this study, we interrogated epigenetic cancer dependencies by
screening a deep-coverage design (DeCoDe) shRNA library targeting the
epigenome across a broad range of 50+ cancer cell lines. Strikingly, this
unbiased screen revealed that silencing of the SWI/SNF ATPase subunit
BRM/SMARCA2, selectively inhibits the proliferation of BRG1-deficient
cancer cells. BRM knockdown selectively induced cell cycle arrest in
BRG1-mutant cancer cells and significantly impaired the growth of
BRG1-mutant lung tumor xenografts. BRM is the paralog of BRG1, suggesting
a model in which mSWI/SNF mutations lead to a hypomorphic complex that
promotes tumorigenesis but cannot tolerate complete inactivation. Thus,
targeting mSWI/SNF subunits that exhibit redundant activities to the
residual mutated complexes may present a general strategy for SWI/SNF
mutated cancers.

