Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Deciphering the role of APE1 protein variants in disease etiology


Base excision repair (BER) is necessary for removal of DNA damage that
has occurred from spontaneous decomposition, alkylation and oxidation.
Defects in BER have been associated with cancer predisposition,
neurodegeneration and premature aging. BER is initiated by a
damage-specific DNA glycosylase that excises the damaged base, creating
an apurinic/apyrimidinic (AP) site. The AP site is recognized by the
multifunctional AP endonuclease 1 (APE1), which cleaves the
phosphodiester backbone, producing a DNA strand break. DNA polymerase
beta incorporates the correct nucleotide, and BER is completed via
ligation by a protein complex of Ligase III and XRCC1. Like many BER
proteins, APE1 is essential for survival, as deletion of both alleles in
mice leads to embryonic lethality. We are pursuing the hypothesis that
more mild reductions in APE1 activity will contribute to disease risk and
development. To address this issue, we have engaged two strategies: (1)
identification and characterization of APE1 missense mutations and (2)
design and characterization of genetically-altered mutant human cell
lines. In our first study, we have characterized eight APE1 variants
found within the population or identified in endometrial cancer. Our
studies reveal that while most of these proteins are normal for protein
stability, biochemical activities, and intracellular localization, the
endometrial cancer-associated variant Arg237Cys has decreased 3-functions
and AP-DNA binding. In our second study, we have created a heterozygous
knockout HCT116 cell line, in which we have deleted one allele of APE1.
The heterozygous knockout cells show a loss in AP endonuclease activity
and are hypersensitive to DNA damaging drugs. Current cellular strategies
are determining the essential nature of APE1 activity in HCT116 and other
cell lines

