Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combined EGFR and MEK inhibition prevents the emergence of drug
resistance in EGFR mutant non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)


Background: EGFR inhibitors are effective clinical therapies for EGFR
mutant NSCLC, but efficacy is limited by the development of acquired drug
resistance. The mechanisms of resistance include secondary mutations in
EGFR (T790M) and activation of compensatory signaling pathways (MET, IGFR
and AXL). Mutant selective EGFR inhibitors (WZ4002, CO-1686 and AZD9291)
are effective in preclinical and clinical models of EGFR T790M. Our lab
has demonstrated that reactivation of ERK signaling is a mechanism of
resistance to WZ4002 (WZ) which could be reversed or prevented by using a
combination of WZ and MEK inhibitors. Given the broad array of possible
EGFR inhibitor resistance mechanisms, we evaluated whether WZ combined
with the MEK inhibitor trametinib (TRA) can prevent the emergence of
resistance in vitro and in vivo.Methods and Results: We developed a plate
based resistance assay in which 350 cells/well are plated in 96 well
plates and treated weekly. This system allows for evaluation of drug
efficacy over weeks of treatment and can be used to measure both time to
development and frequency of drug resistance. Given that ERK reactivation
can cause resistance to WZ, we evaluated WZ, TRA or the combination
thereof (WZ/TRA) using PC9 cells. Single agents led to 100% resistance in
2-3 weeks, versus 5% with WZ/TRA in 24 weeks. We then tested WZ/TRA in 5
additional EGFR TKI sensitive cell lines, including several known to
develop acquired resistance to gefitinib (HCC827, MET amplification;
HCC4006, EMT or FGFR activation; HCC2279; FGFR activation; H3255, T790M;
HCC2935). In all cases, WZ/TRA significantly reduced the emergence of
drug resistant clones compared to each single agent. In models with
established drug resistance mechanisms, WZ/TRA was effective in 3/3
models with T790M mutations, but not (0/5) in models with established
non-T790M resistance mechanisms. In models where WZ/TRA was effective,
the combination led to increased apoptosis compared to single agents and
effective inhibition of ERK signaling. We also evaluated the
effectiveness of the WZ/TRA combination in vivo using EGFR L858R/T790M
genetically engineered mouse model and PC9GR4 (T790M+) xenografts.
Combination WZ/TRA treatment prevented tumor outgrowth for 24 weeks in 5
EGFR L858R/T790M GEMM mice whereas individual treatments did not.
Additionally, we found that WZ/TRA combination treatment, but not single
agents, could cure 7/15 xenograft tumors as assessed by lack of tumor
regrowth after treatment cessation.Conclusion: Our studies suggest that
the combination of a mutant selective EGFR inhibitor and a MEK inhibitor
can prevent the emergence of both T790M and non-T790M mediated drug
resistance mechanisms. This strategy is more effective at preventing
(6/6) than treating (3/8) cancers with established drug resistance
mechanisms and should be evaluated in clinical trials in EGFR TKI nave
EGFR mutant NSCLC patients.

