Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MMP7-mediated cleavage of nucleolin at the Asp255 induces MMP9
expression to promote tumor malignancy


Nucleolin, expressed in various cellular compartments, participates in
DNA transcription, ribosomal biogenesis, regulation of RNA stability. It
is evidence that the posttranslational cleavage of nucleolin determine
the fate of cells, apoptosis or proliferation. However, the contributions
of nucleolin accumulation and cleavage to tumor development are still not
clear. Herein we found that nucleolin was dramatically increased in lung
cancer and correlated with poor prognosis. The overexpressed nucleolin
was cleaved to the smaller fragment (55 kDa), identified in human lung
cancer and mouse models of lung cancer. To study the activated mechanism
found that EGF-mediated EGFR and KRAS activations could enhance nucleolin
expression through increasing Sp1-mediated transcription. Furthermore, to
clarify the cleavage residue and cutting enzyme found that nucleolin
could be cleaved at 255th Asp by MMP7 (255-710 a.a., TNCL). By using
overexpression of TNCL indicated that TNCL enhanced proliferation and
metastasis in vitro and in vivo. To further clarify the mechanism of
TNCL-enhanced tumor malignancy show that TNCL significantly increase
several oncogenes expression including MMP9, Alk and CD74 through
associating with 3-UTR to enhance mRNA stability. Taken together, MMP7
can cleave nucleolin to increase the oncogenes expression, leading lung
cancer formation

