Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: B cells induced during CD4+ T-cell mediated destruction of primary
tumors in neuN mice produce mAbs that are capable of inhibiting
spontaneous tumor growth


We previously identified an induced serologic response in FVB-neuN mice
bearing primary breast tumors following adoptive therapy with CD4+ T
cells. Because the CD4+ T cells were initially primed with breast tumor
progenitor cells, we tested whether the B cells induced in treated mice
also recognized antigens expressed specifically by breast tumor
progenitor cells. We generated hybridomas and then screened supernatant
for binding to target cells by FACS analysis. We isolated three clones
that produced IgG (mAb1-2, mAb2, and mAb3) which recognized cell surface
molecules on tumorsphere cultures from a NeuN breast tumor line but not
the parental adherent culture from which they were derived. We used a
Her-2/neu antigen loss variant to show that Her-2/neu was not itself the
antigen. Interestingly, the three mAbs also recognized 4T1tumorspheres,
an independently derived breast tumor from another mouse strain, but not
adherent 4T1 cultures. Moreover, the mAbs were not reactive with normal
spleen, liver, or kidney cells. To investigate whether any of these mAbs
had anti-tumor function we used Her-2/neuN transgenic mice which develop
mammary adenocarcinoma starting at 5 months of age. We selected mice with
a single spontaneous tumor in situ when tumors became palpable and
visible. The mice received mAb1-2, mAb2, mAb3 (150 g/dose) or PBS on day
0, day 1 then every other day until day 23. There was no toxicity from
the treatment and mice treated with PBS or mAb3 all showed progressive
tumor growth. However, administration of mAb1-2 inhibited primary tumor
progression in 5/8 mice and mAb2 inhibited tumor progression in 9/13 mice
(pWe previously identified an induced serologic response in FVB-neuN mice
bearing primary breast tumors following adoptive therapy with CD4+ T
cells. Because the CD4+ T cells were initially primed with breast tumor
progenitor cells, we tested whether the B cells induced in treated mice
also recognized antigens expressed specifically by breast tumor
progenitor cells. We generated hybridomas and then screened supernatant
for binding to target cells by FACS analysis. We isolated three clones
that produced IgG (mAb1-2, mAb2, and mAb3) which recognized cell surface
molecules on tumorsphere cultures from a NeuN breast tumor line but not
the parental adherent culture from which they were derived. We used a
Her-2/neu antigen loss variant to show that Her-2/neu was not itself the
antigen. Interestingly, the three mAbs also recognized 4T1tumorspheres,
an independently derived breast tumor from another mouse strain, but not
adherent 4T1 cultures. Moreover, the mAbs were not reactive with normal
spleen, liver, or kidney cells. To investigate whether any of these mAbs
had anti-tumor function we used Her-2/neuN transgenic mice which develop
mammary adenocarcinoma starting at 5 months of age. We selected mice with
a single spontaneous tumor in situ when tumors became palpable and
visible. The mice received mAb1-2, mAb2, mAb3 (150 g/dose) or PBS on day
0, day 1 then every other day until day 23. There was no toxicity from
the treatment and mice treated with PBS or mAb3 all showed progressive
tumor growth. However, administration of mAb1-2 inhibited primary tumor
progression in 5/8 mice and mAb2 inhibited tumor progression in 9/13 mice
(p<0.05). Some mice with response to mAb had ongoing attenuation of tumor
growth even after completion of mAb treatments. These data suggest that
mice responding to CD4 T cell immunotherapy were able to stimulate
endogenous B cells with reactivity against auto-antigens expressed by
tumor progenitor cells. Our approach restricted our screen to cell
surface antigens because we used FACS to identify hybridoma supernatant
which specifically bound to tumor progenitor cells. This allowed us to
focus on mAb that might have some direct therapeutic effect and two of
the antibodies did inhibit tumor growth. At this point we do not know
whether mAb1-2 or mAb2 inhibit tumor growth through blockade of signaling
or through cytotoxic mechanisms but the antigen seems to be expressed by
the majority of spontaneous breast tumors arising in FVB-neuN mice. Our
current studies are attempting to identify the antigen recognized by each
mAb.

