Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Increased TSH signaling by overexpressed thyrotrophin receptor is
essential for B-RafV600E induced thyroid carcinogenesis


B-RafV600E oncogene mutation occurs most commonly in papillary thyroid
cancer (PTC), and is associated with tumor initiation. However, a genetic
modification by B-RafV600E in the thyrocytes results in oncogene induced
senescence (OIS). In the present study, therefore, we attempted to
evaluate the factors involved in the senescence overcome program in PTC.
First of all, we observed downregulation of p-Erk1/2 and upregulation of
dual specific phosphatase 6 (DUSP6) in the PTC with B-RafV600E mutation.
In B-RafV600E expressing thyrocytes, although DUSP6 mRNA was upregulated,
its protein and phosphatase activity were similar to those of normal
thyrocytes. However, DUSP6 activity was reactivated when ROS was
downregulated by thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH). Moreover,
upregulation of MnSOD by TSH was observed in thyrocytes and PTC. Although
serum TSH was not increased, its receptor was markedly upregulated in PTC
with B-RafV600E. TSH together with DUSP6 inhibited B-RafV600E induced
senescence in the thyrocytes, and reactivated Ras/Akt/GSK3 resulted in
c-Myc protein stabilization by inhibition of its degradation. These
observations led us to conclude that increased TSH signaling by
overexpression of TSH receptor is essential for B-RafV600E induced
papillary thyroid carcinogenesis.

