Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metronomic docetaxel in PRINT nanoparticles and EZH2 silencing
have synergistic antitumor effect in ovarian cancer


Purpose: The purpose of this study was to investigate the combined
antitumor effects of metronomic docetaxel-containing PLGA-PRINT
nanoparticles and antiangiogenic mEZH2 siRNA incorporated into chitosan
nanoparticles (CH-mEZH2 siRNA). Method: In vivo dose-finding studies and
therapeutic experiments with PLGA-PRINT-docetaxel and CH-mEZH2 siRNA were
conducted in well-established orthotopic mouse models of ovarian cancer
(HeyA8 and SKOV3ip1). Antitumor effects were quantified through mean
tumor weight and tumor nodule counts. Tumor tissues from these studies
were stained to evaluate the proliferation index (Ki67), apoptosis index
(cleaved caspase-3), and microvessel density (CD31). Result: Dose-finding
studies for PLGA-PRINT-docetaxel revealed all doses (0.5, 1.5, 2 mg/kg
for metronomic and 20mg/kg for MTD) significantly reduced tumor burden
(pPurpose: The purpose of this study was to investigate the combined
antitumor effects of metronomic docetaxel-containing PLGA-PRINT
nanoparticles and antiangiogenic mEZH2 siRNA incorporated into chitosan
nanoparticles (CH-mEZH2 siRNA). Method: In vivo dose-finding studies and
therapeutic experiments with PLGA-PRINT-docetaxel and CH-mEZH2 siRNA were
conducted in well-established orthotopic mouse models of ovarian cancer
(HeyA8 and SKOV3ip1). Antitumor effects were quantified through mean
tumor weight and tumor nodule counts. Tumor tissues from these studies
were stained to evaluate the proliferation index (Ki67), apoptosis index
(cleaved caspase-3), and microvessel density (CD31). Result: Dose-finding
studies for PLGA-PRINT-docetaxel revealed all doses (0.5, 1.5, 2 mg/kg
for metronomic and 20mg/kg for MTD) significantly reduced tumor burden
(p<0.05 for MTD; pPurpose: The purpose of this study was to investigate
the combined antitumor effects of metronomic docetaxel-containing
PLGA-PRINT nanoparticles and antiangiogenic mEZH2 siRNA incorporated into
chitosan nanoparticles (CH-mEZH2 siRNA). Method: In vivo dose-finding
studies and therapeutic experiments with PLGA-PRINT-docetaxel and
CH-mEZH2 siRNA were conducted in well-established orthotopic mouse models
of ovarian cancer (HeyA8 and SKOV3ip1). Antitumor effects were quantified
through mean tumor weight and tumor nodule counts. Tumor tissues from
these studies were stained to evaluate the proliferation index (Ki67),
apoptosis index (cleaved caspase-3), and microvessel density (CD31).
Result: Dose-finding studies for PLGA-PRINT-docetaxel revealed all doses
(0.5, 1.5, 2 mg/kg for metronomic and 20mg/kg for MTD) significantly
reduced tumor burden (p<0.05 for MTD; p<0.01 for metronomic doses). The
lowest dose (0.5 mg/kg) reduced tumor weight by 80% and was selected for
subsequent therapeutic studies. We then tested whether combining
PLGA-PRINT-docetaxel particles with CH-mEZH2 siRNA would enhance
antitumor effect. CH-mEZH2 siRNA alone reduced tumor weight by 70% in
both models (pPurpose: The purpose of this study was to investigate the
combined antitumor effects of metronomic docetaxel-containing PLGA-PRINT
nanoparticles and antiangiogenic mEZH2 siRNA incorporated into chitosan
nanoparticles (CH-mEZH2 siRNA). Method: In vivo dose-finding studies and
therapeutic experiments with PLGA-PRINT-docetaxel and CH-mEZH2 siRNA were
conducted in well-established orthotopic mouse models of ovarian cancer
(HeyA8 and SKOV3ip1). Antitumor effects were quantified through mean
tumor weight and tumor nodule counts. Tumor tissues from these studies
were stained to evaluate the proliferation index (Ki67), apoptosis index
(cleaved caspase-3), and microvessel density (CD31). Result: Dose-finding
studies for PLGA-PRINT-docetaxel revealed all doses (0.5, 1.5, 2 mg/kg
for metronomic and 20mg/kg for MTD) significantly reduced tumor burden
(p<0.05 for MTD; p<0.01 for metronomic doses). The lowest dose (0.5
mg/kg) reduced tumor weight by 80% and was selected for subsequent
therapeutic studies. We then tested whether combining
PLGA-PRINT-docetaxel particles with CH-mEZH2 siRNA would enhance
antitumor effect. CH-mEZH2 siRNA alone reduced tumor weight by 70% in
both models (p<0.01 for HeyA8; pPurpose: The purpose of this study was to
investigate the combined antitumor effects of metronomic
docetaxel-containing PLGA-PRINT nanoparticles and antiangiogenic mEZH2
siRNA incorporated into chitosan nanoparticles (CH-mEZH2 siRNA). Method:
In vivo dose-finding studies and therapeutic experiments with
PLGA-PRINT-docetaxel and CH-mEZH2 siRNA were conducted in
well-established orthotopic mouse models of ovarian cancer (HeyA8 and
SKOV3ip1). Antitumor effects were quantified through mean tumor weight
and tumor nodule counts. Tumor tissues from these studies were stained to
evaluate the proliferation index (Ki67), apoptosis index (cleaved
caspase-3), and microvessel density (CD31). Result: Dose-finding studies
for PLGA-PRINT-docetaxel revealed all doses (0.5, 1.5, 2 mg/kg for
metronomic and 20mg/kg for MTD) significantly reduced tumor burden
(p<0.05 for MTD; p<0.01 for metronomic doses). The lowest dose (0.5
mg/kg) reduced tumor weight by 80% and was selected for subsequent
therapeutic studies. We then tested whether combining
PLGA-PRINT-docetaxel particles with CH-mEZH2 siRNA would enhance
antitumor effect. CH-mEZH2 siRNA alone reduced tumor weight by 70% in
both models (p<0.01 for HeyA8; p<0.05 for SKOV3ip1). PLGA-PRINT-docetaxel
treatment reduced tumor weight by 80% (pPurpose: The purpose of this
study was to investigate the combined antitumor effects of metronomic
docetaxel-containing PLGA-PRINT nanoparticles and antiangiogenic mEZH2
siRNA incorporated into chitosan nanoparticles (CH-mEZH2 siRNA). Method:
In vivo dose-finding studies and therapeutic experiments with
PLGA-PRINT-docetaxel and CH-mEZH2 siRNA were conducted in
well-established orthotopic mouse models of ovarian cancer (HeyA8 and
SKOV3ip1). Antitumor effects were quantified through mean tumor weight
and tumor nodule counts. Tumor tissues from these studies were stained to
evaluate the proliferation index (Ki67), apoptosis index (cleaved
caspase-3), and microvessel density (CD31). Result: Dose-finding studies
for PLGA-PRINT-docetaxel revealed all doses (0.5, 1.5, 2 mg/kg for
metronomic and 20mg/kg for MTD) significantly reduced tumor burden
(p<0.05 for MTD; p<0.01 for metronomic doses). The lowest dose (0.5
mg/kg) reduced tumor weight by 80% and was selected for subsequent
therapeutic studies. We then tested whether combining
PLGA-PRINT-docetaxel particles with CH-mEZH2 siRNA would enhance
antitumor effect. CH-mEZH2 siRNA alone reduced tumor weight by 70% in
both models (p<0.01 for HeyA8; p<0.05 for SKOV3ip1). PLGA-PRINT-docetaxel
treatment reduced tumor weight by 80% (p<0.01). Combination therapy
showed the greatest therapeutic benefit with 95% reduction in tumor
weight in both models (pPurpose: The purpose of this study was to
investigate the combined antitumor effects of metronomic
docetaxel-containing PLGA-PRINT nanoparticles and antiangiogenic mEZH2
siRNA incorporated into chitosan nanoparticles (CH-mEZH2 siRNA). Method:
In vivo dose-finding studies and therapeutic experiments with
PLGA-PRINT-docetaxel and CH-mEZH2 siRNA were conducted in
well-established orthotopic mouse models of ovarian cancer (HeyA8 and
SKOV3ip1). Antitumor effects were quantified through mean tumor weight
and tumor nodule counts. Tumor tissues from these studies were stained to
evaluate the proliferation index (Ki67), apoptosis index (cleaved
caspase-3), and microvessel density (CD31). Result: Dose-finding studies
for PLGA-PRINT-docetaxel revealed all doses (0.5, 1.5, 2 mg/kg for
metronomic and 20mg/kg for MTD) significantly reduced tumor burden
(p<0.05 for MTD; p<0.01 for metronomic doses). The lowest dose (0.5
mg/kg) reduced tumor weight by 80% and was selected for subsequent
therapeutic studies. We then tested whether combining
PLGA-PRINT-docetaxel particles with CH-mEZH2 siRNA would enhance
antitumor effect. CH-mEZH2 siRNA alone reduced tumor weight by 70% in
both models (p<0.01 for HeyA8; p<0.05 for SKOV3ip1). PLGA-PRINT-docetaxel
treatment reduced tumor weight by 80% (p<0.01). Combination therapy
showed the greatest therapeutic benefit with 95% reduction in tumor
weight in both models (p<0.001 in HeyA8; pPurpose: The purpose of this
study was to investigate the combined antitumor effects of metronomic
docetaxel-containing PLGA-PRINT nanoparticles and antiangiogenic mEZH2
siRNA incorporated into chitosan nanoparticles (CH-mEZH2 siRNA). Method:
In vivo dose-finding studies and therapeutic experiments with
PLGA-PRINT-docetaxel and CH-mEZH2 siRNA were conducted in
well-established orthotopic mouse models of ovarian cancer (HeyA8 and
SKOV3ip1). Antitumor effects were quantified through mean tumor weight
and tumor nodule counts. Tumor tissues from these studies were stained to
evaluate the proliferation index (Ki67), apoptosis index (cleaved
caspase-3), and microvessel density (CD31). Result: Dose-finding studies
for PLGA-PRINT-docetaxel revealed all doses (0.5, 1.5, 2 mg/kg for
metronomic and 20mg/kg for MTD) significantly reduced tumor burden
(p<0.05 for MTD; p<0.01 for metronomic doses). The lowest dose (0.5
mg/kg) reduced tumor weight by 80% and was selected for subsequent
therapeutic studies. We then tested whether combining
PLGA-PRINT-docetaxel particles with CH-mEZH2 siRNA would enhance
antitumor effect. CH-mEZH2 siRNA alone reduced tumor weight by 70% in
both models (p<0.01 for HeyA8; p<0.05 for SKOV3ip1). PLGA-PRINT-docetaxel
treatment reduced tumor weight by 80% (p<0.01). Combination therapy
showed the greatest therapeutic benefit with 95% reduction in tumor
weight in both models (p<0.001 in HeyA8; p<0.01 in SKOV3ip1). In both the
models, the combination therapy resulted in the greatest reduction of
tumor nodules. Individual as well as combination therapies showed a
significant reduction in proliferation (pPurpose: The purpose of this
study was to investigate the combined antitumor effects of metronomic
docetaxel-containing PLGA-PRINT nanoparticles and antiangiogenic mEZH2
siRNA incorporated into chitosan nanoparticles (CH-mEZH2 siRNA). Method:
In vivo dose-finding studies and therapeutic experiments with
PLGA-PRINT-docetaxel and CH-mEZH2 siRNA were conducted in
well-established orthotopic mouse models of ovarian cancer (HeyA8 and
SKOV3ip1). Antitumor effects were quantified through mean tumor weight
and tumor nodule counts. Tumor tissues from these studies were stained to
evaluate the proliferation index (Ki67), apoptosis index (cleaved
caspase-3), and microvessel density (CD31). Result: Dose-finding studies
for PLGA-PRINT-docetaxel revealed all doses (0.5, 1.5, 2 mg/kg for
metronomic and 20mg/kg for MTD) significantly reduced tumor burden
(p<0.05 for MTD; p<0.01 for metronomic doses). The lowest dose (0.5
mg/kg) reduced tumor weight by 80% and was selected for subsequent
therapeutic studies. We then tested whether combining
PLGA-PRINT-docetaxel particles with CH-mEZH2 siRNA would enhance
antitumor effect. CH-mEZH2 siRNA alone reduced tumor weight by 70% in
both models (p<0.01 for HeyA8; p<0.05 for SKOV3ip1). PLGA-PRINT-docetaxel
treatment reduced tumor weight by 80% (p<0.01). Combination therapy
showed the greatest therapeutic benefit with 95% reduction in tumor
weight in both models (p<0.001 in HeyA8; p<0.01 in SKOV3ip1). In both the
models, the combination therapy resulted in the greatest reduction of
tumor nodules. Individual as well as combination therapies showed a
significant reduction in proliferation (p<0.001). Metronomic
PLGA-PRINT-docetaxel and CH-mEZH2 siRNA monotherapy increased the
apoptotic index significantly (pPurpose: The purpose of this study was to
investigate the combined antitumor effects of metronomic
docetaxel-containing PLGA-PRINT nanoparticles and antiangiogenic mEZH2
siRNA incorporated into chitosan nanoparticles (CH-mEZH2 siRNA). Method:
In vivo dose-finding studies and therapeutic experiments with
PLGA-PRINT-docetaxel and CH-mEZH2 siRNA were conducted in
well-established orthotopic mouse models of ovarian cancer (HeyA8 and
SKOV3ip1). Antitumor effects were quantified through mean tumor weight
and tumor nodule counts. Tumor tissues from these studies were stained to
evaluate the proliferation index (Ki67), apoptosis index (cleaved
caspase-3), and microvessel density (CD31). Result: Dose-finding studies
for PLGA-PRINT-docetaxel revealed all doses (0.5, 1.5, 2 mg/kg for
metronomic and 20mg/kg for MTD) significantly reduced tumor burden
(p<0.05 for MTD; p<0.01 for metronomic doses). The lowest dose (0.5
mg/kg) reduced tumor weight by 80% and was selected for subsequent
therapeutic studies. We then tested whether combining
PLGA-PRINT-docetaxel particles with CH-mEZH2 siRNA would enhance
antitumor effect. CH-mEZH2 siRNA alone reduced tumor weight by 70% in
both models (p<0.01 for HeyA8; p<0.05 for SKOV3ip1). PLGA-PRINT-docetaxel
treatment reduced tumor weight by 80% (p<0.01). Combination therapy
showed the greatest therapeutic benefit with 95% reduction in tumor
weight in both models (p<0.001 in HeyA8; p<0.01 in SKOV3ip1). In both the
models, the combination therapy resulted in the greatest reduction of
tumor nodules. Individual as well as combination therapies showed a
significant reduction in proliferation (p<0.001). Metronomic
PLGA-PRINT-docetaxel and CH-mEZH2 siRNA monotherapy increased the
apoptotic index significantly (p<0.05), whereas the combination therapy
had an additive effect (pPurpose: The purpose of this study was to
investigate the combined antitumor effects of metronomic
docetaxel-containing PLGA-PRINT nanoparticles and antiangiogenic mEZH2
siRNA incorporated into chitosan nanoparticles (CH-mEZH2 siRNA). Method:
In vivo dose-finding studies and therapeutic experiments with
PLGA-PRINT-docetaxel and CH-mEZH2 siRNA were conducted in
well-established orthotopic mouse models of ovarian cancer (HeyA8 and
SKOV3ip1). Antitumor effects were quantified through mean tumor weight
and tumor nodule counts. Tumor tissues from these studies were stained to
evaluate the proliferation index (Ki67), apoptosis index (cleaved
caspase-3), and microvessel density (CD31). Result: Dose-finding studies
for PLGA-PRINT-docetaxel revealed all doses (0.5, 1.5, 2 mg/kg for
metronomic and 20mg/kg for MTD) significantly reduced tumor burden
(p<0.05 for MTD; p<0.01 for metronomic doses). The lowest dose (0.5
mg/kg) reduced tumor weight by 80% and was selected for subsequent
therapeutic studies. We then tested whether combining
PLGA-PRINT-docetaxel particles with CH-mEZH2 siRNA would enhance
antitumor effect. CH-mEZH2 siRNA alone reduced tumor weight by 70% in
both models (p<0.01 for HeyA8; p<0.05 for SKOV3ip1). PLGA-PRINT-docetaxel
treatment reduced tumor weight by 80% (p<0.01). Combination therapy
showed the greatest therapeutic benefit with 95% reduction in tumor
weight in both models (p<0.001 in HeyA8; p<0.01 in SKOV3ip1). In both the
models, the combination therapy resulted in the greatest reduction of
tumor nodules. Individual as well as combination therapies showed a
significant reduction in proliferation (p<0.001). Metronomic
PLGA-PRINT-docetaxel and CH-mEZH2 siRNA monotherapy increased the
apoptotic index significantly (p<0.05), whereas the combination therapy
had an additive effect (p<0.001). CH-mEZH2 siRNA as well as metronomic
PLGA-PRINT-docetaxel therapy resulted in significant reduction in MVD
(pPurpose: The purpose of this study was to investigate the combined
antitumor effects of metronomic docetaxel-containing PLGA-PRINT
nanoparticles and antiangiogenic mEZH2 siRNA incorporated into chitosan
nanoparticles (CH-mEZH2 siRNA). Method: In vivo dose-finding studies and
therapeutic experiments with PLGA-PRINT-docetaxel and CH-mEZH2 siRNA were
conducted in well-established orthotopic mouse models of ovarian cancer
(HeyA8 and SKOV3ip1). Antitumor effects were quantified through mean
tumor weight and tumor nodule counts. Tumor tissues from these studies
were stained to evaluate the proliferation index (Ki67), apoptosis index
(cleaved caspase-3), and microvessel density (CD31). Result: Dose-finding
studies for PLGA-PRINT-docetaxel revealed all doses (0.5, 1.5, 2 mg/kg
for metronomic and 20mg/kg for MTD) significantly reduced tumor burden
(p<0.05 for MTD; p<0.01 for metronomic doses). The lowest dose (0.5
mg/kg) reduced tumor weight by 80% and was selected for subsequent
therapeutic studies. We then tested whether combining
PLGA-PRINT-docetaxel particles with CH-mEZH2 siRNA would enhance
antitumor effect. CH-mEZH2 siRNA alone reduced tumor weight by 70% in
both models (p<0.01 for HeyA8; p<0.05 for SKOV3ip1). PLGA-PRINT-docetaxel
treatment reduced tumor weight by 80% (p<0.01). Combination therapy
showed the greatest therapeutic benefit with 95% reduction in tumor
weight in both models (p<0.001 in HeyA8; p<0.01 in SKOV3ip1). In both the
models, the combination therapy resulted in the greatest reduction of
tumor nodules. Individual as well as combination therapies showed a
significant reduction in proliferation (p<0.001). Metronomic
PLGA-PRINT-docetaxel and CH-mEZH2 siRNA monotherapy increased the
apoptotic index significantly (p<0.05), whereas the combination therapy
had an additive effect (p<0.001). CH-mEZH2 siRNA as well as metronomic
PLGA-PRINT-docetaxel therapy resulted in significant reduction in MVD
(p<0.01). Conclusion: Metronomic delivery of PLGA-PRINT-docetaxel
combined with CH-mEZH2 siRNA is an attractive therapeutic strategy.

