Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: YYEI motif is critical to oncogenicity of 14-3-3 proteins


14-3-3 family consists of seven highly conserved isoforms and most of
them are identified as oncogenes in various types of cancer except for
14-3-3, a well-known tumor suppressor. To clarify the suppressor
characteristic of 14-3-3 divergent from others, we found that the major
difference between the other oncogenic members and 14-3-3 by protein
alignment was an amino acid substitution (Y180H) by which the SH2-binding
motif (YYEI) is disrupted and cannot be phosphorylation. Thus, we
generated a H180Y 14-3-3 mutant and investigated the impact of the
acquired YYEI motif on the tumor suppression. First, we found that 14-3-3
decreased cancer invasion. Surprisingly, the H180Y mutant not only
enhanced cell invasion but increased cell viability. Meanwhile, the
interaction between H180Y mutant and Src was higher than wild type. It
indicates one amino acid substitution switches 14-3-3 from tumor
suppressor to oncogene. Hence, the YYEI motif might be important for the
oncogenicity of other 14-3-3 proteins. Indeed, we demonstrated that
14-3-3 interacted with Src through Y178 phosphorylation, which is crucial
for the binding of 14-3-3 with Src-SH2 domain. Owing to the importance of
Y178 phosphorylation in the 14-3-3/Src interaction, we introduced the
Y178F 14-3-3 mutant to lung cancer cells and confirmed that Y178
phosphorylation is important for the increase of invasion and viability.
Furthermore, we also revealed an amino acid switch of 14-3-3 from YYEI to
HYEI during evolutionary progression. Taken together, our findings
suggest that YYEI motif is essential for 14-3-3 proteins to interact with
Src and to regulate Src-mediated cell functions.

