Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Decreased expression of miR-506 induced epithelial-mesenchymal
transition and poor prognosis in gastric cancer patients


Backgrounds/AimsMost gastric cancer cells acquire epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) to promote malignant cells to form metastasis in gastric
cancer cases. Recent studies proved the roles of microRNAs on the
regulation of EMT through suppressing EMT-related transcription factors.
Of those, miR-506 inhibits expression of SNAI2 and PRRX1 and aberrant low
expression of miR-506 relates to poor prognosis in ovarian and breast
cancers. The aim of this study is to investigate the role of miR-506 on
survival and EMT in Japanese gastric cancer (GC) patients.Methods144
patients with surgically resected primary GC were included in this study.
MicroRNA and mRNA were measured using real-time PCR analysis.
Clinicopathological factors including prognosis that were dependent on
miR-506 expression were analyzed. In vitro, we established miR-506
overexpressing human GC cell lines (MKN-7 and MKN-45). The proliferation,
migration and luciferase assay of 3UTR of SNAI2 were performed.Results(1)
The low expression of miR-506 was significantly correlated with poor
overall survival in the univariate model (log-rank p = 0.02 ) and
multivariate model (hazard ratio = 1.78, p = 0.05). The miR-506
expression was inversely correlated with SNAI2 expression (p = 0.01). The
low expression of miR-506 was significantly correlated with
histologically poorer differentiation that showed more invasive
properties (p = 0.02). (2) In miR-506 overexpressed GC cell lines,
miR-506 suppressed the SNAI2 expression by binding to 3UTR of SNAI2 gene,
and resulted in the increased expression of E-cadherin. MiR-506
overexpression significantly suppressed the cell proliferation and the
cell migration compared to the miR-control transfected
cells.ConclusionsThis study showed that miR-506 directly controlled EMT
by regulating SNAI2, and was a independent prognostic factor in Japanese
GC patients. Our data indicated that miR-506 could be a candidate of EMT
inhibitor in GC patients.


