Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: miR-221: A potential therapeutic target for hepatocellular
carcinoma


microRNAs, which control post-transcriptional gene expression by
repressing mRNA translation and/or causing mRNA degradation, play
important roles in human cancers. miR-221 is one of the two microRNAs in
the miR-221/222 cluster located in chromosome-X, targets key cancer
pathways and inhibit translation of several tumor suppressors including
p27, p57, and PTEN. miR-221 is up-regulated by >2-fold in 55% and >5-fold
in 14% of human hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) tumor samples.
Importantly, it has been shown in preclinical HCC models that miR-221
overexpression accelerated tumorigenesis, while miR-221 inhibition
reduced tumor growth. To identify novel microRNA antagonists that
specifically inhibit miR-221 (refer to as miR-221 anti-miRs) for the
treatment of HCC, we have generated a number of chemically-modified
oligonucleotides and screened for their ability to inhibit miR-221
functions. A number of potent and metabolically stable miR-221 anti-miRs
devoid of proinflammatory potential were identified. These miR-221
anti-miRs were tested in a number of human HCC cell lines that highly
express miR-221 compare to normal adult human hepatocytes. We
demonstrated the de-repression of both p27 mRNA and p27 protein in HCC
cells following treatment with miR-221 anti-miRs. We also showed in HCC
cells the de-repression of a novel miR-221 target gene recently
identified through an argonuate pull-down assay (Ago-IP), alongside with
the enrichment of global miR-221 target seeds (as defined by TargetScan)
following miR-221 anti-miRs treatment. We then sought to determine the
biologic consequences following miR-221 inhibition in HCC cells. In
standard cell proliferation assays, we demonstrated that HCC cells
responded to miR-221 anti-miRs treatment with IC50s of 125 to 500nM under
free-uptake conditions and IC50s of 5 to 75 nM under transfection
conditions. In addition, we also showed that miR-221 anti-miRs treatment
disrupted HCC cell cycle transition. Altogether, our data showed that
miR-221 inhibition de-repressed p27, blocked cell cycle progression and
reduced cell proliferation in HCC cells, and supports the notion of
miR-221 as a potential therapeutic target for the treatment of HCC.
Further preclinical testing of our miR-221 anti-miRs is currently in
progress.

