Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transcription factor PAX6 is expressed in human soft tissue
sarcomas and confers negative impact on patients' survival


AIM:We investigated the expression of PAX6 in soft tissue sarcomas to
evaluate its prognostic value.BACKGROUND:Transcription factor PAX6 has a
decisive role in the development of the CNS, eye, pancreas and olfactory
epithelium, and the pattern of PAX6 normal expression is restricted to
those tissues. PAX6 is detected in various cancer cell lines, but very
little is known about its expression in tumors, possible cancer-relevant
functions and prognostic value. PAX6 is generally believed to be a tumor
suppressor, based mainly on studies in glioblastoma. PAX6 has been
detected in tumors of eye and pancreas, but the prognostic significance
remains unclear. Soft tissue sarcomas (STS) are a relatively uncommon but
deadly group of tumors with poor prognosis and few treatment options.
Improving therapy efficacy requires discovery of novel biomarkers to
identify high-risk patients who may benefit from adjuvant therapy, as
well as to improve our understanding of the molecular pathology of
STS.METHODS:Tissue microarrays from 249 STS patients were constructed
from duplicate cores of viable and representative neoplastic tumor areas.
Immunohistochemistry was used to evaluate the expression of PAX6 and
TGF-beta. Western blotting was used to evaluate expression levels of PAX6
and TGF-beta in B3 lens epithelium cell line.RESULTS:PAX6 expression was
detected in STS tissue samples. Both nuclear and cytoplasmic expression
was observed, and there was a positive correlation between them (r=0.47;
PAIM:We investigated the expression of PAX6 in soft tissue sarcomas to
evaluate its prognostic value.BACKGROUND:Transcription factor PAX6 has a
decisive role in the development of the CNS, eye, pancreas and olfactory
epithelium, and the pattern of PAX6 normal expression is restricted to
those tissues. PAX6 is detected in various cancer cell lines, but very
little is known about its expression in tumors, possible cancer-relevant
functions and prognostic value. PAX6 is generally believed to be a tumor
suppressor, based mainly on studies in glioblastoma. PAX6 has been
detected in tumors of eye and pancreas, but the prognostic significance
remains unclear. Soft tissue sarcomas (STS) are a relatively uncommon but
deadly group of tumors with poor prognosis and few treatment options.
Improving therapy efficacy requires discovery of novel biomarkers to
identify high-risk patients who may benefit from adjuvant therapy, as
well as to improve our understanding of the molecular pathology of
STS.METHODS:Tissue microarrays from 249 STS patients were constructed
from duplicate cores of viable and representative neoplastic tumor areas.
Immunohistochemistry was used to evaluate the expression of PAX6 and
TGF-beta. Western blotting was used to evaluate expression levels of PAX6
and TGF-beta in B3 lens epithelium cell line.RESULTS:PAX6 expression was
detected in STS tissue samples. Both nuclear and cytoplasmic expression
was observed, and there was a positive correlation between them (r=0.47;
P<0.001). In univariate analyses, tumor expression of PAX6 correlated
(p=0,029) with reduced disease-specific survival (DSS). Rhabdomyosarcoma,
synovial sarcoma, undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcoma and leiomyosarcoma
appeared to be the tumor types with highest number of PAX6-positive
samples (73,3%, 68,8%, 54,5%, 50,8%, respectively). Multivariate analysis
(after the exclusion of possible confounders) indicated that PAX6
expression was a negative prognostic factors for DSS of all patients,
irrespective of age, gender, tumor size, histological type, grade or
presence of metastasis at the time of diagnosis (P=0,025, HR=1.5,
CI=1.1-2.2). We also observed a correlation between expression levels of
PAX6 and TGF-beta, with an apparent synergistic negative effect on DSS:
double-positive patients had worst DSS compared to single-positives or
negatives. In the B3 cell line PAX6knockdown caused downregulation of
TGF-beta, while stimulation of cells with TGF-beta protein activated
expression of PAX6.CONCLUSIONS:We detected PAX6 in STS - the first tumor
group with no developmental links to the normal sites of PAX6 expression.
PAX6 appeared to confer a universal negative prognostic impact on DSS,
irrespectively of clinical and pathological subgroups analyzed. PAX6
expression correlated with TGF-beta, and reciprocal upregulation may
explain their synergistic negative effect on DSS.

