Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prognostic significance of T gene SNP s2305089 in individuals with
spinal column chordoma


Chordoma is the most common primary spinal column tumor with a median
survival of only 6-7 years, with extremely high recurrence rates. Radical
surgical resection remains the mainstay of treatment for these tumors,
with radiation often utilized to enhance local disease control. There are
no approved chemotherapeutic agents for chordomas. Recently, Pillay and
colleagues found that the single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) rs2305089
in the T gene was strongly associated with chordoma development1. The
variant A allele at rs2305089 results in a p.GLy177Asp alteration in
brachyury, the protein encoded by the T gene. Brachyury has been
implicated in the pathogenesis of chordomas and is highly expressed in
most of these tumors. Given the rarity of this disease, with an incidence
of 0.08 per 100,000 individuals, determining the clinical significance of
this SNP has been challenging. In order to address whether the rs2305089
SNP was associated with altered prognosis in individuals with spinal
column chordomas, we performed a retrospective analysis on 82 chordomas
from 5 different high volume centers in Europe and North America. Each
sample was linked to well curated clinical outcomes data that were
collected after receiving institutional review board approval. The A
variant at rs2305089 was present in 74 of 82 cases analyzed. In our
cohort, there were no differences in gender, age, location, ethnicity,
histologic subtype or time to local recurrence based on the presence of
the A variant. However, overall survival was significantly worse
(log-rank = 0.003) in individuals who lacked the A variant. To our
knowledge, this is the first time the rs2305089 SNP has been implicated
in the prognosis and survival of individuals with chordoma. This finding
warrants further investigation and may have important implications on
clinical decision-making.1Nature Genetics. 2012 Nov;44(11):1185-7Note:
This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

