Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RRx-001 oxidation of redox sensitive protein thiols in tumors
measured by Gd-LC7-SH enhanced MRI In preclinical tumor models


RRx-001 is a member of the novel dinitroazetidine class of anticancer
agents that profoundly perturbs the thiol redox potential of cancer cells
while inducing damaging ROS/RNS. A Phase 1 study investigating the safety
and tolerability of RRx-001 has been completed and Phase 2 studies are
ongoing. Pre-clinical studies indicate that RRx-001 selectively alkylates
glutathione and a specific thiol on hemoglobin, resulting in a
pro-oxidant effect in tumors. We have previously reported the development
of thiol-containing DOTA-based chelates of gadolinium as redox-sensitive
MRI contrast agents. In the present preclinical MRI study we investigated
the pharmacodynamics and mechanism of action of RRx-001 using the novel
thiol-bearing contrast agent Gd-LC7-SH.SCID mice were inoculated in the
flank with either CHP-100, HT-29, or PANC-1 cells. Mice were imaged on a
7 Tesla Bruker Biospec small animal MRI scanner when tumors had grown to
250-400 mm3 in size. Mice were anesthetized using isoflurane and
cannulated at the tail vein for injections using a zero dead volume i.v.
line for administration of Gd-LC7-SH or RRx-001. Longitudinal relaxation
time (T1) maps of the tumor were acquired pre-contrast and at various
times post-contrast to 60 min post-injection of 0.05 mmol/kg Gd-LC7-SH.
Mice were imaged before treatment and at 1h, 24 h and 72 h post-treatment
with 10 mg/kg RRx-001.Gd-LC7-SH spontaneously binds to thiol targets
following i.v. administration. The fraction of gadolinium that is bound
to macromolecular targets such as plasma albumin and exofacial protein
thiols (EPTs) is protected from renal clearance, and produces a prolonged
decrease in tumor T1 on MRI. We have quantified this decrease in tumor T1
by the parameter -T1, calculated as pre-contrast tumor T1 minus tumor T1
at 40-60 min post Gd-LC7-SH. The larger the magnitude of -T1, the greater
is the retention of Gd-LC7-SH in the tumor. In all 3 tumor types, the
tumor -T1 at 1 h post-drug was significantly smaller than pre-drug tumor
-T1 (pRRx-001 is a member of the novel dinitroazetidine class of
anticancer agents that profoundly perturbs the thiol redox potential of
cancer cells while inducing damaging ROS/RNS. A Phase 1 study
investigating the safety and tolerability of RRx-001 has been completed
and Phase 2 studies are ongoing. Pre-clinical studies indicate that
RRx-001 selectively alkylates glutathione and a specific thiol on
hemoglobin, resulting in a pro-oxidant effect in tumors. We have
previously reported the development of thiol-containing DOTA-based
chelates of gadolinium as redox-sensitive MRI contrast agents. In the
present preclinical MRI study we investigated the pharmacodynamics and
mechanism of action of RRx-001 using the novel thiol-bearing contrast
agent Gd-LC7-SH.SCID mice were inoculated in the flank with either
CHP-100, HT-29, or PANC-1 cells. Mice were imaged on a 7 Tesla Bruker
Biospec small animal MRI scanner when tumors had grown to 250-400 mm3 in
size. Mice were anesthetized using isoflurane and cannulated at the tail
vein for injections using a zero dead volume i.v. line for administration
of Gd-LC7-SH or RRx-001. Longitudinal relaxation time (T1) maps of the
tumor were acquired pre-contrast and at various times post-contrast to 60
min post-injection of 0.05 mmol/kg Gd-LC7-SH. Mice were imaged before
treatment and at 1h, 24 h and 72 h post-treatment with 10 mg/kg
RRx-001.Gd-LC7-SH spontaneously binds to thiol targets following i.v.
administration. The fraction of gadolinium that is bound to
macromolecular targets such as plasma albumin and exofacial protein
thiols (EPTs) is protected from renal clearance, and produces a prolonged
decrease in tumor T1 on MRI. We have quantified this decrease in tumor T1
by the parameter -T1, calculated as pre-contrast tumor T1 minus tumor T1
at 40-60 min post Gd-LC7-SH. The larger the magnitude of -T1, the greater
is the retention of Gd-LC7-SH in the tumor. In all 3 tumor types, the
tumor -T1 at 1 h post-drug was significantly smaller than pre-drug tumor
-T1 (p<0.02). In the HT-29 and PANC-1 tumors the -T1 at 72 h post-drug
remained smaller than baseline -T1 (pRRx-001 is a member of the novel
dinitroazetidine class of anticancer agents that profoundly perturbs the
thiol redox potential of cancer cells while inducing damaging ROS/RNS. A
Phase 1 study investigating the safety and tolerability of RRx-001 has
been completed and Phase 2 studies are ongoing. Pre-clinical studies
indicate that RRx-001 selectively alkylates glutathione and a specific
thiol on hemoglobin, resulting in a pro-oxidant effect in tumors. We have
previously reported the development of thiol-containing DOTA-based
chelates of gadolinium as redox-sensitive MRI contrast agents. In the
present preclinical MRI study we investigated the pharmacodynamics and
mechanism of action of RRx-001 using the novel thiol-bearing contrast
agent Gd-LC7-SH.SCID mice were inoculated in the flank with either
CHP-100, HT-29, or PANC-1 cells. Mice were imaged on a 7 Tesla Bruker
Biospec small animal MRI scanner when tumors had grown to 250-400 mm3 in
size. Mice were anesthetized using isoflurane and cannulated at the tail
vein for injections using a zero dead volume i.v. line for administration
of Gd-LC7-SH or RRx-001. Longitudinal relaxation time (T1) maps of the
tumor were acquired pre-contrast and at various times post-contrast to 60
min post-injection of 0.05 mmol/kg Gd-LC7-SH. Mice were imaged before
treatment and at 1h, 24 h and 72 h post-treatment with 10 mg/kg
RRx-001.Gd-LC7-SH spontaneously binds to thiol targets following i.v.
administration. The fraction of gadolinium that is bound to
macromolecular targets such as plasma albumin and exofacial protein
thiols (EPTs) is protected from renal clearance, and produces a prolonged
decrease in tumor T1 on MRI. We have quantified this decrease in tumor T1
by the parameter -T1, calculated as pre-contrast tumor T1 minus tumor T1
at 40-60 min post Gd-LC7-SH. The larger the magnitude of -T1, the greater
is the retention of Gd-LC7-SH in the tumor. In all 3 tumor types, the
tumor -T1 at 1 h post-drug was significantly smaller than pre-drug tumor
-T1 (p<0.02). In the HT-29 and PANC-1 tumors the -T1 at 72 h post-drug
remained smaller than baseline -T1 (p<0.05). These observations indicate
decreased tumor retention of Gd-LC7-SH following treatment with RRx-001,
which is consistent with a decrease in availability of reduced albumin
and EPTs in the tumor.The previously reported redox activity of RRx-001
together with its very short half-life in vivo suggests an indirect
effect on albumin and exofacial thiols that manifests as smaller -T1
values on Gd-LC7-SH MRI imaging. The anti-proliferative activity of
RRx-001 may not only be due to glutathione depletion and NO release under
hypoxia, but also to an increase in intratumoral ROS burden leading to a
direct redox modulation of exofacial thiols integral to tumor protein
function. Additional studies are planned to confirm this postulate.

