Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Multilayer omics analyses in CpG island methylator phenotype clear
cell renal cell carcinomas


[Background] We have reported that CpG-island methylator phenotype
(CIMP)-positive clear cell renal cell carcinomas (RCCs) are characterized
by accumulation of DNA hypermethylation of CpG islands,
clinicopathological aggressiveness and poorer patient outcome. We have
established the criteria for CIMP diagnosis in clear cell RCCs by
quantification of DNA methylation levels of RCC-specific CIMP marker
genes.[Purpose] The aim of this study was to reveal the molecular
pathways which significantly participate in CIMP-positive renal
carcinogenesis and become a therapeutic target of CIMP-positive clear
cell RCCs.[Methods] Our previous methylome analysis using Illumina
Infinium HumanMethylation27 BeadArray identified CIMP-negative and
-positive clear cell RCCs in the present cohort (n=101). In the present
study, genome (whole-exome), transcriptome and proteome analyses using
Agilent SureSelect All Exon capture followed by sequencing on an Illumina
HiSeq 2000 platform, Agilent SurePrint Human Gene Expression microarray
and two dimensional image converted analysis of liquid
chromatography-mass spectrometry, respectively, were performed in tissue
specimens of 87 CIMP-negative and 14 CIMP-positive clear cell RCCs and
the corresponding non-cancerous renal cortex tissue specimens.[Results]
The number of genes showing genetic aberrations in CIMP-negative clear
cell RCCs was quite low, indicating that CIMP-negative RCCs lacked
distinct genetic characteristics. On the other hand, many genes, such as
genes encoding hisotone modification enzymes and tumor-suppressor genes,
showed 10% or more incidence of genetic aberrations in CIMP-positive
clear cell RCCs. Based on MetaCore pathway analysis, although mRNA or
protein expression alterations in CIMP-negative clear cell RCCs were not
significantly accumulated in any molecular pathways, such alterations in
CIMP-positive clear cell RCCs were accumulated in the 19 pathways
(P[Background] We have reported that CpG-island methylator phenotype
(CIMP)-positive clear cell renal cell carcinomas (RCCs) are characterized
by accumulation of DNA hypermethylation of CpG islands,
clinicopathological aggressiveness and poorer patient outcome. We have
established the criteria for CIMP diagnosis in clear cell RCCs by
quantification of DNA methylation levels of RCC-specific CIMP marker
genes.[Purpose] The aim of this study was to reveal the molecular
pathways which significantly participate in CIMP-positive renal
carcinogenesis and become a therapeutic target of CIMP-positive clear
cell RCCs.[Methods] Our previous methylome analysis using Illumina
Infinium HumanMethylation27 BeadArray identified CIMP-negative and
-positive clear cell RCCs in the present cohort (n=101). In the present
study, genome (whole-exome), transcriptome and proteome analyses using
Agilent SureSelect All Exon capture followed by sequencing on an Illumina
HiSeq 2000 platform, Agilent SurePrint Human Gene Expression microarray
and two dimensional image converted analysis of liquid
chromatography-mass spectrometry, respectively, were performed in tissue
specimens of 87 CIMP-negative and 14 CIMP-positive clear cell RCCs and
the corresponding non-cancerous renal cortex tissue specimens.[Results]
The number of genes showing genetic aberrations in CIMP-negative clear
cell RCCs was quite low, indicating that CIMP-negative RCCs lacked
distinct genetic characteristics. On the other hand, many genes, such as
genes encoding hisotone modification enzymes and tumor-suppressor genes,
showed 10% or more incidence of genetic aberrations in CIMP-positive
clear cell RCCs. Based on MetaCore pathway analysis, although mRNA or
protein expression alterations in CIMP-negative clear cell RCCs were not
significantly accumulated in any molecular pathways, such alterations in
CIMP-positive clear cell RCCs were accumulated in the 19 pathways
(P<0.05), such as molecular pathways involved in cell cycle and cell
adhesion. Quantitative RT-PCR analysis verified expression alterations of
genes involved in the most frequently affected pathway in CIMP-positive
clear cell RCCs.[Conclusion] The most frequently affected pathway may be
a novel therapeutic target of CIMP-positive clear cell RCCs. We are now
examining the effectiveness of the inhibitor of the most frequently
affected pathway in RCC cell lines showing CIMP.

