Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A potential new mechanism for PTEN to maintain genome stability


Purpose: PTEN (phosphatase and tensin homolog) is among the most mutated
or lost tumor suppressors. Recent studies revealed that nuclear PTEN
represses tumorigenesis by stabilizing the centromere, a highly condensed
heterochromatin domain featured with long array of DNA repeats (namely,
satellite DNA), repressive histones, such as trimethylated Histone H3 at
Lys9 residue (H3K9me3), and heterochromatin proteins. Our studies are
aimed to explore the molecular mechanism that PTEN regulates this
heterochromatin structure and thus maintaining genome stability.Methods
and Results: Co-immunoprecipitation (Co-IP) assay showed that PTEN and
the heterochromatin proteins directly interact. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay showed that PTEN is enriched in
satellite locus. Depletion of PTEN leads to abnormal heterochromatin
structure, indicated by reduced H3K9m3 foci (detected by
immunofluorescent staining) and occupancy to satellite locus (ChIP
assay), decreased heterochromatin protein levels (Westernblot analysis),
and overexpression of satellite transcripts (quantitative RT-PCR).
Through a knockdown-and-mutant rescue strategy, we found that the
C-terminal of PTEN is essential for its repressive function on satellite
transcription. Furthermore, overexpression of the C-terminal truncated
PTEN into PTEN-null BT549 cells, as compared to wild-type PTEN
overexpression, lost its function to suppress cell growth (MTT assay),
cell cycle progression (flow cytometry analysis) and protection from DNA
damage (MTT and colony formation assays).Conclusions: Our finding showed
that PTEN guards the genome stability through maintaining the normal
structure of heterochromatin domain.

