Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MMP-1 and pro-MMP-10 as potential urinary pharmacodynamic
biomarkers of FGFR3-targeted therapy in patients with bladder cancer


Aberrant activation of fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 (FGFR3) via
overexpression or mutation occurs frequently in bladder cancer, and
experimental therapeutic agents have entered into clinical trials to
evaluate the potential activity of FGFR3-targeted therapy in this
disease. However, a convenient accessible biomarker indicative of
targeted pathway modulation in vivo drug activity is urgently needed.
Through transcriptional profiling of bladder carcinoma cells expressing
inducible FGFR3 short hairpin RNAs, we identified two matrix
metalloproteinases (MMPs), MMP-1 and MMP-10, as potential downstream
targets of FGFR3. We found that FGFR3 signaling promotes expression and
secretion of MMP-1 and pro-MMP-10 in a MEK-dependent fashion. FGFR3
inhibition by an investigational anti-FGFR3 human monoclonal antibody,
R3Mab, in bladder cancer xenograft models substantially blocked tumor
progression and reduced the protein levels of human MMP-1 and pro-MMP-10
in tumor tissues as well as in mouse serum. Furthermore, we detected
elevated levels of both MMP-1 and pro-MMP-10 in the urine of patients
with advanced bladder cancer. In a phase 1 dose-escalation trial, R3Mab
administration resulted in an acute reduction of urinary MMP-1 and
pro-MMP-10 levels in bladder cancer patients. Together, these findings
reveal a critical role of FGFR3 in regulating MMP-1 and pro-MMP-10
expression and secretion, and identify urinary MMP-1 and pro-MMP-10 as
potential pharmacodynamic biomarkers for FGFR3-targeted therapy in
bladder cancer.

