Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting the Wnt/PCP signaling through ROCK: A new neuroblastoma
drug target


Background: The non-canonical Wnt/planar cell polarity (PCP) pathway
regulates cytoskeletal organization, migration and neuritogenesis.
Signaling is characterized by activation of the GTPases Rho and Rac, and
the downstream Rho-associated protein kinases (ROCKs). Neuroblastoma is a
malignant embryonal tumor of the sympathetic nervous systems, often with
poor prognosis. The need for novel therapeutic approaches is great.
Genetic analyses have revealed mutations and aberrations in the
regulators Rho/Rac in neuroblastoma. The aim of this study was to
characterize the Wnt/PCP signaling and the effects of ROCK inhibition in
neuroblastoma.Methods: Cytotoxic activity of ROCK inhibitors was studied
in cell viability assays. Morphology and invasion were studied with
microscopy. The molecular mechanisms were characterized using cell- and
molecular biology techniques. In vivo studies in mice were carried out to
validate the therapeutic effects and toxicity.Results: Several mediators
in the pathway were differentially expressed in cell lines and patient
samples. Using compounds blocking ROCK1 and ROCK2 activity revealed that
the ROCK2 inhibitor HA-1077 effectively repressed proliferation and
reduced cell viability in neuroblastoma. Additionally, HA-1077 inhibited
migration and induced differentiation through initiating neural
outgrowth. Furthermore, HA-1077 reduced the growth of established
neuroblastoma xenografts in nude mice.Conclusions: These results suggest
that non-canonical Wnt signaling in general and ROCK in particular is a
promising new therapeutic target for high-risk neuroblastoma.

