Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gcn5 modulates the cellular response to oxidative stress induced
by histone deacetylase inhibitors


Aberrant histone post-translational modifications including acetylation
are common in human cancers and result in dysregulation of gene
expression. Our laboratory has focused on studying the effects of
hydroxamic acid based HDAC inhibitors (HDACis) including TSA, SAHA and
CG-1521.We have employed a whole genome yeast deletion library screen to
gain insight into the mechanism of the HDAC inhibitor CG-1521 and
identify potential combinatorial drug targets. Gene ontology enrichment
analysis shows that sensitive strains are highly enriched in processes
regulating chromatin remodeling and transcription. Deletions of
components of the SAGA HAT complex are highly overrepresented in the
sensitive strains, including the catalytic subunit Gcn5. The gcn5
deletion strain displays increased sensitivity to CG-1521 induced cell
death compared to the wild type strain, suggesting that the SAGA complex
is required to reduce the effect of CG-1521 on cell growth. Gene
expression analysis indicates that CG-1521 elicits an oxidative stress
response in both the wild type and the gcn5 deletion strain. Gcn5
deletion substantially increases the level of oxidative stress induced by
CG-1521 as measured by flow cytometry.In the colorectal cancer cell line
HT29, treatment with CG-1521 is accompanied by an increase in oxidative
stress and co-treatment with the Gcn5 specific inhibitor MB-3 or
RNAi-mediated knockdown of the human Gcn5 homologs, Gcn5 and PCAF,
enhances the growth-inhibitory effect of CG-1521.These studies have shown
that disruption of the SAGA HAT complex with MB-3 or RNAi-mediated
knockdown sensitizes tumor cells to CG-1521. Taken together, our work
suggests that the combination of selective HAT and HDAC inhibitors may be
an effective treatment of cancer.

