Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Commonly measured serum liver enzymes as prospective predictors of
hepatocellular carcinoma


Introduction: Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is a highly malignant tumor,
usually diagnosed at late stages and often has very poor prognosis. Serum
liver enzymes (gamma-glutamyltransferase, GGT; alanine aminotransferase,
ALT; aspartate aminotransferase, AST; alkaline phosphatase, ALP) are
generally used as clinical indicators of liver disease, but their
application for HCC is not common. We aimed to prospectively evaluate the
association between liver enzyme levels and their combinations with HCC
risk in a Western European setting with relatively low prevalence of
hepatitis B and/or C (HBV/HCV) and to identify the best discriminatory
model for HCC risk prediction.Methods: A nested-case control study was
conducted within the European Prospective Investigation into Cancer and
Nutrition (EPIC), a large cohort of >520,000 participants from 10
European countries. During mean 7.5 years of follow up, 121 HCC cases
were identified each matched to 2 controls by incidence density sampling.
Serum biomarkers levels of liver enzymes and HBV/HCV status were
measured. Crude and multivariable conditional logistic regression models
adjusted for relevant confounders were used to calculate odds ratio and
95% confidence intervals (OR, 95%CI) for serum standardised biomarker
levels in relation to HCC. Receiver operating characteristics (ROC)
curves were used to compare discriminatory accuracy of models with
combination of 4 most discriminatory biomarkers (score=GGT+ ALT+AST+ALP),
and additionally for alpha-fetoprotein (score+AFP) or HBV/HCV (score+
HBV/HCV) or both (Score+AFP+HBV/HCV), and for score only by time before
diagnosis and hepatitis status.Results: In multivariable models, higher
levels of enzymes and total bilirubin were associated with a high risk of
HCC. The strongest effect was observed for GGT (OR=3.76, 95%CI:2.31-6.13)
and ALP (OR=3.11, 95%CI:1.34-2.85). Weaker effect estimates were observed
for the score: OR=1.61, 95%CI:1.39-1.88 and OR=1.43, 95%CI:1.23-1.68 for
all and hepatitis-free subjects, respectively. The discriminatory
accuracy of individual liver enzymes was the highest for GGT (AUC=81%),
only slightly increased with number of biomarkers used ranging from 83.4%
(score) -84.6% (Score+AFP+HBV/HCV). For the score, the highest accuracy
93%was observed for subjects within the 1st year before cancer diagnosis
vs. 82% for longer follow up and in hepatitis positive subjects
(AUC=94%). In hepatitis-free subset the model accuracy was still
satisfactory (AUC=73%).Conclusion: Our preliminary results showed that
prospectively collected high levels of liver enzymes are associated with
increased HCC risk. GGT alone or in combination with other serum
biomarkers could be employed for HCC risk prediction or early assessment,
also in population with low prevalence of HBC/HCV and over extended time
before the onset of cancer.

