Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Estrogen metabolites and colorectal cancer risk in postmenopausal
women in the Breast and Bone Follow-up to the Fracture Intervention Trial
(BFIT)


Background: A role for estrogen in colon carcinogenesis is suggested by
the lower incidence of colorectal cancer (CRC) in women than men; the
protective effect of exogenous hormones on risk; and reduced levels of
estrogen receptor beta (ER) expression, the predominant ER in the colon,
in cancerous compared to healthy colonic tissue. Nonetheless, the few
cohort studies of endogenous hormones have not found reduced risks
associated with circulating estradiol or estrone levels in postmenopausal
women. We hypothesized that specific metabolites in the estrogen
metabolic pathway may preferentially bind to and activate colonic ER, and
analyzed a panel of 15 estrogen metabolites (EM), including estradiol and
estrone, in a case-cohort study of CRC.Methods: We prospectively followed
15,595 women enrolled in BFIT (Breast and Bone Follow-up to the Fracture
Intervention Trial (FIT)) who had completed questionnaires and donated
blood between 1992 and 1993 for incident CRC through December 2004. Using
liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry, EM were measured in serum
from 197 CRC cases and a subcohort of 491 women who were not using
exogenous hormones at the time of blood draw. EM were examined
individually, grouped by pathway (hydroxylation at the C-2, C-4, or C-16
positions of the steroid ring), and by ratios of the groupings. Cox
proportional hazard regression models adjusted for clinical site and age
(grouped in ten year intervals) were used to calculate quartile-specific
hazard ratios (HRs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs).Results:
Significant risks were not observed for individual EM, and HR for
quartiles of total EM (sum of all EM) were elevated but not significant
(HRQ4 v Q1=1.23, 95% CI=0.8-2.0, ptrend=0.53). No associations were seen
for estrone (HRQ4 v Q1=1.05, 95% CI=0.6-1.7) or estradiol (HRQ4 v
Q1=0.90. 95% CI=0.5-1.5). When represented as a ratio to the parent
estrogens (estrone and estradiol), risks of CRC for women with higher
levels of 2-pathway EM or 4-pathway EM were reduced in each quartile, but
neither HR nor trends were significant (ratio 2-pathway: parent, HRQ4 v
Q1=0.88, 95 CI=0.6-1.4 ptrend=0.56; ratio 4-pathway: parent, HRQ4 v
Q1=0.92, 95% CI=0.6, 1.5 ptrend=0.46).Conclusions: Levels of circulating
estrone and estradiol and their metabolites are not associated with CRC
risk in the BFIT cohort.

