Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: COX-2 blockade improves efficacy of VEGF-targeting drugs


Efficacy of anti-angiogenic drugs is hampered by hypoxia-induced
resistance. Because cyclooxygenase-2 (Cox-2) is upregulated in hypoxic
conditions we analyzed mRNA expression levels of cyclooxygenase-1 (Cox-1)
and Cox-2 in GFP+ FACS-sorted tumor cells from 4T1 tumors after treatment
with anti-VEGFR2 antibodies (DC101) or with sunitinib. Cox-2 but not
Cox-1 mRNA was upregulated by 2.3-fold upon anti-angiogenic treatment. In
addition we found 5.2-fold increased prostaglandin E2 levels in 4T1
tumors after anti-angiogenic therapy. We hypothesized that concomitant
blockade of Cox-2 could increase efficacy of anti-angiogenic agents.
Therefore we treated 4T1 tumor-bearing mice with sunitinib or DC101 alone
and in combination with acetylsalicyclic acid (ASA). We found that single
treatment with ASA or angiogenesis inhibitors inhibited tumor growth and
that combined inhibition of Cox-2 and VEGF(R) signaling exerted additive
therapeutic efficacy (n=5; 114284 (ASS); 114878 (Sunitnib) vs. 635 mg
(combination); pEfficacy of anti-angiogenic drugs is hampered by
hypoxia-induced resistance. Because cyclooxygenase-2 (Cox-2) is
upregulated in hypoxic conditions we analyzed mRNA expression levels of
cyclooxygenase-1 (Cox-1) and Cox-2 in GFP+ FACS-sorted tumor cells from
4T1 tumors after treatment with anti-VEGFR2 antibodies (DC101) or with
sunitinib. Cox-2 but not Cox-1 mRNA was upregulated by 2.3-fold upon
anti-angiogenic treatment. In addition we found 5.2-fold increased
prostaglandin E2 levels in 4T1 tumors after anti-angiogenic therapy. We
hypothesized that concomitant blockade of Cox-2 could increase efficacy
of anti-angiogenic agents. Therefore we treated 4T1 tumor-bearing mice
with sunitinib or DC101 alone and in combination with acetylsalicyclic
acid (ASA). We found that single treatment with ASA or angiogenesis
inhibitors inhibited tumor growth and that combined inhibition of Cox-2
and VEGF(R) signaling exerted additive therapeutic efficacy (n=5; 114284
(ASS); 114878 (Sunitnib) vs. 635 mg (combination); p<0.0001). Similar
effects were achieved upon combining the specific Cox2 inhibitor SC-236
with anti-angiogenic therapy (n=6; 985147 (SC-326); 112361 (Sunitnib) vs.
68076 mg (combination); pEfficacy of anti-angiogenic drugs is hampered by
hypoxia-induced resistance. Because cyclooxygenase-2 (Cox-2) is
upregulated in hypoxic conditions we analyzed mRNA expression levels of
cyclooxygenase-1 (Cox-1) and Cox-2 in GFP+ FACS-sorted tumor cells from
4T1 tumors after treatment with anti-VEGFR2 antibodies (DC101) or with
sunitinib. Cox-2 but not Cox-1 mRNA was upregulated by 2.3-fold upon
anti-angiogenic treatment. In addition we found 5.2-fold increased
prostaglandin E2 levels in 4T1 tumors after anti-angiogenic therapy. We
hypothesized that concomitant blockade of Cox-2 could increase efficacy
of anti-angiogenic agents. Therefore we treated 4T1 tumor-bearing mice
with sunitinib or DC101 alone and in combination with acetylsalicyclic
acid (ASA). We found that single treatment with ASA or angiogenesis
inhibitors inhibited tumor growth and that combined inhibition of Cox-2
and VEGF(R) signaling exerted additive therapeutic efficacy (n=5; 114284
(ASS); 114878 (Sunitnib) vs. 635 mg (combination); p<0.0001). Similar
effects were achieved upon combining the specific Cox2 inhibitor SC-236
with anti-angiogenic therapy (n=6; 985147 (SC-326); 112361 (Sunitnib) vs.
68076 mg (combination); p<0.05) and in the 6CCL4 orthotopic breast cancer
model (data not shown). We carried out an extensive profiling of the
tumor cells and their microenvironment upon concomitant blockade of Cox-2
and VEGF signaling in order to elucidate the underlying mechanism. We
found no changes in tumor cell proliferation or upon combined Cox-2
inhibition and anti-angiogenic therapies. Also combined Cox-2 and
VEGF-signaling inhibition did not change the quantitative composition of
the inflammatory tumor infiltrate. However, upon analyzing polarization
of FACS-sorted TAMs we found that mRNA of the M1 markers iNOS, MHCII, IL1
and TNF were upregulated upon treatment with ASA alone and/or in
combination with anti-angiogenic agents compared to controls or
monotherapy with anti-angiogenic agents. In contrast, the M2 markers Arg1
and YM1 were downregulated upon treatment with Cox2-inhibitors and
anti-angiogenic agents. Therefore, Cox-2 inhibitors skew TAMs towards an
anti-tumoral M1 phenotype while the pro-angiogenic, tumor promoting
M2-phenotype is suppressed.In addition, Cox-2 and PGE2 can promote tumor
angiogenesis. This alternative pro-angiogenic pathway would be enhanced
by increased Cox-2 expression and PGE2 levels and could contribute to
resistance against anti-angiogenic treatments. In line with this
hypothesis the MVD was decreased 4T1 tumors treated with combined Cox-2
and VEGF blockade compared to the respective monotherapy (n=7; 312.4
(Sunitinib); 28.580.83 (ASS) vs. 9.671.71 (combination); pEfficacy of
anti-angiogenic drugs is hampered by hypoxia-induced resistance. Because
cyclooxygenase-2 (Cox-2) is upregulated in hypoxic conditions we analyzed
mRNA expression levels of cyclooxygenase-1 (Cox-1) and Cox-2 in GFP+
FACS-sorted tumor cells from 4T1 tumors after treatment with anti-VEGFR2
antibodies (DC101) or with sunitinib. Cox-2 but not Cox-1 mRNA was
upregulated by 2.3-fold upon anti-angiogenic treatment. In addition we
found 5.2-fold increased prostaglandin E2 levels in 4T1 tumors after
anti-angiogenic therapy. We hypothesized that concomitant blockade of
Cox-2 could increase efficacy of anti-angiogenic agents. Therefore we
treated 4T1 tumor-bearing mice with sunitinib or DC101 alone and in
combination with acetylsalicyclic acid (ASA). We found that single
treatment with ASA or angiogenesis inhibitors inhibited tumor growth and
that combined inhibition of Cox-2 and VEGF(R) signaling exerted additive
therapeutic efficacy (n=5; 114284 (ASS); 114878 (Sunitnib) vs. 635 mg
(combination); p<0.0001). Similar effects were achieved upon combining
the specific Cox2 inhibitor SC-236 with anti-angiogenic therapy (n=6;
985147 (SC-326); 112361 (Sunitnib) vs. 68076 mg (combination); p<0.05)
and in the 6CCL4 orthotopic breast cancer model (data not shown). We
carried out an extensive profiling of the tumor cells and their
microenvironment upon concomitant blockade of Cox-2 and VEGF signaling in
order to elucidate the underlying mechanism. We found no changes in tumor
cell proliferation or upon combined Cox-2 inhibition and anti-angiogenic
therapies. Also combined Cox-2 and VEGF-signaling inhibition did not
change the quantitative composition of the inflammatory tumor infiltrate.
However, upon analyzing polarization of FACS-sorted TAMs we found that
mRNA of the M1 markers iNOS, MHCII, IL1 and TNF were upregulated upon
treatment with ASA alone and/or in combination with anti-angiogenic
agents compared to controls or monotherapy with anti-angiogenic agents.
In contrast, the M2 markers Arg1 and YM1 were downregulated upon
treatment with Cox2-inhibitors and anti-angiogenic agents. Therefore,
Cox-2 inhibitors skew TAMs towards an anti-tumoral M1 phenotype while the
pro-angiogenic, tumor promoting M2-phenotype is suppressed.In addition,
Cox-2 and PGE2 can promote tumor angiogenesis. This alternative
pro-angiogenic pathway would be enhanced by increased Cox-2 expression
and PGE2 levels and could contribute to resistance against
anti-angiogenic treatments. In line with this hypothesis the MVD was
decreased 4T1 tumors treated with combined Cox-2 and VEGF blockade
compared to the respective monotherapy (n=7; 312.4 (Sunitinib); 28.580.83
(ASS) vs. 9.671.71 (combination); p<0.001). In conclusion concomitant
Cox2 inhibition and anti-angiogenic therapies exert pronounced additive
effects, which are at least partially due to increased M1 polarization
and additive anti-angiogenic effects.

