Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: COX-2 inhibitors arrest prostate cancer cell cycle progression by
downregulation of kinetochore/centromere proteins


Epidemiologic studies likewise revealed a decreased incidence of prostate
cancer in patients taking non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)
and selective COX-2 inhibitors. Previous in vitro studies have shown that
inhibition of cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) arrests cancer cell growth.
However, the molecular mechanism underlying the growth arrest effect of
COX-2 inhibition remains elusive. In this study, we demonstrated that
treatment with the COX-2 inhibitors celecoxib and CAY10404 significantly
inhibited prostate cancer LNCaP cell proliferation. Flow cytometric
analysis confirmed the cell cycle arrested at the G2/M phase and
immunofluorescent staining indicated that inhibition of COX-2 prevented
the cells from entering into mitosis. Further biochemical analysis showed
that inhibition of COX-2 induced a dramatic down-regulation of key
proteins in the kinetochore/centromere assembly, such as ZWINT, Cdc20,
Ndc80, CENP-A, Bub1 and Plk1. Furthermore, the EP1 receptor antagonist
SC51322 produced similar effects to the COX-2 inhibitors on LNCaP cell
proliferation and down-regulation of kinetochore/centromere proteins,
which did not occur in the EP2, EP3 and EP4 receptor antagonists,
suggesting the COX-2 inhibitors arrest the cell proliferation and
down-regulate kinetochore/centromere proteins through inactivation of the
EP1 receptor. Our studies indicate that inhibition of COX-2 can arrest
prostate cancer cell growth through inactivation of the EP1 receptor
signaling and down-regulation of kinetochore / centromere proteins.

