Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Patterns of Telomerase reverse transcriptase (TERT) promoter
mutations in melanoma and bladder cancer


We previously reported a disease segregating causal germline mutation in
a melanoma family and recurrent somatic mutations in metastasized tumours
from unrelated patients within the core promoter region of the telomerase
reverse transcriptase (TERT) gene1. Both the germline mutation at -57 bp
from ATG start site and somatic mutations at -124 bp, -124/-125 bp,
-138/-139 bp and -146 bp from ATG result in de novo creation of Ets/TCF
transcription factor binding motifs that lead to the increased gene
expression. Subsequent studies have shown that TERT promoter mutations
are not only confined to melanoma and are rather recurrent in different
cancer types that include bladder cancer, glioma, hepatocellular
carcinoma and others. In this study we show the difference in pattern of
the TERT promoter mutations between melanoma and bladder cancer. While in
melanoma the -146 C>T mutation is the most frequent detected somatic base
change in the TERT promoter, the -124 C>T mutation is overwhelmingly the
most common mutation in bladder cancer. In melanoma CC>TT tandem
mutations at -124/-125 bp and -138/-139 bp positions from ATG constitute
about 10 percent of the detected TERT promoter mutations whereas in
bladder cancer we did not detect any tandem mutations. The differences in
the mutational pattern reflect etiological differences between the cancer
types. In conclusion, the pattern of mutations in the TERT promoter
differ between the cancer types even though all common mutations within
the TERT promoter result in de novo creation of a common CCGGAA/T motif
for Ets/TCF transcription factors.1Horn S, Figl A, Rachakonda PS, Fischer
C, Sucker A, Gast A, Kadel S, Moll I, Nagore E, Hemminki K, Schadendorf
D, Kumar R. TERT promoter mutations in familial and sporadic melanoma.
Science. 2013;22:339:959-961.

