Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development and characterization of a MEK1 inhibitor (AZD6244)
sensitive childhood astrocytoma cell line


We previously characterized the development and reversal of acquired
resistance to the MEK1 inhibitor AZD6244 in an in vivo model of childhood
astrocytoma. The BT-40 astrocytoma xenograft model expresses mutated
BRAFV600E and is highly sensitive to AZD6244, but acquires resistance,
which can be overcome with the addition of the STAT3 inhibitor LLL12. The
purpose of this current study was to establish and characterize a cell
line derived from the xenograft model as well as develop an orthotopic
mouse model. Sensitivity to AZD6244 and LLL12, expression-profiling
assessment of MEK signature and compensatory pathways, and cytokine
levels were assessed in the newly developed BT-40 cell line. The BT-40
cell line exhibited sensitivity to AZD6244 and LLL12 with IC50 values of
350nM and 1M, respectively. Combination treatment was additive. Treatment
of the cells with AZD6244 inhibited p-Erk and the mTOR downstream
signaling molecule p-S6, while p-Akt, p-STAT3, p-4E-BP1 increased. Kinase
expression arrays performed on cells treated with AZD6244 displayed a
decrease in IL-1, G-CSF, and IL-6 and an increase in CXCL10. The decrease
in IL-6 was restored to baseline levels with the addition of LLL12.
Interestingly, the JAK2 inhibitor AZD1480 failed to restore the IL-6
levels. The IL-6 results observed in the expression arrays were confirmed
by ELISA, where AZD6244 decreased soluble IL-6 levels and LLL12, but not
AZD1480, restored IL-6 levels to baseline. The BT-40 cell line, along
with a cell line stably expressing luciferase (BT-40Luc), were implanted
into the caudate putamen using stereotaxic guidance. The BT-40Luc cells
exhibited exponential growth over time as evaluated with bioluminescent
imaging. In conclusion, a cell line derived from a previously described
in vivo model of childhood astrocytoma was developed that closely
recapitulated our original findings in the xenograft model following
treatment with the MEK1 inhibitor AZD6244. Furthermore, an orthotopic
model of these cells was developed, which will allow us to characterize
response to established and novel therapeutic agents. Supported by PHS
award CA169368.

