Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Construction and characterization of novel, human serine protease
granzyme B-based cancer therapeutics targeting the TNFR family member Fn14


The TNF superfamily cytokine TWEAK and its receptor Fn14 have emerged as
potentially clinically valuable targets for cancer therapy. The
expression of Fn14 is comparatively low in normal tissues but elevated in
various human solid tumor types, including brain, breast, lung and
melanoma, and has been shown to be a negative prognostic indicator. We
generated Granzyme B (GrB) containing, Fn14-targeted constructs using
either the extracellular domain (ECD) of the human TWEAK ligand
(GrB-TWEAK) or an engineered anti-Fn14 humanized single-chain antibody
(GrB-Fc-IT4) as the targeting moieties. Both fusion constructs were
expressed in mammalian HEK293T cells and purified to homogeneity from
conditioned media. Both GrB-TWEAK and GrB-Fc-IT4 constructs were designed
to be relatively large in molecular weight (150 kDa and 160 kDa
respectively) to allow prolonged circulation in vivo. BiaCore analysis of
GrB-TWEAK and GrB-Fc-IT4 binding to the Fn14 ECD indicated that these
proteins bound to Fn14 with Kds of 8 nM and 18 nM, respectively. Confocal
immunofluorescence analysis showed that both proteins specifically and
rapidly (within 3 hrs) internalized into Fn14-expressing MDA-MB-231
breast cancer and HT-29 colorectal adenocarcinoma cells. GrB-TWEAK and
GrB-Fc-IT4 demonstrated impressive and selective cytotoxicity to a panel
of Fn14-expressing human tumor cell lines in the low nanomolar range. The
endogenous presence of the GrB proteinase inhibitor 9 (PI-9) had no
impact on the cytotoxic effect of either construct. Treatment of cells
expressing the multidrug resistance protein MDR1 showed no
cross-resistance to the fusion constructs in vitro. Mechanistic studies
demonstrated that GrB-TWEAK and GrB-Fc-IT4 activated caspase cascades and
cytochrome C-related pro-apoptotic mechanisms consistent with the known
intracellular functions of GrB in target cells. Treatment of mice bearing
well-established HT-29 xenografts with GrB-TWEAK (at 20 or 40 mg/kg total
doses) showed significant tumor growth inhibition compared to controls
(PThe TNF superfamily cytokine TWEAK and its receptor Fn14 have emerged
as potentially clinically valuable targets for cancer therapy. The
expression of Fn14 is comparatively low in normal tissues but elevated in
various human solid tumor types, including brain, breast, lung and
melanoma, and has been shown to be a negative prognostic indicator. We
generated Granzyme B (GrB) containing, Fn14-targeted constructs using
either the extracellular domain (ECD) of the human TWEAK ligand
(GrB-TWEAK) or an engineered anti-Fn14 humanized single-chain antibody
(GrB-Fc-IT4) as the targeting moieties. Both fusion constructs were
expressed in mammalian HEK293T cells and purified to homogeneity from
conditioned media. Both GrB-TWEAK and GrB-Fc-IT4 constructs were designed
to be relatively large in molecular weight (150 kDa and 160 kDa
respectively) to allow prolonged circulation in vivo. BiaCore analysis of
GrB-TWEAK and GrB-Fc-IT4 binding to the Fn14 ECD indicated that these
proteins bound to Fn14 with Kds of 8 nM and 18 nM, respectively. Confocal
immunofluorescence analysis showed that both proteins specifically and
rapidly (within 3 hrs) internalized into Fn14-expressing MDA-MB-231
breast cancer and HT-29 colorectal adenocarcinoma cells. GrB-TWEAK and
GrB-Fc-IT4 demonstrated impressive and selective cytotoxicity to a panel
of Fn14-expressing human tumor cell lines in the low nanomolar range. The
endogenous presence of the GrB proteinase inhibitor 9 (PI-9) had no
impact on the cytotoxic effect of either construct. Treatment of cells
expressing the multidrug resistance protein MDR1 showed no
cross-resistance to the fusion constructs in vitro. Mechanistic studies
demonstrated that GrB-TWEAK and GrB-Fc-IT4 activated caspase cascades and
cytochrome C-related pro-apoptotic mechanisms consistent with the known
intracellular functions of GrB in target cells. Treatment of mice bearing
well-established HT-29 xenografts with GrB-TWEAK (at 20 or 40 mg/kg total
doses) showed significant tumor growth inhibition compared to controls
(P< 0.05). GrB-TWEAK and GrB-Fc-IT4 were administered to mice bearing
MDA-MB-231 orthotopic human breast xenograft tumors and both constructs
displayed significant tumor growth inhibition. Treatment with GrB-Fc-IT4
displayed a more pronounced and prolonged tumor growth inhibition and
longer survival than GrB-TWEAK treatment. IHC analysis demonstrates
excellent tumor uptake of both agents. These data suggest that
Fc-containing fusions with GrB may have a design advantage with respect
to efficacy and may form the basis of novel, highly effective and
nontoxic constructs for targeted therapeutic applications. Research
conducted, in part, by the Clayton Foundation for Research (MGR) and
National Institutes of Health grant R01 NS055126 (JAW).

