Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prognostic value of circulating tumor cells with podoplanin
expression in locally advanced and metastatic head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma


Podoplanin (PDPN) is a biomarker for poor prognosis in head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC). A prospective study was designed to
investigate the prognostic value of circulating tumor cells (CTCs) with
PDPN expression (PDPN+-CTCs) in HNSCC patients. Sixty-one healthy donors
and fifty-three HNSCC patients with locally advanced and metastatic
diseases were enrolled in this study. CTCs were enriched from the
peripheral blood by the negative selection method PowerMag that has been
validated in our previous study. Enumeration of CTCs was performed by
co-immunofluorescence staining using the anti-epithelial cell adhesion
molecule (EpCAM) and anti-PDPN antibodies. The CTCs (EpCAM+) and
PDPN+-CTCs (EpCAM+PDPN+) counts between the patients and healthy
volunteers were statistically different (p 20% were associated with poor
PFS (hazard ratio (HR): 4.666, 95% CI: 1.373-15.856, p = 0.016) and OS
(HR: 12.400, 95% CI: 1.643-93.570, p = 0.015). Kaplan-Meier survival
curve further confirmed that the PDPN+/EpCAM+-CTCs ratio had significant
impact on PFS (p = 0.006) and OS (p = 0.008). In conclusion, CTCs
enumeration clearly differentiates HNSCC patients from healthy
individuals, while the PDPN+/EpCAM+-CTC ratio is more important than the
absolute CTCs count in determining the degree of malignancy and serves as
an independent prognostic factor for PFS and OS.

