Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of novel carboplatin resistance gene in ovarian
cancer


Ovarian cancer (OC) is the most lethal gynecology cancer in the world.
Although carboplatin is one of the major drugs used to treat OC,
resistance to carboplatin remains a major barrier to successful
treatment. To date, the mechanisms of carboplatin resistance are still
poorly understood. The purpose of this study is to use the novel
validation-based insertional mutagenesis (VBIM) technique to identify
carboplatin resistance gene in A2780 OC cells. A2780 cells were infected
with VBIM virus to cause the overexpression of drug resistance genes,
then were further selected under carboplatin treatment. Targeted gene was
then identified by using VBIM specific primers. In a preliminary screen,
we identified the novel carboplatin resistance gene 1 (NCR1).
Overexpression of NCR1 increased carboplatin resistance in A2780 OC
cells, while knocking it down with shRNA had the opposite effect. In an
attempt to investigate the molecular mechanism that underlying
NCR1-mediated carboplatin resistance, we found that NCR1 is a potential
NF-B activator. In summary, we conclude that using a novel VBIM
technique, we discovered a previously unknown carboplatin resistance gene
NCR1, which may mediate drug resistance via NF-B signaling pathway. This
study is of extreme importance by identifying a potential novel
therapeutic target NCR1 in carboplatin resistance. Development of small
chemical inhibitors targeting NCR1 could ultimately lead to novel
therapeutic approach for ovarian cancer treatment.

