Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: AKT- and ERK signaling inhibition does not sensitize GBM cells to
chemo-/radiation in vitro


A common feature of Glioblastoma Multiforme (GBM) is an augmented
RTK/RAS/PI3K pathway signaling. This pathway has been shown to be
involved in DNA repair by both NHEJ and HR in various tumor types and is
thought thereby to interfere with its chemo- and radioresistance.
Targeting this pathway to sensitize GBM to chemo- and radiotherapy seems
to be an attractive therapeutic approach.Proliferation and clonogenic
survival of U251, U87 and T98 GBM cells were assessed following exposure
to, BKM120 (pan class I PI3K inhibitor), RAD001 (mTORC1 inhibitor),
MK-2206 (AKT inhibitor) and/or MEK162 (ERK inhibitor) alone and in
combination with either irradiation or Temozolomide (TMZ). Effectivity of
each compound on its target pathway was assessed by westernblot. BEZ235
(PI3K/mTOR/DNA-PK inhibitor) was used as a positive control for
radiosensitization.Our data show BKM120 and MK-2206 to effectively
inhibit AKT phosphorylation at 1 uM and leads to growth inhibition in all
tested cell lines. However, these compounds are not toxic on clonogenic
cell survival and do not sensitize the cells to TMZ or irradiation.
Increasing the dose to 5 uM and 10 uM for BKM120 and MK-2206 respectively
an antagonistic effect was found in the combination with TMZ and
irradiation. Effectively inhibiting mTOR, the downstream effector of AKT,
by 100 nM RAD001 also does not radiosensitize GBM cells.Inhibiting the
parallel ERK-pathway by 1 uM MEK162, dephosphorylates ERK1/2 and leads to
a slight increase in AKT phosphorylation. Inhibiting both pathways with
BKM120 and MEK162 resulted in a synergistic growth inhibition of U251
cells however no radiosensitizing effect was found in a clonogenic
assay.In conclusion, selective targeting of key components in the AKT-
and/or ERK signaling pathway effectively inhibits proliferation of GBM
cells yet does not sensitize them to either TMZ or radiotherapy,
indicating that GBM does not depend on the RTK/RAS/PI3K pathway for its
DNA-repair.

