Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The CDK inhibitor dinaciclib (SCH727965) inhibits the unfolded
protein response (UPR) through a CDK1- and CDK5-dependent mechanism


The endonuclease IRE1 (inositol-requiring enzyme-1), responsible for
splicing of the transcription factor XBP-1s, is a major mediator of the
unfolded protein response (UPR), an adaptive response to endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) and other forms of proteotoxic stress. This arm of the UPR
is constitutively activated in various malignancies, including multiple
myeloma. The chaperone protein Grp78, a target of IRE1/XBP-1s, is also
frequently up-regulated in neoplastic cells, confers resistance to
diverse chemotherapeutic agents, and has been implicated in leukemia
progression. Consequently, XBP-1 and Grp78 represent logical therapeutic
targets within the UPR pathway. Currently, inhibitors of IRE1 or Grp78
have not yet been developed for human use, although pre-clinical studies
have identified IRE1 inhibitors that are active at relatively high (e.g.,
M) concentrations. Here, effects of the cyclin-dependent kinase
inhibitor, SCH727965 (dinaciclib), on the IRE1/XBP1 and Grp78 arms of the
UPR have been examined in human leukemia and myeloma cells. Exposure of
multiple myeloma (J558, 8226, H929, U266) and leukemia (K562, Jurkat,
U937, BaF3/T315I and primary AML) cells to extremely low (e.g., nM)
concentrations of SCH727965, a potent inhibitor of CDKs 1/2/5/9, sharply
attenuated XBP-1s and Grp78 up-regulation by the ER stress-inducers
thapsigargin (Tg) and tunicamycin (Tm), while inducing pronounced cell
death. SCH727965, in contrast to known IRE1 RNase inhibitors (e.g.,
STF-083010, MK0186893 and MKC-3946), inhibited the UPR in association
with attenuation of XBP-1s nuclear localization and accumulation rather
than transcription, translation, or XBP-1 splicing. Notably, in human
leukemia cells, CDK1 and CDK5 shRNA knock-down diminished Grp78 and
XBP-1s up-regulation while significantly increasing Tg lethality, arguing
for a functional role for CDK1/5 in activation of the cytoprotective
IRE1/XBP-1s arm of the UPR. In contrast, CDK9 or CDK2 inhibitors or
CDK2/9 shRNA knockdown failed to down-regulate XBP-1s or Grp78.
Furthermore, IRE1, XBP-1, or Grp78 knockdown significantly increased Tg
lethality, as observed with CDK1/5 inhibition/knockdown. Finally,
SCH727965 diminished myeloma cell growth in vivo in association with
XBP-1s down-regulation. Together, these findings demonstrate, for the
first time that SCH727965 acts at extremely low concentrations to
attenuate XBP-1s nuclear accumulation and Grp78 up-regulation in response
to ER stress inducers. They also highlight a heretofore unrecognized link
between specific components of the cell cycle regulatory apparatus (e.g.,
CDK1/5) and the cytoprotective IRE1/XBP-1s/Grp78 arm of the UPR that
potentially may be exploited therapeutically in UPR-driven malignancies
e.g., by enhancing the activity of anti-cancer agents that elicit a
cytoprotective UPR response.

