Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation of cancer cell stemness by delta-like 1 homolog
(Drosophila) and prohibitins


Cancer stem cell characteristics, especially their self-renewal and
clonogenic potential, play an essential role in malignant progression and
response to anti-cancer therapies. Currently, it remains largely unknown
which pathways are involved in the regulation of cancer cell stemness and
differentiation. Previously, we found that delta-like 1 homolog
(Drosophila) or DLK1, a developmentally regulated gene, plays a critical
role in regulation of differentiation, self-renewal, and tumorigenic
growth of neuroblastoma cells. In order to gain mechanistic understanding
of the involvement of DLK1 in intracellular signal transduction, we
identified DLK1-interacting proteins using an affinity purification
approach. As reported herein, we have found that DLK1 specifically
interacts with the prohibitin (PHB) complex via the DLK1 cytoplasmic
domain. PHB1 and the closely related PHB2 are encoded by evolutionarily
conserved genes and possess diverse functions from mitochondrial
structural integrity and oxidative phosphorylation to gene transcription
in the nucleus. We have found that DLK1 regulates mitochondrial membrane
potential and production of reactive oxygen species (ROS). Our data
further reveal a role of PHBs and especially PHB2 in the regulation of
cancer cell self-renewal as well as their clonogenic potential. Hence,
the DLK1-PHB interaction constitutes a new signaling mechanism that
promotes the maintenance of cancer cell stemness.This work was supported
by a grant from the National Institutes of Health to ZY (R01CA125021). YK
was supported in part by an institutional postdoctoral training grant
(T32) from the National Institutes of Health and an Anna Fuller Fund
Fellowship from Yale School of Medicine.

