Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Covalent capture of protein binding partners using an
azide-tagged, photo-reactive stapled alpha helical p53 peptide


Mutations in the DNA binding region of tumor suppressor p53 render it
transcriptionally inactive (dominant negative) but can also manifest in
transcriptionally-independent gain-of-function (GOF) effects, possibly
due to mutp53 interacting with other, as yet, unknown targets.
Identification of these targets would help to elucidate the pathways and
vulnerabilities involved in mutp53 GOF. Covalently linking a known handle
to these unknown proteins is one method to aid in their isolation and
identification. A hydrocarbon-stapled alpha helical peptide of the p53
transactivation domain (residues 14-29), SAH-p53-8, has been shown to
strongly interact with known p53 targets that utilize this domain for
binding (HDM2, Kd = 55 nM, HDMX, Kd = 2.3 nM). Substitution of a key
interacting residue for the unnatural amino acid benzoylphenylalanine
(Bpa) results in a stapled peptide that retains the biochemical
properties of SAH-p53-8 (affinities of 38.1 nM and 58.3 nM, respectively)
and can covalently capture known targets via photochemical reaction. The
introduction of an azido group - a versatile, biochemically-inert capping
group - to the N-terminus of this photo-reactive peptide allows for the
attachment of various tags to the covalently bound protein(s) via a
copper-catazlyzed azide alkyne cycloaddition. Tags include both
fluorophores for visualization and affinity tags for protein isolation.
This poster will cover the biochemical proof-of-principle of this protein
isolation method and exploration into more complex cell lysate
environments.

