Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anticancer activity of novel PI3K inhibitor BYL719 in head and
neck cancer cell lines


Introduction: Activating mutations of the PIK3CA gene occur frequently in
head and neck squamous cell carcinoma. The purpose of this study was to
explore the antiproliferative effect of BYL719, specific inhibitor for
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) p110, in human head and neck cancer
cell lines as a single agent or in combination with irreversible EGFR
TKI.Methods: Six head and neck cancer cell lines (SNU-1066, SNU-1041,
SNU-1076, SCC25, Detroit562, and FaDu) were tested. The growth inhibitory
effect was assessed using the modified tetrazolium bromide assay. The
cell cycle at various concentrations of BYL719 was analyzed by flow
cytometry, and analysis of downstream molecules was performed by western
blot analysis. Mutational profiles of cell lines were screened by Cancer
Cell Line Encyclopedia.Results: PIK3CA mutant cell lines (SNU-1076 and
Detroit562) were more sensitive to BYL719 than PIK3CA wild type cell
lines (SNU-1066, SNU-1041, SCC25, and FaDu). PIK3CA wild type cell lines
except SNU-1066 exhibited higher IC50 values for BYL719 (IC50 were 6.82,
1.10 M in mutant cell lines and 1.13, 20.65, 19.67, 49.30 M in wild type
cell lines, respectively). BYL719 induced G0/1 arrest and resulted in
apoptosis with dose dependant manner, in PIK3CA mutant cell lines. It
reduced the level of p-mTOR, p-AKT, p-S6, suggesting its effectiveness in
inhibition of translation and protein synthesis. BYL719 combined with
dacomitinib also showed a synergistic inhibitory effect on PIK3CA mutant
cell lines, while PIK3CA wild type cell lines showed no
synergism.Conclusion: BYL719 could be a promising treatment for head and
neck cancer cells with PIK3CA mutation as a single agent or in
combination with dacomitinib. The beneficial effects of BYL719 in in
vitro studies for head and neck cancer warrant a further clinical
investigation.

