Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Overexpression of histone methyltransferase WHSC1L1 regulates
expression of ER-alpha in SUM44 breast cancer cells


The WHSC1L1 gene is amplified and overexpressed in 12% of breast cancers,
and is thought to be a driving oncogene when amplified and overexpressed,
however the mechanism of transformation is not known. SUM44 cells harbor
an amplification of WHSC1L1 as part of the 8p11-p12 amplicon, and express
high levels of both the long and short isoforms of the gene. The short
isoform, containing only a PWWP domain and no catalytic SET domain, is
the major species present in SUM44 cells. To create a model to study the
effect of WHSC1L1 on gene regulation, SUM44 cells were lentivirally
transduced with either a control shRNA for LacZ (shLacZ), an shRNA
specific for both isoforms of WHSC1L1 (shWHtotal), or a short
isoform-specific shRNA (shWHshort). Cell growth was significantly reduced
in shWHtotal cells compared to shLacZ, however, the greatest decrease in
growth was observed in cells transduced with the short isoform-specific
shRNA. To identify genes transcriptionally regulated by WHSC1L1, we
performed genome-wide expression profiling of SUM44 breast cancer cells
transduced with either shWHtotal or shLacZ. A total of 5185 genes were
found to be differentially expressed in shWHtotal SUM44 cells compared to
shLacZ control. Among the 5185 differentially expressed genes, we found
ESR1 to be significantly downregulated (-7.3-fold, p The WHSC1L1 gene is
amplified and overexpressed in 12% of breast cancers, and is thought to
be a driving oncogene when amplified and overexpressed, however the
mechanism of transformation is not known. SUM44 cells harbor an
amplification of WHSC1L1 as part of the 8p11-p12 amplicon, and express
high levels of both the long and short isoforms of the gene. The short
isoform, containing only a PWWP domain and no catalytic SET domain, is
the major species present in SUM44 cells. To create a model to study the
effect of WHSC1L1 on gene regulation, SUM44 cells were lentivirally
transduced with either a control shRNA for LacZ (shLacZ), an shRNA
specific for both isoforms of WHSC1L1 (shWHtotal), or a short
isoform-specific shRNA (shWHshort). Cell growth was significantly reduced
in shWHtotal cells compared to shLacZ, however, the greatest decrease in
growth was observed in cells transduced with the short isoform-specific
shRNA. To identify genes transcriptionally regulated by WHSC1L1, we
performed genome-wide expression profiling of SUM44 breast cancer cells
transduced with either shWHtotal or shLacZ. A total of 5185 genes were
found to be differentially expressed in shWHtotal SUM44 cells compared to
shLacZ control. Among the 5185 differentially expressed genes, we found
ESR1 to be significantly downregulated (-7.3-fold, p < 0.0001) in the
shWHtotal cells compared to shLacZ controls. In addition MYCN, which is
amplified in SUM-44 cells was reduced by 7.43-fold, (p The WHSC1L1 gene
is amplified and overexpressed in 12% of breast cancers, and is thought
to be a driving oncogene when amplified and overexpressed, however the
mechanism of transformation is not known. SUM44 cells harbor an
amplification of WHSC1L1 as part of the 8p11-p12 amplicon, and express
high levels of both the long and short isoforms of the gene. The short
isoform, containing only a PWWP domain and no catalytic SET domain, is
the major species present in SUM44 cells. To create a model to study the
effect of WHSC1L1 on gene regulation, SUM44 cells were lentivirally
transduced with either a control shRNA for LacZ (shLacZ), an shRNA
specific for both isoforms of WHSC1L1 (shWHtotal), or a short
isoform-specific shRNA (shWHshort). Cell growth was significantly reduced
in shWHtotal cells compared to shLacZ, however, the greatest decrease in
growth was observed in cells transduced with the short isoform-specific
shRNA. To identify genes transcriptionally regulated by WHSC1L1, we
performed genome-wide expression profiling of SUM44 breast cancer cells
transduced with either shWHtotal or shLacZ. A total of 5185 genes were
found to be differentially expressed in shWHtotal SUM44 cells compared to
shLacZ control. Among the 5185 differentially expressed genes, we found
ESR1 to be significantly downregulated (-7.3-fold, p < 0.0001) in the
shWHtotal cells compared to shLacZ controls. In addition MYCN, which is
amplified in SUM-44 cells was reduced by 7.43-fold, (p < 0.004), ERBB3
was reduced by 2.5-fold, (p The WHSC1L1 gene is amplified and
overexpressed in 12% of breast cancers, and is thought to be a driving
oncogene when amplified and overexpressed, however the mechanism of
transformation is not known. SUM44 cells harbor an amplification of
WHSC1L1 as part of the 8p11-p12 amplicon, and express high levels of both
the long and short isoforms of the gene. The short isoform, containing
only a PWWP domain and no catalytic SET domain, is the major species
present in SUM44 cells. To create a model to study the effect of WHSC1L1
on gene regulation, SUM44 cells were lentivirally transduced with either
a control shRNA for LacZ (shLacZ), an shRNA specific for both isoforms of
WHSC1L1 (shWHtotal), or a short isoform-specific shRNA (shWHshort). Cell
growth was significantly reduced in shWHtotal cells compared to shLacZ,
however, the greatest decrease in growth was observed in cells transduced
with the short isoform-specific shRNA. To identify genes
transcriptionally regulated by WHSC1L1, we performed genome-wide
expression profiling of SUM44 breast cancer cells transduced with either
shWHtotal or shLacZ. A total of 5185 genes were found to be
differentially expressed in shWHtotal SUM44 cells compared to shLacZ
control. Among the 5185 differentially expressed genes, we found ESR1 to
be significantly downregulated (-7.3-fold, p < 0.0001) in the shWHtotal
cells compared to shLacZ controls. In addition MYCN, which is amplified
in SUM-44 cells was reduced by 7.43-fold, (p < 0.004), ERBB3 was reduced
by 2.5-fold, (p < 0.0009), and ERBB4, which is highly expressed in SUM-44
cells was reduced by 2.12-fold, (p The WHSC1L1 gene is amplified and
overexpressed in 12% of breast cancers, and is thought to be a driving
oncogene when amplified and overexpressed, however the mechanism of
transformation is not known. SUM44 cells harbor an amplification of
WHSC1L1 as part of the 8p11-p12 amplicon, and express high levels of both
the long and short isoforms of the gene. The short isoform, containing
only a PWWP domain and no catalytic SET domain, is the major species
present in SUM44 cells. To create a model to study the effect of WHSC1L1
on gene regulation, SUM44 cells were lentivirally transduced with either
a control shRNA for LacZ (shLacZ), an shRNA specific for both isoforms of
WHSC1L1 (shWHtotal), or a short isoform-specific shRNA (shWHshort). Cell
growth was significantly reduced in shWHtotal cells compared to shLacZ,
however, the greatest decrease in growth was observed in cells transduced
with the short isoform-specific shRNA. To identify genes
transcriptionally regulated by WHSC1L1, we performed genome-wide
expression profiling of SUM44 breast cancer cells transduced with either
shWHtotal or shLacZ. A total of 5185 genes were found to be
differentially expressed in shWHtotal SUM44 cells compared to shLacZ
control. Among the 5185 differentially expressed genes, we found ESR1 to
be significantly downregulated (-7.3-fold, p < 0.0001) in the shWHtotal
cells compared to shLacZ controls. In addition MYCN, which is amplified
in SUM-44 cells was reduced by 7.43-fold, (p < 0.004), ERBB3 was reduced
by 2.5-fold, (p < 0.0009), and ERBB4, which is highly expressed in SUM-44
cells was reduced by 2.12-fold, (p < 0.00001). Immunoblotting confirmed
downregulation of estrogen receptor alpha (ER) in the shWHtotal compared
to shLacZ control. Interestingly, knockdown of WHshort resulted in an
even greater decrease of ER than the shWHtotal knockdown. To determine
whether downregulation of ER affects sensitivity to Tamoxifen, we
measured the Tamoxifen LD50 in SUM44 shLacZ and SUM44 shWHtotal cells,
and found a 10-fold decrease in Tamoxifen LD50 compared to shLacZ control
(3.8nM vs. 35nM). Tamoxifen affected SUM-44 cells in a dose-dependent
manner, however 500nM Tamoxifen resulted in complete growth arrest in
SUM44 shWHtotal cells, while the cells infected with the shLacZ virus
cells grew at the same dose, albeit slowly. Our data indicate that
WHSC1L1 regulates ER expression in SUM44 cells, and WHSC1L1 knockdown
increased the cells' sensitivity to Tamoxifen. The decrease in both cell
growth and ER expression in the SUM44 WHshort-specific knockdown cells
suggests that the catalytically inactive short isoform of WHSC1L1 may be
the isoform driving the oncogenic activity of WHSC1L1 amplification,
perhaps through a dominant-negative interaction with the long isoform of
WHSC1L1. Data showing increases in global H3K36 methylation levels
following knock down of WHSC1L1 are consistent with this hypothesis.

