Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MiR-205 and Trastuzumab: Potential as adjuvant therapeutic tool
and predictive biomarker


Despite the improvement in the management of HER2+ breast cancer patients
with the approval of Trastuzumab in the clinical practise, and the
success rate of this treatment, a still considerable percentage of
patients do not respond or eventually develop a secondary resistance,
leading to relapse and poor outcome. A crucial issue is represented by
the urgent need of biomarkers able to predict the response to treatment,
and certainly of new therapeutic tools to counteract the resistance
mechanisms. It is known that resistance to anti-HER2 therapies can be due
to escape mechanisms triggered by alternative receptors: here we show
that HER3 silencing, either mediated by miR-205, known to directly target
the receptor (Iorio MV et al., 2009) or by a siRNA specific against HER3,
is able to improve the responsiveness to Trastuzumab, reducing tumor cell
growth and colony formation capability. This effect seems to be mediated
by impairment of the Akt-mediated pathway.Finally, evaluating miR-205
expression in a series of 51 HER2+ breast cancer patients treated with
Trastuzumab in adjuvant setting, we observed that miR-205 is
significantly associated with outcome: setting the median expression as
cut-off, and performing a contingency analysis (Fisher's exact test),
miR-205 expression was above the median in a significantly (p=0.03)
higher percentage of responders versus non responders patients (61%
versus 26%).In summary, here we show that miR-205 improves the
responsiveness to Trastuzumab treatment at least partially though HER3
silencing, and associated to outcome of patients treated in adjuvant
setting, thus representing a potential adjuvant tool and predictive
biomarker.

