Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Neuregulin-1 expression correlates with sensitivity to the PI3K
inhibitor, GDC-0032, outside of PIK3CA mutations in head and neck cancer


The phosphoinositol-3-kinase (PI3K) signaling pathway is one of the most
frequently activated pathways in oncogenesis, and controls critical
cellular processes such as proliferation, transcription and survival. GDC
0032 is an orally bioavailable, potent, and selective inhibitor of Class
I PI3K alpha, delta, and gamma isoforms, with 30 fold less inhibition of
the PI3K beta isoform relative to the PI3K alpha isoform. The gene that
encodes the p110 alpha isoform of PI3K, PIK3CA, is frequently mutated in
breast, colorectal and endometrial cancers. Previously published data
demonstrated that GDC-0032 has increased activity against PIK3CA mutant
cancer cell lines (Olivero A. et al., DDT02-01, AACR 2013).To determine
if there are additional predictive biomarkers outside of PIK3CA mutations
for sensitivity to GDC-0032, we profiled over 550 cell lines,
encompassing 13 of the main cancer types, to increasing concentrations of
GDC-0032. As expected, a small percentage of all tumor types responded to
GDC-0032 and, were assessed, correlated strongly with PIK3CA mutations.
Intriguingly, the majority of head and neck squamous cell cancer (HNSCC)
cell lines showed an IC50 concentration of less than 1uM, suggesting that
HNSCC cell lines may be particularly susceptible to PI3K inhibition.
Molecular profiling identified that only 10% of the HNSCC cell lines had
a mutation within PIK3CA, and no consistent copy number alterations were
observed in receptor tyrosine kinases or PTEN. To investigate this
observation further, we developed a PIK3CA activation algorithm, by
utilizing the mutant-selective property of GDC-0032, and calculated a
ratio of GDC-0032 to GDC-0941, a pan PI3K inhibitor with reduced in vitro
selectivity for PIK3CA mutations. Following a proof of principle
experiment in breast cancer cells, a GDC-0941/GDC-0032 ratio of 4
enriched for breast cancer cells with mutant PIK3CA (11 out of 13 cell
lines). Application of the algorithm, to our panel of HNSCC cell lines
identified 10 out of 34 cell lines that had a GDC-0941/GDC-0032 ratio of
4, with only 1 of these cell lines being PIK3CA mutant. Further molecular
characterization identified high mRNA expression of neuregulin-1, the
ligand for HER3, in GDC-0032 cell lines with a GDC-0941/GDC-0032 ratio of
4, compared to cell lines with a ratio of The phosphoinositol-3-kinase
(PI3K) signaling pathway is one of the most frequently activated pathways
in oncogenesis, and controls critical cellular processes such as
proliferation, transcription and survival. GDC 0032 is an orally
bioavailable, potent, and selective inhibitor of Class I PI3K alpha,
delta, and gamma isoforms, with 30 fold less inhibition of the PI3K beta
isoform relative to the PI3K alpha isoform. The gene that encodes the
p110 alpha isoform of PI3K, PIK3CA, is frequently mutated in breast,
colorectal and endometrial cancers. Previously published data
demonstrated that GDC-0032 has increased activity against PIK3CA mutant
cancer cell lines (Olivero A. et al., DDT02-01, AACR 2013).To determine
if there are additional predictive biomarkers outside of PIK3CA mutations
for sensitivity to GDC-0032, we profiled over 550 cell lines,
encompassing 13 of the main cancer types, to increasing concentrations of
GDC-0032. As expected, a small percentage of all tumor types responded to
GDC-0032 and, were assessed, correlated strongly with PIK3CA mutations.
Intriguingly, the majority of head and neck squamous cell cancer (HNSCC)
cell lines showed an IC50 concentration of less than 1uM, suggesting that
HNSCC cell lines may be particularly susceptible to PI3K inhibition.
Molecular profiling identified that only 10% of the HNSCC cell lines had
a mutation within PIK3CA, and no consistent copy number alterations were
observed in receptor tyrosine kinases or PTEN. To investigate this
observation further, we developed a PIK3CA activation algorithm, by
utilizing the mutant-selective property of GDC-0032, and calculated a
ratio of GDC-0032 to GDC-0941, a pan PI3K inhibitor with reduced in vitro
selectivity for PIK3CA mutations. Following a proof of principle
experiment in breast cancer cells, a GDC-0941/GDC-0032 ratio of 4
enriched for breast cancer cells with mutant PIK3CA (11 out of 13 cell
lines). Application of the algorithm, to our panel of HNSCC cell lines
identified 10 out of 34 cell lines that had a GDC-0941/GDC-0032 ratio of
4, with only 1 of these cell lines being PIK3CA mutant. Further molecular
characterization identified high mRNA expression of neuregulin-1, the
ligand for HER3, in GDC-0032 cell lines with a GDC-0941/GDC-0032 ratio of
4, compared to cell lines with a ratio of <4. Pharmacodynamic analysis of
sensitive and refractory HNSCC cell lines demonstrated that GDC-0032
inhibited the phospho-AKT pathway in both groups of cell lines, but
GDC-0032 only suppressed downstream phospo-S6 signaling in the sensitive
cell lines.In conclusion, high throughput cell line screening identified
a PIK3CA activated subset of HNSCC cell lines that correlated with
increased neuregulin-1 expression and corresponding sensitivity to
GDC-0032, outside of PIK3CA mutations.

