Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Significance of osteopontin in the sensitivity of malignant
pleural mesothelioma to pemetrexed


Background: Pemetrexed (PEM) is currently recommended as one of the
standard anticancer drugs for malignant pleural mesothelioma (MPM).
However, the mechanism of the sensitivity of MPM to PEM remains
unclear.Materials and Methods: We analyzed the antitumor effects of PEM
in six MPM cell lines by MTS assay. To identify genes associated with
drug sensitivity, we conducted gene expression profiling on the same set
of cell lines using GeneChips and pathway analysis.Results: Three cell
lines were sensitive to PEM. Eighteen transcripts and fourteen genes
identified by Gene-chips were significantly correlated with sensitivity
to PEM. Pathway analysis revealed that osteopontin (SPP1/OPN) was an
important target in PEM sensitivity. Overexpression of SPP1/OPN was
observed in the sensitive cells by quantitative RT-PCR analysis and
Western blotting. Introduction of SPP1/OPN by lentiviral vector
significantly enhanced the invasion activities of MPM cells. PEM
treatment with SPP1/OPN knockdown inhibited the PEM-induced cell
growth-inhibitory effect in PEM-sensitive cells. Expression of SPP1/OPN
and AKT phosphorylation significantly decreased after PEM treatment of
the PEM sensitive cells. High immunohistochemical expression of SPP1/OPN
was observed in two of three MPM patients who had a partial response to
PEM-based chemotherapy.Conclusion: PEM has anti-tumor effects in MPM
cells dependent on SPP1/OPN overexpression resulting in AKT activation.
Our results suggest that SPP1 may be used as a single predictive
biomarker of the effectiveness of PEM treatment in MPM.

