Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Telomere length in white blood cell DNA and lung cancer: a pooled
analysis of three prospective cohorts


Background: There is growing evidence that longer telomere length is
associated with higher risk of lung cancer. We investigated this
association in the prospective Prostate, Lung, Colorectal and Ovarian
(PLCO) Cancer Screening Trial, which was conducted in the United States.
We also combined these data with two previously published prospective
cohorts: the Alpha-Tocopherol, Beta-Carotene Cancer Prevention (ATBC)
trial conducted among ever smoking males in Finland and the Shanghai
Women's Health Study (SWHS) which comprised primarily of never-smoking
women, resulting in a pooled analysis on a total of 847 cases and 847
controls matched by age, sex and study.Methods: Blood samples were
collected prior to diagnosis of lung cancer and telomere length was
measured using the same monochrome multiplex quantitative PCR method in
all three studies. We used conditional logistic regression models to
calculate odds ratios (OR) and their 95% confidence intervals (CI) for
the association between telomere length and lung cancer risk adjusted for
age, to account for residual confounding, and pack-years of smoking as
continuous variables. Analyses by telomere length quartile retaining the
initial categorization used in each study, and using categorization based
on telomere length in pooled controls, produced similar findings and
results are presented for the former.Results: In the PLCO Trial,
increasing telomere length was significantly associated with lung cancer
risk (adjusted OR [95% CI] by quartile: 1.00; 1.11 [0.65-1.92]; 1.20
[0.66-2.15]; and 1.83 [1.05-3.19]; P-trend = 0.011), consistent with
results from the ATBC and SWHS studies. In the pooled analyses, the
adjusted OR (95% CI) by quartile was 1.00; 1.24 (0.90-1.72); 1.27
(0.91-1.77); and 1.87 (1.33-2.63); P-trend = 0.000022. This positive
association was particularly evident for adenocarcinoma cases, especially
those diagnosed more than 6 years after blood collection (n=115; adjusted
OR [95% CI] by quartile: 1.00; 2.48 [0.85-7.23]; 2.05 [0.81-5.15]; and
3.59 [1.38-9.34]; P-trend = 0.0027).Conclusion: Telomere length in white
blood cell DNA may be an important biomarker of future increased risk of
lung cancer in diverse populations.

