Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: 64-Cu-NOTA-panitumumab F(ab')2 fragments for PET/CT imaging of
pancreatic cancer


Background: Pancreatic cancer is a leading cause of cancer related death.
Radiolabeled panitumumab (Pmab) has potential as an imaging agent for
pancreatic cancer because it targets over-expression of human epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR) commonly found in the disease. Our aim was
to develop a Pmab-based radioimmunoconjugate (RIC) for use for PET
imaging of pancreatic cancer.Methods: Pmab Fab fragments (PmabFab),
F(ab')2 fragments (PmabF(ab')2), intact IgG (PmabIgG) and irrelevant
anti-CD20 rituximab F(ab')2 (RmabF(ab')2) were derivatized with NOTA then
64Cu-labeled to 95 % radiochemical purity. RIC immunoreactivity was
assessed by binding assays with MDA-MB-468 breast cancer cells (1 10E6
EGFR/cell), PANC-1 pancreatic cancer cells (4 10E5 EGFR/cell), and a
primary pancreatic tumour cell line, OCIP-23 (4 10E5 EGFR/cell). RICs (4
MBq, 10 g) were injected i.v. (tail vein) into non-tumour bearing Balb/c
mice and biodistribution was assessed at 18 h post injection (p.i).
Tumours were established in NOD-Scid or CD1 nude mice by s.c. inoculation
with 1 10E7 PANC-1 cells or 1 10E7 MDA-MB-468 cells. RICs were injected
i.v. (tail vein) into tumour-bearing mice (30 MBq, 10 g) then PET/CT
imaging and biodistribution studies were performed at 24 and 48 h
p.i.Results: MDA-MB-468 cell binding assays showed 89.0 0.7 % of applied
50 nM 64Cu-PmabFab and 88.8 4.5 % of 64Cu-PmabF(ab')2 was displaced by
100-fold molar excess PmabIgG, demonstrating specificity for EGFR.
Assessment of 64Cu-PmabF(ab')2 binding to pancreatic cell lines showed
that 90.1 2.0 % in PANC-1 cells and 80.2 1.0 % in OCIP-23 cells of
applied RIC was displaced by PmabIgG. In Balb/c mice, kidney uptake of
64Cu-PmabFab was significantly higher at 90.8 9.0 % ID/g than that of
64Cu-PmabF(ab')2 and PmabIgG with 6.9 0.7 % ID/g and 11.2 1.0 % ID/g,
respectively; (p0.05). Liver uptake of 64Cu-PmabF(ab')2 was lower at 5.4
0.6 % ID/g than 64Cu-PmabIgG at 8.7 0.9 % ID/g (p0.05). 64Cu-PmabF(ab')2
was selected for PET/CT imaging and biodistribution studies. The
tumour:blood ratio in MDA-MB-468 xenografted mice was 1:1 at 24 h, but
increased at 48 h to 5:1, with tumour uptake of 8.0 0.8 % ID/g.
64Cu-RmabF(ab')2 tumour uptake in MDA-MB-468 xenografted mice at 48 h was
0.5 0.1 % ID/g, significantly lower than that of 64Cu-PmabF(ab')2
(p0.005). The tumour:blood ratio in PANC-1 xenografted mice was 1:1 at 24
h, and improved to 2.4:1 at 48 h, with 6.2 1.1 % ID/g tumour uptake.
MDA-MB-468 and PANC-1 tumours were imaged by PET/CT. Studies with primary
pancreatic tumour OCIP-23 xenografts are in progress.Conclusions: F(ab')2
is the optimal form of Pmab for PET/CT imaging due to lower kidney uptake
than Fab fragments, and lower liver uptake than intact IgG. EGFR-positive
PANC-1 and MDA-MB-468 xenografts were well visualized with
64Cu-PmabF(ab')2 at 48 h p.i.Supported by a grant from the Canadian
Cancer Society Research Institute with funds from the Canadian Cancer
Society.

