Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Glucose-regulated protein 58 modulates -catenin protein stability
in cervical adenocarcinoma


Cervical cancer is still a serious problem threatening to women health
worldwide. The incidence of cervical adenocarcinoma (AD) is rising in
more developed countries. Previously we have identified that
glucose-regulated protein 58 (Grp58) serves as a poor independent
prognostic factor for cervical AD. The molecular mechanism underlying
Grp58 involved cervical AD carcinogenesis is unknown. The DNA microarray
and enrichment analysis were used to identify pathway maps perturbed by
knockdown of Grp58 expression. The WNT singling map is one of the
significant enriched pathways. The -catenin, vital effector of WNT
signaling, was stably accumulated in Grp58 knockdown stable cells. A
membrane fashion of -catenin was observed in Grp58 knockdown but not
control cells. By using transwell assay, we have demonstrated that
accumulation of -catenin, which was induced by Grp58 knockdown or lithium
chloride treatment, inhibited the migration ability of HeLa cell.
Furthermore, an exclusive expression pattern of Grp58 and -catenin was
observed in cervix tissues. In sum, we have demonstrated that -catenin
stability is negatively regulated by Grp58. Overpression of Grp58 might
result in lost or decreased of membranous -catenin in cervical cancer to
promote cancer progression.

