Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Galectin-1 mediates radiation-related lymphopenia in non-small
cell lung cancer and attenuates tumor radiation response


Decreased circulating lymphocytes after tumor irradiation has been linked
to worse outcomes in several cancers treated with fractionated
radiotherapy. The mechanism underlying radiation (RT)-induced lymphopenia
is not well understood. Here, we show that lymphopenia also occurs after
stereotactic ablative radiotherapy for early stage non-small cell lung
cancer, and that it is associated with reduced survival. We provide
evidence that RT-induced secretion of Galectin-1 (Gal-1), a b-galactoside
binding protein, can potentially explain for this phenomenon. Using
matched Gal-1 wild type and null mice together with Lewis lung carcinoma
cells stably knocked-down of Gal-1 or scramble control, we show that
irradiation of Gal-1 expressing tumor increases Gal-1 secretion in the
blood and that it is linked to decreased circulating T-lymphocytes. This
was ablated by either genetic down regulation of Gal-1 in the tumor or
inhibition of Gal-1 activity by TDG. Moreover, Gal-1 down regulation
resulted in enhanced radiation sensitivity in vitro as well as less
intratumoral T cell apoptosis and angiogenesis in vivo, resulting in
marked tumor growth delay and reduced spontaneous lung metastases when
combined with radiotherapy. Similar results were noted when Gal-1
function was inhibited with TDG in vivo. Together, our data identify
Gal-1 as an important mediator of RT-related lymphopenia and its
proangiogenic and T cell proapototic effect may explain for the poorer
outcome associated with RT-related lymphopenia. Gal-1 is therefore a new
potential therapeutic target to combine with radiotherapy.

