Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The Pi3K/ inhibitor AZD8186 has potential to treat tumours in
combination with key signalling pathway inhibitors


AZD8186 inhibits Pi3K isoforms Pi3K and , with selectivity over Pi3K and
. In solid tumours Pi3K drives tumour growth when the tumour suppressor
PTEN is deleted, mutated or downregulated. It also mediates signals from
specific GPCR receptors. Pi3K signals downstream of the B-cell receptor,
creating potential for targeted treatment of haematological malignancies
such as CLL, MCL & indolent NHL and possibly DLBCL. AZD8186 is
differentiated from many other agents that target Pi3K family members as
it isn't likely to impact glucose control. AZD8186 has single agent
activity in a range of models, although maximal benefit is anticipated
when used in combination. Loss of PTEN mediated control, and hence
dependency on PI3K occurs in many solid tumour types, and is altered in
up to 40-50% of tumours in some individual disease states. Commonly PTEN
dysregulation is associated with other activation of other signaling
pathways. To explore this we have combined AZD8186 with a number of
different agents. In HCC70 (triple negative breast cancer) and PC3
(prostate cancer) xenografts combination of AZD8186 (25mg/kg bid) with
single dose docetaxel (15mg/kg) gives >90% tumour growth inhibition
(TGI), compared to 40-50% with docetaxel alone. AZD8186 also combines
with other targeted agents. In HCC70, AZD8186 (25mg/kg bid) combined with
selumetinib (10mg/kg) gave 94% TGI compared to 66%, and 47% with each
single agent. In combination with AZD2014 (mTORC1/2 inhibitor) (15mg/kg
qd) in HCC70 xenografts AZD8186 (25mg/kg bid) gave regressions (-23%)
compared to TGI of 87% and 77% for each agent alone. In 786-0 (renal
cancer) xenografts AZD8186 (12.5mg/kg bid) and AZD2014 (15mg/kg qd) gave
regression of -82% compared to TGI of 33% and regression of -39% with
each agent alone. This data establishes the potential for AZD8186 to be
used in combination with a number of different agents including the
ability to customise dose and schedule to optimise both tolerability as
well as anti-tumour effects. Further exploration of the combination
opportunities for AZD8186 with other molecular targeted agents would
inform on the potential for inhibitors of Pi3K and to give benefit in
different tumour types.

