Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Obesity and colon cancer: Does time of exposure matter


Purposes: Obesity is associated with an increased risk of colon cancer in
many epidemiology studies, while calorie restriction (CR) has shown
protective effects on colon tumorigenesis in animal studies. This
preclinical study was designed to investigate the long-term impacts of
early exposure to high fat diet or CR diet on colon
tumorigenesis.Methods: 50 three-week-old female C57/B6J mice were
assigned into five groups: 1) control; 2) HF-control; 3) control-HF; 4)
HF and 5) CR-control. Mice were initially placed on a control diet (10%
kcal from fat), HF diet (45% kcal from fat), or 30% CR diet and fed ad
libitum for nine weeks from the time of weaning and followed by a
seven-week control diet. Azoxymethane was injected once a week for five
weeks at a dose of 10 mg/kg beginning at 13 weeks of age. At 18 week-old,
mice were placed on either a control diet or a HF diet. Mice were
euthanized at 46 week-old and colons were collected to assess
tumorigenesis.Results: After nine weeks of diet intervention, the
percentage of body fat was higher in the mice on the HF diet (31.9%) and
lower in those on the CR diet (18.4%), compared to mice on the control
diet (20.0%, p=0.08). Mice on a CR diet in early life had lower body
weights at the endpoint, compared to those on the control diet (p=0.03).
Analysis of colon histopathology is ongoing as well as evaluation of
apoptosis and proliferation.Conclusions: Early life exposure to calorie
restriction has long-term impacts on body weight. Early life exposure to
high fat diet may increase the risk of colon tumorigenesis. This model is
currently being used to investigate the effects of early alterations in
energy balance on colon cancer development and underlying molecular
mechanisms.

