Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Defining molecular and laboratory predictive biomarkers of
response to cisplatin-based neoadjuvant chemotherapy (NC) in
muscle-invasive bladder cancer (MIBC) - preliminary results and future
plans


Background: MIBC is common, yet there has been little progress in its
research, with no new therapeutic agents approved in years. The optimal
therapeutic modalities and treatment sequence are not entirely
well-defined. Cisplatin-based NC prior to definitive radical cystectomy
(RC) increases overall survival (OS), yet is only active in a proportion
of patients (pts). A pathological complete response (pCR) at RC is
associated with improved OS, but there are currently no molecular
biomarkers predicting which pts are likely to achieve pCR, and thus
treatment decisions are currently based solely on clinical
parameters.Methods: Since micro-RNAs (miRNAs) are known to be key-players
in cancer, we chose to study the differences in miRNA expression patterns
between 7 pts who achieved pCR and 9 pts who did not respond (responders
and non-responders, respectively), using commercial micro-arrays (Agilent
) and quantitative RT-PCR. In a different cohort, we performed a
retrospective chart review of 29 pts with MIBC receiving NC to find
associations between clinical, biochemical or radiological
characteristics and pCR. As the peripheral blood neutrophil-to-lymphocyte
ratio (NLR) is thought to non-specifically correlate with systemic
inflammatory burden, we analyzed its levels before and during NC as well
as prior to RC.Results: The trend of change in NLR was significantly
different between responders and non-responders (p=0.039), the former
exhibiting a sustained decrease in NLR throughout chemotherapy up until
RC, and the latter exhibiting a transient decrease in NLR by mid-NC,
followed by an increase to above baseline. One miRNA was significantly
lower in responders than in non-responders (q value=0.048, corrected for
multiple comparisons), and five miRNAs with the identical seed sequence
(thus potentially targeting the same mRNAs) were also all lower in
responders, one with borderline significance (q value=0.1,
corrected).Conclusions: These findings suggest that chemo-sensitivity of
MIBC is determined by both inherent molecular characteristics as well as
the immune/inflammatory system, and raises the question whether the
response to NC could be enhanced by decreasing the systemic inflammatory
burden. We will corroborate these results in larger pts cohorts and
search for potential targets of these miRNAs. We also plan to initiate a
prospective multi-center clinical trial in which both intra-tumoral and
circulating miRNAs, as well as micro-environment/systemic inflammatory
markers, will be monitored and assessed in order to establish predictive
factors for pCR with NC.

