Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RG7287, a novel humanized anti-CDCP1 antibody with superior
preclinical in vivo efficacy in combination with Paclitaxel


CUB domain-containing protein 1 (CDCP1) is a transmembrane glycoprotein
and a substrate of Src family kinase (SFK). It has been shown to be
upregulated and significantly contributing to a number of different
cancers, including colon, lung, breast, kidney, and pancreas cancer. High
expression of CDCP1 has been shown to correlate with poor prognosis.
CDCP1 is involved in the regulation of anoikis resistance, cell migration
and invasion. We have recently described RG7287, a humanized
glycoengineered therapeutic anti-CDCP1 antibody with a dual mode of
action. (1) downregulation of the receptor from the cell surface, and (2)
engaging immune effector functions such as antibody-dependent cellular
cytotoxicity (ADCC). Upon ligation of RG7287 to CDCP1 an initial
phosphorylation of CDCP1 occurs, this transient activation results in the
down-regulation of CDCP1. RG7287 prohibits the transformation potential
of CDCP1 and Src in focus formation assays. In vivo, RG7287 increased the
survival time of mice bearing tumors of MCF7 cells stably expressing
CDCP1 compared to untreated CDCP1 overexpressing MCF7 tumors. Treatment
of three different xenograft models with RG7287 inhibited tumor growth.In
this study we looked at the possibility of eradicating the tumors by
combining RG7287 with paclitaxel. Combining the cytostatic with RG7287
increases tumor growth inhibition compared to RG7287 alone in one
xenograft model. In another model the combination of RG7287 with
paclitaxel leads to tumor stasis. These results indicate a potential
combination therapy for RG7287. We also tested whether RG7287 inhibits
metastasis in vivo. Using a metastasis model we could show convincing
inhibition of metastasis.

