Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of anti-CXCR2 small molecule inhibitors as novel
chemotherapy targeting the Interleukin-8 pathway in colorectal cancer


Despite new and improved chemotherapy treatments for colorectal cancer
(CRC) contributing to enhanced treatment response rates and patient
prognosis, it has been suggested that an overwhelming 90% of metastatic
CRC patients encounter treatment failure due to drug resistance. The
Interleukin-8/CXCR2 pathway has been validated as a promising target for
novel chemotherapy due to its overarching effects on various cell types
within the tumor microenvironment that ultimately drive tumor growth,
proliferation, survival, chemoresistance, metastasis and angiogenesis. A
series of homologous small molecule inhibitors, which competitively bind
to the active site of CXCR2, was developed and evaluated in terms of
their efficacy in inhibiting the various cellular responses induced by
IL-8/CXCR2 signaling, utilizing MTS cell proliferation, angiogenesis tube
formation, colony formation, Western blot, cell migration and invasion
assays. The anti-CXCR2 compounds developed produce potent repression of
proliferation and colony forming capacity in HCT116, HT29, SW620 and LoVo
CRC cell lines, achieving IC50 values as low as 9.6 M in HCT116 and 9.6 M
in HT29, along with colony formation fold changes as low as .163 in
HCT116 and .255 in HT29. Additionally, the compounds demonstrated
inhibition of angiogenesis, migration and invasion and induced
significant down-regulation of pathways downstream of CXCR2, including
NF-B, MAPK and Akt. The proposed targeting of the IL-8 pathway offers an
attractive and promising approach to CRC therapy. Based on the structure
and functional relationship of these compounds, new inhibitors will be
designed and validated in hopes of having improved drug properties by
utilizing our in vitro and in vivo assay systems.

