Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of KRAS in modulating the metabolomic profile and the
response of NSCLC cells to PI3K/mTOR and AMPK interfering agents


Background: Non-small-cell lung cancers (NSCLC) constitute the majority
of lung cancer cases, whose risk is associated with environmental
factors, such as air pollution, and smoking habits. KRAS mutations are
present in about 20% of NSCLC patients, mostly at codon 12 and have been
associated to tumor progression and resistance to chemotherapy in many
types of cancer. Increasingly evidences seem to highlight that the
definition of KRAS status is not sufficient to determine its predictive
and/or prognostic role in NSCLC, and indicate that different KRAS
mutations could differently impact on crucial cellular processes. An
issue still to be addressed is whether different KRAS mutations may
modulate cellular metabolism with possible implications on different
response to anticancer treatments which specifically inhibit metabolism
modulating pathways, such as the PI3K/AKT/mTOR axis.Methods: We generated
from the human NSCLC cell line NCI-H1299 clones overexpressing WT KRAS,
and the three most common NSCLC KRAS mutations (G12C, G12V and G12D). The
clones were used to determine in vitro response to PI3K, mTOR and AMPK
interfering agents. We applied an explorative mass spectrometry-based
untargeted metabolomics strategy to characterize the largest possible
number of metabolites that might distinguish the different KRAS mutated
clones.Results: KRAS overexpressing clones resulted sensitive to the PI3K
inhibitors BKM-120 and PIK-75 and to the PI3K/mTOR dual inhibitor
BEZ-235. Metformin (acting on AMPK) did not display a cytotoxic activity
on the clones at concentrations below or equal to 1mM. Metabolomics
analyses revealed that clones harboring different KRAS mutations at codon
12 had different metabolic remodellings such as different redox buffering
system and different glutamine-dependency.Conclusion: The preliminary
findings reported herein indicate that specific KRAS mutations at codon
12 are associated to different metabolomics profiles that might have an
impact to the response to anticancer treatments. Combination studies
including metformin and PI3K/mTOR interfering agents and more detailed
metabolomics analyses are ongoing in order to clarify whether metabolic
adaptations dependent on KRAS mutants might account for the behaviour of
KRAS overexpressing clones treated with different drugs.

