Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Virus-guided fluorescence imaging of intraperitoneal free gastric
cancer cells as a potential clinical biomarker


Peritoneal dissemination is a common pattern of metastasis in patients
with gastric cancer, and associated with worse prognosis. Peritoneal
lavage cytology during the operation is an important factor in predicting
future development of peritoneal metastasis and determining the treatment
strategy, but its sensitivity and specificity are unsatisfactory.
TelomeScan is an adenovirus engineered to replicate and express GFP only
in telomerase-activating tumor cells, so that we can easily detect viable
cancer cells even among numerous normal cells. We hypothesized that
TelomeScan might be applicable to detecting free cancer cells in
peritoneal wash. Methods: Peritoneal washes were obtained from 42 gastric
cancer patients during operation. The number of GFP-positive cells was
determined for each sample and compared with cytology results and
clinicopathological data Results: Clinical stage was ranged from IA to
IV, and thirteen cases were diagnosed as class IV or class V by
peritoneal lavage cytology. More than 10 GFP-positive cells were detected
in 12 out of 42 cases, and these cases showed a worse prognosis when
compared to the other 30 cases. Conclusion: We were able to detect
gastric cancer cells as GFP-positive cells in peritoneal wash using
TelomeScan. Furthermore, the presence of GFP-positive cells in peritoneal
wash was associated with worse prognosis. These results suggest that
number of cancer cells detected by TelomeScan in the peritoneal wash may
have important clinical implication as prognostic and therapeutic
biomarkers in gastric cancer.

