Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High-recovery multiplex analysis of circulating tumor cells by
density-based enrichment, automated platform immunofluorescence staining,
and digital microscopy


Background: Analysis of circulating tumor cells (CTC) is an intense area
of diagnostic research that is rapidly evolving from prognostic to
therapeutic applications. We applied three sequential technologies -
density-based enrichment, automated immunofluorescence staining, and
digital microscopy with image analysis to the investigation of recovery
rates from blood containing spiked-in tumor cells as a model of
CTC.Materials and Methods: Cultured MCF7, PC3, A549 and LNCaP cells were
counted using Vitrotube visualization. 100 cells per line were spiked
into normal blood samples in two experiments. Density-based enrichment
was performed using the AccuCyte tube, float and collector system in a
single-tube, two-spin process. Collected cells were processed with an
adherence solution and applied to charged microscopic slides with a
simple spreading device. After drying, slides were placed onto the
Ventana Discovery Ultra automated platform and fluorescently stained with
antibodies to cytokeratin, CD45, and EpCAM or EGFR, as well as a nuclear
dye. Slides were scanned on a CyteFinder digital microscope and candidate
CTCs were identified using CyteMapper image analysis software. CTCs were
verified by a reviewer by appropriate morphology and expression of both
epithelial and nuclear stains without CD45 expression.Results: In a total
of seven samples the recovery of spiked-in CTCs ranged from 88 to 98% and
averaged 91%. This method was successfully applied to samples of blood
from patients with triple-negative breast cancer.Conclusions:
Density-based enrichment combined with automated immunofluorescence
staining, digital microscopy and confirmation of candidate cells by a
trained reviewer, produces exceptional recovery of CTCs and can be used
to assess clinical samples.


