Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genetic variation in obesity-related genes and breast cancer risk
in the Seoul Breast Cancer Study


Many previous association studies have been addressed genetic variations
in obesity related genes on breast cancer risk, however, limited
consideration of genes and gene-environmental interaction was involved.
We investigated the associations of known obesity-related genes on breast
cancer risk by comprehensive assessment based on individual SNP analysis
and gene-based pathway-analysis. This study was conducted in 1,786 cases
and 1,789 controls from Seoul Breast Cancer Study (SEBCS), a multicenter
case-control study. The selection of 1,561 candidate obesity-related gene
for this study was involved based on GWAS catalog and previous published
data associated with obesity. Associations of single-nucleotide
polymorphism (SNP) with BMI were assessed by linear regression models
under an additive genetic model adjusting for age and disease status to
identify genetic loci for obesity. 2,366 BMI-related significant SNPs
including additional significant 449 SNPs which independently associated
with BMI in our data (pMany previous association studies have been
addressed genetic variations in obesity related genes on breast cancer
risk, however, limited consideration of genes and gene-environmental
interaction was involved. We investigated the associations of known
obesity-related genes on breast cancer risk by comprehensive assessment
based on individual SNP analysis and gene-based pathway-analysis. This
study was conducted in 1,786 cases and 1,789 controls from Seoul Breast
Cancer Study (SEBCS), a multicenter case-control study. The selection of
1,561 candidate obesity-related gene for this study was involved based on
GWAS catalog and previous published data associated with obesity.
Associations of single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) with BMI were
assessed by linear regression models under an additive genetic model
adjusting for age and disease status to identify genetic loci for
obesity. 2,366 BMI-related significant SNPs including additional
significant 449 SNPs which independently associated with BMI in our data
(p<10-4) were evaluated for the genetic effect on breast cancer risk.
Per-allele odds ratio for breast cancer risk was assessed using logistic
regression models adjusting for age and 1st family history of breast
cancer. Gene-based pathway significance was assessed by the adaptive
rank-truncated product (ARTP) method with 1,000 permutations for
association between BMI-related genes and breast cancer risk. Among
available 227,197 SNPs from candidate genes and additional significant
SNPs in SEBCS data, 12,388 SNPs in 890 genes were found to be associated
with BMI (pMany previous association studies have been addressed genetic
variations in obesity related genes on breast cancer risk, however,
limited consideration of genes and gene-environmental interaction was
involved. We investigated the associations of known obesity-related genes
on breast cancer risk by comprehensive assessment based on individual SNP
analysis and gene-based pathway-analysis. This study was conducted in
1,786 cases and 1,789 controls from Seoul Breast Cancer Study (SEBCS), a
multicenter case-control study. The selection of 1,561 candidate
obesity-related gene for this study was involved based on GWAS catalog
and previous published data associated with obesity. Associations of
single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) with BMI were assessed by linear
regression models under an additive genetic model adjusting for age and
disease status to identify genetic loci for obesity. 2,366 BMI-related
significant SNPs including additional significant 449 SNPs which
independently associated with BMI in our data (p<10-4) were evaluated for
the genetic effect on breast cancer risk. Per-allele odds ratio for
breast cancer risk was assessed using logistic regression models
adjusting for age and 1st family history of breast cancer. Gene-based
pathway significance was assessed by the adaptive rank-truncated product
(ARTP) method with 1,000 permutations for association between BMI-related
genes and breast cancer risk. Among available 227,197 SNPs from candidate
genes and additional significant SNPs in SEBCS data, 12,388 SNPs in 890
genes were found to be associated with BMI (p<0.05): 495 genes (55.7%)
from GWAS catalog and 281 genes (48.4%) from published candidate genes
for obesity were identified, respectively. Rs17804012 in RBFOX1 and
rs2014791 in LINC00317 showed the most significant association with BMI
(pMany previous association studies have been addressed genetic
variations in obesity related genes on breast cancer risk, however,
limited consideration of genes and gene-environmental interaction was
involved. We investigated the associations of known obesity-related genes
on breast cancer risk by comprehensive assessment based on individual SNP
analysis and gene-based pathway-analysis. This study was conducted in
1,786 cases and 1,789 controls from Seoul Breast Cancer Study (SEBCS), a
multicenter case-control study. The selection of 1,561 candidate
obesity-related gene for this study was involved based on GWAS catalog
and previous published data associated with obesity. Associations of
single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) with BMI were assessed by linear
regression models under an additive genetic model adjusting for age and
disease status to identify genetic loci for obesity. 2,366 BMI-related
significant SNPs including additional significant 449 SNPs which
independently associated with BMI in our data (p<10-4) were evaluated for
the genetic effect on breast cancer risk. Per-allele odds ratio for
breast cancer risk was assessed using logistic regression models
adjusting for age and 1st family history of breast cancer. Gene-based
pathway significance was assessed by the adaptive rank-truncated product
(ARTP) method with 1,000 permutations for association between BMI-related
genes and breast cancer risk. Among available 227,197 SNPs from candidate
genes and additional significant SNPs in SEBCS data, 12,388 SNPs in 890
genes were found to be associated with BMI (p<0.05): 495 genes (55.7%)
from GWAS catalog and 281 genes (48.4%) from published candidate genes
for obesity were identified, respectively. Rs17804012 in RBFOX1 and
rs2014791 in LINC00317 showed the most significant association with BMI
(p<5E-6), which observed null association with breast cancer risk. In
contrast, the gene-based pathway analysis including less significantly
associated genes with BMI (N=644, pMany previous association studies have
been addressed genetic variations in obesity related genes on breast
cancer risk, however, limited consideration of genes and
gene-environmental interaction was involved. We investigated the
associations of known obesity-related genes on breast cancer risk by
comprehensive assessment based on individual SNP analysis and gene-based
pathway-analysis. This study was conducted in 1,786 cases and 1,789
controls from Seoul Breast Cancer Study (SEBCS), a multicenter
case-control study. The selection of 1,561 candidate obesity-related gene
for this study was involved based on GWAS catalog and previous published
data associated with obesity. Associations of single-nucleotide
polymorphism (SNP) with BMI were assessed by linear regression models
under an additive genetic model adjusting for age and disease status to
identify genetic loci for obesity. 2,366 BMI-related significant SNPs
including additional significant 449 SNPs which independently associated
with BMI in our data (p<10-4) were evaluated for the genetic effect on
breast cancer risk. Per-allele odds ratio for breast cancer risk was
assessed using logistic regression models adjusting for age and 1st
family history of breast cancer. Gene-based pathway significance was
assessed by the adaptive rank-truncated product (ARTP) method with 1,000
permutations for association between BMI-related genes and breast cancer
risk. Among available 227,197 SNPs from candidate genes and additional
significant SNPs in SEBCS data, 12,388 SNPs in 890 genes were found to be
associated with BMI (p<0.05): 495 genes (55.7%) from GWAS catalog and 281
genes (48.4%) from published candidate genes for obesity were identified,
respectively. Rs17804012 in RBFOX1 and rs2014791 in LINC00317 showed the
most significant association with BMI (p<5E-6), which observed null
association with breast cancer risk. In contrast, the gene-based pathway
analysis including less significantly associated genes with BMI (N=644,
p<0.05) showed significant association with breast cancer risk (the
pathway p=0.003). Especially, the effect of THRB gene on breast cancer
risk has highly significant value (p=9E-04) and the association was
confined to premenopausal women with BMI above 23.2 (pMany previous
association studies have been addressed genetic variations in obesity
related genes on breast cancer risk, however, limited consideration of
genes and gene-environmental interaction was involved. We investigated
the associations of known obesity-related genes on breast cancer risk by
comprehensive assessment based on individual SNP analysis and gene-based
pathway-analysis. This study was conducted in 1,786 cases and 1,789
controls from Seoul Breast Cancer Study (SEBCS), a multicenter
case-control study. The selection of 1,561 candidate obesity-related gene
for this study was involved based on GWAS catalog and previous published
data associated with obesity. Associations of single-nucleotide
polymorphism (SNP) with BMI were assessed by linear regression models
under an additive genetic model adjusting for age and disease status to
identify genetic loci for obesity. 2,366 BMI-related significant SNPs
including additional significant 449 SNPs which independently associated
with BMI in our data (p<10-4) were evaluated for the genetic effect on
breast cancer risk. Per-allele odds ratio for breast cancer risk was
assessed using logistic regression models adjusting for age and 1st
family history of breast cancer. Gene-based pathway significance was
assessed by the adaptive rank-truncated product (ARTP) method with 1,000
permutations for association between BMI-related genes and breast cancer
risk. Among available 227,197 SNPs from candidate genes and additional
significant SNPs in SEBCS data, 12,388 SNPs in 890 genes were found to be
associated with BMI (p<0.05): 495 genes (55.7%) from GWAS catalog and 281
genes (48.4%) from published candidate genes for obesity were identified,
respectively. Rs17804012 in RBFOX1 and rs2014791 in LINC00317 showed the
most significant association with BMI (p<5E-6), which observed null
association with breast cancer risk. In contrast, the gene-based pathway
analysis including less significantly associated genes with BMI (N=644,
p<0.05) showed significant association with breast cancer risk (the
pathway p=0.003). Especially, the effect of THRB gene on breast cancer
risk has highly significant value (p=9E-04) and the association was
confined to premenopausal women with BMI above 23.2 (p<0.01). The group
of BMI-related genes including THRB was significantly associated with
breast cancer risk in pathway analysis and the associations were
different depending on the menopausal status and/or BMI levels. Our
results suggest that consideration of the complex genetic pathway related
to environmental factors might reveal additional breast cancer
susceptibility loci.

