Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Rescuing cell polarity with small molecule inhibitors of
de-palmitoylation


Protein palmitoylation is a unique post-translational modification
required for the membrane anchoring and trafficking of numerous
regulatory proteins that play key roles in cell growth, polarity, and
signaling. Using a pulse-chase palmitoylation proteomics approach, we
identified the tumor suppressor Scrib as the most dynamic, enzymatically
regulated palmitoylated protein in malignant cells. Scrib localizes at
the basolateral membrane where it regulates epithelial cell
apical-basolateral polarity, junctional integrity, proliferation, and
metastasis. Loss of Scrib at the plasma membrane cooperates with
oncogenic Ras or Myc overexpression to drive tumor formation, promote
epidermal to mesenchymal transition (EMT), and bypass contact inhibition.
Interestingly, overexpression of Snail in polarized cells eliminates
Scrib membrane localization. We recently reported a class of in vivo
active small selective inhibitors of the acyl protein thioesterases APT1
and APT2. Addition of a small molecule APT2 inhibitor restores Scrib
membrane localization and enhances E-Cadherin expression, overcoming
Snail-mediated repression of E-cad. These findings suggest that
thioesterases, predominantly APT2 more than APT1, regulate the
palmitoylation of cell polarity proteins, and highlight a strategy to
attenuate oncogenic signaling and restore cell polarity pathways in
malignant cells.

