Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The pro-inflammatory role of the putative oncogene Bcl-3


Bcl-3 is an oncogene first identified by its translocation into the
immunoglobulin alpha-locus in some cases of chronic B cell lymphocytic
leukemia. Bcl-3 is an atypical member of the IB family that exhibits
unique properties compared with classic IBs. It readily enters nuclei,
where it interacts with p50/NF-B1 or p52/NF-B2 homodimers to
transcriptional activity. Depending on the cellular context and target
gene, Bcl-3 may promote or inhibit gene expression. Recently it was
reported that Bcl-3 could promote tumor growth as well as metastasis in
several mouse tumor models. Bcl-3 is also known to play important roles
in innate and adaptive immunity. For example, mice lacking Bcl-3 become
highly susceptible to various pathogens, including T. gondii and K.
pneumoniae, but the underlying mechanisms remain poorly understood. In
addition, little is known about potential roles of Bcl-3 in inflammation
that may contribute to cancers. Here we report that in a mouse model of
colitis, which is dependent on the functions of Th1 cells, Bcl-3 had an
intrinsic role to maintain Th1 cells and thus promote inflammation over
time. This could also be demonstrated in vitro, where Bcl-3 had no effect
on differentiation of Th1 cells per se, but was required for their
maintenance. We will show how Bcl-3 promoted the maintenance of
specifically Th1, but not Th17 cells. We will also provide evidence that
Bcl-3 likely mediated these effects via p52/NF-B2. Our data demonstrate
that the oncoprotein Bcl-3 can contribute to chronic inflammatory
conditions that in turn may be associated with cancer development.Note:
This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

