Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antibody dependent cytotoxicity is enhanced by Ari-4175 through NK
cell activation


We previously reported that the prolyl peptidase inhibitor, Ari-4175,
showed dramatic anti-tumor effects in KRAS mutant colorectal cancer
xengrafts when given either alone or in combination with cetuximab. In
vitro data suggest that the therapeutic effect of 4175 might partially be
due to the augmentation of ADCC through elevating expression of CD16 on
NK cells. However, our data indicates that 4175 does not have a direct
effect on isolated NK cells. Therefore, we believe that the observed
effect on NK cells and augmentation of ADCC is as a result of activation
of another cell type possibly working through the production of a
cytokine. We noted a significant expansion of neutrophils in 4175-treated
mice that occurred prior to increased expression of CD69 and CD16 on NK
cells. Therefore, we hypothesized that neutrophils might be stimulated by
4175, which results in subsequent activation of NK cells to enhance their
ADCC response.Ari-4175 was administered orally to nude mice at 200 g q.d.
x5 days/week. Peripheral blood or spleens were assayed for immune
parameters, ex vivo, at various time points. Expression of surface
markers on myeloid and NK cells were monitored by flow cytometry. Natural
cytotoxicity and ADCC were assayed using HCT116 cells and cetuximab in a
flow cytometry-based assay. Neutrophil depletion experiments were
accomplished by administration of an anti Ly-6G antibody (clone 1A8,
cat#BE0075-1, BioXCell), specific for neutrophils, (1 mg per mouse,
injected on the days 0, 2, and 4). An Isotype control antibody (rat
IgG2a; cat#BE0089, BioXCell) was given at the same dose and by the
sameschedule.We were able to effectively eliminate neutrophils and the
previously reported cell population (CD45+ CD3- NKp46- CD11c- CD19-
CD11b+ Ly6C+ Ly6G+) that appeared to be upregulated following treatment
with 4175. Preliminarily, depletion of neutrophils and this cell subset
did not have any impact on ADCC augmentation or activation of NK cells.
ADCC was significantly greater with 4175 and cetuximab treatment compared
to 4175 alone with or without neutrophil depletion. Additionally, results
of xenograft studies with panitumomab, an anti EGFR antibody that does
not induce ADCC, and 4175 seem to suggest that there is less activity
with this combination than with 4175 and cetuximab which is capable of
inducing ADCC.Our results indicate that the immunomodulatory effects of
Ari-4175 on NK cells appear to be independent of neutrophils. However, in
these experiments treatment with 4175 and neutrophil depletion were
initiated at the same time. Additional experiments to better elucidate
the mechanism of action of this agent are in progress.

