Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nasal gene expression reflects the physiologic response to
potentially reduced exposure products


RationalePotentially reduced exposure products (PREPs) are tobacco-based
products that may yield lower toxicant levels as compared to traditional
cigarettes thereby possibly mitigating tobacco-exposure related harm. Due
to their increasing popularity, there is an urgent need to develop
approaches for evaluating the biological impact of these products to
determine their potential health risks. We have shown that gene
expression profiling of intra- and extra-thoracic airway epithelium can
serve as an indicator of physiological responses to cigarette smoke
exposure. Our goal here is to establish whether this same approach might
identify similarities and differences in the response to reduced exposure
tobacco products. We therefore examined longitudinal gene-expression
alterations upon switching from traditional cigarettes to a lower
nicotine product (Xodus) in readily collected nasal epithelium and
compared these transcriptomic alterations to those associated with
smoking-cessation.MethodsNasal epithelial brushings were obtained from 13
active smokers who switched to Xodus cigarettes for 6 weeks and then were
tobacco abstinent for the next 18 weeks. Nasal brushings were obtained at
baseline and at 4, 6, 16, and 24-weeks. Alveolar carbon monoxide levels
were used to confirm cigarette use at baseline, 4 and 6 weeks and tobacco
abstinence at 16 and 24 weeks. RNA from the nasal brushings was processed
and hybridized to Affymetrix Human Gene 1.0 ST Arrays. Gene expression
alterations at each time point were identified using a mixed model
ANOVA.ResultsAlterations in the expression levels of 161 genes were
associated with either switching to PREPs or with complete smoking
cessation (FDRRationalePotentially reduced exposure products (PREPs) are
tobacco-based products that may yield lower toxicant levels as compared
to traditional cigarettes thereby possibly mitigating tobacco-exposure
related harm. Due to their increasing popularity, there is an urgent need
to develop approaches for evaluating the biological impact of these
products to determine their potential health risks. We have shown that
gene expression profiling of intra- and extra-thoracic airway epithelium
can serve as an indicator of physiological responses to cigarette smoke
exposure. Our goal here is to establish whether this same approach might
identify similarities and differences in the response to reduced exposure
tobacco products. We therefore examined longitudinal gene-expression
alterations upon switching from traditional cigarettes to a lower
nicotine product (Xodus) in readily collected nasal epithelium and
compared these transcriptomic alterations to those associated with
smoking-cessation.MethodsNasal epithelial brushings were obtained from 13
active smokers who switched to Xodus cigarettes for 6 weeks and then were
tobacco abstinent for the next 18 weeks. Nasal brushings were obtained at
baseline and at 4, 6, 16, and 24-weeks. Alveolar carbon monoxide levels
were used to confirm cigarette use at baseline, 4 and 6 weeks and tobacco
abstinence at 16 and 24 weeks. RNA from the nasal brushings was processed
and hybridized to Affymetrix Human Gene 1.0 ST Arrays. Gene expression
alterations at each time point were identified using a mixed model
ANOVA.ResultsAlterations in the expression levels of 161 genes were
associated with either switching to PREPs or with complete smoking
cessation (FDR<0.2). For a minority of genes, Xodus usage resulted in
decreased expression levels that further decreased upon smoking
cessation. These genes were primarily involved in xenobiotic metabolism
(PRationalePotentially reduced exposure products (PREPs) are
tobacco-based products that may yield lower toxicant levels as compared
to traditional cigarettes thereby possibly mitigating tobacco-exposure
related harm. Due to their increasing popularity, there is an urgent need
to develop approaches for evaluating the biological impact of these
products to determine their potential health risks. We have shown that
gene expression profiling of intra- and extra-thoracic airway epithelium
can serve as an indicator of physiological responses to cigarette smoke
exposure. Our goal here is to establish whether this same approach might
identify similarities and differences in the response to reduced exposure
tobacco products. We therefore examined longitudinal gene-expression
alterations upon switching from traditional cigarettes to a lower
nicotine product (Xodus) in readily collected nasal epithelium and
compared these transcriptomic alterations to those associated with
smoking-cessation.MethodsNasal epithelial brushings were obtained from 13
active smokers who switched to Xodus cigarettes for 6 weeks and then were
tobacco abstinent for the next 18 weeks. Nasal brushings were obtained at
baseline and at 4, 6, 16, and 24-weeks. Alveolar carbon monoxide levels
were used to confirm cigarette use at baseline, 4 and 6 weeks and tobacco
abstinence at 16 and 24 weeks. RNA from the nasal brushings was processed
and hybridized to Affymetrix Human Gene 1.0 ST Arrays. Gene expression
alterations at each time point were identified using a mixed model
ANOVA.ResultsAlterations in the expression levels of 161 genes were
associated with either switching to PREPs or with complete smoking
cessation (FDR<0.2). For a minority of genes, Xodus usage resulted in
decreased expression levels that further decreased upon smoking
cessation. These genes were primarily involved in xenobiotic metabolism
(P<0.05). The majority of genes altered by smoking cessation time points
do not change upon switching to this PREP product.ConclusionOur data
indicate that some of the gene expression differences induced by
switching to the PREP product are intermediate between traditional
cigarette smoking and tobacco abstinence whereas majority of gene
expression remain unaltered with Xodus use. These data suggest that the
PREP product may only constitute partially reduced exposure. Our study
further suggests that the nasal epithelium can serve as a minimally
invasive tool to measure responses to alternative tobacco products and
may ultimately serve as a biomarker to evaluate the potential disease
risks associated with these products.

