Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The fully human, proapoptotic fusion protein Granzyme B/VEGF121
targets tumor vasculature and inhibits tumor growth


Angiogenesis is a critical process in numerous diseases, and targeting
neovascularization has therapeutic value in several disease states
including tumor progression and metastatic spread. Vascular endothelial
growth factor-A (VEGF-A) and its receptors play a central role in the
control of neovascularization. Within the VEGF-A family, VEGF121 is a
naturally-occurring splice variant that binds to receptors (VEGFR-1 and
VEGFR-2) that are over-expressed on the endothelium of tumor vasculature
but not normal vasculature. Granzyme B (GrB) is a serine protease that
plays a critical role in the body's defense against viral infection and
tumor development by initiating the apoptotic cascade via both
caspase-dependent and -independent mechanisms. We expressed GrB/VEGF121
in HEK-293T cells and harvested the secreted fusion protein under
serum-free conditions. Endothelial and tumor cells lines showed varying
levels of sensitivity to GrB/VEGF121 that correlated closely to total
VEGFR-2 expression. IC50 levels were found to be in the nanomolar range.
GrB/VEGF121 internalized rapidly into VEGFR-2 expressing cells while the
internalization into VEGFR-1 expressing cells was significantly reduced.
Forty percent of VEGFR-2+ cells underwent mitochondrial depolarization
within 24 h of exposure to GrB/VEGF121, compared to 13% of controls. Over
this same time period, 35% of GrB/VEGF121-treated cells mobilized into
early apoptosis, compared to 4% of control cells. In vivo, intravenous
administration of GrB/VEGF121 to non-tumor bearing mice at doses up to 40
mg/kg had no observed toxicity. GrB/VEGF121 localized specifically in
xenografts of non-VEGFR-expressing PC-3 and MDA-MB-231/Luc cells,
primarily in perivascular regions and in other areas of the tumor less
well-vascularized, whereas free GrB did not localize to tumor tissue.
Treatment of mice bearing established prostate PC-3 tumor xenografts with
GrB/VEGF121 at 27 mg/kg resulted in the regression of four of five tumors
in this group. Tumors showed a two-fold lower Ki-67-labeling index
compared with controls. Treatment of mice bearing orthotopic triple
negative breast (MDA-MB-231/Luc) tumors with GrB/VEGF121 resulted in
statistically significant differences in tumor volumes by Day 39 when
compared to controls (saline vs 10 mg/kg GrB/VEGF121: P Angiogenesis is a
critical process in numerous diseases, and targeting neovascularization
has therapeutic value in several disease states including tumor
progression and metastatic spread. Vascular endothelial growth factor-A
(VEGF-A) and its receptors play a central role in the control of
neovascularization. Within the VEGF-A family, VEGF121 is a
naturally-occurring splice variant that binds to receptors (VEGFR-1 and
VEGFR-2) that are over-expressed on the endothelium of tumor vasculature
but not normal vasculature. Granzyme B (GrB) is a serine protease that
plays a critical role in the body's defense against viral infection and
tumor development by initiating the apoptotic cascade via both
caspase-dependent and -independent mechanisms. We expressed GrB/VEGF121
in HEK-293T cells and harvested the secreted fusion protein under
serum-free conditions. Endothelial and tumor cells lines showed varying
levels of sensitivity to GrB/VEGF121 that correlated closely to total
VEGFR-2 expression. IC50 levels were found to be in the nanomolar range.
GrB/VEGF121 internalized rapidly into VEGFR-2 expressing cells while the
internalization into VEGFR-1 expressing cells was significantly reduced.
Forty percent of VEGFR-2+ cells underwent mitochondrial depolarization
within 24 h of exposure to GrB/VEGF121, compared to 13% of controls. Over
this same time period, 35% of GrB/VEGF121-treated cells mobilized into
early apoptosis, compared to 4% of control cells. In vivo, intravenous
administration of GrB/VEGF121 to non-tumor bearing mice at doses up to 40
mg/kg had no observed toxicity. GrB/VEGF121 localized specifically in
xenografts of non-VEGFR-expressing PC-3 and MDA-MB-231/Luc cells,
primarily in perivascular regions and in other areas of the tumor less
well-vascularized, whereas free GrB did not localize to tumor tissue.
Treatment of mice bearing established prostate PC-3 tumor xenografts with
GrB/VEGF121 at 27 mg/kg resulted in the regression of four of five tumors
in this group. Tumors showed a two-fold lower Ki-67-labeling index
compared with controls. Treatment of mice bearing orthotopic triple
negative breast (MDA-MB-231/Luc) tumors with GrB/VEGF121 resulted in
statistically significant differences in tumor volumes by Day 39 when
compared to controls (saline vs 10 mg/kg GrB/VEGF121: P < 0.04; saline vs
25 mg/kg GrB/VEGF121: P Angiogenesis is a critical process in numerous
diseases, and targeting neovascularization has therapeutic value in
several disease states including tumor progression and metastatic spread.
Vascular endothelial growth factor-A (VEGF-A) and its receptors play a
central role in the control of neovascularization. Within the VEGF-A
family, VEGF121 is a naturally-occurring splice variant that binds to
receptors (VEGFR-1 and VEGFR-2) that are over-expressed on the
endothelium of tumor vasculature but not normal vasculature. Granzyme B
(GrB) is a serine protease that plays a critical role in the body's
defense against viral infection and tumor development by initiating the
apoptotic cascade via both caspase-dependent and -independent mechanisms.
We expressed GrB/VEGF121 in HEK-293T cells and harvested the secreted
fusion protein under serum-free conditions. Endothelial and tumor cells
lines showed varying levels of sensitivity to GrB/VEGF121 that correlated
closely to total VEGFR-2 expression. IC50 levels were found to be in the
nanomolar range. GrB/VEGF121 internalized rapidly into VEGFR-2 expressing
cells while the internalization into VEGFR-1 expressing cells was
significantly reduced. Forty percent of VEGFR-2+ cells underwent
mitochondrial depolarization within 24 h of exposure to GrB/VEGF121,
compared to 13% of controls. Over this same time period, 35% of
GrB/VEGF121-treated cells mobilized into early apoptosis, compared to 4%
of control cells. In vivo, intravenous administration of GrB/VEGF121 to
non-tumor bearing mice at doses up to 40 mg/kg had no observed toxicity.
GrB/VEGF121 localized specifically in xenografts of non-VEGFR-expressing
PC-3 and MDA-MB-231/Luc cells, primarily in perivascular regions and in
other areas of the tumor less well-vascularized, whereas free GrB did not
localize to tumor tissue. Treatment of mice bearing established prostate
PC-3 tumor xenografts with GrB/VEGF121 at 27 mg/kg resulted in the
regression of four of five tumors in this group. Tumors showed a two-fold
lower Ki-67-labeling index compared with controls. Treatment of mice
bearing orthotopic triple negative breast (MDA-MB-231/Luc) tumors with
GrB/VEGF121 resulted in statistically significant differences in tumor
volumes by Day 39 when compared to controls (saline vs 10 mg/kg
GrB/VEGF121: P < 0.04; saline vs 25 mg/kg GrB/VEGF121: P < 0.03). In both
tumor models, the vascular area as a percent of tumor area was
significantly lower in tumor samples from mice treated with GrB/VEGF121
vs saline (PC-3: 14-fold, P Angiogenesis is a critical process in
numerous diseases, and targeting neovascularization has therapeutic value
in several disease states including tumor progression and metastatic
spread. Vascular endothelial growth factor-A (VEGF-A) and its receptors
play a central role in the control of neovascularization. Within the
VEGF-A family, VEGF121 is a naturally-occurring splice variant that binds
to receptors (VEGFR-1 and VEGFR-2) that are over-expressed on the
endothelium of tumor vasculature but not normal vasculature. Granzyme B
(GrB) is a serine protease that plays a critical role in the body's
defense against viral infection and tumor development by initiating the
apoptotic cascade via both caspase-dependent and -independent mechanisms.
We expressed GrB/VEGF121 in HEK-293T cells and harvested the secreted
fusion protein under serum-free conditions. Endothelial and tumor cells
lines showed varying levels of sensitivity to GrB/VEGF121 that correlated
closely to total VEGFR-2 expression. IC50 levels were found to be in the
nanomolar range. GrB/VEGF121 internalized rapidly into VEGFR-2 expressing
cells while the internalization into VEGFR-1 expressing cells was
significantly reduced. Forty percent of VEGFR-2+ cells underwent
mitochondrial depolarization within 24 h of exposure to GrB/VEGF121,
compared to 13% of controls. Over this same time period, 35% of
GrB/VEGF121-treated cells mobilized into early apoptosis, compared to 4%
of control cells. In vivo, intravenous administration of GrB/VEGF121 to
non-tumor bearing mice at doses up to 40 mg/kg had no observed toxicity.
GrB/VEGF121 localized specifically in xenografts of non-VEGFR-expressing
PC-3 and MDA-MB-231/Luc cells, primarily in perivascular regions and in
other areas of the tumor less well-vascularized, whereas free GrB did not
localize to tumor tissue. Treatment of mice bearing established prostate
PC-3 tumor xenografts with GrB/VEGF121 at 27 mg/kg resulted in the
regression of four of five tumors in this group. Tumors showed a two-fold
lower Ki-67-labeling index compared with controls. Treatment of mice
bearing orthotopic triple negative breast (MDA-MB-231/Luc) tumors with
GrB/VEGF121 resulted in statistically significant differences in tumor
volumes by Day 39 when compared to controls (saline vs 10 mg/kg
GrB/VEGF121: P < 0.04; saline vs 25 mg/kg GrB/VEGF121: P < 0.03). In both
tumor models, the vascular area as a percent of tumor area was
significantly lower in tumor samples from mice treated with GrB/VEGF121
vs saline (PC-3: 14-fold, P < 0.0001; MDA-MB-231/Luc: 5-fold, P
Angiogenesis is a critical process in numerous diseases, and targeting
neovascularization has therapeutic value in several disease states
including tumor progression and metastatic spread. Vascular endothelial
growth factor-A (VEGF-A) and its receptors play a central role in the
control of neovascularization. Within the VEGF-A family, VEGF121 is a
naturally-occurring splice variant that binds to receptors (VEGFR-1 and
VEGFR-2) that are over-expressed on the endothelium of tumor vasculature
but not normal vasculature. Granzyme B (GrB) is a serine protease that
plays a critical role in the body's defense against viral infection and
tumor development by initiating the apoptotic cascade via both
caspase-dependent and -independent mechanisms. We expressed GrB/VEGF121
in HEK-293T cells and harvested the secreted fusion protein under
serum-free conditions. Endothelial and tumor cells lines showed varying
levels of sensitivity to GrB/VEGF121 that correlated closely to total
VEGFR-2 expression. IC50 levels were found to be in the nanomolar range.
GrB/VEGF121 internalized rapidly into VEGFR-2 expressing cells while the
internalization into VEGFR-1 expressing cells was significantly reduced.
Forty percent of VEGFR-2+ cells underwent mitochondrial depolarization
within 24 h of exposure to GrB/VEGF121, compared to 13% of controls. Over
this same time period, 35% of GrB/VEGF121-treated cells mobilized into
early apoptosis, compared to 4% of control cells. In vivo, intravenous
administration of GrB/VEGF121 to non-tumor bearing mice at doses up to 40
mg/kg had no observed toxicity. GrB/VEGF121 localized specifically in
xenografts of non-VEGFR-expressing PC-3 and MDA-MB-231/Luc cells,
primarily in perivascular regions and in other areas of the tumor less
well-vascularized, whereas free GrB did not localize to tumor tissue.
Treatment of mice bearing established prostate PC-3 tumor xenografts with
GrB/VEGF121 at 27 mg/kg resulted in the regression of four of five tumors
in this group. Tumors showed a two-fold lower Ki-67-labeling index
compared with controls. Treatment of mice bearing orthotopic triple
negative breast (MDA-MB-231/Luc) tumors with GrB/VEGF121 resulted in
statistically significant differences in tumor volumes by Day 39 when
compared to controls (saline vs 10 mg/kg GrB/VEGF121: P < 0.04; saline vs
25 mg/kg GrB/VEGF121: P < 0.03). In both tumor models, the vascular area
as a percent of tumor area was significantly lower in tumor samples from
mice treated with GrB/VEGF121 vs saline (PC-3: 14-fold, P < 0.0001;
MDA-MB-231/Luc: 5-fold, P < 0.01) indicating that GrB/VEGF121 treatment
directly impacted tumor vasculature. Our results show that targeted
delivery of granzyme B to tumor vascular endothelial cells or to tumor
cells activates apoptotic cascades and this completely human construct
may have significant therapeutic potential. Research conducted, in part,
by the Clayton Foundation for Research.

