Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of small molecule inhibitors of HSF1 stress pathway
activation in cancer cells


Heat Shock Factor 1 (HSF1) is a key transcription factor involved in
proteostasis and response to stress, as well as being implicated in many
diseases including cancer. Up-regulation of its activity by environmental
stress or oncogenesis leads to transcriptional induction of genes
involved in diverse cellular processes supporting the cancer state,
including proteostasis, proliferation, survival and metastasis.
Inhibition of HSF1 is therefore potentially beneficial for cancer
treatment, but HSF1 is not technically druggable. We developed a
high-throughput cell-based reporter gene assay to screen a library of
small-molecule kinase inhibitors and identified 3 compound series as
validated inhibitors of HSF1 activation by the HSP90 inhibitor 17-AAG.
Further characterization of imidazo[1,2-b]pyridazine compounds showed
inhibition of HSF1 target gene expression and the ability to mimic other
features of the HSF1 knockdown phenotype. Using these tool compounds and
by siRNA knockdown of HSF1 expression we demonstrate that HSF1 inhibition
leads to cell cycle arrest and enhances the antiproliferative effect of
17-AAG. In addition, we show that HSP90 inhibition induces HSF1
phosphorylation at two serine residues, Ser326 and Ser320, highlighting
the importance of Ser320 phosphorylation in HSP72 up-regulation by
17-AAG-induced HSF1 activation, and show that this activation is
inhibited by our tool compounds. Our findings support the optimization
and development of small-molecule inhibitors of the HSF1 pathway for
cancer treatment.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

