Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical development of a novel multi-targeted kinase
inhibitor, MG516, for the treatment of sarcoma


Receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) are key regulators of tumor development
as well as metastasis, aiding in the epithelial-mesenchymal transition,
migration and angiogenesis. RTK signaling pathways such as VEGFR, PDGFR,
and c-Met have been shown to be critical for cell survival, proliferation
and metastasis in sarcomas. RTK inhibitors have been used with moderate
success to block tumor cell survival and proliferation, however, internal
compensatory signaling pathways give rise to drug resistance in a
majority of cases. MG516, is a novel multi-targeted tyrosine kinase
inhibitor that blocks RTK signaling pathways including c-Met, Ephrin
receptors (Eph), and VEGFR with low nanomolar IC50 values. We evaluated
the RTK inhibition profile and anti-proliferative effect of MG516 in a
diverse panel of sarcoma cell lines including malignant peripheral nerve
sheath tumor (MPNST), Ewing's sarcoma (A673) and leiomyosarcoma (SKLMS).
MG516 inhibits tumor cell proliferation in vitro in a dose dependent
manner with IC50s ranging from 500 to 2500 nM. We used a human phopho-RTK
array kit, which allows the screening of 49 different phosphorylated
human RTKs, in a panel of sarcoma cell lines. Our data indicates that
MG516 provides robust blockade of a wide panel of RTKs including c-Met,
EphB3, EphA10, PDGFR-, Axl and IGF1-R at nanomolar to low micromolar
concentrations. Western blot analysis showed a significant blockade of
downstream effectors including p-AKT, p-FAK and p-STAT3. These results
demonstrate the efficacy of MG516 in blocking RTKs and their downstream
signaling pathways. Since PDGFR-, c-Met and IGF1-R have been shown to be
involved in tumor initiation, development and metastasis in a variety of
sarcoma subtypes, our data would strongly support further development of
MG516 as a novel agent in the treatment of sarcomas.

