Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Angiopoietin-like protein 2 as a novel serum biomarker for
diagnosis and prognosis in patients with colorectal cancer


Background:Inflammation plays a role in the carcinogenesis of sporadic
colorectal cancer (CRC), and this can be supported by several evidences
showing that effectiveness of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs as
chemopreventive agents for CRC. Angiopoietin-like protein 2 (ANGPTL2) is
known to act as a causative mediator of chronic inflammation and
inflammatory carcinogenesis. However, the biological role and clinical
significance of ANGPTL2 expression remains poorly understood in human
cancer. We investigated the functional roles of ANGPTL2 in vitro and
evaluated the clinical significance of ANGPTL2 expression in both primary
tumor and matched serum in patients with CRC.Methods:ANGPTL2 gene
knockdown by siRNA transfection was performed to evaluate ANGPTL2
function in CRC cancer cell line (sw480). Next, we examined ANGPTL2
expression in CRC tissues (n=194) to evaluate the association between its
expression and clinicopathological findings by immunohistochemistry
(IHC). Finally, we screened serum ANGPTL2 levels from 32 CRC (16 Stage I
and 16 Stage IV) and 24 normal controls (NC), and validated its levels
using 194 serum samples from CRC and 48 from NC to evaluate its utility
as a biomarker by ELISA.Results: Knockdown of ANGPTL2 resulted in
significantly inhibition of cell proliferation, migration, invasion, and
resistance to anoikis in vitro. ANGPTL2 overexpressed in CRC tissues
compared to normal colonic mucosa and high ANGPTL2 expression was
associated with advanced T stage (pBackground:Inflammation plays a role
in the carcinogenesis of sporadic colorectal cancer (CRC), and this can
be supported by several evidences showing that effectiveness of
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs as chemopreventive agents for CRC.
Angiopoietin-like protein 2 (ANGPTL2) is known to act as a causative
mediator of chronic inflammation and inflammatory carcinogenesis.
However, the biological role and clinical significance of ANGPTL2
expression remains poorly understood in human cancer. We investigated the
functional roles of ANGPTL2 in vitro and evaluated the clinical
significance of ANGPTL2 expression in both primary tumor and matched
serum in patients with CRC.Methods:ANGPTL2 gene knockdown by siRNA
transfection was performed to evaluate ANGPTL2 function in CRC cancer
cell line (sw480). Next, we examined ANGPTL2 expression in CRC tissues
(n=194) to evaluate the association between its expression and
clinicopathological findings by immunohistochemistry (IHC). Finally, we
screened serum ANGPTL2 levels from 32 CRC (16 Stage I and 16 Stage IV)
and 24 normal controls (NC), and validated its levels using 194 serum
samples from CRC and 48 from NC to evaluate its utility as a biomarker by
ELISA.Results: Knockdown of ANGPTL2 resulted in significantly inhibition
of cell proliferation, migration, invasion, and resistance to anoikis in
vitro. ANGPTL2 overexpressed in CRC tissues compared to normal colonic
mucosa and high ANGPTL2 expression was associated with advanced T stage
(p<0.01), lymphatic metastasis (p=0.04) and hepatic metastasis (p=0.04)
in CRC patients. Next, we screened serum ANGPTL2 levels in CRC patients
and NC, revealing that its levels in CRC patients were significantly
higher than that in NC (pBackground:Inflammation plays a role in the
carcinogenesis of sporadic colorectal cancer (CRC), and this can be
supported by several evidences showing that effectiveness of nonsteroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs as chemopreventive agents for CRC.
Angiopoietin-like protein 2 (ANGPTL2) is known to act as a causative
mediator of chronic inflammation and inflammatory carcinogenesis.
However, the biological role and clinical significance of ANGPTL2
expression remains poorly understood in human cancer. We investigated the
functional roles of ANGPTL2 in vitro and evaluated the clinical
significance of ANGPTL2 expression in both primary tumor and matched
serum in patients with CRC.Methods:ANGPTL2 gene knockdown by siRNA
transfection was performed to evaluate ANGPTL2 function in CRC cancer
cell line (sw480). Next, we examined ANGPTL2 expression in CRC tissues
(n=194) to evaluate the association between its expression and
clinicopathological findings by immunohistochemistry (IHC). Finally, we
screened serum ANGPTL2 levels from 32 CRC (16 Stage I and 16 Stage IV)
and 24 normal controls (NC), and validated its levels using 194 serum
samples from CRC and 48 from NC to evaluate its utility as a biomarker by
ELISA.Results: Knockdown of ANGPTL2 resulted in significantly inhibition
of cell proliferation, migration, invasion, and resistance to anoikis in
vitro. ANGPTL2 overexpressed in CRC tissues compared to normal colonic
mucosa and high ANGPTL2 expression was associated with advanced T stage
(p<0.01), lymphatic metastasis (p=0.04) and hepatic metastasis (p=0.04)
in CRC patients. Next, we screened serum ANGPTL2 levels in CRC patients
and NC, revealing that its levels in CRC patients were significantly
higher than that in NC (p<0.01), and differentiated CRC patients from NC
with high accuracy (AUC=0.837). Validation step also indicated that serum
ANGPTL2 levels in CRC patients were significantly higher compared to NC
(pBackground:Inflammation plays a role in the carcinogenesis of sporadic
colorectal cancer (CRC), and this can be supported by several evidences
showing that effectiveness of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs as
chemopreventive agents for CRC. Angiopoietin-like protein 2 (ANGPTL2) is
known to act as a causative mediator of chronic inflammation and
inflammatory carcinogenesis. However, the biological role and clinical
significance of ANGPTL2 expression remains poorly understood in human
cancer. We investigated the functional roles of ANGPTL2 in vitro and
evaluated the clinical significance of ANGPTL2 expression in both primary
tumor and matched serum in patients with CRC.Methods:ANGPTL2 gene
knockdown by siRNA transfection was performed to evaluate ANGPTL2
function in CRC cancer cell line (sw480). Next, we examined ANGPTL2
expression in CRC tissues (n=194) to evaluate the association between its
expression and clinicopathological findings by immunohistochemistry
(IHC). Finally, we screened serum ANGPTL2 levels from 32 CRC (16 Stage I
and 16 Stage IV) and 24 normal controls (NC), and validated its levels
using 194 serum samples from CRC and 48 from NC to evaluate its utility
as a biomarker by ELISA.Results: Knockdown of ANGPTL2 resulted in
significantly inhibition of cell proliferation, migration, invasion, and
resistance to anoikis in vitro. ANGPTL2 overexpressed in CRC tissues
compared to normal colonic mucosa and high ANGPTL2 expression was
associated with advanced T stage (p<0.01), lymphatic metastasis (p=0.04)
and hepatic metastasis (p=0.04) in CRC patients. Next, we screened serum
ANGPTL2 levels in CRC patients and NC, revealing that its levels in CRC
patients were significantly higher than that in NC (p<0.01), and
differentiated CRC patients from NC with high accuracy (AUC=0.837).
Validation step also indicated that serum ANGPTL2 levels in CRC patients
were significantly higher compared to NC (p<0.0001), had a promising AUC
(0.885) with high sensitivity and specificity to distinguish CRC patients
from NC. Serum ANGPTL2 levels also discriminated early CRC patients
(stage I) from NC (AUC=0.79). High serum ANGPTL2 was significantly
associated with tumor progression such as larger tumor size (p=0.03),
undifferentiated adenocarcinoma (p=0.03), advanced T stage
(pBackground:Inflammation plays a role in the carcinogenesis of sporadic
colorectal cancer (CRC), and this can be supported by several evidences
showing that effectiveness of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs as
chemopreventive agents for CRC. Angiopoietin-like protein 2 (ANGPTL2) is
known to act as a causative mediator of chronic inflammation and
inflammatory carcinogenesis. However, the biological role and clinical
significance of ANGPTL2 expression remains poorly understood in human
cancer. We investigated the functional roles of ANGPTL2 in vitro and
evaluated the clinical significance of ANGPTL2 expression in both primary
tumor and matched serum in patients with CRC.Methods:ANGPTL2 gene
knockdown by siRNA transfection was performed to evaluate ANGPTL2
function in CRC cancer cell line (sw480). Next, we examined ANGPTL2
expression in CRC tissues (n=194) to evaluate the association between its
expression and clinicopathological findings by immunohistochemistry
(IHC). Finally, we screened serum ANGPTL2 levels from 32 CRC (16 Stage I
and 16 Stage IV) and 24 normal controls (NC), and validated its levels
using 194 serum samples from CRC and 48 from NC to evaluate its utility
as a biomarker by ELISA.Results: Knockdown of ANGPTL2 resulted in
significantly inhibition of cell proliferation, migration, invasion, and
resistance to anoikis in vitro. ANGPTL2 overexpressed in CRC tissues
compared to normal colonic mucosa and high ANGPTL2 expression was
associated with advanced T stage (p<0.01), lymphatic metastasis (p=0.04)
and hepatic metastasis (p=0.04) in CRC patients. Next, we screened serum
ANGPTL2 levels in CRC patients and NC, revealing that its levels in CRC
patients were significantly higher than that in NC (p<0.01), and
differentiated CRC patients from NC with high accuracy (AUC=0.837).
Validation step also indicated that serum ANGPTL2 levels in CRC patients
were significantly higher compared to NC (p<0.0001), had a promising AUC
(0.885) with high sensitivity and specificity to distinguish CRC patients
from NC. Serum ANGPTL2 levels also discriminated early CRC patients
(stage I) from NC (AUC=0.79). High serum ANGPTL2 was significantly
associated with tumor progression such as larger tumor size (p=0.03),
undifferentiated adenocarcinoma (p=0.03), advanced T stage (p<0.01),
peritoneal metastasis (pBackground:Inflammation plays a role in the
carcinogenesis of sporadic colorectal cancer (CRC), and this can be
supported by several evidences showing that effectiveness of nonsteroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs as chemopreventive agents for CRC.
Angiopoietin-like protein 2 (ANGPTL2) is known to act as a causative
mediator of chronic inflammation and inflammatory carcinogenesis.
However, the biological role and clinical significance of ANGPTL2
expression remains poorly understood in human cancer. We investigated the
functional roles of ANGPTL2 in vitro and evaluated the clinical
significance of ANGPTL2 expression in both primary tumor and matched
serum in patients with CRC.Methods:ANGPTL2 gene knockdown by siRNA
transfection was performed to evaluate ANGPTL2 function in CRC cancer
cell line (sw480). Next, we examined ANGPTL2 expression in CRC tissues
(n=194) to evaluate the association between its expression and
clinicopathological findings by immunohistochemistry (IHC). Finally, we
screened serum ANGPTL2 levels from 32 CRC (16 Stage I and 16 Stage IV)
and 24 normal controls (NC), and validated its levels using 194 serum
samples from CRC and 48 from NC to evaluate its utility as a biomarker by
ELISA.Results: Knockdown of ANGPTL2 resulted in significantly inhibition
of cell proliferation, migration, invasion, and resistance to anoikis in
vitro. ANGPTL2 overexpressed in CRC tissues compared to normal colonic
mucosa and high ANGPTL2 expression was associated with advanced T stage
(p<0.01), lymphatic metastasis (p=0.04) and hepatic metastasis (p=0.04)
in CRC patients. Next, we screened serum ANGPTL2 levels in CRC patients
and NC, revealing that its levels in CRC patients were significantly
higher than that in NC (p<0.01), and differentiated CRC patients from NC
with high accuracy (AUC=0.837). Validation step also indicated that serum
ANGPTL2 levels in CRC patients were significantly higher compared to NC
(p<0.0001), had a promising AUC (0.885) with high sensitivity and
specificity to distinguish CRC patients from NC. Serum ANGPTL2 levels
also discriminated early CRC patients (stage I) from NC (AUC=0.79). High
serum ANGPTL2 was significantly associated with tumor progression such as
larger tumor size (p=0.03), undifferentiated adenocarcinoma (p=0.03),
advanced T stage (p<0.01), peritoneal metastasis (p<0.01) in CRC.
Kaplan-Meier curves revealed that high serum ANGPTL2 was significantly
associated with poor disease free survival (p=0.01) and overall survival
(p=0.03) in CRC. Intriguingly, ANGPTL2 levels in serum from CRC patients
closely correlated with IHC scores of ANGPTL2 expression in matched CRC
tissues (r=0.14, p=0.03).Conclusion: Our study first reports that
overexpression of ANGPTL2 in CRC cells increased malignant potential and
metastasis. Serum ANGPTL2, which might be derived from primary CRC tumor,
was a novel biomarker for diagnosis and prognosis in patients with CRC.

