Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A comprehensive examination of breast cancer risk loci in African
American women


Genome-wide association studies have identified 73 breast cancer risk
variants mainly in European populations. Given considerable differences
in linkage disequilibrium structure between populations of European and
African ancestry, the known risk variants may not be informative for risk
in African populations. In a previous fine-mapping investigation of 19
breast cancer loci, we were able to identify SNPs in 4 regions that
better defined risk associations in African American women. In this study
of breast cancer in African American women (3,016 cases, 2,745 controls),
we tested an additional 54 novel breast cancer risk variants.
Thirty-eight variants (70%) showed an association with breast cancer in
the same direction as previously reported, with eight (15%) replicating
at pGenome-wide association studies have identified 73 breast cancer risk
variants mainly in European populations. Given considerable differences
in linkage disequilibrium structure between populations of European and
African ancestry, the known risk variants may not be informative for risk
in African populations. In a previous fine-mapping investigation of 19
breast cancer loci, we were able to identify SNPs in 4 regions that
better defined risk associations in African American women. In this study
of breast cancer in African American women (3,016 cases, 2,745 controls),
we tested an additional 54 novel breast cancer risk variants.
Thirty-eight variants (70%) showed an association with breast cancer in
the same direction as previously reported, with eight (15%) replicating
at p<0.05. Through fine-mapping, in three regions (1q32, 3p24, 10q25) we
identified variants that better captured associations with overall breast
cancer or estrogen receptor positive disease. We also observed suggestive
associations with variants (at pGenome-wide association studies have
identified 73 breast cancer risk variants mainly in European populations.
Given considerable differences in linkage disequilibrium structure
between populations of European and African ancestry, the known risk
variants may not be informative for risk in African populations. In a
previous fine-mapping investigation of 19 breast cancer loci, we were
able to identify SNPs in 4 regions that better defined risk associations
in African American women. In this study of breast cancer in African
American women (3,016 cases, 2,745 controls), we tested an additional 54
novel breast cancer risk variants. Thirty-eight variants (70%) showed an
association with breast cancer in the same direction as previously
reported, with eight (15%) replicating at p<0.05. Through fine-mapping,
in three regions (1q32, 3p24, 10q25) we identified variants that better
captured associations with overall breast cancer or estrogen receptor
positive disease. We also observed suggestive associations with variants
(at p<510-6) in three separate regions (6q25, 14q13, 22q12) that may
represent novel risk variants, with one variant at the PAX9 locus
replicating in an independent sample (1,657 cases and 2,028 controls of
African ancestry; rs17104923, p=0.057). Directional consistency of
association observed for 65-70% of currently known genetic variants for
breast cancer in women of African ancestry implies a shared functional
common variant at most loci. To validate and enhance the spectrum of
alleles that define associations at the known breast cancer risk loci, as
well as genome-wide, will require even larger collaborative efforts in
women of African ancestry.

