Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Small molecule compound NCI-8 induces mutant p53 degradation via
inhibition of the MDM2-Hsp90 axis


The tumor suppressor p53 prevents cancer development via regulating cell
cycle arrest, cell death, or repair processes. Over 50% of human cancers
harbor mutant p53. Mutations in p53 not only abrogate its tumor
suppressor function, but also endow mutant p53 with a gain-of-function
(GOF), creating a proto-oncogene that contributes to tumorigenesis, tumor
progression and chemotherapeutic resistance. Thus, targeting mutant p53
to restore wild-type p53 pathway signaling is an attractive strategy for
cancer therapy. We previously reported a novel small molecular compound,
NCI-8, which not only restores wild-type p53 signaling, but also depletes
mutant p53 protein (Zhang S, Zhou L, Hong B, et al. Cancer Res 2013;73(8
Suppl):Abstract 2171). In this study, we further elucidate the mechanism
of the small molecular compound NCI-8-mediated degradation of mutant p53
protein. We found that the small molecule NCI-8 induces mutant p53
protein degradation via the MDM2-ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. NCI-8
exposure leads to phosphorylation of p53 at Thr55. Dephosphorylation of
p53 at Thr55 rescues mutant p53 protein from degradation in cells treated
with Apigenin, suggesting that phosphorylation at Thr55 is required for
mutant p53 protein degradation induced by NCI-8. Hsp90 and hsp70 are two
molecular chaperones that stabilize mutant p53 protein by affecting the
MDM2 mediated turnover of mutant p53, therefore, we investigated the
effect of NCI-8 on the MDM2-hsp chaperone axis. We found that less HSP90
but more MDM2 were bound to mutant p53 in cells treated with NCI-8,
suggesting that NCI-8 induces mutant p53 protein degradation through
disturbing the MDM2-hsp chaperone axis. Correlated to the degradation of
mutant p53 protein, the p73 pathway was activated in response to NCI-8
treatment specifically in mutant p53-expressing colorectal cancer cells.
Our results provide a possible mechanism of NCI-8-mediated p73-dependent
restoration of the p53 pathway via mutant p53 protein degradation.

