Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A miRNA signature distinguishing low-grade and high-grade gliomas
shows miR-21 and 210 as promising biomarkers of aggressive phenotype and
prognosis


BACKGROUND. Gliomas account for approximately 80% of all primary
malignant brain tumors and, despite advances in clinical care, remain
still associated with poor prognosis. They are currently classified by
the WHO system in Low Grade Gliomas (LGGs, WHO I, II) and High Grade
Gliomas (HGGs, WHO grade III, IV) based on histological features such as
nuclear atypia, mitotic figures, microvascular proliferation and
necrosis. LGGs and HGGs share several morphological traits and pathways
abnormalities but have a different clinical behaviour. miRNAs have
emerged as key regulators of many biological processes mediating genesis
and dissemination of cancer. Molecular analyses based on miRNA
measurements have shown to be able to better stratify and discriminate
the two tumor types. We hypothesize the comparison of miRNA profile
between LGGs and HGGs may lead to the identification of miRNAs associated
with the most aggressive form, that is GBM (Glioblastoma Multiforme, WHO
IV).MATERIAL AND METHODS. miRNA expression profiling was performed in 8
LGGs, 24 HGGs, and 4 Normal Brain Tissues (NBT) by using the Affymetrix
GeneChip miRNA Array 1.0. Data analysis was performed by Partek Genomic
Suite software, setting a significative p-value 0.01 and a fold change
cutoff of 2. A relative quantification method (RT-qPCR) with standard
curve was used to validate the 22 miRNA signature resulted by array
analysis. The prognostic performance of the 13 validated miRNAs was
estimated by using the Tumor Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA). RESULTS. miRNA
profiling identified 80 miRNAs differentially expressed in LGGs vs NBT
and 71 in HGGs vs NBT. A panel of 22 miRNAs clearly differentiated HGGs
and LGGs. RT-qPCR assay confirmed differential expression for 13 out of
the 22 miRNAs in LGG vs HGG. In addition, 6 among our 13-miRNA signature
(miR-21, miR-210, miR-22, miR-155, miR-223, miR-219-2-3p) were found to
be significantly associated with GBM molecular subtypes when compared on
TCGA dataset. Moreover miR-21 and miR-210 show correlation with worse
overall survival in both univariate and multivariate Cox Regression
analysis (HR 1.19 95% CI 1.008-1.406 p=0.04; and 1.18 95%C 1.018-1.375
p=0.03).CONCLUSIONS. We show the comparison of LGGs and HGGs profiles is
able to identify miRNAs associated with invasive phenotype. Our results
support a direct involvement of miR-21 and miR-210 in glioma progression,
suggesting they may represent promising targets for new therapeutic
approaches in gliomas.

