Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel drug suppresses proliferation of lung cancer cells via
increasing the CBL activity and down-regulating epidermal growth factor
receptor


Aberrant epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) signaling is one of the
most critical oncogenic pathways in NSCLC that may trigger the tumor
progression. Thus, how to suppress the EGFR downstream signaling cascade
or to reduce the EGFR expression level has long been considered an
important therapeutic approach for cancer interventions. Here, we found a
regulatory mechanism by which the degradation of EGFR is enhanced by a
novel promising drug, compound 22. First, the exposure to compound 22
induced cell death via apoptosis in lung cancer cell lines, including
EGFR wild type A549 as well as EGFR mutant PC9 and H1975 cells. Compound
22 decreased the EGFR protein level in a dose-dependent manner and
facilitated dephosphorylation of its downstream targets, including AKT
and ERK, both of which play a critical role for cancer cell survival.
Second, we observed that compound 22 induced EGFR degradation through
proteasome degradation in the cycloheximide chase plus MG132 assay.
Additionally, compound 22 increased the CBL (the ubiquitin E3
ligase)-mediated ubiquitination of EGFR, which was accompanied by the
enhancement of Y1045 phosphorylation in the EGFR kinase domain. Overall,
these pieces of evidence suggest that compound 22 is a novel class of
anticancer drug which is able to inhibit the TKI-resistant NSCLC cells by
inducing the degradation of EGFR.

