Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A meta-analysis of lifestyle factors with MPO and GSTM1 human
genes in lung cancer prevention


Purpose: Lung cancer (LC) is a worldwide public health problem and a
leading cause of death in both men and women. Its development is
attributed to epigenetic factors, including smoking, diet, and occupation
that can be modified. Glutathione S-transferase that belongs to the mu
class (GSTM1) and myeloperoxidase (MPO) gene polymorphisms have been
cumulating in the literature, associating lifestyle factors and LC
development. Thus, a meta-analysis was conducted to examine the
associations of lifestyle factors with GSTM1 and MPO genes for LC
prevention.Procedure: Literature searcheswere completed by searching at
three different times using keyword related to human GSTM1, MPO, and LC.
Quality of the studies were rated based the standards of Quality of
Reporting of Meta-analysis. Inter-rater evaluation on data coding was
completed to ensure data accuracy. Pooled relative risks (RR) was
computed to determine the association of factors with LC.Findings:
Preliminary analyses included 28,831 cases and 35,069 controls
associating smoking with LC in 98 studies; with 5,938 cases versus 6,668
controls nested in 20 studies with MPO gene counts, and 7,101 cases and
9,396 controls nested in 32 studies with GSTM1 gene counts respectively.
Smoking status was associated with increased LC risk in all populations
(RR = 1.40, p Purpose: Lung cancer (LC) is a worldwide public health
problem and a leading cause of death in both men and women. Its
development is attributed to epigenetic factors, including smoking, diet,
and occupation that can be modified. Glutathione S-transferase that
belongs to the mu class (GSTM1) and myeloperoxidase (MPO) gene
polymorphisms have been cumulating in the literature, associating
lifestyle factors and LC development. Thus, a meta-analysis was conducted
to examine the associations of lifestyle factors with GSTM1 and MPO genes
for LC prevention.Procedure: Literature searcheswere completed by
searching at three different times using keyword related to human GSTM1,
MPO, and LC. Quality of the studies were rated based the standards of
Quality of Reporting of Meta-analysis. Inter-rater evaluation on data
coding was completed to ensure data accuracy. Pooled relative risks (RR)
was computed to determine the association of factors with LC.Findings:
Preliminary analyses included 28,831 cases and 35,069 controls
associating smoking with LC in 98 studies; with 5,938 cases versus 6,668
controls nested in 20 studies with MPO gene counts, and 7,101 cases and
9,396 controls nested in 32 studies with GSTM1 gene counts respectively.
Smoking status was associated with increased LC risk in all populations
(RR = 1.40, p < 0.0001), and for subgroups of Whites (46 studies), Asians
(38 studies) and Euramerican mixed race groups (12 studies) (all p
Purpose: Lung cancer (LC) is a worldwide public health problem and a
leading cause of death in both men and women. Its development is
attributed to epigenetic factors, including smoking, diet, and occupation
that can be modified. Glutathione S-transferase that belongs to the mu
class (GSTM1) and myeloperoxidase (MPO) gene polymorphisms have been
cumulating in the literature, associating lifestyle factors and LC
development. Thus, a meta-analysis was conducted to examine the
associations of lifestyle factors with GSTM1 and MPO genes for LC
prevention.Procedure: Literature searcheswere completed by searching at
three different times using keyword related to human GSTM1, MPO, and LC.
Quality of the studies were rated based the standards of Quality of
Reporting of Meta-analysis. Inter-rater evaluation on data coding was
completed to ensure data accuracy. Pooled relative risks (RR) was
computed to determine the association of factors with LC.Findings:
Preliminary analyses included 28,831 cases and 35,069 controls
associating smoking with LC in 98 studies; with 5,938 cases versus 6,668
controls nested in 20 studies with MPO gene counts, and 7,101 cases and
9,396 controls nested in 32 studies with GSTM1 gene counts respectively.
Smoking status was associated with increased LC risk in all populations
(RR = 1.40, p < 0.0001), and for subgroups of Whites (46 studies), Asians
(38 studies) and Euramerican mixed race groups (12 studies) (all p <
0.0001); whereas, no smoking status was protective for LC prevention in
all race subgroups (P Purpose: Lung cancer (LC) is a worldwide public
health problem and a leading cause of death in both men and women. Its
development is attributed to epigenetic factors, including smoking, diet,
and occupation that can be modified. Glutathione S-transferase that
belongs to the mu class (GSTM1) and myeloperoxidase (MPO) gene
polymorphisms have been cumulating in the literature, associating
lifestyle factors and LC development. Thus, a meta-analysis was conducted
to examine the associations of lifestyle factors with GSTM1 and MPO genes
for LC prevention.Procedure: Literature searcheswere completed by
searching at three different times using keyword related to human GSTM1,
MPO, and LC. Quality of the studies were rated based the standards of
Quality of Reporting of Meta-analysis. Inter-rater evaluation on data
coding was completed to ensure data accuracy. Pooled relative risks (RR)
was computed to determine the association of factors with LC.Findings:
Preliminary analyses included 28,831 cases and 35,069 controls
associating smoking with LC in 98 studies; with 5,938 cases versus 6,668
controls nested in 20 studies with MPO gene counts, and 7,101 cases and
9,396 controls nested in 32 studies with GSTM1 gene counts respectively.
Smoking status was associated with increased LC risk in all populations
(RR = 1.40, p < 0.0001), and for subgroups of Whites (46 studies), Asians
(38 studies) and Euramerican mixed race groups (12 studies) (all p <
0.0001); whereas, no smoking status was protective for LC prevention in
all race subgroups (P < 0.0001). GSTM1 present type as compared to null
type was more protective in nonsmoking subjects (RR = 0.35, p Purpose:
Lung cancer (LC) is a worldwide public health problem and a leading cause
of death in both men and women. Its development is attributed to
epigenetic factors, including smoking, diet, and occupation that can be
modified. Glutathione S-transferase that belongs to the mu class (GSTM1)
and myeloperoxidase (MPO) gene polymorphisms have been cumulating in the
literature, associating lifestyle factors and LC development. Thus, a
meta-analysis was conducted to examine the associations of lifestyle
factors with GSTM1 and MPO genes for LC prevention.Procedure: Literature
searcheswere completed by searching at three different times using
keyword related to human GSTM1, MPO, and LC. Quality of the studies were
rated based the standards of Quality of Reporting of Meta-analysis.
Inter-rater evaluation on data coding was completed to ensure data
accuracy. Pooled relative risks (RR) was computed to determine the
association of factors with LC.Findings: Preliminary analyses included
28,831 cases and 35,069 controls associating smoking with LC in 98
studies; with 5,938 cases versus 6,668 controls nested in 20 studies with
MPO gene counts, and 7,101 cases and 9,396 controls nested in 32 studies
with GSTM1 gene counts respectively. Smoking status was associated with
increased LC risk in all populations (RR = 1.40, p < 0.0001), and for
subgroups of Whites (46 studies), Asians (38 studies) and Euramerican
mixed race groups (12 studies) (all p < 0.0001); whereas, no smoking
status was protective for LC prevention in all race subgroups (P <
0.0001). GSTM1 present type as compared to null type was more protective
in nonsmoking subjects (RR = 0.35, p < 0.05 vs. RR = 0.45, p Purpose:
Lung cancer (LC) is a worldwide public health problem and a leading cause
of death in both men and women. Its development is attributed to
epigenetic factors, including smoking, diet, and occupation that can be
modified. Glutathione S-transferase that belongs to the mu class (GSTM1)
and myeloperoxidase (MPO) gene polymorphisms have been cumulating in the
literature, associating lifestyle factors and LC development. Thus, a
meta-analysis was conducted to examine the associations of lifestyle
factors with GSTM1 and MPO genes for LC prevention.Procedure: Literature
searcheswere completed by searching at three different times using
keyword related to human GSTM1, MPO, and LC. Quality of the studies were
rated based the standards of Quality of Reporting of Meta-analysis.
Inter-rater evaluation on data coding was completed to ensure data
accuracy. Pooled relative risks (RR) was computed to determine the
association of factors with LC.Findings: Preliminary analyses included
28,831 cases and 35,069 controls associating smoking with LC in 98
studies; with 5,938 cases versus 6,668 controls nested in 20 studies with
MPO gene counts, and 7,101 cases and 9,396 controls nested in 32 studies
with GSTM1 gene counts respectively. Smoking status was associated with
increased LC risk in all populations (RR = 1.40, p < 0.0001), and for
subgroups of Whites (46 studies), Asians (38 studies) and Euramerican
mixed race groups (12 studies) (all p < 0.0001); whereas, no smoking
status was protective for LC prevention in all race subgroups (P <
0.0001). GSTM1 present type as compared to null type was more protective
in nonsmoking subjects (RR = 0.35, p < 0.05 vs. RR = 0.45, p < 0.0001)
and smoking subjects (RR = 1.25 vs. RR - 1.42, both p Purpose: Lung
cancer (LC) is a worldwide public health problem and a leading cause of
death in both men and women. Its development is attributed to epigenetic
factors, including smoking, diet, and occupation that can be modified.
Glutathione S-transferase that belongs to the mu class (GSTM1) and
myeloperoxidase (MPO) gene polymorphisms have been cumulating in the
literature, associating lifestyle factors and LC development. Thus, a
meta-analysis was conducted to examine the associations of lifestyle
factors with GSTM1 and MPO genes for LC prevention.Procedure: Literature
searcheswere completed by searching at three different times using
keyword related to human GSTM1, MPO, and LC. Quality of the studies were
rated based the standards of Quality of Reporting of Meta-analysis.
Inter-rater evaluation on data coding was completed to ensure data
accuracy. Pooled relative risks (RR) was computed to determine the
association of factors with LC.Findings: Preliminary analyses included
28,831 cases and 35,069 controls associating smoking with LC in 98
studies; with 5,938 cases versus 6,668 controls nested in 20 studies with
MPO gene counts, and 7,101 cases and 9,396 controls nested in 32 studies
with GSTM1 gene counts respectively. Smoking status was associated with
increased LC risk in all populations (RR = 1.40, p < 0.0001), and for
subgroups of Whites (46 studies), Asians (38 studies) and Euramerican
mixed race groups (12 studies) (all p < 0.0001); whereas, no smoking
status was protective for LC prevention in all race subgroups (P <
0.0001). GSTM1 present type as compared to null type was more protective
in nonsmoking subjects (RR = 0.35, p < 0.05 vs. RR = 0.45, p < 0.0001)
and smoking subjects (RR = 1.25 vs. RR - 1.42, both p < 0.0001). Among
the studies with MPO gene counts, nonsmoking status was protective (RR =
0.49) and smoking status increased risk for LC (RR = 1.29) (both p
Purpose: Lung cancer (LC) is a worldwide public health problem and a
leading cause of death in both men and women. Its development is
attributed to epigenetic factors, including smoking, diet, and occupation
that can be modified. Glutathione S-transferase that belongs to the mu
class (GSTM1) and myeloperoxidase (MPO) gene polymorphisms have been
cumulating in the literature, associating lifestyle factors and LC
development. Thus, a meta-analysis was conducted to examine the
associations of lifestyle factors with GSTM1 and MPO genes for LC
prevention.Procedure: Literature searcheswere completed by searching at
three different times using keyword related to human GSTM1, MPO, and LC.
Quality of the studies were rated based the standards of Quality of
Reporting of Meta-analysis. Inter-rater evaluation on data coding was
completed to ensure data accuracy. Pooled relative risks (RR) was
computed to determine the association of factors with LC.Findings:
Preliminary analyses included 28,831 cases and 35,069 controls
associating smoking with LC in 98 studies; with 5,938 cases versus 6,668
controls nested in 20 studies with MPO gene counts, and 7,101 cases and
9,396 controls nested in 32 studies with GSTM1 gene counts respectively.
Smoking status was associated with increased LC risk in all populations
(RR = 1.40, p < 0.0001), and for subgroups of Whites (46 studies), Asians
(38 studies) and Euramerican mixed race groups (12 studies) (all p <
0.0001); whereas, no smoking status was protective for LC prevention in
all race subgroups (P < 0.0001). GSTM1 present type as compared to null
type was more protective in nonsmoking subjects (RR = 0.35, p < 0.05 vs.
RR = 0.45, p < 0.0001) and smoking subjects (RR = 1.25 vs. RR - 1.42,
both p < 0.0001). Among the studies with MPO gene counts, nonsmoking
status was protective (RR = 0.49) and smoking status increased risk for
LC (RR = 1.29) (both p < 0.0001); with AA subtype in nonsmoking subjects
being protective, and GG subtype in smoking subjects increased risk for
LC (both p Purpose: Lung cancer (LC) is a worldwide public health problem
and a leading cause of death in both men and women. Its development is
attributed to epigenetic factors, including smoking, diet, and occupation
that can be modified. Glutathione S-transferase that belongs to the mu
class (GSTM1) and myeloperoxidase (MPO) gene polymorphisms have been
cumulating in the literature, associating lifestyle factors and LC
development. Thus, a meta-analysis was conducted to examine the
associations of lifestyle factors with GSTM1 and MPO genes for LC
prevention.Procedure: Literature searcheswere completed by searching at
three different times using keyword related to human GSTM1, MPO, and LC.
Quality of the studies were rated based the standards of Quality of
Reporting of Meta-analysis. Inter-rater evaluation on data coding was
completed to ensure data accuracy. Pooled relative risks (RR) was
computed to determine the association of factors with LC.Findings:
Preliminary analyses included 28,831 cases and 35,069 controls
associating smoking with LC in 98 studies; with 5,938 cases versus 6,668
controls nested in 20 studies with MPO gene counts, and 7,101 cases and
9,396 controls nested in 32 studies with GSTM1 gene counts respectively.
Smoking status was associated with increased LC risk in all populations
(RR = 1.40, p < 0.0001), and for subgroups of Whites (46 studies), Asians
(38 studies) and Euramerican mixed race groups (12 studies) (all p <
0.0001); whereas, no smoking status was protective for LC prevention in
all race subgroups (P < 0.0001). GSTM1 present type as compared to null
type was more protective in nonsmoking subjects (RR = 0.35, p < 0.05 vs.
RR = 0.45, p < 0.0001) and smoking subjects (RR = 1.25 vs. RR - 1.42,
both p < 0.0001). Among the studies with MPO gene counts, nonsmoking
status was protective (RR = 0.49) and smoking status increased risk for
LC (RR = 1.29) (both p < 0.0001); with AA subtype in nonsmoking subjects
being protective, and GG subtype in smoking subjects increased risk for
LC (both p < 0.05). Low vegetable intakes were associated with increased
LC risk (RR = 1.26, P Purpose: Lung cancer (LC) is a worldwide public
health problem and a leading cause of death in both men and women. Its
development is attributed to epigenetic factors, including smoking, diet,
and occupation that can be modified. Glutathione S-transferase that
belongs to the mu class (GSTM1) and myeloperoxidase (MPO) gene
polymorphisms have been cumulating in the literature, associating
lifestyle factors and LC development. Thus, a meta-analysis was conducted
to examine the associations of lifestyle factors with GSTM1 and MPO genes
for LC prevention.Procedure: Literature searcheswere completed by
searching at three different times using keyword related to human GSTM1,
MPO, and LC. Quality of the studies were rated based the standards of
Quality of Reporting of Meta-analysis. Inter-rater evaluation on data
coding was completed to ensure data accuracy. Pooled relative risks (RR)
was computed to determine the association of factors with LC.Findings:
Preliminary analyses included 28,831 cases and 35,069 controls
associating smoking with LC in 98 studies; with 5,938 cases versus 6,668
controls nested in 20 studies with MPO gene counts, and 7,101 cases and
9,396 controls nested in 32 studies with GSTM1 gene counts respectively.
Smoking status was associated with increased LC risk in all populations
(RR = 1.40, p < 0.0001), and for subgroups of Whites (46 studies), Asians
(38 studies) and Euramerican mixed race groups (12 studies) (all p <
0.0001); whereas, no smoking status was protective for LC prevention in
all race subgroups (P < 0.0001). GSTM1 present type as compared to null
type was more protective in nonsmoking subjects (RR = 0.35, p < 0.05 vs.
RR = 0.45, p < 0.0001) and smoking subjects (RR = 1.25 vs. RR - 1.42,
both p < 0.0001). Among the studies with MPO gene counts, nonsmoking
status was protective (RR = 0.49) and smoking status increased risk for
LC (RR = 1.29) (both p < 0.0001); with AA subtype in nonsmoking subjects
being protective, and GG subtype in smoking subjects increased risk for
LC (both p < 0.05). Low vegetable intakes were associated with increased
LC risk (RR = 1.26, P < 0.05) in 7 studies, and included fiber intake,
cruciferous vegetables or any vegetable intake.Conclusion: Following the
meta-analysis of these studies, it can be recommended that primary
epigenetic prevention of LC could include environment free from tobacco
smoking and having a diet rich in isothiocyanates or vegetable intake.
These preventive measures are important in attenuating oxidative stress
for healthy methylation pathways to reduce the risk factors of LC.

