Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MiR-22 is frequently down-regulated in medulloblastomas, and
inhibits cell proliferation via the novel target PAPST1


Medulloblastoma (WHO grade IV) is the most frequent malignant CNS tumor
in children. MicroRNAs (miRNAs, miRs) are small non-coding RNAs that
target protein-coding mRNAs that play roles in a variety of cellular
processes through regulating multiple target genes. In the present study,
we analyzed miR-22 expression and its effect on cell proliferation and
apoptosis in medulloblastomas. Quantitative RT-PCR revealed significantly
lower expression of miR-22 in 19/25 (76%) medulloblastomas, D341, DAOY
and ONS-76 medulloblastoma cells and primary cultured medulloblastomas
cells, compared to normal cerebellum. Forced expression of miR-22 by
lentiviral vector transfection reduced cell proliferation and induced
apoptosis in DAOY and ONS-76 cells. DAOY cells with miR-22 overexpression
in nude mice yielded tumors smaller than those originated from control
DAOY cells. Microarray analysis in DAOY cells with forced miR-22
expression showed significant changes in expression profiles; PAPST1
being the most significantly (10-fold) down-regulated gene. Quantitative
RT-PCR revealed PAPST1 up-regulation in 18/25 (72%) medulloblastomas.
Furthermore, the results of luciferase reporter assay in ONS-76 cells
suggested that miR-22 directly targets the PAPST1 gene. Thus, frequently
down-regulated miR-22 expression is associated with cell proliferation in
medulloblastomas, at least in part via PAPST1, which is a novel target of
miR-22.

