Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Quantitative Textural Analysis (QTA) in CT imaging: Identifying
markers for genetic instability and overall survival in cohort of
previously treated metastatic pancreatic cancer (mPC)


PURPOSE. To explore the use of helical CT-derived Quantitative Textural
Analysis (QTA) parameters in identifying elevated rates of
intrachromosomal copy number aberrations in mPC and secondarily in
revealing post-treatment QTA prognostic markers.MATERIALS AND METHODS.
Metastatic tumor sites were biopsied and molecularly profiled in a cohort
patients with mPC (n=35). 85% of the cohort had 1-3 previous treatment
regimens, and the remaining 15% had 4-6. Intrachromosal copy number were
assessed by CGH in tumor specimens, and patients were treated with
commercially available cytotoxic regimens based on these individual
molecular profiling results1. Patients with available pre-biopsy
transverse abdominal portal-venous phase CT scans were obtained for
retrospective analysis (n=17). Analysis of pre-biopsy pancreas imaging
was performed by drawing regions of interest around the primary pancreas
adenocarcinoma (n=15) and the normal pancreas tissue when available
(n=12). Two patients did not have any quantifiable imaging due to surgery
or local structural obfuscation and were not included in our cohort.
There were 9 males and 6 females all with stage IV cancer from 34 - 71
years old (median 59). QTA parameters were derived using the TexRAD
platform at texture filtering densities of medium (3 pixels) and coarse
(5 pixels). There values were compared to intrachromosomal copy number
aberrations per tumor and overall survival post-treatment using a
Spearman's rank correlation coefficient.RESULTS. Intrachromosomal copy
number aberrations (median: 14; range: 5 - 52) were negatively correlated
with the kurtosis value of the primary tumor mass (median: -0.146; range:
-0.810 - 0.633) using medium texture filtering (p = 0.034, n = 15).
Secondary analysis of the normal pancreas with coarse texture filtering
yielded a correlation between reduced overall survival time
post-treatment and increasing entropy (p = 0.0014, n = 12). Using entropy
as a cutoff value (median: 4.165; range 2.686 - 4.891), median overall
survival was greater in the entropy 4.165 group (6.1 v 2.0 months,
respectively; hazards ratio [HR] = 11.5; 95% CI 1.36 - 97.4; p = 0.025, n
= 12). Median survival for the entire cohort was 120 days and ranged from
1 day to 372 days post-treatment.CONCLUSION. This exploratory study with
admittedly limited sample size raises interesting questions about the use
of QTA parameters as diagnostic tools and/or biopsy adjuncts in assessing
pancreatic adenocarcinoma susceptibility to commercially available
cytotoxics. Secondarily, entropy, a potential marker of heterogeneity and
inflammation in the normal pancreas, represents an intriguing possibility
for gauging prognosis in mPC. (Clinical trial supported by a grant from
the SU2C/AACR-pancreatic dream team)REFERENCES. 1. Ramanathan RK et al
AACR Annual Meeting. LB-221. 2012.

