Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A mitochondrial switch promotes tumor metastasis


Cancers evolve a subpopulation of tumor cells that metabolically rely on
glycolysis uncoupled from oxidative phosphorylation irrespectively of
oxygen availability (aerobic glycolysis). Given that most metastases are
abnormally avid for glucose (which is the rationale for their clinical
detection using FDG-PET) and because clinical data show a positive
correlation between lactate production and tumor metastasis, we reasoned
that cells performing aerobic glycolysis could constitute a population of
metastatic progenitor cells that would remain glycolytic in the blood
stream. We found a different metabolic phenotype, though. Indeed, using
serial rounds of in vitro selection of highly invasive tumor cells
(starting from wild-type SiHa human cervix adenocarcinoma cells) and in
vivo selection of supermetastatic tumor cells (starting from B16-F10
mouse melanoma cells), we identified a mitochondrial switch corresponding
to an overload of the TCA cycle with preserved mitochondrial functions
(including ATP production) but increased mitochondrial superoxide
production. The switch provided a metastatic advantage which was
phenocopied by moderate OXPHOS inhibition associated with mild
mitochondrial superoxide increase. Thus, two different events, OXPHOS
overload or moderate OXPHOS inhibition, promote superoxide-dependent
tumor cell migration, invasion, clonogenicity, and metastasis;
demonstrating the central role of mitochondrial superoxide generation in
the pathogenesis of metastasis. Consequently, we report that
mitochondria-specific superoxide scavenging (using mitoTEMPO or mitoQ)
inhibits metastatic dissemination from primary mouse and human tumors,
which opens a new avenue for the therapeutic prevention of tumor
metastasis.

