Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A regulatory variant in CYP2E1 affects the risk of lung squamous
cell carcinoma


Background: Cytochrome P450 2E1 (CYP2E1), an ethanol-inducible enzyme,
has been shown to metabolically activate various carcinogens, which is
critical for the development of cancers. It has demonstrated that CYP2E1
polymorphisms alter the transcriptional activity of the gene. However,
studies on the association between CYP2E1 PstI polymorphism and non-small
cell lung cancer have reported conflicting results. Thus, the gain of the
present study was to investigate whether CYP2E1 PstI polymorphism is
associated with the development of non-small cell lung cancer in Chinese
population.Method: A case-control study was conducted in which CYP2E1
PstI polymorphism was analyzed in 526 Chinese patients with non-small
cell lung cancer and 526 age-matched healthy controls by PCR-RFLP. Odds
ratios were estimated by multivariate logistic regression.Result: For
CYP2E1 PstI polymorphism, C allele carriers (OR=0.67; CI=0.51-0.87;
P=0.002) was associated with a decreased risk of non-small cell lung
cancer when compared with GG homozygotes. In the group analyses by
pathological types, for lung SCC and other types the ORs of the C allele
carriers were (OR=0.60; CI=0.41-0.88; P=0.009) and (OR=0.54;
CI=0.30-0.99; P=0.045), respectively. In the group analyses by smoking
status, there was a significant association among nonsmokers (OR=0.57;
CI=0.40-0.81; P=0.002), but not smokers. In the group analyses by TNM
stage, there was no significance between CYP2E1 PstI polymorphism and the
grade of non-small cell lung cancer.Conclusion: CYP2E1 PstI polymorphism
is associated with decreased risk of development of non-small cell lung
cancer and lung SCC or other types in Chinese patients.Key Words: lung
cancer; CYP2E1; gene polymorphism; susceptibility; genetic variant

