Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ERG regulation of intracrine androgen production and
castration-resistant prostate cancer progression


Introduction and Objective: Intratumoral androgen synthesis in prostate
cancer (PC) contributes to the development of castration-resistant
prostate cancer (CRPC). Several enzymes responsible for androgen
biosynthesis have been shown to be overexpressed in CRPC, thus,
contributing to CRPC in a castrated environment. However, little is known
regarding their mode of regulation and expression in this context. The
TMPRSS2-ERG transcription factor has been shown to be present in primary
PC tumors as well as CRPC tumors; however, its biological function
contributing to the development CRPC in the context of intratumoral
androgen synthesis is not known. We hypothesize that TMPRSS2-ERG fusions
regulate androgen biosynthetic enzyme (ABE) gene expression and the
production of androgens, which contributes to the development of
CRPC.Methods: We used a variety of methods including lentiviral knockdown
and overexpression of ERG, qPCR, Western blot, ChIP-PCR, and Mass
Spectrometry.Results: We found that (a) shRNA knockdown of ERG in VCaP PC
cells significantly reduces the expression of ABE's AKR1C3, HSD17B6, and
HSD17B4; (b) overexpression of truncated ERG or wild-type ERG in LNCaP PC
cells significantly increases the expression of AKR1C3 and HSD17B6; (c)
ERG binds to the AKR1C3 gene in VCaP PC cells; and (d) DHT synthesis is
reduced in VCaP shERG cells treated with 5-Androstanedione, a DHT
precursor metabolite, compared to VCaP shScrambled controls.Conclusions:
These data suggest that AKR1C3 catalyzes the biochemical reduction of
5-Androstanedione to DHT in PC cells, and that ERG may regulate this step
through upregulation of AKR1C3 expression. Elucidation of ERG regulation
of ABEs in CRPC may help to stratify TMPRSS2-ERG fusion-positive PC
patients in the clinic for anti-hormone driven therapies. Additionally,
not all PC tumors express CYP17A1 enzyme, therefore this study emphasizes
the importance of investigating ABEs other than CYP17A1, such as AKR1C3
and HSD17B6. In summary, this study addresses alternative ABE drug
targets as well as possible drug resistance modes in PC treatment.

