Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: COX-2 induce mediated multidrug resistance by activating JNK
signal transduction pathway in colorectal cancer


Chemotherapy is an important therapeutic option for most cancer patients;
however, drug resistance causes the failure of chemotherapy and becomes a
major obstacle for successful chemotherapy. The overexpression of P-gp
has been associated with the resistance to a wide range of anticancer
drugs. In the present study, drug-sensitive and multidrug resistant MDR
colon carcinoma cell lines were used to examine the role of JNK signaling
pathway in P-gp-mediated MDR associated with COX-2. We have found that
sp600125, a JNK inhibitor or NS-398, a COX-2 inhibitor, reduced the
degree of MDR in MDR cells. This phenomenon was accompanied by a
significant decrease in gene level of ABCB1 and protein level of P-gp in
MDR cells. In contrast, addition of a JNK inhibitor had no significant
effect on the expression of COX-2. Interestingly, inhibition of COX-2
activity led to a decreased level of p-c-Jun at Ser63/73 due to JNK
activation. In addition, there is an overexpression of p-c-Jun in MDR
cells transfected with recombinant vector pGL3-Basic-COX-2 promoter.
Moreover, the intracellular vincristine accumulation significantly
increased with treatment of sp600125, or NS-398. In conclusion, our study
has provided the first direct evidence that COX-2 induced up-regulation
of P-gp in MDR cells, which was associated with an enhanced activity of
the c-Jun phosphorylation at Ser63/73. Our findings may facilitate the
development of novel antitumor drugs that are more effective against both
chemosensitive and MDR cells.Note: This abstract was not presented at the
meeting.

