Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Overexpression of chromosome 3q26-29 miRNAs in squamous cell
carcinoma of the lung


The amplification of the distal portion of chromosome 3q in lung cancer
is a major signature of neoplastic transformation, particularly in the
squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) of the lung. A number of potential drivers
in the 3q amplicon have been identified and are proposed to contribute to
the development of lung SCC. miRNAs have emerged as a new class of small,
non-coding RNAs that regulate gene expression and might act as integral
parts of the molecular architecture of oncogene and tumor suppressor
networks in human cancer, including non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
miR 1224-5p, 1248 and 944 are located at 3q amplicon and overexpressed in
50%, 26% and 53% of 30 primary SCCs when compared to normal tissues. The
overexpression of these miRNAs was further validated in 237 TCGA lung SCC
samples compared with 35 normal tissues (p=0.007, 1.18E-16 and 7.71E-20,
respectively). The expression of the three miRNAs was higher in lung SCC
compared to lung adenocarcinomas (p=8.19E-05, 1.04E-33 and 3.37E-95,
respectively), suggesting unique roles of these miRNAs in the lung SCC
development. Using miRNA mRNA target prediction tools (miRANDA and
TargetScan) and in the combination with a literature search, we found
RUNX1T1 and SMAD4 were candidate tumor suppressor gene target for
miRNA-1224-5p and miRNA-1248. Downregulation of RUNX1T1 and SMAD4 were
confirmed in TCGA lung SCC dataset. Using real-time RT-PCR, we found that
the same three miRNAs 1224-5p, 1248 and 944 are overexpressed in 3q
amplified lung SCC cell lines H520 and HCC95. When miRNA inhibitors were
used to repress the expression of miR-1224-5p or miR-1248 in H520, we
found that RUNX1T1 and SMAD4 protein expression levels were increased,
suggesting that these tumor suppressor genes are regulated by miR-1224-5p
or miR-1248. Lastly, knockdown of miR-1224-5p or miR-1248 using miRNA
inhibitors led to 35-60% growth inhibition in H520 and HCC95 cells.
Together, these results indicate potential roles for miR-1245-5p and 1248
in regulating cell proliferation by directly targeting tumor suppressor
genes RUNX1T1 or SMAD4 in lung SCC. This work provides, for the first
time, evidence for overexpression of miRNAs at the 3q26-29 amplicon that
might be implicated in the oncogenesis of lung SCC. The work is supported
by the NIH Grant R01 CA102353 to PPM and Lung Cancer Research Foundation
grant (2011) to JQ.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

