Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Imatinib induces expression of Bim and apoptosis in chronic
myelogenous leukemia cells via p38/H2AX pathway


H2AX is a novel human tumor suppressor protein and plays an important
role in apoptosis of cancer cells. Increasing published data indicate
that H2AX phosphorylation (Ser139) contributes to its regulation of
cancer cell apoptosis. Thus, charactering the mechanisms and signaling
pathways involved in H2AX phosphorylation (Ser139) will certainly provide
better understanding on H2AX function in cancer cells. Our previous
report showed that caspase-3/Mst1 pathway regulates phosphorylation of
H2AX at Ser139 in chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) cells. Recently we
found another pathway which regulates H2AX phosphorylation (Ser139) in
CML cells. When the CML cells were subjected to imatinib treatment, MAPK
family member ERK1/2 activity was inhibited, but p38 activity was
increased, another member JNK1/2 had no response. Then we used p38
inhibitor SB202190 and siRNA against p38 to block p38 activation and
observed that H2AX phosphorylation and apoptosis of CML cells was
concurrently inhibited. Our results also showed that inhibition of
MSK1/MSK2 did not affect H2AX phosphorylation (Ser139), although the p38
and ERK1/2 downstream MSK1/MSK2 could be activated by imatinib in CML
cells. Overall, these data confirmed that p38 signaling pathway is also
required for H2AX phosphorylation (Ser139) in CML cells. Our further
evidences indicated that inhibition of H2AX phosphorylation (Ser139)
regulated by p38 during apoptotic induction with imatinib suppressed the
expression of apoptosis-related gene Bim. Taken together, these data
demonstrated that p38/H2AX pathway regulates Bim expression and
subsequent apoptosis in CML cells.

