Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovery of a novel carcinoma-associated EF hand containing
protein by mining the dark matter of the human proteome


The human genome contains thousands of novel and uncharacterized
proteins. These unknown genes are difficult to mine due to lack of
adequate information. Hence, they remain largely untapped. Reasoning that
new druggable targets for cancer can be discovered from these
uncharacterized proteins, we have developed a protocol to mine these
proteins for cancer relevance. Using various cancer-related databases, we
have developed a database of uncharacterized ORF proteins. Numerous ORFs
from this database offer druggable targets. To develop a proof of concept
for mining these targets, we have chosen one target, C1ORF87 for detailed
characterization. The C1ORF87 was analyzed using bioinformatics
approaches for mRNA and protein expression, SNPs, LOH, protein motifs and
domains and for gene network interactions. We have identified the C1ORF87
gene as a calcium binding protein with an EF-Hand motif. The EF-hand
motifs are present in numerous calcium binding proteins, which exert a
complex function in tumor growth and suppression. We show that the
C1ORF87 gene is down-regulated in the lung and breast carcinomas and
up-regulated in the liver carcinomas. Hematopoietic and neuronal tumors
were largely negative. Its expression in select normal tissues suggests
that the C1ORF87 may be a putative druggable gene. Our results suggest
that the C1ORF 87 gene may play a significant role in specific
carcinomas. We further demonstrate that the dark matter of the human
proteome can be readily mined to predict putative cancer targets.
Detailed characterization of the C1ORF87 gene will be presented.

