Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of Glypican-3 (GPC3) on tumor progression of the human
mammary gland


We have previously shown that the reexpression of Glypican-3 (GPC3), a
proteoglycan downregulated in breast cancer, leads to the impairment of
the in vivo metastatic capacity of the murine LM3 mammary adenocarcinoma
cells. On the basis of clinical and translational potential of GPC3, the
aim of this work was to assess whether GPC3 acts as a metastasis
suppressor in human cells. So, we generated a preclinical breast cancer
cell model. We chose MCF-7 cell line (poorly-metastatic, GPC3 +) and
MDA-MB231 cell line (metastatic, GPC3 -) to be genetically modified.GPC3
expression was blocked in MCF-7 cells by siRNA. We demonstrated that
MCF-7-shGPC3 cells proliferate faster than controls (Population doubling
time (h): 72 -shGPC3 vs 87 -shNC). In agreement, silencing of GPC3
increased clonogenic capacity (Colony number: 130 -shGPC3 vs 37 -shNC).
No differences were found in viability. By wound healing assay we
determined that -shGPC3 cells are significantly more motile than controls
(Wound coverage (%): 15 -shGPC3 vs 2 -shNC). GPC3 blocking induced an
increase in homotypic MCF-7 cell adhesion (Cellular aggregation (%): 56
-shGPC3 vs 21 -shNC). We performed an in vivo tumor growth assay, by sc
inoculation of MCF-7 engineered cells into nude mice. MCF-7-shGPC3
tumor-bearing mice showed shorter tumor latency than controls (Md [Rg]
(days): 30 [30-44] -shGPC3 vs 49 [30-71] -shNC), and an increase in
tumorigenic ability (Tumorigenicity (%): 80 -shGPC3 vs 60 -shNC), as well
as in the tumor growth rate (mm3/day: 262.2 -shGPC3 vs 0.20.02).
Spontaneous metastases were not detected in any of the MCF-7
tumor-bearing mice.On the other hand, GPC3 was reexpressed in MDA-MB231
cells by lentiviral infection. Surprisingly, GPC3 reexpressing cells
showed a higher proliferation rate (Population doubling time (h): 24
-GPC3 vs 45 -vector), but their clonogenic capacity was less (Colony
number: 8 -GPC3 vs 40 -vector). While GPC3 reexpression induced a 30%
inhibition on MDA-MB231 viability, controls remained 100% viable. We also
determined that -GPC3 cells are less migrant than controls (Wound
coverage (%): 10 -GPC3 vs 90 -vector), and also they exhibit a reduction
in their homotypic adhesion (Cellular aggregation (%): 33 -GPC3 vs 81
-vector). In relation to in vivo behavior, MDA-MB231-GPC3 tumor-bearing
mice showed shorter tumor latency than controls (Md (days): 14 -GPC3 vs
97 -vector). However, GPC3 reexpression induced a reduction in
tumorigenicity: 40% -GPC3 vs 60% -vector. The tumor growth rate was
higher for GPC3 reexpressing cells (mm3/day: 72.739.46 -GPC3 vs 1.90.21).
Spontaneous metastases were detected in lungs, showing an incidence of
20% for -GPC3 vs 40% -vector cells.In sum, we generated a preclinical
human breast cancer cell model with differential GPC3 expression. Our in
vitro and in vivo results reveal the key role of GPC3 in the biology of
breast cancer cells.

