Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Urinary prostaglandin E metabolite as a biomarker predicting
response to EGFR therapy in patients with head and neck cancer


Background: Cross talk between the epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR) and prostaglandin E2 pathways (PGE2) is well established.
Activation of EGFR signaling can induce PGE2. Urinary PGE-M is a stable
end metabolite of PGE2. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the
role of urinary PGE-M as a biomarker predicting response to anti-EGFR
monoclonal antibody therapy in patients with head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma (HNSCC).Patients and Methods: Ten HNSCC patients with recurrent
and/or metastatic disease received Nimotuzumab, a humanized monoclonal
antibody against EGFR. The response to Nimotuzumab was assessed 2 weeks
following the fourth cycle using PERCIST criteria. Urine samples were
collected before treatment and 2 weeks after the fourth cycle of
therapy.Results: Seven patients had progressive disease (PD) while two
patients had stable disease (SD) and one patient had a partial response
(PR) to therapy. The mean pretreatment value of urinary PGE-M in patients
with SD or PR was 63 ng/mg Cr (range 48-78 ng/mg Cr). By comparison,
patients with progressive disease had lower baseline levels of urinary
PGE-M with mean pretreatment value of 37ng/mg Cr (range 15- 54ng/mg Cr).
More than a 20% reduction in post treatment vs. pretreatment urinary
PGE-M values was seen in patients with SD and PR. By comparison, patients
with progressive disease had either a minimal reduction or an increase in
the post treatment levels of urinary PGE-M.Conclusion: Elevated
pretreatment levels of urinary PGE-M may predict response to anti-EGFR
therapy in patients with HNSCC. These findings need further validation.

