Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ASPH_0047: a potent and selective antisense
oligonucleotide-targeting transforming growth factor beta 2 (TGF-2)


Transforming growth factor beta (TGF-) is a key member of a large family
of cytokines, including bone morphogenetic protein (BMP), nodals,
activins and others, which play critical, pleiotropic roles in the
pathophysiology of various human diseases, such as cancer, inflammation,
autoimmune disease, and cirrhosis/fibrosis. In particular, the different
TGF- isoforms (TGF-1, -2, and -3, encoded by different genes but sharing
high sequence and structure homology) are overexpressed in many human
tumors. Correlations between TGF- expression, cancer stage and clinical
parameters have been reported and linked to poor clinical outcome. TGF-
has been associated with a wide range of tumor-promoting processes,
including tumor cell invasion and migration, angiogenesis,
immunosuppression, as well as tumor stem cell maintenance and protection.
Therefore, blocking the TGF- signaling pathway via inhibition of TGF-
expression appears as an attractive therapeutic intervention in
Oncology.We have previously reported the rational design and preliminary
outcome of an extensive discovery program for identification of antisense
oligodeoxynucleotides targeting the various TGF- isoforms. We present
here ASPH_0047, a 17-mer LNA-modified gapmer based on the sequence of the
human TGF-2 mRNA, as novel preclinical development candidate. ASPH_0047
shows potent and selective target downregulation (mRNA and protein) in
various cell-based assays. Preliminary preclinical biodistribution
studies in rodent point at tissue penetration in expected target organs
(e.g., liver, kidney, spleen) and accumulation in tumor tissue consistent
with observed target downregulation and efficacy in relevant in vivo
experimental antitumor models. Key pharmacology properties and
preclinical features of ASPH_0047 supporting rapid advancement to
clinical development will be presented.

