Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MiR-629 targets TRIM33 to promote TGF-/Smad signaling in clear
cell renal cell carcinoma


Renal cell carcinoma (RCC) is the most common neoplasm of the adult
kidney, and clear cell RCC (ccRCC) represents the most common renal
histology. To identify a novel biomarker or a candidate target of
molecular-targeted drug for ccRCC, we focused on miRNA expression
signatures obtained from ccRCC clinical specimens by miRNA-microarray.
The expression signatures revealed that miR-629 was significantly
up-regulated in ccRCC specimens compared to normal specimens. Inhibition
of miR-629 through a hairpin miRNA inhibitor inhibited cell migration and
invasion. We found that miR-629 directly targets the Tripartite
motif-containing 33 (TRIM33) an inhibitor of TGF-/Smad signaling pathway.
Inhibition of miR-629 significantly suppressed TGF- -induced Smad
activation through up-regulation of TRIM33 expression and subsequent
inhibition of Smad2/3 and Smad4 binding. Furthermore, miR-629 inhibition
attenuated the effect of TGF- on expression of EMT-related factors and
cell migration and invasion. Finally, in human clinical specimens, TRIM33
was down-regulated where an association with pathological stage and
grade. Our findings identify miR-629 as a potent regulator of TGF-/Smad
signaling pathway and functions as an oncomir, which may provide a novel
therapeutic strategy for treatment of ccRCC.

