Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gastrokine 1 inhibits Helicobacter pylori CagA-induced gastric
carcinogenesis


Helicobacter pylori CagA directly injected by the bacterium into
epithelial cells via a type IV secretion system, leads to cellular
changes such as morphology, apoptosis, proliferation and cell mortality,
and stimulates gastric carcinogenesis. We investigated the effects of
CagA and GKN1 on cell proliferation, apoptosis, ROS production,
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and cell migration in CagA or
GKN1 transfected gastric epithelial cells and tissues from humans and
mice infected with H. pylori. We studied whether H. pylori CagA regulates
gene copy number and expression of GKN1 in gastric cells and tissues of
both humans and mice. On a molecular level, H. pylori CagA induced
increased cell proliferation, ROS production, anti-apoptotic activity,
and cell migration and invasion, and activation of NF-B and PI3K/Akt
signaling pathways and epithelial mesenchymal transition-related
proteins. In addition, H. pylori CagA reduced GKN1 gene copy number and
expression in gastric cells and tissues of humans and mice. However, GKN1
overexpression successfully suppressed these carcinogenic effects through
directly binding to CagA. These study identifies GKN1 as pharmacological
target that inhibits the development and progression of gastric cancers
via suppression of H. pylori CagA-induced carcinogenic potential.
Additionally, we propose that GKN1 is a potential diagnostic biomarker
for H. pylori CagA status, gastritis and gastric cancers.

