Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A survey of the most common methods of group randomization and
distribution in preclinical in vivo studies


To more closely emulate clinical research methodology and improve
clinical relevance, researchers are increasingly utilizing
clinically-similar group randomization and distribution methods for
oncology studies in animals. One common pre-clinical approach, a random
number generator in a spreadsheet, is paradoxically the least
clinically-relevant, and subject to manual and transcription errors. This
method provides no easy way to exclude animals from distribution based on
other qualitative or quantitative data parameters. Due to limitations in
spreadsheet software, commercially available pre-clinical trial
applications can be used to perform the most recommended randomization
and distribution methods based on tumor volume or other parameters:
deterministic and matched distribution, pure randomization, stratified
sampling randomization and block randomization across multiple numeric
parameters. Subjects may be excluded initially based on recorded
qualitative observations, and then by acceptable value ranges for numeric
parameters. Animals can be randomized iteratively in rolling enrollment
studies and previously randomized subjects can be re-randomized into new
groups as required on drug-resistance studies. ANOVA results are
displayed instantly to ensure similarity between groups. Standardizing
randomization and distribution using clinically relevant methods improves
the efficiency, clinical relevance, and outcome of animal studies
relative to spreadsheet-based methods.

