Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Breast cancer metastasis suppressor-1 promoter methylation in cell
free DNA provides prognostic information in non-small cell lung cancer


Background: Breast-cancer metastasis suppressor 1 (BRMS1) gene encodes
for a predominantly nuclear protein that differentially regulates the
expression of multiple genes, leading to suppression of metastasis
without blocking orthotopic tumor growth. The aim of the present study
was to evaluate for the first time the prognostic significance of BRMS1
promoter methylation in cell free DNA (cfDNA) circulating in plasma of
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients. Towards this goal, we
examined the methylation status of BRMS1 promoter in NSCLC tissues,
matched adjacent non-cancerous tissues and corresponding cfDNA as well as
in an independent cohort of patients with advanced NSCLC and healthy
individuals.Methods: BRMS1 promoter methylation was examined in 57 NSCLC
tumors and adjacent non-cancerous tissues, in cfDNA isolated from 48
corresponding plasma samples, in cfDNA isolated from plasma of 74
patients with advanced NSCLC and 24 healthy individuals.Results: BRMS1
promoter was highly methylated both in operable NSCLC primary tissues
(59.6%) and corresponding cfDNA (47.9%) but not in cfDNA from healthy
individuals ( 0%), while it was also highly methylated in cfDNA from
advanced NSCLC patients (63.5%). In operable NSCLC, Kaplan-Meier
estimates were significantly different in favor of patients with
non-methylated BRMS1 promoter in cfDNA, concerning both DFI (p=0.048) and
OS (p=0.007). In advanced NSCLC, OS was significantly different in favour
of patients with non-methylated BRMS1 promoter in their cfDNA (p=0.003).
Multivariate analysis confirmed that BRMS1 promoter methylation has a
statistical significant influence both on operable NSCLC patients' DFI
time and OS and on advanced NSCLC patients' PFS and OS.Conclusions: BRMS1
promoter methylation in cfDNA isolated from plasma of NSCLC patients
provides important prognostic information and merits to be further
evaluated as a circulating tumor biomarker.

