Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: p53-directed translational control can shape and expand the
universe of p53 target genes


Several genome-wide transcriptome analyses that focused on p53-induced
cellular responses in many cellular contexts have continued to expand the
already vast p53-regulated transcriptional networks. To investigate
post-transcriptional controls as an additional dimension of p53-directed
gene expression responses we performed translatome analysis by polysomal
profiling on MCF7 cells treated with Doxorubicin and Nutlin-3a. A
comparison between the transcriptome and the translatome revealed a
considerable level of uncoupling, meaning genes whose transcription did
not correlate with translation. Interestingly, this genes category was
significantly associated to apoptosis, DNA and RNA metabolism as well as
cell cycle functions, suggesting that post-transcriptional control can
modulate classical p53-regulated responses. Furthermore, even for
well-established p53 targets that were differentially expressed both at
transcriptional and translational levels, quantitative differences
between transcriptome, subpolysomal and polysomal RNAs were evident.
Seeking mechanisms underlying gene expression uncoupling, we identified
p53-dependent modulation of five RNA binding proteins where hnRNPD (AUF1)
and CPEB4 are direct p53 transcriptional targets and SRSF1, DDX17, YBX1
are indirect targets modulated at translational level in a p53-directed
manner. In particular, YBX1 translation appeared to be reduced by p53 via
two different mechanisms, one related to mTOR inhibition and the second
to miR-34a expression. Overall, we establish p53 as a master regulator of
translational control and identify new p53 target genes affecting
translation that can contribute to p53-dependent cellular responses.

