Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: III-Tubulin and cell survival: Novel role in endoplasmic reticulum
stress and autophagy in non-small cell lung cancer


Non-small Cell Lung Cancer (NSCLC) survival rates are dismal and
chemotherapy resistance is a significant barrier to effective
treatment.III-Tubulin is aberrantly expressed in a range of cancers,
including NSCLC1. Elevated III-tubulin expression is associated with
chemotherapy resistance and tumor aggressiveness in this disease. Growing
evidence links III-tubulin as a survival factor in cancer, where it may
support tumor cells in the harsh tumor microenvironment by regulating
cellular stress responses2. This study aimed to investigate the role of
III-tubulin in cellular survival and stress responses to glucose
starvation in NSCLC cells.METHODS: Previously described2 NCI-H460 cells
with stable expression of III-tubulin shRNA (IIIsh4 and IIIsh59) or a
non-targeting control shRNA (Ctrlsh1) were cultured in glucose-free
media. Cell viability and proliferation were monitored over 14 days using
Trypan Blue Dye Exclusion and Annexin-V Apoptosis assays. Metabolic
activity was measured using the XF24 Extracellular Flux Analyzer. GRP78
protein expression was determined by western blotting. XBP-1 splicing
assays were used to detect Endoplasmic Reticulum (ER) stress induction.
Autophagic activity was examined using western blotting and
immunofluorescence staining for LC3B.RESULTS: Our results demonstrated
that III-tubulin expression affects metabolic activity. Basal rates of
glycolytic metabolism were higher in III-tubulin knockdown cells compared
with control cells (pNon-small Cell Lung Cancer (NSCLC) survival rates
are dismal and chemotherapy resistance is a significant barrier to
effective treatment.III-Tubulin is aberrantly expressed in a range of
cancers, including NSCLC1. Elevated III-tubulin expression is associated
with chemotherapy resistance and tumor aggressiveness in this disease.
Growing evidence links III-tubulin as a survival factor in cancer, where
it may support tumor cells in the harsh tumor microenvironment by
regulating cellular stress responses2. This study aimed to investigate
the role of III-tubulin in cellular survival and stress responses to
glucose starvation in NSCLC cells.METHODS: Previously described2 NCI-H460
cells with stable expression of III-tubulin shRNA (IIIsh4 and IIIsh59) or
a non-targeting control shRNA (Ctrlsh1) were cultured in glucose-free
media. Cell viability and proliferation were monitored over 14 days using
Trypan Blue Dye Exclusion and Annexin-V Apoptosis assays. Metabolic
activity was measured using the XF24 Extracellular Flux Analyzer. GRP78
protein expression was determined by western blotting. XBP-1 splicing
assays were used to detect Endoplasmic Reticulum (ER) stress induction.
Autophagic activity was examined using western blotting and
immunofluorescence staining for LC3B.RESULTS: Our results demonstrated
that III-tubulin expression affects metabolic activity. Basal rates of
glycolytic metabolism were higher in III-tubulin knockdown cells compared
with control cells (p<0.05). Glucose depletion led to decreased cell
number and viability in the III-tubulin knockdown cells (pNon-small Cell
Lung Cancer (NSCLC) survival rates are dismal and chemotherapy resistance
is a significant barrier to effective treatment.III-Tubulin is aberrantly
expressed in a range of cancers, including NSCLC1. Elevated III-tubulin
expression is associated with chemotherapy resistance and tumor
aggressiveness in this disease. Growing evidence links III-tubulin as a
survival factor in cancer, where it may support tumor cells in the harsh
tumor microenvironment by regulating cellular stress responses2. This
study aimed to investigate the role of III-tubulin in cellular survival
and stress responses to glucose starvation in NSCLC cells.METHODS:
Previously described2 NCI-H460 cells with stable expression of
III-tubulin shRNA (IIIsh4 and IIIsh59) or a non-targeting control shRNA
(Ctrlsh1) were cultured in glucose-free media. Cell viability and
proliferation were monitored over 14 days using Trypan Blue Dye Exclusion
and Annexin-V Apoptosis assays. Metabolic activity was measured using the
XF24 Extracellular Flux Analyzer. GRP78 protein expression was determined
by western blotting. XBP-1 splicing assays were used to detect
Endoplasmic Reticulum (ER) stress induction. Autophagic activity was
examined using western blotting and immunofluorescence staining for
LC3B.RESULTS: Our results demonstrated that III-tubulin expression
affects metabolic activity. Basal rates of glycolytic metabolism were
higher in III-tubulin knockdown cells compared with control cells
(p<0.05). Glucose depletion led to decreased cell number and viability in
the III-tubulin knockdown cells (p<0.001) and this was supported by
increased cell death in two independent III-tubulin shRNA clones (IIIsh4
61.491.86%,IIIsh59 54.431.28% viability relative to Ctrlsh1 cells,
pNon-small Cell Lung Cancer (NSCLC) survival rates are dismal and
chemotherapy resistance is a significant barrier to effective
treatment.III-Tubulin is aberrantly expressed in a range of cancers,
including NSCLC1. Elevated III-tubulin expression is associated with
chemotherapy resistance and tumor aggressiveness in this disease. Growing
evidence links III-tubulin as a survival factor in cancer, where it may
support tumor cells in the harsh tumor microenvironment by regulating
cellular stress responses2. This study aimed to investigate the role of
III-tubulin in cellular survival and stress responses to glucose
starvation in NSCLC cells.METHODS: Previously described2 NCI-H460 cells
with stable expression of III-tubulin shRNA (IIIsh4 and IIIsh59) or a
non-targeting control shRNA (Ctrlsh1) were cultured in glucose-free
media. Cell viability and proliferation were monitored over 14 days using
Trypan Blue Dye Exclusion and Annexin-V Apoptosis assays. Metabolic
activity was measured using the XF24 Extracellular Flux Analyzer. GRP78
protein expression was determined by western blotting. XBP-1 splicing
assays were used to detect Endoplasmic Reticulum (ER) stress induction.
Autophagic activity was examined using western blotting and
immunofluorescence staining for LC3B.RESULTS: Our results demonstrated
that III-tubulin expression affects metabolic activity. Basal rates of
glycolytic metabolism were higher in III-tubulin knockdown cells compared
with control cells (p<0.05). Glucose depletion led to decreased cell
number and viability in the III-tubulin knockdown cells (p<0.001) and
this was supported by increased cell death in two independent III-tubulin
shRNA clones (IIIsh4 61.491.86%,IIIsh59 54.431.28% viability relative to
Ctrlsh1 cells, p<0.05). Moreover, III-tubulin knockdown markedly
decreased GRP78 levels, a master regulator of the ER stress response and
a pro-survival factor3. XBP-1 splicing assays confirmed the induction of
ER stress upon glucose starvation, with elevated levels of XBP-1 mRNA in
III-tubulin shRNA cells compared with controls. Furthermore, knockdown of
III-tubulin altered autophagic flux under basal conditions, and this was
further exacerbated by glucose starvation. These results strongly
indicate that III-tubulin knockdown enhances induction of the ER stress
response and autophagy in hypoglycemic conditions.CONCLUSION: This study
demonstrates for the first time that aberrant III-tubulin expression in
NSCLC promotes cell survival in hypoglycaemic conditions and modulates
the ER stress response and autophagy engaged during glucose starvation.
These findings provide new mechanistic insight into the poor prognosis
associated with high III-tubulin levels in NSCLC.1 Kavallaris. Nature Rev
Cancer, 10:194-204, 20102McCarroll et al., Cancer Res 70 :4995-5003,
20103Lee, Cancer Res, 67 :3496-3499, 2007

