Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression of miR-21 in cancer associated fibroblasts in lung
adenocarcinoma


Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer mortality worldwide, and novel
therapeutic targets and molecular diagnostic markers are highly
warranted. Micro RNAs (miRNAs) are a class of small non-coding RNAs
associated with a variety of cancer. miRNA-21 is an oncomiR and
upregulated in many cancers, including lung cancer, and high miR-21
levels have been associated with poor prognosis. To determine the
localization of miR-21 and to compare its expression levels, we performed
in situ hybridization of miR-21 on 89 mixed subtypes of lung
adenocarcinoma. miR-21 was predominantly expressed in cancer associated
fibroblasts (CAF)s expressing -SMA, with no difference in expression
between non-invasive and invasive component. In addition, stromal miR-21
expression was significantly associated with decreased overall survival
(p=0.0021). In functional analyses of miR-21 in vitro, miR-21 was
overexpressed in lung fibroblasts to assess migration and invasion.
miR-21 expression in lung fibroblasts promoted migration and invasion.
Moreover, the proliferation of lung cancer cells was accelerated by
conditioned medium of miR-21-expressing lung fibroblasts. These results
suggest that miR-21 overexpression in CAFs of lung adenocarcinoma might
serve as a prognostic biomarker and be involved in cancer cell
proliferation through interactions with cancer cells.

