Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Parthenolide ameliorates experimental colitis associated colon
cancer by inhibition of NF-kB signaling


Parthenolide (PT), a NF-kB inhibitor, has recently been demonstrated as a
promising anticancer agent that promotes apoptosis of cancer cells. We
previously showed that PT suppresses tumor growth in a xenograft model of
colorectal cancer cells by regulation of Bcl-2 family. Unfortunately,
little is known about its role in the process of tumor development in
colitis associated colon cancer (CAC). Therefore, this study was designed
to investigate the effects of PT on an experimental murine CAC model.
Experimental CAC was induced by azoxymethane (AOM) and dextran sulfate
sodium (DSS). Mice were divided into 3 groups: AOM+DSS, AOM+DSS+2mg/kg PT
and AOM+DSS+4mg/kg PT. We demonstrated that administration of PT
significantly reduced the severity of AOM/DSS-induced CAC as assessed by
histological analysis, and resulted in downregulation of phospho-NF-B p65
expression by the blockade of phosphorylation and subsequent degradation
of IB-a. Administration of PT ameliorated the carcinogenesis through the
downregulation of antiapoptotic protein Bcl-2 and Bcl-xL mediated by
inhibition of NF-kB activation. Moreover, apoptosis and caspase-3
expression also increased markedly in PT administration group. These
findings demonstrate that PT downregulates NF-kB resulting in initiation
of apoptosis and eventual suppression of CAC development, suggesting that
PT exerts beneficial effects in experimental CAC and could therefore be a
potential chemopreventive and therapeutic agent of CAC.

