Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Colorectal cancer cell lines with high BCL-XL and low MCL-1
expression are sensitive to a potent and selective BCL-XL inhibitor


Colorectal cancer is the second most deadly type of cancer in the United
States and worldwide despite the recent approval of new therapies. The
identification of novel agents that are effective against this cancer
thus remains a significant goal. One hallmark of cancer is the defective
regulation of programmed cell death, or apoptosis. The anti-apoptotic
B-cell lymphoma 2 (BCL-2) family members, including BCL-2, BCL-XL, and
MCL-1, are known to regulate cell survival and death and have been
characterized as key survival factors in multiple cancer types. As BCL-XL
is overexpressed in many solid tumors, the sensitivity of a panel of 25
colorectal cancer cell lines to a potent and selective BCL-XL inhibitor
was investigated. Colorectal cell lines with high expression of BCL-XL
and NOXA, a pro-apoptotic protein that antagonizes MCL-1 activity, were
more sensitive to small molecule BCL-XL inhibition. In contrast, cell
lines with lower expression of BCL-XL and higher expression of MCL-1 were
resistant. Silencing the expression of BCL-XL via siRNA killed the cell
lines that were sensitive to small molecule BCL-XL inhibition while
having little effect on lines that were resistant. Furthermore, silencing
the expression of MCL-1 restored sensitivity of resistant cells to the
BCL-XL inhibitor whereas silencing of NOXA abrogated the sensitivity of
cells to BCL-XL inhibitor. BCL-XL inhibition could thus be an effective
treatment in a subset of colorectal cancer patients showing high BCL-XL
expression.Disclosures: All authors are employees of AbbVie. The design,
study conduct, and financial support for the research was provided by
AbbVie. AbbVie participated in the interpretation of data, review, and
approval of the publication.

