Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PKC activation sensitizes certain basal breast cancer cell lines
to the Smac mimetic LBW242


There is a need for novel strategies to initiate cancer cell death. One
approach is the use of Smac mimetics, such as LBW242, which antagonize
inhibitor of apoptosis proteins (IAP)s and facilitates cell death. Recent
studies have shown that combinations of Smac mimetics and
chemotherapeutic agents increase cancer cell death. Here we show that the
protein kinase C (PKC) activator TPA together with LBW242 induce cell
death in two basal breast cancer cell lines (MDA-MB-468 and BT549), that
are resistant to LBW242 as a single agent. Eleven other
LBW242-insensitive cancer cell lines were not influenced by the
TPA+LBW242 combination. The TPA+LBW242 effect was suppressed by the PKC
inhibitor GF109203X, indicating dependence on PKC enzymatic activity. The
PKC effect was mediated via increased synthesis and release of TNF which
can induce death in the presence of LBW242. The cell death, coinciding
with caspsae-3 cleavage, was suppressed by caspase inhibition and
preceded by the association of RIP1 with Caspase-8, as seen in complex II
mediated apoptosis. Our data suggest that in certain basal breast cancer
cell lines co-treatment of TPA with LBW242 induces cell death
highlighting the potential of using these pathways as molecular targets
for basal-like breast cancers.

