Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The anti-estrogen effect of metformin in ER+ breast cancer and
tamoxifen resistant cell lines


Anti-estrogen therapy is still the most important systemic treatment to
manage estrogen responsive breast cancer. Tamoxifen resistance is a major
obstacle in treatment of ER-positive breast cancer. Recently, metformin,
which is a biguanide derivative which is commonly used in the treatment
of type II diabetes, has been emerged as a potential anti-cancer agent.
We investigated if metformin had anti-estrogen effect in ER-positive
breast cancer cell lines which are MCF-7, MDA-MB-361 as well as tamoxifen
resistant cells (TR-MCF-7). Metformin inhibited the cell proliferation
and the expression of ER in dose-dependent manner in MCF-7 and TR-MCF-7
cells. Under stimulation of 17-estradiol (E2), metformin inhibited the
cell proliferation and expression of mRNA and protein of ER in MCF-7 and
TR-MCF-7 cells, while tamoxifen didn't affect E2 induced cell
proliferation and ER expression. This result indicates that metformin, as
anti-estrogen agent, is superior to tamoxifen for targeting ER in breast
cancer. We also identified that metformin inhibited E2 induced cell
proliferation and expression of mRNA and protein of ER in MDA-MB 361 cell
line (ER+/Her-2+). We also analyzed estrogen responsive element (ERE)
activity using by luciferase assay and identified metformin suppressed
E2-inducible luciferase activity and expression of direct ER-regulated
genes, such as c-myc, Cyclin D1 and pS2 and FOXA1, which were not
inhibited by tamoxifen. In conclusion, metformin has a direct anti
proliferative effect and anti-estrogen effect in MCF-7, TR-MCF-7 as well
as MDA-MB-361 cell lines. These results suggest that metformin can be
used as anti- estrogen in ER positive breast cancer (luminal A & B) and
tamoxifen resistant breast cancer.

