Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: IL27 promotes papilloma formation via inducing a pro-inflammatory
milieu in the skin


Ras activation plays an important role in Squamous Cell Carcinomas (SCC)
development. Additionally, there is large evidence confirming the role of
inflammation during cancer initiation. However, the interaction between
inflammation and oncogene activation is poorly understood in
tumorigenesis. We found that IL27 promotes papilloma formation in a 2
step skin carcinogenesis (DMBA followed by benzoyl peroxide) model where
DMBA causes Ras mutation. Because K15-positive follicular stem cells
contribute to papillomas in the two-step skin carcinogenesis model, we
used an inducible oncogenic K-RasG12D under the K15 promoter, which marks
follicular stem cells. Indeed, treating mice with IL27 increased
papilloma incidence earlier in these K15-K-RASG12D mice. Mechanistically,
we see that ETAR+ macrophages are significantly increased in IL27-treated
K15-K-RasG12D mice. Additionally, the ETAR ligand ET1, and the downstream
factor of ETAR, COX2, are upregulated in these K15-KRasG12D mice by IL27,
suggesting that ET1/ETAR pathway is involved in IL27 mediated papilloma
formation. Indeed, IL27-mediated papilloma formation was reversed by
using the ETAR inhibitor ZD4054. Therefore, the data shown here suggest
that IL27 drives accumulation of ETAR+ macrophages, ET1, and Cox-2 in the
skin and ultimately causes faster papilloma formation in K-Ras mutated
follicular stem cells. These findings propose an unrecognized role of
IL27 during initiation of skin carcinogenesis.

