Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An integrated analysis of copy number alteration and global gene
expression reveals potential oncogenes underlying stomach cancer


Although several studies had been carried out to elucidate causative copy
number alteration (CNA) underlying stomach carcinogenesis, deeper
understanding of CNA accumulations in stomach cancer genome in
association with age and histo-pathological subtypes remains still
mysterious. Here, we report an integrated analysis of genome-wide copy
number alteration and global mRNA expression of 40 stomach cancer tissues
from 19 old and 21 young patients using aCGH and microarray. We
identified that stomach cancer genomes showed recurrent amplifications at
17q12 (ERBB2 amplicon) and 7q31.1-7q31.31 (MET amplicon), and homozygous
deletions at 9p21.3 and 17p12 regions harboring tumor suppressor genes.
The most frequent gained regions were 3q26.2 (45%), 7p21.1 (>50%), 7p12.2
(50%), 8q21.11-8q21.12 (45%), 8q22.3 (45%), 8q24.21 (45%), 8q24.22 (45%),
8q24.3 (45%), 20q12 (45%) and 20q13.2 (45%). The most frequent deleted
regions were 21p11.1 (50%), 19p13.2 (45%), 19p13.3 (45%), 4q12 (40%),
3p21.31 (40%) and 1p35.3 (40%). Whereas young stomach cancer genomes
showed more frequent gains at 7q21-7q31 than old cancer genomes, old
stomach cancer genomes exhibited more recurrent gains at 8q12-8q24 and
1p12-1q42 than young cancer genomes, providing a clue about evolution of
CNA accumulation in stomach cancer genome. Hierarchical expression
clustering of 506 (in amplified regions) and 60 (in regions showing
homozygous deletion) genes across the 40 stomach cancer samples
reclassified pathological and histological subtypes based on expression
pattern. Our integrated analysis of aCGH and microarray gene expression
identified a pool of potential candidate stomach oncogenes and tumor
suppressor genes. SiRNA-based interference of genes in MET amplicon and
ERBB2 amplicon in stomach cancer cell lines significantly suppressed cell
proliferation and migration, suggesting that they could be novel
potential oncogenes in stomach cancer. Taken together, this study
improves our understanding of stomach cancer genome evolution during CNA
accumulation process and provides a new gene set of novel potential
oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes that are essential for developing
novel diagnostic biomarker and therapeutics for stomach cancer.

