Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Using Nanoparticle Tracking Analysis (NTA) to characterize
cellular microvesicles


Cellular microvesicles (100 nm-1m) are shed into the circulation from
many different cell types including; platelets, erythrocytes and
endothelial cells. They have major potential as novel biomarkers as they
have been shown to be implicated in a multitude of pathological
conditions. However, developments in this area are constrained by
limitations in the technology available for their
measurement.Nanoparticle Tracking Analysis (NTA) (NanoSight Ltd,
Amesbury) offers the potential to both enumerate and speciate (through
fluorescent markers) these microparticles in a rapid manner. In this
method a laser beam passes through a suspension at a low angle. The
particles scatter light which is collected onto a CCD (or sCMOS) camera
by a microscope-type configuration. Particles between 10-2000 nm are
tracked individually and their diffusion coefficient, and therefore size,
calculated directly from their speed.Therefore, this characterization
method gives a direct measurement of the concentration and size
distribution of the particles in the field of view. If the particles are
fluorescently labelled, then the concentration and size distribution are
those of the labelled particles only, allowing a proportion of labelled
particles to be calculated. However, this requires a combination of
aspects to be identified and optimised during the process. This talk will
look at some of the challenges and considerations that need to be taken
during the protocol development and measurement.It will also review the
application of the technique in this field, compare and contrast it to
other applicable technologies such as various forms of electron
microscopy (EM) and to flow cytometry.

