Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exploration of a potent E-Selectin antagonist (GMI-1271) as a
potential novel therapeutic for treating breast cancer metastasis to the
bone and lung


The propensity of breast cancer to metastasize to the lung and bone with
high frequency presents an attractive opportunity for specific
therapeutic intervention. Targeting the initial steps of metastasis, such
as survival in circulation, arrest, and extravasation, may constitute a
more effective approach than treatment during the later steps. E-Selectin
has been implicated as a pro-metastatic endothelial receptor which
mediates the initial stages of tumor cell arrest and extravasation to the
lung, liver and bone. We examined the ability of the potent E-selectin
antagonist GMI-1271 (Kd = 0.54 M) to inhibit E-selectin binding to lung
and bone metastatic cells. Flow cytometry and ELISA analysis was used to
evaluate the effects of GMI-1271 in vitro while treatment of bone and
lung metastasis with GMI-1271 during the initial stages of metastatic
seeding was used in xenograft models. Results demonstrated that
metastatic breast cancer cells express carbohydrates ligands recognized
by E-selectin as determined by interaction with E-selectin-Fc chimeric
protein and the antibody HECA-452. GMI-1271 could significantly reduce
metastatic breast cancer cell binding to E-selectin in vitro. Treatment
of mice following intracardiac injection resulted in a significant
reduction of mortality (HR = 0.29, p = 0.044) while treatment following
tail vein injection demonstrated a directional increase in survival (p =
0.061 and p = 0.055). These results designate GMI-1271 as a potential
therapeutic for treatment of late stage breast cancer.

