Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Consequences of hepatic JAK2 deficiency for liver metabolism and
hepatocarcinogenesis


The metabolic syndrome is a frequent disease in the western world due to
increased prevalence of obesity and diabetes mellitus. Non-alcoholic
fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is a hepatic manifestation of the metabolic
syndrome associated with primary stages of hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC). Hepatic JAK2-STAT5 signaling is mainly activated by growth hormone
(GH) which controls cellular metabolism.To address the role of hepatic
JAK2 in lipid homeostasis and hepatocarcinogenesis, we crossed a mouse
model of inflammatory liver cancer caused by hyperactivated GH signaling
(GHtg) to mice harboring the hepatocyte-specific deletion of JAK2 (J2KO;
using AlfpCre). While excess of GH caused chronic hepatitis, as well as
pathologic alterations such as big hepatocytes with large polymorphic
nuclei, severe and progressive hepatosteatosis was evident in GHtg:J2KO
and J2KO mice as soon as 12 weeks of age. Hepatosteatosis in JAK2
deficient mice, independent of GH overexpression, was due to increased
hepatic lipid synthesis and peripheral lipolysis associated with elevated
unsaturated fatty acid (FA) and triglyceride (TG) amounts in the liver.
However, microvesicular steatosis, which is associated with a more severe
pathology, was more abundant in GHtg:J2KO livers accompanied by
significantly elevated liver/body weight ratios. Surprisingly, loss of
hepatic JAK2 proteins led to delayed hepatocarcinogenesis in aged mice.
Currently, we are investigating the involvement of NAFLD in the
pathogenesis of HCC development by genetic and histo-pathologic
profiling. We will provide molecular and cellular insights responsible
for delayed hepatocarcinogenesis in GHtg:J2KO and J2KO mice.

