Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CtIP is regulated by the APC/C-Cdh1 to mediate cell
cycle-dependent control of DNA repair


Human cells have evolved elaborate mechanisms for responding to DNA
damage to maintain genome stability and prevent carcinogenesis. For
instance, the cell cycle can be arrested at different stages to allow
time for DNA repair. The APC/C-Cdh1 ubiquitin ligase regulates mitotic
exit but is also implicated in the DNA damage-induced G2 arrest. However,
it is unknown whether APC/C-Cdh1 also directly participates in DNA
repair. Here we show that depletion of Cdh1 in untransformed RPE-1 cells
or several cancer cell lines results in increased levels of genomic
instability as well as enhanced sensitivity to DNA double-strand break
(DSB)-inducing agents. Moreover, Cdh1 depletion results in aberrant
homology-directed repair. Using an integrated SILAC proteomics and
bioinformatics approach in RPE-1 cells, we identified CtIP as a novel
APC/C-Cdh1 target. CtIP interacts with Cdh1 through a conserved KEN box,
of which mutation prevents CtIP ubiquitination and impedes CtIP
down-regulation both during G1 and after DNA damage in G2. Importantly,
the inability of CtIP to interact with Cdh1 causes defective
homology-directed repair. Combined, these results show that APC/C-Cdh1
safeguards genome integrity by controlling CtIP stability in a cell
cycle- and DNA damage-dependent manner. Supported by European Research
Councel grant -2011-293445; Dutch Cancer Society grant RUG-2011-5093; the
Vontobel Stiftung and Swiss National Science Foundation grant
31003A_135507.

