Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Detection of EGFR, HER2, HER3 and HER4 homodimerization and
heterodimerization using EFC-based cellular assays


Ligand-induced receptor dimerization is the first functional step in
receptor signaling, representing the most proximal, functional read-out
for receptor activation. Here we present a novel application of the
Enzyme Fragment Complementation system to monitor receptor-receptor
interactions at the surface of intact cells, applicable to diverse
receptor types such as RTKs, Interleukin receptors, BMP receptors and
cytokine receptors, amongst others. For the purpose of this poster, we
will focus on the HER family of receptors. It is well understood that the
HER family proteins can dimerize with the other members of its family
leading to a complicated oncogenic signaling cascade. Surprisingly,
existing cellular assays have been unable to faithfully monitor these
interactions proximally in a drug discovery setting. We present EFC-based
cellular assays that monitor EGFR homodimerization, EGFR-ErbB2 and
ErbB2-ErbB3 heterodimerization events at the receptor. The high signal to
noise ratio, serum tolerance and reproducibility make these assays ideal
for a diverse range of applications for the identification and
development of therapeutic small molecules and biologics, including
screening, functional characterization, QC lot release assays and
neutralizing antibody studies.

