Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Neutrophil serine proteases, cathepsin-G and elastase, promote
metastasis through cleavage of thrombospondin-1


Inflammation is known to be inextricably associated with tumor
progression. However, the role of inflammation in metastatic initiation
and outgrowth remains largely unexplored. In our study, we show that
CXCR2-CXCL2-dependent recruitment of neutrophils supported a
pro-metastatic phenotype in acutely inflamed lungs. The increased influx
of Ly6G+ neutrophils into inflamed lungs was accompanied by a loss of
thrombospondin-1 (Tsp-1) protein. In vitro, the degranulation of
neutrophils was marked by an increase in the activity of the neutrophil
proteases elastase and cathepsin-G, leading to degradation of Tsp-1,
which was protected by using the protease inhibitor Sivelestat. Whereas
genetic ablation of either cathepsin-G or elastase in vivo partially
impaired metastasis, pharmacological inhibition of both neutrophil
proteases, using the small molecule drug Sivelestat, dramatically
suppressed metastasis.We have uncovered a novel pathway in which the
serine proteases, cathepsin-G and elastase produced by degranulating
neutrophils, promote a metastasis-conducive microenvironment through the
cleavage of Tsp-1. Our results provide mechanistic insights into how
inflammatory components of the premetastatic niche can support metastatic
outgrowth, and they suggest that the neutrophil protease-Tsp-1 axis
presents a therapeutic target against metastatic cancers.

