Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: B7-H1 confers tumor chemoresistance by regulating MAPK/ERK
activation


Development of resistance to chemotherapy and immunotherapy is a major
obstacle in extending the survival of cancer patients. Although several
molecular mechanisms have been identified that can contribute to
chemoresistance, the role of immune checkpoint molecules in tumor
chemoresistance has received little consideration. Elevated expression of
B7-H1 (also named PD-L1) is predictive of an aggressive disease course,
including increases in disease progression and cancer-related mortality
in a variety of cancers (ovary, breast, liver, pancreas, esophagus, colon
and lung). Although the aggressiveness of B7-H1 positive tumors has been
attributed to B7-H1's immune-suppressive function, B7-H1 itself may be
directly altering tumor cell intracellular signaling pathways promoting
acquisition of drug resistance. It has been reported that overexpression
of B7-H1 confers chemoresistance in human cancers. However, the
mechanisms by which B7-H1 contributes to tumor chemoresistance have yet
to be defined. We show that B7-H1 transfected tumor cells are resistant
to chemotherapy. This resistance is due to increased activation of
MAPK/ERK pathway in tumor cells with B7-H1 overexpression. Inhibition of
ERK activation restored drug sensitivity of B7-H1 positive tumor cells.
We further analyzed the downstream elements of B7-H1 signaling pathway
and identified a new B7-H1 associated protein that is involved in DNA
damage repair and MAPK/ERK activation mechanisms. We conclude that B7-H1
mediates tumor chemoresistance by enhancing the activation of MAPK/ERK
pathway via its intracellular signaling pathway. Our studies may identify
a novel pharmaceutical target for treatment of B7-H1 positive refractory
tumor cells.

