Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Efficacy and safety of the Ad-GMCAIX dendritic cell-based vaccine
in treating in vivo metastatic renal cell carcinoma compared to sunitinib
monotherapy and simultaneous vaccine-sunitinib combination therapy


Metastatic clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC) disease is responsible
for significant morbidity and represents the main cause of death in
patients with advanced ccRCC. We have developed a novel dendritic cell
based vaccine targeting human carbonic anhydrase IX (hCAIX; DC-Ad-GMCAIX)
and compared it with the ccRCC standard-of-care drug, sunitinib as a
monotherapy and in simultaneous vaccine-sunitinib combination
therapy.Immunocompetent mice (Balb/c) were orthotopically-transplanted
with syngeneic RCC-hCAIXpositive (NPR-IX) tumor cells, immunized, and/or
treated with sunitinib at low-dose (5mg/kg/d), high-dose (40mg/kg/d) or
untreated. At termination, primary tumor size (weight), lung metastatic
burden, hCAIX and immune-markers expression levels were
compared.Mono-immunotherapy with DC-Ad-GMCAIX vaccine suppressed
metastatic tumor growth: the total number of metastatic heterotypic foci
(i.e., hCAIX positive and negative foci) following vaccination decreased
2.5 fold compared with untreated mice (P10 fold). Vaccination alone
resulted in reduced primary tumor burden of RCC-hCAIXpositive cells to 10
fold). Vaccination alone resulted in reduced primary tumor burden of
RCC-hCAIXpositive cells to <25% of the tumor cell population, with the
remaining cells lacking hCAIX expression (hCAIXnegative); there was no
significant overall primary tumor reduction compared to untreated mice.
In contrast, sunitinib, whether given as high-dose monotherapy or in
combination with the vaccine, inhibited the primary orthotopic tumors,
achieving 35% (P=0.0001) and 51% (P=1.7e-7) tumor reduction,
respectively. However, sunitinib monotherapy was less effective in
reducing the metastatic tumor burden compared with the vaccine.In fact,
simultaneous administration of vaccine and sunitinib increased the
metastatic tumor burden in heterotypic tumors composed also of
hCAIXnegative cells.In conclusion, this preclinical study demonstrates
that (i) the DC-Ad-GMCAIX vaccine effectively controls both primary and
metastatic hCAIXpositive tumors and forms the basis for a phase I trial
in metastatic ccRCC patients, which has been initiated at UCLA
(http://clinicaltrials.gov number NCT01826877), (ii) Antigen editing with
loss of hCAIX is an important immune escape mechanism, (iii) This in vivo
study raises caution regarding the use of DC-Ad-GMCAIX vaccine in
simultaneous combination therapies with sunitinib.Co-corresponding
Authors: ASB and JR

