Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chaetoglobosin K, a dual Akt and JNK inhibitor, modulates Akt
phosphorylation in an mTORC2 independent manner


Chaetoglobosin K (ChK) is a natural indolylcytochalasin that has been
reported to inhibit the proliferation of human lung and ovarian carcinoma
cells in vitro. We have previously shown that ChK concomitantly
down-regulates Akt and JNK activation, and have recently determined that
the inhibition of Akt by ChK is not via direct inhibition of the upstream
enzyme PI3 kinase. The reduction in Akt activation after ChK treatment is
also not related to changes in phosphorylation of the upstream modulators
PDK1 or PTEN. The mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) is a kinase that
regulates cell growth and protein synthesis and can be both upstream
(mTORC2) and downstream (mTORC1) of Akt. The purpose of this study was to
determine whether ChK: 1) decreases the activation of upstream mTORC2, as
this may lead to a decrease in Akt phosphorylation; 2) alters the
phosphorylation of downstream mTORC1 mediators 4E-BP1 and p70 S6 kinase.
In these studies, ras-transformed rat liver epithelial cells were treated
with either a non-cytotoxic dose of ChK or vehicle. Western blot analysis
was performed using phosphorylation site-specific antibodies to monitor
changes in 4E-BP1, p70 S6 kinase, and mTOR protein activation levels. The
results of this study indicate that ChK treatment did not decrease mTORC2
activation levels and suggest that ChK decreases Akt phosphorylation
through an alternate mechanism. ChK treatment decreased the
phosphorylation of 4E-BP1 and p70 S6 kinase, confirming that ChK
modulates downstream Akt/mTOR pathway effectors. Further investigations
are warranted to determine the exact mechanism by which ChK
down-regulates Akt, as well as JNK, activation in tumorigenic cells.This
project was funded by NIH grant 1R15CA135415

