Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epigenetic inactivation of VGF in urothelial cell carcinoma and
its potential as a non-invasive biomarker using urine


Background: Urothelial Cell Carcinoma (UCC) presents as a very
heterogeneous disease which cannot sufficiently be characterized with the
currently known genetic and epigenetic markers. To identify new
epigenetic markers for UCC we scrutinized the methylation status of 19
genes that has been shown to be cancer specific methylated genes in other
solid tumors in our comprehensive genome-wide discovery approach.Methods:
We performed promoter methylation of 19 genes (CAMK4, CKMT1b, FKBP4,
GALE, HOXB5, HPN, KRT14, LPAR2, MAL, NBR1, NDP, NF1, PDLIM3, PHKA2,
PVRL1, RGS4, SGK1, VGF and ZMYM2) that are related to key molecular
pathways involved in urothelial carcinogenesis including MAPK pathway or
PI3K/AKT pathway. The methods we used includes bisulfite sequencing,
methylation specific PCR and quantitative methylation specific PCR(QMSP).
All the 19 genes and/or a particular gene were evaluated in urothelial
cancer cell lines, primary tumor tissues and urine sediments.Results: By
bisulfite sequencing, methylation frequencies for CAMK4, CKMT1b, FKBP4,
GALE, HOXB5, HPN, KRT14, LPAR2, MAL, NBR1, NDP, NF1, PDLIM3, PHKA2,
PVRL1, RGS4, SGK1, VGF and ZMYM2 were 33.3%, 42.9%, 71.4%, 100.0%, 42.9%,
71.4%, 85.7%, 28.6%, 100.0%, 16.7%, 42.9%, 100.0%, 33.3%, 16.7%, 16.7%,
33.3%, 16.7%, 57.1% and 57.1% respectively in urothelial cancer cell
lines. Based on methylation frequencies and known functional evidence,
CAMK4, HOXB5, MAL, RGS4, VGF and ZMYM2 were selected for re-expression
analysis after 5-Aza-2-deoxycytidine treatment of UCC cell lines. We also
found that promoter methylation of these 6 genes were inversely
correlated with gene expression. Since VGF gene was found to be
completely methylated in the representative cell lines, we further
performed QMSP analysis on 19 primary UCC tissues of different stages and
grades with paired normal. Quantitative methylation values were higher in
almost all the primary UCC tissues than the paired normal (student's
t-test, P=0.005). In an independent cohort of 35 low grade UCC primary
tissues, we performed QMSP assay. Twelve out of thirty-five (34.3%) of
low grade UCC cases displayed VGF methylation that indicate VGF could be
a marker for determining initiation of neoplastic transformation. To
explore the potential of methylated VGF as a biomarker for non-invasive
detection of UCC, we tested 20 urine samples from UCC cases and 20 urine
samples from subjects without any known neoplastic diseases. VGF showed
significantly high frequency of QMSP positive status (Fisher's exact
test, P=0.020) in urine from UCC cases (8/20) compared to controls
(1/20).Conclusion: Our selected genes from genome-wide screening approach
successfully identified UCC specific methylated genes that can be
determined in primary tissues and urine. Further studies are needed to
understand the role of VGF in urothelial carcinogenesis and its potential
for the detection of low grade UCC using urine.

