Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Marrow stromal cells promote mitochondrial energy metabolism in
primary CLL cells without impacting cellular proliferation


Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia (CLL) is characterized by the accumulation
of replicationally quiescent mature B cells, as they fail to undergo
apoptosis. Studies show that supporting stromal cells in the
microenvironment provide survival advantage to CLL cells by conferring
resistance to spontaneous and drug-induced apoptosis. A recent
transcriptome characterization showed that compared to normal
lymphocytes, genes involved in metabolic pathways were upregulated in CLL
cells (Ferreira et al., Genome Res 2013). We hypothesized that stromal
cells may have an active role on energy metabolism of malignant B-cells
in order to cope with their energy demands. We assessed the major energy
generating pathways (glycolysis and mitochondrial OXPHOS), in primary CLL
cells using Extracellular Flux Analyzer (Seahorse Bioscience). The oxygen
consumption rate (OCR) in CLL cells is surprisingly high compared to the
proliferating lymphoma cell lines. Whereas, the glycolytic flux, measured
as extracellular acidification rate (ECAR) is significantly low,
suggesting that OXPHOS measured as OCR is upregulated in CLL cells; hence
we focused on OXPHOS. Increased OCR was not impacted by age, Rai stage,
lymphocyte counts, 2M, IgVH mutation status or LDH levels. However, ZAP70
positive (a poor-prognosis marker) samples had higher OCRs (n=30, p
=0.002). Compared to males, samples obtained from female patients had
higher OCRs (n=33, p = 0.043). Co-culturing with stroma (NK.tert human
cell line) for 18-24 hrs had an impact on OCR in CLL; out of 30 samples,
24 showed a significant (p - 0.0005) increase in basal OCR and/or spare
respiratory capacity (SRC, biological parameter of mitochondrial
respiration). In addition, 11 of 12 CLL samples showed a significant
increase in basal OCR, when plated on stroma without prior incubation (p
Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia (CLL) is characterized by the accumulation
of replicationally quiescent mature B cells, as they fail to undergo
apoptosis. Studies show that supporting stromal cells in the
microenvironment provide survival advantage to CLL cells by conferring
resistance to spontaneous and drug-induced apoptosis. A recent
transcriptome characterization showed that compared to normal
lymphocytes, genes involved in metabolic pathways were upregulated in CLL
cells (Ferreira et al., Genome Res 2013). We hypothesized that stromal
cells may have an active role on energy metabolism of malignant B-cells
in order to cope with their energy demands. We assessed the major energy
generating pathways (glycolysis and mitochondrial OXPHOS), in primary CLL
cells using Extracellular Flux Analyzer (Seahorse Bioscience). The oxygen
consumption rate (OCR) in CLL cells is surprisingly high compared to the
proliferating lymphoma cell lines. Whereas, the glycolytic flux, measured
as extracellular acidification rate (ECAR) is significantly low,
suggesting that OXPHOS measured as OCR is upregulated in CLL cells; hence
we focused on OXPHOS. Increased OCR was not impacted by age, Rai stage,
lymphocyte counts, 2M, IgVH mutation status or LDH levels. However, ZAP70
positive (a poor-prognosis marker) samples had higher OCRs (n=30, p
=0.002). Compared to males, samples obtained from female patients had
higher OCRs (n=33, p = 0.043). Co-culturing with stroma (NK.tert human
cell line) for 18-24 hrs had an impact on OCR in CLL; out of 30 samples,
24 showed a significant (p - 0.0005) increase in basal OCR and/or spare
respiratory capacity (SRC, biological parameter of mitochondrial
respiration). In addition, 11 of 12 CLL samples showed a significant
increase in basal OCR, when plated on stroma without prior incubation (p
< 0.0001), whereas the SRC did not statistically change (p - 0.9791).
Moreover, the differences associated with gender and ZAP70 status were
more pronounced when CLL cells were co-cultured on stroma (ZAP70 status,
n= 30, p = 0.0013; Gender n=28, p =0.0173). In contrast to OCR, ECAR did
not show stroma-induced statistical increase. Preliminary data with
murine stroma line (M2-10B4) also showed upregulation of OCR in CLL
cells. The stroma-mediated increase in OCR was not due to an increase in
proliferation index; as CLL cells on stroma stained negative for Ki67
(marker for cell proliferation). Metabolite analysis by mass spectrometry
of 5 CLL sample sets revealed that TCA cycle and gluconeogenesis were
among the top 5 hits of pathways upregulated by stromal co-culture. At
the molecular level, CLL cells in presence of stroma showed an increased
p-AKT and p-ERK levels. Active AKT modulates GLUT4 protein levels, which
was expressed in all 5 samples. Collectively, these data suggest that in
CLL cells, OXPHOS (measured as OCR) is high and was further induced by
stroma.

