Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MiR-517a mediates cisplatin sensitivity in bladder cell carcinoma


Cisplatin-containing neoadjuvant chemotherapy is the standard of care
treatment for patients with muscle-invasive bladder cancer. We sought out
to assess if miR-517a modulates sensitivity to cisplatin in bladder
cancer cell lines. We used four transitional cell carcinoma cell lines
T24, J82, UM-UC3 and TCCSUP. Cells were transfected with miR-517a mimic
or inhibitor using lipofectaime according to manufacturer's instruction.
Mtt assay was performed to assess viability after 96 hrs and clonogenic
survival assays were performed to assess colony forming ability of cell
lines.We found that miR-517a reduced proliferation and increased
cisplatin sensitivity. Overexpression of miR-517a resulted in reduction
of proliferation by 53%, 45%, 62% and 67% respectively (t-test
pCisplatin-containing neoadjuvant chemotherapy is the standard of care
treatment for patients with muscle-invasive bladder cancer. We sought out
to assess if miR-517a modulates sensitivity to cisplatin in bladder
cancer cell lines. We used four transitional cell carcinoma cell lines
T24, J82, UM-UC3 and TCCSUP. Cells were transfected with miR-517a mimic
or inhibitor using lipofectaime according to manufacturer's instruction.
Mtt assay was performed to assess viability after 96 hrs and clonogenic
survival assays were performed to assess colony forming ability of cell
lines.We found that miR-517a reduced proliferation and increased
cisplatin sensitivity. Overexpression of miR-517a resulted in reduction
of proliferation by 53%, 45%, 62% and 67% respectively (t-test p<0.05 for
comparison with respective control cell lines). Transfection with
miR-517a followed by cisplatin treatment resulted in a dramatic reduction
in viability and colony forming ability of cells compared to cisplatin
treatment alone. This reduction in viability was not observed after
transfection with the miR-517a inhibitor. To our knowledge, this is the
first report indicating that miR-517a functions as a sensitizer to
cisplatin therapy in bladder cancer. Bioinformatics and microRNA target
prediction databases identified several candidate genes.Note: This
abstract was not presented at the meeting.

