Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Elevated PKC expression and its association with Notch signaling
in localized and metastatic prostate cancers


Background: Conventional protein Kinase C alpha (PKC) is linked to the
regulation of cell proliferation, differentiation, motility, survival,
and apoptosis. Elevated PKC expression has been reported in human early
prostate cancer (PCa) and rat prostatic tumor cell lines. In this study,
the expression level of PKC was evaluated by immunohistochemistry (IHC)
and correlated with the expression levels of Notch1 and Jagged1 in
localized and metastatic PCa.Methods: : IHC for PKC was performed on
tissue microarray (TMA) slides containing 156 formalin-fixed and
paraffin-embedded (FFPE) prostatic tissues specimens, including 39 benign
prostatic changes, 97 localized prostate cancers and 20 metastatic
prostate cancers. The expression level of PKC was reported as a final IHC
score calculated as staining extent score (0-3) multiplied by intensity
score (0-3) with a maximal score of 9. ANOVA was employed to reveal the
differences in IHC scores among pathologic categories, followed by
Tukey-adjusted pairwise comparisons. Spearman correlation coefficient was
evaluated to measure correlation between expression levels of PKC,
Notch1, and Jagged1.Results: IHC staining for PKC was predominantly
observed in cytoplasm (in 94% specimens). The score of PKC cytoplasmic
staining in metastatic PCa (5.48 1.84, Mean SD) was significantly higher
than those in localized PCa (3.30 2.10, P = 2.95E-05) and in benign
prostatic tissue (1.92 1.53, P = 6.45E-09). Similarly, IHC score in
localized PCa was significantly higher than that observed in benign
prostatic changes (P = 0.001). Correlation analysis revealed that the
expression level of cytoplasmic PKC was significantly correlated with the
expression levels of cytoplasmic Notch1 (r = 0.396, P = 5.85E-05),
cytoplasmic Jagged1 (r = 0.610, P = 3.42E-11), and membranous Jagged1 (r
= 0.354, P = 3.76E-04, respectively) in localized and metastatic prostate
cancers.Conclusions: Our results indicate that up-regulation of PKC plays
a role not only in PCa formation and progression, but also in PCa
metastasis. The evidence of significant correlation between PKC and
Jagged1-Notch1 signaling pathway supports the notion that synergy of PKC
with Jagged1-Notch1 signaling may play an important role in modulating
the tumorgenesis and metastasis in human PCa.

