Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Modulation of MDM2 in context of DNA damage enhances cell death in
a metastatic breast-to-lung xenograft model


Metastatic breast cancer is highly refractive to current treatment
strategies, and new multi-targeted treatments need to be elucidated. In
metastatic disease, inhibiting key protein-protein interactions with the
murine double minute 2 (MDM2) could be beneficial for developing new
treatment modalities since this signaling pathway is a critical
regulatory point in cancer progression. Inhibition of protein binding to
the hydrophobic pocket of MDM2 by Nutlin-3a can activate pro-apoptotic
proteins such p73 and E2F1 as well as decrease pro-angiogenic Hif-1.
Since the DNA damaging agent carboplatin is currently being studied in
clinical trials of triple-negative breast cancers (TNBCs), our objective
was to evaluate the effects of carboplatin and Nutlin-3a in combination
in TNBC in a mutant p53 background. Using a TNBC cell line TMD231 derived
from the MDA-MB-231 human breast cancer cell line, we performed
combination studies using different ratios of carboplatin to Nutlin-3a in
vitro to evaluate the range of carboplatin-mediated DNA damage required
to obtain synergism with inhibition of MDM2 function. A fixed ratio of
1:1 carboplatin:Nutlin-3a was strongly synergistic with a combination
index of Metastatic breast cancer is highly refractive to current
treatment strategies, and new multi-targeted treatments need to be
elucidated. In metastatic disease, inhibiting key protein-protein
interactions with the murine double minute 2 (MDM2) could be beneficial
for developing new treatment modalities since this signaling pathway is a
critical regulatory point in cancer progression. Inhibition of protein
binding to the hydrophobic pocket of MDM2 by Nutlin-3a can activate
pro-apoptotic proteins such p73 and E2F1 as well as decrease
pro-angiogenic Hif-1. Since the DNA damaging agent carboplatin is
currently being studied in clinical trials of triple-negative breast
cancers (TNBCs), our objective was to evaluate the effects of carboplatin
and Nutlin-3a in combination in TNBC in a mutant p53 background. Using a
TNBC cell line TMD231 derived from the MDA-MB-231 human breast cancer
cell line, we performed combination studies using different ratios of
carboplatin to Nutlin-3a in vitro to evaluate the range of
carboplatin-mediated DNA damage required to obtain synergism with
inhibition of MDM2 function. A fixed ratio of 1:1 carboplatin:Nutlin-3a
was strongly synergistic with a combination index of <0.5. In cell
proliferation assays there was increased sensitivity to the drugs when
given in combination (pMetastatic breast cancer is highly refractive to
current treatment strategies, and new multi-targeted treatments need to
be elucidated. In metastatic disease, inhibiting key protein-protein
interactions with the murine double minute 2 (MDM2) could be beneficial
for developing new treatment modalities since this signaling pathway is a
critical regulatory point in cancer progression. Inhibition of protein
binding to the hydrophobic pocket of MDM2 by Nutlin-3a can activate
pro-apoptotic proteins such p73 and E2F1 as well as decrease
pro-angiogenic Hif-1. Since the DNA damaging agent carboplatin is
currently being studied in clinical trials of triple-negative breast
cancers (TNBCs), our objective was to evaluate the effects of carboplatin
and Nutlin-3a in combination in TNBC in a mutant p53 background. Using a
TNBC cell line TMD231 derived from the MDA-MB-231 human breast cancer
cell line, we performed combination studies using different ratios of
carboplatin to Nutlin-3a in vitro to evaluate the range of
carboplatin-mediated DNA damage required to obtain synergism with
inhibition of MDM2 function. A fixed ratio of 1:1 carboplatin:Nutlin-3a
was strongly synergistic with a combination index of <0.5. In cell
proliferation assays there was increased sensitivity to the drugs when
given in combination (p<0.05). TMD231 cells implanted into the mammary
fat pad of NOD.Cg-Prkdcscid Il2rgtm1Wjl/SzJ (NSG) mice showed enhanced
tumor growth, and metastasis was evident in the lungs. Dose-finding
studies were performed to determine an optimal carboplatin dosing schema.
NSG mice were randomized based on fluorescent imaging of E2-crimson
expressing TMD231 cells allowing for a sensitive measurement of early
tumor burden. Following Nutlin-3a and carboplatin combination treatment
in vivo, there was a statistically significant reduction in tumor volume
and lung metastases compared to vehicle and single drug treated mice
(pMetastatic breast cancer is highly refractive to current treatment
strategies, and new multi-targeted treatments need to be elucidated. In
metastatic disease, inhibiting key protein-protein interactions with the
murine double minute 2 (MDM2) could be beneficial for developing new
treatment modalities since this signaling pathway is a critical
regulatory point in cancer progression. Inhibition of protein binding to
the hydrophobic pocket of MDM2 by Nutlin-3a can activate pro-apoptotic
proteins such p73 and E2F1 as well as decrease pro-angiogenic Hif-1.
Since the DNA damaging agent carboplatin is currently being studied in
clinical trials of triple-negative breast cancers (TNBCs), our objective
was to evaluate the effects of carboplatin and Nutlin-3a in combination
in TNBC in a mutant p53 background. Using a TNBC cell line TMD231 derived
from the MDA-MB-231 human breast cancer cell line, we performed
combination studies using different ratios of carboplatin to Nutlin-3a in
vitro to evaluate the range of carboplatin-mediated DNA damage required
to obtain synergism with inhibition of MDM2 function. A fixed ratio of
1:1 carboplatin:Nutlin-3a was strongly synergistic with a combination
index of <0.5. In cell proliferation assays there was increased
sensitivity to the drugs when given in combination (p<0.05). TMD231 cells
implanted into the mammary fat pad of NOD.Cg-Prkdcscid Il2rgtm1Wjl/SzJ
(NSG) mice showed enhanced tumor growth, and metastasis was evident in
the lungs. Dose-finding studies were performed to determine an optimal
carboplatin dosing schema. NSG mice were randomized based on fluorescent
imaging of E2-crimson expressing TMD231 cells allowing for a sensitive
measurement of early tumor burden. Following Nutlin-3a and carboplatin
combination treatment in vivo, there was a statistically significant
reduction in tumor volume and lung metastases compared to vehicle and
single drug treated mice (p<0.001). Following Kaplan-Meier analysis, the
combination treated mice had a significant increase in survival, (54.31.5
days) compared to the vehicle (39.30.6 days) and each single drug
(Nutlin-3a: 391 and carboplatin: 47.51.8 days) (pMetastatic breast cancer
is highly refractive to current treatment strategies, and new
multi-targeted treatments need to be elucidated. In metastatic disease,
inhibiting key protein-protein interactions with the murine double minute
2 (MDM2) could be beneficial for developing new treatment modalities
since this signaling pathway is a critical regulatory point in cancer
progression. Inhibition of protein binding to the hydrophobic pocket of
MDM2 by Nutlin-3a can activate pro-apoptotic proteins such p73 and E2F1
as well as decrease pro-angiogenic Hif-1. Since the DNA damaging agent
carboplatin is currently being studied in clinical trials of
triple-negative breast cancers (TNBCs), our objective was to evaluate the
effects of carboplatin and Nutlin-3a in combination in TNBC in a mutant
p53 background. Using a TNBC cell line TMD231 derived from the MDA-MB-231
human breast cancer cell line, we performed combination studies using
different ratios of carboplatin to Nutlin-3a in vitro to evaluate the
range of carboplatin-mediated DNA damage required to obtain synergism
with inhibition of MDM2 function. A fixed ratio of 1:1
carboplatin:Nutlin-3a was strongly synergistic with a combination index
of <0.5. In cell proliferation assays there was increased sensitivity to
the drugs when given in combination (p<0.05). TMD231 cells implanted into
the mammary fat pad of NOD.Cg-Prkdcscid Il2rgtm1Wjl/SzJ (NSG) mice showed
enhanced tumor growth, and metastasis was evident in the lungs.
Dose-finding studies were performed to determine an optimal carboplatin
dosing schema. NSG mice were randomized based on fluorescent imaging of
E2-crimson expressing TMD231 cells allowing for a sensitive measurement
of early tumor burden. Following Nutlin-3a and carboplatin combination
treatment in vivo, there was a statistically significant reduction in
tumor volume and lung metastases compared to vehicle and single drug
treated mice (p<0.001). Following Kaplan-Meier analysis, the combination
treated mice had a significant increase in survival, (54.31.5 days)
compared to the vehicle (39.30.6 days) and each single drug (Nutlin-3a:
391 and carboplatin: 47.51.8 days) (p<0.001). While there was a decrease
in bone-marrow cellularity, this did not lead to bone-marrow aplasia, and
body weights recovered to normal levels within 7 days post-treatment.
Pharmacodynamic studies are ongoing to further understand at the
molecular level how the DNA damage response and repair is modulated by
MDM2 resulting in a robust synergistic response. These studies will lead
to a better understanding of how to potentiate DNA damage and may lead to
new clinical therapies in the future for metastatic breast cancer.

