Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The methylome of ER-negative tumors is predominantly
hypermethylated


The biological significance of DNA methylation in the regulation of gene
expression and its role in cancer is increasingly recognized. The
underlying hypothesis of this study is that strategic global approaches
will identify aberrantly methylated genes that underlie the pathogenesis
of ER-negative (ER-) breast cancer (BC).We used the Infinium
HumanMethylation450 BeadChip to profile the methylome of ER- breast
cancers to determine differentially methylated genes. The 450K array
includes 485,577 cytosine positions of the human genome. Whole genomic
DNA from 40 primary ER-, 40 ER positive (ER+), and 40 normal breast
tissue samples were assayed for genome-wide methylation. Data were
analyzed by GenomeStudio software (Illumina). Degree of methylation was
calculated as a -value (ranging from 0 to 1) and M-values [log (/ (1- )]
were used for significance tests. With 30 sets of paired tumor/normal
tissue, GEE was performed to account for their correlation. To identify
methylated genes associated with ER- subtypes and distinct from ER+, a
3-tiered approach to call out genes in which methylation changed
dramatically between ER+ and ER- subtypes was used. Tier 1: computed
adjusted FDR values for all CpGs/ (or their averages for each gene) to be
0.05 or lower. Tier 2: the CpGs/genes to include genes with a 2-fold
change (ratio >= 2.0 or ratio 0.2.Differentially methylated genes (DMGs)
at tier 3 for the different comparison groups were as follows: all BC
(n=80) vs normal (n=40): 1070 DMGs: 1001: hypermethylated, 69:
hypemethylated; ER+ vs normal: 1720: 1518 hyper, 202 hypo; ER- vs normal:
1170, 1085 hyper, 85 hypo; ER- vs ER+ vs: 289, 191 hyper, 97
hypomethylated.Overall, ER- BC tumors were more hypermethylated than
hypomethylated when compared to normal breast tissue and ER+ BC. Estrogen
receptor-negative BC is a more aggressive form than ER positive BC with
approximately double the incidence in African Americans than in Caucasian
Americans. The emerging differential methylation pattern would further
help stratify them into distinct subgroups. Promotor methylation being
potentially reversible, methylated genes may serve as future molecular
targets for demethylating therapies.Support: Komen Foundation: KG110218

