Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular analysis of KRAS exon 2 wild type colorectal cancer
patients enrolled in the CAPRI clinical trial reveals high degree of
tumor heterogeneity


The CAPRI clinical trial (Optimal strategy in KRAS wild type metastatic
colorectal cancer patients: cetuximab plus FOLFIRI followed by FOLFOX +/-
cetuximab) enrolls metastatic colorectal carcinoma (mCRC) patients with
no codon 12/13 (exon 2) KRAS mutations. Recent data showed that exon 3
and 4 KRAS mutations as well as NRAS exon 2, 3 and 4 mutations might
confer resistance to EGFR monoclonal antibodies. In addition, somatic
mutations in other genes such as BRAF, PIK3CA, PTEN, have been
hypothesized to be prognostic and/or predictive in CRC. Therefore,
molecular sub-classification of KRAS exon 2 wild type CRC might allow to
identify subgroups of patients highly sensitive or resistant to anti-EGFR
agents within the CAPRI trial. We analyzed 182 FFPE samples from mCRC
patients enrolled in the CAPRI clinical trial by using a next generation
sequencing (NGS) approach based on the Ion AmpliSeq technology. In
particular, 10 ng of genomic DNA were analyzed with the Ion Ampliseq
Colon and Lung cancer panel that targets over 500 hotspot mutations in 22
genes implicated in colon and lung cancers. Data analysis was performed
using Ion Reporter Software. The analysis with the IonAmpliseq panel was
successful in all the tested samples. Among the 182 analyzed cases, 58
(31.9%) showed no mutations in the investigated genes, whereas a total of
206 mutations in 14 genes were detected in 124 cases (68.1%).
Surprisingly, 30 exon 2 KRAS mutations were identified in 29 patients
(15.9%). Mutations at a frequency >4% were also found in: TP53 (39.5% of
the cases mutant), KRAS exon 3 and 4 (7.5%), PIK3CA (13.2), BRAF (8.2%),
NRAS (7.1%), FBXW7 (4.9%). A significant degree of tumor heterogeneity
was observed: several tumors had multiple mutations in different genes,
with some cases showing up to 5 mutations. In particular, 30/45 KRAS,
5/13 NRAS, 12/15 BRAF and 19/24 PIK3CA mutant cases showed variants in
additional genes. The frequency of mutant alleles also differed
significantly among tumors. For example, among the KRAS exon 2 mutant
cases, the frequency of KRAS mutant alleles, after normalization for the
neoplastic cell content, ranged between 6% and 130%, suggesting that some
KRAS mutant cases were polyclonal and that in some other cases gain of
mutant or loss of wild type KRAS alleles might have occurred. These data
suggest that molecular classification of KRAS exon 2 wild type CRC with
the Ion Ampliseq Colon and Lung cancer panel is feasible. This approach
reveals mutations in several key genes involved in CRC tumor progression.
The relatively high incidence of codon 12/13 KRAS mutations also suggests
that an high rate of false negative results in KRAS testing occurs in
clinical practice. Finally, the huge degree of tumor heterogeneity might
have important implications for prognosis and response to therapy.

