Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Highly potent and orally available SIK2 inhibitors block growth of
human ovarian cancer cells in culture and xenografts


Salt Inducible Kinase 2 (SIK2) is a Ser/Thr kinase required for
centrosome splitting and bipolar mitotic spindle formation. SIK2 is
overexpressed in 30% of ovarian cancers associated with a poor prognosis.
Knockdown of SIK2 with siRNA has inhibited ovarian cancer cell growth and
enhanced paclitaxel sensitivity in cell culture and in xenografts. Given
the challenges of delivering siRNA to cancer cells in vivo, we have
sought small molecule inhibitors of SIK2 to permit clinical trials, alone
and in combination with paclitaxel. Fragment-based design strategies
utilizing SIK2 ATP-binding site residues, scaffold-hopping, SIK2 binding
assay and subsequent SAR have led to the discovery of potent, selective,
orally bioavailable first-in-class SIK2 inhibitors. Here we describe the
identification and the preclinical characterization of ARN-3236 and its
novel analogue ARN-3252 belonging to the same chemical class, suitable
for oral administration. ARN-3236 and ARN-3252 compounds are highly
potent (IC50: 1 and 5 nM), ATP competitive SIK2 inhibitors, characterized
by high selectivity when tested against a panel of more than 456 kinases.
ARN-3236 and ARN-3252 potently blocked proliferation of human ovarian
cancer cell lines with endogenous SIK2 activation including OVCAR-3,
SKOv3, HEY and ES-2 with an IC50 between 0.5 to 3.0 nM. Inhibition of
proliferation has been observed in 9 additional ovarian cancer cell
lines. The ARN-3236 and ARN-3252 exhibit a promising in vitro ADME
profile and favorable in vivo PK parameters in mice and rats, including
oral bioavailability. When tested in vivo in three murine subcutaneous
xenograft models employing OVCAR-3, SKOv3 and ES-2 cells, ARN-3236
displayed dose-dependent tumor growth inhibition following daily oral
administration at 30, 60 and 100 mg/Kg, with tumor regression observed at
these dose levels. The lead identification, optimization, SAR, PK, single
agent efficacy, efficacy in combination with paclitaxel and
dose-dependent target modulation and the maintenance of SIK2
phosphorylation inhibition data will be presented. Given these specific
small molecule inhibitors, SIK2 may provide a valuable target for
treatment of a subset of human ovarian cancers.

