Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HER2/Stat3 signaling mediated radioresistance in U87 glioma cancer
cells through suppressed apoptosis and enhanced glycolysis


GBM is the most common and aggressive malignant primary brain tumor, and
the prognosis for GBM patients remains poor. Radiotherapy continues to
play a central role in the management of brain tumors. Even though the
advances of radiotherapy strategies and techniques, frequent failure of
radiotherapy made GBM a disease difficult to be treated. GBM cancer stem
cells (CSCs) are reported to be responsible for resistance to chemo- and
radiotherapy, and chemotherapy and radiotherapy resistant GBM CSCs have
been isolated from GBM. However, the mechanisms of radioresistance of
glioma cells are still elucidative. In this study, we investigated the
role of HER2-Stat3 signaling pathway in radioresistance using human
glioma cell line U87. We found that long-term therapeutic dose of
fragmented irradiation induces repopulation of human glioma U87 cells
with increased number of CD133+/HER2+ stem-like cells. FIR-surviving
CD133+/HER2+ U87 cells have coactivation of HER2 and Stat3 and increased
cell proliferation and invasion abilities. More importantly, we found
that U87-FIR cells have lower level of mitochondria metabolism and ROS
level, and higher mitochondrial membrane potential, while 5Gy single dose
radiation induces increased mitochondria function. Furthermore, U87 cell
injection derived xenograph tumor also has increased mitochondrial
membrane potential and decreased mitochondria function after radiation.
These results suggest that the radioresistance of GBM CSCs possibly due
to the suppressed apoptosis and enhanced glycolysis mediated by
HER2/STAT3 pathway.

