Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Functional characterization of recurrent CD74NRG1 fusions in lung
adenocarcinoma


In nearly 50% of all lung adenocarcinomas the oncogenic driver is still
unknown. We performed transcriptome sequencing on 25 pan-negative lung
adenocarcinomas of never smokers leading to the identification of the
novel CD74-NRG1 gene fusion. In an additional cohort of 102
adenocarcinomas we could identify and validate four additional cases
bearing the CD74-NRG1 fusion gene - all of the invasive mucinous
subtype.We then transduced NIH-3T3 cells with the fusion and found it
localized on the cell surface in FACS experiments. As we found the
identical breakpoint in CD74 in our fusion as in CD74-ROS1, we
hypothesized that the functional active part needs to be NRG1. (Soda et
al. 2012) The NRG1 isoform III-3 that we found is generally not expressed
in lung tissue - therefore the CD74 part leads to the expresseion of NRG1
III-3 in the lung. As Neuregulins are known interaction partners of HER
receptor family members we transduced the human adenocarcinoma cell lines
H322 and H1568, that are HER receptor and KRAS wildtype, with the fusion
and found phosphorylation of HER2 and HER3 in the transduced cells under
starvation conditions compared to empty vector controls. (Hobbs et al.
2002) This holds true as well in the patient situation in which
phospho-HER3 was only found in tumors expressing the fusion (pIn nearly
50% of all lung adenocarcinomas the oncogenic driver is still unknown. We
performed transcriptome sequencing on 25 pan-negative lung
adenocarcinomas of never smokers leading to the identification of the
novel CD74-NRG1 gene fusion. In an additional cohort of 102
adenocarcinomas we could identify and validate four additional cases
bearing the CD74-NRG1 fusion gene - all of the invasive mucinous
subtype.We then transduced NIH-3T3 cells with the fusion and found it
localized on the cell surface in FACS experiments. As we found the
identical breakpoint in CD74 in our fusion as in CD74-ROS1, we
hypothesized that the functional active part needs to be NRG1. (Soda et
al. 2012) The NRG1 isoform III-3 that we found is generally not expressed
in lung tissue - therefore the CD74 part leads to the expresseion of NRG1
III-3 in the lung. As Neuregulins are known interaction partners of HER
receptor family members we transduced the human adenocarcinoma cell lines
H322 and H1568, that are HER receptor and KRAS wildtype, with the fusion
and found phosphorylation of HER2 and HER3 in the transduced cells under
starvation conditions compared to empty vector controls. (Hobbs et al.
2002) This holds true as well in the patient situation in which
phospho-HER3 was only found in tumors expressing the fusion (p<0.0001).We
could further show that the CD74-NRG1 fusion is associated with
activation of the phosphoinsitide-3-kinase pathway activation and the
mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase pathway . As functional
consequence we could observe in several human adenocarcinoma cell lines
increased colony forming ability in soft-agar assays showing the
CD74-NRG1 fusion being a new oncogenic driver in lung adenocarcinoma.
This finding may lead to new treatment options for patients harboring
this fusion gene who do not benefit from any effective treatment option
up to now.

