Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metastasis suppressor CD82 functions as a negative regulator in
the adhesion-dependent epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition in prostate
cancer cells


Tetraspanin CD82 suppresses cancer metastasis by inhibiting cell motility
and invasiveness. In an effect to reveal the mechanism underlying the
metastasis-suppressing role of CD82, we here examined the effect of CD82
on epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), a critical event of cancer
cells that promotes migration and invasion. In human prostate cancer cell
lines, an increase in CD82 expression levels by exogenous gene delivery
elevated E-cadherin levels, but decreased the levels of mesenchymal cell
proteins including Snail, Twist, vimentin, N-cadhherin, and -smooth
muscle actin, suggesting EMT-suppressing role of CD82. Also, increased
CD82 expression resulted in decreased motility and invasiveness of
prostate cancer cells. In contrast, CD82 knockdown decreased E-cadherin
levels, but increased the levels of mesenchymal cell proteins, together
with cell morphology change to fibroblast-like shape. CD82 also
interfered with TGF-1- and Wnt-induced EMT. Additionally, CD82 decreased
expression of -catenin target genes such as c-myc and cyclin D1 by
inhibiting nuclear translocation of -catenin. Notably, the negative
effect of CD82 on EMT was apparent on cells adhered to fibronectin.
Fibronectin-binding 31/51 integrins were involved in CD82-mediated
inhibition of EMT. Importantly, human prostate cancer tissue specimens
displayed a positive correlation of CD82 with E-cadherin expression
levels, along with a negative correlation of CD82 with vimentin levels.
Moreover, both CD82 and E-cadherin levels were inversely correlated with
the malignant progression stages of human prostate cancers. Taken
together, these results strongly suggest that CD82 suppresses motility
and invasiveness of prostate cancer cells by inhibiting EMT in an 31/51
integrin-dependent manner.

