Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Blockade of angiopoietin-2 or Tie2 is equally effective at
inhibiting tumor growth and reducing tumor vessel density in most human
tumor xenograft models


Angiopoietin-1 (Ang1) and -2 (Ang2) regulate angiogenesis via the
endothelial cell-specific receptor tyrosine kinase Tie2. Blocking Ang2
binding to Tie2 decreases vessel density and inhibits tumor growth in
various human xenograft models. However, not all tumors respond to Ang2
blockade, which could be due to high Ang1 levels acting as another ligand
for Tie2, to Ang2 activities independent of Tie2, or to a weak role for
Ang-2/Tie2 signaling in these tumors. To elucidate if Ang1 plays an
integral role in tumor angiogenesis and growth, we compared the effects
of blocking Ang2 or Tie2 in various tumor xenografts with differing
levels of Ang1 expression. We found that in six out of seven tumor
models, antibodies that specifically bind Ang2 (REGN910, 10 mg/kg 2x/wk)
or that bind Tie2 and block binding of both Ang1 and Ang2 (REGN1376, 10
mg/kg 2x/wk) were equally efficacious at inhibiting tumor growth and
decreasing vessel density. In only one tumor model (Calu-6), blockade of
Tie2 with REGN1376 was more effective than blockade of Ang2 (REGN910) at
reducing tumor growth and decreasing tumor vessel density. Although
Calu-6 tumors express high Ang1 levels, other tumors tested (Lox, LS174T)
have comparable or higher Ang1 levels and respond similarly to Ang2 and
Tie2 blockade, thus the levels of Ang1 do not account for the
differential response of Calu-6 tumors. Taken together, our data suggest
that Ang2 is the dominant ligand for Tie2 in the microenvironment of most
tumors, and further, that the effects of Ang2 are mediated primarily via
Tie2. These findings support the approach to specifically block the
binding of Ang2 to Tie2 as an anti-angiogenic therapy.

