Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Honokiol inhibits growth and migration of renal cell carcinoma


Renal cell carcinoma (RCC) is a common urological cancer worldwide and is
known to the high risk of recurrence and metastasis. Approximately 70% of
patients with RCC will develop recurrence after surgical resection, and
25%-30% of patients will eventually develop progression to distant
metastasis. Honokiol is a small-molecule polyphenol isolated from the
genus Magnolia, which has been shown to be a potential anticancer agent
in multiple facets of signal transduction. Here we demonstrate that
honokiol inhibits proliferation of RCC cells 786-0 and A498 without
affecting cell viability. Moreover, honokiol also significantly inhibited
migration of 786-0 cells in a dose-dependent manner. DNA microarray
analysis showed that honokiol regulated expression of many genes related
to human tumor metastasis in 786-0 cells. Real time PCR analysis
confirmed that the expression of metastasis suppressor KISS1 and its
receptor, KISS1R, were upregulated in 786-0 cells after treatment with
honokiol. In addition, the shape changes and excessive formation of actin
stress fibers were identified in 786-0 cells treated with honokiol. This
phenomenon disappeared when treated cells with the pharmacological
Rho-kinase inhibitor Y-27632 and honokiol. This inhibition can also be
identified in 786-0 cells treated with Y-27632 only. Our present results
demonstrated that honokiol could inhibit the growth and migration of RCC,
which is likely to be regulated by the Rho and Rho-Associated Kinase
(ROCK) pathway. In conclusion, honokiol is a biologically active natural
compound which can be considered for the alternative treatment of RCC.
The investigation of detailed mechanisms and molecular targets are in
progress.

