Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Histone deacetylase 2 and N-Myc reduce p53 protein phosphorylation
at serine 46 by repressing gene transcription of tumor protein 53-induced
nuclear protein 1


Myc oncoproteins and histone deacetylases (HDACs) exert oncogenic effects
by modulating gene transcription. Paradoxically, N-Myc induces p53 gene
expression. Tumor protein 53-induced nuclear protein 1 (TP53INP1)
phosphorylates p53 protein at serine 46, leading to enhanced p53
activity, transcriptional activation of p53 target genes and programmed
cell death. We aimed to identify the mechanism through which N-Myc
overexpressing p53 wild-type neuroblastoma cells acquired resistance to
apoptosis.Gene and protein expression was analysed by real-time RT-PCR
and immunoblot. Cell survival/death was examined by flow cytometry study
of Annexin V-staining. The prognostic value of TP53INP1 expression in
tumor tissues was investigated in three independent cohorts of
neuroblastoma patients. TP53INP1 was one of the genes most significantly
repressed by HDAC2 and N-Myc according to Affymetrix microarray gene
expression datasets. HDAC2 and N-Myc reduced TP53INP1 gene expression by
direct binding to the TP53INP1 gene promoter, leading to transcriptional
repression of TP53INP1, p53 protein de-phosphorylation at serine 46,
neuroblastoma cell proliferation and survival. Moreover, low levels of
TP53INP1 expression in human neuroblastoma tissues correlated with high
levels of N-Myc expression and poor patient outcome, and the BET
bromodomain inhibitors JQ1 and I-BET151 reduced N-Myc expression and
reactivated TP53INP1 expression in neuroblastoma cells. These findings
identify TP53INP1 repression as an important co-factor for N-Myc
oncogenesis, and provide further evidence for the potential application
of BET bromodomain inhibitors in the therapy ofN-Myc-induced
neuroblastoma.

