Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CKD-581, a novel histone deacetylase inhibitor, synergistically
enhances Bortezomib cytotoxicity in multiple myeloma cells


For Multiple Myeloma (MM), better anti-MM therapies need to be developed
in order to treat refractory, relapsed, and newly diagnosed MM. Recently,
Histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACIs) as a combined drug with
bortezomib have been evaluated for the treatment of MM. In this study, we
examined to determine the anti-MM effects of a novel HDACI, CKD-581, in
MM cells. We treated MM cells with CKD-581 either alone or in combination
with Bortezomib. Treatments of 9 different MM cell lines with CKD-581
resulted in dose-and time-dependent growth arrest accompanied by the
induction of p21 expression and the reduction of cMYC. CKD-581 enhanced
Bortezomib-induced cell growth arrest and apoptosis by further reduction
of NF-kB mediated cell signaling pathway, which resulted in functional
blockage of ubiquitination-related genes. CKD-581, alone or combined with
bortezomib, also abrogated the G2/M cell cycle checkpoint, potentially
through the suppression of CHK1 expression as well as synergic growth
arrest via induction/reduction of CHKs and cMYC, as revealed in combined
treatment of CDK-581 and bortezomib. CKD-581-induced sensitization of
Bortezomib resistant MM cells to cytotoxic treatment resulted in an
increased number of apoptotic cells as judged by annexin V-positivity and
the presence of cleaved caspase-3. In addition, CKD-581 effectively
induced the apoptosis of MM cells, which were co-cultured with BMSCs
obtained from MM patients' BM. CKD-581 effectively inhibited the
secretion of IL-6/sIL-6 and HGF, involved in bone lesion, from MM
patients' BMSCs. In animal model, CKD-581 was well tolerated, and
resulted in tumor growth inhibition and prolonged survival. In summary,
the HDAC inhibitor, CKD-581, is a promising therapeutic agent for MM
patients, especially when used in combination with Bortezomib.

