Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential expression of codon 72 of TP53 in colorectal tumors


Background & Aim: Correlations between DNA variation and human phenotypic
differences, such as susceptibility to certain diseases, are not well
understood. Polymorphisms can contribute to the observed variation in
complex human traits, but their relative contributions remain to be
determined. Expression differences between alleles of the same gene have
been observed, contributing to phenotypic variation between individuals.
Studies showed that variations exist in the relative allelic expression
levels in certain genes of heterozygote individuals. Polymorphism at
codon 72 of TP53 results in either Arginine or Proline, whose functional
significance in carcinogenesis is controversial. Studies showed that the
Pro72 is less efficient than Arg72 allele in suppressing cell
transformation and inducing apoptosis. We have investigated if the
expression of these p53 polymorphs is selectively regulated, using mRNA
and DNA from colorectal cancer tissues (CRC). Methods: 28 non-related
patients treated at ACCamargo Cancer Center in Brazil were evaluated. DNA
and RNA were isolated from frozen tumor tissue using Trizol and
phenol/chloroform based protocol. TP53 sequences from DNA and RNA were
evaluated by Sanger sequencing and quantified using Pyrosequencing. The
assay for allele quantification was designed with the software PyroMark
Assay Design Software 2.0, featuring algorithms for full quality control.
Results: We found 28 p53 codon 72 SNP heterozygotes tumors and 11 (39.3%)
of these showed differential expressions, and most of them preferentially
expressed the Pro allele. Pyrogram peak heights are proportional to the
frequency of an allele in the sample, providing accurate measures of the
proportion of the alleles. Previous results revealed that these SNP
expression was significantly associated with gender (P= 0.037),
recurrence (P= .005), dirty tumor necrosis (P= 0.025), border pattern of
tumor growth (P= 0.05), post chemoradiotherapy use (P= 0.002), p53
immunohistochemistry expression (P= 0.041) and TP53 mutation (P= 0.004),
suggesting that the expression of the Pro72 allele is associated with
worse tumor features. The expression of Arg72 (OR 3.83; CI 1.02-14.35; P=
0.046) and the TNM grouping stage (OR 7.15; CI 1.45-35.29; P= 0.016) were
independent predictors for recurrence. This is the first report
describing the differential expression of the p53 codon 72 SNP in CRC and
revealed that heterozygotes preferentially express the Pro allele,
suggesting that the Pro allele is selectively activated in CRC.
Conclusions: The expression of the different p53 polymorphs is
selectively regulated in Pro72Arg heterozygotes individuals. Thus, the
expression status of the p53 polymorphs, rather than the genotypic
status, might be an useful indicator tumor aggressiveness.

