Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: 5-azacytidine nucleosides and their derivatives: Molecular
hallmarks of drug resistance


Background: Hypermethylation of gene promoter sequences resulting in
transcriptional silencing of tumor suppressor genes has been explored as
a therapeutic target in cancer for years. The cytosine analogues,
5-azacytidine and 2-deoxy-5-azacytidine, function as DNA
methyltransferase inhibitors and are currently most advanced drugs for
epigenetic cancer therapies. Despite encouraging results, mechanisms of
in vivo resistance to these nucleoside analogues remain unresolved and
are limiting their clinical application.Objective: The goal of this study
was to investigate the mechanisms of resistance to 2-deoxy-5-azacytidine
(decitabine).Methods: To investigate the mechanisms of resistance, we
developed several HCT116 p53 wild-type cell clones resistant towards
2-deoxy-5-azacytidine. Principal methods used during the study of
resistance were MTT cytotoxicity assays, flow cytometry based analyses
and molecular profiling of the resistant clones which included mass
spectrometry based proteomics using stable isotope labelling of amino
acids in cell culture (SILAC) and massively parallel signature sequencing
(MPSS) for studies at gene and transcript level.Results: During resistant
studies, all HCT116 2-deoxy-5-azacytidine resistant clones were >100
folds more resistant to decitabine in MTT cytotoxicity assays. Resistant
clones also displayed cross-resistance to other epigenetic inhibitors.
Flow cytometry based studies revealed significant up-regulation of DNA
and RNA synthesis. Molecular profiling of resistant clones using proteome
wide analysis and transcriptomic sequencing unveiled 4343 proteins, and
8011 genes respectively which were differentially expressed (ANOVA
pBackground: Hypermethylation of gene promoter sequences resulting in
transcriptional silencing of tumor suppressor genes has been explored as
a therapeutic target in cancer for years. The cytosine analogues,
5-azacytidine and 2-deoxy-5-azacytidine, function as DNA
methyltransferase inhibitors and are currently most advanced drugs for
epigenetic cancer therapies. Despite encouraging results, mechanisms of
in vivo resistance to these nucleoside analogues remain unresolved and
are limiting their clinical application.Objective: The goal of this study
was to investigate the mechanisms of resistance to 2-deoxy-5-azacytidine
(decitabine).Methods: To investigate the mechanisms of resistance, we
developed several HCT116 p53 wild-type cell clones resistant towards
2-deoxy-5-azacytidine. Principal methods used during the study of
resistance were MTT cytotoxicity assays, flow cytometry based analyses
and molecular profiling of the resistant clones which included mass
spectrometry based proteomics using stable isotope labelling of amino
acids in cell culture (SILAC) and massively parallel signature sequencing
(MPSS) for studies at gene and transcript level.Results: During resistant
studies, all HCT116 2-deoxy-5-azacytidine resistant clones were >100
folds more resistant to decitabine in MTT cytotoxicity assays. Resistant
clones also displayed cross-resistance to other epigenetic inhibitors.
Flow cytometry based studies revealed significant up-regulation of DNA
and RNA synthesis. Molecular profiling of resistant clones using proteome
wide analysis and transcriptomic sequencing unveiled 4343 proteins, and
8011 genes respectively which were differentially expressed (ANOVA
p<0.05) compared to parental cell line. The major affected cellular
pathways were (i) DNA damage (ii) Transcription: role of heterochromatin
protein 1 (iii) Cell cycle: regulation of G1/S transition and initiation
of mitosis (iv) Apoptosis and survival: granzyme A signaling.Conclusion:
The present study will aid our understanding of the molecular basis of
acquired tumor resistance to 2-deoxy-5-azacytidine and help in predicting
its clinical response, as well as in designing alternative treatment
regimens for overcoming resistance, hence furthering clinical
development.Acknowledgement: This work was supported by internal grant of
Palacky University (LF_2013_016), BIOMEDREG (CZ.1.05/2.1.00/ 01.0030) and
Ministry of Industry and Trade of the Czech Republic (FR-TI4/625).

