Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel cell-based kinase assay panel paired with high content
phenotypic profiling to correlate kinase inhibitor specificity and
cellular activity


In many cancers, drugs that target a single kinase often lack efficacy
due to the presence of alternate oncogenic signaling pathways that may
compensate for the inhibition of the targeted kinase. Although completely
non-selective kinase inhibitors are highly toxic, selective and
simultaneous inhibition of a number of kinases can lead to greater
responses. Here we describe the development of a multiplexed cellular
kinase assay platform in which compounds are simultaneously profiled
against more than 12 kinase targets in a single sample. Using this
high-throughput platform, target activity and selectivity in cells can be
optimized concurrently, enabling the selection of specific multi-targeted
compounds. Using this platform, 300 kinase inhibitors were fully
characterized for cellular activity and potency across a large panel of
tyrosine kinases. These inhibitors were then tested across a panel of
diverse cancer cell lines in a phenotypic screen for their ability to
affect viability, cell cycle, and apoptosis under different growth
conditions. The resulting comprehensive data set of existing in vitro
data, cellular kinase data, and phenotypic screening results provided
novel insights into the relationship between inhibitor selectivity, cell
cycle effects, and the correlation to anti-cancer activity.

