Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of hypoxia-inducible factor-1, carbonic anhydrase-IX and
glucose transporter-1 in cervical cancer


Objectives: Hypoxia can drive the tumor toward a more aggressive
malignant phenotype through genomic and proteomic changes.
Hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1) transactivates genes whose proteins
allow metabolic adaptation to hypoxia, including carbonic anhydrase-IX
(CA-IX) and glucose transporter-1 (Glut-1). This study aimed to determine
whether the HIF-1, CA-IX and Glut-1 were associated with
clinico-pathological characteristics and progression-free survival in
patients with cervical carcinoma.Methods: Under the written informed
consent, tumor tissue samples were obtained from 54 patients with
cervical carcinoma performed radical hysterectomy. The expressions of
HIF-1, CA-IX and Glut-1 were detected by immunohistochemical staining
using paraffin-embedded sections.Results: CA-IX and Glut-1 expressions
were found in cell membrane and cytoplasm, and HIF-1 expression was
observed in cell nuclear. In 54 cases, the positive expression was
observed in 28 cases for HIF-1, 35 for CA-IX and 40 for Glut-1. The HIF-1
expression was related with clinical stage and histology, CA-IX
expression was related with clinical stage, tumor size, lymph-node
metastasis and lymph-vascular space involvement, and the Glut-1
expression was related with clinical stage and lymph-vascular space
involvement. The multivariate regression analysis revealed that the CA-IX
expression and lymph-vascular space involvement were the independent
variable associated with lymph-node metastasis in patients with cervical
cancer. Progression-free survival was shorter in patient with positive
CA-IX expression compared to negative CA-IX expression.Conclusion: In
cervical cancer patients, CA-IX expression is possible to be a risk
factor for lymph-node metastasis and disease recurrence, it was suggested
that pH regulation induced by CA-IX under hypoxic condition may be
associated with lymph node metastasis.

