Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In-vitro adenosine triphosphate-based chemotherapy response assay
(ATP-CRA) results comparison between primary and recurrent gynecologic
cancer using a unique cohort


Purpose: The standard chemotherapy regimen in gynecologic cancer
treatment is not established, particularly in cases of recurrence. The
objective of this study is to evaluate the role of in vitro adenosine
triphosphate-based chemotherapy response assay (ATP-CRA) in recurrent
gynecologic cancer.Methods: We examined 20 matched primary and recurrent
tumor pairs of each patient with recurrent gynecologic cancer, using
ATP-CRA. Tumor samples were obtained from primary and secondary debulking
or palliative surgery. Inhibition rates of the chemotherapeutic agents
were compared.Results: The diseases of patients analyzed in this study
were composed of ovarian/peritoneal cancer [11 patients (55%)], uterine
cancer [7 patients (35%)], and cervical cancer [3 patients (15%)]. The
average of inhibition rate was 36.3% in samples obtained from primary
surgery and 33.6% in samples from secondary debulking or palliative
surgery (P>0.1). In the primary surgery cases, the drugs showing high
inhibition rate were ifosfamide (56.4%), cisplatin (52.6%), and
irinotecan (43.3%) in the following order, and in the secondary operation
cases, ifosfamide (54.3%), cisplatin (44.3%), and Topotecan (39.9%). The
number of cases in which the ATP-CRA result had actual influence in
choosing the regimen, were 0 (0%) in primary surgery cases, and 7 (35%)
in secondary surgery cases (PPurpose: The standard chemotherapy regimen
in gynecologic cancer treatment is not established, particularly in cases
of recurrence. The objective of this study is to evaluate the role of in
vitro adenosine triphosphate-based chemotherapy response assay (ATP-CRA)
in recurrent gynecologic cancer.Methods: We examined 20 matched primary
and recurrent tumor pairs of each patient with recurrent gynecologic
cancer, using ATP-CRA. Tumor samples were obtained from primary and
secondary debulking or palliative surgery. Inhibition rates of the
chemotherapeutic agents were compared.Results: The diseases of patients
analyzed in this study were composed of ovarian/peritoneal cancer [11
patients (55%)], uterine cancer [7 patients (35%)], and cervical cancer
[3 patients (15%)]. The average of inhibition rate was 36.3% in samples
obtained from primary surgery and 33.6% in samples from secondary
debulking or palliative surgery (P>0.1). In the primary surgery cases,
the drugs showing high inhibition rate were ifosfamide (56.4%), cisplatin
(52.6%), and irinotecan (43.3%) in the following order, and in the
secondary operation cases, ifosfamide (54.3%), cisplatin (44.3%), and
Topotecan (39.9%). The number of cases in which the ATP-CRA result had
actual influence in choosing the regimen, were 0 (0%) in primary surgery
cases, and 7 (35%) in secondary surgery cases (P<0.05).Conclusion: The
drug inhibition rate did not decrease in the recurrent tumors compared to
the primary tumors. The actual influence of ATP-CRA results increase
significantly in the secondary surgery compared to the primary one.Note:
This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

