Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epigenetic regulation of KLHL34 may be predictive of pathologic
response to preoperative chemoradiotherapy in rectal cancer patients


Aims: Radiation therapy is used to treat half of all cancer patients, but
response to radiation therapy varies widely among patients. Studies aimed
at predicting individual responsiveness to preoperative radiation therapy
(CRT) are urgently needed, especially considering the risks associated
with poorly responsive patients.Methods: This study adopted a three-step
process to select radiosensitive candidates of methylation genes. In the
first step, a genome-wide creening of methylation genes was performed
using Infinium humanMethylation450K Beadchip according to the correlation
with istopathologic tumor regression grade (TRG) of 45 patients with
locally advanced rectal cancer (LARC). In the second step, methylation
status of selected sites was analyzed with pyrosequencing in the other 98
LARC patients. Finally, candidate gene identified by second screening was
verified by biological utility assessment using cell viability assays of
transfected colorectal cancer (CRC) cells. Results: Genome-wide creening
identified that hypermethylation of 7 CpG sites (DZIP cg24107021, DZIP
cg26886381, ZEB1 cg04430381, DKK3 cg041006961, STL cg00991794, KLHL34
cg01828474, ARHGAP6 cg07828380) were associated with preoperative CRT
responses. Patients carrying hypermethylated KLHL34 cg14232291 were
confirmed to show radiosensitivity by pyrosequencing in additional
patients. Knockdown of KLHL34 significantly reduced colony formation and
increased cytotoxicity in LoVo cells. It increased radiation induced
caspase-3 activity and sub G1 population.Conclusions: In this study, we
showed that methylation status of KLHL34 cg14232291 may be a predictive
marker of radiosensitivity to preoperative CRT, although further
validation is needed in large cohorts.

