Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Investigation of the survival of circulating breast tumor cells
using biomimetic microfluidic circulation system


Distant metastases are the cause of about 90% of breast cancer patient
death and the overall survival rate for metastatic breast cancer is only
about 16%. Circulating tumor cells (CTCs) shed from the primary tumor,
travel through the blood to distant anatomic sites and cause metastasis.
The survival of CTCs in blood vascular system is a challenging
pre-requisite of successful metastasis, as the biochemical and mechanical
environment of circulation is vastly different from the primary tumor
sites. Studies related to the fate of CTCs in circulation are mainly
limited by lack of well-controlled and realistic experimental models.We
have developed a microfluidic device that mimics the human blood
circulatory system in order to study the mechanism underlying the
survival of cancer cells in the blood circulation. The circulation device
integrates a network of channels with a self-contained micropump can
generate pulsatile fluid flow pattern and corresponding fluidic forces,
which can represent the nature of blood flow and haemodynamic forces in
the vasculature.The survival rate of breast cancer cell line MCF7 in
circulation was measured via this microfluidic platform. MCF-7 cells in
circulation device had a much lower survival rate compared with those in
control device. The survival rate of MCF-7 cells after circulating 1, 2
and 4 hours are respectively 48.8%, 36.3% and 10.7%, while the survival
rate in control device after 1, 2 and 4 hours are 93.7%, 77.6% and
94.30%. We further compared the survival rate of MCF-7 cells with SUM-159
cells. We hypothesize that by assessing the differential survival ability
of breast cancer cells with varied EMT traits can reveal the key
signatures of the metastatic tumor cells.

