Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Circulating miRNA in acute myeloid leukemia: A pilot study


Introduction: Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is within the top 10 cancers
in USA. AML Cytogenetic classification currently guides AML treatment
selection strategies based on risk-adapted treatment. However, AML has
proven to be a heterogeneous disease and in up to 45% of patients,
cytogenetic classification fails to predict their clinical outcome and
thus fails to guide further therapy. micro-RNA (miRNA) are regulators of
hematopoiesis and their expression is related to gene expression
modulations. miRNAs can be detected in the blood stream. Thus we intend
to evaluate the value of miRNAs as prognostic biomarkers in AML.Methods:
Using a retrospective case-control (age-gender match) study design,
plasma miRMA was isolated from 10 samples (5 control cases and 5 AML
cases). miRNA was isolated from plasma sample using miRNeasy kit.
Bio-analyzer was used for determine the miRNA integrity and quality. The
miRNA expression level for selected miRNa based on publish data
associating them with functions related to hematopoiesis (myeloid), AML
and cancer using miScript miRNA PCR Array (Qiagen).Results: A total of 10
samples were analyzed (5 cases/ 5 controls). Gender distribution was 80%
female and 20% males, mean age was 59 (range 32 to 66). Cytogenetic risk
classification distribution was 40% low risk, 40% high risk and 20%
intermediate risk. Down expression of miRNA levels in AML participants
compared to controls was found for miR101-3p, miR106b-5p, miR142-3p,
miR142-5p, miR-145-5p, miR-148a-3p, miR15a-5p, miR-16-5p, miR199a-5p (all
p0.071). Over expression of miRNA levels in AML participants compared to
controls was found for miR100-5p, miR-155-5p, miR34a-5p, miR-182-5p,
miR-181b-5p, miR-181a-5p, miR-221-3p, (all p>0.071).Conclusions: We were
able to identify statistically significant differences in plasma miRNA
expressions levels between AML and control participants. Especially when
analyzing miRNA previously associated with hematopoiesis and cancer
development like miR-223-3p (myeloid development), miR-101-3p (tumor
suppressor), miR-145-5p (anti-oncomiR), miR-155-5p (oncomiR), among
others. Our preliminary data analysis is consistent with AML related
published data and contrast with others but, most importantly, its
analysis results are been consistent with known miRNA, AML and cancer
published pathways. Further AML and control subjects recruitment is
ongoing in order to provide an increased sample and further confirmation
of this preliminary findings.Note: This abstract was not presented at the
meeting.

