Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Drug mechanisms of action: Triangulating with cultured cancer cells


The clinical trial is irreplaceable as a scientific test bed for cancer
therapeutics, animal models are becoming ever more sophisticated for
preclinical testing, and 3D cell cultures can mimic some aspects of tumor
structure and microenvironment. So what are the proper roles of 2D cell
cultures in research on mechanisms of drug action? A partial answer is
historical: most of our information about mechanisms of drug sensitivity
and resistance has come from such cultures. A second is that cells in
culture can be engineered readily by selective pressure or genetic
manipulation to express or silence any chosen drug target or modulator of
drug activity. A third is provided by the emergence of cancer cell panels
for use in large-scale drug discovery programs, at the same time
generating massive amounts of data that can be used to support or refute
hypotheses about molecular mechanism. Cell line assays are not in general
predictive of clinical efficacy, but patterns of response among lines and
under different conditions can certainly predict mechanism of action,
often quite incisively (see, e.g., Weinstein, Science 258;447, 1992).The
first large-scale cell-line screen used to illuminate mechanisms of
action was the NCI-60, a diverse set of 60 human lines used to test
>100,000 compounds and natural products since 1988 (Shoemaker, Prog.
Clin. Biol. Res. 2:361, 1988). Because we and others have profiled the
same lines at the DNA, RNA, protein, chromosomal, and epigenomic levels
(see, e.g., Weinstein, Science 258;447, 1997), it has been possible to
correlate molecular aberrations in the cells with their sensitivity to
the agents tested. More recently, the Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia
(CCLE) (Barretina, Nature 483;603, 2012) and Cancer Genome Project (CGP)
(Garnett, Nature 483;570, 2012) were published, describing molecular
profiles and drug response assays for 1,036 cell lines and 24 drugs, and
727 cell lines and 138 drugs, respectively. The three cell panel assays
complement each other: the NCI-60 provides a relatively small number of
cell types but many tested agents; the CCLE and CGP provide many more
cell types but a much smaller collection of tested compounds. Because the
assays and experimental conditions being used in the three systems differ
(Weinstein and Lorenzi, Nature, doi: 10.1038/nature12839, 2013), we are
able to use the similarities and differences in response to triangulate
for more incisive and extensive information on the robustness of
molecular mechanisms suggested by each separately. Even if single
pharmacological measurements for a given cell/drug pair show considerable
variability across different assay types (Haibe-Kains et al. Nature doi:
10.1038/nature12831, 2013), we find that integrated analysis of the
patterns of response across the 60 cell lines and the hundreds of cell
lines are often pathognomonic for particular genomic drivers or
particular functional pathways.

