Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Smoking before first childbirth may explain some of the increase
in breast cancer diagnosed before 50 years of age


Background: Today, the majority of middle-aged women in Norway are ever
(i.e. either former or current) smokers, who started to smoke in their
teens. In the current study we prospectively examined the effect of
smoking initiation before first childbirth on breast cancer risk and
calculated the corresponding population attributable fraction (PAF) of
breast cancer in the Norwegian Women and Cancer Study, a nationally
representative prospective cohort study.Material and Methods: We followed
137,142 women, aged 31-70 years, who completed a baseline questionnaire
between 1991 and 2007, through linkages to national registries through
December, 2010. Questionnaire data included information on lifestyle
factors, including lifetime history of smoking. We used Cox proportional
hazards models to estimate hazard ratios (HRs) and 95% confidence
intervals (CIs) while adjusting for relevant confounders.Results: During
a mean follow-up of 12 years, 3,157 women developed invasive breast
cancer confirmed by histology. At enrolment, the women were on average 49
years old, 38% were postmenopausal, and 91% were parous with a mean age
at first childbirth of 24 years. Altogether, 60% of the women reported to
be ever smokers and 10% reported to be non-alcohol drinkers. Compared
with never smokers, the multivariate adjusted HR estimate for passive
smokers was significantly increased with 18% (HR=1.18, 95% CI 1.03-1.35)
for women overall and with 48% (HR=1.48, 95% CI 1.10-2.00) when the
analyses was restricted to non-alcohol drinkers. The corresponding
figures for ever smokers was a non-significantly increased risk of 11%
(HR=1.11, 95% CI 0.99-1.26) for women overall and of 28% (HR=1.28, 95% CI
0.93-1.77) for non-alcohol drinkers.For parous ever smokers, those who
had smoked >10 years before their first childbirth had a 24% (HR=1.24,
95% CI 1.04-1.48) increased risk of breast cancer overall while
non-drinkers had a 90% (HR=1.90, 95% CI 1.01-3.58) increased risk of
breast cancer, compared with parous never smokers.The PAF of breast
cancer due to smoking initiation before the first childbirth was 9, 3%
(CI 3.2-14.9). For women diagnosed with breast cancer before and after
the age of 50 years the corresponding figure was 15, 9% (CI 1.7-28.1) and
7.9% (1.2-14.1), respectively.In summary, almost one in ten breast cancer
cases among middle aged women in Norway could have been prevented if
women delayed smoking initiation until after their first
childbirth.Impact: Smoking before first childbirth is an important risk
factor for breast cancer that has been emerging during the last decade
due to changing smoking history among Norwegian women.

