Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nanoformulation enhances anti-angiogenic efficacy of Tunicamycin


The breast cancer landscape indicates it is a global problem and accounts
for nearly a quarter of all cancers in women. In 2008, 1.4 million women
were diagnosed with the disease worldwide and 438,000 died globally in
2010. In the United States, it is estimated that 296,000 women and 2,240
men will be diagnosed with breast cancer in 2013 and 39,620 women and 410
men will die from the disease. In 2030, with no major changes in
prevention or treatment 747,802 women are estimated to die worldwide.
Breast cancer treatment includes surgery, radiation therapy, chemotherapy
and/or hormonal therapy, and within the past 15 years, targeted antibody
therapy. Unfortunately, de novo and acquired resistance are major issues
with all known targeted therapies. Tumor microenvironment (TME) is
immensely complex and contributes to chemoresistance. Using Tunicamycin,
a potent inhibitor of asparagine-linked (N-linked) protein glycosylation
we have established earlier that Tunicamycin inhibits (i) angiogenesis in
vitro by arresting cells in G1; (ii) in vivo angiogenesis in Matrigel
implant in nude mice; and (iii) prevents the progression of double- and
triple-negative breast tumors in athymic nude mice by inducing ER stress.
Nanoparticles (The breast cancer landscape indicates it is a global
problem and accounts for nearly a quarter of all cancers in women. In
2008, 1.4 million women were diagnosed with the disease worldwide and
438,000 died globally in 2010. In the United States, it is estimated that
296,000 women and 2,240 men will be diagnosed with breast cancer in 2013
and 39,620 women and 410 men will die from the disease. In 2030, with no
major changes in prevention or treatment 747,802 women are estimated to
die worldwide. Breast cancer treatment includes surgery, radiation
therapy, chemotherapy and/or hormonal therapy, and within the past 15
years, targeted antibody therapy. Unfortunately, de novo and acquired
resistance are major issues with all known targeted therapies. Tumor
microenvironment (TME) is immensely complex and contributes to
chemoresistance. Using Tunicamycin, a potent inhibitor of
asparagine-linked (N-linked) protein glycosylation we have established
earlier that Tunicamycin inhibits (i) angiogenesis in vitro by arresting
cells in G1; (ii) in vivo angiogenesis in Matrigel implant in nude mice;
and (iii) prevents the progression of double- and triple-negative breast
tumors in athymic nude mice by inducing ER stress. Nanoparticles (<100
nm) evade the immune system's clearing mechanisms long enough to reach
the targeted disease tissue efficiently. We have, therefore, hypothesized
that nano-formulated Tunicamycin would have a better efficacy in treating
breast cancer in the clinic. The objective was to evaluate
nano-formulated Tunicamycin, and we have used Tunicamycin encapsulated in
peptide nanotubes, nanotubes bound to gold nanoparticles (Au NPs)
conjugated with Tunicamycin, Tunicamycin conjugated with nanotubes, Au
NPs bound to tubes and conjugated with Tunicamycin, and Au NPs conjugated
with Tunicamycin. The MTT assay indicated that nanoparticles (1 g/mL)
inhibited capillary endothelial cells proliferation 50% within one hour
of treatment whereas the native Tunicamycin had no effect. The
nanoformulated Tunicamycin blocked the cell cycle progression by
inhibiting either both cyclin D1 and CDK4, or cyclin D1, or the CDK4
expression as well as the expression of phospho Rb
(serine-229/threonine-252). Phosphorylation of p53 at serine-392 was
down-regulated but not the total p53. Increased expression of GRP-78/Bip
identified ER stress. Upregulated expression (1.6-5.5 folds) of
phopsho-PERK supported induction of unfolded protein response (upr)
signaling. Down regulated expression of caspase-9 and caspase-3 proposes
a non-canonical pathway of cell death during ER stress induced by
nano-formulated Tunicamycin.

