Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Protective role of thioredoxin-1 in base excision repair under
redox modulation


Thioredoxin-1 (Trx1) is an antioxidant enzyme with a protective role in
the removal of reactive oxygen species (ROS). We investigated the
mechanism by which the redox modulator Trx1 affects base excision repair
(BER) activity to understand the protective role of Trx1. We constructed
a Trx1 knockdown system to demonstrate the specific mechanism of Trx1.
DNA damage in terms of relative intensity of the DNA tail and -H2AX foci
was markedly higher in the Trx1 shRNA cells compared with that in the
wild type cells, leading to increased cellular susceptibility to a
sublethal dose of BER-inducible toxicant, nitrosomethylurea (NMU). In
addition, we observed a modulatory role of Trx1 in the BER pathway via
the p53 downstream gene, growth arrest, and DNA-damage-inducible protein
45 (Gadd45a). The protein level and function of p53, a Trx1 downstream
gene, coincidently decreased in the Trx1 shRNA cells. Furthermore, Trx1
shRNA cells showed decreased Gadd45a expression and interaction of
Gadd45a with apurynic/apyrimidinic endonuclease 1 (APE1) as well as APE1
activity. In conclusion, Trx1 might cooperate in the control of APE1
function by modulating the p53-mediated BER via the protein-protein
interaction between Gadd45a and APE1, providing insight into the novel
role of redox factor Trx1 in modulation of BER.Note: This abstract was
not presented at the meeting.

