Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DNA methylation patterns in peripheral blood and the relationship
with cancer susceptibility loci at chromosome 8q24


Chromosome 8q24 has emerged as an important region for genetic
susceptibility to several cancers, but little is known about the
contribution of DNA methylation in this region. To explore the extent of
variation in DNA methylation at 8q24 in peripheral blood and its
relationship with genetic variation in the region, we conducted a
cross-sectional study using blood samples from 80 non-Hispanic Caucasian
males in the Prostate, Lung, Colorectal, and Ovarian Cancer Screening
Trial. Specifically, we aimed to evaluate between-individual variation in
DNA methylation levels at specific CpG sites at 8q24 and to investigate
the underlying genetic structure in the region by examining correlations
for DNA methylation levels with each other and with the established
cancer susceptibility SNPs at 8q24. We quantified DNA methylation levels
at 145 CpG sites nearby cancer susceptibility single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) at 8q24 or the MYC oncogene using pyrosequencing of
bisulfite-treated DNA, which is considered a highly sensitive method to
detect differences in DNA methylation levels between individuals. We
calculated pairwise Spearman correlations (rho), adjusting for multiple
testing using the False Discovery Rate (FDR) method. We identified a
large number of CpG sites that were reproducible and demonstrated
moderate to high between-individual variation in our study population.
Among these CpG sites, some sites within or nearby MYC and POU5F1B were
strongly correlated with one another (highest rho=0.74), suggesting a
coordination of DNA methylation levels in gene regions. Moreover, we
observed strong correlations between several CpG sites and some of the
known cancer susceptibility SNPs at 8q24. Some of the correlations
remained statistically significant after adjustment for multiple
comparisons, including a CpG site and an established prostate cancer SNP
in the long non-coding RNA PRNCR1 (Chr8:128167809 and rs1456315,
rho=0.52; p-value=1.4x10-6; FDR-adjusted p-value=0.002) and a CpG site
(Chr8:128498051) in POU5F1B and the known prostate/colorectal cancer SNP
rs6983267 (rho=0.46; p-value=2.0x10-5; FDR-adjusted p-value=0.01). This
is the first study to report associations between DNA methylation levels
at 8q24 in peripheral blood and 8q24 cancer susceptibility SNPs,
suggesting that DNA methylation at this important susceptibility locus
may contribute to risk. Additional studies are needed to clarify the
relationship between genetic and epigenetic variation at 8q24 and cancer
risk.

