Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeted or whole genome sequencing of formalin-fixed tissue
samples


Background: To provide a systematic analysis of formalin fixation
artifacts on Illumina sequencing libraries and results, we generated two
complementary sequencing libraries (target enrichment sequencing and
whole exome sequencing) from 11 pairs of matched formalin-fixed
paraffin-embedded (FFPE) and fresh-frozen (FF) tumor samples and two
pairs of matched FFPE and FF germline samples. We also generated whole
genome sequencing data from a single pair of FF/FFPE tumor
samples.Results: The results indicate minimal variations in library
fragment size, coverage, and PCR duplicates within FF/FFPE paired samples
that are less than 1 year old; whereas, a large variation in these
parameters were observed in FF/FFPE pairs in samples that are
approximately 2 years old. No significant increase in global mismatch
rates and CG>TA substitutions were observed in FFPE samples from the
former group; whereas, a discernible increase in mismatch rates and CG>TA
substitutions were observed in FFPE samples from the latter group.
However, over 99.7% and 99.5% of concordant calls were observed between
matched FF and FFPE pairs at reference and non-reference positions within
the targeted regions, respectively. Although an increased rate of global
mismatches and CG>TA substitutions were observed in some FFPE samples,
discordant rates were low (TA substitutions are comparable in
non-reference positions in paired FF and FFPE samples.Conclusions: We
developed upfront quality assessment and library preparation method that
use low input DNA from FFPE samples to perform next-generation
sequencing. The results from our studies indicate the suitability of FFPE
samples in sequencing studies.

