Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The effect of Hoechst 33342 and Hoechst 33258 on side population
(SP) cells or stem cell-like population


Hoechst 33342 side population (SP) analysis is widely used for
identifying and sorting side population (SP) or stem cell-like population
from a variety of tissues and species including cancer cell lines.
However, Hoechst 33342, but not its derivative Hoechst 33258, is an
apoptotic inducer. Our previous results showed that Hoechst 33342 induced
apoptosis in seven mesothelioma cell lines through cytochrome C release,
caspase activation and degradation of Poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase. We
hypothesize Hoechst 33342 may cause SP cell death during Hoechst 33342
staining and Hoechst 33258 may be a safe indicator for identification and
isolation of SP cells.The aims of this study are 1) to detect the effect
of H 33342 on SP cells, and 2) to identify if H33258 can be an indicator
for stem cell isolation.Procedure: The effect of Hoechst dyes on the
tumorigenicity of H2373 mesothelioma cells was analyzed by soft agar
clonogenic colony formation. MTT assay have been employed to estimate the
effect of Hoechst dyes on cell growth in H2373 mesothelioma cells, and
Hoechst 33342 and Hoechst 33258 SP analysis was performed on a FACSDiVa
cell sorter.Results: Our result demonstrated that Hoechst 33342 staining
can causes SP cell damage and also decreases cell colony formation and
cell proliferation after using the routine staining doses and intervals
for SP cell analysis. In contrast, Hoechst 33258 has little effect on the
cell colony formation and cell proliferation. We have found that
verapamil, ABC transporter inhibitor, significantly inhibits the efflux
of intracellular Hoechst 33258, which means Hoechst 33258 may be used as
a marker in isolating ABC transporter positive cells, as Hoechst 33342
does.Conclusion: 1) Hoechst 33342 can induce apoptosis of SP cells of
mesothelioma cancer cells 2) Hoechst 33258 may be a safe indicator and
replace Hoechst 33342 for identification and isolation of side
population.Future Studies: 1) More in vitro methods such as clonogenic
assay, drug resistant assay, and invasion assay are required for further
determination of stem cell-like properties of side population isolated by
Hoechst 33258 when compared to that isolated by Hoechst 33342. 2)
Xenograft (or animal) study is ultimately required to determine the
capacity of in vivo tumor formation of the side population cells isolated
by Hoechst 33258 after the completion of in vitro studyNote: This
abstract was not presented at the meeting.

