Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Allogeneic cell cased vaccine development by shared antigen
screening


The fundamental premise of allogeneic vaccines for cancer relies upon the
presence of common antigens that are shared between established cell
lines and a large proportion of patients with histologically related
tumors. Recent results from The Cancer Genome Atlas have clearly
demonstrated that somatic mutations in exon region DNA, while potentially
immunogenic, do not result in the translation of antigenic proteins that
are similar from patient to patient. Instead, these data reinforce the
concept that dysregulation of common pathways contributes to the general
property of de-differentiation in tumor cells and the acquisition of
immature phenotypes as compared to untransformed precursor cells. This
phenomenon leads to expression of mucinous and embryonal antigens,
collectively known as cancer testis antigens, that are otherwise rare in
mature tissues and to which central tolerance remains incomplete. We have
developed allogeneic vaccines based on parallel screening of non-small
cell lung, bladder, triple-negative breast, ovarian and melanoma tumor
cell lines and patient tumor samples. The baseline expression of certain
antigens, including SSX2, SSX4, CT10, MAGE-A1, MAGE-A10, LAGE-1 and
NY-ESO-1 was found to vary widely both between tumor samples and
non-transformed tissue controls. Among all antigens screened, MAGE-A3 was
most commonly upregulated across transformed tissue samples, however
other antigens including BAGE-1, XAGE-1b and MAGE-A10 were found to be
most dramatically upregulated. This analysis provides a screening tool
with which to appropriately profile and prioritize individual cell lines
for vaccine development in histologically diverse tumor types.

