Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PAN-811 blocks anticancer drug-induced neurotoxicity


The side effects of anticancer drugs, such as chemotherapy-induced
cognitive impairment or chemobrain, severely limit their dose usage and
therapeutic course, and seriously affect quality of life in cancer
patients. The mechanisms underlying chemobrain are still unexplained, and
there are currently no treatments. The present study aimed to understand
neurotoxicological mechanism of anticancer drugs and to develop
therapeutic agents for chemobrain.Antimetabolites methotrexate (MTX) and
5-fluorouracil (5-FU) are widely used chemotherapeutic agents, readily
crossing the blood-brain barrier (BBB). An alkylating agent cisplatin
(CDDP) has also been reported to induce chemobrain although controversy
exists on its capability to pass the BBB. In this study, primary cerebral
neurons from embryonic rats were seeded in serum-free culture medium
containing 100% antioxidants (AO). Half of the medium was replaced twice
with medium without AO at day 7 (50% AO) and 9 (25% AO). By day 13, the
neurons were insulted with 100M MTX, 25M 5-FU, or 3.5M CDDP, and treated
with 1.25, 2.5, 5 or 10 M PAN-811ClH2O (PAN-811) for 3 additional days
using vehicle as the control. By day 16, media were harvested for LDH
assay and cells were photographed at 300x. Five hours following a third
medium replacement (12.5% AO), the cells were photographed again and
evaluated by MTS analysis.No neurotoxicity was observed under 50-100% AO
conditions for MTX, 5-FU or CDDP treatment. When the AO content was
reduced to 25%, MTX and 5-FU all caused 70% and 75% increases in LDH
release, and CDDP elicited a 112% increase, without notable morphological
changes. When AO content was reduced to 12.5%, morphological cell death
(reductions in cell and neurite densities) occurred in each of MTX, 5-FU
and CDDP insulted groups. Additionally, 5-FU and CDDP insults resulted in
33% and 66% reductions in MTS readings, respectively. All these indicate
a key role of oxidative stress in mediation of the in vitro
neurotoxicity.PAN-811, an anticancer drug candidate targeting
ribonucleotide reductase, inhibited MTX-, 5-FU- or CDDP- elicited LDH
leakage in the 25% AO condition in a dose-dependently manner; PAN-811 at
3M suppressed LDH released from MTX- or 5-FU- insulted neurons to control
levels, and at 10M fully blocked CDDP-induced LDH leakage. Furthermore,
PAN-811 at 10M fully inhibited 5-FU-induced MTS reduction, and elevated
MTS reading by 48% for CDDP-insulted neurons under 12.5% AO condition. In
addition, PAN-811 at 5M well blocked MTX-, 5-FU- or CDDP- elicited
morphological cell death.Inhibition of neurotoxicity via suppression of
oxidative stress by PAN-811 should not interfere with anticancer efficacy
of tested drugs since their anticancer activities do not rely on
oxidative stress. Besides, PAN-811 has a distinct intracellular target,
which may introduce a synergistic effect with a tested drug in
suppression of cancer growth, while protecting against chemobrain.

