Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Serial in vivo orthotopic passage of human pancreatic cancer cells
selects for increased stem cell-like behavior


The aim of this study was to determine if stem-like properties of cancer
cells increase after serial orthotopic passages in nude mice. Orthotopic
mouse models of human pancreatic cancer cell lines were established by
injecting 1x106 BxPC-3 RFP or Panc-1 GFP cells into the pancreas of nude
mice. Cell lines were generated from primary pancreatic tumors after each
passage. Cells (1x106) of the passaged cell lines were orthotopically
injected into another set of mice and this process was repeated until a
decreased host-mouse survival plateau was reached. To evaluate stem-like
characteristics, 1x106 cells of the parental (P0) and multiply-passaged
BxCP-3 RFP (P6) and Panc-1 GFP (P7) cell lines were orthotopically
implanted into mice. The mice were followed until they were premorbid. In
a second group of mice, the P0 and P6/7 lines were injected
subcutaneously at different cell concentrations (102, 5 x 102, 103, 104,
105 cells) to determine the minimum cell number for tumor initiation.
Additional orthotopic models were generated to evaluate differences in
tumor progression and sensitivities to the chemotherapeutic agent,
gemcitabine. In vitro proliferation and migration assays were performed
on all four cell lines as well. The P6 and P7 lines demonstrated more
aggressive behavior with regard to tumorigenicity, proliferation, tumor
growth, migration, metastasis, progression, and chemotherapy resistance.
A significantly fewer number of P6-passaged BxPC-3 cells (100 cells,
p=0.02) and P7 Panc-1 cells (500 cells, p=0.005) were required for tumor
initiation in mice by 6 weeks compared to their respective P0 lines. The
P6/7 lines produced larger tumors at 6 weeks post implantation (pThe aim
of this study was to determine if stem-like properties of cancer cells
increase after serial orthotopic passages in nude mice. Orthotopic mouse
models of human pancreatic cancer cell lines were established by
injecting 1x106 BxPC-3 RFP or Panc-1 GFP cells into the pancreas of nude
mice. Cell lines were generated from primary pancreatic tumors after each
passage. Cells (1x106) of the passaged cell lines were orthotopically
injected into another set of mice and this process was repeated until a
decreased host-mouse survival plateau was reached. To evaluate stem-like
characteristics, 1x106 cells of the parental (P0) and multiply-passaged
BxCP-3 RFP (P6) and Panc-1 GFP (P7) cell lines were orthotopically
implanted into mice. The mice were followed until they were premorbid. In
a second group of mice, the P0 and P6/7 lines were injected
subcutaneously at different cell concentrations (102, 5 x 102, 103, 104,
105 cells) to determine the minimum cell number for tumor initiation.
Additional orthotopic models were generated to evaluate differences in
tumor progression and sensitivities to the chemotherapeutic agent,
gemcitabine. In vitro proliferation and migration assays were performed
on all four cell lines as well. The P6 and P7 lines demonstrated more
aggressive behavior with regard to tumorigenicity, proliferation, tumor
growth, migration, metastasis, progression, and chemotherapy resistance.
A significantly fewer number of P6-passaged BxPC-3 cells (100 cells,
p=0.02) and P7 Panc-1 cells (500 cells, p=0.005) were required for tumor
initiation in mice by 6 weeks compared to their respective P0 lines. The
P6/7 lines produced larger tumors at 6 weeks post implantation (p<0.001).
Passaged lines also demonstrated greater proliferation and migration
capabilities in vitro. This translated into the development of a
significantly greater degree of cachexia, ascites, and greater metastatic
tumor burden (p0.019) at 6 weeks in mice harboring the passaged tumors.
There was a significantly greater extent of metastatic disease in liver
and lung samples from mice with tumors generated from P6/7 lines. The
P6/7 lines' average time to metastasis and overall survival were reduced
by more than one-half (pThe aim of this study was to determine if
stem-like properties of cancer cells increase after serial orthotopic
passages in nude mice. Orthotopic mouse models of human pancreatic cancer
cell lines were established by injecting 1x106 BxPC-3 RFP or Panc-1 GFP
cells into the pancreas of nude mice. Cell lines were generated from
primary pancreatic tumors after each passage. Cells (1x106) of the
passaged cell lines were orthotopically injected into another set of mice
and this process was repeated until a decreased host-mouse survival
plateau was reached. To evaluate stem-like characteristics, 1x106 cells
of the parental (P0) and multiply-passaged BxCP-3 RFP (P6) and Panc-1 GFP
(P7) cell lines were orthotopically implanted into mice. The mice were
followed until they were premorbid. In a second group of mice, the P0 and
P6/7 lines were injected subcutaneously at different cell concentrations
(102, 5 x 102, 103, 104, 105 cells) to determine the minimum cell number
for tumor initiation. Additional orthotopic models were generated to
evaluate differences in tumor progression and sensitivities to the
chemotherapeutic agent, gemcitabine. In vitro proliferation and migration
assays were performed on all four cell lines as well. The P6 and P7 lines
demonstrated more aggressive behavior with regard to tumorigenicity,
proliferation, tumor growth, migration, metastasis, progression, and
chemotherapy resistance. A significantly fewer number of P6-passaged
BxPC-3 cells (100 cells, p=0.02) and P7 Panc-1 cells (500 cells, p=0.005)
were required for tumor initiation in mice by 6 weeks compared to their
respective P0 lines. The P6/7 lines produced larger tumors at 6 weeks
post implantation (p<0.001). Passaged lines also demonstrated greater
proliferation and migration capabilities in vitro. This translated into
the development of a significantly greater degree of cachexia, ascites,
and greater metastatic tumor burden (p0.019) at 6 weeks in mice harboring
the passaged tumors. There was a significantly greater extent of
metastatic disease in liver and lung samples from mice with tumors
generated from P6/7 lines. The P6/7 lines' average time to metastasis and
overall survival were reduced by more than one-half (p<0.001). Both P6/7
lines were less sensitive to gemcitabine (p0.009). Thus, serial passaging
allows for in vivo selection of more aggressive variants of the human
pancreatic cancer cell lines BxPC-3 and Panc-1, which are also resistant
to gemcitabine, suggesting that stem-like cells are being selected.

