Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bub1 is a key regulator of TGF- signaling


The transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-) family of cytokines regulates
many processes such as immune suppression, angiogenesis, wound healing
and epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT. Early in tumorigenesis,
when epithelial cells retain exquisite growth sensitivity to this ligand,
TGF- signaling elicits a tumor suppressing activity. However, transformed
cells become refractory to TGF--mediated growth inhibition and acquire a
phenotype wherein the intracellular signaling circuitry of the cells is
altered, leading to tumorigenic and metastatic effects in response to
TGF- exposure. Although TGF- activating pathways have been studied, the
molecular participants are poorly defined. Here we identify budding
uninhibited by benzimidazoles-1 (Bub1) as an integral component of
canonical and non-canonical TGF- signaling pathways, where Bub1 is
required for TGFBRI-TGFBRII complex formation and activation.
Bub1-depleted cells exhibited reductions in TGF- dependent Smad2/3
phosphorylation, recruitment of Smad2/3 to the TGFBRI-II complex,
PI3K/Akt and p38MAPK activation, Smad binding element driven promoter
activity (SBE4-Luc), and invasion and migration. Furthermore, a targeted
small molecule inhibitor of Bub1 kinase activity (2OH-BNPP1), as well as
an inactive kinase mutant of Bub1, abrogated ligand mediated TGF-
signaling and phenotypic response. These studies demonstrate a role for
the Bub1 kinase in mediating TGF- dependent signaling beyond its
established function in cell-cycle regulation and chromosome cohesion and
uncover the underlying basis for the pleiotropic cellular response
commonly observed upon activation of the pathway.

