Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Established genetic variants and dietary patterns jointly impact
risk of renal cell carcinoma in non-Hispanic whites


Background: Several emerging renal cell carcinoma (RCC) risk factors
related to diet and energy balance have been identified; however, the
etiology of RCC and potential mechanisms remain poorly described.
Utilizing data collected in an ongoing case-control study, we identified
dietary patterns associated with RCC risk. We further assessed whether
these associations varied by known and suspected RCC risk factors, such
as obesity, tobacco use, physical inactivity and hypertensive status, as
well as established genetic variants identified through GWAS.Methods:
Diet was assessed among 703 incident RCC cases recruited from the
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center in Houston, Texas and 746
healthy controls recruited via random digit dialing. We derived three
primary dietary patterns: fruits and vegetables, an American/Western and
a Tex-Mex pattern using factor analysis. We examined associations between
dietary pattern scores and RCC risk and effect modification by obesity,
smoking status, physical activity, history of hypertension and genetic
variants. Odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) were
estimated using multivariate logistic regression adjusted for age,
gender, total energy intake, and other RCC risk factors.Results: Greater
adherence to the fruits and vegetables dietary pattern was inversely
related to RCC risk [OR and 95% CI across tertiles: 1.00 (ref), 0.68
(0.51-0.86) and 0.55 (0.41-0.74), respectively; P-trend Background:
Several emerging renal cell carcinoma (RCC) risk factors related to diet
and energy balance have been identified; however, the etiology of RCC and
potential mechanisms remain poorly described. Utilizing data collected in
an ongoing case-control study, we identified dietary patterns associated
with RCC risk. We further assessed whether these associations varied by
known and suspected RCC risk factors, such as obesity, tobacco use,
physical inactivity and hypertensive status, as well as established
genetic variants identified through GWAS.Methods: Diet was assessed among
703 incident RCC cases recruited from the University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center in Houston, Texas and 746 healthy controls recruited via
random digit dialing. We derived three primary dietary patterns: fruits
and vegetables, an American/Western and a Tex-Mex pattern using factor
analysis. We examined associations between dietary pattern scores and RCC
risk and effect modification by obesity, smoking status, physical
activity, history of hypertension and genetic variants. Odds ratios (ORs)
and 95% confidence intervals (CI) were estimated using multivariate
logistic regression adjusted for age, gender, total energy intake, and
other RCC risk factors.Results: Greater adherence to the fruits and
vegetables dietary pattern was inversely related to RCC risk [OR and 95%
CI across tertiles: 1.00 (ref), 0.68 (0.51-0.86) and 0.55 (0.41-0.74),
respectively; P-trend <0.001], while the American/Western dietary pattern
was directly associated with RCC risk [1.00 (ref), 1.60 (95% CI:
1.19-2.15) and 1.96 (95% CI: 1.47-2.61); P-trendBackground: Several
emerging renal cell carcinoma (RCC) risk factors related to diet and
energy balance have been identified; however, the etiology of RCC and
potential mechanisms remain poorly described. Utilizing data collected in
an ongoing case-control study, we identified dietary patterns associated
with RCC risk. We further assessed whether these associations varied by
known and suspected RCC risk factors, such as obesity, tobacco use,
physical inactivity and hypertensive status, as well as established
genetic variants identified through GWAS.Methods: Diet was assessed among
703 incident RCC cases recruited from the University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center in Houston, Texas and 746 healthy controls recruited via
random digit dialing. We derived three primary dietary patterns: fruits
and vegetables, an American/Western and a Tex-Mex pattern using factor
analysis. We examined associations between dietary pattern scores and RCC
risk and effect modification by obesity, smoking status, physical
activity, history of hypertension and genetic variants. Odds ratios (ORs)
and 95% confidence intervals (CI) were estimated using multivariate
logistic regression adjusted for age, gender, total energy intake, and
other RCC risk factors.Results: Greater adherence to the fruits and
vegetables dietary pattern was inversely related to RCC risk [OR and 95%
CI across tertiles: 1.00 (ref), 0.68 (0.51-0.86) and 0.55 (0.41-0.74),
respectively; P-trend <0.001], while the American/Western dietary pattern
was directly associated with RCC risk [1.00 (ref), 1.60 (95% CI:
1.19-2.15) and 1.96 (95% CI: 1.47-2.61); P-trend<0.001]. Results were
consistent across various stratified analyses. We observed evidence of a
significant synergistic interaction between the American/Western pattern
and hypertensive status [highest vs. lowest tertile OR = 1.82 95% CI:
1.20-2.74 among individuals with no history of hypertension and highest
vs. lowest tertile OR =2.14 95% CI: 1.42-3.23 among those with history of
hypertension; additive Pinteraction= 0.01]. Variants in genes ITPR2,
ZEB2, PDZD2 and CEP85L were also found to significantly interact with
dietary patterns in relation to RCC risk. The strongest interaction was
observed between rs718314 (ITPR2) and the American/Western dietary
pattern (multiplicative Pinteraction =0.04; additive Pinteraction= 0.02).
ITPR2 has previously been shown to be related to nutrient metabolism and
central obesity.Conclusion: Dietary patterns, genetic variants, and host
characteristics may individually and jointly influence susceptibility to
RCC.

