Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Quantitation of HER2 gene amplification using digital PCR


Gene amplification is a common genetic abnormality in many types of
cancers and has been implicated in playing important roles in cancer
development. The most common types of amplified genes are oncogenes and
drug-resistance genes. For example, Human epidermal growth factor
receptor 2 (HER2) gene amplification, occurring in about 10-30% of breast
cancer cases, is strongly associated with aggressive tumor progression
and poor prognosis. HER2 also presents an effective therapeutic target,
and several HER2 targeting agents have been approved for treatment of
HER2 positive breast cancer by FDA. Analysis of HER2 gene amplification
is important not only in selecting right patients for HER2 targeting
agents but also monitoring the response to therapy and predicting
clinical outcomes. Currently, fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH)
and immunohistochemical (IHC) analysis are standard testing approaches
for HER2 gene amplification. However, the challenge for these
methodologies is that HER2 gene amplification is less quantitative,
especially with some samples whose HER2/CEP17 ratio fall into equivocal
range, and the workflow is labor intensive. We have developed digital PCR
(dPCR) technology on the QuantStudio 3D Digital PCR System and quantify
gene copy numbers from zero to eight with high accuracy and precision. We
analyzed FFPE samples for HER2 gene amplification and our data show that
dPCR provides a robust and quantitative detection, simple workflow and a
quick turn around time. This study demonstrate that dPCR quantitation of
gene amplification could potentially be used to study any loci that are
amplified in cancer.

