Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Profiling CD antigens signature in human hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC) by cell-based high-throughput screening flow cytometry (HTS-FC)


Accumulating evidence supports the cancer stem cell (CSC) hypothesis,
which posits that CSCs are the source of many solid tumor types including
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). In HCC, CSCs have been identified by a
variety of CD antigens, including CD133, CD326 (EpCAM), CD90, CD44, CD24,
CD13, which could serve as potential therapeutic targets. However, due to
the heterogeneity of HCC, these markers do not account for CSC activity
in all tumors, and there is thus a need to identify novel HCC CSC
markers. We have developed a cell-based high-throughput screening flow
cytometry (HTS-FC) platform to robustly characterize expression profiles
of CD antigens on primary human HCC cells. We titrated all commercial
fluorescence conjugated CD antibodies (CD1 to CD363) into four 96-well
microplates, isolated and stained HCC cells with CD45 antibody then
divided and incubated these cells with different CD antibodies in
microplates (1X10^5 cells/well) followed by a LIVE/DEAD reactive dye
treatment. Stained plates were fixed and subjected to BD LSR II flow
cytometry using High Throughput Sampler Unit. Each CD antigen expression
percentage was analyzed within the CD45 negative subpopulation by FlowJo
software. After investigating 10 HCC tumors, we performed heat-map and
cluster analysis using Multi Experiment Viewer software. Our analysis of
primary human HCC cells demonstrated that previously identified index
markers of HCC CSC are expressed on a highly variable fraction of tumor
cells as follows: CD13 (76.10 8.72%), CD24 (7.79 5.33%), CD90 (5.29
0.84%), EpCAM (0.50 0.46%), CD44 (0.041 0.019%) and CD133 (0.0051
0.0034%). Based on the heat-map, we classified all CD markers into five
groups: 20 CD13-like high expressions (30%100%), 12 median expressions
(10%30%), 32 CD90-like low expressions (1.0%10%), 60 EpCAM-like rare
expressions (0.03%1.0%) and 249 nonsense expressions. We focused on the
CD90- and EpCAM-like groups (92 CD candidates) for novel potential CSC
markers. Using quantitative real-time RT-PCR, we determined the mRNA
level of 92 antigens in reference to the EpCAM+/CD133+ CSC subpopulations
sorted from 4 human HCC cell lines (HepG2, Hep3B, PLC/PRF/5 and Huh7) and
identified 20% of these 92 candidates with stem/progenitor mRNA
phenotype. We then measured the mRNA level of these remaining candidates
in 40 pairs of primary human HCC tumor/adjacent normal tissues and
identified two novel CD antigens showing high tumor specificity. We are
now purifying these cells from primary HCC tumors in order to determine
whether these small populations identify cells with CSC activity in
xenograft models and sphere-forming assays. These studies demonstrate
that cell-based high-throughput screening flow cytometry screening can be
used in combination with other cell/molecular biological techniques to
identify novel populations of tumor cells with unique functional
characteristics.

