Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Germline PALB2 genetic variations of familial esophageal squamous
cell carcinoma (ESCC) in Henan, a high risk ESCC region


Background and aims:ESCC is often a deadly cancer diagnosed at late stage
with a 5-year survival rate less than 10% in advanced cancers. It is
important to elucidate the molecular genetic basis for this deadly cancer
to achieve the ultimate goal of early cancer detection and improved
clinical management. Our aim is to understand the genetic basis of
inherited ESCC by deciphering PALB2 mutation status in high risk northern
China. By investigation of PALB2 germline mutations and variants, as
compared to healthy individuals, the genetic basis and genomic risk
factor associations with inherited EC will be clarified.Methods:Blood was
collected from high-risk Henan familial history-positive (FH+)
individuals. Blood DNAs were extracted for Sanger sequencing
analysis.Results:By Sanger sequencing with primers covering more than 90%
of the PALB2 coding sequence, PALB2 variants were detected in exon 4 for
4% (2/50) FH+ ESCC patients from Henan, but no germline protein
truncation variations were observed. Since mutations were only observed
in exon 4, further mutation screening were confined to exon 4 of PALB2
with an additional 300 FH+ Henan ESCC, 283 FH- Henan ESCC, and 364 Henan
non-ESCC control individuals. However, no mutations were detected in the
validation samples.Conclusions:Infrequent PALB2 germline mutations were
detected in Henan FH+ ESCC patients, suggesting PALB2 may be involved in
a small proportion of familial ESCC in Henan. Further study is necessary
to clarify if the identified mutations are pathogenic.

