Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: E2F1-FOXM1 activation predicts progression of non-muscle invasive
bladder cancer


Backgrounds: Bladder cancer is a genetic disorder driven by the
accumulative changes of the multiple genes, such as E2F1, FOXM1, and
EZH2. The objective of this study is to estimate a prognostic value of
gene expression signature and identify putative signaling pathway for
mediating progression of non-muscle invasive bladder cancer
(NMIBC).Methods: Gene expression profiling was performed using primary
NMIBC cohort to identify a signature correlated with disease progression.
The signature was validated in three independent cohorts. The association
between the signature and prognosis of NMIBC patients was assessed using
various statistical methods including a leave-one-out cross-validation
and multivariate Cox regression analyses. The upstream regulator analysis
of the genes in the signature was performed by Ingenuity Pathway Analysis
TM. We also confirmed a prognostic relevance of the signature with
experimental assays using bladder cancer cell lines.Results: Kaplan-Meier
analysis in the discovery cohort revealed significant differences in
disease progression associated with the expression signature of
E2F1-associated genes (p = 0.003), which produced consistent prognostic
pattern in the validation cohorts. Multivariate Cox regression analysis
revealed that the signature was an independent strong predictor of
disease progression (hazard ratio = 6.082, 95% confidence interval =
3.280 to 11.279, p Backgrounds: Bladder cancer is a genetic disorder
driven by the accumulative changes of the multiple genes, such as E2F1,
FOXM1, and EZH2. The objective of this study is to estimate a prognostic
value of gene expression signature and identify putative signaling
pathway for mediating progression of non-muscle invasive bladder cancer
(NMIBC).Methods: Gene expression profiling was performed using primary
NMIBC cohort to identify a signature correlated with disease progression.
The signature was validated in three independent cohorts. The association
between the signature and prognosis of NMIBC patients was assessed using
various statistical methods including a leave-one-out cross-validation
and multivariate Cox regression analyses. The upstream regulator analysis
of the genes in the signature was performed by Ingenuity Pathway Analysis
TM. We also confirmed a prognostic relevance of the signature with
experimental assays using bladder cancer cell lines.Results: Kaplan-Meier
analysis in the discovery cohort revealed significant differences in
disease progression associated with the expression signature of
E2F1-associated genes (p = 0.003), which produced consistent prognostic
pattern in the validation cohorts. Multivariate Cox regression analysis
revealed that the signature was an independent strong predictor of
disease progression (hazard ratio = 6.082, 95% confidence interval =
3.280 to 11.279, p < 0.001). In subset analyses, the signature could
identify patients who would benefit from intravesical immunotherapy.
Lastly, upstream regulator analyses and experimental assays of the
signature revealed that NMIBC progression could be mediated by E2F1-FOXM1
pathways.Conclusion: The prognostic molecular signature defined by
activation of E2F1 and FOXM1 represents a promising diagnostic tool to
identify high risk NMIBC patients.

