Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of activin-like kinases 4 and 5 attenuates cancer
cachexia associated muscle wasting


Background: Cancer cachexia has a detrimental effect on patient survival.
Cachectic patients experience reduced quality of life and have a
decreased survival time. The underlying mechanism behind cancer cachexia
is not yet fully understood. Recent experimental data suggests myostatin
signaling may be a key contributor in the pathogenesis of cancer
cachexia. Activin receptor IIB / activin-like kinase 4/5 heterodimer
activation by myostatin leads to catabolic muscle degradation. SB-431542
is a potent inhibitor of activin-like kinases 4 and 5. We aimed to assess
its potential in the treatment of cancer cachexia in an experimental
rodent model.Methods: All experiments were approved by the local Animal
Ethics Committee. 24 CD2F1 were inoculated subcutaneously with 0.5 x 106
colon-26 murine adenocarcinoma cells to induce cachexia. The mice were
allocated randomly into one of four experimental groups: healthy control,
tumor-bearing control, tumor-bearing vehicle treated and tumor-bearing
SB-431542 treated. All mice were weighed daily. Tumor size was assessed
every other day, starting day 9 post inoculation. Four-paw grip strength
was determined weekly using a grip-strength meter. SB-431542 was
reconstituted in DMSO 1 mg/mL. From day 5 post inoculation, allocated
mice received 10 mg/kg SB-431542, or vehicle intraperitoneally until
sacrifice on day 20.Results: All tumor-bearing mice had a reduction in
body weight compared to controls, 21.1 2.1 g versus 30.0 1.3 g
respectively (p Background: Cancer cachexia has a detrimental effect on
patient survival. Cachectic patients experience reduced quality of life
and have a decreased survival time. The underlying mechanism behind
cancer cachexia is not yet fully understood. Recent experimental data
suggests myostatin signaling may be a key contributor in the pathogenesis
of cancer cachexia. Activin receptor IIB / activin-like kinase 4/5
heterodimer activation by myostatin leads to catabolic muscle
degradation. SB-431542 is a potent inhibitor of activin-like kinases 4
and 5. We aimed to assess its potential in the treatment of cancer
cachexia in an experimental rodent model.Methods: All experiments were
approved by the local Animal Ethics Committee. 24 CD2F1 were inoculated
subcutaneously with 0.5 x 106 colon-26 murine adenocarcinoma cells to
induce cachexia. The mice were allocated randomly into one of four
experimental groups: healthy control, tumor-bearing control,
tumor-bearing vehicle treated and tumor-bearing SB-431542 treated. All
mice were weighed daily. Tumor size was assessed every other day,
starting day 9 post inoculation. Four-paw grip strength was determined
weekly using a grip-strength meter. SB-431542 was reconstituted in DMSO 1
mg/mL. From day 5 post inoculation, allocated mice received 10 mg/kg
SB-431542, or vehicle intraperitoneally until sacrifice on day
20.Results: All tumor-bearing mice had a reduction in body weight
compared to controls, 21.1 2.1 g versus 30.0 1.3 g respectively (p <
0.0001). No differences in body weight were found between the
tumor-bearing groups. Despite weight loss, SB-431542 treated animals had
no reduction in grip strength. Grip strength directly after tumor
inoculation was 200.9 11.3 g, and on day 14 211.3 20.4 g. Vehicle treated
animals showed a reduction from 204.0 19.1 g to 174.8 13.7 g (p =
0.0158). Mean wet muscle weight of the m. tibialis anterior was
significantly preserved in SB-431542 treated animals versus tumor-bearing
vehicle treated animals (53.8 mg vs. 40.5 mg, p = 0.0171) as well as
tumor-bearing untreated animals (53.8 mg vs. 34.7 mg, p =
0.0002).Conclusion: These findings suggest that inhibition of
activin-like kinases 4 and 5 by SB-431542 attenuates cancer cachexia
associated muscle loss and loss of muscle force in experimental cancer
cachexia, and further emphasizes the role of myostatin/activin signaling.

