Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The modulatory effects of H. pylori infection in the DNA mismatch
repair


The bacterial pathogen H. pylori chronically infects the human gastric
mucosa and is the leading risk factor for the development of gastric
cancer. It is believed that during the infection the organism causes an
impairment of DNA repair in the gastric epithelium. Thus, we evaluated
the in vitro modulatory effects of H. pylori infection in the DNA
mismatch repair (MMR).To evaluate the effects of H. pylori on MMR, AGS
gastric carcinoma cell line and the H. pylori strain P12 were used in
co-culture experiments for 4, 8 and 12 h. In addition, to analyze the
potential effects of virulence factors on MMR, the cagPAI, vacA, babA,
hopQ, and tfs4 mutants were also subjected to co-culture experiments. The
expression levels of EXO1, MLH1, MSH2, MSH3, MSH6, POLD3, PMS1, and PMS2
were assessed by real-time PCR. Moreover, expression levels of five
previously screened miRNAs (miR-142-5p, miR-150-5p, miR-155-5p, miR-3163,
and miR-4775), which are predicted to target MMR genes, were also
evaluated by real-time PCR.Our data show that H. pylori infection
significantly down-regulates the expression of all selected genes.
Regarding the virulence factors, the results suggest that the modulation
on gene expression might be dependent on cagPAI, vacA, and the type IV
secretion (TFS4) system. Although the infection up-regulates miR-150-5p,
miR-155-5p, miR-3163, and miR-4775, only the expression of miR-155-5p is
related with virulence factors.Briefly, this study shows that H. pylori
regulates the expression of several MMR genes, and it may be related with
cagPAI, vacA, and the TFS4 system. Taking into account that MLH1, MSH2,
and MSH6 are the miR-155-5p predicted targets, these preliminary data
suggest that the observed virulence factor-dependent repression of miR
expression could be responsible for the down-regulation of these MMR
genes.

