Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: IGFBP2 promotes EGFR/STAT3 nuclear crosstalk in glioma


Insulin-like growth factor binding protein 2 (IGFBP2) is a pleiotropic
secreted protein that is overexpressed in various cancers including
glioma. Extracellular IGFBP2 binds and modulates the activity of insulin
growth factors I and II (IGFI and IGFII) while cytoplasmic IGFBP2
interacts with signaling pathways essential for cell proliferation and
survival. The versatility of IGFBP2 as a secreted or cytoplasmic
signaling effector is widely characterized; however, the functions of
nuclear IGFBP2 remain largely unknown. Through genomic and functional
analyses of glioma, we mechanistically elucidated the role of nuclear
IGFBP2 and discovered a functional interaction of IGFBP2 with epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR) and signal transducer and activator of
transcription 3 (STAT3) proteins. Our findings established a signaling
hierarchy of IGFBP2-EGFR-STAT3; IGFBP2 not only upregulates EGFR/STAT3
signaling activity, but also facilitates EGFR nuclear translocation and
subsequent nuclear EGFR/STAT3 activity. Furthermore, mutation of the
nuclear localization signal of IGFBP2 demonstrated that nuclear
translocation of IGFBP2 is critical to promote the nuclear activity of
EGFR. By identifying the role of IGFBP2 in perpetuating nuclear crosstalk
between EGFR/STAT3, our study further reveals the importance of
exploiting IGFBP2 as a target for glioma therapy.

