Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ethanol overrides DNA synthesis inhibition in response to PAHs
(tobacco smoke carcinogens): a mechanistic explanation


It is a well-established fact that alcohol intake with smoking presents a
potential health risk to human. Mechanistic understanding in this regard
is not clear. We previously reported that DNA damage by tobacco smoke
carcinogens polynuclear aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) is responded by
cells through induction of cell growth inhibition in different cell
lines. Here we observed that ethanol (EtOH) treatment at physiologically
relevant concentration (60 mM) increases DNA synthesis in DNA damaging
carcinogen (BPDE) treated cells. BPDE treatment of cells elicits G1-S
cell cycle arrest, but EtOH does not have any significant modulating
effect on G1-S arrest indicating increased DNA synthesis by EtOH is due
to modulation of some other signaling event(s). EtOH
co-treatment/pretreatment is unable to modulate BPDE-induced p53
accumulation and p53 phosphorylation at ser15 and ser20 indicating
increased DNA synthesis by EtOH is p53 independent. We also observed that
EtOH co-treatment/pretreatment potentiates BPDE-induced phosphorylation
and activation of ERKs only and not p38 MAPK. Interestingly, treatment of
cells with MEK1 inhibitor (PD098059) significantly reduced ethanol's
ability to increase DNA synthesis in BPDE treated cells. This finding
indicates that the ability of EtOH to potentiate BPDE-induced ERK
activation may potentiate PAH-induced tumorigenesis.Note: This abstract
was not presented at the meeting.

