Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A new method for preparation of low-input, PCR-free next
generation sequencing libraries


Sequence analysis of PCR-free Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) libraries
demonstrates improved evenness of coverage relative to NGS libraries that
have undergone PCR amplification. However, existing PCR-free methods
require 1ug or more of input DNA quantity in order to obtain sufficient
library yield which restricts such analysis when DNA sample quantity is
insufficient. To expand the applicability of PCR-free sequencing, Swift
Biosciences has developed a novel adapter attachment chemistry that is
more efficient than existing methods. This new technology, Accel-NGS,
results in libraries that capture a higher complexity of each sample
which enables a lower input DNA requirement. For Illumina systems,
PCR-free Accel-NGS libraries can be prepared from 100ng of input DNA for
direct sequencing. PCR-free Accel-NGS libraries demonstrate even coverage
across a broad GC content as well as when analyzing whole genome sequence
coverage. To enable library preparation from even less DNA, Accel-NGS
libraries can also be prepared with a low number of PCR cycles for direct
sequencing. The Accel-NGS method with PCR results in more even coverage
and less PCR duplicates when compared to existing methods that use PCR.
For exome hybridization capture, comparable coverage was achieved for
Accel-NGS libraries from 100ng DNA input when compared to an existing
method that requires 1ug of DNA input. The Accel-NGS method is fast and
automatable; additional advantages when applied to clinical samples are
under investigation. PCR-free Accel-NGS libraries can also be prepared
for Ion Torrent systems from 5ng of input DNA with comparable sequence
quality to existing methods.

