Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mig-6 suppresses development and progression of endometrial cancer
by inhibiting ERK2 phosphorylation


Endometrial cancer is the most common cancer of the female reproductive
system. PTEN is mutated or absent in more than half of human endometrial
cancers. The major pathologic phenomenon of endometrial cancer is the
loss of ovarian steroid hormone control over uterine epithelial cell
proliferation and apoptosis. Mig-6 suppresses estrogen signaling. Here,
we show the significance of MIG-6 in human endometrial cancer through
sample analysis, where MIG-6 expression is inversely associated with ERK
phosphorylation; this relationship is tightly correlated with endometrial
cancer progression. To determine the tumor suppressor function of Mig-6
in the development of endometrial cancer, we generated Mig-6 conditional
overexpression mice (R26Mig-6LSL). To assess the effects of Mig-6 on the
PTEN/PI3K/AKT signaling pathway in uterine tumorigenesis, mice with Pten
floxed (Ptenf/f) and R26Mig-6LSL were bred to the PRCre mouse model to
generate overexpression of Mig-6 and ablation of Pten in the uterus
(PRcre/+ R26Mig-6LSL Ptenf/f). PRcre/+ R26Mig-6LSL Ptenf/f showed
significantly increased survival time and uterine weight compared to
PRcre/+ Ptenf/f mice. Gross morphology and histological analysis
displayed dramatically suppressed development of endometrial cancer in
double mutant mice compared to ablation of Pten alone.
Immunohistochemical analysis showed significantly increased apoptosis and
decreased proliferation in epithelial cells of PRcre/+ R26Mig-6LSL
Ptenf/f mice compared to PRcre/+ Ptenf/f mice. Interestingly, the
expression of pERK1/2 was significantly decreased in PRcre/+ R26Mig-6LSL
Ptenf/f mice compared to PRcre/+ Ptenf/f mice. To examine whether
inhibition of ERK phosphorylation suppresses tumor progression in
endometrial cancer, PRcre/+Ptenf/f mice were treated with U0126, an
effective inhibitor of MAPK/ERK kinase. PRcre/+Ptenf/f mice treated with
U0126 exhibited a significant reduction in uterine weight.
Histopathological analysis of the entire animal cohort showed that
inhibition of ERK phosphorylation suppressed endometrial cancer
progression in PRcre/+ Ptenf/f mice, as reflected by the arrest of tumors
at the hyperplastic or normal stage, whereas tumors from PRcre/+Ptenf/f
mice treated with vehicle advanced to endometrial cancer. These results
demonstrate that activation of ERK signaling is critical for endometrial
cancer development and progression in Pten mutation. Our findings
highlight a crucial tumor suppressor role for MIG-6 in progression of
PTEN-null endometrial cancer by inhibiting ERK phosphorylation. As MIG-6
is a mediator of progesterone signaling, the activity of which can
suppress unopposed-estrogen signaling, our studies provide a potential
new drug target for the intervention of metastatic human endometrial
cancer.(This work was supported by NIH, U54 HD007495 to J.P.L, NIH, R01
HD057873 and American Cancer Society Research Grant, RSG-12-084-01-TBG to
J.W.J.)

