Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Rearrangement of ERG and CHD1 genes in prostate cancer as a marker
of tumor heterogeneity


Efforts to develop targeted therapy based on genomic findings are
complicated by the polygenic nature of drug resistance and genetic
heterogeneity between separate biopsy cores. These findings have led to
the conclusion that analysis of multiple biopsy cores and consideration
of multiple targeted agents will be important. Because of our concern
that these assessments may be missing an additional layer of
heterogeneity within even a single biopsy core, which sequencing alone
may not identify, we studied the genetic heterogeneity of cells in focal
areas using TMA. Using confocal microscopy, we analyzed the most common
and prostate cancer specific gene rearrangement (TMPRSS2-ERG fusion and
CHD1 deletion) in neighboring single cells in a tumor focus without
changing the stromal microenvironment. We evaluated 56 patients that
underwent radical prostatectomy at CINJ with pathological assessment,
grading, and ERG rearrangement status. Overall, ERG rearrangements
occurred in 24/56 (42.9%) patients. The most frequent mechanism of
rearrangements was deletion (58%), while a split event was confirmed in
25% of the ERG-rearranged cases. In 88% of cases the ERG rearrangement
was associated with TMPRSS2-ERG gene fusion. A copy number gain of the
non-rearranged ERG gene occurred in 10/56 (17.6%) cases. A heterogeneous
mix of ERG deletions, translocations, and copy number changes occurred in
8/24 (33%) patients, with a combination of deletions and translocations
alone occurring in 3/24 (12.5%) cases. 20/21 (95%) of analyzed cases with
ERG-rearrangement were negative for CHD1 gene rearrangement (pEfforts to
develop targeted therapy based on genomic findings are complicated by the
polygenic nature of drug resistance and genetic heterogeneity between
separate biopsy cores. These findings have led to the conclusion that
analysis of multiple biopsy cores and consideration of multiple targeted
agents will be important. Because of our concern that these assessments
may be missing an additional layer of heterogeneity within even a single
biopsy core, which sequencing alone may not identify, we studied the
genetic heterogeneity of cells in focal areas using TMA. Using confocal
microscopy, we analyzed the most common and prostate cancer specific gene
rearrangement (TMPRSS2-ERG fusion and CHD1 deletion) in neighboring
single cells in a tumor focus without changing the stromal
microenvironment. We evaluated 56 patients that underwent radical
prostatectomy at CINJ with pathological assessment, grading, and ERG
rearrangement status. Overall, ERG rearrangements occurred in 24/56
(42.9%) patients. The most frequent mechanism of rearrangements was
deletion (58%), while a split event was confirmed in 25% of the
ERG-rearranged cases. In 88% of cases the ERG rearrangement was
associated with TMPRSS2-ERG gene fusion. A copy number gain of the
non-rearranged ERG gene occurred in 10/56 (17.6%) cases. A heterogeneous
mix of ERG deletions, translocations, and copy number changes occurred in
8/24 (33%) patients, with a combination of deletions and translocations
alone occurring in 3/24 (12.5%) cases. 20/21 (95%) of analyzed cases with
ERG-rearrangement were negative for CHD1 gene rearrangement (p< 0.01).
Overall, 14/45 (31.1%) of patients had CHD1 deletion, and 13/14 (93%)
CHD1- cases correlate with ERG-rearrangement negative status (pEfforts to
develop targeted therapy based on genomic findings are complicated by the
polygenic nature of drug resistance and genetic heterogeneity between
separate biopsy cores. These findings have led to the conclusion that
analysis of multiple biopsy cores and consideration of multiple targeted
agents will be important. Because of our concern that these assessments
may be missing an additional layer of heterogeneity within even a single
biopsy core, which sequencing alone may not identify, we studied the
genetic heterogeneity of cells in focal areas using TMA. Using confocal
microscopy, we analyzed the most common and prostate cancer specific gene
rearrangement (TMPRSS2-ERG fusion and CHD1 deletion) in neighboring
single cells in a tumor focus without changing the stromal
microenvironment. We evaluated 56 patients that underwent radical
prostatectomy at CINJ with pathological assessment, grading, and ERG
rearrangement status. Overall, ERG rearrangements occurred in 24/56
(42.9%) patients. The most frequent mechanism of rearrangements was
deletion (58%), while a split event was confirmed in 25% of the
ERG-rearranged cases. In 88% of cases the ERG rearrangement was
associated with TMPRSS2-ERG gene fusion. A copy number gain of the
non-rearranged ERG gene occurred in 10/56 (17.6%) cases. A heterogeneous
mix of ERG deletions, translocations, and copy number changes occurred in
8/24 (33%) patients, with a combination of deletions and translocations
alone occurring in 3/24 (12.5%) cases. 20/21 (95%) of analyzed cases with
ERG-rearrangement were negative for CHD1 gene rearrangement (p< 0.01).
Overall, 14/45 (31.1%) of patients had CHD1 deletion, and 13/14 (93%)
CHD1- cases correlate with ERG-rearrangement negative status (p< 0.01).
10/45 (22.2%) cases represent CHD1 gene copy number gain. These results
support the notion that additional heterogeneity may be present even in a
focus of a single biopsy core. These data are extremely important and
urgently require further study to understand heterogeneity of genetic
changes, because clinical studies have already been launched using
genetic changes such as TMPRSS2-ERG fusions found in a single core biopsy
to direct a specific therapy, including a trial using ABT-888 only in
patients with this fusion now ongoing at CINJ.

