Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical anti-tumor efficacy of an anti-C4.4a (LYPD3) antibody
drug conjugate for the treatment of lung squamous cell carcinoma


C4.4a (LYPD3) has been identified previously as a cancer- and
metastasis-associated internalizing cell surface protein. Targeting C4.4a
with a specific antibody-drug conjugate (ADC) represents an unique
opportunity to treat tumors with high unmet medical need such as squamous
cell carcinomas SCC, in particular lung SCC.We have generated an
anti-C4.4a ADC consisting of a fully human monoclonal antibody linked to
a non cell-permeable tubulin-binding auristatin cytotoxic agent
(technology licensed from Seattle Genetics). In vitro, anti-C4.4a ADC
showed an anti-proliferative efficacy (IC50) in the nanomolar range in
cell lines endogenously expressing C4.4a (e.g. human lung cancer cell
lines NCI-H292 and NCI-H322). High ADC stability and selectivity was
observed in transfected A549 lung cancer cells over-expressing C4.4a
compared to mock-transfected cells. In vivo, anti-C4.4a ADC exhibited a
potent and selective antitumor activity in various human xenograft models
(NCI-H292, NCI-H322, SCC-4) as well as in two SCC (Lu7433, Lu7343) and
one pleomorphic (Lu7064) patient-derived lung cancer xenograft models.
The in vivo efficacy is strictly target-dependent and selective as no
efficacy was observed in C4.4a negative models (Fadu, Lu 7700) or using a
non-specific isotype antibody ADC (NCI-H292, NCI-H322). A minimal
effective dose (MED) as low as 1.9 mg/kg, response rates of up to 100%,
and additive anti-tumor efficacy in combination with cisplatin were
observed in the NCI-H292 xenograft model. Furthermore, it has been
demonstrated that NCI-H292 were still sensitive to ADC treatment when
tumors were allowed to regrow after the initial treatment cycle(). The
anti-C4.4a ADC, which is fully cross-reactive with the mouse orthologue
of C4.4a, was well tolerated at efficacious doses. Reversible skin
reddening was observed only at doses markedly higher than the MED. In
summary, anti-C4.4a ADC is a promising therapeutic candidate for the
treatment of C4.4a-expressing squamous cell carcinomas, andpreclinical
development has been initiated.

