Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Whole genome sequencing is superior to cancer panels to aid in
decision-making in patients with advanced malignancies


Background: It is increasingly common to use targeted cancer panels to
assess for informative or actionable targets to guide cancer treatment.
We compared the utility of information obtained from such a panel
compared to whole genome and transcriptome sequencing.Methods: Eligible
subjects with incurable cancers for whom there were limited or no
standard chemotherapy options, have several samples analyzed: a fresh
tumour biopsy; a blood sample for normal comparison; and archival tumours
when available. Samples underwent both the Ion Torrent AmpliSeq cancer
panel analysis and comprehensive DNA (80X) and RNA sequencing followed by
in-depth bioinformatic analysis to identify somatic mutations, copy
number alterations, structural rearrangements, and corresponding gene
expression changes that may be cancer drivers or provide informative
(diagnostic) or actionable/druggable targets. Aberrant pathways were
matched to drug databases and manual literature reviews undertaken to
identify drugs that may be useful or potentially contraindicated; a
report is generated and discussed in a multidisciplinary team.Results:
Between July 2012 - November 2013, 51 subjects have consented and 45 have
been sequenced: 12 breast, 7 lung; 4 colorectal, 3 squamous, 3 adrenal; 2
pancreas; 2 sarcomas, and 1 of each of nasopharynx, primary unknown,
CLL-peripheral mantle cell, parotid, anal, appendix, peripheral T-cell,
prostate, ovary, endometrial, glioma, and mesothelioma. The median number
of lines of chemo prior to sequencing was 3.Of the first 40 cases, the
panel did not yield informative or actionable results in 60% of cases:
36% of the cases the panel did not detect any somatic variants and in a
further 24% TP53 mutations were the only variants identified. In the
other 40% of cases, the panel might have identified an informative
abnormality but when put into context of the pathways that can be drawn
with the whole genome and transcriptome data the detected panel
abnormalities were not comprehensive enough to guide treatment decisions.
Examples include: in two colon cancer patients the panel detected a KRAS
mutation in one and a RET mutation in the other, however both were
actually inactivating mutations and therefore unlikely to be good
targets. In contrast, the full genomic data was informative in 70% of
cases and treatments were delivered based on the results in 60%, in this
heavily pretreated population.Conclusions: The future of cancer medicine
lies in genomic profiling to assist therapeutic decision-making. The
cancer panel has advantages in terms of speed and cost; however it has
not been as informative for identifying candidate druggable driver events
and it has missed critical genomic abnormalities that have changed
diagnoses. Given the complexity of the cancer genome it is our
observation that the panels do not provide the depth and context required
to make treatment decisions for the majority of patients with cancer.

