Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The association between expression of ALDH1, KI67 and grading
system in breast adenocarcinoma


Introduction: Many studies have shown that the ALDH1 and Ki67 markers can
accurately identify different types of cells in the breast. ALDH1 has
proven to be a biomarker of breast cancer stem-like cells, while Ki67 has
considered a proliferative marker. However, although Ki67 has been
correlated with breast cancer grading, little attention has been given to
the relationship between ALDH1 and histological grading. On the other
hand, although ALDH1 has been correlated with intrinsic molecular subtype
of breast cancer, there is an absence of literature between Ki67 and
breast cancer subtypes. Thus, the goals of this study are to address the
relationship between ALDH, Ki67 and histological grading in breast
cancer.Methods and Material: Immunohistochemistry staining (IHC) for
ALDH1 was performed on tissue micro array (TMA) of 200 patient samples
with different histological grades of breast cancer. Similarly, IHC was
used to identify and assess the expression of Ki67 on TMA of 66 patient
samples of various breast cancer subtypes (40 Luminal and 26 TNBC). Both
biomarkers were compared to respective normal breast tissue using t-test
statistical analysis.Results: results showed that 51/129 (39.5%) of
cancerous breast tissues were ALDH1 positive. ALDH1 positivity differed
significantly between different grades cancerous breast tissues and
normal tissue (p=0.0007). In addition, a direct relationship exists
between increasing grade and increasing ALDH1 positivity, with grade 3
having the highest frequency and intensity of ALDH1 positivity (p=0.005).
In normal tissue, 6/25 (24%) cores on the tissue microarray showed
presence of Ki67. The average percentage of cells containing in Ki67
positive cores for normal tissue was 2.54%. In luminal subtypes, 30/38
(78.9%) patients on the tissue microarray showed presence of Ki67. The
average percentage of cells containing Ki67 in luminal breast cancer, for
patients with Ki67 positive cores was 3.93%, with a median of 2.5%. Ki67
was also present in 24/26 (92.3%) patients with triple negative breast
cancer. Among the 24 patients with Ki67 present, an average of 6.91% of
cells exhibited Ki67 in each core, with a median of 4.25%. A one-tailed
student's T-test was used to determine statistical significance of the
difference in Ki67 expression (including the patients with no Ki67
expression) between Luminal and Triple Negative subtypes of breast cancer
with a p-value of 0.026Conclusion: Our findings suggest that higher
grades of breast cancer may contain higher quantities of breast cancer
stem like cells. Given the role of Ki67 in cell proliferation, the
increased presence of Ki67 in triple negative breast cancer, when
compared to Luminal subtypes of breast cancer, may suggest a correlation
with a worse prognosis. Identification of Ki67 positivity in breast
cancer cells may aid in the development of prognosis and novel treatment
techniques.

