Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Blockade of radiation-induced neuropilin-1 in glioblastoma cells
impairs migration of endothelial cells


Neuropilin-1 (NRP-1) is an isoform specific receptor for vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF), that regulates the development of the
nervous system and also promotes angiogenesis in endothelial cells.
Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is a malignant tumor characterized by
robust neoangiogenesis with an aberrant elevation of VEGF. Recent
evidence suggests that the majority of GBMs after radiation therapy (IR)
exhibit an angiogenic regeneration process, which contributes phenotypic
plasticity and therapeutic resistance. A high expression of NRP-1 in GBM
correlates with disease progression. In this study, we show that the
IR-induced NRP-1 role in the VEGFR-2 mediated signaling cascade promotes
migration of endothelial cells. We observed that IR (8Gy) significantly
elevated levels of VEGF and NRP-1 expression in 4910 and 5310 human GBM
xenograft cells. Endothelial cells cultured on tumor- conditioned media
from IR induced xenograft cells showed a significant increase in
migration of endothelial cells; whereas, conditioned medium (CM) from
NRP-1 knockdown xenograft cells inhibited IR-induced migration effects in
endothelial cells. Further, CM from NRP-1 inhibited cells downregulated
IR-induced expression of VEGFR-2 and its downstream molecules Sema3A,
Plexin-A1 and E-cadherin in endothelial cells. Immunoflourescence
co-localization studies revealed that the interaction of NRP-1 and
VEGFR-2 were significantly decreased in endothelial cells cultured on CM
from NRP-1-siRNA-transfected xenograft cells compared to mock- and
SV-transfected cells. Collectively, our data indicate that NRP-1 plays a
significant role in the regulation of VEGF/VEGFR-2 signaling and
migration in endothelial cells, and thereby suggests NRP-1 as an
important therapeutic target for glioma patients receiving radiation
therapy.

