Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting PDK1 in breast cancer: kinase-dependent regulation of
tumor growth and kinase-independent regulation of cell migration and
invasion


3-Phosphoinositide Dependent Kinase 1 (PDK1) is the kinase that
phosphorylates the activation loop of several protein kinases such as
Akt, PKC or SGK. In breast carcinomas PDK1 was found frequently
overexpressed and this correlates with a more aggressive phenotype.This
study is aimed to understand the role of PDK1 in breast tumor progression
and the molecular mechanisms involved.Using stable gene silencing and
kinase inhibitors, we studied PDK1 role in different in vitro and in vivo
assays including anchorage independent growth, anoikis, xenografts,
migration and invasion assays.In our study we found that PDK1 promotes
resistance to anoikis, anchorage independent growth and tumor growth in
breast cancer cell lines through the phosphorylation of its substrates,
since the kinase-dead mutant abrogates all the PDK1-mediated effects. For
this reasons either PDK1 gene silencing or its kinase inhibition with
small compounds are sufficient to promote anoikis, to reduce anchorage
independent growth and tumor growth.We also found that PDK1 silencing is
able to reduce, while its overexpression to increase, cell migration and
invasion in mammary cells. Surprisingly, the regulation of cell migration
is operated in a kinase independent manner. In fact PDK1 kinase inhibitor
failed to recapitulate the effects of gene silencing in cell migration.
The molecular mechanism, underlying this unconventional
kinase-independent regulation of cell migration, involves the binding of
PDK1 to Myotonic Dystrophy kinase-related Cdc42-binding Kinase (MRCK).
This binding increases MRCK kinase activity on Myosin Light Chain-2
(MLC2) and on myosin phosphatase target subunit 1 (MyPT1). Both these
phosphorylations increase of non-muscular myosin activity, which is
required to pull forward the cell body during directional migration and
invasion.In summary, our findings unveil that PDK1 regulates tumor
growth, survival in absence of adhesion, resistance to anoikis, but also
migration and invasion of breast cancer cells by two different
mechanisms. These findings should be taken in account for a rational
targeting of PDK1 in cancer.

