Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Reciprocal expression of miR-125b and miR-192/miR-200 families
define clinically relevant sub-types of colorectal cancer with
differential sensitivity to EGFR and MEK targeted agents


The aims of this study were to determine if miRNA profiles could enhance
prediction of pharmacological response compared to mutation alone. miRNAs
are readily detectable in serum and plasma thus could be used in
combination with mutations in liquid biopsies to support patient
selection.Unsupervised hierarchical clustering of a 50 cell line panel
global miRNA profile revealed a subset of miRNAs with a striking
reciprocal expression pattern. Expression of miR-192+ve (3 miRs),
miR-125b+ve (3miRs) and miR-200-ve (3miRs) defined 3 main cell sub-types
which were further divided into 5 subtypes by expression of
miR31+ve.Significantly, the miRNA sub-types are closely related to the
five mRNA subtypes we had previously identified using iNMF (Schlicker et
al, 2012) and to the subtypes identified in clinical CRC samples by
Sadanandam et al 2013, Loboda et al, 2012 and Oh et al 2012. The
miR192+ve subtype is an epithelial sub-type (iNMF sub-type 2 / Oh A-type)
which has a gene expression pattern found in cells with transit
amplifying phenotype, whereas the miR200 negative sub-type relates to the
mesenchymal iNMF sub-type 1.1 and has a gene expression pattern similar
to that found in CRC stem-like cells. Expression of miR125b is found in
the stem-like subtype but also in mesenchymal sub-types with gene
expression related to an inflammatory phenotype (iNMF sub-type 1.2, Oh
B).Analysis of differentially expressed genes between the sub-types
revealed the miR-192+ve positive sub-type was discriminated from the
miR-125b+ve by higher expression of several genes specifically associated
with intestinal differentiation including HNF1a (TCF1) (3-fold) and HNF4a
(TCF14) (13-fold) which drive expression of miR192 and CDX1 (71-fold),
HNF4G (6-fold) ISX (12-fold), and IHH (24-fold).TCGA clinical samples
were also classified by the four mRNA methods and miRNAs differentially
expressed between the sub-types analysed; all of the miRNAs identified in
cell lines were statistically significantly differentially expressed in
TCGA sub-types, however, there were additional miRNAs which clearly
correlate with sub-types in clinical samples that have very low
expression in cells.Importantly, the miR-192+ve sub-type exhibited
significantly greater sensitivity to EGFR TKIs, cetuximab and MEK
targeted agents compared to the miR-200-ve and miR-125b+ve
sub-types.Taken together, the miR data enables segregation by
differentiation status, this data enhances prediction of drug activity
compared to mutation data alone and is of significance because miR
expression and differentiation status are modulated by prior chemotherapy
regimes.

