Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: miR-491 and miR-218: Two possible tools to reduce FOXP3 expression
in breast carcinomas


The Forkhead box P3 (FOXP3) gene is a member of the forkhead/winged-helix
family of transcription factors implicated in the regulation of immune
system development and function. However, FOXP3 is also expressed in
human epithelial cancers, where it has been reported to be associated
with poor prognosis and in particular with metastasis. Aim of our work is
to identify microRNAs able to regulate FOXP3 expression in breast
tumors.To discover microRNAs able to regulate FOXP3 expression in breast
cancer cells, an in silico analysis has been performed. Among microRNAs
harboring FOXP3 seed regions, we focused our attention on miR-218 and
miR-491, described to have oncosuppressive properties. Indeed, it has
been reported that miR-218 expression stimulates activation of tumor
suppressor genes and miR-491 expression inversely correlates with
migratory potential in HCC cell lines and in vivo with metastatic
potential.We therefore evaluated the ability of these microRNAs to act as
oncosuppressors by targeting FOXP3 in a breast cancer model. After
transient co-transfection either of miR-218 or miR-491 with FOXP3 in
MDA-MB-231 cells, a significant decrease in FOXP3 expression at protein
level by WB was found.To perform functional studies both in vitro and in
vivo, we generated a breast cancer cell model by stable transfection of
MDA-MB-231 with inducible Tet-off plasmid encoding for FOXP3 encompassing
3UTR region, thus maintaining microRNA-mediated regulation. We
demonstrated that FOXP3 expressing clones display an increased migration
capacity as compared with their respective non-induced cells. Also in
these stable clones a reduction of FOXP3 expression after transfection of
miR-491 and miR-218 has been demonstrated by WB. Moreover, FOXP3 was
confirmed to be a direct target of both microRNAs by luciferase reporter
assay.We also found an inverse correlation between miR-491 levels and
FOXP3 expression in human breast carcinoma specimens.Overall, these
preliminary results demonstrate that microRNAs can regulate FOXP3
expression, and encourage to further investigate the biological and
functional consequences of this targeting, and to exploit microRNAs as a
potential therapeutic tool for FOXP3 expressing breast carcinomas.

