Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High frequency of a circulating monocytic subpopulation of
myeloid-derived suppressor cells predicts worst clinical outcome in
untreated non-small lung cancer patients


Background: The immune system can either prevent and control the tumor
growth or promote tumor escape. Myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs)
represent a heterogeneous population of immature cells with immune
suppressive properties and their overexpression seems to confer a worse
prognosis in cancer patients.Objective: The aim of the study was to
investigate the presence of new phenotypically immature subpopulations of
MDSCs which could be associated with advanced/metastatic NSCLC patients'
clinical outcome.Materials & Methods: Circulating subtypes of MDSCs
(monocytic and granulocytic), as well as the CD4+ , CD8+ , dendritic
(DC), monocytes and B cells were assessed in peripheral blood of of
chemotherapy-naive patients with advanced/metastatic NSCLC (n=134) and
healthy controls (n=28) were analyzed using flow cytometry. The
phenotypic characterization of MDSCs subpopulations was determined in
strictly immature myeloid cells. A correlation between the levels of
MDSCs and other tested immune cells as well as their association with
overall (OS) and progression- free survival (PFS) was evaluated; high
expression of MDSCs was defined as the percentage of the cells above the
90% percentile of the controls.Results: Two monocytic [M-MDSC:
CD14+CD15-CD11b+CD33+HLA-DR-Lin- and CD14+CD15+CD11b+CD33+HLA-DR-Lin-]
and a granulocytic [G-MDSC: CD14-CD15+CD11b+CD33+HLA-DR-Lin-]
subpopulation of MDSCs were significantly increased (pBackground: The
immune system can either prevent and control the tumor growth or promote
tumor escape. Myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) represent a
heterogeneous population of immature cells with immune suppressive
properties and their overexpression seems to confer a worse prognosis in
cancer patients.Objective: The aim of the study was to investigate the
presence of new phenotypically immature subpopulations of MDSCs which
could be associated with advanced/metastatic NSCLC patients' clinical
outcome.Materials & Methods: Circulating subtypes of MDSCs (monocytic and
granulocytic), as well as the CD4+ , CD8+ , dendritic (DC), monocytes and
B cells were assessed in peripheral blood of of chemotherapy-naive
patients with advanced/metastatic NSCLC (n=134) and healthy controls
(n=28) were analyzed using flow cytometry. The phenotypic
characterization of MDSCs subpopulations was determined in strictly
immature myeloid cells. A correlation between the levels of MDSCs and
other tested immune cells as well as their association with overall (OS)
and progression- free survival (PFS) was evaluated; high expression of
MDSCs was defined as the percentage of the cells above the 90% percentile
of the controls.Results: Two monocytic [M-MDSC:
CD14+CD15-CD11b+CD33+HLA-DR-Lin- and CD14+CD15+CD11b+CD33+HLA-DR-Lin-]
and a granulocytic [G-MDSC: CD14-CD15+CD11b+CD33+HLA-DR-Lin-]
subpopulation of MDSCs were significantly increased (p<0.001), while the
frequencies of CD4+ cells, DC and monocytes were decreased in patients
compared to healthy donors (p0.0001, p0.0004, p=0.015; respectively). The
frequency of both M-MDSCs' subpopulations was inversely correlated to
that of DCs (p0.04), while the G-MDSC subpopulation was inversely
correlated to CD4+ T cells (p=0.006). Furthermore, the M-MDSCs expressed
high levels of iNOS, whereas the G-MDSCs generated high levels of
reactive oxygen species (ROS). Increased frequencies of M-MDSCs were
associated with worse response to front-line treatment (p=0.02) and
patients with normal levels of CD14+CD15+CD11b+CD33+HLA-DR-Lin- MDSCs had
longer OS and PFS compared to those with high levels (p=0.008 and p=0.02,
respectively). Multivariate analysis revealed that the increased number
of CD14+CD15+CD11b+CD33+HLA-DR-Lin- MDSCs was independently associated
with decreased PFS and OS.Conclusion: The data provide evidence that the
increased frequency of two new M-MDSC subpopulations in patients with
advanced/metastatic NSCLC is associated with an unfavorable clinical
outcome.

