Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synergistic anticancer activity of clinical stage, non-genotoxic
apoptosis inducing agents RG7388 (MDM2 antagonist) and ABT-199 (GDC-0199,
BCL2 inhibitor) in p53 wild-type AML tumor models


MDM2, the most prominent natural inhibitor of the p53 tumor suppressor
pathway, and BCL2, an anti-apoptotic regulator and important player in
preventing induction of apoptosis in tumor cells, both play a pivotal
role in leukemia cell survival and response to therapy in the clinic.The
principal objectives of this study were to assess a synergistic antitumor
effect by combining the clinical stage compounds RG7388, a MDM2
antagonist reactivating p53, and the BCL2 selective inhibitor GDC-0199
and to elucidate the underlying mechanism of action. Further insight into
the biological rationale for this potential therapeutic strategy may pave
the path for clinical combination studies in AML patients.We first
investigated the effect of co-treatment with RG7388 and GDC-0199 on the
viability and induction of apoptosis in AML tumor cell lines followed by
high-resolution cell cycle kinetic analysis using BrdU-Hoechst quenching
technology in-vitro.Cell viability assays demonstrated synergistic
potency of combined RG7388 and GDC-0199 treatment with low nM IC50
values. Subsequent annexin binding assays confirmed the efficacy and
revealed different kinetics of apoptosis induction. To further explain
the mode of action, high-resolution cell cycle compartment analysis of
consecutive cell cycles was performed. Mechanistically, RG7388 induces G1
arrest and preferentially causes nuclear fragmentation in G1 phase of the
second cycle. The BCL2 inhibitor GDC-0199 mainly causes apoptosis in G1
compartments and hence cells transiently protected from apoptosis by
RG7388 induced G1 arrest are hit by GDC-0199.In addition we analyzed
changes in expression of pro- and anti-apoptotic genes and proteins upon
combined treatment using qRT-PCR, Western Blot and Luminex technology. We
identified down-modulation of MCL-1 levels, a known GDC-0199 resistance
factor, as one potential mechanism for the synergistic efficacy and
confirmed this finding by shRNA experiments in-vitro.Furthermore, the
efficacy of the compounds was assessed in subcutaneous and orthotopic AML
tumor cell line based xenograft models in-vivo, confirming the synergy
observed in-vitro.Taken together, our study demonstrates that combined
treatment with RG7388 and GDC-0199 shows a synergistic anticancer effect
on AML cells. This indicates that activating the p53 tumor suppressor
pathway and inhibiting a key anti-apoptosis target simultaneously induces
a more than additive inhibitory effect by modulating the levels of key
pro-survival proteins, such as Mcl-1, thereby further lowering the
apoptotic threshold level for tumor cell death.Based on the observations
from our study, the combined administration of RG7388 and GDC-0199 might
offer a promising new therapeutic regimen for treating AML patients.

