Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrating transcriptomic data using metacore pathway analysis to
identify novel biomarkers of bevacizumab target engagement


The widespread use of microarrays for gene expression studies has
generated large volumes of transcriptomic data to help describe
mechanisms such as drug treatment response. The drug Bevacizumab is well
characterized for its ability to inhibit VEGFA pro-angiogenic signaling
resulting in tumor regression for a number of cancer-related indications.
However, universal mechanisms of action have remained elusive to describe
changes at the mRNA level across different solid tumor types. This case
study uses 3 publically available datasets related to Bevacizumab
treatment and analyzes the data in a manually curated systems biology
context. Using a combination of Thomson Reuters solutions including the
Data Annotation and Processing tool, MetaCore Pathway Analysis and
Integrity Biomarkers Module allows for a simple workflow to process omics
data and identify biomarkers of target engagement through pathway
analysis and data integration. This analysis identified 5 differentially
expressed genes common to all treated tumors including: Basonuclin,
growth arrest-specific 7, mucin 1, integrin beta-4, and dystonin. All 5
of these objects can be connected to VEGF-A in a signaling network based
on previously curated interactions. These in silico results provide a
strong rationale for follow up studies in the lab to validate novel
biomarkers related to Bevacizumab target engagement in solid tumors.

