Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Thymidine catabolic and salvage pathways are responsible for the
heterogeneity of anticancer agent dT-QX in liver cancer cells


Thymidine analog 3-deoxythymidine phenylquinoxaline conjugate (dT-QX) can
selectively kill cancer cell lines while is low cytotoxic towards normal
liver cells. However, the cytotoxicity of dT-QX varied among cell lines
of the same type cancer. Thus, the mechanism of the heterogeneity towards
dT-QX was investigated. Considering that dT-QX is a thymidine analog,
pathways of cellular thymidine metabolism were studied including
catabolic and salvage pathways. The expression levels of enzymes of these
two pathways among different cell lines of liver cancer were determined
and compared. In addition, the impact on the activity of dT-QX by
overexpressing and silencing the enzymes of these two pathways was
assessed. Furthermore, a series of dT-QX analogs were synthesized and
tested to reveal the potential structure-activity relationship to address
the heterogeneity. Our initial results indicated that there was dramatic
difference on the enzyme levels of thymidine catabolic and salvage
pathways among the different cell lines of liver cancer. Modulation of
the level of these enzymes resulted in significant impact on the activity
of dT-QX. Variation on the cytotoxic activity was even observed with
different structural analogs tested on these liver cancer cell lines. Our
data suggested that thymidine catabolic and salvage pathways counteracted
toward each other and thus were responsible for the heterogeneity of
dT-QX in liver cancer cells.

