Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Redefining the somatic landscape of pancreatic adenocarcinoma


Efforts to catalogue genomic abnormalities in pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma (PDAC) have been challenging due to low tumor cellularity
which requires deep sequencing to obtain adequate coverage of tumor DNA.
To make whole genome sequencing (WGS) feasible with PDAC tumors, we have
developed protocols for sequencing enriched tumor material by laser
capture microdissection (LCM) from frozen samples and by flow sorting
when fresh tissue is available. The enriched samples have a median tumor
cellularity of 88% compared to a median cellularity of 12% in the bulk
samples. Furthermore, the enrichment methods may also provide a source of
normal or reference material, non-tumor cells in the case of LCM and
CD45+ blood cells in the case of flow sorting, and eliminate the need for
matched blood samples to call somatic variation. In conjunction with low
quantity DNA input protocols for library construction, high quality next
generation sequencing libraries are readily produced without sacrificing
library complexity that enables somatic mutation, copy-number and
structural variant detection at modest sequencing depths (50x). These
methods are applicable to all tumor types where significant stromal
contamination hinders somatic mutation detection. In addition to
redefining the rates of known somatically altered genes in PDAC, such as
CDKN2A and SMAD4, the high cellularity data set has also allowed us to
evaluate PDAC tumor heterogeneity with the ability to detect sub-clonal
variation that is not masked by non-tumor DNA. Moreover, in 50% of the
samples sequenced to date, we observe evidence of punctuated evolution
suggesting a catastrophic event during mutagenesis, which may be
associated with the clinically observed rapid progression of the disease.
The result of enhanced somatic mutation detection is a more comprehensive
picture of the PDAC genomic landscape.

