Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel function of the BAP1 nuclear deubiquitinase in the
non-homologous end joining (NHEJ) pathway of double strand DNA repair


Background- The deubiquitinating enzyme BAP1 is mutated in a hereditary
cancer syndrome with increased risk of malignant pleural mesothelioma
(MPM) and uveal melanoma and in subsets of sporadic cases of these
cancers, as well as in clear cell renal carcinoma and intrahepatic
cholangiocarcinoma.Methods and Results- We found that BAP1 knockdown is
associated with increased DNA damage and that this effect of BAP1
knockdown is further enhanced by both X-irradiation and concomitant
DNA-PKcs inhibitor II treatment in normal human mesenchymal stem cells
and the MPM cell line H-Meso. A BAP1 mutant deficient in deubiquitinase
activity is also associated with increased DNA damage in the H-Meso
cells. Interactional total peptide (ITOP) analysis based on proteins
identified by Liquid Chromatography coupled to tandem Mass Spectrometry
(LC-MS/MS) of BAP1 protein complexes in H-Meso MPM cells and 293T cells
identified known binding partners [HCF1, ASXL2, H2A] as well as possible
novel interaction partners, notably PRKDC which encodes the catalytic
subunit of the DNA-dependent protein kinase (DNA-PKcs) and functions with
the Ku70/Ku80 heterodimer in the non-homologous end joining (NHEJ)
pathway of DNA repair. Double stranded DNA damage resulted in prominent
nuclear expression of BAP1 protein in H-Meso cells and phosphorylation of
BAP1 at Serine 395. Overexpression of dominant negative BAP1 C91W mutant
in MPM cells caused instability of DNA-PKcs. Although strong
polyubiquitination of DNA-PKcs was observed upon DNA damage in MPM cells
expressing BAP1 C91W, this polyubiquitination was not observed in the
presence of wild type BAP1. A plasmid-based NHEJ assay also confirmed a
significant effect of BAP1 on NHEJ activity.Conclusion- Functional
complexes between BAP1 and the NHEJ family components point to a novel
role in DNA repair and may shed light on BAP1's role as an important
tumor suppressor

