Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Circulating tumor cells: A key deliverable in oncology clinical
trials


Circulating tumor cell (CTC) enumeration is a new pharmacodynamic
biomarker developed from an emerging rare event technology showing
prognostic potential for the management and monitoring of patients with
colon, breast, and prostate cancer. As more evidence is gradually
accumulating at multiple cancer institutes, CTC has the potential to
become a surrogate marker for cancer prognosis. There are challenges in
performing CTC testing, however this assay has the opportunity to become
a key deliverable in oncology clinical trials.Our experience in the
implementation of CTC testing in clinical trials over the past four years
has led to recommendations for future CTC applications, including
critical aspects such as sample accessioning and logistics, operational
maintenance and method training, data collection and sufficient IT
infrastructure to accommodate large data files in full scale trial
operations. To have a successful trial using the CTC test as a monitored
biomarker, the estimation of sample size for the clinical trial has to
take into consideration the anticipated disqualification rate of
collected samples. In our clinical trial experiences, 10% of samples
submitted were disqualified for reasons ranging from insufficient sample
volume to severe hemolysis. Sample logistics and transportation
considerations are keys to successful sample management. Strict quality
control (QC) measurements, a robust training program, effective data
management, and proper maintenance of the CTC system are keys for
delivering standardized results in a timely manner.Our results indicate
that CTC testing can be effectively incorporated into large scale
clinical trials and the data can be seamlessly integrated into the
Laboratory Information Management System (LIMS). CTC results may offer
clinically useful information about patients and their response to
therapy. From a patient perspective, the CTC test only requires a tube of
blood and is well suited to multiple sampling time points during a
clinical trial.

