Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Distinct copy number alterations in genomes of oral cavity
squamous cell carcinomas


Oral cavity squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) is one of the most common
cancers in Taiwan and worldwide. Despite recent progress in the diagnosis
and therapeutic modalities for OSCC, the 5-year survival rate has not
been improved in recent two decades. In order to provide some clues for
clinical management of OSCC, 72 advanced-stage OSCCs were analyzed using
two microarray platforms (26 cases with Affymetrix 500K and 46 cases with
Affymetrix SNP 6.0). Genomic copy number was derived from calculating the
intensity ratio between the OSCC and a set of normal DNAs from HapMap
project. Segmented copy numbers for each tumor were inferred with the
hidden markov model using the Partek GS software and circular binary
segmentation using GenePattern pipeline. Genomic Identification of
Significant Targets in Cancer (GISTIC) analysis was used to identify
significant copy number alterations (CNAs) using a Q-value cutoff of
0.25. With this approach, 41 (2 gain and 39 loss) and 32 (4 gain and 28
loss) significant regions were distinguished from 500K and SNP 6.0
platform, respectively. Among them, 12 (2 gains (7p11.2 and 11q13.3) and
10 losses (2q23.3-q24.2, 3p14.2-p12.1, 4q35.2, 7q33-q34, 9p21.3,
11q22.3-q24.3, 16q23.1, 18q11.2-q22.3, 21q21.1 and 21q22.3)) CNAs were
identical in these two platforms. Two gain regions contained the well
known oncogene EGFR (7p11.2) and CCND1 (11q13.3) and 10 deletion regions
resides several known cancer suppressor genes such as FHIT
(3p14.2-p12.1), FAT1 (4q35.1), CDKN2A (9p21.3) and ATM (11q22.3-q24.3).
Among them, gain of 11q13.3 was correlated significantly with lymph node
metastasis and loss of 4q35.2 was significantly associated with lymph
node extracapsular spread (LNECS) and poor disease-free survival. Copy
number gains of EGFR and CCND1 were further confirmed by fluorescence in
situ hybridization and TaqMan CN assay (Hs01818912_cn and Hs02353610_cn),
respectively. We found that the concordance rate was 74.63% for EGFR and
77.78% for CCND1. To further explore the clinical value of copy number
gains of EGFR and CCND1 in OSCC, 257 OSCC cases were analyzed.
Preliminary results indicated that gains of CCND1 were significantly
associated with tumor differentiation, lymph node metastasis and LNECS;
while amplification of EGFR gene was significantly associated with tumor
stage and lymph node metastasis but not LNECS. Furthermore, gains of
CCND1 were significantly associated with poor disease-free and overall
survival. On the other hand, amplification of EGFR was not associated
with either disease-free or overall survival. Taken together, we have
revealed the significant CNAs of OSCCs in Taiwan and confirmed the
amplification of two important genes (CCND1 and EGFR) in 257 OSCCs. Thus,
current genome-wide CNAs analysis provides clues for future
characterization of important oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes
associated with the behaviors of the disease.

