Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mining the circulating immune cell transcriptome for ovarian
cancer-specific biomarkers: A proof of concept study


The continuous interplay between cancer cells and immune system allows an
opportunity to identify cancer-specific biomarkers in immune cells. Here,
we compare the transcriptomes of peripheral blood mononuclear cells
(PBMCs) obtained from advanced stage ovarian cancer patients and healthy
donors in a proof-of-concept study to identify ovarian cancer-specific
biomarkers. PBMCs were collected from patients undergoing surgery with
the gynecologic oncology service. RNA was extracted from the PBMCs of
five patients (training set) with confirmed diagnosis of epithelial
ovarian cancer and 4 health donor blood samples. Microarray analysis
using Illumina platform was conducted and analyzed using the R
statistical package. After data normalization, differentially expressed
genes in the two cohorts were identified controlling for false discovery
rate at 5 and 10%. The top ten up- and downregulated genes were selected.
Gene ontology and pathway analysis led to identification of a Candidate
Biomarker Panel (CBP) comprising of five of the ten genes that were most
likely to serve as biomarkers for ovarian cancer. Validation of the CBP
was achieved using PBMCs isolated from a separate group of six patients
and healthy donors (test set) was performed using qPCR and flow cytometry
and in vitro culture experiments. Bioinformatics analysis identified 391
genes that were up-regulated and 599 that were down-regulated. A set of
five genes with high biomarker potential and were included in the CBP.
All of the CBP genes were differentially expressed by 3-5 fold (pThe
continuous interplay between cancer cells and immune system allows an
opportunity to identify cancer-specific biomarkers in immune cells. Here,
we compare the transcriptomes of peripheral blood mononuclear cells
(PBMCs) obtained from advanced stage ovarian cancer patients and healthy
donors in a proof-of-concept study to identify ovarian cancer-specific
biomarkers. PBMCs were collected from patients undergoing surgery with
the gynecologic oncology service. RNA was extracted from the PBMCs of
five patients (training set) with confirmed diagnosis of epithelial
ovarian cancer and 4 health donor blood samples. Microarray analysis
using Illumina platform was conducted and analyzed using the R
statistical package. After data normalization, differentially expressed
genes in the two cohorts were identified controlling for false discovery
rate at 5 and 10%. The top ten up- and downregulated genes were selected.
Gene ontology and pathway analysis led to identification of a Candidate
Biomarker Panel (CBP) comprising of five of the ten genes that were most
likely to serve as biomarkers for ovarian cancer. Validation of the CBP
was achieved using PBMCs isolated from a separate group of six patients
and healthy donors (test set) was performed using qPCR and flow cytometry
and in vitro culture experiments. Bioinformatics analysis identified 391
genes that were up-regulated and 599 that were down-regulated. A set of
five genes with high biomarker potential and were included in the CBP.
All of the CBP genes were differentially expressed by 3-5 fold (p<0.03)
in the cancer patient PBMCs as compared to healthy donors. Validation
results for the CBP were similar between the training set and the test
set. Co-culture experiments indicated differential expression of the CBP
genes in healthy donor-derived PBMCs co-cultured with cancer cells.
Continuous cross-talk between immune cells and abnormal tissues leads to
changes in the immune cell transcriptome and proteome in response to a
pathologic state. We demonstrate that the transcriptome and proteome of
circulating immune cells is a repository for ovarian cancer-specific
biomarkers. Our on-going studies are focused on validating the CBP in a
larger cohort of samples obtained from healthy donors, ovarian cancer
patients and subjects treated for benign gynecologic anomalies.

