Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PTP4A3 is oncogenic and modulates triple negative breast cancer
growth


Triple negative breast cancers (TNBCs) are among the most aggressive and
heterogenous breast cancers characterized by a high propensity to invade,
metastasize, and relapse; the exact mechanisms by which TNBCs mediate
progression is unclear and thus, new insights into the biology of TNBC
are desperately needed. We have developed a novel anti-cancer compound
(AMPI-109) that is selectively efficacious against TNBC cell-lines. We
conducted a genome-wide functional genomic shRNA screen to identify
modifiers of AMPI-109 sensitivity and identified PTP4A3 (P3), a protein
tyrosine phosphatase implicated in invasive, node positive TNBC tumors
and associates with poor survival outcome, as a mediator of AMPI-109
action. In silico modeling predicted that AMPI-109 binds the catalytic
site of P3 with favorable energetics. To investigate whether AMPI-109
could impact the activity of P3, we performed an in vitro phosphatase
assay and demonstrated that AMPI-109 impaired the catalytic activity of
P3. To investigate an oncogenic role of P3 in TNBC, we conducted stable
lentiviral knockdown of P3 (ShP3) in BT-20 TNBC cells and demonstrated
that loss of P3 leads to substantial growth inhibition (48%, p = 0.0055),
similar in magnitude to AMPI-109 at 100 nM dose (66%, p = 0.00005).
AMPI-109 also decreased P3 mRNA and protein levels. Accordingly, we
blocked de novo protein synthesis and observed enhanced P3 protein
degradation in the presences of AMPI-109. This degradation was reversible
in the presence of the proteasome inhibitor MG-132, suggesting that
AMPI-109 may induce P3 degradation through a proteasome-dependent
mechanism. Functionally, high expression of P3 has been implicated in
driving metastatic phenotypes in colorectal cancer but its role in TNBC
cell migration has not been investigated. Wound-healing assays
demonstrated that both AMPI-109 and ShP3 significantly impeded the
migratory capacity of BT-20 cells (AMPI-109: 85% reduction, shP3: 80%
reduction). AMPI-109 and ShP3 also conferred a higher rate of apoptosis
induction as measured by activation of pro-apoptotic caspases-3 and 7
suggesting that the growth inhibitory phenotypes observed could
potentially be attributed to increases in apoptotic cell death. To
determine how P3 mechanistically exerts its oncogenic effect in the
context of modulating cell signaling pathways, we carried out
co-expression analysis of mRNAs that tracked with P3 expression across a
suite of TNBC cell lines. We identified TRAPPC9, an activator of the
NF-kappa B pathway, as correlating positively with P3 (r =0.652).
Collectively, our results identify P3 as a target of AMPI-109 and that P3
has an oncogenic role in TNBC. Future studies will further characterize
the relationship between AMPI-109, P3 and the NF-kappa B pathway.
Furthermore, because of the specificity of AMPI-109 for TNBC cells, it
may represent a new tool for understanding the molecular basis underlying
the aggressive nature of this disease.

