Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Stromal fibroblasts in breast carcinomas promote angiogenisis
through Adrenomedullin (AM) secretion


Tumor stroma is an active part influencing the biological properties of
malignancies via molecular cross-talk. Tumor- or cancer-associated
fibroblasts (TAFs or CAFs) play a significant role in this interaction.
These cells frequently express smooth muscle actin and can be classified
as myofibroblasts. CAFs often constitute the majority of the stromal
cells within a breast carcinoma. Adrenomedullin (AM), a multifunctional
peptide, is highly expressed in several tumors and plays an important
role in angiogenesis and tumor growth through its receptors calcitonin
receptor-like receptor/receptor activity modifying protein-2 and -3
(CLR/RAMP2 and CLR/RAMP3). In this study, RT-QPCR showed the expression
of AM and AM receptors mRNAs in CAFs and breast carcinoma cell lines
(MCF7 and MDA 231). Immunostaining demonstrates the presence of
immunoreactive AM in all the CAFs analyzed (n=15). AM activates MAP
kinase pathway by inducing a phosphorylation of ERK1/2 and p38 in both
cell types suggesting a cross-talk between tumor cells and CAFs ensured
by AM. In vivo, CAFs in Matrigel plugs induce angiogenesis by promoting
recruitment of endothelial cells, pericytes, myeloid precursor cells and
by promoting channel formation. AM and AM receptors neutralizing
antibodies blocked neovascularisation of Matrigel plugs suggesting
strongly that angiogenesis induced by CAFs into carcinoma are mediated in
part by AM. Our findings indicate that CAFs within breast carcinomas may
contribute to tumor promotion in part through the secretion of AM.Note:
This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

