Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification and characterization of class I HDAC-specific
small-molecule inhibitors with a novel pharmacophore


Small-molecule inhibitors of HDACs (HDIs) have therapeutic potentials for
treating cancer, metabolic disorders, cardiovascular diseases and
neurodegenerative maladies. Two FDA-approved HDIs (vorinostat and
romidepsin) are in clinical use for cancer therapy and a variety of other
HDIs have been actively tested in clinical trials. Current challenges
facing drug development of HDIs include the lack of isoform specificity,
undesirable toxicity and suboptimal therapeutic efficacy against solid
tumors. Most HDIs in preclinical or clinical evaluations belong to the
hydroxamic acid or aminobenzamide classes. The former class lacks isoform
specificity and the latter has not yet been approved for clinical use.
Thus, the identification of HDIs with novel chemical properties and
isoform-specificity may unleash the considerable therapeutic potential of
targeting HDACs. We have conducted a high-throughput screening of
>620,000 compounds and identified a lead with a hitherto undescribed
pharmacophore with an inhibitory specificity against the class I HDACs,
and a low two-digit nanomolar potency. An array of synthetic analogs
established the structure-activity relationship. These novel inhibitors
induced histone hyperacetylation, suppressed cancer cell proliferation of
diverse cancer cell lines including the NCI-60 panel, and malignant
cell-biological features associated with tumor metastasis. These
compounds are under active preclinical development for cancer therapy.

