Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Parents' ages at birth and risk of hormone-related cancer among
women in the California Teachers Study


Childbearing age has increased in Western countries over the last several
decades. The immediate effects of advanced parental age on the health of
offspring have been extensively studied. However, few studies have
examined the effect of parental age at birth on the risk of adult-onset
cancer. We explored the association between parental age at birth and the
risk of adult-onset hormone-related cancers (i.e., breast cancer, ovarian
cancer and endometrial cancer) in the prospective California Teachers
Study cohort of 133,479 female teachers and administrators. Between 1995
and 2010, 5359 women were diagnosed with breast cancer, 515 women were
diagnosed with ovarian cancer, and 1110 women were diagnosed with
endometrial cancer. Multivariate adjusted relative risks (RR) and 95%
confidence intervals (CI) were estimated by fitting Cox proportional
hazards models. After mutual adjustment for paternal age/maternal age at
birth, no association was observed for maternal age at birth for any of
the three types of cancer. However, compared to those born to a father
whose age at his daughter's birth was 25-29 years, women born to a father
under age 20 years had 35% greater risk of breast cancer (RR=1.35, 95%
CI=1.03-1.76) and more than 2 times greater risk of ovarian cancer
(RR=2.26, 95% CI=1.14-4.50); women born to a father whose age at
childbirth was 30-34 years had 25% greater risk of endometrial cancer
(RR=1.25, 95% CI=1.05-1.48) than women whose father was 25-29 years. In
an interaction model, relative to daughters born to a mother younger than
25 year and a father between 25-29 years, relative risk was elevated for
those born to a mother younger than 25 and a father younger than 20 years
(RR=1.37, 95% CI=1.07-1.76), or to a father older than 34 years old
regardless of mother's age (mother Childbearing age has increased in
Western countries over the last several decades. The immediate effects of
advanced parental age on the health of offspring have been extensively
studied. However, few studies have examined the effect of parental age at
birth on the risk of adult-onset cancer. We explored the association
between parental age at birth and the risk of adult-onset hormone-related
cancers (i.e., breast cancer, ovarian cancer and endometrial cancer) in
the prospective California Teachers Study cohort of 133,479 female
teachers and administrators. Between 1995 and 2010, 5359 women were
diagnosed with breast cancer, 515 women were diagnosed with ovarian
cancer, and 1110 women were diagnosed with endometrial cancer.
Multivariate adjusted relative risks (RR) and 95% confidence intervals
(CI) were estimated by fitting Cox proportional hazards models. After
mutual adjustment for paternal age/maternal age at birth, no association
was observed for maternal age at birth for any of the three types of
cancer. However, compared to those born to a father whose age at his
daughter's birth was 25-29 years, women born to a father under age 20
years had 35% greater risk of breast cancer (RR=1.35, 95% CI=1.03-1.76)
and more than 2 times greater risk of ovarian cancer (RR=2.26, 95%
CI=1.14-4.50); women born to a father whose age at childbirth was 30-34
years had 25% greater risk of endometrial cancer (RR=1.25, 95%
CI=1.05-1.48) than women whose father was 25-29 years. In an interaction
model, relative to daughters born to a mother younger than 25 year and a
father between 25-29 years, relative risk was elevated for those born to
a mother younger than 25 and a father younger than 20 years (RR=1.37, 95%
CI=1.07-1.76), or to a father older than 34 years old regardless of
mother's age (mother <25 or 25 years old; RR=1.31 and 1.12 respectively).
Lower ovarian cancer risk was observed among women born to a mother 25
years and a father between 25-29 years (RR=0.66, 95% CI=0.48-0.90); no
association was observed for endometrial cancer. These findings indicate
that parental age at birth, especially paternal age at birth, may affect
the adult-onset cancer risk of daughters, especially breast cancer.

