Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The research of the mechanism of lung cancer carcinogenesis and
the target gene of microRNA-20a in lung cancer small cells


Purpose: Recent studies have suggested that microRNA biomarkers could be
useful for stratifying lung cancer subtypes, but microRNA signatures
varied between different populations. Small cell lung cancer (SCLC) is
the lowest differentiation degree and the highest malignant subtype of
lung cancer that urgently needs biomarkers to aid patient management.
Here, we undertook the first comprehensive investigation on microRNA in
Chinese SCLC patients of limited stage.Experimental Design: MicroRNA
expression was measured in cancerous and noncancerous tissue pairs
strictly collected from Chinese SCLC patients of limited stage, who had
not been treated with chemotherapy or radiotherapy prior to surgery. The
molecular targets of proposed microRNA were further examined.Results: We
identified that high expression of hsa-miR-20a was associated with poor
survival in these 20 SCLC patients by Kaplan-Meier analysis (P=0.03),
This association was independently validated in a separate cohort of 38
SCLC patients in Kaplan-Meier analysis(P=0.046). We then determined that
the tumor suppressor PTEN is a target of hsa-miR-20a. Expression of
hsa-miR-20a in a human lung cancer cell line repressed PTEN
activity.Conclusions: Our results identified a new prognostic biomarker
of SCLC, hsa-miR-20a.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

