Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analysis of long non-coding RNA expression and function in a mouse
model of glioblastoma


Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most common adult brain tumor and represents
one of the most treatment refractory cancers. Although significant
progress has been made in understanding the coding genomic alterations
associated with GBM, patient survival rarely exceeds 12-14 months
following diagnosis. Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) are RNA species
generally classified as > 200 base-pairs in length that lack protein
coding potential and therefore exert their function as RNA. Several
lncRNAs have been shown to play important roles in cancer biology.
Despite this, the role of lncRNAs in cancer, and GBM in particular,
remains relatively uncharacterized. We hypothesize that lncRNAs are
differentially expressed in GBM and contribute to the pathogenesis of
this disease.Using next generation sequencing, we have identified lncRNAs
expressed in our mouse model of GBM, initiated by lentivirus-mediated
expression of oncogenic Ras and a shRNA targeting p53. This resulted in
the identification of 818 putative lncRNAs, the majority of which
represent novel, uncharacterized transcripts. The majority of the lncRNAs
identified were intergenic and not associated with any known protein
coding gene. Of the total lncRNAs, 44% were differentially expressed in
tumor tissue compared to normal mouse brain. Expression of a subset of
these differentially expressed lncRNAs was validated by real-time PCR.
Expression of several of these validated lncRNAs could be altered by
direct activation of oncogenic signaling in normal mouse neuroprogenitor
cells and astrocytes. Using a combination of computational and molecular
biology approaches, we will identify candidate lncRNAs to test in
functional assays for their role in glioblastoma biology.

