Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Personalized prevention of colorectal rectal trial (PPCCT)


We previously reported from the Tennessee Colorectal Polyp Study that
high total intakes of calcium or magnesium may only be related to a
reduced risk of colorectal adenoma or hyperplastic polyp when the
calcium/magnesium intake ratio was below 2.8. Furthermore, we found that
calcium/magnesium intake ratio significantly interacted with the common
Thr1482Ile polymorphism (rs8042919, GA) in the TRPM7 gene, in relation to
both adenomas and hyperplastic polyps. The TRPM7 gene is involved in
magnesium and calcium re(absorption) and homeostasis. Compared to those
with the GG genotype, we found that people who carry A allele(s) were at
60% and 85% increased risks of adenoma and hyperplastic polyp,
respectively, if they also consumed diets with calcium/magnesium intake
ratio >2.8; and the corresponding risks increased by 345% and 1500% among
those with the AA genotype. The risk was not increased among those who
carried the A allele(s) if they consumed diets low in calcium/magnesium
ratio (We previously reported from the Tennessee Colorectal Polyp Study
that high total intakes of calcium or magnesium may only be related to a
reduced risk of colorectal adenoma or hyperplastic polyp when the
calcium/magnesium intake ratio was below 2.8. Furthermore, we found that
calcium/magnesium intake ratio significantly interacted with the common
Thr1482Ile polymorphism (rs8042919, GA) in the TRPM7 gene, in relation to
both adenomas and hyperplastic polyps. The TRPM7 gene is involved in
magnesium and calcium re(absorption) and homeostasis. Compared to those
with the GG genotype, we found that people who carry A allele(s) were at
60% and 85% increased risks of adenoma and hyperplastic polyp,
respectively, if they also consumed diets with calcium/magnesium intake
ratio >2.8; and the corresponding risks increased by 345% and 1500% among
those with the AA genotype. The risk was not increased among those who
carried the A allele(s) if they consumed diets low in calcium/magnesium
ratio (<2.8). In a recent report from the Calcium Polyp Prevention Study,
a large-scale randomized clinical trial of calcium supplementation, it
was found that calcium treatment only significantly reduced colorectal
adenoma recurrence risk when the baseline dietary calcium/magnesium
intake ratio was under 2.6 and this effect modification by the
calcium/magnesium ratio cannot solely be attributed to the baseline
dietary intake in calcium or magnesium. It is possible for those with a
high calcium/magnesium ratio, reducing the calcium/magnesium intake ratio
may be helpful. We are funded by NCI (R01CA149633) to conduct a
personalized intervention trial clinical trial among 240 colorectal polyp
patients with a high calcium/magnesium intake ratio. We are testing 1) if
reducing the calcium/magnesium through magnesium supplementation affects
biomarkers related to colorectal carcinogenesis in rectal tissues; and 2)
if the effects differ by TRPM7 genotype. As of November 16, 2013, we have
enrolled at least 160 participants and we plan to complete the trial by
the end of January, 2015. Thus the uniqueness of the trial includes 1)
only target colorectal polyp patients with a high calcium/magnesium ratio
through nutritional screening using multiple 24-hour dietary recalls; 2)
personalized doses are based on and used to reduce the current
calcium/magnesium intake ratios; and finally, 3) the participants are
also randomized by the TRPM7 genotype. We have conducted
immunohistochemical assays to measure expressions of carcinogenesis
biomarkers, including apoptosis, cell proliferation, COX2 and TRPM7, in
normal rectal tissues collected at baseline and the end of the
intervention for 40 participants who first completed the trial. We have
also measured lipid profile and blood pressure. We have obtained very
promising preliminary findings. We will report updated findings in the
presentation. The results from our study may ultimately help to develop
personalized strategies to prevent the colorectal cancer.

