Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Usefulness of alternate-day administration of S-1 and leucovorin
in a xenograft mouse model of colorectal cancer: A shorter drug-free
interval leads to more efficient antitumor effects


[Background] A clinical trial of S-1 with leucovorin (S-1/LV) in
metastatic colorectal cancer (CRC) patients demonstrated promising
efficacy; however, the gastrointestinal toxicities were so severe that it
has not been applied in the clinical setting. On the other hand,
alternate-day administration of S-1 has been proposed to attenuate the
adverse events without reducing its anticancer activity. The aim of this
study was to confirm the feasibility of alternate-day administration of
S-1/LV in in vivo xenograft tumor models.[Methods] Mice were treated with
S-1/LV either in a daily group (two weeks of administration followed by
two weeks of withdrawal) or an alternate-day group (administration on
alternate days for four weeks), then the mice of both groups were
sacrificed and the xenograft tumors were resected. To assess the adverse
reactions, the body weight changes, the condition of feces, mucosal
injury of small intestine and myelosuppression were compared between both
groups. Furthermore, tumor volume, tumor growth inhibition (TGI) and the
expression of Ki67, TUNEL, cIAP2 and XIAP were analyzed to evaluate the
antitumor activity and tumor apoptosis.[Results] Severe weight loss,
diarrhea, mucosal injury and myelosuppression were observed only in the
daily group; however, no adverse reactions were observed in the
alternate-day group, except slight myelosuppression. The TGI in the
alternate-day group was better than that in the daily group, possibly
resulting from apoptosis of tumor cells due to the suppression of
cIAP2.[Conclusion] Our findings suggest that alternate-day administration
of S-1/LV for CRC treatment can achieve higher antitumor activity without
severe adverse reactions. Therefore, we propose that clinical trials with
this regimen should be conducted in CRC patients.

