Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: 68Ga/177Lu-Peptide antagonist targeting of breast cancer: A
xenograft evaluation


Introduction: Recent progress in developing BB2r (bombesin receptor
subtype 2) antagonist vectors with long term cellular retention has
captured significant interest for in vivo targeting of BB2r positive
tumor cells using diagnostic and therapeutic radioisotopes. Here we
report on the evaluation of a 68Ga-labeled BB2r antagonist in comparison
to 18F-FDG for selective PET imaging of BB2r expressing breast cancer
xenografts. The theranostic potential of this BB2r antagonist vector is
further explored by direct comparison of tumor targeting using the
companion beta particle emitting 177Lu-labeled BB2r antagonist.Methods:
Breast tumor cell lines (T47D, MCF7, MB361, MB468, and MB231) were
implanted in female SCID mice. ER+ cell line implanted mice were
supplemented with 90 day release 17-beta Estradiol pellets (0.50 mg) one
week prior to bilateral flank inoculations. 68Ga labeling of a
commercially synthesized BB2r antagonist peptide,
DOTA-Amino-Carboxymethyl-Piperidine-DPhe-Gln-Trp-Ala-Val-Gly-His-Sta-Leu-NH
2 (Eur J Nucl Med Mol Imaging 38(1):97, 2011) was performed and the
product verified to possess > 95% purity by HPLC. Animals were
administered 75-100uCi (2.77-3.7MBq) of 68Ga-BB2r antagonist and
200-300uCi (7.4-11.1MBq) of 18F-FDG on consecutive days with all PET
imaging performed one hour post injection. Mice receiving 177Lu-BB2r
antagonist 1.5-2.0mCi (55.5-74GBq) were imaged using Micro-SPECT/CT at
24hrs and 48hrs post injection (p.i.).Results: The presence of the BB2r
in each cell line was verified by Western blot analysis. 68Ga-BB2r
antagonist uptake in xengorafts was observed in all breast tumor
xenograft models and varied with the highest uptake being visualized in
ER+ xenograft models. Concurrent 18F-FDG PET demonstrated relatively
consistent glucose metabolism across all models. In all xenograft models
requiring estradiol supplementation, prolonged bladder retention was
observed. In the xenograft models administered 177Lu-BB2r antagonist, the
tumor uptake at 1 hr p.i. was highest for ER+ models (7.12+1.92 %ID/g and
9.58+/-1.93 %ID/g for MCF7 and T47D xenografts, respectively) compared to
1.5+0.5%ID/g for the ER- MB231 xenograft model.Conclusions: These
preliminary findings suggest that PET imaging of BB2r expression in
breast cancer models may be possible with preferential uptake in ER+
tumor cell lines. The preliminary theranostic data obtained using the
analogous 177Lu-BB2r antagonist demonstrates the potential for in vivo
delivery of targeted radiotherapeutics to BB2r expressing breast tumors.

