Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ultraviolet radiation induces carcinogenesis in a novel transgenic
mouse model of melanoma


Melanomagenesis is caused by environmental factors, such as ultraviolet
(UV) radiation, as well as genetic factors. The Nucleotide Excision
Repair (NER) pathway repairs photoproducts induced by UV radiation. In
humans, NER pathway disruption leads to the development of skin cancers,
including melanoma. Upon UV exposure, mice deficient in Xpc, an important
protein in the NER pathway, develop skin cancer; but not melanoma. The
Endothelin 3 (Edn3) signaling pathway is essential for melanocyte
precursor cell development. In humans, this pathway has also been
associated with melanoma progression and its metastatic potential. The
purpose of this study is the development of a UV-dependent melanoma mouse
model that combines Xpc deficiency with the over-activation of the Edn3
pathway. Transgenic mice over-expressing Edn3 under the control of the
keratin 5 promoter (K5-Edn3) and carrying a targeted mutation in Xpc were
exposed to a single suberythemal neonatal dose of UV radiation.
Immunostaining and histomorphology were used to confirm the melanocytic
origin of primary skin tumors. Melanomas were only found in animals with
the K5-Edn3 transgene. High penetrance was observed in Xpc null (67%,
n=3) and Xpc heterozygous (67%, n=3) mice in comparison to Xpc wild type
(33%, n=3) mice. RNA extracted from melanomas of Xpc null (n=2), Xpc
heterozygous (n=1) and Xpc wild type (n=1) mice were screened for UV
signature mutations in Hras, Kras and Nras. No mutations were found in
any of these genes. These results indicate that UV radiation exposure, in
conjunction with over-activation of the Edn3 pathway is sufficient to
lead to melanomagenesis in mice independently of mutations in Hras, Kras
or Nras.

