Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dual targeting of mTOR and Notch disrupts growth and promotes
apoptosis in diffuse intrinsic pontine glioma


Diffuse intrinsic pontine gliomass (DIPGss) account for 10% of pediatric
brain tumors and have a universally poor prognosis. Our laboratory has
shown that targeting the NOTCH pathway in glioblastoma (GBM) with gamma
secretase inhibitors (GSI), inhibits the growth and viability of tumor
neurospheres. Primary DIPG as well as DIPG cell lines express have very
high levels of NOTCH activity as measured by western blot and qPCR
assays. AKT amplification is observed in primary DIPG, and TORC1/TORC2
activation occurs in DIPG cell lines as measured by western blot. The
mTOR and NOTCH pathways are known to interact and alter cancer stem cell
growth, stemness, and metabolism. We hypothesized that dual targeting of
NOTCH and mTOR in DIPG would lead to decreased proliferation and
increased apoptosis compared to targeting either pathway in isolation. In
established DIPG cell lines, we observed that GSI treatment decreases
NOTCH activity in a dose dependent manner as evidenced by decreased
expression of NOTCH targets expression of Hes1 and Hey1 via as measured
by western blot and qPCR assays. We also observed a dose-dependent
reduction in DIPG proliferation and growth after gamma-secretase
inhibition as measured by BrdU (Day 7, DMSO to 5 uM MRK003 had p value
Diffuse intrinsic pontine gliomass (DIPGss) account for 10% of pediatric
brain tumors and have a universally poor prognosis. Our laboratory has
shown that targeting the NOTCH pathway in glioblastoma (GBM) with gamma
secretase inhibitors (GSI), inhibits the growth and viability of tumor
neurospheres. Primary DIPG as well as DIPG cell lines express have very
high levels of NOTCH activity as measured by western blot and qPCR
assays. AKT amplification is observed in primary DIPG, and TORC1/TORC2
activation occurs in DIPG cell lines as measured by western blot. The
mTOR and NOTCH pathways are known to interact and alter cancer stem cell
growth, stemness, and metabolism. We hypothesized that dual targeting of
NOTCH and mTOR in DIPG would lead to decreased proliferation and
increased apoptosis compared to targeting either pathway in isolation. In
established DIPG cell lines, we observed that GSI treatment decreases
NOTCH activity in a dose dependent manner as evidenced by decreased
expression of NOTCH targets expression of Hes1 and Hey1 via as measured
by western blot and qPCR assays. We also observed a dose-dependent
reduction in DIPG proliferation and growth after gamma-secretase
inhibition as measured by BrdU (Day 7, DMSO to 5 uM MRK003 had p value
<0.05) and MTT assays (Day 5 and Day 7, DMSO to 2 uM and 5 uM MRK003 p
value Diffuse intrinsic pontine gliomass (DIPGss) account for 10% of
pediatric brain tumors and have a universally poor prognosis. Our
laboratory has shown that targeting the NOTCH pathway in glioblastoma
(GBM) with gamma secretase inhibitors (GSI), inhibits the growth and
viability of tumor neurospheres. Primary DIPG as well as DIPG cell lines
express have very high levels of NOTCH activity as measured by western
blot and qPCR assays. AKT amplification is observed in primary DIPG, and
TORC1/TORC2 activation occurs in DIPG cell lines as measured by western
blot. The mTOR and NOTCH pathways are known to interact and alter cancer
stem cell growth, stemness, and metabolism. We hypothesized that dual
targeting of NOTCH and mTOR in DIPG would lead to decreased proliferation
and increased apoptosis compared to targeting either pathway in
isolation. In established DIPG cell lines, we observed that GSI treatment
decreases NOTCH activity in a dose dependent manner as evidenced by
decreased expression of NOTCH targets expression of Hes1 and Hey1 via as
measured by western blot and qPCR assays. We also observed a
dose-dependent reduction in DIPG proliferation and growth after
gamma-secretase inhibition as measured by BrdU (Day 7, DMSO to 5 uM
MRK003 had p value <0.05) and MTT assays (Day 5 and Day 7, DMSO to 2 uM
and 5 uM MRK003 p value <0.05). However, inhibition of growth and
increased apoptosis were not complete. We observed a similar decrease in
proliferation and increase in apoptosis using the dual TORC1/TORC2
inhibitor PPT242. Combination therapy with MRK003 and PP242 led to
significantly increased apoptosis compared to either treatment alone
(cell cycle Sub-G1: DMSO 13.2% vs 1000nM PP242-5uM M003 28.9%). This data
suggest that dual targeting of the mTOR and NOTCH pathways with GSI will
decrease DIPG cell growth and proliferation, increase cell death, and
reduce tumorigenicity.

