Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of BCAT1 suppresses the expression of pro-metastatic
proteins and reduces cancer metastasis


Recent evidence suggests that the cytosolic presence of branched chain
amino acid aminotransferase (BCAT1) in adult tissues is associated with
diverse pathological conditions including cancer and inflammatory
diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis; in these diseases, BCAT1 appears
to modulate the expression of many key proteins and to be a new druggable
target. In cancer, BCAT1 physically associates with CD147 and regulates
the levels and the cellular localization of the protein in a number of
different cell lines in vitro and in vivo. Silencing of Bcat1 gene
downregulates the total expression of CD147 in MDA-MB-435 cells, while
inhibition of BCAT1 by sodium 4-methyl-5-oxo-hexanoate (ERG240) leads to
suppression of the extracellular CD147 in the same cells. In turn,
suppression of extracellular CD147 results in downregulation of
CD147-associated proteins such as MCT4, matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs),
cyclophilin A, and GAPDH. Furthermore, inhibition of BCAT1 is associated
with prevention of cancer cell migration and reduction in secretion of
metabolic by-products such as lactate. Surprisingly, treatment of
MDA-MB-231 tumor-bearing animals with 2-deoxyglucose (2DG), a well-known
inhibitor of glycolysis, leads to a decrease in the levels of c-MYC and
BCAT1, an increase in the total expression of CD147, and the increased
shedding of the extracellular CD147 into the circulation. This
observation suggests that BCAT1-driven regulation of CD147 in cancer
cells involves a complex mechanism. Inhibition of tumoral BCAT1 is
expected to adversely affect the metastatic potential of various tumors
not only through a reduction in cell motility but also through
alterations in the tumor microenvironment, driven by inhibition of
extracellular CD147.

