Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TRPM7 expression predicts poor prognosis in patients with
nasopharyngeal carcinoma and correlates with tumor metastasis


The aim of this study was to investigate prognostic significance of TRPM7
expression in nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) and evaluate the association
of TRPM7 with tumor invasion and metastasis. Immunohistochemical staining
for TRPM7 was carried out on paraffin-embedded tissue sections from 206
NPC patients. The data was subjected to statistical analysis with respect
to clinicopathological variables and survival. Real-time PCR and Western
blot were used to assess the expression of TRPM7 in NPC cells. Small
interfering RNA and construct transfection were used to knockdown and
improve TRPM7 expression in NPC cells. TRPM7 was highly expressed in 102
out of 206 (49.5%) NPC cases. TRPM7 expression was significantly
correlated with clinical stage, lymphatic and distant metastasis. The
patients who had high TRPM7 expression showed a significantly lower 5
year survival rate than the patients who had low TRPM7 expression. TRPM7
might be an independent prognostic indicator for patient's survival. The
cell lines with high metastatic potential expressed more TRPM7 than the
cell lines with low metastatic potential. Moreover, the migratory and
invasive potential of NPC cells was significantly decreased and increased
by TRPM7 knockdown and overexpression. The study indicates that TRPM7
expression is inversely correlated with NPC patient survival and
correlated with NPC invasion and metastasis.Note: This abstract was not
presented at the meeting.

