Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Enhanced permeability of nanoscale chemotherapeutic agents for the
treatment of breast cancer


Nanotechnology is becoming increasingly successful in advancing
site-specific drug delivery to cancer tissues. The ability to deliver
drugs more effectively to a region of interest translates into less
harmful side effects and more beneficial therapeutic action. This
technology is currently in use in treating a number of human cancers.
Certain therapeutic limitations are encountered, such as short
circulation life, poor drug permeability, and drug resistance. These
limitations can be addressed with the use of nanoscale particles that
allow for controlled release of the drug. This presentation will educate
the audience about approaches to treating cancer using new
technologies.ObjectivesThe main objective of this strategy is to minimize
the side effects associated with chemotherapy, while enhancing the
overall efficacy of the treatment of breast cancer, and other cancers.-
Tackle drug limitations by combining nanotechnology and chemotherapeutic
methods that have been shown to increase therapeutic efficacy- Measure
the effects of this combinatorial strategy using a mouse model bearing
human breast tumors- Assemble the drug into a nanoscale shell in order to
form a polymeric nanoparticle capable of providing controlled drug
release.- Create leaky vasculature in the vicinity of tumor tissue
without affecting normal tissueMethods1st Method: Synthesis of a
nanoparticle which encapsulates two chemotherapeutic agents, Paclitaxel
and Cisplatin. The nanoparticle formed is a lipid-polymer hybrid whose
main components are as follows: a core encapsulating the two drugs; a
biocompatible shell to promote drug retention inside the core; and a
polymer stealth layer outside the lipid shell to enhance nanoparticle
stability and systemic circulation lifetime.2nd Method: The tumor will be
starved by limiting vascular growth using the drug, Endostatin. In
addition, the permeability of the vasculature surrounding the tumor will
be made more permeable for drug uptake by using a permability enhancing
agent, iRGD.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

