Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Norleual a hepatocyte growth factor/c-Met inhibitor blocks
malignant phenotypes in cancerous cells


The primary purpose of this study was to demonstrate that the hepatocyte
growth factor (HGF) antagonist norleual is capable of attenuating the
cellular responses of cancer cells to HGF. The angiotensin IV analog
norleual [Nle-Tyr-Ile--(CH2-NH2)3-4-His-Pro-Phe] exhibits structural
homology with the hinge (linker) region of HGF and acts to block HGF
dimerization, a process required for its activation. Norleual
competitively inhibited the binding of a H3-Hinge peptide sequence to the
HGF, and binds directly to HGF with a Ki = 3.6x10-12M. Predictably,
norleulal is able to block the cellular responses due to HGF activation
in multiple cell types at concentrations in the picomolar range including
HGF/c-Met sensitive pancreatic cancer cells. Norleual's ability to
inhibit the growth and survival of several cell lines including
pancreatic cancer cells was evaluated using viability testing and cell
sorting tags to identify living, dead and apoptotic cells. HGF/c-Met
activation increases the invasive potential of the pancreatic cancer
cells, which provides a mechanistic basis for the ability of c-Met to
support pancreatic tumor metastasis. In this regard norleual as an HGF
antagonist was able to block the migration and invasion of cancer cells
through collagen gels in a transwell chamber. Over-activation of the
growth factor system HGF/c-Met is a critical contributor to cancer's
ability to disseminate rapidly and its refractoriness to standard
chemotherapy. Norleual, which is a representative of a first-in-class
group of molecules that blocks the activation step of HGF, represent a
novel therapeutic approach to the treatment of HGF/Met sensitive cancers
including pancreatic cancer.

