Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Simvastatin induced apoptosis and suppressed proliferation of
breast cancer through deactivating PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway


PURPOSE: Statins, inhibitors of 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A
(HMG-CoA) reductase, purportedly exert anti-tumoral effects on breast
cancer by increasing apoptosis and decreasing proliferation. However, the
biologic mechanisms for these actions are not fully elucidated. The aim
of this study was to explore the effects of simvastatin on apoptosis,
proliferation and commonly abrogated PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway in a
window-of-opportunity breast cancer trial and breast cancer cell
lines.EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: A total of 16 female patients with newly
diagnosed primary breast cancer were recruited into a preoperative
window-of-opportunity trial. Patients received simvastatin for 10-28 days
at a dose of 20mg daily before definitive breast cancer surgery. Pre- and
post-treatment tumor biopsies were obtained for immunohistochemistry
staining for cleaved caspase 3, Ki67, Pten, phospho-Akt and phospho-S6
ribosomal protein, and the changes between paired pre- and post-treatment
tumors compared. For in vitro functional studies, apoptosis and
proliferation assays were performed on breast cancer cell lines MCF7 and
MDA-MB-231 48 hours after treatment with simvastatin. Using Western
blots, the effects of simvastatin on apoptosis protein caspase 3, cell
cycle proteins of c-myc, cyclin D1, p21 and p27, and of PI3K/Akt/mTOR
pathway through phosphorylation of Akt, mTOR, p70S6K, S6 ribosomal
protein and 4EBP1, were assessed.RESULTS: In the prospective clinical
trial, simvastatin treatment led to significant increase in apoptosis in
post-treatment tumors, as determined by positive cleaved caspase 3
(23.424.3 vs 8.97.4, p=0.002). Decreased trend for proliferation was also
observed in post-treatment tumors (57.735.2 vs 74.659.9 for Ki67,
p=0.245). Moreover, simvastatin treatment markedly suppressed
PI3K/Akt/mTOR signalling pathway by activating Pten (66.165.2 vs
30.046.6, p=0.005) and by dephosphorylating Pten downstream effectors,
Akt and S6 ribosomal protein (9.019.5 vs 93.087.4, p=0.002 for
phospho-Akt; 63.751.6 vs 108.667.7, p=0.033 for phospho-S6 ribosomal
protein). In MCF7 and MDA-MB-231 cells, simvastatin treatment similarly
induced apoptosis and inhibited cell proliferation, with decrease in
expression of c-myc and cyclin D1 and increase in cell cycle suppressor
p21 and p27 at a dose dependent manner. Moreover, simvastatin treatment,
at 20uM for MCF7 and 400nM for MDA-MB-231 cells, strongly suppressed
sequential phosphorylation of PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway cascades including
Akt, mTOR, p70S6K, S6 ribosomal protein and 4EBP1.CONCLUSION: The
clinical trial and in vitro functional studies concordantly showed
simvastatin to promote apoptosis, suppress proliferation and
dephosphorylate sequential signalling cascades of PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway
of breast cancer. These findings shed light on the biological and
potential anti-tumor effects of simvastatin in breast cancer.

