Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NSCLC cells demonstrate differential mode of cell death in
response to the combined treatment of radiation and a DNA-PKcs inhibitor


Introduction: Lung cancers demonstrate the highest number of p53
mutations of any cancer with 70% of small cell lung cancers and 33% of
adenocarcinomas containing a mutation. Loss of p53 function has been
correlated with therapeutic resistance and poor clinical outcomes.
Therefore, developing therapeutic strategies that specifically target p53
loss-of-function mutants is of the utmost importance. The purpose of this
investigation is to explore whether p53 status has impact on the
radio-sensitizing effect of a DNA-PKcs inhibitor (NU7441).Methods:
Clonogenic surviving fraction analysis, DNA double strand break repair
kinetics, cell cycle analysis, immunofluorescence, immunoblot, apoptosis
and autophagy assays were used to investigate the mechanism of
radiosensitization of NU7441 in NSCLC cell lines (A549, H1299, and H460)
with differential levels of p53 expression.Results: NU7441 substantially
inhibited the repair of IR-induced DNA double strand break (DSB) in all
three cell lines. Clonogenic surviving fraction analysis reveals that
NU7441 is a better radio-sensitizer in p53-deficient cells (H1299) when
compared to p53-wild type cells (A549, H460). Combination of ionizing
radiation (IR) and NU7441 leads to a more robust G2 arrest in A549 and
H460 cells when compared to radiation treatment only. However, NU7441 and
radiation preferentially induced mitotic arrest in H1299 consequently
leading to a significant increase in mitotic catastrophe. Furthermore,
NU7441 led to an increase in apoptosis rather than autophagy as the
predominant cell death pathway in p53-deficient cells. Moreover,
knockdown of p53 using siRNA sensitized A549 to NU7441+IR
treatment.Conclusion: Our study clearly shows that NU7441, a novel
DNA-PKcs inhibitor, is a potent radio-sensitizer in p53-dificient lung
cancer cells and highlights the promise of NU7441 in targeted cancer
treatment.

