Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nurr1, a novel target of 1,1-bis(3-indolyl)-1-(p-chlorophenyl)
methane for inhibition of the initiation and progression of skin cancer
tumorigenesis


The objective of this study was to demonstrate the chemopreventive
potential of 1,1-bis(3-indolyl)-1-(p-chlorophenyl methane) (DIM-D) in
skin cancer using an in vitro and in vivo models. In vitro cell
cytotoxicity and viability assays were carried out in A431 human
epidermoid carcinoma cell line (A431) and normal human epidermal
keratinocytes (NHEK) respectively. Apoptosis induction and accumulation
of ROS following UVB exposure in DIM-D pretreated NHEK cells (2 hr prior)
was also evaluated. Immunocytochemistry and western blot analysis were
performed to determine proapoptotic and proinflammatory markers
expressions in DIM-D treated A431 cells and in UVB irradiated NHEK cells.
For in vivo experiments, DIM-D was encapsulated within nanocarriers by
hot melt homogenization using Nano DeBEE. Nanocarriers were surface
modified with oleic acid and incorporated into a gel using established
procedures (G-NOD) and characterized for particle size, zeta potential,
entrapment efficiency, rheology, skin permeation and drug release. The
chemo-preventive efficiency of G-NOD was evaluated using UVB-induced skin
cancer model in SKH hairless mice and skin samples were collected and
investigated for lipid peroxidation, protein carbonyls, and molecular
markers by western blot. The IC50 values of DIM-D were 24.52.6,
17.23.6and 4.11.1 whilst for EGCG were 192.13.8, 85.32.4 and 26.0 1.4 for
24, 48 and 72 hr treatments respectively. DIM-D induced higher expression
in A431 cells compared to EGCG of cleaved caspase 3 (3.0-fold vs.
2.4-fold changes), Nurr1 (2.7-fold vs. 1.7-fold changes) and NFB
(1.3-fold vs. 1.1-fold changes). Nanocarriers containing DIM-D were
188.008.00 nm in size with polydispersity of 0.590.01. The zeta potential
and entrapment efficiency were 37.170.90mV and 890.50%, respectively.
There was significant (pThe objective of this study was to demonstrate
the chemopreventive potential of 1,1-bis(3-indolyl)-1-(p-chlorophenyl
methane) (DIM-D) in skin cancer using an in vitro and in vivo models. In
vitro cell cytotoxicity and viability assays were carried out in A431
human epidermoid carcinoma cell line (A431) and normal human epidermal
keratinocytes (NHEK) respectively. Apoptosis induction and accumulation
of ROS following UVB exposure in DIM-D pretreated NHEK cells (2 hr prior)
was also evaluated. Immunocytochemistry and western blot analysis were
performed to determine proapoptotic and proinflammatory markers
expressions in DIM-D treated A431 cells and in UVB irradiated NHEK cells.
For in vivo experiments, DIM-D was encapsulated within nanocarriers by
hot melt homogenization using Nano DeBEE. Nanocarriers were surface
modified with oleic acid and incorporated into a gel using established
procedures (G-NOD) and characterized for particle size, zeta potential,
entrapment efficiency, rheology, skin permeation and drug release. The
chemo-preventive efficiency of G-NOD was evaluated using UVB-induced skin
cancer model in SKH hairless mice and skin samples were collected and
investigated for lipid peroxidation, protein carbonyls, and molecular
markers by western blot. The IC50 values of DIM-D were 24.52.6,
17.23.6and 4.11.1 whilst for EGCG were 192.13.8, 85.32.4 and 26.0 1.4 for
24, 48 and 72 hr treatments respectively. DIM-D induced higher expression
in A431 cells compared to EGCG of cleaved caspase 3 (3.0-fold vs.
2.4-fold changes), Nurr1 (2.7-fold vs. 1.7-fold changes) and NFB
(1.3-fold vs. 1.1-fold changes). Nanocarriers containing DIM-D were
188.008.00 nm in size with polydispersity of 0.590.01. The zeta potential
and entrapment efficiency were 37.170.90mV and 890.50%, respectively.
There was significant (p<0.05) reduction in tumor size/number for G-NOD
pretreated group (2 tumors/mouse, average diameter, 20.50 mm) compared to
DIM-PG (4 tumors/mouse, average diameter, 40.45mm) and EGCG PEG-gel
(EGCG-PG; 6 tumors/mouse, average diameter, 50.25mm). IHC and western
blot results indicated significant increase (pThe objective of this study
was to demonstrate the chemopreventive potential of
1,1-bis(3-indolyl)-1-(p-chlorophenyl methane) (DIM-D) in skin cancer
using an in vitro and in vivo models. In vitro cell cytotoxicity and
viability assays were carried out in A431 human epidermoid carcinoma cell
line (A431) and normal human epidermal keratinocytes (NHEK) respectively.
Apoptosis induction and accumulation of ROS following UVB exposure in
DIM-D pretreated NHEK cells (2 hr prior) was also evaluated.
Immunocytochemistry and western blot analysis were performed to determine
proapoptotic and proinflammatory markers expressions in DIM-D treated
A431 cells and in UVB irradiated NHEK cells. For in vivo experiments,
DIM-D was encapsulated within nanocarriers by hot melt homogenization
using Nano DeBEE. Nanocarriers were surface modified with oleic acid and
incorporated into a gel using established procedures (G-NOD) and
characterized for particle size, zeta potential, entrapment efficiency,
rheology, skin permeation and drug release. The chemo-preventive
efficiency of G-NOD was evaluated using UVB-induced skin cancer model in
SKH hairless mice and skin samples were collected and investigated for
lipid peroxidation, protein carbonyls, and molecular markers by western
blot. The IC50 values of DIM-D were 24.52.6, 17.23.6and 4.11.1 whilst for
EGCG were 192.13.8, 85.32.4 and 26.0 1.4 for 24, 48 and 72 hr treatments
respectively. DIM-D induced higher expression in A431 cells compared to
EGCG of cleaved caspase 3 (3.0-fold vs. 2.4-fold changes), Nurr1
(2.7-fold vs. 1.7-fold changes) and NFB (1.3-fold vs. 1.1-fold changes).
Nanocarriers containing DIM-D were 188.008.00 nm in size with
polydispersity of 0.590.01. The zeta potential and entrapment efficiency
were 37.170.90mV and 890.50%, respectively. There was significant
(p<0.05) reduction in tumor size/number for G-NOD pretreated group (2
tumors/mouse, average diameter, 20.50 mm) compared to DIM-PG (4
tumors/mouse, average diameter, 40.45mm) and EGCG PEG-gel (EGCG-PG; 6
tumors/mouse, average diameter, 50.25mm). IHC and western blot results
indicated significant increase (p<0.05) in expression of Nurr1 in G-NOD
pretreated group compared to EGCG-PG. There was however pronounced
reduction in expression of STAT3, NFkB, cleaved Caspase-3, BCl2 and
8-OHdG for G-NOD pretreated group compared to DIM-PG and EGCG-PG. Lipid
peroxidation assay revealed decrease in amount of Malondialehyde (MDA)
produced in G-NOD pretreated group prior to UV exposure by 2 fold
compared to DIM-PG and 1.3 fold compared to EGCG-PG treatments.
Therefore, findings in both in vitro and in vivo studies suggest that the
enhanced percutaneous delivery of DIM-D reduces UVB-induced damage to
skin lipids and protein and inhibits initiation and progression of skin
photocarcinogenesis in SKH mice via the transactivation of Nurr1.

