Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Brain-derived neurotrophic factor increases vascular endothelial
growth factor expression and subsequently enhances angiogenesis in human
chondrosarcoma cells


Chondrosarcomas are a type of primary malignant bone cancer, with a
potent capacity for local invasion and distant metastasis. Brain-derived
neurotrophic factor (BDNF) is commonly upregulated during neurogenesis.
The aim of the present study was to examine the mechanism involved in
BDNF-mediated vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) expression and
angiogenesis in human chondrosarcoma cells. Here, we knocked down BDNF
expression in chondrosarcoma cells and assessed their capacity to control
VEGF expression and angiogenesis in vitro and in vivo. We found knockdown
of BDNF decreased VEGF expression and abolished chondrosarcoma
conditional medium-mediated angiogenesis in vitro as well as angiogenesis
effects in vivo in the chick chorioallantoic membrane and Matrigel plug
nude mouse models. In addition, in the xenograft tumor angiogenesis
model, the knockdown of BDNF significantly reduced tumor growth and
tumor-associated angiogenesis. BDNF increased VEGF expression and
angiogenesis through the TrkB receptor, PLC, PKC, and the HIF-1 signaling
pathway. Finally, we analyzed samples from chondrosarcoma patients by
immunohistochemical staining. The expression of BDNF and VEGF protein in
56 chondrosarcoma patients was significantly higher than in normal
cartilage. In addition, the high level of BDNF expression correlated
strongly with VEGF expression and tumor stage. Taken together, our
results indicate that BDNF increases VEGF expression and enhances
angiogenesis through a signal transduction pathway that involves the TrkB
receptor, PLC, PKC, and the HIF-1. Therefore, BDNF may represent a novel
target for anti-angiogenic therapy for human chondrosarcoma.

