Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Single nucleotide polymorphisms of DPYD and MTHFR predict adverse
events associated with 5-fluorouracil in patients with gastrointestinal
cancer


PurposeThe aim of this study was to investigate the association between
5-fluorouracil (5-FU)-related adverse events (AEs) in Japanese patients
with gastrointestinal cancer treated with 5-FU and the patient genotypes
DPYD, MTHFR, OPRT, and TYMS.MethodsSequence analyses of 33 gene
polymorphisms in four genes were performed using genomic DNA extracted
from peripheral blood mononuclear cells of 103 patients with gastric (n =
34) or colorectal (n = 69) cancer. The 5-FU-related AEs of 157 regimens
in these 103 patients were evaluated based on the medical records of
patients in each of three groups: the intravenous administration group
(i.v. group, n = 51), oral administration group (p.o. group, n = 106),
and all-regimens group (both i.v. and p.o. group, n = 157). The
associations between the incidence of AEs and each genotype were
statistically analyzed.ResultsSix single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs)
were identified (three SNPs in DPYD: c.496A>G, c.1905+1G>A, and
c.2303C>A; two SNPs in MTHFR: c.677C>T and c.1298A>C; and one SNP in
OPRT: c.638G>C). Among them, the patients in the all-regimens group
carrying any one of three DPYD SNPs showed statistically significant
associations with the incidence of AEs of any type and fatigue.
Furthermore, the MTHFR SNP c.1298A>C was significantly associated with
the incidence of neutropenia. A similar trend was observed in the p.o.
group, but not in the i.v. group.ConclusionThese findings suggest that
the DPYD SNPs c.496A>G, c.1905+1G>A, and c.2303C>A and the MTHFR SNP
c.1298A>C may be predictive factors for the occurrence of severe
5-FU-related AEs.

