Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Suppression of p53R2 but not R2 radiosensitizes mutant p53 tumor
cells


Gemcitabine (2,2-difluroro-2-deoxycytidine;dFdCyd) is a potent
radiosensitizer in tumor cells in vitro and in vivo. dFdCyd elicits
cytotoxicity primarily via incorporation of its triphosphate, dFdCTP,
into DNA, whereas inhibition of ribonucleotide reductase (RR) by dFdCDP
produces a profound depletion of dATP which correlates to
radiosensitization. We have demonstrated that dNTP imbalances generated
by dFdCyd produce mismatches in DNA, which augment sensitivity to
subsequent ionizing radiation (IR) but are not required to elicit
cytotoxicity. We have proposed that RR suppression would be as effective
as dFdCyd for radiosensitization. RR is a heterodimeric tetramer composed
of the regulatory and active site subunit R1 paired with either R2 or its
p53-inducible homolog, p53R2, as the catalytic and rate-limiting subunit.
We used a RNAi approach to suppress either R2 or p53R2 ( 90% suppression
of either R2 or p53R2, with little effect (20%) on expression of its
homolog) in two p53 wild type cell lines, MCF7 breast carcinoma and A549
lung carcinoma. This approach produced equivalent radiosensitization,
dATP depletion, cytotoxicity and increase in DNA mismatches compared to
inactivation of RR by dFdCyd (IC50). These results reinforce our prior
finding that radiosensitization with dFdCyd is the result of inhibition
of RR and not incorporation into DNA or cytotoxicity. We then proposed
that R2 but not p53R2 suppression would radiosensitize mutant p53 tumor
cells. Interestingly, R2 shRNA suppression did not radiosensitize mutant
p53 MCF7/ADR cells (radiation enhancement ratio (RER) = 1.07 0.06).
Despite the mutant p53 status of MCF7/ADR cells, p53R2 was elevated (
50%) following suppression of R2 compared to untreated cells (no shRNA).
We hypothesized that this increase in p53R2 permits RR to continue
producing dNTPs for DNA replication and repair in the absence of R2, thus
preventing radiosensitization. Indeed, simultaneous suppression of R2 and
p53R2 produced excellent radiosensitization (RER = 1.68 0.04 (shRNAs) vs.
1.6 0.01 (dFdCyd (IC50)), and similar cytotoxicity (surviving fraction
(SF) = 76.5 8.3% (shRNA) vs. 71.3 6.7% (dFdCyd)). Impressively,
suppression of p53R2 alone produced excellent radiosensitization (RER=
1.76 0.30) with similar cytotoxicity (SF = 84 20%) compared to the double
knockdown or dFdCyd. Considering that most solid tumors express mutant
p53, suppression of p53R2 instead of R2 may be a more effective method
for radiosensitization. These studies suggest that deoxynucleotide
biosynthesis is regulated differently in p53 wild type compared to mutant
p53 tumor cells, and may be used to maintain DNA replication and repair
and prevent anticancer efficacy after damage induced by IR or other DNA
damaging agents. The mechanism by which mutant p53 tumor cells upregulate
p53R2 warrants further investigation.Note: This abstract was not
presented at the meeting.

