Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Direct reprogramming of tumor cells: a basis for novel therapeutic
approaches


IntroductionDirect reprogramming describes a process by which
differentiated cells can be converted into virtually any other cell type,
including terminal differentiated cells. This breakthrough offers a
chance for regenerative medicine in order to treat patients suffering
from degenerative diseases like Parkinson disease or tissue damages.We
believe that direct reprogramming of tumor cells provides a basis for
novel targeted therapies of aggressive tumors. These tumors could be
reprogrammed into tumors of another, less aggressive subtype, that could
potentially be treated more easily than the parental tumor does.We used
the most aggressive breast cancer subtype - triple negative breast cancer
- as research model. Its missing expression of both hormone receptors
(HR) as well as HER2 renders this subtype more aggressive compared to HR
or HER2 positive tumors. It also implies its poorer prognosis compared to
other breast cancer subtypes, for which targeted therapies are available,
e.g. anti-HER2 therapies that drastically improved formerly poor
prognosis of HER2 positive cancer to a much better prognostic subtype
nowadays.We suggest that by use of direct reprogramming of triple
negative breast cancer cells into HER2 positive cancer cells, these cells
are susceptible to anti-HER2 targeted therapies, shifting its poor
prognosis into better prognosis.MethodsTriple negative breast cancer cell
lines were transduced using HER2 expressing lentiviral particles.
Molecular biological analyses were performed to investigate the
functionality of the transgene. Subsequently, targeted therapies against
HER2 followed by molecular analyses of effects were performed.ResultsThe
expression of HER2 could be shown by both mRNA (using qPCR) as well as
protein (Western Blot) approaches. Additionally, immunofluorescence
analysis confirmed membrane localization of HER2.Furthermore, preliminary
results using targeted anti-HER2 therapies showed reduction of
proliferative capacity of formerly triple negative breast cancer
cells.ConclusionWe conclude that direct reprogramming might become a tool
of converting aggressive tumor types into cells susceptible to targeted
therapies. Its current system describes a proof-of-principal whether
reprogramming approaches might find a way into clinical settings someday.
Nevertheless, strong hurdles have to be taken to make such approaches
valuable for (breast) cancer patients.

