Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrative genomic analyses on pediatric acute myeloid leukemia


BackgroundAcute myeloid leukemia (AML) is a complex and heterogeneous
disease leading to a wide range of response variability to conventional
therapy, excessive treatment related toxicity, and an overall poor
outcome. The NCI supported Therapeutically Applicable Research to
Generate Effective Treatments (TARGET) Initiative provided initial
support for large-scale genomics to identify novel disease-associated
genomic and epigenomic alterations that could be used to develop novel,
targeted therapies for pediatric AML.PatientsDiagnostic (Dx), remission
(Rm), and relapse (Rel) samples were obtained from over 200 children with
AML treated on the most recent Children's Oncology Group clinical trials.
Data analyses were performed using Partek Genomics Suite 6.6 and
Ingenuity Pathway Analysis.ResultsMethylation profiling (Illumina
HumanMethylation27) identified 603 CpG sites significantly differentially
methylated between Dx and Rm. In addition, 514 CpG sites were
significantly differentially methylated between matched Rel and Rm
(pBackgroundAcute myeloid leukemia (AML) is a complex and heterogeneous
disease leading to a wide range of response variability to conventional
therapy, excessive treatment related toxicity, and an overall poor
outcome. The NCI supported Therapeutically Applicable Research to
Generate Effective Treatments (TARGET) Initiative provided initial
support for large-scale genomics to identify novel disease-associated
genomic and epigenomic alterations that could be used to develop novel,
targeted therapies for pediatric AML.PatientsDiagnostic (Dx), remission
(Rm), and relapse (Rel) samples were obtained from over 200 children with
AML treated on the most recent Children's Oncology Group clinical trials.
Data analyses were performed using Partek Genomics Suite 6.6 and
Ingenuity Pathway Analysis.ResultsMethylation profiling (Illumina
HumanMethylation27) identified 603 CpG sites significantly differentially
methylated between Dx and Rm. In addition, 514 CpG sites were
significantly differentially methylated between matched Rel and Rm
(p<0.05 FDR, change in 0.25). Pathway analysis using genes associated
with these CpG sites identified significant (pBackgroundAcute myeloid
leukemia (AML) is a complex and heterogeneous disease leading to a wide
range of response variability to conventional therapy, excessive
treatment related toxicity, and an overall poor outcome. The NCI
supported Therapeutically Applicable Research to Generate Effective
Treatments (TARGET) Initiative provided initial support for large-scale
genomics to identify novel disease-associated genomic and epigenomic
alterations that could be used to develop novel, targeted therapies for
pediatric AML.PatientsDiagnostic (Dx), remission (Rm), and relapse (Rel)
samples were obtained from over 200 children with AML treated on the most
recent Children's Oncology Group clinical trials. Data analyses were
performed using Partek Genomics Suite 6.6 and Ingenuity Pathway
Analysis.ResultsMethylation profiling (Illumina HumanMethylation27)
identified 603 CpG sites significantly differentially methylated between
Dx and Rm. In addition, 514 CpG sites were significantly differentially
methylated between matched Rel and Rm (p<0.05 FDR, change in 0.25).
Pathway analysis using genes associated with these CpG sites identified
significant (p<0.01) over-representation of the WNT/-catenin signaling
pathway in Dx vs. Rm and in Rel vs. Rm.Gene expression profiling
(Affymetrix Human Gene 1.1 ST) revealed 1,142 significantly
differentially expressed between Dx and normal bone marrow obatined from
the blood bank. Similarly, there were 1,242 significantly differentially
expressed genes between Rel and normal bone marrow (pBackgroundAcute
myeloid leukemia (AML) is a complex and heterogeneous disease leading to
a wide range of response variability to conventional therapy, excessive
treatment related toxicity, and an overall poor outcome. The NCI
supported Therapeutically Applicable Research to Generate Effective
Treatments (TARGET) Initiative provided initial support for large-scale
genomics to identify novel disease-associated genomic and epigenomic
alterations that could be used to develop novel, targeted therapies for
pediatric AML.PatientsDiagnostic (Dx), remission (Rm), and relapse (Rel)
samples were obtained from over 200 children with AML treated on the most
recent Children's Oncology Group clinical trials. Data analyses were
performed using Partek Genomics Suite 6.6 and Ingenuity Pathway
Analysis.ResultsMethylation profiling (Illumina HumanMethylation27)
identified 603 CpG sites significantly differentially methylated between
Dx and Rm. In addition, 514 CpG sites were significantly differentially
methylated between matched Rel and Rm (p<0.05 FDR, change in 0.25).
Pathway analysis using genes associated with these CpG sites identified
significant (p<0.01) over-representation of the WNT/-catenin signaling
pathway in Dx vs. Rm and in Rel vs. Rm.Gene expression profiling
(Affymetrix Human Gene 1.1 ST) revealed 1,142 significantly
differentially expressed between Dx and normal bone marrow obatined from
the blood bank. Similarly, there were 1,242 significantly differentially
expressed genes between Rel and normal bone marrow (p<0.05 FDR,
fold-change2.00). Many expression differences were coordinated with
methylation changes. Pathway analysis revealed 100 significantly
(pBackgroundAcute myeloid leukemia (AML) is a complex and heterogeneous
disease leading to a wide range of response variability to conventional
therapy, excessive treatment related toxicity, and an overall poor
outcome. The NCI supported Therapeutically Applicable Research to
Generate Effective Treatments (TARGET) Initiative provided initial
support for large-scale genomics to identify novel disease-associated
genomic and epigenomic alterations that could be used to develop novel,
targeted therapies for pediatric AML.PatientsDiagnostic (Dx), remission
(Rm), and relapse (Rel) samples were obtained from over 200 children with
AML treated on the most recent Children's Oncology Group clinical trials.
Data analyses were performed using Partek Genomics Suite 6.6 and
Ingenuity Pathway Analysis.ResultsMethylation profiling (Illumina
HumanMethylation27) identified 603 CpG sites significantly differentially
methylated between Dx and Rm. In addition, 514 CpG sites were
significantly differentially methylated between matched Rel and Rm
(p<0.05 FDR, change in 0.25). Pathway analysis using genes associated
with these CpG sites identified significant (p<0.01) over-representation
of the WNT/-catenin signaling pathway in Dx vs. Rm and in Rel vs. Rm.Gene
expression profiling (Affymetrix Human Gene 1.1 ST) revealed 1,142
significantly differentially expressed between Dx and normal bone marrow
obatined from the blood bank. Similarly, there were 1,242 significantly
differentially expressed genes between Rel and normal bone marrow (p<0.05
FDR, fold-change2.00). Many expression differences were coordinated with
methylation changes. Pathway analysis revealed 100 significantly (p<0.05)
over-represented pathways in Dx vs. normal, Rel vs. normal, or
both.Copy-number data analysis (Affymetrix Genome-Wide Human SNP 6.0)
identified 180,379 significantly different regions in 254 Dx vs matched
Rm. Similarly, 4,707 regions a significantly different in 49 Rel vs
matched Rm (pBackgroundAcute myeloid leukemia (AML) is a complex and
heterogeneous disease leading to a wide range of response variability to
conventional therapy, excessive treatment related toxicity, and an
overall poor outcome. The NCI supported Therapeutically Applicable
Research to Generate Effective Treatments (TARGET) Initiative provided
initial support for large-scale genomics to identify novel
disease-associated genomic and epigenomic alterations that could be used
to develop novel, targeted therapies for pediatric AML.PatientsDiagnostic
(Dx), remission (Rm), and relapse (Rel) samples were obtained from over
200 children with AML treated on the most recent Children's Oncology
Group clinical trials. Data analyses were performed using Partek Genomics
Suite 6.6 and Ingenuity Pathway Analysis.ResultsMethylation profiling
(Illumina HumanMethylation27) identified 603 CpG sites significantly
differentially methylated between Dx and Rm. In addition, 514 CpG sites
were significantly differentially methylated between matched Rel and Rm
(p<0.05 FDR, change in 0.25). Pathway analysis using genes associated
with these CpG sites identified significant (p<0.01) over-representation
of the WNT/-catenin signaling pathway in Dx vs. Rm and in Rel vs. Rm.Gene
expression profiling (Affymetrix Human Gene 1.1 ST) revealed 1,142
significantly differentially expressed between Dx and normal bone marrow
obatined from the blood bank. Similarly, there were 1,242 significantly
differentially expressed genes between Rel and normal bone marrow (p<0.05
FDR, fold-change2.00). Many expression differences were coordinated with
methylation changes. Pathway analysis revealed 100 significantly (p<0.05)
over-represented pathways in Dx vs. normal, Rel vs. normal, or
both.Copy-number data analysis (Affymetrix Genome-Wide Human SNP 6.0)
identified 180,379 significantly different regions in 254 Dx vs matched
Rm. Similarly, 4,707 regions a significantly different in 49 Rel vs
matched Rm (p<0.01). Many regions were distinct to either Dx or Rel
groups.Whole-genome sequencing (Complete Genomics, Inc) was performed on
100 cases with matched Dx and Rm pairs and on 86 cases with matched Dx,
Rel, and Rm samples. The frequencies of either somatic or germline
variants were not significantly different when comparing Dx vs. Rel
samples. Pathway analysis compared 1,528 mutated genes in the pediatric
(TARGET) cohort with 1,963 mutated genes in adult de novo AML (TCGA
cohort). Of the 85 and 80 significantly (pBackgroundAcute myeloid
leukemia (AML) is a complex and heterogeneous disease leading to a wide
range of response variability to conventional therapy, excessive
treatment related toxicity, and an overall poor outcome. The NCI
supported Therapeutically Applicable Research to Generate Effective
Treatments (TARGET) Initiative provided initial support for large-scale
genomics to identify novel disease-associated genomic and epigenomic
alterations that could be used to develop novel, targeted therapies for
pediatric AML.PatientsDiagnostic (Dx), remission (Rm), and relapse (Rel)
samples were obtained from over 200 children with AML treated on the most
recent Children's Oncology Group clinical trials. Data analyses were
performed using Partek Genomics Suite 6.6 and Ingenuity Pathway
Analysis.ResultsMethylation profiling (Illumina HumanMethylation27)
identified 603 CpG sites significantly differentially methylated between
Dx and Rm. In addition, 514 CpG sites were significantly differentially
methylated between matched Rel and Rm (p<0.05 FDR, change in 0.25).
Pathway analysis using genes associated with these CpG sites identified
significant (p<0.01) over-representation of the WNT/-catenin signaling
pathway in Dx vs. Rm and in Rel vs. Rm.Gene expression profiling
(Affymetrix Human Gene 1.1 ST) revealed 1,142 significantly
differentially expressed between Dx and normal bone marrow obatined from
the blood bank. Similarly, there were 1,242 significantly differentially
expressed genes between Rel and normal bone marrow (p<0.05 FDR,
fold-change2.00). Many expression differences were coordinated with
methylation changes. Pathway analysis revealed 100 significantly (p<0.05)
over-represented pathways in Dx vs. normal, Rel vs. normal, or
both.Copy-number data analysis (Affymetrix Genome-Wide Human SNP 6.0)
identified 180,379 significantly different regions in 254 Dx vs matched
Rm. Similarly, 4,707 regions a significantly different in 49 Rel vs
matched Rm (p<0.01). Many regions were distinct to either Dx or Rel
groups.Whole-genome sequencing (Complete Genomics, Inc) was performed on
100 cases with matched Dx and Rm pairs and on 86 cases with matched Dx,
Rel, and Rm samples. The frequencies of either somatic or germline
variants were not significantly different when comparing Dx vs. Rel
samples. Pathway analysis compared 1,528 mutated genes in the pediatric
(TARGET) cohort with 1,963 mutated genes in adult de novo AML (TCGA
cohort). Of the 85 and 80 significantly (p<0.05) over-represented
canonical pathways, respectively, there are 44 pathways in common and
many could be targeted by existing drugs.ConclusionA combination of
genomic approaches have identified genes and pathways that appear
deregulated in pediatric AML. Many changes are specific to Dx or Rel
sample groups, or to pediatric vs. adult AML. Further study into these
genes and pathways may reveal candidate targets for therapeutic
intervention.

