Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The TRiC chaperonin in breast cancer cell growth, survival and
response to taxane therapy


Large-scale efforts such as The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) have
identified the landscape of genetic, epigenetic and proteomic alterations
in breast cancer through analysis of 1000 primary breast tumors.
Importantly, all of the samples analyzed by TCGA also come with long-term
clinical follow-up data that allows for examination of how identified
alterations affect patient outcomes. Although powerful, the sheer number
of alterations identified by TCGA and similar efforts makes it difficult
to separate alterations that drive cancer from those that are merely
passengers. We have been combining data from TCGA with data from
genome-wide, RNAi-based, functional genetic screens that we have been
performing on a panel of breast cancer cell lines that were developed in
our lab. This combination of functional genetic data with data from the
TCGA has resulted in the identification of genes that are responsible for
driving breast cancer cell growth and survival that also affect patient
outcomes. Using this approach, we have identified the TRiC chaperonin
protein complex as playing a critical role in driving breast cancer and
affecting patient outcomes. In the SUM-52 breast cancer cell line, a
member of the TRiC complex known as TCP-1 was a hit in the genome wide,
RNAi-based screen and examination of TCP1 in the TCGA database revealed
that it is altered in 9% (85 of 929 cases) of breast cancers and patients
with TCP1 alterations have significantly reduced long-term survival
(pvalLarge-scale efforts such as The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) have
identified the landscape of genetic, epigenetic and proteomic alterations
in breast cancer through analysis of 1000 primary breast tumors.
Importantly, all of the samples analyzed by TCGA also come with long-term
clinical follow-up data that allows for examination of how identified
alterations affect patient outcomes. Although powerful, the sheer number
of alterations identified by TCGA and similar efforts makes it difficult
to separate alterations that drive cancer from those that are merely
passengers. We have been combining data from TCGA with data from
genome-wide, RNAi-based, functional genetic screens that we have been
performing on a panel of breast cancer cell lines that were developed in
our lab. This combination of functional genetic data with data from the
TCGA has resulted in the identification of genes that are responsible for
driving breast cancer cell growth and survival that also affect patient
outcomes. Using this approach, we have identified the TRiC chaperonin
protein complex as playing a critical role in driving breast cancer and
affecting patient outcomes. In the SUM-52 breast cancer cell line, a
member of the TRiC complex known as TCP-1 was a hit in the genome wide,
RNAi-based screen and examination of TCP1 in the TCGA database revealed
that it is altered in 9% (85 of 929 cases) of breast cancers and patients
with TCP1 alterations have significantly reduced long-term survival
(pval<.0000001). Expression of this gene was found to be regulated by a
known driver oncogene in this cell line, FGFR2, and we have identified
the PI3K signaling pathway as the mediator of this regulation.
Examination of additional cell lines in our panel showed that TCP-1
expression is regulated by driver oncogene activity in multiple breast
cancer cell lines e.g. HER2 in SUM-225 cells. Knocking down TCP-1
resulted in a dramatic decrease in the colony forming ability of the
SUM-52 cell line while a much weaker effect on colony forming is observed
in MCF10A cells, suggesting differential dependency on TRiC activity
between transformed and non-transformed cells. Interestingly, a second
member of TRiC was also a hit in the genome-wide RNAi screen in SUM-52
cells. Although not regulated by FGFR2, this gene is amplified and
overexpressed in this cell line, and examination of TCGA data showed that
12% (113/929) of all breast cancers overexpress CCT2 and, these patients
display a survival disadvantage (pvalLarge-scale efforts such as The
Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) have identified the landscape of genetic,
epigenetic and proteomic alterations in breast cancer through analysis of
1000 primary breast tumors. Importantly, all of the samples analyzed by
TCGA also come with long-term clinical follow-up data that allows for
examination of how identified alterations affect patient outcomes.
Although powerful, the sheer number of alterations identified by TCGA and
similar efforts makes it difficult to separate alterations that drive
cancer from those that are merely passengers. We have been combining data
from TCGA with data from genome-wide, RNAi-based, functional genetic
screens that we have been performing on a panel of breast cancer cell
lines that were developed in our lab. This combination of functional
genetic data with data from the TCGA has resulted in the identification
of genes that are responsible for driving breast cancer cell growth and
survival that also affect patient outcomes. Using this approach, we have
identified the TRiC chaperonin protein complex as playing a critical role
in driving breast cancer and affecting patient outcomes. In the SUM-52
breast cancer cell line, a member of the TRiC complex known as TCP-1 was
a hit in the genome wide, RNAi-based screen and examination of TCP1 in
the TCGA database revealed that it is altered in 9% (85 of 929 cases) of
breast cancers and patients with TCP1 alterations have significantly
reduced long-term survival (pval<.0000001). Expression of this gene was
found to be regulated by a known driver oncogene in this cell line,
FGFR2, and we have identified the PI3K signaling pathway as the mediator
of this regulation. Examination of additional cell lines in our panel
showed that TCP-1 expression is regulated by driver oncogene activity in
multiple breast cancer cell lines e.g. HER2 in SUM-225 cells. Knocking
down TCP-1 resulted in a dramatic decrease in the colony forming ability
of the SUM-52 cell line while a much weaker effect on colony forming is
observed in MCF10A cells, suggesting differential dependency on TRiC
activity between transformed and non-transformed cells. Interestingly, a
second member of TRiC was also a hit in the genome-wide RNAi screen in
SUM-52 cells. Although not regulated by FGFR2, this gene is amplified and
overexpressed in this cell line, and examination of TCGA data showed that
12% (113/929) of all breast cancers overexpress CCT2 and, these patients
display a survival disadvantage (pval<.005) the severity of which
correlates with increased CCT2 expression levels. Similar to TCP-1,
knocking down CCT2 significantly reduces the colony forming ability of
the SUM-52 cell line. The identification of two genes that function as
part of the same complex, both up-regulated by different mechanisms in
breast cancer cells and both determinants of long term survival, points
to a significant role for these genes and the TRiC complex in breast
cancer.

