Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase mediates immune-independent human
tumor cell resistance to olaparib, radiation, and cisplatin


Indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase-1 (IDO) is an immunosuppressive molecule
expressed by most human tumors. IDO levels correlate with poor prognosis
in cancer patients and IDO inhibitors are under investigation to enhance
endogenous anticancer immunosurveillance. Little is known of
immune-independent functions of IDO relevant to cancer therapy. We show,
for the first time, that IDO mediates human tumor cell resistance to a
PARP inhibitor (olaparib), radiation, cisplatin, and combined treatment
with olaparib and radiation, in the absence of immune cells.
Antisense-mediated reduction of IDO, alone and (in a synthetic lethal
approach) in combination with antisense to the DNA repair protein BRCA2
sensitizes human lung cancer cells to olaparib and cisplatin. Antisense
reduction of IDO decreased NAD+ in human tumor cells. NAD+ is essential
for PARP activity and these data suggest that IDO mediates treatment
resistance independent of immunity and at least partially due to a
previously unrecognized role for IDO in DNA repair. Furthermore, IDO
levels correlated with accumulation of tumor cells in G1 and depletion of
cells in G2/M of the cell cycle, suggesting that IDO effects on cell
cycle may also modulate sensitivity to radiation and chemotherapeutic
agents. IDO is a potentially valuable therapeutic target in cancer
treatment, independent of immune function and in combination with other
therapies.Supported by grants to JK and WM from the Canadian Institutes
of Health Research (CIHR).

