Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Canonical Wnt signaling is activated during the initiation of the
migratory phenotype of Ewing's sarcoma family of tumors (ESFT)


Activation of canonical and noncanonical Wnt signaling pathways in the
initiation of the Ewing's sarcoma family of tumors (ESFT) migratory
phenotype has been investigated using an in vitro model of ESFT.Human
embryonic stem (hES) cells transfected with a doxycycline-inducible
expression vector containing EWS-FLI1 (hES-EWS-FLI1) have been
investigated. Expression of EWS-FLI1 was confirmed by RT-qPCR and western
blot, and induction of cell surface CD99 and EWS-FLI1 target gene
expression analyzed by flow cytometry and RT-qPCR, respectively.
Migration was assessed following seeding of cell spheroids onto
gelatin-coated plates. The pixel count of the migrated area was
calculated at 72h and expressed relative to the pixel count at 0h to give
relative migration (RM). Changes in the actin cytoskeleton were examined
by phalloidin staining and immunofluorescence microscopy. Viable cell
number was measured using the trypan blue exclusion assay. Expression of
components (n=91) of the Wnt signaling pathway were analyzed using TaqMan
WNT Pathway arrays (Applied Biosystems). Activity of canonical Wnt
signaling was quantified using a lentiviral TCF-luciferase reporter assay
and noncanonical Wnt signaling using a Rac1 pull-down assay.Expression of
EWS-FLI1 RNA and protein was induced in hES-EWS-FLI1+ cells after 72h
exposure to doxycycline (5g/ml). Induction of EWS-FLI1 was tolerated by
hES cells and had no effect on viable cell number. However, these cells
grew as a substrate adherent monolayer, in contrast to the hES-EWS-FLI1-
cells that retained the colony-phenotype reminiscent of the parent hES
cells. hES-EWS-FLI1+ cells had fewer cell-cell adhesions and produced
filopodia that were absent in hES-EWS-FLI1- cells. Interestingly,
migration of hES-EWS-FLI1+ cells was significantly increased compared to
that of hES-EWS-FLI1- cells (RM= 2 compared to 30, pActivation of
canonical and noncanonical Wnt signaling pathways in the initiation of
the Ewing's sarcoma family of tumors (ESFT) migratory phenotype has been
investigated using an in vitro model of ESFT.Human embryonic stem (hES)
cells transfected with a doxycycline-inducible expression vector
containing EWS-FLI1 (hES-EWS-FLI1) have been investigated. Expression of
EWS-FLI1 was confirmed by RT-qPCR and western blot, and induction of cell
surface CD99 and EWS-FLI1 target gene expression analyzed by flow
cytometry and RT-qPCR, respectively. Migration was assessed following
seeding of cell spheroids onto gelatin-coated plates. The pixel count of
the migrated area was calculated at 72h and expressed relative to the
pixel count at 0h to give relative migration (RM). Changes in the actin
cytoskeleton were examined by phalloidin staining and immunofluorescence
microscopy. Viable cell number was measured using the trypan blue
exclusion assay. Expression of components (n=91) of the Wnt signaling
pathway were analyzed using TaqMan WNT Pathway arrays (Applied
Biosystems). Activity of canonical Wnt signaling was quantified using a
lentiviral TCF-luciferase reporter assay and noncanonical Wnt signaling
using a Rac1 pull-down assay.Expression of EWS-FLI1 RNA and protein was
induced in hES-EWS-FLI1+ cells after 72h exposure to doxycycline (5g/ml).
Induction of EWS-FLI1 was tolerated by hES cells and had no effect on
viable cell number. However, these cells grew as a substrate adherent
monolayer, in contrast to the hES-EWS-FLI1- cells that retained the
colony-phenotype reminiscent of the parent hES cells. hES-EWS-FLI1+ cells
had fewer cell-cell adhesions and produced filopodia that were absent in
hES-EWS-FLI1- cells. Interestingly, migration of hES-EWS-FLI1+ cells was
significantly increased compared to that of hES-EWS-FLI1- cells (RM= 2
compared to 30, p<0.01). Expression of CD99 (pActivation of canonical and
noncanonical Wnt signaling pathways in the initiation of the Ewing's
sarcoma family of tumors (ESFT) migratory phenotype has been investigated
using an in vitro model of ESFT.Human embryonic stem (hES) cells
transfected with a doxycycline-inducible expression vector containing
EWS-FLI1 (hES-EWS-FLI1) have been investigated. Expression of EWS-FLI1
was confirmed by RT-qPCR and western blot, and induction of cell surface
CD99 and EWS-FLI1 target gene expression analyzed by flow cytometry and
RT-qPCR, respectively. Migration was assessed following seeding of cell
spheroids onto gelatin-coated plates. The pixel count of the migrated
area was calculated at 72h and expressed relative to the pixel count at
0h to give relative migration (RM). Changes in the actin cytoskeleton
were examined by phalloidin staining and immunofluorescence microscopy.
Viable cell number was measured using the trypan blue exclusion assay.
Expression of components (n=91) of the Wnt signaling pathway were
analyzed using TaqMan WNT Pathway arrays (Applied Biosystems). Activity
of canonical Wnt signaling was quantified using a lentiviral
TCF-luciferase reporter assay and noncanonical Wnt signaling using a Rac1
pull-down assay.Expression of EWS-FLI1 RNA and protein was induced in
hES-EWS-FLI1+ cells after 72h exposure to doxycycline (5g/ml). Induction
of EWS-FLI1 was tolerated by hES cells and had no effect on viable cell
number. However, these cells grew as a substrate adherent monolayer, in
contrast to the hES-EWS-FLI1- cells that retained the colony-phenotype
reminiscent of the parent hES cells. hES-EWS-FLI1+ cells had fewer
cell-cell adhesions and produced filopodia that were absent in
hES-EWS-FLI1- cells. Interestingly, migration of hES-EWS-FLI1+ cells was
significantly increased compared to that of hES-EWS-FLI1- cells (RM= 2
compared to 30, p<0.01). Expression of CD99 (p<0.01) and other EWS-FLI1
target genes including CAV1 (pActivation of canonical and noncanonical
Wnt signaling pathways in the initiation of the Ewing's sarcoma family of
tumors (ESFT) migratory phenotype has been investigated using an in vitro
model of ESFT.Human embryonic stem (hES) cells transfected with a
doxycycline-inducible expression vector containing EWS-FLI1
(hES-EWS-FLI1) have been investigated. Expression of EWS-FLI1 was
confirmed by RT-qPCR and western blot, and induction of cell surface CD99
and EWS-FLI1 target gene expression analyzed by flow cytometry and
RT-qPCR, respectively. Migration was assessed following seeding of cell
spheroids onto gelatin-coated plates. The pixel count of the migrated
area was calculated at 72h and expressed relative to the pixel count at
0h to give relative migration (RM). Changes in the actin cytoskeleton
were examined by phalloidin staining and immunofluorescence microscopy.
Viable cell number was measured using the trypan blue exclusion assay.
Expression of components (n=91) of the Wnt signaling pathway were
analyzed using TaqMan WNT Pathway arrays (Applied Biosystems). Activity
of canonical Wnt signaling was quantified using a lentiviral
TCF-luciferase reporter assay and noncanonical Wnt signaling using a Rac1
pull-down assay.Expression of EWS-FLI1 RNA and protein was induced in
hES-EWS-FLI1+ cells after 72h exposure to doxycycline (5g/ml). Induction
of EWS-FLI1 was tolerated by hES cells and had no effect on viable cell
number. However, these cells grew as a substrate adherent monolayer, in
contrast to the hES-EWS-FLI1- cells that retained the colony-phenotype
reminiscent of the parent hES cells. hES-EWS-FLI1+ cells had fewer
cell-cell adhesions and produced filopodia that were absent in
hES-EWS-FLI1- cells. Interestingly, migration of hES-EWS-FLI1+ cells was
significantly increased compared to that of hES-EWS-FLI1- cells (RM= 2
compared to 30, p<0.01). Expression of CD99 (p<0.01) and other EWS-FLI1
target genes including CAV1 (p<0.05), IGF1 (pActivation of canonical and
noncanonical Wnt signaling pathways in the initiation of the Ewing's
sarcoma family of tumors (ESFT) migratory phenotype has been investigated
using an in vitro model of ESFT.Human embryonic stem (hES) cells
transfected with a doxycycline-inducible expression vector containing
EWS-FLI1 (hES-EWS-FLI1) have been investigated. Expression of EWS-FLI1
was confirmed by RT-qPCR and western blot, and induction of cell surface
CD99 and EWS-FLI1 target gene expression analyzed by flow cytometry and
RT-qPCR, respectively. Migration was assessed following seeding of cell
spheroids onto gelatin-coated plates. The pixel count of the migrated
area was calculated at 72h and expressed relative to the pixel count at
0h to give relative migration (RM). Changes in the actin cytoskeleton
were examined by phalloidin staining and immunofluorescence microscopy.
Viable cell number was measured using the trypan blue exclusion assay.
Expression of components (n=91) of the Wnt signaling pathway were
analyzed using TaqMan WNT Pathway arrays (Applied Biosystems). Activity
of canonical Wnt signaling was quantified using a lentiviral
TCF-luciferase reporter assay and noncanonical Wnt signaling using a Rac1
pull-down assay.Expression of EWS-FLI1 RNA and protein was induced in
hES-EWS-FLI1+ cells after 72h exposure to doxycycline (5g/ml). Induction
of EWS-FLI1 was tolerated by hES cells and had no effect on viable cell
number. However, these cells grew as a substrate adherent monolayer, in
contrast to the hES-EWS-FLI1- cells that retained the colony-phenotype
reminiscent of the parent hES cells. hES-EWS-FLI1+ cells had fewer
cell-cell adhesions and produced filopodia that were absent in
hES-EWS-FLI1- cells. Interestingly, migration of hES-EWS-FLI1+ cells was
significantly increased compared to that of hES-EWS-FLI1- cells (RM= 2
compared to 30, p<0.01). Expression of CD99 (p<0.01) and other EWS-FLI1
target genes including CAV1 (p<0.05), IGF1 (p<0.01) and NR0B1
(pActivation of canonical and noncanonical Wnt signaling pathways in the
initiation of the Ewing's sarcoma family of tumors (ESFT) migratory
phenotype has been investigated using an in vitro model of ESFT.Human
embryonic stem (hES) cells transfected with a doxycycline-inducible
expression vector containing EWS-FLI1 (hES-EWS-FLI1) have been
investigated. Expression of EWS-FLI1 was confirmed by RT-qPCR and western
blot, and induction of cell surface CD99 and EWS-FLI1 target gene
expression analyzed by flow cytometry and RT-qPCR, respectively.
Migration was assessed following seeding of cell spheroids onto
gelatin-coated plates. The pixel count of the migrated area was
calculated at 72h and expressed relative to the pixel count at 0h to give
relative migration (RM). Changes in the actin cytoskeleton were examined
by phalloidin staining and immunofluorescence microscopy. Viable cell
number was measured using the trypan blue exclusion assay. Expression of
components (n=91) of the Wnt signaling pathway were analyzed using TaqMan
WNT Pathway arrays (Applied Biosystems). Activity of canonical Wnt
signaling was quantified using a lentiviral TCF-luciferase reporter assay
and noncanonical Wnt signaling using a Rac1 pull-down assay.Expression of
EWS-FLI1 RNA and protein was induced in hES-EWS-FLI1+ cells after 72h
exposure to doxycycline (5g/ml). Induction of EWS-FLI1 was tolerated by
hES cells and had no effect on viable cell number. However, these cells
grew as a substrate adherent monolayer, in contrast to the hES-EWS-FLI1-
cells that retained the colony-phenotype reminiscent of the parent hES
cells. hES-EWS-FLI1+ cells had fewer cell-cell adhesions and produced
filopodia that were absent in hES-EWS-FLI1- cells. Interestingly,
migration of hES-EWS-FLI1+ cells was significantly increased compared to
that of hES-EWS-FLI1- cells (RM= 2 compared to 30, p<0.01). Expression of
CD99 (p<0.01) and other EWS-FLI1 target genes including CAV1 (p<0.05),
IGF1 (p<0.01) and NR0B1 (p<0.0001) were significantly increased in
hES-EWS-FLI1+ cells. Components (n=8) of the Wnt signaling pathway were
also differentially expressed in hES-EWS-FLI1+ cells. Importantly
canonical Wnt signaling was increased two-fold in hES-EWS-FLI1+ cells,
within 72 hours of EWS-FLI1 expression. There was a ten-fold increase in
the activation of canonical Wnt signaling following treatment of
hES-EWS-FLI1+ cells with recombinant Wnt3A (200ng/ml, 24 hours) compared
to that in hES-EWS-FLI1- cells (1X compared to 11X, pActivation of
canonical and noncanonical Wnt signaling pathways in the initiation of
the Ewing's sarcoma family of tumors (ESFT) migratory phenotype has been
investigated using an in vitro model of ESFT.Human embryonic stem (hES)
cells transfected with a doxycycline-inducible expression vector
containing EWS-FLI1 (hES-EWS-FLI1) have been investigated. Expression of
EWS-FLI1 was confirmed by RT-qPCR and western blot, and induction of cell
surface CD99 and EWS-FLI1 target gene expression analyzed by flow
cytometry and RT-qPCR, respectively. Migration was assessed following
seeding of cell spheroids onto gelatin-coated plates. The pixel count of
the migrated area was calculated at 72h and expressed relative to the
pixel count at 0h to give relative migration (RM). Changes in the actin
cytoskeleton were examined by phalloidin staining and immunofluorescence
microscopy. Viable cell number was measured using the trypan blue
exclusion assay. Expression of components (n=91) of the Wnt signaling
pathway were analyzed using TaqMan WNT Pathway arrays (Applied
Biosystems). Activity of canonical Wnt signaling was quantified using a
lentiviral TCF-luciferase reporter assay and noncanonical Wnt signaling
using a Rac1 pull-down assay.Expression of EWS-FLI1 RNA and protein was
induced in hES-EWS-FLI1+ cells after 72h exposure to doxycycline (5g/ml).
Induction of EWS-FLI1 was tolerated by hES cells and had no effect on
viable cell number. However, these cells grew as a substrate adherent
monolayer, in contrast to the hES-EWS-FLI1- cells that retained the
colony-phenotype reminiscent of the parent hES cells. hES-EWS-FLI1+ cells
had fewer cell-cell adhesions and produced filopodia that were absent in
hES-EWS-FLI1- cells. Interestingly, migration of hES-EWS-FLI1+ cells was
significantly increased compared to that of hES-EWS-FLI1- cells (RM= 2
compared to 30, p<0.01). Expression of CD99 (p<0.01) and other EWS-FLI1
target genes including CAV1 (p<0.05), IGF1 (p<0.01) and NR0B1 (p<0.0001)
were significantly increased in hES-EWS-FLI1+ cells. Components (n=8) of
the Wnt signaling pathway were also differentially expressed in
hES-EWS-FLI1+ cells. Importantly canonical Wnt signaling was increased
two-fold in hES-EWS-FLI1+ cells, within 72 hours of EWS-FLI1 expression.
There was a ten-fold increase in the activation of canonical Wnt
signaling following treatment of hES-EWS-FLI1+ cells with recombinant
Wnt3A (200ng/ml, 24 hours) compared to that in hES-EWS-FLI1- cells (1X
compared to 11X, p<0.05). In contrast, the activity of the noncanonical
Wnt signaling pathway was not increased in hES-EWS-FLI1+ cells and these
cells did not respond to the noncanonical ligand Wnt5A.In conclusion,
activation of the canonical Wnt signaling pathway may be an important
step in the initiation of ESFT. Targeting this pathway could be a useful
approach to prevent relapse and metastasis.

