Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Macrophage migration inhibitory factor (MIF) and miR-301b
interactively enhance disease aggressiveness by targeting NR3C2 in human
pancreatic cancer


MIF is a pleiotropic cytokine, which plays a role in inflammatory and
immune responses and is implicated in tumorigenesis. Our previous study
showed that MIF enhances tumor aggressiveness and predicts outcome in
patients with pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC). Aberrant microRNA
(miRNA) expression is a common feature in cancer and cytokine responsive
miRNAs are recently described as critical effectors in tumor progression.
We have investigated MIF-associated miRNAs and their interactive roles in
the progression of human pancreatic cancer. Global analysis of miRNA
expression revealed 38 differentially expressed miRNAs in MIF-high as
compared with MIF-low cases of PDAC based on the median value.
Kaplan-Meier survival analysis showed that a higher expression of
miR-301b in tumors was associated with poorer survival (p=0.008, N=37),
which was further validated in an independent cohort of PDAC patients
(p=0.021, N=42). Additionally, MIF expression positively correlated with
miR-301b and mediated its expression in several human pancreatic cancer
cells. Mechanistic analysis revealed that miR-301b promotes pancreatic
cancer cell migration and invasion. Furthermore, nuclear receptor
subfamily group c member 2 (NR3C2) was identified as a functional target
of miR-301b. NR3C2 inhibited tumor migration and invasion and a higher
expression of NR3C2 predicted better survival in pancreatic cancer
patients. Further in vivo studies showed a significant decrease in NR3C2
in MIF-overexpressing orthotopic xenograft as compared to control. Taken
together, our results demonstrate that MIF and miR-301b interactively
contribute to pancreatic cancer progression by targeting NR3C2. This
novel MIF-miR-301b-NR3C2 axis may provide potential targets for improving
disease outcome in pancreatic cancer.

