Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: VS5584 a dual mTORC1/2 and PI3K inhibitor has anti-tumor activity
in multiple in vivo xenograft tumor models and enhanced efficacy in
combination with cisplatin or docetaxel


Verastem is developing VS-5584, a potent and selective dual inhibitor of
the mammalian target of rapamycin complexes 1 and 2 (mTOR) and Class I
phosphatidylinositide 3-kinases (PI3K), for the treatment of advanced
cancer. The PI3K/mTOR signaling pathway is a key regulator in cancer
progression and in the survival of cancer stem cells (CSCs). VS-5584 has
been shown to be an equipotent inhibitor of all four human Class I PI3K
isoforms and the mTOR kinase, and PI3K signaling has been implicated in
the maintenance of CSCs in solid tumors. In multiple orthogonal in vitro
assays, VS-5584 has been shown to preferentially target CSCs and
exhibited significant antiproliferative activity across multiple cancer
cell lines. Furthermore, oral administration of VS-5584 has been shown to
reduce CSCs in xenograft models. The in vivo antitumor efficacy of once
daily and intermittent oral administration of VS-5584 was evaluated in
multiple xenograft tumor models representing small cell (SCLC) and
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), triple negative breast cancer (TNBC)
and mesothelioma. Once daily (QD) treatment with VS-5584 demonstrated
potent anti-tumor activity, with mean percentage tumor growth inhibition
(TGI) ranging from 40% to 97% (P Verastem is developing VS-5584, a potent
and selective dual inhibitor of the mammalian target of rapamycin
complexes 1 and 2 (mTOR) and Class I phosphatidylinositide 3-kinases
(PI3K), for the treatment of advanced cancer. The PI3K/mTOR signaling
pathway is a key regulator in cancer progression and in the survival of
cancer stem cells (CSCs). VS-5584 has been shown to be an equipotent
inhibitor of all four human Class I PI3K isoforms and the mTOR kinase,
and PI3K signaling has been implicated in the maintenance of CSCs in
solid tumors. In multiple orthogonal in vitro assays, VS-5584 has been
shown to preferentially target CSCs and exhibited significant
antiproliferative activity across multiple cancer cell lines.
Furthermore, oral administration of VS-5584 has been shown to reduce CSCs
in xenograft models. The in vivo antitumor efficacy of once daily and
intermittent oral administration of VS-5584 was evaluated in multiple
xenograft tumor models representing small cell (SCLC) and non-small cell
lung cancer (NSCLC), triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) and
mesothelioma. Once daily (QD) treatment with VS-5584 demonstrated potent
anti-tumor activity, with mean percentage tumor growth inhibition (TGI)
ranging from 40% to 97% (P < 0.05). In these models, TGI was
dose-dependent with dosages at and above 15 mg/kg showing good antitumor
activity (P Verastem is developing VS-5584, a potent and selective dual
inhibitor of the mammalian target of rapamycin complexes 1 and 2 (mTOR)
and Class I phosphatidylinositide 3-kinases (PI3K), for the treatment of
advanced cancer. The PI3K/mTOR signaling pathway is a key regulator in
cancer progression and in the survival of cancer stem cells (CSCs).
VS-5584 has been shown to be an equipotent inhibitor of all four human
Class I PI3K isoforms and the mTOR kinase, and PI3K signaling has been
implicated in the maintenance of CSCs in solid tumors. In multiple
orthogonal in vitro assays, VS-5584 has been shown to preferentially
target CSCs and exhibited significant antiproliferative activity across
multiple cancer cell lines. Furthermore, oral administration of VS-5584
has been shown to reduce CSCs in xenograft models. The in vivo antitumor
efficacy of once daily and intermittent oral administration of VS-5584
was evaluated in multiple xenograft tumor models representing small cell
(SCLC) and non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), triple negative breast
cancer (TNBC) and mesothelioma. Once daily (QD) treatment with VS-5584
demonstrated potent anti-tumor activity, with mean percentage tumor
growth inhibition (TGI) ranging from 40% to 97% (P < 0.05). In these
models, TGI was dose-dependent with dosages at and above 15 mg/kg showing
good antitumor activity (P < 0.05). Interestingly, tumor regression was
observed in 33% (3/9) of mice bearing H69 (SCLC) tumors, 60% (6/10) of
mice bearing MDA-MB-468 (TNBC) tumors and 50% (5/10) of mice bearing
NCI-H226 mesothelioma tumors. This significant antitumor activity was
generally observed at well-tolerated dosages. In studies exploring
intermittent dosing schedules, efficacy and tolerability were similar or
better with a QD 5 days on/2 days off or Monday, Wednesday, Friday
schedule compared to continuous daily dosing. We also explored the
efficacy of VS-5584 in combination with either cisplatin or docetaxel. In
these studies, VS-5584 plus either cisplatin or docetaxel showed
significant TGI compared to cisplatin alone in H69 SCLC and docetaxel
alone in A549 NSCLC xenograft models (P Verastem is developing VS-5584, a
potent and selective dual inhibitor of the mammalian target of rapamycin
complexes 1 and 2 (mTOR) and Class I phosphatidylinositide 3-kinases
(PI3K), for the treatment of advanced cancer. The PI3K/mTOR signaling
pathway is a key regulator in cancer progression and in the survival of
cancer stem cells (CSCs). VS-5584 has been shown to be an equipotent
inhibitor of all four human Class I PI3K isoforms and the mTOR kinase,
and PI3K signaling has been implicated in the maintenance of CSCs in
solid tumors. In multiple orthogonal in vitro assays, VS-5584 has been
shown to preferentially target CSCs and exhibited significant
antiproliferative activity across multiple cancer cell lines.
Furthermore, oral administration of VS-5584 has been shown to reduce CSCs
in xenograft models. The in vivo antitumor efficacy of once daily and
intermittent oral administration of VS-5584 was evaluated in multiple
xenograft tumor models representing small cell (SCLC) and non-small cell
lung cancer (NSCLC), triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) and
mesothelioma. Once daily (QD) treatment with VS-5584 demonstrated potent
anti-tumor activity, with mean percentage tumor growth inhibition (TGI)
ranging from 40% to 97% (P < 0.05). In these models, TGI was
dose-dependent with dosages at and above 15 mg/kg showing good antitumor
activity (P < 0.05). Interestingly, tumor regression was observed in 33%
(3/9) of mice bearing H69 (SCLC) tumors, 60% (6/10) of mice bearing
MDA-MB-468 (TNBC) tumors and 50% (5/10) of mice bearing NCI-H226
mesothelioma tumors. This significant antitumor activity was generally
observed at well-tolerated dosages. In studies exploring intermittent
dosing schedules, efficacy and tolerability were similar or better with a
QD 5 days on/2 days off or Monday, Wednesday, Friday schedule compared to
continuous daily dosing. We also explored the efficacy of VS-5584 in
combination with either cisplatin or docetaxel. In these studies, VS-5584
plus either cisplatin or docetaxel showed significant TGI compared to
cisplatin alone in H69 SCLC and docetaxel alone in A549 NSCLC xenograft
models (P < 0.05). This potent in vivo anti-tumor activity in xenograft
models of NSCLC, SCLC, TNBC and mesothelioma suggests that VS-5584 has
the potential for anticancer activity across a variety of cancer types.
Intermittent dosing with VS-5584 was sufficient to achieve good efficacy
while minimizing side effects, thus allowing a broader therapeutic window
compared to QD dosing. VS-5584 in combination with either cisplatin or
docetaxel had enhanced anti-tumor activity compared to either
chemotherapeutic agent or VS-5584 alone in two in vivo models of lung
cancer. VS-5584 is being evaluated in a Phase 1 clinical trial assessing
intermittent dosing in subjects with advanced non-hematologic
malignancies or lymphoma.

