Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and
prostaglandin-endoperoxide synthase 2 (PTGS2) are prognostic biomarkers
for metastatic colorectal cancer


Background: Resection of colorectal cancer liver metastasis (CRCLM) with
curative intent is beneficial in approximately 30% of cases, indicating
the need for prognostic biomarkers to improve clinical management of
CRCLM patients. Protein expression levels of epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) and prostaglandin-endoperoxide synthase 2 (PTGS2; also
known as cyclooxygenase-2 or COX2) have been associated with
carcinogenesis, metastases and survival. EGFR and PTGS2 are targets for
molecular drugs and exhibit complex molecular interactions.Aim: We aimed
to determine the prognostic value of EGFR and PTGS2 expression in CRCLM
of patients who underwent liver resection.Patients and methods:
Formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded CRCLM tissue and corresponding primary
tumor specimens from a multi-institutional cohort of patients who
underwent liver resection between 1990 and 2010 were incorporated into
tissue microarrays (TMAs). TMAs were stained for EGFR and PTGS2 by
immunohistochemistry and a hazard rate ratio (HRR) for the association
between expression in CRCLM and overall survival (OS) was calculated.
Results were validated by 500-fold cross-validation.Results: EGFR
expression could be evaluated in 323 patients and PTGS2 expression in 351
patients. EGFR expression in CRCLM was associated with poor prognosis in
both univariate analysis (average HRR 1.47; P=0.03) and multivariate
analysis with standard clinicopathological prognostic variables (average
HRR 1.54; P=0.02). PTGS2 expression was also associated with poor
prognosis in both univariate (average HRR 1.63; PBackground: Resection of
colorectal cancer liver metastasis (CRCLM) with curative intent is
beneficial in approximately 30% of cases, indicating the need for
prognostic biomarkers to improve clinical management of CRCLM patients.
Protein expression levels of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and
prostaglandin-endoperoxide synthase 2 (PTGS2; also known as
cyclooxygenase-2 or COX2) have been associated with carcinogenesis,
metastases and survival. EGFR and PTGS2 are targets for molecular drugs
and exhibit complex molecular interactions.Aim: We aimed to determine the
prognostic value of EGFR and PTGS2 expression in CRCLM of patients who
underwent liver resection.Patients and methods: Formalin-fixed
paraffin-embedded CRCLM tissue and corresponding primary tumor specimens
from a multi-institutional cohort of patients who underwent liver
resection between 1990 and 2010 were incorporated into tissue microarrays
(TMAs). TMAs were stained for EGFR and PTGS2 by immunohistochemistry and
a hazard rate ratio (HRR) for the association between expression in CRCLM
and overall survival (OS) was calculated. Results were validated by
500-fold cross-validation.Results: EGFR expression could be evaluated in
323 patients and PTGS2 expression in 351 patients. EGFR expression in
CRCLM was associated with poor prognosis in both univariate analysis
(average HRR 1.47; P=0.03) and multivariate analysis with standard
clinicopathological prognostic variables (average HRR 1.54; P=0.02).
PTGS2 expression was also associated with poor prognosis in both
univariate (average HRR 1.63; P<0.01) and multivariate analysis (average
HRR 1.59; P=0.01). Stratification for systemic therapy demonstrated
prognostic value for EGFR and PTGS2 only in the subgroup of patients who
were not treated (HRR 1.78; PBackground: Resection of colorectal cancer
liver metastasis (CRCLM) with curative intent is beneficial in
approximately 30% of cases, indicating the need for prognostic biomarkers
to improve clinical management of CRCLM patients. Protein expression
levels of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and
prostaglandin-endoperoxide synthase 2 (PTGS2; also known as
cyclooxygenase-2 or COX2) have been associated with carcinogenesis,
metastases and survival. EGFR and PTGS2 are targets for molecular drugs
and exhibit complex molecular interactions.Aim: We aimed to determine the
prognostic value of EGFR and PTGS2 expression in CRCLM of patients who
underwent liver resection.Patients and methods: Formalin-fixed
paraffin-embedded CRCLM tissue and corresponding primary tumor specimens
from a multi-institutional cohort of patients who underwent liver
resection between 1990 and 2010 were incorporated into tissue microarrays
(TMAs). TMAs were stained for EGFR and PTGS2 by immunohistochemistry and
a hazard rate ratio (HRR) for the association between expression in CRCLM
and overall survival (OS) was calculated. Results were validated by
500-fold cross-validation.Results: EGFR expression could be evaluated in
323 patients and PTGS2 expression in 351 patients. EGFR expression in
CRCLM was associated with poor prognosis in both univariate analysis
(average HRR 1.47; P=0.03) and multivariate analysis with standard
clinicopathological prognostic variables (average HRR 1.54; P=0.02).
PTGS2 expression was also associated with poor prognosis in both
univariate (average HRR 1.63; P<0.01) and multivariate analysis (average
HRR 1.59; P=0.01). Stratification for systemic therapy demonstrated
prognostic value for EGFR and PTGS2 only in the subgroup of patients who
were not treated (HRR 1.78; P<.01 and HRR 1.64; P=0.04, respectively),
with worst prognosis when both EGFR and PTGS2 were highly expressed (HRR
3.08; PBackground: Resection of colorectal cancer liver metastasis
(CRCLM) with curative intent is beneficial in approximately 30% of cases,
indicating the need for prognostic biomarkers to improve clinical
management of CRCLM patients. Protein expression levels of epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR) and prostaglandin-endoperoxide synthase 2
(PTGS2; also known as cyclooxygenase-2 or COX2) have been associated with
carcinogenesis, metastases and survival. EGFR and PTGS2 are targets for
molecular drugs and exhibit complex molecular interactions.Aim: We aimed
to determine the prognostic value of EGFR and PTGS2 expression in CRCLM
of patients who underwent liver resection.Patients and methods:
Formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded CRCLM tissue and corresponding primary
tumor specimens from a multi-institutional cohort of patients who
underwent liver resection between 1990 and 2010 were incorporated into
tissue microarrays (TMAs). TMAs were stained for EGFR and PTGS2 by
immunohistochemistry and a hazard rate ratio (HRR) for the association
between expression in CRCLM and overall survival (OS) was calculated.
Results were validated by 500-fold cross-validation.Results: EGFR
expression could be evaluated in 323 patients and PTGS2 expression in 351
patients. EGFR expression in CRCLM was associated with poor prognosis in
both univariate analysis (average HRR 1.47; P=0.03) and multivariate
analysis with standard clinicopathological prognostic variables (average
HRR 1.54; P=0.02). PTGS2 expression was also associated with poor
prognosis in both univariate (average HRR 1.63; P<0.01) and multivariate
analysis (average HRR 1.59; P=0.01). Stratification for systemic therapy
demonstrated prognostic value for EGFR and PTGS2 only in the subgroup of
patients who were not treated (HRR 1.78; P<.01 and HRR 1.64; P=0.04,
respectively), with worst prognosis when both EGFR and PTGS2 were highly
expressed (HRR 3.08; P<.01). CRCLM expression of PTGS2 was concordant in
69.2% of matched primary tumors (P=0.02), while there was no such
correlation for EGFR expression (P=0.51).Conclusion: EGFR and PTGS2
expression are prognostic molecular biomarkers with added value to
standard clinicopathological variables for patients with CRCLM.

