Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of Src as a therapeutic target and development of
biomarkers of Src inhibitor in cancer


Background: Src is a nonreceptor tyrosine kinase involved in the
crosstalk and mediation of many signaling pathways that promote cell
proliferation, invasion and angiogenesis. Elevation of Src activity has
been reported in many types of cancers including gastric cancer (GC) and
biliary tract cancer (BTC). The purpose of this study is to evaluate Src
as a therapeutic target and to elaborate the biomarkers of Src inhibitor
in GC and BTC.Methods: Ten gastric cancer cell lines (SNU-1, 5, 16, 216,
601, 620, 638, 668, 719, NCI-N87) and 8 biliary tract cancer cell lines
(SNU-245, 308, 478, 869, 1079, 1196, HuCCT1, TFK1) were used. Saracatinib
and bosutinib were used as Src inhibitors. MTT assay, colony formation
assay and 3D culture were done for determining growth inhibitory effect
of Src inhibitors, alone or in combination with chemotherapeutic agents
(5-FU, gemcitabine, cisplatin). Cell cycle analysis was done by FACS
Calibur flow cytometer. Matrigel invasion assay and wound healing assay
were done. The methods described by Chou and Talalay were used to
determine whether a synergistic effect existed between drug combination.
Tumor xenograft model was made and used for in vivo test of Src
inhibitors.Results: Among 10 GC cells, SNU216 and NCI-N87 were sensitive
to Src inhibitor. These sensitive cells showed high levels of pSRC(Y416)
and pFAK (Y861, Y397, Y925). These 2 sensitive GC cells are both HER2
amplified cells. However, HER2-positive breast cancer (BC) cells (SKBR3,
BT474, MDA-MB453) were resistant to Src inhibitor. Contrast to these
resistant BC cells, SNU216 and N87 showed high expression of integrin V,
4 and 8. Especially, in case of integrin 8, the mRNA/protein levels were
highest in SNU216 and N87 among all GC cells. Src inhibitor-sensitive GC
cells showed the apoptosis by Src inhibitor and synergism with 5-FU in
vitro and in vivo.Among 8 BTC cells, 3 cells were sensitive to Src
inhibitor (SNU308, SNU478 and HuCCT1) in terms of growth inhibition and
migration/invasion inhibition. Sensitive cells showed high levels of
integrin 2, 3 and 4. Src inhibitor induced G1 arrest and decreased pSrc,
pFAK, and pERK in sensitive cells. Inhibition of pSrc was accompanied
with increase of PTEN and decrease of pAKT. Src inhibitor showed the
synergistic effects with cytotoxic chemotherapeutic agents (gemcitabine
and cisplatin) in vitro and in vivo. When the Src was inhibited, pSTAT3
was increased thru increase of IL-6 in some cells.Conclusion: Taken
together, Src could be a potential therapeutic target in gastric cancer
and biliary tract cancer. The role of integrin as a biomarker for Src
inhibitor should be further investigated.

