Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The use of induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells for the safety
testing of enhanced affinity TCR-transduced T cells


Engineering T cells with enhanced affinity T cell receptors (TCRs) is a
promising therapeutic strategy for treating cancer. Engineered TCRs
overcome the limitations of naturally occurring cancer-antigen specific
TCRs which are typically of extremely low affinity and fail to
efficiently recognize tumor cells. However, the use TCRs with enhanced
affinity for adoptive therapy carries with it the risk that they might
recognize normal tissue, either as on-target or off-target reactivity.
Two fatalities in a clinical trial of an affinity-enhanced
MAGE-A3-specific TCR have highlighted the need for more biologically
relevant cellular testing systems to minimize cross-reactivity-related
toxicity in future adoptive immunotherapy trials.Cellular Dynamics
International Inc. supply a range of iCell products that are highly pure
induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cell-derived cells that reproduce normal
human biology in an in vitro setting. The advantage of iCell cultures
over standard cultures of primary cells is that they better represent
human organs with respect to their antigen presentation by HLA.In this
study, a panel of iCell sub-types, representing major organs of the human
body, were used to test the reactivity of T cells transduced with an
enhanced affinity TCR for HLA-A2-restricted peptide antigen
NY-ESO-1/LAGE-1157-165. IncuCyte FLR technology, which enables direct
visualization of caspase-3/7-dependent apoptosis at 37C in real time, was
used to assess the killing of the iCells by NY-ESO TCR-transduced T cells
over a 4 day time course.While potent killing by the NY-ESO
TCR-transduced T cells was observed against an HLA-A2+, NY-ESO-1+/LAGE-1+
tumor cell line, A375, no reactivity was observed against any of the
tested iCells sub-types unless the iCells were pulsed with 1 M NY-ESO
peptide.The screening of TCR-transduced T cells against biologically
appropriate cell cultures, such as iCells, further advances preclinical
safety testing of new TCRs for use in adoptive immunotherapy.

