Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prevalence of cervical cancer and associated mortality in Grenada:
A ten-year analysis (2000 - 2010)


According to recent WHO estimates, cervical cancer is ranked as the
second most frequently diagnosed cancer among women ages 15 - 44 years in
the Caribbean and disproportionately affects developing countries.
Globally, 80 to 85% of deaths occur in low- and middle-income countries.
However, little is known about cervical cancer burden in much of the
Eastern Caribbean and particularly for Grenada, West Indies. Grenada is a
Tri-Island state comprised of Grenada, Carriacou and Petite Martinique,
with a population of 35,000 women ages 15 years and older who are at risk
of developing cervical cancer.To investigate cervical cancer prevalence
and its associated mortality, a study was conducted on de-identified
records obtained from the Grenada General Hospital Histopathology
Laboratory of women who visited hospital and clinic facilities during
2000 - 2010. Ten years of hand-written records (12,016 entries) were
compiled into an electronic master sheet, and cervical cancer prevalence
was assessed. Of the 12,016 entries, 9,003 were female (7,160
individuals) between ages 8 - 94 years. Sampling without replacement
resulted in inclusion of 2,524 entries for analysis. Identified cancer
cases were matched to corresponding patient data from death registries
collected at the Ministry of Health and used to identify and calculate
associated mortality rates.The highest rates of cervical cancer occurred
in the 35 - 44 year age group followed by the 45 - 64 age group.
Prevalence rate of cervical cancer was determined as 52.4 per 100,000
women (ages 15 and above). A total of 65 deaths attributable to cervical
cancer occurred during 2000 - 2010, with women over 65 years old
experiencing a majority of these deaths. The mortality rate was
determined to be 16.7 per 100,000, almost twice the rates estimated by
WHO for the region or reported for the previous decade (9.7 per
100,000).This study reports data that demonstrate the need for a
comprehensive cervical cancer-screening program in Grenada. It should be
used in the generation of public health policy and should aid future
studies in determining how to appropriately execute public health policy
for screening, prevention, and control of cervical cancer in Grenada.

