Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cyclin D:Cdk4/6 activates RB by mono-phosphorylation during early
G1 phase


The retinoblastoma tumor suppressor protein (Rb) functions to
transcriptionally regulate multiple critical cellular activities,
including early G1 phase, the DNA damage response, cell cycle exit and
differentiation, but is infrequently mutated or deleted in cancer. To
account for the lack of Rb mutations, a large body of work over the last
20+ years has led to a widely accepted model of G1 cell cycle progression
that proposes cyclin D:Cdk4/6 complexes partially inactivate Rb during
early G1 phase by progressive multi-phosphorylation, termed
hypo-phosphorylation, on 15 Cdk sites resulting in release of E2F
transcription factors that drive cells across the late G1 phase
checkpoint and ultimately undergo cellular division. Surprisingly given
the importance of G1 cell cycle progression in cancer, the core tenet of
the model, namely cyclin D:Cdk4/6 inactivation of Rb by progressive
multi-phosphorylation, remains largely unproven biochemically.
Consequently, it remains entirely unknown if hypo-phosphorylated Rb
contains one, two, three, five, seven or more phosphates, at what
phosphate number hypo-phosphorylated Rb releases E2F transcription
factors, what the phosphorylation kinetics are and what the biologically
active form(s) of Rb during early G1 phase is. Here using highly
synchronized normal and tumor cells combined with two-dimensional
isoelectric focusing (2D IEF) to quantify the number of phosphates on Rb,
we find no evidence to support the 20 year old notion that cyclin
D:Cdk4/6 complexes progressively hypo-phosphorylate Rb. In contrast, we
discovered that cyclin D:Cdk4/6 complexes exclusively mono-phosphorylates
Rb throughout early G1 phase, and generates fourteen independent
mono-phosphorylated Rb isoforms. Cells undergoing a DNA damage response
activate cyclin D:Cdk4/6 complexes to generate mono-phosphorylated Rb
that regulated global transcription, whereas non-phosphorylatable Rb
remained non-functional. These observations fundamentally change our
understanding of G1 cell cycle progression and show that
mono-phosphorylated Rb, generated by cyclin D:Cdk4/6 complexes, is the
functionally active isoform of Rb in early G1 phase.

