Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of a non-hydrolysable phosphotyrosine mimetic peptide
based on a high affinity SHP2 substrate


The Src homology-2 domain containing protein tyrosine phosphatase-2
(SHP2) is a transducer of growth factor, cytokine, integrin, and hormone
signaling pathways that regulate processes such as cell proliferation,
differentiation, adhesion, migration, and apoptosis and plays a pivotal
role in growth factor and cytokine signaling. Gain-of-function SHP2
mutations are associated with several types of leukemias, and solid
tumors. This makes SHP2 an attractive target for developing new
anticancer therapy. Several small molecules have been developed for
inhibition of this important phosphatase, which serve as chemical tools
to probe the role of SHP2 in disease and lead compounds for optimization.
Nevertheless improvements are required to improve these lead compounds
with better potency, selectivity and cell permeability. To gain
structural insights for development of potent and selective Shp2
inhibitors, we synthesized a non-hydrolysable phosphotyrosine peptide
mimetic, based on reported Shp2 substrate peptide sequences. The
non-hydrolyzable phosphopeptide, containing the phosphotyrosyl surrogate
difluoromethylphosphonate, was prepared by solid phase peptide synthesis
methods from the known building block N-FMOCF2Pmp. We will present the
synthesis of the peptide, analysis of Shp2 phosphatase inhibition, and
binding of the phosphopeptide mimic to SHP2 by micro isothermal
calorimetry. We will present a model for the binding mode of the peptide
and its implications for the design of selective Shp2 inhibitors.

