Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Overexpression of nuclear karyopherin alpha2 correlates with poor
prognosis in patients with colorectal cancer


Objectives: Karyopherin alpha 2 (KPNA2) is a member of the karyopherin
family that moves protein molecules into the nucleus by binding to a
specific recognition sequence. It has recently been reported to play an
important role in carcinogenesis and cancer progression. The aim of the
present study was to elucidate the clinicopathological significance of
overexpression of nuclear KPNA2 expression in colorectal cancers.Methods:
KPNA2 expression was investigated by immunohistochemistry on tissue
microarrays of 363 cases of colorectal cancer and the association of
KPNA2 expression was examined with clinicopathologic features.Results:
Thirty percent (30%) of colorectal cancers demonstrated overexpression of
KPNA2. The overexpression of KPNA2 was significantly associated with high
pN stages (p=0.005), vascular invasions (pObjectives: Karyopherin alpha 2
(KPNA2) is a member of the karyopherin family that moves protein
molecules into the nucleus by binding to a specific recognition sequence.
It has recently been reported to play an important role in carcinogenesis
and cancer progression. The aim of the present study was to elucidate the
clinicopathological significance of overexpression of nuclear KPNA2
expression in colorectal cancers.Methods: KPNA2 expression was
investigated by immunohistochemistry on tissue microarrays of 363 cases
of colorectal cancer and the association of KPNA2 expression was examined
with clinicopathologic features.Results: Thirty percent (30%) of
colorectal cancers demonstrated overexpression of KPNA2. The
overexpression of KPNA2 was significantly associated with high pN stages
(p=0.005), vascular invasions (p<0.001) and lymphatic invasions
(pObjectives: Karyopherin alpha 2 (KPNA2) is a member of the karyopherin
family that moves protein molecules into the nucleus by binding to a
specific recognition sequence. It has recently been reported to play an
important role in carcinogenesis and cancer progression. The aim of the
present study was to elucidate the clinicopathological significance of
overexpression of nuclear KPNA2 expression in colorectal cancers.Methods:
KPNA2 expression was investigated by immunohistochemistry on tissue
microarrays of 363 cases of colorectal cancer and the association of
KPNA2 expression was examined with clinicopathologic features.Results:
Thirty percent (30%) of colorectal cancers demonstrated overexpression of
KPNA2. The overexpression of KPNA2 was significantly associated with high
pN stages (p=0.005), vascular invasions (p<0.001) and lymphatic invasions
(p<0.001). Multivariate Cox regression analysis showed that the
overexpression of PKNA2 in pN stage 1, 2 was an independent prognostic
factor of decreased survival [HR=2.13 (95% CI: 1.32-3.45, p=0.002)]. The
overall survival was significantly decreased in patients of KPNA2 high
expression [HR=2.70 (95% CI: 1.74-4.20, pObjectives: Karyopherin alpha 2
(KPNA2) is a member of the karyopherin family that moves protein
molecules into the nucleus by binding to a specific recognition sequence.
It has recently been reported to play an important role in carcinogenesis
and cancer progression. The aim of the present study was to elucidate the
clinicopathological significance of overexpression of nuclear KPNA2
expression in colorectal cancers.Methods: KPNA2 expression was
investigated by immunohistochemistry on tissue microarrays of 363 cases
of colorectal cancer and the association of KPNA2 expression was examined
with clinicopathologic features.Results: Thirty percent (30%) of
colorectal cancers demonstrated overexpression of KPNA2. The
overexpression of KPNA2 was significantly associated with high pN stages
(p=0.005), vascular invasions (p<0.001) and lymphatic invasions
(p<0.001). Multivariate Cox regression analysis showed that the
overexpression of PKNA2 in pN stage 1, 2 was an independent prognostic
factor of decreased survival [HR=2.13 (95% CI: 1.32-3.45, p=0.002)]. The
overall survival was significantly decreased in patients of KPNA2 high
expression [HR=2.70 (95% CI: 1.74-4.20, p<0.001)]. The cumulative
survival was significantly decreased in patients of KPNA2 high expression
compared to those of KPNA2 low expression by Kaplan-Meier analysis (log
rank test, pObjectives: Karyopherin alpha 2 (KPNA2) is a member of the
karyopherin family that moves protein molecules into the nucleus by
binding to a specific recognition sequence. It has recently been reported
to play an important role in carcinogenesis and cancer progression. The
aim of the present study was to elucidate the clinicopathological
significance of overexpression of nuclear KPNA2 expression in colorectal
cancers.Methods: KPNA2 expression was investigated by
immunohistochemistry on tissue microarrays of 363 cases of colorectal
cancer and the association of KPNA2 expression was examined with
clinicopathologic features.Results: Thirty percent (30%) of colorectal
cancers demonstrated overexpression of KPNA2. The overexpression of KPNA2
was significantly associated with high pN stages (p=0.005), vascular
invasions (p<0.001) and lymphatic invasions (p<0.001). Multivariate Cox
regression analysis showed that the overexpression of PKNA2 in pN stage
1, 2 was an independent prognostic factor of decreased survival [HR=2.13
(95% CI: 1.32-3.45, p=0.002)]. The overall survival was significantly
decreased in patients of KPNA2 high expression [HR=2.70 (95% CI:
1.74-4.20, p<0.001)]. The cumulative survival was significantly decreased
in patients of KPNA2 high expression compared to those of KPNA2 low
expression by Kaplan-Meier analysis (log rank test, p<0.001).Conclusion:
The overexpression of KPNA2 can be a valuable poor prognostic marker of
colorectal cancer and the KPNA2 can be used in therapeutic strategies.

