Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Modeling the differential responses of cancer stem cells (CSCs) as
heterogeneous versus homogenous populations in human cancers


Emerging data suggests that many human cancers including breast, brain,
lung, colon, pancreatic and head and neck cancer are maintained by a
subpopulation of self-renewing cells characterized as cancer stem cells
that contribute to tumor growth and metastasis. Cancer stem cells have
become an important target for new treatment paradigms as they may hold
the key to solving treatment resistance and tumor recurrence. Paramount
to the development of new therapies that preferentially target cancer
stem cells is having predictable and clinically relevant models that
accurately represent stem cell behavior and the tumor microenvironment.
Examination of cancer stem cells both as a homogenous population and as a
heterogeneous population interacting with other tumor cells is required
for the development of effective treatments for stem cell driven tumor
types. To address this we developed in vitro and in vivo cancer stem cell
models of breast and pancreatic cancers to provide a comprehensive
approach for preclinical research in these areas. Using the MDA-MB-231
and BxPC3 human cancer cell lines we are able to show the differential
responses of cancer stem cells isolated from the parent lines to the
standard chemotherapeutic agents docetaxel and gemcitabine with and
without the small molecule inhibitor Reparixin specifically designed to
inhibit cancer stem cells. Treatment response differences between
homogeneous cancer stem cell versus heterogeneous populations were
revealed in their growth, differentiation and invasiveness as determined
by 2D and 3D tumorsphere assays. This response is also recapitulated in
vivo using IVIS imaging to compare orthotopic tumor growth of isolated
cancer stem cells and the parent lines treated with standard
chemotherapeutics agents with or without combination Reparixin treatment.
These results emphasize the need to employ a multifaceted approach to
specifically target cancer stem cells in preclinical drug development to
identify successful therapies for use as part of an overall treatment
regimen in recurring or treatment resistant cancers.

