Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Post-transplantation NK cell is a useful predictor of
graft-versus-host-disease in allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell
transplantation


Background: Reconstitution of the immune system following allogeneic
hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) is important for
transplantation outcome. Quantitative measurement of the lymphocyte
subset (LST) by flow cytometry has been used for analysis of the immune
system. However, the association of each lymphocyte subset with
transplantation has not been fully elucidated. Here, we investigated the
relevance of each lymphocyte fraction as a predictor for HSCT outcome.
Methods: A total of 70 patients who received allogeneic HSCT at national
cancer center were included. The median age was 42 years (range 20-64)
with 34 males (49%). The enrolled diseases included acute myeloid
leukemia (n=33, 47%), acute lymphoblastic leukemia (n=13, 19%), myeloid
dysplastic syndrome (n=9, 13%), non-hodgkin lymphoma (n=5, 7%), severe
aplastic anemia (n=4, 6%), chronic myeloid leukemia (n=3, 4%), and
multiple myeloma (n=3, 4%). LST measurements for CD3, CD4, CD8, CD19, and
CD16/CD56-positive cells were performed at 7 days before and 30 days
after HSCT. The absolute counts of lymphocyte subsets were evaluated for
acute graft-versus-host disease (GVHD), infection (bacterial, viral, and
fungal) and complications during 100 days post HSCT. GVHD was
pathologically validated and determination of infection was based on
microbiology results including culture, cytomegalovirus antigenemia and
virus PCR. Moreover, the association between LST and treatment failure as
relapse or death during any period was analyzed. Results: The number of
each fraction of lymphocyte subsets at 7 days before and 30 days after
HSCT were as following (mean SD/uL): CD3 (804.5 564.6, 862.1 890.0, p
=0.719), CD4 (339.74 284.8, 223.5 189.9, p =0.009, CD8 (430.6 362.9,
576.9 703.1, p = 0.169, CD19 (39.7 72.3, 19.1 22.9, p =0.035), NK (86.6
86.8, 272.5 192.2, p Background: Reconstitution of the immune system
following allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) is
important for transplantation outcome. Quantitative measurement of the
lymphocyte subset (LST) by flow cytometry has been used for analysis of
the immune system. However, the association of each lymphocyte subset
with transplantation has not been fully elucidated. Here, we investigated
the relevance of each lymphocyte fraction as a predictor for HSCT
outcome. Methods: A total of 70 patients who received allogeneic HSCT at
national cancer center were included. The median age was 42 years (range
20-64) with 34 males (49%). The enrolled diseases included acute myeloid
leukemia (n=33, 47%), acute lymphoblastic leukemia (n=13, 19%), myeloid
dysplastic syndrome (n=9, 13%), non-hodgkin lymphoma (n=5, 7%), severe
aplastic anemia (n=4, 6%), chronic myeloid leukemia (n=3, 4%), and
multiple myeloma (n=3, 4%). LST measurements for CD3, CD4, CD8, CD19, and
CD16/CD56-positive cells were performed at 7 days before and 30 days
after HSCT. The absolute counts of lymphocyte subsets were evaluated for
acute graft-versus-host disease (GVHD), infection (bacterial, viral, and
fungal) and complications during 100 days post HSCT. GVHD was
pathologically validated and determination of infection was based on
microbiology results including culture, cytomegalovirus antigenemia and
virus PCR. Moreover, the association between LST and treatment failure as
relapse or death during any period was analyzed. Results: The number of
each fraction of lymphocyte subsets at 7 days before and 30 days after
HSCT were as following (mean SD/uL): CD3 (804.5 564.6, 862.1 890.0, p
=0.719), CD4 (339.74 284.8, 223.5 189.9, p =0.009, CD8 (430.6 362.9,
576.9 703.1, p = 0.169, CD19 (39.7 72.3, 19.1 22.9, p =0.035), NK (86.6
86.8, 272.5 192.2, p < 0.001). Each lymphocyte fraction does not show any
association with complications and increased risk for infection. However,
the decreased number of NK cells at 30 days after HSCT represented
association with an increased risk of GVHD (n=21) (GVHD group vs.
non-GVHD group: 206.4195.2 vs. 310.1 182.5, p = 0.033). When the NK cell
level was divided as median value (219/L), the group of lower level has
correlation decreased overall survival (p = 0.018). Moreover, decreased
number of NK cells at 90 days after HSCT was also associated with an
increased risk of GVHD (145.3107.9 vs. 370.2265.8, p = 0.043).
Conclusion: These results suggest that measuring the early recovery of NK
cells at 30 days and analyzing the trend of LST can be a useful predictor
of clinical outcome including GVHD in allogeneic HSCT.

