Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Significant association of neutrophils in regional lymph nodes
with lymphangiogenesis and micrometastasis by gastric cancer


Recent evidences indicate that inflammation is the seventh hallmark of
cancer. Several researches reported that tumor-associated neutrophils
(TANs) promote tumor invasion or tumor-induced angiogenesis in the tumor
microenvironment. However, the relation between TANs and lymph node
metastasis remains unclear. We previously reported that increasing of
intranodal lymphatic vessel density (LVD) was significantly correlated to
tumor progression, lymph node metastasis and poor prognosis of the
patients with gastric cancer. In this study, we aimed to reveal the
affect ofTANs in regional lymph nodes in terms of micrometastasis and the
prognostic impact. TANs and micrometastasis were immunohistochemically
estimated by anti-CD15 and anti-pan cytokeratin antibody in 1596 lymph
nodes from 52 patients who were underwent gastrectomy with
lymphadenectomy. We investigated the association of the density of TANs
in regional lymph nodes with clinicopathological factors. The number of
TANs in regional lymph nodes had a positive correlation with accumulation
of intranodal LVD and micrometastasis. Furthermore we divided another 96
patients into two groups according to median TAN number of 39 to
investigate the prognostic value. Patients in high CD15+TANs group had
significantly poorer prognosis compared with low group. Our results
suggested that TANs in regional lymph nodes promote the invasion of
cancer cells to lymph nodes by augmentation of lymphangiogenesis and
contribute to tumor progression. In conclusion, TANs might be an
attractive target of novel bioloigical therapies of gastric cancer.

