Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ODM-201 - New generation androgen receptor inhibitor targeting
resistance mechanisms to androgen signalling-directed prostate cancer
therapies


Androgen receptor (AR) mutations have been described to emerge in
response to prostate cancer treatment with first generation AR
antagonists, resulting in broadened ligand specificity and AR
antagonist-to-agonist switch. Second-generation AR antagonists
enzalutamide and ARN-509 function as antagonists in the presence of AR
overexpression. They express high clinical efficacy in castration
resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) but eventually resistance will
emerge.Recently, a F876L missense mutation in the ligand-binding domain
of AR has been described that confers resistance to enzalutamide and
ARN-509 in preclinical models of prostate cancer. AR F876L mutation has
also been identified in plasma DNA from ARN-509-treated CRPC patients
with rising PSA.ODM-201 is a new generation AR inhibitor with high
anticancer activity in patients with CRPC and has unique properties
compared to first and second generation antiandrogens. ODM-201 and its
major metabolite bind to wt AR with excellent affinity (Ki 8 and 9 nM,
respectively) and selectivity. In functional cell-based assays, ODM-201
functions as antagonist in highly AR overexpressing cells and does not
induce AR T877A or W741L transcriptional activity. In contrast to
enzalutamide and ARN-509, ODM-201 and its metabolite have been found to
potently inhibit the activity of AR F876L while enzalutamide and ARN-509
were agonistic.ODM-201 is a promising new generation AR inhibitor for the
treatment of advanced prostate cancer with superior antiandrogenic
activity in preclinical models of AR function.

