Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical efficacy of the novel PIM inhibitor, JP_11646, in
pancreatic cancer


Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is often first diagnosed at an
advanced stage with a poor prognosis. Current systemic treatment
approaches have limited efficacy, pointing to an urgent need to develop
novel therapies. Recent studies have shown that inhibition of Pim-2
activity via JP_11646, a novel pan-PIM inhibitor, resulted in decreased
anchorage-independent growth of PDAC. The aim of this work is to examine
the ability of JP_11646 alone and in combination with gemcitabine to
inhibit the growth of pancreatic cancer cells in vitro and in vivo.Cell
viability was assessed using the MTS assay in two pancreatic cancer cell
lines, MiaPaCa2 and PANC1. Cells were seeded at an average of 5x103 per
well on 96-well plates and exposed to JP_11646 in a range of
concentrations (0.01 - 5 M) for 72 hours. Exposure to JP_11646 inhibited
PANC1 and MiaPaCa2 cell growth in a dose-dependent manner, with IC50
values of 0.15 M and 0.054 M, respectively.For in vivo experiments, SCID
mice were implanted subcutaneously with 3x 106 MiaPaCa2 cells. Upon
successful establishment of tumors (approximately 100 mm3), animals were
randomly divided into groups for drug and control treatments. JP_11646
was given at 5 or 10 mg/kg by intraperitoneal injection (i.p. injection)
once a day for 5 consecutive days from Monday to Friday for a total of
six weeks. Gemcitabine i.p. was given at 45 mg/kg in combination
treatment or 90 mg/kg as a single agent twice a week every Monday and
Friday for a total of six weeks. In a dose-dependent manner, JP_11646 at
5 and 10 mg/kg significantly suppressed the growth of the pancreatic
xenograft by 36% and 77% respectively, compare with control PBS treatment
in SCID mice. Moreover, the combination of JP-11646 5 mg/kg and
gemcitabine 45 mg/kg resulted in a greater tumor inhibition (83%) than
either single agent alone [JP_11646 5 mg/kg (36%) or gemcitabine 90 mg/kg
(69%)].Taken together, our results suggest that JP_11646 is a potent
inhibitor of pancreatic cancer growth with equivalent efficacy to the
maximum tolerated dose of gemcitabine, and is synergistic in combination
with gemcitabine.

