Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HLA-A2 and HER2 expression levels as clinical prognostic factors
in breast cancer patients: implications for peptide cancer vaccine trials


Introduction: Our group has been investigating HER2-derived peptide
vaccines administered in the adjuvant setting to high risk breast cancer
patients (pts) to prevent disease recurrence. Our group has previously
shown that pts with HER2 low-expressing (LE) tumors are at higher risk of
recurrence than over-expressing (OE) tumors in the trastuzumab era. Given
peptide-based cancer vaccination require presentation by a specific HLA
molecule, our group has also examined and found comparable disease
recurrence rates between HLA-A2+ and HLA-A2- patients. Here, we report
recurrence data based on HLA-A2 allele/HER2 expression sub-grouping in
our unvaccinated, control pts.Methods: After completing standard of care
therapy, high-risk, disease-free breast cancer pts with HER2 LE (IHC 1+,
2+) or OE (IHC 3+) tumors are eligible for enrollment in our phase II
trial evaluating the HER2-derived peptide vaccines, AE37 (MHC Class II,
HLA-non-restricted epitope) and GP2 (MHC Class I, HLA-A2+ restricted
epitope). Patients are HLA-typed as A2+ or A2- then randomized to vaccine
vs. adjuvant alone. Demographics between groups are compared using chi
squared or fisher exact.Results: Thus far, 208 pts have been enrolled to
the adjuvant alone control arms of the trial. Five pts were excluded from
analysis (1 ineligible and 4 second malignancies) for a total of 203
evaluable pts: 88 HLA-A2+ (48 OE and 40 LE) and 115 HLA-A2- (48 OE and 67
LE). A2+ and A2- OE pts exhibited significant difference in respect to
age (52 vs. 47, p=0.013) and tumor size (41.7% vs. 68.1% 2 cm, p=0.01)
respectively.With median follow-up of 39 months, recurrence rates were
again compared between A2+ vs. A2- pts (11.4% vs. 11.3%, p=0.50) as well
as HER2 subgroups (OE, 6.25% vs. LE, 15.8%, p=0.02). The latter
difference was particularly prominent among the A2- pts (A2-/OE, 4.2% vs.
16.4%, p=0.03) but less so in the A2+ pts (A2+/OE, 8.3% vs. A2+/LE, 15%,
p=0.26). With no recurrence difference between LE A2 subgroups (LE/A2+,
15% vs. LE/A2-, 16.4%, p=0.54), the OE subgroup comparison was notable
for 50% increased disease recurrence in A2+ pts (A2+/OE, 8.3% vs. A2-/OE,
4.2%, p=0.33).Conclusions: While there is no difference in recurrence
between A2+ and A2- pts overall or among the HER2 LE subset, there does
appear to be a difference in the HER2 OE subset. Compared to A2+/OE pts,
the A2-/OE pts exhibit 50% decreased disease recurrence despite
significantly younger age and larger tumor size. These findings need to
be confirmed but are important given that many peptide vaccines target
A2+ pts. Therefore, these results may impact future trial design.

