Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Highly selective HSV virotherapy for glioblastoma


Glioblastoma Multiforme (GBM) is an aggressive brain cancer for which
there is no effective treatment. Oncolytic HSV vectors (oHSV) are
attenuated lytic viruses that have shown promise in the treatment of
human GBM models in animals. Although proven safe for treatment of GBM in
patients, oHSVs efficacy has been limited, a consequence of poor
intra-tumoral virus replication and spread. To counter these limitations,
we have developed oHSVs whose selective replication in GBM cells does not
rely on defective genes. This was accomplished by (i) full retargeting of
oHSV to utilize the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) for infection
of human GBM tumor cells and (ii) further vector engineering to modify
the essential HSV immediate early gene (ICP4) for sensitivity to
repression by the microRNA mir-124. Mir-124 is highly expressed in
neurons but virtually absent in GBM and highly conserved among different
species. The mir-124-regulated vector was unable to replicate in nude
mice following intracranial inoculation supporting vector safety and was
shown to be effective in the treatment of human GBM in nude mice. To
enhance vector intra-tumor vector spread, our EGFR retargeted-mir-124
controlled vector was further modified by vector arming with the matrix
metalloproteinase gene encoding MMP9. MMP9 degrades collagen type IV, a
major component of the extracellular matrix (ECM) and basement membranes
of glioblastomas but absent in normal brain tissue. Studies are ongoing
to determine whether MMP9 expression enhances vector spread in GBM
neurospheres and as a therapeutic agent for enhanced treatment of human
GBM in animals

