Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Systemic delivery of therapeutic siRNA by multifunctional
mesoporous silica-based nanocarrier inhibits lung cancer growth and
metastasis


RNAi-based therapy by targeting dysregulated genes has shown great
promise in biomedical research but still newer versions of effective and
safe delivery systems are required. In this study, we developed a novel
siRNA delivery vector based on our magnetic mesoporous silica
nanoparticles (M-MSNs) platform. This nanocarrier was constructed by
loading siRNAs into the mesopores of M-MSNs, followed by polyethylenimine
(PEI) capping, PEGylation and fusogenic peptide KALA modification. The
resultant functionalized delivery system exhibited prolonged half-life in
bloodstream, enhanced cell membrane translocation and endosomal
escapablity, and favorable tissue biocompatibility and biosafety.
Systemic application of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) siRNA
via this nanocarrier resulted in remarkable tumor suppression, both in
subdermal and orthotopic lung cancer models, while tumor metastasis was
also significantly reduced, overall leading to improved survival. In
addition, the magnetic core of the particles and the functionalized
fluorescence markers conveniently enabled in vivo imaging of target
tissues. Taken together, this M-MSNs-based siRNA delivery vehicle has
shown very favorable applicability for cancer therapy.

