Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HER2/PIK3CAH1047R transgenic tumors develop acquired resistance to
triple therapy with trastuzumab, pertuzumab, and PI3K inhibitors via
multiple mechanisms


The HER2 (ERBB2) oncogene is amplified in 20-25% of breast cancers and is
associated with poor patient outcome. Activating mutations in PIK3CA, the
gene encoding the p110 catalytic subunit of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase
(PI3K), occur in 30% of breast cancers. HER2 amplification and PIK3CA
mutations often co-occur in breast cancer. Aberrant activation of the
PI3K pathway correlates with a diminished response to HER2-directed
therapies. We previously generated a conditional transgenic mouse model
of HER2-overexpressing (HER2+), PIK3CAH1047R-mutant breast cancer. We
showed that PIK3CAH1047R accelerates HER2-mediated breast epithelial
transformation and metastatic progression, alters the intrinsic phenotype
of HER2-overexpressing cancers and generates resistance to FDA-approved
combinations of anti-HER2 therapies (Hanker et al. PNAS 2013).
HER2+/PIK3CA tumor growth was inhibited by treatment with the HER2
antibodies trastuzumab and pertuzumab in combination with the pan-PI3K
inhibitor BKM120 (TPB). We sought to discover mechanisms of acquired
resistance to the triple therapy by long-term treatment of established
HER2+/PIK3CA tumors. We utilized tumor transplants derived from two
HER2+/PIK3CA transgenic mice, #564 and #635. Tumor transplants from model
564 were initially growth inhibited by TPB, but did not regress. A subset
of 564 transplants (3/11) resumed growth in the presence of continuous
TPB therapy. Resistance was maintained following passaging in mice and
tumors were cross-resistant to trastuzumab/pertuzumab/BYL719, a
p110-specific inhibitor. P-AKT remained suppressed in resistant tumors,
whereas P-ERK was elevated.All transplants (n=9) from model 635 regressed
to a volume of The HER2 (ERBB2) oncogene is amplified in 20-25% of breast
cancers and is associated with poor patient outcome. Activating mutations
in PIK3CA, the gene encoding the p110 catalytic subunit of
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K), occur in 30% of breast cancers.
HER2 amplification and PIK3CA mutations often co-occur in breast cancer.
Aberrant activation of the PI3K pathway correlates with a diminished
response to HER2-directed therapies. We previously generated a
conditional transgenic mouse model of HER2-overexpressing (HER2+),
PIK3CAH1047R-mutant breast cancer. We showed that PIK3CAH1047R
accelerates HER2-mediated breast epithelial transformation and metastatic
progression, alters the intrinsic phenotype of HER2-overexpressing
cancers and generates resistance to FDA-approved combinations of
anti-HER2 therapies (Hanker et al. PNAS 2013). HER2+/PIK3CA tumor growth
was inhibited by treatment with the HER2 antibodies trastuzumab and
pertuzumab in combination with the pan-PI3K inhibitor BKM120 (TPB). We
sought to discover mechanisms of acquired resistance to the triple
therapy by long-term treatment of established HER2+/PIK3CA tumors. We
utilized tumor transplants derived from two HER2+/PIK3CA transgenic mice,
#564 and #635. Tumor transplants from model 564 were initially growth
inhibited by TPB, but did not regress. A subset of 564 transplants (3/11)
resumed growth in the presence of continuous TPB therapy. Resistance was
maintained following passaging in mice and tumors were cross-resistant to
trastuzumab/pertuzumab/BYL719, a p110-specific inhibitor. P-AKT remained
suppressed in resistant tumors, whereas P-ERK was elevated.All
transplants (n=9) from model 635 regressed to a volume of <100 mm3 within
6 weeks of treatment. All tumors recurred within 2 months; 2 tumors
continued growth when re-treated with TPB. Unlike the 564 resistant
tumors, P-AKT was restored in the 635 resistant tumors, while short-term
TPB treatment strongly inhibited P-AKT in the 635 tumors. TPB-resistant
tumor 635-2 expressed p95 HER2, which was not detected in untreated
tumors. In contrast, HER2 expression was significantly reduced in
TPB-resistant tumor 635-3. We are currently performing whole-exome
sequencing on TPB-resistant vs. untreated tumors in order to determine
the mechanisms of resistance. Both 564 and 635 TPB-resistant tumor
transplants displayed resistance to the antibody-drug conjugate
trastuzumab-DM1, despite maintenance of HER2 overexpression. These early
data suggest that multiple mechanisms may contribute to resistance to
dual HER2 blockade in combination with PI3K inhibitors. In parallel, we
are currently establishing human HER2+, PIK3CA-mutant cell lines
resistant to TPB. We speculate that a similar heterogeneity of mechanisms
of acquired resistance may occur in different HER2+/PIK3CA-mutant
metastases in patients.

