Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Id4 acts as a tumor suppressor by inducing apoptosis and
senescence in p53-dependent manner


The physiological mechanisms that can restore biological activity of
mutant p53 is an area of high interest given that mutant p53 expression
is observed in one third of prostate cancer and more than 50% of all
cancers. Here we demonstrate that Id4 (inhibitor of differentiation-4) a
dominant negative regulator of bHLH transcription factors can restore the
mutant p53 transcriptional activity in prostate cancer cells. Id4 is
highly expressed in the normal prostate and decreased in prostate cancer
due to promoter hypermethylation. Prostate cancer cell lines: DU145
harbors mutant p53 also lack Id4 expression, and LNCaP cells with wild
type p53 express Id4, whereas PC3 cells are null for p53 and express low
levels of Id4. The p53 mutants (P223L and V274F) in DU145 cells are
within the DNA binding domain and abrogate p53 transcriptional activity
due structural de-stabilization and/or DNA interactions. Ectopic
expression of Id4 in DU145 cells resulted in increased apoptosis and
expression of BAX, PUMA and p21, the transcriptional targets of p53. DNA
binding, p53 luciferase reporter studies and ChIP analysis demonstrated
that mutant p53 gains Id4 dependent DNA binding and transcriptional
activity in part due to CBP/p300 dependent acetylation of p53 at lysine
373. Loss of Id4 in LNCaP cells also abrogated wild type p53 DNA binding
and transcriptional activity with concomitant loss of CBP/p300
requirement and decreased acetylation of p53. To further elucidate Id4
dependent restoration of biological activity of p53 we stably transfected
p53-null cell line PC3, which has endogenous Id4 with mutant p53
mimicking DU145 cells. mRNA, protein levels and apoptosis assays were
used to determine the effects on cell death and to determine if mutant
p53 had the ability to transactivate upstream/downstream targets (MDM2,
PUMA, and p21). Our results indicate that mutant p53 in PC3 cells were
able to induce expression of downstream targets as well as effect
biological processes such as apoptosis and cell cycle arrest. Also,
post-translational modifications on residues lys320 and lys373 indicated
activation of mutant p53. Collectively, based on our studies we
demonstrate that Id4 promotes post-translational modifications of p53,
which in turn regulates p53 transcriptional activity. NIH grant
#R01CA128914

