Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Windows of susceptibility to endocrine disruptors and gene
expression in mammary tissue


Breast cancer is hormonally driven. Endocrine disruptors (EDs) are
exogenous substances that mimic or antagonize endogenous hormone action
and disrupt endocrine system function. While EDs have been shown to
modulate the risk for mammary tumors in animal models, their effects at
biologically relevant doses and during critical developmental windows
remain poorly understood. We sought to examine the individual and
combinatorial effects of three common EDs, diethyl phthalate, methyl
paraben and triclosan in rats exposed at five distinct developmental
windows of susceptibility - prenatal, neonatal, prepubertal, pubertal and
parous/nulliparous. Pathological features and whole genome expression of
normal rat mammary tissues were profiled to provide both qualitative and
quantitative biological effects of EDs. ED exposure at levels comparable
to human exposure resulted in profound changes in both gross phenotypes
(e.g. reproductive mortality and mammary gland morphology) as well as in
molecular genome profiles. Specifically, ED exposure appeared to hamper
normal breast development and resulted in increased mortality in the
offspring, possibly due to reduced milk production. Whole genome
expression profiling of mammary tissues revealed that in the course of
development, the number of differentially expressed genes was lower in
ED-exposed rats compared to controls, suggesting developmental delay or
suppression by EDs. Pathway enrichment analysis indicated that several
processes including inflammation, metabolism and development were
disrupted by ED exposure. Taken together, our findings reveal novel
mechanisms of ED action in mammary development and strongly suggest the
importance of taking into account the timing of exposure when studying
the relationship between environment and disease.

