Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel small molecule cytidine analog, RX-3117, shows potent
efficacy in xenograft models, even in tumors that are resistant to
treatment with gemcitabine


RX-3117 (fluorocyclopentenylcytosine) is a novel small-molecule
chemotherapeutic agent that belongs to the class of cytotoxic
antimetabolite cytidine analogs. Cytidine analogs, including gemcitabine,
have been widely used for the treatment of various types of cancer, both
hematologic as well as solid. However, despite the success of
gemcitabine, there is no oral formulation of gemcitabine and drug
resistance is common. Thus, RX-3117 was synthesized as a oral formulation
to overcome gemcitabine resistance with a better pharmacologic profile.
In this study, the efficacy of RX-3117 was examined in 12 different human
tumor (colon, non-small cell lung, small cell lung, pancreatic, renal,
ovarian and cervical) xenograft models, grown subcutaneously in athymic
nude mice. Not only has RX-3117 demonstrated potent efficacy in several
cancer xenograft models but also oral treatment with RX-3117 results in
dose-dependent tumor growth inhibition (TGI), even in tumors that are
only moderately sensitive or resistant to gemcitabine. In the Colo-205,
H460, H69 and CaSki models, gemcitabine treatment resulted in 28%, 14%,
25%, and 0% TGI, respectively, whereas oral treatment with RX-3117
induced 93%, 91%, 62%, and 66% TGI, respectively. This indicates that
RX-3117 may have the potential to be used for the treatment of tumors
that do not respond to gemcitabine. In order to extend the results
established in cell line xenograft models, and to test efficacy in a
potentially more clinically relevant system, RX-3117 was evaluated in a
single primary low passage human pancreatic TumorgraftCTG-0298, which is
resistant to gemcitabine and has a favorable RX-3117 activating enzyme
profile. Treatment with RX-3117 resulted in dose dependent TGI and was
superior to the standard of care agent gemcitabine. This study
successfully demonstrated preliminary efficacy and therapeutic potential
of RX-3117.

