Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Application of novel phospholipid conjugated Toll like receptor 7
ligands for cancer therapy by topical and systemic administration


Introduction: Toll like receptor 7 (TLR7) activators are effective cancer
immunotherapeutic drugs. However, the only clinically approved TLR7
ligand, imiquimod (IMQ), is absorbed into the systemic circulation
inducing off-target adverse effects. To overcome this problem, we
synthesized phospholipid-conjugated TLR7-specific activators. The
objective of this project was to evaluate the safety and the anti-cancer
activities of two TLR7 ligand-phospholipid conjugates, designated TMX-201
and TMX-202.Procedures: In vitro immune activities of TLR7 agonists were
compared in human and mouse leukocytes. Anti-malignant effects were
evaluated using Inv-MycERTAM transgenic model of pre-malignant
keratinocyte proliferation and murine models of 4T1 breast cancer and B16
melanoma.Results: TMX-201 and TMX-202 were more potent cytokine inducers
than IMQ in both mouse and human mononuclear cells. TMX-201 and TMX-202
showed less off-target binding compared to IMQ. The maximum tolerated
doses of IMQ, TMX-201, and TMX-202 by i.v. administration were 15, 75 and
150 mg/kg, respectively. Topical administration of TMX-202 gel
significantly reduced acanthosis in the Inv-mycERTAM model without
inducing systemic cytokine production. Systemic administration of TMX-201
(4mg/kg) suppressed the growth of established subcutaneous B16 melanoma
by 46%, without discernible adverse effects. Systemic or intra-tumor
administration of TMX-201, in combination with anti-CTLA4 antibody,
significantly suppressed lung metastasis formation in the 4T1 breast
cancer model.Conclusion: TMX-201 and TMX-202 displayed more potent immune
stimulatory activity than IMQ with fewer off-target effects. These
phospholipid-conjugated TLR7 agonists showed anti-cancer efficacy in
three different mouse models. The new compounds may be useful topical and
systemic therapeutic agents for cancer therapy, alone or in combination
with checkpoint inhibitors.TMX-201 effect on lung metastases in the 4T1
breast cancer model

