Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Proliferative effects of the phytoestrogens 8-Prenylnaringenin,
6-(1.1-dimethylallyl)naringenin and Naringenin in MCF-7 cells and the rat
mammary gland


Evaluation of stimulation of proliferation in female reproductive organs
by phytoestrogens of reproductive tract organs is important to estimate
their safety/risk profile if used as an alternative to hormone therapy.
To assess the proliferative capacity of the flavanones 8-Prenylnaringenin
(8-PN), 6-(1.1-dimethylallyl)naringenin (6-DMAN) and Naringenin (Nar) on
the mammary gland we compared their estrogenic properties to 17-Estradiol
(E2) in three independent assays. We performed competitive estrogen
receptor (ER) ligand binding assays, MCF-7 proliferation studies and a
three day exposure experiment in young adult ovariectomized female rats.
8-PN displayed a high relative binding affinity for both ERs with a
preference for ER (19.46 %) compared to ER (6.5 %). Among the tested
flavanones 8-PN had the strongest mitotic effect on MCF-7 cells. In vivo
8-PN increased the number of terminal end buds (TEB) in the mammary gland
and the protein expression of the proliferation markers Ki-67 and PCNA in
epithelial ductal cells and further led to an increase of Amphiregulin
(Areg) mRNA expression, endpoints correlated to mammary gland
proliferation. 6-DMAN also possesses a higher relative binding affinity
for the ER than for the ER (1.46 %, 0.84 %) and stimulated the cell
proliferation of MCF-7 cells. It enhanced Ki-67 protein expression and
-Casein mRNA expression in vivo. Nar displayed the weakest estrogenic
properties and was the only tested compound with a higher affinity for
the ER than the ER (0.5 %, 0.08 %). It displayed proliferative effects on
MCF-7 cells and slightly induced Ki-67 protein expression in vivo.

