Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Vasohibine-1 negative and EZH2 positive may predict the prognosis
of cholangiocarcinoma


Background: Vasohibin-1 (VASH1) is isolated as an endogenous angiogenesis
inhibitor produced by the vascular endothelium, and the status of VASH1
expression has been documented in various cancer prognosis. Some reports
shows that VASH1 was negatively regulated by enhancer of zeste homolog 2
(EZH2) epigenetically. The aim of this study was to assess the
relationship between EZH2 and VASH1, and the prognostic value of this two
molecules in intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma (ICC) patients.Method: We
examine 47 cases of intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma to which the R0 liver
resection had been performed by our department between 1993 years and
2010. Immunohistochemical staining of VASH1 and EZH2 was performed using
paraffin-embedded block, and we examined the relation among the
expression of VASH1 and a clinicopathological factor (sex, age, tumor
diameter, tumor number, differentiation level, microscopic vascular
invasion, and metastasis in lymph node), EZH2 expression, recurrence-free
survival (RFS) and overall survival (OS).Result: VASH1 and EZH2
positivity was observed in 24 (51.1%) and 24 (51.1%) patients
respectively, and VASH1 positivity was inversely correlated with EZH2
high expression (R=0.3870, p=0.0018). VASH1 positivity was not
significantly correlate with RFS or OS. On the other hands, VASH1
negative and EZH2 positive was observed in 17 (36.2%) patients, and was a
significant disadvantage to both RFS (relative risk (RR) 3.39, 95%
confidence interval (CI) 1.28-8.67, p=0.0157) and OS (RR 3.69, 95% CI
1.20-11.2, 0.0237) in univariate Cox hazard analysis. In multivariate
analysis, VASH1 negative and EZH2 positive group was an independent risk
factor for both RFS (RR 4.19, 95% CI 1.33-13.13, p=0.0150), and OS (RR
8.11, 95% CI 2.01-42.1, p=0.0030).Conclusion: The expression of VASH1 was
inversely correlate with EZH2 expression. VASH1 negative and EZH2
positive was an independent risk factor for OS and DFS in ICC patients.

