Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Heterogeneity of vascular endothelial growth factor receptors 1,
2, and 3 in primary human colorectal adenocarcinoma


The Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor (VEGF) pathway plays an important
role in the genesis, growth and progression of human cancer, including
colorectal carcinomas (CRC). The key mediators of VEGF signaling are
VEGFR1, VEGFR2, and VEGFR3, part of a family of related receptor tyrosine
kinases. The relative expression, activity, or interplay among these
receptors may determine the response of CRC patients to anti-angiogenic
therapies. Using high-affinity, specific monoclonal primary anti-VEGFR1,
2 3 antibodies, we have developed robust imunohistochemical assays in our
laboratory to quantify VEGFR1, 2 and 3 in archival human tissues. Using a
well-annotated CRC tissue microarray (TMA), we carried out comprehensive
comparative evaluation of immunohistochemical (IHC) expression of the
three VEGFRs in archival primary CRC tissues (n=84). VEGFR1
immunoreactivity was reported as H-score (range 0-300); VEGFR2 positive
vessels were counted and normalized to the number of CD34-positive
vessels and reported as vascular positivity index (VEGFR2-VPI) and
VEGFR3-positive vessels were counted in each core by the same solid tumor
immunopathologist, who was blinded to the clinico-pathologic details.
Based on immunoreactivity for VEGFRs, each case was scored as negative,
low, medium or high. Thresholds were selected based on the overall range
of expression of each receptor in the CRC tissues examined: 0, 1-50,
51-100, >100 (VEGFR1 H-scores); 0, 1-25, 26-49, 50-100 (VEGFR2-VPI); 0,
1-5, 6-10, >10 (VEGFR3+ vascular count). Based on VEGFR (1,2,3)
expression, a set of eight VEGFR staining profiles were noted: Triple
VEGFR positive (n=9, 11%), VEGFR1 predominant (17, 20%), VEGFR2
predominant (7, 8%), VEGFR3 predominant (1, 1%), VEGFR1/2 predominant
(42, 50%), VEGFR1/3 predominant (2, 2%), VEGFR2/3 predominant (3, 4%),
and triple VEGFR negative (3, 4%). These new data provide original
insights on the distribution, subcellular localization and heterogeneity
of expression of VEGFRs in human CRC stromal vessels and tumor cells. The
proposed human CRC sub-classification, based on the observed differential
VEGFR 1, 2, 3 expression profiles, has identified various subsets of
human CRCs. Clinical trials incorporating IHC profiling would be required
to test whether these subsets show differential responsiveness to
targeted agents in the VEGF/VEGFR2 family.

