Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High serum transforming growth factor 1 levels associated with
poor survivals in patients with advanced hepatocellular carcinoma


Background: TGF- (Transforming growth factor ) signaling pathway plays a
significant role in mediating progression, metastasis, and immune evasion
of human malignancies. Previous studies have found that serum TGF-1
levels were elevated in patients with hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC)
compared to patients with chronic hepatitis or cirrhosis. However, the
prognostic role of serum TGF-1 levels in patients with advanced HCC is
currently unknown.Patients and Methods: We enrolled patients who had
received sorafenib or sorafenib-based combination therapy for advanced
HCC, defined as metastatic or locally advanced diseases not amenable to
loco-regional therapies, at National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei,
Taiwan, between 2007 and 2012. The baseline blood samples were collected
before sorafenib treatment with the consent of the patients. Serum TGF-1
levels were measured by Human TGF-1 Instant ELISA (eBioscience, Vienna,
Austria), and were correlated with disease control rate (DCR),
progression- free survival (PFS), and overall survival (OS) of the
patients.Results: The study enrolled 91 patients (M:F=82:9), with a
median age of 56.9 years. Sixty-nine patients (75.8 %) had chronic
hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection, 18 (19.7%) had chronic hepatitis C
infection, 82 (90.1%) had Barcelona Clinic Liver Cancer stage C disease,
81(89.0%) had either extrahepatic metastasis or macrovascular invasion,
and 88 (96.7%) had Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance status
of 1. All patients had Child-Puch class A liver function reserve.
Patients with high baseline serum TGF-1 levels (higher than the median
level of the whole patient cohort), compared to patients with low serum
TGF-1 levels, had significantly shorter PFS (median, 2.54 vs. 4.27
months, p = 0.022) and OS (median, 5.57 vs. 11.6 months, p = 0.029). The
DCRs for patients with high and low TGF-1 were not statistically
different (54.3 % vs. 62.2%, p = 0.4463). High baseline TGF-1 levels
tended to associate with high serum alpha-fetal protein (AFP) levels and
high Cancer of the Liver Italian Program (CLIP) scores, although not
reaching statistical significance.Conclusions: High baseline serum TGF-1
levels were associated with poor PFS and OS in patients with advanced
HCC. (This study was supported by grants NRPB-100CAP1020-2,
NSC101-2314-B-002-141 & NSC102-2314-B-002 -120).

