Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting ERBB2-induced, lysosome-mediated invasion


ErbB2 overexpression is strongly associated with invasive cancer with
high recurrence and poor prognosis. Similarly, increased expression of
lysosomal proteases, cysteine cathepsins, is observed in several cancers
and correlates with enhanced angiogenesis, invasion and metastasis. We
recently showed that ErbB2 level correlates positively with cysteine
cathepsin B and L levels in primary breast cancer and that ErbB2
regulates the expression of cathepsins B and L leading to their increased
activity in several ErbB2-positive breast cancer cell lines. The
increased cysteine cathepsin activity is essential for the invasion of
ErbB2 overexpressing breast cancer cells in 3-dimensional (3D) Matrigel
cultures and is mediated by novel signaling network that involves TGFR,
ERK2-MAPK, PAK4, PKC and CDC42bp kinases and two transcription factors,
MZF1 and ETS1.With a pharmacological protein kinase inhibitor screen,
using the ErbB2 inhibitor Lapatinib as positive control, we have now
identified three inhibitors putatively targeting this novel ErbB2-induced
signaling network. Our data shows that the treatment of ErbB2-positive,
highly invasive breast or ovarian cancer cells with any of these
inhibitors specifically reduces cysteine cathepsin expression, activity
and invasion of these cancer cells in 3D Matrigel cultures. It also
reverses lysosomal distribution from the invasion supporting pericellular
position to less-invasive perinuclear position, where the lysosomal
exocytosis and secretion of lysosome contents to extracellular space to
assist extracellular matrix proteolysis becomes less likely. In this
study we have identified novel inhibitors for ErbB2-induced invasion and
discovered a novel, function for clinically used ErbB2 inhibitor
Lapatinib in the regulation of lysosomal function and trafficking.

