Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNA-874 impedes angiogenesis in non-small cell lung cancer


MicroRNAs (miRs) are short (20-24nt) non-coding RNAs that are involved in
post-transcriptional regulation of gene expression in eukaryotes by
affecting both the stability and translation of mRNAs. MicroRNAs play
crucial roles in normal biological processes and are commonly
dysregulated in human diseases. Thus far, miRs have been shown to act as
either tumor suppressor genes or oncogenes in driving critical gene
expression pathways in cancer stem cells in a wide range of human
malignancies, including non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC).We previously
found that miR-874 could suppress tumor growth and metastasis of NSCLC.
Since angiogenesis is important for tumor growth and metastasis, in this
study, we further investigated the possible roles of miR-874 in tumor
angiogenesis. Attenuation of miR-874 expression in histological sections
of NSCLC tumors and the CD133 positive population of NSCLC cells
(NSCLC-initiating cells; NSCLC-ICs), as compared to its normal
counterparts, was observed by in situ hybridization and real time
quantitative PCR, respectively. Tumor-conditioned medium from NSCLC-ICs
induced significantly high levels of endothelial cell capillary network
and neovascularization in vivo; whereas, re-expression of miR-874 in
NSCLC-ICs inhibited this capillary network formation ability by
suppressing the protein levels of VEGF, Stat3, MMP-2, uPA and PI3K.
Further, miR-874-treatment decreased in vivo angiogenesis and
pre-established orthotopic tumor growth in nude mice as compared to mock-
and control-miR-treatments. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed a
significant decrease in the expression of VEGF, Stat3 and microvessel
density (CD31 levels) in xenograft tumor sections from miR-874-treated
mice. In conclusion, our study highlights the possible anti-angiogenic
role of miR-874 in NSCLC-initiating cells and presents a new, hopeful
therapeutic target and prognostic marker for NSCLC.

