Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gastric adenocarcinomas show pervasive loss of heterozygosity and
enrichment for STOP genes in regions of hemizygous deletion


Purpose: Gastric cancer, the second leading cause of cancer death
worldwide, has been little studied compared with other cancers that
impose similar burdens on public health. Our goal is to assess loss of
heterozygosity (LOH) and hemizygous deletion across a large series of
gastric adenocarcinomas using the most sensitive and comprehensive method
currently available.Experimental design: We used high-density
single-nucleotide-polymorphism microarrays that assay genotype and copy
number at 906,600 sites and analyzed the results to determine patterns of
LOH and hemizygous deletion in 77 gastric adenocarcinomas. We
investigated whether STOP genes - genes that tend to impede proliferation
- are associated with hemizygous deletion. We also analyzed the extent to
which hemizygous deletion affected CYCLOPS (Copy number alterations
Yielding Cancer Liabilities Owing to Partial losS) genes - genes that may
be attractive targets for therapeutic inhibition when hemizygously
deleted.Results: We found that LOH is pervasive: on average 27% of each
tumor genome is subject to LOH, and > 98% of single nucleotide
polymorphisms assayed were subject to LOH in at least 10% of tumors.
Furthermore, 26% of LOH was due to hemizygous deletion, and STOP genes
were significantly associated with regions of frequent hemizygous
deletion; on average, 61 STOP genes were hemizygously deleted per tumor.
Furthermore, on average, 4.65 CYCLOPS genes were hemizygously deleted per
tumor, and 54.5% of the tumors had at least one CYCLOPS gene
deleted.Conclusions: These findings suggest that hemizygous deletion of
anti-proliferative STOP genes contributes substantially to gastric
carcinogenesis. Furthermore, the presence of several hemizygously deleted
CYLOPS genes in some tumors suggests potential therapeutic targets in
these tumors.

