Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anticancer agent HJC0416 inhibits the growth of breast cancer
xenografts via downregulating STAT3 signaling


Signal transducers and activators of transcription (STATs) play important
roles in regulating the expression of genes activated during
tumorigenesis. Particularly, STAT3 has been shown to contribute
significantly in breast carcinogenesis and is often overexpressed in
primary breast tumors. Increased STAT3 transcriptional activity is
correlated with ER-negative phenotype in breast cancer cell lines and in
primary invasive ductal breast carcinomas. Therefore, STAT3 emerges as a
promising target for breast cancer treatment and prevention. We have
designed, synthesized and screened a series of novel STAT3 inhibitors
utilizing fragment-based drug design strategy. A number of small
molecules with novel scaffolds have been discovered with low-micromolar
to nanomolar potency in inhibiting the proliferation of various human
breast cancer and pancreatic cancer cells. The identified compound
HJC0416 significantly suppresses STAT3 promoter activity and STAT3
phosphorylation, reduces total STAT3 protein expression, induces cell
growth arrest and early apoptosis in triple-negative breast cancer cell
line MDA-MB-231. HJC0416 also demonstrated a better efficacy in
suppressing the growth of MDA-MB-231 breast xenograft tumors via
intraperitoneal and oral administrative routes, with remarkably improved
aqueous solubility and less toxicity than the lead compounds. We further
demonstrated that p70S6K and MAPK pathways mediate the inhibitory effects
from HJC0416 via downregulating RPS6, PDCD4 and EEF2K proteins. In
conclusion, the new anticancer agent HJC0416 inhibits the growth of
breast cancer xenografts via suppressing STAT3 expression and its
phosphorylation.

