Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A-803467, a sodium channel blocker, reverses ABCG2-mediated MDR


The ATP-binding cassette, subfamily G, isoform 2 protein (ABCG2) is a
vital member of the ABC transporter superfamily, which has been involved
in multidrug resistance (MDR) in cancer. Its diverse range of substrates
includes many antineoplastic agents such as doxorubicin and mitoxantrone.
ABCG2 expression has been significantly increased in some solid tumors
and hematologic malignancies, which is correlated to poorer clinical
outcomes. In addition, ABCG2 expression is a distinguishing feature of
cancer stem cells, whereby this membranous transporter imparts resistance
to the chemotherapeutic drugs. To enhance the chemosensitivity of cancer
cells, attention has been focused on MDR modulators. In this study, we
investigated the ability of sodium channel blocker, A-803467 to reverse
ABCG2-mediated MDR. We found that A-803467 at non-toxic concentration
could significantly increase the cellular sensitivity to ABCG2 substrates
in drug-resistant cells overexpressing either wild-type or mutant ABCG2.
Mechanistic studies indicated that A-803467 (7.5 M) significantly
increased the intracellular accumulation resulted from inhibition of the
efflux of mitoxantrone by inhibiting the transport activity without
altering expression level of ABCG2 protein. Furthermore, ATPase analysis
indicates that A-803467 stimulates the ATPase activity in membranes
overexpressing ABCG2. Our findings suggest that A-803467 has the
potential to be used in combination with ABCG2 chemotherapeutic
substrates to augment the response in drug resistant cancers.

