Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cytotoxic and genotoxic effects of PEG-coated gold nanoparticles
in HK-2 cells


Biomolecular functionalization of gold nanoparticles (GNP's) have led to
a dramatic expansion of their potential biomedical applications,
including biosensorics, bioimaging, photothermal therapy, and targeted
drug delivery. As the range of gold nanoparticle types and their
applications continues to increase, human safety concerns are gaining
attention, which makes it necessary to better understand the potential
toxicity hazards of these novel materials. The main objective of this
study was to determine the cytotoxic and genotoxic potential of
poly-ethylene-glycol-coated gold nanoparticles (PEG-GNPs) in HK-2 cells.
These cells were grown under sterile conditions in 96-well plate until
80% confluency. Four exposure concentrations (125, 250, 500 and 1000
g/ml) of PEG-coated GNP's and a control were used. Following exposure to
PEG-coated GNP's, cytotoxicity assay (MTS) was performed for 24 and 48
hrs using standard protocol. Genotoxic effects of GNP's were determined
measuring DNA damage using comet assay. The results demonstrated a dose
and time dependent decrease in cell viability with PEG-coated GNPs and an
increase in percent DNA damage in exposed cells compared to control. The
difference in the cytotoxic effect between 24 and 48 hrs was not
statistically significant however, the genotoxic effect was statistically
significant both in time and dose. The cellular findings reported here do
suggest that GNPs has the potential to induce cell death and cause damage
to DNA in HK-2 cells. However, more studies to clarify the role of
encapsulation in the in vitro toxicity of GNP's, are required and
parallel comparison is preferred.Note: This abstract was not presented at
the meeting.

