Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Doctor


Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the second most common internal cancer in
Australia and the second leading cause of cancer death with > 4,400
deaths in 2007 [1]. Currently there are greater than 14,000 newly
diagnosed cases annually in Australia with direct costs of over $2
billion per annum [1]. Worldwide, there is an annual incidence of almost
a million CRC cases with an annual mortality around 600,000 [2].
Unfortunately, 30-50% of patients have occult or overt metastases at
presentation and once tumours have metastasised prognosis is very poor
with a five year survival of less than 10% [3]. By contrast, greater than
90% of patients who present while the tumour is still localised (Dukes'
stage A) will still be alive after 5 years and can be considered cured.
The early detection of CRC and clinically significant pre-cancerous
lesions (adenomas) would therefore significantly reduce the health burden
of this disease [3]. Currently the only widely used non-invasive
screening test for CRC is the faecal occult blood test (FOBT). Even
though screening with FOBT has been shown to lead to reductions in CRC
incidence and mortality, there are significant issues that limit its
effectiveness as a diagnostic screening tool, such as a poor positive
predictive value of 5.3% for suspected cancer and low participation rate
of approximately 35% as seen in the Australian National Bowel Cancer
Screening Program. To overcome some of the limitations of the FOBT, we
believe that a blood test may increase participation rates and could
provide a useful adjunct to FOBTIn our recent studies we screened over 65
candidate CRC biomarkers using both commercially sourced ELISA kits and
reagents developed in-house, in more than 550 CRC patients and controls
that were collected with strict SOP based on the EDRN and HuPO. Using
logistic regression, we have defined a panel of 3 blood-borne protein
biomarkers that differentiates between CRC and normal patient sera with
95% specificity and 75% sensitivity in a single measurement (c.f. FOBT:
sensitivity 65.8%, specificity 95% [4]). Currently we are prospectively
collecting a new cohort of over 1,000 blood samples from volunteers that
have undergone colonoscopy, that include CRC patients , controls and
other pathologies (IBD, other cancers etc) to specifically determine the
performance of this blood test in asymptomatic and surveillance screening
populations.1. Australian Institute for Health and Welfare and
Australasian Association of Cancer Registries 2010. Cancer in Australia:
an overview, 2010. Cancer series no. 60. Cat. No. CAN 56. Canberra:
AIHW.2. Weitz, J., et al., Colorectal cancer. Lancet, 2005. 365(9454): p.
153-653. Etzioni, R., et al., The case for early detection. Nat Rev
Cancer, 2003. 3(4): p. 243-52.4. Morikawa, T., et al., A comparison of
the immunochemical fecal occult blood test and total colonoscopy in the
asymptomatic population. Gastroenterology, 2005. 129(2): p. 422-8.Note:
This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

