Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Glutamine mediated aggressiveness and drug sensitivity in ovarian
cancer cells


Platinum-based drugs such as cisplatin, carboplatin and xoaliplatin hav
been introduced into clinical trials and their outcomes has progressed
the treatment on several tumors, including ovarian cancer. However,
cancer cells acquire chemo-resistance in the long term incubation of
drugs, which turns out to be the major limitation for cancer therapy.
Recent studies have shown that cisplatin can accumulate in mitochondria
and induce cytochrome C release, thereby resulting in apoptosis. We found
that glutamine plays a vital role in maintaining mitochondrial integrity
and function by regulating NAD+ and NADH. Using bioenergetics and
isotopomer analysis we show that chemodrugs in presence of glutamine
affect oxidative phosphorylation in drug sensitive parental ovarian
cancer cells. Addition of NAD+ substrates increased NAD/NADH ratio
abrogating cisplatin's effect on cell death and mitochondrial
dysfunction. Furthermore, drug resistant cancer cells had relatively
higher glutamine dependence when compared with parental cells.
Importantly, we found that when glutamine's entry into TCA cycle was
inhibited ovarian cancer cells became more sensitive to chemotherapy. Our
findings are based on the quantification of metabolites, related to
glycolysis, the pentose phosphate pathway, the TCA and urea cycles, and
amino acids and nucleotide metabolism, and comparison of these pathways
fluxes in drug sensitive and drug resistant ovarian cancer. The insights
obtained present a unique opportunity for overcoming the drug resistance
limitation in clinical trials in ovarian cancers.

