Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting of cyclin D/Rb/E2F and PI3K/AKT/MTOR pathways with ON
123300 as a therapeutic strategy for mantle cell lymphoma


Introduction: This study describes the development of a novel dual
specificity kinase inhibitor, ON 123300, which exhibits potent activity
against Mantle Cell Lymphomas (MCLs) both in vitro and in vivo. Mantle
cell lymphoma is genetically characterized by the t(11;14)(q13;q32)
chromosomal translocation which results in constitutive overexpression of
cyclin D1. In addition, MCLs also activate other pathways, including
aberrant B-Cell Receptor and PI3K/AKT/mTOR signaling. As a result, MCL
has a poor clinical outcome with a median survival of 4-5 years. In this
study, we show that ON123300, which inhibits both CDK4/6 and PI3K- (the
predominant PI3K catalytic subunit expressed in MCL cells), is a superior
inducer of apoptosis of MCL cells when compared to PD0332991, a selective
inhibitor of CDK4/6 kinases.Experimental Procedures: We examined the
effects of PD 0332991 and ON123300 on cell cycle progression, modulation
of the Rb and PI3K/AKT pathways, and the induction of apoptosis in the
Granta 519 and Z138C mantle cell lymphoma cell lines. When Granta 519 and
Z138C cells were incubated with increasing concentrations of PD 0332991
and ON 123300, both compounds efficienty inhibited the phosphorylation of
the Rb family of proteins. However, ON123300 showed
concentration-dependent inhibition of MTOR, AKT, 4EBP1 and S6RB
phosphorylation while PD 0332991 had no effect on the phosphorylation
status of these proteins. While cells treated with PD 0332991 rapidly
accumulated in the G0/G1 stage of cell cycle, cells treated with ON123300
showed an accumulation of cells with a sub-G1 DNA content. These ON123300
treated cells showed cleavage of PARP as well as Caspases 3, 7 and 9 and
inhibition of FOXO1 phosphorylation, which was not observed in cells
treated with PD 0332991. We tested the effects of ON 123300 in nude mouse
xenograft assays using Z138 MCL cells. These studies revealed a strong
inhibition of tumor growth when tumor-bearing mice were treated daily
with 100 mg/kg of ON123300. In addition, there was little evidence of
toxicity as measured by change in the body weight in ON123300-treated
mice.Conclusions: ON123300 targets the CyclinD/CDK/Rb pathway as well as
the PI3K/AKT/MTOR pathway to induce apoptosis of MCL cells via intrinsic
apoptotic pathways. Mouse xenograft assays show that ON 123300 is a
strong inhibitor of MCL tumor growth in vivo. This dual activity against
Rb and AKT pathways appears to be an effective therapeutic strategy for
the treatment of MCL.

