Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dalantercept, an ALK1 inhibitor of angiogenesis, in combination
with cisplatin inhibits tumor growth in a xenograft model of squamous
cell carcinoma of the head and neck


Activin receptor-like kinase 1 (ALK1) is a key regulator of angiogenesis
and vascular morphogenesis. ALK1 and its co-receptor endoglin are
selectively expressed on the surface of activated endothelial cells
during angiogenesis. Bone morphogenetic proteins (BMP) 9 and 10 are
ligands that bind to ALK1 and induce activation of the heteromeric
receptor complex, phosphorylation of SMAD1/5/8, and upregulation of
specific genes involved in the maturation stage of angiogenesis, such as
Id-1 and TMEM100. In particular, BMP9 expression is upregulated in a
majority of squamous cell carcinomas of the head and neck
(SCCHN).Dalantercept is an ALK1 extracellular domain-Fc fusion protein
that binds BMP9 and BMP10 with high affinity and antagonizes ALK1
signaling in vivo resulting in defective vascular maturation and
inhibition of tumor growth in preclinical models. In a completed Phase 1
trial in patients with advanced, refractory solid tumors dalantercept
demonstrated signs of clinical activity in a variety of patients,
including two of three patients with SCCHN who achieved either an
objective response or prolonged stable disease. A Phase 2 trial of
dalantercept as monotherapy in recurrent/metastatic SCCHN patients who
have had prior platinum-based chemotherapy is currently ongoing.Based
upon the single agent activity of both dalantercept and cisplatin in
SCCHN, we tested the feasibility of the combination of cisplatin plus
dalantercept in a mouse model of SCCHN. Combination treatment of
dalantercept plus cisplatin showed significant tumor growth inhibition
(TGI) in the RPMI2650 xenograft model (59% TGI on day 30) which was
significantly better than either cisplatin (35% TGI, p= 0.0077) or
dalantercept (32% TGI, p=0.0002) alone. No additional toxicity was
observed in the combination treatment group compared to cisplatin
monotherapy group.These data suggest that combination of dalantercept
plus cisplatin may result in enhanced clinical activity and supports
prospective evaluation in patients with SCCHN.

