Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Knockdown or inhibition of Aldo-keto reductase 1B10 inhibits
pancreatic carcinogenesis via modulating Kras-E-cadherin pathway


Aldo-keto reductase 1B10 (AKR1B10) is an essential enzyme in the
metabolism of carbonyls, retinal and farnesal/geranylgeranial for
maintaining cellular homeostasis of retinal-retinoid acid, detoxifying
the active carbonyls, and recycling key intermediate products of
cholesterol synthesis. All of these biologic processes are crucial
contributing to carcinogenesis, particularly the reduction of
farnesal/geranylgeranial involves in protein prenylation and for mutant
K-ras activity. Mutant K-ras is a most common oncogene in pancreatic
cancer, and over expression of AKR1B10 has been identified in pancreatic
cancer. To determine the role of AKR1B10 in pancreatic carcinogenesis,
silencing of AKR1B10 was achieved in CD18 human pancreatic carcinoma cell
line using shRNA knockdown approach. Silencing of AKR1B10 resulted in a
significant inhibition of anchor-dependent growth (shRNA AKR1B10
knockdown cells compared to vector-control cells 67 9.5 colonies/HPF vs
170 3.7 colonies/HPF, P Aldo-keto reductase 1B10 (AKR1B10) is an
essential enzyme in the metabolism of carbonyls, retinal and
farnesal/geranylgeranial for maintaining cellular homeostasis of
retinal-retinoid acid, detoxifying the active carbonyls, and recycling
key intermediate products of cholesterol synthesis. All of these biologic
processes are crucial contributing to carcinogenesis, particularly the
reduction of farnesal/geranylgeranial involves in protein prenylation and
for mutant K-ras activity. Mutant K-ras is a most common oncogene in
pancreatic cancer, and over expression of AKR1B10 has been identified in
pancreatic cancer. To determine the role of AKR1B10 in pancreatic
carcinogenesis, silencing of AKR1B10 was achieved in CD18 human
pancreatic carcinoma cell line using shRNA knockdown approach. Silencing
of AKR1B10 resulted in a significant inhibition of anchor-dependent
growth (shRNA AKR1B10 knockdown cells compared to vector-control cells 67
9.5 colonies/HPF vs 170 3.7 colonies/HPF, P < 0.01), invasion index (0.27
vs. 1.00, pAldo-keto reductase 1B10 (AKR1B10) is an essential enzyme in
the metabolism of carbonyls, retinal and farnesal/geranylgeranial for
maintaining cellular homeostasis of retinal-retinoid acid, detoxifying
the active carbonyls, and recycling key intermediate products of
cholesterol synthesis. All of these biologic processes are crucial
contributing to carcinogenesis, particularly the reduction of
farnesal/geranylgeranial involves in protein prenylation and for mutant
K-ras activity. Mutant K-ras is a most common oncogene in pancreatic
cancer, and over expression of AKR1B10 has been identified in pancreatic
cancer. To determine the role of AKR1B10 in pancreatic carcinogenesis,
silencing of AKR1B10 was achieved in CD18 human pancreatic carcinoma cell
line using shRNA knockdown approach. Silencing of AKR1B10 resulted in a
significant inhibition of anchor-dependent growth (shRNA AKR1B10
knockdown cells compared to vector-control cells 67 9.5 colonies/HPF vs
170 3.7 colonies/HPF, P < 0.01), invasion index (0.27 vs. 1.00, p<0.05),
and cell migration (at 16 hours 9.2 1.2% vs 14.0 1.8%, at 24 hours 21.0
1.1% vs 30.5 3.5%, and at 48 hours 51.9 5.7% vs 88.9 3.0%, P Aldo-keto
reductase 1B10 (AKR1B10) is an essential enzyme in the metabolism of
carbonyls, retinal and farnesal/geranylgeranial for maintaining cellular
homeostasis of retinal-retinoid acid, detoxifying the active carbonyls,
and recycling key intermediate products of cholesterol synthesis. All of
these biologic processes are crucial contributing to carcinogenesis,
particularly the reduction of farnesal/geranylgeranial involves in
protein prenylation and for mutant K-ras activity. Mutant K-ras is a most
common oncogene in pancreatic cancer, and over expression of AKR1B10 has
been identified in pancreatic cancer. To determine the role of AKR1B10 in
pancreatic carcinogenesis, silencing of AKR1B10 was achieved in CD18
human pancreatic carcinoma cell line using shRNA knockdown approach.
Silencing of AKR1B10 resulted in a significant inhibition of
anchor-dependent growth (shRNA AKR1B10 knockdown cells compared to
vector-control cells 67 9.5 colonies/HPF vs 170 3.7 colonies/HPF, P <
0.01), invasion index (0.27 vs. 1.00, p<0.05), and cell migration (at 16
hours 9.2 1.2% vs 14.0 1.8%, at 24 hours 21.0 1.1% vs 30.5 3.5%, and at
48 hours 51.9 5.7% vs 88.9 3.0%, P < 0.01). Oleanolic acid (OA), a
naturally occurring triterpenoid compound, showed a potent inhibition of
AKR1B10 activity and a dose-dependent inhibition of cell growth with IC50
at 30M. K-ras pull-down and Western blot analysis revealed a significant
down-regulation of active form K-ras and phosphorylated C-Raf, and ErK,as
well as an up-regulation of E-cadherin by either AKR1B10 knockdown or
inhibition. A significant reduction of in vivo tumor growth was observed
in nude mice implanted the CD18 pancreatic carcinoma cells with shRNA
AKR1B10 knockdown (tumor weight: 0.25 0.06g vs. 0.52 0.07g, P = 0.01),
and with AKR1B10 inhibitor OA (tumor weight: 0.35 0.05g vs. 0.52 0.07g, P
= 0.05). Our findings indicate AKR1B10 is a unique enzyme involved in
pancreatic carcinogenesis possibly via modulation of protein prenylation
(KRAS)-E-Cadherin pathway. (supported by NIH R01CA164041)Note: This
abstract was not presented at the meeting.

