Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A porphodimethene chemical inhibitor of uroporphyrinogen
decarboxylase


Uroporphyrinogen decarboxylase (UROD), a heme biosynthetic pathway enzyme
that converts uroporphyrinogen to coproporphyrinogen, was recently
identified as a potential anticancer target. UROD inhibition leads to an
increase in reactive oxygen species (ROS), likely mediated by the Fenton
reaction, which decreases cancer cell viability and sensitizes cells to
cisplatin and radiation. Because there is no known chemical UROD
inhibitor suitable for translational research, we aimed to design,
synthesize, and characterize such a compound. In silico design and
docking was used to identify a potential porphyrin analogue. Subsequent
synthesis produced a porphodimethene (named PI-16) that inhibited UROD in
an enzymatic assay (IC50 = 9.9 M). PI-16 did not affect porphobilinogen
deaminase (at 62.5 M), thereby exhibiting some specificity. In cellular
assays, PI-16 reduced FaDu and ME-180 cancer cell viability with half
maximal effective concentrations of 22.7 M and 26.9 M, respectively,
whereas normal oral epithelial (NOE) cells were only minimally affected.
PI-16 combined effectively with cisplatin and radiation, with potent
synergy being observed with cisplatin (Chou-Talalay combination index
Uroporphyrinogen decarboxylase (UROD), a heme biosynthetic pathway enzyme
that converts uroporphyrinogen to coproporphyrinogen, was recently
identified as a potential anticancer target. UROD inhibition leads to an
increase in reactive oxygen species (ROS), likely mediated by the Fenton
reaction, which decreases cancer cell viability and sensitizes cells to
cisplatin and radiation. Because there is no known chemical UROD
inhibitor suitable for translational research, we aimed to design,
synthesize, and characterize such a compound. In silico design and
docking was used to identify a potential porphyrin analogue. Subsequent
synthesis produced a porphodimethene (named PI-16) that inhibited UROD in
an enzymatic assay (IC50 = 9.9 M). PI-16 did not affect porphobilinogen
deaminase (at 62.5 M), thereby exhibiting some specificity. In cellular
assays, PI-16 reduced FaDu and ME-180 cancer cell viability with half
maximal effective concentrations of 22.7 M and 26.9 M, respectively,
whereas normal oral epithelial (NOE) cells were only minimally affected.
PI-16 combined effectively with cisplatin and radiation, with potent
synergy being observed with cisplatin (Chou-Talalay combination index <
1). This work presents the first known synthetic UROD inhibitor, and sets
the foundation for the design, synthesis, and characterization of higher
affinity and more effective compounds.

