Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: From chemoprevention strategy to identification of potential
therapeutic targets and biomarkers for breast cancer


Over the years, several phyto-compounds have been extensively used in
Complementary Alternative Medicine (CAM) studies, individually and often
at higher doses to kill cancer cells. Based on the combination and
synergism theory, we had previously demonstrated that a combination of
Resveratrol and Indole-3-Carbinol synergized and killed a maximum number
of Breast Cancer cells. In the present study, we have tested various
combinations of 10 well known phytochemicals, used at bioavailable
levels, for their effect on cell growth and proliferation of the
MDA-MB-231; breast cancer (BC) cell line and MCF-10A; normal breast
epithelium as control cell line. The results revealed a super combination
of 7 phyto-compounds (7SC), that synergized and induced 100% clearance of
the BC cells but did not affect the normal breast epithelial cells. Next,
in order to understand the underlying molecular mechanisms of this
synergism effect, microarray analysis will be conducted on the mRNA
collected from the 7SC treated and control cells at 12 and 24 hour time
points. Ongoing in vivo experiments aim to evaluate the efficacy of the
7SC phyto-compound treatment in preventing tumor growth using xenograft
mouse BC model, and further validate the functional relevance of these
genes in BC cell growth and survival. The data supports our hypothesis
that the 7SC could be used in CAM as a dietary supplement approach
against BC, and further identify genes that have the potential to serve
as biomarkers and gene candidate to guide the design of appropriate
anti-BC therapeutic strategies.Note: This abstract was not presented at
the meeting.

