Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Primary and acquired resistance to HERs inhibition in colorectal
cancer cells: All HERs go to RAS


The monoclonal antibodies cetuximab and panitumumab are approved for the
treatment of metastatic colorectal cancers (mCRC). When used as
monotherapy, the anti-EGFR antibodies are effective in approximately 15%
of patients. It is now well established that colorectal tumors carrying
KRAS and BRAF mutations (40%) are refractory to EGFR targeted therapies
(primary resistance). Virtually all-responsive patients eventually become
insensitive to anti-EGFR antibodies (secondary resistance) within 3 to 12
months of initiating therapy. Primary and acquired resistance therefore
limits the clinical benefit of EGFR blockade in CRC patients.We
postulated that concomitant inhibition of multiple members of the HER
(ErbB) receptors family might suppress the growth of CRC cells more
effectively than selectively targeting only the EGFR with cetuximab or
panitumumab.Accordingly, we assessed the pharmacological activity of
momelotinib and afatinib- two pan-HER tyrosine kinase inhibitors- in a
collection of 40 CRC cell lines, which recapitulate the genetic profiles
commonly detected in CRC patients. We report that primary resistance to
pan-HER inhibition is associated with KRAS and BRAF mutations thus
suggesting that this patients' population will unlikely benefit from
momelotinib and afatinib treatments. Notably, however, pan-HER blockade
was effective in a subset of KRAS/BRAF wild type CRC cell lines
refractory to cetuximab and panitumumab indicating that a subgroup of
patients, which do not benefit from EGFR blockade, may profit from
pan-HER inhibition.To define the molecular mechanisms of acquired
resistance to ErbB inhibitors, three KRAS/BRAF/NRAS wild type CRC cell
models were continuously treated with cetuximab, momelotinib and
afatinib, until resistant derivatives emerged. Genetic characterization
of such derivatives unveiled that, regardless of the drug used, the
resistant populations were a mixture of clones carrying distinctive
mutations in KRAS or NRAS. Detailed biochemical analyses of the ErbB
signalling pathway revealed that resistant variants displayed high levels
of MEK and ERK activation, which persisted upon ErbBs
inhibition.Collectively, these results identify KRAS, BRAF and NRAS
mutations as major drivers of primary and/or acquired resistance to HERs
inhibition in colorectal cancer cells and suggest that a molecularly
defined subset of CRC patients might benefit from pan-HER blockade.

