Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Serum sCD23 and sCD30 associated with non-Hodgkin lymphoma risk as
far as 15 to 23 years after blood collection


Background: We and other investigators have recently reported
associations between elevated serum concentrations of selected immune
markers and subsequent risk of non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL). While these
findings support a role for subtle immunologic effects in
lymphomagenesis, the relatively short length of follow-up after
phlebotomy in these studies (10-13 years) limits the ability to rule out
reverse causation as an explanation for these findings. To clarify the
temporal nature of these associations, we conducted a nested case-control
study investigating serum levels of six immune markers and NHL diagnosed
up to 23 years after phlebotomy within the Alpha-Tocopherol,
Beta-Carotene Cancer Prevention (ATBC) Study, a cohort with banked
fasting serum from 29,133 male Finnish smokers.Methods: We selected 272
first-primary NHL cases diagnosed 2+ years after phlebotomy, identified
through linkage with the Finnish Cancer Registry, and 325 controls
individually matched to cases on baseline age, phlebotomy date, and
number of previous specimen thaws. Serum from these individuals were
tested for soluble CD23 (sCD23), sCD27, sCD30, B cell attracting
chemokine-1 (BCA-1), soluble tumor necrosis factor receptor-2 (sTNFR-2),
and soluble vascular endothelial growth factor receptor-2. Odds ratios
(OR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) relating categories of analyte
concentration to NHL risk were computed through conditional logistic
regression with adjustment for cigarette pack-years. Polytomous
regression models were also fit to compute ORs for the two most common
NHL histologic subtypes, chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) and diffuse
large B cell lymphoma (DLBCL).Results: We observed NHL associations with
elevated pre-diagnostic concentrations of the B cell activation markers
sCD23 (highest analyte category vs. lowest: OR 2.4, 95% CI 1.5-3.8,
Ptrend = 0.0005) and sCD30 (OR 3.3, 95% CI 1.9-5.5, Ptrend 8 years
post-phlebotomy.Conclusions: Our study provides strong evidence that
elevated serum sCD23 and sCD30 are associated with future risk of NHL
many years after blood collection. Our findings for these B cell
activation markers suggest that B cell activation is an important
mechanism in NHL development in the general population.

