Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Immunologic effects of a HER2 peptide (GP2) vaccine booster in
previously vaccinated breast cancer patients


Background: We have conducted clinical trials of the HER2 peptide GP2
(MHC Class I restricted) vaccine in clinically disease-free breast cancer
patients. Our Phase I/II trials showed the GP2+GM-CSF vaccine to be safe
and effective in stimulating clonal expansion of GP2-specific cytotoxic
CD8+ T-cells (GP2-CTLs) with anti-tumor activity. Here, we present data
regarding the safety and immunologic response to boosters following
completion of the primary vaccination series (PVS). Methods: Following
completion of their PVS, patients enrolled on our phase II trial were
administered booster inoculations every 6 months for 4 doses (500mcg GP2
peptide + 125mcg GM-CSF in the vaccine group (VG) or 125mcg GM-CSF alone
in the control group (CG)). HLA A2- controls from the parallel study arm
evaluating the HER2 peptide AE37 (MHC Class II restricted) vaccine were
also eligible for evaluation as an extended CG (ECG). Patients were
monitored for local and systemic toxicity, local reactions (LR) were
measured, and GP2-CTLs were quantified using the HLA-A2:IgG dimer assay.
Results: We have enrolled 294 patients (83 VG, 66 CG, and 145 ECG).
Forty-six VG and 104 control (CG + ECG) have received booster doses.
Boosters were well tolerated overall with toxicities comparable between
VG and CG+ECG (Local: Gr 0: 2% vs 2%, Gr 1: 85% vs 93%, Gr 2: 13% vs 9%;
Systemic: Gr 0: 52% vs 52%, Gr 1: 46% vs 45% , Gr 2: 0% vs 2%, Gr 3: 2%
vs 1% ). Mean LR increased from booster 1 (B1) to booster 4 (B4) in the
VG (B1: 63.8mm, B2: 66.0mm, B3: 85.2mm, B4: 72.6mm) and declined in the
CG (B1: 47.8mm, B2: 43.8mm, B3: 40.2mm, B4: 37.8mm). Patients receiving
B1 at 6 months after PVS in the VG group (n=46) were defined as early
booster (EB, n=30), and those receiving B1 >6 months after PVS were
defined as late booster (LB, n=16). GP2-CTLs prior to B1 were lower in LB
patients (LB, 0.550.17 vs. EB, 1.000.16, p=0.07). Post-booster GP2-CTLs
were compared between LB and EB at B1 (0.990.15 vs. 1.170.25, p=0.82), B2
(0.680.11 vs. 0.920.21, p=0.32), B3 (0.790.13 vs. 2.300.64, p=0.003), and
B4 (1.080.43 vs. 3.37, p=na) respectively. EB post-booster GP2-CTLs
levels were greater than LB at all time points although both groups
sustained an increase in GP2-CTLs throughout the booster series.
Conclusions: The GP2 peptide vaccine and boosters are safe with
toxicities likely attributable to GM-CSF. The GP2 vaccine elicits a
strong HER2-specific immune response that can be maintained with
boosters. Based on these data, an optimal booster regimen is being
devised.

