Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HMGB1 regulates pancreatic cancer initiation and pogression


Most pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC), an almost uniformly lethal
disease, is thought to arise from well-defined, non-invasive precursor
lesions, termed pancreatic ductal intraepithelial neoplastic lesions
(PanINs). Studies of human pancreatic carcinogenesis have been greatly
facilitated by the development of a genetically engineered mouse model
that expresses oncogenic K-Ras under a pancreatic promoter
Pdx1-Cre:KrasG12D/+. A more detailed understanding of how this pathway
accelerates pancreatic carcinogenesis may allow improved early detection,
prevention, and therapeutic strategies. Our recent studies demonstrate
that high mobility group box 1 (HMGB1) is a critical regulator of
autophagy, a major pathway for degradation of effete proteins and damaged
organelles. We found that conditional genetic ablation of HMGB1 limited
to the pancreas (Pdx1-Cre;K-Ras G12D/+;HMGB1-/-; termed KCH mice)
inhibits autophagy, promotes proliferation, activates normally quiescent
pathways, and renders mice extraordinarily sensitive to
K-RasG12D/+-driven pancreatic carcinogenesis. We found that the
progression of PanINs from low grade PanIN1 to high grade PanIN3 was
observed as early as three-seven days (normally three-nine months) after
birth in KCH mice, suggesting a critical role of HMGB1 in regulation of
the earliest events during pancreatic carcinogenesis. This
extraordinarily rapid murine pancreatic cancer model that we have created
will allow us to dissect the mechanism by which loss of HMGB1 contributes
to the process.

