Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Silencing RBBP6 (retinoblastoma binding protein 6) sensitizes
breast cancer cells to staurosporine and camptothecin-induced cell death


Retinoblastoma Binding Protein 6 (RBBP6) is a multi-domain protein that
uses its ring finger domain to interact with p53 and pRb tumour
suppressor genes. The mechanism by which RBBP6 uses to degrade p53 is
still unknown; nonetheless it is well known that RBBP6 promotes cell
proliferation in several cancers by negatively regulating p53 via its E3
ubiquitin ligase activity (Ntwasa, 2008). Degradation of p53 by RBBP6 may
compromise p53-mediated apoptosis in breast cancer.This study is intended
to investigate, the potential applications of RNA interference (RNAi) to
block RBBP6 expression, as well as its subsequent effect on cell growth
and apoptosis. To achieve these methodologies the following techniques
were used: RT-PCR, western blotting, xCELLigence system and flow
cytometry. Our studies indicate that the knockdown of RBBP6 expression by
siRNA modulates p53 gene involved in cell death pathways and apoptosis,
showing statistically significant gene expression differences. RBBP6
siRNA significantly reduced cell index (CI) compared to the control
samples and we observed an inhibition of cellular proliferation in the
interval of between 24 and 48 h, as shown in the data obtained by dynamic
evaluation using the xCELLigence System. These results were further
confirmed by flow cytometer which showed some apoptotic activity. About
20.7% increase in apoptosis was observed in cells co-treated with RBBP6
siRNA and camptothecin when compared to camptothecin-only whereas in
siRBBP6 and Staurosporine treated there was only 8.8% increase in
apoptosis. These findings suggest that silencing RBBP6 may be a novel
strategy to promote staurosporine- and camptothecin-induced apoptosis in
breast cancer cells.

