Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Influence of the blood-brain barrier on drug distribution and
efficacy of PI3K/mTOR inhibitors


Drug delivery to glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is influenced by the
presence of blood-brain barrier (BBB). PI3K/mTOR/AKT is frequently
dysregulated in GBM and some agents targeting this pathway have limited
distribution across the BBB due to activity of efflux transporters
p-glycoprotein (P-gp) and breast cancer resistance protein1 (BCRP1).
GNE-317 and GDC-0980 are structurally related PI3K/mTOR inhibitors with
the former molecule optimized for brain delivery. Here the influence of
the BBB on tumor distribution and resultant efficacy was evaluated in
flank and intracranial tumors. Pharmacokinetic-pharmacodynamic approaches
were used in GBM10 (patient-derived) and U87 (cell line) orthotopic
xenograft models to evaluate the influence of delivery on efficacy. We
investigated the brain distribution of GNE-317 and GDC-0980 in
tumor-bearing (GBM10 and U87) athymic nu/nu mice and non-tumor-bearing
(FVBn) mice. BBB-integrity in both GBM10 and U87-models was evaluated
using Texas-Red(TR)-linked 3kD dextran prior to euthanasia. GNE-317 and
GDC-0980 were administered orally at 30mg/kg and 7.5mg/kg, respectively,
for all studies. Brain distribution studies were performed in FVB-wild
type (WT) and P-gp/Bcrp knockout mice (TKO) and brain and plasma
exposures (area-under-curve, AUC) were determined. Comparison of tumor
pharmacokinetic-pharmacodynamic endpoints at 1- and 6-hr post single oral
dose will be reported. GBM10 showed heterogeneous disruption of
BBB-integrity, while U87 tumors exhibited homogenous and uniform
disruption of BBB by analysis of TR-dextran accumulation within
orthotopic xenografts. The brain-to-plasma AUC0-tlast ratio in FVBn-wild
type was 10-fold higher in GNE-317(0.75) vs. GDC-0980 (0.07). Survival
studies in intracranial tumors with U87 demonstrated no difference in
survival between the GNE-317 vs. GDC-0980 treated groups (median
survival26 days (GNE-317), 34 days(GDC-0980), p=0.07), and both
treatments significantly extended survival compared to vehicle control
(pDrug delivery to glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is influenced by the
presence of blood-brain barrier (BBB). PI3K/mTOR/AKT is frequently
dysregulated in GBM and some agents targeting this pathway have limited
distribution across the BBB due to activity of efflux transporters
p-glycoprotein (P-gp) and breast cancer resistance protein1 (BCRP1).
GNE-317 and GDC-0980 are structurally related PI3K/mTOR inhibitors with
the former molecule optimized for brain delivery. Here the influence of
the BBB on tumor distribution and resultant efficacy was evaluated in
flank and intracranial tumors. Pharmacokinetic-pharmacodynamic approaches
were used in GBM10 (patient-derived) and U87 (cell line) orthotopic
xenograft models to evaluate the influence of delivery on efficacy. We
investigated the brain distribution of GNE-317 and GDC-0980 in
tumor-bearing (GBM10 and U87) athymic nu/nu mice and non-tumor-bearing
(FVBn) mice. BBB-integrity in both GBM10 and U87-models was evaluated
using Texas-Red(TR)-linked 3kD dextran prior to euthanasia. GNE-317 and
GDC-0980 were administered orally at 30mg/kg and 7.5mg/kg, respectively,
for all studies. Brain distribution studies were performed in FVB-wild
type (WT) and P-gp/Bcrp knockout mice (TKO) and brain and plasma
exposures (area-under-curve, AUC) were determined. Comparison of tumor
pharmacokinetic-pharmacodynamic endpoints at 1- and 6-hr post single oral
dose will be reported. GBM10 showed heterogeneous disruption of
BBB-integrity, while U87 tumors exhibited homogenous and uniform
disruption of BBB by analysis of TR-dextran accumulation within
orthotopic xenografts. The brain-to-plasma AUC0-tlast ratio in FVBn-wild
type was 10-fold higher in GNE-317(0.75) vs. GDC-0980 (0.07). Survival
studies in intracranial tumors with U87 demonstrated no difference in
survival between the GNE-317 vs. GDC-0980 treated groups (median
survival26 days (GNE-317), 34 days(GDC-0980), p=0.07), and both
treatments significantly extended survival compared to vehicle control
(p<0.0003, 12 days). Survival with GNE-317 in GBM10 xenografts (median
survival 42 days vs. 35 days for control, pDrug delivery to glioblastoma
multiforme (GBM) is influenced by the presence of blood-brain barrier
(BBB). PI3K/mTOR/AKT is frequently dysregulated in GBM and some agents
targeting this pathway have limited distribution across the BBB due to
activity of efflux transporters p-glycoprotein (P-gp) and breast cancer
resistance protein1 (BCRP1). GNE-317 and GDC-0980 are structurally
related PI3K/mTOR inhibitors with the former molecule optimized for brain
delivery. Here the influence of the BBB on tumor distribution and
resultant efficacy was evaluated in flank and intracranial tumors.
Pharmacokinetic-pharmacodynamic approaches were used in GBM10
(patient-derived) and U87 (cell line) orthotopic xenograft models to
evaluate the influence of delivery on efficacy. We investigated the brain
distribution of GNE-317 and GDC-0980 in tumor-bearing (GBM10 and U87)
athymic nu/nu mice and non-tumor-bearing (FVBn) mice. BBB-integrity in
both GBM10 and U87-models was evaluated using Texas-Red(TR)-linked 3kD
dextran prior to euthanasia. GNE-317 and GDC-0980 were administered
orally at 30mg/kg and 7.5mg/kg, respectively, for all studies. Brain
distribution studies were performed in FVB-wild type (WT) and P-gp/Bcrp
knockout mice (TKO) and brain and plasma exposures (area-under-curve,
AUC) were determined. Comparison of tumor pharmacokinetic-pharmacodynamic
endpoints at 1- and 6-hr post single oral dose will be reported. GBM10
showed heterogeneous disruption of BBB-integrity, while U87 tumors
exhibited homogenous and uniform disruption of BBB by analysis of
TR-dextran accumulation within orthotopic xenografts. The brain-to-plasma
AUC0-tlast ratio in FVBn-wild type was 10-fold higher in GNE-317(0.75)
vs. GDC-0980 (0.07). Survival studies in intracranial tumors with U87
demonstrated no difference in survival between the GNE-317 vs. GDC-0980
treated groups (median survival26 days (GNE-317), 34 days(GDC-0980),
p=0.07), and both treatments significantly extended survival compared to
vehicle control (p<0.0003, 12 days). Survival with GNE-317 in GBM10
xenografts (median survival 42 days vs. 35 days for control, p<0.0003)
was greater than the GDC-0980 treated group (median survival 32 days vs.
35 days in control, p=0.79); both treatments were not significantly
different from each other (p=0.08). To evaluate the relative efficacy in
the complete absence of the BBB, the effects on tumor growth are being
evaluated in flank tumor models. These studies demonstrate that efficacy
of a PI3K/mTOR inhibitor with low brain penetrance (GDC-0980) is
marginally inferior to the related brain penetrant GNE-317 in tumor
models with a partially intact BBB. Since GBM patients have regions of
intact BBB, these data suggest that the brain penetration of targeted
agents may be a critical factor that determines treatment efficacy in
patients.

