Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pathway analysis of genome-wide association study data highlights
taste transduction and metabolic pathways and esophageal squamous cell
carcinoma susceptibility


Background: In China, esophageal cancer is the fourth leading cause of
cancer death and essentially all cases are histologically esophageal
squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC). Agnostic pathway-based analyses applied
to GWAS data can identify biological pathways and/or groups of genes
enriched with disease-associated variants whose individual effect sizes
may be too small to be detected by standard single locus methods.
Methods: We used the adaptive rank-truncated product (ARTP) method to
analyze 1,827 pathways containing 69,420 genes in GWAS data from 1942
ESCC cases and 2111 controls with Chinese ancestry. Pathways were
retrieved from five databases: KEGG, BioCarta, Reactome, HumanCys and
NCI-Nature curated. Statistical significance was determined by
permutation. Results: Associations with ESCC risk (PBackground: In China,
esophageal cancer is the fourth leading cause of cancer death and
essentially all cases are histologically esophageal squamous cell
carcinoma (ESCC). Agnostic pathway-based analyses applied to GWAS data
can identify biological pathways and/or groups of genes enriched with
disease-associated variants whose individual effect sizes may be too
small to be detected by standard single locus methods. Methods: We used
the adaptive rank-truncated product (ARTP) method to analyze 1,827
pathways containing 69,420 genes in GWAS data from 1942 ESCC cases and
2111 controls with Chinese ancestry. Pathways were retrieved from five
databases: KEGG, BioCarta, Reactome, HumanCys and NCI-Nature curated.
Statistical significance was determined by permutation. Results:
Associations with ESCC risk (P<0.001) were observed for 60 pathways,
which included overlapping pathways from different sources predominantly
associated with cell cycle control and signaling, DNA repair, and
apoptosis. After excluding genes with previous GWAS hits from the pathway
analysis, the KEGG taste transduction pathway and the KEGG metabolic
pathways were significantly associated with risk of ESCC (PBackground: In
China, esophageal cancer is the fourth leading cause of cancer death and
essentially all cases are histologically esophageal squamous cell
carcinoma (ESCC). Agnostic pathway-based analyses applied to GWAS data
can identify biological pathways and/or groups of genes enriched with
disease-associated variants whose individual effect sizes may be too
small to be detected by standard single locus methods. Methods: We used
the adaptive rank-truncated product (ARTP) method to analyze 1,827
pathways containing 69,420 genes in GWAS data from 1942 ESCC cases and
2111 controls with Chinese ancestry. Pathways were retrieved from five
databases: KEGG, BioCarta, Reactome, HumanCys and NCI-Nature curated.
Statistical significance was determined by permutation. Results:
Associations with ESCC risk (P<0.001) were observed for 60 pathways,
which included overlapping pathways from different sources predominantly
associated with cell cycle control and signaling, DNA repair, and
apoptosis. After excluding genes with previous GWAS hits from the pathway
analysis, the KEGG taste transduction pathway and the KEGG metabolic
pathways were significantly associated with risk of ESCC (P<0.001). The
most significant genes (PBackground: In China, esophageal cancer is the
fourth leading cause of cancer death and essentially all cases are
histologically esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC). Agnostic
pathway-based analyses applied to GWAS data can identify biological
pathways and/or groups of genes enriched with disease-associated variants
whose individual effect sizes may be too small to be detected by standard
single locus methods. Methods: We used the adaptive rank-truncated
product (ARTP) method to analyze 1,827 pathways containing 69,420 genes
in GWAS data from 1942 ESCC cases and 2111 controls with Chinese
ancestry. Pathways were retrieved from five databases: KEGG, BioCarta,
Reactome, HumanCys and NCI-Nature curated. Statistical significance was
determined by permutation. Results: Associations with ESCC risk (P<0.001)
were observed for 60 pathways, which included overlapping pathways from
different sources predominantly associated with cell cycle control and
signaling, DNA repair, and apoptosis. After excluding genes with previous
GWAS hits from the pathway analysis, the KEGG taste transduction pathway
and the KEGG metabolic pathways were significantly associated with risk
of ESCC (P<0.001). The most significant genes (P<0.001) in these pathways
were TAS2R13, TAS2R42, TAS2R14, TAS2R46 and TAS2R50, and MTAP, GAPDH,
DCTD, POLD2 and AMDHD1, respectively. Significance: This approach
provides new insights into the collective role of genetic variants and
ESCC risk in Han Chinese and suggests that genetic alterations associated
with taste transduction and metabolic pathways may contribute to cancer
susceptibility.

