Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vivo whole genome shRNA screen reveals novel targets to block
cancer metastasis


The formation of invasive, rapidly growing metastatic lesions is a
critical step in cancer metastasis, the cause of more than 90% of cancer
deaths. Development of novel therapeutic approaches that block the
invasion step of metastasis is one of the highest priorities for clinical
cancer research. For this reason we completed the first genome-wide in
vivo shRNA screen for genes that directly contribute to invasive
metastatic lesion formation. Using state of the art intravital imaging,
we identified over fifty novel regulators of invasive metastatic colony
formation in vivo. Interactome analysis links these genes to key cellular
processes including: transcriptional regulation of gene expression, mRNA
processing and cytoskeletal remodeling. The target list was then
prioritized based on clinical gene expression profiles that negatively
correlated with key cancer endpoints including metastasis,
cancer-specific and overall survival. Pharmacological and shRNA-mediated
knockdown of the high priority targets in human cancer cell lines such as
prostate cancer and melanoma specifically blocked cancer cell migration
and invasion in vitro and in vivo. Moreover, shRNA-mediated knockdown of
these genes blocked human cancer cell metastasis in the avian embryo and
mouse preclinical models of metastasis. Finally, immunohistochemical
analysis on clinical prostate cancer and melanoma tissue samples showed
strong correlation with disease progression and metastasis. In summary,
we have identified numerous novel genes that that are functionally
involved in cancer invasion and metastasis that may serve as predictive
markers for disease aggressiveness and represent exciting new
pharmacological targets to block cancer invasion and metastasis.

