Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of calreticulin in the regulation of MALAT-1 expression in
mouse adenocarcinoma cells


Calreticulin (CRT) is a ubiquitously expressed protein, with both calcium
binding and chaperone activity. CRT is involved in quality control
process during the folding and maturation of proteins in ER. Recently, we
showed that overexpression of CRT resulted in the development of
metastatic lung adenocarcinoma. In order to examine genes involved in the
development of lung cancer we carried out microarray analysis on RNA
isolated from mouse lung tumors versus control. In this screen we
observed a significant increase in long noncoding RNA (LncRNA) MALAT-1 in
the lungs of CRT overexpressing mouse models. MALAT-1 is a LncRNA that
has been documented to be upregulated in the human lung adenocarcinoma
and associated with metastasis. Our study was to investigate the
mechanism of regulation of MALAT-1 expression and role of CRT in this
process. We hypothesized that CRT as a regulator of intracellular calcium
regulated MALAT-1 expression thus inducing the development of metastatic
lung adenocarcinoma in our mice model. Our data showed a significant
correlation between intracellular calcium levels and MATAT-1 RNA
expression and stability. Treatment of adenocarcinoma cells with BAPTA-AM
resulted in a significant reduction in MALAT-1 level. Treating the cells
with thapsigargin induced a 2 fold increase in MALAT-1 expression. We
also demonstrated that knock down of MALA-1 expression using specific
siRNA reduces the proliferation of adenocarcinoma cell. Our data
demonstrate for the first time involvement of calcium binding protein CRT
and intracellular level of calcium on expression and stability of MALAT-1
involved in development of lung adenocarcinoma.Funded by NPRP4-043-3-016

