Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ATP-binding cassette (ABC) genes genotype and expression: A
potential association with pancreatic cancer development and
chemoresistance


Genetic polymorphisms in ATP-Binding Cassette (ABC) transporter genes are
associated with different responses to chemotherapy in various cancers
including pancreatic cancer. In this study, four single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) in the ABCB1, ABCC1 and ABCG2 genes were
investigated in normal and pancreatic cancer specimens. The potential
association with expression of the efflux pumps was also analyzed. The TT
genotypes of G2677T and C3435T in ABCB1 gene were associated with lower
risk of developing pancreatic cancer in the investigated populations
(p=0.013, OR=0.35 and p=0.015, OR=0.29, respectively). To our knowledge,
this is the first report of the common polymorphisms in ABCB1 gene
affecting the genetic risk of developing pancreatic cancer. Moreover,
compared to ABCB1 G2677T and C3435T wild-type homozygotes and
heterozygotes, the expression of ABCB1 in mutant-type homozygotes (2677TT
and 3435TT) was lower in normal pancreatic tissue (64.3% and 68.9%,
respectively, pGenetic polymorphisms in ATP-Binding Cassette (ABC)
transporter genes are associated with different responses to chemotherapy
in various cancers including pancreatic cancer. In this study, four
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the ABCB1, ABCC1 and ABCG2
genes were investigated in normal and pancreatic cancer specimens. The
potential association with expression of the efflux pumps was also
analyzed. The TT genotypes of G2677T and C3435T in ABCB1 gene were
associated with lower risk of developing pancreatic cancer in the
investigated populations (p=0.013, OR=0.35 and p=0.015, OR=0.29,
respectively). To our knowledge, this is the first report of the common
polymorphisms in ABCB1 gene affecting the genetic risk of developing
pancreatic cancer. Moreover, compared to ABCB1 G2677T and C3435T
wild-type homozygotes and heterozygotes, the expression of ABCB1 in
mutant-type homozygotes (2677TT and 3435TT) was lower in normal
pancreatic tissue (64.3% and 68.9%, respectively, p<0.05), and the same
trend was also found in pancreatic cancer specimens. Interestingly, the
pancreatic cancer cells MIA1, BXPC3 and CFPAC1 are ABCB1 2677TT-3435TT
homozygotes. Cell viability assay revealed that these three cell lines
were much more sensitive to gemcitabine than PANC1, SU86.86, PL-45, and
ASPC1, which are either ABCB1 G2677T-C3435T wild type homozygotes or
heterozygotes. These results are consistent with the clinical observation
that for patients receiving post-operative gemcitabine chemotherapy, the
overall survival is tended to be longer in the ABCB1 2677TT and 3435TT
carriers. Conclusion: Polymorphisms in ABCB1 G2677T and G3435T were
associated with different susceptibility to pancreatic cancer and may
predict responses to chemotherapy.

