Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of single strand binding protein 1 in TERT recruitment to
telomeres and in maintaining telomere G-overhangs


Telomeres cap the ends of all eukaryotic chromosomes from degradation or
end-to-end fusions. Mammalian telomeres are maintained by telomerase
which is a ribonucleoprotein complex that includes a reverse
transcriptase catalytic unit called TERT and a functional telomerase RNA
(TR or TERC), which acts as a template to maintain telomere length.
Telomerase maintains telomere length, by overcoming incomplete lagging
strand synthesis known as the end replication problem during DNA
replication. Mammalian stem and cancer cells utilize telomerase to extend
telomeric G-overhangs to partially (stem cells) or completely (tumor
cells) maintain telomere ends. Cells expressing telomerase also have
higher levels of single strand binding 1 (SSB1) protein, which has a
known critical role in the DNA damage responses and double strand break
repair specifically by homologous recombination. We have established that
SSB1 binds specifically to G-strand telomeric DNA in vitro, and
associates in vivo with telomeres both in human and mouse cell lines.
Interestingly, SSB1 interacts with the TERT protein, and determines the
amount of TERT interaction with telomeres. Deletion/depletion of SSB1
reduces TERT interaction with telomeres and leads to G-overhang loss, but
has no effect on in vitro telomerase activity. We will discuss, how SSB1
is required for telomerase recruitment to telomeres to facilitate
G-strand DNA extension and to maintain telomeres.

