Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNA footprints of circulating tumor cells in patients with
non-small cell lung cancer


Purpose: MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are being investigated as stable,
non-invasive, circulating biomarkers for detecting human disease,
including cancer. We sought to determine whether select, circulating
miRNAs can define a footprint for circulating tumor cells (CTCs) in the
blood of lung cancer patients.Methods: We analyzed plasma from patients
with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) for nine candidate miRNAs using
Taqman qRT-PCR primers in duplicate and normalized by spiked-in synthetic
cel-miR-39. We then associated miRNA expression levels with CTCs using a
morphometric assay that is independent of Epithelial Cell Adhesion
Molecule (EpCAM) and designed for the ultra-sensitive detection of
individual CTCs and tumor cell clusters. We chose candidate plasma miRNA
markers based on criteria including low or absent expression in other
blood components, epithelial-specific expression, and/or significance in
the literature. This included miRs -21, -135b, -141, -200a/b/c, -205,
-210 and -429. We analyzed Pearson and Spearman rank correlations and
associations by group using ANOVA with Bonferonni adjustments for
multiple comparisons. Lastly, we integrated patients' clinical and
tumors' imaging data for modeling using multiple logistic regression to
assess how miRNAs associated with CTCs.Results: We evaluated 68 patients
with predominantly stage I disease (75%) and adenocarcinoma histology
(69%). Median CTC/mL was 4.2 (Interquartile Range [IQR] 0-19), 49%
(33/68) of patients had more than 5 CTCs/mL and 51% (35/68) of these
patients also had tumor clusters present. MiRNAs were only weakly
correlated with absolute CTC/mL levels in the circulation but at a
threshold of 5 CTCs/mL there was a strong relationship with miR-141
(p-value = 0.0004, adj p-value = 0.004). Several miRNAs were associated
with the presence of tumor clusters, including miR-205 (p-value = 0.007;
adj p-value = 0.06) and miR-429 (p-value = 0.006, adj p-value = 0.05). A
logistic model integrating clinical, imaging and miRNA features selected
several miRNAs preferentially to predict the presence of tumor clusters
(miR-21, miR-200b, miR-205, and miR-429).Conclusion: Circulating oncomiRs
may indirectly associate with CTCs and tumor clusters in patients with
NSCLC. Our footprint is concordant with one previous investigation in
metastatic breast cancer showing common results for miR-141 and the
miR-200-429 cluster. Further investigations examining miRNAs expressed
directly in CTCs would be useful to determine the origin of circulating
cancer-associated miRNAs.

