Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Urine and serum biomarkers of pancreatic cancer


The clinical management of pancreatic cancer is severely hampered by the
absence of effective screening tools. Sixty seven candidate biomarkers
were evaluated in prediagnostic sera obtained from cases of pancreatic
cancer enrolled in the Prostate, Lung, Colorectal, and Ovarian Cancer
Screening Trial (PLCO). The multimarker panel of CA 19-9, OPN, and OPG,
previously shown to be useful in retrospective samples, demonstrated
markedly diminished performance in the PLCO cohort. CA 19-9, CEA, NSE,
bHCG, and CEACAM1were significantly elevated in sera obtained from cases
greater than 1 year prior to diagnosis. Levels of CA 19-9, CA 125, CEA,
PRL, and IL-8 were negatively correlated with time to diagnosis. When the
entire PLCO set was used for training at a specificity (SP) of 95%, a
panel consisting of CA 19-9, CEA, and Cyfra 21-1 provided sensitivity
(SN) levels of 33.3% in samples collected >1 year prior to diagnosis
compared to SN levels of 23.8% for CA 19-9 alone in the same sample sets.
Further study performed using pooled PLCO samples identified 25 candidate
biomarkers demonstrating significantly altered expression in
pre-diagnostic serum samples. Robust performance of 3 of these
biomarkers, GM-CSF, fibronectin, HCG, and SHBG was validated in
individual PLCO samples. Next, performance of most promising serum
biomarkers was assessed in case/control urine samples and in urine
samples from a prospective Shanghai clinical trial. In each setup, better
performance of urine biomarkers in comparison with serum counterparts was
determined. A biomarker panel comprised of urine CA 19-9, leptin, OPN,
and IL-8 had a SN=39% at a SP of 95% in Shanghai samples. These results
warrant further studies to develop early detection tests for PDAC with
high levels of sensitivity.Note: This abstract was not presented at the
meeting.

