Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: IGF-axis protein expression and survival in Native Hawaiian breast
cancer patients


Obesity-induced and related aberrations in insulin signaling may
contribute to differences in breast cancer risk and outcome across
racial/ethnic populations. The mechanisms underlying breast cancer
disparities among Asian and Pacific Islander populations in the U.S.
(specifically the high risk and poor survival of Native Hawaiians) are
unknown. We examined the expression of IGF-axis proteins (IGF1, IGF1R,
IGFBP2, and IGFBP3) in archived tumor tissue from 358 invasive breast
cancer patients diagnosed in Hawaii. Overall and breast cancer-specific
survival were evaluated via Kaplan-Meier curves and Cox's proportional
hazards regression. Covariates included demographic and clinical factors,
ER/PR/HER2 status, and for a subset of patients participating in the
Multiethnic Cohort (MEC) (n=104), history of obesity, diabetes, and
estrogen use at baseline.Across all cases, expression of the IGF-axis
proteins in tumors did not differ by race/ethnicity. In the MEC subset,
IGF1 expression was observed in 22% of estrogen users compared to 46% of
non-users (p=0.04) and expression of IGFBP2 was observed in 71% of
estrogen users compared to 93% of non-users (p=0.02). Protein expression
did not vary by body mass index (BMI) or diabetes history. Obesity was
most prevalent in Native Hawaiians (72%) and lowest in Japanese Americans
(2%) (pObesity-induced and related aberrations in insulin signaling may
contribute to differences in breast cancer risk and outcome across
racial/ethnic populations. The mechanisms underlying breast cancer
disparities among Asian and Pacific Islander populations in the U.S.
(specifically the high risk and poor survival of Native Hawaiians) are
unknown. We examined the expression of IGF-axis proteins (IGF1, IGF1R,
IGFBP2, and IGFBP3) in archived tumor tissue from 358 invasive breast
cancer patients diagnosed in Hawaii. Overall and breast cancer-specific
survival were evaluated via Kaplan-Meier curves and Cox's proportional
hazards regression. Covariates included demographic and clinical factors,
ER/PR/HER2 status, and for a subset of patients participating in the
Multiethnic Cohort (MEC) (n=104), history of obesity, diabetes, and
estrogen use at baseline.Across all cases, expression of the IGF-axis
proteins in tumors did not differ by race/ethnicity. In the MEC subset,
IGF1 expression was observed in 22% of estrogen users compared to 46% of
non-users (p=0.04) and expression of IGFBP2 was observed in 71% of
estrogen users compared to 93% of non-users (p=0.02). Protein expression
did not vary by body mass index (BMI) or diabetes history. Obesity was
most prevalent in Native Hawaiians (72%) and lowest in Japanese Americans
(2%) (p<0.0001). History of estrogen use was highest in whites (73%) and
lowest in Native Hawaiians (28%) (p=0.008).Across all MEC patients,
IGFBP2 expression was associated with shorter breast cancer-specific
survival after adjustment for age, stage, first-course of treatment, ER,
PR, HER2, and estrogen use (HR=2.23, 95% CI 1.03-4.85). When examined by
individual race/ethnic groups across all patients, overall and breast
cancer-specific survival did not vary by IGF-axis protein expression for
whites, Japanese, Filipinos, or Chinese. Among Native Hawaiians, IGFBP2
and IGFBP3 expression was associated with shorter overall survival when
adjusted for age, stage, first-course of treatment, ER, PR, and HER2
(HR=10.04, 95% CI 2.13-47.50 and HR=3.40, 95% CI 1.05-10.99,
respectively). In the MEC subset, the associations remained after
additional adjustment for BMI (HR=16.30, 95% CI 2.84-93.40 and HR=4.64,
95% CI 1.30-16.59, respectively). IGFBP3 was also associated with a
poorer breast cancer-specific survival in Native Hawaiian women when
adjusted for age, stage, first-course of treatment, ER, PR, and HER2
(HR=2.79, 95% CI 1.12-6.93), and additional adjustment for BMI (HR=3.03,
95% CI 1.19-7.34). IGF1R expression was significantly inversely
associated with overall survival among Native Hawaiians after adjustment
for age, stage, first-course of treatment, ER, PR, HER2, and BMI
(HR=14.46, 95% CI 2.26-92.57). In the analyses of individual race/ethnic
groups, null cell sizes precluded the evaluation of estrogen use as a
covariate. Aberrant insulin-signaling may influence outcomes in Native
Hawaiian breast cancer patients.

