Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: USP7 modulates UV-induced PCNA monoubiquitylation by regulating
DNA polymerase eta stability


DNA polymerase eta (Pol), a product of the Xeroderma pigmentosum variant
(XPV) gene, plays a unique role in translesion DNA synthesis (TLS). It is
a short-lived proteasomally degraded protein and its steady-state level
is tightly controlled by multiple pathways. In this study, we have
identified the deubiquitylating enzyme ubiquitin-specific protease 7
(USP7) as a novel regulator of Pol stability. Pol and USP7 interact in
vitro and in vivo. Overexpression of wild-type USP7, but not its
interaction-defective and catalytic mutants, deubiquitylate Pol and
increase its steady-state level. The data demonstrate that both physical
interaction and catalytic activity of USP7 are necessary for Pol
deubiquitylation and stability regulation. Interestingly, knockout of
USP7 also increased the steady-state levels and slowed the turnover of
both Pol and p53, which is likely caused by destabilizing MDM2, a
targeting E3 ligase for ubiquitylation of both Pol and p53. Furthermore,
ectopic expression of USP7 upregulated the UV-induced PCNA
monoubiquitylation. In contrast, UV-induced PCNA monoubiquitylation was
not observed in XPV cells ectopically expressing USP7. Taken together,
our results demonstrated that USP7 facilitates UV-induced PCNA
monoubiquitylation by directly and indirectly regulating Pol stability.
(The work was supported by grants from NIH.)Note: This abstract was not
presented at the meeting.

