Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Acidosis-induced NF-B promotes cell invasion in breast cancer


Although acidic microenvironment has been previously shown to promote
breast cancer growth and invasion, the underlying mechanism remains
largely unknown. Because inflammation is a major culprit in cancer
progression, we hypothesize that pro-inflammatory transcription factor
nuclear factor (NF)-B in the acidic microenvironment plays a major role
in the invasion and metastasis of breast cancer. In this study we showed
that acidosis (pH 6.6) activates NF-B but it has no effect on STAT3
activity in breast cancer cells. Mechanistically, the activation of NF-B
is mediated through phosphorylation and degradation of IB; nuclear
translocation, and phosphorylation of p65, leading to enhanced cell
invasion. Upstream to NF-B signaling, AKT, PDK1, and ERK1/2 are also
activated under acidic condition. Moreover, acidosis induces reactive
oxygen species (ROS) which can be suppressed by ROS scavengers such as
glutathione and N-acetyl-L-cysteine, reversing the acidosis-induced
activation of AKT, ERK1/2 and NF-B, and invasiveness. In addition, the
NADPH oxidase (NOX) inhibitor diphenyleneiodonium can suppressed
acidosis-induced ROS. Importantly, we observed all of these effects only
in cancer cells, but not in non-malignant cells. Together, these results
suggest that production of ROS, activation of AKT, ERK1/2 and NF-B may
constitute key acidosis-induced signaling cascades in breast cancer cells.

