Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ERG enhances prostate cancer growth by upregulating
neurotransmitter receptors


Almost 50% of prostate cancer (PCa) cases exhibit a gene fusion between
TMPRSS2 and the ETS transcription factor ERG. ERG is suspected to promote
the acceleration and progression of prostate cancer. However, the
mechanisms whereby ERG exerts its affects growth and development of the
prostate cancer cell is are poorly understood. We aimed to identify and
characterize ERG-related changes using a prostate tumor cell as a model.
We profiled the transcription and metabolomics of cell lines induced to
express ERG, and used RT-PCR, calcium influx, proliferation and
phosphorylation assays to test our in silico observations. Genome-wide
gene expression and metabolite profiling revealed a significantly
increased representation of neuronal receptors and metabolites in the
ERG+ cells. Specifically, ERG+ cells overexpressed several nicotinic,
adrenergic and glutamate receptors. Out of all three receptors, nicotinic
receptors were predominently upregulated compared to others. To test the
function of these receptors, cells expressing ERG were treated with
neuronal receptor agonists nicotin, epinephrine and glutamate.
Interestingly, ERG+ cells responded with increased calcium influx, and
phosphorylation of pAKT and GSK3b. Nicotine increased cellular growth in
ERG+ cells, but had no effect on the ERG- cells. Similar expression of
these receptors was found in human PCa samples. Furtheremore, our
analysis using the EDRN tissue bank identified a positive correlation
between smoking and tumor size among TMRPSS2:ERG expressing PCa patients.
Collectively, our findings suggest a correlation between neurotransmitter
receptors and cellular proliferation of ERG-expressing Pca, and identify
GSK3b and pAKT as the possible underlying signaling mediators.

