Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MOF cooperates with DNA polymerase eta to repair intrastrand break
induced by crosslinking agents


The human MOF gene encodes a protein that specifically acetylates histone
H4 at lysine 16 (H4K16ac). Reduced levels of H4K16ac correlate with a
defective DNA damage response (DDR) and double-strand break (DSB) repair
post ionizing radiation exposure. MOF overexpression increases cell
survival to intrastrand crosslink inducing agents like cisplatin. DNA
polymerase eta (Pol H), the product of the xeroderma pigmentosum variant
(XPV) gene and a Y-family DNA polymerase, plays a pivotal role in
translesion DNA synthesis and was found to interact with MOF. Its
interaction with MOF increases in a dose dependent manner after exposure
to intrastrand DNA damage induced by cisplatin. Pol H colocalized with
phosphorylated MOF and -H2AX foci in cisplatin treated cells.
Overexpression of MOF enhances recruitment of Pol H to laser induced DNA
damage. This correlated with monoubiquitination of PCNA which has been
shown to facilitate the switch between the replicative DNA polymerase
with the low-fidelity polymerase eta to bypass UV or cisplatin-induced
DNA lesions during replication. MOF was found to interact with PCNA and
regulating the ubiquitination of PCNA thereby facilitating Pol H
recruitment to DNA damage sites.Note: This abstract was not presented at
the meeting.

