Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel combination therapy of adenoviral gene transfer of
HER2-extracellular domain and trastuzumab-based photoimmunotherapy for
HER2 negative cancer cells


Introduction: Humanized anti-HER2 monoclonal antibody, trastuzumab, has
provided survival benefit to patients with HER2 positive breast cancer
and advanced gastric cancer. However, the treatment with trastuzumab was
limited due to low or heterogeneous HER2 positivity, insufficient effects
as single agent and acquisition of resistance. To overcome these
problems, we employed the adenoviral vector expressing HER2-extracellular
domain (HER2-ECD), Ad/ HER2-ECD, which is designed to tag cancer cells
with HER2-ECD and to sensitize them to trastuzumab, and a novel
photoimmunotherapy (PIT). PIT consists of trastuzumab-conjugated with a
photosensitizer, IR700 (Tmab-IR700) and irradiation with near-infrared
light, induces a strong cytotoxicity on HER2 positive cancer cells. We
assessed the effect of Ad/HER2-ECD and Tmab-IR700 mediated PIT in HER2
negative cancer cells.Methods: HER2 negative breast cancer cells (MCF7,
MDA-MB-231) and gastric cancer cells (MKN1 and MKN45) were infected with
Ad/ HER2-ECD. They were treated with Tmab-IR700 mediated PIT. We
evaluated the HER2-ECD expression induced by Ad/ HER2-ECD and the
cytotoxic effects of Tmab-IR700 mediated PIT.Results: Ad/HER2-ECD
efficiently expressed HER2 protein on the surface of the cancer cells.
HER2-ECD expressing cells were selectively and rapidly killed by
Tmab-IR700 mediated PIT, which was morphologically captured as bleb
formation of cellular membrane.Conclusions: We demonstrated that Ad/
HER-ECD combined with Tmab-IR700 mediated PIT could induce
target-selective, immediate cell death in HER2 negative cancer cells. The
combination therapy of adenoviral gene transfer of HER2-ECD and the
molecular-target PIT is effective for cancer cells regardless of HER2
expression.

