Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ASCL1 and RET expression define a clinically relevant subgroup of
lung adenocarcinoma characterized by neuroendocrine differentiation


ASCL1 is an important regulatory transcription factor in pulmonary
neuroendocrine cell development, but its value as a biomarker of
neuroendocrine differentiation in lung adenocarcinoma (AD) and as a
potential prognostic biomarker remains unclear. We examined
ASCL1expression in lung cancer samples of varied histologic subtype,
clinical outcome, and smoking status and compared to expression of
traditional neuroendocrine markers. ASCL1 mRNA expression was found
almost exclusively in smokers with AD, in contrast to non-smokers. ASCL1
protein expression by immunohistochemistry (IHC) correlated best with
synaptophysin compared to chromogranin and CD56/NCAM. Analysis of a
compendium of 367 microarray-based gene expression profiles in stage I
lung adenocarcinomas identified significantly higher expression levels of
the RET oncogene in ASCL1 positive tumors (ASCL1+) compared to ASCL1-
tumors (q-value ASCL1 is an important regulatory transcription factor in
pulmonary neuroendocrine cell development, but its value as a biomarker
of neuroendocrine differentiation in lung adenocarcinoma (AD) and as a
potential prognostic biomarker remains unclear. We examined
ASCL1expression in lung cancer samples of varied histologic subtype,
clinical outcome, and smoking status and compared to expression of
traditional neuroendocrine markers. ASCL1 mRNA expression was found
almost exclusively in smokers with AD, in contrast to non-smokers. ASCL1
protein expression by immunohistochemistry (IHC) correlated best with
synaptophysin compared to chromogranin and CD56/NCAM. Analysis of a
compendium of 367 microarray-based gene expression profiles in stage I
lung adenocarcinomas identified significantly higher expression levels of
the RET oncogene in ASCL1 positive tumors (ASCL1+) compared to ASCL1-
tumors (q-value < 10 - 9). High levels of RET expression in ASCL1+ but
not in ASCL1- tumors was associated with significantly shorter overall
survival in stage 1 (p = 0.007) and in all AD (p = 0.037). RET protein
expression by IHC had an association with overall survival in the context
of ASCL1 expression. In silico gene set analysis and in vitro experiments
by ASCL1 shRNA in AD cells with high endogenous expression of ASCL1 and
RET implicated ASCL1 as a potential upstream regulator of the RET
oncogene. Also, silencing ASCL1 in AD cells markedly reduced cell growth
and motility. These results suggest that ASCL1 and RET expression define
a clinically relevant subgroup of approximately 10% of AD characterized
by neuroendocrine differentiation.

