Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Immunohistochemistry predicts presence and type of TP53 mutation
in high-grade serous carcinoma


TP53 mutations are ubiquitous to ovarian high-grade serous carcinomas
(HGSC) but uncommon in other types such as endometrioid carcinomas.
Despite the advances in direct sequencing, this technology is not widely
available for routine diagnostics. Significant improvements in
standardization of immunohistochemistry (IHC) have dramatically improved
sensitivity. We hypothesized that the pattern of p53 expression by IHC
can predict the presence and group of TP53 mutations: complete absence
indicating null mutations versus overexpression indicating missense
mutation.DNA extracted from 91 fresh frozen HGSC samples obtained from
the Canadian Ovarian Experimental Unified Resource (COEUR) and from 66
formalin fixed paraffin embedded HGSC samples obtained from Calgary
Laboratory Services were sequenced using TAmSeq methods for NGS.
Additional Sanger sequencing was performed for confirmation or for
identification of indel mutations. Accompanying tissue microarrays with
0.6 mm cores were constructed and immunohistochemistry for p53 was
performed on a Leica Bond MAX platform using the DO-7 monoclonal
antibody. The expression of p53 was scored in a 3-tier system: complete
absence, wild type (any staining from 1-70%), overexpression (>70% strong
nuclear staining). Cytoplasmic localization was noted separately.TP53
mutations were detected in 147/157 HGSC (94%). The type of mutation in
descending order were missense 104/147 (71%), frameshift 17/147 (12%),
stopgain 13/147 (9%), and splice site 13/147 (13%). 101/104 cases with
TP53 missense mutations showed p53 overexpression (98% concordance) while
12/17 cases with frameshift, 11/13 cases with stopgain, and 7/13 with
splicing (combined 70% concordance) showed the expected complete absence
of p53 expression. The overall sensitivity of p53 IHC to predict the
group of mutation was 89% (131/147). Only 6/147 (4%) cases with TP53
mutations showed a p53 wild type pattern, four those were splice site
mutations, hence the sensitivity of p53 IHC to predict the presence of
mutation is 94%. Interestingly, 7/10 cases with TP53 wild type or
synonymous silent mutations showed aberrant p53 expression as either
complete absence or overexpression, suggesting alternative abnormalities
in the p53 pathway. The three cases with TP53 wild type and p53 wild type
expression may not be HGSC.We conclude that contemporary p53
immunohistochemistry is a useful, widely accessible, inexpensive
complimentary test for direct TP53 sequencing.

