Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Detection and characterization of regions of hypoxia within
orthotopic pancreatic tumors using multispectral optoacoustic tomography


Optical imaging is a vital tool in cancer research for visualization of
tumors in preclinical models. However, resolution for bioluminescence and
fluorescence modalities is restricted to a depth of five millimeters, as
light is attenuated at increased depth and autofluorescence can create
background noise. Light propagation becomes diffuse at only a few
millimeters, resulting in light scattering and absorption. To improve
imaging resolution and acquisition in real-time, multispectral
optoacoustic tomography (MSOT) was utilized to visualize molecular
phenomena such as the tissue oxygenation of characteristically hypoxic
aggressive pancreatic tumors. SCID mice were orthotopically implanted
with S2VP10L and MIA PaCa-2 pancreatic cancer cells that highly express
the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), which exhibits extracellular
domain binding of the epidermal growth factor (EGF) ligand.Cohorts were
then intravenously injected with fluorescent EGF ligand probes and imaged
semiweekly to follow tumor growth and morphology. Medical Grade Air
levels were set to 0.9 L and oxygen at 0.1 L to assess the correlation of
increased hypoxia with tumor growth and progression. Pancreatic tumor
cells were imaged concurrently with evaluating levels of oxygenated and
deoxygenated hemoglobin, providing a distinct picture of the tumor and
its vascularization. Use of MSOT to detect regions of hypoxia within
tumor was validated using pimonidazole immunohistochemical staining of
tumor tissue. For the first time, our data demonstrate regions of tumor
hypoxia in living subjects, at depth, and noninvasively, via optoacoustic
tomography. Dynamic assessment of tumor microenvironment, especially
regions of tumor hypoxia, is essential to effectively target and treat
tumors that are otherwise resistant to treatment.

