Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Circulating tumor cells (CTCs) can predict survival and response
to treatment in non-metastatic colorectal cancer (CRC): Correlation
between flowcytometry, quantitative real-time pcr (qPCR) and
cytomorphology


Background: Circulating tumor cells (CTCs) were detected in patients with
metastatic epithelial malignancies using different methodologies. The
number of CTCs before and during treatment of advanced CRC is an
independent predictor of poor response to treatment, progression-free
(PFS) and overall survival (OS). We investigated 1) whether CTC count can
predict outcome in patients with CRC and 2) the utility of FCM
supplemented with PCR and/or cyto-morphology (CM) in enumerating
CTCs.Methodology: CTCs were enumerated in 56 CRC cases and 20 normal
controls (NC) by flowcytometry (FCM), and quantitative real time PCR
(qPCR) using CK19, MUC, CD44, CD133 and ALDH1after immune-magnetic
separation. Results were correlated to cytomorphology, standard
prognostic factors, overall and progression free survival
(OS&PFS).Results: CTCs Background: Circulating tumor cells (CTCs) were
detected in patients with metastatic epithelial malignancies using
different methodologies. The number of CTCs before and during treatment
of advanced CRC is an independent predictor of poor response to
treatment, progression-free (PFS) and overall survival (OS). We
investigated 1) whether CTC count can predict outcome in patients with
CRC and 2) the utility of FCM supplemented with PCR and/or
cyto-morphology (CM) in enumerating CTCs.Methodology: CTCs were
enumerated in 56 CRC cases and 20 normal controls (NC) by flowcytometry
(FCM), and quantitative real time PCR (qPCR) using CK19, MUC, CD44, CD133
and ALDH1after immune-magnetic separation. Results were correlated to
cytomorphology, standard prognostic factors, overall and progression free
survival (OS&PFS).Results: CTCs < 3 were detected in 45% of the cases
compared to 55% with 3 CTCs. CK19, MUC1, CD44, CD133 and ALDH1-RNA
expression was detected in (55.4%, 44.6%, 53.6%, 43.6%, 46.4%;
respectively). The concordance between FCM& qPCR, FCM&CM, qPCR& CM ranged
from 82% to 96%. Significant correlations were reported between CTCs and
tumor stage and grade (pBackground: Circulating tumor cells (CTCs) were
detected in patients with metastatic epithelial malignancies using
different methodologies. The number of CTCs before and during treatment
of advanced CRC is an independent predictor of poor response to
treatment, progression-free (PFS) and overall survival (OS). We
investigated 1) whether CTC count can predict outcome in patients with
CRC and 2) the utility of FCM supplemented with PCR and/or
cyto-morphology (CM) in enumerating CTCs.Methodology: CTCs were
enumerated in 56 CRC cases and 20 normal controls (NC) by flowcytometry
(FCM), and quantitative real time PCR (qPCR) using CK19, MUC, CD44, CD133
and ALDH1after immune-magnetic separation. Results were correlated to
cytomorphology, standard prognostic factors, overall and progression free
survival (OS&PFS).Results: CTCs < 3 were detected in 45% of the cases
compared to 55% with 3 CTCs. CK19, MUC1, CD44, CD133 and ALDH1-RNA
expression was detected in (55.4%, 44.6%, 53.6%, 43.6%, 46.4%;
respectively). The concordance between FCM& qPCR, FCM&CM, qPCR& CM ranged
from 82% to 96%. Significant correlations were reported between CTCs and
tumor stage and grade (p<0.01). OS was significantly associated with
pathological tumor type, T stage, lymph nodes involvement, CTC, CK, MUC1,
CD44 and CD133. PFS was significantly associated with pathological tumor
type, disease stage, N stage, CTC, CK, MUC1, CD44 and CD133
(p=).Conclusions:1)enumeration of CTCs, pre- and after initial treatment,
can predict outcome in CRC patients, 2)FCM is a sensitive, rapid and easy
technique for enumeration of CTCs, especially if supplemented with qPCR
for detection of CRC cells biomarkers (CK19), MUC, CD44, CD133 and ALDH1).

