Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Establishment of patient-derived xenograft (PDX) models for small
cell lung cancer (SCLC) as a preclinical platform for drug development


Small cell lung cancer comprises 15-20% of all lung cancer cases, and is
more invasive and has a higher rate of proliferation with respect to
non-small cell lung cancer, leading to a higher mortality rate. Most
cases are responsive to chemotherapy, however there is a high rate of
recurrence with treated patients and those in advanced stage of the
disease often have a refractory response to treatment. As such, the need
for new treatment modalities is critical.Use of patient-derived tumor
xenograft (PDX) models as clinically-relevant preclinical model for novel
drug development has gained widespread adoption in recent years. In
previous work, we have reported using the Molecular Response tumor bank,
comprising >144,000 viable tumor specimens, to establish more than 100
PDX models of various cancer types.In this work, we describe the
development of 8 new SCLC PDX models established from a collection of
>300 small cell lung cancer specimens, many of which come from
prior-treated and metastatic patients. We report a comprehensive
characterization of these models, including: histopathology,
immunohistochemistry, and mutation analysis by next-generation
sequencing. Additionally, we have evaluated functional response of these
models with in vivo pharmacology studies. Current studies are underway to
derive correlations between in vivo drug response and mutational status
of these models. Our data strongly suggests the potential to use these
unique PDX models to aid in efforts in drug development efforts in
oncology.

