Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The tumor suppressor Liver Kinase B1 inhibits triple-negative
breast cancer cell metastasis via regulation of AP-1 signaling


The basal sub-type, which shares features with triple-negative breast
cancer (TNBC), is among the most lethal breast cancer subtype,
characterized by a highly aggressive and metastatic phenotype. Although
pathways that may represent targets for novel therapeutic intervention
for basal like breast cancer (BLBC) have begun to be elucidated, the
ability to define and selectively target the invasive and metastatic
phenotype of basal-type/TNBC remains a major challenge facing the breast
cancer field.Liver kinase B1 (LKB1), also known as serine/threonine
kinase 11 (STK11), is a known tumor suppressor in many cancers including
breast. Low LKB1expression has been observed in breast cancer patients
and we report a significant association between loss of LKB1 expression
and poor prognosis specifically in the basal sub-type of breast cancer.
Induction of LKB1 expression in BLBC cell lines inhibited invasiveness in
vitro as well as lung and brain metastatic burden in an orthotopic
xenograft tumor model. Further analysis of BLBC cell lines overexpressing
LKB1 by next generation sequencing (RNA-seq) revealed striking regulation
of metastasis-associated pathways, including cell adhesion, extra
cellular matrix remodeling, and epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition
(EMT). We further demonstrated marked inhibition of matrix
metalloproteinase 1 (MMP-1) expression and activity via regulation AP-1
family member cJun. Additionally, LKB1 overexpression inhibited
EMT-associated genes (CDH2, Vimentin, Twist) and induced the epithelial
cell marker CDH1, indicating a reversal of the EMT phenotype in a
triple-negative breast cancer cell line MDA-MB-231. We have demonstrated
a role for LKB1 expression in the regulation of cell invasion and
metastasis in addition to tumorigenesis. Taken together these data
support future development of therapeutic agents to induce the LKB1
signaling pathway in BLCB/triple-negative breast cancer.

