Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prevention and reversion of multidrug resistance (MDR) in cancer
by NSC23925


The major limitation to the success of chemotherapy in cancer is the
development of multidrug resistance (MDR). Preventing the emergence of
MDR during chemotherapy treatment has been a high priority of clinical
and investigational oncology, but remains an elusive goal. NSC23925 has
recently been identified as a novel and potent MDR reversal agent.
However, whether NSC23925 can prevent the development of MDR in cancer is
unknown. Therefore, this study was to evaluate the effects of NSC23925 on
prevention and reversion of MDR. Human osteosarcoma cell line U-2OS and
Saos were exposed to increasing concentrations of taxol alone or in
combination with NSC23925 for 6 months. The results showed that cells
selected with increasing concentrations of taxol alone developed MDR with
resistance to taxol and other Pgp substrates, while cells cultured with
taxol-NSC23925 simultaneously prevented the development of MDR and cells
remained sensitive to chemotherapeutic agents. Taxol selected resistant
cells showed high expression and activity of drug transporter
P-glycoprotein (Pgp), whereas taxol-NSC23925 combination treatment
prevented the expression of Pgp. Our findings suggest that NSC23925 may
prevent the development of MDR by specifically preventing the
overexpression of Pgp. Moreover, NSC23925 can reverse MDR in drug
resistant cells by modulating Pgp activity. Given the significant
incidence of MDR in cancer and the lack of effective agents for
prevention and revision of MDR, NSC23925 and derivatives hold the
potential to improve the outcome of cancer patients with poor prognosis
due to drug resistance.

