Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Physiologically based pharmacokinetic model and correlative in
vitro assessment of metabolism-based interaction between Everolimus and
PI3K/mTOR inhibitor BEZ235


The PI3/Akt/mTOR kinase is a key intracellular signaling pathway and
deregulation of this signaling pathway has been implicated in
tumorigenesis and in numerous malignancies. Everolimus (RAD) is a potent
allosteric inhibitor of mTORC1 and BEZ235 is a novel dual PI3K/ mTOR
inhibitor (mTORCl and mTORC2). In preclinical studies, the combination of
BEZ235 and RAD has shown synergistic effect and a phase 1b clinical trial
to determine the safety, pharmacokinetics (PK) and pharmacodynamics in
subjects with advanced solid tumors was conducted at University of
Cincinnati. Here, we explored the potential mechanism and clinical impact
of the PK interaction of this combination using a physiologically based
PK (PBPK) model.The dose escalation consisted of five dose levels with a
starting oral daily doses of RAD (2.5 mg) and BEZ235 (200 mg) with 28-day
study treatment cycles. Serial blood samples were collected on Days 1 and
28 and plasma BEZ235 and blood RAD levels were analyzed using validated
HPLC (with fluorescene detection) and LC/MS methods, respectively. The
effect of BEZ235 on the expression and activity of cytochrome P450
CYP3A4, the principal RAD metabolizing enzyme, was studied employing
pooled human liver microsomes (HLMs) and primary human hepatocytes. HLMs
were employed to investigate potential competitive and/or time-dependent
inhibition (TDI) or CYP3A4 by BEZ235. Potential CYP3A4 inductive effects
were also examined in the hepatocyte model. A PBPK model was then
developed along with a mechanistic static model to predict the change in
the clinical PK of RAD. Population PK (NONMEM 7.2) was employed for
analyzing data from our clinical trials and that of published
studies.BEZ235 was observed to be a time-dependent CYP3A4 inhibitor
(Kinact and Ki were, 0.0175 min-1 and 5.21 M, respectively). It was also
observed to be a mild CYP3A4 inducer (Emax, 2.78 M and EC50 ,1.96 M).
Qualification of PBPK model for BEZ235 was performed using data from our
clinical trial; everolimus was qualified using published data. PK
analyses revealed that in our study the CL/F of RAD in the presence of
BEZ235 was 10.5 1.74 L/hr which was significantly lower than the reported
RAD CL/F of 18.8 0.98 L/hr when dosed alone. In-vitro studies and PBPK
model suggests that TDI of CYP3A by BEZ235 may play a role in the
observed DDI. In summary, the mechanistic model developed predicted the
time and dose dependent effect of BEZ235 on RAD clearance and exposure.
Our findings will aid efforts to optimize RAD and BEZ235 combination for
future clinical trials.

