Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Zoledronic acid overcomes the resistance to the anti-angiogenic
therapy and normalizes tumor vessels by switching from a M2- to a M1-like
macrophages phenotype in a mouse model of spontaneous cervical cancer


Recent studies described a resistance to the anti-angiogenic therapy both
in pre-clinical and clinical settings. Several mechanisms that contribute
to this resistance has been so far proposed and, among these, the
recruitment of bone marrow-derived cells to the tumors, seems to be
critical.We have previously showed that an amino-bisphosphonate,
Zoledronic acid (ZA), in a mouse model of spontaneous cervical
carcinogenesis (HPV16/E2) by targeting MMP-9+ tumor-associated
macrophages (TAM), strongly inhibited cancer progression and
angiogenesis. Stemming from these data we sought to investigate whether
ZA by acting on TAM, was able to overcome the resistance to
anti-angiogenic treatments.We treated tumor-bearing HPV16/E2 mice with ZA
alone or combined with the small molecule tyrosine kinase inhibitor
Sunitinib or with an anti-VEGFR-2 antibody, DC101, to assess the ability
of ZA to block metastasis dissemination. Notably ZA synergized with
Sunitinib and DC101 to inhibit primary tumor growth. Interestingly, while
these compounds increased the incidence and the number of liver and lung
metastasis, ZA alone inhibited basal tumor metastasis in parallel to
angiogenesis inhibition. ZA combined with Sunitinib or DC101 showed a
greater effect in impairing liver and lung metastasis formation. Confocal
analysis of the vasculature revealed that while Sunitinib- or
DC101-treated cancers displayed poorly functional vessels, both ZA alone
or combined with Sunitinib or DC101 efficiently induced a normalized
vasculature highly covered by pericytes and better perfused. Remarkably,
gene and protein expression analysis of FACS-sorted macrophages derived
from tumors of the different treatment groups, showed that ZA alone or
combined with Sunitinib or DC101 inhibited the expression of M2-markers
such as MRC-1, Il-10, CCL22 and MMP-9 and simultaneously enhanced the
levels of M1-markers such as Il12 and CXCL9 in these cells.We conclude
that ZA, by promoting a M1-like macrophages phenotype in HPV16/E2
cervical cancers and consequently inducing a normalized vasculature,
efficiently overcomes the resistance to angiogenesis inhibition by
blocking metastasis dissemination.

