Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: mTOR complex 2 modulates glycosylation of CD147 via the hexosamine
biosynthetic pathway


Cell surface proteins transduce extracellular signals into the cell to
control metabolism and growth. In turn, their expression is linked to
nutrient availability and other growth signals by mechanisms that are
poorly understood. The mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) regulates
cell growth and metabolism and is part of two distinct protein complexes,
mTOR complex 1 (mTORC1) and mTORC2. We found that mTORC2 is involved in
the processing and maturation of cell surface receptors such as CD147.
CD147 is a highly glycosylated receptor that has been linked to tumor
progression via its role in activating matrix metalloproteinases and
maturation of lactate transporters. In breast cancer cells, CD147
glycosylation is highly sensitive to glucose starvation and mTOR
inhibition. In mTORC2-disrupted cells CD147 is misprocessed and occurs
predominantly in a low glycosylated form. CD147 misprocessing can be
partly rescued by addition of exogenous UDP-GlcNAc, the end product of
the hexosamine biosynthetic pathway (HBP). However, UDP-GlcNAc cannot
restore the abnormal growth and metabolism in mTORC2-disrupted cells due
to defects in expression of other key metabolic enzymes in these cells.
Our findings define a role for mTORC2 in regulating receptor
glycosylation via the HBP and reveal a broader role for mTORC2 in
controlling other biosynthetic pathways that become deregulated in cancer.

