Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Immune infiltration of normal and benign breast lobules varies in
breast tissues based on cancer risk


Introduction: Histologic characteristics of nonmalignant breast tissues
(epithelial proliferation and involution) are associated with future
breast cancer (BC) risk. We evaluated immune infiltration (lobulitis) in
benign breast lobules and its association with features of BC
risk.Methods: We analyzed archived nonmalignant breast tissue samples
from 81 women in age-matched groups of varying cancer risk: 27 with
benign breast disease (BBD) who later developed BC (cases), 27 with BBD
without subsequent BC (controls), and 27 normal women without clinical
breast disease from the Komen Tissue Bank at Indiana University (KTB). Up
to 10 lobules in each sample were characterized by H&E for lobulitis,
involution (none, partial, complete), and fibrocystic (FC) status
(normal, nonproliferative, proliferative). Lobulitis was defined by H&E
staining as lymphocyte nuclei in the intralobular stroma at low
magnification and between adjacent acini at high magnification. Data was
analyzed by mixed effects logistic regression.Results: Median age was 57
years (range 37-70). Among 81 breast tissue samples, 750 lobules were
evaluated: 249 in BBD Cases, 265 in BBD Controls, and 236 in KTB donors.
56% of lobules were normal and 44% were FC, with 87% of FC lobules
occurring in BBD samples. Lobulitis was present in 44% of lobules and
varied according to subject age and individual lobule features. Younger
women were more likely to have lobulitis (p=0.002); among women
Introduction: Histologic characteristics of nonmalignant breast tissues
(epithelial proliferation and involution) are associated with future
breast cancer (BC) risk. We evaluated immune infiltration (lobulitis) in
benign breast lobules and its association with features of BC
risk.Methods: We analyzed archived nonmalignant breast tissue samples
from 81 women in age-matched groups of varying cancer risk: 27 with
benign breast disease (BBD) who later developed BC (cases), 27 with BBD
without subsequent BC (controls), and 27 normal women without clinical
breast disease from the Komen Tissue Bank at Indiana University (KTB). Up
to 10 lobules in each sample were characterized by H&E for lobulitis,
involution (none, partial, complete), and fibrocystic (FC) status
(normal, nonproliferative, proliferative). Lobulitis was defined by H&E
staining as lymphocyte nuclei in the intralobular stroma at low
magnification and between adjacent acini at high magnification. Data was
analyzed by mixed effects logistic regression.Results: Median age was 57
years (range 37-70). Among 81 breast tissue samples, 750 lobules were
evaluated: 249 in BBD Cases, 265 in BBD Controls, and 236 in KTB donors.
56% of lobules were normal and 44% were FC, with 87% of FC lobules
occurring in BBD samples. Lobulitis was present in 44% of lobules and
varied according to subject age and individual lobule features. Younger
women were more likely to have lobulitis (p=0.002); among women <50 the
median proportion of lobules with lobulitis was 50%, versus 30% among
women 50+. Lobulitis was less frequent in lobules with complete
involution (37%) compared to partial (74%) or no involution (84%),
pIntroduction: Histologic characteristics of nonmalignant breast tissues
(epithelial proliferation and involution) are associated with future
breast cancer (BC) risk. We evaluated immune infiltration (lobulitis) in
benign breast lobules and its association with features of BC
risk.Methods: We analyzed archived nonmalignant breast tissue samples
from 81 women in age-matched groups of varying cancer risk: 27 with
benign breast disease (BBD) who later developed BC (cases), 27 with BBD
without subsequent BC (controls), and 27 normal women without clinical
breast disease from the Komen Tissue Bank at Indiana University (KTB). Up
to 10 lobules in each sample were characterized by H&E for lobulitis,
involution (none, partial, complete), and fibrocystic (FC) status
(normal, nonproliferative, proliferative). Lobulitis was defined by H&E
staining as lymphocyte nuclei in the intralobular stroma at low
magnification and between adjacent acini at high magnification. Data was
analyzed by mixed effects logistic regression.Results: Median age was 57
years (range 37-70). Among 81 breast tissue samples, 750 lobules were
evaluated: 249 in BBD Cases, 265 in BBD Controls, and 236 in KTB donors.
56% of lobules were normal and 44% were FC, with 87% of FC lobules
occurring in BBD samples. Lobulitis was present in 44% of lobules and
varied according to subject age and individual lobule features. Younger
women were more likely to have lobulitis (p=0.002); among women <50 the
median proportion of lobules with lobulitis was 50%, versus 30% among
women 50+. Lobulitis was less frequent in lobules with complete
involution (37%) compared to partial (74%) or no involution (84%),
p<0.0001. Lobulitis was common in normal lobules (52%) and decreased with
increasing epithelial abnormality-39% of nonproliferative lobules and 27%
of proliferative lobules (pIntroduction: Histologic characteristics of
nonmalignant breast tissues (epithelial proliferation and involution) are
associated with future breast cancer (BC) risk. We evaluated immune
infiltration (lobulitis) in benign breast lobules and its association
with features of BC risk.Methods: We analyzed archived nonmalignant
breast tissue samples from 81 women in age-matched groups of varying
cancer risk: 27 with benign breast disease (BBD) who later developed BC
(cases), 27 with BBD without subsequent BC (controls), and 27 normal
women without clinical breast disease from the Komen Tissue Bank at
Indiana University (KTB). Up to 10 lobules in each sample were
characterized by H&E for lobulitis, involution (none, partial, complete),
and fibrocystic (FC) status (normal, nonproliferative, proliferative).
Lobulitis was defined by H&E staining as lymphocyte nuclei in the
intralobular stroma at low magnification and between adjacent acini at
high magnification. Data was analyzed by mixed effects logistic
regression.Results: Median age was 57 years (range 37-70). Among 81
breast tissue samples, 750 lobules were evaluated: 249 in BBD Cases, 265
in BBD Controls, and 236 in KTB donors. 56% of lobules were normal and
44% were FC, with 87% of FC lobules occurring in BBD samples. Lobulitis
was present in 44% of lobules and varied according to subject age and
individual lobule features. Younger women were more likely to have
lobulitis (p=0.002); among women <50 the median proportion of lobules
with lobulitis was 50%, versus 30% among women 50+. Lobulitis was less
frequent in lobules with complete involution (37%) compared to partial
(74%) or no involution (84%), p<0.0001. Lobulitis was common in normal
lobules (52%) and decreased with increasing epithelial abnormality-39% of
nonproliferative lobules and 27% of proliferative lobules (p<0.0001). In
multivariate analysis including all 3 variables, all 3 remained
significantly associated with lobulitis: age (p=0.03), proliferation
(pIntroduction: Histologic characteristics of nonmalignant breast tissues
(epithelial proliferation and involution) are associated with future
breast cancer (BC) risk. We evaluated immune infiltration (lobulitis) in
benign breast lobules and its association with features of BC
risk.Methods: We analyzed archived nonmalignant breast tissue samples
from 81 women in age-matched groups of varying cancer risk: 27 with
benign breast disease (BBD) who later developed BC (cases), 27 with BBD
without subsequent BC (controls), and 27 normal women without clinical
breast disease from the Komen Tissue Bank at Indiana University (KTB). Up
to 10 lobules in each sample were characterized by H&E for lobulitis,
involution (none, partial, complete), and fibrocystic (FC) status
(normal, nonproliferative, proliferative). Lobulitis was defined by H&E
staining as lymphocyte nuclei in the intralobular stroma at low
magnification and between adjacent acini at high magnification. Data was
analyzed by mixed effects logistic regression.Results: Median age was 57
years (range 37-70). Among 81 breast tissue samples, 750 lobules were
evaluated: 249 in BBD Cases, 265 in BBD Controls, and 236 in KTB donors.
56% of lobules were normal and 44% were FC, with 87% of FC lobules
occurring in BBD samples. Lobulitis was present in 44% of lobules and
varied according to subject age and individual lobule features. Younger
women were more likely to have lobulitis (p=0.002); among women <50 the
median proportion of lobules with lobulitis was 50%, versus 30% among
women 50+. Lobulitis was less frequent in lobules with complete
involution (37%) compared to partial (74%) or no involution (84%),
p<0.0001. Lobulitis was common in normal lobules (52%) and decreased with
increasing epithelial abnormality-39% of nonproliferative lobules and 27%
of proliferative lobules (p<0.0001). In multivariate analysis including
all 3 variables, all 3 remained significantly associated with lobulitis:
age (p=0.03), proliferation (p<0.0001), and involution (p=0.0001).
Lobules with lobulitis were less frequent in groups of women with
increased breast cancer risk-55% of lobules in normal KTB samples, 43% in
BBD controls, and 35% in BBD cases (p = 0.02).Conclusion: Lobulitis is
common in normal and benign breast tissue lobules but varies with age,
involution status, and epithelial abnormality. Further work is needed to
understand the role of immune infiltrates in breast cancer risk.

