Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effect of adjuvant chemotherapy on the phenotype of circulating
tumor cells in patients with triple negative breast cancer


Introduction: Recent studies revealed phenotypic discrepancies between
Circulating Tumor Cells' phenotype (CTCs) and the corresponding primary
tumor in patients with breast cancer. Patients with triple negative (TN)
(ER-negative, PR-negative, HER2-negative) primary tumors are considered
as a poor prognosis group for whom no targeted therapies are currently
available. The aim of the current study was to characterize CTCs in TN
breast cancer (BC) patients before and after adjuvant chemotherapy in
order to explore additional therapeutic approaches based on the phenotype
of chemoresistant CTCs.Methods: Cytospins were prepared from peripheral
blood mononuclear cells (PBMC), obtained by ficoll density gradient
centrifugation of 31 TN BC patients, before and after adjuvant treatment.
The expression of Cytokeratins (CK), Estrogen Receptor (ER), Progesterone
Receptor (PR), EGFR and HER2 in CTCs was assessed using double
immunofluorescent experiments and ARIOL analysis.Results: CTCs were
detected in 25 out of 31 (81%) patients before and in 18 out of 31 (58%)
after adjuvant chemotherapy. ER, PR, EGFR and HER2 expression was
detected in 33.7%, 23.0%, 69.3%, 42.8% of the total examined CTCs before
adjuvant chemotherapy and in 4.2%, 0%, 61.79% and 15.73% after treatment.
The frequency of ER- and PR- expressing CTCs was significantly (p=0.05,
p=0.007) reduced post-chemotherapy. The absolute number of ER and PR
positive-CTCs per patient was also statistically decreased (p=0.02,
p=0.001) Triple staining experiments could not reveal co-expression of
CK/EGFR/ER in CTCs; however, there was one patient with CTCs
co-expressing CK/HER2/ER.Conclusions: A significant percentage of CTCs in
triple negative breast cancer patients express HER2 and EGFR before
treatment, implying that these receptors could be a potential target for
the limitation of metastasis in these patients. EGFR-expressing CTCs
persist after adjuvant chemotherapy, suggesting that additional treatment
with EGFR-targeting agents could be used post-chemotherapy to eliminate
chemo-resistant CTCs.

