Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dual targeting of DLL4 and VEGF signaling by a novel bispecific
antibody inhibits tumor growth and reduces cancer stem cell frequency


Both Notch/Delta-like ligand 4 (DLL4) and vascular endothelial growth
factor (VEGF) pathways play a critical role in angiogenesis and tumor
growth. Due to differential regulatory effects of VEGF and DLL4 on the
vasculature, inhibition of DLL4 or VEGF inhibits tumor growth by distinct
mechanisms: anti-DLL4 treatment induces an abnormal increase of poorly
perfused blood vessels, which results in a nonproductive angiogenesis
unable to support tumor growth, whereas the anti-VEGF therapy
significantly decreases vasculature reducing the blood supply to tumors.
We have recently developed a high binding affinity bispecific monoclonal
antibody that targets both human DLL4 and human VEGF. In vitro, this
antibody exhibited nanomolar affinity to hVEGF and hDLL4, and reduced
HUVEC proliferation induced by VEGF. The bispecific antibody demonstrated
significant in vivo anti-tumor efficacy in various solid tumors, delayed
tumor recurrence following termination of chemotherapy, and decreased the
frequency of tumor initiating cells. Analysis of tumor vasculature after
treatment with anti-DLL4/VEGF revealed inhibition of vascular gene
expression and endothelial cell proliferation, indicating that the
anti-VEGF effect on the vasculature is dominant over the anti-DLL4
effect. Notably, at doses where both anti-DLL4 and anti-VEGF alone
produced suboptimal anti-tumor effect, dual targeting resulted in
additive tumor growth inhibition. These results indicate that our
bispecific anti-DLL4/VEGF is broadly efficacious and may be useful for
treatment of a variety of solid tumors.

