Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor-associated microglia secrete paracrine factors that promote
Nf1-deficient optic glial cell growth


Previous studies have demonstrated that brain tumors are composed of
heterogeneous mixtures of neoplastic and non-neoplastic (stromal) brain
cells. However, current brain tumor therapies are primarily focused on
inhibiting the growth of the cancerous cells, largely ignoring the
contribution of the surrounding stromal elements. One of these stromal
cell types is an immune system-like cell (microglia), which constitutes
as many as half of the cells present in human brain tumors (gliomas). The
tumor microenvironment is considered to play an important role in tumor
formation and maintenance by providing signals that both negatively and
positively influence tumor cell growth.Since children with the
neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) inherited cancer syndrome are prone to the
development of gliomas involving the optic nerve (optic gliomas), we have
employed Nf1 genetically-engineered mice as an experimental model system
to examine the role of microglia in optic glioma formation and
maintenance. We leveraged RNA-sequencing data from FACS-isolated, mouse
optic glioma-associated microglia to identify specific paracrine factors
that are expressed in tumor-associated, but not normal, microglia. These
factors were validated using RNA fluorescent in situ hybridization and
investigated for their ability to increase the growth of Nf1-deficient
optic nerve astroglial cells in vitro. Current studies are ongoing to
determine whether (1) inhibition of microglia function in Nf1 genetically
engineered mice reduces the expression of these paracrine factors and (2)
inhibiting these factors attenuates optic glioma growth in vivo.
Together, these studies identify a novel set of paracrine factors
secreted by a key glioma-associated stromal cell type (microglia)
relevant to the pathogenesis of NF1-associated tumors, raising the
possibility that future therapies might be directed against tumor
microenvironment paracrine factors.

