Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pharmacokinetics and in vivo metabolism of Z-endoxifen: Results
from two phase I studies in women with ER+ breast cancer, gynecologic
malignancies and desmoids


Background: Breast cancer recurrence has been shown to differ based upon
CYP2D6 genotype and endoxifen (Endx) exposure following treatment with
tamoxifen (TAM) in the adjuvant setting. The average Endx Css is 29 nM
(range, 2-80 nM) in TAM treated patients at a dose of 20 mg/day.
Administration of Endx itself to patients is predicted to provide
adequate, consistent, active drug levels in all treated patients,
resulting in clinical benefit. As part of two phase 1 trials of oral Endx
to determine the safety, tolerability, and MTD, we characterized the
pharmacokinetics and in vivo metabolism of Endx.Methods: Patients were
given escalating daily oral doses of Endx (28 day cycle) over the dose
range of 20 - 160 mg/day in Phase I trials at the Mayo Clinic and NCI.
Pharmacokinetics sampling was performed on days 1, 7, 14 and 28, and
prior to subsequent cycles. Endx plasma concentrations and metabolite
profiles were determined by HPLC and LC/MS/MS.Results: 44 patients with
ECOG PS 0-1 have been enrolled to date encompassing 8 dose levels in the
Mayo (25 women with AI refractory MBC; median age 58 yrs, range 41-83
yrs) and NCI (19 women with ovary (9), breast (4), desmoid (2), fallopian
tube (2), endometrial cancer (2); median age 64 yrs, range 43-75 yrs)
studies. Day 1 Endx peak concentrations (Cmax) were reached 4h after the
Endx oral dose and mean values of Cmax, C24h, and AUC0-24h increased in
proportion to dose. Css was achieved on day 7 and 3.5-fold accumulation
(t1/2= 50.5 h) was observed on day 28. At the starting dose ( 20 mg/day)
and highest dose level (160 mg/day), Endx Css values of 146 ng/ml (390
nM) and 1950 ng/ml (5200 nM), respectively, were achieved and maintained
throughout the 28-day treatment. Endx Css values remained unchanged
following continuous dosing for 8-10 months. The mean apparent
steady-state clearance was 6.2 L/h. We also characterized the Endx
metabolite profile in patient plasma and urine. Metabolites detected in
plasma include nor-Endx, N-hydroxy-Endx, Endx-catechol, methoxy-Endx
catechol, and Endx-glucuronide, and appear in amounts much lower compared
to Endx. Like the parent drug, metabolites accumulated in plasma over the
28-day cycle. Characterization of the pharmacokinetics of Nor-Endx, a
putative aromatase inhibitor, is ongoing and will be
presented.Conclusion: In these ongoing Phase I studies, daily
administration of Endx is well tolerated with Css consistently above
those obtained following administration of standard dose tamoxifen. In
the Mayo study, expansion at 20 and 100 mg/day has commenced to perform
translational studies and further characterize Endx PK. In the NCI study,
dose escalation continues to establish the maximum tolerated
dose.Supported in part by R01CA 133049, U01 CA69912, P30CA 15083, P50CA
116201 and NCI Contracts CM52206 and HHSN261201100014C.

