Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: FGFR genetic alterations as a potential predictor of the
sensitivity to CH5183284/Debio 1347, a selective FGFR inhibitor with a
novel chemical scaffold


The fibroblast growth factor receptors (FGFR) are tyrosine kinases that
are constitutively activated in a subset of tumors by genetic alterations
such as gene amplification, point mutation, or chromosomal
translocation/rearrangement. Recently, small-molecule inhibitors that can
inhibit the FGFR family as well as the VEGFR or PDGFR family showed some
clinical benefits in FGFR genetically altered patient populations.
However, to achieve more potent and prolonged efficacy in such
populations, a selective FGFR inhibitor is still needed.Here, we report
identifying CH5183284/Debio 1347, a selective and orally available FGFR1,
FGFR2, and FGFR3 inhibitor that has a unique chemical scaffold as a FGFR
inhibitor. By interacting with unique residues in the ATP binding site of
FGFR1, FGFR2, or FGFR3, CH5183284/Debio 1347 selectively inhibits FGFR1,
FGFR2, and FGFR3 (IC50: 9.3 nM, 7.6 nM, and 22 nM), but does not
effectively inhibit FGFR4 (IC50: 290 nM ), KDR (IC50: 2,100 nM) or other
34 kinases. At 100 nM, CH5183284/Debio 1347 only binds to 5 kinases in
the KinomeScan panel, including FGFR1, FGFR2, and FGFR3. Consistent with
its high selectivity for FGFR enzymes, CH5183284/Debio 1347 does not lead
to significant changes in blood pressure in telemetry-instrumented rats.
In addition, CH5183284/Debio 1347 has a preferential antitumor activity
against cancer cells with FGFR genetic alterations in a panel of 327
cancer cell lines. Among them, 4 cancer cell lines have copy number
variations (CNV) of FGFR1 (>2.2 fold), 2 cancer cell lines have
chromosomal translocation of FGFR1 (FGFR1OP-FGFR1), 6 cancer cell lines
have CNV of FGFR2 (>2.2 fold), 3 cancer cell lines have point mutation of
FGFR2 (S252W, K310R, N549K), 3 cancer cell lines have chromosomal
translocation of FGFR3 (FGFR3-TACC3, FGFR3-BAIAP2L1), and 2 cancer cell
lines have point mutation of FGFR3 (S249C, Y373C). This preferential
efficacy against cancers harboring genetic alterations in FGFR was also
confirmed in mouse xenograft studies. These findings warrant further
investigation of CH5183284/Debio 1347 in patients harboring FGFR genetic
alterations. Clinical studies have been initiated.

