Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The tumor immune microenvironment modulates response to
chemotherapy in high-grade serous epithelial ovarian cancer


Resistance to platinum-based chemotherapy remains a major impediment in
the treatment of serous epithelial ovarian cancer. Recent studies have
drawn attention to the role of the tumor-microenvironment in mediating
chemotherapy resistance, in addition to established mechanisms of tumor
progression. This project is investigating the role of the tumor
inflammatory microenvironment in facilitating intrinsic chemotherapy
resistance using a cohort of 36 high-grade serous epithelial ovarian
cancer patient tumor samples. Total RNA from forty-eight, HGSEOC tumor
tissue samples was subjected to gene expression profiling using
NanoString technology. This type of bar-coded expression profiling has
proven to be equally efficient to study gene expression as quantitative
real time PCR technique. The gene panel consisted of 184 human genes that
are differentially expressed in human inflammation and 6 internal
reference genes. The cohort comprised 18 sensitive (PFS >18months) and 18
resistant (PFSResistance to platinum-based chemotherapy remains a major
impediment in the treatment of serous epithelial ovarian cancer. Recent
studies have drawn attention to the role of the tumor-microenvironment in
mediating chemotherapy resistance, in addition to established mechanisms
of tumor progression. This project is investigating the role of the tumor
inflammatory microenvironment in facilitating intrinsic chemotherapy
resistance using a cohort of 36 high-grade serous epithelial ovarian
cancer patient tumor samples. Total RNA from forty-eight, HGSEOC tumor
tissue samples was subjected to gene expression profiling using
NanoString technology. This type of bar-coded expression profiling has
proven to be equally efficient to study gene expression as quantitative
real time PCR technique. The gene panel consisted of 184 human genes that
are differentially expressed in human inflammation and 6 internal
reference genes. The cohort comprised 18 sensitive (PFS >18months) and 18
resistant (PFS<6 months) samples. A multiplex cytokine assay using the
bioplex system was also performed on serum samples from a subset of this
cohort. The results showed significant differences in expression of some
inflammatory cytokines in the serum that were concurrent with the
observed gene expression differences in the tumor samples. The results
are indicative of a cooperative role of a specific inflammatory gene
signature within the tumor microenvironment that may augment pathways
leading to differential drug response. These studies need further
independent validations to derive non-invasive blood-based biomarkers for
use in predicting chemotherapy resistance in serous epithelial ovarian
cancer.

