Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of autoantibody biomarkers to wild-type and mutant
p53 in pancreatic and ovarian cancer


Introduction:Mutations in TP53 are common in early pancreatic and ovarian
cancer development, and are detected in the majority of pancreatic
cancers (75%) and serous ovarian cancers (97%). Mutations in TP53 induce
autoantibody (AAb) immune responses, which may be biomarkers for the
early detection of these cancers. The most common mutations in p53 occur
in the DNA binding domain at residues that directly contact the DNA
(Arg175, 248, and 273). In contrast, preliminary studies suggest that
mutations in the N- and C- termini of p53 alter the thermodynamic
stability of p53, leading to increased accumulation in tumors. It is not
known if the location of the mutations impacts immunogenicity, or if
p53-AAb are specific to mutant p53 proteins.Methods:To evaluate AAb to
mutant p53 proteins, we generated custom programmable protein microarrays
displaying 52 common p53 point mutations. cDNAs encoding full-length p53
with c-terminal GST tags were printed on arrays with anti-GST antibody,
and transcribed and translated in situ using HeLa expression lysate. The
microarrays were screened with sera from pancreatic cancer cases (Stage
I-III, n=60), healthy and benign disease controls (n=63), ovarian cancer
cases (n=19) and controls (n=17). Bound IgG was detected by fluorescence.
For validation, four immunogenic mutant p53 proteins Arg248Met,
Pro278Ser, Arg213Leu, Gly187Ser and wild-type p53 were individually
displayed in 96-well format using a programmable ELISA. The ELISAs were
re-screened with a subset of the sera from pancreatic cancer cases (n=49)
and controls (n=47) and all of the ovarian cancer cases and controls.
Cutoff values were established to determine if a patient is positive for
all wild-type and mutant p53 AAb by measuring the mean antigen
florescence intensity +2 standard deviations of the controls.Results:AAb
were detected to all four mutant and wild-type p53 proteins in sera from
8/49 (16%) of pancreatic cases and 2/47 (4.2%) of pancreatic controls,
but the results were not statistically significant. In comparison, AAb to
all four mutant and wild-type p53 proteins were identified in sera from
8/19 (42%) of ovarian cases and 0/17 (0%) of healthy control women (p
0.005). All sera with AAb to mutant p53 also had measurable AAb to
wild-type p53 protein. All patients with immune responses had evidence of
broad-reactivity to at least at least two mutant p53 proteins, as well as
to wild-type p53.Conclusion:Our results indicate that patients with serum
AAb to wild type p53 protein also have AAb to multiple mutant p53
antigens, suggesting degeneracy of the epitope specificity. No patients
have been identified with AAb specific to mutant-only p53. We observed
inter-patient variation in the patterns of immune reactivity to p53
mutations that is of unclear significance. Correlation with tumor p53
mutation status is ongoing.

