Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Past use of coal for cooking is associated with all-cause
mortality in the prospective Shanghai Women's Health Study


Introduction: Indoor air pollution (IAP), mostly from coal burning, was
responsible for approximately 3.5 million deaths from all-causes and over
100,000 disability-adjusted life years in 2010. The majority of studies
conducted in the past have been retrospective, in rural and under
developed populations with recent and high levels of exposure. We
assessed the association between historic kitchen coal use and various
causes of mortality in the prospective Shanghai Women's Health Study
cohort.Methods: A cohort of 73,363 women was followed through December
2009 with a combination of in-person surveys every 2-3 years and annual
linkage to a vital statistics registry database where all causes of
mortality was recorded. A total of 3808 deaths were identified during the
follow-up period. Cox proportional hazards models were used to estimate
risk of mortality associated with in-home coal use. Models were adjusted
for smoking status, family income, environmental tobacco smoke,
occupational history, shift work, BMI, hormone therapy, and
parity.Results: All-cause mortality was elevated 13% among ever coal
users (Hazard Ratio (HR): 1.13; 95% CI: 1.04-1.23) compared to never-coal
users. Coal use was most strongly associated with all-cause mortality
among women who had more than 15 years of coal use (15-30 years: HR:
1.14; 95% CI: 1.02-1.26; >30 years: HR: 1.15; 95% CI: 1.04-1.26). Women
with 15-30 years of coal use had a 21% elevation of cancer mortality (95%
CI: 1.04-1.42), but no elevation was observed in women with >30 years of
coal use (HR: 1.06; 95% CI: 0.91-1.24) compared to never-coal users. More
than 30 years of coal use was associated with a 32% elevated risk of
cardiovascular mortality (HR: 1.32; 95% CI: 1.11-1.57), and 62% elevated
risk of myocardial infarction mortality (HR: 1.62; 95% CI: 1.01-2.63)
compared to never-coal users. All-cause mortality was elevated in women
who last lived in a coal burning home up to 20 years ago (>0-10 years:
HR: 1.16; 95% CI: 1.04-1.28; >10-20 years: HR: 1.21; 95% CI:
1.09-1.35).Discussion: This is the first study of mortality and in-home
coal use in a prospective study after much of Shanghai transitioned into
a developed and urban city. Evidence from this study suggests that
previous coal use could be related to excess cardiovascular and cancer
deaths among women in Shanghai.

