Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: 6q15 deletion impede development of ERG fusion in prostate cancer


Deletions at chromosome 6q15 belong one to the most frequent alterations
in pros-tate cancer, and are linked to poor prognosis. Furthermore, there
is a marked inverse relationship between 6q15 deletions and TMPRSS2:ERG
fusions in prostate cancer. While heterogeneity may limit the
applicability of diagnostic molecular markers, it is important to
estimate in vivo heterogeneity and the sequel of appearance of potential
prognostic markers. In case of one alteration developing after the other,
we would expect a small area of cancer having both alterations within a
larger area having only one (the first appearing) of these changes.In
this study, we used our heterogeneity tissue microarray approach as a
surrogate method to determine in vivo heterogeneity of 6q15 deletions and
TMPRSS2:ERG fusions. We constructed a heterogeneity TMA containing
samples taken from 10 dif-ferent tumor containing tissue blocks of 189
prostate cancers. Each prostate con-tained 1 to 6 individual cancer foci
allowing the molecular analysis of more than 350 tumor foci. 6q15
deletion was analyzed by fluorescence in situ hybridization and ERG
expression by immunohistochemistry.Only 6.6% of 334 ERG positive but
28.4% of 440 ERG negative TMA spots showed 6q15 deletions (pDeletions at
chromosome 6q15 belong one to the most frequent alterations in pros-tate
cancer, and are linked to poor prognosis. Furthermore, there is a marked
inverse relationship between 6q15 deletions and TMPRSS2:ERG fusions in
prostate cancer. While heterogeneity may limit the applicability of
diagnostic molecular markers, it is important to estimate in vivo
heterogeneity and the sequel of appearance of potential prognostic
markers. In case of one alteration developing after the other, we would
expect a small area of cancer having both alterations within a larger
area having only one (the first appearing) of these changes.In this
study, we used our heterogeneity tissue microarray approach as a
surrogate method to determine in vivo heterogeneity of 6q15 deletions and
TMPRSS2:ERG fusions. We constructed a heterogeneity TMA containing
samples taken from 10 dif-ferent tumor containing tissue blocks of 189
prostate cancers. Each prostate con-tained 1 to 6 individual cancer foci
allowing the molecular analysis of more than 350 tumor foci. 6q15
deletion was analyzed by fluorescence in situ hybridization and ERG
expression by immunohistochemistry.Only 6.6% of 334 ERG positive but
28.4% of 440 ERG negative TMA spots showed 6q15 deletions (p<0.0001). A
breakdown of these data to the level of tumor foci re-vealed 6q deletions
in 34 tumor foci that were large enough to have at least 3 ana-lyzable
TMA spots. The cohort included 42 tumor foci with a homogeneous ERG
pos-itivity and 15 with a homogeneous 6q deletion. Remarkably, six of 42
homogeneously ERG positive tumor foci (14.3%) were focal 6q15-deleted,
but none of 16 homogene-ous 6q15-deleted foci showed focal ERG positivity
in the same tumor area (p=0.022).In conclusion of our study, the complete
absence of ERG positive tumor foci in 6q15-deleted cancers suggests that
the functional consequences of 6q15 deletions may prevent the development
of TMPRSS2:ERG fusions. However, the development of 6q15 deletions is
independent of the ERG status.

