Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of small molecule Bax agonists for lung cancer
treatment


Bax, a central death regulator, is required at the decisional stage of
apoptosis. We recently discovered that the serine(S) 184 site on Bax is a
critical functional switch for controlling the proapoptotic activity of
Bax. The structural pocket around the S184 residue holds great promise as
an ideal target for small molecule docking. We therefore employed the
S184 residue as a docking site for screening small molecule therapeutic
agents using the UCSF DOCK program suite and the NCI library of small
molecules. Three compounds named small molecule Bax agonists (i.e. SMBA1,
SMBA2 and SMBA3) were found to induce a conformational change of Bax by
blocking phosphorylation of its S184 site, facilitating Bax insertion
into mitochondrial membranes and formation of Bax oligomers leading to
cytochrome c release and apoptosis in human lung cancer cells.
Intriguingly, SMBA1 potently suppresses lung tumor growth via apoptosis
in vivo without significant normal tissue toxicity. Survival outcomes
remain very poor for lung cancer patients due to resistance to standard
therapeutic interventions with radiation and systemic chemotherapy.
Development of novel Bax agonists as an entirely new class of anti-cancer
drugs has translational value to foster novel strategies for the
treatment of lung cancer and other Bax expressing malignancies.

