Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SNAI2 expression by cancer-associated fibroblasts is a negative
prognostic factor in non-small cell lung cancer


The tumor microenvironment is increasingly recognized as a contributor to
cancer development and progression since several stromal components,
including fibroblasts, interact with cancer cells regulating their
behavior and ultimately affecting tumor phenotype. Using primary cultures
of human fibroblasts isolated from resected lung cancers we previously
demonstrated that co-injection with cancer cells results in increased
tumorigenicity and altered expression of ECM related genes in heterotypic
tumors. To identify factors involved in the cross-talk between
fibroblasts and lung cancer cells, microarray gene expression profiling
was performed on 60 fibroblast lines from cancerous and normal lung
tissue from primary lung cancer patients, including 25 pairs of normal
(NF) and cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAF) from the same patients.
Lines were also characterized for presence of the activation marker
alpha-SMA and for in vivo pro-tumorigenic activity by co-injection with
A549 adenocarcinoma cells. Class comparison analyses identified: (i)
Factors highly expressed in cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAF) compared
to normal fibroblasts (NF): RHOB, SNAI2, EDIL3, LRRN3, CHN1, CTSC, NOPE
and DOCK10; (ii) Genes highly expressed in activated fibroblasts: POSTN,
TNFAIP6, CLEC2B and (iii) Genes associated with an in vivo
pro-tumorigenic phenotype: CNTN3, ELOVL6, MET, XPO1.To explore the
potential prognostic value of these microenvironment related markers, we
selected antibodies against 20 proteins differentially expressed in lung
fibroblasts and evaluated their performance in immunohistochemistry on
FFPE sections of 74 cases of NSCLC. Selection criteria to prioritize
candidates for IHC were based on results from molecular analyses (both
microarray hybridization and Real-Time PCR validation) and involvement in
biological pathways identified as potentially relevant by Gene Set
Enrichment Analysis (GSEA). The frequency of positive cells was evaluated
on: cancer cells, cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAF) and fibroblasts in
normal tissue adjacent (AF) or distant (NF) from the surgical margin.
This in-depth analysis revealed heterogeneous expression of different
proteins with factors predominantly expressed by cancer cells (LRRN3) and
others by the stromal component (CLEC2B). Among factors expressed by
fibroblasts, positivity for NOPE, MET, CTSC and CLEC2B was detected in
the majority of cases (60-70%) and they were generally expressed at
higher frequency by CAF compared to NF. In univariate Cox models, SNAI2
expression by CAF was shown to correlate with worst overall survival
(p=0.0288) and we further identified association of CNTN3 expression by
CAF with shorter disease free survival (p=0.0125).These findings
strengthen the hypothesis that identification of factors responsible for
proficient tumor-stroma cross-talk could be instrumental in innovative
strategies for risk assessment.

