Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anomalous expression of claudin 16 in ovarian cancer: Role of PKC,
PI3K and estrogen


Background: We have demonstrated that 63% of primary epithelial ovarian
cancer (EOC) anomalously overexpressed CLDN16 in the cell cytoplasm,
regardless of tumor histological type or grade, thus suggesting that this
is an early event in EOC development, and might serve as an EOC marker.
The present work aimed to enlighten cellular mechanisms that modulate
CLDN16 expression in EOC.Methods: PKA, PKC, and PI3K pathways affect
CLDNs cellular localization and function, cancer development and
progression. We investigated the effect of the pathways, and of
intra-tumoral estrogen (0.5, 5, 50 and 500 nM), on CLDN16 expression in
the serous and platinum-resistant EOC model, the OVCAR3 cell line.
Immunofluorescence experiments were carried out to determine the cellular
localization of CLDN16 in OVCAR3. CLDN16 expression was assessed by
real-time RT-PCR, in the presence or absence of the pathway modulators
cAMP (PKA activator, 10-6M), KT5720 (PKA inhibitor, 10-7M), PMA (PKC
activator, 10-8M), and Wortmannin (WORT: PI3K activator, 10-7M). CLDN16
relative expression analyses followed the CT method of Pffalf, using the
REST program (Version 2.0.13, 2009). Data, expressed as mean SE, were
analyzed by Bonferroni and Dunnet multiple comparisons tests.Findings:
OVCAR3 expressed CLDN16 exclusively in the cytoplasm compartment,
resembling primary tumors, so being a reliable in vitro model to our
expression study. While the PKA pathway did not affect CLDN16 expression
in OVCAR3, the PKC pathway lead to an increase of the transcript
by1.95-fold (PMA; p Background: We have demonstrated that 63% of primary
epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) anomalously overexpressed CLDN16 in the
cell cytoplasm, regardless of tumor histological type or grade, thus
suggesting that this is an early event in EOC development, and might
serve as an EOC marker. The present work aimed to enlighten cellular
mechanisms that modulate CLDN16 expression in EOC.Methods: PKA, PKC, and
PI3K pathways affect CLDNs cellular localization and function, cancer
development and progression. We investigated the effect of the pathways,
and of intra-tumoral estrogen (0.5, 5, 50 and 500 nM), on CLDN16
expression in the serous and platinum-resistant EOC model, the OVCAR3
cell line. Immunofluorescence experiments were carried out to determine
the cellular localization of CLDN16 in OVCAR3. CLDN16 expression was
assessed by real-time RT-PCR, in the presence or absence of the pathway
modulators cAMP (PKA activator, 10-6M), KT5720 (PKA inhibitor, 10-7M),
PMA (PKC activator, 10-8M), and Wortmannin (WORT: PI3K activator, 10-7M).
CLDN16 relative expression analyses followed the CT method of Pffalf,
using the REST program (Version 2.0.13, 2009). Data, expressed as mean
SE, were analyzed by Bonferroni and Dunnet multiple comparisons
tests.Findings: OVCAR3 expressed CLDN16 exclusively in the cytoplasm
compartment, resembling primary tumors, so being a reliable in vitro
model to our expression study. While the PKA pathway did not affect
CLDN16 expression in OVCAR3, the PKC pathway lead to an increase of the
transcript by1.95-fold (PMA; p <0.001). Likewise, the PI3K pathway
modulated CLDN16 expression, as seen by the 2.32-fold decrease on its
expression in the presence of WORT (p Background: We have demonstrated
that 63% of primary epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) anomalously
overexpressed CLDN16 in the cell cytoplasm, regardless of tumor
histological type or grade, thus suggesting that this is an early event
in EOC development, and might serve as an EOC marker. The present work
aimed to enlighten cellular mechanisms that modulate CLDN16 expression in
EOC.Methods: PKA, PKC, and PI3K pathways affect CLDNs cellular
localization and function, cancer development and progression. We
investigated the effect of the pathways, and of intra-tumoral estrogen
(0.5, 5, 50 and 500 nM), on CLDN16 expression in the serous and
platinum-resistant EOC model, the OVCAR3 cell line. Immunofluorescence
experiments were carried out to determine the cellular localization of
CLDN16 in OVCAR3. CLDN16 expression was assessed by real-time RT-PCR, in
the presence or absence of the pathway modulators cAMP (PKA activator,
10-6M), KT5720 (PKA inhibitor, 10-7M), PMA (PKC activator, 10-8M), and
Wortmannin (WORT: PI3K activator, 10-7M). CLDN16 relative expression
analyses followed the CT method of Pffalf, using the REST program
(Version 2.0.13, 2009). Data, expressed as mean SE, were analyzed by
Bonferroni and Dunnet multiple comparisons tests.Findings: OVCAR3
expressed CLDN16 exclusively in the cytoplasm compartment, resembling
primary tumors, so being a reliable in vitro model to our expression
study. While the PKA pathway did not affect CLDN16 expression in OVCAR3,
the PKC pathway lead to an increase of the transcript by1.95-fold (PMA; p
<0.001). Likewise, the PI3K pathway modulated CLDN16 expression, as seen
by the 2.32-fold decrease on its expression in the presence of WORT (p
<0.001). Whereas estrogen 0.5 and 5 nM did not change CLDN16 expression,
but increased its expression by 6.57-fold at 50 nM. The stimulatory
effect of estrogen was abolished at 500 nM, thus suggesting a biphasic
effect of the hormone in CLDN16 expression in EOC. Estrogen effects in
EOC result, in part, from the intra-tumoral production of the hormone by
aromatases, as corroborated by the 10.31-fold inhibition of CLDN16
expression by the aromatase inhibitor anastrozole (IC50 2.5 x
10-4M).Conclusions: Our data strongly suggest that the expression of
CLDN16 is stimulated by the PKC and PI3K, and intra-tumoral
aromatase-produced estrogen in EOC. Whereas the anomalous cytoplasm
overexpression of CLDN16 still puzzles us, we speculate that fragments of
the molecule could be possibly secreted. If this is the case, screening
for circulatory portions of the protein could serve as an EOC screening
molecule, considering that it is overexpressed early in disease course.
Despite the fact that more studies are necessary to elighten the
mechanisms that control the expression and function of CLDN16 in EOC, our
study opens a new avenue to overcome EOC dramatic epidemiological
scenario, bringing hope to improve patients overall outcome and quality
of life.

