Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: EGFR targeted iron-oxide nanoparticles for photodynamic therapy in
head and neck cancer


Photodynamic therapy (PDT) is a highly specific anti-cancer treatment
modality for various cancers, particularly for recurrent cancers which
fail to respond to conventional anti-cancer therapies. PDT has been
developed for decades, but light-associated toxicity limits its clinical
application. To improve the efficacy and reduce the toxicity of PDT, we
developed a new targeted nanoparticle (NP) platform that combines a
second-generation PDT drug, Pc 4, with a cancer targeting ligand and iron
oxide (IO) NPs. Carboxyl functionalized IO NPs were first conjugated with
an EGFR specific single chain fragment variable antibody (ScFv EGFR). PDT
drug Pc 4 was then successfully encapsulated into the ligand-conjugated
IO NPs to generate E-IO-Pc 4. Both in vitro and in vivo biodistribution
and efficacy studies were then carried out to characterize this newly
designed nanoparticlized PDT drug. An in vitro efficacy study using SRB
assay on HNSCC cell lines showed both E-IO-Pc 4 and IO-Pc 4 had equal
efficacy compared to free Pc 4, indicating that conjugated Pc 4 in IO NPs
is as biologically active as free Pc 4. Our in vitro binding assay showed
that at 4C, targeted E-IO-Pc 4 had higher cell binding affinity than
non-targeted IO-Pc 4 NPs ( pPhotodynamic therapy (PDT) is a highly
specific anti-cancer treatment modality for various cancers, particularly
for recurrent cancers which fail to respond to conventional anti-cancer
therapies. PDT has been developed for decades, but light-associated
toxicity limits its clinical application. To improve the efficacy and
reduce the toxicity of PDT, we developed a new targeted nanoparticle (NP)
platform that combines a second-generation PDT drug, Pc 4, with a cancer
targeting ligand and iron oxide (IO) NPs. Carboxyl functionalized IO NPs
were first conjugated with an EGFR specific single chain fragment
variable antibody (ScFv EGFR). PDT drug Pc 4 was then successfully
encapsulated into the ligand-conjugated IO NPs to generate E-IO-Pc 4.
Both in vitro and in vivo biodistribution and efficacy studies were then
carried out to characterize this newly designed nanoparticlized PDT drug.
An in vitro efficacy study using SRB assay on HNSCC cell lines showed
both E-IO-Pc 4 and IO-Pc 4 had equal efficacy compared to free Pc 4,
indicating that conjugated Pc 4 in IO NPs is as biologically active as
free Pc 4. Our in vitro binding assay showed that at 4C, targeted E-IO-Pc
4 had higher cell binding affinity than non-targeted IO-Pc 4 NPs (
p<0.001). An in vivo biodistribution study using a fluorescence imaging
system indicated that both non-targeted IO-Pc 4 and targeted E-IO-Pc 4
NPs accumulated in xenograft tumors with a higher concentrations than
non-formulated Pc 4 at 4 hour (pPhotodynamic therapy (PDT) is a highly
specific anti-cancer treatment modality for various cancers, particularly
for recurrent cancers which fail to respond to conventional anti-cancer
therapies. PDT has been developed for decades, but light-associated
toxicity limits its clinical application. To improve the efficacy and
reduce the toxicity of PDT, we developed a new targeted nanoparticle (NP)
platform that combines a second-generation PDT drug, Pc 4, with a cancer
targeting ligand and iron oxide (IO) NPs. Carboxyl functionalized IO NPs
were first conjugated with an EGFR specific single chain fragment
variable antibody (ScFv EGFR). PDT drug Pc 4 was then successfully
encapsulated into the ligand-conjugated IO NPs to generate E-IO-Pc 4.
Both in vitro and in vivo biodistribution and efficacy studies were then
carried out to characterize this newly designed nanoparticlized PDT drug.
An in vitro efficacy study using SRB assay on HNSCC cell lines showed
both E-IO-Pc 4 and IO-Pc 4 had equal efficacy compared to free Pc 4,
indicating that conjugated Pc 4 in IO NPs is as biologically active as
free Pc 4. Our in vitro binding assay showed that at 4C, targeted E-IO-Pc
4 had higher cell binding affinity than non-targeted IO-Pc 4 NPs (
p<0.001). An in vivo biodistribution study using a fluorescence imaging
system indicated that both non-targeted IO-Pc 4 and targeted E-IO-Pc 4
NPs accumulated in xenograft tumors with a higher concentrations than
non-formulated Pc 4 at 4 hour (p<0.01 for both nanoparticle drugs), 24
hour (pPhotodynamic therapy (PDT) is a highly specific anti-cancer
treatment modality for various cancers, particularly for recurrent
cancers which fail to respond to conventional anti-cancer therapies. PDT
has been developed for decades, but light-associated toxicity limits its
clinical application. To improve the efficacy and reduce the toxicity of
PDT, we developed a new targeted nanoparticle (NP) platform that combines
a second-generation PDT drug, Pc 4, with a cancer targeting ligand and
iron oxide (IO) NPs. Carboxyl functionalized IO NPs were first conjugated
with an EGFR specific single chain fragment variable antibody (ScFv
EGFR). PDT drug Pc 4 was then successfully encapsulated into the
ligand-conjugated IO NPs to generate E-IO-Pc 4. Both in vitro and in vivo
biodistribution and efficacy studies were then carried out to
characterize this newly designed nanoparticlized PDT drug. An in vitro
efficacy study using SRB assay on HNSCC cell lines showed both E-IO-Pc 4
and IO-Pc 4 had equal efficacy compared to free Pc 4, indicating that
conjugated Pc 4 in IO NPs is as biologically active as free Pc 4. Our in
vitro binding assay showed that at 4C, targeted E-IO-Pc 4 had higher cell
binding affinity than non-targeted IO-Pc 4 NPs ( p<0.001). An in vivo
biodistribution study using a fluorescence imaging system indicated that
both non-targeted IO-Pc 4 and targeted E-IO-Pc 4 NPs accumulated in
xenograft tumors with a higher concentrations than non-formulated Pc 4 at
4 hour (p<0.01 for both nanoparticle drugs), 24 hour (p<0.01 for both
nanoparticle drugs), and 48 hour (pPhotodynamic therapy (PDT) is a highly
specific anti-cancer treatment modality for various cancers, particularly
for recurrent cancers which fail to respond to conventional anti-cancer
therapies. PDT has been developed for decades, but light-associated
toxicity limits its clinical application. To improve the efficacy and
reduce the toxicity of PDT, we developed a new targeted nanoparticle (NP)
platform that combines a second-generation PDT drug, Pc 4, with a cancer
targeting ligand and iron oxide (IO) NPs. Carboxyl functionalized IO NPs
were first conjugated with an EGFR specific single chain fragment
variable antibody (ScFv EGFR). PDT drug Pc 4 was then successfully
encapsulated into the ligand-conjugated IO NPs to generate E-IO-Pc 4.
Both in vitro and in vivo biodistribution and efficacy studies were then
carried out to characterize this newly designed nanoparticlized PDT drug.
An in vitro efficacy study using SRB assay on HNSCC cell lines showed
both E-IO-Pc 4 and IO-Pc 4 had equal efficacy compared to free Pc 4,
indicating that conjugated Pc 4 in IO NPs is as biologically active as
free Pc 4. Our in vitro binding assay showed that at 4C, targeted E-IO-Pc
4 had higher cell binding affinity than non-targeted IO-Pc 4 NPs (
p<0.001). An in vivo biodistribution study using a fluorescence imaging
system indicated that both non-targeted IO-Pc 4 and targeted E-IO-Pc 4
NPs accumulated in xenograft tumors with a higher concentrations than
non-formulated Pc 4 at 4 hour (p<0.01 for both nanoparticle drugs), 24
hour (p<0.01 for both nanoparticle drugs), and 48 hour (p<0.01 and
pPhotodynamic therapy (PDT) is a highly specific anti-cancer treatment
modality for various cancers, particularly for recurrent cancers which
fail to respond to conventional anti-cancer therapies. PDT has been
developed for decades, but light-associated toxicity limits its clinical
application. To improve the efficacy and reduce the toxicity of PDT, we
developed a new targeted nanoparticle (NP) platform that combines a
second-generation PDT drug, Pc 4, with a cancer targeting ligand and iron
oxide (IO) NPs. Carboxyl functionalized IO NPs were first conjugated with
an EGFR specific single chain fragment variable antibody (ScFv EGFR). PDT
drug Pc 4 was then successfully encapsulated into the ligand-conjugated
IO NPs to generate E-IO-Pc 4. Both in vitro and in vivo biodistribution
and efficacy studies were then carried out to characterize this newly
designed nanoparticlized PDT drug. An in vitro efficacy study using SRB
assay on HNSCC cell lines showed both E-IO-Pc 4 and IO-Pc 4 had equal
efficacy compared to free Pc 4, indicating that conjugated Pc 4 in IO NPs
is as biologically active as free Pc 4. Our in vitro binding assay showed
that at 4C, targeted E-IO-Pc 4 had higher cell binding affinity than
non-targeted IO-Pc 4 NPs ( p<0.001). An in vivo biodistribution study
using a fluorescence imaging system indicated that both non-targeted
IO-Pc 4 and targeted E-IO-Pc 4 NPs accumulated in xenograft tumors with a
higher concentrations than non-formulated Pc 4 at 4 hour (p<0.01 for both
nanoparticle drugs), 24 hour (p<0.01 for both nanoparticle drugs), and 48
hour (p<0.01 and p<0.005 for IO-Pc 4 and E-IO-Pc 4, respectively). A
six-fold lower dose of equivalent Pc 4 than previously reported free
formulated Pc 4 dose was used in the in vivo drug efficacy study using a
nude mouse xenograft model. We found that both IO-Pc 4 and E-IO-Pc 4
inhibited HNSCC xenograft tumors growth more effectively than free Pc 4
(pPhotodynamic therapy (PDT) is a highly specific anti-cancer treatment
modality for various cancers, particularly for recurrent cancers which
fail to respond to conventional anti-cancer therapies. PDT has been
developed for decades, but light-associated toxicity limits its clinical
application. To improve the efficacy and reduce the toxicity of PDT, we
developed a new targeted nanoparticle (NP) platform that combines a
second-generation PDT drug, Pc 4, with a cancer targeting ligand and iron
oxide (IO) NPs. Carboxyl functionalized IO NPs were first conjugated with
an EGFR specific single chain fragment variable antibody (ScFv EGFR). PDT
drug Pc 4 was then successfully encapsulated into the ligand-conjugated
IO NPs to generate E-IO-Pc 4. Both in vitro and in vivo biodistribution
and efficacy studies were then carried out to characterize this newly
designed nanoparticlized PDT drug. An in vitro efficacy study using SRB
assay on HNSCC cell lines showed both E-IO-Pc 4 and IO-Pc 4 had equal
efficacy compared to free Pc 4, indicating that conjugated Pc 4 in IO NPs
is as biologically active as free Pc 4. Our in vitro binding assay showed
that at 4C, targeted E-IO-Pc 4 had higher cell binding affinity than
non-targeted IO-Pc 4 NPs ( p<0.001). An in vivo biodistribution study
using a fluorescence imaging system indicated that both non-targeted
IO-Pc 4 and targeted E-IO-Pc 4 NPs accumulated in xenograft tumors with a
higher concentrations than non-formulated Pc 4 at 4 hour (p<0.01 for both
nanoparticle drugs), 24 hour (p<0.01 for both nanoparticle drugs), and 48
hour (p<0.01 and p<0.005 for IO-Pc 4 and E-IO-Pc 4, respectively). A
six-fold lower dose of equivalent Pc 4 than previously reported free
formulated Pc 4 dose was used in the in vivo drug efficacy study using a
nude mouse xenograft model. We found that both IO-Pc 4 and E-IO-Pc 4
inhibited HNSCC xenograft tumors growth more effectively than free Pc 4
(p<0.01 and pPhotodynamic therapy (PDT) is a highly specific anti-cancer
treatment modality for various cancers, particularly for recurrent
cancers which fail to respond to conventional anti-cancer therapies. PDT
has been developed for decades, but light-associated toxicity limits its
clinical application. To improve the efficacy and reduce the toxicity of
PDT, we developed a new targeted nanoparticle (NP) platform that combines
a second-generation PDT drug, Pc 4, with a cancer targeting ligand and
iron oxide (IO) NPs. Carboxyl functionalized IO NPs were first conjugated
with an EGFR specific single chain fragment variable antibody (ScFv
EGFR). PDT drug Pc 4 was then successfully encapsulated into the
ligand-conjugated IO NPs to generate E-IO-Pc 4. Both in vitro and in vivo
biodistribution and efficacy studies were then carried out to
characterize this newly designed nanoparticlized PDT drug. An in vitro
efficacy study using SRB assay on HNSCC cell lines showed both E-IO-Pc 4
and IO-Pc 4 had equal efficacy compared to free Pc 4, indicating that
conjugated Pc 4 in IO NPs is as biologically active as free Pc 4. Our in
vitro binding assay showed that at 4C, targeted E-IO-Pc 4 had higher cell
binding affinity than non-targeted IO-Pc 4 NPs ( p<0.001). An in vivo
biodistribution study using a fluorescence imaging system indicated that
both non-targeted IO-Pc 4 and targeted E-IO-Pc 4 NPs accumulated in
xenograft tumors with a higher concentrations than non-formulated Pc 4 at
4 hour (p<0.01 for both nanoparticle drugs), 24 hour (p<0.01 for both
nanoparticle drugs), and 48 hour (p<0.01 and p<0.005 for IO-Pc 4 and
E-IO-Pc 4, respectively). A six-fold lower dose of equivalent Pc 4 than
previously reported free formulated Pc 4 dose was used in the in vivo
drug efficacy study using a nude mouse xenograft model. We found that
both IO-Pc 4 and E-IO-Pc 4 inhibited HNSCC xenograft tumors growth more
effectively than free Pc 4 (p<0.01 and p<0.001 for IO-Pc 4 and E-IO-Pc 4,
respectively). Particularly, the targeted E-IO-Pc 4 NPs demonstrated a
significantly higher inhibitory effect on tumor growth than non-targeted
IO-Pc 4 NPs (pPhotodynamic therapy (PDT) is a highly specific anti-cancer
treatment modality for various cancers, particularly for recurrent
cancers which fail to respond to conventional anti-cancer therapies. PDT
has been developed for decades, but light-associated toxicity limits its
clinical application. To improve the efficacy and reduce the toxicity of
PDT, we developed a new targeted nanoparticle (NP) platform that combines
a second-generation PDT drug, Pc 4, with a cancer targeting ligand and
iron oxide (IO) NPs. Carboxyl functionalized IO NPs were first conjugated
with an EGFR specific single chain fragment variable antibody (ScFv
EGFR). PDT drug Pc 4 was then successfully encapsulated into the
ligand-conjugated IO NPs to generate E-IO-Pc 4. Both in vitro and in vivo
biodistribution and efficacy studies were then carried out to
characterize this newly designed nanoparticlized PDT drug. An in vitro
efficacy study using SRB assay on HNSCC cell lines showed both E-IO-Pc 4
and IO-Pc 4 had equal efficacy compared to free Pc 4, indicating that
conjugated Pc 4 in IO NPs is as biologically active as free Pc 4. Our in
vitro binding assay showed that at 4C, targeted E-IO-Pc 4 had higher cell
binding affinity than non-targeted IO-Pc 4 NPs ( p<0.001). An in vivo
biodistribution study using a fluorescence imaging system indicated that
both non-targeted IO-Pc 4 and targeted E-IO-Pc 4 NPs accumulated in
xenograft tumors with a higher concentrations than non-formulated Pc 4 at
4 hour (p<0.01 for both nanoparticle drugs), 24 hour (p<0.01 for both
nanoparticle drugs), and 48 hour (p<0.01 and p<0.005 for IO-Pc 4 and
E-IO-Pc 4, respectively). A six-fold lower dose of equivalent Pc 4 than
previously reported free formulated Pc 4 dose was used in the in vivo
drug efficacy study using a nude mouse xenograft model. We found that
both IO-Pc 4 and E-IO-Pc 4 inhibited HNSCC xenograft tumors growth more
effectively than free Pc 4 (p<0.01 and p<0.001 for IO-Pc 4 and E-IO-Pc 4,
respectively). Particularly, the targeted E-IO-Pc 4 NPs demonstrated a
significantly higher inhibitory effect on tumor growth than non-targeted
IO-Pc 4 NPs (p<0.005). These results suggest that the delivery of PDT
agent Pc 4 by IO NPs can enhance its treatment efficacy and reduce its
administrating dose. The targeted E-IO-Pc 4 NPs have great potential to
serve as both imaging and PDT agent in the clinic. [This study was
supported by NIH grants R01CA156775 (PI: Fei) and R21CA176684 (PI: Fei),
Georgia Cancer Coalition Distinguished Clinicians and Scientists Awards
(PIs: Fei and Chen),(PI: Shin), NIH SPORE P50 CA128613 (PI: Dong M Shin)
and Emory Molecular and Translational Imaging Center (NIH P50CA128301)].

