Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evoking potent RNAi response using novel 2-OMe-phosphorodithioated
modified siRNAs


Improving small interfering RNA (siRNA) efficacy in target cell
populations remains a critical challenge to bringing siRNA therapy into
the clinic. There is currently an unmet need to develop a reliable
strategy to globally enhance siRNA stability and potency. Here, we report
a novel chemical modification, consisting of phosphorodithioate (PS2) and
2-O-Methyl (2-OMe) MePS2 on a single nucleotide, that significantly
enhances potency and resistance to nuclease degradation for a variety of
siRNA sequences. We show a 3.5-fold improvement in gene silencing in
tumors following systemic delivery of MePS2-modified siRNAs using DOPC
nanoliposomes compared to unmodified counterparts. We found that this
enhanced potency stems from an unforeseen increase in loading of siRNAs
to the RNA-induced silencing complex (RISC), likely due to the unique
interaction between 2-OMe and PS2 moieties. We subsequently demonstrate
the therapeutic utility of MePS2 siRNAs in orthotopic mouse models of
chemoresistant ovarian cancer, focusing on targeting GRAM domain
containing 1B (GRAMD1B), a protein whose role in taxane resistance is
first reported here. Efficient silencing of GRAMD1B (>80%) was achieved
in tumors following systemic delivery of these MePS2-modified siRNAs and
a synergistic anti-tumor effect was observed when combined with
paclitaxel treatment. Given that limited success has been achieved thus
far toward broadly enhancing siRNA potency with chemically modified
siRNAs, our finding represents an important step forward in bringing
siRNA therapeutics into the clinic.

