Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Periodontal disease severity and incident cancer in postmenopausal
women: the Buffalo OsteoPerio Study


Background: Periodontal disease has an infectious etiology and there is
growing evidence that it may be positively associated with cancer
occurrence. Potential mechanisms may involve the host inflammatory
response to oral infection and the potential mobility of the oral
microbiome to extra-oral sites. However, few studies have focused on
older postmenopausal women who are susceptible to both periodontal
disease and cancer and where comprehensive periodontal assessments have
been made. This study aims to determine whether loss of alveolar crestal
bone height (ACH) in the oral cavity, a measure of chronic periodontitis,
is associated with incident cancer in a well-characterized cohort of
postmenopausal women.Methods: We prospectively followed a cohort of 1,337
postmenopausal women (aged 53-85 years at baseline; 3% current smokers)
who participated in the Buffalo OsteoPerio Study, an ancillary study of
the Women's Health Initiative. Whole mouth mean and worst site ACH (mm of
loss) were assessed from oral radiographs. Incident cancer was
ascertained from annual health updates and confirmed using medical
records by physician adjudicators. Cox proportional hazard regression was
used to estimate hazard ratios (HR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) for
associations of ACH with total and site-specific cancer risk in
multivariate-adjusted models.Results: During an average follow-up of 9.6
years (SD=2.7), there were 170 confirmed incident cancer cases. The most
common sites were breast (N=77), lung (N=15), colorectum (N=14), and
endometrium (N=12), accounting for 69% of all cancers. When analyzed as a
continuous exposure and after adjusting for age, education, and
pack-years of smoking, worst site ACH was not associated with total
cancer risk (HR=1.04 per 1mm loss, 95% CI=0.94-1.15). However, there was
a statistically significant increased risk of lung (HR=1.49, 95%
CI=1.18-1.89) and colorectal cancer (HR=1.35, 95% CI=1.04-1.74). No
associations were found for worst site ACH with breast (HR=0.91, 95%
CI=0.77-1.09) or endometrial cancer (HR=0.77, 95% CI=0.46-1.30). Whole
mouth mean ACH was also significantly associated with incident lung
cancer (HR=2.05 per 1mm loss, 95% CI=1.40-3.01), but not with total
cancer (HR=1.09, 95% CI=0.89-1.33), or with colorectal (HR=1.45, 95%
CI=0.91-2.33), breast (HR=0.83, 95% CI=0.57-1.20) or endometrial
(HR=0.62, 95% CI=0.21-1.85) cancers in multivariate-adjusted models.
These estimates did not change appreciably after further
adjustments.Conclusions: This study provides evidence that chronic
periodontitis is positively associated with risk of lung and colorectal
cancer in postmenopausal women. These results need to be interpreted
cautiously given the small number of incident cancer cases. Further
research utilizing a larger sample is warranted to confirm these results.

