Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The effect of YOCAS Yoga on prescription sleep medication and
over-the-counter sleep medication usage in cancer survivors with impaired
sleep quality


Background: Impaired sleep quality (ISQ) is highly prevalent among cancer
survivors; 30-90% of cancer survivors report some form of ISQ following
treatment. Cancer survivors with ISQ are often provided with sleep
medications, which fall into two classes: prescription sleep medications
(PSM) or over-the-counter sleep medications (OSM). The most common PSM
are non-benzodiazepine hypnotics (NBH), benzodiazepines (BENZO), and
tricyclic antidepressants (TCA). PSM have an uncertain efficacy, carry a
risk of dependency, and may cause deleterious side effects. OSM (usually
diphenhydramine and doxylamine) are believed to be safer, but the user
can develop tolerance and often report a groggy feeling the next day. The
aim of this secondary data analysis is to examine the effect of YOCAS
Yoga for ISQ in cancer survivors on PSM and OSM usage. We also examined
the baseline association between PSM, sleep quality, and side
effects.Methods: We previously conducted a RCT among 410 cancer survivors
suffering from moderate to severe ISQ between 2 and 24 months after
treatment. The YOCAS program consisted of breathing exercises, 16 Gentle
Hatha and Restorative yoga postures, and meditation. Participants
attended two 75-minute sessions per week for four weeks. At baseline,
participants listed all current prescription sleep medications while also
completing questionnaires on sleep quality and side effects commonly
experienced by cancer survivors. ANCOVA models were used to calculate the
difference between groups while controlling for age, gender, race, and
baseline values (where appropriate).Results: Previously published results
showed YOCAS Yoga significantly improved ISQ compared to the control
group. At baseline, 26% and 13% of participants reported using PSM and
OSM, respectively. PSM users had significantly worse sleep quality (PSQI
score: PSM=10.5 vs. No PSM=8.6; pBackground: Impaired sleep quality (ISQ)
is highly prevalent among cancer survivors; 30-90% of cancer survivors
report some form of ISQ following treatment. Cancer survivors with ISQ
are often provided with sleep medications, which fall into two classes:
prescription sleep medications (PSM) or over-the-counter sleep
medications (OSM). The most common PSM are non-benzodiazepine hypnotics
(NBH), benzodiazepines (BENZO), and tricyclic antidepressants (TCA). PSM
have an uncertain efficacy, carry a risk of dependency, and may cause
deleterious side effects. OSM (usually diphenhydramine and doxylamine)
are believed to be safer, but the user can develop tolerance and often
report a groggy feeling the next day. The aim of this secondary data
analysis is to examine the effect of YOCAS Yoga for ISQ in cancer
survivors on PSM and OSM usage. We also examined the baseline association
between PSM, sleep quality, and side effects.Methods: We previously
conducted a RCT among 410 cancer survivors suffering from moderate to
severe ISQ between 2 and 24 months after treatment. The YOCAS program
consisted of breathing exercises, 16 Gentle Hatha and Restorative yoga
postures, and meditation. Participants attended two 75-minute sessions
per week for four weeks. At baseline, participants listed all current
prescription sleep medications while also completing questionnaires on
sleep quality and side effects commonly experienced by cancer survivors.
ANCOVA models were used to calculate the difference between groups while
controlling for age, gender, race, and baseline values (where
appropriate).Results: Previously published results showed YOCAS Yoga
significantly improved ISQ compared to the control group. At baseline,
26% and 13% of participants reported using PSM and OSM, respectively. PSM
users had significantly worse sleep quality (PSQI score: PSM=10.5 vs. No
PSM=8.6; p<0.001) and insomnia scores (ISI score: PSM=14.7 vs. No
PSM=13.3; pBackground: Impaired sleep quality (ISQ) is highly prevalent
among cancer survivors; 30-90% of cancer survivors report some form of
ISQ following treatment. Cancer survivors with ISQ are often provided
with sleep medications, which fall into two classes: prescription sleep
medications (PSM) or over-the-counter sleep medications (OSM). The most
common PSM are non-benzodiazepine hypnotics (NBH), benzodiazepines
(BENZO), and tricyclic antidepressants (TCA). PSM have an uncertain
efficacy, carry a risk of dependency, and may cause deleterious side
effects. OSM (usually diphenhydramine and doxylamine) are believed to be
safer, but the user can develop tolerance and often report a groggy
feeling the next day. The aim of this secondary data analysis is to
examine the effect of YOCAS Yoga for ISQ in cancer survivors on PSM and
OSM usage. We also examined the baseline association between PSM, sleep
quality, and side effects.Methods: We previously conducted a RCT among
410 cancer survivors suffering from moderate to severe ISQ between 2 and
24 months after treatment. The YOCAS program consisted of breathing
exercises, 16 Gentle Hatha and Restorative yoga postures, and meditation.
Participants attended two 75-minute sessions per week for four weeks. At
baseline, participants listed all current prescription sleep medications
while also completing questionnaires on sleep quality and side effects
commonly experienced by cancer survivors. ANCOVA models were used to
calculate the difference between groups while controlling for age,
gender, race, and baseline values (where appropriate).Results: Previously
published results showed YOCAS Yoga significantly improved ISQ compared
to the control group. At baseline, 26% and 13% of participants reported
using PSM and OSM, respectively. PSM users had significantly worse sleep
quality (PSQI score: PSM=10.5 vs. No PSM=8.6; p<0.001) and insomnia
scores (ISI score: PSM=14.7 vs. No PSM=13.3; p<0.01) than non-PSM users
at baseline. PSM users reported higher levels of fatigue
(Multidimensional Fatigue Inventory: PSM=28.9 vs. No PSM=21.2;
pBackground: Impaired sleep quality (ISQ) is highly prevalent among
cancer survivors; 30-90% of cancer survivors report some form of ISQ
following treatment. Cancer survivors with ISQ are often provided with
sleep medications, which fall into two classes: prescription sleep
medications (PSM) or over-the-counter sleep medications (OSM). The most
common PSM are non-benzodiazepine hypnotics (NBH), benzodiazepines
(BENZO), and tricyclic antidepressants (TCA). PSM have an uncertain
efficacy, carry a risk of dependency, and may cause deleterious side
effects. OSM (usually diphenhydramine and doxylamine) are believed to be
safer, but the user can develop tolerance and often report a groggy
feeling the next day. The aim of this secondary data analysis is to
examine the effect of YOCAS Yoga for ISQ in cancer survivors on PSM and
OSM usage. We also examined the baseline association between PSM, sleep
quality, and side effects.Methods: We previously conducted a RCT among
410 cancer survivors suffering from moderate to severe ISQ between 2 and
24 months after treatment. The YOCAS program consisted of breathing
exercises, 16 Gentle Hatha and Restorative yoga postures, and meditation.
Participants attended two 75-minute sessions per week for four weeks. At
baseline, participants listed all current prescription sleep medications
while also completing questionnaires on sleep quality and side effects
commonly experienced by cancer survivors. ANCOVA models were used to
calculate the difference between groups while controlling for age,
gender, race, and baseline values (where appropriate).Results: Previously
published results showed YOCAS Yoga significantly improved ISQ compared
to the control group. At baseline, 26% and 13% of participants reported
using PSM and OSM, respectively. PSM users had significantly worse sleep
quality (PSQI score: PSM=10.5 vs. No PSM=8.6; p<0.001) and insomnia
scores (ISI score: PSM=14.7 vs. No PSM=13.3; p<0.01) than non-PSM users
at baseline. PSM users reported higher levels of fatigue
(Multidimensional Fatigue Inventory: PSM=28.9 vs. No PSM=21.2; p<0.01)
and memory problems (0-10 scale: PSM=3.7 vs. No-PSM=2.8; pBackground:
Impaired sleep quality (ISQ) is highly prevalent among cancer survivors;
30-90% of cancer survivors report some form of ISQ following treatment.
Cancer survivors with ISQ are often provided with sleep medications,
which fall into two classes: prescription sleep medications (PSM) or
over-the-counter sleep medications (OSM). The most common PSM are
non-benzodiazepine hypnotics (NBH), benzodiazepines (BENZO), and
tricyclic antidepressants (TCA). PSM have an uncertain efficacy, carry a
risk of dependency, and may cause deleterious side effects. OSM (usually
diphenhydramine and doxylamine) are believed to be safer, but the user
can develop tolerance and often report a groggy feeling the next day. The
aim of this secondary data analysis is to examine the effect of YOCAS
Yoga for ISQ in cancer survivors on PSM and OSM usage. We also examined
the baseline association between PSM, sleep quality, and side
effects.Methods: We previously conducted a RCT among 410 cancer survivors
suffering from moderate to severe ISQ between 2 and 24 months after
treatment. The YOCAS program consisted of breathing exercises, 16 Gentle
Hatha and Restorative yoga postures, and meditation. Participants
attended two 75-minute sessions per week for four weeks. At baseline,
participants listed all current prescription sleep medications while also
completing questionnaires on sleep quality and side effects commonly
experienced by cancer survivors. ANCOVA models were used to calculate the
difference between groups while controlling for age, gender, race, and
baseline values (where appropriate).Results: Previously published results
showed YOCAS Yoga significantly improved ISQ compared to the control
group. At baseline, 26% and 13% of participants reported using PSM and
OSM, respectively. PSM users had significantly worse sleep quality (PSQI
score: PSM=10.5 vs. No PSM=8.6; p<0.001) and insomnia scores (ISI score:
PSM=14.7 vs. No PSM=13.3; p<0.01) than non-PSM users at baseline. PSM
users reported higher levels of fatigue (Multidimensional Fatigue
Inventory: PSM=28.9 vs. No PSM=21.2; p<0.01) and memory problems (0-10
scale: PSM=3.7 vs. No-PSM=2.8; p<0.01). Yoga participants significantly
reduced the weekly quantity of NBH (NBH: Yoga = -0.85 vs. Control = 0.26;
p=0.047) and there was a significant trend for a reduction in the weekly
quantity of OSM use in yoga participants compared to the control
participants (OSM: Yoga = -1.46 vs. Control = -0.41; p=0.092).Conclusion:
PSM use was associated with ISQ along with side effects such as fatigue
and memory problems at baseline. YOCAS yoga significantly reduced the use
of NBH, which is currently the most used PSM. There was also a trend
towards the reduction of OSM use with yoga. Clinicians may consider
prescribing alternative therapies for ISQ such as YOCAS yoga, which
improve ISQ and reduce the dependency on certain sleep medications.

