Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pan-Bcl-2 inhibitor, GX15-070 (Obatoclax), decreases human T
regulatory lymphocytes while preserving effector T Lymphocytes: A
rationale for its use in combination immunotherapy


Bcl-2 inhibitors are currently being evaluated in clinical studies for
treatment of patients with solid tumors and hematopoietic malignancies.
In this study we explored the potential for combining the pan-Bcl-2
inhibitor GX15-070 (GX15; obatoclax) with immunotherapeutic modalities.
We evaluated the in vitro effects of GX15 on human T-cell subsets
obtained from PBMCs in terms of activation, memory, and suppressive
function. Our results indicated that in healthy-donor PBMCs,
mature-activated T cells were more resistant to GX15 than early-activated
T cells, and that GX15 preserved memory but not non-memory T-cell
populations. Furthermore, GX15 increased the apoptosis of regulatory T
cells (Tregs), profoundly down-regulated FOXP3 and CTLA-4 in a
dose-dependent manner, and decreased their suppressive function. Treating
PBMCs obtained from ovarian cancer patients with GX15 also resulted in
increased CD8+:Treg and CD4+:Treg ratios. These results support
preclinical studies in which mice vaccinated before treatment with GX15
showed the greatest reduction in metastatic lung tumors as a result of
increased apoptotic resistance of mature CD8+ T cells and decreased Treg
function brought about by GX15. Taken together, these findings suggest
that when a Bcl-2 inhibitor is combined with active immunotherapy in
humans, such as the use of a vaccine or immune checkpoint inhibitor,
immunotherapy should precede administration of the Bcl-2 inhibitor to
allow T cells to become mature, and thus resistant to the cytotoxic
effects of the Bcl-2 inhibitor.

