Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Infertility and risk of incident endometrial carcinoma: a pooled
analysis from the Epidemiology of Endometrial Cancer Consortium


Background: Nulliparity is an established endometrial cancer risk factor,
but whether this association is related to infertility is unclear.
Although there are many underlying causes of infertility, few studies
have assessed risk relationships according to specific causes. Despite
concerns that most treatments induce ovulation and that the endometrium
is highly hormonally-responsive, previous studies have provided
conflicting results on treatment associations.Methods: To address these
issues, we conducted a pooled analysis of 8,151 cases and12,471 controls
from 2 cohort and 12 case-control studies conducted in 1982 to 2009 (N.
America, Europe, Australia, Asia). All studies provided self-reported
infertility, causes and treatments, except for 1 study that relied on
data from national registries. Study-specific exposures and covariate
data were harmonized across studies. Logistic regression was used to
estimate odds ratios (OR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI), adjusted for
study, age, interview year, race, parity, oral contraceptive and
menopausal hormone use, and body mass index. If data were not reported
for a particular variable, that study was excluded from the
variable-specific analysis.Results: Nulliparous women had an elevated
endometrial cancer risk compared with parous women (adjusted OR=1.73; 95%
CI: 1.58-1.90).Women with self-reported infertility also had an increased
risk (adjusted OR=1.22; 95% CI: 1.13-1.32) compared with those without
infertility issues, even after adjusting for parity; the strongest
associations was seen among studies that defined infertility as
unsuccessfully trying to conceive for 2+ years (adjusted OR=1.31; 95% CI:
1.07-1.60). Infertility was associated with similar risks among
nulliparous (1.22; 1.10-1.48) and parous (1.22; 1.12-1.34) women,
although there was no increased risk associated with infertility among
those who had given birth to 3+ children. Two infertility causes
associated with risk elevation were endometriosis (adjusted OR=2.08; 95%
CI: 1.46-2.95 compared with women no infertility problems) and
anovulation (adjusted OR=1.40; 95% CI: 1.16-1.70). Based on relatively
small numbers, none of the individual treatments (in vitro fertilization,
selective estrogen response modulators, gonatropins, progestins,
estrogens) were substantially related to risk.Conclusion: Based on mainly
self-reported infertility data, we found that parity and infertility
independently contribute to endometrial cancer risk, with parity
seemingly being the predominant risk predictor. Understanding residual
endometrial cancer relationships related to causes of infertility and
infertility treatment may benefit from documented medical information on
causes of infertility and treatment parameters.

