Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting WNT1-inducible signaling pathway protein 2 (WISP2)
alters human breast cancer cell susceptibility to specific lysis through
regulation of KLF-4 and miR-7 expression


The molecular basis for the resistance of tumor cells to cell-mediated
cytotoxicity remains poorly understood and thus poses a major challenge
for cancer immunotherapy. The present study was designed to determine
whether the WNT1-inducible signaling pathway protein-2 (WISP2, also
referred to as CCN5), a key regulator of tumor cell plasticity,
interferes with tumor susceptibility to Cytotoxic T Lymphocytes
(CTL)-mediated lysis. We found that targeting WISP2 signaling in human
breast adenocarcinoma MCF7 cells impairs CTL-mediated cell killing by a
mechanism involving Kruppel-like factor-4 (KLF-4) induction and
microRNA-7 (miR-7)downregulation. Inhibition of TGF- signaling using the
A83-01 inhibitor in MCF7-shWISP2 cells resulted in a significant reversal
of the Epithelial-to-Mesenchymal Transition (EMT) phenotype, the
expression of stem cell marker KLF-4 and a partial recovery of target
susceptibility to CTLs. More importantly, we showed that silencing of
KLF-4 was accompanied by a reduction in MCF7-shWISP2 resistance to CTLs.
Using human breast cancer tissues, we demonstrated the coexpression of
KLF-4 with EMT markers and TGF- pathway. More importantly, we found that
KLF-4 expression was accompanied by miR-7 inhibition, which is partly
responsible forimpairing CTL-mediated lysis. Thus, our data indicate that
WISP2 plays a role in regulating tumor cell susceptibility through EMT by
inducing the TGF- signaling pathway, KLF-4 expression and miR-7
inhibition. These studies indicate for the first time that WISP2 acts as
an activator of CTL-induced killing and suggests that the loss of its
function promotes evasion of immunosurveillance and the ensuing
progression of the tumor.

