Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DNA methyltransferase 3B as a mediator in cancer associated
inflammation and progression


For a long time ignored, the tumor microenvironment is now known as an
important contributor in tumor progression and metastasis. However, the
molecular mechanisms as how cancer-associated inflammation promotes
metastasis remain to be investigated. Previous work in our lab showed an
inflammatory and immune suppressive microenvironment in the
pre-metastatic lung prior to tumor cell arrival. Recently, we found that
inflammation is responsible for down-regulation of cyclin-dependent
kinase inhibitors p15, p16, and p21 in a mouse model of invasive squamous
cell carcinoma, in which gene encoding TGFb receptor 2 (Tgfbr2) was
deleted in the stromal fibroblasts (Tgfbr2fspKO). There was an induction
of inflammation and significant DNA damage in the neighboring epithelia
of the forestomach due to the stromal deletion of Tgfbr2. We found that
an up-regulation of DNA methyltransferase 3B (DNMT3B) was responsible for
these epigenetic alterations. Based on these studies, we hypothesize that
the cancer-associated inflammation could induce DNMTs activity leading to
the repression of genes important for inhibition of tumor progression. We
are currently investigating the impact of inflammation on DNMTs
expression using 4T1 mammary tumor models. We hope that our studies will
provide insight for molecular mechanisms underlying tumor-host
interaction in the metastatic process and identify the novel therapeutic
targets.

