Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Zkscan3 facilitates invasion of colorectal cancer associated with
ceacam5


Purpose: ZKSCAN3 is over-expressed in invasive colonic tumor cells and
regulate the expression of several genes favoring tumor progression
including integrin 4. We evaluated the role of ZKSCAN3 in invasive
signaling pathway with stage 4 colorectal cancer (CRC).Materials and
methods: 119 metastatic CRC (mCRC) patients who palliatively or
curatively resected and 331 sporadic CRC patients who curatively resected
from January 2004 to December 2009 were used to identify correlations
between single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) rs733743 and clinically
prognostic parameters. To validation of prior correlation, the genotypes
of SNP identified by pyrosequencing using 81 patients (33 with mCRC and
48 CRC patients) and CRC cell lines. We then performed
immunohistochemistry (IHC) and Western blot on 36 mCRC patients and 49
CRC patients. Up-regulated putative down-stream targets included genes
contributing tumor aggressiveness and invasiveness; VEGF, cyclin D2, Akt,
phospho-Akt, integrin 4, KRAS, CEACAM5, and integrin 51. To test
biological utility assay, ZKSCAN3 mRNA was knocked down by ZKSCAN3
specific siRNA in metastatic CRC cells (LOVO) and ZKSCAN3 cDNA was
overexpressed in the low-ZKSCAN3 expressed CRC cells (HCT116).Results:
Wild-type alleles (GG) of ZKSCAN3 rs733743 was related with male
dominant, family history of malignancy, high CEA concentration, and mCRC.
The wild-type alleles of ZKSCAN3 rs733743 using tissue sample was related
with lymphvascular invasion. ZKSCAN3 IHC positive tissue was related with
lymphovascular invasion. ZKSCAN expression was higher in LOVO and SW620
cell lines which were derived from metastatic site. ZKSCAN3 high groups
were related with CEA, integrin 4, VEGF, and AKT and ZKSCAN3 low groups
were related with RAS, VEGF, AKT, and PAKT in metastatic tumor tissue.
Therefore, ZKSCAN3 seemed to be related with CEA and integrin 4 to
metastasis. Additional CEA expression was observed a significant decrease
in ZKSCAN3 knockdowned LOVO cell (1.0 vs 0.89, P= 0.046) and invasiveness
of the ZKSCAN3 overexpressed HCT116 cells was higher in CEA coated
filters (75.66.0 vs 91.34.5, P=0.023).Conclusion: ZKSCAN3 is related with
colorectal tumor progression and invasion. ZKSCAN3 overexpression tumor
may facilitate metastasis of colorectal cancer associated with CEACAM5.

