Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A molecular docking strategy for identifying fragment inhibitors
of indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase 1 (IDO1)


As part of our studies to identify novel inhibitors for the
immunosuppressive enzyme indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase 1 (IDO1) for
restoring tumor immunity, we investigated the ability of the enzyme's
x-ray crystal structure to predict active molecules when used in
molecular docking based virtual screening of fragment libraries.The 352
compound Zenobia Therapeutics fragment library was screened by
differential scanning fluorimetry and 74 compounds were identified that
altered the thermal stability of the protein. Of these, biochemical
analysis showed that only 14 inhibited the enzyme activity by >50% at 1
mM, and hydrazine containing fragments were the most potent inhibitors of
recombinant human IDO1 (rhIDO1), with the best being a benzothiazole
compound retrieving an IC50 of 8 M. We recently showed that
phenylhydrazine is a more potent inhibitor (IC50 0.3 M), which provided a
dataset for testing various docking strategies to discover fragment
inhibitors.The fragment library was docked into the IDO1 active site (PDB
code 2D0T) using GOLD driven by the scoring functions ChemPLP, Goldscore,
ASP or Chemscore. The three top scoring poses for each compound were kept
then rescored by each scoring function. The combination of docking by
Goldscore and rescoring by Chemscore to identify the top scoring pose
gave the best outcome, an 8.3 fold enrichment of active compounds within
the top 5% of the ranked library compared to random selection.Based on
this docking and scoring strategy we performed a virtual screening
campaign on a 14,000 compound library containing commercially available
phenylhydrazine derivatives. Our characterization of phenylhydrazine
binding indicated that the hydrazine moiety interacts with the heme iron.
Based on this, a set of compounds was selected from the top 30% of poses
kept from the docked library for biochemical testing that had predicted
hydrazine to heme iron interactions. Of 21 compounds chosen, 10 were
tested and 9 inhibited IDO1 with IC50 of As part of our studies to
identify novel inhibitors for the immunosuppressive enzyme indoleamine
2,3-dioxygenase 1 (IDO1) for restoring tumor immunity, we investigated
the ability of the enzyme's x-ray crystal structure to predict active
molecules when used in molecular docking based virtual screening of
fragment libraries.The 352 compound Zenobia Therapeutics fragment library
was screened by differential scanning fluorimetry and 74 compounds were
identified that altered the thermal stability of the protein. Of these,
biochemical analysis showed that only 14 inhibited the enzyme activity by
>50% at 1 mM, and hydrazine containing fragments were the most potent
inhibitors of recombinant human IDO1 (rhIDO1), with the best being a
benzothiazole compound retrieving an IC50 of 8 M. We recently showed that
phenylhydrazine is a more potent inhibitor (IC50 0.3 M), which provided a
dataset for testing various docking strategies to discover fragment
inhibitors.The fragment library was docked into the IDO1 active site (PDB
code 2D0T) using GOLD driven by the scoring functions ChemPLP, Goldscore,
ASP or Chemscore. The three top scoring poses for each compound were kept
then rescored by each scoring function. The combination of docking by
Goldscore and rescoring by Chemscore to identify the top scoring pose
gave the best outcome, an 8.3 fold enrichment of active compounds within
the top 5% of the ranked library compared to random selection.Based on
this docking and scoring strategy we performed a virtual screening
campaign on a 14,000 compound library containing commercially available
phenylhydrazine derivatives. Our characterization of phenylhydrazine
binding indicated that the hydrazine moiety interacts with the heme iron.
Based on this, a set of compounds was selected from the top 30% of poses
kept from the docked library for biochemical testing that had predicted
hydrazine to heme iron interactions. Of 21 compounds chosen, 10 were
tested and 9 inhibited IDO1 with IC50 of < 10 M. Also, compounds
predicted to make a hydrogen bond acceptor to heme iron interaction were
selected and an additional 9 compounds chosen of which 6 were tested and
only 1 inhibited rhIDO1 with IC50 of As part of our studies to identify
novel inhibitors for the immunosuppressive enzyme indoleamine
2,3-dioxygenase 1 (IDO1) for restoring tumor immunity, we investigated
the ability of the enzyme's x-ray crystal structure to predict active
molecules when used in molecular docking based virtual screening of
fragment libraries.The 352 compound Zenobia Therapeutics fragment library
was screened by differential scanning fluorimetry and 74 compounds were
identified that altered the thermal stability of the protein. Of these,
biochemical analysis showed that only 14 inhibited the enzyme activity by
>50% at 1 mM, and hydrazine containing fragments were the most potent
inhibitors of recombinant human IDO1 (rhIDO1), with the best being a
benzothiazole compound retrieving an IC50 of 8 M. We recently showed that
phenylhydrazine is a more potent inhibitor (IC50 0.3 M), which provided a
dataset for testing various docking strategies to discover fragment
inhibitors.The fragment library was docked into the IDO1 active site (PDB
code 2D0T) using GOLD driven by the scoring functions ChemPLP, Goldscore,
ASP or Chemscore. The three top scoring poses for each compound were kept
then rescored by each scoring function. The combination of docking by
Goldscore and rescoring by Chemscore to identify the top scoring pose
gave the best outcome, an 8.3 fold enrichment of active compounds within
the top 5% of the ranked library compared to random selection.Based on
this docking and scoring strategy we performed a virtual screening
campaign on a 14,000 compound library containing commercially available
phenylhydrazine derivatives. Our characterization of phenylhydrazine
binding indicated that the hydrazine moiety interacts with the heme iron.
Based on this, a set of compounds was selected from the top 30% of poses
kept from the docked library for biochemical testing that had predicted
hydrazine to heme iron interactions. Of 21 compounds chosen, 10 were
tested and 9 inhibited IDO1 with IC50 of < 10 M. Also, compounds
predicted to make a hydrogen bond acceptor to heme iron interaction were
selected and an additional 9 compounds chosen of which 6 were tested and
only 1 inhibited rhIDO1 with IC50 of < 10 M. For these latter ones the
hydrazine was not predicted to interact with the heme iron.This study
indicates that the rhIDO1 structure would be useful for discovering
inhibitors in a diverse fragment library, and an additional hydrazine to
heme iron binding descriptor is useful for finding actives in a library
of compounds containing the phenylhydrazine core.

