Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Fusarochromanone inhibits cell proliferation and induces cell
death in COS7 cells


Fusarochromanone (FC101) is a mycotoxin produced by Fusarium equiseti.
Contamination of FC101 occurs frequently in grains and feedstuffs, which
has been found to cause tibial dyschondroplasia in chickens and
Kashin-Beck disease in children. However, little is known about the
toxicity of FC101 in the kidney. In this study, we found that FC101
inhibited cell proliferation and induced cell death in monkey kidney
fibroblasts (COS7) in a concentration-dependent manner. Furthermore, we
found that FC101 inhibited cell proliferation by arresting cells in G1
phase of the cell cycle, which was associated with reduced expression of
CDK4, cyclin D1, and Cdc25A, as well as decreased phosphorylation of Rb.
FC101 induced cell death by downregulating expression of Bcl-2, Bcl-xl
and survivin, and upregulating expression of Bad, leading to increased
cleavages of caspase 3 and PARP. Also, FC101 induced translocation of
apoptosis inducing factor (AIF) from the cytosol to the nucleus.
Furthermore, FC101 activation of JNK cascade also contributed to cell
death, as inhibition of JNK with SP600125 or expression of dominant
negative c-Jun attenuated FC101-induced cell death. In addition, we
observed that FC101-induced cell death linked to induction of reactive
oxygen species (ROS) in the cells, since addition of antioxidants
(co-enzyme Q10 and N-acetyl-cysteine) attenuated the toxic effect of
FC101 on the cells. Our findings suggest that FC101 may exert its
toxicity in COS7 cells through oxidative stress.

