Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The potential of PD-1/PD-L1 signaling inhibition outlined from
clinical analysis of colorectal cancer


Background: Recent data demonstrate the programmed death-1/programmed
death ligand (PD-1/PD-L) pathway in T cell activation to play an
important role in tumor evasion from host immunity. The aim of this study
was to analyze the clinical significance of PD-1/PD-L1/L2 signaling in
colorectal cancer (CRC).Methods: Gene and protein expression levels of
PD-1, PD-L1, PD-L2, CD4, CD8 and Foxp3 were analyzed in tumors from
patients with CRC (n=116 with completed 5-year follow up) by
immunohistochemistry and RT-qPCR. Obtained data were analyzed for their
prognostic significance with respect to outcome analysis.Results: 90.5%
of the investigated tumors showed T cell infiltration, with 58% of the
patients demonstrating PD-1-positive T cells in their tumors. Increased
PD-L1-expression levels were found in patients who developed
PD-1-positive T cell infiltration compared to PD-1-T cell negative
individuals. Statistical analysis showed ligand expression (PD-L1/PD-L2)
in the cancer tissues combined with dense PD-1-positive T cell
infiltration to be associated with poor prognosis in affected patients
(pBackground: Recent data demonstrate the programmed death-1/programmed
death ligand (PD-1/PD-L) pathway in T cell activation to play an
important role in tumor evasion from host immunity. The aim of this study
was to analyze the clinical significance of PD-1/PD-L1/L2 signaling in
colorectal cancer (CRC).Methods: Gene and protein expression levels of
PD-1, PD-L1, PD-L2, CD4, CD8 and Foxp3 were analyzed in tumors from
patients with CRC (n=116 with completed 5-year follow up) by
immunohistochemistry and RT-qPCR. Obtained data were analyzed for their
prognostic significance with respect to outcome analysis.Results: 90.5%
of the investigated tumors showed T cell infiltration, with 58% of the
patients demonstrating PD-1-positive T cells in their tumors. Increased
PD-L1-expression levels were found in patients who developed
PD-1-positive T cell infiltration compared to PD-1-T cell negative
individuals. Statistical analysis showed ligand expression (PD-L1/PD-L2)
in the cancer tissues combined with dense PD-1-positive T cell
infiltration to be associated with poor prognosis in affected patients
(p<0.001). Multivariate analysis demonstrated PD-L expression in the
tumors to be an independent prognostic factor in CRC.Conclusion: The
presented results from clinical cancers suggest for the first time for
CRC that negative signaling of infiltrating PD-1-positive T cells through
PD-L1 expression within the tumor is promoting tumor progression through
downregulation of anti-tumor immunity. In conclusion, this study
demonstrates the importance of strategies inhibiting negative PD-1/PD-L1
signaling in CRC.

