Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ex vivo and in vivo characterization of IPH4102, a humanized
anti-KIR3DL2 antibody for the treatment of cutaneous T-cell lymphomas


KIR3DL2 belongs to the killer immunoglobulin (Ig)-like receptors (KIRs)
family and is composed of three extracellular Ig-like domains. KIR3DL2 is
naturally expressed on some NK cells and minor subpopulations of CD8+ and
CD4+ T cells. Physiologically, KIRD3L2 is an inhibitory receptor for
human leukocyte antigen (HLA) class I molcules regulating NK cell
activation. Interestingly, KIR3DL2 is also expressed on several subtypes
of T lymphomas/leukemias, and in particular on Advanced cutaneous T cell
lymphomas (CTCL), making it a unique therapeutic target in cancer. From a
wide collection of anti-KIR3DL2 monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) with
distinct properties related to several epitopes, we have selected IPH4102
as the lead therapeutic candidate. IPH4102 is a humanized IgG1 that
selectively kills KIR3DL2-positive cells in vitro, mainly through
antibody-dependent cell cytotoxicity (ADCC). IPH4102 also improves
survival of mice engrafted with KIR3DL2-positive tumors. More
importantly, IPH4102 exerts remarkable anti-tumor activity against
primary KIR3DL2-positive tumor cells ex vivo: using blood taken from
Szary Syndrome patients as experimental model, we demonstrated the
efficient killing of primary leukemic cells by autologous NK cells
engaged by IPH4102. IPH4102 IND-enabling studies are ongoing. In
parallel, other anti-KIR3DL2 mAbs were also developed as unique and
sensitive tools for the detection by immunohistochemistry of KIR3DL2 on
tumor biopsies. Owing to its efficacy profile and to the highly
restricted expression pattern of its target KIR3DL2, IPH4102 stands as a
very promising therapeutic option for the treatment of advanced cutaneous
T cell lymphomas.

