Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: EGFR endocytosis is a rational target in lung cancer with
wild-type EGFR


Oncogenic alterations of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
signaling are frequently observed in lung cancer patients with worse
differentiation and poor prognosis. However, the therapeutic efficacy of
EGFR-tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) is currently limited in selected
patients with EGFR mutations. Therefore, in this study, we investigated
the potential molecular mechanism that contributes to cell viability and
the response of gefitinib, one of the EGFR-TKIs, in lung cancer models
with wide-type EGFR (wtEGFR). Interestingly, we found that EGF-induced
EGFR endocytosis is existed differently between gefitinib-sensitive and
-insensitive lung cancer cell lines. Suppressing EGFR endocytos decreased
cell viability and increased apoptotic cell death in
gefitinib-insensitive lung cancer with wtEGFR in vitro and in vivo. In
addition, we found that Rab25 was differentially expressed in between
gefitinib-sensitive and -insensitive lung cancer cells. Rab25 knockdown
caused the changed EGFR endocytosis and reverted the gefitinib response
in gefitinib-sensitive lung cancer with wtEGFR in vitro and in vivo.
Taken together, our findings suggest a novel insight that EGFR
endocytosis is a rational therapeutic target in lung cancer with wtEGFR,
in which the combined efficacy with gefitinib is expected. Furthermore,
we demonstrated that Rab25 plays an important role in EGFR endocytosis
and gefitinib therapy.

