Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Association between new onset hypothyroidism and clinical response
in patients treated with tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) therapy in phase
I clinical trials


Background: TKIs are a new class of novel cancer drugs that represent a
significant advance in cancer therapy. TKI-induced thyroid dysfunction
has been identified as an important but potentially manageable toxicity
of targeted therapy. Relationship between new onset hypothyroidism and
clinical response in patients with advanced cancers treated with TKI
treatment was evaluated.Methods: We retrospectively reviewed 410 patients
from 5 clinical trials treated with therapy that included at least one
TKIstarting January, 2006. Patients with preexisting thyroid disease
including thyroid cancer, hypo or hyperthyroidism were excluded. Analysis
of 198 patients was performed. Response was determined by RECIST 1.0.
Clinical benefit described as complete response or partial response or
stable disease > 4 months. Multivariable Logistic Regression Analysis was
used to correlate new onset hypothyroidism with clinical benefit.Results:
The median age was 58 years (13 to 85); 56% of patients were female. 27%
(53/198) of patients developed hypothyroidism after therapy. Clinical
benefit rates were 51% in patients with new onset hypothyroidism versus
34% in patients without hypothyroidism. In the univariate model, the odds
ratio (OR) for patients who had new onset hypothyroidism was 2.0 (95% CI:
1.0, 3.7; P=0.038), suggesting they were 2 times more likely to have a
clinical benefit than were patients without hypothyroidism. We grouped
tumor types into two classes (good risk (breast, gyn, CRC, lung, H/N, GU,
Biliary, HCC: 53/114= 46% clinical benefit) and poor risk (melanoma,
pancreas, upper GI, others: 24/84= 29% clinical benefit)) based on the
proportion of patients experiencing clinical benefit. When adjusted for
tumor class, age (>50 years old), sex, the OR was 2.6 (95% CI: 1.3, 5.3;
P=0.007) (Table).Conclusions: New onset hypothyroidism is a positive
prognostic indicator for favorable clinical benefit in patients who
received TKI treatment.


