Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Thrombomodulin mediates the migration of cervical cancer cells
through the regulation of epithelial-mesenchymal transition biomarkers


Thrombomodulin (TM) has been shown to regulate many physiological and
pathological processes, including inflammation, thrombosis, and tumor
progression. TM is also a natural anticoagulant that maintains
circulatory homeostasis in endothelial cells. However, little is known
regarding the role of TM in the progression and metastasis of cervical
cancer.TM-specific RNA interference and a cDNA expression vector were
used to manipulate TM expression in cervical cancer cells. Cell growth
and cell migration were evaluated using the MTT assay, transwell
migration assays, and a biosensor system.TM silencing did not affect the
growth rate of the cells. However, cell migration was dramatically
enhanced after silencing of TM in HeLa cells. The overexpression of TM in
cervical cancer cells only slightly influenced their proliferative
capacity. After overexpression of TM in HeLa cells, their migratory
capability was suppressed. Furthermore, we found that the decreased
expression of E-cadherin and increase of zeb-1 and snail expression in
TM-silenced cells which may be correlated with the results of
knocking-down TM increases the migratory ability in this study.In
concludion, our results demonstrate that TM may slightly regulate the
growth but played the important role in the migratory ability of cervical
cancer cells, suggesting that TM could potentially serve as a novel
prognostic and therapeutic target in cervical cancer.

