Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NDN, an imprinted tumor suppressor gene inhibits ovarian cancer
cell growth and motility and is downregulated by genetic and epigenetic
mechanisms


NDN is a maternally imprinted gene on chromosome 15q11.2 that is
consistently expressed in normal ovarian epithelium, but dramatically
downregulated in the majority of ovarian cancer cell lines and surgical
specimens, determined by gene expression array and RT-PCR analysis. On
tissue microarrays, little or no NDN protein could be detected by
immunohistochemical analysis in73% of 351 epithelial ovarian cancers.
Loss of NDN expression could be attributed, in part, to LOH in 28% of 18
informative cases and to hypermethylation of CpG sites 1 and 2 in the NDN
promoter region in 21% and 27% of 43 ovarian cancers, respectively. All
hypermethylated cases were associated with NDN down-regulation. Promoter
hypermethylation and decreased NDN expression were also found in 7 of 10
ovarian cancer cell lines. Treatment with the demethylating agent
decitabine increased NDN expression in 4 of 7 hypermethylated cell lines.
Treatment with the histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor suberoylanilide
hydroxamic acid (SAHA) increased NDN expression in 2 cell lines with
normal or reduced methylation. However, when the two drugs were combined,
they didn't show additive or synergistic effect. Re-expression of NDN in
ovarian cancer cell lines such as SKOv3 and HEY significantly inhibited
cell growth, associated with apoptosis, but not autophagy or necrosis.
Re-expression of NDN also inhibited cell migration. These observations
support the hypothesis that NDN is an imprinted tumor suppressor gene and
its loss of function can be caused by multiple mechanisms in ovarian
cancer.

