Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An expressed retrogene of master embryonic stem cell factor OCT4
alters prostate cancer susceptibility


Genetic association studies of prostate and other cancers have identified
a major risk locus at chromosome 8q24, but a causal gene and a mechanism
for cancer predisposition has remained elusive. The locus harbors the
POU5F1B retrogene and several non-coding RNA genes, and is also proximal
to the MYC oncogene. The open reading frame of the retrogene is preserved
with 96% identity to that of the parent POU5F1 gene on chromosome 6,
encoding the master embryonic stem cell factor Oct4. We observed that
8q24 risk alleles are significantly correlated with reduced expression of
the POU5F1B retrogene in normal prostate tissue. The alleles were not
correlated with the expression of MYC or other flanking genes in normal
prostate tissue. Predicted deleterious POU5F1B missense germline variants
were also associated with risk of prostate cancer. Thus, two independent
lines of genetic evidence support a potential causal role for POU5F1B in
the transformation of normal prostate tissue. A plausible hypothesis of
POU5F1B function is dysregulation of Oct4; POU5F1 is transcriptionally
regulated by the encoded Oct4 transcription factor. The POU5F1B retrogene
on 8q24 and POU5F1 on 6p21 were significantly co-expressed. These results
suggest that a pathway critical to self-renewal of embryonic stem cells
may also have a role in the origin of cancer.Note: This abstract was not
presented at the meeting.

