Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prior bone health history in breast cancer patients on aromatase
inhibitors


Background: Aromatase inhibitors (AIs) have been replacing tamoxifen
(TAM) as adjuvant hormonal therapy (HT) for hormone receptor-positive,
postmenopausal breast cancer (BC). AIs are known for their adverse
effects on bone health, yet bone health history among AI users before BC
diagnosis is unknown, which may impact fracture risk after AI therapy. In
a cross-sectional analysis of a prospective cohort of BC patients on HT,
we describe prior history of osteoporosis and fracture before BC
diagnosis among AI users compared with TAM users.Methods: A total of 3280
women diagnosed with invasive BC from 2005-2013 and initially treated
with AI or TAM were identified from an ongoing prospective cohort study
at Kaiser Permanente Northern California (KPNC). Data on baseline
demographic and lifestyle factors came from in-person interviews about
two months post-diagnosis. Information on BC diagnosis and treatment, HT,
and prior bone health history including bisphosphonate (BP) use was
obtained from the KPNC cancer registry and clinical databases. Using age-
and race-adjusted logistic regression, we examined the association of
lifestyle and clinical factors at BC diagnosis with prior history of 1)
osteoporosis, 2) any fracture (excluding head, face, fingers, toes), and
3) any major fracture (hip, spine, humerus, wrist).Results: Compared with
initial TAM users (n=1140), initial AI users (n=2140) were more likely to
be older (mean 64.5 y vs. 50.5 y) and obese (38% vs. 26%), yet less
likely to have had chemotherapy (36% vs. 51%). AI users were more likely
to have a prior history of osteoporosis (n=164, 7.7% vs. n=62, 5.4%,
age-adjusted pmedian OR=0.4; 95% CI: 0.2, 0.7).Discussion: This
descriptive analysis is one of the first to characterize AI users and
risk factors for prior bone morbidity before BC diagnosis. In the future,
this study will evaluate the impact of AIs on risk of subsequent bone
outcomes and examine lifestyle, molecular, and genetic risk factors for
AI-induced fractures.Funded by R01 CA166701 and R01 CA105274.

