Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Systematic functional assessment of driver mutations for
individual ovarian cancers


Although epithelial ovarian cancer is an intractable cancer and the
overall five-year survival rate is approximately 40 to 50%, clinically
effective molecular-targeted therapeutics to treat ovarian cancer has not
been available thus far. Recent progress of massively parallel sequencing
technologies has been enabling us to identify substantial number of
genomic aberrations including somatic mutations, indels and
translocations in variable cancer types exemplified by epithelial ovarian
cancer and non-small cell lung cancer. However, it is still very
difficult to identify a driver gene, which is functionally relevant for
cancer growth, from hundreds of mutations that are usually found from a
single cancer sample of an individual patient. An in vitro cultured cell
line, which is originated from a clinical sample, can be utilized to
assess functions of the genes that are identified to have somatic
aberrations in the paired clinical tumor. We have been establishing
multiple ovarian cancer cell lines derived from clinical samples and
analyzing pairs of the cell lines and clinical samples with exon-capture
sequencing. The genes, which are somatically mutated and shared in a pair
of cell line and clinical sample, are targeted with RNA interference in
the cell line, and subsequently the effect on cell proliferation and
survival is examined. As such, a driver mutation for an individual cancer
can be identified by a set of experimental perturbations. Identified
driver mutations would be then validated with publicly available
databases and with clinical archive samples. As a proof-of-principle,
somatic mutations of PIK3CA and KRAS were detected as drivers to promote
cell proliferation of a carcinosarcoma. We believe this approach can
increase an opportunity to identify molecular targets in ovarian cancer
therapeutics.

