Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A 3-dimensional cell invasion assay compatible with high content
screening


The transition from non-invasive phenotype to invasive phenotype of tumor
cells marks the switch from a benign tumor that can be successfully
treated via surgery to a more malignant form of cancer. Understanding the
mechanisms underlying this hallmark event, which enables tumor cells to
invade through extracellular matrix, is critical for discovering pathways
and new targets to develop anti-metastatic strategies. Previously, we
developed a cell based assay for the study of cell migration in 96-well
plates. A self-dissolving biocompatible gel (BCG) is utilized to form
uniformly sized, cell-free detection zones in collagen I coated 96-well
plates. When cells are seeded into these wells, they pattern in an
annular monolayer surrounding the BCG. Once the BCG dissolves, an overlay
of collagen I is applied to the assay wells, following which cells can
invade in 3-dimensions into the detection zone previously occupied by the
BCG. This Oris Pro cell invasion assay presents a straightforward,
accessible and quantifiable cell method to study cell invasion, and can
be used for example to evaluate candidate drugs targeting tumor invasion.
Microscopic visual assessment of cell invasion in the presence of
inhibitors is made by use of cell stains at multiple time-points. In this
study we demonstrate the use of this assay platform for robust and
reproducible analysis of HT-1080 and MDA- MB-231 cell invasion in 3-D.
The presentation will discuss (i) factors that influence cell invasion,
including density of collagen overlay and time; (ii) microscopic
monitoring of cell invasion in the presence of potential inhibitors
throughout the duration of the experiment; and (iii) the qualitative and
quantitative readouts that can be obtained using this 3-dimensional cell
invasion assay.

