Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differences in nicotine metabolism among five racial/ethnic groups
with disparate risks for lung cancer: The multiethnic cohort study


Introduction: Globally, lung cancer is the most common cancer and the
leading cause of cancer-related deaths. Smoking is a well-established
risk factor for this disease; however, self-reported dose does not fully
explain the differences in lung cancer risk observed across ethnic/racial
populations. Compared to whites, for the same lifetime number of
cigarettes smoked, African Americans (AA) and Native Hawaiians (NH) have
substantially higher rates of lung cancer, whereas Japanese Americans
(JA) and Latinos (LA) have lower rates of disease. These differences may
be due to variations in nicotine metabolism, thereby influencing smoking
behavior.Methods: Using overnight or first morning urine samples
collected in the Multiethnic Cohort study (MEC), we examined nicotine
metabolism among 2,300 cancer-free smokers of five racial/ethnic groups
with different lung cancer risks: AA (n=356), NH (n=330), whites (n=444),
LA (n=459) and JA (n=711). Total and free urinary nicotine metabolites:
nicotine, cotinine, and trans-3-hydroxycotinine (3-OH) were measured by
liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry. Smoking dose was
quantified by urinary nicotine equivalents (NE)=total cotinine + total
nicotine + total 3-OH. The respective glucuronidation ratio of each
metabolite was calculated as the total metabolite minus the free
metabolite divided by the free metabolite. CYP2A6 enzymatic activity
ratio was calculated as: (total cotinine + 3-OH)/ NE. To examine the
difference in metabolite levels across racial/ethnic groups,
covariate-adjusted geometric means were computed for each group from
linear regression models, adjusting for age at urine collection, sex,
creatinine, BMI, and CYP2A6 activity ratio (for the NE and glucuronides
models), cigarettes per day (CPD) (for the NE model) or NE (for the
glucuronides and CYP2A6 activity models).Results: We found that NE and
nicotine, cotinine and 3-OH glucuronidation and CYP2A6 activity differed
by race/ethnicity (p0.002). For NE, AA had the highest levels, followed
by whites, LA, NH and JA (geometric means=30.9, 28.5, 28.3, 27.2 and 25.7
nmol/mL, respectively). For CYP2A6 activity, the ratio was highest in AA,
followed by LA, whites, NH and JA (geometric means= 0.80, 0.81, 0.77,
0.73 and 0.62, respectively). We found that for each racial/ethnic group
NE was greater for smokers in the higher compared to the lower tertile of
CYP2A6 activity. This trend was significant for all groups, except NH
(p-trend's= 0.02 [AA], 0.30 [NH], Introduction: Globally, lung cancer is
the most common cancer and the leading cause of cancer-related deaths.
Smoking is a well-established risk factor for this disease; however,
self-reported dose does not fully explain the differences in lung cancer
risk observed across ethnic/racial populations. Compared to whites, for
the same lifetime number of cigarettes smoked, African Americans (AA) and
Native Hawaiians (NH) have substantially higher rates of lung cancer,
whereas Japanese Americans (JA) and Latinos (LA) have lower rates of
disease. These differences may be due to variations in nicotine
metabolism, thereby influencing smoking behavior.Methods: Using overnight
or first morning urine samples collected in the Multiethnic Cohort study
(MEC), we examined nicotine metabolism among 2,300 cancer-free smokers of
five racial/ethnic groups with different lung cancer risks: AA (n=356),
NH (n=330), whites (n=444), LA (n=459) and JA (n=711). Total and free
urinary nicotine metabolites: nicotine, cotinine, and
trans-3-hydroxycotinine (3-OH) were measured by liquid chromatography
tandem mass spectrometry. Smoking dose was quantified by urinary nicotine
equivalents (NE)=total cotinine + total nicotine + total 3-OH. The
respective glucuronidation ratio of each metabolite was calculated as the
total metabolite minus the free metabolite divided by the free
metabolite. CYP2A6 enzymatic activity ratio was calculated as: (total
cotinine + 3-OH)/ NE. To examine the difference in metabolite levels
across racial/ethnic groups, covariate-adjusted geometric means were
computed for each group from linear regression models, adjusting for age
at urine collection, sex, creatinine, BMI, and CYP2A6 activity ratio (for
the NE and glucuronides models), cigarettes per day (CPD) (for the NE
model) or NE (for the glucuronides and CYP2A6 activity models).Results:
We found that NE and nicotine, cotinine and 3-OH glucuronidation and
CYP2A6 activity differed by race/ethnicity (p0.002). For NE, AA had the
highest levels, followed by whites, LA, NH and JA (geometric means=30.9,
28.5, 28.3, 27.2 and 25.7 nmol/mL, respectively). For CYP2A6 activity,
the ratio was highest in AA, followed by LA, whites, NH and JA (geometric
means= 0.80, 0.81, 0.77, 0.73 and 0.62, respectively). We found that for
each racial/ethnic group NE was greater for smokers in the higher
compared to the lower tertile of CYP2A6 activity. This trend was
significant for all groups, except NH (p-trend's= 0.02 [AA], 0.30 [NH],
<0.0001 [W, LA and JA]; p-interactionIntroduction: Globally, lung cancer
is the most common cancer and the leading cause of cancer-related deaths.
Smoking is a well-established risk factor for this disease; however,
self-reported dose does not fully explain the differences in lung cancer
risk observed across ethnic/racial populations. Compared to whites, for
the same lifetime number of cigarettes smoked, African Americans (AA) and
Native Hawaiians (NH) have substantially higher rates of lung cancer,
whereas Japanese Americans (JA) and Latinos (LA) have lower rates of
disease. These differences may be due to variations in nicotine
metabolism, thereby influencing smoking behavior.Methods: Using overnight
or first morning urine samples collected in the Multiethnic Cohort study
(MEC), we examined nicotine metabolism among 2,300 cancer-free smokers of
five racial/ethnic groups with different lung cancer risks: AA (n=356),
NH (n=330), whites (n=444), LA (n=459) and JA (n=711). Total and free
urinary nicotine metabolites: nicotine, cotinine, and
trans-3-hydroxycotinine (3-OH) were measured by liquid chromatography
tandem mass spectrometry. Smoking dose was quantified by urinary nicotine
equivalents (NE)=total cotinine + total nicotine + total 3-OH. The
respective glucuronidation ratio of each metabolite was calculated as the
total metabolite minus the free metabolite divided by the free
metabolite. CYP2A6 enzymatic activity ratio was calculated as: (total
cotinine + 3-OH)/ NE. To examine the difference in metabolite levels
across racial/ethnic groups, covariate-adjusted geometric means were
computed for each group from linear regression models, adjusting for age
at urine collection, sex, creatinine, BMI, and CYP2A6 activity ratio (for
the NE and glucuronides models), cigarettes per day (CPD) (for the NE
model) or NE (for the glucuronides and CYP2A6 activity models).Results:
We found that NE and nicotine, cotinine and 3-OH glucuronidation and
CYP2A6 activity differed by race/ethnicity (p0.002). For NE, AA had the
highest levels, followed by whites, LA, NH and JA (geometric means=30.9,
28.5, 28.3, 27.2 and 25.7 nmol/mL, respectively). For CYP2A6 activity,
the ratio was highest in AA, followed by LA, whites, NH and JA (geometric
means= 0.80, 0.81, 0.77, 0.73 and 0.62, respectively). We found that for
each racial/ethnic group NE was greater for smokers in the higher
compared to the lower tertile of CYP2A6 activity. This trend was
significant for all groups, except NH (p-trend's= 0.02 [AA], 0.30 [NH],
<0.0001 [W, LA and JA]; p-interaction<0.005).Conclusion: CYP2A6 enzymatic
activity affects smoking dose beyond CPD, which in part may explain the
relatively lower risk of lung cancer of Japanese Americans. Further
investigation of racial differences in lung cancer risk using nicotine
biomarkers is warranted.

