Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hepatitis C virus (HCV) core protein potentiates proangiogenic
activity of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) cells


Background: Recent clinical trials found that sorafenib may have better
efficacy for HCV-related HCC than HCC with other etiologies. HCV core
protein has been found to influence the mitogen-activated protein kinase
pathway, which is one of the targets of sorafenib. We thus planned this
study to examine the effect of HCV core protein overexpression on HCC
cells.Methods: We stably expressed HCV core protein in Huh7, a HCC cell
line, using a lentivirus based vector S2. Two stable clones were selected
for experiments. One clone (Huh7-core-high) expressed a higher amount of
HCV core protein than the other (Huh7-core-low). Huh7 expressing the
empty vector (Huh7-S2) served as a control. We compared the cytotoxicity
of sorafenib in these cells using the MTT assay. Tube formation analysis
and Matrigel plug assay were performed to evaluate the angiogenic
activity.Results: Huh7-core-high and Huh7-core-low cells did not show
increased cell proliferation compared to Huh7-S2 cells. Sorafenib showed
similar in vitro cytotoxicity for Huh7-core-high, Huh7-core-low, and
Huh7-S2 cells. Overexpression of HCV core protein potentiates
proangiogenic activity of Huh7 cells dose-dependently. In tube formation
analysis, Huh7-core-high induced more potent angiogenesis than Huh7-S2
cells with more total tube lengths (p = 0.02), mean tube lengths (p =
0.04), mean tube areas (p = 0.04), branch points (p = 0.03), and nodes (p
Background: Recent clinical trials found that sorafenib may have better
efficacy for HCV-related HCC than HCC with other etiologies. HCV core
protein has been found to influence the mitogen-activated protein kinase
pathway, which is one of the targets of sorafenib. We thus planned this
study to examine the effect of HCV core protein overexpression on HCC
cells.Methods: We stably expressed HCV core protein in Huh7, a HCC cell
line, using a lentivirus based vector S2. Two stable clones were selected
for experiments. One clone (Huh7-core-high) expressed a higher amount of
HCV core protein than the other (Huh7-core-low). Huh7 expressing the
empty vector (Huh7-S2) served as a control. We compared the cytotoxicity
of sorafenib in these cells using the MTT assay. Tube formation analysis
and Matrigel plug assay were performed to evaluate the angiogenic
activity.Results: Huh7-core-high and Huh7-core-low cells did not show
increased cell proliferation compared to Huh7-S2 cells. Sorafenib showed
similar in vitro cytotoxicity for Huh7-core-high, Huh7-core-low, and
Huh7-S2 cells. Overexpression of HCV core protein potentiates
proangiogenic activity of Huh7 cells dose-dependently. In tube formation
analysis, Huh7-core-high induced more potent angiogenesis than Huh7-S2
cells with more total tube lengths (p = 0.02), mean tube lengths (p =
0.04), mean tube areas (p = 0.04), branch points (p = 0.03), and nodes (p
< 0.01). Huh7-core-low cells induced stronger angiogenesis than Huh7-S2
cells with more total tube lengths (p = 0.05) and branch points (p =
0.01). By Matrigel plug assay, Huh7-core-high and Huh7-core-low cells
dose-dependently induced stronger angiogenesis in mice compared to
Huh7-S2 cells with significantly higher hemoglobin levels in the Matrigel
plugs.Conclusions: HCV core protein expression potentiates the
proangiogenic activity of HCC, both in vitro and in vivo. (This work was
supported by grants NSC98-3112-B-002-038, NSC101-2314-B-002-141,
100CAP1020-2 & 102-2314-B-002-120.)

