Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: microRNA-26a expression may suppress tumor growth by modulating
macrophage infiltration in tumor through down-regulation of M-CSF in
hepatocellular carcinoma


PurposeTo Study molecular changes specific to tumor-derived endothelial
cells.Materials and methodsTumor tissue and adjacent nontumor tissue were
obtained from 27 hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) patients. Primary
cultured CD31+ and CD105+ tumor endothelial cells (TECs) and nontumor
endothelial cells (NECs) were isolated by magnetic-activated cell
sorting. Affymetrix GeneChip Human Gene ST Arrays were used to determine
gene expression profiles of HCC cells and matched TECs and NECs. A
capillary tube formation assay was used to evaluate tube formation by the
endothelial cells. The tumorigenicity of isolated TECs was monitored in
nonobese diabetic/severe combined immunodeficient mice.ResultsThe
isolated CD31+ and CD105+ TECs and NECs displayed features of endothelial
cells. Both cultured HCC cells and TECs induced capillary tube formation
in vitro and were incorporated into tumor vasculature in vivo. The TEC
isolates had a gene signature resembling that of HCC cells, and
TEC-specific genes were associated with poorer HCC survival.ConclusionsA
subset of TECs may originate from tumor cells, and they express a unique
set of genes linked to HCC prognosis.Note: This abstract was not
presented at the meeting.

