Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metastasis suppressor CD82/KAI1 expression is dependent on
functional SWI/SNF ARID1A/B


CD82/KAI1 was one of the first metastasis suppressors identified and is
capable of inhibiting the metastatic process in orthotopic tumor models.
The expression of the CD82/KAI1 is down-regulated during tumor
progression in many tumor types including prostate, breast, lung,
bladder, and pancreatic cancers, and this down regulation appears to be
at the level of transcription or post-transcription. The gene is not
mutated, deleted or silenced by promoter methylation. CD82/KAI1 is also
down regulated in advanced gynecologic cancers where CD82/KAI1 loss is
associated with the poor overall survival in ovarian cancer. The
mechanisms controlling the level of CD82/KAI1 expression remains unclear
particularly the widespread loss in advanced cancers. The p53 tumor
suppressor (TP53) can directly activate the CD82/KAI1 gene by interacting
with the 5-prime upstream region of the CD82/KAI1 gene. Mutant TP53 is
unable to bind this promoter site and fails to support CD82/KAI1
transcription. Taken together these data support a direct relationship
between TP53 and CD82/KAI1 genes and suggested that the loss of TP53
function, which is common in many types of advanced cancer can lead to
downregulation of CD82/KAI1, which then may result in metastases. However
many cancers without TP53 mutation also exhibit loss of CD82/KAI1
suggesting that the mechanism for CD82/KAI1 loss is not completely
explained by mutant TP53. Furthermore the mutant TP53 state and CD82/KAI1
loss is not strongly correlated in ovarian cancer. In some sarcomas the
mechanism of CD82/KAI1 loss is related to the increase of the gp-78 E3
ligase and increased proteasomal degradation. Therefore the regulation of
CD82/KAI1 in cells is likely complex. The AT Rich DNA binding protein
ARID1A gene is frequently mutated in endometrial and ovarian cancers. In
order to explore the functions of ARID1A in these cancers we complemented
mutant ARID1A in the ACI-98 endometrial cancer cell line. We utilized a
doxycycline inducible system and catalogued the protein changes following
ARID1A complementation using LC MS/MS. Among the most differentially
expressed proteins was CD82/KAI1. Levels of CD82 were dramatically
increased following ARID1A induction. ACI-98 cells were found to be TP53
wild-type and CD82 expression null. QRT-PCR assays confirmed the dramatic
increase in CD82/KAI1 mRNA levels and western blots also confirmed
restoration of CD82/KAI1 protein following Doxycycline induced ARID1A
restoration. We performed ChIP and confirmed that ARID1A was bound to the
CD82/KAI1 promoter region close to the TP53 interaction area.
Interestingly ACI-98 cells are mutant in both ARID1 homologs A and B.
Ectopic expression of ARID1B was also able to restore expression of
CD82/KAI1. These data suggest that the SWI/SNFARID1A/B complex is
necessary for chromatin remodeling and expression of the CD82/KAI1 gene.

