Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of notch3 in epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition of HCC


Introduction:The epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) program is often
activated in cancer cells during invasion and metastasis. During EMT,
expression of transcription factors such as Snail and Slug is induced due
to the reduction in E-cadherin expression. In addition, matrix
metallo-proteinases (MMPs) which digest the various components of
extracellular matrix also induced during EMT. Various signaling pathways
have been involved in the regulation of EMT program. We hypothesize that
notch signaling pathway is a potential regulator of EMT program in
HCC.Methods:Lysates from human HCC cell lines, Huh-7, HepG2, and Hep3B,
were analyzed for the expression of active notch intracellular domain
(NICD) 1-3 proteins by western analysis. To determine the role of NICD3
in cancer invasion and metastasis, siRNA against NICD3 was transfected
into HCC cell lines. The effect of depletion of NICD3 in HCC cell lines,
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) markers were measured by western
analyses.Results: Varied level of expression of NICD1-3 was observed in
HCC cell lines tested. Transfection of siRNA against NICD3 reduced the
level of NICD3 but not the NICD1 protein. Western analysis for the EMT
markers expression showed an increase in E-cadherin and concomitant
reduction in Snail, Slug, Matrix Metallo Proteinases (MMPs) 2 and
9.Conclusions:NICD3 inhibition significantly reduced the expression of
markers of metastasis by increasing E-cadherin and suppressing
transcription factors Snail, Slug, and MMPs. These observed change in the
protein levels are occurred in the absence of NICD3 protein but the
presence of NICD1 protein suggesting that NICD3 may play a role in
metastasis. Therefore, targeting NICD3 may be potential strategy for
treatment of HCC.

