Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Population pharmacokinetic model of ibrutinib, a Bruton's tyrosine
kinase inhibitor, for the treatment of B-cell malignancies


Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) and mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) are
B-cell malignancies with initial high response rate to
chemoimmunotherapy, but are largely considered incurable. Ibrutinib
(PCI-32765), an oral Bruton's tyrosine kinase inhibitor recently approved
to treat MCL, is under development for other B-cell malignancies. We
developed a population pharmacokinetic (PK) model for describing data
collected to date in clinical trials with ibrutinib.Ibrutinib plasma data
were available from 3 clinical trials: 1) a phase 1 dose-escalation study
in recurrent B-cell malignancies (doses: 1.25-12.5 mg/kg and 560 mg
fixed); 2) a phase 1b/2 dose-finding study in CLL (doses: 420 and 840
mg); 3) an open-label, phase 2, fixed-dose study in MCL (dose: 560 mg).
Overall, 3477 observations were collected in 245 patients following
single and repeated daily dosing on different treatment days. A
2-compartment model with sequential zero to first order absorption and
first order elimination was implemented. Analyses were performed with a
log-transform-both-sides approach. Additive and exponential models were
used to describe residual and inter-individual variability, respectively.
The first-order conditional estimation method was implemented using
NONMEM v 7.1.A linear model constructed with data collected following
single and repeated doses of ibrutinib at different dose levels
demonstrated that the PK was dose and time independent. Ibrutinib was
rapidly absorbed and was characterized by a high oral plasma clearance
(1000 L/h with between-subject variability of 21.9%; this, for a dose of
560 mg, would lead to an average steady state concentration of 22 ng/mL,
ie, 50 nM) and a high apparent volume of distribution at steady state
(10,000 L). Though both values are confounded by absolute
bioavailability, these values suggest that ibrutinib clearance and volume
are high. The half-lives of distribution and terminal phases were
estimated to be Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) and mantle cell
lymphoma (MCL) are B-cell malignancies with initial high response rate to
chemoimmunotherapy, but are largely considered incurable. Ibrutinib
(PCI-32765), an oral Bruton's tyrosine kinase inhibitor recently approved
to treat MCL, is under development for other B-cell malignancies. We
developed a population pharmacokinetic (PK) model for describing data
collected to date in clinical trials with ibrutinib.Ibrutinib plasma data
were available from 3 clinical trials: 1) a phase 1 dose-escalation study
in recurrent B-cell malignancies (doses: 1.25-12.5 mg/kg and 560 mg
fixed); 2) a phase 1b/2 dose-finding study in CLL (doses: 420 and 840
mg); 3) an open-label, phase 2, fixed-dose study in MCL (dose: 560 mg).
Overall, 3477 observations were collected in 245 patients following
single and repeated daily dosing on different treatment days. A
2-compartment model with sequential zero to first order absorption and
first order elimination was implemented. Analyses were performed with a
log-transform-both-sides approach. Additive and exponential models were
used to describe residual and inter-individual variability, respectively.
The first-order conditional estimation method was implemented using
NONMEM v 7.1.A linear model constructed with data collected following
single and repeated doses of ibrutinib at different dose levels
demonstrated that the PK was dose and time independent. Ibrutinib was
rapidly absorbed and was characterized by a high oral plasma clearance
(1000 L/h with between-subject variability of 21.9%; this, for a dose of
560 mg, would lead to an average steady state concentration of 22 ng/mL,
ie, 50 nM) and a high apparent volume of distribution at steady state
(10,000 L). Though both values are confounded by absolute
bioavailability, these values suggest that ibrutinib clearance and volume
are high. The half-lives of distribution and terminal phases were
estimated to be <1 h and 14 h, respectively. Administration of ibrutinib
in fasting state was characterized by a 67% relative bioavailability
compared to both meal conditions used in the clinical trials and
administration after a high-fat meal. The PK parameters were not found to
be significantly different between studies and clinical indications. Body
weight and coadministration of antacids had a marginal effect on volume
of distribution and duration of absorption processes, respectively. No
significant effect of covariates such as age, gender, patient
pretreatment, or clinical chemistry data was found. Population parameters
and inter-individual variability were estimated with good precision. The
model provided satisfactory goodness of fit, individual fittings, and
visual predictive checks.In conclusion, the proposed population PK model
was able to accommodate the plasma concentration-time profiles of
ibrutinib across various trials.

