Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel HER3 neutralizing antibody, patritumab abrogates cetuximab
resistance mediated by a heregulin-autocrine loop in colorectal cancer


PurposeAcquired resistance to cetuximab is a major problem in the
treatment of colorectal cancers. We previously showed that the HER3/HER4
ligand heregulin induced resistance to cetuximab by increasing the
association between HER2 and HER3, and subsequent activation of
downstream targets. We have now investigated strategies to overcome such
resistance, using patritumab, a novel neutralizing HER3
antibody.Experimental designWe established DiFi cells that stably express
heregulin (DiFi-HRG cells) as a result of retroviral infection, and
examined the antitumor effect of cetuximab, patritumab, and the
combination of both in these cells in vitro and vivo.ResultsDiFi-HRG
cells secreted large amount of heregulin and exhibited resistance to
cetuximab. Cetuximab alone down-regulated ERK phosphorylation, whereas it
had no effect on AKT phosphorylation, suggesting that continuous AKT
activation underlain underlies resistance to cetuximab in these cells. In
contrast, Patritumab in combination with cetuximab markedly reduced the
level of phosphorylation of HER2 HER3 and AKT, as well as ERK, and
induced apoptosis that was accompanied by upregulation of BIM and by
downregulation of survivin in vitro. Furthermore, the combination therapy
also markedly inhibited the growth of DiFi-HRG tumors in nude mice to a
greater extent than did treatment with either drug alone.ConclusionOur
data indicate that HER2/HER3 signaling activated by a heregulin-autocrine
loop confers resistance to cetuximab, and that patritumab restored
sensitivity to cetuximab by inhibition of HER3 phosphorylation that is
stimulated by heregulin.

