Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: FoxD3-regulated microRNA-137 suppresses tumour growth and
metastasis in human hepatocellular carcinoma by targeting AKT2


Background and Aims: microRNAs, which are frequently deregulated in human
cancer, have been implicated in the progression of hepatocarcinogenesis.
Our study aims to investigate the role of miR-137 in cell proliferation
and metastasis of hepatocellular carcinoma and the underlying molecular
mechanisms.Methods: Real-time PCR and western blot were used to examine
the expressions of miR-137, Akt2 and FoxD3 in HCC tissues and cells. The
in vitro and in vivo effects of miR-137 were determined. Luciferase
reporter assay was conducted to confirm the association of miR-137 and
AKT2. CHIP assay was performed to test the regulation of miR-137 by
FoxD3.Results: We show that microRNA (miR)-137 is significantly
down-regulated in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), and its decreased
expression is associated with vein invasion, incomplete Involucrum, and
tumour metastasis. Multivariate analysis suggests that miR-137 is an
independent indicator for poor survival. To determine its role in HCC
development, we showed that overexpression of miR-137 suppresses cell
proliferation, invasion and metastasis in vitro. Conversely, miR-137
inhibition promoted HCC cell growth. We also identified AKT2 as a key
target of miR-137 in this context. Statistical data revealed a reverse
correlation of AKT2 and miR-137 expression in HCC patients. Silencing of
AKT2 phenotypically copied miR-137-induced phenotypes, whereas
re-expression of AKT2 reversed the suppressive effects of miR-137.
Further investigation showed that miR-137 exerted its anti-tumour
activity via inhibiting the AKT2/mTOR pathway. Moreover, we demonstrated
that FoxD3 binds to the promoter of miR-137 and activates its
transcription. In vivo studies confirmed that FoxD3-regulated miR-137
inhibition of HCC growth and metastasis via directly targeting
AKT2.Conclusions: Our findings indicated that miR-137 is a valuable
biomarker for HCC prognosis and demonstrated that the FoxD3/miR-137/AKT2
regulatory network plays an important role in HCC progression.

