Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PET imaging of 89Zr-labeled Pertuzumab in HER2-positive breast
cancer xenografts


The sensitivity and quantitative properties of Positron Emission
Tomography (PET) imaging combined with the selectivity and high affinity
of radiolabeled monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) make a powerful tool in
molecular imaging of diseases including breast cancer. Radiolabeling mAbs
with the positron-emitting 89Zr has recently been useful in clinical
trials due to its relatively long half-life (t1/2 = 3.3 days), which
matches the pharmacokinetic properties of mAbs. Pertuzumab (Perjeta) is
an FDA-approved mAb for the treatment of human epidermal growth factor
receptor 2 (HER2)-positive metastatic breast cancer, in combination with
Trastuzumab (Herceptin) and chemotherapy. Herein, we evaluated
89Zr-labeled Pertuzumab as a PET imaging agent in transgenic mice-bearing
human breast cancer. The 89Zr chelator,
p-isothiocyanatobenzyl-desferrioxamine, was conjugated to Pertuzumab and
subsequently radiolabeled with 89Zr. The immunoreactivity and specificity
of 89Zr-Pertuzumab for HER2-expressing cells were determined in vitro and
showed retention of 89Zr-Pertuzumab immunoreactivity and specific binding
to HER2-expressing cells. Human breast cancer cells were inoculated
subcutaneously in severely immunocompromised NOG mice, a model which
allows for the growth of HER2-positive tumors without exogenous stimuli.
89Zr-Pertuzumab was injected via tail vein and imaged and 5 and 7 days
post-injection (p.i.) followed by biodistribution studies. Optimal
contrast was achieved at 5 days p.i., with higher tumor uptake in the
HER2-positive xenograft than the HER2-negative model. Immunohistochemical
analysis of these tumors is in agreement with PET imaging analysis. These
results illustrate that 89Zr-Pertuzumab may be beneficial for the
noninvasive assessment of HER2 expression.

