Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The Apoptosis repressor with a CARD domain (ARC) is a direct HIF1
target gene and promotes survival and proliferation of VHL deficient
renal cancer cells


The induction of hypoxia inducible factors (HIFs) is essential for the
adaptation of tumor cells to a low oxygen environment. We found that the
expression of the apoptosis inhibitor ARC was induced by hypoxia in a
variety of cancer cell types and its induction is primarily HIF1
dependent. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) and reporter assays also
indicate that the ARC gene is regulated by direct binding of HIF1 to a
hypoxia response element (HRE) located at -190 bp upstream of the
transcription start site. HIFs play an essential role in the pathogenesis
of renal cell carcinoma (RCC) under normoxic conditions, through the loss
of the Von Hippel Lindau (VHL) gene. Accordingly, our results show that
ARC is not expressed in normal renal tissue, but is highly expressed in
65% of RCC tumors, which also express high levels of Carbonic Anhydrase
IX (CAIX), a HIF1-dependent gene. Compared to controls, ARC-deficient
RCCs exhibited decreased colony formation and increased apoptosis in
vitro. In addition, loss of ARC resulted in a dramatic reduction of RCC
tumor growth in SCID mice in vivo. Thus, HIF-mediated increased
expression of ARC in RCC can explain how loss of VHL can promote survival
early in tumor formation.

