Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effects of black raspberries and their constituents on rat
prostate carcinogenesis and human prostate cancer cell growth


Black raspberries (BRBs) and their constituents may inhibit human GI
tract cancers and prevent breast cancer in a rat model. Anthocyanins and
polyphenols in BRBs are responsible for their anti-cancer effects.
Berries and other fruits are used as dietary supplements by cancer
patients. As prostate cancer remains a major health problem, it is thus
important to determine whether BRBs or BRB constituents may prevent or
treat this malignancy. We previously reported (AACR Ann Mtg 2013) that
the BRB anthocyanin metabolite protocatechuic acid (PCA) was detectable
in the prostate of rats fed BRB, indicating that it reaches this tissue,
but BRB consumption by Wistar rats did not prevent prostate cancer
induced by MNU and chronic testosterone treatment. We now studied the
effect of feeding AIN-93M diet containing 5% or 10% lyophilized BRB
powder (exchanged for starch) on induction of prostate cancer in NBL rats
by chronic testosterone & 17-estradiol treatment via SC Silastic
implants. Incidence of adenocarcinomas arising from periurethral
prostatic ducts was similar in rats fed control diet and those fed
berry-containing diets (73-90%), as was tumor multiplicity (1.7-1.8
tumors per prostate). In contrast, we previously found that
cyanidin-3-rutinoside, the most abundant anthocyanin in BRBs, inhibits
growth of LAPC-4 human prostate cancer cells. We now used PC-3 and LNCaP
prostate cancer cells to study effects of ethanolic extract of
lyophilized BRB powder and major BRB constituents: the polyphenol ellagic
acid (EA), cyanidin-3-rutinoside, and PCA. Growth rates were measured by
hemocytometer counting with trypan blue exclusion. BRB extract (1 g/ml to
1 mg/ml) inhibited viability of LNCaP cells dose-dependently, but linear
trend was not significant (p=0.09). Similar, but also not quite
significant, decreases in LNCaP cell numbers were caused by PCA and EA,
while EA increased the number of dead cells (ANOVA p=0.0471, linear trend
p=0.0385). No significant changes occurred in PC-3 cell viability with
any of the treatments. Effects on anchorage independent growth of PC-3
cells were assessed by soft agar colony forming assays. A dose-dependent
reduction in the number of colonies occurred after EA treatment (ANOVA
p=0.0065, linear trend p=0.0007) and BRB extract (ANOVA pBlack
raspberries (BRBs) and their constituents may inhibit human GI tract
cancers and prevent breast cancer in a rat model. Anthocyanins and
polyphenols in BRBs are responsible for their anti-cancer effects.
Berries and other fruits are used as dietary supplements by cancer
patients. As prostate cancer remains a major health problem, it is thus
important to determine whether BRBs or BRB constituents may prevent or
treat this malignancy. We previously reported (AACR Ann Mtg 2013) that
the BRB anthocyanin metabolite protocatechuic acid (PCA) was detectable
in the prostate of rats fed BRB, indicating that it reaches this tissue,
but BRB consumption by Wistar rats did not prevent prostate cancer
induced by MNU and chronic testosterone treatment. We now studied the
effect of feeding AIN-93M diet containing 5% or 10% lyophilized BRB
powder (exchanged for starch) on induction of prostate cancer in NBL rats
by chronic testosterone & 17-estradiol treatment via SC Silastic
implants. Incidence of adenocarcinomas arising from periurethral
prostatic ducts was similar in rats fed control diet and those fed
berry-containing diets (73-90%), as was tumor multiplicity (1.7-1.8
tumors per prostate). In contrast, we previously found that
cyanidin-3-rutinoside, the most abundant anthocyanin in BRBs, inhibits
growth of LAPC-4 human prostate cancer cells. We now used PC-3 and LNCaP
prostate cancer cells to study effects of ethanolic extract of
lyophilized BRB powder and major BRB constituents: the polyphenol ellagic
acid (EA), cyanidin-3-rutinoside, and PCA. Growth rates were measured by
hemocytometer counting with trypan blue exclusion. BRB extract (1 g/ml to
1 mg/ml) inhibited viability of LNCaP cells dose-dependently, but linear
trend was not significant (p=0.09). Similar, but also not quite
significant, decreases in LNCaP cell numbers were caused by PCA and EA,
while EA increased the number of dead cells (ANOVA p=0.0471, linear trend
p=0.0385). No significant changes occurred in PC-3 cell viability with
any of the treatments. Effects on anchorage independent growth of PC-3
cells were assessed by soft agar colony forming assays. A dose-dependent
reduction in the number of colonies occurred after EA treatment (ANOVA
p=0.0065, linear trend p=0.0007) and BRB extract (ANOVA p<0.0001, linear
trend pBlack raspberries (BRBs) and their constituents may inhibit human
GI tract cancers and prevent breast cancer in a rat model. Anthocyanins
and polyphenols in BRBs are responsible for their anti-cancer effects.
Berries and other fruits are used as dietary supplements by cancer
patients. As prostate cancer remains a major health problem, it is thus
important to determine whether BRBs or BRB constituents may prevent or
treat this malignancy. We previously reported (AACR Ann Mtg 2013) that
the BRB anthocyanin metabolite protocatechuic acid (PCA) was detectable
in the prostate of rats fed BRB, indicating that it reaches this tissue,
but BRB consumption by Wistar rats did not prevent prostate cancer
induced by MNU and chronic testosterone treatment. We now studied the
effect of feeding AIN-93M diet containing 5% or 10% lyophilized BRB
powder (exchanged for starch) on induction of prostate cancer in NBL rats
by chronic testosterone & 17-estradiol treatment via SC Silastic
implants. Incidence of adenocarcinomas arising from periurethral
prostatic ducts was similar in rats fed control diet and those fed
berry-containing diets (73-90%), as was tumor multiplicity (1.7-1.8
tumors per prostate). In contrast, we previously found that
cyanidin-3-rutinoside, the most abundant anthocyanin in BRBs, inhibits
growth of LAPC-4 human prostate cancer cells. We now used PC-3 and LNCaP
prostate cancer cells to study effects of ethanolic extract of
lyophilized BRB powder and major BRB constituents: the polyphenol ellagic
acid (EA), cyanidin-3-rutinoside, and PCA. Growth rates were measured by
hemocytometer counting with trypan blue exclusion. BRB extract (1 g/ml to
1 mg/ml) inhibited viability of LNCaP cells dose-dependently, but linear
trend was not significant (p=0.09). Similar, but also not quite
significant, decreases in LNCaP cell numbers were caused by PCA and EA,
while EA increased the number of dead cells (ANOVA p=0.0471, linear trend
p=0.0385). No significant changes occurred in PC-3 cell viability with
any of the treatments. Effects on anchorage independent growth of PC-3
cells were assessed by soft agar colony forming assays. A dose-dependent
reduction in the number of colonies occurred after EA treatment (ANOVA
p=0.0065, linear trend p=0.0007) and BRB extract (ANOVA p<0.0001, linear
trend p<0.0001), but no change in colony formation of cells treated with
cyanidin-3-rutinoside or PCA. Compared to vehicle, BRB at 1 mg/ml
maximally reduced colonies by 50%, and 3.0 g/ml EA reduced colonies by
39%. No effects on cell migration of PC-3 cells, assessed by wound
healing assays, were found for any of the treatments. Thus, BRBs may be
beneficial for treatment of prostate cancer and EA is at least partially
responsible for the anti-cancer activity of BRBs, but, surprisingly,
cyanidin-3-rutinoside and protocatechuic acid did not have significant
effects. (Supported by NIH Grant R21 CA152879).

