Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: 25-hydroxyvitamin D3 induces vitamin D signaling independent of
CYP27B1 in non-small cell lung cancer cells


Introduction 25-hydroxyvitamin D3 (25(OH)D3) levels are associated with
increased overall survival in early stage non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC). Studies suggest that 25(OH)D3 is converted locally in tissues by
CYP27B1 into the active metabolite, 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D
(1,25(OH)2D3). Once produced, 1,25(OH)2D3exerts anti-tumor effects by
binding to the vitamin D receptor (VDR) and regulating target gene
expression. It is unknown whether CYP27B1 is necessary for NSCLC cells to
respond to 25(OH)D3. We therefore tested the requirement for VDR and
CYP27B1 in mediating the anti-tumor effects of 25(OH)D3 in NSCLC.Methods
Immunoblot and qRT-PCR were used to evaluate VDR expression. Small
interfering RNA was used to knock down the VDR. Colony formation assays
and qRT-PCR were used to assess effects of 25(OH)D3 and 1,25(OH)2D on
growth and transcriptional responses. To study the requirement for
CYP27B1, pharmacological inhibition was achieved using ketoconazole, and
1,25(OH)2D3 production was measured by LC/MS-MS. A xenograft study was
performed to determine the in vivo effect of modulating 25(OH)D3
levels.Results NSCLC cells expressing high levels of VDR (VDRhigh) are
more responsive to vitamin D metabolites. In these cells, 25(OH)D3 and
1,25(OH)2D3 induce target gene transcription and inhibit colony
formation. These effects are not observed in VDRlow cells. When VDRhigh
cells were transfected with VDR siRNA, the ability of 25(OH)D3 to induce
target gene transcription was diminished, and no VDR protein was
observed. VDRhigh cells were exposed to ketoconazole to determine if
effects of 25(OH)D3 required conversion to 1,25(OH)2D3. Ketoconazole
effectively abrogated production of 1,25(OH)2D3from 25(OH)D3. However,
VDR target gene expression remained induced by 25(OH)D3. Thus, NSCLC
cells may not require CYP27B1 to promote vitamin D signaling. To more
specifically inhibit CYP27B1, zinc finger nucleases (ZFNs) were used to
create CYP27B1 knockout cells. The ZFNs have been transfected into cells,
assays optimized, and positive clones are being expanded. Lastly, a mouse
xenograft experiment was performed to determine if 25(OH)D3 promotes a
decrease in tumor volume. Mice were fed diets containing 100, 1,000 or
10,000 IU/kg vitamin D3 prior to implantation of VDRhigh NSCLC cells.
Mice fed the 10,000 IU/kg diet had a statistically significant decrease
in tumor volume.Conclusions NSCLC cells expressing high levels of VDR
display increased responsiveness to vitamin D metabolites. Although NSCLC
cells express CYP27B1, our results demonstrate that the enzyme may not be
required to achieve vitamin D signaling. Rather, 25(OH)D3 may act via the
VDR to elicit an anti-tumor responses. The implication of these findings
is that dietary supplementation to increase circulating 25(OH)D3 may be
beneficial in a subset of NSCLC patients.Funding provided by NIH RO1
CA132844, training grant 5T32CA009072-37 and P30CA47904

