Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Angiomotin regulates the Hippo pathway to increase prostate cancer
cell growth


Angiomotin (AMOT) is a member of the motin family that consists of three
members, AMOT, AMOTL1, and AMOTL2, which function as either positive or
negative regulators of cell growth depending on interacting proteins and
cellular context. The role of AMOT in prostate cancer (PCa) has not been
studied. AMOT is expressed as two isoforms, AMOTp80 and AMOTp130. The
AMOTp130 isoform has an extended 409 aa N-terminal domain that is absent
in AMOTp80. Both AMOTp80 and AMOTp130 are expressed in LNCaP and C4-2B4,
but at a very low level in PC3-mm2 PCa cells. We found that expression of
AMOTp130 and AMOTp80 have distinct functions in PCa cells. While AMOTp80
functions as a tumor promoter by enhancing PCa cell proliferation,
AMOTp130 did not. We further show that AMOTp80 affects the Hippo tumor
suppressor pathway by inhibiting LATS1 and YAP phosphorylation, resulting
in nuclear translocation of YAP. Once in the nucleus, YAP increases
transcription of the target protein BMP4. Moreover, inhibition of BMP
receptor activity by LDN-193189 abrogates AMOTp80-mediated proliferation.
These observations suggest that AMOTp80 induces the expression of BMP4,
which functions in an autocrine manner to promote PCa cell proliferation.
Together, our studies identify AMOTp80-MST-LATS1-YAP-BMP4 as a novel
signal pathway that regulates PCa cell proliferation.

