Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Extracellular vesicle-mediated reversal of the prostate cancer
phenotype


Extracellular vesicle (EV) trafficking is a fundamental cellular process
that occurs in cells and is required for different aspects of
pathophysiology. EV trafficking leads to changes in cellular function
including apoptosis, angiogenesis and proliferation required for
increased tumor formation.In our current study we report several
phenotypic changes mediated by EVs isolated from non-malignant and
malignant prostate cells as well as patient biopsied prostate tumor
samples. EVs can reverse the resistance of prostate cancer cells to
camptothecin EVs isolated from non-malignant PrECs (Prostate Epithelial
Cells) can reverse soft agar colony formation of malignant DU145 cells,
with the reciprocal effect observed. Isolation of EVs from 2 Gleason
grade 8 prostate cancer patients significantly induced soft agar colony
formation of non-malignant PrECs. We have identified proteins via
antibody and Mass spectrometry analysis that may be responsible for the
phenotypic changes. Mass spectrometry analysis of protein lysates using
ProteoIQ revealed protein candidates associated with gene ontology
annotations that may be responsible for this phenotypic change. Ingenuity
Pathway Analysis was used to identify statistically relevant canonical
pathways and functions associated the protein IDs and expression values
obtained using ProteoIQ. Western blot analysis confirmed the increase of
14-3-3 zeta, pRKIP and prohibitin protein levels in PrEC cells
co-cultured with patient EVs. 14-3-3 proteins were also found as common
proteins of 3 other Gleason grade 8 patients.Our results provides a
rational basis to further investigate putative proteins, such as 14-3-3
and prohibitin and genetic factors that may be responsible for phenotypic
changes that are associated with prostate cancer progression.

