Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting IGF-I receptor for hepatocellular carcinoma


Aims; Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of worse prognostic diseases.
Insulin-like growth factor (IGF)-I receptor (IGF-IR) signaling is
required for carcinogenicity and tumor development of many malignancies
and is thought to be a next molecular target. We have previously shown
successful therapy for gastrointestinal carcinomas, including colon,
stomach, esophageal, pancreatic, and biliary tract cancers, using
recombinant adenoviruses expressing dominant negative IGF-IR (IGF-IR/dn).
In this study, we want to assess the roles of IGF axis on HCC and to
develop potential targeted therapeutics for HCC.Methods; We assessed mRNA
expressions of IGFs and those receptors in HCC cell lines. We assessed
the effect of IGF-IR blockade on signal-transduction, growth,
apoptosis-induction, and migration. To block IGF signals, we used
IGF-IR/dn, short hairpin RNA, monoclonal antibody, and tyrosin kinase
inhibitor for IGF-IR.Results; IGF-I messages expressed in 63%, IGF-II
mRNA in 44%, and IGF-IR in 89% of HCC cell lines. All IGF-IR blockades
suppressed significantly both in vitro cell growth and colony formation.
Each anti-IGF-IR up-regulated both stressor- and chemotherapy-induced
apoptosis. IGF-IR inhibitor down-regulated cell migration. IGF-IR
targeting strategies effectively blocked ligands induced receptor
activation and the downstream signals.Conclusions; IGF axis might play a
key role in tumor progression of human HCC. Every strategy to block
IGF-IR shows a useful anticancer therapeutic for HCC, indicating that
IGF-IR may be a candidate molecular target for HCC.

