Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Luteolin's role as a radiosensitizer by promoting cell death and
ROS modulation


Radiotherapy is one of major cancer treatment, but radiation treatment
could evoke resistance or side effects such as fibrosis. To overcome
these obstacles against radiation treatment, many researchers are
developing effective radiosensitizer. To develop a new radiosensitizer,
we test whether luteolin has functions as a radiosensitizer candidate
because previous studies already demonstrated luteolin could promote
cancer cell death by reactive oxygen species (ROS) induction, and this
phenomenon is one of main effects of radiation-induced cell death.
Luteolin is 3,4,5,7-tetrahydroxyflavone, which could induce cell death of
various cancer cells. We observed luteolin treatment could induce cell
death of non-small cell lung cancer cells with independent manner of p53
and PTEN status, and combination treatment of radiation and luteolin
enhance more cell death than those of radiation only or luteolin only
treatment condition. Dose enhancement ratios of luteolin and radiation
combination are 1.54 and 1.31 in NCI-H460 and NCI-H1299, respectively.
Combined treatment with luteolin and radiation down-regulate Bcl-2 level
and induce the phosphorylation of JNK and activation of caspase-3/9. ROS
accumulation also was induced in combined condition of luteolin and
radiations. In a xenograft assay, the combined luteolin and radiation
group showed 27.2 days of growth delay versus the control in terms of
tumor growth. The enhancement factor of this combined treatment was
determined to be 3.2. Taken together, we conclude that luteolin contain
role of radiosensitizer via promotion of cell death and ROS accumulation.

