Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: S6 kinase signaling in prognosis and tamoxifen response in two
randomized breast cancer cohorts


Detecting signals in the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR), and the
estrogen receptor (ER) pathways for prediction of treatment response may
be a future clinical tool in primary breast cancer. Here, we investigated
the validity and value of the mTOR targets p70-S6 kinase (S6K) 1 and 2 as
biomarkers for tamoxifen sensitivity in vitro and in two independent
tamoxifen randomized postmenopausal breast cancer cohorts. In addition,
the prognostic value of the S6Ks was evaluated.We found S6K1 to correlate
with HER2 and cytoplasmic Akt activity, whereas S6K2 and phosphorylated
S6K were closer connected with ER positivity, low proliferation and
nucleic p-Akt. Treatment prediction and prognosis were evaluated by
immunohistochemical staining. Nuclear accumulation of S6K1 was indicative
of a reduced tamoxifen treatment effect, compared with a significant
benefit from tamoxifen treatment in patients without tumor S6K1 nuclear
accumulation. Patients with a combination of S6K1 nuclear accumulation
and S6K2 cytoplasmic accumulation in the tumor cells had no tamoxifen
benefit. Also, S6K1 and S6K2 activation, indicated by p-S6K-t389
expression, was associated with low benefit from tamoxifen compared with
untreated patients. In addition, high protein expression of S6K1,
independent of localization, predicted worse prognosis. This was not
evident for variations in S6K2 or p-S6K-t389 expression.In conclusion,
the mTOR targeted kinases S6K1 and S6K2 interfere with proliferation and
response to tamoxifen. Monitoring their activity and intracellular
localization may provide biomarkers for breast cancer treatment, allowing
for identification of a group of patients less likely to benefit from
tamoxifen and thus in need of an alternative or additional treatment.

