Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The genetic polymorphisms of ATG5 and COL4A3 are associated with
the prognosis of patients with esophageal squamous cell carcinoma


PURPOSE: To investigate the association between the prognosis of patients
with esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) and the autophagy or
collagen related single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs).PATIENTS AND
METHODS: The study was analyzed retrospectively. A total of 570 patients
diagnosed with ESCC were enrolled in the study and randomly assigned to a
training set (n=188) or replication set (n=382). The genotypes of 16
candidate SNPs involved in autophagy or collagen-related functions were
analyzed using iPLEX Gold technology from the genomic DNA of peripheral
leukocytes. The association of the genotypes and the overall survival or
progression-free survival of patients was analyzed by multivariate Cox
regression analysis and Kaplan-Meier survival function.RESULTS: Among
these subjects, 239 patients were with early stage (stage IIa or
earlier), and 331 patients were with advanced stages (stage IIb or
advanced). In patients with early stages, the genetic variants of
ATG5:rs1322178, ATG5:rs3804329 and COL4A3: rs28381984 was associated with
increased risk of death in the training set. The associations were
confirmed in the replication set and in the combined set (HR[95 %
CI]=2.47 [1.31-4.65], P=0.005 in ATG5:rs1322178; HR[95 %
CI]=2.16[1.08-4.31], P=0.029 in ATG5:rs3804329; HR[95 %
CI]=1.48[1.00-2.20], P=0.052 in COL4A3: rs28381984, in combined set). In
cumulative effect analysis of multiple SNPs, patients carrying the
unfavorable genotypes at all these 3 genes exhibited a 3.87 fold increasd
risk of death in early ESCC patients (HR[95 % CI]=3.87 [1.37-10.93],
P=0.011). Finally, the Kaplan-Meier survival curves were constructed for
overall survival by the number of unfavorable genotypes. The overall
survival duration differed significantly between those with 0, 1, 2, and
3 cumulative unfavorable genotypes (log-rank P=0.012).CONCLUSION: The
hereditary genetic polymorphisms of ATG5 and COL4A3 genes can serve as
prognostic predictors of the patients with early ESCC.

