Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pleiotropy analysis identifies a novel prostate cancer variant at
6p21.33: The PAGE, PRACTICAL, and BPC3 Consortia


Background: Genome-wide association studies have identified hundreds of
susceptibility loci for various cancer sites including prostate cancer.
Several of the risk loci have demonstrated pleiotropic effects with
multiple cancers, suggesting shared biological pathways in
carcinogenesis. In the present study, we systematically investigated the
effects of other cancer-associated variants on prostate cancer
risk.Methods: We examined 196 genetic risk variants identified for 18
cancer and cancer-related traits in a total of 28,135 prostate cancer
cases and 37,218 controls. This large meta-analysis of multiethnic
samples was assembled from three consortia: Population Architecture using
Genetics and Epidemiology (PAGE), Prostate Cancer Association Group to
Investigate Cancer Associated Alterations in the Genome (PRACTICAL) and
Breast and Prostate Cancer Cohort Consortium (BPC3). Study- and
ethnic-specific logistic regressions results were combined through
fixed-effect meta-analysis to evaluate the association between each
variant and prostate cancer risk, applying a Bonferroni-corrected
significance threshold of 2.610-4. We also assessed the cumulative effect
of other cancer risk variants on prostate cancer susceptibility via risk
score analysis.Results: Three variants, RTEL rs6010620, TERT rs2853676
and HLA rs6457327, demonstrated statistically significant associations
with prostate cancer risk after correcting for multiple comparisons.
Originally reported as a follicular lymphoma risk variant, rs6457327 was
associated with prostate cancer at the genome-wide significant level
(meta-analysis OR=0.93, 95% CI: 0.91-0.96; p=4.510-8). The cumulative
genetic risk score for risk variants of other cancers demonstrated a
significant effect on prostate cancer risk (p=0.021).Conclusions: This
systematic pleiotropy analysis identified HLA as a novel susceptibility
locus for prostate cancer in a large multiethnic population. The genetic
variant with pleiotropic effects on both follicular lymphoma and prostate
cancer provides evidence for shared etiologic mechanisms between prostate
cancer and other cancer sites.

