Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TERT promoter mutations are highly prevalent in bladder cancer and
represent a potential new urinary biomarker


Somatic mutation of the promoter region of the telomerase reverse
transcriptase (TERT) gene was recently reported as a potential mechanism
by which telomerase becomes activated in cancer cells. Here, we aimed to
assess the frequency and spectrum of TERT promoter mutations in bladder
cancer and detect mutations in voided urine. A SNaPshot assay designed to
simultaneously interrogate two positions (-124bp and -146bp) previously
reported as mutated in melanoma was used to screen 47 bladder cancer cell
lines and 262 tumors. Forty cell lines and 201 tumors carried mutations
at either -124bp or -146bp. Mutations at these positions were mutually
exclusive. A germline mutation at -57bp (T>G) was previously reported in
a melanoma-prone family. A second SNaPshot assay was designed to
interrogate position -57bp and we screened all samples that were wildtype
at positions -124bp and -146bp. Mutations at -57bp were detected in two
cell lines and eight tumors. Matched blood samples were available for six
of the tumors and one cell line, and somatic mutation status was
confirmed. Sanger sequencing of the TERT core promoter in samples that
were wildtype at positions -57bp, -124bp and -146bp revealed a further
nine somatic mutations. Four mutations at positions -45bp, -72/-77bp,
-141bp, and -54bp were novel, and all but one (-54bp) created new binding
sites for ETS/TCF transcription factors. Overall, TERT promoter mutations
were detected in 89% of cell lines and 83% of tumors. There was no
association of TERT promoter mutation status with stage (p=0.1089,
chi-square test) or grade (p=0.2438, chi-square test). As mutations are
highly frequent in both non-muscle-invasive and invasive bladder cancer,
these represent potential biomarkers for urine-based disease monitoring.
For sixty-four tumors used in this study, matched urine samples were also
collected prior to surgery. Fifty-three of the tumors had mutations at
-124bp or -146bp and using the -124bp/-146bp SNaPshot assay we were able
to detect 51 of these in the corresponding urine samples including all
mutations (n=23) in 29 patients with low-grade noninvasive tumors. The
use of TERT promoter mutation analysis in combination with other
DNA-based biomarkers could markedly improve the sensitivity for
urine-based detection of recurrent disease.

