Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Family history of cancer and rhabdomyosarcoma in children: a
report from the Children's Oncology Group


Introduction: Rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) is the most common soft tissue
sarcoma in children. In the United States, about 350 children are
diagnosed with RMS per year. The two major histologic subtypes of RMS are
embryonal (ERMS; approximately 70% of cases) and alveolar (ARMS;
approximately 30% of cases). A small percentage of RMS cases are
associated with germline mutations in TP53, HRAS, and NF1. However, it
has been difficult to show if inherited susceptibility may play a role in
sporadic cases due to the rarity of these tumors and the potential
etiologic heterogeneity between subtypes.Objective: In order to better
characterize genetic susceptibility to childhood RMS, we evaluated the
role of family history of cancer using data from the largest case-control
study of RMS to date.Methods: Cases (n=322) were enrolled from the third
trial run by the Intergroup Rhabdomyosarcoma Study Group.
Population-based controls (n=322) were pair matched to cases on race,
sex, and age. Conditional logistic regression was used to evaluate cancer
history among first- and second-degree relatives and the association with
childhood RMS by generating adjusted odds ratios (aOR) and 95% confidence
intervals (CI). Stratified analyses were conducted to independently
evaluate the association of family cancer history and childhood RMS for
children who had relatives diagnosed with a cancer before the age of 40
years and those with relatives diagnosed when older than 40 years. The
association of family cancer history and childhood RMS was also assessed
separately for children diagnosed with ERMS and those diagnosed with
ARMS.Results: While there were no statistically significant associations,
three patterns appeared to emerge: 1) having any first degree relative
with a history of cancer was more common in RMS cases than controls
(aOR=1.46, 95% CI: 0.72-2.97); 2) having a first degree relative who was
younger at diagnosis (Introduction: Rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) is the most
common soft tissue sarcoma in children. In the United States, about 350
children are diagnosed with RMS per year. The two major histologic
subtypes of RMS are embryonal (ERMS; approximately 70% of cases) and
alveolar (ARMS; approximately 30% of cases). A small percentage of RMS
cases are associated with germline mutations in TP53, HRAS, and NF1.
However, it has been difficult to show if inherited susceptibility may
play a role in sporadic cases due to the rarity of these tumors and the
potential etiologic heterogeneity between subtypes.Objective: In order to
better characterize genetic susceptibility to childhood RMS, we evaluated
the role of family history of cancer using data from the largest
case-control study of RMS to date.Methods: Cases (n=322) were enrolled
from the third trial run by the Intergroup Rhabdomyosarcoma Study Group.
Population-based controls (n=322) were pair matched to cases on race,
sex, and age. Conditional logistic regression was used to evaluate cancer
history among first- and second-degree relatives and the association with
childhood RMS by generating adjusted odds ratios (aOR) and 95% confidence
intervals (CI). Stratified analyses were conducted to independently
evaluate the association of family cancer history and childhood RMS for
children who had relatives diagnosed with a cancer before the age of 40
years and those with relatives diagnosed when older than 40 years. The
association of family cancer history and childhood RMS was also assessed
separately for children diagnosed with ERMS and those diagnosed with
ARMS.Results: While there were no statistically significant associations,
three patterns appeared to emerge: 1) having any first degree relative
with a history of cancer was more common in RMS cases than controls
(aOR=1.46, 95% CI: 0.72-2.97); 2) having a first degree relative who was
younger at diagnosis (<40 years of age) appeared to convey a greater risk
of RMS (aOR=1.55, 95% CI: 0.96-2.51); and 3) having a first degree
relative with cancer was more common for those with ERMS compared to ARMS
(aOR=1.58, 95% CI: 0.61-4.10 vs. aOR=1.01, 95% CI: 0.29-3.50,
respectively).Conclusions: In the largest analysis of its kind to date,
we found that family history of cancer appeared to increase the risk of
childhood RMS. While the associations were not statistically significant,
this is likely due to the low prevalence of family cancer history in this
population (i.e., 6.6% overall). Ultimately, these findings tentatively
support the role of inherited genetic susceptibility in the development
of childhood RMS.

