Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Colorectal cancer survival is not associated with genetic variants
related to risk of other cancers: The GECCO study


Background:Colorectal cancer (CRC) is a major cause of morbidity and
mortality. Previous genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have
identified a large number of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs)
associated with CRC, at least one of which has also been found to be
associated with CRC survival. Furthermore, some SNPs have demonstrated
risk associations with multiple cancers (i.e. pleiotropy), including CRC.
Together, this raises the possibility that SNPs associated with risk of
other cancers may also be associated with survival after a diagnosis of
CRC. To investigate this question, we evaluated 526 SNPs reported as
strongly associated with risk of any type of cancer in the National Human
Genome Research Institute GWAS catalog (as of 11/13/2013) for an
association with CRC-specific and overall survival. This study utilized
data available from multiple studies in the Genetic Epidemiology of
Colorectal Cancer Consortium (GECCO).Methods:We evaluated 526 SNPs
associated with risk of cancers other than CRC in six studies
participating in GECCO: the Health Professionals Follow-up Study; the
Nurses' Health Study; the Physicians' Health Study; the Prostate, Lung,
Colorectal, and Ovarian Cancer Screening Trial; the VITamins And
Lifestyle Study; and the Women's Health Initiative. A total of 3,494
colorectal cancer cases were evaluated, of whom 1,223 (35%) died (830
from CRC, 24%) during follow-up (average median follow-up time of 6.8
years). Cox proportional hazards regression was used to calculate the
per-allele hazard ratio (HR) and 95% confidence interval (95% CI) for the
association between each SNP and CRC-specific or overall survival,
adjusting for age at diagnosis, sex, study sample, and the first three
principal components of genetic ancestry.Results:After Bonferroni
correction for multiple comparisons (P = 0.05/526 = 9.51e-5), no SNPs
were statistically significantly associated with either CRC-specific or
overall survival. For CRC-specific survival, 35 SNPs showed a nominal
association (pBackground:Colorectal cancer (CRC) is a major cause of
morbidity and mortality. Previous genome-wide association studies (GWAS)
have identified a large number of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs)
associated with CRC, at least one of which has also been found to be
associated with CRC survival. Furthermore, some SNPs have demonstrated
risk associations with multiple cancers (i.e. pleiotropy), including CRC.
Together, this raises the possibility that SNPs associated with risk of
other cancers may also be associated with survival after a diagnosis of
CRC. To investigate this question, we evaluated 526 SNPs reported as
strongly associated with risk of any type of cancer in the National Human
Genome Research Institute GWAS catalog (as of 11/13/2013) for an
association with CRC-specific and overall survival. This study utilized
data available from multiple studies in the Genetic Epidemiology of
Colorectal Cancer Consortium (GECCO).Methods:We evaluated 526 SNPs
associated with risk of cancers other than CRC in six studies
participating in GECCO: the Health Professionals Follow-up Study; the
Nurses' Health Study; the Physicians' Health Study; the Prostate, Lung,
Colorectal, and Ovarian Cancer Screening Trial; the VITamins And
Lifestyle Study; and the Women's Health Initiative. A total of 3,494
colorectal cancer cases were evaluated, of whom 1,223 (35%) died (830
from CRC, 24%) during follow-up (average median follow-up time of 6.8
years). Cox proportional hazards regression was used to calculate the
per-allele hazard ratio (HR) and 95% confidence interval (95% CI) for the
association between each SNP and CRC-specific or overall survival,
adjusting for age at diagnosis, sex, study sample, and the first three
principal components of genetic ancestry.Results:After Bonferroni
correction for multiple comparisons (P = 0.05/526 = 9.51e-5), no SNPs
were statistically significantly associated with either CRC-specific or
overall survival. For CRC-specific survival, 35 SNPs showed a nominal
association (p<0.05), the strongest being breast cancer SNP rs6504950 in
STXBP4 (HR = 1.19, 95% CI = 1.06-1.31, p = 0.0018). For overall survival,
38 SNPs showed a nominal association, the strongest being melanoma SNP
rs1393350 in TYR (HR = 1.15, 95% CI = 1.06-1.26, p = 0.0012). More SNPs
showed a nominal association with survival than expected by chance
(0.05*526 = 26 SNPs).Conclusion:These preliminary results broadly suggest
that CRC-specific and overall survival do not appear to be strongly
associated with genetic variants related to incidence for other cancers.
However, some suggestive evidence of nominal associations with survival
supports further investigation. Planned future steps include the
incorporation of two additional studies (Cancer Prevention Study II;
Diet, Activity, and Lifestyle Study), as well as analyses stratified by
factors such as cancer site, stage at diagnosis, and sex.

