Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Claudin-1, a novel target of miR-375 in non-small cell lung cancer


MicroRNAs, the small and noncoding RNAs, regulate the translation of
specific protein-coding genes. Accumulated evidence strongly suggests
that microRNAs play important and complex roles in human cancers,
including lung cancer. We previously reported that miR-375 expression was
low in squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) and high in adenocarcinoma (AC) of
lung cancer. The target gene of miR-375 in non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) has not been elucidated. The purpose of this study was to
identify a target of miR-375 and clarify the function of miR-375 in
NSCLC. Candidate genes of miR-375 targets were determined using the
prediction databases and also previous findings about the different gene
expression between SCC and AC. We focused on claudin-1 (CLDN1), which has
four putative target sites of miR-375 in its 3-untranslated region (UTR).
CLDN1 was reported to express high in SCC and low in AC opposite to
miR-375. We evaluated miR-375 and CLDN1 expression levels by quantitative
polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) and Western blotting in 12 NSCLC cell
lines. The effect of miR-375 overexpression upon the CLDN1 expression was
evaluated in 5 NSCLC cell lines by transfecting miR-375 precursor. It
showed that the expression of CLDN1 messenger RNA and protein were
attenuated by miR-375 overexpression. Luciferase reporter assay was
performed to confirm direct interaction between miR-375 and CLDN1. We
cloned 3-UTR of CLDN1 cDNA into the downstream of a luciferase reporter
gene and co-transfected this vector into A549 cells with miR-375
precursor. MiR-375 overexpression resulted in a 3-fold repression of
luciferase activity (p MicroRNAs, the small and noncoding RNAs, regulate
the translation of specific protein-coding genes. Accumulated evidence
strongly suggests that microRNAs play important and complex roles in
human cancers, including lung cancer. We previously reported that miR-375
expression was low in squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) and high in
adenocarcinoma (AC) of lung cancer. The target gene of miR-375 in
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) has not been elucidated. The purpose
of this study was to identify a target of miR-375 and clarify the
function of miR-375 in NSCLC. Candidate genes of miR-375 targets were
determined using the prediction databases and also previous findings
about the different gene expression between SCC and AC. We focused on
claudin-1 (CLDN1), which has four putative target sites of miR-375 in its
3-untranslated region (UTR). CLDN1 was reported to express high in SCC
and low in AC opposite to miR-375. We evaluated miR-375 and CLDN1
expression levels by quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) and
Western blotting in 12 NSCLC cell lines. The effect of miR-375
overexpression upon the CLDN1 expression was evaluated in 5 NSCLC cell
lines by transfecting miR-375 precursor. It showed that the expression of
CLDN1 messenger RNA and protein were attenuated by miR-375
overexpression. Luciferase reporter assay was performed to confirm direct
interaction between miR-375 and CLDN1. We cloned 3-UTR of CLDN1 cDNA into
the downstream of a luciferase reporter gene and co-transfected this
vector into A549 cells with miR-375 precursor. MiR-375 overexpression
resulted in a 3-fold repression of luciferase activity (p < 0.001). To
ascertain the clinical validity, we analyzed the relationship between
miR-375 and CLDN1 expression in 63 clinical samples of NSCLC. There was a
negative correlation between miR-375 and CLDN1 expression (r = -0.35, p =
0.005). In addition, we analyzed the correlation between miR-375
expression and overall survival in the same samples. High miR-375
expression correlated with poor survival in NSCLC (p = 0.043). To
investigate the reason why high miR-375 expression lead to poor survival,
wound healing assay was performed to evaluate the effect of miR-375
overexpression on the cell migration in SK-MES-1 cells. The cell
migration was promoted by miR-375 overexpression, suggesting the high
potential of invasion and metastasis in NSCLC expressing high level of
miR375. In conclusion, we found that CLDN1 is a novel target of miR-375,
and high miR-375 expression leads to poor survival in NSCLC.

