Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Everolimus enhances the cytotoxic action of the immunotoxin, HA22,
directed to CD22 on B-cell malignancies


Recombinant immunotoxins, antibody-toxin fusion proteins, are therapeutic
proteins designed as targeted anti-cancer agents. Clinical trials of
immunotoxins directed to surface CD22 or mesothelin are ongoing with a
50% complete response rate in patients with refractory Hairy Cell
Leukemia as well as dramatic responses in some patients with advanced
mesothelioma. To identify agents that could improve clinical efficacy
further, a screen of 500 approved or near-approved compounds (MIPE-4) was
conducted, revealing everolimus as a potential enhancer of Pseudomonas
exotoxin-based recombinant immunotoxins. When the immunotoxin HA22
(moxetumomab pasudotox), which targets CD22, was added to various B-cell
lines, everolimus enhanced cytotoxicity by 2-10-fold. Kinetic analyses
indicated that combinations of HA22 and everolimus (0.25 uM) accelerated
the cessation of protein synthesis in Nalm-6 and CA46 cells compared to
either agent alone. Likewise, in CellTiterGlo assays of cell viability,
combinations of HA22 and everolimus resulted in a greater loss of ATP
from cells. Western blot analysis of key survival proteins indicated an
early loss of Mcl-1 in combination treatments. Additional experiments are
ongoing to extend these observations with the goal of uncovering insights
in the mechanism of synergy seen with these two compounds.

