Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combined effects of docetaxel-magnetic nanoparticles with
different surface modifications on prostate cancer cells


Docetaxel-based chemotherapy prolongs life and relieves symptoms in
patients with castration resistant prostate cancer. However, this needs
to be improved because of limitations by lack of specificity, systemic
toxicity, and progression of docetaxel-resistance. Nanotechnology has
served a new role in medical sciences by a variety of nanotechnology
platforms, leading to theranostics. Among these platforms, Fe3O4 magnetic
nanoparticles (MgNPs) have potential applications in drug delivery,
cancer diagnosis and hyperthermia. We have already shown that MgNPs would
modify the effect of chemotherapy in prostate cancer cells based on the
observations that MgNPs increased reactive oxygen species (ROS)
production and induced oxidative DNA damage in prostate cancer cell
lines. Combined treatment of docetaxel and MgNPs has also shown to
suppress nuclear transcription factor kappa B expression in DU145 cells.
In this study, we analyzed the combined effects of docetaxel-MgNPs with
different surface modifications on a prostate cancer cell line, DU145 and
their mechanisms. The combination treatment of docetaxel and carboxylic
acid-modified MgNPs (MgNPs-COOH) more effectively inhibited cancer cell
growth and induced apoptosis compared with docetaxel-MgNPs combination.
While MgNPs produced ROS in a dose-dependent manner and inhibited cancer
cell growth slightly, MgNPs-COOH did exert no ROS production, however
cell membrane damage in a dose-dependent manner. In addition, MgNPs-COOH
showed the involvement of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress. These
results suggest that MgNPs-COOH may induce different responses compared
with MgNPs, and result in favorable development of current chemotherapy
for the advanced disease and leading to new theranostics.

