Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dichotomy effects of Akt signaling in breast cancer


Background: The oncogenic roles contributed by the Akt/PKB kinase family
remain controversial and presumably depend on cell context, but are
perceived to be modulated by an interplay and net balance between various
isoforms. This study is intended to decipher whether distinct Akt kinase
isoforms exert either redundant or unique functions in regulating
neoplastic features of breast cancer cells, including
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), cell motility, and
stem/progenitor cell expansion. Results: We demonstrate that
overactivation of Akt signaling in nonmalignant MCF10A cells and in
primary cultures of normal human mammary epithelial tissue results in
previously unreported inhibitory effects on EMT, cell motility and
stem/progenitor cell expansion. Importantly, this effect is largely
redundant and independent of Akt isoform types. However, using a series
of isogenic cell lines derived from MCF-10A cells but exhibiting varying
stages of progressive tumorigenesis, we observe that this inhibition of
neoplastic behavior can be reversed in epithelial cells that have
advanced to a highly malignant state. In contrast to the tumor
suppressive properties of Akt, activated Akt signaling in MCF10A cells
can rescue cell viability upon treatment with cytotoxic agents. This
feature is regarded as tumor-promoting. Conclusion: We demonstrate that
Akt signaling conveys novel dichotomy effects in which its oncogenic
properties contributes mainly to sustaining cell viability, as opposed to
the its tumor suppressing effects, which are mediated by repressing EMT,
cell motility, and stem/progenitor cell expansion. While the former
exerts a tumor-enhancing effect, the latter merely acts as a safeguard by
restraining epithelial cells at the primary sites until metastatic spread
can be moved forward, a process that is presumably dictated by the
permissive tumor microenvironment or additional oncogenic insults.

