Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: mTOR complex inhibition as a novel therapeutic strategy in
high-grade papillary serous ovarian cancer


Objectives:To compare mTOR complex 1 inhibition (RAD001) vs. mTOR complex
1/2 inhibition (PP242) as single agents and with Carboplatin (CPP) in a
preclinical model of serous ovarian cancer (OVCA).Methods:In vitro:
OVCAR3 and SKOV3 cell lines were exposed to the following treatment
conditions: RAD001 or PP242 as single agents, vehicle, CPP alone, and
RAD001 or PP242 followed by CPP. Colony forming assays (CFAs) were
performed and quantified. mRNA levels of AKT, downstream targets of mTOR
and the DNA repair response (ATR, ATM, BRCA1/2) were quantified by
qRTPCR. Immunoblots characterized the protein expression of key
components of mTOR and DNA repair pathways. Non-parametric analyses were
used to compare results across groups on SPSS. In vivo: OVCAR3 cells
expressing F-Luciferase were injected IP into SCID-BG mice. 15 wks
post-injection, mice were exposed to the treatment conditions described
above for 4 weeks. Tumor growth and response to treatment were assessed
using bioluminescence imaging (IVIS). Results were analyzed on Living
Image and Prism6.Results:In vitro: OVCAR3 and SKOV3 cells are highly
sensitive to mTOR inhibition. CFAs showed significantly decreased colony
counts and diameter in groups exposed to either PP242 or RAD001 vs.
control, an effect that was potentiated by CPP (Fig 1). qRTPCR revealed a
significant decrease in 4EBP1 mRNA with mTOR inhibition (pObjectives:To
compare mTOR complex 1 inhibition (RAD001) vs. mTOR complex 1/2
inhibition (PP242) as single agents and with Carboplatin (CPP) in a
preclinical model of serous ovarian cancer (OVCA).Methods:In vitro:
OVCAR3 and SKOV3 cell lines were exposed to the following treatment
conditions: RAD001 or PP242 as single agents, vehicle, CPP alone, and
RAD001 or PP242 followed by CPP. Colony forming assays (CFAs) were
performed and quantified. mRNA levels of AKT, downstream targets of mTOR
and the DNA repair response (ATR, ATM, BRCA1/2) were quantified by
qRTPCR. Immunoblots characterized the protein expression of key
components of mTOR and DNA repair pathways. Non-parametric analyses were
used to compare results across groups on SPSS. In vivo: OVCAR3 cells
expressing F-Luciferase were injected IP into SCID-BG mice. 15 wks
post-injection, mice were exposed to the treatment conditions described
above for 4 weeks. Tumor growth and response to treatment were assessed
using bioluminescence imaging (IVIS). Results were analyzed on Living
Image and Prism6.Results:In vitro: OVCAR3 and SKOV3 cells are highly
sensitive to mTOR inhibition. CFAs showed significantly decreased colony
counts and diameter in groups exposed to either PP242 or RAD001 vs.
control, an effect that was potentiated by CPP (Fig 1). qRTPCR revealed a
significant decrease in 4EBP1 mRNA with mTOR inhibition (p<0.0001), but
no change in other biomarkers. Although treatment with both mTOR
inhibitors resulted in decreased expression of p-S6 by immunoblots,
treatment with the dual inhibitor (PP242) caused a decrease in p-AKT,
p-4EBP1, total and p-CHK1, and total and p-BRCA1. The levels of these
proteins were not changed by addition of CPP despite the significant
effect observed in the functional assay (CFA). In vivo: Treatment with
CPP + PP242 was associated with a longer median survival than other
treatment groups (Table 1). A decrease in tumor burden was seen on IVIS
and tumor flux (photons/sec) at the end of treatment was significantly
lower in mice treated with CPP+PP242 compared to other groups
(pObjectives:To compare mTOR complex 1 inhibition (RAD001) vs. mTOR
complex 1/2 inhibition (PP242) as single agents and with Carboplatin
(CPP) in a preclinical model of serous ovarian cancer (OVCA).Methods:In
vitro: OVCAR3 and SKOV3 cell lines were exposed to the following
treatment conditions: RAD001 or PP242 as single agents, vehicle, CPP
alone, and RAD001 or PP242 followed by CPP. Colony forming assays (CFAs)
were performed and quantified. mRNA levels of AKT, downstream targets of
mTOR and the DNA repair response (ATR, ATM, BRCA1/2) were quantified by
qRTPCR. Immunoblots characterized the protein expression of key
components of mTOR and DNA repair pathways. Non-parametric analyses were
used to compare results across groups on SPSS. In vivo: OVCAR3 cells
expressing F-Luciferase were injected IP into SCID-BG mice. 15 wks
post-injection, mice were exposed to the treatment conditions described
above for 4 weeks. Tumor growth and response to treatment were assessed
using bioluminescence imaging (IVIS). Results were analyzed on Living
Image and Prism6.Results:In vitro: OVCAR3 and SKOV3 cells are highly
sensitive to mTOR inhibition. CFAs showed significantly decreased colony
counts and diameter in groups exposed to either PP242 or RAD001 vs.
control, an effect that was potentiated by CPP (Fig 1). qRTPCR revealed a
significant decrease in 4EBP1 mRNA with mTOR inhibition (p<0.0001), but
no change in other biomarkers. Although treatment with both mTOR
inhibitors resulted in decreased expression of p-S6 by immunoblots,
treatment with the dual inhibitor (PP242) caused a decrease in p-AKT,
p-4EBP1, total and p-CHK1, and total and p-BRCA1. The levels of these
proteins were not changed by addition of CPP despite the significant
effect observed in the functional assay (CFA). In vivo: Treatment with
CPP + PP242 was associated with a longer median survival than other
treatment groups (Table 1). A decrease in tumor burden was seen on IVIS
and tumor flux (photons/sec) at the end of treatment was significantly
lower in mice treated with CPP+PP242 compared to other groups
(p<0.0001).Conclusions:Our preclinical model supports the concurrent use
of dual mTOR inhibitors and platinum chemotherapy in the treatment of
OVCA. mTOR complex 1/2 inhibition impairs the DNA repair response and
correlates with improved survival in a murine model.

