Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CCL-4 affects prostate cancer cell migration and tumorigenesis


Prostate cancer (PCa) is the most frequently diagnosed and the second
leading cause of cancer-related deaths in the United States. Inflammatory
processes have been related to cancer progression and metastasis.
Macrophage inflammatory protein 1 or CCL-4 has been reported as a
differentially expressed chemokine among patients that showed PCa
recurrence after radical prostastectomy. The aim of this study is to
determine the role and mechanism of CCL-4 in the progression of PCa using
in vitro and in vivo models. PC3 (androgen-independent) and 22RV1
(androgen-dependent) cell lines were treated in vitro with CCL-4 at
concentrations of 0.001ng/mL and 0.1ng/mL and subjected to migration
(Wound Healing) and invasion (Boyden Chamber) assays. The role of CCL-4
in PCa tumor progression was evaluated using a xenograft model in which
the anterior prostate lobes of SCID mice were ortothopically injected
with 250,000 22RV1 cells or 500,000 PC3 cells. CCL-4 was administered
bi-weekly at concentrations of 0.001ng/mL and 0.1ng/mL with
intraperitoneal injections during 4 weeks (22RV1) or 8 weeks (PC3). Tumor
volumes were calculated using a caliper and tissue was collected, fixed
and processed for gross examination, immunohistochemical, and gene
expression analysis. In vitro studies indicated that PC3 cells treated
with CCL4 had significantly increased migration when compared to control
(PProstate cancer (PCa) is the most frequently diagnosed and the second
leading cause of cancer-related deaths in the United States. Inflammatory
processes have been related to cancer progression and metastasis.
Macrophage inflammatory protein 1 or CCL-4 has been reported as a
differentially expressed chemokine among patients that showed PCa
recurrence after radical prostastectomy. The aim of this study is to
determine the role and mechanism of CCL-4 in the progression of PCa using
in vitro and in vivo models. PC3 (androgen-independent) and 22RV1
(androgen-dependent) cell lines were treated in vitro with CCL-4 at
concentrations of 0.001ng/mL and 0.1ng/mL and subjected to migration
(Wound Healing) and invasion (Boyden Chamber) assays. The role of CCL-4
in PCa tumor progression was evaluated using a xenograft model in which
the anterior prostate lobes of SCID mice were ortothopically injected
with 250,000 22RV1 cells or 500,000 PC3 cells. CCL-4 was administered
bi-weekly at concentrations of 0.001ng/mL and 0.1ng/mL with
intraperitoneal injections during 4 weeks (22RV1) or 8 weeks (PC3). Tumor
volumes were calculated using a caliper and tissue was collected, fixed
and processed for gross examination, immunohistochemical, and gene
expression analysis. In vitro studies indicated that PC3 cells treated
with CCL4 had significantly increased migration when compared to control
(P<0.05). Additionaly, in vivo, CCL-4 increased tumor volume when
compared with tumors generated in mice treated with vehicle. Tumors
developed with CCL-4 showed an increased expression of desmin,
alpha-smooth muscle actin (-sma), and phospho histone 3 (pH3). Gene
expression analysis showed that CCL-4 modulates the expression of several
genes involved in PCa progression including PTEN, -Catenin, and matrix
metalloproteinases. Real-Time PCR confirmed increased expression of
MMP-11. This study shows that CCL4 alters migration of PC3 cells and
22RV1 cells in vitro. Additionally, CCL4 treatment induces tumor growth
in vivo using a SCID mouse orthotopic model. Interestingly tumors treated
with CCL4 were associated with increased levels of alpha smooth muscle
actin, proliferation as well as increased levels of matrix
metalloproteinases. Our results indicate that CCL4 may promote tumor
growth and metastasis in vivo by increasing proliferation and altering
migration.

