Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Irradiation and anti-B7-H1 provide synergistic treatment effects
in murine cancer


High dose ionizing irradiation (IR) results in direct tumor cell death
and has been demonstrated to augment tumor-specific immunity that enhance
tumor control both locally and distantly. However, local relapses often
occur in patients and in established experimental tumors after treatment
with IR suggesting that IR-induced immune responses are inadequate.
Therapeutic blockade of the T cell negative regulator Programmed Death
Ligand 1 (PD-L1, also named B7-H1) can enhance T cell effector function
when PD-L1 is expressed in chronically inflamed tissues and tumors. Here,
we demonstrate that PD-L1 is up-regulated in the tumor microenvironment
after IR. Administration of anti-PD-L1 enhanced the efficacy of IR
through a CD8+ T cell dependent mechanism. Concomitant with IR-mediated
tumor regression, we observed that IR and anti-PD-L1 synergistically
reduced the local accumulation of tumor-infiltrating Myeloid Derived
Suppressor Cells (MDSCs), thus altering the tumor immune
microenvironment. We demonstrate that CD8+ T cells, activated by
combination therapy, mediate the reduction of MDSCs in tumors through the
cytotoxic actions of TNF. Our data provide evidence for a close
interaction between IR, T cells, and the PD-1/PD-L1 axis and establish
the basis for the rational design of combination therapy with immune
modulators and radiotherapy in the clinical setting.Note: This abstract
was not presented at the meeting.

