Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrated DNA/RNA sequencing for discovery and orthogonal
validation of expressed fusion genes in peripheral T-cell lymphomas


Background: Fusion genes, transcripts, and proteins are key drivers of
hematopoietic oncogenesis and can serve as effective therapeutic targets.
Among peripheral T-cell lymphomas (PTCLs), little is known about fusion
genes except for those involving ALK. Discovery of fusion genes may
provide therapeutic targets for PTCLs, which have poor outcomes with
conventional therapy. We have developed methods for detecting candidate
fusions using (1) mate-pair DNA sequencing (MPseq), an approach that
spans the entire genome at a fraction of the cost of traditional
whole-genome sequencing, and (2) RNA sequencing (RNAseq). Each technique
has strengths, limitations, and false discovery rates. Here, we
integrated results of both methods to discover and orthogonally validate
expressed fusion genes in PTCLs.Methods: DNA and RNA were extracted from
49 frozen, OCT-embedded clinical PTCL specimens, including 25 anaplastic
large cell lymphomas; 16 PTCLs, not otherwise specified; and 8 other
PTCLs. MPseq and RNAseq were performed using Illumina library protocols
and a HiSeq 2000. Detection of fusion genes and transcripts followed our
published methods (Blood 2012;120:2280 and Nucleic Acids Res
2011;39:e100, respectively). Functional annotation of genes involved in
fusions was performed using DAVID.Results: Of 2818 candidate chromosomal
rearrangements identified by MPseq and 90 candidate fusion transcripts
identified by RNAseq, 45 events were present in both datasets (mean/case,
0.9; range, 0-7). Fusions were inter-chromosomal in 16 and
intra-chromosomal in 29. Annotation clusters with the highest enrichment
scores related to SH2 domain-containing proteins and tyrosine kinases
(including FER and MAP2K3). Seven genes were recurrently involved in
fusions, including known fusion partners such as ALK and previously
unreported fusion partners such as PPP1R8, a phosphatase inhibitor
important for the activity of Polycomb group proteins such as EZH2.
Detection of candidate events only by MPseq could be explained in part by
breakpoints mapping to non-genic regions (79% of events). Detection only
by RNAseq could be explained in part by unannotated transcripts spanning
neighboring named genes (median intra-chromosomal distance, 0.09 MB vs.
12.7 MB for intra-chromosomal candidates identified by MPseq;
pBackground: Fusion genes, transcripts, and proteins are key drivers of
hematopoietic oncogenesis and can serve as effective therapeutic targets.
Among peripheral T-cell lymphomas (PTCLs), little is known about fusion
genes except for those involving ALK. Discovery of fusion genes may
provide therapeutic targets for PTCLs, which have poor outcomes with
conventional therapy. We have developed methods for detecting candidate
fusions using (1) mate-pair DNA sequencing (MPseq), an approach that
spans the entire genome at a fraction of the cost of traditional
whole-genome sequencing, and (2) RNA sequencing (RNAseq). Each technique
has strengths, limitations, and false discovery rates. Here, we
integrated results of both methods to discover and orthogonally validate
expressed fusion genes in PTCLs.Methods: DNA and RNA were extracted from
49 frozen, OCT-embedded clinical PTCL specimens, including 25 anaplastic
large cell lymphomas; 16 PTCLs, not otherwise specified; and 8 other
PTCLs. MPseq and RNAseq were performed using Illumina library protocols
and a HiSeq 2000. Detection of fusion genes and transcripts followed our
published methods (Blood 2012;120:2280 and Nucleic Acids Res
2011;39:e100, respectively). Functional annotation of genes involved in
fusions was performed using DAVID.Results: Of 2818 candidate chromosomal
rearrangements identified by MPseq and 90 candidate fusion transcripts
identified by RNAseq, 45 events were present in both datasets (mean/case,
0.9; range, 0-7). Fusions were inter-chromosomal in 16 and
intra-chromosomal in 29. Annotation clusters with the highest enrichment
scores related to SH2 domain-containing proteins and tyrosine kinases
(including FER and MAP2K3). Seven genes were recurrently involved in
fusions, including known fusion partners such as ALK and previously
unreported fusion partners such as PPP1R8, a phosphatase inhibitor
important for the activity of Polycomb group proteins such as EZH2.
Detection of candidate events only by MPseq could be explained in part by
breakpoints mapping to non-genic regions (79% of events). Detection only
by RNAseq could be explained in part by unannotated transcripts spanning
neighboring named genes (median intra-chromosomal distance, 0.09 MB vs.
12.7 MB for intra-chromosomal candidates identified by MPseq; p<0.0001,
Wilcoxon test).Conclusions: Integrated DNA/RNA sequencing is an
effective, clinically feasible tool for simultaneous discovery and
orthogonal validation of expressed fusion genes. This approach yielded
fusions in PTCLs involving genes with key functions in lymphocytes,
including novel and recurrent fusions, some of which might be targetable
with compounds currently in clinical trial. Candidate intra-chromosomal
fusion transcripts not identified by MPseq may represent unrecognized
isoforms or the results of novel read-through mechanisms, and merit
further study.

