Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Defining an elusive multiple myeloma stem cell population in mice


Multiple Myeloma (MM) is a debilitating disease of proliferating and
malignant plasma cells that is currently incurable. The ability of
monoclonal recurrence of disease suggests it might arise from a stem
cell-like population capable of self-renewal. The difficulty to isolate
the cancer stem-like cell in MM in both mice and men has introduced
confusion toward this hypothesis. XBP1s is a key positive regulator for
unfolded protein response and a master transcription factor for plasma
cell development. It was previously reported that transgenic
overexpression of XBP1s in the B cell lineage of mice (XBP1s-Tg), induces
a multiple myeloma phenotype resembling human MM. We have now defined a
post-germinal center, pre-plasma B cell population that was significantly
increased in XBP1s-Tg mice as the hallmarks of MM was demonstrated. This
non-memory B cell population resembled a stem/progenitor cell population,
with increased expression of aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH), Notch1 and
c-kit. Importantly, utilizing an in vitro culture for differentiating
plasma cells, the increased population began to differentiate into plasma
cells, increasing in size and gaining CD138 expression, the hallmark
marker for plasma cells. In conclusion, we have defined a transitional
pre-plasma cell population that could potentially be a stem/progenitor
population of multiple myeloma. These results provide a novel insight
into stem cell biology with regard to multiple myeloma and the use of
murine models of myeloma to study the disease.

