Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Single-cell transcriptome analysis on lung squamous cell carcinoma
derived from a patient


Distinct genomic signature of a patient's cancer could provide a clue to
design and predict accurate therapeutic responses to targeted medicine.
Current approaches regarding heterogeneous cancer cells en masse as a
pooled population, however, hardly reflect complete genomic landscape of
tumor diversity, missing potentially important minor clones' implications
regarding metastasis and drug resistance. Here we report a comprehensive
analysis to discover different patterns of subclonal behaviors in
functional modalities and signaling pathways out of heterogeneous
population derived from a patient with lung squamous cell carcinoma,
using single-cell mRNA sequencing. As a result of nonnegative matrix
factorization as a clustering, we identified discrete 4 subgroups with a
major group in accordance with overall expression profile of a pooled
population of cells, and the other 3 minor groups that were masked in a
pooled sample. Genomic variants were also reliably identified and
compared across single cells. We integrated these genomic signatures from
single cells to address the different responses in drug screening.
Together, our approach provides insights into the more accurate strategy
to identify minor but potentially important subclones that are relevant
to drug resistance.

