Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Enhancing specificity in predication of human papillomavirus
associated oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma by combining biomarkers
p16 and -catenin


Background: p16 is a FDA approved surrogate biomarker for predicting
human papillomavirus (HPV) associated oropharyngeal squamous cell
carcinoma (OPSCC) with high sensitivity and moderate specificity. A p16
positive HPV negative phenotype indeed exists. Increased nuclear -catenin
expression has also been shown to correlate with HPV status in OPSCC. We,
therefore, tested a novel model by combining -catenin with p16 to
increase the specificity for HPV prediction in OPSCC. Methods: Expression
levels of -catenin (nuclear and membrane immune-reactivity) and p16 were
evaluated by immunohistochemistry (IHC) staining in 101 OPSCC tissues.
HPV status was determined by HPV DNA in situ hybridization. Logistic
regression models were used to estimate single or multiple biomarkers in
HPV prediction. The prediction power, sensitivity, and specificity were
determined by the Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) analysis.
Results: All three biomarkers (p16, nuclear and membrane -catenin) were
significantly associated with HPV status (P Background: p16 is a FDA
approved surrogate biomarker for predicting human papillomavirus (HPV)
associated oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma (OPSCC) with high
sensitivity and moderate specificity. A p16 positive HPV negative
phenotype indeed exists. Increased nuclear -catenin expression has also
been shown to correlate with HPV status in OPSCC. We, therefore, tested a
novel model by combining -catenin with p16 to increase the specificity
for HPV prediction in OPSCC. Methods: Expression levels of -catenin
(nuclear and membrane immune-reactivity) and p16 were evaluated by
immunohistochemistry (IHC) staining in 101 OPSCC tissues. HPV status was
determined by HPV DNA in situ hybridization. Logistic regression models
were used to estimate single or multiple biomarkers in HPV prediction.
The prediction power, sensitivity, and specificity were determined by the
Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) analysis. Results: All three
biomarkers (p16, nuclear and membrane -catenin) were significantly
associated with HPV status (P < 0.01 for all). p16 alone showed the
highest predictive power with area under the curve (AUC) of 0.9074
compared to 0.6762 for nuclear -catenin and 0.7635 for membrane -catenin.
Multivariable analysis indicated that the odds ratios and 95% confidence
interval (CI) for HPV positivity were 381.21 (17.14-8476.34), 4.93
(0.78-31.02), and 0.98 (0.97-1.00) for p16 (P Background: p16 is a FDA
approved surrogate biomarker for predicting human papillomavirus (HPV)
associated oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma (OPSCC) with high
sensitivity and moderate specificity. A p16 positive HPV negative
phenotype indeed exists. Increased nuclear -catenin expression has also
been shown to correlate with HPV status in OPSCC. We, therefore, tested a
novel model by combining -catenin with p16 to increase the specificity
for HPV prediction in OPSCC. Methods: Expression levels of -catenin
(nuclear and membrane immune-reactivity) and p16 were evaluated by
immunohistochemistry (IHC) staining in 101 OPSCC tissues. HPV status was
determined by HPV DNA in situ hybridization. Logistic regression models
were used to estimate single or multiple biomarkers in HPV prediction.
The prediction power, sensitivity, and specificity were determined by the
Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) analysis. Results: All three
biomarkers (p16, nuclear and membrane -catenin) were significantly
associated with HPV status (P < 0.01 for all). p16 alone showed the
highest predictive power with area under the curve (AUC) of 0.9074
compared to 0.6762 for nuclear -catenin and 0.7635 for membrane -catenin.
Multivariable analysis indicated that the odds ratios and 95% confidence
interval (CI) for HPV positivity were 381.21 (17.14-8476.34), 4.93
(0.78-31.02), and 0.98 (0.97-1.00) for p16 (P < 0.001), nuclear -catenin
(P = 0.089) and membrane -catenin (P = 0.085), respectively. The
three-biomarker model had a sensitivity (99%) close to p16 alone (100%),
but a higher specificity (89%) than p16 alone (81%) and showed prognosis
value for overall survival (P = 0.0002) and disease-free survival (P =
0.0158). The model adjusting of clinical covariates only (AUC = 0.794) or
adjusting of both clinical covariates and the three biomarkers (AUC =
0.852) did not produce a better HPV prediction as compared to the
three-biomarker model (AUC = 0.962). Conclusion: Our findings suggests
that the novel strategy of combining -catenin with p16 increases the
specificity for HPV prediction in OPSCC compared to p16 alone and
deserves further validation in different clinical settings. (This study
was supported by grants from Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Program (HHSN261201200097C) and National Institutes of Health (R33
CA161873) and Georgia Cancer Collation Distinguished Scholar Award to Dr.
Zhuo Georgia Chen.)

