Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The Integrated Stress Response kinase GCN2 regulates cell
proliferation and survival through combined transcriptional and
translational control of p21 (Cip1/Waf1)


The tumor microenvironment is often characterized by deficiencies in
nutrients, such as oxygen, glucose, and amino acids. Activation of the
nutrient-sensing kinase GCN2, which constitutes one arm of the Integrated
Stress Response (ISR), is one mechanism by which tumor cells cope with
and adapt to nutrient stress. GCN2 phosphorylates the alpha subunit of
eukaryotic translation initiation factor eIF2, leading to global
downregulation of translation to conserve amino acids and initiation of a
transcriptional program through ATF4 to promote recovery from nutrient
deprivation. Loss of GCN2 results in decreased tumor cell survival in
vitro under conditions of amino acid deprivation and attenuated tumor
growth in vivo in a variety of implanted animal tumor models. Our recent
studies have shown that amino acid deprivation induces the cell cycle
inhibitor p21 in a GCN2-dependent manner. GCN2 regulates p21 at both the
transcriptional and translational level. Upregulation of p21 results in
cell cycle arrest and promotes survival under amino acid deprivation. In
agreement with a pro-survival role, we observe p21 upregulation
concomitant with ISR activation in a genetically engineered mouse model
of soft tissue sarcoma. These findings point to a novel mechanism of p21
regulation in order to coordinate cell division with nutrient
availability.Research supported by NCI R01CA094214.

