Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of FGFR3-BAIAP2L1 fusion kinase oncogenic potential by
CH5183284/Debio 1347, a compound that inhibits FGFR3 kinase activity
constitutively activated by BAIAP2L1 BAR domain dimerization


Advances in next-generation sequencing technologies have made possible to
identify more efficiently novel fusion proteins in cancer. Among them,
fusion kinases are well known as potent oncogenes and promising
therapeutic targets for cancer patients. Recently, several FGFR fusion
genes, such as FGFR1-TACC1, FGFR2-CCDC6, FGFR3-TACC3, and FGFR3-BAIAP2L1,
have been identified in GBM, bladder cancer, and breast cancer as well as
other tumor types. In this study, we focused on the FGFR3-BAIAP2L1 (F3-B)
gene fusion and investigated its prevalence in clinical samples,
tumorigenic activity, mechanism of constitutive activation, and
sensitivity to CH5183284/ Debio 1347.We screened cancer tissue panels by
RT-PCR for F3-B mRNA and identified F3-B positive specimens in bladder
cancer (4.3%: 2/47) and lung cancer (1.2%: 1/83). All these F3-B fusions
were confirmed by cDNA sequencing. To expand this study further, we
established an FGFR3 break apart FISH assay. In a larger bladder cancer
panel, we found 2 additional positive cases (2.2%: 2/89). To investigate
the role of F3-B in tumors, we established Rat-2 transfectants with full
length F3-B and assessed tumorigenic activity of these cells in in vitro
and in vivo settings. Rat-2/F3-B cells acquired sphere forming activity
even without FGF1 in vitro, and efficiently formed tumors when
subcutaneously inoculated the cells into nude mice. Consistent with these
observations, FGFR3 or BAIAP2L1siRNA blocked the proliferation of F3-B
positive SW780 cells. Interestingly, the selective FGFR inhibitor,
CH5183284/Debio 1347, effectively inhibited the in vivo tumor growth of
Rat-2/F3-B and SW780 cells, indicating that F3-B oncogenic activity is
depending on FGFR kinase activity. To confirm this, we established
Rat-2/F3-B-BAR, which lacks dimerization domain of BAIAP2L1 (BAR domain:
Bin-Amphiphysin-Rvs). Phosphorylation of FGFR3 in Rat-2/F3-B-BAR cells
was lowered as compared to that in Rat-2/F3-B cells. Furthermore,
Rat-2/F3-B-BAR cells exhibited lower spheroid formation activity and
slower tumor growth compared with Rat-2/F3-B cells. Taking this
information together, the constitutive dimerization though BAR domain is
essential for F3-B fusion to exert its potent oncogene activity in
tumors. These findings underline the oncogenic potential of
FGFR3-BAIAP2L1 gene fusion and warrant further clinical evaluation of the
therapeutic potential of CH5183284/Debio 1347 in patients harboring this
genetic alteration.

