Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Human breast carcinoma-associated mesenchymal stem cells from
primary breast cancer metastasis promote proliferation, invasion and
mammosphere formation in breast cancer


Background: Accumulating evidence suggests that mesenchymal stem cells
(MSCs) are recruited to the tumor microenvironment; however controversy
exists regarding their role in solid tumors. In this study, we identified
the presence of carcinoma-associated MSCs (CA-MSCs) isolated from breast
cancer metastasis to a human lymph node (LNM) and liver (LM).Methods:
Tissue harvesting and culture: CA-MSCs were isolated from fresh samples
of lymph nodes and liver breast cancer metastasis obtained from the
operating room. A portion of each specimen was mechanically dissected and
digested with collagenase. Red cells were lysed with ACK buffer and cell
suspensions were cultured in Human Epithelial Medium and isolated
adherent CA-MSCs were subculture in MSC medium for up to 12 passages for
each experiment. Another portion of the tumor samples were subjected to
IHC for H&E staining.Differentiation assays: For bone differentiation
cells were plated in StemPro Osteogenesis differentiation or control
medium and allowed to grow for 14 days, and then washed and stained with
Alizarin Red S.For cartilage differentiation cells were pelleted and
grown in 15 ml tubes for 21 days, immobilized in histogel and stained
with Alizarin Blue.For adipose differentiation cells were plated in
StemCell differentiation and control medium, after 21 days the cells were
stained with 0.3% Oil Red O.Proliferation, invasion, mammosphere assays,
cytokine array and RT-PCR for EMT signature were performed seeding the
same number of cells and comparing the single culture of CA-MSCs with
co-culture of CA-MSCs and a panel of breast cancer cells linesResults:
CA-MSCs had spindle morphology, normal karyotype, were nontumorigenic,
and possessed tri-lineage differentiation ability (osteoblast, adipocyte,
and chondrocyte). When co-cultured with breast cancer cells, CA-MSCs
promoted proliferation, invasion, and mammosphere formation, increased
IL6 and IL8 secretion into the media, and induced a gene expression
profile of EMT when compared to the single cultures.Conclusion: We
successfully isolated and characterized CA-MSCs, confirming their
presence in human breast metastasis. We found that they provide a
favorable microenvironment for tumor cell growth, enhance mammosphere
formation, and promote an EMT signature and invasion in breast cancer
cells.

