Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor suppressor SCUBE2 inhibits breast-cancer cell migration and
invasion through the reversal of epithelial-mesenchymal transition


Signal peptide-CUB-EGF domain-containing protein 2 (SCUBE2) belongs to a
secreted and membrane-associated multi-domain SCUBE protein family. We
previously demonstrated that SCUBE2 is a novel breast-tumor suppressor
and could be a useful prognostic marker. However, the role of SCUBE2 in
breast-cancer cell migration and invasion and how it is regulated during
the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) remain undefined. In this
study, we showed that ectopic SCUBE2 overexpression could enhance the
formation of E-cadherin-containing adherens junctions by
-catenin-SOX-mediated induction of forkhead box A1 (a positive regulator
of E-cadherin) and upregulation of E-cadherin, which in turn led to
epithelial transition and inhibited migration and invasion of aggressive
MDA-MB-231 breast-carcinoma cells. SCUBE2 expression was repressed
together with that of E-cadherin in TGF--induced EMT; direct expression
of SCUBE2 alone was sufficient to inhibit the TGF--induced EMT.
Furthermore, quantitative DNA methylation, methylation-specific PCR, and
chromatin immunoprecipitation analyses revealed that SCUBE2 expression
was inactivated by DNA hypermethylation at the CpG islands by recruiting
and binding DNA methyltransferase 1 during TGF--induced EMT. Together,
our results suggest that SCUBE2 plays a key role in suppressing
breast-carcinoma cell mobility and invasiveness by increasing the
formation of the epithelial E-cadherin-containing adherens junctions to
promote epithelial differentiation and drive the reversal of EMT.

