Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular dissection of platinum resistance through functional
analysis


BACKGROUND: Platinum (Pt) agents (cisplatin, carboplatin and oxaliplatin)
are active in many cancers including bladder cancer. Chemoresistance is
the most common cause of treatment failure. This study is to determine
the feasibility of using ultrasensitive accelerator mass spectrometry
(AMS) to identify chemoresistance after cancer cells or patients are
treated with one non-toxic microdose (1/100th of therapeutic dose) of Pt
agents. The long-term goal is to identify chemoresistance before cancer
patients receive toxic chemotherapy, and to determine the underlying
resistance mechanisms to design personalized chemotherapy.METHODS:
Cellular sensitivity to chemotherapeutic agents was determined by the MTT
assay. Platinum-induced DNA adduct formation and repair of adducts was
measured with AMS after cells were exposed 14C-labeled carboplatin and
oxaliplatin. AMS quantifies the 14C label that is attached to genomic DNA
when the 14C-labled drug forms adducts with DNA. Cell uptake and efflux
was measured by liquid scintillation counting. Intracellular glutathione
levels were measured by colorimetric analysis.RESULTS: Compared to the
parental bladder cancer 5637 cells, chemoresistant 5637R cells are
resistant to oxaliplatin (IC50: 2.45 M versus 27.27 M, pBACKGROUND:
Platinum (Pt) agents (cisplatin, carboplatin and oxaliplatin) are active
in many cancers including bladder cancer. Chemoresistance is the most
common cause of treatment failure. This study is to determine the
feasibility of using ultrasensitive accelerator mass spectrometry (AMS)
to identify chemoresistance after cancer cells or patients are treated
with one non-toxic microdose (1/100th of therapeutic dose) of Pt agents.
The long-term goal is to identify chemoresistance before cancer patients
receive toxic chemotherapy, and to determine the underlying resistance
mechanisms to design personalized chemotherapy.METHODS: Cellular
sensitivity to chemotherapeutic agents was determined by the MTT assay.
Platinum-induced DNA adduct formation and repair of adducts was measured
with AMS after cells were exposed 14C-labeled carboplatin and
oxaliplatin. AMS quantifies the 14C label that is attached to genomic DNA
when the 14C-labled drug forms adducts with DNA. Cell uptake and efflux
was measured by liquid scintillation counting. Intracellular glutathione
levels were measured by colorimetric analysis.RESULTS: Compared to the
parental bladder cancer 5637 cells, chemoresistant 5637R cells are
resistant to oxaliplatin (IC50: 2.45 M versus 27.27 M, p<0.0001), and
cisplatin (0.59 M versus 2.99 M, p=0.049), carboplatin (24.34 M versus
72.18 M, pBACKGROUND: Platinum (Pt) agents (cisplatin, carboplatin and
oxaliplatin) are active in many cancers including bladder cancer.
Chemoresistance is the most common cause of treatment failure. This study
is to determine the feasibility of using ultrasensitive accelerator mass
spectrometry (AMS) to identify chemoresistance after cancer cells or
patients are treated with one non-toxic microdose (1/100th of therapeutic
dose) of Pt agents. The long-term goal is to identify chemoresistance
before cancer patients receive toxic chemotherapy, and to determine the
underlying resistance mechanisms to design personalized
chemotherapy.METHODS: Cellular sensitivity to chemotherapeutic agents was
determined by the MTT assay. Platinum-induced DNA adduct formation and
repair of adducts was measured with AMS after cells were exposed
14C-labeled carboplatin and oxaliplatin. AMS quantifies the 14C label
that is attached to genomic DNA when the 14C-labled drug forms adducts
with DNA. Cell uptake and efflux was measured by liquid scintillation
counting. Intracellular glutathione levels were measured by colorimetric
analysis.RESULTS: Compared to the parental bladder cancer 5637 cells,
chemoresistant 5637R cells are resistant to oxaliplatin (IC50: 2.45 M
versus 27.27 M, p<0.0001), and cisplatin (0.59 M versus 2.99 M, p=0.049),
carboplatin (24.34 M versus 72.18 M, p<0.0001), and gemcitabine (0.12 M
versus 1.44 M, p=0.0015). Both 5637 and 5637R cells are still sensitive
to other chemotherapeutic agents commonly used in treating bladder
cancer, such as doxorubicin, methotrexate and vinblastine. Consistent
with our hypothesis, chemoresistant 5637R cells have low
oxaliplatin-induced DNA adduct levels than the parental 5637 cells (AUC
of 943 versus 2,772 adducts per 109 nucleotide-hour for 5637, p=0.001).
This low level of oxaliplatin-DNA adduct formation might be secondary to
the pre-DNA damage mechanisms, such as decreased uptake (AUC of 4.42
versus 5.12 X 109 oxaliplatin molecules per cell for 5637, p=0.037) and
increased intracellular inactivation of oxaliplatin by glutathione (53.91
versus 46.93 nmol/mg protein for 5637, p=0.003), plus increased repair of
oxaliplatin-DNA adducts (3.48 versus 1.34 adducts per 108 nucleotides per
hour for 5637, p=0.0004). We found the same correlation of low Pt-DNA
adduct levels and chemoresistance in non-small cell lung (NSCLC) and
breast cancer cell lines, and determined the same resistant mechanisms,
such as cell uptake/efflux, intracellular inactivation and DNA repair.
Carboplatin had partially different resistant mechanisms.CONCLUSION:
Functional analysis of major resistant steps can identify some
chemoresistance mechanisms that can potentially help design personalized
chemotherapy to overcome resistance. This approach can be applied to
several different cancer types. A Phase 0 microdosing clinical trial is
currently going on in patients with NSCLC and bladder cancer.

