Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Personalized ovarian cancer surveillance and detection of a
therapeutic drug target in circulating tumor DNA


Retrospective studies have demonstrated that nearly 50% of ovarian cancer
patients with normal CA125 levels have persistent disease; however,
prospectively distinguishing between patients is currently impossible.
Here we demonstrate that for one patient, with the first reported FGFR2
fusion transcript in ovarian cancer, circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA) is a
more sensitive and specific biomarker than CA125 and it can also inform
on a candidate therapeutic. Over a four year period, during which the
patient underwent primary debulking surgery and chemotherapy, tumor
recurrences and multiple chemotherapeutic regimens, blood samples were
longitudinally-collected and stored. Whereas post-surgical CA125 levels
were elevated only three times over 28 measurements, the FGFR2 fusion
ctDNA biomarker was readily detectable by qtRT-PCR in all of these same
blood samples and in the tumor recurrences. Given the persistence of the
FGFR2 fusion, we treated tumor cells derived from this patient and other
with the FGFR2 inhibitor BGJ398. Only tumor cells derived from this
patient were sensitive to FGFR2 inhbitor treatment. Using the same
overall approach, ctDNA is demonstrated in other patients and the results
compared to CA125. Taken together, we demonstrate that a relatively
inexpensive, PCR-based ctDNA surveillance assay can outperform CA125 in
identifying occult disease. To our knowledge, this use of a personalized
biomarker represents the first example in ovarian cancer demonstrating
the presence of continuous occult disease in the face of negative
clinical, radiologic and biochemical examination. Moreover, the recent
identification of FGFR fusions in other solid cancers suggests a broader
application of this strategy beyond ovarian cancer.

