Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting of tumor myeloid suppressor cells by Salmonella bacteria
causes a shift to M1 phenotype and leads to inhibition of tumor growth


Tumor development is associated with changes in hematopoiesis that lead
to an increase in myelomonocytic cells in systemic sites as well as
within the tumor tissue. The accumulation of myeloid cells within tumors
not only promotes angiogenesis and tissue remodeling required for tumor
growth but also maintains the tumor milieu as an immunosuppressive
environment. We have previously shown that attenuated strains of the
facultative anaerobic bacteria, Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimrium,
can effectively retard tumor growth in a therapeutic melanoma model.
Given that Salmonella organisms utilize host macrophages as their primary
niche for survival, we investigated the consequences of Salmonella
treatment on myeloid cell recruitment, phenotypic characteristics and
functional activation within tumor tissue of B16.F1 melanoma-bearing
animals. Treatment with Salmonella led a preferential expansion, within
spleen and tumor tissues, of CD11b+Gr-1+, but not CD11b+Gr-1-, myeloid
cells. Using 6-color FACS analysis, CD11b+Gr-1+ cells were shown to
exhibit significant up-regulation in the expression of activation
markers, including MHC class II, CD80, and Sca-1/Ly6A proteins. Moreover,
the functional activities of total tumor infiltrating cells or
CD11b-purified cells from tumor tissue were assessed by qRT-PCR.
Salmonella treatment induced a dramatic increase in iNOS and IFN-g gene
expression but inhibited ARG1 and IL-4 genes. Further, while expression
of TGF-b and VEGF was reduced, the level of inflammation-related S100A9
gene was increased. Our findings demonstrate that systemic administration
of attenuated Salmonella leads to phenotypic and functional changes in
tumor myeloid suppressor cells, with a shift from a predominantly M2
phenotype to an activated, effector macrophage phenotype.

