Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Different pancreatic cancer cells have their own core signaling
pathway


Gemcitabine as the standard chemotherapy agent to pancreatic cancer has
proved effective; however, the response rate remains at 5.4% and the
5-year survival rate is extremely poor. Due to the shortcomings of
gemcitabine and the presence of gemcitabine-resistant pancreatic cancer,
the development of targeted agents into an anti-neoplastic agent remains
a viable option.We have investigated the transforming growth factor-beta
(TGF-), which is known to play a central role in pancreas cell function.
We have already observed that the suppression of TGF-2 induced an
unexpected down-regulation of both TGF-1 and TGF-3 with concomitant
decreases of survival-related signals, such as N-caderin, -catenin, pp65
in melanoma cell line. Here, two different pancreatic cancer cell lines
(HPAC, BxPC3), which have opposite genetic backgrounds (K-ras, p53,
Smad4, EGFR), have shown differing sensitivities to the down-regulation
of TGF-2. Through transcriptome analysis, HPAC showed a high expression
of TGF-2, MUC4, HSP27, BMP4 which are deeply related to tumor progression
and metastasis and are composed to core signaling complex initiating from
TGF-2. This was confirmed by TGF-2 down-regulation with gemcitabine to
show a greater decrease in survival potential compared to BxPC3. On the
contrary, BxPC3, which has more of the mutant type p53, exhibited greater
down-regulation of MUC4 by downregulation of p53 compared to that of
TGF-2. Such observations suggest that BxPC3 is composed of a different
core signaling pathway, p53-MUC4 rather than TGF-2-related signalings.In
conclusion, it is necessary that the core signaling pathways which are
implicated in individual pancreatic carcinogenesis are more specifically
considered so that the various gemcitabine-resistant pancreatic cancer
cells on the basis of customized treatment can be controlled.

