Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Quantitative in situ biomarker analysis via ultrasensitive RNA in
situ hybridization and automated image analysis


Background and objectives: Accurate biomarker analysis and interpretation
require tissue and cellular context information, which is lost when
DNA/RNA is extracted for molecular analysis. This is especially
challenging in cancer biomarker analysis due to significant inter- and
intra-tumor heterogeneity. To address this, we have recently developed an
ultrasensitive RNA In situ hybridization (ISH) technique (RNAscope) that
enables quantitative RNA detection in the presence of full morphological
and cellular context that can be visualized under standard bright-field
microscopy. The resulting stained slides can be scored by enumerating the
punctate signal dots in each cell. Although feasible, manual scoring can
be tedious, time-consuming and subjective for routine use. Therefore, we
have developed dedicated image analysis software (SpotStudio) to automate
this task. The purpose of this study was to validate the performance of
this software.Materials and Methods: A melanoma tissue microarray (TMA)
containing formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) specimens from 159
cases were used in this study. Two TMA sections were stained for the
reference gene UBC and a long non-coding RNA (lncRNA) using RNAscope 2.0
Red assay (Advanced Cell Diagnostics, Hayward, CA). UBC staining was used
to assess RNA quality. LncRNA expression was scored manually by two
independent observers by scoring both the RNA signals in each cell using
the following scale: 0 (0 dot/cell), 1+ (1-3 dots/cell), 2+ (4-10
dots/cell), 3+ (>10 dots/cell) and the percentage of cells in each signal
category. Scanned TMA images were analyzed using SpotStudio software to
estimate the number of signal dots in each cell in a region of interest
selected by the user, and the single-cell level results were binned
according to the same categories as manual scoring. An H-score was
calculated for each case by summing the product of the signal category
score and the percentage cells in that category for all scoring
categories.Results: Among the 159 cases of TMA, 18 were excluded due to
tissue detachment, less than 5% tumor, or excessive melanin obscuring ISH
signals. Three cases were excluded from automated image analysis due to
poor focusing of scanned images. There was good agreement between the two
manual H-scores by the two independent observers (Spearman rho = 0.86,
pBackground and objectives: Accurate biomarker analysis and
interpretation require tissue and cellular context information, which is
lost when DNA/RNA is extracted for molecular analysis. This is especially
challenging in cancer biomarker analysis due to significant inter- and
intra-tumor heterogeneity. To address this, we have recently developed an
ultrasensitive RNA In situ hybridization (ISH) technique (RNAscope) that
enables quantitative RNA detection in the presence of full morphological
and cellular context that can be visualized under standard bright-field
microscopy. The resulting stained slides can be scored by enumerating the
punctate signal dots in each cell. Although feasible, manual scoring can
be tedious, time-consuming and subjective for routine use. Therefore, we
have developed dedicated image analysis software (SpotStudio) to automate
this task. The purpose of this study was to validate the performance of
this software.Materials and Methods: A melanoma tissue microarray (TMA)
containing formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) specimens from 159
cases were used in this study. Two TMA sections were stained for the
reference gene UBC and a long non-coding RNA (lncRNA) using RNAscope 2.0
Red assay (Advanced Cell Diagnostics, Hayward, CA). UBC staining was used
to assess RNA quality. LncRNA expression was scored manually by two
independent observers by scoring both the RNA signals in each cell using
the following scale: 0 (0 dot/cell), 1+ (1-3 dots/cell), 2+ (4-10
dots/cell), 3+ (>10 dots/cell) and the percentage of cells in each signal
category. Scanned TMA images were analyzed using SpotStudio software to
estimate the number of signal dots in each cell in a region of interest
selected by the user, and the single-cell level results were binned
according to the same categories as manual scoring. An H-score was
calculated for each case by summing the product of the signal category
score and the percentage cells in that category for all scoring
categories.Results: Among the 159 cases of TMA, 18 were excluded due to
tissue detachment, less than 5% tumor, or excessive melanin obscuring ISH
signals. Three cases were excluded from automated image analysis due to
poor focusing of scanned images. There was good agreement between the two
manual H-scores by the two independent observers (Spearman rho = 0.86,
p<0.001). The automated H-scores also demonstrated excellent agreement
with the manual H-scores (Spearman rho = 0.91, pBackground and
objectives: Accurate biomarker analysis and interpretation require tissue
and cellular context information, which is lost when DNA/RNA is extracted
for molecular analysis. This is especially challenging in cancer
biomarker analysis due to significant inter- and intra-tumor
heterogeneity. To address this, we have recently developed an
ultrasensitive RNA In situ hybridization (ISH) technique (RNAscope) that
enables quantitative RNA detection in the presence of full morphological
and cellular context that can be visualized under standard bright-field
microscopy. The resulting stained slides can be scored by enumerating the
punctate signal dots in each cell. Although feasible, manual scoring can
be tedious, time-consuming and subjective for routine use. Therefore, we
have developed dedicated image analysis software (SpotStudio) to automate
this task. The purpose of this study was to validate the performance of
this software.Materials and Methods: A melanoma tissue microarray (TMA)
containing formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) specimens from 159
cases were used in this study. Two TMA sections were stained for the
reference gene UBC and a long non-coding RNA (lncRNA) using RNAscope 2.0
Red assay (Advanced Cell Diagnostics, Hayward, CA). UBC staining was used
to assess RNA quality. LncRNA expression was scored manually by two
independent observers by scoring both the RNA signals in each cell using
the following scale: 0 (0 dot/cell), 1+ (1-3 dots/cell), 2+ (4-10
dots/cell), 3+ (>10 dots/cell) and the percentage of cells in each signal
category. Scanned TMA images were analyzed using SpotStudio software to
estimate the number of signal dots in each cell in a region of interest
selected by the user, and the single-cell level results were binned
according to the same categories as manual scoring. An H-score was
calculated for each case by summing the product of the signal category
score and the percentage cells in that category for all scoring
categories.Results: Among the 159 cases of TMA, 18 were excluded due to
tissue detachment, less than 5% tumor, or excessive melanin obscuring ISH
signals. Three cases were excluded from automated image analysis due to
poor focusing of scanned images. There was good agreement between the two
manual H-scores by the two independent observers (Spearman rho = 0.86,
p<0.001). The automated H-scores also demonstrated excellent agreement
with the manual H-scores (Spearman rho = 0.91, p<0.001).Conclusion:
Automated quantitation of RNA ISH slides is highly desirable as manual
scoring can be time consuming and a significant source of variability.
The SpotStudio software demonstrated excellent agreement with manual
scoring. In addition, the software can provide quantitative data on a
cell-by-cell basis, which would be impractical manually. Quantitative
analysis of biomarkers at the single-cell level will be invaluable in
many areas of cancer research and diagnostics.

