Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Profiling inhibitors of MDM2:p53 and MDMX:p53 in relation to MDMX
protein levels


Pharmacological antagonism of the interaction between MDM2 and/or MDMX
with p53 has been pursued as a therapeutic strategy to restore p53 tumour
suppressor activity in wild type TP53 tumours with amplification or
over-expression of these negative regulators. The majority of small
molecule approaches described to date inhibit MDM2 binding to p53, which
has E3 ligase activity and through ubiquitination targets p53 for
degradation. However, MDMX, although devoid of E3 ligase activity itself,
forms heterodimers with MDM2 and augments its activity to induce
polyubiquitination of p53. Further complexity in this regulatory network
arises from the fact that MDM2 is a target gene of p53 transcription, and
that MDM2 can also control the stability of MDMX. Since MDMX is widely
reported to confer resistance to established MDM2:p53 antagonists, this
study aimed to examine the activity of MDM2:p53 selective inhibitors
across a panel of wild-type TP53 cell lines with variable MDM2 and MDMX
protein expression, and to contrast this with recently described
inhibitors with mixed MDM2:p53 and MDMX:p53 activity.Growth inhibition
studies (72h) were performed using XTT assays, but with verification by
orthogonal methods (SRB, clonogenic assays). Gene expression was
determined at the level of mRNA and protein. The selectivity of all
inhibitors was confirmed initially in p53 wild-type and non-functional
paired cell lines.As anticipated, MDM2:p53 selective inhibitors
(nutlin-3a, MI-773, RG7112) were active in MDM2 amplified cell lines with
low MDMX expression (SJSA-1 and T778; GI50 range 0.2 to 1 uM). However, a
similar level of activity was also evident in cell lines with low/medium
MDM2 in the presence of medium/high MDMX expression (Pre B 697, A375,
HCT116, MRK-NU1, and NGP cells: GI50 range 0.2 to 2 uM). Appreciable
resistance was only evident in Jeg3 and MCF-7 cells (low MDM2 and high
MDMX), averaged compound GI50 values ranging from 9 - 10 uM in Jeg3 and 6
- 14 uM in MCF-7. Whilst a concentration dependent degradation of MDMX
was observed in some sensitive cell lines with medium/high MDMX
expression, in others no change was evident, suggesting that there are
multiple determinants of cellular sensitivity to such inhibitors.
Importantly, the mixed MDM2:p53 and MDMX:p53 antagonist RO-5963,
displayed a different spectrum of activity, with least growth inhibition
evident in SJSA-1 and T778 MDM2 amplified cell lines, and activity being
retained in MDMX amplified Jeg3 cells.These studies support the concept
that targeting MDMX may provide a different spectrum of antitumour
activity to selective MDM2:p53 inhibition. However, MDMX protein levels
per se do not constitute a universal resistance factor to selective
MDM2:p53 inhibitors and, beyond MDM2 amplification, the identification of
additional markers of sensitivity is warranted for this class of agent.

