Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SMURF1 inhibition reduces cancer stem cell-like population in head
and neck squamous cell carcinoma


Cancer stem cells (CSCs) possess capabilities for long-term survival
(quiescence), self-renewal, and tumor initiation thought to be
responsible for drug resistance and treatment failures for many
malignancies, including head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC).
Previously, we showed that the activity of bone morphogenetic protein
(BMP), a key regulator of cell differentiation, proliferation, migration,
and apoptosis, is inhibited in CSC-like populations enriched from HNSCC
cell lines. In contrast, the BMP signaling inhibitor SMAD specific E3
ubiquitin protein ligase 1 (SMURF1) and CD44, a marker of CSCs, were
upregulated.Objectives: In this study, we characterized the role of
SMURF1 for CSC maintenance and differentiating growth and identified a
population of cells regulated by SMURF1.Methods: We generated a stable
knockdown of SMURF1 expression in CSC-like populations using a lentivirus
delivered shRNA interference construct. Long-term colony formation and
Calcein AM dye efflux assays were performed to assess CSC maintenance and
differentiating growth.Results: Knockdown of SMURF1 expression by shRNA
reduced viability and colony formation of CSC-like cells grown in
three-dimensional culture. Furthermore, reduced SMURF1 expression
diminished the number of cells capable of dye efflux and decreased CD44
expression (CD44-high) in a select cell population.Conclusion: We
interpret our data to suggest that SMURF1 inhibition of BMP signaling
potentiates the long-term survival of HNSCC CSCs. Reduced dye efflux and
expression of CD44-high cells suggests decreased maintenance of CSC-like
populations along with an increased potential for differentiating growth.
Targeting SMURF1 may provide a long-term benefit for HNSCC treatment to
reduce resistant CSC populations and disease recurrence.

