Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Activating transcription factor 4 regulates RET
autophosphorylation and ubiquitin-dependent degradation


RET proto-oncogene, a receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK), activates a complex
network of signal transduction pathways that when unregulated contributes
to cell transformation. Germ line missense mutations, which give rise to
constitutively active oncogenic RET, were found to cause multiple
endocrine neoplasia type 2 (MEN2), a dominant inherited cancer syndrome
that affects multiple neuroendocrine organs. Recent findings also suggest
that impairment of RTK down-regulation or deactivation may be involved in
tumorigenesis. The molecular mechanism that functions to attenuate RET
signaling remain elusive. ATF4 is a central mediator of integrated stress
response pathway. Activation of ATF4 results in tumor cell death under
stress conditions thereby suggesting that ATF4 agonists constitute a
potential therapeutic strategy for inhibiting tumor growth. Here, we
report that ATF4 overexpression in medullary thyroid cancer cells
harboring RET C634W mutation decreases RET protein expression but not the
mRNA levels. In addition, ATF4 accelerates RET turnover and promotes its
ubiquitination. Moreover, a RET kinase dead mutant is more stable than
wild type or M918T RET suggesting that kinase activity is required for
ATF4-mediated degradation. Finally, ATF4 depletion upregulates RET
protein levels and RET autophosphorylation. Our findings unravel ATF4 as
a feedback negative attenuator of RET signaling that could be used as a
potential therapeutic target for medullary thyroid cancer or other
malignancy with RET abnormalities.

