Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Basal level of FANCD2 monoubiquitination is required for the
maintenance of a sufficient number of licensed-replication origins to
fire at a normal rate


Normal DNA replication starts following the stepwise recruitment of
replication initiators to assemble Mini-chromosome Maintenance (MCM) 2-7
protein complexes at an adequate amount of DNA replication origins. Under
normal conditions, the monoubiquitination of Fanconi Anemia (FA) group D2
protein (FANCD2) occurs in each S-phase of cell cycle, which is the basal
level of FANCD2 monoubiquitination. However, little is known regarding
the roles of this basal level of monoubiquitinated FANCD2. Here, we
report that monoubiquitnated FANCD2 in each S-phase of a given cell cycle
can interact with replication origins and MCM3. In normally growing
cells, the presence of non-monoubiquitinated FANCD2 or mutant MCM3
lacking AA 477-480 responsible for interacting with FANCD2 can lead to an
insufficient amount of licensed origins ready for firing and, thereby,
enlarged intervals between the fired origins. These results demonstrate
that in normally cycling cells, the monoubiquitinated FANCD2 is required
to maintain an enough number of licensed origins to initiate a normal DNA
replication. This finding is the first to provide insights into how
FANCD2 functions under normal conditions of cell cycle to maintain genome
stability, as well as its resulting implications in the strategic
improvement for the fight against human cancer. This study is funded by
NIH RO1CA136532.

