Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metformin synergistically enhances antitumor efficacy of sorafenib
in vitro


Background: Previously, we observed anti-tumor effect of sorafenib in
osteosarcoma cells. However, a number of studies suggested that cancer
cells might escape from the therapeutic effects of sorafenib though
activation of mTOR pathways. Metformin displays significant growth
inhibitory effects in several cancer cells by modulating AMPK/Akt/mTOR
signaling pathway. We evaluated the effect of metformin in osteosarcoma
cells as a single agent, as well as in combination with
sorafenib.Methods: The effects of metformin on proliferation, migration
and apoptosis of osteosarcoma cells were evaluated using MTT,
wound-healing and FACS analysis. To elucidate the mechanisms of cell
growth inhibition induced by metformin, we investigated expression of
several key signaling proteins in OS cells. The synergistic interactions
of metformin and sorafenib were determined by calcusyn analysis.Results:
We found that metformin significantly decreased the cell survival,
wound-healing capacity of OS cells. Metformin also markedly activated
AMPK and decreased the expression of Akt, ERK1/2, mTOR and its downstream
target markers. And we observed that addition of sorafenib enhanced
antiproliferative and proapoptotic effects of metformin by synergistic
modulation of AMPK/Akt/mTOR signaling pathway.Conclusion: We found that
metformin exerts therapeutic potentials in OS cells. Currently, studies
are underway to evaluate the possibilities of using metformin as an
adjuvant therapeutic agent for osteosarcoma, in combination with
chemotherapeutic agents or radiotherapy.

