Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: 15-Deoxy-12,14-prostaglandin J2 upregulates the expression of
15-hydroxyprostaglandin dehydrogenase through DNA methyltrasferase 1
inactivation


15-Hydroxyprostaglandin dehydrogenase (15-PGDH) is the key enzyme that
catalyzes the conversion of prostaglandin E2 to a biologically inactive
keto metabolite. The down regulation of 15-PGDH is ubiquitously observed
in various human malignancies including breast cancer. Hypermethylation
of CpG islands present in the gene promoter region is considered to
silence the expression of 15-PGDH. However, the molecular mechanisms
underlying regulation of 15-PGDH remain largely unknown.
15-Deoxy-12,14-prostaglandin J2 (15d-PGJ2), an endogenous ligand of
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor , has been reported to have
anti-inflammatory and anti-carcinogenic activities. In the present study,
we have found that 15-PGJ2 upregulates expression and catalytic activity
of 15-PGDH in human breast cancer (MDA-MB-231) cells. 15d-PGJ2 decreased
the level of CpG methylation in the 15-PGDH promoter in MDA-MB-231 cells
as determined by the bisulfite genome sequencing and methyl specific PCR.
15d-PGJ2 inhibited catalytic activity of methyltransferase 1 (DNMT1) but
did not influence expression of either mRNA or protein of DNMT1. siRNA
knockdown of DNMT1 induced expression of 15-PGDH. Biotinylated 15d-PGJ2
directly interacted with DNMT1 and reduced its catalytic activity.
Chromatin-immunoprecipitation analysis revealed that 15d-PGJ2
significantly attenuated DNMT1 binding to the site for AP-1 transcription
factor present in the 15-PGDH promoter regions. We also observed that
15-PGJ2 induced expression of c-Fos, but not c-Jun in the nuclear extract
of MDA-MD-231 cells. Moreover, 15d-PGJ2 increased the c-Fos binding to
the 15-PGDH promoter regions. A non-electrophilic analogue
9,10-dihydro-15d-PGJ2 failed to suppress the methylation of CpG islands
present in 15-PGDH promoter and did not affect DNMT1 activity and 15-PGDH
expression. This finding suggests that the ,-unsaturated carbonyl group
is essential for 15d-PGJ2-mediated inactivation of DNMT1 and expression
of 15-PGDH. In conclusion, 15d-PGJ2 plays as a hypomethylating agent
through direct interaction with DNMT1 and thereby suppresses
DNMT1-mediated hypermethylation of 15-PGDH promoter, leading to
upregulation of 15-PGDH expression.

