Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An in-situ proximity assay using biotin ligase


Protein-protein interactions (PPIs) are fundamental to biological
processes, from signaling pathways that modulate gene expression, cell
proliferation, tumor invasion to cytoskeleton networks that maintain
morphological integrity of cells and tissues. Activation of oncogenes and
inactivation of tumor suppressor genes in the cell that lead to
carcinogenesis are inevitably accompanied by disruption of normal or
activation of aberrant PPIs, thus detection and understanding of PPIs may
advance the diagnosis and treatment of cancer.Although many methods have
been developed to discover and detect PPIs in vivo and ex vivo, few are
applicable to in situ detection of PPIs, particularly in formalin-fixed,
paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissue samples. Here we report a sensitive in
situ PPI detection method for FFPE tissues that utilizes biotin ligase
(BirA), an enzyme that covalently labels its specific peptide target
substrate (BTS) with biotin. We developed BirA and BTS conjugated
antibodies, each of which binds specifically to one of the interacting
protein pair and whose close proximity permits BirA to biotinylate the
BTS for subsequent visualization.Using both artificial system such as
hapten-labeled proteins and known biological PPI models such as
E-cadherin and beta-catenin and HER2/HER3 dimers in the context of FFPE
tissues, we have demonstrated that the assay is both sensitive and
robust. Moreover, the assay has been fully automated and is easily
adaptable for detecting protein dimers, fusion proteins, or other novel
binary interactions in tissue specimens. As understanding details of
signaling pathways becomes increasingly important in cancer biology, in
situ proximity assay may offer novel mechanistic and therapeutic insights
and provide a powerful tool for cancer diagnostics.

