Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antitumor properties of ouabain in lipid double emulsion in
orthotopic canine osteosarcoma xenografted mouse model


Canine cancers develop in immunocompetent environments and share many
similar features observed in human cancers, such as long periods of
latency for initiation, progression and development, metastasis, acquired
drug resistance and recurrence. Osteosarcoma is a primary bone tumor that
occurs in dogs. It is highly aggressive and metastatic in nature, and the
therapeutic methods utilized to treat this primary canine tumor are very
limited. We have successfully established canine osteosarcoma orthotopic
xenograft models with NSG mice (from Jackson Lab) in vivo. Ouabain, known
as Na+, K+ ATPase inhibitor, has been used for many years in human
clinical applications for the treatment of congestive heart failure.
Recently, ouabain has been investigated for potential anticancer
properties. However, the therapeutic dose window is very narrow because
the side effects of ouabain overdose can be lethal. In an attempt to
mitigate such narrow therapeutic margin of safety, ouabain was formulated
in lipid double emulsion by using microfluidic synthesis method or
membrane emulsification method. Our preliminary results showed enhanced
antitumor activities of ouabain in double emulsion or nanoemulsion
against canine osteosarcoma cell lines in vitro and in orthotopic
xenograft models in vivo. The safety and delivery efficiency of ouabain
in vivo was also improved, suggesting a therapeutic application of
ouabain double emulsion could be benefit in canine osteosarcoma targeting
therapy.

