Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Focal adhesion kinsase (FAK) protein overexpression and gene copy
number gain correlate with better outcome in patients with surgically
resected NSCLC tumors


Purpose: Cancer cell migration mechanisms are important for invasion and
metastasis development. Focal adhesion kinase (FAK) is a critical
cancer-related signaling molecule that regulates cell motility and
migration. We investigated the effect of tumor FAK protein expression and
gene copy number gain in the prognosis of patients with surgically
resected non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC).Material and Methods: We
studied FAK protein expression by immunohistochemistry (IHC) in 216 NSCLC
stages I-III archival tumors, including 151 adenocarcinomas (ACs) and 65
squamous cell carcinomas (SCCs). In 190 of these tumors (132 ACs and 58
SCCs), we examined FAK gene copy number by fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH). FAK IHC expression was examined using the H-score,
and a score >150 was defined as overexpression. We examined the
correlation of FAK abnormalities with tumors' clinic-pathological and
molecular features, and with patients' outcome, including recurrence free
and overall survivals.Results: FAK cytoplasmic protein expression score
(PPurpose: Cancer cell migration mechanisms are important for invasion
and metastasis development. Focal adhesion kinase (FAK) is a critical
cancer-related signaling molecule that regulates cell motility and
migration. We investigated the effect of tumor FAK protein expression and
gene copy number gain in the prognosis of patients with surgically
resected non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC).Material and Methods: We
studied FAK protein expression by immunohistochemistry (IHC) in 216 NSCLC
stages I-III archival tumors, including 151 adenocarcinomas (ACs) and 65
squamous cell carcinomas (SCCs). In 190 of these tumors (132 ACs and 58
SCCs), we examined FAK gene copy number by fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH). FAK IHC expression was examined using the H-score,
and a score >150 was defined as overexpression. We examined the
correlation of FAK abnormalities with tumors' clinic-pathological and
molecular features, and with patients' outcome, including recurrence free
and overall survivals.Results: FAK cytoplasmic protein expression score
(P<0.0001) was significantly higher in AC (143 71) compared to SCC (70
42) histology, and in never smokers than smokers. FAK protein
overexpression was more frequently (P=0.0005) detected in stage I (46%)
than stage II (22%) and III (23%) tumors. In ACs, FAK protein
overexpression was significantly higher (P=0.003) in tumors with EGFR
mutation (11/13, 85%) compared with wild-type tumors (40/97, 41%). We
found that 4 FAK gene copies in 20% of malignant cells were detected in
28.8% of ACs and 22.4% of SCCs. We did not find correlation between
protein expression and gene copy number. After adjusting for stage and
adjuvant therapy, NSCLC and AC patients with FAK expression higher than
the median had better overall survival (NSCLC, HR 0.51 [CI 0.29-0.86],
P=0.017; AC, HR 0.43 [CI 0.23-0.82], P=0.011) compared with patients
without protein overexpression. Also, we found that, after adjusting for
stage and adjuvant therapy, FAK gene copy number 4 in 20% of tumors cells
correlated with better overall survival (HR 0.34 [CI 0.16-0.95], P=0.039)
in patients with AC histology.Conclusion: FAK protein overexpression and
gene copy number gain were frequently detected in NSCLC tumors, and,
interestingly, they correlated with better outcome in patients with
surgically resected tumors.

