Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: FGFR2-ADC potently and selectively inhibits growth of gastric and
breast cancer xenograft models


Antibody-drug conjugates (ADCs) represent a promising therapeutic
approach for treatment of cancer. We have developed a novel ADC directed
against fibroblast growth factor receptor 2 (FGFR2). FGFR2 is
overexpressed in several cancer indications, such as gastric cancer and
breast cancer, thus representing an interesting therapeutic target for
the treatment of FGFR2 positive cancer patients with an ADC-based
therapy. The FGFR2-ADC consists of the fully human anti-FGFR2-mAb BAY
1179470 conjugated via a stable linker to a novel auristatin cytotoxic
agent (technology licensed from Seattle Genetics). The FGFR2-mAb BAY
1179470, which is cross-reactive with human, mouse, rat and monkey,
induces internalization of FGFR2. Quantitative data on FGFR2 antibody
bound per cell (ABC) were determined with the QuantiBrite assay using BAY
1179470. FGFR2-ADC has a potency in the single digit nM to sub nM range
in a panel of FGFR2-positive cells lines (e.g., SNU-16, KatoIII,
SUM52-PE, MFM-223) and shows more than 100-fold selectivity versus
FGFR2-negative cell lines. High levels of FGFR2 on cancer cells correlate
with internalization efficacy and cytotoxic activity in vitro. FGFR2-ADC
is highly efficacious in monotherapy and results in tumor growth
inhibition in the gastric cancer xenograft model SNU-16 and tumor
regression in the breast cancer xenograft model MFM-223. At doses
efficacious in mice, FGFR2-ADC is well tolerated. The pre-clinical
efficacy and tolerability data obtained for FGFR2-ADC suggest a
therapeutic index and support clinical testing.

