Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Fast and automated assessment of tumor response: Infrared imaging


The rabbit Vx2 tumor is a fast-growing carcinoma model, which is commonly
used to study different aspects of tumor behaviour under cancer
treatments. The reduction of tumor viability and the degree of induced
necrosis are the most common criteria to evaluate the efficacy of cancer
treatments. The most recent developments in infrared microspectroscopy
(IRMS) imaging aimed at automating the procedure of tissue recognition
and quantification by using statistical methods and prediction algorithm.
We used IRMS for the automatic characterization and quantification of the
Vx2 liver tumor viability after a chemoembolization
treatment.Twenty-eight rabbits with Vx2 liver tumor were included in this
study: 20 rabbits were subjected to a Doxorubicin eluting beads (DEB)
treatment and compared to a control (CTRL) group of 8 rabbits. The tumor
bearing livers were resected, fixed in formalin and embedded in paraffin.
Two adjacent sections were cut from each sample using a microtome. The
first section was mounted on a calcium fluoride window suitable for IRMS
imaging. The second section was put on a standard glass slide and stained
with HES to serve as a control for IRMS imaging. On a first series of 14
different tumor sections (CTRL: 7 sections, DEB: 7 sections), we
developed and validated a prediction algorithm. The protocol consisted of
K-means (KM) clustering followed by linear discriminant analysis (LDA).
The KM clustering was used to classify the spectra from the infrared
images and to build a data base containing a large number of reference
spectra (397.289 spectra) characteristics for tumor necrosis, viable
tumor, fibrosis, liver parenchyma and liver parenchyma necrosis. Once the
model validated, we empirically attributed a color for each type of
tissue. Then, the predictive model was applied to infrared images of 52
new test tumor sections (CTRL: 9 sections, DEB: 43 sections). The result
of the LDA model analysis is a false color image where each color
corresponds to a type of tissue. The percentage of pixels corresponding
to each color is automatically recorded by the LDA model. This advantage
was used to calculate the mean percentage of surface occupied by each
type of tissue and to determine the tumor viability after the DEB
treatment.The LDA false color images reproduced the histological
structures of Vx2 liver tumors. The sensitivity and specificity of the
LDA model were high to 86.7% and 96.7% for the 5 tissue types
respectively. For DEB group, the LDA model determined that the surface of
necrotic tissue represented 77.6823 % (CTRL group: 16.899 %, Mann
Whitney: PThe rabbit Vx2 tumor is a fast-growing carcinoma model, which
is commonly used to study different aspects of tumor behaviour under
cancer treatments. The reduction of tumor viability and the degree of
induced necrosis are the most common criteria to evaluate the efficacy of
cancer treatments. The most recent developments in infrared
microspectroscopy (IRMS) imaging aimed at automating the procedure of
tissue recognition and quantification by using statistical methods and
prediction algorithm. We used IRMS for the automatic characterization and
quantification of the Vx2 liver tumor viability after a chemoembolization
treatment.Twenty-eight rabbits with Vx2 liver tumor were included in this
study: 20 rabbits were subjected to a Doxorubicin eluting beads (DEB)
treatment and compared to a control (CTRL) group of 8 rabbits. The tumor
bearing livers were resected, fixed in formalin and embedded in paraffin.
Two adjacent sections were cut from each sample using a microtome. The
first section was mounted on a calcium fluoride window suitable for IRMS
imaging. The second section was put on a standard glass slide and stained
with HES to serve as a control for IRMS imaging. On a first series of 14
different tumor sections (CTRL: 7 sections, DEB: 7 sections), we
developed and validated a prediction algorithm. The protocol consisted of
K-means (KM) clustering followed by linear discriminant analysis (LDA).
The KM clustering was used to classify the spectra from the infrared
images and to build a data base containing a large number of reference
spectra (397.289 spectra) characteristics for tumor necrosis, viable
tumor, fibrosis, liver parenchyma and liver parenchyma necrosis. Once the
model validated, we empirically attributed a color for each type of
tissue. Then, the predictive model was applied to infrared images of 52
new test tumor sections (CTRL: 9 sections, DEB: 43 sections). The result
of the LDA model analysis is a false color image where each color
corresponds to a type of tissue. The percentage of pixels corresponding
to each color is automatically recorded by the LDA model. This advantage
was used to calculate the mean percentage of surface occupied by each
type of tissue and to determine the tumor viability after the DEB
treatment.The LDA false color images reproduced the histological
structures of Vx2 liver tumors. The sensitivity and specificity of the
LDA model were high to 86.7% and 96.7% for the 5 tissue types
respectively. For DEB group, the LDA model determined that the surface of
necrotic tissue represented 77.6823 % (CTRL group: 16.899 %, Mann
Whitney: P<0.0001), the viable tumor 14.2923 % (CTRL group: 74.747 %, MW:
PThe rabbit Vx2 tumor is a fast-growing carcinoma model, which is
commonly used to study different aspects of tumor behaviour under cancer
treatments. The reduction of tumor viability and the degree of induced
necrosis are the most common criteria to evaluate the efficacy of cancer
treatments. The most recent developments in infrared microspectroscopy
(IRMS) imaging aimed at automating the procedure of tissue recognition
and quantification by using statistical methods and prediction algorithm.
We used IRMS for the automatic characterization and quantification of the
Vx2 liver tumor viability after a chemoembolization
treatment.Twenty-eight rabbits with Vx2 liver tumor were included in this
study: 20 rabbits were subjected to a Doxorubicin eluting beads (DEB)
treatment and compared to a control (CTRL) group of 8 rabbits. The tumor
bearing livers were resected, fixed in formalin and embedded in paraffin.
Two adjacent sections were cut from each sample using a microtome. The
first section was mounted on a calcium fluoride window suitable for IRMS
imaging. The second section was put on a standard glass slide and stained
with HES to serve as a control for IRMS imaging. On a first series of 14
different tumor sections (CTRL: 7 sections, DEB: 7 sections), we
developed and validated a prediction algorithm. The protocol consisted of
K-means (KM) clustering followed by linear discriminant analysis (LDA).
The KM clustering was used to classify the spectra from the infrared
images and to build a data base containing a large number of reference
spectra (397.289 spectra) characteristics for tumor necrosis, viable
tumor, fibrosis, liver parenchyma and liver parenchyma necrosis. Once the
model validated, we empirically attributed a color for each type of
tissue. Then, the predictive model was applied to infrared images of 52
new test tumor sections (CTRL: 9 sections, DEB: 43 sections). The result
of the LDA model analysis is a false color image where each color
corresponds to a type of tissue. The percentage of pixels corresponding
to each color is automatically recorded by the LDA model. This advantage
was used to calculate the mean percentage of surface occupied by each
type of tissue and to determine the tumor viability after the DEB
treatment.The LDA false color images reproduced the histological
structures of Vx2 liver tumors. The sensitivity and specificity of the
LDA model were high to 86.7% and 96.7% for the 5 tissue types
respectively. For DEB group, the LDA model determined that the surface of
necrotic tissue represented 77.6823 % (CTRL group: 16.899 %, Mann
Whitney: P<0.0001), the viable tumor 14.2923 % (CTRL group: 74.747 %, MW:
P< 0.0001) and fibrosis 3.896 % of the tumor (CTRL group: 1.12 %, MW: P=
0.6262). The remaining percentage corresponded to unclassified spectra
(DEB group: 3.947 %, CTRL group: 6.405 %, MW: P=0.0135).Our results show
that IR imaging coupled with LDA model analysis could be a helpful to
easily assess tumor response.

