Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Butterfly effect in cancer: How a single base mutation of PIK3CA
remodels multiple pathways


PI 3-kinase is a frequently mutated oncogene. Along with the phosphatase
PTEN, numerous receptor tyrosine kinases, and Akt, the PI 3-kinase
pathway is among the most frequently activated in cancer. The H1047R
mutation of PIK3CA is a representative gain-of-function mutation in the
PI 3-kinase pathway and is transforming in both chicken fibroblasts and
mouse embryonic fibroblasts. Recently, a knock-in of this mutation has
been made in the normal human mammary epithelial cell line, MCF-10A.
Here, H1047R confers growth factor independence, but does enable the
knock-in cells to grow in soft agar or to form xenografts in mice.We have
investigated this knock-in cell line and the parental MCF-10A by both
deep sequencing and proteomics to determine the transcriptional and
translational changes induced by PIK3CA-H1047R. We can confirm that the
only coding mutation introduced into the MCF-10A cell line is
PIK3CA-H1047R. Surprisingly, this single base mutation induces changes in
the expression of thousands of transcripts and proteins. Despite rapid
proliferation and growth factor independence, H1047R also induces a
decrease in cell cycle genes including Cyclin A2 and Cyclin D2. The
decrease in these genes may be the cause of an observed decrease in S and
G2 phase cells as compared with the parental MCF-10A cell line. The
parental cells overexpress MYC, however this overexpression is lost upon
H1047R expression. Inhibition of PI 3-kinase with small molecule
compounds that are selective for p110 or affect all isoforms of p110 as
well as inhibition of mTOR do not restore the expression of c-MYC. This
suggests that long-term activation of the PI 3-kinase pathway can result
in changes to the gene expression landscape which no longer depend upon
the PI 3-kinase pathway. Finally, H1047R causes changes in 3D cell
culture morphology. Both MCF-10A and the H1047R knock-in form acinar
structures with hollow lumen when grown on reduced growth factor Matrigel
substrates. However, if these cultures are treated with IGF1, the MCF-10A
cells retain their acinar structures while, H1047R form branching
tube-like structures which invade into Matrigel. The formation of these
structures can be inhibited by the introduction of GDC-0941, a pan-PI3K
inhibitor. IGF1 has no effect upon cell proliferation or migration in 2D
cell culture systems.In summary, the H1047R mutation of PIK3CA while
possessing a single catalytic activity can lead to a diverse range of
phenotypes beyond growth factor independence.This work was supported by
the National Institutes of Health under award numbers R01 CA078230 and
R21 AG039716 (JRH and PKV), P30 NS057096 and P41 RR011823 (YZ, LL and
JRY). This is abstract 24060 of The Scripps Research Institute.

