Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of functional risk alleles in colorectal
cancer-associated regions in African Americans


Background. There are disparities in both colorectal cancer (CRC)
incidence and survival between African Americans (AAs) and Non-Hispanic
Whites (NHWs). Genetic susceptibility factors are believed to contribute
to CRC development but have been inadequately studied in AAs. Our
previous work showed both shared and independent CRC-associated risk
alleles are present in some gene regions identified in genome-wide
association studies (GWAS) in NHWs. In the present work, using a
functional bioinformatics approach, we searched for risk alleles in these
regions in AAs. Methods. 10 chromosomal regions (8q23.3, 8q24.21, 10p14,
11q23.1, 14q22.2, 15q13.3, 16q22.1, 18q21.1, 19q13.11, 20p12) from COGENT
consortium meta-analysis were selected for DNA sequencing. Three
additional high-interest regions were included. The region surrounding
each associated SNP was analyzed using r2 plots, based on
European-ancestry genotype data from HapMap Phase 3. DNAs from 63
individuals (25 AA CRC cases and 38 AA controls) were sequenced using
Agilent SureSelect enrichment arrays and Illumina HiSeq platform
technology. Variants from the targeted sequencing were combined with 1000
genomes variant data for a total of 16,193 variants. Potentially
functional variants were identified based on the following criteria: the
variant is (i) in a coding region, (ii) an expression quantitative trait
locus (eQTL) or a DNAseI eQTL (DsQTL), (iii) in a miRNA binding site, and
(iv) in a transcription factor binding site. Golden Helix software was
used to process the data. Using the Sequenom Massarray platform, we
genotyped variants in discovery and replication sets for a total of 1177
AA CRC cases and 1264 AA controls. We calculated odds ratios (OR) and 95%
confidence intervals using logistic regression, assuming an additive
genetic model and adjusting for age, sex, and African ancestry. Results.
We identified 81 variants in coding sequences, 82 eQTLs, 5 dsQTLs, 38
variants in putative microRNA binding sites, 33 variants in possible
transcription factor binding sites, and 6 variants that are in two or
more of the preceding categories, for a total of 245 variants. After
assay development and quality control, 163 SNPs were available for
genetic analysis. Nominal associations (pBackground. There are
disparities in both colorectal cancer (CRC) incidence and survival
between African Americans (AAs) and Non-Hispanic Whites (NHWs). Genetic
susceptibility factors are believed to contribute to CRC development but
have been inadequately studied in AAs. Our previous work showed both
shared and independent CRC-associated risk alleles are present in some
gene regions identified in genome-wide association studies (GWAS) in
NHWs. In the present work, using a functional bioinformatics approach, we
searched for risk alleles in these regions in AAs. Methods. 10
chromosomal regions (8q23.3, 8q24.21, 10p14, 11q23.1, 14q22.2, 15q13.3,
16q22.1, 18q21.1, 19q13.11, 20p12) from COGENT consortium meta-analysis
were selected for DNA sequencing. Three additional high-interest regions
were included. The region surrounding each associated SNP was analyzed
using r2 plots, based on European-ancestry genotype data from HapMap
Phase 3. DNAs from 63 individuals (25 AA CRC cases and 38 AA controls)
were sequenced using Agilent SureSelect enrichment arrays and Illumina
HiSeq platform technology. Variants from the targeted sequencing were
combined with 1000 genomes variant data for a total of 16,193 variants.
Potentially functional variants were identified based on the following
criteria: the variant is (i) in a coding region, (ii) an expression
quantitative trait locus (eQTL) or a DNAseI eQTL (DsQTL), (iii) in a
miRNA binding site, and (iv) in a transcription factor binding site.
Golden Helix software was used to process the data. Using the Sequenom
Massarray platform, we genotyped variants in discovery and replication
sets for a total of 1177 AA CRC cases and 1264 AA controls. We calculated
odds ratios (OR) and 95% confidence intervals using logistic regression,
assuming an additive genetic model and adjusting for age, sex, and
African ancestry. Results. We identified 81 variants in coding sequences,
82 eQTLs, 5 dsQTLs, 38 variants in putative microRNA binding sites, 33
variants in possible transcription factor binding sites, and 6 variants
that are in two or more of the preceding categories, for a total of 245
variants. After assay development and quality control, 163 SNPs were
available for genetic analysis. Nominal associations (p<0.05) were
detected between CRC and 17 variants. We have completed genetic analysis
in the replication set for 8 of the 17 SNPs. The SNPs rs1862748 (OR,
0.73; P = 0.001) in the CDH1 region and 16888699 (OR, 1.39; P = 0.0006)
in the EIF3H region were statistically significant in both the discovery
and replication series. rs1862748 has previously been associated with AA
CRC and was identified as a eQTL for ZFP90. rs16888699 was identified as
an eQTL for UTP23. Conclusion. Our results suggest that rs1862748 and
rs16888699 are CRC risk alleles, validating the bioinformatics approach.
Functional studies will are now needed to characterize the genetic
mechanisms underlying risk.

