Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ketoconazole-induced O-GlcNAcylated c-Myc expression and
inhibition of cell proliferation in cancers


Protein N-acetylglucosamine modification (O-GlcNAcylation) plays a
critical role in cell-cycle regulation, apoptosis and signal
transduction. Thr-58 of c-Myc, a mutational hot spot in lymphomas, is a
site for both phosphorylation (primed by Ser-62 phosphorylation) and
O-GlcNAcylation. Whereas Thr-58 O-GlcNAcylation induces
ubiquitin-dependent c-Myc degradation, Thr-58/Ser-62 phosphorylation
increases c-Myc stability and thus induces invasiveness and tumorigenesis
of MCF-7 human breast cancer cells. Using form-specific antibodies for
Thr-58-O-GlcNAcylated c-Myc, Western blot analysis was carried out and
found that Thr-58-O-GlcNAcylated c-Myc proteins were detected primarily
in the nuclear fraction as 68 kDa proteins. MCF-7 cells were treated for
4 hr with 1% DMSO or 2 mM ketoconazole [-N-acetylglucosaminidase
(O-GlcNAcase) inhibitor, dissolved in DMSO]. Western blot analysis of
nuclear lysates of MCF-7 cells revealed that the levels of
Thr-58-O-GlcNAcylated c-Myc dramatically increased after ketoconazole
treatment. Thr-58-O-GlcNAcylated c-Myc levels also increased in the
nuclear lysates of Mia Paca-2 and SW480 cells treated with 50 g/ml for 48
hours. The ketoconazole treatment increased cell death in MCF-7 cells 84%
higher than in MCF10A non-cancerous cells by lactate dehydrogenase (LDH)
cytotoxicity assays. Treatment with 50 g/ml ketoconazole for 72 hr
inhibited cell proliferation of colon cancer cells, SW480 and HT29, by
63.3% and 67.4%, respectively, lung cancer cells, H1437 and A549, by
44.9% and 51.3%, respectively, and a pancreatic cancer cell, Mia Paca-2,
by 60.2% in a dose-dependent manner. These results demonstrated that
treatment of ketoconazole inhibited the proliferation of MCF-7 breast
cancer cells as well as colon, lung and pancreatic cancer cells. Wound
healing assays were carried out to verify the inhibition of cell
migration. Whereas 55.3% of Mia Paca-2 cells migrated toward a scratched
field after 24-hr treatment, only 11.6% of the cells migrated after
treatment with 100 g/ml ketoconazole. PANC-1 cells, which failed to
increase Thr-58-O-GlcNAcylated c-Myc expression and cell proliferation
after ketoconazole treatment, showed no significant difference of cell
migration after 24 hr with 100 g/ml ketoconazole treatment. Surprisingly,
colon cancer cells, SW480 and HT29, showed an inhibition of invasiveness
as evidenced by the inhibition of cell proliferation and cell migration
after treatment with 100 g/ml ketoconazole. Collectively, our results
demonstrated that treatment of ketoconazole, an O-GlcNAcase inhibitor,
increased Thr-58-O-GlcNAcylated c-Myc level and inhibited cell
proliferation in MCF-7, SW480, HT29, H1437, A549 and Mia Paca-2 cells,
which may decrease invasiveness and migration of the breast, colon, lung
and pancreatic cancer cells. Supported by NCI SBIR Phase II Contract No.
HHSN261201300058C.

