Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel OSM inhibition of cancer metastasis and
epithelialmesenchymal transition in lung adenocarcinoma through
STAT1mediated suppression of Slug


We previously reported that mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) secrete a
multifunctional cytokine - Oncostatin M (OSM) which effectively inhibited
the metastasis and growth of LAC cells, and induced the mesenchymal
epithelial transition (MET) pathway, as evidenced by the reduction of
several epithelial-mesenchymal transition related markers, including
SLUG. However, the underlying mechanism of how OSM mediates the
suppression of SLUG is still unknown.To dissect the downstream effectors
of OSM-dependent suppression of SLUG, we individually knocked down STAT1
(STAT1-KD) and STAT3 (STAT3-KD), the two well-known downstream
transcription factors activated by OSM, in A549 and CL1-5 cells using
lentiviral expressed short hairpin RNAs (shRNA). We demonstrated that
knockdown of STAT1, but not STAT3, reversed the OSM suppressed SLUG level
and resulted in a higher SLUG mRNA and protein in comparison to scrambled
shRNA control. Consistently, knockdown of STAT1 in LAC cells rescued the
OSM-mediated inhibition of cell migration, invasion, and proliferation,
indicating that STAT1 is the effector of OSM-dependent induction of MET
and suppression of cell motility.Moreover, we constructed SLUG
promoter-driven luciferase expression reporters and test the effect of
OSM and STAT1 on SLUG promoter activity. We observed that STAT1-KD cells
had increased SLUG promoter activity than control cells, while OSM
treatment augments this difference. A mutation in the putative STAT1
binding sequence (gamma activated sequence) mapped at -599 bp upstream of
STAT1 transcriptional start site diminished the SLUG promoter activity in
STAT1-KD cells. We also showed STAT1 binding to SLUG promoter region
after OSM treatment by using a chromatin immunoprecipitation assay. These
data indicated that the OSM-dependent inhibition of SLUG and elevation of
MET signaling is mediated, at least in part, by a STAT1-dependent pathway
through a transcriptional control. Our findings revealed a novel
paracrine effect of OSM and the underlying mechanism on cancer metastasis
and MET in LAC.

