Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clinical significance of adiponectin receptor 1 (AdipoR1)
expression in invasive breast cancer


Recent studies have demonstrated that obesity is associated with an
increased risk of breast cancer, but the mechanisms underlying this
relationship remain to be fully elucidated. Adiponectin is one of major
adipokines secreted from adipose tissue. This protein is believed to act
through AdipoR1 and has been suggested to play an important role in
cancer development. The purpose of this study was to quantitatively
evaluate the expression of AdipoR1 in invasive breast cancer tissue
compared to normal breast tissue. And then, we analyzed clinical
significance of AdipoR1 in invasive breast cancer. Tissues were obtained
from 269 patients who were underwent curative surgery with no prior
treatment for invasive ductal carcinoma from Jan. 2003 to Dec. 2008 in
Hallym Sacred Heart Hospital. A tissue microarray (TMA) containing 269
invasive ductal carcinomas as well as 269 adjacent normal breast tissues
was established from paraffin-embedded archived tissue for further
analysis. AdipoR1 expression was investigated in epithelium and stroma by
immunohistochemistry, using 1:1600 dilution of rabbit anti-adiponectin
receptor antibody, and correlated with clinical and pathologic tumor
parameters. In 269 patients, median follow-up period was 57 months.
AdipoR1 was detected in epithelial and stromal component of both normal
breast and invasive ductal carcinoma tissues. In epithelium,
immunoreactivity for AdioR1 was much lower in cancer tissue than normal
one (24.5% versus 72%). This trend was quite similar in stroma, although
the gap between cancer and normal was a bit narrow (48.7% versus 77.6%).
AdipoR1 was more expressed in stroma than in epithelium among invasive
breast cancer (48.7% versus 24.5%). In clinicopathologic features, mean
age at diagnosis of AdipoR1 expression group in both epithelium and
stroma was older than negative group. Furthermore, in epithelial
component, HER-2/neu overexpression rate was slightly higher in AdipoR1
negative group than in positive one (27.8% versus 15%, pRecent studies
have demonstrated that obesity is associated with an increased risk of
breast cancer, but the mechanisms underlying this relationship remain to
be fully elucidated. Adiponectin is one of major adipokines secreted from
adipose tissue. This protein is believed to act through AdipoR1 and has
been suggested to play an important role in cancer development. The
purpose of this study was to quantitatively evaluate the expression of
AdipoR1 in invasive breast cancer tissue compared to normal breast
tissue. And then, we analyzed clinical significance of AdipoR1 in
invasive breast cancer. Tissues were obtained from 269 patients who were
underwent curative surgery with no prior treatment for invasive ductal
carcinoma from Jan. 2003 to Dec. 2008 in Hallym Sacred Heart Hospital. A
tissue microarray (TMA) containing 269 invasive ductal carcinomas as well
as 269 adjacent normal breast tissues was established from
paraffin-embedded archived tissue for further analysis. AdipoR1
expression was investigated in epithelium and stroma by
immunohistochemistry, using 1:1600 dilution of rabbit anti-adiponectin
receptor antibody, and correlated with clinical and pathologic tumor
parameters. In 269 patients, median follow-up period was 57 months.
AdipoR1 was detected in epithelial and stromal component of both normal
breast and invasive ductal carcinoma tissues. In epithelium,
immunoreactivity for AdioR1 was much lower in cancer tissue than normal
one (24.5% versus 72%). This trend was quite similar in stroma, although
the gap between cancer and normal was a bit narrow (48.7% versus 77.6%).
AdipoR1 was more expressed in stroma than in epithelium among invasive
breast cancer (48.7% versus 24.5%). In clinicopathologic features, mean
age at diagnosis of AdipoR1 expression group in both epithelium and
stroma was older than negative group. Furthermore, in epithelial
component, HER-2/neu overexpression rate was slightly higher in AdipoR1
negative group than in positive one (27.8% versus 15%, p<0.059). And,
Ki67 was more expressed in AdipoR1 negative group than in positive one
(49.5% versus 34.5%, pRecent studies have demonstrated that obesity is
associated with an increased risk of breast cancer, but the mechanisms
underlying this relationship remain to be fully elucidated. Adiponectin
is one of major adipokines secreted from adipose tissue. This protein is
believed to act through AdipoR1 and has been suggested to play an
important role in cancer development. The purpose of this study was to
quantitatively evaluate the expression of AdipoR1 in invasive breast
cancer tissue compared to normal breast tissue. And then, we analyzed
clinical significance of AdipoR1 in invasive breast cancer. Tissues were
obtained from 269 patients who were underwent curative surgery with no
prior treatment for invasive ductal carcinoma from Jan. 2003 to Dec. 2008
in Hallym Sacred Heart Hospital. A tissue microarray (TMA) containing 269
invasive ductal carcinomas as well as 269 adjacent normal breast tissues
was established from paraffin-embedded archived tissue for further
analysis. AdipoR1 expression was investigated in epithelium and stroma by
immunohistochemistry, using 1:1600 dilution of rabbit anti-adiponectin
receptor antibody, and correlated with clinical and pathologic tumor
parameters. In 269 patients, median follow-up period was 57 months.
AdipoR1 was detected in epithelial and stromal component of both normal
breast and invasive ductal carcinoma tissues. In epithelium,
immunoreactivity for AdioR1 was much lower in cancer tissue than normal
one (24.5% versus 72%). This trend was quite similar in stroma, although
the gap between cancer and normal was a bit narrow (48.7% versus 77.6%).
AdipoR1 was more expressed in stroma than in epithelium among invasive
breast cancer (48.7% versus 24.5%). In clinicopathologic features, mean
age at diagnosis of AdipoR1 expression group in both epithelium and
stroma was older than negative group. Furthermore, in epithelial
component, HER-2/neu overexpression rate was slightly higher in AdipoR1
negative group than in positive one (27.8% versus 15%, p<0.059). And,
Ki67 was more expressed in AdipoR1 negative group than in positive one
(49.5% versus 34.5%, p<0.051). However, in stroma component, there was no
other difference between AdipoR1 expression and clinicopathologic
parameters. In survival analysis, AdipoR1 expression group in stroma
showed significantly better disease free survival (DFS) than negative
group (pRecent studies have demonstrated that obesity is associated with
an increased risk of breast cancer, but the mechanisms underlying this
relationship remain to be fully elucidated. Adiponectin is one of major
adipokines secreted from adipose tissue. This protein is believed to act
through AdipoR1 and has been suggested to play an important role in
cancer development. The purpose of this study was to quantitatively
evaluate the expression of AdipoR1 in invasive breast cancer tissue
compared to normal breast tissue. And then, we analyzed clinical
significance of AdipoR1 in invasive breast cancer. Tissues were obtained
from 269 patients who were underwent curative surgery with no prior
treatment for invasive ductal carcinoma from Jan. 2003 to Dec. 2008 in
Hallym Sacred Heart Hospital. A tissue microarray (TMA) containing 269
invasive ductal carcinomas as well as 269 adjacent normal breast tissues
was established from paraffin-embedded archived tissue for further
analysis. AdipoR1 expression was investigated in epithelium and stroma by
immunohistochemistry, using 1:1600 dilution of rabbit anti-adiponectin
receptor antibody, and correlated with clinical and pathologic tumor
parameters. In 269 patients, median follow-up period was 57 months.
AdipoR1 was detected in epithelial and stromal component of both normal
breast and invasive ductal carcinoma tissues. In epithelium,
immunoreactivity for AdioR1 was much lower in cancer tissue than normal
one (24.5% versus 72%). This trend was quite similar in stroma, although
the gap between cancer and normal was a bit narrow (48.7% versus 77.6%).
AdipoR1 was more expressed in stroma than in epithelium among invasive
breast cancer (48.7% versus 24.5%). In clinicopathologic features, mean
age at diagnosis of AdipoR1 expression group in both epithelium and
stroma was older than negative group. Furthermore, in epithelial
component, HER-2/neu overexpression rate was slightly higher in AdipoR1
negative group than in positive one (27.8% versus 15%, p<0.059). And,
Ki67 was more expressed in AdipoR1 negative group than in positive one
(49.5% versus 34.5%, p<0.051). However, in stroma component, there was no
other difference between AdipoR1 expression and clinicopathologic
parameters. In survival analysis, AdipoR1 expression group in stroma
showed significantly better disease free survival (DFS) than negative
group (p<0.02). DFS curve according to AdipoR1 expression in epithelium
showed a quite similar trend with ones in stroma (p=0.06). This study
showed that AdipoR1 expression was suppressed in both epithelium and
stroma of invasive breast cancer tissue, compared to normal breast
tissue. Even though there was no significant difference between AdipoR1
expression and many well-known prognostic factors, AdipoR1 expression in
stroma as well as epithelium appears to play a role of good prognostic
factor to predict disease progression somehow.

