Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A prognostic model of head and neck cancer ties TP53 mutation to
3p loss


Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is frequently characterized
by aggressive clinical behavior with a propensity for metastasis and
recurrence. Current understanding of HNSCC pathogenesis remains limited,
and there are few biomarkers that reliably predict patient outcomes such
as survival or response to therapy. Here we report a comprehensive
analysis of the molecular and clinical features of HNSCC that define
patient survival. Building on data and infrastructure established by The
Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA), we develop an approach that integrates
molecular events across multiple tiers of omics data to progressively
factor patients into subgroups with the greatest survival differences. We
show that in HPV negative patients, the detrimental impact of TP53
mutation occurs only in combination with loss of chromosome 3p, leading
to a marked decrease in median survival from >5 years for TP53 mutation
only to 1.7 years for both events. Conditioned on TP53/3p, patients are
stratified by a hierarchy of events incorporating MUC5B mutation,
mir-548k expression, and mutation and expression of Abnormal Spindle
Protein (ASPM), while in the absence of the TP53/3p event RAS signaling
is an important driver. We also show in HPV positive patients that
HPV-mediated inactivation of TP53 acts in synergy with 3p deletion. The
major findings are replicated in an independent HNSCC cohort as well as a
pan-cancer TCGA cohort of over 3000 patients. Together, the identified
markers enable a new multi-tiered molecular classification of HNSCC.

