Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Investigation of C/EBPG transcription factor role in regulation of
ERCC4 and ERCC5 in human lung cancer cells


Background: ERCC4 and ERCC5 are key nucleotide excision DNA repair genes
and are expressed abundantly in normal bronchial epithelial cells (NBEC).
DNA sequence variation in ERCC4 or ERCC5 is associated with risk for lung
cancer in multiple independent studies. C/EBPG expression is correlated
with that of ERCC4, ERCC5 and many other key genes in BEC, suggesting a
regulatory role, supported by experimental observation that up-regulation
of CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein gamma (C/EBPG) transcription factor
up-regulates ERCC5 expression in H23 lung cancer cell line. The purpose
of this study was to test the hypothesis that knockdown of C/EBPG in lung
cancer cells would reduce transcription of ERCC5 and ERCC4. Methods: We
knocked-down C/EBPG transcript level by C/EBPG siRNA transfection in
three non-small cell lung cancer cell lines: H23, H520 and H1703.
Following transfection, RNA was extracted after 24 and 48 hours.
Reduction of C/EBPG transcript abundance measured by competitive
multiplex RT-PCR in H23, H520, and H1703 was 56%, 84%, and 92% at 24
hours, and 82%, 89%, and 76% at 48 hours. After confirming C/EBPG
knockdown, we measured allele-specific expression (ASE) and total
expression of C/EBPG, ERCC4 ERCC5 through competitive multiplex PCR-based
amplicon sequencing library preparation followed by Illumina HiSeq next
generation sequencing (NGS) (Blomquist et al, PLOS one, 2013). This NGS
method a) targets only the sequences of interest and b) controls for
inter-target variation in PCR amplification during library preparation by
measuring each transcript native template relative to a known number of
synthetic competitive template internal standard copies. ASE was measured
at ERCC4 SNPs rs2276466, rs3743538 and ERCC5 SNPs rs1047768, rs17655,
rs4150316. Results: In H23 C/EBPG knock-down was associated with no
change in expression at any of the SNPs for ERCC4 or ERCC5, while in H520
one ERCC5 rs1047768 allele decreased (3-fold) and the other allele had no
change, and in H1703 both ERCC5 rs1047768 alleles increased (10-fold, and
2-fold). In H520, ERCC4 measured at two SNPs were different with increase
at one allele but not the other at rs3743538 and decrease for both
alleles at rs2276466. In H1703 each allele at ERCC4 rs3743538 increased,
2-fold and 45-fold respectively and each allele at ERCC4 rs2276466
increased, 5-fold and 2.7-fold respectively. Conclusions: These results
support prior evidence that C/EBPG regulates ERCC5 transcription, and
provides evidence that it also contributes to regulation of ERCC4. The
inter-allelic and inter-cell line variation in response to C/EBPG
knockdown data supports that hypothesis that cis-regulatory DNA variants
interact with C/EBPG in regulation of these genes. The lack of response
in H23 may be in part due to the low constitutive level of ERCC4 and
ERCC5 expression in this cell line.

