Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NKX6.1 functions as a tumor suppressor in hepatocellular carcinoma


In addition to genetic alterations, epigenetic alterations have been
increasingly recognized as a key event for carcinogenesis. Methylation of
CpG islands in promoter regions is almost associated with transcriptional
silencing and is implicated in tumor suppressor gene (TSG) inactivation
in cancer cells. Our previous data showed that NKX6.1 promoter is
hypermethylated and downregulated in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) cell
lines. The goal of this study was to elucidate whether NKX6.1 is a tumor
suppressor gene in HCC.All HCC samples with NKX6.1 promoter
hypermethylation showed downregulation of NKX6.1 expression using
quantitative methylation-specific PCR and quantitative RT-PCR analysis.
In addition, the expression of NKX6.1 in HCC cell lines can be restored
by treatment with DNA methyltransferase (DNMT) inhibitor,
5-aza-2-deoxycytidine. These findings indicate that NKX6.1 is frequently
silenced in HCC via promoter methylation. We then cloned and determined
the putative promoter of NKX6.1 by luciferase reporter assay. The Sp1
site in the NKX6.1 promoter region is important for the promoter
activity. When we treated cells with Trichostatin A (TSA), a histone
deacetylase inhibitor (HDACi), the NKX6.1 promoter activity increased.
These data suggest that promoter methylation and histone modification may
take part in the epigenetic silencing of NKX6.1 in HCC. Overexpression of
NKX6.1 significantly suppressed transformation in HepG2 and SK-Hep1
cells; however, there is no significant effect on cell viability.
Moreover we use a xenograft model to demonstrate the suppressor effects
of NKX6.1 on tumor formation in vivo. Taken together, these data suggest
that NKX6.1 might be a candidate tumor suppressor in HCC in vitro and in
vivo.

