Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A three-gene signature predicts esophageal squamous cell carcinoma
prognosis


The 5-year survival rate of esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC)
remains dismal despite improvements in treatments such as surgical
resection and adjuvant chemoradiation, and current clinical staging
approaches are limited in their ability to effectively stratify patients
for treatment options. To improve the clinical risk assessment for ESCC
patients, we developed an immunohistochemistry-based predictor model by
evaluating the prognostic value of a three-gene signature, i.e. epidermal
growth factor receptor, phosphorylated Specificity protein 1, and Fascin,
which constitute a regulatory axis in ESCC cells as revealed by our
previously study. The presence of this three-gene signature and the
association with clinical outcomes were analyzed in 185 esophageal
curative resection specimens (generation dataset), and the findings were
validated using an independent cohort of 130 specimens (validation
dataset). We revealed that the protein expression of this three-gene
signature was highly predictive of ESCC survival in both generation and
validation datasets (P=0.001). Regression analysis showed that this
three-gene signature was an independently predictor of overall survival
(hazard ratio=1.990 [95% CI, 1.256-3.154], P=0.003 in generation dataset;
hazard ratio=2.358 [95% CI, 1.391-3.996], P=0.001 in validation dataset).
Importantly, the predictive ability of the 3-gene signature was more
robust than that of each individual factor. In conclusion, this
immunohistochemistry-based molecular model accurately predicts ESCC
patient survival, and thus could serve as a complement to current
approached in clinical risk stratification.Note: This abstract was not
presented at the meeting.

