Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antitumor effect of a Compound A, a derivative of a naturally
occurring rotenoid deguelin, by inhibition of ATP binding to heat shock
protein 90


Despite several decades of intensive efforts to develop anti-cancer drugs
and therapeutic strategies, lung cancer is still one of the main causes
of cancer-related deaths worldwide. Deguelin, a natural plant product,
has shown anti-cancer activities in skin, colon, breast and non-small
cell lung (NSCLC) cancers. However, the potential side effects of
deguelin could be an obstacle to its use in clinic. In the current study,
we aimed to develop a derivative of deguelin with reduced potential side
effects. We have synthesized a novel deguelin analog, compound A, and
evaluated its effects on cancer and normal bronchial epithelial cell
proliferation, survival, and colony formation by the MTT, FACS, and/or
anchorage-dependent and -independent colony forming assays. Mechanisms
underlying anti-tumor effects of compound A were investigated by Western
blot, and RT-PCR. Treatment with compound A inhibited cancer cell
proliferation and colony formation, promoted cell cycle arrest and
induced apoptosis. Compound A also suppressed the expression of HIF-1
protein and its target gene, VEGF, in NSCLC cells. Administration of
compound A to NSCLC xenograft-bearing mice significantly decreased tumor
growth by inhibiting tumor angiogenesis and by inducing apoptosis. In its
action mechanism, compound A was involved in binding to the ATP-binding
pocket of HSP90, leading to the suppression of HSP90 function. These
collective results suggest that a novel deguelin derivative, compound A,
has a strong potential as an anti-cancer drug.

