Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Advantages of polyacetal polymer-based ADCs: Application to low
expression targets


The application of biodegradable polymers to antibody-drug conjugate
(ADC) design can provide numerous advantages, including significantly
higher drug-antibody ratios, the use of alternative payloads with
potencies considered insufficient for direct conjugation, the improvement
of ADC physico-chemical properties, especially for highly hydrophobic
payloads, and the potential expansion of protein recognition scaffolds
beyond the commonly used IgGs.The basis of the novel polymer-based
conjugation system described herein is a hydrophilic, fully biodegradable
polyacetal carrier, (poly(1-hydroxymethylethylene hydroxymethylformal) or
PHF) modified with chemically orthogonal linkers. A bioconjugation linker
is used for efficient covalent attachment of a targeting moiety to the
PHF scaffold, while a second, chemically distinct linker is used to
attach multiple copies of a drug payload to the polymer to control the
mechanism and rate of drug release.Utilizing multiple copies of a
proprietary dolastatin derivative chemically conjugated to PHF, we have
developed a potent and effective drug conjugation platform for ADC
application, which has been named Dolaflexin. Here, we report the
preparation and characterization of a novel trastuzumab DolaflexinTM ADC,
employing a maleimide-based bioconjugation approach. The resulting ADC,
with a drug-antibody ratio of 20, exhibits enhanced stability and
improved pharmacokinetics, with a prolonged plasma half-life and
tumor-specific accumulation. Active drug release and accumulation in
tumor tissue was also confirmed by LC/MS/MS methods.The activity of this
novel trastuzumab-dolaflexin ADC was evaluated in multiple tumor
xenograft models with significant variations in target antigen expression
levels. Models including BT474 breast cancer, NCI-N87 gastric cancer, and
JIMT1 breast cancer models were utilized, and comparisons to a variety of
controls and ADC reference standards were made. Significant advantages of
the polyacetal polymer-based ADCs in comparison to conventional ADCs,
particularly in models with low target antigen expression, were observed.
Details of these studies and potential applications for the development
of new ADC therapeutics based on this approach will be presented.

