Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Systematic analysis of peptide linker length and liposomal
polyethylene glycol coating on cellular uptake of peptide-targeted
liposomal nanoparticles


In an effort to improve tumor targeting and cellular uptake of
nanoparticle-based drug carriers, nanoparticles are functionalized with
active targeting molecules such as antibodies, antibody fragments, small
ligands, and peptides. However, active targeting approaches have not
consistently shown successful outcomes. Nanoparticle design factors
including: traditional methods of generating active targeting
nanoparticles, PEG coatings, linkers used to conjugate targeting ligands,
and various types of targeting ligands used further contribute to the
inconsistencies observed with targeted nanoparticle therapies. In order
to dissect the individual effects of these parameters, we employed a
multifaceted synthetic strategy to prepare peptide-targeted liposomal
nanoparticles with high purity, reproducibility, and precisely controlled
stoichiometry of functionalities to evaluate the role of liposomal PEG
coating, peptide EG-linker length, and peptide valency on cellular uptake
in a systematic manner. We analyzed these parameters in two distinct
disease models where the liposomes were functionalized with either HER2-
or VLA-4-antagonistic peptides to target HER2-overexpressing breast
cancer cells or VLA-4-overexpressing myeloma cells, respectively. When
targeting peptides were tethered to nanoparticles with an EG45 (PEG2000)
linker in a manner similar to a more traditional formulation, their
cellular uptake was not enhanced compared to non-targeted versions
regardless of the liposomal PEG coating used. Conversely, reduction of
the liposomal PEG to PEG350 and the peptide linker to EG12 dramatically
enhanced cellular uptake by 9-fold in breast cancer cells, while an EG6
peptide linker enhanced cellular uptake by 150-fold in multiple myeloma
cells. Uptake efficiency is highly dependent on peptide valency, reaching
a maximum and a plateau with 2% peptide density in the breast cancer
model. Taken together, these results demonstrate the significance of
using the right design elements such as the appropriate peptide EG-linker
length in coordination with the appropriate liposomal PEG coating and
optimal ligand density in efficient cellular uptake of liposomal
nanoparticles.

