Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: p70 S6 kinase signals tristetraprolin/Dicer-mediated maturation of
microRNA-145 to regulate tumor metastasis


Ovarian cancer is a highly metastatic tumor characterized by malignant
ascites spheroids, which represent one of the most important prognostic
factors of poor clinical outcome. Multicellular aggregates known as
spheroids (MCS) are important for anchorage-independent growth and
metastasis. MCS are also an important phenomenon of cancer stem cells.
However, the factors that regulate MCS formation are largely unknown.
MicroRNAs (miRNA) are short non-coding RNAs that are critically involved
in different oncogenic events by actively modulating mRNA and protein
synthesis. Despite their clinical significance, processes regulating
miRNA biogenesis remain obscure. Here, we identify N-cadherin as a key
regulator of MCS formation activated in response to p70 S6 kinase
(p70S6K) signaling, a downstream effector of phosphatidylinositol
3-kinase/Akt which is hyperactive in human ovarian cancer. The results
also identify a new mechanism of p70S6K function that mediates microRNA
(miR)-145 coregulation of key transcription factors Twist and Sox-9,
thereby enhancing N-cadherin and MCS formation. p70S6K regulates miR-145
by deactivating a distinct tristetraprolin (TPP)/Dicer program. The
p70S6K phosphorylates TTP, leading to inhibition of interaction between
TTP and Dicer and decreased TTP activity in miR-145 processing. Silencing
of p70S6K enhances the TTP/Dicer interaction and its activating in
regulating miR-145. These results providea novel regulatory mechanism of
p70S6K involved in the formation and spread of MCS and insights on the
development of new therapeutic targets (This work was supported by RGC
grant HKU782111 and CUHK8/CRF/11R).

