Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D, vitamin D binding protein, and lung
cancer survival in the Alpha-Tocopherol, Beta-Carotene Cancer Prevention
Study


Background: Vitamin D may inhibit tumor progression by suppressing
metastasis, proliferation, and angiogenesis. The vitamin D binding
protein (DBP) is the primary carrier of circulating vitamin D compounds
and functions in actin scavengering, macrophage activation, and
neutrophil chemotaxis. Little is known about the association between
vitamin D, DBP, and lung cancer survival. We investigated the association
between serum concentrations of 25-hydroxyvitamin D (25(OH)D), DBP, and
lung cancer mortality in 500 lung cancer cases from the ATBC
Study.Methods: Serum concentrations of 25(OH)D, DBP, and the molar ratio
of 25(OH)D:DBP, a proxy for free circulating vitamin D, were measured in
fasting blood samples collected at baseline. Hazards ratios (HR) and 95%
confidence intervals (CI) were used to estimate survival by quartiles of
25(OH)D, DBP, and the 25(OH)D:DBP molar ratio.Results: Median survival
time was 0.5 years (IQR: 0.1 - 1.1) for 428 cases that died from lung
cancer and 1.7 years (IQR: 0.1 - 7.8) for 72 lung cancer survivors.
Median serum concentrations (nmol/L) of 25(OH)D and DBP were 33 (IQR:
20-50) and 5951 (IQR: 4725-7196), respectively, for lung cancer deaths
and 37 (IQR: 22-52) and 5431 (IQR: 4600-7151), respectively, for lung
cancer survivors. In multivariable adjusted models, higher concentrations
of serum 25(OH)D were associated with a small but not statistically
significant increase in lung cancer mortality (Q4 vs. Q1 HR = 1.20; 95%
CI: 0.90, 1.60). Survival was not associated with higher serum
concentrations of DBP (Q4 vs. Q1 HR = 1.01; 95% CI: 0.76, 1.34). A higher
25(OH)D:DBP molar ratio was associated with a slightly reduced risk of
mortality, although not significant (Q4 vs. Q1 HR = 0.87; 95% CI: 0.65,
1.18). DBP concentration did not modify the association between 25(OH)D
or the 25(OH)D:DBP molar ratio and lung cancer survival. In
histology-specific analyses, elevated concentrations of 25(OH)D was
associated with higher mortality in squamous cell carcinomas (HR = 1.47;
95% CI: 0.82, 2.65) and adenocarcinomas (HR = 1.42; 95% CI: 0.33, 6.05),
but reduced mortality in small cell carcinomas (HR = 0.62; 95% CI: 0.18,
2.10). A higher 25(OH)D:DBP molar ratio was associated with higher
mortality for squamous cell tumors (HR = 1.28; 95% CI: 0.68, 2.40), and
lower mortality for adenocarcinomas (HR = 0.10; 95% CI: 0.02, 0.57) and
small cell tumors (HR = 0.52; 95% CI: 0.12, 2.18). Associations between
serum DBP and mortality were similar across histologic types.Conclusion:
Higher vitamin D status was weakly associated with lung cancer survival
and DBP was unrelated to survival; however, a higher 25(OH)D:DBP molar
ratio indicative of unbound or free vitamin D may be related to increased
adenocarcinoma and possibly small cell carcinoma survival. The findings
should be evaluated in other longitudinal studies.

