Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel photodynamic therapy with virus-mediated delivery of
photosensitive cytotoxic fluorescent protein KillerRed for human cancers


Photodynamic therapy (PDT) is an antitumor strategy to induce
tumor-specific cytotoxicity through accumulation of photosensitizers
(PSs) and following light irradiation. Specific wavelength light
irradiation induces the PS-mediated generation of reactive oxygen species
(ROS) and subsequent cytotoxicity in tumor cells. Currently, some kinds
of PSs, such as photofrin and laserphyrin, are used for PDT on clinical
settings. However, the lack of sufficient and continuous accumulation of
PSs in tumor tissues makes difficult to eradicate tumor cells by PDT.
Therefore, the development of novel strategy for accumulation of PS in
tumor tissues more efficiently and persistently is required to improve
the antitumor effect of PDT. A bioengineered fluorescent protein
KillerRed has been previously reported to generate ROS upon green light
irradiation, suggesting a potential of KillerRed fluorescent protein as a
novel PS. We recently confirmed that transient or stable transfection
with KillerRed-expressing plasmid vector suppressed the cell viability
through induction of ROS-mediated apoptosis in various types of human
cancer cells when combined with light irradiation. In this study, we
generated non-replicative adenovirus expressing KillerRed (Ad-KillerRed)
and telomerase-specific conditionally replicating adenovirus expressing
KillerRed (CRAd-KillerRed) to induce efficient accumulation of KillerRed
in tumor cells. The in vitro antitumor effect of these viruses was
investigated in human cancer H1299, HCT116 and HT29 cells in combination
with light irradiation. Ad-KillerRed at high dose suppressed cell
viability of human cancer cells when combined with light irradiation. In
contrast, CRAd-KillerRed suppressed cell viability of human cancer cells
more efficiently compared to Ad-KillerRed in combination with light
irradiation. These results suggest that virus-mediated delivery system of
KillerRed is a promising strategy for novel PDT. Now, in vivo experiments
are under way to investigate antitumor effect of these viruses.

