Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: K-ras Silencing has diverse effect on the response of cells to
chemotherapeutic drugs


Introduction: Drug resistance in different types of cancer arise serious
concerns in oncology. Different genes and signaling pathways are
responsible for this resistance. K-ras is one of the important signaling
pathways in cancer. This pathway is activated in 50% of all types of
cancer. In this study we aimed to study the effect of silencing RAS
signaling pathway on the response of Hct116 as a colon cancer cell line
to 5-flurouracil and oxaliplatin as the common chemotherapeutic
drugs.Materials and methods: Two oligonucleotides silencing the wild type
k-ras were selected by different online programs such as Dharmcon,
Invitrogen and Promega. After insertion of these oligonucleotides into
psilencer neo2.1, they were transfected into HCT116 cell line. Thereafter
the lethality of 5-fluouracil and oxaliplatin in these cells was assessed
by XTT proliferation assay kit.Results:Plasmids containing
oligonucleotides silencing wild type were named p565ks and p688ks
according to the site of silencing within the k-ras mRNA. Quantitative
PCR analysis showed that silencing k-ras was more profound in HCT565ks.
After stably transfecting Hct116 cell line with these plasmids, these
cells were named HCT565ks and HCT688ks. While the LC50 of 5-flurouracil
for Hct116 was 13-15M, for HCT565ks and HCT688ks, it was 37.5-40 M and
22.5-25 M. While the LC50 of oxaliplatin for HCT116 was 8.75 M, in
HCT565ks and HCT688ks LC50s were 0.35 M and 0.3 M. These data showed that
silencing k-ras have made the cells more resistant to 5-flurouracil while
it increased the sensitivity of cells to lethal effects of
oxaliplatin.Conclusion: In conclusion silencing k-ras had different
effects on the response of cells to different chemotherapeutic drugs.
This can urge us to be more cautious about prescribing RAS inhibiting
drugs as it may cause the cells to become more resistant to some
chemotherapeutic drugs such as 5-flurouracil while they may be killed
more by other drugs such as oxaliplatin.

