Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Simultaneous targeting of androgen receptor (AR) and Eukaryotic
Initiation Factor 4E (eIF4E) dependent translation initiation by RAMBA
Retinamides promotes apoptosis and impedes cell growth, cell
proliferation and matrix invasion in androgen sensitive and
castration-resistant prostate cancers


Introduction: Prostate cancer (PCa) remains the second most leading cause
of cancer-related death in Western male population. Although initially
counteracted by androgen deprivation therapy (ADT), PCa cells eventually
progress to a hormone-independent state thereby limiting treatment
options and rendering the discovery of new therapeutic approaches a
clinical priority. Direct targeting of translational machinery has gained
enormous attention in recent years for treating castration resistant
prostate cancers (CRPC). The present study aims to investigate the effect
of our novel retinoic acid metabolism blocking agents (RAMBA) retinamides
(RRs) on eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4E (eIF4E)
translational machinery and androgen receptor (AR) signaling in prostate
cancers.Methods: Androgen-sensitive (LNCaP), androgen-resistant (PC-3,
C4-2B and CWR22Rv1), enzalutamide resistant (MR49F) prostate cancer cells
and normal prostatic epithelial cells (PWR-1E) were used analyzing the
effect of RRs on prostate cancers.Results: 24 h treatment of PCa cells to
RRs resulted in substantial down-regulation of androgen receptor (AR),
degradation of MAPK-interacting kinases (MNK), and attenuation of
eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4E (eIF4E) cap dependent
translation initiation. Down-regulation of AR and MNK mediated eIF4E
translation initiation by RRs in PCa cells were in turn associated with
inhibition of cell growth and proliferation, induction of cell cycle
arrest, increased apoptosis, and inhibition of matrix invasion and
metastasis. Most importantly, the effects of our RRs on AR degradation,
eIF4E translation initiation and subsequent oncogenic program were far
more potent than the clinically relevant retinoids, established MNK
inhibitors (CGP 57380 and/or cercosporamide) and the FDA approved PCa
drugs (Casodex, Enzalutamide and Abiraterone acetate).Conclusion: RAMBA
retinamides which can exclusively target the degradation of both AR and
MNK- the two divergent axes in PCa, at pharmacologically feasible
concentrations are novel therapeutic compounds for treatment of both
androgen-sensitive and androgen-resistant prostate cancers.

