Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Up-regulation of VHL by miR-1273C inhibits renal cell carcinoma


VHL (Von Hippel-Lindau) is a known tumor suppressor that binds to hypoxia
inducible factor (HIF) and induces ubiquitin-mediated degradation. VHL is
also involved in the regulation of tumor angigoenesis, cell cycle
regulation, and apoptosis. Recent studies have reported that double
strand RNA complementary to target promoter sequence can induce gene
expression in several cancer cells and this is called small activating
RNA (saRNA). By scanning gene promoters in silico for sequences
complementary to known miRNAs, we identified 32 putative miRNAs target
site in the promoter of VHL. Experimental validation identified two
miRNAs (miR-1273C and miR-4512) that induce VHL expression in 769-P renal
cancer cells. Another dsRNA molecule (dsVHL-101) complementary to the
putative miR-1273C target site also induced VHL expression. Functional
studies revealed that transfection of miR-1273C and dsVHL-101 inhibited
cell proliferation and induced apoptosis in dose dependent manner.
Furthermore, knockdown experiments confirmed that induction of VHL and
apoptosis by miR-1273C and dsVHL-101 required the miRNA maturation
protein Ago2 and nuclear transport protein TNRC6A. This study suggests
that miRNAs play an inhibiting role in the progression of cancer cells by
VHL gene expression, which may be a potential therapeutic approach in the
future.

