Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Interaction of CD200 overexpression on tumor cells with CD200R1
overexpression on stromal cells: An escape from the host immune response
in rectal cancer patients


Introduction: CD200 imparts an immunoregulatory signal through its
receptor - CD200R1, leading to the suppression of tumor specific
immunity. The mechanism of CD200:CD200R1 signaling pathway is still
uncertain.The aim of this study was to investigate the expression pattern
and localization of CD200 and its receptor CD200R1 in normal mucosa and
rectal cancer patients.Material and Methods: The immunohistochemical
expressions and localizations of CD200 and CD200R1 were examined in 140
rectal cancer patients. Seventy nine of 140 underwent the preoperative
radiotherapy treatment and the others were untreated prior to the
surgery. In addition, 121 matched normal rectal mucosa samples from the
same patients were evaluated.Results: CD200 was expressed in normal
mucosal epithelium and rectal cancer. Expression of CD200R1 was seen in
normal mucosal epithelium and stromal cells of tumor samples. We found
significant up-regulation of CD200 in rectal cancer tissues compared to
the normal mucosa (P = 0.001). Interestingly, CD200R1 was overexpressed
in stromal cells of rectal cancer patients presenting metastases compared
to patients without metastases (P = 0.002). However, there is no
difference in the expression levels between stromal cells and tumor
cells. More than that, the up-regulation of CD2OO in tumor cells and
CD200R1 overexpression in stromal cells was observed in 87 % of
metastatic rectal cancer patients. These high expression levels of
tumoral CD200 and stromal CD200R1 were significantly correlated with
lymph node metastasis.Conclusions: Interaction of CD200 and CD200R1 and
their expression profile might be useful to follow-up disease progression
in terms of carcinogenesis and metastasis.

