Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A p53 and microRNA-mediated pathway regulates mesenchymal stem
cell differentiation


The tumor suppressor p53 plays important roles in bone density regulation
and osteosarcoma suppression. However, the relationship between
p53-mediated bone density regulation and osteosarcoma suppression is
unclear mainly because the underlying molecular and cellular mechanisms
are elusive. Here, we reported that p53 controls differentiation of mouse
mesenchymal stem cells (mMSCs) in a cell cycle and apoptosis independent
manner. The loss of p53 predisposes mMSCs towards osteogenic lineage but
not adipogenic and chondrogenic lineages. This pro-osteogenic effect
caused by p53 loss is associated with the up-regulation of Runt related
transcription factor 2, a factor required for the osteogenic
differentiation of mMSCs. Without extrinstic stress, studies show that
p53 does not directly repress the transcription of Runt related
transcription factor 2. Instead, it indirectly represses Runt related
transcription factor 2 through activating microRNAs (miRs), which
suppress Runt related transcription factor 2 at a post-transcriptional
level. In osteosarcoma cells, the loss of p53 correlates with high levels
of Runt related transcription factor 2 and the oncogene addiction of
these cells to Runt related transcription factor 2. Together, our results
discover a p53 and miR-mediated pathway regulating the differentiation of
MSCs and this pathway is dysregulated in osteosarcoma cells. This lineage
controlling role links the role of p53 in the osteogenic differentiation
of MSC to its suppressive functions in osteosarcoma.

