Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Opposite effects of adipocytes and adenosine on hematological
cancer cell survival and proliferation in vitro


Background: Tumor microenvironment is composed of stroma that contains
adipocytes. It is well established that obesity is a cancer risk factor
and is associated with a poor prognosis in cancer patients.
Cancer-associated adipocytes are thought to interact with cancer cells to
promote tumor progression. Moreover, adipocytes express CD73 and can
produce adenosine which also has been shown to promote cancer development
through its interaction with adenosine receptors on solid cancer cells.
As hematological malignancies can proliferate in bone marrow which is
rich in adipocytes, we hypothesized that these latter could influence
cancer cell survival and proliferation through the action of
adenosine.Methods: CD73 enzymatic activity was determined on human
pre-adipocyte cells (hMAD, ASC) by the Malachite Green Assay. The
expression of adenosine receptor was assessed on human T-acute
lymphoblastic leukemia cells (Jurkat) and follicular lymphoma cells (RL)
by FACS analysis. Cancer cell proliferation and percentage of cell death
were evaluated by FACS using CFSE staining and DAPI respectively.
Survival and proliferation was evaluated in the absence or presence of
human pre-adipocytes (hMAD, ASC) or adenosine with or without an
adenosine deaminase inhibitor (deoxycoformycin 10 M).Results: CD73
enzymatic activity was observed both in hMAD and ASC cells, while Jurkat
and RL cells express the four adenosine receptors A1, A2A, A2B and A3.
Hematological cancer cells tend to proliferate more when co-cultivated
with pre-adipocytes (Jurkat 63,8% alone vs 69,2% with hMAD; RL 67,7%
alone vs 73,9% with hMAD; Jurkat 62,4% alone vs 69,6% with ASC; RL 66,1%
alone vs 74,8% with ASC). These cells also tend to have a lower rate of
spontaneous cell death in same conditions (Jurkat 31,4% alone vs 23,6%
with hMAD; RL 37,1% alone vs 30,1% with hMAD; Jurkat 32,7% alone vs 30,9%
with ASC; RL 53,5% alone vs 36,0% with ASC). In contrast, we found that
hematological cancer cells proliferate less in the presence of adenosine
in a dose-dependent manner starting from 200 M in media containing 1%
serum (Jurkat 71,0% alone vs 68,6% with 200 M adenosine and 47,6% with
200 M adenosine + deoxycoformycin; RL 79,0% alone vs 73,3% with 200 M
adenosine and 59,8% with 200 M adenosine + deoxycoformycin). Finally,
adenosine also induced more cell death in these cells (Jurkat 28,6% alone
vs 41,2% with 200 M adenosine and 57,4% with 200 M adenosine +
deoxycoformycin; RL: 28,2% alone vs 47,9% with 200 M adenosine +
deoxycoformycin).Conclusion: Adipose cells have pro-proliferative and
protective effects on hematological cancer cells in vitro while acute
exposure to adenosine at supraphysiological concentrations has a
cytotoxic effect. These results do not suggest that adipocytes favor
proliferation through adenosine signaling.

