Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A comparative analysis of PI3K inhibitors in human tumor primary
culture microspheroids


Altered phosphoinosotide metabolism is a hallmark of many human
malignances. The phosphoinsotide kinases (PI3K) of which there are
several sub-classes, have been explored as targets for cancer therapy.
Beyond the first generation pan-PI3K inhibitors Wortmannin & LY294002,
new, clinically active agents with subclass specificity and/or dual
inhibitory functions (PI3K & mTOR) have been developed, including BEZ235
(PI3K/mTOR), GDC0941(), BYL719() & Idelalisib (). To examine the activity
of these agents we applied Ex Vivo Analysis of Programmed Cell Death
(EVA/PCD) (Nagourney, R et al Anticancer Res., 2012)to human tumor
microspheroids, isolated directly from surgical specimens. Lethal
concentrations (LC50's) interpolated from 5-point dose response curves
were compared for activity and for correlation by Pearson Moment.
Results: Micro-molar activity favored BEZ > BYL > LY. Correlation
coefficients reveal BYL vs. BEZ (N=15, R =0.69, PAltered phosphoinosotide
metabolism is a hallmark of many human malignances. The phosphoinsotide
kinases (PI3K) of which there are several sub-classes, have been explored
as targets for cancer therapy. Beyond the first generation pan-PI3K
inhibitors Wortmannin & LY294002, new, clinically active agents with
subclass specificity and/or dual inhibitory functions (PI3K & mTOR) have
been developed, including BEZ235 (PI3K/mTOR), GDC0941(), BYL719() &
Idelalisib (). To examine the activity of these agents we applied Ex Vivo
Analysis of Programmed Cell Death (EVA/PCD) (Nagourney, R et al
Anticancer Res., 2012)to human tumor microspheroids, isolated directly
from surgical specimens. Lethal concentrations (LC50's) interpolated from
5-point dose response curves were compared for activity and for
correlation by Pearson Moment. Results: Micro-molar activity favored BEZ
> BYL > LY. Correlation coefficients reveal BYL vs. BEZ (N=15, R =0.69,
P< 0.01); BYL vs. LY (N=7, R=0.74, P=0.1); BEZ vs. LY (N=61, R=0.52, P
Solid; BEZ: Solid > Heme; BYL: Heme > Solid with preliminary evidence for
Idelalisib showing Heme > Solid.Conclusions: The PI3K inhibitors are
active in both Heme and Solid tumors, with relative concordance between
agents, but some evidence of disease specificity. Additional comparisons
with GDC 0941 and drug combination studies are being conducted to further
characterize the clinical activity and combinatorial potential of this
class of agents. EVA/PCD analyses, conducted in human tumor primary
cultures, have the capacity to evaluate drug activity, synergy and
sequence dependence offering clinically relevant insights into novel drug
applications.

