Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression profiles of proinflammatory chemokines in prostate
cancer cell supernatants


Background: Prostate cancer progression is a complex process in which
chemokines and their receptors play an important role related to tumor
survival, growth, and metastasis.Objectives: 1) To determine the
expression profiles of proinflammatory chemokines in prostate cancer cell
line supernatants and their association with the metastatic phenotype,
and 2) To determine whether these chemokines are present in the exosomes
released from prostate cancer cell lines examined.Methods: Prostate
cancer lines investigated included PWR-1E (non-tumorigenic), LNCaP (low
metastatic potential) and PC-3 (high metastatic potential). The Human
Common Chemokines Multi-Analyte ELISArray Kit (Qiagen) was used to
evaluate the expression profiles of several proinflammatory chemokines in
the supernatant and in the exosomal fraction of prostate cancer cells in
culture. Chemokine profiles were correlated with the metastatic abilities
of the cell lines analyzed. Chemokines evaluated were CCL2, CCL3, CCL4,
CCL5, CCL11, CCL17, CCL22, CXCL1, CXCL8, CXCL9, CXCL10 and
CXCL11.Results: Differential chemokine profiles in the cell lines were
observed in the supernatant and in the exosomal fractions.Conclusions:
Prostate cancer cell lines with different phenotypes have different
chemokine profiles, both in supernatant and in the exosomal fraction of
these cells in culture. These results may be useful for the design of
diagnostic, prognostic and/ or therapeutic strategies.Financial support:
Universidad de Cartagena Project Code: Res 04670 - 2012

