Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of primary cilia in breast and prostate cancer


Primary cilia are microtubule-based organelles expressed on many
mammalian cell types and help sense the extracellular environment.
Signaling pathways important in development, tissue homeostasis, as well
as cancer are known to be regulated by primary cilia, such as the Wnt and
Hedgehog pathways. However, little is known about the role of primary
cilia in cancer. We have previously demonstrated in a published study
that primary cilia expression was significantly decreased through human
prostate cancer progression (PLoS ONE 8 (7), 2013). We also discovered
that primary cilia lengths were shorter through prostate cancer
progression, which suggests dysfunction. In addition, we observed that
primary cilia expression and length correlated with canonical Wnt
signaling in normal human prostate tissue, premalignant lesions, and a
subset of cancers. This data suggested that primary cilia dysfunction may
alter Wnt signaling in the human prostate. We have also characterized
primary cilia in human breast cancers, and similarly found a significant
loss of primary cilia with breast cancer progression. We therefore
hypothesize that primary cilia suppress tumorigenesis in these tissues,
and consequently that primary cilia loss promotes cancer formation by
altering signaling pathways. We are currently testing this hypothesis by
knocking out primary cilia in a tumorigenic mammary mouse model and
measuring changes in tumor growth, as well as changes in signaling
pathways, like Wnt and Hedgehog signaling. Preliminary data demonstrates
enhanced tumor growth in the absence of primary cilia, thus supporting
our hypothesis that primary cilia may act as tumor suppressor organelles.

