Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Loss of CADM1 expression is associated with poor prognosis and
brain metastasis in breast cancer patients


Purpose: Breast cancer brain metastases (BCBM) are detected with
increasing incidence. Therefore, identification of genes involved in BCBM
formation is of great interest. Eperimental Design: In order to detect
potential genes involved in BCBM, we first screened for genes
down-regulated by methylation in cell lines with site-specific metastatic
ability. The expression of five genes, CADM1, SPARC, RECK, TNFAIP3 and
CXCL14, which were also found down-regulated in gene expression profiling
analyses of BCBM tissue samples, were verified by qRT-PCR in a larger
patient cohort. CADM1 was chosen for further down-stream analyses.
Results: A higher incidence of CADM1 methylation, correlating with the
expression levels, was found in BCBM as compared to non-matched primary
BC. Similarly, loss of CADM1 protein expression was detected more
commonly among BCBM samples as well as among primary breast tumors with
subsequent brain relapse. The prognostic role of CADM1 expression was
finally verified in two publicly available data sets (n=418) and in two
large independent primary breast cancer TMA tumor cohorts (n=1718). The
immunohistochemical analyses revealed an association between loss of
CADM1 protein expression and risk factors such as disease stage, lymph
node status, and tumor size in primary BC. Furthermore, all analyses
revealed a significant association between CADM1 and shorter survival. In
multivariate analyses, survival was significantly longer for patients
with CADM1-positive primary tumors for both TMA data sets (p= 0.04 and
p=0.01). Conclusions: Loss of CADM1 expression is an independent
prognostic factor especially associated with the development of brain
metastases in breast cancer patients.

