Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of driver mutations and gene amplifications in
resected asophageal adenocarcinoma: Impact on clinical care


BACKGROUND:Adenocarcinoma of the distal esophagus and esophagogastric
junction (EGJ) have received much attention because of increasing
frequency and poor outcome despite multimodality therapy. Driver
mutations and gene amplifications in resected esophageal adenocarcinoma
are not widely investigated. Opportunity exists to discover actionable
mutations in resected esophageal adenocarcinoma.METHODS:We analyzed
driver mutations harbored in coding regions of 25 selected genes (95
point mutations) using a multiplex PCR-based assay. EGFR, HER2, MET, and
PI3K amplifications were tested using fluorescent in situ hybridization
in patients who underwent esophagectomy for distal esophagus and EGJ
adenocarcinoma from 2009 to 2013. Disease free survival (DFS) and overall
survival (OS) were compared between patients with TP53, KRAS, PI3K, BRAF,
APC mutant and wild-type tumors using Kaplan-Meier methods and Cox
regression models. The impact of HER2 expression and outcomes were also
analyzed.RESULTS:Of 54 distal esophagus and EGJ adenocarcinoma patients,
5 different driver mutations were observed in 39 patients, including TP53
(11/39, 28.2%), KRAS (6/39,15.4%), PI3K (2/11,5.1%), BRAF(1/39, 2.6%) and
APC (2/39,5.1%). Double driver mutations (3/39, 7.9%) were shared in 3
patients with TP53 and KRAS (1/39, 2.6%), TP53 and PI3K (1/39, 2.6%),
KRAS and PI3K (1/39, 2.6%), respectively. Amplifications in HER2 (10/45,
22.2%), MET (1/34, 2.9%) and EGFR (2/17, 11.8%) were observed where
directed therapy was altered in 5 patients (1 patient received induction
herceptin and 4 patients received adjuvant herceptin). In the targeted
patients with HER2 amplification who received herceptin, mean
progression-free survival was 18.8 (range 7-41 months) vs. 8.9 (1-28
months) [p=0.089] and OS was 35.7 (range 26-46 months) vs. 24.2 (range
20-29 months) [p=0.053], compared to herceptin naive patients. We did not
identify any significant difference in DFS and OS (inclusive of all
stages) between TP53, KRAS or any mutation compared to wild type
patients.DISCUSSION:Oncogenic driver mutations are under-investigated in
resected distal esophageal and EGJ adenocarcinoma. Different therapeutic
opportunities may become available if routine tumor genotyping is
employed in the treatment of esophageal adenocarcinoma. We recommend the
routine use of driver mutation and gene amplification analysis for
esophageal cancer.

