Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Association between microrna binding site polymorphism and
susceptibility to colorectal cancer in Korean population


Background : MicroRNAs (miRNAs) play an important role in the colorectal
cancer tumorigenesis by regulation of gene expression through binding to
3 untranslational region (UTR) of target gene. Single nucleotide
polymorphism (SNP) within 3UTR of gene could be affected by miRNA
binding. Docking protein 3 (DOK3) is adapter protein that acts as tumor
suppressor through modulating tyrosine kinase signaling.Methods : One
hundred thirty five SNPs were selected in Silico analysis for the current
study from 3UTR SNPs of SNP database, which was based on several miRNA
database, calculating miRNA bind efficiency on polymorphism, and HapMap
database. Here independent two set of study was designed, 380 healthy
controls and 371 colorectal adenocarcinoma patients were enrolled in
discovery set, and 524 healthy controls and 521 colorectal adenocarcinoma
patients were enrolled in replication set. The SNP genotyping was
performed using the Sequenom MassARRAYResult: In discovery set, 16 SNPs
were significantly associated with colorectal cancer in any genetic model
from 135 SNP genotyping. Among 16 SNPs, DOK3 rs2279398G>A was
significantly associated in replication set recessive model (adjusted
odds ratio (OR) = 0.65, 95% confidence interval (CI) = 0.44-0.97, P =
0.03). In combined analysis, DOK3 rs2279398G>A was associated with
significantly decreased risk of colorectal cancer in codominant and
recessive model (adjusted OR = 0.84, 95% CI = 0.73-0.96, P = 0.012,
adjusted OR = 0.65, CI = 0.49-0.88, P = 0.004, respectively).Conclusion :
DOK3 rs2279398G>A may affect the expression of DOK3 by altering miRNA
binding efficiency on miRNA-binding sites of the 3-UTR of DOK3 and impact
on colorectal cancer tumorigenesis. This finding suggests that DOK3
rs2279398G>A may be a useful biomarker for determining the susceptibility
to colorectal cancer.

