Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel orthotopic mammary epithelial cell (MEC) transplantation
model of breast cancer formation


The pathogenesis of breast cancer is polygenic. Exploring the involvement
of different onco- and tumor suppressor genes, and combinations of these
genes, in early breast cancer formation is important for understanding
the natural history of the disease. Preclinical studies of the
fundamental biological and metabolic changes that occur during breast
oncogenesis in currently available transgenic mouse models are limited by
the requirement for tissue-specific promoters and the random nature of
tumor formation.The mouse mammary gland is a unique organ in that most of
its development occurs after birth. Moreover, isolated mammary epithelial
cells (MECs) have the capacity to regenerate a functional gland upon
orthotopic transplantation into the cleared fat pad of a syngeneic
recipient. We describe here a new transplantation system using pure MECs
derived from genetically engineered mice harboring floxed oncogenes.
First we selected in vitro for a stromal and hematopoietic cell-free MEC
preparation. In the MEC donor transgenic strains the activation of
oncogenes (K-Ras, c-Myc) or the deletion of tumor suppressors (p53) is
dependent on Cre recombinase expression (Cre-lox system). Using an
adenoviral Cre-recombinase vector we activated these oncogenic changes in
isolated MECs. Colony formation assays demonstrated the viability of
these mixed transduced/non-transduced MEC populations. Following
transplantation into the cleared fat pad of syngeneic mice the transduced
MECs preserved their fat pad repopulating and duct forming potential and
the induced oncogenic changes resulted in mammary tumor formation. This
proposed system offers tissue specific promoter-free and lactation
independent spatial control of oncogenic events in the epithelial cell
compartment of breast ducts.

