Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A patient derived xenograft (PDX) platform for development of next
generation KIT kinase inhibitors in imatinib-resistant gastrointestinal
stromal tumors (GIST)


Despite best efforts in the treatment of gastrointestinal stromal tumors
(GIST), patients continue to face a poor prognosis. That said,
introduction of imatinib into clinical practice has vastly improved
outcomes for KIT positive patients. However, as with many kinases,
resistance has developed into a clinical dilemma, rendering the drug
ineffective. A number of resistance mutations have previously been
identified including the well known D816 activating mutation. To overcome
this challenge, we have established a set of GIST patient derived
xenograft models to recapitulate the original patient tumor, including
genetics of resistance. In this work, we show four primary GIST samples
which were selected based on mutational and clinical profile. PDX models
were developed in immunocompromised mice and were further characterized
by immunohistochemistry, additional sequencing and pharmacological
efficacy. We then evaluated the efficacy of chemotherapeutic agents in
these models. We describe imatinib resistance mutations, and demonstrate
in vivo efficacy of dasatinib over imatinib in the resistant GIST PDX
model. Take together, this data validates these GIST PDX models as a
novel platform for the evaluation of new drug candidates to better delay
and circumvent resistance now found in the clinic.

