Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effect of the phytochemical crinumaquine on prostate mesenchymal
type cells


In a prostate carcinogenesis cell culture model benign EP156T prostate
epithelial cells underwent epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT),
and a series of progeny EPT mesenchymal type cells accumulated malignant
features in a stepwise fashion. Through the screening of phytochemicals
using this model, we have found that crinumaquine inhibited proliferation
of mesenchymal type EPT1 and EPT2 cells more efficiently than the
compound inhibited epithelial type EP156T cells. Genome-wide gene
expression analysis revealed a pattern where crinumaquine induced
patterns associated with cell cycle arrest at both G1-S and G2-M phase
checkpoints and strong up-regulation of genes involved in DNA repair and
CDKN1A and CDKN1C and chromatin rearrangement. Differentially expressed
genes were uploaded to the Connectivity Map tools (The Broad Institute,
MA, USA) and the highest score was associated with histone deacetylase
inhibitors. ChemMap analysis based on its chemical structure indicated
that crinumaquine targets ER- and cyclines. Crinumaquine was also found
to induce up-regulation of CDH1 and other genes associated with an
incomplete mesenchymal to epithelial transition (MET) of EPT1 and EPT2
cells, and this was associated with increased apoptosis markers in gene
expression and Western blot analyses. Due to the selective inhibition of
mesenchymal type and more malignant cells of the model, crinumaquine will
be further explored concerning its anti-cancer leading compound potential.

