Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antioxidants markedly accelerate tumor growth and reduce survival
in mice with KRAS- and BRAF-induced lung cancer by disrupting the ROS-p53
axis


Antioxidants are widely used to protect cells from damage induced by
reactive oxygen species (ROS). The concept that antioxidants can help
fight cancer is deeply rooted in the general population, promoted by the
food supplement industry, and supported by some scientific studies.
However, clinical trials have reported inconsistent results. Here, we
show that supplementing the diet with the antioxidants N-acetylcysteine
(NAC) or vitamin E markedly increases tumor progression and reduces
survival by 50-60% in mouse models of B-RAF- and K-RAS-induced lung
cancer. RNA sequencing revealed that NAC and vitamin E, which are
structurally unrelated, produce highly coordinated changes in tumor
transcriptome profiles, dominated by reduced expression of endogenous
antioxidant genes. NAC and vitamin E increase tumor cell proliferation by
reducing ROS, DNA damage, and p53 expression in mouse and human lung
tumor cells. Inactivation of p53 increases tumor growth to a similar
degree as antioxidants and abolishes the antioxidant effect. Thus,
antioxidants accelerate tumor growth by disrupting the ROS-p53 axis.
Because somatic mutations in p53 occur late in tumor progression,
antioxidants may accelerate the growth of early tumors or precancerous
lesions in high-risk populations such as smokers and patients with
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease who receive NAC to relieve mucus
production.

