Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A comparative preclinical PET imaging study between [11C]erlotinib
and [18F]afatinib


Background: The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is an established
target for the treatment of advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) gefitinib, erlotinib and afatinib
have been approved for treatment of NSCLC. The Efficacy of those TKIs
depends on the presence of activating mutations of EGFR (exon 19 del. or
L858R point mutation). Therefore, the EGFR mutational status needs to be
ascertained by an invasive biopsy before treatment; however this is often
compromised by sampling errors due to tumor heterogeneity or by lack of
access to the tumor tissue. We hypothesize that PET-imaging with
radiolabeled TKIs (TKI-PET) can provide a tool to determine and predict
responsiveness to EGFR TKIs in vivo. Previously, this was demonstrated
with the reversible EGFR inhibitor [11C]erlotinib that showed higher
uptake in patients harboring exon 19 deletions of EGFR. Therefore, to
validate the application of TKI-PET imaging, we developed irreversible
second generation TKI afatinib as a PET tracer and extensively evaluated
both [18F]afatinib and [11C]erlotinib in a comparative preclinical
imaging study to determine the feasibility of TKI-PET as a potential
personalized medicine tool.Methods: The synthesis of [11C]erlotinib was
already established in our center. The synthesis of [18F]afatinib was
developed using an innovative three step radiosynthesis. Both tracers
were thoroughly evaluated in a PET imaging study in mice bearing a panel
of three clinically relevant EGFR expressing human NSCLC xenografts. The
three selected cell lines are: A549 with wild-type EGFR, H1975 with the
sensitizing mutation L858R and the acquired resistance related mutation
T790M and HCC827 cell line with the sensitizing exon 19 deletion. Other
factors influencing uptake were also investigated, such as tracer
metabolism and effects of drug efflux transporters.Results: [18F]afatinib
was successfully synthesized in an overall decay corrected yield of 17
2.3% with a radiochemical purity of >97% and a specific activity of >200
GBq/mole at end of synthesis. In a panel of lung cancer xenograft models,
[11C]erlotinib and [18F]afatinib both showed an increased uptake in the
treatment sensitive cell line, while showing low to no uptake in wild
type or acquired resistance cell lines. [18F]afatinib showed a higher
tumor-to-background ratio than [11C]erlotinib in the sensitive cell line.
In vivo blocking of the P-gp drug efflux transporter with tariquidar
revealed an increased uptake of both tracers indicating that they are
substrates for efflux pumps.Conclusions: The new TKI-PET tracer
[18F]afatinib has been synthesized successfully. [11C]erlotinib and
[18F]afatinib show similar uptake patterns across EGFR mutations, while
uptake appears to correspond with treatment sensitivity. A treatment
study in mice will be performed to directly correlate uptake to
sensitivity.

