Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of a binary diagnostic immunofluorescence assay by
AQUA technology for accurate detection of HER-2 levels in breast cancer
specimens


HER2 is a prognostic and predictive marker for breast cancer patients and
its expression is routinely evaluated by immunochemistry (IHC). Scoring
of IHC slides is prone to operator subjectivity and equivocal results
make selection of appropriate therapy difficult, ultimately affecting
patient outcomes. We describe development and validation of a
reproducible quantitative immunofluorescence assay to accurately assess
HER-2 levels in Formalin-Fixed Paraffin-Embedded (FFPE) breast cancer
specimens by AQUA Technology that avoids the ambiguity of equivocal
results and enables critical treatment decisions.Methods: A tissue
microarray (n=80) composed of breast cancer cases with known IHC and
fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) status was used to characterize
and optimize assay performance for three HER-2 antibody clones; A0485,
CB11, and SP3. Eight dilutions of each antibody were tested with four
different antigen retrieval conditions. A total of 108 assay conditions
were evaluated by receiver operator characteristic (ROC) analysis for
sensitivity and specificity. Equal weight was given to sensitivity and
specificity to select the most robust assay. The top six assay conditions
were then assessed using 45 whole tissue breast cancer specimens to
identify one condition with highest sensitivity and specificity. The
selected assay condition was evaluated on an additional 90 breast cancer
specimens (training set) annotated for IHC and FISH scores to determine
the binary cut point for the HER-2 AQUA assay, the cut point was then
confirmed on a validation set composed of 90 independent breast cancer
specimens. The final assay was analytically validated in accordance with
College of American Pathologists (CAP) guidelines utilizing over 120
independent breast cancer specimens.Results: Based on an evaluation of
over 400 breast cancer specimens with nearly equal distribution of 0, 1+,
2+ and 3+ cases, HER-2 antibody clone, SP3, which recognizes the
extracellular domain of the receptor, clearly segregated HER2 positive
specimens from HER2 negative breast cancer cases.Conclusion: The
availability of a highly reproducible quantitative binary test
facilitates rapid treatment decisions with appropriate HER-2 targeting
biologics on the market.

