Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Using NLPs to study EGFR structure, activation, and inhibition


The mammalian ErbB receptor tyrosine kinase family is critical for the
development and maintenance of a variety of tissues. Though not
completely understood, the mechanism of ErbB receptor activation involves
the binding of ligand to the extracellular domain leading to a
conformational change that allows dimerization and phosphorylation to
initiate downstream signaling pathways. Mutations, amplification, and
aberrant activation of these receptors lead to oncogenesis and tumor
progression in several cancer types, including lung, breast, and colon.
Current ErbB-targeted therapies include monoclonal antibodies and
tyrosine kinase inhibitors. These treatments are initially effective but
many tumors develop resistance, necessitating the discovery of a more
specific and efficient drug. Studying the ErbB receptors is often
difficult because of their large size and poor water solubility. Here we
report success in assembling EGFR into nanolipoprotein particles (NLPs)
to study activation and inhibition of the correctly-folded, full-length,
and active receptor. NLPs are 20 nm cell membrane analogs composed of an
apolipoprotein surrounding a lipid bilayer. We produced a homogenous
population of EGFR-NLPs, by FLAG-purification of EGFR from mammalian
cells, which are of the correct size, phosphorylated, and can be
quantified. Furthermore, these EGFR-NLPs can be utilized as a novel
target in a one-bead-one-compound (OBOC) screen of small molecules and
peptides to identify unique therapeutics. Studies of ligand binding,
kinase activity, and EGFR structure are ongoing. Future directions are to
incorporate disease-relevant EGFR mutations into NLPs. The T790M mutation
is of particular interest because it is a treatment-induced mutation
observed in half of all non small cell lung cancers and confers
resistance to current ErbB-targeted therapies.

