Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Lgl1 loss promotes stemness and invasion in EGFRvIII-driven gliomas


Stem and progenitor cells may divide asymmetrically to self-renew and
produce differentiating progeny in a single division. Usually, during an
asymmetric cell division (ACD), determinants of self-renewal and
differentiation segregate to opposite daughter cells during mitosis and
thereby specify distinct cell fates.Disruption of ACD is seen in many
cancers with a stem or progenitor cell component, including malignant
gliomas (Sugiarto et al., 2011, Cancer Cell 20:328-40). Yet, it is not
clear whether this is a contributing factor or a consequence of
neoplastic transformation. Lethal giant larvae 1 (Lgl1), a gene that was
initially identified as a tumor suppressor in Drosophila, has been
implicated in the asymmetric localization of cell fate determinants in
neural progenitor cells (Klezovitch et al., 2004, Genes Dev 18:559-571).
Here, we investigated the effects of Lgl1 depletion on distinct hallmarks
of glioma.In murine neural progenitor cells carrying conditional null
alleles of Lgl1 (Klezovitch et al., 2004, Genes Dev 18:559-571),
depletion of Lgl1 resulted in reduced rates of ACD, increased expression
of progenitor markers and impaired differentiation. In an orthotopic
model of glioma, driven by expression of EGFRvIII, a frequent and
constitutively active mutant form of epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR), Lgl1 inactivation led to increased tumor invasiveness.Our data
suggest that disruption of ACD in glioma precursor cells promotes
maintenance of progenitor features and hampers differentiation. At later
stages of gliomagenesis, loss of ACD and cell polarity controls may
contribute to tumor invasiveness.

