Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Western diet enhances benzo(a)pyrene [B(a)P]-induced colon
tumorigenesis in the PIRC rat model via proinflammatory mechanisms


Colorectal cancer ranks third in terms of mortalities in the United
States. Consumption of Western Diet (rich in red meat and fats),
contaminated with environmental toxicants such as benzo(a)pyrene [B(a)P]
has also been implicated as one of the causative factors for sporadic
colon cancer. Therefore, the objective of this study was to investigate
the effect of dietary fat type on B(a)P -induced colon cancer in an adult
male rat model, the Polyposis In the Rat Colon (PIRC) kindred type.
Groups of PIRC rats (n = 5) were fed with AIN-76A regular diet (RD) or
Western diet (WD) and these rats also received 25, 50 and 100 g B(a)P/kg
body wt., daily via oral gavage for a period of 60 days. Rats that were
fed with the diets alone, but no B(a)P served as controls. Food
consumption and body weights of the rats were periodically monitored.
Subsequent to exposure, rats were sacrificed; colons, liver and other
tissues were retrieved and preserved in 10% formalin for observation of
gross pathological changes. Blood samples were collected and
concentrations of cholesterol, triglycerides, and adiponectin were
measured. Colon tissues were scored for tumors, and preserved in 10%
formalin for observation of pathological changes. Colon and liver samples
were analyzed for activation of drug metabolizing enzymes (DMEs) CYP1A1,
CYP1B1 and GST. The lack of change in food consumption notwithstanding,
body weight loss of WD group compared to RD group and controls (p
Colorectal cancer ranks third in terms of mortalities in the United
States. Consumption of Western Diet (rich in red meat and fats),
contaminated with environmental toxicants such as benzo(a)pyrene [B(a)P]
has also been implicated as one of the causative factors for sporadic
colon cancer. Therefore, the objective of this study was to investigate
the effect of dietary fat type on B(a)P -induced colon cancer in an adult
male rat model, the Polyposis In the Rat Colon (PIRC) kindred type.
Groups of PIRC rats (n = 5) were fed with AIN-76A regular diet (RD) or
Western diet (WD) and these rats also received 25, 50 and 100 g B(a)P/kg
body wt., daily via oral gavage for a period of 60 days. Rats that were
fed with the diets alone, but no B(a)P served as controls. Food
consumption and body weights of the rats were periodically monitored.
Subsequent to exposure, rats were sacrificed; colons, liver and other
tissues were retrieved and preserved in 10% formalin for observation of
gross pathological changes. Blood samples were collected and
concentrations of cholesterol, triglycerides, and adiponectin were
measured. Colon tissues were scored for tumors, and preserved in 10%
formalin for observation of pathological changes. Colon and liver samples
were analyzed for activation of drug metabolizing enzymes (DMEs) CYP1A1,
CYP1B1 and GST. The lack of change in food consumption notwithstanding,
body weight loss of WD group compared to RD group and controls (p < 0.05)
was noticed. An increased incidence of adenomas and high grade dysplasia
were encountered in rats that were fed with WD compared to RD and
controls (p Colorectal cancer ranks third in terms of mortalities in the
United States. Consumption of Western Diet (rich in red meat and fats),
contaminated with environmental toxicants such as benzo(a)pyrene [B(a)P]
has also been implicated as one of the causative factors for sporadic
colon cancer. Therefore, the objective of this study was to investigate
the effect of dietary fat type on B(a)P -induced colon cancer in an adult
male rat model, the Polyposis In the Rat Colon (PIRC) kindred type.
Groups of PIRC rats (n = 5) were fed with AIN-76A regular diet (RD) or
Western diet (WD) and these rats also received 25, 50 and 100 g B(a)P/kg
body wt., daily via oral gavage for a period of 60 days. Rats that were
fed with the diets alone, but no B(a)P served as controls. Food
consumption and body weights of the rats were periodically monitored.
Subsequent to exposure, rats were sacrificed; colons, liver and other
tissues were retrieved and preserved in 10% formalin for observation of
gross pathological changes. Blood samples were collected and
concentrations of cholesterol, triglycerides, and adiponectin were
measured. Colon tissues were scored for tumors, and preserved in 10%
formalin for observation of pathological changes. Colon and liver samples
were analyzed for activation of drug metabolizing enzymes (DMEs) CYP1A1,
CYP1B1 and GST. The lack of change in food consumption notwithstanding,
body weight loss of WD group compared to RD group and controls (p < 0.05)
was noticed. An increased incidence of adenomas and high grade dysplasia
were encountered in rats that were fed with WD compared to RD and
controls (p < 0.05). The colon tumor counts were more in B(a)P + WD rats
compared to their B(a)P + RD counterparts, and also exhibited a B(a)P
dose-response relationship, with 100 g B(a)P/kg registering greater
counts. Adenomas with high grade dysplasia were prominent in B(a)P + WD
rats compared to B(a)P + RD rats. Immunohistochemical analyses of colon
tissue samples for PCNA, cyclin D1, TGF-, and -catenin revealed increased
levels of cell proliferation and nuclear positivity among all treatment
groups. Rats that received B(a)P + WD showed increased levels of
cholesterol and triglycerides in comparison to rats that received B(a)P +
RD and also controls. Levels of adiponectin did not vary much between
B(a)P + WD, and B(a)P + RD groups. Western diet consumption increased DME
activation among rats that were given B(a)P + WD with marked increase in
rats that were administered 100 g/kg B(a)P + WD (p Colorectal cancer
ranks third in terms of mortalities in the United States. Consumption of
Western Diet (rich in red meat and fats), contaminated with environmental
toxicants such as benzo(a)pyrene [B(a)P] has also been implicated as one
of the causative factors for sporadic colon cancer. Therefore, the
objective of this study was to investigate the effect of dietary fat type
on B(a)P -induced colon cancer in an adult male rat model, the Polyposis
In the Rat Colon (PIRC) kindred type. Groups of PIRC rats (n = 5) were
fed with AIN-76A regular diet (RD) or Western diet (WD) and these rats
also received 25, 50 and 100 g B(a)P/kg body wt., daily via oral gavage
for a period of 60 days. Rats that were fed with the diets alone, but no
B(a)P served as controls. Food consumption and body weights of the rats
were periodically monitored. Subsequent to exposure, rats were
sacrificed; colons, liver and other tissues were retrieved and preserved
in 10% formalin for observation of gross pathological changes. Blood
samples were collected and concentrations of cholesterol, triglycerides,
and adiponectin were measured. Colon tissues were scored for tumors, and
preserved in 10% formalin for observation of pathological changes. Colon
and liver samples were analyzed for activation of drug metabolizing
enzymes (DMEs) CYP1A1, CYP1B1 and GST. The lack of change in food
consumption notwithstanding, body weight loss of WD group compared to RD
group and controls (p < 0.05) was noticed. An increased incidence of
adenomas and high grade dysplasia were encountered in rats that were fed
with WD compared to RD and controls (p < 0.05). The colon tumor counts
were more in B(a)P + WD rats compared to their B(a)P + RD counterparts,
and also exhibited a B(a)P dose-response relationship, with 100 g
B(a)P/kg registering greater counts. Adenomas with high grade dysplasia
were prominent in B(a)P + WD rats compared to B(a)P + RD rats.
Immunohistochemical analyses of colon tissue samples for PCNA, cyclin D1,
TGF-, and -catenin revealed increased levels of cell proliferation and
nuclear positivity among all treatment groups. Rats that received B(a)P +
WD showed increased levels of cholesterol and triglycerides in comparison
to rats that received B(a)P + RD and also controls. Levels of adiponectin
did not vary much between B(a)P + WD, and B(a)P + RD groups. Western diet
consumption increased DME activation among rats that were given B(a)P +
WD with marked increase in rats that were administered 100 g/kg B(a)P +
WD (p < 0.05) compared to other treatment groups. Our results demonstrate
that WD accelerates the development of colon tumors induced by B(a)P
through proinflammatory action, characterized by gain in tumor number and
sizes, and body weight loss.

