Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Protein phosphatases modulate kinase signaling mediated Wnt
activation


Multiple growth factors, signaling through their respective kinase
cascades, phosphorylate beta-catenin at specific Serine residues to cause
its nuclear sequestration thereby fueling Wnt driven tumor cell
proliferation. Our present work identifies a group of phosphatase genes
that attenuate such growth factor mediated activation of Wnt signaling in
colo-rectal cancer (CRC) cells. This proposed mechanism proposes an
additional mode of regulation of Wnt activity in CRC cells.Using a
lentiviral TCF-LEF reporter system, we isolated distinct SW480 (primary)
and SW620 (metastatic) cell fractions based on their endogenous level of
Wnt activity. Receptor Tyrosine Kinase (RTK) antibody arrays using cell
lysates from these cell fractions identified that FGFR3, ALK and RET
signaling pathways have a positive correlation with enhanced Wnt
activity. Simultaneously qPCR arrays performed on these same cellular
fractions identified a total of 10 phosphatase genes whose expression
levels are significantly decreased with heightened Wnt activity, out of
which 4 genes PHLPP, PHLPPL, PTPRK and PTPN6 are known to regulate the
aforementioned RTK pathways.Of these phosphatase genes, PTPRK has been
reported to undergo gene fusion events with RSPO3 (a non-canonical
activator of Wnt) in CRC patients. Since the fusion gene product provides
no additional Wnt activation that the wild-type RSPO3, we theorized that
these fusion events occur either to allow CRC cells to utilize the
enhanced promoter activity of the PTPRK gene promoter, or to nullify the
Wnt attenuating properties of PTPRK. To test this hypothesis, we have
presently cloned and identified PTPRK and RSPO3 gene promoter regions and
wish to test their activity in distinct Wnt responsive cell fractions.
Our work will allow a better understanding of how phosphatase genes may
be involved in controlling the Wnt pathway and how their inactivation may
contribute to CRC cell proliferation.

