Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Runx3 inhibited epithelial to mesenchymal transition promotes
motility and invasiveness of colon cancer cells through reduction of ROS
generation


Approximately 90% of all cancer deaths arise from the metastatic spread
of primary tumours. Most colon cancer metastasis occurs.
Runx3(runt-related transcription factor3) is known as tumor suppressor
gene in gastrointestinal epithelium. Recent reports have been shown that
loss of Runx3 induce proliferative effect in gastric cancer cells.
However, their roles and underlying mechanism in colon cancer cell lines
are not yet known. In this study, we investigated the function of Runx3
in human colon cancer cells. The proliferation, migration, and invasion
of colon cancer cells in response to using the Runx3 expression vector
for various times were investigated using MTT, wound healing, and
Matrigel invasion assay, respectively. The morphologic changes of colon
cancer cells through the EMT process were monitored by immunofluorescence
staining and Western blot assay for EMT markers Twist and Vimentin. We
found that Runx3 overexpressing cell inhibited cell motility and
invasiveness in colon cancer, and this process was enhanced by Runx3
siRNA. We observed that the mRNA expressions of Runx3 was enhanced by
Runx3 overexpressing cell, whereas no increase of these factors was
observed when the Runx3 siRNA was transfection. Overexpression of Runx3
decreases protein expression of EMT (Epithelial-Mesenchymal transition)
markers. In addition, Runx3 knockdown upregulates MMP2 activity. The ROS
production was decreased in Runx3-overexpressing cells. These results
indicate that Runx3 signaling pathway can contribute to ROS generation
enhancing the metastatic potential of tumor cells. Our findings suggest
that Runx3 signaling processes through ROS and MMP2 the inhibition of
these pathway blocked the metastatic potential of colon cancer cell lines.

