Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HER2-dependent RNA polymerase II binding in human breast tumors
defines a regulon including a stem cell network


HER2-positive breast cancer accounts for approximately 25% of all cases
and has a poor overall prognosis in spite of gains in targeted therapy.
Multiple modes of resistance have been identified. We identified genes
regulated in HER2 positive disease as a means of understanding the
mechanisms of aggression and resistance to therapy. Chip-on-chip with
anti-RNA polymerase II (POL II) in breast cancer cell lines with little
or no HER2 expression was compared to cells with very high HER2
expression. Compared to MCF-7 cells with little or no HER2 expression,
cells engineered to express large amounts of HER2 exhibits new POL II
binding to 606 identified genes. Many of these genes, 379 and 486, also
exhibited POL II binding in two breast cancer cell lines with naturally
occurring amplified HER2: MDA453 and BT474 respectively. These
observations indicate that the expression of HER2 in MCF-7 cells causes a
massive increase in the number of genes bound by POL II.We performed
whole genome expression analysis on the three HER2+/- cells and compared
these to expression in 812 primary tumors stratified for HER2 +/-
expression. Genes differentially expressed dependent on HER2 status were
overwhelmingly regulated in the same direction in MCF7HER2, MDA453 and
BT474 cell lines and in breast cancer tissues; 273/459 (60%), 335/502
(67%) and 349/502 (70%) respectively (Kappa 0.4, p HER2-positive breast
cancer accounts for approximately 25% of all cases and has a poor overall
prognosis in spite of gains in targeted therapy. Multiple modes of
resistance have been identified. We identified genes regulated in HER2
positive disease as a means of understanding the mechanisms of aggression
and resistance to therapy. Chip-on-chip with anti-RNA polymerase II (POL
II) in breast cancer cell lines with little or no HER2 expression was
compared to cells with very high HER2 expression. Compared to MCF-7 cells
with little or no HER2 expression, cells engineered to express large
amounts of HER2 exhibits new POL II binding to 606 identified genes. Many
of these genes, 379 and 486, also exhibited POL II binding in two breast
cancer cell lines with naturally occurring amplified HER2: MDA453 and
BT474 respectively. These observations indicate that the expression of
HER2 in MCF-7 cells causes a massive increase in the number of genes
bound by POL II.We performed whole genome expression analysis on the
three HER2+/- cells and compared these to expression in 812 primary
tumors stratified for HER2 +/- expression. Genes differentially expressed
dependent on HER2 status were overwhelmingly regulated in the same
direction in MCF7HER2, MDA453 and BT474 cell lines and in breast cancer
tissues; 273/459 (60%), 335/502 (67%) and 349/502 (70%) respectively
(Kappa 0.4, p < 0.0001). The same comparisons were performed on randomly
selected genes and kappa values were calculated for 1000 rounds. The
random kappa values averaged 0.05 indicating minimal false
discovery.Second we identified genes that had HER2-dependent POLII
binding in cell lines without significant expression. Of 737 such genes
poised for expression, 113 were differentially expressed in breast tumors
in a HER2 dependent manner, including a similar number of up and
down-regulated genes in each class of tumors. We carried out pathway
analysis of 113 poised genes identified having HER2-dependent POL II
binding and exhibiting significant differential expression between high
and low HER2-expressing breast cancer tissues. A pathway analysis tool
(MetaCore) identified enrichment in GO terms for cell adhesion,
regulation of translational initiation, inflammation, immune response
especially for Interleukins -5 and 13, cytoskeleton remodeling, membrane
domain ectodomain proteolysis (the proteolytic cleavage of trans membrane
proteins and release of their extracellular domain), and development. The
largest groups of genes are associated with stem cell and progenitor cell
control as indicated by networks centered on NANOG and OCT3/4. Thus, the
role of stem cells proliferation in HER2 regulated breast cancer is
highly suggested. The massive gene regulation changes that are tissue
context-dependent is a fundamental new insight for understanding HER2
mechanisms in breast cancer.

