Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Vaccination with a therapeutic cancer vaccine containing prostate
specific antigen and the biological adjuvants IL-2 and GM-CSF results in
reduced serum PSA in prostate cancer patients


In 1997 we initiated a phase I/II clinical trial of a therapeutic
prostate cancer vaccine. We have enrolled 12 biopsy confirmed prostate
cancer patients in this study and 11 finished the initial course of 6
intradermal vaccinations containing prostate specific antigen (50 g) and
biological adjuvants (IL-2, 20,000 units, and GM-CSF, 16.7 g) at 0, 1, 2,
6, 10 and 14 weeks. During this study the prostate cancer patients
received no other concurrent therapy (surgery, hormone, radiation,
radioactive seeds, chemotherapy). One of the 12 patient's PSA rose from
7.6 to 13.7 after the fourth vaccination and he (patient #8) withdrew
from the study to seek other therapy. In the remaining 11 prostate cancer
patients serum PSA concentrations were determined before initiating
vaccination and 3-4 weeks after the 6th vaccination. There was a decrease
in the PSA levels in 8 of 12 of the prostate cancer patients after 6
vaccinations. One of the patients (patient #3), whose PSA had dropped
from 6.8 to 6.4 and had previously received radiotherapy (the only
patient previously treated), elected to withdraw from the study and
underwent radical prostatectomy. Nine of the original 12 patients have
received monthly 3 intradermal IL-2 injections (11 million units)
alternated with 3 further vaccinations for the 6 months following the
initial vaccinations, and 8 patients have been followed from 18 to 92
months. The mean PSA values for the 8 patients still being followed
without additional therapy were 5.8 initially, decreasing to 4.1 after 6
vaccines, 3.7 after 12 vaccines and is 4.7 after a mean follow-up of 49
months (median follow-up of 45.5 months). These promising results have
led to the creation of the U.S. Navy Cancer Vaccine Program with a Phase
I clinical trial at the Veterans Administration Medical Center San
Diego/UCSD Medical School.

