Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibiting glycolysis with an LDHA inhibitor: A new solution to an
old problem


Tumors exhibit altered metabolic profiles compared to normal,
non-transformed tissues. In the presence of oxygen, most differentiated
cells convert glucose to ATP by oxidative phosphorylation (OX-PHOS),
whereas tumor cells consume glucose and convert it to lactate, a
phenomenon known as aerobic glycolysis or the Warburg effect. There is
increased interest in targeting glycolysis as a therapeutic strategy in
oncology, and one of the key enzymes in this pathway is lactate
dehydrogenase (LDH), which catalyzes the conversion of pyruvate to
lactate in the last step of glycolysis. A small molecule LDHA inhibitor
that was identified by high throughput screening was optimized to
generate GNE-140, which has a biochemical EC50 of 0.005 M and inhibits
MiaPaCa-2 pancreatic cell proliferation with an EC50 of 0.25 M. We show
that inhibition of LDHA reduces carbon flux from pyruvate to lactate,
impairs glycolysis, and leads to global effects in cell metabolism. Cells
cease proliferation within 24 hours of LDHA inhibition, yet only undergo
cell death following sustained pathway inhibition. Finally, we show that
pancreatic cell lines that are resistant to LDHA inhibition can be
re-sensitized to LDHA inhibition by inhibiting OX-PHOS. In conclusion, we
describe a potent cell active LDHA inhibitor that modulates glycolysis,
induces cell death, and that can be used to help evaluate the importance
of LDHA in tumor growth.

