Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: EGF816, a novel covalent inhibitor of mutant-selective epidermal
growth factor receptor, overcomes T790M-mediated resistance in NSCLC


Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients with activating epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutations initially respond to EGFR
tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKI) but ultimately develop resistance to
these therapies. The most common mechanism of resistance is a second site
gate-keeper mutation within exon 20 of EGFR (T790M), followed by MET and
other receptor tyrosine kinase amplification/activation. We developed a
covalent mutant-selective EGFR inhibitor, EGF816 that potently inhibits
both activating EGFR mutations as well as the T790M resistance mutation
while sparing wild-type EGFR. EGF816 demonstrated strong tumor
regressions in several EGFR activating and resistant tumor models in
vivo. These include H1975 (L858R; T790M), HCC827 (exon 19 del) and H3255
(L858R) that are representative of the relevant clinical settings. In all
of the models EGF816 inhibited tumor growth in a dose dependent manner
and achieved regressions of established tumors at well tolerated doses.
In single dose studies, EGF816 showed sustained inhibition of pEGFR,
consistent with the irreversible binding mechanism of EGF816. EGF816 also
performs exceptionally well in long term dosing studies providing durable
responses in the preclinical models. Together, this data indicates that
EGF816 exhibits excellent anti-tumor activity in the relevant patient
derived tumor cell lines at well tolerated doses and is expected to
provide long term duration of responses compared to current EGFR TKI
therapy in the clinic.

