Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development and preclinical testing of AMG 780, a fully human
antibody targeting angiopoietin 1 (Ang1) and angiopoietin 2 (Ang2)


Targeting the angiopoietins with trebananib (a peptibody that inhibits
the interaction between the endothelial cell-selective Tie2 receptor and
its ligands Ang1 and Ang2) in combination with paclitaxel was associated
with clinical benefit in a phase 3 ovarian cancer clinical trial (TRINOVA
1). Herein, we describe the generation of AMG 780, a fully human IgG2
antibody targeting Ang1 and Ang2. We compared AMG 780 to trebananib in
affinity/neutralization ELISA assays and in vivo studies assessing
inhibition of tumor growth and endothelial cell proliferation. AMG 780 is
a derivative of an Ang2-binding antibody (Ab X). Ab X was generated by
panning a human phage display Fab library (Dyax Corporation) against
recombinant Ang2. The Ab X Fab was affinity matured by individually
substituting every possible amino acid at every position in the light and
heavy chain complementarity determining regions (CDRs). Resulting phage
clones were interrogated for improved Ang1- and Ang2-binding activity.
Clones with improved potency were converted to full antibodies. The most
improved heavy chain clones were paired with the most improved light
chain clones. The resulting IgGs were tested for neutralization of the
interaction between the angiopoietins and their receptor, Tie2, as
measured by homogenous time-resolved fluorescence (HTRF). Three resulting
fully human IgG2 antibodies (AMG 780, Ab Y, and Ab Z) and the parental
clone (Ab X) with potent Ang2 inhibitory activities (IC50 [nM],
0.05-0.10) and a range of Ang1 inhibitory activities (IC50 [nM],
0.31-547.00) were selected for xenograft studies. Mice were implanted
with 5x106 Colo205 (human colon carcinoma) cells. When tumors were
approximately 200 mm3, 300 g of each of the four antibodies
intraperitoneally or 14 g of trebananib subcutaneously were administered
twice weekly. For viable tumor fraction analyses, treated tumors at the
end of the xenograft study were harvested and processed for paraffin
histology. To examine endothelial cell proliferation, treated tumors were
enzyme digested and stained with anti-CD31, anti-CD45, and anti-BrdU
antibodies. The percentage of BrdU-positive tumor-associated endothelial
cells (CD31high/CD45neg) was determined by flow cytometry. Relative to an
isotope control antibody, all four IgG2 antibodies and trebananib
inhibited tumor growth (P Targeting the angiopoietins with trebananib (a
peptibody that inhibits the interaction between the endothelial
cell-selective Tie2 receptor and its ligands Ang1 and Ang2) in
combination with paclitaxel was associated with clinical benefit in a
phase 3 ovarian cancer clinical trial (TRINOVA 1). Herein, we describe
the generation of AMG 780, a fully human IgG2 antibody targeting Ang1 and
Ang2. We compared AMG 780 to trebananib in affinity/neutralization ELISA
assays and in vivo studies assessing inhibition of tumor growth and
endothelial cell proliferation. AMG 780 is a derivative of an
Ang2-binding antibody (Ab X). Ab X was generated by panning a human phage
display Fab library (Dyax Corporation) against recombinant Ang2. The Ab X
Fab was affinity matured by individually substituting every possible
amino acid at every position in the light and heavy chain complementarity
determining regions (CDRs). Resulting phage clones were interrogated for
improved Ang1- and Ang2-binding activity. Clones with improved potency
were converted to full antibodies. The most improved heavy chain clones
were paired with the most improved light chain clones. The resulting IgGs
were tested for neutralization of the interaction between the
angiopoietins and their receptor, Tie2, as measured by homogenous
time-resolved fluorescence (HTRF). Three resulting fully human IgG2
antibodies (AMG 780, Ab Y, and Ab Z) and the parental clone (Ab X) with
potent Ang2 inhibitory activities (IC50 [nM], 0.05-0.10) and a range of
Ang1 inhibitory activities (IC50 [nM], 0.31-547.00) were selected for
xenograft studies. Mice were implanted with 5x106 Colo205 (human colon
carcinoma) cells. When tumors were approximately 200 mm3, 300 g of each
of the four antibodies intraperitoneally or 14 g of trebananib
subcutaneously were administered twice weekly. For viable tumor fraction
analyses, treated tumors at the end of the xenograft study were harvested
and processed for paraffin histology. To examine endothelial cell
proliferation, treated tumors were enzyme digested and stained with
anti-CD31, anti-CD45, and anti-BrdU antibodies. The percentage of
BrdU-positive tumor-associated endothelial cells (CD31high/CD45neg) was
determined by flow cytometry. Relative to an isotope control antibody,
all four IgG2 antibodies and trebananib inhibited tumor growth (P <
0.0001), viable tumor fraction (P Targeting the angiopoietins with
trebananib (a peptibody that inhibits the interaction between the
endothelial cell-selective Tie2 receptor and its ligands Ang1 and Ang2)
in combination with paclitaxel was associated with clinical benefit in a
phase 3 ovarian cancer clinical trial (TRINOVA 1). Herein, we describe
the generation of AMG 780, a fully human IgG2 antibody targeting Ang1 and
Ang2. We compared AMG 780 to trebananib in affinity/neutralization ELISA
assays and in vivo studies assessing inhibition of tumor growth and
endothelial cell proliferation. AMG 780 is a derivative of an
Ang2-binding antibody (Ab X). Ab X was generated by panning a human phage
display Fab library (Dyax Corporation) against recombinant Ang2. The Ab X
Fab was affinity matured by individually substituting every possible
amino acid at every position in the light and heavy chain complementarity
determining regions (CDRs). Resulting phage clones were interrogated for
improved Ang1- and Ang2-binding activity. Clones with improved potency
were converted to full antibodies. The most improved heavy chain clones
were paired with the most improved light chain clones. The resulting IgGs
were tested for neutralization of the interaction between the
angiopoietins and their receptor, Tie2, as measured by homogenous
time-resolved fluorescence (HTRF). Three resulting fully human IgG2
antibodies (AMG 780, Ab Y, and Ab Z) and the parental clone (Ab X) with
potent Ang2 inhibitory activities (IC50 [nM], 0.05-0.10) and a range of
Ang1 inhibitory activities (IC50 [nM], 0.31-547.00) were selected for
xenograft studies. Mice were implanted with 5x106 Colo205 (human colon
carcinoma) cells. When tumors were approximately 200 mm3, 300 g of each
of the four antibodies intraperitoneally or 14 g of trebananib
subcutaneously were administered twice weekly. For viable tumor fraction
analyses, treated tumors at the end of the xenograft study were harvested
and processed for paraffin histology. To examine endothelial cell
proliferation, treated tumors were enzyme digested and stained with
anti-CD31, anti-CD45, and anti-BrdU antibodies. The percentage of
BrdU-positive tumor-associated endothelial cells (CD31high/CD45neg) was
determined by flow cytometry. Relative to an isotope control antibody,
all four IgG2 antibodies and trebananib inhibited tumor growth (P <
0.0001), viable tumor fraction (P < 0.0001), and tumor endothelial cell
proliferation (P Targeting the angiopoietins with trebananib (a peptibody
that inhibits the interaction between the endothelial cell-selective Tie2
receptor and its ligands Ang1 and Ang2) in combination with paclitaxel
was associated with clinical benefit in a phase 3 ovarian cancer clinical
trial (TRINOVA 1). Herein, we describe the generation of AMG 780, a fully
human IgG2 antibody targeting Ang1 and Ang2. We compared AMG 780 to
trebananib in affinity/neutralization ELISA assays and in vivo studies
assessing inhibition of tumor growth and endothelial cell proliferation.
AMG 780 is a derivative of an Ang2-binding antibody (Ab X). Ab X was
generated by panning a human phage display Fab library (Dyax Corporation)
against recombinant Ang2. The Ab X Fab was affinity matured by
individually substituting every possible amino acid at every position in
the light and heavy chain complementarity determining regions (CDRs).
Resulting phage clones were interrogated for improved Ang1- and
Ang2-binding activity. Clones with improved potency were converted to
full antibodies. The most improved heavy chain clones were paired with
the most improved light chain clones. The resulting IgGs were tested for
neutralization of the interaction between the angiopoietins and their
receptor, Tie2, as measured by homogenous time-resolved fluorescence
(HTRF). Three resulting fully human IgG2 antibodies (AMG 780, Ab Y, and
Ab Z) and the parental clone (Ab X) with potent Ang2 inhibitory
activities (IC50 [nM], 0.05-0.10) and a range of Ang1 inhibitory
activities (IC50 [nM], 0.31-547.00) were selected for xenograft studies.
Mice were implanted with 5x106 Colo205 (human colon carcinoma) cells.
When tumors were approximately 200 mm3, 300 g of each of the four
antibodies intraperitoneally or 14 g of trebananib subcutaneously were
administered twice weekly. For viable tumor fraction analyses, treated
tumors at the end of the xenograft study were harvested and processed for
paraffin histology. To examine endothelial cell proliferation, treated
tumors were enzyme digested and stained with anti-CD31, anti-CD45, and
anti-BrdU antibodies. The percentage of BrdU-positive tumor-associated
endothelial cells (CD31high/CD45neg) was determined by flow cytometry.
Relative to an isotope control antibody, all four IgG2 antibodies and
trebananib inhibited tumor growth (P < 0.0001), viable tumor fraction (P
< 0.0001), and tumor endothelial cell proliferation (P < 0.002). Tumor
xenografts in those animals receiving AMG 780 exhibited the most
pronounced inhibition in tumor growth (66%), viable tumor fraction (81%),
and endothelial cell proliferation (84%). The inhibitory activities of
AMG 780 (IC50 [nM]: Ang1, 4.5; Ang2, 0.06) were similar to those of
trebananib (IC50 [nM]: Ang1, 3.5; Ang2, 0.03). Based on these findings,
AMG 780 was selected for clinical development and currently is being
evaluated in a first-in-human phase 1 trial.

