Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The genetic landscape of Ph-like acute lymphoblastic leukemia


BCR-ABL1-like, or Ph-like B-progenitor acute lymphoblastic leukemia
(B-ALL) constitutes up to 15% of childhood and 30% of adult ALL, and is
characterized by a gene expression profile similar to BCR-ABL1 ALL,
alteration of IKZF1, and poor outcome. A pilot next-generation sequencing
study identified kinase activating alterations in 15 Ph-like ALL cases.
The goals of this study were to define the genomic landscape of Ph-like
ALL in children and young adults, and to examine the utility of tyrosine
kinase inhibitors (TKIs) in patients harboring genetic alterations
activating kinase signaling.We studied 1665 B-ALL cases, including 309
childhood standard risk (10.8% Ph-like), 826 childhood high risk (14%
Ph-like), 370 adolescent (16-21 years, 21% Ph-like) and 160 young adult
(21-39 years; 26% Ph-like) cases. Approximately 50% of Ph-like cases
harbored a CRLF2 rearrangement (IGH-CRLF2 or P2RY8-CRLF2).
Next-generation sequencing was performed for 160 non-CRLF2 expressing
Ph-like cases, including mRNA-seq (141 cases), whole genome sequencing
(30 cases) and/or exome sequencing (12 cases). Fusion transcripts were
identified using CICERO, a novel mRNA-seq assembly-based structural
variation detection method.Over 100 chimeric in-frame fusions were
identified, including 29 involving 12 tyrosine kinase or cytokine
receptor genes, 15 of which were recurrent: JAK2 (10 partners), ABL1 (6),
ABL2 (3), PDGFRB (3), CSF1R, TYK2, NTRK3, PTK2B, IL2RB (1 partner each),
and rearrangements of EPOR into the IGH and IGK loci. Together, these
rearrangements were present in 30% of Ph-like ALL cases. Additional
sequence and structural alterations activating kinase signaling were
identified in 10% of cases (e.g IL7R, FLT3, SH2B3).Despite the diversity
of kinase alterations, the majority are predicted to respond to a limited
number of TKIs, but many are novel or have not been tested in suitable
preclinical models of ALL. We show that expression of RCSD1-ABL1,
RANBP2-ABL1, ZMIZ1-ABL1, RCSD1-ABL2, SSBP2-CFS1R and PAX5-JAK2 in Ba/F3
and primary mouse pre-B cultures induces cytokine-independent
proliferation and constitutive activation of JAK/STAT signaling.
Furthermore, the ABL1, ABL2 and CSF1R fusions were sensitive to dasatinib
(IC50 range 1-2nM), whilst PAX5-JAK2 only responded to the JAK2
inhibitor, ruxolitinib. Notably, we show efficacy of dasatinib
(20mg/kg/day p.o) in a xenograft model of ETV6-ABL1, with reduction of
circulating human CD45+ cells (17.4 vs 88.2%; pBCR-ABL1-like, or Ph-like
B-progenitor acute lymphoblastic leukemia (B-ALL) constitutes up to 15%
of childhood and 30% of adult ALL, and is characterized by a gene
expression profile similar to BCR-ABL1 ALL, alteration of IKZF1, and poor
outcome. A pilot next-generation sequencing study identified kinase
activating alterations in 15 Ph-like ALL cases. The goals of this study
were to define the genomic landscape of Ph-like ALL in children and young
adults, and to examine the utility of tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs)
in patients harboring genetic alterations activating kinase signaling.We
studied 1665 B-ALL cases, including 309 childhood standard risk (10.8%
Ph-like), 826 childhood high risk (14% Ph-like), 370 adolescent (16-21
years, 21% Ph-like) and 160 young adult (21-39 years; 26% Ph-like) cases.
Approximately 50% of Ph-like cases harbored a CRLF2 rearrangement
(IGH-CRLF2 or P2RY8-CRLF2). Next-generation sequencing was performed for
160 non-CRLF2 expressing Ph-like cases, including mRNA-seq (141 cases),
whole genome sequencing (30 cases) and/or exome sequencing (12 cases).
Fusion transcripts were identified using CICERO, a novel mRNA-seq
assembly-based structural variation detection method.Over 100 chimeric
in-frame fusions were identified, including 29 involving 12 tyrosine
kinase or cytokine receptor genes, 15 of which were recurrent: JAK2 (10
partners), ABL1 (6), ABL2 (3), PDGFRB (3), CSF1R, TYK2, NTRK3, PTK2B,
IL2RB (1 partner each), and rearrangements of EPOR into the IGH and IGK
loci. Together, these rearrangements were present in 30% of Ph-like ALL
cases. Additional sequence and structural alterations activating kinase
signaling were identified in 10% of cases (e.g IL7R, FLT3, SH2B3).Despite
the diversity of kinase alterations, the majority are predicted to
respond to a limited number of TKIs, but many are novel or have not been
tested in suitable preclinical models of ALL. We show that expression of
RCSD1-ABL1, RANBP2-ABL1, ZMIZ1-ABL1, RCSD1-ABL2, SSBP2-CFS1R and
PAX5-JAK2 in Ba/F3 and primary mouse pre-B cultures induces
cytokine-independent proliferation and constitutive activation of
JAK/STAT signaling. Furthermore, the ABL1, ABL2 and CSF1R fusions were
sensitive to dasatinib (IC50 range 1-2nM), whilst PAX5-JAK2 only
responded to the JAK2 inhibitor, ruxolitinib. Notably, we show efficacy
of dasatinib (20mg/kg/day p.o) in a xenograft model of ETV6-ABL1, with
reduction of circulating human CD45+ cells (17.4 vs 88.2%; p<0.0001) and
spleen weight (117 vs 321mg; pBCR-ABL1-like, or Ph-like B-progenitor
acute lymphoblastic leukemia (B-ALL) constitutes up to 15% of childhood
and 30% of adult ALL, and is characterized by a gene expression profile
similar to BCR-ABL1 ALL, alteration of IKZF1, and poor outcome. A pilot
next-generation sequencing study identified kinase activating alterations
in 15 Ph-like ALL cases. The goals of this study were to define the
genomic landscape of Ph-like ALL in children and young adults, and to
examine the utility of tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) in patients
harboring genetic alterations activating kinase signaling.We studied 1665
B-ALL cases, including 309 childhood standard risk (10.8% Ph-like), 826
childhood high risk (14% Ph-like), 370 adolescent (16-21 years, 21%
Ph-like) and 160 young adult (21-39 years; 26% Ph-like) cases.
Approximately 50% of Ph-like cases harbored a CRLF2 rearrangement
(IGH-CRLF2 or P2RY8-CRLF2). Next-generation sequencing was performed for
160 non-CRLF2 expressing Ph-like cases, including mRNA-seq (141 cases),
whole genome sequencing (30 cases) and/or exome sequencing (12 cases).
Fusion transcripts were identified using CICERO, a novel mRNA-seq
assembly-based structural variation detection method.Over 100 chimeric
in-frame fusions were identified, including 29 involving 12 tyrosine
kinase or cytokine receptor genes, 15 of which were recurrent: JAK2 (10
partners), ABL1 (6), ABL2 (3), PDGFRB (3), CSF1R, TYK2, NTRK3, PTK2B,
IL2RB (1 partner each), and rearrangements of EPOR into the IGH and IGK
loci. Together, these rearrangements were present in 30% of Ph-like ALL
cases. Additional sequence and structural alterations activating kinase
signaling were identified in 10% of cases (e.g IL7R, FLT3, SH2B3).Despite
the diversity of kinase alterations, the majority are predicted to
respond to a limited number of TKIs, but many are novel or have not been
tested in suitable preclinical models of ALL. We show that expression of
RCSD1-ABL1, RANBP2-ABL1, ZMIZ1-ABL1, RCSD1-ABL2, SSBP2-CFS1R and
PAX5-JAK2 in Ba/F3 and primary mouse pre-B cultures induces
cytokine-independent proliferation and constitutive activation of
JAK/STAT signaling. Furthermore, the ABL1, ABL2 and CSF1R fusions were
sensitive to dasatinib (IC50 range 1-2nM), whilst PAX5-JAK2 only
responded to the JAK2 inhibitor, ruxolitinib. Notably, we show efficacy
of dasatinib (20mg/kg/day p.o) in a xenograft model of ETV6-ABL1, with
reduction of circulating human CD45+ cells (17.4 vs 88.2%; p<0.0001) and
spleen weight (117 vs 321mg; p<0.0001) in dasatinib treated mice (n=5)
compared to vehicle treated mice (n=5).These data define the genomic
landscape of Ph-like ALL and show that the majority of cases harbor
genetic alterations that activate a limited number of kinase signaling
pathways. These results provide the basis for prospective precision
medicine clinical trials that identify and direct patients with Ph-like
ALL to logical TKI therapy.

