Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Resistance to LDHA inhibitors requires signaling through the
AMPK/mTOR/S6K pathway leading to increased oxidative phosphorylation


Lactate Dehydrogenase A (LDHA) is an attractive candidate for targeting
glycolysis-addicted tumors. However, due to the inherent plasticity of
metabolic networks in cells, there is concern that the benefit of
targeting LDHA may be transient and that resistance will quickly emerge.
To identify predictive features of LHDA inhibitor sensitivity and to
understand how cells adapt to long-term LHDA inhibition, we screened a
large panel (500) of tumor cell lines with GNE-140, a newly developed
LHDA inhibitor. We found that approximately 15% of lines were inherently
sensitive to the LDHA inhibitor, with sensitivity correlating with
increased expression of glycolysis genes and inversely correlating with
expression of oxidative phosphorylation genes. Despite the metabolic
plasticity of cells, the timing of acquired resistance to LDHA inhibitors
was comparable with other targeted agents. Under long-term LDHAi
treatment, glycolytic cells acquired resistance by increased oxidative
phosporylation (OX-PHOS) in a mechanism dependent on the AMPK stress
response pathway; targeting either AMPK, downstream kinases, or OX-PHOS
using tool compounds synergized with and prevented acquired resistance to
GNE-140. Taken together, our data suggests that targeting anaerobic
glycolysis may benefit a subset of patients across indications and that
combinations with agents that block AMPK signaling or the mitochondria
will be effective at delaying tumor relapse.

