Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Salinomycin have antiproliferative and apoptotic effects on
ovarian cancer stem-like cell


OBJECTIVE: Cancer stem cells (CSCs) represent a subpopulation of
undifferentiated tumorigenic cells responsible for tumor initiation,
maintenance, drug resistance and metastasis of tumors. CSCs involved in
drug resistance and relapse of cancers can significantly affect ovarian
cancer therapy. The antibiotics salinomycin has recently been shown to be
a potent compound to deplete chemoresistant cells in adenocarcinoma. The
objective of the present study was to evaluate the effect of salinomycin
on ovarian CSC whereby salinomycin mono-and combination treatment with
paclitaxol regimend were analyzed.METHODS: The CD44+CD117+CSCs were
isolated from the primary ovarian cancer cells derived from ascites
fluids of patients with epithelial ovarian cancer by using immune
magnetic-activated cell sorting system. To evaluate the effect of
salinomycin on ovarian CSC, cells were treated in single and combined
treatment. The expression was Nanog, Oct3/4, Sox2 and ABCG2 mRNA was
determined by RT-PCR and protein expression was detected by Western blot
analysis. The cell viability assay, gelatin zymography and apoptosis
assay were applied to evaluate the effects of salinomycin compared with
parental tumor cells and CSCs.RESULTS: The combination of salinomycin
with paclitaxel (PTX) was enhanced change cell viability or activating
apoptosis in CD44+CD117+ cells, whereas the salinomycin monotreatment did
not cause significant changes. Salinomycin treatment reduced stemness
gene expression and suppressed invasion of CSCs.CONCLUSIONS: Based on our
findings, we concluded that anti-cancer effect of salinomycin with PTX
reduced stemness and induced apoptosis in ovarian cancer and cancer stem
cells.

