Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Postoperative neutrophil-lymphocyte ratio as a surrogate marker
for recurrence of gastric cancer


Tumor markers such as carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) and CA 19-9 are both
widely used in the follow up of patients with gastric cancer. However,
there are no definitive predictive markers for postopetrative recurrence.
It has been reported that preoperative neutrophil lymphocyte ratio (NLR)
was associated with prognosis of patients with gastrointestinal cancer.
The aim of this study was to examine the impact of postoperative NLR on
prediction for postoperative recurrence of gastric cancer. We
retrospective reviewed data from 133 patients underwent curative surgical
resection for gastric cancer between 2006 and 2010. Patients treated with
preoperative chemotherapy or multiple cancers were excluded. We found 52
recurrent diseases which mainly included 29 cases with peritoneal
dissemination, 13 with distant lymph node metastasis and 7 with liver
metastasis. In univariate analysis, histological diffuse type,
mascroscopical type 4 cancer, regional lymph node metastasis, lymphatic
invasion in primary tumor, tumor diameter, elevated CEA or CA19-9, and
elevated NLR. By ultivariate analysis, we found that elevated CA19-9 and
NLR were independent predictive markers. Increased NLR was associated
with diffuse type, peritoneal ddissemination, elevated CEA and
preoperative NLR but not the presence or absence of adjuvant
chemotherapy. In conclusion, postoperative NLR might be one of the
surrogate markers for recurrence after curative surgery for gastric
cancer.

