Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of a novel radiation-induced sarcoma cell line


Background: Radiation-induced sarcoma (RIS) is a potential complication
of cancer treatment. No widely available cell line models currently exist
to facilitate studies of RIS. Methods: We derived a primary human cell
line, UACC-SARC1, from a RIS. Short tandem repeat (STR) genotyping was
used to confirm that this cell line was propagated from the tumor.
Further characterization of this cell line involved comparing 24 markers
using immunocytochemistry (ICC) to immunohistochemistry (IHC) of the
tumor, a Matrigel invasion assay, karyotyping of the cell line,
comparative genomic hybridization (CGH), DNA sequencing using the Ion
AmpliSeq Cancer panel and in vivo mouse xenografts after subcutaneous
injection of UACC-SARC1 in immunodeficient mice. Results: STR profiling
of UACC-SARC1 was virtually identical to its parental tumor. IHC analysis
of the tumor and ICC analysis of UACC-SARC1 revealed shared expression of
vimentin, osteonectin, CD68, Ki67 and PTEN but tumor-restricted
expression of the histiocyte markers 1-antitrypsin and
1-antichymotrypsin. Karyotyping of the tumor demonstrated aneuploidy. CGH
provided direct genetic comparison between the tumor and UACC-SARC1.
Sequencing of 740 mutation hotspots revealed no mutations in UACC-SARC1
nor in the tumor. SCID mice xenografts exhibited tumor formation but
resulting tumors failed to metastasize. Further xenografts with NOD SCID
gamma (NSG) mice are planned. The doubling time of UACC-SARC1 was 28.3
hours. Conclusion: Our novel RIS strain constitutes a useful tool for
pre-clinical studies of this rare, aggressive disease.

