Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epigenome-wide profiling identified significant differences in DNA
methylation between African-American and European-American men with
prostate cancer


Background: DNA methylation is a dynamic epigenetic mark that is
essential for mammalian organismal development. For human prostate cancer
(PCa), abundant evidence has accumulated to suggest that somatic
epigenetic alterations may appear early during cancer development, as
well as more commonly and consistently, than genetic changes. Several
cancer-associated genes have been reported to show significant
differences in DNA methylation pattern in prostate tissues from
African-American (AA) and European-American men, but the genome-wide
pattern and extent of these differences are largely unknown. The current
study investigated genome-wide DNA methylation differences in AA and EA
prostate tissue samples with the aim of assessing the variation of
genome-wide patterns of DNA methylation.Methods: To comprehensively
examine the DNA methylation pattern in AA and EA samples, we used
illumina 450 K methylation platform (Infunium Chip) to conduct
genome-wide large scale analysis of DNA methylation changes in 7 normal
and 3 PCa tissue samples from AA versus 8 normal and 3 PCa tissue samples
from EA. This chip interrogates >485,000 CpG methylation sites per sample
at single-nucleotide resolution and assigns each site an average beta
value for quantitative methylation level.Results: Pathway analysis of the
genes with altered methylation patterns identified top canonical pathways
for the involvement of cancer related network for genes involved in
axonal guidance, antigen presentation, androgen signaling and protein
ubiquitination pathways in prostate cancer tissues compared with normal
prostate tissues obtained from AA men. On the other hand, the top
canonical pathways identified in prostate cancer tissues compared with
normal prostate tissues obtained from EA men are genes involved in
epithelial-mesenchymal transition, p53 signaling, nucleotide sugars
metabolism and germ cell-sertoli cell junction signaling
pathways.Conclusion: Using this quantitative sequencing-based approach,
our work uncovers significant global DNA methylation alterations in AA
versus EA prostate tissues and provides a mechanistic explanation for the
disease disparity.

