Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel anti-B cell maturation antigen-monomethyl auristatin F
antibody-drug conjugate (GSK2857916) induces potent and selective
anti-multiple myeloma activity via enhanced effector function and direct
tumor cell killing


B cell maturation antigen (BCMA), highly expressed on malignant plasma
cells in human multiple myeloma (MM), has not been effectively targeted
with therapeutic monoclonal antibodies (mAbs). We here investigated the
anti-MM activity of J6M0-mcMMAF (GSK2857916), a humanized and
afucosylated anti-BCMA antibody-drug conjugate (ADC) via uncleavable
linker. This novel antagonist anti-BCMA antibody shows binding against
all CD138-expressing MM cell lines and patient MM cells, confirming
universal BCMA expression on the surface of myeloma cells. Real-time
qRT-PCR also showed significantly upregulated BCMA mRNA in CD138+ cells
purified from MM patients vs. normal donors (p B cell maturation antigen
(BCMA), highly expressed on malignant plasma cells in human multiple
myeloma (MM), has not been effectively targeted with therapeutic
monoclonal antibodies (mAbs). We here investigated the anti-MM activity
of J6M0-mcMMAF (GSK2857916), a humanized and afucosylated anti-BCMA
antibody-drug conjugate (ADC) via uncleavable linker. This novel
antagonist anti-BCMA antibody shows binding against all CD138-expressing
MM cell lines and patient MM cells, confirming universal BCMA expression
on the surface of myeloma cells. Real-time qRT-PCR also showed
significantly upregulated BCMA mRNA in CD138+ cells purified from MM
patients vs. normal donors (p < 0.03). In contrast, BCMA is undetectable
in CD138-negative cells from MM patients. J6M0-mcMMAF inhibits cell
growth and induces caspase 3-dependent apoptosis in both drug-sensitive
and -resistant MM cell lines and patient CD138+ MM cells, alone and in
co-culture with BMSCs. It strongly blocks colony formation of MM cell
lines (ED50 6-70 ng/ml) via induction of G2/M arrest, followed by
apoptosis. This ADC does not affect viability of BCMA-negative NK, PBMC,
and BMSCs, cultured alone or together, confirming its specific targeting
of BCMA-positive MM cells. J6M0-mcMMAF, which has enhanced Fc-receptor
binding due to afucosylation, significantly improved autologous
antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC) potency and maximum MM
cell lysis against MM patient cells (n=5), when compared to J6M0 with
normal Fc. The in vivo efficacy of J6M0-mcMMAF was evaluated in murine
subcutaneous xenograft models using NCI-H929 and OPM2 cells, as well as
in NK-deficient SCID-beige mice with diffuse human MM bone lesions using
MM1Sluc cells. Administration of J6M0-mcMMAF at 4 mg/kg (q3d x 4, ip)
completely eliminated NCI-H929 and OPM2 xenograft tumors in all mice
which remained tumor-free until the termination of studies at 60 and 100
days, respectively. In the MM1Sluc bone marrow dissemination model,
J6M0-mcMMAF eradicates detectable tumors after 2 doses at 0.4 mg/kg (q3d
x 9, ip), which resulted in extended survival (pB cell maturation antigen
(BCMA), highly expressed on malignant plasma cells in human multiple
myeloma (MM), has not been effectively targeted with therapeutic
monoclonal antibodies (mAbs). We here investigated the anti-MM activity
of J6M0-mcMMAF (GSK2857916), a humanized and afucosylated anti-BCMA
antibody-drug conjugate (ADC) via uncleavable linker. This novel
antagonist anti-BCMA antibody shows binding against all CD138-expressing
MM cell lines and patient MM cells, confirming universal BCMA expression
on the surface of myeloma cells. Real-time qRT-PCR also showed
significantly upregulated BCMA mRNA in CD138+ cells purified from MM
patients vs. normal donors (p < 0.03). In contrast, BCMA is undetectable
in CD138-negative cells from MM patients. J6M0-mcMMAF inhibits cell
growth and induces caspase 3-dependent apoptosis in both drug-sensitive
and -resistant MM cell lines and patient CD138+ MM cells, alone and in
co-culture with BMSCs. It strongly blocks colony formation of MM cell
lines (ED50 6-70 ng/ml) via induction of G2/M arrest, followed by
apoptosis. This ADC does not affect viability of BCMA-negative NK, PBMC,
and BMSCs, cultured alone or together, confirming its specific targeting
of BCMA-positive MM cells. J6M0-mcMMAF, which has enhanced Fc-receptor
binding due to afucosylation, significantly improved autologous
antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC) potency and maximum MM
cell lysis against MM patient cells (n=5), when compared to J6M0 with
normal Fc. The in vivo efficacy of J6M0-mcMMAF was evaluated in murine
subcutaneous xenograft models using NCI-H929 and OPM2 cells, as well as
in NK-deficient SCID-beige mice with diffuse human MM bone lesions using
MM1Sluc cells. Administration of J6M0-mcMMAF at 4 mg/kg (q3d x 4, ip)
completely eliminated NCI-H929 and OPM2 xenograft tumors in all mice
which remained tumor-free until the termination of studies at 60 and 100
days, respectively. In the MM1Sluc bone marrow dissemination model,
J6M0-mcMMAF eradicates detectable tumors after 2 doses at 0.4 mg/kg (q3d
x 9, ip), which resulted in extended survival (p<0.0001) and no weight
loss of mice following 120 days. J6M0 treatment, although less effective
than J6M0-mcMMAF, also had significantly prolonged survival (pB cell
maturation antigen (BCMA), highly expressed on malignant plasma cells in
human multiple myeloma (MM), has not been effectively targeted with
therapeutic monoclonal antibodies (mAbs). We here investigated the
anti-MM activity of J6M0-mcMMAF (GSK2857916), a humanized and
afucosylated anti-BCMA antibody-drug conjugate (ADC) via uncleavable
linker. This novel antagonist anti-BCMA antibody shows binding against
all CD138-expressing MM cell lines and patient MM cells, confirming
universal BCMA expression on the surface of myeloma cells. Real-time
qRT-PCR also showed significantly upregulated BCMA mRNA in CD138+ cells
purified from MM patients vs. normal donors (p < 0.03). In contrast, BCMA
is undetectable in CD138-negative cells from MM patients. J6M0-mcMMAF
inhibits cell growth and induces caspase 3-dependent apoptosis in both
drug-sensitive and -resistant MM cell lines and patient CD138+ MM cells,
alone and in co-culture with BMSCs. It strongly blocks colony formation
of MM cell lines (ED50 6-70 ng/ml) via induction of G2/M arrest, followed
by apoptosis. This ADC does not affect viability of BCMA-negative NK,
PBMC, and BMSCs, cultured alone or together, confirming its specific
targeting of BCMA-positive MM cells. J6M0-mcMMAF, which has enhanced
Fc-receptor binding due to afucosylation, significantly improved
autologous antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC) potency and
maximum MM cell lysis against MM patient cells (n=5), when compared to
J6M0 with normal Fc. The in vivo efficacy of J6M0-mcMMAF was evaluated in
murine subcutaneous xenograft models using NCI-H929 and OPM2 cells, as
well as in NK-deficient SCID-beige mice with diffuse human MM bone
lesions using MM1Sluc cells. Administration of J6M0-mcMMAF at 4 mg/kg
(q3d x 4, ip) completely eliminated NCI-H929 and OPM2 xenograft tumors in
all mice which remained tumor-free until the termination of studies at 60
and 100 days, respectively. In the MM1Sluc bone marrow dissemination
model, J6M0-mcMMAF eradicates detectable tumors after 2 doses at 0.4
mg/kg (q3d x 9, ip), which resulted in extended survival (p<0.0001) and
no weight loss of mice following 120 days. J6M0 treatment, although less
effective than J6M0-mcMMAF, also had significantly prolonged survival
(p<0.03) and diminished tumor burden when compared with control vehicle
and isotype-treated groups, indicating a potential role of
macrophage-mediated phagocytosis. Indeed, J6M0-mcMMAF recruits macrophage
and mediates phagocytosis of target MM cells. Taken together, our studies
show that J6M0-mcMMAF potently and selectively induce direct and indirect
killing of MM tumor cells both in vitro and in vivo, providing a very
promising next-generation immunotherapeutic in this cancer.Note: This
abstract was not presented at the meeting.

