Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Interferon regulatory factor-4 is transcriptionally regulated by
NF-B in peripheral T-cell lymphomas


Interferon regulatory factor-4 (IRF4) is a tightly-regulated
transcription factor involved in growth and differentiation of normal
lymphocytes. IRF4 is expressed in multiple lymphoid malignancies and its
expression drives tumor growth. Thus, characterization of the molecular
events regulating IRF4 levels is key to design any targeting strategy.
Here, we define a novel regulatory mechanism controlling IRF4 expression
in peripheral T-cell lymphoma (PTCL), an aggressive non-Hodgkin lymphoma
with poor overall survival rates and high levels of this transcription
factor. In normal T cells, IRF4 was induced upon external activation of
protein kinase C (PKC) by phorbol myristate acetate and ionomycin, an
effect reversed by the PKC inhibitor, enzastaurin. Unlike normal T cells,
PTCL cells constitutively expressed IRF4 in the absence of external
stimulation, and this expression was resistant to enzastaurin. To
identify regulators of IRF4 expression in PTCL, we performed a
pharmacological screen using inhibitors that targeted PKC-associated
pathways, including mitogen-activated protein kinases, PI3K/AKT/mTOR, and
NF-B. Of the inhibitors tested, only the proteasome inhibitor,
bortezomib, showed a decrease in IRF4 expression in a dose- and
time-dependent manner. To confirm this result we used a more specific
NF-B inhibitor blocking IB kinase, BMS-345541. This inhibitor
dramatically reduced IRF4 expression by 95.6% (PInterferon regulatory
factor-4 (IRF4) is a tightly-regulated transcription factor involved in
growth and differentiation of normal lymphocytes. IRF4 is expressed in
multiple lymphoid malignancies and its expression drives tumor growth.
Thus, characterization of the molecular events regulating IRF4 levels is
key to design any targeting strategy. Here, we define a novel regulatory
mechanism controlling IRF4 expression in peripheral T-cell lymphoma
(PTCL), an aggressive non-Hodgkin lymphoma with poor overall survival
rates and high levels of this transcription factor. In normal T cells,
IRF4 was induced upon external activation of protein kinase C (PKC) by
phorbol myristate acetate and ionomycin, an effect reversed by the PKC
inhibitor, enzastaurin. Unlike normal T cells, PTCL cells constitutively
expressed IRF4 in the absence of external stimulation, and this
expression was resistant to enzastaurin. To identify regulators of IRF4
expression in PTCL, we performed a pharmacological screen using
inhibitors that targeted PKC-associated pathways, including
mitogen-activated protein kinases, PI3K/AKT/mTOR, and NF-B. Of the
inhibitors tested, only the proteasome inhibitor, bortezomib, showed a
decrease in IRF4 expression in a dose- and time-dependent manner. To
confirm this result we used a more specific NF-B inhibitor blocking IB
kinase, BMS-345541. This inhibitor dramatically reduced IRF4 expression
by 95.6% (P<0.0001). We used cell-based assays to investigate further the
role of NF-B in the transcriptional regulation of IRF4. A reporter assay
for the IRF4 promoter demonstrated reduced promoter activity by siRNA
knockdown of RelB and p52 NF-B subunits to 31.4% and 36.9% of control
(P=0.009). IRF4 promoter activity also was inhibited 67.9% by IBN, a
dominant negative inhibitor of NF-B activity (P=0.002), and was increased
71% by siRNA knockdown of IB (PInterferon regulatory factor-4 (IRF4) is a
tightly-regulated transcription factor involved in growth and
differentiation of normal lymphocytes. IRF4 is expressed in multiple
lymphoid malignancies and its expression drives tumor growth. Thus,
characterization of the molecular events regulating IRF4 levels is key to
design any targeting strategy. Here, we define a novel regulatory
mechanism controlling IRF4 expression in peripheral T-cell lymphoma
(PTCL), an aggressive non-Hodgkin lymphoma with poor overall survival
rates and high levels of this transcription factor. In normal T cells,
IRF4 was induced upon external activation of protein kinase C (PKC) by
phorbol myristate acetate and ionomycin, an effect reversed by the PKC
inhibitor, enzastaurin. Unlike normal T cells, PTCL cells constitutively
expressed IRF4 in the absence of external stimulation, and this
expression was resistant to enzastaurin. To identify regulators of IRF4
expression in PTCL, we performed a pharmacological screen using
inhibitors that targeted PKC-associated pathways, including
mitogen-activated protein kinases, PI3K/AKT/mTOR, and NF-B. Of the
inhibitors tested, only the proteasome inhibitor, bortezomib, showed a
decrease in IRF4 expression in a dose- and time-dependent manner. To
confirm this result we used a more specific NF-B inhibitor blocking IB
kinase, BMS-345541. This inhibitor dramatically reduced IRF4 expression
by 95.6% (P<0.0001). We used cell-based assays to investigate further the
role of NF-B in the transcriptional regulation of IRF4. A reporter assay
for the IRF4 promoter demonstrated reduced promoter activity by siRNA
knockdown of RelB and p52 NF-B subunits to 31.4% and 36.9% of control
(P=0.009). IRF4 promoter activity also was inhibited 67.9% by IBN, a
dominant negative inhibitor of NF-B activity (P=0.002), and was increased
71% by siRNA knockdown of IB (P<0.05). Chromatin immunoprecipitation
assays confirmed the occupancy of NF-B subunits in the IRF4 promoter, and
this interaction was diminished in the presence of BMS-345541. Finally,
knockdown of RelB and p52 subunits had a tendency to decrease IRF4 gene
expression by 24.4% and 27.3% (P=0.1). Taken together, these data
demonstrate transcriptional regulation of IRF4 by the NF-B family in
PTCL, and suggest the NF-B pathway may represent a therapeutic target for
PTCLs with concurrent IRF4 and NF-B expression.

