Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The precursor miR-138/2, but not miR-138/1, targets p53 mRNA and
contributes to the acquisition of melanoma metastatic phenotype: Are the
miRNAs precursors important to direct mature miRNA to mRNA targets


MiRNAs regulate pathways associated with differentiation, proliferation,
apoptosis, among others, miRNAs missregulation may contribute to
malignant transformation. Although melanoma is one of the rarest
dermatological cancers, it is responsible for the greatest number of skin
cancer-related deaths. In that context, our aim is to identify miRNAs
that could be involved with melanoma progression. Using a cellular murine
model of melanoma development, we identified the miR-138 as an
interesting target of studying. In this model, four cell lines (melan-a,
4C, 4C11- and 4C11+) mimics the distinct steps of human melanoma genesis.
miR-138 is codified from two different regions on the genome and they
were named according to their origin. miR-138/1 is coded from chromosome
9 in mouse (corresponding to 3, in humans) while miR138/2 is coded from
chromosome 8 in mouse (equivalent to 16, in humans). Despite the mature
sequence of these two miRNAs being exactly the same, the flanking regions
that form the precursors are distinct. miR-138 coded from chromosome 8
but not from chromosome 9 promotes cells to acquire a more aggressive
phenotype. When we transfected the tumorigenic but non-metastatic cell
line 4C11- with the genomic DNA corresponding to miR-138/2, it promotes
the increase of proliferation, migration, colony formation and resistance
to anoikis by this cell line compared to its untransfected counterpart
4C11-. In vivo assays showed that 4C11- miR-138/2 is able to form
fast-growing tumors and pulmonary metastasis. None of these phenotypic
changes was observed in 4C11- cells overexpressing the miR-138 coded from
chromosome 9. We also validated p53 (rarely mutated in melanomas) as a
target of miR-138 coded from chromosome 8, but not from chromosome 9.
Therefore, we hypothesized that the sequence of precursor miRNA (pre-miR)
could be involved with the direction of mature miRNA to the mRNA target.
Moreover, EZH2, validated as a target of miR-138, is downregulated only
in 4C11- cells overexpressing the miR-138/1, emphasizing even more the
importance of the precursor sequence in the regulation of the mRNA
target. miR-138 expression in melanocytic lesion were evaluated as well.
We observed increased expression of miR-138 in primary and metastatic
human melanoma samples related to benign nevi. Therefore, in this work we
showed that miR-138 may contribute to melanoma genesis and is capable to
regulate the expression of p53. Moreover, we suggest for the first time
that the precursor sequence of miRNA can direct the mature miRNA to mRNA
targets.Supported by CNPq and FAPESP

