Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Breast cancer incidence and Gail risk in a prospective study of
women with benign breast disease


Introduction: Women with benign breast disease (BBD) are at an increased
risk of subsequent development of breast cancer. We followed a cohort of
high-risk women to investigate the development of invasive breast cancer
and examined differences in incidence and Gail risk among women with and
without BBD.Methods: The Women At Risk (WAR) registry is a prospectively
followed cohort of women at Columbia University medical Center from 1991
to 2011. Ascertainment of progression from BBD to breast cancer was done
through examination of medical records and New York Presbyterian tumor
registry. Incidence rates are reported per 10,000 person-years at risk.
Women with a history of BBD at baseline were diagnosed with BBD prior to
enrollment in the WAR registry, women with BBD diagnosed after enrollment
were classified as incident BBD. We calculated 5-year and lifetime Gail
risk based on women's characteristics at baseline to compare Gail risk in
women with and without BBD. For this analysis, women with incident BBD
were excluded. We assessed risk of invasive breast cancer using Poisson
regression analysis, with the log-transformed person-years as the
offset.Results: There were 396 women with a history of BBD at baseline.
Mean 5-year Gail risk was significantly higher for women with a history
of BBD as compared to women without a history of BBD at baseline (BBD
(MeanStd): 3.602.29 vs. No BBD: 1.941.68, pIntroduction: Women with
benign breast disease (BBD) are at an increased risk of subsequent
development of breast cancer. We followed a cohort of high-risk women to
investigate the development of invasive breast cancer and examined
differences in incidence and Gail risk among women with and without
BBD.Methods: The Women At Risk (WAR) registry is a prospectively followed
cohort of women at Columbia University medical Center from 1991 to 2011.
Ascertainment of progression from BBD to breast cancer was done through
examination of medical records and New York Presbyterian tumor registry.
Incidence rates are reported per 10,000 person-years at risk. Women with
a history of BBD at baseline were diagnosed with BBD prior to enrollment
in the WAR registry, women with BBD diagnosed after enrollment were
classified as incident BBD. We calculated 5-year and lifetime Gail risk
based on women's characteristics at baseline to compare Gail risk in
women with and without BBD. For this analysis, women with incident BBD
were excluded. We assessed risk of invasive breast cancer using Poisson
regression analysis, with the log-transformed person-years as the
offset.Results: There were 396 women with a history of BBD at baseline.
Mean 5-year Gail risk was significantly higher for women with a history
of BBD as compared to women without a history of BBD at baseline (BBD
(MeanStd): 3.602.29 vs. No BBD: 1.941.68, p<0.001). We identified 26
subsequent invasive breast cancers among 396 women with BBD at baseline
and 47 breast cancers among 1,322 women without BBD, with a mean
follow-up of 8.6 years. Among women with BBD at baseline breast cancer
incidence is 100.8 per 10,000 women years, compared to 38.6 per 10,000
woman years among women without BBD. A diagnosis of BBD at baseline
resulted in an excess incidence of 62.2 per 10,000 woman years.
Age-adjusted risk of invasive breast cancer was 2.45 higher in women with
BBD at baseline as compared to women without BBD (RR: 2.45, 95% CI:
1.52-3.96). The average time between BBD diagnosis and invasive breast
cancer diagnosis was 9.0 years. Time to breast cancer diagnosis was
similar regardless of histologic type (p=0.22). After follow-up, 844
women were diagnosed with incident BBD. We identified 48 invasive breast
cancers among 844 women with incident BBD, with a breast cancer incidence
of 65.6 per 10,000 woman years. Incident BBD results in an excess
incidence of breast cancer of 35.2 per 10,000 woman years. Age-adjusted
risk of invasive breast cancer was 1.76 higher in women with incident BBD
as compared to women without BBD (RR: 1.76, 95% CI:
1.18-2.64).Conclusions: Breast cancer incidence is higher among women
with BBD, contributing to the evidence of increased breast cancer risk
after BBD diagnosis.

