Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel inhibitors of signal transducer and activator of
transcription 3 (STAT3) show potent activity in cell cultures and tumor
xenografts


The transcription factor (TF) STAT3 is an attractive target for
development of anticancer drugs. STAT3 is over-expressed and activated in
many human malignancies and has an important role in multiple oncogenic
signaling pathways affecting proliferation, survival and metabolic
adaptation of cancer cells. It has been difficult, however, to develop
effective inhibitors of STAT3. In this study, we performed an in-depth
analysis of the mechanism of action of two compounds, OPB-31121 and
OPB-51602, which are currently undergoing clinical testing. We combined
computational docking (CD), molecular dynamic simulation (MDS) and in
vitro binding assays to study the compounds interaction with STAT3. CD
predicted that OPB-31121 and OPB-51602 could bind to a common pocket in
the STAT3 SH2 domain, which was not shared with other STAT3 inhibitors.
MDS and in silico mutational analysis allowed refinement of the binding
site predictions and an estimate of the relative binding affinities.
Isotermal titration calorimetry (ITC) studies confirmed that OPB-31121
and OPB-51602 bound with high affinity (Kd, 5-10 nM) to recombinant STAT3
SH2 domain. Binding of the two compounds was disrupted by mutations of
aminoacid residues in the predicted binding pocket and was mutually
exclusive in competition assays. In contrast, OPB-31121 and OPB-51602 did
not compete for binding with other STAT3 inhibitors, confirming that they
occupied distinct pockets in the SH2 domain. In cell culture assays,
OPB-31121 and OPB-51602 interfered with both Tyr705 and Ser727
phosphorylation, which are required for full transcriptional activity of
STAT3. Proliferation of cancer cells was strongly affected in vitro by
OPB-51602 and OPB-31121 in anchorage-dependent growth and soft-agar
assays. In these assays OPB-51602 and OPB-31121 were active at low
nanomolar concentrations (IC50, 5-10 nM). Interestingly, the compounds
were more effective in metabolic stress conditions (e.g., nutrient and
glucose depletion), suggesting that STAT3 inhibition interfered with
relevant metabolic functions in cancer cells. In vivo treatment with
OPB-51602 (PO, 20-40 mg/kg, 3-5 days) reduced Tyr705 and Ser727
phosphorylation in tumor xenografts. Growth of DU145 prostate tumor
xenografts was almost completely arrested by daily treatment with
OPB-51602 (PO, 20-40 mg/kg, 2 weeks). Interestingly, tumor growth did not
resume after discontinuation of the 2-weeks treatment, indicating a
persistent impairment of tumor-initiating capability. Altogether, this
study demonstrates that STAT3 is the relevant intracellular target of
OPB-51602 and OPB-31121. The two compounds bound with high affinity to a
distinct pocket in the SH2 domain of STAT3 and interfered with STAT3
functions both in cells and tumor xenografts. These features resulted in
distinctive biological activity and pharmacological properties of these
novel compounds.

