Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TAM and CD44 in medullary thyroid carcinoma


Background: Tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) are alternatively
activated or M2 macrophages that infiltrate cancer tissues. It has been
suggested that TAMs exert several pro-tumor functions by releasing
several growth factors and proangiogenic cytokines that favor tumor
progression. In fact, TAM density has been associated with poor
prognosis. Although it is well known the pro-tumor roles of TAM in
several tumor types, its role in medullary thyroid cancer (MTC) is still
unknown. We here evaluated the M2 macrophage marker CD163 in MTC and
correlated with RET mutational status and clinical and pathological
features. Because it has been suggested TAMs could interact with
CD44-positive tumor cells to during tumorigenesis process, we also
investigated the expression of CD44 in MTC.Patients and Methods: CD163
and CD44 expression we investigated in 78 MTC by immunohistochemistry
(IHC). Because hereditary form is caused by germline mutations in the RET
gene, all patients were screened for RET mutations (exons 8, 10, 11,
13-16) in the DNA isolated from blood samples. Those MTC that were
negative for RET germline mutations, were also screened for somatic
mutations in the RET gene (exons 10, 11 e 16).Results: Germline mutation
in the RET gene were identified in 29 patients (p.G533C, p.C609Y,
p.C611Y, p.C620Y, p.C634R, p.C634Y/Y791F, p.S891A and p.M918V).
Approximately 49 cases are sporadic cases in which somatic RET mutations
were identified in about 6 cases (p.M918T, p.C634R and p.C634Y). CD163
expression was mainly found in sporadic MTC when compared to hereditary
MTC (p=0.021), suggesting that TAM may play a role in the progression of
sporadic MTC. On the other hand CD44 expression was mainly found in
hereditary MTC than in sporadic cases (p=0.017), particularly in patients
with RET germlime mutation at codon C634.Conclusion: TAM seems to be more
important for sporadic MTC tumorigenesis when compared to hereditary MTC.
On the other hand, CD44 expression correlated with hereditary MTC,
particularly in patients with mutation at codon C634.

