Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Akt/survivin pathway inhibition synergizes the apoptotic cell
death induced by A-santalol in prostate cancer cells


-santalol, a major component of sandalwood oil inhibits growth of
cultured prostate cancer cells in vitro by causing apoptosis. The present
study was undertaken to investigate the mechanistic details associated
with the induction of apoptosis by -santalol in cultured prostate cancer
cells (LNCaP and PC-3). Expressions of major proteins studied in the
present investigation were determined using standard Western blot
protocol and analyzed by LICOR-Odyssey infra-red scanner. Activity of
survivin was confirmed employing survivin ELISA kit. The cell viability
was determined by trypan blue dye exclusion assay and caspase-3 activity
was confirmed using caspase-3 (active) ELISA kit. Treatment of prostate
cancer cells with -santalol (20, 40 M) resulted in the down regulation of
survivin, XIAP and p-AKT (s-473) levels. Furthermore, -santalol
significantly reduced the activity of survivin as evidenced by survivin
ELISA assay. Inhibition of PI3K/Akt by pharmacological inhibitor LY294002
synergized the apoptotic cell death induced by -santalol as determined by
cell viability, active caspase-3 activity and expression of cleaved PARP,
caspase-3 levels. In conclusion, the present study reveals that -santalol
downregulates activity and expression of survivin and that inhibition of
PI3K/Akt pathway synergize the apoptotic cell death by downregulating
survivin. This study was supported by Mentoring Task Force, Type I grant
by Wilkes University and by Translational Cancer Research Center funded
by South Dakota Governor's Office of Economic Development.

