Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Elucidating the role of miRNA-31 in retinoblastoma


Retinoblastoma is the most common pediatric ocular cancer. Although early
detection of the disease may have a favorable outcome for the patient,
retinoblastoma can aggressively develop and become fatal. Current
treatment strategies include focal therapies, chemotherapy and in more
severe cases, enucleation (removal of the eye) is necessary. This cancer
may initiate from acquired or inherited mutations in the RB1 gene. As a
result, the mutant retinal cell is conferred an unrestrained
proliferative ability that is facilitated by multiple genetic events.
Determining the mechanism(s) responsible for tumor growth, invasion, and
metastasis may provide an alternative treatment strategy that may delay
enucleation, prevent toxic side effects from chemotherapy, or even
prevent metastatic spread altogether. Genetic factors that are highly
involved in both carcinogenesis and homeostasis are often regulated by
miRNAs. miRNAs are small, non-coding molecules that negatively regulate
gene expression by mediating mRNA cleavage and/or disrupting protein
synthesis. Our rationale for this study is that investigating aberrant
miRNA regulation in retinoblastoma will enable us to identify key genetic
factors that can be targeted therapeutically. Our miRNA array suggests
that there is a significant number of miRNAs whose expression is
significantly downregulated between retinoblastoma tumors and normal
human retinae. From this data, we have identified candidate miRNAs, such
as miRNA-31, that have been previously reported to have an important
anti-metastatic role in different cancer types. We are currently
investigating the role of these miRNAs in regulating retinoblastoma
progression. These functional studies will allow us to determine how
increasing miRNA expression in retinoblastoma models can disrupt
important signaling pathways associated with retinoblastoma progression
and invasion.

