Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Correlation of plasma biomarker levels with early-stage tumor
viability in an orthotopic ovarian cancer mouse model


Introduction: The detection of proteins or other biomarkers secreted or
released (shed) from tumor cells into blood may facilitate early cancer
screening, particularly for lethal cancers such as ovarian carcinoma,
which typically remains asymptomatic and undetected until advanced
stages. But the utility of blood-based assays is confounded because it is
unknown whether cancer biomarker levels correlate with viable tumor
burden, and it is unclear how highly shed a biomarker must be to enable
detection of early (Introduction: The detection of proteins or other
biomarkers secreted or released (shed) from tumor cells into blood may
facilitate early cancer screening, particularly for lethal cancers such
as ovarian carcinoma, which typically remains asymptomatic and undetected
until advanced stages. But the utility of blood-based assays is
confounded because it is unknown whether cancer biomarker levels
correlate with viable tumor burden, and it is unclear how highly shed a
biomarker must be to enable detection of early (< 1 cm diameter) tumors.
No clinical or animal data is available to correlate blood biomarker
levels with cancer state, before and after disease diagnosis, for
multiple time points in the same subject, without intervention or
treatment.Aim: To determine whether cancer blood biomarkers may be used
as measures of tumor viability in an early-stage ovarian cancer mouse
model.Methods: We genetically engineered human ovarian cancer cell line
2008 to stably coexpress a secretory reporter (secreted alkaline
phosphatase, SEAP) not produced endogenously in any living animal, and a
bifusion optical imaging reporter (firefly luciferase-eGFP, FL-eGFP) to
enable in vivo bioluminescence imaging of tumor viability. We
orthotopically implanted as few as 3103 2008-SEAP-FL-eGFP cells into the
ovary of 6-week-old female Nu/Nu mice, and monitored subsequent tumor
growth for up to 28 days using serial 25-l plasma SEAP sampling to assess
biomarker shedding, in vivo bioluminescence imaging to quantify tumor
viability, and in vivo ultrasound imaging to assess tumor volume. Plasma
SEAP concentration was measured using a chemiluminescence assay
(Clontech). Mice were sacrificed when tumor volume reached 1-cm diameter
(or by Day 28) and tumors were excised for histological analysis.Results
and Discussion: This is the first study to show that cancer plasma
biomarker measurements may be used as surrogates of tumor viability
during the early tumor growth stages in a living animal model. Orthotopic
implantation of at least 3104 transfected cells in the ovary resulted in
tumor growth (confirmed by ultrasound imaging) that was detectable by
plasma SEAP levels and FL imaging within 4 hours and up to 28 days.
Clinical translation of this preclinical work was aided by the use of
mathematical modeling, which yielded novel estimates of biomarker
shedding rates never before measured in vivo (210-5 ng/day/cell) and were
consistent with predicted rates from cell culture. Plasma SEAP levels
correlated well with increasing FL average radiance during the first 15
days post-implantation (R2=0.86), indicating that a cancer-specific
biomarker, when shed highly, may reflect early tumor viability. This
integrative mouse model and mathematical modeling approach may be used to
further elucidate the biology of cancer biomarker shedding in vivo,
thereby helping to define guidelines for selecting better biomarkers for
early cancer detection.

