Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Somatic mutations and aberrant expression of RNF43 are recurrently
found in intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms of the pancreas


Background: RNF43 encodes ring finger protein 43, an ubiquitin ligase,
and is recently uncovered as mutated in intraductal papillary mucinous
neoplasms of the pancreas (IPMNs). We studied mutations and aberrant
expressions of RNF43 and their associations with molecular and
clinicopathological features in IPMNs. Materials and methods: Studied
were 178 IPMNs operated upon between 2001 and 2010 at Tokyo Women's
Medical University Hospital. Formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded tissues
of the 178 cases and frozen tisssues of 56 of the cases were subjected
for immunohistochemical and the next generation semiconducter sequencing
analyses, respectively. Detected mutations were validated by Sanger
sequencing. Results: Expression of RNF43 was reduced in 60 (33.7%) of the
178 IPMNs. Somatic mutations in RNF43 were found in 10 (17.9%) of the 56
examined cases, in which frameshift mutations, a nonsense mutation, and
missense mutations were found in 5, 1, and 4 cases, respectively. These
mutations were significantly associated with RNF43 expression (p = 0.008)
and GNAS mutation (p = 0.012), however, not associated with tumor grade,
histological subtype or prognosis. Conclusion: These results indicate
that RNF43 may function as a tumor suppressor and play a role in
development of IPMN.

