Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: IMO-8400, a selective antagonist of TLRs 7, 8 and 9, inhibits
MYD88 L265P mutation-driven signaling and cell survival: A potential
novel approach for treatment of B-cell lymphomas harboring MYD88 L265P
mutation


In studies of B-cell lymphoma, Staudt and colleagues have identified
oncogenic mutations in the signaling pathways associated with the B-cell
receptor (BCR) and, more recently, the MYD88 L265P mutation (Ngo et al,
Nature 2011, 470:115). MYD88 is a key adaptor protein in the Toll-like
Receptor (TLR) signaling pathway. It has been shown that the MYD88 L265P
mutation leads to the over activation of the TLRs 7 and 9 signaling
pathway, whereas blocking of this pathway decreased cell survival,
providing a rationale for targeting TLRs 7 and 9 signaling as a
therapeutic approach (Lim et al, AACR 2013, #2332). The MYD88 L265P
mutation is reported to be present in over 90% of Waldenstrm's
macroglobulinemia (WM) patients, 29% of patients with activated
B-cell-like (ABC) diffuse large B cell lymphoma (DLBCL), and in other
B-cell lymphomas. We evaluated IMO-8400, an antagonist for TLRs 7, 8 and
9, in preclinical studies employing three cell lines with the MYD88 L265P
mutation (OCI-Ly3, OCI-Ly10 and TMD8), primary bone marrow cells from a
WM patient with the mutation, and a control GCB-DLBCL cell line SU-DHL-6
with wild-type MYD88. The presence of MYD88 L265P mutation was confirmed
by allele-specific PCR and Sanger sequencing. All cell lines expressed
TLRs 7 and 9. Treatment of mutation-positive cell lines with IMO-8400
resulted in dose- and duration-dependent decreases in multiple parameters
of cell activation, including cell survival (EC50: 0.95 M and 5 M, with
and without use of lipid, respectively), phosphorylation of BTK, IRAK1,
IRAK4, NF-B, STAT3 and p38 (assayed by Western blot), and secretion of
cytokines including IL-10, MIG and IL-2R. Gene array analysis indicated
that IMO-8400 inhibited the expression of several genes in the NF-B and
JAK/STAT pathways, including NFKB1, TNFSF10, STAT3 and IL2RA. IMO-8400
also inhibited cell survival and cytokine secretion in cells from the WM
patient. In a murine model of disseminated OCI-LY10, IMO-8400 as a single
treatment agent showed potent anti-tumor activity in vivo, with
dose-dependent increase in animal survival. Treatment was well-tolerated
at all dose levels. In a subcutaneous tumor model, growth of even
well-established tumor nodules (approximately 500 mm3) was significantly
inhibited by IMO-8400 treatment, and this effect correlated with
decreased IB phosphorylation and IL-10 expression (gene and protein) in
tumor cells as well as decreased human IL-10 in the serum of the mice. In
contrast, IMO-8400 treatment had no effects on control SU-DHL-6 cells in
vitro or in vivo. Our studies show that IMO-8400 inhibits oncogenic MYD88
L265P-mediated cell survival and provides a novel approach for treatment
of patients with this mutation. A Phase 1/2 trial of IMO-8400 in patients
with WM is now open for enrollment.

