Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antitumor activity of Trametinib, a MEK1/2 inhibitor, in malignant
pleural mesothelioma cells in vitro


Introducion: Malignant pleural mesothelioma (MPM) is a highly aggressive
malignancy and there is no approved targeted therapy. The MAPK pathway
plays critical roles in the regulation of cell proliferation, growth,
differentiation, and survival in multiple solid tumors, including MPM.
Trametinib, a selective MEK inhibitor, have a survival benefit in
patients with V600 BRAF-mutant metastatic melanoma. FDA approved
Trametinib for these patients in May 2013. The effect of Trametinib in
MPM cells has not been well studied.Purpose: We examined the effects of
Trametinib in MPM cells in vitro.Methods: To examine the effect of
Trametinib on the proliferation of MPM cells, we performed cell
proliferation assay using four MPM cell lines, NCI-H2452, NCI-H226,
NCI-H2052 and MSTO-211H. To examine the effect of Trametinib on
intracellular signaling, we performed Western blot analysis in NCI-H226
cell line.Results: Trametinib exhibited potent antiproliferative activity
in all four MPM cell lines with IC50 values ranging from 0.5 M to 44 M.
Trametinib blocked the phosphorylation of ERK until 72 hours and
decreased the expression of CD44 in a dose-dependent manner. In addition,
the expression of CD44 was inhibited (48-72 hours) after the suppression
of ERK phosphorylation by Trametinib.Conclusions: Our results suggest
that Trametinib is a promising therapeutic agent for MPM.

