Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mechanism of EGFR and c-Met TKI resistance and role of
co-expression of EGFR and c-Met in non-small cell lung cancer patients


Current EGFR/c-Met tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) combination therapies
are shown to be susceptible to acquired resistance in the majority of
NSCLC patients. To understand how cells develop EGFR/c-Met TKI
resistance, we use three model NSCLC cell lines: H2170, H358 and H1975.
H2170 and H358 cell lines express high levels of EGFR and c-Met and are
EGFR wild-type. These cell lines were made resistant to the EGFR TKI
erlotinib, the c-Met TKI SU11274 and a combination of both by exposure to
increasing concentrations of these TKIs. The H1975 cell line is positive
for two EGFR TKD mutations (T790M and L858R) which confer resistance to
erlotinib.Studies have shown that EGFR/c-Met TKI resistant cells may use
alternative signaling pathways to activate downstream
transcription/translation proteins previously activated by EGFR and c-Met
signaling. The Wnt/-catenin and mTOR pathways are demonstrated to have
significant roles in cell survival, resistance and tumorigenesis in
NSCLC. Several EGFR/c-Met-linked proteins in these two signaling pathways
were differentially modulated in H2170 and H358 resistant lines. The Wnt
signaling transducer -catenin plays a role in cellular proliferation and
death and its deregulation is implicated in lung cancer. Protein kinase
GSK-3 also plays an important role in lung cancer and its inhibition by
Wnt results in mTOR activation. It is encoded by two genes, GSK-3 and
GSK-3. GATA-6 is a transcriptional activator of Wnt and is also
implicated in several cancers. Active -catenin was found to be 2 to
4-fold upreglated in H2170 SU11274-resistant (SR) cells and 2 to 20-fold
upreglated in H2170 erlotinib-resistant (ER) cells, in the presence and
absence of TKIs and growth factor ligands, when compared to nave H2170
cells. GATA-6 was found to be 1.5 to 4-fold upreglated in H2170 SR cells
and 2 to 3-fold upreglated in H2170 ER cells. Conversely, p-GSK-3 and
p-GSK-3 were found to be 1.2 to 4.8-fold and 1.5 to 10.7-fold
downreglated in H2170 SR cells, respectively. These results indicate
increased activation of the Wnt/-catenin and mTOR pathways in TKI
resistant cells.We are currently studying the expression of these
proteins further in the H1975 cell line.To translate our studies to
patients, we are investigating the role of EGFR/c-Met synergism in NSCLC
by conducting a retrospective biomarker analysis using IHC on 100 tissue
samples from patients with stage 3 and 4 squamous cell and
adenocarcinoma. Preliminary results indicate that EGFR and c-Met
receptors are co-expressed in lung cancer tissues and we are acquiring
data to determine how co-localization and synergism affects patient
prognosis. Further studies are being conducted on proteins in the Wnt and
mTOR signaling pathways, such as p70S6Kinase, mTOR, -Catenin and Axin-2,
and their involvement in patient prognosis and resistance. This study may
provide clinicians with novel targets for improving treatment options for
future NSCLC patients.

