Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Simultaneous targeting of multiple cancer-related pathways in
HPV-positive head and neck cancer with demethylating agents


Head and neck cancer is the 6th most common cancer worldwide with the
vast majority being squamous cell carcinoma (SCC). The human
papillomavirus (HPV) has recently been shown to be the etiologic agent in
approximately 60% of head and neck SCC (HNSCC) arising from the
oropharynx. Patients with HPV-positive HNSCC are clinically distinct from
those with HPV-negative cancer being younger, and having decreased
exposure to the established risk factors for HNSCC of tobacco and
alcohol. Although HPV-positive HNSCC patients have higher cure rates
compared to HPV-negative HNSCC, lifelong side effects of treatment are
severe, and upon recurrence, treatment options and survival are limited.
Therefore, new therapies with better side effect profiles that can also
offer therapeutic options for patients with recurrent HPV-associated
HNSCC are needed.Recently, we found that HPV-positive head and neck
cancer cell lines and primary cells were more sensitive than HPV-negative
cells to the demethylating agent 5-azacytidine. Importantly, even low
doses of 5-azacytidine delayed HPV-positive tumor growth in mouse
xenograft model. Cancer-related pathways that we found to be altered in
HPV-positive, but not in HPV-negative head and neck cancer cells, upon
demethylation included: 1) restoration of tumor suppressor p53 levels and
associated apoptotic activity; 2) activation of cytotoxic type I
interferon response; and, 3) downregulation of matrix metalloproteinase
(MMP1 and MMP10 ) expression.Demethylation as a therapy for
HPV-associated HNSCC is particularly interesting, since simultaneous
targeting of multiple molecular pathways that are important for cancer
development and progression, may increase efficacy and reduce acquisition
of resistance. Based on our data, a small clinical trial with 5-azacytide
on patients with HNSC C was initiated at Yale Cancer Center.

