Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inducible ROCK 2/rasHa cooperation requires wound promotion to
achieve malignancy in transgenic mouse skin carcinogenesis, whereas
inducible ROCK 2/PTEN loss fails to achieve benign papilloma


To study tumour progression mechanism in vivo, ROCK 2 signalling
deregulation and co-operation with activated rasHa or PTEN loss was
investigated in transgenic mouse skin carcinogenesis. Transgenic mice
that expressed a 4-hydroxytamoxifen (4HT)-activated human ROCK 2-estrogen
receptor fusion transgene from a keratin 14 promoter [K14.ROCKer] were
crossed to mice expressing activated rasHa exclusively in epidermal
transit amplifying keratinocytes [HK1.ras-ROCKer] or mice where cutaneous
PTEN loss was achieved in basal layers, hair follicles and stem cell
keratinocytes via topical RU486 treatment of bi-genic K14.creP/5PTENflx
genotypes [K14.5PTEN-ROCKer]. Initial 4HT-treatments of K14.ROCKer mice
[3/wk; 26 wks] induced epidermal and follicular hyperplasia but no
papillomas; whilst treatment of HK1.ras line 1205 gave ear tag papillomas
[10-12 wks] typically smaller than vehicle controls, but no malignant
conversion. In contrast, 4-HT treated HK1.ras-Rocker papillomas [10-12
wks] exhibited areas of carcinoma in situ and well-differentiated
squamous cell carcinoma [wdSCC]. With time [16-20wks] wdSCC areas
increased, concomitant with loss of p53, increased p-AKT and altered
differentiation marker expression; however histotypes remained wdSCC
despite continued 4HT-induced Rock 2 activity; as confirmed by downstream
MYPT-1 phosphorylation. Furthermore, papillomas regressed whenever 4-HT
treated HK1.ras-Rocker mice lost ear tags, suggesting that continued
promotion from wounding during papillomatogenesis was critical to
achieving the appropriate [late-stage] papilloma context that facilitated
Rock 2-mediated conversion. To test this idea, K14.ROCKer mice were
crossed to HK1.ras line 1276, which is insensitive to wound promotion,
and such bi-genic mice did not exhibit papillomas; while in reverse,
demonstrating the need for initiation, classic TPA-promoted K14.ROCKer
mice were also devoid of papillomas. In addition, as previously
rasHa/PTENnull mice exhibited papillomas prone to conversion on
acquisition of an additional oncogene [e.g. fos], K14.ROCKer mice were
bred into a K14.cre.5PTEN strain and bi-genic mice treated with Ru486
[3wks] and 4HT [>26wks]. Again, in the absence of rasHa no papillomas
were observed and mice exhibited increased hyperplasia and altered
differentiation consistent with disruption of epidermal physiology. These
data suggest that Rock 2 deregulation plays major roles in malignant
conversion and progression, and in cooperation with rasHa activation or
PTEN loss, the mechanism requires additional promotion/initiation events
during papillomatogenesis to create the context of late-stage papilloma
where Rock 2 activities become causal; an idea being tested in tri-genic
HK1.ras/5PTEN-Rocker genotypes.

