Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DNA mismatch repair protein, PMS2, induces apoptosis in human
prostate cancer cells


Prostate cancer is one of the most common malignancies and ranks the
second most common cause of cancer-related deaths in men. DNA mismatch
repair (MMR) enzymes act as proofreading complexes that maintain the
genomic integrity and MMR-deficient cells show an increased mutation
rate. Recent studies have shown that MMR influences the regulation of
tumor development in various cancers such as colon, ovarian and others,
but their effect on prostate cancer growth has not been investigated thus
far. The aim of the present study was to investigate the effect of the
post-meiotic segregation (PMS) 2 MMR gene on growth properties of
prostate cancer cells. Expression of PMS2 was initially measured in
normal and cancerous prostate cell lines by real-time PCR and western
blotting. Cancerous cells displaying the lowest levels compared to normal
cells was then transfected with PMS2. Gene effect on various cellular
properties (cell proliferation, migration, invasion, apoptosis and cell
cycle assays) as well as growth in nude mice were determined. Of the
various prostate cell lines, DU145 had dramatically reduced expression
levels of PMS2 with little protein detected, whereas levels were high in
normal prostate cells. Interestingly, over-expressing the PMS2 gene in
DU145 cells decreased cell proliferation, migration and invasion, and
increased apoptosis and cell cycle arrest compared to vector control.
PMS2 also inhibited DU145 cell tumor formation in animal models. These
results demonstrate PMS2 to protect against prostate cancer progression
and to have a functional role by affecting apoptosis and cell cycle of
prostate cancer cells.

