Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A pipeline within the OncoTrack project for generating
Patient-tumor-derived 3D cell cultures (PT3DC) and their application for
individualized, targeted drug sensitivity assays


OncoTrack is an international consortium funded by the Innovative
Medicines Initiative (www.OncoTrack.eu) that has launched one of Europe's
largest collaborative public-private research projects to implement novel
approaches of systems biology in colon cancer therapy.Within OncoTrack,
tumor tissue and circulating tumor cells from a cohort of more than 120
patients with primary or metastatic colon cancer are subjected to whole
genome-, exome-, epigenome- and transcriptome sequencing, as well as
high-throughput protein analysis.Alongside the systematic analysis of
colon cancer tissues, in vivo xenografts in immunodeficient mice
(patient-derived xenografts, PDX) and in vitro 3D cell cultures are
generated from each tissue sample and used to determine response to more
than 14 approved drugs, investigational drug candidates and tool
compounds. These wet-lab data, combined with clinical data, will serve as
a basis for in silico modeling to identify new predictors for tailored
therapies.Although early diagnosis and molecular characterization of
colon cancer has improved significantly, rapid and cost-effective means
to address molecular genotyping and therapeutic options on the level of
the individual patient are still in high demand. Here, we present an
experimental pipeline within the OncoTrack project starting from
Matrigel-based Patient-tumor-derived 3D cell cultures (PT3DC). To date,
we were able to establish 50 long-term 3D cell culture strains
originating from 35 primary tumors, 9 metastases and 6 PDX-derived
tissues as suitable models for basic and translational research. On the
basis of immunohistochemistry, we show that our in vitro cultures
preserve an in vivo like architecture, preventing tumor cells from
differentiating and allowing the investigation of intra-tumor
heterogeneity and cancer stem cell like sub-populations. To interrogate
the mutation status of selected clinically relevant oncogenes and tumor
suppressors in PT3DC cultures, we applied cost-efficient benchtop
sequencing and show the preservation of putative driver mutations found
in the original tumor.IC50 data generated by automated 384-well based
dose-response experiments of approved drugs are then used to link
individual genotypes with drug sensitivity phenotypes and serve as a
source of comparison and complementation to drug response data of the
corresponding in vivo PDX models, where applicable.

