Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TRPM8 channel as a novel molecular target in androgen-regulated
prostate cancer cells


TRPM8 channels are highly expressed in prostate cancer cells but the
physiological and pathological functions of TRPM8 in these cells are not
known. In addition to prostate cancer (PC) cells, TRPM8 is expressed in
sensory neurons where it acts as a sensor of cold. Recently, trpm8 has
been identified as both an important gene regulated by androgens and a
critical regulator of Ca2+ homeostasis. The androgen and its receptor
(AR) are pivotal in the biology of sex hormone-regulated malignancies,
with PC the most affected tumor. From the chromatin-immunoprecipitation
(ChIP) analysis, we observed that an androgen response element (ARE)
mediates androgen regulation of TRPM8. Further, using immunoprecipitation
and calcium-imaging experiments, we identified that TRPM8 Ca+2 channels
are functionally associated with androgens (testosterone and
5-dihydrotestosterone) in the prostate. We also identified that unlike
prostate cancer cell lines (LNCAP, PC3 and RWPE2) and normal prostate
tissues, prostate tumor tissues (grade 1-4) showed high levels of TRPM8
which was predominantly localized as the plasma membrane protein at the
tumor periphery. Of note, the decreased stabilization of TRPM8 on the
plasma membrane was associated with increased expression of AR protein.
These results suggest an important role of androgen signaling in trpm8
gene transcription corroborating to cancer progression and clinical
lethality in prostate cancer.

