Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Serum biomarkers reflecting specific tumor tissue remodeling is a
valuable diagnostic tool for lung cancer


Background: The extracellular matrix (ECM) that integrates and surrounds
malignant tumors consists of several proteins, amongst other type I
collagen and elastin. These structural proteins, as well as intermediate
filament (IMF) proteins like vimentin, are remodeled and dysregulated as
part of malignant changes. We investigated whether serum biomarkers
reflecting ECM and IMF remodeling/dysregulation could be used to
differentiate lung cancer patients from healthy controls, other lung
pathologies, and other cancer types.Methods: Levels of matrix
metalloproteinase (MMP) generated fragments of type I collagen (C1M), of
elastin (ELM) and of citrullinated vimentin (VICM) were measured in serum
from patients with lung cancer (n=40), gastrointestinal cancer (n=25),
prostate cancer (n=14), malignant melanoma (n=7), chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) (n=13), and idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF)
(n=10), as well as in age-matched controls (n=33). The area under the
receiver operating characteristics (AUROC) was calculated for the
biomarkers and a diagnostic decision tree was generated from specific
cut-off values.Results: Circulating levels of C1M and VICM were
significantly elevated in lung cancer patients as compared to healthy
controls (AUROC=0.98, pBackground: The extracellular matrix (ECM) that
integrates and surrounds malignant tumors consists of several proteins,
amongst other type I collagen and elastin. These structural proteins, as
well as intermediate filament (IMF) proteins like vimentin, are remodeled
and dysregulated as part of malignant changes. We investigated whether
serum biomarkers reflecting ECM and IMF remodeling/dysregulation could be
used to differentiate lung cancer patients from healthy controls, other
lung pathologies, and other cancer types.Methods: Levels of matrix
metalloproteinase (MMP) generated fragments of type I collagen (C1M), of
elastin (ELM) and of citrullinated vimentin (VICM) were measured in serum
from patients with lung cancer (n=40), gastrointestinal cancer (n=25),
prostate cancer (n=14), malignant melanoma (n=7), chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) (n=13), and idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF)
(n=10), as well as in age-matched controls (n=33). The area under the
receiver operating characteristics (AUROC) was calculated for the
biomarkers and a diagnostic decision tree was generated from specific
cut-off values.Results: Circulating levels of C1M and VICM were
significantly elevated in lung cancer patients as compared to healthy
controls (AUROC=0.98, p<0.0001) and other cancers (AUROC=0.83
pBackground: The extracellular matrix (ECM) that integrates and surrounds
malignant tumors consists of several proteins, amongst other type I
collagen and elastin. These structural proteins, as well as intermediate
filament (IMF) proteins like vimentin, are remodeled and dysregulated as
part of malignant changes. We investigated whether serum biomarkers
reflecting ECM and IMF remodeling/dysregulation could be used to
differentiate lung cancer patients from healthy controls, other lung
pathologies, and other cancer types.Methods: Levels of matrix
metalloproteinase (MMP) generated fragments of type I collagen (C1M), of
elastin (ELM) and of citrullinated vimentin (VICM) were measured in serum
from patients with lung cancer (n=40), gastrointestinal cancer (n=25),
prostate cancer (n=14), malignant melanoma (n=7), chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) (n=13), and idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF)
(n=10), as well as in age-matched controls (n=33). The area under the
receiver operating characteristics (AUROC) was calculated for the
biomarkers and a diagnostic decision tree was generated from specific
cut-off values.Results: Circulating levels of C1M and VICM were
significantly elevated in lung cancer patients as compared to healthy
controls (AUROC=0.98, p<0.0001) and other cancers (AUROC=0.83 p<0.0001).
A trend was detected when comparing lung cancer with COPD+IPF. No
difference could be seen for ELM. Interestingly, C1M and VICM were able
to identify patients with lung cancer with a positive predictive value of
0.9 and an odds ratio of 40 (95% CI=8.7-186, pBackground: The
extracellular matrix (ECM) that integrates and surrounds malignant tumors
consists of several proteins, amongst other type I collagen and elastin.
These structural proteins, as well as intermediate filament (IMF)
proteins like vimentin, are remodeled and dysregulated as part of
malignant changes. We investigated whether serum biomarkers reflecting
ECM and IMF remodeling/dysregulation could be used to differentiate lung
cancer patients from healthy controls, other lung pathologies, and other
cancer types.Methods: Levels of matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) generated
fragments of type I collagen (C1M), of elastin (ELM) and of citrullinated
vimentin (VICM) were measured in serum from patients with lung cancer
(n=40), gastrointestinal cancer (n=25), prostate cancer (n=14), malignant
melanoma (n=7), chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) (n=13), and
idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) (n=10), as well as in age-matched
controls (n=33). The area under the receiver operating characteristics
(AUROC) was calculated for the biomarkers and a diagnostic decision tree
was generated from specific cut-off values.Results: Circulating levels of
C1M and VICM were significantly elevated in lung cancer patients as
compared to healthy controls (AUROC=0.98, p<0.0001) and other cancers
(AUROC=0.83 p<0.0001). A trend was detected when comparing lung cancer
with COPD+IPF. No difference could be seen for ELM. Interestingly, C1M
and VICM were able to identify patients with lung cancer with a positive
predictive value of 0.9 and an odds ratio of 40 (95% CI=8.7-186,
p<0.0001).Conclusion: This study indentifies biomarkers specifically
reflecting ECM and IMF remodeling as applicable for lung cancer patients.
We speculate that these markers may aid in diagnosing and characterizing
patients with lung cancer.

