Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oral combined therapy with probiotics and alloantigen induces B
cell dependent long lasting specific tolerance


Background. Allogeneic hematopietic stem cell transplantation (aHSCT) is
widely used for the treatment of hematologic malignancies. Although aHSCT
provides a good response against the malignant cells (GVL), it also leads
to the development of graft-versus-host disease (GVHD), a severe disease
with high mortality and morbidity rates. Therapy for GVHD is commonly
based on non-specific immunosupression of the transplanted recipient,
resulting in the concomitant inhibition of the GVL effect. Material and
Methods. Here we propose an alternative approach to specifically suppress
GVHD, while sparing the GVL, based on oral treatment of transplant donors
with recipient antigens, associated with the intake of probiotic
Lactococcus lactis as tolerogenic adjuvant (combined therapy). Results.
We show that treatment of C57Bl/6 donor mice with combined therapy before
the transplant protects the recipients F1 (C57Bl/6XBAL/c) mice from
clinical and pathological manifestations of disease, resulting in 100%
survival rate. Importantly, the animals keep the immunological competence
maintaining the GVL response as well as the response to third party
antigens. The protection is specific, long lasting and dependent on donor
IL-10 sufficient B cells activity which induces regulatory T cells in the
host. Conclusion. These data suggest that combined therapy is a promising
strategy for prevention of GVHD with preservation of GVL, opening new
possibilities to treat human patients subjected transplantation.Note:
This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

