Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clinical significance of mucinous production in rectal cancer
after preoperative chemoradiotherapy


Background: Mucinous adenocarcinoma (MA) is a relatively rare
histological subtype of colorectal cancer, in which more than 50% of the
tumor is occupied by extracellular mucin. MA has been reported to be
associated with poor response to neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy (CRT), but
the prognostic significance still remains to be evaluated. Here, we aimed
to analyze the prognostic significance of mucin production in the
response of rectal cancer to neoadjuvant CRT.Methods: The medical records
of 141 consecutive patients receiving rectal resection after neoadjuvant
CRT for the treatment of rectal cancer at our institution, in the period
between October 2003 and December 2012, were retrospectively reviewed.
For the histological evaluation, Hematoxylin-Eosin (HE) and Periodic Acid
Schiff/Alcian Blue (PAS/AB) stainings were used. Mucin production was
evaluated according to the proportion of the tumor area occupied by
extracellular mucin, and cases were sorted, according to the mucin
occupancy rate, into three groups, namely, low (0 - 5%), medium (5 - 25%)
and high (>25%).Results: The number of patients in the low, medium and
high mucin rate groups was 89 (63.1%), 28 (19.9%) and 24 (17.0%),
respectively. Only advanced tumor stage out of histological features had
a significant correlation with the high mucin rate group. Compared to the
low mucin rate group, patients in the high group had a worse prognosis in
disease free survival, and also a worse prognosis in distant recurrence
free survival, compared to the medium group, while no significant
difference was observed among the three groups in overall and local
recurrence-free survivals. Multivariate analysis showed that the high
mucin rate group had an independent association with shorter disease-free
survival, and those advanced stage tumors (T3 and T4) with a high mucin
rate had an independent association with shorter distant recurrence-free
survival.Conclusion: Mucinous production in rectal cancer may be
associated with resistance to neoadjuvant CRT. Thus, careful histological
analysis for the presence of extracellular mucin should be indicated for
rectal patients receiving neoadjuvant CRT, and those cases with high
mucin rate (> 25% mucinous component) should be closely followed-up.

