Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PTEN mutations correlate with relapse risk in pediatric T-cell
lymphoblastic lymphoma patients: Validation of whole exome sequencing
results


Prognosis of T-cell lymphoblastic lymphoma (T-LBL) in children and
adolescents is poor in case of relapse, but pathogenetic knowledge of the
disease which may lead to the establishment of prognostic parameters is
still extremely limited. Recently, it was reported that molecular
aberrations like NOTCH1 mutations or loss of heterozygosity at chromosome
6q (LOH6q) significantly correlate with relapse risk and survival in
patients with T-LBL treated according to NHL-BFM protocols. PI3-kinase
(PI3K) consists of two subunits (PIK3R1 and PIK3CA); its activity is
repressed by the tumor suppressor PTEN. Mutations in PIK3R1, PIK3CA and
PTEN leading to increased cell proliferation have been reported for
different cancer types. Next generation sequencing (NGS) technologies
facilitate in-depth genome-wide insight into different types of cancer.
We performed NGS of pediatric T-LBL patients and validated results
regarding the PI3K pathway in a large cohort of patients with respect to
mutational frequencies and prognostic relevance.We analyzed five
pediatric T-LBL cases by whole exome sequencing. A total of 107 cases
were available for validation of candidate genes. All patients were
treated according to NHL-BFM regimen for LBL.A lymphoma-specific
aberration in PIK3R1 was identified via whole exome sequencing and
verified by Sanger sequencing. Mutation frequencies in selected exons of
PIK3R1, PIK3CA and PTEN were investigated in 107 cases. Five patients
(5%) showed mutations in PIK3R1, 7 (7%) in PIK3CA, and 16 (15%) in PTEN.
In 22% of the cases (24/107), mutations in at least one of the genes
could be detected. These aberrations correlated with inferior probability
of event-free survival (pEFS) in the analyzed cohort (pEFS at 5 years
0.800.05 vs. 0.610.10; pPrognosis of T-cell lymphoblastic lymphoma
(T-LBL) in children and adolescents is poor in case of relapse, but
pathogenetic knowledge of the disease which may lead to the establishment
of prognostic parameters is still extremely limited. Recently, it was
reported that molecular aberrations like NOTCH1 mutations or loss of
heterozygosity at chromosome 6q (LOH6q) significantly correlate with
relapse risk and survival in patients with T-LBL treated according to
NHL-BFM protocols. PI3-kinase (PI3K) consists of two subunits (PIK3R1 and
PIK3CA); its activity is repressed by the tumor suppressor PTEN.
Mutations in PIK3R1, PIK3CA and PTEN leading to increased cell
proliferation have been reported for different cancer types. Next
generation sequencing (NGS) technologies facilitate in-depth genome-wide
insight into different types of cancer. We performed NGS of pediatric
T-LBL patients and validated results regarding the PI3K pathway in a
large cohort of patients with respect to mutational frequencies and
prognostic relevance.We analyzed five pediatric T-LBL cases by whole
exome sequencing. A total of 107 cases were available for validation of
candidate genes. All patients were treated according to NHL-BFM regimen
for LBL.A lymphoma-specific aberration in PIK3R1 was identified via whole
exome sequencing and verified by Sanger sequencing. Mutation frequencies
in selected exons of PIK3R1, PIK3CA and PTEN were investigated in 107
cases. Five patients (5%) showed mutations in PIK3R1, 7 (7%) in PIK3CA,
and 16 (15%) in PTEN. In 22% of the cases (24/107), mutations in at least
one of the genes could be detected. These aberrations correlated with
inferior probability of event-free survival (pEFS) in the analyzed cohort
(pEFS at 5 years 0.800.05 vs. 0.610.10; p<0.02). This depended on
mutations in PTEN, as the effect was more prominent when these
aberrations were considered separately (pEFS 0.800.04 vs. 0.530.13;
pPrognosis of T-cell lymphoblastic lymphoma (T-LBL) in children and
adolescents is poor in case of relapse, but pathogenetic knowledge of the
disease which may lead to the establishment of prognostic parameters is
still extremely limited. Recently, it was reported that molecular
aberrations like NOTCH1 mutations or loss of heterozygosity at chromosome
6q (LOH6q) significantly correlate with relapse risk and survival in
patients with T-LBL treated according to NHL-BFM protocols. PI3-kinase
(PI3K) consists of two subunits (PIK3R1 and PIK3CA); its activity is
repressed by the tumor suppressor PTEN. Mutations in PIK3R1, PIK3CA and
PTEN leading to increased cell proliferation have been reported for
different cancer types. Next generation sequencing (NGS) technologies
facilitate in-depth genome-wide insight into different types of cancer.
We performed NGS of pediatric T-LBL patients and validated results
regarding the PI3K pathway in a large cohort of patients with respect to
mutational frequencies and prognostic relevance.We analyzed five
pediatric T-LBL cases by whole exome sequencing. A total of 107 cases
were available for validation of candidate genes. All patients were
treated according to NHL-BFM regimen for LBL.A lymphoma-specific
aberration in PIK3R1 was identified via whole exome sequencing and
verified by Sanger sequencing. Mutation frequencies in selected exons of
PIK3R1, PIK3CA and PTEN were investigated in 107 cases. Five patients
(5%) showed mutations in PIK3R1, 7 (7%) in PIK3CA, and 16 (15%) in PTEN.
In 22% of the cases (24/107), mutations in at least one of the genes
could be detected. These aberrations correlated with inferior probability
of event-free survival (pEFS) in the analyzed cohort (pEFS at 5 years
0.800.05 vs. 0.610.10; p<0.02). This depended on mutations in PTEN, as
the effect was more prominent when these aberrations were considered
separately (pEFS 0.800.04 vs. 0.530.13; p<0.005).Although PTEN is
reported to be transcriptionally repressed by NOTCH1, NOTCH1 mutations
seem to set off the negative effect of PTEN mutations on outcome instead
of acting synergistically in T-LBL. The pEFS of patients with mutations
in both genes was 0.880.12 (N=10), whereas patients with mutations in
PTEN, but wild-type NOTCH1 (N=6), displayed a significantly inferior pEFS
compared to all other patients (0.170.15 vs. 0.800.04; pPrognosis of
T-cell lymphoblastic lymphoma (T-LBL) in children and adolescents is poor
in case of relapse, but pathogenetic knowledge of the disease which may
lead to the establishment of prognostic parameters is still extremely
limited. Recently, it was reported that molecular aberrations like NOTCH1
mutations or loss of heterozygosity at chromosome 6q (LOH6q)
significantly correlate with relapse risk and survival in patients with
T-LBL treated according to NHL-BFM protocols. PI3-kinase (PI3K) consists
of two subunits (PIK3R1 and PIK3CA); its activity is repressed by the
tumor suppressor PTEN. Mutations in PIK3R1, PIK3CA and PTEN leading to
increased cell proliferation have been reported for different cancer
types. Next generation sequencing (NGS) technologies facilitate in-depth
genome-wide insight into different types of cancer. We performed NGS of
pediatric T-LBL patients and validated results regarding the PI3K pathway
in a large cohort of patients with respect to mutational frequencies and
prognostic relevance.We analyzed five pediatric T-LBL cases by whole
exome sequencing. A total of 107 cases were available for validation of
candidate genes. All patients were treated according to NHL-BFM regimen
for LBL.A lymphoma-specific aberration in PIK3R1 was identified via whole
exome sequencing and verified by Sanger sequencing. Mutation frequencies
in selected exons of PIK3R1, PIK3CA and PTEN were investigated in 107
cases. Five patients (5%) showed mutations in PIK3R1, 7 (7%) in PIK3CA,
and 16 (15%) in PTEN. In 22% of the cases (24/107), mutations in at least
one of the genes could be detected. These aberrations correlated with
inferior probability of event-free survival (pEFS) in the analyzed cohort
(pEFS at 5 years 0.800.05 vs. 0.610.10; p<0.02). This depended on
mutations in PTEN, as the effect was more prominent when these
aberrations were considered separately (pEFS 0.800.04 vs. 0.530.13;
p<0.005).Although PTEN is reported to be transcriptionally repressed by
NOTCH1, NOTCH1 mutations seem to set off the negative effect of PTEN
mutations on outcome instead of acting synergistically in T-LBL. The pEFS
of patients with mutations in both genes was 0.880.12 (N=10), whereas
patients with mutations in PTEN, but wild-type NOTCH1 (N=6), displayed a
significantly inferior pEFS compared to all other patients (0.170.15 vs.
0.800.04; p<0.0001). Moreover, in a Cox regression model with LOH6q,
NOTCH1, PTEN and an interaction term (NOTCH1 WT/PTEN mutated) only the
interaction was significant (p=0.001).Thus, we identified mutations in
PTEN as another molecular parameter which is significantly associated
with prognosis in pediatric T-LBL patients treated according to NHL-BFM
protocols. Validation studies on larger series are needed to evaluate the
genetic interplay of these alterations and their impact on pediatric
T-LBL pathogenesis.

