Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The allelic variants of Dock9 contribute to urethane-induced lung
tumor susceptibility


Mouse lung tumors have histological and molecular features similar to
human lung adenocarcinomas. Several lung tumor susceptibility loci have
been identified through genome-wide association analysis in laboratory
inbred mice. In this study, we employed a powerful strategy for
association mapping that combines classic inbred strains for mapping
resolution and additional recombinant inbred strains for enhanced mapping
power. We performed a whole-genome association analysis for
urethane-induced lung tumor multiplicity with 211,768 SNPs from 21
laboratory inbred mouse strains and 35 recombinant inbred strains (19 AB
and 16 BA, derived from susceptible strain A/J and resistant strain
C57BL/6J) and identified two genomic regions, each having at least one
SNP strongly associated with urethane-induced lung tumor susceptibility
(PMouse lung tumors have histological and molecular features similar to
human lung adenocarcinomas. Several lung tumor susceptibility loci have
been identified through genome-wide association analysis in laboratory
inbred mice. In this study, we employed a powerful strategy for
association mapping that combines classic inbred strains for mapping
resolution and additional recombinant inbred strains for enhanced mapping
power. We performed a whole-genome association analysis for
urethane-induced lung tumor multiplicity with 211,768 SNPs from 21
laboratory inbred mouse strains and 35 recombinant inbred strains (19 AB
and 16 BA, derived from susceptible strain A/J and resistant strain
C57BL/6J) and identified two genomic regions, each having at least one
SNP strongly associated with urethane-induced lung tumor susceptibility
(P<10-5). The most significant one (-log(P) = 6.8) co-localized with a
major and previously identified locus of mouse Pulmonary Adenoma
Susceptibility (Pas1) on the distal region of chromosome 6 and was
refined to a region of Mouse lung tumors have histological and molecular
features similar to human lung adenocarcinomas. Several lung tumor
susceptibility loci have been identified through genome-wide association
analysis in laboratory inbred mice. In this study, we employed a powerful
strategy for association mapping that combines classic inbred strains for
mapping resolution and additional recombinant inbred strains for enhanced
mapping power. We performed a whole-genome association analysis for
urethane-induced lung tumor multiplicity with 211,768 SNPs from 21
laboratory inbred mouse strains and 35 recombinant inbred strains (19 AB
and 16 BA, derived from susceptible strain A/J and resistant strain
C57BL/6J) and identified two genomic regions, each having at least one
SNP strongly associated with urethane-induced lung tumor susceptibility
(P<10-5). The most significant one (-log(P) = 6.8) co-localized with a
major and previously identified locus of mouse Pulmonary Adenoma
Susceptibility (Pas1) on the distal region of chromosome 6 and was
refined to a region of <0.5 Mb in which at least two genes Kras2 and
Casc1 are strong candidates. The second region we identified is on distal
mouse chromosome 14. This locus spans about 700 kb (121.45-122.15 Mb) and
includes four candidate genes including Farp1, Slk24, Slc15a1 and Dock9.
The marker rs30937139 shows the strongest evidence of association is
located within Dock9 (P = 3.94 10-6). Analysis of the genome sequences of
17 common mouse strains revealed that Dock9 carries a non-synonymous SNP
in codon 1610 and this corresponds to a non-synomous change of arginine
(CGG) in tumor susceptible strains, to Proline (CCG) in tumor resistant
strains. The non-synonymous SNP that is significantly associated with the
risk of lung cancer at codon 1610 (encoding a proline) is highly
conserved across 20 different species. All tumor resistant mouse strains
(such as C57BL/6J and 129S1/SvImJ) take the Dock9-resistance allele, ie.
proline at codon 1610, while all the tumor susceptible strains (such as
A/J and BALB/cByJ) take the Dock9 susceptible allele, i.e arginine at
codon 1610. It suggests that 1610R SNP is a causal genetic variant that
confers increased lung cancer risk. Tissue microarrays of 70 lung
adenocarcinoma patients were done to examine DOCK9 expression in normal
and tumor tissues by immunohistochemistry. Higher expression in tumor
tissues than that in their matched normal tissues was identified in 53/58
(91.4%) patients (P=2.410-12). DOCK9 was localized mainly to epithelial
tumor cells, but not normal epithelial cells. GST-CRIB (Cdc42 binding
domain of PAK) pulldown assay showed that Dock9-1610P reduce GEF activity
for Cdc42 compared to Dock9-1610R. These data suggest that Dock9 allelic
variants may influence urethane-induced lung tumor susceptibility and
play a tumorigenic role in lung cancer through activation of Cdc42.

