Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synergy between an engineered cytokine, NKTR-214, and CTLA-4
blockade in murine colon and breast tumor models


Background: Immunotherapy offers the potential for durable responses in a
growing list of cancer indications. NKTR-214 is comprised of the cytokine
IL2 conjugated o multiple PEG units. Upon in vivo administration some of
these PEG molecules are released to leave activated IL2-conjugates that
bind selectively at the IL2 receptor beta subunit (IL2R). The active
IL-2-conjugates favor proliferation of tumor-killing CD8+ memory T cells
(CD8T) over immunosuppressive regulatory T cells (Treg) in the tumor
microenvironment (Charych, JCO 2013, 31:15, Suppl. 1).We have also shown
that NKTR-214 results in sustained exposure of drug in the tumor and
robust immune system activation that translates between rodents and
monkeys at safe doses, (AACR; Mol Cancer Ther 2013;12 (11 Suppl):
Abstract B296). The receptor selectivity and improved pharmacokinetic
profile leads to substantially improved single-agent efficacy and safety
over the original IL-2 cytokine. Combinations of different checkpoint
blockade antibodies have shown great promise clinically and in
preclinical tumor models, highlighting the importance of targeting
multiple immune activation pathways. Here we examine the combination of
NKTR-214 with anti-CTLA4 antibody in murine breast and colon tumor models
to explore the interaction of two mechanisms of action: checkpoint
inhibition and direct CD8T cell activation via the IL-2 receptor
beta.Methods: Female BALB/c mice bearing established tumors implanted
with CT-26 (Murine Colon Carcinoma) or EMT6 (Murine Mammary Carcinoma)
cells were treated with single agent NKTR-214, murine anti-CTLA-4
antibody or the two agents in combination. NKTR-214 was administered at
0.8 mg/kg i.v. and anti-CTLA-4 at 100 g/mouse i.p.Results: In both the
EMT6 breast and the CT-26 colon models, the combination of NKTR-214 with
anti-CTLA-4 yielded significantly better tumor growth inhibition compared
to either agent dosed alone. In the EMT6 model 10/12 animals were tumor
free by day 20 in the combination arm and stayed tumor free until the end
of study (60 days). Similarly in the CT-26 model, 8/12 animals were tumor
free by day 25 in the combination arm and stayed tumor free until the end
of study (day 60). Single agent anti CTLA-4 or NKTR-214 did not show
significant tumor inhibition in either model. No toxicities were observed
when NKTR-214 was combined with anti CTLA-4 antibody.Conclusions:
NKTR-214 is a highly differentiated immunotherapy with a new mechanism of
action that shows efficacy both as a single agent (as previously shown in
a mouse melanoma model) and in combination. Combining NKTR-214 mediated T
cell activation with CTLA-4 blockade is highly synergistic in murine
models of cancer and holds the promise for durable responses in patients.

