Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel biisoquinoimidazolium-derivatives for breast cancer therapy


Breast cancer is the most frequently diagnosed cancer in women. This
cancer is classified according to its expression of hormone/growth factor
receptors. It is divided into three groups: (i) Estrogen receptor (ER)
and progesterone receptor (PR)-positive; (ii) Human epidermal growth
factor receptor 2 (HER2)-positive; and (iii) ER, PR, and HER2-negative
(triple-negative). Most chemotherapeutic anti-cancer drugs used in the
clinical practice include an anti-estrogenic agent that interferes with
ER and prevents tumor progression; however, it is still a big challenge
to manage the triple-negative breast tumors. Mitosis and other distinct
pathways of apoptosis are considered as a potential target for the
development of novel anti-mitotic drugs. In the present investigation, we
designed the biisoquinoimidazoliums class of drugs which is structurally
similar to anti-mitotic drugs. We synthesized various derivatives of
biisoquinoimidazoliums, tested their potency, and suitability as
therapeutic agents in preclinical biological system using clonogenic
assay. Results showed a strong growth inhibitory effect of these
compounds on both triple-positive and triple-negative breast cancer cell
lines in the following order: DHO2-93-1 DHO2-85-3 DHO2-75-3 DHO2-85-1.
DH02-75-1 also showed some activity, while DHO2-75-2 and DHO2-107-1 did
not show any growth inhibitory effect on these cells. From these results,
we concluded that DHO2-93-1 may have therapeutic implication as a novel
anti-tumor drug for the intervention of both triple-positive and
triple-negative breast cancers.

