Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovery of small molecule inhibitors of the interaction between
PPAR and SMRT


The gamma isoform of the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
(PPAR) is a ligand-activated nuclear hormone receptor that plays central
roles in regulating adipogenesis and maintaining lipid and glucose
homeostasis. PPAR is the molecular target for the thiazolidinedione (TZD)
class of antidiabetic drugs. While clinically efficacious, the TZDs
exhibit significant side effects that are mechanistically linked to PPAR
including weight gain, edema, and heart failure. SMRT (silencing mediator
of retinoid acid and thyroid hormone receptor) and NCoR (nuclear receptor
corepressor) are transcriptional corepressors that are critical for
normal PPAR function and act by repressing PPAR-mediated transcriptional
activity in the absence of agonist ligands. In order to explore an
alternate method of activating PPAR signaling, we designed a biochemical
assay for the purpose of high-throughput screening (HTS) to identify
inhibitors of the interaction between PPAR and corepressors from our
in-house library compounds (292K), which might act as pharmacological
agonists. Herein, we report the use of this method to discover small
molecule inhibitors of the corepressor interaction with PPAR. Following
hit validation and evaluation, we identified small molecule inhibitors
acting through this novel mechanism that potently induce a cellular
response similar to the known PPAR agonist rosiglitazone. In addition, we
also confirmed that our hit compound revealed induced adipogenesis in
3T3-L1 cell and reduced fat storage in C.elegans model. These findings
highlight the potential of targeting the interaction of PPAR and SMRT for
the discovery of small molecule agonists of PPAR.

