Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Attacking EGFR mutant lung cancer by combined EGFR and c-Met
inhibition


In lung adenocarcinomas, targeted therapy with the EGFR tyrosine kinase
inhibitors (TKIs) erlotinib and gefitinib is associated with longer
progression free survival (PFS). However, despite the initial success,
all patients progress with a median PFS of 12 to 16 months. Acquired
resistance is driven by the occurrence of a secondary EGFR mutation
(T790M) in about 50% of the cases and by c-Met amplification in 5 to 10 %
of the cases. We report the activity of a new reversible and
ATP-competitive c-Met inhibitor, EMD1214063, in the setting of primary
lung adenocarcinomas harboring EGFR activating mutations and in two
models of acquired resistance. EMD1214063 showed to be specifically
active in c-Met amplified and c-Met dependent cells in a large panel of
genotypically characterized lung cancer cell lines. In the context of
acquired resistance, we studied the effect of EMD1214063 alone and in
combination of afatinib, an irreversible EGFR TKI, in PC9 cells (EGFR
Exon19del), H1975 cells (EGFR L858R and T790M), HCC827 (EGFR Exon19del,
not c-Met amplified) and in HCC827GR cells (EGFR Exon19del and c-Met
amplified). Treatment of HCC827GR cells with EMD1214063 resulted in
substantial growth inhibition and induced apoptosis. The in vitro results
showed a significant synergistic effect of the combination of EMD121039
and afatinib in the induction of growth inhibition in the context of
c-Met amplification and EGFR T790M mutation. Combination treatment
robustly suppressed expression of downstream pErk and pAkt, showing
efficient suppression of PI3K and MAPK signaling. To determine whether
the antitumor activity of the combination observed in vitro might also be
apparent in vivo, we injected these cells in nude mice to elicit the
formation of solid tumors. Mice were treated with EMD121043 (25mg/kg),
afatinib (10mg/kg) or the combination of both. In H1975 xenografts only
the combination therapy could significantly reduce tumor growth, thus
confirming the results obtained in vitro. In the c-Met amplified setting,
we treated mice harboring HCC827, HCC827GR and mixed xenografts.
HCC827-driven tumors strongly responded to both afatinib monotherapy and
to the combination, leading to complete remission within 40 days of
therapy. HCC827/HCC827GR mixed xenografts containing 0.1%, 1% and 10% of
HCC827GR cells partially responded to afatinib monotherapy; however,
growth was completely abolished by combination therapy. Treatment with
EMD1214063 led to significant growth reduction in mice harboring HCC827GR
tumors. In this model, only the combination therapy led to massive tumor
shrinkage. Assessment of cell proliferation in vivo by [18F]FLT-PET
showed a decline in FLT-uptake of 40% in both the combination therapy and
the EMD1214063 monotherapy. In conclusion, the combination of EMD1214063
and afatinib promote tumor regression in erlotinib acquired resistant
lung cancers driven by EGFR L858R/T790M or EGFR Exon19 del/c-Met
amplification.

