Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comparative combination cancer immunotherapy with vaccination,
checkpoint inhibition and TNFRSF stimulation


Therapeutic tumor immunity requires the presence and appropriate
activation of tumor antigen specific CD8+ T cells and migration of
activated tumor-antigen specific CD8+ T cells into a tumor
microenvironment where immunosuppressive barriers have been eliminated.
Antibody mediated blockade of CTLA-4 and PD-1 is a clinically effective
strategy to dampen tumor mediated immunosuppression in a minority of
patients with advanced cancer, and this approach may be potentiated
through vaccination to prime additional CTL clones and through direct
stimulation of T cell costimulatory molecules of the TNF superfamily.
Here we provide a systematic comparison of anti-tumor vaccination with
either heat shock protein gp96-Ig or traditional peptide/adjuvant
vaccines given alone or in combination with CTLA-4 or PD-1 blockade and
direct T cell costimulation via OX40, 4-1BB and TNFRSF25. Through the
tracking of tumor-antigen specific CD4+ and CD8+ T cell responses, these
studies demonstrate that both TNFRSF4 and TNFRSF25 independently and
additively costimulate vaccine induced CD8+ T cell proliferation
following both primary and secondary antigen challenge. In contrast, the
activity of TNFRSF4 and TNFRSF25 were observed to be divergent in the
costimulation of CD4+ T cell immunity. Interestingly, antigen-specific
cellular and humoral responses were uncoupled upon secondary
immunization, which was dramatically effected by the presence of OX40,
4-1BB or TNFRSF25 costimulation. When combined with checkpoint inhibition
in therapeutic murine orthotopic tumor models, synergistic anti-tumor
activity was observed with various triple combinations with vaccine,
checkpoint inhibition and T cell costimulation. These studies highlight
the complementary activity of vaccination, checkpoint inhibition and
direct T cell costimulation, which may guide the application of
combination immunotherapy for effective anti-tumor immunity.

