Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Constitutional BRCA1 methylation is a major predisposition factor
for high-grade serous ovarian cancer


This study aimed to determine whether constitutional methylation of the
BRCA1 promoter region was a predisposition factor for ovarian cancer. We
had previously shown that in a case control study of early-onset breast
cancer patients, the presence of constitutional BRCA1 methylation in the
blood was associated with tumors that phenocopied pathogenic germline
BRCA1 mutations, indicating that BRCA1 methylation predisposed to and
drove the development of these tumors. Germline BRCA1 mutations also
predispose to ovarian cancer, in particular, high-grade serous ovarian
cancer. In collaboration with the Australian Ovarian Cancer Study, we
determined the presence of detectable BRCA1 methylation in 154 high-grade
serous cancers. Twenty patients showed detectable levels of BRCA1
methylation in DNA extracted from their peripheral blood. Remarkably,
when the corresponding tumor samples were assessed for methylation, 14 of
the 20 that showed any methylation corresponded to a highly methylated
tumour. When tumors occurring before the age of 55 were considered, 9 of
the 10 bloods with detectable mutation corresponded to a strongly
methylated tumour. This study also determined the frequency of BRCA1 and
BRCA2 mutations. Fifteen women had germline BRCA1 mutations and 11 had
germline BRCA2 mutations. The germline BRCA1 mutation carriers were
predominantly younger at diagnosis and 11 pathogenic BRCA1 mutations were
seen in the under 55 group. BRCA1 methylation was mutually exclusive with
BRCA1 mutation. This data strongly suggests that constitutional BRCA1
methylation can drive ovarian cancer, in particular early onset ovarian
cancer, and moreover is as important a predisposition factor as BRCA1
mutation.

