Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Funding innovative technologies for cancer research at the
National Cancer Institute


In the fall of 2013, the National Cancer Institute re-launched the
Innovative Molecular Analysis Technologies (IMAT) program, committing up
to $10.5 million through unique funding mechanisms (3 year R21s and R33s)
to better support investigators through both the early and advanced
stages of technology development over traditional funding mechanisms for
exploratory research. The IMAT program has supported the development of
various analytical and sample processing platforms that have made
substantial contributions across the cancer research continuum, and the
process of winning an award remains highly competitive. A variety of
IMAT-supported research projects will be highlighted to demonstrate the
variety and high level of innovation evident in the IMAT portfolio of
supported research. An emphasis will be placed on recently completed
projects so that investigators interested in next generation tools may
become aware of possible developments through NCI-funded projects for
their research. In addition, trends from recently awarded projects will
be described to provide insight for potential applicants on the nature of
the program and the competition. Potential projects of interest and
identified technology gaps will also be discussed. The IMAT program
continues to represent a unique resource for highly innovative technology
development.

