Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An automatic pipeline to find and annotate rare subclonal somatic
variants in a paired tumor/normal sample


Identifying and characterizing somatic variants in deep genome sequence
data from tumor samples remains challenging and time-consuming. Of
special interest in cancer research and diagnostics is the detection and
annotation of rare subclonal somatic variants found only in a small
proportion of primary tumor cells. Such variants can drive tumor spread
and recurrence, but are often neglected in choosing treatments.Currently,
few tools reliably distinguish such rare subclonal variants from
sequencing errors. And even among real somatic variants, drivers (of
tumor growth, spread, or resistance) are hard to distinguish from
passengers. Doing so entails integrating diverse information on variants,
genes, pathways, cancer-relevant phenotypes, and treatments (including
insights on population allele frequencies and broader evolutionary
conservation; known/likely effects on gene product structure, function,
expression, and interaction; and relations among gene products,
phenotypes, and drugs). Software for effectively integrating such data in
light of genomic variation in samples, to highlight relevant findings
through clear visualization, has been a pressing need.Here we present an
end-to-end analysis workflow for finding and functionally characterizing
rare subclonal variants, using the newly developed CLC Cancer Research
Workbench to feed the interpretive platform of Ingenuity Variant
Analysis, to identify cancer driver mutations in paired tumor/normal
samples. We will show new interesting results from this analysis, which
were not shown beforehand on this publicly available cancer dataset (Case
Reports in Oncological Medicine, Volume 2013 (2013), Article ID 270362)
from a patient with massive acinic cell carcinoma.

