Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SOX2 promotes tumor growth via activation of the PI3K/Akt/mTORC1
signaling pathway in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma


Our previous study revealed that SOX2, a master regulator during
embryogenesis, is an amplification target of 3q26.3 in esophageal
squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) and that SOX2 promotes ESCC cell
proliferation. To identify the mechanisms by which SOX2 promotes
proliferation of ESCC cells, we assayed multiple signaling pathways
activated by SOX2 using a phosphoprotein array. We determined that SOX2
activated the AKT/mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1)
signaling pathway. Immunoblotting confirmed that SOX2 elevated levels of
p-AKT and levels of p-p70S6K and p-4E-BP1 which are direct targets of
mTORC1. Effects of SOX2 knockdown, including reduced levels of p-AKT and
decreased ESCC cell viability, were reversed with constitutive activation
of AKT with PTEN knockdown. SOX2 also promoted in vivo tumor growth of
ESCC with AKT/mTORC1 activation in mouse xenografts. LY294002, a PI3K
inhibitor, suppressed the ability of SOX2 to enhance tumor growth of ESCC
by reducing cell proliferation. Furthermore, tissue microarray analysis
showed a positive correlation between expression levels of SOX2 and p-AKT
in 61 primary ESCC tumors. Our results suggest that SOX2 promotes ESCC
tumor growth via activation of the PI3K/AKT / mTORC1 signaling pathway,
which enhances cell proliferation.

