Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of somatic mutations and copy number alterations in
metastatic high-grade ovarian cancer


Background: The extent to which metastatic tumors further evolve by
accumulating additional mutations is unclear and has yet to be
systematically addressed using next-generation sequencing in high-grade
serous ovarian cancer.Methods: During cytoreductive surgery prior to
chemotherapy, 11 spatially separated tumor samples from primary tumor and
associated metastatic sites with 2 normal samples were obtained. Whole
exome sequencing and copy number analysis were performed and multiplex
PCR followed by ultra-deep resequencing was used for validation.
Especially, omental samples were sequenced with high depth of coverage
(200x).Phylogenetic tree was built to explore the evolutionary
relationship between samples.Results: Only 6% of all somatic mutations
were present in every sample of a given case with TP53 gene as the only
known mutant gene consistently present in all samples. Two non-spatial
clusters of primary samples (cluster 1 and 2), and a cluster of
metastatic samples (cluster M) were identified. The patterns of mutations
indicate that cluster M was originated from cluster 1, and that cluster 2
was diverged from a portion of right fimbriae in cluster 1 at the early
phase of tumorigenesis. No significant metastatic sample-specific
mutations or copy number changes were detected.Conclusion: Our results
showed that high level of intratumor heterogeneity was evident in a
high-grade serous ovarian cancer. Moreover, we showed that transcoelomic
metastasis arises with little accumulation of somatic mutations or copy
number alterations.

