Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel bispecific Fap-Dr5 antibody inducing potent and
tumor-specific death receptor 5 (Dr5) activation by fibroblast activation
protein (Fap)-dependent crosslinking


Background:Activation of the extrinsic apoptosis pathway in tumor cells
through agonistic death receptor 5 (DR5) antibodies has been evaluated in
the clinic with limited success so far. In this context, several reports
show that DR5 activation is strongly dependent on receptor
hyperclustering on the cell surface. Therefore a therapeutic principle
that induces DR5 hyperclustering specifically at the tumor site may
provide superior efficacy, potency and safety compared to conventional
DR5 agonistic antibodies. Fibroblast activation protein (FAP) is a marker
for activated fibroblasts and abundantly expressed in cancer associated
fibroblasts of various epithelial tumor indications and as a tumor
antigen on tumors of mesenchymal origin. Due to its relative absence from
normal tissues, FAP can be used as a tumor targeting antigen. Here, we
are using the broad expression of FAP in tumor stroma for crosslinking of
DR5 by a bispecific antibody.Aim:In order to achieve superior tumor
targeting and tumor located DR5 hyperclustering we have generated a
bispecific antibody, RG7386, comprised of an agonistic DR5 binder and a
FAP targeting moiety.Results:RG7386 shows potent and selective binding to
FAP and DR5 and can simultaneously bind to both targets. In in vitro
co-culture assays, using human DLD-1 colon cancer cells and FAP
expressing fibroblasts, RG7386 induces potent, FAP dependent DR5
hyperclustering and apoptosis induction in DR5 positive tumor cells
(IC50: 0.05 nM). In preclinical in vivo models with co-injection of DLD-1
tumor cells and fibroblasts as well as patient-derived colorectal cancer
models, RG7386 shows FAP dependent efficacy and apoptosis induction
superior to conventional DR5 antibodies. Furthermore the superior
induction of apoptosis could be confirmed by in vivo and ex vivo analysis
of cleaved Caspase-3 with imaging, Luminex and
histopathology.Conclusion:RG7386 is a promising novel therapeutic entity
for the treatment of solid tumors with FAP positive tumor stroma inducing
DR5 activation by FAP dependent DR5 hypercrosslinking which results in
potent anti-tumor activity.

