Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cdk5 involves in interleukin-6 induces AR activation through
phosphorylation of serine 727 Stat3 and serine 81 AR in prostate cancer
cells


Signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (Stat3), a common
transcription factor, has been reported to regulate cancer development,
including prostate cancer. Stat3 has also been suggested that its
transcriptional activity is initiated by phosphorylation. The tyrosine
705 (Y705) and serine 727 (S727) phosphorylation of Stat3 were documented
to Stat3 activation. Androgen receptor (AR) is a ligand-activated
transcription factor that mediates the biological responses of androgens.
Cyclin-dependent kinase 5 (Cdk5), which belongs to Cdk family, is a
proline-directed serine/threonine kinase. Our previous results indicate
that Cdk5 may phosphorylate AR at serine 81 site (S81) and increase AR
stabilization and transactivation. On the other hand, previous studies
have shown that Interleukin-6 (IL-6), which is a cytokine, activates
androgen receptor (AR) via MAPK and Stat3-related pathway. Therefore, the
aim of this study is to investigate if Cdk5 regulates S81
phosphorylation-related AR activation through S727 Stat3 phosphorylation
under IL-6 treatment. First we observed IL-6 enhanced S727
phosphorylation of Stat3 and S81 phosphorylation of AR as well as AR
protein level. Next, IL-6 increased AR biochemical interaction with Stat3
and AR stabilization, nuclear localization, and transactivation, which is
correlated to S727 phosphorylation of Stat3. Subsequently, we found that
IL-6 induced tyrosine 15 (Y15) phosphorylation of Cdk5, which is an
indicator of Cdk5 activation, and this phosphorylation was inhibited by
AG490 (JAK inhibitor). We also found that Y15-Cdk5 mutant (Y15F)
decreased IL-6-induced phosphorylation of AR S81 and Stat3 S727 and the
biochemical interaction between AR and Stat3 was also affected. In
summary, these results suggest that IL-6 activated AR by S81
phosphorylation via S727 phosphorylation of Stat3 and Cdk5 might be an
upstream regulator in the pathway.

