Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metabolic influences of pancreatic tumor microenvironment on
pancreatic cancer cell's metabolism


Pancreatic cancer, the most lethal of solid tumors, is associated with a
five-year survival rate and high mortality. The lethality of this tumor
stems from lack of early symptoms, inability for detection of cancerous
pancreatic lesions, and a diagnosis window that is accompanied by tumor
resistance and metastasis. The bulk of the tumor mass, the fibrotic
stroma, has been deemed an active player in the initiation and
progression of pancreatic ductal adinocarcinoma (PDAC). A number of
studies have elucidated the interactions between stromal cells and
pancreatic cancer cells (PCCs), and the extracellular matrix (ECM) and
PCCs. However, the role of the tumor microenvironment on the metabolic
machinery of PCCs remains an active field of investigation. In this
study, we investigate the effect of pancreatic stellate cells (PSCs),
cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs), with or without ECM components, in
a two-dimensional or three-dimensional setting on the glycolytic and
mitochondrial pathways of patient-derived PCCs. The modulation of the
expression levels of metabolic enzymes by the tumor microenvironment was
also investigated. The metabolic reprogramming induced in PCCs by normal
and reactive pancreatic stroma was investigated by isotopomer flux
analysis. Our results reveal that pancreatic reactive stroma
differentially upregulates glutamine and arginine metabolism in PCCs. The
insights obtained from our work will lead to the development of targeted
therapies for stroma and pancreatic cancer cells.

