Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Olaparib and veliparib as effective PARP inhibitors for cancer
prevention in a BRCA1-deficient mouse model


An inherited mutation in the BRCA1 gene leads to genomic instability and
those with this mutation have a 50-80% risk for developing breast cancer
by age 70. Though bilateral prophylactic mastectomy and surveillance are
viable options for this high-risk population, chemoprevention may serve
as a good alternative strategy. BRCA1 functions to repair double stranded
DNA breaks via homologous recombination and as such, BRCA1 mutations
force the cells to rely on other DNA repair mechanisms such as base
excision repair, a process which requires Poly ADP ribose polymerase
(PARP). Thus, PARP inhibition in BRCA1-deficient cells may induce
apoptosis in these cells, which would otherwise develop into a tumor,
while leaving normal cells intact. Olaparib and veliparib are promising
PARP inhibitors that are currently in clinical trials for breast cancer
treatment; however, their role in cancer prevention has not been
examined. Hence, this study evaluated the effect of these PARP inhibitors
in chemoprevention in the BrcaCo/Co;MMTV-Cre;p53+/- mouse model. Mice
were fed continuously with olaparib (200 mg/kg diet) or veliparib (100
mg/kg diet) and tumor development was assessed. Both olaparib and
veliparib significantly delayed tumor development by 6.5 and 2.4 weeks
respectively (pAn inherited mutation in the BRCA1 gene leads to genomic
instability and those with this mutation have a 50-80% risk for
developing breast cancer by age 70. Though bilateral prophylactic
mastectomy and surveillance are viable options for this high-risk
population, chemoprevention may serve as a good alternative strategy.
BRCA1 functions to repair double stranded DNA breaks via homologous
recombination and as such, BRCA1 mutations force the cells to rely on
other DNA repair mechanisms such as base excision repair, a process which
requires Poly ADP ribose polymerase (PARP). Thus, PARP inhibition in
BRCA1-deficient cells may induce apoptosis in these cells, which would
otherwise develop into a tumor, while leaving normal cells intact.
Olaparib and veliparib are promising PARP inhibitors that are currently
in clinical trials for breast cancer treatment; however, their role in
cancer prevention has not been examined. Hence, this study evaluated the
effect of these PARP inhibitors in chemoprevention in the
BrcaCo/Co;MMTV-Cre;p53+/- mouse model. Mice were fed continuously with
olaparib (200 mg/kg diet) or veliparib (100 mg/kg diet) and tumor
development was assessed. Both olaparib and veliparib significantly
delayed tumor development by 6.5 and 2.4 weeks respectively (p<0.05)
compared to their controls but olaparib was more effective than
veliparib. To determine the lowest dose required for prevention, a dose
de-escalation study was done and tumor development was assessed in mice
fed with 100, 50, or 25 mg/kg of olaparib in diet. Tumor development was
significantly delayed by 3.2 and 3.5 weeks (pAn inherited mutation in the
BRCA1 gene leads to genomic instability and those with this mutation have
a 50-80% risk for developing breast cancer by age 70. Though bilateral
prophylactic mastectomy and surveillance are viable options for this
high-risk population, chemoprevention may serve as a good alternative
strategy. BRCA1 functions to repair double stranded DNA breaks via
homologous recombination and as such, BRCA1 mutations force the cells to
rely on other DNA repair mechanisms such as base excision repair, a
process which requires Poly ADP ribose polymerase (PARP). Thus, PARP
inhibition in BRCA1-deficient cells may induce apoptosis in these cells,
which would otherwise develop into a tumor, while leaving normal cells
intact. Olaparib and veliparib are promising PARP inhibitors that are
currently in clinical trials for breast cancer treatment; however, their
role in cancer prevention has not been examined. Hence, this study
evaluated the effect of these PARP inhibitors in chemoprevention in the
BrcaCo/Co;MMTV-Cre;p53+/- mouse model. Mice were fed continuously with
olaparib (200 mg/kg diet) or veliparib (100 mg/kg diet) and tumor
development was assessed. Both olaparib and veliparib significantly
delayed tumor development by 6.5 and 2.4 weeks respectively (p<0.05)
compared to their controls but olaparib was more effective than
veliparib. To determine the lowest dose required for prevention, a dose
de-escalation study was done and tumor development was assessed in mice
fed with 100, 50, or 25 mg/kg of olaparib in diet. Tumor development was
significantly delayed by 3.2 and 3.5 weeks (p<0.05) in mice fed with 50
and 100 mg/kg of olaparib diets respectively compared to their controls.
To circumvent the possibility of drug resistance and adverse drug
reaction from prolonged use of olaparib, an intermittent dosing regimen
was examined where mice cycled through 200 mg/kg of olaparib diet for 2
weeks followed by a 4-week rest period of control diet. Intermittent
treatment with olaparib significantly delayed tumor development by 5.7
weeks (pAn inherited mutation in the BRCA1 gene leads to genomic
instability and those with this mutation have a 50-80% risk for
developing breast cancer by age 70. Though bilateral prophylactic
mastectomy and surveillance are viable options for this high-risk
population, chemoprevention may serve as a good alternative strategy.
BRCA1 functions to repair double stranded DNA breaks via homologous
recombination and as such, BRCA1 mutations force the cells to rely on
other DNA repair mechanisms such as base excision repair, a process which
requires Poly ADP ribose polymerase (PARP). Thus, PARP inhibition in
BRCA1-deficient cells may induce apoptosis in these cells, which would
otherwise develop into a tumor, while leaving normal cells intact.
Olaparib and veliparib are promising PARP inhibitors that are currently
in clinical trials for breast cancer treatment; however, their role in
cancer prevention has not been examined. Hence, this study evaluated the
effect of these PARP inhibitors in chemoprevention in the
BrcaCo/Co;MMTV-Cre;p53+/- mouse model. Mice were fed continuously with
olaparib (200 mg/kg diet) or veliparib (100 mg/kg diet) and tumor
development was assessed. Both olaparib and veliparib significantly
delayed tumor development by 6.5 and 2.4 weeks respectively (p<0.05)
compared to their controls but olaparib was more effective than
veliparib. To determine the lowest dose required for prevention, a dose
de-escalation study was done and tumor development was assessed in mice
fed with 100, 50, or 25 mg/kg of olaparib in diet. Tumor development was
significantly delayed by 3.2 and 3.5 weeks (p<0.05) in mice fed with 50
and 100 mg/kg of olaparib diets respectively compared to their controls.
To circumvent the possibility of drug resistance and adverse drug
reaction from prolonged use of olaparib, an intermittent dosing regimen
was examined where mice cycled through 200 mg/kg of olaparib diet for 2
weeks followed by a 4-week rest period of control diet. Intermittent
treatment with olaparib significantly delayed tumor development by 5.7
weeks (p<0.05), which was almost as effective as continuous olaparib
treatment. BrdU staining revealed that olaparib significantly reduced
proliferation (pAn inherited mutation in the BRCA1 gene leads to genomic
instability and those with this mutation have a 50-80% risk for
developing breast cancer by age 70. Though bilateral prophylactic
mastectomy and surveillance are viable options for this high-risk
population, chemoprevention may serve as a good alternative strategy.
BRCA1 functions to repair double stranded DNA breaks via homologous
recombination and as such, BRCA1 mutations force the cells to rely on
other DNA repair mechanisms such as base excision repair, a process which
requires Poly ADP ribose polymerase (PARP). Thus, PARP inhibition in
BRCA1-deficient cells may induce apoptosis in these cells, which would
otherwise develop into a tumor, while leaving normal cells intact.
Olaparib and veliparib are promising PARP inhibitors that are currently
in clinical trials for breast cancer treatment; however, their role in
cancer prevention has not been examined. Hence, this study evaluated the
effect of these PARP inhibitors in chemoprevention in the
BrcaCo/Co;MMTV-Cre;p53+/- mouse model. Mice were fed continuously with
olaparib (200 mg/kg diet) or veliparib (100 mg/kg diet) and tumor
development was assessed. Both olaparib and veliparib significantly
delayed tumor development by 6.5 and 2.4 weeks respectively (p<0.05)
compared to their controls but olaparib was more effective than
veliparib. To determine the lowest dose required for prevention, a dose
de-escalation study was done and tumor development was assessed in mice
fed with 100, 50, or 25 mg/kg of olaparib in diet. Tumor development was
significantly delayed by 3.2 and 3.5 weeks (p<0.05) in mice fed with 50
and 100 mg/kg of olaparib diets respectively compared to their controls.
To circumvent the possibility of drug resistance and adverse drug
reaction from prolonged use of olaparib, an intermittent dosing regimen
was examined where mice cycled through 200 mg/kg of olaparib diet for 2
weeks followed by a 4-week rest period of control diet. Intermittent
treatment with olaparib significantly delayed tumor development by 5.7
weeks (p<0.05), which was almost as effective as continuous olaparib
treatment. BrdU staining revealed that olaparib significantly reduced
proliferation (p<0.05) when compared to their controls at both 24 (9.9%
vs. 13.5% in hyperplastic areas; 4.5% vs. 9.5% in mammary ducts) and 30
weeks (9% vs. 15.9% in hyperplastic areas; 8.9% vs. 17.6% in mammary
ducts) of age. A significant increase in apoptosis in hyperplastic areas
from mice treated with olaparib compared to the control group (12.3% vs.
8.4%; pAn inherited mutation in the BRCA1 gene leads to genomic
instability and those with this mutation have a 50-80% risk for
developing breast cancer by age 70. Though bilateral prophylactic
mastectomy and surveillance are viable options for this high-risk
population, chemoprevention may serve as a good alternative strategy.
BRCA1 functions to repair double stranded DNA breaks via homologous
recombination and as such, BRCA1 mutations force the cells to rely on
other DNA repair mechanisms such as base excision repair, a process which
requires Poly ADP ribose polymerase (PARP). Thus, PARP inhibition in
BRCA1-deficient cells may induce apoptosis in these cells, which would
otherwise develop into a tumor, while leaving normal cells intact.
Olaparib and veliparib are promising PARP inhibitors that are currently
in clinical trials for breast cancer treatment; however, their role in
cancer prevention has not been examined. Hence, this study evaluated the
effect of these PARP inhibitors in chemoprevention in the
BrcaCo/Co;MMTV-Cre;p53+/- mouse model. Mice were fed continuously with
olaparib (200 mg/kg diet) or veliparib (100 mg/kg diet) and tumor
development was assessed. Both olaparib and veliparib significantly
delayed tumor development by 6.5 and 2.4 weeks respectively (p<0.05)
compared to their controls but olaparib was more effective than
veliparib. To determine the lowest dose required for prevention, a dose
de-escalation study was done and tumor development was assessed in mice
fed with 100, 50, or 25 mg/kg of olaparib in diet. Tumor development was
significantly delayed by 3.2 and 3.5 weeks (p<0.05) in mice fed with 50
and 100 mg/kg of olaparib diets respectively compared to their controls.
To circumvent the possibility of drug resistance and adverse drug
reaction from prolonged use of olaparib, an intermittent dosing regimen
was examined where mice cycled through 200 mg/kg of olaparib diet for 2
weeks followed by a 4-week rest period of control diet. Intermittent
treatment with olaparib significantly delayed tumor development by 5.7
weeks (p<0.05), which was almost as effective as continuous olaparib
treatment. BrdU staining revealed that olaparib significantly reduced
proliferation (p<0.05) when compared to their controls at both 24 (9.9%
vs. 13.5% in hyperplastic areas; 4.5% vs. 9.5% in mammary ducts) and 30
weeks (9% vs. 15.9% in hyperplastic areas; 8.9% vs. 17.6% in mammary
ducts) of age. A significant increase in apoptosis in hyperplastic areas
from mice treated with olaparib compared to the control group (12.3% vs.
8.4%; p<0.05) was also observed by TUNEL staining at 30 weeks. Taken
together, these studies demonstrated that olaparib is an effective agent
that can be used intermittently to delay tumor development by reducing
proliferation and inducing apoptosis in BRCA1-deficient mice. These
results highlight the potential for using PARP inhibitors as novel
preventive strategies to manage cancer risk in BRCA1 mutation carriers.

