Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BRD4 antagonist-based therapy exerts lethal activity against FLT3
mutation expressing AML cells resistant to FLT3 tyrosine kinase inhibitors


The BET (bromodomain and extra terminal) protein antagonists, e.g., JQ1,
disrupt the binding of the bromodomains of BRD4 to acetylated lysines,
displacing the BET proteins, along with the associated transcript
initiation and elongation factors, from the chromatin. JQ1 treatment also
induces hexamethylene bisacetamide (HMBA)-inducible protein 1 (HEXIM1),
which binds and sequesters pTEFb, thereby inhibiting its kinase activity
for RNAP II. This inhibits the pause release of RNAP II, thereby
attenuating the elongation and expression of the mRNA of oncogenes, e.g.,
c-MYC and BCL2, and their target genes, leading to growth inhibition and
apoptosis of AML cells. Although the second generation FLT3 tyrosine
kinase inhibitors (TKI), such as AC220 induce remissions in the
aggressive sub-type of AML expressing FLT3 mutations, resistance-causing
gatekeeper (F691I/L), activation loop (AL) (D835V/Y/F) or compound
FLT3-ITD/F691I mutations are known to impair the in vitro and in vivo
activity of the FLT3-TKIs. We have recently determined that JQ1, but not
its inactive enantiomer R-JQ1 potently induced apoptosis of not only
Ba/F3/FLT3-ITD but also Ba/F3/FLT3-ITD expressing the highly FLT3
TKI-resistant mutations F691L and D835V (IC50 values for JQ1 were 697,
1588 and 909 nM, in the three cell lines, respectively). JQ1
dose-dependently induced apoptosis of human cultured AML MOLM13 and
MV4-11 cells, as well as of primary AML cells, all expressing FLT3-ITD.
Concomitantly, JQ1 treatment attenuated c-MYC, BCL2 and CDK6, while
inducing p21, p27, BIM and cleaved PARP levels. Following engraftment of
NOD/SCID mice with MOLM13 xenografts, treatment with JQ1 (50 mg/kg, daily
x 5 days per week x 3 weeks), versus treatment with vehicle control,
significantly improved survival of the mice (p 50-fold resistance to
AC220. As compared to the parental MOLM13, the TKI-resistant cells
express higher levels of BRD4, c-MYC and class I HDACs. Importantly, as
compared to the parental MOLM13, the MOLM13/TKIR cells were significantly
more sensitive to JQ1-induced apoptosis (p 50-fold resistance to AC220.
As compared to the parental MOLM13, the TKI-resistant cells express
higher levels of BRD4, c-MYC and class I HDACs. Importantly, as compared
to the parental MOLM13, the MOLM13/TKIR cells were significantly more
sensitive to JQ1-induced apoptosis (p < 0.001). Additionally,
co-treatment with JQ1 and PS, but not AC220, synergistically induced
apoptosis of MOLM13/TKIR cells. This was associated with marked
attenuation of c-MYC levels. Collectively, these findings support further
in vivo testing of BRD4 antagonist-based combinations with AC220 or PS
against FLT3 TKI-sensitive, and of BRD4 antagonist with PS against FLT3
TKI-refractory AML expressing FLT3-ITD.

