Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genetic variation in CYP2A6, a nicotine/nitrosamine metabolism
enzyme, influences lung cancer risk in two independent case-control
studies of African American smokers


We investigated the association of CYP2A6 genotype with lung cancer risk
among African American smokers to further our understanding of cancer
susceptibility within this high-risk population. CYP2A6 gene variants are
hypothesized to modify lung cancer risk among cigarette smokers by
influencing smoking amount, through altered nicotine inactivation, and/or
by influencing the bioactivation of carcinogenic tobacco-specific
nitrosamines.Participants were African American smokers drawn from two
independent lung cancer case-control studies: a study nested within the
Southern Community Cohort Study, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN
with 1-2 controls matched to each incident lung cancer case by age, sex
and recruitment site (SCCS: n = 494), and a case-control study from the
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX with controls
frequency matched to cases by smoking history in addition to age and sex
(MDA: n = 407). Genotyping was performed for 12 CYP2A6 reduced/null
activity alleles, and participants with genotypes associated with a 25%
or more reduction in CYP2A6 activity were pooled together as reduced
metabolizers. Lung cancer risk was estimated through logistic regression
modeling, which permitted adjustments for smoking.Compared to the CYP2A6
normal metabolism genotype group, the reduced metabolism group was
associated with a significant reduction in lung cancer risk in SCCS, MDA,
and in the pooled studies (SCCS: Odds ratio [OR] 0.62, 95% confidence
interval [CI] 0.43-0.90; MDA: OR 0.66, 95% CI 0.44-0.98; Pooled: OR 0.64,
95% CI 0.49-0.84; ORs adjusted for age and sex). The association remained
significant following additional adjustments for cigarettes/day and years
of smoking (SCCS: OR 0.58, 95% CI 0.39-0.87; MDA: OR 0.66, 95% CI
0.44-0.99; Pooled: OR 0.62, 95% CI 0.47-0.83). Stratified analyses within
the pooled studies revealed a consistent degree of CYP2A6 genetic risk
across categories of cigarettes/day (10 cig/day: OR 0.65, 95% CI
0.43-0.98; 11-20 cig/day: OR 0.58, 95% CI 0.37-0.91; >20 cig/day: OR
0.64, 95% CI 0.29-1.44) and further assessment of CYP2A6 genotype and
lung cancer risk according to smoking duration and current/former smoking
status is ongoing. We also noted a significant interaction between CYP2A6
genotype and sex on the risk for lung cancer (SCCS: P=.03; MDA: P=.03;
Pooled: P=.003) with a greater effect in men. Additional analyses are
underway to explore potential contributing factors to the observed
interaction.Genetic variation in CYP2A6 contributes to lung cancer risk
among African American smokers, whereby CYP2A6 genotypes associated with
reduced metabolic activity confer a lower risk of developing lung cancer.

