Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The regulatory mechanism of fibronectin in EGFR and/or HER2
positive breast cancer


Fibronectin (FN) is a glycoprotein of the extracellular matrix and plays
a major role in cell adhesion, migration and oncogenic transformation.
Aberrant FN expression is associated with poor prognosis in a variety of
cancers including breast cancer. However, the regulatory mechanism
between FN and HER2 is not fully elucidated in breast cancer.Our clinical
data showed that both disease free survival (DFS) and overall survival
(OS) was lower in EGFR (+) and HER2 (+) breast cancer patients than in
EGFR (+) breast cancer patients. To verify the causing of poor prognosis,
we analyzed secreted proteins in EGFR and/or HER2 overexpressed MDA-MB231
cells. Our results showed that the level of FN expression was
significantly increased in HER2 overexpressed MDA-MB231 cells. On the
other hand, the induction of FN by HER2 overexpression was decreased by
trastuzumab (HER2 monoclonal antibody) and AG825 (HER2 inhibitor),
respectively. In addition, we observed that the expression of FN was
dose-dependently increased by EGFR ligands in SKBR3 cells which are
expressed endogenous EGFR and HER2. EGF ligands-induced FN expression
also decreased through the suppression of HER2 in SKBR3 cell. However,
these effects did not detect in trastuzumab-resistant breast cancer cell
line, JIMT-1. Taken together, we demonstrated that the induction of FN by
HER2 correlates poor clinical outcome in breast cancer patients.

