Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Imaging of stromal cells during hepatocellular metastasis
formation in the RFP-MUP-uPA mouse


Major urinary protein-urokinase type plasminogen activator (MUP-uPA)
transgenic mice develop liver disease. We have developed the RFP-MUP-uPA
mice, by crossing MUP-uPA mice with transgenic mice
ubiquitously-expressing RFP. Hepatocyte RFP fluorescence in this model is
very strong. In addition, RFP fluorescence of stromal cells is very
bright enabling the portal vein and sinusoid structures to be clearly
visualized. Huh7 liver cancer cells expressing green fluorescent protein
(GFP) were injected in the spleen of MUP-uPA transgenic mice. The vessels
of the MUP-uPA liver are filled with Huh7-GFP cells as imaged in live
mice 3h after cell injection. Huh7-GFP cells formed tumor colonies in the
liver 28 days after cell transplantation to the spleen. The Huh7-GFP
cells were visualized in the liver with the Olympus FV1000 confocal
microscope. In large metastatic liver tumors in RFP-MUP-uPA mice, stroma
cells derived from the host animal appeared around and into the edge of
Huh7-GFP tumors. In contrast, in small metastatic liver tumors, there
were no stromal cells observed. The stromal cells were observed in the
spleen primary tumor, as well as kidney and the lung metastasis in
addition to the large liver tumors. This model enables imaging the
effects of uPA on liver metastasis and stromal recruitment enabling the
metastasis to progress.

