Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anti-tumor activity in pancreatic cancer of a low immunogenic and
clinically optimized anti-mesothelin immunotoxin RG7787


BackgroundPancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) has a poor prognosis
and new therapies are needed. SS1P is a recombinant immunotoxin (RIT)
containing an anti-mesothelin dsFv fused to a cytotoxic fragment of
Pseudomonas Exotoxin A (PE). In clinical trials, patients developed
dose-limiting neutralizing anti-drug antibodies within the first cycle of
treatment. RG7787 is a next generation, clinically optimized RIT with
decreased immunogenicity and increased resistance to lysosomal proteases.
In this study, we evaluated the in vitro and in vivo activity of RG7787
in PDAC.MethodFive established PDAC cell lines (KLM-1, AsPC-1, BxPC-1,
BxpC3, Panc 3.014, and PK-1) and one primary PDAC line directly obtained
from a patient tumor (GUMC108) were used. Cell viability and
proliferation were calculated by measuring ATP levels with Cell Titer-Glo
assays. In vivo activity was evaluated in a subcutaneous KLM-1 mouse
tumor model. Delivery of fluor-labeled RG7787 to mouse tumors was
assessed by flow cytometry.ResultsRG7787 had significant in vitro
activity in the PDAC cell lines tested with most IC50 values in the
subnanomolar range. It was significantly more active than SS1P in KLM-1,
Panc 3.014 and GUMC108, with similar activity in the other cell lines.
GUMC108 (IC50 = 18.9 pM) was the most sensitive cell line. In KLM-1
cells, SS1P and RG7787 had similar internalization rates. RG7787 could be
safely administered to mice at a dose of 2.5 mg/ kg IV QOD x3, which is
more than five times the maximum tolerated murine dose of SS1P. In vivo
uptake studies in a KLM-1 subcutaneous mouse xenograft model demonstrated
intracellular delivery of RG7787-Alexa647 to 50% of tumor cells after a
single 2.5 mg/kg IV dose. Tumor volume was reduced by 13% after a single
cycle of RG7787 treatment (n=6). Two cycles of combination treatment with
paclitaxel (50 mg/kg IP) and RG7787 shrank tumors to BackgroundPancreatic
ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) has a poor prognosis and new therapies are
needed. SS1P is a recombinant immunotoxin (RIT) containing an
anti-mesothelin dsFv fused to a cytotoxic fragment of Pseudomonas
Exotoxin A (PE). In clinical trials, patients developed dose-limiting
neutralizing anti-drug antibodies within the first cycle of treatment.
RG7787 is a next generation, clinically optimized RIT with decreased
immunogenicity and increased resistance to lysosomal proteases. In this
study, we evaluated the in vitro and in vivo activity of RG7787 in
PDAC.MethodFive established PDAC cell lines (KLM-1, AsPC-1, BxPC-1,
BxpC3, Panc 3.014, and PK-1) and one primary PDAC line directly obtained
from a patient tumor (GUMC108) were used. Cell viability and
proliferation were calculated by measuring ATP levels with Cell Titer-Glo
assays. In vivo activity was evaluated in a subcutaneous KLM-1 mouse
tumor model. Delivery of fluor-labeled RG7787 to mouse tumors was
assessed by flow cytometry.ResultsRG7787 had significant in vitro
activity in the PDAC cell lines tested with most IC50 values in the
subnanomolar range. It was significantly more active than SS1P in KLM-1,
Panc 3.014 and GUMC108, with similar activity in the other cell lines.
GUMC108 (IC50 = 18.9 pM) was the most sensitive cell line. In KLM-1
cells, SS1P and RG7787 had similar internalization rates. RG7787 could be
safely administered to mice at a dose of 2.5 mg/ kg IV QOD x3, which is
more than five times the maximum tolerated murine dose of SS1P. In vivo
uptake studies in a KLM-1 subcutaneous mouse xenograft model demonstrated
intracellular delivery of RG7787-Alexa647 to 50% of tumor cells after a
single 2.5 mg/kg IV dose. Tumor volume was reduced by 13% after a single
cycle of RG7787 treatment (n=6). Two cycles of combination treatment with
paclitaxel (50 mg/kg IP) and RG7787 shrank tumors to <10 mm3 in 100% of
mice by 30 days (n = 11 over 2 experiments). Two single doses of
paclitaxel alone (n=6) induced stable disease without significant tumor
regression. Complete remission persisted through day 100 in 2/11
combination treated animals.ConclusionsRG7787 has superior or similar
activity compared to SS1P in established PDAC cell lines and a primary
PDAC cell line in vitro. In a KLM-1 mouse xenograft model, the
combination of paclitaxel with RG7787 cured 18.1% of mice and reduced
tumor size by more than 90% in all other mice treated. RG7787 merits
further development for the treatment of pancreatic cancer.

