Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Key tumor suppressor genes inactivated by promoter methylation and
somatic mutations in head and neck cancer


The number of known mutations and specific mutational hotspots in Head
and Neck Squamous Cell Carcinomas (HNSCCs) only partially explain their
biological complexity and limit the development of novel diagnostic
markers and therapeutic agents. Tumor suppressor genes (TSGs) are
commonly inactivated by somatic mutation and/or promoter hypermethylation
yet recent high throughput genomic studies have not identified key TSGs
inactivated by both mechanisms. Our aim was to perform a detailed genome
wide analysis of the HNSCC methylome to study expression alterations
associated with differential methylation patterns in the greater promoter
region, focusing on key TSGs also inactivated by somatic
mutations.Methylation Binding Domain Sequencing (MBD-seq), 450K
Methylation arrays, whole exome sequencing and whole genome gene
expression arrays in 41 primary HNSCC tumors and 16 matched
uvulopalatopharyngoplasty tissue samples (UPPPs) were assessed. Results
were validated in an independent cohort of 76 tumors and 19 UPPPs using
quantitative methylation specific PCR (qMSP) and Sanger sequencing. A
second external validation using 279 samples from the TCGA project was
also performed.The integrated molecular analysis identified 186
downregulated genes harboring cancer specific promoter methylation
including PAX1 and PAX5 and 10 key tumor suppressor genes inactivated by
both promoter methylation and/or somatic mutation. PAX1, ZIC4, PLCB1 and
PAX5 were selected for validation. Methylation frequencies in all of them
could distinguish tumor from UPPP samples (PAX1, p The number of known
mutations and specific mutational hotspots in Head and Neck Squamous Cell
Carcinomas (HNSCCs) only partially explain their biological complexity
and limit the development of novel diagnostic markers and therapeutic
agents. Tumor suppressor genes (TSGs) are commonly inactivated by somatic
mutation and/or promoter hypermethylation yet recent high throughput
genomic studies have not identified key TSGs inactivated by both
mechanisms. Our aim was to perform a detailed genome wide analysis of the
HNSCC methylome to study expression alterations associated with
differential methylation patterns in the greater promoter region,
focusing on key TSGs also inactivated by somatic mutations.Methylation
Binding Domain Sequencing (MBD-seq), 450K Methylation arrays, whole exome
sequencing and whole genome gene expression arrays in 41 primary HNSCC
tumors and 16 matched uvulopalatopharyngoplasty tissue samples (UPPPs)
were assessed. Results were validated in an independent cohort of 76
tumors and 19 UPPPs using quantitative methylation specific PCR (qMSP)
and Sanger sequencing. A second external validation using 279 samples
from the TCGA project was also performed.The integrated molecular
analysis identified 186 downregulated genes harboring cancer specific
promoter methylation including PAX1 and PAX5 and 10 key tumor suppressor
genes inactivated by both promoter methylation and/or somatic mutation.
PAX1, ZIC4, PLCB1 and PAX5 were selected for validation. Methylation
frequencies in all of them could distinguish tumor from UPPP samples
(PAX1, p <0.0001; ZIC4, pThe number of known mutations and specific
mutational hotspots in Head and Neck Squamous Cell Carcinomas (HNSCCs)
only partially explain their biological complexity and limit the
development of novel diagnostic markers and therapeutic agents. Tumor
suppressor genes (TSGs) are commonly inactivated by somatic mutation
and/or promoter hypermethylation yet recent high throughput genomic
studies have not identified key TSGs inactivated by both mechanisms. Our
aim was to perform a detailed genome wide analysis of the HNSCC methylome
to study expression alterations associated with differential methylation
patterns in the greater promoter region, focusing on key TSGs also
inactivated by somatic mutations.Methylation Binding Domain Sequencing
(MBD-seq), 450K Methylation arrays, whole exome sequencing and whole
genome gene expression arrays in 41 primary HNSCC tumors and 16 matched
uvulopalatopharyngoplasty tissue samples (UPPPs) were assessed. Results
were validated in an independent cohort of 76 tumors and 19 UPPPs using
quantitative methylation specific PCR (qMSP) and Sanger sequencing. A
second external validation using 279 samples from the TCGA project was
also performed.The integrated molecular analysis identified 186
downregulated genes harboring cancer specific promoter methylation
including PAX1 and PAX5 and 10 key tumor suppressor genes inactivated by
both promoter methylation and/or somatic mutation. PAX1, ZIC4, PLCB1 and
PAX5 were selected for validation. Methylation frequencies in all of them
could distinguish tumor from UPPP samples (PAX1, p <0.0001; ZIC4,
p<0.0001; PLCB1, pThe number of known mutations and specific mutational
hotspots in Head and Neck Squamous Cell Carcinomas (HNSCCs) only
partially explain their biological complexity and limit the development
of novel diagnostic markers and therapeutic agents. Tumor suppressor
genes (TSGs) are commonly inactivated by somatic mutation and/or promoter
hypermethylation yet recent high throughput genomic studies have not
identified key TSGs inactivated by both mechanisms. Our aim was to
perform a detailed genome wide analysis of the HNSCC methylome to study
expression alterations associated with differential methylation patterns
in the greater promoter region, focusing on key TSGs also inactivated by
somatic mutations.Methylation Binding Domain Sequencing (MBD-seq), 450K
Methylation arrays, whole exome sequencing and whole genome gene
expression arrays in 41 primary HNSCC tumors and 16 matched
uvulopalatopharyngoplasty tissue samples (UPPPs) were assessed. Results
were validated in an independent cohort of 76 tumors and 19 UPPPs using
quantitative methylation specific PCR (qMSP) and Sanger sequencing. A
second external validation using 279 samples from the TCGA project was
also performed.The integrated molecular analysis identified 186
downregulated genes harboring cancer specific promoter methylation
including PAX1 and PAX5 and 10 key tumor suppressor genes inactivated by
both promoter methylation and/or somatic mutation. PAX1, ZIC4, PLCB1 and
PAX5 were selected for validation. Methylation frequencies in all of them
could distinguish tumor from UPPP samples (PAX1, p <0.0001; ZIC4,
p<0.0001; PLCB1, p<0.001; PAX5, p The number of known mutations and
specific mutational hotspots in Head and Neck Squamous Cell Carcinomas
(HNSCCs) only partially explain their biological complexity and limit the
development of novel diagnostic markers and therapeutic agents. Tumor
suppressor genes (TSGs) are commonly inactivated by somatic mutation
and/or promoter hypermethylation yet recent high throughput genomic
studies have not identified key TSGs inactivated by both mechanisms. Our
aim was to perform a detailed genome wide analysis of the HNSCC methylome
to study expression alterations associated with differential methylation
patterns in the greater promoter region, focusing on key TSGs also
inactivated by somatic mutations.Methylation Binding Domain Sequencing
(MBD-seq), 450K Methylation arrays, whole exome sequencing and whole
genome gene expression arrays in 41 primary HNSCC tumors and 16 matched
uvulopalatopharyngoplasty tissue samples (UPPPs) were assessed. Results
were validated in an independent cohort of 76 tumors and 19 UPPPs using
quantitative methylation specific PCR (qMSP) and Sanger sequencing. A
second external validation using 279 samples from the TCGA project was
also performed.The integrated molecular analysis identified 186
downregulated genes harboring cancer specific promoter methylation
including PAX1 and PAX5 and 10 key tumor suppressor genes inactivated by
both promoter methylation and/or somatic mutation. PAX1, ZIC4, PLCB1 and
PAX5 were selected for validation. Methylation frequencies in all of them
could distinguish tumor from UPPP samples (PAX1, p <0.0001; ZIC4,
p<0.0001; PLCB1, p<0.001; PAX5, p <0.0001). A gene panel combining
promoter methylation results for these four genes had 96% sensitivity,
94% specificity, a 0.97 AUC and a PPV of 98.5%. Among the novel TSGs
discovered with dual mechanisms of inactivation, a high frequency of
genomic and epigenomic alterations was observed in the PAX gene family of
transcription factors, which selectively impact canonical NOTCH and TP53
pathways to determine cell fate, cell survival, and genome maintenance.To
our knowledge, our study consist the first detailed genome wide analysis
of the HNSCC methylome covering expression alterations associated with
differential methylation patterns in the greater promoter region, on key
TSGs also inactivated by somatic mutations. Characterization of the
complete HNSCC methylome has contributed insights into the clustering of
specific genetic and epigenetic events, and highlights the importance of
understanding the relative contribution of each to the overall frequency
of TSG inactivation. Understanding the complete contribution of genomic
and epigenomic alterations to specific genes and pathways in cancer will
reveal novel high frequency specific markers for better risk assessment
and can highlight the true frequency of therapeutic pathways to better
target the disease at the molecular level.

