Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MT-MMP cleavage profiling using rapid endopeptidase profiling
library (REPLi)


Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are a family of zinc-dependent
endopeptidases that are associated with the metastatic process. Relative
to non-diseased tissue, the increased expression and activity of
Membrane-type matrix metalloproteinases (MT-MMPs) such as MMP-15 within
the prostate tumour microenvironment can be exploited in order to
selectively activate highly toxic chemotherapeutics. The main advantage
to such a targeted drug delivery system is a significant reduction of
systemic toxicity, resulting in a highly efficacious and successful
treatment for prostate cancer.We have screened 3375 peptides with a
variety of residue combinations using Rapid Endopeptidase Profiling
Library (REPLi). A small but smart design, the REPLi library template:
MCA-Gly-Gly-Gly-Xaa-Xaa-Xaa-Gly-Gly-DPA-Lys-Lys contains a donor (MCA)
and quenching acceptor (DPA) FRET pair. No fluorescence indicates the
molecules within the pools are intact, however, upon cleavage, the
tri-variable cores can be assessed via auto fluorescence of the MCA
molecule.By analysing the 512 distinct substrate pools we have identified
combinations of Phe/Tyr and Asn/Gln residues as having a greater MMP-15
cleavage bias over MMP-14, with the opposite being true for variable
cores with Ile/Leu and Lys/Arg combinations. Since most known substrates
show little (if any) MMP selectivity this is a novel finding, and as
such, provides us with insights that are essential for designing prodrugs
targeted to specific MMPs.Through detailed metabolic studies, this
information is being utilised in a bid to maximise the successful
development of novel MMP-15 targeted paclitaxel conjugated prostate
cancer prodrugs.

