Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gallium-68- and Copper-64-labeled LLP2A conjugates for PET-CT
imaging of integrin 41 in melanoma


Introduction:Melanoma is a malignant tumor derived from epidermal
melanocytes, and it is known for its therapeutic resistance, aggressive
clinical behavior, and predisposition for late metastasis. Integrin 41 is
a transmembrane non-covalent heterodimer overexpressed in melanoma tumors
that plays an important role in tumor growth, angiogenesis and metastasis
by promoting adhesion and migration of cancer cells. There has been
increasing interest in targeting this receptor for cancer imaging and
therapy. In this study we evaluated three conjugates of a peptidomimetic
ligand, LLP2A known to have high binding affinity for 41 for PET-CT
imaging and potential radiotherapy.Methods:LLP2A was conjugated to three
different chelators, CB-TE1A1P, NODAGA and DOTA, for 68Ga and 64Cu
labeling. The conjugates were synthesized by solid phase peptide
synthesis, purified by RP-HPLC and verified by LC-MS mass spectrometry.
68Ga and 64Cu labeling was done in acetate buffer pH 4 for 68Ga and pH
6.5 for 64Cu at 70C for 20 min. High Specific activity (1 mCi/g) and
radiopurity (>98%) were achieved. Saturation binding and competitive
binding assays with B16F10 melanoma cells determined the binding affinity
of the compounds. The biodistributions of the LLP2A conjugates were
evaluated in B16F10 subcutaneous tumor bearing C57BL/6 mice. PET-CT
imaging was performed at 2, 4 and 24 h post-injection for the 64Cu
tracers and 1h post-injection for 68Ga tracer.Results:The competitive
binding assay indicated that Ga-NODAGA-PEG4-LLP2A had higher affinity
(IC50 = 0.68, Ki = 0.11 nM) compared to Ga-DOTA-PEG4-LLP2A (IC50 = 9.37,
Ki = 1.56 nM); however, biodistribution showed similar tumor uptake for
68Ga-NODAGA-PEG4-LLP2A and 68Ga-DOTA-PEG4-LLP2A (8.7 1.3 %ID/g and 9.1
0.9 %ID/g respectively) but less renal and liver retention for the DOTA
conjugate. Both 64Cu-labeled CB-TE1A1P-PEG4-LLP2A and NODAGA-PEG4-LLP2A
showed high affinity to 41 integrin with a comparable Kd (0.28 nM vs 0.23
nM) and Bmax (296 fmol/mg vs 243 fmol/mg). The tumor uptake at 2 h
post-injection was comparable for the two probes but
64Cu-CB-TE1A1P-PEG4-LLP2A had higher uptake compared to
64Cu-NODAGA-PEG4-LLP2A (16.9 2.2 %ID/g vs13.4 1.7 %ID/g). Tumor to muscle
and tumor to blood ratios from biodistribution and PET-CT images were
significantly higher for 64Cu-CB-TE1A1P-PEG4-LLP2A compared to
64Cu-NODAGA-PEG4-LLP2A. In addition, liver and kidney uptake was 2-fold
lower for 64Cu-CB-TE1A1P-PEG4-LLP2A.Conclusion:These data demonstrate
that 68Ga-labeled DOTA, NODAGA and 64Cu-labeled CB-TE1A1P, NODAGA LLP2A
conjugates are excellent imaging agents for melanoma or other 41-positive
tumors, with 64Cu-CB-TE1A1P-PEG4-LLP2A being the best. These data also
suggest the potential for radiotherapy and radiotheranostics using
radioisotopes like Lu-177, Y-90 and Cu-67.

