Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CD133 is associated with resistance of melanoma to multikinase
inhibition


Purpose: High-risk melanoma is a lethal cancer with a high recurrence
rates and variable disease-free intervals, due to tumorigenic cell
populations that are resistant to treatment. Prominin 1 (CD133) is a
putative stem cell marker in a number of cancers, based on its expression
in cells that possess greater tumorigenicity, motility and colony-forming
ability in different types of cancer. Furthermore, Prominin 1 is highly
expressed in late-stage metastatic melanoma showing its potential as a
marker of a resistant cell population. Trametinib and dabrafenib are
targeted kinase inhibitors recently approved by the FDA, and now widely
used for treatment of melanoma, while the anthelmintic drug mebendazole,
a multikinase inhibitor, also exhibits promising anticancer potential.
The purpose of this study was to test the relative resistance of CD133+
and CD133- cells to these three agents, as well as to explore potential
mechanisms underlying any differences.Design: Three melanoma cell lines
with different kinase mutation profiles were exposed to increasing
concentrations of trametinib, dabrafenib, or mebendazole alone, or in
combination, either before or after separation into CD133-positive and
CD133-negative populations. Cells were then assayed for cell viability
and CD133-positivity. Microarray analysis was performed on CD133-positive
and CD133-negative cells to explore potential differences in gene
expression profiles.Result: In all parental cell lines, the percentages
of the CD133-positive cells increased significantly (PPurpose: High-risk
melanoma is a lethal cancer with a high recurrence rates and variable
disease-free intervals, due to tumorigenic cell populations that are
resistant to treatment. Prominin 1 (CD133) is a putative stem cell marker
in a number of cancers, based on its expression in cells that possess
greater tumorigenicity, motility and colony-forming ability in different
types of cancer. Furthermore, Prominin 1 is highly expressed in
late-stage metastatic melanoma showing its potential as a marker of a
resistant cell population. Trametinib and dabrafenib are targeted kinase
inhibitors recently approved by the FDA, and now widely used for
treatment of melanoma, while the anthelmintic drug mebendazole, a
multikinase inhibitor, also exhibits promising anticancer potential. The
purpose of this study was to test the relative resistance of CD133+ and
CD133- cells to these three agents, as well as to explore potential
mechanisms underlying any differences.Design: Three melanoma cell lines
with different kinase mutation profiles were exposed to increasing
concentrations of trametinib, dabrafenib, or mebendazole alone, or in
combination, either before or after separation into CD133-positive and
CD133-negative populations. Cells were then assayed for cell viability
and CD133-positivity. Microarray analysis was performed on CD133-positive
and CD133-negative cells to explore potential differences in gene
expression profiles.Result: In all parental cell lines, the percentages
of the CD133-positive cells increased significantly (P<0.05) after
high-dose drug treatment. The CD133-positive, drug resistant cells showed
reduced proliferation until after the drug was removed. Correspondingly,
the presorted CD133-positive population exhibited significantly higher
(PPurpose: High-risk melanoma is a lethal cancer with a high recurrence
rates and variable disease-free intervals, due to tumorigenic cell
populations that are resistant to treatment. Prominin 1 (CD133) is a
putative stem cell marker in a number of cancers, based on its expression
in cells that possess greater tumorigenicity, motility and colony-forming
ability in different types of cancer. Furthermore, Prominin 1 is highly
expressed in late-stage metastatic melanoma showing its potential as a
marker of a resistant cell population. Trametinib and dabrafenib are
targeted kinase inhibitors recently approved by the FDA, and now widely
used for treatment of melanoma, while the anthelmintic drug mebendazole,
a multikinase inhibitor, also exhibits promising anticancer potential.
The purpose of this study was to test the relative resistance of CD133+
and CD133- cells to these three agents, as well as to explore potential
mechanisms underlying any differences.Design: Three melanoma cell lines
with different kinase mutation profiles were exposed to increasing
concentrations of trametinib, dabrafenib, or mebendazole alone, or in
combination, either before or after separation into CD133-positive and
CD133-negative populations. Cells were then assayed for cell viability
and CD133-positivity. Microarray analysis was performed on CD133-positive
and CD133-negative cells to explore potential differences in gene
expression profiles.Result: In all parental cell lines, the percentages
of the CD133-positive cells increased significantly (P<0.05) after
high-dose drug treatment. The CD133-positive, drug resistant cells showed
reduced proliferation until after the drug was removed. Correspondingly,
the presorted CD133-positive population exhibited significantly higher
(P<0.05) IC50s both for single and multidrug treatment. Microarray
analysis revealed a significant (P1.5-fold) difference in expression of
265 genes in CD133-positive cells, including putative oncogenes such as
POU5F1, NPM1, NES and MYC. Also, 10 of 18 ABC transporter genes were
significantly (P1.5-fold) difference in expression of 265 genes in
CD133-positive cells, including putative oncogenes such as POU5F1, NPM1,
NES and MYC. Also, 10 of 18 ABC transporter genes were significantly
(P<0.05) up-regulated in the CD133-positive population.Conclusion: Both
purified and mixed population-derived CD133 positive cells are more
resistant to the three kinase inhibitors. Upregulation of ABC transporter
genes and/or oncogenes may contribute to the drug resistance of
CD133-positive cells.

