Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: LKB1 deficiency enhances sensitivity to energetic stress induced
by erlotinib treatment in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cells


The tumor suppressor LKB1 is inactivated in 20-30% of non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) patient tumors. Because LKB1 is the master kinase
phosphorylating the energy-sensing kinase AMPK, dysregulation of the
LKB1-AMPK signaling axis causes loss of cellular homeostasis in response
to metabolic inhibition or external stress-induced mitochondrial insults.
Erlotinib is used clinically in NSCLC patients to target mutationally
activated EGFR and is known to induce mitochondrial-mediated apoptosis.
We investigated the metabolic response and mitochondrial function of
LKB1-deficient NSCLC cells treated with erlotinib. LKB1-deficient cells
exhibited enhanced sensitivity to erlotinib treatment in vitro and in
vivo despite having wild-type EGFR. We found that this enhanced response
was due to altered energetic metabolism and mitochondrial dysfunction in
LKB1-deficient cells, which prevents homestatic maintenance of ATP and
reactive oxygen species (ROS) levels in response to erlotinib treatment.
Despite negative regulation of mTOR activity by LKB1-AMPK signaling,
erlotinib effectively blocked mTOR signaling in LKB1-deficient cells,
resulting in inhibition of cell growth, as well as activation of
apoptosis. These findings will be important for designing targeted
treatments for LKB1-deficient NSCLC patient tumors harboring wild-type
EGFR, which disrupt metabolic and signaling pathways known to regulate
energy metabolism in these cells.

