Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Age dependence of doxorubicin pharmacokinetics in pediatric cancer
patients; results of an FP7-funded clinical study


Doxorubicin is a key component of a number of treatment regimens used in
paediatric oncology, despite the very limited pharmacology data on which
current dosing regimens are based. We conducted a multicentre,
multinational phase II pharmacokinetic study investigating age-dependency
in the clearance of doxorubicin in children with solid tumours and
leukaemia. The study was funded under the Framework Program 7 of the
European Commission. 101 patients treated with doxorubicin according to a
tumour-specific national or European therapeutic trial were recruited to
the study, with a particular focus on children less than 3 years.
Absolute doses of doxorubicin ranged from 2.4 to 57 mg, administered,
with infusion durations ranging from 0.25 to 24 hours. Samples were
collected after 2 administrations, with 5 samples collected in children
Doxorubicin is a key component of a number of treatment regimens used in
paediatric oncology, despite the very limited pharmacology data on which
current dosing regimens are based. We conducted a multicentre,
multinational phase II pharmacokinetic study investigating age-dependency
in the clearance of doxorubicin in children with solid tumours and
leukaemia. The study was funded under the Framework Program 7 of the
European Commission. 101 patients treated with doxorubicin according to a
tumour-specific national or European therapeutic trial were recruited to
the study, with a particular focus on children less than 3 years.
Absolute doses of doxorubicin ranged from 2.4 to 57 mg, administered,
with infusion durations ranging from 0.25 to 24 hours. Samples were
collected after 2 administrations, with 5 samples collected in children
<3yrs and 8 samples in children 3yrs. Doxorubicin and its major
metabolite doxorubicinol were measured in plasma using a validated
HPLC-fluorescence assay with a limit of quantification of 2 g/L for each
analyte. Markers such as troponin T and natriuretic peptides were
measured to evaluate as clinical indicators of cardiotoxicity. Data were
analysed using a population pharmacokinetic approach, including
pharmacogenetic covariates.Data were available from all but 5 patients,
with samples lost due to withdrawn consent, analytical issues or sample
stability related to sample transport.A three compartment model was
sufficient to characterize the pharmacokinetics of doxorubicin, with a
further compartment to describe those of the major metabolite
doxorubicinol. All parameters of the population model were scaled to body
surface area. Age dependence of doxorubicin clearance was demonstrated,
with children less than 3 years having a lower clearance (21.15.8 l/h/m2)
than older children (26.66.7 l/h/m2) (p=0.0004), even after correcting
for body weight. No other patient-related covariate, including liver
function, was found to influence the parameters of the model. While the
model provided a good fit to the doxorubicinol data, no covariate was
identified which influenced the parameters of the metabolite model.
Pharmacogenetic variants, including those in transporters and drug
metabolizing enzymes, had little influence on pharmacokinetic parameters.
Likewise, pharmacokinetics had only limited impact on markers of
cardiotoxicity such as troponins or on measured cardiac function.This
study yields new pharmacokinetic data on doxorubicin pharmacokinetics in
very young patients, suggesting that lower doses may be appropriate in
children less than 3 years. The data presented her may be useful for
refining dosage regimens in this patient group.

