Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Detection of the Cyclin J (CCNJ) as a new cancer-related gene in
human hepatocellular carcinoma by using a method of triple combination
array analysis


Background: Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) has a high rate of recurrence
and a poor prognosis. To detect genes correlated with HCC, we have
developed a new technique, triple combination array analysis, consisting
of methylation array, gene expression array and single nucleotide
polymorphism (SNP) array analysis.Methods: A surgical specimen obtained
from a 68-year-old female HCC patient was analyzed using triple
combination array analysis, which identified a candidate cancer-related
gene of HCC. Subsequently, samples from nine cell lines and 48 HCC
patients were evaluated for their methylation and expression status of
the identified gene using methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction
(MSP) and quantitative real-time reverse transcriptase PCR,
respectively.Results: Using the triple combination array analysis, cyclin
J (CCNJ) was detected as a candidate cancer-related gene. CCNJ was
located on chromosome 10q24.1 and the copy number, using SNP chip array,
revealed no loss of heterozygosity. According to expression array
results, The expression of CCNJ in tumor tissue decreased at two points
of the expression array chip, and the decreased values of the chip were
1.3 and 2.3. CCNJ was found to be hypermethylated (methylation value
0.906, range 0-1.0) in cancer tissue compared with adjacent normal tissue
(0.112) using the methylation array. Using MSP, hypermethylation of the
promoter region of CCNJ was shown to occur in 37 (77.1%) tumor samples.
CCNJ expression was significantly decreased in cases with methylation
(pBackground: Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) has a high rate of
recurrence and a poor prognosis. To detect genes correlated with HCC, we
have developed a new technique, triple combination array analysis,
consisting of methylation array, gene expression array and single
nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) array analysis.Methods: A surgical specimen
obtained from a 68-year-old female HCC patient was analyzed using triple
combination array analysis, which identified a candidate cancer-related
gene of HCC. Subsequently, samples from nine cell lines and 48 HCC
patients were evaluated for their methylation and expression status of
the identified gene using methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction
(MSP) and quantitative real-time reverse transcriptase PCR,
respectively.Results: Using the triple combination array analysis, cyclin
J (CCNJ) was detected as a candidate cancer-related gene. CCNJ was
located on chromosome 10q24.1 and the copy number, using SNP chip array,
revealed no loss of heterozygosity. According to expression array
results, The expression of CCNJ in tumor tissue decreased at two points
of the expression array chip, and the decreased values of the chip were
1.3 and 2.3. CCNJ was found to be hypermethylated (methylation value
0.906, range 0-1.0) in cancer tissue compared with adjacent normal tissue
(0.112) using the methylation array. Using MSP, hypermethylation of the
promoter region of CCNJ was shown to occur in 37 (77.1%) tumor samples.
CCNJ expression was significantly decreased in cases with methylation
(p<0.0001). Furthermore, HCC patients with methylated CCNJ had a
significantly worse prognosis for recurrence-free survival (p=0.0353) and
tended to have a worse prognosis for overall survival than those with
unmethylated CCNJ (p=0.0838).Conclusion: The present study indicates that
triple combination array analysis is an effective method to detect novel
genes related to HCC. We suggest that CCNJ acts as a cancer-related gene
in HCC.

