Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterizing the regulation and function of miR-155 in hypoxia
biology


Aberrant expression of microRNAs has been correlated with the initiation
and progression of many diseases. One such microRNA, miR-155, is an
oncogenic microRNA that has been associated with several different types
of cancer, including lung, breast, and lymphoma. We are studying the role
of miR-155 in promoting hypoxia-driven tumor phenotypes such as therapy
resistance and genomic instability. Previously, we have shown that
miR-155 expression is induced under hypoxic conditions and that
over-expression of miR-155 under normal oxygen conditions confers
resistance to ionizing radiation therapy. Additionally, we have shown
that by knocking down expression of miR-155 under hypoxic conditions, we
were able to sensitize these cells to ionizing radiation. Here, we
demonstrate that miR-155 expression is tightly linked to genomic
instability, another characteristic of hypoxia. We have found that
over-expression of miR-155 drives increased mutation frequency as
measured by a mutation reporter assay screen both in vitro and in vivo.
These results are consistent with a recent finding that miR-155
over-expression targets mismatch repair proteins, MLH1, MSH2, and MSH6.
An increase in mutation frequency could be due to a decrease in mismatch
repair function. Surprisingly, we have also found that loss of miR-155
increases the baseline level of double strand breaks observed in a
fibroblast cell line. Taken together, this data suggests that a finite
regulation of miR-155 is necessary to maintain cellular homeostasis. Our
goal is to gain a better understanding of the role of miR-155 in
promoting hypoxic cancer cell survival.

