Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mir-134/487b/655 cluster regulates TGF--induced
epithelial-mesenchymal transition and drug resistance to gefitinib by
targeting MAGI2 in lung adenocarcinoma cells


Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) has recently been recognized as a
key element of cell invasion, migration, metastasis, and drug resistance
in several types of cancer, including non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
Our aim was to clarify microRNA (miRNA) -related mechanisms underlying
EMT followed by acquired resistance to epidermal growth factor receptor
tyrosine-kinase inhibitor (EGFR-TKI) in NSCLC. MiRNA expression profiles
were examined before and after TGF-1 exposure in four human
adenocarcinoma cell lines with or without EMT. Correlation between
expressions of EMT-related miRNAs and resistance to EGFR-TKI gefitinib
was evaluated. MiRNA array and quantitative RT-PCR revealed that TGF-1
significantly induced overexpression of miR-134, miR-487b, and miR-655,
which belong to the same cluster located on chromosome 14q32, in lung
adenocarcimona cells with EMT. MAGI2, a predicted target of these miRNAs
and a scaffold protein required for PTEN, was diminished in A549 cells
with EMT after the TGF-1 stimulation. Overexpression of miR-134 and
miR-487b promoted the EMT phenomenon and affected the drug resistance to
gefitinib, whereas knockdown of these miRNAs inhibited the EMT process
and reversed TGF-1-induced resistance to gefitinib. Our study
demonstrated that the miR-134/487b/655 cluster contributed to the
TGF-1-induced EMT phenomenon and affected the resistance to gefitinib by
directly targeting MAGI2, whose suppression subsequently caused loss of
PTEN stability in lung cancer cells. The miR-134/miR-487b/miR-655 cluster
may be new therapeutic targets in advanced lung adenocarcinoma patients,
depending on the EMT phenomenon.

