Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genome-wide interaction analyses between genetic variants and
alcohol consumption and risk of colorectal cancer


Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have successfully identified
numerous genetic loci for colorectal cancer. However, GWAS loci explain
only a subset of the estimated heritability and interactions with
environmental risk factors have been discussed as a potential source of
the missing heritability. To explore this further we conducted a
genome-wide interaction analyses between genetic variants and alcohol
consumption, a frequently observed risk factor for colorectal cancer. We
included 8,058 cases and 8,765 controls from the Genetics and
Epidemiology of Colorectal Cancer Consortium. Individual-level alcohol
consumption data were harmonized across studies and participants were
grouped as nondrinkers (drinking 28 g of alcohol per day). We used
standard logistic regression (including an interaction term) and our
newly developed Cocktail method, which includes a screening step based
on: a) marginal associations between genetic variants and colorectal
cancer and b) correlation between genetic variants and an environmental
factor, followed by a testing step for interactions while correcting for
multiple testing using weighted hypothesis testing. As the association
between alcohol intake and colorectal cancer was inverse in
light/moderate drinkers (OR=0.91, P=0.005) but positive in heavy drinkers
(OR=1.22, P=0.0005) compared with non-drinkers, we conducted the
interaction analyses separately. Using standard logistic regression to
test for interaction, we identified two potential novel loci associated
with colorectal cancer, 9q22.32/FBP1 (the most significant SNP rs9409565
with PGE =1.7610-8) and 11q22.1/CNTN5 (the most significant SNP rs6590690
with PGE=4.9510-8). At 9q22.32/FBP1, the common allele of rs9409565 was
associated with decreased risk of colorectal cancer in all nondrinkers
(OR=0.87, 95% Confidence interval [CI] 0.82-0.99, P=6.410-6) but was
associated with increased risk in all light-moderate drinkers (OR=1.16,
95% CI 1.10-1.22, P=8.210-8). Similarly, at 11q22.1/CNTN5 the common
allele of rs6590690 was associated with reduced risk of colorectal cancer
in all nondrinkers (OR=0.76, 95% CI 0.69-0.85, P=1.210-6) but with
increased risk in light-moderate drinkers (OR=1.32, 95% CI 1.20-1.45,
P=2.510-8). We did not find any interaction for heavy drinkers; however,
only 12 % of the participants were heavy drinkers thus limiting power. We
also did not find genome-wide significant interactions using the Cocktail
method. FBP1 functions as a tumor suppressor and has been shown to be
involved in gastric, liver and colon carcinogenesis. Our findings
demonstrate the utility of genome-wide gene-environmental interaction
analyses to identify novel interactions in colorectal cancer,
contributing to our understanding of colorectal cancer etiology.

