Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clinical utility of DNA methylation markers for prostate cancer
detection and prognosis: Towards less-invasive molecular diagnostic tests


This project aims to develop new epigenetic biomarkers that can improve
the accuracy of prostate cancer (PC) diagnosis and prognosis through a
non/minimally-invasive molecular diagnostic test. Excessive use of
prostate specific antigen (PSA) testing combined with the continued lack
of accurate prognostic tools has led to overdiagnosis and overtreatment
of many indolent prostate tumors. Hence, there is an urgent need for
better PC biomarkers and for their translation into clinically useful
tests. We have recently identified six novel genes that were
hypermethylated in PC (C1orf114, HAPLN3, MOB3B, KLF8, GAS6, and AOX1)
and, furthermore, developed and validated a three-gene DNA methylation
signature that predicted time to PSA recurrence after radical
prostatectomy (RP) in two large PC patient cohorts independently of
clinicopathological parameters (Haldrup et al. 2013, J Clin Oncol). While
our earlier work was based on analysis of post-operative tissue
specimens, we now assess the feasibility of transferring these candidate
markers to urine, plasma, or prostate needle biopsies.Using quantitative
methylation-specific PCR (qMSP), we have determined the methylation level
for each of the six candidate genes in histologically malignant vs.
non-malignant prostate needle biopsies from a total of 49 patients
referred to biopsy due to suspicion of PC. Ten random prostate biopsies
were taken from each patient: 31 of the patients had PC in at least one
biopsy, 18 patients had exclusively cancer-negative biopsies. For all six
genes, the DNA methylation level was significantly higher in
cancer-positive compared to cancer-negative biopsies (AUC: 0.95-1.00),
confirming our previous results from RP specimens. Notably, for two of
the genes (HAPLN3 and GAS6), we found a significantly (pThis project aims
to develop new epigenetic biomarkers that can improve the accuracy of
prostate cancer (PC) diagnosis and prognosis through a
non/minimally-invasive molecular diagnostic test. Excessive use of
prostate specific antigen (PSA) testing combined with the continued lack
of accurate prognostic tools has led to overdiagnosis and overtreatment
of many indolent prostate tumors. Hence, there is an urgent need for
better PC biomarkers and for their translation into clinically useful
tests. We have recently identified six novel genes that were
hypermethylated in PC (C1orf114, HAPLN3, MOB3B, KLF8, GAS6, and AOX1)
and, furthermore, developed and validated a three-gene DNA methylation
signature that predicted time to PSA recurrence after radical
prostatectomy (RP) in two large PC patient cohorts independently of
clinicopathological parameters (Haldrup et al. 2013, J Clin Oncol). While
our earlier work was based on analysis of post-operative tissue
specimens, we now assess the feasibility of transferring these candidate
markers to urine, plasma, or prostate needle biopsies.Using quantitative
methylation-specific PCR (qMSP), we have determined the methylation level
for each of the six candidate genes in histologically malignant vs.
non-malignant prostate needle biopsies from a total of 49 patients
referred to biopsy due to suspicion of PC. Ten random prostate biopsies
were taken from each patient: 31 of the patients had PC in at least one
biopsy, 18 patients had exclusively cancer-negative biopsies. For all six
genes, the DNA methylation level was significantly higher in
cancer-positive compared to cancer-negative biopsies (AUC: 0.95-1.00),
confirming our previous results from RP specimens. Notably, for two of
the genes (HAPLN3 and GAS6), we found a significantly (p<0.025) higher
methylation level in histologically cancer-negative biopsies from
patients with PC in at least one other biopsy compared to patients with
exclusively cancer-negative biopsies, indicating the existence of a
cancer field effect. A similar trend was observed for AOX1, but was not
statistically significant (p=0.08) in this relatively small sample set.
Detection of epigenetic field cancerization in histologically benign
prostate needle biopsies may increase the sensitivity for PC detection
and thereby predict the need for repeat biopsy in men with initial
cancer-negative biopsies. We are currently investigating this further in
a larger patient sample set. In addition, qMSP analyses of urine and
plasma samples from patients with BPH, localized or advanced PC,
respectively, are ongoing and the results will be presented at the
conference. The development of novel and more accurate diagnostic and/or
prognostic PC biomarkers, suitable for detection in non/minimally
invasive samples, would be a major improvement to the clinical management
of PC by allowing better and more personalized treatment strategies.

