Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Common, germline genetic variants within the Wnt/beta-catenin stem
cell pathway as determinants of multiple myeloma risk


Multiple Myeloma (MM) is the second most common hematologic malignancy in
the US being diagnosed in over 20,500 individuals each year. The etiology
of MM remains unclear and little is known regarding the effect of common,
germline genetic variants on MM risk. Towards this, we investigated
polymorphisms in the Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathway as predictors of
risk. This pathway is an essential regulator of hematopoietic and cancer
stem cells and has been shown to be aberrantly activated in MM cells. A
total of 171 variants were genotyped in 409 MM cases and 410 age, gender,
and ethnicity-matched healthy controls. In the main effect analysis, 10
polymorphisms were significantly associated with risk, of which eight
associations were supported by bootstrap analysis with over 80% of the
re-samplings reaching PMultiple Myeloma (MM) is the second most common
hematologic malignancy in the US being diagnosed in over 20,500
individuals each year. The etiology of MM remains unclear and little is
known regarding the effect of common, germline genetic variants on MM
risk. Towards this, we investigated polymorphisms in the Wnt/beta-catenin
signaling pathway as predictors of risk. This pathway is an essential
regulator of hematopoietic and cancer stem cells and has been shown to be
aberrantly activated in MM cells. A total of 171 variants were genotyped
in 409 MM cases and 410 age, gender, and ethnicity-matched healthy
controls. In the main effect analysis, 10 polymorphisms were
significantly associated with risk, of which eight associations were
supported by bootstrap analysis with over 80% of the re-samplings
reaching P<0.05. This includes rs7916830 in BTRC, the ubiquitin E3 ligase
for the pathway, that was associated with a 28% reduction in risk (95%
CI: 0.59-0.89, P=0.0017). This variant is located 2.7 kb upstream of BTRC
and is predicted to alter a transcription factor binding site located
within a region of high regulatory potential. The incidence of MM in
African-Americans (AA) is twice that in Caucasian-American (CA)
individuals. Therefore, we performed stratified analyses to identify
cross-ethnic and ethnic-group specific associations. Twelve variants were
associated with MM risk in the AA population, including five that
remained consistent in the bootstrap analysis. The most significant
finding was for FZD5:rs3731568 that resulted in a significant reduction
in risk (OR: 0.42(0.23-0.78), P=0.0057). Interestingly, only three of
these variants were also significantly associated with risk in the
overall analysis with adjustment for ethnicity, and only one was also
significant in the CA-only analysis (DKK1:rs1569199 - ORoverall:
0.67(0.49-0.90); ORaa: 0.50(0.28-0.91); ORca: 0.68(0.46-0.99)). One of
these ethnic-group specific associations was FZD6:rs951826, resulting in
a 2.12-fold increased risk in the AA population (95% CI: 1.04-4.33,
P=0.040), yet suggestive opposite effects in the overall and CA
populations (ORoverall: 0.74(0.39-1.40); ORca: 0.64(0.32-1.26)).
Gene-based analyses confirmed these ethnic-group differences with no
overlap at the gene level between the associations with MM risk for the
CA and AA populations. Together, these findings provide additional
support of the role of the Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathway in MM,
while also identifying global and ethnic-group specific genetic
associations, particularly with regard to the AA population.

