Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Selective nuclear export inhibitor kpt330 enhances the antitumor
activity of gemcitabine in human pancreatic cancer


Background: Pancreatic cancer is the fourth leading cause of
cancer-related deaths in the United States. Gemcitabine is currently the
standard chemotherapeutic agent for advanced pancreatic cancer, but has
limited efficacy due to chemoresistance and dose escalation toxicity.
Therefore an effective and safer therapy is warranted against this deadly
malignancy. Selective nuclear export inhibitor KPT-330 inhibits the
exportin 1 (CRM1) leading to nuclear localization of tumor suppressor
proteins. The aim of this study was to evaluate the combination of
KPT-330 and gemcitabine on anchorage-dependent and indepencent metastatic
tumor cell growth, pro and antiapoptotic protein expression in vitro and
in vivo orthotopic mouse model of metastatic human pancreatic
cancer.Methods: Human pancreatic cancer cell MiaPaCa-2 and human
metastatic pancreatic cancer cell L3.6pl were treated with different
concentrations of KPT-330 (0.1-10 M), and gemcitabine (0.1-10 M) alone
and in combination and anchorage-dependent growth recorded using MTT
assay for 72 h. The effect of KPT330 and gemcitabine alone and in
combination on anchorage independent growth were performed using soft
agar colony formation assay. Human metastatic pancreatic cancer cells
L3.6pl with luciferase were injected orthotopically into pancreas of
female athymic nude mice and were treated with 1) Vehicle (PBS 1 ml/kg,
ip, 2/week and PVP/PF68 1ml/kg, po, 3/week), 2) KPT330 (20 mg/kg, po,
3/week), 3) gemcitabine (100 mg/kg, ip, 2/week) and 4) KPT330 (10 mg/kg,
po, 3/week + gemcitabine (50 mg/kg, ip, 2/week) for 4 weeks. The tumor
volume and tumor weights were recorded after 4 weeks of treatment. The
CRM1, p53, proapoptotic Bax and antiapoptotic survivin protein
expressions in cells and tumor tissues were determined by Western
blotting.Results: KPT-330 and gemcitabine alone significantly inhibited
the anchorage-dependent growth in a concentration dependent manner. The
combination of the two drugs inhibited the growth synergistically and
almost completely inhibited the malignant transformation of anchorage
independent cell growth. KPT-330 and gemcitabine alone decreased tumor
volume and tumor weight compared to vehicle (pBackground: Pancreatic
cancer is the fourth leading cause of cancer-related deaths in the United
States. Gemcitabine is currently the standard chemotherapeutic agent for
advanced pancreatic cancer, but has limited efficacy due to
chemoresistance and dose escalation toxicity. Therefore an effective and
safer therapy is warranted against this deadly malignancy. Selective
nuclear export inhibitor KPT-330 inhibits the exportin 1 (CRM1) leading
to nuclear localization of tumor suppressor proteins. The aim of this
study was to evaluate the combination of KPT-330 and gemcitabine on
anchorage-dependent and indepencent metastatic tumor cell growth, pro and
antiapoptotic protein expression in vitro and in vivo orthotopic mouse
model of metastatic human pancreatic cancer.Methods: Human pancreatic
cancer cell MiaPaCa-2 and human metastatic pancreatic cancer cell L3.6pl
were treated with different concentrations of KPT-330 (0.1-10 M), and
gemcitabine (0.1-10 M) alone and in combination and anchorage-dependent
growth recorded using MTT assay for 72 h. The effect of KPT330 and
gemcitabine alone and in combination on anchorage independent growth were
performed using soft agar colony formation assay. Human metastatic
pancreatic cancer cells L3.6pl with luciferase were injected
orthotopically into pancreas of female athymic nude mice and were treated
with 1) Vehicle (PBS 1 ml/kg, ip, 2/week and PVP/PF68 1ml/kg, po,
3/week), 2) KPT330 (20 mg/kg, po, 3/week), 3) gemcitabine (100 mg/kg, ip,
2/week) and 4) KPT330 (10 mg/kg, po, 3/week + gemcitabine (50 mg/kg, ip,
2/week) for 4 weeks. The tumor volume and tumor weights were recorded
after 4 weeks of treatment. The CRM1, p53, proapoptotic Bax and
antiapoptotic survivin protein expressions in cells and tumor tissues
were determined by Western blotting.Results: KPT-330 and gemcitabine
alone significantly inhibited the anchorage-dependent growth in a
concentration dependent manner. The combination of the two drugs
inhibited the growth synergistically and almost completely inhibited the
malignant transformation of anchorage independent cell growth. KPT-330
and gemcitabine alone decreased tumor volume and tumor weight compared to
vehicle (p<0.05) but when combined together significantly decreased tumor
size and weight (PBackground: Pancreatic cancer is the fourth leading
cause of cancer-related deaths in the United States. Gemcitabine is
currently the standard chemotherapeutic agent for advanced pancreatic
cancer, but has limited efficacy due to chemoresistance and dose
escalation toxicity. Therefore an effective and safer therapy is
warranted against this deadly malignancy. Selective nuclear export
inhibitor KPT-330 inhibits the exportin 1 (CRM1) leading to nuclear
localization of tumor suppressor proteins. The aim of this study was to
evaluate the combination of KPT-330 and gemcitabine on
anchorage-dependent and indepencent metastatic tumor cell growth, pro and
antiapoptotic protein expression in vitro and in vivo orthotopic mouse
model of metastatic human pancreatic cancer.Methods: Human pancreatic
cancer cell MiaPaCa-2 and human metastatic pancreatic cancer cell L3.6pl
were treated with different concentrations of KPT-330 (0.1-10 M), and
gemcitabine (0.1-10 M) alone and in combination and anchorage-dependent
growth recorded using MTT assay for 72 h. The effect of KPT330 and
gemcitabine alone and in combination on anchorage independent growth were
performed using soft agar colony formation assay. Human metastatic
pancreatic cancer cells L3.6pl with luciferase were injected
orthotopically into pancreas of female athymic nude mice and were treated
with 1) Vehicle (PBS 1 ml/kg, ip, 2/week and PVP/PF68 1ml/kg, po,
3/week), 2) KPT330 (20 mg/kg, po, 3/week), 3) gemcitabine (100 mg/kg, ip,
2/week) and 4) KPT330 (10 mg/kg, po, 3/week + gemcitabine (50 mg/kg, ip,
2/week) for 4 weeks. The tumor volume and tumor weights were recorded
after 4 weeks of treatment. The CRM1, p53, proapoptotic Bax and
antiapoptotic survivin protein expressions in cells and tumor tissues
were determined by Western blotting.Results: KPT-330 and gemcitabine
alone significantly inhibited the anchorage-dependent growth in a
concentration dependent manner. The combination of the two drugs
inhibited the growth synergistically and almost completely inhibited the
malignant transformation of anchorage independent cell growth. KPT-330
and gemcitabine alone decreased tumor volume and tumor weight compared to
vehicle (p<0.05) but when combined together significantly decreased tumor
size and weight (P<0.001). KPT-330 and gemcitabine alone and in
combination induced apoptosis (Bax expression). KPT-330 but not
gemcitabine depleted CRM1 expression whereas no significant change was
observed in mutant p53 expression with any treatment. KPT330 and
gemcitabine alone moderately depleted survivin expression compared to
vehicle but when combined together, they markedly depleted survivin
expression.Conclusion: KPT-330 potentiates antitumor activity of
gemcitabine through inhibition of metastatic pancreatic tumor growth,
depletion of the antiapoptotic protein and induction of apoptosis in
human metastatic pancreatic cancer.

