Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Lichen-derived metabolites show synergistic effects in combination
with lapatinib and doxorubicin against breast cancer cells


Protolichesterinic acid (PA) is the major biologically active second
metabolite of the lichen Cetraria islandica. PA has anti-proliferative
effects on several types of cancer cells, but no effect on normal skin
fibroblasts and is an inhibitor of 5- and 12-lipoxygenase (LOX). Usnic
acid (UA) (from Cladonia arbuscula) has a wide range of biological
activities, e.g. anti-inflammatory, anti-viral and anti-bacterial
activity. UA affects pH gradients and inhibits growth and proliferation
of several cancer cells.Fatty acid synthase (FASN) is up-regulated in a
variety of cancers. Overexpression of human epidermal growth factor
receptor 2 (HER2) has been linked to increased translation of FASN. The
chemical structure of PA is very similar to the FASN inhibitor, C75. FASN
inhibition interacts synergistically with HER2 targeted drugs (e.g.
lapatinib) in breast cancer cells and can overcome resistance.
Doxorubicin stops DNA replication. The accumulation and distribution of
doxorubicin in cells is pH-dependent. Synergistic effects of the lichen
compounds and lapatinib or doxorubicin were estimated, using the CalcuSyn
software, in the breast cancer cell lines, SK-BR-3 (HER2+, high levels of
FASN) T-47D (P53-mutated) and MCF7. Significant synergistic effects were
obtained in SK-BR-3 cell line after combined treatment with PA/lapatinib,
and in T-47D cells but at higher concentrations. No synergism was seen in
MCF7 cells. Treatment with UA/doxorubicin showed marked synergism at all
tested concentrations in T-47D cells; none was seen in SK-BR-3 cells.
Synergism between a lichen compound and a drug can be related to
metabolic effects. Moreover the synergistic effects appear to be
cell-type-dependent.

