Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Network-based stratification of thyroid cancer


Many forms of cancer consist of multiple subtypes with different
molecular causes and clinical outcomes. Somatic tumor genomes provide a
rich new source of data for uncovering these subtypes, but have proven
difficult to compare as two tumors share little in their genetic
landscapes. Recently, we have introduced a method called network-based
stratification (NBS) which integrates somatic tumor genomes with gene
networks. This approach allows for stratification of cancer into
informative subtypes by clustering together patients who have mutations
within similar network regions. Here we apply NBS to a combination of
whole-exome somatic mutation data, copy number aberrations and gene
fusion events in a cohort of thyroid cancer (TC) patients, an as yet
unpublished part of The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA). Using NBS combined
with the HumanNet gene interaction network we were able to discover a
robust cluster assignment of thyroid patients into three subtypes. These
subtypes are found to significantly associate with histological type (X2
P = 5.42x10-22) and are also found to be predictive multiple clinical
variables such as predicted risk of recurrence (X2 P = 9.95x10-6,
estimated based on standard (TNM) staging by AJCC Cancer Staging Manual.
7th ed.), extra-thyroidal expansion(X2 P = 4.68x10-7), lymph node status
(pathological N stage, X2 P = 9.25x10-4), and pathological T stage (X2 P
= 4.46x10-3). In each subtype we highlight the characteristically
perturbed genes and subnetworks (Table 1) and further explore the
association of mRNA and protein expression to these subtypes. The study
demonstrates the utility of combining genomic profiles with interaction
networks, enabling the discovery of clinically meaningful mutation based
subtypes and provides genetic based subtypes with potential clinical
implications.


