Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comprehensive non-invasive tumor sequencing: High fidelity
sequencing of tumor-derived circulating cell-free DNA across 300 cancer
patients


Background: Analysis of circulating tumor nucleic acids by massively
parallel DNA sequencing has created an exciting new tool for capturing an
accurate, more complete and real-time picture of a patient's tumor
profile throughout the body and the course of disease. However, the
widespread use of this biomarker has been limited by the high-quality
false positives and non-systematic distortion present in current NGS
assays, especially where the tumor-derived fraction is low (Background:
Analysis of circulating tumor nucleic acids by massively parallel DNA
sequencing has created an exciting new tool for capturing an accurate,
more complete and real-time picture of a patient's tumor profile
throughout the body and the course of disease. However, the widespread
use of this biomarker has been limited by the high-quality false
positives and non-systematic distortion present in current NGS assays,
especially where the tumor-derived fraction is low (<1%). These
limitations have heretofore impeded routine clinical use of circulating
DNA in oncology.Methods: Our differentiated sequencing assay, Digital
Sequencing Technology, has enabled robust, ultra-sensitive and
ultra-specific detection of rare genomic abnormalities in cell-free
circulating DNA. Digital Sequencing relies on enabling single-molecule
sequencing using current next-gen sequencers. Our assay is able to
eliminate most of the errors and distortion introduced by these
sequencers and produce near-perfect representations of all rare
variants.Results: We have shown that in sequencing 0.1% cancer cell line
titrated samples across a broad 80kbp cancer panel, standard Illumina
sequencing generates several high-quality false positives with allele
frequencies of 0.05-5%, while our novel Digital Sequencing Technology
results in high sensitivity and completely error-free detection of rare
variants.Furthermore, we have applied our technology to analyze rare
tumor-derived cell-free DNA from more than 300 cancer patient plasma
samples collected at multiple sites (various US and international
locations) and across different cancer types. We investigated the
concordance of tumor mutation profiles derived from circulating cell-free
DNA with those derived from matched tumor biopsy samples in colorectal,
breast, NSCLC, prostate and melanoma cancers across patients (Stage
II-IV). We also studied the presence of de novo mutations (SNV and CNV)
in these cancer patient plasma samples. In general, the range of tumor
DNA in plasma was determined to be between 0.03%-85.9% in these studies.
This comprehensive dataset illustrates the broad power of cell-free DNA
analysis as a diagnostic biomarker in cancer patients.Conclusion: The
present work shows the strong potential clinical impact of Digital
Sequencing in analysis of circulating cell-free tumor-derived nucleic
acids, thereby allowing researchers and clinicians to comprehensively and
non-invasively monitor the genetic dimension of cancer throughout the
body.

