Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The immunocytokine NHS-IL12 as a potential cancer therapeutic


Targeted delivery of IL-12 might make this cytokine a safer, more
effective cancer therapeutic. Here we evaluated whether fusing IL-12 to a
tumor necrosis-targeting human IgG1 (NHS76) could improve its anti-tumor
efficacy in vivo. In vivo imaging and immunohistochemistry staining were
used to assess the ability of this novel immunocytokine (NHS-IL12) to
target murine tumors. The anti-tumor efficacy of NHS-IL12 was examined at
various doses and treatment schedules. Immune cell subset-depleting
antibodies, flow cytometric methods, and in vitro cytotoxicity and ELISA
assays were used to investigate the mechanisms of action of NHS-IL12.
This immunocytokine was investigated in several models and in all cases
NHS-IL12 outperformed recombinant IL-12 in anti-tumor activity. Depletion
of immune cell subsets revealed that the anti-tumor activity depends
primarily on CD8+ cells; mice that had complete tumor regression
following NHS-IL12 treatment displayed durable anti-tumor memory
responses. Combining NHS-IL12 treatment with a cancer vaccine, radiation,
or chemotherapy resulted in greater anti-tumor effects than each
individual therapy alone. These preclinical findings provide a rationale
for the clinical testing of this immunocytokine, both as a single agent
and in combination with vaccines, radiation, and chemotherapy. NHS-IL12
is currently being evaluated in a Phase 1 clinical trial (NCT01417546).

