Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ags67e, an anti-cd37 monomethyl auristatin e antibody (mmae) drug
conjugate as a potential therapeutic for non-hodgkin's lymphoma, chronic
lymphocytic leukemia and acute myeloid leukemia


We have developed AGS67E, an antibody drug conjugate that targets CD37, a
tetraspanin highly expressed on malignant B cells, for the potential
treatment of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL), chronic lymphocytic leukemia
(CLL) and acute myeloid leukemia (AML). AGS67E is a fully human anti-CD37
monoclonal IgG2 antibody conjugated to the potent microtubule-disrupting
agent, MMAE, via reduced cysteines and the protease cleavable linker,
maleimidocaproyl-valine-citrulline-p-aminobenzoyloxycarbonyl.AGS67E
exhibits potent in vitro binding, internalization and cytotoxicity on a
variety of NHL, CLL and AML models and patient-derived samples, including
CD34+CD38- leukemic stem cells. AGS67E also demonstrates potent
anti-tumor responses, including complete tumor regressions in a variety
of NHL, CLL and AML xenografts, including Rituxan refractory models and
patient-derived samples. In general, CD37 was highly expressed across all
models and a strong correlation was observed between the in vitro and in
vivo efficacy of AGS67E.To confirm binding of AGS67E in a variety of
normal and patient-derived NHL, CLL and AML samples, we developed flow
cytometry and immunohistochemistry (IHC) assays which have confirmed
reported CD37 expression data in NHL & CLL. In normal hematopoietic
cells, AGS67E bound strongly to B cells and to a much lesser extent to
monocytes, T cells, neutrophils and NK cells. AGS67E also bound with high
and similar affinity to cynomolgus monkey B cells and was equally
cytotoxic to these and human B cells. In other normal tissues, AGS67E
binding was only evident where lymphoid structures were apparent such as
in the spleen and lymph node. With respect to CD37 expression in NHL, CLL
and AML, AGS67E was found to bind to >80% of NHL and 100% of CLL and AML
samples.Taken together, our findings suggest that AGS67E may serve as a
potential therapeutic for NHL, CLL and AML. To our knowledge, this body
of work is also the first demonstration that CD37 is well expressed and
potentially drug-able in AML.

