Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Noninvasive monitoring of blood-brain barrier permeability for
antibodies by apoptosis imaging: optimization of treatment strategies for
maximal brain delivery


Purposes: Large molecules like antibodies cannot penetrate the intact
blood-brain barrier (BBB) in adequate amounts to deploy efficacy. Brain
shuttle antibodies for enhanced BBB crossing are considered to overcome
this obstacle. Thus, we established a non-invasive technology that
accelerates quantification of brain tumor delivery and pharmacodynamics
of antibodies.Experimental Procedures: The technology implies
intracranial implantation of a split-luciferase apoptosis reporter cell
line (Caspase-3/7 GloSensor) in SHO mice. An agonistic Death Receptor 5
antibody (anti-DR5) was used as model substance. To quantify BBB crossing
of systemically applied anti-DR5, we compared apoptosis inductions after
i.c. and i.v. application at different dosages.Results: Assuming a 100 %
drug delivery after i.c. application, the amount of antibody delivery
after i.v. application was calculated relative to its apoptosis
induction. We found that less than 1 % of the unmodified anti-DR5 passed
the BBB dose-dependently. These data were confirmed by 3-dimensional
fluorescence microscopy of explanted brain tissue. Significant anti-tumor
efficacy was detected when anti-DR5 is given in adequately high dosages.
We further demonstrate in different brain tumor models that unspecific
IgG antibody penetration into brain tumors is presumably enhanced by a
slightly impaired BBB.Conclusions: Our technology facilitates the
quantification of BBB penetration by measuring apoptosis non-invasively
without using radiolabeling approaches. This orthotopic model accelerates
the assessment of i.v. dosage optimization and brain shuttle systems for
maximal anti-tumor efficacy in brain tumors.

