Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel regulatory region of the MYC oncogene decreases Myc
transcriptional activity


MYC is a transcription factor that contributes to over 50% of cancers.
While deregulated protein expression of MYC is an important factor
driving tumorigenesis, remarkably little is known about the
post-translational modifications (PTMs) that are necessary for MYC to
function as an active oncogene. Given the important role of PTMs in the
regulation of protein activity and stability, our overall objective is to
further characterize novel PTMs of MYC, and the functional contribution
of these modifications to the ability of the MYC to transform cells.
Using a structure-function approach, we have identified six C-terminal
lysines that can modulate the ability of MYC to transform cells. By
utilizing lysine to arginine mutations (6KR) to abrogate signaling
through these residues, we show that MYC 6KR increases
anchorage-independent colony growth compared with MYC-WT. Moreover, this
mutant was also more potent than WT in promoting xenograft tumour growth.
Through target gene expression analysis and luciferase reporter assays,
we show that 6KR has enhanced transcriptional activity compared with
MYC-WT. To characterize the modifications that can occur at these lysine
residues, we have performed mass spectrometry analysis and have
identified a number of PTMs that can occur in this region. Furthermore,
we have conducted BioID to identify MYC interactors that change in
association with 6KR MYC compared to MYC-WT. We theorize that identifying
the signaling pathways leading to post-translational modification of this
region will be an important first step in the development of inhibitors
targeting MYC induced transformation.

