Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effects of cabozantinib on breast cancer bone metastases, overall
survival, and bone mass in a mouse model


Rapid tumor growth results in tumor hypoxia and the induction of key
mediators of angiogenesis including VEGF and MET. Cells in the bone
microenvironment, including osteoblasts and osteoclasts, express MET and
VEGFRs and respond to HGF and VEGF. Cabozantinib (cabo) is an inhibitor
of tyrosine kinases including MET, VEGFR2, and RET. Cabo treatment in
preclinical models results in tumor regression and blockade of tumor
invasiveness and metastasis, and has shown clinical activity in patients
with castration-resistant prostate cancer and breast cancer tumors with
bone metastases. To elucidate the mechanisms underlying some of these
clinical observations, the effects of cabo were studied in a human breast
cancer bone xenograft and in a non-tumor bearing model. Female nude mice
were inoculated with MDA-MB-231 cells into the left cardiac ventricle and
treated with cabo (10 or 60 mg/kg/day). Treatment was initiated 13 days
after tumor inoculation when osteolytic lesions were detectable on x-ray,
and continued for 11 days. In a non-tumor model, female nude mice (5
weeks old) were treated with similar doses for 28 days. Tumor-bearing
mice treated with cabo 60 mg/kg showed a reduction in osteolytic lesion
area as measured by x-ray (pRapid tumor growth results in tumor hypoxia
and the induction of key mediators of angiogenesis including VEGF and
MET. Cells in the bone microenvironment, including osteoblasts and
osteoclasts, express MET and VEGFRs and respond to HGF and VEGF.
Cabozantinib (cabo) is an inhibitor of tyrosine kinases including MET,
VEGFR2, and RET. Cabo treatment in preclinical models results in tumor
regression and blockade of tumor invasiveness and metastasis, and has
shown clinical activity in patients with castration-resistant prostate
cancer and breast cancer tumors with bone metastases. To elucidate the
mechanisms underlying some of these clinical observations, the effects of
cabo were studied in a human breast cancer bone xenograft and in a
non-tumor bearing model. Female nude mice were inoculated with MDA-MB-231
cells into the left cardiac ventricle and treated with cabo (10 or 60
mg/kg/day). Treatment was initiated 13 days after tumor inoculation when
osteolytic lesions were detectable on x-ray, and continued for 11 days.
In a non-tumor model, female nude mice (5 weeks old) were treated with
similar doses for 28 days. Tumor-bearing mice treated with cabo 60 mg/kg
showed a reduction in osteolytic lesion area as measured by x-ray
(p<0.05). Cabo treatment at both doses reduced the intensity of photon
emission from tumors as measured by optical imaging using a Cathepsin
K-linked fluorescent probe (pRapid tumor growth results in tumor hypoxia
and the induction of key mediators of angiogenesis including VEGF and
MET. Cells in the bone microenvironment, including osteoblasts and
osteoclasts, express MET and VEGFRs and respond to HGF and VEGF.
Cabozantinib (cabo) is an inhibitor of tyrosine kinases including MET,
VEGFR2, and RET. Cabo treatment in preclinical models results in tumor
regression and blockade of tumor invasiveness and metastasis, and has
shown clinical activity in patients with castration-resistant prostate
cancer and breast cancer tumors with bone metastases. To elucidate the
mechanisms underlying some of these clinical observations, the effects of
cabo were studied in a human breast cancer bone xenograft and in a
non-tumor bearing model. Female nude mice were inoculated with MDA-MB-231
cells into the left cardiac ventricle and treated with cabo (10 or 60
mg/kg/day). Treatment was initiated 13 days after tumor inoculation when
osteolytic lesions were detectable on x-ray, and continued for 11 days.
In a non-tumor model, female nude mice (5 weeks old) were treated with
similar doses for 28 days. Tumor-bearing mice treated with cabo 60 mg/kg
showed a reduction in osteolytic lesion area as measured by x-ray
(p<0.05). Cabo treatment at both doses reduced the intensity of photon
emission from tumors as measured by optical imaging using a Cathepsin
K-linked fluorescent probe (p<0.01). Histomorphometric analysis showed a
reduction in tumor burden in mice treated with cabo 60 mg/kg (pRapid
tumor growth results in tumor hypoxia and the induction of key mediators
of angiogenesis including VEGF and MET. Cells in the bone
microenvironment, including osteoblasts and osteoclasts, express MET and
VEGFRs and respond to HGF and VEGF. Cabozantinib (cabo) is an inhibitor
of tyrosine kinases including MET, VEGFR2, and RET. Cabo treatment in
preclinical models results in tumor regression and blockade of tumor
invasiveness and metastasis, and has shown clinical activity in patients
with castration-resistant prostate cancer and breast cancer tumors with
bone metastases. To elucidate the mechanisms underlying some of these
clinical observations, the effects of cabo were studied in a human breast
cancer bone xenograft and in a non-tumor bearing model. Female nude mice
were inoculated with MDA-MB-231 cells into the left cardiac ventricle and
treated with cabo (10 or 60 mg/kg/day). Treatment was initiated 13 days
after tumor inoculation when osteolytic lesions were detectable on x-ray,
and continued for 11 days. In a non-tumor model, female nude mice (5
weeks old) were treated with similar doses for 28 days. Tumor-bearing
mice treated with cabo 60 mg/kg showed a reduction in osteolytic lesion
area as measured by x-ray (p<0.05). Cabo treatment at both doses reduced
the intensity of photon emission from tumors as measured by optical
imaging using a Cathepsin K-linked fluorescent probe (p<0.01).
Histomorphometric analysis showed a reduction in tumor burden in mice
treated with cabo 60 mg/kg (p<0.05). This was accompanied by reduction in
osteoclast numbers at the tumor bone interface with cabo 60 mg/kg (pRapid
tumor growth results in tumor hypoxia and the induction of key mediators
of angiogenesis including VEGF and MET. Cells in the bone
microenvironment, including osteoblasts and osteoclasts, express MET and
VEGFRs and respond to HGF and VEGF. Cabozantinib (cabo) is an inhibitor
of tyrosine kinases including MET, VEGFR2, and RET. Cabo treatment in
preclinical models results in tumor regression and blockade of tumor
invasiveness and metastasis, and has shown clinical activity in patients
with castration-resistant prostate cancer and breast cancer tumors with
bone metastases. To elucidate the mechanisms underlying some of these
clinical observations, the effects of cabo were studied in a human breast
cancer bone xenograft and in a non-tumor bearing model. Female nude mice
were inoculated with MDA-MB-231 cells into the left cardiac ventricle and
treated with cabo (10 or 60 mg/kg/day). Treatment was initiated 13 days
after tumor inoculation when osteolytic lesions were detectable on x-ray,
and continued for 11 days. In a non-tumor model, female nude mice (5
weeks old) were treated with similar doses for 28 days. Tumor-bearing
mice treated with cabo 60 mg/kg showed a reduction in osteolytic lesion
area as measured by x-ray (p<0.05). Cabo treatment at both doses reduced
the intensity of photon emission from tumors as measured by optical
imaging using a Cathepsin K-linked fluorescent probe (p<0.01).
Histomorphometric analysis showed a reduction in tumor burden in mice
treated with cabo 60 mg/kg (p<0.05). This was accompanied by reduction in
osteoclast numbers at the tumor bone interface with cabo 60 mg/kg
(p<0.01) and 10 mg/kg (PRapid tumor growth results in tumor hypoxia and
the induction of key mediators of angiogenesis including VEGF and MET.
Cells in the bone microenvironment, including osteoblasts and
osteoclasts, express MET and VEGFRs and respond to HGF and VEGF.
Cabozantinib (cabo) is an inhibitor of tyrosine kinases including MET,
VEGFR2, and RET. Cabo treatment in preclinical models results in tumor
regression and blockade of tumor invasiveness and metastasis, and has
shown clinical activity in patients with castration-resistant prostate
cancer and breast cancer tumors with bone metastases. To elucidate the
mechanisms underlying some of these clinical observations, the effects of
cabo were studied in a human breast cancer bone xenograft and in a
non-tumor bearing model. Female nude mice were inoculated with MDA-MB-231
cells into the left cardiac ventricle and treated with cabo (10 or 60
mg/kg/day). Treatment was initiated 13 days after tumor inoculation when
osteolytic lesions were detectable on x-ray, and continued for 11 days.
In a non-tumor model, female nude mice (5 weeks old) were treated with
similar doses for 28 days. Tumor-bearing mice treated with cabo 60 mg/kg
showed a reduction in osteolytic lesion area as measured by x-ray
(p<0.05). Cabo treatment at both doses reduced the intensity of photon
emission from tumors as measured by optical imaging using a Cathepsin
K-linked fluorescent probe (p<0.01). Histomorphometric analysis showed a
reduction in tumor burden in mice treated with cabo 60 mg/kg (p<0.05).
This was accompanied by reduction in osteoclast numbers at the tumor bone
interface with cabo 60 mg/kg (p<0.01) and 10 mg/kg (P<0.05). Mice treated
with cabo 60 mg/kg did not exhibit as much weight loss as vehicle-treated
mice (PRapid tumor growth results in tumor hypoxia and the induction of
key mediators of angiogenesis including VEGF and MET. Cells in the bone
microenvironment, including osteoblasts and osteoclasts, express MET and
VEGFRs and respond to HGF and VEGF. Cabozantinib (cabo) is an inhibitor
of tyrosine kinases including MET, VEGFR2, and RET. Cabo treatment in
preclinical models results in tumor regression and blockade of tumor
invasiveness and metastasis, and has shown clinical activity in patients
with castration-resistant prostate cancer and breast cancer tumors with
bone metastases. To elucidate the mechanisms underlying some of these
clinical observations, the effects of cabo were studied in a human breast
cancer bone xenograft and in a non-tumor bearing model. Female nude mice
were inoculated with MDA-MB-231 cells into the left cardiac ventricle and
treated with cabo (10 or 60 mg/kg/day). Treatment was initiated 13 days
after tumor inoculation when osteolytic lesions were detectable on x-ray,
and continued for 11 days. In a non-tumor model, female nude mice (5
weeks old) were treated with similar doses for 28 days. Tumor-bearing
mice treated with cabo 60 mg/kg showed a reduction in osteolytic lesion
area as measured by x-ray (p<0.05). Cabo treatment at both doses reduced
the intensity of photon emission from tumors as measured by optical
imaging using a Cathepsin K-linked fluorescent probe (p<0.01).
Histomorphometric analysis showed a reduction in tumor burden in mice
treated with cabo 60 mg/kg (p<0.05). This was accompanied by reduction in
osteoclast numbers at the tumor bone interface with cabo 60 mg/kg
(p<0.01) and 10 mg/kg (P<0.05). Mice treated with cabo 60 mg/kg did not
exhibit as much weight loss as vehicle-treated mice (P<0.05). Mice
treated with cabo at both doses showed significantly improved survival
compared with vehicle treated mice (pRapid tumor growth results in tumor
hypoxia and the induction of key mediators of angiogenesis including VEGF
and MET. Cells in the bone microenvironment, including osteoblasts and
osteoclasts, express MET and VEGFRs and respond to HGF and VEGF.
Cabozantinib (cabo) is an inhibitor of tyrosine kinases including MET,
VEGFR2, and RET. Cabo treatment in preclinical models results in tumor
regression and blockade of tumor invasiveness and metastasis, and has
shown clinical activity in patients with castration-resistant prostate
cancer and breast cancer tumors with bone metastases. To elucidate the
mechanisms underlying some of these clinical observations, the effects of
cabo were studied in a human breast cancer bone xenograft and in a
non-tumor bearing model. Female nude mice were inoculated with MDA-MB-231
cells into the left cardiac ventricle and treated with cabo (10 or 60
mg/kg/day). Treatment was initiated 13 days after tumor inoculation when
osteolytic lesions were detectable on x-ray, and continued for 11 days.
In a non-tumor model, female nude mice (5 weeks old) were treated with
similar doses for 28 days. Tumor-bearing mice treated with cabo 60 mg/kg
showed a reduction in osteolytic lesion area as measured by x-ray
(p<0.05). Cabo treatment at both doses reduced the intensity of photon
emission from tumors as measured by optical imaging using a Cathepsin
K-linked fluorescent probe (p<0.01). Histomorphometric analysis showed a
reduction in tumor burden in mice treated with cabo 60 mg/kg (p<0.05).
This was accompanied by reduction in osteoclast numbers at the tumor bone
interface with cabo 60 mg/kg (p<0.01) and 10 mg/kg (P<0.05). Mice treated
with cabo 60 mg/kg did not exhibit as much weight loss as vehicle-treated
mice (P<0.05). Mice treated with cabo at both doses showed significantly
improved survival compared with vehicle treated mice (p<0.01). In
non-tumor bearing mice, bone mineral density (BMD) increased at the tibia
with cabo 60 mg/kg (pRapid tumor growth results in tumor hypoxia and the
induction of key mediators of angiogenesis including VEGF and MET. Cells
in the bone microenvironment, including osteoblasts and osteoclasts,
express MET and VEGFRs and respond to HGF and VEGF. Cabozantinib (cabo)
is an inhibitor of tyrosine kinases including MET, VEGFR2, and RET. Cabo
treatment in preclinical models results in tumor regression and blockade
of tumor invasiveness and metastasis, and has shown clinical activity in
patients with castration-resistant prostate cancer and breast cancer
tumors with bone metastases. To elucidate the mechanisms underlying some
of these clinical observations, the effects of cabo were studied in a
human breast cancer bone xenograft and in a non-tumor bearing model.
Female nude mice were inoculated with MDA-MB-231 cells into the left
cardiac ventricle and treated with cabo (10 or 60 mg/kg/day). Treatment
was initiated 13 days after tumor inoculation when osteolytic lesions
were detectable on x-ray, and continued for 11 days. In a non-tumor
model, female nude mice (5 weeks old) were treated with similar doses for
28 days. Tumor-bearing mice treated with cabo 60 mg/kg showed a reduction
in osteolytic lesion area as measured by x-ray (p<0.05). Cabo treatment
at both doses reduced the intensity of photon emission from tumors as
measured by optical imaging using a Cathepsin K-linked fluorescent probe
(p<0.01). Histomorphometric analysis showed a reduction in tumor burden
in mice treated with cabo 60 mg/kg (p<0.05). This was accompanied by
reduction in osteoclast numbers at the tumor bone interface with cabo 60
mg/kg (p<0.01) and 10 mg/kg (P<0.05). Mice treated with cabo 60 mg/kg did
not exhibit as much weight loss as vehicle-treated mice (P<0.05). Mice
treated with cabo at both doses showed significantly improved survival
compared with vehicle treated mice (p<0.01). In non-tumor bearing mice,
bone mineral density (BMD) increased at the tibia with cabo 60 mg/kg
(p<0.001). MicroCT data analysis showed that treatment of mice with cabo
60 mg/kg resulted in an increase in trabecular bone volume (TBV) at the
femur (pRapid tumor growth results in tumor hypoxia and the induction of
key mediators of angiogenesis including VEGF and MET. Cells in the bone
microenvironment, including osteoblasts and osteoclasts, express MET and
VEGFRs and respond to HGF and VEGF. Cabozantinib (cabo) is an inhibitor
of tyrosine kinases including MET, VEGFR2, and RET. Cabo treatment in
preclinical models results in tumor regression and blockade of tumor
invasiveness and metastasis, and has shown clinical activity in patients
with castration-resistant prostate cancer and breast cancer tumors with
bone metastases. To elucidate the mechanisms underlying some of these
clinical observations, the effects of cabo were studied in a human breast
cancer bone xenograft and in a non-tumor bearing model. Female nude mice
were inoculated with MDA-MB-231 cells into the left cardiac ventricle and
treated with cabo (10 or 60 mg/kg/day). Treatment was initiated 13 days
after tumor inoculation when osteolytic lesions were detectable on x-ray,
and continued for 11 days. In a non-tumor model, female nude mice (5
weeks old) were treated with similar doses for 28 days. Tumor-bearing
mice treated with cabo 60 mg/kg showed a reduction in osteolytic lesion
area as measured by x-ray (p<0.05). Cabo treatment at both doses reduced
the intensity of photon emission from tumors as measured by optical
imaging using a Cathepsin K-linked fluorescent probe (p<0.01).
Histomorphometric analysis showed a reduction in tumor burden in mice
treated with cabo 60 mg/kg (p<0.05). This was accompanied by reduction in
osteoclast numbers at the tumor bone interface with cabo 60 mg/kg
(p<0.01) and 10 mg/kg (P<0.05). Mice treated with cabo 60 mg/kg did not
exhibit as much weight loss as vehicle-treated mice (P<0.05). Mice
treated with cabo at both doses showed significantly improved survival
compared with vehicle treated mice (p<0.01). In non-tumor bearing mice,
bone mineral density (BMD) increased at the tibia with cabo 60 mg/kg
(p<0.001). MicroCT data analysis showed that treatment of mice with cabo
60 mg/kg resulted in an increase in trabecular bone volume (TBV) at the
femur (p<0.001), tibia (pRapid tumor growth results in tumor hypoxia and
the induction of key mediators of angiogenesis including VEGF and MET.
Cells in the bone microenvironment, including osteoblasts and
osteoclasts, express MET and VEGFRs and respond to HGF and VEGF.
Cabozantinib (cabo) is an inhibitor of tyrosine kinases including MET,
VEGFR2, and RET. Cabo treatment in preclinical models results in tumor
regression and blockade of tumor invasiveness and metastasis, and has
shown clinical activity in patients with castration-resistant prostate
cancer and breast cancer tumors with bone metastases. To elucidate the
mechanisms underlying some of these clinical observations, the effects of
cabo were studied in a human breast cancer bone xenograft and in a
non-tumor bearing model. Female nude mice were inoculated with MDA-MB-231
cells into the left cardiac ventricle and treated with cabo (10 or 60
mg/kg/day). Treatment was initiated 13 days after tumor inoculation when
osteolytic lesions were detectable on x-ray, and continued for 11 days.
In a non-tumor model, female nude mice (5 weeks old) were treated with
similar doses for 28 days. Tumor-bearing mice treated with cabo 60 mg/kg
showed a reduction in osteolytic lesion area as measured by x-ray
(p<0.05). Cabo treatment at both doses reduced the intensity of photon
emission from tumors as measured by optical imaging using a Cathepsin
K-linked fluorescent probe (p<0.01). Histomorphometric analysis showed a
reduction in tumor burden in mice treated with cabo 60 mg/kg (p<0.05).
This was accompanied by reduction in osteoclast numbers at the tumor bone
interface with cabo 60 mg/kg (p<0.01) and 10 mg/kg (P<0.05). Mice treated
with cabo 60 mg/kg did not exhibit as much weight loss as vehicle-treated
mice (P<0.05). Mice treated with cabo at both doses showed significantly
improved survival compared with vehicle treated mice (p<0.01). In
non-tumor bearing mice, bone mineral density (BMD) increased at the tibia
with cabo 60 mg/kg (p<0.001). MicroCT data analysis showed that treatment
of mice with cabo 60 mg/kg resulted in an increase in trabecular bone
volume (TBV) at the femur (p<0.001), tibia (p<0.001) and lumbar spine
(pRapid tumor growth results in tumor hypoxia and the induction of key
mediators of angiogenesis including VEGF and MET. Cells in the bone
microenvironment, including osteoblasts and osteoclasts, express MET and
VEGFRs and respond to HGF and VEGF. Cabozantinib (cabo) is an inhibitor
of tyrosine kinases including MET, VEGFR2, and RET. Cabo treatment in
preclinical models results in tumor regression and blockade of tumor
invasiveness and metastasis, and has shown clinical activity in patients
with castration-resistant prostate cancer and breast cancer tumors with
bone metastases. To elucidate the mechanisms underlying some of these
clinical observations, the effects of cabo were studied in a human breast
cancer bone xenograft and in a non-tumor bearing model. Female nude mice
were inoculated with MDA-MB-231 cells into the left cardiac ventricle and
treated with cabo (10 or 60 mg/kg/day). Treatment was initiated 13 days
after tumor inoculation when osteolytic lesions were detectable on x-ray,
and continued for 11 days. In a non-tumor model, female nude mice (5
weeks old) were treated with similar doses for 28 days. Tumor-bearing
mice treated with cabo 60 mg/kg showed a reduction in osteolytic lesion
area as measured by x-ray (p<0.05). Cabo treatment at both doses reduced
the intensity of photon emission from tumors as measured by optical
imaging using a Cathepsin K-linked fluorescent probe (p<0.01).
Histomorphometric analysis showed a reduction in tumor burden in mice
treated with cabo 60 mg/kg (p<0.05). This was accompanied by reduction in
osteoclast numbers at the tumor bone interface with cabo 60 mg/kg
(p<0.01) and 10 mg/kg (P<0.05). Mice treated with cabo 60 mg/kg did not
exhibit as much weight loss as vehicle-treated mice (P<0.05). Mice
treated with cabo at both doses showed significantly improved survival
compared with vehicle treated mice (p<0.01). In non-tumor bearing mice,
bone mineral density (BMD) increased at the tibia with cabo 60 mg/kg
(p<0.001). MicroCT data analysis showed that treatment of mice with cabo
60 mg/kg resulted in an increase in trabecular bone volume (TBV) at the
femur (p<0.001), tibia (p<0.001) and lumbar spine (p<0.05). This was
accompanied by an increase in trabecular thickness (pRapid tumor growth
results in tumor hypoxia and the induction of key mediators of
angiogenesis including VEGF and MET. Cells in the bone microenvironment,
including osteoblasts and osteoclasts, express MET and VEGFRs and respond
to HGF and VEGF. Cabozantinib (cabo) is an inhibitor of tyrosine kinases
including MET, VEGFR2, and RET. Cabo treatment in preclinical models
results in tumor regression and blockade of tumor invasiveness and
metastasis, and has shown clinical activity in patients with
castration-resistant prostate cancer and breast cancer tumors with bone
metastases. To elucidate the mechanisms underlying some of these clinical
observations, the effects of cabo were studied in a human breast cancer
bone xenograft and in a non-tumor bearing model. Female nude mice were
inoculated with MDA-MB-231 cells into the left cardiac ventricle and
treated with cabo (10 or 60 mg/kg/day). Treatment was initiated 13 days
after tumor inoculation when osteolytic lesions were detectable on x-ray,
and continued for 11 days. In a non-tumor model, female nude mice (5
weeks old) were treated with similar doses for 28 days. Tumor-bearing
mice treated with cabo 60 mg/kg showed a reduction in osteolytic lesion
area as measured by x-ray (p<0.05). Cabo treatment at both doses reduced
the intensity of photon emission from tumors as measured by optical
imaging using a Cathepsin K-linked fluorescent probe (p<0.01).
Histomorphometric analysis showed a reduction in tumor burden in mice
treated with cabo 60 mg/kg (p<0.05). This was accompanied by reduction in
osteoclast numbers at the tumor bone interface with cabo 60 mg/kg
(p<0.01) and 10 mg/kg (P<0.05). Mice treated with cabo 60 mg/kg did not
exhibit as much weight loss as vehicle-treated mice (P<0.05). Mice
treated with cabo at both doses showed significantly improved survival
compared with vehicle treated mice (p<0.01). In non-tumor bearing mice,
bone mineral density (BMD) increased at the tibia with cabo 60 mg/kg
(p<0.001). MicroCT data analysis showed that treatment of mice with cabo
60 mg/kg resulted in an increase in trabecular bone volume (TBV) at the
femur (p<0.001), tibia (p<0.001) and lumbar spine (p<0.05). This was
accompanied by an increase in trabecular thickness (p<0.001) and
connectivity density (femur pRapid tumor growth results in tumor hypoxia
and the induction of key mediators of angiogenesis including VEGF and
MET. Cells in the bone microenvironment, including osteoblasts and
osteoclasts, express MET and VEGFRs and respond to HGF and VEGF.
Cabozantinib (cabo) is an inhibitor of tyrosine kinases including MET,
VEGFR2, and RET. Cabo treatment in preclinical models results in tumor
regression and blockade of tumor invasiveness and metastasis, and has
shown clinical activity in patients with castration-resistant prostate
cancer and breast cancer tumors with bone metastases. To elucidate the
mechanisms underlying some of these clinical observations, the effects of
cabo were studied in a human breast cancer bone xenograft and in a
non-tumor bearing model. Female nude mice were inoculated with MDA-MB-231
cells into the left cardiac ventricle and treated with cabo (10 or 60
mg/kg/day). Treatment was initiated 13 days after tumor inoculation when
osteolytic lesions were detectable on x-ray, and continued for 11 days.
In a non-tumor model, female nude mice (5 weeks old) were treated with
similar doses for 28 days. Tumor-bearing mice treated with cabo 60 mg/kg
showed a reduction in osteolytic lesion area as measured by x-ray
(p<0.05). Cabo treatment at both doses reduced the intensity of photon
emission from tumors as measured by optical imaging using a Cathepsin
K-linked fluorescent probe (p<0.01). Histomorphometric analysis showed a
reduction in tumor burden in mice treated with cabo 60 mg/kg (p<0.05).
This was accompanied by reduction in osteoclast numbers at the tumor bone
interface with cabo 60 mg/kg (p<0.01) and 10 mg/kg (P<0.05). Mice treated
with cabo 60 mg/kg did not exhibit as much weight loss as vehicle-treated
mice (P<0.05). Mice treated with cabo at both doses showed significantly
improved survival compared with vehicle treated mice (p<0.01). In
non-tumor bearing mice, bone mineral density (BMD) increased at the tibia
with cabo 60 mg/kg (p<0.001). MicroCT data analysis showed that treatment
of mice with cabo 60 mg/kg resulted in an increase in trabecular bone
volume (TBV) at the femur (p<0.001), tibia (p<0.001) and lumbar spine
(p<0.05). This was accompanied by an increase in trabecular thickness
(p<0.001) and connectivity density (femur p<0.001, tibia pRapid tumor
growth results in tumor hypoxia and the induction of key mediators of
angiogenesis including VEGF and MET. Cells in the bone microenvironment,
including osteoblasts and osteoclasts, express MET and VEGFRs and respond
to HGF and VEGF. Cabozantinib (cabo) is an inhibitor of tyrosine kinases
including MET, VEGFR2, and RET. Cabo treatment in preclinical models
results in tumor regression and blockade of tumor invasiveness and
metastasis, and has shown clinical activity in patients with
castration-resistant prostate cancer and breast cancer tumors with bone
metastases. To elucidate the mechanisms underlying some of these clinical
observations, the effects of cabo were studied in a human breast cancer
bone xenograft and in a non-tumor bearing model. Female nude mice were
inoculated with MDA-MB-231 cells into the left cardiac ventricle and
treated with cabo (10 or 60 mg/kg/day). Treatment was initiated 13 days
after tumor inoculation when osteolytic lesions were detectable on x-ray,
and continued for 11 days. In a non-tumor model, female nude mice (5
weeks old) were treated with similar doses for 28 days. Tumor-bearing
mice treated with cabo 60 mg/kg showed a reduction in osteolytic lesion
area as measured by x-ray (p<0.05). Cabo treatment at both doses reduced
the intensity of photon emission from tumors as measured by optical
imaging using a Cathepsin K-linked fluorescent probe (p<0.01).
Histomorphometric analysis showed a reduction in tumor burden in mice
treated with cabo 60 mg/kg (p<0.05). This was accompanied by reduction in
osteoclast numbers at the tumor bone interface with cabo 60 mg/kg
(p<0.01) and 10 mg/kg (P<0.05). Mice treated with cabo 60 mg/kg did not
exhibit as much weight loss as vehicle-treated mice (P<0.05). Mice
treated with cabo at both doses showed significantly improved survival
compared with vehicle treated mice (p<0.01). In non-tumor bearing mice,
bone mineral density (BMD) increased at the tibia with cabo 60 mg/kg
(p<0.001). MicroCT data analysis showed that treatment of mice with cabo
60 mg/kg resulted in an increase in trabecular bone volume (TBV) at the
femur (p<0.001), tibia (p<0.001) and lumbar spine (p<0.05). This was
accompanied by an increase in trabecular thickness (p<0.001) and
connectivity density (femur p<0.001, tibia p<0.01), a reduction in
trabecular spacing (pRapid tumor growth results in tumor hypoxia and the
induction of key mediators of angiogenesis including VEGF and MET. Cells
in the bone microenvironment, including osteoblasts and osteoclasts,
express MET and VEGFRs and respond to HGF and VEGF. Cabozantinib (cabo)
is an inhibitor of tyrosine kinases including MET, VEGFR2, and RET. Cabo
treatment in preclinical models results in tumor regression and blockade
of tumor invasiveness and metastasis, and has shown clinical activity in
patients with castration-resistant prostate cancer and breast cancer
tumors with bone metastases. To elucidate the mechanisms underlying some
of these clinical observations, the effects of cabo were studied in a
human breast cancer bone xenograft and in a non-tumor bearing model.
Female nude mice were inoculated with MDA-MB-231 cells into the left
cardiac ventricle and treated with cabo (10 or 60 mg/kg/day). Treatment
was initiated 13 days after tumor inoculation when osteolytic lesions
were detectable on x-ray, and continued for 11 days. In a non-tumor
model, female nude mice (5 weeks old) were treated with similar doses for
28 days. Tumor-bearing mice treated with cabo 60 mg/kg showed a reduction
in osteolytic lesion area as measured by x-ray (p<0.05). Cabo treatment
at both doses reduced the intensity of photon emission from tumors as
measured by optical imaging using a Cathepsin K-linked fluorescent probe
(p<0.01). Histomorphometric analysis showed a reduction in tumor burden
in mice treated with cabo 60 mg/kg (p<0.05). This was accompanied by
reduction in osteoclast numbers at the tumor bone interface with cabo 60
mg/kg (p<0.01) and 10 mg/kg (P<0.05). Mice treated with cabo 60 mg/kg did
not exhibit as much weight loss as vehicle-treated mice (P<0.05). Mice
treated with cabo at both doses showed significantly improved survival
compared with vehicle treated mice (p<0.01). In non-tumor bearing mice,
bone mineral density (BMD) increased at the tibia with cabo 60 mg/kg
(p<0.001). MicroCT data analysis showed that treatment of mice with cabo
60 mg/kg resulted in an increase in trabecular bone volume (TBV) at the
femur (p<0.001), tibia (p<0.001) and lumbar spine (p<0.05). This was
accompanied by an increase in trabecular thickness (p<0.001) and
connectivity density (femur p<0.001, tibia p<0.01), a reduction in
trabecular spacing (p<0.001 tibia & femur), and an increase in structure
model index (pRapid tumor growth results in tumor hypoxia and the
induction of key mediators of angiogenesis including VEGF and MET. Cells
in the bone microenvironment, including osteoblasts and osteoclasts,
express MET and VEGFRs and respond to HGF and VEGF. Cabozantinib (cabo)
is an inhibitor of tyrosine kinases including MET, VEGFR2, and RET. Cabo
treatment in preclinical models results in tumor regression and blockade
of tumor invasiveness and metastasis, and has shown clinical activity in
patients with castration-resistant prostate cancer and breast cancer
tumors with bone metastases. To elucidate the mechanisms underlying some
of these clinical observations, the effects of cabo were studied in a
human breast cancer bone xenograft and in a non-tumor bearing model.
Female nude mice were inoculated with MDA-MB-231 cells into the left
cardiac ventricle and treated with cabo (10 or 60 mg/kg/day). Treatment
was initiated 13 days after tumor inoculation when osteolytic lesions
were detectable on x-ray, and continued for 11 days. In a non-tumor
model, female nude mice (5 weeks old) were treated with similar doses for
28 days. Tumor-bearing mice treated with cabo 60 mg/kg showed a reduction
in osteolytic lesion area as measured by x-ray (p<0.05). Cabo treatment
at both doses reduced the intensity of photon emission from tumors as
measured by optical imaging using a Cathepsin K-linked fluorescent probe
(p<0.01). Histomorphometric analysis showed a reduction in tumor burden
in mice treated with cabo 60 mg/kg (p<0.05). This was accompanied by
reduction in osteoclast numbers at the tumor bone interface with cabo 60
mg/kg (p<0.01) and 10 mg/kg (P<0.05). Mice treated with cabo 60 mg/kg did
not exhibit as much weight loss as vehicle-treated mice (P<0.05). Mice
treated with cabo at both doses showed significantly improved survival
compared with vehicle treated mice (p<0.01). In non-tumor bearing mice,
bone mineral density (BMD) increased at the tibia with cabo 60 mg/kg
(p<0.001). MicroCT data analysis showed that treatment of mice with cabo
60 mg/kg resulted in an increase in trabecular bone volume (TBV) at the
femur (p<0.001), tibia (p<0.001) and lumbar spine (p<0.05). This was
accompanied by an increase in trabecular thickness (p<0.001) and
connectivity density (femur p<0.001, tibia p<0.01), a reduction in
trabecular spacing (p<0.001 tibia & femur), and an increase in structure
model index (p<0.001). No difference was detected in cortical bone
parameters with either dose. In conclusion, cabo reduced osteolytic
lesions, reduced tumor burden, reduced osteoclast number and improved
survival in mice with established breast cancer bone metastases, and
increased trabecular bone volume in non-tumor bearing mice. Studies to
further characterize the molecular mechanisms underlying these effects
are ongoing.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

