Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Proxalutamide (GT0918), a potent androgen receptor pathway
inhibitor


Elevated AR expression or mutations in tumor cells, causing resistance to
first generation AR antagonist agents, are considered the main driver of
castration resistant prostate cancer (CRPC). MDV3100, a more potent AR
antagonist ( 5x vs bicalutamide) without residual agonism, has
demonstrated excellent efficacy in CRPC patients and has been approved by
FDA for treating CRPC in clinic. More recently, AR antagonists
demonstrated anti-tumor activities in preclinical AR+ breast cancer
models and are being tested in clinical trials. Although MDV3100 is
generally well-tolerated, there is a need to eliminate the clinically
observed CNS AE's ( 1% incidences of seizure) and revserse the resistance
to MDV3100 in CRPC patients.Suzhou Kintor previously reported a
preclinical candidate compound Proxalutamide (GT0918), a potent androgen
receptor (AR) antagonist with ability to down regulate AR protein level
in prostate cancer cells. In biochemical assay, GT0918 more potently
inhibits androgen binding with AR's ligand binding domain than
Bicalutamide (11.4x) and MDV3100(3.5x). In both hormone-sensitive (LNCaP)
and CRPC (C4-2) cancer cells, GT0918 demonstrated stronger potency to
block AR function of gene transcription than Bicalutamide (5-10) and
MDV3100(2-5x) while maintaining full antagonism in CRPC cells. GT0918
impairs androgen stimulated AR translocation to cell nuclei hence blocks
its binding DNA and shuts down the downstream oncogenic signaling.
Moreover, GT0918 induced AR down regulation in prostate cancer cells. As
the AR up-regulation remains to be the main driver of CRPC resistance,
its feature of AR down regulation may enable GT0918 to retain efficacy
against CRPC that have developed resistance to current AR-blockage
treatments. In vitro, GT0918 not only inhibits proliferation of
hormone-sensitive CaP cells, but also more potently inhibits
proliferation of CRPC cells than MDV3100 (6.5x). In addition, GT0918
inhibits the growth of AR positive breast cancer cells. In contrast,
GT0918 has minimum effects on the growth of AR-negative CaP cells (PC-3
and DU145), indicating it is a selective AR pathway inhibitor. In vivo,
GT0918 demonstrated good anti-tumor efficacy among hormone sensitive,
CRPC and AR+ breast cancer animal models with efficacious drug exposure
lower than MDV3100. ADME profile was optimized for once a day dosing
schedule in human to reduce drug accumulation as seen in MDV3100.
IND-enabling GLP toxicology studies have been completed for GT0918, which
was well-tolerated with minimum safety findings except for the effects
expected from anti-androgens. Toxicokinetic studies confirmed the drug
exposures in toxicology studies were significantly higher (rat: 11; dog:
25x) than the exposure required for maximum efficacy. No seizure was
observed across all the animal safety studies. An IND application has
been filed for starting Phase I clinical trial to test the selective AR
pathway blocker GT0918 in patients.

