Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Restoring physiological levels of ascorbate alleviates HIF-1
activation and reduces tumour growth in Gulo-/- mice


Background: Hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1) upregulates the expression
of hundreds of genes involved in adaption of tumours to the hypoxic
microenvironment. HIF-1 levels and transcriptional activity are regulated
by hydroxylase enzymes, which require ascorbate as a cofactor. Adequate
supplementation of cells with ascorbate has been shown to reduce HIF-1
activation in vitro, and we hypothesise that a similar activity could
affect tumour growth in vivo. In this study we investigated the effect of
dietary ascorbate on tumour growth in Gulo-/- mice, a model of the human
ascorbate deficiency condition.Methods: C57/Bl6 Gulo-/- mice were
supplemented with 3300 mg/L, 330 mg/L or 33mg/L of ascorbate in their
drinking water for one month before subcutaneous, syngeneic tumour
implantation with either B16-F10 melanoma, or Lewis lung carcinoma
(LL/2), and then for duration of the experiment. Levels of HIF-1, and its
targets, carbonic anhydrase-IX (CA-IX), and glucose transporter-1
(GLUT-1) were analysed by western blotting, and vascular endothelial
growth factor (VEGF) levels by ELISA. Ascorbate concentrations of tissue,
plasma and tumours were measured using high pressure liquid
chromatography with electrochemical detection (HPLC-EC).Results: Across
all organs and plasma samples, ascorbate content was in the physiological
range (up to levels seen in wild-type mice) and was correlated with
dietary ascorbate intake. Tumour ascorbate also reflected ascorbate
intake and optimal ascorbate levels (3300 mg/L) significantly increased
the time for LL/2 tumours to reach 200 mm3 (lag growth) (13.32.6 days),
compared to these same tumours in mice supplemented with either 330 mg/L
(9.12.6 days) or 33 mg/L (9.81.39 days) of ascorbate (pBackground:
Hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1) upregulates the expression of hundreds
of genes involved in adaption of tumours to the hypoxic microenvironment.
HIF-1 levels and transcriptional activity are regulated by hydroxylase
enzymes, which require ascorbate as a cofactor. Adequate supplementation
of cells with ascorbate has been shown to reduce HIF-1 activation in
vitro, and we hypothesise that a similar activity could affect tumour
growth in vivo. In this study we investigated the effect of dietary
ascorbate on tumour growth in Gulo-/- mice, a model of the human
ascorbate deficiency condition.Methods: C57/Bl6 Gulo-/- mice were
supplemented with 3300 mg/L, 330 mg/L or 33mg/L of ascorbate in their
drinking water for one month before subcutaneous, syngeneic tumour
implantation with either B16-F10 melanoma, or Lewis lung carcinoma
(LL/2), and then for duration of the experiment. Levels of HIF-1, and its
targets, carbonic anhydrase-IX (CA-IX), and glucose transporter-1
(GLUT-1) were analysed by western blotting, and vascular endothelial
growth factor (VEGF) levels by ELISA. Ascorbate concentrations of tissue,
plasma and tumours were measured using high pressure liquid
chromatography with electrochemical detection (HPLC-EC).Results: Across
all organs and plasma samples, ascorbate content was in the physiological
range (up to levels seen in wild-type mice) and was correlated with
dietary ascorbate intake. Tumour ascorbate also reflected ascorbate
intake and optimal ascorbate levels (3300 mg/L) significantly increased
the time for LL/2 tumours to reach 200 mm3 (lag growth) (13.32.6 days),
compared to these same tumours in mice supplemented with either 330 mg/L
(9.12.6 days) or 33 mg/L (9.81.39 days) of ascorbate (p<0.001).
Similarly, tumours took significantly longer to grow from 200-800 mm3
(log phase) when mice were supplemented with 3300 mg/L compared to lower
supplementation (pBackground: Hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1)
upregulates the expression of hundreds of genes involved in adaption of
tumours to the hypoxic microenvironment. HIF-1 levels and transcriptional
activity are regulated by hydroxylase enzymes, which require ascorbate as
a cofactor. Adequate supplementation of cells with ascorbate has been
shown to reduce HIF-1 activation in vitro, and we hypothesise that a
similar activity could affect tumour growth in vivo. In this study we
investigated the effect of dietary ascorbate on tumour growth in Gulo-/-
mice, a model of the human ascorbate deficiency condition.Methods:
C57/Bl6 Gulo-/- mice were supplemented with 3300 mg/L, 330 mg/L or 33mg/L
of ascorbate in their drinking water for one month before subcutaneous,
syngeneic tumour implantation with either B16-F10 melanoma, or Lewis lung
carcinoma (LL/2), and then for duration of the experiment. Levels of
HIF-1, and its targets, carbonic anhydrase-IX (CA-IX), and glucose
transporter-1 (GLUT-1) were analysed by western blotting, and vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF) levels by ELISA. Ascorbate
concentrations of tissue, plasma and tumours were measured using high
pressure liquid chromatography with electrochemical detection
(HPLC-EC).Results: Across all organs and plasma samples, ascorbate
content was in the physiological range (up to levels seen in wild-type
mice) and was correlated with dietary ascorbate intake. Tumour ascorbate
also reflected ascorbate intake and optimal ascorbate levels (3300 mg/L)
significantly increased the time for LL/2 tumours to reach 200 mm3 (lag
growth) (13.32.6 days), compared to these same tumours in mice
supplemented with either 330 mg/L (9.12.6 days) or 33 mg/L (9.81.39 days)
of ascorbate (p<0.001). Similarly, tumours took significantly longer to
grow from 200-800 mm3 (log phase) when mice were supplemented with 3300
mg/L compared to lower supplementation (p<0.05). B16-F10 tumours showed
no difference in the lag growth period between ascorbate treatments
(p=0.49). However, supplementing mice with 3300 mg/mL of ascorbate lead
to a significant reduction in the tumour growth rate during log phase
(3.91.1 days), compared to mice supplemented with either 330 mg/L
(2.00.90 days) or 33mg/L (2.10.71 days) (pBackground: Hypoxia-inducible
factor-1 (HIF-1) upregulates the expression of hundreds of genes involved
in adaption of tumours to the hypoxic microenvironment. HIF-1 levels and
transcriptional activity are regulated by hydroxylase enzymes, which
require ascorbate as a cofactor. Adequate supplementation of cells with
ascorbate has been shown to reduce HIF-1 activation in vitro, and we
hypothesise that a similar activity could affect tumour growth in vivo.
In this study we investigated the effect of dietary ascorbate on tumour
growth in Gulo-/- mice, a model of the human ascorbate deficiency
condition.Methods: C57/Bl6 Gulo-/- mice were supplemented with 3300 mg/L,
330 mg/L or 33mg/L of ascorbate in their drinking water for one month
before subcutaneous, syngeneic tumour implantation with either B16-F10
melanoma, or Lewis lung carcinoma (LL/2), and then for duration of the
experiment. Levels of HIF-1, and its targets, carbonic anhydrase-IX
(CA-IX), and glucose transporter-1 (GLUT-1) were analysed by western
blotting, and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) levels by ELISA.
Ascorbate concentrations of tissue, plasma and tumours were measured
using high pressure liquid chromatography with electrochemical detection
(HPLC-EC).Results: Across all organs and plasma samples, ascorbate
content was in the physiological range (up to levels seen in wild-type
mice) and was correlated with dietary ascorbate intake. Tumour ascorbate
also reflected ascorbate intake and optimal ascorbate levels (3300 mg/L)
significantly increased the time for LL/2 tumours to reach 200 mm3 (lag
growth) (13.32.6 days), compared to these same tumours in mice
supplemented with either 330 mg/L (9.12.6 days) or 33 mg/L (9.81.39 days)
of ascorbate (p<0.001). Similarly, tumours took significantly longer to
grow from 200-800 mm3 (log phase) when mice were supplemented with 3300
mg/L compared to lower supplementation (p<0.05). B16-F10 tumours showed
no difference in the lag growth period between ascorbate treatments
(p=0.49). However, supplementing mice with 3300 mg/mL of ascorbate lead
to a significant reduction in the tumour growth rate during log phase
(3.91.1 days), compared to mice supplemented with either 330 mg/L
(2.00.90 days) or 33mg/L (2.10.71 days) (p<0.001). Levels of HIF-1
protein in tumours decreased as dietary ascorbate supplementation
increased for both LL/2 (pBackground: Hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1)
upregulates the expression of hundreds of genes involved in adaption of
tumours to the hypoxic microenvironment. HIF-1 levels and transcriptional
activity are regulated by hydroxylase enzymes, which require ascorbate as
a cofactor. Adequate supplementation of cells with ascorbate has been
shown to reduce HIF-1 activation in vitro, and we hypothesise that a
similar activity could affect tumour growth in vivo. In this study we
investigated the effect of dietary ascorbate on tumour growth in Gulo-/-
mice, a model of the human ascorbate deficiency condition.Methods:
C57/Bl6 Gulo-/- mice were supplemented with 3300 mg/L, 330 mg/L or 33mg/L
of ascorbate in their drinking water for one month before subcutaneous,
syngeneic tumour implantation with either B16-F10 melanoma, or Lewis lung
carcinoma (LL/2), and then for duration of the experiment. Levels of
HIF-1, and its targets, carbonic anhydrase-IX (CA-IX), and glucose
transporter-1 (GLUT-1) were analysed by western blotting, and vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF) levels by ELISA. Ascorbate
concentrations of tissue, plasma and tumours were measured using high
pressure liquid chromatography with electrochemical detection
(HPLC-EC).Results: Across all organs and plasma samples, ascorbate
content was in the physiological range (up to levels seen in wild-type
mice) and was correlated with dietary ascorbate intake. Tumour ascorbate
also reflected ascorbate intake and optimal ascorbate levels (3300 mg/L)
significantly increased the time for LL/2 tumours to reach 200 mm3 (lag
growth) (13.32.6 days), compared to these same tumours in mice
supplemented with either 330 mg/L (9.12.6 days) or 33 mg/L (9.81.39 days)
of ascorbate (p<0.001). Similarly, tumours took significantly longer to
grow from 200-800 mm3 (log phase) when mice were supplemented with 3300
mg/L compared to lower supplementation (p<0.05). B16-F10 tumours showed
no difference in the lag growth period between ascorbate treatments
(p=0.49). However, supplementing mice with 3300 mg/mL of ascorbate lead
to a significant reduction in the tumour growth rate during log phase
(3.91.1 days), compared to mice supplemented with either 330 mg/L
(2.00.90 days) or 33mg/L (2.10.71 days) (p<0.001). Levels of HIF-1
protein in tumours decreased as dietary ascorbate supplementation
increased for both LL/2 (p<0.001) and B16F10 (pBackground:
Hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1) upregulates the expression of hundreds
of genes involved in adaption of tumours to the hypoxic microenvironment.
HIF-1 levels and transcriptional activity are regulated by hydroxylase
enzymes, which require ascorbate as a cofactor. Adequate supplementation
of cells with ascorbate has been shown to reduce HIF-1 activation in
vitro, and we hypothesise that a similar activity could affect tumour
growth in vivo. In this study we investigated the effect of dietary
ascorbate on tumour growth in Gulo-/- mice, a model of the human
ascorbate deficiency condition.Methods: C57/Bl6 Gulo-/- mice were
supplemented with 3300 mg/L, 330 mg/L or 33mg/L of ascorbate in their
drinking water for one month before subcutaneous, syngeneic tumour
implantation with either B16-F10 melanoma, or Lewis lung carcinoma
(LL/2), and then for duration of the experiment. Levels of HIF-1, and its
targets, carbonic anhydrase-IX (CA-IX), and glucose transporter-1
(GLUT-1) were analysed by western blotting, and vascular endothelial
growth factor (VEGF) levels by ELISA. Ascorbate concentrations of tissue,
plasma and tumours were measured using high pressure liquid
chromatography with electrochemical detection (HPLC-EC).Results: Across
all organs and plasma samples, ascorbate content was in the physiological
range (up to levels seen in wild-type mice) and was correlated with
dietary ascorbate intake. Tumour ascorbate also reflected ascorbate
intake and optimal ascorbate levels (3300 mg/L) significantly increased
the time for LL/2 tumours to reach 200 mm3 (lag growth) (13.32.6 days),
compared to these same tumours in mice supplemented with either 330 mg/L
(9.12.6 days) or 33 mg/L (9.81.39 days) of ascorbate (p<0.001).
Similarly, tumours took significantly longer to grow from 200-800 mm3
(log phase) when mice were supplemented with 3300 mg/L compared to lower
supplementation (p<0.05). B16-F10 tumours showed no difference in the lag
growth period between ascorbate treatments (p=0.49). However,
supplementing mice with 3300 mg/mL of ascorbate lead to a significant
reduction in the tumour growth rate during log phase (3.91.1 days),
compared to mice supplemented with either 330 mg/L (2.00.90 days) or
33mg/L (2.10.71 days) (p<0.001). Levels of HIF-1 protein in tumours
decreased as dietary ascorbate supplementation increased for both LL/2
(p<0.001) and B16F10 (p<0.001). Tumour ascorbate was significantly
correlated with low levels of CA-IX, GLUT-1 and VEGF levels in both LL/2
and B16 tumours (all pBackground: Hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1)
upregulates the expression of hundreds of genes involved in adaption of
tumours to the hypoxic microenvironment. HIF-1 levels and transcriptional
activity are regulated by hydroxylase enzymes, which require ascorbate as
a cofactor. Adequate supplementation of cells with ascorbate has been
shown to reduce HIF-1 activation in vitro, and we hypothesise that a
similar activity could affect tumour growth in vivo. In this study we
investigated the effect of dietary ascorbate on tumour growth in Gulo-/-
mice, a model of the human ascorbate deficiency condition.Methods:
C57/Bl6 Gulo-/- mice were supplemented with 3300 mg/L, 330 mg/L or 33mg/L
of ascorbate in their drinking water for one month before subcutaneous,
syngeneic tumour implantation with either B16-F10 melanoma, or Lewis lung
carcinoma (LL/2), and then for duration of the experiment. Levels of
HIF-1, and its targets, carbonic anhydrase-IX (CA-IX), and glucose
transporter-1 (GLUT-1) were analysed by western blotting, and vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF) levels by ELISA. Ascorbate
concentrations of tissue, plasma and tumours were measured using high
pressure liquid chromatography with electrochemical detection
(HPLC-EC).Results: Across all organs and plasma samples, ascorbate
content was in the physiological range (up to levels seen in wild-type
mice) and was correlated with dietary ascorbate intake. Tumour ascorbate
also reflected ascorbate intake and optimal ascorbate levels (3300 mg/L)
significantly increased the time for LL/2 tumours to reach 200 mm3 (lag
growth) (13.32.6 days), compared to these same tumours in mice
supplemented with either 330 mg/L (9.12.6 days) or 33 mg/L (9.81.39 days)
of ascorbate (p<0.001). Similarly, tumours took significantly longer to
grow from 200-800 mm3 (log phase) when mice were supplemented with 3300
mg/L compared to lower supplementation (p<0.05). B16-F10 tumours showed
no difference in the lag growth period between ascorbate treatments
(p=0.49). However, supplementing mice with 3300 mg/mL of ascorbate lead
to a significant reduction in the tumour growth rate during log phase
(3.91.1 days), compared to mice supplemented with either 330 mg/L
(2.00.90 days) or 33mg/L (2.10.71 days) (p<0.001). Levels of HIF-1
protein in tumours decreased as dietary ascorbate supplementation
increased for both LL/2 (p<0.001) and B16F10 (p<0.001). Tumour ascorbate
was significantly correlated with low levels of CA-IX, GLUT-1 and VEGF
levels in both LL/2 and B16 tumours (all p<0.05).Conclusions: The data
from the current study support the hypothesis that restoration of optimal
intracellular ascorbate levels is associated with reduced HIF-1 levels
and slower tumour growth. This data may have implications for the
management of cancer, although clinical trials are required to assess
whether human tumour levels of ascorbate can similarly be manipulated.

