Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Overexpression of incrna h19 enhances development and metastasis
of gastric cancer


Background: Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) have been shown to play key
roles in the progression and metastasis in some carcinomas in recent
studies. We found that the expression of long non-coding RNA H19 (H19)
was much higher in gastric cancer tissues than that in paired noncanerous
tissues. But its mechanism in gastric cancer remains unknown. The object
of this study is to explore the role of H19 and it derived miR-675 in
gastric cancer and to discover the downstream target genes. Methods: We
detected the expression of H19 in 74 gastric tissues together with paired
noncancerous tissues and followed-up median 27 months. Then, we
investigated the role of H19 and miR-675 by knock-down their expression
in MKN45 cell line and ectopic expression in SGC7901 cell line in vitro
and in vivo. Finally, we built the co-expression network of H19 and
demonstrate the target genes by RIP and DLR. Results: The overall
survival (OS) in the patients with low H19 expression (ratioBackground:
Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) have been shown to play key roles in the
progression and metastasis in some carcinomas in recent studies. We found
that the expression of long non-coding RNA H19 (H19) was much higher in
gastric cancer tissues than that in paired noncanerous tissues. But its
mechanism in gastric cancer remains unknown. The object of this study is
to explore the role of H19 and it derived miR-675 in gastric cancer and
to discover the downstream target genes. Methods: We detected the
expression of H19 in 74 gastric tissues together with paired noncancerous
tissues and followed-up median 27 months. Then, we investigated the role
of H19 and miR-675 by knock-down their expression in MKN45 cell line and
ectopic expression in SGC7901 cell line in vitro and in vivo. Finally, we
built the co-expression network of H19 and demonstrate the target genes
by RIP and DLR. Results: The overall survival (OS) in the patients with
low H19 expression (ratio<6) is much longer than that with high H19
expression (ratio6). Overexpression of H19 can enhance the
characteristics of gastric cancer cells such as proliferation, migration,
invasion Tumor formation and metastasis. We built the co-expression
network of H19 and demonstrated ISM1 was the binding protein of H19. The
expression of ISM1 was positive correlated with that of H19. CALN1 was
the target gene of miR-675. The expression of CALN1 was negative
correlated with that of miR-675. Conclusion: Overexpression of H19
correlates with bad prognosis in gastric cancer. H19 acts as an oncogene
in gastric cancer to enhance the proliferation, migration, invasion, and
metastasis. MiR-675 also can enhance gastric cancer progression and
metastasis. In additional, H19 RNA is actively bind to protein ISM1
however miR-675 targets the protein CALN1. These suggested that H19
effect on GC both through encoding miR-675 and up-regulation ISM1.

