Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: IL-4 receptor-targeted delivery of liposomal doxorubicin and siRNA
to tumor


Targeted delivery of imaging agents and therapeutics to tumors would
provide early detection and increased therapeutic efficacy against
cancer. Using phage displayed-random peptide libraries, we have
identified IL4RPep-1 (IL-4 receptor-binding peptide-1), CRKRLDRNC, that
binds to IL-4 receptor (IL4R). IL4R is over-expressed on many types of
cancer cells including lung cancer and breast cancer. Peptides have
smaller size and in turn may exert better tissue penetration than bulky
antibodies. IL4RPep-1 bound to H226 lung tumor cells that over-express
IL4R, while little binding was observed in H460 lung tumor cells that
express IL4R at low levels. When injected intravenously into nude mice
bearing a subcutaneous H226 tumor, Cy7.5 near-infrared fluorescence
(NIRF) dye-conjugated IL4RPep-1 selectively homed to tumor.
IL4RPep-1-labeled liposomes containing doxorubicin showed more efficient
anti-tumor growth activity than untargeted liposomes. In addition,
IL4RPep-1-labeled, branched-type polyethyleneimine nanoparticles
containing Bcl-xL siRNA more efficiently knocked down Bcl-xL expression
and showed higher cytotoxic effect on cancer cells over-expressing IL4R
than cancer cells expressing IL4R at low levels. These results suggest
that IL4RPep-1 could be a useful probe for affinity-based imaging and
drug delivery to tumor that over-expressing IL4R.

