Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Omentin: A novel adipokine in the omental microenvironment
associated with ovarian cancer progression


Advanced stage serous ovarian cancer metastasizes preferentially to the
omentum, which is a well-vascularized fold of peritoneal tissue and is a
major site of intra-abdominal fat accumulation, suggesting that the
omental microenvironment is a favorable niche for ovarian cancer cells.
The 5-year survival drops to below 50% for the cancer cases that spread
beyond the pelvis to the omentum. It has also become apparent that
obesity contributes to a poor clinical outcome. The mechanisms by which
omental adipose tissue promotes tumor growth and disease progression are
not entirely clear.Using transcriptome profiling analysis on the
microdissected adipose tissue from patients with benign gynecologic
diseases and from patients with advanced high-grade serous ovarian cancer
(HGSOC), we identified a gene signature for ovarian cancer associated
omental adipose tissue, suggesting that alteration of these genes in the
ovarian cancer associated omental adipose tissue may generate a
permissive microenvironment to support ovarian cancer growth. Among genes
that are significantly up- or down-regulated in ovarian cancer associated
adipose tissue compared with the normal adipose tissue, we seek to focus
on evaluating the role of omentin (Intestinal Lactoferrin Receptor ITLN1)
in ovarian cancer progression since it is a novel adipokine that is
predominantly expressed and secreted by visceral adipose tissue and is
barely detectable in subcutaneous fats. Our data showed for the first
time that omentin was expressed predominantly by the mesothelial cells
covering the visceral adipose tissue but not by other cell types in the
omental adipose tissue. Interestingly, we showed that circulating omentin
level is significantly lower in patients with HGSOC compared with those
in the BMI matched healthy individuals. In addition, using monolayer
culture models, we demonstrated that omentin suppressed ovarian cancer
motility and invasion potential directly and ovarian cancer growth only
in the presence of adipocytes. We also showed that omentin can increase
insulin-dependent glucose up-take in adipocytes and omentin expression
can be down-regulated by co-culturing with ovarian cancer cells and in
the presence of TNF-.The study provides the first evidence that ovarian
cancer cells modify the visceral adipose tissue through down-regulation
of omentin to facilitate their growth in the omental microenvironment.

