Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: STAT3 inhibition by LLL12 in combination with niclosamide and
chemotherapy in ovarian cancer


Objective:Chemoresistance and recurrence invariably develop in the
treatment of ovarian cancer, despite initial response to chemotherapy.
Recent studies have shown that signal transducer and activator of
transcription-3 (STAT3) signaling is associated with recurrence and
development of chemoresistance in ovarian cancer. A novel small molecule,
LLL12, has been shown to inhibit STAT3 in many solid tumors including
colon, breast, and glioma. Niclosamide, an FDA approved salicyclamide
derivative used for the treatment of tapeworm infections, has also been
shown to inhibit STAT3 and other pathways including mTOR, Wnt, NfkB.
Therefore, the objective of this study was to investigate LLL12 alone and
in combination with niclosamide and/or chemotherapy as a potential
treatment for ovarian cancer.Methods:Ovarian cancer cell lines A2780 and
SKOV3ip2 and their carboplatin and paclitaxel chemoresistant derivatives
A2780.cp20, SKOV3ip2.TR were initially treated with LLL12 alone (0.1 nM -
10 M). These cell lines were treated with the IC50 values for LLL12 alone
in combination with niclosamide (0.1 - 5 M). Ascites was collected from a
patient undergoing surgery for ovarian cancer and treated concurrently
with LLL12 (0.5 - 10 M) and carboplatin (25 - 100 M). Cell viability was
assessed using the ATP-lite assay. All samples were assayed in
quadruplicate and reported as the mean SE.Results:Combination treatment
with LLL12 and niclosamide produced increased cytotoxicity compared to
LLL12 alone in all ovarian cancer cell lines. Treatment with chemotherapy
and LLL12 showed additive cytotoxicity in the patient-derived
tumorspheres. The IC50 dose of LLL12 against A2780 cells was 0.2 .06 but
when this dose was combined with 1 M of niclosamide, 100% cytotoxicity
was achieved; 1 M of niclosamide alone produced 80% cytotoxicity. With
the A2780.cp20 cell line, LLL12 had an IC50 of 0.79 M, but with 1 M of
niclosamide there was 100% cell kill, and 80% with niclosamide alone.
Both SKOV3 and SKOV3ip2.TR cell lines had higher IC50 values for LLL12
(4.25 M 2.1 and 2.29 M 1.4, respectively) and an additive effect was
achieved in both cell lines when LLL12 was combined with niclosamide. In
the patient sample, a dose of 50 M of carboplatin alone killed 10% of
cells, and 10 M of LLL12 killed 50%, The combination of 10 M of LLL12 and
50 M of carboplatin killed 80% of the cells; therefore an additive
cytotoxicity was seen with carboplatin and LLL12.Conclusion:This study
demonstrates that the STAT3 inhibitor, LLL12, is active against ovarian
cancer cell lines and tumorspheres from a patient sample. Future animal
xenograft studies will elucidate more about its activity in combination
with other agents such as niclosamide and chemotherapy.

