Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Human rectal carcinoid tumors highly express DCLK1, a putative
cancer stem cell marker


Background and Aim: Doublecortin-like kinase 1 (Dclk1) is known to
regulate neuronal differentiation, migration, and neurogenesis (Shu et
al., Neuron 2006). Accumulating evidence suggests that the protein is a
putative marker for intestinal and pancreatic stem cells, including
cancer stem cells (CSCs) of those organs (Gagliardi et al., Pathol Res
2012, Nakanishi et al., Nat Genet 2013, Bailey et al., Gastroenterology
2013). Since carcinoid tumor is defined as a neuroendocrine tumor, we
assessed whether or not the Dclk1 protein, a marker of CSC, was expressed
in human rectal carcinoid tumor tissues. Patients and Methods: Eighteen
patients (9 male, 9 female; mean age, 51) with rectal carcinoid tumors
were included in this study. Informed consent was obtained from all of
the patients. The tumors were safely resected by endoscopic mucosal
resection (EMR) method between 2003 and 2012 in the Kurume University
Hospital. Mean diameter of the tumors was 5.4 mm (range, 2.0-8.0 mm).
Immunohistochemical staining was performed to examine the Dclk1 protein
expression, accompanied by the staining for the commonly-used
neuroendocrine markers synaptophysin, chromogranin A, and CD56. The
immune-reactivity was evaluated according to the following criteria: the
intensity of staining was scored in each specimen on a scale of 0 to 3,
in which 0 = negative staining, 1 = weakly positive staining, 2 =
moderately positive staining, and 3 = strongly positive staining. The
extent to which positive cells were seen in each specimen (extent of
distribution of positive cells) was estimated on a scale of 0 to 2, in
which 0 = positive staining in 0% to 20% of cells; 1, in 21% to 60%; and
2, in 61% to 100%. Sum of the scores was calculated for each specimen.
Results: The total score for Dclk1, synaptophysin, CD56, and chromogranin
A was 87/90, 86/90, 60/90, and 34/90, respectively. Conclusions: Human
rectal caricinoid tumor highly expressed Dclk1, and the high expression
rate indicated that the protein expression was a novel feature for the
neuroendocrine tumor. It is suggested that Dclk1 is a potential marker of
not only CSCs but also non-epithelial tumors, such as carcinoid tumor,
regulating crucial tumor cell behaviors.

