Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MiR-199a-5p is a biomarker for and regulator of
epithelial-mesenchymal transition in triple-negative breast cancer
patients


Objectives: Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) accounts for 15-20% of
all breast cancer, and is characterized by the absence of estrogen
receptor, progesterone receptor and human epidermal growth factor
receptor. The lack of targeted therapy is a major obstacle for treating
against this aggressive subtype, hence the search of specific biomarkers
may use as potential diagnostic marker and perhaps a therapeutic target
for TNBC. Methods: Plasma samples from patients with TNBC and non-TNBC
were recruited for miRNA profiling. By using miRCURY LNA array containing
730 miRNAs, we compared the differential miRNA expressions in plasma of
patient with TNBC (n=5) and non-TNBC (n=5), as well as healthy controls
(n=5). Selected miRNAs were further validated in an independent cohort
(n=250) using real-time RT-PCR. Functional study of miRNA was also
carried out in the cell lines. Results: Microarray data revealed miR-16,
miR-21 and miR-199a-5p have differentially expression between TNBC and
non-TNBC. We found that miR-16, miR-21 and miR-199a-5p were
underexpressed in TNBC cases when compared with healthy controls.
Moreover, post-operative expression levels of miR-16, miR-21 and
miR-199a-5p were significantly increased than that of pre-operative
plasma of TNBC. We then stratified the patients by TNM stage and
associate with miRNA expression level. Plasma miR-199a-5p expression in
TNBC patients had significant difference when compared with healthy
controls (stage I, pObjectives: Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC)
accounts for 15-20% of all breast cancer, and is characterized by the
absence of estrogen receptor, progesterone receptor and human epidermal
growth factor receptor. The lack of targeted therapy is a major obstacle
for treating against this aggressive subtype, hence the search of
specific biomarkers may use as potential diagnostic marker and perhaps a
therapeutic target for TNBC. Methods: Plasma samples from patients with
TNBC and non-TNBC were recruited for miRNA profiling. By using miRCURY
LNA array containing 730 miRNAs, we compared the differential miRNA
expressions in plasma of patient with TNBC (n=5) and non-TNBC (n=5), as
well as healthy controls (n=5). Selected miRNAs were further validated in
an independent cohort (n=250) using real-time RT-PCR. Functional study of
miRNA was also carried out in the cell lines. Results: Microarray data
revealed miR-16, miR-21 and miR-199a-5p have differentially expression
between TNBC and non-TNBC. We found that miR-16, miR-21 and miR-199a-5p
were underexpressed in TNBC cases when compared with healthy controls.
Moreover, post-operative expression levels of miR-16, miR-21 and
miR-199a-5p were significantly increased than that of pre-operative
plasma of TNBC. We then stratified the patients by TNM stage and
associate with miRNA expression level. Plasma miR-199a-5p expression in
TNBC patients had significant difference when compared with healthy
controls (stage I, p<0.002; stage II, pObjectives: Triple-negative breast
cancer (TNBC) accounts for 15-20% of all breast cancer, and is
characterized by the absence of estrogen receptor, progesterone receptor
and human epidermal growth factor receptor. The lack of targeted therapy
is a major obstacle for treating against this aggressive subtype, hence
the search of specific biomarkers may use as potential diagnostic marker
and perhaps a therapeutic target for TNBC. Methods: Plasma samples from
patients with TNBC and non-TNBC were recruited for miRNA profiling. By
using miRCURY LNA array containing 730 miRNAs, we compared the
differential miRNA expressions in plasma of patient with TNBC (n=5) and
non-TNBC (n=5), as well as healthy controls (n=5). Selected miRNAs were
further validated in an independent cohort (n=250) using real-time
RT-PCR. Functional study of miRNA was also carried out in the cell lines.
Results: Microarray data revealed miR-16, miR-21 and miR-199a-5p have
differentially expression between TNBC and non-TNBC. We found that
miR-16, miR-21 and miR-199a-5p were underexpressed in TNBC cases when
compared with healthy controls. Moreover, post-operative expression
levels of miR-16, miR-21 and miR-199a-5p were significantly increased
than that of pre-operative plasma of TNBC. We then stratified the
patients by TNM stage and associate with miRNA expression level. Plasma
miR-199a-5p expression in TNBC patients had significant difference when
compared with healthy controls (stage I, p<0.002; stage II, p<0.001;
stage III, pObjectives: Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) accounts for
15-20% of all breast cancer, and is characterized by the absence of
estrogen receptor, progesterone receptor and human epidermal growth
factor receptor. The lack of targeted therapy is a major obstacle for
treating against this aggressive subtype, hence the search of specific
biomarkers may use as potential diagnostic marker and perhaps a
therapeutic target for TNBC. Methods: Plasma samples from patients with
TNBC and non-TNBC were recruited for miRNA profiling. By using miRCURY
LNA array containing 730 miRNAs, we compared the differential miRNA
expressions in plasma of patient with TNBC (n=5) and non-TNBC (n=5), as
well as healthy controls (n=5). Selected miRNAs were further validated in
an independent cohort (n=250) using real-time RT-PCR. Functional study of
miRNA was also carried out in the cell lines. Results: Microarray data
revealed miR-16, miR-21 and miR-199a-5p have differentially expression
between TNBC and non-TNBC. We found that miR-16, miR-21 and miR-199a-5p
were underexpressed in TNBC cases when compared with healthy controls.
Moreover, post-operative expression levels of miR-16, miR-21 and
miR-199a-5p were significantly increased than that of pre-operative
plasma of TNBC. We then stratified the patients by TNM stage and
associate with miRNA expression level. Plasma miR-199a-5p expression in
TNBC patients had significant difference when compared with healthy
controls (stage I, p<0.002; stage II, p<0.001; stage III, p<0.011).
Transfection of miR-199a-5p mimic significantly reduced cell
proliferation and restored the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT)
markers (E-cadherin, ZEB1 and TWIST2). Conclusions: Our data implicate
that miR-199a-5p is a potential marker for discriminating TNBC cases and
non-TNBC cases. The association of miR-199a-5p with EMT markers uncovers
an important pathway in metastatic breast cancer. This study provides
insights for the potential use of miRNA as diagnostic marker and targeted
therapy for the treatment of TNBC.

