Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phosphorylation of Raptor by pemetrexed-activated AMPK is
sufficient to suppress mTORC1 activity promoted by loss of p53 and TSC2


The key sensor of energy status, AMP-dependent kinase (AMPK), can be
activated by intracellular ZMP generated directly from the
aminoimidazolecarboxamide ribonucleoside (AICAR) or from inhibition of
purine synthesis by the antifolate pemetrexed (PTX). In spite of this
common mechanism, signaling from AMPK activated by PTX or AICAR differed:
PTX-activated AMPK phosphorylated the mTORC1 component Raptor but not
tuberin (TSC2), whereas AICAR-activated AMPK phosphorylated both targets.
This dichotomy proved to be due to p53 function: although p53 accumulated
after either treatment, AICAR robustly activated the transcriptional
profile of p53, including expression of p53 target genes TSC2 and
sestrin2 whereas, in PTX-treated cells, p53 was virtually inactive as a
transcriptional activator. Accordingly, activation of AMPK by PTX
initiated a cell growth inhibition that was p53 and TSC2 independent,
whereas p53 and TSC2 wild-type HCT116 colon carcinoma cells were more
sensitive to AICAR than isogenic cells null for p53 or both p53 and TSC2.
Furthermore, in cells null for p53, mTORC1 was hyperactive, apparently
caused by lower TSC2 function, higher Rheb bound to mTORC1, and a
concomitantly lower inhibition of mTORC1 by PRAS40. Although TSC2 was
deficient and mTORC1 activity enhanced in the absence of p53 function,
Raptor phosphorylation by AMPK following PTX was robust and independent
of both p53 and TSC2. This provides insight into the therapeutic activity
of PTX against human lung cancers lacking p53 function and with
hyperactive mTORC1, a feature atypical of other antifolates. We concluded
that phosphorylation of Raptor by AMPK after PTX treatment was both
necessary and sufficient to suppress the kinase activity of mTORC1, even
under conditions of limited TSC2 and enhanced mTORC1 function, suggesting
the use of pemetrexed for treatment of Tuberous Sclerosis.

