Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CDK8: A new druggable mediator of NFB activity


Cyclin-dependent kinase 8 (CDK8) is a transcription-regulating oncogenic
serine kinase, which mediates several cancer-related transcriptional
pathways such as beta-catenin, TP53, TGF-beta and HIF1A. We have recently
discovered the first selective small-molecule inhibitors of CDK8 and its
closely related isoform CDK19 and showed that these inhibitors block
chemotherapy-induced tumor-promoting paracrine activities of both tumor
and normal cells (Porter et al., PNAS 109, 13799, 2012). Since
transcription factor NFB plays a key role in damage-induced expression of
tumor-promoting cytokines, we have tested the effects of a highly
selective CDK8/19 inhibitor Senexin A on NFB-induced transcription.
Senexin A treatment or knockdown of CDK8 by shRNA inhibits
transcriptional activation of NFB-responsive promoters and of acutely
responsive cytokine genes (such as CXCL1, CXCL2, IL8 and CCL20), by TNF,
a canonical NFB activator, in several cell lines. CDK8 inhibition did not
prevent nuclear translocation of active NFB proteins. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) analysis of HEK293 cells, untreated or treated
with TNF or Senexin A, singly or in combination, showed that CDK8 is
recruited to NFB early-responsive genes upon TNF treatment, but the CDK8
inhibitor did not prevent the recruitment of NFB, CDK8 or RNA Polymerase
II (Pol II) to the target genes. However, CDK8 kinase activity was found
to be required for C-terminal domain phosphorylation (both at S2 and S5
residues) of Pol II associated with the target genes, which is needed for
the elongation of their NFB-initiated transcription. In contrast, Pol II
phosphorylation at constitutively expressed genes is not dependent on
CDK8 kinase activity. These results suggest that CDK8 inhibitors may
exert their effects against the activation of tumor-promoting and
pro-inflammatory secreted factors in the tumor microenvironment by
preventing transcriptional activation of NFB-induced genes.

