Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pten deletion in SOX9+ cells leads to tumor initiating cell
expansion and tumor development in mouse liver


Liver cancer is one of the most aggressive malignancies with a five-year
survival rate less than 10%. There is thus an urgent unmet need to
understand the process of liver tumorigenesis in order to develop early
diagnosis and effective therapeutic treatments. Clinical studies have
suggested that tumor initiating cell (TIC) activation is observed in over
70% of liver cancer samples and is closely linked with poor survival
outcome after treatment. Consistent with these observations, our previous
studies utilizing a Pten (loxp/loxp); Albumin-Cre+ mouse liver cancer
model also confirmed the expansion of TICs during liver tumorigenesis.
However, how TICs are activated and what mechanisms contribute to liver
tumor development remains unclear. Here, we studied the role of tumor
suppressor PTEN in TICs using the Pten (loxp/loxp); SOX9-CreER+ mouse
model. Lineage tracing results indicated that in the liver SOX9+ cells
possess the progenitor cell characteristics and give rise to bile duct
cells and peri-portal hepatocytes later on. Pten deletion in SOX9+ cells
at 4 weeks of age leads to expansion of both CK+ duct cells and HNF4+
hepatocytes in the peri-portal areas. Interestingly, we also observed
tumor development at 12 months old mutant mice and close examinations
revealed that the tumors are heterogeneous, indicating the contribution
of TICs during this process. Together, our study suggested that the PTEN
signaling is critical for TICs regulation and that TICs activation plays
a key role in liver tumorigenesis.

