Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BET bromodomain inhibitors abrogate cell cycle progression and
induces apoptosis in Myc-induced mouse lymphoma cells without affecting
MYC transcription


Overexpression of one of the three MYC genes is a hallmark of many human
cancers. They encode transcription factors that regulate expression of a
number of genes critical for tumor development. Conditional transgenic
mouse models have shown that Myc inhibition causes tumor regression; Myc
is therefore an attractive target for therapy, and effective
pharmacological Myc inhibition has been a long-standing goal in cancer
research. Recent publication have shown that selective inhibition of BET
bromodomain and extra-terminal (BET) domain family of proteins, that bind
to acetylated lysines on histones, show promise as potent anti-cancer
drugs via down-regulation of the MYC oncogene. Here we confirm that two
structurally different BET protein inhibitors (BETi), JQ1 (proto-type)
and RVX2135, inhibit the proliferation and induce apoptosis of lymphoma
cells arising in Myc-transgenic mice. BETi have been reported to directly
inhibit MYC transcription. Surprisingly, in our system BET inhibition had
no effect on MYC transcription, despite exhibiting broad transcriptional
effects evident from expression profiling. Our data challenge the
prevailing view that BETi operate primarily via suppression of MYC
transcription in hematological malignancies. Instead we suggest that BET
proteins have Myc-independent pleiotropic effects that should be
exploited to treat a wide range of cancers. Myc still remains a
challenging target for therapy to date.

