Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pharmacodynamic analysis of PI3K inhibition in breast tumors: A
model to improve early clinical investigation of novel agents


PI3K inhibitors have shown promise for the treatment of
anti-estrogen-resistant breast cancers. Dose determination in clinical
studies is often performed in a dose-escalation fashion until toxicities
are observed; however, this approach does not provide information on
target inhibition or allow optimization of scheduling for maximal
anti-cancer effects. Current PI3K inhibitor treatment regimens
incompletely and transiently inhibit the pathway in carcinomas, and are
accompanied by adverse effects in patients. We hypothesize that
short-term, complete inhibition of PI3K will have a greater anti-tumor
effect and reduced adverse effects than chronic, partial inhibition.
Through detailed analysis of the timing and magnitude of drug effects on
tumor biology, drug doses and schedules may be optimized during early
clinical development to improve anti-tumor effects in subsequent trials.
Pharmacokinetic analysis of the PI3K inhibitor GDC-0941 at low (100
mg/kg) and high (800 mg/kg) doses in mice revealed that plasma levels
peaked after 15-30 min (18.6 uM and 20.7 uM, respectively), and decreased
to a plateau phase after 1 h that was maintained for 8 h with low-dose
GDC-0941 (6.8-10.7 uM) and for 23 h with high-dose GDC-0941 (7.9-15 uM).
Thus, GDC-0941 appears to be retained in a tissue compartment and slowly
released back into plasma over time.Mice bearing MCF-7 tumors were
treated with the anti-estrogen fulvestrant (5 mg) for three days, and
then low- or high-dose GDC-0941, or 2 low doses of GDC-0941 12 hours
apart, to assess pharmacodynamic effects and tumor cell response. PARP
cleavage (marker of apoptosis) occurred within 1 h and 3 h of high- and
low-dose treatments, respectively, and apoptosis increased over time.
Phosphorylated AKT and S6 levels (markers of PI3K and mTORC1 activities)
were maximally suppressed after 1 h and 3 h of high- and low-dose
treatments, respectively, and returned to baseline within 16 h after
low-dose treatment. In vitro analysis revealed that PI3K inhibition
induced upregulation of growth factor receptors upstream of PI3K,
indicating a requirement for sustained and robust PI3K inhibition.
Re-treatment of mice with low-dose GDC-0941 after 12 h induced continued
inhibition of PI3K and mTORC1 for >9 h, suggesting that twice daily
low-dose treatment may be sufficient to continually inhibit PI3K. In
contrast, high-dose GDC-0941 suppressed PI3K and mTORC1 for >24 h.
Analysis of these doses and schedules on tumor growth is ongoing.

