Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tyrosine kinase inhibition with sorafenib but not pazopanib
enriches for sarcoma cancer stem cells in diverse models of soft tissue
sarcoma


Purpose: Cancer stem cells (CSCs) are a putative source of resistance and
relapse following conventional anti-proliferative therapies. We
hypothesized that anti-proliferative, but not anti-angiogenic, tyrosine
kinase inhibitors would enrich for CSCs in models of soft tissue
sarcoma.Experimental Design: We exposed multiple human sarcoma cell lines
to sorafenib and pazopanib and assessed cell viability and expression of
CSC markers. We exposed mice harboring lung/liver Ewing's sarcoma
metastases to daily sorafenib and evaluated survival and CSC expression.
We exposed dissociated primary sarcoma tumors to overnight sorafenib and
pazopanib. We used tissue microarray (TMA) to evaluate the frequency and
intensity of CSC markers in clinical sarcoma samples after neoadjuvant
therapy with sorafenib.Results: Viability following sorafenib exposure in
vitro ranged from 1 - 20% with a corresponding 2 - 8.2 fold increase in
ALDHbright cells from baseline (PPurpose: Cancer stem cells (CSCs) are a
putative source of resistance and relapse following conventional
anti-proliferative therapies. We hypothesized that anti-proliferative,
but not anti-angiogenic, tyrosine kinase inhibitors would enrich for CSCs
in models of soft tissue sarcoma.Experimental Design: We exposed multiple
human sarcoma cell lines to sorafenib and pazopanib and assessed cell
viability and expression of CSC markers. We exposed mice harboring
lung/liver Ewing's sarcoma metastases to daily sorafenib and evaluated
survival and CSC expression. We exposed dissociated primary sarcoma
tumors to overnight sorafenib and pazopanib. We used tissue microarray
(TMA) to evaluate the frequency and intensity of CSC markers in clinical
sarcoma samples after neoadjuvant therapy with sorafenib.Results:
Viability following sorafenib exposure in vitro ranged from 1 - 20% with
a corresponding 2 - 8.2 fold increase in ALDHbright cells from baseline
(P<0.05), while negligible effects from pazopanib were observed. In vivo,
sorafenib treatment improved median survival by 10 days (PPurpose: Cancer
stem cells (CSCs) are a putative source of resistance and relapse
following conventional anti-proliferative therapies. We hypothesized that
anti-proliferative, but not anti-angiogenic, tyrosine kinase inhibitors
would enrich for CSCs in models of soft tissue sarcoma.Experimental
Design: We exposed multiple human sarcoma cell lines to sorafenib and
pazopanib and assessed cell viability and expression of CSC markers. We
exposed mice harboring lung/liver Ewing's sarcoma metastases to daily
sorafenib and evaluated survival and CSC expression. We exposed
dissociated primary sarcoma tumors to overnight sorafenib and pazopanib.
We used tissue microarray (TMA) to evaluate the frequency and intensity
of CSC markers in clinical sarcoma samples after neoadjuvant therapy with
sorafenib.Results: Viability following sorafenib exposure in vitro ranged
from 1 - 20% with a corresponding 2 - 8.2 fold increase in ALDHbright
cells from baseline (P<0.05), while negligible effects from pazopanib
were observed. In vivo, sorafenib treatment improved median survival by
10 days (P<0.05), but increased the population of ALDHbright cells 2.5 -
2.8 fold (PPurpose: Cancer stem cells (CSCs) are a putative source of
resistance and relapse following conventional anti-proliferative
therapies. We hypothesized that anti-proliferative, but not
anti-angiogenic, tyrosine kinase inhibitors would enrich for CSCs in
models of soft tissue sarcoma.Experimental Design: We exposed multiple
human sarcoma cell lines to sorafenib and pazopanib and assessed cell
viability and expression of CSC markers. We exposed mice harboring
lung/liver Ewing's sarcoma metastases to daily sorafenib and evaluated
survival and CSC expression. We exposed dissociated primary sarcoma
tumors to overnight sorafenib and pazopanib. We used tissue microarray
(TMA) to evaluate the frequency and intensity of CSC markers in clinical
sarcoma samples after neoadjuvant therapy with sorafenib.Results:
Viability following sorafenib exposure in vitro ranged from 1 - 20% with
a corresponding 2 - 8.2 fold increase in ALDHbright cells from baseline
(P<0.05), while negligible effects from pazopanib were observed. In vivo,
sorafenib treatment improved median survival by 10 days (P<0.05), but
increased the population of ALDHbright cells 2.5 - 2.8 fold (P<0.05).
Analysis of primary human sarcoma samples revealed direct cytotoxicity
following exposure to sorafenib with a corresponding increase in
ALDHbright cells (PPurpose: Cancer stem cells (CSCs) are a putative
source of resistance and relapse following conventional
anti-proliferative therapies. We hypothesized that anti-proliferative,
but not anti-angiogenic, tyrosine kinase inhibitors would enrich for CSCs
in models of soft tissue sarcoma.Experimental Design: We exposed multiple
human sarcoma cell lines to sorafenib and pazopanib and assessed cell
viability and expression of CSC markers. We exposed mice harboring
lung/liver Ewing's sarcoma metastases to daily sorafenib and evaluated
survival and CSC expression. We exposed dissociated primary sarcoma
tumors to overnight sorafenib and pazopanib. We used tissue microarray
(TMA) to evaluate the frequency and intensity of CSC markers in clinical
sarcoma samples after neoadjuvant therapy with sorafenib.Results:
Viability following sorafenib exposure in vitro ranged from 1 - 20% with
a corresponding 2 - 8.2 fold increase in ALDHbright cells from baseline
(P<0.05), while negligible effects from pazopanib were observed. In vivo,
sorafenib treatment improved median survival by 10 days (P<0.05), but
increased the population of ALDHbright cells 2.5 - 2.8 fold (P<0.05).
Analysis of primary human sarcoma samples revealed direct cytotoxicity
following exposure to sorafenib with a corresponding increase in
ALDHbright cells (P<0.05). Again, negligible effects from pazopanib were
observed. TMA analysis of clinical sarcoma specimens demonstrated
significant enrichment for ALDHbright cells in the post-treatment
resection specimen following neoadjuvant therapy including sorafenib
(PPurpose: Cancer stem cells (CSCs) are a putative source of resistance
and relapse following conventional anti-proliferative therapies. We
hypothesized that anti-proliferative, but not anti-angiogenic, tyrosine
kinase inhibitors would enrich for CSCs in models of soft tissue
sarcoma.Experimental Design: We exposed multiple human sarcoma cell lines
to sorafenib and pazopanib and assessed cell viability and expression of
CSC markers. We exposed mice harboring lung/liver Ewing's sarcoma
metastases to daily sorafenib and evaluated survival and CSC expression.
We exposed dissociated primary sarcoma tumors to overnight sorafenib and
pazopanib. We used tissue microarray (TMA) to evaluate the frequency and
intensity of CSC markers in clinical sarcoma samples after neoadjuvant
therapy with sorafenib.Results: Viability following sorafenib exposure in
vitro ranged from 1 - 20% with a corresponding 2 - 8.2 fold increase in
ALDHbright cells from baseline (P<0.05), while negligible effects from
pazopanib were observed. In vivo, sorafenib treatment improved median
survival by 10 days (P<0.05), but increased the population of ALDHbright
cells 2.5 - 2.8 fold (P<0.05). Analysis of primary human sarcoma samples
revealed direct cytotoxicity following exposure to sorafenib with a
corresponding increase in ALDHbright cells (P<0.05). Again, negligible
effects from pazopanib were observed. TMA analysis of clinical sarcoma
specimens demonstrated significant enrichment for ALDHbright cells in the
post-treatment resection specimen following neoadjuvant therapy including
sorafenib (P<0.05).Conclusions: Sorafenib, but not pazopanib, exerts a
direct anti-proliferative effect on sarcoma cells with a corresponding
enrichment in sarcoma CSCs. Sustained anti-sarcoma therapeutic effects
may require targeting of the CSC population in combination with cytotoxic
treatments.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

