Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Proteomic analysis of citrullinated targets regulated by the
p53-PADI4 pathway


We recently reported that p53 regulates protein citrullination through
the transcriptional regulation of PADI4 that converts an arginine residue
in proteins to a citrulline residue. In response to DNA damage, p53-PADI4
pathway induces citrullination of NPM1, Histone H4, and Lamin C, and
subsequently promotes apoptotic pathway. To verify the clinical
significance of PADI4 in human carcinogenesis, we screened the mutation
of PADI4 in hepatocellular carcinoma and found three non-synonymous
mutations among 104 cancer tissues (2.9%). Then we evaluated these three
mutations as well as 8 somatic mutations reported by ICGC or COMP
projects. We found that 8 among 11 mutations remarkably inhibited the
enzymatic activity of PADI4 protein. To identify novel PADI4 substrates,
we conducted proteome analysis using HEK293T cells ectopically
transfected with wild type or mutant PADI4 expressing plasmid. Among more
than 10000 peptides identified by the liquid chromatography MS/MS
analysis, 265 peptides (2.2%) were citrullinated in PADI4-introduced
cells, while less than 0.4% of total peptides were citrullinated in
control or mock transfected cells. Pathway analysis revealed that RNA
binding proteins such as hnRNPs are dominantly citrullinated by PADI4,
indicating that possible role of protein citrullination in RNA processing.

