Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pharmacokinetics and biodistribution of eribulin mesylate,
paclitaxel, and ixabepilone in mouse


Chemotherapy-induced peripheral neurotoxicity is a major clinical problem
representing the dose-limiting side effect of many antineoplastic drugs.
The degree and type of neuropathy incurred is dependent on the
chemotherapeutic drug, dose intensity, and cumulative dose. In an earlier
study by our group, we found that paclitaxel and ixabepilone,
administered to mice at their respective MTDs, produced dose dependent
deficits in caudal nerve conduction velocity, caudal amplitude and
digital nerve amplitudes, as well as moderate to severe degenerative
pathologic changes in dorsal root ganglia (DRG) and sciatic nerve (SN).
In contrast, eribulin mesylate produced no significant deleterious
effects on any nerve conduction parameter measured and caused milder,
less frequent effects on morphology. Similar trends for eribulin to cause
less neuropathy (including later onset and resolution) in the clinic have
also been reported (Cigler and Vadhat, 2010; Jain and Cigler 2012, Vadhat
et al., 2013). Differences in tubulin binding may, in part, potentially
explain the differential effect (Perez et al 2009; Jordan et al 2005).
Another potential explanation may reside in different pharmacokinetic
(PK) and peripheral nerve distribution of these agents. To elucidate
this, mice received a single dose of paclitaxel, ixabepilone or eribulin
mesylate (30, 3 and 1.75mg/kg respectively, based on an MTD regimen),
administered IV into the caudal vein. Plasma, DRG and SN samples were
obtained at 0.25, 1, 3, 6, 8, 24, 48, and 72 h post dose. Tissues were
homogenized and after extraction, concentrations of eribulin mesylate,
ixabepilone and paclitaxel were determined in each matrix using LC/MS/MS.
PK parameters were calculated using noncompartmental analysis in
WinNonLin v 5.0.3. We report that all 3 chemotherapies rapidly penetrated
both SN and DRG with maximal concentrations seen at, or within 15 mins
after administration. Concentrations of all 3 agents in DRG and SN then
declined by 30-50% over the first 1-3h and thereafter remained relatively
stable in the tissue for up to 72 h, despite clearing rapidly from plasma
to reach levels below quantification, (Chemotherapy-induced peripheral
neurotoxicity is a major clinical problem representing the dose-limiting
side effect of many antineoplastic drugs. The degree and type of
neuropathy incurred is dependent on the chemotherapeutic drug, dose
intensity, and cumulative dose. In an earlier study by our group, we
found that paclitaxel and ixabepilone, administered to mice at their
respective MTDs, produced dose dependent deficits in caudal nerve
conduction velocity, caudal amplitude and digital nerve amplitudes, as
well as moderate to severe degenerative pathologic changes in dorsal root
ganglia (DRG) and sciatic nerve (SN). In contrast, eribulin mesylate
produced no significant deleterious effects on any nerve conduction
parameter measured and caused milder, less frequent effects on
morphology. Similar trends for eribulin to cause less neuropathy
(including later onset and resolution) in the clinic have also been
reported (Cigler and Vadhat, 2010; Jain and Cigler 2012, Vadhat et al.,
2013). Differences in tubulin binding may, in part, potentially explain
the differential effect (Perez et al 2009; Jordan et al 2005). Another
potential explanation may reside in different pharmacokinetic (PK) and
peripheral nerve distribution of these agents. To elucidate this, mice
received a single dose of paclitaxel, ixabepilone or eribulin mesylate
(30, 3 and 1.75mg/kg respectively, based on an MTD regimen), administered
IV into the caudal vein. Plasma, DRG and SN samples were obtained at
0.25, 1, 3, 6, 8, 24, 48, and 72 h post dose. Tissues were homogenized
and after extraction, concentrations of eribulin mesylate, ixabepilone
and paclitaxel were determined in each matrix using LC/MS/MS. PK
parameters were calculated using noncompartmental analysis in WinNonLin v
5.0.3. We report that all 3 chemotherapies rapidly penetrated both SN and
DRG with maximal concentrations seen at, or within 15 mins after
administration. Concentrations of all 3 agents in DRG and SN then
declined by 30-50% over the first 1-3h and thereafter remained relatively
stable in the tissue for up to 72 h, despite clearing rapidly from plasma
to reach levels below quantification, (<5 ng/ml), by 24 h. Overall, dose
normalized AUC in SN was similar for eribulin mesylate and ixabepilone
and higher than for paclitaxel (1927 vs 2451 vs 793 ng/h/per g tissue,
respectively). The ranking for the dose normalized AUC in DRG was
eribulin mesylate Chemotherapy-induced peripheral neurotoxicity is a
major clinical problem representing the dose-limiting side effect of many
antineoplastic drugs. The degree and type of neuropathy incurred is
dependent on the chemotherapeutic drug, dose intensity, and cumulative
dose. In an earlier study by our group, we found that paclitaxel and
ixabepilone, administered to mice at their respective MTDs, produced dose
dependent deficits in caudal nerve conduction velocity, caudal amplitude
and digital nerve amplitudes, as well as moderate to severe degenerative
pathologic changes in dorsal root ganglia (DRG) and sciatic nerve (SN).
In contrast, eribulin mesylate produced no significant deleterious
effects on any nerve conduction parameter measured and caused milder,
less frequent effects on morphology. Similar trends for eribulin to cause
less neuropathy (including later onset and resolution) in the clinic have
also been reported (Cigler and Vadhat, 2010; Jain and Cigler 2012, Vadhat
et al., 2013). Differences in tubulin binding may, in part, potentially
explain the differential effect (Perez et al 2009; Jordan et al 2005).
Another potential explanation may reside in different pharmacokinetic
(PK) and peripheral nerve distribution of these agents. To elucidate
this, mice received a single dose of paclitaxel, ixabepilone or eribulin
mesylate (30, 3 and 1.75mg/kg respectively, based on an MTD regimen),
administered IV into the caudal vein. Plasma, DRG and SN samples were
obtained at 0.25, 1, 3, 6, 8, 24, 48, and 72 h post dose. Tissues were
homogenized and after extraction, concentrations of eribulin mesylate,
ixabepilone and paclitaxel were determined in each matrix using LC/MS/MS.
PK parameters were calculated using noncompartmental analysis in
WinNonLin v 5.0.3. We report that all 3 chemotherapies rapidly penetrated
both SN and DRG with maximal concentrations seen at, or within 15 mins
after administration. Concentrations of all 3 agents in DRG and SN then
declined by 30-50% over the first 1-3h and thereafter remained relatively
stable in the tissue for up to 72 h, despite clearing rapidly from plasma
to reach levels below quantification, (<5 ng/ml), by 24 h. Overall, dose
normalized AUC in SN was similar for eribulin mesylate and ixabepilone
and higher than for paclitaxel (1927 vs 2451 vs 793 ng/h/per g tissue,
respectively). The ranking for the dose normalized AUC in DRG was
eribulin mesylate < paclitaxel Chemotherapy-induced peripheral
neurotoxicity is a major clinical problem representing the dose-limiting
side effect of many antineoplastic drugs. The degree and type of
neuropathy incurred is dependent on the chemotherapeutic drug, dose
intensity, and cumulative dose. In an earlier study by our group, we
found that paclitaxel and ixabepilone, administered to mice at their
respective MTDs, produced dose dependent deficits in caudal nerve
conduction velocity, caudal amplitude and digital nerve amplitudes, as
well as moderate to severe degenerative pathologic changes in dorsal root
ganglia (DRG) and sciatic nerve (SN). In contrast, eribulin mesylate
produced no significant deleterious effects on any nerve conduction
parameter measured and caused milder, less frequent effects on
morphology. Similar trends for eribulin to cause less neuropathy
(including later onset and resolution) in the clinic have also been
reported (Cigler and Vadhat, 2010; Jain and Cigler 2012, Vadhat et al.,
2013). Differences in tubulin binding may, in part, potentially explain
the differential effect (Perez et al 2009; Jordan et al 2005). Another
potential explanation may reside in different pharmacokinetic (PK) and
peripheral nerve distribution of these agents. To elucidate this, mice
received a single dose of paclitaxel, ixabepilone or eribulin mesylate
(30, 3 and 1.75mg/kg respectively, based on an MTD regimen), administered
IV into the caudal vein. Plasma, DRG and SN samples were obtained at
0.25, 1, 3, 6, 8, 24, 48, and 72 h post dose. Tissues were homogenized
and after extraction, concentrations of eribulin mesylate, ixabepilone
and paclitaxel were determined in each matrix using LC/MS/MS. PK
parameters were calculated using noncompartmental analysis in WinNonLin v
5.0.3. We report that all 3 chemotherapies rapidly penetrated both SN and
DRG with maximal concentrations seen at, or within 15 mins after
administration. Concentrations of all 3 agents in DRG and SN then
declined by 30-50% over the first 1-3h and thereafter remained relatively
stable in the tissue for up to 72 h, despite clearing rapidly from plasma
to reach levels below quantification, (<5 ng/ml), by 24 h. Overall, dose
normalized AUC in SN was similar for eribulin mesylate and ixabepilone
and higher than for paclitaxel (1927 vs 2451 vs 793 ng/h/per g tissue,
respectively). The ranking for the dose normalized AUC in DRG was
eribulin mesylate < paclitaxel < ixabepilone (3894 vs 7217 vs 22800
ng/h/per g tissue, respectively). These findings suggest that peripheral
nerve exposure is likely not the underlying mechanism for the
differential propensity of eribulin mesylate, paclitaxel and ixabepilone
to produce neurotoxicity.This work was financially supported by Eisai.

