Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nicotine-induced gemcitabine resistance is reversed by
gamma-aminobutyric acid but enhanced by baclofen in pancreatic cancer
xenografts and in pancreatic cancer cells in vitro


Pancreatic cancer is frequently resistant to cancer therapeutics. Smoking
and alcoholism are risk factors and pancreatic cancer patients often
undergo nicotine replacement therapy (NRT) and treatment for alcohol
dependence. Based on our report that low dose nicotine within the range
of NRT causes gemcitabine resistance in pancreatic cancer, our current
study has tested the hypothesis that GABA or the selective GABA-B-R
agonist baclofen used to treat alcohol dependence reverse
nicotine-induced gemcitabine resistance in pancreatic cancer. Using
pancreatic cancer cell lines BXPC-3 and PANC-1, our data show that GABA
significantly reversed gemcitabine resistance induced by low dose
nicotine in xenografts whereas baclofen did not. This effect of GABA was
accompanied by decreases in cAMP, p-CREB, p-AKT, p-Src, p-ERK
metalloproteinases-9 and -2 and EGR-1 and increases in cleaved caspase-3
in xenografts whereas baclofen had the opposite effects. In vitro
exposure of cells to single doses or seven days of nicotine induced the
protein expression of MMP-2, MMP-9 and EGR-1 and these responses were
blocked by GABA. Baclofen downregulated the protein expression of
GABA-B-Rs in xenograft tissues and in cells exposed to baclofen for seven
days in vitro. This response was accompanied by inversed baclofen effects
from inhibition of cAMP formation after single dose exposures to
stimulation of cAMP formation in cells pretreated for seven days. These
findings suggest GABA as a promising agent to overcome nicotine-induced
gemcitabine resistance in pancreatic cancer whereas treatment of
alcoholism by baclofen may increase gemcitabine resistance.Supported by
grants RO1CA130888 and RO1CA042829 with the National Cancer Institute.

