Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Relative bioavailability of dovitinib (TKI258) formulations


Background: Dovitinib (TKI258) is a potent oral tyrosine kinase inhibitor
of FGFR as well as VEGFR, PDGFR, cKIT, and FLT3. Early clinical trials
used an oral solution or a clinical service form (CSF) capsule of a
lactate anhydrous formulation, which was challenging to produce on a
large scale. Thus, a lactate monohydrate salt was developed as the final
market image (FMI) and has been tested in both capsule and tablet
form.Methods: The objective was to characterize the relative
bioavailability of the CSF capsule, the FMI capsule, and the FMI tablet
to the oral solution. Relative bioavailability was quantified via the
area under the concentration time curve from time zero until the last
time point sampled (AUClast) and by the maximum concentration (Cmax)
following a single dose. First, population pharmacokinetic (PK) modeling
from 2 phase 1 studies was used to characterize the relative
bioavailability of the CSF capsule to the oral solution. Then, results
from 2 formal relative bioavailability studies (FMI capsule vs CSF
capsule and FMI tablet vs CSF capsule) were used to bridge the FMI
formulations to the oral solution. The ratio of an FMI formulation's
AUClast or Cmax to that of the oral solution was found as the product of
the ratio of the FMI formulation to the CSF capsule times the ratio of
the CSF capsule to the oral solution. In the 2 phase 1 studies, the oral
solution was used in 9 patients (dose range, 50-600 mg), and the CSF
capsule was used in 67 patients (dose range, 200-600 mg). The sample
sizes of the 2 relative bioavailability studies for the CSF capsule were
20 and 21 for the FMI capsule and tablet, respectively.Results: The
population PK model showed that the ratios of PK parameters (90% CI)
comparing the CSF capsule to the oral solution were 0.85 (range,
0.65-1.14) for AUClast and 0.85 (range, 0.64-1.12) for Cmax. Then using
the bioavailability ratio of the FMI capsule to the CSF capsule (AUClast,
0.88 [range, 0.82-0.94]; Cmax, 0.97 [range, 0.89-1.06]), bridging found
the AUClast ratio of the FMI capsule to the oral solution to be 0.75
(range, 0.56-1.02), and the Cmax ratio was 0.83 (range, 0.61-1.10).
Similarly, the bioavailability ratio of the FMI tablet to the CSF capsule
(AUClast, 0.97 [range, 0.88-1.07]; Cmax, 0.99 [range, 0.91-1.08]) was
used to calculate the ratio of FMI tablet to the oral solution: 0.82
(range, 0.62-1.14) for AUClast and 0.85 (range, 0.62-1.13) for
Cmax.Conclusions: The relative bioavailabilities of dovitinib CSF
capsules ( 0.85), FMI capsules (0.75-0.83) and FMI tablets (0.82-0.85) to
oral solution were found to be similar to each other with respect to both
AUClast and Cmax. This is consistent with the fact that the FMI capsule
and CSF capsule as well as the FMI tablet and CSF capsule were similarly
bioavailable.

