Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Interrogation of mechanisms that underlie augmented
steroidogenesis in castration-resistant prostate cancer


The conversion of adrenal androgens, such as dehydroepiandrosterone
(DHEA), to dihydrotestosterone (DHT) drives castration resistant prostate
cancer (CRPC) progression. No mutations or variations in those
steroidogenic enzymes have been identified as responsible for the
phenotype of increased intratumoral DHT synthesis in CRPC. By analyzing
CRPC cell line models and clinical samples from patients with CRPC, we
found that a gain-of-stability mutation in 3-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase
type 1 (3HSD1, encoded by HSD3B1 gene) confers an increase in metabolic
flux from DHEA to DHT in CRPC. The prolonged protein half-life of mutant
3HSD1 results from resisting an association with the ubiquitin E3-ligase
autocrine mobility factor receptor (AMFR). Genetic selection for mutant
3HSD1 is evident from somatic mutation in human CRPC tumors, by loss of
heterozygosity (LOH) of the wild type copy in patients with heterozygous
inheritance, and from acquisition of same somatic mutation in a mouse
xenograft tumor model treated with abiraterone. Furthermore, we found the
expression of AMFR is suppressed in a CRPC xenograft model expressing
wild type 3HSD1, suggesting a compensatory mechanism that augments
steroidogenesis in CRPC progression. Our discovery of this 3HSD1
gain-of-function mutation is the first example of a mutation identified
in a component of steroidogenic machinery in CRPC, which strongly
validates a new target for individualized cancer therapy in CPRC.

