Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genetic susceptibility to cervical cancer: Role of XRCC1


Background: X-ray repair cross-complementation group 1 (XRCC1) is a
scaffold protein involved in the early and late stages of Base Excision
Repair (BER). Three single nucleotide polymorphisms occur in XRCC1,
resulting in non-synonymous amino acid changes, which could change the
binding or regulatory activities of XRCC1. Human papillomavirus (HPV) is
considered to be a necessary but not sufficient cause for cervical cancer
and, therefore, other factors contribute to the carcinogenic process. A
hereditary component for this neoplasia has been reported and several
studies indicate that genetic background of the host is important for
cervical cancer susceptibility. Previous studies investigating the
association of (XRCC1) polymorphisms with squamous intraepithelial
lesions (SIL) and cervical cancer (CC) risk has provided inconsistent
results. The aim of our study was to assess the association between the
XRCC1 gene Arg194Trp, Arg399Gln, Arg280His polymorphisms as well as its
expression and risk of SIL and CC.Methods: A case control study
consisting of 178 samples (65 CC cases, 45 SIL cases and 68 controls) was
carried out. HPV DNA detection was performed by consensus PCR and
genotyping of positive samples by type specific primers. XRCC1
polymorphisms were determined by Restriction Fragment Length Polymorphism
(RFLP). Expression at mRNA level was checked by Real Time PCR and at
protein level by Western blotting.Results: The SNPs in XRCC1 gene was
associated with increased risk of SIL and CC. The TT genotype of XRCC1
codon 194 and AA genotype of XRCC1 codon 280 presented 12 fold (p=0.001;
OR=12.2; 95%CI=4.9-30.9) and 7.5 fold (p=0.001; OR=7.5; 95%CI=2.9-18.7)
higher risk of cervical cancer, respectively. The variant genotype of
XRCC1 codon 399 was associated with 4.2 fold (p=0.008; OR=4.2;
95%CI=1.5-12.1) higher risk of cervical cancer. The heterozygous genotype
of all the three exons did not present any significant risk. In XRCC1
C194T, and XRCC1 G280A combining the heterozygous and variant genotype
there was higher risk for CC (p=0.001; OR=7.01 95%CI=3.1-15.7 and
p=0.001, OR=3.2, 95%CI=1.6-6.6, respectively). In SIL cases, the
homozygous variant TT of Exon 6 presented 3.5 fold (p=0.012; OR=3.5;
95%CI=1.3-9.8) higher risk. The combined variant genotype (CT+TT) also
showed an elevated risk of SIL (p=0.003, OR=3.3). The invasive cancer and
SIL subjects demonstrated lower relative expression of the XRCC1
(pBackground: X-ray repair cross-complementation group 1 (XRCC1) is a
scaffold protein involved in the early and late stages of Base Excision
Repair (BER). Three single nucleotide polymorphisms occur in XRCC1,
resulting in non-synonymous amino acid changes, which could change the
binding or regulatory activities of XRCC1. Human papillomavirus (HPV) is
considered to be a necessary but not sufficient cause for cervical cancer
and, therefore, other factors contribute to the carcinogenic process. A
hereditary component for this neoplasia has been reported and several
studies indicate that genetic background of the host is important for
cervical cancer susceptibility. Previous studies investigating the
association of (XRCC1) polymorphisms with squamous intraepithelial
lesions (SIL) and cervical cancer (CC) risk has provided inconsistent
results. The aim of our study was to assess the association between the
XRCC1 gene Arg194Trp, Arg399Gln, Arg280His polymorphisms as well as its
expression and risk of SIL and CC.Methods: A case control study
consisting of 178 samples (65 CC cases, 45 SIL cases and 68 controls) was
carried out. HPV DNA detection was performed by consensus PCR and
genotyping of positive samples by type specific primers. XRCC1
polymorphisms were determined by Restriction Fragment Length Polymorphism
(RFLP). Expression at mRNA level was checked by Real Time PCR and at
protein level by Western blotting.Results: The SNPs in XRCC1 gene was
associated with increased risk of SIL and CC. The TT genotype of XRCC1
codon 194 and AA genotype of XRCC1 codon 280 presented 12 fold (p=0.001;
OR=12.2; 95%CI=4.9-30.9) and 7.5 fold (p=0.001; OR=7.5; 95%CI=2.9-18.7)
higher risk of cervical cancer, respectively. The variant genotype of
XRCC1 codon 399 was associated with 4.2 fold (p=0.008; OR=4.2;
95%CI=1.5-12.1) higher risk of cervical cancer. The heterozygous genotype
of all the three exons did not present any significant risk. In XRCC1
C194T, and XRCC1 G280A combining the heterozygous and variant genotype
there was higher risk for CC (p=0.001; OR=7.01 95%CI=3.1-15.7 and
p=0.001, OR=3.2, 95%CI=1.6-6.6, respectively). In SIL cases, the
homozygous variant TT of Exon 6 presented 3.5 fold (p=0.012; OR=3.5;
95%CI=1.3-9.8) higher risk. The combined variant genotype (CT+TT) also
showed an elevated risk of SIL (p=0.003, OR=3.3). The invasive cancer and
SIL subjects demonstrated lower relative expression of the XRCC1
(p<0.001). Reduction was also found on the protein level.Conclusions: The
present study suggested that XRCC1 as a predisposing factor in cervical
precancer and increased risk of invasive cervical cancer. Low mRNA
transcript of XRCC1 showed an increased risk of cervical cancer
irrespective of HPV status, as majority of cervical cancer and SIL
samples were HPV positive. This implies that polymorphism and reduction
in expression of XRCC1 gene is associated with an early event in the
progression to cervical cancer.Note: This abstract was not presented at
the meeting.

