Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Extended adjuvant temozolomide improves survival in a glioblastoma
mouse model


Glioblastoma (GBM) represents the most aggressive malignant primary brain
tumor. Temozolomide (TMZ) is a standard of care for newly diagnosed GBM
patients in conjunction with ionizing radiation (IR) or as an adjuvant
agent. Yet the prognosis of GBM remains devastating with a median
survival of 14 months. We investigated whether extended TMZ treatment
cycles would provide survival benefit for GBM patients. To recapitulate
the genomic and pathological heterogeneity found in GBM patients, we
utilized patient derived xenograft (PDX) mouse models.We demonstrated
that thecombination of TMZ and IR prevents tumor progression, but tumors
ultimately recur and lead to death. Overall survival was prolonged when
adjuvant TMZ treatment was administered with minimal toxicity.
Additionally, development of resistance to TMZ and IR was often
correlated with an increase in levels of MGMT protein, irrespective of
the promoter methylation status. Moreover, we demonstrate the utility of
a voxel-based MRI biomarker, the functional diffusionmap (fDM), as
animagingsurrogate to detect spatially varying changes in tumor response,
as well as a more sensitive predictor of overall response versus
whole-volume tumor measurements.The fDM biomarker was also useful as an
early predictor of impeding resistance to TMZ and IR.In summary, we
demonstrate that prolonged TMZ treatment should be considered for the
treatment of GBM patients. Furthermore, MRI based imaging allows early
prediction of therapy response as well as impeding resistance.

