Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PI3K/mTOR dual inhibitor PF-5212384 inhibits aberrant NF-kB
activation and exhibits activity in combination with MEK inhibitor
PD-325901 and docetaxel in human head and neck squamous cell carcinoma


Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is the sixth most common
cancer worldwide, and standard treatment with surgery or chemoradiation
has significant morbidity, with 5 year survival of 60% of head and neck
tumors harbor genomic alterations in the RTK-PI3K-mTOR and MAPK pathways
important in cell growth and survival. In this study, we determined the
effects of the novel PI3K-mTOR inhibitor PF-5212384 (PF-384) on molecular
targets and HNSCC growth in preclinical models. PF-384 IC50s of
0.75nM-133nM were found in 12 HNSCC lines by XTT cell density assays and
treatment resulted in increased sub-G0 cell death and G0/G1 phase
blockade by DNA flow cytometry. PF-384 strongly inhibited direct targets
of PI3K-mTOR, aberrant NF-kB transactivation and induced cytokines, but
only partially inhibited MEK pathway targets. Transient siRNA knockdown
of PIK3CA inhibited NF-kB activity, supporting PI3K-mTOR as an important
driver and target for inhibition of NF-kB prosurvival signaling in HNSCC.
PF-384 partially inhibited UMSCC1 tumor xenografts in vivo. PF-384 with
MEK inhibitor PD-325901 or docetaxel revealed combinatorial activity.
Given the high proportion of HNSCC patients with aberrations in the PI3K
pathway and combinatorial activity observed, PF-384 with PD-901 or
docetaxel merit further investigation in HNSCC.Supported by NIH Medical
Research Scholars Program (SM, RVB, DFE) and NIDCD intramural projects
ZIA-DC-000016, 73 and 74 (AS, JC, ZC, CVW).

