Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hyaluronan-CD44v3 interaction with oct4/sox2/nanog promotes
miR-302 expression leading to self-renewal, clonal formation and
cisplatin resistance in cancer stem cells from head and neck squamous
cell carcinoma


Human Head and Neck Squamous Cell Carcinoma (HNSCC) is a highly malignant
cancer associated with major morbidity and mortality. In this study we
determined that human HNSCC-derived HSC-3 cells contain a subpopulation
of cancer stem cells (CSCs) characterized by a high levels of CD44v3 and
aldehyde dehydrogenase-1 (ALDH1) expression. These tumor cells also
express several stem cell markers (the transcription factors-Oct4, Sox2
and Nanog) and display the hallmark CSC properties of self-renewal/clonal
formation and the ability to generate heterogeneous cell
populations.Importantly, hyaluronan (HA) stimulates the CD44v3 (an HA
receptor) interaction with Oct4/Sox2/Nanog leading to both a complex
formation and the nuclear translocation of three CSC transcription
factors. Further analysis reveals that microRNA-302 (miR-302) is
controlled by an upstream promoter containing Oct4/Sox2/Nanog binding
sites, while chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays demonstrate that
stimulation of miR-302 expression by HA/CD44 is Oct4/Sox2/Nanog-dependent
in HNSCC-specific CSCs. This process results in suppression of several
epigenetic regulators (AOF1/AOF2 and DNMT1) and the upregulation of
several survival proteins (cIAP-1, cIAP-2 and XIAP) leading to
self-renewal, clonal formation and cisplatin resistance. These CSCs were
transfected with a specific anti-miR-302 inhibitor in order to silence
miR-302 expression and block its target functions. Our results
demonstrate that the anti-miR-302 inhibitor not only enhances the
expression of AOF1/AOF2 and DNMT1, but also abrogates the production of
cIAP-1, cIAP-2 and XIAP and HA/CD44v3-mediated cancer stem cell
functions. Taken together, these findings strongly support the contention
that the HA-induced CD44v3 interaction with Oct4/Sox2/Nanog signaling
plays a pivotal role in miR-302 production leading to AOF1/AOF2/DNMT1
downregulation and survival protein activation. All of these events are
critically important for the acquisition of cancer stem cell properties
including self-renewal, clonal formation and chemotherapy resistance in
HA/CD44v3-activated head and neck cancer.Note: This abstract was not
presented at the meeting.

