Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A literature-based sum score of genetic variants in IGF genes
modifies associations between indicators of energy balance and colorectal
cancer risk


Background: Gene-environment interactions between variants in
growth-regulating IGF genes and energy balance in colorectal cancer (CRC)
were studied in the Netherlands Cohort Study (NLCS) after 16.3 years
follow-up.Methods: Using a systematic strategy, we selected 25 SNPs and a
CA repeat in IGF genes that had repeatedly demonstrated significant
associations with CRC risk, energy balance-related exposures or related
endpoints in literature, and thus likely modify effects of energy balance
on CRC development. Twenty-four SNPs were successfully genotyped in
toenail DNA of NLCS subcohort members (n=3,203) and CRC cases (n=2,274)
with adequate exposure data. Unfavorable alleles were aggregated into a
sum score. Hazard ratios (HR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) were
estimated in case-cohort analyses for linear combinations between
tertiles of the genetic sum score and 8 energy balance-related
exposures.Results: Significant and increasingly higher risks were
observed for men with more adverse profiles compared to men with the most
optimal profile. In particular carrying more unfavorable alleles in
combination with a larger adult trouser/skirt size, an increased height
or the absence of early life energy restriction during the Dutch Hunger
Winter (1944-45) was associated with distal colon cancer [highest vs.
lowest linear combinations: HR (95% CI) = 2.03 (1.27-3.24), 2.05
(1.16-3.63) and 1.87 (1.11-3.16), respectively]. A combined effect of IGF
polymorphisms and energy balance-related exposures on subsite-specific
CRC risk was less convincing in women.Conclusion: Combined effects of IGF
polymorphisms and specific energy balance-related exposures are important
in CRC development in men, and less convincingly in women. The
availability of extensive environmental data and the aggregation of
genetic variants were invaluable for interpreting the joint
associations.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

