Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mitochondrial DNA copy number in peripheral blood and the risk of
clear-cell renal cell carcinoma: Effect of age, gender, smoking, and
history of hypertension


Mitochondria are the primary source of cellular energy. Mitochondrial DNA
(mtDNA) copy number in peripheral blood leukocytes (PBLs) has high
genetic heritability and inter-individual variation of mtDNA copy number
in PBLs has been associated with the risk of several human cancers. In
this study, we investigated into the link between mtDNA and clear-cell
renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC) in a large population-based case control
study. We measured relative mtDNA copy number in PBLs from 616 Caucasian
ccRCC cases and 603 controls frequency-matched on age, gender, and
ethnicity. In the analyses of controls only, there was a significant
inverse correlation between age and mtDNA copy number (P=0.001); men had
significantly lower mtDNA copy number than women (PMitochondria are the
primary source of cellular energy. Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) copy number
in peripheral blood leukocytes (PBLs) has high genetic heritability and
inter-individual variation of mtDNA copy number in PBLs has been
associated with the risk of several human cancers. In this study, we
investigated into the link between mtDNA and clear-cell renal cell
carcinoma (ccRCC) in a large population-based case control study. We
measured relative mtDNA copy number in PBLs from 616 Caucasian ccRCC
cases and 603 controls frequency-matched on age, gender, and ethnicity.
In the analyses of controls only, there was a significant inverse
correlation between age and mtDNA copy number (P=0.001); men had
significantly lower mtDNA copy number than women (P<0.001); and both
smoking and hypertension had a negative effect on mtDNA copy number
(P=0.03 and 0.04, respectively). We found a significantly lower mtDNA
copy number in cases compared to controls (meanSD: 1.160.37 versus
1.210.39, P=0.04). Dichotomized at the median level of mtDNA copy number
in controls, individuals with lower mtDNA copy number were at an
increased risk of ccRCC (OR=1.20, 95% CI: 0.96-1.51, P=0.11) adjusting
for age, gender, smoking status, BMI, and history of hypertension in a
multivariate logistic regression analysis. In stratified analyses, the
association between lower mtDNA copy number and increased ccRCC risks
reached statistical significance in younger aged (ageMitochondria are the
primary source of cellular energy. Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) copy number
in peripheral blood leukocytes (PBLs) has high genetic heritability and
inter-individual variation of mtDNA copy number in PBLs has been
associated with the risk of several human cancers. In this study, we
investigated into the link between mtDNA and clear-cell renal cell
carcinoma (ccRCC) in a large population-based case control study. We
measured relative mtDNA copy number in PBLs from 616 Caucasian ccRCC
cases and 603 controls frequency-matched on age, gender, and ethnicity.
In the analyses of controls only, there was a significant inverse
correlation between age and mtDNA copy number (P=0.001); men had
significantly lower mtDNA copy number than women (P<0.001); and both
smoking and hypertension had a negative effect on mtDNA copy number
(P=0.03 and 0.04, respectively). We found a significantly lower mtDNA
copy number in cases compared to controls (meanSD: 1.160.37 versus
1.210.39, P=0.04). Dichotomized at the median level of mtDNA copy number
in controls, individuals with lower mtDNA copy number were at an
increased risk of ccRCC (OR=1.20, 95% CI: 0.96-1.51, P=0.11) adjusting
for age, gender, smoking status, BMI, and history of hypertension in a
multivariate logistic regression analysis. In stratified analyses, the
association between lower mtDNA copy number and increased ccRCC risks
reached statistical significance in younger aged (age<60) individuals
(OR=1.56, 95% CI: 1.12-2.15, P=0.01), women (OR=1.57, 95% CI: 1.06-2.35,
P=0.03), and individuals without history of hypertension (OR=1.48, 95%
CI: 1.08-2.04, P=0.02). Interestingly, there was a significant
interaction between age and mtDNA copy number, and between a history of
hypertension and mtDNA copy number in elevating ccRCC risk (P for
interaction=0.02 and 0.03, respectively). In summary, our data showed
that several established risk factors of ccRCC, including advanced age,
male sex, smoking, and history of hypertension, negatively impacted mtDNA
copy number in PBLs. Lower mtDNA copy number in PBLs was associated with
significantly increased risk of ccRCC in younger aged individuals, women,
never smokers, and those without a history of hypertension. There was a
significant interaction between age and mtDNA, and a history of
hypertension and mtDNA in elevating the risk of ccRCC. These findings
indicate that the association between mtDNA copy number in PBLs and ccRCC
risk may be modified by various host characteristics (age, gender,
smoking, and history of hypertension), providing novel insight into the
role of mtDNA in modulating RCC tumorigenesis.

