Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Efficacy of aerosolized pioglitazone in lung carcinogenesis in A/J
mice


Pioglitazone is a PPAR gamma agonist commonly utilized clinically in the
treatment of diabetes. There have been clinical trials with this agent in
oral cancer prevention and we sought to potentially expand its use in
lung cancer in a B[a]P mouse model. Directed epithelial delivery in lung
cancer is an attractive treatment approach and we felt pioglitazone would
be amenable to aerosol delivery. Initially, a maximum tolerated dose
experiment examining standard toxicity parameters, including animal
behavior characteristics, weight, general health, and increases in
markers of cytotoxicity in bronchoalveolar lavage was conducted. We found
no statistically significant indications of increased toxicity in the
animals with administration of aerosolized pioglitazone and proceeded
with the prevention protocol. We utilized 192 seven week old female A/J
mice. All groups received Benzo[a]pyrene by oral gavage in 3 doses of
3mg/kg body weight over the course of 1 week. Animals were then
randomized into 8 groups of 24 mice per group based on weight.
Experimental diets, 0, 50, 150, and 450g/kg body weight pioglitazone
formulated into 0.6m average diameter respiratory particles, were started
1 week or 8 weeks after last dose of B[a]P. Animals were continued on the
feeding schedule, weighed weekly, and monitored for weight loss,
attenuation, rough hair coat, or other signs of ill health. The study was
concluded 16 weeks after administration of B[a]P. The agent was well
tolerated for the duration of the experiment and there was no observable
toxicity. The average number of adenomas per animal in the late treatment
group was 10.69 1.685 in the control, 12.27 1.761 in the 50g, 6.000
0.6359 in the 150 g, and 7.267 1.071 in the 450g groups but low control
tumor counts in the early treatment group precluded analysis. The same
tumor initation protocol was used with 72 mice. Animals were randomized
into 3 groups of 24 animals and treated with 0, 150, or 450g/kg body
weight aerosol pioglitazone for 16 weeks starting 1 week after the last
B[a]P dose. The average number of adenomas per animal was 9.217 1.004 in
the control, 7.957 0.9440 in the in the 150 g, and 6.304 0.8653 in the
450g groups. We conclude aerosol pioglitazone is well tolerated in the
A/J mouse model and a promising chemoprevention agent in the
aerodigestive tract.

