Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Associations between IL-6 genotype and IL-6-related tumor
alterations in ER+ breast cancer: results from ECOG2190/Int0121


Background: Despite overall favorable prognosis, a subset of patients
with ER+ breast cancer will subsequently relapse, and there is a need to
identify mechanisms associated with recurrence. Interleukin-6 (IL-6) is a
cytokine that has been implicated in progression and metastatic behavior
in breast cancer. We previously demonstrated that genotypic variants in
the IL-6 promotor associated with high IL-6 production are associated
with poor prognosis in a subset of non-metastatic, ER+ breast cancers
(Cancer Res, 2009). In the current study, we sought to determine whether
patients with these high-producer (HP) genotypes (GT) had tumors that
were enriched for IL-6 related alterations in membrane receptors,
signaling pathways and cell cycle control.Methods: We identified patients
with tumor blocks available from the ECOG 2190/INT0121 trial subjects in
which we previously had obtained germline DNA and performed GT/haplotype
(HT) analysis, and tumor microarrays (TMAs) were prepared. Expression of
IL-6/gp130 membrane receptors, tumoral IL-6 content, cytoplasmic
signaling through expression of phosphorylated signaling proteins
(p-STAT3, p-AKT and p-ERK) and alterations in nuclear cell cycle marker
expression (cyclin D, cyclin E and p27) were assessed by
immunohistochemistry. Patients had previously been GT for IL-6-174, -572,
-597 and the -373 variable repeat as well as assigned HT combining the HP
alleles. Chi2 and Fishers exact tests were used to compare proportions.
All tests were 2-sided.Results: From the previously GT ER+ patients in
E2190 (n=205), we recovered assessable tumor in 84 (41%) patients. Those
with tumor did not differ from the overall or ER+ GT cohorts by any
tumor/patient characteristics, genotype frequencies or recurrence rate at
10 years (63% with tumor vs. 60% overall). Gp130 membrane receptor
positivity was significantly associated with all IL-6 HP GT (-174GG
p=0.012; -572GG p=0.01; -597GG p=0.007 and -373non8A12T p=0.008), though
IL-6 receptor or IL-6 tumor content were not, and none were associated
with HT. Tumor expression of p-STAT3 was seen exclusively in tumors of
patients with any of the four IL-6 HP genotypes (rate 10 - 14% for HP GT
vs. 0% for all other GT) and within those with the intermediate and HP HT
(p=0.03), and p-AKT expression was significantly higher among those with
IL6-174GG (p=0.06) and -373non8A12T (p=0.04) GT. Tumor cyclin D levels
were significantly higher in those with IL6-174GG (p=0.02), -597GG
(p=0.02) and HT (p=0.04). No associations were seen with p-ERK, cyclin E
or p27 expression.Conclusions: These data suggest that patients with ER+
breast cancer who have high-producer IL-6 genotypes and poor prognosis
have tumors enriched for the IL-6 gp130 receptor, JAK/STAT signaling and
cyclin D overexpression, suggesting targets for intervention in these
patients.

