Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNA 760 regulates gastric cancer progression by
downregulation of histone mRNA expression


The presence of isolated tumor cells in the peripheral blood (PB) and
bone marrow (BM) is an important factor contributing to the metastasis of
solid cancers. Moreover, recent studies have demonstrated that various
types of host cells are also involved in cancer development and
metastasis. BM microenvironment is thought to be a good reflection of the
interplay between tumor cells and cancer-associated host cells in
metastatic sites compared to the bloodstream. We performed RNA-seq
analysis of the BM samples from 8 gastric cancer (GC) patients (Stages I
and IV: n = 4 each) in order to identify candidate prognostic markers,
and revealed higher expression of multiple histone mRNAs in Stage IV
patients. Results were validated through qRT-PCR analysis of HIST1H3D
expression in 175 BM, 92 PB, and 115 primary tumor (PT) samples from GC
patients. HIST1H3D expression in the BM, PB, and PT of Stage IV patients
was higher than that in Stage I patients (p = 0.0284, 0.0243, 0.0006,
respectively). In silico analysis revealed that most of the histone genes
upregulated in BM samples from Stage IV GC patients had predictive target
sites for microRNA 760 (miR-760) in their 3 UTRs. miR-760 expression was
assayed using qRT-PCR in 105 BM and 96 PT samples. In contrast to histone
mRNA expression, miR-760 was downregulated in the BM and PT of Stage IV
patients compared to Stage I patients (p = 0.0094 and 0.0018,
respectively). Direct interaction between miR-760 and histone mRNA was
confirmed by luciferase analysis in a GC cell line, NUGC3. HIST1H3D
expression was downregulated in 3 GC cell lines (NUGC3, KE39, and
KATOIII) after Pre-miR-760 transfection in both mRNA and protein levels.
We also examined miR-760 expression levels of noncancerous host cells in
samples from GC patients. In BM samples from another set of 4 GC
patients, the CD14 positive fraction exhibited the same degree of miR-760
expression compared to aCD45/EpCAM+ fraction. Moreover, in corresponding
noncancerous tissues from primary gastric tumors, miR-760 expression was
lower in Stage IV patients than in Stage I patients. These results
suggest that changes in miR-760 expression in host noncancerous cells are
also associated with GC progression. In conclusion, histone mRNA is
upregulated, while miR-760 is downregulated in the BM and PT of advanced
GC patients and proposed that the histone mRNA/miR-760 axis may have a
crucial role in the development of GC.

