Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Activity of MM-398, nanoliposomal irinotecan (nal-IRI), in Ewings
family tumor xenografts is associated with high exposure of tumor to drug
and high SLFN11 expression


Introduction: Pharmacokinetic properties of irinotecan limit tumor
exposure to the active metabolite SN-38. MM-398, a nanoliposomal
irinotecan (nal-IRI) developed to attempt to enhance delivery of
irinotecan and SN-38 to tumor cells is being tested in clinical trials.
We assessed the pharmacokinetics and anti-tumor activity of nal-IRI in
comparison to the current clinical formulation of irinotecan (free
irinotecan) in preclinical models of pediatric cancer in relationship to
expression of the putative DNA/RNA helicase SLFN11.Experimental Design:
Plasma and tissue samples were analyzed by liquid chromatography-tandem
mass spectrometry for irinotecan and SN-38. In vivo activity of free
irinotecan and nal-IRI was compared in subcutaneous xenograft models (3
each) of Ewing's sarcoma family of tumors (EFT), neuroblastoma (NB), and
rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS). SLFN11 mRNA expression (real-time RT-PCR) was
correlated to in vitro cytotoxicity of SN-38 (by DIMSCAN) in 20 EWS, 13
RMS, and 20 NB cell lines. SLFN11 mRNA expression in primary tumors (10
EFT, 10 NB, and 39 RMS) was assessed by Affymetrix HuEx
microarrays.Results: Plasma and tumor concentrations of irinotecan and
SN-38 were 10-fold higher for nal-IRI than for free irinotecan at 4h, 6h,
and 24h post-intravenous injection (p 100 days (88% EFS on day 120). EFS
for mice with RMS (median 39 days) and NB (median 81 days) was
significantly shorter (P 100-fold higher in EFT cell lines and > 10-fold
in EFT primary tumors compared with NB or RMS cell lines or primary
tumors (P 100-fold higher in EFT cell lines and > 10-fold in EFT primary
tumors compared with NB or RMS cell lines or primary tumors (P<0.0001).
Relative cytotoxic/inhibitory concentrations (rIC50) of SN-38 showed a
significant inverse correlation with SLFN11 expression in 20 EWS cell
lines (r=-0.63, P=0.004).Conclusions: Nal-IRI demonstrated higher
anti-tumor activity than free irinotecan in pediatric solid tumor
xenografts, presumably due to increased systemic and tumor exposures to
the SN-38 active metabolite. The high SLFN11 expression reported in EFT
cell lines and the strong nal-IRI activity we have observed in EFT
xenografts warrants testing in correlative clinical studies to determine
if SLFN11 can reliably be used as a biomarker to predict nal-IRI activity
in patients.

