Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combined analysis of TERT, EGFR and IDH status define distinct
prognostic classes of GBM


Background. The importance of telomerase reverse transcriptase (TERT) in
gliomagenesis has been recently strengthened by the frequent occurrence
of TERT promoter mutations in glioblastomas.Methods. We sequenced TERT
promoter mutation in 395 glioblastomas DNA and confronted the results
with histology, genetic profile (IDH1 mutation, EGFR amplification,
CDKN2A homozygous deletion, loss of chromosome 9 and 10, TP53 mutation),
and overall survival (OS).Results. TERT promoter mutations (TERTp-mut)
were found in 299/395 glioblastomas (75.7%) and were associated with an
older age (median 59.6 vs. 53.6 years pBackground. The importance of
telomerase reverse transcriptase (TERT) in gliomagenesis has been
recently strengthened by the frequent occurrence of TERT promoter
mutations in glioblastomas.Methods. We sequenced TERT promoter mutation
in 395 glioblastomas DNA and confronted the results with histology,
genetic profile (IDH1 mutation, EGFR amplification, CDKN2A homozygous
deletion, loss of chromosome 9 and 10, TP53 mutation), and overall
survival (OS).Results. TERT promoter mutations (TERTp-mut) were found in
299/395 glioblastomas (75.7%) and were associated with an older age
(median 59.6 vs. 53.6 years p<0.0001). TERTp-mut was an independent
factor of poor prognosis (OS= 13.8 months vs. 18.4 months), in both IDH
mutated (OS= 13.8 months vs. 37.6., p= 0.022) and IDH wild type (IDH-wt)
GBM (OS= 13.7 vs. 17.5 months, p= 0.006). TERTp-mut was associated with
IDH-wt and EGFR amplification (EGFR-amp) status. In TERTp-wt group, OS
was twice longer in EGFR wt compared to EGFR-amp GBM (OS= 26.6 months vs.
13.3 months; p= 0.005). In the EGFR-wt group, TERTp-wt patients had a
much better outcome (OS= 26.3 vs. 12.5 months; pBackground. The
importance of telomerase reverse transcriptase (TERT) in gliomagenesis
has been recently strengthened by the frequent occurrence of TERT
promoter mutations in glioblastomas.Methods. We sequenced TERT promoter
mutation in 395 glioblastomas DNA and confronted the results with
histology, genetic profile (IDH1 mutation, EGFR amplification, CDKN2A
homozygous deletion, loss of chromosome 9 and 10, TP53 mutation), and
overall survival (OS).Results. TERT promoter mutations (TERTp-mut) were
found in 299/395 glioblastomas (75.7%) and were associated with an older
age (median 59.6 vs. 53.6 years p<0.0001). TERTp-mut was an independent
factor of poor prognosis (OS= 13.8 months vs. 18.4 months), in both IDH
mutated (OS= 13.8 months vs. 37.6., p= 0.022) and IDH wild type (IDH-wt)
GBM (OS= 13.7 vs. 17.5 months, p= 0.006). TERTp-mut was associated with
IDH-wt and EGFR amplification (EGFR-amp) status. In TERTp-wt group, OS
was twice longer in EGFR wt compared to EGFR-amp GBM (OS= 26.6 months vs.
13.3 months; p= 0.005). In the EGFR-wt group, TERTp-wt patients had a
much better outcome (OS= 26.3 vs. 12.5 months; p< 0.0001), whereas in the
EGFR-amp group, TERTp-mut patients did better (OS = 15.8 vs. 13.3 months;
p= 0.05). Taken together the absence of both EGFR-amp and Tertp-mut is
associated with better survival (26.5 months for IDH-wt, 36.7 months for
IDH-mut patients).Conclusions. The analysis of TERT promoter mutations,
in combination with EGFR amplification and IDH mutation status, refines
the prognostic classification of GBM.

