Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exploring target gene(s) within chromosome 19-amplification
detected in a subclone from metastatic tumors in mouse transplantable OSCC


Cancer metastasis is caused by a highly complex molecular and cellular
mechanism. Although this mechanism has been gradually revealed, there are
few genes found as useful diagnostic markers or molecular targets for
clinical application so far. In this study, we attempted to establish
highly metastatic cells by in vivo selection for identifying
metastasis-related genes with an oral squamous cell carcinoma cell line
(HOC313-parent). As a result, we established a highly metastatic subline
(HOC313-LM) derived from a metastatic site of axillary lymph node. To
explore metastasis-related genes and signaling pathways, we performed
integrative omics including several genomic and epigenomic approaches
combined with systems biology. Since the amplification of chromosome 19
was identified in HOC313-LM by array CGH, we focused on this amplicon
containing 44 genes. Among them, one gene, which was essential for the
posttranslational modification, was associated with tumor formation and
metastasis in vivo via the Rho signaling pathway. Indeed, activation of
the Rho signaling pathway emerged in HOC313-LM by our systems biology
approach using the gene expression data sets. In addition, the expression
pattern of this gene correlated with poor disease-free survival and
distant metastasis in patients with esophageal squamous cell carcinoma.
Then, we performed therapeutic experiments using a known inhibitor of
this gene, and found that tumor growth was inhibited by this compound.
Taken together, our findings suggested that this gene might serve as a
novel molecular target for anti-cancer therapy.

