Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical evaluation of
7-chloro-N,N,5-trimethyl-4-oxo-3(6-[18F]fluoropyridin-2-yl)-3,5-dihydro-4H-
pyridazino[4,5-b]indole-1-acetamide: A novel pyridazinoindole ligand for
PET imaging of TSPO in cancer


There exists a continued need for the development of improved positron
emission tomography (PET) biomarkers for glioma imaging to aid in tumor
diagnosis, inform clinical outcome, and quantify response to therapeutic
intervention. Translocator protein (TSPO) expression is elevated in
cancer and has been linked with disease progression and diminished
survival and tends to be a hallmark of aggressive tumors. Our laboratory
has pursued development of TSPO PET ligands as candidates for molecular
imaging of glioma, as TSPO ligand binding correlates with tumor grade in
this setting.We report the first exploration of the structure-activity
relationship (SAR) around the pyridazinoindole ring and subsequent
radiofluorination of a potent and novel pyridazinoindole-based
TSPO-selective ligand for cancer imaging. Library and SAR development
around the N3 position of the pyridazinoindole scaffold led to the
discovery of
7-chloro-N,N,5-trimethyl-4-oxo-3(6-fluoropyridin-2-yl)-3,5-dihydro-4H-pyrid
azino[4,5-b]indole-1-acetamide (VUIIS8310), a novel TSPO ligand
exhibiting a binding affinity comparable to SSR180575, yet bearing a
fluorine atom for subsequent radiolabeling with fluorine-18 (18F) to give
7-chloro-N,N,5-trimethyl-4-oxo-3(6-[18F]fluoropyridin-2-yl)-3,5-dihydro-4H-
pyridazino[4,5-b]indole-1-acetamide (18F-VUIIS8310).Initial production
feasibility and radiochemical development were evaluated with
microfluidics and subsequently translated to traditional box-based
methods. Subsequently, quantitative, preclinical elevation of
18F-VUIIS8310 was conducted in a rat glioma model, given our previous
experience in this setting. Glioma-bearing rats were imaged in a microPET
system, with dynamic PET acquisitions acquired simultaneously upon tracer
injection. PET ligand reversibility and specificity were evaluated by
ligand displacement studies that utilized VUIIS8310. 18F-VUIIS8310
exhibited elevated uptake and specific, displaceable binding in tumor, in
contrast with normal brain, which exhibited very low uptake.
18F-VUIIS8310 uptake in the tumor, relative to normal brain, reached a
tumor-to-normal brain ratio of greater than 10:1. Ex vivo histological
analysis of resected tissue correlated well with PET imaging data.These
preclinical studies illuminate 18F-VUIIS8310 as a promising, novel TSPO
PET ligand for imaging glioma and potentially other solid tumors.
Importantly, the in vivo stability and high signal-to-noise achieved
between tumor and surrounding normal brain suggest the potential of this
PET ligand for early tumor detection within this setting. Future
head-to-head comparisons between this tracer and emerging, potent TSPO
ligands (J. Med. Chem. 2013, 56, 3429) are underway.

