Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An 18-gene signature for vascular invasion is associated with
aggressive features and reduced survival in breast cancer


Introduction: Vascular invasion, i.e. tumor cells entering the vascular
system, is considered to be an early step in the metastatic process and
important for the progress of malignant tumors. By microarray and qPCR,
we previously constructed an 18-gene signature in relation to vascular
invasion among endometrial cancer patients. Here, we wanted to
investigate the vascular invasion signature (VIS) among breast cancers
patients.Methods: The 18-gene signature was studied in 11 gene expression
data sets of breast cancer including information on 2423 patients. The
genes in the signature were investigated in the external data sets and
related to clinical data and follow-up information. We also wanted to
examine if our signature was associated with other published signatures
related to tumor progression.Results and Conclusions: High VIS showed
associations with aggressive features of breast cancer such as high tumor
grade, hormone receptor negativity, HER2 positive tumors, presence of a
basal-like phenotype, reduced patient survival and response to cytostatic
treatment. Correlations between VIS and other signatures for tumor
progression indicate an involvement in similar biological processes. In
conclusion, the vascular invasion signature showed strong and consistent
associations with aggressive features of breast cancer.

