Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: 4-methylumbelliferone: Dietary supplement turned chemo-preventive
and anti-metastatic agent for prostate cancer


INTRODUCTION: Hyaluronic acid (HA), a glycosaminoglycan, is associated
with prostate cancer (PCa) progression and metastasis.
4-methylumbelliferone (4-MU) is dietary supplement that inhibits
HA-synthesis. In this study we evaluated chemopreventive and therapeutic
efficacy of 4-MU to prevent PCa growth and metastasis in three PCa
models.METHODS: Efficacy of daily oral gavage of 4-MU was evaluated in 3
PCa models: Model 1: TRAMP mice (n = 8-20/group) were treated with
vehicle or 4-MU (450 mg/kg) by starting stage-specific treatment at 8
(PIN stage), 12 (adenocarcinoma) and 22 (invasive carcinoma) wks of age.
Model 2: Mice were treated with 4-MU (200 mg/kg or 450 mg/kg) following
intracardiac injection of Luciferase expressing PC3-ML cells. 3. Palpable
DU145 xenografts were treated with 4-MU (200 and 450 mg/kg). Effect of
4-MU on EMT markers, HA receptors was evaluated by Q-PCR, immunoblotting
and/or immunohistochemistry in PCa cells and xenograft tissues. HA add
back and overexpression studies were conducted to evaluate the mechanism
of action of 4-MU.RESULTS: In the TRAMP model, at 28 wks, 100% of vehicle
treated mice developed PCa, but tumor growth and progression was
inhibited in all 4-MU treated groups; P+SV weight (g): vehicle: 3.22.9; 8
wk: 0.430.14; 12 wk: 0.350.04; 22 wk: 1.00.35 g. The P+SV weight in TRAMP
mice at 22 wks of age was 0.90.04, showing that late stage administration
of 4-MU halted further tumor progression. Animals in 8, 12 and 22 wk
groups remained tumor free until 52, 44 and 34 wks respectively, even
after stopping treatment at 28 wks. While 55% of vehicle treated animals
developed metastasis, none of the treated groups had metastasis. In the
PC3-ML intracardiac model, 100% of the mice in the vehicle group but none
in the treatment group developed skeletal metastasis. In the DU145 model,
4-MU inhibited tumor growth. No serum/organ toxicity or weight loss was
observed in any treatment groups. In all models, 4-MU treatment
downregulated HA, HA receptors (CD44, RHAMM) and EMT markers (-catenin,
Zeb2) by >2-fold) but up-regulated E-cadherin. HA addition and
overexpression of myristoylated AKt inhibited 4-MU effects.CONCLUSION:
4-MU is a potent non-toxic, oral chemopreventive agent, which inhibits
PCa growth and metastasis by abrogating HA-signaling and reversing
EMT.Support: R01 CA 123063-04 (VBL); R01 CA 72821-11 (VBL)Note: This
abstract was not presented at the meeting.

