Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antiproliferative effect of fingolimod (FTY720) in human prostate
cancer cells: Insights to estrogen metabolism in situ


Sphingokinase-1/sphingosine-1-phosphate pathway contributes significantly
to progression of different types of cancer which has been recently
reported to influence estrogen level in breast cancer cells. Current
evidence suggests that estrogen (E2) and its metabolites, especially
catechol metabolites, are playing a key role in the proliferation and
carcinogenesis of the prostate glands. FTY720 is
Sphingokinase-1inhibitorwhich possess anticancer properties in various
tumor cell types. The aim of this study is to investigate the
chemotherapeutic effect of FTYY720 against prostate cancer cells with
emphasis on estrogenic microenvironment in-situ. The IC50 of FTY720 in
DU145 cell line was4.21.4g/ml. The concentration of estrogen and its
metabolites were assayed in the media over DU145 cells using liquid
chromatography tandem mass (LC/MS) technique. FTY720 treatment resulted
in a dramatic decrease in estradiol (E2) and estrone (E1) levels compared
to control untreated cells (2652.76115.62 vs. 725.691.28 and
283.364.18vs. 150.328.96ng/g, respectively); however, it had no
significant effect on the concentration of Estriol(E3). In terms of
catechol estrogens, 4-hydroxyEstradiol (4-OHE2) and 2-hydroxy Estradiol
(2-OHE2) formation was significantly decreased after treatment withFTY720
compared to control cells (25.422.40 vs. 7.450.82 and 485.933.10 vs.
477.424.24 ng/g), respectively. FTY720 had no significant effect on
formation of 16-hydroxyEstrone (16 -OHE1). On the other hand, treatment
with FTY720 significantly increased the concentration of 2-methoxyestrone
(2-MOHE1) and 2-methoxyestradiol (2-MOHE2) compared to control cells
(5.450.12 vs. 29.942.97 and165.625.67 vs. 269.9715.85), respectively..The
expression of catechol estrogen synthesizing enzymes (CYP19, CYP1A1 and
CYP1B1) was significantly decreased within prostate cancer cells after
treatment with FTY720 compared to untreated counterpart. On the other
hand, the expression level of catechol estrogen degrading enzyme (COMT)
was significantly decreased. Cell cycle analysis of DU145 cells showed
arrest at G1 phase with significant decrease in the G2-M population due
to treatment with FTY720. In conclusion, FTY720 induced anti
proliferative effect in prostate cancer cells might be attributed partly
to its influence on estrogen metabolism in-situ.

