Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CD24 polymorphisms and susceptibility to inflammatory bowel
disease and colorectal cancer risk


Background: Inflammatory bowel diseases (IBD), including ulcerative
colitis (UC) and Crohn's disease (CD), are chronic inflammatory disorders
of the gastrointestinal tract probably resulting from an aberrant immune
response to luminal microbial antigens in a genetically predisposed host.
Despite significant progress in the understanding and treatment of IBD,
patients have an increased risk of colorectal cancer. We have previously
shown that CD24 plays an important role in the multistep process of
colorectal carcinogenesis and that it may be a target for chemoprevention
and antitumor therapy (Sagiv, Gastroenterol, 2006; Sagiv, Can Res, 2008;
Shapira, Gastroenterol 2011). However, the role of CD24 in mediating
colitis has not been elucidated. Recently, single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) in the CD24 gene have been associated with disease
risk and progression in autoimmune diseases and may impact breast cancer
prognosis.Aim: Evaluate whether CD24 SNPs are associated with a risk for
IBD.Methods: The CD24 polymorphisms: C170T (rs8734), TG1527del
(rs3838646), A1626G (rs1058881) and A1056G (rs1058818) were assessed in a
case-control study of an Israeli cohort comprising 138 IBD patients and
105 age- and gender-matched healthy controls. Restriction fragment length
polymorphism (RFLP) analysis was performed using BstX1, Bsr1, Mfe1, and
BstU1 restriction enzymes, respectively. Odds ratio (OR) and 95%
confidence interval (CI) were estimated by logistic regression
models.Results: C170T carriers had more IBD (OR=3.022, 95% CI:
1.748-5.223, p=0.001): UC (OR=3.002, 95% CI: 1.661-5.427, p=0.001) and CD
(OR=3.077, 95% CI: 1.334-7.095 p=0.008). Carrying the A1626G and A1056G
SNPs was a risk factor for IBD: OR=2.460, 95% CI: 1.420-4.259, p=0.001
and OR=1.856, 95%: 1.011-3.405, p=0.01, respectively, specifically UC:
OR=2.218, 95% CI: 1.207-4.075, p=0.01 and OR=1.944, 95% CI: 0.995-3.798,
p=0.01, respectively, but not for CD (p=0.086, p=0.299). A1626G and
TG1527del were associated with a younger age of IBD onset (p=0.022,
p=0.027, respectively).Conclusions:1. The CD24 C170T polymorphism is
associated with IBD risk.2. CD24 A1626G and A1056G SNPs might be
specifically associated with UC risk.3. CD24 SNPs associated with an
earlier onset of IBD (A1626G and TG1527del) may have a protective role.4.
CD24 may be a new IBD genetic susceptibility factor, with clinical
implications in the prediction of IBD phenotype, the course of the
disease, and colitis-associated cancer.

