Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High coffee consumption and different brewing methods in relation
to postmenopausal endometrial cancer risk in the norwegian women and
cancer study: A population-based prospective study


BackgroundCoffee and its compounds have been proposed to inhibit
endometrial carcinogenesis. Studies in the Norwegian population can be
especially interesting due to the high coffee consumption and increasing
incidence of endometrial cancer in the country.MethodsA total of 97 926
postmenopausal Norwegian women from the population-based prospective
Norwegian Women and Cancer (NOWAC) Study, were included in the present
analysis. We evaluated the general association between total coffee
consumption and endometrial cancer risk as well as the possible impact of
brewing method. Multivariate Cox regression analysis was used to estimate
risks, and heterogeneity tests were performed to compare brewing
methods.ResultsDuring an average of 10.9 years of follow-up, 462 incident
endometrial cancer cases were identified. After multivariate adjustment,
significant risk reduction was found among participants who drank 8
cups/day of coffee with a hazard ratio of 0.52 (95% confidence interval,
CI 0.34-0.79). However, we did not observe a significant dose-response
relationship. No significant heterogeneity in risk was found when
comparing filtered and boiled coffee brewing methods. A reduction in
endometrial cancer risk was observed in subgroup analyses among
participants who drank 8 cups/day and had a body mass index 25 kg/m2, and
in current smokers.ConclusionsThese data suggest that in this population
with high coffee consumption, endometrial cancer risk decreases in women
consuming 8 cups/day, independent of brewing method.

