Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of novel -ketoamide derivatives as potent
inhibitors against cathepsin S induced by acidic extracellular pH in
pancreatic cancer cells


Extracellular acidification is known to be a driving force in pancreatic
cancer growth and metastasis. Thus, manipulation of acidic peritumoral pH
or blockage of key proteins stimulated by acidic extracellular
microenvironment may offer considerable potential for pancreatic cancer
therapy. Cathepsin S, also known as CTSS or CatS, is a critical
proteolytic enzyme found to be up-regulated in malignant cells and
secreted into the extracellular milieu to degrade surrounding matrix
components. By examining the effect of low pH (6.7) on various pancreatic
tumor cell lines, we detected a consistently increased CTSS expression
associated with augmented cell migration and invasion. Other features
such as CTSS-mediated proteolysis and ECM degradation were also observed
under mildly acidic condition. Based on these findings, we designed and
synthesized some new small molecules bearing an -ketoamide warhead to
evaluate their ability to inhibit CTSS. Kinetic study revealed these
compound inhibitors possess very low Ki values and high specificity
against target CTSS enzyme. Further in vitro and in vivo analyses
demonstrated these agents not only could protect fibronectin from
CTSS-mediated degradation but also induce tumor cell autophagy under
extracellular acidification. Together these results indicate the
potential of -ketoamide derivatives as antitumor agents against
pancreatic cancer.

