Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A dual FLT-3 and MER tyrosine kinase small molecule inhibitor in
acute myeloid leukemia cell lines and patient samples


FLT-3 and MER tyrosine kinases have been previously identified as
potential targets in the treatment of acute myeloid leukemia (AML).
Expression of FLT-3 internal tandem duplication (ITD) occurs in 30-40% of
AML patient samples and MER overexpression has been detected in 80-100%.
Here we describe a novel first-in-class small molecule inhibitor that has
potent activity against both of these kinases and mediates growth
inhibition or apoptosis of cell lines and patient myeloblasts.UNC1666 is
an ATP-competitive reversible small molecule inhibitor that potently
inhibits FLT-3 and MER, preventing phosphorylation of these kinases and
resultant downstream signaling. In these studies, the effects of
treatment with UNC1666 were analyzed in FLT3-ITD-positive (Molm-13 and
MV4;11) and MER-positive (Kasumi-1 and U937) AML cell lines and in
primary AML patient samples with variable expression of FLT3-ITD and MER.
Short term exposure to UNC1666 in cell lines that express either a
FLT3-ITD or MER resulted in a dose-dependent decrease in AKT and STAT6
activation compared to cells treated with vehicle, confirming that
UNC1666 inhibits both targets in cell-based assays. AML cell lines were
also stained with Yo-Pro-1 iodide and propidium iodide and analyzed by
flow cytometry to determine induction of apoptosis in response to
treatment with UNC1666. Treatment of MER-positive cell lines with UNC1666
resulted in a two to five-fold induction of apoptosis relative to
vehicle-treated cells (6610% and 2010% apoptotic cells respectively;
pFLT-3 and MER tyrosine kinases have been previously identified as
potential targets in the treatment of acute myeloid leukemia (AML).
Expression of FLT-3 internal tandem duplication (ITD) occurs in 30-40% of
AML patient samples and MER overexpression has been detected in 80-100%.
Here we describe a novel first-in-class small molecule inhibitor that has
potent activity against both of these kinases and mediates growth
inhibition or apoptosis of cell lines and patient myeloblasts.UNC1666 is
an ATP-competitive reversible small molecule inhibitor that potently
inhibits FLT-3 and MER, preventing phosphorylation of these kinases and
resultant downstream signaling. In these studies, the effects of
treatment with UNC1666 were analyzed in FLT3-ITD-positive (Molm-13 and
MV4;11) and MER-positive (Kasumi-1 and U937) AML cell lines and in
primary AML patient samples with variable expression of FLT3-ITD and MER.
Short term exposure to UNC1666 in cell lines that express either a
FLT3-ITD or MER resulted in a dose-dependent decrease in AKT and STAT6
activation compared to cells treated with vehicle, confirming that
UNC1666 inhibits both targets in cell-based assays. AML cell lines were
also stained with Yo-Pro-1 iodide and propidium iodide and analyzed by
flow cytometry to determine induction of apoptosis in response to
treatment with UNC1666. Treatment of MER-positive cell lines with UNC1666
resulted in a two to five-fold induction of apoptosis relative to
vehicle-treated cells (6610% and 2010% apoptotic cells respectively;
p<0.01). Treatment of FLT3-ITD cell lines with UNC1666 resulted in an
even more dramatic nine-fold induction of apoptosis (906% verses102% in
vehicle-treated cultures, pFLT-3 and MER tyrosine kinases have been
previously identified as potential targets in the treatment of acute
myeloid leukemia (AML). Expression of FLT-3 internal tandem duplication
(ITD) occurs in 30-40% of AML patient samples and MER overexpression has
been detected in 80-100%. Here we describe a novel first-in-class small
molecule inhibitor that has potent activity against both of these kinases
and mediates growth inhibition or apoptosis of cell lines and patient
myeloblasts.UNC1666 is an ATP-competitive reversible small molecule
inhibitor that potently inhibits FLT-3 and MER, preventing
phosphorylation of these kinases and resultant downstream signaling. In
these studies, the effects of treatment with UNC1666 were analyzed in
FLT3-ITD-positive (Molm-13 and MV4;11) and MER-positive (Kasumi-1 and
U937) AML cell lines and in primary AML patient samples with variable
expression of FLT3-ITD and MER. Short term exposure to UNC1666 in cell
lines that express either a FLT3-ITD or MER resulted in a dose-dependent
decrease in AKT and STAT6 activation compared to cells treated with
vehicle, confirming that UNC1666 inhibits both targets in cell-based
assays. AML cell lines were also stained with Yo-Pro-1 iodide and
propidium iodide and analyzed by flow cytometry to determine induction of
apoptosis in response to treatment with UNC1666. Treatment of
MER-positive cell lines with UNC1666 resulted in a two to five-fold
induction of apoptosis relative to vehicle-treated cells (6610% and 2010%
apoptotic cells respectively; p<0.01). Treatment of FLT3-ITD cell lines
with UNC1666 resulted in an even more dramatic nine-fold induction of
apoptosis (906% verses102% in vehicle-treated cultures, p<0.001). When
AML cell lines were cultured in soft agar, treatment with the dual
inhibitor resulted in decreased colony formation compared to cells
treated with vehicle (relative colony counts were 100 for vehicle-treated
cultures versus, 3415 for MER-positive cell lines and 1512 for FLT3-ITD
cell lines treated with UNC1666, pFLT-3 and MER tyrosine kinases have
been previously identified as potential targets in the treatment of acute
myeloid leukemia (AML). Expression of FLT-3 internal tandem duplication
(ITD) occurs in 30-40% of AML patient samples and MER overexpression has
been detected in 80-100%. Here we describe a novel first-in-class small
molecule inhibitor that has potent activity against both of these kinases
and mediates growth inhibition or apoptosis of cell lines and patient
myeloblasts.UNC1666 is an ATP-competitive reversible small molecule
inhibitor that potently inhibits FLT-3 and MER, preventing
phosphorylation of these kinases and resultant downstream signaling. In
these studies, the effects of treatment with UNC1666 were analyzed in
FLT3-ITD-positive (Molm-13 and MV4;11) and MER-positive (Kasumi-1 and
U937) AML cell lines and in primary AML patient samples with variable
expression of FLT3-ITD and MER. Short term exposure to UNC1666 in cell
lines that express either a FLT3-ITD or MER resulted in a dose-dependent
decrease in AKT and STAT6 activation compared to cells treated with
vehicle, confirming that UNC1666 inhibits both targets in cell-based
assays. AML cell lines were also stained with Yo-Pro-1 iodide and
propidium iodide and analyzed by flow cytometry to determine induction of
apoptosis in response to treatment with UNC1666. Treatment of
MER-positive cell lines with UNC1666 resulted in a two to five-fold
induction of apoptosis relative to vehicle-treated cells (6610% and 2010%
apoptotic cells respectively; p<0.01). Treatment of FLT3-ITD cell lines
with UNC1666 resulted in an even more dramatic nine-fold induction of
apoptosis (906% verses102% in vehicle-treated cultures, p<0.001). When
AML cell lines were cultured in soft agar, treatment with the dual
inhibitor resulted in decreased colony formation compared to cells
treated with vehicle (relative colony counts were 100 for vehicle-treated
cultures versus, 3415 for MER-positive cell lines and 1512 for FLT3-ITD
cell lines treated with UNC1666, p<0.01). Six primary patient samples
that were MER and/or FLT3-ITD positive were analyzed in similar assays
and exhibited dose-dependent induction of apoptosis and near complete
inhibition of colony formation in methylcellulose after treatment with
UNC1666.In summary, UNC1666 is a novel first-in-class small molecule with
ability to inhibit activation of both FLT-3 and MER tyrosine kinases.
Treatment with UNC1666 blocked activation of pro-survival signaling,
including AKT and STAT6, induced apoptosis, and decreased myeloblast
colony-forming potential in FLT3-ITD positive and MER-expressing AML cell
lines. Moreover, similar anti-leukemia effects were observed in primary
samples from patients with AML. These data validate dual FLT-3/MER
inhibition as a new and attractive approach for treatment of AML with
potential for clinical application.

