Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The diarylpentanoid curcumin analog GO-Y078 can effectively
inhibit tumor angiogenesis through actin disorganization


BackgroundCurcumin is a dietary pigment with anti-tumor potential.
However, its bioavailability is low, and its numerous analogs are being
developed. Diarylpentanoid analogs have approximately 50 times higher
tumor suppression potential than curcumin and more effectively regulate
various targets including -catenin, nuclear factor-B, and
caspase-3.MethodsAnalogs were screened using endothelial cell sprouting
and Xenopus vasculogenesis assays. Growth inhibition, apoptosis
induction, wound healing, and invasion analyses as well as western
blotting and cDNA microarrays were also performed. Stress fiber
structures and focal adhesion (FA) were examined by immunohistochemistry.
Subcellular analog localization was examined using a biotinylated
analog.ResultsSprouting and Xenopus assays indicated that GO-Y078 was
comparable to the clinically approved angiogenesis inhibitors sorafenib
and sunitinib. Inhibition against endothelial cell growth and migration
and apoptosis induction of GO-Y078 were similar to or at most 20 times
higher than those of sorafenib and sunitinib. However, inhibition of
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) signaling was much less than
that observed with sorafenib and sunitinib. GO-Y078 inhibited actin
stress fiber formation more effectively than sorafenib and sunitinib. It
also decreased FA and induced detachment, resulting in anoikis. These
potentials were suggested to be the result of mislocalization of heat
shock protein 27 and actin as well as downregulation of fibronectin
1.ConclusionGO-Y078 is a new class of angiogenesis inhibitor that
suppresses actin organization and vascular endothelial cell FA.
Inhibition by these analogs could also be effective for redundancy due to
complex angiogenesis signaling.

