Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Quantitative immunofluorescence assessment of MET and epithelial
to mesenchymal transition (EMT) biomarker modulation by antiangiogenic
inhibitors in xenograft tumor tissues


We have previously reported the development of ELISA assays for intact
MET, pY1235-MET, and pY1356-MET in tumor lysates (Srivastava et al, ASCO
2011). Here we report the development of a multiplex quantitative
immunofluorescence assay (qIFA) for simultaneous detection of pY1235-MET
and total MET in formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissues. We
utilized a rabbit monoclonal antibody specific to pY1235-MET (with no
detectable crossreactivity to pY1234-MET) to develop a highly specific
and sensitive IFA assay with total MET (MET4 Mab; from G. Vande Woude,
Van Andel Research Institute). Specificity of the IFA was demonstrated by
HGF stimulation of A549 cells showing increased intensity of pY1235-MET
which was completely inhibited by crizotinib but not by the non-MET
specific multi-kinase inhibitor sorafenib, in vitro. The pY1235-MET
epitope is stable in FFPE, and IFA detection was enhanced by EDTA (vs.
Citrate) for antigen retrieval. Quantitative assessment of pY1235-MET was
determined in xenograft models that demonstrate very high IFA expression
of pY1235-MET and total MET via gene amplification (GTL-16 and SNU-5),
lower expression in HGF-induced paracrine or autocrine cell lines (A549
and HT29), and no detectable staining for pY1235-MET in negative controls
(SNU-1 and MDA-MB-231). We have demonstrated assay fitness for purpose
using SNU-5 FFPE xenograft tumor samples from animals treated with
increasing doses of crizotinib in vivo. Quantitative measurement by
Definiens analysis of pY1235-MET and total MET in tissue regions of
interest (ROI) showed 50% and 95% pY1235-MET inhibition with 12.5 mg/kg
and 25 mg/kg crizotinib, respectively. There were no significant changes
in total MET by IFA. A high correlation (R=0.899) was observed between %
pY1235-MET/total MET ratio measured by IFA levels (expressed as the
marker area/# nuclei for pY1235-MET and total MET per ROI) and %
pY1235-MET/total MET ratio determined by ELISA levels (pM/ug protein).
This quantitative MET IFA assay is currently being applied in conjunction
with a previously developed EMT IFA assay (Navas et al, AACR 2013) for
focal tissue analysis of pY1235-MET and total MET IFA expression as well
as changes in epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) in gastric tumor
xenograft tissues treated with the VEGF inhibitor pazopanib, the MET
inhibitor tivantinib (ARQ197), or the drug combination in vivo. These
studies will determine whether pY1235-MET or total MET is induced by
anti-VEGF inhibitors via increased EMT transition, and whether this
effect can be reversed by combination with tivantinib. Funded by NCI
Contract No. HHSN261200800001E

