Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Multi-omic profiling to predict response to gemcitabine/
carboplatin (GC) plus iniparib (BSI-201) as neoadjuvant therapy for
triple-negative (TN) and BRCA1/2 mutation-associated breast cancer using
a pathway-based approach


Background: TN and BRCA1-deficient breast tumors share clinicopathologic
characteristics and are highly sensitive to DNA-damaging agents. This
single-arm phase II study was designed to assess efficacy and safety of
iniparib, whose mechanism of action is under investigation, in
combination with GC in early-stage triple-negative and BRCA1/2
mutation-associated breast cancer. Our objective was to use multi-omic
profiling of breast tumors to identify markers associated with therapy
response.Methods: Fresh-frozen breast tumor core biopsies were collected
under ultrasound guidance (n=75 tumors from 74 patients (one patient with
bilateral tumors)) prior to treatment. Tumor RNA and DNA was extracted,
as well as matched peripheral whole blood DNA for germline comparison.
Affymetrix U133 plus 2.0 array was used for whole genome expression
analysis and Affymetrix Molecular Inversion Probe (MIP) was used for copy
number variation analysis on 75 tumors. After normalization, we used the
PARADIGM algorithm, a pathway-based approach for combining multi-omics
data types on individual tumors.Results: We identified pathway features
that correspond to pathologic response, assessed using the residual
cancer burden (RCB) index. All patients were tested for BRCA germline
mutation and 16 (22%) patients were positive. Overall, a low RCB (0,1)
was observed in 43 (58%) patients and a high RCB (2,3) in 31 (42%)
patients. Pathway-based analysis of these breast tumors revealed
significant alterations in 459 of 1466 (31%) of the cancer-related
pathways. Gene set enrichment analysis on the PARADIGM results identified
differentially expressed pathways in tumors with RCB 0 (65 pathways at
pBackground: TN and BRCA1-deficient breast tumors share clinicopathologic
characteristics and are highly sensitive to DNA-damaging agents. This
single-arm phase II study was designed to assess efficacy and safety of
iniparib, whose mechanism of action is under investigation, in
combination with GC in early-stage triple-negative and BRCA1/2
mutation-associated breast cancer. Our objective was to use multi-omic
profiling of breast tumors to identify markers associated with therapy
response.Methods: Fresh-frozen breast tumor core biopsies were collected
under ultrasound guidance (n=75 tumors from 74 patients (one patient with
bilateral tumors)) prior to treatment. Tumor RNA and DNA was extracted,
as well as matched peripheral whole blood DNA for germline comparison.
Affymetrix U133 plus 2.0 array was used for whole genome expression
analysis and Affymetrix Molecular Inversion Probe (MIP) was used for copy
number variation analysis on 75 tumors. After normalization, we used the
PARADIGM algorithm, a pathway-based approach for combining multi-omics
data types on individual tumors.Results: We identified pathway features
that correspond to pathologic response, assessed using the residual
cancer burden (RCB) index. All patients were tested for BRCA germline
mutation and 16 (22%) patients were positive. Overall, a low RCB (0,1)
was observed in 43 (58%) patients and a high RCB (2,3) in 31 (42%)
patients. Pathway-based analysis of these breast tumors revealed
significant alterations in 459 of 1466 (31%) of the cancer-related
pathways. Gene set enrichment analysis on the PARADIGM results identified
differentially expressed pathways in tumors with RCB 0 (65 pathways at
p<0.05) versus RCB 3 (37 pathways at pBackground: TN and BRCA1-deficient
breast tumors share clinicopathologic characteristics and are highly
sensitive to DNA-damaging agents. This single-arm phase II study was
designed to assess efficacy and safety of iniparib, whose mechanism of
action is under investigation, in combination with GC in early-stage
triple-negative and BRCA1/2 mutation-associated breast cancer. Our
objective was to use multi-omic profiling of breast tumors to identify
markers associated with therapy response.Methods: Fresh-frozen breast
tumor core biopsies were collected under ultrasound guidance (n=75 tumors
from 74 patients (one patient with bilateral tumors)) prior to treatment.
Tumor RNA and DNA was extracted, as well as matched peripheral whole
blood DNA for germline comparison. Affymetrix U133 plus 2.0 array was
used for whole genome expression analysis and Affymetrix Molecular
Inversion Probe (MIP) was used for copy number variation analysis on 75
tumors. After normalization, we used the PARADIGM algorithm, a
pathway-based approach for combining multi-omics data types on individual
tumors.Results: We identified pathway features that correspond to
pathologic response, assessed using the residual cancer burden (RCB)
index. All patients were tested for BRCA germline mutation and 16 (22%)
patients were positive. Overall, a low RCB (0,1) was observed in 43 (58%)
patients and a high RCB (2,3) in 31 (42%) patients. Pathway-based
analysis of these breast tumors revealed significant alterations in 459
of 1466 (31%) of the cancer-related pathways. Gene set enrichment
analysis on the PARADIGM results identified differentially expressed
pathways in tumors with RCB 0 (65 pathways at p<0.05) versus RCB 3 (37
pathways at p<0.05). Tumors with complete pathologic response (RCB 0)
were significantly enriched for immune-related pathways, including
multiple interleukin signaling pathways. This signature appears to be
primarily driven by increased signaling through SHC1, GRB2, PTPN6 and
JAK2. Tumors that were least responsive (RCB 3) to therapy were enriched
for NOTCH and WNT signaling cascades, primarily WNT1, CTBP1, CCND1 and
APC.Conclusions: Using a pathway-based approach, predictors of pathologic
response to GC plus iniparib were identified from pre-treatment tumor
biopsies. Tumors with complete pathologic response were enriched for
immune-related pathways, including interleukin signaling pathways. Least
responsive tumors to this therapy were enriched for NOTCH and WNT
signaling pathways. We plan to validate these findings in external
datasets. Platinum-based therapies are under clinical investigation for
TN and BRCA1/2-associated breast cancer and identification of response
predictors can guide patient selection.

