Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Disulfiram is a potent inhibitor of topoisomerase II


Disulfiram is used in the treatment of alcoholism. It has also shown
promise as an anticancer drug. The disulfide bond in disulfiram is
metabolized in vivo to diethyldithiocarbamate (DDTC) which forms an
extremely strong complex with copper(II) through which it may exert its
cytotoxicity. Both disulfiram and diethyldithiocarbamate inhibited K562
cell growth in the low nanomolar range. The addition of the copper(II)
chelators Trien and ammonium tetrathiomolybdate to the cell culture
medium significantly reduced the cytotoxicity of disulfiram and
diethyldithiocarbamate towards K562 cells, which suggests that their
cytotoxicity is mediated by uptake of trace amounts of copper from the
culture medium. Disulfiram, but not DDTC, strongly inhibited the
decatenation activity of topoisomerase II in the low micromolar
concentration range. Disulfiram, but not DDTC, also was shown to be a
topoisomerase II poison as evidenced by its ability to induce formation
of linear DNA. However, the K/VP.5 cell line, a K562-derived
etoposide-resistant cell line with reduced levels of topoisomerase II,
was not cross-resistant to either disulfiram or DDTC. K562 cells depleted
in GSH levels by treatment with buthionine sulfoximine did not show
increased sensitivity to disulfiram or DDTC. Disulfiram and DDTC also did
not increase dichlorofluorescein fluorescence in K562 cells. These latter
two results suggest that copper-mediated oxidative stress may not be a
significant factor in their cytotoxicity. In summary, these results
showed that while disulfiram and DDTC inhibited topoisomerase II, this
inhibition may be only partly responsible for their cytotoxicity.
Support: CIHR, a Canada Research Chair in Drug Development to B.B.H., and
a National Institutes of Health grant CA090787 to J.C.Y.

