Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DNA methylation in ductal carcinoma in situ and its relation with
disease progression


Ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) of the breast is a non-invasive lesion
associated with a ten-fold increased relative risk for future invasive
ductal cancer (IDC). DNA methylation is recognized as an important
epigenetic regulator of gene expression and DNA methylation alterations
are widespread in breast cancer. In addition, not all patients with DCIS
will later present with invasive disease and epigenetic alterations in
DCIS associated with disease progression are not clear. To investigate
the relation of methylation with progression from DCIS to IDC we first
identified patients with DCIS and a subsequent diagnosis of IDC through
the New Hampshire Mammography Network (n=13). Next, we identified
age-matched subjects with DCIS who did not have a subsequent diagnosis of
IDC over a similar follow up period (n=27). Slides from all 40 patients
underwent central pathology review by a breast pathologist, and 2 or 3 mm
tissue cores were taken from archived FFPE blocks from selected areas of
DCIS and adjacent normal tissue for DNA extraction and bisulfite
modification. We measured DNA methylation genome-wide using the Illumina
HumanMethylation450 BeadChip and processed the data using the ChAMP
pipeline for quality control and normalization, after which 380,000 CpG
sites remained in the data set. To investigate the relation of
methylation with progression from DCIS to IDC, locus-specific differences
in DNA methylation of 40 DCIS samples were examined using linear
regression models fit to each of 380,000 CpG sites, modeling the
logit-transformed methylation beta-valuesand adjusting for subject age
and DCIS grade. Over 1,000 CpG sites exhibited large differences in DNA
methylation levels (probes with a median > 0.2), and had a nominal
P-value Ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) of the breast is a non-invasive
lesion associated with a ten-fold increased relative risk for future
invasive ductal cancer (IDC). DNA methylation is recognized as an
important epigenetic regulator of gene expression and DNA methylation
alterations are widespread in breast cancer. In addition, not all
patients with DCIS will later present with invasive disease and
epigenetic alterations in DCIS associated with disease progression are
not clear. To investigate the relation of methylation with progression
from DCIS to IDC we first identified patients with DCIS and a subsequent
diagnosis of IDC through the New Hampshire Mammography Network (n=13).
Next, we identified age-matched subjects with DCIS who did not have a
subsequent diagnosis of IDC over a similar follow up period (n=27).
Slides from all 40 patients underwent central pathology review by a
breast pathologist, and 2 or 3 mm tissue cores were taken from archived
FFPE blocks from selected areas of DCIS and adjacent normal tissue for
DNA extraction and bisulfite modification. We measured DNA methylation
genome-wide using the Illumina HumanMethylation450 BeadChip and processed
the data using the ChAMP pipeline for quality control and normalization,
after which 380,000 CpG sites remained in the data set. To investigate
the relation of methylation with progression from DCIS to IDC,
locus-specific differences in DNA methylation of 40 DCIS samples were
examined using linear regression models fit to each of 380,000 CpG sites,
modeling the logit-transformed methylation beta-valuesand adjusting for
subject age and DCIS grade. Over 1,000 CpG sites exhibited large
differences in DNA methylation levels (probes with a median > 0.2), and
had a nominal P-value < 0.05, between patients with and without a
subsequent diagnosis of IDC. Among the 1,007 CpG loci with significant
and sizable changes in methylation, the majority (87.1%) exhibited
increased methylation in women with a subsequent diagnosis of IDC
compared to those without. We also sought to determine the relation of
DNA methylation with DCIS grade among CpG loci that track to genes
previously associated with DCIS grade, modeling the methylation as the
dependent variable and DCIS grade (low/intermediate or high) as the
independent variable. Comparing DCIS samples of low/intermediate grade
with high grade we found that 15 CpG loci located near the
transcriptional start site of the APC gene demonstrated significant (P
Ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) of the breast is a non-invasive lesion
associated with a ten-fold increased relative risk for future invasive
ductal cancer (IDC). DNA methylation is recognized as an important
epigenetic regulator of gene expression and DNA methylation alterations
are widespread in breast cancer. In addition, not all patients with DCIS
will later present with invasive disease and epigenetic alterations in
DCIS associated with disease progression are not clear. To investigate
the relation of methylation with progression from DCIS to IDC we first
identified patients with DCIS and a subsequent diagnosis of IDC through
the New Hampshire Mammography Network (n=13). Next, we identified
age-matched subjects with DCIS who did not have a subsequent diagnosis of
IDC over a similar follow up period (n=27). Slides from all 40 patients
underwent central pathology review by a breast pathologist, and 2 or 3 mm
tissue cores were taken from archived FFPE blocks from selected areas of
DCIS and adjacent normal tissue for DNA extraction and bisulfite
modification. We measured DNA methylation genome-wide using the Illumina
HumanMethylation450 BeadChip and processed the data using the ChAMP
pipeline for quality control and normalization, after which 380,000 CpG
sites remained in the data set. To investigate the relation of
methylation with progression from DCIS to IDC, locus-specific differences
in DNA methylation of 40 DCIS samples were examined using linear
regression models fit to each of 380,000 CpG sites, modeling the
logit-transformed methylation beta-valuesand adjusting for subject age
and DCIS grade. Over 1,000 CpG sites exhibited large differences in DNA
methylation levels (probes with a median > 0.2), and had a nominal
P-value < 0.05, between patients with and without a subsequent diagnosis
of IDC. Among the 1,007 CpG loci with significant and sizable changes in
methylation, the majority (87.1%) exhibited increased methylation in
women with a subsequent diagnosis of IDC compared to those without. We
also sought to determine the relation of DNA methylation with DCIS grade
among CpG loci that track to genes previously associated with DCIS grade,
modeling the methylation as the dependent variable and DCIS grade
(low/intermediate or high) as the independent variable. Comparing DCIS
samples of low/intermediate grade with high grade we found that 15 CpG
loci located near the transcriptional start site of the APC gene
demonstrated significant (P < 0.05) hypermethylation in high grade DCIS
compared to low/intermediate grade DCIS. Ongoing analyses are
highlighting profound differences between DCIS and available matched
adjacent-normal samples (n=15) and examining the enrichment of regulatory
features among differentially methylated loci. This work contributes to
the understanding of epigenetic alterations that occur in earlier stages
of disease and illustrates the potential of DNA methylation as a
predictive marker in DCIS.

