Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Robust feature selection and gene committee predictor for breast
cancer patient survival prediction


Gene expression signatures have been widely used to predict patient
survival. However, predictors developed on training data often failed on
validation data. The grand challenge is to improve the generalization of
such predictors. We analyzed the breast cancer data from METABRIC
(Molecular Taxonomy of Breast Cancer International Consortium). There
were n=997 patients in the training data and n=995 patients in the
validation data. Using the training data, we applied the Cox Proportional
Hazards Model to estimate patient survival using the dichotomized
expression with adjustment for age, ER, tumor size, and node. Based on
the whole transcriptome analysis of the training data using the Cox model
for each of 33075 genes, we selected 330 genes (the top 1%). To quantify
their reproducibility, we analyzed bootstrap samples (half-samples of the
training data) and defined the repetition rate (rep-rate) in two steps.
Step1: choose a p-value cutoff (Pc) to determine whether a gene is
significant in the analysis of any bootstrap sample. We randomly drew 100
half-samples and did the whole transcriptome analysis for each
half-sample. We found 100 Pc's for the top 1% genes. We then choose the
geometric average of the 100 Pc's as the desired Pc. Step2: randomly drew
1000 half-samples from the training data. Using Pc, we only needed to do
the analysis on the 330 genes for each half-sample with 99% less
computation. Based on the analyses of the 1000 half- samples, we computed
the rep-rates for the 330 genes. We then selected 50 genes with rep-rates
greater than 0.36. Considering each gene as a weak predictor, we used
three models to combine the expression of a set of k genes: sum, weighted
sum and gene committee. The hazard ratio (HR) data from the analyses of
the bootstrap samples were used in 2nd and 3rd model. For the i-th gene
we computed mHR(i) (the median HR). We defined a k-dim vector w: w(i)=1
if mHR(i) greater than 1 and w(i)=-1 if mHR(i) less than 1. We then used
w as the weights in the weighted sum predictor. For the gene committee,
from the binary (0 and 1 for below and above the median, respectively)
expression variables for the k genes, we defined k risk variables. If a
gene had mHR greater than 1, its risk variable was the same as the binary
expression variable. But if a gene had mHR less than 1, let x be the
binary expression variable, the risk variable was defined as y=1-x. A
committee predictor was defined from the risk variables based on the
majority rule. We used the validation data to examine the performance of
these three predictors. Using our 50 genes, the sum predictor was not
significant. However, the weighted sum had HR=1.53 with 95%CI 1.25-1.87
and P= 4.449e-05. The gene committee was the most significant predictor
with HR=1.7, CI 1.39-2.08 and P= 2.552e-07. Using the PAM50 genes, the
sum predictor was significant with HR= 1.30, CI 1.07-1.58 and
P=7.008e-03. The weighted sum had HR=1.56, CI 1.26-1.93 and P=4.381e-05
and the gene committee had HR=1.55, CI 1.26-1.91 and P= 3.249e-05.

