Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CB-PIC sensitizes chemoresistant cancer cells to drugs via
suppression of MDR1 and its upstream signal molecules, AKT and p38-MAPK


ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporters including MDR1-/P-gp have been
majorly targeted for drug resistant tumor therapies. In this study, we
screened the compound that negatively affects MDR-1 expression in
chomoresistant cancer cell lines. We found that CB-PIC, the novel
synthetic compound, could decrease P-glycoprotein expression via disrupt
AKT/p-38 signal pathway in paclitaxel resistant lung cancer cell, H460/PR
and doxorubicin resistant breast cancer cell, MCF7/Adr with highly
expressed P-glycoprotein. However, CB-PIC did not regulate enzyme
activity of P-glycoprotein, while EGCG and tannic acid accumulated
Rhodamine 123 intracellular region of cell via short time efflux assay.
CB-PIC treatment resulted in disruption of proliferation of drug
resistant cells. In addition, CB-PIC dramatically induced apoptosis in
time and dose dependent manner in both paclitaxel and doxorubicin
resistant cancer cells. Furthermore, CB-PIC sensitizes drug-resistant
cancer cells to paclitaxel and doxorubicin by decrease of survival
proteins, survivin, Mcl-1 and Bcl-2, as well as MDR1 suppression leading
to accumulate the treated drug intracellular region. Taken together,
CB-PIC suppresses the P-glycoprotein expression through inhibition of
AKT/p-38 MAPK signaling resulting in the increase of drug sensitivity in
chemoresistant cancer cells.

