Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NVP-BEZ235 decreases mutant p53 and downregulates miR-23a-24-27a
to inhibit metastasis in breast cancer cells


Nearly half of human cancers harbor TP53 mutations, which are
predominantly through missense mutations that result in accumulation of
mutant p53 proteins in cancer cells. More and more findings indicate that
the mutant p53 proteins acquire gain-of-function abilities to promote
carcinogenesis, metastasis, tumor recurrence and chemoresistance. TP53
mutations are the most frequent genetic alterations in breast cancer,
observed in 30% of breast carcinomas, especially the triple negative
breast cancer (TNBC),which most easily metastasizes and confers
chemoresistance. Therefore targeting TP53 mutation in breast cancer might
be another promising approach of therapeutics. Our previous investigation
showed that the AKT-mTOR dual inhibitor, NVP-BEZ235(called BEZ235
thereafter), could inhibit AKT-mTOR pathway activation, most
interestingly mutant p53 was significantly reduced with BEZ235
treatment(unpublished data). In this study, three TNBC cell lines
MDA-MB-231, MDA-MB-436, MDA-MB-468 as TP53 mutation group and MCF-7 as
control were employed with BEZ235 treatment at different dosages and time
points. We found that AKT-mTOR signaling pathway were highly activated in
these TNBC cells but were inhibited obviously after BEZ235 treatment;
most importantly, mutant p53 in these TNBC cells decreased significantly,
but rare changes were detected in MCF-7 cells with BEZ235 treatment.
Interestingly, we found miR-23a-24-27a cluster was about 2 fold
upregulation in TNBC cells after BEZ235 treatment while exploring the
decline of p53 by detecting microRNAs expression in those cell lines. To
address whether BEZ235 could affect the metastasis ability of TNBC cells,
cell invasion assay Transwell was used to measure the invasiveness of
TNBC cells with BEZ235, and we observed that BEZ235 could inhibit the
metastasis of TNBC cells, on the other hand miR-23a-24-27a cluster mimics
could also induce the inhibition of metastasis in TNBC cells. Our results
suggest that BEZ235 might target mutant p53 accumulation and downregulate
miR-23a-24-27a cluster to inhibit the metastasis abilities of triple
negative breast cancer cells, which might provide an important direction
to further study the breast cancer harboring mutant p53, and also have
promising therapeutic benefits for cancer patients carrying such p53
mutations.

