Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeted delivery of temozolomide to pediatric brain tumors using
micelle-based theranostic nanocarriers


Diffuse intrinsic pontine glioma (DIPG) is the single most devastating
pediatric brain tumor. Surgical excision of these tumors, due to the
exquisite location of the pons, is dangerous and is not curative. No
chemotherapy has been identified that can control these tumors. One
theory for this failure is that the pons is a unique location into which
delivery of medications at therapeutic concentrations is singularly
challenging. Current standard of care utilizes temozolomide (TMZ), a
pro-drug that releases a DNA alkylating agent that is used to kill glial
cells. TMZ is very toxic when delivered systemically and therapeutic
dosages are limited by severe side effects. These factors necessitate a
selectively targeted carrier for TMZ to deliver the drug efficiently to
malignant cells avoiding nonspecific interaction and reducing offsite
toxicity. In order to design an efficient and effective drug carrier, we
addressed several issues: a tailored surface on the carrier to attach
biomolecules for targeted drug delivery; a biocompatible coating which
can efficiently encapsulate the hydrophobic drug thereby reducing
cytotoxicity; and stimuli-induced (pH) disruption of the carrier agent
for slow and controlled drug release to the desired environment. Micelles
are the preferred choice of carrier as they fulfill these requirements
based on their composition. Micelles containing drug are synthesized
using PEG-PE-Amine and N-palmitoyl homocysteine (pH sensitive lipid
breaks in endosome pH 5.5). Specific targeting of the micelles to
glioblastoma cells is achieved by coupling a short 12 a.a. PDGF (platelet
derived growth factor) peptide to the amine moeity of the DSPE-PEG. In
addition, these micelles have been labeled with a NIR fluorophore to
track them for cellular uptake and can be used to image tumor
internalization in vivo. These micelles have an advantage of small size
(Diffuse intrinsic pontine glioma (DIPG) is the single most devastating
pediatric brain tumor. Surgical excision of these tumors, due to the
exquisite location of the pons, is dangerous and is not curative. No
chemotherapy has been identified that can control these tumors. One
theory for this failure is that the pons is a unique location into which
delivery of medications at therapeutic concentrations is singularly
challenging. Current standard of care utilizes temozolomide (TMZ), a
pro-drug that releases a DNA alkylating agent that is used to kill glial
cells. TMZ is very toxic when delivered systemically and therapeutic
dosages are limited by severe side effects. These factors necessitate a
selectively targeted carrier for TMZ to deliver the drug efficiently to
malignant cells avoiding nonspecific interaction and reducing offsite
toxicity. In order to design an efficient and effective drug carrier, we
addressed several issues: a tailored surface on the carrier to attach
biomolecules for targeted drug delivery; a biocompatible coating which
can efficiently encapsulate the hydrophobic drug thereby reducing
cytotoxicity; and stimuli-induced (pH) disruption of the carrier agent
for slow and controlled drug release to the desired environment. Micelles
are the preferred choice of carrier as they fulfill these requirements
based on their composition. Micelles containing drug are synthesized
using PEG-PE-Amine and N-palmitoyl homocysteine (pH sensitive lipid
breaks in endosome pH 5.5). Specific targeting of the micelles to
glioblastoma cells is achieved by coupling a short 12 a.a. PDGF (platelet
derived growth factor) peptide to the amine moeity of the DSPE-PEG. In
addition, these micelles have been labeled with a NIR fluorophore to
track them for cellular uptake and can be used to image tumor
internalization in vivo. These micelles have an advantage of small size
(<80 nm, to cross blood brain barrier) and reduced toxicity due to robust
packaging of TMZ drug inside the core as determined by dynamic light
scattering and UV-vis spectroscopy. We have decreased the leaching of the
drug in the circulation and in the extracellular microenvironment,
resulting in reduced cytotoxicity. Cellular uptake studies via
fluorescence imaging, flow cytometry, and spectroscopy of glioblastoma
cells treated with either targeted or untargeted micellar nanoparticles
demonstrate significant uptake of the PDGFR-targeted micelles, a 6-fold
increase in delivered drug over untargeted micelle-TMZ. We show that
uptake is mediated by receptor-mediated endocytosis using competition
assays and is nontoxic to the cell until released as demonstrated by
cytotoxicity assays. We can track the delivery of the
micelle-encapsulated TMZ to tumors using NIR in vivo fluorescence
imaging. Little drug escapes into the surrounding offsite organs. Future
experiments involve pharmacokinetic and tissue distribution studies in in
vivo orthotopic brain tumor models.

