Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of markers for the presence of lymph nodes
metastasis in patients with oral squamous cell carcinomas


INTRODUCTION: Oral cancer is the most common subset of head and neck
squamous cell carcinomas (OSCC). These tumors often have an aggressive
clinical outcome hallmarked by a propensity for local invasion and
regional nodal metastasis. The presence of metastatic disease in cervical
lymph nodes is an important prognostic factor and it influences in the
choice of the therapeutic strategy to be adopted. Thus, the
identification of molecular markers able to select patients who are at
high risk for lymph node metastasis and/or locoregional recurrence could
be of great value. Recent studies have shown that microRNAs can be
regulators of the tumor metastasis process by the activation of various
signaling pathways involved in this process being useful in diagnosis,
determination of disease prognosis and prediction of therapeutic
response. PURPOSE: to identify microRNAs expressed in OSCC associated
with the presence of lymph node metastasis. METHODS: Tumor samples were
obtained from patients diagnosed with OSCC at the Head and Neck Surgery
Department, Cancer Hospital of Barretos. For microRNA microarrays
experiments, total RNA from 32 tumor samples (12 without lymph node
metastasis and 12 with metastasis) was extracted labelled and
hybridizated Analysis of microarray data was performed using GeneSpring
GX 12.0 and R program. RESULTS: This analysis allowed the identification
of six microRNAs differentially expressed in the comparison between
metastatic and non-metastatic OCCS cases. These microRNAs will be
validate and selected by qRT-PCR in an independent cohort of OSCC
patients and correlate the molecular data with the clinical features of
the patients.Financial Support: FAPESPNote: This abstract was not
presented at the meeting.

