Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The receptor for hyaluronan acid mediator motility (RHAMM, CD168)
expression in EMT-like cancer cells is a predictor of tumor progression
in colorectal cancer


Background/Aim: The receptor for hyaluronan acid mediator motility
(RHAMM) is a marker of tumor progression and decreased overall survival
in patients with different solid tumor types. The aim of the present
study was to investigate the functional and clinical role of RHAMM in
colorectal cancer (CRC) using in vitro and in vivo models and to validate
the results on a cohort (n=200) of CRC patients with full
clinico-pathological features.Material and Methods: Two established CRC
cell lines HT29 and HT116 (mismatch-repair proficient and deficient)
expressing RHAMM by flow-cytometry were selected for proliferation,
invasion and migration assays. For the in vivo analysis tumor cells were
injected in immune-deficient NOD/SCID mice. RHAMM expression was
additionally analyzed by immunohistochemistry on 200 CRC whole tissue
sections, with particular focus on the single, detached and aggressive
EMT-like cells at the invasion front and correlated to
clinicopathological data and survival.Results: In vitro, RHAMM silenced
HT29 and HCT116 cell lines showed a significant decrease in invasiveness
and migration compared to untreated cells. In vivo, a lower
tumorigenicity of HT29 and HT116 cells silenced for RHAMM compared to
untreated cells was reflected by smaller tumor volumes in the injected
immune-deficient NOD/SCID mice. In the immunohistochemical analysis RHAMM
expression in EMT-like cancer cells was associated with lymphatic
invasion (p=0.0013), higher tumor grade (p=0.021) and worse survival
(p=0.034).Conclusion: In vitro and in vivo findings as well as results on
clinical patient data support the notion that over-expression of RHAMM is
involved in tumor progression in CRC and highlight a promising basis for
a therapeutic approach.

