Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrative and comparative genomic analysis of East-Asian lung
squamous cell carcinomas


PurposeLung squamous cell carcinoma (SqCC) is the second most prevalent
type of lung cancer. Currently, no targeted-therapeutics are approved for
treatment of this cancer, largely due to a lack of systematic
understanding of the molecular pathogenesis of the disease. To identify
therapeutic targets and perform comparative analyses of lung SqCC, we
probed somatic genome alterations of lung SqCC cases from Korean
patients.Patients and MethodsWe performed whole-exome sequencing of DNA
from 104 lung SqCC samples from Korean patients and matched normal DNA.
In addition, copy number analysis and transcriptome analysis were
conducted for a subset of these samples. Clinical association with
cancer-specific somatic alterations was investigated.ResultsThis cancer
cohort is characterized by a very high mutational burden with an average
of 261 somatic exonic mutations per tumor and a mutational spectrum
showing a signature of cigarette-smoke exposure. Seven genes demonstrated
statistical enrichment for mutation (TP53, RB1, PTEN, NFE2L2, KEAP1, MLL2
and PIK3CA). Comparative analysis between Korean and North American lung
SqCC demonstrated similar spectrum of alterations in these two
populations, in contrast to the differences seen in lung adenocarcinoma.
We also uncovered recurrent occurrence of therapeutically actionable
FGFR3-TACC3 fusion in lung SqCC.ConclusionThese findings provide new
steps towards the identification of genomic target candidates for
precision medicine in lung SqCC, a disease with a significant unmet
medical need.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

