Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Parthenolide sensitizes colorectal cancer cells to TRAIL-induced
apoptosis by regulating mitochonrial pathway


Combination therapy utilizing of tumor necrosis factor-related
apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL) in conjunction with other anticancer
agents, is a promising strategy to overcome TRAIL resistance in malignant
cells. Recently, parthenolide (PT) has proved to be a promising
anticancer agent, and several studies have explored its use in
combination therapy. Here, we investigated the molecular mechanisms by
which PT sensitizes colorectal cancer (CRC) cells to TRAIL-induced
apoptosis. TRAIL inhibited HCT116 cell growth in a dose-dependent manner;
however, this reduction did not occur in TRAIL resistant HT-29 cells with
an even higher dose of TRAIL. A combination of PT with TRAIL
significantly inhibited cell growth of TRAIL resistant HT-29 cells.
Consistent with cell growth inhibition, apoptotic cell death was
significantly increased by a combination of PT with TRAIL in both of
HCT116 and HT-29 cells. Results of flow cytometry analysis demonstrated
that TRAIL-sensitive HCT116 cells had much higher death receptor (DR) 5
than TRAIL-resistant HT-29 cells. Interestingly, treatment of PT and/or
TRAIL did not affect DR4/DR5, these results indicate that the apoptotic
effect of combination is death receptor-independent apoptosis. We
observed that the synergistic effect was associated with Bcl-2 family
members, p53 and cytochrome C. Moreover, activation of caspase -3, -8 and
-9 was increased by combination treatment in both of TRAIL-resistant and
-sensitive cells. These results suggest that PT sensitizes TRAIL-induced
apoptosis via death receptor-independent and mitochondrial-dependent
pathway. Combination treatment using PT and TRAIL might offer an
effective strategy to overcome TRAIL resistance in certain CRC cells.

