Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Downregulation of beta1 integrins in E-cadherin positive triple
negative breast cancer cells elicits pro-metastatic shift in migration
strategy through TGFbeta/miR200/ZEB signaling network


Interactions with the extracellular matrix (ECM) through integrin
adhesion receptors provide cancer cells with physical and chemical cues
that act in concert with growth factors to support survival and
proliferation. Preclinical studies testing 1 integrin antagonists in
(breast) cancer models have shown inhibition of tumor growth and
sensitization to radio- or chemotherapy and these strategies are
currently evaluated in clinical trials. Here, we show that downregulation
of 1 integrins attenuates breast tumor growth but dissemination to the
lungs from such small tumors can be markedly enhanced. 1 integrin
downregulation induces compensatory upregulation of 3 integrins, but
increased 3 expression does not lead to enhanced lung metastasis.
Instead, 1 integrin downregulation in human and mouse triple negative,
E-cadherin positive breast cancer cells elicits a switch from collective
invasion to individual cell migration in 3D ECM. This involves
alterations in the TGF-BMP signaling network shifting the balance between
miR-200 and ZEB, which causes a block in E-cadherin transcription. The
switch is fully reversible: restored 1 expression reinstates E-cadherin
expression and cell cohesion. Moreover, restoring the network at the
level of TGFR, ZEB/miR-200 balance, or E-cadherin, restores cohesion and
prevents the induction of lung metastasis without affecting tumor growth.
These findings reveal that integrin-mediated ECM-attachments regulate a
signaling network in control of epithelial characteristics that suppress
metastatic spread. This raises concerns with respect to the use of 1
integrins as cancer drug targets.

