Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of miR-526b in COX-2 mediated breast cancer progression
via EP4 signaling


A minor tumour cell subset, known as stem-like cells (SLCs), appears to
defy conventional therapy, causing relapse. Thus, identification of
SLC-specific therapeutic targets and markers is urgently needed. Our
laboratory has established that aberrant expression of COX-2 promotes
breast cancer progression via multiple mechanisms including SLC induction
owing to activation of the PGE receptor EP4 which signals via the
canonical cAMP/PKA, and non-canonical PI3K-AKT pathways. Differential
gene and microRNA (miR) expression micro arrays in human breast cancer
cell lines stably transfected to over-express COX-2 revealed
up-regulation of miR-526b. We sought to determine if miR-526b is induced
by EP4 activation and whether it promotes breast cancer progression,
including SLC stimulation. COX-2-ve human breast cancer cell lines MCF-7
(ER+, HER-2-) and SKBR-3 (ER-, HER-2+) were stably transfected to
over-express miR-526b (MCF7-526b and SKBR3-526b), and functional assays
were performed. The cells exhibited enhanced proliferation, migration and
invasiveness, and increased tumoursphere-forming efficiency on ultra-low
attachment plates (in vitro surrogate of SLC phenotype), compared to
empty vector-transfected and parental controls. These results indicate
that miR-526b is a COX-2 induced oncogenic microRNA. In order to assess
the roles of miR-526b in vivo, MCF7-526b, SKBR3-526b, or empty vector
control cells were injected into the tail vein of NOD/SCID/GUSB-null
female mice. Both miR-526b over-expressing cell lines revealed a
significantly increased ability to form proliferative lung colonies at 4
weeks identified with HLA staining and EdU proliferation marker. To
examine the role of EP4 activation in miR-526b up-regulation, MCF-7 cells
cultured as monolayers or tumourspheres were treated with PGE2 or an EP4
agonist, PGE1OH. Both ligands induced a significant over-expression of
miR-526b in both culture conditions. Conversely, MCF7-COX-2 cells treated
with either an EP4 specific antagonist (ONO-AE3-208) or a COX-2 inhibitor
(NS-398) displayed significant reduction in miR-526b expression, as
quantified with qPCR. To investigate the role of PI3K-AKT pathway of EP4
signaling in miR-526b expression, PI3K was stimulated with PGE2 or PGE1OH
in MCF7 cells, and inhibited with LY294002 or Wortmannin in MCF7-COX-2
cells. MiR-526b expression levels quantified with qPCR revealed
significant increases and declines, respectively, with PI3K-AKT pathway
stimulators and inhibitors applied to the above cell lines. Together
these results suggest an important association of miR-526b with
EP4-induced SLC stimulation and breast cancer progression, and the
possibility that miR-526b may be used as a biomarker for monitoring
patients and personalizing therapy. (Supported by the CBCF, Ontario
chapter and the OICR funds to PKL. EL holds a CBCF and CIHR-STP Graduate
Fellowship and MM a TBCRU and CIHR-STP Post Doctoral fellowship).

