Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibiting bladder cancer metastasis with a dietary supplement


INTRODUCTION AND OBJECTIVE: Hyaluronic acid (HA) and HYAL-1 hyaluronidase
(HAase) family molecules are potential markers for BCa diagnosis and
prognosis and promote tumor growth and metastasis. 4-Methylumbelliferone
(4-MU) is an orally bioavailable dietary supplement that inhibits HA
synthesis. Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is the hallmark of
invasion and metastasis. Since HA promotes tumor metastasis and EMT, we
evaluated the expression of EMT markers in bladder tissues and antitumor
effects of 4-MU in BCa models.METHODS: Quantitative PCR was used to
measure mRNA expression of EMT genes (-catenin, Twist, and Snail) in 66
bladder tissue specimens (27 normal; 39 tumor); follow-up: 264.3 months;
median 20 months. The effect of 4-MU (40 - 120 g/ml) on cell
proliferation, apoptosis, intracellular signaling, and the expression of
HA receptors and EMT genes were examined in BCa cell lines, 253J-Lung and
HT1376. Effect of 4-MU on tumor growth was analyzed in subcutaneous
xenografts.RESULTS: Among the EMT genes, Snail and Twist were
differentially expressed in BCa tissues when compared to normal bladder
(P 3-fold) when treatment was started either on the day of tumor cell
injection or after tumors became palpable. No weight loss or serum or
organ toxicity was observed in treated mice. Tumors showed reduced
microvessel density (3-fold) and HA expression but increased TURNEL
positive cells.CONCLUSION: This study shows that expression of EMT
determinants correlates with clinical outcome. Furthermore, the non-toxic
dietary supplement 4-MU has potent antitumor activity and reverses
EMT.Support: R01 CA 123063-04 (VBL); R01 CA 72821-11 (VBL).

