Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nutrient depletion caused by PKR induces phosphorylation of AMPK
in lung cancer


We have demonstrated that RNA-dependent protein kinase (PKR) and its
downstream protein p-eIF2 are independent prognostic markers for survival
in lung cancer. In the current study, we aimed to elucidate PKR's
specific role in lung cancer. We examined PKR and p-PKR protein
expression in 60 frozen primary lung tumor tissues by Western blot
analysis and analyzed the association between PKR/p-PKR expression and
expression of 139 proteins examined previously by reverse phase protein
array in tissue samples from the same 60 patients. We demonstrated
several biomarkers that were either positively (p-AMPK) or negatively
(IRS1, p-IGF1R, MRE11, ATRIP, telomerase, CHK1, and cyclin E1) correlated
with PKR and p-PKR. We confirmed that induction of PKR or p-PKR with
expression vectors in lung cancer cells caused phospholation of the
AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) protein; phospholation was
independent of the LKB1, CaMKK, and TAK1 pathways. We observed that AMPK
phosphorylation was caused by the elevated levels of AMP and decreased
levels of ATP resulting from PKR-mediated nutrient depletion. Inhibition
of AMPK expression by compound C or siRNA enhanced PKR-mediated cell
death. We next investigated the combination of PKR and p-AMPK expression
in non-small cell lung cancer patients; we observed that high expression
of p-AMPK predicted worse prognosis in patients with high PKR expression
but better prognosis in patients with low PKR expression. The p-AMPK may
be required for cancer cell survival in patients with high PKR expression
and may inhibit cancer cell growth in patients with low PKR expression.
In summary, our data indicate that PKR-mediated nutrient depletion
induces phosphorylation of AMPK, which is required for lung cancer cell
survival.

