Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epigenome-wide study of sister study samples replicates and
extends cpg sites associated with cigarette smoking


Smoking increases the risk of many diseases -including cancer, and is
also linked to blood DNA methylation changes that may be important in
disease etiology. The objective of the current study was to identify and
confirm potentially novel CpG sites associated with cigarette smoking. To
do this we used two epigenome-wide datasets from the Sister Study. One
included 908 women with methylation measurements at 27,578 CpG sites
using the Illumina HumanMethylation27 BeadChip; the other included 200
women with methylation measurements for 473,844 CpG sites using the
Illumina HumanMethylation450 BeadChip. Significant CpGs from the second
dataset that were not included in the 27k assay were validated by
pyrosequencing in a subset of 476 samples from the first dataset. We were
able to successfully confirm smoking associations for nine previously
established CpGs and identify two potentially novel CpGs: cg26764244 in
GNG12 (p= 9.010-10) and cg22335340 in PTPN6 (p=2.910-05).In addition to
this we provide the first independent confirmation of the association
between smoking status and cg02657160 in CPOX (p=7.28x10-7). All 12 CpGs
were under-methylated in current smokers and showed increasing percent
methylation in former and never smokers. The CPOX CpG proved to be of
particular interest as the corresponding enzyme is involved in heme
biosynthesis and smoking is known to increase heme production. Our study
extends the evidence base for smoking-related changes in DNA methylation.

