Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: New technology to detect DNA methylation in plasma sample from
lung cancer patients


Epigenetic alterations have emerged as a common hallmark of many types of
human cancers including lung cancers. Therefore, detection of aberrant
DNA methylation from blood samples may be a promising diagnostic tool for
cancers. We have been developing a highly sensitive plasma-based approach
to detect aberrant DNA methylation in lung cancer patients. First, we
identified seven markers from genome-wide methylation analysis, which can
diagnose lung cancer in tissue samples with high accuracy (sensitivity,
91%; specificity, 100%). Next, we evaluated DNA methylation status in
tissue samples and corresponding plasma samples in each patient using
pyrosequencing analysis and qMSP. However, DNA methylation status between
tissue and plasma samples were not concordant by both methods
(pyrosequencing, 0/19 cases; qMSP, 3/9 cases). Given the concentration of
DNA in plasma originated from cancerous tissue might theoretically be
very low, we need to use more sensitive and accurate methods. We used
digital PCR and next generation sequencer to analyze the methylation
status of plasma DNA. These methods are both highly sensitive. Now we
invent a new technology using specific probes, which can recognize
sequence information including methylated cytosine even in one DNA
molecule. This new technology might be applicable as a practical tool for
lung cancer diagnosis.

