Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of NANOG/NANOGP8 downregulates MCL-1 in colorectal
cancer (CRC) cells, enhances the efficacy of BH3 mimetics and inhibits
clonogenicity


Combining lentiviral (LV) delivered shRNA against NANOG (shNG-1) or
NANOGP8 (shNp8-1) with BH3 mimetics (ABT-737 and ABT-199) was undertaken
to determine whether inhibition of NANOG/NANOGP8 enhances the cytotoxic
effect of these BH3 mimetics in Colorectal Cancer (CRC) cells. NANOG is a
key transcription factor important for both pluripotency in embryonic
stem cells and malignant transformation and progression of colorectal
carcinoma (CRC). Inhibition of NANOG or its paralog NANOGP8 reduces the
proliferation, stemness and tumorigenicity of CRC cells. The cytotoxic
potential of ABT-737 or ABT-199, as single agents, was tested in the CRC
cell lines- Clone A, CX-1 and LS174T that have high levels of
anti-apoptotic BCL-2 family proteins. Treatment with ABT-737 or ABT-199
showed variable cytotoxicity in the three CRC lines with LS174T being the
most resistant. Inhibition of NANOG and NANOGP8 with LVshNG-1 or
LVshNp8-1 in these cell lines decreased expression of MCL-1. The
combination of LVshNG-1 and/or LVshNp8-1, with ABT-737 produced enhanced
killing of the CRC cells by caspase-dependent apoptosis. These results
were were confirmed when LV shNG-1 or LV shNp8-1 was used in combination
with ABT-199. siRNA targeting MCL-1 reproduced the effects of
NANOG/NANOGP8 inhibition. The CRC cells that survived the combination
treatment showed lower regrowth potential and reduced clonogenicity when
re-plated in fresh media. These results demonstrate that inhibition of
NANOGP8 or NANOG enhances the cytotoxicity of BH3 mimetics that target
BCL-2 family members through inhibition of MCL-1 expression.

