Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel irreversible EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor, DBPR112, as a
therapeutic candidate for lung adenocarcinoma


Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer death in the world and
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) accounts for 85% of the lung cancer
deaths. In recent years, EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) have
showed remarkable effects in patients with certain genetic alternations
in the EGFR proteins. However, the clinical benefits of two
first-generation EGFR TKIs (gefitinib and erlotinib) have been limited
due to the acquired resistance from patients within 9-12 months after
treatment, therefore, the discovery of next-generation EGFR-TKIs poses an
utmost priority.Our team at IBPR has identified DBPR112 as a potent
EGFR-TKI, showing IC50 of 2 nM in HCC827 cells, EGFRWild-Type (IC50: 10
nM) and EGFRL858R/T790M (IC50: 70 nM), which are comparatively better
than gefitinib and similar to that of BIBW2992 (afatinib, developed by
Boehringer Ingelheim, and approved by FDA in 2013). DBPR112 (10, 50 and
100 mg/kg/day, 5 days/wk for 2 weeks) was orally effective against the
growth of human lung HCC827 tumors subcutaneously xenografted in nude
mice. A dramatic reduction in tumor size was noted with DBPR112 treatment
at 50 and 100 mg/kg/day, while displaying negligible body weight loss in
all dosing groups. In addition, the pharmacokinetics properties of
DBPR112 are superior to those of BIBW2992; demonstrating the potential of
DBPR112 as a therapeutic candidate for the treatment of lung
adenocarcinoma with EGFR mutations.This NRPB-granted 4-year top-down
project was commenced in Dec. 2012 and aimed at accomplishing a
comprehensive program of pre-clinical development and phase I study. To
date, several pre-clinical studies and progress were steadily
accomplished, including non-GMP production of 5 kg DBPR112 (tox-lot),
preliminary analysis methods development, pre-formulation study,
pharmacokinetics/metabolism studies and preliminary toxicology
evaluation. GLP-toxicity studies, GMP-production of DBPR112
(clinical-lot) and formulation for clinical use will be scheduled in 2014
(2nd year of this top-down project), and we look forward to filing an IND
application in early 2015.

