Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transformation from NSCLC to SCLC in EGFR mutant lung cancers with
acquired resistance to EGFR inhibitors


Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutant non-small cell lung
cancers (NSCLCs) are sensitive to the EGFR inhibitors erlotinib and
gefitinib. In the majority of patients with this type of cancer, EFGR
inhibition leads to a dramatic reduction in tumor size coupled with an
abatement of symptoms. These responses are temporary, and in most cases
the cancers become resistant after an average of one year. Recently, we
and others have found that a subset of these cancers transform from NSCLC
to SCLC as they acquire resistance to EGFR TKI. Details underlying this
novel resistance mechanism are largely undiscovered. To assess the
genetic changes associated with NSCLC to SCLC transformation, we carried
out next generation sequencing analysis on NSCLC and SCLC resistant
tumors. The sequencing results revealed that Rb, along with p53 and
PIK3CA were specifically altered in the SCLC transformed tumors. An IHC
assay to detect Rb indicated that while 10 out of 10 SCLC transformed
cases have loss of Rb, resistant cancers that maintained an NSCLC
histology largely retained Rb. To address the mechanism underlying the
resistance to EGFR inhibition in these tumors, we demonstrated that upon
the transformation to SCLC there is a marked reduction in EGFR
expression, suggesting that in transforming to SCLC these cells become a
cell type that no longer requires EGFR for their survival. Finally,
utilizing cell lines generated from biopsies taken from resistant
cancers, we identify the Bcl-2/Bcl-XL inhibitor Abt-263 as a potential
therapeutic approach to treat these resistant patients. Together, our
results provide details underlying this novel mechanism of resistance to
targeted therapy.

