Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Monoclonal antibodies specific for the oncofetal antigen -
immature laminin receptor: Tumor selectivity, rapid internalization and
in vivo efficacy


A series of murine monoclonal antibodies were generated using recombinant
oncofetal antigen - immature laminin receptor protein (OFA/iLRP) as the
immunogen. Several of the antibodies detected the 37kD OFA/iLRP but did
not recognize the structurally related 67kD mature laminin receptor
protein (LRP), as determined by western blot analysis. Additional
antibodies demonstrated reactivity with both proteins. Those antibodies
specific for the 37kD moiety bound to recombinant OFA/iLRP with high
affinity (Kaff = 1-2 x 10-10M; Biacore technology). These antibodies also
reacted with native OFA/iLRP on the surface of human tumor cells with
high affinity (Kaff = 1-2 x 10-9M) but did not show significant
reactivity with normal human epithelial cells or fibroblasts. In
contrast, antibodies that interacted with both 37kD OFA/iLRP and 67kD
mature LRP were reactive with both tumor cells and normal cells.
Antibodies specific to OFA/iLRP were internalized upon binding to the
target protein on human tumor cells. Two monoclonal antibodies from this
group were tested for anti-tumor activity in a murine model of B-cell
leukemia. BALB/c mice were injected with A20 leukemia cells either
intramuscularly or intravenously. Mice were given a total of six
intraperitoneal 100g antibody injections over a two-week period following
tumor initiation. Both antibodies slowed growth of the intramuscular
primary tumor by approximately 45%. More importantly, in the intravenous
tumor model, the treatments reduced systemic blood tumor levels by
greater than 70% and suppressed liver tumor formation by up to 46%. These
high affinity tumor-selective antibodies potentially provide a front-line
or adjuvant therapy for hematological malignancies.

