Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NF-B signaling supports a sub-population of ovarian cancer
tumor-initiating cells


Although most patients respond favorably to first-line chemotherapy,
ovarian cancer remains the most lethal gynecological cancer in the United
States primarily because of a high incidence of disease recurrence. The
inability of traditional chemotherapy to eradicate tumor-initiating cells
(TICs) is a plausible explanation for tumor relapse and we have begun to
characterize TIC populations in ovarian cancer cell lines. Importantly,
we are investigating the role of the NF-B pathway in regulating this
system. We have identified conditions that sustain a highly tumorigenic
TIC population. Preliminary data suggest that NF-B promotes and sustains
TICs in ovarian cancer and current efforts are underway to characterize
the molecular mechanisms underlying this preference. We will correlate
activity of this pathway with expression of ovarian TIC protein markers
such as CD133, Sox2, Nanog, and Oct-4 in TIC cell cultures and
xenografts. Moreover we will use TICs to investigate effects of
inhibiting this pathway on marker expression, proliferation, resistance
to chemotherapy, and the ability to form tumors in mice. Clarifying the
specific role of the NF-B network in TIC populations will further our
understanding of ovarian cancer initiation, progression, and relapse and
may lead to improved therapeutic strategies for women in first remission,
to prevent subsequent relapse to incurable disease.

