Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: p53-dependent regulation of epithelial-to-mescenchymal transition
by nf-b in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma


PURPOSE:In head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC), mutations of
p53 usually coexist with aberrant activation of NF-kappaB (NF-B) and
other transcription factors which promote tumor pathogenesis. However,
how these factors mediate oncogenesis and metastasis is not fully
understood. Herein we investigate the mechanisms by which p53 and NF-B
contribute to Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition (EMT) in
HNSCC.EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN:We evaluated the effects of p65 mutation on the
molecular events of EMT in surgical specimens and HNSCC cell lines. We
examined the correlation with tumor histologic features.RESULTS:In HNSCC
cell lines with mutant p53, p65 knockdown promotes EMT. In contrast, in
normal oral epithelial cells or HNSCC cells with WT p53, p65
over-expression, instead of knockdown, promotes EMT. Ablation of p53 in
normal oral epithelial cells blocks p65 induced EMT. These findings are
functionally corroborated herein in three-dimensional cell culture,
anchorage-independent growth assays, and tumor cell migration
assays.CONCLUSIONS:This is the first report indicating the role of p53
status in the NF-B -induced promotion of EMT in HNSCC. Bortezomib-based
regimens have been shown to have minimal activity in recurrent or
metastatic head and neck cancer. Our new findings are important in
understanding a possible basis for these clinical findings as well as
defining important implications for targeted chemoprevention and therapy.

