Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bone metastases in renal cell carcinoma are predicted by
characteristics of the primary tumor


Introduction: The poor prognosis of renal cell carcinoma (RCC) is caused
by a high risk of metastasis. 30 % of all RCC patients develop bone
metastases during course of disease. The outcome of RCC patients with
bone metastases is poor so that a prediction would be of advantage. The
aim of this study was to elucidate the mechanisms that lead to an organ
specific metastasis of RCC in bones and probably predict bone
metastasis.Methods: In 30 RCC tissue specimens and 9 RCC primary cell
lines collected from patients who had developed no metastases, lung or
bone metastases within 5 years after nephrectomy (each 10 RCC tissue
specimens, each 3 RCC cell lines) expression and/or activity of 46
cellular signalling molecules were quantified by a phospho kinase array
and Western blot analyses. As steps of metastasis, migration of the
primary RCC cells was analysed in a Boyden chamber with 10 g/ml
fibronectin as chemotaxin, adhesion to extracellular matrix compounds
fibronectin, collagen I and IV was determined after cell staining with
crystal violet.Results: In RCC tissue specimens and primary cells from
patients who developed bone metastases a higher expression of alpha5
integrins, higher activity of Akt and FAK as well as a lower expression
of PTEN was detected, compared to those from patients without or with
lung metastases. According to these results we observed an enhanced
chemotactic migration (13-fold) of bone metastatic RCC cells and adhesion
to fibronectin (6-fold) or collagen type I (8-fold) - both components of
the bone matrix.Conclusion: These results show that specific
characteristics like the expression and activity of cell signalling
mediators and the cellular behaviour of the primary tumor determine the
location of the subsequent metastasis in RCC and could be used as
prognostic marker for bone metastasis. This should be considered during
follow-up care.Funded by the Wilhelm Sander Foundation

