Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel pathway mutations in malignant mesothelioma revealed by
high-throughput DNA and RNA sequencing


Background: Malignant mesothelioma (MM) is an aggressive neoplasm
associated with asbestos exposure. Because MM is usually diagnosed at an
advanced stage and is largely unresponsive to conventional therapy, it is
necessary to identify the signal pathways driving MM and to develop
therapeutics specifically targeting these pathways.Materials and Methods:
We carried out RNA sequencing of 12 MM cell lines and 4 clinical samples
and exome sequencing of 6 MM cells using a so-called next-generation
sequencer. We further performed pathway-targeted genome sequencing of 23
paired samples of MM tumor and normal tissue.Results: We identified 15
novel fusion genes by RNA sequencing and confirmed them by conventional
Sanger sequencing and FISH analyses. We showed that the novel gene was
included in both LOH and a fusion gene, and the gene which was critical
tumor-suppressor roles caused two hit and was down-regulated. The gene
has been identified as a central player of the emerging signaling
pathway. We further identified the accumulation of mutations in 35% of
the MMs by pathway-targeted genome sequencing.Conclusions: We indicated
the need for the discovering molecular targets in the novel pathway in
MMs. Our findings provide novel insights into the pathogenesis of MM and
unequivocally demonstrate the power of sequencing technologies in cancer
research.

