Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of Abl kinases in breast cancer bone metastasis


Abl kinases are a family of non-receptor tyrosine kinases consisting of
two members, Abl1 and Abl2 (Arg). In recent years, accumulating data
support a role of Abl kinases in breast cancer that harbor enhanced
expression and/or activation of these kinases. The Cancer Genome Atlas
has recently reported that Abl2 is among the most highly amplified genes
and overexpression of Abl2 correlates with poor survival in invasive
breast cancer. In addition, Abl kinases are activated downstream of
receptor tyrosine kinases, chemokine receptors and src family kinases,
all of which are deregulated in breast cancer and drive tumor
proliferation and invasion. In this study, we have uncovered a critical
role of Abl kinases in the regulation of breast cancer metastasis to the
bone. We found that the incidence of bone metastasis is significantly
greater in breast cancer patients with high Abl expression. Using global
transcriptome analysis (RNAseq) of breast cancer cells we uncovered a
novel role for Abl kinases in regulating the expression of multiple
pro-bone metastasis genes. Furthermore, both pharmacological inhibition
and RNA interference mediated knockdown of Abl kinases resulted in
markedly decreased osteolytic metastasis in vivo and decreased osteoclast
activation in vitro. Together these findings support a role for Abl
kinases in promoting osteolytic metastasis and suggest that Abl dependent
signaling may be targeted to inhibit this process.

