Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting PIM1 kinase enhances 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3-mediated
anti-tumor activity in bladder cancer cells


Bladder cancer is the 5th most common in the United States. 30% of cases
are advanced stage requiring multimodality therapy at diagnosis and many
which are first diagnosed when superficial will progress to more advanced
disease. High recurrence and progression rate and drug resistance
highlight the need for new therapeutic strategies to improve clinical
outcomes. 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 (1,25D3), the most active vitamin D
metabolite, has demonstrated broad spectrum antitumor activities in vitro
and in vivo. In addition, 1,25D3 potentiates the antitumor effects of
common chemotherapeutic agents in several cancer cell types including
bladder cancer. 24-hydroxylase, encoded by the CYP24A1 gene, plays a key
role in degrading 1,25D3. Increased expression of CYP24A1 has been found
in several human tumors. Several studies reveal that the protein kinase
signaling pathways including PIM1 are involved in the regulation of
CYP24A1 expression. The PIM kinases are a family of serine/threonine
kinases (PIM-1, PIM-2, PIM-3) that have been associated with
tumorigenesis and drug resistance. PIM1 has been extensively studied in
lymphoma and upregulation of PIM kinase expression has been reported in
many malignancies. We analyzed mRNA expression of CYP24A1 and PIM1 in 17
bladder cancer cell lines by qRT-PCR. We found that CYP24A1 expression is
increased in 12 out of 17 bladder cancer cell lines and PIM1 expression
is increased in 8 out of 17 bladder cancer cell lines compared to
expression in a benign bladder cancer cell line. Therefore, we
hypothesized that inhibition of PIM kinase activity would suppress
CYP24A1 expression and thus enhancing 1,25D3-mediated anti-tumor
activity. Using the PIM1 inhibitor, JP11646, we found that inhibition of
PIM1 kinase activity reduces CYP24A1 expression at transcriptional level
in bladder cancer cells RT112 and RT112D21 which express high level of
PIM1 and CYP24A1. We further evaluated the efficacy of the PIM1 inhibitor
alone and in combination with 1,25D3. Inhibition of PIM1 kinase activity
by JP11646 reduces cell growth in a panel of bladder cancer cell lines in
a dose-dependent manner as measured by MTT assays. MTT assays detected a
significant inhibition of cell proliferation by 50% compared to the
control when cells were treated with 128 nM of JP11646 for 72 h in 6 of
bladder cancer cell lines tested. Furthermore, inhibition of PIM1 kinase
activity enhances 1,25D3-mediated inhibitory effect on cell growth in
bladder cancer cells RT112 and RT112D21. This study provides the first
evidence that inhibition of PIM kinase activity may be an attractive
therapeutic strategy to facilitate the optimization of antitumor therapy
of vitamin D in bladder cancer.This study was supported by NIH/NCI grants
5R01CA067267 and 5R01CA095045

