Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nestin is an independent molecular prognostic factor in patients
with anaplastic thyroid carcinoma


Introduction: Nestin, a 200-220 kDa intermediate filament protein, is
considered as a neuronal stem cell marker reportedly expressed in newly
formed blood vessels of various neoplasms such as glioblastoma, prostate
cancer, pancreatic cancer and colorectal cancer. Expression of nestin
indicates poorer prognosis in various tumors. Although rare, anaplastic
thyroid carcinoma (ATC) is one of the most aggressive malignancies of
human, often showed resistance to the multimodal therapeutic approach,
and resulted in fatal outcome within half a year in most of the patients.
Although several clinical prognostic factors were reported, no molecular
background has been demonstrated to indicate its prognosis to date. In
this study, the association between nestin expression and prognosis in
patient with ATC was evaluated.Methods: We analyzed 23 histologically
confirmed ATC patients (12 males and 11 females; mean age, 71.0 years;
range, 31-88 years). Formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue samples
were subjected to imunohistochemical staining (10c2, mouse monoclonal Ab;
Santa Cruz, CA). Positive staining was defined when cytoplasmic staining
was observed in 10% or more ATC cells at the same intensity as newly
formed blood vessels. Fishere's exact test was used to compare the
variables. Survival data were estimated by the Kaplan-Meier method. The
Cox proportional hazards model was used for the multivariate survival
analysis. A p-value5cm in diameter), distant metastasis and leukocytosis
(>10000/mm3) were reported as significant clinical risk factors for poor
prognosis, defined as prognostic index (PI) [Sugitani et al. WJS 2010],
and were included as clinical prognostic indicators in this
study.Results: Expression of nestin was confirmed in 6 of 23 tissue
samples (26.1%). There was no correlation between expression of nestin
and clinicopathological factors including age, gender, acute symptoms,
tumor size, number of leukocyte, stage of cancer, lymph node metastasis
and distant metastasis. Nestin positive group (n=6) showed a
significantly worse prognosis than nestin negative group (n=17) (median
survival time, 86.5 vs. 306 days; pIntroduction: Nestin, a 200-220 kDa
intermediate filament protein, is considered as a neuronal stem cell
marker reportedly expressed in newly formed blood vessels of various
neoplasms such as glioblastoma, prostate cancer, pancreatic cancer and
colorectal cancer. Expression of nestin indicates poorer prognosis in
various tumors. Although rare, anaplastic thyroid carcinoma (ATC) is one
of the most aggressive malignancies of human, often showed resistance to
the multimodal therapeutic approach, and resulted in fatal outcome within
half a year in most of the patients. Although several clinical prognostic
factors were reported, no molecular background has been demonstrated to
indicate its prognosis to date. In this study, the association between
nestin expression and prognosis in patient with ATC was
evaluated.Methods: We analyzed 23 histologically confirmed ATC patients
(12 males and 11 females; mean age, 71.0 years; range, 31-88 years).
Formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue samples were subjected to
imunohistochemical staining (10c2, mouse monoclonal Ab; Santa Cruz, CA).
Positive staining was defined when cytoplasmic staining was observed in
10% or more ATC cells at the same intensity as newly formed blood
vessels. Fishere's exact test was used to compare the variables. Survival
data were estimated by the Kaplan-Meier method. The Cox proportional
hazards model was used for the multivariate survival analysis. A
p-value5cm in diameter), distant metastasis and leukocytosis (>10000/mm3)
were reported as significant clinical risk factors for poor prognosis,
defined as prognostic index (PI) [Sugitani et al. WJS 2010], and were
included as clinical prognostic indicators in this study.Results:
Expression of nestin was confirmed in 6 of 23 tissue samples (26.1%).
There was no correlation between expression of nestin and
clinicopathological factors including age, gender, acute symptoms, tumor
size, number of leukocyte, stage of cancer, lymph node metastasis and
distant metastasis. Nestin positive group (n=6) showed a significantly
worse prognosis than nestin negative group (n=17) (median survival time,
86.5 vs. 306 days; p<0.01; HR, 4.26; 95% CI, 1.32 to 13.41). The
univariate analysis demonstrated that the 6 months survival rate of
patients with nestin-positive tumors or PI-high was significantly poorer
than that of those with nestin-negative tumors (pIntroduction: Nestin, a
200-220 kDa intermediate filament protein, is considered as a neuronal
stem cell marker reportedly expressed in newly formed blood vessels of
various neoplasms such as glioblastoma, prostate cancer, pancreatic
cancer and colorectal cancer. Expression of nestin indicates poorer
prognosis in various tumors. Although rare, anaplastic thyroid carcinoma
(ATC) is one of the most aggressive malignancies of human, often showed
resistance to the multimodal therapeutic approach, and resulted in fatal
outcome within half a year in most of the patients. Although several
clinical prognostic factors were reported, no molecular background has
been demonstrated to indicate its prognosis to date. In this study, the
association between nestin expression and prognosis in patient with ATC
was evaluated.Methods: We analyzed 23 histologically confirmed ATC
patients (12 males and 11 females; mean age, 71.0 years; range, 31-88
years). Formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue samples were subjected
to imunohistochemical staining (10c2, mouse monoclonal Ab; Santa Cruz,
CA). Positive staining was defined when cytoplasmic staining was observed
in 10% or more ATC cells at the same intensity as newly formed blood
vessels. Fishere's exact test was used to compare the variables. Survival
data were estimated by the Kaplan-Meier method. The Cox proportional
hazards model was used for the multivariate survival analysis. A
p-value5cm in diameter), distant metastasis and leukocytosis (>10000/mm3)
were reported as significant clinical risk factors for poor prognosis,
defined as prognostic index (PI) [Sugitani et al. WJS 2010], and were
included as clinical prognostic indicators in this study.Results:
Expression of nestin was confirmed in 6 of 23 tissue samples (26.1%).
There was no correlation between expression of nestin and
clinicopathological factors including age, gender, acute symptoms, tumor
size, number of leukocyte, stage of cancer, lymph node metastasis and
distant metastasis. Nestin positive group (n=6) showed a significantly
worse prognosis than nestin negative group (n=17) (median survival time,
86.5 vs. 306 days; p<0.01; HR, 4.26; 95% CI, 1.32 to 13.41). The
univariate analysis demonstrated that the 6 months survival rate of
patients with nestin-positive tumors or PI-high was significantly poorer
than that of those with nestin-negative tumors (p<0.01) or PI-low
(pIntroduction: Nestin, a 200-220 kDa intermediate filament protein, is
considered as a neuronal stem cell marker reportedly expressed in newly
formed blood vessels of various neoplasms such as glioblastoma, prostate
cancer, pancreatic cancer and colorectal cancer. Expression of nestin
indicates poorer prognosis in various tumors. Although rare, anaplastic
thyroid carcinoma (ATC) is one of the most aggressive malignancies of
human, often showed resistance to the multimodal therapeutic approach,
and resulted in fatal outcome within half a year in most of the patients.
Although several clinical prognostic factors were reported, no molecular
background has been demonstrated to indicate its prognosis to date. In
this study, the association between nestin expression and prognosis in
patient with ATC was evaluated.Methods: We analyzed 23 histologically
confirmed ATC patients (12 males and 11 females; mean age, 71.0 years;
range, 31-88 years). Formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue samples
were subjected to imunohistochemical staining (10c2, mouse monoclonal Ab;
Santa Cruz, CA). Positive staining was defined when cytoplasmic staining
was observed in 10% or more ATC cells at the same intensity as newly
formed blood vessels. Fishere's exact test was used to compare the
variables. Survival data were estimated by the Kaplan-Meier method. The
Cox proportional hazards model was used for the multivariate survival
analysis. A p-value5cm in diameter), distant metastasis and leukocytosis
(>10000/mm3) were reported as significant clinical risk factors for poor
prognosis, defined as prognostic index (PI) [Sugitani et al. WJS 2010],
and were included as clinical prognostic indicators in this
study.Results: Expression of nestin was confirmed in 6 of 23 tissue
samples (26.1%). There was no correlation between expression of nestin
and clinicopathological factors including age, gender, acute symptoms,
tumor size, number of leukocyte, stage of cancer, lymph node metastasis
and distant metastasis. Nestin positive group (n=6) showed a
significantly worse prognosis than nestin negative group (n=17) (median
survival time, 86.5 vs. 306 days; p<0.01; HR, 4.26; 95% CI, 1.32 to
13.41). The univariate analysis demonstrated that the 6 months survival
rate of patients with nestin-positive tumors or PI-high was significantly
poorer than that of those with nestin-negative tumors (p<0.01) or PI-low
(p<0.01). The multivariate analysis indicated that nestin expression and
PI were independent prognostic indicators for patient
survival.Conclusion: Nestin expression is an independent molecular
indicator of poor prognosis for patients with ATC.

