Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Investigating p53 and other potential determinants of cell
sensitivity to ATR inhibition by VE-821


Background: Defects in the multifactorial DNA damage response (DDR) are
common in cancer, making them vulnerable to inhibitors of other
components of the DDR. ATR is a key component of the DDR, signalling
ssDNA, arising from stalled replication forks, resected double strand
breaks (DSBs) and NER intermediates to activate cell cycle arrest at the
S/G2 checkpoints and initiate homologous recombination repair (HRR).
Tumors often have a dysfunctional G1 checkpoint e.g. due to p53 mutations
or other DDR defects. ATR inhibition of the S/G2 checkpoints and HRR has
the potential to exploit these defects and selectively target cancer.
VE-821 is a potent ATR inhibitor under advanced pre-clinical
investigationHypotheses: 1) Cells with dysfunctional p53 will be more
sensitive to ATR inhibition. 2) Defects in other DDR components will
sensitise cells to ATR inhibition.Methods: The survival of isogenic p53
mutant/null and wt/corrected human cell lines (HCT116 p53+/+ and p53-/-
or U2OS p53WT and p53DN (dominant negative)) and a panel of repair
defective Chinese hamster ovary and lung fibroblast cells was determined
using colony formation after 24 hours exposure VE-821 alone or in the
presence of gemcitabine or ionising radiation.Results: There was no
significant difference in sensitivity to VE-821 between p53 wt or
mutant/null cells in either HCT116 (LC50 = 2.13 and 4.56 M, respectively)
or U2OS pairs (LC50 = 2.54 and 3.34 M, respectively). However, 1 M VE-821
significantly potentiated the antimetabolite, gemcitabine, in HCT116
p53-/- (4.3-fold) but not p53+/+ cells (1.5-fold), and enhanced cell kill
by 100 nM gemcitabine 40-fold in U2OS p53DN cells but only 3-fold in U2OS
p53WT cells. Chinese hamster ovary cells defective in XRCC1 (single
stranded break repair) were more sensitive to single agent VE-821 than
the parental wt cells (35% and 55% survival at 10 M, respectively). Data
on other repair-defective cell lines will be presented.Conclusions: p53
status is not a determinant of sensitivity to VE-821 as a single agent
but VE-821 preferentially sensitises cells lacking functional p53 to
gemcitabine. This supports the hypothesis that p53 status may be
predictive of cellular response to ATR inhibition in combination with
certain chemotherapies. Furthermore, data using Chinese hamster cell
lines indicate that DDR defects may be exploited by ATR inhibition.

