Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mouse models of human lung adenocarcinoma: Identification of
potential tumor suppressors by functional in vivo shRNA screening


Lung cancer is one of the leading human cancer malignancies, and
histopathologically divided into Non small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and
small cell lung cancer (SCLC). Lung adenocarcinoma is a major form of
NSCLC. We have developed a lentiviral-vector-mediated mouse model, which
enables generation of lung adenocarcinoma from less than 100 alveolar
epithelial cells, and investigated the role of IKK2 and NF-B in
lung-cancer development. IKK2 depletion in tumour cells significantly
attenuated tumour proliferation and significantly prolonged mouse
survival. We identified Timp1, one of the NF-B target genes, as a key
mediator for tumour growth by activating ERK signaling pathway. Knockdown
of either Ikbkb or Timp1 by short hairpin RNAs reduced tumour growth in
both xenograft and lentiviral models. Further, by utilizing lentiviral
mediated mouse models, we performed a genome wide in vivo shRNA screen to
findout tumor suppressors or tumor suppressor like genes that will
cooperate with KRasG12D expression. The screen identified several novel
molecules as potential tumor suppressor properties, which will cooperate
with KRasG12D. Several of these molecules were also altered in human
patient cohorts of The Cancer Genome Atlas. Ephrin receptor A2, EphA2, is
one of the molecule knockdown of which cooperated with KRasG12D
expression to generate lung adenocarcinomas comparable to knockdown of
potent tumorsuppressor P53 thus validating our screen. The mechanisms
underlying EPhA2 mediated tumorsuppression are being studied. Overall,
our study identified novel potential tumorsuppressors.

