Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Circulating microRNAs as non-invasive biomarkers for early
detection of lung cancer


Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer deaths worldwide. In 2008,
1.61 million new cases, and 1.38 million deaths due to lung cancer were
recorded. This high mortality rate is mainly due to the late stage at
which lung cancer is diagnosed. While early diagnosis has been
successfully implemented through tomography-based population screenings
in high-risk individuals, there is a need for simpler, non-invasive and
more accessible methodologies for effective early cancer detection
programs. Circulating microRNA (miRNA) profiles have been suggested as
promising diagnostic and prognostic biomarkers for cancer, including lung
cancer. However, the results have so far been inconsistent between
studies. The objective of this study was to explore the potential of
circulating miRNAs in plasma for early detection of lung cancer using
global profiling approach.Plasma samples were collected from 100 early
stage (I to IIIA) non-small-cell lung cancer patients (35 lung
adenocarcinoma and 65 squamous cell carcinoma patients) and 100 age- and
gender-matched healthy controls. 754 circulating miRNAs were analyzed via
quantitative RT-PCR using TaqMan Low Density Arrays. Data were quantile
normalized and limma analysis with adjustment for multiple testing to
control for false discovery rate (FDR, Benjamini-Hochberg method) was
performed to identify differentially regulated miRNA between cases and
controls. Penalized Lasso logistic regression model (with penalty
parameter tuning conducted by 10-fold cross-validation) was used to
compute the least redundant panel of miRNAs for discriminating between
cases and controls. The area under the receiver operating characteristic
curve (AUC) was calculated to assess the discriminatory power of the
model. Internal validation was conducted by calculating the bootstrap
optimism-corrected AUC for the selected model.Sixty one plasma miRNAs
were found to be significantly differentially expressed between lung
cancer cases and controls including 33 upregulated and 28 downregulated
miRNAs (p-value Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer deaths
worldwide. In 2008, 1.61 million new cases, and 1.38 million deaths due
to lung cancer were recorded. This high mortality rate is mainly due to
the late stage at which lung cancer is diagnosed. While early diagnosis
has been successfully implemented through tomography-based population
screenings in high-risk individuals, there is a need for simpler,
non-invasive and more accessible methodologies for effective early cancer
detection programs. Circulating microRNA (miRNA) profiles have been
suggested as promising diagnostic and prognostic biomarkers for cancer,
including lung cancer. However, the results have so far been inconsistent
between studies. The objective of this study was to explore the potential
of circulating miRNAs in plasma for early detection of lung cancer using
global profiling approach.Plasma samples were collected from 100 early
stage (I to IIIA) non-small-cell lung cancer patients (35 lung
adenocarcinoma and 65 squamous cell carcinoma patients) and 100 age- and
gender-matched healthy controls. 754 circulating miRNAs were analyzed via
quantitative RT-PCR using TaqMan Low Density Arrays. Data were quantile
normalized and limma analysis with adjustment for multiple testing to
control for false discovery rate (FDR, Benjamini-Hochberg method) was
performed to identify differentially regulated miRNA between cases and
controls. Penalized Lasso logistic regression model (with penalty
parameter tuning conducted by 10-fold cross-validation) was used to
compute the least redundant panel of miRNAs for discriminating between
cases and controls. The area under the receiver operating characteristic
curve (AUC) was calculated to assess the discriminatory power of the
model. Internal validation was conducted by calculating the bootstrap
optimism-corrected AUC for the selected model.Sixty one plasma miRNAs
were found to be significantly differentially expressed between lung
cancer cases and controls including 33 upregulated and 28 downregulated
miRNAs (p-value < 0.05). Penalized Lasso logistic regression identified a
panel of 24 miRNA having the optimum classification performance. Multiple
logistic regression analysis showed that combination of the 24 miRNAs
alone could discriminate lung cancer cases from healthy controls (AUC of
0.92). This classification improved to AUC of 0.94 following addition of
gender, age at interview and smoking status to the model. Internal
validation of the model using the bootstrap optimism corrected AUC
suggests that the discriminatory power of the panel will be high when
applied to independent samples (corrected AUC of 0.86 and for the
24-miRNA panel alone, 0.87 for the model including gender, age and
smoking status). These results highlight the potential of circulating
miRNA as biomarkers for lung cancer. Independent prospective validation
of the clinical potential of the panel within a cohort with
pre-diagnostic samples is warranted.

