Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential expression of cancer stem cell markers and their
clinicopathological features in hepatocellular carcinoma patients with
different etiologies


Aim: Some pluripotent genes and epithelial cell adhesion molecule (EpCAM)
have been reported as cancer stem cell markers in hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC). Nanog was recently reported to regulate self-renewal of
cancer stem cells though the insulin-like growth factor pathway in HCC.
However, the expression status of the pluripotent stem cell genes and
their clinicopathological significance in HCC from different etiologies
remain unexplored. Here, we compared the expression status of stem cell
markers in HCCs derived from hepatitis C virus (HCV)-related liver
disease and from nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH), and also determined
the clinical characteristics of Nanog-positive HCCs in NASH
patients.Methods: Resected tissues from 21 NASH-related HCC (NASH-HCC)
patients with histologically proven steatohepatitis and 24 HCV-related
HCC (HCV-HCC)CV-HCC)HCV patients were analyzed with all patients' written
informed consent. The NASH group was defined as patients who consumed
less than 20 g/day of alcohol. The expression status of Nanog, Oct4,
Sox9, and EpCAM were determined by immunohistochemistry. The
clinicopathological features of Nanog-positive NASH-HCC patients were
analyzed.Results: 1) Nanog was strongly expressed in 14.3/8.3% of
NASH-HCC/HCV-HCC patients, and in 66.7/25% of noncancerous tissues of
NASH/HCV (pAim: Some pluripotent genes and epithelial cell adhesion
molecule (EpCAM) have been reported as cancer stem cell markers in
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Nanog was recently reported to regulate
self-renewal of cancer stem cells though the insulin-like growth factor
pathway in HCC. However, the expression status of the pluripotent stem
cell genes and their clinicopathological significance in HCC from
different etiologies remain unexplored. Here, we compared the expression
status of stem cell markers in HCCs derived from hepatitis C virus
(HCV)-related liver disease and from nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH),
and also determined the clinical characteristics of Nanog-positive HCCs
in NASH patients.Methods: Resected tissues from 21 NASH-related HCC
(NASH-HCC) patients with histologically proven steatohepatitis and 24
HCV-related HCC (HCV-HCC)CV-HCC)HCV patients were analyzed with all
patients' written informed consent. The NASH group was defined as
patients who consumed less than 20 g/day of alcohol. The expression
status of Nanog, Oct4, Sox9, and EpCAM were determined by
immunohistochemistry. The clinicopathological features of Nanog-positive
NASH-HCC patients were analyzed.Results: 1) Nanog was strongly expressed
in 14.3/8.3% of NASH-HCC/HCV-HCC patients, and in 66.7/25% of
noncancerous tissues of NASH/HCV (p<0.05). Strong positive expression
(defined as a positive area of over 50% of the examined tissues) was
observed in most in NASH-HCC cases. Nanog-positive HCC patients showed no
expression of EpCAM, and were Oct4-positive in 50% of cases and
Sox9-positive in 75%. 2) EpCAM was strongly expressed in 5.0/8.3% of
NASH-HCC/HCV-HCC, and in 10/41.7% of noncancerous tissues of NASH/HCV
(pAim: Some pluripotent genes and epithelial cell adhesion molecule
(EpCAM) have been reported as cancer stem cell markers in hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC). Nanog was recently reported to regulate self-renewal of
cancer stem cells though the insulin-like growth factor pathway in HCC.
However, the expression status of the pluripotent stem cell genes and
their clinicopathological significance in HCC from different etiologies
remain unexplored. Here, we compared the expression status of stem cell
markers in HCCs derived from hepatitis C virus (HCV)-related liver
disease and from nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH), and also determined
the clinical characteristics of Nanog-positive HCCs in NASH
patients.Methods: Resected tissues from 21 NASH-related HCC (NASH-HCC)
patients with histologically proven steatohepatitis and 24 HCV-related
HCC (HCV-HCC)CV-HCC)HCV patients were analyzed with all patients' written
informed consent. The NASH group was defined as patients who consumed
less than 20 g/day of alcohol. The expression status of Nanog, Oct4,
Sox9, and EpCAM were determined by immunohistochemistry. The
clinicopathological features of Nanog-positive NASH-HCC patients were
analyzed.Results: 1) Nanog was strongly expressed in 14.3/8.3% of
NASH-HCC/HCV-HCC patients, and in 66.7/25% of noncancerous tissues of
NASH/HCV (p<0.05). Strong positive expression (defined as a positive area
of over 50% of the examined tissues) was observed in most in NASH-HCC
cases. Nanog-positive HCC patients showed no expression of EpCAM, and
were Oct4-positive in 50% of cases and Sox9-positive in 75%. 2) EpCAM was
strongly expressed in 5.0/8.3% of NASH-HCC/HCV-HCC, and in 10/41.7% of
noncancerous tissues of NASH/HCV (p<0.05). EpCAM-positive HCC patients
showed no expression of Nanog, Oct4, or Sox9. 3) The expression of Sox9
was more dominant in noncancerous tissues in both NASH and HCV patients.
4) In NASH-HCC, Nanog-positive patients showed a significantly higher
indocyanine green retention rate at 15 min (ICG-R15), were more obese,
and showed advanced fibrosis of noncancerous tissues.Conclusions: The
expression status of stem cell markers differed between NASH- and
HCV-related liver diseases. The expression of Nanog and EpCAM in HCC were
mutually exclusive and their expression in noncancerous liver tissues may
be an independent risk factor in NASH- and HCV-related HCCs, respectively.

