Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovery of JNJ-42756493, a potent fibroblast growth factor
receptor (FGFR) inhibitor using a fragment based approach


Fibroblast growth factors (FGFs) and their receptors (FGFR1 through 4)
regulate a variety of key cellular processes, including proliferation,
migration, survival, and differentiationa. Aberrant activation of
FGF/FGFR is strongly implicated in oncogenic signalling in many tumor
types. This has stimulated the development of a number of FGFR
inhibitors, with diverse kinase inhibition and pharmacological profiles
that are currently being evaluated in clinical studies.We conducted a
fragment screening campaign and this resulted in identification of a
6-aminoquinoxalinyl fragment with a binding affinity in the micromolar
range. Structure-guided medicinal chemistry led to the identification of
a novel quinoxaline-based chemical series with nanomolar affinity for
FGFR1, 2, 3, and 4, activity in cells, and selectivity with respect to
VEGFR-2. Further optimisation resulted in the generation of JNJ-42756493,
a compound with favourable drug-like properties that demonstrated strong
anti-tumoral activity in a FGFR2-dependent SNU-16 human gastric carcinoma
xenograft model.This report represents the first disclosure of the
structure-activity relationships as well as the chemical synthesis
pathway of the JNJ-42756493 series and illustrates how a fragment-based
drug discovery approach has been efficiently used to discover FGFR1-4
inhibitors with nanomolar affinity.aTurner, N. and Grose, R. Nat. Rev.
Cancer, 2010, 10, 116-129.

