Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dual inhibition of the androgen receptor and PI-3K/mTor pathways
has significant antitumor activity in castrate-resistant prostate cancer


Inhibition of the androgen receptor (AR) results in activation of the
PI-3K/mTOR pathway in PTEN deficient prostate cancer cells by reciprocal
feedback inhibition (Carver BS, 2011). Enzalutamide or PI-3K/mTor
inhibition result in feedback activation and combined inhibition
abrogated this effect. We explored AR inhibition in CRPC cell lines with
low, intermediate and high AR expression in the context of PI-3K/mTor
inhibition to identify biomarkers of response and resistance. We utilized
no/low (DU145, PC3), intermediate (LNCaP) and high (22Rv1,VCap) AR
expressing prostate cancer (PC) cell lines to evaluate anti-tumor
activity with 4 pan-PI3K/mTOR inhibitors (GDC-0980, GDC-0941, LY294002,
PF-04691502), enzalutamide and abiraterone as single agents or various in
combinations at clinically relevant doses. Cytotoxic activity of
enzalutamide was more potent than abiraterone (IC50's was 10M) in LNCaP
cells, however, the opposite was seen in DU145 and PC-3 cell lines. High
AR expressing cells (22Rv1, VCap) were more sensitive to AR inhibition.
PI-3K/mTor SMIs GDC-0980, GDC-0941 or PF-04691502 had IC50's in the range
50-500nM while LY294002 had an IC50 16-24 M except for DU145. This cell
line had increased IC50 values comparatively for PI-3K/mTor SMIs
GDC-0980, GDC-0941 or PF-04691502 (1.5-3.75 M) and LY29002 (48.5 M). The
combination index (CI) isobologram method indicated significant synergism
for PI-3K/mTOR SMIs plus enzalutamide or abiraterone in all PC cell lines
irrespective of AR status. Combination treatments were associated with
increased apoptosis (Annexin-V staining and PARP-cleavage assay) in LNCaP
and VCaP > 22Rv1 > DU145 and PC3. Cell cycle analysis by flow cytometry
demonstrated that enzalutamide induces G1 arrest in LNCaP and DU145 cells
and G2/M arrest in PC3 cells. PI-3K inhibition induces S arrest in LNCaP
and DU145 and G2/M arrest in PC3 cells. The combination of enzalutamide
plus PI-3K inhibition enhanced S arrest in LNCaP while in DU145 and PC3,
G0/G1 arrest was prominent. PI-3K SMI plus enzalutamide completely
inhibited pAkt308/473, pS6 and p4EBP1 in LNCaP cells, pAkt473 in PC3
cells and pS6 and p4EBP1 in 22Rv1 cells. Enzalutamide alone or in
combination with PI-3K inhibition also suppressed AR expression in 22Rv1
cells. A 22Rv1 mouse xenograft model is evaluating safety and efficacy of
the combination. This is a novel therapeutic strategy for CRPC patients
to be evaluated in a clinical trial.

