Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Elevated serum free light chains and risk of non-Hodgkin lymphoma
and the subtype follicular lymphoma in a prospective cohort study


Background: Serum free light chains (FLC) are plausible biomarkers
associated with risks of Hodgkin and non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) or its
subtypes.Methods: We investigated the relationship between free light
chains and the risks of non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) with a particular
focus on two major subtypes - diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) and
follicular lymphoma (FL) using samples from the prospective Prostate,
Lung, Colorectal and Ovarian (PLCO) Cancer Screening Trial. Kappa and
lambda free light chains were analyzed in 292 incident NHL cases
[including 62 DLBCL, 45 FL and 122 chronic lymphocytic leukemia/small
lymphocytic lymphoma (CLL/SLL) cases] and 292 controls
individually-matched to cases on age, sex, race, study center, and date
of baseline blood draw. Conditional logistic regression was performed to
compute the odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs). Impact
of follow-up time from blood collection to case diagnosis was evaluated
by stratifying on 1-4 and 5-10 years of follow-up in cases and the
matched controls.Results: Elevated kappa and/or lambda FLC above the
upper limit of normal (ULN) were found to be significantly associated
with risks of overall NHL [OR(95% CI): 1.74(1.04-2.90)]. Further analysis
on risk of NHL by FLC divided into quartiles based on the distribution in
controls showed a stronger dose-response relationship with lambda FLC
(ptrend=0.034, adjusted for kappa FLC) than kappa FLC (ptrend=0.15,
adjusted for lambda FLC). Lambda FLC also showed a stronger relationship
with risk of NHL in 5-10 follow-up years [OR(95% CI): 3.11(1.26-7.66) and
3.58(1.36-9.40) for the second highest and the highest vs. lowest
quartile, respectively, ptrend=0.0097, adjusted for kappa FLC] in
contrast to 1-4 years (ptrend=0.95, adjusted for kappa FLC). Though the
clinical definition of abnormal level did not show an association with
FL, likely due to small numbers, there was a strong dose-response
relationship between quartiles of lambda FLC and risk of FL [OR(95% CI)
for highest vs. lowest quartile: 14.51(2.58-81.54), ptrend=0.0054]. No
significant associations were observed between FLC and DLBCL. We also
found that elevated kappa FLC was associated with CLL/SLL [OR(95% CI) for
highest vs. lowest quartile: 1.92(0.85-4.35), ptrend=0.019], consistent
with findings from a previous report from this study.Conclusion: These
findings suggest that immune activation precedes development of
clinically apparent FL.

