Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chemoresistance acquisition by ovarian adenocarcinoma cells due to
microenvironment


Epithelial Ovarian Carcinoma is characterized by high frequency of
recurrence (70% of patients) and carboplatin resistance acquisition. We
recently showed that Carcinoma-Associated-Mesenchymal Stem Cells (CA-MSC)
are involved in ovarian tumor growth via the facilitation of angiogenesis
in the tumor site as well as in ovarian cancer chemoresistance
acquisition. Our aim is to identify the mechanisms by which CA-MSC
activate tumor cells signaling pathway for both effects. First we showed
that factors released by CA-MSC are able to induce angiogenic cytokines
(IL-6, IL-8 and VEGF) synthesis by tumor cells in a cell line specific
way. Second, CA-MSC are able to attract and activate macrophages into a
M2 TAM like phenotype and allow them to secrete a huge quantity of
pro-angiogenic cytokines, favorable to tumor progression of all the
associated ovarian adenocarcinoma cells tested. Third, factors released
by CA-MSC protect adenocarcinoma cells from carboplatin-induced apoptosis
by inhibiting the activation of effector caspases 3 and 7, inducing the
activation of PI3K/Akt pathway signalling and the phosphorylation of the
downstream target XIAP (caspase inhibitor from IAP family). XIAP
depletion by siRNA strategy or inhibitors permitted to restore
carboplatin-induced apoptosis in ovarian cancer cells stimulated by
CA-MSC conditioned medium . Our results suggested targeting factors
released by CA-MSC could be of interest in ovarian cancer therapy.Note:
This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

