Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Proteomics signature of lack of retinoic acid signal surveillance
at early breast cancer stages


Endogenous retinoic acid (RA), the bioactive derivative of Vitamin A, is
necessary for breast acinar morphogenesis. One of the hallmarks of early
stage breast cancer, such as ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS), is the
inability to respond to RA morphogenetic action, which results in the
uncontrolled growth of the mammary duct luminal cells. By imaging
endogenous RA signaling during normal and aberrant breast acinar
development in three dimensional (3D) culture, we found that the
inability to form the acinar lumen can be traced to lack of activation of
the RA receptor alpha (RARA) genomic function by endogenous RA variation.
We further found that aberrant acinar morphogenesis, regardless of the
causing factors, is marked by a distinct protein signature, which
includes the upregulation of Annexin A8 (ANXA8). Forced expression of
ANXA8 in breast epithelial cells was sufficient to disrupt 3D acinar
architecture. Moreover, by screening DCIS tissue microarrays (TMAs), we
found that ANXA8 expression correlates with tumor grade and stage. Thus,
further development of this proteomics signature indicative of lack RA
signal surveillance is expected to assist in the early detection of
initial breast cancer stages.This work was funded by R01 CA127614, the
Friends for an Earlier Breast Cancer Test Foundation, and the Terri
Brodeur Breast Cancer Foundation.

