Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor cells express genome-derived DNA in the cytosol


Type I interferons (IFNs) are secreted by infected cells in response to
the recognition of nucleic acids. DNA damage and the ensuing DNA damage
response also induce the expression of IFNs by poorly understood
mechanisms. Here we show the presence of extramitochondrial
single-stranded (ss) and double-stranded (ds) DNA in the cytosol of mouse
and human tumor cells. The DNA only partially co-localized with
autophagosomes, stress granules or lysosomes, but a majority was
associated with mitochondria. Genotoxic agents increased the amount of
DNA in the cytosol of tumor cells with low levels of constitutive
cytosolic DNA. Cloning of ssDNA and dsDNA present in the cytosol of mouse
tumor cells showed that at least some of the cytosolic DNA is derived
from unique genomic loci. Cloned cytosolic DNA sequences often contained
genomic retroelements. In silico analysis of the cloned DNA indicated
that cytosolic DNA is predicted to form putative triplex DNA structures.
Overexpression of Rnaseh1, which degrades intermolecular triplex
structures called R-loops, reduced the levels of cytosolic ssDNA and
dsDNA, while overexpression of Trex1, the major 3-5 DNA exonuclease,
decreased the amount of cytosolic ssDNA but not dsDNA. Upregulation of
IFNs in response to genotoxic agents was impaired in cells expressing
Rnaseh1 or Trex1. In summary, we provide evidence that DNA damage in
tumor cells induces the accumulation of genomic DNA in the cytosol and
the production of type I IFNs in many tumor cells, which may contribute
to immunosurveillance of cancers.

