Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phospho-MED1 mediates the transcriptional regulation of AR splice
variants in castration-resistant prostate cancer


The appearance of constitutively active androgen receptor splice variants
(AR-Vs) has been proposed as one of the causes of castration-resistant
prostate cancer (CRPC). Prior to treatment with enzalutamide or
abiraterone, around 20-30% of CRPC patients already have high levels of
AR-Vs in their metastases, especially ARv567es, and this portends a rapid
progression and shorter survival. However, the underlying mechanism of
AR-Vs in CRPC transcriptional regulation still remains unclear. A
distinct transcriptome enriched with cell cycle genes (like UBE2C) has
been associated with AR-Vs, which indicates the possibility of a
different transcriptional mechanism than that of wild type AR. In our
study, we performed co-immunoprecipitation, ChIP and luciferase reporter
assays to explore the components involved in ARv567es activated UBE2C
transcription. We found that (i) MED1 is necessary for ARv567es induced
UBE2C up-regulation and subsequent prostate cancer cell growth; (ii)
p-MED1 is recruited to ARv567es independent of full-length AR; (iii)
p-MED1 has higher recruitment to UBE2C promoter and enhancer regions in
the presence of ARv567es, (iv) ARv567es enhanced UBE2C transcription
could be blocked by silencing MED1; (v) ARv567es/p-MED1 signaling cross
talks with the PI3K-AKT pathway but not the MAPK pathway, and (vi) FoxA1
and histone methylation are involved in ARv567es/p-MED1 induced UBE2C
long range chromatin interactions. In summary, these data indicate that
p-MED1 serves as a key mediator in ARv567es transcriptional regulation
and suggests a mechanism by which AR-Vs promote the development and
progression of CRPC.

