Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hotspot mutation and fusion transcript detection from the same
non-small lung adenocarcinoma sample


The presence of certain chromosomal rearrangements and the subsequent
fusion gene derived from translocations has been implicated in a number
of cancers. Hundreds of translocations have been described in the
literature recently but the need to efficiently detect and further
characterize these chromosomal translocations is growing exponentially.
The two main methods to identify and monitor translocations, fluorescent
in situ hybridization (FISH) and comparative genomic hybridization (CGH)
are challenging, labor intensive, the information obtained is limited,
and sensitivity is rather low. Common sample types for these analyses are
biopsies or small tumors, which are very limited in material making the
downstream measurement of more than one analyte rather difficult;
obtaining another biopsy, using a different section or splitting the
sample can raise issues of tumor heterogeneity. The ability to study
mutation status as well as measuring fusion transcript expression from
the same sample is powerful because you're maximizing the information
obtained from a single precious sample and eliminating any sample to
sample variation. Here we describe the efficient isolation of two
valuable analytes, RNA and DNA, from the same starting sample without
splitting, followed by versatile and informative downstream analysis.
This methodology was applied to FFPE and degraded samples as well as
fresh tissues and cells. DNA and RNA were recovered from the same
non-small lung adenocarcinoma sample and both mutation analysis, as well
as fusion transcript detection was performed using the Ion Torrent PGM
platform on the same Ion 318 chip. Using 10ng of DNA and 10ng of RNA
input, we applied the Ion AmpliSeq Colon and Lung Cancer panel to analyze
over 500 COSMIC mutations in 22 genes and the Ion AmpliSeq RNA Lung
Fusion panel to detect 40 different fusion transcripts.

