Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clinicopathological roles of adiponectin receptor and leptin
receptor in endometrial carcinoma


Objectives:To clarify the roles of adiponectin receptor (AdipoR) and
leptin receptor (ObR) in endometrial carcinoma, expressions of AdipoR-1
and -2 and ObR in endometrial cancer were examined immunohistochemically
and relationships to clinicopathological implications were also
analyzed.Methods: Under the written informed consent, paraffin-embedded
tissues were obtained from 77 patients with endometrial carcinoma and
were stained immunohistochemically using antibodies against AdipoR-1,
AdipoR-2 and ObR.Results: AdipoR-1, AdipoR-2 and ObR were localized
predominantly in the cell membrane and cytoplasm of tumor cells and
normal endometrial cells. In 77 cases of endometrial cancer, positive
expression was observed in 46 cases (59.7%) for AdipoR-1, 47 cases
(61.0%) for AdipoR-2 and 33 cases (42.9%) for ObR. Expression of AdipoR-1
was observed more in stage I cases, G1 tumours, tumors with shallow
myometrial invasion, tumors negative for lymphovascular space
involvement, cases negative for adnexal invasion, and cases with no lymph
node metastasis. However, expressions of AdipoR-2 and ObR showed no
relationship to any clinicopathological factors. Kaplan-Meier analyses
revealed that progression-free and overall survivals were longer in cases
with positive AdipoR-1 expression compared with negative AdipoR-1
expression.Conclusion: Poor expression of AdipoR-1 thus appears to be
associated with tumour grade, myometrial invasion, adnexal invasion,
lymph-vascular space involvement and lymph-node metastasis, as well as
poor prognosis in endometrial cancer.

