Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Rare germline copy number variations in hereditary cutaneous
melanoma


Background: Melanoma is a highly aggressive skin cancer; approximately
10% of melanomas are caused by germline mutations, mainly affecting the
p16 isoform of the CDKN2A gene (responsible for up to 40% of the familial
melanoma). Although other genes exhibiting moderate to high penetrant
mutations have been recently associated with melanoma susceptibility,
such as CDK4, PALB2, MITF, and TERT promoter, the majority of the
melanoma susceptibility remains without a clear genetic etiology. Copy
number variations (CNVs) are a common class of structural variants of the
human genome, mainly impacting genes that mediate the interaction with
environment. However, many rare germline CNVs have been causally
associated with diseases, including mental impairment and cancer
predisposition.Objective: Aiming to identify new genes potentially
related to melanoma predisposition, 34 melanoma-prone patients negative
for CDKN2A/CDK4 mutations were investigated for rare germline
CNVs.Material and Methods: Patients - patients were ascertained at the A.
C. Camargo Cancer Center, Sao Paulo, Brazil; signed informed consents
were obtained from all patients. DNA samples from peripheral blood were
extracted from 34 unrelated probands fulfilling either the classical
criteria for familial melanoma syndrome or based on evidence of a strong
genetic predisposition (occurrence of 2 primary melanomas). These
patients had been previously tested negative for CDKN2A and CDK4 genes.
Methods - we performed evaluation of germline CNVs using the CytoSNP-850K
(Illumina), analyzing data in the BlueFuse Multi Software v3.2. Selected
CNVs were validated by real-time quantitative PCR (qPCR).Results: Among
the 34 patients, we detected rare CNVs in 9 of them, mainly large
duplications (>230kb) at 4q26-q27, 6p22.1, 8q23.1, 9p24.2, 10q22.3,
12p12.3 and 20p12.1, and deletions affecting 6p24.3 and 19p13.3. Four of
these changes in DNA copy number were validated by qPCR using probes for
genes mapped within affected regions (ANXA11, ESF1, MGST1 and ANGPT1
genes).Conclusion: We found 26% of the melanoma-prone patients carrying
rare germline CNVs that encompass genes potentially associated with
melanoma predisposition. Our data suggest that melanoma susceptibility
could be originated by a broad spectrum of no recurrent genomic
alterations, and part of the genetic etiology of the hereditary melanoma
might reside in rare germline copy number changes. In addition to the
well-known melanoma genes, germline CNVs, here reported, disclosed other
candidate genes to melanoma predisposition deserving further
investigation.Funding: This work was supported by grants from FAPESP
(2012/21932-6) and the Brazilian National Institute of Science and
Technology in Oncogenomics (FAPESP 2008/57887-9, CNPq 573589/08-9).

