Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Piwi-like 1 and -4 gene transcript levels are associated with
clinicopathological parameters in renal cell carcinomas


Background: Piwi-like gene family members (Piwil 1-4) are considered stem
cell-associated genes/proteins. These are expressed predominantly in
germline cells, but are re-expressed in different tumors. Piwil 1-4 gene
expression has not previously been studied and correlated with
clinicopathological parameters in renal cell carcinomas (RCC).Material
and Methods: The Piwil 1-4 transcript levels were analyzed by
quantitative real-time PCR in 74 clear cell RCC (ccRCC) tissues and
corresponding normal tissues.Results: The transcript levels of Piwil 1, 2
and 4 were strongly and significantly correlated with each other, but not
with Piwil 3, in both the tumor tissues and the normal tissues (P
Background: Piwi-like gene family members (Piwil 1-4) are considered stem
cell-associated genes/proteins. These are expressed predominantly in
germline cells, but are re-expressed in different tumors. Piwil 1-4 gene
expression has not previously been studied and correlated with
clinicopathological parameters in renal cell carcinomas (RCC).Material
and Methods: The Piwil 1-4 transcript levels were analyzed by
quantitative real-time PCR in 74 clear cell RCC (ccRCC) tissues and
corresponding normal tissues.Results: The transcript levels of Piwil 1, 2
and 4 were strongly and significantly correlated with each other, but not
with Piwil 3, in both the tumor tissues and the normal tissues (P <
0.001; Spearman's rank test). Piwil 4 gene expression was significantly
higher in the ccRCC tissues than in the corresponding normal renal
tissues (P 64 years), the younger patients displayed significantly higher
levels of Piwil 1 mRNA in comparison to the older patients (P = 0.010;
Fisher's exact test). Interestingly, Piwil 1 expression was left-right
polarized in the normal tissues but not in the tumor tissues (P = 0.0005;
Fisher's exact test).Conclusions: Altogether, associations were
determined between the Piwi-like family member expression levels and
clinicopathological parameters of ccRCC, suggesting a potential role for
these genes/proteins in ccRCC diagnostics and tumorigenesis, as well as
in renal tissue embryology.

