Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SL01, an oral gemcitabine prodrug as a potent anticancer drug


SL01,dodecyl-3-((1-((2R,4R,5R)-3,3-difluoro-4-hydroxy-5-(hydroxymethyl)-tet
rahydrofuran-2-yl)-2-oxo-1,2-dihydropyrimidin-4-yl)carbamoyl)pyrazine-2-car
boxylate, is a gemcitabine prodrug synthesized by introducing the moiety
of 3-(dodecyloxycarbonyl)pyrazine-2-carbonyl at the N4-position on the
cytidine ring of gemcitabine. Our goal is to investigate the efficacy and
the safety of this oral prodrug as a potent oral anticancer agent, which
may supplant the use of gemcitabine in clinic. The evaluation was
accomplished by determining its inhibition of the growth of several
tumors with gemcitabine administrated by injection as a control, and also
by exploring its pharmacokinetics and its safety. In vivo, SL01 could
effectively inhibit the growth of NCI-H460 human non-small cell lung
cancer, MCF-7 human breast cancer, BxPC-3 human pancreatic cancer, ES-2
human bladder cancer, HepG2 human hepatocellular carcinoma cells and
HCT-116 human colon adenocarcinoma cells in xenografts nude mice without
loss their body weight significantly. After three weeks oral
administration at the dosage of 30 umol/kg, the inhibition rates were
58.0%, 66.5%, 41.5%, 77.1%, 41.5% and 63.1%, respectively. Molecular
analysis indicated that the high efficacy of SL01 was associated with its
ability in inducing apoptosis, as evidenced by increase of TUNEL staining
cells, activation of caspase-9, caspase-3 and cleaved poly ADP-ribose
polymerase in tumor tissues. Pharmacokinetics studies indicated that SL01
exhibited a longer mean retention time and half-life than that of
gemcitabine after oral administration in rat, further analysis showed
that the bioavailability of SL01 was 22.1%, which indicating that the
introduction of 3-(dodecyloxycarbonyl)pyrazine-2-carbonyl moiety to
gemcitabine could improve its bioavailability and reduce its first-pass
metabolism. The metabolism analysis suggested that SL01 could transform
into gemcitabine by hydrolyzing and then releasing into blood to keep the
relatively long steady-state concentrations. Toxicity studies indicated
that the LD50 was >1.4 g/kg for its acute toxicity, and the tolerated
dosage was 45 mg/kg for 4 weeks evaluation in rat. Based on these
results, SL01 is proposed as a potent oral anticancer agent, which may
supplant the use of gemcitabine in clinic. Acknowledgment: This project
was supported by the Ministry of Science and Technology of China
(2010ZX09401-302-2-07and 2011ZX09102-001-03).

