Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of LIN28 in atypical teratoid rhabdoid tumor (ATRT)
pathogenesis


Atypical teratoid rhabdoid tumor (ATRT) is a highly malignant brain tumor
developing almost exclusively in children. It belongs to the embryonal
brain tumor group which consists of primitive tumors recapitulating early
embryogenesis of nervous system. It is known that loss of INI protein
expression is the hallmark of ATRT pathogenesis. LIN28 is a key gene in
embryonic development and maintenance of pluripotency in stem cells.
Considering the primitive nature and young age onset of ATRT, LIN28 may
be an important co-player in ATRT pathogenesis.We explored the expression
and functional role of LIN28 in ATRT. In tumor tissues, LIN28 is highly
expressed in ATRT compared with medulloblastomas, another embroynal
tumor, whereas primary let-7 microRNA is down-regulated in ATRT. ATRT
also showed higher expression of CCND1 and MYC and lower expression of
CDKN1C. Knockdown of LIN28 with siRNA in ATRT cell lines resulted
decreased cell viability, proliferation, and migration capability.
Suppression of CCND1 and MYC expression and enhanced expression of CDKN1C
were also observed. Knockdown of LIN28 lead to decreased expression of
other pulripotency genes (OCT4 and NANOG) and signature of
mesenchymal-epithelial transition was observed after suppression of
LIN28. We then introduced wild-type INI1 into ATRT cells by transfection.
Restoration of INI in ATRT cell lines lead to decreased expression of
LIN28 and CCND1.These results showed that LIN28 is regulated by INI1 and
that loss of INI1 protein in ATRT results in unopposed expression of
LIN28 and related oncogenes such as CCND1, leading to tumorigenesis.
Therefore, the strategic role of LIN28 in ATRT may be utilized as an
important therapeutic target.

