Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The combination treatment of TNF- and poly (dA:dT) preactivated
hMSCs with doxorubicin enhances antitumorigenic activity


Our recent study showed that human mesenchymal stem/stromal cells (hMSCs)
were activated to express TRAIL by exposure to TNF-. These TRAIL
expressing hMSCs effectively induced apoptosis in MDA-MB-231 (MDA) cells
in vitro and in vivo. TRAIL was further up-regulated by RNA released by
dead MDA cells in a TLR3-dependent manner. Here, we show that the further
increase of TRAIL in hMSCs was also mediated by feed-forward stimulation
of AIM2 or IFIH1 by DNA and RNA released from dead MDA cells.
Poly(dA:dT), a synthetic ligand for AIM2, most effectively activated
hMSCs to express TRAIL and increased the killing efficacy of hMSCs in MDA
cells compared to TNF- or poly(I:C), a synthetic ligand for TLR3 or
IFIH1. Furthermore, weekly infusions of hMSCs pre-activated with TNF- and
poly(dA:dT) effectively inhibited the progression of lung tumor formation
in mice, compared to TNF- pre-activated hMSCs. Such anti-tumorigenic
effect of hMSCs upon activation with TNF- and poly(dA:dT) was enhanced
when combined with chemotherapeutic drug, doxorubicin and thereby, this
combination treatment significantly reduced the size of tumor burden in
mice compared to TNF- pre-activated hMSC treatment. These results suggest
that treatment of pre-activated hMSCs combined with doxorubicin enhances
their tumor-suppressive properties and may provide a potential novel
therapy for cancer treatment.

