Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation of extracellular microvesicles secretion by Rab27b in
glioblastoma multiforme


Background: Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most malignant form of
astrocytomas and they release a heterogeneous population of microvesicles
(MVEs) to the extracellular space. These MVEs are involved in
intercellular communication by carrying oncogenes, and miRNAs that
contribute with the tumor aggressiveness. However, the mechanisms of MVEs
biogenesis and secretion in GBM are poorly understood.Material and
Methods: Using five glioblastoma cell lines (LN-18, LN-229, U87MG, A-172
and U118MG) the vesicular biogenesis was characterize analyzing the
expression of markers involved in steps of this process by western
blotting. MVEs were also quantified using Nanoparticle Tracking Analysis
(NTA - NanoSight). Immunofluorescence was performed in these cell lines
to characterize the cellular distribution of Rab27b, which is responsible
for driving the multivesicular bodies to the plasma membrane.
Immunohistochemistry (IHC) measured Rab27b expression in a tissue
microarray with 60 GBMs samples and 13 non-neoplastic human brain tissues
used as controls. IHC intensity was scored from 1 to 3 (1 weak; 2,
moderate; 3, strong) and positive cells, from 0 to 3 (0, 0%; 1, 1-10%+;
2, 11-50%+; 3, 51%+). The final IHC score was represented by intensity +
positivity. Student's t-test was performed to compare Rab27b expression
in GBM and non neoplastic tissues. Kaplan-Meier and log-rank tests were
used to correlate overall survival with Rab27b expression.Results: The
cell lines showed a heterogeneous expression of markers involved in
vesicle biogenesis. LN-18 cells presented higher levels of Cavelin-1,
Flotillin -1, Alix and VPS4, pBackground: Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM)
is the most malignant form of astrocytomas and they release a
heterogeneous population of microvesicles (MVEs) to the extracellular
space. These MVEs are involved in intercellular communication by carrying
oncogenes, and miRNAs that contribute with the tumor aggressiveness.
However, the mechanisms of MVEs biogenesis and secretion in GBM are
poorly understood.Material and Methods: Using five glioblastoma cell
lines (LN-18, LN-229, U87MG, A-172 and U118MG) the vesicular biogenesis
was characterize analyzing the expression of markers involved in steps of
this process by western blotting. MVEs were also quantified using
Nanoparticle Tracking Analysis (NTA - NanoSight). Immunofluorescence was
performed in these cell lines to characterize the cellular distribution
of Rab27b, which is responsible for driving the multivesicular bodies to
the plasma membrane. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) measured Rab27b
expression in a tissue microarray with 60 GBMs samples and 13
non-neoplastic human brain tissues used as controls. IHC intensity was
scored from 1 to 3 (1 weak; 2, moderate; 3, strong) and positive cells,
from 0 to 3 (0, 0%; 1, 1-10%+; 2, 11-50%+; 3, 51%+). The final IHC score
was represented by intensity + positivity. Student's t-test was performed
to compare Rab27b expression in GBM and non neoplastic tissues.
Kaplan-Meier and log-rank tests were used to correlate overall survival
with Rab27b expression.Results: The cell lines showed a heterogeneous
expression of markers involved in vesicle biogenesis. LN-18 cells
presented higher levels of Cavelin-1, Flotillin -1, Alix and VPS4,
p<0.01, but lower levels of Rab27b, pBackground: Glioblastoma multiforme
(GBM) is the most malignant form of astrocytomas and they release a
heterogeneous population of microvesicles (MVEs) to the extracellular
space. These MVEs are involved in intercellular communication by carrying
oncogenes, and miRNAs that contribute with the tumor aggressiveness.
However, the mechanisms of MVEs biogenesis and secretion in GBM are
poorly understood.Material and Methods: Using five glioblastoma cell
lines (LN-18, LN-229, U87MG, A-172 and U118MG) the vesicular biogenesis
was characterize analyzing the expression of markers involved in steps of
this process by western blotting. MVEs were also quantified using
Nanoparticle Tracking Analysis (NTA - NanoSight). Immunofluorescence was
performed in these cell lines to characterize the cellular distribution
of Rab27b, which is responsible for driving the multivesicular bodies to
the plasma membrane. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) measured Rab27b
expression in a tissue microarray with 60 GBMs samples and 13
non-neoplastic human brain tissues used as controls. IHC intensity was
scored from 1 to 3 (1 weak; 2, moderate; 3, strong) and positive cells,
from 0 to 3 (0, 0%; 1, 1-10%+; 2, 11-50%+; 3, 51%+). The final IHC score
was represented by intensity + positivity. Student's t-test was performed
to compare Rab27b expression in GBM and non neoplastic tissues.
Kaplan-Meier and log-rank tests were used to correlate overall survival
with Rab27b expression.Results: The cell lines showed a heterogeneous
expression of markers involved in vesicle biogenesis. LN-18 cells
presented higher levels of Cavelin-1, Flotillin -1, Alix and VPS4,
p<0.01, but lower levels of Rab27b, p<0.0001. On the other hand, the
U87MG cells standed out by higher levels of Rab27b, compared to the other
cell lines studied, pBackground: Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the
most malignant form of astrocytomas and they release a heterogeneous
population of microvesicles (MVEs) to the extracellular space. These MVEs
are involved in intercellular communication by carrying oncogenes, and
miRNAs that contribute with the tumor aggressiveness. However, the
mechanisms of MVEs biogenesis and secretion in GBM are poorly
understood.Material and Methods: Using five glioblastoma cell lines
(LN-18, LN-229, U87MG, A-172 and U118MG) the vesicular biogenesis was
characterize analyzing the expression of markers involved in steps of
this process by western blotting. MVEs were also quantified using
Nanoparticle Tracking Analysis (NTA - NanoSight). Immunofluorescence was
performed in these cell lines to characterize the cellular distribution
of Rab27b, which is responsible for driving the multivesicular bodies to
the plasma membrane. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) measured Rab27b
expression in a tissue microarray with 60 GBMs samples and 13
non-neoplastic human brain tissues used as controls. IHC intensity was
scored from 1 to 3 (1 weak; 2, moderate; 3, strong) and positive cells,
from 0 to 3 (0, 0%; 1, 1-10%+; 2, 11-50%+; 3, 51%+). The final IHC score
was represented by intensity + positivity. Student's t-test was performed
to compare Rab27b expression in GBM and non neoplastic tissues.
Kaplan-Meier and log-rank tests were used to correlate overall survival
with Rab27b expression.Results: The cell lines showed a heterogeneous
expression of markers involved in vesicle biogenesis. LN-18 cells
presented higher levels of Cavelin-1, Flotillin -1, Alix and VPS4,
p<0.01, but lower levels of Rab27b, p<0.0001. On the other hand, the
U87MG cells standed out by higher levels of Rab27b, compared to the other
cell lines studied, p<0.0001. Interesting, our results pointed that MVEs
secretion is directed correlated to the expression pattern of Rab27b in
GBM cells. Indeed, LN-18 cells showed lower levels of MVEs secretion
(pBackground: Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most malignant form of
astrocytomas and they release a heterogeneous population of microvesicles
(MVEs) to the extracellular space. These MVEs are involved in
intercellular communication by carrying oncogenes, and miRNAs that
contribute with the tumor aggressiveness. However, the mechanisms of MVEs
biogenesis and secretion in GBM are poorly understood.Material and
Methods: Using five glioblastoma cell lines (LN-18, LN-229, U87MG, A-172
and U118MG) the vesicular biogenesis was characterize analyzing the
expression of markers involved in steps of this process by western
blotting. MVEs were also quantified using Nanoparticle Tracking Analysis
(NTA - NanoSight). Immunofluorescence was performed in these cell lines
to characterize the cellular distribution of Rab27b, which is responsible
for driving the multivesicular bodies to the plasma membrane.
Immunohistochemistry (IHC) measured Rab27b expression in a tissue
microarray with 60 GBMs samples and 13 non-neoplastic human brain tissues
used as controls. IHC intensity was scored from 1 to 3 (1 weak; 2,
moderate; 3, strong) and positive cells, from 0 to 3 (0, 0%; 1, 1-10%+;
2, 11-50%+; 3, 51%+). The final IHC score was represented by intensity +
positivity. Student's t-test was performed to compare Rab27b expression
in GBM and non neoplastic tissues. Kaplan-Meier and log-rank tests were
used to correlate overall survival with Rab27b expression.Results: The
cell lines showed a heterogeneous expression of markers involved in
vesicle biogenesis. LN-18 cells presented higher levels of Cavelin-1,
Flotillin -1, Alix and VPS4, p<0.01, but lower levels of Rab27b,
p<0.0001. On the other hand, the U87MG cells standed out by higher levels
of Rab27b, compared to the other cell lines studied, p<0.0001.
Interesting, our results pointed that MVEs secretion is directed
correlated to the expression pattern of Rab27b in GBM cells. Indeed,
LN-18 cells showed lower levels of MVEs secretion (p<0.001) while U87MG
cells presented higher MVEs secretion, pBackground: Glioblastoma
multiforme (GBM) is the most malignant form of astrocytomas and they
release a heterogeneous population of microvesicles (MVEs) to the
extracellular space. These MVEs are involved in intercellular
communication by carrying oncogenes, and miRNAs that contribute with the
tumor aggressiveness. However, the mechanisms of MVEs biogenesis and
secretion in GBM are poorly understood.Material and Methods: Using five
glioblastoma cell lines (LN-18, LN-229, U87MG, A-172 and U118MG) the
vesicular biogenesis was characterize analyzing the expression of markers
involved in steps of this process by western blotting. MVEs were also
quantified using Nanoparticle Tracking Analysis (NTA - NanoSight).
Immunofluorescence was performed in these cell lines to characterize the
cellular distribution of Rab27b, which is responsible for driving the
multivesicular bodies to the plasma membrane. Immunohistochemistry (IHC)
measured Rab27b expression in a tissue microarray with 60 GBMs samples
and 13 non-neoplastic human brain tissues used as controls. IHC intensity
was scored from 1 to 3 (1 weak; 2, moderate; 3, strong) and positive
cells, from 0 to 3 (0, 0%; 1, 1-10%+; 2, 11-50%+; 3, 51%+). The final IHC
score was represented by intensity + positivity. Student's t-test was
performed to compare Rab27b expression in GBM and non neoplastic tissues.
Kaplan-Meier and log-rank tests were used to correlate overall survival
with Rab27b expression.Results: The cell lines showed a heterogeneous
expression of markers involved in vesicle biogenesis. LN-18 cells
presented higher levels of Cavelin-1, Flotillin -1, Alix and VPS4,
p<0.01, but lower levels of Rab27b, p<0.0001. On the other hand, the
U87MG cells standed out by higher levels of Rab27b, compared to the other
cell lines studied, p<0.0001. Interesting, our results pointed that MVEs
secretion is directed correlated to the expression pattern of Rab27b in
GBM cells. Indeed, LN-18 cells showed lower levels of MVEs secretion
(p<0.001) while U87MG cells presented higher MVEs secretion, p<0.001. In
addition, Rab27b and CD63 (MVEs marker) were retained in the perinuclear
region of LN -18 cells while in U87MG cells both proteins were
distributed throughout the cytoplasm. Finally, Rab27b is overexpressed in
GBM samples when compared to non-neoplastic tissue and patients
presenting high expression of Rab27b showed lower survival
outcomes.Conclusions: Our findings suggest that Rab27b may be crucial to
the secretion of MVEs process in GBM. Furthermore, the overexpression of
Rab27b in glioblastoma patients coincides with a poor prognostic
phenotype.Supported by So Paulo State Foundation (FAPESP).

