Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bone sialoprotein is an essential target in breast cancer skeletal
metastasis


Breast cancer is a leading cause of cancer related death in women due to
onset of metastasis. Bone metastasis is the most frequent complication
occurring in patients with advanced breast cancer and bone sialoprotein
(BSP) is related to this process. However, the underlying mechanisms are
not clear yet. Therefore, the aim of the study was to analyze BSP
functions in greater detail and to decipher its signaling pathways
contributing to bone metastasis.To that purpose a combination of the
tetracycline-controlled transcription activation system (Tet-Off system)
and RNA interference was used to initiate and maintain the conditional
knockdown of BSP for any intended period. This new technique was
established in MDA-MB-231 subclones by recombinase-mediated cassette
exchange. Additionally, the cell clones were equipped with the reporter
genes mCherry and firefly luciferase for testing their regulative
properties and following their fate. In absence of doxycycline, the
expression of a miRNA targeting BSP was activated and after six days of
BSP knockdown the ensuing cellular, metastatic or molecular properties
were monitored by fluorescent microscopy, flow cytometry analysis, assays
for proliferation, migration and colony formation, as well as expression
profiling analysis. Furthermore, the cell clones were examined in a nude
rat model for soft tissue and osteolytic lesions after 2 to 6 weeks of
miRNA treatment. The clones revealed good regulative properties to
doxycycline. Phenotypic changes indicating apoptosis were observed after
6 days of conditional knockdown which was characterized by up to 86%
decreased BSP levels and resulted in significant anti-proliferative,
anti-migratory and anti-clonogenic effects in vitro. Additionally, the
effect of miRNA-mediated BSP knockdown was assessed in vivo. Significant
decreases (p Breast cancer is a leading cause of cancer related death in
women due to onset of metastasis. Bone metastasis is the most frequent
complication occurring in patients with advanced breast cancer and bone
sialoprotein (BSP) is related to this process. However, the underlying
mechanisms are not clear yet. Therefore, the aim of the study was to
analyze BSP functions in greater detail and to decipher its signaling
pathways contributing to bone metastasis.To that purpose a combination of
the tetracycline-controlled transcription activation system (Tet-Off
system) and RNA interference was used to initiate and maintain the
conditional knockdown of BSP for any intended period. This new technique
was established in MDA-MB-231 subclones by recombinase-mediated cassette
exchange. Additionally, the cell clones were equipped with the reporter
genes mCherry and firefly luciferase for testing their regulative
properties and following their fate. In absence of doxycycline, the
expression of a miRNA targeting BSP was activated and after six days of
BSP knockdown the ensuing cellular, metastatic or molecular properties
were monitored by fluorescent microscopy, flow cytometry analysis, assays
for proliferation, migration and colony formation, as well as expression
profiling analysis. Furthermore, the cell clones were examined in a nude
rat model for soft tissue and osteolytic lesions after 2 to 6 weeks of
miRNA treatment. The clones revealed good regulative properties to
doxycycline. Phenotypic changes indicating apoptosis were observed after
6 days of conditional knockdown which was characterized by up to 86%
decreased BSP levels and resulted in significant anti-proliferative,
anti-migratory and anti-clonogenic effects in vitro. Additionally, the
effect of miRNA-mediated BSP knockdown was assessed in vivo. Significant
decreases (p < 0.03) and even complete remissions of soft tissue and
osteolytic lesions were found following 3 and 6 weeks of miRNA treatment
by bioluminescence and magneting resonance imaging, as well as volume
computed tomography. The microarray data showed modulated expression in
1.3% of all genes, thus hinting to specific effects in response to BSP
knockdown. These genes included increased expression of endoplasmic
reticulum stress and apoptosis related genes (ATF3, CHOP), of
transcription factor c-FOS, of the gene related to breast epithelial
differentiation (ID2) and the tumor suppressor gene EGR1.Conversely,
there was suppression of metastasis associated genes (CD44, IL11). These
findings were confirmed by western blot for induction of intrinsic and
extrinsic apoptotic pathways as shown by cleavage of caspases 8, 9, 3 and
7, and of PARP, as well as the upregulation of ATF3, DDIT3 (CHOP), c-FOS,
ID2 and CD44.In conclusion, the role of BSP in the development of
skeletal metastasis has been defined more precisely and renders this
protein an attractive target in the treatment of this disease.

