Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: LYN is a new prognostic and therapeutic target in non-small cell
lung cancer


SRC family kinases (SFKs) have a strong rationale as a clinical strategy
in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Unfortunately, the reviewed study
showed disappointing activity of SFK inhibitor dasatinib in molecularly
unselected patient cohort. Therefore, the studies in NSCLC should be
investigated to identify patients more likely to benefit from dasatinib
either as monotherapy or in combination with other agents. Here, we
considered that LYN may play specific roles in lung cancer and therefore
analysed survival prognosis according to the expression of LYN and the
effect of dasatinib on the inhibition of cell growth and LYN activity. We
evaluated LYN expression by immunohistochemistry on 446 NSCLCs using
paraffin-embedded tissues. Elevated LYN expression level of NSCLCs,
especially in adenocarcinoma, female, and non-smoker, affected poor
overall survival (OS, P=0.036). In lung adenocarcinoma cell lines, LYN
expression impacted on cell proliferation, migration and invasion.
Dasatinib treatment resulted in decreased cell viability in most of these
cell lines. Also, we found that dasatinib suppressed active tyrosine
phosphorylation of LYN. In the resistant cell lines, H23 and SK-LU-1,
which showed elevated epidermal growth factor (EGFR) and MET activities,
combined treatment of EGFR or MET inhibitor with dasatinib revealed the
synergistic effects on decreased cell viability. Our findings highly
suggest that LYN has potential as a new selected target molecule of SFKs
in the treatment of NSCLCs.

