Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A cell based bioluminescent reporter assay for rapid measuring
function of PD-1 or PD-L1 therapeutic antibodies


Programmed death-1(PD-1) and its ligand (PD-L1) are important
immunotherapy targets for cancer. PD-1 serves as a negative costimulatory
receptor on various cell types, including T and B cells as well as
myeloid-derived cells. Its ligand PD-L1 (B7-H1) is not expressed by
normal epithelial tissues, but it is aberrantly expressed on a wide array
of human cancers including melanoma, non-small cell lung carcinoma,
breast cancer, pancreatic cancer, etc. Engagement of PD-1 by its ligands
PD-L1 expressed on tumor cells associated with poorer prognosis by
disabling the host antitumor response. The most recent investigational
anti-PD-1 immunotherapy drugs such as nivolumab from BMS and
lambrolizumab (MK-3475) from Merck have all demonstrated significant
overall survival rate in patients with advanced melanoma.Here we
developed a cell based bioluminescent reporter assay that can be used for
rapid quantifying function of PD-1 or PD-L1 therapeutic antibodies as
measured by activation of NFAT signaling pathway. For this, Jurkat T-cell
line stably expressing NFAT-luciferase reporter and human PD-1 was
generated. Raji stably expressing human PD-L1 was generated as antigen
presenting cells (APC). by co-cultivating the two cell lines in the
present of CD3 and IgG, Raji cells fully activate Jurkat NFAT pathway via
CD28 binding to CD80 (B7-1) and CD86 (B7-2) endogenously expressed on
Raji cells. PD-1 signaling in Jurkat cells following engagement of PD-L1
ectopically expressed on Raji cells inhibits T cell function, and results
in NFAT pathway inhibition. Blockade of PD-L1 using anti-PD-L1 mAb
reversed NFAT pathway activation.

