Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of GADD45 (growth arrest DNA damage-inducible gene 45
beta) agonists for the treatment of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC)


Induction of GADD45 expression, which is associated with cellular stress
response and apoptosis regulation, in HCC cells was found to correlate
with sensitivity of sorafenib, the standard molecular targeted therapy
for advanced HCC. In this study, we use this GADD45 induction as a
screening platform to identify novel agents for HCC treatment from
sorafenib derivatives that lack RAF kinase inhibition activity. GADD45
expression in Huh-7 cells was measured by quantitative RT-PCR. Cell
viability was examined by the
3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) assay.
Apoptosis was examined by flow cytometry. Signal transduction pathways in
cells were assessed by western blotting. In vivo anti-tumor efficacy was
tested in mouse xenograft models using Huh7 and Huh7R cells, the latter
had acquired resistance to sorafenib. Pharmacokinetic studies were done
in Sprague-Dawley rat model. The compound SC-20, which had a
N-(4-(quinolin-4-yloxy)phenyl)benzamide scaffold, showed greater GADD45
induction than other derivatives. The nitro group on the quinolone ring
of SC-20 was considered important in GADD45 induction. SC-20 induced more
prominent apoptosis and inhibition of proliferation in Huh7 cells than
sorafenib, independent of MEK/ERK signaling activity in Huh7 cells. SC-20
showed more prominent GADD45 induction and better antitumor activity than
sorafenib in both Huh-7 and Huh7R xenograft models and good safety.
Pharmacokinetic studies indicated that SC-20 had long plasma half-life
(22.5 0.51 hours), low water solubility, high (> 99%) plasma protein
binding, and inhibited CYP2C9 and 2C19. GADD45 agonists warrant further
development for HCC treatment. (supported by NSC 101-2325-B-002 -039, NSC
101-2321-B-002 -014, NSC 102-2325-B-002 -038)

