Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Geranylgeranylation signals to the hippo pathway for breast cancer
cell proliferation and migration


Protein geranylgeranylation (GGylation) is an important biochemical
process for cellular localization of many signaling molecules including
Rho and Rab small GTPases and heterotrimeric GTPase gamma subunits.
Previous studies have shown that GGylation is essential for cancer cell
survival. However, the molecular mechanism mediating the cell survival
effect remains elusive. Here we show that the hippo pathway is the
downstream pathway of GGylation in breast cancer cells. Inhibition of
GGylation enhanced phosphorylation of Mst1, Mst2 and Lats1 kinases, and
eliminated LPA-induced activation of Yap and Taz and the hippo
pathway-dependent transcription of Cyr61 and CTGF. We have demonstrated
that the inhibitory effects of atorvastatin, an inhibitor of the
biosynthesis of geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate (GGPP), and GGTI-298, an
inhibitor of geranylgeranyltransferase I (GGTase I), on cell
proliferation and migration are dependent on the hippo pathway in the
breast cancer cells. In addition, knockdown of Yap and Taz produced the
similar inhibitory effect on the cell proliferation and migration to that
of atorvastatin and GGTI-298, suggesting the functional correlation
between GGylation and the hippo signaling. Thus, our studies have
demonstrated that the hippo pathway mediates the GGylation-dependent
cancer cell survival and migration.

