Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genomic instability and telomere characteristics as predictive
biomarkers of therapeutic response in triple-negative breast cancer


Background. Triple negative breast cancers (TNBC) represent about 15 % of
invasive breast carcinomas. These tumors are identified in clinical
practice according to their triple negative immunophenotype (estrogen
receptor, progesterone receptor and HER2 negative). TNBC show aggressive
behavior and an unusual sarcoma-like pattern of metastasis.
Identification of predictive biomarkers is critical to optimal
therapeutic management of these tumors. TNBC are characterized by
increased genomic instability. These tumors present complex pattern of
numerous low-amplitude genomic gains and losses as well as shorter
telomeres.Aim. Identification of predictive biomarkers of response to
neoadjuvant chemotherapy in TNBC by evaluating telomeric parameters and
genomic instability.Methods. We studied 38 TNBC patients treated with
neoadjuvant chemotherapy according to the TVA protocol (FEC 100,
docetaxel, panitumumab). DNA and RNA were extracted from snap-frozen
tumor samples obtained before neoadjuvant therapy. The pathological
response to treatment was evaluated according to Chevallier's and
Sataloff's classifications and correlated with aCGH profiles (8x60K,
Agilent) and telomere characteristics, including telomere length (qPCR)
and expression (qRT-PCR) of telomerase (hTERT) and shelterin complex
genes (TRF1, TRF2, POT1, TPP1, RAP1 and TIN2).Results. Telomere
shortening and high hTERT expression were found in more aggressive tumors
according to TNM classification (PBackground. Triple negative breast
cancers (TNBC) represent about 15 % of invasive breast carcinomas. These
tumors are identified in clinical practice according to their triple
negative immunophenotype (estrogen receptor, progesterone receptor and
HER2 negative). TNBC show aggressive behavior and an unusual sarcoma-like
pattern of metastasis. Identification of predictive biomarkers is
critical to optimal therapeutic management of these tumors. TNBC are
characterized by increased genomic instability. These tumors present
complex pattern of numerous low-amplitude genomic gains and losses as
well as shorter telomeres.Aim. Identification of predictive biomarkers of
response to neoadjuvant chemotherapy in TNBC by evaluating telomeric
parameters and genomic instability.Methods. We studied 38 TNBC patients
treated with neoadjuvant chemotherapy according to the TVA protocol (FEC
100, docetaxel, panitumumab). DNA and RNA were extracted from snap-frozen
tumor samples obtained before neoadjuvant therapy. The pathological
response to treatment was evaluated according to Chevallier's and
Sataloff's classifications and correlated with aCGH profiles (8x60K,
Agilent) and telomere characteristics, including telomere length (qPCR)
and expression (qRT-PCR) of telomerase (hTERT) and shelterin complex
genes (TRF1, TRF2, POT1, TPP1, RAP1 and TIN2).Results. Telomere
shortening and high hTERT expression were found in more aggressive tumors
according to TNM classification (P< 0.04), and hTERT expression was also
highly correlated with an increased tumor size (P= 0.0058). Short
telomeres were strongly associated with incomplete histological response
to neoadjuvant therapy according to Chevallier's (P= 0.0004) and
Sataloff's classifications, (P= 0.0007). hTERT expression was
significantly increased in cases with incomplete response (PBackground.
Triple negative breast cancers (TNBC) represent about 15 % of invasive
breast carcinomas. These tumors are identified in clinical practice
according to their triple negative immunophenotype (estrogen receptor,
progesterone receptor and HER2 negative). TNBC show aggressive behavior
and an unusual sarcoma-like pattern of metastasis. Identification of
predictive biomarkers is critical to optimal therapeutic management of
these tumors. TNBC are characterized by increased genomic instability.
These tumors present complex pattern of numerous low-amplitude genomic
gains and losses as well as shorter telomeres.Aim. Identification of
predictive biomarkers of response to neoadjuvant chemotherapy in TNBC by
evaluating telomeric parameters and genomic instability.Methods. We
studied 38 TNBC patients treated with neoadjuvant chemotherapy according
to the TVA protocol (FEC 100, docetaxel, panitumumab). DNA and RNA were
extracted from snap-frozen tumor samples obtained before neoadjuvant
therapy. The pathological response to treatment was evaluated according
to Chevallier's and Sataloff's classifications and correlated with aCGH
profiles (8x60K, Agilent) and telomere characteristics, including
telomere length (qPCR) and expression (qRT-PCR) of telomerase (hTERT) and
shelterin complex genes (TRF1, TRF2, POT1, TPP1, RAP1 and TIN2).Results.
Telomere shortening and high hTERT expression were found in more
aggressive tumors according to TNM classification (P< 0.04), and hTERT
expression was also highly correlated with an increased tumor size (P=
0.0058). Short telomeres were strongly associated with incomplete
histological response to neoadjuvant therapy according to Chevallier's
(P= 0.0004) and Sataloff's classifications, (P= 0.0007). hTERT expression
was significantly increased in cases with incomplete response (P< 0.04).
Among shelterin complex genes, TRF2 and TPP1 overexpression was found in
more aggressive TNBC (according to TNM classification and SBR grading,
PBackground. Triple negative breast cancers (TNBC) represent about 15 %
of invasive breast carcinomas. These tumors are identified in clinical
practice according to their triple negative immunophenotype (estrogen
receptor, progesterone receptor and HER2 negative). TNBC show aggressive
behavior and an unusual sarcoma-like pattern of metastasis.
Identification of predictive biomarkers is critical to optimal
therapeutic management of these tumors. TNBC are characterized by
increased genomic instability. These tumors present complex pattern of
numerous low-amplitude genomic gains and losses as well as shorter
telomeres.Aim. Identification of predictive biomarkers of response to
neoadjuvant chemotherapy in TNBC by evaluating telomeric parameters and
genomic instability.Methods. We studied 38 TNBC patients treated with
neoadjuvant chemotherapy according to the TVA protocol (FEC 100,
docetaxel, panitumumab). DNA and RNA were extracted from snap-frozen
tumor samples obtained before neoadjuvant therapy. The pathological
response to treatment was evaluated according to Chevallier's and
Sataloff's classifications and correlated with aCGH profiles (8x60K,
Agilent) and telomere characteristics, including telomere length (qPCR)
and expression (qRT-PCR) of telomerase (hTERT) and shelterin complex
genes (TRF1, TRF2, POT1, TPP1, RAP1 and TIN2).Results. Telomere
shortening and high hTERT expression were found in more aggressive tumors
according to TNM classification (P< 0.04), and hTERT expression was also
highly correlated with an increased tumor size (P= 0.0058). Short
telomeres were strongly associated with incomplete histological response
to neoadjuvant therapy according to Chevallier's (P= 0.0004) and
Sataloff's classifications, (P= 0.0007). hTERT expression was
significantly increased in cases with incomplete response (P< 0.04).
Among shelterin complex genes, TRF2 and TPP1 overexpression was found in
more aggressive TNBC (according to TNM classification and SBR grading, P<
0.05), but there was no correlation with pathological response. aCGH data
indicated that genomic instability in non-responders was mainly
represented by genomic gains. In particular, cases with incomplete
therapeutic responses showed significantly larger size of gains than
cases with complete responses. (P= 0.0089). Short telomeres were also
associated with larger gains of genomic material (P= 0.0067). Of note,
telomere shortening has been previously described as one of the
mechanisms of genomic gains and amplifications.Conclusions. Telomere
shortening and hTERT overexpression were observed in resistant TNBC.
Genomic profile of non-responding tumors was characterized by larger
genomic gains. Telomere length, hTERT expression and genomic instability
profiles may represent predictive biomarkers of response to neoadjuvant
chemotherapy in TNBC.

