Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Real-time FUCCI imaging of cell cycle phase in tumors demonstrates
why cancer chemotherapy is not effective in solid cancers


The phase of the cell cycle can determine whether a cancer cell can
respond to a given drug. The present report describes technology to
monitor real-time cell cycle dynamics of cancer cells throughout a live
tumor in vivo using a fluorescence ubiquitination cell cycle indicator
(FUCCI). In nascent tumors in nude mice, approximately 30% of the cells
in the center of the tumor are in G0/G1 and 70% in S/G2/M. In contrast in
an established tumor, approximately 90% of cancer cells in the center are
in G0/G1 phase. Similarly, approximately 75% of cancer cells far from
(>100 m) tumor blood vessels are in G0/G1. Longitudinal real-time imaging
demonstrated that cytotoxic agents killed only proliferating cancer cells
at the surface of tumors and, in contrast, had little effect on quiescent
cancer cells that are the vast majority of an established tumor. Moreover
resistant quiescent cancer cells that moved to the tumor surface
restarted cycling after the cessation of chemotherapy. Most drugs
currently in clinical use target cancer cells in S/G2/M which our results
show are a small minority in established tumors, thereby accounting, at
least in part, for poor efficacy of cytotoxic drugs in solid cancer. Our
results also suggest that drugs that target quiescent cancer cells are
urgently needed.

