Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of ATM in lytic infection of EBV in nasopharyngeal
epithelial cells


Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), a type of oncogenic herpesvirus, is associated
with human malignancies. Previous studies have shown that reactivation of
EBV in infected cells induces ATM-dependent DNA damage response (DDR).
The functional role and involvement of ATM activation during lytic
induction remains obscure. In this study, the essential role of ATM for
viral DNA replication was examined in EBV-infected nasopharyngeal
epithelial cells. Induction of lytic EBV infection triggers ATM
activation and localization of DDR proteins at the viral replication
compartments. Suppression of ATM activity using siRNA approach or
specific chemical inhibitor diminished EBV DNA replication and production
of infectious virion in EBV-infected cells induced to undergo lytic
infection. Phosphorylation of Sp1 is a downstream event of ATM
activation. The phosphorylation of Sp1 at serine 101 residue is crucial
in promoting the accretion of EBV replication proteins at the replication
compartment to facilitate viral DNA replication. Depletion of Sp1
suppresses viral DNA replication and localization of EBV replication
proteins to the replication compartments. Our studies support an
important role of ATM activation in lytic infection of EBV.
Phosphorylation of Sp1 is an essential process mediating the recruitment
of EBV replication protein to replication compartments. Our study
highlights the importance of DDR pathway in lytic infection of EBV and
suggests the potential application of specific DDR inhibitors to control
the EBV replication in infected cells.Funding support: Research Grant
Council of Hong Kong (GRF #779312 & 779713; AoE/M-06/08).Note: This
abstract was not presented at the meeting.

