Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gene and miRNA expression networks specific to never smoker lung
adenocarcinoma


While smoking is well recognized as a major risk factor for lung cancer,
there is a growing incidence of lung cancer in never smokers which is in
turn the fifth leading cause of cancer-related death worldwide. Never
smokers (NS) who develop lung cancer exhibit disparate profiles of
somatic mutations and clinical responses to targeted therapy relative to
lung cancer arising in current or former ever smokers (ES), suggesting
that ES and NS lung cancer arise through distinct molecular processes. We
therefore sought to characterize mRNA and miRNA expression differences
specific to NS adenocarcinoma (AdC) to gain insights into the molecular
differences underlying NS and ES AdC carcinogenesis.Total RNA was
isolated from matched pairs of lung AdC tumor and adjacent histologically
normal tissue obtained from 22 subjects (8 NS, 14 ES). Large and small
RNA libraries were sequenced on the Illumina HiSeq 2000. Tumor-specific
gene and miRNA expression differences between NS and ES were identified
using linear mixed-effects ANOVA. MiRConnx was used to construct
miRNA-mRNA networks.We identified 120 mRNA and 15 miRNA whose expression
was modified uniquely in NS lung AdC. In the predicted miRNA-mRNA
regulatory network, additional analysis pinpointed modulation of the
development and cellular metabolism canonical pathway within genes
connected to several of the differentially expressed miRNA (GATHER,
pWhile smoking is well recognized as a major risk factor for lung cancer,
there is a growing incidence of lung cancer in never smokers which is in
turn the fifth leading cause of cancer-related death worldwide. Never
smokers (NS) who develop lung cancer exhibit disparate profiles of
somatic mutations and clinical responses to targeted therapy relative to
lung cancer arising in current or former ever smokers (ES), suggesting
that ES and NS lung cancer arise through distinct molecular processes. We
therefore sought to characterize mRNA and miRNA expression differences
specific to NS adenocarcinoma (AdC) to gain insights into the molecular
differences underlying NS and ES AdC carcinogenesis.Total RNA was
isolated from matched pairs of lung AdC tumor and adjacent histologically
normal tissue obtained from 22 subjects (8 NS, 14 ES). Large and small
RNA libraries were sequenced on the Illumina HiSeq 2000. Tumor-specific
gene and miRNA expression differences between NS and ES were identified
using linear mixed-effects ANOVA. MiRConnx was used to construct
miRNA-mRNA networks.We identified 120 mRNA and 15 miRNA whose expression
was modified uniquely in NS lung AdC. In the predicted miRNA-mRNA
regulatory network, additional analysis pinpointed modulation of the
development and cellular metabolism canonical pathway within genes
connected to several of the differentially expressed miRNA (GATHER,
p<0.001). Several of the differentially expressed mRNA and miRNA were
validated by qRT-PCR in samples from an independent cohort.In summary,
the construction of a miRNA-mRNA regulatory network has enabled us to
identify molecular alterations that may be specific to NS lung AdC.
Ultimately, these findings may serve to broaden the landscape of
personalized therapeutic and treatment options by identifying targetable
molecular interactions and therapeutic drug candidates for lung AdC in
never smokers.

