Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNA-375 impairs head and neck squamous cell carcinoma
invasion by suppressing invadopodia activity


Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is a highly invasive
cancer, with a five-year survival rate of around 50%. Our goal is to
improve patient outcome through understanding the mechanisms determining
HNSCC invasiveness. Our research group previously reported that miR-375
expression levels correlate with patient survival, recurrence and distant
metastasis. We have previously observed diminished HNSCC invasion in
vitro correlates with increased miR-375 expression. To assess whether the
miR-375 over-expressing transductant lines have reduced matrix
degradation properties, a fluorescent matrix degradation assay was used.
We have observed that miR-375 over-expression in HNSCC cells suppresses
extracellular matrix degradation. We further determined whether miR-375
over-expressing cells show reduced invadopodium formation and maturation.
We observed miR-375 expression in HNSCC cell lines reduces the number of
mature invadopodia, but does not affect levels of invadopodium
precursors. We examined the phosphorylation and total levels of key
invadopodia components (Tks5 and cortactin) to determine whether changes
in regulation or expression of these components may lead impaired matrix
degradation properties. We determined that miR-375 expression in HNSCC
cell lines does not reduce cellular levels of cortactin and Tks5, nor is
tyrosine phosphorylation of cortactin altered. To identify candidate
proteins regulated by miR-375, we are utilizing stable isotope labeling
of cells in cell culture (SILAC). Candidate target proteins are being
validated as targets of miR-375 and tested for involvement in the
diminished invasive properties of HNSCC as a result of miR-375
expression. In conclusion, increased miR-375 expression may suppress the
invasive properties of HNSCC through diminished invadopodia activity.

