Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A pilot study of FBRSL1 and melanoma: What's the connection


FBRSL1 is a novel protein and a member of a heterogeneous group of
proteins that form polycomb repressive complex 1 (PRC1). The canonical
function of PRC1 is monoubiquitination of H2A at lysine 119 which has
been associated with nucleotide excision repair of UV-induced DNA
lesions; however, the role FBRSL1 plays in the PRC1 complex is unknown.
Additionally, single nucleotide polymorphisms residing in FBRSL1 have
been shown to modify melanoma risk following indoor tanning. Since very
little is known about the function of FBRSL1, the connection between
FBRSL1 and melanoma is unclear. To investigate FBRSL1 expression in
relationship to melanoma, we performed an immunohistochemistry (IHC)
pilot study, using antibodies against both the long and short forms of
murine FBRSL1, on a small set of melanoma tumor and benign patient
tissues. Our results indicate that both murine antibodies recognize
FBRSL1 in human skin. The FBRSL1 amino acid sequence is highly conserved
between mice and humans, but only the long isoform has been validated in
humans indicating that further characterization of the human isoforms of
FBRSL1 is needed. Additionally, we found FBRSL1 expression only in
melanoma tissues, and not in benign tissues. Future directions include
validating these results in a larger group of patients using both
melanoma and benign tissues to confirm the relationship between FBRSL1
expression and melanoma. Ultimately, we will investigate the association
between FBRSL1 and patient characteristics that modify melanoma risk and
prognosis. We expect that these results will inform experiments to
elucidate the role of FBRSL1 in melanoma.

