Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Insulin-like growth factor-1 receptor (IGF-1R) inhibitors
downregulate p53 expression and upregulate the Warburg effect in
paediatric glioblastoma cells


Introduction: Previously we showed that Picropodophyllin (PPP) - an
inhibitor of Insulin-Like Growth Factor-1 Receptor (IGF-1R) promotes the
Warburg effect and this effect is associated with the downregulation of
p53 after 24h of PPP-treatment. Activation of IKK-NF-B, by loss of p53,
has been reported to increase glycolysis in cancer (1).Aims: To
understand the molecular mechanism that links p53 downregulation with
increased glycolysis after PPP treatment, we studied the changes in
glucose metabolism in 3 different IGF-1R inhibitors - PPP, OSI906 and
NVP-AEW541 (NVP) and related these changes to IKK-NF-B expression and
other molecular markers.Methods: KNS42 cells were treated for 24 hours
with 5xIC50 of either PPP (2.4M), OSI906 (220M) or NVP (40M). Culture
media from each treated group and controls were analyzed by 1H-MRS.
Lactate dehydrogenase-A (LDH-A), p53, pAKT, pS6, MCT-1, MCT-4, Glut-1,
pIKK and -actin (loading control) were examined by western blot (WB). LDH
enzyme activity was also measured in PPP- and NVP-treated cells.Results:
After 24 hours of OSI906, NVP and PPP treatment, decreases of 30%
(pIntroduction: Previously we showed that Picropodophyllin (PPP) - an
inhibitor of Insulin-Like Growth Factor-1 Receptor (IGF-1R) promotes the
Warburg effect and this effect is associated with the downregulation of
p53 after 24h of PPP-treatment. Activation of IKK-NF-B, by loss of p53,
has been reported to increase glycolysis in cancer (1).Aims: To
understand the molecular mechanism that links p53 downregulation with
increased glycolysis after PPP treatment, we studied the changes in
glucose metabolism in 3 different IGF-1R inhibitors - PPP, OSI906 and
NVP-AEW541 (NVP) and related these changes to IKK-NF-B expression and
other molecular markers.Methods: KNS42 cells were treated for 24 hours
with 5xIC50 of either PPP (2.4M), OSI906 (220M) or NVP (40M). Culture
media from each treated group and controls were analyzed by 1H-MRS.
Lactate dehydrogenase-A (LDH-A), p53, pAKT, pS6, MCT-1, MCT-4, Glut-1,
pIKK and -actin (loading control) were examined by western blot (WB). LDH
enzyme activity was also measured in PPP- and NVP-treated cells.Results:
After 24 hours of OSI906, NVP and PPP treatment, decreases of 30%
(p<0.01), 30% (pIntroduction: Previously we showed that Picropodophyllin
(PPP) - an inhibitor of Insulin-Like Growth Factor-1 Receptor (IGF-1R)
promotes the Warburg effect and this effect is associated with the
downregulation of p53 after 24h of PPP-treatment. Activation of IKK-NF-B,
by loss of p53, has been reported to increase glycolysis in cancer
(1).Aims: To understand the molecular mechanism that links p53
downregulation with increased glycolysis after PPP treatment, we studied
the changes in glucose metabolism in 3 different IGF-1R inhibitors - PPP,
OSI906 and NVP-AEW541 (NVP) and related these changes to IKK-NF-B
expression and other molecular markers.Methods: KNS42 cells were treated
for 24 hours with 5xIC50 of either PPP (2.4M), OSI906 (220M) or NVP
(40M). Culture media from each treated group and controls were analyzed
by 1H-MRS. Lactate dehydrogenase-A (LDH-A), p53, pAKT, pS6, MCT-1, MCT-4,
Glut-1, pIKK and -actin (loading control) were examined by western blot
(WB). LDH enzyme activity was also measured in PPP- and NVP-treated
cells.Results: After 24 hours of OSI906, NVP and PPP treatment, decreases
of 30% (p<0.01), 30% (p<0.01) and 50% (pIntroduction: Previously we
showed that Picropodophyllin (PPP) - an inhibitor of Insulin-Like Growth
Factor-1 Receptor (IGF-1R) promotes the Warburg effect and this effect is
associated with the downregulation of p53 after 24h of PPP-treatment.
Activation of IKK-NF-B, by loss of p53, has been reported to increase
glycolysis in cancer (1).Aims: To understand the molecular mechanism that
links p53 downregulation with increased glycolysis after PPP treatment,
we studied the changes in glucose metabolism in 3 different IGF-1R
inhibitors - PPP, OSI906 and NVP-AEW541 (NVP) and related these changes
to IKK-NF-B expression and other molecular markers.Methods: KNS42 cells
were treated for 24 hours with 5xIC50 of either PPP (2.4M), OSI906 (220M)
or NVP (40M). Culture media from each treated group and controls were
analyzed by 1H-MRS. Lactate dehydrogenase-A (LDH-A), p53, pAKT, pS6,
MCT-1, MCT-4, Glut-1, pIKK and -actin (loading control) were examined by
western blot (WB). LDH enzyme activity was also measured in PPP- and
NVP-treated cells.Results: After 24 hours of OSI906, NVP and PPP
treatment, decreases of 30% (p<0.01), 30% (p<0.01) and 50% (p<0.001) in
cell number were found respectively, when compared with their respective
controls. 1H-MRS analysis showed increases in glucose uptake
(pIntroduction: Previously we showed that Picropodophyllin (PPP) - an
inhibitor of Insulin-Like Growth Factor-1 Receptor (IGF-1R) promotes the
Warburg effect and this effect is associated with the downregulation of
p53 after 24h of PPP-treatment. Activation of IKK-NF-B, by loss of p53,
has been reported to increase glycolysis in cancer (1).Aims: To
understand the molecular mechanism that links p53 downregulation with
increased glycolysis after PPP treatment, we studied the changes in
glucose metabolism in 3 different IGF-1R inhibitors - PPP, OSI906 and
NVP-AEW541 (NVP) and related these changes to IKK-NF-B expression and
other molecular markers.Methods: KNS42 cells were treated for 24 hours
with 5xIC50 of either PPP (2.4M), OSI906 (220M) or NVP (40M). Culture
media from each treated group and controls were analyzed by 1H-MRS.
Lactate dehydrogenase-A (LDH-A), p53, pAKT, pS6, MCT-1, MCT-4, Glut-1,
pIKK and -actin (loading control) were examined by western blot (WB). LDH
enzyme activity was also measured in PPP- and NVP-treated cells.Results:
After 24 hours of OSI906, NVP and PPP treatment, decreases of 30%
(p<0.01), 30% (p<0.01) and 50% (p<0.001) in cell number were found
respectively, when compared with their respective controls. 1H-MRS
analysis showed increases in glucose uptake (p<0.01) and lactate
excretion (pIntroduction: Previously we showed that Picropodophyllin
(PPP) - an inhibitor of Insulin-Like Growth Factor-1 Receptor (IGF-1R)
promotes the Warburg effect and this effect is associated with the
downregulation of p53 after 24h of PPP-treatment. Activation of IKK-NF-B,
by loss of p53, has been reported to increase glycolysis in cancer
(1).Aims: To understand the molecular mechanism that links p53
downregulation with increased glycolysis after PPP treatment, we studied
the changes in glucose metabolism in 3 different IGF-1R inhibitors - PPP,
OSI906 and NVP-AEW541 (NVP) and related these changes to IKK-NF-B
expression and other molecular markers.Methods: KNS42 cells were treated
for 24 hours with 5xIC50 of either PPP (2.4M), OSI906 (220M) or NVP
(40M). Culture media from each treated group and controls were analyzed
by 1H-MRS. Lactate dehydrogenase-A (LDH-A), p53, pAKT, pS6, MCT-1, MCT-4,
Glut-1, pIKK and -actin (loading control) were examined by western blot
(WB). LDH enzyme activity was also measured in PPP- and NVP-treated
cells.Results: After 24 hours of OSI906, NVP and PPP treatment, decreases
of 30% (p<0.01), 30% (p<0.01) and 50% (p<0.001) in cell number were found
respectively, when compared with their respective controls. 1H-MRS
analysis showed increases in glucose uptake (p<0.01) and lactate
excretion (p<0.0001) in cells treated with the 3 IGF-1R inhibitors when
compared with their corresponding controls. Larger increases were
observed in the PPP-treated group when compared to the other 2 groups. In
all 3 treatments, WB showed decreases in p53 and pAkt, an increase in
Glut-1 and no change in MCT-1 expression. PPP-treated cells showed an
increase in pS6 but a decreased pS6 expression was shown in OSI906- and
NVP-treated cells. MCT-4 and pIKK expressions were higher in OSI906- and
NVP-treated cells, but unchanged in the PPP-treated cells. LDH enzymatic
activities were found to be significantly increased in PPP
(pIntroduction: Previously we showed that Picropodophyllin (PPP) - an
inhibitor of Insulin-Like Growth Factor-1 Receptor (IGF-1R) promotes the
Warburg effect and this effect is associated with the downregulation of
p53 after 24h of PPP-treatment. Activation of IKK-NF-B, by loss of p53,
has been reported to increase glycolysis in cancer (1).Aims: To
understand the molecular mechanism that links p53 downregulation with
increased glycolysis after PPP treatment, we studied the changes in
glucose metabolism in 3 different IGF-1R inhibitors - PPP, OSI906 and
NVP-AEW541 (NVP) and related these changes to IKK-NF-B expression and
other molecular markers.Methods: KNS42 cells were treated for 24 hours
with 5xIC50 of either PPP (2.4M), OSI906 (220M) or NVP (40M). Culture
media from each treated group and controls were analyzed by 1H-MRS.
Lactate dehydrogenase-A (LDH-A), p53, pAKT, pS6, MCT-1, MCT-4, Glut-1,
pIKK and -actin (loading control) were examined by western blot (WB). LDH
enzyme activity was also measured in PPP- and NVP-treated cells.Results:
After 24 hours of OSI906, NVP and PPP treatment, decreases of 30%
(p<0.01), 30% (p<0.01) and 50% (p<0.001) in cell number were found
respectively, when compared with their respective controls. 1H-MRS
analysis showed increases in glucose uptake (p<0.01) and lactate
excretion (p<0.0001) in cells treated with the 3 IGF-1R inhibitors when
compared with their corresponding controls. Larger increases were
observed in the PPP-treated group when compared to the other 2 groups. In
all 3 treatments, WB showed decreases in p53 and pAkt, an increase in
Glut-1 and no change in MCT-1 expression. PPP-treated cells showed an
increase in pS6 but a decreased pS6 expression was shown in OSI906- and
NVP-treated cells. MCT-4 and pIKK expressions were higher in OSI906- and
NVP-treated cells, but unchanged in the PPP-treated cells. LDH enzymatic
activities were found to be significantly increased in PPP (p<0.01) and
NVP (pIntroduction: Previously we showed that Picropodophyllin (PPP) - an
inhibitor of Insulin-Like Growth Factor-1 Receptor (IGF-1R) promotes the
Warburg effect and this effect is associated with the downregulation of
p53 after 24h of PPP-treatment. Activation of IKK-NF-B, by loss of p53,
has been reported to increase glycolysis in cancer (1).Aims: To
understand the molecular mechanism that links p53 downregulation with
increased glycolysis after PPP treatment, we studied the changes in
glucose metabolism in 3 different IGF-1R inhibitors - PPP, OSI906 and
NVP-AEW541 (NVP) and related these changes to IKK-NF-B expression and
other molecular markers.Methods: KNS42 cells were treated for 24 hours
with 5xIC50 of either PPP (2.4M), OSI906 (220M) or NVP (40M). Culture
media from each treated group and controls were analyzed by 1H-MRS.
Lactate dehydrogenase-A (LDH-A), p53, pAKT, pS6, MCT-1, MCT-4, Glut-1,
pIKK and -actin (loading control) were examined by western blot (WB). LDH
enzyme activity was also measured in PPP- and NVP-treated cells.Results:
After 24 hours of OSI906, NVP and PPP treatment, decreases of 30%
(p<0.01), 30% (p<0.01) and 50% (p<0.001) in cell number were found
respectively, when compared with their respective controls. 1H-MRS
analysis showed increases in glucose uptake (p<0.01) and lactate
excretion (p<0.0001) in cells treated with the 3 IGF-1R inhibitors when
compared with their corresponding controls. Larger increases were
observed in the PPP-treated group when compared to the other 2 groups. In
all 3 treatments, WB showed decreases in p53 and pAkt, an increase in
Glut-1 and no change in MCT-1 expression. PPP-treated cells showed an
increase in pS6 but a decreased pS6 expression was shown in OSI906- and
NVP-treated cells. MCT-4 and pIKK expressions were higher in OSI906- and
NVP-treated cells, but unchanged in the PPP-treated cells. LDH enzymatic
activities were found to be significantly increased in PPP (p<0.01) and
NVP (p<0.0001) treated groups, when compared with controls.Discussions
and Conclusion: Our data indicated that the observed increased Warburg
effect after IGF-1R inhibition is associated with increased Glut-1
expression, LDH activity and downregulation of p53 but the molecular
mechanism is different in PPP when compared to OSI906 and NVP-treated
cells. The increased Warburg effect after OSI906 and NVP treatment may be
driven by the activation of the IKK-NF-B pathway following the
downregulation of p53, whereas upregulation of pS6 was seen in the
PPP-treated cells. The activation of the mTOR-S6K pathway has been linked
with the reduction of p53 expression (2). Further investigation is needed
to examine why KNS42 cells have a different molecular response to PPP
compared with OSI906 and NVP treatment.1) Kawauchi et al., Nature Cell
Biology 30(9): 1792-5, 2007.2) Lai et al., EMBO 29: 2994-3006, 2010.

