Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A prospective study on oral contraceptive use and risk of
colorectal adenomas


Background: Most colorectal cancers (CRC) arise from colorectal adenomas.
The influence of reproductive factors on CRC, including oral
contraceptive (OC) use, has been examined for a number of years, but less
research is available on the role of OC use on adenomas. A better
understanding of this association will provide insight into the mechanism
through which hormones impact colorectal carcinogenesis.Objective: To
examine the association of OC use and colorectal adenomas using detailed
data from a large prospective cohort study with 32 yrs of follow-up
data.Design: The Nurses' Health Study was established in 1976 when
121,701 female registered nurses 30-55 yrs of age completed a mailed
questionnaire on medical history and lifestyle factors. We assessed OC
use every 2 yrs between 1976-1982 and categorized this use according to
ever (2 mo) and never use (reference), duration of use (never, 1,
>1-Background: Most colorectal cancers (CRC) arise from colorectal
adenomas. The influence of reproductive factors on CRC, including oral
contraceptive (OC) use, has been examined for a number of years, but less
research is available on the role of OC use on adenomas. A better
understanding of this association will provide insight into the mechanism
through which hormones impact colorectal carcinogenesis.Objective: To
examine the association of OC use and colorectal adenomas using detailed
data from a large prospective cohort study with 32 yrs of follow-up
data.Design: The Nurses' Health Study was established in 1976 when
121,701 female registered nurses 30-55 yrs of age completed a mailed
questionnaire on medical history and lifestyle factors. We assessed OC
use every 2 yrs between 1976-1982 and categorized this use according to
ever (2 mo) and never use (reference), duration of use (never, 1, >1-<2,
2-Background: Most colorectal cancers (CRC) arise from colorectal
adenomas. The influence of reproductive factors on CRC, including oral
contraceptive (OC) use, has been examined for a number of years, but less
research is available on the role of OC use on adenomas. A better
understanding of this association will provide insight into the mechanism
through which hormones impact colorectal carcinogenesis.Objective: To
examine the association of OC use and colorectal adenomas using detailed
data from a large prospective cohort study with 32 yrs of follow-up
data.Design: The Nurses' Health Study was established in 1976 when
121,701 female registered nurses 30-55 yrs of age completed a mailed
questionnaire on medical history and lifestyle factors. We assessed OC
use every 2 yrs between 1976-1982 and categorized this use according to
ever (2 mo) and never use (reference), duration of use (never, 1, >1-<2,
2-<5, 5-4-4-<10, 10-4-<10, 10-<15, 15+ yrs). Participants had to undergo
a lower bowel endoscopy during the study period to be eligible for the
current analyses. All colorectal adenoma cases identified at endoscopy
were included from 1986 (when endoscopies were first accessed) through
2010; cases were stratified by subsite (proximal, distal, rectal),
stage/size (small/early, large/advanced), and number of adenomas (1,
2+).Methods: Multivariable logistic regression models for clustered data
were used to estimate odds ratios [OR (95% CIs)]. Models were adjusted
for age, body mass index, height, physical activity, smoking, processed
and red meat, folate, calcium, total energy, alcohol, aspirin use, age at
first birth, parity, hormone therapy use/duration, family history of CRC,
time period, as well as endoscopy information including reason, number,
and yr since most recent.Results: Among 70,164 participants who had a
lower bowel endoscopy, 49% (N=34,329) reported never using OCs and 51%
(N=35,835) reported 2 mo of use. We recorded 2,950 never-users with an
adenoma compared to 3,075 ever-users. Ever OC use was associated with a
slight increase of small/early stage adenomas [OR=1.12 95% CI
(1.03-1.22)] but not with large/advanced stage adenomas or any other
category (e.g., number of adenomas). Duration of OC use was not
associated with adenomas but longer times since last OC use were
associated with increased odds for all of the adenoma outcomes [e.g.,
compared to never use, 15+ yrs since last use for all adenomas: OR=1.18
(1.08, 1.29)]. Shorter times since last OC use were inversely associated
[e.g., 4 yrs since last use for all adenomas: OR=0.76 (0.67,
0.86)].Conclusions: The null association between OC use and colorectal
adenomas may be more nuanced than initially described in the literature.
We found that OC use was associated with certain stages/sizes of
colorectal adenomas (e.g., small/early) and further exploration of the
time since last OC use associations are warranted. Support: P01CA87969,
T32CA09001, T32HD060454

