Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of the activity and the mechanism of action of
the new retinoid derivative ST5589 in pre-clinical models of lymphomas:
involvement of MYC and cell cycle genes


Innovative and effective treatments are necessary for lymphomas that are
common and still deadly cancers for many patients. Atypical retinoids
show cytotoxic activity in different pre-clinical tumor models even
though their mechanism of action is still largely unclear. Here, we
report activity and mechanistic data with ST5589 (adarotene derivative),
an active representative of this new class of agents (1), in pre-clinical
lymphoma models.Methods. Cell lines from diffuse large B-cell lymphoma
(DLBCL, n=17), mantle cell lymphoma (MCL, n=4), splenic marginal zone
lymphoma (SMZL, n=3) underwent 72 hr exposure to increasing doses of
ST5589 (Sigma Tau, Pomezia, IT) to assess anti-proliferative activity by
MTT assay. Apoptosis was assessed by Annexin-V/7-AAD staining. Gene
expression profiling (GEP) was done with Illumina HumanHT-12 Expression
BeadChips at baseline on all cell lines and, in triplicate, on 1 ABC-
(TMD8) and 1 GCB-DLBCL (DOHH2) cell line treated with 300 nM ST5589 or
DMSO for 8 hrs. Cell lines with IC50 Innovative and effective treatments
are necessary for lymphomas that are common and still deadly cancers for
many patients. Atypical retinoids show cytotoxic activity in different
pre-clinical tumor models even though their mechanism of action is still
largely unclear. Here, we report activity and mechanistic data with
ST5589 (adarotene derivative), an active representative of this new class
of agents (1), in pre-clinical lymphoma models.Methods. Cell lines from
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL, n=17), mantle cell lymphoma (MCL,
n=4), splenic marginal zone lymphoma (SMZL, n=3) underwent 72 hr exposure
to increasing doses of ST5589 (Sigma Tau, Pomezia, IT) to assess
anti-proliferative activity by MTT assay. Apoptosis was assessed by
Annexin-V/7-AAD staining. Gene expression profiling (GEP) was done with
Illumina HumanHT-12 Expression BeadChips at baseline on all cell lines
and, in triplicate, on 1 ABC- (TMD8) and 1 GCB-DLBCL (DOHH2) cell line
treated with 300 nM ST5589 or DMSO for 8 hrs. Cell lines with IC50 < than
the median were defined as sensitive. GEP/IC50 correlation was assessed
by Pearson correlation. Differential expression analysis was performed
with LIMMA, GSEA, Metacore.Results. Median IC50 was 235 nM (91-2652) for
all the cell lines without significant differences among histological
subtypes or between GCB- and ABC-DLBCL: DLBCL, 269 (97-2652); GCB-DLBCL
250, (97-1684); ABC-DLBCL, 531 (181-2625); MCL, 237 (91-401); SMZL, 144
(135-203). ST5589 induced apoptosis in 4/5 DLBCL cell lines (DOHH2, TMD8,
SU-DHL-2, VAL). GEP in two DLBCL treated with ST5589 or DMSO was
performed, and ST5589 significantly affected transcripts involved in
multiple cell cycle-related gene-sets. Aurora kinase A coding gene was
one of the most down-regulated.MYC translocation was associated with
lower IC50 (P 0.045) and higher number of responders (P 0.021).
Transcripts associated with resistance to ST5589 were significantly
enriched of genes involved in MYD88/TLR/STAT3 signaling and MAPK pathway,
while transcripts associated with sensitivity were enriched of MYC target
genes, genes high in Burkitt lymphoma, and involved in cellular
respiration, and proteoglycan biosynthesis.Conclusions. ST5589 showed
anti-proliferative and cytotoxic preclinical activity in lymphoma,
affecting cell-cycle regulation. While MYD88, TLR, STAT3 and MAPK
pathways activation correlated with reduced drug activity, MYC
deregulation was associated with sensitivity to ST5589. Our data,
together with direct cytotoxicity and immune-system mediated activity
reported for the parent compound adarotene ST1926 (2), make ST5589 worth
of further studies in MYC-driven lymphomas as a representative of the
innovative therapeutic class of atypical retinoids.References1 Giannini
et al. Bioorganic and Med Chemistry 2012, 20: 2405-152 Pisano et al.
Proceedings AACR 2004 Abstract #2075

