Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pharmacological stimulation of DLL1-Notch signaling as an
effective cancer immunotherapy


Our data demonstrated that in cancer, expression of Notch ligands is
selectively altered and Notch signaling in the hematopoietic compartment
is attenuated and associated with impaired anti-tumor immunity caused by
the aberrant T cell differentiation and function. Our important and
therapeutically relevant finding is that stimulation of DLL1-mediated
Notch signaling by systemic administration of soluble multivalent
(clustered) DLL1 efficiently restores Notch signaling in the
hematopoietic compartment. Such therapy strongly activates Notch
downstream signaling and variably modulates expression of Notch receptors
and ligands. Clustered DLL1 treatment results in significant enhancement
of tumor antigen-specific T cell immune responses and memory, decreased
proportion of regulatory T cells, remarkably increased tumor infiltration
by T cells, attenuated tumor vascularization, and suppression of tumor
growth. In an inducible model of lung tumor expressing L858R mutant EGFR
in lung epithelium, clustered DLL1 elicited robust anti-tumor immune
responses in concert with EGFR inhibition by erlotinib and produced
remarkably improved progression-free survival. It is also likely that
more efficient tumor killing and induction of T cell memory would
significantly delay tumor progression/recurrence. Activation of Notch
signaling by multivalent DLL1 in a panel of lung cancer cells in vitro
did not stimulate cells proliferative of colony-forming potential, but
rather demonstrated inhibitory effect in several cases. Pharmacological
stimulation of Notch by multivalent DLL1 might represent an efficient
strategy for enhancement of anti-tumor immunity and targeting multiple
mechanisms of tumor growth. Reagents based on the multivalent forms of
Notch ligands can be efficiently utilized for the therapeutic modulation
of Notch signaling.

