Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mitochondrial 22 tRNAs alterations in Iranian breast cancer
patients


Introduction: Mitochondrial dysfunction is related to the genesis of many
types of cancers, including breast cancer. Mitochondrial tRNA genes
perform several functions including processing and translation in which
are essential components of mitochondrial protein synthesis. Until now
only few somatic mitochondrial tRNA mutations have been reported in
cancer cells. The aim of this study was to find out the relationship
between mitochondrial DNA mutations and breast cancer.Patients and
Methods: In current this study, 22 mitochondrial tRNAs genes in 30
tumoral tissues and adjacent non-tumoral tissues of patients with breast
cancer and 100 blood samples of healthy controls were investigate using
PCR-Sequencing methods.Results and conclusions: From 30 breast cancer
cases, twelve genetic variations were found in 22 tRNA MtDNA. Six of
twelve (50%) were novel and remaining was polymorphism. Among new
variants, which incloding C1631A (tRNA Val), T1633A (tRNA Val), A5565G
(tRNA Trp), G5849A (tRNA Tyr) were at hetroplasmic state and remaining
which including C12187 (tRNA His) and A15948G (tRNA Thr) were at
homoplasmic. Among variants, A12308G, a polymorphic mutation in V-loop
(tRNALeu(CUN)), was found in 23% breast tumoral tissues (7 of 30) and
3%in healthy blood controls (3 of 100), indicating a statistically
significant association of the A12308G alteration between tumoral tissues
and controls(p Introduction: Mitochondrial dysfunction is related to the
genesis of many types of cancers, including breast cancer. Mitochondrial
tRNA genes perform several functions including processing and translation
in which are essential components of mitochondrial protein synthesis.
Until now only few somatic mitochondrial tRNA mutations have been
reported in cancer cells. The aim of this study was to find out the
relationship between mitochondrial DNA mutations and breast
cancer.Patients and Methods: In current this study, 22 mitochondrial
tRNAs genes in 30 tumoral tissues and adjacent non-tumoral tissues of
patients with breast cancer and 100 blood samples of healthy controls
were investigate using PCR-Sequencing methods.Results and conclusions:
From 30 breast cancer cases, twelve genetic variations were found in 22
tRNA MtDNA. Six of twelve (50%) were novel and remaining was
polymorphism. Among new variants, which incloding C1631A (tRNA Val),
T1633A (tRNA Val), A5565G (tRNA Trp), G5849A (tRNA Tyr) were at
hetroplasmic state and remaining which including C12187 (tRNA His) and
A15948G (tRNA Thr) were at homoplasmic. Among variants, A12308G, a
polymorphic mutation in V-loop (tRNALeu(CUN)), was found in 23% breast
tumoral tissues (7 of 30) and 3%in healthy blood controls (3 of 100),
indicating a statistically significant association of the A12308G
alteration between tumoral tissues and controls(p < 0.05).Our finding
indicate that , the A12308G alteration may increase the risk of breast
cancer through its impact on the tRNA structure result in mitochondrial
dysfunction. Therefore, it may consider as a pathogenic predisposition
factor for the breast cancer risk.Note: This abstract was not presented
at the meeting.

