Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genome-wide fingerprinting of regulatory chromatin to evaluate the
tissue specific origins of high-grade serous ovarian cancer


The normal precursor tissue origins of high grade serous epithelial
ovarian cancers (HSOC) are likely to be the fallopian tube epithelium
(FTE) and/or the ovarian surface epithelium (OSE). To address this
hypothesis, we used FAIRE-seq and ChIP-seq to evaluate the genome wide
regulatory profiles of both tissue types and compared these profiles to
well characterized HSOC cell lines (CaOV3 and UWB1.289). This analysis
provided, for the first time, global high-resolution annotation of open
chromatin and histone H3K27 acetylation and H3K4 monomethylation marks
for these tissues types, which are consistent with sites of
transcriptional regulation. Using these data, we identified over 10,000
non-promoter associated FAIRE/ChIP signal sites that represent candidate
functional enhancers. The regulatory features provided a cell
type-specific fingerprint for each cell type. While there were many
similarities between OSE and FTE compared to other normal cell types, we
also were also able to use these profiles to functionally distinguish OSE
from FTE. When we compared profiles of HSOC cells, we observed stronger
similarities in the regulatory chromatin landscape between FTE and HSOC
cell types than between OSE and FTE. Supervised pathway analysis of genes
located closest to putative enhancer sites provided additional evidence
of signaling pathways that may underlie the neoplastic initiation and
progression from normal tissue to HSOC phenotypes. Our results
demonstrate the utility of this approach for identifying precursor tissue
types for HSOC and other cancers based on the cell type specific
chromatin datasets.

