Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Elevated levels of E2F1, EZH2 and SUZ12 lead to invasive
progression of superficial bladder cancers


Bladder cancer is increasing a rate of occurrence in aging societies. A
superficial bladder cancer is noninvasive that is presented as a good
prognosis after receiving treatment. However, about 2050% of superficial
bladder cancer patients progressed to invasive tumor which represent the
poor survival rates within 5 years. In previous study, we addressed if
the transcriptional characteristics of the superficial bladder cancer
could be used as predictive biomarkers for the progression of superficial
tumors to invasive ones. Using gene expression data from 165 bladder
cancer patients, we identified a gene expression signature that could
predict the likelihood of progression to invasive tumors. Gene network
analyses of the signature revealed that E2F1 and its downstream effectors
EZH2 and SUZ12 could be important mediators for the invasive and
metastatic progression of superficial tumors. In this study, we
investigated how these genes may affect the invasive and metastatic
progression of superficial tumors. For confirmation of the expression of
E2F1, EZH2 and SUZ12 in two groups of bladder cancer cells, we performed
quantitative RT-PCR and western blot assay. Both of mRNA and protein
expression of E2F1, EZH2 and SUZ12 in superficial bladder cancer were
significantly lower than invasive bladder cancer cells (pBladder cancer
is increasing a rate of occurrence in aging societies. A superficial
bladder cancer is noninvasive that is presented as a good prognosis after
receiving treatment. However, about 2050% of superficial bladder cancer
patients progressed to invasive tumor which represent the poor survival
rates within 5 years. In previous study, we addressed if the
transcriptional characteristics of the superficial bladder cancer could
be used as predictive biomarkers for the progression of superficial
tumors to invasive ones. Using gene expression data from 165 bladder
cancer patients, we identified a gene expression signature that could
predict the likelihood of progression to invasive tumors. Gene network
analyses of the signature revealed that E2F1 and its downstream effectors
EZH2 and SUZ12 could be important mediators for the invasive and
metastatic progression of superficial tumors. In this study, we
investigated how these genes may affect the invasive and metastatic
progression of superficial tumors. For confirmation of the expression of
E2F1, EZH2 and SUZ12 in two groups of bladder cancer cells, we performed
quantitative RT-PCR and western blot assay. Both of mRNA and protein
expression of E2F1, EZH2 and SUZ12 in superficial bladder cancer were
significantly lower than invasive bladder cancer cells (p< 0.0001). Next,
we performed an invasion and migration assay. The overexpression of E2F1,
EZH2 and SUZ12 presented an increase of invasiveness and migratory in UC9
superficial bladder cancer. On the other hand, the silencing of gene
expression in EJ invasive cell was shown a significantly decreasing of
invasiveness and migratory ability. Also, we determine the effect of
proliferation and colony formation in superficial and invasive bladder
cancer. The depletion of E2F1, EZH2 and SUZ12 in EJ and 5637 invasive
bladder cancer cells that significantly decreasing of forming colonies on
soft agar. Furthermore, we founded the reduction of tumor size when
injected cells depleted E2F1, EZH2 and SUZ12 than control by xenograft
assay. Together, our findings reveal that the estimating the roles of
E2F1, EZH2 and SUZ12 for the invasive and metastatic progression in
superficial bladder cancer.

