Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of p38 MAPK signaling pathway in the inhibition of breast
tumor progression induced by Glypican-3 (GPC3)


Glypican-3 (GPC3) is expressed in normal mammary tissues, but it
disappears in tumors. We have transfected the GPC3 gene into murine
mammary adenocarcinoma LM3 cells, demonstrating that this proteoglycan
acts as a metastasis suppressor. GPC3 reexpressing clones are less
metastatic in vivo, showing reduced migration and increased
susceptibility to apoptosis in vitro. In relation to GPC3 signaling
pathway, we have reported that LM3-GPC3 cells exhibit an inhibition of
Akt and canonical Wnt pathways, while they show an activation of
non-canonical Wnt and p38 signaling.The aim of this work was to study if
the effects of GPC3 on breast tumor progression could be due to p38
activation. LM3-GPC3 or LM3-vector cells were inoculated s.c. into female
BALB/c mice. One day later, the p38 inhibitor SB203580 or the vehicle
DMSO, were injected i.p. into LM3-GPC3 cells-bearing mice, every 24 h for
10 days. Daily, we recorded the largest and smallest diameter of tumors.
Thirty days post-inoculation, mice were killed. We evaluated primary
tumor invasiveness behavior by macroscopic examination and
histopathological study. We also analyze the spontaneous lungs
metastasis, through the counting of macroscopic nodules.LM3-GPC3 and
LM3-vector clones generated s.c. tumors showing similar latency and
tumorigenic capacity, irrespective of SB203580 treatment (Latency in
days, Md [Rg]: 8 [8-10]. Tumorigenicity: 100%). LM3-GPC3 tumors presented
a growth rate higher than LM3-vector, while tumors treated with SB203580
grew faster (mm3/day: 17.61.9 -GPC3; 15.80.9 -vector, 28.21.6
-GPC3+SB203580; pGlypican-3 (GPC3) is expressed in normal mammary
tissues, but it disappears in tumors. We have transfected the GPC3 gene
into murine mammary adenocarcinoma LM3 cells, demonstrating that this
proteoglycan acts as a metastasis suppressor. GPC3 reexpressing clones
are less metastatic in vivo, showing reduced migration and increased
susceptibility to apoptosis in vitro. In relation to GPC3 signaling
pathway, we have reported that LM3-GPC3 cells exhibit an inhibition of
Akt and canonical Wnt pathways, while they show an activation of
non-canonical Wnt and p38 signaling.The aim of this work was to study if
the effects of GPC3 on breast tumor progression could be due to p38
activation. LM3-GPC3 or LM3-vector cells were inoculated s.c. into female
BALB/c mice. One day later, the p38 inhibitor SB203580 or the vehicle
DMSO, were injected i.p. into LM3-GPC3 cells-bearing mice, every 24 h for
10 days. Daily, we recorded the largest and smallest diameter of tumors.
Thirty days post-inoculation, mice were killed. We evaluated primary
tumor invasiveness behavior by macroscopic examination and
histopathological study. We also analyze the spontaneous lungs
metastasis, through the counting of macroscopic nodules.LM3-GPC3 and
LM3-vector clones generated s.c. tumors showing similar latency and
tumorigenic capacity, irrespective of SB203580 treatment (Latency in
days, Md [Rg]: 8 [8-10]. Tumorigenicity: 100%). LM3-GPC3 tumors presented
a growth rate higher than LM3-vector, while tumors treated with SB203580
grew faster (mm3/day: 17.61.9 -GPC3; 15.80.9 -vector, 28.21.6
-GPC3+SB203580; p<0.05). On the other hand, while only about 30% of
LM3-GPC3 tumors showed macroscopic invasion with ulceration compared to
100% of LM3-vector ones, the SB203580 treatment induced an increase in
LM3-GPC3 tumors ulceration (reaching 100% affected tumors). This was
confirmed through hematoxylin-eosin staining and microscopic examination.
We observed only 40% of LM3-GPC3 tumors with occasional invasion of the
muscle and dermis, in contrast to 100% of LM3-vector tumors with muscle,
dermis and epidermis invasion. The SB203580 treatment was able to revert
the GPC3 inhibitory effect on local invasion, inducing invasion of the
muscle, dermis and epidermis in all cases.We observed that all tumors
generated only lung spontaneous metastasis. While about 90% of LM3-vector
tumors-bearing mice developed metastasis, there were no LM3-GPC3
tumors-bearing mice that did it. However, the treatment with p38
inhibitor induced a partial reversion of the GPC3 effect, showing
metastasis in 60% of the animals.In sum, we have confirmed that GPC3 acts
as metastasis suppressor in the present breast cancer model. Also, we
demonstrated that GPC3 would be able to inhibit invasiveness and
metastatic capacities trough p38 activation. We trust that our results
could be the bases to explore new molecular targets against metastatic
disease.

