Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hypercholesterolemia promotes prostate cancer PC-3 metastases in
orthotopic xenograft mice


Hypercholesterolemia has been proposed as a potential risk factor for
advanced prostate cancer, and use of cholesterol-lowering drugs, statins,
inversely correlates with advanced prostate cancer risk.
Hypercholesterolemia increases growth of androgen-sensitive LNCaP
xenograft in vivo, potentially via androgen signaling. The aim of this
study was to determine if hypercholesterolemia affects
castration-resistant prostate tumor progression using an androgen
receptor-negative prostate cancer cell line PC-3. Compared to control
media, cholesterol-deficient media reduced PC-3 proliferation, migration
and anchorage-independent growth in vitro. While adding cholesterol did
not significantly increase proliferation or anchorage-independent growth,
cholesterol replacement in cholesterol-deficient media significantly
increased PC-3 transmigration. In order to determine the in vivo effect,
mice were randomly assigned to normal or hypercholesterolemic, isocaloric
diet groups (N=14 and 15, respectively). After two weeks,
hypercholesterolemic diet significantly increased circulating cholesterol
but did not increase body weight. PC-3 cells stably expressing luciferase
were orthotopically injected into the dorsolateral prostate. Tumor
progression and metastases were monitored by in vivo and ex vivo optical
bioluminescence imaging for 6 weeks. Strikingly, the results show that
diet-induced hypercholesterolemia accelerated tumor metastases to lymph
nodes, lung, proximal and distant bones without significantly affecting
primary tumor growth. The metastases were confirmed histopathologcally.
Hypercholesterolemia was not associated with elevated weight or
circulating testosterone. This is the first study to directly demonstrate
a causal relationship between hypercholesterolemia and prostate tumor
metastases mediated through androgen-independent mechanisms, highlighting
the potential clinical benefit of cholesterol lowering therapy such as
statins in advanced, castration-resistant, prostate cancer patients.

