Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Neuropathic pain in breast cancer patients undergoing radiotherapy


Post-surgery radiotherapy (RT) significantly reduces recurrence of
early-stage breast cancer. However, many patients experience side effects
from RT, such as neuropathic pain (NP), experienced by one third of
patients during RT. Breast cancer survivors report moderate to severe NP
symptoms, including hypersensitivity to cold/mechanical stimuli, itching,
and numbness, which not only impact patient's functional performance and
health-related quality of life, but also may interfere with treatment.
Therefore, we evaluated prevalence of pain and neuropathic pain symptom
(NPS) in 330 breast cancer patients undergoing RT for changes over time
in these pain scales, and to determine the effect of body mass index
(BMI) on the RT-induced NP (RINP) at baseline, immediately post-RT, and 1
month after completion of RT. Pain prevalence was assessed using Brief
Pain Inventory (0-10) for pain at the worst over the past 4 weeks. NPS
index (NPSI, 0-33) was developed using 9 questions from the National
Surgical Adjuvant Breast Cancer and Bowel B39 Quality of Life
questionnaire specific for breast cancer patients. Changes in these pain
scales over time were assessed using a multivariate mixed model. The
study consists of 56 Non-Hispanic Whites, 209 Hispanic Whites, and 66
African Americans. There were significant racial/ethnic differences in
BMI (pPost-surgery radiotherapy (RT) significantly reduces recurrence of
early-stage breast cancer. However, many patients experience side effects
from RT, such as neuropathic pain (NP), experienced by one third of
patients during RT. Breast cancer survivors report moderate to severe NP
symptoms, including hypersensitivity to cold/mechanical stimuli, itching,
and numbness, which not only impact patient's functional performance and
health-related quality of life, but also may interfere with treatment.
Therefore, we evaluated prevalence of pain and neuropathic pain symptom
(NPS) in 330 breast cancer patients undergoing RT for changes over time
in these pain scales, and to determine the effect of body mass index
(BMI) on the RT-induced NP (RINP) at baseline, immediately post-RT, and 1
month after completion of RT. Pain prevalence was assessed using Brief
Pain Inventory (0-10) for pain at the worst over the past 4 weeks. NPS
index (NPSI, 0-33) was developed using 9 questions from the National
Surgical Adjuvant Breast Cancer and Bowel B39 Quality of Life
questionnaire specific for breast cancer patients. Changes in these pain
scales over time were assessed using a multivariate mixed model. The
study consists of 56 Non-Hispanic Whites, 209 Hispanic Whites, and 66
African Americans. There were significant racial/ethnic differences in
BMI (p<0.001) and cancer stage at diagnosis (p=0.018). About 85% of cases
received the standard RT (50-50.4 Gy in a 200 cGy fraction) and 83%
received boost of 10 Gy to the breast scar. Pain prevalence changed over
time (pPost-surgery radiotherapy (RT) significantly reduces recurrence of
early-stage breast cancer. However, many patients experience side effects
from RT, such as neuropathic pain (NP), experienced by one third of
patients during RT. Breast cancer survivors report moderate to severe NP
symptoms, including hypersensitivity to cold/mechanical stimuli, itching,
and numbness, which not only impact patient's functional performance and
health-related quality of life, but also may interfere with treatment.
Therefore, we evaluated prevalence of pain and neuropathic pain symptom
(NPS) in 330 breast cancer patients undergoing RT for changes over time
in these pain scales, and to determine the effect of body mass index
(BMI) on the RT-induced NP (RINP) at baseline, immediately post-RT, and 1
month after completion of RT. Pain prevalence was assessed using Brief
Pain Inventory (0-10) for pain at the worst over the past 4 weeks. NPS
index (NPSI, 0-33) was developed using 9 questions from the National
Surgical Adjuvant Breast Cancer and Bowel B39 Quality of Life
questionnaire specific for breast cancer patients. Changes in these pain
scales over time were assessed using a multivariate mixed model. The
study consists of 56 Non-Hispanic Whites, 209 Hispanic Whites, and 66
African Americans. There were significant racial/ethnic differences in
BMI (p<0.001) and cancer stage at diagnosis (p=0.018). About 85% of cases
received the standard RT (50-50.4 Gy in a 200 cGy fraction) and 83%
received boost of 10 Gy to the breast scar. Pain prevalence changed over
time (p<0.001): 58% at baseline, 78% at the end of RT, and 71% at 1 month
after RT. NPSI also changed over time; 4.9 at baseline, 10.0 at the end
of RT, and 6.7 at 1 month after RT. There were significant differences in
NPSI by race/ethnicity and BMI. Obese patients have worse NPS at RT
completion and 1 month after RT compared to women with BMIPost-surgery
radiotherapy (RT) significantly reduces recurrence of early-stage breast
cancer. However, many patients experience side effects from RT, such as
neuropathic pain (NP), experienced by one third of patients during RT.
Breast cancer survivors report moderate to severe NP symptoms, including
hypersensitivity to cold/mechanical stimuli, itching, and numbness, which
not only impact patient's functional performance and health-related
quality of life, but also may interfere with treatment. Therefore, we
evaluated prevalence of pain and neuropathic pain symptom (NPS) in 330
breast cancer patients undergoing RT for changes over time in these pain
scales, and to determine the effect of body mass index (BMI) on the
RT-induced NP (RINP) at baseline, immediately post-RT, and 1 month after
completion of RT. Pain prevalence was assessed using Brief Pain Inventory
(0-10) for pain at the worst over the past 4 weeks. NPS index (NPSI,
0-33) was developed using 9 questions from the National Surgical Adjuvant
Breast Cancer and Bowel B39 Quality of Life questionnaire specific for
breast cancer patients. Changes in these pain scales over time were
assessed using a multivariate mixed model. The study consists of 56
Non-Hispanic Whites, 209 Hispanic Whites, and 66 African Americans. There
were significant racial/ethnic differences in BMI (p<0.001) and cancer
stage at diagnosis (p=0.018). About 85% of cases received the standard RT
(50-50.4 Gy in a 200 cGy fraction) and 83% received boost of 10 Gy to the
breast scar. Pain prevalence changed over time (p<0.001): 58% at
baseline, 78% at the end of RT, and 71% at 1 month after RT. NPSI also
changed over time; 4.9 at baseline, 10.0 at the end of RT, and 6.7 at 1
month after RT. There were significant differences in NPSI by
race/ethnicity and BMI. Obese patients have worse NPS at RT completion
and 1 month after RT compared to women with BMI<30. Obese patients had a
higher prevalence and NPSI at both RT completion (21.7% and 6.9) and
follow-up (16.0% and 3.6) while normal, over-weight patients showed less
increase in prevalence and NPSI at RT completion (11.8% and 5.3) and
recovered to the baseline levels after 1 month of RT. In summary, our
data suggest that RT-related NP is associated with race/ethnicity and
obesity in breast cancer patients. To improve quality of life, including
NP, as an important survivorship issue for cancer patients, our ongoing
biomarker studies are warranted to elucidate the molecular mechanisms and
identify potential targets for intervention.

