Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cyclin D1 expression correlates with supratentorial location of
ependymomas


Ependymomas are rare central nervous system tumors. Clinical variables
are intercorrelated and usually are not able to predict the disease
course. Cyclin D1 is an important regulator of cell cycle and its
overexpression has been related with several cancers. The prognostic
value of increased cyclin D1 expression in ependymomas has not yet been
fully established. We aimed to analyze cyclin D1 gene (CCND1) and protein
expression in a large series of ependymomas.We initially performed CCND1
expression in 32 cases of ependymomas. We further analyzed cyclin D1
protein expression by immunohistochemistry of a tissue microarray of 149
samples of ependymomas, corresponding to 121 patients (including
relapses). Forty patients were under 18 years and 81 patients were adults
(mean 27.2 years). There were 61 intracranial and 60 spinal cases, of
which 10 tumors were grade I (myxopapillary), 92 grade II and 19 grade
III (anaplastic). Gross total resection was achieved in 62% of cases.
Relapse was confirmed in 40.4% of cases (mean follow up of 53 months) and
tissue samples of the first surgery and the relapse resection were
available for 23 patients. Immunohistochemical reactions were analyzed by
two observers independently and final labeling indices (LI) were
calculated as the percentage of the positively stained nuclei
(negative=0, 0-25%=1, 26-50%=2, 51-75%=3, >75%=4, and focal=F) over the
intensity (weak=1, moderate=2, strong=3).Higher CCND1 expression levels
were observed in anaplastic cases (pEpendymomas are rare central nervous
system tumors. Clinical variables are intercorrelated and usually are not
able to predict the disease course. Cyclin D1 is an important regulator
of cell cycle and its overexpression has been related with several
cancers. The prognostic value of increased cyclin D1 expression in
ependymomas has not yet been fully established. We aimed to analyze
cyclin D1 gene (CCND1) and protein expression in a large series of
ependymomas.We initially performed CCND1 expression in 32 cases of
ependymomas. We further analyzed cyclin D1 protein expression by
immunohistochemistry of a tissue microarray of 149 samples of
ependymomas, corresponding to 121 patients (including relapses). Forty
patients were under 18 years and 81 patients were adults (mean 27.2
years). There were 61 intracranial and 60 spinal cases, of which 10
tumors were grade I (myxopapillary), 92 grade II and 19 grade III
(anaplastic). Gross total resection was achieved in 62% of cases. Relapse
was confirmed in 40.4% of cases (mean follow up of 53 months) and tissue
samples of the first surgery and the relapse resection were available for
23 patients. Immunohistochemical reactions were analyzed by two observers
independently and final labeling indices (LI) were calculated as the
percentage of the positively stained nuclei (negative=0, 0-25%=1,
26-50%=2, 51-75%=3, >75%=4, and focal=F) over the intensity (weak=1,
moderate=2, strong=3).Higher CCND1 expression levels were observed in
anaplastic cases (p<0.0001) with supratentorial localization (p=0.029).
Cyclin D1 expression was considered as negative in 12.9% (LI=0), focal in
17%, weak in 23.1% (LI=1, 2 or 3), moderate in 19.7% (LI=4 or 6) and
strong in 27.2% (LI=9 or 12). There was a correlation between mRNA and
protein expression levels (p=0.017). Additionally, statistically
significant correlations between cyclin D1 LI score and clinical
variables as age (p=0.001), tumor location (pEpendymomas are rare central
nervous system tumors. Clinical variables are intercorrelated and usually
are not able to predict the disease course. Cyclin D1 is an important
regulator of cell cycle and its overexpression has been related with
several cancers. The prognostic value of increased cyclin D1 expression
in ependymomas has not yet been fully established. We aimed to analyze
cyclin D1 gene (CCND1) and protein expression in a large series of
ependymomas.We initially performed CCND1 expression in 32 cases of
ependymomas. We further analyzed cyclin D1 protein expression by
immunohistochemistry of a tissue microarray of 149 samples of
ependymomas, corresponding to 121 patients (including relapses). Forty
patients were under 18 years and 81 patients were adults (mean 27.2
years). There were 61 intracranial and 60 spinal cases, of which 10
tumors were grade I (myxopapillary), 92 grade II and 19 grade III
(anaplastic). Gross total resection was achieved in 62% of cases. Relapse
was confirmed in 40.4% of cases (mean follow up of 53 months) and tissue
samples of the first surgery and the relapse resection were available for
23 patients. Immunohistochemical reactions were analyzed by two observers
independently and final labeling indices (LI) were calculated as the
percentage of the positively stained nuclei (negative=0, 0-25%=1,
26-50%=2, 51-75%=3, >75%=4, and focal=F) over the intensity (weak=1,
moderate=2, strong=3).Higher CCND1 expression levels were observed in
anaplastic cases (p<0.0001) with supratentorial localization (p=0.029).
Cyclin D1 expression was considered as negative in 12.9% (LI=0), focal in
17%, weak in 23.1% (LI=1, 2 or 3), moderate in 19.7% (LI=4 or 6) and
strong in 27.2% (LI=9 or 12). There was a correlation between mRNA and
protein expression levels (p=0.017). Additionally, statistically
significant correlations between cyclin D1 LI score and clinical
variables as age (p=0.001), tumor location (p<0.0001), histological grade
(pEpendymomas are rare central nervous system tumors. Clinical variables
are intercorrelated and usually are not able to predict the disease
course. Cyclin D1 is an important regulator of cell cycle and its
overexpression has been related with several cancers. The prognostic
value of increased cyclin D1 expression in ependymomas has not yet been
fully established. We aimed to analyze cyclin D1 gene (CCND1) and protein
expression in a large series of ependymomas.We initially performed CCND1
expression in 32 cases of ependymomas. We further analyzed cyclin D1
protein expression by immunohistochemistry of a tissue microarray of 149
samples of ependymomas, corresponding to 121 patients (including
relapses). Forty patients were under 18 years and 81 patients were adults
(mean 27.2 years). There were 61 intracranial and 60 spinal cases, of
which 10 tumors were grade I (myxopapillary), 92 grade II and 19 grade
III (anaplastic). Gross total resection was achieved in 62% of cases.
Relapse was confirmed in 40.4% of cases (mean follow up of 53 months) and
tissue samples of the first surgery and the relapse resection were
available for 23 patients. Immunohistochemical reactions were analyzed by
two observers independently and final labeling indices (LI) were
calculated as the percentage of the positively stained nuclei
(negative=0, 0-25%=1, 26-50%=2, 51-75%=3, >75%=4, and focal=F) over the
intensity (weak=1, moderate=2, strong=3).Higher CCND1 expression levels
were observed in anaplastic cases (p<0.0001) with supratentorial
localization (p=0.029). Cyclin D1 expression was considered as negative
in 12.9% (LI=0), focal in 17%, weak in 23.1% (LI=1, 2 or 3), moderate in
19.7% (LI=4 or 6) and strong in 27.2% (LI=9 or 12). There was a
correlation between mRNA and protein expression levels (p=0.017).
Additionally, statistically significant correlations between cyclin D1 LI
score and clinical variables as age (p=0.001), tumor location (p<0.0001),
histological grade (p<0.0001) and relapse (p=0.046) were observed.
Stratified analysis demonstrated that cyclin D1 expression was strong in
supratentorial tumor location in grade II (8/12, pEpendymomas are rare
central nervous system tumors. Clinical variables are intercorrelated and
usually are not able to predict the disease course. Cyclin D1 is an
important regulator of cell cycle and its overexpression has been related
with several cancers. The prognostic value of increased cyclin D1
expression in ependymomas has not yet been fully established. We aimed to
analyze cyclin D1 gene (CCND1) and protein expression in a large series
of ependymomas.We initially performed CCND1 expression in 32 cases of
ependymomas. We further analyzed cyclin D1 protein expression by
immunohistochemistry of a tissue microarray of 149 samples of
ependymomas, corresponding to 121 patients (including relapses). Forty
patients were under 18 years and 81 patients were adults (mean 27.2
years). There were 61 intracranial and 60 spinal cases, of which 10
tumors were grade I (myxopapillary), 92 grade II and 19 grade III
(anaplastic). Gross total resection was achieved in 62% of cases. Relapse
was confirmed in 40.4% of cases (mean follow up of 53 months) and tissue
samples of the first surgery and the relapse resection were available for
23 patients. Immunohistochemical reactions were analyzed by two observers
independently and final labeling indices (LI) were calculated as the
percentage of the positively stained nuclei (negative=0, 0-25%=1,
26-50%=2, 51-75%=3, >75%=4, and focal=F) over the intensity (weak=1,
moderate=2, strong=3).Higher CCND1 expression levels were observed in
anaplastic cases (p<0.0001) with supratentorial localization (p=0.029).
Cyclin D1 expression was considered as negative in 12.9% (LI=0), focal in
17%, weak in 23.1% (LI=1, 2 or 3), moderate in 19.7% (LI=4 or 6) and
strong in 27.2% (LI=9 or 12). There was a correlation between mRNA and
protein expression levels (p=0.017). Additionally, statistically
significant correlations between cyclin D1 LI score and clinical
variables as age (p=0.001), tumor location (p<0.0001), histological grade
(p<0.0001) and relapse (p=0.046) were observed. Stratified analysis
demonstrated that cyclin D1 expression was strong in supratentorial tumor
location in grade II (8/12, p<0.0001) and grade III (23/26, p=0.002), in
children (22/26 pEpendymomas are rare central nervous system tumors.
Clinical variables are intercorrelated and usually are not able to
predict the disease course. Cyclin D1 is an important regulator of cell
cycle and its overexpression has been related with several cancers. The
prognostic value of increased cyclin D1 expression in ependymomas has not
yet been fully established. We aimed to analyze cyclin D1 gene (CCND1)
and protein expression in a large series of ependymomas.We initially
performed CCND1 expression in 32 cases of ependymomas. We further
analyzed cyclin D1 protein expression by immunohistochemistry of a tissue
microarray of 149 samples of ependymomas, corresponding to 121 patients
(including relapses). Forty patients were under 18 years and 81 patients
were adults (mean 27.2 years). There were 61 intracranial and 60 spinal
cases, of which 10 tumors were grade I (myxopapillary), 92 grade II and
19 grade III (anaplastic). Gross total resection was achieved in 62% of
cases. Relapse was confirmed in 40.4% of cases (mean follow up of 53
months) and tissue samples of the first surgery and the relapse resection
were available for 23 patients. Immunohistochemical reactions were
analyzed by two observers independently and final labeling indices (LI)
were calculated as the percentage of the positively stained nuclei
(negative=0, 0-25%=1, 26-50%=2, 51-75%=3, >75%=4, and focal=F) over the
intensity (weak=1, moderate=2, strong=3).Higher CCND1 expression levels
were observed in anaplastic cases (p<0.0001) with supratentorial
localization (p=0.029). Cyclin D1 expression was considered as negative
in 12.9% (LI=0), focal in 17%, weak in 23.1% (LI=1, 2 or 3), moderate in
19.7% (LI=4 or 6) and strong in 27.2% (LI=9 or 12). There was a
correlation between mRNA and protein expression levels (p=0.017).
Additionally, statistically significant correlations between cyclin D1 LI
score and clinical variables as age (p=0.001), tumor location (p<0.0001),
histological grade (p<0.0001) and relapse (p=0.046) were observed.
Stratified analysis demonstrated that cyclin D1 expression was strong in
supratentorial tumor location in grade II (8/12, p<0.0001) and grade III
(23/26, p=0.002), in children (22/26 p<0.001) and adults (9/12,
pEpendymomas are rare central nervous system tumors. Clinical variables
are intercorrelated and usually are not able to predict the disease
course. Cyclin D1 is an important regulator of cell cycle and its
overexpression has been related with several cancers. The prognostic
value of increased cyclin D1 expression in ependymomas has not yet been
fully established. We aimed to analyze cyclin D1 gene (CCND1) and protein
expression in a large series of ependymomas.We initially performed CCND1
expression in 32 cases of ependymomas. We further analyzed cyclin D1
protein expression by immunohistochemistry of a tissue microarray of 149
samples of ependymomas, corresponding to 121 patients (including
relapses). Forty patients were under 18 years and 81 patients were adults
(mean 27.2 years). There were 61 intracranial and 60 spinal cases, of
which 10 tumors were grade I (myxopapillary), 92 grade II and 19 grade
III (anaplastic). Gross total resection was achieved in 62% of cases.
Relapse was confirmed in 40.4% of cases (mean follow up of 53 months) and
tissue samples of the first surgery and the relapse resection were
available for 23 patients. Immunohistochemical reactions were analyzed by
two observers independently and final labeling indices (LI) were
calculated as the percentage of the positively stained nuclei
(negative=0, 0-25%=1, 26-50%=2, 51-75%=3, >75%=4, and focal=F) over the
intensity (weak=1, moderate=2, strong=3).Higher CCND1 expression levels
were observed in anaplastic cases (p<0.0001) with supratentorial
localization (p=0.029). Cyclin D1 expression was considered as negative
in 12.9% (LI=0), focal in 17%, weak in 23.1% (LI=1, 2 or 3), moderate in
19.7% (LI=4 or 6) and strong in 27.2% (LI=9 or 12). There was a
correlation between mRNA and protein expression levels (p=0.017).
Additionally, statistically significant correlations between cyclin D1 LI
score and clinical variables as age (p=0.001), tumor location (p<0.0001),
histological grade (p<0.0001) and relapse (p=0.046) were observed.
Stratified analysis demonstrated that cyclin D1 expression was strong in
supratentorial tumor location in grade II (8/12, p<0.0001) and grade III
(23/26, p=0.002), in children (22/26 p<0.001) and adults (9/12,
p<0.0001). However, cyclin D1 expression did not correlated with
progression free survival (p=0.107). Multivariate analysis revealed that
risk of recurrence was associated with intracranial tumor location
(hazard ratio=4.7; p=0.03) and incomplete resection of tumors (hazard
ratio = 6.35; p=0.012) in this cohort. Although there were more relapses
in patients with gross total resection and strong cyclin D1 expression
(p=0.013), no correlation with incomplete resection was observed
(p=0.430). Determination of cyclin D1 expression LI could be used to
guide treatment in supratentorial cases with gross total resection.

