Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: S100P is a potential biomarker in distinguishing mucinous from
non-mucinous pancreatic cysts and predicting invasive adenocarcinoma


Introduction. Our previous publications demonstrated that S100P was a
highly sensitive biomarker in identifying pancreatic mucinous neoplasms
(PMNs) and invasive ductal adenocarcinomas (ADCs) on both cytological and
surgical specimens. When working on pancreatic cystic lesions, there are
two important undertakings: 1) distinguishing mucinous neoplasms from
non-mucinous cysts and 2) predicting the presence of invasive
adenocarcinomas. In this study, we investigated the potential utility of
S100P for these purposes.Design. Thirty pancreatic cystic fluid samples
obtained by EUS-FNA biopsy were retrieved from Geisinger Biospecimen
Bank. Diagnosis was based on definitive cytological diagnosis in all
cases and additional surgical pathology confirmation in 11 cases. These
30 samples included 7 benign cysts in Group 1, 14 PMNs in Group 2, and 9
ADCs in Group 3. The S100P protein level of each sample was
quantitatively measured by enzyme-linked immunoassay (ELISA) (CircuLex
S100P ELISA kit, MBL International Corporation) according to the vendor's
protocol.Results. The results are summarized in Table 1. Marked elevation
of S100P was seen in 6 of 9 ADCs (2129.81 + 1834.34 ng/ml), in contrast
to the moderate increase in Group 2 (666.67 + 1439.91 ng/ml) and the
minimal increase in Group 1 (22.27 + 18.62 ng/ml). Using 50 ng/ml as a
cutoff value to differentiate a PMN/ADC (Group 2 and Group 3) from a
benign cyst (Group 1), the sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive
value and negative predictive value for identifying a PMN/ADC were 60.9%,
100%, 100%, and 43.8%, respectively.Conclusion. These preliminary data
suggest that S100P is a useful biomarker in identifying invasive
adenocarcinomas and in distinguishing mucinous neoplasms from
non-mucinous cysts. Caution should be taken since some ADCs may show only
mildly increased S100P levels, similar to some PMNs and non-mucinous
cysts. Additional study in a large series of cases is needed to
substantiate the current findings.Summary of S100P protein level (ng/ml)
in 30 pancreatic cysts by ELISA


