Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Generation of a conditional S194A mutant RalA allele in mice


The Ras family of small-GTPases represent the most frequently mutated
oncogene in human cancer. Oncogenic Ras activates RalGEFs, which converts
the Ras like small GTPases RalA and RalB to their active GTP-bound state
to promote tumorigenesis. Despite being highly related, RalA generally
tends to be more important in tumor growth while RalB has been implicated
in metastasis. In regard to a mechanism underlying these functional
differences, we note that RalA, but not RalB, is phosphorylated by the
mitotic kinase AuroraA at Serine 194, and this phosphorylation is
necessary for Ras-driven tumorigenesis. This phosphorylation has been
found to result in an accumulation of RalA in mitochondrial fractions and
an increase in mitochondrial fission and segregation during cytokinesis.
Despite these encouraging observations, the role of this seemingly
critical phosphorylation event in an actual in vivo setting was
completely unknown. Thus, to determine the physiological consequence of
this phosphorylation in vivo, we generated a mouse with a Cre-inducible
S194A conditional Rala allele. We now report that these mice express
wild-type RalA in the absence of Cre, but upon Cre-mediated
recombination, convert wild-type exon 5 of Rala to one encoding the S194A
mutant version. We propose to next investigate the consequences of
blocking this critical posttranslational modification on normal
development and on oncogenic Kras-driven tumorigenesis.

