Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Race-associated variation in the airway transcriptome response to
cigarette smoke


INTRODUCTION: Tobacco-induced lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer
death. Lung cancer incidence is 15% higher in African Americans (AFA)
than Caucasians (CAU) even after taking into account variations in
smoking behavior and other environmental variables, and the reasons for
this difference are unclear. As 90% of patients with lung cancer have a
smoking history, we hypothesize that race-related differences in the
response to tobacco smoke might contribute to the elevated lung cancer
risk observed in AFA. To begin to test this hypothesis, we have used gene
expression profiling to identify differences in the biologic response of
the bronchial airway epithelium of AFA and CAU to tobacco smoke.METHODS:
Cytologically normal bronchial epithelial cells obtained during
bronchoscopy from current (C) and former (F) smokers with and without
lung cancer were hybridized to Affymetrix Human Gene 1.0 ST microarrays
(n=885). After quality control, n=810 samples (from n=710 subjects) were
selected for subsequent analysis. RMA-normalized gene expression levels
were batch-corrected using ComBat. Genes whose expression is altered by
smoking differently in the airway epithelium of AFA (n=155; nC=76, nF=79)
as compared to CAU (n=655; nC=283, nF=372), were identified via ANOVA
using a linear model including terms for self-reported race, smoking
status, and the interaction between race and smoking status, as well as
other covariates including gender, cancer status, COPD status, age,
cumulative cigarette smoke exposure, and RIN. Smoking-associated
race-dependent pathways were identified using Enrichr. An independent
dataset of cytologically normal bronchial epithelial cells hybridized to
the Affymetrix HGU133A microarrays (nCAU=154, nAFA=58) was analyzed as
detailed above and relationships between the two datasets were
established using GSEA for the genes associated with race, and the
interaction between race and smoking status.RESULTS: We identified 361
genes that displayed smoking-associated race-dependent patterns of
expression (FDRINTRODUCTION: Tobacco-induced lung cancer is the leading
cause of cancer death. Lung cancer incidence is 15% higher in African
Americans (AFA) than Caucasians (CAU) even after taking into account
variations in smoking behavior and other environmental variables, and the
reasons for this difference are unclear. As 90% of patients with lung
cancer have a smoking history, we hypothesize that race-related
differences in the response to tobacco smoke might contribute to the
elevated lung cancer risk observed in AFA. To begin to test this
hypothesis, we have used gene expression profiling to identify
differences in the biologic response of the bronchial airway epithelium
of AFA and CAU to tobacco smoke.METHODS: Cytologically normal bronchial
epithelial cells obtained during bronchoscopy from current (C) and former
(F) smokers with and without lung cancer were hybridized to Affymetrix
Human Gene 1.0 ST microarrays (n=885). After quality control, n=810
samples (from n=710 subjects) were selected for subsequent analysis.
RMA-normalized gene expression levels were batch-corrected using ComBat.
Genes whose expression is altered by smoking differently in the airway
epithelium of AFA (n=155; nC=76, nF=79) as compared to CAU (n=655;
nC=283, nF=372), were identified via ANOVA using a linear model including
terms for self-reported race, smoking status, and the interaction between
race and smoking status, as well as other covariates including gender,
cancer status, COPD status, age, cumulative cigarette smoke exposure, and
RIN. Smoking-associated race-dependent pathways were identified using
Enrichr. An independent dataset of cytologically normal bronchial
epithelial cells hybridized to the Affymetrix HGU133A microarrays
(nCAU=154, nAFA=58) was analyzed as detailed above and relationships
between the two datasets were established using GSEA for the genes
associated with race, and the interaction between race and smoking
status.RESULTS: We identified 361 genes that displayed smoking-associated
race-dependent patterns of expression (FDR<0.05) and were linked to
multiple biological processes, pathways, and phenotypes, including DNA
damage response, membrane organization, endoplasmic reticulum stress, and
abnormal lung morphology and respiration. In addition, 2771 genes were
found to be associated with race (FDRINTRODUCTION: Tobacco-induced lung
cancer is the leading cause of cancer death. Lung cancer incidence is 15%
higher in African Americans (AFA) than Caucasians (CAU) even after taking
into account variations in smoking behavior and other environmental
variables, and the reasons for this difference are unclear. As 90% of
patients with lung cancer have a smoking history, we hypothesize that
race-related differences in the response to tobacco smoke might
contribute to the elevated lung cancer risk observed in AFA. To begin to
test this hypothesis, we have used gene expression profiling to identify
differences in the biologic response of the bronchial airway epithelium
of AFA and CAU to tobacco smoke.METHODS: Cytologically normal bronchial
epithelial cells obtained during bronchoscopy from current (C) and former
(F) smokers with and without lung cancer were hybridized to Affymetrix
Human Gene 1.0 ST microarrays (n=885). After quality control, n=810
samples (from n=710 subjects) were selected for subsequent analysis.
RMA-normalized gene expression levels were batch-corrected using ComBat.
Genes whose expression is altered by smoking differently in the airway
epithelium of AFA (n=155; nC=76, nF=79) as compared to CAU (n=655;
nC=283, nF=372), were identified via ANOVA using a linear model including
terms for self-reported race, smoking status, and the interaction between
race and smoking status, as well as other covariates including gender,
cancer status, COPD status, age, cumulative cigarette smoke exposure, and
RIN. Smoking-associated race-dependent pathways were identified using
Enrichr. An independent dataset of cytologically normal bronchial
epithelial cells hybridized to the Affymetrix HGU133A microarrays
(nCAU=154, nAFA=58) was analyzed as detailed above and relationships
between the two datasets were established using GSEA for the genes
associated with race, and the interaction between race and smoking
status.RESULTS: We identified 361 genes that displayed smoking-associated
race-dependent patterns of expression (FDR<0.05) and were linked to
multiple biological processes, pathways, and phenotypes, including DNA
damage response, membrane organization, endoplasmic reticulum stress, and
abnormal lung morphology and respiration. In addition, 2771 genes were
found to be associated with race (FDR<0.01) and enriched in pathways
related to metabolism of xenobiotics, integrin cell surface interactions,
and response to chemical stimulus. (Enrichr; Fisher exact test
p-valueINTRODUCTION: Tobacco-induced lung cancer is the leading cause of
cancer death. Lung cancer incidence is 15% higher in African Americans
(AFA) than Caucasians (CAU) even after taking into account variations in
smoking behavior and other environmental variables, and the reasons for
this difference are unclear. As 90% of patients with lung cancer have a
smoking history, we hypothesize that race-related differences in the
response to tobacco smoke might contribute to the elevated lung cancer
risk observed in AFA. To begin to test this hypothesis, we have used gene
expression profiling to identify differences in the biologic response of
the bronchial airway epithelium of AFA and CAU to tobacco smoke.METHODS:
Cytologically normal bronchial epithelial cells obtained during
bronchoscopy from current (C) and former (F) smokers with and without
lung cancer were hybridized to Affymetrix Human Gene 1.0 ST microarrays
(n=885). After quality control, n=810 samples (from n=710 subjects) were
selected for subsequent analysis. RMA-normalized gene expression levels
were batch-corrected using ComBat. Genes whose expression is altered by
smoking differently in the airway epithelium of AFA (n=155; nC=76, nF=79)
as compared to CAU (n=655; nC=283, nF=372), were identified via ANOVA
using a linear model including terms for self-reported race, smoking
status, and the interaction between race and smoking status, as well as
other covariates including gender, cancer status, COPD status, age,
cumulative cigarette smoke exposure, and RIN. Smoking-associated
race-dependent pathways were identified using Enrichr. An independent
dataset of cytologically normal bronchial epithelial cells hybridized to
the Affymetrix HGU133A microarrays (nCAU=154, nAFA=58) was analyzed as
detailed above and relationships between the two datasets were
established using GSEA for the genes associated with race, and the
interaction between race and smoking status.RESULTS: We identified 361
genes that displayed smoking-associated race-dependent patterns of
expression (FDR<0.05) and were linked to multiple biological processes,
pathways, and phenotypes, including DNA damage response, membrane
organization, endoplasmic reticulum stress, and abnormal lung morphology
and respiration. In addition, 2771 genes were found to be associated with
race (FDR<0.01) and enriched in pathways related to metabolism of
xenobiotics, integrin cell surface interactions, and response to chemical
stimulus. (Enrichr; Fisher exact test p-value<0.05). Both sets of genes
were significantly concordantly enriched in the independent dataset by
GSEA (FDRINTRODUCTION: Tobacco-induced lung cancer is the leading cause
of cancer death. Lung cancer incidence is 15% higher in African Americans
(AFA) than Caucasians (CAU) even after taking into account variations in
smoking behavior and other environmental variables, and the reasons for
this difference are unclear. As 90% of patients with lung cancer have a
smoking history, we hypothesize that race-related differences in the
response to tobacco smoke might contribute to the elevated lung cancer
risk observed in AFA. To begin to test this hypothesis, we have used gene
expression profiling to identify differences in the biologic response of
the bronchial airway epithelium of AFA and CAU to tobacco smoke.METHODS:
Cytologically normal bronchial epithelial cells obtained during
bronchoscopy from current (C) and former (F) smokers with and without
lung cancer were hybridized to Affymetrix Human Gene 1.0 ST microarrays
(n=885). After quality control, n=810 samples (from n=710 subjects) were
selected for subsequent analysis. RMA-normalized gene expression levels
were batch-corrected using ComBat. Genes whose expression is altered by
smoking differently in the airway epithelium of AFA (n=155; nC=76, nF=79)
as compared to CAU (n=655; nC=283, nF=372), were identified via ANOVA
using a linear model including terms for self-reported race, smoking
status, and the interaction between race and smoking status, as well as
other covariates including gender, cancer status, COPD status, age,
cumulative cigarette smoke exposure, and RIN. Smoking-associated
race-dependent pathways were identified using Enrichr. An independent
dataset of cytologically normal bronchial epithelial cells hybridized to
the Affymetrix HGU133A microarrays (nCAU=154, nAFA=58) was analyzed as
detailed above and relationships between the two datasets were
established using GSEA for the genes associated with race, and the
interaction between race and smoking status.RESULTS: We identified 361
genes that displayed smoking-associated race-dependent patterns of
expression (FDR<0.05) and were linked to multiple biological processes,
pathways, and phenotypes, including DNA damage response, membrane
organization, endoplasmic reticulum stress, and abnormal lung morphology
and respiration. In addition, 2771 genes were found to be associated with
race (FDR<0.01) and enriched in pathways related to metabolism of
xenobiotics, integrin cell surface interactions, and response to chemical
stimulus. (Enrichr; Fisher exact test p-value<0.05). Both sets of genes
were significantly concordantly enriched in the independent dataset by
GSEA (FDR<0.05).CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that race influences
the airway epithelial response to cigarette smoke at the level of
individual genes and pathways. Our findings also suggest that gene
expression profiling of the airway epithelium might be useful to
understand the molecular basis of the elevated risk of lung cancer among
African Americans.

