Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dual kinase/bromodomain inhibitors for rationally designed
polypharmacology


Concomitant inhibition of multiple cancer-driving kinases is an
established strategy to improve the durability of clinical responses to
targeted therapies. The difficulty of discovering kinase inhibitors with
an appropriate multi-target profile has, however, necessitated the
application of combination therapies, which can pose significant clinical
development challenges. Epigenetic reader domains of the bromodomain
family have recently emerged as novel targets for cancer therapy. Here we
have used BROMOscan bromodomain ligand binding assays to identify several
clinical kinase inhibitors that also inhibit bromodomains with
therapeutically relevant potencies and are best classified as dual
kinase/bromodomain inhibitors. Nanomolar activity on BRD4 by clinical
PLK1 and JAK2/FLT3 kinase inhibitors is particularly noteworthy as these
combinations of activities on independent oncogenic pathways exemplify a
novel strategy for rational single agent polypharmacological targeting.
Importantly, cell-based data show that these dual inhibitors suppress
c-Myc expression (a hallmark of BRD4 inhibition) and induce complex
polypharmacological phenotypes reflecting dual kinase/bromodomain
inhibition across a panel of primary human cell assay systems that model
complex tissue and disease state environments (BioMap). Furthermore, rich
structure-activity relationships for related inhibitors and co-crystal
structures identify design features that enable a general platform for
the rational design of dual kinase/bromodomain inhibitors.

