Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Recipient-donor contradictory genotype with impact on anticancer
drug pharmacogenetics after liver transplant: A deadly gift


A 5-year old girl with liver transplant was scheduled for a therapy
including high-dose cytarabine for her Burkitt lymphoma. Cytarabine
pharmacogenetics focus on cytidine deaminase (CDA) , the polymorphic
liver enzyme responsible for its detoxification. Preliminary double
testing for her CDA status on DNA lymphocytes showed none of the germline
polymorphisms usually associated with CDA deficiency (ie, 79A>C (K27Q),
208G>A), but surprisingly with a functional mild deficiency syndrom.
Despite 30% reduction in cytarabine dosing, life-threatening toxicities
showed quickly and treatment was discontinued. Genetic HRM-based
investigations performed in the patient on liver biopsy failed in
generating a clear genotype. Further HRM+sequencing retrospective
investigations on liver biopsy collected from the donor showed that he
was actually bearing the homozygous CDA*2 allelic variant (ie, 79AA), a
genotype usually associated with severe CDA deficiency. Based upon the
donor liver genotype, and not the recipient genotype, treatement was
resumed with further dose reduction, close monitoring and better
tolerance eventually. The patient is now in complete remission more than
a year after completion of the treatment. This case report illustrates
the limits and risks of searching germline polymorphisms in patients with
liver transplant when the story plays in the liver.

