Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Three-dimensional Gelfoam histoculture enables cancer cells to
mimic in vivo cancer cell cycling as visualized with FUCCI imaging


Collagen sponge-gel histoculture was developed by Leighton (In:
Encyclopedia of Life Sciences. John Wiley and Sons, Ltd.: Chichester,
2010, Published Online. DOI: 10.1002/9780470015902.a0002573.pub2). In the
1950s, Leighton showed that placing cells in histoculture enables them to
form 3-dimensional structures. Because of its architectural resemblance
to native tissue, sponge gel histoculture represents a unique in
vivo-like model to study cancer-cell behavior (Brenner's Encyclopedia of
Genetics, 2nd Ed., Vol. 7, pp. 73-76. Elsevier, 2013). For example,
Leighton observed that when C3HBA mouse mammary adenocarcinoma cells were
grown on sponge-matrix histoculture, the cells aggregated similar to the
original in vitro tumor. Distinct structures were formed within the
tumors such as lumina and stromal elements, with some of the glandular
structures similar to the original tumor (above-reference). We have
further developed sponge gel histoculture using Gelfoam to grow tumors,
nerves, hair follicles, skin with growing hair (above-reference). In the
present report, we use fluorescence ubiquitination cell cycle indicator
(FUCCI) imaging and Gelfoam collagen sponge gel histoculture to
demonstrate that the cell cycle phase distribution of cancer cells in
Gelfoam and in vivo tumors is similar whereby only the surface cells
proliferate and interior cells are quiescent in G1/G0. This is markedly
contrary to 2D culture where most cancer cells cycle. This observation
explains, at least in part, the resistance of solid tumors to
chemotherapy which targets only cycling cells.

