Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Toxicity screening, apoptosis hallmark events and nitro reduction
of novel quinolinium salts (BQS) on lymphoma cells


The main purpose of this research was to evaluate the effects of two
novel benzazolo[3,2-a]quinolinium salts (ABQ-48 and NBQ48) on lymphoma
cells (TOLEDO). The cationic nature of these BQS can facilitate its
interaction with cell organelles such as mitochondria and DNA. To
determine its potential cytotoxic effects the compounds were screened
through the NCI 60 cell line protocol which determines the cell viability
inhibitory activity in various cancer histological types. The IC50 dose
for these compounds was determined and used to assess their apoptosis
induction capacity evaluating apoptosis hallmark events such as DNA
Fragmentation, Caspase 3&7 activators and mitochondrial membrane
permeabilization. Additionally cell reduction potential of the compounds
was measured. Results from the NCI 60 cell line protocol demonstrated the
toxicity of BQS in multiple cancer types including breast and colon
cancer cells. Preliminary results indicated mitochondrial membrane
permeabilization on cells treated with NBQ48 (51.3%) and ABQ48 (57.67%)
comparable to the positive controls camptothecin (51.6%) and valinomycin
(55.3%). Treated cells also presented DNA fragmentation with NBQ48 and
ABQ48 (28%) comparable to the positive control 37%. Preliminary data for
caspases 3&7 activation strongly suggest an intrinsic apoptosis pathway.
Analysis of the reduction of nitro substituted compound NBQ 48 to the
amino substituted ABQ 48 on treated cells was determined by measuring an
increment on fluorescence emission, characteristic of an amino specie. In
conclusion, the study provides evidence of the induction of key apoptotic
events as part of the mechanism of action of these novel BQS.

