Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Copper is required for oncogenic BRAF signaling and tumorigenesis


The BRAF serine/threonine kinase is mutated, typically at V600, to induce
an active oncogenic state in a large fraction of melanoma, thyroid
cancers, hairy cell leukemia, and to a lesser extent, a wide spectrum of
other cancers. BRAFV600E in turn activates the kinases MEK1 and MEK2,
which stimulates the MAPK pathway to promote cancer. Excitingly, ATP
inhibitors of oncogenic BRAF and MEK provide a survival advantage in
metastatic melanoma, an effect enhanced by combining the two inhibitors.
Thus, combining multiple approaches to inhibit MAPK signaling holds great
promise for the treatment of BRAF mutation-positive cancers, especially
in terms of overcoming resistance. In this regard, we previously found
that copper (Cu) influx enhanced MEK1 phosphorylation of its substrates
ERK1/2 through a Cu-MEK1 interaction. We show here that genetic loss of
the high affinity Cu transporter Ctr1 or mutations in MEK1 that disrupt
Cu binding reduced MAPK signaling and oncogenic BRAFV600E-mediated
tumorigenesis, which was rescued by expressing activated MEK5 engineered
to phosphorylate ERK1/2 or activated ERK2. Importantly, Cu chelators used
in the treatment of Wilson disease reduced tumor growth of not only
BRAFV600E-transformed cells but also cells resistant to a BRAF inhibitor.
Taken together, these results suggest that Cu-chelation therapy could be
repurposed for the treatment of BRAFV600E mutation-positive cancers.

