Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comparative transforming effects of ultra low tar (ULT) and full
flavor low tar (FFLT) cigarette smoke particulate extracts on human oral
epithelial cells


ULT cigarettes produce much lower levels of tars and particulate matter
than FFLT cigarettes, but are generally not safer alternatives with
respect to carcinogenesis, possibly because of compensatory smoking
behavior. In a previous study (P.G. Sacks, et al., Food Chem Toxicol 49
(2011) 2348-2355) we reported that tobacco smoke particulate (TSP)
extracts from FF, FFLT and ULT cigarettes exerted similar effects on the
induction of phase I and II proteins and the activation of the tobacco
carcinogen, benzo(a)pyrene (BaP) to genotoxic metabolites in primary oral
epithelial cells when compared on a concentration basis, although ULT
cigarettes were less effective on a per cigarette basis. Here we report
that both a FFLT and an ULT TSP extract transform a human oral epithelial
cell line to growth independence in soft agar, and enhance the
transforming effects of BaP. At equal concentrations the ULT extract was
more effective than the FFLT extract. A human oral leukoplakia cell line,
MSKleuk1, was employed in these studies. Cells were treated twice over a
two week period or 3 times over a 3 week period with: a) one uM BaP, b)
4ug/ml TSP extract, c) TSP extract + BaP, or d) vehicle control. One week
after the last treatment cells were seeded on soft agar and were assayed
either by counting colonies 3 weeks after seeding, or 8 days after
seeding using an anchorage-independent growth assay (CytoSelect 96-Well
Cell Transformation Assay Kit, Cell Biolabs). Results in initial
experiments for the two week treatment were assayed by counting colonies,
and the fraction of growth-independent cells for groups a-d resp. were:
a, 5.5 +/- 0.2; b, 6.0 +/- 0.6; c, 6.6 +/- 0.3 and d, 0.78 +/- 0.3 (all
in units of 10E-4). For the three week treatment the results were: a, 9.1
+/- 0.5; b, 9.2 +/- 1.2; c, 11.9, +/- 2.5; d, 1.4 +/- 0.7. The TSP
extract was from a reference filtered cigarette, 2RF4. A further soft
agar assay was carried out using the cell transformation assay; and TSP
extracts from a commercial ULT and 2RF4 cigarettes were compared, in the
presence and absence of BaP. The groups were a) 1 uM BaP, b) 4ug/ml 2RF4
extract, c) 4ug/ml 2RF4 extract + 1 uM BaP, d) 4ug/ml ULT extract, e)
4ug/ml ULT extract + 1uM BaP and f) vehicle control. All groups were
treated 2x as described above. Results are expressed relative to the
vehicle control which is set as 1. a, 1.9 +/- 0.4; b, 1.4 +/- 0.3; c, 2.2
+/- 0.4; d, 2.1 +/ 0.3; e, 2.6 +/- 0.6.The results of these show: 1)
human oral epithelial cells can be transformed by BaP, and TSP extracts
from FFLT and ULT cigarettes, 2) the effects of BaP and TSP extracts are
approximately additive, 3) when compared on a concentration of
particulate basis, ULT TSP extracts were more effective than FFLT TSP
extracts. Unlike previous studies relating primarily to carcinogenesis
initiation, ULT TSP extracts appear to more effective at transformation
than FFLT TSP extracts.

