Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Viral-based nanoparticles: a new therapeutic approach for
anticancer therapy


One of the hurdles to effective cancer treatment is tumor specific
targeting of drugs. We have observed, both in vitro and in vivo, that
Human papillomavirus-derived nanoparticles (HPV-NPs) have an innate
tropism for tumors. HPV's primary attachment factors in infection are
heparan-sulfated proteoglycans (HSPG) and as tumors often upregulate
HSPGs at the extracellular matrix, this may be a contributing factor for
HPV's tumor tropic nature. Here we present data to support the use of
HPV-NPs in the treatment of ovarian carcinoma and uveal melanoma with
-particle emitting radiation (227Th) and photodynamic therapy (PDT),
respectively. We first explored in vivo tumor targeting using HPV-NPs
delivering a plasmid expressing the luciferase gene. Luciferase signal
was detected in SKOV-3 tumor bearing, but not control animals, and this
signal was only present in tumor tissue as revealed by ex vivo imaging.
This finding prompted us to explore the therapeutic effect of delivering
227Th. The agent AU-010 was constructed by conjugation of a chelator to
the HPV-NPs. Th-227 was then used to radiolabel the conjugated HPV-NPs.
Animals were injected with SKOV-3 tumor cells, and 10 days following
implant, treatment was initiated with three weekly administrations of
either AU-010 (100 nCi), free chelated-227Th (100 nCi), unlabeled HPV-NPs
or saline. HPV-NP targeting of 227Th to tumors provided a significant
survival advantage over the control arms, demonstrating the therapeutic
potential of HPV-NPs. Currently, follow-up experiments are evaluating
optimized chelators in additional animal models. We next explored the use
of HPV-NPs in photodynamic therapy with the development of AU-011. AU-011
is an HPV-NP conjugated to 500 molecules of infrared dye, IR700 (LiCor),
and when irradiated with 690 nm near-infrared light generates reactive
oxygen species that are specifically and immediately lethal to dye bound
cells. This technology was initially validated using Trastuzumab as a
targeting agent (Mitsunaga et al, Nat Med 17(12):1685-91, 2011). We
compared the cell binding activity of AU-011 and Trastuzumab-IR700 on
SKOV-3 ovarian cancer cells in vitro and observed a higher binding
capacity of AU-011. We next compared the killing activity of the two
agents. Trastuzumab-IR700 was found to have an IC50 value of 1.6 nM when
activated with 32 J of 690 nm light. By comparison, AU-011 was found to
have an IC50 value of 5.6 pM when activated with 16 J of 690 nm light.
Thus, AU-011 appeared to be considerably more potent than
Trastuzumab-IR700. Finally, we extended these observations to a panel of
uveal melanoma cell lines. We chose uveal melanoma because PDT with 690
nm light is FDA approved and used regularly in the ophthalmic clinic.
When applied on the melanoma cell lines, AU-011 was found to show high
cell binding and potent cell killing. Currently, proof-of-concept in vivo
studies of AU-011 in uveal melanoma are underway, paving the way to
clinical development for this indication.

