Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TMPRSS2-ERG influences IGF-1R expression and affects its
prognostic value in prostate cancer


INTRODUCTION: Insulin like growth factor 1 receptor (IGF-1R) plays a
critical role in different tumors including prostate cancer (PCa).
Recently, a fusion gene involving the androgen receptor-regulated gene
TMPRSS2 and one of the ETS transcription factors family member,
predominantly ERG, has been described in half of PCa patients.
TMPRSS2-ERG results in the overproduction of a truncated ERG protein and
cooperates in the establishment of a neoplastic phenotype in prostate
cells. The aim of this study was to evaluate TMPRSS2-ERG impact on IGF-1R
expression and to verify the value of IGF-1R as biomarker of PCa
progression.MATERIAL AND METHODS: IGF-1R expression was evaluated in a
panel of six prostate cell lines, including malignant VCaP, DU-145, PC-3,
LNCaP, 22RV1 and non malignant RWPE-1 prostate cells by qRT-PCR, western
blot and immunofluorescence. ERG siRNA was transiently transfected in
VCaP cells and ERG down-regulation was assessed by western blot. Total
RNA was extracted from a cohort of 270 paraffin-embedded PCa samples with
more than 5 years of follow-up and IGF-1R expression was analysed by
qRT-PCR. The prognostic value of IGF-1R was evaluated both in the
univariate and multivariate analysis. The clinicopathological
informations as well as the TMPRSS2-ERG fusion gene status were
considered in the statistical analysis.RESULTS: The IGF-1R expression
profile analysis was performed in PCa cells and pointed out that VCaP
cell line, harboring the TMPRSS2-ERG fusion gene, carries the highest
IGF-1R expression levels both considering mRNA, total protein and
membrane expression levels. Interestingly, IGF-1R protein levels were
found to be down-regulated upon ERG silencing in VCaP cells. PCa tumors
did not show any remarkable difference in the expression of IGF-1R when
compared with normal tissues (median=1.04) but IGF-1R was directly
correlated with TMPRSS2-ERG status (p=0.027) in tumors. Log-rank tests
showed an association between higher IGF-1R expression and better
biochemical progression free survival (p=0.047).When dividing the
population according to the TMPRSS2-ERG status we found higher
fold-change in IGF-1R expression in tumors expressing TMPRSS2-ERG
(median=1.25) compared to non-expressors (median=0.91) and a
statistically stronger association between IGF-1R and prognosis in the
TMPRSS2-ERG negative tumors (p=0.012). Moreover, multivariate analysis
confirmed that higher expression of IGF-1R is an independent indicator of
better prognosis in this subgroup (HR:0.48.IC95% [0.25-0.90].p=0.023).
CONCLUSIONS: In this study we demonstrated that TMPRSS2-ERG affects
IGF-1R expression both in vitro and in clinical samples. High expression
of IGF-1R is significantly associated with a better clinical outcome of
PCa patients. (Grants: FIRB RBAP11884M_005 to KS; FIS PI10/01206 and
FPI11/00505 from ISCIII)

