Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Acute colitis and colitis-associated cancer are exacerbated in
mice deficient N-deacetylase/N-sulfotransferase-4


NDST4 is one member of N-deacetylase/N-sulfotransferase (heparan
glucosaminyl) (NDST) family, which are responsible for heparan sulfate
(HS) biosynthesis on a core protein to form heparan sulfate proteoglycans
(HSPGs). The HS chains of HSPGs bind to and regulate their functions of
various growth factors, cytokines and chemokines. HSPGs ubiquitously
reside on cell surface, inside the cell, and in the extracellular matrix.
Importantly, the content and distribution of HSPGs are altered during
tumorigenesis. In the study, 30 (57.7%) of 52 primary colorectal
carcinomas showed a dramatic reduction in NDST4 RNA transcripts, and
genetic loss of NDST4 was significantly associated with poor survival of
patients with colorectal cancer. We further generated an Ndst4-knockout
mouse strain, which could develop and reproduce normally. Notably, using
the dextran sodium sulfate mouse model of acute colitis, Ndst4 deficiency
resulted in a significantly higher disease activity index and obviously
hyperemic appearance in the cecum. In the development of
colitis-associated cancer, the size of colonic tumors induced by
azoxymethane/dextran sodium sulfate was significantly increased in
Ndst4-deficient mice compared with wild-type mice. Taken together,
loss-of-function of NDST4 might impair the modification of HS chains of
specific HSPGs leading to tumor-promoting inflammation in the colon. The
full spectrum of signaling pathways contributed by NDST4 to colitis and
tumor progression remains to be elucidated.

