Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel inhibitors of -catenin


-catenin is a key player of the WNT pathway; its aberrant regulation is
associated with the onset and progression of numerous types of cancer.
-catenin is therefore an attractive drug target but direct inhibition of
-catenin is a challenging approach toward suppression of -catenin-driven
tumorigenesis. Ideal drug candidates should specifically target nuclear
-catenin, leaving its cytoplasmic and cell junctional functions intact.
We have identified several drug-like candidate -catenin inhibitors using
a robust screening method against four allosteric binding sites of
-catenin (TCF4, BCL9 and two novel sites). We show that these inhibitors
significantly reduce proliferation of a panel of human -catenin-driven
cancer cell lines, and repress the expression of -catenin-induced target
genes. They cause a shift in the melting temperature of the purified
-catenin protein. We also show that the candidate compounds reduce levels
of -catenin in the nucleus and block -catenin-driven oncogenic
transformation in cell culture. We consider these novel -catenin
inhibitors promising leads that should be further investigated for their
molecular mechanism of action and for their potential development as
therapeutic drugs.Key words: -catenin, oncogene, therapeutic, target,
small molecule, protein-protein interactionThis work was supported by NIH
Grant R01 CA078230. This is abstract 26043 of The Scripps Research
Institute.

