Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exome genotyping array identifies rare and low-frequency variants
that may be associated with ovarian cancer risk


Background: Common genetic variants identified by genome-wide association
studies and follow-up genotyping initiatives only explain a small
proportion of the heritability of epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC). We
hypothesized that some of the missing heritability may be explained by
rare (minor allele frequency (MAF) 90%. After removing 31,436 monomorphic
markers, the 249,301 remaining markers were included in association
analyses. We confirmed variants at previously reported EOC susceptibility
loci (9p22, 3q25, 17cen-q21.3, and 8q24), with p-values between 10-5 and
10-11. Several correlated low-frequency non-synonymous variants (MAF=5%)
residing in a novel EOC susceptibility gene at 3q25.31 were
risk-associated. The most significant variant at 3q25.31 had an OR=1.36
and p = 5.58x10-8. Also noteworthy is a rare variant at 15q15.1-q21.1
(MAF=0.5%) that introduces a stop codon in a gene belonging to the
tyrosine kinase family (OR=0.39, CI=0.26-0.58, p = 4.52x10-6). We also
identified a more common synonymous coding variant in a phosphatase at
6q21.3 that was associated with increased risk (OR=1.22, CI=1.13-1.33, p
= 1.84x10-6, MAF=9.6%). Population stratification and gene-based analyses
are underway to further examine the impact of the newly-identified
variants on EOC risk. A meta-analysis to include data from an additional
2104 EOC cases and 2516 controls genotyped with Illumina's HumanExome
Beadchip rare variant array is also underway. Functional analysis of the
most promising variants will follow. Conclusions: Preliminary data from
this large-scale study reveals novel rare and low-frequency variants that
may influence susceptibility to epithelial ovarian cancer.

