Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor necrosis factor-alpha and apoptosis induction in melanoma
cells through histones modification by 3-deazaneplanocin A


Tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF) is cytokine, which influences the tumor
microenvironment. While melanoma is known to express variable levels of
TNF, its regulation is not well understood. The objective of the study
was to investigate the epigenetic regulation of TNF in melanoma cells.
Melanoma cell lines were treated with 3-Deazaneplanocin A(DZNep), an
inhibitor of polycomb-repressive complex 2(PRC2), and analyzed for its
effect on the cell viability assay and apoptosis assay. PRC2 and histones
H3K27me3, H3K4me2 and H3K9ac activity were assessed pre- and post-DZNep
by Western blot on cell lines and tumors. ChIP-qPCR array, chromatin
immunoprecipitation, and PCR array analysis of melanoma lines treated
with DZNep. DZNep could induce apoptosis in melanoma cells, and
up-regulate TNF expression. Specific histones were associated with the
upregulation of TNF expression by ChIP-qPCR array. The repressive histone
mark, H3K27me3, as well as the active histone marks, H3K4me2 and H3K9ac,
were correlated with the regulation of TNF expression. We demonstrated
that DZNep can activate TNF expression in melanoma through histone
modification. These findings suggest that epigenetic agents targeting
PRC2 can activate TNF in melanoma cells. The DNA methylation, H3K27me3,
H3K4me2, and H3K9ac modification, contribute to TNF regulation.

