Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genetic and social determinants of quality of life in lung cancer
patients


Patient reported health-related quality of life (QOL) has been recognized
as a major component of the overall well-being of cancer patients, with
links to prognosis and other endpoints. We aimed to identify determinants
of baseline QOL by investigating the relationship between patient
characteristics, genetic factors, and baseline QOL in lung cancer
patients. We included 7,135 newly diagnosed and previously untreated lung
cancer patients. Patient reported data from the SF-12 questionnaire was
used to calculate baseline Physical Component Summary (PCS) and Mental
Component Summary (MCS), with lower scores indicating a worse quality of
life. We observed that the mean PCS (38.82) and MCS (46.22) scores were
reduced in the lung cancer population when compared to the general
population which was normalized to 50. We observed a significant trend
for decreasing mean PCS and MCS from never, former, to current smokers
(PCS PtrendPatient reported health-related quality of life (QOL) has been
recognized as a major component of the overall well-being of cancer
patients, with links to prognosis and other endpoints. We aimed to
identify determinants of baseline QOL by investigating the relationship
between patient characteristics, genetic factors, and baseline QOL in
lung cancer patients. We included 7,135 newly diagnosed and previously
untreated lung cancer patients. Patient reported data from the SF-12
questionnaire was used to calculate baseline Physical Component Summary
(PCS) and Mental Component Summary (MCS), with lower scores indicating a
worse quality of life. We observed that the mean PCS (38.82) and MCS
(46.22) scores were reduced in the lung cancer population when compared
to the general population which was normalized to 50. We observed a
significant trend for decreasing mean PCS and MCS from never, former, to
current smokers (PCS Ptrend<0.0001; MCS PtrendPatient reported
health-related quality of life (QOL) has been recognized as a major
component of the overall well-being of cancer patients, with links to
prognosis and other endpoints. We aimed to identify determinants of
baseline QOL by investigating the relationship between patient
characteristics, genetic factors, and baseline QOL in lung cancer
patients. We included 7,135 newly diagnosed and previously untreated lung
cancer patients. Patient reported data from the SF-12 questionnaire was
used to calculate baseline Physical Component Summary (PCS) and Mental
Component Summary (MCS), with lower scores indicating a worse quality of
life. We observed that the mean PCS (38.82) and MCS (46.22) scores were
reduced in the lung cancer population when compared to the general
population which was normalized to 50. We observed a significant trend
for decreasing mean PCS and MCS from never, former, to current smokers
(PCS Ptrend<0.0001; MCS Ptrend<0.0001) and a similar significant
increasing trend of mean PCS/MCS was seen for education from no high
school through college (PCS PtrendPatient reported health-related quality
of life (QOL) has been recognized as a major component of the overall
well-being of cancer patients, with links to prognosis and other
endpoints. We aimed to identify determinants of baseline QOL by
investigating the relationship between patient characteristics, genetic
factors, and baseline QOL in lung cancer patients. We included 7,135
newly diagnosed and previously untreated lung cancer patients. Patient
reported data from the SF-12 questionnaire was used to calculate baseline
Physical Component Summary (PCS) and Mental Component Summary (MCS), with
lower scores indicating a worse quality of life. We observed that the
mean PCS (38.82) and MCS (46.22) scores were reduced in the lung cancer
population when compared to the general population which was normalized
to 50. We observed a significant trend for decreasing mean PCS and MCS
from never, former, to current smokers (PCS Ptrend<0.0001; MCS
Ptrend<0.0001) and a similar significant increasing trend of mean PCS/MCS
was seen for education from no high school through college (PCS
Ptrend<0.0001; MCS PtrendPatient reported health-related quality of life
(QOL) has been recognized as a major component of the overall well-being
of cancer patients, with links to prognosis and other endpoints. We aimed
to identify determinants of baseline QOL by investigating the
relationship between patient characteristics, genetic factors, and
baseline QOL in lung cancer patients. We included 7,135 newly diagnosed
and previously untreated lung cancer patients. Patient reported data from
the SF-12 questionnaire was used to calculate baseline Physical Component
Summary (PCS) and Mental Component Summary (MCS), with lower scores
indicating a worse quality of life. We observed that the mean PCS (38.82)
and MCS (46.22) scores were reduced in the lung cancer population when
compared to the general population which was normalized to 50. We
observed a significant trend for decreasing mean PCS and MCS from never,
former, to current smokers (PCS Ptrend<0.0001; MCS Ptrend<0.0001) and a
similar significant increasing trend of mean PCS/MCS was seen for
education from no high school through college (PCS Ptrend<0.0001; MCS
Ptrend<0.0001). When compared to never smokers, current smokers were at
an increased risk of reporting a poor PCS (OR: 1.51, 95%CI: 1.18-1.94,
P=1.0x10-3). Compared to individuals with less than a high school degree,
those with a high school (OR: 0.76, 95%CI: 0.61-0.94, P=1.0x10-2) or
college degree (OR: 0.48, 95%CI: 0.38-0.62, PPatient reported
health-related quality of life (QOL) has been recognized as a major
component of the overall well-being of cancer patients, with links to
prognosis and other endpoints. We aimed to identify determinants of
baseline QOL by investigating the relationship between patient
characteristics, genetic factors, and baseline QOL in lung cancer
patients. We included 7,135 newly diagnosed and previously untreated lung
cancer patients. Patient reported data from the SF-12 questionnaire was
used to calculate baseline Physical Component Summary (PCS) and Mental
Component Summary (MCS), with lower scores indicating a worse quality of
life. We observed that the mean PCS (38.82) and MCS (46.22) scores were
reduced in the lung cancer population when compared to the general
population which was normalized to 50. We observed a significant trend
for decreasing mean PCS and MCS from never, former, to current smokers
(PCS Ptrend<0.0001; MCS Ptrend<0.0001) and a similar significant
increasing trend of mean PCS/MCS was seen for education from no high
school through college (PCS Ptrend<0.0001; MCS Ptrend<0.0001). When
compared to never smokers, current smokers were at an increased risk of
reporting a poor PCS (OR: 1.51, 95%CI: 1.18-1.94, P=1.0x10-3). Compared
to individuals with less than a high school degree, those with a high
school (OR: 0.76, 95%CI: 0.61-0.94, P=1.0x10-2) or college degree (OR:
0.48, 95%CI: 0.38-0.62, P<0.001) had a decreased risk of a poor PCS. A
similar relationship was seen for MCS. As cancer stage increased the mean
PCS and MCS score decreased (PCS PtrendPatient reported health-related
quality of life (QOL) has been recognized as a major component of the
overall well-being of cancer patients, with links to prognosis and other
endpoints. We aimed to identify determinants of baseline QOL by
investigating the relationship between patient characteristics, genetic
factors, and baseline QOL in lung cancer patients. We included 7,135
newly diagnosed and previously untreated lung cancer patients. Patient
reported data from the SF-12 questionnaire was used to calculate baseline
Physical Component Summary (PCS) and Mental Component Summary (MCS), with
lower scores indicating a worse quality of life. We observed that the
mean PCS (38.82) and MCS (46.22) scores were reduced in the lung cancer
population when compared to the general population which was normalized
to 50. We observed a significant trend for decreasing mean PCS and MCS
from never, former, to current smokers (PCS Ptrend<0.0001; MCS
Ptrend<0.0001) and a similar significant increasing trend of mean PCS/MCS
was seen for education from no high school through college (PCS
Ptrend<0.0001; MCS Ptrend<0.0001). When compared to never smokers,
current smokers were at an increased risk of reporting a poor PCS (OR:
1.51, 95%CI: 1.18-1.94, P=1.0x10-3). Compared to individuals with less
than a high school degree, those with a high school (OR: 0.76, 95%CI:
0.61-0.94, P=1.0x10-2) or college degree (OR: 0.48, 95%CI: 0.38-0.62,
P<0.001) had a decreased risk of a poor PCS. A similar relationship was
seen for MCS. As cancer stage increased the mean PCS and MCS score
decreased (PCS Ptrend<0.0001; MCS PtrendPatient reported health-related
quality of life (QOL) has been recognized as a major component of the
overall well-being of cancer patients, with links to prognosis and other
endpoints. We aimed to identify determinants of baseline QOL by
investigating the relationship between patient characteristics, genetic
factors, and baseline QOL in lung cancer patients. We included 7,135
newly diagnosed and previously untreated lung cancer patients. Patient
reported data from the SF-12 questionnaire was used to calculate baseline
Physical Component Summary (PCS) and Mental Component Summary (MCS), with
lower scores indicating a worse quality of life. We observed that the
mean PCS (38.82) and MCS (46.22) scores were reduced in the lung cancer
population when compared to the general population which was normalized
to 50. We observed a significant trend for decreasing mean PCS and MCS
from never, former, to current smokers (PCS Ptrend<0.0001; MCS
Ptrend<0.0001) and a similar significant increasing trend of mean PCS/MCS
was seen for education from no high school through college (PCS
Ptrend<0.0001; MCS Ptrend<0.0001). When compared to never smokers,
current smokers were at an increased risk of reporting a poor PCS (OR:
1.51, 95%CI: 1.18-1.94, P=1.0x10-3). Compared to individuals with less
than a high school degree, those with a high school (OR: 0.76, 95%CI:
0.61-0.94, P=1.0x10-2) or college degree (OR: 0.48, 95%CI: 0.38-0.62,
P<0.001) had a decreased risk of a poor PCS. A similar relationship was
seen for MCS. As cancer stage increased the mean PCS and MCS score
decreased (PCS Ptrend<0.0001; MCS Ptrend<0.0001). Further, we analyzed
218 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the p38 MAPK signaling
pathway, a key mediator of response to cellular and environmental stress,
as genetic determinants of QOL in a subset of the study population
(N=588). Using the median PCS/MCS score as the cut-off, twenty SNPs were
statistically significantly associated with PCS and 26 SNPs were
associated with MCS (PPatient reported health-related quality of life
(QOL) has been recognized as a major component of the overall well-being
of cancer patients, with links to prognosis and other endpoints. We aimed
to identify determinants of baseline QOL by investigating the
relationship between patient characteristics, genetic factors, and
baseline QOL in lung cancer patients. We included 7,135 newly diagnosed
and previously untreated lung cancer patients. Patient reported data from
the SF-12 questionnaire was used to calculate baseline Physical Component
Summary (PCS) and Mental Component Summary (MCS), with lower scores
indicating a worse quality of life. We observed that the mean PCS (38.82)
and MCS (46.22) scores were reduced in the lung cancer population when
compared to the general population which was normalized to 50. We
observed a significant trend for decreasing mean PCS and MCS from never,
former, to current smokers (PCS Ptrend<0.0001; MCS Ptrend<0.0001) and a
similar significant increasing trend of mean PCS/MCS was seen for
education from no high school through college (PCS Ptrend<0.0001; MCS
Ptrend<0.0001). When compared to never smokers, current smokers were at
an increased risk of reporting a poor PCS (OR: 1.51, 95%CI: 1.18-1.94,
P=1.0x10-3). Compared to individuals with less than a high school degree,
those with a high school (OR: 0.76, 95%CI: 0.61-0.94, P=1.0x10-2) or
college degree (OR: 0.48, 95%CI: 0.38-0.62, P<0.001) had a decreased risk
of a poor PCS. A similar relationship was seen for MCS. As cancer stage
increased the mean PCS and MCS score decreased (PCS Ptrend<0.0001; MCS
Ptrend<0.0001). Further, we analyzed 218 single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) in the p38 MAPK signaling pathway, a key mediator of response to
cellular and environmental stress, as genetic determinants of QOL in a
subset of the study population (N=588). Using the median PCS/MCS score as
the cut-off, twenty SNPs were statistically significantly associated with
PCS and 26 SNPs were associated with MCS (P<0.05). In the PCS analysis,
there was a 3.47-fold (95%CI, 1.75-6.88, P=3.5x10-4) increased risk of
reporting a low PCS score in individuals with at least one variant of
MAP2K6: rs12600726. At least one variant allele of rs7207011 in MAP2K4
was associated with a lower score for both PCS and MCS (PCS: OR=0.10,
95%CI, 0.01-0.87, P=3.7x10-2; MCS: OR=0.09, 95%CI, 0.01-0.80,
P=3.0x10-2). A gene-based analysis identified MEF2D and MAP3K5 as a
significant contributor to PCS, but not MCS. Furthermore, MAP2K6 was
identified as a significant contributor to both PCS and MCS. Validation
for these results is underway. Taken together these findings suggest that
multiple factors can contribute to QOL in lung cancer patients.

