Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Using CellMiner for gene expression, DNA copy number, microRNA
transcript levels, variant status, drug activity, and their integration
for systems pharmacology for the NCI-60


Molecular biology and pharmacology are being transformed by
high-throughput data. Access, and integration of this data, however,
remains difficult. The NCI-60 cancerous cell lines are arguably the
premier model for data integration and systems pharmacology. To make this
data accessible for both bioinformaticists and non-bioinformaticists, we
have developed the CellMiner set of web-based tools
(http://discover.nci.nih.gov/cellminer). These tools currently or in the
near future will provide Cell line signatures for gene and microRNA
transcript expression, DNA copy number variation, genetic variation, and
drug or compound activity. This data includes relative levels of
transcript expression for 26,065 genes, 360 microRNAs, activities of
19,940 compounds including 110 Food and Drug Administration
(FDA)-approved and 53 in clinical trial drugs, and percent conversions of
16,381 genetic variants (both germline and somatic). Current or upcoming
tools facilitating the combination of this data include i) Pattern
comparison, which provides correlations to a users input pattern to
transcript and microRNA expression and compound/drug activity, ii) Cross
correlation, which provides all correlations between up to 150 input
genes, microRNAs, and compounds or drugs, iii) Genetic variation versus
drug visualization, which provides a rapid visualization of potential
drug: gene DNA variant relationships, and iv) Genetic variant summation,
which provides a synopsis of mutational burden on any pathway of interest
for up to 150 genes. These tools allow the user to flexibly query the
data for potential relationships between molecular and pharmacological
parameters, in a manner specific to that users area of expertise and
interest.

