Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: p70S6 kinase is a critical node that integrates HER-family and PI3
kinase signaling


Targeted cancer therapies often induce compensatory adaptive responses
that blunt drug effectiveness, resulting in therapeutic resistance -
intrinsic or acquired. Adaptive responses are characteristic of the
complex nature of the cancer cell signaling network. Within this network,
nodes of convergence between signaling modules are critical mediators of
adaptive responses to targeted drugs. The critical nodes in an
oncogenically-activated signaling network represent potential therapeutic
vulnerabilities because their inhibition could result in collapse of the
network and hence enhanced cytotoxicity. We have previously used
high-throughput combinatorial drug screening to empirically identify
adaptive survival responses to targeted therapies. We found that
HER-family and PI3K represented compensatory signaling pathways, and
combination therapy caused synergistic cytotoxicity in cases where
inhibition of neither target was effective as a monotherapy. RPPA
analysis identified ribosomal protein S6 as being synergistically
down-regulated upon HER-family and PI3K co-inhibition. Expression of a
constitutively active construct of the upstream activator of S6, p70S6K,
was protective against apoptosis induced by combined HER-family and PI3K
inhibition. Direct inhibition of p70S6K using small molecule inhibitors
phenocopied the growth inhibition and apoptosis caused by HER-family and
PI3K inhibition. These data implicate p70S6K as a critical node and
druggable target in the HER-family / PI3K signaling network. The ability
of direct inhibitors of p70S6K to phenocopy the co-inhibition of upstream
signaling indicates that identification and targeting of critical nodes
may be a way to overcome adaptive resistance to targeted therapies.

