Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gene expression analysis of argininosuccinate synthetase loss and
the effects of pegylated arginine deiminase in malignant pleural
mesothelioma


Malignant pleural mesothelioma (MPM) is a devastating asbestos-related
malignancy that is increasing in many countries worldwide with few
systemic treatment options beyond platinum and antifolate chemotherapy.
Deficiency of the arginine biosynthetic enzyme argininosuccinate
synthetase (ASS1) occurs in up to 50% of MPM cell lines and primary
tumors and is being validated as a biomarker in patients treated with the
arginine-depleting agent, pegylated arginine deiminase (ADI-PEG20). To
understand the role of ASS1 loss and the effect of the ADI-PEG20 in MPM
we used pathway analysis tools on microarray gene expression data from a
representative panel of MPM cell lines. First, we identified that ASS1
loss was linked to several protumorigenic functions including increased
cell invasiveness and migration, which were confirmed subsequently using
invasion assays and organotypic modelling, respectively. We also detected
a large number of enriched pathways connected to the immune response
including communication between innate and adaptive immune cells and
interferon signalling. Furthermore, ASS1 deficiency was linked to worse
outcome with a median survival of 6 months in ASS1 low expressors
compared to 12 months for ASS1 high expressors using a retrospective
dataset (n=41; p=0.003). Second, ADI-PEG20 treatment modulated numerous
pathways in ASS1-deficient cells including suppression of mTOR and folate
metabolism, while promoting stress, oxidant and amino acid signalling.
Third, bioinformatics analyses of drug interactions using Connectivity
map revealed that arginine deprivation using ADI-PEG20 may potentiate
several chemotherapeutic and targeted agents in the clinic. Taken
together, our bioinformatics approach links loss of ASS1 in MPM cells to
a more aggressive phenotype and identifies several potential combination
strategies with ADI-PEG20 for further clinical investigation.

