Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Angiogenin and PlexinB2 promote glioblastoma progression by
stimulating tumor angiogenesis, cancer cell survival and invasion


Glioblastoma (GBM) tumors secrete high level of angiogenic factors and
feature vascular abnormality. Targeted therapy, such as Bevacizumab,
which neutralizes VEGF and normalizes tumor vasculature, has been
approved to treat recurrent GBM. However, it only marginally increases
patients' overall survival with inevitable resistance. It suggests that
therapy targeting complementary angiogenic pathway in GBM could suppress
Bevacizumab resistance and extend patients' survival.Angiogenin (ANG) is
involved in tumor angiogenesis where it regulates ribosomal RNA
transcription and functions downstream of VEGF and other related
angiogenic factors. Like VEGF, ANG is also up-regulated in GBM patients.
Inhibition of ANG by neutralizing monoclonal antibody delays U87 human
GBM xenografts on nude mice. My preliminary data have shown that ANG is
essential for GBM cell line s.c. vessel formation and tumor
proliferation. In Rcas/tva orthotropic GBM model, Ang1 knockout mice show
lower penetration and better survivals. ANG knockdown increases apoptosis
during GBM cell line colony formation in agarose. Notably, ANG's role in
tumor proliferation might extend beyond GBM, since oncogenic KRas
transformed Ang1 knockout MEFs also fail to grow in agarose. Lastly, I
have shown that PlexinB2, ANG cellular receptor, can mediate ANG cellular
uptake and also modulate GBM apoptosis in agarose. In conclusion,
inhibition of ANG inhibits GBM progression both in vitro and in vivo and
thus represents a new molecular target for GBM treatment.

