Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Notch-1 regulated stemness and EMT in colorectal cancer


Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the second leading cause of cancer death
nationwide. In 2013, nearly 156,000 patients will be diagnosed with CRC.
Surgical resection for early stage disease offers the best chance for
cure; however, up to 30% of patients will relapse. Current models of CRC
progression hold that tumor development is driven by a small
subpopulation of cancer initiating (CIC) or cancer stem (CSC) cells that
share many properties of stem cells. These cells have the capacity to
drive tumor growth, are largely responsible for relapse and have been
implicated in metastasis via epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT),
similar to normal counterparts in organogenesis. Notch-1 is the major
receptor for a highly conserved signaling pathway that is well-documented
to control stem cell and lineage commitment in various organs, including
the colon. The function of Notch signaling in colorectal cancer, however,
is not well-defined. Based on preliminary data in which colon tumor
samples from CRC patients expressed Notch-1 but surrounding benign tissue
did not, we sought to test the hypothesis that Notch-1 signaling in colon
cells promotes tumorigenesis by enhancing stem cell and EMT
characteristics of tumor cells. The human colon tumor line HCT-116 was
transduced with a retroviral construct that expresses constitutively
active Notch-1 (ICN1). Hes-1 protein levels were increased in the
activated Notch-1 transduced cells, indicating that the construct was
functional in activating Notch-signaling. These HCT116/ICN1 cells
exhibited higher plating efficiency than the parental cell line. The
average colony size of the HCT116/ICN1 cells was about two-fold smaller
than the parental cell line (pColorectal cancer (CRC) is the second
leading cause of cancer death nationwide. In 2013, nearly 156,000
patients will be diagnosed with CRC. Surgical resection for early stage
disease offers the best chance for cure; however, up to 30% of patients
will relapse. Current models of CRC progression hold that tumor
development is driven by a small subpopulation of cancer initiating (CIC)
or cancer stem (CSC) cells that share many properties of stem cells.
These cells have the capacity to drive tumor growth, are largely
responsible for relapse and have been implicated in metastasis via
epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT), similar to normal
counterparts in organogenesis. Notch-1 is the major receptor for a highly
conserved signaling pathway that is well-documented to control stem cell
and lineage commitment in various organs, including the colon. The
function of Notch signaling in colorectal cancer, however, is not
well-defined. Based on preliminary data in which colon tumor samples from
CRC patients expressed Notch-1 but surrounding benign tissue did not, we
sought to test the hypothesis that Notch-1 signaling in colon cells
promotes tumorigenesis by enhancing stem cell and EMT characteristics of
tumor cells. The human colon tumor line HCT-116 was transduced with a
retroviral construct that expresses constitutively active Notch-1 (ICN1).
Hes-1 protein levels were increased in the activated Notch-1 transduced
cells, indicating that the construct was functional in activating
Notch-signaling. These HCT116/ICN1 cells exhibited higher plating
efficiency than the parental cell line. The average colony size of the
HCT116/ICN1 cells was about two-fold smaller than the parental cell line
(p<0.001). In addition, cells with constitutively active Notch-1
(HCT116/ICN1) had a longer duplication time than parental HCT-116 cells
(pColorectal cancer (CRC) is the second leading cause of cancer death
nationwide. In 2013, nearly 156,000 patients will be diagnosed with CRC.
Surgical resection for early stage disease offers the best chance for
cure; however, up to 30% of patients will relapse. Current models of CRC
progression hold that tumor development is driven by a small
subpopulation of cancer initiating (CIC) or cancer stem (CSC) cells that
share many properties of stem cells. These cells have the capacity to
drive tumor growth, are largely responsible for relapse and have been
implicated in metastasis via epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT),
similar to normal counterparts in organogenesis. Notch-1 is the major
receptor for a highly conserved signaling pathway that is well-documented
to control stem cell and lineage commitment in various organs, including
the colon. The function of Notch signaling in colorectal cancer, however,
is not well-defined. Based on preliminary data in which colon tumor
samples from CRC patients expressed Notch-1 but surrounding benign tissue
did not, we sought to test the hypothesis that Notch-1 signaling in colon
cells promotes tumorigenesis by enhancing stem cell and EMT
characteristics of tumor cells. The human colon tumor line HCT-116 was
transduced with a retroviral construct that expresses constitutively
active Notch-1 (ICN1). Hes-1 protein levels were increased in the
activated Notch-1 transduced cells, indicating that the construct was
functional in activating Notch-signaling. These HCT116/ICN1 cells
exhibited higher plating efficiency than the parental cell line. The
average colony size of the HCT116/ICN1 cells was about two-fold smaller
than the parental cell line (p<0.001). In addition, cells with
constitutively active Notch-1 (HCT116/ICN1) had a longer duplication time
than parental HCT-116 cells (p<0.03). Consistent with longer duplication
time, HCT116/ICN1 cells were two-fold slower in completing wound healing
as compared with the parental HCT-116 cell line (pColorectal cancer (CRC)
is the second leading cause of cancer death nationwide. In 2013, nearly
156,000 patients will be diagnosed with CRC. Surgical resection for early
stage disease offers the best chance for cure; however, up to 30% of
patients will relapse. Current models of CRC progression hold that tumor
development is driven by a small subpopulation of cancer initiating (CIC)
or cancer stem (CSC) cells that share many properties of stem cells.
These cells have the capacity to drive tumor growth, are largely
responsible for relapse and have been implicated in metastasis via
epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT), similar to normal
counterparts in organogenesis. Notch-1 is the major receptor for a highly
conserved signaling pathway that is well-documented to control stem cell
and lineage commitment in various organs, including the colon. The
function of Notch signaling in colorectal cancer, however, is not
well-defined. Based on preliminary data in which colon tumor samples from
CRC patients expressed Notch-1 but surrounding benign tissue did not, we
sought to test the hypothesis that Notch-1 signaling in colon cells
promotes tumorigenesis by enhancing stem cell and EMT characteristics of
tumor cells. The human colon tumor line HCT-116 was transduced with a
retroviral construct that expresses constitutively active Notch-1 (ICN1).
Hes-1 protein levels were increased in the activated Notch-1 transduced
cells, indicating that the construct was functional in activating
Notch-signaling. These HCT116/ICN1 cells exhibited higher plating
efficiency than the parental cell line. The average colony size of the
HCT116/ICN1 cells was about two-fold smaller than the parental cell line
(p<0.001). In addition, cells with constitutively active Notch-1
(HCT116/ICN1) had a longer duplication time than parental HCT-116 cells
(p<0.03). Consistent with longer duplication time, HCT116/ICN1 cells were
two-fold slower in completing wound healing as compared with the parental
HCT-116 cell line (p<0.001). Transwell migration assays revealed a
two-fold increase in migration of HCT116/ICN1 cells as compared with the
parental control (pColorectal cancer (CRC) is the second leading cause of
cancer death nationwide. In 2013, nearly 156,000 patients will be
diagnosed with CRC. Surgical resection for early stage disease offers the
best chance for cure; however, up to 30% of patients will relapse.
Current models of CRC progression hold that tumor development is driven
by a small subpopulation of cancer initiating (CIC) or cancer stem (CSC)
cells that share many properties of stem cells. These cells have the
capacity to drive tumor growth, are largely responsible for relapse and
have been implicated in metastasis via epithelial to mesenchymal
transition (EMT), similar to normal counterparts in organogenesis.
Notch-1 is the major receptor for a highly conserved signaling pathway
that is well-documented to control stem cell and lineage commitment in
various organs, including the colon. The function of Notch signaling in
colorectal cancer, however, is not well-defined. Based on preliminary
data in which colon tumor samples from CRC patients expressed Notch-1 but
surrounding benign tissue did not, we sought to test the hypothesis that
Notch-1 signaling in colon cells promotes tumorigenesis by enhancing stem
cell and EMT characteristics of tumor cells. The human colon tumor line
HCT-116 was transduced with a retroviral construct that expresses
constitutively active Notch-1 (ICN1). Hes-1 protein levels were increased
in the activated Notch-1 transduced cells, indicating that the construct
was functional in activating Notch-signaling. These HCT116/ICN1 cells
exhibited higher plating efficiency than the parental cell line. The
average colony size of the HCT116/ICN1 cells was about two-fold smaller
than the parental cell line (p<0.001). In addition, cells with
constitutively active Notch-1 (HCT116/ICN1) had a longer duplication time
than parental HCT-116 cells (p<0.03). Consistent with longer duplication
time, HCT116/ICN1 cells were two-fold slower in completing wound healing
as compared with the parental HCT-116 cell line (p<0.001). Transwell
migration assays revealed a two-fold increase in migration of HCT116/ICN1
cells as compared with the parental control (p<0.03). Western blot
analysis demonstrated that the HCT116/ICN1 cells with activated Notch-1
expressed highly increased levels of the EMT associated proteins Smad3,
CD44 and Slug. This was accompanied by a four-fold decreased expression
of E-cadherin. Meanwhile, E-cadherin was not altered in HCT116 cells
transduced with a Notch-1 shRNA lentiviral construct that inactivated
Notch-1 signaling. Finally, levels of the numb protein, a Notch-1
antagonist, appeared to be significantly reduced (five-fold decrease) by
constitutive Notch-1 signaling. Alternatively, inactivation of Notch-1
resulted in a four-fold increased expression of the numb protein.
Collectively, our data point to the Notch-1 pathway as being a potential
key regulator of EMT in colorectal tumors and as such, may be of
therapeutic or prognostic utility.

