Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SRJ09, a semisynthetic anticancer agent, targets Ras-MAPK
signaling pathway: assessment in breast and colon cancer cell lines


SRJ09 (3,19-(2-bromobenzylidene)andrographolide) was shown to be more
selective towards breast and colon cancers in USA NCI 60 cancer cell line
screen, thus conferring it as lead anticancer agent (Jada et al (2008) Br
J Pharmacol, 155(5):641-54). The compound was recently reported by us to
be a mutant K-Ras binder (Hocker et al (2013), PNAS, 110(25):10201-6). In
the present investigation, MCF-7 breast and HCT116 colon cancer cell
lines were used to elucidate the mechanism of action of SRJ09. MTT cell
viability assay was carried out to determine the growth inhibition by
SRJ09 and other analogues of andrographolide (AGP). Cell cycle analysis
was performed by flow cytometry technique. Western blot was carried out
to determine the expression of cell signaling, cell cycle and apoptosis
regulatory proteins. Additionally, reverse transcriptase (RT)-PCR was
carried out to determine the expression of cell cycle regulatory genes.
SRJ09 was approximately one-fold more potent than AGP and analogues. In
terms of selectivity, HCT116 cells were more sensitive towards SRJ09
compared with MCF-7. SRJ09 was found to reduce the phosphorylated c-Raf
and ERK1/2 proteins in both cell lines, with HCT116 being more
susceptible towards the compound.SRJ09 induced G1 cell cycle arrest in
both cell lines through up-regulation of p21 and down-regulation of CDK4
expressions, without affecting cyclin D1. However, HCT116 cells were more
prone to undergo cell cycle arrest than MCF-7 cells. This finding was
substantiated by western blot and RT-PCR analyses, whereby both the gene
and protein expressions implicated in G1 arrest in HCT116 cells were
affected at much lower concentration (3 M) than in MCF-7. Western blot
analysis revealed that SRJ09 induces apoptosis in both cell lines via
p53-independent extrinsic pathway through activation of caspase 8 and
with subsequent activation of Bax, Bid and caspase 9, without affecting
Bcl-2. These findings were confirmed using caspase-8 inhibitor
(Z-IETD-FMK), whereby HCT116 cells pretreated with the inhibitor failed
to undergo apoptosis upon treatment with SRJ09. The differential
sensitivity observed might be related to the K-Ras status in both cell
lines, with HCT116 harboring mutant K-Ras while MCF-7 with wild type
K-Ras. In conclusion, SRJ09 potentially inhibits K-Ras signaling pathway
which reduces phosphorylated c-Raf and ERK1/2, thereby leading to G1 cell
cycle arrest and apoptosis. Importantly, this study further supports our
earlier finding that SRJ09 is a direct binder of K-Ras. This study was
funded by Universiti Putra Malaysia Research University Grant Scheme
(04-01-09-0713RU; 04-02-12-2017RU).

