Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phase specific microRNA deregulation of oncogenesis and stemness
in a mouse model of sporadic CRC


Background: The definition of cancer stem cells (CSCs) as tumor cells
that contain self-renewal and multilineage differentiation capacity still
lacks conclusive experimental evidence. This is partly because the gold
standard assay to identify CSCs, serial transplantation in animal models,
is an operation that can undervalue total CSC numbers. Recently, the
combination of mouse models that spontaneously develop tumors with
genetic tracing provided exciting support for the CSC theory.Here, we
took advantage of the use of cell-surface biomarkers, to purify, to some
extent, murine cell populations with CSC phenotype by cell sorting on
fresh spontaneous colorectal cancer (CRC).The aim of our study was to
define a panel of miRNAs pathways with a potential function in the
orchestration of selfrenewal and cell fate during cancer development
using tissue of colorectal cancer from both mouse and human
origin.Methods: Different populations of murine colon cells derived from
AOM/DSS-induced carcinoma were isolated with cell sorting performed on a
BD FACSAria system, by the expression of cell surface biomarkers (CD44,
EphB2), then stem/progenitor cells-like property was analysed by the
expression of stemness/differentiation genes (gene expression and IHC
analysis).Specific regions of AOM/DSS treated colon mucosa containing
dysplastic ACFs, microadenoma, adenoma, carcinoma compared to normal
mucosa were isolated with Laser Capture Microdissection for RNA
extraction. miRNAs expression profiling were performed using TaqMan Low
Density Arrays (LifeTechnologies) both on cells and tissue
samples.Microarray data were evaluated by state of the art statistics and
bioinformatics tools. Single Real-Time PCR for selected miRNAs were
performed on a training set of 60 FFPE human samples.Results: Global
miRNAs expression profiles showed a total of 100 miRNAs with a
significantly (pBackground: The definition of cancer stem cells (CSCs) as
tumor cells that contain self-renewal and multilineage differentiation
capacity still lacks conclusive experimental evidence. This is partly
because the gold standard assay to identify CSCs, serial transplantation
in animal models, is an operation that can undervalue total CSC numbers.
Recently, the combination of mouse models that spontaneously develop
tumors with genetic tracing provided exciting support for the CSC
theory.Here, we took advantage of the use of cell-surface biomarkers, to
purify, to some extent, murine cell populations with CSC phenotype by
cell sorting on fresh spontaneous colorectal cancer (CRC).The aim of our
study was to define a panel of miRNAs pathways with a potential function
in the orchestration of selfrenewal and cell fate during cancer
development using tissue of colorectal cancer from both mouse and human
origin.Methods: Different populations of murine colon cells derived from
AOM/DSS-induced carcinoma were isolated with cell sorting performed on a
BD FACSAria system, by the expression of cell surface biomarkers (CD44,
EphB2), then stem/progenitor cells-like property was analysed by the
expression of stemness/differentiation genes (gene expression and IHC
analysis).Specific regions of AOM/DSS treated colon mucosa containing
dysplastic ACFs, microadenoma, adenoma, carcinoma compared to normal
mucosa were isolated with Laser Capture Microdissection for RNA
extraction. miRNAs expression profiling were performed using TaqMan Low
Density Arrays (LifeTechnologies) both on cells and tissue
samples.Microarray data were evaluated by state of the art statistics and
bioinformatics tools. Single Real-Time PCR for selected miRNAs were
performed on a training set of 60 FFPE human samples.Results: Global
miRNAs expression profiles showed a total of 100 miRNAs with a
significantly (p<0,05) up/down regulation in a gradual or punctual way in
4 different stages of murine CRC. Numerous miRNAs were already
demonstrated to be deregulated in hCRC, confirming the high reliability
of the murine model to mimic the human pathology. A set of 100 miRNAs
distinguished the 4 steps of CRC progression in a unsupervised
hierarchical clustering analysis (pBackground: The definition of cancer
stem cells (CSCs) as tumor cells that contain self-renewal and
multilineage differentiation capacity still lacks conclusive experimental
evidence. This is partly because the gold standard assay to identify
CSCs, serial transplantation in animal models, is an operation that can
undervalue total CSC numbers. Recently, the combination of mouse models
that spontaneously develop tumors with genetic tracing provided exciting
support for the CSC theory.Here, we took advantage of the use of
cell-surface biomarkers, to purify, to some extent, murine cell
populations with CSC phenotype by cell sorting on fresh spontaneous
colorectal cancer (CRC).The aim of our study was to define a panel of
miRNAs pathways with a potential function in the orchestration of
selfrenewal and cell fate during cancer development using tissue of
colorectal cancer from both mouse and human origin.Methods: Different
populations of murine colon cells derived from AOM/DSS-induced carcinoma
were isolated with cell sorting performed on a BD FACSAria system, by the
expression of cell surface biomarkers (CD44, EphB2), then stem/progenitor
cells-like property was analysed by the expression of
stemness/differentiation genes (gene expression and IHC
analysis).Specific regions of AOM/DSS treated colon mucosa containing
dysplastic ACFs, microadenoma, adenoma, carcinoma compared to normal
mucosa were isolated with Laser Capture Microdissection for RNA
extraction. miRNAs expression profiling were performed using TaqMan Low
Density Arrays (LifeTechnologies) both on cells and tissue
samples.Microarray data were evaluated by state of the art statistics and
bioinformatics tools. Single Real-Time PCR for selected miRNAs were
performed on a training set of 60 FFPE human samples.Results: Global
miRNAs expression profiles showed a total of 100 miRNAs with a
significantly (p<0,05) up/down regulation in a gradual or punctual way in
4 different stages of murine CRC. Numerous miRNAs were already
demonstrated to be deregulated in hCRC, confirming the high reliability
of the murine model to mimic the human pathology. A set of 100 miRNAs
distinguished the 4 steps of CRC progression in a unsupervised
hierarchical clustering analysis (p<0,05).The analysis of miRNAs
expression pattern in the sorted stem-like cell populations in comparison
to miRNAs altered in the murine CRC initiation/progression steps revealed
a significant cancer stemness signature, composed by miRNAs related to
pluripotency and differentiation. Some of these changes, including
miR-200b, mir-429, mir-365, mir-215, mir-26b, mir-135, were studied as
well in the human samples, showing a similar pattern of that observed in
the murine model.Conclusions: These data provide a comprehensive miRNAs
signature implicated in the regulation of tumorigenesis, stemness, and
cell fate determination that could be exploited for diagnosis and
therapeutic design.

