Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SGI-110 alters ovarian cancer stem cells to prevent recurrent and
chemoresistant ovarian cancer


Ovarian cancer stem cells (OCSCs) are associated with drug resistance and
tumor relapse. Epigenetic aberrations, especially DNA methylation, result
in silencing of tumor suppressor and differentiation-associated genes and
regulate OCSCs' survival. To test the hypothesis that DNA hypomethylating
agents can reset OCSCs towards differentiation, we investigated the
effect of the DNA methytransferase inhibitor SGI-110 on OCSCs, defined by
aldehyde dehydrogenase 1 (ALDH)(+) cells. We treated ALDH(+) cells from
platinum-sensitive A2780 and platinum-resistant A2780-cp OC cells with
SGI-110 (100nM, 72 hr) or with cisplatin (CDDP; 1.67M, 24hr). After a 4
day recovery period, %ALDH+ was analyzed using FACS, cell viability was
determined, and ALDH(+) cells were grown as spheroids in culture or as
xenografts in mice. The overall %ALDH+ cells was higher (POvarian cancer
stem cells (OCSCs) are associated with drug resistance and tumor relapse.
Epigenetic aberrations, especially DNA methylation, result in silencing
of tumor suppressor and differentiation-associated genes and regulate
OCSCs' survival. To test the hypothesis that DNA hypomethylating agents
can reset OCSCs towards differentiation, we investigated the effect of
the DNA methytransferase inhibitor SGI-110 on OCSCs, defined by aldehyde
dehydrogenase 1 (ALDH)(+) cells. We treated ALDH(+) cells from
platinum-sensitive A2780 and platinum-resistant A2780-cp OC cells with
SGI-110 (100nM, 72 hr) or with cisplatin (CDDP; 1.67M, 24hr). After a 4
day recovery period, %ALDH+ was analyzed using FACS, cell viability was
determined, and ALDH(+) cells were grown as spheroids in culture or as
xenografts in mice. The overall %ALDH+ cells was higher (P<0.05) at
baseline in the SKOV3 (0.65%) and A2780-cp (1.07%) cells vs. A2780
(0.3%). SGI-110 inhibited (POvarian cancer stem cells (OCSCs) are
associated with drug resistance and tumor relapse. Epigenetic
aberrations, especially DNA methylation, result in silencing of tumor
suppressor and differentiation-associated genes and regulate OCSCs'
survival. To test the hypothesis that DNA hypomethylating agents can
reset OCSCs towards differentiation, we investigated the effect of the
DNA methytransferase inhibitor SGI-110 on OCSCs, defined by aldehyde
dehydrogenase 1 (ALDH)(+) cells. We treated ALDH(+) cells from
platinum-sensitive A2780 and platinum-resistant A2780-cp OC cells with
SGI-110 (100nM, 72 hr) or with cisplatin (CDDP; 1.67M, 24hr). After a 4
day recovery period, %ALDH+ was analyzed using FACS, cell viability was
determined, and ALDH(+) cells were grown as spheroids in culture or as
xenografts in mice. The overall %ALDH+ cells was higher (P<0.05) at
baseline in the SKOV3 (0.65%) and A2780-cp (1.07%) cells vs. A2780
(0.3%). SGI-110 inhibited (P<0.001) the growth and %ALDH+ of A2780,
A2780-cp cells. SGI-110-CDDP inhibited cell growth vs. CDDP alone
(pOvarian cancer stem cells (OCSCs) are associated with drug resistance
and tumor relapse. Epigenetic aberrations, especially DNA methylation,
result in silencing of tumor suppressor and differentiation-associated
genes and regulate OCSCs' survival. To test the hypothesis that DNA
hypomethylating agents can reset OCSCs towards differentiation, we
investigated the effect of the DNA methytransferase inhibitor SGI-110 on
OCSCs, defined by aldehyde dehydrogenase 1 (ALDH)(+) cells. We treated
ALDH(+) cells from platinum-sensitive A2780 and platinum-resistant
A2780-cp OC cells with SGI-110 (100nM, 72 hr) or with cisplatin (CDDP;
1.67M, 24hr). After a 4 day recovery period, %ALDH+ was analyzed using
FACS, cell viability was determined, and ALDH(+) cells were grown as
spheroids in culture or as xenografts in mice. The overall %ALDH+ cells
was higher (P<0.05) at baseline in the SKOV3 (0.65%) and A2780-cp (1.07%)
cells vs. A2780 (0.3%). SGI-110 inhibited (P<0.001) the growth and %ALDH+
of A2780, A2780-cp cells. SGI-110-CDDP inhibited cell growth vs. CDDP
alone (p<0.001) and decreased (POvarian cancer stem cells (OCSCs) are
associated with drug resistance and tumor relapse. Epigenetic
aberrations, especially DNA methylation, result in silencing of tumor
suppressor and differentiation-associated genes and regulate OCSCs'
survival. To test the hypothesis that DNA hypomethylating agents can
reset OCSCs towards differentiation, we investigated the effect of the
DNA methytransferase inhibitor SGI-110 on OCSCs, defined by aldehyde
dehydrogenase 1 (ALDH)(+) cells. We treated ALDH(+) cells from
platinum-sensitive A2780 and platinum-resistant A2780-cp OC cells with
SGI-110 (100nM, 72 hr) or with cisplatin (CDDP; 1.67M, 24hr). After a 4
day recovery period, %ALDH+ was analyzed using FACS, cell viability was
determined, and ALDH(+) cells were grown as spheroids in culture or as
xenografts in mice. The overall %ALDH+ cells was higher (P<0.05) at
baseline in the SKOV3 (0.65%) and A2780-cp (1.07%) cells vs. A2780
(0.3%). SGI-110 inhibited (P<0.001) the growth and %ALDH+ of A2780,
A2780-cp cells. SGI-110-CDDP inhibited cell growth vs. CDDP alone
(p<0.001) and decreased (P<0.05) ALDH(+) cells in A2780 and A2780-cp. MTT
assay showed A2780-cp-ALDH(+) cells were 3-fold more resistant than
ALDH(-) cells to CDDP. SGI-110 decreased by 2 and 6-fold respectively the
CDDP IC50 in A2780 and A2780-cp (POvarian cancer stem cells (OCSCs) are
associated with drug resistance and tumor relapse. Epigenetic
aberrations, especially DNA methylation, result in silencing of tumor
suppressor and differentiation-associated genes and regulate OCSCs'
survival. To test the hypothesis that DNA hypomethylating agents can
reset OCSCs towards differentiation, we investigated the effect of the
DNA methytransferase inhibitor SGI-110 on OCSCs, defined by aldehyde
dehydrogenase 1 (ALDH)(+) cells. We treated ALDH(+) cells from
platinum-sensitive A2780 and platinum-resistant A2780-cp OC cells with
SGI-110 (100nM, 72 hr) or with cisplatin (CDDP; 1.67M, 24hr). After a 4
day recovery period, %ALDH+ was analyzed using FACS, cell viability was
determined, and ALDH(+) cells were grown as spheroids in culture or as
xenografts in mice. The overall %ALDH+ cells was higher (P<0.05) at
baseline in the SKOV3 (0.65%) and A2780-cp (1.07%) cells vs. A2780
(0.3%). SGI-110 inhibited (P<0.001) the growth and %ALDH+ of A2780,
A2780-cp cells. SGI-110-CDDP inhibited cell growth vs. CDDP alone
(p<0.001) and decreased (P<0.05) ALDH(+) cells in A2780 and A2780-cp. MTT
assay showed A2780-cp-ALDH(+) cells were 3-fold more resistant than
ALDH(-) cells to CDDP. SGI-110 decreased by 2 and 6-fold respectively the
CDDP IC50 in A2780 and A2780-cp (P<0.05). SGI-110 induced both transient
and prolonged inhibitory (POvarian cancer stem cells (OCSCs) are
associated with drug resistance and tumor relapse. Epigenetic
aberrations, especially DNA methylation, result in silencing of tumor
suppressor and differentiation-associated genes and regulate OCSCs'
survival. To test the hypothesis that DNA hypomethylating agents can
reset OCSCs towards differentiation, we investigated the effect of the
DNA methytransferase inhibitor SGI-110 on OCSCs, defined by aldehyde
dehydrogenase 1 (ALDH)(+) cells. We treated ALDH(+) cells from
platinum-sensitive A2780 and platinum-resistant A2780-cp OC cells with
SGI-110 (100nM, 72 hr) or with cisplatin (CDDP; 1.67M, 24hr). After a 4
day recovery period, %ALDH+ was analyzed using FACS, cell viability was
determined, and ALDH(+) cells were grown as spheroids in culture or as
xenografts in mice. The overall %ALDH+ cells was higher (P<0.05) at
baseline in the SKOV3 (0.65%) and A2780-cp (1.07%) cells vs. A2780
(0.3%). SGI-110 inhibited (P<0.001) the growth and %ALDH+ of A2780,
A2780-cp cells. SGI-110-CDDP inhibited cell growth vs. CDDP alone
(p<0.001) and decreased (P<0.05) ALDH(+) cells in A2780 and A2780-cp. MTT
assay showed A2780-cp-ALDH(+) cells were 3-fold more resistant than
ALDH(-) cells to CDDP. SGI-110 decreased by 2 and 6-fold respectively the
CDDP IC50 in A2780 and A2780-cp (P<0.05). SGI-110 induced both transient
and prolonged inhibitory (P<0.05) effects on ALDH(+) cell migration and
sphere and colony formation. DNA methylation and gene expression changes
in the ALDH(+) spheres were assessed by pyrosequencing and qRT-PCR.
HOXA10 and HOXA11 (differentiation-associated genes) were upregulated and
the stemness markers ALDH1A1, Bmi1, Nanog, Notch3 and Oct4 were down
regulated by SGI-110. ALDH+ cells treated with SGI-110 (100nM) showed
prolonged tumor formation latency and reduced tumor growth in mice
compared to ALDH+ cells alone, whereas ALDH- cells were non-tumorigenic.
In an ip xenograft model derived from A2780 cells, CDDP decreased
(POvarian cancer stem cells (OCSCs) are associated with drug resistance
and tumor relapse. Epigenetic aberrations, especially DNA methylation,
result in silencing of tumor suppressor and differentiation-associated
genes and regulate OCSCs' survival. To test the hypothesis that DNA
hypomethylating agents can reset OCSCs towards differentiation, we
investigated the effect of the DNA methytransferase inhibitor SGI-110 on
OCSCs, defined by aldehyde dehydrogenase 1 (ALDH)(+) cells. We treated
ALDH(+) cells from platinum-sensitive A2780 and platinum-resistant
A2780-cp OC cells with SGI-110 (100nM, 72 hr) or with cisplatin (CDDP;
1.67M, 24hr). After a 4 day recovery period, %ALDH+ was analyzed using
FACS, cell viability was determined, and ALDH(+) cells were grown as
spheroids in culture or as xenografts in mice. The overall %ALDH+ cells
was higher (P<0.05) at baseline in the SKOV3 (0.65%) and A2780-cp (1.07%)
cells vs. A2780 (0.3%). SGI-110 inhibited (P<0.001) the growth and %ALDH+
of A2780, A2780-cp cells. SGI-110-CDDP inhibited cell growth vs. CDDP
alone (p<0.001) and decreased (P<0.05) ALDH(+) cells in A2780 and
A2780-cp. MTT assay showed A2780-cp-ALDH(+) cells were 3-fold more
resistant than ALDH(-) cells to CDDP. SGI-110 decreased by 2 and 6-fold
respectively the CDDP IC50 in A2780 and A2780-cp (P<0.05). SGI-110
induced both transient and prolonged inhibitory (P<0.05) effects on
ALDH(+) cell migration and sphere and colony formation. DNA methylation
and gene expression changes in the ALDH(+) spheres were assessed by
pyrosequencing and qRT-PCR. HOXA10 and HOXA11 (differentiation-associated
genes) were upregulated and the stemness markers ALDH1A1, Bmi1, Nanog,
Notch3 and Oct4 were down regulated by SGI-110. ALDH+ cells treated with
SGI-110 (100nM) showed prolonged tumor formation latency and reduced
tumor growth in mice compared to ALDH+ cells alone, whereas ALDH- cells
were non-tumorigenic. In an ip xenograft model derived from A2780 cells,
CDDP decreased (P<0.001) tumor growth. The %ALDH(+) cells and spheroid
numbers were increased (pOvarian cancer stem cells (OCSCs) are associated
with drug resistance and tumor relapse. Epigenetic aberrations,
especially DNA methylation, result in silencing of tumor suppressor and
differentiation-associated genes and regulate OCSCs' survival. To test
the hypothesis that DNA hypomethylating agents can reset OCSCs towards
differentiation, we investigated the effect of the DNA methytransferase
inhibitor SGI-110 on OCSCs, defined by aldehyde dehydrogenase 1 (ALDH)(+)
cells. We treated ALDH(+) cells from platinum-sensitive A2780 and
platinum-resistant A2780-cp OC cells with SGI-110 (100nM, 72 hr) or with
cisplatin (CDDP; 1.67M, 24hr). After a 4 day recovery period, %ALDH+ was
analyzed using FACS, cell viability was determined, and ALDH(+) cells
were grown as spheroids in culture or as xenografts in mice. The overall
%ALDH+ cells was higher (P<0.05) at baseline in the SKOV3 (0.65%) and
A2780-cp (1.07%) cells vs. A2780 (0.3%). SGI-110 inhibited (P<0.001) the
growth and %ALDH+ of A2780, A2780-cp cells. SGI-110-CDDP inhibited cell
growth vs. CDDP alone (p<0.001) and decreased (P<0.05) ALDH(+) cells in
A2780 and A2780-cp. MTT assay showed A2780-cp-ALDH(+) cells were 3-fold
more resistant than ALDH(-) cells to CDDP. SGI-110 decreased by 2 and
6-fold respectively the CDDP IC50 in A2780 and A2780-cp (P<0.05). SGI-110
induced both transient and prolonged inhibitory (P<0.05) effects on
ALDH(+) cell migration and sphere and colony formation. DNA methylation
and gene expression changes in the ALDH(+) spheres were assessed by
pyrosequencing and qRT-PCR. HOXA10 and HOXA11 (differentiation-associated
genes) were upregulated and the stemness markers ALDH1A1, Bmi1, Nanog,
Notch3 and Oct4 were down regulated by SGI-110. ALDH+ cells treated with
SGI-110 (100nM) showed prolonged tumor formation latency and reduced
tumor growth in mice compared to ALDH+ cells alone, whereas ALDH- cells
were non-tumorigenic. In an ip xenograft model derived from A2780 cells,
CDDP decreased (P<0.001) tumor growth. The %ALDH(+) cells and spheroid
numbers were increased (p<0.001) in the cell population dissociated from
residual OC xenografts after CDDP treatment (3 weeks) compared to control
(44% vs. 2.3%). Maintenance therapy with SGI-110 after maximal response
induced by CDDP decreased recurrent tumor growth and metastases (P=0.05).
DNA methylome assessed with Infinium 450K methylation arrays showed
global demethylation of xenografts by SGI-110 vs. control (6% decrease in
average -value, p=0.05 and over 60,000 hypomethylated sites). In summary,
our in vitro and in vivo data demonstrate that low dose SGI-110 or with
CDDP, reduced the stemness capability of OCSCs and SGI-110 alone
increased CDDP sensitivity and induced reexpression of
differentiation-associated genes in ALDH+ cells. Therefore, SGI-110 in
combination with cisplatin has the potential to alter OCSC in patients to
prevent recurrent and chemoresistant OC.

