Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Liver selective Acetyl-CoA Carboxylase inhibition by ND-654
decreases hepatocellular carcinoma development in cirrhotic rats


Background: Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is increasing in incidence
worldwide. This increase is in part due to the obesity epidemic which is
an independent risk factor for both nonalcoholic fatty liver disease
(NAFLD) and HCC. In fact, recent evidence suggests that enhanced de novo
lipogenesis is a critical mediator for HCC development. Current treatment
options for HCC are limited, and as such, prognosis is extremely poor
with a 5-year survival less than 12%. Therefore, there is an urgent
medical need for new therapeutic strategies. Simultaneous inhibition of
the acetyl-CoA carboxylase isozymes, ACC1 and ACC2, results in
concomitant inhibition of fatty acid synthesis (FASyn) and stimulation of
fatty acid oxidation (FAOxn) in cultured cells and in animals, reduces
hepatic steatosis, and impedes tumor cell growth in vitro. Here, we test
the hypothesis that simultaneous reduction of hepatic FASyn through
inhibition of ACC1 and stimulation of hepatic FAOxn through inhibition
ACC2 is a potential therapeutic target for HCC. Results: Using
state-of-the-art structure-based drug design and crystal structures of
the human ACC2 biotin carboxylase domain, we identified ND-654, a
hepatoselective (2700:5:1 liver to plasma to muscle exposure), allosteric
inhibitor that binds to the ACC subunit dimerization site, inhibits the
enzymatic activity of both ACC1 (IC50 = 3 nM) and ACC2 (IC50 = 8 nM), and
inhibits FASyn in HepG2 cells (IC50 = 14 nM) and in rats (ED50 = 0.3
mg/kg). Male Wistar rats were treated weekly with 50 mg/kg
diethylnitrosamine (DEN) to induce sequential development of fibrosis,
cirrhosis and HCC. After establishment of cirrhosis (13 wks), rats were
treated daily by oral gavage with either vehicle or 10 mg/kg ND-654. At
the end of the study (18 wks), rats were sacrificed and tumor nodules
were counted. Liver tissue and plasma were also analyzed to assess the
effects of ND-654 on disease progression. When measured four hours after
the final dose, ND-654 showed preferential liver exposure, with steady
state levels reaching 3.71.8 M in cirrhotic tissue and 2.21.8 M in tumor
tissue. ND-654 did not alter body weight or food consumption, but reduced
serum triglyceride levels by 35%. Importantly, ND-654 significantly (p
Background: Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is increasing in incidence
worldwide. This increase is in part due to the obesity epidemic which is
an independent risk factor for both nonalcoholic fatty liver disease
(NAFLD) and HCC. In fact, recent evidence suggests that enhanced de novo
lipogenesis is a critical mediator for HCC development. Current treatment
options for HCC are limited, and as such, prognosis is extremely poor
with a 5-year survival less than 12%. Therefore, there is an urgent
medical need for new therapeutic strategies. Simultaneous inhibition of
the acetyl-CoA carboxylase isozymes, ACC1 and ACC2, results in
concomitant inhibition of fatty acid synthesis (FASyn) and stimulation of
fatty acid oxidation (FAOxn) in cultured cells and in animals, reduces
hepatic steatosis, and impedes tumor cell growth in vitro. Here, we test
the hypothesis that simultaneous reduction of hepatic FASyn through
inhibition of ACC1 and stimulation of hepatic FAOxn through inhibition
ACC2 is a potential therapeutic target for HCC. Results: Using
state-of-the-art structure-based drug design and crystal structures of
the human ACC2 biotin carboxylase domain, we identified ND-654, a
hepatoselective (2700:5:1 liver to plasma to muscle exposure), allosteric
inhibitor that binds to the ACC subunit dimerization site, inhibits the
enzymatic activity of both ACC1 (IC50 = 3 nM) and ACC2 (IC50 = 8 nM), and
inhibits FASyn in HepG2 cells (IC50 = 14 nM) and in rats (ED50 = 0.3
mg/kg). Male Wistar rats were treated weekly with 50 mg/kg
diethylnitrosamine (DEN) to induce sequential development of fibrosis,
cirrhosis and HCC. After establishment of cirrhosis (13 wks), rats were
treated daily by oral gavage with either vehicle or 10 mg/kg ND-654. At
the end of the study (18 wks), rats were sacrificed and tumor nodules
were counted. Liver tissue and plasma were also analyzed to assess the
effects of ND-654 on disease progression. When measured four hours after
the final dose, ND-654 showed preferential liver exposure, with steady
state levels reaching 3.71.8 M in cirrhotic tissue and 2.21.8 M in tumor
tissue. ND-654 did not alter body weight or food consumption, but reduced
serum triglyceride levels by 35%. Importantly, ND-654 significantly (p <
0.01) inhibited HCC development in DEN-injured livers from an average of
15.8 tumor nodules in controls to an average of 7.1 tumor nodules in
ND-654-treated rats. Consistently, ND-654 reduced the DEN-induced
increase in liver weight by 48%, and decreased the number of tumor
related deaths by 67% (6 of 8 controls vs 2 of 8 ND-654-treated rats).
Conclusions: These results provide further evidence that de novo
lipogenesis is an important mediator of hepatic carcinogenesis and that
selective inhibition of hepatic ACC is a potential therapeutic strategy
for HCC.

