Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Direct inhibition of oncogenic KRAS by hydrocarbon-stapled SOS1
helices


Activating mutations in KRAS represent the most frequent oncogenic
driving force among the RAS homologs K-, N- and H-RAS, and are associated
with poor prognosis and chemoresistance. KRAS mutations are present in
approximately 30% of tumors, and at even higher frequencies in cancers of
the pancreas, lung, thyroid gland, colon, and liver. In pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinomas (PDAC), which carries a 5-year survival rate of less than
5%, activating KRAS mutations are present in over 90% of tumors.
Moreover, these mutations have been causally linked to the initiation and
progression of PDAC. Despite the mechanistic insights into KRAS-mediated
oncogenesis, development of high affinity targeted inhibitors remains a
formidable challenge. Here, we report the synthesis and application of
hydrocarbon-stapled peptides as prototype therapeutics for blocking wild
type and mutant KRAS in vitro and in cancer cells. Stabilized
Alpha-Helices of SOS1 (SAH-SOS1) were generated by inserting hydrocarbon
staples into SOS1 peptide sequence to recapitulate the alpha-helical
structure of the native KRAS-interaction domain. SAH-SOS1 peptides, but
not negative control analogs, bound to a variety of KRAS constructs with
nanomolar affinity, inhibiting nucleotide exchange. This
sequence-specific biochemical activity correlated with impairment of
KRAS-driven cancer cell viability and signal transduction. These studies
provide proof-of-concept for the utility of SAH-SOS1 peptides in
dissecting and targeting the oncogenic KRAS pathway in human cancer.

