Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Patient-derived xenograft study reveals the pharmacology and the
role of ESR1 gene aberrations in endocrine therapy resistance of ER
positive breast cancer


Background: The study of estrogen-receptor-positive patient-derived
xenografts (PDXs) from patients with disease progression despite
endocrine therapy has revealed recurrent ESR1 mutation, gene
amplification and ESR1 gene translocations as likely drivers of
resistance. We addressed this hypothesis further using pharmacological
and genetic approaches in the PDX system.Methodology: ER positive PDXs
that harbored one of four recurrent ligand binding domain (LBD) mutations
(Y537S/N/C and D538G) as well as a ESR1/YAP1 translocation were studied
in parallel with T47D and MCF7 cells expressing these mutants through
lentivirus constructs. Single cell suspensions generated from PDX models
were using for in vitro experiments using with a panel of endocrine
inhibitors and ESR1 shRNA constructs. In vitro effects were confirmed
using in vivo tumor response.Results: Cell suspensions from ER+ PDX
models in short-term culture successfully reproduced the endocrine
therapy resistant phenotypes exhibited by the donor patient, thereby
facilitating drugs screens designed to identify new endocrine approaches
for ESR1 mutant breast cancer using authentic models rather than an
exclusive reliance on models derived by transfection of mutant constructs
into standard indicator cell lines. We were also able to demonstrate that
that lentivirus-driven shRNA mediated knockdown of ESR1-YAP1 caused
inhibition of PDX tumor growth in in vivo and reduced cell growth in
vitro, confirming that this chimeric protein is a driver of
estradiol-independent growth.Conclusion: ER+ PDX can be manipulated in
vitro and in vivo to successfully model ESR1 mutation and
gene-rearrangement driven endocrine therapy resistance. PDX studies
complement standard ectopic expression systems for the study of ESR1
mutation-driven resistance and, we hypothesize, will provide
pharmacological data that will predict the activity of pharmacological
agents designed to improve outcomes for patients with ESR1 mutant driven
endocrine therapy resistance.

