Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Monitoring the level of the universal nucleotide AMP in diverse
enzymatic reactions using bioluminescent homogenous assay platform


Adenine nucleotides are major determinants of the energy status of the
cell and thus any modulation of their cellular concentration has
significant consequences to cellular metabolism, cellular growth and cell
death. Many biochemical reactions that generate AMP as a reaction product
are pivotal players in a variety of signaling pathways and thus are
considered validated drug targets. These include enzymes involved in
protein ubiquitination (Ubiquitin ligases), protein synthesis (aminoacyl
tRNA synthetases), second messenger signaling (cAMP-phosphodiesterases),
and DNA synthesis and repair (prokaryotic and eukaryotic DNA ligases).
Therefore, an assay that monitors the activity of these enzymes is
desirable in the search for selective modulators and the development of
novel therapeutics. As AMP is a common product of these enzymatic
reactions, the development of an assay that monitors AMP in a homogenous
and sensitive fashion will have significant impact in these diverse areas
of research. In addition, enzyme reactions that generate products which
can be converted to AMP can be also monitored using this assay. We
demonstrate the utility of this assay platform in monitoring the activity
of cAMP-PDE, aminoacyl tRNA synthetases, ubiquitin ligases, DNA ligases.
Furthermore, enzyme reactions such as methyltransferases that produce
product (SAH) which can be converted to AMP can be monitored using this
assay platform

