Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Altered regulation of CEBP transcription factor family in normal
bronchial epithelial cells of subjects with lung cancer or COPD


Background: Antioxidant (AO), DNA repair (DNAR), and cell cycle control
(CCC) genes play a role in protecting normal bronchial epithelial cells
(NBEC) from damage, and sub-optimal function is associated with risk for
COPD and lung cancer. CEBP transcription factors regulate key AO and DNA
repair genes in NBEC. In this study, we investigated the association
between CEBP transcription factor function and regulation of these gene
pathways in NBEC of cancer (CA) and non-cancer (NC) COPD subjects.
Methods: NBEC samples were obtained by bronchoscopy from 66 CA cases and
60 matched NC controls, and 30 NC COPD and 30 NC non-COPD controls
defined by spirometry (FEV1 Background: Antioxidant (AO), DNA repair
(DNAR), and cell cycle control (CCC) genes play a role in protecting
normal bronchial epithelial cells (NBEC) from damage, and sub-optimal
function is associated with risk for COPD and lung cancer. CEBP
transcription factors regulate key AO and DNA repair genes in NBEC. In
this study, we investigated the association between CEBP transcription
factor function and regulation of these gene pathways in NBEC of cancer
(CA) and non-cancer (NC) COPD subjects. Methods: NBEC samples were
obtained by bronchoscopy from 66 CA cases and 60 matched NC controls, and
30 NC COPD and 30 NC non-COPD controls defined by spirometry (FEV1 <0.7,
FEV1/FVC Background: Antioxidant (AO), DNA repair (DNAR), and cell cycle
control (CCC) genes play a role in protecting normal bronchial epithelial
cells (NBEC) from damage, and sub-optimal function is associated with
risk for COPD and lung cancer. CEBP transcription factors regulate key AO
and DNA repair genes in NBEC. In this study, we investigated the
association between CEBP transcription factor function and regulation of
these gene pathways in NBEC of cancer (CA) and non-cancer (NC) COPD
subjects. Methods: NBEC samples were obtained by bronchoscopy from 66 CA
cases and 60 matched NC controls, and 30 NC COPD and 30 NC non-COPD
controls defined by spirometry (FEV1 <0.7, FEV1/FVC <80% expected). RNA
was extracted and reverse transcribed into cDNA with M-MLV using oligo dT
primer. A targeted competitive multiplex next generation sequencing
method was used to quantify expression of CEBPA, CEBPG, CEBPD, and 30 AO,
DNAR, and CCC target genes. We assessed difference in inter-gene
correlation of log-transformed transcript abundance by Pearson,
difference in correlation by Fisher Z-transformation, dispersion
difference by F-test and difference in mean by t-test. Results: Among NC
controls, CEBPG transcript abundance was highly correlated with CEBPA (r
= 0.78) and NFE2L2 (r = 0.86) but correlation was significantly lower in
cancer (r = 0.45, 0.52, respectively). Correspondingly, CEBPA and CEBPG
expression was more disperse among NC compared to CA (p-value = 1.6E-04,
4.2E-12, respectively). Further, correlation with CEBPG and/or CEBPA was
significantly lower in cancer compared to controls for 13 AO, DNAR, or
CCC genes, and significantly higher for only 2 genes. Moreover, CEBPA,
CEBPG, CCND2, KEAP1, MYC, NFE2L2, RB1, TP53, and TP73 mean expression was
lower in cancer compared to control while BRCA1, GSTM1, and GSTP1
expression was higher (p-value Background: Antioxidant (AO), DNA repair
(DNAR), and cell cycle control (CCC) genes play a role in protecting
normal bronchial epithelial cells (NBEC) from damage, and sub-optimal
function is associated with risk for COPD and lung cancer. CEBP
transcription factors regulate key AO and DNA repair genes in NBEC. In
this study, we investigated the association between CEBP transcription
factor function and regulation of these gene pathways in NBEC of cancer
(CA) and non-cancer (NC) COPD subjects. Methods: NBEC samples were
obtained by bronchoscopy from 66 CA cases and 60 matched NC controls, and
30 NC COPD and 30 NC non-COPD controls defined by spirometry (FEV1 <0.7,
FEV1/FVC <80% expected). RNA was extracted and reverse transcribed into
cDNA with M-MLV using oligo dT primer. A targeted competitive multiplex
next generation sequencing method was used to quantify expression of
CEBPA, CEBPG, CEBPD, and 30 AO, DNAR, and CCC target genes. We assessed
difference in inter-gene correlation of log-transformed transcript
abundance by Pearson, difference in correlation by Fisher
Z-transformation, dispersion difference by F-test and difference in mean
by t-test. Results: Among NC controls, CEBPG transcript abundance was
highly correlated with CEBPA (r = 0.78) and NFE2L2 (r = 0.86) but
correlation was significantly lower in cancer (r = 0.45, 0.52,
respectively). Correspondingly, CEBPA and CEBPG expression was more
disperse among NC compared to CA (p-value = 1.6E-04, 4.2E-12,
respectively). Further, correlation with CEBPG and/or CEBPA was
significantly lower in cancer compared to controls for 13 AO, DNAR, or
CCC genes, and significantly higher for only 2 genes. Moreover, CEBPA,
CEBPG, CCND2, KEAP1, MYC, NFE2L2, RB1, TP53, and TP73 mean expression was
lower in cancer compared to control while BRCA1, GSTM1, and GSTP1
expression was higher (p-value <0.01). Among non-COPD NC controls, CEBPG
was positively correlated with OGG1, CCND2 and ERCC5 and correlation with
each gene was significantly lower among COPD NC subjects (p-value of
Z-score Background: Antioxidant (AO), DNA repair (DNAR), and cell cycle
control (CCC) genes play a role in protecting normal bronchial epithelial
cells (NBEC) from damage, and sub-optimal function is associated with
risk for COPD and lung cancer. CEBP transcription factors regulate key AO
and DNA repair genes in NBEC. In this study, we investigated the
association between CEBP transcription factor function and regulation of
these gene pathways in NBEC of cancer (CA) and non-cancer (NC) COPD
subjects. Methods: NBEC samples were obtained by bronchoscopy from 66 CA
cases and 60 matched NC controls, and 30 NC COPD and 30 NC non-COPD
controls defined by spirometry (FEV1 <0.7, FEV1/FVC <80% expected). RNA
was extracted and reverse transcribed into cDNA with M-MLV using oligo dT
primer. A targeted competitive multiplex next generation sequencing
method was used to quantify expression of CEBPA, CEBPG, CEBPD, and 30 AO,
DNAR, and CCC target genes. We assessed difference in inter-gene
correlation of log-transformed transcript abundance by Pearson,
difference in correlation by Fisher Z-transformation, dispersion
difference by F-test and difference in mean by t-test. Results: Among NC
controls, CEBPG transcript abundance was highly correlated with CEBPA (r
= 0.78) and NFE2L2 (r = 0.86) but correlation was significantly lower in
cancer (r = 0.45, 0.52, respectively). Correspondingly, CEBPA and CEBPG
expression was more disperse among NC compared to CA (p-value = 1.6E-04,
4.2E-12, respectively). Further, correlation with CEBPG and/or CEBPA was
significantly lower in cancer compared to controls for 13 AO, DNAR, or
CCC genes, and significantly higher for only 2 genes. Moreover, CEBPA,
CEBPG, CCND2, KEAP1, MYC, NFE2L2, RB1, TP53, and TP73 mean expression was
lower in cancer compared to control while BRCA1, GSTM1, and GSTP1
expression was higher (p-value <0.01). Among non-COPD NC controls, CEBPG
was positively correlated with OGG1, CCND2 and ERCC5 and correlation with
each gene was significantly lower among COPD NC subjects (p-value of
Z-score <0.01). In contrast, CEBPD correlation with GSTM4, ERCC5 and EGFR
changed from positive in COPD to negative in control (p-value of Z-score
Background: Antioxidant (AO), DNA repair (DNAR), and cell cycle control
(CCC) genes play a role in protecting normal bronchial epithelial cells
(NBEC) from damage, and sub-optimal function is associated with risk for
COPD and lung cancer. CEBP transcription factors regulate key AO and DNA
repair genes in NBEC. In this study, we investigated the association
between CEBP transcription factor function and regulation of these gene
pathways in NBEC of cancer (CA) and non-cancer (NC) COPD subjects.
Methods: NBEC samples were obtained by bronchoscopy from 66 CA cases and
60 matched NC controls, and 30 NC COPD and 30 NC non-COPD controls
defined by spirometry (FEV1 <0.7, FEV1/FVC <80% expected). RNA was
extracted and reverse transcribed into cDNA with M-MLV using oligo dT
primer. A targeted competitive multiplex next generation sequencing
method was used to quantify expression of CEBPA, CEBPG, CEBPD, and 30 AO,
DNAR, and CCC target genes. We assessed difference in inter-gene
correlation of log-transformed transcript abundance by Pearson,
difference in correlation by Fisher Z-transformation, dispersion
difference by F-test and difference in mean by t-test. Results: Among NC
controls, CEBPG transcript abundance was highly correlated with CEBPA (r
= 0.78) and NFE2L2 (r = 0.86) but correlation was significantly lower in
cancer (r = 0.45, 0.52, respectively). Correspondingly, CEBPA and CEBPG
expression was more disperse among NC compared to CA (p-value = 1.6E-04,
4.2E-12, respectively). Further, correlation with CEBPG and/or CEBPA was
significantly lower in cancer compared to controls for 13 AO, DNAR, or
CCC genes, and significantly higher for only 2 genes. Moreover, CEBPA,
CEBPG, CCND2, KEAP1, MYC, NFE2L2, RB1, TP53, and TP73 mean expression was
lower in cancer compared to control while BRCA1, GSTM1, and GSTP1
expression was higher (p-value <0.01). Among non-COPD NC controls, CEBPG
was positively correlated with OGG1, CCND2 and ERCC5 and correlation with
each gene was significantly lower among COPD NC subjects (p-value of
Z-score <0.01). In contrast, CEBPD correlation with GSTM4, ERCC5 and EGFR
changed from positive in COPD to negative in control (p-value of Z-score
<0.01). Further, CEBPA expression was more disperse in COPD compared to
non-COPD control (p-value = 0.04). Conclusion: CEBPG and CEBPA expression
regulation was different in CA compared to NC, and CEBPG, CEBPA and CEBPD
regulation was different in NC COPD compared with NC non-COPD subjects.
We hypothesize that inherited variation in NBEC regulation of these CEBP
transcription factors and respective AO, DNAR, and CCC pathway genes in
CA and/or COPD contributes to genetic risk. Exploration of mechanisms for
variation in regulation of these genes will be the focus of additional
studies in NBEC samples from over 500 subjects at risk for development
for lung cancer in effort develop tests that better determine the group
at genetic risk for lung cancer.

