Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization and validation of an implantable chronic lung
imaging window


Metastatic disease is the major cause of cancer mortality and is
responsible for over 1/2 million deaths each year in the U.S. alone. Of
the three most common sites of metastasis observed clinically (bone, lung
and liver), the most difficult to study using intravital microscopy is
the lung; a delicate organ in perpetual motion. Recent advances in
intravital microscopy have enabled visualization of the live intact lung,
but are limited in the duration over which they can be utilized (hours)
and require major invasive surgeries. Both of these limitations reduce
their usefulness in the study of single cell events in the lung and are
susceptible to introducing artefacts. We report the development of a
novel, minimally invasive surgical protocol for the implantation of a
long-lasting lung imaging window. Once implanted, this window allows for
the repeated, non-invasive visualization of living, breathing lung tissue
over a period of two weeks without the need for ventilation, vacuum
plates, or gated imaging equipment. Here we characterize and validate the
use of this window in living mice. The window is well tolerated, does not
cause infection or inflammation, and offers a 4mm view of the left lung.
We utilize it to visualize, with single cell resolution, the progression
of experimental metastasis from the arrival of a single cell to the
formation of micro-metastases. The development of this novel optical
window will allow visualization of, with single cell resolution, tumor
microenvironments and metastatic progression within the lung over
extended periods of time. This approach to imaging live lung tissue has
the potential to reveal the mechanisms underlying many diseases affecting
the lung as well as the means to directly evaluate responses to
therapeutics in in real time and within a single animal.

