Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effects of thymoquinone encapsulation on its uptake, delivery and
anticancer activity in breast cancer cells


Introduction: Thymoquinone (TQ) is a promising anticancer molecule which
suffers from limited bioavailability. Drug encapsulation is commonly used
to overcome low drug solubility, bioavailability as well as nonspecific
targeting. For this project, we synthesized different TQ nanoparticles
(TQ-NPs), characterized their properties, uptake and delivery mechanisms,
and assessed their anticancer potential in a panel of breast cancer
cells.Methods: The different TQ-NPs were prepared using Flash
nanoprecipitation. Dynamic light scattering and scanning electron
microscope were used for the characterization of the size, morphology and
stability of the NPs. The anticancer effect was assessed by MTT. We
subsequently formulated fluorescent TQ-NPs and evaluated their uptake and
subcellular intake mechanism by both fluorometry and confocal
microscopy.Results: We were successful at formulating four different
stable TQ-NPs that had an average diameter size between 45-130 nm. All
TQ-NPs had also high entrapment efficiency and loading content. In vitro,
TQ-NPs enhanced the antitumor activity of the drug in both MCF-7 and
MDA-MB-231 cells, when compared to free TQ with no significant
cytotoxicity of the blank NPs. Fluorescent TQ-NPs uptake was further
found to be both time and concentration dependent. Finally, using
inhibitors of endocytosis we determined that the endocytosis of TQ-NPs is
caveolin mediated. This was also confirmed by examining the subcellular
localization of TQ-NPs. The nanoparticle formulations colocalized with
both caveolin and transferrin but not with lamp-1 and EEA-1
proteins.Conclusion: Altogether, our results describe a new approach for
the enhancement of TQ anticancer activity and provide insights on the
uptake dynamics specific to our formulation.

