Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Amplicon-based NGS detects targeted variants in paired tissue and
ctDNA samples


Circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA) in blood stream has been recognized as an
essential sample source for non-invasive biopsy of cancer patients. With
next generation sequencing (NGS) technology it is possible to detect
multiple cancer relevant mutation spots simultaneously. In order to
understand the correlation of mutation spectrum between DNA from original
solid tumor and DNA from plasma, we analyzed paired DNA samples with
amplicon-based NGS. Paired frozen tissue and plasma samples were
collected from 17 colon cancer patients under the IRB protocol. Tissue
DNA was extracted with NucleoSpin Tissue kit of Clontech. The ctDNA was
extracted from 0.5ml of plasma with Quick-cfDNA Serum & Plasma Kit from
Zymo Research. The library was prepared with Accel-Amplicon 56G Oncology
Panel of Swift Biosciences, Inc. This panel generates 263 amplicons
covering 56 clinically relevant oncology-related genes. Input ctDNA from
plasma was 0.5 to 10 ng depending on the sample yield. The sequencing was
conducted on Illumina's Miseq with MiSeq Reagent Kits v2 (300cycles).
FastQ files were generated by Miseq Reporter. Non-synonymous variant
calls by the tissue DNA sequencing were defined by coverage depth (30),
frequency (>5%), and forward/reverse balance (0). The defined
non-synonymous variant calls were searched from variant calls by the
paired ctDNA sequencing with the cutoff frequency at 0.1%. In 17 paired
colon cancer samples, 86 non-synonymous variant calls were identified by
tissue DNA sequencing. The variant calls of tissue DNA samples showed 56
of 86 variants matched variant calls in the paired ctDNA samples. Among
56 variant calls in ctDNA, 44 variant calls were assumed as germline
variants according to the 1000 genome reference and similar frequency of
the variant call between paired tissue DNA and ctDNA. There were 12
variant calls deemed somatic variant calls by the literature references
and the differential frequency of the variant call between paired tissue
DNA and ctDNA. The 12 detected somatic variant calls were clustered in
seven cases. Twelve somatic variant calls with frequency (%) in tissue
and plasma DNA samples are shown as APC S1456 frame shift (41.8 vs 6.17),
KRAS G12D(37.0 vs 5.0),TP53 G105R(56.0 vs 11.3), HNF1A P291 frame
shift(36.8 vs 2.41), HNF1A P291 frame shift(27.1 vs 1.2) KRAS G12D(23.1
vs 0.3), ERBB4 I377T(8.3 vs 0.5),PTEN L267 frame shift (12.4 vs 0.4),
MAKP2K1 L57N(23.9 vs 0.7),TP53 R273C(25.8 vs 0.3), TP53 H178D(12.1 vs
1.1),TP53 T377 frame shift(11.2 vs 0.1). Remaining 30 somatic variant
calls were detected only in tissue DNA samples. Our results indicated
that the simultaneous detection of somatic variants of multiple genes in
ctDNA samples with the amplicon-based DNA sequencing is applicable with
variant frequency over 0.1%. The NGS analysis of paired tissue DNA and
ctDNA is a reliable evaluation for cancer related mutations in ctDNA.

