Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gene expression profile differences between early- and late-onset
colorectal adenocarcinoma


Introduction: Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the third most commonly
diagnosed cancer and the second leading cause of cancer related deaths in
the US. The overall incidence of CRC in the US has decreased over the
past three decades, yet recent literature indicates increase in incidence
among individuals younger than 50. These early-onset CRC tumors (EO) tend
to be more aggressive and advanced at initial diagnosis. As the etiology
of EO CRC is not understood yet, the aim of this study was to elucidate
gene expression profiling in EO CRC and show its molecular uniqueness
compared to late-onset (LO) CRC.Methods: Two cohorts of patients with
sporadic EO CRC (age under 50) and LO CRC (age over 65) tumors were
identified. Tumors and their matching non-involved tissue samples with
equal representation of colon and rectal neoplasms from twelve EO
patients and twelve LO patients were obtained. Patients with Lynch
syndrome, familial adenomatous polyposis and inflammatory bowel disease
were excluded. De-paraffinized tissues were macro-dissected from FFPE
sections, RNA isolated and used for nanoString nCounter PanCancer
Pathways Panel gene expression analysis to quantify transcript levels of
770 genes representing 13 canonical cancer pathways. Statistical analysis
was performed using the Gene Expression R-script module within the
nCounter software v2.6. A gene was considered to be above background if
the average count for the target gene was greater than the average counts
for the eight negative control genes and if the P value of the t-test was
less than 0.05.Results: We analyzed a total of twenty four tumor samples,
six EO and six LO colon tumors and six EO and six LO rectal tumors. Their
expression profiles were then compared to their matching non-involved
tissues in order to identify genes that are unique to colon and rectal
neoplasm, respectively. Out of 770 PanCancer Panel pathway genes assayed,
98 genes were uniquely expressed in EO colon tumors with 73 genes being
up- and 25 down-regulated with a fold change higher than two. 77 genes
were uniquely expressed in EO rectal tumors, with 57 of them up-regulated
and 20 down-regulated. Further statistical analysis revealed that, from
265 genes differentially expressed specifically in EO colon tumors,
changes in expression of 147 genes were statistically significant
(pIntroduction: Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the third most commonly
diagnosed cancer and the second leading cause of cancer related deaths in
the US. The overall incidence of CRC in the US has decreased over the
past three decades, yet recent literature indicates increase in incidence
among individuals younger than 50. These early-onset CRC tumors (EO) tend
to be more aggressive and advanced at initial diagnosis. As the etiology
of EO CRC is not understood yet, the aim of this study was to elucidate
gene expression profiling in EO CRC and show its molecular uniqueness
compared to late-onset (LO) CRC.Methods: Two cohorts of patients with
sporadic EO CRC (age under 50) and LO CRC (age over 65) tumors were
identified. Tumors and their matching non-involved tissue samples with
equal representation of colon and rectal neoplasms from twelve EO
patients and twelve LO patients were obtained. Patients with Lynch
syndrome, familial adenomatous polyposis and inflammatory bowel disease
were excluded. De-paraffinized tissues were macro-dissected from FFPE
sections, RNA isolated and used for nanoString nCounter PanCancer
Pathways Panel gene expression analysis to quantify transcript levels of
770 genes representing 13 canonical cancer pathways. Statistical analysis
was performed using the Gene Expression R-script module within the
nCounter software v2.6. A gene was considered to be above background if
the average count for the target gene was greater than the average counts
for the eight negative control genes and if the P value of the t-test was
less than 0.05.Results: We analyzed a total of twenty four tumor samples,
six EO and six LO colon tumors and six EO and six LO rectal tumors. Their
expression profiles were then compared to their matching non-involved
tissues in order to identify genes that are unique to colon and rectal
neoplasm, respectively. Out of 770 PanCancer Panel pathway genes assayed,
98 genes were uniquely expressed in EO colon tumors with 73 genes being
up- and 25 down-regulated with a fold change higher than two. 77 genes
were uniquely expressed in EO rectal tumors, with 57 of them up-regulated
and 20 down-regulated. Further statistical analysis revealed that, from
265 genes differentially expressed specifically in EO colon tumors,
changes in expression of 147 genes were statistically significant
(p<0.05). Similarly, from 275 genes differentially expressed in EO rectal
tumors, 82 showed statistically significant alterations in
expression.Conclusions: Results of this study suggest EO CRC as a
distinct molecular subtype which is characterized by unique molecular
events compared to LO disease. Further studies using larger cohorts of
patients are needed to validate these findings. Such studies might offer
the possibilities of coming up with novel molecular markers to enhance
newer, faster and noninvasive detection modalities for young patients
with CRC tumors.

