Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Free IGFBP3 and the risk of liver cancer in a nested case-control
study


Background: Insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF1) is a potent mitogen,
whereas IGF-binding protein-3 (IGFBP3) binds and inhibits IGF1. High
circulating IGF1 and low IGFBP3 are associated with increased risk of
several cancers. Here we examined relations of those serum levels with
the risk of hepatoma in a prospective case-control study nested in the
JACC Study.Methods: A baseline survey was conducted from 1988 to 1990 and
39,242 subjects donated blood samples. Those who had been diagnosed as
hepatoma were regarded as cases for nested case-control studies.
Ninety-one cases and 263 controls are eligible for the present analysis.
A conditional logistic model was used to estimate odds ratios (OR) for
incidence of hepatoma associated with serum IGF1 and IGFBP3
levels.Results: Both IGF1 and molar ratio of IGF1/IGFBP3 were not
correlated with the risk of hepatoma. After adjustment for
hepatitis-viral infection, body mass index, smoking, and alcohol intake,
higher molar difference of (IGFBP3 - IGF1) was associated with decreased
risk of hepatoma (p for trend Background: Insulin-like growth factor-1
(IGF1) is a potent mitogen, whereas IGF-binding protein-3 (IGFBP3) binds
and inhibits IGF1. High circulating IGF1 and low IGFBP3 are associated
with increased risk of several cancers. Here we examined relations of
those serum levels with the risk of hepatoma in a prospective
case-control study nested in the JACC Study.Methods: A baseline survey
was conducted from 1988 to 1990 and 39,242 subjects donated blood
samples. Those who had been diagnosed as hepatoma were regarded as cases
for nested case-control studies. Ninety-one cases and 263 controls are
eligible for the present analysis. A conditional logistic model was used
to estimate odds ratios (OR) for incidence of hepatoma associated with
serum IGF1 and IGFBP3 levels.Results: Both IGF1 and molar ratio of
IGF1/IGFBP3 were not correlated with the risk of hepatoma. After
adjustment for hepatitis-viral infection, body mass index, smoking, and
alcohol intake, higher molar difference of (IGFBP3 - IGF1) was associated
with decreased risk of hepatoma (p for trend < 0.001), and peoples in the
highest quintile had a lower risk (OR = 0.098; 95%CI = 0.026-0.368). In
subgroup analyses, both in male and female, high molar difference of
(IGFBP3 - IGF1) was associated with decreased risk of hepatoma (p for
trend Background: Insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF1) is a potent
mitogen, whereas IGF-binding protein-3 (IGFBP3) binds and inhibits IGF1.
High circulating IGF1 and low IGFBP3 are associated with increased risk
of several cancers. Here we examined relations of those serum levels with
the risk of hepatoma in a prospective case-control study nested in the
JACC Study.Methods: A baseline survey was conducted from 1988 to 1990 and
39,242 subjects donated blood samples. Those who had been diagnosed as
hepatoma were regarded as cases for nested case-control studies.
Ninety-one cases and 263 controls are eligible for the present analysis.
A conditional logistic model was used to estimate odds ratios (OR) for
incidence of hepatoma associated with serum IGF1 and IGFBP3
levels.Results: Both IGF1 and molar ratio of IGF1/IGFBP3 were not
correlated with the risk of hepatoma. After adjustment for
hepatitis-viral infection, body mass index, smoking, and alcohol intake,
higher molar difference of (IGFBP3 - IGF1) was associated with decreased
risk of hepatoma (p for trend < 0.001), and peoples in the highest
quintile had a lower risk (OR = 0.098; 95%CI = 0.026-0.368). In subgroup
analyses, both in male and female, high molar difference of (IGFBP3 -
IGF1) was associated with decreased risk of hepatoma (p for trend <
0.001). Both in the elderly and non-elderly, it was correlated inversely
with risk of hepatoma (p for trend = 0.001, Background: Insulin-like
growth factor-1 (IGF1) is a potent mitogen, whereas IGF-binding protein-3
(IGFBP3) binds and inhibits IGF1. High circulating IGF1 and low IGFBP3
are associated with increased risk of several cancers. Here we examined
relations of those serum levels with the risk of hepatoma in a
prospective case-control study nested in the JACC Study.Methods: A
baseline survey was conducted from 1988 to 1990 and 39,242 subjects
donated blood samples. Those who had been diagnosed as hepatoma were
regarded as cases for nested case-control studies. Ninety-one cases and
263 controls are eligible for the present analysis. A conditional
logistic model was used to estimate odds ratios (OR) for incidence of
hepatoma associated with serum IGF1 and IGFBP3 levels.Results: Both IGF1
and molar ratio of IGF1/IGFBP3 were not correlated with the risk of
hepatoma. After adjustment for hepatitis-viral infection, body mass
index, smoking, and alcohol intake, higher molar difference of (IGFBP3 -
IGF1) was associated with decreased risk of hepatoma (p for trend <
0.001), and peoples in the highest quintile had a lower risk (OR = 0.098;
95%CI = 0.026-0.368). In subgroup analyses, both in male and female, high
molar difference of (IGFBP3 - IGF1) was associated with decreased risk of
hepatoma (p for trend < 0.001). Both in the elderly and non-elderly, it
was correlated inversely with risk of hepatoma (p for trend = 0.001, <
0.001, respectively).Conclusions: Molar difference of (IGFBP3 - IGF1)
might associate inversely with the incidence of hepatoma.

