Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ED-71, an analogue of Vitamin D3, blocks the promotion but not the
initiation of colorectal tumors in the Apc+/Min-FCCC mouse model


Results from several studies demonstrate an inverse relationship between
circulating levels of Vitamin D and risk of colorectal cancer.
Eldecalcitol (1,25-dihydroxy-2-(3-hydroxypropyloxy) Vitamin D3; ED-71) is
a novel analog of calcitriol, the most active form of Vitamin D3. ED-71
is more potent in stimulating bone remodeling and has been approved in
Japan for the treatment of osteoporosis. The goal of this study was to
assess the ability of ED-71 to inhibit spontaneous colorectal adenomas in
a unique strain of multiple intestinal neoplasia (Apc+/Min-FCCC) mice.
Male mice (6 wks of age) were randomized to treatment groups based on
colon tumor status (endoscopic confirmation as tumor-free or -bearing)
and body weight (bw) and administered: vehicle (MCT), calcitriol (0.25
g/kg bw), or ED-71 (0.05 or 0.1 g/kg bw) by gavage. Mice were treated
every other day and bws were recorded weekly. After 14 wks of treatment,
the small intestines and colons were excised and examined for gross
tumors. Colorectal tumors >3 mm in diameter were frozen for gene
expression analyses. The remaining tissue was fixed in formalin and
processed for histological review. The multiplicity of gross small
intestinal tumors in animals treated with ED-71 (both doses) was
comparable to that of vehicle-treated controls. In contrast, the
multiplicity of small intestinal tumors was elevated 34.6% over that of
controls in animals treated with calcitriol (Mean SEM: 28.4 2.6 vs. 21.1
2.8, respectively; P = 0.034). The ability of ED-71 to inhibit colon
tumorigenesis was evaluated independently in mice with vs. without tumors
at treatment initiation. In tumor-bearing mice, neither calcitriol nor
ED-71 (both doses) had any significant effect on the multiplicity of
colorectal tumors as compared to control mice. However in tumor-free
mice, ED-71 (0.1 g/kg bw) reduced the mean incidence of adenomas (> 4
crypts) by 47% (ED-71 - 45.5%, controls 92.3%; P = 0.02) and the
multiplicity by 47.6% (Mean SEM: ED-71 - 1.1 0.39, controls - 2.1 0.72; P
> 0.05). In contrast, the multiplicity of microadenomas ( 4 crypts) was
increased in mice treated with ED-71 (0.1 g/kg bw) as compared to
controls (0.9 0.22 vs. 0.5 0.25 P = 0.06, respectively). These findings
suggest that ED-71 is effective in preventing the transition of
microadenomas to mature adenomas. The lack of an effect of ED-71 on colon
tumor development in mice bearing tumors at baseline could be due in part
to loss of the Vitamin D receptor in colon adenomas, as confirmed by
real-time PCR. Insight into the mechanism by which ED-71 inhibits adenoma
development is being gained from analyses of Vitamin D signaling and
microRNA expression in treated colonic epithelial cells. These promising
data provide support for future studies to determine the potential
utility of ED-71 in preventing colorectal cancer in high-risk patients
found to be tumor-free during surveillance endoscopy. (Supported by NCI
HHSN261201200015I)

