Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Investigating the functional contribution of TANK binding kinase 1
to inflammation induced disease progression


Initial stages of human pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA) are
commonly characterized by an activating mutation in K-RAS along with
extensive immune cell infiltration. Direct inhibition of K-RAS through
pharmacological means remains a challenge; however targeted inhibition of
TANK Binding Kinase 1 (TBK1), a critical downstream effector of mutant
active K-RAS is an attractive alternative. High levels of active TBK1 are
associated with inflammatory disease and cancer progression. TBK1 and
homolog, IKKe activate the immune response transcription factor NF-B. In
metabolically challenged mice, IKKe regulates energy balance by
sustaining chronic, low-grade inflammation. We hypothesize that TBK1
signaling is also critical in metabolic regulation and is required for
progression of inflammation-induced diseases such as PDA.A kinase dead,
Tbk1/ mouse was used to determine the contribution of TBK1 to metabolic
disease and PDA progression. Metabolic phenotyping experiments were
performed with Tbk1/ and Tbk1+/+ mice including a high fat diet weight
study, body composition and metabolic chamber analyses. Tbk1+/+ and Tbk1/
mice were crossed into a genetically engineered mouse model of PDA to
determine the consequences of genetically removing Tbk1 on tumor
development and overall survival.Here we report that Tbk1/ mice are
significantly smaller, leaner and have less fat than Tbk1+/+ mice on high
fat chow diets (HFD) for 14 weeks. Tbk1/ mice are more active and have
smaller and more abundant adipocytes relative to Tbk1+/+ mice.
Additionally, Tbk1/ mice are protected from HFD induced
hypercholesterolemia and liver steatosis. White adipose tissue (WAT) from
HFD fed Tbk1/ mice exhibit an induction of brown fat gene expression
suggesting that thermogenesis is a contributor to their healthier and
more active phenotype. Macrophage infiltration is fairly low in WAT from
Tbk1+/+ and Tbk1/ mice on normal chow. However on HFD, WAT from Tbk1+/+
mice display a significant increase in macrophage marker expression
compared to Tbk1/ mice. These findings indicate that HFD fed Tbk1/ mice
are protected from classic phenotypes of metabolic syndrome.In PDA, TBK1
is expressed and more active in human PDA cell lines relative to
immortalized pancreatic epithelial lines and fibroblasts. Human PDA cell
lines are sensitive to a small molecule inhibitor of TBK1 (compound II)
in the low micromolar range. In a K-Ras driven genetic mouse model of
PDA, TBK1 supports spontaneous pancreatic tumor growth as evidenced by
smaller tumors in Tbk1/: PDA mice relative to Tbk1+/+: PDA mice. Our
results suggest that TBK1 contributes to metabolic regulation and
demonstrate the therapeutic potential of targeting TBK1 in pancreatic
malignancies. Current work is focused on delineating the inflammatory and
metabolic dysregulation in these animals and determining the precise
mechanism by which TBK1 supports the progression of PDA.

