Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Co-occurring mutations of tumors suppressor genes, NF2 and LATS2,
in malignant pleural mesothelioma


Background: Malignant Pleural Mesothelioma (MPM), mainly due to asbestos
exposure, is an aggressive thoracic tumor resistant to conventional
anti-cancer therapies. MPM patients have poor prognosis and a median
survival around 12 months. These tumors are heterogeneous at the clinical
and molecular level. To better characterize MPM heterogeneity, we
recently identified a robust MPM transcriptomic classification defining
two subgroups (C1 and C2). Epithelioid MPM, the most frequent histologic
subtype, was found in both tumor subgroups, with a worse survival
prognosis in the C2 subgroup. MPM heterogeneity is also found at the
genetic level. Literature data showed alteration of Hippo signaling
pathway in MPM linked to a frequent inactivation of NF2 tumor suppressor
gene (30-40%). LATS2 tumor suppressor gene, another member of the Hippo
pathway, was also shown to be altered but the frequency is not well
determined.Methods: Sixty-one primary cultures of MPM established in our
laboratory were screened by Sanger sequencing for genes involved in
mesothelial carcinogenesis, including CDKN2A, CDKN2B, BAP1, TP53, NF2 and
LATS2. Transcriptomic data were obtained by Affymetrix microarray.
Functional studies were performed using siRNAs to knockdown gene
expression in three different MPM in culture. Gene expression was
analyzed by quantitative RT-PCR and protein expression by Western blot.
Cell proliferation was determined by MTS assay.Results: Alteration
frequencies of NF2 and LATS2 genes were 39% (24 cases) and 11% (7 cases),
respectively. Five of seven LATS2 mutations were found associated with
NF2 mutations in MPM of the C2 tumor subgroup. Patients with a
co-occurring mutations in NF2 and LATS2 in tumor cells showed a worse
prognosis (Logrank p-value of 0.02). These double mutants shared a
similar transcriptomic profile. We identified MOK gene, a member of MAP
kinase family, which is specifically deregulated in these double mutants
(PBackground: Malignant Pleural Mesothelioma (MPM), mainly due to
asbestos exposure, is an aggressive thoracic tumor resistant to
conventional anti-cancer therapies. MPM patients have poor prognosis and
a median survival around 12 months. These tumors are heterogeneous at the
clinical and molecular level. To better characterize MPM heterogeneity,
we recently identified a robust MPM transcriptomic classification
defining two subgroups (C1 and C2). Epithelioid MPM, the most frequent
histologic subtype, was found in both tumor subgroups, with a worse
survival prognosis in the C2 subgroup. MPM heterogeneity is also found at
the genetic level. Literature data showed alteration of Hippo signaling
pathway in MPM linked to a frequent inactivation of NF2 tumor suppressor
gene (30-40%). LATS2 tumor suppressor gene, another member of the Hippo
pathway, was also shown to be altered but the frequency is not well
determined.Methods: Sixty-one primary cultures of MPM established in our
laboratory were screened by Sanger sequencing for genes involved in
mesothelial carcinogenesis, including CDKN2A, CDKN2B, BAP1, TP53, NF2 and
LATS2. Transcriptomic data were obtained by Affymetrix microarray.
Functional studies were performed using siRNAs to knockdown gene
expression in three different MPM in culture. Gene expression was
analyzed by quantitative RT-PCR and protein expression by Western blot.
Cell proliferation was determined by MTS assay.Results: Alteration
frequencies of NF2 and LATS2 genes were 39% (24 cases) and 11% (7 cases),
respectively. Five of seven LATS2 mutations were found associated with
NF2 mutations in MPM of the C2 tumor subgroup. Patients with a
co-occurring mutations in NF2 and LATS2 in tumor cells showed a worse
prognosis (Logrank p-value of 0.02). These double mutants shared a
similar transcriptomic profile. We identified MOK gene, a member of MAP
kinase family, which is specifically deregulated in these double mutants
(P<0.01). Modeling NF2 and LATS2 co-inactivation by RNA interference
resulted in a specific up-regulation of MOK expression (PBackground:
Malignant Pleural Mesothelioma (MPM), mainly due to asbestos exposure, is
an aggressive thoracic tumor resistant to conventional anti-cancer
therapies. MPM patients have poor prognosis and a median survival around
12 months. These tumors are heterogeneous at the clinical and molecular
level. To better characterize MPM heterogeneity, we recently identified a
robust MPM transcriptomic classification defining two subgroups (C1 and
C2). Epithelioid MPM, the most frequent histologic subtype, was found in
both tumor subgroups, with a worse survival prognosis in the C2 subgroup.
MPM heterogeneity is also found at the genetic level. Literature data
showed alteration of Hippo signaling pathway in MPM linked to a frequent
inactivation of NF2 tumor suppressor gene (30-40%). LATS2 tumor
suppressor gene, another member of the Hippo pathway, was also shown to
be altered but the frequency is not well determined.Methods: Sixty-one
primary cultures of MPM established in our laboratory were screened by
Sanger sequencing for genes involved in mesothelial carcinogenesis,
including CDKN2A, CDKN2B, BAP1, TP53, NF2 and LATS2. Transcriptomic data
were obtained by Affymetrix microarray. Functional studies were performed
using siRNAs to knockdown gene expression in three different MPM in
culture. Gene expression was analyzed by quantitative RT-PCR and protein
expression by Western blot. Cell proliferation was determined by MTS
assay.Results: Alteration frequencies of NF2 and LATS2 genes were 39% (24
cases) and 11% (7 cases), respectively. Five of seven LATS2 mutations
were found associated with NF2 mutations in MPM of the C2 tumor subgroup.
Patients with a co-occurring mutations in NF2 and LATS2 in tumor cells
showed a worse prognosis (Logrank p-value of 0.02). These double mutants
shared a similar transcriptomic profile. We identified MOK gene, a member
of MAP kinase family, which is specifically deregulated in these double
mutants (P<0.01). Modeling NF2 and LATS2 co-inactivation by RNA
interference resulted in a specific up-regulation of MOK expression
(P<0.01). Knockdown also induced a significant increase of MPM
proliferation when the cells reach confluence (PBackground: Malignant
Pleural Mesothelioma (MPM), mainly due to asbestos exposure, is an
aggressive thoracic tumor resistant to conventional anti-cancer
therapies. MPM patients have poor prognosis and a median survival around
12 months. These tumors are heterogeneous at the clinical and molecular
level. To better characterize MPM heterogeneity, we recently identified a
robust MPM transcriptomic classification defining two subgroups (C1 and
C2). Epithelioid MPM, the most frequent histologic subtype, was found in
both tumor subgroups, with a worse survival prognosis in the C2 subgroup.
MPM heterogeneity is also found at the genetic level. Literature data
showed alteration of Hippo signaling pathway in MPM linked to a frequent
inactivation of NF2 tumor suppressor gene (30-40%). LATS2 tumor
suppressor gene, another member of the Hippo pathway, was also shown to
be altered but the frequency is not well determined.Methods: Sixty-one
primary cultures of MPM established in our laboratory were screened by
Sanger sequencing for genes involved in mesothelial carcinogenesis,
including CDKN2A, CDKN2B, BAP1, TP53, NF2 and LATS2. Transcriptomic data
were obtained by Affymetrix microarray. Functional studies were performed
using siRNAs to knockdown gene expression in three different MPM in
culture. Gene expression was analyzed by quantitative RT-PCR and protein
expression by Western blot. Cell proliferation was determined by MTS
assay.Results: Alteration frequencies of NF2 and LATS2 genes were 39% (24
cases) and 11% (7 cases), respectively. Five of seven LATS2 mutations
were found associated with NF2 mutations in MPM of the C2 tumor subgroup.
Patients with a co-occurring mutations in NF2 and LATS2 in tumor cells
showed a worse prognosis (Logrank p-value of 0.02). These double mutants
shared a similar transcriptomic profile. We identified MOK gene, a member
of MAP kinase family, which is specifically deregulated in these double
mutants (P<0.01). Modeling NF2 and LATS2 co-inactivation by RNA
interference resulted in a specific up-regulation of MOK expression
(P<0.01). Knockdown also induced a significant increase of MPM
proliferation when the cells reach confluence (P<0.01). In the MPM double
mutants, MOK knockdown showed that MOK may be involved in the loss of
contact inhibition.Conclusions: In summary, we identified and
characterized cell cultures of MPM tumors with co-occurring mutations of
two members of the Hippo signaling pathway, NF2 and LATS2. Our findings
demonstrate that NF2 and LATS2 inactivation leads to MOK overexpression
and loss of contact inhibition. Novel target therapies are needed for MPM
patients and MOK kinase could be a new potential therapeutic target.

