Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Vectorization in an oncolytic vaccinia virus of an antibody, a Fab
and a scFv against programmed cell death -1 (PD-1) allow their
intratumoral delivery and an improved tumor-growth inhibition


We report here the successful vectorization of a hamster monoclonal IgG
(namely J43) recognizing the murine Programmed cell death-1 (mPD-1) in
Western Reserve (WR) oncolytic vaccinia virus. Three forms of mPD-1
binders have been inserted in the virus: whole antibody (mAb), Fragment
antigen-binding (Fab) or single-chain variable fragment (scFv). MAb, Fab
and scFv were produced and assembled with the expected patterns in
supernatants of cells infected by the recombinant viruses. The 3 purified
mPD-1 binders were able to block the binding of mPD-1 ligand to mPD-1 in
vitro. Moreover, mAb was detected in tumor and in serum of C57BL/6 mice
when the recombinant WR-mAb was injected intratumorally (IT) in B16F10
and MCA 205 tumors. The concentration of circulating mAb detected after
IT injection was up to 1900-fold higher than the level obtained after a
subcutaneous (SC) injection (i.e. without tumor) confirming the virus
tropism for tumoral cells and/or that tumoral microenvironment allows
virus escape from immune surveillance. Moreover, the overall tumoral
accumulation of the mAb was higher and lasted longer after IT injection
of WR-mPD-1, than after IT administration of 10 g of J43. Interestingly,
in the MCA 205 tumor model, WR-mPD-1 (both mAb and scFv) induced a
therapeutic control of tumor growth similar to unarmed WR combined to
systemically administered J43 and superior to that provided by an unarmed
WR. These results pave the way for next generation of oncolytic vaccinia
armed with immunomodulatory therapeutic proteins such as mAbs. New
generation of oncolytic vaccinia virus that will express several
transgenes simultaneously may also be designed with the goal of providing
to the patients enhanced therapeutic/toxicity ratio.

