Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Downregulation of glycine decarboxylase contributes to paclitaxel
resistance in ovarian cancer cells


Glycine decarboxylase (GLDC) is a metabolic oncogene that links glycine
metabolism with tumorigenesis. In humans, GLDC is part of a multienzyme
complex that couples the decarboxylation of glycine to the biosynthesis
of serine. The role of GLDC in relation to chemoresistance is unclear. We
designed this study to determine the role of GLDC in chemoresistance in
ovarian cancer cells. First, we found GLDC is downregulated in paclitaxel
resistant ovarian cancer cells (OVCAR3/PTX). Prompted by decreased
glucose transport in OVCAR3/PTX cells, we transplanted OVCAR3 and
OVCAR3/PTX onto the back of the NOD-scid IL2Rgammanull mice and found
that the OVCAR3/PTX tumor grew less rapidly than paclitaxel sensitive
ovarian cancer cells (OVCAR3). We also found that GLDC is downregulated
in OVCAR3/PTX tumor. In vitro study revealed that the inhibitory effect
of siGLDC on proliferation was significantly greater in OVCAR3 than in
OVCAR3/PTX. We also found that knockdown of GLDC in OVCAR3 cells rendered
ovarian cancer cells PTX-resistant. Finally, we determined GLDC
expressions in patients with chemosensitive and chemoresistant serous
type ovarian cancer and found that GLDC expression was markedly
downregulated in chemoresistant cancer patients. These results suggest
GLDC is associated with ovarian cancer chemoresistance.

