Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of cancer cell growth by combined treatment with
lactate dehydrogenase (LDHA) inhibitors and either phenformin or
inhibitors of 6-phosphofructo-2-kinase/fructose-2,6-biphosphatase 3
(PFKFB3)


The tendency for enhanced glycolysis in cancer cells presents a target
for chemotherapy. In previous studies we observed that proliferation of
colon and bladder cancer cells can be inhibited by treatment with either
phenformin or an inhibitor of PFKFB3 namely
3-(3-pyridinyl)-1-(4-pyridinyl)-2-propen-1-one (3PO). In the present work
we have examined the action of two inhibitors that are effective at lower
concentrations than 3PO, namely
1-(3-pyridinyl)-3-(2-quinolinyl)-2-propen-1-one (PQP) and
1-(4-pyridinyl)-3-(2-quinolinyl)-2-propen-1-one (PFK15). The LDHA
inhibitors that we chose to study in increasing order of IC50s were
methyl 1-hydroxy-6-phenyl-4-(trifluoromethyl)-1H-indole-2-carboxylate
(NHI-2) The tendency for enhanced glycolysis in cancer cells presents a
target for chemotherapy. In previous studies we observed that
proliferation of colon and bladder cancer cells can be inhibited by
treatment with either phenformin or an inhibitor of PFKFB3 namely
3-(3-pyridinyl)-1-(4-pyridinyl)-2-propen-1-one (3PO). In the present work
we have examined the action of two inhibitors that are effective at lower
concentrations than 3PO, namely
1-(3-pyridinyl)-3-(2-quinolinyl)-2-propen-1-one (PQP) and
1-(4-pyridinyl)-3-(2-quinolinyl)-2-propen-1-one (PFK15). The LDHA
inhibitors that we chose to study in increasing order of IC50s were
methyl 1-hydroxy-6-phenyl-4-(trifluoromethyl)-1H-indole-2-carboxylate
(NHI-2) < isosafrole The tendency for enhanced glycolysis in cancer cells
presents a target for chemotherapy. In previous studies we observed that
proliferation of colon and bladder cancer cells can be inhibited by
treatment with either phenformin or an inhibitor of PFKFB3 namely
3-(3-pyridinyl)-1-(4-pyridinyl)-2-propen-1-one (3PO). In the present work
we have examined the action of two inhibitors that are effective at lower
concentrations than 3PO, namely
1-(3-pyridinyl)-3-(2-quinolinyl)-2-propen-1-one (PQP) and
1-(4-pyridinyl)-3-(2-quinolinyl)-2-propen-1-one (PFK15). The LDHA
inhibitors that we chose to study in increasing order of IC50s were
methyl 1-hydroxy-6-phenyl-4-(trifluoromethyl)-1H-indole-2-carboxylate
(NHI-2) < isosafrole < oxamate. A synergistic anti-cancer effect of
phenformin and oxamate has been reported. In the present work with colon
and bladder cancer cells, additive but not synergistic growth inhibitory
effects were seen with the LDHA inhibitors of which NHI-2 was effective
at the lowest concentrations. Growth inhibition with PQP and PFK15 was
compared in colon (Caco-2 and HT29) and bladder cancer cells (5637,
HT1376, RT4, SW780, T24, TCCSUP and UM-UC-3). Apart from RT4 cells where
the effects were similar, the effects were somewhat greater with PFK15
than with PQP and for both compounds the actions were seen at lower
concentrations than in previous studies with 3PO. Actions on medium
acidification and glucose uptake are more readily observed in the most
rapidly growing cell lines. Effects of phenformin on medium pH and
glucose concentration were decreased by the PFKFB3 and LDHA inhibitors
that were examined. In accord with our previous studies on inhibitors of
glycolysis, the increased medium acidification and glucose uptake caused
by phenformin could be blocked by combined treatment with PFKFB3 or LDHA
inhibitors. At the same time additive growth inhibitory effects were
observed. The results supported the concept that combined treatment with
phenformin and inhibitors of glycolysis can cause additive inhibition of
cell proliferation while mitigating the lactic acidosis caused by
phenformin as a single agent.

