Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Plasma proteomics for the discovery of biomarkers of incisional
hernia in colorectal cancer patients in the ColoCare Study


BackgroundIncisional hernia is the most common long-term complication
after laparotomy for colorectal cancer resection with an incidence of
9-20%. Predisposing factors have been identified. Nevertheless, there are
limited approaches to precisely predict individual risk, creating a need
for predictive biomarkers of incisional hernia development.MethodsWe
utilized pre-operative plasma samples of patients with newly diagnosed
colorectal cancer [n = 72; (stage I-IV)] from the ColoCare Study in
Heidelberg, Germany, who underwent laparoscopic tumor resection between
2010 and 2013. Patient questionnaires and telephone-interviews were used
to assess the incidence of an incisional hernia, and demographic and
clinical-surgical data were abstracted from medical records. 21 patients
with incisional hernia occurrence were matched with 51 patients without
an incisional hernia ( = controls) by gender, age, and BMI with at least
18 months follow-up. To assess predictive markers of incisional hernia
risk we screened the plasma proteome for 3061 proteins using a
well-validated antibody microarray test. Paired t-tests were used to
compare protein levels between cases and controls. A gene-set-enrichment
analysis (Gene Ontology and KEGG) was applied to test for differences in
signaling pathways between the two groups.ResultsThe proteome screen
identified 27 proteins that showed elevated or reduced plasma levels in
the hernia group compared to the control group (nominal p-values
BackgroundIncisional hernia is the most common long-term complication
after laparotomy for colorectal cancer resection with an incidence of
9-20%. Predisposing factors have been identified. Nevertheless, there are
limited approaches to precisely predict individual risk, creating a need
for predictive biomarkers of incisional hernia development.MethodsWe
utilized pre-operative plasma samples of patients with newly diagnosed
colorectal cancer [n = 72; (stage I-IV)] from the ColoCare Study in
Heidelberg, Germany, who underwent laparoscopic tumor resection between
2010 and 2013. Patient questionnaires and telephone-interviews were used
to assess the incidence of an incisional hernia, and demographic and
clinical-surgical data were abstracted from medical records. 21 patients
with incisional hernia occurrence were matched with 51 patients without
an incisional hernia ( = controls) by gender, age, and BMI with at least
18 months follow-up. To assess predictive markers of incisional hernia
risk we screened the plasma proteome for 3061 proteins using a
well-validated antibody microarray test. Paired t-tests were used to
compare protein levels between cases and controls. A gene-set-enrichment
analysis (Gene Ontology and KEGG) was applied to test for differences in
signaling pathways between the two groups.ResultsThe proteome screen
identified 27 proteins that showed elevated or reduced plasma levels in
the hernia group compared to the control group (nominal p-values <0.05).
Most of these proteins were connected to cell adhesion and inflammation,
e.g. the encoding genes CCL21, IL12A, EPCAM and CDH3. The
gene-set-enrichment analysis identified several pathways of extracellular
matrix receptor interaction or cell proliferation that differed
significantly between the hernia and control group.ConclusionTo date no
predictive blood-based biomarkers of incisional hernia risk are
available. We discovered several candidate protein biomarkers which,
after validation in further studies, could be incorporated into a
multifactorial risk model to guide clinical decision making. This could
enable the initiation of prophylactic treatments such as a mesh
implantation and individualized patient recommendations to prevent
incisional hernia occurrence in high-risk patients.

