Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Quantitative cell-based bioassays for therapeutic development
targeting immune checkpoint and co-stimulatory receptors


Immunotherapy harnesses the immune system to fight cancer and has proven
to be a very promising therapeutic strategy. Drug targets in cancer
immunotherapy include both inhibitory and co-stimulatory immune receptors
on T cells or NK cells, in particular. Current approaches to assay
immunotherapy biologics rely on primary cells, are highly variable, and
are not suitable for a quality control environment during drug
development. We have developed a panel of cell-based assays using a
bioluminescent reporter platform that can quantitatively determine the
potencies of antibodies and ligand proteins targeting immune checkpoint
receptors and co-stimulatory receptors including PD-1, CTLA-4, LAG-3,
GITR, 4-1BB, OX40 and CD40. For each target, a stable cell line was
generated in an immune cell background to stably express an immune
checkpoint or co-stimulatory receptor and a luciferase reporter driven by
a response element specifically responding to signaling induced by TCR or
directly from the immune receptor. These bioassays reflect biological
mode-of-action for each class of drug candidate and are able to determine
the potencies for on-market biologic drugs including PD-1 antibodies
pembrolizumab and nivolumab, and CTLA-4 antibody ipilimumab. The assay
signals are robust, specific, and have good repeatability and linearity.
Therefore they can serve as valuable tools for drug screening, QC lot
release and stability studies in immunotherapy drug development.

