Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: IDH1 promotes tumor growth and resistance to targeted therapies in
the absence of mutation


Metabolic abnormalities of cancers provide opportunities for novel
tumor-specific therapies. Isocitrate dehydrogenases (IDHs) are enzymes of
the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle that catalyze the oxidative
decarboxylation of isocitrate to -ketoglutarate (-KG) and the reduction
of NADP+ to NADPH. Oncogenic mutations in two IDH-encoding genes (IDH1
and IDH2) have been identified in acute myelogenous leukemia, low-grade
glioma, and secondary glioblastoma (GBM). Our in silico analysis of The
Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) data combined with wet-bench analysis of tumor
extracts indicate that non-mutated IDH1 mRNA and protein is commonly
overexpressed in primary GBM. We show that genetic and pharmacologic
inactivation of IDH1 decreases GBM cell growth, promotes a more
differentiated tumor cell state, increases apoptosis in response to
targeted therapies, and prolongs survival of animal subjects bearing
patient-derived xenografts (PDXs). On molecular levels, diminished IDH1
activity results in reduced -KG and NADPH production, which is paralleled
by deficient metabolic flux from glucose or acetate into lipids,
exhaustion of reduced glutathione, increased levels of reactive oxygen
species (ROS), and enhanced histone methylation and differentiation
marker expression. These findings suggest that IDH1 upregulation
represents a common mechanism of metabolic adaptation of GBM to support
macromolecular synthesis, aggressive growth, and therapy resistance.

