Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting the notch pathway: A potential therapeutic approach for
desmoid tumors


Desmoid tumors (DTs) are rare mesenchymal lesions that can recur
repeatedly. When it is feasible, DTs are surgically resected; however,
this often results in high recurrence rates. Recently, treatment with
PF-03084014, a potent -secretase inhibitor, has been shown to have
antitumor activity in several tumor types by affecting the WNT/-catenin
pathway. Consequently, Notch pathway inhibition by PF-03084014 might be a
promising approach for DT treatment. The expression of Notch pathway
components was analyzed in DT tissues and cell strains with
immunohistochemistry and Western blotting, respectively. A panel of DT
cell strains was exposed to PF-03084014 and evaluated for cell
proliferation. Antitumor effects were assessed via cell cycle, apoptosis,
and migration and invasion analysis. Cells treated with PF-03084014 were
characterized with a gene array analysis combined with Ingenuity Pathway
Analysis. The results showed that Notch pathway components were expressed
at different levels in DTs. Hes1 (Hes Family BHLH Transcription Factor 1)
was overexpressed in DT tumors versus dermal scar tissue, and PF-03084014
caused significant decreases in Notch intracellular domain and Hes1
expression in DT cell strains. PF-03084014 decreased DT cell migration
and invasion and also caused cell growth inhibition in DT cell strains,
most likely through cell cycle arrest. Gene array analysis combined with
Ingenuity Pathway Analysis showed that Wnt1-inducible signaling pathway
protein 2 possibly regulated Notch and WNT pathways after treatment with
PF-03084014 through integrin. Our findings suggest that the Notch pathway
is an important DT therapeutic target. Furthermore, PF-03084014 has
significant antitumor activity against DTs, and it may be an alternative
strategy for DT treatment.

