Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting ovarian cancer with novel 6-substituted pyrrolo [2,3-d]
pyrimidine fluorinated antifolates via cellular uptake by folate receptor
and the proton-coupled folate transporter


The proton coupled folate transporter (PCFT) is a proton-folate symporter
with an acidic pH optimum, while folate receptor (FR) delivers folate
substrates into the cell via endocytosis. FR and PCFT are highly
expressed in ovarian cancer. PCFT transport is favored by acidic pH,
including pHs associated with the acidic tumor microenvironment. We
previously synthesized a novel class of 6-substituted
pyrrolo[2,3-d]pyrimidine thiophene antifolates with 4- and 3-carbon
bridge lengths, designated AGF117 and AGF150, targeted to FR and PCFT,
but not the ubiquitously expressed reduced folate carrier (RFC). To
increase antitumor specificity and activity, reflecting multi-polar
interactions with cellular targets, we synthesized fluorinated analogs of
AGF117 and AGF150, designated AGF278 and AGF283. In the presence of a
physiologic concentration of reduced folate, AGF278 and AGF283 potently
inhibited proliferation of Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells engineered
to express PCFT, but not RFC or FR (R2/PCFT4) (IC50s of 6 and 1.5 nM,
respectively), or FR without PCFT or RFC (RT16) (IC50s of 4.8 and 5.4
nM). AGF278 and AGF283 also inhibited growth of IGROV1 (IC50s of 1.5 and
11 nM, respectively) and SKOV3 (IC50s of 37.8 and 30.2 nM, respectively)
ovarian cancer cells. We measured [3H]methotrexate uptake in R2/PCFT4 CHO
cells in the presence of AGF278 and AGF283; AGF278 and AGF283 potently
inhibited PCFT transport with increased binding over AGF117 and AGF150,
respectively, as reflected in Ki values. Analogous to AGF117 and AGF150,
glycinamide ribonucleotide (GAR) formyltransferase (GARFTase), the first
folate-dependent enzyme in de novo purine biosynthesis, was implicated as
the cellular target for AGF278 and AGF283 as adenosine (10 M) and
5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide (320 M) protected IGROV1 cells from growth
inhibition. GARFTase inhibition by AGF278 and AGF283 was confirmed by an
in situ GARFTase assay which measures incorporation of [14C]glycine into
formyl GAR, the GARFTase product, with potencies similar to those of the
parent molecules. Preliminary in vivo studies with AGF278 using SKOV3
tumor xenografts in SCID mice established antitumor efficacy. Our results
suggest that novel fluorinated 6-substituted pyrrolo[2,3-d]pyrimidine
thienoyl antifolates may offer significant promise for treating ovarian
cancer, reflecting their selective cellular uptake by PCFT and FR and
potent inhibition of de novo purine biosynthesis. Additional utility of
our fluorine-substituted analogs lies in their potential for positron
emission tomography imaging of PCFT-expressing tumors.

