Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phase I results of mitoxantrone in combination with clofarabine in
children with refractory/relapsed acute leukemia


BACKGROUND: Despite excellent outcomes in pediatric ALL, multiply
relapsed patients have response rates 40%, with BACKGROUND: Despite
excellent outcomes in pediatric ALL, multiply relapsed patients have
response rates 40%, with <10% OS in CR3.(Gaynon, BJH 2005) The prognosis
for relapsed or refractory AML is 20% OS.(Wells, JCO 2003) Novel
combinations with improved outcomes are needed. Clofarabine and
Mitoxantrone have proven efficacy in children with leukemia and offer
possible synergistic activity in vivo with less drug resistance.(Chow,
Leukemia & Lymphoma 2000)OBJECTIVES: To determine the maximal tolerated
dose and overall response rate of clofarabine in combination with
mitoxantrone as reinduction therapy for refractory/relapsed acute
leukemia. To determine the percent of minimal residual disease (MRD)
following reinduction.DESIGN: Prospective, open label, uncontrolled,
safety and efficacy study. Patients 0-30.99yr old with ALL, AML or NHL in
1st, 2nd or 3rd relapse OR primary induction failure were given 1 to 3
cycles of clofarabine (escalating doses 20, 30, 35 and 40mg/m2/day) Day
1-5, in combination with mitoxantrone 12mg/m2/day on Day 3-6. Dexrazoxane
was given prior to Mitoxantrone. Dose escalation was planned every 3
patients pending dose limiting toxicities. CNS prophylaxis was achieved
with intrathecal liposomal cytarabine. Patients were allowed subsequent
cycles pending response and anthracycline exposure.RESULTS: To date 17
patients have been enrolled on the Phase I safety portion of this study.
Median Age is 13yrs (8months-23yrs); 11 ALL (3 = Induction Failure, 6 =
Relapse1, 2 = Relapse2), 5 AML (4 = Induction Failure, 1 = Relapse2), 1
NHL ( = Progressive Disease). There have been 2 prolonged Grade III/IV
toxicities at Dose Level 4 (Clofarabine 40mg/m2) (1 hepatic toxicity, 1
prolonged myelosuppression) hence additional patients were enrolled at
Dose Level 3 (Clofarabine 35mg/m2). Median time to neutrophil recovery
was 24 days. Fourteen of 16 (88%) evaluable leukemia patients achieved a
CR after 1 cycle of therapy. Of these patients, 94% achieved MRD
negativity (BACKGROUND: Despite excellent outcomes in pediatric ALL,
multiply relapsed patients have response rates 40%, with <10% OS in
CR3.(Gaynon, BJH 2005) The prognosis for relapsed or refractory AML is
20% OS.(Wells, JCO 2003) Novel combinations with improved outcomes are
needed. Clofarabine and Mitoxantrone have proven efficacy in children
with leukemia and offer possible synergistic activity in vivo with less
drug resistance.(Chow, Leukemia & Lymphoma 2000)OBJECTIVES: To determine
the maximal tolerated dose and overall response rate of clofarabine in
combination with mitoxantrone as reinduction therapy for
refractory/relapsed acute leukemia. To determine the percent of minimal
residual disease (MRD) following reinduction.DESIGN: Prospective, open
label, uncontrolled, safety and efficacy study. Patients 0-30.99yr old
with ALL, AML or NHL in 1st, 2nd or 3rd relapse OR primary induction
failure were given 1 to 3 cycles of clofarabine (escalating doses 20, 30,
35 and 40mg/m2/day) Day 1-5, in combination with mitoxantrone 12mg/m2/day
on Day 3-6. Dexrazoxane was given prior to Mitoxantrone. Dose escalation
was planned every 3 patients pending dose limiting toxicities. CNS
prophylaxis was achieved with intrathecal liposomal cytarabine. Patients
were allowed subsequent cycles pending response and anthracycline
exposure.RESULTS: To date 17 patients have been enrolled on the Phase I
safety portion of this study. Median Age is 13yrs (8months-23yrs); 11 ALL
(3 = Induction Failure, 6 = Relapse1, 2 = Relapse2), 5 AML (4 = Induction
Failure, 1 = Relapse2), 1 NHL ( = Progressive Disease). There have been 2
prolonged Grade III/IV toxicities at Dose Level 4 (Clofarabine 40mg/m2)
(1 hepatic toxicity, 1 prolonged myelosuppression) hence additional
patients were enrolled at Dose Level 3 (Clofarabine 35mg/m2). Median time
to neutrophil recovery was 24 days. Fourteen of 16 (88%) evaluable
leukemia patients achieved a CR after 1 cycle of therapy. Of these
patients, 94% achieved MRD negativity (<0.1%). Two patients with relapsed
ALL had no response. One patient with relapsed/refractory NHL had
progressive disease after 2 cycles. Thirteen of 14 patients achieving CR
went on to receive an allogeneic HSCT with continued remission at a
median follow up time of 275 days (range 40-634). Overall 1 year survival
for leukemia patients is 78.7% (CI95: 47.2-92.5).CONCLUSION: The
combination of clofarabine and mitoxantrone reinduction therapy for
relapsed or refractory acute leukemia appears to be safe and well
tolerated in children, adolescents and young adults with poor risk
hematologic malignancies. The Phase I MTD of this combination was found
to be 35mg/m2 Clofarabine. Hematopoietic recovery appears to be rapid and
complete. Initial data from the first 17 patients enrolled is encouraging
with an 88% CR rate in leukemic patients. An extended multicenter Phase
II Study is ongoing.

