Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Polymorphisms in DNA-repair genes and its association with pain
among breast cancer patients receiving adjuvant radiation therapy


Pain related to cancer or treatments is a critical quality of life (QOL)
issue for breast cancer survivors. This study aimed to evaluate the
association between the polymorphisms in DNA-repair genes and radiation
therapy (RT)-associated pain among breast cancer patients receiving
adjuvant RT. Pain score was assessed at pre- and post-RT as the mean of
four pain severity items (i.e., pain at its worst, least, average, and
now) from the Brief Pain Inventory with 11-point numeric rating scale
(0-10) and RT-associated clinically relevant pain was considered present
when pain score increased from Pain related to cancer or treatments is a
critical quality of life (QOL) issue for breast cancer survivors. This
study aimed to evaluate the association between the polymorphisms in
DNA-repair genes and radiation therapy (RT)-associated pain among breast
cancer patients receiving adjuvant RT. Pain score was assessed at pre-
and post-RT as the mean of four pain severity items (i.e., pain at its
worst, least, average, and now) from the Brief Pain Inventory with
11-point numeric rating scale (0-10) and RT-associated clinically
relevant pain was considered present when pain score increased from <4 to
4 during RT. We evaluated 3,747 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in
119 DNA repair-related genes; 15 genes in base excision repair (BER), 11
in mismatch repair (MMR), 26 in nucleotide excision repair (NER), 15 in
homologous recombination, 5 in non-homologous end-joining (NHEJ), 15 in
DNA polymerase, and 47 in other DNA repair-related pathways. Multiple
logistic regression analyses were conducted to assess the associations
between SNPs and RT-associated pain. In a prospective study of 359 breast
cancer patients, 81 experienced RT-associated pain. After controlling for
significant covariates, 232 SNPs were found significant at p Pain related
to cancer or treatments is a critical quality of life (QOL) issue for
breast cancer survivors. This study aimed to evaluate the association
between the polymorphisms in DNA-repair genes and radiation therapy
(RT)-associated pain among breast cancer patients receiving adjuvant RT.
Pain score was assessed at pre- and post-RT as the mean of four pain
severity items (i.e., pain at its worst, least, average, and now) from
the Brief Pain Inventory with 11-point numeric rating scale (0-10) and
RT-associated clinically relevant pain was considered present when pain
score increased from <4 to 4 during RT. We evaluated 3,747
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in 119 DNA repair-related genes;
15 genes in base excision repair (BER), 11 in mismatch repair (MMR), 26
in nucleotide excision repair (NER), 15 in homologous recombination, 5 in
non-homologous end-joining (NHEJ), 15 in DNA polymerase, and 47 in other
DNA repair-related pathways. Multiple logistic regression analyses were
conducted to assess the associations between SNPs and RT-associated pain.
In a prospective study of 359 breast cancer patients, 81 experienced
RT-associated pain. After controlling for significant covariates, 232
SNPs were found significant at p <0.05 and 48 at p Pain related to cancer
or treatments is a critical quality of life (QOL) issue for breast cancer
survivors. This study aimed to evaluate the association between the
polymorphisms in DNA-repair genes and radiation therapy (RT)-associated
pain among breast cancer patients receiving adjuvant RT. Pain score was
assessed at pre- and post-RT as the mean of four pain severity items
(i.e., pain at its worst, least, average, and now) from the Brief Pain
Inventory with 11-point numeric rating scale (0-10) and RT-associated
clinically relevant pain was considered present when pain score increased
from <4 to 4 during RT. We evaluated 3,747 single-nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) in 119 DNA repair-related genes; 15 genes in base
excision repair (BER), 11 in mismatch repair (MMR), 26 in nucleotide
excision repair (NER), 15 in homologous recombination, 5 in
non-homologous end-joining (NHEJ), 15 in DNA polymerase, and 47 in other
DNA repair-related pathways. Multiple logistic regression analyses were
conducted to assess the associations between SNPs and RT-associated pain.
In a prospective study of 359 breast cancer patients, 81 experienced
RT-associated pain. After controlling for significant covariates, 232
SNPs were found significant at p <0.05 and 48 at p < 0.01. Significant
associations (pPain related to cancer or treatments is a critical quality
of life (QOL) issue for breast cancer survivors. This study aimed to
evaluate the association between the polymorphisms in DNA-repair genes
and radiation therapy (RT)-associated pain among breast cancer patients
receiving adjuvant RT. Pain score was assessed at pre- and post-RT as the
mean of four pain severity items (i.e., pain at its worst, least,
average, and now) from the Brief Pain Inventory with 11-point numeric
rating scale (0-10) and RT-associated clinically relevant pain was
considered present when pain score increased from <4 to 4 during RT. We
evaluated 3,747 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in 119 DNA
repair-related genes; 15 genes in base excision repair (BER), 11 in
mismatch repair (MMR), 26 in nucleotide excision repair (NER), 15 in
homologous recombination, 5 in non-homologous end-joining (NHEJ), 15 in
DNA polymerase, and 47 in other DNA repair-related pathways. Multiple
logistic regression analyses were conducted to assess the associations
between SNPs and RT-associated pain. In a prospective study of 359 breast
cancer patients, 81 experienced RT-associated pain. After controlling for
significant covariates, 232 SNPs were found significant at p <0.05 and 48
at p < 0.01. Significant associations (p<0.01) were found in 11 SNPs in
XRCC4 and 3 in XRCC5 in NHEJ, 7 in ATR in DNA damage response pathway, 6
in MGMT in direct reversal of damage pathway, 6 in MSH3 and 1 in PMS1 in
MMR, 3 in XRCC1 genes in BER, 2 in POLB and POLB, and 1 in REV1 in DNA
polymerase pathway, 1 in XPC and RPA3 in NER, and 1 in UBE2V2 in Rad6
pathway. Among these, most significant association was found in SNP in
ATR serine/threonine kinase (rs13099184) which showed that carrying one
or two doses of minor T allele was associated with increased risk of
experiencing RT-associated pain (odds ratio [OR] = 2.33; 95% confidence
interval (CI) = 1.53-3.55, p = 8.5210-5). For XRCC4 (rs2089565), carriers
with one or two minor C allele were more likely to experience
RT-associated pain (OR = 1.93, 95% CI = 1.31-2.84, p = 8.110-4). This
study demonstrated that genetic variations in multiple genes in
DNA-repair pathways may contribute to inter-individual variation in pain
experience among cancer patients during RT. After validation with a
larger sample, these findings may be used as predictive biomarkers of
radiation sensitivity which allows to identify patients at high risk of
pain. Also the results can provide biological targets for early
intervention for pain management to improve QOL in breast cancer
survivors.

