Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: GSK3 modulates chemoresistance in epithelial ovarian cancer


Introduction: Epithelial ovarian cancer is one of the most common
gynecological malignancies and the fifth most frequent cause of cancer
death in women, affecting over 22,000 women annually. Nearly 15,500
affected women die from this disease annually, and chemoresistance from
the commonly prescribed platinum-based drug, carboplatin, is a major
contributor to this mortality. Previous studies have identified genes
with CpG islands that are methylated and transcriptionally silenced in
resistant epithelial ovarian cancer patients. One of these genes is GSK3,
an important regulator of apoptosis and cell growth in the Wnt pathway.
Thus, understanding the role of GSK3 suppression in chemoresistance of
epithelial ovarian cancer can help contribute to more effective
treatments for this disease. By performing different assays our study
examined the functional role that GSK3 plays in carboplatin
chemoresistance.Procedure: Human ovarian surface epithelium (HOSE) 6-3
cell line was utilized, which is characterized as sensitive to
carboplatin therapy. The cells were studied in six groups: 1) untreated;
2) treated with Lithium Chloride (LiCl); 3) treated with carboplatin; 4)
treated with carboplatin and LiCl; 5) treated with doxorubicin as
control; 6) treated with doxorubicin and LiCl as another control. LiCl is
known to suppress GSK3 gene expression. We took images of cells using a
fluorescence microscope. We also performed the Neutral Red Dye assay that
determines cell viability, Vybrant MTT Cell Assay which measures amount
of non-viable cells, Caspase 3 Assay which measures cell apoptosis, and
we did cell counting using a hemocytometer and a light microscope. Data
analysis was done by T-tests using Microsoft Excel, with p Introduction:
Epithelial ovarian cancer is one of the most common gynecological
malignancies and the fifth most frequent cause of cancer death in women,
affecting over 22,000 women annually. Nearly 15,500 affected women die
from this disease annually, and chemoresistance from the commonly
prescribed platinum-based drug, carboplatin, is a major contributor to
this mortality. Previous studies have identified genes with CpG islands
that are methylated and transcriptionally silenced in resistant
epithelial ovarian cancer patients. One of these genes is GSK3, an
important regulator of apoptosis and cell growth in the Wnt pathway.
Thus, understanding the role of GSK3 suppression in chemoresistance of
epithelial ovarian cancer can help contribute to more effective
treatments for this disease. By performing different assays our study
examined the functional role that GSK3 plays in carboplatin
chemoresistance.Procedure: Human ovarian surface epithelium (HOSE) 6-3
cell line was utilized, which is characterized as sensitive to
carboplatin therapy. The cells were studied in six groups: 1) untreated;
2) treated with Lithium Chloride (LiCl); 3) treated with carboplatin; 4)
treated with carboplatin and LiCl; 5) treated with doxorubicin as
control; 6) treated with doxorubicin and LiCl as another control. LiCl is
known to suppress GSK3 gene expression. We took images of cells using a
fluorescence microscope. We also performed the Neutral Red Dye assay that
determines cell viability, Vybrant MTT Cell Assay which measures amount
of non-viable cells, Caspase 3 Assay which measures cell apoptosis, and
we did cell counting using a hemocytometer and a light microscope. Data
analysis was done by T-tests using Microsoft Excel, with p < .05 for
significance.Summary of Data: More growth was observed in the carboplatin
and LiCl group compared to the carboplatin group alone on microscopy.
Neutral Red Dye assay: Compared to the cells exposed to carboplatin
alone, those exposed to carboplatin and LiCl were more viable (p
Introduction: Epithelial ovarian cancer is one of the most common
gynecological malignancies and the fifth most frequent cause of cancer
death in women, affecting over 22,000 women annually. Nearly 15,500
affected women die from this disease annually, and chemoresistance from
the commonly prescribed platinum-based drug, carboplatin, is a major
contributor to this mortality. Previous studies have identified genes
with CpG islands that are methylated and transcriptionally silenced in
resistant epithelial ovarian cancer patients. One of these genes is GSK3,
an important regulator of apoptosis and cell growth in the Wnt pathway.
Thus, understanding the role of GSK3 suppression in chemoresistance of
epithelial ovarian cancer can help contribute to more effective
treatments for this disease. By performing different assays our study
examined the functional role that GSK3 plays in carboplatin
chemoresistance.Procedure: Human ovarian surface epithelium (HOSE) 6-3
cell line was utilized, which is characterized as sensitive to
carboplatin therapy. The cells were studied in six groups: 1) untreated;
2) treated with Lithium Chloride (LiCl); 3) treated with carboplatin; 4)
treated with carboplatin and LiCl; 5) treated with doxorubicin as
control; 6) treated with doxorubicin and LiCl as another control. LiCl is
known to suppress GSK3 gene expression. We took images of cells using a
fluorescence microscope. We also performed the Neutral Red Dye assay that
determines cell viability, Vybrant MTT Cell Assay which measures amount
of non-viable cells, Caspase 3 Assay which measures cell apoptosis, and
we did cell counting using a hemocytometer and a light microscope. Data
analysis was done by T-tests using Microsoft Excel, with p < .05 for
significance.Summary of Data: More growth was observed in the carboplatin
and LiCl group compared to the carboplatin group alone on microscopy.
Neutral Red Dye assay: Compared to the cells exposed to carboplatin
alone, those exposed to carboplatin and LiCl were more viable (p <0.01).
Vybrant MTT Cell Assay: the cells treated with carboplatin and LiCl
showed lesser amounts of nonviable cells as compared to the carboplatin
alone group (pIntroduction: Epithelial ovarian cancer is one of the most
common gynecological malignancies and the fifth most frequent cause of
cancer death in women, affecting over 22,000 women annually. Nearly
15,500 affected women die from this disease annually, and chemoresistance
from the commonly prescribed platinum-based drug, carboplatin, is a major
contributor to this mortality. Previous studies have identified genes
with CpG islands that are methylated and transcriptionally silenced in
resistant epithelial ovarian cancer patients. One of these genes is GSK3,
an important regulator of apoptosis and cell growth in the Wnt pathway.
Thus, understanding the role of GSK3 suppression in chemoresistance of
epithelial ovarian cancer can help contribute to more effective
treatments for this disease. By performing different assays our study
examined the functional role that GSK3 plays in carboplatin
chemoresistance.Procedure: Human ovarian surface epithelium (HOSE) 6-3
cell line was utilized, which is characterized as sensitive to
carboplatin therapy. The cells were studied in six groups: 1) untreated;
2) treated with Lithium Chloride (LiCl); 3) treated with carboplatin; 4)
treated with carboplatin and LiCl; 5) treated with doxorubicin as
control; 6) treated with doxorubicin and LiCl as another control. LiCl is
known to suppress GSK3 gene expression. We took images of cells using a
fluorescence microscope. We also performed the Neutral Red Dye assay that
determines cell viability, Vybrant MTT Cell Assay which measures amount
of non-viable cells, Caspase 3 Assay which measures cell apoptosis, and
we did cell counting using a hemocytometer and a light microscope. Data
analysis was done by T-tests using Microsoft Excel, with p < .05 for
significance.Summary of Data: More growth was observed in the carboplatin
and LiCl group compared to the carboplatin group alone on microscopy.
Neutral Red Dye assay: Compared to the cells exposed to carboplatin
alone, those exposed to carboplatin and LiCl were more viable (p <0.01).
Vybrant MTT Cell Assay: the cells treated with carboplatin and LiCl
showed lesser amounts of nonviable cells as compared to the carboplatin
alone group (p<0.01). Caspase 3 Assay: the cells treated with carboplatin
and LiCl were less apoptotic, compared to cells treated with carboplatin
alone (p Introduction: Epithelial ovarian cancer is one of the most
common gynecological malignancies and the fifth most frequent cause of
cancer death in women, affecting over 22,000 women annually. Nearly
15,500 affected women die from this disease annually, and chemoresistance
from the commonly prescribed platinum-based drug, carboplatin, is a major
contributor to this mortality. Previous studies have identified genes
with CpG islands that are methylated and transcriptionally silenced in
resistant epithelial ovarian cancer patients. One of these genes is GSK3,
an important regulator of apoptosis and cell growth in the Wnt pathway.
Thus, understanding the role of GSK3 suppression in chemoresistance of
epithelial ovarian cancer can help contribute to more effective
treatments for this disease. By performing different assays our study
examined the functional role that GSK3 plays in carboplatin
chemoresistance.Procedure: Human ovarian surface epithelium (HOSE) 6-3
cell line was utilized, which is characterized as sensitive to
carboplatin therapy. The cells were studied in six groups: 1) untreated;
2) treated with Lithium Chloride (LiCl); 3) treated with carboplatin; 4)
treated with carboplatin and LiCl; 5) treated with doxorubicin as
control; 6) treated with doxorubicin and LiCl as another control. LiCl is
known to suppress GSK3 gene expression. We took images of cells using a
fluorescence microscope. We also performed the Neutral Red Dye assay that
determines cell viability, Vybrant MTT Cell Assay which measures amount
of non-viable cells, Caspase 3 Assay which measures cell apoptosis, and
we did cell counting using a hemocytometer and a light microscope. Data
analysis was done by T-tests using Microsoft Excel, with p < .05 for
significance.Summary of Data: More growth was observed in the carboplatin
and LiCl group compared to the carboplatin group alone on microscopy.
Neutral Red Dye assay: Compared to the cells exposed to carboplatin
alone, those exposed to carboplatin and LiCl were more viable (p <0.01).
Vybrant MTT Cell Assay: the cells treated with carboplatin and LiCl
showed lesser amounts of nonviable cells as compared to the carboplatin
alone group (p<0.01). Caspase 3 Assay: the cells treated with carboplatin
and LiCl were less apoptotic, compared to cells treated with carboplatin
alone (p <0.01). Cell Counting: cells treated with carboplatin and LiCl
had significantly more growth compared to the cells treated with
carboplatin alone (p Introduction: Epithelial ovarian cancer is one of
the most common gynecological malignancies and the fifth most frequent
cause of cancer death in women, affecting over 22,000 women annually.
Nearly 15,500 affected women die from this disease annually, and
chemoresistance from the commonly prescribed platinum-based drug,
carboplatin, is a major contributor to this mortality. Previous studies
have identified genes with CpG islands that are methylated and
transcriptionally silenced in resistant epithelial ovarian cancer
patients. One of these genes is GSK3, an important regulator of apoptosis
and cell growth in the Wnt pathway. Thus, understanding the role of GSK3
suppression in chemoresistance of epithelial ovarian cancer can help
contribute to more effective treatments for this disease. By performing
different assays our study examined the functional role that GSK3 plays
in carboplatin chemoresistance.Procedure: Human ovarian surface
epithelium (HOSE) 6-3 cell line was utilized, which is characterized as
sensitive to carboplatin therapy. The cells were studied in six groups:
1) untreated; 2) treated with Lithium Chloride (LiCl); 3) treated with
carboplatin; 4) treated with carboplatin and LiCl; 5) treated with
doxorubicin as control; 6) treated with doxorubicin and LiCl as another
control. LiCl is known to suppress GSK3 gene expression. We took images
of cells using a fluorescence microscope. We also performed the Neutral
Red Dye assay that determines cell viability, Vybrant MTT Cell Assay
which measures amount of non-viable cells, Caspase 3 Assay which measures
cell apoptosis, and we did cell counting using a hemocytometer and a
light microscope. Data analysis was done by T-tests using Microsoft
Excel, with p < .05 for significance.Summary of Data: More growth was
observed in the carboplatin and LiCl group compared to the carboplatin
group alone on microscopy. Neutral Red Dye assay: Compared to the cells
exposed to carboplatin alone, those exposed to carboplatin and LiCl were
more viable (p <0.01). Vybrant MTT Cell Assay: the cells treated with
carboplatin and LiCl showed lesser amounts of nonviable cells as compared
to the carboplatin alone group (p<0.01). Caspase 3 Assay: the cells
treated with carboplatin and LiCl were less apoptotic, compared to cells
treated with carboplatin alone (p <0.01). Cell Counting: cells treated
with carboplatin and LiCl had significantly more growth compared to the
cells treated with carboplatin alone (p <0.01).Conclusion: Our results
show that cells with suppressed GSK3 had increased proliferation and
reduced apoptosis, strongly suggesting that silenced GSK3 expression
contributes to carboplatin resistance and GSK3 expression is vital to
carboplatin chemosensitivity. Future in vivo studies could further
investigate the role of GSK3 methylation to facilitate the design of
potential genome-guided treatments for patients with chemoresistant
epithelial ovarian cancer.

