Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Crosstalk of androgen sensitive prostate cancer cells and
insensitive prostate cancer cells


[Background] The mechanisms that prostate cancer (PCa) progresses to
castration-resistant PCa (CRPC) are adaptation and clonal selection. We
hypothesized that PCa proliferated while each mechanism cooperated when
PCa recurred.[Materials and Methods] After LNCaP cells were transfected
with luciferase reporter driven by PSA promoter, LNCaP were cocultured
with androgen-insensitive DU145 or PC-3. Then DHEA or DHT were added to
the medium and luciferase assay was performed. Also, we added DHEA or DHT
in the medium and measured various androgens level by LC-MS/MS. As for
proliferation, LNCaP were cocultured with DU145 or PC -3 in 2-layer
chamber and number of LNCaP were counted. DU145 and PC-3 were also
cocultured with LNCaP cells for 4 days. We also checked migration by
using 2-layer chamber and migrated cells were counted.[Results] Whereas
DHEA was converted into DHT in DU145 and induced PSA promoter activity in
LNCaP, the effect was not found in PC-3. Moreover, DU145 elevated
DHT-induced PSA promoter activity. DU145 promoted LNCaP proliferation
stimulated by DHT and DHEA, but PC-3 did not. LNCaP also promoted
proliferation of DU145 and PC-3. LNCaP promoted migration of PC-3, but
not DU145.[Conclusion] Cross-talk between androgen-sensitive PCa cells
and androgen-insensitive PCa cells might regulate progression of CRPC.

