Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The inflammatory pre-metastatic niche in reliably metastatic
models of triple negative breast cancer


The purpose of this study was to evaluate Triple Negative Breast Cancer
(TNBC) murine models to use for investigations of the pre-metastatic
niche. We selected two murine TNBC based on published gene expression
studies which demonstrated molecular profiles that mirrored human breast
tumor subtypes. The 2225L murine tumor has similar gene expression
patterns to human tumors of the basal-like phenotype. When 2225L was
implanted in the mammary fat pad or sc flank of syngeneic nave Balb/c
female mice, no metastases were observed. Tumors were subsequently
resected at approximately 600-800 mm3 to promote the growth of seeded
metastases. To select for a consistently metastatic 2225L variant,
primary tumors or lung metastases from the most consistently metastatic
2225L tumors were serially passaged sc. The resulting variant (2225LM) is
highly metastatic, with lung metastases in 90% (43/48) of mice from the
most recent 4 cohorts compared to 27% (47/176) of mice in 66 previous
passages. Metastases were not observed at any other site. We also studied
the T11 murine tumor, which is representative of the claudin-low
phenotype. However, when tested for mouse pathogens prior to
implantation, T11 was positive for lactate dehydrogenase elevating virus
(LDEV). To eliminate LDEV, T11 tumors were serially passaged into athymic
nude rats. The resulting LDEV-free T11 tumor was used for in vivo
studies. After sc implantation of T11 in Balb/c mice, consistent lung
metastases were observed (89%; 24/27 mice). Tumor-infiltrating immune
cell subsets were assessed using flow cytometry. CD11b+ Ly6G- and CD11b+
Ly6G+ cells comprised the majority of tumor-infiltrating immune cells and
both subsets were more prevalent in 2225LM than T11. Infiltrating
lymphoid (CD3+) cells were a minor component of both tumors. In
preliminary studies to quantify lung-infiltrating immune cells, levels of
CD11b+ Ly6G+ cells were 1.5 fold higher in 2225LM and T11 tumor-bearing
mice compared to controls. Prior to the development of frank metastases
(12-30 days post-2225L implant), lung analysis by ELISA showed a steady
increase in the neutrophil chemoattractant KC and the pro-tumor M2/N2
chemokine marker MCP-1. Analysis of lungs with visible 2225LM metastases
detected increased levels of KC (6-27 fold) and MCP-1 (11-23 fold), when
compared to nave mice. These chemokines were not elevated at
non-metastatic sites (i.e. kidney). To conclude, our lab has selected,
developed and characterized two TNBC mouse models. Both tumor cell lines
are reliable metastatic models of TNBC and will be used to further
characterize the inflammatory microenvironment of the pre-metastatic
niche, including the continuum of gene expression patterns and changing
cellular components.

