Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Recurrent gains of CD274 (PD-L1) and PDCD1LG2 (PD-L2) provide a
genetic basis for PD-1 ligand expression in a subset of solid tumors


Background: A subset of malignant tumors are immunogenic but avoid immune
surveillance through ectopic expression of the programmed cell death 1
ligands, PD-L1 and PD-L2, that bind PD-1 on effector T-cells to inhibit
T-cell activation, a phenotype that is reversible with PD-1 blockade.
Co-amplification and co-gain of CD274 (PD-L1) and PDCD1LG2 (PD-L2) on
chromosome 9p24.1 provide a genetic basis for PD-1 ligand expression by
Reed-Sternberg cells in classical Hodgkin lymphoma, a tumor highly
sensitive to PD-1 blockade. We sought to determine whether copy number
alterations of CD274 and PDCD1LG2 are a mechanism of PD-1 ligand
expression in other tumor types.Methods: We surveyed data derived from a
clinically-deployed next generation sequencing assay (OncoPanel) to
identify tumors with evidence of selective copy gain of genes located at
9p24.1. Formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded biopsy specimens from available
cases were reviewed for tumor content, immunostained for PD-L1, and
analyzed with custom probes targeting the CD274 and PDCD1LG2 loci and a
commercial probe targeting the centromere of chromosome 9 by flourescence
in situ hybridization (FISH).Results: Review of NGS data revealed 171 of
7,070 clinical samples (2.4%) with evidence for selective copy gain of
CD274 and/or PDCD1LG2. Tissue was available for analysis in 73 cases, of
which 55 were successfully analyzed. Co-amplification and co-gain of
CD274 and PDCD1LG2 were observed for 20 (36%) and 18 (33%) of cases,
respectively. Polysomy 9 and disomy 9 were observed among 9 (16%) and 2
(4%) cases, respectively. Genetic abnormalities associated with
chromosome 9 loss were observed among the remaining cases 6 (11%). PD-L1
IHC revealed positive staining of tumor cells in 36 (65%) cases. Among
cases with co-amplification/gain of CD274 and PDCD1LG2, a subset (Co-Amp:
36%; Co-Gain: 28%) exhibited moderate to high PD-L1 expression in
significant percentages of tumor cells (Tumor H-score > 50). Tumor types
with high PD-L1 expression in the context of co-amplification/gain
included carcinomas of the head and neck, bladder, and
cervix.Conclusions: Review of over 7000 tumors analyzed by a
clinically-deployed NGS platform identifies CD274 and PDCD1LG2 copy gain
in a low percentage of a variety of solid tumor types, a subset of which
has a corresponding increase of PD-L1 expression. These data suggest that
copy gain of CD274 and PDCD1LG2 contributes to PD-1 ligand expression in
a subset of solid tumors beyond classical Hodgkin lymphoma.

