Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: miR-29b acts as an oncogene or tumor suppressor gene depending on
the external stimulus


microRNAs (miRNAs), short regulatory sequences at the posttranscriptional
level, are important mediators of signaling pathways that act as backups
of transcriptional control. To identify miRNAs implicated in epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR) signaling, transformed bronchial epithelial
BEAS-2B cells were retrovirally transduced with KRASG12V and alterations
in miRNA expression were assessed by microarray analysis. Here we show
that miR-29b is significantly induced by mutant KRAS in bronchial
epithelial and non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cell lines as well as
in primary NSCLC tissue. In agreement with these results, inhibitors of
EGFR and MEK resulted in reduced levels of miR-29b while inhibitors of
PI3K had no effect. KRASG12V-transduced BEAS-2B cells were significantly
more protected from extrinsic apoptosis than control transduced cells,
but co-transduction of cells with KRASG12V and anti-miR-29b constructs
sensitized cells to apoptosis indicating that miR-29b is a mediator of
KRAS-induced resistance to apoptosis. Protection from extrinsic apoptosis
was due to enhanced nuclear factor B (NF-B) activity. The
ubiquitin-editing enzyme tumor necrosis factor alpha-induced protein 3
(TNFAIP3/A20) is a negative regulator of NF-B signaling. Enhanced NF-B
activity elicited by miR-29b was due to targeting TNFAIP3/A20.
Overexpression of miR-29b-refractory TNFAIP3 restored NF-B activity as
well as extrinsic apoptosis, demonstrating that TNFAIP3 is a relevant
target of miR-29b. Interestingly, miR-29b conferred sensitivity to
cisplatin-induced intrinsic apoptosis by targeting Mcl-1. Thus, miR-29b
tips the balance from extrinsic apoptosis towards intrinsic apoptosis.
Our results indicate that miR-29b can act either as an oncogene or tumor
suppressor gene depending on the external stimulus.

