Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gene expression based subtypes of colorectal cancer


Colorectal cancer is a heterogeneous disease and improved molecular
stratification of patients is warranted for precise treatment. Several
gene expression classification systems are reported in the literature,
albeit many have shown low reproducibility in external validation. A
robust random forest classification system based on gene expression
profiles was recently proposed, suggesting the existence of four
biologically different subtypes with associations to prognosis (CMS1,
CMS2, CMS3 and CMS4) (Guinney,J., et al., Nat Med, 2015). By applying the
CMS classifier to high-quality gene expression profiles from a
consecutive series of >400 stage I-IV primary colorectal cancers we are
able to reproduce results from Guinney et al in an independent cohort.
Analyses of mutational hotspots in BRAF / KRAS and the complete coding
sequence of TP53 confirms enrichment of BRAF mutations in CMS1
(pColorectal cancer is a heterogeneous disease and improved molecular
stratification of patients is warranted for precise treatment. Several
gene expression classification systems are reported in the literature,
albeit many have shown low reproducibility in external validation. A
robust random forest classification system based on gene expression
profiles was recently proposed, suggesting the existence of four
biologically different subtypes with associations to prognosis (CMS1,
CMS2, CMS3 and CMS4) (Guinney,J., et al., Nat Med, 2015). By applying the
CMS classifier to high-quality gene expression profiles from a
consecutive series of >400 stage I-IV primary colorectal cancers we are
able to reproduce results from Guinney et al in an independent cohort.
Analyses of mutational hotspots in BRAF / KRAS and the complete coding
sequence of TP53 confirms enrichment of BRAF mutations in CMS1 (p<0.001),
TP53 mutations in CMS2 and KRAS mutations in CMS4 (pColorectal cancer is
a heterogeneous disease and improved molecular stratification of patients
is warranted for precise treatment. Several gene expression
classification systems are reported in the literature, albeit many have
shown low reproducibility in external validation. A robust random forest
classification system based on gene expression profiles was recently
proposed, suggesting the existence of four biologically different
subtypes with associations to prognosis (CMS1, CMS2, CMS3 and CMS4)
(Guinney,J., et al., Nat Med, 2015). By applying the CMS classifier to
high-quality gene expression profiles from a consecutive series of >400
stage I-IV primary colorectal cancers we are able to reproduce results
from Guinney et al in an independent cohort. Analyses of mutational
hotspots in BRAF / KRAS and the complete coding sequence of TP53 confirms
enrichment of BRAF mutations in CMS1 (p<0.001), TP53 mutations in CMS2
and KRAS mutations in CMS4 (p<0.001). We further validate high levels of
somatic copy number aberrations (SCNAs) in CMS2 and CMS4 compared to CMS1
and CMS3 (pair-wise comparisons, fraction of genome affected by SCNAs:
CMS1 vs CMS2: pColorectal cancer is a heterogeneous disease and improved
molecular stratification of patients is warranted for precise treatment.
Several gene expression classification systems are reported in the
literature, albeit many have shown low reproducibility in external
validation. A robust random forest classification system based on gene
expression profiles was recently proposed, suggesting the existence of
four biologically different subtypes with associations to prognosis
(CMS1, CMS2, CMS3 and CMS4) (Guinney,J., et al., Nat Med, 2015). By
applying the CMS classifier to high-quality gene expression profiles from
a consecutive series of >400 stage I-IV primary colorectal cancers we are
able to reproduce results from Guinney et al in an independent cohort.
Analyses of mutational hotspots in BRAF / KRAS and the complete coding
sequence of TP53 confirms enrichment of BRAF mutations in CMS1 (p<0.001),
TP53 mutations in CMS2 and KRAS mutations in CMS4 (p<0.001). We further
validate high levels of somatic copy number aberrations (SCNAs) in CMS2
and CMS4 compared to CMS1 and CMS3 (pair-wise comparisons, fraction of
genome affected by SCNAs: CMS1 vs CMS2: p<0.001; CMS1 vs CMS4:
pColorectal cancer is a heterogeneous disease and improved molecular
stratification of patients is warranted for precise treatment. Several
gene expression classification systems are reported in the literature,
albeit many have shown low reproducibility in external validation. A
robust random forest classification system based on gene expression
profiles was recently proposed, suggesting the existence of four
biologically different subtypes with associations to prognosis (CMS1,
CMS2, CMS3 and CMS4) (Guinney,J., et al., Nat Med, 2015). By applying the
CMS classifier to high-quality gene expression profiles from a
consecutive series of >400 stage I-IV primary colorectal cancers we are
able to reproduce results from Guinney et al in an independent cohort.
Analyses of mutational hotspots in BRAF / KRAS and the complete coding
sequence of TP53 confirms enrichment of BRAF mutations in CMS1 (p<0.001),
TP53 mutations in CMS2 and KRAS mutations in CMS4 (p<0.001). We further
validate high levels of somatic copy number aberrations (SCNAs) in CMS2
and CMS4 compared to CMS1 and CMS3 (pair-wise comparisons, fraction of
genome affected by SCNAs: CMS1 vs CMS2: p<0.001; CMS1 vs CMS4: p<0.01;
CMS2 vs CMS3: pColorectal cancer is a heterogeneous disease and improved
molecular stratification of patients is warranted for precise treatment.
Several gene expression classification systems are reported in the
literature, albeit many have shown low reproducibility in external
validation. A robust random forest classification system based on gene
expression profiles was recently proposed, suggesting the existence of
four biologically different subtypes with associations to prognosis
(CMS1, CMS2, CMS3 and CMS4) (Guinney,J., et al., Nat Med, 2015). By
applying the CMS classifier to high-quality gene expression profiles from
a consecutive series of >400 stage I-IV primary colorectal cancers we are
able to reproduce results from Guinney et al in an independent cohort.
Analyses of mutational hotspots in BRAF / KRAS and the complete coding
sequence of TP53 confirms enrichment of BRAF mutations in CMS1 (p<0.001),
TP53 mutations in CMS2 and KRAS mutations in CMS4 (p<0.001). We further
validate high levels of somatic copy number aberrations (SCNAs) in CMS2
and CMS4 compared to CMS1 and CMS3 (pair-wise comparisons, fraction of
genome affected by SCNAs: CMS1 vs CMS2: p<0.001; CMS1 vs CMS4: p<0.01;
CMS2 vs CMS3: p<0.001; CMS3 vs CMS4: pColorectal cancer is a
heterogeneous disease and improved molecular stratification of patients
is warranted for precise treatment. Several gene expression
classification systems are reported in the literature, albeit many have
shown low reproducibility in external validation. A robust random forest
classification system based on gene expression profiles was recently
proposed, suggesting the existence of four biologically different
subtypes with associations to prognosis (CMS1, CMS2, CMS3 and CMS4)
(Guinney,J., et al., Nat Med, 2015). By applying the CMS classifier to
high-quality gene expression profiles from a consecutive series of >400
stage I-IV primary colorectal cancers we are able to reproduce results
from Guinney et al in an independent cohort. Analyses of mutational
hotspots in BRAF / KRAS and the complete coding sequence of TP53 confirms
enrichment of BRAF mutations in CMS1 (p<0.001), TP53 mutations in CMS2
and KRAS mutations in CMS4 (p<0.001). We further validate high levels of
somatic copy number aberrations (SCNAs) in CMS2 and CMS4 compared to CMS1
and CMS3 (pair-wise comparisons, fraction of genome affected by SCNAs:
CMS1 vs CMS2: p<0.001; CMS1 vs CMS4: p<0.01; CMS2 vs CMS3: p<0.001; CMS3
vs CMS4: p<0.01). Additionally we explore within-subtype variations with
respect to SCNAs in the CMS2 and CMS4 subtypes. Altogether our results
validate the CMS system as a robust classification system for colorectal
cancer.

