Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular testing in lung cancer: Patient and caregiver experiences


Increasingly over the past decade, new targeted therapeutics and
immunotherapies with associated companion diagnostics have been approved
for the treatment of lung cancer. Lung cancer is often associated with
elderly and lower socio-economic populations that may not have a high
level of health literacy. As part of a comprehensive needs assessment
survey of the lung cancer community, lung cancer patients and their
caregivers were asked whether they or their loved ones had undergone
molecular testing/biomarker testing as well as asked to report the
history of oncologic drugs they had taken. Demographic information and
additional cancer treatment history were also collected. Over 300 survey
responses were collected. Interim analyses indicated that the majority
(68%) of patients currently undergoing active treatment had received
molecular testing to help determine their treatment plan. There was a
clear improvement in testing rates over time with less than 30% of
patients who had completed treatment reporting use of a molecular test.
Importantly, there is still an educational gap that needs to be addressed
as greater than 20% of patients and greater than 30% of loved ones,
including the group who self-identified as the primary caregiver,
reported that they did not know whether molecular testing had been
performed. In addition, patients reported that they had not received EGFR
mutation testing but had taken erlotinib, gefinitib, and/or afatinib.
Final results will be presented as well as an analysis of factors that
associate with lack of molecular testing. Taken together, these data
indicate that there is a critical need for enhanced patient and caregiver
education regarding molecular testing.

