Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The interleukin-1 inflammatory cytokine family modulates
p62/SQSTM1 accumulation in breast cancer cell lines


Tumors are likened to wounds that do not heal. Thus, not surprisingly,
inflammatory cytokines are present in the primary and metastatic tumor
microenvironments due, in part, to infiltrating bone-derived cells (e.g.,
macrophages). We previously discovered that a bone marrow stromal cell
line that secretes the inflammatory cytokine, interleukin-1 beta (IL-1),
upregulates p62 mRNA and protein in prostate cancer cell lines and we
showed that p62 can be cytoprotective for prostate cancer cells.
p62/Sequestome-1 is a multifunctional scaffold protein that can be seen
microscopically as subcellular speckles which serve as organizing centers
for multiple different signaling cascades, ranging from
autophagy-mediated degradation of ubiquitinated proteins to KEAP1-NRF2
antioxidant response. To determine if our previous discoveries might be
cancer-type specific and to test our hypothesis that p62 promotes cancer
cell survival in response to inflammatory cytokines, we expanded our
studies to various breast cancer cell lines of varying receptor status,
including ZR57-1, T47D, and MDA-MB-468 and determined cell response two
interleukin-1 family members, alpha () and beta (). We treated the breast
cancer cells with IL-1 and/or IL-1 and analyzed p62 mRNA and protein
levels, subcellular localization, and protein-protein interactions. IL-1
and IL-1 can induce p62 speckle accumulation that can be seen to
co-localize with the autophagosome membrane protein, LC3B, suggesting an
autophagy-dependent regulation and/or function for p62. In addition, p62
co-immunoprecipitates with KEAP1, suggesting a KEAP1-NRF2-dependent
antioxidant function for p62. Taken together, our data implies that
cancer cells usurp inflammatory cytokines, such as IL-1, present in the
primary or metastatic tumor microenvironment to promote cell survival
through proteins such as p62.

