Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Heparan sulfate modifying enzymes deliver cancer, stromal and
macrophage-produced heparin-binding growth factors in the prostate cancer
microenvironment


We previously showed that the heparan sulfate proteoglycan, perlecan
(PLN)/HSPG2, is deposited into the matrix of reactive stroma surrounding
tumors, where it concentrates heparin binding growth factors (HBGFs) and
cytokines at the tumor-stromal border both in primary prostatic tumors
and bone metastatic lesions. Heparan sulfate (HS) modifying enzymes
produced in tumor-associated stroma play key roles in the delivery of
these perlecan-sequestered cancer, stromal and tumor macrophage-produced
HBGFs and cytokines, serving to enhance tumorigenesis and recruit other
bystander cells to sites of metastasis. Studies presented here focused on
the production of secreted HS-modifying enzyme heparanase and the two
extracellular sulfatases, SULF1 and SULF2, in the prostatic tumor
microenvironment. Our studies showed that SULF1 and heparanase mRNA
levels are elevated in prostate cancer (PCa) cells of the LNCaP lineage
in the presence of stroma, indicating that both stroma and PCa cells can
be sources of these enzymes. We are presently examining a number of PCa
patient derived xenografts to determine the prevalence of SULF-1 and
heparanase elevation in castrate resistant disease. To study function, we
developed a modified 3D hyaluronate gel system that contains HS-bearing
recombinant perlecan domain I (PlnDI) to retain and deliver HBGFs and
cytokines to various PCa cells cultured with bone marrow stromal cells,
osteoblasts, or tumor macrophages. We are using this system to study the
expression and individual functions of heparanase and the two SULFs in
promoting HBGF-dependent PCa progression in a physiologically relevant
system. Overexpression and gene deletion techniques allow us to determine
the role that heparanase or SULFs play in each relevant cell type present
in the tumor microenvironment, and thus determine the need for
co-targeting of both tumor and reactive stroma. (Supported by NIH P01 and
CAPES).

