Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sox2 enhances breast tumor angiogenesis by promoting the
transition of cancer cell to CD31+ and LYVE-1+ cells


Angiogenesis plays an important role during the development of tumor.
Sox2 is one of the transcription factors involved in tumorigenesis and
metastasis. However, its function during the process of tumor
angiogenesis and lymphogenesis is still poorly understood. Here, we
demonstrated that down-regulation of Sox2 significantly reduced the tumor
angiogenesis and lymphogenesis as reflected by attenuated
immunofluorescence staining of CD31 and LYVE-1 and improved prognosis in
xenograft models of breast tumor. Furthermore, Sox2 also promoted the
recruitment of bone marrow derived endothelial progenitor cells (MDEPC)
to tumor microenvironment. Most importantly, we demonstrated that some of
CD31+ and LYVE-1+ cells were derived from Sox2+ cancer cells and
silencing of Sox2 could inhibit this transition. We revealed that Sox2
promoted the expression of LYVE-1, VEGFs and enhanced the phosphorylation
of VEGFR2 in breast cancer. ChIP-seq and dual-luciferase assay further
revealed the binding of Sox2 protein on proximate promoter region of
VEGFB and LYVE1 to regulate their transcriptional activities, disclosing
the underlying molecular mechanism on the regulatory effects of Sox2 on
angiogenesis and lymphogenesis. Our study indicated that Sox2 improved
tumor angiogenesis and lymphogenesis through regulating the related genes
and unveiled a novel function of Sox2 in tumor progression.

