Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exosomal encapsulation of doxorubicin reduces the cardiac toxicity
of mice


Exosomes are nanovesicles produced by cells embedded of cellular
information and represent a formidable natural cargo for communication.
The name FedExosomes denotes the general idea that exosomes could deliver
cargo that conveniently manipulated could be of help for patient therapy.
Up to now, a few papers demonstrated that modified exosomes could deliver
drugs specifically to cancer cells and many laboratories are now studying
their properties and compositions. Differently from previously published
papers that focused on the efficacy of the doxorubicin encapsulated in
exosomes (exoDOX), for the first time, we demonstrated that unmodified
exosomes loaded with DOX are less toxic than free DOX by altering the
biodistribution of the drug. The heart tissue of mice treated with a
toxic dosage of DOX exhibited scattered cytoplasmic paranuclear vacuoles
and focal intense eosinophilic cytoplasm, devoid of their transversal
striations with moderate disarrangement of cardiomyocytes. The heart
tissue of exoDOX treated mice at the same dosage appeared normal. Mass
spectrometry studies confirmed that although the quantity of exoDOX in
the blood was the same compared to DOX, accumulation in the heart was
reduced of about forty percent. Maximum tolerated dose of exoDOX treated
mice is double than free DOX. Mice treated at double concentration of
exoDOX vs DOX have reduced tumor burden compared to free DOX without
observable toxicity.We demonstrated that exoDOX increased the therapeutic
index of DOX by reducing toxic side effects and envisage a similar
mechanism for others chemotherapeutic drugs. Since the exosomes could be
prepared directly from the patients, our preclinical approach could have
a possible immediately application in the clinic.

