Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting GPNMB with 89Zr-CR011 for PET imaging of triple negative
breast cancer


Glycoprotein non-metastatic melanoma B (GPNMB) is a transmembrane protein
overexpressed in 30 - 40% of triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) and has
shown to be associated with metastasis and disease recurrence. An
anti-GPNMB antibody drug conjugate, Glembatumumab Vedotin (CDX-011), is
currently in Phase II clinical trials for the treatment of metastatic
TNBC patients, with promising outcomes. Positron Emission Tomography
using radiolabeled antibodies could be advantageous in stratifying
patients who may benefit from CDX-011, tracking the biodistribution of
CDX-011, and assessing GPNMB expression in vivo. To this end, we
radiolabeled the naked antibody, Glembatumumab (CR011), with the
positron-emitting 89Zr (half life = 3.3 days). We characterized the
stability, affinity, rate of cellular internalization, and specificity of
89Zr-CR011 using various cell-binding assays in human TNBC cell lines. We
determined that 89Zr-CR011 is stable in serum solution for up to 5 days,
binds specifically to GPNMB+ TNBC cells with high affinity (KD = 16 nM),
and internalizes rapidly (50% within 30 - 60 min). We conducted a
biodistribution study from 1 - 12 days post administration via tail vein
in GPNMB+ MDA-MB-468 xenografts to determine the time point at which we
achieve the optimal tumor-to-nontarget ratios. A subset of mice was
administered a blocking dose of unlabeled CR011 (100-fold excess, 1
mg/mouse), where we observed a 2.5-fold reduction in 89Zr-CR011 tumor
uptake, confirming the specificity of 89Zr-CR011 for GPNMB+ TNBC tumors.
PET imaging studies and dosimetry calculations are currently in progress.
This preliminary study demonstrates that 89Zr-CR011 may be an excellent
companion diagnostic agent for CDX-011 therapy and an essential tool to
assess the function of GPNMB in vivo.

