Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A long noncoding RNA-regulating enhancer links Ewing sarcoma
susceptibility to stress response


Ewing sarcoma is the second most frequent bone cancer in Caucasian
children and young adults, but hardly occurs in Africans. It is
characterized by a relatively quiet genome with only one highly recurrent
chromosomal aberration, a EWS-ETS (predominantly EWS-FLI1) gene
rearrangement. The resulting fusion gene encodes for an aberrant ETS
transcription factor which drives sarcomagenesis. In a large GWAS study,
three Ewing sarcoma susceptibility loci were discovered on chromosomes 1,
10 and 15, but the molecular mechanisms, how these loci affect
tumorigenesis, remained largely unknown.By epigenomic mapping, EWS-FLI1
ChIP-seq, and reporter gene assays we found one of the susceptibility
loci to localize to an EWS-FLI1 bound enhancer in the intron of a long
non-coding antisense RNA, which we termed lncESST1 (Ewing Sarcoma
Susceptibility Transcript 1). Deletion of the ETS binding region in the
enhancer by CRISPR/Cas9 mediated gene editing lead to a drastic decrease
in lncESST1 expression. Modulation of lncESST expression by siRNA or
enhancer deletion significantly reduced soft agar colony formation of
Ewing sarcoma cells without affecting growth under adherent culture
conditions. Detachment of Ewing sarcoma cells from the plastic surface
and growth under spheroid culture conditions induced stress granule
formation as an immediate response, and a steady increase in lncESST1
expression over a period of at least 72 hours. We report that lncESST1
binds to a stress granule component with which it shares the promoter,
and that loss of lncESST1 expression due to enhancer deletion perturbs
stress granule formation. Our study therefore unveils a novel mechanism
of lncRNA mediated cancer susceptibility.Supported by FWF grant I1225-B19

