Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Proteomic analysis of ubiquitination identifies the interplay
between HSP90 inhibition and CUL5 in the control of autophagy


HSP90 has emerged as an important target in cancer therapy as inhibition
of HSP90 can result in the degradation of many oncogenic client proteins.
The two major cellular protein degradation pathways are the
ubiquitin-proteasome system and autophagy. The role of the
ubiquitin-proteasome pathway in client protein degradation following
HSP90 inhibition is well established. We recently described how this
process is controlled by an E3-ubiquitin ligase, cullin 5 (CUL5). We
sought to further understand how both major protein degradation pathways
are regulated in response to HSP90 inhibition. To do this, we performed a
proteomic screen on the ubiquitination status of proteins extracted from
HT29 cells following HSP90 inhibition by 17-AAG and / or siRNA silencing
of CUL5 expression. We found the level of ubiquitination of 125 proteins
increased by more than 2 fold in response to 17-AAG treatment. For 66 of
these proteins, CUL5 silencing eliminated the 17-AAG-induced increase in
ubiquitination; for 30 proteins CUL5 silencing partially reduced the
17-AAG-induced increase in ubiquitination; and for 29 proteins CUL5
silencing had no effect. Importantly, we found some known regulators of
autophagy to be among those proteins ubiquitinated in response to 17-AAG
treatment and rescued by CUL5 silencing. There was a correlation between
levels of ubiquitination and levels of protein degradation. We measured
markers of autophagic flux, LC3B and p62, and found clear evidence for
altered pathway flux in response to HSP90 inhibition and CUL5 silencing.
This study indicates that the interplay between HSP90 inhibition and CUL5
can control both proteasomal degradation and autophagy.

