Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical anti-tumor activity of nanoliposomal irinotecan
(Nal-IRI, MM-398) + 5-FU + oxaliplatin in pancreatic cancer


Nanoliposomal irinotecan (Nal-IRI, MM-398) recently gained approval in
combination with 5-fluorouracil/leucovorin (5-FU/LV) in post-gemcitabine
metastatic pancreatic cancer based on results of the Phase 3 NAPOLI-1
trial. Nal-IRI, in combination with 5-FU/LV, improved overall survival in
gemcitabine-refractory metastatic PDAC relative to 5-FU/LV alone with a
well-defined and manageable toxicity profile in pretreated patients.
FOLFIRINOX (5-FU/LV, irinotecan and oxaliplatin) is a chemotherapy
regimen active in first-line metastatic PDAC. Herein, we evaluate the
preclinical anti-tumor activity of a nal-IRI + 5-FU + oxaliplatin regimen
relative to the FOLFIRINOX regimen. Using pancreatic cancer cell lines,
we demonstrate enhanced cell death when nal-IRI treatment is simulated
using prolonged exposure of SN-38 (the active metabolite of irinotecan)
in combination with 5-FU and oxaliplatin. In cell line-derived and
patient-derived xenograft models of pancreatic cancer we demonstrate
improved anti-tumor activity of nal-IRI relative to exposure-matched
doses of unencapsulated irinotecan. Further, nal-IRI consistently
improved tumor growth inhibition and survival relative to unencapsulated
irinotecan in preclinical models, both as a monotherapy and in
combination with 5-FU and oxaliplatin. The addition of nal-IRI to 5-FU
and/or oxaliplatin did not exacerbate the baseline toxicities of these
agents, including weight loss and neutropenia, and tolerability could be
further improved by delaying the administration of oxaliplatin to 1 day
post-MM-398. These findings illustrate the therapeutic potential of
nal-IRI in combination with 5-FU/LV and oxaliplatin and support an
ongoing Phase 2 trial (NCT02551991) of this triplet regimen in first-line
PDAC.

