Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A cell cycle-related genomic and transcriptomic signature
distinguish aneuploid and euploid acute myeloid leukemia


Chromosome gain or loss, which is the hallmark of aneuploidy, occurs in
about 10% of adult Acute Myeloid Leukemia (AML) cases (Farag et al. IJO
2002, Breems et al. JCO 2008), despite inducing a dramatic reduction of
cellular fitness in non-malignant cells (Torres et al. Science 2007).The
study aimed to identify AML-specific molecular mechanisms having a
causative and/or tolerogenic role towards aneuploidy.We performed 100 bp
paired-end whole exome sequencing (WES, Illumina Hiseq2000) of 38
aneuploid (A) and 34 euploid (E) AML cases, identified according to
cytogenetic analysis and SNP array (CytoScan HD, Affymetrix). Variants
were called with GATK, MuTect and VarScan. We also compared the
transcriptomic profile of leukemic bone marrow cells from 21 A-AML and 28
E-AML cases (HTA 2.0, Affymetrix).A-AML showed a significantly higher
mutation load compared with E-AML (median number of variants: 25 and 15,
respectively, pChromosome gain or loss, which is the hallmark of
aneuploidy, occurs in about 10% of adult Acute Myeloid Leukemia (AML)
cases (Farag et al. IJO 2002, Breems et al. JCO 2008), despite inducing a
dramatic reduction of cellular fitness in non-malignant cells (Torres et
al. Science 2007).The study aimed to identify AML-specific molecular
mechanisms having a causative and/or tolerogenic role towards
aneuploidy.We performed 100 bp paired-end whole exome sequencing (WES,
Illumina Hiseq2000) of 38 aneuploid (A) and 34 euploid (E) AML cases,
identified according to cytogenetic analysis and SNP array (CytoScan HD,
Affymetrix). Variants were called with GATK, MuTect and VarScan. We also
compared the transcriptomic profile of leukemic bone marrow cells from 21
A-AML and 28 E-AML cases (HTA 2.0, Affymetrix).A-AML showed a
significantly higher mutation load compared with E-AML (median number of
variants: 25 and 15, respectively, p<.001) and a specific pattern of
genomic lesions. Indeed, mutations in myeloid transcription factors and
chromatin modifiers preferentially occurred in E-AML (p = .04 and
pChromosome gain or loss, which is the hallmark of aneuploidy, occurs in
about 10% of adult Acute Myeloid Leukemia (AML) cases (Farag et al. IJO
2002, Breems et al. JCO 2008), despite inducing a dramatic reduction of
cellular fitness in non-malignant cells (Torres et al. Science 2007).The
study aimed to identify AML-specific molecular mechanisms having a
causative and/or tolerogenic role towards aneuploidy.We performed 100 bp
paired-end whole exome sequencing (WES, Illumina Hiseq2000) of 38
aneuploid (A) and 34 euploid (E) AML cases, identified according to
cytogenetic analysis and SNP array (CytoScan HD, Affymetrix). Variants
were called with GATK, MuTect and VarScan. We also compared the
transcriptomic profile of leukemic bone marrow cells from 21 A-AML and 28
E-AML cases (HTA 2.0, Affymetrix).A-AML showed a significantly higher
mutation load compared with E-AML (median number of variants: 25 and 15,
respectively, p<.001) and a specific pattern of genomic lesions. Indeed,
mutations in myeloid transcription factors and chromatin modifiers
preferentially occurred in E-AML (p = .04 and p<.01, respectively), while
A-AML was enriched for alterations in cell cycle-related genes
(pChromosome gain or loss, which is the hallmark of aneuploidy, occurs in
about 10% of adult Acute Myeloid Leukemia (AML) cases (Farag et al. IJO
2002, Breems et al. JCO 2008), despite inducing a dramatic reduction of
cellular fitness in non-malignant cells (Torres et al. Science 2007).The
study aimed to identify AML-specific molecular mechanisms having a
causative and/or tolerogenic role towards aneuploidy.We performed 100 bp
paired-end whole exome sequencing (WES, Illumina Hiseq2000) of 38
aneuploid (A) and 34 euploid (E) AML cases, identified according to
cytogenetic analysis and SNP array (CytoScan HD, Affymetrix). Variants
were called with GATK, MuTect and VarScan. We also compared the
transcriptomic profile of leukemic bone marrow cells from 21 A-AML and 28
E-AML cases (HTA 2.0, Affymetrix).A-AML showed a significantly higher
mutation load compared with E-AML (median number of variants: 25 and 15,
respectively, p<.001) and a specific pattern of genomic lesions. Indeed,
mutations in myeloid transcription factors and chromatin modifiers
preferentially occurred in E-AML (p = .04 and p<.01, respectively), while
A-AML was enriched for alterations in cell cycle-related genes (p<.01),
with 70% of cases carrying at least one of those mutations (vs. 35% of
E-AML, pChromosome gain or loss, which is the hallmark of aneuploidy,
occurs in about 10% of adult Acute Myeloid Leukemia (AML) cases (Farag et
al. IJO 2002, Breems et al. JCO 2008), despite inducing a dramatic
reduction of cellular fitness in non-malignant cells (Torres et al.
Science 2007).The study aimed to identify AML-specific molecular
mechanisms having a causative and/or tolerogenic role towards
aneuploidy.We performed 100 bp paired-end whole exome sequencing (WES,
Illumina Hiseq2000) of 38 aneuploid (A) and 34 euploid (E) AML cases,
identified according to cytogenetic analysis and SNP array (CytoScan HD,
Affymetrix). Variants were called with GATK, MuTect and VarScan. We also
compared the transcriptomic profile of leukemic bone marrow cells from 21
A-AML and 28 E-AML cases (HTA 2.0, Affymetrix).A-AML showed a
significantly higher mutation load compared with E-AML (median number of
variants: 25 and 15, respectively, p<.001) and a specific pattern of
genomic lesions. Indeed, mutations in myeloid transcription factors and
chromatin modifiers preferentially occurred in E-AML (p = .04 and p<.01,
respectively), while A-AML was enriched for alterations in cell
cycle-related genes (p<.01), with 70% of cases carrying at least one of
those mutations (vs. 35% of E-AML, p<.01). The mutated genes played
different functions across cell cycle phases, including DNA replication,
centrosome dynamics, chromatid cohesion, chromosome segregation and
spindle-assembly checkpoint. Moreover, 29% of A-AML displayed mutations
of TP53 or a TP53-related gene (DDIAS, USP10), compared with 5.9% of
E-AML cases (p = .01), with enrichment for a transcriptional signature of
p53 downregulation in the aneuploid cohort (pChromosome gain or loss,
which is the hallmark of aneuploidy, occurs in about 10% of adult Acute
Myeloid Leukemia (AML) cases (Farag et al. IJO 2002, Breems et al. JCO
2008), despite inducing a dramatic reduction of cellular fitness in
non-malignant cells (Torres et al. Science 2007).The study aimed to
identify AML-specific molecular mechanisms having a causative and/or
tolerogenic role towards aneuploidy.We performed 100 bp paired-end whole
exome sequencing (WES, Illumina Hiseq2000) of 38 aneuploid (A) and 34
euploid (E) AML cases, identified according to cytogenetic analysis and
SNP array (CytoScan HD, Affymetrix). Variants were called with GATK,
MuTect and VarScan. We also compared the transcriptomic profile of
leukemic bone marrow cells from 21 A-AML and 28 E-AML cases (HTA 2.0,
Affymetrix).A-AML showed a significantly higher mutation load compared
with E-AML (median number of variants: 25 and 15, respectively, p<.001)
and a specific pattern of genomic lesions. Indeed, mutations in myeloid
transcription factors and chromatin modifiers preferentially occurred in
E-AML (p = .04 and p<.01, respectively), while A-AML was enriched for
alterations in cell cycle-related genes (p<.01), with 70% of cases
carrying at least one of those mutations (vs. 35% of E-AML, p<.01). The
mutated genes played different functions across cell cycle phases,
including DNA replication, centrosome dynamics, chromatid cohesion,
chromosome segregation and spindle-assembly checkpoint. Moreover, 29% of
A-AML displayed mutations of TP53 or a TP53-related gene (DDIAS, USP10),
compared with 5.9% of E-AML cases (p = .01), with enrichment for a
transcriptional signature of p53 downregulation in the aneuploid cohort
(p<.05). Among the differentially expressed genes, we identified a cell
cycle-related signature characterized by increased CDC20 and UBE2C and
reduced RAD50, ATR and CCNA1 in A-AML (pChromosome gain or loss, which is
the hallmark of aneuploidy, occurs in about 10% of adult Acute Myeloid
Leukemia (AML) cases (Farag et al. IJO 2002, Breems et al. JCO 2008),
despite inducing a dramatic reduction of cellular fitness in
non-malignant cells (Torres et al. Science 2007).The study aimed to
identify AML-specific molecular mechanisms having a causative and/or
tolerogenic role towards aneuploidy.We performed 100 bp paired-end whole
exome sequencing (WES, Illumina Hiseq2000) of 38 aneuploid (A) and 34
euploid (E) AML cases, identified according to cytogenetic analysis and
SNP array (CytoScan HD, Affymetrix). Variants were called with GATK,
MuTect and VarScan. We also compared the transcriptomic profile of
leukemic bone marrow cells from 21 A-AML and 28 E-AML cases (HTA 2.0,
Affymetrix).A-AML showed a significantly higher mutation load compared
with E-AML (median number of variants: 25 and 15, respectively, p<.001)
and a specific pattern of genomic lesions. Indeed, mutations in myeloid
transcription factors and chromatin modifiers preferentially occurred in
E-AML (p = .04 and p<.01, respectively), while A-AML was enriched for
alterations in cell cycle-related genes (p<.01), with 70% of cases
carrying at least one of those mutations (vs. 35% of E-AML, p<.01). The
mutated genes played different functions across cell cycle phases,
including DNA replication, centrosome dynamics, chromatid cohesion,
chromosome segregation and spindle-assembly checkpoint. Moreover, 29% of
A-AML displayed mutations of TP53 or a TP53-related gene (DDIAS, USP10),
compared with 5.9% of E-AML cases (p = .01), with enrichment for a
transcriptional signature of p53 downregulation in the aneuploid cohort
(p<.05). Among the differentially expressed genes, we identified a cell
cycle-related signature characterized by increased CDC20 and UBE2C and
reduced RAD50, ATR and CCNA1 in A-AML (p<.001), confirmed at protein
level, which was able to separate A-AML and E-AML. A-AML also showed
upregulation of a KRAS transcriptional signature, irrespective of KRAS
mutational status (pChromosome gain or loss, which is the hallmark of
aneuploidy, occurs in about 10% of adult Acute Myeloid Leukemia (AML)
cases (Farag et al. IJO 2002, Breems et al. JCO 2008), despite inducing a
dramatic reduction of cellular fitness in non-malignant cells (Torres et
al. Science 2007).The study aimed to identify AML-specific molecular
mechanisms having a causative and/or tolerogenic role towards
aneuploidy.We performed 100 bp paired-end whole exome sequencing (WES,
Illumina Hiseq2000) of 38 aneuploid (A) and 34 euploid (E) AML cases,
identified according to cytogenetic analysis and SNP array (CytoScan HD,
Affymetrix). Variants were called with GATK, MuTect and VarScan. We also
compared the transcriptomic profile of leukemic bone marrow cells from 21
A-AML and 28 E-AML cases (HTA 2.0, Affymetrix).A-AML showed a
significantly higher mutation load compared with E-AML (median number of
variants: 25 and 15, respectively, p<.001) and a specific pattern of
genomic lesions. Indeed, mutations in myeloid transcription factors and
chromatin modifiers preferentially occurred in E-AML (p = .04 and p<.01,
respectively), while A-AML was enriched for alterations in cell
cycle-related genes (p<.01), with 70% of cases carrying at least one of
those mutations (vs. 35% of E-AML, p<.01). The mutated genes played
different functions across cell cycle phases, including DNA replication,
centrosome dynamics, chromatid cohesion, chromosome segregation and
spindle-assembly checkpoint. Moreover, 29% of A-AML displayed mutations
of TP53 or a TP53-related gene (DDIAS, USP10), compared with 5.9% of
E-AML cases (p = .01), with enrichment for a transcriptional signature of
p53 downregulation in the aneuploid cohort (p<.05). Among the
differentially expressed genes, we identified a cell cycle-related
signature characterized by increased CDC20 and UBE2C and reduced RAD50,
ATR and CCNA1 in A-AML (p<.001), confirmed at protein level, which was
able to separate A-AML and E-AML. A-AML also showed upregulation of a
KRAS transcriptional signature, irrespective of KRAS mutational status
(p<.05).Our data show a link between aneuploidy and genomic instability
in AML and highlight novel molecular mechanisms for the acquisition
and/or maintenance of the aneuploid phenotype. Deregulation of the cell
cycle machinery and DNA damage/repair checkpoints, either through
mutations, copy number and transcriptomic alterations, cooperate with
leukemogenic pathways, as KRAS signaling, to develop A-AML and overcome
the unfitness barrier. This evidence suggests that a number of A-AML
patients may benefit from pharmacological reactivation of TP53 and
inhibition of KRAS pathway.Supported by: FP7 NGS-PTL project, ELN, AIL,
AIRC, PRIN, progetto Regione-Universit 2010-12 (L. Bolondi).

