Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor treating fields (TTFields) reduce migration and invasion
properties of human glioma cancer cells in vitro


The ability of glioblastoma cells to invade adjacent brain tissue remains
one of the major obstacles in obtaining therapeutic success. The
development of novel treatment modalities that hinder glioma cancer cell
motility could therefore facilitate disease control. TTFields are an
effective treatment modality delivered via continuous, noninvasive
application of low intensity, intermediate frequency, alternating
electric fields. This therapy is approved for the treatment of patients
with glioblastoma. Previous investigations have shown that TTFields
disrupt microtubules and septin filaments, both of which govern key roles
in mitosis. The goal of this study was to evaluate the possible effect of
TTFields on human glioma cell migration and invasion properties. Four
human glioma cell lines: U-87 MG, A-172, LN-229, and LN-18 (ATCC, USA)
were treated with TTFields (1.75 V/cm RMS, 200 kHz) for 24 hours using
the inovitro system. Cell migration was measured using in vitro wound
healing assays. These were analyzed with Image Pro Premier (Media
Cybernetics, USA) to determine migration rates. Invasion assays were
performed using modified Matrigel coated Boyden chamber. Cells were
stained, photographed and counted using image J (NIH, USA).Application of
TTFields in-vitro led to a significant reduction in both migratory and
invasive phenotype in all tested cell lines. Specifically, cell migration
velocity, as assessed by the wound healing assay, was significantly
reduced in U-87 MG (60%, PThe ability of glioblastoma cells to invade
adjacent brain tissue remains one of the major obstacles in obtaining
therapeutic success. The development of novel treatment modalities that
hinder glioma cancer cell motility could therefore facilitate disease
control. TTFields are an effective treatment modality delivered via
continuous, noninvasive application of low intensity, intermediate
frequency, alternating electric fields. This therapy is approved for the
treatment of patients with glioblastoma. Previous investigations have
shown that TTFields disrupt microtubules and septin filaments, both of
which govern key roles in mitosis. The goal of this study was to evaluate
the possible effect of TTFields on human glioma cell migration and
invasion properties. Four human glioma cell lines: U-87 MG, A-172,
LN-229, and LN-18 (ATCC, USA) were treated with TTFields (1.75 V/cm RMS,
200 kHz) for 24 hours using the inovitro system. Cell migration was
measured using in vitro wound healing assays. These were analyzed with
Image Pro Premier (Media Cybernetics, USA) to determine migration rates.
Invasion assays were performed using modified Matrigel coated Boyden
chamber. Cells were stained, photographed and counted using image J (NIH,
USA).Application of TTFields in-vitro led to a significant reduction in
both migratory and invasive phenotype in all tested cell lines.
Specifically, cell migration velocity, as assessed by the wound healing
assay, was significantly reduced in U-87 MG (60%, P<0.001), and in A-172
(33%, PThe ability of glioblastoma cells to invade adjacent brain tissue
remains one of the major obstacles in obtaining therapeutic success. The
development of novel treatment modalities that hinder glioma cancer cell
motility could therefore facilitate disease control. TTFields are an
effective treatment modality delivered via continuous, noninvasive
application of low intensity, intermediate frequency, alternating
electric fields. This therapy is approved for the treatment of patients
with glioblastoma. Previous investigations have shown that TTFields
disrupt microtubules and septin filaments, both of which govern key roles
in mitosis. The goal of this study was to evaluate the possible effect of
TTFields on human glioma cell migration and invasion properties. Four
human glioma cell lines: U-87 MG, A-172, LN-229, and LN-18 (ATCC, USA)
were treated with TTFields (1.75 V/cm RMS, 200 kHz) for 24 hours using
the inovitro system. Cell migration was measured using in vitro wound
healing assays. These were analyzed with Image Pro Premier (Media
Cybernetics, USA) to determine migration rates. Invasion assays were
performed using modified Matrigel coated Boyden chamber. Cells were
stained, photographed and counted using image J (NIH, USA).Application of
TTFields in-vitro led to a significant reduction in both migratory and
invasive phenotype in all tested cell lines. Specifically, cell migration
velocity, as assessed by the wound healing assay, was significantly
reduced in U-87 MG (60%, P<0.001), and in A-172 (33%, P<0.001) compared
with untreated control cells. The number of invading cells, as assessed
by the modified Boyden chamber assay, was reduced in U-87 MG (54%, PThe
ability of glioblastoma cells to invade adjacent brain tissue remains one
of the major obstacles in obtaining therapeutic success. The development
of novel treatment modalities that hinder glioma cancer cell motility
could therefore facilitate disease control. TTFields are an effective
treatment modality delivered via continuous, noninvasive application of
low intensity, intermediate frequency, alternating electric fields. This
therapy is approved for the treatment of patients with glioblastoma.
Previous investigations have shown that TTFields disrupt microtubules and
septin filaments, both of which govern key roles in mitosis. The goal of
this study was to evaluate the possible effect of TTFields on human
glioma cell migration and invasion properties. Four human glioma cell
lines: U-87 MG, A-172, LN-229, and LN-18 (ATCC, USA) were treated with
TTFields (1.75 V/cm RMS, 200 kHz) for 24 hours using the inovitro system.
Cell migration was measured using in vitro wound healing assays. These
were analyzed with Image Pro Premier (Media Cybernetics, USA) to
determine migration rates. Invasion assays were performed using modified
Matrigel coated Boyden chamber. Cells were stained, photographed and
counted using image J (NIH, USA).Application of TTFields in-vitro led to
a significant reduction in both migratory and invasive phenotype in all
tested cell lines. Specifically, cell migration velocity, as assessed by
the wound healing assay, was significantly reduced in U-87 MG (60%,
P<0.001), and in A-172 (33%, P<0.001) compared with untreated control
cells. The number of invading cells, as assessed by the modified Boyden
chamber assay, was reduced in U-87 MG (54%, P<0.01), A-172 (51%, PThe
ability of glioblastoma cells to invade adjacent brain tissue remains one
of the major obstacles in obtaining therapeutic success. The development
of novel treatment modalities that hinder glioma cancer cell motility
could therefore facilitate disease control. TTFields are an effective
treatment modality delivered via continuous, noninvasive application of
low intensity, intermediate frequency, alternating electric fields. This
therapy is approved for the treatment of patients with glioblastoma.
Previous investigations have shown that TTFields disrupt microtubules and
septin filaments, both of which govern key roles in mitosis. The goal of
this study was to evaluate the possible effect of TTFields on human
glioma cell migration and invasion properties. Four human glioma cell
lines: U-87 MG, A-172, LN-229, and LN-18 (ATCC, USA) were treated with
TTFields (1.75 V/cm RMS, 200 kHz) for 24 hours using the inovitro system.
Cell migration was measured using in vitro wound healing assays. These
were analyzed with Image Pro Premier (Media Cybernetics, USA) to
determine migration rates. Invasion assays were performed using modified
Matrigel coated Boyden chamber. Cells were stained, photographed and
counted using image J (NIH, USA).Application of TTFields in-vitro led to
a significant reduction in both migratory and invasive phenotype in all
tested cell lines. Specifically, cell migration velocity, as assessed by
the wound healing assay, was significantly reduced in U-87 MG (60%,
P<0.001), and in A-172 (33%, P<0.001) compared with untreated control
cells. The number of invading cells, as assessed by the modified Boyden
chamber assay, was reduced in U-87 MG (54%, P<0.01), A-172 (51%,
P<0.001), LN-229 (52%, PThe ability of glioblastoma cells to invade
adjacent brain tissue remains one of the major obstacles in obtaining
therapeutic success. The development of novel treatment modalities that
hinder glioma cancer cell motility could therefore facilitate disease
control. TTFields are an effective treatment modality delivered via
continuous, noninvasive application of low intensity, intermediate
frequency, alternating electric fields. This therapy is approved for the
treatment of patients with glioblastoma. Previous investigations have
shown that TTFields disrupt microtubules and septin filaments, both of
which govern key roles in mitosis. The goal of this study was to evaluate
the possible effect of TTFields on human glioma cell migration and
invasion properties. Four human glioma cell lines: U-87 MG, A-172,
LN-229, and LN-18 (ATCC, USA) were treated with TTFields (1.75 V/cm RMS,
200 kHz) for 24 hours using the inovitro system. Cell migration was
measured using in vitro wound healing assays. These were analyzed with
Image Pro Premier (Media Cybernetics, USA) to determine migration rates.
Invasion assays were performed using modified Matrigel coated Boyden
chamber. Cells were stained, photographed and counted using image J (NIH,
USA).Application of TTFields in-vitro led to a significant reduction in
both migratory and invasive phenotype in all tested cell lines.
Specifically, cell migration velocity, as assessed by the wound healing
assay, was significantly reduced in U-87 MG (60%, P<0.001), and in A-172
(33%, P<0.001) compared with untreated control cells. The number of
invading cells, as assessed by the modified Boyden chamber assay, was
reduced in U-87 MG (54%, P<0.01), A-172 (51%, P<0.001), LN-229 (52%,
P<0.001) and in LN-18 (30%, PThe ability of glioblastoma cells to invade
adjacent brain tissue remains one of the major obstacles in obtaining
therapeutic success. The development of novel treatment modalities that
hinder glioma cancer cell motility could therefore facilitate disease
control. TTFields are an effective treatment modality delivered via
continuous, noninvasive application of low intensity, intermediate
frequency, alternating electric fields. This therapy is approved for the
treatment of patients with glioblastoma. Previous investigations have
shown that TTFields disrupt microtubules and septin filaments, both of
which govern key roles in mitosis. The goal of this study was to evaluate
the possible effect of TTFields on human glioma cell migration and
invasion properties. Four human glioma cell lines: U-87 MG, A-172,
LN-229, and LN-18 (ATCC, USA) were treated with TTFields (1.75 V/cm RMS,
200 kHz) for 24 hours using the inovitro system. Cell migration was
measured using in vitro wound healing assays. These were analyzed with
Image Pro Premier (Media Cybernetics, USA) to determine migration rates.
Invasion assays were performed using modified Matrigel coated Boyden
chamber. Cells were stained, photographed and counted using image J (NIH,
USA).Application of TTFields in-vitro led to a significant reduction in
both migratory and invasive phenotype in all tested cell lines.
Specifically, cell migration velocity, as assessed by the wound healing
assay, was significantly reduced in U-87 MG (60%, P<0.001), and in A-172
(33%, P<0.001) compared with untreated control cells. The number of
invading cells, as assessed by the modified Boyden chamber assay, was
reduced in U-87 MG (54%, P<0.01), A-172 (51%, P<0.001), LN-229 (52%,
P<0.001) and in LN-18 (30%, P<0.001) compared with untreated control
cells.Our results suggest that human glioma cell motility is impaired by
exposure to TTFields. Further studies are needed to elucidate the
mechanism by which TTFields disrupts cellular motility in glioma cancer
cells.

