Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NUP98-fusion proteins interact with the NSL/MLL1 complexes to
drive leukemogenesis


The Nucleoporin 98 gene (NUP98) is fused to a variety of partner genes in
an array of hematopoietic malignancies via chromosomal translocations
involving 11p15. NUP98-rearranged leukemias show elevated HOXA and HOXB
cluster genes and mouse model systems have recapitulated this high-level
expression independent of whether the leukemias are derived from mouse or
human bone marrow. However, the molecular mechanisms of NUP98-fusion
mediated leukemogenesis and elevated HOX gene expression in this leukemia
are unclear. Recent studies in Drosophila show that nucleoplasmic Nup98
functions as a potential transcriptional activator, and physically
interacts with the non-specific lethal (NSL) and trithorax (Trx)/mixed
lineage leukemia (MLL) complex (Kalverda et al., 2010; Pascual-Garcia et
al., 2014). To test whether the intranuclear localized NUP98-fusion
proteins interact with NSL/MLL1 complexes, coimmunoprecipitation (co-IP)
experiments using 293T cells with overexpression of NUP98 fusions and
wild type (WT) NUP98 were performed. NUP98-fusion proteins NUP98-HOXA9,
NUP98-HOXD13, NUP98-NSD1 and NUP98-PHF23, but not the full-length WT
NUP98, show physical interaction with MLL1 and the NSL histone
acetyltransferase (HAT) complexes. Genome-wide chromatin
immunoprecipitation followed by next generation sequencing (ChIP-seq)
illustrated that NUP98-HOXA9 and MLL1 co-localize at Hoxa and Hoxb gene
promoters, which correlates with the presence of activating chromatin
modifications such as H4K16ac and H3K4me3. In vitro and in vivo
functional assays further showed that Mll1 is crucial for the growth of
NUP98-HOXA9-transformed cells, and for the initiation and maintenance of
NUP98-HOXA9 driven AML. These findings were further supported by
transcriptome analyses performed in mouse NUP98-HOXA9 transformed cells
lacking Mll1. We found a significant enrichment of co-bound targets of
MLL1 and NUP98-HOXA9 and genes downregulated in the absence of Mll1. Gene
set enrichment analysis (GSEA) demonstrated strong similarity between
Mll1-dependent gene expression signature in our murine NUP98-HOXA9 AML
model and the expression profile of human NUP98-fusion AML, indicating
that our findings in murine AML models can be extended to human AML.
Finally, the overexpression of Hoxa9 and Meis1, direct binding targets of
NUP98-HOXA9 and MLL1 that are downregulated upon Mll1 loss, rescues the
in vitro transformation defects in NUP98-HOXA9 Mll1-/- cells. In
conclusion, our findings support a model where NUP98-fusion proteins
recruit the NSL/MLL1 complex as an important step during leukemogenesis.
The deregulated HOX gene expression in NUP98 fusion transformed cells
remains dependent on MLL1. The discovery of this common leukemogenic
pathway for NUP98-fusion proteins opens up new avenues for potential
therapeutic opportunities to treat patients with leukemia that harbor
various NUP98 rearrangements.

