Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluating changes in T cell activation by measuring expression of
IL-2, CTLA-4, NFAT, and NF-kB in Jurkat cells


Insufficient stimulation of T cells due to activated checkpoint pathways
can lead to ineffective clearance of tumor cells and thus, tumor growth
and cancer. Developing methods to measure changes in the activation of
such pathways are needed to evaluate the efficacy of immunotherapy
approaches to treating cancer by altering T cell activation. Current
methods that use measurments of IL-2 expression are limited by the fact
that IL-2 is not specific to T cell activation and that it provides
little insight into the mechanisms by which activation is affected. This
project aims to address such limitations by determining whether changes
in T cell activation can be effectively evaluated by measuring expression
of CTLA-4, NFAT, and NF-kB, in addition to IL-2. Jurkat cells were
cultured and activated with PMA (100 ng/mL) and ionomycin (500 ng/mL) for
five hours. Staining for IL-2 and CTLA-4 with antibodies and transfection
of the cells with genetic constructs that link NFAT and NF-kB to
fluorescent proteins provided the means to link expression of
fluorescence to expression of the molecules of interest. FACS analysis
was then used to measure changes in the expression of the four signaling
molecules in response to the induced changes in activation. Activation of
the cells resulted in increased expression of all four molecules.
Following activation, fluorescence due to CTLA-4, NFAT, and NF-kB
expression changed by average fold increases of 2.58, 1.10 and 1.13,
respectively. By measuring these key elements of T cell signaling
pathways in addition to IL-2, these methods provide a potentially more
effective alternative to current methods for evaluating the efficacy of
immunotherapeutic treatments for cancer.

