Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel synergistic antibody pair targeting non-overlapping
epitopes of MET effectively inhibits MET-driven cancer models


The receptor tyrosine kinase MET (Hepatocyte Growth Factor Receptor,
HGFR) has been associated with development and progression of a range of
human tumors due to its regulation of cell proliferation, migration,
invasion, and angiogenesis. A subset of human tumors, particularly of
lung or gastric origin, appear to have a primary dependency on MET, which
is driven by alterations, such as MET-gene amplification, MET-exon 14
deletion, activating mutations, or autocrine HGF production. Furthermore,
MET-amplification has been reported as a key mechanism of de novo
resistance to EGFR targeting agents.Sym015 is a mixture of two humanized
monoclonal antibodies against non-overlapping epitopes on MET. The
specific pair of antibodies was identified in a high-throughput cell
based screen searching for antibody mixtures with superior growth
inhibitory activity against four MET-dependent cell lines. Both
antibodies bind the SEMA domain of MET with high affinity. Synergistic
activity was confirmed by dose-response curves in several MET-dependent
cell lines and cell line and patient-derived xenograft models.
Mechanistically, Sym015 blocks HGF binding to MET, induces MET
internalization and degradation effectively diminishing MET oncogenic
signaling. Sym015 also induces higher levels of antibody-dependent
cell-mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC) in vitro compared to individual mAbs.In
conclusion, Sym015, a novel monoclonal antibody mixture against MET,
shows strong inhibitory activity against MET driven cell lines and
xenografts due to a combined effect of MET degradation and secondary
effector functions. These data support initiation of clinical trials.

