Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Androgen receptor expression is associated with sunitinib
resistance in renal cell carcinoma models


Background: Androgen receptor (AR) expression has been reported in renal
cell carcinoma but its biological role remains elusive. Sunitinib is a
potent anti-angiogenic drug approved for the treatment of advanced renal
cell carcinoma (RCC). However, eventually RCC tumors develop drug
resistance. We have hypothesized that tumor cells resistance to sunitinib
is associated with kinome reprograming and anti-apoptotic genes
upregulation. To date, there is no report on the association between AR
expression and resistance to TKI such as sunitinib in RCC. Our study was
designed to investigate the role of AR in sunitinib resistance in RCC. We
used our previously reported sunitinib resistant ccRCC cells and patient
derived xenograft models. Methods: Human RCC cell lines; 786-0, 786-0R
(sunitinib resistant), C2, C2R (sunitinib resistant), ACHN and Caki 2
were utilized to determine sensitivity or resistance to sunitinib.
Patient derived xenograft (PDX) models of advance and metastatic RCC and
RCC cell lines, sensitive and resistant tumors were used to detect AR
expression by qRT-PCR, immunohistochemistry and Western blot analysis.
Reverse phase protein array (RPPA) was used to assess 249 protein
including AR in sunitinib sensitive and resistant tumors. Results: Our
qRT-PCR data showed an increase by 1000 folds in mRNA levels of AR in our
sunitinib resistant cell lines. Similarly, RPPA data revealed AR to be
increased in sunitinib resistant RCC PDX tumors. This observation was
confirmed by Western blot analysis. Conclusion: Overall our data suggest
the potential role of AR and its association with resistance to
sunitinib. Ongoing studies are testing the in vitro and in vivo
combination treatment of RCC models with sunitinib and AR antagonists.

