Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Delineation of novel CYP24A1 transcriptional regulators


The anti-proliferative and pro-apoptotic effects of 1,25
dihydroxycholecalciferol (1,25D3) are well-documented in various tumor
model systems in vitro and in vivo. However, limited anti-tumor effects
of 1,25D3 have been observed in clinical trials. One potential reason may
be the over-expression of CYP24A1, the primary 1,25D3 degrading enzyme,
in tumors, and the subsequent rapid local inactivation of 1,25D3. A
CYP24A1 inhibitor might be added to improve the anti-tumor activity of
1,25D3. However, most CYP24A1 inhibitors are non-specific, and their use
is accompanied by a striking increase in the CYP24A1 expression level. In
this study, we screened a small molecule library to identify novel
CYP24A1 transcriptional inhibitors using a luciferase reporter assay in a
human prostate cancer PC3 cell line stably expressing CYP24A1
promoter-driving luciferase reporter. Screening of DIVERSet, a diverse
library of 55,230 compounds, resulted in the identification of 150 hits,
each of which had over 50% inhibition of 1,25D3-induced CYP24A1 promoter
activity. After confirming initial observations, four hits (CPI3, CPI8,
CPI11 and CPI17) displaying the strongest inhibitory effect were chosen
to further examine their effects on endogenous and 1,25D3-regulated
CYP24A1 expression in cancer cells. Prostate cancer (PC3) cells, bladder
cancer (RT112, RT112/D21) cells, kidney cancer (A498, ACHN and 786-O)
cells were treated with CPI3, CPI8, CPI11 and CPI17 alone or followed by
100 nM of 1,25D3. qRT-PCR analysis showed that 1,25D3 induced CYP24A1
mRNA expression in these cancer cells and the induction of CYP24A1 was
significantly inhibited by the treatment with CPI8 and CPI17 (P The
anti-proliferative and pro-apoptotic effects of 1,25
dihydroxycholecalciferol (1,25D3) are well-documented in various tumor
model systems in vitro and in vivo. However, limited anti-tumor effects
of 1,25D3 have been observed in clinical trials. One potential reason may
be the over-expression of CYP24A1, the primary 1,25D3 degrading enzyme,
in tumors, and the subsequent rapid local inactivation of 1,25D3. A
CYP24A1 inhibitor might be added to improve the anti-tumor activity of
1,25D3. However, most CYP24A1 inhibitors are non-specific, and their use
is accompanied by a striking increase in the CYP24A1 expression level. In
this study, we screened a small molecule library to identify novel
CYP24A1 transcriptional inhibitors using a luciferase reporter assay in a
human prostate cancer PC3 cell line stably expressing CYP24A1
promoter-driving luciferase reporter. Screening of DIVERSet, a diverse
library of 55,230 compounds, resulted in the identification of 150 hits,
each of which had over 50% inhibition of 1,25D3-induced CYP24A1 promoter
activity. After confirming initial observations, four hits (CPI3, CPI8,
CPI11 and CPI17) displaying the strongest inhibitory effect were chosen
to further examine their effects on endogenous and 1,25D3-regulated
CYP24A1 expression in cancer cells. Prostate cancer (PC3) cells, bladder
cancer (RT112, RT112/D21) cells, kidney cancer (A498, ACHN and 786-O)
cells were treated with CPI3, CPI8, CPI11 and CPI17 alone or followed by
100 nM of 1,25D3. qRT-PCR analysis showed that 1,25D3 induced CYP24A1
mRNA expression in these cancer cells and the induction of CYP24A1 was
significantly inhibited by the treatment with CPI8 and CPI17 (P < 0.01).
Western blot showed the reduction of 1,25D3-induced CYP24A1 protein
expression in CPI8 and CPI17 treated cancer cells. These results indicate
that CPI8 and CPI17 inhibit CYP24A1 expression at the transcriptional
level. To investigate whether these compounds affect the transcriptional
expression of vitamin D receptor (VDR) and other vitamin D target genes,
the expression of VDR and p21Waf1 were measured by qRT-PCR in kidney
cancer A498, ACHN and 786-O cells treated with CPI8, which displayed the
strongest inhibitory effect on CYP24A1 expression. Treatment with CPI8
did not affect VDR expression in kidney cancer cells. In contrast with
the reduction of CYP24A1 expression by CPI8, treatment with CPI8 markedly
increased p21Waf1 mRNA and protein expression compared to 1,25D3 alone.
These results indicate that CPI8 differentially affects the expression of
vitamin D target genes. In summary, we identified novel CYP24A1
inhibitors, which differentially regulate 1,25D3 target genes. Inhibiting
CYP24A1 expression, while increasing the expression of other
anti-proliferative 1,25D3-target genes, may be a useful approach to
enhance 1,25D3 antitumor activity.Supported by NIH/NCI grant CA67267.

