Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Global DNA hypomethylation is an important feature of melanoma


Aberrant DNA methylation occurs nearly universally in cancer.
Paradoxically, changes in DNA methylation are bi-directional: there is a
focal increase in DNA methylation (hypermethylation), and a global
overall decrease in DNA methylation (hypomethylation). Focal
hypermethylation plays well described roles in silencing tumor suppressor
genes in many malignancies, including melanoma. However, the functional
role of global hypomethylation in tumorigenesis is relatively poorly
understood. Melanoma is the deadliest form of skin cancer, accounting for
approximately 74,000 new cases and 10,000 deaths in the United States in
2015. Changes in DNA methylation are also arguably one of the most common
features of melanoma. Similar to other malignancies, most studies have
focused on focal hypermethylation, identifying genomic loci
differentially methylated between melanocytes and melanoma cells.
However, global changes in DNA methylation have not been well described
thus far. In this study, we describe global changes in DNA methylation in
two melanoma clinical cohorts (JHH cohort, n = 13 nevi and n = 39
melanomas; NCI cohort n = 31 nevi and n = 97 melanomas) relative to
benign nevi using a semi-quantitative immunohistochemistry based assay.
We report a global decrease in DNA methylation levels in melanoma
relative to benign melanocytic nevi consistent between both cohorts (p
Aberrant DNA methylation occurs nearly universally in cancer.
Paradoxically, changes in DNA methylation are bi-directional: there is a
focal increase in DNA methylation (hypermethylation), and a global
overall decrease in DNA methylation (hypomethylation). Focal
hypermethylation plays well described roles in silencing tumor suppressor
genes in many malignancies, including melanoma. However, the functional
role of global hypomethylation in tumorigenesis is relatively poorly
understood. Melanoma is the deadliest form of skin cancer, accounting for
approximately 74,000 new cases and 10,000 deaths in the United States in
2015. Changes in DNA methylation are also arguably one of the most common
features of melanoma. Similar to other malignancies, most studies have
focused on focal hypermethylation, identifying genomic loci
differentially methylated between melanocytes and melanoma cells.
However, global changes in DNA methylation have not been well described
thus far. In this study, we describe global changes in DNA methylation in
two melanoma clinical cohorts (JHH cohort, n = 13 nevi and n = 39
melanomas; NCI cohort n = 31 nevi and n = 97 melanomas) relative to
benign nevi using a semi-quantitative immunohistochemistry based assay.
We report a global decrease in DNA methylation levels in melanoma
relative to benign melanocytic nevi consistent between both cohorts (p <
0.001, Student's t-test). Furthermore, we studied the functional effect
of increasing the level of global DNA methylation in a panel of five
early passage melanoma cell lines. Increases in global DNA methylation
suppressed proliferation of melanoma cells (p Aberrant DNA methylation
occurs nearly universally in cancer. Paradoxically, changes in DNA
methylation are bi-directional: there is a focal increase in DNA
methylation (hypermethylation), and a global overall decrease in DNA
methylation (hypomethylation). Focal hypermethylation plays well
described roles in silencing tumor suppressor genes in many malignancies,
including melanoma. However, the functional role of global
hypomethylation in tumorigenesis is relatively poorly understood.
Melanoma is the deadliest form of skin cancer, accounting for
approximately 74,000 new cases and 10,000 deaths in the United States in
2015. Changes in DNA methylation are also arguably one of the most common
features of melanoma. Similar to other malignancies, most studies have
focused on focal hypermethylation, identifying genomic loci
differentially methylated between melanocytes and melanoma cells.
However, global changes in DNA methylation have not been well described
thus far. In this study, we describe global changes in DNA methylation in
two melanoma clinical cohorts (JHH cohort, n = 13 nevi and n = 39
melanomas; NCI cohort n = 31 nevi and n = 97 melanomas) relative to
benign nevi using a semi-quantitative immunohistochemistry based assay.
We report a global decrease in DNA methylation levels in melanoma
relative to benign melanocytic nevi consistent between both cohorts (p <
0.001, Student's t-test). Furthermore, we studied the functional effect
of increasing the level of global DNA methylation in a panel of five
early passage melanoma cell lines. Increases in global DNA methylation
suppressed proliferation of melanoma cells (p <0.05, Student's t-test),
and increased the proportion of apoptotic cells (p Aberrant DNA
methylation occurs nearly universally in cancer. Paradoxically, changes
in DNA methylation are bi-directional: there is a focal increase in DNA
methylation (hypermethylation), and a global overall decrease in DNA
methylation (hypomethylation). Focal hypermethylation plays well
described roles in silencing tumor suppressor genes in many malignancies,
including melanoma. However, the functional role of global
hypomethylation in tumorigenesis is relatively poorly understood.
Melanoma is the deadliest form of skin cancer, accounting for
approximately 74,000 new cases and 10,000 deaths in the United States in
2015. Changes in DNA methylation are also arguably one of the most common
features of melanoma. Similar to other malignancies, most studies have
focused on focal hypermethylation, identifying genomic loci
differentially methylated between melanocytes and melanoma cells.
However, global changes in DNA methylation have not been well described
thus far. In this study, we describe global changes in DNA methylation in
two melanoma clinical cohorts (JHH cohort, n = 13 nevi and n = 39
melanomas; NCI cohort n = 31 nevi and n = 97 melanomas) relative to
benign nevi using a semi-quantitative immunohistochemistry based assay.
We report a global decrease in DNA methylation levels in melanoma
relative to benign melanocytic nevi consistent between both cohorts (p <
0.001, Student's t-test). Furthermore, we studied the functional effect
of increasing the level of global DNA methylation in a panel of five
early passage melanoma cell lines. Increases in global DNA methylation
suppressed proliferation of melanoma cells (p <0.05, Student's t-test),
and increased the proportion of apoptotic cells (p <0.01, Student's
t-test). Global DNA hypomethylation is thus an important epigenetic
feature of melanoma that may regulate proliferative capacity, and merits
further investigation.

