Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bioluminescent assays for investigating cellular energy metabolism


Cellular energy metabolism is recognized to have a central role in many
cell processes and is an increasingly important area of study in many
research fields such as cancer, immunology, obesity, diabetes and
neurology. To facilitate these studies, we have taken advantage of key
features of bioluminescence, such as increased sensitivity and wide assay
windows, to develop assays for measuring energy metabolites. These assays
are easy-to-use plate-based assays with streamlined protocols that
require minimal cell sample processing. The assays can be used to measure
consumption of major fuel sources such as glucose and glutamine from the
cell medium, as well as lactate and glutamate secretion. The sensitivity
(1-5pmol/sample), broad linear range (0.1-100 uM) and wide dynamic range
(maximum signal-to-background > 100 fold) allow all four metabolites to
be measured from the same sample of medium and over time, with earlier
detection from fewer cells compared to other methods. The assays are also
sensitive enough to detect intracellular levels of glutamine, glutamate
and lactate and changes in those levels. Additional assays have been
developed to measure glucose uptake and NAD/NADH levels in cells.
Analysis of these metabolites provides information regarding the
energetic state of the cell. In this poster we provide examples
demonstrating the utility of these assays to detect a glycolytic shift in
cancer cells, monitor cell growth and differentiation with associated
changes in glucose uptake and glycolysis, and evaluate insulin
sensitivity in primary adipocytes.

