Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A mass spectrometry-based serum test to predict outcome of
treatment with nivolumab: Analysis of samples taken during therapy


Background. The durability of antitumor responses observed in patients
treated with antibodies blocking PD-1 supports a central role for these
drugs in current melanoma therapy. However, not all patients achieve a
durable response, so identification of biomarkers able to aid therapeutic
decision making is needed. We have recently reported on a
mass-spectrometry-based test (BDX-008) able to stratify patients
according to outcome following anti-PD1 therapy using pretreatment serum
samples1. The test assigns a binary label of Positive or Negative,
denoting the likelihood of good or poor outcome, respectively, following
anti-PD 1 therapy. Here we present the results of an investigation of the
use of this test on samples taken during administration of
immunotherapy.Materials and Methods. Pretreatment serum samples were
available from 119 patients enrolled in a study of nivolumab with or
without a peptide vaccine for the treatment of advanced melanoma
(NCT01176461). Of these patients, 109 provided a serum sample taken at
week 7 (WK7) and 91 also provided a sample collected at week 13 (WK13).
The fully locked test was performed on all samples. The association of
test classifications at all three timepoints with overall survival (OS)
and time-to-progression (TTP) was assessed using Kaplan-Meier methods and
log-rank p values.Results. Test classifications were obtained for 107 WK7
samples and 90 WK13 samples. The proportion of patients classified as
Positive was similar across the three timepoints (61% baseline, 69% WK7,
66% WK13). Of the 90 patients with three available classifications, 56
(62%) maintained their baseline classification across all timepoints.
Classification significantly stratified OS at all three timepoints
(baseline: HR = 0.38; WK7: HR = 0.24; WK 13: HR = 0.33; log-rank p for
all times Background. The durability of antitumor responses observed in
patients treated with antibodies blocking PD-1 supports a central role
for these drugs in current melanoma therapy. However, not all patients
achieve a durable response, so identification of biomarkers able to aid
therapeutic decision making is needed. We have recently reported on a
mass-spectrometry-based test (BDX-008) able to stratify patients
according to outcome following anti-PD1 therapy using pretreatment serum
samples1. The test assigns a binary label of Positive or Negative,
denoting the likelihood of good or poor outcome, respectively, following
anti-PD 1 therapy. Here we present the results of an investigation of the
use of this test on samples taken during administration of
immunotherapy.Materials and Methods. Pretreatment serum samples were
available from 119 patients enrolled in a study of nivolumab with or
without a peptide vaccine for the treatment of advanced melanoma
(NCT01176461). Of these patients, 109 provided a serum sample taken at
week 7 (WK7) and 91 also provided a sample collected at week 13 (WK13).
The fully locked test was performed on all samples. The association of
test classifications at all three timepoints with overall survival (OS)
and time-to-progression (TTP) was assessed using Kaplan-Meier methods and
log-rank p values.Results. Test classifications were obtained for 107 WK7
samples and 90 WK13 samples. The proportion of patients classified as
Positive was similar across the three timepoints (61% baseline, 69% WK7,
66% WK13). Of the 90 patients with three available classifications, 56
(62%) maintained their baseline classification across all timepoints.
Classification significantly stratified OS at all three timepoints
(baseline: HR = 0.38; WK7: HR = 0.24; WK 13: HR = 0.33; log-rank p for
all times < 0.001) and TTP at baseline and WK7 (HR = 0.50, log-rank p =
0.001 and HR = 0.33, log-rank p Background. The durability of antitumor
responses observed in patients treated with antibodies blocking PD-1
supports a central role for these drugs in current melanoma therapy.
However, not all patients achieve a durable response, so identification
of biomarkers able to aid therapeutic decision making is needed. We have
recently reported on a mass-spectrometry-based test (BDX-008) able to
stratify patients according to outcome following anti-PD1 therapy using
pretreatment serum samples1. The test assigns a binary label of Positive
or Negative, denoting the likelihood of good or poor outcome,
respectively, following anti-PD 1 therapy. Here we present the results of
an investigation of the use of this test on samples taken during
administration of immunotherapy.Materials and Methods. Pretreatment serum
samples were available from 119 patients enrolled in a study of nivolumab
with or without a peptide vaccine for the treatment of advanced melanoma
(NCT01176461). Of these patients, 109 provided a serum sample taken at
week 7 (WK7) and 91 also provided a sample collected at week 13 (WK13).
The fully locked test was performed on all samples. The association of
test classifications at all three timepoints with overall survival (OS)
and time-to-progression (TTP) was assessed using Kaplan-Meier methods and
log-rank p values.Results. Test classifications were obtained for 107 WK7
samples and 90 WK13 samples. The proportion of patients classified as
Positive was similar across the three timepoints (61% baseline, 69% WK7,
66% WK13). Of the 90 patients with three available classifications, 56
(62%) maintained their baseline classification across all timepoints.
Classification significantly stratified OS at all three timepoints
(baseline: HR = 0.38; WK7: HR = 0.24; WK 13: HR = 0.33; log-rank p for
all times < 0.001) and TTP at baseline and WK7 (HR = 0.50, log-rank p =
0.001 and HR = 0.33, log-rank p <0.001, respectively). At WK13 TTP was
numerically better for patients classified as Positive in the reduced set
of patients (N = 64) without progression before sample collection (HR =
0.58, log-rank p = 0.11). Patients changing from a Negative
classification at baseline to Positive at WK7 and WK13 (N = 14) had
outcomes similar to those of patients maintaining an initial Positive
classification (N = 41).Conclusions. These results support previous data
indicating the potential clinical utility for this test as an aid to
physicians in their immunotherapy treatment decisions. Further validation
of the test in pretreatment and monitoring settings is ongoing.1. J Weber
et al, Pre-treatment patient selection for nivolumab benefit based on
serum mass spectra, SITC 2015.

