Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metformin enhances trastuzumab efficacy for HER2+ gastric cancer
cells


Background: Trastuzumab is an effective monoclonal antibody against
advanced gastric cancers (GCs) with HER2 amplification. Recently, HER2
directed therapies, such as pertuzumab or lapatinib are actively
investigated in clinical trials, but showed disappointing results in
patients with HER2+ GC. Unfortunately, the efficacy of trastuzumab is
limited due to primary and acquired resistance to this agent. Metformin
is a widely used antidiabetic drug and shows promising anti-tumor effect
in several cancers.Material and Methods: The following GC cells were
evaluated: HER2 amplification -positive (HER2+) and trastuzumab-sensitive
NCI-N87 and OE19, HER2+ trastuzumab-resistant OE33 and HER2 negative AGS,
H1750 and SNU601. We assessed response of these GC cells to trastuzumab
alone or in combination with metformin by
3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium (MTT) assay and
anchorage independent growth in soft agar. MGI (mean growth inhibition)
was calculated by dividing the colony number of the treated group by that
of the untreated control group. Western blots were performed to assess
biochemical changes, especially those related with HER2 signaling
components.Results: We observed that treatment with trastuzumab in
combination with metformin induced a statistically significant decrease
in the number of colonies formed in soft agar by N87 and OE19 cells, as
compared to the numbers formed by control cells or cells in the
single-treatment groups (Kruskal-Wallis test, p = 0.025, respectively).
No growth inhibitory effect was detected in OE33 cells with Compared to
trastuzumab alone, the combination of metformin resulted in decreased
phosphorylation of HER2 and downstream targets, such as AKT or ERK, in
trastuzumab-sensitive HER2+ cells.Conclusion: Collectively, these data
support that trastuzumab and metformin are synergistic in
trastuzumab-sensitive HER2+ GC cells.
Combination effect on soft agar colony forming assays

