Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anti-angiogenic properties of PM060184


Vascular supply of tumors is one of the main targets for cancer therapy.
Different studies have shown that most of the microtubule-binding agents
present antiangiogenic and vascular-disrupting effects. PM060184 is a new
marine-derived drug that binds to a new site in -tubulin inhibiting
tubulin polymerization. The compound is currently being evaluated in
phase 1/2 studies in patients with advanced malignancies. The present
study describes the antiangiogenic and vascular-disrupting properties of
PM060184. Treatment of HUVEC endothelial cells with PM060184 resulted in
depolymerization of the microtubule network. Differently from untreated
cells, PM060184-treated cells showed a rounded morphology with a
well-developed actin filament structure and plasma membrane blebs. Using
transwell chambers pre-coated with matrigel or collagen matrix, we showed
that PM060184 inhibited migration and invasion of HUVEC endothelial
cells. We finally found that PM060184 interfered with the correct
formation of the HUVEC capillary network grown on matrigel; moreover,
drug treatment also resulted in a significant disruption of the
previously formed capillary-like network. This rapid collapse of the
endothelial tubular network in vitro occurred in a
concentration-dependent manner and was observed at concentrations lower
than those affecting cells survival. These in vitro findings were
confirmed in nude mice bearing MDA-MB-231 (breast) xenografts: after the
administration of a single dose of PM060184 (at its MTD, 16 mg/kg,) a
very strong reduction in the number of vessels was quantified in serial
tumor sections stained with H&E. Moreover, nude mice xenografted with
H-460 (NSCLC) tumors and treated with a single dose of either 2 or 16
mg/kg of PM060184, experienced a strong and dose-dependent decrease of
the intratumoral fluorescence after the administration of Angiosense 680,
a fluorescence vascular imaging probe. Altogether, these data suggest
that an anti-vascular mechanism is also contributing to the anti-tumor
activities of PM060184.

