Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Interaction of Microsatellite Instability (MSI) and tumor for
Differential DNA Methylation in Colorectal carcinoma


Introduction: Colorectal Cancer (CRC) is one of the most common
malignancies worldwide. The role of MSI and KRAS somatic mutation in
tumor tissue is well known in CRC. In genome-wide scale, we explored
whether differential methylation is associated with MSI status.Methods:
We carried out a genome-wide methylation assay (Illumina 450K) for a
total of 250 paired samples from 125 CRC patients (m = 72, f = 53) at
different stages (stage1:25, stage II: 33 and stageIII: 67). Of them 101
had left-sided (descending colon to rectum) CRC and 30 had MSI, and 34
had somatic mutation in KRAS (rs112445441).Results: MSI was more frequent
in the right-sided tumor (54% vs. 17%, p = 0.003). Frequency of KRAS
mutation was not different between right and left-sided CRC (29% vs.
27%). Among the patients with microsatellite stable (MSS) CRC (n = 95),
paired comparison of methylation data between tumor and corresponding
normal tissue revealed a total of 1641 tumor-specific differentially
methylated loci (DML) covering 686 genes that were significant at FDR
0.001 and the magnitude of difference (delta beta) was at least 20%;
Similar analysis in patients with MSI (n = 30) revealed 6209
tumor-specific DML covering 2316 genes. This suggested that MSI is
associated with methylation change in much larger number of genes.We
could not find any methylation signature from normal colon tissue that
could predict MSI or KRAS mutation in the corresponding tumor tissue.
However, we identified 413 genes to be differentially methylated in tumor
tissue compared to corresponding normal tissue only in presence of MSI,
irrespective of KRAS mutation status, tumor staging, and location of
tumor. These are MSI-associated tumor-specific genes. Among these, 19 DML
covering17 genes showed delta-beta >30%. The list was enriched in genes
associated with biologically relevant GO-terms like, negative regulation
of cell proliferation, regulation of MAP kinase activity, regulation of
biological process etc.We also identified 240 genes differentially
methylated in tumor tissue compared to corresponding normal tissue
irrespective of MSI status, KRAS mutation, tumor staging, and location of
tumor. These are general tumor-specific genes. Among these loci, 87 DML
(49 genes) showed delta-beta >30%.Conclusions: Our study shows evidence
of association between MSI and DNA methylation in the pathogenesis of CRC.

