Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Caspase-1 from MDSC promote MyD88 dependent carcinogenesis that is
T-cell independent


Myeloid-derived-suppression cells (MDSC) are functionally defined to
suppress T-cells in their primary means of immune evasion mechanism in
cancer. However, we have discovered that MDSC can have direct, T-cell
independent pro-carcinogenic effect on tumor cells. Sorted monocytic
CD14+/CD11b+/HLA-DRlow MDSCs from head and neck squamous cell carcinoma
(HNSCC) patients were found to increase the proliferation index of HNSCC
cells. This induction of tumor proliferation was not dependent on
MDSC-tumor cell contact. Exome analysis showed that these human MDSC from
cancer patients expressed high levels of inflammasome complex, and
supernatant from the MDSCs were found to secrete IL-1b and IL-18. When we
probed the functional significance of these inflammasome complex, we
found that MDSC's promotion of tumor proliferative index of the tumor was
found to be Caspase-1 dependent. To test this in vivo, T-cell depleted
caspase-1 null mice showed significant decrease in tumor growth rate. To
confirm the importance of myeloid inflammasome signaling in
carcinogenesis, we suppressed MyD88 gene in tumor cell line Cal27 and
found that the ability of MDSC to promoting tumor proliferation is
diminished. Taken together, our findings demonstrate that tumor
infiltrating MDSCs may play a prominent role in chronic inflammation
associated carcinogenesis.

