Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exploiting ROS and metabolic differences to selectively killing
cisplatin resistant lung cancer


Cisplatin resistance remains a major problem in the treatment of lung
cancer. We have discovered that cisplatin resistant (CR) lung cancer
cells, regardless of the KRAS mutation status, share one common parameter
which is increased reactive oxygen species (ROS) when compared to their
parental cells counterpart. Importantly, we found that CR cells were no
longer addicted to the glycolytic pathway, but rather relied on oxidative
metabolism (OXMET) for energy and biosynthesis. Thus, alteration in
mitochondria which resulted in metabolic changes and higher basal levels
of ROS may be one of the major factors contributing to cisplatin
resistance. We have investigated mitochondrial morphology in parental vs.
CR cells using transmission electron microscopy (TEM). Our data clearly
showed that CR cells possessed significantly higher number of
mitochondria per total cell area (n = 4; p = 0.0006). CR cells also
consumed 2-4 fold more oxygen when compared to their parental cells. To
further confirm that oxidative phosphorylation was utilized more in CR
cells, we assayed mitochondrial membrane potential (MMP) using TMRE
staining. MMP was significantly higher in CR cells suggesting that CR
cells possess highly active mitochondria. Key glycolytic enzymes
hexokinase II (HKII) and lactate dehydrogenase A (LDHA), as well as
lactate production were decreased in all CR cell lines which corresponded
to the resistance to glycolytic inhibitor, 2DG (n = 8; pCisplatin
resistance remains a major problem in the treatment of lung cancer. We
have discovered that cisplatin resistant (CR) lung cancer cells,
regardless of the KRAS mutation status, share one common parameter which
is increased reactive oxygen species (ROS) when compared to their
parental cells counterpart. Importantly, we found that CR cells were no
longer addicted to the glycolytic pathway, but rather relied on oxidative
metabolism (OXMET) for energy and biosynthesis. Thus, alteration in
mitochondria which resulted in metabolic changes and higher basal levels
of ROS may be one of the major factors contributing to cisplatin
resistance. We have investigated mitochondrial morphology in parental vs.
CR cells using transmission electron microscopy (TEM). Our data clearly
showed that CR cells possessed significantly higher number of
mitochondria per total cell area (n = 4; p = 0.0006). CR cells also
consumed 2-4 fold more oxygen when compared to their parental cells. To
further confirm that oxidative phosphorylation was utilized more in CR
cells, we assayed mitochondrial membrane potential (MMP) using TMRE
staining. MMP was significantly higher in CR cells suggesting that CR
cells possess highly active mitochondria. Key glycolytic enzymes
hexokinase II (HKII) and lactate dehydrogenase A (LDHA), as well as
lactate production were decreased in all CR cell lines which corresponded
to the resistance to glycolytic inhibitor, 2DG (n = 8; p<0.03). Moreover,
CR cells were highly sensitive to glutamine deprivation. Glutamine
withdrawal for 72h resulted in 75-80% cell death in CR cells while only
10-15% cell death occurred in parental cells. CR also take up twice as
much L-[G-3H] glutamine when compared to its parental counterpart (n = 4,
pCisplatin resistance remains a major problem in the treatment of lung
cancer. We have discovered that cisplatin resistant (CR) lung cancer
cells, regardless of the KRAS mutation status, share one common parameter
which is increased reactive oxygen species (ROS) when compared to their
parental cells counterpart. Importantly, we found that CR cells were no
longer addicted to the glycolytic pathway, but rather relied on oxidative
metabolism (OXMET) for energy and biosynthesis. Thus, alteration in
mitochondria which resulted in metabolic changes and higher basal levels
of ROS may be one of the major factors contributing to cisplatin
resistance. We have investigated mitochondrial morphology in parental vs.
CR cells using transmission electron microscopy (TEM). Our data clearly
showed that CR cells possessed significantly higher number of
mitochondria per total cell area (n = 4; p = 0.0006). CR cells also
consumed 2-4 fold more oxygen when compared to their parental cells. To
further confirm that oxidative phosphorylation was utilized more in CR
cells, we assayed mitochondrial membrane potential (MMP) using TMRE
staining. MMP was significantly higher in CR cells suggesting that CR
cells possess highly active mitochondria. Key glycolytic enzymes
hexokinase II (HKII) and lactate dehydrogenase A (LDHA), as well as
lactate production were decreased in all CR cell lines which corresponded
to the resistance to glycolytic inhibitor, 2DG (n = 8; p<0.03). Moreover,
CR cells were highly sensitive to glutamine deprivation. Glutamine
withdrawal for 72h resulted in 75-80% cell death in CR cells while only
10-15% cell death occurred in parental cells. CR also take up twice as
much L-[G-3H] glutamine when compared to its parental counterpart (n = 4,
p<0.05). Here, using Riluzole (the FDA approved drug that interferes with
cystine/glutamate pump and results in reduced intracellular glutathione
(GSH) levels), can selectively kill CR cells. ROS levels were increased
(2-3X) more in resistant cells after Riluzole treatment while no
significant change occurred in parental cells. The ID50 dosage of
parental cells were 3-4 fold more than theirs CR cell counterparts and no
cytotoxicity were found in normal lung fibroblast (n = 8; pCisplatin
resistance remains a major problem in the treatment of lung cancer. We
have discovered that cisplatin resistant (CR) lung cancer cells,
regardless of the KRAS mutation status, share one common parameter which
is increased reactive oxygen species (ROS) when compared to their
parental cells counterpart. Importantly, we found that CR cells were no
longer addicted to the glycolytic pathway, but rather relied on oxidative
metabolism (OXMET) for energy and biosynthesis. Thus, alteration in
mitochondria which resulted in metabolic changes and higher basal levels
of ROS may be one of the major factors contributing to cisplatin
resistance. We have investigated mitochondrial morphology in parental vs.
CR cells using transmission electron microscopy (TEM). Our data clearly
showed that CR cells possessed significantly higher number of
mitochondria per total cell area (n = 4; p = 0.0006). CR cells also
consumed 2-4 fold more oxygen when compared to their parental cells. To
further confirm that oxidative phosphorylation was utilized more in CR
cells, we assayed mitochondrial membrane potential (MMP) using TMRE
staining. MMP was significantly higher in CR cells suggesting that CR
cells possess highly active mitochondria. Key glycolytic enzymes
hexokinase II (HKII) and lactate dehydrogenase A (LDHA), as well as
lactate production were decreased in all CR cell lines which corresponded
to the resistance to glycolytic inhibitor, 2DG (n = 8; p<0.03). Moreover,
CR cells were highly sensitive to glutamine deprivation. Glutamine
withdrawal for 72h resulted in 75-80% cell death in CR cells while only
10-15% cell death occurred in parental cells. CR also take up twice as
much L-[G-3H] glutamine when compared to its parental counterpart (n = 4,
p<0.05). Here, using Riluzole (the FDA approved drug that interferes with
cystine/glutamate pump and results in reduced intracellular glutathione
(GSH) levels), can selectively kill CR cells. ROS levels were increased
(2-3X) more in resistant cells after Riluzole treatment while no
significant change occurred in parental cells. The ID50 dosage of
parental cells were 3-4 fold more than theirs CR cell counterparts and no
cytotoxicity were found in normal lung fibroblast (n = 8; p<0.05).
However, antioxidant, N-acetylcysteine (NAC, 0.1mM), cannot completely
abort cell death by Riluzole suggesting other mechanisms are involved.
Importantly, Riluzole is also effective in 2 mouse xenograft models
(H460CR (KRAS mutant) and SC (wt)). Tumors completely disappeared in wild
type mice and were significant reduced in KRAS mutant mice (n = 5 per
treatment group; pCisplatin resistance remains a major problem in the
treatment of lung cancer. We have discovered that cisplatin resistant
(CR) lung cancer cells, regardless of the KRAS mutation status, share one
common parameter which is increased reactive oxygen species (ROS) when
compared to their parental cells counterpart. Importantly, we found that
CR cells were no longer addicted to the glycolytic pathway, but rather
relied on oxidative metabolism (OXMET) for energy and biosynthesis. Thus,
alteration in mitochondria which resulted in metabolic changes and higher
basal levels of ROS may be one of the major factors contributing to
cisplatin resistance. We have investigated mitochondrial morphology in
parental vs. CR cells using transmission electron microscopy (TEM). Our
data clearly showed that CR cells possessed significantly higher number
of mitochondria per total cell area (n = 4; p = 0.0006). CR cells also
consumed 2-4 fold more oxygen when compared to their parental cells. To
further confirm that oxidative phosphorylation was utilized more in CR
cells, we assayed mitochondrial membrane potential (MMP) using TMRE
staining. MMP was significantly higher in CR cells suggesting that CR
cells possess highly active mitochondria. Key glycolytic enzymes
hexokinase II (HKII) and lactate dehydrogenase A (LDHA), as well as
lactate production were decreased in all CR cell lines which corresponded
to the resistance to glycolytic inhibitor, 2DG (n = 8; p<0.03). Moreover,
CR cells were highly sensitive to glutamine deprivation. Glutamine
withdrawal for 72h resulted in 75-80% cell death in CR cells while only
10-15% cell death occurred in parental cells. CR also take up twice as
much L-[G-3H] glutamine when compared to its parental counterpart (n = 4,
p<0.05). Here, using Riluzole (the FDA approved drug that interferes with
cystine/glutamate pump and results in reduced intracellular glutathione
(GSH) levels), can selectively kill CR cells. ROS levels were increased
(2-3X) more in resistant cells after Riluzole treatment while no
significant change occurred in parental cells. The ID50 dosage of
parental cells were 3-4 fold more than theirs CR cell counterparts and no
cytotoxicity were found in normal lung fibroblast (n = 8; p<0.05).
However, antioxidant, N-acetylcysteine (NAC, 0.1mM), cannot completely
abort cell death by Riluzole suggesting other mechanisms are involved.
Importantly, Riluzole is also effective in 2 mouse xenograft models
(H460CR (KRAS mutant) and SC (wt)). Tumors completely disappeared in wild
type mice and were significant reduced in KRAS mutant mice (n = 5 per
treatment group; p<0.002). We conclude that addiction to glutamine
instead of glucose and higher basal ROS levels seen in CR cells can make
them hypersensitive to Riluzole. Repurpose this drug should be considered
for future treatment of CR lung cancer patients. Supported by Department
of Veterans Affairs, CDA2 award (1K2BX001289) and Woman Cancer
Association Fund.

