Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: First pre-clinical validation of radiogenomics in glioblastoma


A plethora of Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) features have been
correlated to cancer genomics to date, however, none have established
causality. Here, we present an in vivo xenograft RNA interference
validated, potentially clinically applicable test method termed Magnetic
Resonance Radiomic Sequencing (MRRS) for the noninvasive detection of
cancer genomics in Glioblastoma. MRRS comprehensively assesses the entire
tumor mass using imaging texture-based algorithms that generate thousands
of variables (features) inherent to the tumor. Two independent
glioblastoma stem cells (GSC1 and GSC3) harboring doxycycline inducible
short hairpin RNA against Periostin (POSTN), a gene previously identified
in our radiogenomic screen, were implanted at orthotopic location in nude
mouse brain. In vivo knockdown of >90% and 40% POSTN gene was achieved in
GSC3 and GSC1 respectively. The T2 and T1 post MRI texture features, in
edema and contrast enhancement phenotype features were compared between
doxycycline (POSTN knockdown) and sucrose (control) group of mice using T
test statistics. The significant features were included in a Stepwise
Forward Logistic Regression analysis to build the final predictive model.
The accuracy of the model was tested using ROC cure analysis. Among 3600
features in GSC3 mice cohort, 117 features were significantly (p valueA
plethora of Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) features have been
correlated to cancer genomics to date, however, none have established
causality. Here, we present an in vivo xenograft RNA interference
validated, potentially clinically applicable test method termed Magnetic
Resonance Radiomic Sequencing (MRRS) for the noninvasive detection of
cancer genomics in Glioblastoma. MRRS comprehensively assesses the entire
tumor mass using imaging texture-based algorithms that generate thousands
of variables (features) inherent to the tumor. Two independent
glioblastoma stem cells (GSC1 and GSC3) harboring doxycycline inducible
short hairpin RNA against Periostin (POSTN), a gene previously identified
in our radiogenomic screen, were implanted at orthotopic location in nude
mouse brain. In vivo knockdown of >90% and 40% POSTN gene was achieved in
GSC3 and GSC1 respectively. The T2 and T1 post MRI texture features, in
edema and contrast enhancement phenotype features were compared between
doxycycline (POSTN knockdown) and sucrose (control) group of mice using T
test statistics. The significant features were included in a Stepwise
Forward Logistic Regression analysis to build the final predictive model.
The accuracy of the model was tested using ROC cure analysis. Among 3600
features in GSC3 mice cohort, 117 features were significantly (p
value<0.05) different between the two groups. The significant features
were included in a Stepwise Forward Logistic Regression analysis, 2
textures features (feature 234 of edema T1 and feature 251 of edema T2)
were selected to be included in the final predictive model. The AUC of
the model with leave one out cross validation method was 100%. The
similar analyses were done in the GSC1 mice. The final predictive model
in the GSC1 group was statistically insignificant (p value = 0.15) with
AUC (95% CI) = 73% (46%-98%), suggesting that MRRS is reflective of
underlying gene expression levels. Our results therefore describe the
first mouse model derived MRRS signature to describe a causal link of
gene alteration to MRRS. This novel test method may open an avenue for
human-mouse matched co-clinical trials and noninvasive Radiogenomic
diagnostics.

