Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HER3 targeting sensitizes HNSCC to cetuximab - evidence from cell
line and patient derived xenograft (PDX) models


Background and Objectives: Our previous study demonstrated that a
combination of EGFR-targeted antibody cetuximab and HER3-specific
antibody MM121 could significantly inhibit growth of head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) as compared with either of the single
drugs. The current study aims to understand the role of HER3 in cetuximab
resistance and the anti-tumor mechanisms of dual targeting of EGFR/HER3
in HNSCC. Materials and Methods: A cetuximab resistant HNSCC cell line
SCC1-C, its parental cell line SCC1-P, and a HER3 knockdown counterpart
SCC1-C/H were treated with cetuximab, MM121 and their combination. SRB
and colony formation assays were performed to investigate the combined
effect of MM121 and cetuximab on cancer cell growth. Activations of EGFR,
HER2, HER3, AKT, and ERK signaling pathways were evaluated by Western
blotting. The SCC1-C xenograft animal model and PDX models from 6
patients with HNSCC were utilized to determine the combined efficacy of
MM121 and cetuximab. Results: Cetuximab induced HER3 activation and
HER2/HER3 dimerization in HNSCC cell lines. The combined treatment
blocked both EGFR and HER3 activation and inhibited both PI3K/AKT and ERK
signaling pathways as well as HNSCC cell growth more effectively compared
to either single antibody treatment in vitro. Furthermore, knock down of
HER3 re-sensitized the resistant cell line to cetuximab. The
anti-HER3/EGFR combination also demonstrated better efficacy than either
single agent antibody in the cetuximab resistant HNSCC xenograft model
and the PDX animal models. In PDX models from patients 1-4, both
cetuximab and the combination significantly inhibited tumor growth in
nude mice compare to the control (pBackground and Objectives: Our
previous study demonstrated that a combination of EGFR-targeted antibody
cetuximab and HER3-specific antibody MM121 could significantly inhibit
growth of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) as compared with
either of the single drugs. The current study aims to understand the role
of HER3 in cetuximab resistance and the anti-tumor mechanisms of dual
targeting of EGFR/HER3 in HNSCC. Materials and Methods: A cetuximab
resistant HNSCC cell line SCC1-C, its parental cell line SCC1-P, and a
HER3 knockdown counterpart SCC1-C/H were treated with cetuximab, MM121
and their combination. SRB and colony formation assays were performed to
investigate the combined effect of MM121 and cetuximab on cancer cell
growth. Activations of EGFR, HER2, HER3, AKT, and ERK signaling pathways
were evaluated by Western blotting. The SCC1-C xenograft animal model and
PDX models from 6 patients with HNSCC were utilized to determine the
combined efficacy of MM121 and cetuximab. Results: Cetuximab induced HER3
activation and HER2/HER3 dimerization in HNSCC cell lines. The combined
treatment blocked both EGFR and HER3 activation and inhibited both
PI3K/AKT and ERK signaling pathways as well as HNSCC cell growth more
effectively compared to either single antibody treatment in vitro.
Furthermore, knock down of HER3 re-sensitized the resistant cell line to
cetuximab. The anti-HER3/EGFR combination also demonstrated better
efficacy than either single agent antibody in the cetuximab resistant
HNSCC xenograft model and the PDX animal models. In PDX models from
patients 1-4, both cetuximab and the combination significantly inhibited
tumor growth in nude mice compare to the control (p<0.001 for both
treatments) and there was no difference between single cetuximab and the
combination. In 1 of the 4 PDXs, tumors treated with cetuximab grew back
while no relapse could be detected in the combination group. In the PDX
from patient 5, only the combination treatment significantly inhibited
tumor growth (pBackground and Objectives: Our previous study demonstrated
that a combination of EGFR-targeted antibody cetuximab and HER3-specific
antibody MM121 could significantly inhibit growth of head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) as compared with either of the single
drugs. The current study aims to understand the role of HER3 in cetuximab
resistance and the anti-tumor mechanisms of dual targeting of EGFR/HER3
in HNSCC. Materials and Methods: A cetuximab resistant HNSCC cell line
SCC1-C, its parental cell line SCC1-P, and a HER3 knockdown counterpart
SCC1-C/H were treated with cetuximab, MM121 and their combination. SRB
and colony formation assays were performed to investigate the combined
effect of MM121 and cetuximab on cancer cell growth. Activations of EGFR,
HER2, HER3, AKT, and ERK signaling pathways were evaluated by Western
blotting. The SCC1-C xenograft animal model and PDX models from 6
patients with HNSCC were utilized to determine the combined efficacy of
MM121 and cetuximab. Results: Cetuximab induced HER3 activation and
HER2/HER3 dimerization in HNSCC cell lines. The combined treatment
blocked both EGFR and HER3 activation and inhibited both PI3K/AKT and ERK
signaling pathways as well as HNSCC cell growth more effectively compared
to either single antibody treatment in vitro. Furthermore, knock down of
HER3 re-sensitized the resistant cell line to cetuximab. The
anti-HER3/EGFR combination also demonstrated better efficacy than either
single agent antibody in the cetuximab resistant HNSCC xenograft model
and the PDX animal models. In PDX models from patients 1-4, both
cetuximab and the combination significantly inhibited tumor growth in
nude mice compare to the control (p<0.001 for both treatments) and there
was no difference between single cetuximab and the combination. In 1 of
the 4 PDXs, tumors treated with cetuximab grew back while no relapse
could be detected in the combination group. In the PDX from patient 5,
only the combination treatment significantly inhibited tumor growth
(p<0.004) which was also more effective than cetuximab treatment
(pBackground and Objectives: Our previous study demonstrated that a
combination of EGFR-targeted antibody cetuximab and HER3-specific
antibody MM121 could significantly inhibit growth of head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) as compared with either of the single
drugs. The current study aims to understand the role of HER3 in cetuximab
resistance and the anti-tumor mechanisms of dual targeting of EGFR/HER3
in HNSCC. Materials and Methods: A cetuximab resistant HNSCC cell line
SCC1-C, its parental cell line SCC1-P, and a HER3 knockdown counterpart
SCC1-C/H were treated with cetuximab, MM121 and their combination. SRB
and colony formation assays were performed to investigate the combined
effect of MM121 and cetuximab on cancer cell growth. Activations of EGFR,
HER2, HER3, AKT, and ERK signaling pathways were evaluated by Western
blotting. The SCC1-C xenograft animal model and PDX models from 6
patients with HNSCC were utilized to determine the combined efficacy of
MM121 and cetuximab. Results: Cetuximab induced HER3 activation and
HER2/HER3 dimerization in HNSCC cell lines. The combined treatment
blocked both EGFR and HER3 activation and inhibited both PI3K/AKT and ERK
signaling pathways as well as HNSCC cell growth more effectively compared
to either single antibody treatment in vitro. Furthermore, knock down of
HER3 re-sensitized the resistant cell line to cetuximab. The
anti-HER3/EGFR combination also demonstrated better efficacy than either
single agent antibody in the cetuximab resistant HNSCC xenograft model
and the PDX animal models. In PDX models from patients 1-4, both
cetuximab and the combination significantly inhibited tumor growth in
nude mice compare to the control (p<0.001 for both treatments) and there
was no difference between single cetuximab and the combination. In 1 of
the 4 PDXs, tumors treated with cetuximab grew back while no relapse
could be detected in the combination group. In the PDX from patient 5,
only the combination treatment significantly inhibited tumor growth
(p<0.004) which was also more effective than cetuximab treatment
(p<0.032). In the PDX from patient 6, both cetuximab and the combination
significantly inhibited tumor growth in nude mice as compared with the
control (pBackground and Objectives: Our previous study demonstrated that
a combination of EGFR-targeted antibody cetuximab and HER3-specific
antibody MM121 could significantly inhibit growth of head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) as compared with either of the single
drugs. The current study aims to understand the role of HER3 in cetuximab
resistance and the anti-tumor mechanisms of dual targeting of EGFR/HER3
in HNSCC. Materials and Methods: A cetuximab resistant HNSCC cell line
SCC1-C, its parental cell line SCC1-P, and a HER3 knockdown counterpart
SCC1-C/H were treated with cetuximab, MM121 and their combination. SRB
and colony formation assays were performed to investigate the combined
effect of MM121 and cetuximab on cancer cell growth. Activations of EGFR,
HER2, HER3, AKT, and ERK signaling pathways were evaluated by Western
blotting. The SCC1-C xenograft animal model and PDX models from 6
patients with HNSCC were utilized to determine the combined efficacy of
MM121 and cetuximab. Results: Cetuximab induced HER3 activation and
HER2/HER3 dimerization in HNSCC cell lines. The combined treatment
blocked both EGFR and HER3 activation and inhibited both PI3K/AKT and ERK
signaling pathways as well as HNSCC cell growth more effectively compared
to either single antibody treatment in vitro. Furthermore, knock down of
HER3 re-sensitized the resistant cell line to cetuximab. The
anti-HER3/EGFR combination also demonstrated better efficacy than either
single agent antibody in the cetuximab resistant HNSCC xenograft model
and the PDX animal models. In PDX models from patients 1-4, both
cetuximab and the combination significantly inhibited tumor growth in
nude mice compare to the control (p<0.001 for both treatments) and there
was no difference between single cetuximab and the combination. In 1 of
the 4 PDXs, tumors treated with cetuximab grew back while no relapse
could be detected in the combination group. In the PDX from patient 5,
only the combination treatment significantly inhibited tumor growth
(p<0.004) which was also more effective than cetuximab treatment
(p<0.032). In the PDX from patient 6, both cetuximab and the combination
significantly inhibited tumor growth in nude mice as compared with the
control (p<0.001 for both treatments). However, the combination was
significantly more effective than either of the single agents
(pBackground and Objectives: Our previous study demonstrated that a
combination of EGFR-targeted antibody cetuximab and HER3-specific
antibody MM121 could significantly inhibit growth of head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) as compared with either of the single
drugs. The current study aims to understand the role of HER3 in cetuximab
resistance and the anti-tumor mechanisms of dual targeting of EGFR/HER3
in HNSCC. Materials and Methods: A cetuximab resistant HNSCC cell line
SCC1-C, its parental cell line SCC1-P, and a HER3 knockdown counterpart
SCC1-C/H were treated with cetuximab, MM121 and their combination. SRB
and colony formation assays were performed to investigate the combined
effect of MM121 and cetuximab on cancer cell growth. Activations of EGFR,
HER2, HER3, AKT, and ERK signaling pathways were evaluated by Western
blotting. The SCC1-C xenograft animal model and PDX models from 6
patients with HNSCC were utilized to determine the combined efficacy of
MM121 and cetuximab. Results: Cetuximab induced HER3 activation and
HER2/HER3 dimerization in HNSCC cell lines. The combined treatment
blocked both EGFR and HER3 activation and inhibited both PI3K/AKT and ERK
signaling pathways as well as HNSCC cell growth more effectively compared
to either single antibody treatment in vitro. Furthermore, knock down of
HER3 re-sensitized the resistant cell line to cetuximab. The
anti-HER3/EGFR combination also demonstrated better efficacy than either
single agent antibody in the cetuximab resistant HNSCC xenograft model
and the PDX animal models. In PDX models from patients 1-4, both
cetuximab and the combination significantly inhibited tumor growth in
nude mice compare to the control (p<0.001 for both treatments) and there
was no difference between single cetuximab and the combination. In 1 of
the 4 PDXs, tumors treated with cetuximab grew back while no relapse
could be detected in the combination group. In the PDX from patient 5,
only the combination treatment significantly inhibited tumor growth
(p<0.004) which was also more effective than cetuximab treatment
(p<0.032). In the PDX from patient 6, both cetuximab and the combination
significantly inhibited tumor growth in nude mice as compared with the
control (p<0.001 for both treatments). However, the combination was
significantly more effective than either of the single agents (p<0.0004
and pBackground and Objectives: Our previous study demonstrated that a
combination of EGFR-targeted antibody cetuximab and HER3-specific
antibody MM121 could significantly inhibit growth of head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) as compared with either of the single
drugs. The current study aims to understand the role of HER3 in cetuximab
resistance and the anti-tumor mechanisms of dual targeting of EGFR/HER3
in HNSCC. Materials and Methods: A cetuximab resistant HNSCC cell line
SCC1-C, its parental cell line SCC1-P, and a HER3 knockdown counterpart
SCC1-C/H were treated with cetuximab, MM121 and their combination. SRB
and colony formation assays were performed to investigate the combined
effect of MM121 and cetuximab on cancer cell growth. Activations of EGFR,
HER2, HER3, AKT, and ERK signaling pathways were evaluated by Western
blotting. The SCC1-C xenograft animal model and PDX models from 6
patients with HNSCC were utilized to determine the combined efficacy of
MM121 and cetuximab. Results: Cetuximab induced HER3 activation and
HER2/HER3 dimerization in HNSCC cell lines. The combined treatment
blocked both EGFR and HER3 activation and inhibited both PI3K/AKT and ERK
signaling pathways as well as HNSCC cell growth more effectively compared
to either single antibody treatment in vitro. Furthermore, knock down of
HER3 re-sensitized the resistant cell line to cetuximab. The
anti-HER3/EGFR combination also demonstrated better efficacy than either
single agent antibody in the cetuximab resistant HNSCC xenograft model
and the PDX animal models. In PDX models from patients 1-4, both
cetuximab and the combination significantly inhibited tumor growth in
nude mice compare to the control (p<0.001 for both treatments) and there
was no difference between single cetuximab and the combination. In 1 of
the 4 PDXs, tumors treated with cetuximab grew back while no relapse
could be detected in the combination group. In the PDX from patient 5,
only the combination treatment significantly inhibited tumor growth
(p<0.004) which was also more effective than cetuximab treatment
(p<0.032). In the PDX from patient 6, both cetuximab and the combination
significantly inhibited tumor growth in nude mice as compared with the
control (p<0.001 for both treatments). However, the combination was
significantly more effective than either of the single agents (p<0.0004
and p<0.003, respectively). Conclusion: Our study indicates that dual
targeting of EGFR and HER3 is more effective than cetuximab alone in both
cetuximab resistant HNSCC cell line and PDX models. These results pave
the way for further clinical investigations using multiple targeting
strategies in patients who have failed cetuximab based therapy. (The
current study is supported by NIH grant R21 CA182661 to NFS and ZGC).

