Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The effects of KPT-330, a selective inhibitor of nuclear export,
on nuclear topoisomerase II alpha levels and etoposide activity in human
myeloid leukemia HL-60 cells


DNA topoisomerase II (topo II) is a known cargo protein for exportin 1
(XPO1, CRM1) (Seminars Cancer Biol. 27: 62-73, 2014) for nuclear export.
Here we utilized KPT-330, a selective inhibitor of nuclear export, to
evaluate its cytotoxicity, its effects on the nuclear content of topo II
in human myeloid leukemia HL60 cells and on the subsequent activity of
the topo II targeting agent etoposide. Since KPT-330 is a potential
michael acceptor and is known to interact with the CRM1 active site
Cys528 to inhibit its activity, we first analyzed interaction of KPT-330
with glutathione (GSH)-containing cysteine. In an in vitro binding study
KPT-330 was weakly bound to GSH with a Kd = 130+/-24 M. In contrast, the
natural product compound parthenolide, also a michael acceptor, bound to
GSH with 30-fold greater affinity. Depletion of cellular GSH with
buthionine sulfoximine (BSO) did not significantly alter the 72 hr growth
inhibitory effects of KPT-330 yielding I50-values of 109 +/- 19 and 80
+/- 44 nM (p = 0.133) in the absence and presence of BSO. In contrast,
GSH depletion significantly enhanced the activity of parthenolide
yielding I50-values of 2.59 +/- 0.16 and 1.35 +/- 0.15 M (pDNA
topoisomerase II (topo II) is a known cargo protein for exportin 1 (XPO1,
CRM1) (Seminars Cancer Biol. 27: 62-73, 2014) for nuclear export. Here we
utilized KPT-330, a selective inhibitor of nuclear export, to evaluate
its cytotoxicity, its effects on the nuclear content of topo II in human
myeloid leukemia HL60 cells and on the subsequent activity of the topo II
targeting agent etoposide. Since KPT-330 is a potential michael acceptor
and is known to interact with the CRM1 active site Cys528 to inhibit its
activity, we first analyzed interaction of KPT-330 with glutathione
(GSH)-containing cysteine. In an in vitro binding study KPT-330 was
weakly bound to GSH with a Kd = 130+/-24 M. In contrast, the natural
product compound parthenolide, also a michael acceptor, bound to GSH with
30-fold greater affinity. Depletion of cellular GSH with buthionine
sulfoximine (BSO) did not significantly alter the 72 hr growth inhibitory
effects of KPT-330 yielding I50-values of 109 +/- 19 and 80 +/- 44 nM (p
= 0.133) in the absence and presence of BSO. In contrast, GSH depletion
significantly enhanced the activity of parthenolide yielding I50-values
of 2.59 +/- 0.16 and 1.35 +/- 0.15 M (p<0.001) in the absence or presence
of BSO. KPT-330 (50 M) did not alter cellular GSH levels in HL60 cells.
Using 3-(p-hydroxyphenyl) fluorescein, KPT-330 was antioxidant in GSH
replete and depleted HL60 cells. Together results indicate that
conjugation with GSH does not play a significant role in KPT-330
activity. Less than additive cytotoxicity (trypan blue) and apoptosis
(Hoescht) were observed using a single fixed ratio of KPT-330 and
etoposide incubated either simultaneously or after overnight
pre-incubation with KPT-330. Similarly, using the Chou and Talalay
technique, KPT-330/etoposide combinations were less than additive in
exponentially growing HL60 cells. The mechanism(s) for this apparent
antagonism using this combination are under investigation. Using
fluorescently labeled topo II antibody, nuclear content of exponentially
growing HL60 cells was 85.9 +/- 2.3% of total in the absence of KPT-330
and 86.5+/- 1.8% after an 16 hr incubation with 100 nM KPT-330. In
plateau phase cells there was a statistically significant decrease in
nuclear topoisomerase II to 74.1+/-1.8% compared to exponentially growing
cells (pDNA topoisomerase II (topo II) is a known cargo protein for
exportin 1 (XPO1, CRM1) (Seminars Cancer Biol. 27: 62-73, 2014) for
nuclear export. Here we utilized KPT-330, a selective inhibitor of
nuclear export, to evaluate its cytotoxicity, its effects on the nuclear
content of topo II in human myeloid leukemia HL60 cells and on the
subsequent activity of the topo II targeting agent etoposide. Since
KPT-330 is a potential michael acceptor and is known to interact with the
CRM1 active site Cys528 to inhibit its activity, we first analyzed
interaction of KPT-330 with glutathione (GSH)-containing cysteine. In an
in vitro binding study KPT-330 was weakly bound to GSH with a Kd =
130+/-24 M. In contrast, the natural product compound parthenolide, also
a michael acceptor, bound to GSH with 30-fold greater affinity. Depletion
of cellular GSH with buthionine sulfoximine (BSO) did not significantly
alter the 72 hr growth inhibitory effects of KPT-330 yielding I50-values
of 109 +/- 19 and 80 +/- 44 nM (p = 0.133) in the absence and presence of
BSO. In contrast, GSH depletion significantly enhanced the activity of
parthenolide yielding I50-values of 2.59 +/- 0.16 and 1.35 +/- 0.15 M
(p<0.001) in the absence or presence of BSO. KPT-330 (50 M) did not alter
cellular GSH levels in HL60 cells. Using 3-(p-hydroxyphenyl) fluorescein,
KPT-330 was antioxidant in GSH replete and depleted HL60 cells. Together
results indicate that conjugation with GSH does not play a significant
role in KPT-330 activity. Less than additive cytotoxicity (trypan blue)
and apoptosis (Hoescht) were observed using a single fixed ratio of
KPT-330 and etoposide incubated either simultaneously or after overnight
pre-incubation with KPT-330. Similarly, using the Chou and Talalay
technique, KPT-330/etoposide combinations were less than additive in
exponentially growing HL60 cells. The mechanism(s) for this apparent
antagonism using this combination are under investigation. Using
fluorescently labeled topo II antibody, nuclear content of exponentially
growing HL60 cells was 85.9 +/- 2.3% of total in the absence of KPT-330
and 86.5+/- 1.8% after an 16 hr incubation with 100 nM KPT-330. In
plateau phase cells there was a statistically significant decrease in
nuclear topoisomerase II to 74.1+/-1.8% compared to exponentially growing
cells (p<0.05). In these plateau phase cells, a similar 16 hr incubation
with 100 nM KPT-330 resulted in a significant increase in nuclear
topoisomerase II to 82.6+/-2.5% of total compared to controls (pDNA
topoisomerase II (topo II) is a known cargo protein for exportin 1 (XPO1,
CRM1) (Seminars Cancer Biol. 27: 62-73, 2014) for nuclear export. Here we
utilized KPT-330, a selective inhibitor of nuclear export, to evaluate
its cytotoxicity, its effects on the nuclear content of topo II in human
myeloid leukemia HL60 cells and on the subsequent activity of the topo II
targeting agent etoposide. Since KPT-330 is a potential michael acceptor
and is known to interact with the CRM1 active site Cys528 to inhibit its
activity, we first analyzed interaction of KPT-330 with glutathione
(GSH)-containing cysteine. In an in vitro binding study KPT-330 was
weakly bound to GSH with a Kd = 130+/-24 M. In contrast, the natural
product compound parthenolide, also a michael acceptor, bound to GSH with
30-fold greater affinity. Depletion of cellular GSH with buthionine
sulfoximine (BSO) did not significantly alter the 72 hr growth inhibitory
effects of KPT-330 yielding I50-values of 109 +/- 19 and 80 +/- 44 nM (p
= 0.133) in the absence and presence of BSO. In contrast, GSH depletion
significantly enhanced the activity of parthenolide yielding I50-values
of 2.59 +/- 0.16 and 1.35 +/- 0.15 M (p<0.001) in the absence or presence
of BSO. KPT-330 (50 M) did not alter cellular GSH levels in HL60 cells.
Using 3-(p-hydroxyphenyl) fluorescein, KPT-330 was antioxidant in GSH
replete and depleted HL60 cells. Together results indicate that
conjugation with GSH does not play a significant role in KPT-330
activity. Less than additive cytotoxicity (trypan blue) and apoptosis
(Hoescht) were observed using a single fixed ratio of KPT-330 and
etoposide incubated either simultaneously or after overnight
pre-incubation with KPT-330. Similarly, using the Chou and Talalay
technique, KPT-330/etoposide combinations were less than additive in
exponentially growing HL60 cells. The mechanism(s) for this apparent
antagonism using this combination are under investigation. Using
fluorescently labeled topo II antibody, nuclear content of exponentially
growing HL60 cells was 85.9 +/- 2.3% of total in the absence of KPT-330
and 86.5+/- 1.8% after an 16 hr incubation with 100 nM KPT-330. In
plateau phase cells there was a statistically significant decrease in
nuclear topoisomerase II to 74.1+/-1.8% compared to exponentially growing
cells (p<0.05). In these plateau phase cells, a similar 16 hr incubation
with 100 nM KPT-330 resulted in a significant increase in nuclear
topoisomerase II to 82.6+/-2.5% of total compared to controls (p<0.05).
Results are in accord with the known CRM1-mediated shuttling of topo II
from the nucleus only in cells approaching or in plateau phase (Exp. Cell
Res. 313: 627-637, 2007). Studies are underway to evaluate
etoposide-mediated DNA damage and topo II-covalent complexes in HL60
cells in various growth phases after KPT-330 treatment as a correlate
with nuclear topo II residency.

