Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Modulation of aromatase inhibitor resistance by miRNAs in breast
cancer


The blockade of E2 signaling by either tamoxifen or aromatase inhibitors
(AI) is the standard treatment of patients with estrogen receptor
(ER)-positive breast cancer. However, acquired resistance to antiestrogen
therapies remains a big clinical challenge. The in vitro breast cancer
models MCF-7:5C and MCF-7:2A mimic clinical AI resistance in that they
grow under tamoxifen, but can rapidly regress with E2 due to the
reconfiguration of survival signaling known as E2-inducible apoptosis.
This principle is currently explored in clinical trials in order to
develop strategies to overcome endocrine resistance. To better understand
the biology of AI resistance we previously ascertained a wide range of
alterations of stress related pathways including the accumulation of
endoplasmic reticulum stress, oxidative stress, and inflammatory stress
that occur prior to E2-induced apoptosis (Ariazi et al. 2011; Fan et al.
2013, 2015; Sweeney et al. 2014). In this current work we investigated
miRNA expression profiles of the 5C and 2A models (both compared to
MCF-7:WS8 reference) in order to further elucidate the molecular scenario
that characterizes the AI resistance phenotypes and their susceptibility
to E2-induced apoptosis. Using Affymetrix GeneChip miRNA2.0 arrays we
identified 184 miRNAs differentially expressed between 2A and 5C (FC >
1.5 or The blockade of E2 signaling by either tamoxifen or aromatase
inhibitors (AI) is the standard treatment of patients with estrogen
receptor (ER)-positive breast cancer. However, acquired resistance to
antiestrogen therapies remains a big clinical challenge. The in vitro
breast cancer models MCF-7:5C and MCF-7:2A mimic clinical AI resistance
in that they grow under tamoxifen, but can rapidly regress with E2 due to
the reconfiguration of survival signaling known as E2-inducible
apoptosis. This principle is currently explored in clinical trials in
order to develop strategies to overcome endocrine resistance. To better
understand the biology of AI resistance we previously ascertained a wide
range of alterations of stress related pathways including the
accumulation of endoplasmic reticulum stress, oxidative stress, and
inflammatory stress that occur prior to E2-induced apoptosis (Ariazi et
al. 2011; Fan et al. 2013, 2015; Sweeney et al. 2014). In this current
work we investigated miRNA expression profiles of the 5C and 2A models
(both compared to MCF-7:WS8 reference) in order to further elucidate the
molecular scenario that characterizes the AI resistance phenotypes and
their susceptibility to E2-induced apoptosis. Using Affymetrix GeneChip
miRNA2.0 arrays we identified 184 miRNAs differentially expressed between
2A and 5C (FC > 1.5 or < 1/1.5, P The blockade of E2 signaling by either
tamoxifen or aromatase inhibitors (AI) is the standard treatment of
patients with estrogen receptor (ER)-positive breast cancer. However,
acquired resistance to antiestrogen therapies remains a big clinical
challenge. The in vitro breast cancer models MCF-7:5C and MCF-7:2A mimic
clinical AI resistance in that they grow under tamoxifen, but can rapidly
regress with E2 due to the reconfiguration of survival signaling known as
E2-inducible apoptosis. This principle is currently explored in clinical
trials in order to develop strategies to overcome endocrine resistance.
To better understand the biology of AI resistance we previously
ascertained a wide range of alterations of stress related pathways
including the accumulation of endoplasmic reticulum stress, oxidative
stress, and inflammatory stress that occur prior to E2-induced apoptosis
(Ariazi et al. 2011; Fan et al. 2013, 2015; Sweeney et al. 2014). In this
current work we investigated miRNA expression profiles of the 5C and 2A
models (both compared to MCF-7:WS8 reference) in order to further
elucidate the molecular scenario that characterizes the AI resistance
phenotypes and their susceptibility to E2-induced apoptosis. Using
Affymetrix GeneChip miRNA2.0 arrays we identified 184 miRNAs
differentially expressed between 2A and 5C (FC > 1.5 or < 1/1.5, P <
0.05). Of these, 30 miRNAs were specific for 2A, 99 for 5C, and 55
overlapped. Common miRNAs include upregulated oncogenic miRNAs of the
miR-17-92 cluster (Chr. 13q31) and the paralogous 106a-363 cluster (Chr.
X), as well as downregulated tumor suppressive miRNAs such as miR-342-5p.
Thirty-four miRNAs that cluster at Chr. 14q32 were overexpressed in 5C
cells and highly correlate with the downregulated miR-99a and miR-125b
(Chr. 21q21). At the clinical level based on data from The Cancer Genome
Atlas (miRNA-Seq v. 3.1.17.0), low expression of miR-31 was associated
with poor (HR = 3.0, 95% CI: 1.9-4.8; Padj = 8.7E-5), and low miR-222
expression was associated with better outcome (HR = 0.3, 95% CI: 0.1-0.6;
Padj. = 4.4E-3). As miR-31 expression is high and miR-222 expression is
low in 5C cells compared to the MCF-7:WS8 reference, we suggest
protective roles. Functions of miRNAs were deciphered via analyses of
their predicted targets (CLIP-confirmed). Using KEGG and GO databases
functional enrichment analyses of 5C and 2A specific miRNA sets revealed
pathways associated with cell proliferation for both models including
insulin, mTOR, and ErbB signaling as well as immune response and
metabolism associated pathways. While the 2A specific miRNA set revealed
additional metabolic pathways, the 5C specific miRNA set points to
pathways involved in apoptosis. Thus, we confirmed the biological
processes inherent to AI resistance and provide critical evidence for
miRNA profiles as an important regulatory principle in these AI
resistance models.

