Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Intravital microscopy of prostate cancer lesions in bone: kinetics
of osteolysis and therapy response


Bone metastases are the initial site of progression and account for many
of the complications experienced by men with metastatic prostate cancer
(PCa), including therapy resistance. Besides cell intrinsic mechanisms,
the interaction between PCa cells and the bone microenvironment
critically contributes to lesion expansion and drug sensitivity. We here
developed a mouse model amenable to intravital multiphoton microscopy
(iMPM) to longitudinally study PCa-stromal cell interactions and therapy
response in a partially humanized neobone, established in the dermis of
the mouse. Tissue engineered bone constructs, TEBCs, were generated by
functionalizing polymeric polycaprolactone scaffolds with human
mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs) differentiated to osteoblasts followed by
cell-derived calcification of the inter-scaffold space. 30 days after
implantation of functionalized scaffolds under the skin of the mouse,
bone and bone marrow maturation resulted in a 30mm3 cavity surrounded by
optically transparent cortical bone of 50-60 m thickness, as monitored by
microCT and iMPM. Intra-bone tumor growth and osteolysis caused by human
fluorescent PCa cells (PC3) were three-dimensionally reconstructed by
multi-parameter detection through a body window, including collagen and
bone matrix (SHG), calcified bone (fluorescent bisphosphonates),
osteoclasts (cathepsin K), bone surface (THG), blood vessels and stromal
phagocytes (fluorescent dextran), and PC3 cells (nuclear H2B/eGFP,
cytoplasmatic DsRed2). As a proof of concept, the efficacy to halt bone
remodeling during bisphosphonate therapy was detected, revealing the
composition and kinetics of the bone-tumor interface, including
oscillating bone loss followed by neo-apposition. Thus, combining
engineered neobone with an optical window is suited to detail the 3D
organization and dynamics of cancer lesions in bone and provides
mechanistic insight and efficacy predictions for therapy response.

