Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PET imaging of tissue factor using 64Cu-labeled active
site-inhibited factor VII: A potential companion diagnostic for tissue
factor targeted cancer therapies


Introduction: The transmembrane glycoprotein tissue factor (TF) is the
primary initiator of coagulation. In addition to its physiological role,
TF is associated with a variety of pathophysiological processes including
tumor growth, tumor angiogenesis and metastasis. Increased TF expression
has been reported in 53-89% of all pancreatic adenocarcinomas and
clinically correlates with advanced stage and poor survival. Non-invasive
imaging of tumor TF status holds great clinical potential as a companion
diagnostic for anti-cancer therapy targeting TF. The goal of our study
was to develop and evaluate a PET tracer for imaging of TF expression in
pancreatic cancer by utilizing the natural ligand for TF, coagulation
factor VII.Experimental procedures: Active site-inhibited factor VII
(FVIIai) was conjugated to
2-S-(4-isothiocyanatobenzyl)-1,4,7-triazacyclononane-1,4,7-triacetic acid
(p-SCN-Bn-NOTA) followed by radiolabeling with 64Cu (64Cu-NOTA-FVIIai).
Mice bearing subcutaneous pancreatic adenocarcinoma tumors (BxPC-3) were
subjected to PET imaging 1, 4, 15 and 36 hours post-injection of
64Cu-NOTA-FVIIai for longitudinal assessment. The in vivo specificity of
64Cu-NOTA-FVIIai towards TF was evaluated in a competition blocking
experiment and in a panel of subcutaneous pancreatic tumor models
exhibiting low, medium and high TF expression. Additionally, the ability
of 64Cu-NOTA-FVIIai to visualize TF expression in orthotopically
implanted BxPC-3 tumors was evaluated by PET/MRI. Ex vivo
biodistribution, immunohistochemistry and flow cytometry was performed to
verify the in vivo imaging data.Results: PET imaging at 1, 4, 15 and 36
hours after injection of 64Cu-NOTA-FVIIai revealed a tumor uptake of 2.3
0.2, 3.7 0.3, 3.4 0.3 and 2.4 0.3% injected dose per gram (%ID/g),
respectively. A graduate increase in image contrast (tumor to background
ratio) was observed over the imaging time course with no further increase
beyond 15 hours. Competition with excess unlabeled FVIIai significantly
reduced tumor uptake of 64Cu-NOTA-FVIIai (pIntroduction: The
transmembrane glycoprotein tissue factor (TF) is the primary initiator of
coagulation. In addition to its physiological role, TF is associated with
a variety of pathophysiological processes including tumor growth, tumor
angiogenesis and metastasis. Increased TF expression has been reported in
53-89% of all pancreatic adenocarcinomas and clinically correlates with
advanced stage and poor survival. Non-invasive imaging of tumor TF status
holds great clinical potential as a companion diagnostic for anti-cancer
therapy targeting TF. The goal of our study was to develop and evaluate a
PET tracer for imaging of TF expression in pancreatic cancer by utilizing
the natural ligand for TF, coagulation factor VII.Experimental
procedures: Active site-inhibited factor VII (FVIIai) was conjugated to
2-S-(4-isothiocyanatobenzyl)-1,4,7-triazacyclononane-1,4,7-triacetic acid
(p-SCN-Bn-NOTA) followed by radiolabeling with 64Cu (64Cu-NOTA-FVIIai).
Mice bearing subcutaneous pancreatic adenocarcinoma tumors (BxPC-3) were
subjected to PET imaging 1, 4, 15 and 36 hours post-injection of
64Cu-NOTA-FVIIai for longitudinal assessment. The in vivo specificity of
64Cu-NOTA-FVIIai towards TF was evaluated in a competition blocking
experiment and in a panel of subcutaneous pancreatic tumor models
exhibiting low, medium and high TF expression. Additionally, the ability
of 64Cu-NOTA-FVIIai to visualize TF expression in orthotopically
implanted BxPC-3 tumors was evaluated by PET/MRI. Ex vivo
biodistribution, immunohistochemistry and flow cytometry was performed to
verify the in vivo imaging data.Results: PET imaging at 1, 4, 15 and 36
hours after injection of 64Cu-NOTA-FVIIai revealed a tumor uptake of 2.3
0.2, 3.7 0.3, 3.4 0.3 and 2.4 0.3% injected dose per gram (%ID/g),
respectively. A graduate increase in image contrast (tumor to background
ratio) was observed over the imaging time course with no further increase
beyond 15 hours. Competition with excess unlabeled FVIIai significantly
reduced tumor uptake of 64Cu-NOTA-FVIIai (p< 0.001) in subcutaneous
BxPC-3 tumors, while the uptake was unaffected in other organs. The ex
vivo biodistribution confirmed the data obtained by in vivo PET imaging.
In pancreatic cancer models with different levels of TF expression, the
tumor uptake was found to be significantly different from each other (p
Introduction: The transmembrane glycoprotein tissue factor (TF) is the
primary initiator of coagulation. In addition to its physiological role,
TF is associated with a variety of pathophysiological processes including
tumor growth, tumor angiogenesis and metastasis. Increased TF expression
has been reported in 53-89% of all pancreatic adenocarcinomas and
clinically correlates with advanced stage and poor survival. Non-invasive
imaging of tumor TF status holds great clinical potential as a companion
diagnostic for anti-cancer therapy targeting TF. The goal of our study
was to develop and evaluate a PET tracer for imaging of TF expression in
pancreatic cancer by utilizing the natural ligand for TF, coagulation
factor VII.Experimental procedures: Active site-inhibited factor VII
(FVIIai) was conjugated to
2-S-(4-isothiocyanatobenzyl)-1,4,7-triazacyclononane-1,4,7-triacetic acid
(p-SCN-Bn-NOTA) followed by radiolabeling with 64Cu (64Cu-NOTA-FVIIai).
Mice bearing subcutaneous pancreatic adenocarcinoma tumors (BxPC-3) were
subjected to PET imaging 1, 4, 15 and 36 hours post-injection of
64Cu-NOTA-FVIIai for longitudinal assessment. The in vivo specificity of
64Cu-NOTA-FVIIai towards TF was evaluated in a competition blocking
experiment and in a panel of subcutaneous pancreatic tumor models
exhibiting low, medium and high TF expression. Additionally, the ability
of 64Cu-NOTA-FVIIai to visualize TF expression in orthotopically
implanted BxPC-3 tumors was evaluated by PET/MRI. Ex vivo
biodistribution, immunohistochemistry and flow cytometry was performed to
verify the in vivo imaging data.Results: PET imaging at 1, 4, 15 and 36
hours after injection of 64Cu-NOTA-FVIIai revealed a tumor uptake of 2.3
0.2, 3.7 0.3, 3.4 0.3 and 2.4 0.3% injected dose per gram (%ID/g),
respectively. A graduate increase in image contrast (tumor to background
ratio) was observed over the imaging time course with no further increase
beyond 15 hours. Competition with excess unlabeled FVIIai significantly
reduced tumor uptake of 64Cu-NOTA-FVIIai (p< 0.001) in subcutaneous
BxPC-3 tumors, while the uptake was unaffected in other organs. The ex
vivo biodistribution confirmed the data obtained by in vivo PET imaging.
In pancreatic cancer models with different levels of TF expression, the
tumor uptake was found to be significantly different from each other (p <
0.001). This was in agreement with the TF level evaluated by
immunohistochemistry and flow cytometry. Furthermore orthotopic BxPC-3
tumors were visualized and distinguishable by PET/MRI using
64Cu-NOTA-FVIIai as the PET tracer.Conclusions: 64Cu-NOTA-FVIIai is well
suited for specific PET imaging of TF in pancreatic cancer and its uptake
is related to the tumor TF expression level. The data supports further
development of 64Cu-NOTA-FVIIai as a companion diagnostic and theranostic
agent.

