Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MM-151 elicits broad and unique inhibition of cells harboring EGFR
extracellular domain mutations results of multiscale experiments with
genome-edited cell lines


Mutations in the extracellular domain (ECD) of EGFR have been reported in
colorectal (CRC) patients as a mechanism of acquired resistance to the
EGFR-directed antibodies cetuximab and panitumumab. Similar to EGFR
intracellular domain mutations observed in patients treated with EGFR
kinase inhibitors, these EGFR-ECD mutations inhibit the binding of the
antibodies while maintaining EGFR signaling activity. MM-151, an
investigational agent consisting of three anti-EGFR IgG1 antibodies, has
been recently reported to overcome these mutations in over-expression and
patient-derived cell line models. Here, we extend these studies to
characterize the mechanisms of action that enable MM-151 to provide
robust inhibition of EGFR-ECD mutations beyond that achievable by other
monoclonal and oligoclonal EGFR antibodies. First, utilizing a cell-free
binding assay with recombinant EGFR-ECD mutants, we found that MM-151,
but not the Sym004 combination of two antibodies, maintained oligoclonal
binding to all mutants. Second, we performed a panel of 2D and 3D in
vitro experiments with over-expression and genome-edited (CRISPR-Cas9)
cell lines harboring EGFR-ECD mutations to characterize target
engagement, cell signaling, proliferation, and the impact of hetero-
versus homozygous expression of EGFR wild type or mutant alleles. We
observed that the three mechanisms of action for MM-151- antagonism of
both low- and high-affinity EGFR ligands, EGFR down-regulation, and
immune-effector activity were preserved in these models. Third, we
performed xenograft experiments to evaluate the behavior of MM-151 and
found that MM-151 maintained inhibitory activity in an in vivo context.
The results of our multiscale experiments identified the impact of
combining three antibodies to overcome the high plasticity of the EGFR
extracellular domain and thus reveal the potential for clinical
evaluation of MM-151 in both EGFR-nave and EGFR-refractory CRC
populations.

