Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vitro and in vivo activity of site-specific antibody-drug
conjugates (ADCs) with 2 and 4 maytansinoid molecules per antibody
prepared through conjugation to SeriMabs (N-terminal serine engineered
Abs)


Site-specific attachment of cell-killing agents to antibodies directed
against tumor-associated antigens has continued to be an active area of
innovation in the field of ADCs. Most reports focus on homogeneous ADCs
that have a DAR (cytotoxic molecules per antibody ratio) of 2. Here we
describe the preparation, biochemical characterization, and biological
evaluation of ADCs made through conjugation of maytansinoids (DM1, DM4)
to aldehydes derived from chemically oxidized N-terminal serines
(SeriMab) engineered onto the antibody heavy chain (2 DAR) or both light
and heavy chain simultaneously (4 DAR). ADCs prepared with a
non-cleavable linker or a cleavable disulfide linker were homogeneous 2
or 4 DAR by MS analysis, and were produced in high yield with a monomer
content of >98%. Despite conjugation at the N-termini of both the light
and heavy chain variable regions, FACS analysis showed the 4 DAR SeriMab
conjugates maintained binding to the target antigen.The ADCs showed
antigen-specific potency in vitro on a panel of target-expressing cancer
cell lines. In the disulfide cleavable linker series, the 2 DAR SeriMab
conjugate was 2-5 fold less active than lysine-conjugated Ab-SPDB-DM4
(3.4 DAR), while the 4 DAR SeriMab conjugate was comparably active on an
antibody basis. The SeriMab conjugates also displayed strong bystander
killing. Surprisingly, in the non-cleavable linker series, the 2 DAR
SeriMab conjugate was up to 17-fold more active (depending on cell line)
than lysine-conjugated Ab-SMCC-DM1 (3.5 DAR), and the 4 DAR SeriMab
conjugate was up to 100-fold more potent than the SMCC-DM1 conjugate on
an antibody concentration basis. In a P-gp-positive multi-drug resistant
cell line, the non-cleavable 4 DAR SeriMab-maytansinoid conjugate was
highly active while the 2 DAR SeriMab ADCs and lysine-conjugated
maytansinoid ADCs were >100-fold less potent.The unique oxime bond formed
with the non-cleavable SeriMab-maytansinoid conjugate was found to be
stable in circulation in mice for >3 days as assayed by affinity capture
LC-MS. Polar carboxylic acid containing metabolites were identified which
may lead to high cellular retention of maytansinoid species in cancer
cells, yielding higher in vitro potency than lysine-linked ADCs in some
cell lines.The in vivo anti-tumor activity of disulfide cleavable 2 and 4
DAR SeriMab-DM4 ADCs was evaluated in a clinically relevant cancer
xenograft model. The 4 DAR conjugate was active at 60 g/kg (maytansinoid
payload dose) and was more active than the 2 DAR conjugate at this same
payload dose.Using the SeriMab conjugation platform we show that in vitro
and in vivo activity of site-specific ADCs can be dependent on amount of
cytotoxic agent attached per antibody.

