Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Composition and distribution of tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes in
breast cancer


Backgroud: High tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes(TILs)are known to be
associated with response to primary systemic therapy (PST) in breast
cancer patients especially in Her2+ and triple negative patients.
However, the composition of TILs in the high infiltration group is
largely unknown. Uncovering the immunodynamic composition of TILs may be
useful for better understanding the mechanism how the TILs exert effect.
And the immune reservoir data for extensive analysis of altered TIL
subsets after chemotherapy is still lacking.Methods: The tumor specimens
of 56 breast cancer patients who did not receive PST and 16 breast cancer
patients who underwent surgical resection after anthracycline- or
anthracycline/taxane-based PST were analysed. We used the multi
-parametric flow cytometric platform (optimized for 20 colors for each
panel of T cells, B cells, NK, and other Lineage markers detection) to
accomplish the purpose. The result is more objective and estimated
parameter is more abundant compared to the histological methods
(hematoxylin-eosin staining and immunohistochemical staining). Breast
cancer patients can be divided into low, medium and high infiltration
group according to the CD45+ number in the tissue and weight of the tumor
specimens. TIL subset composition is compared among different groups (Low
vs Medium vs High, Chemotherapy vs non Chemotherapy).Result: In patients
with ER- and high histological grade patients, there are more TILs
infiltration compared to the ER+ and low histological grade patients (P =
0.038 and P = 0.039 respectively). And we found that the percentage of
CD4+T cells in total CD3+T cells, Treg in CD4+T cells and Plasmablasts in
total B cells is much higher in the high infiltration group compared to
the low infiltration group (56.03% vs 44.21%, PBackgroud: High
tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes(TILs)are known to be associated with
response to primary systemic therapy (PST) in breast cancer patients
especially in Her2+ and triple negative patients. However, the
composition of TILs in the high infiltration group is largely unknown.
Uncovering the immunodynamic composition of TILs may be useful for better
understanding the mechanism how the TILs exert effect. And the immune
reservoir data for extensive analysis of altered TIL subsets after
chemotherapy is still lacking.Methods: The tumor specimens of 56 breast
cancer patients who did not receive PST and 16 breast cancer patients who
underwent surgical resection after anthracycline- or
anthracycline/taxane-based PST were analysed. We used the multi
-parametric flow cytometric platform (optimized for 20 colors for each
panel of T cells, B cells, NK, and other Lineage markers detection) to
accomplish the purpose. The result is more objective and estimated
parameter is more abundant compared to the histological methods
(hematoxylin-eosin staining and immunohistochemical staining). Breast
cancer patients can be divided into low, medium and high infiltration
group according to the CD45+ number in the tissue and weight of the tumor
specimens. TIL subset composition is compared among different groups (Low
vs Medium vs High, Chemotherapy vs non Chemotherapy).Result: In patients
with ER- and high histological grade patients, there are more TILs
infiltration compared to the ER+ and low histological grade patients (P =
0.038 and P = 0.039 respectively). And we found that the percentage of
CD4+T cells in total CD3+T cells, Treg in CD4+T cells and Plasmablasts in
total B cells is much higher in the high infiltration group compared to
the low infiltration group (56.03% vs 44.21%, P<0.01; 18.64% vs 9.37%,
PBackgroud: High tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes(TILs)are known to be
associated with response to primary systemic therapy (PST) in breast
cancer patients especially in Her2+ and triple negative patients.
However, the composition of TILs in the high infiltration group is
largely unknown. Uncovering the immunodynamic composition of TILs may be
useful for better understanding the mechanism how the TILs exert effect.
And the immune reservoir data for extensive analysis of altered TIL
subsets after chemotherapy is still lacking.Methods: The tumor specimens
of 56 breast cancer patients who did not receive PST and 16 breast cancer
patients who underwent surgical resection after anthracycline- or
anthracycline/taxane-based PST were analysed. We used the multi
-parametric flow cytometric platform (optimized for 20 colors for each
panel of T cells, B cells, NK, and other Lineage markers detection) to
accomplish the purpose. The result is more objective and estimated
parameter is more abundant compared to the histological methods
(hematoxylin-eosin staining and immunohistochemical staining). Breast
cancer patients can be divided into low, medium and high infiltration
group according to the CD45+ number in the tissue and weight of the tumor
specimens. TIL subset composition is compared among different groups (Low
vs Medium vs High, Chemotherapy vs non Chemotherapy).Result: In patients
with ER- and high histological grade patients, there are more TILs
infiltration compared to the ER+ and low histological grade patients (P =
0.038 and P = 0.039 respectively). And we found that the percentage of
CD4+T cells in total CD3+T cells, Treg in CD4+T cells and Plasmablasts in
total B cells is much higher in the high infiltration group compared to
the low infiltration group (56.03% vs 44.21%, P<0.01; 18.64% vs 9.37%,
P<0.001; 16.75% vs 1.88%, PBackgroud: High tumor-infiltrating
lymphocytes(TILs)are known to be associated with response to primary
systemic therapy (PST) in breast cancer patients especially in Her2+ and
triple negative patients. However, the composition of TILs in the high
infiltration group is largely unknown. Uncovering the immunodynamic
composition of TILs may be useful for better understanding the mechanism
how the TILs exert effect. And the immune reservoir data for extensive
analysis of altered TIL subsets after chemotherapy is still
lacking.Methods: The tumor specimens of 56 breast cancer patients who did
not receive PST and 16 breast cancer patients who underwent surgical
resection after anthracycline- or anthracycline/taxane-based PST were
analysed. We used the multi -parametric flow cytometric platform
(optimized for 20 colors for each panel of T cells, B cells, NK, and
other Lineage markers detection) to accomplish the purpose. The result is
more objective and estimated parameter is more abundant compared to the
histological methods (hematoxylin-eosin staining and immunohistochemical
staining). Breast cancer patients can be divided into low, medium and
high infiltration group according to the CD45+ number in the tissue and
weight of the tumor specimens. TIL subset composition is compared among
different groups (Low vs Medium vs High, Chemotherapy vs non
Chemotherapy).Result: In patients with ER- and high histological grade
patients, there are more TILs infiltration compared to the ER+ and low
histological grade patients (P = 0.038 and P = 0.039 respectively). And
we found that the percentage of CD4+T cells in total CD3+T cells, Treg in
CD4+T cells and Plasmablasts in total B cells is much higher in the high
infiltration group compared to the low infiltration group (56.03% vs
44.21%, P<0.01; 18.64% vs 9.37%, P<0.001; 16.75% vs 1.88%, P<0.001
respectively). By contrast, percentage of CD8+T in total CD3+T cells and
NK cells in the total lymphocytes is much lower (35.26% vs 46.71%,
PBackgroud: High tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes(TILs)are known to be
associated with response to primary systemic therapy (PST) in breast
cancer patients especially in Her2+ and triple negative patients.
However, the composition of TILs in the high infiltration group is
largely unknown. Uncovering the immunodynamic composition of TILs may be
useful for better understanding the mechanism how the TILs exert effect.
And the immune reservoir data for extensive analysis of altered TIL
subsets after chemotherapy is still lacking.Methods: The tumor specimens
of 56 breast cancer patients who did not receive PST and 16 breast cancer
patients who underwent surgical resection after anthracycline- or
anthracycline/taxane-based PST were analysed. We used the multi
-parametric flow cytometric platform (optimized for 20 colors for each
panel of T cells, B cells, NK, and other Lineage markers detection) to
accomplish the purpose. The result is more objective and estimated
parameter is more abundant compared to the histological methods
(hematoxylin-eosin staining and immunohistochemical staining). Breast
cancer patients can be divided into low, medium and high infiltration
group according to the CD45+ number in the tissue and weight of the tumor
specimens. TIL subset composition is compared among different groups (Low
vs Medium vs High, Chemotherapy vs non Chemotherapy).Result: In patients
with ER- and high histological grade patients, there are more TILs
infiltration compared to the ER+ and low histological grade patients (P =
0.038 and P = 0.039 respectively). And we found that the percentage of
CD4+T cells in total CD3+T cells, Treg in CD4+T cells and Plasmablasts in
total B cells is much higher in the high infiltration group compared to
the low infiltration group (56.03% vs 44.21%, P<0.01; 18.64% vs 9.37%,
P<0.001; 16.75% vs 1.88%, P<0.001 respectively). By contrast, percentage
of CD8+T in total CD3+T cells and NK cells in the total lymphocytes is
much lower (35.26% vs 46.71%, P<0.001; 2.74% vs 5.88%, PBackgroud: High
tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes(TILs)are known to be associated with
response to primary systemic therapy (PST) in breast cancer patients
especially in Her2+ and triple negative patients. However, the
composition of TILs in the high infiltration group is largely unknown.
Uncovering the immunodynamic composition of TILs may be useful for better
understanding the mechanism how the TILs exert effect. And the immune
reservoir data for extensive analysis of altered TIL subsets after
chemotherapy is still lacking.Methods: The tumor specimens of 56 breast
cancer patients who did not receive PST and 16 breast cancer patients who
underwent surgical resection after anthracycline- or
anthracycline/taxane-based PST were analysed. We used the multi
-parametric flow cytometric platform (optimized for 20 colors for each
panel of T cells, B cells, NK, and other Lineage markers detection) to
accomplish the purpose. The result is more objective and estimated
parameter is more abundant compared to the histological methods
(hematoxylin-eosin staining and immunohistochemical staining). Breast
cancer patients can be divided into low, medium and high infiltration
group according to the CD45+ number in the tissue and weight of the tumor
specimens. TIL subset composition is compared among different groups (Low
vs Medium vs High, Chemotherapy vs non Chemotherapy).Result: In patients
with ER- and high histological grade patients, there are more TILs
infiltration compared to the ER+ and low histological grade patients (P =
0.038 and P = 0.039 respectively). And we found that the percentage of
CD4+T cells in total CD3+T cells, Treg in CD4+T cells and Plasmablasts in
total B cells is much higher in the high infiltration group compared to
the low infiltration group (56.03% vs 44.21%, P<0.01; 18.64% vs 9.37%,
P<0.001; 16.75% vs 1.88%, P<0.001 respectively). By contrast, percentage
of CD8+T in total CD3+T cells and NK cells in the total lymphocytes is
much lower (35.26% vs 46.71%, P<0.001; 2.74% vs 5.88%, P<0.01
respectively). After PST both the percentage of CD8+T in total CD3+T
cells and effector memory CD8+T cells increase heavily (53.82% vs 41.14%,
PBackgroud: High tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes(TILs)are known to be
associated with response to primary systemic therapy (PST) in breast
cancer patients especially in Her2+ and triple negative patients.
However, the composition of TILs in the high infiltration group is
largely unknown. Uncovering the immunodynamic composition of TILs may be
useful for better understanding the mechanism how the TILs exert effect.
And the immune reservoir data for extensive analysis of altered TIL
subsets after chemotherapy is still lacking.Methods: The tumor specimens
of 56 breast cancer patients who did not receive PST and 16 breast cancer
patients who underwent surgical resection after anthracycline- or
anthracycline/taxane-based PST were analysed. We used the multi
-parametric flow cytometric platform (optimized for 20 colors for each
panel of T cells, B cells, NK, and other Lineage markers detection) to
accomplish the purpose. The result is more objective and estimated
parameter is more abundant compared to the histological methods
(hematoxylin-eosin staining and immunohistochemical staining). Breast
cancer patients can be divided into low, medium and high infiltration
group according to the CD45+ number in the tissue and weight of the tumor
specimens. TIL subset composition is compared among different groups (Low
vs Medium vs High, Chemotherapy vs non Chemotherapy).Result: In patients
with ER- and high histological grade patients, there are more TILs
infiltration compared to the ER+ and low histological grade patients (P =
0.038 and P = 0.039 respectively). And we found that the percentage of
CD4+T cells in total CD3+T cells, Treg in CD4+T cells and Plasmablasts in
total B cells is much higher in the high infiltration group compared to
the low infiltration group (56.03% vs 44.21%, P<0.01; 18.64% vs 9.37%,
P<0.001; 16.75% vs 1.88%, P<0.001 respectively). By contrast, percentage
of CD8+T in total CD3+T cells and NK cells in the total lymphocytes is
much lower (35.26% vs 46.71%, P<0.001; 2.74% vs 5.88%, P<0.01
respectively). After PST both the percentage of CD8+T in total CD3+T
cells and effector memory CD8+T cells increase heavily (53.82% vs 41.14%,
P<0.001; 79.49% vs70.88%, PBackgroud: High tumor-infiltrating
lymphocytes(TILs)are known to be associated with response to primary
systemic therapy (PST) in breast cancer patients especially in Her2+ and
triple negative patients. However, the composition of TILs in the high
infiltration group is largely unknown. Uncovering the immunodynamic
composition of TILs may be useful for better understanding the mechanism
how the TILs exert effect. And the immune reservoir data for extensive
analysis of altered TIL subsets after chemotherapy is still
lacking.Methods: The tumor specimens of 56 breast cancer patients who did
not receive PST and 16 breast cancer patients who underwent surgical
resection after anthracycline- or anthracycline/taxane-based PST were
analysed. We used the multi -parametric flow cytometric platform
(optimized for 20 colors for each panel of T cells, B cells, NK, and
other Lineage markers detection) to accomplish the purpose. The result is
more objective and estimated parameter is more abundant compared to the
histological methods (hematoxylin-eosin staining and immunohistochemical
staining). Breast cancer patients can be divided into low, medium and
high infiltration group according to the CD45+ number in the tissue and
weight of the tumor specimens. TIL subset composition is compared among
different groups (Low vs Medium vs High, Chemotherapy vs non
Chemotherapy).Result: In patients with ER- and high histological grade
patients, there are more TILs infiltration compared to the ER+ and low
histological grade patients (P = 0.038 and P = 0.039 respectively). And
we found that the percentage of CD4+T cells in total CD3+T cells, Treg in
CD4+T cells and Plasmablasts in total B cells is much higher in the high
infiltration group compared to the low infiltration group (56.03% vs
44.21%, P<0.01; 18.64% vs 9.37%, P<0.001; 16.75% vs 1.88%, P<0.001
respectively). By contrast, percentage of CD8+T in total CD3+T cells and
NK cells in the total lymphocytes is much lower (35.26% vs 46.71%,
P<0.001; 2.74% vs 5.88%, P<0.01 respectively). After PST both the
percentage of CD8+T in total CD3+T cells and effector memory CD8+T cells
increase heavily (53.82% vs 41.14%, P<0.001; 79.49% vs70.88%, P<0.05
respectively) and percentage of CD4+T cells in total CD3+T and nave CD8+T
cells decrease (31.81% vs 50.35%, PBackgroud: High tumor-infiltrating
lymphocytes(TILs)are known to be associated with response to primary
systemic therapy (PST) in breast cancer patients especially in Her2+ and
triple negative patients. However, the composition of TILs in the high
infiltration group is largely unknown. Uncovering the immunodynamic
composition of TILs may be useful for better understanding the mechanism
how the TILs exert effect. And the immune reservoir data for extensive
analysis of altered TIL subsets after chemotherapy is still
lacking.Methods: The tumor specimens of 56 breast cancer patients who did
not receive PST and 16 breast cancer patients who underwent surgical
resection after anthracycline- or anthracycline/taxane-based PST were
analysed. We used the multi -parametric flow cytometric platform
(optimized for 20 colors for each panel of T cells, B cells, NK, and
other Lineage markers detection) to accomplish the purpose. The result is
more objective and estimated parameter is more abundant compared to the
histological methods (hematoxylin-eosin staining and immunohistochemical
staining). Breast cancer patients can be divided into low, medium and
high infiltration group according to the CD45+ number in the tissue and
weight of the tumor specimens. TIL subset composition is compared among
different groups (Low vs Medium vs High, Chemotherapy vs non
Chemotherapy).Result: In patients with ER- and high histological grade
patients, there are more TILs infiltration compared to the ER+ and low
histological grade patients (P = 0.038 and P = 0.039 respectively). And
we found that the percentage of CD4+T cells in total CD3+T cells, Treg in
CD4+T cells and Plasmablasts in total B cells is much higher in the high
infiltration group compared to the low infiltration group (56.03% vs
44.21%, P<0.01; 18.64% vs 9.37%, P<0.001; 16.75% vs 1.88%, P<0.001
respectively). By contrast, percentage of CD8+T in total CD3+T cells and
NK cells in the total lymphocytes is much lower (35.26% vs 46.71%,
P<0.001; 2.74% vs 5.88%, P<0.01 respectively). After PST both the
percentage of CD8+T in total CD3+T cells and effector memory CD8+T cells
increase heavily (53.82% vs 41.14%, P<0.001; 79.49% vs70.88%, P<0.05
respectively) and percentage of CD4+T cells in total CD3+T and nave CD8+T
cells decrease (31.81% vs 50.35%, P<0.001; 2.81% vs 4.21%, PBackgroud:
High tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes(TILs)are known to be associated with
response to primary systemic therapy (PST) in breast cancer patients
especially in Her2+ and triple negative patients. However, the
composition of TILs in the high infiltration group is largely unknown.
Uncovering the immunodynamic composition of TILs may be useful for better
understanding the mechanism how the TILs exert effect. And the immune
reservoir data for extensive analysis of altered TIL subsets after
chemotherapy is still lacking.Methods: The tumor specimens of 56 breast
cancer patients who did not receive PST and 16 breast cancer patients who
underwent surgical resection after anthracycline- or
anthracycline/taxane-based PST were analysed. We used the multi
-parametric flow cytometric platform (optimized for 20 colors for each
panel of T cells, B cells, NK, and other Lineage markers detection) to
accomplish the purpose. The result is more objective and estimated
parameter is more abundant compared to the histological methods
(hematoxylin-eosin staining and immunohistochemical staining). Breast
cancer patients can be divided into low, medium and high infiltration
group according to the CD45+ number in the tissue and weight of the tumor
specimens. TIL subset composition is compared among different groups (Low
vs Medium vs High, Chemotherapy vs non Chemotherapy).Result: In patients
with ER- and high histological grade patients, there are more TILs
infiltration compared to the ER+ and low histological grade patients (P =
0.038 and P = 0.039 respectively). And we found that the percentage of
CD4+T cells in total CD3+T cells, Treg in CD4+T cells and Plasmablasts in
total B cells is much higher in the high infiltration group compared to
the low infiltration group (56.03% vs 44.21%, P<0.01; 18.64% vs 9.37%,
P<0.001; 16.75% vs 1.88%, P<0.001 respectively). By contrast, percentage
of CD8+T in total CD3+T cells and NK cells in the total lymphocytes is
much lower (35.26% vs 46.71%, P<0.001; 2.74% vs 5.88%, P<0.01
respectively). After PST both the percentage of CD8+T in total CD3+T
cells and effector memory CD8+T cells increase heavily (53.82% vs 41.14%,
P<0.001; 79.49% vs70.88%, P<0.05 respectively) and percentage of CD4+T
cells in total CD3+T and nave CD8+T cells decrease (31.81% vs 50.35%,
P<0.001; 2.81% vs 4.21%, P<0.05 respectively). Functional markers such as
HLADR,CD28 and PD1 in the T cells decrease dramatically and CD127
increases noticeably.Conclusion: The inner composition of TIL subsets in
the high infiltration is largely different from low infiltration group
and this might help explain the reason why high TILs could predict
pathological complete response. Chemotherapy can lead to the heavy change
of TIL subsets and this may be the part of immunological mechanism that
why chemotherapy has deep influences on the tumor.

