Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Overexpression of enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) in
endometrial carcinoma: evidence from an NRG Oncology/Gynecologic Oncology
Group trial


Objectives: Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) is a histone
methyltransferase that mediates epigenetic silencing of tumor suppressor
genes. It is commonly over-expressed in several solid tumors and has been
shown to be a prognostic biomarker in breast, renal, and gastric cancers.
This study aims to investigate patterns of EZH2 expression in endometrial
cancer.Methods: Evaluation of expression of EZH2 was completed on both
early and advanced stage endometrioid adenocarcinoma tissues and a subset
of matched normal mullerian tissue samples, from participants enrolled in
GOG protocol 210, using real time reverse transcription polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR) and western blot (WB) analysis. Investigators were
blinded to clinical data. One-way ANOVA, F test and Fisher's exact test
were used to assess differences in log mRNA and protein expression
respectively with known clinical and pathologic prognostic factors.
Kaplan Meier survival analysis was used to evaluate differences in
progression free survival (PFS) based on EZH2 expression.Results:
Eight-seven specimens were analyzed including 60 tumors and 27 normal
tissue specimens. EZH2 mRNA and protein expression in tumor specimens was
significantly higher than in matched controls (paired t test, p
Objectives: Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) is a histone
methyltransferase that mediates epigenetic silencing of tumor suppressor
genes. It is commonly over-expressed in several solid tumors and has been
shown to be a prognostic biomarker in breast, renal, and gastric cancers.
This study aims to investigate patterns of EZH2 expression in endometrial
cancer.Methods: Evaluation of expression of EZH2 was completed on both
early and advanced stage endometrioid adenocarcinoma tissues and a subset
of matched normal mullerian tissue samples, from participants enrolled in
GOG protocol 210, using real time reverse transcription polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR) and western blot (WB) analysis. Investigators were
blinded to clinical data. One-way ANOVA, F test and Fisher's exact test
were used to assess differences in log mRNA and protein expression
respectively with known clinical and pathologic prognostic factors.
Kaplan Meier survival analysis was used to evaluate differences in
progression free survival (PFS) based on EZH2 expression.Results:
Eight-seven specimens were analyzed including 60 tumors and 27 normal
tissue specimens. EZH2 mRNA and protein expression in tumor specimens was
significantly higher than in matched controls (paired t test, p < 0.001).
EZH2 expression was associated with lympho-vascular space invasion (p =
0.044) but other clinical and pathologic factors including age, stage,
grade, nodal involvement or disease status were not associated with
significant differences in expression. However, there does appear to be a
trend towards decreased progression free survival among patients with
increased EZH2 expression levels.Conclusions: Our results confirm that
there is differential expression of EZH2 in uterine cancers compared to
normal tissues and suggests a potential role of the EZH2 as prognostic
marker of aggressive disease in patients with endometrial cancer. In view
of the substantial portion of early stage low grade tumors expressing
EZH2, it will be interesting to investigate if increased EZH2 protein
levels may also have therapeutic implications, since targeted inhibition
of EZH2 expression has been shown to repress tumor cell growth in other
solid malignancies. Further investigation into this potential prognostic
biomarker and therapeutic target is warranted.

