Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comprehensive molecular characterization of 412 muscle-invasive
urothelial bladder carcinomas: final analysis of The Cancer Genome Atlas
(TCGA) project


Introduction: In 2014, TCGA's Bladder Cancer Working Group presented a
preliminary integrated molecular analysis of 131 muscle-invasive
urothelial carcinomas (Nature 507:315, 2014). We now report on the entire
cohort of 412 fresh-frozen, chemotherapy-nave tumors. Included in the
analysis were paired blood and/or tumor-adjacent tissue samples. This is
the largest sequencing project on bladder cancer to date. After strict
clinical and pathologic quality control, tumors were analyzed for DNA
copy number variants, somatic mutations, DNA methylation, mRNA, microRNA
and (phospho-) protein expression, transcript splicing, gene fusions,
viral integration, APOBEC mutagenesis, pathway perturbation, clinical
correlates, and histopathology.Results: There was a high overall somatic
mutation rate (8.0/Mb), with a median of 245 and mean of 348
coding-region mutations per sample. That is the third highest mutation
rate among the cancer types profiled by TCGA (after cutaneous melanoma
and non-small cell lung cancers). We identified 54 genes as significantly
mutated, compared with 32 in the original report on 131 tumors. TP53
mutations were the most common (49%), and also quite common were
mutations in a number of chromatin-modifying genes, including MLL2 (29%),
KDM6A (26%), ARID1A (25%), MLL3 (19%), EP300 (15%), CREBBP (12%), and MLL
(11%). Other cancer-related genes showing frequent mutations included
PIK3CA (22%), RB1 (17%), FGFR3 (14%), STAG2 (14%), ATM (14%), ELF3 (12%),
FAT1 (12%), SPTAN1 (12%), ERBB2 (12%), ERBB3 (11%), ASXL2 (10%), ERCC2
(9%), CDKN1A (9%), TSC1 (8%), CDKN2A (7%), RHOB (6%), NFE2L2 (6%), PARD3
(6%), FAM47C (5%), RBM10 (5%),HRAS (5%), KRAS (4%), and PTEN (3%). High
mutation burden was associated with improved outcome (p = 0.0004). APOBEC
mutagenesis explained 70% of the mutation burden and was associated with
survival. Gene silencing by promoter hypermethylation was identified in
167 genes with at least 5% frequency in the cohort. The previously
identified four mRNA expression subtypes were again found in the complete
set of 412 tumors, and the proportions of samples in each subtype were
similar to the previous proportions. Reverse-phase proteomic array
analysis of 344 of the samples revealed clusters associated with
diagnostic subtype, pathological stage, and grade but not with smoking
history or non-muscle invasive status.Conclusions: This integrated
molecular analysis of 412 TCGA tumor samples largely validates and
considerably extends observations from the initial cohort of 131
patients. The larger cohort significantly increased our power to detect
lower-frequency aberrations that were not identified in the original
cohort. The results provide a robust basis for further functional studies
of bladder cancer biology and also provide additional incisive
information for the identification of molecular targets for therapy.

