Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Stratification of metastatic colorectal cancer patients using DNA
and RNA sequencing and in-silico prediction of tumor antigens for
consideration in immunotherapy


Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the third most common type of cancer in the
United States. Although chemotherapy, radiation and targeted therapies
can improve survival rates, recent studies have shown the potential
benefit of immunotherapies to improve outcomes for patients with advanced
CRC. Targeted therapies that use monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) to EGFR
have been shown to benefit some CRC patients. Until recently, KRAS has
been the only predictive biomarker for anti-EGFR therapy for metastatic
CRC. However, 40% to 60% of patients with wild-type KRAS do not respond
to anti-EGFR therapy. Therefore, to accurately predict patients response
to treatments and improve clinical outcomes, additional prediction and
treatment methods are imperative. One of the many efforts to improve
prediction for CRC patient's response to the anti-EGFR therapy is the
development of gene expression based RAS signature scores for
identification of RAS activated tumors independent of mutations in the
KRAS gene. Recently there have been major advances in immunotherapeutic
approaches in a wide variety of cancers. In solid tumors such as melanoma
and colon cancers, immune checkpoints have been shown to improve clinical
outcomes. There is considerable effort being placed on combinations of
targeted therapy and immunotherapies to improve responses for these
cancers. Similarly, since no single treatment can apply to all CRC
patients, we aim to stratify patients using a combination of three
methods: 1. RAS signature score based on the expression profile of 18
genes. This RAS signature score enables measurements of mitogen-activated
protein/extracellular signal-regulated kinase (MEK) pathway functional
output independent of tumor genotype. 2. Expression profile of immune
checkpoint inhibitor target genes, such as PD1 and PDL1, and 3. In-silico
prediction of neo-antigens and peptide binding affinity between tumor
antigens derived from mutations and human HLA alleles.55 FFPE samples
were selected from a cohort of 468 samples with matching FF samples.
These 55 samples have about 1:1:1 ratio of high, medium and low RAS
scores. Here we showed our ability to obtain RAS signature scores with
concordant results using different platforms including RNA-seq, targeted
RNA-seq, Nanostring and Affymetrix microarray. Samples that have RAS
activating mutations such as KRAS and BRAF have significant higher RAS
scores (pColorectal cancer (CRC) is the third most common type of cancer
in the United States. Although chemotherapy, radiation and targeted
therapies can improve survival rates, recent studies have shown the
potential benefit of immunotherapies to improve outcomes for patients
with advanced CRC. Targeted therapies that use monoclonal antibodies
(mAbs) to EGFR have been shown to benefit some CRC patients. Until
recently, KRAS has been the only predictive biomarker for anti-EGFR
therapy for metastatic CRC. However, 40% to 60% of patients with
wild-type KRAS do not respond to anti-EGFR therapy. Therefore, to
accurately predict patients response to treatments and improve clinical
outcomes, additional prediction and treatment methods are imperative. One
of the many efforts to improve prediction for CRC patient's response to
the anti-EGFR therapy is the development of gene expression based RAS
signature scores for identification of RAS activated tumors independent
of mutations in the KRAS gene. Recently there have been major advances in
immunotherapeutic approaches in a wide variety of cancers. In solid
tumors such as melanoma and colon cancers, immune checkpoints have been
shown to improve clinical outcomes. There is considerable effort being
placed on combinations of targeted therapy and immunotherapies to improve
responses for these cancers. Similarly, since no single treatment can
apply to all CRC patients, we aim to stratify patients using a
combination of three methods: 1. RAS signature score based on the
expression profile of 18 genes. This RAS signature score enables
measurements of mitogen-activated protein/extracellular signal-regulated
kinase (MEK) pathway functional output independent of tumor genotype. 2.
Expression profile of immune checkpoint inhibitor target genes, such as
PD1 and PDL1, and 3. In-silico prediction of neo-antigens and peptide
binding affinity between tumor antigens derived from mutations and human
HLA alleles.55 FFPE samples were selected from a cohort of 468 samples
with matching FF samples. These 55 samples have about 1:1:1 ratio of
high, medium and low RAS scores. Here we showed our ability to obtain RAS
signature scores with concordant results using different platforms
including RNA-seq, targeted RNA-seq, Nanostring and Affymetrix
microarray. Samples that have RAS activating mutations such as KRAS and
BRAF have significant higher RAS scores (p<0.001). Interestingly,
expression of PD-L1 was significantly lower in tumor samples harboring
mutations of genes such as MET, PTEN, NRAS, FBXW7, and GNAS.
Kruskal-Wallis test showed that the expression of PD-L1 was significantly
lower in samples with higher RAS signature scores (pColorectal cancer
(CRC) is the third most common type of cancer in the United States.
Although chemotherapy, radiation and targeted therapies can improve
survival rates, recent studies have shown the potential benefit of
immunotherapies to improve outcomes for patients with advanced CRC.
Targeted therapies that use monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) to EGFR have
been shown to benefit some CRC patients. Until recently, KRAS has been
the only predictive biomarker for anti-EGFR therapy for metastatic CRC.
However, 40% to 60% of patients with wild-type KRAS do not respond to
anti-EGFR therapy. Therefore, to accurately predict patients response to
treatments and improve clinical outcomes, additional prediction and
treatment methods are imperative. One of the many efforts to improve
prediction for CRC patient's response to the anti-EGFR therapy is the
development of gene expression based RAS signature scores for
identification of RAS activated tumors independent of mutations in the
KRAS gene. Recently there have been major advances in immunotherapeutic
approaches in a wide variety of cancers. In solid tumors such as melanoma
and colon cancers, immune checkpoints have been shown to improve clinical
outcomes. There is considerable effort being placed on combinations of
targeted therapy and immunotherapies to improve responses for these
cancers. Similarly, since no single treatment can apply to all CRC
patients, we aim to stratify patients using a combination of three
methods: 1. RAS signature score based on the expression profile of 18
genes. This RAS signature score enables measurements of mitogen-activated
protein/extracellular signal-regulated kinase (MEK) pathway functional
output independent of tumor genotype. 2. Expression profile of immune
checkpoint inhibitor target genes, such as PD1 and PDL1, and 3. In-silico
prediction of neo-antigens and peptide binding affinity between tumor
antigens derived from mutations and human HLA alleles.55 FFPE samples
were selected from a cohort of 468 samples with matching FF samples.
These 55 samples have about 1:1:1 ratio of high, medium and low RAS
scores. Here we showed our ability to obtain RAS signature scores with
concordant results using different platforms including RNA-seq, targeted
RNA-seq, Nanostring and Affymetrix microarray. Samples that have RAS
activating mutations such as KRAS and BRAF have significant higher RAS
scores (p<0.001). Interestingly, expression of PD-L1 was significantly
lower in tumor samples harboring mutations of genes such as MET, PTEN,
NRAS, FBXW7, and GNAS. Kruskal-Wallis test showed that the expression of
PD-L1 was significantly lower in samples with higher RAS signature scores
(p<0.05). Combined with further prediction of tumor antigen derived from
genes with missense mutations, we provide a combinatorial method for
stratifying metastatic CRC patients.

