Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Large-scale evaluation of SLC18A2 in prostate cancer reveals
diagnostic and prognostic biomarker potential at three molecular levels


Limitations of current diagnostic and prognostic tools for prostate
cancer (PC) contribute to over-diagnosis and over-treatment. Here, we
investigate the biomarker potential of the SLC18A2 (VMAT2) gene for PC at
three molecular levels. Thus, SLC18A2 promoter methylation was analyzed
in 767 malignant and 78 benign radical prostatectomy (RP) samples using
methylation-specific qPCR and Illumina 450K methylation microarray data.
SLC18A2 transcript levels were assessed in 412 malignant and 45 benign RP
samples using RNAseq data. SLC18A2 protein was evaluated by
immunohistochemistry in 502 malignant and 305 benign RP samples.
Cancer-specificity of molecular changes was tested using Mann-Whitney U
tests and/or receiver operating characteristic (ROC) analyses. Log rank,
uni- and multivariate Cox regression tests were used for survival
analyses. We found that SLC18A2 promoter hypermethylation was highly
cancer-specific (area under the curve (AUC): 0.923-0.976) and associated
with biochemical recurrence (BCR) after RP in univariate analyses.
SLC18A2 transcript levels were reduced in PC and had independent
prognostic value for BCR after RP (multivariate HR 0.13, PLimitations of
current diagnostic and prognostic tools for prostate cancer (PC)
contribute to over-diagnosis and over-treatment. Here, we investigate the
biomarker potential of the SLC18A2 (VMAT2) gene for PC at three molecular
levels. Thus, SLC18A2 promoter methylation was analyzed in 767 malignant
and 78 benign radical prostatectomy (RP) samples using
methylation-specific qPCR and Illumina 450K methylation microarray data.
SLC18A2 transcript levels were assessed in 412 malignant and 45 benign RP
samples using RNAseq data. SLC18A2 protein was evaluated by
immunohistochemistry in 502 malignant and 305 benign RP samples.
Cancer-specificity of molecular changes was tested using Mann-Whitney U
tests and/or receiver operating characteristic (ROC) analyses. Log rank,
uni- and multivariate Cox regression tests were used for survival
analyses. We found that SLC18A2 promoter hypermethylation was highly
cancer-specific (area under the curve (AUC): 0.923-0.976) and associated
with biochemical recurrence (BCR) after RP in univariate analyses.
SLC18A2 transcript levels were reduced in PC and had independent
prognostic value for BCR after RP (multivariate HR 0.13, P<0.05).
Likewise, SLC18A2 protein was down-regulated in PC (AUC 0.898) and had
independent prognostic value for BCR (multivariate HR 0.51, PLimitations
of current diagnostic and prognostic tools for prostate cancer (PC)
contribute to over-diagnosis and over-treatment. Here, we investigate the
biomarker potential of the SLC18A2 (VMAT2) gene for PC at three molecular
levels. Thus, SLC18A2 promoter methylation was analyzed in 767 malignant
and 78 benign radical prostatectomy (RP) samples using
methylation-specific qPCR and Illumina 450K methylation microarray data.
SLC18A2 transcript levels were assessed in 412 malignant and 45 benign RP
samples using RNAseq data. SLC18A2 protein was evaluated by
immunohistochemistry in 502 malignant and 305 benign RP samples.
Cancer-specificity of molecular changes was tested using Mann-Whitney U
tests and/or receiver operating characteristic (ROC) analyses. Log rank,
uni- and multivariate Cox regression tests were used for survival
analyses. We found that SLC18A2 promoter hypermethylation was highly
cancer-specific (area under the curve (AUC): 0.923-0.976) and associated
with biochemical recurrence (BCR) after RP in univariate analyses.
SLC18A2 transcript levels were reduced in PC and had independent
prognostic value for BCR after RP (multivariate HR 0.13, P<0.05).
Likewise, SLC18A2 protein was down-regulated in PC (AUC 0.898) and had
independent prognostic value for BCR (multivariate HR 0.51, P<0.05).
Reduced SLC18A2 protein expression was also associated with poor overall
survival in univariate analysis (HR 0.29, PLimitations of current
diagnostic and prognostic tools for prostate cancer (PC) contribute to
over-diagnosis and over-treatment. Here, we investigate the biomarker
potential of the SLC18A2 (VMAT2) gene for PC at three molecular levels.
Thus, SLC18A2 promoter methylation was analyzed in 767 malignant and 78
benign radical prostatectomy (RP) samples using methylation-specific qPCR
and Illumina 450K methylation microarray data. SLC18A2 transcript levels
were assessed in 412 malignant and 45 benign RP samples using RNAseq
data. SLC18A2 protein was evaluated by immunohistochemistry in 502
malignant and 305 benign RP samples. Cancer-specificity of molecular
changes was tested using Mann-Whitney U tests and/or receiver operating
characteristic (ROC) analyses. Log rank, uni- and multivariate Cox
regression tests were used for survival analyses. We found that SLC18A2
promoter hypermethylation was highly cancer-specific (area under the
curve (AUC): 0.923-0.976) and associated with biochemical recurrence
(BCR) after RP in univariate analyses. SLC18A2 transcript levels were
reduced in PC and had independent prognostic value for BCR after RP
(multivariate HR 0.13, P<0.05). Likewise, SLC18A2 protein was
down-regulated in PC (AUC 0.898) and had independent prognostic value for
BCR (multivariate HR 0.51, P<0.05). Reduced SLC18A2 protein expression
was also associated with poor overall survival in univariate analysis (HR
0.29, P<0.05).Our results highlight SLC18A2 methylation as a new
promising biomarker candidate for PC diagnosis. Furthermore, both SLC18A2
RNA and protein expression showed promising prognostic potential beyond
routine clinicopathological variables. Thus, novel SLC18A2-based
molecular tests could have useful future applications for PC detection
and identification of high-risk patients.

