Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Diagnostic and prognostic value of expression of CCND1 splice
variant cyclin D1b in papillary thyroid carcinoma


Background: An active cyclin D1 isoform, cyclin D1b, arises as a result
of a failure to splice the fourth intron of the CCND1 pre-mRNA
transcript. The expression of cyclin D1b has been associated with
tumorigenesis and tumor progression in many types of human cancer.
However, no studies with cyclin D1b have yet been reported in the thyroid
cancer.Methods: We investigated the CCND1 rs9344 (cDNA 870) polymorphism
by TaqMan SNP genotyping assay and expression profiles of mRNA and
protein of full-length cyclin D1 (cyclin D1a) and cyclin D1b by
quantative real-time PCR and immunohistochemistry in 286 thyroid tumors
including 16 nodular hyperplasias, 33 follicular adenomas (FA), 179
papillary thyroid carcinomas (PTC), 32 follicular thyroid carcinomas
(FTC), 5 poorly differentiated carcinomas (PDC), 4 anaplastic thyroid
carcinomas (ATC), and 17 medullary thyroid carcinomas (MTC). The
relationships between cyclin D1 expression levels and clinicopathological
features were analyzed.Results: The cyclinD1b mRNA expression level in
all thyroid tumors was significantly higher in the AA and GA genotype
groups compared with the GG genotype group (pBackground: An active cyclin
D1 isoform, cyclin D1b, arises as a result of a failure to splice the
fourth intron of the CCND1 pre-mRNA transcript. The expression of cyclin
D1b has been associated with tumorigenesis and tumor progression in many
types of human cancer. However, no studies with cyclin D1b have yet been
reported in the thyroid cancer.Methods: We investigated the CCND1 rs9344
(cDNA 870) polymorphism by TaqMan SNP genotyping assay and expression
profiles of mRNA and protein of full-length cyclin D1 (cyclin D1a) and
cyclin D1b by quantative real-time PCR and immunohistochemistry in 286
thyroid tumors including 16 nodular hyperplasias, 33 follicular adenomas
(FA), 179 papillary thyroid carcinomas (PTC), 32 follicular thyroid
carcinomas (FTC), 5 poorly differentiated carcinomas (PDC), 4 anaplastic
thyroid carcinomas (ATC), and 17 medullary thyroid carcinomas (MTC). The
relationships between cyclin D1 expression levels and clinicopathological
features were analyzed.Results: The cyclinD1b mRNA expression level in
all thyroid tumors was significantly higher in the AA and GA genotype
groups compared with the GG genotype group (p<0.001 and p = 0.006,
respectively). The mRNA expression levels of cyclin D1b was significantly
higher in PTCs when compared to benign or other malignant tumors
(pBackground: An active cyclin D1 isoform, cyclin D1b, arises as a result
of a failure to splice the fourth intron of the CCND1 pre-mRNA
transcript. The expression of cyclin D1b has been associated with
tumorigenesis and tumor progression in many types of human cancer.
However, no studies with cyclin D1b have yet been reported in the thyroid
cancer.Methods: We investigated the CCND1 rs9344 (cDNA 870) polymorphism
by TaqMan SNP genotyping assay and expression profiles of mRNA and
protein of full-length cyclin D1 (cyclin D1a) and cyclin D1b by
quantative real-time PCR and immunohistochemistry in 286 thyroid tumors
including 16 nodular hyperplasias, 33 follicular adenomas (FA), 179
papillary thyroid carcinomas (PTC), 32 follicular thyroid carcinomas
(FTC), 5 poorly differentiated carcinomas (PDC), 4 anaplastic thyroid
carcinomas (ATC), and 17 medullary thyroid carcinomas (MTC). The
relationships between cyclin D1 expression levels and clinicopathological
features were analyzed.Results: The cyclinD1b mRNA expression level in
all thyroid tumors was significantly higher in the AA and GA genotype
groups compared with the GG genotype group (p<0.001 and p = 0.006,
respectively). The mRNA expression levels of cyclin D1b was significantly
higher in PTCs when compared to benign or other malignant tumors
(p<0.001) while no significant difference in cyclin D1a mRNA expression
was observed according to the genotypes or tumor types. PTCs showed
similar expression levels of cyclin D1b mRNA regardless of histologic
subtypes, even when compared with follicular variant. In
immunohistochemistry analysis, cyclin D1b overexpression was observed in
PTC, PDC, ATC, and MTC, but not in FA and FTC. Cytoplasmic overexpression
of cyclin D1b was significantly associated with advanced tumor stage in
all PTCs (p = 0.025). Nuclear overexpression of cyclin D1b was associated
with an increased incidence of lymph node metastases (p = 0.014) in
classic PTCs.Conclusion: The A allele of the rs9344 polymorphism
predisposes for cyclin D1b production in thyroid cancer. Cyclin D1b
overexpression has a diagnostic biomarker utility to differentiate PTC
from benign follicular nodules and may be functionally involved in the
progression of the disease.

