Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nestin expression is associated with a basal-like phenotype and
poor prognosis in breast cancer


Background:Nestin, neuroepitheilal stem cell protein, is an intermediate
filament protein first described in neural stem or progenitor cells, and
its expression has been seen in several tissues, including different
types of cancer.In breast cancer, Nestin expression has been linked to
the triple negative and basal-like phenotypes. We here evaluated Nestin
and its association with clinico-pathologic markers and survival in two
prospective Norwegian breast cancer cohorts.Materials and methods:Series
I includes 546 women (50-69 years) diagnosed with primary invasive breast
cancer (403 screen-detected and 143 interval cancers) as part of the
prospective and population-based Norwegian Breast Cancer Screening
Program (NBCSP) during 1996-2003 (Hordaland county).Series II includes
282 women (50-69 years) with invasive cancers (199 screen-detected and 83
interval cancers) diagnosed as part of the NBCSP during 2004-2009
(Vestfold County).Immunohistochemical staining of Nestin was done on
tissue microarrays (TMAs). Expression in tumor cells was graded by a
Staining Index (SI) (values 0-9).Results:Nestin positivity, observed in
9% and 13% of the breast cancer cases in Series I and II, was associated
with higher histological grade (OR, odds ratio 14.3 and 8.1), high tumor
cell proliferation by Ki-67 (OR 11.4 and 9.1), larger tumor diameter (OR
1.8 and 2.4), but not with lymph node status or HER2 status. Further,
Nestin positivity was associated with negativity for estrogen (OR 14.9
and 11.9) and progesterone receptor (8.5 and 3.4), the triple negative
phenotype (OR 29.1 and 17.4) and basal-like differentiation by positivity
for Cytokeratin 5 (OR 9.1 and 8.7) or P-cadherin (OR 7.0 and 8.5).By
univariate survival analysis, Nestin positivity was associated with
reduced breast cancer specific (p = 0.002 and p = 0.076) and overall
survival (p = 0.005 and p = 0.039). When including the standard variables
tumor size, histologic grade and lymph node status in a multivariate
analysis, Nestin was still significantly associated with reduced breast
cancer specific survival in the largest cohort (Series I).Conclusion:We
found that Nestin expression in breast cancer is associated with
aggressive features, the triple negative phenotype, basal-like
differentiation, and reduced breast cancer specific survival.

