Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ruxolitinib inhibits STAT-3 activation in glioblastoma


Glioblastoma (GBM), a primary Grade IV astrocytoma, is the most
aggressive primary brain cancer in humans. Despite combined radiotherapy
and chemotherapy, the median survival is 14 months. We and others have
validated that levels of phosphorylated JAK1/2 and STAT-3 are increased
in GBM tissues. When stimulated with IL-6 family members, JAK1/2 recruits
and phosphorylates STAT-3. Phosphorylated STAT-3 dimerizes and
translocates to the nucleus where it regulates genes involved in
proliferation, angiogenesis, anti-apoptotic activity and
immunosuppression. Elevated JAK/STAT activation is generated through an
increase in IL-6 family cytokines as well as a decrease in JAK/STAT-3
negative regulators. To therapeutically inhibit the JAK/STAT-3 pathway in
GBM we employed ruxolitinib, an FDA approved JAK1/JAK2 inhibitor. Human
GBM cell lines U87-MG and U251-MG, as well as patient derived GBM
xenograft lines JX6 and JX12, were treated with ruxolitinib in doses
ranging from 0.01 to 10 M. Ruxolitinib was observed to inhibit STAT-3
activation in a dose-dependent manner. Pre-treatment of U87-MG and
U251-MG cells with ruxolitinib inhibited stimulus-induced STAT-3
activation and downstream gene expression in a dose-dependent manner.
Future studies will examine ruxolitinib effects on migration, invasion,
apoptosis and proliferation in vitro. Collectively, these data indicate
the potential for ruxolitinib therapy for GBM patients.

