Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Resistin promotes tumor angiogenesis and lymphangiogenesis through
c-Src/PI3K/AKT signaling pathway in human chondrosarcoma cells


Chondrosarcoma is a kind of commonly found bone malignant tumor. The
development of distant metastasis often leads to a significant decline in
overall survival, and there are no specific therapeutic methods for it
until today. For tumors to metastasize, angiogenesis and
lymphangiogenesis are both important steps in the early periods. Resistin
was discovered as an adipocyte-secreting adipokine, which may play a
critical role in modulating cancer pathogenesis. However, the role of
resistin in the angiogenesis and lymphangiogenesis of human
chondrosarcoma is largely unknown. In our lab, we found that the
expression of resistin was higher in chondrosarcoma biopsy tissues than
in normal cartilage. We also confirmed that treated cells with resistin
increased VEGFA and VEGFC expression, promoting angiogenesis as well as
lymphangiogenesis in human chondrosarcoma cells. Moreover, the inhibitors
and siRNAs of c-Src, PI3K, and AKT reduced the resistin-increased cell
angiogenesis and lymphangiogenesis. Our results indicate that resistin
promotes chondrosarcoma angiogenesis and lymphangiogenesis by the
increasing VEGFA and VEGFC expression through the activation of the
c-Src/PI3K/AKT signaling pathway expression. Therefore, resistin may
represent a potential novel molecular therapeutic target for
chondrosarcoma therapeutic treatment.

