Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BPM 31510 synergizes gemcitabine efficacy in pancreatic
adenocarcinoma via mechanism independent of its anti-Warburg influence on
metabolism


Pancreatic adenocarcinoma (PanCa) is associated with poor prognosis and
overall survival. Current first-line therapeutics are cytotoxic agents
targeting DNA based mechanistic end-points for efficacy, their use
limited by dose associated toxicity. There is a critical need for
therapeutics with novel mechanisms amenable to combination with current
standard-of-care chemotherapy to improve outcomes. BPM 31510 is a drug
that targets cellular metabolism networks, effectuating an anti-Warburg
effect in cancer. The documented high metabolic phenotype observed in
PanCa provided rationale for investigation of BPM 31510 alone and in
combination with gemcitabine in in vitro and in vivo PanCa models. Based
on BPM 31510 EC50/EC>90 values for MIA-PaCa-2 and Panc-1 PanCa cell lines
in vitro, the PanCa cells were significantly more sensitive to BPM 31510
compared to fibroblasts. BPM 31510 treatment in a time- and
dose-dependent manner decreased the PI- and Annexin V-negative (viable)
population and a concomitant increase in the percentage of Annexin
V-positive cells, with PI indicative of early and late apoptosis. The
anti-cancer activity of BPM 31510 was assessed in vivo using MIA-PaCa-2
tumor-bearing immune-compromised mice. Treatment with increasing doses of
BPM 31510 (0.5-50 mg/kg IP, 3X/week) significantly improved survival
outcomes, with the highest dose extending median survival by more than 36
days compared to saline control. Moreover, combined treatment with BPM
31510 and gemcitabine (150 mg/kg IV, 1X/week, given on cycles, 3 weeks on
1 week) resulted in further extension of median survival over either
treatment alone. The mechanistic underpinnings for the enhanced efficacy
of combination treatment were explored in vitro. In MIA-PaCa-2 cells,
co-treatment with BPM 31510 and gemcitabine increased indices of
regulated cell death higher than observed for either treatment alone. In
contrast, although treatment with either BPM 31510 or gemcitabine alone
increased caspase-3 activity, co-treatment did not enhance caspase-3
activation, suggesting that BPM 31510 augments gemcitabine cytotoxicity
through independent mechanisms. In fact, BPM31510, and not gemcitabine,
increased the mitochondrial uncoupling efficient ratio and Stateapparent
in MIA-PaCa-2 cells. Nonetheless, co-treatment with BPM 31510 and
gemcitabine synergistically decreased the mitochondrial membrane
potential (m) in cells prior to cell death. Taken together, these data
indicate that BPM 31510-driven bioenergetic alterations are separate from
the effects of gemcitabine; however, their effects converge at the
mitochondrion to dissipate m and activate regulated cell death. The data
suggests that combination of BPM 31510 with gemcitabine in pancreatic
cancer will effectuate an efficacy response via independent mechanisms
with improvement in therapeutic outcome.

