Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression profiling, cellular and clinical implications of
mitochondrial miRNAs in colorectal carcinomas


Aim: The aim of this study was to determine the expression profiling and
cellular implications of mitochondrial miRNAs (Mitomirs) such asmiR-145,
miR-15a, miR-335 and miR-126)in colorectal cancer tissues. Expression
changes in matched metastatic tissues were also examined.Method:
Colorectal tissues from163 primary cancers, 96 lymph node, 48 metastatic,
40 adenoma and 42 non-neoplastic tissues were recruited from 389
patients. The expression of Mitomirs in tissues and colon cancer (SW-480,
SW-48) and normal (FHC) cell lines were investigated by qRT-PCR.
Functional assays including cell proliferation, cell cycle analysis and
apoptosis assays were performed with an exogenous miR-126 mimic to detect
its in-vitro changes on cancer cell biology. In addition, Western blot
was used to detect the targets of miR-126.Result: Expressions of Mitomirs
were down-regulated in colorectal cancer tissues compared to non-tumour
colorectal tissues. Higher expression of miR-145 was predominantly noted
in colorectal cancers with tumour recurrence (P = 0.058). Expression of
miR-335 was significantly reduced distal colorectum compared to proximal
colon (P = 0.025). Reduced expression of miR-335 also showed significant
correlation with occurrence of lymphovascular permeation (P = 0.019), and
late T stage (P = 0.004) of colorectal cancer. Moreover, in
microsatellite instability (MSI) positive adenocarcinomas, notable
downregulation of miR-15a (P = 0.018) was observed and this reduced
expression was significantly correlated with size of tumour (> 40 mm) (P
= 0.014). Expression of miR-15a, and miR-145 was reduced in metastatic
cell line (SW48). Overexpression of miR-126 in-vitro showed increased
apoptosis, reduced cell proliferation and suppression of synthetic phase
in cell cycle. Also, overexpression of miR-126 has induced reduced
expression of BCL-2 protein and increased expression of P53
protein.Conclusion: This study suggests that expression of Mitomirs
significantly reduces in advanced stages of cancer and even in early
stages in comparison to normal tissues. In vitro studies indicated that
ectopic expression miR-126 has the capability of inducing apoptosis and
reducing viability of cancers cells potentially via modulating its target
partners such as BCL-2 and p53.

