Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Is P53 the up-and-coming predictive biomarker for volasertib
treatment in NSCLC


Introduction: Polo-like kinase (Plk1), a key regulator of cell division,
is considered as an attractive target for mitotic intervention. The
observed Plk1 overexpression in several tumor types, including non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC), has led to the development of small molecule
inhibitors. Moreover, previous studies suggested an interplay between
Plk1 and the tumor suppressor P53. This led to the hypothesis that the
P53 status might be predictive for the response to Plk1 inhibition.
Therefore, we investigated the cytotoxic effect of volasertib in NSCLC
cell lines with a different P53 background, under normoxia and
hypoxia.Material and methods: A549 (TP53 wild type) was transduced with a
P53 shRNA lentiviral vector to obtain the P53 deficient sub-cell line
A549-920 or with an empty vector as control (A549-NTC). In addition,
NCI-H1975 cells were used as a TP53 mutant (R273H) cell line. Cells were
treated with 0-85nM volasertib (24-72h). Cell survival was assessed using
the sulphorhodamine B assay and IC50-values were calculated using
WinNonlin software. The effect of Plk1 inhibition (0-20nM) on cell cycle
distribution (24h) and apoptosis induction (48h) was determined flow
cytometrically. In addition, we investigated the potential of volasertib
to inhibit cell migration using a Transwell system. All experiments were
performed under both normoxia and hypoxia (Introduction: Polo-like kinase
(Plk1), a key regulator of cell division, is considered as an attractive
target for mitotic intervention. The observed Plk1 overexpression in
several tumor types, including non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), has
led to the development of small molecule inhibitors. Moreover, previous
studies suggested an interplay between Plk1 and the tumor suppressor P53.
This led to the hypothesis that the P53 status might be predictive for
the response to Plk1 inhibition. Therefore, we investigated the cytotoxic
effect of volasertib in NSCLC cell lines with a different P53 background,
under normoxia and hypoxia.Material and methods: A549 (TP53 wild type)
was transduced with a P53 shRNA lentiviral vector to obtain the P53
deficient sub-cell line A549-920 or with an empty vector as control
(A549-NTC). In addition, NCI-H1975 cells were used as a TP53 mutant
(R273H) cell line. Cells were treated with 0-85nM volasertib (24-72h).
Cell survival was assessed using the sulphorhodamine B assay and
IC50-values were calculated using WinNonlin software. The effect of Plk1
inhibition (0-20nM) on cell cycle distribution (24h) and apoptosis
induction (48h) was determined flow cytometrically. In addition, we
investigated the potential of volasertib to inhibit cell migration using
a Transwell system. All experiments were performed under both normoxia
and hypoxia (<0.1% O2).Results: Plk1 inhibition established a
dose-dependent growth inhibition under both normoxia and hypoxia.
Interestingly, a reduced sensitivity to volasertib treatment (24h) was
observed in P53 deficient cells (A549-920, IC50: 27.595.77 nM) compared
to P53 wild type cells (A549-NTC, IC50: 17.870.40 nM) (pIntroduction:
Polo-like kinase (Plk1), a key regulator of cell division, is considered
as an attractive target for mitotic intervention. The observed Plk1
overexpression in several tumor types, including non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC), has led to the development of small molecule inhibitors.
Moreover, previous studies suggested an interplay between Plk1 and the
tumor suppressor P53. This led to the hypothesis that the P53 status
might be predictive for the response to Plk1 inhibition. Therefore, we
investigated the cytotoxic effect of volasertib in NSCLC cell lines with
a different P53 background, under normoxia and hypoxia.Material and
methods: A549 (TP53 wild type) was transduced with a P53 shRNA lentiviral
vector to obtain the P53 deficient sub-cell line A549-920 or with an
empty vector as control (A549-NTC). In addition, NCI-H1975 cells were
used as a TP53 mutant (R273H) cell line. Cells were treated with 0-85nM
volasertib (24-72h). Cell survival was assessed using the sulphorhodamine
B assay and IC50-values were calculated using WinNonlin software. The
effect of Plk1 inhibition (0-20nM) on cell cycle distribution (24h) and
apoptosis induction (48h) was determined flow cytometrically. In
addition, we investigated the potential of volasertib to inhibit cell
migration using a Transwell system. All experiments were performed under
both normoxia and hypoxia (<0.1% O2).Results: Plk1 inhibition established
a dose-dependent growth inhibition under both normoxia and hypoxia.
Interestingly, a reduced sensitivity to volasertib treatment (24h) was
observed in P53 deficient cells (A549-920, IC50: 27.595.77 nM) compared
to P53 wild type cells (A549-NTC, IC50: 17.870.40 nM) (p<0.001). Except
for the NCI-H1975 cells, a decreased effect of volasertib was observed
under hypoxia (pIntroduction: Polo-like kinase (Plk1), a key regulator of
cell division, is considered as an attractive target for mitotic
intervention. The observed Plk1 overexpression in several tumor types,
including non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), has led to the development
of small molecule inhibitors. Moreover, previous studies suggested an
interplay between Plk1 and the tumor suppressor P53. This led to the
hypothesis that the P53 status might be predictive for the response to
Plk1 inhibition. Therefore, we investigated the cytotoxic effect of
volasertib in NSCLC cell lines with a different P53 background, under
normoxia and hypoxia.Material and methods: A549 (TP53 wild type) was
transduced with a P53 shRNA lentiviral vector to obtain the P53 deficient
sub-cell line A549-920 or with an empty vector as control (A549-NTC). In
addition, NCI-H1975 cells were used as a TP53 mutant (R273H) cell line.
Cells were treated with 0-85nM volasertib (24-72h). Cell survival was
assessed using the sulphorhodamine B assay and IC50-values were
calculated using WinNonlin software. The effect of Plk1 inhibition
(0-20nM) on cell cycle distribution (24h) and apoptosis induction (48h)
was determined flow cytometrically. In addition, we investigated the
potential of volasertib to inhibit cell migration using a Transwell
system. All experiments were performed under both normoxia and hypoxia
(<0.1% O2).Results: Plk1 inhibition established a dose-dependent growth
inhibition under both normoxia and hypoxia. Interestingly, a reduced
sensitivity to volasertib treatment (24h) was observed in P53 deficient
cells (A549-920, IC50: 27.595.77 nM) compared to P53 wild type cells
(A549-NTC, IC50: 17.870.40 nM) (p<0.001). Except for the NCI-H1975 cells,
a decreased effect of volasertib was observed under hypoxia (p<0.001).
After treatment, a G2/M phase block was induced in all cell lines
(pIntroduction: Polo-like kinase (Plk1), a key regulator of cell
division, is considered as an attractive target for mitotic intervention.
The observed Plk1 overexpression in several tumor types, including
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), has led to the development of small
molecule inhibitors. Moreover, previous studies suggested an interplay
between Plk1 and the tumor suppressor P53. This led to the hypothesis
that the P53 status might be predictive for the response to Plk1
inhibition. Therefore, we investigated the cytotoxic effect of volasertib
in NSCLC cell lines with a different P53 background, under normoxia and
hypoxia.Material and methods: A549 (TP53 wild type) was transduced with a
P53 shRNA lentiviral vector to obtain the P53 deficient sub-cell line
A549-920 or with an empty vector as control (A549-NTC). In addition,
NCI-H1975 cells were used as a TP53 mutant (R273H) cell line. Cells were
treated with 0-85nM volasertib (24-72h). Cell survival was assessed using
the sulphorhodamine B assay and IC50-values were calculated using
WinNonlin software. The effect of Plk1 inhibition (0-20nM) on cell cycle
distribution (24h) and apoptosis induction (48h) was determined flow
cytometrically. In addition, we investigated the potential of volasertib
to inhibit cell migration using a Transwell system. All experiments were
performed under both normoxia and hypoxia (<0.1% O2).Results: Plk1
inhibition established a dose-dependent growth inhibition under both
normoxia and hypoxia. Interestingly, a reduced sensitivity to volasertib
treatment (24h) was observed in P53 deficient cells (A549-920, IC50:
27.595.77 nM) compared to P53 wild type cells (A549-NTC, IC50: 17.870.40
nM) (p<0.001). Except for the NCI-H1975 cells, a decreased effect of
volasertib was observed under hypoxia (p<0.001). After treatment, a G2/M
phase block was induced in all cell lines (p<0.004), albeit more
pronounced in A549-920 cells compared to A549-NTC cells (p = 0.06). Under
hypoxia, this mitotic arrest was only detected using high volasertib
concentrations (12.520nM) (pIntroduction: Polo-like kinase (Plk1), a key
regulator of cell division, is considered as an attractive target for
mitotic intervention. The observed Plk1 overexpression in several tumor
types, including non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), has led to the
development of small molecule inhibitors. Moreover, previous studies
suggested an interplay between Plk1 and the tumor suppressor P53. This
led to the hypothesis that the P53 status might be predictive for the
response to Plk1 inhibition. Therefore, we investigated the cytotoxic
effect of volasertib in NSCLC cell lines with a different P53 background,
under normoxia and hypoxia.Material and methods: A549 (TP53 wild type)
was transduced with a P53 shRNA lentiviral vector to obtain the P53
deficient sub-cell line A549-920 or with an empty vector as control
(A549-NTC). In addition, NCI-H1975 cells were used as a TP53 mutant
(R273H) cell line. Cells were treated with 0-85nM volasertib (24-72h).
Cell survival was assessed using the sulphorhodamine B assay and
IC50-values were calculated using WinNonlin software. The effect of Plk1
inhibition (0-20nM) on cell cycle distribution (24h) and apoptosis
induction (48h) was determined flow cytometrically. In addition, we
investigated the potential of volasertib to inhibit cell migration using
a Transwell system. All experiments were performed under both normoxia
and hypoxia (<0.1% O2).Results: Plk1 inhibition established a
dose-dependent growth inhibition under both normoxia and hypoxia.
Interestingly, a reduced sensitivity to volasertib treatment (24h) was
observed in P53 deficient cells (A549-920, IC50: 27.595.77 nM) compared
to P53 wild type cells (A549-NTC, IC50: 17.870.40 nM) (p<0.001). Except
for the NCI-H1975 cells, a decreased effect of volasertib was observed
under hypoxia (p<0.001). After treatment, a G2/M phase block was induced
in all cell lines (p<0.004), albeit more pronounced in A549-920 cells
compared to A549-NTC cells (p = 0.06). Under hypoxia, this mitotic arrest
was only detected using high volasertib concentrations (12.520nM)
(p<0.04). Furthermore, a sub-G1 peak could be observed after treatment
with high volasertib concentrations, suggesting apoptosis induction.
Indeed, an increase in PI-stained cells was detected 48h after Plk1
inhibition in all cell lines (pIntroduction: Polo-like kinase (Plk1), a
key regulator of cell division, is considered as an attractive target for
mitotic intervention. The observed Plk1 overexpression in several tumor
types, including non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), has led to the
development of small molecule inhibitors. Moreover, previous studies
suggested an interplay between Plk1 and the tumor suppressor P53. This
led to the hypothesis that the P53 status might be predictive for the
response to Plk1 inhibition. Therefore, we investigated the cytotoxic
effect of volasertib in NSCLC cell lines with a different P53 background,
under normoxia and hypoxia.Material and methods: A549 (TP53 wild type)
was transduced with a P53 shRNA lentiviral vector to obtain the P53
deficient sub-cell line A549-920 or with an empty vector as control
(A549-NTC). In addition, NCI-H1975 cells were used as a TP53 mutant
(R273H) cell line. Cells were treated with 0-85nM volasertib (24-72h).
Cell survival was assessed using the sulphorhodamine B assay and
IC50-values were calculated using WinNonlin software. The effect of Plk1
inhibition (0-20nM) on cell cycle distribution (24h) and apoptosis
induction (48h) was determined flow cytometrically. In addition, we
investigated the potential of volasertib to inhibit cell migration using
a Transwell system. All experiments were performed under both normoxia
and hypoxia (<0.1% O2).Results: Plk1 inhibition established a
dose-dependent growth inhibition under both normoxia and hypoxia.
Interestingly, a reduced sensitivity to volasertib treatment (24h) was
observed in P53 deficient cells (A549-920, IC50: 27.595.77 nM) compared
to P53 wild type cells (A549-NTC, IC50: 17.870.40 nM) (p<0.001). Except
for the NCI-H1975 cells, a decreased effect of volasertib was observed
under hypoxia (p<0.001). After treatment, a G2/M phase block was induced
in all cell lines (p<0.004), albeit more pronounced in A549-920 cells
compared to A549-NTC cells (p = 0.06). Under hypoxia, this mitotic arrest
was only detected using high volasertib concentrations (12.520nM)
(p<0.04). Furthermore, a sub-G1 peak could be observed after treatment
with high volasertib concentrations, suggesting apoptosis induction.
Indeed, an increase in PI-stained cells was detected 48h after Plk1
inhibition in all cell lines (p<0.042). Remarkably, induction of cell
death was higher in P53 wild type cells compared to P53 deficient cells
(pIntroduction: Polo-like kinase (Plk1), a key regulator of cell
division, is considered as an attractive target for mitotic intervention.
The observed Plk1 overexpression in several tumor types, including
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), has led to the development of small
molecule inhibitors. Moreover, previous studies suggested an interplay
between Plk1 and the tumor suppressor P53. This led to the hypothesis
that the P53 status might be predictive for the response to Plk1
inhibition. Therefore, we investigated the cytotoxic effect of volasertib
in NSCLC cell lines with a different P53 background, under normoxia and
hypoxia.Material and methods: A549 (TP53 wild type) was transduced with a
P53 shRNA lentiviral vector to obtain the P53 deficient sub-cell line
A549-920 or with an empty vector as control (A549-NTC). In addition,
NCI-H1975 cells were used as a TP53 mutant (R273H) cell line. Cells were
treated with 0-85nM volasertib (24-72h). Cell survival was assessed using
the sulphorhodamine B assay and IC50-values were calculated using
WinNonlin software. The effect of Plk1 inhibition (0-20nM) on cell cycle
distribution (24h) and apoptosis induction (48h) was determined flow
cytometrically. In addition, we investigated the potential of volasertib
to inhibit cell migration using a Transwell system. All experiments were
performed under both normoxia and hypoxia (<0.1% O2).Results: Plk1
inhibition established a dose-dependent growth inhibition under both
normoxia and hypoxia. Interestingly, a reduced sensitivity to volasertib
treatment (24h) was observed in P53 deficient cells (A549-920, IC50:
27.595.77 nM) compared to P53 wild type cells (A549-NTC, IC50: 17.870.40
nM) (p<0.001). Except for the NCI-H1975 cells, a decreased effect of
volasertib was observed under hypoxia (p<0.001). After treatment, a G2/M
phase block was induced in all cell lines (p<0.004), albeit more
pronounced in A549-920 cells compared to A549-NTC cells (p = 0.06). Under
hypoxia, this mitotic arrest was only detected using high volasertib
concentrations (12.520nM) (p<0.04). Furthermore, a sub-G1 peak could be
observed after treatment with high volasertib concentrations, suggesting
apoptosis induction. Indeed, an increase in PI-stained cells was detected
48h after Plk1 inhibition in all cell lines (p<0.042). Remarkably,
induction of cell death was higher in P53 wild type cells compared to P53
deficient cells (p<0.02). Transwell experiments, investigating the
potential of volasertib to inhibit cell migration, are currently being
analyzed.Conclusion: Our results show that there is a difference in
response to Plk1 inhibition in cancer cells with and without functional
P53. While P53 deficient/mutant cells were mostly arrested in the G2/M
phase, cell death was induced in P53 wild type cells. These data lead to
the hypothesis that P53 might be a predictive marker for response to Plk1
inhibition.

