Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mitochondrial morphology as a biomarker of cancer phenotype and
drug response


Mitochondria, critical organelles in quiescent and dividing cells, have
been shown to vary in number, mass, and shape. While previous work has
focused on understanding molecular mechanisms underlying changes in
normal and immortalized cells, less is known about longer-term
mitochondrial behavior such as morphological patterns in individual cells
and overall populations, the heterogeneity and functional consequences of
these patterns, and ultimately how potential mitochondrial heterogeneity
can be exploited in the clinic. Indeed, while previous studies have been
conducted illustrating mitochondrial dysfunction and morphological
alterations in certain tumor types, more comprehensive analyses across
tumor and cell types, as well as from cells derived from individual
patients, have yet to be conducted. A primary impediment to this work is
the technical challenge of consistently assaying mitochondrial morphology
in diverse cell types where fixation procedures, collection techniques,
and differing optical qualities between samples make potential analyses a
challenging application.We have developed an image based analytical
technique to phenotype mitochondrial morphology in different cancers,
including in vitro cancer cell lines and patient derived cancer cells.
Our methodology is based on a combination of novel, clinically relevant
collection and fixation techniques, and advanced image processing and
computer learning analysis methodologies. Our results demonstrate that i)
cancer cells of different origins, including patient-derived xenografts,
express highly diverse mitochondrial phenotypes; ii) a given phenotype is
characteristic of a cell population and fairly constant over time; iii)
mitochondrial patterns correlate with cell metabolomics measurements and
iv) therapeutic interventions can alter mitochondrial phenotypes in
drug-sensitive cancers as measured in pre- versus post-treatment fine
needle aspirates in mice. These observations shed light on the role of
mitochondrial dynamics in the biology and drug response of cancer cells.

