Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tripartite motif containing 28 (TRIM28) promotes breast cancer
metastasis by stabilizing TWIST1 protein


Regulation of gene expression by TRIM28 is not only by transcriptional
repression but also by post-translational regulation. Here we report that
TRIM28 promotes breast cancer cell metastasis through TRIM28-TWIST1-EMT
pathway. We find that TRIM28 is highly expressed in metastatic cancer
cell lines and advanced breast cancer tissues. The expression of TRIM28
and TWIST1 is positively correlated with most of the invasive breast
carcinomas. Notably, we find that overexpression of TRIM28 upregulates
TWIST1 protein, whereas TRIM28 depletion downregulates TWIST1 protein,
indicating that TWIST1 upregulation likely occurs at post-transcriptional
level, not at transcriptional level. Overexpression of TRIM28 in BT549
breast cancer cell line promotes cell migration and invasion
functionally; conversely, knockdown of TRIM28 reduces TWIST1 protein
level, up-regulates E-cadherin and down-regulates N-cadherin, and
consequently inhibits cell migration and invasion. Furthermore,
Immunoprecipitation and GST pull down reveal that TRIM28 interacts with
TWIST1 directly, thereby preventing from proteasomal degradation.
Moreover, TWIST1 degradation rate is reduced after cycloheximide blocking
protein synthesis through the depletion of TRIM28 in BT549 cells. Taken
together, our findings suggest that TRIM28 functionally stabilizes TWIST1
protein, reveals a novel mechanism, and provides an effective therapeutic
strategy to target TRIM28 in breast cancer treatments.

