Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Urban-rural disparity of overweight/obesity distribution and its
potential association with breast cancer among Chinese females


Background: Disparity of overweight/obesity distribution had been
investigated in developed countries, but rarely been investigated in
developing countries, especially for China with rapid socio-economic
development in the past decades.Methods: A total of 1 210 762
participants were recruited from the Chinese National Breast Cancer
Screening Program. Overweight and obesity were defined as body mass index
(BMI) ranged 24.0-27.9 kg/m2 and BMI 28.0kg/m2, respectively.Results: The
prevalence of overweight/obesity for Chinese rural women (35.2%, 29.2%
for overweight and 6.0% for obesity) was significantly higher than that
for Chinese urban women (33.4%, 27.7% for overweight and 5.7% for
obesity) (P Background: Disparity of overweight/obesity distribution had
been investigated in developed countries, but rarely been investigated in
developing countries, especially for China with rapid socio-economic
development in the past decades.Methods: A total of 1 210 762
participants were recruited from the Chinese National Breast Cancer
Screening Program. Overweight and obesity were defined as body mass index
(BMI) ranged 24.0-27.9 kg/m2 and BMI 28.0kg/m2, respectively.Results: The
prevalence of overweight/obesity for Chinese rural women (35.2%, 29.2%
for overweight and 6.0% for obesity) was significantly higher than that
for Chinese urban women (33.4%, 27.7% for overweight and 5.7% for
obesity) (P <0.001). For either rural or urban women, the prevalence of
overweight/obesity was highest in north region, followed by east region
for rural women and north-east region for urban women. For rural women,
higher prevalence of overweight/obesity was significantly positively
associated with elder age, Han nationality, low level of education, no
occupation, high family income, less number of family residents,
insurance, and elder age at marriage. Similar positive associations were
also found for urban women, except negative associations for high family
income, less number of family residents, and elder age at marriage. A
non-significant positive association between overweight/obesity and
breast cancer was found for rural women [odds ratio (OR) = 1.06; 95%
confidence interval (CI): 0.87-1.29], but a significant positive
association for urban women (OR = 1.55; 95%CI: 1.19-2.02).Conclusions:
There was an obvious urban-rural disparity of overweight/obesity
distribution among Chinese females, which could also lead to an obvious
disparity of breast cancer distribution.

