Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Stromal cell-induced alterations in the response of colorectal
cancer cell to demethylating agents


Epigenetic mechanisms such as DNA hypermethylation, that results in gene
silencing, is closely associated with resistance to platinum-based
chemotherapy for colorectal cancer (CRC). DNA methyltransferase
inhibitors (DNMTi) that reactivate and induce reexpression of silenced
gene have the potential to improve the outcome of platinum-based and
other therapies in CRC. In fact, non-cytotoxic concentrations of
azacitidine, a clinically used DNMTi, has been reported to resensitize
platinum-resistant ovarian cells to carboplatin. Hypomethylating agents,
such as azacitidine and decitabine have shown significant promise in
hematologic malignancies; however, studies on their application to CRC
and other solid tumors have yielded ambivalent results potentially due to
the complexities of the tumor microenvironment that result from the
numerous cell type interactions.In this study, we analyzed the impact of
different tumor-stroma ratios on cancer cell response to azacitidine,
decitabine, and two lead compounds identified by in vitro screens in
two-dimensional (2D) and three-dimensional (3D) co-cultures of colorectal
HCT116 carcinoma demethylation reporter cells and adipose-derived
mesenchymal stromal cells (MSCs) isolated from healthy individuals
undergoing elective lipoaspiration. Each subject provided informed
consent. Activity of hypomethylating drugs was examined in 2D and 3D
cultures of different tumor-stroma ratios using confocal microscopy, flow
cytometry, and MTT analyses.Our preliminary flow cytometry results show
an altered response of hypomethylating agents in cocultures of HCT116 and
MSCs compared to monocultures of HCT116 cells alone. There was an
increase in demethylation of HCT116 cells in 3D cultures containing a
higher ratio of stromal cells following treatment with low concentration
of decitabine. Furthermore, confocal analysis 3D co-cultures at various
z-plane heights revealed increased demethylation at low concentrations of
all drugs in cultures with high stromal cell numbers. These results
indicate that intratumoral stroma may alter the sensitivity of cancer
cells to demethylating agents and warrant further studies.

