Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Optimization of lead antibody selection for XMT-1522, a novel,
highly potent HER2-targeted antibody-drug conjugate (ADC)


XMT-1522 is an anti-HER2 ADC that incorporates HT-19, a novel, human
anti-HER2 antibody optimized for cytotoxic payload delivery. Several
parameters such as cell binding, internalization rate, cytotoxicity,
antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC) downstream
signaling, affinity maturation, NHP cross-reactivity, normal human tissue
cross-reactivity and in vivo efficacy were used to screen a wide range of
antibodies to select a lead candidate optimized for use in ADC
applications. In addition HT-19 was selected to be non-competitive for
HER2 binding with existing therapies - trastuzumab or pertuzumab, to
allow for potential combinability. In vivo efficacy as an ADC did not
directly correlate with typical parameters used in antibody screening
cascade such as in vitro cytotoxicity, internalization or binding
affinity. The lead antibody underwent affinity maturation, and despite
increases in affinity, affinity maturation significantly decreased the in
vivo efficacy of the ADC in vivo xenograft models. This phenomenon was
observed in all the antibody hits. HT-19 showed antibody-dependent
cell-mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC) activity. When administered as a single
agent in NCI-N87 gastric cancer xenograft model it had biological
activity at 20 mg/kg as well as at 3 mg/kg. Consistent with the
hypothesis that a non-competitive ADC is combinable with current
anti-HER2 regimens, the combination of XMT-1522 with trastuzumab and/or
pertuzumab showed more rapid internalization, more complete HER2
degradation, and significantly great anti-tumor activity in the NCI-N87
gastric cancer xenograft model relative to XMT-1522 alone or the
combination of pertuzumab + trastuzumab.

