Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular profiling of primary malignant pleuralmesothelioma
histotypes cell lines reveals relationship between GDF15overexpression
and cisplatin resistance both in in vitro and in vivo models


Malignant pleural mesothelioma (MPM) development is mainly correlated
with exposure to asbestos and appears to be a trend toward an increase in
its incidence in the years to come. Although novel therapeutic strategies
are under investigation, alone or in combination with conventional
therapy, MPM remains a cancer with high medical need.With the aim to
identify putative novel therapeutic targets/biomarkers expressed in
specific MPM histotypes we investigated 9 different primary MPM cell
lines at molecular, biochemical and pharmacological levels.A
transcriptomic analysis has been conducted comparing the gene expression
in epitheliod (E-MM473), sarcomatoid (S-MM432) and biphasic (B-MM487)
primary cell lines.We found more than 1000 genes differentially regulated
and statistically validated (p90%) and E-MM473/B-MM487 cell survival
(>50%).GDF15 belongs to the TGF- superfamily and its role in different
pathologies including cancer is controversial (Breit et al., 2011). Its
overexpression has been associated to tumor chemoresistance (Chung-Ying
et al.,2007) including Cisplatin (Cis) (Li et al., 2015; Yang et al.
2014). To this end, we investigated if GDF15 protein levels in MPM cells
exposed to Cis correlate with its citotoxicity. Interestingly GDF15
protein level, which is high in E-MM473, medium in B-M M432 and low in
S-MM487, is inversely correlated with the cells sensitivity to the
treatment (i.e. E-MM473 are 2-5 times more resistant) and GDF15 silencing
increases Cis-induced cytotoxicity. To assess the relationship between
GDF15 levels/ Cis resistance, efficacy of Cis (4mg/kg; q7dx3w;i.v.) on
stably expressing luciferase E-MM473(highGDF15) and B-MM487 (lowGDF15),
orthotopically xenografted in nude mice, were investigated. While,
E-MM473 showed a poor response to the Cis (TGI 58%), an impressive tumor
response (TGI 95%) was observed in treated B-MM487.Our results suggest
and support the need of further clinical investigation to correlate GDF15
plasma level to the chemotherapy response in MPM patients.

