Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Somatic MED12 mutations in hematological malignancies


Somatic mutations in exons 1 and 2 of the Mediator complex subunit 12
(MED12) have been identified in 70% of uterine leiomyomas, 7-20% of
uterine leiomyosarcomas, 59% of breast fibroadenomas and 67% of breast
phyllodes tumors. In addition to female hormone-dependent tumors we have
recently found the same specific missense and small in-frame insertion
and deletion mutations in approximately 5% of chronic lymphocytic
leukemias (CLL). In CLL the presence of MED12 mutations was also
associated with markers of poor prognosis (IgVH (-), Zap70 (+), and
Zap70-methylation). The surprising finding of the same mutations in a
completely different tumor type prompted us to further screen other
hematological malignancies for MED12 mutations.We have thus far collected
samples of 107 T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemias (T-ALL), 21 large
granular lymphocyte leukemias (LGL), 33 acute myeloid leukemias (AML),
154 diffuse large B cell lymphomas (DLBCL), and 6 six follicular
lymphomas (FL). Also a set of 30 additional CLLs was collected. The MED12
mutation status was determined by direct Sanger sequencing of exons 1 and
2 of the gene. A c.107T>G, p.L36R mutation was found in a single DLBCL
case and c.100-8T>A, p.E33_D34insPQ in one AML sample. A novel variant of
uncertain significance, c.-3A>G, was detected on 5UTR of one FL sample.
One T-ALL patient harbored a nonsense mutation affecting the last codon
of exon 1 c.97G>T, p.E33X. No mutations were identified in the LGL or CLL
samples. We are also analyzing approximately 100 new AML samples and 100
multiple myeloma samples.MED12 mutations are present, in addition to CLL,
also in other hematological malignancies. The frequency, however, seems
to be low and, as the number of samples in the preliminary analysis is
limited, screening of larger sample sets is needed. The c.107T>G, p.L36R
and c.100-8T>A, p.E33_D34insPQ mutations have previously been detected
recurrently in uterine leiomyomas and in CLL. Further studies are
required for evaluation of the effects of c.-3A>G and c.97G>T, p.E33X
mutations. The latter mutation affects the last codon of exon 1, which is
also a mutational hotspot in CLL, with recurrent missense mutations.
MED12 exon 1 and 2 missense mutations disrupt the interactions between
the Mediator complex and Cyclin C and cause loss of CDK8 kinase activity.
Studies to determine the impact of the c.97G>T, p.E33X mutation on MED12
function are ongoing.

