Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification and characterization of patient-derived PREX2
mutation in HCC


Phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-trisphosphate Rac exchange factor 2 (PREX2), a
highly distributed GEF, is abundant in human cancer cells. Also, PREX2 is
frequently mutated in melanoma, stomach, colorectal, and lung cancers.
Recently, we identified HectH9 (homologous to E6AP carboxyl terminus
homologous protein 9) is the E3 ligase of PREX2 and mediates its
degradation. We found that PREX2 was overexpressed in HCC and associated
with the following clinical characteristics: viral infection (P = 0.004),
tumor size (P = 0.03) and AFP levels (P = 0.04). Results from
multivariate logistic regression analysis indicated that PREX2 expression
profoundly correlated with hepatitis B virus infection (odds ratio =
14.07, P = 0.01). Moreover, high-expression level of PREX2 in the tumor
tissues was associated with poor survival (P = 0.02). In addition, we
performed HaloPlex sequencing to analyze the PREX2 genome among tumorous,
tumor-adjacent tissues and peripheral blood mononuclear cells from 68 HCC
patients. Thirteen non-silent point mutations were detected in PREX2.
Compared to wild-type PREX2, the S113R mutant displayed a weaker
interaction with HectH9, a reduced ubiquitination level and prolonged
half-life. Moreover, the S1113R mutant further enhanced AKT activation
and cell proliferation. These results reveal a novel mechanism through
which GNMT restrains AKT signaling and HCC tumorigenesis.

