Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of a novel compound, MO2455, that induces
poly(ADP-ribose) (PAR) accumulation and inhibits the growth of cancer
cells in vitro and in vivo


Poly (ADP-ribose) chain (PAR) formed by poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase
(PARP) is catabolized mainly by poly (ADP-ribose) glycohydrolase (PARG).
PARG is emerging as a therapeutic target for cancer, because its
inhibition leads to cell death in some kinds of cancer cell lines.In
order to obtain small molecules that effectively inhibit PARG protein, an
in-house collection of 10,000 small molecules were screened for their
ability to accumulate the PAR in A549 cells at 5 M. We identified 100 hit
compounds. Among them, MO2282 and MO2455 induced the most significant
accumulation of PAR. MO2455 is an analogue of MO2282 with improved
water-solubility. MO2282 and MO2455 were evaluated in vitro for their
ability to inhibit the catalytic activity of PARG. MO2282 and MO2455
showed modest inhibition activities against recombinant rat PARG. They
also inhibited the growth of various kinds of cancel cell lines in vitro
at an IC50 value of 0.05 - 3.0 M and showed different spectrum of
antitumor activity from conventional anticancer drugs, CDDP, ADM, PTX,
and CPT-11. Next, we investigated the growth-inhibitory effect of MO2455
on A549 cells in a xenotransplanted model. A significant anti-tumor
activity was observed in mice when treated with MO2455 at doses of 25
mg/kg every two days. Although treatment-related body weight loss was
observed in mice treated with MO2455, body weight recovered by day 8.In
conclusion, the present data suggest that MO2455 has potential as a
cancer drug with different mechanisms of action from conventional
anti-cancer drugs.

