Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel injectable formulation of quercetin reliant on the ability
of the drug to complex copper


Low levels of fruit and vegetable consumptions have been linked to
increased risk of cancer. Quercetin is one of the most ubiquitous
flavanoids found in fruits and vegetables and there is increasing
evidence that points to the anti-cancer potential of quercetin. This
flavanoid acts as a promoter of apoptosis by modulating apoptosis through
Bcl-2, Akt-1, and/or NF-B. In addition, quercetin also demonstrated
promise when used in combination with approved chemotherapeutic agents
such as cisplatin and irinotecan. However, quercetin has remained largely
clinically irrelevant despite all the potential anti-cancer benefits
noted in in vitro assays. This is due in part to the low bioavailability
of the compound and its poor aqueous solubility (solubility 98%
encapsulation efficiency. Compared to previous data on free quercetin,
the liposomal formulation of quercetin shows a markedly improved
pharmacokinetic profile. The formulation demonstrated a 10-fold increase
in elimination half life and a 7-fold increase in AUC when compared to
previously published studies with free quercetin. A novel liposomal
formulation of quercetin has been generated and the resulting formulation
resolved the solubility issues faced when considering the use of
quercetin for studies attempting to define its therapeutic activity in
various cancer models.

