Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Potent and selective inhibition of CDK7 by novel covalent
inhibitors


Background: Phosphorylation of the RNA polymerase II (RNAPII) in
C-terminal domain (CTD) by Cyclin-dependent kinase 7 (CDK7) is an
important step in cellular transcription process. Hence pharmacological
modulation of CDK7 kinase activity is considered as an interesting
approach to treat cancers that critically dependent on transcription to
maintain their oncogenic state.Experimental procedures: Multiple series
of novel covalent CDK7 inhibitors were identified by SBDD approach based
on the binding mode of known CDK7 inhibitors to find early hits.
Iterative medicinal chemistry efforts were performed to identify several
lead compounds by optimizing the initial hits to achieve good
physicochemical properties, high potency, good selectivity and desirable
pharmacokinetic profile.Summary: Highly potent ATP competitive covalent
inhibitors of CDK7 from two distinct chemical series were identified.
They show time-dependent inhibition of CDK7 enzyme activity as a proof of
covalent binding and exhibit potent anti-proliferative activity in cell
lines derived from various tumor types. CDK7 modulation by these
compounds was also confirmed by monitoring cellular pS5RNAPII levels.
Representative compounds from each series showed very good selectivity
profile in broad kinase (332) panel. Lead molecules were identified based
on excellent drug-like properties (solubility, permeability and good oral
bioavailability). Tolerability and efficacy studies in rodent xenograft
models are ongoing with selected leads to test their impact on tumor
growth inhibition and to determine therapeutic window by oral
administration.Conclusion: We have identified novel and selective CDK7
covalent inhibitors from two distinct chemical series with optimized
drug-like properties including oral bioavailability. These compounds are
being evaluatedfor anti-tumor activity in mouse xenograft models.

