Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clinical research results for a NGS-based kit for targeted
detection of clinically relevant gene rearrangements in lung tumor samples


In recent years, advances in next-generation sequencing (NGS)
technologies have enabled faster and cheaper methods for uncovering the
genetic basis of disease. For cancer, NGS based screening for known tumor
subtypes may inform diagnosis and allow the clinician to tailor a
specific therapeutic approach in the future. Here, we present the testing
results of one such NGS based kit used to detect specific chromosomal
translocations in retrospective non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
samples by targeting specific breakpoints in known fusion transcripts.The
included panel tested consists of a single primer pool containing
amplicon designs to simultaneously screen for over 75 specific
rearrangements involving the receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) genes ALK,
RET and ROS1 as well as NTRK1. The panel was compatible with
formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) lung tumor research samples and
achieved high-sensitivity down to 10 ng of RNA input. In addition,
amplicon assays designed at the 5 and 3 ends the RTK genes provide
non-specific evidence that a translocation exists in a sample by
comparing expression imbalance between the two ends.Testing was carried
out at three external clinical research laboratories. In addition to
positive and negative control samples, each site contributed FFPE lung
tumor research samples for which ALK fusion status was known prior to NGS
library preparation carried out using the Ion AmpliSeq workflow. For
site-specific samples (n = 144, 16 samples per sequencing run), high
concordance, sensitivity and specificity were measured at 97.2%, 90.5%
and 98.4%, respectively.

