Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation of the oncogenic, invasion-promoting transcription
factor myeloid zinc finger-1 (MZF1) in breast cancer by microRNAs


INTRODUCTION: Myeloid Zinc Finger 1 (MZF1) is a transcription factor that
is normally involved in myeloid differentiation. MZF1 can also be found
in epithelial cancers, where it functions as an invasion and metastasis
promoting oncogene. MZF1 is a central node of the invasive signaling
network activated by HER2/ErbB2 in breast cancer, where MZF1 mobilizes
and activates lysosomes and increases the expression of cysteine
cathepsin B to promote invasion and metastasis. Thus, maintaining the
sufficient expression level of MZF1 is important for the invasive
signaling of breast cancer cells.RESULTS AND EXPERIMETAL PROCHEDURES:
Here we show that MZF1 is essential for the invasion of breast cancer
cells in 3-dimensional cultures. We also describe a possible mechanism
that regulates MZF1 levels in breast cancer. By using available micro-RNA
(miRNA) binding site prediction programs (www.microrna.org/), specific
microRNA mimics, corresponding miRNA inhibitors e.g. locked nucleic
acids, luciferase reporter assays, immunofluorescense, quantitative PCR
and 3-dimensional invasion assays we show that some breast cancer
specific miRNAs can regulate MZF1 RNA and protein levels and revert the
malignant and invasive cellular phenotype of breast cancer cells by
altering the invasion promoting functions of lysosomes. These results are
supported by the analysis of breast cancer patient data from the cancer
genome atlas (http://cancergenome.nih.gov) showing that MZF1 expression
correlates negatively with the expression of the identified miRNAs, when
using data collected from over 600 primary breast cancer tumors.SUMMARY:
This study shows that MZF1 is an oncogene whose sufficient expression
levels are central for breast cancer cell invasion and whose specific
miRNA-mediated downregulation can inhibit breast cancer malignancy by
modifying the expression of its lysosomal target genes.CONCLUSION:
Cancer-associated upregulation of MZF1 increases the breast cancer
malignancy. Thus finding ways to downregulate MZF1 expression or inhibit
its activity can be beneficial for breast cancer therapy.

