Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Enhanced in vitro activity of dianhydrogalactitol (VAL-083) in
combination with platinum drugs: Impact of p53 and platinum-resistance


Cisplatin is an important frontline drug for ovarian carcinoma and
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). However, the initial response rates
of up to 70% are usually followed by relapse due to the onset of drug
resistance. Mechanistically, platinum resistance is multifactorial, with
loss of p53 function (by mutation or inhibitory protein binding to
wild-type (wt) p53) playing a central role. The appearance of drug
resistance is a major clinical barrier and, therefore, new agents are
needed to overcome this limitation. Dianhydrogalactitol (VAL-083) is a
bi-functional alkylating agent that induces DNA interstrand cross-links
at N7-guanine, a mechanism that is distinct from the intrastrand
cross-links by platinum-based drugs. VAL-083 is clinically approved in
China for lung cancer, and is undergoing clinical trial in the US for
glioma. In the present study, we have examined the in vitro cytotoxicity
of VAL-083 as a single agent and in combination with cisplatin or
oxaliplatin using the 5-day MTT assay. In the isogenic HCT-116p53+/+ and
HCT-116p53-/- colorectal models, loss of p53 increased IC50 of (or
resistance to) cisplatin and oxaliplatin by 3- to 6-fold, whereas
resistance to VAL-083 was increased only 1.7-fold by loss of p53. These
results indicate that the cytotoxicity of VAL-083 is less impacted than
the platinum drugs by loss of p53. When tested in cisplatin-sensitive
(A2780) vs. cisplatin-resistant wt p53 ovarian tumor models (2780CP-16,
OVCAR-10, Hey and OVCA-433) there was a 10- to 40-fold increase in IC50
for cisplatin, while the corresponding increase in IC50 for VAL-083 was
only 4- to 7-fold. This indicates only partially cross-resistance between
VAL-083 and cisplatin and thus suggests a distinct mode of action for
VAL-083 as compared to cisplatin. To further investigate, immunoblots
were developed after a 24-h exposure of isogenic A2780 or 2780CP-16
models to cisplatin or VAL-083. The two drugs were equally effective at
stabilizing and activating p53 in A2780 cells. However, in
cisplatin-resistant 2780CP-16 cells, VAL-083 was more effective than
cisplatin at increasing p53 and p21 levels, and at inducing Ser-15 and
Ser-20 phosphorylation of p53. This is consistent with the ability of
VAL-083 to circumvent cisplatin resistance and demonstrated that this
alkylating agent also has the capacity to partially restore wt p53
function in ovarian tumor cells. The independent mode of actions of these
drugs suggested the potential for combining VAL-083 with cisplatin or
oxaliplatin. These combinations in wt (H460 and A549) and mutant (H1975
and H157) p53 NSCLC models demonstrated significant super-additivity
(pCisplatin is an important frontline drug for ovarian carcinoma and
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). However, the initial response rates
of up to 70% are usually followed by relapse due to the onset of drug
resistance. Mechanistically, platinum resistance is multifactorial, with
loss of p53 function (by mutation or inhibitory protein binding to
wild-type (wt) p53) playing a central role. The appearance of drug
resistance is a major clinical barrier and, therefore, new agents are
needed to overcome this limitation. Dianhydrogalactitol (VAL-083) is a
bi-functional alkylating agent that induces DNA interstrand cross-links
at N7-guanine, a mechanism that is distinct from the intrastrand
cross-links by platinum-based drugs. VAL-083 is clinically approved in
China for lung cancer, and is undergoing clinical trial in the US for
glioma. In the present study, we have examined the in vitro cytotoxicity
of VAL-083 as a single agent and in combination with cisplatin or
oxaliplatin using the 5-day MTT assay. In the isogenic HCT-116p53+/+ and
HCT-116p53-/- colorectal models, loss of p53 increased IC50 of (or
resistance to) cisplatin and oxaliplatin by 3- to 6-fold, whereas
resistance to VAL-083 was increased only 1.7-fold by loss of p53. These
results indicate that the cytotoxicity of VAL-083 is less impacted than
the platinum drugs by loss of p53. When tested in cisplatin-sensitive
(A2780) vs. cisplatin-resistant wt p53 ovarian tumor models (2780CP-16,
OVCAR-10, Hey and OVCA-433) there was a 10- to 40-fold increase in IC50
for cisplatin, while the corresponding increase in IC50 for VAL-083 was
only 4- to 7-fold. This indicates only partially cross-resistance between
VAL-083 and cisplatin and thus suggests a distinct mode of action for
VAL-083 as compared to cisplatin. To further investigate, immunoblots
were developed after a 24-h exposure of isogenic A2780 or 2780CP-16
models to cisplatin or VAL-083. The two drugs were equally effective at
stabilizing and activating p53 in A2780 cells. However, in
cisplatin-resistant 2780CP-16 cells, VAL-083 was more effective than
cisplatin at increasing p53 and p21 levels, and at inducing Ser-15 and
Ser-20 phosphorylation of p53. This is consistent with the ability of
VAL-083 to circumvent cisplatin resistance and demonstrated that this
alkylating agent also has the capacity to partially restore wt p53
function in ovarian tumor cells. The independent mode of actions of these
drugs suggested the potential for combining VAL-083 with cisplatin or
oxaliplatin. These combinations in wt (H460 and A549) and mutant (H1975
and H157) p53 NSCLC models demonstrated significant super-additivity
(p<0.05) and/or synergy (CI Cisplatin is an important frontline drug for
ovarian carcinoma and non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). However, the
initial response rates of up to 70% are usually followed by relapse due
to the onset of drug resistance. Mechanistically, platinum resistance is
multifactorial, with loss of p53 function (by mutation or inhibitory
protein binding to wild-type (wt) p53) playing a central role. The
appearance of drug resistance is a major clinical barrier and, therefore,
new agents are needed to overcome this limitation. Dianhydrogalactitol
(VAL-083) is a bi-functional alkylating agent that induces DNA
interstrand cross-links at N7-guanine, a mechanism that is distinct from
the intrastrand cross-links by platinum-based drugs. VAL-083 is
clinically approved in China for lung cancer, and is undergoing clinical
trial in the US for glioma. In the present study, we have examined the in
vitro cytotoxicity of VAL-083 as a single agent and in combination with
cisplatin or oxaliplatin using the 5-day MTT assay. In the isogenic
HCT-116p53+/+ and HCT-116p53-/- colorectal models, loss of p53 increased
IC50 of (or resistance to) cisplatin and oxaliplatin by 3- to 6-fold,
whereas resistance to VAL-083 was increased only 1.7-fold by loss of p53.
These results indicate that the cytotoxicity of VAL-083 is less impacted
than the platinum drugs by loss of p53. When tested in
cisplatin-sensitive (A2780) vs. cisplatin-resistant wt p53 ovarian tumor
models (2780CP-16, OVCAR-10, Hey and OVCA-433) there was a 10- to 40-fold
increase in IC50 for cisplatin, while the corresponding increase in IC50
for VAL-083 was only 4- to 7-fold. This indicates only partially
cross-resistance between VAL-083 and cisplatin and thus suggests a
distinct mode of action for VAL-083 as compared to cisplatin. To further
investigate, immunoblots were developed after a 24-h exposure of isogenic
A2780 or 2780CP-16 models to cisplatin or VAL-083. The two drugs were
equally effective at stabilizing and activating p53 in A2780 cells.
However, in cisplatin-resistant 2780CP-16 cells, VAL-083 was more
effective than cisplatin at increasing p53 and p21 levels, and at
inducing Ser-15 and Ser-20 phosphorylation of p53. This is consistent
with the ability of VAL-083 to circumvent cisplatin resistance and
demonstrated that this alkylating agent also has the capacity to
partially restore wt p53 function in ovarian tumor cells. The independent
mode of actions of these drugs suggested the potential for combining
VAL-083 with cisplatin or oxaliplatin. These combinations in wt (H460 and
A549) and mutant (H1975 and H157) p53 NSCLC models demonstrated
significant super-additivity (p<0.05) and/or synergy (CI < 1). Taken
together, these results demonstrate the antitumor activity of VAL-083
against both wt and mutant p53 cancers and raise the clinical potential
for treatment in a combination setting with platinum drugs.

