Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Correlation between the expression of Sox2, Oct4 and deltaNp63 in
clinical samples of resected esophageal cancers


Background. DeltaNp63 is the oncogenic isoform in several squamous cell
carcinomas including esophageal cancer (EC), however, the mechanisms of
regulation of the expression are still unclear. Sox2 and Oct4 are well
known transcription factors which function in cancer stemness. We
supposed that these two molecules work as transcription factors on
deltaNp63, and verified the expression of these genes in cases of
resected squamous cell EC.Methods. In 78 surgical specimens of squamous
cell EC with no prior neoadjuvant therapy, messenger RNA (mRNA)
expression of deltaNp63, Sox2 and Oct4 in EC tissues and corresponding
normal tissues was analyzed by quantitative real-time reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction assay. The mRNA expression was
standardized to that of glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH)
mRNA. The expressions were compared in terms of clinicopathological
factors and prognosis of postoperative survivals.Results. Peason
correlation analysis showed significant correlations between expression
of deltaNp63 and Sox2 in tumor tissues (r = 0.67, PBackground. DeltaNp63
is the oncogenic isoform in several squamous cell carcinomas including
esophageal cancer (EC), however, the mechanisms of regulation of the
expression are still unclear. Sox2 and Oct4 are well known transcription
factors which function in cancer stemness. We supposed that these two
molecules work as transcription factors on deltaNp63, and verified the
expression of these genes in cases of resected squamous cell EC.Methods.
In 78 surgical specimens of squamous cell EC with no prior neoadjuvant
therapy, messenger RNA (mRNA) expression of deltaNp63, Sox2 and Oct4 in
EC tissues and corresponding normal tissues was analyzed by quantitative
real-time reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction assay. The mRNA
expression was standardized to that of glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate
dehydrogenase (GAPDH) mRNA. The expressions were compared in terms of
clinicopathological factors and prognosis of postoperative
survivals.Results. Peason correlation analysis showed significant
correlations between expression of deltaNp63 and Sox2 in tumor tissues (r
= 0.67, P<0.001), and between deltaNp63 and Oct4 (r = 0.71, PBackground.
DeltaNp63 is the oncogenic isoform in several squamous cell carcinomas
including esophageal cancer (EC), however, the mechanisms of regulation
of the expression are still unclear. Sox2 and Oct4 are well known
transcription factors which function in cancer stemness. We supposed that
these two molecules work as transcription factors on deltaNp63, and
verified the expression of these genes in cases of resected squamous cell
EC.Methods. In 78 surgical specimens of squamous cell EC with no prior
neoadjuvant therapy, messenger RNA (mRNA) expression of deltaNp63, Sox2
and Oct4 in EC tissues and corresponding normal tissues was analyzed by
quantitative real-time reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction
assay. The mRNA expression was standardized to that of
glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) mRNA. The expressions
were compared in terms of clinicopathological factors and prognosis of
postoperative survivals.Results. Peason correlation analysis showed
significant correlations between expression of deltaNp63 and Sox2 in
tumor tissues (r = 0.67, P<0.001), and between deltaNp63 and Oct4 (r =
0.71, P<0.001). The deltaNp63 expressions in tumor tissues were
significantly higher than that in corresponding normal tissues
(PBackground. DeltaNp63 is the oncogenic isoform in several squamous cell
carcinomas including esophageal cancer (EC), however, the mechanisms of
regulation of the expression are still unclear. Sox2 and Oct4 are well
known transcription factors which function in cancer stemness. We
supposed that these two molecules work as transcription factors on
deltaNp63, and verified the expression of these genes in cases of
resected squamous cell EC.Methods. In 78 surgical specimens of squamous
cell EC with no prior neoadjuvant therapy, messenger RNA (mRNA)
expression of deltaNp63, Sox2 and Oct4 in EC tissues and corresponding
normal tissues was analyzed by quantitative real-time reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction assay. The mRNA expression was
standardized to that of glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH)
mRNA. The expressions were compared in terms of clinicopathological
factors and prognosis of postoperative survivals.Results. Peason
correlation analysis showed significant correlations between expression
of deltaNp63 and Sox2 in tumor tissues (r = 0.67, P<0.001), and between
deltaNp63 and Oct4 (r = 0.71, P<0.001). The deltaNp63 expressions in
tumor tissues were significantly higher than that in corresponding normal
tissues (P<0.001), whereas Sox2 and Oct4 did not show significant
differences between cancer and non-cancerous tissues. Univariate analysis
identified poor differentiation, lymphatic involvement and higher ratio
(Tumor/Normal) of expression of Oct4 as significant prognostic factors
for poor overall survival, however, lymphatic involvement was the only
independent prognostic factor in multivariate analysis (hazard ratio:
5.34; PBackground. DeltaNp63 is the oncogenic isoform in several squamous
cell carcinomas including esophageal cancer (EC), however, the mechanisms
of regulation of the expression are still unclear. Sox2 and Oct4 are well
known transcription factors which function in cancer stemness. We
supposed that these two molecules work as transcription factors on
deltaNp63, and verified the expression of these genes in cases of
resected squamous cell EC.Methods. In 78 surgical specimens of squamous
cell EC with no prior neoadjuvant therapy, messenger RNA (mRNA)
expression of deltaNp63, Sox2 and Oct4 in EC tissues and corresponding
normal tissues was analyzed by quantitative real-time reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction assay. The mRNA expression was
standardized to that of glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH)
mRNA. The expressions were compared in terms of clinicopathological
factors and prognosis of postoperative survivals.Results. Peason
correlation analysis showed significant correlations between expression
of deltaNp63 and Sox2 in tumor tissues (r = 0.67, P<0.001), and between
deltaNp63 and Oct4 (r = 0.71, P<0.001). The deltaNp63 expressions in
tumor tissues were significantly higher than that in corresponding normal
tissues (P<0.001), whereas Sox2 and Oct4 did not show significant
differences between cancer and non-cancerous tissues. Univariate analysis
identified poor differentiation, lymphatic involvement and higher ratio
(Tumor/Normal) of expression of Oct4 as significant prognostic factors
for poor overall survival, however, lymphatic involvement was the only
independent prognostic factor in multivariate analysis (hazard ratio:
5.34; P<0.001).Conclusions. Expression of deltaNp63 in EC tumor tissues
showed positive correlation with expression of Sox2 and Oct4. Therefore,
these two transcription factors may regulate the expression of deltaNp63.
The deltaNp63 is not a strong prognostic factor, however, Oct4 might be a
significant predictor for poor prognosis for overall survival in squamous
cell EC.

