Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MiR-203 suppresses cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma growth and
targets the myc oncogene


Cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma (cSCC) is the second most common cancer
in man and accounts for approximately 20% of non-melanoma skin cancers.
Although most cSCC are benign, poorly differentiated cSCC poses a
significant risk of metastasis and death. To date, little is known about
the difference in molecular background between low-risk and high risk
cSCC. MicroRNAs are short regulatory RNAs that can regulate gene
expression and cellular functions. Here we demonstrate for the first time
that the expression of miR-203 in cSCC correlates with tumor
differentiation grade, being down-regulated in poorly but not in
moderately or well differentiated cSCC. In vitro, miR-203 causes a delay
in G1 to S phase transition and suppresses cell proliferation in human
cSCC cells. Furthermore, miR-203 suppresses scratch-wound closure, cell
migration, cell invasion, colony forming ability and
angiogenesis-inducing capacity of cSCC cells. Transcriptomic analysis of
cSCC cells with ectopic overexpression of miR-203 reveals dramatic
changes in gene networks related to carcinogenesis, with significant
suppression of genes with known oncogenic functions (e.g. PCNA, EGFR,
HGF). Using luciferase reporter assays and site-specific mutagenesis, we
identify c-MYC as a novel target of miR-203. Highlighting the importance
of c-MYC within miR-203-regulated gene network, in rescue experiments
overexpression of c-MYC reverses miR-203-induced growth arrest in cSCC.
In vivo, overexpression of miR-203 in cSCC cell lines result in reduced
xenograft tumor volume and decreased vessel density. Together our data
show that miR-203 acts a tumor suppressor in cSCC, affecting several
oncogenic and angiogenic mechanisms. Importantly, its restoration may
provide therapeutic benefit in particular in poorly differentiated cSCC.

