Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Triphenylmethanol conjugates of triptorelin as anti-cancer prodrugs


Triptorelin (TRP) is an anti-cancer agent used for the treatment of a
wide variety of hormone-responsive cancers, such as prostate cancer. The
surge of testosterone, known as a flare effect, is the major side-effect
of cancer chemotherapy using TRP in a combination regiment. Improving the
biological activity of TRP by increasing the cellular uptake and
retention is a remedy to this end. In this study, the hydrophobicity of
TRP was optimized by using an appropriate hydrophobic linker attached to
tris(4-methoxyphenyl)methanol (TPM) derivatives with the expectation to
improve the cellular uptake. In this regard, a number of TRP conjugates
of TPM derivatives with optimized hydrophobicity were synthesized by the
reaction of 2-substituted methoxy benzenes (e.g. methyl
2-methoxybenzoate, 1,2-dimethoxybenzene, methoxy-2-methylbenzene,
methoxy-2-nitrobenzene, chloro-2-methxyenzene), and 1,3,5-trioxane,
followed by the conjugation with TRP and decanedioic acid in the presence
of HBTU/DIPEA/DIC in moderate yields. Comparative antiproliferative
assays between TPM-TRP conjugates and the corresponding non-covalent
physical mixtures of the TPM derivatives and TRP were performed against
human acute lymphoblastic leukemia (CCRF-CEM), human ovarian
adenocarcinoma (SK-OV-3), and mouse pre adipocytes (3T3-L1) cells.
TPM-TRP conjugates inhibited the cell proliferation of CCRF-CEM, SK-OV-3
and 3T3-L1 cells by 55-92%, 24-73%, 37-56%, respectively, at a
concentration of 10-50 M after 24-72 h of incubation. These data suggest
that TPM-TRP derivatives with optimized hydrophobicity can be used to
improve the biological activity of TRP.

