Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Design and engineering of TRAIL fusion proteins for cancer therapy


Protein-based agonists of apoptotic death receptors have shown remarkable
preclinical efficacy but limited clinical response. The short circulating
half-life of recombinant human TRAIL and the necessity of Fc-mediated
clustering for potentiating agonistic antibodies against DR4 and DR5 have
been proposed to be major impediments to the clinical success of this
class. To address these limitations we have created Fc-scTRAIL, a single
fusion polypeptide consisting of an IgG1 Fc region followed by three
successive TRAIL monomers connected by two fifteen-amino acid linkers.
While Fc-scTRAIL showed potent activity in vitro, we observed a low TM
(48 C) and rapid inactivation in serum indicating protein instability.
Subsequently, we applied a directed evolution approach using yeast
surface display to identify mutations that would stabilize the TRAIL
trimer. When individual mutations were transferred to the Fc-scTRAIL
format, we observed a dramatic increase in the TM (66-70 C) while the
combination of three mutations improved serum stability by ten-fold.
Stabilized Fc-scTRAIL shows greater pro-apoptotic activity across a panel
of cancer cell lines when compared to mapatumumab (anti-DR4) and
drozitumab (anti-DR5), or the combination of antibodies even in the
presence of anti-Fc cross-linking. Moreover, anti-Fc did not improve
Fc-scTRAIL activity suggesting that the hexavalent design of the molecule
maximizes death receptor activation. Currently, in vivo evaluation of
Fc-scTRAIL for pharmacokinetic properties and activity is underway. We
believe this format, when combined with an appropriate patient selection
strategy, will result in improved clinical outcomes.

