Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Defective calcium signaling pathway highlights the mutational
landscapes of liver metastasis from colorectal and breast cancer


BackgroundImaging-based early detections of colorectal cancer (CRC) and
breast cancer (BC) have significantly improved clinical outcome of these
two common cancers. However, when metastasis to distant organs (e.g.
liver) occurs, few therapeutic options are currently available. Recent
advances in the next-generation sequencing technologies have
revolutionized our possibilities to precisely profile all the genetic
changes involved in the evolutionary process of individual cancers. To
gain insight into genetic and molecular underpinning of metastasis, we
performed whole exome sequencing of paired primary and metastases samples
from seven CRC/BC patients. Candidate gene mutations were orthogonally
validated by targeted sequencing on 28 paired samples including an
additional 21 matched primary and metastatic tumors.ResultsWe found that
the mutational spectra of metastases were highly heterogeneous. A
pairwise comparison between primary and metastatic samples indicated many
point mutations were exclusively enriched either in primary tumor or
metastases or were present in a sharing pattern between them, showing a
lesion-specific genetic difference. Besides the known and novel mutations
in APC, TP53, KRAS genes, we discovered 64 significantly mutated genes
that were associated with liver metastases from CRC or BC, 9 of which
were metastasis specific. Notably, genetic aberrations in calcium
signaling pathway genes (GPR98, SYT6, TACR3, CYSLTR1, RYR3, and CACNA1A)
were somatically mutated in liver metastases in 29% of CRC and BC cases,
indicating that calcium-dependent signaling plays a key role in distant
metastasis.ConclusionsThese results begin to define the genetic basis
underlying liver metastasis from CRC/BC and identify potential
therapeutic targets.

