Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor infiltrating (TINKs) and tumor-associated (TANKs) natural
killer cells (TINKs): A new paradigm in colorectal cancer


Tumor infiltrating immune cells often show a skewed phenotype that
reflects attenuation of anti-tumor activity and enhancement of pro-tumor
activities, including angiogenesis. Natural Killer (NK) cells are
effectors lymphocytes of innate immunity, primarily involved in
immunosurvelliance against tumors through their cytotoxic activity. We
previously reported that NKs from Non Small Cell Lung Cancer (NSCLC) show
the decidual-like CD56brightCD16-VEGFhighPlGFhighIL-8+IFNlow phenotype
[Bruno et al, Neoplasia, 2014; Bruno et al, JNCI, 2014].Here we
investigated whether tumor associated (TANKs) and tumor infiltrating
(TINKs) NK cells undergo an angiogenic-switch in colorectal cancer
(CRC).NK subset distribution and cytokine profiling were performed by
multicolor flow cytometry, using peripheral blood and tissue samples from
CRC patients. Conditioned media (CM) from FACS-sorted NKs were used
either for secretomic profiling, by antibody membrane array or
angiogenesis functional assay on human umbilical endothelial vein cells
(HUVECs)We found that CD56brightCD16 NK cells predominate in CRC adjacent
and tumor tissues, produce VEGF, PlGF, IL-8 and show impaired
cytotoxicity. Further, TINK/TANKs from CRC patients express the decidual
NK markers CD9 and CD49a. Secretomic analysis on CRC peripheral blood NKs
revealed up regulation for several pro angiogenic factors, including
Angiogenin, Angiopoietin-1/2, TIMP-1/2, Tie-2, MMP1, MMP9. Media
conditioned by FACS sorted NK cells from peripheral blood and tumor
tissue of CRC patients were able to induce HUVEC proliferation, migration
and the formation of capillary like structures.Our data demonstrate that
TINK/TANKS from CRC patients are switched toward a
pro-angiogenic/pro-tumor phenotype and function. We propose that
TINK/TANKs could represent the hallmark for a new paradigm in CRC
inflammation.1. Bruno A, Focaccetti C, Pagani A, Imperatori AS,
Spagnoletti M, Rotolo N, Cantelmo AR, Franzi F, Capella C, Ferlazzo G,
Mortara L, Albini A, Noonan DM. The proangiogenic phenotype of natural
killer cells in patients with non-small cell lung cancer. Neopla sia.
2013 Feb;15(2):133-42.2. Bruno A, Ferlazzo G, Albini A, Noonan DM. A
think tank of TINK/TANKs: tumor infiltrating/tumor-associated natural
killer cells in tumor progression and angiogenesis. J Natl Cancer Inst.
2014Aug;106(8):dju200

