Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Your targeted population might not be what you predict: Changes in
tumor genetic landscapes post standard of care


Our current understanding of the mutation spectrum of relapse/refractory
patients is limited. Public sequencing efforts have focused by design, on
primary tumors, while re-biopsy of patients who are refractory to first
line therapy or who relapse on treatment is not standard protocol. We
have performed whole exome sequencing on post standard of care biopsies
from 3 patient cohorts, 47 DLBCL patients post-relapse following R-CHOP,
49 triple negative breast (TNBC) following taxol alone or in combination
and 41 lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD) following platinum alone or in
combination. Comparative analysis of the mutation spectrum of these
cohorts was performed against available clinically matched primary tumor
cohorts. Comparison of the mutational signatures, somatic variant
frequencies and copy number variation between matched pre- and
post-treatment samples, and treated-primary tumor cohorts were performed.
Significant differences were identified in the frequency of oncogenic
drivers including PIK3CA in TNBC and KRAS in LUAD. We also observed
mutational signature differences between cohorts that could impact
treatment regimens post standard of care. Collectively these data further
highlight the value of re-assessing the tumor genetic landscape at the
time of treatment rather than relying on primary tumor samples, which may
not be representative of the cohort to be treated.

