Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel compound ARN-3236 inhibits SIK2 and sensitizes ovarian
cancer to paclitaxel


Ovarian carcinomas account for 4% of total cancers in women in the United
States. Improved outcomes might be attained if sensitivity to primary
chemotherapy were enhanced. A recent study discovered that the salt
inducible kinase 2 (SIK2) plays a key role in the initiation of mitosis
and regulates paclitaxel sensitivity. Here we show that SIK2 is
overexpressed in 30% ovarian cancer specimens, associated with a poor
prognosis. ARN-3236, a selective, highly potent small molecule SIK2
inhibitor with function similar to SIK2 siRNA, blocks cell proliferation
in a panel of ovarian cancer cell lines, where the IC50 of ARN-3236 was
inversely correlated with endogenous SIK2 expression. ARN-3236 also
enhanced response to paclitaxel in ovarian cancer cells (OC316, SKOv3,
A2780, HEY, ES2 and UPN251). Similar to the function of SIK2 siRNA,
ARN-3236 effectively inhibits AKT phosphorylation at Ser473 and Tyr308,
as well as the expression of the downstream effector survivin. ARN-3236
uncouples the centrosome from the nucleus in interphase, and blocks
centrosome separation in mitosis, resulting in the accumulation of cells
in prometaphase. In addition, ARN-3236 enhances tumor growth inhibition
of paclitaxel in ovarian cancer xenograft models. Thus, functional
inhibition of SIK2 with ARN-3236 had the same effects on ovarian cancer
cell function as knockdown of SIK2 with siRNA. ARN-3236 deserves further
study as a SIK2 inhibitor that significantly improves the sensitivity to
paclitaxel for treatment of human ovarian cancer cells and xenografts.

