Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prognostic significance of PTEN alteration in Middle Eastern
colorectal carcinoma


Phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN) detected on chromosome 10 is a
tumour suppressor commonly reported to be inactivated in colorectal
cancers, but the prognostic significance of PTEN remains controversial.
Here, we investigated the clinical associations and the significant
prognostic value of combined PTEN mutation, genomic deletion and loss of
expression in a large cohort of Middle Eastern colorectal cancers. We
examined PTEN protein expression using immunohistochemistry in 400
sporadic colorectal cancers with full clinical investigations and follow
up data. PTEN mutations were studied using capture sequencing and Sanger
sequencing validation. PTEN copy number alteration was carried out using
Fluorescence In-Situ Hybridization (FISH). Of the all CRC tumours
analysed 83/347 (24%) cases showed absence of PTEN staining, 189/347
(54.5%%) cases showed weak staining and remaining 75/347 (21.5%) cases
showed staining similar to normal & internal positive control. 17
mutations in coding region of PTEN were identified in 13 (3.2%) CRC
cases. Further, PTEN deletion was identified in 24/338 (7.1%) of CRC
cases. No amplification of PTEN gene was detected. Interestingly when
combining all PTEN alterations (protein expression loss, PTEN mutation
and PTEN genomic deletion), it accounted for 97 (29.7%) CRC cases.
Significant association of combined PTEN alterations was seen disease
free survival (p = 0.0367). On multivariate analysis, this stands true (p
= 0.0227) when adjusted for Age, Sex, Site, Grade and Stage. Thus, PTEN
alteration is an independent marker of poor prognosis in CRC. In
conclusion, PTEN gene alteration plays an important role in Middle
Eastern colorectal cancer pathogenesis and it can help in identifying a
subgroup of CRC with particular poor outcome.

