Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of developmental endothelial locus-1 on circulating
extracellular vesicles as a novel biomarker for early breast cancer
detection


Purpose: Currently, there are no molecular biomarkers for the early
detection of breast cancer (BC). This study focused on identifying
surface proteins found on circulating extracellular vesicles (EVs) for
detecting early-stage BC.Experimental Design: Circulating EVs, isolated
from the plasma of 10 patients with BC (stages I and II), and 5 healthy
controls, were analyzed using LC-MS/MS. Developmental endothelial locus-1
protein (Del-1) was selected as a candidate biomarker. Two different
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISAs) were used to measure Del-1 in
plasma samples from healthy controls (n = 81), patients with BC (n =
269), BC patients after surgical resection (n = 50), patients with benign
breast tumors (n = 64), and patients with non-cancerous diseases (n =
98), in two cohorts.Results: Plasma Del-1 levels were significantly
higher (P Purpose: Currently, there are no molecular biomarkers for the
early detection of breast cancer (BC). This study focused on identifying
surface proteins found on circulating extracellular vesicles (EVs) for
detecting early-stage BC.Experimental Design: Circulating EVs, isolated
from the plasma of 10 patients with BC (stages I and II), and 5 healthy
controls, were analyzed using LC-MS/MS. Developmental endothelial locus-1
protein (Del-1) was selected as a candidate biomarker. Two different
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISAs) were used to measure Del-1 in
plasma samples from healthy controls (n = 81), patients with BC (n =
269), BC patients after surgical resection (n = 50), patients with benign
breast tumors (n = 64), and patients with non-cancerous diseases (n =
98), in two cohorts.Results: Plasma Del-1 levels were significantly
higher (P < 0.0001) in patients with BC than in all controls and returned
to almost normal after tumor removal. The diagnostic accuracy of Del-1
was area under the curve (AUC), 0.961 [95% CI, 0.924-0.983], sensitivity
of 94.70% and specificity of 86.36% in test cohort, and 0.968
[0.933-0.988], 92.31% and 86.62% in validation cohort for early-stage BC
by one type of ELISA. Furthermore, Del-1 maintained diagnostic accuracy
for patients with early-stage BC using the other type of ELISA (0.946
[0.905-0.972], 90.90%, and 77.14% in the test cohort; 0.943
[0.900-0.971], 89.23%, and 80.99% in the validation cohort).Conclusions:
Del-1 on circulating EVs is a promising marker to improve identification
of patients with early-stage BC and distinguish BC from benign breast
tumors and non-cancerous diseases.

