Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Radiation potentiates systemic anti-tumor immunity unleashed by a
novel TLR9 agonist (SD-101)


Background: SD-101 is a CpG oligonucleotide-based TLR9 agonist that
engages its target within early and late endosomes of plasmacytoid
dendritic cells (pDCs), resulting in DC activation, robust IFN-
responses, and priming of tumor-specific T-cells. We have previously
shown that local radiotherapy (RT) may also act as an immune adjuvant and
thereby contribute to immune-mediated tumor rejection (J Natl Cancer
Inst, 2013: 105:256-265). We hypothesized that the effects of SD-101 may
be potentiated by RT and trigger immune-mediated abscopal responses,
outside the irradiated field (Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys.,
58:862-870).Methods: BALB/c mice were inoculated s.c. with syngeneic TSA
mammary tumor cells in 2 sites (primary [ipsilateral flank] and secondary
[contralateral flank]) to detect abscopal responses. When tumors reached
an average of 5 mm in diameter, mice were randomly assigned to 1 out of 4
treatment groups: control (untreated), SD-101, RT, or SD-101+RT. RT was
delivered to primary tumors (8 Gy x3 fractions) in 3 consecutive days;
secondary tumors were completely shielded from RT. SD-101 was injected
into primary tumors (50 g) three times per week starting on the last day
of RT. Mice were followed for tumor growth in both the primary and
secondary tumors. In a parallel experiment, mice were euthanized 10 days
after initiation of therapy for immune analysis.Results: Significant
growth delays (p Background: SD-101 is a CpG oligonucleotide-based TLR9
agonist that engages its target within early and late endosomes of
plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs), resulting in DC activation, robust
IFN- responses, and priming of tumor-specific T-cells. We have previously
shown that local radiotherapy (RT) may also act as an immune adjuvant and
thereby contribute to immune-mediated tumor rejection (J Natl Cancer
Inst, 2013: 105:256-265). We hypothesized that the effects of SD-101 may
be potentiated by RT and trigger immune-mediated abscopal responses,
outside the irradiated field (Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys.,
58:862-870).Methods: BALB/c mice were inoculated s.c. with syngeneic TSA
mammary tumor cells in 2 sites (primary [ipsilateral flank] and secondary
[contralateral flank]) to detect abscopal responses. When tumors reached
an average of 5 mm in diameter, mice were randomly assigned to 1 out of 4
treatment groups: control (untreated), SD-101, RT, or SD-101+RT. RT was
delivered to primary tumors (8 Gy x3 fractions) in 3 consecutive days;
secondary tumors were completely shielded from RT. SD-101 was injected
into primary tumors (50 g) three times per week starting on the last day
of RT. Mice were followed for tumor growth in both the primary and
secondary tumors. In a parallel experiment, mice were euthanized 10 days
after initiation of therapy for immune analysis.Results: Significant
growth delays (p <0.05) were observed in the primary tumors of mice
treated with monotherapy (RT or SD-101), as compared to the primary
tumors of the untreated controls. In contrast, no significant growth
delays were observed in the secondary tumors of these mice, when compared
to the secondary tumors of their untreated counterparts. The combination
of SD-101+RT, however, effectively controlled the primary tumors (100% of
mice exhibited complete tumor rejection) of treated mice, while
significant growth delays were also observed in the secondary tumors (p
Background: SD-101 is a CpG oligonucleotide-based TLR9 agonist that
engages its target within early and late endosomes of plasmacytoid
dendritic cells (pDCs), resulting in DC activation, robust IFN-
responses, and priming of tumor-specific T-cells. We have previously
shown that local radiotherapy (RT) may also act as an immune adjuvant and
thereby contribute to immune-mediated tumor rejection (J Natl Cancer
Inst, 2013: 105:256-265). We hypothesized that the effects of SD-101 may
be potentiated by RT and trigger immune-mediated abscopal responses,
outside the irradiated field (Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys.,
58:862-870).Methods: BALB/c mice were inoculated s.c. with syngeneic TSA
mammary tumor cells in 2 sites (primary [ipsilateral flank] and secondary
[contralateral flank]) to detect abscopal responses. When tumors reached
an average of 5 mm in diameter, mice were randomly assigned to 1 out of 4
treatment groups: control (untreated), SD-101, RT, or SD-101+RT. RT was
delivered to primary tumors (8 Gy x3 fractions) in 3 consecutive days;
secondary tumors were completely shielded from RT. SD-101 was injected
into primary tumors (50 g) three times per week starting on the last day
of RT. Mice were followed for tumor growth in both the primary and
secondary tumors. In a parallel experiment, mice were euthanized 10 days
after initiation of therapy for immune analysis.Results: Significant
growth delays (p <0.05) were observed in the primary tumors of mice
treated with monotherapy (RT or SD-101), as compared to the primary
tumors of the untreated controls. In contrast, no significant growth
delays were observed in the secondary tumors of these mice, when compared
to the secondary tumors of their untreated counterparts. The combination
of SD-101+RT, however, effectively controlled the primary tumors (100% of
mice exhibited complete tumor rejection) of treated mice, while
significant growth delays were also observed in the secondary tumors (p
<0.05), when compared to the secondary tumors of mice from the other
groups. SD-101 alone or in combination with RT, induced intratumoral
enrichment of CD8+ DCs (3.02% of CD11c+ cells in SD-101-treated mice vs
1.08% in untreated mice), whereby these CD8+ DCs preferentially expressed
high levels of activation markers (CD40, CD80, and CD86). Yet, mice
treated with SD-101+RT, when compared to the other groups, also
demonstrated an expansion of tumor-reactive T-cells (CD8+/PD-1+) both
locally and systemically (J Clin Investig 2014
124(5):2246-2259).Conclusions: Our studies support the rational use of RT
as a powerful therapeutic partner to potentiate the anti-tumor effects of
SD-101.

