Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Polymorphisms of DNA-repair pathways and its association with
radiotherapy-induced acute skin toxicity among tri-racial breast cancer
populations


Radiotherapy-induced skin toxicity is one of the critical quality of life
issues in breast cancer patients receiving adjuvant radiation therapy
(RT). Finding a biomarker which can predict the development of acute
RT-induced toxicity prior to RT is critical to improve precision medicine
in radiation oncology. This study evaluated the association of single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in DNA-repair genes in 268 breast cancer
undergoing adjuvant RT. We analyzed 3,747 polymorphisms in 119 DNA
repair-related genes; 15 genes in base excision repair (BER), 11 in
mismatch repair (MMR), 26 in nucleotide excision repair (NER), 15 in
homologous recombination, 5 in non-homologous end-joining (NHEJ), 15 in
DNA polymerases, and 47 in other DNA repair-related pathways. Skin
toxicity was assessed at post-RT using the modified NCI's Common Toxicity
Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE) and multiple logistic regression
analyses were conducted to assess the associations between SNPs and grade
4 skin toxicity n = 115). After controlling for covariates, 221 SNPs were
significant at p Radiotherapy-induced skin toxicity is one of the
critical quality of life issues in breast cancer patients receiving
adjuvant radiation therapy (RT). Finding a biomarker which can predict
the development of acute RT-induced toxicity prior to RT is critical to
improve precision medicine in radiation oncology. This study evaluated
the association of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in DNA-repair
genes in 268 breast cancer undergoing adjuvant RT. We analyzed 3,747
polymorphisms in 119 DNA repair-related genes; 15 genes in base excision
repair (BER), 11 in mismatch repair (MMR), 26 in nucleotide excision
repair (NER), 15 in homologous recombination, 5 in non-homologous
end-joining (NHEJ), 15 in DNA polymerases, and 47 in other DNA
repair-related pathways. Skin toxicity was assessed at post-RT using the
modified NCI's Common Toxicity Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE) and
multiple logistic regression analyses were conducted to assess the
associations between SNPs and grade 4 skin toxicity n = 115). After
controlling for covariates, 221 SNPs were significant at p <0.05 and 34
at p Radiotherapy-induced skin toxicity is one of the critical quality of
life issues in breast cancer patients receiving adjuvant radiation
therapy (RT). Finding a biomarker which can predict the development of
acute RT-induced toxicity prior to RT is critical to improve precision
medicine in radiation oncology. This study evaluated the association of
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in DNA-repair genes in 268 breast
cancer undergoing adjuvant RT. We analyzed 3,747 polymorphisms in 119 DNA
repair-related genes; 15 genes in base excision repair (BER), 11 in
mismatch repair (MMR), 26 in nucleotide excision repair (NER), 15 in
homologous recombination, 5 in non-homologous end-joining (NHEJ), 15 in
DNA polymerases, and 47 in other DNA repair-related pathways. Skin
toxicity was assessed at post-RT using the modified NCI's Common Toxicity
Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE) and multiple logistic regression
analyses were conducted to assess the associations between SNPs and grade
4 skin toxicity n = 115). After controlling for covariates, 221 SNPs were
significant at p <0.05 and 34 at p < 0.01. Significant associations
(pRadiotherapy-induced skin toxicity is one of the critical quality of
life issues in breast cancer patients receiving adjuvant radiation
therapy (RT). Finding a biomarker which can predict the development of
acute RT-induced toxicity prior to RT is critical to improve precision
medicine in radiation oncology. This study evaluated the association of
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in DNA-repair genes in 268 breast
cancer undergoing adjuvant RT. We analyzed 3,747 polymorphisms in 119 DNA
repair-related genes; 15 genes in base excision repair (BER), 11 in
mismatch repair (MMR), 26 in nucleotide excision repair (NER), 15 in
homologous recombination, 5 in non-homologous end-joining (NHEJ), 15 in
DNA polymerases, and 47 in other DNA repair-related pathways. Skin
toxicity was assessed at post-RT using the modified NCI's Common Toxicity
Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE) and multiple logistic regression
analyses were conducted to assess the associations between SNPs and grade
4 skin toxicity n = 115). After controlling for covariates, 221 SNPs were
significant at p <0.05 and 34 at p < 0.01. Significant associations
(p<0.01) were found in 7 SNPs in PAPD5 gene, 1 in POLD1, POLE, and POLI
in DNA polymerase; 5 in RAD51L1 and 1 in RAD54L in HR; 4 in MMS19 in NER;
2 in MSH4 and 1 in PMS1 in MMR; 2 in RPA3 in BER; 2 in RAD18, and 1 in
UBE2V2 in Rad6 pathway; 2 in CHEK2 in DNA damage response pathway; 1 in
MGMT in direct reversal of DNA damage; and 1 in BLM in diseases
associated with sensitivity to DNA damaging agents pathways. Among these,
most significant association was found in BLM variant (s16944918) which
showed that carrying at least one minor T allele was associated with
increased risk of RT-induced skin toxicity (odds ratio [OR] = 3.36; 95%
confidence interval (CI) = 1.62-6.97, p = 0.001). For RPA3 (rs11978293),
carriers with at least one minor G allele were more likely to develop
RT-induced skin toxicity (OR = 2.17, 95% CI = 1.34-3.52, p = 0.002). The
current study suggests that genetic variations in multiple DNA-repair
genes/pathways may contribute to inter-individual variation in RT-induced
normal tissue toxicity in breast cancer patients and suggests the
possibility of potential predictive values of genetic polymorphisms in RT
sensitivity. Further validation studies with larger sample size are
warranted.

