Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Loss of EZH2 accelerates STAT5 loss mediated fatty liver and
cancer development through non-methyltransferase function


Background: The molecular mechanisms underlying the development of fatty
liver and hepatocellular carcinoma are not fully understood. Loss of
STAT5 from liver tissue results in hepatosteatosis and hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC). Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) mediates epigenetic
silencing of gene expression and is frequently up-regulated in human HCC.
STAT5 recruits EZH2, which represses a substantial subset of genes
regulated by STAT5 during B lymphopoiesis. However, it is not clear if
EZH2 can affect STAT5-target genes in liver.Methods: To investigate the
role of STAT5 and EZH2 in liver, mice were generated that carried
EZH2fl/fl alleles, STAT5fl/fl alleles, EZH2fl/flSTAT5fl/fl alleles and an
Alb-Cre transgene. Lipid analysis in serum and liver, and RNA-seq were
examined at 3 & 8 months of age. Mice were also examined by chronic 3
months injection by carbon tetrachloride (CCl4).Results: The deletion of
STAT5 in hepatocyte caused fatty liver and increased cholesterol in serum
and liver. The deletion of EZH2 did not make a difference in H3K27me3
expression, and lipid in serum and liver. However, combined loss of EZH2
and STAT5 caused severe fatty liver, increase triglyceride and the ratio
liver/body weight compare to STAT5 KO mice (the ratio; 0.097 vs. 0.058, p
Background: The molecular mechanisms underlying the development of fatty
liver and hepatocellular carcinoma are not fully understood. Loss of
STAT5 from liver tissue results in hepatosteatosis and hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC). Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) mediates epigenetic
silencing of gene expression and is frequently up-regulated in human HCC.
STAT5 recruits EZH2, which represses a substantial subset of genes
regulated by STAT5 during B lymphopoiesis. However, it is not clear if
EZH2 can affect STAT5-target genes in liver.Methods: To investigate the
role of STAT5 and EZH2 in liver, mice were generated that carried
EZH2fl/fl alleles, STAT5fl/fl alleles, EZH2fl/flSTAT5fl/fl alleles and an
Alb-Cre transgene. Lipid analysis in serum and liver, and RNA-seq were
examined at 3 & 8 months of age. Mice were also examined by chronic 3
months injection by carbon tetrachloride (CCl4).Results: The deletion of
STAT5 in hepatocyte caused fatty liver and increased cholesterol in serum
and liver. The deletion of EZH2 did not make a difference in H3K27me3
expression, and lipid in serum and liver. However, combined loss of EZH2
and STAT5 caused severe fatty liver, increase triglyceride and the ratio
liver/body weight compare to STAT5 KO mice (the ratio; 0.097 vs. 0.058, p
< 0.05). In response to 3 months treatment with CCl4, combined loss of
EZH2 and STAT5 showed accelerated development of hepatocellular carcinoma
at 12 months of age. Transcriptome analysis identified the expression of
several genes was significantly increased (cd36, ppar, cyp4a14,
lipoprotein lipase, fasn) and decreased (nox4, bbc3, bcl2l1, cdkn2b)
which were well known as STAT5 target genes in combined loss of EZH2 and
STAT5.Conclusions: This work demonstrates that loss of EZH2 in liver
affects the expression of STAT5 target genes and accelerates STAT5 loss
mediated fatty liver and hepatocellular carcinoma development through
non-methyltransferase function.

