Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: EphA3 maintains radioresistance in head and neck cancers


Radiotherapy is a well-established therapeutic modality used in treatment
of many cancers. However, radioresistance remains a serious obstacle to
successful treatment. Radioresistance can cause local recurrence and
distant metastases in some patients after treatment by radiation. Thus,
special emphasis has been given to the discovery of effective
radiosensitizers. EphA3 receptors functions contribute to tumor
development, modulating cell-cell adhesion, invasion, neo-angiogenesis,
tumor growth and metastasis. However, the role of EphA3 in
radioresistance remains to be elucidated. Here, we established the stable
radioresistant head and neck cancer cell line (AMC HN3R cell line) and
identified that EphA3 was overexpressed predominantly in the AMC HN3R
cancer cell line through DNA microarray, real time PCR and Western
blotting. Additionally, we identified that EphA3 was overexpressed in
recurred laryngeal cancer specimen after radiation therapy. And we found
that EphA3 mediated the tumor invasiveness and migration and EMT
(epithelial mesenchymal transition) related protein expression in AMC
HN3R cancer cell line. To investigate the role of EphA3 in modulating the
radiosensitivity, we observed the change of survival fraction after
transfection EphA3 siRNA. And we found that inhibition of EphA3 enhances
radiosensitivity in AMC HN 3R cell line. In conclusion, these results
suggest that EphA3 is overexpressed in radioresistant head and neck
cancer and can play a crucial role in development radioresistance in head
and neck cancers through regulation of EMT pathway.

