Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting estrogen receptor mutations for treatment of endocrine
therapy resistance in breast cancer


Approximately 70% of all breast cancers express the Estrogen Receptor
(ER) and inhibition of the ER signaling remains the mainstay of systemic
therapy in such cancers. The advent of endocrine therapies (ET) have
contributed significantly to reduction in the incidence, recurrence and
mortality associated with breast cancer. However, approximately one-third
of patients with ER-positive breast cancer do not benefit from adjuvant
ET, and nearly all patients with ER-positive metastatic breast cancer
(MBC) ultimately become refractory to all known ETs. While several
mechanisms of resistance to ET have been proposed, there are currently no
clinically effective treatments for ET resistance. Thus, ET resistance
remains a major obstacle to the effective treatment of a significant
subset of ER-positive breast cancers. We have recently reported recurrent
somatic mutations in the ligand binding domain (LBD) of the Estrogen
Receptor gene (ESR1) in metastatic breast cancer patients with a history
of prior treatment with ET. The ESR1 mutations result in constitutive
activation of the ER and confer ET resistance when ectopically expressed
in ER-positive cell lines. In an attempt to develop novel therapeutic
strategies to treat ET-resistant breast cancer, we have evaluated OTX015,
a clinical bromodomain and extraterminal (BET) domain inhibitor, in
pre-clinical models of ET resistance due to ESR1 mutations. Our studies
suggest that BET inhibition may serve as an attractive strategy for
treatment of ET resistance due to ESR1 mutations.

