Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CRISPR/Cas9 genome-wide gRNA library for target identification


Genome-wide loss-of-function screening is a fundamental method to
identify genes responsible for driving biological responses, and complex
pooled lentiviral-based libraries expressing large numbers of genetic
disruptors, such as shRNAs, make large-scale cell screening practical.
While RNAi-based approaches have proven to be an effective strategy for
these screens, recent work suggests CRISPR technology offers an effective
alternative. Although shRNA and sgRNA pooled library screens are similar
in concept, the gene interruption with the two techniques occurs by a
very different mechanism so some divergence may be expected when
comparing results obtained using one method versus the other.To
investigate the potential difference in the two methodologies, we
performed parallel dropout viability screens to identify essential genes
in a pair of primary isogenic CML cell lines using a CRISPR/Cas9 knockout
library and an RNA interference (RNAi) library targeting the same set of
6,300 genes with the same number of targeted effectors (sgRNA or shRNA)
for each gene. The results showed significant, but not complete, overlap
in the essential genes identified by each assay in each cell line
indicating that both approaches are effective to identify the majority of
essential genes in a cell system. However, analysis did indicate that a
small number of essential targets were only identified with CRISPR and
certain unique targets seemed to show up only in the RNAi screen results.
By combining data from the two screening methodologies, a consistent
number of viability genes and pathways could be identified and
subsequently validated by independent cell based assays at a very high
confirmation rate.

