Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A family affair: Prostate cancer risk and family history of breast
or prostate cancer


Background - There is suggestive evidence of familial clustering of
breast and prostate cancer in first-degree relatives; women with a family
history of prostate cancer are at increased risk of breast cancer. Few
studies have investigated joint family history of breast and prostate
cancer and prostate cancer risk, and no study to date has examined lethal
prostate cancer.Methods - We studied 42,672 from the Health Professionals
Follow-up Study between 1996 to 2012. During follow-up, 4,258 prostate
cancer cases were diagnosed, of whom 380 were lethal disease. Men
self-reported family history of breast and prostate cancer, including in
siblings or parents. Using cause-specific hazards regression, we
estimated hazard ratios (HR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) of the
association between family history and prostate cancer risk and
progression.Results - About 8% of men had a family history of prostate
cancer, 8.7% had a family history of breast cancer, and 1.4% of men had a
family history of both breast and prostate cancer. A family history of
prostate cancer was significantly associated with an increased risk of
prostate cancer (HR: 1.69; 95% CI: 1.54-1.85). Increased risk was higher
for men with a father diagnosed with prostate cancer (HR: 1.64 95% CI:
1.49-1.80) than for men with a diagnosis in a brother(s) (HR: 1.51 95%
CI: 1.27-1.80). A positive family history of breast cancer was associated
with a small, but significant 22% increased risk (HR: 1.22; 95% CI:
1.11-1.35). Familial breast cancer in a sister (HR: 1.22 95% CI:
1.06-1.41) increased risk more than familial breast cancer in a mother
(HR: 1.12; 95% CI: 0.99-1.25). Men with a family history of both prostate
and breast cancer had a 52% (HR: 1.52; 95%CI: 1.23-1.88) increased risk
of prostate cancer compared to men with no family history of either
cancer. Risk of lethal prostate cancer was also significantly increased
for men with a positive family history of prostate cancer (HR: 1.64; 95%
CI: 1.20-2.24), as well as for men with a family history of breast cancer
(HR: 1.47; 95% CI: 1.07-2.01).Conclusions - These results support the
findings of familial aggregation of breast and prostate cancer, and for
the first time suggest an association between familial breast cancer and
lethal prostate cancer. Data from this prospective study have
translational relevance for family counseling of cancer patients.

