Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oncogenomic analysis of Merkel cell carcinoma


We used an integrative oncogenomic approach to investigate the molecular
etiology of Merkel Cell Carcinoma (MCC) in an effort to identify novel
therapeutic targets and biomarkers for this highly aggressive
neuroendocrine skin tumor. Because MCC is rare and poorly understood,
there are currently no effective treatment options for patients with
advanced disease. Approximately 80% of MCC tumors have Merkel Cell
polyomavirus (MCV) DNA integrated into the host genome, and viral
oncogenes are thought to drive carcinogenesis. Moreover it has been
reported that MCV-negative MCC samples have an increased rate of
mutations relative to MCV-positive tumors. Taken together, this suggests
that MCV-positive and negative MCCs are driven by different mechanisms.
We used whole exome sequencing and bioinformatic analyses to identify
somatically dysregulated genes and pathways in MCC tumor samples.
Additionally, we used a comparative genomic hybridization array to
identify genomic amplifications and deletions. Whole transcriptome
profiling was achieved using microarrays and RNA-sequencing. As the same
tumor samples were used in each of these platforms, we were able to
systematically correlate sequence variants with copy number changes and
gene expression to identify high priority targets for further study.
Interestingly, despite differences in driver mutations, we found
relatively few differences in the global gene expression of MCV-positive
and MCV-negative MCC tumors. Overall, our integrative oncogenomic
approach has identified novel therapeutic targets for the treatment of
MCC that are currently undergoing functional validation and preclinical
testing.

