Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Collagen, type I, alpha 1 (COL1A1): a potential urinary biomarker
that can distinguish between benign prostate hyperplasia and localized
prostate cancer


Benign prostate hyperplasia (BPH) is the most frequent benign disease
among men worldwide and its incidence increases with age. Prostate cancer
(PCa) and BPH share similar symptoms and an elevated serum
prostate-specific antigen (PSA) can be observed with either benign or
malignant growth of the prostate. It is the demographic overlap of BPH
and PCa, and the lack of discrimination between these two prostate
diseases by PSA, that defines the diagnostic dilemma faced by clinicians
when treating prostate disease. The goal of the current study was to
identify novel non-invasive, biomarkers that can distinguish between BPH
and PCa. We utilized iTRAQ (Isobaric Tags for Relative and Absolute
Quantitation) mass spectrometry techniques to sensitively and accurately
identify the urinary proteome of men with BPH vs. men with PCa. We then
performed functional enrichment analysis and pathways enrichment analysis
of these proteins using Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) tools to
determine differentially expressed pathways and functions in PCa as
compared to BPH. Network analysis identified differences in a number of
signaling molecules including ERK1/2, TGF, PI3K, p38 MAPK and NFB, with a
high degree of interactivity. Protein expression was validated by
immunoblot analyses using monospecific antibodies. Here, we focused on
collagen, type I, alpha 1 (COL1A1), one of a number of extracellular
matrix-associated proteins detected. We found that COL1A1 was
significantly (P Benign prostate hyperplasia (BPH) is the most frequent
benign disease among men worldwide and its incidence increases with age.
Prostate cancer (PCa) and BPH share similar symptoms and an elevated
serum prostate-specific antigen (PSA) can be observed with either benign
or malignant growth of the prostate. It is the demographic overlap of BPH
and PCa, and the lack of discrimination between these two prostate
diseases by PSA, that defines the diagnostic dilemma faced by clinicians
when treating prostate disease. The goal of the current study was to
identify novel non-invasive, biomarkers that can distinguish between BPH
and PCa. We utilized iTRAQ (Isobaric Tags for Relative and Absolute
Quantitation) mass spectrometry techniques to sensitively and accurately
identify the urinary proteome of men with BPH vs. men with PCa. We then
performed functional enrichment analysis and pathways enrichment analysis
of these proteins using Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) tools to
determine differentially expressed pathways and functions in PCa as
compared to BPH. Network analysis identified differences in a number of
signaling molecules including ERK1/2, TGF, PI3K, p38 MAPK and NFB, with a
high degree of interactivity. Protein expression was validated by
immunoblot analyses using monospecific antibodies. Here, we focused on
collagen, type I, alpha 1 (COL1A1), one of a number of extracellular
matrix-associated proteins detected. We found that COL1A1 was
significantly (P < 0.001) elevated in the urine of patients diagnosed
with early or localized PCa but not in the urine of men with BPH.
Complementary studies were conducted on human BPH and PCa cells. Our data
suggest that COL1A1 may represent a novel non-invasive biomarker that can
discriminate between BPH and early PCa. (Supported by The Ellison
Foundation)

