Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Randomized double-blind clinical study of F14512, a new
polyamine-vectorized anticancer drug and Etoposide in naturally occurring
canine lymphoma


F14512 is a new topoisomerase II inhibitor containing a spermine moiety
that facilitates selective uptake by tumor cells and increases
topoisomerase II poisoning. F14512 is currently in Phase I/II clinical
trials in patients with acute myeloid leukemia. The aim of this study is
to investigate the potential of F14512 in a new clinical indication and
to compare its clinical efficacy with the reference topoisomerase II
inhibitor Etoposide. Because of the many similarities between human and
dog lymphomas, we are seeking to determine the tolerance, efficacy, PK/PD
relationship of F14512 in this indication and potential biomarkers that
could be translated into human trials.Firstly, we successfully initiated
two Phase 1 dose-escalation trials with 23 and 27 dogs with naturally
occurring lymphomas using F14512 and Etoposide, respectively, with
endpoints including safety, therapeutic efficacy and biomarker studies.
Secondly, we initiated a randomized double blind study with two groups of
24 dogs with naturally occurring lymphomas in order to compare the
clinical efficacy of F14512 and Etoposide in both newly diagnosed and
relapsing cases.The Phase 1 trial demonstrated that F14512 could be
safely administered to dogs with lymphoma resulting in strong therapeutic
efficacy with a response rate of 91% (21/23) with 10 complete responses,
11 partial responses, one stable disease and one progressive disease.
Phosphorylation of histone H2AX was studied as a potential
pharmacodynamic biomarker of F14512. Etoposide displayed modest
therapeutic efficacy with a response rate of 19% (5/27) with 1 complete
response, 4 partial responses, and 6 stable diseases. The comparative
clinical study was then initiated with both compounds administered at the
recommended dose identified in the Phase 1 trial. Inclusion of all the
dogs from the randomized double blind comparative study will be finalized
at the beginning of 2016 and the results of the study will be disclosed
at the AACR 2016 meeting.This work shows that naturally occurring cancers
in dogs can be of great interest in translational research in order to
support preclinical and clinical development of new compounds.

