Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: USP21 stabilizes the BRCA2/Rad51 complex to ensure cancer genome
maintenance


Cancer is a disease of defective genome maintenance. Paradoxically,
however, tumor growth relies on efficient DNA repair to mitigate the
detrimental impact of replication-associated DNA double-strand breaks
(DSBs). Deleterious mutations in BRCA2, a tumor suppressor that promotes
homologous recombination (HR), consequently result in increased
susceptibility to genotoxic stress in rapidly dividing tumor cells. While
these findings underscore the importance of tightly controlled BRCA2
function for tumor growth, little is known about the factors that
regulate this process. Here, we establish the ubiquitin-specific protease
USP21 as a positive regulator of BRCA2 stability. USP21 interacts with,
deubiquitinates and stabilizes the BRCA2/Rad51 complex and promotes
efficient Rad51 loading to DSBs. As a result, depletion of USP21
decreases HR efficiency, causes an increase in DNA damage load and
impairs tumor cell survival. Importantly, BRCA2 overexpression partially
restores the USP21-associated HR defect. Moreover, we show that USP21 is
overexpressed in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), where it promotes BRCA2
stability and inversely correlates with patient survival. These findings
demonstrate a novel deubiquitination mechanism to control BRCA2 levels
and point to USP21 as a potential therapeutic target in BRCA2-proficient
tumors.

