Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Polyphenon E treatment affects p73 mRNA levels


Prostate cancer (PCa) is the most common malignancy among men in the USA.
Polyphenon E (PolyE) is a standardized blend of polyphenols found in
green tea extract, which has been shown to have chemoprevention value in
PCa models, but the molecular mechanism(s) have not been elucidated. The
p73 gene is a member of the p53 tumor suppressor family. A p73
dinucleotide polymorphism (DNP) (rs1801173) is a G4C14-to-A4T14 linked
pair of transitions located in exon 2 and lies between the P1 and P2 gene
promoters. The P1 and P2 p73 gene promoters are the transcription
initiation sites for mRNAs encoding TAp73 and deltaNp73 (DNp73) isoforms,
respectively. These p73 mRNA isoforms, TAp73 and Np73, encode protein
isoforms which differ in their N-termini. TAp73 isoforms include the
full-length N-terminal sequence and are transcriptionally active. Np73
isoforms lack the N-terminal trans-activation domain and are dominate
negative. Recently, we reported the p73 DNP allele was associated with
(1) decreased risk [OR = 0.55, 95%CI = 0.31-0.99] for aggressive PCa and
(2) increased TAp73/DNp73 protein isoform ratios in ten human cancer cell
lines. We hypothesize that exposure to PolyE induces changes in
TAp73/DNp73 mRNA isoform ratios. Our goal for this study is to assess the
effect of PolyE on total p73 mRNA levels and TAp73/DNp73 mRNA isoform
ratios using two human PCa cell lines with different p73 DNP genotypes:
DU145 (wild-type) and PC-3 (heterozygous). Cultured cells were treated
with PolyE (100 or 200 mg/L). Cellular RNA was isolated, converted to
cDNA and used in TaqMan RT-PCR assays to detect total p73, TAp73 or DNp73
isoform mRNAs. Our data from PolyE treatments of both DU145 and PC-3
cells are consistent with increased p73 mRNA levels (2.05 and 1.60 fold,
respectively) and higher TAp73/DNp73 mRNA ratios (1.13 and 1.29 fold,
respectively) at the low Poly E level (100 mg/L). At the high PolyE level
(200 mg/L), the TAp73/DNp73 mRNA ratios significantly decreased for both
DU145 and PC-3 (0.54 and 0.49 respectively). However, the overall p73
mRNA levels was not changed in DU145 (0.91 fold), but increased in PC-3
(1.60 fold) as compared with level in negative control at the high Poly E
concentration. Therefore, in this exploratory study, PolyE treatment of
the two PCa cell lines tested using a more moderate concentration of 100
mg/L results in higher overall p73 levels and increased TAp73/DNp73 mRNA
ratios. This data could provide a potential molecular rationale for the
observation that Poly E treatments provide chemopreventative impact
against PCa.

