Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pharmacokinetics (PK) of CRLX301, a novel nanoparticle-drug
conjugate (NDC) containing the payload docetaxel, in patients with
refractory solid tumors


Introduction. Nanoparticles (NPs) provide many advantages over small
molecule drugs, such as greater solubility, increased duration of
exposure, and enhanced tumor delivery, which may lead to improved
antitumor activity and reduced toxicity. PK of NPs is complex as the PK
is dependent upon the carrier and not the therapeutic entity until the
active-drug payload is released. It is important to evaluate the PK of
the inactive carrier-associated drug and active released drug. CRLX301 is
an investigational NDC containing the payload docetaxel covalently
conjugated to a cyclodextrin-polyethylene glycol (CD-PEG) co-polymer that
is 10-30 nm in diameter. This study evaluated CRLX301 PK in a phase 1
study in patients with refractory solid tumors.Methods. CRLX301 was
administered at 7.5, 15, 30, 60 and 75 mg/m2 IV over 1 h every 21 days.
The doses of CRLX301 represent mg of docetaxel. PK studies were performed
on days 1-21 of cycles 1, 3 and 6. Plasma samples were processed to
measure total (conjugated + released) and released docetaxel. PK
parameters area under conc-time curve (AUC0-inf) and volume of
distribution (Vd) were estimated. Results were compared to a prior PK
study of Taxotere at 75 mg/m2 IV x 1 every 21 days (Zamboni, et al. CCP
2011).Results. Plasma PK of total and released docetaxel were linear
after CRLX301 from 7.5 to 75 mg/m2. CRLX301 plasma PK was similar on
cycles 1, 3 and 6 suggesting no accumulation after multiple doses. For
CRLX301 at 75 mg/m2 on cycle 1, mean SD plasma AUC0-inf of total and
released docetaxel were 321,355 9,831 and 3,015 904 ng/mLh, respectively.
Mean SD% of docetaxel released from CRLX301 into the plasma was 1.0
0.2%.Exposures of total and released docetaxel in plasma after
administration of CRLX301 (7 days) were prolonged compared with Taxotere
(24 h). Total docetaxel plasma AUC after CRLX301 at 75 mg/m2 was 63-fold
greater than for Taxotere. The Vd of CRLX301 total docetaxel and Taxotere
were 2.1 0.1 and 74-99 L/m2, respectively. The overall plasma AUC of
released docetaxel after CRLX301 (3,015 904 ng/mLh) was similar to
Taxotere (2,000-10,000 ng/mLh); however, most of the released docetaxel
AUC after CRLX301 is associated with exposures at 24-168 h. Early
exposures of released docetaxel in plasma after CRLX301 (Cmax = 242 44
ng/mL) were 25-fold lower than Taxotere (Cmax = 5,000-8,000
ng/mL).Conclusions. CRLX301 exhibits PK advantages over Taxotere such as
higher retention of drug in plasma, slower clearance and controlled slow
release of docetaxel from the carrier. CRLX301 exhibits low inter- and
intra-patient PK variability. It is anticipated that this unique PK
profile of CRLX301 may improve efficacy as well as the tolerability
profile when compared to Taxotere. The study continues with dose
escalation to further explore the safety, efficacy and PK of CRLX301.

