Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Stromalcell suppression of estrogen receptor in growth-arrested
breast cancer cellsand promotion of outgrowth of estrogen-independent
clones


Breast cancers have a poorer prognosis if estrogen receptor expression
was lost during recurrence. It is unclear whether this conversion is cell
autonomous or whether it can be promoted by the microenvironment during
cancer dormancy. Bone marrow is the most common site for luminal breast
cancer recurrence. We explored whether the HS5 bone marrow stromal cell
line that is known to arrest co-cultured breast cancer cells could
suppress estrogen receptor alpha (ER) expression during arrest, and
whether it could prime the emergence of estrogen-independent breast
cancer clones. We demonstrated that paracrine signaling from HS5 cells
downregulated ER at the mRNA level and also decreased ER protein
stability in T47D and MCF7 breast cancer cells. Conditioned medium (CM)
from HS5 arrested the cells in G0/G1 in part through interleukin-1 (IL1),
inhibiting mammosphere formation and 2D-growth despite activation of
proliferative pathways (Erk and AKT) by the CM. Reversal of
stromal-induced growth arrest by blockade of signaling by IL1 in HS5-CM
enabled the outgrowth of ER-negative breast cancer cells that were
fulvestrant-resistant and estrogen-independent. Outgrowth depended on AKT
signaling. Our results describe pro- and anti-proliferative paracrine
signals arising from a bone marrow stromal cell line. Blockade of the
growth suppressive signaling unmasked stromal facilitation of ER
conversion and anti-estrogen resistance in breast cancer cells.

