Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of TFPI2 and FGF2 in asbestos-induced mesothelial to
fibroblastic transition


Mechanisms involved in the tumorigenesis of the devastating cancer,
malignant mesothelioma (MM) are poorly understood. We have recently shown
that interleukin-1 (IL-1), an inflammatory cytokine is upregulated by
asbestos via the activation of the inflammasome (a molecular platform
that assembles for the activation of caspase-1) in mesothelial cells.
Furthermore we have demonstrated that IL-1 secretion may lead to the
activation of downstream signaling cascades involved in malignant
transformation of mesothelial cells.Preliminary data from our lab
indicate that in addition to IL-1, asbestos exposure upregulated the
secretion of basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF/FGF2) and tissue factor
pathway inhibitor 2 ((TFPI2) a kunitz type protease inhibitor). These
factors were also regulated by the inflammasome and have never before
been implicated in asbestos-induced mesothelial to fibroblastic
transition (MFT). Based on our preliminary data, we hypothesized that
upregulation of IL-1 by asbestos-induced inflammasome activation
increases FGF2 secretion and signaling. Furthermore, we hypothesize that
FGF2 together with increased TFPI2 secretion induces transition of
mesothelial cells to a fibroblastic phenotype that facilitates MM
carcinogenesis. In the proposed study we will delineate the role of TFPI2
(siRNA) and FGF2 (pan FGFR inhibitor, BGJ398) in the process of
asbestos-induced MFT.Data from this study will provide added insight into
the mechanisms involved in the initiation of MM and indicate whether
TFPI2 and FGF2 can serve as drugable targets for combination therapy
against MM. This work is supported by NIH grant, RO1 ES021110.

