Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Microarray analysis of polysome-associated mRNAs from different
regions of the same human glioblastoma reveals intratumoral heterogeneity


Glioblastoma is among the most aggressive tumor type and less responsive
to chemotherapeutic agents, thus a better understanding of the behavior
of these tumors may help to develop new treatments for this disease.
Currently, many genome-wide projects attempt to define general patterns
of gene expression based on deep sequencing or microarray data from total
mRNA populations. However, this approach provides little information
about the molecular mediators of tumor biology, because the expression
levels of mRNAs do not necessarily reflect the levels of proteins. The
identification of mRNAs target of translational alterations in tumors can
show gene expression profiles that better reflect the population of
proteins. In this work we were able to identify mRNAs differentially
translated in a human glioblastoma that presented histologically
different parts. The sample was divided in 8 pieces that were classified
as high or low grade based on histological characteristics. Actively
translating ribosomes and their associated mRNAs were isolated
biochemically through a polysomal profile. Total and polysomal mRNA was
then extracted and submitted to a microarray analysis. By comparing high
vs low grade tumor pieces, we were able to identify more differentially
translated genes (138 genes) than differentially expressed genes (43
genes). Among the differentially translated mRNAs, there are many related
to proliferation, development and cancer. By Integrated Pathway Analysis,
we identified the TGF- pathway among the the most relevant for grade
progression. Thus, the technique of isolating mRNAs engaged in
translation can be used to identify biomarkers of tumor progression,
leading to new therapeutic approaches.

