Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Whole transcriptome analysis of patient-derived 3D in vitro and
xenograft models of colon cancer identifies placental genes required for
the survival of cancer stem cells


Growing evidence supports a subpopulation of cancer stem cells (CSCs) as
both the drivers of tumor growth and the source of relapse following
treatment. The identification of genes and pathways required for the
survival of CSCs may therefore lead to better treatment outcomes. Here,
as part of the OncoTrack* consortium, we report the use of 3D in vitro
and xenograft models of patient-derived colon cancer for the
identification of novel regulators of CSCs.Increased aldehyde
dehydrogenase (ALDH) activity has been demonstrated to be a marker of
normal intestinal stem cells and colon CSCs. We therefore isolated and
functionally tested ALDH+ cells for CSC properties using 3D in vitro
models and xenografts of patient derived colon cancer. These studies
revealed ALDH+ cells to be highly enriched for CSCs. In addition, there
was a positive correlation between CSC frequency in the models and tumor
grade at time of surgical resection.ALDH+ CSCs were subjected to RNA
sequencing for whole transcriptome analysis. These analyses demonstrated
ALDH+ CSCs to be enriched for stem cell associated genes (ALDH1A1, BMI1,
LGR5, CD44, CD166), signaling pathways (Wnt, Hedgehog) and developmental
(embryonic, placental, tissue development, EMT) and metabolic processes
(retinol metabolism, drug metabolism, hypoxia).Lentivirus mediated gene
knockdown was carried out on a panel of genes that were differentially
expressed in ALDH+ cells from 3D in vitro models and xenografts. These
studies led to the identification of genes required for the self-renewal
and survival of colon CSCs. Interestingly, these genes have been reported
as important regulators of early embryonic and placental development but
have not previously been reported in the regulation of cancer stem
cells.*The research leading to these results has received funding from
the European Union's Seventh Framework Program (FP7/2007-2013) for the
Innovative Medicine Initiative under grant agreement n115234.

