Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genome-wide mapping of MYCN, MYC, and MAX binding across
neuroblastoma cell lines identifies novel transcriptional targets


Arising from the sympathetic nervous system, neuroblastoma (NBL) is the
most common extracranial solid tumor in children. Although the 5-year
survival rate for children in the low and intermediate risk groups ranges
between 90 to over 95%, children with high-risk disease have only a
40-50% likelihood of survival and relapse of high-risk disease is
currently largely incurable. The best-characterized genetic determinant
of high-risk disease is amplification of MYCN. Members of the MYC protein
family are highly homologous and share redundant biological functions,
each able to form heterodimers with MAX at consensus E-box motifs
(CANNTG) to regulate transcription. While MYCN is known to
transcriptionally activate genes involved in malignancy and repress
expression of genes that antagonize metastases, amplification of MYCN
alone is likely not sufficient for transformation. To identify MYCN and
MYC DNA binding partners and ultimately, therapeutic targets in the
high-risk NBL subset, we performed chromatin immunoprecipitation and
next-generation sequencing (ChIP-Seq) for MYCN, MYC, and MAX across three
MYCN amplified and three non-MYCN amplified cell lines (n = 2 ChIPs per
protein). Peak calling was performed using MACS2 and annotated using
bedtools and/or ChIPseeker. MYCN displays genome-wide binding in all
three amplified cell lines, suggesting global transcriptional regulation
in NBL. ChIPenrich and TOPPgene were used to determine enrichment of
peaks based on gene ontology. As expected, we show MYCN ChIP peaks were
significantly enriched for MYC and MAX interactions, as well as
DNA-binding, in the MYCN amplified subset of cell lines. Genes containing
peaks within 1 kb of gene promoters were intersected with genes
differentially expressed based on MYCN amplification status in high-risk
NBL cases based on RNA-Seq analysis. This set of over 4000 genes was
significantly enriched (p Arising from the sympathetic nervous system,
neuroblastoma (NBL) is the most common extracranial solid tumor in
children. Although the 5-year survival rate for children in the low and
intermediate risk groups ranges between 90 to over 95%, children with
high-risk disease have only a 40-50% likelihood of survival and relapse
of high-risk disease is currently largely incurable. The
best-characterized genetic determinant of high-risk disease is
amplification of MYCN. Members of the MYC protein family are highly
homologous and share redundant biological functions, each able to form
heterodimers with MAX at consensus E-box motifs (CANNTG) to regulate
transcription. While MYCN is known to transcriptionally activate genes
involved in malignancy and repress expression of genes that antagonize
metastases, amplification of MYCN alone is likely not sufficient for
transformation. To identify MYCN and MYC DNA binding partners and
ultimately, therapeutic targets in the high-risk NBL subset, we performed
chromatin immunoprecipitation and next-generation sequencing (ChIP-Seq)
for MYCN, MYC, and MAX across three MYCN amplified and three non-MYCN
amplified cell lines (n = 2 ChIPs per protein). Peak calling was
performed using MACS2 and annotated using bedtools and/or ChIPseeker.
MYCN displays genome-wide binding in all three amplified cell lines,
suggesting global transcriptional regulation in NBL. ChIPenrich and
TOPPgene were used to determine enrichment of peaks based on gene
ontology. As expected, we show MYCN ChIP peaks were significantly
enriched for MYC and MAX interactions, as well as DNA-binding, in the
MYCN amplified subset of cell lines. Genes containing peaks within 1 kb
of gene promoters were intersected with genes differentially expressed
based on MYCN amplification status in high-risk NBL cases based on
RNA-Seq analysis. This set of over 4000 genes was significantly enriched
(p < 1E-10) for multiple categories of RNA binding and ribosomal
proteins, as well as interactions with known oncogenes and/or cooperating
partners of MYCN or MYC: CUL7, VCAM1, SUMO2, and CDK2 (p Arising from the
sympathetic nervous system, neuroblastoma (NBL) is the most common
extracranial solid tumor in children. Although the 5-year survival rate
for children in the low and intermediate risk groups ranges between 90 to
over 95%, children with high-risk disease have only a 40-50% likelihood
of survival and relapse of high-risk disease is currently largely
incurable. The best-characterized genetic determinant of high-risk
disease is amplification of MYCN. Members of the MYC protein family are
highly homologous and share redundant biological functions, each able to
form heterodimers with MAX at consensus E-box motifs (CANNTG) to regulate
transcription. While MYCN is known to transcriptionally activate genes
involved in malignancy and repress expression of genes that antagonize
metastases, amplification of MYCN alone is likely not sufficient for
transformation. To identify MYCN and MYC DNA binding partners and
ultimately, therapeutic targets in the high-risk NBL subset, we performed
chromatin immunoprecipitation and next-generation sequencing (ChIP-Seq)
for MYCN, MYC, and MAX across three MYCN amplified and three non-MYCN
amplified cell lines (n = 2 ChIPs per protein). Peak calling was
performed using MACS2 and annotated using bedtools and/or ChIPseeker.
MYCN displays genome-wide binding in all three amplified cell lines,
suggesting global transcriptional regulation in NBL. ChIPenrich and
TOPPgene were used to determine enrichment of peaks based on gene
ontology. As expected, we show MYCN ChIP peaks were significantly
enriched for MYC and MAX interactions, as well as DNA-binding, in the
MYCN amplified subset of cell lines. Genes containing peaks within 1 kb
of gene promoters were intersected with genes differentially expressed
based on MYCN amplification status in high-risk NBL cases based on
RNA-Seq analysis. This set of over 4000 genes was significantly enriched
(p < 1E-10) for multiple categories of RNA binding and ribosomal
proteins, as well as interactions with known oncogenes and/or cooperating
partners of MYCN or MYC: CUL7, VCAM1, SUMO2, and CDK2 (p < 1E-20).
Finally, we performed de novo motif discovery on MYCN ChIP peaks using
Homer2 and found significant enrichment (p Arising from the sympathetic
nervous system, neuroblastoma (NBL) is the most common extracranial solid
tumor in children. Although the 5-year survival rate for children in the
low and intermediate risk groups ranges between 90 to over 95%, children
with high-risk disease have only a 40-50% likelihood of survival and
relapse of high-risk disease is currently largely incurable. The
best-characterized genetic determinant of high-risk disease is
amplification of MYCN. Members of the MYC protein family are highly
homologous and share redundant biological functions, each able to form
heterodimers with MAX at consensus E-box motifs (CANNTG) to regulate
transcription. While MYCN is known to transcriptionally activate genes
involved in malignancy and repress expression of genes that antagonize
metastases, amplification of MYCN alone is likely not sufficient for
transformation. To identify MYCN and MYC DNA binding partners and
ultimately, therapeutic targets in the high-risk NBL subset, we performed
chromatin immunoprecipitation and next-generation sequencing (ChIP-Seq)
for MYCN, MYC, and MAX across three MYCN amplified and three non-MYCN
amplified cell lines (n = 2 ChIPs per protein). Peak calling was
performed using MACS2 and annotated using bedtools and/or ChIPseeker.
MYCN displays genome-wide binding in all three amplified cell lines,
suggesting global transcriptional regulation in NBL. ChIPenrich and
TOPPgene were used to determine enrichment of peaks based on gene
ontology. As expected, we show MYCN ChIP peaks were significantly
enriched for MYC and MAX interactions, as well as DNA-binding, in the
MYCN amplified subset of cell lines. Genes containing peaks within 1 kb
of gene promoters were intersected with genes differentially expressed
based on MYCN amplification status in high-risk NBL cases based on
RNA-Seq analysis. This set of over 4000 genes was significantly enriched
(p < 1E-10) for multiple categories of RNA binding and ribosomal
proteins, as well as interactions with known oncogenes and/or cooperating
partners of MYCN or MYC: CUL7, VCAM1, SUMO2, and CDK2 (p < 1E-20).
Finally, we performed de novo motif discovery on MYCN ChIP peaks using
Homer2 and found significant enrichment (p < 1E-50) of 15-20 motifs,
including the canonical MYCN basic helix loop helix E-box motif
(CCACGTGGCN, 23% enriched), an ELK1 ETS motif (44%), an AHR motif (29%),
and a SMAD4 (MAD) motif (21%). To our knowledge, this combination of RNA-
and ChIP-Seq represents the first global epigenomic analysis of MYCN,
MYC, and MAX binding across multiple NBL cell lines, revealing
MYCN-targeted transcriptional upregulation and/or putative repression.
This and further epigenomic characterization of known and novel MYC and
MYCN transcriptional targets will enable prioritization of potential
therapeutic targets for treatment of the high-risk NBL subset.

