Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Influence of age on androgen deprivation therapy-associated
Alzheimer's disease


Androgen deprivation therapy (ADT) is a mainstay of treatment for
prostate cancer with approximately 500,000 males currently receiving ADT
in the United States. ADT decreases androgen levels with 20-30% of
patients experiencing prolonged suppression. Concerningly, low
testosterone has been shown to precede Alzheimer's disease (AD) and ADT
increases -amyloid protein levels. Here, extending prior work, we examine
the association of ADT with the development of AD in an age-stratified
analysis among men with prostate cancer.We analyzed electronic medical
record data at Stanford University and Mt. Sinai. Individuals with
prostate cancer and follow-up 180 days after diagnosis without a history
of dementia, stroke or chemotherapy were eligible. Covariates, extracted
from coded and textual data, were age at prostate cancer diagnosis, race,
smoking status, use of anti-platelet, anti-coagulant, anti-hypertensive
and statin medications, and a history of cardiovascular disease, diabetes
or malignancy. We examined the association of ADT with AD stratified by
age at diagnosis. Age 70 years was selected as the cut-off given existing
management guidelines for cancer patients older than 70. Hazard ratios
(HRs) were calculated using 1:5 propensity score matched and traditional
multivariable Cox proportional hazards models to test the association of
use versus non-use of ADT, and ADT duration (no-ADT, Androgen deprivation
therapy (ADT) is a mainstay of treatment for prostate cancer with
approximately 500,000 males currently receiving ADT in the United States.
ADT decreases androgen levels with 20-30% of patients experiencing
prolonged suppression. Concerningly, low testosterone has been shown to
precede Alzheimer's disease (AD) and ADT increases -amyloid protein
levels. Here, extending prior work, we examine the association of ADT
with the development of AD in an age-stratified analysis among men with
prostate cancer.We analyzed electronic medical record data at Stanford
University and Mt. Sinai. Individuals with prostate cancer and follow-up
180 days after diagnosis without a history of dementia, stroke or
chemotherapy were eligible. Covariates, extracted from coded and textual
data, were age at prostate cancer diagnosis, race, smoking status, use of
anti-platelet, anti-coagulant, anti-hypertensive and statin medications,
and a history of cardiovascular disease, diabetes or malignancy. We
examined the association of ADT with AD stratified by age at diagnosis.
Age 70 years was selected as the cut-off given existing management
guidelines for cancer patients older than 70. Hazard ratios (HRs) were
calculated using 1:5 propensity score matched and traditional
multivariable Cox proportional hazards models to test the association of
use versus non-use of ADT, and ADT duration (no-ADT, <12 months, 12
months), on risk of AD. KaplanMeier survival functions were compared
among individuals Androgen deprivation therapy (ADT) is a mainstay of
treatment for prostate cancer with approximately 500,000 males currently
receiving ADT in the United States. ADT decreases androgen levels with
20-30% of patients experiencing prolonged suppression. Concerningly, low
testosterone has been shown to precede Alzheimer's disease (AD) and ADT
increases -amyloid protein levels. Here, extending prior work, we examine
the association of ADT with the development of AD in an age-stratified
analysis among men with prostate cancer.We analyzed electronic medical
record data at Stanford University and Mt. Sinai. Individuals with
prostate cancer and follow-up 180 days after diagnosis without a history
of dementia, stroke or chemotherapy were eligible. Covariates, extracted
from coded and textual data, were age at prostate cancer diagnosis, race,
smoking status, use of anti-platelet, anti-coagulant, anti-hypertensive
and statin medications, and a history of cardiovascular disease, diabetes
or malignancy. We examined the association of ADT with AD stratified by
age at diagnosis. Age 70 years was selected as the cut-off given existing
management guidelines for cancer patients older than 70. Hazard ratios
(HRs) were calculated using 1:5 propensity score matched and traditional
multivariable Cox proportional hazards models to test the association of
use versus non-use of ADT, and ADT duration (no-ADT, <12 months, 12
months), on risk of AD. KaplanMeier survival functions were compared
among individuals < 70, non-ADT users 70, and ADT users 70 years in the
propensity score matched cohort using Cox tests for equality. A 2-sided
p-value 0.07). The median follow-up period was 2.7 years (interquartile
range, 1.0-5.4 years). Kaplan-Meier survival functions demonstrated a
lower probability of remaining AD-free for age 70 versus 0.07). The
median follow-up period was 2.7 years (interquartile range, 1.0-5.4
years). Kaplan-Meier survival functions demonstrated a lower probability
of remaining AD-free for age 70 versus < 70 years (p0.07). The median
follow-up period was 2.7 years (interquartile range, 1.0-5.4 years).
Kaplan-Meier survival functions demonstrated a lower probability of
remaining AD-free for age 70 versus < 70 years (p<0.001) and between ADT
and non-ADT users 70 years (p = 0.034). There was a statistically
significant association between ADT use and AD among those 70 years using
propensity score matched (HR = 1.84; 95% confidence interval [CI],
1.07-3.17; p = 0.027) and traditional multivariable Cox regression
analysis (HR = 2.04; 95% CI, 1.23-3.40; p = 0.006). Among those 70 years
a longer duration of ADT was associated with a greater risk of AD (HR =
1.41; 95% CI 1.01-1.96, p = 0.043).Among men aged 70 years or older the
utilization and duration of ADT is associated with an increased rate of
AD. This further supports the association between ADT and cognitive
dysfunction and suggests that older men may be most susceptible.
Limitations of this study include inadequate power to conduct subgroup
analysis in the 0.07). The median follow-up period was 2.7 years
(interquartile range, 1.0-5.4 years). Kaplan-Meier survival functions
demonstrated a lower probability of remaining AD-free for age 70 versus <
70 years (p<0.001) and between ADT and non-ADT users 70 years (p =
0.034). There was a statistically significant association between ADT use
and AD among those 70 years using propensity score matched (HR = 1.84;
95% confidence interval [CI], 1.07-3.17; p = 0.027) and traditional
multivariable Cox regression analysis (HR = 2.04; 95% CI, 1.23-3.40; p =
0.006). Among those 70 years a longer duration of ADT was associated with
a greater risk of AD (HR = 1.41; 95% CI 1.01-1.96, p = 0.043).Among men
aged 70 years or older the utilization and duration of ADT is associated
with an increased rate of AD. This further supports the association
between ADT and cognitive dysfunction and suggests that older men may be
most susceptible. Limitations of this study include inadequate power to
conduct subgroup analysis in the < 70 years cohort. Prospective studies
are required to determine the mechanism of this association in order to
develop preventative strategies.

