Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Enzymatic depletion of adenosine by pegylated, engineered
adenosine deaminase 2 (PEG-ADA2): A novel immunotherapeutic approach to
treat solid tumors


Adenosine is an endogenous immunosuppressant that binds to adenosine
receptor checkpoints and protects tissue from immune-mediated rejection.
Abnormally high adenosine levels (up to 100-fold greater than other
tissues) contribute to a highly immunosuppressive tumor microenvironment
(TME). We hypothesized that adenosine deaminase 2 (ADA2), a human enzyme
that catalyzes the deamination of adenosine, could be administered at
therapeutic levels to deplete high levels of TME adenosine and stimulate
anti-tumor immune activity. Recombinant wild-type ADA2 (wtADA2) was
cleared extremely rapidly from circulation (t1/2 = 69 min, 7.5 mg/kg iv,
n = 9 mice), rendering it unsuitable for therapeutic testing. Therefore,
a series of variants was designed to attenuate the heparin binding
properties of ADA2 to improve bio-distribution and conjugated with 20K
PEG to improve pharmacokinetics (PK). The variant PEG-ADA2-K374D
displayed 94% less binding to heparin compared to wtADA2, enzymatic
activity comparable to wtADA2, and 33-fold improved PK (t1/2 = 2,256
min); and consistently induced at least 60% (pAdenosine is an endogenous
immunosuppressant that binds to adenosine receptor checkpoints and
protects tissue from immune-mediated rejection. Abnormally high adenosine
levels (up to 100-fold greater than other tissues) contribute to a highly
immunosuppressive tumor microenvironment (TME). We hypothesized that
adenosine deaminase 2 (ADA2), a human enzyme that catalyzes the
deamination of adenosine, could be administered at therapeutic levels to
deplete high levels of TME adenosine and stimulate anti-tumor immune
activity. Recombinant wild-type ADA2 (wtADA2) was cleared extremely
rapidly from circulation (t1/2 = 69 min, 7.5 mg/kg iv, n = 9 mice),
rendering it unsuitable for therapeutic testing. Therefore, a series of
variants was designed to attenuate the heparin binding properties of ADA2
to improve bio-distribution and conjugated with 20K PEG to improve
pharmacokinetics (PK). The variant PEG-ADA2-K374D displayed 94% less
binding to heparin compared to wtADA2, enzymatic activity comparable to
wtADA2, and 33-fold improved PK (t1/2 = 2,256 min); and consistently
induced at least 60% (p<0.0001) tumor growth inhibition (TGI) of
established subcutaneous syngeneic CT26 tumors (b.i.w., 0.3mg/kg, n = 8).
Treatment with PEG-ADA2-K374D resulted in a 5-fold increase in tumor
infiltrating CD3+ T-cells (pAdenosine is an endogenous immunosuppressant
that binds to adenosine receptor checkpoints and protects tissue from
immune-mediated rejection. Abnormally high adenosine levels (up to
100-fold greater than other tissues) contribute to a highly
immunosuppressive tumor microenvironment (TME). We hypothesized that
adenosine deaminase 2 (ADA2), a human enzyme that catalyzes the
deamination of adenosine, could be administered at therapeutic levels to
deplete high levels of TME adenosine and stimulate anti-tumor immune
activity. Recombinant wild-type ADA2 (wtADA2) was cleared extremely
rapidly from circulation (t1/2 = 69 min, 7.5 mg/kg iv, n = 9 mice),
rendering it unsuitable for therapeutic testing. Therefore, a series of
variants was designed to attenuate the heparin binding properties of ADA2
to improve bio-distribution and conjugated with 20K PEG to improve
pharmacokinetics (PK). The variant PEG-ADA2-K374D displayed 94% less
binding to heparin compared to wtADA2, enzymatic activity comparable to
wtADA2, and 33-fold improved PK (t1/2 = 2,256 min); and consistently
induced at least 60% (p<0.0001) tumor growth inhibition (TGI) of
established subcutaneous syngeneic CT26 tumors (b.i.w., 0.3mg/kg, n = 8).
Treatment with PEG-ADA2-K374D resulted in a 5-fold increase in tumor
infiltrating CD3+ T-cells (p<0.0001, 6 hours post dose), as assessed by
histology. We hypothesized that CD73, which catalyzes the turnover of AMP
to adenosine, could be used as a biomarker to identify tumors with
elevated adenosine levels. Gene expression studies against a panel of
syngeneic tumors revealed that lung KLN205 and pancreatic MH194/PSC4
tumors had high CD73 levels. PEG-ADA2-K374D inhibited the growth of
established MH194/PSC4 and KLN205 tumors, with TGI reaching 47%
(pAdenosine is an endogenous immunosuppressant that binds to adenosine
receptor checkpoints and protects tissue from immune-mediated rejection.
Abnormally high adenosine levels (up to 100-fold greater than other
tissues) contribute to a highly immunosuppressive tumor microenvironment
(TME). We hypothesized that adenosine deaminase 2 (ADA2), a human enzyme
that catalyzes the deamination of adenosine, could be administered at
therapeutic levels to deplete high levels of TME adenosine and stimulate
anti-tumor immune activity. Recombinant wild-type ADA2 (wtADA2) was
cleared extremely rapidly from circulation (t1/2 = 69 min, 7.5 mg/kg iv,
n = 9 mice), rendering it unsuitable for therapeutic testing. Therefore,
a series of variants was designed to attenuate the heparin binding
properties of ADA2 to improve bio-distribution and conjugated with 20K
PEG to improve pharmacokinetics (PK). The variant PEG-ADA2-K374D
displayed 94% less binding to heparin compared to wtADA2, enzymatic
activity comparable to wtADA2, and 33-fold improved PK (t1/2 = 2,256
min); and consistently induced at least 60% (p<0.0001) tumor growth
inhibition (TGI) of established subcutaneous syngeneic CT26 tumors
(b.i.w., 0.3mg/kg, n = 8). Treatment with PEG-ADA2-K374D resulted in a
5-fold increase in tumor infiltrating CD3+ T-cells (p<0.0001, 6 hours
post dose), as assessed by histology. We hypothesized that CD73, which
catalyzes the turnover of AMP to adenosine, could be used as a biomarker
to identify tumors with elevated adenosine levels. Gene expression
studies against a panel of syngeneic tumors revealed that lung KLN205 and
pancreatic MH194/PSC4 tumors had high CD73 levels. PEG-ADA2-K374D
inhibited the growth of established MH194/PSC4 and KLN205 tumors, with
TGI reaching 47% (p<0.0001) and 78% (p40-fold increase). This variant
induced a maximum TGI of 69% (p40-fold increase). This variant induced a
maximum TGI of 69% (p<0.05) in the MH194/PSC4 model at 0.003 mg/kg, a
100-fold lower dose than PEG-ADA2-K374D (n = 8). A third variant,
PEG-ADA2-E182T lacked detectable enzymatic activity and displayed no
tumor growth inhibition, suggesting that ADA2 enzyme activity is required
for efficacy. These datasuggest that engineered PEG-ADA2 variants induce
significant tumor growth inhibition activity in several syngeneic solid
tumor models, validating enzymatic depletion of high TME adenosine levels
as novel immunotherapeutic approach to treat solid tumors.

