Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Melanoma and ovarian cancer cells tested for drug sensitivity
using anchorage-independent growth


This study aims to test patient-derived melanoma and ovarian cancer cells
for their sensitivity to clinically available drugs and drug
combinations. The experiments were performed by using the growth in low
attachment (GILA) assay, which is equivalent to the classic soft-agar
assay and allows screening of 3D ex vivo cultures, which resemble the
tumor and its microenvironment.To assay tumor cells from malignant
lesions we isolated ovarian cancer cells from peritoneal fluid (ascites)
derived from patients and melanoma cells from metastatic melanoma
patients. The fresh samples were enriched for tumor cells and later
cultured in an ex vivo manner on either high- or low-attachment surfaces.
These cells were subjected to drug treatments and cellular viability was
measured at the end of these experiments.Our experiments demonstrate that
the GILA assay is a highly sensitive method for pharmacological tests, as
compared to the traditional 2D method (growth on high-attachment
surfaces). By using GILA assay we found that melanoma cells are sensitive
to drugs that inhibit driver oncogenes, such as BRAF or MEK. In addition,
we found interesting targets in metastatic melanoma lesions that carry an
unknown mutational background.Drug sensitivity assays for ovarian cancer
cells using the GILA approach showed that cancer cells from various
patients with the same cancer type display differential sensitivity to
drugs. Additionally, ovarian cancer cells were found to have a different
drug-sensitivity threshold when grown in spheres.Our studies present an
approach that utilizes the unique ability of transformed cells to grow in
anchorage-independent conditions and enables ex vivo drug sensitivity
testing. This phenotypic approach is complementary to a genetic approach
that uses DNA sequencing to identify putative oncogenes that confer
sensitivity to drugs designed to specifically inhibit the identified
oncoprotein.

