Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovery of a covalent inhibitor of ERK docking-interactions that
inhibits A375 melanoma cells proliferation


Acquired drug resistance, especially mechanisms associated with the
reactivation of the MAPK (RAF/MEK/ERK) pathway represent a major
challenge to current treatments of melanoma. Recently, targeting ERK has
evolved as a potentially attractive strategy to overcome this resistance.
Several ERK inhibitors have already entered clinical trials.Most of the
available ERK inhibitors are reversible inhibitors that either act
through an allosteric mechanism, or by targeting the ATP binding site.
Taking advantage of our understanding of ERK-docking interactions we
tried to discover an irreversible substrate-selective inhibitor that
targets the protein-binding site of ERK. Here, we report the discovery of
a covalent inhibitor of ERK that targets its protein-docking site.
Protein NMR, Mass spectroscopy, mutagenesis and molecular docking studies
indicate a covalent interaction of the inhibitor with a conserved
cysteine residue, Cys-159. Extensive biochemical studies provide an
estimate of its kinetic parameters and its kinase-selectivity profile.
The new ERK inhibitor inhibits ERK activation, as well as its ability to
phosphorylate downstream substrates (e.g. p90RSK and Elk-1) in HEK293T
and A375 melanoma cells. The targeting of ERK in HEK293T cells was
confirmed using a chemical-genetic approach where the ERK2 C159A mutant
was used to rescue the effects of this compound on ERK2 signaling and
cell proliferation. Currently, we are testing the effect of the compound
on tumor growth inhibition in an A375 melanoma cancer xenografts model.
This covalent inhibitor represents a potentially valuable lead molecule
whose development may result in a novel class of pharmacologically useful
ERK inhibitors for targeting resistant forms of melanoma.

