Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The combination of ACP-196 and ACP-319 leads to increased survival
in the TCL1-192 CLL mouse model


INTRODUCTION: Recent advances in the treatment of CLL focus on targeting
the B-cell receptor (BCR) pathway, which is strongly upregulated in CLL.
The BTK inhibitor ibrutinib and the PI3K inhibitor idelalisib, both
targeting the BCR pathway, are approved for clinical use based on
significant survival benefit in clinical trials. In vitro studies have
shown synergy for combined PI3K and BTK inhibition (Griner, PNAS, 2014).
Since CLL propagation relies on the microenvironment, in vivo models are
needed for better testing of new drug combinations. We tested two new
inhibitors of the BCR pathway, the BTK inhibitor ACP-196 and the PI3K
inhibitor ACP-319 as single agents and in combination using the murine
TCL1-192 allograft model of aggressive, BCR driven CLL.METHODS: TCL1-192
cells were injected into SCID mice and drug was given through the
drinking water with vehicle, ACP-196, ACP-319 or a combination of the two
drugs at a concentration of 0.15 mg/mL of each drug. Blood was analyzed
weekly by flow cytometry and at the end of the study spleens were weighed
and analyzed by flow cytometry.RESULTS: Tumor burden in the blood
significantly decreased with both single agent and combination treatment
compared to vehicle, and with single agent compared to combination, P
INTRODUCTION: Recent advances in the treatment of CLL focus on targeting
the B-cell receptor (BCR) pathway, which is strongly upregulated in CLL.
The BTK inhibitor ibrutinib and the PI3K inhibitor idelalisib, both
targeting the BCR pathway, are approved for clinical use based on
significant survival benefit in clinical trials. In vitro studies have
shown synergy for combined PI3K and BTK inhibition (Griner, PNAS, 2014).
Since CLL propagation relies on the microenvironment, in vivo models are
needed for better testing of new drug combinations. We tested two new
inhibitors of the BCR pathway, the BTK inhibitor ACP-196 and the PI3K
inhibitor ACP-319 as single agents and in combination using the murine
TCL1-192 allograft model of aggressive, BCR driven CLL.METHODS: TCL1-192
cells were injected into SCID mice and drug was given through the
drinking water with vehicle, ACP-196, ACP-319 or a combination of the two
drugs at a concentration of 0.15 mg/mL of each drug. Blood was analyzed
weekly by flow cytometry and at the end of the study spleens were weighed
and analyzed by flow cytometry.RESULTS: Tumor burden in the blood
significantly decreased with both single agent and combination treatment
compared to vehicle, and with single agent compared to combination, P <
0.05, P INTRODUCTION: Recent advances in the treatment of CLL focus on
targeting the B-cell receptor (BCR) pathway, which is strongly
upregulated in CLL. The BTK inhibitor ibrutinib and the PI3K inhibitor
idelalisib, both targeting the BCR pathway, are approved for clinical use
based on significant survival benefit in clinical trials. In vitro
studies have shown synergy for combined PI3K and BTK inhibition (Griner,
PNAS, 2014). Since CLL propagation relies on the microenvironment, in
vivo models are needed for better testing of new drug combinations. We
tested two new inhibitors of the BCR pathway, the BTK inhibitor ACP-196
and the PI3K inhibitor ACP-319 as single agents and in combination using
the murine TCL1-192 allograft model of aggressive, BCR driven
CLL.METHODS: TCL1-192 cells were injected into SCID mice and drug was
given through the drinking water with vehicle, ACP-196, ACP-319 or a
combination of the two drugs at a concentration of 0.15 mg/mL of each
drug. Blood was analyzed weekly by flow cytometry and at the end of the
study spleens were weighed and analyzed by flow cytometry.RESULTS: Tumor
burden in the blood significantly decreased with both single agent and
combination treatment compared to vehicle, and with single agent compared
to combination, P < 0.05, P < 0.0001 and P INTRODUCTION: Recent advances
in the treatment of CLL focus on targeting the B-cell receptor (BCR)
pathway, which is strongly upregulated in CLL. The BTK inhibitor
ibrutinib and the PI3K inhibitor idelalisib, both targeting the BCR
pathway, are approved for clinical use based on significant survival
benefit in clinical trials. In vitro studies have shown synergy for
combined PI3K and BTK inhibition (Griner, PNAS, 2014). Since CLL
propagation relies on the microenvironment, in vivo models are needed for
better testing of new drug combinations. We tested two new inhibitors of
the BCR pathway, the BTK inhibitor ACP-196 and the PI3K inhibitor ACP-319
as single agents and in combination using the murine TCL1-192 allograft
model of aggressive, BCR driven CLL.METHODS: TCL1-192 cells were injected
into SCID mice and drug was given through the drinking water with
vehicle, ACP-196, ACP-319 or a combination of the two drugs at a
concentration of 0.15 mg/mL of each drug. Blood was analyzed weekly by
flow cytometry and at the end of the study spleens were weighed and
analyzed by flow cytometry.RESULTS: Tumor burden in the blood
significantly decreased with both single agent and combination treatment
compared to vehicle, and with single agent compared to combination, P <
0.05, P < 0.0001 and P < 0.0075, respectively. Combination treatment also
resulted in significantly lower spleen weights when compared to spleens
from mice treated with single agents or vehicle. Both single agent and
combination treatment led to decreased phosphorylation of PLC2, NFB and
ERK, molecules downstream in the BCR pathway, P INTRODUCTION: Recent
advances in the treatment of CLL focus on targeting the B-cell receptor
(BCR) pathway, which is strongly upregulated in CLL. The BTK inhibitor
ibrutinib and the PI3K inhibitor idelalisib, both targeting the BCR
pathway, are approved for clinical use based on significant survival
benefit in clinical trials. In vitro studies have shown synergy for
combined PI3K and BTK inhibition (Griner, PNAS, 2014). Since CLL
propagation relies on the microenvironment, in vivo models are needed for
better testing of new drug combinations. We tested two new inhibitors of
the BCR pathway, the BTK inhibitor ACP-196 and the PI3K inhibitor ACP-319
as single agents and in combination using the murine TCL1-192 allograft
model of aggressive, BCR driven CLL.METHODS: TCL1-192 cells were injected
into SCID mice and drug was given through the drinking water with
vehicle, ACP-196, ACP-319 or a combination of the two drugs at a
concentration of 0.15 mg/mL of each drug. Blood was analyzed weekly by
flow cytometry and at the end of the study spleens were weighed and
analyzed by flow cytometry.RESULTS: Tumor burden in the blood
significantly decreased with both single agent and combination treatment
compared to vehicle, and with single agent compared to combination, P <
0.05, P < 0.0001 and P < 0.0075, respectively. Combination treatment also
resulted in significantly lower spleen weights when compared to spleens
from mice treated with single agents or vehicle. Both single agent and
combination treatment led to decreased phosphorylation of PLC2, NFB and
ERK, molecules downstream in the BCR pathway, P < 0.05 compared to
vehicle treated mice. Phosphorylation of PLC2 and NFB was further
decreased with combination treatment compared to single agent treatment.
Both single agent and combination treatment greatly enhanced survival of
the mice compared to vehicle treatment with a median survival from
treatment start of 17 days (vehicle), 23 days (single agent) and 40 days
(combination), P INTRODUCTION: Recent advances in the treatment of CLL
focus on targeting the B-cell receptor (BCR) pathway, which is strongly
upregulated in CLL. The BTK inhibitor ibrutinib and the PI3K inhibitor
idelalisib, both targeting the BCR pathway, are approved for clinical use
based on significant survival benefit in clinical trials. In vitro
studies have shown synergy for combined PI3K and BTK inhibition (Griner,
PNAS, 2014). Since CLL propagation relies on the microenvironment, in
vivo models are needed for better testing of new drug combinations. We
tested two new inhibitors of the BCR pathway, the BTK inhibitor ACP-196
and the PI3K inhibitor ACP-319 as single agents and in combination using
the murine TCL1-192 allograft model of aggressive, BCR driven
CLL.METHODS: TCL1-192 cells were injected into SCID mice and drug was
given through the drinking water with vehicle, ACP-196, ACP-319 or a
combination of the two drugs at a concentration of 0.15 mg/mL of each
drug. Blood was analyzed weekly by flow cytometry and at the end of the
study spleens were weighed and analyzed by flow cytometry.RESULTS: Tumor
burden in the blood significantly decreased with both single agent and
combination treatment compared to vehicle, and with single agent compared
to combination, P < 0.05, P < 0.0001 and P < 0.0075, respectively.
Combination treatment also resulted in significantly lower spleen weights
when compared to spleens from mice treated with single agents or vehicle.
Both single agent and combination treatment led to decreased
phosphorylation of PLC2, NFB and ERK, molecules downstream in the BCR
pathway, P < 0.05 compared to vehicle treated mice. Phosphorylation of
PLC2 and NFB was further decreased with combination treatment compared to
single agent treatment. Both single agent and combination treatment
greatly enhanced survival of the mice compared to vehicle treatment with
a median survival from treatment start of 17 days (vehicle), 23 days
(single agent) and 40 days (combination), P < 0.0001 for single agent vs
to combination treatment.CONCLUSION: We here show that a combination of
ACP-196 (BTK inhibitor) and ACP-319 (PI3K inhibitor) is superior to
single agent treatment in the murine TCL1-192 model of aggressive,
BCR-driven CLL. Survival was significantly increased by combination
treatment and the tumor burden was significantly reduced compared to both
single agent mice and vehicle treated mice. The on-target effects were
validated by reduced phosphorylation of PLC2 and NFB. Thus, evaluation of
combination treatment with ACP-196 and ACP-319 in clinical trials is
warranted.

