Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comparative effectiveness of everolimus + endocrine therapy vs
endocrine monotherapy among postmenopausal women with HR+/HER2- advanced
breast cancer: a multicountry retrospective chart review


Background: This study aims to compare patient characteristics and
outcomes of everolimus (EVE) + endocrine therapy (ET) vs ET monotherapy
among postmenopausal women with hormone receptor-positive (HR+) human
epidermal growth factor receptor 2-negative (HER2-) advanced breast
cancer (aBC) across multiple countries.Methods: This retrospective chart
review included postmenopausal patients with HR+/HER2- aBC who were
previously treated with a nonsteroidal aromatase inhibitor (NSAI) and
later received EVE + ET, ET monotherapy, or chemotherapy (the index
treatment) from 17 sites in 6 countries (Canada, the Netherlands, France,
Italy, Russia, and Argentina). This is a subset analysis comparing
patients who received EVE + ET vs ET monotherapy. Stratified sampling by
index treatment and line of therapy was used to ensure the sample groups
included different treatments and lines of therapy. Patient
characteristics were compared using Wilcoxon rank-sum tests for
continuous variables and Fisher exact tests for categorical variables.
Progression-free survival (PFS) was estimated using Kaplan-Meier analysis
and was compared between the 2 groups using Cox proportional hazards
models adjusting for age, country, line of therapy, metastatic sites,
symptoms, comorbidities, prior chemotherapy, recurrent vs de novo cancer,
and time from the last adjuvant ET to aBC diagnosis.Results: A total of
119 patients in the EVE + ET group (77 in 1st/2nd, and 42 in 3rd/4th
lines) and 102 patients in the ET monotherapy group (76 in 1st /2nd, and
26 in 3rd/4th lines) were included in the study. All but 2 patients in
the EVE + ET group received EVE + exemestane; ET monotherapy included
fulvestrant (46.1%), exemestane (21.6%), NSAIs (16.7%), and tamoxifen
(14.7%). Patients in the EVE + ET group were numerically younger (median
63.0 vs 66.0 years; P = .10); appeared to have fewer comorbidities,
particularly hypertension (11.8% vs 35.3%; P Background: This study aims
to compare patient characteristics and outcomes of everolimus (EVE) +
endocrine therapy (ET) vs ET monotherapy among postmenopausal women with
hormone receptor-positive (HR+) human epidermal growth factor receptor
2-negative (HER2-) advanced breast cancer (aBC) across multiple
countries.Methods: This retrospective chart review included
postmenopausal patients with HR+/HER2- aBC who were previously treated
with a nonsteroidal aromatase inhibitor (NSAI) and later received EVE +
ET, ET monotherapy, or chemotherapy (the index treatment) from 17 sites
in 6 countries (Canada, the Netherlands, France, Italy, Russia, and
Argentina). This is a subset analysis comparing patients who received EVE
+ ET vs ET monotherapy. Stratified sampling by index treatment and line
of therapy was used to ensure the sample groups included different
treatments and lines of therapy. Patient characteristics were compared
using Wilcoxon rank-sum tests for continuous variables and Fisher exact
tests for categorical variables. Progression-free survival (PFS) was
estimated using Kaplan-Meier analysis and was compared between the 2
groups using Cox proportional hazards models adjusting for age, country,
line of therapy, metastatic sites, symptoms, comorbidities, prior
chemotherapy, recurrent vs de novo cancer, and time from the last
adjuvant ET to aBC diagnosis.Results: A total of 119 patients in the EVE
+ ET group (77 in 1st/2nd, and 42 in 3rd/4th lines) and 102 patients in
the ET monotherapy group (76 in 1st /2nd, and 26 in 3rd/4th lines) were
included in the study. All but 2 patients in the EVE + ET group received
EVE + exemestane; ET monotherapy included fulvestrant (46.1%), exemestane
(21.6%), NSAIs (16.7%), and tamoxifen (14.7%). Patients in the EVE + ET
group were numerically younger (median 63.0 vs 66.0 years; P = .10);
appeared to have fewer comorbidities, particularly hypertension (11.8% vs
35.3%; P < .01); had a higher proportion of visceral metastasis (43.7% vs
32.4%; P = .10) and a highernumber of metastatic sites (median 2.0 vs
1.0; P = .14); had a lower proportion of bone/joint symptoms (30.3% vs
42.2%; P = .07); and had a shorter time from initiation of the last
adjuvant ET to aBC diagnosis (median 43.1 vs 55.6 months; P = .05). In
the unadjusted analysis, patients in the EVE + ET group had similar PFS
as those in the ET monotherapy group (median 9.1 vs 9.2 months;
unadjusted HR = 0.98; P = .90), but after adjustment for baseline
characteristics, the hazard of progression or death of any cause was
lower (adjusted HR = 0.67; P = .05).Conclusions: Patients who received
EVE + ET tended to be younger with fewer comorbidities yet have disease
with faster progression and a higher burden of metastases. After
adjusting for these characteristics, EVE + ET was associated with longer
PFS compared with ET monotherapy.

