Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Superior lethal activity of single agent BET protein PROTAC
compared to bromodomain inhibitor or in combination with JAK inhibitor
against post-myelofibrosis secondary AML cells


Myeloproliferative neoplasm, myelofibrosis (MPN-MF), exhibits increased
JAK-STAT signaling and often progresses (15-20%) to AML (sAML). JAK
inhibitor (JAK-I) ruxolitinib (Rux) or standard induction chemotherapy is
only modestly active against sAML, culminating in treatment-refractory
relapse. Genetic alterations commonly documented in sAML include the
co-occurrence of JAK2 V617F and mutant TP53. Here, we demonstrate that
treatment with ARV-825 (Arvinas, Inc.), a BET (bromodomain and
extraterminal) protein PROTAC (proteasome activating chimera) which
degrades (through the proteasome) BET proteins by binding and recruiting
E3 Ubiquitin ligase cereblon activity to them, caused efficient, and
prolonged depletion of the levels of the BET protein BRD4. In contrast,
treatment with the bromodomain inhibitors (BET-Is) JQ1 or OTX015 induced
the levels of BRD4. ARV-825 treatment also mediated greater and more
sustained attenuation than OTX-015 of the mRNA and protein expressions of
BCL-xL, CDK4/6, PIM1, p-STAT5 and p-STAT3 levels, while concomitantly
inducing p21 and p27 in the cultured sAML (HEL92.1.7 and SET2) cells.
This correlated with high level of apoptosis in the cultured and
patient-derived post-MPN-MF sAML cells, with relative sparing of the
normal CD34+ progenitor cells. Compared to treatment with each agent
alone, co-treatment with ARV-825 and the JAK-Is Rux (100 to 1000 nM) or
pacritinib (250 to 1000 nM), was synergistically more lethal against the
cultured sAML cells (CI of 10-fold resistant to ruxolitinib; HEL/JIR
cells) under the in vitro selection pressure of a continuous exposure to
JAK-I. Notably, compared to the parental HEL92.1.7, HEL/JIR cells were
highly and collaterally sensitive to both ARV-825 and AUY922.
Furthermore, co-treatment with ARV-825 and AUY922 was also
synergistically lethal against HEL/JIR cells (CI 10-fold resistant to
ruxolitinib; HEL/JIR cells) under the in vitro selection pressure of a
continuous exposure to JAK-I. Notably, compared to the parental
HEL92.1.7, HEL/JIR cells were highly and collaterally sensitive to both
ARV-825 and AUY922. Furthermore, co-treatment with ARV-825 and AUY922 was
also synergistically lethal against HEL/JIR cells (CI < 1.0). Taken
together, these findings demonstrate that ARV-825 is a highly active
agent alone or in combination with JAK-Is against post-MF sAML cells
expressing mutant p53. Combined therapy with ARV-825 and an HSP90
inhibitor is synergistically lethal against sAML cells resistant to
JAK-Is. Based on these finding, in vivo testing of the BRD4 PROTAC-based
combinations against post-MF sAML cells is warranted.

