Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mitochondrial genome and the risk of lung cancer: The Multiethnic
Cohort


Background: The human mitochondrial genome (mtDNA) encodes for 13
essential polypeptides of the mitochondrial respiratory complex.
Maternally-inherited variation in mtDNA may influence cancer development
by altering mitochondrial proteins and complexes involved in the
oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) process. In lung cancer, Complex I
appears frequently altered, which has been linked to increased cellular
proliferation and invasion, and overproduction of reactive oxygen
species. Few studies have investigated the associations between mtDNA
variants and lung cancer risk.Methods: Within the 16 kb mtDNA, we tested
186 mitochondrial single nucleotide polymorphisms (mtSNPs) located in 13
genes that comprise the 4 complexes of the OXPHOS pathway and mtSNPs for
rRNA and tRNA in 773 lung cancer cases and 10,491 controls from the
Multiethnic Cohort. Logistic regression was conducted to examine the odds
ratio (OR) and corresponding 95% confidence interval (CI) for mtSNPs and
haplogroups associated with lung cancer risk. Associations were adjusted
for age, sex, maternal self-reported race/ethnicity, principal components
of global ancestry, smoking status, and the number of cigarettes smoked
per day. The sequence kernel association test was conducted for pathway
analysis, adjusting for the same covariates. Stratified analysis was
conducted by self-reported maternal race/ethnicityAfrican American (AA),
Japanese American (JA), Latino (LA), European American (EA), and Native
Hawaiian (NH).Results: Overall, the most significant lung cancer
association was seen with mt15629 (OR: 0.36, 95% CI: 0.22-0.60; p = 810-5
that reached a Bonferroni significance threshold of p = 2.710-4). This
association was largely driven by AA (OR: 0.41, 95% CI: 0.24-0.71; p =
1.610-5; MAF = 0.05) and LA (OR: 0.14, 95% CI: 0.03-0.54; p = 4.810-5;
MAF = 0.007) data with no evidence of heterogeneity in effects by
race/ethnicity. Mt15629 was monomorphic in JA, EA, and NH populations.
Similar patterns of associations were seen across histological cell types
(small cell carcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma, and adenocarcinoma).
Furthermore, mt15629 showed no evidence of heterogeneity in effects by
smoking status and was not associated with smoking status or cigarette
pack years. Haplogroup L1 was associated with lung cancer risk among LAs
(OR: 0.14, 95% CI: 0.04-0.48; p = 0.002) for which mt15629 is one of the
defining haplogroup mtSNPs. Pathway analysis showed an association
between the cumulative effect of 161 polymorphic mtSNPs among LAs (p =
0.002); also the OXPHOS pathway (p = 0.002), 4 mitochondrial complexes (p
= 0.001-0.049) and 10 of 15 mitochondrial genes (p = 0.001-0.049) were
associated with lung cancer risk among LAs.Conclusion: Our findings
demonstrate an association between specific variants in the mitochondrial
genome and lung cancer risk, particularly among Latinos. The mechanism
underlying this association appears to be independent of smoking status.

