Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Usefulness of VE1 immunohistochemical detection of BRAFV600E in
aggressive thyroid cancers (PDCs and UCs)


Activating BRAF mutations are frequent in thyroid follicular cell
carcinogenesis. The BRAFV600E point mutation represents the most common
oncogenic event in sporadic papillary thyroid cancer (PTC). Although at a
much lower frequency the BRAFV600E mutation is also present among less
differentiated, more aggressive, I131 resistant forms of thyroid cancer
as poorly differentiated carcinomas (PDCs) and undifferentiated
carcinomas (UCs). Small molecule inhibitors targeting either the BRAF
V600E protein or upstream or downstream kinases involved in MAPK
signalling are currently under pre-clinical or clinical investigation in
advanced, metastatic, I131 resistant thyroid cancers. Recently,
immunohistochemical (IHC) studies on PTCs, using the VE1 mouse anti-human
BRAF V600E antibody have shown to be a reliable means for detecting the
BRAFV600E mutation in a clinical setting without molecular genotyping
units. In this study we sought to determine the usefulness of the VE1
antibody for detecting the BRAF V600E mutant protein in a series of 103
aggressive thyroid cancers (59 PDCs and 44 UCs) previously characterized
by PCR-SSCP for the presence of BRAF mutations in exons 11 and 15. The
BRAFV600E mutation was present in 10/59 PDCs (17%) and 11/44 UCs (25%).
Immunohistochemistry revealed 9 mutated PDCs (sensitivity 90%) and 9
mutated UCs (82% sensitivity). The staining intensity in BRAF V600E
mutated samples ranged from weak to strong. Non valuable results were
found in 3 PDCs and 4 UCs. Overall the results indicate that
immunohistochemistry with VE1 antibody may be an alternative to molecular
biology approaches for the routine detection of BRAFV600E point mutations
in clinical settings without molecular genotyping facilities. It may help
clinicians in targeted therapy decision making.

