Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The effect of EPZ011989, an enhancer of Zeste homolog 2 inhibitor,
in acute myeloid leukemia


Enhancer of Zeste Homolog 2 (EZH2) is a catalytic core subunit of the
Polycomb repressive complex 2, PRC2. EZH2 catalyzes the tri-methylation
of lysine 27 on histone H3 (H3K27me3) which often results in the
silencing of associated gene promoters. The over-expression of EZH2 is
associated with cancer progression and poor prognosis in solid tumors and
hematological malignances. EZH2 mutations in lymphoma generally are
activating whereas those in myelodysplasia and acute myeloid leukemia are
typically loss of function. Additionally, EZH2 mutations are not isolated
to a hotspot and therefore discerning phenotype is challenging. The
purpose of this study was to determine if the inhibition of EZH2 induces
cell differentiation or apoptosis in AML, and to determine the
significance of EZH2 mutations in AML patients. As H3K27me3 deposition is
catalyzed by EZH2, we hypothesized that analysis of H3K27me3 levels could
differentiate an inactivating EZH2 mutation. We analyzed H3K27me3 levels
in AML patient samples with wild type (N = 5) and mutant (N = 3) EZH2,
and found that overall H3K27me3 is reduced in the mutant patient samples.
Furthermore, the sample with the highest variant allele frequency (VAF)
of the EZH2 mutation had noticeably lower levels of H3K27me3 compared to
those that had a lower VAF. This finding demonstrates that diminished
H3K27me3 levels can predict the presence of an inactivating EZH2 mutation
in AML cells. We next assessed if the EZH2 tool molecule EPZ011989
produced a similar phenotype in wild-type EZH2 AML cell lines (Kasumi-1,
MOLM-13, and MV4-11). EPZ011989 inhibited H3K27me3 in all of the cell
lines at a concentration of 0.625 M after only four days of treatment. At
these concentrations and this time point we demonstrated no change in
viability among these three cell lines and only minimal proliferation
inhibition in MV4-11 and MOLM-13 cells. Longer time points are currently
being investigated as EZH2 inhibitors often induce anti-proliferative
effects only after longer incubation periods.Therefore, our results
support that inactivation of EZH2 with EZP011989 in AML cell lines
induces the same cell-biochemical consequence (i.e. H3K27me3 loss)
associated with EZH2 mutations in AML patients. This potentially will
allow diverse pharmacologic studies in cell lines relative to gene
targets and also synergistic lethality studies utilizing genetic and
pharmacologic screening techniques to potentially develop therapeutic
agents to treat this subtype of AML.

