Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Improvement of the bispecific antibody ADCC platform by genetic
insertion of IL-15 as a cross-linker to create NK cell reactive TriKEs


Natural killer (NK)-cell related anti-tumor surveillance is limited by
the ability of the tumor to escape killing. Previously, we constructed a
bispecific NK-cell engager (BiKE) consisting of two scFV against CD16
(FcRIII) on NK cells and EpCAM on tumor cells (EpCAM16). Epithelial cell
adhesion molecule (EpCAM) is a transmembrane protein with prevalent
expression on carcinomas making it a valuable marker for cancer
targeting. This BiKE facilitated ADCC and tumor elimination, but did not
account for the cellular expansion required for the success of T CARs. To
improve this, we incorporated a modified interleukin (IL)-15 crosslinker
to create a trispecific construct (TriKE) to enhance activation,
proliferation, and to prolong survival of NK-cells. IL-15 was chosen
since it is an established immunostimulatory cytokine with known effects
on NK cells and is recognized as a promising cancer cure drug in NIH
guided review. TriKE was assembled, expressed in E.coli, extracted,
refolded, and purified to >90% with a molecular weight of 68,860 daltons.
To determine the functional activity of 1615EpCAM, its killing ability
was measured in standard Cr-51 release assays with EpCAM+ HT-29
colorectal cancer cells. The 1615EpCAM TriKE induced the highest level of
killing compared to BiKE and other controls. To determine if the effect
of IL-15 in the drug correlated with NK-cell levels, donors were selected
with different naturally occurring NK cell levels. Freshly isolated PBMCs
were added to HT-29 cells at E:T ratios of 20:1, 6.6:1, and 2:1. Donors
showed increasingly higher levels of Cr-51 kill with TriKE, but not with
BiKE indicating that greater the presence of NK-cells, the greater the
TriKE effect. In order to study lytic degranulation as a function of
NK-cell activity, CD107a expression was measured. Cells treated with
TriKE showed significantly elevated degranulation when co-cultivated with
targets (pNatural killer (NK)-cell related anti-tumor surveillance is
limited by the ability of the tumor to escape killing. Previously, we
constructed a bispecific NK-cell engager (BiKE) consisting of two scFV
against CD16 (FcRIII) on NK cells and EpCAM on tumor cells (EpCAM16).
Epithelial cell adhesion molecule (EpCAM) is a transmembrane protein with
prevalent expression on carcinomas making it a valuable marker for cancer
targeting. This BiKE facilitated ADCC and tumor elimination, but did not
account for the cellular expansion required for the success of T CARs. To
improve this, we incorporated a modified interleukin (IL)-15 crosslinker
to create a trispecific construct (TriKE) to enhance activation,
proliferation, and to prolong survival of NK-cells. IL-15 was chosen
since it is an established immunostimulatory cytokine with known effects
on NK cells and is recognized as a promising cancer cure drug in NIH
guided review. TriKE was assembled, expressed in E.coli, extracted,
refolded, and purified to >90% with a molecular weight of 68,860 daltons.
To determine the functional activity of 1615EpCAM, its killing ability
was measured in standard Cr-51 release assays with EpCAM+ HT-29
colorectal cancer cells. The 1615EpCAM TriKE induced the highest level of
killing compared to BiKE and other controls. To determine if the effect
of IL-15 in the drug correlated with NK-cell levels, donors were selected
with different naturally occurring NK cell levels. Freshly isolated PBMCs
were added to HT-29 cells at E:T ratios of 20:1, 6.6:1, and 2:1. Donors
showed increasingly higher levels of Cr-51 kill with TriKE, but not with
BiKE indicating that greater the presence of NK-cells, the greater the
TriKE effect. In order to study lytic degranulation as a function of
NK-cell activity, CD107a expression was measured. Cells treated with
TriKE showed significantly elevated degranulation when co-cultivated with
targets (p<0.001) compared to BiKE. IL-15 alone did not enhance lytic
degranulation. When PBMC were exposed to TriKE, only NK-cells, but not
T-cells showed a proliferation specific pattern. Direct comparison of the
BiKE and the TriKE showed that the TriKE had the ability to induce
proliferation and expansion, the BiKE did not. Only with TriKE or IL-15
exposure was there a significantly enhanced expansion index. IFN-
production from the same CD56+/CD3- NK-cell population was enhanced by
1615EpCAM, but levels did not approach levels seen with the IL12/IL18
combination that is known to stimulate cytokine production at
supraphysiologic levels. We believe that this is a platform technology
since anti-CD133 also can be substituted for anti-EpCAM to create
functional anti-cancer stem cell TriKEs. These results indicate that we
have successfully developed an immune engager that simultaneously
mediates ADCC and also provides a self-sustaining costimulatory signal
inducing NK effector cell expansion.

