Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ICAM3 and CCL16, inflammation genes screened by high-throughput
siRNA library, govern cancer stemness in malignant tumors


Cancer stem cells (CSCs) have the ability of both self-renewal and
differentiation, were thought to be the main root of tumorigenesis,
metastasis, recurrence and drug resistance. Current studies have focused
on the maintenance of cancer stem cell abilities. Moreover, existing
studies have shown that tumor associated inflammation microenvironment
(TIM) play a pivotal role in different stages of tumor development. The
linkage between inflammation and tumor stemness has been established.
However, the evidence of TIM function on maintaining and nourishing CSCs
properties remains insufficient. Here, we performed a high throughput
siRNA interference platform to systemically screen out the inflammatory
genes that regulate tumor stemness via OCT4 promoter linked reporter
system in HMLE-Snail cells. 10 candidates were screened out which
knockdown could both down-regulate OCT4 expression and decrease ALDH+
subpopulation. Furthermore, we validated the function of genes ICAM3 and
CCL16 and found that knockdown ICAM3 or CCL16 inhibit cell migration,
sphere formation in 231, A549 and HepG2 cell lines. We also found ICAM3
or CCL16 deficiency decrease side population and reduce chemo-resistance.
In addition, mice bearing ICAM3 or CCL16 knockdown breast cancer cells
develop smaller tumors and less lung metastases verse controls. Taken
together, our study demonstrated that the inflammation related genes
ICAM3 and CCL16 govern cancer cell migration and stemness in malignant
tumors in vitro and in vivo, and that will provide new possible targets
to CSCs for cancer therapy.

