Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting the crosstalk between tumor cells and adipocytes to
block breast cancer progression


It is now well-established that the local microenvironment of an emerging
tumor plays a vital role in various steps of tumorigenesis. Stromal
cells, such as fibroblasts, endothelial and various inflammatory cells,
can contribute to tumor progression, and tumor cells can directly model
their microenvironment, influencing host cells to secrete factors that
favor cancer cell survival and growth. Recent studies have demonstrated
the existence of cross-talk between breast cancer (BC) cells and
adipocytes, the most abundant stromal cell in the breast, supporting
their involvement in BC and consistent with epidemiological studies
reporting the association of obesity and insulin resistance/diabetes with
a higher risk and poor prognosis of BC.Based on this evidence, we
investigated whether adipocyte de-differentiation is the crucial trigger
in inducing pro-tumor microenvironment remodeling and tumor
progression.Co-culture of 4T1 mouse mammary tumor cells using Transwell
or their conditioned medium with mature adipocytes derived from the
3T3-L1 mouse cells induced adipocyte de-differentiation, observed as a
reduced expression of specific differentiation markers (peripilin,
adipocyte protein 2 (aP2), PPAR and adiponectin) in Western blots and by
qRT-PCR, and a reduced triglyceride content as assessed by oil red O
staining compared to mature adipocytes. Strong adipocyte
de-differentiation, associated with an increase in pro-inflammatory
molecules (IL6 and CCL2), was also induced in vitro by tumor interstitial
fluids obtained from MMT-PyMT transgenic mice, but not by plasma of these
mice. Preliminary studies to identify molecules involved in the
cross-talk indicated that the phenomenon is exosome-unrelated.Based on
the relevant role of the PPAR transcription factor in inducing and
maintaining adipocyte differentiation, we co-cultured adipocytes with 4T1
BC cells in the presence of several PPAR agonists enriched in the diets
of many populations displaying a low incidence of cancer (3-fatty acids),
and in the presence of glitazones (rosiglitazone and pioglitazone) to
force adipocyte stable differentiation. While most of these compounds did
not block adipocyte de-differentiation induced by tumor cells,
pioglitazone and eicosanoid acid showed some activity in inhibiting this
de-differentiation in vitro. Treatment of MMTV-PyMT transgenic mice at
tumor onset by oral gavage with pioglitazone did not significantly reduce
mammary tumor growth compared to controls, whereas eicosanoid acid
treatment significantly reduced tumor multiplicity and tumor burden
compared to controls.Overall, our results suggest that tumor-induced
adipocyte de-differentiation participates in tumorigenesis and that the
blockade of this program can inhibit tumor progression.Supported by AIRC
and Fondazione Cariplo.

