Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cystathionine--synthase overexpression increases cell
proliferation, migration, bioenergetics and tumorigenesis in a
non-tumorigenic colorectal cancer (CRC) cell line


Introduction: We recently described overexpression of the enzyme,
cystathionine--synthase (CBS) in human CRC (but not normal colonic
mucosa) produces endogenous hydrogen sulfide (H2S) increasing tumor
bioenergetics, cell proliferation, invasion, migration and promotes tumor
angiogenesis. Its role in the progression of a colorectal adenoma to
carcinoma remains elusive. The purpose of this study was to determine
whether CBS overexpression in a non-tumorigenic human CRC cell line
(NCM356) is sufficient to increase cell proliferation, migration,
tumorigenesis, and metastasis. Methods: NCM356-p (parental) are
non-tumorigenic when xenografted into athymic nude mice and express low
levels of endogenous CBS, similar to normal colonic mucosa. RNASeq
analysis determined mutation status. NCM-p were transduced with a
lentiviral vector containing a CBS cDNA (NCM-C) or vector (NCM-v). H2S
production was visualized with a fluorescent probe,
7-azido-4-methylcoumarine (AzMC). Cell proliferation rates where
determined with a Coulter Counter. Cell migration and invasion assay were
performed in Boyden chambers with NIH3T3 conditioned media (CM) as a
chemoattractant. Anchorage-independent growth was assessed by soft-agar
assay. Cellular bioenergetics was assessed using Oxygraph-O2K
respirometer chamber. Tumorigenesis and metastasis were assessed
injecting cells subcutaneously and orthotopically into nude mice,
respectively. Aminooxyacetic acid (AOAA) was used to inhibit CBS
activity. Statistical significance (p0.05) set using ANOVA or
non-parametric Student t-test. Results: CBS overepression and H2S
production was verified by Western blot and AzMC fluorescence in the
NCM-C cells. CBS overexpression demonstrated significantly increased
proliferation rate (pIntroduction: We recently described overexpression
of the enzyme, cystathionine--synthase (CBS) in human CRC (but not normal
colonic mucosa) produces endogenous hydrogen sulfide (H2S) increasing
tumor bioenergetics, cell proliferation, invasion, migration and promotes
tumor angiogenesis. Its role in the progression of a colorectal adenoma
to carcinoma remains elusive. The purpose of this study was to determine
whether CBS overexpression in a non-tumorigenic human CRC cell line
(NCM356) is sufficient to increase cell proliferation, migration,
tumorigenesis, and metastasis. Methods: NCM356-p (parental) are
non-tumorigenic when xenografted into athymic nude mice and express low
levels of endogenous CBS, similar to normal colonic mucosa. RNASeq
analysis determined mutation status. NCM-p were transduced with a
lentiviral vector containing a CBS cDNA (NCM-C) or vector (NCM-v). H2S
production was visualized with a fluorescent probe,
7-azido-4-methylcoumarine (AzMC). Cell proliferation rates where
determined with a Coulter Counter. Cell migration and invasion assay were
performed in Boyden chambers with NIH3T3 conditioned media (CM) as a
chemoattractant. Anchorage-independent growth was assessed by soft-agar
assay. Cellular bioenergetics was assessed using Oxygraph-O2K
respirometer chamber. Tumorigenesis and metastasis were assessed
injecting cells subcutaneously and orthotopically into nude mice,
respectively. Aminooxyacetic acid (AOAA) was used to inhibit CBS
activity. Statistical significance (p0.05) set using ANOVA or
non-parametric Student t-test. Results: CBS overepression and H2S
production was verified by Western blot and AzMC fluorescence in the
NCM-C cells. CBS overexpression demonstrated significantly increased
proliferation rate (p<0.03 NCM-C vs. NCM-v or NCM-p) over 4 days in
culture, invasion through matrigel (pIntroduction: We recently described
overexpression of the enzyme, cystathionine--synthase (CBS) in human CRC
(but not normal colonic mucosa) produces endogenous hydrogen sulfide
(H2S) increasing tumor bioenergetics, cell proliferation, invasion,
migration and promotes tumor angiogenesis. Its role in the progression of
a colorectal adenoma to carcinoma remains elusive. The purpose of this
study was to determine whether CBS overexpression in a non-tumorigenic
human CRC cell line (NCM356) is sufficient to increase cell
proliferation, migration, tumorigenesis, and metastasis. Methods:
NCM356-p (parental) are non-tumorigenic when xenografted into athymic
nude mice and express low levels of endogenous CBS, similar to normal
colonic mucosa. RNASeq analysis determined mutation status. NCM-p were
transduced with a lentiviral vector containing a CBS cDNA (NCM-C) or
vector (NCM-v). H2S production was visualized with a fluorescent probe,
7-azido-4-methylcoumarine (AzMC). Cell proliferation rates where
determined with a Coulter Counter. Cell migration and invasion assay were
performed in Boyden chambers with NIH3T3 conditioned media (CM) as a
chemoattractant. Anchorage-independent growth was assessed by soft-agar
assay. Cellular bioenergetics was assessed using Oxygraph-O2K
respirometer chamber. Tumorigenesis and metastasis were assessed
injecting cells subcutaneously and orthotopically into nude mice,
respectively. Aminooxyacetic acid (AOAA) was used to inhibit CBS
activity. Statistical significance (p0.05) set using ANOVA or
non-parametric Student t-test. Results: CBS overepression and H2S
production was verified by Western blot and AzMC fluorescence in the
NCM-C cells. CBS overexpression demonstrated significantly increased
proliferation rate (p<0.03 NCM-C vs. NCM-v or NCM-p) over 4 days in
culture, invasion through matrigel (p<0.01), migration (pIntroduction: We
recently described overexpression of the enzyme, cystathionine--synthase
(CBS) in human CRC (but not normal colonic mucosa) produces endogenous
hydrogen sulfide (H2S) increasing tumor bioenergetics, cell
proliferation, invasion, migration and promotes tumor angiogenesis. Its
role in the progression of a colorectal adenoma to carcinoma remains
elusive. The purpose of this study was to determine whether CBS
overexpression in a non-tumorigenic human CRC cell line (NCM356) is
sufficient to increase cell proliferation, migration, tumorigenesis, and
metastasis. Methods: NCM356-p (parental) are non-tumorigenic when
xenografted into athymic nude mice and express low levels of endogenous
CBS, similar to normal colonic mucosa. RNASeq analysis determined
mutation status. NCM-p were transduced with a lentiviral vector
containing a CBS cDNA (NCM-C) or vector (NCM-v). H2S production was
visualized with a fluorescent probe, 7-azido-4-methylcoumarine (AzMC).
Cell proliferation rates where determined with a Coulter Counter. Cell
migration and invasion assay were performed in Boyden chambers with
NIH3T3 conditioned media (CM) as a chemoattractant. Anchorage-independent
growth was assessed by soft-agar assay. Cellular bioenergetics was
assessed using Oxygraph-O2K respirometer chamber. Tumorigenesis and
metastasis were assessed injecting cells subcutaneously and
orthotopically into nude mice, respectively. Aminooxyacetic acid (AOAA)
was used to inhibit CBS activity. Statistical significance (p0.05) set
using ANOVA or non-parametric Student t-test. Results: CBS overepression
and H2S production was verified by Western blot and AzMC fluorescence in
the NCM-C cells. CBS overexpression demonstrated significantly increased
proliferation rate (p<0.03 NCM-C vs. NCM-v or NCM-p) over 4 days in
culture, invasion through matrigel (p<0.01), migration (p<0.001) toward
NIH3T3 CM and increased colony formation in soft agar (pIntroduction: We
recently described overexpression of the enzyme, cystathionine--synthase
(CBS) in human CRC (but not normal colonic mucosa) produces endogenous
hydrogen sulfide (H2S) increasing tumor bioenergetics, cell
proliferation, invasion, migration and promotes tumor angiogenesis. Its
role in the progression of a colorectal adenoma to carcinoma remains
elusive. The purpose of this study was to determine whether CBS
overexpression in a non-tumorigenic human CRC cell line (NCM356) is
sufficient to increase cell proliferation, migration, tumorigenesis, and
metastasis. Methods: NCM356-p (parental) are non-tumorigenic when
xenografted into athymic nude mice and express low levels of endogenous
CBS, similar to normal colonic mucosa. RNASeq analysis determined
mutation status. NCM-p were transduced with a lentiviral vector
containing a CBS cDNA (NCM-C) or vector (NCM-v). H2S production was
visualized with a fluorescent probe, 7-azido-4-methylcoumarine (AzMC).
Cell proliferation rates where determined with a Coulter Counter. Cell
migration and invasion assay were performed in Boyden chambers with
NIH3T3 conditioned media (CM) as a chemoattractant. Anchorage-independent
growth was assessed by soft-agar assay. Cellular bioenergetics was
assessed using Oxygraph-O2K respirometer chamber. Tumorigenesis and
metastasis were assessed injecting cells subcutaneously and
orthotopically into nude mice, respectively. Aminooxyacetic acid (AOAA)
was used to inhibit CBS activity. Statistical significance (p0.05) set
using ANOVA or non-parametric Student t-test. Results: CBS overepression
and H2S production was verified by Western blot and AzMC fluorescence in
the NCM-C cells. CBS overexpression demonstrated significantly increased
proliferation rate (p<0.03 NCM-C vs. NCM-v or NCM-p) over 4 days in
culture, invasion through matrigel (p<0.01), migration (p<0.001) toward
NIH3T3 CM and increased colony formation in soft agar (p<0.01). CBS
inhibition with AOAA (1mM) decreased invasion and migration
(pIntroduction: We recently described overexpression of the enzyme,
cystathionine--synthase (CBS) in human CRC (but not normal colonic
mucosa) produces endogenous hydrogen sulfide (H2S) increasing tumor
bioenergetics, cell proliferation, invasion, migration and promotes tumor
angiogenesis. Its role in the progression of a colorectal adenoma to
carcinoma remains elusive. The purpose of this study was to determine
whether CBS overexpression in a non-tumorigenic human CRC cell line
(NCM356) is sufficient to increase cell proliferation, migration,
tumorigenesis, and metastasis. Methods: NCM356-p (parental) are
non-tumorigenic when xenografted into athymic nude mice and express low
levels of endogenous CBS, similar to normal colonic mucosa. RNASeq
analysis determined mutation status. NCM-p were transduced with a
lentiviral vector containing a CBS cDNA (NCM-C) or vector (NCM-v). H2S
production was visualized with a fluorescent probe,
7-azido-4-methylcoumarine (AzMC). Cell proliferation rates where
determined with a Coulter Counter. Cell migration and invasion assay were
performed in Boyden chambers with NIH3T3 conditioned media (CM) as a
chemoattractant. Anchorage-independent growth was assessed by soft-agar
assay. Cellular bioenergetics was assessed using Oxygraph-O2K
respirometer chamber. Tumorigenesis and metastasis were assessed
injecting cells subcutaneously and orthotopically into nude mice,
respectively. Aminooxyacetic acid (AOAA) was used to inhibit CBS
activity. Statistical significance (p0.05) set using ANOVA or
non-parametric Student t-test. Results: CBS overepression and H2S
production was verified by Western blot and AzMC fluorescence in the
NCM-C cells. CBS overexpression demonstrated significantly increased
proliferation rate (p<0.03 NCM-C vs. NCM-v or NCM-p) over 4 days in
culture, invasion through matrigel (p<0.01), migration (p<0.001) toward
NIH3T3 CM and increased colony formation in soft agar (p<0.01). CBS
inhibition with AOAA (1mM) decreased invasion and migration (p<0.01) in
the NCM-C cells compared to NCM-v. In high-resolution respirometry,
respiratory rate was significantly higher in the NCM-C compared to -p and
-v. (141.8 1.5 vs. 33.7 0.8 vs. 72.2 1.77 pmols1mg1, -p v -C p
Introduction: We recently described overexpression of the enzyme,
cystathionine--synthase (CBS) in human CRC (but not normal colonic
mucosa) produces endogenous hydrogen sulfide (H2S) increasing tumor
bioenergetics, cell proliferation, invasion, migration and promotes tumor
angiogenesis. Its role in the progression of a colorectal adenoma to
carcinoma remains elusive. The purpose of this study was to determine
whether CBS overexpression in a non-tumorigenic human CRC cell line
(NCM356) is sufficient to increase cell proliferation, migration,
tumorigenesis, and metastasis. Methods: NCM356-p (parental) are
non-tumorigenic when xenografted into athymic nude mice and express low
levels of endogenous CBS, similar to normal colonic mucosa. RNASeq
analysis determined mutation status. NCM-p were transduced with a
lentiviral vector containing a CBS cDNA (NCM-C) or vector (NCM-v). H2S
production was visualized with a fluorescent probe,
7-azido-4-methylcoumarine (AzMC). Cell proliferation rates where
determined with a Coulter Counter. Cell migration and invasion assay were
performed in Boyden chambers with NIH3T3 conditioned media (CM) as a
chemoattractant. Anchorage-independent growth was assessed by soft-agar
assay. Cellular bioenergetics was assessed using Oxygraph-O2K
respirometer chamber. Tumorigenesis and metastasis were assessed
injecting cells subcutaneously and orthotopically into nude mice,
respectively. Aminooxyacetic acid (AOAA) was used to inhibit CBS
activity. Statistical significance (p0.05) set using ANOVA or
non-parametric Student t-test. Results: CBS overepression and H2S
production was verified by Western blot and AzMC fluorescence in the
NCM-C cells. CBS overexpression demonstrated significantly increased
proliferation rate (p<0.03 NCM-C vs. NCM-v or NCM-p) over 4 days in
culture, invasion through matrigel (p<0.01), migration (p<0.001) toward
NIH3T3 CM and increased colony formation in soft agar (p<0.01). CBS
inhibition with AOAA (1mM) decreased invasion and migration (p<0.01) in
the NCM-C cells compared to NCM-v. In high-resolution respirometry,
respiratory rate was significantly higher in the NCM-C compared to -p and
-v. (141.8 1.5 vs. 33.7 0.8 vs. 72.2 1.77 pmols1mg1, -p v -C p < 0.0001,
-v v -C p Introduction: We recently described overexpression of the
enzyme, cystathionine--synthase (CBS) in human CRC (but not normal
colonic mucosa) produces endogenous hydrogen sulfide (H2S) increasing
tumor bioenergetics, cell proliferation, invasion, migration and promotes
tumor angiogenesis. Its role in the progression of a colorectal adenoma
to carcinoma remains elusive. The purpose of this study was to determine
whether CBS overexpression in a non-tumorigenic human CRC cell line
(NCM356) is sufficient to increase cell proliferation, migration,
tumorigenesis, and metastasis. Methods: NCM356-p (parental) are
non-tumorigenic when xenografted into athymic nude mice and express low
levels of endogenous CBS, similar to normal colonic mucosa. RNASeq
analysis determined mutation status. NCM-p were transduced with a
lentiviral vector containing a CBS cDNA (NCM-C) or vector (NCM-v). H2S
production was visualized with a fluorescent probe,
7-azido-4-methylcoumarine (AzMC). Cell proliferation rates where
determined with a Coulter Counter. Cell migration and invasion assay were
performed in Boyden chambers with NIH3T3 conditioned media (CM) as a
chemoattractant. Anchorage-independent growth was assessed by soft-agar
assay. Cellular bioenergetics was assessed using Oxygraph-O2K
respirometer chamber. Tumorigenesis and metastasis were assessed
injecting cells subcutaneously and orthotopically into nude mice,
respectively. Aminooxyacetic acid (AOAA) was used to inhibit CBS
activity. Statistical significance (p0.05) set using ANOVA or
non-parametric Student t-test. Results: CBS overepression and H2S
production was verified by Western blot and AzMC fluorescence in the
NCM-C cells. CBS overexpression demonstrated significantly increased
proliferation rate (p<0.03 NCM-C vs. NCM-v or NCM-p) over 4 days in
culture, invasion through matrigel (p<0.01), migration (p<0.001) toward
NIH3T3 CM and increased colony formation in soft agar (p<0.01). CBS
inhibition with AOAA (1mM) decreased invasion and migration (p<0.01) in
the NCM-C cells compared to NCM-v. In high-resolution respirometry,
respiratory rate was significantly higher in the NCM-C compared to -p and
-v. (141.8 1.5 vs. 33.7 0.8 vs. 72.2 1.77 pmols1mg1, -p v -C p < 0.0001,
-v v -C p < 0.0005, -p v -v p Introduction: We recently described
overexpression of the enzyme, cystathionine--synthase (CBS) in human CRC
(but not normal colonic mucosa) produces endogenous hydrogen sulfide
(H2S) increasing tumor bioenergetics, cell proliferation, invasion,
migration and promotes tumor angiogenesis. Its role in the progression of
a colorectal adenoma to carcinoma remains elusive. The purpose of this
study was to determine whether CBS overexpression in a non-tumorigenic
human CRC cell line (NCM356) is sufficient to increase cell
proliferation, migration, tumorigenesis, and metastasis. Methods:
NCM356-p (parental) are non-tumorigenic when xenografted into athymic
nude mice and express low levels of endogenous CBS, similar to normal
colonic mucosa. RNASeq analysis determined mutation status. NCM-p were
transduced with a lentiviral vector containing a CBS cDNA (NCM-C) or
vector (NCM-v). H2S production was visualized with a fluorescent probe,
7-azido-4-methylcoumarine (AzMC). Cell proliferation rates where
determined with a Coulter Counter. Cell migration and invasion assay were
performed in Boyden chambers with NIH3T3 conditioned media (CM) as a
chemoattractant. Anchorage-independent growth was assessed by soft-agar
assay. Cellular bioenergetics was assessed using Oxygraph-O2K
respirometer chamber. Tumorigenesis and metastasis were assessed
injecting cells subcutaneously and orthotopically into nude mice,
respectively. Aminooxyacetic acid (AOAA) was used to inhibit CBS
activity. Statistical significance (p0.05) set using ANOVA or
non-parametric Student t-test. Results: CBS overepression and H2S
production was verified by Western blot and AzMC fluorescence in the
NCM-C cells. CBS overexpression demonstrated significantly increased
proliferation rate (p<0.03 NCM-C vs. NCM-v or NCM-p) over 4 days in
culture, invasion through matrigel (p<0.01), migration (p<0.001) toward
NIH3T3 CM and increased colony formation in soft agar (p<0.01). CBS
inhibition with AOAA (1mM) decreased invasion and migration (p<0.01) in
the NCM-C cells compared to NCM-v. In high-resolution respirometry,
respiratory rate was significantly higher in the NCM-C compared to -p and
-v. (141.8 1.5 vs. 33.7 0.8 vs. 72.2 1.77 pmols1mg1, -p v -C p < 0.0001,
-v v -C p < 0.0005, -p v -v p < 0.001). Exome-wide sequence analyses of
the NCM-p identified inactivating mutations in the APC and TP53 tumor
suppressor genes, and an activating mutation in KRAS. Although the NCM-C
cells produced significantly larger tumors in mice compared with NCM-v or
NCM-p (pIntroduction: We recently described overexpression of the enzyme,
cystathionine--synthase (CBS) in human CRC (but not normal colonic
mucosa) produces endogenous hydrogen sulfide (H2S) increasing tumor
bioenergetics, cell proliferation, invasion, migration and promotes tumor
angiogenesis. Its role in the progression of a colorectal adenoma to
carcinoma remains elusive. The purpose of this study was to determine
whether CBS overexpression in a non-tumorigenic human CRC cell line
(NCM356) is sufficient to increase cell proliferation, migration,
tumorigenesis, and metastasis. Methods: NCM356-p (parental) are
non-tumorigenic when xenografted into athymic nude mice and express low
levels of endogenous CBS, similar to normal colonic mucosa. RNASeq
analysis determined mutation status. NCM-p were transduced with a
lentiviral vector containing a CBS cDNA (NCM-C) or vector (NCM-v). H2S
production was visualized with a fluorescent probe,
7-azido-4-methylcoumarine (AzMC). Cell proliferation rates where
determined with a Coulter Counter. Cell migration and invasion assay were
performed in Boyden chambers with NIH3T3 conditioned media (CM) as a
chemoattractant. Anchorage-independent growth was assessed by soft-agar
assay. Cellular bioenergetics was assessed using Oxygraph-O2K
respirometer chamber. Tumorigenesis and metastasis were assessed
injecting cells subcutaneously and orthotopically into nude mice,
respectively. Aminooxyacetic acid (AOAA) was used to inhibit CBS
activity. Statistical significance (p0.05) set using ANOVA or
non-parametric Student t-test. Results: CBS overepression and H2S
production was verified by Western blot and AzMC fluorescence in the
NCM-C cells. CBS overexpression demonstrated significantly increased
proliferation rate (p<0.03 NCM-C vs. NCM-v or NCM-p) over 4 days in
culture, invasion through matrigel (p<0.01), migration (p<0.001) toward
NIH3T3 CM and increased colony formation in soft agar (p<0.01). CBS
inhibition with AOAA (1mM) decreased invasion and migration (p<0.01) in
the NCM-C cells compared to NCM-v. In high-resolution respirometry,
respiratory rate was significantly higher in the NCM-C compared to -p and
-v. (141.8 1.5 vs. 33.7 0.8 vs. 72.2 1.77 pmols1mg1, -p v -C p < 0.0001,
-v v -C p < 0.0005, -p v -v p < 0.001). Exome-wide sequence analyses of
the NCM-p identified inactivating mutations in the APC and TP53 tumor
suppressor genes, and an activating mutation in KRAS. Although the NCM-C
cells produced significantly larger tumors in mice compared with NCM-v or
NCM-p (p<0.001 2-w ANOVA), none of the cell lines caused liver metastasis
in vivo. Conclusion: A non-tumorigenic cell line with some known
mutations can progress to a tumorigenic, but not metastatic, phenotype
with CBS overexpression and H2S production. Our data supports the
importance of CBS/H2S axis in the adenoma to carcinoma sequence.

