Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Psychoimmunological effect of depression on cervical carcinoma:
Genome-wide long noncoding RNA implications


Objective: Cervical cancer is the second most commonly diagnosed cancer
and the third leading cause of cancer death among females in developing
countries. Depression is a vital psychological factor for tumor
progression. Long noncoding RNAs(LncRNAs) are a novel group of gene
regulators and may contribute to the disease development. Herein, the
study aims to discover the mechanisms of psychoimmunological effect of
depression on cervical carcinoma from the perspective of long noncoding
ribonucleic acid.Methods: Six tumor tissues were obtained from Ib-IIa
invasive squamous cell cervical carcinoma patients during laproscopic
surgeries. They were divided into high-depressed group and low-depressed
group according to the scoring system. LncRNA microarray experiments were
performed. Expression levels of six lncRNA-mRNA pairs were confirmed by
quantitative real-time PCR in other 20 patients materials.Results: We
found that 1621 lncRNA transcripts are differently expressed between
high-depressed and paired low-depressed samples, with 510 up-regulated
and 1111 down-regulated (fold-change>2.0). Most of lncRNAs were found
trans-regulated by three TFs with most credentiality: BCL11A,MEF2A and
TBP. In the KEGG analysis, the most down-regulated mRNA involved was
systemic lupus erythematosus (Maximun transcriptional domain coverage:
25.5%). In the LncRNA and mRNA Coexpression, the function of lncRNAs with
most differently expressions was predicted in relationship with
interleukin-1 receptor activity (Number of lncRNAs annotated:
15).Conclusions: Our study identified that genome-wide LncRNA profiles
are significantly altered in cervical carcinoma patients with worse
depressed profiles, and the psychoimmunological effect of tumor
progression needs further investigation.Keywords: Depression, Cervical
Cancer, Immunology, Long-noncoding RNA

