Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The effect of Erlotinib treatment on human angiogenesis in vitro


Background: Angiogenesis is a process by which new capillaries develop
from previously formed venules. Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
is a member of ErbB family of receptor tyrosine kinases (TKs). The EGFR
signaling pathway is activated in proliferation, angiogenesis, tumor
growth and progression. Overexpression of EGFR in many solid human tumors
associates with poor prognosis. One of the effective strategies to target
Erb receptors is use of small molecule inhibitors of the TK domain, such
as Erlotinib. We hypothesized that inhibiting EGFR signaling by Erlotinib
treatment will decrease physiologic and pathologic angiogenesis in an in
vitro model system.Methods: Tissue was embedded in a three-dimensional
fibrin-thrombin clot, and evaluated for neovessel growth as per our in
vitro Human Angiogenesis Model (HAM). Physiologic angiogenesis was
studied in two venous tissues, human placental vein (HPV) and inferior
vena cava (IVC). Human liver neuroendocrine tumor (NET) tissue modeled
pathologic angiogenesis. All tissues were treated with Erlotinib in a
dose response manner (1 M, 10 M, 100 M) and evaluated for three
angiogenesis parameters: percent initiation (%I), angiogenic growth (AG),
and overall angiogenic response (OAR). Concentrations of
angiogenesis-relevant ligand-receptor pairs in supernatant were
determined by Human Angiogenesis/Growth panel (Milliplex, EMD Millipore).
Effect of Erlotinib treatment on EGF pathway genes expression in IVCs and
liver NETs was analyzed by TaqMan EGF pathway array. Angiogenesis data
was analyzed for significance using Z-test (Primer) and paired t-test
(MedCalc).Results: Selected dose of Erlotinib [10 M] consistently
achieved statistically significant inhibition of both AG (pBackground:
Angiogenesis is a process by which new capillaries develop from
previously formed venules. Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is a
member of ErbB family of receptor tyrosine kinases (TKs). The EGFR
signaling pathway is activated in proliferation, angiogenesis, tumor
growth and progression. Overexpression of EGFR in many solid human tumors
associates with poor prognosis. One of the effective strategies to target
Erb receptors is use of small molecule inhibitors of the TK domain, such
as Erlotinib. We hypothesized that inhibiting EGFR signaling by Erlotinib
treatment will decrease physiologic and pathologic angiogenesis in an in
vitro model system.Methods: Tissue was embedded in a three-dimensional
fibrin-thrombin clot, and evaluated for neovessel growth as per our in
vitro Human Angiogenesis Model (HAM). Physiologic angiogenesis was
studied in two venous tissues, human placental vein (HPV) and inferior
vena cava (IVC). Human liver neuroendocrine tumor (NET) tissue modeled
pathologic angiogenesis. All tissues were treated with Erlotinib in a
dose response manner (1 M, 10 M, 100 M) and evaluated for three
angiogenesis parameters: percent initiation (%I), angiogenic growth (AG),
and overall angiogenic response (OAR). Concentrations of
angiogenesis-relevant ligand-receptor pairs in supernatant were
determined by Human Angiogenesis/Growth panel (Milliplex, EMD Millipore).
Effect of Erlotinib treatment on EGF pathway genes expression in IVCs and
liver NETs was analyzed by TaqMan EGF pathway array. Angiogenesis data
was analyzed for significance using Z-test (Primer) and paired t-test
(MedCalc).Results: Selected dose of Erlotinib [10 M] consistently
achieved statistically significant inhibition of both AG (p<0.0001) and
OAR (pBackground: Angiogenesis is a process by which new capillaries
develop from previously formed venules. Epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR) is a member of ErbB family of receptor tyrosine kinases (TKs). The
EGFR signaling pathway is activated in proliferation, angiogenesis, tumor
growth and progression. Overexpression of EGFR in many solid human tumors
associates with poor prognosis. One of the effective strategies to target
Erb receptors is use of small molecule inhibitors of the TK domain, such
as Erlotinib. We hypothesized that inhibiting EGFR signaling by Erlotinib
treatment will decrease physiologic and pathologic angiogenesis in an in
vitro model system.Methods: Tissue was embedded in a three-dimensional
fibrin-thrombin clot, and evaluated for neovessel growth as per our in
vitro Human Angiogenesis Model (HAM). Physiologic angiogenesis was
studied in two venous tissues, human placental vein (HPV) and inferior
vena cava (IVC). Human liver neuroendocrine tumor (NET) tissue modeled
pathologic angiogenesis. All tissues were treated with Erlotinib in a
dose response manner (1 M, 10 M, 100 M) and evaluated for three
angiogenesis parameters: percent initiation (%I), angiogenic growth (AG),
and overall angiogenic response (OAR). Concentrations of
angiogenesis-relevant ligand-receptor pairs in supernatant were
determined by Human Angiogenesis/Growth panel (Milliplex, EMD Millipore).
Effect of Erlotinib treatment on EGF pathway genes expression in IVCs and
liver NETs was analyzed by TaqMan EGF pathway array. Angiogenesis data
was analyzed for significance using Z-test (Primer) and paired t-test
(MedCalc).Results: Selected dose of Erlotinib [10 M] consistently
achieved statistically significant inhibition of both AG (p<0.0001) and
OAR (p<0.0001) in all three tissue types compared to the control. Percent
inhibition of%I was below 30% for HPV, IVC and liver NETs. Angiogenic
growth was inhibited by 45.65% in HPV (p = 0.035), 52.14% in IVC
(pBackground: Angiogenesis is a process by which new capillaries develop
from previously formed venules. Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
is a member of ErbB family of receptor tyrosine kinases (TKs). The EGFR
signaling pathway is activated in proliferation, angiogenesis, tumor
growth and progression. Overexpression of EGFR in many solid human tumors
associates with poor prognosis. One of the effective strategies to target
Erb receptors is use of small molecule inhibitors of the TK domain, such
as Erlotinib. We hypothesized that inhibiting EGFR signaling by Erlotinib
treatment will decrease physiologic and pathologic angiogenesis in an in
vitro model system.Methods: Tissue was embedded in a three-dimensional
fibrin-thrombin clot, and evaluated for neovessel growth as per our in
vitro Human Angiogenesis Model (HAM). Physiologic angiogenesis was
studied in two venous tissues, human placental vein (HPV) and inferior
vena cava (IVC). Human liver neuroendocrine tumor (NET) tissue modeled
pathologic angiogenesis. All tissues were treated with Erlotinib in a
dose response manner (1 M, 10 M, 100 M) and evaluated for three
angiogenesis parameters: percent initiation (%I), angiogenic growth (AG),
and overall angiogenic response (OAR). Concentrations of
angiogenesis-relevant ligand-receptor pairs in supernatant were
determined by Human Angiogenesis/Growth panel (Milliplex, EMD Millipore).
Effect of Erlotinib treatment on EGF pathway genes expression in IVCs and
liver NETs was analyzed by TaqMan EGF pathway array. Angiogenesis data
was analyzed for significance using Z-test (Primer) and paired t-test
(MedCalc).Results: Selected dose of Erlotinib [10 M] consistently
achieved statistically significant inhibition of both AG (p<0.0001) and
OAR (p<0.0001) in all three tissue types compared to the control. Percent
inhibition of%I was below 30% for HPV, IVC and liver NETs. Angiogenic
growth was inhibited by 45.65% in HPV (p = 0.035), 52.14% in IVC
(p<0.0001) and 47.59% in liver NETs (p = 0.0107) and OAR by 60% in HPV (p
= 0.105*), 53.61% in IVC (pBackground: Angiogenesis is a process by which
new capillaries develop from previously formed venules. Epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR) is a member of ErbB family of receptor tyrosine
kinases (TKs). The EGFR signaling pathway is activated in proliferation,
angiogenesis, tumor growth and progression. Overexpression of EGFR in
many solid human tumors associates with poor prognosis. One of the
effective strategies to target Erb receptors is use of small molecule
inhibitors of the TK domain, such as Erlotinib. We hypothesized that
inhibiting EGFR signaling by Erlotinib treatment will decrease
physiologic and pathologic angiogenesis in an in vitro model
system.Methods: Tissue was embedded in a three-dimensional
fibrin-thrombin clot, and evaluated for neovessel growth as per our in
vitro Human Angiogenesis Model (HAM). Physiologic angiogenesis was
studied in two venous tissues, human placental vein (HPV) and inferior
vena cava (IVC). Human liver neuroendocrine tumor (NET) tissue modeled
pathologic angiogenesis. All tissues were treated with Erlotinib in a
dose response manner (1 M, 10 M, 100 M) and evaluated for three
angiogenesis parameters: percent initiation (%I), angiogenic growth (AG),
and overall angiogenic response (OAR). Concentrations of
angiogenesis-relevant ligand-receptor pairs in supernatant were
determined by Human Angiogenesis/Growth panel (Milliplex, EMD Millipore).
Effect of Erlotinib treatment on EGF pathway genes expression in IVCs and
liver NETs was analyzed by TaqMan EGF pathway array. Angiogenesis data
was analyzed for significance using Z-test (Primer) and paired t-test
(MedCalc).Results: Selected dose of Erlotinib [10 M] consistently
achieved statistically significant inhibition of both AG (p<0.0001) and
OAR (p<0.0001) in all three tissue types compared to the control. Percent
inhibition of%I was below 30% for HPV, IVC and liver NETs. Angiogenic
growth was inhibited by 45.65% in HPV (p = 0.035), 52.14% in IVC
(p<0.0001) and 47.59% in liver NETs (p = 0.0107) and OAR by 60% in HPV (p
= 0.105*), 53.61% in IVC (p<0.0001) and 52.27% in liver NET (p = 0.0168).
Preliminary ligand-receptor pair concentrations in IVCs and liver NETs
show opposing response to Erlotinib treatment. Out of 92 EGF
pathway-related genes, only twelve exhibited significant expression level
changes [2-fold] in both IVC and liver NET Erlotinib-treated samples.
Among them, only five genes demonstrated the same direction of change in
both tissue types. The CAV2, GAB1, RHOD genes were down-regulated; MUC1
and PIK3c2b genes were upregulated.Conclusions: Erlotinib is an effective
antiangiogenic kinase inhibitor in HPV, IVC and liver NETs in-vitro. It
impedes physiologic and pathologic angiogenesis via regulation of
neovessel growth rather than initiation of sprouts. Five EGF pathway
related genes commonly affected in both physiologic and pathologic models
by Erlotinib treatment may be essential modulators of human angiogenesis.

