Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Deep phenotyping of dissociated solid tumor cells from breast
cancer specimens


Exploring tumor heterogeneity with the goal of improving outcome has led
to the need to glean as much information as possible at an individual
cell level from these valuable specimens. Traditional approaches to solid
tumor analyses fail to reveal the diverse range of cellular compartments
beyond tumor cells that comprise the tumor microenvironment. A
comprehensive approach to tumor interrogation requires efficient tissue
dissociation to facilitate analysis at the single-cell level. Compared to
current methods, single-cell analysis of tumor derived cell suspensions
by flow cytometry has the potential to provide a more thorough
understanding of the many subpopulations within the tumor
microenvironment and the cell-to-cell interactions that govern this
space.Here, we demonstrate an efficient workflow that enables
comprehensive cell analysis of solid tumors from breast cancers. After
dissociating human breast cancer biopsies from primary tumors into cell
suspension, we analyzed the immune compartment and the cancer/stromal
cell compartment by multicolor flow cytometry, using 26 markers. A
comprehensive analysis of this data set reveals the heterogeneity within
the tumor microenvironment on a phenotypic level, which might have
potentially significant correlations to the clinical status and molecular
phenotype of the cancer. These results encourage the expansion of the use
of flow cytometry as a means of solid tumor biopsy analysis, highlighting
the potential clinical value of this approach in disease management.

