Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Optimization of a method for FACS analysis of checkpoint receptor
expression on tumor infiltrating lymphocytes in clinical tumor samples


While immune checkpoint therapies against CTLA-4, PD-1 and PD-L1 have
achieved promising clinical outcome recently, the dynamic therapeutic
responses spanning individual patients and different cancer types warrant
exploration and validation of additional therapeutic strategies. Since
the expression of immune checkpoints in tumor infiltrating lymphocytes
(TIL) has been of interest to the field, we attempted to analyze the
expression of several checkpoint receptors on TILs in clinical tumor
samples. Unexpectedly, a number of markers were subject to time-dependent
degradation during the tissue disaggregation process. This degradation
could be due to the proteolytic activity of a proteinase, which has been
used commonly in various tissue disaggregation protocols. Analysis of the
protein sequences verified the presence of the proteinase recognition
sequences in the affected receptors. Using PHA-stimulated hPBMCs, we
found and demonstrated that a specific protease was responsible for
either partial or total degradation of these markers. To overcome this
issue, we developed a protease-free tissue disaggregation method, which
showed no adverse effect on protease affected cell membrane receptors,
thus allowing for more reliable flow cytometric analysis of various TIL
subpopulations. With this method, we analyzed these checkpoint receptors
positivity of both CD4+ and CD8+ TILs and revealed a high degree of
heterogeneity of these immune checkpoints in a number of tumor types,
including lung, breast and gastric cancers. Analysis of the magnitude of
lymphocyte infiltration to the tumor and expression of prominent immune
checkpoints on CD4+ or CD8+ TILs will help understand the subtle
interaction between tumor and the immune system in the tumor
microenvironment and may provide guidance for clinical trials of novel
combinatorial immuno-therapeutic strategies.

