Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Insulin-like growth factor receptor and sphingosine kinase
co-expression has prognostic and therapeutic potential in breast cancer


The search for reliable prognostic markers of breast cancer disease
outcome is ongoing. The insulin-like growth factor receptor (IGF1R) and
sphingosine kinase (SphK1) signaling pathways are known to contribute to
breast oncogenesis and are therapeutic targets [1, 2]. Since IGF-I
signaling activates SphK1 [3] we hypothesized that high IGF1R and SphK1
co-expression may be clinically relevant, and potential dual therapeutic
targets in breast cancer. Kaplan-Meier analysis was performed to
determine the prognostic significance of IGF1R and SphK1 high
co-expression on disease free survival (DFS) and overall survival (OS)
probability in breast cancer (http://glados.ucd.ie/BreastMark/). Cell
viability studies and clonogenic assays were undertaken using the
luminal, estrogen receptor (ER)-positive MCF7 and T47D and the
basal-like, ER-negative HCC-1806 and HCC70 breast cancer cells to test
the effectiveness of the dual IGF1R and insulin receptor inhibitor
(OSI-906; 0.1 - 10 M) and the SphK1 inhibitor (SKI-II; 1 - 20 M) as
single and combined agents. Statistical analysis was completed using a
one-way ANOVA (pThe search for reliable prognostic markers of breast
cancer disease outcome is ongoing. The insulin-like growth factor
receptor (IGF1R) and sphingosine kinase (SphK1) signaling pathways are
known to contribute to breast oncogenesis and are therapeutic targets [1,
2]. Since IGF-I signaling activates SphK1 [3] we hypothesized that high
IGF1R and SphK1 co-expression may be clinically relevant, and potential
dual therapeutic targets in breast cancer. Kaplan-Meier analysis was
performed to determine the prognostic significance of IGF1R and SphK1
high co-expression on disease free survival (DFS) and overall survival
(OS) probability in breast cancer (http://glados.ucd.ie/BreastMark/).
Cell viability studies and clonogenic assays were undertaken using the
luminal, estrogen receptor (ER)-positive MCF7 and T47D and the
basal-like, ER-negative HCC-1806 and HCC70 breast cancer cells to test
the effectiveness of the dual IGF1R and insulin receptor inhibitor
(OSI-906; 0.1 - 10 M) and the SphK1 inhibitor (SKI-II; 1 - 20 M) as
single and combined agents. Statistical analysis was completed using a
one-way ANOVA (p<0.05), repeated measures (pThe search for reliable
prognostic markers of breast cancer disease outcome is ongoing. The
insulin-like growth factor receptor (IGF1R) and sphingosine kinase
(SphK1) signaling pathways are known to contribute to breast oncogenesis
and are therapeutic targets [1, 2]. Since IGF-I signaling activates SphK1
[3] we hypothesized that high IGF1R and SphK1 co-expression may be
clinically relevant, and potential dual therapeutic targets in breast
cancer. Kaplan-Meier analysis was performed to determine the prognostic
significance of IGF1R and SphK1 high co-expression on disease free
survival (DFS) and overall survival (OS) probability in breast cancer
(http://glados.ucd.ie/BreastMark/). Cell viability studies and clonogenic
assays were undertaken using the luminal, estrogen receptor (ER)-positive
MCF7 and T47D and the basal-like, ER-negative HCC-1806 and HCC70 breast
cancer cells to test the effectiveness of the dual IGF1R and insulin
receptor inhibitor (OSI-906; 0.1 - 10 M) and the SphK1 inhibitor (SKI-II;
1 - 20 M) as single and combined agents. Statistical analysis was
completed using a one-way ANOVA (p<0.05), repeated measures (p<0.05) and
calculation of drug synergism by a combination index (CI) The search for
reliable prognostic markers of breast cancer disease outcome is ongoing.
The insulin-like growth factor receptor (IGF1R) and sphingosine kinase
(SphK1) signaling pathways are known to contribute to breast oncogenesis
and are therapeutic targets [1, 2]. Since IGF-I signaling activates SphK1
[3] we hypothesized that high IGF1R and SphK1 co-expression may be
clinically relevant, and potential dual therapeutic targets in breast
cancer. Kaplan-Meier analysis was performed to determine the prognostic
significance of IGF1R and SphK1 high co-expression on disease free
survival (DFS) and overall survival (OS) probability in breast cancer
(http://glados.ucd.ie/BreastMark/). Cell viability studies and clonogenic
assays were undertaken using the luminal, estrogen receptor (ER)-positive
MCF7 and T47D and the basal-like, ER-negative HCC-1806 and HCC70 breast
cancer cells to test the effectiveness of the dual IGF1R and insulin
receptor inhibitor (OSI-906; 0.1 - 10 M) and the SphK1 inhibitor (SKI-II;
1 - 20 M) as single and combined agents. Statistical analysis was
completed using a one-way ANOVA (p<0.05), repeated measures (p<0.05) and
calculation of drug synergism by a combination index (CI) <1 (CommSyn).
Immunoblot analysis was used to show effective drug target inhibition of
IGF1R and SphK1. IGF1R and SphK1 high co-expression was associated with
decreased DFS (HR; 2.184 (1.007 - 4.735, p = 0.042; total 270 patients)
and OS (HR; 2.433 (1.136 - 5.214, p = 0.018; total 170 patients) in
ER-positive, luminal A, lymph-node positive breast cancers compared to no
significance using single-gene analysis. A reduction in OS in basal,
ER-negative, lymph node negative breast cancers was associated with high
IGF1R and SphK1 co-expression (HR; 5.687 (1.534 - 21.084, p = 0.003;
total 55 patients), compared to high IGF1R expression alone (HR; 4.103
(1.34 - 12.57, p = 0.007; total 55 patients). In all four cell-lines 4 M
SKI-II acted synergistically with OSI over the range 0.1 - 6.4 M (CIThe
search for reliable prognostic markers of breast cancer disease outcome
is ongoing. The insulin-like growth factor receptor (IGF1R) and
sphingosine kinase (SphK1) signaling pathways are known to contribute to
breast oncogenesis and are therapeutic targets [1, 2]. Since IGF-I
signaling activates SphK1 [3] we hypothesized that high IGF1R and SphK1
co-expression may be clinically relevant, and potential dual therapeutic
targets in breast cancer. Kaplan-Meier analysis was performed to
determine the prognostic significance of IGF1R and SphK1 high
co-expression on disease free survival (DFS) and overall survival (OS)
probability in breast cancer (http://glados.ucd.ie/BreastMark/). Cell
viability studies and clonogenic assays were undertaken using the
luminal, estrogen receptor (ER)-positive MCF7 and T47D and the
basal-like, ER-negative HCC-1806 and HCC70 breast cancer cells to test
the effectiveness of the dual IGF1R and insulin receptor inhibitor
(OSI-906; 0.1 - 10 M) and the SphK1 inhibitor (SKI-II; 1 - 20 M) as
single and combined agents. Statistical analysis was completed using a
one-way ANOVA (p<0.05), repeated measures (p<0.05) and calculation of
drug synergism by a combination index (CI) <1 (CommSyn). Immunoblot
analysis was used to show effective drug target inhibition of IGF1R and
SphK1. IGF1R and SphK1 high co-expression was associated with decreased
DFS (HR; 2.184 (1.007 - 4.735, p = 0.042; total 270 patients) and OS (HR;
2.433 (1.136 - 5.214, p = 0.018; total 170 patients) in ER-positive,
luminal A, lymph-node positive breast cancers compared to no significance
using single-gene analysis. A reduction in OS in basal, ER-negative,
lymph node negative breast cancers was associated with high IGF1R and
SphK1 co-expression (HR; 5.687 (1.534 - 21.084, p = 0.003; total 55
patients), compared to high IGF1R expression alone (HR; 4.103 (1.34 -
12.57, p = 0.007; total 55 patients). In all four cell-lines 4 M SKI-II
acted synergistically with OSI over the range 0.1 - 6.4 M (CI<1), and
significantly increased sensitivity towards OSI (pThe search for reliable
prognostic markers of breast cancer disease outcome is ongoing. The
insulin-like growth factor receptor (IGF1R) and sphingosine kinase
(SphK1) signaling pathways are known to contribute to breast oncogenesis
and are therapeutic targets [1, 2]. Since IGF-I signaling activates SphK1
[3] we hypothesized that high IGF1R and SphK1 co-expression may be
clinically relevant, and potential dual therapeutic targets in breast
cancer. Kaplan-Meier analysis was performed to determine the prognostic
significance of IGF1R and SphK1 high co-expression on disease free
survival (DFS) and overall survival (OS) probability in breast cancer
(http://glados.ucd.ie/BreastMark/). Cell viability studies and clonogenic
assays were undertaken using the luminal, estrogen receptor (ER)-positive
MCF7 and T47D and the basal-like, ER-negative HCC-1806 and HCC70 breast
cancer cells to test the effectiveness of the dual IGF1R and insulin
receptor inhibitor (OSI-906; 0.1 - 10 M) and the SphK1 inhibitor (SKI-II;
1 - 20 M) as single and combined agents. Statistical analysis was
completed using a one-way ANOVA (p<0.05), repeated measures (p<0.05) and
calculation of drug synergism by a combination index (CI) <1 (CommSyn).
Immunoblot analysis was used to show effective drug target inhibition of
IGF1R and SphK1. IGF1R and SphK1 high co-expression was associated with
decreased DFS (HR; 2.184 (1.007 - 4.735, p = 0.042; total 270 patients)
and OS (HR; 2.433 (1.136 - 5.214, p = 0.018; total 170 patients) in
ER-positive, luminal A, lymph-node positive breast cancers compared to no
significance using single-gene analysis. A reduction in OS in basal,
ER-negative, lymph node negative breast cancers was associated with high
IGF1R and SphK1 co-expression (HR; 5.687 (1.534 - 21.084, p = 0.003;
total 55 patients), compared to high IGF1R expression alone (HR; 4.103
(1.34 - 12.57, p = 0.007; total 55 patients). In all four cell-lines 4 M
SKI-II acted synergistically with OSI over the range 0.1 - 6.4 M (CI<1),
and significantly increased sensitivity towards OSI (p<0.05). p-IGF1R and
SphK1 protein levels were both reduced by SKI-II and OSI-906 in the
HCC-1806 and HCC70 cell-lines, revealing a reciprocal regulation of
signaling and effective drug treatment. Based on the limited clinical
success of the IGF1R mono-therapies better predictive markers of IGF1R
activity are now required for the development of more effective
IGF1R-directed combination therapies. Collectively, these studies have
identified: i) IGF1R and SphK1 expression are potentially co-dependent
and have prognostic significance and ii) a novel IGF1R targeted
combination therapy that may be of clinical benefit to specific molecular
subtypes of breast cancer.1. Martin, J.L., et al., Mol Cancer Ther, 2014.
13(2): p. 316-28.2. Beckwith, H. and D. Yee., Endocr Pract, 2014. 20(11):
p. 1214-21.3. Granata, R., et al., J Thromb Haemost, 2007. 5(4): p.
835-45.

