Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Demonstration of casual relationship between blood-tumor barrier
permeability changes and chemotherapeutic uptake and effect in brain
micrometastases of breast cancer


Background: 10-16% of women with advanced breast cancer will develop
symptomatic brain metastases, the survival rate of which is less than 2
years. When metastasis develop within the brain, the BBB anatomy changes
due to increased angiogenesis with increase in permeability of BBB in the
tumor region (> 1mm diameter). We have also demonstrated in our previous
study that, once the metastases are established in the brain (>1 mm in
diameter) chemotherapy fails to induce cytotoxicity in most of them. The
efficacy of a chemotherapeutic agent in the metastatic brain tumors
significantly correlates to its uptake in the micro metastases
(Background: 10-16% of women with advanced breast cancer will develop
symptomatic brain metastases, the survival rate of which is less than 2
years. When metastasis develop within the brain, the BBB anatomy changes
due to increased angiogenesis with increase in permeability of BBB in the
tumor region (> 1mm diameter). We have also demonstrated in our previous
study that, once the metastases are established in the brain (>1 mm in
diameter) chemotherapy fails to induce cytotoxicity in most of them. The
efficacy of a chemotherapeutic agent in the metastatic brain tumors
significantly correlates to its uptake in the micro metastases (< 0.5 mm
in diameter). Therefore, it is important to characterize the permeability
changes in micrometastases using permeability markers 14C-AIB (104 Da)
and Texas Red dextran (3kDa) in five novel brain seeking cell lines (4T1,
MDA-MB-231BR HER2+, MDA-MB-231BR, JIMT-1Br and Sum190) which
preferentially develop brain metastases of breast cancer.Methods: Female
nude mice were intracardially injected with different human brain seeking
breast cancer cell and allowed it to metastasize. Metastases were allowed
to develop until neurologic symptoms appeared and animals were injected
with IV bolus dose of permeability markers 14C-AIB (104 Da) and Texas Red
dextran (3kDa) 10 minutes prior to euthanasia. After euthanasia rain
sample were harvested, sectioned and analyzed by autoradiography and
fluorescent microscopy.Results: Passive permeability changes in 4T1
metastatic lesions was 3.171 + 1.52 (SD) for 14C-AIB, and 2.529 + 0.84
(SD) for the passive diffusion marker 3kDa Texas Red Dextran(TRD).
MDA-MB-231BR HER2 metastatic lesions has 14C-AIB permeability 4.936 + 3.6
(SD) and for TRD 1.301 + 0.49 (SD). For MDA-MB-231Br cell line
permeability changes with 14C-AIB was found to be 3.001 0.1514 (SD) and
the BTB permeability to TRD ranged was found to be 1.159 0.3137 (SD). In
JIMT-1Br, 14C-AIB permeability was found to be 2.212 + 0.72 (SD) and TRD
was 1.502 + 0.344 (SD). Sum190 micrometastases showed maximum 14C-AIB
permeability in the range of 1 to 28.64 fold (Mean was 10.11 5.68; SD)
and TRD was found to be in the range of 1 to 2.10 (Mean was 1.287 0.293;
SD).Conclusions: We have demonstrated that there are differences in
passive permeability between each cell line and there are differences in
overall survival and the size of lesions at the time neurological
symptoms develop. The increased permeability of the vasculature of CNS
micrometastases is critically important for both diagnosis and treatment.

