Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Association of mammographic density measures and breast cancer
intrinsic molecular subtypes


Percent mammographic density (PMD) is a risk factor for estrogen receptor
(ER)-positive and ER-negative invasive breast cancer (BC). Gene
expression profiling has identified molecular signatures that classify
invasive BC into distinct subtypes that vary in their clinical behavior,
response to treatment and likely, etiology. Immunohistochemical (IHC)
staining of tumor sections using antibody panels can be used to classify
these intrinsic molecular subtypes. We evaluated whether density measures
[PMD, absolute dense area (DA) and non-dense area (NDA)], are associated
equally with all intrinsic molecular subtypes.Pooled analysis of six
cohort or case-control studies included 3492 women with invasive BC and
10,148 without, who underwent screening mammography a median 4 years
prior to diagnosis (for cases). PMD, DA, and NDA were assessed from
digitized film-screen mammograms using a computer-assisted thresholding
technique, and categorized as 0-10%, 11-25%, 26-50% and 51%+ (PMD) or
into quartiles (DA and NDA). Receptor status was abstracted from
pathology records and supplemented by IHC staining. We classified tumors
as Luminal A (ER+ and/or PR+ and HER2- and grade 1 or 2), Luminal B (ER+
and/or PR+ and HER2+ or Luminal A and grade 3), HER2 expressing
(HER2+/ER-/PR-) and triple negative (TN) (ER-/PR-/HER2-). For TN, we also
differentiated basal-like tumors (positive for EGFR and/or CK 5/6) from
unclassified (negative on both markers). We used polytomous logistic
regression to calculate the odds ratio (OR) of each intrinsic subtype of
BC by categories of PMD, DA or NDA, adjusting for age, body mass index
and study. We tested for statistical heterogeneity of associations by
subtype.Of 3492 invasive BC cases, 2217 (63%) were classified as Luminal
A, 747 (21%) as Luminal B, 159 (5%) as HER2 expressing, and 369 (11%) as
TN. Of TN, 203 were evaluated for CK 5/6 and EGFR, with 167 (82%)
classified as basal-like and 36 (18%) unclassified. PMD was associated
with BC risk across all subtypes. For Luminal A, compared to women with
11-25% PMD (reference), women with 0-10% had a reduced risk of BC (OR =
0.63 [95% confidence interval: 0.55, 0.74]) while women with 26-50% had
an OR = 1.5 [1.3, 1.7] and women with 51%+ had the highest risk, OR = 2.3
[2.0, 2.7]. Similar BC associations were seen across PMD categories when
comparing the five subtypes (P-heterogeneity = 0.63). Similar trends were
seen for DA and BC across the five subtypes (P-het = 0.25). NDA was
inversely associated with BC across subtypes, and there was suggestion of
a stronger inverse trend among HER2-expressing BC compared to other
subtypes (P-het = 0.09).Our results suggest mammographic density measures
are associated with all intrinsic molecular subtypes. However, NDA may be
more strongly inversely associated with HER2-expressing than other
subtypes. Understanding the importance of density measures for BC
subtypes has significance for subtype-specific risk models.

