Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Insulin-like growth factor 2 (IGF-2) mRNA binding protein 3
predicts poor prognosis and promotes cell proliferation in Ewing sarcoma


INTRODUCTION: Insulin-like growth factor 2 (IGF-2) mRNA binding protein 3
(IGF2BP3, also known as IMP3) is an oncofetal protein which binds RNA
thus influencing the transcript target fate. IGF2BP3 is de novo
synthesized in malignancies where it promotes proliferation, drug
resistance and metastases. Moreover, IGF2BP3 represents a promising
indicator of outcome in several cancers. Ewing sarcoma (EWS) is a rare
bone and soft tissue tumor where the IGF system plays a pivotal role.
This study aimed to investigate the relevance of IGF2BP3 in EWS and
verify its value as a prognostic biomarker.MATERIAL AND METHODS: Total
RNA was extracted from two independent cohorts of 30 and 109 snap-frozen
tissues from localized primary EWS samples with more than 5 years
follow-up. Microarray analysis (Affymetrix) was performed in the cohort
of 30 patients while IGF2BP3 expression was analysed by qRT-PCR (Applied
Biosystem) in the cohort of 109 cases. Prognostic value of IGF2BP3 was
evaluated both in univariate and multivariate analysis. IGF2BP3
expression was assessed by qRT-PCR and western blot in a panel of 14 EWS
cell lines. Plasmids for IGF2BP3 silencing or over-expression were
transfected in A673 or LAP-35 and IOR/CAR EWS cells, respectively.
Soft-agar growth of cell lines with differential IGF2BP3 expression was
evaluated. catRAPID express human web server was employed for prediction
of novel IGF2BP3/mRNAs interactions. IGF-2 and ABCF1 expression levels
were analysed in vitro and in clinical specimens.RESULTS: Microarray
results evidenced that IGF2BP3 higher expression correlated with a worse
outcome (p-value 0.0002). This data was confirmed in the cohort analysed
by qRT-PCR both considering univariate (p-value 0.001) and multivariate
analysis (HR:2.83. IC95% [1.22-6.53].p = 0.015). In vitro, higher IGF2BP3
expression correlated with an increased capability of growth in
anchorage-independent conditions and IGF2BP3 knockdown significantly
decreased soft-agar growth of EWS cells. Oncogenic potential of IGF2BP3
was not found to be mediated through IGF-2-dependent mechanism but ABCF1,
an ABC family member with a key role in translation initiation, was
predicted as a target of IGF2BP3 by in silico analysis. Accordingly,
IGF2BP3 loss- or gain-of-functions approaches induced down- or
up-regulation of ABCF1 protein levels, respectively. In addition, a
direct correlation between IGF2BP3 and ABCF1 was found in 109 EWS
patients (p-value minor than 0.0001). Functional studies on the role of
ABCF1 in EWS will follow.CONCLUSIONS: IGF2BP3 represents an indicator of
prognosis in EWS therefore its detection may be of help to stratify
patients according to risk. We also provided evidences for IGF2BP3 in the
regulation of EWS aggressiveness and identified ABCF1 as a new putative
mediator of IGF2BP3 malignant effects. (Grants: FIRB RBAP11884M_005 and
AIRC IG2013_14049 to KS)

