Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluating the consequences of MCT1 inhibition in Burkitt lymphoma
following treatment with AZD3965


Many tumors display an altered metabolic phenotype with an increased
reliance on glycolysis resulting in a greater production of the waste
product, lactate [1]. Use of glycolysis, as opposed to oxidative
phosphorylation, represents a less efficient means of ATP generation but
provides a selective advantage to cancer cells in that it rapidly
supplies intermediates to support anabolic pathways necessary for
increased cellular proliferation. Lactate efflux, is facilitated by
monocarboxylate transporters 1-4 and is essential to prevent feedback
inhibition of major energy generating pathways. A sub-group of cancers
express only MCT1 and are therefore exclusively reliant on this
transporter to export lactate. Elevated MCT1 expression has previously
been identified in Burkitt lymphoma (BL), a highly aggressive form of
non-Hodgkin's lymphoma characterised by MYC translocations [2].We have
studied the effects of a potent, selective and orally available inhibitor
of MCT1, AZD3965, in models of BL that predominantly express MCT1. MCT1
inhibition was associated with intracellular lactate accumulation in
vitro and a significant growth inhibitory effect (AZD3965 72h GI50 99%
P99% P<0.005 Student's two-tailed t-test). In support of this efficacy,
post-mortem macroscopic measurements revealed greatly reduced tumor cell
engraftment of bone marrow and spleen in MCT1 inhibitor treated
animals.AZD3965 has potent growth inhibitory activity in both in vitro
and in vivo models of Burkitt lymphoma that are reliant upon MCT1 for
lactate transport.[1] Science (1956) 123, 309-314[2] Cancer Res (2014)
74, 908-920

