Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Possible prediction of tumor specific checkpoint inhibitor
response based on TCGA somatic mutation load


Immune checkpoint inhibitor therapy has been shown to be effective in a
subset of patients with melanoma, non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and
kidney cancer. Recent studies have suggested that the number of
non-synonymous mutations (NsM) can be used to select melanoma and NSCLC
patients most likely to benefit from immune checkpoint inhibitor
treatment. It is hypothesized that NsMs generate novel epitopes and gene
products which can be detected by the immune system. The aim of this
study is to apply prior information on NsM count and immune checkpoint
inhibitor treatment to a range of tumor subtypes in the TCGA database to
evaluate the proportion cases that could be possible responders. In our
analysis of published studies of melanoma and NSCLC, the receiver
operator characteristic (ROC) curve suggests a cutoff of 192 NsM would
have a maximum combination of sensitivity (74%) and specificity (59.3%)
for potential clinical benefit for patients. We conducted an analysis of
7,757 samples from 26 different TCGA tumor types and observed that
approximately 16.2% of TCGA samples harbor more than 192 NsM, and thus
could be in the category associated with a higher likelihood of response
to immune checkpoint inhibitors. Based on NsM count, bladder, colon,
gastric, and endometrial cancers each contained more than 30% of tumors
with a high NsM and thus, could be possible candidates for checkpoint
immune therapy. Although our model estimates clinical response to immune
checkpoint treatment from NsM count is preliminary and needs future
validation, information on NsM count can be useful for selecting tumor
types most likely to benefit in clinical trials of immune checkpoint
inhibitor treatment.

