Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical mode of action and anti-tumor efficacy of the
selective MKNK1 inhibitor BAY 1143269 in NSCLC models


MKNK1 (MAP kinase-interacting serine/threonine-protein kinase, also known
as Mnk1) is activated by the mitogen-activated protein kinases ERK1/2 and
p38. Thus, MKNK1 signaling is involved in the cellular response to
environmental stress factors and cytokines. Of particular interest, MKNK1
kinase regulates mRNA translation by phosphorylating the translation
initiation factor eIF4E (eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4E),
known to be critical for malignant transformation but shown to be
dispensable for translation in normal cells. Phosphorylated eIF4E levels
were found to be elevated in several cancer tissues, including lung
cancer. MKNK1 is also involved in resistance mechanisms to cancer
therapeutics. Thus, the inhibition of MKNK1 activity may provide an
innovative approach for anti-cancer therapy, and in particular for lung
cancer, the main cancer-related cause of death worldwide. BAY 1143269 is
a potent and selective MKNK1 inhibitor and inhibits eIF4E phosphorylation
and reduces MKNK1-regulated translational downstream targets in non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cell lines. In this study, BAY 1143269-mediated
effects on molecular mechanisms in lung cancer models were
analyzed.Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is associated with the
pathogenesis of numerous lung diseases including cancer progression,
metastasis and resistance. BAY 1143269 reduced expression of EMT key
regulators like Snail1 and cellular junction components, as well as
reduced TGF1-induced EMT. Accumulating evidence suggests a role for
proinflammatory cytokines in the development and progression of cancer;
increased serum concentrations of cytokines like interleukin 6 (IL-6) are
associated with diminished lung cancer survival rates. BAY 1143269
reduced the secretion of several proinflammatory cytokines, including TNF
and IL-6 in whole blood, and affected IFN-stimulated gene expression in
cell lines.Consistent with the observed effects in vitro, BAY 1143269
showed significant anti-tumor effects in vivo in cell line as well as
patient derived NSCLC xenograft models in monotherapy. In combination
with chemotherapeutics approved for treatment of NSCLC, BAY 1143269
improved anti-tumor effects in comparison to chemotherapy alone.In
conclusion, BAY 1143269 has the potential to provide therapeutic benefit
in NSCLC. A phase I study of BAY 1143269 in combination with docetaxel
for subjects with advance solid tumors is ongoing (NCT02439346).

