Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Germline PARP4 mutations in patients with primary thyroid and
breast cancers


Breast and thyroid cancers occur more frequently in the same individual
than what is expected due to random occurrence, implying the presence of
genetic susceptible factors. Germline mutations in the PTEN gene, which
cause Cowden syndrome (CS), are known to be one of the genetic factors
for primary thyroid and breast cancers, however, PTEN mutations are found
in only a small subset of research participants with non-syndrome breast
and thyroid cancers. In this study, we attempted to identify germline
variants that may be related to genetic risk of primary thyroid and
breast cancers by whole-exome sequencing. Genomic DNAs extracted from
peripheral blood of 14 PTEN-wild-type female research participants with
primary thyroid and breast cancers were analyzed. Among them, 7 (50%) and
5 (36%) participants had a family history of thyroid or breast cancer
within 3 generations of the proband, respectively. No rare variants were
found in SDHx/KLLN/PIK3CA/AKT1 genes previously known to be responsible
for CS. We then performed a case-control association study using the
information of 406 Europeans obtained from the 1000 Genomes Project
database as controls. The predicted impact of amino acid substitutions
was annotated using 5 algorithms of LRT score, MutationTaster,
PolyPhen-2, HumDiv, PolyPhen-2 HumVar and SIFT. Gene-based association
analysis identified 34 genes, including DNA repair-related genes,
possibly associated with the phenotype with PBreast and thyroid cancers
occur more frequently in the same individual than what is expected due to
random occurrence, implying the presence of genetic susceptible factors.
Germline mutations in the PTEN gene, which cause Cowden syndrome (CS),
are known to be one of the genetic factors for primary thyroid and breast
cancers, however, PTEN mutations are found in only a small subset of
research participants with non-syndrome breast and thyroid cancers. In
this study, we attempted to identify germline variants that may be
related to genetic risk of primary thyroid and breast cancers by
whole-exome sequencing. Genomic DNAs extracted from peripheral blood of
14 PTEN-wild-type female research participants with primary thyroid and
breast cancers were analyzed. Among them, 7 (50%) and 5 (36%)
participants had a family history of thyroid or breast cancer within 3
generations of the proband, respectively. No rare variants were found in
SDHx/KLLN/PIK3CA/AKT1 genes previously known to be responsible for CS. We
then performed a case-control association study using the information of
406 Europeans obtained from the 1000 Genomes Project database as
controls. The predicted impact of amino acid substitutions was annotated
using 5 algorithms of LRT score, MutationTaster, PolyPhen-2, HumDiv,
PolyPhen-2 HumVar and SIFT. Gene-based association analysis identified 34
genes, including DNA repair-related genes, possibly associated with the
phenotype with P<1.010-3. Among them, rare variants in the PARP4 gene
were detected at significant high frequency (odds ratio = 5.2, P =
1.010-5). The variants, G496V and T1170I, were found in 6 of the 14 study
participants (43%) while their frequencies were only 0.5% in controls. We
subsequently performed functional analysis using HCC1143 cell line which
showed the highest expression of PARP4 among 18 breast cancer cell lines
examined, and found that knockdown of PARP4 with siRNA significantly
enhanced the cell proliferation, compared with the cells transfected with
siControl (P = 0.02). In addition, Kaplan-Meier analysis using GEO, EGA
and TCGA datasets showed poor progression-free survival (P = 0.006,
Hazard ratio 0.71) and overall survival (P Breast and thyroid cancers
occur more frequently in the same individual than what is expected due to
random occurrence, implying the presence of genetic susceptible factors.
Germline mutations in the PTEN gene, which cause Cowden syndrome (CS),
are known to be one of the genetic factors for primary thyroid and breast
cancers, however, PTEN mutations are found in only a small subset of
research participants with non-syndrome breast and thyroid cancers. In
this study, we attempted to identify germline variants that may be
related to genetic risk of primary thyroid and breast cancers by
whole-exome sequencing. Genomic DNAs extracted from peripheral blood of
14 PTEN-wild-type female research participants with primary thyroid and
breast cancers were analyzed. Among them, 7 (50%) and 5 (36%)
participants had a family history of thyroid or breast cancer within 3
generations of the proband, respectively. No rare variants were found in
SDHx/KLLN/PIK3CA/AKT1 genes previously known to be responsible for CS. We
then performed a case-control association study using the information of
406 Europeans obtained from the 1000 Genomes Project database as
controls. The predicted impact of amino acid substitutions was annotated
using 5 algorithms of LRT score, MutationTaster, PolyPhen-2, HumDiv,
PolyPhen-2 HumVar and SIFT. Gene-based association analysis identified 34
genes, including DNA repair-related genes, possibly associated with the
phenotype with P<1.010-3. Among them, rare variants in the PARP4 gene
were detected at significant high frequency (odds ratio = 5.2, P =
1.010-5). The variants, G496V and T1170I, were found in 6 of the 14 study
participants (43%) while their frequencies were only 0.5% in controls. We
subsequently performed functional analysis using HCC1143 cell line which
showed the highest expression of PARP4 among 18 breast cancer cell lines
examined, and found that knockdown of PARP4 with siRNA significantly
enhanced the cell proliferation, compared with the cells transfected with
siControl (P = 0.02). In addition, Kaplan-Meier analysis using GEO, EGA
and TCGA datasets showed poor progression-free survival (P = 0.006,
Hazard ratio 0.71) and overall survival (P < 0.0001, Hazard ratio 0.79)
in a PARP4 low-expression group, suggesting that PARP4 may function as a
tumor suppression. In conclusion, we identified PARP4 as a possible
susceptibility gene of primary thyroid and breast cancer.

