Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The impact of PD-L1 expression in patients with metastatic GEP-NETs


Programmed death-ligand 1 (PD-L1), which is expressed on many cancer
cells, interacts with PD1 expressed on the surface of T cells, inhibiting
the T cells and blocking the antitumor immune response. Expression of
PD-L1 in gastroenteropancreatic neuroendocrine tumors (GEP-NETs) has not
been studied. We investigated the impact of PD-L1 expression in 32
patients with metastatic GEP-NET.The expression of PD-L1 was evaluated
using an anti-PD-L1 immunohistochemistry (IHC) antibody optimized for
staining of formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissue samples. The
correlation between PD-L1 and clinicopathological data including survival
and response to systemic treatments was analyzed.Primary sites were 24
foregut-derived GEP-NETs, including stomach (n = 1), duodenum (n = 2),
biliary tract (n = 7), and pancreas (n = 14), and 8 hindgut-derived
GEP-NETs of the distal colon and rectum. Among the 32 patients with
metastatic GEP-NET analyzed in this study, 7 (21.9%) had expression of
PD-L1 in tumor tissues. Expression of PD-L1 was significantly associated
with high-grade WHO classification (grade 3) (p = 0.008) but not with
gender, primary site, and number of metastatic sites (p>0.05). The status
of PD-L1 expression was statistically associated with progression-free
survival (PFS) for first-line systemic treatment (p = 0.047). Moreover,
the status of PD-L1 expression could significantly predict overall
survival (p = 0.037).The expression of PD-L1 was associated with higher
WHO tumor grade (grade 3) in metastatic GEP-NETs. PD-L1 expression had
both predictive and prognostic value for survival of patients with
metastatic GEP-NETs.

