Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sigma-2 receptor-mediated cell death is altered by cell density in
human SK-N-SH neuroblastoma 2-D and 3-D cultures


Sigma-2 receptors are highly expressed in tumor cell lines compared to
normal cells and are more highly upregulated in proliferative than in
quiescent cells. Sigma-2 receptor agonists induce apoptotic cell death.
Here, we investigate the effect of cell confluence at the time of
harvest, cell plating density, and 3-D cell aggregation on the cytotoxic
potency of the irreversible sigma-2 receptor partial agonist CM572.
Sensitivity to sigma-2 receptor agonists has in practice appeared to vary
with cell confluency, an effect likely due to proliferative state. To
examine 2-D SK-N-SH cell culture sensitivity to CM572, we varied two
parameters: 1) cell confluence at the time of harvest (cells harvested
upon reaching 60% confluency or cells harvested after remaining at 100%
confluency for 3 days) and 2) cell plating density (low: 7,000, medium:
15,000, or high: 30,000 cells/well). Cells were treated with CM572 24 h
after plating. Using MTT assay, CM572 EC50 values for cells harvested at
60% confluence were similar regardless of cell plating densities (M):
4.92 2.24, 7.6 1.68, and 6.06 1.30 for cells plated at low, medium, and
high densities, respectively. In contrast, CM572 EC50 values for cells
harvested at 100% confluence for 3 days were significantly dependent on
plating density (M): 17.62 7.62, 35.33 35.3, and >50 for cells plated at
low, medium, and high densities, respectively. [3H]DTG Scatchard analysis
of cells harvested at 60% confluence vs. 100% confluence for 3 days
revealed no significant difference in sigma-2 receptor number: Bmax =
212.3 34.22 and 173.0 4.31 fmol bound/mg protein, respectively. The
effect of CM572 on cell aggregation and cytotoxicity was additionally
studied in 3-D SK-N-SH cultures. Cells were seeded into rod-shaped
agarose wells, to which they could not adhere but only self-aggregate
over a period of 24 h. Subsequent treatment with CM572 over 24-72 h
significantly reduced 3-D aggregation, which was defined as an increase
in the length of the 3-D culture rod after aggregation. However,
treatment of these 3-D cultures with up to 70 M CM572 for 24-72 h
resulted in cytotoxicity levels of less than 10%, as measured by the LDH
assay. This indicates a significant decrease in CM572 potency compared to
the 2-D EC50. Therefore, sensitivity to CM572 decreases both after cells
are confluent for 3 days at 100% in 2-D culture and in cells that form
aggregates in 3-D culture. These results show that sensitivity of SK-N-SH
cell cultures to CM572 is dependent on cell density, suggesting that
CM572 may cause cell death in a cell-cycle dependent manner. This may be
related to SK-N-SH cells transitioning from a proliferative to quiescent
state when they are confluent in 2-D culture or form aggregates in 3-D
culture. Taken together, these results suggest that cytotoxic sigma-2
receptor ligands such as CM572 may be more potent in proliferating cancer
cells and/or cells leaving tumor masses in the process of metastasis.

