Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metformin improves multiple cytokine producing ability of
exhausted peripheral CD8+ T cells of cancer patients


Background: We have recently shown that metformin, a prescribed drug for
type 2 diabetes, can increase the number of CD8+ tumor infiltrating
lymphocytes (CD8+ TILs) that can produce triple cytokines, thus, IFN-,
IL-2 and TNF- in mouse models. Increased numbers of such multifunctional
CD8+ TILs have well correlated with tumor retardation, suggesting an
underlying mechanism of metformin in tumor immunity. In the current
study, we examined the effects of direct exposure of metformin in vitro
to CD8+ T cells of cancer patients.Methods: Peripheral blood mononuclear
cells (PBMC) from cancer patients and healthy volunteers were obtained
for the analysis. We cultured the PBMC with or without metformin
overnight, followed by stimulation with phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate
(PMA) / ionomycin in vitro in various glucose concentrations for 6 hours.
Expressions of markers for immune-check points (PD-1 and Tim-3) were
examined together with accumulated intracellular cytokines, IFN-, IL-2
and TNF- by flow cytometry analysis.Results: PD-1 and Tim-3 expressions
of cancer patients PBMC were apparently higher than those of healthy
volunteers. Increased production of multiple cytokines was observed in
CD8+ T cells of almost all cancer patients by metformin pretreatment,
whereas no changes were detected in the samples from healthy volunteers.
Moreover, deprivation of glucose clearly limited the production of
cytokines on CD8 + T cells in a cancer patient. These results suggested
patient CD8 + T cells showed lower activity of glycolysis compared with a
healthy volunteer and metformin might stimulate glycolysis followed by
reversion of mitochondrial respiration in exhausted CD8 + T
cells.Conclusion: Metformin treatment might be useful in reversion of
exhausted CD8+T cells in cancer bearing patients.

