Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel resveratrol analogue, HS-1793, inhibits hypoxia-induced
HIF-1 and VEGF expressions and inhibits tumor growth of human breast
cancer cells in a nude mouse xenograft model


Taking phytochemicals provide various benefits for human health. Among
them, resveratrol, from the blueberry, is well known for its beneficial
effects for human. However, resveratrol has photosensitive and easily
decomposition by digestive enzyme. Thus we synthesized several synthetic
analogues of resveratrol with potent activity. One of them,
4-(6-hydroxy-2-naphtyl)-1, 3-benzenediol (HS-1793) treatment showed
potent antitumor activity in various human cancer cells. In this study,
we investigated the effects of a novel analogue of resveratrol, HS-1793
on the expressions of hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1) and vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF) in MCF-7 with MDA-MB-231 human breast
cancer cells. We found that HS-1793 inhibited hypoxia (1.0% oxygen)
induced HIF-1 protein level and its downstream target, vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF) expression dose-dependently in both cell
lines. Decreased HIF-1 by HS-1793 modulated through 26S proteasome
pathway. We also found that HS-1793 suppressed tumor growth in tumor
xenograft mice model. Treatment with 10 mg/kg of HS-1793 suppressed Ki-67
and CD31 expressions in tumor tissues. Above all, HS-1793 shows more
powerful effects than resveratrol. Taken together, these results implied
that HS-1793, a novel analogue of resveratrol might be a new potent
chemopreventive agent and anticancer therapy in human breast cancer.

