Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Increased IgG antibody responses to neoepitope and native peptides
containing high affinity domains for MHCI following combination cancer
immunotherapy


The importance of anti-tumor immunity by CD8+ T cells is well defined,
but antigen-specific immune monitoring for CD8+ responses across many
potential tumor antigens is expensive and difficult. This difficulty is
compounded by increasing evidence that every tumor has unique mutant
neoepitopes. We hypothesized that new technologies in peptide printing
might allow us to partially overcome this obstacle by instead
characterizing antibody responses against a paired array of neoepitope
and native peptides.We designed a 15-mer peptide array of mutated and
native peptides from the murine mammary carcinoma 4T1 and used it to
characterize the serum IgG antibody responses to vaccination with 4T1
autophagosome-enriched vaccine (DRibbles), poly-IC adjuvant, the
combination of both, or nave animals across 4 independent experiments.
This array was printed by JPT peptides and included 75 pairs of
single-nucleotide polymorphic and native peptides identified by both our
own whole exome sequencing and the current 4T1 literature. We also
included other sequences of interest to 4T1 immunity such as the
retrovirus fragment AH1. MHCI peptide predictions were robust and used
the top NetMHCpan v2.8 score from all possible windowed 8,9,10, and
11-mers for H2-Kd,Ld, and Dd surrounding the mutation site in its native
protein context.The results of this work identify a linear correlation
between higher predicted peptide MHCI binding affinity and the IgG
antibody signals increased in combination treated groups versus controls.
Linear regression analysis demonstrates that normalized antibody
responses to mutated and native 4T1 peptides are more likely to be higher
in sera from autophagosome-enriched vaccine plus poly-IC treated animals
than nave animals if these peptides contain higher affinity domains for
MHCI (pThe importance of anti-tumor immunity by CD8+ T cells is well
defined, but antigen-specific immune monitoring for CD8+ responses across
many potential tumor antigens is expensive and difficult. This difficulty
is compounded by increasing evidence that every tumor has unique mutant
neoepitopes. We hypothesized that new technologies in peptide printing
might allow us to partially overcome this obstacle by instead
characterizing antibody responses against a paired array of neoepitope
and native peptides.We designed a 15-mer peptide array of mutated and
native peptides from the murine mammary carcinoma 4T1 and used it to
characterize the serum IgG antibody responses to vaccination with 4T1
autophagosome-enriched vaccine (DRibbles), poly-IC adjuvant, the
combination of both, or nave animals across 4 independent experiments.
This array was printed by JPT peptides and included 75 pairs of
single-nucleotide polymorphic and native peptides identified by both our
own whole exome sequencing and the current 4T1 literature. We also
included other sequences of interest to 4T1 immunity such as the
retrovirus fragment AH1. MHCI peptide predictions were robust and used
the top NetMHCpan v2.8 score from all possible windowed 8,9,10, and
11-mers for H2-Kd,Ld, and Dd surrounding the mutation site in its native
protein context.The results of this work identify a linear correlation
between higher predicted peptide MHCI binding affinity and the IgG
antibody signals increased in combination treated groups versus controls.
Linear regression analysis demonstrates that normalized antibody
responses to mutated and native 4T1 peptides are more likely to be higher
in sera from autophagosome-enriched vaccine plus poly-IC treated animals
than nave animals if these peptides contain higher affinity domains for
MHCI (p<.0001). This correlation is not significant in the groups treated
with vaccine or adjuvant alone. Animals pre-treated with this combination
therapy also benefit from a significant delay in tumor growth upon
challenge with 4T1 versus nave animals (pThe importance of anti-tumor
immunity by CD8+ T cells is well defined, but antigen-specific immune
monitoring for CD8+ responses across many potential tumor antigens is
expensive and difficult. This difficulty is compounded by increasing
evidence that every tumor has unique mutant neoepitopes. We hypothesized
that new technologies in peptide printing might allow us to partially
overcome this obstacle by instead characterizing antibody responses
against a paired array of neoepitope and native peptides.We designed a
15-mer peptide array of mutated and native peptides from the murine
mammary carcinoma 4T1 and used it to characterize the serum IgG antibody
responses to vaccination with 4T1 autophagosome-enriched vaccine
(DRibbles), poly-IC adjuvant, the combination of both, or nave animals
across 4 independent experiments. This array was printed by JPT peptides
and included 75 pairs of single-nucleotide polymorphic and native
peptides identified by both our own whole exome sequencing and the
current 4T1 literature. We also included other sequences of interest to
4T1 immunity such as the retrovirus fragment AH1. MHCI peptide
predictions were robust and used the top NetMHCpan v2.8 score from all
possible windowed 8,9,10, and 11-mers for H2-Kd,Ld, and Dd surrounding
the mutation site in its native protein context.The results of this work
identify a linear correlation between higher predicted peptide MHCI
binding affinity and the IgG antibody signals increased in combination
treated groups versus controls. Linear regression analysis demonstrates
that normalized antibody responses to mutated and native 4T1 peptides are
more likely to be higher in sera from autophagosome-enriched vaccine plus
poly-IC treated animals than nave animals if these peptides contain
higher affinity domains for MHCI (p<.0001). This correlation is not
significant in the groups treated with vaccine or adjuvant alone. Animals
pre-treated with this combination therapy also benefit from a significant
delay in tumor growth upon challenge with 4T1 versus nave animals
(p<.001).These results identify a previously unknown link between
predicted MHCI binding affinity and the anti-tumor antibody response
following combination immunotherapy - suggesting some antigen-specific
interaction between B cells and CD8+ T cells that might be exploited to
improve the immune monitoring of cancer therapies.

