Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Piperlongumine (PPLGM) has potent tumor-radiosensitizing
properties in a mouse model of lung cancer


Background: Although over half of all lung cancer patients receive
radiation therapy as part of their treatment plan, the therapeutic window
of radiation is quite small, and it is difficult to deliver tumoricidal
doses of radiation without the development of severe adverse effects in
the nearby normal tissues. An agent that could sensitize lung cancer
tissue to radiotherapy while sparing damage to normal tissues is still an
unmet need. Piperlongumine (PPLGM), a natural product of the plant Piper
longum has shown potent anti-carcinogenic properties through an
ROS-inducing mechanism. Our hypothesis is that PPLGM will sensitize tumor
cells to radiation-induced cell death in an orthotopic murine model of
lung cancer. Methods: 7-week old female C57BL/6 mice were injected
intravenously with 1106 Lewis lung carcinoma (LLC) cells. Mouse cohorts
(n = 30/group) were administered PPLGM (1 mg/kg of body weight) or
vehicle daily by oral gavage initiated 7 days post-LLC injection. At 14
days post-LLC injection, 15 mice per treatment cohort were exposed to 12
Gy thoracic X-ray radiation treatment (XRT). Administration of PPLGM or
vehicle continued 7 days post-XRT. Mice were euthanized 14 days post-XRT
and evaluated for total lung weight and tumor burden using morphometric
analysis. Additionally, we assessed the potential for a dual role of
PPLGM (0.1-2.5M) as a radiosensitizer of cancer cells (LLC) and a
radioprotector of normal lung cells (pulmonary microvascular endothelial
cells (PMVEC)) via clonogenic survival assays. Results: Using LC/MS/MS we
were able to detect significantly elevated levels of PPLGM above baseline
in mouse plasma and lung tissue. We observed a significant (pBackground:
Although over half of all lung cancer patients receive radiation therapy
as part of their treatment plan, the therapeutic window of radiation is
quite small, and it is difficult to deliver tumoricidal doses of
radiation without the development of severe adverse effects in the nearby
normal tissues. An agent that could sensitize lung cancer tissue to
radiotherapy while sparing damage to normal tissues is still an unmet
need. Piperlongumine (PPLGM), a natural product of the plant Piper longum
has shown potent anti-carcinogenic properties through an ROS-inducing
mechanism. Our hypothesis is that PPLGM will sensitize tumor cells to
radiation-induced cell death in an orthotopic murine model of lung
cancer. Methods: 7-week old female C57BL/6 mice were injected
intravenously with 1106 Lewis lung carcinoma (LLC) cells. Mouse cohorts
(n = 30/group) were administered PPLGM (1 mg/kg of body weight) or
vehicle daily by oral gavage initiated 7 days post-LLC injection. At 14
days post-LLC injection, 15 mice per treatment cohort were exposed to 12
Gy thoracic X-ray radiation treatment (XRT). Administration of PPLGM or
vehicle continued 7 days post-XRT. Mice were euthanized 14 days post-XRT
and evaluated for total lung weight and tumor burden using morphometric
analysis. Additionally, we assessed the potential for a dual role of
PPLGM (0.1-2.5M) as a radiosensitizer of cancer cells (LLC) and a
radioprotector of normal lung cells (pulmonary microvascular endothelial
cells (PMVEC)) via clonogenic survival assays. Results: Using LC/MS/MS we
were able to detect significantly elevated levels of PPLGM above baseline
in mouse plasma and lung tissue. We observed a significant (p<0.01)
increase in lung weight (from 0.14 g to 0.36 g), an indicator of tumor
burden, that was significantly (pBackground: Although over half of all
lung cancer patients receive radiation therapy as part of their treatment
plan, the therapeutic window of radiation is quite small, and it is
difficult to deliver tumoricidal doses of radiation without the
development of severe adverse effects in the nearby normal tissues. An
agent that could sensitize lung cancer tissue to radiotherapy while
sparing damage to normal tissues is still an unmet need. Piperlongumine
(PPLGM), a natural product of the plant Piper longum has shown potent
anti-carcinogenic properties through an ROS-inducing mechanism. Our
hypothesis is that PPLGM will sensitize tumor cells to radiation-induced
cell death in an orthotopic murine model of lung cancer. Methods: 7-week
old female C57BL/6 mice were injected intravenously with 1106 Lewis lung
carcinoma (LLC) cells. Mouse cohorts (n = 30/group) were administered
PPLGM (1 mg/kg of body weight) or vehicle daily by oral gavage initiated
7 days post-LLC injection. At 14 days post-LLC injection, 15 mice per
treatment cohort were exposed to 12 Gy thoracic X-ray radiation treatment
(XRT). Administration of PPLGM or vehicle continued 7 days post-XRT. Mice
were euthanized 14 days post-XRT and evaluated for total lung weight and
tumor burden using morphometric analysis. Additionally, we assessed the
potential for a dual role of PPLGM (0.1-2.5M) as a radiosensitizer of
cancer cells (LLC) and a radioprotector of normal lung cells (pulmonary
microvascular endothelial cells (PMVEC)) via clonogenic survival assays.
Results: Using LC/MS/MS we were able to detect significantly elevated
levels of PPLGM above baseline in mouse plasma and lung tissue. We
observed a significant (p<0.01) increase in lung weight (from 0.14 g to
0.36 g), an indicator of tumor burden, that was significantly (p<0.01)
reduced by exposure to a tumoricidal dose of XRT. Importantly, while
thoracic XRT-alone reduced tumor burden by 48%, administration of
PPLGM+XRT radiosensitized tumor and enhanced tumor killing by XRT,
leading to a significant (pBackground: Although over half of all lung
cancer patients receive radiation therapy as part of their treatment
plan, the therapeutic window of radiation is quite small, and it is
difficult to deliver tumoricidal doses of radiation without the
development of severe adverse effects in the nearby normal tissues. An
agent that could sensitize lung cancer tissue to radiotherapy while
sparing damage to normal tissues is still an unmet need. Piperlongumine
(PPLGM), a natural product of the plant Piper longum has shown potent
anti-carcinogenic properties through an ROS-inducing mechanism. Our
hypothesis is that PPLGM will sensitize tumor cells to radiation-induced
cell death in an orthotopic murine model of lung cancer. Methods: 7-week
old female C57BL/6 mice were injected intravenously with 1106 Lewis lung
carcinoma (LLC) cells. Mouse cohorts (n = 30/group) were administered
PPLGM (1 mg/kg of body weight) or vehicle daily by oral gavage initiated
7 days post-LLC injection. At 14 days post-LLC injection, 15 mice per
treatment cohort were exposed to 12 Gy thoracic X-ray radiation treatment
(XRT). Administration of PPLGM or vehicle continued 7 days post-XRT. Mice
were euthanized 14 days post-XRT and evaluated for total lung weight and
tumor burden using morphometric analysis. Additionally, we assessed the
potential for a dual role of PPLGM (0.1-2.5M) as a radiosensitizer of
cancer cells (LLC) and a radioprotector of normal lung cells (pulmonary
microvascular endothelial cells (PMVEC)) via clonogenic survival assays.
Results: Using LC/MS/MS we were able to detect significantly elevated
levels of PPLGM above baseline in mouse plasma and lung tissue. We
observed a significant (p<0.01) increase in lung weight (from 0.14 g to
0.36 g), an indicator of tumor burden, that was significantly (p<0.01)
reduced by exposure to a tumoricidal dose of XRT. Importantly, while
thoracic XRT-alone reduced tumor burden by 48%, administration of
PPLGM+XRT radiosensitized tumor and enhanced tumor killing by XRT,
leading to a significant (p<0.05) 56% reduction in lung weight.
Morphometric analysis of lung sections confirmed that PPLGM-alone
significantly (pBackground: Although over half of all lung cancer
patients receive radiation therapy as part of their treatment plan, the
therapeutic window of radiation is quite small, and it is difficult to
deliver tumoricidal doses of radiation without the development of severe
adverse effects in the nearby normal tissues. An agent that could
sensitize lung cancer tissue to radiotherapy while sparing damage to
normal tissues is still an unmet need. Piperlongumine (PPLGM), a natural
product of the plant Piper longum has shown potent anti-carcinogenic
properties through an ROS-inducing mechanism. Our hypothesis is that
PPLGM will sensitize tumor cells to radiation-induced cell death in an
orthotopic murine model of lung cancer. Methods: 7-week old female
C57BL/6 mice were injected intravenously with 1106 Lewis lung carcinoma
(LLC) cells. Mouse cohorts (n = 30/group) were administered PPLGM (1
mg/kg of body weight) or vehicle daily by oral gavage initiated 7 days
post-LLC injection. At 14 days post-LLC injection, 15 mice per treatment
cohort were exposed to 12 Gy thoracic X-ray radiation treatment (XRT).
Administration of PPLGM or vehicle continued 7 days post-XRT. Mice were
euthanized 14 days post-XRT and evaluated for total lung weight and tumor
burden using morphometric analysis. Additionally, we assessed the
potential for a dual role of PPLGM (0.1-2.5M) as a radiosensitizer of
cancer cells (LLC) and a radioprotector of normal lung cells (pulmonary
microvascular endothelial cells (PMVEC)) via clonogenic survival assays.
Results: Using LC/MS/MS we were able to detect significantly elevated
levels of PPLGM above baseline in mouse plasma and lung tissue. We
observed a significant (p<0.01) increase in lung weight (from 0.14 g to
0.36 g), an indicator of tumor burden, that was significantly (p<0.01)
reduced by exposure to a tumoricidal dose of XRT. Importantly, while
thoracic XRT-alone reduced tumor burden by 48%, administration of
PPLGM+XRT radiosensitized tumor and enhanced tumor killing by XRT,
leading to a significant (p<0.05) 56% reduction in lung weight.
Morphometric analysis of lung sections confirmed that PPLGM-alone
significantly (p<0.01) reduced tumor area relative to vehicle,
irrespective of radiation exposure. While exposure to XRT significantly
(pBackground: Although over half of all lung cancer patients receive
radiation therapy as part of their treatment plan, the therapeutic window
of radiation is quite small, and it is difficult to deliver tumoricidal
doses of radiation without the development of severe adverse effects in
the nearby normal tissues. An agent that could sensitize lung cancer
tissue to radiotherapy while sparing damage to normal tissues is still an
unmet need. Piperlongumine (PPLGM), a natural product of the plant Piper
longum has shown potent anti-carcinogenic properties through an
ROS-inducing mechanism. Our hypothesis is that PPLGM will sensitize tumor
cells to radiation-induced cell death in an orthotopic murine model of
lung cancer. Methods: 7-week old female C57BL/6 mice were injected
intravenously with 1106 Lewis lung carcinoma (LLC) cells. Mouse cohorts
(n = 30/group) were administered PPLGM (1 mg/kg of body weight) or
vehicle daily by oral gavage initiated 7 days post-LLC injection. At 14
days post-LLC injection, 15 mice per treatment cohort were exposed to 12
Gy thoracic X-ray radiation treatment (XRT). Administration of PPLGM or
vehicle continued 7 days post-XRT. Mice were euthanized 14 days post-XRT
and evaluated for total lung weight and tumor burden using morphometric
analysis. Additionally, we assessed the potential for a dual role of
PPLGM (0.1-2.5M) as a radiosensitizer of cancer cells (LLC) and a
radioprotector of normal lung cells (pulmonary microvascular endothelial
cells (PMVEC)) via clonogenic survival assays. Results: Using LC/MS/MS we
were able to detect significantly elevated levels of PPLGM above baseline
in mouse plasma and lung tissue. We observed a significant (p<0.01)
increase in lung weight (from 0.14 g to 0.36 g), an indicator of tumor
burden, that was significantly (p<0.01) reduced by exposure to a
tumoricidal dose of XRT. Importantly, while thoracic XRT-alone reduced
tumor burden by 48%, administration of PPLGM+XRT radiosensitized tumor
and enhanced tumor killing by XRT, leading to a significant (p<0.05) 56%
reduction in lung weight. Morphometric analysis of lung sections
confirmed that PPLGM-alone significantly (p<0.01) reduced tumor area
relative to vehicle, irrespective of radiation exposure. While exposure
to XRT significantly (p<0.01) reduced tumor volume by 65% (from 44.4 7.6%
to 15.4 4.5% tumor area), lung sections from mice exposed to PPLGM+XRT
significantly (pBackground: Although over half of all lung cancer
patients receive radiation therapy as part of their treatment plan, the
therapeutic window of radiation is quite small, and it is difficult to
deliver tumoricidal doses of radiation without the development of severe
adverse effects in the nearby normal tissues. An agent that could
sensitize lung cancer tissue to radiotherapy while sparing damage to
normal tissues is still an unmet need. Piperlongumine (PPLGM), a natural
product of the plant Piper longum has shown potent anti-carcinogenic
properties through an ROS-inducing mechanism. Our hypothesis is that
PPLGM will sensitize tumor cells to radiation-induced cell death in an
orthotopic murine model of lung cancer. Methods: 7-week old female
C57BL/6 mice were injected intravenously with 1106 Lewis lung carcinoma
(LLC) cells. Mouse cohorts (n = 30/group) were administered PPLGM (1
mg/kg of body weight) or vehicle daily by oral gavage initiated 7 days
post-LLC injection. At 14 days post-LLC injection, 15 mice per treatment
cohort were exposed to 12 Gy thoracic X-ray radiation treatment (XRT).
Administration of PPLGM or vehicle continued 7 days post-XRT. Mice were
euthanized 14 days post-XRT and evaluated for total lung weight and tumor
burden using morphometric analysis. Additionally, we assessed the
potential for a dual role of PPLGM (0.1-2.5M) as a radiosensitizer of
cancer cells (LLC) and a radioprotector of normal lung cells (pulmonary
microvascular endothelial cells (PMVEC)) via clonogenic survival assays.
Results: Using LC/MS/MS we were able to detect significantly elevated
levels of PPLGM above baseline in mouse plasma and lung tissue. We
observed a significant (p<0.01) increase in lung weight (from 0.14 g to
0.36 g), an indicator of tumor burden, that was significantly (p<0.01)
reduced by exposure to a tumoricidal dose of XRT. Importantly, while
thoracic XRT-alone reduced tumor burden by 48%, administration of
PPLGM+XRT radiosensitized tumor and enhanced tumor killing by XRT,
leading to a significant (p<0.05) 56% reduction in lung weight.
Morphometric analysis of lung sections confirmed that PPLGM-alone
significantly (p<0.01) reduced tumor area relative to vehicle,
irrespective of radiation exposure. While exposure to XRT significantly
(p<0.01) reduced tumor volume by 65% (from 44.4 7.6% to 15.4 4.5% tumor
area), lung sections from mice exposed to PPLGM+XRT significantly
(p<0.05) potentiated radiation-induced tumor eradication (reduction in
tumor area to 5.6 3.0%) above XRT-only exposure. Furthermore, PPLGM
significantly (pBackground: Although over half of all lung cancer
patients receive radiation therapy as part of their treatment plan, the
therapeutic window of radiation is quite small, and it is difficult to
deliver tumoricidal doses of radiation without the development of severe
adverse effects in the nearby normal tissues. An agent that could
sensitize lung cancer tissue to radiotherapy while sparing damage to
normal tissues is still an unmet need. Piperlongumine (PPLGM), a natural
product of the plant Piper longum has shown potent anti-carcinogenic
properties through an ROS-inducing mechanism. Our hypothesis is that
PPLGM will sensitize tumor cells to radiation-induced cell death in an
orthotopic murine model of lung cancer. Methods: 7-week old female
C57BL/6 mice were injected intravenously with 1106 Lewis lung carcinoma
(LLC) cells. Mouse cohorts (n = 30/group) were administered PPLGM (1
mg/kg of body weight) or vehicle daily by oral gavage initiated 7 days
post-LLC injection. At 14 days post-LLC injection, 15 mice per treatment
cohort were exposed to 12 Gy thoracic X-ray radiation treatment (XRT).
Administration of PPLGM or vehicle continued 7 days post-XRT. Mice were
euthanized 14 days post-XRT and evaluated for total lung weight and tumor
burden using morphometric analysis. Additionally, we assessed the
potential for a dual role of PPLGM (0.1-2.5M) as a radiosensitizer of
cancer cells (LLC) and a radioprotector of normal lung cells (pulmonary
microvascular endothelial cells (PMVEC)) via clonogenic survival assays.
Results: Using LC/MS/MS we were able to detect significantly elevated
levels of PPLGM above baseline in mouse plasma and lung tissue. We
observed a significant (p<0.01) increase in lung weight (from 0.14 g to
0.36 g), an indicator of tumor burden, that was significantly (p<0.01)
reduced by exposure to a tumoricidal dose of XRT. Importantly, while
thoracic XRT-alone reduced tumor burden by 48%, administration of
PPLGM+XRT radiosensitized tumor and enhanced tumor killing by XRT,
leading to a significant (p<0.05) 56% reduction in lung weight.
Morphometric analysis of lung sections confirmed that PPLGM-alone
significantly (p<0.01) reduced tumor area relative to vehicle,
irrespective of radiation exposure. While exposure to XRT significantly
(p<0.01) reduced tumor volume by 65% (from 44.4 7.6% to 15.4 4.5% tumor
area), lung sections from mice exposed to PPLGM+XRT significantly
(p<0.05) potentiated radiation-induced tumor eradication (reduction in
tumor area to 5.6 3.0%) above XRT-only exposure. Furthermore, PPLGM
significantly (p<0.05) radiosensitized LLC dose-dependently to
gamma-radiation killing, while trending towards radioprotecting normal
lung cells. Conclusion: These findings provide evidence that PPLGM is a
potent radiosensitizing agent that could aid in the eradication of
irradiated tumors in the clinical setting.Funding: Funded in part by
NIH-1R21CA178654-01

