Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The adenosine A2A receptor antagonist CPI-444 blocks
adenosine-mediated T-cell suppression and exhibits antitumor activity
alone and in combination with anti-PD-1 and anti-PD-L1


Elevated levels of extracellular adenosine within the tumor
microenvironment create an immunosuppressive niche that promotes tumor
growth and metastasis. Adenosine signaling via the A2A receptor (A2AR) on
immune cells suppresses anti-tumor immunity and limits the efficacy of
immunotherapies such as anti-PD-L1 or anti-PD-1 monoclonal antibodies
(mAbs).CPI-444 is an oral A2AR antagonist that has been evaluated
previously in phase 1 clinical trials for non-oncology indications.
CPI-444 demonstrates binding to A2AR with a Ki of 3.5 nM and > 50-fold
selectivity over other adenosine receptor subtypes. We examined the
immune activating and anti-tumor properties of CPI-444 alone and in
combination with anti-PD-1/PDL-1 mAbs.In vitro studies using activated
primary human T cells demonstrated that CPI-444 fully inhibited the
production of intracellular cAMP following incubation of the cells with
5-N-ethylcarboxamidoadenosine (NECA), a stable analog of adenosine. A2AR
agonists suppressed rapid TCR-mediated ERK phosphorylation and,
subsequently, production of IL-2 and IFN by activated T cells; blockade
of A2AR with CPI-444 restored T cell signaling and function.The efficacy
of CPI-444 was evaluated in MC38 and CT26 syngeneic mouse tumor models.
In the MC38 model, daily treatment of mice with CPI-444 (1, 10, 100
mg/kg) led to a dose-dependent reduction in tumor growth, leading to full
tumor elimination in 9/30 treated mice. New tumors failed to establish
when the cured mice were re-challenged with MC38 cells, indicating that
CPI-444 induced systemic anti-tumor immune memory. Combining CPI-444 with
anti-PD-L1 mAb treatment in the MC38 model synergistically inhibited
tumor growth and led to elimination of tumors in 9/10 treated mice. In
the CT26 model, CPI-444 alone or anti-PD-1 alone led to non-significant
reductions in tumor growth; however the combination of CPI-444 and
anti-PD-1 led to a synergistic inhibition of tumor growth and prolonged
survival compared to either agent alone. These results, and others,
suggest that adenosine signaling may be an important resistance mechanism
in tumors that incompletely respond to anti-PD-1/PD-L1 mAb therapy.Based
on these results and others, we plan to initiate a Phase 1b clinical
trial to examine safety, tolerability, biomarkers, and preliminary
efficacy of CPI-444 as a single agent and in combination with anti-PD-L1
(atezolizumab) in patients with solid tumors.

