Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of TGF to prevent brain metastases of breast cancer


Introduction: Because systemic chemotherapy fails to effectively treat
brain metastases, the need for novel strategies designed to prevent brain
metastasis is urgent. Recently, transforming growth factor beta (TGF) has
been shown to influence the development of brain metastases of breast
cancer and may offer a therapeutic target to prevent metastatic disease
in brain. This study seeks to evaluate the efficacy of TGF inhibition,
using losartan, at preventing metastases in an experimental model of
brain metastases of breast cancer.Methods: Human breast cancer cells
(MDA-MB-231Br-Luc) were inoculated into female NuNu mice after TGF
knockdown or treatment with inhibitor; after 1-week mice were sacrificed,
their brains removed and sliced, and metastatic cells counted and
localized to determine seeding. Survival studies were then initiated with
daily low (10mg/kg) or high (25mg/kg) doses of losartan, or SB431542
(5mg/kg) prior to the injection of one of two human breast cancer cell
lines (MDA-MB-231Br-Luc or JIMT-1-Br3-Luc) transfected with luciferase.
Treatments resumed daily until neurological symptoms developed. Animals
were sacrificed, brains removed, and sliced to evaluate the number of
metastases and their respective sizes.Results: The number of metastatic
cells seeding brain was reduced after knockdown of TGF (from 3,331 263
cells to 1,079 495 cells; pIntroduction: Because systemic chemotherapy
fails to effectively treat brain metastases, the need for novel
strategies designed to prevent brain metastasis is urgent. Recently,
transforming growth factor beta (TGF) has been shown to influence the
development of brain metastases of breast cancer and may offer a
therapeutic target to prevent metastatic disease in brain. This study
seeks to evaluate the efficacy of TGF inhibition, using losartan, at
preventing metastases in an experimental model of brain metastases of
breast cancer.Methods: Human breast cancer cells (MDA-MB-231Br-Luc) were
inoculated into female NuNu mice after TGF knockdown or treatment with
inhibitor; after 1-week mice were sacrificed, their brains removed and
sliced, and metastatic cells counted and localized to determine seeding.
Survival studies were then initiated with daily low (10mg/kg) or high
(25mg/kg) doses of losartan, or SB431542 (5mg/kg) prior to the injection
of one of two human breast cancer cell lines (MDA-MB-231Br-Luc or
JIMT-1-Br3-Luc) transfected with luciferase. Treatments resumed daily
until neurological symptoms developed. Animals were sacrificed, brains
removed, and sliced to evaluate the number of metastases and their
respective sizes.Results: The number of metastatic cells seeding brain
was reduced after knockdown of TGF (from 3,331 263 cells to 1,079 495
cells; p<0.01) and after treatment with galunisertib (808 82 cells;
pIntroduction: Because systemic chemotherapy fails to effectively treat
brain metastases, the need for novel strategies designed to prevent brain
metastasis is urgent. Recently, transforming growth factor beta (TGF) has
been shown to influence the development of brain metastases of breast
cancer and may offer a therapeutic target to prevent metastatic disease
in brain. This study seeks to evaluate the efficacy of TGF inhibition,
using losartan, at preventing metastases in an experimental model of
brain metastases of breast cancer.Methods: Human breast cancer cells
(MDA-MB-231Br-Luc) were inoculated into female NuNu mice after TGF
knockdown or treatment with inhibitor; after 1-week mice were sacrificed,
their brains removed and sliced, and metastatic cells counted and
localized to determine seeding. Survival studies were then initiated with
daily low (10mg/kg) or high (25mg/kg) doses of losartan, or SB431542
(5mg/kg) prior to the injection of one of two human breast cancer cell
lines (MDA-MB-231Br-Luc or JIMT-1-Br3-Luc) transfected with luciferase.
Treatments resumed daily until neurological symptoms developed. Animals
were sacrificed, brains removed, and sliced to evaluate the number of
metastases and their respective sizes.Results: The number of metastatic
cells seeding brain was reduced after knockdown of TGF (from 3,331 263
cells to 1,079 495 cells; p<0.01) and after treatment with galunisertib
(808 82 cells; p<0.01). There was a 33% reduction (pIntroduction: Because
systemic chemotherapy fails to effectively treat brain metastases, the
need for novel strategies designed to prevent brain metastasis is urgent.
Recently, transforming growth factor beta (TGF) has been shown to
influence the development of brain metastases of breast cancer and may
offer a therapeutic target to prevent metastatic disease in brain. This
study seeks to evaluate the efficacy of TGF inhibition, using losartan,
at preventing metastases in an experimental model of brain metastases of
breast cancer.Methods: Human breast cancer cells (MDA-MB-231Br-Luc) were
inoculated into female NuNu mice after TGF knockdown or treatment with
inhibitor; after 1-week mice were sacrificed, their brains removed and
sliced, and metastatic cells counted and localized to determine seeding.
Survival studies were then initiated with daily low (10mg/kg) or high
(25mg/kg) doses of losartan, or SB431542 (5mg/kg) prior to the injection
of one of two human breast cancer cell lines (MDA-MB-231Br-Luc or
JIMT-1-Br3-Luc) transfected with luciferase. Treatments resumed daily
until neurological symptoms developed. Animals were sacrificed, brains
removed, and sliced to evaluate the number of metastases and their
respective sizes.Results: The number of metastatic cells seeding brain
was reduced after knockdown of TGF (from 3,331 263 cells to 1,079 495
cells; p<0.01) and after treatment with galunisertib (808 82 cells;
p<0.01). There was a 33% reduction (p<0.05) in extravasated metastatic
cells after TGF knockdown and a 23% reduction (p0.05) in median survival
was observed for the JIMT-1-Br3-Luc losartan (30 days, low; 26 days,
high) or inhibitor (29 days) treatment groups.Conclusions: Inhibition of
TGF reduced the total number of metastatic MDA-MB-231Br cells seeding
brain and simultaneously reduced the percentage of cells that had
extravasated the vessel. While losartan did not increase survival for
animals inoculated with JIMT-1-Br3-Luc cells, the MDA-MB-231Br model
exhibited enhanced survival with losartan (15% survival rate; high dose),
inhibitor (20% survival rate) treatment, and after TGF knockdown (38%
survival rate). The data indicate that TGF offers a potential therapeutic
target to reduce the risk of brain metastases of breast cancer.

