Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Polychlorinated biphenyls and relative telomere length in the
Anniston Community Health Survey: A cross-sectional study


Background: Polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) exposure is associated with
increased risk of melanoma and non-Hodgkin lymphoma in some, but not all,
epidemiologic studies. Although the carcinogenic mechanisms of specific
PCB congeners remain to be fully explained, PCBs have been demonstrated
to induce oxidative stress and inflammation and therefore may have
deleterious impacts on telomere length. We investigated the association
between serum concentrations of PCBs and telomere length in a highly
exposed population.Methods: The Anniston Community Health Survey (ACHS)
is a cross-sectional study of 766 residents of Anniston, Alabama
conducted between 2005 and 2007. We measured relative telomere length
(RTL) with telomere/single copy gene ratio, in DNA extracted from
peripheral blood samples in a subset of 57 African-American and 46 white
participants, using monochrome multiplex quantitative polymerase chain
reaction. We used multiple linear regression to estimate the association
between 27 individual PCB congeners, and sum PCBs, adjusting for age,
plate, and total lipids. All analyses were stratified by race. PCBs and
RTL were log-transformed.Results: ACHS participants had high serum
concentrations of PCBs (mean sum PCBs among African-Americans = 14,687.69
ppt whole weight, SD = 23,515.46; mean sum PCBs white participants
6,088.32 ppt whole weight, SD = 8,750.57). RTL did not differ by race
(mean RTL African-Americans = 0.94 SD = 0.08; mean RTL whites = 0.94, SD
= 0.09). Among African-American participants, sum serum PCBs was not
associated with RTL (0.70% per 100 ppt; 95% confidence interval = -9.43,
19.70). However, PCB 167 was weakly associated with higher RTL (2.35%,
95%CI = -8.56, 14.55), while PCB 157 was associated with shorter RTL
(-4.36%; 95%CI = -15.63, 8.40). Among white participants, a 100 ppt
increase in sum serum PCBs was associated with a 10.20% increase in RTL
(95% CI = -7.10, 30.72). PCB 138, in particular, was associated with
increased RTL among white participants (16.29%; 95% CI = 1.34, 33.46).
Conversely, PCB 189 was associated with shorter RTL among white
participants (-10.48%; 95%CI = -29.82, 14.19).Conclusions: We did not
observe consistent associations between serum concentrations of PCBs and
RTL, suggesting that the association may vary by race and be congener
specific. Our results are necessarily preliminary and are limited by the
small number of participants. Additional measurements of RTL among ACHS
participants are on-going.

