Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Circulating exosomal miRNAs as potential biomarker in liposarcoma


Liposarcoma (LPS) is the most common soft tissue sarcoma histological
subtype. Despite the development of combined modality treatments in
recent years, a significant proportion of patients respond poorly to
chemotherapy, leading to local recurrence or distant metastasis. Thus,
early detection of recurrent or metastatic disease or early decision
making could improve patient prognosis. However, there are no useful
biomarkers for these purposes. Thus, the discovery of novel biomarkers to
detect tumors, predict their drug sensitivity, and monitor their
progression is one of the most important challenges that must be
overcome.miRNAs are short (approximately 22 nucleotides in length)
non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs) that regulate gene expression by binding to
specific mRNA targets and promoting their degradation and/or
translational inhibition; since their discovery in body fluids (secreted
in cell-borne membrane vesicles or associated with macromolecular
complexes), circulating blood-borne microRNAs are being investigated as
potent minimally invasive biomarkers of several diseases including
tumors.In this study, our goal is to identify potential biomarkers in the
peripheral blood of LPS patients that could be useful for LPS diagnostic,
prognostic and therapeutic purposes.To determine the miRNA expression
profiles of LPS in peripheral blood (PB) and in peripheral blood exosomes
(PBX), a series of 16 human LPS patient specimens and 8 healthy controls
was analyzed on a miRNA microarray platform capable of detecting 800
human miRNAs (nCounter Human microRNA expression Assay Nanostring v3).
Validation of the array was performed by qRT-PCR on a new set of samples
(10 human LPS and 9 healthy controls).To identify differentially
expressed miRNAs, we compared miRNAs expression profiles from PBX of 15
patients to 8 healthy samples. A total of 26 miRNAs were significantly
upregulated and 3 miRNAs were significantly down regulated (pLiposarcoma
(LPS) is the most common soft tissue sarcoma histological subtype.
Despite the development of combined modality treatments in recent years,
a significant proportion of patients respond poorly to chemotherapy,
leading to local recurrence or distant metastasis. Thus, early detection
of recurrent or metastatic disease or early decision making could improve
patient prognosis. However, there are no useful biomarkers for these
purposes. Thus, the discovery of novel biomarkers to detect tumors,
predict their drug sensitivity, and monitor their progression is one of
the most important challenges that must be overcome.miRNAs are short
(approximately 22 nucleotides in length) non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs) that
regulate gene expression by binding to specific mRNA targets and
promoting their degradation and/or translational inhibition; since their
discovery in body fluids (secreted in cell-borne membrane vesicles or
associated with macromolecular complexes), circulating blood-borne
microRNAs are being investigated as potent minimally invasive biomarkers
of several diseases including tumors.In this study, our goal is to
identify potential biomarkers in the peripheral blood of LPS patients
that could be useful for LPS diagnostic, prognostic and therapeutic
purposes.To determine the miRNA expression profiles of LPS in peripheral
blood (PB) and in peripheral blood exosomes (PBX), a series of 16 human
LPS patient specimens and 8 healthy controls was analyzed on a miRNA
microarray platform capable of detecting 800 human miRNAs (nCounter Human
microRNA expression Assay Nanostring v3). Validation of the array was
performed by qRT-PCR on a new set of samples (10 human LPS and 9 healthy
controls).To identify differentially expressed miRNAs, we compared miRNAs
expression profiles from PBX of 15 patients to 8 healthy samples. A total
of 26 miRNAs were significantly upregulated and 3 miRNAs were
significantly down regulated (p<0.004). When we compared miRNA expression
profiles from PB to healthy controls, fewer miRNAs were consistently
deregulated (18 miRNAs were upregulated and 3 miRNAs were downregulated,
pLiposarcoma (LPS) is the most common soft tissue sarcoma histological
subtype. Despite the development of combined modality treatments in
recent years, a significant proportion of patients respond poorly to
chemotherapy, leading to local recurrence or distant metastasis. Thus,
early detection of recurrent or metastatic disease or early decision
making could improve patient prognosis. However, there are no useful
biomarkers for these purposes. Thus, the discovery of novel biomarkers to
detect tumors, predict their drug sensitivity, and monitor their
progression is one of the most important challenges that must be
overcome.miRNAs are short (approximately 22 nucleotides in length)
non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs) that regulate gene expression by binding to
specific mRNA targets and promoting their degradation and/or
translational inhibition; since their discovery in body fluids (secreted
in cell-borne membrane vesicles or associated with macromolecular
complexes), circulating blood-borne microRNAs are being investigated as
potent minimally invasive biomarkers of several diseases including
tumors.In this study, our goal is to identify potential biomarkers in the
peripheral blood of LPS patients that could be useful for LPS diagnostic,
prognostic and therapeutic purposes.To determine the miRNA expression
profiles of LPS in peripheral blood (PB) and in peripheral blood exosomes
(PBX), a series of 16 human LPS patient specimens and 8 healthy controls
was analyzed on a miRNA microarray platform capable of detecting 800
human miRNAs (nCounter Human microRNA expression Assay Nanostring v3).
Validation of the array was performed by qRT-PCR on a new set of samples
(10 human LPS and 9 healthy controls).To identify differentially
expressed miRNAs, we compared miRNAs expression profiles from PBX of 15
patients to 8 healthy samples. A total of 26 miRNAs were significantly
upregulated and 3 miRNAs were significantly down regulated (p<0.004).
When we compared miRNA expression profiles from PB to healthy controls,
fewer miRNAs were consistently deregulated (18 miRNAs were upregulated
and 3 miRNAs were downregulated, p<0.02). Moreover the miRNAs found to be
consistently deregulated in PB were all also significantly deregulated in
the PBX. Validation of the miRNA panel in an independent cohort of LPS
patients confirmed this signature.Our study has identified a specific
miRNA signature in circulating exosomes that may have a novel role in the
diagnosis, prognosis and or treatment of LPS patients in a clinical
setting.

