Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Physical activity, sitting time and prostate cancer specific
mortality: The Cancer Prevention Study II Nutrition Cohort


Objective: To investigate the associations of pre- and post-diagnostic
recreational physical activity, and sitting time with prostate cancer
specific mortality (PCSM) among men diagnosed with non-metastatic
prostate cancer in the Cancer Prevention Study II Nutrition
Cohort.Methods: 10,067 men were diagnosed with non-metastatic prostate
cancer between enrollment in 1992 or 1993 and June 2011, of whom 600 died
of prostate cancer during follow-up through 2012. Multivariable-adjusted
Cox proportional hazards regression models were used to calculate hazard
ratios (HRs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) for the associations of
self-reported pre-diagnostic and post-diagnostic physical activity and
sitting time with PCSM.Results: Compared with engaging in fewer than 3.5
metabolic equivalent (MET) hours per week of recreational physical
activity, 17.5 or more MET hours (equivalent to 5 hours of walking) per
week was associated with 30% lower risk of PCSM (HR: 0.70, 95% CI:
0.54-0.92) for pre-diagnostic, and with 34% lower risk (HR: 0.66, 95% CI:
0.46-0.93) for post-diagnostic recreational physical activity. Among men
with walking as the only form of leisure time physical activity, walking
4 hours or more per week before diagnosis was associated with lower risk
of PCSM (for 4-6 hours, HR: 0.65, 95% CI: 0.46-0.91; for 7+ hours, HR:
0.60, 95% CI: 0.41-0.88), while no statistically significant association
was observed with walking after diagnosis. Sitting time was not
associated with PCSM.Conclusion: Higher recreational physical activity
levels before and after diagnosis may improve prognosis in men diagnosed
with non-metastatic prostate cancer. These results additional support
that prostate cancer survivors should adhere to physical activity
guidelines and that physicians should promote adopting a physically
active lifestyle to prostate cancer survivors.

