Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of L1 in proliferation and chemoresistance of
retinoblastoma


Retinoblastoma is the most common intraocular malignant tumor in
children, affecting approximately 1 in 20,000 live births. In this study,
we investigated the role of L1, a transmembrane protein, in proliferation
and chemoresistance of retinoblastoma to figure out the potential for the
novel therapeutic target. Retinoblastoma tissues demonstrated varying
degrees of L1 positivity in 86.6% (26/30) of samples. In particular, the
degree of L1 positivity was inversely related with that of
Flexner-Wintersteiner rosette formation. Further in vitro studies using
stable cell lines which showed up- or down-regulation of L1 demonstrated
that L1 was associated with cell-cell adhesion and proliferation of
retinoblastoma cells. Retinoblastoma cells with low expression of L1
showed decreased tumor formation in vivo. In addition, L1 expression was
related with resistance to carboplatin, one of the most-widely utilized
chemotherapeutic agents against retinoblastoma. In line with these
results, retinoblastoma cells with higher expression of L1 demonstrated
increased resistance to carboplatin in vivo. We also observed diffuse and
dense expression of L1 in retinoblastoma tissues from 4 patients who
underwent enucleation despite intensive chemotherapy based on
carboplatin. Taken together, L1 was related with proliferation and
chemoresistance of retinoblastoma and might be a potential therapeutic
target of retinoblastoma.

