Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Highly cytotoxic EGFR/CD16A TandAbs specifically recruit NK cells
to potently kill various types of solid tumors


Constitutive EGFR activation through amplification or dysregulation plays
an important role in the pathophysiology of numerous solid cancers, such
as colorectal cancer (CRC), non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) or
squamous cell carcinomas of the head and neck (SCCHN), thus providing a
strong rationale for the development of therapeutic strategies targeting
EGFR. Different therapeutic approaches have been approved for treatment
of such cancers, including tyrosine kinase inhibitors that interfere with
signal transduction by blocking the kinase domain or monoclonal
antibodies (mAbs) that prevent EGFR ligand binding, dimerization and
activation. However, despite demonstrated clinical efficacy, intrinsic or
acquired resistance to such treatments has been described for a larger
number of patients.Natural killer cells (NK-cells) play a central role in
the innate immune system and have the capacity to destroy
virally-infected or neoplastic cells. To specifically utilize the
cytotoxic potential of NK-cells for the elimination of EGFR+ cancer
cells, we developed tetravalent bispecific EGFR/CD16A NK-cell TandAbs,
with two binding sites for EGFR being expressed on tumor cells, and two
binding sites for CD16A expressed on NK-cells.Using antibody phage
display technologies, we identified high affinity scFvs recognizing
conformational epitopes in the extracellular domain of EGFR that were
different to those targeted by other therapeutic antibodies. We
engineered a set of bispecific EGFR/CD16A TandAbs and analysed their
binding, thermostability and cytotoxic properties in a panel of in vitro
assays. TandAbs containing our EGFR-specific domain 21 were highly potent
in cytotoxicity assays towards endogenously EGFR-expressing tumor cell
lines or transfected CHO cells with single digit picomolar or
subpicomolar EC50 values. In contrast to comparator NK-cell recruiting
TandAbs containing the Fv sequences from cetuximab, the TandAbs
containing our EGFR-binding domain 21 did not exhibit any signs of
temperature-induced instability or aggregation in thermostability
studies.Taken together, our data suggest that EGFR/CD16A TandAbs are
novel, highly potent drug candidates suitable for the treatment of
EGFR-overexpressing malignancies and overcoming resistance to other
therapeutic agents.

