Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression of the HPV E7 oncogene in K14E7Fancd2-/- mouse long
term bone marrow culture derived hematopoietic cells produces malignant
plasmacytomas


Introduction: Transgenic FVB/n mice with the HPV E7 oncogene under the
control of the CK14 promoter were bred with Fancd2+/- (129/Sv background)
mice to obtain K14E7 Fancd2-/- mice Park, et al. Cancer Research, 70(23):
9959, 2010), in which delivery of 4-nitroquinoline N-oxide in drinking
water produces oral and esophageal adenomas. The hematopoietic system, of
these mice was studied, using long term bone marrow cultures (LTBMCs)
from Fancd2-/- (SV129), K14E7 transgenic (FVB/n), and K14E7 Fancd2-/-
mice.Methods: LTBMCs were established by flushing bone marrow into T-25
flasks from which bone marrow stromal cell lines and IL3-dependent
hematopoietic cell lines were developed. The cell lines were analyzed
using irradiation survival curves, Western analysis for protein
expression. K14E7 Fancd2-/- IL3 dependent clonal cell lines of the
IL3-dependent cell lines were established by flow cytometry. Clonal lines
were expanded and tested for tumorigenicity by injecting 1 106 cells of
each of four clones into flanks of K14E7 Fancd2+/+ mice.Results: K14E7
Fancd2-/- LTBMCs were similar to those from Sv/129 Fancd2-/-: 1)
hematopoiesis was shortened when compared to K14E7 Fancd2+/+ or Fancd2+/+
LTBMCs, respectively. Stromal cell line irradiation survival curves with
K14E7 Fancd2+/+ and Fancd2-/- cell lines showed (Do = 1.48 0.05 and 1.52
0.15 Gy) they were radiosensitive compared to those from K14E7 Fancd2+/+
or Sv/129 Fancd2+/+ cells (Do = 2.33 0.11 and 2.23 0.01 Gy, p = 0.0043
and 0.0368, respectively). Fancd2-/- stromal cells were more
radiosensitive than Fancd2+/+ cells (decreased shoulder on the survival
curve of n = 1.5 0.5 compared to 4.7 0.3 (p = 0.0126). K14E7Fancd2+/+
cells had an n of 1.9 0.3 compared to 3.5 0.1 (p = 0.0309) for Sv/129
cells. In contrast, hematopoietic IL-3 dependent K14E7Fancd2+/+ and
Sv/129 Fancd2+/+ cell lines were similar (Do = 2.15 0.4 and 1.92 0.06, p
= 0.6469, respectively). Confirming prior data, (Berhane et. al, Rad Res
182: 35, 2014) Sv/129 Fancd2-/- IL-3 dependent cell lines were
radioresistant compared to Fancd2+/+ cell lines (Do = 2.12 0.12 and 1.92
0.06, respectively, p = 0.0236). In contrast, K14E7 Fancd2-/- cell lines
were radiosensitive compared to K14E7 Fancd2+/+ cell lines (1.44 0.13 and
2.15 0.28, respectively, p = 0.0498). Hematopoietic and marrow stromal
cell lines from K14E7Fancd2-/- marrow expressed cytokeratin 14 and E7
oncogene by Western analysis. K14E7 Fancd2-/- (but no other genotype
derived) IL-3 dependent cell lines transformed in vitro to dense tumor
cells lines. Cloned sublines were injected into K14E7 Fancd2+/- mice
producing plasmacytomas.Conclusions: Expression of the E7 oncogene in the
K14/E7 Fancd2-/- mouse marrow derived IL-3 dependent cell lines leads to
radiosensitivity and tumorgenicity.Supported by NIAID/NIH U19-A 1068021
and the Fanconi Anemia Research Foundation.

