Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synthesis and characterization of novel benzylpyrazole-based BUB1
kinase inhibitors with anti-tumor activity


BUB1 (budding uninhibited by benzimidazoles 1) is a serine/threonine
protein kinase. The protein is bound to kinetochores and plays a key role
in the establishment of the mitotic spindle checkpoint and chromosome
congression prior to anaphase.Inhibition of BUB1 kinase represents a
novel approach for cancer treatment: whereas cell cycle arrest is the
predominant mode of action of a number of antimitotic cancer drugs (e.g.
taxanes and vinca alkaloids), BUB1 inhibition results in aneuploidy and
cell death by driving cells through mitosis irrespective of DNA damage
and misattached chromosomes.Here, we report the characterization of a
novel benzylpyrazole lead-structure series inhibiting BUB1 exemplified by
BAY-320, a novel, first-in-class small molecule inhibitor of BUB1 kinase.
This structure class was initially discovered as a single hit in a
high-throughput screen, and resulted in a lead compound by chemical
optimization. Benzylpyrazole BAY-320 is highly selective for BUB1 with
single digit nanomolar biochemical potency and single-digit micromolar
cellular potency (HeLa proliferation assay). Synergistic effects can be
observed when BUB1 inhibitor BAY-320 is combined with low doses of
paclitaxel affecting chromosome segregation and cell proliferation. X-ray
data of benzylpyrazoles allowed for a better understanding the binding
mode for rational property design. Further data on structure-activity
relationship including pharmacokinetic, drug metabolism and the synthesis
of BAY-320 and analogues will be presented.These results validate the
benzylpyrazoles as novel selective BUB1 inhibitors and BUB1 as a
promising approach for cancer treatment.

