Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comparison of human-specific versus cross-reactive Complex I
inhibitor for in vivo tumor efficacy


Mitochondria are both key regulators of energy supply and apoptotic cell
death. The mitochondrial electron transport chain (ETC) consists of four
enzyme complexes that transfer electrons from NADH to oxygen. During
electron transfer, the ETC (Complex I to IV) pumps protons into the
inter-membrane space, generating a gradient across the inner
mitochondrial membrane that is used by Complex V to drive ATP synthesis.
Recent publications have shown that tumor cells harboring specific
mutations (LKB1, mIDH and others) are more sensitive to Complex I
inhibition, compared to cells that do not have these mutations. We have
identified an optimized human/mouse cross-reactive Complex I inhibitor
that allows profiling of Complex I inhibitors in pharmacological models.
We have pursued different approaches based on the literature, an unbiased
screen and in-house results generated with the human-specific Complex I
inhibitor BAY 872243 to identify sensitive in vivo tumor models. However,
using the cross-reactive Complex I inhibitor we were unable to identify
sensitive models apart from weakly sensitive LKB1-deficient tumors (A549,
G361) when animals were treated at maximum tolerated dose (MTD). In
addition, all approaches for combination therapy failed to improve
efficacy in vivo. Direct comparison of human-specific Complex I inhibitor
BAY 87-2243 and cross-reactive inhibitor BAY179 in a sensitive
LKB1-deficient melanoma model, G361, demonstrated that inhibition of
Complex I specifically in the tumor is a valid approach as it results in
tumor growth inhibition of 50%. However, cross-reactive compounds do not
reach exposures at MTD to generate comparable effects.

