Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analysis of noncoding RNA expression in a mouse model of
PTEN-deficient prostate cancer


Prostate cancer is a heterogeneous disease that is driven by combined
genetic and epigenetic alterations. A significant portion of the
mammalian genome consists of non-coding regions of RNA. Increasing
evidence has shown that these noncoding RNAs (ncRNAs) have significant
roles in the epigenetic regulation of several cellular processes, and
their dysregulation can contribute to tumorigenesis and promote disease
progression in many cancer types. In order to gain better insights into
the potential roles of ncRNAs in prostate cancer, we used a genetically
engineered mouse model of prostate cancer to perform a comparative
analysis of the cancer transcriptome and the landscape of ncRNAs in
castration-nave prostate tumors and the progression to
castration-resistant disease. Whole transcription arrays were used to
explore both messenger (mRNA) and long intergenic non-coding RNA
(LincRNA) transcript expression in normal prostate tissue from wildtype
mice and prostate tumors from conditional PTEN-knockout mice. Comparative
analyses were performed between prostate tumor samples from
castration-nave mice and, at 4 weeks and 10 weeks post-surgical
castration. Altered expression of ncRNAs was most commonly observed and
accounted for 56.2% (2370/4216), 47.6% (4460/9366) and 41.57% (1545/3717)
of the total genes differentially expressed between normal mouse prostate
and prostate tumors from castration-nave, 4 weeks post-castration and 10
weeks post-castration, respectively. We also profile the expression of
relevant cancer-related lincRNAs present in these models. Overall, our
analyses provide data to support a role of LincRNA dysregulation in the
pathogenesis of PTEN-deficient prostate cancer, and suggest that these
mouse models might provide a potential preclinical tool to test candidate
prospective therapies targeting ncRNAs.

