Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exploration of 2-aryl fused thiophene analogs as selective
inhibitors of MEK5


In several cancers intermediate enzymes in the MAPK cascades are
up-regulated and may represent adaptive changes giving these cancers a
competitive metabolic edge over normal cells. Additionally these
alterations may induce resistance to previously useful chemotherapeutic
agents. The enzyme MEK5, a component of the MEK5/ERK5 cascade, is
up-regulated in several cancer types including triple negative breast
cancer and prostrate cancers. Our group has previously described the
synthesis and testing of anthranillic acid derived compounds and their
ring constrained analogs. To explore chemical functional group tolerance
and preference on the central arene ring by MEK5, a series of
fused-thiophene ring variations, obtainable by the Gewald reaction were
prepared and tested. These compounds were examined at 10 M with
MDA-MB-231 cells treated with EGF to induce MEK1/2 and MEK5
phosphorylation. Western blot analysis using IR-tagged antibodies against
pERK1/2, pERK5, ERK1/2, or ERK5 was used to determine total and relative
inhibition of MEK-mediated phosphorylation of respective pERK products.
Incubation with PD0325901 resulted in full suppression of both pERK1/2
and pERK5. For the variations explored, several novel compounds were
identified that resulted in no inhibition in the formation of pERK1/2 and
70% inhibition of pERK5. This establishes a new structural class of
selective Type III inhibitors of MEK5 that are more amenable to
structural variation, facilitating additional structure activity
relationship studies.

