Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Secreted protein acidic and rich in cysteine (SPARC) promotes
mammary tumor growth and dissemination through immune and non-immune
mediated mechanisms


Secreted protein and rich in cysteine (SPARC) is a matricellular
glycoprotein which has been extensively associated with breast cancer
progression, both in human tumors and in experimental models. However,
the molecular mechanisms responsible for this effect are still unclear in
particular because most studies were performed in immunocompromised nude
mice. We undertook a comprehensive study of SPARC role in this disease by
using the highly metastatic and poorly immunogenic 4T1 and LM3 mammary
tumor cells syngeneic in Balb/c mice. Knock down of SPARC expression
using a targeted shRNA in both cell lines greatly reduced primary tumor
growth and completely obliterated the establishment of metastatic foci in
lung. We performed global gene expression analysis comparing primary
tumors and metastatic foci of control 4T1 cells with those arisen from
shRNA-treated, SPARC-deficient 4T1 cells. From these studies, a potential
role of the inflammatory/immune response in controlling tumor evasion and
metastasis, more specifically through genes associated with the
prostaglandin pathway, was suggested. As we explored this hypothesis, we
observed that knock down of SPARC expression in 4T1 3D spheroids, but not
in 2D monolayers, downregulated COX-2 mRNA and protein levels. Moreover,
exogenous addition of SPARC in SPARC-deficient spheroids of 4T1 and
MDA-MB-231 human breast cancer cells increased COX-2 expression.
Interestingly, the re-expression of COX-2 in SPARC-deficient 4T1 cells
partially restored the in vivo primary tumor growth with no effect on the
establishment of metastatic foci. COX-2 plays an important role in
inducing myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs, CD11b+Gr-1+ cells),
which promotes breast cancer outgrowth through immunosuppression. Flow
cytometry analyses demonstrated that SPARC-deficient 4T1 tumor-bearing
mice exhibited reduced levels of CD11b+Gr-1+ cells compared to control
4T1 tumor-bearing mice in the spleen (6,93,2 vs. 25,32,0 pSecreted
protein and rich in cysteine (SPARC) is a matricellular glycoprotein
which has been extensively associated with breast cancer progression,
both in human tumors and in experimental models. However, the molecular
mechanisms responsible for this effect are still unclear in particular
because most studies were performed in immunocompromised nude mice. We
undertook a comprehensive study of SPARC role in this disease by using
the highly metastatic and poorly immunogenic 4T1 and LM3 mammary tumor
cells syngeneic in Balb/c mice. Knock down of SPARC expression using a
targeted shRNA in both cell lines greatly reduced primary tumor growth
and completely obliterated the establishment of metastatic foci in lung.
We performed global gene expression analysis comparing primary tumors and
metastatic foci of control 4T1 cells with those arisen from
shRNA-treated, SPARC-deficient 4T1 cells. From these studies, a potential
role of the inflammatory/immune response in controlling tumor evasion and
metastasis, more specifically through genes associated with the
prostaglandin pathway, was suggested. As we explored this hypothesis, we
observed that knock down of SPARC expression in 4T1 3D spheroids, but not
in 2D monolayers, downregulated COX-2 mRNA and protein levels. Moreover,
exogenous addition of SPARC in SPARC-deficient spheroids of 4T1 and
MDA-MB-231 human breast cancer cells increased COX-2 expression.
Interestingly, the re-expression of COX-2 in SPARC-deficient 4T1 cells
partially restored the in vivo primary tumor growth with no effect on the
establishment of metastatic foci. COX-2 plays an important role in
inducing myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs, CD11b+Gr-1+ cells),
which promotes breast cancer outgrowth through immunosuppression. Flow
cytometry analyses demonstrated that SPARC-deficient 4T1 tumor-bearing
mice exhibited reduced levels of CD11b+Gr-1+ cells compared to control
4T1 tumor-bearing mice in the spleen (6,93,2 vs. 25,32,0 p<0,001), lungs
(0,70,2 vs. 6,20,9 p0,05). COX-2 re-expression restored systemic MDSCs
expansion in SPARC-deficient 4T1 tumor-bearing mice. The present data
suggest that COX-2 expression is under SPARC control in breast cancer
cells; moreover, COX-2 could mediate SPARC effects on tumor evasion from
immune surveillance.

