Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Potent compounds targeting the human MutT homolog 1 (hMTH1)
activity and their cytotoxicity evaluation


Recently, it has been reported that MTH1, a sanitizing protein for the
oxidized dNTP pool, plays an important role in cancer-associated damage
in the dNTP pool and is required for survival in cancer cells. To study
the antitumor mechanism of MTH1 and screen effective anti-cancer drugs,
the current study was designed to set up an in vitro expressing and
activity evaluation system for MTH1, which will be used for MTH1 specific
inhibitor screening. Briefly, the acquired recombinant vector
pET-28b-MTH1 was transfected into E.Coli BL21(DE3). The MTH1 protein
expression was induced by IPTG and purified by Ni2+ affinity
chromatography. Through converting dGTP to dGMP and pyrophosphate by
MTH1, the latter of which can then be hydrolyzed to inorganic
pyrophosphate by inorganic pyrophosphatase, the MTH1 activity is
evaluated through measuring the amount of inorganic pyrophosphate after
reacting with malachite green and ammonium molybdate at 630nm. Using this
method, we have successfully generated a reliable in vitro evaluation
system for MTH1 activity. Furthermore, five brand new series of hybrids
with total more than one hundred compounds were virtually designed and
synthesized. Their potential MTH1 inhibitory effects were screened based
on our system. We found that some of them exhibited moderate to excellent
inhibitory activity toward MTH1 with nanomole IC50 values, which also
showed significant cytotoxicity on several gastric cancer cell lines by
MTT assay (with IC50 below 10M). On the other hand, our studies in human
gastric cancer patients also indicated that MTH1 expression levels were
significantly enhanced in these patients cancer tissues, compared to the
para-cancer ones. Our findings suggest that MTH1 may be a potential
therapeutic target in gastric cancer. Compounds specifically designed to
target MTH1 activity may represent a novel and useful strategy for
anti-gastric cancer drug discovery.*Corresponding author: Wen Zhao, Ph.D,
Tel.: 01186-15003898187. Email: zhaowen100@139.comFunding Sources.This
work was supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China
(Project No. 81430085, No. 21372206 and No. 81172937 for H.-M.L.; Project
No. 81270270 and No. 81470524 for W.Z.); Ph.D Educational Award from
Ministry of Education (No. 20134101130001, for H.-M.L. and No.
20134101110013, for W.Z.); The 2013 Scientific Innovation Talent Award
from Department of Education of Henan Province (No. 13HASTIT029, for
W.Z.).

