Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Adolescent boys and the human papillomavirus (HPV) - Geographical
patterns of vaccination uptake


INTRODUCTIONHuman Papillomavirus (HPV) remains the most common sexually
transmitted infection (STI) and is associated with multiple cancers.
Previous research has examined HPV vaccine initiation and completion
among girls. Among adolescent boys who are also at risk for contracting
HPV, however, vaccine initiation and completion have not been widely
explored.OBJECTIVETo examine predictors of HPV vaccine initiation and
completion among boys in the United States.METHODSAnalysis was conducted
on 10,866 adolescent boys aged 13-17 using the 2014 National Immunization
Survey-Teen. Our outcomes of interest, HPV vaccine initiation and
completion, were measured using provider-verified vaccine history.
Weighted multivariable logistic regression models assessed predictors of
HPV vaccine initiation and completion.RESULTSData stratified by
geographic region showed that the prevalence of HPV vaccine initiation
and completion ratio was lowest in the South: South (initiation: 38.82%,
completion: 18.20%), Midwest (initiation: 38.15%, completion: 19.69%),
West (initiation, 48.88%, completion: 26.12%), Northeast (initiation:
48.30%, completion: 26.96%).Multivariable analysis of geographic patterns
indicated that adolescent boys residing in the West had higher odds of
vaccine initiation compared to those in the South (OR = 1.41; 95% CI:
1.08 - 1.83).On the other hand, the odds of vaccine completion were
higher in adolescents residing both in the Northeast (OR = 1.46; 95% CI:
1.14 - 1.87) and West (OR = 1.42; 95% CI: 1.03 - 1.95) compared to
adolescent boys residing in the South.Adolescent boys who were
recommended the HPV vaccine by a physician had 8.49 (95% CI; 7.03 -
10.26) and 5.97 (95% CI: 4.49 - 7.94) higher odds of initiation and
completion, respectively. Compared to White adolescent boys, the odds of
vaccine initiation (OR = 1.90; 95% CI: 1.47 - 2.48) and completion (OR =
1.49; 95% CI: 1.09 - 2.04) were higher amongHispanics boys. Moreover,
boys aged 17 had higher odds of vaccine initiation compared to those who
were 13 (OR = 1.41; 95% CI: 1.05 - 1.90). Finally, while mothers
education partially influenced the odds of vaccine initiation in
adolescent boys (INTRODUCTIONHuman Papillomavirus (HPV) remains the most
common sexually transmitted infection (STI) and is associated with
multiple cancers. Previous research has examined HPV vaccine initiation
and completion among girls. Among adolescent boys who are also at risk
for contracting HPV, however, vaccine initiation and completion have not
been widely explored.OBJECTIVETo examine predictors of HPV vaccine
initiation and completion among boys in the United States.METHODSAnalysis
was conducted on 10,866 adolescent boys aged 13-17 using the 2014
National Immunization Survey-Teen. Our outcomes of interest, HPV vaccine
initiation and completion, were measured using provider-verified vaccine
history. Weighted multivariable logistic regression models assessed
predictors of HPV vaccine initiation and completion.RESULTSData
stratified by geographic region showed that the prevalence of HPV vaccine
initiation and completion ratio was lowest in the South: South
(initiation: 38.82%, completion: 18.20%), Midwest (initiation: 38.15%,
completion: 19.69%), West (initiation, 48.88%, completion: 26.12%),
Northeast (initiation: 48.30%, completion: 26.96%).Multivariable analysis
of geographic patterns indicated that adolescent boys residing in the
West had higher odds of vaccine initiation compared to those in the South
(OR = 1.41; 95% CI: 1.08 - 1.83).On the other hand, the odds of vaccine
completion were higher in adolescents residing both in the Northeast (OR
= 1.46; 95% CI: 1.14 - 1.87) and West (OR = 1.42; 95% CI: 1.03 - 1.95)
compared to adolescent boys residing in the South.Adolescent boys who
were recommended the HPV vaccine by a physician had 8.49 (95% CI; 7.03 -
10.26) and 5.97 (95% CI: 4.49 - 7.94) higher odds of initiation and
completion, respectively. Compared to White adolescent boys, the odds of
vaccine initiation (OR = 1.90; 95% CI: 1.47 - 2.48) and completion (OR =
1.49; 95% CI: 1.09 - 2.04) were higher amongHispanics boys. Moreover,
boys aged 17 had higher odds of vaccine initiation compared to those who
were 13 (OR = 1.41; 95% CI: 1.05 - 1.90). Finally, while mothers
education partially influenced the odds of vaccine initiation in
adolescent boys (<12 years; OR = 2.053; 95% CI: 1.43 - 2.95), such was
not significant in vaccine completion. Instead, higher odds of vaccine
initiation among adolescent boys were associated with mothers who had two
children agedINTRODUCTIONHuman Papillomavirus (HPV) remains the most
common sexually transmitted infection (STI) and is associated with
multiple cancers. Previous research has examined HPV vaccine initiation
and completion among girls. Among adolescent boys who are also at risk
for contracting HPV, however, vaccine initiation and completion have not
been widely explored.OBJECTIVETo examine predictors of HPV vaccine
initiation and completion among boys in the United States.METHODSAnalysis
was conducted on 10,866 adolescent boys aged 13-17 using the 2014
National Immunization Survey-Teen. Our outcomes of interest, HPV vaccine
initiation and completion, were measured using provider-verified vaccine
history. Weighted multivariable logistic regression models assessed
predictors of HPV vaccine initiation and completion.RESULTSData
stratified by geographic region showed that the prevalence of HPV vaccine
initiation and completion ratio was lowest in the South: South
(initiation: 38.82%, completion: 18.20%), Midwest (initiation: 38.15%,
completion: 19.69%), West (initiation, 48.88%, completion: 26.12%),
Northeast (initiation: 48.30%, completion: 26.96%).Multivariable analysis
of geographic patterns indicated that adolescent boys residing in the
West had higher odds of vaccine initiation compared to those in the South
(OR = 1.41; 95% CI: 1.08 - 1.83).On the other hand, the odds of vaccine
completion were higher in adolescents residing both in the Northeast (OR
= 1.46; 95% CI: 1.14 - 1.87) and West (OR = 1.42; 95% CI: 1.03 - 1.95)
compared to adolescent boys residing in the South.Adolescent boys who
were recommended the HPV vaccine by a physician had 8.49 (95% CI; 7.03 -
10.26) and 5.97 (95% CI: 4.49 - 7.94) higher odds of initiation and
completion, respectively. Compared to White adolescent boys, the odds of
vaccine initiation (OR = 1.90; 95% CI: 1.47 - 2.48) and completion (OR =
1.49; 95% CI: 1.09 - 2.04) were higher amongHispanics boys. Moreover,
boys aged 17 had higher odds of vaccine initiation compared to those who
were 13 (OR = 1.41; 95% CI: 1.05 - 1.90). Finally, while mothers
education partially influenced the odds of vaccine initiation in
adolescent boys (<12 years; OR = 2.053; 95% CI: 1.43 - 2.95), such was
not significant in vaccine completion. Instead, higher odds of vaccine
initiation among adolescent boys were associated with mothers who had two
children aged<18 years compared to one child (OR = 1.29; 95% CI: 1.07 -
1.56).CONCLUSIONOur findings highlight the suboptimal HPV vaccine across
the United States, as well as the sociodemographic disparities and
geographic variation of HPV vaccine initiation and completion.
Particularly among adolescent boys residing in the South, tailored
interventions are needed to improve HPV vaccine uptake.

