Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ONC201 induces cell death in triple negative, BRCA1-deficient and
non-triple negative breast cancer cells


Breast cancer is a major cause of cancer related death. TRAIL has been of
interest as a cancer therapeutic, but resistance has been observed in
breast cancer and only a subset of triple negative breast cancers (TNBC)
is sensitive to TRAIL. Small molecule ONC201 functions through the
ATF4/CHOP pathway to upregulate TRAIL receptor DR5 (Kline et. al., Sci.
Sig., in press, 2015), and through dual inhibition of Akt/ERK signaling
to upregulate TRAIL (Allen et. al Sci. Trans. Med., 2013). We recently
reported that ONC201 depletes colorectal cancer stem cell (CSC) markers
and prevents formation of colonospheres. ONC201 also prevents colorectal
CSCs from initiating growth of xenografted tumors (Prabhu et. al Can.
Res., 2015). ONC201 has completed its first-in-human clinical trial in
advanced solid tumors (Stein et al., 2015 AACR-NCI-EORTC meeting) and is
being tested in multiple phase I/II clinical trials (NCT02250781,
NCT02324621, NCT02420795, NCT02392572, NCT02609230, NCT02525692,
NCT02038699). We investigated ONC201 efficacy in TNBC (TRAIL-sensitive),
BRCA1-deficient, and non-TNBC (TRAIL-resistant) cells. We demonstrate
IC50 values for ONC201 in the low M range for TNBC or BRCA1-deficient (n
= 6) and non-TNBC cells (n = 5), doses that are achievable based on human
PK. Importantly, ONC201 induces apoptotic death in both TNBC and non-TNBC
cells. ONC201 depletes Aldefluor+ putative breast CSCs in vitro whereas
paclitaxel does not. ONC201 inhibits growth of TNBC, BRCA1-deficient and
non-TNBC CSC-like mammospheres while paclitaxel chemotherapy does not. We
show ONC201 is well tolerated and efficacious in vivo against the
MDA-MB-231 TNBC xenograft model. We investigated effects of ONC201 on
mechanisms of TRAIL resistance in breast cancer cells, including
expression of inhibitor of apoptosis (IAP) family proteins. We found that
ONC201 mediates a decrease in XIAP, c-IAP1, and c-IAP2 expression in the
breast cancer cells used. We also examined levels of DR5 using flow
cytometry, as a mechanism of TRAIL resistance in breast cancer cells
involves receptor endocytosis from the cell surface (Zhang et al., Mol
Cancer Res., 2008). Interestingly, we observed greater increases in cell
surface DR5 in TNBC cells than non-TNBC cells after ONC201 treatment. Our
findings suggest that ONC201 exerts cytotoxic effects against a broad
range of breast cancer cells, including TNBC, BRCA1-deficient, and
non-TNBC subtypes. ONC201 is efficacious against breast cancer cells
regardless of the TRAIL sensitivity of the cells, and this efficacy may
be mediated through mechanisms involving downregulation of IAP proteins
and upregulation of cell surface death receptors. Furthermore, ONC201 may
target paclitaxel-resistant breast CSCs. Our findings suggest unique
targeting of multiple non-TNBC, BRCA1-deficient and TNBC cells and
develop a preclinical rationale for the use of ONC201 as a treatment for
breast cancer.

