Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effect of equol on hormone-dependent rat mammary carcinoma induced
by ethyl methanesulphonate (EMS)


Soy isoflavones such as daidzein and its bioactive metabolite equol
converted from daidzein by human intestinal bacterial flora, have been
proposed to reduce the risk of breast cancer incidence in Asian women
probably due to higher number of the inhabitants capable of producing
equol in these countries. Although several in vitro studies shows the
anti-cancer activity of equol against human breast cancer cells, there
have been few reports that have directly showed the preventive role of
equol in the experimental animal model of mammary carcinoma. We
investigated here the effects of equol on the development of breast
cancer using the EMS chemically induced rat model of hormone-dependent
mammary carcinoma. Female WKA rats (n = 30) were equally divided into 2
groups, subsequently given EMS orally for 12 weeks and fed the CE2 diets
with or without 50 mg equol/g diet throughout the experiments. All
EMS-treated rats fed either diet developed ER- and/or PgR- positive
hormone-dependent mammary carcinoma by 24 weeks. Compared with the
equol-free diet, the diet supplemented with equol could not significantly
delay the development of mammary carcinoma, showing any preventive
activity on the development of EMS-induced hormone-dependent mammary
carcinoma. The body weight, total EMS uptakes, and urine estradiol
concentrations were not significantly different between these 2 groups.
These data indicate that high dose administration of equol alone does not
exert clear preventive effects on hormone-dependent EMS-induced mammary
carcinogenesis, and may require other soy isoflavone components such as
genistein that has previously been shown to exhibit a great synergy when
combined with equol. The in vivo combination studies using genistein and
equol are underway.

