Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel small molecule ONC201 induces cell death and targets
chemotherapy-resistant cancer stem-like cells in triple negative breast
cancer


Breast cancer is the most commonly diagnosed cancer in US women today.
Triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) accounts for 15% of all breast
cancers that are diagnosed and has a poor prognosis. TNBC has a high
recurrence rate following treatment with chemotherapy and radiation
compared to other breast cancer subtypes. Many tumors, including those of
the breast, contain a population of stem-like cells known as cancer stem
cells (CSCs). The CSC population is capable of self-renewal and has been
shown to be resistant to chemotherapy and radiation. These observations
suggest that the CSCs may be responsible for tumor relapse after initial
response to therapy. We previously identified a small molecule inducer of
the TRAIL pathway, ONC201/TIC10. This compound functions through the
ATF4/CHOP pathway to upregulate DR5 (Kline et. al., in press, 2015), and
through dual inhibition of Akt/ERK signaling to upregulate TRAIL (Allen
et. al Science Translational Medicine, 2013). ONC201 recently completed
its first-in-human clinical trial in advanced solid tumors that defined
its safety, pharmacokinetics and recommended phase II dose (Stein et al.,
Abstract C138, 2015 AACR-NCI-EORTC meeting). ONC201 is being tested in
multiple phase I/II clinical trials (NCT02250781, NCT02324621,
NCT02420795, NCT02392572, NCT02609230, NCT02525692, NCT02038699). We have
shown that ONC201 is able to decrease formation of colonospheres as well
as deplete colorectal CSC markers in vitro. We have also showed that
treatment with ONC201 prevents colorectal CSCs from initiating xenograft
tumor growth in mice. (Prabhu et. al Cancer Research., 2015). The goal of
this work was to investigate the efficacy of ONC201 in triple negative
breast cancer cells, as well as to determine if ONC201 was able to target
breast CSCs. We used cell viability assays to determine that the IC50
values for 6 TNBC cell types are in the low micromolar range, doses which
are achievable based on human pharmacokinetic data. Propidium iodide
staining and analysis of SubG1 DNA content indicates that ONC201 induces
apoptosis in TNBC cells. Levels of TRAIL receptor DR5 are increased on
the cell surface in TNBC cells following ONC201 treatment. In addition we
show that ONC201 is well tolerated and efficacious in vivo against the
MDA-MB-231 TNBC xenograft model. We have observed that ONC201 depletes
Aldefluor+ TNBC cells in vitro. ONC201 inhibits formation of mammospheres
from TNBC CSC-like cells while paclitaxel, a chemotherapeutic drug used
to treat TNBC, does not. Our findings suggest that ONC201 exerts
cytotoxic effects against TNBC cell types and that ONC201 may target
paclitaxel resistant CSCs. Our work contributes to the development of a
preclinical rationale for the use of ONC201 as a novel therapy for triple
negative breast cancers.

