Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Detecting intracellular bRAF/cRAF dimerization using a novel
luminescent complementation system


BRAF mutations can promote constitutive activation of MEK/ERK signaling,
leading to unregulated cell proliferation and tumorigenesis. Although
inhibitors targeting oncogenic BRAF have shown promise in preventing cell
growth, these same inhibitors can paradoxically activate signaling by
inducing BRAF interaction with CRAF. Methods for monitoring this
undesired outcome are typically low throughput or use kinase binding
domains modified with a membrane targeting sequence. We sought to develop
a cell-based assay that could reliably detect dimerization of full-length
BRAF/CRAF and could potentially be used to rapidly screen inhibitors for
modulation of this interaction. To achieve this objective, we utilized a
NanoLuc luciferase-based complementation reporter consisting of 1.3 kD
(SmBiT) and 18 kD (LgBiT) fusion tags that reconstitute an active
luciferase when brought into proximity. In this optimally configured
BRAF/CRAF assay, BRAF-LgBiT and CRAF-SmBiT fusions are stably expressed
in mammalian cells, and luminescence, indicative of protein interaction,
is monitored using a live cell detection reagent. With this assay, we
were able to observe rapid and dose-dependent induction of BRAF/CRAF
dimerization in response to a panel of kinase inhibitors. The sensitivity
and robustness of the assay permitted reliable screening in both 96- and
384-well formats (Z factors > 0.9 and 0.6, respectively). Furthermore,
the brightness of the reporter allowed the assay to be monitored in
individual cells using bioluminescence imaging. These results suggest
this BRAF/CRAF complementation assay can enable rapid, high-throughput
profiling of kinase inhibitors targeting the RAS/RAF/MEK/ERK signaling
pathway.

