Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation of Hes1 expression by the Wnt transcription factor
T-cell factor-4


Background: The Notch effector Hes1 plays a critical role in stemness of
cancer stem cells (CSCs). T-cell factor (TCF)-4 is a key transcription
factor in Wnt signaling, which is suggested to be linked with Notch
signaling. Among our TCF-4 isoforms cloned previously, the TCF-4J and K
pair have been characterized based on the presence (K) or absence (J) of
SxxSS motif (Exp Cell Res 2010). TCF-4J was highly expressed in poorly
differentiated human hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) tissues, and the
TCF-4J-overexpressing HCC cells (J cells) exhibited high tumor-initiating
potential, which is one of the features of CSCs (PLoS One 2013). Thus,
the AIM of this study was to investigate whether the SxxSS motif of TCF-4
was involved in the regulation of Hes1 expression in HCC cells. Methods:
TCF-4K mutants were prepared by site-directed mutagenesis. Sphere
formation assay was used to condense CSC-like cells. Results: Hes1 was
strikingly expressed in spheres of J cells and K-mutant cells in both
protein and mRNA levels, while its expression level was 70% inhibited in
K cells. Consistently, protein expression levels of Jagged1 and Notch1
were highest in J cells under both attached and floating conditions. The
Notch inhibitor DAPT, a -secretase inhibitor, clearly decreased the
expression levels of Hes1, suggesting that the Notch-Hes1 axis was
functional. Conclusion: Lack of SxxSS motif in TCF-4 robustly upregulated
Hes1 expression in HCC cell spheres. The finding strongly suggests that
TCF-4 directly regulates Hes1 in HCC spheres, where CSCs abundantly exist.

