Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Two novel anti-PD-1 antibodies, 244C8 and 388D4, elicit in vivo
antitumor efficacy in a lung PDX tumorgraft in immuno-humanized NSG mice


We have previously described the identification of more than 300
anti-PD-1 monoclonal antibody candidates using Enumeral's proprietary
single cell immune-profiling technology, on which our antibody discovery
platform is based. Bioinformatics analysis of heavy chain CDR3 sequences
show they comprise diverse families, encompassing 26 phylogenetic clades.
Functional studies from cell-based, ex vivo human assays led to the
discovery of two distinct lead candidates, 244C8 and 388D4. The former
represents a novel class of anti-PD-1 antibodies with a potentially
differentiated mechanism of action, as they appear not to compete with
currently marketed antibodies for PD-1 nor do they compete with PD-L1 for
PD-1 binding. Further, antibodies from the 244C8 family elicit both a
higher T cell activation and an increased expression of the high affinity
IL-2 receptor CD25 than currently marketed anti-PD-1 antibodies in ex
vivo human cell based assays. Lead antibodies from both anti-PD-1
classes, 244C8 and 388D4, have been humanized for preclinical testing in
preparation for Phase 1 clinical studies. Here we describe the in vivo
efficacy testing of these two antibodies in a human PDX tumorgraft model
derived from a core needle biopsy of a patient with metastatic non-small
cell lung carcinoma (LG1306). Direct testing of the anti-human PD-1
antibodies was made possible by the use of immune-humanized NSG mice.
Pembrolizumab, a currently marketed anti-PD-1 antibody, served as
control, along with vehicle alone. Treatment with each of the humanized
lead PD-1 antibodies, 388D4 and 244C8, was well tolerated at 5 mg/kg and
led to significant tumor growth inhibition over a 28-day study period.
Both showed equivalent efficacy to pembrolizumab with tumor growth
inhibition (%TGI) at 40% and 38% respectively compared to 37% for
pembrolizumab. All three treatment agents showed significant tumor growth
inhibition relative to vehicle, with Student T-test p values We have
previously described the identification of more than 300 anti-PD-1
monoclonal antibody candidates using Enumeral's proprietary single cell
immune-profiling technology, on which our antibody discovery platform is
based. Bioinformatics analysis of heavy chain CDR3 sequences show they
comprise diverse families, encompassing 26 phylogenetic clades.
Functional studies from cell-based, ex vivo human assays led to the
discovery of two distinct lead candidates, 244C8 and 388D4. The former
represents a novel class of anti-PD-1 antibodies with a potentially
differentiated mechanism of action, as they appear not to compete with
currently marketed antibodies for PD-1 nor do they compete with PD-L1 for
PD-1 binding. Further, antibodies from the 244C8 family elicit both a
higher T cell activation and an increased expression of the high affinity
IL-2 receptor CD25 than currently marketed anti-PD-1 antibodies in ex
vivo human cell based assays. Lead antibodies from both anti-PD-1
classes, 244C8 and 388D4, have been humanized for preclinical testing in
preparation for Phase 1 clinical studies. Here we describe the in vivo
efficacy testing of these two antibodies in a human PDX tumorgraft model
derived from a core needle biopsy of a patient with metastatic non-small
cell lung carcinoma (LG1306). Direct testing of the anti-human PD-1
antibodies was made possible by the use of immune-humanized NSG mice.
Pembrolizumab, a currently marketed anti-PD-1 antibody, served as
control, along with vehicle alone. Treatment with each of the humanized
lead PD-1 antibodies, 388D4 and 244C8, was well tolerated at 5 mg/kg and
led to significant tumor growth inhibition over a 28-day study period.
Both showed equivalent efficacy to pembrolizumab with tumor growth
inhibition (%TGI) at 40% and 38% respectively compared to 37% for
pembrolizumab. All three treatment agents showed significant tumor growth
inhibition relative to vehicle, with Student T-test p values < 0.003 at
end of study assessment. These results show that, contrary to
expectation, competition for binding to PD-L1 ligand by an anti-PD-1
antibody is not a pre-requisite for functional efficacy in vivo, as we
observed with 244C8. In addition to the in vivo efficacy studies, we will
report on post-treatment analyses of all treatment cohorts by
immunohistochemistry and RNAseq of the tumor samples, immunoprofiling
analysis of tumor infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) from all treatment
cohorts, as well as donor-specific differences that influence response to
treatment.

