Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antitumor activities of CD161, a structurally novel and orally
bioavailable BET inhibitor, in leukemia and triple negative breast cancer
cells in vitro and in vivo


Bromodomain and extraterminal (BET) proteins, such as
bromodomain-containing protein 2 (BRD2), BRD3 and BRD4, bind lysine
acetylated proteins and regulate gene transcription. Several BET
inhibitors are currently under clinical development for hematological
malignancies and solid tumors. We have recently developed a novel class
of BET inhibitor, CD161, which binds the bromodomain 1 (BD1) and BD2
domains of BRD2, BRD3, BRD4 and BRDT with Ki less than 10 nM. Co-crystal
structure of CD161 and BRD4 BD2 at 2.5 resolution confirmed that the
docked CD161 occupies the acetyl-lysine binding pocket of BD2. CD161 has
>1000-fold selectivity over other bromodomain containing proteins
including CREBBP, ATAD2B, TRIM24 and ASH1L. In human leukemia cell lines
MV4-11 and MOLM-13, CD161 strongly inhibits cell growth and induces
apoptosis, with IC50s Bromodomain and extraterminal (BET) proteins, such
as bromodomain-containing protein 2 (BRD2), BRD3 and BRD4, bind lysine
acetylated proteins and regulate gene transcription. Several BET
inhibitors are currently under clinical development for hematological
malignancies and solid tumors. We have recently developed a novel class
of BET inhibitor, CD161, which binds the bromodomain 1 (BD1) and BD2
domains of BRD2, BRD3, BRD4 and BRDT with Ki less than 10 nM. Co-crystal
structure of CD161 and BRD4 BD2 at 2.5 resolution confirmed that the
docked CD161 occupies the acetyl-lysine binding pocket of BD2. CD161 has
>1000-fold selectivity over other bromodomain containing proteins
including CREBBP, ATAD2B, TRIM24 and ASH1L. In human leukemia cell lines
MV4-11 and MOLM-13, CD161 strongly inhibits cell growth and induces
apoptosis, with IC50s <100 nM. Furthermore, CD161 exerts potent
growth-inhibitory activities in a panel of breast cancer cell lines
representative of triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC), with IC50s in the
sub micromolar range. At 20-50 mg/kg daily oral dosing for 2 weeks, CD161
significantly inhibited the growth of MV4-11 and MDA-MB-231 tumors (TGI:
55-80%) in mouse xenograft models and had no significant effect on body
weights. Pharmacokinetics studies show that CD161 has a T1/2 of 2-3 hours
and oral bioavailability (F%) of 93% in male SpragueDawley rats.
Transcriptional profiling revealed that CD161 causes broad
transcriptional changes in TNBC cell lines. Our preliminary results
suggest the therapeutic potential of CD161 in human leukemia and TNBC.

