Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of STAT3 with the generation 2.5 antisense
oligonucleotide, AZD9150 increases the chemosensitivity and decreases
tumor-initiating potential of neuroblastoma cells


Neuroblastoma (NB) is the most common extra-cranial solid tumor in
childhood. The long-term, event-free survival of high-risk NB remains 50%
despite intensive multi-modality treatments. Activated JAK/STAT3 pathway
plays an important role in many human cancers. In NB patients, cytokines
activating STAT3 have been associated with poor patient outcome and have
been implicated in the survival of a rare population of NB tumor
initiating cells. Thus targeting STAT3 may be a promising therapeutic
strategy for high-risk NB. To evaluate the biologic consequences of
genetic targeting of STAT3, we assessed the effects of inhibition of
STAT3 in NB cell lines containing a tetracycline (Tet)-inducible STAT3
expression plasmid. Additionally we evaluated pharmacogenomic inhibition
of STAT3 using AZD9150, a generation 2.5, 16-nucleotide, antisense
oligonucleotide (ASO) that is now in Phase I/II clinical trials. Studies
were conducted in 3 representative NB cell line models (AS (MYCN-WT) and
NGP and IMR32 (MYCN-Amplified)). Both the Tet-inducible STAT3 shRNA and
AZD9150 reduced endogenous STAT3 mRNA and protein levels causing
decreased transcription and expression of STAT3 target genes, such as
CyclinD1, D3, and MYC/MYCN. In functional in vitro studies Tet-inducible
STAT3 shRNA and AZD9150 decreased NB cell migration and clonogenicity in
soft agar. In vivo, STAT3 inhibition by Tet-inducible STAT3 shRNA or
AZD9150 alone had little effect on the growth of established tumors nor
did it alter the survival of tumor-bearing mice, despite decreases in
STAT3, P-STAT3 and target gene expression in xenografts from
AZD9150-treated mice compared to those from ASO-treated mice. To assess
whether inhibition of STAT3 altered the tumor initiating potential of NB
cells, NB tumor xenograft cells from ASO or AZD9150 treated mice were
re-implanted and secondary tumor growth assessed. At 200,000 and 20,000
ASO-treated NB cells, 100% of mice had tumors while only 40 and 20%,
respectively of AZD9150-treated mice had tumors. These results indicate
that the inhibition of STAT3 decreased the frequency of tumor initiating
cells in the NB xenograft from AZD9150 treated mice. Since tumor
initiating or stem-like cells are frequently more resistant to cytotoxic
agents, we next evaluated a combination therapy with cisplatin. We found
that in vitro either genetic shSTAT3 or AZD9150 mediated pharmacogenomic
inhibition of STAT3 significantly increased the sensitivity of NB cells
to cisplatin. Furthermore, in established NB tumors xenografts, the
combination of STAT3 inhibition with cisplatin caused a 30% decrease in
tumor size (P = 0.0092) and increased the survival of AZD9150 treated
tumor-bearing mice compared to ASO-treated mice (P = 0.026). Our study
supports the development of strategies targeting STAT3 in combination
with conventional chemotherapy for patients with high-risk NB.

