Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Change in serum microRNA expression during neoadjuvant
chemoradiation for rectal cancer


IntroductionMicroRNAs (miRNA) expression may change with treatment and
influence responses in locally advanced rectal cancer (LARC) making them
potentially useful predictive and prognostic biomarkers. We investigated
112 miRNAs in serum during chemoradiation for LARC.MethodsTwenty-one
patients with LARC treated with neoadjuvant chemoradiation were
prospectively recruited for the study. Serum was collected at three
time-points: 1) at diagnosis (baseline), 2) at three weeks into treatment
and 3) at completion of chemoradiation (pre-surgery). Serum was also
collected from 10 healthy controls. RNA extraction was performed using
the Norgen total RNA purification kit. Reverse transcription and
pre-amplification were performed as per the Taqman OpenArray MicroRNA
Panels manufacturer's instructions. miRNA array qPCR was performed on 112
miRNA targets using the QuantStudio 12K platform. Differentially
expressed miRNAs were identified using the delta-delta-Ct method, using
the endogenous U6 snRNA as the control. Analysis was performed in R,
using paired t-statistics, and the Benjamini-Hochberg False Discovery
Rate for multiple hypothesis testing adjustment, with a threshold q
3-fold. These genes are known to target key rectal cancer genes such as
SMAD4, BCL2, MSH2 and TGFBR2. An additional three miRNAs changed
significantly between baseline and week 3: hsa-miR-135b*, hsa-miR-375 and
hsa-miR-629. All except hsa-miR-135b* became less abundant.ConclusionsTen
differentially expressed miRNAs appear downregulated during
chemoradiation in LARC. These miRNAs have been implicated in cell
proliferation, the epithelial-mesenchymal transition and radiation
resistance. Further work will be undertaken to understand the functional
implications of these changes.

