Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Loss of Pkhd1 promotes intestinal tumorigenesis in Apc mice


Objectives: PKHD1 (Polycystic Kidney and Hepatic Disease 1), a causal
gene for ARPKD (Autosomal Recessive Polycystic Kidney Disease), has been
proposed to play a role in the colorectal carcinogenesis. This study is
to explore the role of PKHD1 in colorectal carcinogenesis.Methods: Mouse
model with Pkhd1 mutation (Pkhd1-/-) was used to mate with ApcMin/+ mouse
in the same genetic background. The resulting ApcMin/+ mice with and
without Pkhd1-/- alleles were randomly sorted into two experimental
groups (i.e. Pkhd1-/-;ApcMin/+ n = 36; ApcMin/+ n = 23). Tumorigenic
susceptibility of Pkhd1-/-;ApcMin/+ and ApcMin/+ mice was compared. The
number, size, pathology of intestinal tumors in the mice were analyzed at
the age of 1-, 3-, and 6-month. The survival rates were investigated in
the two groups of mice.Results: There was no statistical difference in
tumor number and size between 1-month-old ApcMin/+ and Pkhd1-/-;ApcMin/+
mice. However, the number and size of the intestinal tumors in 3- and
6-month-old Pkhd1-/-;ApcMin/+ mice were significantly increased compared
with those of ApcMin/+ mice alone (P = 0.017,P = 0.022). In addition, the
pathology of tumors was also analyzed between the two groups. There was
no pathological difference between 1-month-old ApcMin/+ and
Pkhd1-/-;ApcMin/+ mice. However, at 3-month-old, Pkhd1-/-;ApcMin/+ mice
exhibited severer atypical hyperplasia in the intestinal tumor than those
of ApcMin/+ mice; while at 6-month-old, focal necrosis were often seen in
intestinal tumors of Pkhd1-/-;ApcMin/+ mice, but none from ApcMin/+ mice.
Strikingly, tumor infiltration into the muscular mucosa was also seen in
a 6-month-old Pkhd1-/-;ApcMin/+ mice. There was no statistically survival
difference between ApcMin/+ and Pkhd1-/-;ApcMin/+ mice.Conclution: Loss
of Pkhd1 promotes the intestinal tumorigenesis and induces tumor
malignant transformation in ApcMin/+ mice.

