Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of the CD44+/CD49f+/CD24- subpopulation in
basal-like DCIS cells


The molecular mechanisms responsible for Ductal Carcinoma In Situ
(DCIS)-Invasive Ductal Carcinoma (IDC) transition have yet to be
elucidated. Due to the lack of molecularly targeted therapies, basal-like
DCIS has a high risk of recurrence and progression to invasive and
metastatic cancers. In this study, using a human DCIS cell line model and
a novel single-cell clonogenic approach, we have identified and
characterized the aggressive clones derived from single cells with the
CD49f+/CD44+/CD24- surface markers. We found that aggressive clones had
enhanced self-renewal, migratory and invasive capacities. The aggressive
clones had elevated ALDH activity, lower global DNA methylation and
increased expression of stem cell related genes including OCT4 and SOX2.
Further mechanistic studies showed that linc-ROR and miR-10b were
overexpressed in aggressive clones and are key regulators of their
self-renewal and invasive abilities. Finally, we confirmed our in vitro
results in vivo, demonstrating that aggressive clones were capable of
forming tumors in nude mice, whereas non-aggressive clones were not. We
believe that characterization of aggressive clones within the
heterogeneous CD49f+/CD44+/CD24- DCIS population and having linc-ROR and
miR10b as additional markers to distinguish them from non-aggressive
clones would provide the basis to develop new chemoprevention agents.

