Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gene expression analysis of P-glycoprotein and LMWPTP in chronic
myeloid leukemia cells treated with metformin and imatinib mesylate


Chemotherapy is an effective treatment for many tumors; however, some
tumors begin to exhibit a wide range of resistance after a few cycles of
chemotherapy, which is known as phenotype of resistance to multiple drugs
(multidrug resistance - MDR). The MDR phenotype arises through various
mechanisms, but often is associated with an increased efflux of
hydrophobic cytotoxic drugs. Therefore, the search for more selective and
efficient antitumor compounds in the elimination of cancer cells boosts
the research in oncology area. Studies of genes and pathways that are
deregulated in tumors and that are essential to their growth may provide
new strategies that lead to the development of therapeutic agents that
target these pathways. Previous data from our research group have shown
potent toxic activity of metformin, an oral hypoglycemic used for more
than 30 years for the treatment of type II diabetes, on chronic myeloid
leukemia cells (CML), potentiating the effects of imatinib mesylate, the
standard chemotherapy used in the treatment of CML. CML cells treated
with these agents showed changes in expression of proteins associated
with the MDR phenotype. In this way, this project aimed to evaluate the
expression of ABCB1 (Pgp) e ACP1 (LMWPTP) by Polymerase Chain Reaction in
real time (qPCR) in LCM K562 cells and Lucena before and after treatment
with metformin and/or imatinib mesylate, seeking to verify the effects of
metformin, alone or in combination with Imatinib mesylate in the
expression of these genes in Lucena in K562 cells. We found statistically
significant differences in expression between treatments compared to
control and between K562 and Lucena cells. It is possible to conclude
that these genes may be associated with MDR phenotype.

