Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Plasma levels of cartilage oligomeric matrix protein (COMP), are
significantly increased in patients with colorectal cancer


Introduction: Cartilage Oligomeric Matrix Protein (COMP) is a member of
the thrombospondin family of extracellular calcium-binding proteins that
plays role in the assembly of extracellular matrix. COMP maintains the
structural integrity of cartilage through its interaction with a number
of extracellular matrix proteins. COMP has a unique binding site for
Vitamin D, indicating that it may also participate in storage and
delivery of cell-signaling molecules. An expression array analysis of
colorectal cancer samples vs normal tissue has noted overexpression of
COMP mRNA. This study was undertaken to assess preoperative blood levels
of COMP in the setting of colorectal cancer(CRC). Our hypothesis is that
plasma levels of COMP may be elevated due to tumor overexpression and
that this protein may have potential as a diagnostic marker for
colorectal cancer.Method: Patients (pts) undergoing elective colorectal
resection for CRC or benign colonic pathology (BCP) that had been
prospectively enrolled in an IRB approved tissue and data bank for whom
adequate PreOp plasma samples were available were studied. Demographic,
clinical, and pathologic data were collected. Plasma COMP levels were
determined via ELISA in duplicate and are reported as median +95%CI
(ng/ml). Tissue expression levels were determined in paired tumor and
normal tissue samples of a subpopulation of study pts by QRT-PCR .The
candidacy of COMP as a diagnostic marker for CRC was validated by the
receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve and by the area under the
ROC curve (AUC) results. The Wilcoxon/Kruskal-Wallis test was used for
statistical analysis, (significance pIntroduction: Cartilage Oligomeric
Matrix Protein (COMP) is a member of the thrombospondin family of
extracellular calcium-binding proteins that plays role in the assembly of
extracellular matrix. COMP maintains the structural integrity of
cartilage through its interaction with a number of extracellular matrix
proteins. COMP has a unique binding site for Vitamin D, indicating that
it may also participate in storage and delivery of cell-signaling
molecules. An expression array analysis of colorectal cancer samples vs
normal tissue has noted overexpression of COMP mRNA. This study was
undertaken to assess preoperative blood levels of COMP in the setting of
colorectal cancer(CRC). Our hypothesis is that plasma levels of COMP may
be elevated due to tumor overexpression and that this protein may have
potential as a diagnostic marker for colorectal cancer.Method: Patients
(pts) undergoing elective colorectal resection for CRC or benign colonic
pathology (BCP) that had been prospectively enrolled in an IRB approved
tissue and data bank for whom adequate PreOp plasma samples were
available were studied. Demographic, clinical, and pathologic data were
collected. Plasma COMP levels were determined via ELISA in duplicate and
are reported as median +95%CI (ng/ml). Tissue expression levels were
determined in paired tumor and normal tissue samples of a subpopulation
of study pts by QRT-PCR .The candidacy of COMP as a diagnostic marker for
CRC was validated by the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve
and by the area under the ROC curve (AUC) results. The
Wilcoxon/Kruskal-Wallis test was used for statistical analysis,
(significance p<0.05).Results: A total of 151 CRC (73%colon, 27%rectal)
and 73 BCP pats (Adenoma 21%, diverticulitis 57%, other 22%) were
studied. The male/female ratios were similar. The CRC stage distribution
was: Stage 1, 22%; Stage 2, 32%; Stage 3, 31%; and Stage 4, 15%. The
median plasma COMP levels were significantly higher in the CRC pts
(209.2,CI: 187.8,234) vs. the BCP pats(129.6,CI: 110.7,149.2; P =
Introduction: Cartilage Oligomeric Matrix Protein (COMP) is a member of
the thrombospondin family of extracellular calcium-binding proteins that
plays role in the assembly of extracellular matrix. COMP maintains the
structural integrity of cartilage through its interaction with a number
of extracellular matrix proteins. COMP has a unique binding site for
Vitamin D, indicating that it may also participate in storage and
delivery of cell-signaling molecules. An expression array analysis of
colorectal cancer samples vs normal tissue has noted overexpression of
COMP mRNA. This study was undertaken to assess preoperative blood levels
of COMP in the setting of colorectal cancer(CRC). Our hypothesis is that
plasma levels of COMP may be elevated due to tumor overexpression and
that this protein may have potential as a diagnostic marker for
colorectal cancer.Method: Patients (pts) undergoing elective colorectal
resection for CRC or benign colonic pathology (BCP) that had been
prospectively enrolled in an IRB approved tissue and data bank for whom
adequate PreOp plasma samples were available were studied. Demographic,
clinical, and pathologic data were collected. Plasma COMP levels were
determined via ELISA in duplicate and are reported as median +95%CI
(ng/ml). Tissue expression levels were determined in paired tumor and
normal tissue samples of a subpopulation of study pts by QRT-PCR .The
candidacy of COMP as a diagnostic marker for CRC was validated by the
receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve and by the area under the
ROC curve (AUC) results. The Wilcoxon/Kruskal-Wallis test was used for
statistical analysis, (significance p<0.05).Results: A total of 151 CRC
(73%colon, 27%rectal) and 73 BCP pats (Adenoma 21%, diverticulitis 57%,
other 22%) were studied. The male/female ratios were similar. The CRC
stage distribution was: Stage 1, 22%; Stage 2, 32%; Stage 3, 31%; and
Stage 4, 15%. The median plasma COMP levels were significantly higher in
the CRC pts (209.2,CI: 187.8,234) vs. the BCP pats(129.6,CI: 110.7,149.2;
P = < 0.0001). The plasma COMP levels were significantly higher in Stage
III pts. (p = 0.001) and in Stage II+III pats. (p = 0.03) compared to
Stage I pts. The AUC value for the ROC curve was 0.781 (sensitivity 53%,
specificity 93%). Increased expression of COMP was noted in 59% of the
CRC tissue samples tested (10/17) vs. paired normal tissue
samples.Conclusion: The CRC median plasma COMP level was 61% higher than
the median BCP result and the Stage 3 median level 50% higher than the
median Stage I level. In general, plasma COMP levels increased with
advancing cancer stage. The AUC results suggest COMP may have value as a
CRC prognostic marker, perhaps, in combination with other protein markers
to increase the sensitivity. Tissue expression analysis suggests that the
most likely source of the added COMP in the plasma is the tumor itself.
Further study with larger populations of control and CRC pts is warranted.

