Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Establishment of a multicellular 3D cell culture model for tumor -
endothelial cell interaction


Introduction: Due to the increasing understanding of the mechanisms
relevant to the genesis of cancer, we are experiencing a transition from
disease to target-oriented therapy. One major hurdle for the development
of these targeted therapeutic regimens, however, is the limited
availability of predictive in vitro models. The critical challenge is to
develop culture models better reflecting in vivo conditions. We present
data that highlights the differences of RNA expression of in vivo like 3D
microtissues consisting of tumour cells, fibroblasts and two different
endothelial cell lines compared to normal 2D cell culture
conditions.Methods: 96-well hanging drop microtiter plates (InSphero AG,
Zrich, Switzerland) were applied for the production of 3D mono-, co- and
tri-cultures including the human lung cancer cell lines A549 or Colo699
alone or in combination with a human lung fibroblast cell line (SV-80)
and either a human umbilical vein endothelial cell line (HUVEC) or the
primary human lung microvascular endothelial cell line (HMVEC-L).In
addition, to conventional histology (H&E), tumour endothelial spheroid
aggregation was displayed immunohistochemically (IHC) by protein
expression of e-cadherin, CD31, von Willebrand factor (vWF) and -muscle
actin (-SMA).RNA expression profiling by Affymetrix chip analysis was
performed for multicellular 3D microtissues and 2D cultured cell
lines.Results: Endothelial cells aggregated in coherent tube like
structures preferentially in the fibroblast consisting core of all
microtissues. Furthermore, endothelial cells expressed -SMA only in
microtissues that consisted both of fibroblasts and tumour cells
indicating an interaction between these two cell types.RNA expression
profiles revealed a high number of regulated genes in tri-cultures when
compared to microtissues only consisting of mono- or co-cultures or to
traditional 2D cultivated cells. Regulated genes played an important role
either in cell cycle, organelle fission, wound healing and DNA
packing.Interestingly, no difference in the RNA expression was displayed
in microtissues containing either immortalized or primary endothelial
cells,Finally, a relation of RNA expression between our cell culture
model and patient data was identified.Conclusion: We demonstrate that
cultivation of cells as multicellular microtissues in a 3D environment
led not only to a difference in RNA but also in protein expression due to
cell - cell interactions. Our data support the importance of performing
complex co-culture for investigating tumour stroma interactions.

