Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Short-term outcomes of abiraterone in community settings


Introduction: About 32% of men with high-risk prostate cancer have
comorbidities, conditions that may be under-represented in randomized
clinical trials (RCTs). Because men enrolled on RCTs are often excluded
if they have multiple comorbidities, these patients may be at higher risk
for serious toxicities from cancer therapies that the results of RCTs may
not reflect. This study was undertaken to test the hypothesis that 90-day
mortality rates in men undergoing treatment with abiraterone (a novel
agent for treating castration-resistant prostate cancer) in the community
settings is higher than that observed in the pivotal trial.Methods:
SEER-Medicare linked data with Medicare Drug Event File during the period
2006-2012 were used to identify patients who filled prescriptions for
abiraterone during the study period and these patients were followed
through 12/31/2013 for overall mortality. Ninety-day mortality after
abiraterone initiation among patients with Charlson score 0 was compared
to that in the pivotal abiraterone trial published in the New England
Journal of Medicine 2011.Results: We identified 1,106 patients who took
abiraterone during the study period. Among them, 484 (43.8%) were age 75
or older at the time of abiraterone initiation and 61 (5.5%) had
comorbidity score 2 or higher. Hospitalization rates among those who had
abiraterone were 0.09 per person month during the 6-month window before
the initiation of abiraterone and 0.12 per person month within 3 months
of drug initiation. The top five diagnoses for hospital admission after
drug initiation were general symptoms (ICD-9 780), malignant neoplasm of
prostate (ICD-9 185), respiratory abnormality (ICD-9 786), care involving
rehabilitation (ICD-9 V57), and urinary tract infection (ICD-9 599). The
90-day all-cause mortality after drug initiation was 14.5% (95% 12.4% -
16.5%) in the entire study cohort, 13.0% (95% CI 10.4% - 15.7%) among
those under age 75 and 16.3% (13.0% - 19.6%) among those 75 or older. The
90-day mortality was 15.5% (95% CI 12.2% - 18.8%), 12.8% (95% CI 6.2% -
19.3%), and 18.0% (95% CI 8.3% - 27.8%) among patients with comorbidity
score 0, 1, and 2+ respectively. The 90-day mortality among patients with
comorbidity 0 in the community settings is substantially higher than
those found in the pivotal trial abiraterone arm (risk ratio 2.03; 95% CI
1.48 - 2.78) and control arm (risk ratio 1.43; 1.01 - 2.03).Conclusion:
This first US national study shows that 90-day mortality after
abiraterone among relatively healthy patients in the community settings
is twice that observed in the pivotal trial abiraterone arm. Further
studies are needed to improve selection of eligible patients and
post-treatment monitoring.

