Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Killing cancer one cell at a time: Development and
characterization of a novel antibody drug conjugate


Thymidine Kinase 1 (TK1) is a protein that we have established to be
present on the surface of cancer cells and absent on the surface of
normal cells. Various methods have been used to confirm the presence of
TK1 using localization methods such as scanning electron microscopy gold
labeling, fluorescence imaging, and flow cytometry analysis. In this
project, we explored the potential of using the TK1 marker as a
therapeutic target by conjugating an anti-TK1 antibody to the toxin
saporin, a ribosome inhibiting protein derived from the seeds of
Saponaria officinalis. The toxin is widely used in the biological and
neurological fields due to its stability and adaptability. An additional
benefit to using this particular toxin is the inability of saporin to
transverse the cell membrane without an antibody or other agent mediating
internalization into the cell. We expressed a cysteine mutated form of
saporin in the BL21(DE3) E. coli strain. Saporin from the expressed
protein was subsequently isolated with a cation exchange cellulose column
before verification on a non-reducing SDS-PAGE gel. A single band was
observed at approximately 30 kD, indicating purity of the protein. After
thiolation of the amine groups in the anti-TK1 antibody, the cysteine
residues on the mutated saporin toxin was linked to the antibody through
the formation of disulfide bonds. Further purification of the conjugate
was achieved by eliminating unconjugated saporin and antibody, and high
molecular weight aggregates using a Sephacryl S-200 column. Over 90%
cancer cell death was observed in the Burkitt's Lymphoma Raji cell line
when exposed to conjugate concentrations of 10 nM. Complete cell death
was observed with exposure to 100 nM concentrations. In addition, there
was a significant difference between the saporin conjugated treated and
untreated samples (p Thymidine Kinase 1 (TK1) is a protein that we have
established to be present on the surface of cancer cells and absent on
the surface of normal cells. Various methods have been used to confirm
the presence of TK1 using localization methods such as scanning electron
microscopy gold labeling, fluorescence imaging, and flow cytometry
analysis. In this project, we explored the potential of using the TK1
marker as a therapeutic target by conjugating an anti-TK1 antibody to the
toxin saporin, a ribosome inhibiting protein derived from the seeds of
Saponaria officinalis. The toxin is widely used in the biological and
neurological fields due to its stability and adaptability. An additional
benefit to using this particular toxin is the inability of saporin to
transverse the cell membrane without an antibody or other agent mediating
internalization into the cell. We expressed a cysteine mutated form of
saporin in the BL21(DE3) E. coli strain. Saporin from the expressed
protein was subsequently isolated with a cation exchange cellulose column
before verification on a non-reducing SDS-PAGE gel. A single band was
observed at approximately 30 kD, indicating purity of the protein. After
thiolation of the amine groups in the anti-TK1 antibody, the cysteine
residues on the mutated saporin toxin was linked to the antibody through
the formation of disulfide bonds. Further purification of the conjugate
was achieved by eliminating unconjugated saporin and antibody, and high
molecular weight aggregates using a Sephacryl S-200 column. Over 90%
cancer cell death was observed in the Burkitt's Lymphoma Raji cell line
when exposed to conjugate concentrations of 10 nM. Complete cell death
was observed with exposure to 100 nM concentrations. In addition, there
was a significant difference between the saporin conjugated treated and
untreated samples (p < 0.001). Further tests are underway to determine
the effectiveness of the conjugate in other cancer cell lines. These
promising results suggest the use of saporin in an effective antibody
drug conjugate therapeutic that could influence the way we treat cancer:
a drug that will selectively target cancer cells.

