Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical combination strategies to enhance the efficacy of the
anti-PD-1 antibody pembrolizumab


Pembrolizumab (MK-3475), a humanized monoclonal IgG4 antibody against
programmed death receptor 1 (PD-1), has shown activity in multiple types
of cancer. Although pembrolizumab is showing a dramatic impact in
patients that respond, a large fraction of patients do not respond to
single agent therapy. Combination approaches may be the key to improving
response rates in these patients. One of the challenges is how best to
tailor combination strategies to provide maximal benefit to patients. How
we prioritize new combinations will require an understanding of which
mechanism is best for which tumor. To elucidate mechanisms that may
create an immunogeneic tumor microenvironment and enhance the antitumor
activity of PD-1 blockade, we have tested combination strategies with
muDX400, a murine anti-PD-1 antibody. The murine preclinical syngeneic
tumor models selected for these studies had varied tumor microenvironment
compositions and displayed a range of responses to therapy with single
agent anti-PD-1. Here we show enhanced anti-tumor activity when PD-1
blockade is combined with conventional chemotherapies, small molecule
therapies and additional immunotherapy approaches that target multiple
steps in the immune-oncology pathway. Pre and post treatment tumors from
these models were extensively characterized by gene expression profiling,
whole exome sequencing, flow cytometry and immunohistochemistry analysis.
Molecular and cellular correlates of response to anti-PD-1 as a single
agent and in combination with these agents were evaluated. These data
support potential combination strategies that could either increase
efficacy or expand the patient population in which pembrolizumab will
demonstrate benefit.

