Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pro-oncogenic role of desmosomal plaque-related proteins in
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)


Squamous cell carcinomas and adenocarcinomas are the most frequent forms
of lung carcinoma, and have different prognoses and therapeutic
approaches.During recent years, accumulating evidence has supported an
important role of several junctional proteins in carcinogenesis, tumor
invasion and metastasis. Contact between epithelial cells is mediated by
several types of cell-cell junction, which are composed by complex arrays
of transmembrane and plaque proteins and are connected typically to
cytoskeletal components.Desmosomes are cell-cell complexes found
primarily in epithelial tissues. In addition to the well-known structural
role of desmosome genes, evidences such as their dual subcellular
location, the interaction with single-stranded DNA and translation
initiation factors, etc. suggest there is a poorly understood role of
these proteins in signalling pathways.Desmosomal components have been
traditionally considered as tumoral suppressors although current
evidences suggest potential pro-oncogenic functions of desmosomal-plaque
proteins, probably due to an unknown regulatory role in intracellular
signaling -such as in Wnt and Akt pathways.Previously, our group showed
differentially expressed gene sequences corresponding to several
desmosomal plaque-related proteins as a function of tumor type, stage and
differentiation grade in NSCLC.The staining pattern of some junctional
proteins also differed between squamous-cell carcinomas and
adenocarcinomas. Expression of these proteins marked intercellular
junctions that are characteristic of the squamous stratum of stratified
flattened epithelium and of neoplasias with this type of differentiation.
We observed more intense staining of these proteins in
better-differentiated areas.In order to gain greater insight into the
specific function of some desmosomal components in NSCLC tumors, we have
performed several functional assays, as cell cycle and proliferation
among others, in selected SCC lung cancer cell lines. Furthermore, we are
developing stable cell lines with over-expression and knockdown of some
desmosomal proteins by lentiviral vectors and inducible clonal cell
lines; and also carrying out knockout cell lines using CRISPR-Cas9
system. Presumably, they will allow us to perform long-term functional
assays and expression arrays in order to identify subcellular location
and potential pro-oncogenic roles of desmosomal proteins in NSCLC
carcinogenesis which may lead to improvements in the treatment and
prevention of this disease.Our preliminary results indicate some
desmosomal proteins as potential targets for NSCLC diagnosis and
treatment.In a future perspective, xenografts will lead to understand the
molecular origins and progression of lung cancer in regard to structural
components of the desmosome.Corresponding authors: pedromedina@ugr.es,
efarez@ugr.es

