Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of the T-cell receptor (TCR) repertoire in
extensive disease small cell lung cancer (ED SCLC)


Background: The current study explores T-cell (TC) clonality and
molecular factors associated with this metric. Tumors employ multiple
mechanisms to evade antitumor immune responses. One process involves TC
inhibition via upregulation of immune checkpoint (IC) ligands in the
tumor microenvironment (TME). Gradual upregulation of inhibitory receptor
at their cellular surface results in a decreased capacity to proliferate
and activate cytotoxic pathways against tumor cells presenting antigenic
peptides.1 In melanoma, this subset of exhausted TCs has been described
as highly clonal, where the majority of PD-1-expressing TC population
shares the same TCR sequence specific against the same antigenic
fragment.2 Previous studies have demonstrated that a clonal TCR
repertoire appears to be associated in part with therapeutic responses
during IC blockade.3Methods: We performed TCR sequencing on 82 blood and
73 archival tumor tissue samples collected from ED SCLC patients (pts) in
an ongoing longitudinal cohort study in US community oncology practices.
Of these, 82 blood and 48 tissue samples had sufficient material
available to quantify a clonality metric. To quantify TC abundance as a
fraction of total nucleated cells, 82 blood and 58 tissue samples had
sufficient material available.Results: Within the subset of 48 tumor
samples, a more clonal (ie, less diverse) TCR repertoire was associated
with less necrosis (P0.012) and lower levels of inflammatory cell
infiltration in the local TME (P0.021). When pts were divided into 2
equal groups according to the median clonality level, pts with a less
clonal TCR repertoire (n = 24/48) who were treated with
non-immune-targeted therapy trended toward a longer overall survival (OS;
446 vs 301 days; P0.039). In contrast, the percentage of TCs in the TME
did not correlate with improved survival (P0.412), necrosis (P0.131), and
inflammation (P0.615). This observation differs from results in melanoma
describing the impact of IC blockade where pts responding to therapy were
associated with a more clonal TME TC population and increased CD8 TCs in
the tumor compartment and at the invasive margin.3 In blood, while a less
clonal TCR repertoire was associated with a similar but non-significant
trend toward longer survival (P0.148), pts with increased TC abundance
had longer OS (P0.025). No association was observed between clonality in
TME and clonality (P0.571) or TC abundance (P0.965) in blood.Conclusion:
We hypothesize that a diverse TCR repertoire in the TME and increased
peripheral TC abundance are 2 predictors of longer OS in ED SCLC. To
further explore factors that may influence TC responses in ED SCLC, the
current TCR sequencing results will be integrated with transcriptome and
whole genome sequencing analyses.References1. Wherry EJ. Nat Immunol.
2011;12:492-99.2. Gros A, et al. J Clin Invest. 2014;124:2246-59.3. Tumeh
PC, et al. Nature. 2014;515:568-71.

