Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Composite cyclin dependent kinase inhibition shows potent activity
against hepatocellular carcinoma


Background: Almost a decade after its approval, sorafenib remains the
only approved therapy for advanced hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Novel
treatment is warranted for advanced HCC. Previous preclinical studies
reported that inhibition of various cyclin dependent kinases (CDKs),
whether cell cycle dependent or independent, showed activity against HCC.
Dinaciclib is a potent inhibitor of CDK1, 2, 5, and 9 and has an
acceptable safety profile in humans. We thus examined the efficacy of
dinaciclib in HCC using preclinical models.Methods: In a panel of HCC
cell lines with high Rb expression (HuH7, PLC5, HepG2, SK-Hep1, SNU387,
SNU449, SNU426 and SNU475) and low Rb expression (Hep3B and HLE),
dinaciclib was examined for its effect on cell viability. The impacts of
dinaciclib on cell cycle distribution, apoptosis induction, and the
expressions of phospho- (p-) Rb (the target of CDK1 and 2), p-ATM (the
target of CDK5), c-myc, and p-RNA polymerase II (the target of CDK9) were
explored in selected cell lines including HuH7 and PLC5. The in vivo
efficacy of dinaciclib on HCC was tested in mouse xenografts of HuH7
cells implanted subcutaneously. Knockdown of various CDKs using RNA
interference was conducted to explore the mechanisms of
dinaciclib.Results: Dinaciclib showed potent anti-proliferative
activities in all the tested HCC cell lines. The IC50s to dinaciclib by
the MTT assay did not significantly differ between cell lines with high
Rb expression (8.5 to 20.1 nM) and cell lines with low Rb expression (9.4
to 15.6 nM). After 48 hours of dinaciclib treatment, HuH7 and PLC5 cells
showed G2/M arrest in a dose-dependent manner. Apoptosis assays including
sub-G1 fraction analysis, DNA fragmentation detection, and cleaved PARP-1
confirmed the occurrence of apoptosis in HuH7 and PLC5 cells treated with
dinaciclib. Dinaciclib at the concentration near the IC50 inhibited the
phosphorylation of Rb, RNA polymerase II, and ATM in HuH7 and PLC5 cells;
it also inhibited the expressions of multiple anti-apoptotic proteins
including Mcl-1, XIAP, and survivin. In xenograft studies with HuH7
cells, mice receiving dinaciclib had a significantly slower tumor growth
rate compared with mice receiving vehicles. The TUNEL assay showed that
tumors treated with dinaciclib exhibited higher apoptosis activity. Mice
tolerated the dinaciclib treatment well without significant body weight
change. Knockdown of CDK 1, 2, 5, and 9 using RNA interference showed
that CDK1 and CDK9 may contribute the most to the efficacy of
dinaciclib.Conclusions: Composite knockdown of CDK 1, 2, 5, and 9 with
dinaciclib showed potent activity against HCC. (This study was supported
by Ministry of Science and Technology, Taiwan
[MOST-103-2314-B-002-181-MY2, MOST-103-2314-B-002-090,
MOST-103-2314-B-002-092]).

