Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MiR-21 may serve as a predictive biomarker of response in the
assessment of efficacy of HSP-90 inhibition in gastrointestinal (GI)
cancers


Background and Aims: MicroRNAs mediate drug resistance and are often
deregulated in cancer with miR-21 upregulation being shared across
different gastrointestinal (GI) cancers. In this study we aim to identify
small drugs for which miR-21 may be considered a biomarker of
sensitivity.Methods: High throughput screening technologies (HST) was
applied in RKO colorectal cancer (CRC) cells engineered to knock out
miR-21 locus (miR-21KO) and parental isogenic wild type (WT) cells, as
well as 6 Biliary Tract Cancer (BTC) cell lines that were NGSed for a
panel of 64 genes. Library included 484 small molecules that were
screened at 3 doses against each cell line in triplicate. Transient
miR-21 inhibition was achieved by reverse transfection. Stable
doxycycline-activated miR-21 expressing clones of BTC and CRC cells were
generated with doxycycline-inducible TRIPZ lentiviral vectors.Results:
Twenty four drugs reduced cell viability compared to DMSO at a greater
extent in miR-21KO RKO in comparison to WT cells. Enrichment in HSP-90
inhibitors (including 17-DMAG, 17-AAG and AUY-922) was noticed,
suggesting that miR-21 may be involved in resistance to HSP-90
inhibition. HST in BTC cells showed enrichment of HSP-90 inhibitors
independently on mutational status. However IC50 to AUY-922 was
correlated to baseline miR-21 expression in BTC cells. Transient
inhibition of miR-21 enhanced sensitivity to AUY-922 in BTC cells.
AUY-922 IC50 was 35nM for WT and 17nM for miR-21KO RKO cells. Knock-out
of miR-21 in DLD-1 cells did not change sensitivity to AUY-922 in line
with the lower baseline levels of miR-21 in DLD-1 wild type cells.
However, the reduced levels of baseline miR-21 made them more sensitive
to AUY-922 than RKO. Doxycycline-activated overexpression of miR-21 in
miR-21KO DLD-1 cells conferred resistance to AUY-922. When co-cultured
with non-infected miR-21KO DLD-1 cells, miR-21 overexpressing miR-21KO
DLD-1 cells were able to drive cell growth in presence of AUY-922. To
similar extent CCLP with enforced expression of miR-21 were more
resistant compared to control cells; inactivation of the induction of
miR-21 overexpression recovered sensitivity to the drug. HSP Array blot
of AUY-922-treated cells with induced expression of miR-21 showed
reduction of the co-chaperone HSP-40 protein expression compared to
control cells.Conclusions: Our data suggest the development of studies
looking at the biomarker potential of miR-21 to guide treatment with
HSP-90 inhibitors in GI cancers, as well as pursuing the combination with
miR-21 inhibitors that may enhance the effect of the drug and avoid
toxicity by enabling dose reduction.

