Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prevalence of activated NOTCH receptor in solid tumors and chronic
lymphocytic leukemia


Recent reports identified high expression of Notch 1 receptor in various
tumors including adenoid cystic carcinomas (ACC). Notch 1 receptor is
activated by gamma secretase cleavage to exert transcriptional control of
processes including cellular differentiation and proliferation. Notch is
also known to be activated in approximately 60% of T-cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemias. We investigated the prevalence of Notch 1, 2 and
3 activation in different tumors by immunohistochemistry (IHC) designed
separately for Notch 1, 2 and 3. Our proprietary antibodies recognize the
post-gamma secretase cleavage activated Notch intracellular domain (NICD)
fragments of Notch 1, Notch 2 and Notch 3, allowing direct measurement of
activation of these receptors, in addition to their expression level by
the tumor cells.In total we tested 48 ACCs of the salivary glands, 19
breast cancer, 35 chronic lymphocytic leukemias (CLL), 7 glioblastomas,
and 35 non-small cell lung carcinomas (NSCLC) We found that at least 65%
(31 out of 48) of ACCs were positive for Notch 1 activation using our
assay. Of other tumor types, 4 out of 7 glioblastomas (57%), 14 out of 35
CLLs (40%), 7 out of 35 NSCLC (20%) and 2 out of 19 breast cancer cases
(11%) were positive for Notch 1. Within NSCLC, 5 of the 16 tested
squamous cell carcinomas were positive for Notch 1 activation (31%).
Notch 2 and Notch 3 showed only rare activation in these tumors. We
conclude that high levels of Notch 1 activation are identifiable in
different tumor types including high prevalence in ACC, CLL and glioma.
These tumors may benefit from therapeutic Notch pathway inhibition.

