Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Kras mediates amino acid metabolism during nutrient stress


Kras is a small GTPase that functions in the transmission of
extracellular mitogenic stimuli, and is one of the most frequently
mutated genes in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Previously, Kras has
been demonstrated to play a role in tumor metabolism in certain cell
types and cancers, but this has yet to be analyzed in the context of
NSCLC. We have analyzed how Kras changes metabolic gene expression by
expressing a doxycycline-inducible hairpin against Kras in 4 NSCLC cell
lines. One of the most regulated metabolism genes is asparagine
synthetase (Asns), which transfers the -amino group of glutamine to
aspartate, yielding glutamate and asparagine. We find elevated levels of
Asns in Kras mutant tumors, and that expression of Asns correlates with
poor patient outcome. Knockdown of Asns in the absence of exogenous
asparagine in the media results in inhibition of cell growth and
induction of apoptosis that is rescued by addition of asparagine.
Additionally, under conditions of low glutamine levels, knockdown of Asns
sensitizes cells to apoptosis, and overexpression of Asns is protective
under these conditions. We also find a role for the glutaminase-activity
of Asns in glutamine-mediated anapleurosis of the TCA cycle. These
observations suggest Asns may be an interesting therapeutic target for
NSCLC tumors with mutations in Kras.

