Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Benzyl isothiocyanate inhibits breast cancer-induced
osteoclastogenesis


Breast cancer is a major public health issue for women worldwide and 70%
of the disease preferentially metastasizes to bone resulting in its
destruction. Advanced breast cancer releases osteoclastogenic factors to
promote bone resorption. As bone metastasis with breast cancer is
associated with high mortality, osteoclastogenesis is a potential
therapeutic target. We have shown previously that benzyl isothiocyanate
(BITC), which is present in edible cruciferous vegetables, inhibits
breast cancer development in a transgenic mouse model. The present study
was designed to determine effect of BITC on breast cancer-induced
osteoclastogenesis. We employed well-established in vitro osteoclast
co-culture system of Raw 264.7 murine macrophage cells with human breast
cancer cells for this assessment. BITC treatment significantly inhibited
the number as well as size of osteoclasts in a dose dependent manner in
every co-culture experiment. In addition, BITC downregulated both mRNA
and protein levels of macrophage colony stimulating factor (MCSF) and
receptor activator of NF-B ligand (RANKL) which are key factors for
formation of osteoclasts. Moreover, receptor activator of NF-B ligand
(RANKL)-induced osteoclast differentiation as well as bone resorption was
suppressed in the presence of BITC. On the other hand, BITC induced
osteoprotegerin (OPG) acting as a decoy receptor of RANKL and negatively
regulated osteoclast formation. Quantitative PCR analysis revealed that
mRNA levels of osteoclastogenesis-related cytokines and proteins (IL-1,
IL-6, TNF-, GM-CSF, OPG, RUNX2) were repressed in BITC-treated breast
cancer cells. Taken together, BITC showed inhibitory activity on breast
cancer-mediated osteoclastogenesis. This study was supported by the grant
CA129347 awarded by the National Cancer Institute.

