Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Activation of the acid sphingomyelinase pathway as a potential
mechanism of chemotherapy-induced normal tissue vasculature damage


Background: Several classes of chemotherapy confer substantial risk for
late-term vascular morbidity. We aimed to investigate the mechanisms of
chemotherapy-induced vascular toxicity in normal tissues.Methods: The
effect of Doxorubicin and Cisplatin has been studied in-vitro using
bovine aortic endothelial cells (BAEC) as a model of normal tissue
vascular endothelium. Specifically, we investigated activation of the
acid sphingomyelinase (ASMase) pathway, which may lead to endothelial
dysfunction (vasoconstriction) and apoptosis following incubation with
different concentrations of Doxorubicin and Cisplatin. ASMase activity
was measured using radioenzymatic assay with [N-methyl-14C]
sphingomyelin. Cellular Reactive Oxygen Species (ROS) production was
assessed using the 2,7-dichlorofluorescin diacetate (DCFDA) detection
assay kit (Abcam). Endothelial apoptosis was quantified using the
3,5-bis-benzamide assay (Sigma-Aldrich). For the in-vivo studies, mouse
femoral arterial blood flow was measured in real-time during and after
Doxorubicin (8 mg/kg intravenously) or Cisplatin (8 mg/kg)
administration. Visualization of ovarian and femoral microvasculature was
obtained by fluorescence optical imaging system, equipped with a confocal
fiber microscope (Cell-viZio).Results: Incubation of BAEC with
Doxorubicin (0.25 M or 0.50 M) resulted in increased ASMase activity,
production of ROS and induction of apoptosis in a dose-dependent fashion.
Cisplatin (25 M or 50 M) generated significantly reduced effects in BAEC
yet apoptosis and ROS were notable. In-vivo endoscopic fibered confocal
microscopy following chemotherapy administration revealed a differential
pattern between the two agents. While post Doxorubicin injection, there
was a marked reduction in fluorescent signal in small vessels
(Background: Several classes of chemotherapy confer substantial risk for
late-term vascular morbidity. We aimed to investigate the mechanisms of
chemotherapy-induced vascular toxicity in normal tissues.Methods: The
effect of Doxorubicin and Cisplatin has been studied in-vitro using
bovine aortic endothelial cells (BAEC) as a model of normal tissue
vascular endothelium. Specifically, we investigated activation of the
acid sphingomyelinase (ASMase) pathway, which may lead to endothelial
dysfunction (vasoconstriction) and apoptosis following incubation with
different concentrations of Doxorubicin and Cisplatin. ASMase activity
was measured using radioenzymatic assay with [N-methyl-14C]
sphingomyelin. Cellular Reactive Oxygen Species (ROS) production was
assessed using the 2,7-dichlorofluorescin diacetate (DCFDA) detection
assay kit (Abcam). Endothelial apoptosis was quantified using the
3,5-bis-benzamide assay (Sigma-Aldrich). For the in-vivo studies, mouse
femoral arterial blood flow was measured in real-time during and after
Doxorubicin (8 mg/kg intravenously) or Cisplatin (8 mg/kg)
administration. Visualization of ovarian and femoral microvasculature was
obtained by fluorescence optical imaging system, equipped with a confocal
fiber microscope (Cell-viZio).Results: Incubation of BAEC with
Doxorubicin (0.25 M or 0.50 M) resulted in increased ASMase activity,
production of ROS and induction of apoptosis in a dose-dependent fashion.
Cisplatin (25 M or 50 M) generated significantly reduced effects in BAEC
yet apoptosis and ROS were notable. In-vivo endoscopic fibered confocal
microscopy following chemotherapy administration revealed a differential
pattern between the two agents. While post Doxorubicin injection, there
was a marked reduction in fluorescent signal in small vessels (<15 M)
indicating vessel constriction and disintegration of vessel's wall in
larger vessels, Cisplatin treatment resulted in very minor vascular
changes.Conclusions: These findings suggest that chemotherapy-induced
vascular damage in normal tissues may represent different modes of
toxicity in vivo and in vitro, while is mediated via activation of the
ASMase pathway in response to Doxorubicin and to a lesser extent in
response to Cisplatin.

