Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Breast cancer metabolism: Are ketone bodies energetic substrates


Cancer cell metabolism differs from non-transformed cells in that cancer
cells do not employ oxidative phosphorylation for ATP-production from
glucose even in the presence of adequate oxygen concentrations. This
conjecture increases the cancer cell's reliance on glucose, potentially
reducing the cancer cell's ability to utilize non-glucose substrates. The
main alternative to glucose are high-energy breakdown products of hepatic
lipid metabolism, collectively termed ketone bodies. Non-transformed
cells are able to metabolize ketone bodies to form ATP, but the role of
ketone bodies metabolism in human breast cancer cells is unclear, since
it relies on metabolic functions downstream of glucose metabolism. Here
we aimed to determine if human breast cancer cells will utilize ketone
bodies (beta-hydroxybuterate) as energy substrate in the absence of
glucose.Cell proliferation of MDA-MB-231 and MCF-7 human breast cancer
cells was measured after 48 h or 72 h of treatment using an MTT-Assay.
Treatment conditions were various glucose concentrations (4.5 g/l to 0
g/l) and 25 nM beta-hydroxybuterate (BHB) for all cells after overnight
serum starvation.After 48 h, cell proliferation decreased to 47% (pCancer
cell metabolism differs from non-transformed cells in that cancer cells
do not employ oxidative phosphorylation for ATP-production from glucose
even in the presence of adequate oxygen concentrations. This conjecture
increases the cancer cell's reliance on glucose, potentially reducing the
cancer cell's ability to utilize non-glucose substrates. The main
alternative to glucose are high-energy breakdown products of hepatic
lipid metabolism, collectively termed ketone bodies. Non-transformed
cells are able to metabolize ketone bodies to form ATP, but the role of
ketone bodies metabolism in human breast cancer cells is unclear, since
it relies on metabolic functions downstream of glucose metabolism. Here
we aimed to determine if human breast cancer cells will utilize ketone
bodies (beta-hydroxybuterate) as energy substrate in the absence of
glucose.Cell proliferation of MDA-MB-231 and MCF-7 human breast cancer
cells was measured after 48 h or 72 h of treatment using an MTT-Assay.
Treatment conditions were various glucose concentrations (4.5 g/l to 0
g/l) and 25 nM beta-hydroxybuterate (BHB) for all cells after overnight
serum starvation.After 48 h, cell proliferation decreased to 47%
(p<0.001) in no glucose medium compared to proliferation observed for
cells in 4.5 g/l glucose for MDA-MB-231 cells. Cell proliferation at
glucose concentrations as low as 0.125 g/l did not change cell
proliferation in these cells. After 48 h, cell proliferation of MCF-7
cells decreased to 24% (pCancer cell metabolism differs from
non-transformed cells in that cancer cells do not employ oxidative
phosphorylation for ATP-production from glucose even in the presence of
adequate oxygen concentrations. This conjecture increases the cancer
cell's reliance on glucose, potentially reducing the cancer cell's
ability to utilize non-glucose substrates. The main alternative to
glucose are high-energy breakdown products of hepatic lipid metabolism,
collectively termed ketone bodies. Non-transformed cells are able to
metabolize ketone bodies to form ATP, but the role of ketone bodies
metabolism in human breast cancer cells is unclear, since it relies on
metabolic functions downstream of glucose metabolism. Here we aimed to
determine if human breast cancer cells will utilize ketone bodies
(beta-hydroxybuterate) as energy substrate in the absence of glucose.Cell
proliferation of MDA-MB-231 and MCF-7 human breast cancer cells was
measured after 48 h or 72 h of treatment using an MTT-Assay. Treatment
conditions were various glucose concentrations (4.5 g/l to 0 g/l) and 25
nM beta-hydroxybuterate (BHB) for all cells after overnight serum
starvation.After 48 h, cell proliferation decreased to 47% (p<0.001) in
no glucose medium compared to proliferation observed for cells in 4.5 g/l
glucose for MDA-MB-231 cells. Cell proliferation at glucose
concentrations as low as 0.125 g/l did not change cell proliferation in
these cells. After 48 h, cell proliferation of MCF-7 cells decreased to
24% (p<0.001) for cells treated with 0 g/l glucose, to 83% (p = 0.0078)
for cells treated with 0.125 g/l glucose and to 87% (p = 0.0108) for
cells treated with 0.25 g/l glucose.After 72 h, cell proliferation
decreased to 30.5% (pCancer cell metabolism differs from non-transformed
cells in that cancer cells do not employ oxidative phosphorylation for
ATP-production from glucose even in the presence of adequate oxygen
concentrations. This conjecture increases the cancer cell's reliance on
glucose, potentially reducing the cancer cell's ability to utilize
non-glucose substrates. The main alternative to glucose are high-energy
breakdown products of hepatic lipid metabolism, collectively termed
ketone bodies. Non-transformed cells are able to metabolize ketone bodies
to form ATP, but the role of ketone bodies metabolism in human breast
cancer cells is unclear, since it relies on metabolic functions
downstream of glucose metabolism. Here we aimed to determine if human
breast cancer cells will utilize ketone bodies (beta-hydroxybuterate) as
energy substrate in the absence of glucose.Cell proliferation of
MDA-MB-231 and MCF-7 human breast cancer cells was measured after 48 h or
72 h of treatment using an MTT-Assay. Treatment conditions were various
glucose concentrations (4.5 g/l to 0 g/l) and 25 nM beta-hydroxybuterate
(BHB) for all cells after overnight serum starvation.After 48 h, cell
proliferation decreased to 47% (p<0.001) in no glucose medium compared to
proliferation observed for cells in 4.5 g/l glucose for MDA-MB-231 cells.
Cell proliferation at glucose concentrations as low as 0.125 g/l did not
change cell proliferation in these cells. After 48 h, cell proliferation
of MCF-7 cells decreased to 24% (p<0.001) for cells treated with 0 g/l
glucose, to 83% (p = 0.0078) for cells treated with 0.125 g/l glucose and
to 87% (p = 0.0108) for cells treated with 0.25 g/l glucose.After 72 h,
cell proliferation decreased to 30.5% (p<0.001) after treatment with no
glucose compared to proliferation observed for cells in 4.5 g/l glucose
for MDA-MB-231 cells. Cell proliferation at glucose concentrations as low
as 0.125 g/l did not significantly change cell proliferation in these
cells. After 72 h, cell proliferation of MCF-7 cells decreased to 22%
(pCancer cell metabolism differs from non-transformed cells in that
cancer cells do not employ oxidative phosphorylation for ATP-production
from glucose even in the presence of adequate oxygen concentrations. This
conjecture increases the cancer cell's reliance on glucose, potentially
reducing the cancer cell's ability to utilize non-glucose substrates. The
main alternative to glucose are high-energy breakdown products of hepatic
lipid metabolism, collectively termed ketone bodies. Non-transformed
cells are able to metabolize ketone bodies to form ATP, but the role of
ketone bodies metabolism in human breast cancer cells is unclear, since
it relies on metabolic functions downstream of glucose metabolism. Here
we aimed to determine if human breast cancer cells will utilize ketone
bodies (beta-hydroxybuterate) as energy substrate in the absence of
glucose.Cell proliferation of MDA-MB-231 and MCF-7 human breast cancer
cells was measured after 48 h or 72 h of treatment using an MTT-Assay.
Treatment conditions were various glucose concentrations (4.5 g/l to 0
g/l) and 25 nM beta-hydroxybuterate (BHB) for all cells after overnight
serum starvation.After 48 h, cell proliferation decreased to 47%
(p<0.001) in no glucose medium compared to proliferation observed for
cells in 4.5 g/l glucose for MDA-MB-231 cells. Cell proliferation at
glucose concentrations as low as 0.125 g/l did not change cell
proliferation in these cells. After 48 h, cell proliferation of MCF-7
cells decreased to 24% (p<0.001) for cells treated with 0 g/l glucose, to
83% (p = 0.0078) for cells treated with 0.125 g/l glucose and to 87% (p =
0.0108) for cells treated with 0.25 g/l glucose.After 72 h, cell
proliferation decreased to 30.5% (p<0.001) after treatment with no
glucose compared to proliferation observed for cells in 4.5 g/l glucose
for MDA-MB-231 cells. Cell proliferation at glucose concentrations as low
as 0.125 g/l did not significantly change cell proliferation in these
cells. After 72 h, cell proliferation of MCF-7 cells decreased to 22%
(p<0.001) for cells treated with 0 g/l glucose and to 74% (p = 0.0288)
for cells treated with 0.125 g/l glucose compared to proliferation
observed for cells in 4.5 g/l glucose. All conditions and time points had
been supplemented with 25 nM BHB.These preliminary results indicate that
human breast cancer cells are not able to use ketone bodies as energy
substrates in the absence of glucose. An additional finding was also that
more aggressive, triple-negative breast cancer cells are able to survive
with very low glucose conditions. Pending further investigation, this may
provide a rationale for dietary carbohydrate restriction as neoadjuvant
therapy for breast cancer patients, but may necessitate further glucose
restrictions than what can be achieved through diet alone.

