Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Leptin induces a fibroblast and endothelial cell crosstalk in
tumor stroma


Background: The tissue microenvironment plays a major role in tumor
development and recurrence. It is known that leptin secreted by cancer
and adipose cells can modify the tumor stroma, which is composed of
immune, fibroblast, and endothelial cells (EC). Leptin affects both
normal and cancer associated fibroblasts. We have previously shown that
leptin can modify EC directly via an increase of angiogenic features;
which was linked to VEGFR signaling and Notch expression independent of
VEGF. It is hypothesized that leptin induces a communication between
fibroblast and endothelial cells via induction of Notch signaling, which
may be related to exosome production.Methods: Non-expressing Ob-R
fibroblasts, and fibroblasts transfected with Ob-R plasmid, were used to
investigate leptin's actions on Notch activation. Fibroblasts were
challenged with leptin (0.6, 1.2, 6.2 nM) and an inhibitor of Notch
signaling activation (DAPT). Fibroblast culture supernatants were added
to and human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC) cultures. Notch
proteins and RNA expression and molecular markers of activated
fibroblasts and derived exosomes were determined via Western blot,
RT-PCR, and multiplex analyses, respectively. EC angiogenic features were
also determined.Results: Our findings suggest that leptin induces
fibroblast activation, which triggers the expression of Notch and the
development of angiogenic features by EC.Conclusions: A novel mechanism
is proposed by which leptin promotes tumor stroma development via Notch
activation and a crosstalk between fibroblasts and EC. Cancer therapies
targeting leptin signaling could be a new strategy for interfering with
cellular processes that promotes changes of tumor stroma towards a more
aggressive tumor environment.

