Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Structure-activity relationships and mechanistic analysis of
analogues of the clinical-stage anti-cancer small molecule ONC201


TRAIL is an endogenous protein that initiates apoptosis selectively in
cancer without toxic side effects, prompting interest in therapeutic
modulation. We previously screened for small molecules that could
upregulate the endogenous TRAIL gene to trigger apoptosis and restore
anti-tumor immunity within tumor cells in a p53-independent manner. We
showed that ONC201 (previously referred to as TIC10) is a dual
inactivator of Akt and ERK, leading to nuclear translocation of Foxo3a
and TRAIL gene activation (Allen et al., Science Translational Medicine,
2013). We recently found that ONC201 causes an early-stage upregulation
of the integrated stress response through ATF4/CHOP/DR5 (Kline et al.,
Science Signaling, in press) and can inhibit cancer stem cell
self-renewal (Prabhu et al., Cancer Research, 2015). ONC201 recently
completed its first-in-man phase I clinical trial and several other
trials in select advanced cancers are ongoing (NCT02250781, NCT02324621,
NCT02420795, NCT02392572, NCT02609230, NCT02525692, NCT02038699).
Leveraging the unique pharmacophore of ONC201, we synthesized ONC201
analogues in search for compounds with distinct therapeutic properties.
After establishing the importance of the pyrido[3,4-e]pyrimidinone core
structure of ONC201 in its anti-tumor activity (Wagner et al.,
Oncotarget, 2014), we performed detailed structure activity relationship
(SAR) studies. We evaluated several ONC201 analogues with differing
N-substituents around the core structure. Certain ONC201 analogues
exhibit more rapid kinetics of activity and lowered IC50 values in some
human cancer cell lines in vitro. Interim results of ONC212 sensitivity
profiling in >100 genetically annotated cell lines from the Genomic of
Drug Sensitivity in Cancer collection have corroborated this improvement
in potency. One analogue, ONC212, has demonstrated compelling efficacy
against several tumor types in vivo with no evidence of toxicity at
therapeutic doses. Furthermore, in vitro mechanism studies have
demonstrated overlap between ONC201- and ONC212-mediated signaling in
tumor cells that includes activation of the integrated stress response.
With a wide safety margin, distinct pharmacokinetics (PK), and robust
potency, ONC212 is being developed as the next drug candidate from the
new class of compounds defined by the novel pharmacophore of ONC201 in
indications that complement the parent compound's use spectrum.

