Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Small molecule T-reg inhibitors for cancer immunotherapy


Immune evasion is a hallmark feature of tumors as they employ various
strategies to suppress the immune system's ability to recognize and
destroy cancer cells. T cell checkpoint inhibitors such as anti-PD1 and
anti-CTLA-4 antibodies spearhead the immune response against a variety of
tumors. Numerous studies suggest that the complex immunosuppressive
milieux require the development of additional therapeutic agents to
potentiate active drugs and thereby broaden the utility and increase the
therapeutic indices of revolutionary immune-oncology treatment
modalities. The presence of immunosuppressive regulatory T cells (Tregs)
in tumors, keeping tumoricidal Teffector cells in check, signals poor
prognosis. Thus, depletion of Tregs or impairment of Treg function is an
attractive therapeutic approach for cancer. USP7, a deubiquitylase enzyme
implicated as a critical node in several cancer signaling pathways, has
recently emerged as an essential factor in maintaining Treg functions.
Progenra identified small molecule USP7 inhibitors and employed them to
show that Treg specific inhibition of USP7 results in impairment of Treg
function leading to immune activation, commensurate with the ablation of
Foxp3, a transcription factor that is a target of USP7 and is essential
to Treg activation. This USP7 inhibitor class was subsequently lead
optimized, and selected USP7 inhibitors were evaluated in ADME/PK studies
and shown to impair Treg functions and to exhibit powerful anti-tumor
activity against syngeneic lung tumor models in immunocompetent mice. In
addition, Progenra's USP7 inhibitors significantly augmented the
antitumor activity of anti-PD1 antibody, CAR T cell therapy, and cancer
vaccines. These studies provide a strong rationale for the use of USP7
inhibitors in combination therapy protocols to improve the efficacy of
currently approved cancer immunotherapy agents.

