Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Validated structural variant detection with prioritisation of
known cancer related changes


Reliable detection of structural variation (SV) is playing an
increasingly important role in cancer diagnostics and treatments. We
introduce a best practice integrative workflow for detecting large
structural variations (SVs) such as deletions, duplications, inversions,
fusions and translocations from standard DNA re-sequencing techniques,
annotating and prioritising for clinically actionable events.While
established RNA-Seq fusion workflows exist to detect and filter fusion
events in tumors detecting large structural changes from exome- and WGS
data remains challenging. Current DNA-based SV callers predict a large
percentage of false positive events, and the resulting event lists are
not prioritised for validation. To streamline follow-up studies we
automate running multiple structural variant callers (Manta, WHAM, Lumpy,
MetaSV), identifying potentially disruptive large scale events. We
evaluate the integrated workflow sensitivity and specificity against the
ICGC-TCGA DREAM Mutation Calling Challenge data set, optimise filtering
criteria based on quality and supporting information, and annotate the
filtered calls using known cancer related alterations from CIViC and
publicly available gene lists from AstraZeneca. This enables us to
prioritise known and potentially interesting events over intergenic
events or non-whole exon deletions.We show validation results from test
data and clinically actionable inversions, duplications and fusion events
from cancer cell lines. Our approach is based on a two tier approach of
first focusing on known events that yield fusion transcripts such as the
TACC3-FGFR3 tandem duplication and ALK-EML4 inversion, and secondarily on
events in oncogenes and tumor suppressors of interest. While whole genome
sequencing is the preferred approach to detecting these events, we also
show how by design or by the nature of the breakpoint being close enough
to exons, hybrid capture data can also be surprisingly useful for SV
inference.

