Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combinational therapy with specific immunization plus checkpoint
inhibition results in enhanced tumor regression and survival benefit


Effective immunotherapeutic treatment of various cancers may require
combinational approaches to induce specific immunity to the tumor as well
as inhibition of immune check-points. We have developed a viral gene
delivery platform to immunize against numerous tumor associated antigens
(TAA) such as carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), HER2/neu and HPV 16. We
investigated the therapeutic benefit of the immunotherapeutics alone and
in combination with check-point inhibitors such as programmed
death-ligand 1 (PD-1) blockade and LAG3 blockade in murine tumor models.
As single agents, immunization with the viral delivery platform encoding
the TAA induced target-specific cell-mediated immunity and anti-tumor
responses in the respective model. When the immunotherapies were combined
with immune checkpoint blockade, an increased level of anti-tumor
activity against was observed in addition to an improvement in survival.
Tumor microenvironment analysis immunized mice revealed an increase in
CD8+ tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs). In addition, we observed
induction of suppressive mechanisms such as programmed death-ligand 1
(PD-L1) expression on tumor cells and an increase in PD-1+ TILs. When
immunotherapy was combined with anti-PD-1 antibody, we observed CD8+ TILs
at the same increased level but found that a smaller fraction of these
were PD-1+. Furthermore, we observed a reduction in PD-L1 expression on
tumor cells, providing a mechanism by which combination therapy favors
tumor clearance and a rationale for pairing antigen-specific vaccines
with checkpoint inhibitors in future clinical trials.

