Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Microenvironment-on-chip: Development of a microfluidics-based
tumor ecosystem


Despite its limited clinical predictive capacity, conventional cell
culture remains the most frequently used preclinical model in biomedical
research. For many years, microfluidics-based organ-on-chips have been
proposed to overcome conventional cell culture limitations but given
their inability to provide reliable and reproducible data, their usage
remains anecdotal.Immune, stromal and cancer cells constitute a complex
adaptive system in each tumor microenvironment. To study the causes and
consequences of tumor heterogeneity in these complex adaptive systems, we
have developed a platform to model and investigate tumor
microenvironments at primary and metastatic sites in which multiple
nuclear-labelled cell types can be grown in a multi-welled, communicating
habitat with controlled gradients for temperature, pH, nutrients, and
oxygen tension. In conjunction with labelled-nuclei,
genetically-engineered cell lines with fluorescence-based biosensors can
be generated to detect specific genetic expression changes in response to
cell to cell interactions as well as varying environmental conditions
over time.One of the major caveats for microfluidics prototypes is
reproducibility. The proposed design is easily adaptable to most of the
commercially available incubation microscopy systems, allowing the
experiments to be replicated by independent groups in an effort to
provide reliable and reproducible data.The ability to establish dynamic
gradients within individual habitats longitudinally over time and space
provides the capacity to study the effect of chemokines and drugs on the
tumor ecosystem in order to discover key interactions between host cells
and cancer cells and to develop improved therapeutic strategies.In
contrast to previous organ-on-chip models, our technology is not limited
to a mere observational platform for automated cell counting and tracking
but also provides flexibility for downstream capacities such as
immunofluorescence, in situ hybridization or single-cell sequencing, as
well as retrieval of single cells or specific subpopulations based on the
fluorescent reporters and labelled nuclei.The presented engineered
microenvironment allows continued in vitro quantitative studies of the
interactions of multiple cell types as well as varying environmental
conditions. Here we propose a cancer-on-chip platform that is able to
recapitulate key components and interactions to mimic different tumor
microenvironments in a comprehensive manner, yet simple enough to provide
reliable and reproducible data.

