Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Key tumor growth controlling long non-coding RNA (lncRNA)
expression alterations in the colorectal adenoma-carcinoma sequence


Background: Long non-coding RNAs may play role in colorectal cancer (CRC)
development, however, lncRNA expression profile in the colorectal
adenoma-carcinoma sequence (C-ACS) and its relation to the complex
epigenetic regulation system still remain incomplete.Aims: We aimed the
whole genomic lncRNA expression profiling with up- and downstream
epigenetic analyses of the C-ACS in order to explore the underlying
mechanisms and consequences of aberrantly expressed
lncRNAs.Materials&methods: lncRNA expression levels were analyzed on 60
colonic biopsy samples (20 CRCs, 20 adenomas, 20 normals) by Human
Transcriptome Array (HTA) 2.0 (Affymetrix). Data analysis was perfomed
using Expression Console and Transcriptome Analysis Console. Expression
of certain candidates was verified in silico on HGU133 Plus 2.0 array
data and also by qRT-PCR. DNA methylation status of lncRNA promoter
regions was studied by methyl-capture sequencing. miRNA targets of
lncRNAs were predicted with miRCODE algorithm and miRNA expression was
analysed using GeneChip miRNA 3.0 Array. In the respective regulatory
networks mRNA expression changes were also evaluated on the basis of the
above-mentioned whole genome expression arrays.Results: According to HTA
results analyzing 40.914 non-coding transcripts on whole genome level, in
adenomas 12 lncRNAs (e.g. CCAT1, LINC00278) were significantly
upregulated and 6 lncRNAs (e.g.FLJ22763, RP11.747D18.1) were
downregulated compared to the healthy controls, while in CRC samples 1
lncRNA (UCA1) was overexpressed and 8 lncRNAs (e.g. LINC00350, LINC00261)
were underexpressed compared to adenomas (pBackground: Long non-coding
RNAs may play role in colorectal cancer (CRC) development, however,
lncRNA expression profile in the colorectal adenoma-carcinoma sequence
(C-ACS) and its relation to the complex epigenetic regulation system
still remain incomplete.Aims: We aimed the whole genomic lncRNA
expression profiling with up- and downstream epigenetic analyses of the
C-ACS in order to explore the underlying mechanisms and consequences of
aberrantly expressed lncRNAs.Materials&methods: lncRNA expression levels
were analyzed on 60 colonic biopsy samples (20 CRCs, 20 adenomas, 20
normals) by Human Transcriptome Array (HTA) 2.0 (Affymetrix). Data
analysis was perfomed using Expression Console and Transcriptome Analysis
Console. Expression of certain candidates was verified in silico on
HGU133 Plus 2.0 array data and also by qRT-PCR. DNA methylation status of
lncRNA promoter regions was studied by methyl-capture sequencing. miRNA
targets of lncRNAs were predicted with miRCODE algorithm and miRNA
expression was analysed using GeneChip miRNA 3.0 Array. In the respective
regulatory networks mRNA expression changes were also evaluated on the
basis of the above-mentioned whole genome expression arrays.Results:
According to HTA results analyzing 40.914 non-coding transcripts on whole
genome level, in adenomas 12 lncRNAs (e.g. CCAT1, LINC00278) were
significantly upregulated and 6 lncRNAs (e.g.FLJ22763, RP11.747D18.1)
were downregulated compared to the healthy controls, while in CRC samples
1 lncRNA (UCA1) was overexpressed and 8 lncRNAs (e.g. LINC00350,
LINC00261) were underexpressed compared to adenomas (p<0.05; -2Fold
change2). In CRC samples 8 lncRNAs (e.g. MACC1, AC123023.1) were
upregulated and 11 lncRNAs (e.g. RP13-497K6.1) were downregulated
compared to normal controls. Furthermore, 42% of lncRNAs upregulated in
CRC samples showed significantly elevated expression (pBackground: Long
non-coding RNAs may play role in colorectal cancer (CRC) development,
however, lncRNA expression profile in the colorectal adenoma-carcinoma
sequence (C-ACS) and its relation to the complex epigenetic regulation
system still remain incomplete.Aims: We aimed the whole genomic lncRNA
expression profiling with up- and downstream epigenetic analyses of the
C-ACS in order to explore the underlying mechanisms and consequences of
aberrantly expressed lncRNAs.Materials&methods: lncRNA expression levels
were analyzed on 60 colonic biopsy samples (20 CRCs, 20 adenomas, 20
normals) by Human Transcriptome Array (HTA) 2.0 (Affymetrix). Data
analysis was perfomed using Expression Console and Transcriptome Analysis
Console. Expression of certain candidates was verified in silico on
HGU133 Plus 2.0 array data and also by qRT-PCR. DNA methylation status of
lncRNA promoter regions was studied by methyl-capture sequencing. miRNA
targets of lncRNAs were predicted with miRCODE algorithm and miRNA
expression was analysed using GeneChip miRNA 3.0 Array. In the respective
regulatory networks mRNA expression changes were also evaluated on the
basis of the above-mentioned whole genome expression arrays.Results:
According to HTA results analyzing 40.914 non-coding transcripts on whole
genome level, in adenomas 12 lncRNAs (e.g. CCAT1, LINC00278) were
significantly upregulated and 6 lncRNAs (e.g.FLJ22763, RP11.747D18.1)
were downregulated compared to the healthy controls, while in CRC samples
1 lncRNA (UCA1) was overexpressed and 8 lncRNAs (e.g. LINC00350,
LINC00261) were underexpressed compared to adenomas (p<0.05; -2Fold
change2). In CRC samples 8 lncRNAs (e.g. MACC1, AC123023.1) were
upregulated and 11 lncRNAs (e.g. RP13-497K6.1) were downregulated
compared to normal controls. Furthermore, 42% of lncRNAs upregulated in
CRC samples showed significantly elevated expression (p<0.05) already in
adenoma samples (e.g. LINC350, CCAT1 were upregulated and LINC01133,
FLJ22763 were downregulated compared to healthy controls). Promoter DNA
methylation showed inverse relation with lncRNA expression along the
C-ACS (e.g. CCAT1). In line with aberrant lncRNA expression in tumors,
miRNA and mRNA targets expression showed systematic alterations, e.g.
UCA1 upregulation in CRC samples in parallel with miR-1 downregulation
accompanied by MET proto-oncogene target mRNA overexpression
(pBackground: Long non-coding RNAs may play role in colorectal cancer
(CRC) development, however, lncRNA expression profile in the colorectal
adenoma-carcinoma sequence (C-ACS) and its relation to the complex
epigenetic regulation system still remain incomplete.Aims: We aimed the
whole genomic lncRNA expression profiling with up- and downstream
epigenetic analyses of the C-ACS in order to explore the underlying
mechanisms and consequences of aberrantly expressed
lncRNAs.Materials&methods: lncRNA expression levels were analyzed on 60
colonic biopsy samples (20 CRCs, 20 adenomas, 20 normals) by Human
Transcriptome Array (HTA) 2.0 (Affymetrix). Data analysis was perfomed
using Expression Console and Transcriptome Analysis Console. Expression
of certain candidates was verified in silico on HGU133 Plus 2.0 array
data and also by qRT-PCR. DNA methylation status of lncRNA promoter
regions was studied by methyl-capture sequencing. miRNA targets of
lncRNAs were predicted with miRCODE algorithm and miRNA expression was
analysed using GeneChip miRNA 3.0 Array. In the respective regulatory
networks mRNA expression changes were also evaluated on the basis of the
above-mentioned whole genome expression arrays.Results: According to HTA
results analyzing 40.914 non-coding transcripts on whole genome level, in
adenomas 12 lncRNAs (e.g. CCAT1, LINC00278) were significantly
upregulated and 6 lncRNAs (e.g.FLJ22763, RP11.747D18.1) were
downregulated compared to the healthy controls, while in CRC samples 1
lncRNA (UCA1) was overexpressed and 8 lncRNAs (e.g. LINC00350, LINC00261)
were underexpressed compared to adenomas (p<0.05; -2Fold change2). In CRC
samples 8 lncRNAs (e.g. MACC1, AC123023.1) were upregulated and 11
lncRNAs (e.g. RP13-497K6.1) were downregulated compared to normal
controls. Furthermore, 42% of lncRNAs upregulated in CRC samples showed
significantly elevated expression (p<0.05) already in adenoma samples
(e.g. LINC350, CCAT1 were upregulated and LINC01133, FLJ22763 were
downregulated compared to healthy controls). Promoter DNA methylation
showed inverse relation with lncRNA expression along the C-ACS (e.g.
CCAT1). In line with aberrant lncRNA expression in tumors, miRNA and mRNA
targets expression showed systematic alterations, e.g. UCA1 upregulation
in CRC samples in parallel with miR-1 downregulation accompanied by MET
proto-oncogene target mRNA overexpression (p<0.05).Conclusion: The
defined lncRNA sets (including MACC1, CCAT1, UCA1) have a central
regulatory role in colorectal adenoma development and in tumor cell
growth pathways. The underlying DNA methylation changes and miRNA and
mRNA target expression alterations were proven using whole genomic array
technologies. The identified lncRNA candidate sets can be further
investigated as early diagnostic biomarkers and as potential therapeutic
molecular targets for CRC.

