Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analytic validation and clinical qualification of a novel
immunohistochemical assay for AR-V7 protein expression in metastatic
prostate cancer


BACKGROUND:The androgen-receptor splice variant 7 (AR-V7) has been
implicated in the development of castration resistant prostate cancer
(CRPC) and resistance to current therapies including enzalutamide and
abiraterone. AR-V7 mRNA expression in circulating tumour cells of
patients with CRPC correlated with treatment resistance. However, the
importance of AR-V7 has been questioned in light of low AR-V7 mRNA levels
relative to the full-length androgen receptor in CRPC and it is
critically important to develop validated assays that confirm AR-V7
protein levels and its clinical importance in patients with
CRPC.METHODS:Following validation of a monoclonal antibody,
immunohistochemical analysis of nuclear AR-V7 (alongside a nuclear AR
N-terminal domain antibody; AR-NTD) was performed in a patient cohort
identified with matched therapy-naive hormone-sensitive primary prostate
cancer (HSPC) and CRPC. We determined the levels of nuclear AR-V7 as
patients progressed from HSPC to CRPC. We also determined if AR-V7
expression levels associated with overall survival from time of CRPC
biopsy.RESULTS:In our patient cohort (n = 39), nuclear AR-V7 (p =
BACKGROUND:The androgen-receptor splice variant 7 (AR-V7) has been
implicated in the development of castration resistant prostate cancer
(CRPC) and resistance to current therapies including enzalutamide and
abiraterone. AR-V7 mRNA expression in circulating tumour cells of
patients with CRPC correlated with treatment resistance. However, the
importance of AR-V7 has been questioned in light of low AR-V7 mRNA levels
relative to the full-length androgen receptor in CRPC and it is
critically important to develop validated assays that confirm AR-V7
protein levels and its clinical importance in patients with
CRPC.METHODS:Following validation of a monoclonal antibody,
immunohistochemical analysis of nuclear AR-V7 (alongside a nuclear AR
N-terminal domain antibody; AR-NTD) was performed in a patient cohort
identified with matched therapy-naive hormone-sensitive primary prostate
cancer (HSPC) and CRPC. We determined the levels of nuclear AR-V7 as
patients progressed from HSPC to CRPC. We also determined if AR-V7
expression levels associated with overall survival from time of CRPC
biopsy.RESULTS:In our patient cohort (n = 39), nuclear AR-V7 (p =
<0.0001) and nuclear AR-NTD (p = 0.0006) increased significantly as
patients progressed from HSPC to CRPC. Lower nuclear AR-V7 expression was
associated with improved overall survival from time of CRPC biopsy in
patient groups divided by the 25th (18.7 vs 9.6 months; HR 0.36 [95% CI
0.17-0.62]; p = 0.002), 50th (13.0 vs 9.8 months; HR 0.60 [95% CI
0.29-1.07]; p = 0.09) or 75th (6.0 vs 11.5 months; HR 0.31 [95% CI
0.04-0.34]; p = 0.0004) percentile of AR-V7 expression. Similarly, a
lower nuclear AR-V7 to nuclear AR-NTD ratio was associated with improved
overall survival from time of CRPC biopsy in patient groups divided by
the 25th (17.8 vs 9.1 months; HR 0.42 [95% CI 0.22-0.78], p = 0.01), 50th
(14.0 vs 8.8 months; HR 0.43 [95% CI 0.17-0.69], p = 0.005) and 75th
(11.5 vs 7.3 months; HR 0.39 [95% CI 0.09-0.69], p = 0.009) percentile.
Nuclear AR-NTD did not associate with overall survival from CRPC
biopsy.CONCLUSION:We provide first evidence that expression of nuclear
AR-V7 protein not only increases with emerging treatment resistance in
CRPC but also is associated with overall survival from time of CRPC
biopsy. These data support AR-V7 protein being key to CRPC progression
and that agents targeting AR splice variants will be important to improve
patient outcome in CRPC.

