Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effects of metfornin on mammary carcinogenesis and metabolic
profiles in methylnitrosourea-treated rats on standard or Western diets


The methylnitrosourea-induced model of ER+ mammary cancer in female
Sprague-Dawley rats has been routinely used to screen for chemopreventive
agents. We recently reported that metformin was ineffective in reducing
cancer formation in rats on a standard (4% fat) diet (Thompson, et al.,
Cancer Prev Res. 8, 231, 2015). In the present studies, rats were placed
on a standard (Teklad) diet or on a Western diet (20% fat, low calcium)
at 43 days of age (DOA), and administered MNU at 50 DOA. Rats were
administered metformin or vehicle daily by gavage beginning at 57 days of
age. Serum from the rats of the various groups was obtained both at 21
days following initial administration of metformin (or vehicle) and at
the end of the study (when tumors had developed in most rats). We found
an increase in the final body weights, number of mammary cancers, and the
final weights of tumors in rats on western diet compared with standard
diet. Furthermore, metformin failed to decrease tumor multiplicity in
either diet, in fact, it increased final cancer weights (PThe
methylnitrosourea-induced model of ER+ mammary cancer in female
Sprague-Dawley rats has been routinely used to screen for chemopreventive
agents. We recently reported that metformin was ineffective in reducing
cancer formation in rats on a standard (4% fat) diet (Thompson, et al.,
Cancer Prev Res. 8, 231, 2015). In the present studies, rats were placed
on a standard (Teklad) diet or on a Western diet (20% fat, low calcium)
at 43 days of age (DOA), and administered MNU at 50 DOA. Rats were
administered metformin or vehicle daily by gavage beginning at 57 days of
age. Serum from the rats of the various groups was obtained both at 21
days following initial administration of metformin (or vehicle) and at
the end of the study (when tumors had developed in most rats). We found
an increase in the final body weights, number of mammary cancers, and the
final weights of tumors in rats on western diet compared with standard
diet. Furthermore, metformin failed to decrease tumor multiplicity in
either diet, in fact, it increased final cancer weights (P<.05). Serum
from rats in the various groups were examined for approximately 500
metabolites (Metabolon; Research Triangle Park, NC). The Metabolites
which were differentially expressed when comparing Western vs standard
diets at either time point included myoinositol, scyllo-inositol,
2-hydroxydecanoate, carnitine, tocopherol, and nicotinamide. Certain of
these were fatty acids and lipid soluble vitamins that one would expect
to be altered by diet. We also compared serum from animals on standard or
Western diets at the early or late time points to determine metabolites
associated with cancer development. Metabolites whose levels changed in
tumor bearing rats included 4-OH-butyrate, acetyl-carnitine, uranate, and
threonate. Finally, we compared the effects of metformin treatment in
rats on Western or standard diet and found that the metabolic changes
associated with metformin treatment were dependent on the diet employed.
Thus, metformin altered levels of arachidate and serotonin only in rats
on standard diet, while carnnitine and N-delta-acetylornithine were only
modulated in rats on Western diet. Again, the most striking result may be
that we still failed to observe any efficacy of metformin in animals on
standard or Western diet.

