Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A meta-analysis of MSI frequency and race in colorectal cancer


BACKGROUND: African Americans(AA) are at a higher risk of colorectal
cancer (CRC) and some studies report a higher frequency of microsatellite
instability (MSI) in their tumors while others report lower frequency
compared to Caucasians.AIM: To determine and evaluate the association of
race and clinical factors with MSI rate through meta- analysis.METHODS:
Twenty-two studies out of 15105 (1997-2015) were evaluated after a search
in different literature databases, using keywords colorectal cancer,
microsatellite instability. We used random effect meta-analysis to
calculate the MSI frequency in all studies as well as in African American
and Caucasian samples. Meta-regression analysis was used to assess the
univariate effect of race, gender, age, tumor location and stage on MSI
rate.RESULTS: The overall MSI frequency among CRCs was 17% (95%CI:
15%-19%, I2 = 91%). The MSI rate among racial groups were 12%, 12% and
14% in AAs, Hispanics and Caucasians respectively and was not
significantly different. Sub-group analysis of studies with racial
information indicates MSI OR (95% CI) of 0.78 (0.58-1.06) for AAs
compared to Caucasians.CONCLUSION: CRCs demonstrate an MSI frequency of
17%. MSI frequency differences between AAs and Caucasians were not
pronounced, suggesting other factors contribute to the racial disparity.
There is a large variation in MSI rate between different studies.
Methodology approaches and biological sources of this variation should be
investigated.

