Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Marine -3 polyunsaturated fatty acid intake and risk of colorectal
cancer according to tumor-infiltrating T cells


Importance: Marine -3 polyunsaturated fatty acids possess potent
immunomodulatory activity and may protect against cancer development.
However, evidence relating marine -3 polyunsaturated fatty acids to
colorectal cancer risk remains inconclusive.Objective: To test the
hypothesis that marine -3 polyunsaturated fatty acid intake may be
associated with lower risk of colorectal cancer subsets characterized by
immune infiltrate.Design: Prospective cohort studySetting: Nurses Health
Study and Health Professionals Follow-up StudyParticipants: In the two
cohorts, 125,172 participants provided data about marine -3
polyunsaturated fatty acid intake every 4 years through a validated food
frequency questionnaire and followed up for incident colorectal cancer
over 24-26 years. We documented 614 colorectal cancer cases from which we
could assess T-cell infiltration in the tumor microenvironment.
Cause-specific Cox proportional hazards regression was used to estimate
hazard ratios and 95% confidence intervals for risks of colorectal cancer
subtypes.Exposure: Intake of marine -3 polyunsaturated fatty acidsMain
Outcome and Measures: Incidence of colorectal cancer according to
tumor-infiltrating T cellsResults: The inverse association of marine -3
polyunsaturated fatty acids with colorectal cancer risk differed
according to FOXP3+ T-cell infiltration (P for heterogeneity = 0.006).
Compared to intake of Importance: Marine -3 polyunsaturated fatty acids
possess potent immunomodulatory activity and may protect against cancer
development. However, evidence relating marine -3 polyunsaturated fatty
acids to colorectal cancer risk remains inconclusive.Objective: To test
the hypothesis that marine -3 polyunsaturated fatty acid intake may be
associated with lower risk of colorectal cancer subsets characterized by
immune infiltrate.Design: Prospective cohort studySetting: Nurses Health
Study and Health Professionals Follow-up StudyParticipants: In the two
cohorts, 125,172 participants provided data about marine -3
polyunsaturated fatty acid intake every 4 years through a validated food
frequency questionnaire and followed up for incident colorectal cancer
over 24-26 years. We documented 614 colorectal cancer cases from which we
could assess T-cell infiltration in the tumor microenvironment.
Cause-specific Cox proportional hazards regression was used to estimate
hazard ratios and 95% confidence intervals for risks of colorectal cancer
subtypes.Exposure: Intake of marine -3 polyunsaturated fatty acidsMain
Outcome and Measures: Incidence of colorectal cancer according to
tumor-infiltrating T cellsResults: The inverse association of marine -3
polyunsaturated fatty acids with colorectal cancer risk differed
according to FOXP3+ T-cell infiltration (P for heterogeneity = 0.006).
Compared to intake of <0.15 g/day of marine -3 PUFAs, intake of 0.35
g/day was associated with a multivariable hazard ratio of 0.57 (95%
confidence interval, 0.40 to 0.81) (P for trend Importance: Marine -3
polyunsaturated fatty acids possess potent immunomodulatory activity and
may protect against cancer development. However, evidence relating marine
-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids to colorectal cancer risk remains
inconclusive.Objective: To test the hypothesis that marine -3
polyunsaturated fatty acid intake may be associated with lower risk of
colorectal cancer subsets characterized by immune infiltrate.Design:
Prospective cohort studySetting: Nurses Health Study and Health
Professionals Follow-up StudyParticipants: In the two cohorts, 125,172
participants provided data about marine -3 polyunsaturated fatty acid
intake every 4 years through a validated food frequency questionnaire and
followed up for incident colorectal cancer over 24-26 years. We
documented 614 colorectal cancer cases from which we could assess T-cell
infiltration in the tumor microenvironment. Cause-specific Cox
proportional hazards regression was used to estimate hazard ratios and
95% confidence intervals for risks of colorectal cancer
subtypes.Exposure: Intake of marine -3 polyunsaturated fatty acidsMain
Outcome and Measures: Incidence of colorectal cancer according to
tumor-infiltrating T cellsResults: The inverse association of marine -3
polyunsaturated fatty acids with colorectal cancer risk differed
according to FOXP3+ T-cell infiltration (P for heterogeneity = 0.006).
Compared to intake of <0.15 g/day of marine -3 PUFAs, intake of 0.35
g/day was associated with a multivariable hazard ratio of 0.57 (95%
confidence interval, 0.40 to 0.81) (P for trend < 0.001) for FOXP3+
T-cell-high tumors. In contrast, the corresponding hazard ratio was 1.14
(95% confidence interval, 0.81 to 1.60) (P for trend = 0.77) for FOXP3+
T-cell-low tumors. No statistically significant differential association
was found according to tumor-infiltrating CD3+, CD8+, or CD45RO+ T cells
(P for heterogeneity 0.34). In functional assays, the suppressive
activity of regulatory T cells was approximately two-fold lower when
pre-incubated with marine -3 polyunsaturated fatty acids at 50, 100 and
200 M than without marine -3 polyunsaturated fatty acids (PImportance:
Marine -3 polyunsaturated fatty acids possess potent immunomodulatory
activity and may protect against cancer development. However, evidence
relating marine -3 polyunsaturated fatty acids to colorectal cancer risk
remains inconclusive.Objective: To test the hypothesis that marine -3
polyunsaturated fatty acid intake may be associated with lower risk of
colorectal cancer subsets characterized by immune infiltrate.Design:
Prospective cohort studySetting: Nurses Health Study and Health
Professionals Follow-up StudyParticipants: In the two cohorts, 125,172
participants provided data about marine -3 polyunsaturated fatty acid
intake every 4 years through a validated food frequency questionnaire and
followed up for incident colorectal cancer over 24-26 years. We
documented 614 colorectal cancer cases from which we could assess T-cell
infiltration in the tumor microenvironment. Cause-specific Cox
proportional hazards regression was used to estimate hazard ratios and
95% confidence intervals for risks of colorectal cancer
subtypes.Exposure: Intake of marine -3 polyunsaturated fatty acidsMain
Outcome and Measures: Incidence of colorectal cancer according to
tumor-infiltrating T cellsResults: The inverse association of marine -3
polyunsaturated fatty acids with colorectal cancer risk differed
according to FOXP3+ T-cell infiltration (P for heterogeneity = 0.006).
Compared to intake of <0.15 g/day of marine -3 PUFAs, intake of 0.35
g/day was associated with a multivariable hazard ratio of 0.57 (95%
confidence interval, 0.40 to 0.81) (P for trend < 0.001) for FOXP3+
T-cell-high tumors. In contrast, the corresponding hazard ratio was 1.14
(95% confidence interval, 0.81 to 1.60) (P for trend = 0.77) for FOXP3+
T-cell-low tumors. No statistically significant differential association
was found according to tumor-infiltrating CD3+, CD8+, or CD45RO+ T cells
(P for heterogeneity 0.34). In functional assays, the suppressive
activity of regulatory T cells was approximately two-fold lower when
pre-incubated with marine -3 polyunsaturated fatty acids at 50, 100 and
200 M than without marine -3 polyunsaturated fatty acids
(P<0.0001).Conclusion and Relevance: High marine -3 polyunsaturated fatty
acid intake was associated with lower risk of colorectal cancer with
high-level, but not low-level, FOXP3+ T-cell density, suggesting a
potential role of -3 polyunsaturated fatty acids in cancer
immunoprevention through modulation of regulatory T cells.

