Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting the Hippo pathway in NF-2 deficient papillary kidney
cancers


About 10% of papillary renal cell carcinomas (PRCC) bear mutations in NF2
or SAV1, two members of the Hippo pathway, which controls cell growth by
regulating the transcriptional activity of YES1-Associated Protein YAP1.
NF2 or SAV1 mutations lead to aberrant YAP1 activation resulting in cell
proliferation and anti-apoptotic signals. The src family kinase YES1 is a
known regulator of YAP1 transcriptional activity in the context of
-catenin-dependent tumors. Dasatinib and saracatinib are 2 src inhibitors
that have shown to also have potent inhibitory effects on YES1. We
hypothesized that inhibition of the Hippo pathway might provide a
valuable therapeutic approach for patients with PRCC tumors bearing NF2
mutation, and that inhibiting YES1 might inhibit YAP1 in PRCC. Our data
demonstrate that inhibition of the Hippo pathway is lethal to
NF2-deficient PRCC cell lines, and that inhibiting YES1 with dasatinib or
saracatinib effectively inhibits YAP1 and its downstream targets BIRC5
(survivin), CCND1 (cyclin D1) and CTGF (CTGF). Further, dasatinib proves
to have an anti-tumor effect in vivo and was cytotoxic in vivo and in
vitro, causing G0-G1 cell cycle arrest in NF2-deficient PRCC cell lines.
Thus, inhibiting YES1 and the subsequent transcriptional activity of YAP1
with dasatinib or saracatinib might be a viable therapeutic approach for
NF2-deficient PRCC tumors.

