Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of circulating monocyte infiltration in brain
metastasis


Brain metastases are a devastating condition with extremely poor
prognosis. To improve treatment outcomes for patients with brain
metastases, the role of the host's immune system in their development
needs to be better understood. The contribution of circulating monocytes,
in particular, to the progression of brain metastases is not well
understood. Histologically and molecularly, it is difficult to
differentiate between resident brain macrophages (microglia) and
infiltrating circulating monocytes from the systemic circulation.
However, advances in genetic engineering have allowed these populations
to be distinguished. We hypothesise that infiltration of circulating
monocytes into brain metastases increases over time, and correlates with
BBB breakdown and increased cell adhesion molecule (CAM) expression.In
this study, we have used the Lys-GFP-ki mouse strain in which bone marrow
derived monocytes express GFP, but CNS microglia do not. 500 EO771 cells
(mouse mammary carcinoma) were microinjected into the left striatum of
Lys-GFP-ki mice (n = 28) using stereotaxic guidance and a finely-drawn
glass microcapillary. Some animals underwent MRI at 7T on days 7 (n = 7),
14 (n = 4) or 21 (n = 7), and were perfusion-fixed immediately after
imaging. T1-weighted 3D data sets were acquired both pre- and post-
intravenous injection of 30L gadodiamide. The remaining animals were
perfusion-fixed on days 7 (n = 2), 14 (n = 5) or 21 (n = 3).
Immunofluorescent staining was performed on all brains and assessed the
expression of F4/80 (macrophage marker), as well as the adhesion
molecules VCAM-1, VLA-4, ICAM-1, LFA-1, E- and P-Selectin, PSGL-1, ALCAM
and CD34.The percentage of GFP-positive area (indicating recruitment of
systemic monocytes) within the tumour increased significantly from day 7
to 14 (p Brain metastases are a devastating condition with extremely poor
prognosis. To improve treatment outcomes for patients with brain
metastases, the role of the host's immune system in their development
needs to be better understood. The contribution of circulating monocytes,
in particular, to the progression of brain metastases is not well
understood. Histologically and molecularly, it is difficult to
differentiate between resident brain macrophages (microglia) and
infiltrating circulating monocytes from the systemic circulation.
However, advances in genetic engineering have allowed these populations
to be distinguished. We hypothesise that infiltration of circulating
monocytes into brain metastases increases over time, and correlates with
BBB breakdown and increased cell adhesion molecule (CAM) expression.In
this study, we have used the Lys-GFP-ki mouse strain in which bone marrow
derived monocytes express GFP, but CNS microglia do not. 500 EO771 cells
(mouse mammary carcinoma) were microinjected into the left striatum of
Lys-GFP-ki mice (n = 28) using stereotaxic guidance and a finely-drawn
glass microcapillary. Some animals underwent MRI at 7T on days 7 (n = 7),
14 (n = 4) or 21 (n = 7), and were perfusion-fixed immediately after
imaging. T1-weighted 3D data sets were acquired both pre- and post-
intravenous injection of 30L gadodiamide. The remaining animals were
perfusion-fixed on days 7 (n = 2), 14 (n = 5) or 21 (n = 3).
Immunofluorescent staining was performed on all brains and assessed the
expression of F4/80 (macrophage marker), as well as the adhesion
molecules VCAM-1, VLA-4, ICAM-1, LFA-1, E- and P-Selectin, PSGL-1, ALCAM
and CD34.The percentage of GFP-positive area (indicating recruitment of
systemic monocytes) within the tumour increased significantly from day 7
to 14 (p < 0.001) and maintained significance at day 21. In contrast,
blood vessel area and number, as determined from CD34 staining, only
increased significantly at day 21 (area: p Brain metastases are a
devastating condition with extremely poor prognosis. To improve treatment
outcomes for patients with brain metastases, the role of the host's
immune system in their development needs to be better understood. The
contribution of circulating monocytes, in particular, to the progression
of brain metastases is not well understood. Histologically and
molecularly, it is difficult to differentiate between resident brain
macrophages (microglia) and infiltrating circulating monocytes from the
systemic circulation. However, advances in genetic engineering have
allowed these populations to be distinguished. We hypothesise that
infiltration of circulating monocytes into brain metastases increases
over time, and correlates with BBB breakdown and increased cell adhesion
molecule (CAM) expression.In this study, we have used the Lys-GFP-ki
mouse strain in which bone marrow derived monocytes express GFP, but CNS
microglia do not. 500 EO771 cells (mouse mammary carcinoma) were
microinjected into the left striatum of Lys-GFP-ki mice (n = 28) using
stereotaxic guidance and a finely-drawn glass microcapillary. Some
animals underwent MRI at 7T on days 7 (n = 7), 14 (n = 4) or 21 (n = 7),
and were perfusion-fixed immediately after imaging. T1-weighted 3D data
sets were acquired both pre- and post- intravenous injection of 30L
gadodiamide. The remaining animals were perfusion-fixed on days 7 (n =
2), 14 (n = 5) or 21 (n = 3). Immunofluorescent staining was performed on
all brains and assessed the expression of F4/80 (macrophage marker), as
well as the adhesion molecules VCAM-1, VLA-4, ICAM-1, LFA-1, E- and
P-Selectin, PSGL-1, ALCAM and CD34.The percentage of GFP-positive area
(indicating recruitment of systemic monocytes) within the tumour
increased significantly from day 7 to 14 (p < 0.001) and maintained
significance at day 21. In contrast, blood vessel area and number, as
determined from CD34 staining, only increased significantly at day 21
(area: p < 0.05, number: p Brain metastases are a devastating condition
with extremely poor prognosis. To improve treatment outcomes for patients
with brain metastases, the role of the host's immune system in their
development needs to be better understood. The contribution of
circulating monocytes, in particular, to the progression of brain
metastases is not well understood. Histologically and molecularly, it is
difficult to differentiate between resident brain macrophages (microglia)
and infiltrating circulating monocytes from the systemic circulation.
However, advances in genetic engineering have allowed these populations
to be distinguished. We hypothesise that infiltration of circulating
monocytes into brain metastases increases over time, and correlates with
BBB breakdown and increased cell adhesion molecule (CAM) expression.In
this study, we have used the Lys-GFP-ki mouse strain in which bone marrow
derived monocytes express GFP, but CNS microglia do not. 500 EO771 cells
(mouse mammary carcinoma) were microinjected into the left striatum of
Lys-GFP-ki mice (n = 28) using stereotaxic guidance and a finely-drawn
glass microcapillary. Some animals underwent MRI at 7T on days 7 (n = 7),
14 (n = 4) or 21 (n = 7), and were perfusion-fixed immediately after
imaging. T1-weighted 3D data sets were acquired both pre- and post-
intravenous injection of 30L gadodiamide. The remaining animals were
perfusion-fixed on days 7 (n = 2), 14 (n = 5) or 21 (n = 3).
Immunofluorescent staining was performed on all brains and assessed the
expression of F4/80 (macrophage marker), as well as the adhesion
molecules VCAM-1, VLA-4, ICAM-1, LFA-1, E- and P-Selectin, PSGL-1, ALCAM
and CD34.The percentage of GFP-positive area (indicating recruitment of
systemic monocytes) within the tumour increased significantly from day 7
to 14 (p < 0.001) and maintained significance at day 21. In contrast,
blood vessel area and number, as determined from CD34 staining, only
increased significantly at day 21 (area: p < 0.05, number: p < 0.001).
With regards to MRI data, the area of signal enhancement post-gadodiamide
injection increased significantly over time and correlated with GFP
positive cell infiltration (p Brain metastases are a devastating
condition with extremely poor prognosis. To improve treatment outcomes
for patients with brain metastases, the role of the host's immune system
in their development needs to be better understood. The contribution of
circulating monocytes, in particular, to the progression of brain
metastases is not well understood. Histologically and molecularly, it is
difficult to differentiate between resident brain macrophages (microglia)
and infiltrating circulating monocytes from the systemic circulation.
However, advances in genetic engineering have allowed these populations
to be distinguished. We hypothesise that infiltration of circulating
monocytes into brain metastases increases over time, and correlates with
BBB breakdown and increased cell adhesion molecule (CAM) expression.In
this study, we have used the Lys-GFP-ki mouse strain in which bone marrow
derived monocytes express GFP, but CNS microglia do not. 500 EO771 cells
(mouse mammary carcinoma) were microinjected into the left striatum of
Lys-GFP-ki mice (n = 28) using stereotaxic guidance and a finely-drawn
glass microcapillary. Some animals underwent MRI at 7T on days 7 (n = 7),
14 (n = 4) or 21 (n = 7), and were perfusion-fixed immediately after
imaging. T1-weighted 3D data sets were acquired both pre- and post-
intravenous injection of 30L gadodiamide. The remaining animals were
perfusion-fixed on days 7 (n = 2), 14 (n = 5) or 21 (n = 3).
Immunofluorescent staining was performed on all brains and assessed the
expression of F4/80 (macrophage marker), as well as the adhesion
molecules VCAM-1, VLA-4, ICAM-1, LFA-1, E- and P-Selectin, PSGL-1, ALCAM
and CD34.The percentage of GFP-positive area (indicating recruitment of
systemic monocytes) within the tumour increased significantly from day 7
to 14 (p < 0.001) and maintained significance at day 21. In contrast,
blood vessel area and number, as determined from CD34 staining, only
increased significantly at day 21 (area: p < 0.05, number: p < 0.001).
With regards to MRI data, the area of signal enhancement post-gadodiamide
injection increased significantly over time and correlated with GFP
positive cell infiltration (p < 0.05; y = 0.5913x - 0.2513; r2 = 0.3706).
Additionally, the degree of co-localisation increased significantly over
time between GFP-positive macrophages and ICAM-1 (p Brain metastases are
a devastating condition with extremely poor prognosis. To improve
treatment outcomes for patients with brain metastases, the role of the
host's immune system in their development needs to be better understood.
The contribution of circulating monocytes, in particular, to the
progression of brain metastases is not well understood. Histologically
and molecularly, it is difficult to differentiate between resident brain
macrophages (microglia) and infiltrating circulating monocytes from the
systemic circulation. However, advances in genetic engineering have
allowed these populations to be distinguished. We hypothesise that
infiltration of circulating monocytes into brain metastases increases
over time, and correlates with BBB breakdown and increased cell adhesion
molecule (CAM) expression.In this study, we have used the Lys-GFP-ki
mouse strain in which bone marrow derived monocytes express GFP, but CNS
microglia do not. 500 EO771 cells (mouse mammary carcinoma) were
microinjected into the left striatum of Lys-GFP-ki mice (n = 28) using
stereotaxic guidance and a finely-drawn glass microcapillary. Some
animals underwent MRI at 7T on days 7 (n = 7), 14 (n = 4) or 21 (n = 7),
and were perfusion-fixed immediately after imaging. T1-weighted 3D data
sets were acquired both pre- and post- intravenous injection of 30L
gadodiamide. The remaining animals were perfusion-fixed on days 7 (n =
2), 14 (n = 5) or 21 (n = 3). Immunofluorescent staining was performed on
all brains and assessed the expression of F4/80 (macrophage marker), as
well as the adhesion molecules VCAM-1, VLA-4, ICAM-1, LFA-1, E- and
P-Selectin, PSGL-1, ALCAM and CD34.The percentage of GFP-positive area
(indicating recruitment of systemic monocytes) within the tumour
increased significantly from day 7 to 14 (p < 0.001) and maintained
significance at day 21. In contrast, blood vessel area and number, as
determined from CD34 staining, only increased significantly at day 21
(area: p < 0.05, number: p < 0.001). With regards to MRI data, the area
of signal enhancement post-gadodiamide injection increased significantly
over time and correlated with GFP positive cell infiltration (p < 0.05; y
= 0.5913x - 0.2513; r2 = 0.3706). Additionally, the degree of
co-localisation increased significantly over time between GFP-positive
macrophages and ICAM-1 (p < 0.05), ALCAM (p Brain metastases are a
devastating condition with extremely poor prognosis. To improve treatment
outcomes for patients with brain metastases, the role of the host's
immune system in their development needs to be better understood. The
contribution of circulating monocytes, in particular, to the progression
of brain metastases is not well understood. Histologically and
molecularly, it is difficult to differentiate between resident brain
macrophages (microglia) and infiltrating circulating monocytes from the
systemic circulation. However, advances in genetic engineering have
allowed these populations to be distinguished. We hypothesise that
infiltration of circulating monocytes into brain metastases increases
over time, and correlates with BBB breakdown and increased cell adhesion
molecule (CAM) expression.In this study, we have used the Lys-GFP-ki
mouse strain in which bone marrow derived monocytes express GFP, but CNS
microglia do not. 500 EO771 cells (mouse mammary carcinoma) were
microinjected into the left striatum of Lys-GFP-ki mice (n = 28) using
stereotaxic guidance and a finely-drawn glass microcapillary. Some
animals underwent MRI at 7T on days 7 (n = 7), 14 (n = 4) or 21 (n = 7),
and were perfusion-fixed immediately after imaging. T1-weighted 3D data
sets were acquired both pre- and post- intravenous injection of 30L
gadodiamide. The remaining animals were perfusion-fixed on days 7 (n =
2), 14 (n = 5) or 21 (n = 3). Immunofluorescent staining was performed on
all brains and assessed the expression of F4/80 (macrophage marker), as
well as the adhesion molecules VCAM-1, VLA-4, ICAM-1, LFA-1, E- and
P-Selectin, PSGL-1, ALCAM and CD34.The percentage of GFP-positive area
(indicating recruitment of systemic monocytes) within the tumour
increased significantly from day 7 to 14 (p < 0.001) and maintained
significance at day 21. In contrast, blood vessel area and number, as
determined from CD34 staining, only increased significantly at day 21
(area: p < 0.05, number: p < 0.001). With regards to MRI data, the area
of signal enhancement post-gadodiamide injection increased significantly
over time and correlated with GFP positive cell infiltration (p < 0.05; y
= 0.5913x - 0.2513; r2 = 0.3706). Additionally, the degree of
co-localisation increased significantly over time between GFP-positive
macrophages and ICAM-1 (p < 0.05), ALCAM (p < 0.05), E- and P-Selectin (p
Brain metastases are a devastating condition with extremely poor
prognosis. To improve treatment outcomes for patients with brain
metastases, the role of the host's immune system in their development
needs to be better understood. The contribution of circulating monocytes,
in particular, to the progression of brain metastases is not well
understood. Histologically and molecularly, it is difficult to
differentiate between resident brain macrophages (microglia) and
infiltrating circulating monocytes from the systemic circulation.
However, advances in genetic engineering have allowed these populations
to be distinguished. We hypothesise that infiltration of circulating
monocytes into brain metastases increases over time, and correlates with
BBB breakdown and increased cell adhesion molecule (CAM) expression.In
this study, we have used the Lys-GFP-ki mouse strain in which bone marrow
derived monocytes express GFP, but CNS microglia do not. 500 EO771 cells
(mouse mammary carcinoma) were microinjected into the left striatum of
Lys-GFP-ki mice (n = 28) using stereotaxic guidance and a finely-drawn
glass microcapillary. Some animals underwent MRI at 7T on days 7 (n = 7),
14 (n = 4) or 21 (n = 7), and were perfusion-fixed immediately after
imaging. T1-weighted 3D data sets were acquired both pre- and post-
intravenous injection of 30L gadodiamide. The remaining animals were
perfusion-fixed on days 7 (n = 2), 14 (n = 5) or 21 (n = 3).
Immunofluorescent staining was performed on all brains and assessed the
expression of F4/80 (macrophage marker), as well as the adhesion
molecules VCAM-1, VLA-4, ICAM-1, LFA-1, E- and P-Selectin, PSGL-1, ALCAM
and CD34.The percentage of GFP-positive area (indicating recruitment of
systemic monocytes) within the tumour increased significantly from day 7
to 14 (p < 0.001) and maintained significance at day 21. In contrast,
blood vessel area and number, as determined from CD34 staining, only
increased significantly at day 21 (area: p < 0.05, number: p < 0.001).
With regards to MRI data, the area of signal enhancement post-gadodiamide
injection increased significantly over time and correlated with GFP
positive cell infiltration (p < 0.05; y = 0.5913x - 0.2513; r2 = 0.3706).
Additionally, the degree of co-localisation increased significantly over
time between GFP-positive macrophages and ICAM-1 (p < 0.05), ALCAM (p <
0.05), E- and P-Selectin (p < 0.001, p Brain metastases are a devastating
condition with extremely poor prognosis. To improve treatment outcomes
for patients with brain metastases, the role of the host's immune system
in their development needs to be better understood. The contribution of
circulating monocytes, in particular, to the progression of brain
metastases is not well understood. Histologically and molecularly, it is
difficult to differentiate between resident brain macrophages (microglia)
and infiltrating circulating monocytes from the systemic circulation.
However, advances in genetic engineering have allowed these populations
to be distinguished. We hypothesise that infiltration of circulating
monocytes into brain metastases increases over time, and correlates with
BBB breakdown and increased cell adhesion molecule (CAM) expression.In
this study, we have used the Lys-GFP-ki mouse strain in which bone marrow
derived monocytes express GFP, but CNS microglia do not. 500 EO771 cells
(mouse mammary carcinoma) were microinjected into the left striatum of
Lys-GFP-ki mice (n = 28) using stereotaxic guidance and a finely-drawn
glass microcapillary. Some animals underwent MRI at 7T on days 7 (n = 7),
14 (n = 4) or 21 (n = 7), and were perfusion-fixed immediately after
imaging. T1-weighted 3D data sets were acquired both pre- and post-
intravenous injection of 30L gadodiamide. The remaining animals were
perfusion-fixed on days 7 (n = 2), 14 (n = 5) or 21 (n = 3).
Immunofluorescent staining was performed on all brains and assessed the
expression of F4/80 (macrophage marker), as well as the adhesion
molecules VCAM-1, VLA-4, ICAM-1, LFA-1, E- and P-Selectin, PSGL-1, ALCAM
and CD34.The percentage of GFP-positive area (indicating recruitment of
systemic monocytes) within the tumour increased significantly from day 7
to 14 (p < 0.001) and maintained significance at day 21. In contrast,
blood vessel area and number, as determined from CD34 staining, only
increased significantly at day 21 (area: p < 0.05, number: p < 0.001).
With regards to MRI data, the area of signal enhancement post-gadodiamide
injection increased significantly over time and correlated with GFP
positive cell infiltration (p < 0.05; y = 0.5913x - 0.2513; r2 = 0.3706).
Additionally, the degree of co-localisation increased significantly over
time between GFP-positive macrophages and ICAM-1 (p < 0.05), ALCAM (p <
0.05), E- and P-Selectin (p < 0.001, p < 0.05), whilst ALCAM expression
also increased significantly on CD34 positive vessels (p Brain metastases
are a devastating condition with extremely poor prognosis. To improve
treatment outcomes for patients with brain metastases, the role of the
host's immune system in their development needs to be better understood.
The contribution of circulating monocytes, in particular, to the
progression of brain metastases is not well understood. Histologically
and molecularly, it is difficult to differentiate between resident brain
macrophages (microglia) and infiltrating circulating monocytes from the
systemic circulation. However, advances in genetic engineering have
allowed these populations to be distinguished. We hypothesise that
infiltration of circulating monocytes into brain metastases increases
over time, and correlates with BBB breakdown and increased cell adhesion
molecule (CAM) expression.In this study, we have used the Lys-GFP-ki
mouse strain in which bone marrow derived monocytes express GFP, but CNS
microglia do not. 500 EO771 cells (mouse mammary carcinoma) were
microinjected into the left striatum of Lys-GFP-ki mice (n = 28) using
stereotaxic guidance and a finely-drawn glass microcapillary. Some
animals underwent MRI at 7T on days 7 (n = 7), 14 (n = 4) or 21 (n = 7),
and were perfusion-fixed immediately after imaging. T1-weighted 3D data
sets were acquired both pre- and post- intravenous injection of 30L
gadodiamide. The remaining animals were perfusion-fixed on days 7 (n =
2), 14 (n = 5) or 21 (n = 3). Immunofluorescent staining was performed on
all brains and assessed the expression of F4/80 (macrophage marker), as
well as the adhesion molecules VCAM-1, VLA-4, ICAM-1, LFA-1, E- and
P-Selectin, PSGL-1, ALCAM and CD34.The percentage of GFP-positive area
(indicating recruitment of systemic monocytes) within the tumour
increased significantly from day 7 to 14 (p < 0.001) and maintained
significance at day 21. In contrast, blood vessel area and number, as
determined from CD34 staining, only increased significantly at day 21
(area: p < 0.05, number: p < 0.001). With regards to MRI data, the area
of signal enhancement post-gadodiamide injection increased significantly
over time and correlated with GFP positive cell infiltration (p < 0.05; y
= 0.5913x - 0.2513; r2 = 0.3706). Additionally, the degree of
co-localisation increased significantly over time between GFP-positive
macrophages and ICAM-1 (p < 0.05), ALCAM (p < 0.05), E- and P-Selectin (p
< 0.001, p < 0.05), whilst ALCAM expression also increased significantly
on CD34 positive vessels (p < 0.05).In conclusion, it appears that tumour
progression in brain metastasis is associated with increasing
infiltration of circulating monocytes, which correlates with increasing
BBB breakdown. Interestingly, circulating monocyte infiltration appears
to occur prior to significant changes in vascular area and density.
Analysis of CAM expression, suggests that CAMs, and in particular ICAM-1,
may play a role in recruitment of circulating monocytes and in their
interactions with cancer cells.

