Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PEGylated recombinant hyaluronidase PH20 (PEGPH20) enhances
checkpoint inhibitor efficacy in syngeneic mouse models of cancer


Hyaluronan (HA), a major extracellular matrix component in many solid
tumors, has been proposed to contribute to tumor progression, and to play
a complex role in T lymphocyte biology. Its depletion by intravenous
PEGylated recombinant human hyaluronidase PH20 (PEGPH20) remodels the
tumor stroma, reduces intratumoral pressure, decompresses tumor blood
vessels, and facilitates tumor drug delivery. However, the impact of HA
removal on intra-tumoral immune responses and the efficacy of immune
checkpoint inhibitors is unknown. To evaluate checkpoint blockade
efficacy with PEGPH20, two mouse tumor cell lines, CT26 (colon) and MH194
(pancreatic, derived from spontaneous tumors in
KrasLSL-G12D/+Trp53LSL-R172H/+Cre mice) were transduced with hyaluronan
synthase-3 (HAS3) to generate syngeneic HA-high tumor models. For
anti-CTLA4 studies, parental CT26 and CT26/HAS3 cells were implanted
peritibially in Balb/C mice. While treatment with anti-mouse-CTLA4 alone
(clone 9D9) inhibited tumor growth in CT26 tumors (37%), PEGPH20 alone
did not significantly inhibit tumor growth or increase anti-CTLA4
efficacy. In contrast, tumor growth of CT26/HAS3 tumors was inhibited to
a greater extent by the combination of PEGPH20 and anti-CTLA4 (79%)
(PEGPH20 treatment 24h prior to anti-CTLA4 treatment), compared to
anti-CTLA4 alone (60%, p = 0.002) or PEGPH20 alone (43%, p = 0.0001).
Furthermore, gene expression of markers associated with immune
suppression, such as IL10 and FoxP3, was higher in CT26/HAS3 than in CT26
tumors; suggesting an association between HA content and immune
suppression. To evaluate the effect of PEGPH20 on tumor growth inhibition
by PD-1 blockade, MH194/HAS3 cells were implanted peritibially in C57BL/6
mice along with immortalized pancreatic stellate cells. Growth of
MH194/HAS3 tumors was significantly inhibited (33%, p = 0.049) by
anti-mouse-PD-L1 antibody (clone 10F.9G2), and the addition of PEGPH20
(24h prior to anti-PD-L1) to anti-PD-L1 further enhanced tumor growth
inhibition (79%, p Hyaluronan (HA), a major extracellular matrix
component in many solid tumors, has been proposed to contribute to tumor
progression, and to play a complex role in T lymphocyte biology. Its
depletion by intravenous PEGylated recombinant human hyaluronidase PH20
(PEGPH20) remodels the tumor stroma, reduces intratumoral pressure,
decompresses tumor blood vessels, and facilitates tumor drug delivery.
However, the impact of HA removal on intra-tumoral immune responses and
the efficacy of immune checkpoint inhibitors is unknown. To evaluate
checkpoint blockade efficacy with PEGPH20, two mouse tumor cell lines,
CT26 (colon) and MH194 (pancreatic, derived from spontaneous tumors in
KrasLSL-G12D/+Trp53LSL-R172H/+Cre mice) were transduced with hyaluronan
synthase-3 (HAS3) to generate syngeneic HA-high tumor models. For
anti-CTLA4 studies, parental CT26 and CT26/HAS3 cells were implanted
peritibially in Balb/C mice. While treatment with anti-mouse-CTLA4 alone
(clone 9D9) inhibited tumor growth in CT26 tumors (37%), PEGPH20 alone
did not significantly inhibit tumor growth or increase anti-CTLA4
efficacy. In contrast, tumor growth of CT26/HAS3 tumors was inhibited to
a greater extent by the combination of PEGPH20 and anti-CTLA4 (79%)
(PEGPH20 treatment 24h prior to anti-CTLA4 treatment), compared to
anti-CTLA4 alone (60%, p = 0.002) or PEGPH20 alone (43%, p = 0.0001).
Furthermore, gene expression of markers associated with immune
suppression, such as IL10 and FoxP3, was higher in CT26/HAS3 than in CT26
tumors; suggesting an association between HA content and immune
suppression. To evaluate the effect of PEGPH20 on tumor growth inhibition
by PD-1 blockade, MH194/HAS3 cells were implanted peritibially in C57BL/6
mice along with immortalized pancreatic stellate cells. Growth of
MH194/HAS3 tumors was significantly inhibited (33%, p = 0.049) by
anti-mouse-PD-L1 antibody (clone 10F.9G2), and the addition of PEGPH20
(24h prior to anti-PD-L1) to anti-PD-L1 further enhanced tumor growth
inhibition (79%, p <0.0001 to both anti-PD-L1 alone and PEGPH20 alone).
Similar findings were obtained with anti-mouse-PD-1 (clone RMP1-14),
where the tumor growth inhibition by anti-PD-1 (33%) was further enhanced
by PEGPH20 (56%, p = 0.020 and 0.017, respectively, to anti-PD-1 alone
and PEGPH20 alone). At 24h following injection, the dose of PEGPH20 used
(37.5 g/kg, the human equivalent dose) removed approximately 50% of HA
from tumors as shown by immunohistochemistry and HA ELISA on tumor
lysates. Finally, in separate studies, PEGPH20 enhanced labelled
intratumoral anti-PD-L1 accumulation (2.6 fold, p = 0.006) in a SKOV3
ovarian xenograft model engineered to express HAS2. In conclusion, in
HA-high tumors, PEGPH20 reduced HA, increased anti-PD-L1 accumulation,
and significantly enhanced tumor growth inhibition induced by anti-CTLA4,
anti-PD-L1, and anti-PD-1 antibodies.

