Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Omega-3 fatty acid conjugated paclitaxel dendrimers exhibit
enhanced anticancer activity in various preclinical models of
gastrointestinal cancers


Background: Paclitaxel (PTX) is frequently used for the treatment of
advanced gastrointestinal (GI) cancers. However, development of drug
resistance, dose-dependent toxicity, and lack of oral bioavailability are
some of the major limiting factors that impede the therapeutic use of PTX
for treatment of GI cancers. Drug conjugates of dendrimers, such as poly
(amidoamine) (PAMAM), have been reported to effectively overcome
bioavailability and dose-dependent toxicity related limitations.
Therefore, in this study we synthesized and investigated the anticancer
potential of omega-3 fatty acid [docosahexanoic acid (DHA)]-poly
(amido)amine (PAMAM)-paclitaxel conjugates in various in vitro models of
gastrointestinal cancers. Methods: DHA was conjugated to amine-terminated
PAMAMG4 dendrimers using coupling agents HOBt and HBTU. PAMAMG4-DHA was
then conjugated to PTX using PTX-NHS-ester. The conjugates were purified
by size exclusion chromatography and characterized using 1H-NMR,
MALDI-TOF-MS and high-resolution ESI-MS. The percentage payload of PTX
conjugated to PAMAMG4-DHA and in vitro stability of PAMAMG4-DHA-PTX were
evaluated using HPLC. Cell viability, clonogenic cell survival, and
western blot analyses were done to evaluate the cell viability, survival,
and induction of apoptotic proteins (P53 and P21), respectively. The in
vitro cytotoxicity and induction of apoptosis was investigated in AGS,
FLO-1, and MIA PaCa-2 GI cancer cell lines after treatment with PTX or
PAMAMG4-DHA-PTX. Results: The 1H-NMR, MALDI-TOF and high-resolution ESI
mass spectra confirmed the conjugation of DHA to PAMAM and PTX to
PAMAM-DHA. The in vitro stability data showed that PAMAM-DHA-PTX
conjugate was stable in human plasma for 24 hours. The cell viability
data indicated that treatment with PAMAMG4-DHA-PTX is significantly more
potent than PTX at inhibiting proliferation of esophageal (FLO-1: PTX
IC50: 3.80.68 nM, PAMAMG4-DHA-PTX IC50: 1.10.17 nM), gastric (AGS: PTX
IC50: 5.10.58 nM, PAMAMG4-DHA-PTX IC50: 1.40.23 nM), and pancreatic (MIA
PaCa: PTX IC50: 5.10.75 nM, PAMAMG4-DHA-PTX IC50: 1.80.35 nM) cancer cell
lines. The clonogenic cell survival data shows a similar activity where
treatment with PAMAMG4-DHA-PTX exhibited enhanced inhibition of long term
survival of FLO-1, AGS, and MIA PaCa cells when compared to PTX. The
protein expression data further showed that compared to PTX treatment
with PAMAMG4-DHA-PTX induced higher expression of P53 and P21
pro-apoptotic protein in AGS gastric cancer cell line. Conclusions:
Overall our findings indicate that paclitaxel was successfully conjugated
with PAMAMG4-DHA resulting in the synthesis of a novel PAMAMG4-DHA-PTX
conjugate that exhibits enhanced anticancer activity than PTX alone in
various in vitro models of GI cancers.

