Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mitochodrial D-loop polymorphisms are associated with colorectal
adenoma risk


Somatic mutational events in the mitochondria have been detected in
adenomatous polyps. However, the contribution of germline variation in
the mitochondrial DNA towards risk of colorectal adenomas, well
recognized precursor lesions to colorectal cancer, has not been evaluated
previously. Hence, we evaluated associations of mitochondrial
polymorphisms in the D-loop and non-D loop regions with incident
colorectal adenoma in three pooled colonoscopy-based case-control studies
(n = 327 colorectal adenoma cases and 420 controls) that used identical
methods for case ascertainment and risk factor determination. We
sequenced a 1,124 bp fragment to comprehensively identify all genetic
variation in the mitochondrial D-loop region, and used the Sequenom
platform to genotype 64 previously described tagSNPs in the non-D loop
region. We used multivariate unconditional logistic regression to analyze
the association between the mitochondrial polymorphisms and colorectal
adenoma risk after adjustment for potential confounders. We identified
320 germline mutations in the D-loop region; 30 (9%) had a minor allele
frequency (MAF) 5%. Most of the mutations clustered in the hypervariable
regions HV1 (n = 124; 39%) and HV2 (n = 111; 35%) of the D-loop region.
Among the nine common polymorphisms (MAF 5%) in the HV1 region, four
polymorphisms (mt16069, mt16278, mt16294, and mt16296) were statistically
significantly directly associated with colorectal adenoma risk (odds
ratios [OR]: 1.76 - 2.66; p-values: 0.001 - 0.04). In addition, the polyC
tract in the HV1 region was inversely associated with colorectal adenoma
risk (OR: 0.90; p = 0.03). None of the other polymorphisms in the
mitochondrial D-loop region tract was associated with colorectal adenoma
risk. After correction for multiple comparisons, none of the
mitochondrial tagSNPs in the non-D loop region was associated with
colorectal adenoma risk. These findings suggest that polymorphisms in the
HV1 region of the mitochondrial D-loop may be associated with colorectal
adenoma risk and support further investigation in future studies.

