Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNAs associated with the p53 tumor suppressor signaling
network are differentially expressed in triple negative breast cancer
cell lines


Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) is an aggressive subtype of breast
cancer that appears prevalently in African American women below the age
of 35, and has no known biomarker that can be targeted for drug therapy.
This aggressive breast cancer phenotype is due to its high mitotic index
and high metastatic potential, and may be due to the fact that up to 80%
of TNBC has a mutation in the p53 tumor suppressor gene. The p53 tumor
suppressor gene signaling pathway can be mediated by microRNAs (miRNAs)
which are short sequences of RNA (22nt) that target protein coding mRNA
and mark them for degradation. Characterization of the miRNA profiles in
TNBC cells compared to normal breast cell lines may provide potential
targets in treating TNBC. In this study, microarray analysis was
performed on TNBC cell lines HCC1806, HCC70, and MB157 and the normal
breast cells AG11132. The expression levels of miRNAs found to play a
role in the p53 tumor suppressor gene signaling pathway were compared
between the normal and TNBC cell lines. The miRNAs let-7b, let-7a,
miR-29a, miR-100, let-7f, miR-34a, miR-15b, miR-21, miR-16, and miR-22
displayed the greatest differences in expression levels between the
normal and TNBC cell lines, thereby implicating them as potential
biomarkers for TNBC and potential drug treatment targets. These miRNAs
can be studied further to determine their role in mediating the p53 tumor
suppressor gene signaling pathway in these cells for their potential use
in the diagnosis and treatment of TNBC.

