Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tandem anti-CD20 and -CD19 scFV-based chimeric antigen receptors
(CARs) mitigate tumor escape in hematologic malignancies


In recent years, adoptive cell therapy using T cells engineered with
chimeric antigen receptors (CAR T) specific for CD19 has shown marked
clinical efficacy. Nevertheless, cases of tumor escape due to the loss of
CD19 antigen have been reported. We hypothesized that tumor escape in B
cell malignancies could be mitigated by CAR T approaches that target the
CD19 and CD20 tumor antigens simultaneously.Second generation CARs
containing scFv specific for CD19 and CD20 were generated by lentiviral
transduction of human primary T cells. The configurations were: a) single
targeting domain, b) tandem targeting domains, or c) two full-length CAR
receptors co-expressed bicistronically in the same T cell. CAR T
expression for all constructs was confirmed by Western blotting and
protein L flow cytometry. CAR T cytolytic activity and IFN gamma
secretion were evaluated by killing assays and ELISA,
respectively.Single, tandem, and bicistronic CAR T cells exhibited CAR
surface expression of 50-70%. All anti-CD19 and anti-CD20 CAR T cells
demonstrated target-specific cells lysis and induction of IFN gamma.
Interestingly, the bicistronic CAR19 CAR20 construct yielded high CAR T
surface expression and IFN gamma production, but inferior in vitro
cytolytic activity. To confirm CAR T specificity, K562 CD19+ and K562
CD20+ cell lines were generated. In flow-based 1h killing assays, CAR19
and CAR20 lysed their respective target lines only, whereas tandem CAR
constructs lysed both K562 CD19+ and K562 CD20+ cells, but not K562
control. In a subsequent series of co-culture experiments, Raji target
cells were combined with very low ratios of CAR T cells, to allow for the
evolution of escape variants. On day 5 of co-incubation in the presence
of CAR19 T cells, the surviving Raji cells numbers were comparable to
control (85,000 cells/well vs 77, 000 cells/well in sham control). In
comparison, viable Raji numbers decreased drastically post co-incubation
with CAR20-, CAR19_20- and CAR20_19-T cells (546, 1,355 and 1,543
cells/well, respectively). Among the surviving Raji population, CD19
surface expression was reduced to 1.6%, vs 93.29% for sham control,
whereas the expression of CD20 and CD22 remained high (97% and 78%,
respectively). By contrast, the CD20 surface marker was less prone to
down-regulation by CAR-T cells expressing anti-CD20 scFv. Similar results
were seen when experiments were of longer, 7 days, or shorter, 1 day,
duration.Thus, targeting two tumor antigens simultaneously using tandem
CAR T cells is a promising new strategy for mitigation of tumor escape
via antigen down-regulation. Moreover, expression of two scFv in a single
CAR format is superior to expression of two independent CARs from a
bicitsronic vector. It also appears that the order of the targeting
domains within the tandem CAR impacts anti-tumor activity. These findings
are currently being explored further in animal model systems.

