Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Overexpression of DCLK1 in pancreatic cancer activates
KRAS/PI3K/MTOR pathway signaling and supports tumorigenesis,
invasiveness, and stemness


Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) has the worst prognosis of any
major malignancy with less than a 6% 5-year survival rate. Oncogenic KRAS
mutation plays a key role in PDAC tumorigenesis with nearly 95% of PDAC
harboring mutationally activated KRAS. Cells with cancer stem cell-like
(CSC) properties have been identified in PDAC. These cells are often
resistant to conventional chemotherapy and radiation therapy, and as such
may explain why current treatments do not cure PDAC or prevent
recurrences. It is suggested that driver mutations in these stem-like
cells may be the root cause of PDAC. Doublecortin-like kinase 1 (DCLK1),
is overexpressed and marks a population of tumor-initiating cells in
PDAC. It regulates key oncogenes, pluripotency factors, angiogenic
factors, and epithelial mesenchymal transition (EMT) related
transcription factors. In this study we evaluated the role of DCLK1 in
KRAS-mediated signaling in PDAC. Human pancreatic cancer cells (AsPC-1
and MiaPaCa-2) were infected with Lentivirus containing human DCLK1 cDNA
sequence to overexpress DCLK1 or red fluorescent protein (RFP) cDNA
sequence as control. The expressing levels of DCLK1, active KRAS, and
proteins in KRAS/PI3K/mTOR pathway were analyzed by western blotting. The
proliferative and invasive potential of these cells were compared using a
MTT assay for proliferation, wound healing assay for migration, soft agar
assay for clonogenicity, and Matrigel coated transwell assay for
invasion. Gemcitabine, Rapamycin, and PI3K inhibitors were used for
evaluation. Analysis of human PDAC was performed using the TCGA PAAD
dataset. Here we report that DCLK1 protein levels were increased more
than 20 fold in AsPC-DCLK1 and MP2-DCLK1 cells resulting in activation of
KRAS which was reversible by DCLK1-inhibitor XMD8-92. Compared to RFP
control cells, AsPC-DCLK1 and MP2-DCLK1 cells exhibited a more than 20%
increase in proliferation, approximately 30% increase in colony
formation, 20% increase in migration, and a 2-fold increase (p Pancreatic
ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) has the worst prognosis of any major
malignancy with less than a 6% 5-year survival rate. Oncogenic KRAS
mutation plays a key role in PDAC tumorigenesis with nearly 95% of PDAC
harboring mutationally activated KRAS. Cells with cancer stem cell-like
(CSC) properties have been identified in PDAC. These cells are often
resistant to conventional chemotherapy and radiation therapy, and as such
may explain why current treatments do not cure PDAC or prevent
recurrences. It is suggested that driver mutations in these stem-like
cells may be the root cause of PDAC. Doublecortin-like kinase 1 (DCLK1),
is overexpressed and marks a population of tumor-initiating cells in
PDAC. It regulates key oncogenes, pluripotency factors, angiogenic
factors, and epithelial mesenchymal transition (EMT) related
transcription factors. In this study we evaluated the role of DCLK1 in
KRAS-mediated signaling in PDAC. Human pancreatic cancer cells (AsPC-1
and MiaPaCa-2) were infected with Lentivirus containing human DCLK1 cDNA
sequence to overexpress DCLK1 or red fluorescent protein (RFP) cDNA
sequence as control. The expressing levels of DCLK1, active KRAS, and
proteins in KRAS/PI3K/mTOR pathway were analyzed by western blotting. The
proliferative and invasive potential of these cells were compared using a
MTT assay for proliferation, wound healing assay for migration, soft agar
assay for clonogenicity, and Matrigel coated transwell assay for
invasion. Gemcitabine, Rapamycin, and PI3K inhibitors were used for
evaluation. Analysis of human PDAC was performed using the TCGA PAAD
dataset. Here we report that DCLK1 protein levels were increased more
than 20 fold in AsPC-DCLK1 and MP2-DCLK1 cells resulting in activation of
KRAS which was reversible by DCLK1-inhibitor XMD8-92. Compared to RFP
control cells, AsPC-DCLK1 and MP2-DCLK1 cells exhibited a more than 20%
increase in proliferation, approximately 30% increase in colony
formation, 20% increase in migration, and a 2-fold increase (p < 0.05) in
invasion. Evidence from TCGA PAAD demonstrated that pancreatic tumors
expressing high levels of DCLK1 had activated PI3K/AKT/MTOR-pathway
signaling suggesting greater KRAS activity. These data taken together
suggest that DCLK1 promotes KRAS-driven PI3K/AKT/mTOR signaling in PDAC
leading to increased migratory, invasive, anti-apoptotic effects,
stem-like and tumorigenic properties.

