Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting oncogenic miR-17-92 primary transcripts by LNA gapmeRs
in multiple myeloma: Molecular findings and therapeutic potential


There is emerging evidence that miR-17-92 plays a crucial role in c-Myc
driven tumorigenesis of multiple myeloma (MM). We attempted to antagonize
its full-oncogenic activity by targeting primary transcripts
(pri-miR-17-92) with RNase H-triggering antisense oligonucleotides (LNA
gapmeRs). Specifically, 7 different molecules were generated and screened
for their ability to inhibit pri-miR-17-92 expression. The most effective
molecule, henceforth named miR17-92-i-PT, was selected for furher
investigation. As assessed by qRT-PCR, transfection of MM cells with
miR17-92-i-PT resulted in downregulation of both pri-miR-17-92 and all 6
mature miRNA transcripts. Importantly, miR17-92-i-PT inhibited MM cell
proliferation more effectively than inhibitors targeting each cluster's
miRNA. Lack of relevant off-target effects was demonstrated by
specifically-designed negative (LNA mixmeRs) and positive
(not-phosphorothioated LNA gapmeRs) control oligos, and a
dominant-negative genome-edited cell line by CRISPR/CAS9 technology is
currently under development. Importantly, treatment of MM cells with
naked miR17-92-i-PT resulted in miR-17-92 downregulation. Low micromolar
concentrations of miR17-92-i-PT significantly affected survival of MM
patient plasma cells (n = 14) and MM cell lines (n = 15), while the
viability of CD138+ cells from MGUS patients (n = 3) or PBMCs from
healthy donors (n = 3) was not impaired. Further, a synergistic in vitro
activity with Bortezomib,Carfilzomib or Melphalan was demonstrated.
Molecular perturbations in MM cells exposed to miR17-92-i-PT were firstly
investigated by gene expression profiling (HTA 2.0, Affimetrix).
Ingenuity pathway analysis (IPA) of differentially expressed genes
highlighted alteration of relevant molecular functions, including cell
cycle, DNA replication, recombination, and repair, and cell death and
survival, which were validated by functional assays. Moreover, impairment
of BRD4 activity was indicated by upstream regulator analysis
(ZscoreThere is emerging evidence that miR-17-92 plays a crucial role in
c-Myc driven tumorigenesis of multiple myeloma (MM). We attempted to
antagonize its full-oncogenic activity by targeting primary transcripts
(pri-miR-17-92) with RNase H-triggering antisense oligonucleotides (LNA
gapmeRs). Specifically, 7 different molecules were generated and screened
for their ability to inhibit pri-miR-17-92 expression. The most effective
molecule, henceforth named miR17-92-i-PT, was selected for furher
investigation. As assessed by qRT-PCR, transfection of MM cells with
miR17-92-i-PT resulted in downregulation of both pri-miR-17-92 and all 6
mature miRNA transcripts. Importantly, miR17-92-i-PT inhibited MM cell
proliferation more effectively than inhibitors targeting each cluster's
miRNA. Lack of relevant off-target effects was demonstrated by
specifically-designed negative (LNA mixmeRs) and positive
(not-phosphorothioated LNA gapmeRs) control oligos, and a
dominant-negative genome-edited cell line by CRISPR/CAS9 technology is
currently under development. Importantly, treatment of MM cells with
naked miR17-92-i-PT resulted in miR-17-92 downregulation. Low micromolar
concentrations of miR17-92-i-PT significantly affected survival of MM
patient plasma cells (n = 14) and MM cell lines (n = 15), while the
viability of CD138+ cells from MGUS patients (n = 3) or PBMCs from
healthy donors (n = 3) was not impaired. Further, a synergistic in vitro
activity with Bortezomib,Carfilzomib or Melphalan was demonstrated.
Molecular perturbations in MM cells exposed to miR17-92-i-PT were firstly
investigated by gene expression profiling (HTA 2.0, Affimetrix).
Ingenuity pathway analysis (IPA) of differentially expressed genes
highlighted alteration of relevant molecular functions, including cell
cycle, DNA replication, recombination, and repair, and cell death and
survival, which were validated by functional assays. Moreover, impairment
of BRD4 activity was indicated by upstream regulator analysis (Zscore<2).
Indeed, Hexim1 -the endogenous antagonist of BRD4- was upregulated upon
treatment with miR17-92-i-PT and is currently being validated as a direct
target of miR-18a, miR-19a and miR-19b cluster members. Consistent with a
BET bromodomain inhibitor-like activity, miR17-92-i-PT downregulated
c-Myc, thus indicating a novel feedback loop between miR-17-92 and c-Myc.
Finally, we found a significant in vivo anti-tumor activity of
systemically delivered naked miR17-92-i-PT against human MM xenografts in
SCID/NOD mice. Different animal models were utilized, including SCID-hu
and mouse orthotopic models, besides classic subcutaneous xenografts.
Lack of systemic toxicity was demonstrated both in mice (balb/c) and in
monkeys (cynomolgus monkeys). Overall, our results provide the rational
framework for development of miR17-92-i-PT-based therapies in MM.

