Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The balance of divergent IRE1 signaling regulates pancreatic
neuroendocrine tumor growth


The Unfolded Protein Response (UPR) is an intracellular signaling pathway
that communicates the protein folding status of the endoplasmic reticulum
(ER) to the nucleus to maintain ER homeostasis. Hypoxia, nutrient
deprivation, proteasome dysfunction, or sustained demands on the
secretory pathwayconditions often encountered by solid tumor cellslead to
the accumulation of misfolded proteins in the ER and cause ER stress.
However, the precise role of UPR signaling in the development and
maintenance of cancer remains controversial. We reasoned that pancreatic
neuroendocrine tumors (PanNETs) might be one class of solid tumor that
may be particularly sensitive to protein folding stress due to their high
secretory activity.The Master UPR regulator IRE1 is an ER transmembrane
kinase/endoribonuclease (RNase) that acts as a critical life-death switch
depending on the level of ER stress. We analyzed primary human PanNET
samples for activation of UPR components and found strong evidence of ER
stress and IRE1 hyperactivation in this tumor type. We used a variety of
chemical-genetic tools to selectively manipulate IRE1's homeostatic and
apoptotic outputs in a PanNET xenograft model and found that the precise
balance of IRE1 signaling is critical for tumor growth in vivo.
Disrupting this balance by pushing the pathway in either direction is
detrimental to PanNET survival. Moreover, targeting IRE1 with highly
selective small molecules in a preclinical mouse model phenocopied the
results of genetic manipulation. Our results indicate that IRE1 is an
important regulator of PanNET cell survival and growth, and provide a
strong rationale for therapeutically targeting this kinase in PanNETs and
other cancers that experience high levels of ER stress.

