Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel drug candidates CEP1430 and CEP1507 against cancer stem
cells and circulating tumor cells in advanced stage pancreatic cancer


Despite improvements in treatment modalities, pancreatic cancer remains
the fourth leading cause of cancer mortality in the US. The 5-year
survival rate is less than 6% because of the extent of metastases at the
time of diagnosis. The treatment of pancreatic cancer remains challenging
however there is much optimism with targeted strategies and trial
designs. The interrogation of pathway centric targets that regulate the
regenerative and metastatic activities in the tumor, adequate
molecular-hypothesis driven trial designs with robust prognostic and
predictive markers of response are necessary for the development of
effective therapeutic strategies for long term anti-tumor benefit.Here,
we examined the efficacy of CEP1430 and CEP1507 to target cancer stem
cells (CSC) and circulating tumor cells (CTC) in human pancreatic cancer.
The pancreatic CSCs expressed the following
markers(CD133,CD44,CXCR4,SSEA3/4,Oct4,ALDH,Telomerase,& Nestin). In vitro
CEP1430 inhibited the growth of CSCs whereas CEP1507 inhibited CTCs that
expressed the following markers [CK19, CEA, CA19-9,CK8
/18,h-TERT,C-MET,CK20,EpCAM, Vimentin, E- Cadherin, MUC1, CEA CAM5,CD45
neg]. Gemcitabine on the other hand suppressed the viability of non-CSCs
(differentiated tumor Cells) by 70%. In accord, in vivo studies showed
that CEP1507 when combined with gemcitabine eliminated the engraftment of
human pancreatic cancer CTCs by 85% (n = 20,pDespite improvements in
treatment modalities, pancreatic cancer remains the fourth leading cause
of cancer mortality in the US. The 5-year survival rate is less than 6%
because of the extent of metastases at the time of diagnosis. The
treatment of pancreatic cancer remains challenging however there is much
optimism with targeted strategies and trial designs. The interrogation of
pathway centric targets that regulate the regenerative and metastatic
activities in the tumor, adequate molecular-hypothesis driven trial
designs with robust prognostic and predictive markers of response are
necessary for the development of effective therapeutic strategies for
long term anti-tumor benefit.Here, we examined the efficacy of CEP1430
and CEP1507 to target cancer stem cells (CSC) and circulating tumor cells
(CTC) in human pancreatic cancer. The pancreatic CSCs expressed the
following markers(CD133,CD44,CXCR4,SSEA3/4,Oct4,ALDH,Telomerase,&
Nestin). In vitro CEP1430 inhibited the growth of CSCs whereas CEP1507
inhibited CTCs that expressed the following markers [CK19, CEA,
CA19-9,CK8 /18,h-TERT,C-MET,CK20,EpCAM, Vimentin, E- Cadherin, MUC1, CEA
CAM5,CD45 neg]. Gemcitabine on the other hand suppressed the viability of
non-CSCs (differentiated tumor Cells) by 70%. In accord, in vivo studies
showed that CEP1507 when combined with gemcitabine eliminated the
engraftment of human pancreatic cancer CTCs by 85% (n = 20,p<0.001). In
contrast, CEP1430 in combination with gemcitabine selectively inhibited
CSCs by 80% (n = 20,pDespite improvements in treatment modalities,
pancreatic cancer remains the fourth leading cause of cancer mortality in
the US. The 5-year survival rate is less than 6% because of the extent of
metastases at the time of diagnosis. The treatment of pancreatic cancer
remains challenging however there is much optimism with targeted
strategies and trial designs. The interrogation of pathway centric
targets that regulate the regenerative and metastatic activities in the
tumor, adequate molecular-hypothesis driven trial designs with robust
prognostic and predictive markers of response are necessary for the
development of effective therapeutic strategies for long term anti-tumor
benefit.Here, we examined the efficacy of CEP1430 and CEP1507 to target
cancer stem cells (CSC) and circulating tumor cells (CTC) in human
pancreatic cancer. The pancreatic CSCs expressed the following
markers(CD133,CD44,CXCR4,SSEA3/4,Oct4,ALDH,Telomerase,& Nestin). In vitro
CEP1430 inhibited the growth of CSCs whereas CEP1507 inhibited CTCs that
expressed the following markers [CK19, CEA, CA19-9,CK8
/18,h-TERT,C-MET,CK20,EpCAM, Vimentin, E- Cadherin, MUC1, CEA CAM5,CD45
neg]. Gemcitabine on the other hand suppressed the viability of non-CSCs
(differentiated tumor Cells) by 70%. In accord, in vivo studies showed
that CEP1507 when combined with gemcitabine eliminated the engraftment of
human pancreatic cancer CTCs by 85% (n = 20,p<0.001). In contrast,
CEP1430 in combination with gemcitabine selectively inhibited CSCs by 80%
(n = 20,p<0.001) and was more effective than the individual agents. This
data demonstrates that CEP1430 and CEP1507 that target CSCs and CTCs
respectively may change the treatment paradigm and enhance the efficacy
of gemcitabine in advanced pancreatic cancer. Further studies will
evaluate the full potential of this approach to target the CSCs - and
metastasis-initiating cells (CTCs) as combination therapy against locally
advanced and metastatic pancreatic cancer.

