Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exposure - response (overall survival [OS]) analyses of patients
with unresectable pancreatic cancer (PC) treated with
galunisertib+gemcitabine (GG) or gemcitabine+placebo (GP) in a randomized
phase 2, double-blind study


Background: Transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-) signaling pathway is
active in PC. A pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic (PK/PD) approach
integrated preclinical biomarkers and toxicity and allowed for
prospective definition of therapeutic window (Gueorguieva et al. Br J
Clin Pharmacol 2014;77:796-807). Here, we evaluate the observed
exposure-OS relationship in patients with unresectable PC treated with
either GG or GP with median (95% CI) OS (months) of 9.10 (7.43, 12.2) and
7.59 (4.04, 9.92), respectively.Methods: A therapeutic exposure window
for galunisertib between 3730 and 8380 ng*hr/mL was targeted in patients
as described in Gueorguieva et al. 2014. Galunisertib 150 mg BID was
given orally as intermittent dosing (14 days on/14 days off per cycle)
and gemcitabine was administered as approved. Using nonlinear mixed
effects modeling, data from six studies (n = 297, 3097 observations) were
combined; galunisertib population PK model was developed. Galunisertib
exposure metrics were calculated for each patient in the phase 2 PC study
(n = 100 GG arm). Parametric survival models were used to identify
influential covariates on OS such as dose, plasma exposure at steady
state (AUC0-24,ss), Cmax,ss, ECOG, pre-treatment with gemcitabine, age,
biomarkers (CA19-9 and TGF) and liver metastasis.Results: PK profile of
galunisertib was not altered when combined with gemcitabine. The
population PK dataset included data from 297 patients/healthy subjects
whose ages ranged from 22 to 84 years and who weighed between 39 and 126
kg. The PK of galunisertib was best described by a 2-compartment model
with first order absorption and elimination. Galunisertib was rapidly
absorbed with peak concentrations within 1-3 h and elimination half-life
of 8 h. The mean (% SEE) population apparent clearance and volume of
distribution of galunisertib was 35 (3%) L/hr and the steady state was
190 (11%) L. Between-patient variance was estimated to be 47% on the
population apparent clearance. There was a small, but statistically
significant effect of age on apparent clearance. None of the other
investigated demographic patient characteristics were found to be
significant. Galunisertib median (25th-75th percentile) AUC0-24,ss for PC
patients was 5.56 (3.82-7.91) mg*h/L with Cmax and tmax of 904 (668-1194)
ng/mL and 1.5 (1-2.5) h, respectively. A Weibull parametric survival
model provided best fit to the OS data. There was a flat exposure-OS
relationship within the observed exposure range, once all significant
covariates (namely ECOG, pre-treatment with gemcitabine, age, CA19-9, and
liver metastasis) were included.Conclusion: This investigation confirms
that 300 mg galunisertib administered as 150 mg BID for 14 days followed
by 14 days off treatment is an appropriate dosing regimen for patients
with PC.

