Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor fragmentation is a poor prognostic histologic biomarker for
lung squamous cell carcinoma


Introduction: Lung squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) is the second most
frequent histologic type of non-small cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC). Next
to pTNM staging, grading is also important for histomorphologic
classification of tumors into relevant prognostic groups. SCC forms
cohesive tumor sheets of various sizes, ranging from large pushing
boundaries to small detached clusters. The presence of small clusters
such as single cells, tumor buds 15 cells) could also contain prognostic
information and hence be pertinent for tumor grading. Herein we propose a
computer-based morphometric analysis for the global assessment of lung
SCC fragmentation.Methods: Surgically resected lung SCC tumors (discovery
tissue microarray cohort n = 208, 2 cores per patient; validation whole
section cohort n = 99, 2 blocks per patient) were immuno-histochemically
stained with pan-cytokeratin. Color-based segmentation (tumor epithelia
brown, stroma blue-grey) allowed to separate tumor from stroma and to
compute the number of tumor fragments. Associations with disease-free
(DFS) and overall survival (OS) were assessed by univariate Cox
regressions.Results: Tumor fragments were defined as tumor clusters
>3000m2 (circa >15 cells) entirely surrounded by stroma. Criteria for
high fragmentation were: > 5 fragments summed over 2 TMA cores (range:
2-18, median = 5) and > 700 fragments summed over 2 whole sections
(range: 94-3988, median = 570). Respectively, 44% and 42% of the patients
had highly fragmenting tumors in the discovery (D) and validation cohort
(V), correlating with blood vessel infiltration (cc = 0.181,
pIntroduction: Lung squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) is the second most
frequent histologic type of non-small cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC). Next
to pTNM staging, grading is also important for histomorphologic
classification of tumors into relevant prognostic groups. SCC forms
cohesive tumor sheets of various sizes, ranging from large pushing
boundaries to small detached clusters. The presence of small clusters
such as single cells, tumor buds 15 cells) could also contain prognostic
information and hence be pertinent for tumor grading. Herein we propose a
computer-based morphometric analysis for the global assessment of lung
SCC fragmentation.Methods: Surgically resected lung SCC tumors (discovery
tissue microarray cohort n = 208, 2 cores per patient; validation whole
section cohort n = 99, 2 blocks per patient) were immuno-histochemically
stained with pan-cytokeratin. Color-based segmentation (tumor epithelia
brown, stroma blue-grey) allowed to separate tumor from stroma and to
compute the number of tumor fragments. Associations with disease-free
(DFS) and overall survival (OS) were assessed by univariate Cox
regressions.Results: Tumor fragments were defined as tumor clusters
>3000m2 (circa >15 cells) entirely surrounded by stroma. Criteria for
high fragmentation were: > 5 fragments summed over 2 TMA cores (range:
2-18, median = 5) and > 700 fragments summed over 2 whole sections
(range: 94-3988, median = 570). Respectively, 44% and 42% of the patients
had highly fragmenting tumors in the discovery (D) and validation cohort
(V), correlating with blood vessel infiltration (cc = 0.181, p<0.001 (D);
cc = 0.220, p = 0.029 (V)). High fragmentation was also associated with
decreased OS (HR = 1.77, p = 0.001) and DFS (HR = 1.83, p = 0.027) in
(D). This was confirmed in (V): OS (HR = 2.09, p = 0.004), DFS (HR =
2.60, p = 0.005).Conclusions: We used an automated morphometric approach
for unbiased scoring of tumor fragmentation on digitalized histological
sections. This versatile method could potentially be applied to virtually
any solid human carcinoma. Our analysis revealed that tumor fragmentation
is a poor prognosticator for lung squamous cell carcinoma, e.g. due to
increased likelihood of vessel infiltration.

