Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bioinformatic and experimental evaluation of regulatory variants
in breast cancer susceptibility genes


Many germline DNA sequence variants in gene regulatory elements are
associated with an increased risk of cancer. These include large genomic
deletions of the promoter of the BRCA1 gene, through to single nucleotide
variants in the promoter, UTRs and long-range enhancers of multiple other
cancer related genes. Next generation sequence analysis of early onset
and familial breast cancer cases is currently identifying an escalating
number of variants in non-coding regions of the genome, however for most
of these the significance in unknown. This project aims to determine the
functional and clinical significance of breast cancer associated variants
in regulatory regions of BRCA1 and BRCA2, as part of an international
collaborative project arising from the Evidence-based Network for the
Interpretation of Germline Mutant Alleles (ENIGMA) consortium. To date
over two hundred variants mapping to promoter, UTR and deep intronic
regions have been identified in early onset or familial breast cancer
patients that have no identifiable coding or splicing changes in BRCA1 or
BRCA2. Through a pipeline of bioinformatics analyses using ENCODE
datasets, these variants have been prioritized for experimental
evaluation. This has lead to the identification of several variants that
significantly alter the regulation of BRCA1 or BRCA2 expression, through
mechanisms including altered binding of transcription factors and
microRNAs. These studies will lay the groundwork for comprehensive
statistical analyses, in which bioinformatics and experimental data is
combined with clinical and genetic data to establish multifactorial risk
prediction models that can ultimately be used in a clinical setting.

