Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Temporal trends in microRNAs during subchronic aflatoxin dosing
and modulation by the chemopreventive oleane triterpenoid, CDDO-Im


Liver cancer is the second leading cause of cancer death worldwide: risk
factors include the viruses, HBV and HCV, and the environmental
carcinogen aflatoxin B1 (AFB1). Chemoprevention strategies that activate
genes controlled by the KEAP1-NRF2 pathway, such as CDDO-Im, afford
complete protection against AFB1-induced hepatocarcinogenesis in rats.
The opportunity to deploy these types of agents in high-risk populations
would be advanced by the validation of biomarkers reflecting their
efficacy. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) affecting gene expression are important in
normal physiology and have been shown to be frequently dysregulated in
cancer. It is our hypothesis that specific rat liver miRNAs are
biomarkers that temporally track with AFB1-induced liver cancer, and are
modulated in animals that receive complete protection by CDDO-Im.MiRNAs
were isolated from archived liver tissue of rats (Johnson et al., CaPR,
2014) that were dosed with AFB1 (200 g) for 28 consecutive days. Two
additional groups received either vehicle only or AFB1 + CDDO-Im (30
mol). After RNA isolation (miRCURY tissue, Exiqon), samples were profiled
by RNA sequencing (Illumina). Fourteen miRNAs were selected based on
dynamic range and level of detection for validation by RT-qPCR (TaqMan
microRNA assay).MiRNA profiling from animals at the end of the
carcinogenic 28-day dosing regimen revealed an increased total number of
miRNAs due to AFB1 exposure alone (n500) compared to control. Those
miRNAs displaying a greater than 10 fold increase in expression between
control and AFB1 treatment groups were examined in detail: 541-5p,
34a-5p, 127-3p, 205, 434-3p, 429, 411-5p, 181c-3p, 200b-3p, 221-3p.
RNA-seq data showed that these were all upregulated in the AFB1-treated
samples. Co-treatment with CDDO-Im shifted expression levels back to
control. The miRNAs 192-3p, 92a-3p, 26b-3p, and 375-3p were expressed
consistently in all treatment groups and were selected for normalization.
Expression levels of the 14 candidate miRNAs were then examined in liver
samples obtained from rats after 7, 14 and 21 doses AFB1 and compared to
levels determined at week 4 (28 doses AFB1). Quantitative analysis
demonstrated an increase in expression of the panel of miRNAs due to AFB1
exposure over the dosing period, potentially indicating a role in early
carcinogenesis. MicroRNA expression showed a varying trend over time in
animals treated with AFB1 plus CDDO-Im. Three invariant miRNAs
(miR-375-3p, 92a-3p, 192-3p) showed little change during the 28-day
exposure period.In conclusion, we have identified a panel of miRNAs that
are upregulated and track with AFB1 exposure. These changes are abrogated
by treatment with CDDO-Im and thus reflect the protective efficacy of the
intervention. Supported by T32ES007141-31A1 and CA197222.

