Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Immune profiling uncovers neo-antigens and TCR repertoire
responding to WX-mPD-1 and WX-mPD-L1 immune checkpoint inhibitors in
syngeneic mouse xenograft models


Introduction: PD-1 and PD-L1antibodies have shown impressive clinical
benefits to cancer patients. However, still a significant number of
patients fail to respond to those checkpoint inhibitors. To understand
the underlying mechanism, we performed genomic and immune profiling of
both tumor tissues and cytotoxic T cells isolated from syngeneic mouse
xenograft models treated with in-house WuXi anti-mouse PD-1(WX-mPD-1) and
anti-mouse PD-L1 (WX-mPD-L1) antibodies.Material and methods: Syngeneic
mouse xenograft models from melanoma cell lines, CloudmanS91 and B16-F10,
were used to evaluate the anticancer efficacy of WX-mPD-1 and WX-mPD-L1
antibodies. Cancer cells and xenograft tumors before and after treatment
were collected for RNASeq profiling, from which mRNA expression and DNA
mutations were called and neo-antigens were predicted. FACS analysis and
TCR sequencing were also performed to examine the tumor infiltrating
lymphocytes (TILs) population and TCR repertoire diversity,
respectively.Results: Among forty-eight established syngeneic models,
nine had been tested with WX-mPD-1 and WX-mPD-L1 antibodies as single
agent or in combination. More importantly, we have investigated the
expression, mutation loads, neo-antigens for responsive model from
CloudmanS91 and partially responsive model from B16-F10. CloudmanS91
model had 8 fold increases in mutation loads compared with B16-F10 model.
Neo-antigens identified in CloudmanS91 cells were further knocked out to
dissect their roles in activating immune response to WX-mPD-1 and
WX-mPD-L1 antibodies in vivo.Conclusions: WX-mPD-1 and WX-mPD-L1
antibodies as well as syngeneic tumor models are useful tools for
pre-clinical combination and MoA studies for cancer immunotherapy.
Analysis of Neo-antigen and TCR repertoire helps us better understand
immune response to these antibodies in preclinical settings, and suggest
novel approaches to enhance the current immunotherapeutic interventions.

