Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Validation of FOXR2 and ARHGAP36 as oncogenes in medulloblastoma


We are working to validate two putative oncogenes in medulloblastoma
(MB), ARHGAP36 and FOXR2. These genes were identified as MB drivers using
a Sleeping Beauty mutagenesis screen in mice and are overexpressed in
subsets of human MB. We are using gain (GOF) and loss of function (LOF)
studies both in vitro and in vivo to understand the roles of FOXR2 and
ARHGAP36 in MB genesis. In GOF studies, both genes individually drove
anchorage independent growth in a mouse cerebellar progenitor cell line
(C17.2) and a human MB cell line (ONS76). When overexpressed individually
in C17.2 cells, both FOXR2 and ARHGAP36 drove tumor formation in the
flank of NU/J mice. We are also using an orthotopic injection model with
C17.2 cells overexpressing either ARHGAP36 or FOXR2 individually to
determine if these genes drive tumor formation in a more relevant
setting. RNA sequencing and reverse-phase protein array analyses were
also performed on WT and C17 cells overexpressing each oncogene to
identify their effects in an unbiased manner. We are working to validate
those effects using RT-PCR and Western analysis. In LOF studies, the
CRISPR/Cas system is being used to create mutations in either the
ARHGAP36 or FOXR2 locus in human MB cell lines (ONS76, MED8A, Daoy). This
has been accomplished with ARHGAP36 in ONS76 cells, and we are currently
characterizing those cells using proliferation, soft agar colony
formation, and tumor formation assays. Lastly, we are working to create
GOF and LOF mouse models of both FOXR2 and ARHGAP36 to characterize their
oncogenic potential in vivo. We identified ARHGAP36 and FOXR2 as putative
oncogenes in MB and our findings may elucidate novel targets for
therapeutic efforts aimed at treating patients with MB.

