Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Decreased H2B monoubiquitination is associated with enhanced
proliferation and resistance to apoptosis in human lung cancer


Monoubiquitination of histone H2B (H2Bub1) is an important chromatin
modification that plays multiple roles in transcription, mRNA processing,
DNA repair, cell differentiation, and maintenance of stemness. Recent
studies have indicated that dysregulation of H2Bub1 and the resulting
alterations of global gene expression are key contributors in cellular
transformation and metastasis. However, the importance of H2B
ubiquitination in lung cancer is unknown. Here, by using
immunohistochemical analysis (IHC), we have demonstrated that the protein
level of H2Bub1 is frequently decreased in a cohort of human lung cancer
tissues in comparison to paired adjacent normal tissues. We also found
that decrease in H2Bub1 is associated with increased cellular
proliferation, as measured by Ki67, and is associated with decreased
overall survival. Furthermore, using RNA-seq and transcriptional
profiling analysis, we identified that reduction of H2Bub1 via
attenuating the expression of histone H2B E3 ubiquitin ligase ring finger
protein 20 (RNF20) leads to significant changes of global gene
expression, modulating multiple malignancy-promoting genes, including
c-Met, E2F2, and BMF. Signaling pathways including p53, DNA replication,
DNA repair, and cellular proliferation, and regulation of apoptosis in
lung cancer cells are also altered. Additionally, we have further shown
that decrease of H2Bub1 by RNF20 knockdown significantly promotes growth,
migration/invasion, and strongly enhances resistance to cytotoxic
chemotherapy-induced apoptosis in lung cancer cells. Our findings suggest
that dysregulation of H2Bub1 signaling may play an important role in
growth and drug resistance of lung cancers, and may potentially serve as
a prognostic biomarker and therapeutic target for lung cancer patients.

