Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Adipocytes-mediated autophagy activation and metabolic
reprogramming promotes colon cancer survival


Obesity has been associated with increased incidence and mortality of a
wide variety of human cancers including colorectal cancer. However, the
molecular mechanism underlying the functional interaction between obesity
and cancer remains elusive. Here, we demonstrated that adipocytes
isolated from adipose tissues of colon cancer patients play an important
role in promoting tumor cell survival and progression by altering
cellular metabolism. In stage IV colon cancer cases, abundant adipocytes
were found in close association with invasive colon cancer cells.
Co-culture of adipocytes with colon cancer cells led to direct transfer
of free fatty acids (FAs) released by the adipocytes to colon cancer
cells. Uptake of FAs allowed the cancer cells to survive nutrient
deprivation conditions by upregulating mitochondrial fatty acid
-oxidation, suggesting that FAs from adipocytes were used as an energy
source by the cancer cells. In addition, we found that co-culture of
adipocytes or treating cells with fatty acids induced autophagy in colon
cancer cells as a result of AMPK activation. Inhibition of autophagy
attenuated the ability of cancer cells to utilize FAs and blocked the
growth promoting effect of adipocytes. Furthermore, we found that
adipocytes induced dedifferentiation of tumor cells in primary colon
cancer cells and mouse tumor organoids. Taken together, these results
identify adipocytes as active contributors to the tumor microenvironment
that promote tumor growth and survival by serving as an energy provider
and a metabolic regulator for the embedded colon cancer cells.

