Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of PHF5A as a common cellular target of
splicing-modulating chemical probes


Recent discoveries that splicing factors such SF3B1, U2AF1, SRSF2 are
frequently mutated in multiple hematological malignancies including
chronic lymphocytic leukaemia and myelodysplastic syndromes have
generated interest in therapeutic approaches to target the splicesome
dependency in cancer cells bearing mutations in splicing factors.
Previously, several structurally unrelated natural compounds including
pladienolide, herboxidiene, and FR901464 have been shown to exert potent
anti-proliferative effects in cancer cells grown in vitro. Further
optimization has led to the discovery of natural product analogs (e.g.
E7107) with anti-tumor efficacy in vivo in xenograft models. Target
identification has revealed the SF3B complex of the splicesome as the
common action site for these compounds. Recent work has demonstrated
biological and genetic evidence that single amino acid substitution
(R1074H) in SF3B1 completely abolished the anti-proliferative effect of
pladienolide derivative E7107, suggesting that SF3B1 is the direct
binding partner for pladienolides. However, the same SF3B1 R1074H
mutation does not provide equal level of protections for cells treated
with herboxidiene derivatives, indicating differential mechanism of
action for these two classes of splicing modulators. To identify targets
for herboxidiene-like compounds, we have generated resistant HCT116
clones upon continuous administration of herboxidiene derivative
H3B-37045 in vitro. Whole exome sequencing from 6 resistant clones
revealed a common Y36C mutation in SF3B subunit component PHF5A
(SF3B14b). Over-expression of PHF5A Y36C but not the wild-type form in
parental HCT116 cells confirmed the protective effect of this mutation to
H3B-37045. Surprisingly, PHF5A Y36C expression also conferred resistance
to the pladienolide derivative E7107, which indicates that, unlike the
SF3B1 R1074H mutation, PHF5A resides within a common node of action site
among different splicing modulators. RNA-seq, biochemical and structure
homology-modeling analysis suggested that PHF5A Y36C mutation disrupted
the action of splicing modulators through interfering with the compounds
interaction with the SF3B complex. Detailed analysis of the function of
the Y36C mutant and wild-type PHF5A in the SF3B complex is currently
ongoing. Understanding the function of PHF5A in splicing and the
molecular mechanism of Y36C mutation shall provide new insights of the
biological role of splicesome, and guide the development of next
generation splicesome inhibitors.

