Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: KA2237 and KA2507: Novel, oral cancer immunotherapeutics targeting
PI3K-p110/p110 and HDAC6 with single-agent and combination activity


Two de novo-designed classes of orally-active immunotherapeutics -
selectively targeting the PI3K-p110/p110 and HDAC6 enzymes - for solid
and hematological cancer treatment will be described. The former,
exemplified by the clinical candidate KA2237, are uniquely-selective
inhibitors of the PI3K-p110/p110 isoforms, displaying immunotherapeutic
activity and inhibiting primary tumor growth and metastasis. The latter,
for which KA2507 is the candidate compound, are HDAC6-specific
inhibitors, which inhibit tumor growth through regulation of aggresome
formation, and inhibition of PD-L1 expression via decrease of STAT3
phosphorylation. In both cases, selectivity has been achieved over other
enzyme superfamily members, with the aim being to minimize
mechanism-related toxicity, thereby potentially providing opportunities
to enable elevated single dose levels - and broad combination modalities
not possible with pan-inhibitors of both enzymes - to be investigated.
The PI3K-p110/p110 and HDAC6 inhibitors display potent oral activity as
single agents in in vivo tumor syngeneic models, impacting on growth
inhibition, PD and tumor marker responses; the PI3K-p110/p110 inhibitors
also inhibit metastatic spread and, following surgical removal of primary
tumor, confer promising inhibition of tumor regrowth. Crucially, the
inhibitors work in combination with one another, making this co-therapy
approach unique in oncology, and potentially important clinically in
overcoming resistance mechanisms in both solid and hematological cancer.
The rationale for this combination is based upon immunotherapeutic and
cell signalling mechanisms, which will be described. KA2237 is entering
Phase I studies in patients with lymphoma as a single agent in Q1 2016,
with KA2507 scheduled to follow in Q3 to treat multiple myeloma. Further
clinical investigations into solid tumor immunotherapy - both single
agent- and combination-studies - are planned.

