Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Variants in autophagy related genes and clinical characteristics
in melanoma: a population-based study


Autophagy has been linked with melanoma, but no polymorphisms in
autophagy related (ATG) genes have been investigated for association with
melanoma prognostic indicators and survival. We examined 5 ATG gene
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in a large international
multicenter population-based case-control study of melanoma. DNA from 911
melanoma patients was genotyped for five SNPs with a known or suspected
impact on autophagic flux. While we did not identify an association with
survival, a significant association was identified between the minor
allele for an ATG16L polymorphism (rs2241880) and a decrease in Breslow
thickness (p = 0.03), earlier tumor stage at diagnosis (OR 0.47, 95% CI
0.27-0.81, p = 0.02) and younger age at diagnosis (p = 0.02). In
addition, two SNPs in ATG5 (rs2245214 and rs510432) were found to be
significantly associated with increased tumor stage of melanoma (OR 1.84
95% CI 1.12-3.02, p = 0.05; OR 1.47 95% CI 1.11-1.94, p = 0.03). Finally,
we identified inverse associations between the minor allele of rs2245214
and melanomas on the scalp or neck (OR 0.20, 95% CI 0.05-0.86, p = 0.03);
rs1864182 (OR 0.42, 95% CI 0.21-0.88, p = 0.02) and brisk TILs, and
rs510432 (OR 0.55 95% CI 0.34-0.87, p = 0.01) with non-brisk TILs,
although they were not globally significant. In summary, our data
suggests that ATG SNPs, while not associated with survival, may be
associated with Breslow thickness, tumor stage, age at diagnosis, and
aggressive histopathological factors. These associations could contribute
to our current understanding of the significant role of autophagy in
melanoma progression.

