Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Addition of mTOR inhibition to HER2 blockade results in improved
antitumor activity in a preclinical model of uterine serous carcinoma
with HER2 gene amplification and a gain of function mutation in PIK3CA


Subsets of uterine serous carcinomas (USC) harbor simultaneous HER2
(ERBB2) over-expression and gain of function mutations in PIK3CA that may
play a role in resistance to single agent anti-HER2 therapies. Targeting
the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) may be a promising option to
heighten anti-tumor response and restore sensitivity to anti-HER2
therapies.HER2 gene amplified cell lines with (ARK1, E542K) and without
(ARK2) PIK3CA gene mutations were divided into four arm cohorts with
equivalent tumor volumes and treated with either vehicle, ridaforolimus
(1 mg/kg, lapatinib (150 mg/kg) and trastuzumab (10mg/kg) or the
combination of lapatinib/trastuzumab and ridaforolimus. At day 22, tumors
were collected to measure downstream target proteins and calculate the
proliferation and apoptosis index.In the ARK1 USC xenograft cohort,
inhibition of tumor growth was observed following treatment with
ridaforolimus compared to vehicle (PSubsets of uterine serous carcinomas
(USC) harbor simultaneous HER2 (ERBB2) over-expression and gain of
function mutations in PIK3CA that may play a role in resistance to single
agent anti-HER2 therapies. Targeting the mammalian target of rapamycin
(mTOR) may be a promising option to heighten anti-tumor response and
restore sensitivity to anti-HER2 therapies.HER2 gene amplified cell lines
with (ARK1, E542K) and without (ARK2) PIK3CA gene mutations were divided
into four arm cohorts with equivalent tumor volumes and treated with
either vehicle, ridaforolimus (1 mg/kg, lapatinib (150 mg/kg) and
trastuzumab (10mg/kg) or the combination of lapatinib/trastuzumab and
ridaforolimus. At day 22, tumors were collected to measure downstream
target proteins and calculate the proliferation and apoptosis index.In
the ARK1 USC xenograft cohort, inhibition of tumor growth was observed
following treatment with ridaforolimus compared to vehicle (P<0.05) and
this was not statistically different from the lapatinib/trastuzumab
group. However, when lapatinib/trastuzumab was combined with
ridaforolimus, improved anti-tumor activity was observed compared to all
other arms (PSubsets of uterine serous carcinomas (USC) harbor
simultaneous HER2 (ERBB2) over-expression and gain of function mutations
in PIK3CA that may play a role in resistance to single agent anti-HER2
therapies. Targeting the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) may be a
promising option to heighten anti-tumor response and restore sensitivity
to anti-HER2 therapies.HER2 gene amplified cell lines with (ARK1, E542K)
and without (ARK2) PIK3CA gene mutations were divided into four arm
cohorts with equivalent tumor volumes and treated with either vehicle,
ridaforolimus (1 mg/kg, lapatinib (150 mg/kg) and trastuzumab (10mg/kg)
or the combination of lapatinib/trastuzumab and ridaforolimus. At day 22,
tumors were collected to measure downstream target proteins and calculate
the proliferation and apoptosis index.In the ARK1 USC xenograft cohort,
inhibition of tumor growth was observed following treatment with
ridaforolimus compared to vehicle (P<0.05) and this was not statistically
different from the lapatinib/trastuzumab group. However, when
lapatinib/trastuzumab was combined with ridaforolimus, improved
anti-tumor activity was observed compared to all other arms (P<0.01).
Similarly, the treatment of ARK2 mice with ridaforolimus slowed tumor
growth (PSubsets of uterine serous carcinomas (USC) harbor simultaneous
HER2 (ERBB2) over-expression and gain of function mutations in PIK3CA
that may play a role in resistance to single agent anti-HER2 therapies.
Targeting the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) may be a promising
option to heighten anti-tumor response and restore sensitivity to
anti-HER2 therapies.HER2 gene amplified cell lines with (ARK1, E542K) and
without (ARK2) PIK3CA gene mutations were divided into four arm cohorts
with equivalent tumor volumes and treated with either vehicle,
ridaforolimus (1 mg/kg, lapatinib (150 mg/kg) and trastuzumab (10mg/kg)
or the combination of lapatinib/trastuzumab and ridaforolimus. At day 22,
tumors were collected to measure downstream target proteins and calculate
the proliferation and apoptosis index.In the ARK1 USC xenograft cohort,
inhibition of tumor growth was observed following treatment with
ridaforolimus compared to vehicle (P<0.05) and this was not statistically
different from the lapatinib/trastuzumab group. However, when
lapatinib/trastuzumab was combined with ridaforolimus, improved
anti-tumor activity was observed compared to all other arms (P<0.01).
Similarly, the treatment of ARK2 mice with ridaforolimus slowed tumor
growth (P<0.05) compared to the vehicle. Both the lapatinib/trastuzumab
and lapatinib/trastuzumab/ridaforolimus arms induced reductions in tumor
sizes compared to the vehicle and ridaforolimus arms (PSubsets of uterine
serous carcinomas (USC) harbor simultaneous HER2 (ERBB2) over-expression
and gain of function mutations in PIK3CA that may play a role in
resistance to single agent anti-HER2 therapies. Targeting the mammalian
target of rapamycin (mTOR) may be a promising option to heighten
anti-tumor response and restore sensitivity to anti-HER2 therapies.HER2
gene amplified cell lines with (ARK1, E542K) and without (ARK2) PIK3CA
gene mutations were divided into four arm cohorts with equivalent tumor
volumes and treated with either vehicle, ridaforolimus (1 mg/kg,
lapatinib (150 mg/kg) and trastuzumab (10mg/kg) or the combination of
lapatinib/trastuzumab and ridaforolimus. At day 22, tumors were collected
to measure downstream target proteins and calculate the proliferation and
apoptosis index.In the ARK1 USC xenograft cohort, inhibition of tumor
growth was observed following treatment with ridaforolimus compared to
vehicle (P<0.05) and this was not statistically different from the
lapatinib/trastuzumab group. However, when lapatinib/trastuzumab was
combined with ridaforolimus, improved anti-tumor activity was observed
compared to all other arms (P<0.01). Similarly, the treatment of ARK2
mice with ridaforolimus slowed tumor growth (P<0.05) compared to the
vehicle. Both the lapatinib/trastuzumab and
lapatinib/trastuzumab/ridaforolimus arms induced reductions in tumor
sizes compared to the vehicle and ridaforolimus arms (P<0.01), but
ridaforolimus failed to add any additional anti-tumor activity.Analysis
of the treatment effects revealed the lapatinib/trastuzumab/ridaforolimus
therapy was required to decrease Ki67 positive cells in ARK1 xenografts
compared to the vehicle (PSubsets of uterine serous carcinomas (USC)
harbor simultaneous HER2 (ERBB2) over-expression and gain of function
mutations in PIK3CA that may play a role in resistance to single agent
anti-HER2 therapies. Targeting the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR)
may be a promising option to heighten anti-tumor response and restore
sensitivity to anti-HER2 therapies.HER2 gene amplified cell lines with
(ARK1, E542K) and without (ARK2) PIK3CA gene mutations were divided into
four arm cohorts with equivalent tumor volumes and treated with either
vehicle, ridaforolimus (1 mg/kg, lapatinib (150 mg/kg) and trastuzumab
(10mg/kg) or the combination of lapatinib/trastuzumab and ridaforolimus.
At day 22, tumors were collected to measure downstream target proteins
and calculate the proliferation and apoptosis index.In the ARK1 USC
xenograft cohort, inhibition of tumor growth was observed following
treatment with ridaforolimus compared to vehicle (P<0.05) and this was
not statistically different from the lapatinib/trastuzumab group.
However, when lapatinib/trastuzumab was combined with ridaforolimus,
improved anti-tumor activity was observed compared to all other arms
(P<0.01). Similarly, the treatment of ARK2 mice with ridaforolimus slowed
tumor growth (P<0.05) compared to the vehicle. Both the
lapatinib/trastuzumab and lapatinib/trastuzumab/ridaforolimus arms
induced reductions in tumor sizes compared to the vehicle and
ridaforolimus arms (P<0.01), but ridaforolimus failed to add any
additional anti-tumor activity.Analysis of the treatment effects revealed
the lapatinib/trastuzumab/ridaforolimus therapy was required to decrease
Ki67 positive cells in ARK1 xenografts compared to the vehicle (P<0.01)
however in ARK2 xenografts, lapatinib/trastuzumab was sufficient to
decrease Ki67 positive cells with or without ridaforolimus. Similarly,
differential TUNEL staining was observed in the two cell lines with
ridaforolimus being required to increase the percentage of apoptotic
cells in ARK1, while the apoptotic index was solely dependent of
lapatinib/trastuzumab administration in ARK2. In ARK1, we observed that
pS6 expression was reduced (pSubsets of uterine serous carcinomas (USC)
harbor simultaneous HER2 (ERBB2) over-expression and gain of function
mutations in PIK3CA that may play a role in resistance to single agent
anti-HER2 therapies. Targeting the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR)
may be a promising option to heighten anti-tumor response and restore
sensitivity to anti-HER2 therapies.HER2 gene amplified cell lines with
(ARK1, E542K) and without (ARK2) PIK3CA gene mutations were divided into
four arm cohorts with equivalent tumor volumes and treated with either
vehicle, ridaforolimus (1 mg/kg, lapatinib (150 mg/kg) and trastuzumab
(10mg/kg) or the combination of lapatinib/trastuzumab and ridaforolimus.
At day 22, tumors were collected to measure downstream target proteins
and calculate the proliferation and apoptosis index.In the ARK1 USC
xenograft cohort, inhibition of tumor growth was observed following
treatment with ridaforolimus compared to vehicle (P<0.05) and this was
not statistically different from the lapatinib/trastuzumab group.
However, when lapatinib/trastuzumab was combined with ridaforolimus,
improved anti-tumor activity was observed compared to all other arms
(P<0.01). Similarly, the treatment of ARK2 mice with ridaforolimus slowed
tumor growth (P<0.05) compared to the vehicle. Both the
lapatinib/trastuzumab and lapatinib/trastuzumab/ridaforolimus arms
induced reductions in tumor sizes compared to the vehicle and
ridaforolimus arms (P<0.01), but ridaforolimus failed to add any
additional anti-tumor activity.Analysis of the treatment effects revealed
the lapatinib/trastuzumab/ridaforolimus therapy was required to decrease
Ki67 positive cells in ARK1 xenografts compared to the vehicle (P<0.01)
however in ARK2 xenografts, lapatinib/trastuzumab was sufficient to
decrease Ki67 positive cells with or without ridaforolimus. Similarly,
differential TUNEL staining was observed in the two cell lines with
ridaforolimus being required to increase the percentage of apoptotic
cells in ARK1, while the apoptotic index was solely dependent of
lapatinib/trastuzumab administration in ARK2. In ARK1, we observed that
pS6 expression was reduced (p<0.01) only in the arms where ridaforalimus
was administered but in ARK2, its expression was again independent of
mTOR inhibition.These data suggest that USCs harboring gain of function
PIK3CA mutations are relatively insensitive to anti-HER2 therapies. The
addition of downstream mTOR inhibition to HER2 blockade increased the
anti-tumor activity only in the xenograft model with PIK3CA mutation and
provides rationale for clinical trials in HER2 positive endometrial
cancers based on molecular genotype.

