Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Vascular shutdown anti-tumor effect of tetra-arsenic oxide on
cervical cancer cells


Background: Tetra arsenic oxide (As4O6) is a novel arsenic compound that
exhibits potent anti-vascular activity and significantly suppresses solid
tumor growth. The present study was conducted to investigate the vascular
shutdown effects in HPV E6/E7-expressing tumors bearing mice.Methods:
After tumors reached 300-350 mm3 in volume, mice were randomly divided
into four groups and treated intraperitoneally with three different dose
of As4O6 at 1-week interval. Tumor blood perfusion and vascularity were
visualized using Hoechst 33342, CD31 staining respectively from 1 hour to
1 week after As4O6 treatment. Histopathological features were observed
following hematoxylin and eosin staining. Apoptosis, TNF-a, caspase
activity and tumor regression were used to determine the mechanisms for
vascular shutdown effects.Results: As4O6 significantly suppressed tumor
growth compared with control group. This tumor growth inhibition led to
massive necrosis and vascular shutdown in tumor tissue, and also tumor
tissue necrosis and apoptosis. Mice treated with As4O6 had a reduction in
tumor vessel dimensions compared with the control animals, with CD31
stained microvessels still being apparent at the outer edge of the tumor.
Additionally, in the control group, vessel area and diameter increased
over time, whereas in the tumors from the As4O6-treated group, vessel
area and diameter remained stable or decreased. Apoptotic cell
populations induced by As4O6 were increased by double staining the TC-1
cells with annexin V and propidium iodide.Conclusions: The results
suggest that As4O6 has potential anticancer activity that is exerted by
vascular shutdown in C57BL/6 mice transplanted with TC-1 cells. The study
is novel in the observation of recovery of disturbed vascular function.

