Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The cell cycle checkpoint kinase 1/2 inhibitor, LY2606368 with
PARP inhibition results in synergistic cytotoxicity in high-grade serous
ovarian cancer (HGSOC) at lower than physiologically administered
concentrations


Background: Chk1/2 are major cell cycle regulators in p53-deficient
tumors, such as HGSOC. Chk1 plays a critical role in DNA repair,
facilitating the BRCA2-RAD51 interaction by phosphorylating the BRCA2
C-terminal domain and Thr309-RAD51. Clinical activity with the Chk1/2
inhibitor, LY2606368 mesylate monohydrate (LY), has been observed in
solid tumors. We hypothesize that Chk1 inhibition would sensitize HGSOC
to PARP inhibition (PARPi) by preventing nuclear RAD51 foci formation,
thus impairing DNA repair. We investigated potential synergy of the
combination of LY and the PARPi, olaparib (O), in HGSOC cell lines,
testing lower concentrations than clinically attained.Materials and
Methods: We examined cytotoxicity, DNA damage, and nuclear RAD51 foci
formation by LY and/or O using XTT assay, comet assay and
immunofluorescence (IF), in 3 HGSOC cell lines: two BRCA1/2 wild type
(CAOV3, OV90), and one with BRCA2 mutation (PEO1). We examined a dose
range based on clinically achievable concentrations of LY (0.53M1.34M)
and O (7.8M11.0M) and calculated IC50 concentrations for cytotoxicity.
The combination index (CI) was calculated to evaluate synergism. DNA
damage and nuclear RAD51 foci formation were examined. DMSO was used as
vehicle control. All experiments were performed in at least three
replicates in all cell lines. Results are presented as mean SEM.Results:
LY alone yielded cytotoxicity in CAOV3, OV90, and PEO1 with IC50 6.34nM,
35.2nM, 12.6nM, respectively. O 5M monotherapy resulted in 47%, 13%, and
69% cytotoxicity in CAOV3, OV90, and PEO1. LY/O combination showed 51%,
58% and 82% cell injury in CAOV3, OV90 and PEO1. CI values indicated
cytotoxicity synergism with the combination. LY/O (5nM/5M) treatment
showed greater DNA damage than O alone in OV90 and PEO1 (pBackground:
Chk1/2 are major cell cycle regulators in p53-deficient tumors, such as
HGSOC. Chk1 plays a critical role in DNA repair, facilitating the
BRCA2-RAD51 interaction by phosphorylating the BRCA2 C-terminal domain
and Thr309-RAD51. Clinical activity with the Chk1/2 inhibitor, LY2606368
mesylate monohydrate (LY), has been observed in solid tumors. We
hypothesize that Chk1 inhibition would sensitize HGSOC to PARP inhibition
(PARPi) by preventing nuclear RAD51 foci formation, thus impairing DNA
repair. We investigated potential synergy of the combination of LY and
the PARPi, olaparib (O), in HGSOC cell lines, testing lower
concentrations than clinically attained.Materials and Methods: We
examined cytotoxicity, DNA damage, and nuclear RAD51 foci formation by LY
and/or O using XTT assay, comet assay and immunofluorescence (IF), in 3
HGSOC cell lines: two BRCA1/2 wild type (CAOV3, OV90), and one with BRCA2
mutation (PEO1). We examined a dose range based on clinically achievable
concentrations of LY (0.53M1.34M) and O (7.8M11.0M) and calculated IC50
concentrations for cytotoxicity. The combination index (CI) was
calculated to evaluate synergism. DNA damage and nuclear RAD51 foci
formation were examined. DMSO was used as vehicle control. All
experiments were performed in at least three replicates in all cell
lines. Results are presented as mean SEM.Results: LY alone yielded
cytotoxicity in CAOV3, OV90, and PEO1 with IC50 6.34nM, 35.2nM, 12.6nM,
respectively. O 5M monotherapy resulted in 47%, 13%, and 69% cytotoxicity
in CAOV3, OV90, and PEO1. LY/O combination showed 51%, 58% and 82% cell
injury in CAOV3, OV90 and PEO1. CI values indicated cytotoxicity
synergism with the combination. LY/O (5nM/5M) treatment showed greater
DNA damage than O alone in OV90 and PEO1 (p<0.05), and a similar trend
was observed in CAOV3 (20.2% 3.10 vs. 6.71% 1.08, p = 0.05). The mean
percentage of cells with 5 nuclear RAD51 foci decreased with LY/O
(5nM/5M) combination therapy compared to O alone in CAOV3 (9.03% 1.85 vs.
36.3% 7.45, pBackground: Chk1/2 are major cell cycle regulators in
p53-deficient tumors, such as HGSOC. Chk1 plays a critical role in DNA
repair, facilitating the BRCA2-RAD51 interaction by phosphorylating the
BRCA2 C-terminal domain and Thr309-RAD51. Clinical activity with the
Chk1/2 inhibitor, LY2606368 mesylate monohydrate (LY), has been observed
in solid tumors. We hypothesize that Chk1 inhibition would sensitize
HGSOC to PARP inhibition (PARPi) by preventing nuclear RAD51 foci
formation, thus impairing DNA repair. We investigated potential synergy
of the combination of LY and the PARPi, olaparib (O), in HGSOC cell
lines, testing lower concentrations than clinically attained.Materials
and Methods: We examined cytotoxicity, DNA damage, and nuclear RAD51 foci
formation by LY and/or O using XTT assay, comet assay and
immunofluorescence (IF), in 3 HGSOC cell lines: two BRCA1/2 wild type
(CAOV3, OV90), and one with BRCA2 mutation (PEO1). We examined a dose
range based on clinically achievable concentrations of LY (0.53M1.34M)
and O (7.8M11.0M) and calculated IC50 concentrations for cytotoxicity.
The combination index (CI) was calculated to evaluate synergism. DNA
damage and nuclear RAD51 foci formation were examined. DMSO was used as
vehicle control. All experiments were performed in at least three
replicates in all cell lines. Results are presented as mean SEM.Results:
LY alone yielded cytotoxicity in CAOV3, OV90, and PEO1 with IC50 6.34nM,
35.2nM, 12.6nM, respectively. O 5M monotherapy resulted in 47%, 13%, and
69% cytotoxicity in CAOV3, OV90, and PEO1. LY/O combination showed 51%,
58% and 82% cell injury in CAOV3, OV90 and PEO1. CI values indicated
cytotoxicity synergism with the combination. LY/O (5nM/5M) treatment
showed greater DNA damage than O alone in OV90 and PEO1 (p<0.05), and a
similar trend was observed in CAOV3 (20.2% 3.10 vs. 6.71% 1.08, p =
0.05). The mean percentage of cells with 5 nuclear RAD51 foci decreased
with LY/O (5nM/5M) combination therapy compared to O alone in CAOV3
(9.03% 1.85 vs. 36.3% 7.45, p<0.01) and OV90 (3.66% 1.84 vs. 22.9% 3.08,
pBackground: Chk1/2 are major cell cycle regulators in p53-deficient
tumors, such as HGSOC. Chk1 plays a critical role in DNA repair,
facilitating the BRCA2-RAD51 interaction by phosphorylating the BRCA2
C-terminal domain and Thr309-RAD51. Clinical activity with the Chk1/2
inhibitor, LY2606368 mesylate monohydrate (LY), has been observed in
solid tumors. We hypothesize that Chk1 inhibition would sensitize HGSOC
to PARP inhibition (PARPi) by preventing nuclear RAD51 foci formation,
thus impairing DNA repair. We investigated potential synergy of the
combination of LY and the PARPi, olaparib (O), in HGSOC cell lines,
testing lower concentrations than clinically attained.Materials and
Methods: We examined cytotoxicity, DNA damage, and nuclear RAD51 foci
formation by LY and/or O using XTT assay, comet assay and
immunofluorescence (IF), in 3 HGSOC cell lines: two BRCA1/2 wild type
(CAOV3, OV90), and one with BRCA2 mutation (PEO1). We examined a dose
range based on clinically achievable concentrations of LY (0.53M1.34M)
and O (7.8M11.0M) and calculated IC50 concentrations for cytotoxicity.
The combination index (CI) was calculated to evaluate synergism. DNA
damage and nuclear RAD51 foci formation were examined. DMSO was used as
vehicle control. All experiments were performed in at least three
replicates in all cell lines. Results are presented as mean SEM.Results:
LY alone yielded cytotoxicity in CAOV3, OV90, and PEO1 with IC50 6.34nM,
35.2nM, 12.6nM, respectively. O 5M monotherapy resulted in 47%, 13%, and
69% cytotoxicity in CAOV3, OV90, and PEO1. LY/O combination showed 51%,
58% and 82% cell injury in CAOV3, OV90 and PEO1. CI values indicated
cytotoxicity synergism with the combination. LY/O (5nM/5M) treatment
showed greater DNA damage than O alone in OV90 and PEO1 (p<0.05), and a
similar trend was observed in CAOV3 (20.2% 3.10 vs. 6.71% 1.08, p =
0.05). The mean percentage of cells with 5 nuclear RAD51 foci decreased
with LY/O (5nM/5M) combination therapy compared to O alone in CAOV3
(9.03% 1.85 vs. 36.3% 7.45, p<0.01) and OV90 (3.66% 1.84 vs. 22.9% 3.08,
p<0.01), but not in PEO1 (1.26% 1.26 vs. 3.73% 3.73). Ongoing work
includes cell cycle analysis and immunoblotting to examine biochemical
changes in DNA repair and cell cycle checkpoint pathways.Conclusions: Our
preliminary results suggest synergistic activity of the combination of LY
and PARPi in HGSOC cell lines using concentrations that are lower than
clinically attainable in patients.

