Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The p53 mutation R273H contributed to drug resistance of EGFR
tyrosine kinase inhibitors


Tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) of epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR) were the standard first-line treatments for lung cancers with
activating EGFR mutations. Emergent drug resistance is the major problem
in the patients who received treatment of EGFR TKIs. Second point
mutation T790M mutations could be found in 50-60% patients who had drug
resistance to EGFR TKIs. Alternative pathway of Met signaling,
transformation to small cell lung cancer, over-expression of other HER
family receptors or epithelial mesenchymal transit were reported in these
patients who had drug resistance to EGFR TKIs. NFKB pathway played a role
of early resistance to EGFR TKIs in the patients.The p53 mutation could
be found in 70-80% lung adenocarcinoma patients. These mutations could be
found in lung cancer patients who had wild type or mutated EGFR. Lung
adenocarcinomas with mutated p53 lose tumor suppressor function of wild
type p53 and have new function from mutated p53. We thought p53 mutation
may have gain of function and result in drug resistance to EGFR TKIs in
lung cancer patients.We knocked down p53 in three cancer cell line,
MDA-MB-468 (p53 R273H), BT-549 (p53 R249S) and H322 (p53 R248L). We found
knockdown of p53 R273H in MDA-MB-468 increased sensitivity to gefitinib.
Knockdown of p53 R249S and p53 R248L showed the same response to
gefitinib in cancer cell lines BT-549 and H322.Lung cancer cell line
HCC827 had EGFR exon 19 deletion and was sensitive to gefitinib. We
overexpressed p53 R273H, p53 R157H and p53 R249S in HCC827 lung cancer
cell line. Overexpression of p53 R273H increased resistance to gefitinib
in HCC827 lung cancer cell line. Overexpression of p53 R157H and p53
R249S did not increased the resistance to gefitinib.Conclusion: Gain of
function of p53 R273H increased resistance to EGFR TKIs in cancer cell
lines. Further immunohistochemistry staining and gene analysis of mutated
p53 will be done in lung adenocarcinoma from lung cancer patients who
received EGFR TKIs.

