Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Coregulation of progesterone receptor and O-GlcNAc in breast cancer


Progesterone receptor (PR) activity is highly regulated by
post-translational modifications. Rapid immunoprecipitation mass
spectrometry of endogenous protein (RIME) analysis identified O-linked
N-acetylglucosamine (O-GlcNAc) transferase (OGT) as a PR-interacting
protein. OGT catalyzes the addition of N-acetylglucosamine sugar moieties
to serine/threonine residues in order to coordinate several cellular
processesincluding transcription, metabolism, and cell fate. Further
investigation revealed that PR is O-GlcNAcylated, and enhanced OGT
activity subsequently decreases PR protein stability. Interestingly,
PR-expressing breast cancer cells display lower OGT levels in comparison
to PR-null counterparts, suggesting that PR may govern its own
O-GlcNAcylation or that of other key regulatory proteins. Our lab
previously identified a phosphorylation site at Ser-81 in PR that
potentiates the expression of PR proliferative target genes.
Phosphorylation and O-GlcNAcylation are known to compete for the same
residue substrates; and our preliminary data suggests that PR
O-GlcNAcylation may also alter its transcriptional activity for a subset
of target genes. While the role of PR in breast cancer progression is
well characterized, the overall effect of protein O-GlcNAcylation within
these tumors remains highly controversial. Collectively, our data
supports a potential regulatory mechanism wherein OGT serves to restrain
PR function in early PR+ tumors; whereas those that have lost PR
expression may exhibit the elevated pro-tumorigenic OGT activity
previously associated with more advanced breast cancers. As such, the
continued study of O-GlcNAcylation with respect to PR stability,
phosphorylation, and transcriptional activity may lead to a clearer
understanding of these effectors and their contribution to breast cancer
progression.

