Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Treatment of breast cancer xenografts with paclitaxel enriches for
cancer stem cells that can be targeted by a ROR1-specific antibody


Although initially responsive to hormone therapy and chemotherapy, many
patients with metastatic breast cancer develop resistant and potentially
fatal disease. One of the mechanisms of resistance is the emergence of
post-treatment survival of a small number of breast cancer stem cells
(CSC), which are relatively resistant to chemotherapy, have self-renewal
capacity, and can repopulate the tumor and spread to distal sites. New
therapies are required to eliminate breast CSC that could be used alone
or in combination with standard therapy to mitigate the risk of
developing relapsed disease.In this study, treatment of immune-deficient
mice bearing breast-cancer patient-derived xenografts (PDX) with
paclitaxel reduced tumor volumes, but enhanced the proportion of tumor
cells that expressed ROR1, an RTK-like orphan receptor that is ordinarily
expressed during embryogenesis. We found that breast cancer tumors with
high levels of ROR1 expression were enriched for stem-cell
gene-expression signatures. Moreover, cells isolated from breast cancer
PDX that were positive for CSC markers such as aldehyde dehydrogenase 1
(ALDH1) were enriched for ROR1 expression, and ROR1+-cells isolated from
breast cancer PDX had a greater capacity to form spheroids in vitro or
re-engraft immune-deficient mice, than did ROR1-negative (ROR1Neg) cells
isolated from the same tumor population. Treatment of breast cancer cells
with a humanized anti-ROR1 mAb, UC-961, suppressed expression of the
polycomb-ring-finger oncogene Bmi-1, and genes encoding proteins
implicated in the epithelial-mesenchymal transition. UC-961 also impaired
the capacity of breast-cancer cells to form spheroids or to re-engraft
immune-deficient mice. Finally, combined therapy with UC-961 and
paclitaxel appeared more effective in reducing re-engraftment potential
than either agent alone (Table1). Collectively, this study implies that
patients with advanced breast cancer may benefit from anti-CSC therapy,
either alone or in combination with conventional anti-cancer drugs.

