Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Diffusion-weighted MRI can predict response to aflibercept in in
vivo models


BACKGROUND: The liver is the most frequent metastatic site in colorectal
cancer (CRC), and relevant in vivo models are needed to study the
efficacy of anticancer drugs in this setting. Aflibercept, targeting
vascular endothelial growth factors A and B and placental growth factor,
is one of the most recently approved antiangiogenic agents for treatment
of metastatic CRC. In the present work, the efficacy of aflibercept was
investigated in experimental models of liver metastases in nude mice and
growth progression was monitored using non-invasive imaging.METHODS:
Liver metastases were established in mice by intrasplenic injection of
CRC cell lines HCT116 and HT29 transfected with luciferase. Magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) (7T) and bioluminescent imaging (IVIS spectrum)
were used to monitor tumor growth. Aflibercept was delivered
intraperitoneally. To further characterize treatment response in
metastatic tumors, diffusion-weighted (DW)-MR images were obtained. At
termination tumors were sampled for histopathologic analysis.RESULTS:
Mice bearing HCT116 xenografts responded well to treatment and a
significant increase in survival compared to vehicle treated animals was
observed (pBACKGROUND: The liver is the most frequent metastatic site in
colorectal cancer (CRC), and relevant in vivo models are needed to study
the efficacy of anticancer drugs in this setting. Aflibercept, targeting
vascular endothelial growth factors A and B and placental growth factor,
is one of the most recently approved antiangiogenic agents for treatment
of metastatic CRC. In the present work, the efficacy of aflibercept was
investigated in experimental models of liver metastases in nude mice and
growth progression was monitored using non-invasive imaging.METHODS:
Liver metastases were established in mice by intrasplenic injection of
CRC cell lines HCT116 and HT29 transfected with luciferase. Magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) (7T) and bioluminescent imaging (IVIS spectrum)
were used to monitor tumor growth. Aflibercept was delivered
intraperitoneally. To further characterize treatment response in
metastatic tumors, diffusion-weighted (DW)-MR images were obtained. At
termination tumors were sampled for histopathologic analysis.RESULTS:
Mice bearing HCT116 xenografts responded well to treatment and a
significant increase in survival compared to vehicle treated animals was
observed (p< 0.001), in addition to decreased tumor burden. No increase
in survival was observed upon aflibercept treatment in HT29 xenografts (p
= 0.155), whereas in one of two experiments performed a significant
reduction in tumor volume was observed, suggesting that there was a
slight response to treatment.T2-weighted MRI was used to quantify tumor
volume by manual delineation using the OsiriX software. MRI-assessed
tumor volumes correlated well with tumor weight at the time of
termination, while for bioluminescence measurements no such correlation
was observed. In contrast, bioluminescence was a sensitive detection
method early in the experiments when MRI did not show liver tumor.DW-MRI
was obtained and apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) tumor maps were
calculated using the nordicIce software. A slight increase in ADC values
was observed for HT29 tumors while there was a large increase in ADC
values for HCT116 tumors after treatment with aflibercept. This
corresponded well with histologic evaluation of tumors, showing increased
necrosis in HCT116 tumors, but not in HT29 tumors.CONCLUSION: Our results
demonstrate efficacy of aflibercept in an orthotopic model of liver
metastases in CRC. MRI could be used to monitor treatment efficacy with
high precision, while bioluminescence measurement could detect
small-volume disease with high sensitivity, but was less specific in
high-volume disease. Interestingly, ADC values obtained from DW-MRI were
highly predictive of treatment response by clearly visualizing and
quantifying tumor necrosis.

