Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oncogenic chromatin factors drive cell type-specific transcription
within megadomains in NUT midline carcinoma


NUT midline carcinoma (NMC), a subtype of squamous cell cancer, is one of
the most aggressive human solid malignancies known. NMC is driven by the
creation of a translocation oncoprotein, BRD4-NUT, which blocks
differentiation and drives growth of NMC cells. BRD4-NUT forms
distinctive nuclear foci in patient tumors, which we find correlate with
100 unprecedented, hyperacetylated expanses of chromatin that reach up to
2 Mb in size. These megadomains appear to be the result of aberrant,
feed-forward loops of acetylation and binding of acetylated histones.
Megadomains drive transcription of underlying DNA in NMC patient cells
and in nave cells induced to express BRD4-NUT. Here we characterize the
constituents of BRD4-NUT chromatin complexes using a crosslinking
approach, BioTAP-XL. We find many transcriptional activating proteins
known to associate with BRD4, along with novel interactors including
p300/CBP and a previously uncharacterized BRD4-NUT Megadomain Associated
Protein (BMAP1). BMAP1 is expressed in primary NMC tissue and a subset of
more common head and neck squamous cell carcinomas (HNSQC). Concurrently,
we discovered a patient-derived NMC harboring a novel BMAP1-NUT fusion.
BMAP-NUT blocks differentiation, and like BRD4-NUT recruits p300 to form
hyperacetylated megadomains, including at the MYC locus. Thus, our
proteomic and genetic approaches have converged on a novel mechanism that
involves reprogramming very large regulatory regions to drive oncogenic
transcription.

