Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hypoxic long noncoding RNA NDRG1-OT1 inhibit NDRG1 in MCF-7 breast
cancer cell line


Hypoxia is a crucial factor that associated with solid tumor progression
by driving multiple signaling pathway. Our lab previously reported that
NDRG1 was oxygen-responsive genes and could affect cellular function in a
breast cancer cell line MCF-7. Long-non coding RNAs (lncRNAs) have
recently emerged as important regulators of tumor progression by
participating in several process of gene expression. However, it is
unclear whether lncRNAs are responsed to oxygen concentrations in breast
cancer. Therefore, the aim of this study is to identify lncRNAs which are
responsive upon changes in oxygen concentrations, and its regulatory
mechanism in the breast cancer MCF-7 cells. We investigated the
differentially expressed lncRNAs in different oxygen concentrations using
next-generation sequencing (NGS) and validated these results through
quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR).
We found an lncRNA, NDRG1-OT1, that was up-regulated during hypoxia and
down-regulated during reoxygenation. Next, we identified the
differentially expressed genes regulated by NDRG1-OT1 using microarrays
and confirmed these results through qRT-PCR and Western blotting. We
found an oxygen responsive gene, NDRG1, was inhibited by NDRG1-OT1.
Furthermore, Ingenuity Pathway Analysis(IPA) indicated that NDRG1-OT1
could involve in the Ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. We considered
NDRG1-OT1 might regulate NDRG1 stability and ubiquitination, and we are
proving these possibility by immunoblotting and immunoprecipitation.
These findings may provide new insights into epigenetic regulation of
breast cancer during hypoxia.

