Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MEDI4276, a HER2-targeting antibody tubulysin conjugate, displays
potent in vitro and in vivo activity in preclinical studies


Antibody drug conjugates (ADCs) combine the specificity of antibodies
with the potent cytotoxicity of small molecule drugs and have shown to
provide therapeutic options for various cancers. We report herein the
discovery of a HER2-targeting ADC MEDI4276 that showed potent cell
killing activity in vitro in cancer cell lines that express the HER2
receptor. The observed in vitro activity translated into in vivo tumor
growth inhibition in various xenograft mouse models. MEDI4276 is a
homogeneous molecule with precise control of drug loading following site
specific conjugation of a cytotoxic drug. The drug in MEDI4276 is MMETA,
a fully synthetic analog of the tubulysin family that showed pM potency
in a panel of cancer cell lines. MMETA was conjugated to the antibody via
engineered cysteines with a maleimide-bearing mc-Lys protease cleavable
linker. The antibody in MEDI4276 is a bivalent biparatopic antibody
targeting two distinct non-overlapping epitopes on HER2 that leads to
antibody-receptor clustering following binding and thus promoting
internalization, lysosomal trafficking and degradation. The combination
of enhanced internalization and potent cytotoxic drug allows for this ADC
to kill tumor cell populations with a broader range of HER2 expression.
Preclinical studies showed that MEDI4276 induced tumor regression in
HER2-positive tumor models that had developed acquired resistance to
T-DM1 and in a number of models with lower HER2 expression that are
refractory to T-DM1 treatment. Overall, our findings underscore the
potential application of MEDI4276 to treat a large patient population
that is ineligible for or relapsed/refractory to current HER2-targeted
therapies. MEDI4276 is currently being investigated in a Phase I clinical
trial.

