Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Design, synthesis, and biological evaluation of thieno[2,3-d] and
thieno[3,2-d]pyrimidines as dual acting RTK inhibitors and microtubule
targeting antitumor agents


Microtubules, attractive targets for drug development as anticancer
agents, play vital roles in multiple aspects of cellular metabolism.
These agents have been successfully used in the clinic for the treatment
of various cancers. However, the utility of such agents are often limited
by the emergence of tumor resistance due to overexpression of
P-glycoprotein and/or III-tubulin. Tumor angiogenic mechanisms are
important for tumor growth and metastasis are inhibited by antiangiogenic
agents (AAs). AAs are usually cytostatic, and their utility in cancer
chemotherapy lies in their combination with cytotoxic chemotherapeutic
agents. Clinical combinations of antiangiogenic agents with antitubulin
agents have been particularly successful. Recently, we reported
water-soluble tubulin targeting pyrrolo[2,3-d]- and
pyrrolo[3,2-d]pyrimidine analogs as antitumor agents, that circumvent
drug resistance. These analogs also possess RTK (EGFR, VEGFR2 and PDGFR)
inhibitory activity. To further explore the activity of these dual
RTK/tubulin inhibitors we designed isosteric thieno[2,3-d] pyrimidine and
thieno[3,2-d]pyrimidine analogs which increased microtubule
depolymerizing potency by 14 to 24-fold (AG95 IC50 = 7.0 2.7 nM, AG370
IC50 = 7.6 2.1 nM) compared with the lead compounds (AG85 IC50 = 96.6 5.3
nM, AG20 IC50 = 183 3.4 nM). Substitution at the 4-anilino position of
both these scaffolds were also explored with various moieties to afford
the 6-methoxy-tetrahydroquinoline moiety which possess the optimum
balance of microtubule depolymerizing activity (AG372 IC50 = 4.3 1.6 nM,
AG337 IC50 = 3.4 0.9 nM,) and RTK (EGFR, VEGFR2 and PDGFR) inhibitory
activity. These two compounds demonstrated excellent inhibition for EGFR
(IC50 = 12.6 1.2 nM, 28.5 3.9 nM), VEGFR-2 (25.2 7.2 nM, 216.1 18.6 nM)
and PDGFR (IC50 = 25.6 7.2 nM, 266.8 35.4 nM) comparable to the standard
clinically used agents. These attributes of the 4-N-substituted thieno
pyrimidines provides the impetus for further development of these
compounds as dual acting targeted antitumor agents.

