Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of Her2 overexpression in Middle Eastern papillary
thyroid cancer


Thyroid cancer is the second most common malignancy among females in
Saudi Arabia accounting for 7.4% of all cancers and 10.6% of all female
malignant cancer. Among different subtypes, papillary thyroid cancer
(PTC) is the most common subtype of thyroid cancer. Although the overall
cancer related ten year survival rate for PTC has reached 90%, local,
regional and distant metastasis does occur in 10% of cases. Therefore, in
search for new therapeutic targets for PTC, we investigated the role of
Her2 oncogene in PTC as this gene is known to be involved in other
cancers such as breast cancer. The aim of this study was to determine the
prevalence and prognostic role of Her2 overexpression in Middle Eastern
papillary thyroid carcinoma by immunohistochemistry (IHC), Fluorescent
In-Situ Hybridization (FISH) and clinical data. A tissue microarray (TMA)
containing >1000 PTC cases with follow-up data was used. TMA sections
were analysed at protein and DNA level using IHC and FISH. FISH analyses
were performed to look for the gain or amplifications in Her2 gene. IHC
analysis showed Her2 overexpression in 19.7% of our cases of PTC.
Elevated expression was almost exclusively 2+ (194 tumors) and only
rarely 3+ (1 tumor). Interestingly, no amplification of Her2 gene was
visualized by FISH. Only 3% of our cases showed mildly elevated HER2 gene
copy numbers not reaching the threshold for amplification. HER2
overexpression and copy number gains were unrelated to tumor stage,
metastasis, patient survival and other clinical and pathological
parameters. Our results demonstrated that Her2 overexpression occurs at
relevant frequency in papillary thyroid cancer and in the absence of gene
amplification. Additionally, expression of Her2 seems to hold no clinical
value as prognostic factor in PTC

