Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification and characterization of ATM substrates in mitosis


The Ataxia-Telangiectasia Mutated (ATM) Kinase, mutation of which is
responsible for the autosomal recessive disorder Ataxia-Telangiectasia,
is an essential element for cells to deal with DNA double-strand breaks.
In the absence of DNA damage, it has also been recognized that ATM has a
role in optimizing the spindle assembly checkpoint during mitosis. In the
process, ATM is activated at a lower level (compared to the DNA damage
response) which requires phosphorylation by the Aurora-B kinase. Known
ATM targets in mitosis include kinetochore proteins Bub1 and Mad1.
However, it has become clear that ATM-mediated phosphorylation in mitosis
is distinct from that in the DNA damage response. Therefore, we performed
an unbiased assay to identify ATM substrates in mitosis in order to study
the functional significance of mitotic ATM activation. To achieve our
goal, we utilized a stable isotope labeling by amino acid (SILAC)
/Peptide IP with phosphor-specific SQ/TQ antibodies and mass spectrometry
(MS). About 18 proteins were identified as substrates of mitotically
activated ATM in the assay. We then conducted bioinformatic analyses for
the identified proteins using PANTHER and Ingenuity programs. With many
proteins having their known functions in mitosis, we found a much smaller
number, but highly interconnected, pool of proteins in the ATM substrate
list as compared to that of the DNA damage response. Among them, we
validated several phosphorylation events using an in vitro kinase assay.
Furthermore we present data to demonstrate the functional significance of
ATM-mediated phosphorylation. Taken together, our data provide a
comprehensive picture of how mitotically activated ATM signals to
downstream targets to fine-tune the mitotic checkpoint.

