Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genetic variants in the dopaminergic system and bladder cancer
clinical outcomes


Bladder cancer is estimated to be the fourth most common cancer diagnosed
and the eighth most common cancer related death in men in 2015. A
hallmark of bladder cancer outcomes is the high rates of recurrence and
progression in patients diagnosed with non-muscle invasive bladder cancer
(NMIBC) and poor survival rates in those that have progressed to or are
diagnosed with muscle invasive bladder cancer (MIBC). Because of the poor
outcomes, research for predictors of clinical outcomes is necessary.
Recent studies show that current depressive symptoms at time of bladder
cancer diagnosis are associated with bladder cancer mortality. We are
interested in investigating the genetic mechanism underlying this
relationship. The dopaminergic pathway is of interest because of its
associations with depression and smoking addiction (with smoking being
the main risk factor for bladder cancer). Therefore we aimed to do a
candidate pathway analysis examining 256 single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) in 15 genes from the dopaminergic system. We analyzed the
association of genetic variants with recurrence and progression in NMIBC
patients (N = 497) and the association with survival in MIBC patients (N
= 399). Overall, there were four SNPs with a p-value of less than
0.01associated with recurrence in NMIBC. The most significant variant
being rs2797853 located in DBH under the recessive model (HR = 1.77, 95%
CI: 1.28- 2.46. P = 0.0012). Eight polymorphisms had a statistically
significant association with progression in NMIBC patients, with COMT:
rs5993891 being the most significant variant showing an increased odds of
bladder cancer progression (HR = 2.54, 95% CI: 1.50- 4.28, P = 0.0013).
Interestingly, the variant rs174675 located in COMT (an enzyme
responsible for degrading dopamine) was associated with an increased risk
of recurrence (HR = 1.23, 95% CI: 1.01-1.49, P = 0.046) and progression
(HR = 1.55, 95% CI: 1.13-2.12, P = 0.007). Finally, five SNPs were
statistically significant for bladder cancer survival in MIBC patients.
BDNF: rs2203877 was associated with a 71% increased risk of death (HR =
1.71, 95% CI: 1.25-2.34, P = 0.001). There was a significant difference
in median survival time (MST). Those with the homozygous dominant or
heterozygous genotype had a MST of 66.3 months and those with the
homozygous recessive genotype had a MST of 31.8 months (Plog-rank =
0.02). The variant rs2239395 in COMT was associated with an increased
risk of progression (HR = 2.54, 95% CI: 1.49-4.34, P = 0.002) and death
(HR = 1.63, 95% CI: 1.05-2.53, P = 0.041). In addition to validation
studies that are underway, the next steps include analyzing the
association between these factors and BMI (a factor associated with
depression, the dopamine system, and bladder cancer). The results of this
study have the potential to contribute to identifying bladder cancer
patients who may have poor clinical outcomes as well as the development
of interventions that may improve outcomes.

