Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Association of PM2.5 and ozone exposure with mammographic breast
density in the Breast Cancer Surveillance Consortium


Background: Mammographic breast density (BD) is a well-established and
strong breast cancer risk factor. Some studies suggest geographical
disparities in BD. Environmental factors such as air pollution may
contribute to geographic variation in BD because urban and rural areas
have distinct air pollution patterns and some of the pollutants are known
to have endocrine disrupting properties. We examined the association of
BD with particlesBackground: Mammographic breast density (BD) is a
well-established and strong breast cancer risk factor. Some studies
suggest geographical disparities in BD. Environmental factors such as air
pollution may contribute to geographic variation in BD because urban and
rural areas have distinct air pollution patterns and some of the
pollutants are known to have endocrine disrupting properties. We examined
the association of BD with particles<2.5 m in diameter (PM2.5) and ozone
(O3) in a large population-based cohort.Methods: Women were selected from
participants of the Breast Cancer Surveillance Consortium (2001-2009). We
included women aged 40 years with no history of breast cancer, with BD
data available from screening mammography and with known residential zip
code for at least 3 years prior to the index mammogram. Categorical BD
was defined with BI-RADS breast density classification as predominantly
fat, fat with some fibroglandular tissue (reference), heterogeneously
dense, and extremely dense. PM2.5 and O3 estimates for grids across the
United States from 2001-2008 were obtained from the US Environmental
Protection Agency hierarchical Bayesian model (HBM), which combines
monitoring data with numerical output from the Community Multi-scale Air
Quality model. For both pollutants, the smallest grids available for each
year were used. Daily concentrations of PM2.5 and O3 were used to
calculate annual concentrations for each grid. Yearly mean exposures of
PM2.5 and O3 for each subject were calculated using the inverse distance
weighted method based on their zip code centroid and HBM grid centroids.
PM2.5 and O3 exposures were modeled as continuous and as quartiles.
Associations of PM2.5 and ozone with BD were estimated with polychotomous
logistic regression adjusting for potential confounders.Results: In this
study of 368,302 women, participants with extremely dense breasts had
mean PM2.5 and O3 exposures of 9.41ug/m3 and 33.76 ug/m3 as compared to
9.02 ug/m3 and 35.42 ug/m3 in women with fatty breasts, respectively. In
multivariate regression, women with heterogeneously dense vs. scattered
fibroglandular breasts were more likely to have been exposed to higher
concentrations of PM2.5 (4th vs. 1st quartile Odds Ratio [OR] = 1.21, 95%
Confidence Interval [CI] 1.17-1.24; 3rd vs. 1st quartile: OR = 1.27, 95%
CI 1.23-1.30) and women with fatty breasts were less likely to have been
exposed to high PM2.5 levels (4th vs. 1st quartile: OR = 0.95, 95% CI
0.91-1.00; 3rd vs. 1st quartile: OR = 0.75, 95% CI 0.73-0.78). Women with
heterogeneously and extremely dense vs. scattered fibroglandular breasts
were less likely to have been exposed to higher levels of ozone (4th vs.
1st quartile: OR = 0.94, 95% CI 0.89-0.98 and OR = 0.79, 95% CI
0.72-0.86, respectively).Conclusion: Exposure to PM2.5 and ozone may in
part explain geographical variation in BD. Further studies are warranted
to determine the causal nature of these associations.

