Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Efficacy of pemetrexed-based chemotherapy in patients with NSCLC
harboring KRAS mutations


[Background]Biomarkers like epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) gene
mutations or anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) rearrangement have been
discovered in lung cancer, leading to targeted therapies developed in
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Several oncogenes have been reported
to be negative biomarkers for response to tyrosine kinase inhibitors
(TKIs), for example, NSCLC with KRAS mutations are resistant to
EGFR-TKIs. A preclinical study showed that KRAS mutant lung cancer cells
were sensitive to pemetrexed, while a retrospective study reported that
pemetrexed-based chemotherapy didn't show a favorable outcomes in
patients with KRAS mutant NSCLC. We, therefore, studied efficacy of
pemetrexed-based chemotherapy in patients with NSCLC, and compared the
efficacy between KRAS and wild-type NSCLC.[Methods]We retrospectively
studied the medical records of patients diagnosed with NSCLC between 2013
to 2015. Genomic DNA (gDNA) was extracted from FFPE tissue samples
(QIAamp DNA FFPE Tissue Kit, QIAGEN). KRAS mutations were evaluated using
Ion Torrent NGS systems (Ion PGM, Thermo Fischer Scientific) or PCR-rSSO.
AmpliSeq Colon and Lung Cancer Research Panel v2 was used in the present
study. We used Ion Reporter software for next-generation sequencing data
analysis.[Results]We analyzed the data of 226 patients with NSCLC and
successfully extracted gDNA from 94 tissue samples. Among them, mutation
analysis by Ion PGM system was performed in 48 samples and PCR-rSSO in 46
samples. We will report response rate and progression free survival in
the patients treated with pemetrexed-based chemotherapy.

