Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Social support as emotional adjustment determinant of breast
cancer patients after surgery in selected hospitals in Nigeria


Breast cancer is the most common invasive cancer and a leading cause of
premature mortality for females worldwide. It accounts for 16% of all
female cancers; 18.2% of all cancer deaths globally are from breast
cancer. Social support plays a major role in modifying negative effect of
this disease on affected individuals. It is an important psychosocial
resource for coping with stressful life events. This study was carried
out to examine social support as determinant of emotional adjustment of
breast cancer patients after surgery in selected hospitals in Ibadan,
Nigeria.This cross-sectional descriptive survey utilized a quantitative
approach. A sample of two hundred and eighteen patients was randomly
selected from hospitals in Ibadan. The respondents were reassured of
confidentiality of the data. The instrument used basically was
self-structured questionnaire. Data were collected, coded and analyzed
using Pearson correlation coefficient.The respondents ages were between
21- 51 years; 87.2% were females, majority of them (81.6%) were
Christians, more than half (62.4%) were married, about one third (31.2%)
had higher qualifications, 55.0% were civil servants and 74.3% were
living with other family members. Result findings show that instrumental
support had significant effect on emotional adjustment of the breast
cancer patients after surgery. Family and friends helping the patients
had a positive effect on their emotional adjustment. Therefore, it was
revealed that instrumental support had a positive effect on emotional
adjustment of the patients (r.cal = .217, r. critical = .195, P Breast
cancer is the most common invasive cancer and a leading cause of
premature mortality for females worldwide. It accounts for 16% of all
female cancers; 18.2% of all cancer deaths globally are from breast
cancer. Social support plays a major role in modifying negative effect of
this disease on affected individuals. It is an important psychosocial
resource for coping with stressful life events. This study was carried
out to examine social support as determinant of emotional adjustment of
breast cancer patients after surgery in selected hospitals in Ibadan,
Nigeria.This cross-sectional descriptive survey utilized a quantitative
approach. A sample of two hundred and eighteen patients was randomly
selected from hospitals in Ibadan. The respondents were reassured of
confidentiality of the data. The instrument used basically was
self-structured questionnaire. Data were collected, coded and analyzed
using Pearson correlation coefficient.The respondents ages were between
21- 51 years; 87.2% were females, majority of them (81.6%) were
Christians, more than half (62.4%) were married, about one third (31.2%)
had higher qualifications, 55.0% were civil servants and 74.3% were
living with other family members. Result findings show that instrumental
support had significant effect on emotional adjustment of the breast
cancer patients after surgery. Family and friends helping the patients
had a positive effect on their emotional adjustment. Therefore, it was
revealed that instrumental support had a positive effect on emotional
adjustment of the patients (r.cal = .217, r. critical = .195, P < 0.05).
Also, emotional support had a significant effect on emotional adjustment
of the patients after surgery. Having family members and friends to talk
to and help with personal problems was helpful to emotional adjustment.
Thus it was evident that emotional support had a positive effect on
emotional adjustment (r. cal = .250, r. critical = .195, P Breast cancer
is the most common invasive cancer and a leading cause of premature
mortality for females worldwide. It accounts for 16% of all female
cancers; 18.2% of all cancer deaths globally are from breast cancer.
Social support plays a major role in modifying negative effect of this
disease on affected individuals. It is an important psychosocial resource
for coping with stressful life events. This study was carried out to
examine social support as determinant of emotional adjustment of breast
cancer patients after surgery in selected hospitals in Ibadan,
Nigeria.This cross-sectional descriptive survey utilized a quantitative
approach. A sample of two hundred and eighteen patients was randomly
selected from hospitals in Ibadan. The respondents were reassured of
confidentiality of the data. The instrument used basically was
self-structured questionnaire. Data were collected, coded and analyzed
using Pearson correlation coefficient.The respondents ages were between
21- 51 years; 87.2% were females, majority of them (81.6%) were
Christians, more than half (62.4%) were married, about one third (31.2%)
had higher qualifications, 55.0% were civil servants and 74.3% were
living with other family members. Result findings show that instrumental
support had significant effect on emotional adjustment of the breast
cancer patients after surgery. Family and friends helping the patients
had a positive effect on their emotional adjustment. Therefore, it was
revealed that instrumental support had a positive effect on emotional
adjustment of the patients (r.cal = .217, r. critical = .195, P < 0.05).
Also, emotional support had a significant effect on emotional adjustment
of the patients after surgery. Having family members and friends to talk
to and help with personal problems was helpful to emotional adjustment.
Thus it was evident that emotional support had a positive effect on
emotional adjustment (r. cal = .250, r. critical = .195, P < 0.05)The
patients admitted that they had friends and family members who helped
them and were a source of comfort to them. This helped them to show a
better psychological and emotional adjustment to breast cancer than those
who did not have support. It is recommended that adequate attention be
given to financial, material and emotional needs of the breast cancer
patient.Keywords: Social support, determinant, emotional adjustment,
breast cancer patients.

