Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Breast mammographic density and the fecal microbiota


The microbial population (microbiota) of the distal human gut has
multiple functions that modulate cancer risk including digestion of
nutrients, deconjugation and enterohepatic circulation of hormones and
other bile acids, and regulation of immunity and inflammation. We have
previously reported that postmenopausal breast cancer cases, compared to
controls, have lower fecal microbiota alpha diversity, independent of
age, body mass index, and estrogen levels, and that the cases microbiota
is compositionally altered. For deeper understanding of these
associations with breast cancer, we compared microbiota metrics to a
strong cancer risk factor, breast density, among 48 cancer-free,
postmenopausal controls in the Breast and Colon Health study (86%
non-Hispanic White, mean age 62 years). In routine screening mammograms,
they had the following Breast Imaging Reporting and Data System (BI-RADS,
5th ed.) composition: a) almost entirely fatty (N = 4); b) scattered
areas of fibroglandular density (N = 14); c) heterogeneously dense (N =
26); and d) extremely dense (N = 4).As shown in the Table, simple linear
regression across these four ordered BI-RADS categories revealed that
there was no significant association with fecal microbiota alpha
diversity (PD_tree -0.08, P = 0.56). Breast density in these women also
was not associated with microbiota beta diversity (composition) by MiRKAT
analysis of un-weighted and weighted UniFrac metrics (P = 0.25 and 0.08,
respectively).We conclude that breast density is unlikely to mediate the
association of the gut microbiota with breast cancer in postmenopausal
women.
Fecal alpha diversity by mammographic density category

