Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Arginylation as a novel regulator of prostate cancer progression


Post-translational arginylation, mediated by Arginyltransferase (Ate1),
is an important protein modification involved in stress response yet
remains poorly studied. Our lab recently reported that a loss of Ate1 is
sufficient to induce tumorigenesis and loss of contact inhibition in
fibroblasts. However, the role of Ate1 in cancer initiation and
progression is not clear. This study examines the effects of Ate1 loss in
prostate cancer models of tumorigenesis and progression. We first show
that Ate1 is required for normal cellular responses to several types of
stress present in cancer. Preliminary data in fibroblasts shows that Ate1
is essential for cell death following oxidative stress, hypoxia, UV and
gamma radiation, and apoptosis-inducing drugs. These results inspired
further tests to examine if cancer progression may be directly stimulated
by a loss of Ate1 through increased cell survival and invasiveness. To
study the effects of lost Ate1, we characterize established prostate
cancer cell lines with Ate1 stably knocked down. In PC-3 prostate cancer
cells, a reduction of Ate1 corresponded with increased invasiveness in
the Boyden Chamber invasion assay, and reduced H2O2-induced cell death.
In LnCaP prostate cancer cells, reduced Ate1 induced significantly higher
anchorage-independent growth during a soft-agar growth assay. In
conclusion, our data suggests that the loss of Ate1 in prostate cancer
serves to stimulate cancer progression, and that Ate1 protein expression
levels may predict malignancy.

