Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 alpha suppresses cell proliferation
and induces cellular senescence and apoptosis in prostate cancer cells


Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 (HNF4, NR2A1) is a highly conserved member of
the nuclear receptor superfamily of ligand-dependent transcription
factors. Recent advances show that it is a key transcriptional regulator
of many genes, involved in xenobiotic and drug metabolism and also
cancers of gastrointestinal tract. However, the exact functional roles of
HNF4 gene in prostate cancer progression are still not fully understood.
In this study we used the overexpression (gain-of-function) and knockdown
(loss-of-function) approaches to determine the functional roles of HNF4
in prostate cancer. Our results showed that HNF4 exhibited a reduced
expression pattern in many prostate cancer cells compared to immortalized
prostatic cell lines. Its overexpression could significantly inhibit the
cell proliferation of prostate cancer cells, and trigger the cellular
senescence and apoptosis by activation of p21 signal pathway in a
p53-independent manner. We showed that stable overexpression of HNF4
could significantly induce G2/M arrest in PC3 cells, while shRNA-mediated
knockdown of HNF4 could induce G1 growth arrest, suggesting that HNF4
might play a negative role in the cell cycle regulation of PC3 cells.
Moreover, stable HNF4 knockdown could confer resistance to paclitaxel
treatment and enhance colony formation capacity in prostate cancer cells.
Together, our results suggest that HNF4 may play a tumor suppressor
function in prostate cancer progression.This work was supported by a
Direct Grant for Research 2015-2016 (2015. 1. 064), CUHK.

