Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: EMT in cancer cells promotes the extracellular matrix remodeling
by cancer-associated fibroblasts


Microenvironmental factors in tumor tissue induce epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) in cancer cells. However, it remains unclear how
EMT-induced cancer cells affect mechanisms of invasion by
cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs). In this study, we investigated how
EMT-induced cancer cells develop supportive functions of CAFs in the
process of local invasion. Using an in vitro collagen invasion assay
model, EMT-induced cancer cells invaded the collagen matrix to a greater
extent compared to control cells when they were cultured alone.
Interestingly, CAFs co-cultured with EMT-induced cancer cells invaded to
a greater extent compared to those with control cancer cells. We revealed
that platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF)-B was upregulated in
EMT-induced cancer cells, and the invasion ability of CAFs decreased by
shRNA knockdown of PDGF-B in EMT-induced cancer cells. Treatment of a
PDGF receptor inhibitor cancelled the increased invasion abilities of
CAFs and EMT-induced cancer cells. Our results indicated that EMT-induced
cancer cells enhanced the CAF invasion ability through the secretion of
PDGF-BB as well as increased the invasion ability themselves, suggesting
that EMT-induced cancer cells in the tumor microenvironment could not
only exhibit their increased invasion but also promote CAF invasion which
might lead to local invasion of cancer cells.

