Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Insulin receptor signaling contributes to mammary tumorigenesis in
mice


A recent convergence of clinical and epidemiological evidence suggests
that hyperinsulinemia associated with obesity and type 2 diabetes leads
to higher incidence and poor outcome of breast cancer (BC). To probe the
role of insulin signaling in BC, we created the MMTV-driven polyoma
middle T BC model mice with an inducible mammary epithelium-specific
deletion of the insulin receptor (INSR). Deletion of INSR in the mammary
gland considerably reduced the mammary tumour burden in the INSR knockout
mice as compared to the INSR wildtype controls, without affecting the
tumour onset. The average weight of individual tumours was similar across
the genotypes, suggesting that deletion of INSR affected the tumour
initiation potential of the epithelial cells rather than tumour growth.
Deletion of INSR also affected the metastasis of mammary tumours to the
lung, with the INSR knockout mice presenting with half the number of
metastases compared to the INSR wildtype controls. Our ongoing efforts
are focused on mapping the signaling events downstream of the INSR that
govern tumour initiation and metastasis in our mice, as well as modeling
the impact of obesity on tumors in this model system, with the ultimate
goal of identifying the role of INSR signaling in BC development and
progression.

