Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In silico discovery of target genes and pathways associated with
breast cancer brain and bone metastases


Metastasis is the primary cause of death from breast cancer. Bone and
brain are the most frequent sites for breast cancer metastasis. The aim
of this study was to explore candidate genes associated with breast
cancer bone and brain metastases. We compared the gene expression
profiles of bone and brain metastases with primary tumors by compiling 55
microarray data sets from Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO: GSE12763, primary
tumor n = 30; GSE14017, bone metastasis n = 10, brain metastasis n = 15).
A total of 160 differentially expressed genes were screened with a
two-fold change, among which 109 genes were up-regulated and 51 genes
were down-regulated in bone metastasis. Pathway analysis showed these
differentially expressed genes were significantly related to bone
development and cell adhesion (pMetastasis is the primary cause of death
from breast cancer. Bone and brain are the most frequent sites for breast
cancer metastasis. The aim of this study was to explore candidate genes
associated with breast cancer bone and brain metastases. We compared the
gene expression profiles of bone and brain metastases with primary tumors
by compiling 55 microarray data sets from Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO:
GSE12763, primary tumor n = 30; GSE14017, bone metastasis n = 10, brain
metastasis n = 15). A total of 160 differentially expressed genes were
screened with a two-fold change, among which 109 genes were up-regulated
and 51 genes were down-regulated in bone metastasis. Pathway analysis
showed these differentially expressed genes were significantly related to
bone development and cell adhesion (p<0.01). Similarly, a total of 150
differentially expressed genes were identified in brain metastasis, 36
genes were up-regulated and 114 genes were down-regulated, which were
enriched in immune response (pMetastasis is the primary cause of death
from breast cancer. Bone and brain are the most frequent sites for breast
cancer metastasis. The aim of this study was to explore candidate genes
associated with breast cancer bone and brain metastases. We compared the
gene expression profiles of bone and brain metastases with primary tumors
by compiling 55 microarray data sets from Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO:
GSE12763, primary tumor n = 30; GSE14017, bone metastasis n = 10, brain
metastasis n = 15). A total of 160 differentially expressed genes were
screened with a two-fold change, among which 109 genes were up-regulated
and 51 genes were down-regulated in bone metastasis. Pathway analysis
showed these differentially expressed genes were significantly related to
bone development and cell adhesion (p<0.01). Similarly, a total of 150
differentially expressed genes were identified in brain metastasis, 36
genes were up-regulated and 114 genes were down-regulated, which were
enriched in immune response (p<0.01). Moreover, protein-protein
interaction analysis revealed highly connected hub genes that are
expected to play an important role in brain and bone metastases. These
hub genes were FOS, EGR1, CTNNB1, DCUN1D1, HIST1H4E, VIM, UBD, EGFR in
bone metastasis, and HIST1H4E, DCUN1D1, CDC42, ESR1 in brain metastasis.
Interestingly, two genes, DCUN1D1 and HIST1H4E were both up-regulated in
bone and brain metastases. It is known that DCUN1D1 could induce
extracellular matrix invasion while HIST1H4E played a critical role in
regulating chromosomal accessibility and stability. These findings reveal
potential biomarkers and therapeutic targets of breast cancer bone and
brain metastases, which provide a molecular basis for our future in vitro
and in vivo studies.

