Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CRISPR knockout of HuR in pancreatic cancer cells causes a
xenograft lethal phenotype


Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA) is the most prevalent type of
pancreatic cancer and will soon become the second leading cause of cancer
related deaths in the U.S. Studies show that the nuclear localized
mRNA-binding protein HuR (ELAVL1) is activated in PDA cells, with
cytoplasmic translocation associated with increased tumor size and poor
prognosis. Previous in vitro and in vivo studies have established HuR's
role as a PDA cell survival mechanism. Thus, we explored the phenotypic
effect of completely eliminating HuR expression from PDA cells through
the use of clustered, regularly interspaced, short palindromic repeat
(CRISPR)/Cas9 technology to target and disrupt the HuR genomic sequence.
Since INDELs are induced randomly, we designed 3 gRNAs to target HuR at
different loci. Gene disruption was determined via sequencing and
validated through protein and mRNA expression, where homozygous knockouts
(HuR/) had undetectable HuR expression as compared to wild-type (HuR+/+),
heterozygotes (HuR+/), and CRISPR/Cas9 negative control. Sanger
sequencing confirmed homozygous knockouts with a frame shift mutation on
both alleles. When HuR knockout cells were exposed to chemotherapeutic
stress including mitomycin C, oxaliplatin, and gemcitabine, no HuR
expression (nuclear or cytoplasmic) was detected via immunofluorescence.
Phenotypically, HuR/ cells resulted in increased apoptosis and necrosis
as measured via trypan blue assay, and accordingly, had increased caspase
3 activity, a marker of a cell death. HuR/ cells, when treated with
mitomycin C, oxaliplatin, gemcitabine, and glucose deprivation exhibited
decreased long and short-term cell survival as compared to control cells.
HuR/ cells, pulse-labeled with bromodeoxyurdine (BrdU), had a higher
proportion of cells in S phase and fewer cells in G2/M phase. HuR
deletion enhanced premature mitotic entry thereby preventing efficient
repair of DNA damage, leading to cell death. Importantly, CRISPR knockout
of HuR showed marked impairment in tumor growth in mouse xenografts. The
differences in median tumor volume with HuR/- xenografts was significant
as compared to xenografts in mice with HuR(+/+) cells (0.0 mm3 vs 378.0
mm3, P Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA) is the most prevalent type
of pancreatic cancer and will soon become the second leading cause of
cancer related deaths in the U.S. Studies show that the nuclear localized
mRNA-binding protein HuR (ELAVL1) is activated in PDA cells, with
cytoplasmic translocation associated with increased tumor size and poor
prognosis. Previous in vitro and in vivo studies have established HuR's
role as a PDA cell survival mechanism. Thus, we explored the phenotypic
effect of completely eliminating HuR expression from PDA cells through
the use of clustered, regularly interspaced, short palindromic repeat
(CRISPR)/Cas9 technology to target and disrupt the HuR genomic sequence.
Since INDELs are induced randomly, we designed 3 gRNAs to target HuR at
different loci. Gene disruption was determined via sequencing and
validated through protein and mRNA expression, where homozygous knockouts
(HuR/) had undetectable HuR expression as compared to wild-type (HuR+/+),
heterozygotes (HuR+/), and CRISPR/Cas9 negative control. Sanger
sequencing confirmed homozygous knockouts with a frame shift mutation on
both alleles. When HuR knockout cells were exposed to chemotherapeutic
stress including mitomycin C, oxaliplatin, and gemcitabine, no HuR
expression (nuclear or cytoplasmic) was detected via immunofluorescence.
Phenotypically, HuR/ cells resulted in increased apoptosis and necrosis
as measured via trypan blue assay, and accordingly, had increased caspase
3 activity, a marker of a cell death. HuR/ cells, when treated with
mitomycin C, oxaliplatin, gemcitabine, and glucose deprivation exhibited
decreased long and short-term cell survival as compared to control cells.
HuR/ cells, pulse-labeled with bromodeoxyurdine (BrdU), had a higher
proportion of cells in S phase and fewer cells in G2/M phase. HuR
deletion enhanced premature mitotic entry thereby preventing efficient
repair of DNA damage, leading to cell death. Importantly, CRISPR knockout
of HuR showed marked impairment in tumor growth in mouse xenografts. The
differences in median tumor volume with HuR/- xenografts was significant
as compared to xenografts in mice with HuR(+/+) cells (0.0 mm3 vs 378.0
mm3, P < 0.005). Taken together with our past work in patient samples,
this pre-clinical model demonstrates that HuR is essential for PDA growth
in vivo. Future work will develop strategies to target HuR either as a
monotherapy or in combination with other chemotherapies.

