Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oxdative stress suppresses the expression of
15-hydroxyprostaglandin dehydrogenase via upregulation of DNMT3a/Snail in
human colon epithelial cells


Overproduction of prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) is implicated in pathogenesis
of inflammation-associated carcinogenesis. 15-Hydroxyprostaglandin
dehydrogenase (15-PGDH) is a key enzyme that catalyzes the conversion of
PGE2 to biologically inactive 15-keto-PGE2 metabolite. 15-PGDH has been
considered to be a tumor suppressor as its expression is frequently
repressed in human malignancies via hypermethylation of its promoter. In
our previous study, oxidative stress caused by Helicobacter pylori
infection suppressed the expression of 15-PGDH. Reactive oxygen species
(ROS) can induce methylation as well as mutation of genes including those
that encode tumor suppressor proteins, thereby contributing to
carcinogenesis. This prompted us to investigate whether 15-PGDH
expression could be down-regulated by oxidative stress in normal colon
epithelial CCD841 cells. When CCD841 cells were treated with H2O2, the
expression level of 15-PGDH was significantly reduced in both
concentration and time dependent manners. Hydrogen peroxide (300 M)
induced the expression of DNA methyltransferase (DNMT) 3a, which was
blocked by an inhibitor of DNMT, 5-Aza-2-deoxycytidine (5-Aza). The 5-Aza
abrogated the down-regulation of 15-PGDH expression induced by H2O2. The
antioxidant, N-acetylcysteine (NAC) abrogated the down-regulation of
15-PGDH and upregulation of DNMT 3a expression induced by H2O2. The
transcriptional repressor Snail plays a central role in the suppression
of 15-PGDH expression. H2O2 treatment also elevated expression of Snail,
which was abrogated by NAC and 5-Aza. Taken together, these finding
suggest that ROS suppresses the expression of 15-PGDH through
hypermethylation of CpG island in the 15-PGDH promoter.

