Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dynamic long-range chromatin interaction controls expression of
Il-21 in CD4+ T cells


IL-21, a member of four--helical bundle type I cytokines, causes many
pleiotropic effects, including terminal differentiation of B cells,
immunoglobulin production, and the development of follicular helper T
cells. IL-21 also promotes differentiation of Th17 cells and is
implicated in the development of autoimmune disease. IL-21 can be
strongly induced in CD4+ T cells by IL-6; however, very little is known
about the mechanisms underlying the transcriptional regulation of the
Il-21 gene at the chromatin level. Here, we identified insulator elements
in the Il-21 locus with enhancer-blocking activity, which constitutively
bind CTCF and cohesin. In nave CD4+ T cells, these upstream and
downstream CTCF-binding sites interact with each other to make a DNA
loop; however, the Il-21 promoter does not interact with any cis-elements
in the Il-21 locus. In contrast, stimulation of CD4+ T cells with IL-6 in
the presence of CD3 and CD28 leads to recruitment of STAT3 and NFAT
transcription factors to the promoter, as well as to novel distal
enhancer region. This induces dynamic changes in chromatin configuration,
bringing the promoter and the regulatory elements in close spatial
proximity, facilitating IL-21 expression. The long-range interaction
between the promoter and distal enhancer region was dependent on
JAK/STAT3 signaling pathway but was disrupted in regulatory T cells,
where IL-21 expression was repressed. In addition, we demonstrated that
CTCF was required for optimal IL-21 expression and formation of chromatin
looping in the Il-21 locus. Thus, our work uncovers a novel topological
chromatin framework underlying proper transcriptional regulation of Il-21
gene.

