Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A xenograft mouse model coupled with in-depth cell surface
proteome analysis facilitates further elucidation of K-Ras driven
tumorigenesis in lung carcinoma


The purpose of this study was to develop a proteomic approach for
analysis of cell surface proteins in tissue specimens and applied it on a
K-Ras driven mouse model of metastatic lung carcinoma. Metastatic disease
is the leading cause of lung cancer-related mortality in the United
States. In spite of continuous efforts, effective treatments targeting
oncogenic K-Ras in lung and other K-Ras driven malignancies are slow to
develop. To expand the treatment options for lung cancer and facilitate
better understanding of metastasis new targets need to be identified and
characterized at the surface of cancer cells, preferably in their native
tissue microenvironment. Towards this goal we developed a
mass-spectrometry (MS)-based glyco-proteomic approach targeting
specifically cell surface proteins in tissue specimens and applied it on
a xenograft lung cancer mouse model. We used A549 cells expressing
endogenous K-RasG12S to induce lung tumor xenografts in BALB/c mice via
tail vein injection. A comparative surface glyco-proteomics of cultured
A549 cells, dissected tumor tissue (TT), adjacent tumor (AT) tissue and
normal mouse lung tissue (NT) obtained from saline-injected age-matched
littermates yielded high enrichment (i.e., 80%) of surface proteins. It
resulted in extensive catalogue/map of more than 400 glycoproteins
identified on tumor cell surface. More than 50% of proteins identified on
the surface of A549 cultured cells were unambiguously identified in mouse
TT, featuring proteins and pathways implicated in metastasis, invadopodia
formation and cancer cell migration. These markers also provide insight
regarding species determination of tissue origin (i.e., human vs. mouse)
differentiation of tumor parenchyma from stroma, and regulation of tumor
immune response.

