Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ALDH1A3-inducible RARRES1 is a tumor suppressor in triple-negative
breast cancer and is methylated in claudin-low breast cancers


The retinoic acid (RA) signalling pathway plays an important role in
breast cancer progression and has either a pro-tumorigenic or
tumor-suppressive role depending upon the effector function of
RA-inducible genes that are expressed or epigenetically silenced. To
study this paradigm in breast cancer, we focused on a controversial
RA-inducible gene, the retinoic acid receptor responder 1 (RARRES1)
protein that is often hypermethylated in cancer and has been reported to
have tumor-suppressive function in prostate and nasopharyngeal
carcinomas. However, in a study focused on a rare subtype of breast
cancer, inflammatory breast cancer, RARRES1 is pro-tumorigenic. This
functional discrepancy requires further investigation to determine its
role in breast cancer in general.First, analysis of patient data sets
revealed that RARRES1 is predominantly expressed in triple-negative
breast cancers (TNBCs). Knockdown of RARRES1 in claudin-low MDA-MB-231
and basal-like MDA-MB-468 and HCC1937 significantly increased tumor
growth and cell proliferation, suggesting RARRES1 has a tumor suppressive
function in (TNBC), regardless of position on the differentiation
hierarchy.Expression analyses of 24 breast cancer cell lines (including
18 TNBC and 2 normal-like cell lines) revealed that RARRES1 is
predominantly expressed in basal-like TNBC cells We found that RARRES1
expression is dependent on, and strongly correlates with, the cancer stem
cell marker, and RA-producing, ALDH1A3 in fixed breast cancer patient
samples. Immunohistochemistry of the same patient tumor samples revealed
RARRES1 expression is localized to the endoplasmic reticulum.Importantly,
however, the presence of ALDH1A3 or RA is not sufficient to induce
RARRES1 expression. RARRES1 is hypermethylated in claudin-low breast
cancer cell lines, and release of this silencing is required for full
induction of RARRES1 expression. We have identified sites of regulation
by methylation in RARRES1 using Illumina 450K methylation arrays and
5-methylcytosine ChIP.We conclude that RARRES1 is an ALDH1A3/RA-inducible
tumor suppressor in TNBC with methylation and expression profiles
distinct to the differentiation hierarchy observed in breast cancer.

