Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Excessive HCK kinase activity in the tumor stroma promotes
colorectal cancer progression


Excessive activation of the myeloid-specific Src-family kinase
Hematopoietic Cell Kinase (HCK) acts as a tumor intrinsic oncogene by
promoting proliferation and survival of immune cells, and confers a poor
prognosis for leukemia. However, the role of HCK in the tumor stroma of
solid malignancies remains unexplored.We analyzed the expression level of
HCK in matched biopsies from sporadic colorectal cancer patients and
observed elevated HCK phosphorylation in tumors compared to unaffected
colons. Analysis of corresponding RNAseq data revealed a striking
correlation between tumors with high HCK gene expression and a gene
signature indicative of a tumor-promoting alternatively-activated
macrophage (AAM) endotype. To functionally assess this observation, we
exploited HckCA mice [Ernst et al., J Exp Med 2002] that express a
constitutively active form of Hck as a knockin mutation, and subjected
these mice to a chemically-induced model of sporadic colorectal cancer.
HckCA mice developed more and larger tumors compared to wild-type (WT)
animals, and this was associated with a significant bias towards CD206+
AAMs in tumors of HckCA mice without affecting the total number of
tumor-associated leukocyte and lymphocytes. Likewise, adoptive
bone-marrow transfer experiments revealed enhanced tumor formation and
AAM differentiation in WT mice reconstituted with HckCA bone marrow, with
a reciprocal decrease of these parameters in HckCA mice reconstituted
with WT marrow. Finally, pharmacologic targeting of the catalytic
activity of Hck with a small molecule inhibitor significantly reduced
tumor progression and impaired AAM polarisation.Collectively, our
findings suggest that excessive Hck activity in the tumor stroma promotes
the progression of solid cancers by modulating the endotype of
tumor-associated myeloid cells. Therefore, Hck represents a rational
therapeutic target for macrophage re-education in solid cancers by
limiting polarization of tumor-promoting AAM.

