Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Association between CYP2D6 genotype and response to tamoxifen in a
prospective multicenter study in Japan


Purpose:CYP2D6 is key enzyme responsible for the generation of the potent
active metabolite of tamoxifen, endoxifen. We previously reported that
reduced- or null-function alleles of CYP2D6 were significantly associated
with poor clinical outcome of breast cancer patients treated with
tamoxifen. However, there are still discrepant reports questioning the
association between CYP2D6 genotype and tamoxifen efficacy. Hence, we
carried out prospective multicenter studies to evaluate the value of
CYP2D6 genotyping in tamoxifen therapy.Patients and Methods:We studied
279 patients with hormone receptor-positive and Her-2 negative, invasive
breast cancer receiving preoperative tamoxifen monotherapy for 14 - 28
days. Ki-67 response in breast cancer tissues after tamoxifen therapy was
used as a surrogate marker of response to tamoxifen. We investigated the
effects of allelic variants of CYP2D6 on Ki-67 change in breast cancer
tissues, histological response, breast conservative operation and hot
flash.Results:Ki-67 labeling index in breast cancer tissues significantly
decreased after preoperative tamoxifen monotherapy for 14-28 days (P =
0.00000000024). Moreover, proportion of estrogen receptor positive cells
in breast cancer tissues were significantly associated with Ki-67 change
after tamoxifen therapy (P = 0.0099). CYP2D6 variants were not
significantly associated with histological response, breast conservative
operation and hot flash (P = 0.25, P = 0.28 and P = 0.34, respectively).
However, CYP2D6 variants were significantly associated with Ki-67
decrease after the preoperative tamoxifen therapy (P = 0.000014; in
patients with two variant alleles v patients carrying one or two
wild-type alleles).Conclusion:Our result suggest that genetic variation
in CYP2D6 is a key predictor for the prognosis of patients with breast
cancer treated with tamoxifen.

