Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of a diagnostic blood test for colorectal cancer
screening and as a triage tool to stratify patients for colonoscopy


Worldwide, colorectal cancer (CRC) is the third most common cancer and
the second leading cause of cancer death, with an annual incidence in
2012 of 1.4 million CRC cases and an annual mortality around 700,000 [1].
Fortunately the majority of colorectal cancer (CRC) cases are preventable
by early detection and removal by colonoscopy or surgery. Currently in
Australia, the only widely used non-invasive screening test for CRC is
the immunological faecal occult blood test (iFOBT), which has been shown
to reduce CRC incidence and mortality by 15-25% [2]. There are however
significant issues that limit its effectiveness as a diagnostic screening
tool, such as a poor positive predictive value of 5.3% for suspected
cancer and low participation rate of approximately 33.5% in 2013, as seen
in the Australian National Bowel Cancer Screening Program (NBCSP)[2].
Evidence indicates a robust, blood-based, diagnostic assay would increase
screening participation and compliance. In our systematic analysis of 68
individual biomarkers using logistic regression strategies, we have
identified a unique 3 protein biomarker panel blood test consisting of
Insulin like growth factor binding protein 2 (IGFBP2), Dickkopf-3 (DKK3),
and Pyruvate kinase M2(PKM2)[3]. This panel not only differentiates
between CRC and normal patient sera with 95% specificity and 73%
sensitivity in a single measurement (c.f. FOBT: 35-50 sensitivity [4])
but early stage disease. Currently, we are prospectively collecting a new
cohort of over 1,000 blood samples from volunteers that have undergone
colonoscopy, that include CRC patients, controls and other pathologies
(IBD, other cancers) to specifically determine the performance of this
blood test in asymptomatic and surveillance screening populations. We
will also evaluate directly the accuracy and performance of our biomarker
panel, as a diagnostic test suitable for CRC screening versus the iFOBT
used in the NBCSP, as an intermediary test in the triage of individuals
with positive iFOBT result for need and urgency to have a colonoscopy.1.
Ferlay J, Soerjomataram I, Ervik M, Dikshit R, Eser S, Mathers C, Rebelo
M, Parkin DM, Forman D, Bray, F. GLOBOCAN 2012 v1.1, Cancer Incidence and
Mortality Worldwide: IARC CancerBase No. 112. National Bowel Cancer
Screening Program: monitoring report 2012-2013. AIHW & Australian
Government Department of Health and Ageing, 2014.3. Fung KYC et al 2015.
Blood-based protein biomarker panel for the detection of colorectal
cancer. PloS one. 2015;10(3):e0120425.4. Morikawa, T et al., A comparison
of the immunochemical fecal occult blood test and total colonoscopy in
the asymptomatic population. Gastroenterology, 2005. 129(2): p. 422-8.

