Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: C-reactive protein and risk of lung cancer: A pooled analysis of
20 prospective cohorts


Background: Inflammation may have an important role in the etiology of
lung cancer, and several studies have reported that C-reactive protein
(CRP) is associated with risk of lung cancer. To clarify this
association, we conducted a pooled analysis of CRP and lung cancer risk
using data from 20 prospective cohort studies.Methods: Within the NCI
Cohort Consortium, we designed a prospective nested case-control study.
Controls were selected from appropriate risk sets and were matched to
cases on smoking status, sex, and age at blood draw. This analysis
included 5,299 case-control pairs nested within 20 cohorts. Rate ratios
(RR) and their 95% confidence intervals associated with a doubling in
concentration of CRP were estimated using conditional logistic regression
models.Results: Overall, higher circulating CRP was associated with an
increased risk of lung cancer (RR 1.05, 95% CI [1.03, 1.08]). This
association varied strongly by smoking status (p-heterogeneity
Background: Inflammation may have an important role in the etiology of
lung cancer, and several studies have reported that C-reactive protein
(CRP) is associated with risk of lung cancer. To clarify this
association, we conducted a pooled analysis of CRP and lung cancer risk
using data from 20 prospective cohort studies.Methods: Within the NCI
Cohort Consortium, we designed a prospective nested case-control study.
Controls were selected from appropriate risk sets and were matched to
cases on smoking status, sex, and age at blood draw. This analysis
included 5,299 case-control pairs nested within 20 cohorts. Rate ratios
(RR) and their 95% confidence intervals associated with a doubling in
concentration of CRP were estimated using conditional logistic regression
models.Results: Overall, higher circulating CRP was associated with an
increased risk of lung cancer (RR 1.05, 95% CI [1.03, 1.08]). This
association varied strongly by smoking status (p-heterogeneity < 0.01),
being similar for current (1.09 [1.05, 1.13]) and former smokers (1.09
[1.04, 1.14]), but not for never smokers (0.95 [0.91, 1.00]). The
association was strongest for cancers diagnosed less than 2 years after
blood draw (1.21 [1.13, 1.29], p-heterogeneity Background: Inflammation
may have an important role in the etiology of lung cancer, and several
studies have reported that C-reactive protein (CRP) is associated with
risk of lung cancer. To clarify this association, we conducted a pooled
analysis of CRP and lung cancer risk using data from 20 prospective
cohort studies.Methods: Within the NCI Cohort Consortium, we designed a
prospective nested case-control study. Controls were selected from
appropriate risk sets and were matched to cases on smoking status, sex,
and age at blood draw. This analysis included 5,299 case-control pairs
nested within 20 cohorts. Rate ratios (RR) and their 95% confidence
intervals associated with a doubling in concentration of CRP were
estimated using conditional logistic regression models.Results: Overall,
higher circulating CRP was associated with an increased risk of lung
cancer (RR 1.05, 95% CI [1.03, 1.08]). This association varied strongly
by smoking status (p-heterogeneity < 0.01), being similar for current
(1.09 [1.05, 1.13]) and former smokers (1.09 [1.04, 1.14]), but not for
never smokers (0.95 [0.91, 1.00]). The association was strongest for
cancers diagnosed less than 2 years after blood draw (1.21 [1.13, 1.29],
p-heterogeneity < 0.01), and weakened as time between blood draw and
diagnosis increased. The association was similar across all histological
subtypes, with the exception of adenocarcinoma for which we observed no
association.Conclusions: CRP is associated with risk of lung cancer. The
fact that the association is restricted to ever-smokers, and is most
prominent for cancers diagnosed in the first 2 years of follow-up,
strongly suggests that CRP is not a causal risk factor, but rather a
distal marker of disease.

