Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Crosstalk between stem and non-stem cells in glioblastoma promotes
radioresistance in a CD109-dependent manner


Glioblastoma (GBM) is a lethal brain tumor that contains cancer stem
cells that are bestowed with tumor initiating and treatment resistant
properties. Patient-derived glioma stem-like cells (GSCs) that resemble
the clinically relevant MES subtype harbor more aggressive and therapy
resistant properties. Here we report that exposure of GSCs to ionizing
radiation (IR) provokes inter-cellular signals from therapy-induced
senescent non-stem cancer cells to stimulate compensatory growth in
cancer stem cells resulting in persistent transcriptomic and phenotypic
shift toward a more MES subtype. This IR-induced gain of MES features in
GSCs is accompanied by conversion of CD133+ stem cell populations to
CD133- /CD109+ cells. In both de novo and IR-induced MES GSCs, CD109+,
but not CD109- populations are highly tumorigenic and multipotent in
vivo. Inhibition of CD109 attenuates clonogenicity and radioresistance in
MES GSCs GBM. Clinically, CD109 expression is significantly associated
with the MES GBMs and poorer prognosis of GBM patients. Taken together,
our data imply that radiation of GSCs induces direct transformation of
cancer stem cells to the MES subtype accompanied by a loss of the widely
adopted stem cell marker CD133 and a gain of a novel, tumor propagating,
and clinically relevant MES stem cell marker, CD109.

