Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Silica promotes anchorage-independent growth of human bronchial
cells via activation of NF-B1 p50


Although crystalline silica (hereafter silica) was judged as carcinogen
by IARC, the mechanism of silica-induced carcinogenesis remains elusive.
As limited studies have been reported to support the direct carcinogenic
effect of silica on human lung epithelial cells, silica-induced
inflammatory microenvironment may be postulated to facilitate lung
neoplastic transformation. To test this hypothesis, we investigate the
growth of immortalized human lung bronchial epithelial cell lines NL20,
BEAS-2B and 16HBE14o-, following incubation with conditioned media
collected 48h after exposed to silica (Silica CM) in each cell line. All
cell lines promoted anchorage-independent growth in each Silica CM,
compared with those in CM without silica exposure. All the bronchial cell
lines in Silica CM increased DNA binding activity of NF-B1 p50. After
incubated with Silica CM, culture supernatants of NL20 and BEAS-2B kept
higher concentration of EGF, and those of 16HBE14o- contained higher
concentration of TNF and IGF1, respectively. Recombinant EGF, TNF and
IGF1 are all sufficient to promote anchorage-independent growth of each
bronchial cell line, and to increase DNA binding activity of NF-B1 p50.
Neutralizing human EGF and TNF antibodies dampened the growth of each
bronchial cell line. NF-B inhibitor Bay11-7082 suppressed the growth of
all bronchial cell lines incubated with Silica CM. Taken together, silica
promoted anchorage-independent growth of human lung epithelial cells via
silica-induced secretion of soluble factors, followed by activation of
NF-B1 p50 in an autocrine manner. The present study supports the
hypothesis that silica-induced inflammatory microenvironment may be
actively involved in the potential carcinogenic effect of silica.

