Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of lung tumorspheres by gene expression and flow
cytometry: differential expression in CSC-related markers and signaling
pathways


Chemoresistance, progression and metastasis have made of lung cancer the
first cause of cancer mortality. These features were linked to a
subpopulation of cells, named cancer stem cells (CSCs), which remain
largely unknown. The aim of this study was to isolate and characterize
CSCs from lung cancer cell-lines and tumor-tissue from resectable
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC).Methods: Tumor cells from resected
NSCLC and cell lines (H1650, H1993, A549, and PC9) were grown in
monolayer and as spheroids. RTqPCR was performed to analyze the mRNA
expression of CSCs-related genes: CSC-markers (EPCAM1, ALDH1A1, CD166,
ABCG2, CD44, CD133); pluripotency genes (KLF4, OCT4, NANOG, SOX2, MYC,
CCND1); Notch pathway (NOTCH1, NOTCH3, HEY1); Wnt pathway (WNT1, WNT5A,
DKK1, FZD7) and Hedgehog pathway (SMO, PTCH1, SHH, GLI1). ACTB and CDKN1B
were used as endogenous controls for relative expression calculation. The
expression of lung stem cell markers EpCAM, CD166, E-cadherin, CD90,
CD44, CD34, CD133 and ABCG2 was assessed by flow cytometry. The
tumor-initiating cell capacity of selected lung-spheres was tested in
vivo to confirm tumorigenicity.Results: Lung-tumorspheres had increased
expression of EPCAM, CD44 and ALDH1A1 (p = 0.028, p = 0.021 and p =
0.043, respectively) when compared to cells grown in adherence. Likewise,
NANOG, KLF4 and OCT4 tended to be more expressed in tumorspheres.
Relative gene expression of NOTCH1 was also higher in spheroids than in
monolayer cells (p = 0.028), in concordance with the same tendency
observed in NOTCH3. Similarly, RTqPCR analysis revealed a possible
activation of the canonical Wnt pathway in tumorspheres, with high
expression levels of the downstream effector gene CCND1 (p = 0.05), along
with a repression of DKK1 inhibitor. Regarding to the non-canonical Wnt
pathway, its activator WNT5A showed lower expression levels in spheroids
compared to monolayer-culture cells. Concerning the expression levels of
Hedgehog pathway's genes, we found that SMO and PTCH1 were underexpressed
in lung-tumorspheres compared with their paired adherent-cultured cells
(p = 0.028 andp = 0.069). Flow cytometry revealed that EpCAM and CD44
were highly expressed in lungspheres obtained from cell lines and primary
tumors. The expression of CD166 differed among the cell lines.
Furthermore, EpCAM+/CD90- subpopulation were the ones able to induce
tumor in xenotrasplant mouse model demostrating tumor-initiating capacity
in vivo.Conclusions: Lung-tumorspheres derived from cancer cell lines and
primary tumor tissues show increased levels of EpCAM and others CSC
markers. Genes related to Notch and Wnt signaling pathways were more
expressed in spheroids compared to the cells grown in adherence,
suggesting both pathways as interesting lung-CSC targets.Supported by
grants RD12/0036/0025 from RTICC, PI12-02838 and PI12-0956 from ISCIII
and SEOM/2012.[E.M.-M., A.H.-P. and A.M.-R. contributed equally to this
work.]

