Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel PTK7-targeted antibody-drug conjugate eliminates
tumor-initiating cells and induces sustained tumor regressions


Disease relapse after treatment is common in triple-negative breast
cancer (TNBC), ovarian cancer and non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
Therapies that target tumor-initiating cells (TICs) should improve
patient survival by eliminating the cells that can drive tumor regrowth
and metastasis. Here we identify Protein Tyrosine Kinase 7 (PTK7), a
highly conserved but catalytically inactive receptor tyrosine kinase, as
an antigen that is enriched on TICs in low-passage patient-derived
xenografts (PDX) of TNBC, NSCLC and other tumor types. An anti-PTK7
antibody-drug conjugate (ADC) was generated from a humanized anti-PTK7
monoclonal antibody, a cleavable valine-citrulline-based linker and the
Aur0101 auristatin microtubule inhibitor. The anti-PTK7 ADC induced
sustained regressions of TNBC, NSCLC and ovarian cancer PDX, with
improved activity over standard-of-care chemotherapy, and reduced the
frequency of TICs as determined by serial transplantation experiments.
Moreover, the ADC may have additional mechanisms of action, including an
anti-angiogenic effect, that promote anti-tumor immune responses.
Together these preclinical results indicate the potential of the
anti-PTK7 ADC to improve the long-term survival of cancer patients. The
ADC is currently being tested in a Phase 1 clinical trial, from which
interim results will be presented.

