Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antibody blockade of semaphorin 4D breaks down stromal barriers to
enhance tumoricidal immune infiltration, supporting rational
immunotherapy combinations


Semaphorin 4D (SEMA4D, CD100) and its receptor plexin-B1 are broadly
expressed in cancer; increased expression correlates with poor prognosis.
SEMA4D normally functions to regulate the motility and differentiation of
multiple cell types, including those of the immune, vascular, and nervous
systems. In the tumor microenvironment (TME), SEMA4D is expressed
strongly at the invasive margin and modulates the infiltration and
spatial distribution of leukocytes, suppressing anti-tumor activity.
Neutralization of SEMA4D was evaluated for effects on immune activity and
tumor growth in preclinical models, incorporating single agent and
combination treatments with other immunotherapies, including immune
checkpoint blockade inhibitors. The safety and tolerability of humanized
anti-SEMA4D antibody VX15/2503 was assessed in a Phase I clinical
trial.RESULTS:SEMA4D restricts migration of myeloid cells expressing
cognate PLXNB1/2 receptors, determined using trans-well migration assays
and IHC of in vivo tumors. Antibody neutralization disrupted the SEMA4D
gradient at the invasive margin, which correlated with recruitment of
activated APCs and T lymphocytes into the TME, and significant shift
toward increased Th1 cytokines (IFNg, TNFa) and CTL-recruiting CXCL9
chemokine, with concurrent reduction in Treg- and M2-macrophage promoting
chemokines (CCL2, CXCL1, CCL17). Accordingly, an increase in Teff:Treg
ratio (3x, pSemaphorin 4D (SEMA4D, CD100) and its receptor plexin-B1 are
broadly expressed in cancer; increased expression correlates with poor
prognosis. SEMA4D normally functions to regulate the motility and
differentiation of multiple cell types, including those of the immune,
vascular, and nervous systems. In the tumor microenvironment (TME),
SEMA4D is expressed strongly at the invasive margin and modulates the
infiltration and spatial distribution of leukocytes, suppressing
anti-tumor activity. Neutralization of SEMA4D was evaluated for effects
on immune activity and tumor growth in preclinical models, incorporating
single agent and combination treatments with other immunotherapies,
including immune checkpoint blockade inhibitors. The safety and
tolerability of humanized anti-SEMA4D antibody VX15/2503 was assessed in
a Phase I clinical trial.RESULTS:SEMA4D restricts migration of myeloid
cells expressing cognate PLXNB1/2 receptors, determined using trans-well
migration assays and IHC of in vivo tumors. Antibody neutralization
disrupted the SEMA4D gradient at the invasive margin, which correlated
with recruitment of activated APCs and T lymphocytes into the TME, and
significant shift toward increased Th1 cytokines (IFNg, TNFa) and
CTL-recruiting CXCL9 chemokine, with concurrent reduction in Treg- and
M2-macrophage promoting chemokines (CCL2, CXCL1, CCL17). Accordingly, an
increase in Teff:Treg ratio (3x, p<0.005) and CTL activity (4x,
pSemaphorin 4D (SEMA4D, CD100) and its receptor plexin-B1 are broadly
expressed in cancer; increased expression correlates with poor prognosis.
SEMA4D normally functions to regulate the motility and differentiation of
multiple cell types, including those of the immune, vascular, and nervous
systems. In the tumor microenvironment (TME), SEMA4D is expressed
strongly at the invasive margin and modulates the infiltration and
spatial distribution of leukocytes, suppressing anti-tumor activity.
Neutralization of SEMA4D was evaluated for effects on immune activity and
tumor growth in preclinical models, incorporating single agent and
combination treatments with other immunotherapies, including immune
checkpoint blockade inhibitors. The safety and tolerability of humanized
anti-SEMA4D antibody VX15/2503 was assessed in a Phase I clinical
trial.RESULTS:SEMA4D restricts migration of myeloid cells expressing
cognate PLXNB1/2 receptors, determined using trans-well migration assays
and IHC of in vivo tumors. Antibody neutralization disrupted the SEMA4D
gradient at the invasive margin, which correlated with recruitment of
activated APCs and T lymphocytes into the TME, and significant shift
toward increased Th1 cytokines (IFNg, TNFa) and CTL-recruiting CXCL9
chemokine, with concurrent reduction in Treg- and M2-macrophage promoting
chemokines (CCL2, CXCL1, CCL17). Accordingly, an increase in Teff:Treg
ratio (3x, p<0.005) and CTL activity (4x, p<0.0001) was observed. This
orchestrated change in the tumoral immune context was associated with
durable tumor rejection and immunologic memory in preclinical colon,
breast, and melanoma models. Importantly, the immunomodulatory activity
of anti-SEMA4D antibody can be further enhanced by combination with other
immunotherapies, including immune checkpoint inhibitors and chemotherapy.
Strikingly, the combination with antibody to CTLA-4 acts synergistically,
with maximal increase in survival (110% tumor growth delay, pSemaphorin
4D (SEMA4D, CD100) and its receptor plexin-B1 are broadly expressed in
cancer; increased expression correlates with poor prognosis. SEMA4D
normally functions to regulate the motility and differentiation of
multiple cell types, including those of the immune, vascular, and nervous
systems. In the tumor microenvironment (TME), SEMA4D is expressed
strongly at the invasive margin and modulates the infiltration and
spatial distribution of leukocytes, suppressing anti-tumor activity.
Neutralization of SEMA4D was evaluated for effects on immune activity and
tumor growth in preclinical models, incorporating single agent and
combination treatments with other immunotherapies, including immune
checkpoint blockade inhibitors. The safety and tolerability of humanized
anti-SEMA4D antibody VX15/2503 was assessed in a Phase I clinical
trial.RESULTS:SEMA4D restricts migration of myeloid cells expressing
cognate PLXNB1/2 receptors, determined using trans-well migration assays
and IHC of in vivo tumors. Antibody neutralization disrupted the SEMA4D
gradient at the invasive margin, which correlated with recruitment of
activated APCs and T lymphocytes into the TME, and significant shift
toward increased Th1 cytokines (IFNg, TNFa) and CTL-recruiting CXCL9
chemokine, with concurrent reduction in Treg- and M2-macrophage promoting
chemokines (CCL2, CXCL1, CCL17). Accordingly, an increase in Teff:Treg
ratio (3x, p<0.005) and CTL activity (4x, p<0.0001) was observed. This
orchestrated change in the tumoral immune context was associated with
durable tumor rejection and immunologic memory in preclinical colon,
breast, and melanoma models. Importantly, the immunomodulatory activity
of anti-SEMA4D antibody can be further enhanced by combination with other
immunotherapies, including immune checkpoint inhibitors and chemotherapy.
Strikingly, the combination with antibody to CTLA-4 acts synergistically,
with maximal increase in survival (110% tumor growth delay, p<0.01) and
complete tumor regression in 100% of mice, as compared to 22% with
monotherapy (pSemaphorin 4D (SEMA4D, CD100) and its receptor plexin-B1
are broadly expressed in cancer; increased expression correlates with
poor prognosis. SEMA4D normally functions to regulate the motility and
differentiation of multiple cell types, including those of the immune,
vascular, and nervous systems. In the tumor microenvironment (TME),
SEMA4D is expressed strongly at the invasive margin and modulates the
infiltration and spatial distribution of leukocytes, suppressing
anti-tumor activity. Neutralization of SEMA4D was evaluated for effects
on immune activity and tumor growth in preclinical models, incorporating
single agent and combination treatments with other immunotherapies,
including immune checkpoint blockade inhibitors. The safety and
tolerability of humanized anti-SEMA4D antibody VX15/2503 was assessed in
a Phase I clinical trial.RESULTS:SEMA4D restricts migration of myeloid
cells expressing cognate PLXNB1/2 receptors, determined using trans-well
migration assays and IHC of in vivo tumors. Antibody neutralization
disrupted the SEMA4D gradient at the invasive margin, which correlated
with recruitment of activated APCs and T lymphocytes into the TME, and
significant shift toward increased Th1 cytokines (IFNg, TNFa) and
CTL-recruiting CXCL9 chemokine, with concurrent reduction in Treg- and
M2-macrophage promoting chemokines (CCL2, CXCL1, CCL17). Accordingly, an
increase in Teff:Treg ratio (3x, p<0.005) and CTL activity (4x, p<0.0001)
was observed. This orchestrated change in the tumoral immune context was
associated with durable tumor rejection and immunologic memory in
preclinical colon, breast, and melanoma models. Importantly, the
immunomodulatory activity of anti-SEMA4D antibody can be further enhanced
by combination with other immunotherapies, including immune checkpoint
inhibitors and chemotherapy. Strikingly, the combination with antibody to
CTLA-4 acts synergistically, with maximal increase in survival (110%
tumor growth delay, p<0.01) and complete tumor regression in 100% of
mice, as compared to 22% with monotherapy (p<0.01).SEMA4D antibody
treatment was well tolerated in nonclinical and clinical studies;
including a Phase I multiple ascending dose trial in patients with
advanced refractory solid tumors. Patients with the longest duration of
treatment, 48-55 weeks, included colorectal, breast, and a papillary
thyroid patient, who had a partial response by RECIST. Progression free
survival strongly correlated with elevated baseline lymphocyte counts (r
= 0.6133), supporting an immune mediated mechanism of action for
VX15/2503.CONCLUSION:Inhibition of SEMA4D represents a novel mechanism
and therapeutic strategy to promote functional immune infiltration into
the tumor and inhibit tumor progression. A phase 1b/2 trial of
combination therapy with an immune checkpoint inhibitor is planned.

