Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: 2-Deoxy-2-halo-D-glucose derivatives inhibition of glycolysis in
pancreatic cancer


Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is one of the most hypoxic and
subsequently glycolytic tumors. Thus the inhibition of glycolysis appears
to be an attractive therapeutic approach that should be explored.Methods:
A series of 2-deoxy analogs of D-glucose, namely, 2-deoxy-D-glucose
(2-DG), 2-fluoro-D-glucose (2-FG), 2-chloro-D-glucose (2-CG),
2-bromo-D-glucose (2-BG), and 2,2-difluoro-D-glucose (2,2-diFG) were
synthesized in our laboratory. The ability of 2-deoxy-2-halo-D-glucose
derivatives to inhibit glycolysis in pancreatic cancer cell lines was
tested using Seahorse 96 analyzer and XF Glycolysis Stress Test kit. The
cellular ATP level was measured using CellTiter-Glo assay. Viability of
cells cultured in normoxic and hypoxic conditions were assessed using MTS
assay.Results: 2,2-diFG and 2-FG were significantly more potent
inhibitors than 2-DG of the Extracellular Acidification Rate (ECAR) of
medium in oligomycin-stimulated PDAC cells (complete inhibition at
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is one of the most hypoxic and
subsequently glycolytic tumors. Thus the inhibition of glycolysis appears
to be an attractive therapeutic approach that should be explored.Methods:
A series of 2-deoxy analogs of D-glucose, namely, 2-deoxy-D-glucose
(2-DG), 2-fluoro-D-glucose (2-FG), 2-chloro-D-glucose (2-CG),
2-bromo-D-glucose (2-BG), and 2,2-difluoro-D-glucose (2,2-diFG) were
synthesized in our laboratory. The ability of 2-deoxy-2-halo-D-glucose
derivatives to inhibit glycolysis in pancreatic cancer cell lines was
tested using Seahorse 96 analyzer and XF Glycolysis Stress Test kit. The
cellular ATP level was measured using CellTiter-Glo assay. Viability of
cells cultured in normoxic and hypoxic conditions were assessed using MTS
assay.Results: 2,2-diFG and 2-FG were significantly more potent
inhibitors than 2-DG of the Extracellular Acidification Rate (ECAR) of
medium in oligomycin-stimulated PDAC cells (complete inhibition at <12.5
mM, whereas, the 100 mM is a commonly used concentration for 2-DG in
Seahorse 96 experiments). Interestingly, 2-bromo (2-BG) and 2-chloro
(2-CG) analogs have a limited or no effect on glycolysis at tested
concentration. Consistently, both, 2,2-diFG and 2-FG, inhibited
proliferation of pancreatic cancer cell lines more potently than 2-DG in
either normoxic and hypoxic conditions, with the differential effects
being significantly more pronounced under hypoxia.Conclusion: Both,
2,2-diFG and 2-FG have a superior to 2-DG ability to inhibit glycolysis
in vitro and should be further evaluated in vivo in the PDAC models as a
potential anticancer agents.

