Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The E3 ubiquitin ligase COP1 controls STAT3 turnover and its loss
leads to increased STAT3 stabilization and activation in prostate cancer


The E3 ubiquitin ligase COP1 acts as a tumor suppressor and is deleted in
a small percentage of prostate cancers. We reported that COP1 was
repressed in prostate tumors through miRNA-mediated silencing, which
represents an alternative and more frequent event than genetic deletion.
COP1 controls ubiquitination and turnover of c-Jun and ETV1 and its loss
has been associated with over-expression of these transcription factors.
In this study, we identify STAT3 as a novel substrate of COP1 and report
that concomitant deregulation of COP1 and STAT3 leads to prostate cancer
progression. In a panel of prostate cancer cell lines, low expression of
COP1 was associated with increased level of STAT3 protein and a more
aggressive phenotype. Knockdown of COP1 in normal prostate epithelial
RWPE-1 cells increased total (tSTAT3) and phosphorylated STAT3 (pSTAT3)
and promoted tumorigenic properties. Conversely, over-expression of COP1
in DU145 cells, expressing low level of COP1, reversed the transformed
phenotype and reduced tSTAT3 and pSTAT3 level and activation. COP1/STAT3
anti-correlation suggested that STAT3 was a substrate of COP1 for
ubiquitination and degradation by the ubiquitin-proteasome system.
Consistently, the proteasome inhibitor PS-341 prevented down-regulation
of STAT3 in response to COP1 in DU145 cells. Furthermore, COP1 knockdown
delayed significantly STAT3 protein turnover in RWPE-1 cells, indicating
that COP1 regulated STAT3 degradation in these cells. Co-IP showed that
COP1 and STAT3 directly interacted in RWPE-1 and DU145 cells.
Interestingly, co-IP with the wild type and phosphorylation defective
Y705F mutant STAT3 showed that the interaction with COP1 did not depend
on STAT3 phosphorylation. Furthermore, the level of ubiquitinated STAT3
in RWPE1 cells was reduced after COP1 knockdown, whereas increased in
DU145 cells after COP1 over-expression. These data provided evidence of
COP1-dependent ubiquitination and degradation of STAT3 in normal prostate
epithelial cells and, conversely, STAT3 accumulation and activation in
prostate cancer cells with loss of COP1. To assess the clinical relevance
of these findings, we examined the level of COP1, tSTAT3 and pSTAT3 by
IHC in primary prostate tumors (n = 136) from patients with long-term
clinical follow up. Low COP1 levels were significantly associated with
high tSTAT3 expression (Fisher test pThe E3 ubiquitin ligase COP1 acts as
a tumor suppressor and is deleted in a small percentage of prostate
cancers. We reported that COP1 was repressed in prostate tumors through
miRNA-mediated silencing, which represents an alternative and more
frequent event than genetic deletion. COP1 controls ubiquitination and
turnover of c-Jun and ETV1 and its loss has been associated with
over-expression of these transcription factors. In this study, we
identify STAT3 as a novel substrate of COP1 and report that concomitant
deregulation of COP1 and STAT3 leads to prostate cancer progression. In a
panel of prostate cancer cell lines, low expression of COP1 was
associated with increased level of STAT3 protein and a more aggressive
phenotype. Knockdown of COP1 in normal prostate epithelial RWPE-1 cells
increased total (tSTAT3) and phosphorylated STAT3 (pSTAT3) and promoted
tumorigenic properties. Conversely, over-expression of COP1 in DU145
cells, expressing low level of COP1, reversed the transformed phenotype
and reduced tSTAT3 and pSTAT3 level and activation. COP1/STAT3
anti-correlation suggested that STAT3 was a substrate of COP1 for
ubiquitination and degradation by the ubiquitin-proteasome system.
Consistently, the proteasome inhibitor PS-341 prevented down-regulation
of STAT3 in response to COP1 in DU145 cells. Furthermore, COP1 knockdown
delayed significantly STAT3 protein turnover in RWPE-1 cells, indicating
that COP1 regulated STAT3 degradation in these cells. Co-IP showed that
COP1 and STAT3 directly interacted in RWPE-1 and DU145 cells.
Interestingly, co-IP with the wild type and phosphorylation defective
Y705F mutant STAT3 showed that the interaction with COP1 did not depend
on STAT3 phosphorylation. Furthermore, the level of ubiquitinated STAT3
in RWPE1 cells was reduced after COP1 knockdown, whereas increased in
DU145 cells after COP1 over-expression. These data provided evidence of
COP1-dependent ubiquitination and degradation of STAT3 in normal prostate
epithelial cells and, conversely, STAT3 accumulation and activation in
prostate cancer cells with loss of COP1. To assess the clinical relevance
of these findings, we examined the level of COP1, tSTAT3 and pSTAT3 by
IHC in primary prostate tumors (n = 136) from patients with long-term
clinical follow up. Low COP1 levels were significantly associated with
high tSTAT3 expression (Fisher test p<0.001). Furthermore, pSTAT3 was
prevalently observed in the group of COP1 negative/STAT3 high tumors
indicative of STAT3 activation. The combination of low COP1 and high
STAT3 expression was associated with significantly higher risk of disease
recurrence after prostatectomy (p0.01) marking patients at risk of poor
clinical outcome. Collectively, this study identifies STAT3 as a
substrate of COP1 and provides evidence of a novel pathway leading to
STAT3 activation in human tumors.

