Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Galactose probes hit neuroblastoma cells through a specific
galactose-galectin association


Galectins are a family of proteins that decorate the cell membrane and
form extracellular molecular associations with -galactoside sugars.In
order to mimic multivalent molecular recognitions, galactoside moieties
have been immobilized on microbeads and used in cytofluorimetric analysis
and in microfluidic assay to study the molecular association between
carbohydrates and proteins in neuroblastoma (NB) cells. The hypothesis
behind this investigation was that the molecular mechanisms by which
glycans modulate neural metastatic cells involve protein-carbohydrate
association.To evaluate the binding between microbeads and tumor cells,
two human NB cell lines were used in cellular association experiments.
GI-LI-N cells, derived from the peripheral blood of a bone
marrow-infiltrated, high risk, stage IV NB patient, were chosen for
metastatic characteristics; IMR-32 cells were chosen because derived from
the primary tumor in the abdominal site of an unknown-stage NB patient.In
vitro experiments have revealed molecular binding preferences of the
metastatic NB cells. This result underscores that the efficiency of the
cellular association might be related to the differences in the
expression of the galectins between the two cell lines (GI-LI-N cells >>
IMR-32 cells) and that the formation of the molecular association
galectin-galactose could discriminate the tumor stages.Ex vivo
investigations have supported in vitro results; indeed, galactose
moieties mostly recognized GI-LI-N cells derived from orthotopic
tumor-bearing mice respect to explanted IMR-32 cells. This molecular
association was tumor cells specific because it discriminated healthy
tissues.The understanding of this mechanism of recognition, and of
possible cellular discrimination, can be relevant for the diagnostic
monitoring of metastatic NB cells, and for producing probes tailored to
interfere with galectin activities associated with the malignant
phenotype.

