Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exploring novel treatment agent in GIST by using connectivity map


Gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GIST) is gastrointestinal tract sarcoma
which commonly contains a mutation in the KIT or PDGFRA. Imatinib
mesylate, a specific tyrosine kinase inhibitor of the KIT and PDGFRA,
causes regression or stabilization of disease in most of the patients
with metastatic GIST. However, acquired resistance to imatinib is
inevitable. Recently, E26 variant 1 (ETV1) pathway was found to be a key
downstream effector of KIT. In this study, we explored the role of ETVI
and its downstream effectors pathway in GIST by bioinformatics analysis,
and identified potential novel agents that target ETV1 pathway of GISTs
by using expression profile and a pattern-matching software Connectivity
Map (CMAP), and confirmed the efficacy of novel agents by using GIST cell
line in vitro assay. By using CMAP, four drugs with potential
ETV1-inhibition effect were identified: suberanilohydroxamic acid
(SAHA,Vorinostat) and trichostatin, two histone deacetylase inhibitors
(HDACI), and trifluoperazine (TFP) and thioridazine (TDZ), two drugs of
phenothiazine class. All four drugs were found to have ETV1-down
regulating effect by immunoblotting. Phenothiazine could induce apoptosis
and autophagy in GIST. Treatment of phenothiazine was found paradoxically
up-regulate MEK activity. Combination of MEK inhibitor and phenothiazine
showed great synergistic effect in exerting cytotoxicity against GIST
cell lines. Our study established phenothiazine as a new class of agent
with therapeutic effect in GIST, and combination of phenothiazine and MEK
inhibitor showed great potential in GIST treatment.

