Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sociodemographic correlates of knowledge and risk perception of
HPV and HPV-associated oropharyngeal cancer


PurposeTo analyze how key sociodemographic variables correlate with risk
perception and knowledge of HPV-associated oropharyngeal cancer in the
community.MethodsA cross-sectional study was conducted at a drag racing
event on September 12-13, 2015 in Madison, Illinois. The independent
variables were sociodemographic factors including age, gender, race,
income level, education level, drinking history, smoking history, and
number of sexual partners. The outcome variables were HPV risk perception
and knowledge of HPV-associated oropharyngeal cancer, both derived from
combining questionnaire items to form knowledge and perception scores.
Multivariable linear regression analysis assessed the predictors of risk
perception and knowledge of HPV-associated oropharyngeal
cancer.ResultsFinal sample population was 301. Mean risk perception score
was 2.16 1.37 out of 6, and mean knowledge score was 5.65 4.63 out of 15.
In multivariable linear regression, race and education were significant
predictors of HPV risk perception. Compared to Caucasians, African
Americans had a lower perceived risk of developing oropharyngeal cancer (
= -0.35; 95% CI: -0.69 - -0.02). Participants with high school diploma
had a lower perceived risk of developing oropharyngeal cancer compared to
those with college degree ( = -0.60; 95% CI: -1.05 - -0.15). Age, gender,
race and education were significant predictors of HPV-associated
oropharyngeal cancer knowledge in multivariable analysis. For every one
year increase in age, HPV-associated oropharyngeal cancer knowledge
decreased by 5%. Men had lower HPV-associated oropharyngeal cancer
knowledge ( = -1.30; 95% CI: -2.35 - -0.26) as were African Americans
compared to Caucasians ( = -1.30; 95% CI: -2.36 - -0.25). Participants
with high school diploma had lower HPV-associated oropharyngeal cancer
knowledge compared to those with college degree ( = -3.33; 95% CI: -4.75
- -1.91).ConclusionsAge and gender were independent predictors of
knowledge of HPV-associated oropharyngeal cancer, while race and
education predict both knowledge and risk perception of HPV-associated
oropharyngeal cancer. The sociodemographic correlates demonstrated in our
study should inform future interventions targeted at increasing knowledge
of HPV-associated oropharyngeal cancer in the community.

