Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of reference reagents to accelerate research on the
RAS pathway


The RAS Reference Reagents program within the NCI RAS Initiative is
produces and distributes qualified DNA vectors, cell lines, and viruses
to the external community to facilitate research into RAS biology and
development of RAS cancer therapeutics. DNA vectors representing a
variety of RAS mutations, as well as a complete collection of 180 genes
in the RAS pathway are available as Gateway-compatible Entry clones.
These clones represent the most commonly expressed transcript forms of
the 180 genes, many of which were not previously available in
full-length, wildtype forms. The vectors can be used with the FNLCR
combinatorial cloning library to easily generate a large number of
different types of expression clones with various promoters, fusion tags,
and plasmid backbones. Additional reagents under construction include
validated plasmid and lentiviral reagents for shRNA and CRISPR delivery,
qualified cell lines for use in research into the RAS pathway, and
systems for the generation of highly purified and characterized Ras and
Ras-related proteins. A highlight of these reagents are materials for the
high yield production of properly processed, prenylated KRAS protein
using an engineered insect cell expression system. This system could be
used to produce other prenylated small GTPases at levels not previously
attainable. All of the resources of the RAS Reference Reagents program
are readily available to the academic community through simple
mechanisms, and can be licensed to industry scientists as well. The
program is also interested in identifying the needs of the community for
additional RAS-related resources, and is developing methods for vetting
requests from the outside to provide additional reagents.

