Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: KRAS mutation status is associated with stromal inactivation in
colorectal cancer and predicts poor response to neoadjuvant
chemoradiotherapy


Background: Treatment for locally advanced rectal cancer (LARC) consists
of neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy (NCRT) followed by radical excision.
Patients with tumors carrying a mutant KRAS are less likely to respond to
NCRT compared to KRAS wild type tumors. We hypothesized that an RNA-based
signature differentiating KRAS mutant and wild type patients could serve
as an indicator of the biological process associated with response to
NCRT. We found that the RNA-based signature is enriched for stromal and
immune genes. Furthermore, the stromal component of the signature is a
predictor of response to NCRT.Methods: Tumors from 120 LARC patients
enrolled in a multicenter phase 2 trial studying response to NCRT were
tested for KRAS status by Sanger Sequencing or Memorial Sloan Kettering
(MSK)-IMPACT assay and gene expression was quantified by sequencing.
Colorectal cancer (CRC) patients from MSK (n = 95) and TCGA (n = 261),
previously annotated for KRAS mutation status and gene expression, were
used for validation. A KRAS-inducible mouse model and CRC patient-derived
xenografts (PDXs) were utilized to determine the cell of origin for the
gene expression signature. Stromal enrichment was assessed with the
ESTIMATE stromal gene signature. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) was completed
for Periostin (POSTN), a stromal marker from the RNA-signature. Variant
Allele Frequency (VAF) was used to measure the abundance of KRAS, TP53
and Adenomatous Polyposis Coli (APC) mutant alleles in tumors, and was
quantified by targeted exome sequencing with the MSK-IMPACT
assay.Results: Analysis of the KRAS-associated gene signature showed
significant stromal inactivation in KRAS mutant patients. The signature
was validated in the MSK and TCGA cohorts. The stromal signature was
recapitulated in a KRAS inducible mouse model. Human CRC PDXs in mouse
indicated that the signature arose from murine stroma and not human
epithelium. Consistent with the stromal signature, IHC for POSTN, a
stromal marker, was significantly lower in the KRAS mutant tumors
compared with the KRAS wild type tumors (pBackground: Treatment for
locally advanced rectal cancer (LARC) consists of neoadjuvant
chemoradiotherapy (NCRT) followed by radical excision. Patients with
tumors carrying a mutant KRAS are less likely to respond to NCRT compared
to KRAS wild type tumors. We hypothesized that an RNA-based signature
differentiating KRAS mutant and wild type patients could serve as an
indicator of the biological process associated with response to NCRT. We
found that the RNA-based signature is enriched for stromal and immune
genes. Furthermore, the stromal component of the signature is a predictor
of response to NCRT.Methods: Tumors from 120 LARC patients enrolled in a
multicenter phase 2 trial studying response to NCRT were tested for KRAS
status by Sanger Sequencing or Memorial Sloan Kettering (MSK)-IMPACT
assay and gene expression was quantified by sequencing. Colorectal cancer
(CRC) patients from MSK (n = 95) and TCGA (n = 261), previously annotated
for KRAS mutation status and gene expression, were used for validation. A
KRAS-inducible mouse model and CRC patient-derived xenografts (PDXs) were
utilized to determine the cell of origin for the gene expression
signature. Stromal enrichment was assessed with the ESTIMATE stromal gene
signature. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) was completed for Periostin
(POSTN), a stromal marker from the RNA-signature. Variant Allele
Frequency (VAF) was used to measure the abundance of KRAS, TP53 and
Adenomatous Polyposis Coli (APC) mutant alleles in tumors, and was
quantified by targeted exome sequencing with the MSK-IMPACT
assay.Results: Analysis of the KRAS-associated gene signature showed
significant stromal inactivation in KRAS mutant patients. The signature
was validated in the MSK and TCGA cohorts. The stromal signature was
recapitulated in a KRAS inducible mouse model. Human CRC PDXs in mouse
indicated that the signature arose from murine stroma and not human
epithelium. Consistent with the stromal signature, IHC for POSTN, a
stromal marker, was significantly lower in the KRAS mutant tumors
compared with the KRAS wild type tumors (p<0.05) and was absent from the
epithelium. The stromal enrichment in mutant KRAS tumors was inversely
correlated with the KRAS VAF (pBackground: Treatment for locally advanced
rectal cancer (LARC) consists of neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy (NCRT)
followed by radical excision. Patients with tumors carrying a mutant KRAS
are less likely to respond to NCRT compared to KRAS wild type tumors. We
hypothesized that an RNA-based signature differentiating KRAS mutant and
wild type patients could serve as an indicator of the biological process
associated with response to NCRT. We found that the RNA-based signature
is enriched for stromal and immune genes. Furthermore, the stromal
component of the signature is a predictor of response to NCRT.Methods:
Tumors from 120 LARC patients enrolled in a multicenter phase 2 trial
studying response to NCRT were tested for KRAS status by Sanger
Sequencing or Memorial Sloan Kettering (MSK)-IMPACT assay and gene
expression was quantified by sequencing. Colorectal cancer (CRC) patients
from MSK (n = 95) and TCGA (n = 261), previously annotated for KRAS
mutation status and gene expression, were used for validation. A
KRAS-inducible mouse model and CRC patient-derived xenografts (PDXs) were
utilized to determine the cell of origin for the gene expression
signature. Stromal enrichment was assessed with the ESTIMATE stromal gene
signature. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) was completed for Periostin
(POSTN), a stromal marker from the RNA-signature. Variant Allele
Frequency (VAF) was used to measure the abundance of KRAS, TP53 and
Adenomatous Polyposis Coli (APC) mutant alleles in tumors, and was
quantified by targeted exome sequencing with the MSK-IMPACT
assay.Results: Analysis of the KRAS-associated gene signature showed
significant stromal inactivation in KRAS mutant patients. The signature
was validated in the MSK and TCGA cohorts. The stromal signature was
recapitulated in a KRAS inducible mouse model. Human CRC PDXs in mouse
indicated that the signature arose from murine stroma and not human
epithelium. Consistent with the stromal signature, IHC for POSTN, a
stromal marker, was significantly lower in the KRAS mutant tumors
compared with the KRAS wild type tumors (p<0.05) and was absent from the
epithelium. The stromal enrichment in mutant KRAS tumors was inversely
correlated with the KRAS VAF (p<0.01). This finding was not observed for
TP53 or APC VAF indicating specificity for stromal inactivation in KRAS
mutant tumors. Furthermore, the stromal component of the signature is
associated with poor response to NCRT in LARC.Conclusions: This study
shows that a KRAS mutation in CRC is associated with a lower expression
of a stromal signature and that this signature is derived from the tumor
microenvironment. This study indicates that CRC KRAS mutant tumors and a
stromal subtype are closely related. Understanding this relationship may
play a key role in elucidating the mechanism by which a KRAS mutant tumor
is resistant to standard therapy.

