Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prospective evaluation of serum unbound fraction of docetaxel as a
key determinant of its pharmacokinetics and neutropenia in the elderly


Background: Although elderly patients are at increased risk for
treatment-related toxicities of docetaxel (DOC), total body clearance
(CL) is unaltered by advanced age. Because the elderly patients show
large interindividual variability in pharmacokinetics and toxicities, the
profiles of DOC in older patients remain unclear. The present prospective
study was conducted to elucidate a key determinant of pharmacokinetics
and hematological toxicities of DOC in the elderly focusing on the
unbound fraction in serum.Patients and Methods: DOC was administered at a
dose of 60 mg/m2 once every 3 weeks to patients with non-small cell lung
cancer. Pharmacokinetics and toxicity were assessed during the first
cycle of therapy. Blood samples were taken immediately before and at the
end of the DOC infusion, and at 3 points until 24 h. Unbound DOC was
obtained by equilibrium dialysis, and DOC concentrations were determined
by the UPLC-MS/MS method. Population pharmacokinetic (PPK) analysis was
performed using NONMEM version 7.3.Results: Of 51 patients treated,
median age was 66 years (range 34-84 years), alpha1-acid glycoprotein
(AAG) level was 1.21 g/L in median (range 0.5-2.64 g/L), and albumin
(ALB) level was 37 g/L in median (range 22-48 g/L). The estimated CL,
area under the concentration-time curve (AUC), volume of distribution of
the central component (V1), volume of distribution at steady state (Vss)
and serum unbound fraction were 23.91 5.78 L/hr, 4.22 1.24 mg/hr/L, 9.10
0.94 L, 128.44 9.09 L, and 0.08 0.03, respectively (mean SD). In the PPK
analysis, levels of serum proteins were significant covariates affecting
pharmacokinetics of DOC but age was not statistically significant. AAG
and ALB were associated with CL and V1 (both pBackground: Although
elderly patients are at increased risk for treatment-related toxicities
of docetaxel (DOC), total body clearance (CL) is unaltered by advanced
age. Because the elderly patients show large interindividual variability
in pharmacokinetics and toxicities, the profiles of DOC in older patients
remain unclear. The present prospective study was conducted to elucidate
a key determinant of pharmacokinetics and hematological toxicities of DOC
in the elderly focusing on the unbound fraction in serum.Patients and
Methods: DOC was administered at a dose of 60 mg/m2 once every 3 weeks to
patients with non-small cell lung cancer. Pharmacokinetics and toxicity
were assessed during the first cycle of therapy. Blood samples were taken
immediately before and at the end of the DOC infusion, and at 3 points
until 24 h. Unbound DOC was obtained by equilibrium dialysis, and DOC
concentrations were determined by the UPLC-MS/MS method. Population
pharmacokinetic (PPK) analysis was performed using NONMEM version
7.3.Results: Of 51 patients treated, median age was 66 years (range 34-84
years), alpha1-acid glycoprotein (AAG) level was 1.21 g/L in median
(range 0.5-2.64 g/L), and albumin (ALB) level was 37 g/L in median (range
22-48 g/L). The estimated CL, area under the concentration-time curve
(AUC), volume of distribution of the central component (V1), volume of
distribution at steady state (Vss) and serum unbound fraction were 23.91
5.78 L/hr, 4.22 1.24 mg/hr/L, 9.10 0.94 L, 128.44 9.09 L, and 0.08 0.03,
respectively (mean SD). In the PPK analysis, levels of serum proteins
were significant covariates affecting pharmacokinetics of DOC but age was
not statistically significant. AAG and ALB were associated with CL and V1
(both p<0.01), respectively. In addition, significant correlation was
observed between unbound fraction and AAG (pBackground: Although elderly
patients are at increased risk for treatment-related toxicities of
docetaxel (DOC), total body clearance (CL) is unaltered by advanced age.
Because the elderly patients show large interindividual variability in
pharmacokinetics and toxicities, the profiles of DOC in older patients
remain unclear. The present prospective study was conducted to elucidate
a key determinant of pharmacokinetics and hematological toxicities of DOC
in the elderly focusing on the unbound fraction in serum.Patients and
Methods: DOC was administered at a dose of 60 mg/m2 once every 3 weeks to
patients with non-small cell lung cancer. Pharmacokinetics and toxicity
were assessed during the first cycle of therapy. Blood samples were taken
immediately before and at the end of the DOC infusion, and at 3 points
until 24 h. Unbound DOC was obtained by equilibrium dialysis, and DOC
concentrations were determined by the UPLC-MS/MS method. Population
pharmacokinetic (PPK) analysis was performed using NONMEM version
7.3.Results: Of 51 patients treated, median age was 66 years (range 34-84
years), alpha1-acid glycoprotein (AAG) level was 1.21 g/L in median
(range 0.5-2.64 g/L), and albumin (ALB) level was 37 g/L in median (range
22-48 g/L). The estimated CL, area under the concentration-time curve
(AUC), volume of distribution of the central component (V1), volume of
distribution at steady state (Vss) and serum unbound fraction were 23.91
5.78 L/hr, 4.22 1.24 mg/hr/L, 9.10 0.94 L, 128.44 9.09 L, and 0.08 0.03,
respectively (mean SD). In the PPK analysis, levels of serum proteins
were significant covariates affecting pharmacokinetics of DOC but age was
not statistically significant. AAG and ALB were associated with CL and V1
(both p<0.01), respectively. In addition, significant correlation was
observed between unbound fraction and AAG (p<0.01) which is the major
binding protein of DOC, whereas ALB showed marginal correlation (p =
0.055). In 49 patients evaluable of adverse events, decrease in
neutrophil counts was well correlated with AUC of unbound DOC (p90%), was
influenced by not only AAG but also ALB levels in serum. The key
determinant of DOC pharmacokinetics was the unbound fraction caused by
individual variations in AAG and ALB levels regardless of patients age.
The present results suggest that the severe hematologic toxicity induced
by higher unbound exposure can be predicted by serum protein levels in
patients treated with DOC and it is useful especially for the elderly.

