Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of a successful combination therapy for hepatocellular
cancer by targeting Treg and PD-1


We have established a clinically relevant murine model to reveal
tumor-induced immunotoerance in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Critical
factors are targeted to develop immune-based therapies for HCC
control.Intrasplenic (ISPL) inoculation of oncogenic hepatocytes and
intraperitoneal (IP) injection of carbon tetrachloride (CCl4) are
combined to induce progressive HCCs in fibrotic livers of immunocompetent
mice. We characterize the features of this model, examine
tumor-antigen-specific (TAS) immunity during tumor initiation and
progression, and identify the critical factors in tumor-induced immune
tolerance. The established murine model recapitulates human HCC and
reflects its typical features. TAS CD8+ T cells initially maintain a
naive phenotype and function in early-stage tumor-bearing mice, then
become profound exhaustion with the tumor progression to the advanced
stage. The deep immunosuppression is associated with the significant
upregulation of Programmed cell death protein 1(PD-1), Cytotoxic
T-lymphocyte-associated protein 4 (CTLA-4) and the increase of Tregs.
While the changes in Tregs and PD-1 are systemic, they are particularly
pronounced in the tumor microenvironment. Sunitinib-mediated reduction of
Treg together with antibody-mediated blockade of PD-1 synergistically
suppress tumor growth and activate anti-tumor immunity.Our data provide
evidence that oncogenic hepatocytes escape immune surveillance during
tumor initiation via immune ignorance, while later-stage established HCCs
evade immune destruction via tumor-induced immunotolerance. Synergy of
sunitinib and anti-PD-1 Ab generates favorable effect on suppressing
tumor growth and activating anti-tumor immunity. This combinational
strategy has high translational potential in HCC treatment.

