Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Reviving kinesin-5 inhibitors: Evidence for a powerful
combinatorial strategy


Mitosis serves as a powerful opportunity for therapeutic intervention in
the treatment of neoplastic diseases like cancer. Anti-mitotic
pharmacological agents tame the proliferative capacity of tumor cells by
interfering with proper function of the mitotic spindle. Several next
generation anti-mitotics target kinesins involved in assembling the
mitotic spindle. Of these mitotic kinesins, the kinesin-5 Eg5 (also known
as KSP) is perhaps the most compelling because of its primacy during
spindle assembly in animal cells. Indeed, Eg5-inhibitors (K5Is) induce a
potent and lethal mitotic arrest in cell culture and murine xenografts;
however, K5Is failed to induce tumor regression during Phase II trials.
This devastating clinical performance has halted further development of
K5I monotherapies and motivated investigation into the underlying
reason(s) for K5I inefficacy.We previously showed that tumor cells in
culture are capable of acquiring K5I resistance by employing parallel
spindle assembly pathways. By studying a limited number of K5I-resistant
cell lines, we showed that resistance involved the kinesin-12 Kif15;
however, the generality of this finding was unclear. In this study we
capitalize on the latest methodologies in targeted genome editing to
study mechanisms of K5I resistance on a broader cell population level. We
find that cells require Kif15 in all cases of K5I resistance, and that
rescue is sensitive to the timing and extent of Kif15 expression. We
propose that K5Is steer cells into an evolutionary bottleneck that
requires Kif15, and that adaptive changes occur during passage through
the bottleneck that enable populations to recover and diversify. These
findings prompt a search for pharmacological inhibitors of Kif15 to test
in combination with K5Is as an anti-mitotic chemotherapeutic regimen.

