Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exploring target genes of eukaryotic initiation factor 5A in
cancer using RNA sequence analysis


Protein synthesis has a key role of maintaining cellular homeostasis such
as growth and metabolism. However, dysregulation of translational process
is a frequent feature of cancer and contributes to cancer progression.
Since oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes are regulated by the
translation machinery, therapeutic drugs which target the translation
machinery have the possibility for overcoming cancer. We then focused on
the hypusine cascade which is related to translational process. In our
previous study, we showed that overexpression of the deoxyhypusine
synthase (DHPS), an enzyme contained in the hypusine cascade, promoted
cancer progression such as migration and invasion ability through RhoA
signaling pathway. A DHPS inhibitor, GC7, showed significant decrease in
the tumor formation in vivo. In particular, eukaryoutec initiation factor
5A (eIF5A) which is activated by hypusination has important roles of the
translational regulation such as initiation and elongation of protein
synthesis and nucleocytoplasmic transport of mRNA. We tried to identify
the target genes of eIF5A by combining RNA-ChIP method with RNA
sequencing analysis. As a result, candidate genes which bound to eIF5A
were extracted by bioinformatics analysis, and redundant binding motifs
for eIF5A in mRNAs emerged. These findings and future analyses would
reveal the regulation of translational machinery by eIF5A which could be
an important target for cancer therapy.

