Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Breast cancer-derived extracellular vesicles: clinical and
prognostic impact


Background: Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are released from cancer cells
into the tumor microenvironment, there participating in intercellular
communication by altering recipient cell function. Breast cancer (BC)
derived EVs are hypothesized to have an impact on tumor growth,
immunosuppression or metastatic development, indicating analytical
significance of EV concentrations in BC patients. For this reason, we
investigated plasmatic EV numbers from locally advanced, neoadjuvant
treated (NACT) BC patients in association with clinical parameters and
prognostic impact.Material and methods: Plasmatic extracellular vesicles
were isolated using ExoQuick precipitation reagent (SBI Inc., Mountain
View, CA, USA), according to manufacturer's instructions, from locally
advanced BC patients before (n = 142) and after (n = 156) NACT as well as
from healthy female controls (n = 16). Subsequently, number and EV
particle size were analyzed using ZetaView Laser Scattering Video
Microscope (Particle Metrix GmbH, Microtrac, Meerbusch, Germany). Samples
were 1:50.000 in PBS pre-diluted to obtain particle concentrations of
approx. 1 106 particles per ml. Circulating tumor cells (CTCs) and stem
cell-like circulating tumor cells (slCTCs) were evaluated using the
AdnaTests BreastCancer, StemCell and EMT, respectively (QIAGEN Hannover
GmbH, Germany).Results: EV particle concentrations (mean SEM in 109/ml)
were significantly (p 2480 109/ml (p = 0.005). A reduced OS of BC
patients was significantly associated with (i) EV levels before NACT >
3540 109/ml) (p = 0.001) and (ii) EV levels after NACT > 2480 109/ml) (p
= 0.003). Decreased EV levels were found in BC patients after NACT with
CTCs expressing ERCC1 (p = 0.025) or the stem cell marker ALDH1 (p =
0.004).Conclusion: In conclusion, BC patients showed elevated plasmatic
EV levels compared to healthy females, while increased EV levels after
NACT might be due to therapeutic effects. The association between EV
particle concentrations and clinical parameters as well as their
prognostic impact on clinical outcome in BC indicate the importance of
EVs as a mediator in the BC tumor microenvironment. Therefore,
determination of plasmatic EV particle amount might serve as a biomarker
for BC monitoring.

