Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of FBXL4 as a bone metastasis-associated gene in
prostate cancer


Prostate cancer (PCa) is the most common cancer among men in Western
developed countries. While the majority of PCa diagnosed by PSA screening
are indolent, advanced and metastatic disease has a significant mortality
and morbidity. Bone metastases are extremely common in PCa and
identification of bone metastasis associated genes may provide insights
into PCa progression and assist in finding new drug targets. However, the
genetic study of bone metastases is very limited due to the difficulty of
sampling. By analyzing PCa bone metastases using high density
microarrays, we found a common genomic copy number loss at 6q16.1-16.2,
containing the FBXL4 gene, which was confirmed in a separate and larger
series of bone metastatic samples by fluorescence in situ hybridization
(FISH). Loss of FBXL4 was also detected in primary PCa, although at a
significantly lower frequency than in bone metastases, and it was highly
associated with prognostic factors including high Gleason score, clinical
stage, PSA and extent of disease, as well as poor patient survival in
conservatively-managed localized PCa, suggesting that loss of FBXL4
contributes to PCa progression. We also demonstrated that FBXL4 deletion
is detectable in circulating tumor cells, making it a potential disease
prognostic or progression monitoring biomarker by liquid biopsy.
Consistent with loss of FBXL4 being associated with aggressive tumors, we
demonstrated in vitro that FBXL4 plays a role in regulating the migration
and invasion of PCa cells. Therefore, FBXL4 is a potential novel PCa
suppressor gene, which may prevent cancer progression and bone metastasis
through controlling cell invasion.

