Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular profiling of pancreatic cancer patients from a wide
geographical distribution across the US


Commercial genomic and protein-based profiling was performed on tissue
from pancreatic cancer patients who enrolled in the Pancreatic Cancer
Action Network's Know Your Tumor (KYT) service. The service offers
molecular profiling for patients with resectable or metastatic disease,
in preparation for their next treatment plan. Patients are eligible to
enroll at any institution, clinic, or cancer center in the US. Biopsies,
tissue retrieval and testing is coordinated by Perthera, Inc.From 6/2014
to 11/2015 tumor biopsies, resected or archived tissue was obtained from
152 (53% male) pancreatic cancer patients and profiling including
NGS/FISH (144 patients) and IHC (143 patients) was performed. The median
age at biopsy or resection was 63 (25-83), 55% of the tissue came from
liver, 16% from pancreas, 7% lung, 4% peritoneum, and 18% from another
type of tissue. 87% of the patients were diagnosed with pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma and the remaining with another form of confirmed or
suspected pancreatic cancer.The most identified pathogenic mutations were
KRAS (85%), TP53 (72%), CDKN2A (47%), CDKN2B (24%), SMAD4 (22%), ARID1A
(10%), STK11 (7%), and BRCA2 (5%). The average number of genomic
alterations (likely but not confirmed to be somatic) detected was five
per patient from a panel of 320 genes. Molecular modifications that are
linked to a treatment option were observed in 44% of patients. Twenty
four of 144 patients (17%) had mutations in at least one DNA repair gene
potentially benefiting from platinum or PARP inhibitor-based therapies,
including BRCA2 (5%), ATM (4%), BAP1 (4%), SMARCA4 (3%), FANC (1%), CHEK2
(1%), and PALB2 (Commercial genomic and protein-based profiling was
performed on tissue from pancreatic cancer patients who enrolled in the
Pancreatic Cancer Action Network's Know Your Tumor (KYT) service. The
service offers molecular profiling for patients with resectable or
metastatic disease, in preparation for their next treatment plan.
Patients are eligible to enroll at any institution, clinic, or cancer
center in the US. Biopsies, tissue retrieval and testing is coordinated
by Perthera, Inc.From 6/2014 to 11/2015 tumor biopsies, resected or
archived tissue was obtained from 152 (53% male) pancreatic cancer
patients and profiling including NGS/FISH (144 patients) and IHC (143
patients) was performed. The median age at biopsy or resection was 63
(25-83), 55% of the tissue came from liver, 16% from pancreas, 7% lung,
4% peritoneum, and 18% from another type of tissue. 87% of the patients
were diagnosed with pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma and the remaining
with another form of confirmed or suspected pancreatic cancer.The most
identified pathogenic mutations were KRAS (85%), TP53 (72%), CDKN2A
(47%), CDKN2B (24%), SMAD4 (22%), ARID1A (10%), STK11 (7%), and BRCA2
(5%). The average number of genomic alterations (likely but not confirmed
to be somatic) detected was five per patient from a panel of 320 genes.
Molecular modifications that are linked to a treatment option were
observed in 44% of patients. Twenty four of 144 patients (17%) had
mutations in at least one DNA repair gene potentially benefiting from
platinum or PARP inhibitor-based therapies, including BRCA2 (5%), ATM
(4%), BAP1 (4%), SMARCA4 (3%), FANC (1%), CHEK2 (1%), and PALB2 (<1%).
Other actionable molecular phenotypes observed include anti-HER2
therapies targeting ERBB2 amplifications (3%) and mTOR inhibitors
suitable for patients with mutations in STK11/LKB1 (7%), PTEN (3.5%),
PIK3R1 (Commercial genomic and protein-based profiling was performed on
tissue from pancreatic cancer patients who enrolled in the Pancreatic
Cancer Action Network's Know Your Tumor (KYT) service. The service offers
molecular profiling for patients with resectable or metastatic disease,
in preparation for their next treatment plan. Patients are eligible to
enroll at any institution, clinic, or cancer center in the US. Biopsies,
tissue retrieval and testing is coordinated by Perthera, Inc.From 6/2014
to 11/2015 tumor biopsies, resected or archived tissue was obtained from
152 (53% male) pancreatic cancer patients and profiling including
NGS/FISH (144 patients) and IHC (143 patients) was performed. The median
age at biopsy or resection was 63 (25-83), 55% of the tissue came from
liver, 16% from pancreas, 7% lung, 4% peritoneum, and 18% from another
type of tissue. 87% of the patients were diagnosed with pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma and the remaining with another form of confirmed or
suspected pancreatic cancer.The most identified pathogenic mutations were
KRAS (85%), TP53 (72%), CDKN2A (47%), CDKN2B (24%), SMAD4 (22%), ARID1A
(10%), STK11 (7%), and BRCA2 (5%). The average number of genomic
alterations (likely but not confirmed to be somatic) detected was five
per patient from a panel of 320 genes. Molecular modifications that are
linked to a treatment option were observed in 44% of patients. Twenty
four of 144 patients (17%) had mutations in at least one DNA repair gene
potentially benefiting from platinum or PARP inhibitor-based therapies,
including BRCA2 (5%), ATM (4%), BAP1 (4%), SMARCA4 (3%), FANC (1%), CHEK2
(1%), and PALB2 (<1%). Other actionable molecular phenotypes observed
include anti-HER2 therapies targeting ERBB2 amplifications (3%) and mTOR
inhibitors suitable for patients with mutations in STK11/LKB1 (7%), PTEN
(3.5%), PIK3R1 (<1%), or PIK3CA (3%). Actionable alterations identified
with a low frequency (Commercial genomic and protein-based profiling was
performed on tissue from pancreatic cancer patients who enrolled in the
Pancreatic Cancer Action Network's Know Your Tumor (KYT) service. The
service offers molecular profiling for patients with resectable or
metastatic disease, in preparation for their next treatment plan.
Patients are eligible to enroll at any institution, clinic, or cancer
center in the US. Biopsies, tissue retrieval and testing is coordinated
by Perthera, Inc.From 6/2014 to 11/2015 tumor biopsies, resected or
archived tissue was obtained from 152 (53% male) pancreatic cancer
patients and profiling including NGS/FISH (144 patients) and IHC (143
patients) was performed. The median age at biopsy or resection was 63
(25-83), 55% of the tissue came from liver, 16% from pancreas, 7% lung,
4% peritoneum, and 18% from another type of tissue. 87% of the patients
were diagnosed with pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma and the remaining
with another form of confirmed or suspected pancreatic cancer.The most
identified pathogenic mutations were KRAS (85%), TP53 (72%), CDKN2A
(47%), CDKN2B (24%), SMAD4 (22%), ARID1A (10%), STK11 (7%), and BRCA2
(5%). The average number of genomic alterations (likely but not confirmed
to be somatic) detected was five per patient from a panel of 320 genes.
Molecular modifications that are linked to a treatment option were
observed in 44% of patients. Twenty four of 144 patients (17%) had
mutations in at least one DNA repair gene potentially benefiting from
platinum or PARP inhibitor-based therapies, including BRCA2 (5%), ATM
(4%), BAP1 (4%), SMARCA4 (3%), FANC (1%), CHEK2 (1%), and PALB2 (<1%).
Other actionable molecular phenotypes observed include anti-HER2
therapies targeting ERBB2 amplifications (3%) and mTOR inhibitors
suitable for patients with mutations in STK11/LKB1 (7%), PTEN (3.5%),
PIK3R1 (<1%), or PIK3CA (3%). Actionable alterations identified with a
low frequency (<2%) include RET fusions, amplifications of FGFR, CRKL,
AXL, and mutations in NTRK3, MEN1 (PNET), and BRAF. One patient harbored
the BRAF V600E mutation, prompting consideration of off label
melanoma-approved therapy. Overexpression of ALK by IHC was observed in
one patient who chose to enroll in a ceritinib clinical trial. Six
percent of patients were PDL-1 positive, and 22% were positive for PD-1
from tumor infiltrating lymphocytes, suggesting possible activity from
immune checkpoint inhibitors.To date, 7 of the 152 patients have enrolled
in a clinical trial, 4 were treated with an off label treatment, 67 have
yet to make their next treatment decision, and 53 are known to be
deceased. KYT has successfully profiled tumors and presented targeted
treatment options to patients and physicians in 33 states regardless of a
patient's socioeconomic background and geographic location, moving the
field a step closer towards a democratized, personalized approach to
treating pancreatic cancer.

