Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Correlations between overall survival and patient regulatory
T-cell levels at initiation of Folfiri therapy in colorectal cancer


Twenty-three patients with metastatic colon or rectal carcinoma were
enrolled in a first-line study of Folfiri therapy consisting of
irinotecan (180 mg/m2 day 1), levo-leucovorin (200 mg/m2 day 1), 5-FU
(400 mg/m2 bolus day 1 and 2400 mg/m2 continuous infusion over 48h), and
bevacizumab (5 mg/kg day 1). This treatment schedule was repeated every 2
weeks. Peripheral blood samples were collected prior to the start of
cycle I, and after 30 days, and assayed by 4-color flow cytometry and
regulatory T-cell (Treg) suppression assay.Cytofluorometric analysis of
PBMCs of the entire group of patients revealed no statistical differences
between the PBMCs collected at baseline and post 30 days of therapy in
terms of PBMC amount, percent of CD4+ T cells, CD8+ T cells, or Tregs, or
the ratios of CD4+ T cells or CD8+ T cells vs. Tregs.Lower levels of
Tregs (Twenty-three patients with metastatic colon or rectal carcinoma
were enrolled in a first-line study of Folfiri therapy consisting of
irinotecan (180 mg/m2 day 1), levo-leucovorin (200 mg/m2 day 1), 5-FU
(400 mg/m2 bolus day 1 and 2400 mg/m2 continuous infusion over 48h), and
bevacizumab (5 mg/kg day 1). This treatment schedule was repeated every 2
weeks. Peripheral blood samples were collected prior to the start of
cycle I, and after 30 days, and assayed by 4-color flow cytometry and
regulatory T-cell (Treg) suppression assay.Cytofluorometric analysis of
PBMCs of the entire group of patients revealed no statistical differences
between the PBMCs collected at baseline and post 30 days of therapy in
terms of PBMC amount, percent of CD4+ T cells, CD8+ T cells, or Tregs, or
the ratios of CD4+ T cells or CD8+ T cells vs. Tregs.Lower levels of
Tregs (< 2.5% of PBMC) at baseline, i.e., prior to chemotherapy, were
associated with a better PFS by log-rank analysis. The median PFS for
patients with 2.5% Tregs at baseline PFS was 10.7 weeks (p = 0.037, n =
23).Furthermore, a forward step-wise regression analysis model
demonstrated that lower Tregs at baseline (regression coefficient =
0.467, p = 0.004) and the decrease in Tregs (as% of PBMC) at 30 days of
chemotherapy (regression coefficient = 0.454, p = 0.006) were both
independent predictors of better OS, independent of age, gender, ALP,
LDH, mucinous vs. non-mucinous phenotype, serum CEA, serum 19.9, and
number of metastatic sites.Of the 23 patients on study, 14 demonstrated
clinical responses by RECIST criteria and nine did not. Eight of the 14
(57%) responders by RECIST criteria displayed Treg levels 2.5% Tregs at
baseline PFS was 10.7 weeks (p = 0.037, n = 23).Furthermore, a forward
step-wise regression analysis model demonstrated that lower Tregs at
baseline (regression coefficient = 0.467, p = 0.004) and the decrease in
Tregs (as% of PBMC) at 30 days of chemotherapy (regression coefficient =
0.454, p = 0.006) were both independent predictors of better OS,
independent of age, gender, ALP, LDH, mucinous vs. non-mucinous
phenotype, serum CEA, serum 19.9, and number of metastatic sites.Of the
23 patients on study, 14 demonstrated clinical responses by RECIST
criteria and nine did not. Eight of the 14 (57%) responders by RECIST
criteria displayed Treg levels < 2.5% of PBMC at baseline, whereas only
two of the seven (22%) non-responders demonstrated 2.5% Tregs at baseline
PFS was 10.7 weeks (p = 0.037, n = 23).Furthermore, a forward step-wise
regression analysis model demonstrated that lower Tregs at baseline
(regression coefficient = 0.467, p = 0.004) and the decrease in Tregs
(as% of PBMC) at 30 days of chemotherapy (regression coefficient = 0.454,
p = 0.006) were both independent predictors of better OS, independent of
age, gender, ALP, LDH, mucinous vs. non-mucinous phenotype, serum CEA,
serum 19.9, and number of metastatic sites.Of the 23 patients on study,
14 demonstrated clinical responses by RECIST criteria and nine did not.
Eight of the 14 (57%) responders by RECIST criteria displayed Treg levels
< 2.5% of PBMC at baseline, whereas only two of the seven (22%)
non-responders demonstrated < 2.5% Tregs at baseline. In addition, nine
of the responders by RECIST criteria (64%) showed a trend in the decrease
of Tregs as% of PBMC at 30 days of therapy, whereas only 22% of the
non-responders had a decrease in Tregs (p = 0.049, Chi2 = 3.9 with
Pearson test).In conclusion, we found lower frequencies of Tregs at
baseline in responders than non-responders, which was associated with
longer PFS. In addition, lower Tregs at baseline and a decrease in Treg
frequency after 1 month of Folfiri therapy were both independent
predictors of longer OS.

