Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PD-L1 is expressed on CD11bhighCD14highHLA-DR+ myeloid cells in
the tumor microenvironment of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)


Understanding the immune system of cancer patients is essential for the
development of optimal treatment. We analyzed tumor cells and
infiltrating immune cells in tumor tissues of NSCLC to determine the type
of cells which expressed immune checkpoint molecules and/or their
ligands, and compared them to clinicopathological characteristics. To
obtain a single cell suspension from the tumor tissues of lung cancer
patients, each fresh tumor sample was chopped and treated with
collagenase and DNase. The dissociated tumor tissue cells (DTCs) were
stained with fluorochrome-labeled mAbs and the distribution of immune
cell components and expression of surface markers in DTCs were determined
by FACSuite analysis. The yield of DTCs was 5.874.73107/gram. PD-L1,
which is a ligand for immune checkpoint molecule PD-1, is expressed on
CD11bhigh myeloid cells in the blood, regardless of HLA-DR expression. On
the other hand, PD-L1 is expressed on CD11highCD14highSSClow myeloid
cells in the tumor site. All PD-L1 expressing cells were positive for
HLA-DR, a ligand for a T cell receptor of CD4 T cells. Furthermore, these
cells also expressed both CD86 and CD124. Interestingly, most tumor cells
expressed very low levels of the PD-L1 molecule. And we found that
CD11highCD14+HLA-DR- myeloid cells did not express PD-L1. The proportion
of CD11highCD14+HLA-DR-PD-L1- myeloid cells was higher in advanced stage
patients than early stage patients. In conclusion, PD-L1 is expressed on
CD11bhighCD14highHLA-DR+SSClow myeloid cells, but not
CD11bhighCD14+HLA-DR- myeloid cells. We propose that the PD-L1+ myeloid
cells are likely to play an important role in tumor immunity. Further
functional studies will be necessary to determine how the interaction
between the cells will affect immunity.


