Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Defining the immune checkpoint landscape of acute myeloid leukemia
(AML)


Introduction: The expression of co-stimulatory (costim) receptors/ligands
in the bone marrow (BM) and peripheral blood (PB) in patients (pts) with
AML has not been defined. Identification of immune-checkpoint pathways
that dominate in AML will guide the rational selection of specific
antibodies for clinical trials.Methods: Between March, 2015 and October
2015 we performed 17-color multi-parameter flow-cytometry (MFC) on 15
untreated AML and 25 relapsed AML to assess expression of costim ligands
(4-1BBL, B7-1, B7-2, ICOSL, PDL-1, PDL-2, OX40L) on leukemic blasts and
costim receptors (4-1BB, CTLA-4, ICOS, PD-1, OX40, GITR, LAG-3, TIM-3) on
T cell subsets: CD4 T effector cells [Teff]: CD3+CD4+CD127lo/+Foxp3, CD4
T regulatory cells [Treg]: CD3+CD4+CD127Foxp3+, and CD8 T cells:
CD3+CD8+. Four healthy human BMs were used as control. Expression is
denoted by percentage of specific T-cell subset or gated AML blasts
positive for the marker indicated. PB mononuclear cells (PBMCs) and
blasts were evaluated at the same time-point.Results: OX40+ Teffs and
OX40+ CD8 cells were higher in untreated AML BM as compared to healthy
donor BM (median [med]: 7.2% versus [vs] 0.26%; P = 0.0005 and med: 2.03%
vs 0.06%; P = 0.07, respectively). PD1+ Tregs and OX40+ Tregs were also
higher in untreated AML BM as compared to healthy donor BM (med: 19.7% vs
7.5%; P = 0.03 and med: 10.3% vs 0.5%; P = 0.02, respectively). PD1+
Teffs, OX40+ Teffs, and ICOS+ Teffs were higher in relapsed AML BM as
compared to healthy donor BM (med: 17.7% vs 6.7%; P = 0.047, med: 12% vs
0.27%, P = 0.002, and med: 13.3% vs 1.1%; P = 0.07, respectively). OX40+
CD8 cells, ICOS+ CD8 cells, TIM3+ CD8 cells (med: 5.0% vs 0.07%; P =
0.04, med: 18.5% vs 2.6%; P = 0.09, and med: 2.7% vs 0.7%; P = 0.01,
respectively) and OX40+ Tregs (med: 15.5% vs 0.5%; PIntroduction: The
expression of co-stimulatory (costim) receptors/ligands in the bone
marrow (BM) and peripheral blood (PB) in patients (pts) with AML has not
been defined. Identification of immune-checkpoint pathways that dominate
in AML will guide the rational selection of specific antibodies for
clinical trials.Methods: Between March, 2015 and October 2015 we
performed 17-color multi-parameter flow-cytometry (MFC) on 15 untreated
AML and 25 relapsed AML to assess expression of costim ligands (4-1BBL,
B7-1, B7-2, ICOSL, PDL-1, PDL-2, OX40L) on leukemic blasts and costim
receptors (4-1BB, CTLA-4, ICOS, PD-1, OX40, GITR, LAG-3, TIM-3) on T cell
subsets: CD4 T effector cells [Teff]: CD3+CD4+CD127lo/+Foxp3, CD4 T
regulatory cells [Treg]: CD3+CD4+CD127Foxp3+, and CD8 T cells: CD3+CD8+.
Four healthy human BMs were used as control. Expression is denoted by
percentage of specific T-cell subset or gated AML blasts positive for the
marker indicated. PB mononuclear cells (PBMCs) and blasts were evaluated
at the same time-point.Results: OX40+ Teffs and OX40+ CD8 cells were
higher in untreated AML BM as compared to healthy donor BM (median [med]:
7.2% versus [vs] 0.26%; P = 0.0005 and med: 2.03% vs 0.06%; P = 0.07,
respectively). PD1+ Tregs and OX40+ Tregs were also higher in untreated
AML BM as compared to healthy donor BM (med: 19.7% vs 7.5%; P = 0.03 and
med: 10.3% vs 0.5%; P = 0.02, respectively). PD1+ Teffs, OX40+ Teffs, and
ICOS+ Teffs were higher in relapsed AML BM as compared to healthy donor
BM (med: 17.7% vs 6.7%; P = 0.047, med: 12% vs 0.27%, P = 0.002, and med:
13.3% vs 1.1%; P = 0.07, respectively). OX40+ CD8 cells, ICOS+ CD8 cells,
TIM3+ CD8 cells (med: 5.0% vs 0.07%; P = 0.04, med: 18.5% vs 2.6%; P =
0.09, and med: 2.7% vs 0.7%; P = 0.01, respectively) and OX40+ Tregs
(med: 15.5% vs 0.5%; P<0.0001) were also higher in relapsed AML BM as
compared to healthy donor BM. GITR+ Teffs, PD1+ CD 8 cells, and LAG3+
Tregs were higher in relapsed AML BM as compared to new AML BM (med:
10.9% vs 1.7%; P = 0.08, med: 36.2% vs 21.3%; P = 0.03, and med: 46.7% vs
16.9%; P = 0.07, respectively). No other noteworthy differences were
noted for costim receptor expression. There were no noteworthy
differences in ligand expression patterns between relapsed AML and new
AML. There was significant variability in BM expression of costim
receptors and ligands between individual pts. The expression of costim
receptors and ligands differed significantly between BM and PB from the
same time-point in the same pt. A larger sample size is needed to confirm
these data and find additional associations and this is currently
underway at our institution.Conclusions: Clinically targetable checkpoint
receptors including PD1, OX40, and ICOS appear to be overexpressed in the
BM of pts with AML as compared to healthy donor BM. Relapsed AML had
higher expression of costim receptors than untreated AML. Three anti-PD1
based clinical trials for pts with AML are enrolling at our institution
(NCT02397720, NCT02464657, NCT02532231).

