Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Associations of clinical, molecular and immunohistochemical
parameters in five different types of uterine smooth muscle tumors


Objective:To evaluate clinical, molecular and pathologic factors
associated with 5 types of uterine smooth muscle tumors.Materials and
Methods:Seventy-nine patients with leiomyosarcoma [31 (39.2%) LMS],
smooth muscle tumors of undetermined significance [10 (12.7%) STUMP],
atypical leiomyoma [19 (24.1%) ALM], mitotically active leiomyoma [5
(6.3%) MALM], and cellular leiomyoma [14 (17.7%) CLM] treated from
1997-2015 were analyzed. Statistical analysis was performed using ANOVA,
chi-square and logrank tests.Results:Mean age (years) differed across
histologies: 54 (LMS), 36 (STUMP), 41 (ALM), and 47 (CLM/MALM)
(pObjective:To evaluate clinical, molecular and pathologic factors
associated with 5 types of uterine smooth muscle tumors.Materials and
Methods:Seventy-nine patients with leiomyosarcoma [31 (39.2%) LMS],
smooth muscle tumors of undetermined significance [10 (12.7%) STUMP],
atypical leiomyoma [19 (24.1%) ALM], mitotically active leiomyoma [5
(6.3%) MALM], and cellular leiomyoma [14 (17.7%) CLM] treated from
1997-2015 were analyzed. Statistical analysis was performed using ANOVA,
chi-square and logrank tests.Results:Mean age (years) differed across
histologies: 54 (LMS), 36 (STUMP), 41 (ALM), and 47 (CLM/MALM) (p<.0001).
Median follow up was 37 months (range 0-226). Those with LMS were more
likely to have a family history of cancer (48%, pObjective:To evaluate
clinical, molecular and pathologic factors associated with 5 types of
uterine smooth muscle tumors.Materials and Methods:Seventy-nine patients
with leiomyosarcoma [31 (39.2%) LMS], smooth muscle tumors of
undetermined significance [10 (12.7%) STUMP], atypical leiomyoma [19
(24.1%) ALM], mitotically active leiomyoma [5 (6.3%) MALM], and cellular
leiomyoma [14 (17.7%) CLM] treated from 1997-2015 were analyzed.
Statistical analysis was performed using ANOVA, chi-square and logrank
tests.Results:Mean age (years) differed across histologies: 54 (LMS), 36
(STUMP), 41 (ALM), and 47 (CLM/MALM) (p<.0001). Median follow up was 37
months (range 0-226). Those with LMS were more likely to have a family
history of cancer (48%, p<.003). Tobacco use did not vary by histology
but was significantly associated with recurrence (50 vs. 17%, p = .03).
Fifty-four percent of LMS recurred and 48% died. There were no
recurrences or deaths due to non-LMS histology. Patients who recurred
were more likely to have a family history of malignancy (58 vs 41%, p =
.0005). There was no association with recurrence or survival for:
ethnicity, parity, hormone use, personal history of malignancy, tumor
size or weight.Of 6 gene markers examined by immunohistochemistry (IHC),
ER and PR expression were significantly lower in LMS than in other types
(p Objective:To evaluate clinical, molecular and pathologic factors
associated with 5 types of uterine smooth muscle tumors.Materials and
Methods:Seventy-nine patients with leiomyosarcoma [31 (39.2%) LMS],
smooth muscle tumors of undetermined significance [10 (12.7%) STUMP],
atypical leiomyoma [19 (24.1%) ALM], mitotically active leiomyoma [5
(6.3%) MALM], and cellular leiomyoma [14 (17.7%) CLM] treated from
1997-2015 were analyzed. Statistical analysis was performed using ANOVA,
chi-square and logrank tests.Results:Mean age (years) differed across
histologies: 54 (LMS), 36 (STUMP), 41 (ALM), and 47 (CLM/MALM) (p<.0001).
Median follow up was 37 months (range 0-226). Those with LMS were more
likely to have a family history of cancer (48%, p<.003). Tobacco use did
not vary by histology but was significantly associated with recurrence
(50 vs. 17%, p = .03). Fifty-four percent of LMS recurred and 48% died.
There were no recurrences or deaths due to non-LMS histology. Patients
who recurred were more likely to have a family history of malignancy (58
vs 41%, p = .0005). There was no association with recurrence or survival
for: ethnicity, parity, hormone use, personal history of malignancy,
tumor size or weight.Of 6 gene markers examined by immunohistochemistry
(IHC), ER and PR expression were significantly lower in LMS than in other
types (p <.0001). High ER IHC intensity was protective against recurrence
compared to negative ER IHC (3 vs 42%, p = .0014). High PR IHC intensity
was also protective against recurrence compared to negative PR IHC (3% v
56%, p Objective:To evaluate clinical, molecular and pathologic factors
associated with 5 types of uterine smooth muscle tumors.Materials and
Methods:Seventy-nine patients with leiomyosarcoma [31 (39.2%) LMS],
smooth muscle tumors of undetermined significance [10 (12.7%) STUMP],
atypical leiomyoma [19 (24.1%) ALM], mitotically active leiomyoma [5
(6.3%) MALM], and cellular leiomyoma [14 (17.7%) CLM] treated from
1997-2015 were analyzed. Statistical analysis was performed using ANOVA,
chi-square and logrank tests.Results:Mean age (years) differed across
histologies: 54 (LMS), 36 (STUMP), 41 (ALM), and 47 (CLM/MALM) (p<.0001).
Median follow up was 37 months (range 0-226). Those with LMS were more
likely to have a family history of cancer (48%, p<.003). Tobacco use did
not vary by histology but was significantly associated with recurrence
(50 vs. 17%, p = .03). Fifty-four percent of LMS recurred and 48% died.
There were no recurrences or deaths due to non-LMS histology. Patients
who recurred were more likely to have a family history of malignancy (58
vs 41%, p = .0005). There was no association with recurrence or survival
for: ethnicity, parity, hormone use, personal history of malignancy,
tumor size or weight.Of 6 gene markers examined by immunohistochemistry
(IHC), ER and PR expression were significantly lower in LMS than in other
types (p <.0001). High ER IHC intensity was protective against recurrence
compared to negative ER IHC (3 vs 42%, p = .0014). High PR IHC intensity
was also protective against recurrence compared to negative PR IHC (3% v
56%, p <.0001). Higher PFS was significantly associated with ER (p =
.0019) and PR (p Objective:To evaluate clinical, molecular and pathologic
factors associated with 5 types of uterine smooth muscle tumors.Materials
and Methods:Seventy-nine patients with leiomyosarcoma [31 (39.2%) LMS],
smooth muscle tumors of undetermined significance [10 (12.7%) STUMP],
atypical leiomyoma [19 (24.1%) ALM], mitotically active leiomyoma [5
(6.3%) MALM], and cellular leiomyoma [14 (17.7%) CLM] treated from
1997-2015 were analyzed. Statistical analysis was performed using ANOVA,
chi-square and logrank tests.Results:Mean age (years) differed across
histologies: 54 (LMS), 36 (STUMP), 41 (ALM), and 47 (CLM/MALM) (p<.0001).
Median follow up was 37 months (range 0-226). Those with LMS were more
likely to have a family history of cancer (48%, p<.003). Tobacco use did
not vary by histology but was significantly associated with recurrence
(50 vs. 17%, p = .03). Fifty-four percent of LMS recurred and 48% died.
There were no recurrences or deaths due to non-LMS histology. Patients
who recurred were more likely to have a family history of malignancy (58
vs 41%, p = .0005). There was no association with recurrence or survival
for: ethnicity, parity, hormone use, personal history of malignancy,
tumor size or weight.Of 6 gene markers examined by immunohistochemistry
(IHC), ER and PR expression were significantly lower in LMS than in other
types (p <.0001). High ER IHC intensity was protective against recurrence
compared to negative ER IHC (3 vs 42%, p = .0014). High PR IHC intensity
was also protective against recurrence compared to negative PR IHC (3% v
56%, p <.0001). Higher PFS was significantly associated with ER (p =
.0019) and PR (p <.0001) positivity. PR was associated with a significant
increase in OS (pObjective:To evaluate clinical, molecular and pathologic
factors associated with 5 types of uterine smooth muscle tumors.Materials
and Methods:Seventy-nine patients with leiomyosarcoma [31 (39.2%) LMS],
smooth muscle tumors of undetermined significance [10 (12.7%) STUMP],
atypical leiomyoma [19 (24.1%) ALM], mitotically active leiomyoma [5
(6.3%) MALM], and cellular leiomyoma [14 (17.7%) CLM] treated from
1997-2015 were analyzed. Statistical analysis was performed using ANOVA,
chi-square and logrank tests.Results:Mean age (years) differed across
histologies: 54 (LMS), 36 (STUMP), 41 (ALM), and 47 (CLM/MALM) (p<.0001).
Median follow up was 37 months (range 0-226). Those with LMS were more
likely to have a family history of cancer (48%, p<.003). Tobacco use did
not vary by histology but was significantly associated with recurrence
(50 vs. 17%, p = .03). Fifty-four percent of LMS recurred and 48% died.
There were no recurrences or deaths due to non-LMS histology. Patients
who recurred were more likely to have a family history of malignancy (58
vs 41%, p = .0005). There was no association with recurrence or survival
for: ethnicity, parity, hormone use, personal history of malignancy,
tumor size or weight.Of 6 gene markers examined by immunohistochemistry
(IHC), ER and PR expression were significantly lower in LMS than in other
types (p <.0001). High ER IHC intensity was protective against recurrence
compared to negative ER IHC (3 vs 42%, p = .0014). High PR IHC intensity
was also protective against recurrence compared to negative PR IHC (3% v
56%, p <.0001). Higher PFS was significantly associated with ER (p =
.0019) and PR (p <.0001) positivity. PR was associated with a significant
increase in OS (p<.0001). Ki67 index was higher in LMS than other types
(p = .05). PTEN IHC intensity correlated with histology (p = .03) and a
shorter PFS and OS (p = .01, p = .018, respectively). PTEN molecular
analysis correlated with shorter survival (pObjective:To evaluate
clinical, molecular and pathologic factors associated with 5 types of
uterine smooth muscle tumors.Materials and Methods:Seventy-nine patients
with leiomyosarcoma [31 (39.2%) LMS], smooth muscle tumors of
undetermined significance [10 (12.7%) STUMP], atypical leiomyoma [19
(24.1%) ALM], mitotically active leiomyoma [5 (6.3%) MALM], and cellular
leiomyoma [14 (17.7%) CLM] treated from 1997-2015 were analyzed.
Statistical analysis was performed using ANOVA, chi-square and logrank
tests.Results:Mean age (years) differed across histologies: 54 (LMS), 36
(STUMP), 41 (ALM), and 47 (CLM/MALM) (p<.0001). Median follow up was 37
months (range 0-226). Those with LMS were more likely to have a family
history of cancer (48%, p<.003). Tobacco use did not vary by histology
but was significantly associated with recurrence (50 vs. 17%, p = .03).
Fifty-four percent of LMS recurred and 48% died. There were no
recurrences or deaths due to non-LMS histology. Patients who recurred
were more likely to have a family history of malignancy (58 vs 41%, p =
.0005). There was no association with recurrence or survival for:
ethnicity, parity, hormone use, personal history of malignancy, tumor
size or weight.Of 6 gene markers examined by immunohistochemistry (IHC),
ER and PR expression were significantly lower in LMS than in other types
(p <.0001). High ER IHC intensity was protective against recurrence
compared to negative ER IHC (3 vs 42%, p = .0014). High PR IHC intensity
was also protective against recurrence compared to negative PR IHC (3% v
56%, p <.0001). Higher PFS was significantly associated with ER (p =
.0019) and PR (p <.0001) positivity. PR was associated with a significant
increase in OS (p<.0001). Ki67 index was higher in LMS than other types
(p = .05). PTEN IHC intensity correlated with histology (p = .03) and a
shorter PFS and OS (p = .01, p = .018, respectively). PTEN molecular
analysis correlated with shorter survival (p<.0001). Using an H-score
cut-off of 40 for ER and 25 for PR, LMS will be positive in 21-24% of
cases compared to over 80% in other histologies. Ki67 was uniquely
positive in 81% of LMS tumors. P53 mutations were detected in LMS, STUMP
and ALM, and absent in CLM/MALM.Conclusions:ER/PR and Ki67 IHC are
valuable biomarkers in differentiating histology and predicting clinical
recurrence in uterine smooth muscle tumors. Smoking cessation is key to
decreasing recurrence.

