Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: AZD4547 and AZD5363 synergistically inhibit prostate cancer
progression by modulating MAPK and AKT activation


Prostate cancer (PCa) is the second most common cancer and the second
most common cause of cancer mortality in men in the United States.
Multiple approved therapies target the androgen signaling axis in this
metastatic disease, however, after advancing to the androgen-independent
stage, PCa is unresponsive to androgen ablation therapy and is refractory
to further curative treatment. Recent advances have demonstrated that two
intracellular signaling pathways promote prostate cancer progression, one
is the Fibroblast Growth Factor (FGF) pathway included multiple FGFs and
4 kinds of FGF receptors (FGFR), which remains activated in the cancer
cells, the other is the oncogenic PI3K/AKT pathway, which is constantly
active due to the loss of an important tumor suppressor gene. Targeted
inhibition of FGF and AKT signaling pathways has shown promising both in
vitro and in vivo studies. However, FGFR or AKT inhibitor, as a single
agent, would result in a reciprocal feedback loop. Therefore, it is
imperative that both pathways be targeted simultaneously in the treatment
of advanced prostate cancer. In this study, we evaluated the effect of
combined treatment of FGFR inhibitor AZD4547 and AKT inhibitor AZD5363 on
PCa progression. Proliferation assay shows that AZD4547 just weakly, or
not inhibits PCa cell proliferation, AZD5363 significantly inhibits PCa
cell proliferation; the combined treatment of AZD4547 and AZD5363 shows
similar inhibition effect to AZD5363. Both AZD4547 and AZD5363 inhibit
PCa cell anchorage-independent growth and invasion, which are
synergistically decrease by the combined treatment. AZD4547 significantly
inhibits phosporylation of FGFR1 and FGFR4 in PCa cells; AZD5363
increases FGFR1 and FGFR4 phosphorylation, which was significantly
repressed in combined treatment. The activation of FGFR2, MEK1/2, and
Erk1/2 in PCa cells was remarkably inhibited by AZD4547 but increased by
AZD5363, and synergistically inhibited by the combined treatment. AKT was
hyperphosphorylated by AZD5363 and inhibited by AZD4547. The
phosporylation of AKT downstream molecules PRAS40, GSK3 and S6, was
slightly decreased by AZD4547 but strongly inhibited by AZD5363 and the
combined treatment. Both AZD4547 and AZD5363 suppress STAT3
phosphorylation in PCa cells and the combind treatment shows synergistic
inhibition effect. Both AZD4547 and AZD5363 promote AR and PTEN
expression at both RNA and protein levels in VCaP and 22RV1cells, and the
combination treatment remains the promotion effect. In LNCaP cells,
AZD5363, but not AZD4547, stimulates AR mRNA and protein expression,
which keep increased in combined treatment. This study provides a
preclinical proof of concept that combination of a FGFR inhibitor with an
AKT inhibitor has a profound potential to treat PCa.Acknowledgement: This
project was supported by the DOD Prostate Cancer Program,
PCRP-IDEA-PC120481 (Ittmann), the Prostate Cancer Foundation (Ittmann)

