Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synthetic novel Psammaplin A derivatives enhance radiation
lethality in human cancer cells


DNA methyltransferase (DNMT) inhibitors show not only anticancer effects
but radiosensitization activity. Psammaplin A (PsA), a known DNMT
inhibitor, enhances radiation lethality of human cancer cells, but the
chemical instability hampers in vivo application of PsA. The purpose of
the present study was to synthesize novel radiosensitizers using PsA as
the backbone structure. Eight novel PsA-based derivatives (MA2, MA3, MA5,
MA6, MA7, MA8, MA9 and MA5M) were synthesized. They were tested for in
vitro cytotoxicity and radiosensitizing effects in A549 (lung cancer) and
U373MG (glioblastoma) cells using a clonogenic assay. A paired ratio
t-test was used to test a statistical significance of sensitizer
enhancement ratios of the compounds. All 8 PsA derivatives inhibited in
vitro cell survival with 50% inhibitory concentrations ranging 16-150 M
(A549) and 15-50 M (U373MG). MA7, MA9 and MA5M significantly enhanced
radiation lethality in A549 cells, while compounds MA2, MA3 and MA7
showed a significant radiosensitization in U373MG cells (pDNA
methyltransferase (DNMT) inhibitors show not only anticancer effects but
radiosensitization activity. Psammaplin A (PsA), a known DNMT inhibitor,
enhances radiation lethality of human cancer cells, but the chemical
instability hampers in vivo application of PsA. The purpose of the
present study was to synthesize novel radiosensitizers using PsA as the
backbone structure. Eight novel PsA-based derivatives (MA2, MA3, MA5,
MA6, MA7, MA8, MA9 and MA5M) were synthesized. They were tested for in
vitro cytotoxicity and radiosensitizing effects in A549 (lung cancer) and
U373MG (glioblastoma) cells using a clonogenic assay. A paired ratio
t-test was used to test a statistical significance of sensitizer
enhancement ratios of the compounds. All 8 PsA derivatives inhibited in
vitro cell survival with 50% inhibitory concentrations ranging 16-150 M
(A549) and 15-50 M (U373MG). MA7, MA9 and MA5M significantly enhanced
radiation lethality in A549 cells, while compounds MA2, MA3 and MA7
showed a significant radiosensitization in U373MG cells (p<0.05). MA3 and
MA6 marginally radiosensitized A549 and U373MG cells, respectively (pDNA
methyltransferase (DNMT) inhibitors show not only anticancer effects but
radiosensitization activity. Psammaplin A (PsA), a known DNMT inhibitor,
enhances radiation lethality of human cancer cells, but the chemical
instability hampers in vivo application of PsA. The purpose of the
present study was to synthesize novel radiosensitizers using PsA as the
backbone structure. Eight novel PsA-based derivatives (MA2, MA3, MA5,
MA6, MA7, MA8, MA9 and MA5M) were synthesized. They were tested for in
vitro cytotoxicity and radiosensitizing effects in A549 (lung cancer) and
U373MG (glioblastoma) cells using a clonogenic assay. A paired ratio
t-test was used to test a statistical significance of sensitizer
enhancement ratios of the compounds. All 8 PsA derivatives inhibited in
vitro cell survival with 50% inhibitory concentrations ranging 16-150 M
(A549) and 15-50 M (U373MG). MA7, MA9 and MA5M significantly enhanced
radiation lethality in A549 cells, while compounds MA2, MA3 and MA7
showed a significant radiosensitization in U373MG cells (p<0.05). MA3 and
MA6 marginally radiosensitized A549 and U373MG cells, respectively
(p<0.10). For further investigation, we selected MA3 and MA7, because
only these two compounds showed radiosensitization in both A549 and
U373MG cell lines. A DNMT activity assay showed that MA3 inhibited DNMT1
activity, but that MA7 showed no inhibitory effect on DNMT1.
Pharmacokinetic parameters were determined in mice by a validated
LC-MS/MS assay method using a non-compartmental analysis. The average
degradation half-life of MA3 and MA7 was under 10 minutes in mouse serum.
In the present study, we synthesized two novel PsA-derived compounds that
enhanced radiation lethality in two human cancer cell lines. However,
they lacked chemical stability to allow for in vivo experiments. Based on
the present study, a further study is necessary to improve
bioavailability of PsA-derived radiosensitizers. [Supported by
2013M2A2A7043683]

