Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Association between serum concentrations of polychlorinated
biphenyls (PCBs) and increased risk of breast cancer among US women


The main objective of this study was to examine the cross-sectional
relationship between exposure to PCBs or their congeners and breast
cancer among US women. There is limited information on the association of
specific PCB congener or their combination levels in blood serum with
increased breast cancer risk. PCBs are weak estrogens which has been
shown to act as endocrine disrupters by increasing or blocking estrogen
like activities in animals and humans. We analyzed National Health and
Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) data from 1999-2004 in the lipid
adjusted blood samples of female participants (>20 years of age).
Exposure assessment was based on lipid adjusted serum levels of 6
individual PCB congeners (PCB 074, 099, 118, 138, 153, and 180), the sum
of dioxin-like PCBs (074 and 118), and the sum of non-dioxin-like PCBs
(099 + 138 + 153+187) in conjunction with data obtained from the medical
and reproductive health questionnaires. We calculated geometric means to
compare PCB concentrations in women's blood samples who also
self-reported a breast cancer diagnosis and women who were never
diagnosed with cancer. Logistic regression models were used to estimate
odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) for the association
between PCB, their congener or their combinations and breast cancer. We
evaluated age, race/ethnicity, age at menarche, body mass index (BMI;
kg/m2), and lactation as potential confounders. Our results show a
weighted geometric mean levels of 6 PCB congeners to be significantly
higher in blood serum among women with breast cancer when compared to the
rest of the study population. After adjusting for age, race, BMI,
lactation, and age at menarche we found significant association of PCB
138 with breast cancer [odds ratios of 2.88; 95% confidence interval
(CI): 1.14-7.30; 2.93, 95% CI: 1.04-8.26; and 3.43, 95% CI: 1.12-10.4] in
women with higher body burdens of individual PCB congeners (> 50th
percentile, 50th-75th percentile, and 75th percentile), respectively.
After adjusting for age and race, it was also found that the sum of
non-dioxin-like PCBs (074 and 118) in blood serum is significantly
associated with breast cancer [OR of 1.14; 95% CI: 1.00-1.29]. In
summary, our results suggest a possible link between environmental
exposures to PCBs and increased risk of breast cancer among U.S. women.

