Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular characterization of in vivo isolated EpCAM-positive
circulating tumor cells in breast cancer


Introduction: In the early stages of cancer, the chance to detect rare
CTCs is increasing by increasing the sample volume. The aim of our study
was to evaluate the diagnostic sensitivity of a novel clinical device for
the in-vivo isolation of EpCAM-positive CTCs (CellCollectorTM, GILUPI,
GmBH), by using highly sensitive RT-qPCR molecular assays.Patients and
methods: 29 breast cancer patients without overt metastases before the
beginning of adjuvant chemotherapy (M0), 26 breast cancer patients with
overt metastases before starting of therapy (M1) and 12/26 of them before
the second cycle of therapy (M2), as well as 18 healthy donors
participated in the study. After in-vivo isolation, total RNA was
extracted from captured cells, lysed in Trizol, followed by cDNA
synthesis. RT-qPCR was used for the molecular characterization of
captured cells, for: CK-19, HER-2, TWIST1, VEGF, ER, PR, EGFR, CD44,
CD24, and ALDH1, while B2M was used as a reference gene. Peripheral blood
was also collected for CTC analysis by the FDA cleared CellSearchTM
system. In addition, immunofluorescence staining of cytospins was
performed and screened for CTCs using the ARIOL system, using ER, HER2,
CK (8, 18, 19) and CD45 for CTC identification.Results: Results are shown
in Table 1. At least one gene was expressed in 10(34.5%) of M0, 15(57.7%)
of M1 and 4(33.3%) of M2 patient groups, but in none of healthy donors
0/18(0%). CellSearchTM gave positive results in 5(17.2%) of M0, 10(38.5%)
of M1 and 0(0%) of M2. Immunofluorescence (Ariol system) was positive for
ER, HER2, CK (8, 18, 19) in 5/15(33.3%) M0, in 4/12(33.3%) M1 and in
1/7(14.3%) M2 groups.
Conclusions: In-vivo isolation of CTC is minimally invasive, and in
combination with high specific and sensitive RT-qPCR assays for CTC
detection and molecular characterization seems promising. Comparison
studies with the CellSearch and immunofluorescence have shown poor
agreement. These results should be validated in large patient cohorts,
and in respect to the clinical outcome.

