Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Distinctive chromatin organization of p53 binding sites in normal
and cancer cells


The tumor suppressor p53 is arguably one of best known proteins in
humans, which induces or represses hundreds of genes to prevent tumor
development. Now, it becomes clear where p53 binds across the human
genome and how it regulates gene expression. Recent studies have
established that p53 can access its target sites on the nucleosomal DNA
and the rotational positioning of a nucleosome is critical to determine
the accessibility of p53 sites. We have found that p53 response elements
(REs) associate with cell cycle arrest such as p21 REs are likely to be
exposed on the nuclesomal surface. However, it remains unclear if other
chromatin elements such as histone modifications and DNA methylation
affect p53 in vivo binding and if such chromatin organization differs in
normal cells versus cancer cells.We analyzed the pre-existing chromatin
landscape of thousands of p53 binding sites identified so far in normal
(GM12878) and cancer (K562) cells. The p53 sites derived from the normal
cells are often found in the vicinity of the transcription start sites
(TSSs) of nearby genes, characterized with relative low nucleosome
occupancy, high levels of transcriptionally active histone marks such as
H3K4me3 and low levels of DNA methylation. By contrast, the p53 sites
found in the cancer cells are located remotely from TSSs, with relatively
high nucleosome occupancy, low levels of H3K4me3 and DNA methylation. The
shift in p53 genomic binding patterns in the normal and cancer cells
reflects the cancer-associated epigenetic dysregulation. Overall, in
contrast to most of DNA-binding transcriptional factors, p53 binding
sites occur in nucleosome-enriched regions. These findings indicate that
p53 belong to a set of transcription factors including the pluripotency
factors Oct4, Sox2 and Klf4 that can directly interact with nucleosomes
in the context of chromatin.

