Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of mucin gene variations in microRNA binding sites in
modulating colorectal cancer susceptibility and clinical outcomes


Mucins, high molecular weight glycoproteins predominantly expressed at
the epithelial surface of tissues, provide protection for colon surface
under normal physiological conditions. Mucinous colorectal carcinoma is
generally defined as having greater than 50% of the tumor area with a
mucinous differentiation by histologic examination.MiRNAs have recently
emerged as important regulators for altered mucin expression during
malignant development. MiRNAs are short non-coding RNAs that regulate
gene expression by binding to the 3untranslated regions (3UTR) of target
mRNA thereby hampering protein translation or inducing mRNA
destabilization. Aberrant miRNA expression and/or function are frequently
observed in colorectal cancer (CRC). Polymorphisms in miRNA binding sites
may affect miRNA binding to target genes, resulting in differential mRNA
and protein expression and susceptibility to common diseases. We
hypothesize that variations in mucin genes may modulate signaling
response affecting cancer susceptibility, cancer survival and efficacy of
chemotherapy.Thirteen polymorphisms in nine mucin genes (MUC6, MUC7,
MUC13, MUC14, MUC15, MUC17, MUC20, MUC21 and MUC24) were analyzed in DNA
samples of 1111 cases and 1469 controls from the Czech Republic.
Investigated variants were also studied in association with clinical
outcome in all patients provided with detailed information on follow
up.Genetic variations in mucin genes were associated with clinical
outcome. In particular, CRC patients carrying the CC genotype for
rs886403 in MUC21 gene displayed a shorter survival and higher recurrence
risk (HR 1.69; 95% CI 1.13-2.46; p = 0.01 and EFS: HR 1.99; 95% CI
1.38-2.84; p = 0.0002, resp.). The observed association was strikingly
pronounced in colon cancer patients while individuals with rectal cancer
and carrying variant CC genotype of rs4729655 in MUC17 displayed better
overall survival (HR 0.27; 95% CI 0.14-0.54; p = 0.0002).Expanding our
knowledge on mucin involvement in CRC may help us better understand the
etiopathogenesis of this disease and thereby contribute to the
development of new treatment strategies. The present results identified
plausible candidate SNPs potentially affecting miRNAs that target mucin
genes in relation to CRC patients survival.Work supported by IGA MZ: NT
15-26535A

