Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel formulation of CX-5461, a small-molecule inhibitor of rRNA
synthesis, and its use for treatment of acute myeloid leukemia models


CX-5461 is a RNA polymerase I inhibitor currently in Phase I clinical
trial in Australia for patients with advanced hematologic malignancies.
In the pre-clinical setting, CX-5461 is efficacious in a wide range of
hematologic and solid tumor models when given orally or
intraperitoneally. Currently, the compound is given intravenously (iv) in
the first-in-human clinical trial. CX-5461 is solubilized in low pH (3.5)
50 mM sodium phosphate as it is sparingly soluble in water (CX-5461 is a
RNA polymerase I inhibitor currently in Phase I clinical trial in
Australia for patients with advanced hematologic malignancies. In the
pre-clinical setting, CX-5461 is efficacious in a wide range of
hematologic and solid tumor models when given orally or
intraperitoneally. Currently, the compound is given intravenously (iv) in
the first-in-human clinical trial. CX-5461 is solubilized in low pH (3.5)
50 mM sodium phosphate as it is sparingly soluble in water (<1 mg/mL) and
at physiological pH. The use of such low pH phosphate buffers affects
infusion tolerance. While CX-5461 has nanomolar range activity in vitro,
in vivo studies are conducted with either high dosages or frequent
dosing. The chemical structure of CX-5461 also suggests potential drug
instability under physiological conditions. We have addressed these
solubility and stability issues by developing a lipid-based
nanoparticulate (LNP) formulation which relies on a previously
unrecognized interaction between CX-5461 and copper. Copper (Cu)
coordination with CX-5461 was demonstrated using 1H NMR and UV-Vis.
Cu-LNPs were prepared with 1,2-distearoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine
(DSPC) and cholesterol (CHOL) (55:45 molar ratio) using extrusion
methods. CX-5461 was loaded into Cu-LNPs at 60C for 30 minutes and the
external buffer was exchanged to Hepes Buffered Saline (pH 7.4).
Pharmacokinetic (PK) studies were performed in CD-1 mice given a dose of
30 mg/kg (iv) and plasma concentrations of CX-5461 were determined by
HPLC. Efficacy studies were performed in RAG2M mice with established
subcutaneous (sc) MV-4-11 tumors and in a MV-4-11 bone marrow engraftment
model (30 mg/kg given iv, Q4Dx3). Our 1H NMR data suggests that CX-5461
binds to copper at a 1:1 molar ratio. Copper complexation does not affect
the anticancer activity of CX-5461 as determined in several cancer cell
lines in vitro. Using copper-complexation as a driving force, CX-5461 was
efficiently loaded into LNPs (100 nm) prepared to contain copper (300 mM
CuSO4). Resulting LNPs have a drug-to-lipid-ratio of 0.2. The LNP
formulation has significantly improved the PK profile of CX-5461 and
increased the total exposure to drug by an order of magnitude (AUC = 4156
g-hr/mL for LNP and 319 g-hr/mL for free CX-5461). The LNP formulation of
CX-5461 is more active than the current low-pH formulation of CX-5461
when given iv in leukemia xenograft models. Specifically 37 days after sc
tumor cell inoculation the tumor sizes were 720 mm3 and 240 mm3 in
control and LNP-CX5461-treated animals respectively. The clinical
formulation administered at the same dose exhibited tumor volumes that
were comparable to the untreated controls. We have generated the first
LNP formulation of CX-5461 using the copper complexation technology
developed in our laboratory. LNP-CX-5461 is suitable for iv
administration and is more efficacious than the current formulation in
our pre-clinical studies.

