Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Performance of the Agilent D5000 and high sensitivity D5000
ScreenTape assays for the Agilent 4200 TapeStation system


The Agilent 4200 TapeStation system provides automated, fast, and
reliable DNA and RNA electrophoresis for up to 96 samples using
prepackaged reagents and minimal manual handling. The Agilent D5000
ScreenTape and High Sensitivity D5000 ScreenTape assays have been
developed for the separation and analysis of DNA fragments from 100 bp to
5,000 bp, a size range that complements and resides between the Agilent
D1000 ScreenTape and the Genomic DNA ScreenTape assays. The 4200
TapeStation system and the DNA ScreenTape assays can be used at several
steps of the Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) workflow. With the
emergence of methodologies, such as the use of Transposomes, NGS library
sizes are tending to increase beyond 1,000 bp, even for the short-read
NGS technologies. This Poster focuses on the performance of both D5000
ScreenTape assays with respect to the accuracy and precision of
quantification and sizing, as well as the sensitivity of these assays.
Data analysis for quantification and molarity determination was compared
against the corresponding assay for the Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer system.
Additionally, performance of both the D5000 and High Sensitivity D5000
assays on the 4200 TapeStation was compared to the 2200 TapeStation
system.

