Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sequencing the B-cell and T-cell repertoire


Immune sequencing allows for the study of complex immunological diseases
by sequencing millions of V(D)J combinations from B-cell antibody and
T-cell receptors. The popularity of this technique has increased due to
recent throughput and read length improvements in next-generation
sequencing technologies. However, structural and sequence complexities of
antibody genes have made reliable targeting approaches challenging.We
have developed and optimized a method for accurate sequencing of
full-length immune gene repertoires of B-cells and T-cells. The method
uses a unique barcoding scheme specifically designed to tag every mRNA
molecule with a unique identifier (UID) so that all PCR copies of each
mRNA fragment can be collapsed into a single consensus sequence. This
makes the assay extremely accurate, by resolving PCR bias and sequencing
errors as well as allowing quantitative digital molecule counting.Immune
sequencing libraries were generated from total RNA extracted from
Peripheral Blood Mononuclear Cells in duplicate from a single patient.
The use of UIDs enabled absolute quantification of starting RNA molecules
present in the original sample and therefore accurate ranking of the
antibody clone abundance, by avoiding the bias incorporated by PCR or
sequencing when total reads only were measured. Using the same sequencing
method, tumor samples were analyzed for abundance of expanded clones via
grouping clones by V gene, J gene and CDR3 similarity and ranking by mRNA
abundance. Additionally, the use of isotype-specific primers (IgM, IgD,
IgG, IgA and IgE) enabled measurement of the heavy chain isotype
proportions within the samples. Further, alignment of full-length heavy
chain antibody sequences generated using this method to germline genes
from reference databases enabled quantitation of the mutation level of
each antibody sequence, thereby providing information on the overall
maturity and mutational profile of the sample repertoire.

