Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The NALP3 inflammasome and IL-1 signaling link asbestos-induced
inflammation with the development of malignant mesothelioma


Exposure to asbestos is causally associated with the development of
malignant mesothelioma (MM), a cancer of cells lining the internal body
cavity. MM is an aggressive cancer that is resistant to all current
therapies. Once inhaled or ingested, asbestos causes inflammation in and
around tissues that come in contact with these carcinogenic fibers.
Recent studies suggest that inflammation is a major contributing factor
in the development of many types of cancer, including MM. The NALP3
inflammasome, including the component ASC, is an important mediator of
inflammation that senses extracellular insults, such as infection or
asbestos, and activates a signaling cascade resulting in release of
mature IL-1 and recruitment of inflammatory cells. To determine if
inflammasome-mediated inflammation contributes to asbestos-induced MM, we
chronically exposed Asc-deficient mice to asbestos and evaluated tumor
incidence, latency and overall survival. Asc-deficient mice showed a
significant delay in tumor onset compared to wild-type animals,
suggesting that the NALP3 inflammasome plays a role in MM carcinogenesis.
We also tested whether inflammation-related release of IL-1 promotes
tumor development in an accelerated mouse model of asbestos-induced MM.
Nf2+/-;Cdkn2a+/- mice exposed to asbestos in the presence of the IL-1
antagonist, anakinra, showed a 50% longer disease-free survival than in
similarly exposed mice given vehicle control, consistent with IL-1
signaling contributing significantly to MM development. Collectively,
these studies provide evidence for a link between asbestos-associated
inflammation/IL-1 signaling and the development of MM; furthermore, these
findings provide rationale for chemoprevention strategies targeting
inflammation-related IL-1 signaling in high risk, asbestos-exposed
populations.

