Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epigenetically altered circulating nucleosomes as blood biomarkers
for early detection of cancer: clinical studies in NSCLC, CRC, PCA and PC


BACKGROUND: The epigenetic structure of chromosomes in cancer tissue is
altered with respect to histone modification, histone isoform and DNA
modification composition as well as the composition of non-histone
chromatin proteins - for example; the androgen receptor (AR) in prostate
cancer.Short (>180bp) fragments of tumor-derived cell free DNA circulate
in the blood of cancer patients as mono-nucleosomes.AIM: To evaluate
whether epigenetically altered circulating nucleosomes provide a blood
biomarker opportunity for early detection of cancers.METHODS: We have
developed more than 25 ELISA tests for circulating nucleosomes containing
different epigenetic signals. These assays employ a solid phase
anti-nucleosome antibody in combination with a labelled antibody directed
to bind to a particular epigenetic signal - for example a histone
modification, histone isoform, modified cytosine residue or a
nucleosome-AR adduct. We have conducted clinical studies in collaboration
with a number of centres to investigate the use of these ELISA tests for
the detection of epigenetically altered circulating nucleosomes in serum
samples taken from patients with lung cancer, colorectal cancer,
pancreatic cancer and prostate cancer and from control subjects with no
cancer and with or without concomitant disease of the same organ.RESULTS:
A collaborative study of 121 patients referred for colonoscopy at the CHU
Dinant Godinne - UCL Namur, Belgium, who either showed potential symptoms
of CRC or were high-risk subjects found that a panel test of five
epigenetic nucleosome biomarker assays detected 87% of colorectal cancer
cases and 67% of dysplastic polyps at 90% specificity.A 59 subject
collaborative study with Lund University, Sweden, including 25 patients
with operable stage 2 pancreatic cancer, 10 patients with other
pancreatic diseases and 24 healthy individuals found that a panel of 5
assays including 4 epigenetic nucleosome ELISA assays and CA19-9 detected
92% of early-stage pancreatic cancer cases, with 100% specificity among
the healthy subjects and 2 false positives among patients with benign
pancreatic disease.A study of 73 patients conducted with the Liege
University Hospital, Belgium, including 29 NSCLC cases, 22 COPD cases and
22 subjects healthy lungs showed that a panel of 4 epigenetic nucleosome
assays combined with the smoking history detected 93% of NSCLC cases,
with 91% specificity and also differentiated NSCLC and COPD
cases.Collaborative studies in prostate cancer have also shown excellent
results and data from these studies will be presented at the
conference.CONCLUSION: Epigenetic profiling of circulating nucleosomes
using simple ELISA methods offers a biomarker opportunity for the early
detection of a variety cancers.

