Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Glutamine drives glutathione synthesis and contributes to
radiation sensitivity of A549 and H460 lung cancer cell lines


Increased glutamine uptake is known to drive cancer cell proliferation,
making tumor cells glutamine-dependent. Glutamine provides additional
carbon and nitrogen sources for cell growth. The first step in glutamine
utilization is its conversion to glutamate by glutaminase (GLS).
Glutamate is a precursor for glutathione synthesis, and we investigated
the hypothesis that glutamine drives glutathione synthesis and thereby
contributes to cellular defense systems. The importance of glutamine for
glutathione synthesis was studied in H460 and A549 lung cancer cell lines
using glutamine-free medium and BPTES a GLS inhibitor. Metabolic
activities were determined by targeted mass spectrometry. A significant
correlation between glutamine consumption and glutathione excretion was
demonstrated in H460 and A549 tumor cells. Culturing in the presence of
[13C5]glutamine demonstrated that by 12 hrs >50% of excreted glutathione
is derived from glutamine. Culturing in glutamine-free medium or
treatment with Bis-2-(5-phenyl-acetamido-1,3,4-thiadiazol-2-yl)ethyl
sulfide (BPTES), a glutaminase (GLS)-specific inhibitor, reduced cell
proliferation and viability, and abolished glutathione excretion.
Treatment with glutathione-ester prevented BPTES induced cytotoxicity.
Inhibition of GLS markedly radiosensitized the lung tumor cell lines,
suggesting an important role of glutamine-derived glutathione in
determining radiation sensitivity. We demonstrate here for the first time
that a significant amount of extracellular glutathione is directly
derived from glutamine. This finding adds yet another important function
to the already known glutamine dependence of tumor cells and probably
tumors as well.

