Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Potent inhibition of bromodomain-containing BET family with
ABBV-075 induces robust antitumor efficacy in preclinical models of
breast cancer and exhibits in vitro synergy with doxorubicin


Breast cancer diagnosisis highly prevalent in the US, with an estimated
231,840 new cases occurring in 2015. Targeted therapies, such as
tamoxifen or Trastuzumab (herceptin) are available to woman whose tumors
are estrogen receptor (ER) positive or HER2 positive, respectively.
However, women with triple negative breast cancer or relapsed metastatic
disease have limited treatment options. ABBV-075 is a novel BET family
bromodomain inhibitor currently under phase I clinical investigation for
a wide spectrum of cancer indications. Here we show that ABBV-075
exhibits broad anti-proliferative activity across cell lines representing
ER positive, HER2+, and triple negative breast cancer. Notably, ABBV-075
induced G1 arrest and growth inhibition of breast cancer cell lines
regardless of ER or RB status. This result suggests that ABBV-075 may
provide therapeutic benefit to a broader patient population relative to
the recently approved cdk4/6 inhibitor, palbociclib. The G1 arrest
mechanism of ABBV-075 was efficacious in breast cancer xenograft studies,
where significant tumor growth inhibition was observed. Additionally,
ABBV-075 exhibited synergy in ER positive cell lines with doxorubicin, a
TOPO2 inhibitor and DNA intercalating agent prescribed to ER positive
patients refractory to hormone therapies. Intriguingly, the mechanism by
which ABBV-075 and doxorubicin interact was independent of the
TOP2-trapping activity of doxorubicin and instead required DNA
intercalation. Together, these results demonstrate the potential of
ABBV-075 as a treatment option across the different subtypes of breast
cancer and in combination with doxorubicin in patients with ER positive
disease

