Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bone marrow-derived CD11b+/Podoplanin+ cells are lymphatic
progenitors directly responsible for breast cancer lymphatic formation


Introduction: Lymphatic metastasis, a key factor for poor outcome of
breast cancer (BC), strongly depends on lymphatic vessel (LV) formation.
Recent studies suggest that lymphangiogenesis is strongly promoted by
bone marrow (BM)-derived CD11b+ monocytes that differentiate into
Lymphatic Endothelial Cell Progenitors dubbed here M-LECP. While BC are
known to recruit BM monocytes, a specific BM subset responsible for tumor
lymphatic formation has not been identified. We recently discovered that
podoplanin (Pdpn) is the highest upregulated lymphatic marker that
signifies transdifferentiation of either human or mouse immature myeloid
cells into M-LECP. We hypothesized that BM-derived M-LECP are represented
by a subset expressing podoplanin in CD11b+ myeloid cells that are
capable of inducing tumor lymphatics. Methods: Tumor lymphatic vessels
expressing myeloid markers were detected immunohistochemically by
triple-staining in clinical specimens and experimental breast tumors.
Expression of Vegfr-3, Lyve-1, Sca-1, and other markers in BM-derived
CD11b+/Pdpn+ and Pdpn-negative subsets was determined by FACS. Expression
of lymphatic-specific markers in CD11b+/Pdpn+ and Pdpn myeloid cells
isolated from MDA-MB-231 tumors was determined by RT-qPCR. CD11b+/Pdpn+
and Pdpn-negative subsets from BM of GFP-expressing mice were adoptively
transferred to mice with orthotopic breast tumors followed by quantifying
mobilized GFP+/CD11b+/Pdpn+ cells and the density of tumor LV. Results:
M-LECP were absent in normal human breast tissues but highly present in
tumors. Analysis of clinical BC specimens showed significant correlations
between tumor-mobilized M-LECP, density of LV and metastasis to regional
nodes. All examined BC models exhibited very high densities (60-90%) of
double-positive macrophages expressing lymphatic markers, and lymphatic
vessels expressing myeloid proteins. At least a half of CD11b+ cells
isolated from tumors were positive for podoplanin and nearly 90% of
CD11b+/Pdpn+ subset expressed markers of progenitor cells. Only
CD11b+/Pdpn+ subset (but not other myeloid cells) expressed a broad panel
of proteins specific to the lymphatic endothelial lineage. Adoptive
transfer of BM-derived CD11b+/Pdpn+ or Pdpn-negative fractions into
tumor-bearing mice showed that only Pdpn+ BM myeloid cells integrated
into preexisting LV and caused a 10-fold increase in peritumoral and
intratumoral LV density. Conclusion: We show for the first time in
clinical BC samples that tumor-recruited M-LECP significantly correlate
with LN metastasis. We also identified a phenotypically distinct BM
fraction of CD11b+/Pdpn+ cells that directly promote generation of new
tumor lymphatic vessels. Our data suggest that tumors induce myeloid BM
cells to undergo differentiation into M-LECP that subsequently promote
cancer lymphatics thereby promoting tumor spread.

