Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CETSA as a new strategy to understand efficacy, adverse effects
and resistance development of anticancer drugs


A key step of the action of most drugs is their binding (engagement) of
the target protein(s). However, limitations in the available methods for
directly accessing this critical step have added uncertainties in many
stages of drug development.We have developed a generic method for
evaluating drug binding to target proteins in cells and tissues (Martinez
Molina et al. Science, 341:84). The technique is based on the physical
phenomenon of ligand-induced thermal stabilization of target proteins;
the method is therefore called the cellular thermal shift assay (CETSA).
The technique allows for the first time to directly measure the
biophysical interactions between a drug and protein target in non-
engineered cells and tissues. We show that using CETSA a range of
critical factors for drug development can be addressed at the target
engagement level, including drug transport and activation, off-target
effects, drug resistance as well as drug distribution in cells, patient
and animal tissues. Using quantitative mass-spectrometry, proteome-wide
CETSA has been established which allows for off-target effects as well as
downstream biochemistry to be discovered (Savitsk et al. Science, 346,
6205:1255784). Together the data supports that CETSA is likely to become
a valuable tool for developing and understanding the action of cancer
drugs in the future.

