Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A multicenter clinical trial of lung cancer circulating tumor cell
assay with the largest sample size (1210 cases) in China


Background: As a novel biomarker of primary tumors, circulating tumor
cells (CTCs) are well known to play an important role in cancer
diagnosis, recurrence and metastasis, and disease monitoring. This study
investigated the application of CTCs in lung cancer therapy by
quantitative determination of folate receptor-positive CTCs.Methods: This
study enrolled 1210 subjects (including 560 lung cancer patients, 350
patients with benign lung diseases, 150 healthy subjects and 150 non-lung
cancer malignant tumor patients) and quantified the tiny amounts of CTCs
in peripheral blood by negative enrichment using immunomagnetic beads in
combination with folate receptor-directed polymerase chain reaction
(PCR).Results: Following ROC curve analyses of CTC levels in the patients
with benign lung diseases or benign lung diseases and the healthy
subjects, the cut-off of CTCs was 8.70 CTC Units/3mL with a specificity
of 88.2% (441/500) and a sensitivity of 79.6% (446/560) as determined by
the method mentioned above. The ROC area undercurve of more than 0.8 (AUC
= 0.8797, PBackground: As a novel biomarker of primary tumors,
circulating tumor cells (CTCs) are well known to play an important role
in cancer diagnosis, recurrence and metastasis, and disease monitoring.
This study investigated the application of CTCs in lung cancer therapy by
quantitative determination of folate receptor-positive CTCs.Methods: This
study enrolled 1210 subjects (including 560 lung cancer patients, 350
patients with benign lung diseases, 150 healthy subjects and 150 non-lung
cancer malignant tumor patients) and quantified the tiny amounts of CTCs
in peripheral blood by negative enrichment using immunomagnetic beads in
combination with folate receptor-directed polymerase chain reaction
(PCR).Results: Following ROC curve analyses of CTC levels in the patients
with benign lung diseases or benign lung diseases and the healthy
subjects, the cut-off of CTCs was 8.70 CTC Units/3mL with a specificity
of 88.2% (441/500) and a sensitivity of 79.6% (446/560) as determined by
the method mentioned above. The ROC area undercurve of more than 0.8 (AUC
= 0.8797, P<0.0001) suggested the excellence of ligand-directed PCR to
diagnose lung cancer. For stage II-IV lung cancer patients, the
sensitivities were 70.8%(34/48), 79.6% (125/157), and 90.2% (185/205)
respectively, and the sensitivity in stage I patients can reach up to
68.0% (102/150) as well. CTC levels appeared to have greater accuracy to
diagnose lung cancer (AUC: 0.8833, PBackground: As a novel biomarker of
primary tumors, circulating tumor cells (CTCs) are well known to play an
important role in cancer diagnosis, recurrence and metastasis, and
disease monitoring. This study investigated the application of CTCs in
lung cancer therapy by quantitative determination of folate
receptor-positive CTCs.Methods: This study enrolled 1210 subjects
(including 560 lung cancer patients, 350 patients with benign lung
diseases, 150 healthy subjects and 150 non-lung cancer malignant tumor
patients) and quantified the tiny amounts of CTCs in peripheral blood by
negative enrichment using immunomagnetic beads in combination with folate
receptor-directed polymerase chain reaction (PCR).Results: Following ROC
curve analyses of CTC levels in the patients with benign lung diseases or
benign lung diseases and the healthy subjects, the cut-off of CTCs was
8.70 CTC Units/3mL with a specificity of 88.2% (441/500) and a
sensitivity of 79.6% (446/560) as determined by the method mentioned
above. The ROC area undercurve of more than 0.8 (AUC = 0.8797, P<0.0001)
suggested the excellence of ligand-directed PCR to diagnose lung cancer.
For stage II-IV lung cancer patients, the sensitivities were
70.8%(34/48), 79.6% (125/157), and 90.2% (185/205) respectively, and the
sensitivity in stage I patients can reach up to 68.0% (102/150) as well.
CTC levels appeared to have greater accuracy to diagnose lung cancer
(AUC: 0.8833, P<0.0001) than the combination of the other four lung
cancer-specific serum tumor markers (CEA, NSE, CYFRA21-1 and SCC)(AUC:
0.8557, PBackground: As a novel biomarker of primary tumors, circulating
tumor cells (CTCs) are well known to play an important role in cancer
diagnosis, recurrence and metastasis, and disease monitoring. This study
investigated the application of CTCs in lung cancer therapy by
quantitative determination of folate receptor-positive CTCs.Methods: This
study enrolled 1210 subjects (including 560 lung cancer patients, 350
patients with benign lung diseases, 150 healthy subjects and 150 non-lung
cancer malignant tumor patients) and quantified the tiny amounts of CTCs
in peripheral blood by negative enrichment using immunomagnetic beads in
combination with folate receptor-directed polymerase chain reaction
(PCR).Results: Following ROC curve analyses of CTC levels in the patients
with benign lung diseases or benign lung diseases and the healthy
subjects, the cut-off of CTCs was 8.70 CTC Units/3mL with a specificity
of 88.2% (441/500) and a sensitivity of 79.6% (446/560) as determined by
the method mentioned above. The ROC area undercurve of more than 0.8 (AUC
= 0.8797, P<0.0001) suggested the excellence of ligand-directed PCR to
diagnose lung cancer. For stage II-IV lung cancer patients, the
sensitivities were 70.8%(34/48), 79.6% (125/157), and 90.2% (185/205)
respectively, and the sensitivity in stage I patients can reach up to
68.0% (102/150) as well. CTC levels appeared to have greater accuracy to
diagnose lung cancer (AUC: 0.8833, P<0.0001) than the combination of the
other four lung cancer-specific serum tumor markers (CEA, NSE, CYFRA21-1
and SCC)(AUC: 0.8557, P<0.0001). CTCs were related to tumor stage and
tumor size other than pathological type. By quantitative determination of
folate receptor-positive cells in 150 different types of cancers, the CTC
level in lung cancer was found to be higher than those in gastric,
breast, colorectal, liver, and esophageal cancers.Conclusions: LT-PCR
achieves quantitative determination of folate receptor-positive CTCs to
diagnose lung cancer with high sensitivity and specificity, and
significantly greater diagnosis accuracy than the model of combined lung
cancer-specific serum tumor markers.

