Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oxidative status of mouse azoxymethane (AOM)/dextran sulfate
sodium (DSS)-induced colitis-associated cancer model and the effects of
COX-2 inhibitor


Background: Colorectal cancer (CRC) is becoming increasingly common in
Asian and European countries and still remains the second leading cause
of cancer deaths in the United States. The prevention of carcinogenesis
by anti-inflammatory agents including nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs (NSAIDs), selective cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) inhibitors, and
natural products is an area of considerable interest and research.
Numerous anti-inflammatory agents have been identified as potential CRC
chemopreventive agents but vary in their mechanism of action.The
objective of this study is to explore the oxidative status of the mouse
model of azoxymethane (AOM)/dextran sulfate sodium (DSS)-induced
colitis-associated cancer, and effects of COX-2 inhibitor in these
animals.Materials and Methods: Totally 40 mice were randomized divided to
four groups All animals except control and Cox-2 inhibitor alone group
received AOM/DSS to establish colitis-associated cancer model as reported
elsewhere. Control group animals were fed with conventional mice diet.
COX-2 preferential inhibitor meloxicam was used to minimize side effects
such as gastrointestinal hemorrhage Meloxicam were used i.p. 5mg/kg tree
times in a week for meloxicam alone and AOM/DSS + meloxicam group.
Oxidative stress markers Superoxide dismutase (SOD), Glutation peroxidase
(GPx), Malondialdehyde (MDA) and Advanced Oxidation Protein Products
(AOPP) were measured by spectrophotometrically in sera.Results: The
combination treatment of Meloxicam and AOM/DSS significantly increased
(pBackground: Colorectal cancer (CRC) is becoming increasingly common in
Asian and European countries and still remains the second leading cause
of cancer deaths in the United States. The prevention of carcinogenesis
by anti-inflammatory agents including nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs (NSAIDs), selective cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) inhibitors, and
natural products is an area of considerable interest and research.
Numerous anti-inflammatory agents have been identified as potential CRC
chemopreventive agents but vary in their mechanism of action.The
objective of this study is to explore the oxidative status of the mouse
model of azoxymethane (AOM)/dextran sulfate sodium (DSS)-induced
colitis-associated cancer, and effects of COX-2 inhibitor in these
animals.Materials and Methods: Totally 40 mice were randomized divided to
four groups All animals except control and Cox-2 inhibitor alone group
received AOM/DSS to establish colitis-associated cancer model as reported
elsewhere. Control group animals were fed with conventional mice diet.
COX-2 preferential inhibitor meloxicam was used to minimize side effects
such as gastrointestinal hemorrhage Meloxicam were used i.p. 5mg/kg tree
times in a week for meloxicam alone and AOM/DSS + meloxicam group.
Oxidative stress markers Superoxide dismutase (SOD), Glutation peroxidase
(GPx), Malondialdehyde (MDA) and Advanced Oxidation Protein Products
(AOPP) were measured by spectrophotometrically in sera.Results: The
combination treatment of Meloxicam and AOM/DSS significantly increased
(p<0,05) SOD activities. GPx activities were found significantly
increased (pBackground: Colorectal cancer (CRC) is becoming increasingly
common in Asian and European countries and still remains the second
leading cause of cancer deaths in the United States. The prevention of
carcinogenesis by anti-inflammatory agents including nonsteroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), selective cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2)
inhibitors, and natural products is an area of considerable interest and
research. Numerous anti-inflammatory agents have been identified as
potential CRC chemopreventive agents but vary in their mechanism of
action.The objective of this study is to explore the oxidative status of
the mouse model of azoxymethane (AOM)/dextran sulfate sodium
(DSS)-induced colitis-associated cancer, and effects of COX-2 inhibitor
in these animals.Materials and Methods: Totally 40 mice were randomized
divided to four groups All animals except control and Cox-2 inhibitor
alone group received AOM/DSS to establish colitis-associated cancer model
as reported elsewhere. Control group animals were fed with conventional
mice diet. COX-2 preferential inhibitor meloxicam was used to minimize
side effects such as gastrointestinal hemorrhage Meloxicam were used i.p.
5mg/kg tree times in a week for meloxicam alone and AOM/DSS + meloxicam
group. Oxidative stress markers Superoxide dismutase (SOD), Glutation
peroxidase (GPx), Malondialdehyde (MDA) and Advanced Oxidation Protein
Products (AOPP) were measured by spectrophotometrically in sera.Results:
The combination treatment of Meloxicam and AOM/DSS significantly
increased (p<0,05) SOD activities. GPx activities were found
significantly increased (p<0,001) in mice treatment with Meloxicam and
AOM/DSS combinations or alone. There were no differences between the
control and treatment groups of MDA levels. Advanced Oxidation Protein
Products levels of Meloxicam and AOM/DSS combination group were found
higher than the other groups.Conclusion: Meloxicam and /or AOM/DSS
treatment not caused lipid peroxidation, but increased the antioxidant
enzymes and Advanced Oxidation Protein Products levels.

