Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DNA methylation profiles of Helicobacter pylori strains from
patients with gastric cancer and gastritis


BACKGROUND: Helicobacter pylori, a gram-negative bacterium associated
with a spectrum of benign and malignant gastric conditions, is one of the
most genetically variable pathogens. Its genome encodes a large number of
DNA methyltransferases targeting specific motif sequences of 4-15 bp. DNA
base modifications epigenetically regulate gene expression and
genome-wide methylation profiles (methylomes) have been hypothesized to
be associated with virulence. A limited number of H. pylori methylomes
have been published to date, precluding meaningful analyses of clinical
correlates.METHODS: We sequenced 30 H. pylori clinical isolates from
Mexico City using Pacific Biosciences Single Molecule Real-Time (SMRT)
technology, a unique platform that simultaneously determines a wide range
of DNA base modifications. The resulting methylome data were compared for
the 15 strains from gastric cancer cases vs. the 15 from non-atrophic
gastritis controls.RESULTS: All 30 strains exhibited high levels of DNA
methylation throughout their genomes. Three types of base modification
were detected: N6-methyladenine (m6A), N4-methylcytosine (m4C) and
5-methylcytosine (m5C). m6A was more common than m4C, and m5C was rare.
Over 100 different motifs were detected, including many novel motifs not
found in the three reference strains. For most methylated motifs, >95% of
all occurrences in a given genome were methylated. Individual strains had
between 14 and 28 different motifs. Some of the methylated motifs were
conserved across all (e.g., Cm6ATG) or almost all (e.g., Gm6ACT) strains,
but the majority were found in only one or two strains. Two conserved
motifs, GTm6AC and GTNNm6AC, were significantly (PBACKGROUND:
Helicobacter pylori, a gram-negative bacterium associated with a spectrum
of benign and malignant gastric conditions, is one of the most
genetically variable pathogens. Its genome encodes a large number of DNA
methyltransferases targeting specific motif sequences of 4-15 bp. DNA
base modifications epigenetically regulate gene expression and
genome-wide methylation profiles (methylomes) have been hypothesized to
be associated with virulence. A limited number of H. pylori methylomes
have been published to date, precluding meaningful analyses of clinical
correlates.METHODS: We sequenced 30 H. pylori clinical isolates from
Mexico City using Pacific Biosciences Single Molecule Real-Time (SMRT)
technology, a unique platform that simultaneously determines a wide range
of DNA base modifications. The resulting methylome data were compared for
the 15 strains from gastric cancer cases vs. the 15 from non-atrophic
gastritis controls.RESULTS: All 30 strains exhibited high levels of DNA
methylation throughout their genomes. Three types of base modification
were detected: N6-methyladenine (m6A), N4-methylcytosine (m4C) and
5-methylcytosine (m5C). m6A was more common than m4C, and m5C was rare.
Over 100 different motifs were detected, including many novel motifs not
found in the three reference strains. For most methylated motifs, >95% of
all occurrences in a given genome were methylated. Individual strains had
between 14 and 28 different motifs. Some of the methylated motifs were
conserved across all (e.g., Cm6ATG) or almost all (e.g., Gm6ACT) strains,
but the majority were found in only one or two strains. Two conserved
motifs, GTm6AC and GTNNm6AC, were significantly (P<0.05) more common in
cancer cases than controls. CONCLUSIONS: The H. pylori methylome varies
widely across strains, in concert with the high plasticity of its genome.
Epigenetic modifications may modulate bacterial pathogenicity. These
intriguing observations warrant replication with larger numbers and
multiple populations in different geographic areas. The inferred novel
methyltransferases remain to be identified and functionally
characterized. This report greatly increases the number of H. pylori
strains with defined methylomes, and represents the first effort to
associate these features with clinical outcome. Availability of these
genomic and epigenomic data will enhance understanding of H. pylori
pathogenesis.

