Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PARP-1 regulates cell cycle by downregulating E2F-1
transcriptional activity in vitro and in vivo


Although PARP-1 has been traditionally related to DNA repair, in the last
years an increasing number of studies have linked this polymerase to
other cellular processes such as metabolism and cell mitosis.In this
study we wanted to investigate the biological importance of the
interaction between PARP-1 and the transcription factor E2F-1, and more
specifically in scenarios where the activity, or hyperactivity, of E2F-1
is of critical importance such as embryonic development or oncogenesis.
In this regard, we have found that the treatment either with enzymatic
inhibitors of PARP-1 has an effect on the transcriptional activity of
E2F-1 as well as the proliferative rate of treated cells. This effect is
significantly increased with the treatment with gossypol, a specific
inhibitor of PARP-1 protein-protein interactions occurring through the
BRCT domain, as in the case of E2F-1. This effect is also observed in
vivo since the severity of histological malformations in Rb-/- embryos is
significantly reduced in Parp-1-/- Rb-/- embryos, which phenotype closely
resembles that of E2f-1-/- Rb-/- mice. Finally, we also found that the
deletion or inhibition of PARP-1 in an animal model of gliomagenesis
helps the cell to block oncogenic stimuli derived from E2F-1
hyperactivity, by reactivating critical signalling pathways involved in
oncogene-induced senescence.In summary, the importance of the
relationship between PARP-1 and E2F-1 in different biological contexts
leads us to believe that the search for ways of altering or disrupting
this interaction could be a novel strategy for the development of
molecules of therapeutic potential.

