Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of liver inflammation and tumorigenesis by blocking
Ccl2-Ccr2 axis in a mouse model


Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), the second cancer-related deadly disease,
commonly arises in the setting of chronic liver inflammation. CC
chemokine ligand 2 (CCL2), a chemokine that recruits CCR2-positive immune
cells to promote inflammation, is highly upregulated in HCC patients.
Here, we examined the therapeutic efficacy of inhibitors of the Ccl2-Ccr2
axis against hepatitis and HCC in the miR-122 knockout (aka KO) mouse
model, in which upregulation of Ccl2 promotes liver inflammation that
progresses to HCC with age. To determine whether blocking the Ccl2-Ccr2
axis has any therapeutic potential, we treated KO mice with Ccl2
neutralizing antibody (nab) or a small molecule inhibitor of Ccr2 and
monitored liver pathology. Both agents were able to reduce the bridging
inflammation in these mice by reducing the population of CD11highGr1+
cells, and expression of IL-6 and TNF-alpha in KO livers. Furthermore,
treatment of tumor-bearing KO mice with Ccl2 nab for 8 weeks
significantly reduced the recruitment of CD11bhighGr1+ monocytes, IL-6
and TNF-alpha production, and HCC incidence as well as tumor burden. The
down-regulation of pStat3 and c-Myc (IL-6 downstream) as well as
NF-kappaB (TNF-alpha downstream) upon targeting Ccl2 positively
correlated with tumor growth suppression. In addition, inhibition of
tumorigenesis by Ccl2 nab also correlated with enhanced cytotoxicity and
IFN-gamma expression of NK cells isolated from the tumor
microenvironment. Collectively, our results demonstrate that blocking the
Ccl2-Ccr2 axis can be an effective therapeutic approach against both
hepatitis and HCC.

