Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sub-cytotoxic concentrations of a novel polyphenol fatty acid
ester derivative arrest breast cancer cell proliferation and metastasis


In this study, the antiproliferative and antimetastatic properties of
phloridzin docosahexaenoate (PZ-DHA), a novel polyphenol fatty acid ester
derivative, were explored using in vitro and in vivo models of mammary
carcinoma. PZ-DHA combines phloridzin (PZ, a dihydrochalcone found in
apple peels) with docosahexaenoic acid (DHA, an omega-3 fatty acid). The
regioselective acylation reaction was catalyzed by lipase B enzyme from
Candida antarctica. PZ-DHA-induced selective cytotoxicity towards breast
cancer cells (triple-negative mammary carcinoma cells, MDA-MB-231,
MDA-MB-468, and 4T1; estrogen receptor-positive mammary carcinoma cells,
MCF-7 and T-47D) was observed compared to human mammary epithelial cells
(HMECs and MCF 10A) using the MTS assay. Significantly less (pIn this
study, the antiproliferative and antimetastatic properties of phloridzin
docosahexaenoate (PZ-DHA), a novel polyphenol fatty acid ester
derivative, were explored using in vitro and in vivo models of mammary
carcinoma. PZ-DHA combines phloridzin (PZ, a dihydrochalcone found in
apple peels) with docosahexaenoic acid (DHA, an omega-3 fatty acid). The
regioselective acylation reaction was catalyzed by lipase B enzyme from
Candida antarctica. PZ-DHA-induced selective cytotoxicity towards breast
cancer cells (triple-negative mammary carcinoma cells, MDA-MB-231,
MDA-MB-468, and 4T1; estrogen receptor-positive mammary carcinoma cells,
MCF-7 and T-47D) was observed compared to human mammary epithelial cells
(HMECs and MCF 10A) using the MTS assay. Significantly less (p<0.05)
cytotoxicity of PZ-DHA for normal cells was also confirmed using flow
cytometric analysis of annexin-V-FLUOS/propidium iodide-stained MCF 10A
and human dermal fibroblasts compared to MDA-MB-231 cells. Flow
cytometric analysis of Oregon Green 488-stained MDA-MB-231 cells showed
an antiproliferative effect of PZ-DHA at sub-cytotoxic concentrations (10
to 30 M). Cell cycle analysis showed that MDA-MB-231 replication was
arrested at the G2/M phase of the cell cycle following treatment with
PZ-DHA at sub-cytotoxic concentrations. PZ-DHA suppressed the migration
of MDA-MB-231 and 4T1 cells in vitro in wound healing and cell migration
assays. Reduced expression of proteins (-catenin, slug, Zinc finger
E-box-binding homeobox 1, vimentin and matrix metalloproteinase-2)
involved in the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition was demonstrated by
western blot analysis of PZ-DHA-treated MDA-MB-231 cell lysates. Finally,
4T1 tumor bearing-female BALB/c mice that received intra-peritoneal
injections of PZ-DHA showed a significant reduction (pIn this study, the
antiproliferative and antimetastatic properties of phloridzin
docosahexaenoate (PZ-DHA), a novel polyphenol fatty acid ester
derivative, were explored using in vitro and in vivo models of mammary
carcinoma. PZ-DHA combines phloridzin (PZ, a dihydrochalcone found in
apple peels) with docosahexaenoic acid (DHA, an omega-3 fatty acid). The
regioselective acylation reaction was catalyzed by lipase B enzyme from
Candida antarctica. PZ-DHA-induced selective cytotoxicity towards breast
cancer cells (triple-negative mammary carcinoma cells, MDA-MB-231,
MDA-MB-468, and 4T1; estrogen receptor-positive mammary carcinoma cells,
MCF-7 and T-47D) was observed compared to human mammary epithelial cells
(HMECs and MCF 10A) using the MTS assay. Significantly less (p<0.05)
cytotoxicity of PZ-DHA for normal cells was also confirmed using flow
cytometric analysis of annexin-V-FLUOS/propidium iodide-stained MCF 10A
and human dermal fibroblasts compared to MDA-MB-231 cells. Flow
cytometric analysis of Oregon Green 488-stained MDA-MB-231 cells showed
an antiproliferative effect of PZ-DHA at sub-cytotoxic concentrations (10
to 30 M). Cell cycle analysis showed that MDA-MB-231 replication was
arrested at the G2/M phase of the cell cycle following treatment with
PZ-DHA at sub-cytotoxic concentrations. PZ-DHA suppressed the migration
of MDA-MB-231 and 4T1 cells in vitro in wound healing and cell migration
assays. Reduced expression of proteins (-catenin, slug, Zinc finger
E-box-binding homeobox 1, vimentin and matrix metalloproteinase-2)
involved in the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition was demonstrated by
western blot analysis of PZ-DHA-treated MDA-MB-231 cell lysates. Finally,
4T1 tumor bearing-female BALB/c mice that received intra-peritoneal
injections of PZ-DHA showed a significant reduction (p<0.05, n = 9) in
primary tumor volume at the mammary fat pad and fewer metastatic lesions
in the lungs compared to the saline-treated control mice, suggesting an
in vivo antimetastatic effect of PZ-DHA. In conclusion, findings of this
study reveal that PZ-DHA suppresses mammary carcinoma cell proliferation
and metastasis, suggesting a potential clinical application to prevent
breast cancer progression in patients.

