Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The insulin-like growth factor-2 (IGF-2): A potential therapeutic
target for triple-negative breast cancer metastasis


Introduction: Triple-negative breast cancers (TNBC) occur in 15-17% of
patients, yet this subtype accounts for almost half of all breast cancer
(BC) deaths. This breast cancer sub-type often occur in younger and
African American (AA) women. TNBCs cannot be treated with current
chemotherapies. Although initially responsive to chemotherapy, TNBCs tend
to relapse and metastasize early. As there are no specific treatments for
TNBCs, we aim to identify the therapeutic potential of insulin-like
growth factor- 2 (IGF-2) in TNBC management.Methods: Using
immunohistochemistry archival breast tissue from women with metastatic
TNBC was evaluated and scored for IGF-2 expression. To assess the ability
of IGF-2 to stimulate cell proliferation and migration we used
commercially available TNBC cell lines validated to be ER-alpha-negative
(ER-), progesterone receptor-negative (PR-) and Her2
overexperssion-negative (HER2).Results: We have found IGF-2 to be highly
expressed archival breast tissue of women with metastatic TNBC. Using
TNBC cell lines MDA-MB-231, HCC 38, HCC 1806 and HCC 1937, our in vitro
studies demonstrate the ability of IGF-2 to stimulate TNBC proliferation
and migration (P = 0.05). Further, the combination of NVP-AEW541, an
insulin-like growth factor-1 receptor (IGF-1R) inhibitor, and BMS-754807,
an inhibitor of IGF-1R and the insulin receptor (IR), cause a significant
(P Introduction: Triple-negative breast cancers (TNBC) occur in 15-17% of
patients, yet this subtype accounts for almost half of all breast cancer
(BC) deaths. This breast cancer sub-type often occur in younger and
African American (AA) women. TNBCs cannot be treated with current
chemotherapies. Although initially responsive to chemotherapy, TNBCs tend
to relapse and metastasize early. As there are no specific treatments for
TNBCs, we aim to identify the therapeutic potential of insulin-like
growth factor- 2 (IGF-2) in TNBC management.Methods: Using
immunohistochemistry archival breast tissue from women with metastatic
TNBC was evaluated and scored for IGF-2 expression. To assess the ability
of IGF-2 to stimulate cell proliferation and migration we used
commercially available TNBC cell lines validated to be ER-alpha-negative
(ER-), progesterone receptor-negative (PR-) and Her2
overexperssion-negative (HER2).Results: We have found IGF-2 to be highly
expressed archival breast tissue of women with metastatic TNBC. Using
TNBC cell lines MDA-MB-231, HCC 38, HCC 1806 and HCC 1937, our in vitro
studies demonstrate the ability of IGF-2 to stimulate TNBC proliferation
and migration (P = 0.05). Further, the combination of NVP-AEW541, an
insulin-like growth factor-1 receptor (IGF-1R) inhibitor, and BMS-754807,
an inhibitor of IGF-1R and the insulin receptor (IR), cause a significant
(P < 0.05) reduction in TNBC proliferation and migration. Investigation
into the cellular characteristics of the TNBC cell lines used, suggest
that BRCA1 mutations increase cell susceptibility to IGF-1R
inhibitors.Conclusion: Our data indicate that IGF-2 plays a role in TNBC
metastasis, an action that can be inhibited by targeting multiple IGF-2
mediated receptors.

