Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Heregulin-induced resistance against HER2-targeted therapies in
HER2 positive breast and gastric cancer in vitro and in vivo


BackgroundHER2-targeted therapies have been shown clinical benefits in
patients with HER2 positive breast and gastric cancers. However,
resistance against such targeted therapies eventually develops in most
cases. Overexpression of heregulin, a ligand for HER3, has been reported
as one of the resistant mechanism against HER2-targeted therapies.
Upregulation of heregulin activates HER3-PI3K-AKT signaling, leading to
the resistance against HER2-targeted therapies. We investigated the
effects of heregulin in cell lines and evaluate its clinical impacts in
HER2 positive breast and gastric cancers.Materials and methodsWe utilized
transfected or recombinant heregulin to investigate the effect of
heregulin on proliferation and apoptosis of SK-BR-3 and NCI-N87 cell
lines treated with lapatinib, trastuzumab, trastuzumab-emtansine and
paclitaxel. Clinical data and specimens were obtained from patients with
HER2 positive breast and gastric cancers, evaluating their heregulin
value from both serum and tissues using ELISA and RT-PCR,
respectively.ResultsHeregulin transfection and recombinant heregulin
conferred resistance against treatment with lapatinib, trastuzumab, and
weak resistance against trastuzumab-emtansine, but no resistance against
paclitaxel in HER2 positive cell lines. Clinical data of heregulin among
patients treated with HER2-targeted therapies revealed that patients with
relatively high heregulin value tended to have worse
prognosis.ConclusionsTogether these data, overexpression of heregulin may
at least in part play a role in resistance against HER2-targeted
therapies in HER2 positive cancer patients. Further investigation is
warranted to elucidate the relevance of treatments targeting
heregulin-HER3-PI3K signaling.

