Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of PI-3 kinase signaling potentiates the apoptotic
response to mitotic arrest


Anti-mitotic drugs represent a common strategy for cancer chemotherapy by
inducing a prolonged prometaphase delay and eventual cell death by
apoptosis. Kinesin Spindle Protein (KSP) inhibitors arrest cells in
mitosis by blocking bipolar spindle assembly, and these drugs have
demonstrated limited side effects in clinical trials. However, they are
not as effective as Taxol, whose efficacy is limited by the frequent
development of resistance as well as the deleterious effects on
non-dividing cells. Recent studies suggest that the ability of cells to
maintain energy levels during mitosis could account for the differential
responses of cancer cells to mitotic arrest. To determine if manipulating
cellular metabolism could potentiate the efficacy of KSP inhibitors, we
arrested cells in mitosis in the absence or presence of the PI3-kinase
LY294002, and probed for the induction of apoptosis. Because tumor cells
respond differently to mitotic arrest, we employed two cell lines that
either survive mitotic arrest (MCF7) or undergo apoptosis shortly
following mitotic slippage (HeLa). In both cases, simultaneous inhibition
of KSP and PI3-kinase induced apoptosis more effectively than mitotic
arrest or PI3-K inhibition alone. In the case of HeLa cells, there also
appeared to be an acceleration of cell death such that arrested cells
underwent apoptosis prior to mitotic slippage. Similar effects were
observed using Akt inhibitors, providing additional evidence that
PI3-kinase signaling was critical for surviving mitotic arrest. Lastly,
we found that increased glucose had a protective effect, further
supporting the notion that the ability to survive mitotic arrest depended
on the ability to maintain energy levels. If confirmed, this may
represent a novel approach for potentiating the anti-tumor activity of
KSP inhibitors in the clinic.

