Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antibodies targeting LAG-3, TIM-3, KIR cloned from healthy human
donors


The immunosurveillance/immunoediting theory postulates that tumor growth
is repressed in healthy individuals through the activation of adaptive
and innate immune mechanisms. The clinical success of antibodies that
target inhibitory checkpoint pathways of the immune system (i.e. CTLA-4,
PD-1) has provided compelling evidence in support of this theory and
raises the question of whether antibodies targeting these, or other
inhibitory immune cell modulators (ICM), are present in apparently
healthy individuals. The present studies were designed to answer this
question by probing the circulating memory B-cell compartment that
represents a historic record of an individual's lifelong adaptive immune
response.Methods: Blood from donors, with no known cancer history, was
screened for the presence of anti-ICM binding memory B-cells targeting
LAG-3, TIM-3, B7-H3, KIR, and VISTA, using Trellis's established
CellSpotTM technology that can detect the presence of antigen specific
memory B-cells at a frequency of 0.1 per 100,000 memory B-cells.Results:
Circulating memory B-cells targeting ICM's were present in all apparently
healthy individuals tested (20 total). There was substantial variation as
to which ICM's were recognized within each individual across this sample
population. Antibodies cloned from these rare B-cells were of IgG class
and exhibited low to sub-nM affinity toward the specific ICM. These high
affinity antibodies bound their respective antigens on activated T-cells
and were able to augment immune stimulatory cytokine release in cellular
assays. Data from ongoing studies will be presented.Conclusion: These
studies demonstrate that apparently healthy individuals produce high
affinity, pharmacologically active anti-ICM antibodies. Thus, healthy
individuals represent a previously unrecognized source of antibodies that
have undergone natural selection and hold particular promise as potential
therapeutic agents for the treatment of cancer.

