Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mutational landscape of breast cancers from PALB2 germline
mutation carriers


Introduction: The PALB2 gene encodes the partner and localizer of BRCA2
protein, which interacts with BRCA1/2 and is involved in homologous
recombination DNA repair. Germline mutations in PALB2 are associated with
an increased risk of breast cancer, with a cumulative risk of 35% by age
70 in female PALB2 mutation carriers. Whether the PALB2 wild-type allele
is lost in the development of PALB2 breast cancers has yet to be defined.
Further, the repertoire of somatic genetic alterations in these tumors is
currently unknown. In this study we sought to characterize the genomic
landscape of PALB2 breast cancers and to define the differences in the
repertoire of somatic genetic alterations and mutational signatures
between PALB2 and BRCA1 and BRCA2 breast cancers.Material and Methods:
Representative samples from nine breast cancers from patients with known
PALB2 germline mutations were microdissected. DNA samples from
microdissected tumors and matched normal counterparts were subjected to
whole exome sequencing on an Illumina HiSeq2000. Somatic mutations were
defined using MuTect and insertions and deletions using Strelka and
Varscan2. Driver mutations were defined by state-of-the-art
bioinformatics methods. Mutational signatures were defined using
non-negative matrix factorization. Copy number alterations (CNAs) and
regions with loss of heterozygosity were determined using FACETS. The
mutational frequency of breast cancers from PALB2 germline mutation
carriers was compared to that of breast cancers from BRCA1 (n = 11) and
BRCA2 (n = 10) germline mutation carriers from The Cancer Genome Atlas
study.Results: Three patients harbored germline frame-shift PALB2
mutations (2 S1169fs, 1 T841fs), five displayed truncating mutations (3
W1038* and 2 Q775*) and 1 harbored a missense mutation (W1140G, of
uncertain significance). Somatic loss of the PALB2 wild-type allele was
found in 3 cases, in 2 of which the loss was caused by CNAs and in 1 case
it was caused by a somatic PALB2 Q479* mutation. A median of 65 somatic
mutations (range 45-223) and a median of 1 driver mutation (range 0-3)
were identified per tumor. Cancer genes mutated in PALB2 breast cancers
included TP53 (n = 2), PIK3CA (n = 2), NF1 (n = 1) and NCOR1 (n = 1). Six
cases displayed mutational signatures consistent with the aging process;
the BRCA signature was not found in any of the cases analyzed. Breast
cancers from PALB2 mutation carriers had fewer somatic TP53 mutations
than BRCA1 breast cancers (2/9, 22% vs 9/11, 82%, p = 0.02). No
difference in the repertoire of somatic mutations between PALB2 and BRCA2
breast cancers was observed.Conclusion: Unlike breast cancers from BRCA1
and BRCA2 mutation carriers, the majority of breast cancers from PALB2
mutation carriers lacked somatic loss of the wild-type allele and none
displayed a BRCA mutational signature. No highly recurrently mutated gene
was identified, but pathogenic mutations in driver genes (TP53, PIK3CA,
NF1 and NCOR1) were found.

