Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Solid papillary carcinoma with reverse polarization are driven by
IDH2 and PI3K pathway mutations


Background: Solid papillary carcinoma with reverse polarization (SPCRP)
is a rare breast cancer subtype, whose most striking morphologic feature
is the presence of back-to-back columnar epithelial cells with nuclei
situated in an apical rather than in the normal basal location. We sought
to characterize the morphologic and genetic landscape of SPCRP and
determine whether it represents a distinct subtype of breast cancer
underpinned by highly recurrent disease-specific genetic
alterations.Material and Methods: Archival sections of 13 SPCRPs were
subjected to microdissection. DNA samples extracted from microdissected
tumor and matched normal samples were subjected to whole exome sequencing
(n = 2) on an Illumina HiSeq2000, and DNA samples from tumors were
further subjected to targeted massively parallel sequencing (n = 1),
SNaPshot profiling (n = 7) and/or Sanger sequencing. State-of-the-art
bioinformatics methods were used to define somatic mutations.
Non-malignant breast epithelial MCF10A cells with and without somatic
PIK3CA H1047R knock-in were used to assess the functional impact of the
mutations identified by sequencing of SPCRPs in two- and
three-dimensional cell culture systems.Results: Ten of 13 (77%) SPCRPs
were found to harbor IDH2 R172 hotspot mutations, and eight of these
cases had concurrent pathogenic mutations affecting PIK3CA or PIK3R1, in
particular PIK3CA H1047R hotspot mutations. Functional monolayer and
three-dimensional cell culture studies demonstrated that IDH2 R172 and
PIK3CA mutations constitute likely drivers of this tumor and contribute
to its unusual nuclear polarization phenotype.Conclusions: Our results
suggest that SPCRP is a distinct subtype of breast cancer underpinned by
IDH2 hotspot mutations in conjunction with mutations affecting canonical
genes of the PI3K pathway. Given that IDH2 hotspot mutations have not
been described in breast cancer to date, these may be used as a
diagnostic ancillary marker for SPCRPs. Furthermore, IDH2 mutations may
serve as a potential therapeutic target in SPCRP patients with
disseminated disease.

