Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Proteomic analysis of off-target toxicities following treatment
with the tyrosine kinase inhibitor sunitinib


Background: Sunitinib is a multi-targeted agent approved for treatment of
a number of cancers. However, since approval, data has continually
emerged relating to toxicity profiles including hypertension, hand-foot
syndrome and fatigue. Underlying mechanisms are unresolved. It has been
hypothesised that the multi-parameter toxicity profile is related to
on-target kinase inhibition in off-target tissues.Methods: To interrogate
off-target effects, the Zeptosens Reverse Phase protein Array (RPA)
platform was used to assess tissues obtained from mice treated with
sunitinib (40 mg/kg) for 4 weeks. Additional tissue was collected for
histological analyses and pathophysiologic changes assessed.Results: RPA
data analyses on all organs collected (heart, kidney, liver, brain,
intestine and skin) revealed the presence of differentially expressed
proteins associated with damage and/or stress. Of note, Cyclin D1, MEK
and phosphorylated-p21(CIP/WAF1) expression increased by 1.8-fold (p
Background: Sunitinib is a multi-targeted agent approved for treatment of
a number of cancers. However, since approval, data has continually
emerged relating to toxicity profiles including hypertension, hand-foot
syndrome and fatigue. Underlying mechanisms are unresolved. It has been
hypothesised that the multi-parameter toxicity profile is related to
on-target kinase inhibition in off-target tissues.Methods: To interrogate
off-target effects, the Zeptosens Reverse Phase protein Array (RPA)
platform was used to assess tissues obtained from mice treated with
sunitinib (40 mg/kg) for 4 weeks. Additional tissue was collected for
histological analyses and pathophysiologic changes assessed.Results: RPA
data analyses on all organs collected (heart, kidney, liver, brain,
intestine and skin) revealed the presence of differentially expressed
proteins associated with damage and/or stress. Of note, Cyclin D1, MEK
and phosphorylated-p21(CIP/WAF1) expression increased by 1.8-fold (p <
0.05), 2.2-fold (p Background: Sunitinib is a multi-targeted agent
approved for treatment of a number of cancers. However, since approval,
data has continually emerged relating to toxicity profiles including
hypertension, hand-foot syndrome and fatigue. Underlying mechanisms are
unresolved. It has been hypothesised that the multi-parameter toxicity
profile is related to on-target kinase inhibition in off-target
tissues.Methods: To interrogate off-target effects, the Zeptosens Reverse
Phase protein Array (RPA) platform was used to assess tissues obtained
from mice treated with sunitinib (40 mg/kg) for 4 weeks. Additional
tissue was collected for histological analyses and pathophysiologic
changes assessed.Results: RPA data analyses on all organs collected
(heart, kidney, liver, brain, intestine and skin) revealed the presence
of differentially expressed proteins associated with damage and/or
stress. Of note, Cyclin D1, MEK and phosphorylated-p21(CIP/WAF1)
expression increased by 1.8-fold (p < 0.05), 2.2-fold (p < 0.1) and
1.7-fold (p Background: Sunitinib is a multi-targeted agent approved for
treatment of a number of cancers. However, since approval, data has
continually emerged relating to toxicity profiles including hypertension,
hand-foot syndrome and fatigue. Underlying mechanisms are unresolved. It
has been hypothesised that the multi-parameter toxicity profile is
related to on-target kinase inhibition in off-target tissues.Methods: To
interrogate off-target effects, the Zeptosens Reverse Phase protein Array
(RPA) platform was used to assess tissues obtained from mice treated with
sunitinib (40 mg/kg) for 4 weeks. Additional tissue was collected for
histological analyses and pathophysiologic changes assessed.Results: RPA
data analyses on all organs collected (heart, kidney, liver, brain,
intestine and skin) revealed the presence of differentially expressed
proteins associated with damage and/or stress. Of note, Cyclin D1, MEK
and phosphorylated-p21(CIP/WAF1) expression increased by 1.8-fold (p <
0.05), 2.2-fold (p < 0.1) and 1.7-fold (p < 0.1) respectively in the
kidneys of sunitinib treated mice. These proteins are associated with
kidney damage after chemotherapy, and induction of genes associated with
renal immune response, inflammation and apoptosis. Mild proteinuria was
observed in sunitinib treated animals, however no gross change in renal
glomerular ultrastructure was visible via electron microscopy.
Phosphorylated-FGFR1, cleaved Caspase-7, and phosphorylated-cMYC
expression decreased by 0.45-fold (p Background: Sunitinib is a
multi-targeted agent approved for treatment of a number of cancers.
However, since approval, data has continually emerged relating to
toxicity profiles including hypertension, hand-foot syndrome and fatigue.
Underlying mechanisms are unresolved. It has been hypothesised that the
multi-parameter toxicity profile is related to on-target kinase
inhibition in off-target tissues.Methods: To interrogate off-target
effects, the Zeptosens Reverse Phase protein Array (RPA) platform was
used to assess tissues obtained from mice treated with sunitinib (40
mg/kg) for 4 weeks. Additional tissue was collected for histological
analyses and pathophysiologic changes assessed.Results: RPA data analyses
on all organs collected (heart, kidney, liver, brain, intestine and skin)
revealed the presence of differentially expressed proteins associated
with damage and/or stress. Of note, Cyclin D1, MEK and
phosphorylated-p21(CIP/WAF1) expression increased by 1.8-fold (p < 0.05),
2.2-fold (p < 0.1) and 1.7-fold (p < 0.1) respectively in the kidneys of
sunitinib treated mice. These proteins are associated with kidney damage
after chemotherapy, and induction of genes associated with renal immune
response, inflammation and apoptosis. Mild proteinuria was observed in
sunitinib treated animals, however no gross change in renal glomerular
ultrastructure was visible via electron microscopy. Phosphorylated-FGFR1,
cleaved Caspase-7, and phosphorylated-cMYC expression decreased by
0.45-fold (p < 0.05), 0.4-fold (p Background: Sunitinib is a
multi-targeted agent approved for treatment of a number of cancers.
However, since approval, data has continually emerged relating to
toxicity profiles including hypertension, hand-foot syndrome and fatigue.
Underlying mechanisms are unresolved. It has been hypothesised that the
multi-parameter toxicity profile is related to on-target kinase
inhibition in off-target tissues.Methods: To interrogate off-target
effects, the Zeptosens Reverse Phase protein Array (RPA) platform was
used to assess tissues obtained from mice treated with sunitinib (40
mg/kg) for 4 weeks. Additional tissue was collected for histological
analyses and pathophysiologic changes assessed.Results: RPA data analyses
on all organs collected (heart, kidney, liver, brain, intestine and skin)
revealed the presence of differentially expressed proteins associated
with damage and/or stress. Of note, Cyclin D1, MEK and
phosphorylated-p21(CIP/WAF1) expression increased by 1.8-fold (p < 0.05),
2.2-fold (p < 0.1) and 1.7-fold (p < 0.1) respectively in the kidneys of
sunitinib treated mice. These proteins are associated with kidney damage
after chemotherapy, and induction of genes associated with renal immune
response, inflammation and apoptosis. Mild proteinuria was observed in
sunitinib treated animals, however no gross change in renal glomerular
ultrastructure was visible via electron microscopy. Phosphorylated-FGFR1,
cleaved Caspase-7, and phosphorylated-cMYC expression decreased by
0.45-fold (p < 0.05), 0.4-fold (p < 0.1) and 0.8-fold (p Background:
Sunitinib is a multi-targeted agent approved for treatment of a number of
cancers. However, since approval, data has continually emerged relating
to toxicity profiles including hypertension, hand-foot syndrome and
fatigue. Underlying mechanisms are unresolved. It has been hypothesised
that the multi-parameter toxicity profile is related to on-target kinase
inhibition in off-target tissues.Methods: To interrogate off-target
effects, the Zeptosens Reverse Phase protein Array (RPA) platform was
used to assess tissues obtained from mice treated with sunitinib (40
mg/kg) for 4 weeks. Additional tissue was collected for histological
analyses and pathophysiologic changes assessed.Results: RPA data analyses
on all organs collected (heart, kidney, liver, brain, intestine and skin)
revealed the presence of differentially expressed proteins associated
with damage and/or stress. Of note, Cyclin D1, MEK and
phosphorylated-p21(CIP/WAF1) expression increased by 1.8-fold (p < 0.05),
2.2-fold (p < 0.1) and 1.7-fold (p < 0.1) respectively in the kidneys of
sunitinib treated mice. These proteins are associated with kidney damage
after chemotherapy, and induction of genes associated with renal immune
response, inflammation and apoptosis. Mild proteinuria was observed in
sunitinib treated animals, however no gross change in renal glomerular
ultrastructure was visible via electron microscopy. Phosphorylated-FGFR1,
cleaved Caspase-7, and phosphorylated-cMYC expression decreased by
0.45-fold (p < 0.05), 0.4-fold (p < 0.1) and 0.8-fold (p < 0.1)
respectively in the skin of sunitinib treated mice. Down-regulation of
these proteins has been associated with a perturbation of cutaneous wound
healing (p-FGFR1/cleaved Caspase-7). Mice treated with high dose
sunitinib (80 mg/kg) showed overt signs of skin toxicity. Histopathologic
studies of the thyroid gland revealed decreased thyroid epithelial cell
height (p Background: Sunitinib is a multi-targeted agent approved for
treatment of a number of cancers. However, since approval, data has
continually emerged relating to toxicity profiles including hypertension,
hand-foot syndrome and fatigue. Underlying mechanisms are unresolved. It
has been hypothesised that the multi-parameter toxicity profile is
related to on-target kinase inhibition in off-target tissues.Methods: To
interrogate off-target effects, the Zeptosens Reverse Phase protein Array
(RPA) platform was used to assess tissues obtained from mice treated with
sunitinib (40 mg/kg) for 4 weeks. Additional tissue was collected for
histological analyses and pathophysiologic changes assessed.Results: RPA
data analyses on all organs collected (heart, kidney, liver, brain,
intestine and skin) revealed the presence of differentially expressed
proteins associated with damage and/or stress. Of note, Cyclin D1, MEK
and phosphorylated-p21(CIP/WAF1) expression increased by 1.8-fold (p <
0.05), 2.2-fold (p < 0.1) and 1.7-fold (p < 0.1) respectively in the
kidneys of sunitinib treated mice. These proteins are associated with
kidney damage after chemotherapy, and induction of genes associated with
renal immune response, inflammation and apoptosis. Mild proteinuria was
observed in sunitinib treated animals, however no gross change in renal
glomerular ultrastructure was visible via electron microscopy.
Phosphorylated-FGFR1, cleaved Caspase-7, and phosphorylated-cMYC
expression decreased by 0.45-fold (p < 0.05), 0.4-fold (p < 0.1) and
0.8-fold (p < 0.1) respectively in the skin of sunitinib treated mice.
Down-regulation of these proteins has been associated with a perturbation
of cutaneous wound healing (p-FGFR1/cleaved Caspase-7). Mice treated with
high dose sunitinib (80 mg/kg) showed overt signs of skin toxicity.
Histopathologic studies of the thyroid gland revealed decreased thyroid
epithelial cell height (p < 0.05). Nevertheless, serum levels of
triiodothyronine and thyroxine remained unchanged. An orthogonal
validation study (Western blotting) is ongoing based on gene ontology,
pathway analysis and observed fold changes in critical signalling pathway
proteins involved in cellular stress.Conclusions: Implementation of a
combined histopathologic/ RPA approach may provide a sensitive method to
mechanistically elucidate the off-target toxicity sequelae associated
with TKIs approved in the oncology setting.Work was supported by an EU
funded Industry Academia Pathways and Partnerships Marie Curie Award
(AngioTox) Grant Number 251528. RPAs were performed at Bayer Technology
Services, Leverkusen, Germany.

