Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Atypical protein kinase C inhibition in prostate cancer cells: a
study of ICA-1 and ACPD


Aggressive and metastatic prostate cancers are highly lethal tumors and
are one of the leading causes of death among men. Certain prostate
cancers are highly lethal tumors due to the emergence of
therapy-resistant cancer cells. There is a gap in knowledge relating to
which intracellular chemicals confer the emergence of therapy-resistant
prostate cancer cells, which intracellular chemicals are responsible for
prostate cancer survival and which chemicals regulate intracellular
signaling pathways in prostate cancer. To address this critical problem,
we investigated two drugs that act as inhibitors of atypical Protein
Kinase C Iota. The objective of this study was to test the effectiveness
of ACPD as an atypical PKC inhibitor and ICA-1 as an inhibitor of PKC
iota. [The Inter. J. Biochem. & Cell Biol. 43:784-794(2011)] DU-145 and
PC-3 prostate carcinoma cells and non-malignant prostate RWPE-1 cells
were each cultivated in separate flasks. They were treated with drugs of
interest for three consecutive days. The cells were counted before and
after the treatments and a statistical analysis was performed. The cells
were lysed and levels of PKC iota and PKC zeta were measured by Western
blotting and immunoprecipitation. Our preliminary results show that
treatment of DU-145 and PC-3 showed a statistically significant decrease
in cells that was proportional to the concentration in both drugs.
Treatment of the RWPE-1 cells showed no statistically significant change
in population. The Western blotting showed both drugs decreased PKC iota.
In conclusion ACPD and ICA1 are effective inhibitors of PKC iota and PKC
zeta and consequently significantly reduced the neogenesis of the
prostate DU-145 and PC-3 carcinoma cells while having negligible effect
on the non-malignant prostate RWPE-1 cells.

