Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting of epithelial-to-mesenchyme transition by a novel small
molecule inhibitor attenuates prostate and breast cancer invasiveness and
bone metastases


Transformed epithelial cells can activate embryonic programs of
epithelial plasticity and switch from a sessile, epithelial phenotype to
a motile, mesenchymal phenotype also referred to as
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT). EMT is associated with poor
prognosis in patients with osteotropic cancers. E-cadherin (CDH1) is an
essential homotypic cell adhesion molecule that is often down regulated
during this process.EMT-like processes are increasingly linked to therapy
resistance and metastasis-initiating cells, thus providing the rationale
for the development of novel small-molecule inhibitors that a) block the
acquisition of an invasive phenotype in osteotropic cancer cells via EMT
or b) revert their invasive, mesenchymal phenotype into epithelial
phenotype (MET) by upregulation of CDH1 expression.High throughput
screening of >43,000 LMW compounds, followed by compound design &
optimization in vitro led to the identification ten candidate therapeutic
compounds. These compounds displayed significant inhibitory effects on
cancer cell invasion (>80%) and induced E-cadherin (re)expression, most
likely through interference with the binding of transcriptional
repressors to the CDH1 E-box elements. We identified a unique compound,
OCD155, can effectively and dose-dependently block the acquisition of an
invasive phenotype in osteotropic prostate and breast cancer cells
(PC-3M-Pro4luc2 and MDA-MB-231/Bluc). When tested in our in vivo models
of prostate and breast cancer bone metastasis, treatment of mice with
OCD155 strongly and dose-dependently inhibited skeletal metastasis
(number of metastases, tumor burden) according to preventive and curative
protocols. At the dosages tested, no adverse effects of OCD155 were
observed (body weight, liver toxicity parameters). To the best of our
knowledge, our studies are the first to demonstrate the efficacy of new
small molecule EMT inhibitor in the treatment of experimental skeletal
metastasis.

