Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Correlation between tumor infiltrating lymphocytes and CCL5 gene
expression in chemotherapy-resistant triple negative breast cancer


Background:The presence of tumor infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) have
been associated with a better outcome in triple negative breast cancer
(TNBC). In the other hand, we have found that CCL5, a chemokine involved
in the recruitment of immune cells to the tumor microenvironment is an
independent prognostic marker for distant-recurrence free survival (DFRS)
in TNBC. The aim of this work was to evaluate the relationship between
these two immunological prognostic markers in chemotherapy-resistant
TNBC.Material and Methods:We evaluated a retrospective cohort (n = 74) of
TNBC patients with residual disease after neoadjuvante chemotherapy.
Residual tumors were profiled with Nanostring for genes previously
related to TNBC aggressiveness. Gene expression values for CCL5 were log2
transformed and median centered. TIL count was performed according to the
methods published by Salgado et al (2015). Values of TILs count were log2
transformed (values with 0% were removed from the cohort; n = 1).
Spearman's rank correlation analysis and proportional hazards regression
was used to investigate the relationship and impact in the outcome
between these two markers.Results: The median TIL count was 10%
(interquartile range: 21.25). A total of 59.5% of cases had TILs
Background:The presence of tumor infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) have
been associated with a better outcome in triple negative breast cancer
(TNBC). In the other hand, we have found that CCL5, a chemokine involved
in the recruitment of immune cells to the tumor microenvironment is an
independent prognostic marker for distant-recurrence free survival (DFRS)
in TNBC. The aim of this work was to evaluate the relationship between
these two immunological prognostic markers in chemotherapy-resistant
TNBC.Material and Methods:We evaluated a retrospective cohort (n = 74) of
TNBC patients with residual disease after neoadjuvante chemotherapy.
Residual tumors were profiled with Nanostring for genes previously
related to TNBC aggressiveness. Gene expression values for CCL5 were log2
transformed and median centered. TIL count was performed according to the
methods published by Salgado et al (2015). Values of TILs count were log2
transformed (values with 0% were removed from the cohort; n = 1).
Spearman's rank correlation analysis and proportional hazards regression
was used to investigate the relationship and impact in the outcome
between these two markers.Results: The median TIL count was 10%
(interquartile range: 21.25). A total of 59.5% of cases had TILs <15%.
There was a significant correlation between TILs and CCL5 ( = 0.345, P =
0.032). In univariate analysis (as continuous variable), TILs (HR = 0.968
per unit of change; 95%IC: 0.946-0.990; P = 0.006) and CCL5 (HR = 0.95
per unit of change; 95%IC: 0.635-0.996; P = 0.046) were both associated
with outcome. After adjusting to CCL5 expression, TIL's count, was the
only significant marker with a P-value = 0.007 (HR = 0.702 per unit of
change; 95%IC: 0.54-0.909), in contrast to CCL5 (HR = 0.925,
CI95%:0.717-1,194; P-value = 0.550).Conclusions: TILs and CCL5 gene
expression are significantly correlated in chemotherapy-resistant TNBC.
However, although CCL5 expression is strongly associated with the
progression of BC, particularly TNBC, TIL assessment remains the stronger
and more significant prognostic immunological marker.

