Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BET bromodomain inhibition is a promising treatment strategy for
distinct subsets of lethal castration-resistant prostate cancer


Background: While treatment options for patients with
castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) are expanding, one American
man is still predicted to die every 19 minutes from this disease this
year. Moreover, more widespread use of novel and more potent AR-targeting
agents has led to increased clinical frequency of virulent androgen and
AR-independent CRPC subsets(Small, Huang et al. 2015). Currently, there
are limited treatment options for men with CRPC who are resistant to
these AR-targeting agents, clearly demonstrating an urgent need to
develop more effective therapies for CRPC patients.Recent published
reports demonstrate an important role for BET bromodomain chromatin
reader proteins in prostate cancer models that are androgen or
AR-dependent (Gao, Schwartzman et al. 2013; Wyce, Degenhardt et al. 2013;
Asangani, Dommeti et al. 2014; Chan, Selth et al. 2015). However, there
was limited information about the anti-tumor activity of this class of
drugs in androgen-independent, enzalutamide-resistant, or AR-independent
CRPC models. The studies reported herein were designed to address that
deficit.Methods: We treated a panel of CRPC cell lines with dose
escalation of the BET bromodomain inhibitor JQ1 and measured cell
viability. To clarify molecular mechanisms that contribute to the
anti-tumor effect, we treated CRPC cell lines with JQ1 and measured gene
expression changes with RNA-sequencing. Finally, to determine the
anti-tumor activity of JQ1 in vivo, we implanted enzalutamide resistant
or AR-null CRPC xenografts in immunocompromised mice and treated them
with JQ1.Results: All cell lines were sensitive to JQ1 with similar GI50
values (all Background: While treatment options for patients with
castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) are expanding, one American
man is still predicted to die every 19 minutes from this disease this
year. Moreover, more widespread use of novel and more potent AR-targeting
agents has led to increased clinical frequency of virulent androgen and
AR-independent CRPC subsets(Small, Huang et al. 2015). Currently, there
are limited treatment options for men with CRPC who are resistant to
these AR-targeting agents, clearly demonstrating an urgent need to
develop more effective therapies for CRPC patients.Recent published
reports demonstrate an important role for BET bromodomain chromatin
reader proteins in prostate cancer models that are androgen or
AR-dependent (Gao, Schwartzman et al. 2013; Wyce, Degenhardt et al. 2013;
Asangani, Dommeti et al. 2014; Chan, Selth et al. 2015). However, there
was limited information about the anti-tumor activity of this class of
drugs in androgen-independent, enzalutamide-resistant, or AR-independent
CRPC models. The studies reported herein were designed to address that
deficit.Methods: We treated a panel of CRPC cell lines with dose
escalation of the BET bromodomain inhibitor JQ1 and measured cell
viability. To clarify molecular mechanisms that contribute to the
anti-tumor effect, we treated CRPC cell lines with JQ1 and measured gene
expression changes with RNA-sequencing. Finally, to determine the
anti-tumor activity of JQ1 in vivo, we implanted enzalutamide resistant
or AR-null CRPC xenografts in immunocompromised mice and treated them
with JQ1.Results: All cell lines were sensitive to JQ1 with similar GI50
values (all < 1M). Our analysis of RNA-seq data after JQ1 treatment
identified a BET bromodomain response signature that was conserved across
the population of cell lines. Further, we applied Virtual Inference of
Protein-activity by Enriched Regulon (VIPER) analysis to identify novel
Master Regulator transcription factors that mediate response to
JQ1(Aytes, Mitrofanova et al. 2014). Finally, JQ1 treatment of
enzalutamide resistant or AR-null CRPC xenografts implanted in vivo
suppressed tumor growth without appreciable toxicity.Conclusions: BET
bromodomain inhibition is a promising treatment strategy for distinct
subsets of lethal CRPC. Our work using a broad panel of CRPC models sheds
further light on pharmacodynamic markers of response and target proteins
whose function is impacted by BET bromodomain inhibition. These findings
may have implications for the design of BET bromodomain inhibitor
clinical trials in men with CRPC and interpretation of on-target effects
in those trials.

