Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: GEP100-Arf6 pathway enhanced by Grb2 expression plays important
roles for node-metastasis of lung cancer


BACKGROUNDInvasive and metastatic activities are the most challenging
hallmark of cancer in clinical settings. Our previous reports have shown
that GEP100 activates Arf6 by its binding to activated ErbB family
receptors, such as EGFR. They also have revealed the phosphorylation at
specific tyrosines in the C-terminal EGFR is necessary for the binding to
the plekstrin homology (PH) domain of GEP100, which tyrosines are well
known to be Grb2-binding sites as well. Additionally, this GEP100-Arf6
signal pathway is pivotal for epithelio-mesenchymal transition (EMT)
leading to invasion and metastasis in various types of tumors. Here we
have examined the augmentation effect of Grb2 on the binding of GEP100
with EGFR and the Arf6 activation. Furthermore, the significance of
co-expression of Grb2 and GEP100 in clinical settings was
analyzedMATERIALS AND METHODSGST-tagged proteins including PH domain of
GEP100 or SH2/SH3 domain of Grb2 inserted into pGEX vector were expressed
in bacteria with glutathione-beads purification. They were used for the
mutual binding assays. A549 cells which HA-Grb2 or HA alone vector was
transfected, were starved for 18hours and stimulated with EGF. And, their
lysates were applied for the immunoprecipitation assay against GEP100.
Then, Arf6 activities of these cells were examined using the pulldown
assay with GST-tagged GGA protein. Furthermore the in vitro invasive
activities of those cells were measured by Matrigel invasion assays. The
expression levels of Grb2 and GEP100 of the tumor cells by
immunohistochemical staining methods were examined in resected human lung
adenocarcinoma specimens. The expression data of the two molecules
integrated with their clinicopathological factors and EMT status
information previously published were analyzed with regard to their
invasive and metastatic activities.RESULTSOur results revealed that
endogenous Grb2 was immunoprecipitaed with GEP100. These two molecules
were physically associated through the PH domain of GEP100 and both the
SH2 and N-terminal SH3 domain of Grb2, not its C-terminal SH3 domain.
Exogenously aberrant expression of Grb2 in A549 lung cancer cells
enhanced the association between activated EGFR and GEP100, consequently,
Arf6 activation, and in vitro invasive activity, according to the
expression level of Grb2. Among 239 lung adenocarcinoma specimens on
tissue microarrays, 131 (55%) and 65 (27%) cases of patients were
positive for Grb2 and GEP100, respectively. Tumors with double-positive
for Grb2 and GEP100 (45 cases) showed significantly more aggressive EMT
status (p = 0.0116) and higher node-metastatic potential (p = 0.0082,
node-positive/negative; 12/33 to 7/77) than the double-negative one (84
cases).CONCLUSIONGrb2 augments the binding of GEP100 to EGFR leading to
Arf6 activation, and promotes lung cancer invasion and metastasis via
GEP100-Arf6 pathway.

