Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Co-injection of human fibroblasts significantly enhances
tumorigenicity of orthotopically implanted human non-small cell lung
cancer cells in immunocompromised mice


Human tumor xenografts in immunodeficient mice have led to valuable
insights into the biology of human cancer. The corresponding limitations
and pitfalls of xenograft models have been described extensively. To
tackle some limitations, we supplemented the murine tumor
microenvironment (TME) with human stromal fibroblasts to mirror
tumor-stroma cross-talk in vivo.Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cell
lines Calu-1 and H1437 were co-injected with different types of
fibroblasts into NOG (NOD.Cg-Prkdcscid Il2rgtm1Wjl/SzJ) mice in 3
independent experiments (n = 4-6/group; 106 in total). Human Dermal
Fibroblasts (HDFs), lung cancer associated fibroblasts (CAFs),
corresponding normal fibroblasts (NFs) and NSCLC cells were implanted
into the lungs of 4-6 week old recipient mice. The influence of
extracellular matrix components was evaluated by using either a
matrigel/collagen mixture or alginate capsules. Tumor load was determined
via overall survival (OS) and flow cytometry (FC). When mice had to be
sacrificed, organs were collected and analyzed by FC and
patho-histological examination. In a subsequent experiment, mice were
sacrificed and tumors analyzed at defined time points and similar
analyses performed.OS and metastatic pattern were similar in both cell
lines when injected in mono-culture. OS of Calu-1 injected mice was not
influenced when cells were co-injected with HDF but prolonged when
co-injected with CAFs or NFs. In H1437 bearing mice, OS was significantly
reduced when cells were co-injected with HDF or NF (Log-rank [Mantel-cox]
test; pHuman tumor xenografts in immunodeficient mice have led to
valuable insights into the biology of human cancer. The corresponding
limitations and pitfalls of xenograft models have been described
extensively. To tackle some limitations, we supplemented the murine tumor
microenvironment (TME) with human stromal fibroblasts to mirror
tumor-stroma cross-talk in vivo.Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cell
lines Calu-1 and H1437 were co-injected with different types of
fibroblasts into NOG (NOD.Cg-Prkdcscid Il2rgtm1Wjl/SzJ) mice in 3
independent experiments (n = 4-6/group; 106 in total). Human Dermal
Fibroblasts (HDFs), lung cancer associated fibroblasts (CAFs),
corresponding normal fibroblasts (NFs) and NSCLC cells were implanted
into the lungs of 4-6 week old recipient mice. The influence of
extracellular matrix components was evaluated by using either a
matrigel/collagen mixture or alginate capsules. Tumor load was determined
via overall survival (OS) and flow cytometry (FC). When mice had to be
sacrificed, organs were collected and analyzed by FC and
patho-histological examination. In a subsequent experiment, mice were
sacrificed and tumors analyzed at defined time points and similar
analyses performed.OS and metastatic pattern were similar in both cell
lines when injected in mono-culture. OS of Calu-1 injected mice was not
influenced when cells were co-injected with HDF but prolonged when
co-injected with CAFs or NFs. In H1437 bearing mice, OS was significantly
reduced when cells were co-injected with HDF or NF (Log-rank [Mantel-cox]
test; p< 0.002 & 0.005), whereas CAFs had no influence on OS.
Co-injection of HDF and Calu-1 enhanced the number of tumor cells in
bronchoalveolar lavage fluid, whereas CAFs had the opposite effect (1way
ANOVA for all following statistics, pHuman tumor xenografts in
immunodeficient mice have led to valuable insights into the biology of
human cancer. The corresponding limitations and pitfalls of xenograft
models have been described extensively. To tackle some limitations, we
supplemented the murine tumor microenvironment (TME) with human stromal
fibroblasts to mirror tumor-stroma cross-talk in vivo.Non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) cell lines Calu-1 and H1437 were co-injected with
different types of fibroblasts into NOG (NOD.Cg-Prkdcscid
Il2rgtm1Wjl/SzJ) mice in 3 independent experiments (n = 4-6/group; 106 in
total). Human Dermal Fibroblasts (HDFs), lung cancer associated
fibroblasts (CAFs), corresponding normal fibroblasts (NFs) and NSCLC
cells were implanted into the lungs of 4-6 week old recipient mice. The
influence of extracellular matrix components was evaluated by using
either a matrigel/collagen mixture or alginate capsules. Tumor load was
determined via overall survival (OS) and flow cytometry (FC). When mice
had to be sacrificed, organs were collected and analyzed by FC and
patho-histological examination. In a subsequent experiment, mice were
sacrificed and tumors analyzed at defined time points and similar
analyses performed.OS and metastatic pattern were similar in both cell
lines when injected in mono-culture. OS of Calu-1 injected mice was not
influenced when cells were co-injected with HDF but prolonged when
co-injected with CAFs or NFs. In H1437 bearing mice, OS was significantly
reduced when cells were co-injected with HDF or NF (Log-rank [Mantel-cox]
test; p< 0.002 & 0.005), whereas CAFs had no influence on OS.
Co-injection of HDF and Calu-1 enhanced the number of tumor cells in
bronchoalveolar lavage fluid, whereas CAFs had the opposite effect (1way
ANOVA for all following statistics, p< 0.0001). Consistently, the number
of circulating Calu-1 cells was highest in co-culture with HDF and
significantly lower in mice bearing Calu-1 and CAF or NF (pHuman tumor
xenografts in immunodeficient mice have led to valuable insights into the
biology of human cancer. The corresponding limitations and pitfalls of
xenograft models have been described extensively. To tackle some
limitations, we supplemented the murine tumor microenvironment (TME) with
human stromal fibroblasts to mirror tumor-stroma cross-talk in
vivo.Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cell lines Calu-1 and H1437 were
co-injected with different types of fibroblasts into NOG
(NOD.Cg-Prkdcscid Il2rgtm1Wjl/SzJ) mice in 3 independent experiments (n =
4-6/group; 106 in total). Human Dermal Fibroblasts (HDFs), lung cancer
associated fibroblasts (CAFs), corresponding normal fibroblasts (NFs) and
NSCLC cells were implanted into the lungs of 4-6 week old recipient mice.
The influence of extracellular matrix components was evaluated by using
either a matrigel/collagen mixture or alginate capsules. Tumor load was
determined via overall survival (OS) and flow cytometry (FC). When mice
had to be sacrificed, organs were collected and analyzed by FC and
patho-histological examination. In a subsequent experiment, mice were
sacrificed and tumors analyzed at defined time points and similar
analyses performed.OS and metastatic pattern were similar in both cell
lines when injected in mono-culture. OS of Calu-1 injected mice was not
influenced when cells were co-injected with HDF but prolonged when
co-injected with CAFs or NFs. In H1437 bearing mice, OS was significantly
reduced when cells were co-injected with HDF or NF (Log-rank [Mantel-cox]
test; p< 0.002 & 0.005), whereas CAFs had no influence on OS.
Co-injection of HDF and Calu-1 enhanced the number of tumor cells in
bronchoalveolar lavage fluid, whereas CAFs had the opposite effect (1way
ANOVA for all following statistics, p< 0.0001). Consistently, the number
of circulating Calu-1 cells was highest in co-culture with HDF and
significantly lower in mice bearing Calu-1 and CAF or NF (p<0.0021).
Co-injection of fibroblasts enhanced the H1437 tumor load in all
compartments. Of note, the effect was not statistically significant. The
use of alginate capsules was favorable compared to matrigel/collagen,
improving fibroblast engraftment in all investigated organs. Furthermore,
alginate capsules enhanced the number of circulating H1437 cells when
co-injected with HDF as compared to matrigel/collagen (pHuman tumor
xenografts in immunodeficient mice have led to valuable insights into the
biology of human cancer. The corresponding limitations and pitfalls of
xenograft models have been described extensively. To tackle some
limitations, we supplemented the murine tumor microenvironment (TME) with
human stromal fibroblasts to mirror tumor-stroma cross-talk in
vivo.Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cell lines Calu-1 and H1437 were
co-injected with different types of fibroblasts into NOG
(NOD.Cg-Prkdcscid Il2rgtm1Wjl/SzJ) mice in 3 independent experiments (n =
4-6/group; 106 in total). Human Dermal Fibroblasts (HDFs), lung cancer
associated fibroblasts (CAFs), corresponding normal fibroblasts (NFs) and
NSCLC cells were implanted into the lungs of 4-6 week old recipient mice.
The influence of extracellular matrix components was evaluated by using
either a matrigel/collagen mixture or alginate capsules. Tumor load was
determined via overall survival (OS) and flow cytometry (FC). When mice
had to be sacrificed, organs were collected and analyzed by FC and
patho-histological examination. In a subsequent experiment, mice were
sacrificed and tumors analyzed at defined time points and similar
analyses performed.OS and metastatic pattern were similar in both cell
lines when injected in mono-culture. OS of Calu-1 injected mice was not
influenced when cells were co-injected with HDF but prolonged when
co-injected with CAFs or NFs. In H1437 bearing mice, OS was significantly
reduced when cells were co-injected with HDF or NF (Log-rank [Mantel-cox]
test; p< 0.002 & 0.005), whereas CAFs had no influence on OS.
Co-injection of HDF and Calu-1 enhanced the number of tumor cells in
bronchoalveolar lavage fluid, whereas CAFs had the opposite effect (1way
ANOVA for all following statistics, p< 0.0001). Consistently, the number
of circulating Calu-1 cells was highest in co-culture with HDF and
significantly lower in mice bearing Calu-1 and CAF or NF (p<0.0021).
Co-injection of fibroblasts enhanced the H1437 tumor load in all
compartments. Of note, the effect was not statistically significant. The
use of alginate capsules was favorable compared to matrigel/collagen,
improving fibroblast engraftment in all investigated organs. Furthermore,
alginate capsules enhanced the number of circulating H1437 cells when
co-injected with HDF as compared to matrigel/collagen (p<0.0001).Our
results demonstrate the major impact of fibroblasts on tumor cell
behavior in a preclinical setting. With the successful co-cultivation of
human fibroblast and NSCLC cells in vivo, it will be possible to study
tumor-stroma interactions in a clinically relevant mouse model. Once
validated by a compound screening approach, this model will help to
reduce drug failure rates and contribute to a more efficient development
of urgently needed novel anti-cancer treatments.

