Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of the MSC-derived exosomal and endogenous
JAK2-SET/PP2A--catenin-modulator miR-300 in leukemic stem/progenitor
proliferation and survival in CML


MiR-300 is a microRNA predicted to target multiple components of the
BCR-ABL1/JAK2/hnRNPA1/SET/PP2A/-catenin pathway, which is essential for
survival/self-renewal of leukemic progenitors and quiescent TKI-resistant
Ph+ hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs). Nanostring arrays analysis of bone
marrow (BM) cells from healthy individuals (n = 5) and CML patients (n =
10) showed gradual inhibition of miR-300 expression
(CML-CPmiR-300>CML-BCmiR-300).MiR-300 transduction in CMLCD34+ cells and
BCR-ABL1+ cell lines decreased JAK2, -catenin, hnRNPA1 and SET expression
and increased PP2A activity. Targets were confirmed by miR-300 expression
in BCR-ABL1+ cells expressing Flag-tagged miR-300-targets lacking or
carrying a wild-type or mutated 3UTR. Restored miR-300 expression in
CMLCD34+ cells and/or BCR-ABL1+ cell lines impaired proliferation and
clonogenic potential, markedly reduced LTC-ICs, and increased TKI
sensitivity. Notably, miR-300 expression was inhibited by BCR-ABL1 in
proliferating cells. Accordingly, imatinib restored miR-300 expression in
CD34+ dividing progenitors and BCR-ABL1+ cell lines without altering
miR-300 levels in quiescent (CFSEMAX) CMLCD34+ cells (n = 3), consistent
with the BCR-ABL1 kinase-dependent activation of the
Jak2/SET/PP2A/-catenin pathway in CML progenitors but not quiescent Ph+
HSCs. Surprisingly, miR-300 levels were increased in CD34+CD38- compared
to CD34+CD38+ CML cells, and >20-fold higher in CFSEMAX compared to
dividing CMLCD34+ cells (n = 4).To determine whether enhanced miR-300
expression in quiescent cells depends on cell autonomous events or is
induced by the BM microenvironment, we exposed BCR-ABL+ cells to
conditioned medium (CM) of HS-5 or hTERT mesenchymal stem cells (MSC). CM
strongly decreased proliferation, induced imatinib but not FTY720 (PP2A
activator) resistance, increased miR-300 levels, decreased BCR-ABL1
activity and Jak2 expression but not its activity, and did not alter
-catenin levels or PP2A activity. Interestingly, miR-300 was found in
MSC-derived exosomes, and its expression increased in BCR-ABL1+ cells
exposed to exosomes. Accordingly, proliferation of CML-BCCD34+and LAMA-84
cells was strongly reduced upon exposure to MSC-derived exosomes. These
effects were abolished when we used CM from MSCs transduced with a
miR-300 antagomir.Altogether our results indicate that downregulation of
miR-300 appears necessary for the activation of JAK2/SET/PP2A/-catenin
survival signals in CML progenitors. Conversely, increased miR-300 levels
(endogenous and MSC-derived) seem to be required for HSC quiescence.

