Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prognostic value of circulating tumor DNA in advanced colorectal
cancer patients: quantification of hypermethylated or mutant sequences
using picoliter-droplet digital PCR


Background: Circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA) has been suggested as a new
marker in different cancer types including colorectal cancer (CRC). Its
prognostic role needs to be validated in prospective clinical studies
using precise and robust procedures. In this context, picoliter-droplet
digital PCR has arisen as a highly sensitive and quantitative approach
offering a broad dynamic range of detection.Patients and methods: All
consecutive advanced CRC patients receiving first-line chemotherapy were
included in this monocentric prospective study. Plasma samples were
collected before the 1st cycle of chemotherapy, then at 14 and 28 days
after the beginning of the chemotherapy. Both, carcinoembryonic antigen
(CEA) dosages and computed tomography (CT) were performed at baseline and
every 8 weeks. For each patient, tumor DNA from biopsies was tested for
the presence of KRAS, BRAF and TP53 mutations either by conventional qPCR
or Next-Generation Sequencing. When no mutation was identified in the
tumor, ctDNA was screened for hypermethylated sequences of WIF1 and NPY
genes. CtDNA sequences (mutated or hypermethylated) were quantified
(concentration, ng/mL) using picoliter-droplet digital PCR coupled to
Taqman probes. Associations of ctDNA concentration with progression-free
survival (PFS) and overall survival (OS) were analysed using a Cox
proportional hazards model. Multivariate models were adjusted on age,
gender, Kohne's score, CEA and type of genetic alteration.Results: Up to
now 43 patients were included (mean age: 661.8years [62.6-69.6], gender
ratio: M/F 1.15). At baseline ctDNA was detectable in 38/43 (88%)
patients based on KRAS, BRAF or TP53 mutation (n = 27), or
hypermethylation of the WIF1 or NPY genes (n = 16). Values ranged from 0
to 208 ng/mL, mean and median ctDNA concentration were 12.7 ng/mL and
2.05 ng/mL, respectively. After adjustment on prognostic covariates, the
concentration of baseline ctDNA was significantly positively associated
with a worse PFS (HR: 1.01 CI95% [1-1.02]; padj = 0.03) and OS (HR: 1.02
CI95% [1.01-1.035] padj = 0.004). The median PFS were 8.6 and 2.3 months
in patients with less or more than 5 ng/mL of baseline ctDNA,
respectively (HR: 6.7, CI95% 2-22; padj = 0.001). When ctDNA
concentration was considered at 14 or 28 days, patients with a ctDNA 0.2
ng /mL have a significantly worse PFS (HR: 4.12 CI95% [1.41-12.0]; padj =
0.009) than the others independently of the baseline concentration of
ctDNA.Conclusion: This study suggests that ctDNA is a strong prognostic
factor highlighting the clinical relevance of quantifying circulating
tumor DNA by picoliter-droplet digital PCR in first-line advanced
colorectal cancer treatment.

