Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DNA methylation age is accelerated in breast tissue of healthy
women donors


Background: Advanced age and cumulative estrogen exposure are well known
risk factors for breast cancer. However, the mechanisms underlying the
link between cellular senescence, chronic estrogen stimulation, increased
cell cycling, and breast carcinogenesis are poorly understood. We
examined epigenetic alterations that occur in the female breast with
advancing age, and estrogen exposure.Methods: We utilized specimens from
49 women healthy tissue donors from the Komen Tissue Bank who donated
both breast tissue and peripheral blood at two time points spaced at
least 2 years apart. Ages of the donors ranged from 18-65 years and they
were grouped by menopausal status (27 pre- and and 22 post-menopausal)
and parity (21 nulliparous). We assessed epigenome-wide DNA methylation
levels (Illumina 450K platform) from DNA extracted from breast and blood
tissue, and calculated tissue DNA methylation age (DNAm age) based on
methylation levels at 353 CpGs that have been shown to strongly correlate
with chronologic age across tissues. We examined the relationship between
this outcome and age and variables related to cumulative estrogen
exposure, including age at menarche, gravidity, parity, and menopausal
status.Results: DNAm age was highly correlated with chronological age in
our sample (cor = 0.8, pBackground: Advanced age and cumulative estrogen
exposure are well known risk factors for breast cancer. However, the
mechanisms underlying the link between cellular senescence, chronic
estrogen stimulation, increased cell cycling, and breast carcinogenesis
are poorly understood. We examined epigenetic alterations that occur in
the female breast with advancing age, and estrogen exposure.Methods: We
utilized specimens from 49 women healthy tissue donors from the Komen
Tissue Bank who donated both breast tissue and peripheral blood at two
time points spaced at least 2 years apart. Ages of the donors ranged from
18-65 years and they were grouped by menopausal status (27 pre- and and
22 post-menopausal) and parity (21 nulliparous). We assessed
epigenome-wide DNA methylation levels (Illumina 450K platform) from DNA
extracted from breast and blood tissue, and calculated tissue DNA
methylation age (DNAm age) based on methylation levels at 353 CpGs that
have been shown to strongly correlate with chronologic age across
tissues. We examined the relationship between this outcome and age and
variables related to cumulative estrogen exposure, including age at
menarche, gravidity, parity, and menopausal status.Results: DNAm age was
highly correlated with chronological age in our sample (cor = 0.8,
p<0.001), within both peripheral blood (cor = 0.94, pBackground: Advanced
age and cumulative estrogen exposure are well known risk factors for
breast cancer. However, the mechanisms underlying the link between
cellular senescence, chronic estrogen stimulation, increased cell
cycling, and breast carcinogenesis are poorly understood. We examined
epigenetic alterations that occur in the female breast with advancing
age, and estrogen exposure.Methods: We utilized specimens from 49 women
healthy tissue donors from the Komen Tissue Bank who donated both breast
tissue and peripheral blood at two time points spaced at least 2 years
apart. Ages of the donors ranged from 18-65 years and they were grouped
by menopausal status (27 pre- and and 22 post-menopausal) and parity (21
nulliparous). We assessed epigenome-wide DNA methylation levels (Illumina
450K platform) from DNA extracted from breast and blood tissue, and
calculated tissue DNA methylation age (DNAm age) based on methylation
levels at 353 CpGs that have been shown to strongly correlate with
chronologic age across tissues. We examined the relationship between this
outcome and age and variables related to cumulative estrogen exposure,
including age at menarche, gravidity, parity, and menopausal
status.Results: DNAm age was highly correlated with chronological age in
our sample (cor = 0.8, p<0.001), within both peripheral blood (cor =
0.94, p<0.001) and breast tissues (cor = 0.88, pBackground: Advanced age
and cumulative estrogen exposure are well known risk factors for breast
cancer. However, the mechanisms underlying the link between cellular
senescence, chronic estrogen stimulation, increased cell cycling, and
breast carcinogenesis are poorly understood. We examined epigenetic
alterations that occur in the female breast with advancing age, and
estrogen exposure.Methods: We utilized specimens from 49 women healthy
tissue donors from the Komen Tissue Bank who donated both breast tissue
and peripheral blood at two time points spaced at least 2 years apart.
Ages of the donors ranged from 18-65 years and they were grouped by
menopausal status (27 pre- and and 22 post-menopausal) and parity (21
nulliparous). We assessed epigenome-wide DNA methylation levels (Illumina
450K platform) from DNA extracted from breast and blood tissue, and
calculated tissue DNA methylation age (DNAm age) based on methylation
levels at 353 CpGs that have been shown to strongly correlate with
chronologic age across tissues. We examined the relationship between this
outcome and age and variables related to cumulative estrogen exposure,
including age at menarche, gravidity, parity, and menopausal
status.Results: DNAm age was highly correlated with chronological age in
our sample (cor = 0.8, p<0.001), within both peripheral blood (cor =
0.94, p<0.001) and breast tissues (cor = 0.88, p<0.001). When we examine
the residuals for each sample from our regression analysis of DNAm age
versus chronological age, we find that age acceleration is significantly
increased in breast relative to peripheral blood tissue (pBackground:
Advanced age and cumulative estrogen exposure are well known risk factors
for breast cancer. However, the mechanisms underlying the link between
cellular senescence, chronic estrogen stimulation, increased cell
cycling, and breast carcinogenesis are poorly understood. We examined
epigenetic alterations that occur in the female breast with advancing
age, and estrogen exposure.Methods: We utilized specimens from 49 women
healthy tissue donors from the Komen Tissue Bank who donated both breast
tissue and peripheral blood at two time points spaced at least 2 years
apart. Ages of the donors ranged from 18-65 years and they were grouped
by menopausal status (27 pre- and and 22 post-menopausal) and parity (21
nulliparous). We assessed epigenome-wide DNA methylation levels (Illumina
450K platform) from DNA extracted from breast and blood tissue, and
calculated tissue DNA methylation age (DNAm age) based on methylation
levels at 353 CpGs that have been shown to strongly correlate with
chronologic age across tissues. We examined the relationship between this
outcome and age and variables related to cumulative estrogen exposure,
including age at menarche, gravidity, parity, and menopausal
status.Results: DNAm age was highly correlated with chronological age in
our sample (cor = 0.8, p<0.001), within both peripheral blood (cor =
0.94, p<0.001) and breast tissues (cor = 0.88, p<0.001). When we examine
the residuals for each sample from our regression analysis of DNAm age
versus chronological age, we find that age acceleration is significantly
increased in breast relative to peripheral blood tissue (p<0.001). In a
multivariate regression analysis, we found that earlier age at menarche (
= -0.62, p = 0.04) and higher gravidity ( = 0.95, p = 0.03) were
associated with higher DNAm age.Conclusions: We find that DNAm age is
accelerated in breast tissue compared with peripheral blood cells in a
population of healthy donors to the Komen Tissue Bank. We further note a
significant association between DNAm age and early menarche, and rising
number of pregnancies, suggesting that cumulative cell cycling with
menstrual cycles and the tissue plasticity occurring with pregnancy may
contribute to accelerated epigenetic age in the female breast.

