Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Non-invasive assessment of prostate-specific membrane antigen
(PSMA) expression as a prognostic marker in men with metastatic
castration-resistant prostate cancer (mCRPC)


Background: PSMA is nearly universally expressed by PC, has a correlation
with androgen receptor (AR) pathway dysregulation, and some studies have
pointed towards PSMA expression as a prognostic marker. Non-invasive
measurement of PSMA expression may be biomarker of AR activity in animal
models.[Evans et al, PNAS 2011] Anti-PSMA monoclonal antibody J591 has
been utilized both for imaging as well as therapeutics and we have
published semi-quantitative scoring in the setting of therapeutic
clinical trials.Methods: Patients with mCRPC underwent planar gamma
camera imaging following radiolabeled (RL) J591 injection (177Lu- or
111In-J591). RL-J591 images were semi-quantitatively scored using a
5-point visual score (VS) system [Tagawa et al, Clin Cancer Res 2013].
Overall survival (OS) was calculated from the date of imaging to death or
last follow up. As several life-prolonging treatments (docetaxel,
sipuleucel-T, cabazitaxel, abiraterone (Abi), enzalutamide (Enza),
radium-223) became available during the study time period, treatment
following RL-J591 imaging was recorded and used in multivariate
analysis.Results: Between 2000 and 2015, 165 patients with mCRPC were
imaged following RL-J591 and semi-quantitatively scored for PSMA
expression by VS. Baseline demographics included median age of 71.3 years
(44.5-85.9); bone metastases present in 86.7%, 52.7% with LN mets, 17%
with lung mets, 7.9% with liver mets, 1.8% other mets. Fifty three
(32.2%) had low PSMA expression by imaging (VS 0-1) and 112 (67.8%) had
high PSMA expression (VS 2-5). Post RL-J591 imaging, 41.2% (68/165)
patients received life prolonging therapy, including taxane chemotherapy
(33.9%), Abi/Enza (14.5%), sipuleucel-T (1.2%), or radium-223 (1.2%). At
last follow up 12.7% (21/165) patients were alive. Median OS was 22.6
months in patients with low PSMA expression and 16.6 mo with high PSMA
expression (P = 0.07). Those with subsequent receipt of life prolonging
therapy had OS of 23.6 months vs 14.3 mo (P = 0.002). On multivariable
analysis controlling for life prolonging therapy, higher PSMA expression
by imaging was a significant predictor for poorer OS (adjusted hazard
ratio = 1.60; 95% CI = 1.10, 2.31; P = 0.01).Conclusion: Non-invasive
measurement of PSMA expression may be evaluated on a semi-quantitative
basis via planar imaging. The level of PSMA expression is inversely
associated with survival when controlling for receipt of known
life-prolonging therapy. With the introduction of newer quantitative
molecular imaging (i.e. PET), quantitative PSMA imaging may prove to be a
useful prognostic tool.

