Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Neutralization of BCL2/XL enhances the cytotoxicity of T-DM1 in
vivo


One of the most recent advances in the treatment of HER2+ breast cancer
is the development of the antibody-drug conjugate, T-DM1, composed of
trastuzumab (T) linked to the cytotoxic maytansinoid (DM1). T-DM1 has
proven clinical benefits for patients with advanced and/or metastatic
breast cancer who have progressed on prior HER2-targeted therapies.
However, T-DM1 resistance ultimately occurs and represents a major
obstacle in the effective treatment of this disease. We previously
identified BCL2 upregulation as a critical component and biomarker of the
adaptive response to inhibition of PI3K/mTOR or HER2, and thus examined
whether BCL2/XL combinatorial strategies could improve the initial
efficacy of T-DM1. Here, we demonstrate that combined inhibition of
BCL2/XL plus T-DM1 significantly enhances the cytotoxicity of T-DM1 in
vivo. The effectiveness of T-DM1 plus BCL2/XL inhibition was evaluated in
two patient-derived xenograft (PDX) models of advanced HER2+ER- resistant
disease (PDX8;PDX12). Animals were randomized into one of four groups:
T-DM1, ABT-737, T-DM1 + ABT-737 or vehicles. Our initial results after a
14d treatment period indicate that combined treatment with T-DM1 and
ABT-737, the dual BCL2/XL inhibitor, confers an exceptional tumor cell
cytotoxic advantage characterized by widespread elimination of the tumor
cells. To evaluate whether ABT-263, the clinically relevant BCL2/XL
inhibitor, mimics ABT-737, we randomized animals into one of four groups:
T-DM1, ABT-263, T-DM1 + ABT-263 or vehicles. To minimize thrombocytopenia
that is induced by ABT-263, we included a fifth group that received
pulsed treatment of ABT-263 + T-DM1. Notably, unlike continuous
treatment, pulsed administration of ABT-263 reduced weight loss to
vehicle levels and allowed recovery of platelets. Evaluation of
pathological responses by H&E staining indicated that T-DM1 + ABT-263
mimics T-DM1 + ABT-737. To better distinguish tumor cells from stromal
elements, we used epithelial membrane antigen IHC to specifically
visualize tumor cells and Trichrome stain to visualize stromal content
and scored the tissue sections blindly. ABT-263 had no observable effect.
T-DM1 induced a 38.75% and 20% average reduction in tumor cell content in
the two PDX models, whereas the combined treatment caused a 74% and 54%
average reduction after the 14d treatment period. The loss of tumor cell
content was associated with an increased stromal reaction at the tumor
bed. T-DM1 treated tumors contained 27.5% and 47.5% average stromal
content, whereas combination treated tumors contained 86% and 85.6%
average stromal content. Importantly, T-DM1 + pulsed ABT-263 elicited a
similar response as continuous treatment in the PDX8 model, but was not
as effective in PDX12. The dramatic improvement in tumor regression
observed in these preclinical studies, together with the safety benefits
of modified dosing of ABT-263, provides substantial rationale for the
clinical investigation of this drug combination.

