Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Functional effects of MutL homolog 1 promoter polymorphism in
prostate cancer


The mutL homolog (MLH1) gene protects the integrity of the genome by
correcting erroneous insertions, deletions and mismatches that occur
during DNA replication. Proper MLH1 expression is thus essential for the
health of the cell and deficiency can result in mutation and genomic
instability, which ultimately may lead to cancer. Polymorphisms in the
promoter region can lead to altered gene expression and we tested the
hypothesis that MLH1 promoter variants can affect levels as well as be a
risk for prostatic cancer. Two polymorphic sites were analyzed, rs1800734
(A to G) and rs4647203 (G to A). A luciferase reporter construct
containing the MLH1 promoter region was utilized and site-directed
mutagenesis was performed to create rs1800734 and rs4647203 variants.
Activity was tested using DU145, PC3 and LNCaP prostatic cells and
interestingly, the rs1800734 G variant resulted in significantly
decreased luciferase levels in all three cell lines compared to A (PThe
mutL homolog (MLH1) gene protects the integrity of the genome by
correcting erroneous insertions, deletions and mismatches that occur
during DNA replication. Proper MLH1 expression is thus essential for the
health of the cell and deficiency can result in mutation and genomic
instability, which ultimately may lead to cancer. Polymorphisms in the
promoter region can lead to altered gene expression and we tested the
hypothesis that MLH1 promoter variants can affect levels as well as be a
risk for prostatic cancer. Two polymorphic sites were analyzed, rs1800734
(A to G) and rs4647203 (G to A). A luciferase reporter construct
containing the MLH1 promoter region was utilized and site-directed
mutagenesis was performed to create rs1800734 and rs4647203 variants.
Activity was tested using DU145, PC3 and LNCaP prostatic cells and
interestingly, the rs1800734 G variant resulted in significantly
decreased luciferase levels in all three cell lines compared to A
(P<0.01). No difference however, was seen for the rs4647203 variant. To
determine whether rs1800734 can affect clinical expression levels, benign
prostatic hyperplasia specimens were evaluated for MLH1 expression by
immunohistochemistry. A significantly lower H score was observed for the
GG genotype compared to AA (PThe mutL homolog (MLH1) gene protects the
integrity of the genome by correcting erroneous insertions, deletions and
mismatches that occur during DNA replication. Proper MLH1 expression is
thus essential for the health of the cell and deficiency can result in
mutation and genomic instability, which ultimately may lead to cancer.
Polymorphisms in the promoter region can lead to altered gene expression
and we tested the hypothesis that MLH1 promoter variants can affect
levels as well as be a risk for prostatic cancer. Two polymorphic sites
were analyzed, rs1800734 (A to G) and rs4647203 (G to A). A luciferase
reporter construct containing the MLH1 promoter region was utilized and
site-directed mutagenesis was performed to create rs1800734 and rs4647203
variants. Activity was tested using DU145, PC3 and LNCaP prostatic cells
and interestingly, the rs1800734 G variant resulted in significantly
decreased luciferase levels in all three cell lines compared to A
(P<0.01). No difference however, was seen for the rs4647203 variant. To
determine whether rs1800734 can affect clinical expression levels, benign
prostatic hyperplasia specimens were evaluated for MLH1 expression by
immunohistochemistry. A significantly lower H score was observed for the
GG genotype compared to AA (P<0.01). To further explore the clinical
relevance of rs1800734, a case-control study was performed using DNA
extracted from normal healthy, BPH, and prostate cancer patients from a
Japanese population by sequence-specific PCR and sequencing. Results of
experiments showed a trend for the variant G allele to be associated with
prostate cancer when compared to normal controls (PThe mutL homolog
(MLH1) gene protects the integrity of the genome by correcting erroneous
insertions, deletions and mismatches that occur during DNA replication.
Proper MLH1 expression is thus essential for the health of the cell and
deficiency can result in mutation and genomic instability, which
ultimately may lead to cancer. Polymorphisms in the promoter region can
lead to altered gene expression and we tested the hypothesis that MLH1
promoter variants can affect levels as well as be a risk for prostatic
cancer. Two polymorphic sites were analyzed, rs1800734 (A to G) and
rs4647203 (G to A). A luciferase reporter construct containing the MLH1
promoter region was utilized and site-directed mutagenesis was performed
to create rs1800734 and rs4647203 variants. Activity was tested using
DU145, PC3 and LNCaP prostatic cells and interestingly, the rs1800734 G
variant resulted in significantly decreased luciferase levels in all
three cell lines compared to A (P<0.01). No difference however, was seen
for the rs4647203 variant. To determine whether rs1800734 can affect
clinical expression levels, benign prostatic hyperplasia specimens were
evaluated for MLH1 expression by immunohistochemistry. A significantly
lower H score was observed for the GG genotype compared to AA (P<0.01).
To further explore the clinical relevance of rs1800734, a case-control
study was performed using DNA extracted from normal healthy, BPH, and
prostate cancer patients from a Japanese population by sequence-specific
PCR and sequencing. Results of experiments showed a trend for the variant
G allele to be associated with prostate cancer when compared to normal
controls (P<0.1). However, no differences were observed between BPH and
controls as well as between stages or grades of prostate cancer. The MLH1
promoter polymorphism is thus capable of altering expression and
associated with prostate cancer, and these results are important in
understanding its role in this disease.

