Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PARP3 inhibitors in cancer therapy


Poly-ADP-ribose-polymerase (PARP1) is an important regulator of DNA
damage response (DDR). After induction of certain types of DNA damage,
including nicks and double strand breaks (DSB)s, PARP1 is rapidly
recruited to altered DNA sites were its catalytic activity produces
protein-conjugated long-branched-poly-ADP-ribose (PAR) chains. These
protein modifications result in the recruitment and activation of
multiple proteins involved in DNA repair. Although there is considerable
research describing the characteristics and activity of PARP1/2, there
are 15 other PARP family members that are less well characterized. Of
these PARP3 has been shown to have a distinct role in DNA repair. This
protein has been shown to have a critical role in DSB resolution and to
interact with partner proteins know to function in classical
nonhomologous end joining (NHEJ) such as DNA-PKcs, Ku70, and Ku80.In
order to examine the role of PARP3 vis--vis chemotherapy, we utilized the
specific PARP3 inhibitor, ME-0328 in combination with activated
cyclophosphamide (4HC) in the chronic lymphocytic leukaemia (CLL) cell
lines, MEC1 and MEC2.Results from MTT cytotoxicity assays showed that the
50% inhibitory concentration (IC50) (50% of control) of 4HC in MEC-1
cells was 12.9M. When used in combination with a nontoxic concentration
(2M) of the specific PARP3 inhibitor ME-0328 the IC50 of 4HC was reduced
to 3.3M. In MEC-2 cells the IC50 of 4HC was 10.8M and was reduced to 2.1M
in the presence of ME-0328 at 2M. ABT-888, a specific PARP1/2 inhibitor
in clinical trials had a minimal effect on 4HC cytotoxicity in these cell
lines. 4HC results in interstrand crosslinks (ICLs) which are believed to
be repaired by homologous recombination. Intriguingly, PARP3 negatively
regulates class switch recombination via activation-induced cytidine
deaminase in B-lymphocytes. This may be involved in ME-0328 sensitization
of 4HC in B-lymphocytic malignancies.Given these preliminary results we
hypothesize that the PARP3 inhibitor, ME-0328 will sensitize
B-lymphocytic cancers to chemotherapies. To explore this hypothesis this
project will pursue the following objectives:1. Characterize the
selective sensitization of ME-0328 with 4HC and/or bendamustine (an
ICL-inducing drug utilized in the treatment of B-lymphocyte malignancies)
in B-lymphoma and CLL cell lines plus CLL clinical samples.2. Determine
the mechanisms by which ME-0328 sensitizes CLL cells to 4HC and/or
bendamustine (i.e. reduction of PARP1 or 3 activity and/or altered
activity of known DNA repair proteins (Rad51, DNA-PK, H2AX) and/or
altered activation-induced cytidine deaminase).3. Determine the in-vivo
activity of 4HC and/or bendamustine with or without ME-0328 in a Rag2
/-cc-/- xenograft model using the MEC1-CLL cell line.The inhibition of
PARP3 may increase the sensitivity of tumor cells to DNA damaging
chemotherapies. Our results should stimulate development of specific
PARP3 inhibitors for clinical use.

