Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Patterns of metagene activation in ovarian cancer subtypes


High grade serous ovarian cancer (HGSC) is a complex and aggressive
disease. Recently, three or four gene expression-based subtypes, which
may be differentially associated with survival, have been reported in
several populations. To identify the biological functions that define the
subtypes, we determined the extent to which metageneslinear combinations
of gene expression vectorswere differentially activated across subtypes,
could be reliably identified across populations, and showed consistent
associations with survival.We previously clustered HGSC samples using
gene expression data from TCGA, Tothill (GSE9891), Yoshihara (GSE32062),
and Mayo (GSE74357) to identify subtypes across populations. We found
subtype-specific genes within each population through differential
expression analysis (p High grade serous ovarian cancer (HGSC) is a
complex and aggressive disease. Recently, three or four gene
expression-based subtypes, which may be differentially associated with
survival, have been reported in several populations. To identify the
biological functions that define the subtypes, we determined the extent
to which metageneslinear combinations of gene expression vectorswere
differentially activated across subtypes, could be reliably identified
across populations, and showed consistent associations with survival.We
previously clustered HGSC samples using gene expression data from TCGA,
Tothill (GSE9891), Yoshihara (GSE32062), and Mayo (GSE74357) to identify
subtypes across populations. We found subtype-specific genes within each
population through differential expression analysis (p < 4.610-6). Using
the intersection of differentially expressed genes for parallel subtypes
across these four populations, we applied non-negative matrix
factorization to identify metagenes. To determine whether the metagenes
were consistently observed across populations, we performed
leave-one-dataset-out cross validation. For each metagene, we performed
gene set enrichment analysis against the National Cancer Institute
pathway interaction database to annotate metagene pathways. We examined
whether increasing tertiles of metagene activity, which we termed low,
medium, and high activity, were associated with survival using a random
effects meta-analysis of Cox regression estimates adjusting for age at
diagnosis, tumor stage, tumor grade, and debulking status.Five metagenes
were consistently identified and significantly associated with HGSC
subtypes (p High grade serous ovarian cancer (HGSC) is a complex and
aggressive disease. Recently, three or four gene expression-based
subtypes, which may be differentially associated with survival, have been
reported in several populations. To identify the biological functions
that define the subtypes, we determined the extent to which
metageneslinear combinations of gene expression vectorswere
differentially activated across subtypes, could be reliably identified
across populations, and showed consistent associations with survival.We
previously clustered HGSC samples using gene expression data from TCGA,
Tothill (GSE9891), Yoshihara (GSE32062), and Mayo (GSE74357) to identify
subtypes across populations. We found subtype-specific genes within each
population through differential expression analysis (p < 4.610-6). Using
the intersection of differentially expressed genes for parallel subtypes
across these four populations, we applied non-negative matrix
factorization to identify metagenes. To determine whether the metagenes
were consistently observed across populations, we performed
leave-one-dataset-out cross validation. For each metagene, we performed
gene set enrichment analysis against the National Cancer Institute
pathway interaction database to annotate metagene pathways. We examined
whether increasing tertiles of metagene activity, which we termed low,
medium, and high activity, were associated with survival using a random
effects meta-analysis of Cox regression estimates adjusting for age at
diagnosis, tumor stage, tumor grade, and debulking status.Five metagenes
were consistently identified and significantly associated with HGSC
subtypes (p < 0.0001). Of these, a metagene weakly enriched for the CMYB
pathway was associated with subtype 1; three metagenes (one significantly
enriched with the IL12 pathway and the others weakly enriched with the
FCER1 and CXCR4 pathways) were associated with subtype 2; and a metagene
weakly enriched with the AVB3 Integrin pathway distinguished between all
3 subtypes. Neither the CYMB metagene nor the IL12 metagene was
significantly associated with survival. High activity of the CXCR4 and
AVB3 metagenes was associated with poorer survival (hazard ratios (HR)
and 95% confidence intervals (CI) are, respectively: 1.21, 0.99-1.48 and
1.34, 1.09-1.64). In contrast, high activity of the FCER1 metagene was
associated with improved survival (HR 0.76, 95% CI 0.62-0.93).Metagenes
that are consistently and statistically significantly associated with
subtype may be indicative of functional differences between HGSC
subtypes. The contrast in hazard estimates for metagenes associated with
subtype 2 may indicate that the metagenes capture survival signal
distinct from the subtype association. Future work associating metagene
activity with subtype uncertainty may better enable the refinement of
subtype definitions and the development of subtype specific treatment
strategies.

