Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sleepduration across the adult lifecourse and risk of lung cancer
mortality in Xuanwei, China


Previous studies have implicated sleep duration as a risk factor for
cancer incidence and all-cause mortality. However, to our knowledge, no
study has addressed its relationship to lung cancer mortality among
Chinese populations. Our objective was to evaluate the association
between average sleep hours during various age periods, and risk of lung
cancer mortality in rural Xuanwei, China.Men and women who were born in
1917-1951 and lived in Xuanwei as of Jan 1 1976 were recruited for this
cohort study. A total of 42,421 participants interviewed in 1992
contributed data to this analysis. The exposure was average sleep hours
in the age periods of: 21-30, 31-40, 41-50, and 51-60 years, categorized
as 7, 8 (reference), 9, and 10 hrs/day. The outcome was time to lung
cancer mortality in 1992-2009. Cases diagnosed in the first two years of
follow-up were excluded to avoid reporting bias due to early, undiagnosed
disease. Fine and Gray models with age as the time scale were used to
estimate the hazard ratios (HR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI).
Separate models were performed for each age period, and were adjusted for
hours of indoor activities, respondent, secondary job, education,
ethnicity, number of people and rooms in residence, fuel type and tons
used, ventilation, smoking status and duration in men, mining work in
men, and cooking age in women. Analyses were further stratified by sex
and median age at baseline ( 61 and Previous studies have implicated
sleep duration as a risk factor for cancer incidence and all-cause
mortality. However, to our knowledge, no study has addressed its
relationship to lung cancer mortality among Chinese populations. Our
objective was to evaluate the association between average sleep hours
during various age periods, and risk of lung cancer mortality in rural
Xuanwei, China.Men and women who were born in 1917-1951 and lived in
Xuanwei as of Jan 1 1976 were recruited for this cohort study. A total of
42,421 participants interviewed in 1992 contributed data to this
analysis. The exposure was average sleep hours in the age periods of:
21-30, 31-40, 41-50, and 51-60 years, categorized as 7, 8 (reference), 9,
and 10 hrs/day. The outcome was time to lung cancer mortality in
1992-2009. Cases diagnosed in the first two years of follow-up were
excluded to avoid reporting bias due to early, undiagnosed disease. Fine
and Gray models with age as the time scale were used to estimate the
hazard ratios (HR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI). Separate models
were performed for each age period, and were adjusted for hours of indoor
activities, respondent, secondary job, education, ethnicity, number of
people and rooms in residence, fuel type and tons used, ventilation,
smoking status and duration in men, mining work in men, and cooking age
in women. Analyses were further stratified by sex and median age at
baseline ( 61 and < 61 years).Non-linear relationships were found between
sleep duration and lung cancer mortality. In men 61 years of age at
baseline, 10 sleep hrs/day across adulthood was associated with
substantially increased risks of lung cancer mortality compared to the
recommended 8 sleep hrs/day [21-30 years: HR = 1.44 (95%CI: 1.00-2.07),
31-40 years: HR = 1.73 (95%CI: 1.15-2.59), 41-50 years: HR = 3.97 (95%CI:
2.64-5.97), and 51-60 years: HR = 3.55 (95%CI: 2.41-5.22). Furthermore, 7
sleep hrs/day in middle and later age was associated with significantly
increased risks [41-50 years: HR = 1.56 (95%CI: 1.17-2.07) and 51-60
years: HR = 1.48 (95%CI: 1.15-1.92)]. Trends were similar in men Previous
studies have implicated sleep duration as a risk factor for cancer
incidence and all-cause mortality. However, to our knowledge, no study
has addressed its relationship to lung cancer mortality among Chinese
populations. Our objective was to evaluate the association between
average sleep hours during various age periods, and risk of lung cancer
mortality in rural Xuanwei, China.Men and women who were born in
1917-1951 and lived in Xuanwei as of Jan 1 1976 were recruited for this
cohort study. A total of 42,421 participants interviewed in 1992
contributed data to this analysis. The exposure was average sleep hours
in the age periods of: 21-30, 31-40, 41-50, and 51-60 years, categorized
as 7, 8 (reference), 9, and 10 hrs/day. The outcome was time to lung
cancer mortality in 1992-2009. Cases diagnosed in the first two years of
follow-up were excluded to avoid reporting bias due to early, undiagnosed
disease. Fine and Gray models with age as the time scale were used to
estimate the hazard ratios (HR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI).
Separate models were performed for each age period, and were adjusted for
hours of indoor activities, respondent, secondary job, education,
ethnicity, number of people and rooms in residence, fuel type and tons
used, ventilation, smoking status and duration in men, mining work in
men, and cooking age in women. Analyses were further stratified by sex
and median age at baseline ( 61 and < 61 years).Non-linear relationships
were found between sleep duration and lung cancer mortality. In men 61
years of age at baseline, 10 sleep hrs/day across adulthood was
associated with substantially increased risks of lung cancer mortality
compared to the recommended 8 sleep hrs/day [21-30 years: HR = 1.44
(95%CI: 1.00-2.07), 31-40 years: HR = 1.73 (95%CI: 1.15-2.59), 41-50
years: HR = 3.97 (95%CI: 2.64-5.97), and 51-60 years: HR = 3.55 (95%CI:
2.41-5.22). Furthermore, 7 sleep hrs/day in middle and later age was
associated with significantly increased risks [41-50 years: HR = 1.56
(95%CI: 1.17-2.07) and 51-60 years: HR = 1.48 (95%CI: 1.15-1.92)]. Trends
were similar in men <61 years of age at baseline for the later age
period. In women 61 years of age at baseline, 10 sleep hrs/day in ages
41-50 and 51-60 years was associated with substantially increased risks
[HR = 2.45 (95%CI: 1.37-4.37) and HR = 2.59 (95%CI: 1.61-4.17)]. However,
no statistically significant associations with 7 sleep hrs/day were
found. Similar trends were observed for women Previous studies have
implicated sleep duration as a risk factor for cancer incidence and
all-cause mortality. However, to our knowledge, no study has addressed
its relationship to lung cancer mortality among Chinese populations. Our
objective was to evaluate the association between average sleep hours
during various age periods, and risk of lung cancer mortality in rural
Xuanwei, China.Men and women who were born in 1917-1951 and lived in
Xuanwei as of Jan 1 1976 were recruited for this cohort study. A total of
42,421 participants interviewed in 1992 contributed data to this
analysis. The exposure was average sleep hours in the age periods of:
21-30, 31-40, 41-50, and 51-60 years, categorized as 7, 8 (reference), 9,
and 10 hrs/day. The outcome was time to lung cancer mortality in
1992-2009. Cases diagnosed in the first two years of follow-up were
excluded to avoid reporting bias due to early, undiagnosed disease. Fine
and Gray models with age as the time scale were used to estimate the
hazard ratios (HR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI). Separate models
were performed for each age period, and were adjusted for hours of indoor
activities, respondent, secondary job, education, ethnicity, number of
people and rooms in residence, fuel type and tons used, ventilation,
smoking status and duration in men, mining work in men, and cooking age
in women. Analyses were further stratified by sex and median age at
baseline ( 61 and < 61 years).Non-linear relationships were found between
sleep duration and lung cancer mortality. In men 61 years of age at
baseline, 10 sleep hrs/day across adulthood was associated with
substantially increased risks of lung cancer mortality compared to the
recommended 8 sleep hrs/day [21-30 years: HR = 1.44 (95%CI: 1.00-2.07),
31-40 years: HR = 1.73 (95%CI: 1.15-2.59), 41-50 years: HR = 3.97 (95%CI:
2.64-5.97), and 51-60 years: HR = 3.55 (95%CI: 2.41-5.22). Furthermore, 7
sleep hrs/day in middle and later age was associated with significantly
increased risks [41-50 years: HR = 1.56 (95%CI: 1.17-2.07) and 51-60
years: HR = 1.48 (95%CI: 1.15-1.92)]. Trends were similar in men <61
years of age at baseline for the later age period. In women 61 years of
age at baseline, 10 sleep hrs/day in ages 41-50 and 51-60 years was
associated with substantially increased risks [HR = 2.45 (95%CI:
1.37-4.37) and HR = 2.59 (95%CI: 1.61-4.17)]. However, no statistically
significant associations with 7 sleep hrs/day were found. Similar trends
were observed for women <61 years of age at baseline.These findings
suggest that both excessive and insufficient sleep may be risk factors
for lung cancer mortality. Sleep deficit was associated with increased
risks of lung cancer mortality in men, but less apparent in women.
However, overabundance of sleep was found to be detrimental in both men
and women, particularly during later ages. This study enriches the body
of evidence implicating sleep duration in risk of lung cancer.

