Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Predictors of participants retention among African Americans in
the Healthy Eating and Living in The Spirit (HEALS) trial


Background: Recruitment and retention of minority racial/ethnic groups is
necessary to assess and address cancer health disparities in the United
States. The objective of this study was to characterize participants
retention status and identify baseline participant factors associated
with retention among an entirely African American (AA) population in a
randomized controlled trial (RCT).Methods: Using data from the Healthy
Eating and Living in the Spirit (HEALS) program, an RCT conducted from
2009 to 2012 among AAs in South Carolina we examined participant-level
factors associated with retention. We used SAS v9.4 to compute chi square
tests and fit logistic regressions in order to compare 220 (53.14%)
retained to 194 not-retained participants with the goal of identifying
important predictors of retention. Among the entire study population,
main predictor variable of interest was network distance in miles from
home of participants to the clinic venue (i.e. their church) whereas
among participants randomized to the intervention arm, a second predictor
was percentage of intervention classes attended.Results: Baseline
characteristics that were significantly associated with retention status
included group assignment, age, body mass index (BMI), distance from home
to clinic site(s), and partner enrollment in the study. Participants who
lived in locations >5 miles from the clinic sites were more likely to be
retained in the study (OR = 1.58; 95% CI: 1.04 - 2.4) compared to
participants who lived 60 years) were 3.3 times as likely (95% CI: 1.59 -
6.81) than those aged 5 miles) and attending 60% or more of the
intervention classes was strongly predictive of being retained in the
study. Ensuring that there is a run-in period as part of the screening
procedure for all participants before randomization will help project
managers to identify participants that are likely to be retained in the
study and morestudies need to be done to know why those who lived farther
away were more likely to be retained.

