Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Multiple different mutations of same cancer genes in the same
tumors from lung adenocarcinoma patients


Background: Previous studies have demonstrated multiple different
mutations of the same cancer genes in different subclones (multiple-hit)
of the same tumors suggesting cancer gene convergence. By analyzing
publically available large dataset, we sought to investigate whether
multiple-hit phenomenon reflects a propensity for specific routes of
tumorigenesis in certain patients with lung adenocarcinomas.Methods:
Whole exome sequencing data from the Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) lung
adenocarcinoma study was queried and nonsilent somatic mutations
(stop-gain, stop-loss, frameshift, splicing site and nonsynonymous) were
analyzed. Bootstrapping was performed to investigate whether multiple-hit
( 2 mutations of the same gene in the same tumor) phenomenon is enriched
in cancer genes (from Cancer Gene Census (CGC), Catalogue Of Somatic
Mutations In Cancer (COSMIC) database excluding Translocation only genes)
compared to all other genes (background). Using stage-stratified Cox
proportional hazards regression, we examined the association between
multiple-hit mutation status in well-known cancer genes and overall
survival (OS) in patients who had complete staging and follow up
information in the most recent TCGA survival dataset (updated on
4/10/2015). Subclonal analysis is in process to assess the clonal
relationship among different mutations of the same genes in the same
tumors.Results: Somatic mutation data from 538 lung adenocarcinomas was
analyzed. In total, 17,059 genes showed at least one nonsilent mutation
in at least one tumor and 9,151 genes (54%) demonstrated multiple
different nonsilent mutations in at least one tumor (multiple-hit). Of
the 419 CGC cancer genes, 323 (77%) demonstrated multiple-hit phenomenon
(p Background: Previous studies have demonstrated multiple different
mutations of the same cancer genes in different subclones (multiple-hit)
of the same tumors suggesting cancer gene convergence. By analyzing
publically available large dataset, we sought to investigate whether
multiple-hit phenomenon reflects a propensity for specific routes of
tumorigenesis in certain patients with lung adenocarcinomas.Methods:
Whole exome sequencing data from the Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) lung
adenocarcinoma study was queried and nonsilent somatic mutations
(stop-gain, stop-loss, frameshift, splicing site and nonsynonymous) were
analyzed. Bootstrapping was performed to investigate whether multiple-hit
( 2 mutations of the same gene in the same tumor) phenomenon is enriched
in cancer genes (from Cancer Gene Census (CGC), Catalogue Of Somatic
Mutations In Cancer (COSMIC) database excluding Translocation only genes)
compared to all other genes (background). Using stage-stratified Cox
proportional hazards regression, we examined the association between
multiple-hit mutation status in well-known cancer genes and overall
survival (OS) in patients who had complete staging and follow up
information in the most recent TCGA survival dataset (updated on
4/10/2015). Subclonal analysis is in process to assess the clonal
relationship among different mutations of the same genes in the same
tumors.Results: Somatic mutation data from 538 lung adenocarcinomas was
analyzed. In total, 17,059 genes showed at least one nonsilent mutation
in at least one tumor and 9,151 genes (54%) demonstrated multiple
different nonsilent mutations in at least one tumor (multiple-hit). Of
the 419 CGC cancer genes, 323 (77%) demonstrated multiple-hit phenomenon
(p < 0.001). Totally 142,253 nonsilent mutations were identified in any
genes, 27,616 (19%) of which were multi-hit mutations (background).
Compared to this, 2,414 of 9,297 (26%) of nonsilent mutations identified
in the 419 CGC cancer genes were multiple-hit mutations, which is
significantly higher than background (26% vs 19%, pBackground: Previous
studies have demonstrated multiple different mutations of the same cancer
genes in different subclones (multiple-hit) of the same tumors suggesting
cancer gene convergence. By analyzing publically available large dataset,
we sought to investigate whether multiple-hit phenomenon reflects a
propensity for specific routes of tumorigenesis in certain patients with
lung adenocarcinomas.Methods: Whole exome sequencing data from the Cancer
Genome Atlas (TCGA) lung adenocarcinoma study was queried and nonsilent
somatic mutations (stop-gain, stop-loss, frameshift, splicing site and
nonsynonymous) were analyzed. Bootstrapping was performed to investigate
whether multiple-hit ( 2 mutations of the same gene in the same tumor)
phenomenon is enriched in cancer genes (from Cancer Gene Census (CGC),
Catalogue Of Somatic Mutations In Cancer (COSMIC) database excluding
Translocation only genes) compared to all other genes (background). Using
stage-stratified Cox proportional hazards regression, we examined the
association between multiple-hit mutation status in well-known cancer
genes and overall survival (OS) in patients who had complete staging and
follow up information in the most recent TCGA survival dataset (updated
on 4/10/2015). Subclonal analysis is in process to assess the clonal
relationship among different mutations of the same genes in the same
tumors.Results: Somatic mutation data from 538 lung adenocarcinomas was
analyzed. In total, 17,059 genes showed at least one nonsilent mutation
in at least one tumor and 9,151 genes (54%) demonstrated multiple
different nonsilent mutations in at least one tumor (multiple-hit). Of
the 419 CGC cancer genes, 323 (77%) demonstrated multiple-hit phenomenon
(p < 0.001). Totally 142,253 nonsilent mutations were identified in any
genes, 27,616 (19%) of which were multi-hit mutations (background).
Compared to this, 2,414 of 9,297 (26%) of nonsilent mutations identified
in the 419 CGC cancer genes were multiple-hit mutations, which is
significantly higher than background (26% vs 19%, p<0.001). Bootstrap
resampling was performed with 10,000 samples confirmed above finding
(pBackground: Previous studies have demonstrated multiple different
mutations of the same cancer genes in different subclones (multiple-hit)
of the same tumors suggesting cancer gene convergence. By analyzing
publically available large dataset, we sought to investigate whether
multiple-hit phenomenon reflects a propensity for specific routes of
tumorigenesis in certain patients with lung adenocarcinomas.Methods:
Whole exome sequencing data from the Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) lung
adenocarcinoma study was queried and nonsilent somatic mutations
(stop-gain, stop-loss, frameshift, splicing site and nonsynonymous) were
analyzed. Bootstrapping was performed to investigate whether multiple-hit
( 2 mutations of the same gene in the same tumor) phenomenon is enriched
in cancer genes (from Cancer Gene Census (CGC), Catalogue Of Somatic
Mutations In Cancer (COSMIC) database excluding Translocation only genes)
compared to all other genes (background). Using stage-stratified Cox
proportional hazards regression, we examined the association between
multiple-hit mutation status in well-known cancer genes and overall
survival (OS) in patients who had complete staging and follow up
information in the most recent TCGA survival dataset (updated on
4/10/2015). Subclonal analysis is in process to assess the clonal
relationship among different mutations of the same genes in the same
tumors.Results: Somatic mutation data from 538 lung adenocarcinomas was
analyzed. In total, 17,059 genes showed at least one nonsilent mutation
in at least one tumor and 9,151 genes (54%) demonstrated multiple
different nonsilent mutations in at least one tumor (multiple-hit). Of
the 419 CGC cancer genes, 323 (77%) demonstrated multiple-hit phenomenon
(p < 0.001). Totally 142,253 nonsilent mutations were identified in any
genes, 27,616 (19%) of which were multi-hit mutations (background).
Compared to this, 2,414 of 9,297 (26%) of nonsilent mutations identified
in the 419 CGC cancer genes were multiple-hit mutations, which is
significantly higher than background (26% vs 19%, p<0.001). Bootstrap
resampling was performed with 10,000 samples confirmed above finding
(p<0.01). Multivariate survival analyses suggested that multiple-hit
mutation status was associated with worse OS for EGFR (HR 3.27, p = 0.03,
in patients with stage III/IV, median OS was 0.52 vs. 3.5 years) after
adjusted by stage.Conclusions: Cancer gene convergence in lung
adenocarcinomas suggests certain genes and/or pathways may be critical
for carcinogenesis in certain patients. Multiple different mutations of
certain cancer genes may have impact on clinical outcomes. Further
studies are warranted to further investigate the clinical implications of
multi-hit phenomenon and their potential role in identifying novel cancer
genes.

