Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Human oral microbiome and prospective risk for pancreatic cancer:
a population based, nested case control study


Background: A history of periodontal disease and the presence of
circulating antibodies to selected oral pathogens have been associated
with increased risk of pancreatic cancer in prospective studies; however,
relationships of oral microbes with pancreatic cancer have not been
directly evaluated. We conducted a prospective study to examine the
relationship of oral microbiota with subsequent risk of pancreatic
cancer.Methods: We selected 361 incident pancreatic cancer cases and 371
matched controls from two prospective cohort studies, the ACS Cancer
Prevention Study (CPS) II and the NCI Prostate, Lung, Colorectal, and
Ovarian Cancer Screening Trial (PLCO). From pre-diagnostic oral wash
samples, we characterized the composition of the oral microbiota using
bacterial 16S rRNA gene amplification and sequencing. Logistic regression
analysis was used to examine the association between oral microbiota and
risk of pancreatic cancer, controlling for the random effect of cohorts
and other covariates, age, race, sex, smoking status, alcohol
consumption, body mass index, and history of diabetes.Findings: Carriage
of oral pathogens, Porphyromonas gingivalis and Aggregatibacter
actinomycetemcomitans, were associated with higher risk of pancreatic
cancer (adjusted Odds Ratio [OR]p.g = 159 and 95% confidence interval
[CI] = 115-220; ORa.a = 219 and 95%CI = 115-415, respectively). Greater
relative abundance of phylum Fusobacteria was associated with decreased
pancreatic cancer risk (OR per percent increase of abundance = 092, 95%CI
= 087-098). Risks related to these phylotypes remained after exclusion of
cases that developed within two years of sample collection, reducing the
likelihood of reverse causation in this prospective study.Interpretation:
The study provides evidence that the oral mcirobiota plays a role in the
etiology of pancreatic cancer and may point to accessible means for
prevention of this disease.

