Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Disruption of intrachromosomal interactions by deficient cohesin
initiate epithelial-mesenchymal transition and stemness in cancer


PURPOSEAlthough EMT-MET process is a crucial reversible event in
development of human tumorigenesis controlled by complex networks, very
little is known about how EMT-MET occurs reversibly and timely in cancer.
Recently, different levels of Rad21 protein, a subunit of cohesin
high-order-chromatin-architectural complex, between mesenchymal and
epithelial cancers have been described.METHODSTo elucidate how Rad21
determines EMT states, we silenced Rad21 in epithelial cancers using
lentiviral shRNAs. We performed microarray to compare transcriptional
changes by Rad21-KD. Additionally, we measured cell cycles and mitotic
chromosome segregations to rule out the role of Rad21 as a sister
chromatid segregation molecule. We observed cell morphology through
confocal microscopy and checked high-order-chromatin structures using
Chromosome-Conformation-Capture (3C) and Chromatin immunoprecipitation
(ChIP) assay.RESULTSWe identified high-order-chromatin structures
mediated by Rad21 plays critical regulatory roles in transcription of EMT
related genes for the first time. Rad21-KD in epithelial cancers caused
reduction of Rad21 enrichment on TGFB1 and ITGA5 genes, leading to
disruption of the-gene-specific-chromatin-looping structures. This
dramatically recruited PolII and AcH3, active transcription marks,
causing rapid induction of the gene transcriptions. Indeed, induced
EMT-related genes directly led to morphological changes with EMT traits.
We ultimately found that cancer stem cell-like cells showed same results
with mesenchymal cancer and Rad21-KD epithelial cells.These findings
indicate that the initiation of EMT in cancer might crucially require
changes in high-order-chromatin structures of EMT-related genes mediated
by cohesin, contributing to rapid and precise reversible changes in EMT
or MET state to adapt to phenotypes of human cancer development.

