Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Activation of PI3K pathway in breast cancer associates with tumor
phospholipid fatty acid composition


BackgroundEver since the discovery of the PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway key role
in breast cancer resistance, several molecules have been developed to
target this pathway. However, mechanisms of resistance restrain their
efficacy. An in-depth understanding of the interactions of PI3K pathway
is essential to improve its blockade and avoid resistance. Preclinical
studies reported that lipid composition of cancer cells altered the
activation of PI3K pathway, thus suggesting another possible molecular
interaction with lipid metabolism. The aim of this study was to analyze
the relationship between the activation of PI3K pathway and tumor lipid
composition in breast cancer patients.MethodsFrozen and formalin-fixed
paraffin-embedded tumor specimens were retrieved for 50 French patients
with stage I to III primary breast cancer treated uniformly with surgery,
adjuvant chemotherapy, radiation therapy and endocrine therapy. The tumor
specimens were analyzed for PIK3CA gene mutation, PTEN protein expression
by immunohistochemistry, and pAktS473, pAktT308, mTOR, pS6K, and S6RP by
protein array. Tumor total fatty acid (FA) and phospholipid FA
compositions were analysed using mass spectroscopy. Pearson test was used
for correlation analyses.ResultsMean age was 53 years. All tumors were ER
or PR positive and HER-2 negative, and 76% were node positive. PI3K
mutation was observed in 14% of cases, and 34% were PTEN negative or had
low PTEN expression. Mean tumor satured fatty acid (SFA) level was 33.78
mol%, monounsaturated FA (MUFA) level was 46.46 mol%, n-6 polyunsaturated
FA (PUFA) level was 18.08 mol%, and n-3 PUFA level was 1.68 mol%. Large
and high grade tumors had a higher SFA content. MUFA rich tumors were
frequently low grade. There was a positive correlation between
d18:1/C20:0 ceramide level and Akt, mTOR and p70S6K expression. mTOR
expression also correlated with 18:0 lysophosphatidylserine (lysoPS),
36:1 PS, 38:3 PS, 38:5 PS, 40:5 PS, 40:6 PS, 34:0 phosphatidylcholine
(PC), 34:1 PC, and 38:3 PC.ConclusionsOur results show that SFA
associated with a more aggressive tumor phenotype and that PI3K pathway
activation significantly correlated with fatty acid composition of
specific tumor phospholipids. These results suggest a potential role of
tumor lipid metabolism in PI3K pathway activation.

