Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SOX4 is essential for PTEN-mediated prostate tumorigenesis in vivo


Prostate cancer is the most common cancer and the second leading cause of
cancer mortality in American men, underscoring the significance of
unraveling the molecular mechanisms involved in the initiation and
progression of the disease. The sex-determining region Y-box 4 (SOX4)
gene is overexpressed in many types of human cancers, including prostate
cancer, suggesting that SOX4 plays a fundamental role in tumorigenesis.
In this study, we demonstrate that SOX4 is critical for PTEN-mediated
prostate cancer progression in vivo. We show that homozygous deletion of
Sox4 in the adult prostate epithelium strongly inhibits tumor progression
initiated by homozygous loss of the Pten tumor suppressor, demonstrating
the key role of SOX4 in the development of prostate cancer. Homozygous
deletion of Sox4 also reduces the activation of AKT and -catenin in
Pten-null mice, resulting in inhibition of an invasive cancer phenotype.
We also show that SOX4 expression is induced by loss of PTEN, and that
PI3K-AKT-mTOR signaling activity is critical for SOX4 expression,
suggesting a positive feedback loop between SOX4 protein and
PI3K-AKT-mTOR activity. Our findings indicate that SOX4 is a critical
component of the PTEN-PI3K-AKT pathway in prostate cancer, suggesting
that SOX4 may be a promising molecular target for novel combinatorial
therapies for both primary and advanced prostate cancers.

