Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: EGFR inhibition generates drug-tolerant persister cells by
blocking AKT activity and thus inactivating Ets-1 function


In non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC)the leading cause of cancer death
worldwideabout 10-20% harbor mutations in epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR), a receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK). Although treatment
with EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) had shown promise, drug
resistance has been the most important determinant limiting its success.
Recent studies have identified the mechanisms of drug resistance to TKIs,
but the origin of acquired resistant cells remains to be elucidated. We
consider that they must arise from a small subset of surviving
populations after EGFR inhibition. Thus, we have studied the mechanism by
which the subset remains viable after EGFR inhibition, despite cell death
in the vast majority. Our study demonstrates that EGFR inhibition in lung
cancer cells generates a drug-tolerant subpopulation by blocking AKT
activity and thus inactivating Ets-1 function. The remaining cells enter
a dormant, non-dividing state because of the inhibited transactivation of
Ets-1 target genes cyclins D1, D3, and E2. Moreover, Ets-1 inactivation
inhibits transcription of dual specificity phosphatase 6 (DUSP6), a
negative regulator specific for ERK1/2. As a result, ERK1/2 is activated,
which combines with c-Src to renew activation of the Ras/MAPK pathway,
causing increased cell survival by accelerating Bim protein turnover.
Conversely, inhibition of elevated ERK1/2 by the addition of a MEK
inhibitor enhances programmed cell death through rewiring apoptotic
signaling. These observations may explain why a small subset of quiescent
cells can tolerate TKIs, and might suggest that combined treatment of TKI
and MEK inhibitor could overcome drug resistance in the population.

