Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nanoparticles targeting RAF/ERK-driven cell-autonomous resistance
to sorafenib for effective treatment of hepatocellular carcinoma


Sorafenib is the only systemic therapy approved for advanced
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Sorafenib's efficacy has been attributed
in part to inhibition of cancer cell proliferation due to B- and CRAF
targeting in HCC cells. However, cell autonomous mechanisms promote
evasion from sorafenib treatment, leading to moderate survival benefit.
Herein, we demonstrated that the effects of sorafenib on HCC cell
viability were initially independent of RAF kinase inhibition and were
mediated in part by p38MAPK inhibition. Moreover, sorafenib treatment led
to RAF heterodimerization (BRAF/CRAF) and subsequent ERK activation and
thus converted HCC cell dependence for survival signaling to the RAF/ERK
pathway. Inhibition of ERK pathway by the MEK inhibitor AZD6244
significantly enhanced the therapeutic efficacy of sorafenib efficacy on
HCC in vitro and in vivo. Furthermore, we developed HCC-targeted
nanoparticles (NPs) to efficiently co-deliver both sorafenib and AZD6244
into HCC, downregulate RAF/ERK pathway, suppress angiogenesis and enhance
anti-cancer effect in the orthotopic HCC model. In conclusion, sorafenib
treatment leads to rapid MAPK activation due to BRAF heterodimerization
as a cell-autonomous mechanism of treatment resistance. Co-delivery of
sorafenib and MEK inhibitor AZD6244 using HCC targeted NPs downregulates
the compensatory activated RAF/ERK pathway and overcomes resistance to
sorafenib in HCC.

