Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of a decellularized tumor model for the evaluation of
breast carcinomas


Breast cancer recurrence is a clinical manifestation of tumor progression
in patients which has been shown to significantly increase mortality
rates. While up to one-fifth of breast cancer patients will experience
recurrence, the mechanisms underlying this process remain poorly
understood. Recently, gene expression profiling of human tumor metastasis
and recurrence demonstrated that the extracellular matrix (ECM)-receptor
interactions pathway was enhanced. In breast carcinomas, the ECM is known
to vary with cancer progression. The ECM acts as a chemical reservoir,
structural component, and mediator of tumorigenesis to tumors. To date,
the ECM of breast carcinomas has been evaluated within the context of a
seeded cellular population, i.e. intact tumor. Here we demonstrate for
the first time a mechanism to evaluate the ECM devoid of breast cancer
cells. We have employed a model of tissue decellularization to breast
cancer cell line derived tumors and demonstrate that tumor ECM
architecture remains intact when devoid of cells. Validation of loss of
cell content is evident through DNA quantification, nuclear DAPI stain,
and H&E stain. Furthermore we demonstrate that structural proteins,
fibronectin, collagen, and elastin are still retained within the
decellularized scaffold. Applications of the tumor decellularization
model will aid in the evaluation of ECM structural and molecular
characteristics independent of cancer cell populations. The data
presented here will enhance methods used to evaluate the cancer
microenvironment and further our understanding of breast cancer
recurrence, altering existing treatment strategies to extend survival.

