Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A Neil1 DNA glycosylase germline variant induces genomic
instability and cellular transformation


NEIL1 DNA glycosylase is a bifunctional enzyme that recognizes oxidized
pyrimidines and formamidopyrimidines, and appears to remove damage in
advance of the replication fork. The rs5745906 SNP of the NEIL1 gene has
a minor allele frequency of 1% and is a G to A base substitution that
encodes the G83D NEIL1 protein. Interestingly, this mutation is also
present in cholangiocarcinomas. Unlike WT NEIL1, the G83D variant is not
able to recognize oxidized bases efficiently due to a shift in the void
filling residues that stabilize the DNA duplex once a damaged base has
been extruded into the glycosylase substrate binding pocket. The goal of
our study was to determine if the G83D NEIL1 variant exhibits a
cancer-related phenotype in cells. We found that unlike wild-type (WT)
NEIL1, expression of G83D in MCF10A immortal human breast epithelial
cells induces genomic instability and cellular transformation. Expression
of G83D but not WT NEIL1, in MCF10A cells leads to replication fork
stalling and slow replication fork velocity. Our results suggest that
G83D is unable to remove oxidative DNA damage at the replication fork,
resulting in genomic instability and cellular transformation. Our results
are consistent with the idea that individuals who harbor the G83D NEIL1
variant are at increased risk for cancer.

