Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Survivin-mediated radio-sensitization response in p53 mutant tumor
cells


Doses of ionizing radiation 100 mGy induce changes in radiation
sensitivity expressed by cells exposed to subsequent higher doses. This
is referred to as an adaptive effect. We describe a unique
survivin-associated adaptive response in which increased radiation
resistance or sensitization of cells can be induced by exposure to doses
as low as 5 mGy. Experiments were performed using two murine sarcomas,
SA-NH and FSa,grown either in culture or as tumors, and two human cancer
cell lines, Panc-1 (pancreatic epithelioid carcinoma) and MDA-MB-231
(breast adenocarcinoma). Doses of 5 mGy were used to induce changes in
the response of these tumor cells to higher therapy doses using a
multi-dosing paradigm. Effects on radiation sensitivity were associated
with changes in both survivin concentration and its translocation to the
cytoplasm (SA-NH, p53 wild type) or nucleus (FSa, Panc-1 and MDA-MB-231,
p53 mutant). In vitro survival assays (2 Gy per fraction, two once daily
fractions) and tumor growth delay (TGD) (5 Gy per fraction, five once
daily fractions) studies were performed on SA-NH and FSa cells.
Intracellular localization of survivin was determined by ELISA and
correlated to survival response. 2 Gy alone had no effect on
intracellular translocation of survivin. When preceded 15 min earlier by
a 5 mGy exposure, survivin increased in the cytoplasm of SA-NH as
compared to the nuclei of FSa, Panc-1 and MDA-MB-231 cells. SA-NH tumors
were protected by 5 mGy exposures (1.9 day decrease in TGD, P = 0.032)
while FSa tumors were sensitized (4.5 day increase inTGD, P Doses of
ionizing radiation 100 mGy induce changes in radiation sensitivity
expressed by cells exposed to subsequent higher doses. This is referred
to as an adaptive effect. We describe a unique survivin-associated
adaptive response in which increased radiation resistance or
sensitization of cells can be induced by exposure to doses as low as 5
mGy. Experiments were performed using two murine sarcomas, SA-NH and
FSa,grown either in culture or as tumors, and two human cancer cell
lines, Panc-1 (pancreatic epithelioid carcinoma) and MDA-MB-231 (breast
adenocarcinoma). Doses of 5 mGy were used to induce changes in the
response of these tumor cells to higher therapy doses using a
multi-dosing paradigm. Effects on radiation sensitivity were associated
with changes in both survivin concentration and its translocation to the
cytoplasm (SA-NH, p53 wild type) or nucleus (FSa, Panc-1 and MDA-MB-231,
p53 mutant). In vitro survival assays (2 Gy per fraction, two once daily
fractions) and tumor growth delay (TGD) (5 Gy per fraction, five once
daily fractions) studies were performed on SA-NH and FSa cells.
Intracellular localization of survivin was determined by ELISA and
correlated to survival response. 2 Gy alone had no effect on
intracellular translocation of survivin. When preceded 15 min earlier by
a 5 mGy exposure, survivin increased in the cytoplasm of SA-NH as
compared to the nuclei of FSa, Panc-1 and MDA-MB-231 cells. SA-NH tumors
were protected by 5 mGy exposures (1.9 day decrease in TGD, P = 0.032)
while FSa tumors were sensitized (4.5 day increase inTGD, P < 0.001).
Panc-1 and MDA-MB-231 tumor cells were also sensitized to ionizing
radiation following 5 mGy exposures. Exposure of SA-NH to 4 mM of the
free radical scavenger N-acetylcysteine inhibited the effect of 5 mGy on
inducing this adaptive response. We have identified a very low radiation
dose-induced survivin-mediated radio-sensitization response that could
enhance therapeutic outcomes associated with the increased usage of
imaging procedures in radiation therapy. This work was supported by
NIH/NCI grant R01 CA132998 and DOE Low Dose Program/Project Grant
DE-SC0001271 (D.J.G.)

