Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: IGF-1 and TGF- promote EMT and angiogenesis in 3D cultures of lung
adenocarcinoma cells: A pilot study


BackgroundLung cancer is leading cause of cancer related deaths
worldwide, with metastasis underlying this high mortality rate. An
epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) and angiogenesis are processes
well known to increase tumor cell invasive potential. Transforming growth
factor - beta (TGF-) and insulin-like growth factor (IGF-1) are well
established inducers of EMT and promoters of angiogenesis. In this pilot
study, we tested the effects of IGF-1 and TGF- on the lung adenocarcinoma
cell line, A549, using a novel 3D cell culture method.MethodA549 lung
adenocarcinoma cells were seeded (15 million cells/ 500 L 3D cocoon) in a
Cell Mate 3D matrix (BRTI). After 24 h of recovery the cocoons were
maintained in DMEM containing 2.5% FBS and received either IGF-1 (100
ng/mL), TGF-beta (20 ng/mL) for up to 7 days. A fourth group receiving
only DMEM medium with 2.5% FBS was used for control purposes. Cocoons
were formalin-fixed and paraffin embedded; 5um sections were prepared and
stained for vimentin and E-cadherin. Cell-conditioned media was evaluated
for angiogenesis factors(MILLIPLEX Human Angiogenesis Kits (EMD
Millipore, Billerica, MA)) using the Luminex immunobead platform (Luminex
Corp., Austin, TX). All data were then analyzed using SPSS.Results80% of
TGF- treated cells expressed vimentin compared to 27.5% in the control
group. Cell staining strongly positive for vimentin demonstrated
increased migration to the periphery compared to cells that were positive
for E-cadherin. Both of IGF-1 and TGF- significantly upregulated VEGF-A,
IL-8, sHer2. Tenascin-C and Follistatin were significantly increased with
TGF- only (pBackgroundLung cancer is leading cause of cancer related
deaths worldwide, with metastasis underlying this high mortality rate. An
epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) and angiogenesis are processes
well known to increase tumor cell invasive potential. Transforming growth
factor - beta (TGF-) and insulin-like growth factor (IGF-1) are well
established inducers of EMT and promoters of angiogenesis. In this pilot
study, we tested the effects of IGF-1 and TGF- on the lung adenocarcinoma
cell line, A549, using a novel 3D cell culture method.MethodA549 lung
adenocarcinoma cells were seeded (15 million cells/ 500 L 3D cocoon) in a
Cell Mate 3D matrix (BRTI). After 24 h of recovery the cocoons were
maintained in DMEM containing 2.5% FBS and received either IGF-1 (100
ng/mL), TGF-beta (20 ng/mL) for up to 7 days. A fourth group receiving
only DMEM medium with 2.5% FBS was used for control purposes. Cocoons
were formalin-fixed and paraffin embedded; 5um sections were prepared and
stained for vimentin and E-cadherin. Cell-conditioned media was evaluated
for angiogenesis factors(MILLIPLEX Human Angiogenesis Kits (EMD
Millipore, Billerica, MA)) using the Luminex immunobead platform (Luminex
Corp., Austin, TX). All data were then analyzed using SPSS.Results80% of
TGF- treated cells expressed vimentin compared to 27.5% in the control
group. Cell staining strongly positive for vimentin demonstrated
increased migration to the periphery compared to cells that were positive
for E-cadherin. Both of IGF-1 and TGF- significantly upregulated VEGF-A,
IL-8, sHer2. Tenascin-C and Follistatin were significantly increased with
TGF- only (p<0.01). sVEGFR2 and sVEGFR3 were down regulated by IGF-1 and
upregulated by TGF-beta relative to control (pBackgroundLung cancer is
leading cause of cancer related deaths worldwide, with metastasis
underlying this high mortality rate. An epithelial to mesenchymal
transition (EMT) and angiogenesis are processes well known to increase
tumor cell invasive potential. Transforming growth factor - beta (TGF-)
and insulin-like growth factor (IGF-1) are well established inducers of
EMT and promoters of angiogenesis. In this pilot study, we tested the
effects of IGF-1 and TGF- on the lung adenocarcinoma cell line, A549,
using a novel 3D cell culture method.MethodA549 lung adenocarcinoma cells
were seeded (15 million cells/ 500 L 3D cocoon) in a Cell Mate 3D matrix
(BRTI). After 24 h of recovery the cocoons were maintained in DMEM
containing 2.5% FBS and received either IGF-1 (100 ng/mL), TGF-beta (20
ng/mL) for up to 7 days. A fourth group receiving only DMEM medium with
2.5% FBS was used for control purposes. Cocoons were formalin-fixed and
paraffin embedded; 5um sections were prepared and stained for vimentin
and E-cadherin. Cell-conditioned media was evaluated for angiogenesis
factors(MILLIPLEX Human Angiogenesis Kits (EMD Millipore, Billerica, MA))
using the Luminex immunobead platform (Luminex Corp., Austin, TX). All
data were then analyzed using SPSS.Results80% of TGF- treated cells
expressed vimentin compared to 27.5% in the control group. Cell staining
strongly positive for vimentin demonstrated increased migration to the
periphery compared to cells that were positive for E-cadherin. Both of
IGF-1 and TGF- significantly upregulated VEGF-A, IL-8, sHer2. Tenascin-C
and Follistatin were significantly increased with TGF- only (p<0.01).
sVEGFR2 and sVEGFR3 were down regulated by IGF-1 and upregulated by
TGF-beta relative to control (p<0.05). G-CSF, FGF-2, sIL6R, sAXLs, HGFR,
Neuropillin-1 and suPAR were significantly higher in IGF-1 and lower in
TGF- (pBackgroundLung cancer is leading cause of cancer related deaths
worldwide, with metastasis underlying this high mortality rate. An
epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) and angiogenesis are processes
well known to increase tumor cell invasive potential. Transforming growth
factor - beta (TGF-) and insulin-like growth factor (IGF-1) are well
established inducers of EMT and promoters of angiogenesis. In this pilot
study, we tested the effects of IGF-1 and TGF- on the lung adenocarcinoma
cell line, A549, using a novel 3D cell culture method.MethodA549 lung
adenocarcinoma cells were seeded (15 million cells/ 500 L 3D cocoon) in a
Cell Mate 3D matrix (BRTI). After 24 h of recovery the cocoons were
maintained in DMEM containing 2.5% FBS and received either IGF-1 (100
ng/mL), TGF-beta (20 ng/mL) for up to 7 days. A fourth group receiving
only DMEM medium with 2.5% FBS was used for control purposes. Cocoons
were formalin-fixed and paraffin embedded; 5um sections were prepared and
stained for vimentin and E-cadherin. Cell-conditioned media was evaluated
for angiogenesis factors(MILLIPLEX Human Angiogenesis Kits (EMD
Millipore, Billerica, MA)) using the Luminex immunobead platform (Luminex
Corp., Austin, TX). All data were then analyzed using SPSS.Results80% of
TGF- treated cells expressed vimentin compared to 27.5% in the control
group. Cell staining strongly positive for vimentin demonstrated
increased migration to the periphery compared to cells that were positive
for E-cadherin. Both of IGF-1 and TGF- significantly upregulated VEGF-A,
IL-8, sHer2. Tenascin-C and Follistatin were significantly increased with
TGF- only (p<0.01). sVEGFR2 and sVEGFR3 were down regulated by IGF-1 and
upregulated by TGF-beta relative to control (p<0.05). G-CSF, FGF-2,
sIL6R, sAXLs, HGFR, Neuropillin-1 and suPAR were significantly higher in
IGF-1 and lower in TGF- (p<0.01) stimulated cultures. Other factors, such
as VEGF-D, EGF, and Angiopoietin-2, showed significant decrease in both
treated groups compared with control (pBackgroundLung cancer is leading
cause of cancer related deaths worldwide, with metastasis underlying this
high mortality rate. An epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) and
angiogenesis are processes well known to increase tumor cell invasive
potential. Transforming growth factor - beta (TGF-) and insulin-like
growth factor (IGF-1) are well established inducers of EMT and promoters
of angiogenesis. In this pilot study, we tested the effects of IGF-1 and
TGF- on the lung adenocarcinoma cell line, A549, using a novel 3D cell
culture method.MethodA549 lung adenocarcinoma cells were seeded (15
million cells/ 500 L 3D cocoon) in a Cell Mate 3D matrix (BRTI). After 24
h of recovery the cocoons were maintained in DMEM containing 2.5% FBS and
received either IGF-1 (100 ng/mL), TGF-beta (20 ng/mL) for up to 7 days.
A fourth group receiving only DMEM medium with 2.5% FBS was used for
control purposes. Cocoons were formalin-fixed and paraffin embedded; 5um
sections were prepared and stained for vimentin and E-cadherin.
Cell-conditioned media was evaluated for angiogenesis factors(MILLIPLEX
Human Angiogenesis Kits (EMD Millipore, Billerica, MA)) using the Luminex
immunobead platform (Luminex Corp., Austin, TX). All data were then
analyzed using SPSS.Results80% of TGF- treated cells expressed vimentin
compared to 27.5% in the control group. Cell staining strongly positive
for vimentin demonstrated increased migration to the periphery compared
to cells that were positive for E-cadherin. Both of IGF-1 and TGF-
significantly upregulated VEGF-A, IL-8, sHer2. Tenascin-C and Follistatin
were significantly increased with TGF- only (p<0.01). sVEGFR2 and sVEGFR3
were down regulated by IGF-1 and upregulated by TGF-beta relative to
control (p<0.05). G-CSF, FGF-2, sIL6R, sAXLs, HGFR, Neuropillin-1 and
suPAR were significantly higher in IGF-1 and lower in TGF- (p<0.01)
stimulated cultures. Other factors, such as VEGF-D, EGF, and
Angiopoietin-2, showed significant decrease in both treated groups
compared with control (p<0.05).ConclusionA549 cells in this 3D model
demonstrated increased metastatic potential with associated EMT features
and increased expression of angiogenesis factors upon stimulation with
IGF-1 and TGF-. These findings will be contrasted to 2D conventional
culture methods for the substantiation for the 3D scaffolds for routine
culturing. Evaluation of EMT in a 3D format is a critical tool for cancer
research as it emulates dynamic interactions of the cancer cells with
surrounding matrix, the tumor microenvironment in a more practical
fashion than conventional 2D culture methods.

