Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cytochrome c oxidase subunit 5a (COX5A) is identified as a
potential therapeutic target for lung cancer with high therapeutic index
through a pooled shRNA screen


[Background]Recent advances in high throughput analysis of genetic and
epigenetic alterations revealed numerous changes in lung cancer cells. It
is vital to sort out genes that substantially contribute to oncogenic
properties of cancer cells from these numerous altered genes by
performing a functional screening because such genes could serve as
valuable therapeutic targets. To this end, we performed a screening with
a pooled shRNA library for genes critical for survival and/or
proliferation in lung cancer cells. [Methods and Results]A pooled shRNA
library comprising 5,000 genes, with 3 to 7 constructs per gene, were
transduced in NCI-H460 lung cancer cell line. Subsequently, genomic DNA
was extracted from the transduced cells and numbers of shRNA for each
gene were quantified by next generation sequencing. Through a stringent
filtering process we narrowed down genes to a list of 24 candidates as
potentially target genes. Next, we integrated data of genome-wild gene
expression and copy number analyses of a panel of lung cancer cell lines
to narrow down to genes more relevant to lung cancer. Through these
processes, we listed up several candidate genes. Among them, we focused
on Cytochrome c oxidase subunit 5a (COX5A), one of the nuclear encoded
subunits of cytochrome c oxidase, the terminal protein of the
mitochondrial electron transport chain. Importantly, COX5A knockdown
didn't suppress growth of HBEC3, a normal control cell line, suggesting
that therapeutics of targeting COX5A may have high therapeutic
index.[Conclusions]Our results suggest that inhibiting COX5A may be an
attractive strategy for the treatment of NSCLC with high therapeutic
index.

