Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Surface-displayed RGD enhanced the targeting and therapeutic
efficacy of attenuated Salmonella typhimurium


Anticancer therapy using engineered bacteria aims to overcome limitations
of current cancer therapy by actively targeting and efficiently removing
cancer. In order to achieve this goal, new approaches are essential to
target therapeutically resistant regions of tumors, to maintain enough
number of bacteria in tumor and to deliver drugs at sufficient
concentrations during the period of therapeutic process. Therefore, it is
necessary to enhance the bacterial targeting efficiency through bacterial
surface engineering. Here, we demonstrate that Salmonella tumor tropism
can be strengthened significantly via surface displaying of RGD peptide
sequence (ACDCRGDCFCG; RGD sequence) in the external loop of outer
membrane protein A (OmpA) of attenuated Salmonella typhimurium.
RGD-displaying Salmonella strongly bound to v3 over-expressing cancer
cells while showed weak binding to non-expressing cancer cells,
indicating the feasibility of surface display with preferential homing
peptide. In vivo bioluminescence imaging showed strong targeting
efficiency of RGD-displayed Salmonella in v3 over-expressing cancer
xenografts (MDA-MB-231, MDA-MB-435, M21, and U87MG). The surface
engineered bacteria significantly suppressed both human breast tumor
(MDA-MB-231) and human melanoma (MDA-MB-435), and prolonged survival in
mice. In conclusion, engineered bacteria displaying RGD peptides on the
surface could advance both targeting efficiency and therapeutic effects.

