Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Disrupting the epigenetic modifier HMGA2 in DIPG and GBM inhibits
tumor invasion, growth and tumorigenicity


Diffuse intrinsic pontine glioma (DIPG) and glioblastoma (GBM) are
lethal, incurable brain tumors with poor prognosis. Identifying and
targeting novel molecular markers regulating tumor invasion and growth
can lead to development of better therapies. HMGA2, a minor-groove
DNA-binding protein, is a transcriptional modulator in normal and cancer
stem cells. We hypothesized that HMGA2 contributes to pediatric high
grade glioma invasion and tumorigenicity through its ability to alter the
transcription of large numbers of genes. We found increased expression of
HMGA2 in a subset of GBM and DIPG tumors by western blotting and
immunohistochemistry. We confirmed this result in multiple
patient-derived tumor cell lines, including 3 DIPG neurosphere cell
lines. Lentiviral short hairpin RNA (shRNA)-mediated reduction of HMGA2
in GBM cells significantly reduced invasion in transwell assay and colony
formation in soft agar assay (shHMGA2 vs. shControl, PDiffuse intrinsic
pontine glioma (DIPG) and glioblastoma (GBM) are lethal, incurable brain
tumors with poor prognosis. Identifying and targeting novel molecular
markers regulating tumor invasion and growth can lead to development of
better therapies. HMGA2, a minor-groove DNA-binding protein, is a
transcriptional modulator in normal and cancer stem cells. We
hypothesized that HMGA2 contributes to pediatric high grade glioma
invasion and tumorigenicity through its ability to alter the
transcription of large numbers of genes. We found increased expression of
HMGA2 in a subset of GBM and DIPG tumors by western blotting and
immunohistochemistry. We confirmed this result in multiple
patient-derived tumor cell lines, including 3 DIPG neurosphere cell
lines. Lentiviral short hairpin RNA (shRNA)-mediated reduction of HMGA2
in GBM cells significantly reduced invasion in transwell assay and colony
formation in soft agar assay (shHMGA2 vs. shControl, P<0.01). Similarly,
shRNA mediated suppression of HMGA2 in DIPG cell lines reduced
proliferation as measured by BrdU incorporation, reduced invasion by
transwell assay and increased apoptosis by cleaved caspase-3 (CC-3)
immunofluorescence (shHMGA2 vs. shControl, PDiffuse intrinsic pontine
glioma (DIPG) and glioblastoma (GBM) are lethal, incurable brain tumors
with poor prognosis. Identifying and targeting novel molecular markers
regulating tumor invasion and growth can lead to development of better
therapies. HMGA2, a minor-groove DNA-binding protein, is a
transcriptional modulator in normal and cancer stem cells. We
hypothesized that HMGA2 contributes to pediatric high grade glioma
invasion and tumorigenicity through its ability to alter the
transcription of large numbers of genes. We found increased expression of
HMGA2 in a subset of GBM and DIPG tumors by western blotting and
immunohistochemistry. We confirmed this result in multiple
patient-derived tumor cell lines, including 3 DIPG neurosphere cell
lines. Lentiviral short hairpin RNA (shRNA)-mediated reduction of HMGA2
in GBM cells significantly reduced invasion in transwell assay and colony
formation in soft agar assay (shHMGA2 vs. shControl, P<0.01). Similarly,
shRNA mediated suppression of HMGA2 in DIPG cell lines reduced
proliferation as measured by BrdU incorporation, reduced invasion by
transwell assay and increased apoptosis by cleaved caspase-3 (CC-3)
immunofluorescence (shHMGA2 vs. shControl, P<0.01). Pharmacological
inhibition of HMGA proteins using the DNA minor-groove binding drug
Netropsin significantly inhibited growth (BrdU assay) and increased
apoptosis (CC-3 immunofluorescence) of DIPG cell lines (PDiffuse
intrinsic pontine glioma (DIPG) and glioblastoma (GBM) are lethal,
incurable brain tumors with poor prognosis. Identifying and targeting
novel molecular markers regulating tumor invasion and growth can lead to
development of better therapies. HMGA2, a minor-groove DNA-binding
protein, is a transcriptional modulator in normal and cancer stem cells.
We hypothesized that HMGA2 contributes to pediatric high grade glioma
invasion and tumorigenicity through its ability to alter the
transcription of large numbers of genes. We found increased expression of
HMGA2 in a subset of GBM and DIPG tumors by western blotting and
immunohistochemistry. We confirmed this result in multiple
patient-derived tumor cell lines, including 3 DIPG neurosphere cell
lines. Lentiviral short hairpin RNA (shRNA)-mediated reduction of HMGA2
in GBM cells significantly reduced invasion in transwell assay and colony
formation in soft agar assay (shHMGA2 vs. shControl, P<0.01). Similarly,
shRNA mediated suppression of HMGA2 in DIPG cell lines reduced
proliferation as measured by BrdU incorporation, reduced invasion by
transwell assay and increased apoptosis by cleaved caspase-3 (CC-3)
immunofluorescence (shHMGA2 vs. shControl, P<0.01). Pharmacological
inhibition of HMGA proteins using the DNA minor-groove binding drug
Netropsin significantly inhibited growth (BrdU assay) and increased
apoptosis (CC-3 immunofluorescence) of DIPG cell lines (P<0.01). Mice
bearing orthotopic GBM xenograft cell lines transduced with HMGA2 shRNA
lived longer (median survival = 108 days) compared to control shRNA (67.5
days, PDiffuse intrinsic pontine glioma (DIPG) and glioblastoma (GBM) are
lethal, incurable brain tumors with poor prognosis. Identifying and
targeting novel molecular markers regulating tumor invasion and growth
can lead to development of better therapies. HMGA2, a minor-groove
DNA-binding protein, is a transcriptional modulator in normal and cancer
stem cells. We hypothesized that HMGA2 contributes to pediatric high
grade glioma invasion and tumorigenicity through its ability to alter the
transcription of large numbers of genes. We found increased expression of
HMGA2 in a subset of GBM and DIPG tumors by western blotting and
immunohistochemistry. We confirmed this result in multiple
patient-derived tumor cell lines, including 3 DIPG neurosphere cell
lines. Lentiviral short hairpin RNA (shRNA)-mediated reduction of HMGA2
in GBM cells significantly reduced invasion in transwell assay and colony
formation in soft agar assay (shHMGA2 vs. shControl, P<0.01). Similarly,
shRNA mediated suppression of HMGA2 in DIPG cell lines reduced
proliferation as measured by BrdU incorporation, reduced invasion by
transwell assay and increased apoptosis by cleaved caspase-3 (CC-3)
immunofluorescence (shHMGA2 vs. shControl, P<0.01). Pharmacological
inhibition of HMGA proteins using the DNA minor-groove binding drug
Netropsin significantly inhibited growth (BrdU assay) and increased
apoptosis (CC-3 immunofluorescence) of DIPG cell lines (P<0.01). Mice
bearing orthotopic GBM xenograft cell lines transduced with HMGA2 shRNA
lived longer (median survival = 108 days) compared to control shRNA (67.5
days, P<0.0001 by log-rank analysis). Our results suggest an oncogenic
role of HMGA2 in promoting DIPG and GBM invasion and growth, identifying
HMGA2 as a potential therapeutic target in these devastating tumors.
Netropsin or other minor groove binding agents may be effective
therapeutics for pediatric high-grade gliomas.

