Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combining sensitivity markers to identify triple-negative breast
cancer patients most responsive to veliparib/carboplatin: results from
the I-SPY 2 TRIAL


BACKGROUND: In the I-SPY 2 TRIAL, HER2-negative patients received
standard chemotherapy alone or with the PARP inhibitor veliparib and
carboplatin (VC). VC graduated in the triple-negative (TN) subtype, and
weve previously shown that MammaPrint High1/High2 (MP1/2) risk class and
the PARPi-7 signature may predict VC response. Here we evaluate whether
combining these signatures identifies a subset of TN patients especially
likely to respond to VC.METHODS: This analysis includes 60 TN patients
(VC: 39 and controls: 21). PARPi-7 and MP1/2 signature scores are
computed from Agilent 44K arrays. We further stratify TN patients by
VC-sensitivity biomarkers (MP2, PARPi7-high). We use Bayesian modeling to
estimate pCR rates in each arm and the predictive probability of VC
demonstrating superiority to control in a 1:1 randomized phase 3 trial of
300 biomarker-positive patients. Our study is exploratory and does not
adjust for multiplicities of biomarkers outside this study.RESULTS:
Though 90% of TNs are PARPi7-high or MP2, concordance between these
biomarkers is 50%. The estimated pCR rates to VC are 69% in PARPi7-high
and 64% in MP2 TN patients, compared to 53% in the entire TN subgroup. TN
patients positive for both sensitivity markers (assessed as PARPi7-high
and MP2) achieved an estimated pCR rate of 79% in the VC arm vs. 23% in
the control arm, with a predictive probability of success in phase 3 of
99.6%. In contrast, TN patients negative for at least one VC sensitivity
marker (PARPi7-low and/or MP1) only had an estimated response rate to VC
of 35%.
Estimated pCR rates in biomarker subsetsCONCLUSION: Our analysis suggests
TN patients who are also MP2 and PARPi7-high may be more sensitive to V/C
than patients with fewer markers in the sensitive state.

