Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Contribution of Stromal Lymphocytes to Lung Cancer Metastasis:
Role in Epithelial Mesenchymal Transition


The tumor microenvironment and its immune components play a critical role
in cancer development, progression, and control. In this study we aim to
investigate the role of tumor infiltrating lymphocyte subpopulations in
lung cancer progression.Conditioned media (CM) from co-cultures of human
lymphocytes with adenocarcinoma cells (A549) induced the loss of the
epithelial markers (E-Cadherin and ZO2 and an increase of mesenchymal
markers (vimentin, N-cadherin on mRNA and protein level. In addition, the
cells demonstrated a spindled shape-like morphological changes and an
increased migratory property. In order to explore the molecular mechanism
that led to lymphocyte-induced EMT and migration, we performed a cytokine
array from the co-culture CM and found elevated levels of IL-8, IL-16,
CCL2 and G-CSF. Furthermore, we observed that lymphocyte-induced EMT was
mediated via a TGF-independent pathway that involves phosphorylation of
ERK1/2.Notably, this EMT phenotype induction by lymphocytes was
independent of the pre-activation of lymphocytes with PMA. Furthermore,
in order to identify the specific CD4+ T cell subpopulations (Th0, Th1,
Th9 and Th17) responsible for the EMT effect, we generated specific
subpopulations from mouse spleen T cells. Interestingly, we observed that
Th9 and Th17 subpopulation CM led to EMT and increased migratory
phenotype in mouse lung cancer cell lines. Additionally, we identified
the T lymphocyte secretory cytokine, IL9, as responsible for the Th9
induced EMT and migratory phenotype of lung cancer cells.This study
reveals that specific T lymphocyte subpopulations, i.e. Th9 and Th17
induce EMT in lung cancer cells, suggesting T cell regulated mechanisms
of metastasis.

