Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Loss of the ubiquitin protease USP18 represses KRAS mutant lung
cancer tumorigenicity in mice by destabilizing KRAS protein


KRAS is frequently mutated in lung cancers. Innovative strategies are
needed to combat KRAS mutant lung cancers because these tumors are often
resistant to therapy. This study reports that loss of the deubiquitinase
USP18 leads to destabilization of the KRAS oncogenic protein in panels of
murine and human lung cancer cells. In marked contrast, engineered gain
of USP18 expression using retroviral vectors introduced into the same
panel of murine and human lung cancer cells stabilized KRAS protein. Loss
of USP18 expression in KRAS mutant-expressing lung cancer cells inhibited
their growth while gain of USP18 expression opposed this effect. We
sought to identify mechanisms engaged in this KRAS protein
destabilization. Intriguingly, immunoprecipitation assays established
that KRAS conjugates with the ubiquitin-like protein ISG15. This leads to
KRAS protein destabilization. Using the protein synthesis inhibitor
cycloheximide, USP18 knockdown was shown to destabilize mutant KRAS more
prominently than wild-type KRAS protein. To independently confirm that
KRAS directly complexes with ISG15, site-directed mutagenesis was
performed to render the C-terminal domain of KRAS lysine-less. This led
to stabilization of KRAS, despite knockdown of USP18. These studies were
confirmed and extended in the in vivo setting of KRAS-driven lung cancers
in KRASLA2/+ mice within the FVB strain background. We crossed these mice
with USP18 null (USP18-/-) mice to obtain KRASLA2/+;USP18-/- compound
mice. Strikingly, these compound mice had statistically significantly (P
KRAS is frequently mutated in lung cancers. Innovative strategies are
needed to combat KRAS mutant lung cancers because these tumors are often
resistant to therapy. This study reports that loss of the deubiquitinase
USP18 leads to destabilization of the KRAS oncogenic protein in panels of
murine and human lung cancer cells. In marked contrast, engineered gain
of USP18 expression using retroviral vectors introduced into the same
panel of murine and human lung cancer cells stabilized KRAS protein. Loss
of USP18 expression in KRAS mutant-expressing lung cancer cells inhibited
their growth while gain of USP18 expression opposed this effect. We
sought to identify mechanisms engaged in this KRAS protein
destabilization. Intriguingly, immunoprecipitation assays established
that KRAS conjugates with the ubiquitin-like protein ISG15. This leads to
KRAS protein destabilization. Using the protein synthesis inhibitor
cycloheximide, USP18 knockdown was shown to destabilize mutant KRAS more
prominently than wild-type KRAS protein. To independently confirm that
KRAS directly complexes with ISG15, site-directed mutagenesis was
performed to render the C-terminal domain of KRAS lysine-less. This led
to stabilization of KRAS, despite knockdown of USP18. These studies were
confirmed and extended in the in vivo setting of KRAS-driven lung cancers
in KRASLA2/+ mice within the FVB strain background. We crossed these mice
with USP18 null (USP18-/-) mice to obtain KRASLA2/+;USP18-/- compound
mice. Strikingly, these compound mice had statistically significantly (P
< 0.05) reduced lung cancers as compared to parental KRASLA2/+ mice. To
establish the biological importance of this finding, USP18
immunohistochemical expression was compared in these engineered mice
versus a second engineered mouse lung cancer model that was not driven by
KRAS, but by aberrant cyclin E expression. USP18 immunohistochemical
expression was substantially higher in the KRAS-driven than cyclin
E-dependent lung cancers. To explore the translational relevance of this
work, lung cancer tissue arrays were examined in 551 lung cancers where a
clinical database was available. USP18 immunohistochemical expression was
significantly (P KRAS is frequently mutated in lung cancers. Innovative
strategies are needed to combat KRAS mutant lung cancers because these
tumors are often resistant to therapy. This study reports that loss of
the deubiquitinase USP18 leads to destabilization of the KRAS oncogenic
protein in panels of murine and human lung cancer cells. In marked
contrast, engineered gain of USP18 expression using retroviral vectors
introduced into the same panel of murine and human lung cancer cells
stabilized KRAS protein. Loss of USP18 expression in KRAS
mutant-expressing lung cancer cells inhibited their growth while gain of
USP18 expression opposed this effect. We sought to identify mechanisms
engaged in this KRAS protein destabilization. Intriguingly,
immunoprecipitation assays established that KRAS conjugates with the
ubiquitin-like protein ISG15. This leads to KRAS protein destabilization.
Using the protein synthesis inhibitor cycloheximide, USP18 knockdown was
shown to destabilize mutant KRAS more prominently than wild-type KRAS
protein. To independently confirm that KRAS directly complexes with
ISG15, site-directed mutagenesis was performed to render the C-terminal
domain of KRAS lysine-less. This led to stabilization of KRAS, despite
knockdown of USP18. These studies were confirmed and extended in the in
vivo setting of KRAS-driven lung cancers in KRASLA2/+ mice within the FVB
strain background. We crossed these mice with USP18 null (USP18-/-) mice
to obtain KRASLA2/+;USP18-/- compound mice. Strikingly, these compound
mice had statistically significantly (P < 0.05) reduced lung cancers as
compared to parental KRASLA2/+ mice. To establish the biological
importance of this finding, USP18 immunohistochemical expression was
compared in these engineered mice versus a second engineered mouse lung
cancer model that was not driven by KRAS, but by aberrant cyclin E
expression. USP18 immunohistochemical expression was substantially higher
in the KRAS-driven than cyclin E-dependent lung cancers. To explore the
translational relevance of this work, lung cancer tissue arrays were
examined in 551 lung cancers where a clinical database was available.
USP18 immunohistochemical expression was significantly (P < 0.001) higher
in KRAS mutant adenocarcinomas as compared to wild-type cases. There was
also a significant increase in USP18 expression in adenocarcinoma versus
squamous cell carcinoma cases. Taken together, these studies broaden the
role of USP18 as an antineoplastic target to combat lung cancers that
harbor KRAS mutations.

