Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The evaluation of INCB059872, an FAD-directed inhibitor of LSD1,
in preclinical models of human small cell lung cancer


Methylated histone marks on H3K4 and H3K9 are generally coupled with
transcriptional activation and repression, respectively. Altered levels
of these histone methylation marks lead to abnormal gene expression and
are associated with oncogenesis. Lysine specific demethylase 1 (LSD1)
catalyzes demethylation of mono and di-methylated lysine 4 and 9 of
histone H3 via an FAD-dependent redox-process. Deregulated LSD1 activity
perturbs normal gene expression and can lead to cellular transformation.
In particular, the function of LSD1 has been reported to maintain stem
cell-like gene expression patterns in various cancers, most notably small
cell lung cancer (SCLC), a cancer type that is characterized by a highly
undifferentiated state and with high unmet medical need. INCB059872 is a
potent, selective and orally bioavailable inhibitor of LSD1 that achieves
inhibitory activity through the formation of covalent FAD-adducts. The
effect of INCB059872 in SCLC cell lines was assessed in vitro and in
vivo. In these studies, the proliferation of a panel of SCLC cell lines
was inhibited by INCB059872, with EC50 values ranging from 47 to 377 nM.
Non-tumorigenic cells, such as IL-2 stimulated T cells from normal
donors, by contrast, were significantly less sensitive with IC50 values >
10 M. Oral administration of INCB059872 on once daily (QD) and
alternative day (QoD) dosing regimens inhibited tumor growth in the
NCI-H526 and NCI-H1417 human SCLC xenograft models. Consistent with
previous reports, INCB059872 treatment in these models led to the
induction of the FEZ1 and UMODL1 genes relative to vehicle-treated
animals, as part of a gene signature in SCLC cell lines that is
predictive of LSD1 responsiveness. Moreover, serum levels of the
neuroendocrine marker pro-GRP were markedly reduced at all efficacious
dosing regimens in the NCI-H1417 human SCLC xenograft model, suggesting
that serum pro-GRP levels could be used as a surrogate pharmacodynamic
marker of LSD1 inhibition. Currently, the efficacy of INCB059872 in
combination with standard of care therapies for SCLC is under evaluation
in these preclinical models. These data support the clinical evaluation
of INCB059872 in patients with SCLC.

