Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Notch signaling activates B-cell specific enhancers to drive
oncogene targets in B-cell lymphoma


Recurrent gain-of-function mutations in genes encoding Notch receptors
are associated with poor clinical outcome in chronic lymphocytic leukemia
(CLL) and mantle cell lymphoma (MCL), but genome-wide functional targets
of Notch signaling in B cells have not been characterized.We identified
genome-wide binding sites for Notch transcription factor (TF) complexes,
using antibodies specific for intracellular NOTCH1 and its binding
partner RBPJ, in CLL and MCL lymph node biopsies, and lymphoma cell
lines. We employed a gamma-secretase inhibitor washout strategy to
rapidly modulate mutant NOTCH1 protein activation in complementary
lymphoma cell line models of ligand-dependent and ligand-independent
Notch signaling, and performed RNA-sequencing and genome-wide enhancer
acetylation profiling in both the notch on and notch off states. These
data identify a common set of functional Notch target genes in B-cell
lymphoma that includes both canonical Notch targets as well as
B-cell-specific target genes. The latter are frequently associated with
adjacent B-cell-specific enhancers that show direct Notch TF binding and
Notch-signaling-dependent histone acetylation. Notch-activated target
genes include MYC and other TFs implicated in B-cell lymphoma, and are
significantly enriched for mediators of targetable oncogenic lymphoma
signaling pathways, (B-cell receptor, toll-like receptor, JAK-STAT, MAP
kinase, and G-protein signaling pathways, all FDR q-value Recurrent
gain-of-function mutations in genes encoding Notch receptors are
associated with poor clinical outcome in chronic lymphocytic leukemia
(CLL) and mantle cell lymphoma (MCL), but genome-wide functional targets
of Notch signaling in B cells have not been characterized.We identified
genome-wide binding sites for Notch transcription factor (TF) complexes,
using antibodies specific for intracellular NOTCH1 and its binding
partner RBPJ, in CLL and MCL lymph node biopsies, and lymphoma cell
lines. We employed a gamma-secretase inhibitor washout strategy to
rapidly modulate mutant NOTCH1 protein activation in complementary
lymphoma cell line models of ligand-dependent and ligand-independent
Notch signaling, and performed RNA-sequencing and genome-wide enhancer
acetylation profiling in both the notch on and notch off states. These
data identify a common set of functional Notch target genes in B-cell
lymphoma that includes both canonical Notch targets as well as
B-cell-specific target genes. The latter are frequently associated with
adjacent B-cell-specific enhancers that show direct Notch TF binding and
Notch-signaling-dependent histone acetylation. Notch-activated target
genes include MYC and other TFs implicated in B-cell lymphoma, and are
significantly enriched for mediators of targetable oncogenic lymphoma
signaling pathways, (B-cell receptor, toll-like receptor, JAK-STAT, MAP
kinase, and G-protein signaling pathways, all FDR q-value < 1e-3 in KEGG
and / or Reactome analyses). Many B-cell Notch target genes show
significantly increased expression in lymph nodes from patients with
NOTCH1 mutant vs. wild-type CLL. Notch target genes are also up-regulated
in lymph node- versus peripheral blood-derived CLL cells, consistent with
immunohistochemical evidence for microenvironment-dependent Notch
signaling activation in the CLL lymph node. Combined small-molecule
inhibition of Notch and B-cell receptor signaling showed a synergistic
anti-proliferative effect in Notch-dependent lymphoma cells.Our data
reveal the functional regulome of Notch signaling in small B-cell
lymphoma, and may have implications for the role of Notch signaling in
normal B-cell development. These findings suggest novel strategies for
rational combination therapy in CLL and MCL.

