Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pharmacokinetics and biodistribution of LNA-i-miR-221 in NOD.SCID
mice and Cynomolgus monkeys


miRNAs therapeutics is based on the use of oligonucleotide engineered to
efficiently replace or sequester endogenous miRNAs. miR-221 is
upregulated in several tumors, including multiple myeloma (MM), where it
promotes cancer cell proliferation mainly via targeting the negative
regulators of G1/S cell cycle progression p27 and/or p57. We previously
demonstrated that direct miR-221 inhibition by the use of an original LNA
inhibitor, LNA-i-miR-221, induces significant anti-MM activity and
upregulates canonical targets in vitro and in vivo.To assess
pharmacokinetics (PK)/pharmacodynamics of LNA-i-miR-221, we set-up, and
report here, novel assays for oligo quantification in plasma, urine and
tissues of NOD.SCID mice and Cynomolgus monkeys. We investigated the
LNA-i-miR-221 PKs by UHPLC-MS/MS, following solid-phase extraction, in
plasma and urine, and tissue uptake by in-situ hybridization (ISH). In
particular, PK profile was calculated by UHPLC-MS/MS after single dose
i.p injection of LNA-i-miR-221 (25 mg/kg) in mouse and the Tmax was
identified at 1.5 hours with Cmax of 1110 ng/mL. Three hours after bolus
injection, the plasma concentration was about 60% reduced and the
molecule was not detectable at later time-points. The plasma exposure of
the oligo showed an AUClast of 2330 h*ng/mL. Similarly, in monkeys the
LNA-i-miR-221 plasma concentration following a single i.v. bolus
injection (8.75 mg/kg) peaked at a Tmax of hour, with a Cmax of 23600
ng/mL. The plasma exposure of the oligo showed an AUClast of
49300h*ng/mL, C0 of 61400 ng/mL and the t1/2 was 12.8 hours. Urine PK
evaluation was performed in monkey on samples collected from 2 up to 48
hours. The excreted LNA-i-miR-221 was quantified equal to 0.68 mg with a
total urinary recovery of approximately 2.68% of the amount injected
(25,375 mg). Specifically, the urinary concentration/time-points plot
shows the excretion of 9394,5 ng/mL (1.63% of recovery) in the interval
of 2-6 hours. In addition, murine tissues analyzed by ISH revealed strong
signals and long-lasting accumulation of the oligo in mice vital organs
together with upregulation of the main canonical miR-221 target p27, as
assessed by IHC. In addition, ISH analysis excluded that the
LNA-i-miR-221 crosses the blood-brain barrier. All together PK results
demonstrated that LNA-i-miR-221 has a short serum half-life with a rapid
tissue uptake and minimum urinary excretion of the intact molecule, with
a very long tissue half-life and biological activity. Moreover, we report
preliminary toxicity analysis in non-human primates. No changes in the
monkeys behavior, body weight or food consumption were observed in
treated animals.In conclusion our results suggest that LNA-i-miR-221 is a
promising anti-MM agent associated with a favorable PK, long-lasting
tissue bioavailability and good safety profile in mice and in monkeys,
providing the rationale for translation of this novel miR-221 inhibitor
in early clinical investigation

