Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The significance of the expression of E-cadherin and CD44 in
patients with unresectable metastatic colorectal cancer


The loss of the adhesion molecules is reported to correlate with tumor
invasion and metastasis in patients with various cancers. E-cadherin is
an important molecule for cell-to-cell adhesion. While, CD44 is important
for cell-to-extra cellular matrix adhesion. The aim of the present study
is to evaluate the significance of the expression of E-cadherin and CD44
in patients with the unresectable metastatic colorectal cancer who are
undergoing palliative chemotherapy. Formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded
samples were obtained from 49 patients who underwent primary tumor
resection and who were receiving palliative chemotherapy for unresectable
metastatic colorectal cancer. We evaluated the expression of E-cadherin
and CD44 by immunohistochemistry. The expression of E-cadherin was not
significantly associated with progression-free survival (PFS) or overall
survival (OS). Although, the expression of CD44 did not correlate with
PFS, it tended to correlate with the OS (p = 0.0699). According to the
combination of CD44 and E-cadherin, both low expression group showed a
significant poor PFS (p = 0.0101) and OS (p = 0.0009). Objective response
rate and disease control rate were significantly decreased in both low
expression group (p = 0.0076 and p = 0.0294, respectively). A univariate
analysis to determine the variables that were associated with PFS
indicated that the both low expression of E-cadherin and CD44 (p =
0.0474) and gender (p = 0.0330) were significantly associated with
decreased survival. A multivariate analysis showed that the both low
expression of E-cadherin and CD44 was an independent risk factor for
decreased PFS (hazard ratio [HR]: 8.276, 95% confidence interval [CI]:
1.383-43.311; p = 0.0227). According to OS, the both low expression of
E-cadherin and CD44 expression was revealed a prognostic factor by
univariate and multivariate analysis(HR:15.118, 95%CI: 2.645-77.490; p =
0.0039). This study suggested that the combined low expression of both
E-cadherin and CD44 was a strong independent predictor of decreased
chemotherapeutic outcome and survival in patients with unresectable
metastatic colorectal cancer.

