Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exposure to long-term traffic-related air pollutants, NO2 and NOX,
and breast cancer incidence: The Multiethnic Cohort


Introduction: California has one of the highest levels of air pollution
in the nation. Vehicle exhaust contains a mixture of gases and
particulate matter that are known to have mutagenic and carcinogenic
effects. Our objective was to examine the effects of markers of
traffic-related air pollutants on breast cancer risk among the California
component of Multiethnic Cohort (MEC).Methods: Residential addresses from
baseline, 1993-1996, through 2010 for over 57,000 female California MEC
participants were geocoded to latitude and longitude coordinates and used
to estimate traffic-related air pollutant exposures of NO2 and NOX, using
three complementary approaches: 1) land use regression (LUR) models based
on passive diffusion measurements, land use patterns, roadway and traffic
data, and satellite information (high spatial but low temporal
resolution); 2) Bayesian kriging interpolation of state and national
government air monitoring data (low spatial but high temporal
resolution); 3) California line source dispersion model, version 4
(CALINE4) based on local traffic emissions, traffic volume, roadway
geometry, meteorological conditions (high spatial and moderate temporal
resolution). A total of 2,639 incident breast cancer cases (315 Japanese
Americans, 830 Latinas, 974 African Americans and 511 whites) were
identified by linkage to the California cancer registry. Cox proportional
hazard regression was conducted to examine the long-term effects of NO2
and NOX (annual average exposure for up to 18 years), adjusting for age,
race/ethnicity, education, health behaviors, established breast cancer
risk factors, and neighborhood SES.Results: For NO2, per unit (ppb)
increase in the interquartile range, a non-statistically significant
association with breast cancer risk was observed with the LUR model among
all women (OR = 1.04; 95% CI: 0.99-1.09). A significant positive
association was seen in Japanese Americans (OR = 1.20; 95% CI: 1.07-1.34;
p = 0.002) that met a conservative Bonferonni significance threshold (p =
0.003), but no associations were seen in African Americans, Latinas, and
Whites. For NOx, per unit (ppb) increase in the interquartile range, no
significant increased risk of breast cancer was seen with the CALINE4
model among all women, but a positive association was seen in Japanese
Americans (OR = 1.10, 95% CI: 1.02-1.19; p = 0.016). NO2 and NOx
exposures based on the kriging model were not associated with breast
cancer risk among all women or in specific racial/ethnic
groups.Conclusion: These preliminary findings suggest long-term NO2 and
NOX exposure may influence breast cancer risk in Japanese Americans,
using a LUR model of high spatial resolution and a CALINE4 model of high
spatial and moderate temporal resolution. Future analyses will examine
associations with other pollutants and differences in associations by
neighborhood- and individual-level factors.

