Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: FPA144, a therapeutic monoclonal antibody targeting the FGFR2b
receptor, promotes antibody dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity and
stimulates sensitivity to PD-1 in the 4T1 syngeneic tumor model


Five Prime Therapeutics, Inc. has developed an FGFR2b-specific humanized
monoclonal antibody, FPA144, to treat patients with cancer bearing
overexpression of the FGFR2b receptor, and is currently in clinical
trials as a single agent for gastric cancer (NCT02318329). FGFR2 gene
amplification and FGFR2b overexpression occur in approximately 5% of
gastric cancers and are associated with a poor prognosis in gastric
cancer patients. In addition to blocking ligand binding and inducing
FGFR2b internalization, FPA144 is glycoengineered for enhanced
antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC). We have shown
previously that FPA144 can produce complete and durable tumor growth
inhibition in FGFR2b-over-expressing and FGFR2-amplified gastric cancer
xenografts in immune-compromised mice (Gemo et al., Poster 5446, AACR
2014). In order to understand the contribution of the immune system to
the mechanisms of action of FPA144, we evaluated the anti-tumor effects
and immune cell recruitment of FPA144 in the 4T1 model of cancer in
immune-competent mice. Although this model expresses FGFR2b, it is not
FGFR2 amplified. Therapeutic treatment with FPA144 in the orthotopic 4T1
model resulted in a reduction in tumor burden (33%, PFive Prime
Therapeutics, Inc. has developed an FGFR2b-specific humanized monoclonal
antibody, FPA144, to treat patients with cancer bearing overexpression of
the FGFR2b receptor, and is currently in clinical trials as a single
agent for gastric cancer (NCT02318329). FGFR2 gene amplification and
FGFR2b overexpression occur in approximately 5% of gastric cancers and
are associated with a poor prognosis in gastric cancer patients. In
addition to blocking ligand binding and inducing FGFR2b internalization,
FPA144 is glycoengineered for enhanced antibody-dependent cell-mediated
cytotoxicity (ADCC). We have shown previously that FPA144 can produce
complete and durable tumor growth inhibition in FGFR2b-over-expressing
and FGFR2-amplified gastric cancer xenografts in immune-compromised mice
(Gemo et al., Poster 5446, AACR 2014). In order to understand the
contribution of the immune system to the mechanisms of action of FPA144,
we evaluated the anti-tumor effects and immune cell recruitment of FPA144
in the 4T1 model of cancer in immune-competent mice. Although this model
expresses FGFR2b, it is not FGFR2 amplified. Therapeutic treatment with
FPA144 in the orthotopic 4T1 model resulted in a reduction in tumor
burden (33%, P<0.001) and concomitant recruitment of NK cells to the site
of tumor implantation, while a modified antibody lacking Fc effector
function neither inhibited tumor growth nor lead to the recruitment of NK
cells. Together these data support a potential role for ADCC as a
mechanism of FPA144 tumor growth inhibition. In addition, treatment with
FPA144 increased PD-L1 expressing cells within the tumor
microenvironment, providing a strong rationale that FPA144 may combine
effectively with PD-1 blockade for additional tumor growth inhibition.
PD-1 blockade by the RPM1-14 antibody did not inhibit tumor growth as a
single agent in the 4T1 model. Treatment with RPM1-14 in combination with
FPA144, however, inhibited tumor growth by 49% (PFive Prime Therapeutics,
Inc. has developed an FGFR2b-specific humanized monoclonal antibody,
FPA144, to treat patients with cancer bearing overexpression of the
FGFR2b receptor, and is currently in clinical trials as a single agent
for gastric cancer (NCT02318329). FGFR2 gene amplification and FGFR2b
overexpression occur in approximately 5% of gastric cancers and are
associated with a poor prognosis in gastric cancer patients. In addition
to blocking ligand binding and inducing FGFR2b internalization, FPA144 is
glycoengineered for enhanced antibody-dependent cell-mediated
cytotoxicity (ADCC). We have shown previously that FPA144 can produce
complete and durable tumor growth inhibition in FGFR2b-over-expressing
and FGFR2-amplified gastric cancer xenografts in immune-compromised mice
(Gemo et al., Poster 5446, AACR 2014). In order to understand the
contribution of the immune system to the mechanisms of action of FPA144,
we evaluated the anti-tumor effects and immune cell recruitment of FPA144
in the 4T1 model of cancer in immune-competent mice. Although this model
expresses FGFR2b, it is not FGFR2 amplified. Therapeutic treatment with
FPA144 in the orthotopic 4T1 model resulted in a reduction in tumor
burden (33%, P<0.001) and concomitant recruitment of NK cells to the site
of tumor implantation, while a modified antibody lacking Fc effector
function neither inhibited tumor growth nor lead to the recruitment of NK
cells. Together these data support a potential role for ADCC as a
mechanism of FPA144 tumor growth inhibition. In addition, treatment with
FPA144 increased PD-L1 expressing cells within the tumor
microenvironment, providing a strong rationale that FPA144 may combine
effectively with PD-1 blockade for additional tumor growth inhibition.
PD-1 blockade by the RPM1-14 antibody did not inhibit tumor growth as a
single agent in the 4T1 model. Treatment with RPM1-14 in combination with
FPA144, however, inhibited tumor growth by 49% (P<0.001), demonstrating
an additive benefit of combination therapy. Overall, these data suggest
that the enhanced ADCC activity of FPA144 may be critical for anti-tumor
efficacy in tumors that have modest expression of FGFR2b. In addition,
FPA144 may reprogram the tumor micro-environment in a way that primes the
tumor for additional anti-tumor activity when combined with PD-1 blockade.

