Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genome-wide CRISPR-Cas9 screens reveal loss of redundancy between
PKMYT1 and WEE1 in patient-derived glioblastoma stem-like cells


Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most aggressive and common form of
brain cancer in adults. There are currently no effective therapies for
GBM. Even with standard of care treatments, such as surgery, radiation,
and chemotherapy, 90% of adult patients die within 2 years of diagnosis.
To identify therapeutic targets for Glioblastoma (GBM), we performed
genome-wide CRISPR-Cas9 knockout (KO) screens in patient-derived GBM
stem-like cells (GSCs) and human neural stem/progenitors (NSCs),
non-neoplastic stem cell controls, for genes required for their in vitro
growth. Surprisingly, the vast majority GSC-lethal hits were found
outside of molecular networks commonly altered in GBM and GSCs (e.g.,
oncogenic drivers). In vitro and in vivo validation of GSC-specific
targets revealed several strong hits, including the wee1-like kinase,
PKMYT1/Myt1. Mechanistic studies demonstrated that PKMYT1 acts
redundantly with WEE1 to inhibit Cyclin B-CDK1 activity via CDK1-Y15
phosphorylation and to promote timely completion of mitosis in NSCs.
However, in GSCs, this redundancy is lost, likely as a result of
oncogenic signaling, causing GBM-specific lethality. From a biological
standpoint, our results help re-discover PKMYT1 function in human cells.
From a cancer standpoint, these results suggest that targeting PKMYT1 is
a glioma-lethal gene and that tandem or sequential use of PKMYT1 and WEE1
inhibitors may illicit therapeutic responses in GBM. In addition to these
results we will also present retest data for other candidate
glioma-lethal genes and networks in multiple patient samples.

