Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Isolated cannabidiol from Cannabis sativa plant extracts inhibit
growth and induce apoptosis in cervical cancer cells


Cervical cancer remains a global health related issue among females of
Sub-Saharan Africa, with over half a million new cases reported each
year. Different therapeutic regimens have been suggested in various
regions of Africa, however, over a quarter of a million women die of
cervical cancer, annually. Therefore, it is important to search for new
drugs through effective screening of medicinal plant extracts to identify
lead anti-cervical cancer drugs. The aim of this study was to evaluate
for the anti-growth effects of Cannabis sativa extracts and its isolate,
cannabidiol on cervical cancer cell lines HeLa, SiHa, and ME-180. To
determine for the presence of important constituents and evaluate for the
anti-growth effects, phytochemical screening, MTT assay, cell growth
analysis, flow cytometry, morphology analysis, Western blot, caspase 3/7
assay, and ATP measurement assay were conducted were conducted. Results
obtained indicate that both plant extracts induced cell death at an IC50
of 50 - 100g/ml and the Inhibition of cell growth was cell line
dependent. Flow cytometry confirmed that, with or without cell cycle
arrest, the type of induced cell death was apoptosis. Cannabis sativa
extracts led to the up-regulation of apoptosis proteins (p53, Bax,
caspase-3, and caspase-9) and the down regulation of anti-apoptosis
proteins (Bcl-2 and RBBP6), signalling the execution of apoptosis.
Apoptosis induction was further confirmed by morphological changes, an
increase in Caspase 3/7 and a decrease in the ATP levels. In conclusion,
this data implies Cannabis sativa crude extracts has the potential to
inhibit growth and induce apoptosis in cervical cancer cell lines, which
may be due to the presence of cannabidiol.

