Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of an improved derivative of the Rac/PAK
inhibitor EHop-016 in breast cancer


The expression and activities of the Rho GTPases Rac and Cdc42, and their
downstream effector P21-activated kinase (PAK), have been correlated with
metastatic cancer. Our published studies with the Rac/PAK inhibitor
EHop-016 demonstrate the validity of using Rac inhibitors as anti
metastatic cancer therapeutics. However, the relatively high effective
concentrations (Rac activity IC50 1M, tumor inhibition at 25 mg/kg body
weight (BW)), and the moderate bioavailability (30%, t1/2 4.5h) of
EHop-016 need improvement. Therefore, we developed EHop-016 derivatives
and identified EHop-167 as a Rac inhibitor at nM concentrations. Unlike
EHop-016, which does not substantially change breast cancer cell shape,
but only reduces cell surface actin based invadopodia, EHop-167 induced a
marked decrease in breast cancer cell polarity, cell surface extensions,
and cell-extracellular matrix (ECM) attachments (focal adhesions). This
phenotype of cell rounding and detachment in response to EHop-167 was
demonstrated only by breast cancer cell lines that have undergone
epithelial to mesenchymal transition, but not by epithelial breast cancer
cells, or MCF-10A mammary epithelial cells. As assessed by pulldown
assays and western blotting, Rac and PAK activities were reduced by
80-90% in response to 250 nM EHop-167, in the detached cells. As
demonstrated by caspase assays, the cell rounding and detachment from the
ECM ultimately resulted in anoikis (cell death due to loss of focal
adhesions). Accordingly, Transwell assays of mesenchymal breast cancer
cells following 250 nM Ehop-167 showed a 90% reduction in cell migration
in the detached breast cancer cells, and a 60% inhibition in the attached
cells. EHop-167 also reduced the mammosphere formation efficiency of
metastatic cancer cells by 50%, indicating an inhibitory effect on cancer
stem cells. To determine the in vivo efficacy of EHop-167, athymic nude
mice, bearing mammary fatpad tumors of MDA-MB-435 metastatic cancer
cells, were treated 3X a week with 0, 1, or 10 mg/kg BW EHop-167 for 50
days. Treatment with 1.0 mg/kg BW EHop-167 resulted in a 50% reduction in
tumor growth, while 10.0 mg/kg BW EHop-167 induced an 95% reduction in
tumor growth, compared to controls. Additionally, these mice did not show
gross signs of toxicity or significant weight loss. Since the parental
compound EHop-016 has no anticancer effects at similar concentrations, we
conclude that EHop-167 is an improved Rac/PAK inhibitor that holds
promise as an anti metastatic breast cancer therapeutic.

