Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Lung adenocarcinoma differential expression analysis using the
Maverix RNA-Seq pipeline


BackgroundRNA-Seq is a powerful means of identifying changes in gene
expression in cancerous tissue. Widespread adoption of RNA-Seq is
hampered by lack of familiarity with the appropriate analysis tools and
excessive turn around time. Maverix Biomics, Inc offers a scalable,
reliable, validated, and easily accessible differential expression
pipeline for translational and clinical researchers to analyze and
explore RNA-Seq data. Here we describe the pipeline, demonstrate the
available tools and visualizations, and provide benchmarks for completion
time from lung adenocarcinoma.ResultsLung adenocarcinoma samples appear
very different compared to their normal counterparts in terms of overall
gene expression and exhibit many differentially expressed genes. For
analysis completion time, parallelization is far superior than the
theoretical curve without parallelization. It took 7.9 hours to analyze
two samples, but took only 13.1 hours to analyze 25 samples. We found
2246 significant genes common to three different differential expression
tools: DESeq, edgeR, and cuffdiff.ConclusionsThe Maverix RNA-Seq pipeline
is demonstrated here to be highly scalable, easy to use, and includes a
range of tools and visualizations for understanding differential
expressions results. This pipeline is a great analytic option to
accelerate translational and clinical research in the field of oncology.

