Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor-targeting Salmonella typhimurium A1-R promotes CD8+ T cell
infiltration in pancreatic cancer in an orthotopic syngeneic mouse model


The effect of tumor-targeting Salmonella typhimurium A1-R on CD8+ cell
infiltration was determined on Pan02 murine pancreatic adenocarcinoma
cells implanted orthotopically on the pancreatic tail of C57BL/6 mice.
Three weeks after orthotopic implantation, mice were randomized into G1:
untreated control group (n = 8); and G2: Salmonella typhimurium A1-R
treatment group (n = 8, 1 107 CFU/body, iv, weekly, 3 weeks). On the 22nd
day from initial treatment, all mice were sacrificed and tumors were
harvested. The tumor volume ratio was defined as ratio of tumor volume at
the 1st day to the 22nd day. H&E staining was performed to evaluate tumor
destruction which was classified into 4 categories according to the Evans
grading system: Grade I; 0-9% destruction, Grade IIA; 10-50% destruction,
Grade IIB; 51-90% destruction, Grade III; few (The effect of
tumor-targeting Salmonella typhimurium A1-R on CD8+ cell infiltration was
determined on Pan02 murine pancreatic adenocarcinoma cells implanted
orthotopically on the pancreatic tail of C57BL/6 mice. Three weeks after
orthotopic implantation, mice were randomized into G1: untreated control
group (n = 8); and G2: Salmonella typhimurium A1-R treatment group (n =
8, 1 107 CFU/body, iv, weekly, 3 weeks). On the 22nd day from initial
treatment, all mice were sacrificed and tumors were harvested. The tumor
volume ratio was defined as ratio of tumor volume at the 1st day to the
22nd day. H&E staining was performed to evaluate tumor destruction which
was classified into 4 categories according to the Evans grading system:
Grade I; 0-9% destruction, Grade IIA; 10-50% destruction, Grade IIB;
51-90% destruction, Grade III; few (<10%) viable cancer cells.
Immunohistochemical staining using anti-mouse CD8+ antibody was performed
to count tumor infiltrating CD8+ cells. The tumor volume ratio was
significantly lower in G2 (3.0 2.8) than G1 (39.9 30.7, p The effect of
tumor-targeting Salmonella typhimurium A1-R on CD8+ cell infiltration was
determined on Pan02 murine pancreatic adenocarcinoma cells implanted
orthotopically on the pancreatic tail of C57BL/6 mice. Three weeks after
orthotopic implantation, mice were randomized into G1: untreated control
group (n = 8); and G2: Salmonella typhimurium A1-R treatment group (n =
8, 1 107 CFU/body, iv, weekly, 3 weeks). On the 22nd day from initial
treatment, all mice were sacrificed and tumors were harvested. The tumor
volume ratio was defined as ratio of tumor volume at the 1st day to the
22nd day. H&E staining was performed to evaluate tumor destruction which
was classified into 4 categories according to the Evans grading system:
Grade I; 0-9% destruction, Grade IIA; 10-50% destruction, Grade IIB;
51-90% destruction, Grade III; few (<10%) viable cancer cells.
Immunohistochemical staining using anti-mouse CD8+ antibody was performed
to count tumor infiltrating CD8+ cells. The tumor volume ratio was
significantly lower in G2 (3.0 2.8) than G1 (39.9 30.7, p < 0.01). Six
mice in G1 had peritoneal dissemination whereas no mice showed peritoneal
dissemination in G2 (p The effect of tumor-targeting Salmonella
typhimurium A1-R on CD8+ cell infiltration was determined on Pan02 murine
pancreatic adenocarcinoma cells implanted orthotopically on the
pancreatic tail of C57BL/6 mice. Three weeks after orthotopic
implantation, mice were randomized into G1: untreated control group (n =
8); and G2: Salmonella typhimurium A1-R treatment group (n = 8, 1 107
CFU/body, iv, weekly, 3 weeks). On the 22nd day from initial treatment,
all mice were sacrificed and tumors were harvested. The tumor volume
ratio was defined as ratio of tumor volume at the 1st day to the 22nd
day. H&E staining was performed to evaluate tumor destruction which was
classified into 4 categories according to the Evans grading system: Grade
I; 0-9% destruction, Grade IIA; 10-50% destruction, Grade IIB; 51-90%
destruction, Grade III; few (<10%) viable cancer cells.
Immunohistochemical staining using anti-mouse CD8+ antibody was performed
to count tumor infiltrating CD8+ cells. The tumor volume ratio was
significantly lower in G2 (3.0 2.8) than G1 (39.9 30.7, p < 0.01). Six
mice in G1 had peritoneal dissemination whereas no mice showed peritoneal
dissemination in G2 (p < 0.01). Significant tumor destruction was
observed in G2 (Grade I: 0, Grade IIA: 1, Grade IIB: 6, Grade III: 1)
compared to G1 (Grade I: 5, Grade IIA: 3, Grade IIB: 0, Grade III: 0, p
The effect of tumor-targeting Salmonella typhimurium A1-R on CD8+ cell
infiltration was determined on Pan02 murine pancreatic adenocarcinoma
cells implanted orthotopically on the pancreatic tail of C57BL/6 mice.
Three weeks after orthotopic implantation, mice were randomized into G1:
untreated control group (n = 8); and G2: Salmonella typhimurium A1-R
treatment group (n = 8, 1 107 CFU/body, iv, weekly, 3 weeks). On the 22nd
day from initial treatment, all mice were sacrificed and tumors were
harvested. The tumor volume ratio was defined as ratio of tumor volume at
the 1st day to the 22nd day. H&E staining was performed to evaluate tumor
destruction which was classified into 4 categories according to the Evans
grading system: Grade I; 0-9% destruction, Grade IIA; 10-50% destruction,
Grade IIB; 51-90% destruction, Grade III; few (<10%) viable cancer cells.
Immunohistochemical staining using anti-mouse CD8+ antibody was performed
to count tumor infiltrating CD8+ cells. The tumor volume ratio was
significantly lower in G2 (3.0 2.8) than G1 (39.9 30.7, p < 0.01). Six
mice in G1 had peritoneal dissemination whereas no mice showed peritoneal
dissemination in G2 (p < 0.01). Significant tumor destruction was
observed in G2 (Grade I: 0, Grade IIA: 1, Grade IIB: 6, Grade III: 1)
compared to G1 (Grade I: 5, Grade IIA: 3, Grade IIB: 0, Grade III: 0, p <
0.01). Tumor infiltrating CD8+ cells per high-magnification field were
significantly higher in G2 (133.5 32.2) than G1 (45.1 19.4, p The effect
of tumor-targeting Salmonella typhimurium A1-R on CD8+ cell infiltration
was determined on Pan02 murine pancreatic adenocarcinoma cells implanted
orthotopically on the pancreatic tail of C57BL/6 mice. Three weeks after
orthotopic implantation, mice were randomized into G1: untreated control
group (n = 8); and G2: Salmonella typhimurium A1-R treatment group (n =
8, 1 107 CFU/body, iv, weekly, 3 weeks). On the 22nd day from initial
treatment, all mice were sacrificed and tumors were harvested. The tumor
volume ratio was defined as ratio of tumor volume at the 1st day to the
22nd day. H&E staining was performed to evaluate tumor destruction which
was classified into 4 categories according to the Evans grading system:
Grade I; 0-9% destruction, Grade IIA; 10-50% destruction, Grade IIB;
51-90% destruction, Grade III; few (<10%) viable cancer cells.
Immunohistochemical staining using anti-mouse CD8+ antibody was performed
to count tumor infiltrating CD8+ cells. The tumor volume ratio was
significantly lower in G2 (3.0 2.8) than G1 (39.9 30.7, p < 0.01). Six
mice in G1 had peritoneal dissemination whereas no mice showed peritoneal
dissemination in G2 (p < 0.01). Significant tumor destruction was
observed in G2 (Grade I: 0, Grade IIA: 1, Grade IIB: 6, Grade III: 1)
compared to G1 (Grade I: 5, Grade IIA: 3, Grade IIB: 0, Grade III: 0, p <
0.01). Tumor infiltrating CD8+ cells per high-magnification field were
significantly higher in G2 (133.5 32.2) than G1 (45.1 19.4, p < 0.001).
Strong tumor destruction correlated with higher numbers of
tumor-infiltrating CD8+ cells per high-magnification field (Grade I: 35.5
18.3, Grade IIA: 77.3 32.8 Grade IIB and III: 134.7 34.8). The present
study demonstrates that Salmonella typhimurium A1-R promotes CD8+ T cell
infiltration in a syngeneic pancreatic cancer mouse model.

