Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ERG-negative index tumor status combined with obesity predict
prostate cancer progression in Caucasian American prostate cancer patients


Introduction: and Objectives: A significantly lower prevalence of ERG
oncoprotein has been reported for African American (AA) compared to
Caucasian American (CA) prostate cancer (PCa) patients. This difference
has been observed when examining prostate cancer (PCa) index tumors as
well as for comparisons of non-index tumor foci. To evaluate the
potential of ERG status in predicting disease progression, this study
examined a large cohort of AA and CA PCa patients within a racially
diverse, equal access, military health care center.Methods:
Representative sections of whole mounted prostatectomy specimens from AA
(n = 373) and CA (n = 684) patients were evaluated for ERG oncoprotein
status by immunohistochemistry. Demographic, clinical, and pathologic
patient features, including body mass index, were compared across ERG
status (positive vs. negative). Time to event regression analysis was
used to model ERG status as a putative predictor of biochemical
recurrence (BCR) and distant metastasis.Results: A significantly lower
prevalence of ERG positivity was noted in both index and non-index tumors
of AA patients as compared to CA patients. Among CA patients only,
ERG-negative index tumors were associated with greater odds of developing
BCR and metastasis. Similarly, among CA patients only, having an ERG
negative index tumor and being obese at time of prostatectomy was
strongly associated with developing biochemical recurrence and
metastasis.Conclusions: These provocative data warrant further
investigation of the combined roles between race, obesity, and ERG status
on PCa progression. Despite a robust sample size of AA men, the absence
of statistically significant associations between ERG and obesity status
on disease progression among AA patients could be attributed to
insufficient statistical power.Source of Funding: This research was
supported by the National Cancer Institute R01CA162383 grant to SS, by
the Center for Prostate Disease Research and by the EDRN/NCI ACN12011-001
to GP, AD, IAS, DGM and SS.

