Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Interleukin-6 as potential predictive marker for therapeutic
effect of Gefitinib in patients with advanced non-small-cell lung cancer
harboring EGFR mutations


Background: Although epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) -tyrosine
kinase inhibitors (TKIs) are the key drug in patients with EGFR-mutant
(mt) Non-small-cell Lung Cancer (NSCLC), some of them can not respond
well to its therapy. An overexpression of Interleukin (IL)-6 in tumor
cells is postulated as a potential mechanism for such resistance or low
sensitivity to EGFR-TKI in the preclinical models (PNAS 2010). Here, we
evaluated clinically if tumor IL-6 level can be predictive for the effect
of EGFR-TKI therapy, and evaluated the expression of IL-6 in EGFR-mt
NSCLC cell-lines, and the effect of EGFR-TKI.Methods: A total of 52 pts
with advanced EGFR-mt NSCLC who had received gefitinib (G) were
retrospectively assessed. The protein expression of IL-6 in the tumor
cells was immunostained. Each specimen was assessed independently by 2
physicians (TT and YK) and 2 pathologists (KI and TT), and judged as
positive if 50% of 100 tumor cells were stained positively (BJC 1999).
Serum IL-6 level was measured by CLEIA in 11 (21%) of 52 pts.Next we
checked 13 EGFR-mt NSCLC cell lines. Enzyme linked immunosorbent assay
(ELISA) and real time PCR (RT-PCR) of cell culture supernate were
peformed.Results: Patients demographics were as follows: 24 men; median
age, 66 yrs; PS 0-1, 48; stage IV, 22; Ad, 49; exon19, 29. Of these, 24
(46%) and 28 (54%) were defined as IL-6-postitive (group P) and
IL-6-negative (group N), respectively. Group P had worse PFS (75% v 92%
at 6m; p Background: Although epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
-tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) are the key drug in patients with
EGFR-mutant (mt) Non-small-cell Lung Cancer (NSCLC), some of them can not
respond well to its therapy. An overexpression of Interleukin (IL)-6 in
tumor cells is postulated as a potential mechanism for such resistance or
low sensitivity to EGFR-TKI in the preclinical models (PNAS 2010). Here,
we evaluated clinically if tumor IL-6 level can be predictive for the
effect of EGFR-TKI therapy, and evaluated the expression of IL-6 in
EGFR-mt NSCLC cell-lines, and the effect of EGFR-TKI.Methods: A total of
52 pts with advanced EGFR-mt NSCLC who had received gefitinib (G) were
retrospectively assessed. The protein expression of IL-6 in the tumor
cells was immunostained. Each specimen was assessed independently by 2
physicians (TT and YK) and 2 pathologists (KI and TT), and judged as
positive if 50% of 100 tumor cells were stained positively (BJC 1999).
Serum IL-6 level was measured by CLEIA in 11 (21%) of 52 pts.Next we
checked 13 EGFR-mt NSCLC cell lines. Enzyme linked immunosorbent assay
(ELISA) and real time PCR (RT-PCR) of cell culture supernate were
peformed.Results: Patients demographics were as follows: 24 men; median
age, 66 yrs; PS 0-1, 48; stage IV, 22; Ad, 49; exon19, 29. Of these, 24
(46%) and 28 (54%) were defined as IL-6-postitive (group P) and
IL-6-negative (group N), respectively. Group P had worse PFS (75% v 92%
at 6m; p < 0.05), which was retained in the multivariate analysis (HR:
2.38; 95%CI: 1.00-5.68; p = 0.05). In contrast, PFS in the platinum-based
chemotherapy did not differ in groups P and N (p = 0.47). The serum IL-6
level ranged from 0.75 to 23.80 pg/ml (median: 2.90 pg/ml), which
correlated neither to that in the tumor cells (regression coefficient:
1.69, p = 0.29) nor PFS in gefitinib therapy (p = 0.44).The IL-6 level in
cell culture supernatant was ranged from 1.46 to 1219.75 pg/ml (median:
85.84 pg/ml). 2 of 13 cell lines showed especially high IL-6 level; IL-6
level of 11-18 was 1090.91 pg/ml and H1650 was 1219.75 pg/ml. RT-PCR also
showed the high expression level of IL-6 mRNA in 11-18 and H1650 compared
with other cell lines. 11-18 and H1650 showed low sensitivity to G
therapy.Conclusions: Pts in group P benefited less from G therapy.In
vitro experiment suggested that secretion of IL-6 may confer the less
sensitivity to EGFR-TKIs. These data suggest that the expression of IL-6
lead to early acquisition of resistance to EGFR-TKIs in EGFR-mt tumors.

