Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Detection of PSMA on circulating tumor cells from blood of
prostate cancer patients using anti-PSMA Centyrin


Prostate specific membrane antigen (PSMA), a transmembrane glycoprotein,
is a clinically validated marker of prostate cancer. PSMA is
overexpressed in primary and metastatic prostate cancer when compared to
normal prostate tissue which makes it an attractive target for
immunotherapy. Several antibodies are being considered to target PSMA for
the development of an anticancer drug. The expression levels of PSMA on
tumor cells may play a role in response to treatment with anti PSMA
drugs. Therefore, it is important to monitor PSMA expression on tumor
cells before and during treatment. We used CellSearch CTC assay to
determine the presence of PSMA on circulating tumor cells (CTCs) using
anti PSMA Centyrin as a biomarker. Centyrins are a class of alternative
scaffold molecules which are proteins of small size ( 10 kDa). They are
engineered to bind to target molecules with high specificity and
sensitivity. The anti PSMA Centyrin was tested for specificity and
sensitivity using tissue cultured tumor cell lines spiked into normal
healthy blood and then compared to anti PSMA antibody. The anti PSMA
Centyrin showed 100% positivity with the high PSMA expressing cell line
(LNCap), 25% positivity with the low PSMA expressing cell line (22Rv1)
and 0% positivity with the PSMA negative cell line (PC3-9). The anti PSMA
Centyrin was further tested with prostate patient blood samples to
determine the expression levels of PSMA on CTCs. The patient samples
which contain CTCs are positive for anti PSMA Centyrin and the percentage
of CTCs positive for PSMA ranged from 25-100%. Thus, PSMA expression on
CTCs can be determined using CellSearch system and anti PSMA Centyrin as
a biomarker in a clinical trial.

