Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of adenosine A2A receptor (A2AR) by CPI-444 enhances
CD8+ T cell killing of a HER-2/neu expressing murine tumor


Immunotherapies such as checkpoint inhibitors that block immune
suppressive mechanisms are transforming the way some cancers are treated.
The identification of additional mechanisms that suppress immune cell
function is stimulating the search for other immune modulating agents
that are additive or synergistic with current immune checkpoint
inhibitors or are capable of overcoming mechanisms of resistance and
tolerance. Extracellular adenosine and its signaling through A2AR
increases the activity of regulatory T cells (Tregs), and attenuates
tumor-specific CD4+/CD8+ T cells. In this study we evaluated the role of
a small-molecule inhibitor of A2AR in enhancing antitumor immunity
against murine Her-2/neu (neu)-expressing breast cancer. We examined
whether an A2AR inhibitor would enhance the activity of cancer specific
CD8+ T cells when given with a T cell inducing vaccine. To test this,
neu-expressing mammary tumor bearing HER-2/neu transgenic (Neu-N) mice
were treated with low dose cyclophosphamide (Cy) to deplete Tregs
followed one day later with a granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating
factor (GM-CSF) and neu-expressing whole cell vaccine (GVAX). Mice were
treated with the A2AR inhibitor, CPI-444, by oral gavage daily for twelve
days. Mice also received adoptively transferred high-avidity nave
neu-specific CD8+ T cells intravenously one day after vaccination. Mice
were monitored for tumor progression, and tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes
(TIL) were harvested from additional mice at multiple time points and
analyzed for T cell activation by flow cytometry. Inflammatory changes in
the tumor microenvironment were assessed by immunohistochemistry. We
found that T cells adoptively transferred to mice together with Cy, a
neu-targeted vaccine and CPI-444 are more effective at reducing
established tumors and delaying tumor progression when compared with mice
treated with Cy, vaccine, adoptively transferred T cells and vehicle
control. Of particular note, mice receiving the same treatment but with
CPI-444 in lieu of vehicle had a significant mean difference in tumor
area of 6.446mm2 (PImmunotherapies such as checkpoint inhibitors that
block immune suppressive mechanisms are transforming the way some cancers
are treated. The identification of additional mechanisms that suppress
immune cell function is stimulating the search for other immune
modulating agents that are additive or synergistic with current immune
checkpoint inhibitors or are capable of overcoming mechanisms of
resistance and tolerance. Extracellular adenosine and its signaling
through A2AR increases the activity of regulatory T cells (Tregs), and
attenuates tumor-specific CD4+/CD8+ T cells. In this study we evaluated
the role of a small-molecule inhibitor of A2AR in enhancing antitumor
immunity against murine Her-2/neu (neu)-expressing breast cancer. We
examined whether an A2AR inhibitor would enhance the activity of cancer
specific CD8+ T cells when given with a T cell inducing vaccine. To test
this, neu-expressing mammary tumor bearing HER-2/neu transgenic (Neu-N)
mice were treated with low dose cyclophosphamide (Cy) to deplete Tregs
followed one day later with a granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating
factor (GM-CSF) and neu-expressing whole cell vaccine (GVAX). Mice were
treated with the A2AR inhibitor, CPI-444, by oral gavage daily for twelve
days. Mice also received adoptively transferred high-avidity nave
neu-specific CD8+ T cells intravenously one day after vaccination. Mice
were monitored for tumor progression, and tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes
(TIL) were harvested from additional mice at multiple time points and
analyzed for T cell activation by flow cytometry. Inflammatory changes in
the tumor microenvironment were assessed by immunohistochemistry. We
found that T cells adoptively transferred to mice together with Cy, a
neu-targeted vaccine and CPI-444 are more effective at reducing
established tumors and delaying tumor progression when compared with mice
treated with Cy, vaccine, adoptively transferred T cells and vehicle
control. Of particular note, mice receiving the same treatment but with
CPI-444 in lieu of vehicle had a significant mean difference in tumor
area of 6.446mm2 (P<0.05) when compared to the vaccine and vehicle
control cohort. When compared to the tumor alone cohort, mice receiving
the full therapeutic regimen had a significant mean difference in tumor
area of 13.59mm2 (PImmunotherapies such as checkpoint inhibitors that
block immune suppressive mechanisms are transforming the way some cancers
are treated. The identification of additional mechanisms that suppress
immune cell function is stimulating the search for other immune
modulating agents that are additive or synergistic with current immune
checkpoint inhibitors or are capable of overcoming mechanisms of
resistance and tolerance. Extracellular adenosine and its signaling
through A2AR increases the activity of regulatory T cells (Tregs), and
attenuates tumor-specific CD4+/CD8+ T cells. In this study we evaluated
the role of a small-molecule inhibitor of A2AR in enhancing antitumor
immunity against murine Her-2/neu (neu)-expressing breast cancer. We
examined whether an A2AR inhibitor would enhance the activity of cancer
specific CD8+ T cells when given with a T cell inducing vaccine. To test
this, neu-expressing mammary tumor bearing HER-2/neu transgenic (Neu-N)
mice were treated with low dose cyclophosphamide (Cy) to deplete Tregs
followed one day later with a granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating
factor (GM-CSF) and neu-expressing whole cell vaccine (GVAX). Mice were
treated with the A2AR inhibitor, CPI-444, by oral gavage daily for twelve
days. Mice also received adoptively transferred high-avidity nave
neu-specific CD8+ T cells intravenously one day after vaccination. Mice
were monitored for tumor progression, and tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes
(TIL) were harvested from additional mice at multiple time points and
analyzed for T cell activation by flow cytometry. Inflammatory changes in
the tumor microenvironment were assessed by immunohistochemistry. We
found that T cells adoptively transferred to mice together with Cy, a
neu-targeted vaccine and CPI-444 are more effective at reducing
established tumors and delaying tumor progression when compared with mice
treated with Cy, vaccine, adoptively transferred T cells and vehicle
control. Of particular note, mice receiving the same treatment but with
CPI-444 in lieu of vehicle had a significant mean difference in tumor
area of 6.446mm2 (P<0.05) when compared to the vaccine and vehicle
control cohort. When compared to the tumor alone cohort, mice receiving
the full therapeutic regimen had a significant mean difference in tumor
area of 13.59mm2 (P<0.001). Mechanistic studies are underway to assess
the activity of the adoptively transferred T cells in the TIL. These
studies may provide the rationale to test an A2AR inhibitor in
combination with adoptively transferred T cells and/or vaccines in
patients with cancer.

