Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ER stress, unfolded protein response, and autophagy are
pro-survival responses to fenretinide + safingol treatment in GBM cells


The cytotoxicity of the synthetic retinoid, fenretinide (4-HPR), is
associated with increased dihydroceramide and reactive oxygen species
(ROS) levels and enhanced by co-treatment with safingol (S), an
L-threo-dihydroceramide precursor. The ER stress response displays
dichotomic effects wherein mild short-term stressors activate responses
to neutralize or adapt to stress, but severe or long-lasting stressors
activate cell death cascades. Here, we report that ER stress and
autophagy are pro-survival responses in glioblastoma multiforme (GBM)
cells to unfolded proteins-related cytotoxicity induced by 4-HPR+S in
vitro. In T98G and A172 cells, 4-HPR+S induced mixed cell death
associated with time-dependent increase of TUNEL-positivity (+12-36 h)
and cleavage of caspase-3 (+12-36 h), but pan- caspase inhibitor,
boc-D-fmk, did not rescue cell death. Cytotoxicity (+6-24 h) was
associated with minimal mitochondrial depolarization or dual-staining of
Annexin V/PI. Assays for known non-apoptotic mechanisms were negative.
There was time-dependent (+6-24 h) increase of GRP78 protein levels, a
key regulator of ER stress response; ER stress sensors, PERK, IRE1, and
ATF6, were activated (+6-24 h); levels of pro-apoptotic transcription
factor, CHOP, increased (+6-24 h). Cytotoxicity was increased by PERK
pathway inhibitors, salubrinal (+24-72 h, p0.05), GSK 2606414 (+24-72 h,
p0.05), and GSK 2656157 (+48-72 h, p0.05), indicating that PERK
activation was pro-survival. Treatment increased levels of CHIP, a key
co-chaperone targeting unfolded proteins for degradation (+6-24 h). There
was strong activation of the ubiquitin-proteasome system (UPS) and
autophagy preceding or concurrent with the accumulation of
poly-ubiquitinated proteins (+12-24 h). Autophagy was evidenced by
increased conversion of LC3B-I to LC3B-II (+6-24 h). LC3B-II levels were
increased by lysosomal degradation inhibitor, bafilomycin A1, indicating
increased autophagic flux. Cytosolic levels of HDAC6, a coordinator of
protein turnover via UPS and autophagy through trafficking of protein
aggregates into pre-lysosomal structures (aggresomes) prior to
autophagosome engulfment, increased (+6-24 h). siRNA knockdown of CHIP
enhanced cytotoxicity (+24-72 h, p0.05). siRNA ablation of autophagy
(ATG7, BECN1)(+24-36 h, p0.05), or pharmacological disruption by
mefloquine, increased cytotoxicity (+24-72 h, p0.05), indicating that
autophagy was pro-survival. Cytotoxicity was increased by siRNA knockdown
of HDAC6 (+24-72 h, p0.05) and selective HDAC6 inhibitor, ACY1215,
(+24-72 h, p0.05). Together, these results support that ER
stress/unfolded protein response (UPR) is pro-survival in GBM cells
exposed to 4-HPR+S. This suggests that co-agents that reduce ER stress
response, UPR, or autophagy processes may further sensitize GBM cells to
4-HPR+S.

