Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genome-wide association study identifies two susceptibility loci
that modify radiation-related risk for breast cancer after childhood
cancer: A report from the Childhood Cancer Survivor Study and St. Jude
Lifetime Cohort


Background: Childhood cancer survivors treated with chest radiotherapy
have substantially elevated risk for developing breast cancer. Although
numerous breast cancer susceptibility variants have been established,
genetic predisposition for breast cancer after childhood cancer remains
poorly understood.Methods: We conducted the first genome-wide association
study of subsequent breast cancer in female childhood cancer survivors
within two large-scale cohorts with detailed treatment data and
systematic, long-term follow-up: the Childhood Cancer Survivor Study
[CCSS; 178 breast cancer cases, 2200 controls (survivors without
subsequent neoplasm) of European descent] and the St. Jude Lifetime
Cohort (SJLIFE; 29 cases, 574 controls). Genotyping on the Illumina
HumanOmni5MExome (CCSS) or Affymetrix 6.0 (SJLIFE) array and imputation
based on the 1000 Genomes Project yielded >16 million high quality
genotyped or imputed variants available in both studies. Assuming an
additive genetic model, we used multivariate Cox regression to quantify
the effect of each variant in the overall population and stratified by
receipt of 10 Gray (Gy) or Background: Childhood cancer survivors treated
with chest radiotherapy have substantially elevated risk for developing
breast cancer. Although numerous breast cancer susceptibility variants
have been established, genetic predisposition for breast cancer after
childhood cancer remains poorly understood.Methods: We conducted the
first genome-wide association study of subsequent breast cancer in female
childhood cancer survivors within two large-scale cohorts with detailed
treatment data and systematic, long-term follow-up: the Childhood Cancer
Survivor Study [CCSS; 178 breast cancer cases, 2200 controls (survivors
without subsequent neoplasm) of European descent] and the St. Jude
Lifetime Cohort (SJLIFE; 29 cases, 574 controls). Genotyping on the
Illumina HumanOmni5MExome (CCSS) or Affymetrix 6.0 (SJLIFE) array and
imputation based on the 1000 Genomes Project yielded >16 million high
quality genotyped or imputed variants available in both studies. Assuming
an additive genetic model, we used multivariate Cox regression to
quantify the effect of each variant in the overall population and
stratified by receipt of 10 Gray (Gy) or <10 Gy radiation exposure to the
chest.Results: We identified two loci associated with breast cancer risk
among children who received 10 Gy radiation to the chest (131 cases, 493
controls): one at 1q41 [rs4342822, risk allele frequency (RAF) = 0.46 in
controls, pooled per allele hazard ratio (HR) = 1.94, 95% confidence
interval (CI) = 1.50-2.51, Pexact = 1.20108] and another at 11q23
(rs74949440, RAF = 0.02 in controls, HR = 3.71, 95%CI = 2.18-6.32, Pexact
= 2.00109). Neither locus was associated with breast cancer risk among
children who received 10% of breast cancers in The Cancer Genome Atlas
data. The variant rs74949440 is intronic to TAGLN, whose expression
levels have been associated with breast cancer prognosis and altered cell
death resistance following irradiation in human carcinoma cell
lines.Conclusion: These findings represent the first evidence outside of
identified high-risk cancer susceptibility genes that certain individuals
are genetically predisposed to developing breast cancer after
radiotherapy and suggest that radiation exposure may interact with
germline genetics to modify breast cancer risk.

