Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pharmacokinetic drug-drug interaction: a phase Ib dose escalation
study of LY2780301 in combination with weekly paclitaxel


Introduction: LY2780301 is an orally available small molecule dual
inhibitor of p70 S6 kinase and AKT. LY2780301 is an inhibitor of CYP3A4.
By the one hand, Paclitaxel (PXL) undergoes extensive metabolism via
CYP450 2C8 and CYP450 3A4 pathways. By the other hand, PXL induces weakly
CYP3A4 activity. In this study we investigated for the first time, the
potential pharmacokinetic (PK) drug-drug interaction (DDI) related to the
combination of both drugs LY2780301 and PXL.Methods: Women with HER2-
locally advanced or metastatic breast cancer, with and without PI3/AKT
pathway activation, were treated with weekly administration of PXL on
day1 (D1), D8 and D15. LY2780301 was administered by a daily flat dosing
regimen starting at D3. Dose levels [DL, LY2780301 (mg/day)/PXL
(mg/m2/week)] ranged from 400/70 to 500/80. For PK analysis, 7 time point
samples were collected on D1 and D3 of cycle 1 for PXL and LY2780301
respectively. 7 samples were collected on D8 for both drugs. LY2780301
plasma concentrations were measured using Ultra Performance Liquid
Chromatography (UPLC) coupled with tandem mass spectrometry validated
method. PXL plasma concentrations were measured using UPLC coupled with
UV validated method. A joint population PK (PK-POP) model has been
developed for LY2780301 andits main metabolite. PK-POP modelling has been
performed with a non linear mixed effect model program (Monolix version
4.3.2).Results: 12 patients, 35 to 67 years old, were treated. A total of
160 and 157 concentrations for LY2780301 and its metabolite were used
respectively for PK-POP modeling. A one compartment open model adequately
described LY2780301 and its metabolite concentration versus time courses
respectively with the estimation of the fraction of absorbed dose (fm) of
LY2780301 metabolised in that metabolite. The interindividual
variabilities (ISV) could be well estimated for all structural parameters
(clearance: CL, volume of distribution: V, L and the absorption constant:
Ka). The population PK parameters obtained for the structural model were:
Ka = 0.536 h1, CL/F = 3.57 L/h, V/F = 85.2 L, CL/(F*fm) = 13.2 L/h,
V2/(F*fm) = 13.2 L, fm = 0.747 for LY2780301 and its metabolite
respectively. PXL increases LY2780301 CL from 3.57 to 4.4 L/h (p =
0.016).Conclusions: We have demonstrated a PK DDI between LY2780301 and
PXL. PXL increases LY2780301 CL and decreases LY2780301 AUC. PXL PK
modeling is ongoing in order to verify the effect of LY2780301 on PXL PK.

