Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Patterns of genetic progression in high grade prostatic
intraepithelial neoplasia


High grade prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia (HGPIN) is considered a
neoplastic lesion that precedes prostate cancer (PCA). Genetically, HGPIN
is known to have some driver mutations such as TMPRSS2-ERG fusion and 8p
loss. However, we still do not know how the whole picture of somatic
mutations in HGPIN is and what are added during the progression to PCA.
To identify the genomic differences between HGPIN and PCA, we analyzed 20
regions of paired HGPIN and PCA from 6 patients by whole-exome sequencing
and array-comparative genomic hybridization. As expected, the number of
total mutations and CNAs of HGPINs were significantly fewer than those of
PCAs. Mutations in FOXA1 and CNAs (1q and 8q gains) were detected in both
HGPIN and PCA (common), suggesting their roles in early PCA development.
Mutations in SPOP, KDM6A, and KMT2D were PCA-specific, suggesting their
roles in HGPIN progression to PCA. The 8p loss was either common or
PCA-specific. HRAS and FOXA1 mutations were PIN-specific. Our data show
that PCAs are direct descendants of HGPINs in most cases that require
more genomic alterations to progress to PCA. The nature of heterogeneous
HGPIN population that might attenuate genomic signals should further be
studied. Our results provide a clue to explain the long latency from
HGPIN to PCA and provide useful information for clinical decision making
in the genetic diagnosis of HGPIN and PCA.

