Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gemcitabine-loaded microparticles promote cancer cell death in
subcutaneous pancreatic cancer xenografts


Pancreatic cancer is the fourth leading cause of cancer death in the
United States with only 7% of diagnosed patients surviving 5 years. Most
pancreatic cancer patients are not surgical candidates due to advanced
stage at diagnosis. Current systemic chemotherapies, while exposing
patients to the adverse side effects of treatment, have not been very
effective at decreasing tumor burden primarily due to poor systemic drug
uptake resulting from the dense stromal nature of pancreatic tumors.
Poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid)-based (PLGA) microparticles (MPs) are a
promising tool for localized drug delivery within the tumor due to their
high biocompatibility, flexibility in the encapsulation of different
drugs and extended drug release inside the tumor. The present study
investigated whether gemcitabine-loaded microparticles (GMPs) in the
range of 10-50 microns, in comparison with blank (no drug) MPs (BMPs),
saline intraperitoneal injection (SIP) and gemcitabine intraperitoneal
injection (GIP) as controls, are able to promote cancer cell killing
effects in vivo.In vitro studies with PANC-1 and MIAPaCa-2 human
pancreatic adenocarcinoma cell lines treated with different PLGA
co-polymer ratios used to encapsulate gemcitabine showed enhanced cell
killing and decreased colony formation in the longer release co-polymer
ratio after 2 weeks of treatment. Subsequently, the in vivo efficacy of
GMPs was tested by direct injection of GMPs into established subcutaneous
MIAPaCa-2 tumors in nude mice. Treatment commenced when tumor volume was
approximately 250 mm3. Following two weeks of treatment, there was a
trending decrease in tumor volume in the GMPs-injected MIAPaCa-2 tumors
compared to the BMPs-injected tumors. When comparing the SIP to GIP
groups, there was no difference in final tumor volume emphasizing the
lack of effective penetration of systemic gemcitabine into the tumor. In
addition, we observed less tumor progression in the GMPs group compared
to the others. At the endpoint, the tumors were excised, frozen in OCT
compound and sectioned to visualize fluorescent MPs and to detect
apoptosis by immunofluorescence. Interestingly, we observed a significant
increase in apoptosis in the tumors treated with GMPs compared to the BMP
tumors (pPancreatic cancer is the fourth leading cause of cancer death in
the United States with only 7% of diagnosed patients surviving 5 years.
Most pancreatic cancer patients are not surgical candidates due to
advanced stage at diagnosis. Current systemic chemotherapies, while
exposing patients to the adverse side effects of treatment, have not been
very effective at decreasing tumor burden primarily due to poor systemic
drug uptake resulting from the dense stromal nature of pancreatic tumors.
Poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid)-based (PLGA) microparticles (MPs) are a
promising tool for localized drug delivery within the tumor due to their
high biocompatibility, flexibility in the encapsulation of different
drugs and extended drug release inside the tumor. The present study
investigated whether gemcitabine-loaded microparticles (GMPs) in the
range of 10-50 microns, in comparison with blank (no drug) MPs (BMPs),
saline intraperitoneal injection (SIP) and gemcitabine intraperitoneal
injection (GIP) as controls, are able to promote cancer cell killing
effects in vivo.In vitro studies with PANC-1 and MIAPaCa-2 human
pancreatic adenocarcinoma cell lines treated with different PLGA
co-polymer ratios used to encapsulate gemcitabine showed enhanced cell
killing and decreased colony formation in the longer release co-polymer
ratio after 2 weeks of treatment. Subsequently, the in vivo efficacy of
GMPs was tested by direct injection of GMPs into established subcutaneous
MIAPaCa-2 tumors in nude mice. Treatment commenced when tumor volume was
approximately 250 mm3. Following two weeks of treatment, there was a
trending decrease in tumor volume in the GMPs-injected MIAPaCa-2 tumors
compared to the BMPs-injected tumors. When comparing the SIP to GIP
groups, there was no difference in final tumor volume emphasizing the
lack of effective penetration of systemic gemcitabine into the tumor. In
addition, we observed less tumor progression in the GMPs group compared
to the others. At the endpoint, the tumors were excised, frozen in OCT
compound and sectioned to visualize fluorescent MPs and to detect
apoptosis by immunofluorescence. Interestingly, we observed a significant
increase in apoptosis in the tumors treated with GMPs compared to the BMP
tumors (p<0.05) as well as the SIP (pPancreatic cancer is the fourth
leading cause of cancer death in the United States with only 7% of
diagnosed patients surviving 5 years. Most pancreatic cancer patients are
not surgical candidates due to advanced stage at diagnosis. Current
systemic chemotherapies, while exposing patients to the adverse side
effects of treatment, have not been very effective at decreasing tumor
burden primarily due to poor systemic drug uptake resulting from the
dense stromal nature of pancreatic tumors. Poly(lactic-co-glycolic
acid)-based (PLGA) microparticles (MPs) are a promising tool for
localized drug delivery within the tumor due to their high
biocompatibility, flexibility in the encapsulation of different drugs and
extended drug release inside the tumor. The present study investigated
whether gemcitabine-loaded microparticles (GMPs) in the range of 10-50
microns, in comparison with blank (no drug) MPs (BMPs), saline
intraperitoneal injection (SIP) and gemcitabine intraperitoneal injection
(GIP) as controls, are able to promote cancer cell killing effects in
vivo.In vitro studies with PANC-1 and MIAPaCa-2 human pancreatic
adenocarcinoma cell lines treated with different PLGA co-polymer ratios
used to encapsulate gemcitabine showed enhanced cell killing and
decreased colony formation in the longer release co-polymer ratio after 2
weeks of treatment. Subsequently, the in vivo efficacy of GMPs was tested
by direct injection of GMPs into established subcutaneous MIAPaCa-2
tumors in nude mice. Treatment commenced when tumor volume was
approximately 250 mm3. Following two weeks of treatment, there was a
trending decrease in tumor volume in the GMPs-injected MIAPaCa-2 tumors
compared to the BMPs-injected tumors. When comparing the SIP to GIP
groups, there was no difference in final tumor volume emphasizing the
lack of effective penetration of systemic gemcitabine into the tumor. In
addition, we observed less tumor progression in the GMPs group compared
to the others. At the endpoint, the tumors were excised, frozen in OCT
compound and sectioned to visualize fluorescent MPs and to detect
apoptosis by immunofluorescence. Interestingly, we observed a significant
increase in apoptosis in the tumors treated with GMPs compared to the BMP
tumors (p<0.05) as well as the SIP (p<0.05) and GIP tumors (pPancreatic
cancer is the fourth leading cause of cancer death in the United States
with only 7% of diagnosed patients surviving 5 years. Most pancreatic
cancer patients are not surgical candidates due to advanced stage at
diagnosis. Current systemic chemotherapies, while exposing patients to
the adverse side effects of treatment, have not been very effective at
decreasing tumor burden primarily due to poor systemic drug uptake
resulting from the dense stromal nature of pancreatic tumors.
Poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid)-based (PLGA) microparticles (MPs) are a
promising tool for localized drug delivery within the tumor due to their
high biocompatibility, flexibility in the encapsulation of different
drugs and extended drug release inside the tumor. The present study
investigated whether gemcitabine-loaded microparticles (GMPs) in the
range of 10-50 microns, in comparison with blank (no drug) MPs (BMPs),
saline intraperitoneal injection (SIP) and gemcitabine intraperitoneal
injection (GIP) as controls, are able to promote cancer cell killing
effects in vivo.In vitro studies with PANC-1 and MIAPaCa-2 human
pancreatic adenocarcinoma cell lines treated with different PLGA
co-polymer ratios used to encapsulate gemcitabine showed enhanced cell
killing and decreased colony formation in the longer release co-polymer
ratio after 2 weeks of treatment. Subsequently, the in vivo efficacy of
GMPs was tested by direct injection of GMPs into established subcutaneous
MIAPaCa-2 tumors in nude mice. Treatment commenced when tumor volume was
approximately 250 mm3. Following two weeks of treatment, there was a
trending decrease in tumor volume in the GMPs-injected MIAPaCa-2 tumors
compared to the BMPs-injected tumors. When comparing the SIP to GIP
groups, there was no difference in final tumor volume emphasizing the
lack of effective penetration of systemic gemcitabine into the tumor. In
addition, we observed less tumor progression in the GMPs group compared
to the others. At the endpoint, the tumors were excised, frozen in OCT
compound and sectioned to visualize fluorescent MPs and to detect
apoptosis by immunofluorescence. Interestingly, we observed a significant
increase in apoptosis in the tumors treated with GMPs compared to the BMP
tumors (p<0.05) as well as the SIP (p<0.05) and GIP tumors (p<0.05).In
conclusion, our data suggest that gemcitabine-loaded MPs could decrease
tumor volume and increase local pancreatic tumor cell death. Further
studies are needed to optimize the MPs loading and injection to confirm
its efficacy. The described drug delivery method has the potential to be
a more efficient local treatment modality than systemic gemcitabine
against pancreatic cancer.

