Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNA-383 located in frequently deleted chromosomal locus 8p22
regulates prostate cancer stem cell marker CD44


A major genomic alteration in prostate cancer (PCa) is frequent loss of
chromosome (chr) 8p with a common region of loss of heterozygosity (LOH)
at chr8p22 locus. Genomic studies implicate this locus in the initiation
of clinically significant PCa and with progression to metastatic disease.
However, the genes within this region have not been fully characterized
to date. Here we demonstrate for the first time that a microRNA component
of this region -miR-383- is frequently downregulated in prostate cancer,
plays a critical role in determining tumor initiating potential and is
involved in prostate cancer metastasis via direct regulation of CD44, a
ubiquitous marker of PCa tumor initiating cells (TICs)/ stem cells.
Expression analyses of miR-383 in PCa clinical tissues established that
low miR-383 expression is associated with poor prognosis. Functional data
suggests that miR-383 regulates PCa tumor initiating/ stem-like cells via
CD44 regulation. Ectopic expression of miR-383 inhibited tumor initiating
capacity of CD44+ PCa cells. Also, anti-metastatic effects of ectopic
miR-383 expression were observed in a PCa experimental metastasis model.
In view of our results, we propose that frequent loss of miR-383 at
chr8p22 region leads to tumor initiation and prostate cancer metastasis.
Thus, we have identified a novel finding that associates a long observed
genomic alteration to PCa stemness and metastasis. Our data suggests that
restoration of miR-383 expression may be an effective therapeutic
modality against PCa relapse and metastasis. Importantly, we identified
miR-383 as a novel PCa diagnostic biomarker with potential that
outperforms that of serum PSA.

