Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The emerging role of SOX2 in cancer cell plasticity and EGFR-TKI
resistance


Activating mutations in the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) lead
to the aberrant growth of lung adenocarcinoma while endowing cancer cells
with sensitivity to EGFR-tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs). Nonetheless,
EGFR-TKI resistance often occurs in less than one year. The intriguing
phenomenon that cancer cells have biological features similar to stem
cells suggests that cancer and stem cells may share the same regulatory
signaling pathway, but the involvement of stem cell signaling in EGFR-TKI
resistance is not clear. Herein, we observed that SOX2, a master
transcriptional factor controlling self-renewal of lung stem cells, was
highly expressed in lung adenocarcinoma and inversely correlated with
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT). Clonogenic analysis showed
that SOX2-silenecing attenuated cell growth in EGFR-mutated lung cancer
cells. The selection of EGFR-TKI resistant HCC827 (delE746_A750) cells
induced EMT while attenuating the expression of SOX2 and spheroid forming
ability. Preselection of HCC827 (delE746_A750) cells with EMT features
endowed cells with TKI resistance but suppressed SOX2 expression.
Pharmacological inhibition of HDACs in EGFR-mutated lung cancer cells
attenuated SOX2 expression but induced EMT, thus enhancing the
development of EGFR-TKI resistance. Our findings support the notion that
the switching expression between SOX2 and EMT plays a critical role in
EGFR-TKI resistance, with the potential as biomarkers for lung cancer
prediction.

