Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Eradication of neuroblastoma by suppressing the expression of a
single long noncoding RNA


Neuroblastoma is the most common solid tumour in early childhood, and
accounts for approximately 15% of all childhood cancer death. N-Myc gene
amplification occurs in one quarter to one third of human neuroblastoma
tissues, and the majority of patient with neuroblastoma due to N-Myc gene
amplification die of the disease. We performed RNA sequencing
experiments, and identified 5 transcripts, including RP1X, which were
considerably differentially expressed between N-Myc gene amplified and
non-amplified human neuroblastoma cell lines. Affymetrix microarray
studies revealed that DEPD was one of the few genes considerably
down-regulated in neuroblastoma cells after RP1X depletion. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays showed that knocking-down RP1X expression
reduced histone H3 lysine 4 trimethylation, a marker for active gene
transcription, at the DEPD gene promoter. Depletion of RP1X or DEPD
significantly reduced ERK protein phosphorylation, N-Myc protein
phosphorylation at Serine 62, N-Myc protein stabilization, neuroblastoma
cell proliferation and survival. Clonogenic assays showed that
knocking-down RP1X with doxycycline completely abolished colony formation
capacity of neuroblastoma cells stably transfected with
doxycycline-inducible RP1X shRNA. Importantly, treatment with doxycycline
in mice xenografted with neuroblastoma cells stably transfected with
doxycycline-inducible RP1X shRNA, led to tumour eradication. In human
neuroblastoma tissues from 600 neuroblastoma patients, high levels of
RP1X gene expression correlated with DEPD gene expression and poor
patient prognosis. In conclusion, this study identifies the novel long
noncoding RNA RP1X as an important regulator of N-Myc protein stability
and neuroblastoma tumourigenesis.

