Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CDK4/6 inhibitor PD-0332991 (palbociclib) promotes cell death and
synergizes with CPT-11 in colorectal cancer under hypoxia in vitro


We recently reported that a family of nucleoside analogues
(sangivamycin-like molecules) can sensitize tumor cells to TRAIL through
dual blockade of CDK1 and GSK3-beta (Mayes et al., Cancer Research,
2011). We further reported that CDK inhibitors can destabilize HIF1-alpha
regardless of VHL or p53 status or the presence of hypoxia (Warfel et
al., Cell Cycle, 2013). In order to translate this knowledge into a
cancer therapeutic strategy, we investigated the effects of CDK
inhibition in colorectal cancer (CRC) cell lines with or without
chemotherapy. PD-0332991 (Palbociclib) is a specific inhibitor of CDK4/6
that has been tested in numerous clinical trials for breast cancer,
NSCLC, GBM, lymphoma, leukemia, in combination with 5-FU and oxaliplatin
in solid malignancies (NCT01522989) or with cetuximab in head and neck
cancer (NCT02101034). Palbociclib was approved by the FDA in 2015 in
combination with letrozole as initial endocrine therapy for
post-menopausal women with ER(+)/Her2(-) breast cancer. Little is known
about the effects of CDK4/6 inhibition in CRC. We investigated the
therapeutic effect and anti-proliferative mechanism of CDK4/6 inhibition
in CRC. We used CellTiter-Glo assays to detect CRC cell viability and
determined IC50 values (50% inhibitory concentration) of single drug
through nonlinear regression analysis by GraphPad Prism software. The
combination index (CI) of multiple drug combinations was identified with
Compusyn analysis. We found that Palbociclib promotes cell death of CRC
cells under hypoxia but not under normoxia where Palbociclib inhibited
cell proliferation via the pRb pathway. These results suggest that the
CDK4/6 inhibitor could regulate cell fate of CRC via different molecular
mechanisms under hypoxia versus normoxia. We further found that
Palbociclib can upregulate ERK/MAPK signaling under hypoxia, as compared
with normoxia. The IC50 values of Palbociclib were generally higher under
hypoxia (Mean SD: 10.54 3.35 M, N = 5) versus normoxia (Mean SD: 6.61
0.85 M, N = 5) in CRC cell lines. Thus, hypoxia promotes resistance of
CRC cells toward the cytotoxic activity of the CDK4/6 inhibitor. We found
that Palbociclib synergizes with CPT-11 much better than with either 5-FU
or oxaliplatin against CRC cell lines with different molecular subtypes.
Based on our findings that Palbociclib can promote cell death of CRC
cells under hypoxia and synergizes with CPT11, further investigation is
needed to assess the novel combination therapy against CRC.

