Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ultra-sensitive picodroplet digital PCR assay for multiplex
genotyping of mutations in epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) in
non-small cell lung cancer patients


BACKGROUND: The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutations have
been used as a reliable predictor of response to EGFR tyrosine kinase
inhibitor (TKI) treatment. Two common EGFR mutations (L858R, and exon19
deletion) and EGFR T790M mutation are clinically important for
decision-making in clinical practice. Picodroplet digital PCR (ddPCR) has
recently emerged as an accurate and ultra-sensitive method for tumor
genotyping and have a great advantage over conventional mutation
detection methods. We have previously reported far more frequent
incidence of pretreatment EGFR T790M mutation than previous reports
utilizing ddPCR method. Here, we developed a multiplex ddPCR assay to
detect three clinically relevant EGFR mutations in one reaction.METHODS:
Positive and negative control plasmids for the EGFR mutation assay were
prepared by cloning DNA fragments containing wild-type or mutant EGFR.
Genomic DNAs from lung cancer cell lines H1975, PC-9/ZD, A549 and
wild-type human genomic DNA were digested with CviQ1, and then were used
to quantitatively assess each EGFR mutant sequence in the multiplex assay
panels. We then evaluated the utility of multiplex ddPCR to detect the
three clinically relevant mutations in EGFR from FFPE samples of patients
with non-small cell lung cancer. 45 FFPE samples were also genotyped for
EGFR mutations by conventional qPCR-based methods for validation. The
concordance between duplex and multiplex ddPCR assay was also
evaluated.RESULTS: Serial dilutions experiments using genomic DNA
harboring EGFR mutations revealed a linear performance with an analytical
sensitivity of approximately 0.01% for each mutation. All of the 33
EGFR-activating mutations detected in FFPE samples by conventional
qPCR-based method were also detected by multiplex ddPCR assay. Owing to
its ultra-high sensitivity, additional T790M mutation at ultra-low allele
frequency (BACKGROUND: The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
mutations have been used as a reliable predictor of response to EGFR
tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) treatment. Two common EGFR mutations
(L858R, and exon19 deletion) and EGFR T790M mutation are clinically
important for decision-making in clinical practice. Picodroplet digital
PCR (ddPCR) has recently emerged as an accurate and ultra-sensitive
method for tumor genotyping and have a great advantage over conventional
mutation detection methods. We have previously reported far more frequent
incidence of pretreatment EGFR T790M mutation than previous reports
utilizing ddPCR method. Here, we developed a multiplex ddPCR assay to
detect three clinically relevant EGFR mutations in one reaction.METHODS:
Positive and negative control plasmids for the EGFR mutation assay were
prepared by cloning DNA fragments containing wild-type or mutant EGFR.
Genomic DNAs from lung cancer cell lines H1975, PC-9/ZD, A549 and
wild-type human genomic DNA were digested with CviQ1, and then were used
to quantitatively assess each EGFR mutant sequence in the multiplex assay
panels. We then evaluated the utility of multiplex ddPCR to detect the
three clinically relevant mutations in EGFR from FFPE samples of patients
with non-small cell lung cancer. 45 FFPE samples were also genotyped for
EGFR mutations by conventional qPCR-based methods for validation. The
concordance between duplex and multiplex ddPCR assay was also
evaluated.RESULTS: Serial dilutions experiments using genomic DNA
harboring EGFR mutations revealed a linear performance with an analytical
sensitivity of approximately 0.01% for each mutation. All of the 33
EGFR-activating mutations detected in FFPE samples by conventional
qPCR-based method were also detected by multiplex ddPCR assay. Owing to
its ultra-high sensitivity, additional T790M mutation at ultra-low allele
frequency (<0.1%) was also detected in the same reaction. The regression
analysis between duplex and multiplex assay demonstrated a correlation
coefficient (R2) of 0.9986 for L858R, 0.9844 for exon19 deletion, and
0.9959 for T790M, respectively.CONCLUSIONS: Using ddPCR technology, we
established multiplex and ultra-sensitive genotyping platform for three
clinically relevant EGFR mutations. Results of a proof-of-principle study
using clinical samples indicated that the clinical utility of multiplex
ddPCR assay to screen for multiple EGFR-activating mutations concurrently
with low-frequency T790M mutation.

