Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epigenetic re-expression of fetal IGF2 as therapeutic target in
hepatocellular carcinoma


Background and aimsHepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is a major health
problem. Most patients are diagnosed at advanced stages when the only
approved therapy is the multi-kinase inhibitor sorafenib. Consequently,
there is a great need for the development of new effective treatments.
IGF signaling pathway is aberrantly activated in HCC; however, its
contribution to HCC pathogenesis is still unclear. Since IGF2 is
overexpressed in HCC, we aimed to elucidate the oncogenic potential and
mechanism of dis-regulation of this protein and determine the antitumoral
efficacy of molecular abrogation of this ligand by targeted
therapies.MethodsTranscriptomic profiling, miRNAs expression, RNA- and
whole exome- sequencing and methylation were analyzed in 228 HCCs with a
focus on IGF-pathway. Gene Set Enrichment Analysis and Ingenuity Pathway
Analysis were carried out in IGF2-overexpressing tumors. Stable HCC cell
lines with knock-down and ectopic overexpression of IGF2 were generated.
A chemically-induced mouse model of HCC, and two genetically-engineered
mosaic mouse models (GEMM) overexpressing IGF2 specifically in the liver
were generated to assess IGF2 oncogenicity in hepatocarcinogenesis. The
therapeutic potential of a monoclonal-antibody against IGF-ligands
(IGF1/2-mAb) alone or in combination with sorafenib was tested in a
xenograft model of HCC.ResultsHere, IGF2-overexpression occurred in 15%
of HCC patients as a result of the epigenetic reactivation of IGF2-fetal
promoters, mainly through loss of promoters methylation (53% of cases)
and deregulation of miR-216b, miR-483-5p and miR-let7-d (35% of cases).
Re-expression of IGF2 was associated with a progenitor cell-like, poorly
differentiated and aggressive subtype of HCC, and poor prognosis
(pBackground and aimsHepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is a major health
problem. Most patients are diagnosed at advanced stages when the only
approved therapy is the multi-kinase inhibitor sorafenib. Consequently,
there is a great need for the development of new effective treatments.
IGF signaling pathway is aberrantly activated in HCC; however, its
contribution to HCC pathogenesis is still unclear. Since IGF2 is
overexpressed in HCC, we aimed to elucidate the oncogenic potential and
mechanism of dis-regulation of this protein and determine the antitumoral
efficacy of molecular abrogation of this ligand by targeted
therapies.MethodsTranscriptomic profiling, miRNAs expression, RNA- and
whole exome- sequencing and methylation were analyzed in 228 HCCs with a
focus on IGF-pathway. Gene Set Enrichment Analysis and Ingenuity Pathway
Analysis were carried out in IGF2-overexpressing tumors. Stable HCC cell
lines with knock-down and ectopic overexpression of IGF2 were generated.
A chemically-induced mouse model of HCC, and two genetically-engineered
mosaic mouse models (GEMM) overexpressing IGF2 specifically in the liver
were generated to assess IGF2 oncogenicity in hepatocarcinogenesis. The
therapeutic potential of a monoclonal-antibody against IGF-ligands
(IGF1/2-mAb) alone or in combination with sorafenib was tested in a
xenograft model of HCC.ResultsHere, IGF2-overexpression occurred in 15%
of HCC patients as a result of the epigenetic reactivation of IGF2-fetal
promoters, mainly through loss of promoters methylation (53% of cases)
and deregulation of miR-216b, miR-483-5p and miR-let7-d (35% of cases).
Re-expression of IGF2 was associated with a progenitor cell-like, poorly
differentiated and aggressive subtype of HCC, and poor prognosis
(p<0.0001). In a GEMM model, IGF2-overexpression accelerated HCC
progression and reduced survival (p = 0.02). Conversely, IGF2-blockage
using an IGF1/2-monoclonal antibody (mAb) or specific shRNAs against IGF2
reduced viability and proliferation in vitro (pBackground and
aimsHepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is a major health problem. Most
patients are diagnosed at advanced stages when the only approved therapy
is the multi-kinase inhibitor sorafenib. Consequently, there is a great
need for the development of new effective treatments. IGF signaling
pathway is aberrantly activated in HCC; however, its contribution to HCC
pathogenesis is still unclear. Since IGF2 is overexpressed in HCC, we
aimed to elucidate the oncogenic potential and mechanism of
dis-regulation of this protein and determine the antitumoral efficacy of
molecular abrogation of this ligand by targeted
therapies.MethodsTranscriptomic profiling, miRNAs expression, RNA- and
whole exome- sequencing and methylation were analyzed in 228 HCCs with a
focus on IGF-pathway. Gene Set Enrichment Analysis and Ingenuity Pathway
Analysis were carried out in IGF2-overexpressing tumors. Stable HCC cell
lines with knock-down and ectopic overexpression of IGF2 were generated.
A chemically-induced mouse model of HCC, and two genetically-engineered
mosaic mouse models (GEMM) overexpressing IGF2 specifically in the liver
were generated to assess IGF2 oncogenicity in hepatocarcinogenesis. The
therapeutic potential of a monoclonal-antibody against IGF-ligands
(IGF1/2-mAb) alone or in combination with sorafenib was tested in a
xenograft model of HCC.ResultsHere, IGF2-overexpression occurred in 15%
of HCC patients as a result of the epigenetic reactivation of IGF2-fetal
promoters, mainly through loss of promoters methylation (53% of cases)
and deregulation of miR-216b, miR-483-5p and miR-let7-d (35% of cases).
Re-expression of IGF2 was associated with a progenitor cell-like, poorly
differentiated and aggressive subtype of HCC, and poor prognosis
(p<0.0001). In a GEMM model, IGF2-overexpression accelerated HCC
progression and reduced survival (p = 0.02). Conversely, IGF2-blockage
using an IGF1/2-monoclonal antibody (mAb) or specific shRNAs against IGF2
reduced viability and proliferation in vitro (p<0.05), and inhibited
IGF-Insulin pathway activation without disturbing insulin metabolism.
IGF1/2-mAb delayed tumor growth and increased survival in vivo compared
to placebo or sorafenib (pBackground and aimsHepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC) is a major health problem. Most patients are diagnosed at advanced
stages when the only approved therapy is the multi-kinase inhibitor
sorafenib. Consequently, there is a great need for the development of new
effective treatments. IGF signaling pathway is aberrantly activated in
HCC; however, its contribution to HCC pathogenesis is still unclear.
Since IGF2 is overexpressed in HCC, we aimed to elucidate the oncogenic
potential and mechanism of dis-regulation of this protein and determine
the antitumoral efficacy of molecular abrogation of this ligand by
targeted therapies.MethodsTranscriptomic profiling, miRNAs expression,
RNA- and whole exome- sequencing and methylation were analyzed in 228
HCCs with a focus on IGF-pathway. Gene Set Enrichment Analysis and
Ingenuity Pathway Analysis were carried out in IGF2-overexpressing
tumors. Stable HCC cell lines with knock-down and ectopic overexpression
of IGF2 were generated. A chemically-induced mouse model of HCC, and two
genetically-engineered mosaic mouse models (GEMM) overexpressing IGF2
specifically in the liver were generated to assess IGF2 oncogenicity in
hepatocarcinogenesis. The therapeutic potential of a monoclonal-antibody
against IGF-ligands (IGF1/2-mAb) alone or in combination with sorafenib
was tested in a xenograft model of HCC.ResultsHere, IGF2-overexpression
occurred in 15% of HCC patients as a result of the epigenetic
reactivation of IGF2-fetal promoters, mainly through loss of promoters
methylation (53% of cases) and deregulation of miR-216b, miR-483-5p and
miR-let7-d (35% of cases). Re-expression of IGF2 was associated with a
progenitor cell-like, poorly differentiated and aggressive subtype of
HCC, and poor prognosis (p<0.0001). In a GEMM model, IGF2-overexpression
accelerated HCC progression and reduced survival (p = 0.02). Conversely,
IGF2-blockage using an IGF1/2-monoclonal antibody (mAb) or specific
shRNAs against IGF2 reduced viability and proliferation in vitro
(p<0.05), and inhibited IGF-Insulin pathway activation without disturbing
insulin metabolism. IGF1/2-mAb delayed tumor growth and increased
survival in vivo compared to placebo or sorafenib (p<0.0001), through
antiproliferative and antiangiogenic mechanisms.ConclusionsIGF2 is the
first validated epidriver in HCC and has a key role in the
hepatocarcinogenic process. These results provide the rationale for
testing IGF1/2-mAb in a selected subset of HCC patients.

