Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Urinary miRNAs as predictors of tumor metastasis in localized
patients with clear cell renal cell carcinoma: a pilot study


Introduction: 25-50% of localized renal cell carcinoma (RCC) patients
will eventually develop metastasis which has a dramatic adverse effect on
prognosis following treatment. Unfortunately, reliable biomarkers
predicting RCC metastasis are still lacking. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are
important regulators for vital biological processes in humans. Urine
miRNAs(UmiRNAs) present promising potential as biomarkers for diagnosis
of urological cancers. However, no study has assessed the predictive
value of UmiRNAs for RCC metastasis.Materials and Methods: We
prospectively collected pre- and post-surgery urine samples from 117
patients with localized clear cell RCC (ccRCC,T1-3 N0/x M0). UmiRNAs were
extracted and purified from 250 l urine supernatants and measured using
RT-PCR. Relative quantifications (RQ) of 137 selected miRNAs were
calculated by 2ct method. The ratio of post/pre RQs were tested for the
association with distant metastasis using multivariable Cox regression
models.Results: More than half of the patients were diagnosed at pT3
(53%) or grade III-IV (69%). Twenty-two patients (18.8%) had metastasis
during a mean follow-up of 73 months. The levels of 34 UmiRNAs were
significantly changed after nephrectomy (pIntroduction: 25-50% of
localized renal cell carcinoma (RCC) patients will eventually develop
metastasis which has a dramatic adverse effect on prognosis following
treatment. Unfortunately, reliable biomarkers predicting RCC metastasis
are still lacking. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are important regulators for vital
biological processes in humans. Urine miRNAs(UmiRNAs) present promising
potential as biomarkers for diagnosis of urological cancers. However, no
study has assessed the predictive value of UmiRNAs for RCC
metastasis.Materials and Methods: We prospectively collected pre- and
post-surgery urine samples from 117 patients with localized clear cell
RCC (ccRCC,T1-3 N0/x M0). UmiRNAs were extracted and purified from 250 l
urine supernatants and measured using RT-PCR. Relative quantifications
(RQ) of 137 selected miRNAs were calculated by 2ct method. The ratio of
post/pre RQs were tested for the association with distant metastasis
using multivariable Cox regression models.Results: More than half of the
patients were diagnosed at pT3 (53%) or grade III-IV (69%). Twenty-two
patients (18.8%) had metastasis during a mean follow-up of 73 months. The
levels of 34 UmiRNAs were significantly changed after nephrectomy
(p<0.05, 29 of 34 significantly reduced). The 50% or more reduced
post-nephrectomy levels of five UmiRNAs (miR-191-5p, miR-324-3p,
miR-186-5p, miR-93-5p, and miR-30b-5p) independently conferred a 2- to
4-fold increased risk of metastasis with miR-191-5p being the most
significant one (hazard ratio [HR] = 4.16, 95% confidence interval [CI] =
1.38-12.58, p = 0.011). Stratified analyses by stage and Fuhrman grade
revealed that the associations were most profound in pT3 patients for
miR-191-5p, miR-324-3p, and miR-186-5p. Ingenuity pathway analysis showed
that the predicted target genes of these five UmiRNAs were enriched in
cell survival and proliferation networks.Conclusion: Our study suggests
that urinary miR-191-5p, miR-324-3p, and miR-186-5p are potential
biomarkers for the prediction of metastasis in localized, particularly
pT3 ccRCC patients after nephrectomy. These findings may help improve
individualized patient management in the clinic.

