Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Serial droplet digital PCR (ddPCR) of plasma cell-free DNA (cfDNA)
as pharmacodynamic (PD) biomarker in Phase 1 clinical trials for patients
(pts) with KRAS mutant non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)


Introduction: Phase 1 clinical trials of novel therapeutics have
historically focused on toxicity, but increasingly are doubling as
efficacy studies in biomarker-enriched populations. Given the small
sample sizes (3-6 patients per dose), response on imaging may be a coarse
marker of therapeutic effect. Here we piloted serial ddPCR of plasma
cfDNA as a PD marker in a phase I combination study of a MEK inhibitor
and a CDK 4/6 inhibitor in patients with RAS mutated cancers.Methods /
Results: Twenty-five pts with RAS-mutated cancer (incl. 17 patients with
KRAS-mutant NSCLC) have been enrolled to date in a phase I dose
escalation trial of the MEK inhibitor PD-0325901 with the CDK4/6
inhibitor palbociclib (NCT02022982). Plasma for cfDNA genotyping was
collected at baseline prior to therapy and at the beginning of cycle 2.
Plasma genotyping for KRAS G12X mutations was performed using a validated
and highly quantitative droplet digital PCR assay.Pts were enrolled in 5
dose level cohorts ranging from 75 mg palbociclib daily (3 weeks on, 1
week off) with 2 mg PD-0325901 BID (3 weeks on 1week off) to 125 mg
palbociclib daily with 8 mg PD-0325901 BID (Table). KRAS mutations were
detected in 14/24 pts at baseline (59%, median 1402 copies/mL plasma,
range: 11-93000), consistent with the previously reported sensitivity of
64%. A second blood draw at cycle 2 was obtained for all 14 pts. A
positive plasma response, defined as decrease of KRAS G12X mutants from
first to second dose, was observed in 6 pts (range -6% - -100%) with the
most plasma responders (n = 4 pts) at the maximum administered dose. At
lower administered doses, there was a median increase in plasma KRAS
mutant levels.Conclusions: Increasing dose levels resulted in more
consistent decreases in KRAS mutation in cfDNA, consistent with a
dose-dependent pharmacodynamic effect.These results highlight the
potential value of serial plasma ddPCR as a PD marker in early phase
clinical trials.


