Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovery of preclinical development candidate inhibitors of the
mediator complex-associated kinases CDK8 and CDK19 and evaluation of
their therapeutic potential


BackgroundThe Mediator complex-associated kinases CDK8 and CDK19 are
cyclin C-dependent enzymes that, with MED12 and MED13, form the kinase
module of the Mediator complex. CDK8 expression correlates with
activation of -catenin in colon and gastric cancers and has also been
associated with increased mortality in colorectal, breast and ovarian
cancers. CDK8 is located in a region of chromosome 13 known to undergo
copy number gain in 60% of colorectal cancers and inducible
shRNA-mediated knockdown of CDK8 protein reduces the growth of colorectal
cancer human tumor xenograft animal models harboring CDK8 gene
amplification.ResultsHere we report the discovery and evaluation of
CCT251545, a potent, selective and orally bioavailable small molecule
chemical probe for CDK8 and CDK19 that we identified from a cell-based
WNT pathway screen [1]. We also report a structure-based design approach
to the discovery of CCT251921, a potent, selective and orally
bioavailable inhibitor of CDK8, with equipotent affinity for CDK19, that
has optimised pharmacokinetic and pharmaceutical properties suitable for
preclinical development. Furthermore, we describe the discovery of
MSC2530818, a structurally differentiated back-up candidate with
equivalent pharmacological profile to CCT251921, from a high throughput
screen versus CDK8 and subsequent structure-based design. Taking
advantage of these two structurally distinct and highly selective dual
CDK8/19 modulators we were able to reliably define on-target effects of
targeting both CDK8 and CDK19 in the cellular context and in in vivo
animal models. We describe gene expression profiles resulting from dual
inhibition of CDK8 and CDK19 to demonstrate robust modulation of WNT
signalling and additional pathways, including stress and immune response,
consistent with the multiple contexts in which Mediator complex is known
to regulate gene transcription. We show that both CCT251921 and
MSC2530818 exhibit potent cell-based and in vivo inhibition of
STAT1SER727 phosphorylation, a target engagement biomarker of CDK8
inhibition, and further demonstrate in vivo antiproliferative activity in
human tumour xenograft animal models of colorectal cancer and acute
myeloid leukaemia at exposures where pharmacodynamics biomarker
modulation is evident. Recent observations suggest CDK8 as a novel
anticancer therapeutic target; here we will disclose, for the first time,
comprehensive preclinical efficacy, toleration and safety findings for
both CCT251921 and MSC2530818 which will inform on the potential for dual
CDK8/19 inhibition in the clinical setting.References1. Dale, T. et. al.
Identification of a potent and selective chemical probe for exploring the
role of Mediator complex-associated protein kinases CDK8 and CDK19 in
human disease. 2015, Nat. Chem. Biol., 11, 973-980.

