Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dynamic SPECT imaging of PSMA-specific CAR T cells in mice bearing
prostate cancer


Immunotherapy using CAR-T-cells is acquiring an expanding role in the
treatment of malignant disease. However, efficacy of solid tumour
CAR-T-immunotherapy has proven inconsistent. Limitations include poor
T-cell trafficking to tumour deposits, insufficient T-cell longevity
in-vivo and the occurrence of both predicted and unanticipated on-target
and off-target toxicity. To refine this therapeutic approach, it is
desirable to develop systems that allow the monitoring of T-cell location
and persistence in-vivo.A retroviral vector named PiN-4 was constructed,
which co-expresses: (i) an interleukin (IL)-4-responsive chimeric
cytokine receptor (4); (ii) a prostate-specific membrane antigen
(PSMA)-targeted CAR (P28z) and (iii) hNIS, which promotes the uptake of
technetium-99m pertechnetate (99mTcO4) in viable cells. IL-4 enriched
human 4P28zN+ T-cells were administered intravenously to Nod Scid Gamma
(NSG) mice bearing prostate tumour xenografts.Measurement of the tumour
xenografts by bioluminescent imaging (BLI) found that only
PSMA-expressing tumours responded to 4P28zN+ T-cell treatment.
Longitudinal SPECT-CT imaging further confirmed this with the
preferential accumulation of 4P28zN+ T-cells in PSMA-expressing tumours
compared to PSMA-negative tumours.Use of NIS as a T-cell imaging reporter
brings several potential advantages. It promotes receptor-mediated uptake
of the inexpensive, low toxicity and clinically useful SPECT tracer,
technetium-99m pertechnetate (99mTcO4). In addition, the ectopic
expression of NIS is well tolerated by host cells and hNIS functions only
in viable cells. These data demonstrate proof of concept for the utility
of hNIS as an imaging reporter in genetically engineered T-cells.

