Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Coffee and tea intake and risk of endometrial cancer in the
Epidemiology of Endometrial Cancer Consortium (E2C2)


Background: Endometrial cancer (EC) is the most common gynecological
malignancy in developed countries. Well-known risk factors for EC include
obesity and elevated levels of estrogen and insulin. Coffee and tea are
the most widely consumed beverages in the world, after water. Both are a
complex mixture of chemicals with potential antimutagenic and antioxidant
properties. Previous studies have reported an inverse association between
coffee consumption and circulating levels of estrogen and C-peptide, a
marker of insulin secretion, both involved in endometrial carcinogenesis.
The presence of antioxidants and other chemopreventive compounds in
coffee and tea may have an anticarcinogenic effect. Thus, coffee and tea
drinking may decrease the risk of EC.Objective: To examine the
association between coffee and tea intake and endometrial cancer
risk.Patients and Methods: We combined individual-level data from 24
epidemiologic studies (10 Cohort studies, 14 Case-Control studies) from
the Epidemiology of Endometrial Cancer (E2C2) Consortium and performed a
pooled analysis of 11,424 endometrial cancer cases and 28,388 controls.
Logistic regression models were used to calculate ORs and the
corresponding 95% CI. All models were adjusted for potential
confounders.Results and Conclusions: Increased coffee consumption was
associated with a reduced risk of endometrial cancer: compared to
non-coffee drinkers, the pooled OR for those who drank more than 1 cup of
coffee per day was 0.79 (95%CI = 0.71-0.87, p = 5.48106). The association
is mainly observed in cohort studies and remains significant after
adjusting for potential confounders. We found no association between tea
consumption and endometrial cancer risk.

