Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Diagnostic significance of cathepsin L and cathepsin B expression
in human gallbladder cancer - A pilot study


Background: Gallbladder cancer (GBC) is the most common biliary tract
malignancy worldwide. Cancer of gallbladder usually refers to as an
Indian disease as it is more common in Indian subcontinent especially in
north and central India. Incidence rate of GBC in women in Delhi is as
high as 21.5 per 100,000 population. It is an aggressive malignancy,
which spreads locally to liver, adjacent organs and lymph nodes as well
as to distant organs. Cathepsin L (CTSL) and B (CTSB) are lysosomal
cysteine proteases implicated in protein turnover and tissue remodeling.
Deregulated expression of these proteases has been associated with
invasion and metastasis in several solid tumors.Objective: To assess the
expression and clinical significance of CTSL and CTSB in human
gallbladder cancer.Methods: We assayed the activities of CTSL and CTSB
via spectroflurometrically in whole tissue lysates of gallbladder cancer
patients (N = 23) and normal gall bladder tissue samples with gallstones
(N = 31) / without gallstones (N = 34), which served as controls.
Activities of these proteases were correlated with several clinic
pathological parameters in GBC patients. CTSL and CTSB mRNA levels were
determined in tissues samples by Real time PCR. Furthermore serum levels
of these proteases were also assayed using sandwich based ELISA in GBC
patients and controls.Results: Significant increase in the enzymatic
activities of CTSL+B, CTSL and CTSB was observed in gallbladder cancer
tissue samples in comparison to normal gall bladder both with and without
gallstones (p Background: Gallbladder cancer (GBC) is the most common
biliary tract malignancy worldwide. Cancer of gallbladder usually refers
to as an Indian disease as it is more common in Indian subcontinent
especially in north and central India. Incidence rate of GBC in women in
Delhi is as high as 21.5 per 100,000 population. It is an aggressive
malignancy, which spreads locally to liver, adjacent organs and lymph
nodes as well as to distant organs. Cathepsin L (CTSL) and B (CTSB) are
lysosomal cysteine proteases implicated in protein turnover and tissue
remodeling. Deregulated expression of these proteases has been associated
with invasion and metastasis in several solid tumors.Objective: To assess
the expression and clinical significance of CTSL and CTSB in human
gallbladder cancer.Methods: We assayed the activities of CTSL and CTSB
via spectroflurometrically in whole tissue lysates of gallbladder cancer
patients (N = 23) and normal gall bladder tissue samples with gallstones
(N = 31) / without gallstones (N = 34), which served as controls.
Activities of these proteases were correlated with several clinic
pathological parameters in GBC patients. CTSL and CTSB mRNA levels were
determined in tissues samples by Real time PCR. Furthermore serum levels
of these proteases were also assayed using sandwich based ELISA in GBC
patients and controls.Results: Significant increase in the enzymatic
activities of CTSL+B, CTSL and CTSB was observed in gallbladder cancer
tissue samples in comparison to normal gall bladder both with and without
gallstones (p < 0.001). ROC analysis confirmed the diagnostic relevance
of CTSL and CTSB analysis with area under the curve 0.791 and 0.840
respectively for gallbladder cancer patients with respect to controls.
Over expression of CTSB was also significantly associated with
involvement of lymph node (p = 0.05) in gall bladder carcinoma. Secretory
levels of CTSL and CTSB in serum were significantly elevated in GBC
patients (p Background: Gallbladder cancer (GBC) is the most common
biliary tract malignancy worldwide. Cancer of gallbladder usually refers
to as an Indian disease as it is more common in Indian subcontinent
especially in north and central India. Incidence rate of GBC in women in
Delhi is as high as 21.5 per 100,000 population. It is an aggressive
malignancy, which spreads locally to liver, adjacent organs and lymph
nodes as well as to distant organs. Cathepsin L (CTSL) and B (CTSB) are
lysosomal cysteine proteases implicated in protein turnover and tissue
remodeling. Deregulated expression of these proteases has been associated
with invasion and metastasis in several solid tumors.Objective: To assess
the expression and clinical significance of CTSL and CTSB in human
gallbladder cancer.Methods: We assayed the activities of CTSL and CTSB
via spectroflurometrically in whole tissue lysates of gallbladder cancer
patients (N = 23) and normal gall bladder tissue samples with gallstones
(N = 31) / without gallstones (N = 34), which served as controls.
Activities of these proteases were correlated with several clinic
pathological parameters in GBC patients. CTSL and CTSB mRNA levels were
determined in tissues samples by Real time PCR. Furthermore serum levels
of these proteases were also assayed using sandwich based ELISA in GBC
patients and controls.Results: Significant increase in the enzymatic
activities of CTSL+B, CTSL and CTSB was observed in gallbladder cancer
tissue samples in comparison to normal gall bladder both with and without
gallstones (p < 0.001). ROC analysis confirmed the diagnostic relevance
of CTSL and CTSB analysis with area under the curve 0.791 and 0.840
respectively for gallbladder cancer patients with respect to controls.
Over expression of CTSB was also significantly associated with
involvement of lymph node (p = 0.05) in gall bladder carcinoma. Secretory
levels of CTSL and CTSB in serum were significantly elevated in GBC
patients (p <0.01). Increased expression of these cysteine proteases were
also confirmed at the mRNA level by Real time PCR.Conclusion: Our study
for the first time demonstrated a significant increase in the levels of
cathepsin L and B in GBC patients as compared to controls. Elevated
levels of these proteases may serve as potential biomarkers for human
gall bladder cancer.

