Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovery and preclinical development of a highly potent
NaPi2b-targeted antibody-drug conjugate (ADC) with significant activity
in patient-derived non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) xenograft models


The type II sodium-dependent potassium transporter NaPi2b (SLC34A2) is
highly expressed in non-squamous NSCLC and non-mucinous ovarian cancer
(OC) with restricted normal tissue expression, suggesting it may be a
suitable ADC target for these indications. XMT-1536 is a novel, highly
potent anti-NaPi2b ADC comprised of an average of 15 auristatin molecules
conjugated to XMT-1535, a novel humanized anti-NaPi2b antibody, via the
Dolaflexin ADC platform. The auristatin payload is enzymatically cleaved
upon ADC trafficking to the endosome/lysosome compartment, releasing a
cytotoxic auristatin derivative that is capable of bystander effect
killing. In cell binding assays, XMT-1535 antibody binds to OC cells with
low nanomolar affinity, which is unaffected by conjugation of the
Dolaflexin drug conjugate. In vitro cytotoxicity assays show picomolar
potency of XMT-1536 in OVCAR3 (OC; 32,000 NaPi2b molecules/cell; IC50 2
pM), TOV21G (OC; 10,000 NaPi2b molecules/cell; IC50 40 pM), and HCC-4006
(NSCLC; 52,000 NaPi2b molecules/cell; IC50 130 pM). In each cell line,
XMT-1536 is 1-2 logs more potent than a non-binding Dolaflexin ADC
control, consistent with target-dependent cytotoxic effect. XMT-1536 was
tested in mouse xenograft models of OC and NSCLC. In the OVCAR3 OC model,
XMT-1536 induced partial tumor regressions after a single dose of 3 mg/kg
(0.21 mg/kg payload equivalent dose), and complete tumor regressions
after a single dose of 5 mg/kg (0.36 mg/kg payload dose) or 3 weekly
doses of 3 mg/kg. In contrast, a non-binding Dolaflexin ADC with
comparable drug loading was inactive after 3 weekly administrations of 3
mg/kg, consistent with the anti-tumor activity of XMT-1536 being mediated
through binding to the NaPi2b target. XMT-1536 was also tested in a
patient-derived model of KRAS mutant NSCLC, where 3 weekly doses of 3
mg/kg led to significant tumor growth delay and regressions in some
animals. Evaluation of XMT-1536 in additional patient derived xenograft
models is on-going and will be updated at the meeting. XMT-1535 is
cross-reactive with cynomolgous monkey NaPi2b, allowing an informative
evaluation of whether XMT-1536 retains good tolerability in non-human
primate. XMT-1536 was administered to cynomolgous monkeys in an
exploratory single dose study up to 5 mg/kg ADC (4294 g/m2 auristatin
payload equivalents), with no observed target-mediated toxicity and
limited adverse findings. Of note, there was no evidence of bone marrow
toxicity, which has been observed generally for cleavable auristatin
ADCs, and specifically for a recently published auristatin-based NaPi2b
ADC (Lin et al., Clinical Cancer Research, 2015). Based on these data
XMT-1536 is advancing to early clinical development for the treatment of
NaPi2b-expressing tumors.

