Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Neuroendocrine gene transcript expression is associated with
efficacy to lysine-specific demethylase-1 inhibitor RG6016 in small cell
lung cancer-derived cell lines


Small cell lung cancer (SCLC), which comprises 15% of lung neoplasms, is
an aggressive malignancy with limited treatment options. Survival in
refractory settings is typically less than one year, exemplifying the
need for more effective therapeutics. Recent published results suggest
that epigenetic modulation mediated by Lysine Specific Demethylase-1
(LSD1) inhibition can impact this disease setting (Mohammed et al., Cell,
2015 28(1):57-69). RG6016 is a potent and selective inhibitor of LSD1
that promotes growth inhibition in vitro and in vivo SCLC xenograft
models. Here we describe the identification of a gene expression profile
associated with neuroendocrine lineages that predicts responses to RG6016
in SCLC cell lines. RG6016 was screened on a panel of 19 SCLC cell lines;
potent sub-nanomolar to nanomolar activity was exhibited on a subset of
these cell lines. Growth inhibitory responses were greater in classic
compared to variant SCLC cell lines (p-value 0.0055). 9 of the 11 classic
SCLC cell lines tested were responsive to growth inhibitory effects of
RG6016, while 7 of the 8 variant cell lines were insensitive to RG6016
treatment. Differential gene expression analysis comparing classic to
variant cell lines ranked neuroendocrine lineage-associated markers, such
as ASCL1, amongst the highest differentially expressed genes (adj.
p-value = 2.6 10-23). ASCL1 is a transcription factor required for proper
development of pulmonary neuroendocrine cells, and was recently
identified as essential for the survival of a majority of small cell lung
cancers (Augustyn et al., Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2014 111(41):14788-93).
Two other established neuroendocrine markers, DDC and GRP, ranked within
the top ten differentially expressed genes. We also found that a subset
of insensitive SCLC cell lines harbor c-MYC amplifications, suggesting a
potential pathway for resistance to LSD1 inhibition. An RG6016 response
gene expression pattern that highly correlates with growth inhibition was
defined using baseline expression levels of neuroendocrine lineage
transcripts and c-MYC amplification. In vitro activity also correlated
with in vivo responses; RG60106 treatment inhibited xenograft growth of
response signature positive cell line NCI-H510A, while the response
signature negative NCI-H526 xenografts were refractory to RG6016
exposure. Similar gene expression patterns were observed within SCLC cell
lines and a panel of SCLC patient samples, suggesting that use of the
RG6016 response gene signature may increase the likelihood of identifying
patients who will clinically benefit from LSD1- based therapies.

