Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NGS-SWIFT: A cloud-based variant analysis framework using
control-accessed sequencing data from dbGaP/SRA


Genetic variation analysis plays an important role in elucidating the
causes of various human diseases. The drastically reduced costs of genome
sequencing driven by next generation sequence technologies now make it
possible to analyze genetic variations with hundreds or thousands of
samples simultaneously, but with the cost of ever increasing local
storage requirements. The tera- and peta-byte scale footprint for
sequence data imposes significant technical challenges for data
management and analysis, including the tasks of collection, storage,
transfer, sharing, and privacy protection. Currently, each analysis group
must download all the relevant sequence data into a local file system
before variation analysis is initiated. This heavy-weight transaction not
only slows down the pace of the analysis, but also creates financial
burdens for researchers due to the cost of hardware and time required to
transfer the data over typical academic internet connections. To overcome
such limitations and explore the feasibility of analyzing
control-accessed sequencing data in cloud environment while maintaining
data privacy and security, here we introduce a cloud-based analysis
framework that facilitates variation analysis using direct access to the
NCBI Sequence Read Archive through NCBI SRA Toolkit, which allows the
users to programmatically access data housed within SRA with encryption
and decryption capabilities and converts it from the SRA format to the
desired format for data analysis. A customized machine image (ngs-swift)
with preconfigured tools, including NCBI SRA Toolkit and NGS Software
Development Kit, and resources essential for variant analysis has been
created for instantiating an EC2 instance or instance cluster on Amazon
cloud. Performance of this framework has been evaluated using dbGaP study
phs000710.v1.p1 (1000Genome Dataset in dbGaP,
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/projects/gap/cgi-bin/study.cgi?study_id =
phs000710.v1.p1), and compared with that from traditional analysis
pipeline, and security handling in cloud environment when dealing with
control-accessed sequence data has been addressed. We demonstrate that
with this framework, it is cost effective to make variant calls without
first transferring the entire set of aligned sequence data into a local
storage environment, thereby accelerating variant discovery using
control-accessed sequencing data.

