Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PDGF signaling maintains survival of proneural glioma cells by
regulating USP1 to stabilize ID2


Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most aggressive primary brain tumor and
responds poorly to currently available therapies. Transcriptomic
characterization of GBM has identified distinct molecular subtypes of GBM
with the latest report identifying four molecular subtypes: proneural,
neural, classical, and mesenchymal. Gain-of-function alterations leading
to enhanced platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) signaling are commonly
observed in proneural GBM and can drive proneural gliomagenesis. However,
little is known about the critical determinants of malignancy mediated by
PDGF signaling in proneural glioma. Using a mouse model of proneural
glioma and comparative transcriptomics, we determined that PDGF signaling
upregulates ubiquitin specific peptidase 1 (Usp1) to promote survival of
murine proneural glioma cells. Further experimentation revealed that
PDGF-mediated expression of USP1 post-translationally stabilized
Inhibitor of DNA-binding 2 (ID2), which we found to be required for
glioma cell survival. Deletion of the Id2 gene delayed tumor-induced
mortality. Pharmacological inhibition of USP1 decreased ID2 levels, and
delayed tumorigenesis in mice. Importantly, decreased USP1 expression is
associated with prolonged survival in patients with proneural GBM but not
with other subtypes of GBM. Our data describe a signaling cascade
downstream of PDGF that is required for the survival of proneural GBM
cells and suggest that inhibition of the PDGF-USP1-ID2 axis could serve
as a therapeutic strategy for the treatment of proneural GBM with
increased PDGF signaling.

