Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular signaling in multiple myeloma: association of RAS/RAF
mutation status and MAPK pathway activation in primary myeloma patient
biopsies


Multiple myeloma (MM) is an incurable plasma cell malignancy. Recent
studies have identified a dominant mutation cluster in RAS/BRAF genes,
highlighting the MEK/ERK signaling pathway as a potentially promising
therapeutic target. However, treatment of RAS/RAF mutant MM with the MEK
inhibitor, trametinib, resulted in moderate response rates. There were,
however, durable remissions in those patients (pts) who responded. This
suggests a variable degree of dependency on MEK/ERK signaling in RAS/RAF
mutant MM. To address this issue, we correlated RAS/RAF mutations with
the RAF/MEK/ERK cascade activation in primary MM patient biopsies.Primary
material consisted of bone marrow or soft tissue biopsies from 179 pts,
including 102 pts with newly diagnosed myeloma (NDMM) and 77 pts with
relapsed/refractory myeloma (rrMM). Activation of the RAF/MEK/ERK cascade
was assessed using an immunohistochemical (IHC) assay for phospho-ERK. In
parallel, KRAS, NRAS, HRAS and BRAF mutation status was assessed by
targeted re-sequencing using the Ion Torrent NGS technology.The mutation
frequencies found were KRAS (25%), NRAS (24%), and BRAF (8%) while no
HRAS was detected, consistent with previous studies. Overall, RAS/RAF
mutations were significantly more frequent in rrMM (p = 0.010), mainly
driven by an increase in NRAS mutations (p = 0.017), proving the
importance of RAS/RAF-mediated signaling in MM and indicating a potential
role for NRAS mutations in drug resistance development. The top nine
recurrently detected individual mutations were KRAS Q61H (n = 11), NRAS
Q61R (11), NRAS Q61K (10), KRAS G12D/G12V (6 each), BRAF V600E (6), NRAS
G13D (5), NRAS G13R/Q61H (4 each).When correlated with ERK activation
status, KRAS but not NRAS mutations were associated with pathway
activation compared to RAS/RAF-wild type (wt) (p = 0.003). However, these
were not mutually exclusive, suggesting that ERK activation is dependent
on the type of mutation rather than the fact that the RAS/RAF gene is
mutated. Therefore, each recurrent RAS/RAF mutation was tested against
all RAS/RAF-wt samples: Only KRAS G12D and BRAF V600E were consistently
associated with ERK activation (pMultiple myeloma (MM) is an incurable
plasma cell malignancy. Recent studies have identified a dominant
mutation cluster in RAS/BRAF genes, highlighting the MEK/ERK signaling
pathway as a potentially promising therapeutic target. However, treatment
of RAS/RAF mutant MM with the MEK inhibitor, trametinib, resulted in
moderate response rates. There were, however, durable remissions in those
patients (pts) who responded. This suggests a variable degree of
dependency on MEK/ERK signaling in RAS/RAF mutant MM. To address this
issue, we correlated RAS/RAF mutations with the RAF/MEK/ERK cascade
activation in primary MM patient biopsies.Primary material consisted of
bone marrow or soft tissue biopsies from 179 pts, including 102 pts with
newly diagnosed myeloma (NDMM) and 77 pts with relapsed/refractory
myeloma (rrMM). Activation of the RAF/MEK/ERK cascade was assessed using
an immunohistochemical (IHC) assay for phospho-ERK. In parallel, KRAS,
NRAS, HRAS and BRAF mutation status was assessed by targeted
re-sequencing using the Ion Torrent NGS technology.The mutation
frequencies found were KRAS (25%), NRAS (24%), and BRAF (8%) while no
HRAS was detected, consistent with previous studies. Overall, RAS/RAF
mutations were significantly more frequent in rrMM (p = 0.010), mainly
driven by an increase in NRAS mutations (p = 0.017), proving the
importance of RAS/RAF-mediated signaling in MM and indicating a potential
role for NRAS mutations in drug resistance development. The top nine
recurrently detected individual mutations were KRAS Q61H (n = 11), NRAS
Q61R (11), NRAS Q61K (10), KRAS G12D/G12V (6 each), BRAF V600E (6), NRAS
G13D (5), NRAS G13R/Q61H (4 each).When correlated with ERK activation
status, KRAS but not NRAS mutations were associated with pathway
activation compared to RAS/RAF-wild type (wt) (p = 0.003). However, these
were not mutually exclusive, suggesting that ERK activation is dependent
on the type of mutation rather than the fact that the RAS/RAF gene is
mutated. Therefore, each recurrent RAS/RAF mutation was tested against
all RAS/RAF-wt samples: Only KRAS G12D and BRAF V600E were consistently
associated with ERK activation (p< 0.001 each).In summary, we found that
RAS/RAF mutations are not generally associated with RAF/MEK/ERK pathway
activation in MM. However, we did identify specific amino acid changes in
KRAS and BRAF which are more likely to be associated with pathway
activation and two mutations which were consistently associated with
MEK/ERK signaling. These findings indicate that confirmation of
protein-level pathway activation is needed when considering targeted
therapy. In this regard, IHC is a cost-effective and reliable method to
assess pathway activation and should therefore be considered in future.
The clinical relevance of RAS/RAF mutations in MM should be further
elucidated in prospective cohort studies.

