Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PB1, a DDR2 inhibitor with antitumor activity in preclinical
models of squamous cell carcinoma and KRAS-mutated adenocarcinoma of the
lung


Introduction: Discoidin domain receptor 2 (DDR2) is a receptor tyrosine
kinase (RTK) activated by collagen I and identified as an oncogenic
driver in squamous cell carcinoma of the lung (SCC) (1). DDR2 mutations
have been reported in 4% of SCC patients and at lower frequencies in lung
adenocarcinoma, gastric, breast and brain tumors (2). In addition, DDR2
is expressed during epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) (3) and
acts as an upstream activator of SHP2. SHP2 in turn is a key signaling
effector which leads to activation of multiple signaling pathways (4).
DDR2 has recently emerged as a potential therapeutic target in
DDR2-mutated tumors and drugs such as dasatinib are being tested in this
setting.Results and discussion: PB1 is a small organic molecule with a
simple synthesis pathway that showed strong inhibitory activity against
wild type (wt) and mutated purified DDR2 protein. The compound was
subsequently tested in a panel of tumor cell lines from different origins
and histologies.PB1 showed good antiproliferative activity:
IC50Introduction: Discoidin domain receptor 2 (DDR2) is a receptor
tyrosine kinase (RTK) activated by collagen I and identified as an
oncogenic driver in squamous cell carcinoma of the lung (SCC) (1). DDR2
mutations have been reported in 4% of SCC patients and at lower
frequencies in lung adenocarcinoma, gastric, breast and brain tumors (2).
In addition, DDR2 is expressed during epithelial to mesenchymal
transition (EMT) (3) and acts as an upstream activator of SHP2. SHP2 in
turn is a key signaling effector which leads to activation of multiple
signaling pathways (4). DDR2 has recently emerged as a potential
therapeutic target in DDR2-mutated tumors and drugs such as dasatinib are
being tested in this setting.Results and discussion: PB1 is a small
organic molecule with a simple synthesis pathway that showed strong
inhibitory activity against wild type (wt) and mutated purified DDR2
protein. The compound was subsequently tested in a panel of tumor cell
lines from different origins and histologies.PB1 showed good
antiproliferative activity: IC50<1 M in (i) SCC cell lines with DDR
mutations such as H2286 or H520, (ii) SCC lung tumor cell lines wt for
DDR2, and (iii) some lung adenocarcinoma cell lines with KRAS mutations
such as A549. Remarkably, the two cell lines tested carrying the DDR2
activating mutation I638F were extremely sensitive to PB1, with IC50 in
the nanomolar range. The compound also showed good activity against cells
harboring the DDR2 L239R mutation. We also generated two
dasatinib-resistant cells lines from the H2286 and H520 cell lines. Cells
had IC50s for dasatinib over 25 uM but remained sensitive to PB1, with
IC50s of 0.6 and 5.92, respectively. Finally, in non tumor cell lines, no
toxicity was observed with PB1 at concentrations tested (up to 50 M),
indicating a good therapeutic index. Western blotting was used to study
the effects of PB1 on DDR2, ERK and AKT activation in H2286 and A549
cells. The compound strongly inhibited FBS-induced phosphorylation of the
three proteins.Conclusion: PB1 shows significant antitumor activity in
preclinical models of mutated and wt DDR2 in SCC of the lung and some
KRAS mutated adenocarcinoma cell lines. PB1 is also active against tumor
cells with secondary resistance to dasatinib.References:1) Hammerman et
al. Cancer Discovery. 2011 June; 1: 78-89.2) Terai et al. ACS Chem Biol.
2015 Sep; Epub ahead of print.3) Walsh et al. Matrix Biol. 2011 May;
30(4): 243-247.4) Iwai et al. Biochem. J. (2013) 454, 501-513.

