Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In breast cancer cells IGF-I induces upregulation of DDR1 by
suppressing miR-199a-5p via the PI3K/Akt pathway


Discoidin Domain Receptor 1 (DDR1) is a collagen receptor tyrosine-kinase
that is implicated in tumor progression by contributing to epithelial
mesenchymal transition (EMT) and by enhancing tumor cell migration and
invasion.We previously demonstrated that, in breast cancer cells, DDR1
functionally cross-talks with IGF-I receptor (IGF-IR), by affecting
IGF-IR expression and trafficking. In these cells, DDR1 was able to
enhance the stimulatory effects of IGF-I on mitogenesis and invasion
suggesting that the DDR1-IGF-IR cross-talk may play a role in cancer
progression.Herein, we evaluated whether IGF-I may in turn affect DDR1
expression. Indeed, we demonstrated that in breast cancer cells (MCF-7
and MDA-MB-231), IGF-I was able to upregulate DDR1 protein expression in
a time and dose dependent manner. In contrast, DDR1 mRNA levels showed
non-significant changes after stimulation with IGF-I.Moreover, we found
that DDR1 protein upregulation requires the activation of the PI3K/Akt
pathway, while the Erk1/2, the p70/mTOR and the PKC pathways are not
involved.Indeed, IGF-I induced DDR1 protein upregulation through a
post-trascriptional mechanism involving miR-199a-5p suppression via Akt.
We also found that autocrine IGF-II, induced by stable IGF-II cDNA
transfection, is also able to elicit significant DDR1 upregulation in
breast cancer cells. Similar effects were induced by IGF-II secreted by
human cancer associated fibroblasts.Finally, we showed that miR-199a-5p
transfection in breast cancer cells, decreased DDR1 expression and
affected the response to IGF-I in terms of intracellular signaling
through the PI3K/Akt and Erk1/2 pathways, and biological effects such as
cell proliferation and migration.These results demonstrate that the
protumoral effects of IGF-I include downregulation of miR-199a-5p and
consequent upregulation of DDR1 protein. Both these molecules may
represent important targets for breast cancers with overactivation of the
IGF-IR axis.

