Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Lurbinectedin specifically targets transcription in cancer cells,
triggering DNA breaks and degradation of phosphorylated Pol II


Cancer cells are characterized for their avid demand for active
transcription, which reaches the level of a real addiction in solid
tumors as small cell lung cancer (SCLC) or triple-negative breast cancer.
Pharmacological modulation of transcription may thus provide a
therapeutic approach to treat tumor types that depend on deregulated
transcription for the maintenance of their oncogenic state.
Lurbinectedin, currently under evaluation in a Phase III clinical trial
for platinum-resistant ovarian cancer patients, and with very promising
activity in combination with doxorubicin in SCLC, inhibits active
transcription. Here we demonstrate that, after binding to specific DNA
triplets highly represented in the CG-rich region surrounding the
promoter of genes, this drug induces a rapid degradation of RNA
Polymerase II (Pol II). Our results show that the hyperphosphorylated
form of Pol II, already engaged in transcription elongation and likely
blocked during this process by the lurbinectedin-DNA adduct, is then
specifically submitted to the ubiquitin/proteasome degradation process,
which finally removes the majority of the Pol II protein pool in treated
cells. Disappearance of Pol II is followed by the formation of DNA
breaks, process in which the nucleotide excision repair (NER) machinery,
specifically the endonuclease XPF, has an important role. Pol II
degradation and subsequent DNA damage were not only abrogated by
inhibitors of CDK7 and CDK9 cyclin dependent kinases (DRB and
flavopyridol), ubiquitin ligation (PYR-41), or proteasome activity
(MG132), but also correlated with the antiproliferative activity of
lurbinectedin in different cancer cell line models. In summary,
lurbinectedin exemplifies a prototype drug for targeting transcriptional
dependency in tumor cells and, thus, it could represent a new therapeutic
alternative for solid tumors with this addiction.

