Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Generation of a selectively cytotoxic fusion protein against p53
mutated cancers


The most common genetic alteration in human cancer involves the p53 tumor
suppressor gene resulting in defective control of cell cycle arrest and
death.The p53 protein induces a cyclin-dependent kinase (cdk) inhibitor,
p21 which occupies a central position in cell cycle regulation. Cdk
inhibition by p21 results in a lack of progression from the G1 to the
S-phase due to the prevention of retinoblastoma (Rb) phosphorylation and
subsequent inhibition of transcription factors that regulate the genes
involved in DNA replication and cell-cycle progression.It is hypothesized
that the re-introduction of p21 into tumor cells will regenerate the
pathway to apoptosis (programmed cell death) and inhibit proliferation
since it has been suggested that overexpression of p21 results in
suppression of tumor growth in vitro and in vivo.Unfortunately, p21
protein alone is unable to be administered directly in vivo and progress
to the cell nuclei of cancer cells since there is no active mechanism to
transport the protein. However, a number of proteins are known which can
translocate across the cytoplasmic membrane of mammalian cells and into
the nuclei, carrying additional cargoes with them. One of these
translocating proteins is a 60 amino acid peptide corresponding to the
homeodomain of the Drosophilia protein Antennapedia [ANTP].A fusion
protein (TR1) has been developed where the full-length p21 protein is
attached to the antennapedia protein with a view to delivering the p21
protein into cancer cells to restore cell cycle control.TR1 penetrated
and killed cancer cells that do not express wild type p53 or p21. This
included cells that were matched to cogenic parental cell lines. Antp-p21
killed cancer cells selectively that were malignant as a result of
mutations or nuclear exclusion of the p53 and p21 genes and
over-expression of MDM2.Non-specific toxicity was excluded by showing
that TR1 penetrated but did not kill p53- or p21- wild-type cells. TR1
was not immunogenic in normal New Zealand White rabbits. Recombinant Antp
peptide alone was not cytotoxic, showing that killing was due to the
transduction of the p21 component of TR1. TR1was shown to penetrate
cancer cells engrafted in vivo and resulted in tumour eradication when
administered with chemotherapy.TR1 may represent a new and promising
targeted therapy for patients with p53-associated cancers supporting the
concept that rational design of therapies directed against specific
cancer mutations will play a part in the future of cancer therapeutics.

