Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Significant enhancement of efficacy of an anti-Trop-2
antibody-drug conjugate, sacituzumab govitecan (IMMU-132), in
experimental triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) when combined with
microtubule or PARP inhibitors


Purpose: In current clinical trials (ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT01631552),
TNBC patients treated with IMMU-132, which is composed of the active
metabolite of irinotecan, SN-38, conjugated to an anti-Trop-2 antibody
(drug:Ab ratio = 7.6), shows manageable toxicity and encouraging
responses in relapsed/refractory cases. Preclinical studies were
performed to determine the utility of combinations of IMMU-132 with
either a poly(adenosine diphosphoribose) polymerase (PARP) inhibitor
(olaparib) or microtubule inhibitors (paclitaxel or eribulin mesylate) in
mice bearing BRCA1/2 defective (HCC1806)and wild-type (MDA-MB-468) TNBC
tumor xenografts.Procedures: In vitro, human TNBC cell lines were
incubated with IMMU-132 and olaparib to determine a combination index
number and whether the interaction was synergistic, as well as incubating
with SN-38 or IMMU-132 olaparib with analysis by western blot or flow
cytometry (FACS) for double-stranded DNA breaks, as evidenced by
increases in phosphorylated histone H2AX (p-H2AX). In vivo, mice bearing
MDA-MB-468 or HCC1806 tumors were treated with either paclitaxel
(qwklyx5wks) or eribulin mesylate (wks 1, 2, 4, & 5) alone or in
combination with IMMU-132 (wks 1, 2, 4, & 5). Additionally, mice bearing
TNBC tumors were treated with olaparib (qdx5d) plus IMMU-132 (qwkly) for
4 wks. Study survival endpoint was tumor progression to >1.0 cm3.Results:
Treatment with IMMU-132 plus paclitaxel in HCC1806 or MDA-MB-468
tumor-bearing mice significantly inhibited tumor growth compared to
monotherapy (PPurpose: In current clinical trials (ClinicalTrials.gov,
NCT01631552), TNBC patients treated with IMMU-132, which is composed of
the active metabolite of irinotecan, SN-38, conjugated to an anti-Trop-2
antibody (drug:Ab ratio = 7.6), shows manageable toxicity and encouraging
responses in relapsed/refractory cases. Preclinical studies were
performed to determine the utility of combinations of IMMU-132 with
either a poly(adenosine diphosphoribose) polymerase (PARP) inhibitor
(olaparib) or microtubule inhibitors (paclitaxel or eribulin mesylate) in
mice bearing BRCA1/2 defective (HCC1806)and wild-type (MDA-MB-468) TNBC
tumor xenografts.Procedures: In vitro, human TNBC cell lines were
incubated with IMMU-132 and olaparib to determine a combination index
number and whether the interaction was synergistic, as well as incubating
with SN-38 or IMMU-132 olaparib with analysis by western blot or flow
cytometry (FACS) for double-stranded DNA breaks, as evidenced by
increases in phosphorylated histone H2AX (p-H2AX). In vivo, mice bearing
MDA-MB-468 or HCC1806 tumors were treated with either paclitaxel
(qwklyx5wks) or eribulin mesylate (wks 1, 2, 4, & 5) alone or in
combination with IMMU-132 (wks 1, 2, 4, & 5). Additionally, mice bearing
TNBC tumors were treated with olaparib (qdx5d) plus IMMU-132 (qwkly) for
4 wks. Study survival endpoint was tumor progression to >1.0 cm3.Results:
Treatment with IMMU-132 plus paclitaxel in HCC1806 or MDA-MB-468
tumor-bearing mice significantly inhibited tumor growth compared to
monotherapy (P<0.0195 and Purpose: In current clinical trials
(ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT01631552), TNBC patients treated with IMMU-132,
which is composed of the active metabolite of irinotecan, SN-38,
conjugated to an anti-Trop-2 antibody (drug:Ab ratio = 7.6), shows
manageable toxicity and encouraging responses in relapsed/refractory
cases. Preclinical studies were performed to determine the utility of
combinations of IMMU-132 with either a poly(adenosine diphosphoribose)
polymerase (PARP) inhibitor (olaparib) or microtubule inhibitors
(paclitaxel or eribulin mesylate) in mice bearing BRCA1/2 defective
(HCC1806)and wild-type (MDA-MB-468) TNBC tumor xenografts.Procedures: In
vitro, human TNBC cell lines were incubated with IMMU-132 and olaparib to
determine a combination index number and whether the interaction was
synergistic, as well as incubating with SN-38 or IMMU-132 olaparib with
analysis by western blot or flow cytometry (FACS) for double-stranded DNA
breaks, as evidenced by increases in phosphorylated histone H2AX
(p-H2AX). In vivo, mice bearing MDA-MB-468 or HCC1806 tumors were treated
with either paclitaxel (qwklyx5wks) or eribulin mesylate (wks 1, 2, 4, &
5) alone or in combination with IMMU-132 (wks 1, 2, 4, & 5).
Additionally, mice bearing TNBC tumors were treated with olaparib (qdx5d)
plus IMMU-132 (qwkly) for 4 wks. Study survival endpoint was tumor
progression to >1.0 cm3.Results: Treatment with IMMU-132 plus paclitaxel
in HCC1806 or MDA-MB-468 tumor-bearing mice significantly inhibited tumor
growth compared to monotherapy (P<0.0195 and <0.0328, respectively).
IMMU-132 plus eribulin mesylate also resulted in significant tumor
regressions when compared to all other treatments in these two disease
models (PPurpose: In current clinical trials (ClinicalTrials.gov,
NCT01631552), TNBC patients treated with IMMU-132, which is composed of
the active metabolite of irinotecan, SN-38, conjugated to an anti-Trop-2
antibody (drug:Ab ratio = 7.6), shows manageable toxicity and encouraging
responses in relapsed/refractory cases. Preclinical studies were
performed to determine the utility of combinations of IMMU-132 with
either a poly(adenosine diphosphoribose) polymerase (PARP) inhibitor
(olaparib) or microtubule inhibitors (paclitaxel or eribulin mesylate) in
mice bearing BRCA1/2 defective (HCC1806)and wild-type (MDA-MB-468) TNBC
tumor xenografts.Procedures: In vitro, human TNBC cell lines were
incubated with IMMU-132 and olaparib to determine a combination index
number and whether the interaction was synergistic, as well as incubating
with SN-38 or IMMU-132 olaparib with analysis by western blot or flow
cytometry (FACS) for double-stranded DNA breaks, as evidenced by
increases in phosphorylated histone H2AX (p-H2AX). In vivo, mice bearing
MDA-MB-468 or HCC1806 tumors were treated with either paclitaxel
(qwklyx5wks) or eribulin mesylate (wks 1, 2, 4, & 5) alone or in
combination with IMMU-132 (wks 1, 2, 4, & 5). Additionally, mice bearing
TNBC tumors were treated with olaparib (qdx5d) plus IMMU-132 (qwkly) for
4 wks. Study survival endpoint was tumor progression to >1.0 cm3.Results:
Treatment with IMMU-132 plus paclitaxel in HCC1806 or MDA-MB-468
tumor-bearing mice significantly inhibited tumor growth compared to
monotherapy (P<0.0195 and <0.0328, respectively). IMMU-132 plus eribulin
mesylate also resulted in significant tumor regressions when compared to
all other treatments in these two disease models (P<0.0007 and Purpose:
In current clinical trials (ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT01631552), TNBC
patients treated with IMMU-132, which is composed of the active
metabolite of irinotecan, SN-38, conjugated to an anti-Trop-2 antibody
(drug:Ab ratio = 7.6), shows manageable toxicity and encouraging
responses in relapsed/refractory cases. Preclinical studies were
performed to determine the utility of combinations of IMMU-132 with
either a poly(adenosine diphosphoribose) polymerase (PARP) inhibitor
(olaparib) or microtubule inhibitors (paclitaxel or eribulin mesylate) in
mice bearing BRCA1/2 defective (HCC1806)and wild-type (MDA-MB-468) TNBC
tumor xenografts.Procedures: In vitro, human TNBC cell lines were
incubated with IMMU-132 and olaparib to determine a combination index
number and whether the interaction was synergistic, as well as incubating
with SN-38 or IMMU-132 olaparib with analysis by western blot or flow
cytometry (FACS) for double-stranded DNA breaks, as evidenced by
increases in phosphorylated histone H2AX (p-H2AX). In vivo, mice bearing
MDA-MB-468 or HCC1806 tumors were treated with either paclitaxel
(qwklyx5wks) or eribulin mesylate (wks 1, 2, 4, & 5) alone or in
combination with IMMU-132 (wks 1, 2, 4, & 5). Additionally, mice bearing
TNBC tumors were treated with olaparib (qdx5d) plus IMMU-132 (qwkly) for
4 wks. Study survival endpoint was tumor progression to >1.0 cm3.Results:
Treatment with IMMU-132 plus paclitaxel in HCC1806 or MDA-MB-468
tumor-bearing mice significantly inhibited tumor growth compared to
monotherapy (P<0.0195 and <0.0328, respectively). IMMU-132 plus eribulin
mesylate also resulted in significant tumor regressions when compared to
all other treatments in these two disease models (P<0.0007 and <0.0432,
respectively). In vitro, olaparib combined with SN-38 or IMMU-132
increased p-H2AX levels. Cytotoxicity assays revealed this interaction to
be synergistic in both BRCA1/2 defective and wild-typeTNBC cell lines. In
vivo, IMMU-132 plus olaparib had significant anti-tumor effects in both
HCC1806 and MDA-MB-468 tumor-bearing mice when compared to single-agent
responses (PPurpose: In current clinical trials (ClinicalTrials.gov,
NCT01631552), TNBC patients treated with IMMU-132, which is composed of
the active metabolite of irinotecan, SN-38, conjugated to an anti-Trop-2
antibody (drug:Ab ratio = 7.6), shows manageable toxicity and encouraging
responses in relapsed/refractory cases. Preclinical studies were
performed to determine the utility of combinations of IMMU-132 with
either a poly(adenosine diphosphoribose) polymerase (PARP) inhibitor
(olaparib) or microtubule inhibitors (paclitaxel or eribulin mesylate) in
mice bearing BRCA1/2 defective (HCC1806)and wild-type (MDA-MB-468) TNBC
tumor xenografts.Procedures: In vitro, human TNBC cell lines were
incubated with IMMU-132 and olaparib to determine a combination index
number and whether the interaction was synergistic, as well as incubating
with SN-38 or IMMU-132 olaparib with analysis by western blot or flow
cytometry (FACS) for double-stranded DNA breaks, as evidenced by
increases in phosphorylated histone H2AX (p-H2AX). In vivo, mice bearing
MDA-MB-468 or HCC1806 tumors were treated with either paclitaxel
(qwklyx5wks) or eribulin mesylate (wks 1, 2, 4, & 5) alone or in
combination with IMMU-132 (wks 1, 2, 4, & 5). Additionally, mice bearing
TNBC tumors were treated with olaparib (qdx5d) plus IMMU-132 (qwkly) for
4 wks. Study survival endpoint was tumor progression to >1.0 cm3.Results:
Treatment with IMMU-132 plus paclitaxel in HCC1806 or MDA-MB-468
tumor-bearing mice significantly inhibited tumor growth compared to
monotherapy (P<0.0195 and <0.0328, respectively). IMMU-132 plus eribulin
mesylate also resulted in significant tumor regressions when compared to
all other treatments in these two disease models (P<0.0007 and <0.0432,
respectively). In vitro, olaparib combined with SN-38 or IMMU-132
increased p-H2AX levels. Cytotoxicity assays revealed this interaction to
be synergistic in both BRCA1/2 defective and wild-typeTNBC cell lines. In
vivo, IMMU-132 plus olaparib had significant anti-tumor effects in both
HCC1806 and MDA-MB-468 tumor-bearing mice when compared to single-agent
responses (P<0.0017 and Purpose: In current clinical trials
(ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT01631552), TNBC patients treated with IMMU-132,
which is composed of the active metabolite of irinotecan, SN-38,
conjugated to an anti-Trop-2 antibody (drug:Ab ratio = 7.6), shows
manageable toxicity and encouraging responses in relapsed/refractory
cases. Preclinical studies were performed to determine the utility of
combinations of IMMU-132 with either a poly(adenosine diphosphoribose)
polymerase (PARP) inhibitor (olaparib) or microtubule inhibitors
(paclitaxel or eribulin mesylate) in mice bearing BRCA1/2 defective
(HCC1806)and wild-type (MDA-MB-468) TNBC tumor xenografts.Procedures: In
vitro, human TNBC cell lines were incubated with IMMU-132 and olaparib to
determine a combination index number and whether the interaction was
synergistic, as well as incubating with SN-38 or IMMU-132 olaparib with
analysis by western blot or flow cytometry (FACS) for double-stranded DNA
breaks, as evidenced by increases in phosphorylated histone H2AX
(p-H2AX). In vivo, mice bearing MDA-MB-468 or HCC1806 tumors were treated
with either paclitaxel (qwklyx5wks) or eribulin mesylate (wks 1, 2, 4, &
5) alone or in combination with IMMU-132 (wks 1, 2, 4, & 5).
Additionally, mice bearing TNBC tumors were treated with olaparib (qdx5d)
plus IMMU-132 (qwkly) for 4 wks. Study survival endpoint was tumor
progression to >1.0 cm3.Results: Treatment with IMMU-132 plus paclitaxel
in HCC1806 or MDA-MB-468 tumor-bearing mice significantly inhibited tumor
growth compared to monotherapy (P<0.0195 and <0.0328, respectively).
IMMU-132 plus eribulin mesylate also resulted in significant tumor
regressions when compared to all other treatments in these two disease
models (P<0.0007 and <0.0432, respectively). In vitro, olaparib combined
with SN-38 or IMMU-132 increased p-H2AX levels. Cytotoxicity assays
revealed this interaction to be synergistic in both BRCA1/2 defective and
wild-typeTNBC cell lines. In vivo, IMMU-132 plus olaparib had significant
anti-tumor effects in both HCC1806 and MDA-MB-468 tumor-bearing mice when
compared to single-agent responses (P<0.0017 and <0.004, respectively).
In all studies, the combination of IMMU-132 with either microtubule
inhibitors or olaparib was well tolerated, with no observable toxicities
(e.g., weight loss).Conclusions: Combining IMMU-132 with a PARP inhibitor
achieves synergistic growth inhibition in TNBC, regardless of BRCA1/2
status. The combination of IMMU-132 therapy with either microtubule or
PARP inhibitors results in significant anti-tumor effects in TNBC disease
models with no observable toxicity. These data provide the rationale for
the clinical evaluation of IMMU-132 in combination with these
chemotherapeutics in TNBC patients.

