Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Optical imaging of ovarian cancer metastasis in mouse models of
obesity


Epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) is a deadly gynecologic malignancy, owing
to its propensity for intraperitoneal (IP) metastasis. Indeed, almost 75%
of women with EOC are diagnosed during the later stages of the disease in
which metastasis is already underway. Pathogenesis of EOC is marked by
diffuse and widely disseminated metastatic sites within the IP
compartment, often with peritoneal ascites. Mouse models of EOC have been
developed to facilitate the pre-clinical research of this deadly disease,
however the quantification of metastatic tumor burden in these animals
has remained challenging due to the broad distribution of lesions in the
IP space. Here we describe a combined In Vivo/Post-Mortem method to
monitor and measure EOC metastasis in mouse models of obesity.
RFP-labeled ovarian cancer cells were injected IP in obese and control
cohorts of mice, followed by weekly in vivo imaging until time of
sacrifice. Subsequent post-mortem imaging was conducted after surgical
exposure of the peritoneal cavity to reveal organs that were then imaged
in situ. Ex vivo imaging was performed last on dissected organs from each
animal. Imaging signal was enhanced via multispectral imaging methods to
remove tissue auto-fluorescence. Semi-quantitative methods to measure
tumor burden are demonstrated in their application to the study of
metastasis in both obese and control animals. Ultimately these results
demonstrated that obesity dramatically increased ovarian cancer
metastatic success, and likely contributes to the reduced EOC survival
rates noted in clinical reports of obese patients.

