Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Detection of early gastric cancer with Sox17 DNA methylation
analysis of gastric washes


Aim: Although minimal invasive treatment is widely accepted for early
stage of gastric cancer (EGC), we still do not have any appropriate risk
markers to detect residual neoplasia and some potential of recurrence. We
previously reported that aberrant DNA methylation is an early and
frequent process in gastric carcinogenesis and could be useful for
detection of gastric neoplasia (Gastroenterology 2009, Tumor Biology
2011). Our goal is to verify the potency of our three selected candidate
genes (Sox17, MINT25, miR34) as a treatment marker for EGC. Method: We
conducted a multicenter, prospective study using selected three candidate
genes (Sox17, MINT25 and miR34) by Methylated CpG Island Amplification
Microarray (MACAM) based analysis and analyzed the DNA methylation levels
before and after endoscopic resection (ER) for EGC using gastric washes.
We statistically analyzed sensitivity, specificity and AUC with DNA
methylation levels of before / after ER and information of recurrent
cases in 2 years. Results: 352 EGC cases were registered and
endoscopically removed. 182 cases could followed endoscopically for 2
years (51.7%). Sensitivity, specificity and AUC were as follows. Sox17
(70.0%, 48.1%, 0.646), MINT25 (70.0%, 35.2% 0.555), miR34 (65.0%, 49.4%,
0.578). Conclusion: We have developed a new methodology for gastric
cancer detection by DNA methylation in gastric washes. It is easy and
useful for early detection of recurrence after endoscopic treatment in
GCa patients.

