Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The mechanobiome of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma: a new,
targetable drug space


Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is a leading cause of cancer
mortality, with 37,000 people dying annually in the US. Existing
strategies for treating cancer primarily mainly focus on inhibiting cell
growth through specific genetic pathways, which typically either fail to
completely abolish the disease or which lead to compensatory regulatory
changes, and hence, drug resistance. Targeting cell mechanics remains an
under-used approach for drug development.The direct driver of cell shape
change events intrinsic to cellular functions, such migration and
invasion, is the mechanobiome - a collection of cytoskeletal proteins
which are the final determinants of a cell's mechanical attributes and
which lie downstream of KRAS and other regulatory molecules. Targeting,
and ultimately, inhibiting these processes is less likely to be subject
to compensatory regulation by cancer cells. We determined via western
blot analysis and immunohistochemistry of patient-derived samples that
key players involved in mechanosensation-myosin IIA, IIC, -actin-4, and
filamin B -show increased expression in cancerous ductal epithelial over
normal tissue, while non-mechanosensory, or variable mechanosensory,
paralogs (myosin IIB, -actin-1, and filamin A) show decreased expression.
This upregulation of highly mechanosensory proteins has initiated an
investigation into the necessity and sufficiency of the myosin II
paralogs in PDAC metastasis through overexpression and knockdown of
expression, coupled with mechanical assays. In addition to resolving the
mechanobiome of PDAC, we have previously shown that targeting of myosin
IIC by 4-hydroxyacetophenone affects PDAC mechanics. We are testing the
in vivo efficacy of 4-HAP by conducting a murine multi-arm study of
metastatically human derived pancreatic cancer cells. Preliminary results
suggest a protective effect against the metastasis of human pancreatic
cancer cells among mice treated with 4-HAP every other day.

