Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MiR182 mediated control over myeloid differentiation provides
novel mechanism of Imatinib resistance in chronic myeloid leukemia


MiR182 is an evolutionarily conserved miR, present in a cluster with
miR183, and miR96 on human chromosome 7q32.2. This cluster is
over-expressed in hESCs, and iPSCs. Developmentally, miR182 is
over-expressed during erythropoiesis from CD34 cells. Erythroid
differentiation of CML cells induced by Imatinib treatment provides an
alternate mechanism of Imatinib escape, and also emphasizes the need to
explore miR182 function in this context. In cancerous cells, miR182
regulates metastasis in melanoma cells by regulation of MITF and FOXO3,
and DNA repair in breast cancer by targeting BRCA1. These reports provide
some understanding of miR182 function by transient in-vitro assays. To
refine functional importance, targeted deletion of MIR182 has been done
on mice retinal cells where it is shown an over-expressed candidate by
quantitative methods; nevertheless MIR182 deletion does not show any
phenotypic change indicating challenges to study their functions along
with better model systems. We focus to study K562 cells, CML blast crisis
cell line with wild type Bcr-Abl tyrosine kinase, partially
differentiated cells able to differentiate in different lineages upon
induction. We exploit use of CRISPR/Cas9 mediated knock-out approach to
find out miR182 function in K562 cells. We show that we have successfully
deleted MIR182 loci in K562 cells by CRISPR. We hypothesize if miR182
regulates proliferation or differentiation in bi-potent K562 cells. Using
phenotypic characterization, we studied MIR182 deleted cells. We show
that myeloid differentiation is augmented by MIR182 deletion. Homozygous
MIR182 deleted cells display decreased proliferation. We find striking
inverse correlation with notch signalling genes in the context of
Imatinib resistance. Notch signalling has been documented in cancer cells
where its role has been shown in context dependent which require more
explanation of its regulation. Hes1, one of main transcriptional
regulator of notch signalling pathway, is targeted by miR182 shown by
both bio-informatics, and in-vitro assays. Hes1 manipulation confirms it
as down-stream target of miR182 in CML cells. We next explored Imatinib
resistance phenotype in the context of miR182 given its expression in
CD34 cells. We demonstrate miR182 is over-expressed in CML cells towards
Imatinib treatment in ex-vivo, and in-vitro. We find miR182 essential for
proliferation of K562 cells, Imatinib resistance. Taken together, our
studies highlight miR182 targets notch signalling genes in CML cells
implication of which we have shown in the context of Bcr-Abl independent
Imatinib resistance mediated by differentiation deregulation.

