Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identify and prioritize candidate neoantigens from cancer exome
sequencing with unmatched accuracy


Somatic, nonsynonymous genetic alterations present in cancer can lead to
the formation of novel protein sequences and thus production of
immunogenic non-self neoantigens. Some of those neoantigens will be
processed, presented on MHC molecules, and induce tumor-specific T cell
responses. Because neoantigens play central roles in the cancer-immunity
cycle, it is critical to identify the most potent immunogenic neoantigens
effectively and accurately.Combining PGDx's highly accurate cancer exome
analyses (CancerXome) with in silico neoantigen prediction, we have
launched ImmunoSelect-R that identifies and prioritizes the most relevant
mutation-derived neoantigens. To ensure detection of true somatic
mutations and prevent false positive mutations from confounding
neoantigen identification, ImmunoSelect utilizes CancerXome that delivers
unparalleled cancer whole exome sequencing accuracy, achieving 95%
sensitivity and 97% positive predictive value at 10% mutant allele
frequency with 150x coverage. ImmunoSelect also provides accurate HLA
typing from whole exome sequencing with >99.9% sensitivity and
specificity. Once exome-based mutations and novel open-reading-frames are
identified and HLA genotypes defined, ImmunoSelect utilizes state of art
bioinformatics pipelines for prediction and prioritization of the most
relevant neoantigens. When applied to a set of experimentally validated
neoantigens, ImmunoSelect identified 18 out of 19 of them as being strong
neoantigen candidates, suggesting a sensitivity of greater than 90%.
Moreover, ImmunoSelect consistently ranked experimentally validated
neoantigens within top 20% of all neoantigen candidates derived from
whole exome sequencing.In summary, ImmunoSelect is able to identify and
prioritize candidate neoantigens from cancer exome sequencing results
effectively and accurately, enabling personalized cancer vaccine
development, adoptive T-cell transfer, and prediction of response to
checkpoint inhibitors

