Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Glypican-1 is a potential marker of prognosis and involved in
chemoresistance of cisplatin in esophageal squamous cell cancer


[Introduction]Despite recent improvements in multi-treatment approaches,
including surgery, radiotherapy and chemotherapy, the prognosis for
patients with Esophageal squamous cell cancer (ESCC) remains
unsatisfactory. In addition, predicting a prognosis and treatment
response for ESCC had been constantly being required but remains
difficult, even when using the TNM system. We identified Glypican-1(GPC1)
as a novel disease specific antigen of ESCC by quantitative proteomic
analysis focused on cell surface membrane proteins. GPC1 is one of the
cell-surface heparan sulfate proteoglycans which has been reported as a
prognostic factor in pancreatic cancer.[Objectives]This study aimed to
clarify correlations between GPC1 expression and the prognosis in patient
with ESCC and also reveal the association of GPC1 with the drug
resistance to chemotherapeutic agents in squamous cancer cell lines and
esophageal cancer patients treated with chemotherapy.[Methods]ESCC
tissues were obtained from 175 patients who underwent esophagectomy at
Osaka University Hospital(Osaka, Japan), from 2001 to 2013 and were
subjected to immunohistochemistry. We performed immunohistochemical (IHC)
assessment using anti-GPC1 antibody and investigated the association
between GPC1 expression and the clinicopathological parameters. We
divided the patients into two groups such as high expression group (HG)
and low expression group (LG). Furthermore, we investigated associations
between GPC1 expression and clinical response of neo-adjuvant
chemotherapy for patients with ESCC. We established GPC1 knocked out
cells of TE-14 using Crisper-Cas9 system and stable GPC1-transfected
cells of LK-2(Lung squamous cell carcinoma cell line) using pcDNA3.1-GPC1
plasmid transfection. To investigate the relationship between GPC1
expression and sensitivity to cisplatin (CDDP), we examined sensitivity
to CDDP by the WST-8 assay.[Results]The patients characteristics as
follows, age (median) = 64yrs(39-80), gender (Male: Female) = 155:20. By
the IHC analysis, 99 patients were classified into HG and 76 were LG. HG
patients exhibited a poorer prognosis compared with the LG patients.
(p[Introduction]Despite recent improvements in multi-treatment
approaches, including surgery, radiotherapy and chemotherapy, the
prognosis for patients with Esophageal squamous cell cancer (ESCC)
remains unsatisfactory. In addition, predicting a prognosis and treatment
response for ESCC had been constantly being required but remains
difficult, even when using the TNM system. We identified Glypican-1(GPC1)
as a novel disease specific antigen of ESCC by quantitative proteomic
analysis focused on cell surface membrane proteins. GPC1 is one of the
cell-surface heparan sulfate proteoglycans which has been reported as a
prognostic factor in pancreatic cancer.[Objectives]This study aimed to
clarify correlations between GPC1 expression and the prognosis in patient
with ESCC and also reveal the association of GPC1 with the drug
resistance to chemotherapeutic agents in squamous cancer cell lines and
esophageal cancer patients treated with chemotherapy.[Methods]ESCC
tissues were obtained from 175 patients who underwent esophagectomy at
Osaka University Hospital(Osaka, Japan), from 2001 to 2013 and were
subjected to immunohistochemistry. We performed immunohistochemical (IHC)
assessment using anti-GPC1 antibody and investigated the association
between GPC1 expression and the clinicopathological parameters. We
divided the patients into two groups such as high expression group (HG)
and low expression group (LG). Furthermore, we investigated associations
between GPC1 expression and clinical response of neo-adjuvant
chemotherapy for patients with ESCC. We established GPC1 knocked out
cells of TE-14 using Crisper-Cas9 system and stable GPC1-transfected
cells of LK-2(Lung squamous cell carcinoma cell line) using pcDNA3.1-GPC1
plasmid transfection. To investigate the relationship between GPC1
expression and sensitivity to cisplatin (CDDP), we examined sensitivity
to CDDP by the WST-8 assay.[Results]The patients characteristics as
follows, age (median) = 64yrs(39-80), gender (Male: Female) = 155:20. By
the IHC analysis, 99 patients were classified into HG and 76 were LG. HG
patients exhibited a poorer prognosis compared with the LG patients.
(p<0.001) In multivariate analyses pT, pN, and GPC1 high expression were
became significant prognostic factors (p[Introduction]Despite recent
improvements in multi-treatment approaches, including surgery,
radiotherapy and chemotherapy, the prognosis for patients with Esophageal
squamous cell cancer (ESCC) remains unsatisfactory. In addition,
predicting a prognosis and treatment response for ESCC had been
constantly being required but remains difficult, even when using the TNM
system. We identified Glypican-1(GPC1) as a novel disease specific
antigen of ESCC by quantitative proteomic analysis focused on cell
surface membrane proteins. GPC1 is one of the cell-surface heparan
sulfate proteoglycans which has been reported as a prognostic factor in
pancreatic cancer.[Objectives]This study aimed to clarify correlations
between GPC1 expression and the prognosis in patient with ESCC and also
reveal the association of GPC1 with the drug resistance to
chemotherapeutic agents in squamous cancer cell lines and esophageal
cancer patients treated with chemotherapy.[Methods]ESCC tissues were
obtained from 175 patients who underwent esophagectomy at Osaka
University Hospital(Osaka, Japan), from 2001 to 2013 and were subjected
to immunohistochemistry. We performed immunohistochemical (IHC)
assessment using anti-GPC1 antibody and investigated the association
between GPC1 expression and the clinicopathological parameters. We
divided the patients into two groups such as high expression group (HG)
and low expression group (LG). Furthermore, we investigated associations
between GPC1 expression and clinical response of neo-adjuvant
chemotherapy for patients with ESCC. We established GPC1 knocked out
cells of TE-14 using Crisper-Cas9 system and stable GPC1-transfected
cells of LK-2(Lung squamous cell carcinoma cell line) using pcDNA3.1-GPC1
plasmid transfection. To investigate the relationship between GPC1
expression and sensitivity to cisplatin (CDDP), we examined sensitivity
to CDDP by the WST-8 assay.[Results]The patients characteristics as
follows, age (median) = 64yrs(39-80), gender (Male: Female) = 155:20. By
the IHC analysis, 99 patients were classified into HG and 76 were LG. HG
patients exhibited a poorer prognosis compared with the LG patients.
(p<0.001) In multivariate analyses pT, pN, and GPC1 high expression were
became significant prognostic factors (p<0.01).We clarified there was a
significant negative correlation between histological responses and GPC1
expression in patient with neoadjuvant chemo therapy. Furthermore, in
vitro experiments showed that the IC50 values for CDDP of GPC1 expressing
cells (TE-14 and GPC1 transfected LK-2) were significantly higher than
that of GPC1 no-expressing cells (GPC1 knocked out TE-14 and
LK-2).[Conclusion]Our study showed that GPC1 was an independent
prognostic factor in esophageal cancer. Furthermore, we showed that GPC1
was a critical molecule for chemoresistance to cisplatin.

