Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genetic aberrations in the DNA repair pathway among children with
Philadelphia chromosome positive leukemias


Background. Aberrations in the DNA repair pathway among children with
leukemia are largely unknown. Knowledge of such mutations may improve the
understanding of tumorigenesis, direct patient care, and enable genetic
counseling of patients and families. Germline aberrations of the
DNA-repair machinery are crucial for generating chromosomal instability
and occurrence of acute leukemia in children. In order to better
understand this mechanism, we studied a specific subgroup of childhood
leukemia, e.g. t(9;22) or chromosome Philadelphia positive (Ph+) acute
lymphoblastic and chronic myeloid leukemias. We addressed our research to
specific genes (Nijmegen Breakage Syndrome (NBS1) and Fanconi Anemia)
involved in the DNA repair pathway, in the attempt to identify mutations
and aberrant expressions, predisposing and/or cooperating with the
leukemogenic process.Materials and Methods. We analyzed diagnostic and
remission samples of 12 children: 8 with a Ph+ acute lymphoblastic
leukemia (ALL) and 4 with a chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) diagnosed and
treated at our institution from 1999 to 2013. We performed RT-PCR
analyses to detect mutations in exons 3-6 of the NBS1 gene, followed by a
direct sequencing analysis (BMR - Padova - Italy). The status of FANCD2
and PALB2 genes was studied by a multiplex ligation-dependent probe
amplification (MLPA) using the Salsa MLPA P057-025R FANCD2-PALB2 Probemix
and SALSA MLPA EK1 kit (MRC-Holland, Amsterdam, the Netherlands). Samples
from five healthy donors (HDs) were used as wild-type controls. For data
elaboration, we used Coffalyser.Net software for MLPA. Moreover we
performed a real-time PCR amplification of BRCA1 (exons 14-15) and BRCA2
(exons 15-16) genes, respectively, calculating the median fold-changes
(MFC) in patients comparing with HDs.Results. We detected the NBS1 E185Q
polymorphism (c533G>C, rs1805794) in both diagnostic and remission
samples in 3 out of 12 children with a Ph positive acute leukemia (2 ALL,
1 CML). We also found two pairs of deletions in FANCD2 (32-35; 35-38) and
PALB2 (2; 2-6) in 4 out of 12 Ph positive cases (2 ALL and 2 CML). These
aberrations were mutually exclusive. Thus a total of 7 cases (58%) showed
an aberrant pathway. Moreover we determined that the MFC of BRCA1
expression among children with Ph positive ALL and CML was slightly
higher than HDs (1,388 vs 0,433 and 1,625 vs 0,451, respectively).
Surprisingly the MFC of BRCA2 expression was strongly higher than HDs in
both children with Ph positive ALL (5,924 vs 0,002) and CML (54,504 vs
0,256).Conclusion. Our preliminary findings strongly suggest that
germline mutations or deletions in association with aberrant expression
of specific genes that regulate the DNA repair machinery may contribute
to the chromosomal instability in children with Ph positive leukemias.
These data will be confirmed in a larger population of different subtypes
of pediatric leukemia.

