Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Aberrant JAK/STAT signaling orchestrates global promoter
methylation and promotes TGF- mediated EMT through epigenetic silencing
of miR-193a in gastric cancer


Gastric cancer is the fourth leading cause of cancer-related death
worldwide. Previous studies demonstrated that activation of the JAK/STAT3
signaling pathway is frequently observed in H. pylori infected gastric
cancer. However, the role of aberrant JAK/STAT signaling in the global
epigenetic changes remains unclear. In this regard, we compared the
global methylomic changes in AGS gastric cancer cells showing
constitutive activation of STA3 vs its STAT3 knock-down subclone by
MBDcap-Seq followed by PrEMeR-CG analysis. Together with RNA-Seq, we
identified 97 targets showing concomitant hypomethylation and
over-expression while 76 targets showing concomitant hypermethylation and
down-regulation after STAT3 knock down. Genes showing
hypomethylaton/over-expression were subjected to transcription factor
binding site analysis by MEME CentriMo. Interestingly, the
transcriptional repressors binding site for ETS1 (p = 2.90E-06) and EHF
(p = 3.50E-06) were overrepresented in those identifed STAT3 targets
suggesting the cooperative binding with STAT3 in the epigenetic silencing
of the targets. Further gene ontology analysis by DAVID showed that genes
involved in cell cycle and apoptosis were significantly enriched in the
hypomethylated/over-expressed targets while genes involved in protein
degradation and ubiquitination were found among the
hypermethylation/down-regulated targets. To experimentally confirm our
result, we analyzed the functional role of one of the hypomethylated
targets, miR-193a in gastric cancer. Concomitant with MBDcap-Seq,
bisulphite pyrosequencing confirmed that promoter region of miR-193a was
hypomethylated in AGS cells depleted with STAT3 but hypermethylated in
MKN28 gastric cancer cells overexpressed with constitutive activated
STAT3. Cell lines studies also found that promoter region of miR-193a was
hypermethylated in gastric cancer cells which did not express miR-193a.
Over-expression of miR-193a in AGS cells inhibited cell proliferation
(pGastric cancer is the fourth leading cause of cancer-related death
worldwide. Previous studies demonstrated that activation of the JAK/STAT3
signaling pathway is frequently observed in H. pylori infected gastric
cancer. However, the role of aberrant JAK/STAT signaling in the global
epigenetic changes remains unclear. In this regard, we compared the
global methylomic changes in AGS gastric cancer cells showing
constitutive activation of STA3 vs its STAT3 knock-down subclone by
MBDcap-Seq followed by PrEMeR-CG analysis. Together with RNA-Seq, we
identified 97 targets showing concomitant hypomethylation and
over-expression while 76 targets showing concomitant hypermethylation and
down-regulation after STAT3 knock down. Genes showing
hypomethylaton/over-expression were subjected to transcription factor
binding site analysis by MEME CentriMo. Interestingly, the
transcriptional repressors binding site for ETS1 (p = 2.90E-06) and EHF
(p = 3.50E-06) were overrepresented in those identifed STAT3 targets
suggesting the cooperative binding with STAT3 in the epigenetic silencing
of the targets. Further gene ontology analysis by DAVID showed that genes
involved in cell cycle and apoptosis were significantly enriched in the
hypomethylated/over-expressed targets while genes involved in protein
degradation and ubiquitination were found among the
hypermethylation/down-regulated targets. To experimentally confirm our
result, we analyzed the functional role of one of the hypomethylated
targets, miR-193a in gastric cancer. Concomitant with MBDcap-Seq,
bisulphite pyrosequencing confirmed that promoter region of miR-193a was
hypomethylated in AGS cells depleted with STAT3 but hypermethylated in
MKN28 gastric cancer cells overexpressed with constitutive activated
STAT3. Cell lines studies also found that promoter region of miR-193a was
hypermethylated in gastric cancer cells which did not express miR-193a.
Over-expression of miR-193a in AGS cells inhibited cell proliferation
(p<0.001) and migration (p Gastric cancer is the fourth leading cause of
cancer-related death worldwide. Previous studies demonstrated that
activation of the JAK/STAT3 signaling pathway is frequently observed in
H. pylori infected gastric cancer. However, the role of aberrant JAK/STAT
signaling in the global epigenetic changes remains unclear. In this
regard, we compared the global methylomic changes in AGS gastric cancer
cells showing constitutive activation of STA3 vs its STAT3 knock-down
subclone by MBDcap-Seq followed by PrEMeR-CG analysis. Together with
RNA-Seq, we identified 97 targets showing concomitant hypomethylation and
over-expression while 76 targets showing concomitant hypermethylation and
down-regulation after STAT3 knock down. Genes showing
hypomethylaton/over-expression were subjected to transcription factor
binding site analysis by MEME CentriMo. Interestingly, the
transcriptional repressors binding site for ETS1 (p = 2.90E-06) and EHF
(p = 3.50E-06) were overrepresented in those identifed STAT3 targets
suggesting the cooperative binding with STAT3 in the epigenetic silencing
of the targets. Further gene ontology analysis by DAVID showed that genes
involved in cell cycle and apoptosis were significantly enriched in the
hypomethylated/over-expressed targets while genes involved in protein
degradation and ubiquitination were found among the
hypermethylation/down-regulated targets. To experimentally confirm our
result, we analyzed the functional role of one of the hypomethylated
targets, miR-193a in gastric cancer. Concomitant with MBDcap-Seq,
bisulphite pyrosequencing confirmed that promoter region of miR-193a was
hypomethylated in AGS cells depleted with STAT3 but hypermethylated in
MKN28 gastric cancer cells overexpressed with constitutive activated
STAT3. Cell lines studies also found that promoter region of miR-193a was
hypermethylated in gastric cancer cells which did not express miR-193a.
Over-expression of miR-193a in AGS cells inhibited cell proliferation
(p<0.001) and migration (p <0.01) by colony formation assay and
wound-healing assay respectively. Clinically, significantly higher
promoter methylation of miR-193a was observed in gastric cancer patient
samples (Hong Kong, n = 70; Taiwan, n = 38) as compared to gastritis (n =
9, pGastric cancer is the fourth leading cause of cancer-related death
worldwide. Previous studies demonstrated that activation of the JAK/STAT3
signaling pathway is frequently observed in H. pylori infected gastric
cancer. However, the role of aberrant JAK/STAT signaling in the global
epigenetic changes remains unclear. In this regard, we compared the
global methylomic changes in AGS gastric cancer cells showing
constitutive activation of STA3 vs its STAT3 knock-down subclone by
MBDcap-Seq followed by PrEMeR-CG analysis. Together with RNA-Seq, we
identified 97 targets showing concomitant hypomethylation and
over-expression while 76 targets showing concomitant hypermethylation and
down-regulation after STAT3 knock down. Genes showing
hypomethylaton/over-expression were subjected to transcription factor
binding site analysis by MEME CentriMo. Interestingly, the
transcriptional repressors binding site for ETS1 (p = 2.90E-06) and EHF
(p = 3.50E-06) were overrepresented in those identifed STAT3 targets
suggesting the cooperative binding with STAT3 in the epigenetic silencing
of the targets. Further gene ontology analysis by DAVID showed that genes
involved in cell cycle and apoptosis were significantly enriched in the
hypomethylated/over-expressed targets while genes involved in protein
degradation and ubiquitination were found among the
hypermethylation/down-regulated targets. To experimentally confirm our
result, we analyzed the functional role of one of the hypomethylated
targets, miR-193a in gastric cancer. Concomitant with MBDcap-Seq,
bisulphite pyrosequencing confirmed that promoter region of miR-193a was
hypomethylated in AGS cells depleted with STAT3 but hypermethylated in
MKN28 gastric cancer cells overexpressed with constitutive activated
STAT3. Cell lines studies also found that promoter region of miR-193a was
hypermethylated in gastric cancer cells which did not express miR-193a.
Over-expression of miR-193a in AGS cells inhibited cell proliferation
(p<0.001) and migration (p <0.01) by colony formation assay and
wound-healing assay respectively. Clinically, significantly higher
promoter methylation of miR-193a was observed in gastric cancer patient
samples (Hong Kong, n = 70; Taiwan, n = 38) as compared to gastritis (n =
9, p<0.05). Interestingly, gastritis with H. pylori infection (p Gastric
cancer is the fourth leading cause of cancer-related death worldwide.
Previous studies demonstrated that activation of the JAK/STAT3 signaling
pathway is frequently observed in H. pylori infected gastric cancer.
However, the role of aberrant JAK/STAT signaling in the global epigenetic
changes remains unclear. In this regard, we compared the global
methylomic changes in AGS gastric cancer cells showing constitutive
activation of STA3 vs its STAT3 knock-down subclone by MBDcap-Seq
followed by PrEMeR-CG analysis. Together with RNA-Seq, we identified 97
targets showing concomitant hypomethylation and over-expression while 76
targets showing concomitant hypermethylation and down-regulation after
STAT3 knock down. Genes showing hypomethylaton/over-expression were
subjected to transcription factor binding site analysis by MEME CentriMo.
Interestingly, the transcriptional repressors binding site for ETS1 (p =
2.90E-06) and EHF (p = 3.50E-06) were overrepresented in those identifed
STAT3 targets suggesting the cooperative binding with STAT3 in the
epigenetic silencing of the targets. Further gene ontology analysis by
DAVID showed that genes involved in cell cycle and apoptosis were
significantly enriched in the hypomethylated/over-expressed targets while
genes involved in protein degradation and ubiquitination were found among
the hypermethylation/down-regulated targets. To experimentally confirm
our result, we analyzed the functional role of one of the hypomethylated
targets, miR-193a in gastric cancer. Concomitant with MBDcap-Seq,
bisulphite pyrosequencing confirmed that promoter region of miR-193a was
hypomethylated in AGS cells depleted with STAT3 but hypermethylated in
MKN28 gastric cancer cells overexpressed with constitutive activated
STAT3. Cell lines studies also found that promoter region of miR-193a was
hypermethylated in gastric cancer cells which did not express miR-193a.
Over-expression of miR-193a in AGS cells inhibited cell proliferation
(p<0.001) and migration (p <0.01) by colony formation assay and
wound-healing assay respectively. Clinically, significantly higher
promoter methylation of miR-193a was observed in gastric cancer patient
samples (Hong Kong, n = 70; Taiwan, n = 38) as compared to gastritis (n =
9, p<0.05). Interestingly, gastritis with H. pylori infection (p <0.05)
had higher methylation of miR-193a than that without H. pylori infection.
Patients with higher methylation of miR-193a tended to have shorter
overall survival. Importantly, overexpression of miR-193a suppressed the
expression of a predicted miR-193a target, YWHAZ (14-3-3). As YWHAZ has
been previously found to be a positive regulator in TGF--mediated EMT in
human cancer, the role of JAK/STAT signaling in promoting TGF--mediated
EMT program deserves further investigation.

