Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of HSP90 enhances T cell-mediated antitumor immune
responses through expression of interferon-alpha response Genes


Recently, T cell based immunotherapies have moved to the forefront of
cancer immunotherapy with the success of Adoptive T cell therapy (ACT)
and Immune checkpoint blockade. ACT, where patients are treated with
tumor infiltrating T cells (TILs), conferred a clinical response rate of
50%. Treatment with anti-CTLA4 therapy, Ipilimumab, conferred response
rates of 10-20%, greatly improving the overall survival of patients with
advanced melanoma. Despite the encouraging outcomes, there are relatively
low response rates coupled with the delay of weeks to months before tumor
shrinkage can be appreciated. Thus, understanding mechanisms of
resistance to immune therapies, to improve response rates, shorten time
to treatment effect and developing predictive biomarkers of response are
vital to the care of melanoma patients. In order to identify possible
resistance mechanisms to immunotherapy, a high-throughput in vitro screen
with 850 different bio-active compounds (Selleckchem), was designed to
search for agents that could either increase or decrease the resistance
of melanoma tumor cells to T cell mediated killing. Paired tumor samples
and TILs from melanoma patients were used to assess which compounds when
used to treat the melanoma cell lines can enhance the cytotoxic activity
of the TILs against the paired melanoma sample, using a flow cytometry
based assay in which active caspase 3 was used as a read out of
apoptosis. We identified heat shock protein 90 (HSP90) inhibitors amongst
compounds that improved T cell mediated cytotoxicity. We show that
treatment with the HSP90 inhibitor ganetespib (Synta) greatly improves T
cell mediated cytotoxicity of both human and murine cancer cells lines in
vitro. Furthermore, in vivo murine studies using the MC38/gp100 tumor
model show that ganestespib in combination with anti-CTLA4, resulted in
superior antitumor effect and survival compared to either treatment alone
(Average tumor volume at day 21 of treatment: Vehicle 294.3mm3, -CTLA4
193 mm3, Ganetespib 237.5 mm3 and Ganetespib + -CTLA4 105.8 mm3, P
Recently, T cell based immunotherapies have moved to the forefront of
cancer immunotherapy with the success of Adoptive T cell therapy (ACT)
and Immune checkpoint blockade. ACT, where patients are treated with
tumor infiltrating T cells (TILs), conferred a clinical response rate of
50%. Treatment with anti-CTLA4 therapy, Ipilimumab, conferred response
rates of 10-20%, greatly improving the overall survival of patients with
advanced melanoma. Despite the encouraging outcomes, there are relatively
low response rates coupled with the delay of weeks to months before tumor
shrinkage can be appreciated. Thus, understanding mechanisms of
resistance to immune therapies, to improve response rates, shorten time
to treatment effect and developing predictive biomarkers of response are
vital to the care of melanoma patients. In order to identify possible
resistance mechanisms to immunotherapy, a high-throughput in vitro screen
with 850 different bio-active compounds (Selleckchem), was designed to
search for agents that could either increase or decrease the resistance
of melanoma tumor cells to T cell mediated killing. Paired tumor samples
and TILs from melanoma patients were used to assess which compounds when
used to treat the melanoma cell lines can enhance the cytotoxic activity
of the TILs against the paired melanoma sample, using a flow cytometry
based assay in which active caspase 3 was used as a read out of
apoptosis. We identified heat shock protein 90 (HSP90) inhibitors amongst
compounds that improved T cell mediated cytotoxicity. We show that
treatment with the HSP90 inhibitor ganetespib (Synta) greatly improves T
cell mediated cytotoxicity of both human and murine cancer cells lines in
vitro. Furthermore, in vivo murine studies using the MC38/gp100 tumor
model show that ganestespib in combination with anti-CTLA4, resulted in
superior antitumor effect and survival compared to either treatment alone
(Average tumor volume at day 21 of treatment: Vehicle 294.3mm3, -CTLA4
193 mm3, Ganetespib 237.5 mm3 and Ganetespib + -CTLA4 105.8 mm3, P <
0.0001). Microarray analysis of human cell lines treated with ganetespib
in vitro revealed an increase in interferon alpha (IFN-) response genes
including IFIT1, IFIT2, IFIT3 and IFIH1. Silencing IFIT2 abrogated the
synergy observed with ganetespib treatment and T cell mediated killing,
suggesting that the IFN- response pathway plays an important role in this
combination therapy. We are further elucidating the role of these genes
in the synergy observed. This will enable the emergence of a new
combination therapy of HSP90 inhibitors and anti-CTLA4 for the treatment
of melanoma patients that will increase the percentage of patients
responding to immunotherapy and achieving long term responses.

