Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The consequence of obesity and obstructive sleep apnea in liver
cancer


Primary liver cancer is the 3rd leading cause of cancer mortality
worldwide. Eighty-five percent of liver cancers is comprised of
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Risk of developing HCC increases when
patients have obesity related comorbidities, involving non-alcoholic
steatohepatitis (NASH), hepatic inflammation, or lipid accumulation.
Additionally, obesity is generally regarded as a prime risk factor for
the development of obstructive sleep apnea (OSA), a repeated obstruction
of the upper airway during sleep leading to oxygen deficiency (OD), which
also increases the incidence of NASH. The connection of these morbidities
presume that patients suffering from obesity induced OSA have an
increased risk of developing HCC. To examine obesity and OSA's role in
HCC we combined three generally accepted methods: A one-time injection of
tumor initiator diethylnitrosamine followed by continuous administration
of the promoter phenobarbital, a high fat diet, and a hypoxia chamber to
house the mice for regulation of their oxygen intake, allowing us to
mimic the OD seen in OSA. Utilizing these treatment methods and applying
microCT imaging to non-invasively and repeatedly monitor the liver, we
have been able to examine the effects of obesity and/or OD. Preliminary
result indicate that a high fat diet results in obesity, lipidosis and
liver damage. Interestingly, OD seems to inhibit obesity while still
generating hepatic inflammation. Furthermore, we have observed that
obesity and OD together cause severe damage to the liver, enhancing the
risk of developing HCC. This study will be a significant preclinical step
in distinguishing mechanisms that may explain obesities and OSA's
combined consequence in HCC.

