Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: IL-24 modulates the high mobility group (HMG) A1/miR222 /AKT
signaling in lung cancer cells


Background: High mobility group A1 (HMGA1), a member of the non-histone
chromosomal proteins and commonly referred to as architectural
transcription factor, regulates transcription of various genes involved
in cell growth and survival. Overexpression of HMGA1 has been shown to be
associated with tumor progression and metastasis in several cancers,
including human lung cancer. A recent study demonstrated that HMGA1
activates AKT function by reducing the activity of the protein
phosphatase, phosphatase 2A subunitB (PPPR2A) via the oncogenic micro
(mi) RNA-222. We demonstrated that interleukin (IL)-24, a novel tumor
suppressor/cytokine, inhibited AKT in lung cancer cells. However, the
molecular mechanism of AKT inhibition by IL-24 remains elusive.Aim: To
determine the molecular mechanism of IL-24-mediated AKT inhibition
involved the HMGA1/miR-222 axis.Methods: Human H1299 lung tumor cell line
was stably transfected with a tetracycline-inducible plasmid vector
carrying the IL-24. After the induced expression of IL-24 protein,
expression levels of HMGA1 and its downstream molecular mechanisms were
analyzed at the RNA and protein levels in lung cancer cell lines. The
inhibitory effect of IL-24 on HMG A1/miR222 /AKT axis in the lung cancer
cells is determined by RT-qPCR, western blot, reporter assay, and
immunocytochemistry. Mechanistic approaches on overexpression and
knockdown of HMGA1 and or miR-222 were utilized and the consequences of
its inhibition/overexpression were analyzed on HMGA1/miR222 /AKT
signaling axis and in vitro migration and invasion.Results: Upon
induction of IL-24 expression in the H1299 lung tumor cells, we observed
a marked reduction in HMGA1protein and mRNA levels. Using a mechanistic
approach, we found that IL-24 reduced miR-222-3p and -5p levels, as
determined by qRT-PCR. Associated with HMGA1 and miR-222 inhibition was a
marked increase in PPP2R2A, with a concomitant decrease in phosphorylated
AKTT308/S473 expression. SiRNA-mediated knockdown of HMGA1in combination
with IL-24 significantly reduced AKT T308/S473 protein expression and
greatly reduced cell migration and invasion compared with individual
treatments. Further combination of IL-24 and a miR-222-3p inhibitor
significantly increased PPP2R2A expression.Conclusion: Our results
demonstrate for the first time that IL-24 inhibits AKT via regulating the
HMGA1/miR-222 signaling node in human lung cancer cells and acts as an
effective tumor suppressor. HMGA1 should present a novel target for the
effective treatment of lung cancer.

