Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Grape compounds suppress colon cancer stem cells in vitro and in a
rodent model of colon carcinogenesis


We have previously shown that the grape bioactive compound resveratrol
(RSV) potentiates grape seed extract (GSE)-induced colon cancer cell
apoptosis at physiologically relevant concentrations. However, RSV-GSE
combination efficacy against colon cancer stem cells (CSCs), which play a
key role in chemotherapy and radiation resistance, is not known. Hence,
we tested the anti-cancer efficacy of the RSV-GSE in an
azoxymethane-induced mouse model of colon carcinogenesis. RSV-GSE
suppressed tumor incidence similar to sulindac, without any
gastrointestinal toxicity. Additionally, RSV-GSE treatment reduced the
number of crypts containing cells with nuclear -catenin (an indicator of
colon CSCs) via induction of apoptosis. In in vitro mechanistic studies,
RSV-GSE suppressed proliferation and sphere formation properties of colon
CSCs (positive for CD44, CD133 and ALDH1b1), suppressed pGSK3 and nuclear
translocation of -catenin, a critical regulator of CSC proliferation,
similar to sulindac. RSV-GSE, but not sulindac, suppressed nuclear levels
of downstream proteins of Wnt/-catenin pathway, c-Myc and cyclin D1.
RSV-GSE also induced mitochondrial-mediated apoptosis in colon CSCs
characterized by elevated p53, Bax/Bcl-2 ratio and cleaved PARP.
Furthermore, shRNA-mediated knockdown of p53, a tumor suppressor gene
that is mutated in advanced stages of colon cancer, in the colon CSCs did
not alter efficacy of RSV-GSE. The suppression of Wnt/-catenin signaling
and elevated mitochondrial-mediated apoptosis in colon CSCs support
potential clinical testing/application of grape bioactives for colon
cancer prevention and/or therapy.

