Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting MUC1-C oncoprotein inhibits AKT-S6K1-elF4A pathway
regulated TIGAR translation in colorectal cancer


Colorectal cancer is third most common malignancy and is the second most
common cause of cancer-related death. The MUC1 multi-domain oncoprotein
is aberrantly overexpressed in colorectal cancer and has been linked to
poor outcomes in this disease. However, it is not known if MUC1 is of
functional significance to colorectal tumors. Here, we investigate the
effects of the MUC1-C inhibitor (GO-203), which disrupts MUC1-C
homo-oligomerization, on AKT-mTORC-S6K translation pathway in human
colorectal cancer cells. The present study demonstrates that GO-203
treatment was associated with inhibition of AKT-S6K1 signaling in
colorectal cancer cells. Targeting MUC1-C with GO-203 downregulates
TP53-inducible glycolysis and apoptosis regulator (TIGAR) protein. We
show that GO-203-induced suppression of TIGAR is mediated by inhibition
of AKT and the downstream mTOR pathway. The results also demonstrate that
targeting MUC1-C blocks eIF4A cap-dependent translation of TIGAR. TIGAR
promotes the shunting of glycolytic intermediates into the pentose
phosphate pathway and thus is of importance for maintaining redox
balance. In concert with these results, GO-203-induced suppression of
TIGAR was associated with decreases glutathione levels. GO-203 treatment
also resulted increases in reactive oxygen species (ROS) and loss of
mitochondrial transmembrane potential. Consistent with these results,
GO-203 inhibited the growth of colon cancer cells in vitro and xenografts
in nude mice. These findings thus indicate that MUC1-C is a potential
target for the treatment of colorectal cancer.

