Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Local immune activation resulting in tumor growth inhibition with
MEDI9197 - an intratumorally administered TLR7/8 agonist


MEDI9197 (formerly 3M-052) is a sustained-release imidazoquinoline toll
like receptor (TLR) TLR7/8 agonist designed with a lipid tail that, when
injected, is retained within the tumor. This has been shown in
pharmacokinetic studies in mice and rats injected with MEDI9197 via the
subcutaneous (SC) or intratumoral (IT, mouse only) routes. Stimulation of
TLR7 and TLR8 in primary human dendritic cells induces the release of
interferon-alpha (IFN-a) from plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs) and
interleukin 12 (IL-12) from myeloid dendritic cells (mDCs). Intratumoral
administration of MEDI9197 induces a local immune response characterized
by upregulation of genes involved in activation of innate and adaptive
immunity both from the injected tumor and tumor draining lymph node.
Furthermore, flow cytometric analysis of tumor infiltrating lymphocytes
(TILs) show increased expression of activation markers, such as CD69, on
natural killer (NK) cells and CD8 cytotoxic T cells. This local
stimulation of immune cells with MEDI9197 results in tumor growth
inhibition as shown in the B16F10 luc syngeneic mouse tumor model using
in vivo imaging system (IVIS) equipment. Additionally, combination of
MEDI9197 with immune checkpoint inhibitors enhances the efficacy observed
in syngeneic mouse tumor models. The data presented shows intratumoral
administration of MEDI9197 induces local immune activation leading to
tumor growth inhibition in preclinical models of cancer. MEDI9197 is
currently being evaluated as a monotherapy for safety and efficacy in
human clinical trials.

