Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The tumor immune microenvironment is similar in anal squamous cell
carcinomas (SCCs) from HIV-infected and uninfected patients


Tumors may evade immune attack by constitutive (oncogene-driven) and/or
adaptive (IFN-g inducible) expression of PD-L1. PD-1/PD-L1 blockade can
mediate tumor regression in immunocompetent patients. In HIV-infected
patients, developing tumors may face little immune selection pressure and
therefore may not evolve to evade immune attack. Expression of PD-L1 has
not been systematically assessed in cancers from HIV-infected people. In
the current study, immunohistochemistry for PD-L1, and CD3 and CD68
(immune cells, ICs) was performed on biopsies from 46 anal SCCs,
including 27 from HIV-infected and 19 from uninfected patients. The
proportion of cases with tumor cell PD-L1 expression was similar in
patients with and without HIV (52% vs. 47%, respectively, p = 0.76), as
was the presence of moderate/severely dense ICs (33% vs. 37%, p = 0.81)
(Table). Among HIV-infected patients, 19% of anal SCC tumors (5/27) both
expressed PD-L1 and had moderate/severe IC infiltration. Tumors from
HIV-infected and uninfected patients had similar densities of CD68+
macrophages (mean 517 vs. 404 cells/mm2, p = 0.33) and CD3+ T-
lymphocytes (mean 501 vs. 428 cells/mm2, p = 0.57). A component of
adaptive PD-L1 expression (juxtaposed to tumor infiltrating ICs) was also
observed in both groups (56% vs. 47%, p = 0.58), consistent with
comparable T-cell functionality. Further studies will explore the
expression of other immune checkpoint proteins and lymphocyte subsets.
Despite expectations that cancers from HIV-infected patients would show
reduced inflammation, our preliminary findings demonstrate an
immune-reactive microenvironment in both HIV+ and HIV- anal SCCs and
suggest that anti-PD-1/PD-L1 therapies should be evaluated in anal SCC
patients.


