Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel radiation mitigators and anticancer drugs


The possibility of a radiation disaster from a nuclear detonation or
accident has existed for over 50 years and spawned much of the basic
research in radiobiology in the 1950-60s. The recent Fukushima accident
was yet another reminder that there remains a dire need to develop novel
therapies against radiation-induced toxicities. Here we report on the
development of two novel radiation countermeasure therapies: CJ010 and
Yel002. These small, biologically active, drug-like molecules were
uncovered in the DEL high throughput assay reducing radiation-induced
cyto- and geno-toxicity in yeast. Radiation-modulating activity was
further confirmed in yeast plate-based DEL Assay: addition of either
CJ010 or Yel002 to irradiated cultures reduced cell death and genomic
instability. Further, the compounds increases survival to 75% in vivo
following an LD100/30 dose of ionizing radiation (IR) with the first
therapeutic injection administered 24 hours post exposure followed by
injections at 48,72,96, and 120 hours. Additionally, treatment with
Yel001 an analog of CJ010 and Yel002 compounds reduces radiation-induced
leukemia from 90% to to 50% and 40% respectively. Of note, treatment with
either Yel001 or Yel002 reduced spontaneous leukemia rate from 10% to 0%.
Treatment with Yel002 following IR accelerates the recovery of the
hematopoietic cells after sub-lethal exposures. In addition, treatment
with Yel002 reduces EMS, MMS, UV, radioactive iodine, cigarette smoke
extract as well as nitrogen mustard induced toxicity as well as
genotoxicity showing a broad application spectrum. It also prolongs live
of cells in a senescence assay. In addition Atm deficient mice live 16
weeks longer with weekly injection of Yel002 which is about 12 years in
human life expectancy. In addition, Yel002 complements a zebrafish model
of Diamond Blackfan Anemia. It works in yeast, CHO cells, different human
cells, mice and zebrafish. Toxicity has not been observed in neither in
vitro or in vivo administrations. Overall, Yel compounds have much
potential as stockpile therapies for radiation-induced lethality and
cancer: they are highly effective when administered up to 24hours post
exposure, they reduce radiation-induce sequelae such as leukemia, and
appear to have an acceptable toxicity profile.

