Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Serglycin promotes cell migration via modulating cytoskeleton
reorganization and enhancing focal adhesion turnover


Serglycin (SRGN), a hematopoietic cell granule proteoglycan, has recently
been shown to be overexpressed in several aggressive cancer types. In
nasopharyngeal and hepatocellular carcinomas, elevated expression of SRGN
was shown to correlate with poor prognosis. However, the molecular
mechanisms underlying SRGN-mediated malignancies remain to be explored.
In this study, we showed that SRGN is expressed at elevated levels in
several lung cancer-derived cell lines. By gain-of-function and
loss-of-function approaches, we showed that SRGN promoted NSCLC cell
migration. SRGN modulated actin cytoskeleton reorganization and promoted
lamellipodia and filopodia formation at the leading edge, facilitating a
directional movement during wound closure in NSCLC cells. In consistence,
increased levels of activated Rac1, which is required for lamellipodia
formation, and CDC42, which is required for filopodia formation, were
detected. Increased focal adhesion (FA) turnover, the process of
continuous assembly and disassembly of adhesions, would lead to increased
cell migration. We further showed that SRGN promoted Src activation,
leading to increased phosphorylation of paxillin (PAX) at Y118 as well as
reduced PAX/FAK complex formation, which were well-defined indicators of
FA turnover. Taken together, these data suggested that SRGN promotes cell
migration through inducing cytoskeleton reorganization and focal adhesion
turnover.

