Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Values of single nucleotide polymorphisms identified from
genome-wide association studies on risk prediction, risk
reclassification, and population-based screening of breast-cancer


Background: With an increasing number of single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) being identified from genome-wide association studies (GWAS), it's
important to examine whether these SNPs have values in public health. And
it's also unclear how to select the targeted SNPs valuable for
population-based screening from numerous GWAS-identified SNPs.Methods:
Based on the fraction of the genetic risk explained by a SNP, the area
under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC), integrated
discrimination improvement, and net reclassification improvement were
used to select targeted SNPs and to evaluate the values of genetic risk
score (GRS) with targeted SNPs on risk prediction, risk reclassification,
and effects of population-based screening among 2 million simulated
Chinese women aged 35-69 years.Results: A total of 11 targeted SNPs from
23 GWAS-identified SNPs would be valuable for population-based screening
of breast cancer among Chinese women. After incorporating GRS with
targeted SNPs into traditional risk predication based on established risk
factors (ERF) of breast cancer, the AUC significantly improved from 65.5%
to 67.5% (PBackground: With an increasing number of single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) being identified from genome-wide association
studies (GWAS), it's important to examine whether these SNPs have values
in public health. And it's also unclear how to select the targeted SNPs
valuable for population-based screening from numerous GWAS-identified
SNPs.Methods: Based on the fraction of the genetic risk explained by a
SNP, the area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC),
integrated discrimination improvement, and net reclassification
improvement were used to select targeted SNPs and to evaluate the values
of genetic risk score (GRS) with targeted SNPs on risk prediction, risk
reclassification, and effects of population-based screening among 2
million simulated Chinese women aged 35-69 years.Results: A total of 11
targeted SNPs from 23 GWAS-identified SNPs would be valuable for
population-based screening of breast cancer among Chinese women. After
incorporating GRS with targeted SNPs into traditional risk predication
based on established risk factors (ERF) of breast cancer, the AUC
significantly improved from 65.5% to 67.5% (P<0.001). Additional 25.5%
(PBackground: With an increasing number of single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) being identified from genome-wide association
studies (GWAS), it's important to examine whether these SNPs have values
in public health. And it's also unclear how to select the targeted SNPs
valuable for population-based screening from numerous GWAS-identified
SNPs.Methods: Based on the fraction of the genetic risk explained by a
SNP, the area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC),
integrated discrimination improvement, and net reclassification
improvement were used to select targeted SNPs and to evaluate the values
of genetic risk score (GRS) with targeted SNPs on risk prediction, risk
reclassification, and effects of population-based screening among 2
million simulated Chinese women aged 35-69 years.Results: A total of 11
targeted SNPs from 23 GWAS-identified SNPs would be valuable for
population-based screening of breast cancer among Chinese women. After
incorporating GRS with targeted SNPs into traditional risk predication
based on established risk factors (ERF) of breast cancer, the AUC
significantly improved from 65.5% to 67.5% (P<0.001). Additional 25.5%
(P<0.001) population would be correctly reclassified into cases or
controls. If screening targeted at top 25% high-risk women,
screening-detected cancer would significantly increase 4.2% (49.2% vs
45.0%, PBackground: With an increasing number of single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) being identified from genome-wide association
studies (GWAS), it's important to examine whether these SNPs have values
in public health. And it's also unclear how to select the targeted SNPs
valuable for population-based screening from numerous GWAS-identified
SNPs.Methods: Based on the fraction of the genetic risk explained by a
SNP, the area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC),
integrated discrimination improvement, and net reclassification
improvement were used to select targeted SNPs and to evaluate the values
of genetic risk score (GRS) with targeted SNPs on risk prediction, risk
reclassification, and effects of population-based screening among 2
million simulated Chinese women aged 35-69 years.Results: A total of 11
targeted SNPs from 23 GWAS-identified SNPs would be valuable for
population-based screening of breast cancer among Chinese women. After
incorporating GRS with targeted SNPs into traditional risk predication
based on established risk factors (ERF) of breast cancer, the AUC
significantly improved from 65.5% to 67.5% (P<0.001). Additional 25.5%
(P<0.001) population would be correctly reclassified into cases or
controls. If screening targeted at top 25% high-risk women,
screening-detected cancer would significantly increase 4.2% (49.2% vs
45.0%, P<0.001) for screening strategy included GRS and ERF in risk
assessment before screening compared with that only included ERF in risk
assessment.Conclusion: GRS based on targeted GWAS-identified SNPs could
significantly improve the risk prediction, risk reclassification, and the
effects of population-based screening. Further real-world studies are
needed to validate this method and these results.

