Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MDM2 regulates intracellular pathways in TNBC and osteosarcoma
that affect osteoclastogenesis


Advanced cancer cells infiltrate and colonize new organ microenvironments
through transformation of the dynamic metastatic niche. In bone, tumor
cells secrete soluble factors that distort and manipulate normal bone
remodeling leading to osteolytic lesions and inflammation. Clinically,
primary high-grade bone sarcomas and secondary metastatic cancers exhibit
elevated levels of murine double minute 2 (Mdm2), the principal cellular
antagonist and E3 ubiquitin ligase of tumor suppressor p53. We
demonstrate a novel function of mdm2, independent of p53, to drive
osteolytic disease influenced by the signaling cascade of RANKL, ICAM1,
and RANTES. To elucidate the direct influence of Mdm2 in cancer cells on
osteoclast differentiation, several cell lines were created to
overexpress or silence Mdm2. We found that osteoblast-like osteosarcoma
(MG63, Saos2) and metastatic breast cancer cell lines (MDA468, MDA231,
TMD-231, T47D, and BT474) lead to significant increased osteoclast
differentiation, proliferation, and bone resorption. Co-cultures of Mdm2
over-expressing cancers and normal monocytes resulted in increased
numbers of osteoclasts. In cancer cell lines where Mdm2 is silenced, we
observed lower number of osteoclasts. The presence of Mdm2 in cancer
cells also increased osteoclast resorption in an in vitro organ model. To
determine the effects of ICAM1, we used an ICAM antibody to block ICAM1
in the media and showed a decrease in osteoclastogenesis. Understanding
the role of Mdm2 in osteoclastogenesis may be amendable to translational
benefit in disease models of advanced bone resorption and bone metastases.

