Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: YAP is an important pathway downstream of EGFR that is a potential
target for EGFR-TKI-resistance lung adenocarcinomas


Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutations are found in lung
adenocarcinomas leading to tumor cells proliferation and survival. EGFR
tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) that block EGFR activity are effective
therapeutics for EGFR-mutant lung adenocarcinoma patients, but
TKI-resistance inevitably occurs. The YES-associated protein (YAP)
transcription coactivator has been implicated as an oncogene and is
amplified in human cancers and provides tumor cells strong proliferation
and survival cues. This study investigated the roles of YAP in lung
adenocarcinoma by exploring its regulation and functions mediated by EGFR
signaling. Using lung adenocarcinoma cell lines, we detected enhanced YAP
expression and activity mediated by EGFR signaling due to enhanced
protein stability. The Src family protein YES was involved in
EGFR-regulated YAP expression. The YAP/YES pathway was crucial for
proliferation in EGFR-dependent cells. Small molecules that reduced YAP
levels by mechanisms bypassing EGFR were effective in killing
EGFR-dependent cells including EGFR T790M, the major cause of
TKI-resistance. These observations unveiled the significance of YAP in
EGFR mutant lung adenocarcinomas and identified YAP as an promising
therapeutic target for EGFR-dependent lung adenocarcinoma patients,
including those with EGFR T790M-caused TKI resistance.

