Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DNA repair capacity, chromosomal damage, methylation and gene
expression levels in bladder cancer: An integrated analysis


Bladder cancer (BC) is the sixth most commonly diagnosed tumor worldwide.
DNA repair capacity (DRC) refers to the ability of a cell to protect the
integrity of the genome and DNA repair pathways have been implicated in
BC risk. It has been observed that individuals with low DRC tend to
accumulate more damage than those with a more efficient DRC. This
inter-individual variability is modulated by the genetic background, as
well as differential gene expression and epigenetic regulation.We aimed
at studying the relationship between DRC and DNA damage (evaluated by
H2AX phosphorylation and micronucleus assays) and BC risk and clinical
outcome, integrating with gene expression and epigenetic profile data in
159 BC cases and 159 matched controls, enrolled in the Turin Bladder
Cancer Study (TBCS).We investigated -H2AX phosphorylation levels and MN
frequencies in cryopreserved peripheral blood mononuclear cells. We found
significant differences in micronuclei and nuclear buds frequencies, with
higher number of these damages in cases compared to controls (p = 0.0002
and p = 0.002 respectively).On the other hand, we observed a significant
association between -H2AX basal levels and risk of disease
recurrence/progression in both BC patients as a whole and the subgroup of
non-muscle invasive BC (NMIBC) (for all BC HR 0.70, 95% CI 0.52-0.94, p =
0.02; for NMIBC HR 0.68, 95% CI 0.50-0.92, p = 0.01): this suggests a
protective effect of DNA double strand breaks signalling in terms of
preventing BC recurrence or progression.In order to evaluate the genetic
and epigenetic role in modulation of DRC we performed whole genome
methylation and gene expression analyses on the same BC cases and
controls. Preliminary analyses on methylation levels did not show any
significant difference between cases and controls. Two metalloproteinases
(MMP23A and MMP23B) resulted significantly under-expressed in BC compared
to healthy controls (logFC = -0.23, p = 0.01; logFC = -0.37, p = 0.007,
respectively). Interestingly, the expression levels of these genes were
also significantly correlated with the relative CpGs methylation.Further
analyses focusing on the integration of whole genome data with DRC assays
are ongoing to unravel new prognostic biomarkers of disease.

