Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tributyltin-induced dysregulation of inflammatory cytokine levels
in human and mouse immune cells


The effects of Tributyltin (TBT), a widespread environmental contaminant,
on the induction of in vivo and ex vivo cytokine production and secretion
were investigated. Human monocyte-depleted peripheral blood mononuclear
cells and different groups of Balb/C mice were stimulated with desired
concentrations of TBT (200-2.5 nM for human studies and 200-25 nM for
mouse studies). The quantitative determination of IFN, TNF and IL-1 was
performed in mouse sera by MagPix analysis and western blot. The levels
of these cytokines were measured at different time points: 6, 12, 24 and
48 h after injection. Analysis of IFN and TNF in human cells were
conducted by ELISA and western blot. MAPK and NF-B pathways were
inhibited to determine TBT-induced dysregulation of IFN and TNF.
Inhibition of the p38 and p44/42 pathways blocked the TBT-induced
elevation of IFN, while the inhibition of the p38 pathway blocked the
TBT-induced elevation of TNF. Results showed that TBT increased the
levels of IFN, TNF and IL-1 in the sera of mice. IFN and TNF secretion
from human monocyte-depleted peripheral blood mononuclear cells also
increased, showing striking agreement in the response to TBT between the
mouse and human systems. These data suggest that TBT exposure can result
in an inflammatory environment, which could predispose the host to
various immunopathologies.Grant U54CA163066 from the National Institute
of Health

