Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Model-riven optimization of anti-angiogenics combined with
chemotherapy: application to bevacizumab + pemetrexed/cisplatin doublet
in NSCLC-bearing mice


Bevacizumab-containing protocols are all based upon the concomitant
administration of the drugs given in a row. Bevacizumab is expected to
induce a transient normalization of the tumor neo-vasculature prior to
exert its anti-angiogenic properties. The resulting increase in blood
flow could lead to higher drug delivery to the tumors and therefore to
higher efficacy, provided that cytotoxics are administered after
bevacizumab. Determining this time-window cannot be performed by
empirical practice, but mathematical modeling can help to achieve this
goal. To this end, we have developed an original mathematical PK/PD model
that enables the description of the effect of bevacizumab on the quality
of the vasculature and the resulting effects of drugs sequential
administration on tumor growth. The model was able to simulate a variety
of scheduling and suggested that a 5-days lag between bevacizumab and
cytotoxics should achieve higher antiproliferative efficacy as compared
with standard administration. To test the predictivity of the model, a
comparative study was undertaken in tumor-bearing mice. Human H460 NSCLC
cells stably transfected with luciferase were ectotopically implanted in
swiss nude mice. Treatment consisted in the combo bevacizumab (20 mg/kg)
plus pemetrexed (100 mg/kg) and cisplatin (3 mg/kg) given as 3 cycles
administered every 2 weeks following different scheduling. Mice were
randomly allocated into 4 groups (n = 12 mice per group): control,
concomitant (bevacizumab and chemo given the same day), sequence-1 (chemo
followed by bevacizumab 5 days later) and sequence-2 (bevacizumab
followed by chemo 5 days later). Tumor growth was monitored twice a week
by bioluminescence imaging after i.p. injection of 150 mg/kg luciferine.
As predicted by our mathematical model, results showed that the
sequential administration of bevacizumab followed 5 days later by the
pemetrexed/cisplatin doublet led to a better efficacy (-42% reduction in
tumor growth at treatment completion and -35% at study conclusion,
pBevacizumab-containing protocols are all based upon the concomitant
administration of the drugs given in a row. Bevacizumab is expected to
induce a transient normalization of the tumor neo-vasculature prior to
exert its anti-angiogenic properties. The resulting increase in blood
flow could lead to higher drug delivery to the tumors and therefore to
higher efficacy, provided that cytotoxics are administered after
bevacizumab. Determining this time-window cannot be performed by
empirical practice, but mathematical modeling can help to achieve this
goal. To this end, we have developed an original mathematical PK/PD model
that enables the description of the effect of bevacizumab on the quality
of the vasculature and the resulting effects of drugs sequential
administration on tumor growth. The model was able to simulate a variety
of scheduling and suggested that a 5-days lag between bevacizumab and
cytotoxics should achieve higher antiproliferative efficacy as compared
with standard administration. To test the predictivity of the model, a
comparative study was undertaken in tumor-bearing mice. Human H460 NSCLC
cells stably transfected with luciferase were ectotopically implanted in
swiss nude mice. Treatment consisted in the combo bevacizumab (20 mg/kg)
plus pemetrexed (100 mg/kg) and cisplatin (3 mg/kg) given as 3 cycles
administered every 2 weeks following different scheduling. Mice were
randomly allocated into 4 groups (n = 12 mice per group): control,
concomitant (bevacizumab and chemo given the same day), sequence-1 (chemo
followed by bevacizumab 5 days later) and sequence-2 (bevacizumab
followed by chemo 5 days later). Tumor growth was monitored twice a week
by bioluminescence imaging after i.p. injection of 150 mg/kg luciferine.
As predicted by our mathematical model, results showed that the
sequential administration of bevacizumab followed 5 days later by the
pemetrexed/cisplatin doublet led to a better efficacy (-42% reduction in
tumor growth at treatment completion and -35% at study conclusion,
p<0.05, One-Way Anova) whereas standard dosing or reverse sequence did
not significantly reduce tumor growth. Additionally, this sequential
administration of bevacizumab first and cytotoxics next led to a median
survival of 75 days, whereas other treatment groups could only achieve 52
days survival and control mice 32 days, respectively. Altogether, our
experimental data demonstrate that delaying the administration of the
chemotherapy after that of bevacizumab leads to higher efficacy and
longer survival as compared with standard dosing. Although preliminary,
this study suggests that current administration of bevacizumab could be
an underpowered strategy. Besides, this preclinical study confirms the
accuracy of our mathematical model to identify the optimal sequencing
between anti-angiogenics and cytotoxics.

