Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeted deep sequencing of plasma circulating cell-free DNA shows
VIM and FBLN1 methylation as potential biomarkers for hepatocellular
carcinoma


Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the second most common cause of cancer
death worldwide, but is still lacking sensitive and specific biomarkers
for diagnosis and prognosis. HCC carcinogenesis is a multi-step process
that usually arises in background chronic metabolic, inflammatory and/or
infectious liver disease and it exhibits a wide range of epigenetic
alterations that could potentially be used as biomarkers. In this study,
we applied the targeted massively parallel semiconductor sequencing to
assess in plasma circulating cell-free DNA (cfDNA) the methylation of a
panel of genes (FBLN1, HINT2, LAMC1, LTBP1, LTBP2, PSMA2, PSMA7, PXDN,
TGFB1, UBE2L3, VIM and YWHAZ) and to evaluate the potential of these
genes as novel HCC biomarkers in two different series, one from France
and one from Thailand. Methylation in cfDNA was detected for FBLN1,
PSMA7, PXDN and VIM, with substantial differences in methylation patterns
between cases and controls for FBLN1 and VIM. Further, the average
methylation level across analyzed CpG-sites was associated with higher
odds of HCC for VIM (1.48 [1.02, 2.16] for French cases, and 2.18 [1.28,
3.72] for Thai cases), and lower odds of HCC for FBLN1 (0.89 [0.76, 1.03]
for French cases and 0.75 [0.63, 0.88] for Thai cases). We also analyzed
a set of HCC and adjacent tissues as well as The Cancer Genome Atlas
(TCGA) data to further investigate the origin of methylation pattern in
cfDNA and noted that the analysis of VIM could be improved based on the
methylation pattern detected in TCGA data. Overall, our study provides
evidence that changes in methylation levels of cfDNA could be used as
potential cancer biomarkers and that VIM and FBLN1 methylation in cfDNA
are associated with HCC and may represent useful plasma-based biomarkers
for improved detection and patient surveillance.

