Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Engaging the immune system with GSK3174998, a potent anti-OX40
agonist antibody


Introduction: GSK3174998, a humanized IgG1 agonistic anti-OX40 monoclonal
antibody (mAb) identified in collaboration between GSK and MDACC is
currently in Phase I clinical development. Critical for the development
of more effective cancer immunotherapy are agents that stimulate effector
T cells (Teff) and inhibit the immunosuppressive function of regulatory T
cells (Treg) that typically infiltrate tumors. OX40 is a tumor necrosis
factor receptor superfamily member expressed on the surface of activated
CD4+ and CD8+ T cells. OX40 agonism stimulates both immune effector and
memory functions and attenuation of Tregs. Therefore, OX40 agonistic mAbs
are ideal candidates to potentially increase the efficacy of
immune-checkpoint blocking antibodies, like anti-PD1 (aPD1).Methods:
GSK3174998 has suitable cross-reactivity to cynomolgus monkey OX40 to
inform directly on toxicology, pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic (PD)
preclinical endpoints. However, to understand the antitumor efficacy of
OX40 agonism in vivo, studies were performed using a surrogate mAb to
murine OX40 (OX86) alone or in combination with a surrogate aPD1 antibody
in A20 lymphoma and CT26 colon carcinoma syngeneic tumor models.
Intratumoral (i.e. tumor infiltrating T cells) and peripheral (blood) PD
biomarkers, including T cell intracellular and surface protein
expression, cytokine production and gene regulation were
analyzed.Results: GSK3174998 was well tolerated in monkeys up to 100
mg/kg. In vitro T-cell activation of OX40 with GSK3174998 resulted in
enhanced CD4+ and CD8+ effector T-cell proliferation, both in plate-bound
as well as soluble PBMC assays. Suppression of Treg differentiation was
observed with GSK3174998 as compared with an Fc-disabled mAb, which did
not demonstrate these effects. In vitro GSK3174998 induced Th1 cytokine
production (IFN and TNF) and this was further enhanced by the addition of
pembrolizumab. In vitro OX86 demonstrated similar characteristics to
GSK3174998. In vivo OX86 induced a significant dose-dependent, durable
anti-tumor response as monotherapy, which was significantly enhanced when
combined with an aPD1 checkpoint inhibitor. Preclinical efficacy
correlated with PD changes in several immunological markers including
T-cell proliferation and activation. In silico and IHC analysis of
expression of OX40 and PDL1 in human tumors was utilized to prioritize
cancers most likely to respond to monotherapy and combination therapy for
the first-time-in-human (FTIH) clinical study.Conclusions: GSK3174998 is
a potent anti-OX40 agonist that engages the immune system via several
T-cell-mediated pathways and may further enhance the antitumor activity
observed with PD1 inhibition. Preclinical studies provide a strong
rationale to support the ongoing FTIH Phase I study of GSK3174998
administered alone and in combination with pembrolizumab to patients with
selected advanced solid tumors.

