Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Myosin-IIA heavy chain phosphorylation on S1943 regulates tumor
cell invasion


Nonmuscle myosin IIA (NMHC-IIA) heavy chain phosphorylation has been
shown to regulate motility and chemotaxis in invasive breast cancer
cells; phosphorylation on S1943 promotes myosin-IIA filament disassembly
in vitro and enhances two-dimensional cell migration. To test the role of
NMHC-IIA S1943 phosphorylation in regulating the invasive properties of
tumor cells, we produced MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells in which the
endogenous NMHC-IIA was stably knocked down via shRNA and replaced with
exogenously expressed murine GFP-tagged wild type, phosphomimetic
(S1943E) or non-phosphorylatable (S1943A) NMHC-IIA. Since previous
studies have shown that the matrix-degrading activity of invadopodia is
regulated via a myosin II-FAK-Cas pathway (Alexander et al, Curr Biol
18:1295, 2009), we examined the ability of MDA-MB-231 cells expressing
wild type, S1943E or S1943A NMHC-IIA to form invadopodia and degrade
matrix. Only 39.4% of S1943A NMHC-IIA expressing cells exhibited matrix
degradation as compared to wild type NMHC-IIA (90.5%) and S1943E NMHC-IIA
(90.3%). In addition, the average percent degradation area for cells
expressing S1943A NMHC-IIA was 15-fold lower than for cells expressing
wild type NMHC-IIA, whereas S1943E NMHC-IIA cells exhibited a 2-fold
increase in degradation area. There was no significant difference in the
numbers of immature invadopodia between the three cell lines. However,
S1943A NMHC-IIA cells had significantly fewer mature invadopodia, while
S1943E NMHC-IIA cells had increased numbers of mature invadopodia
compared to wild type NMHC-IIA cells. To investigate the consequences of
altered invadopodia maturation and activity, we examined the secretion of
MMP-9 from cells expressing wild type, S1943E or S1943A NMHC-IIA. Gelatin
zymography and MMP-9 activity assays of conditioned medium showed that
S1943E NMHC-IIA expression enhanced MMP-9 secretion by 2-fold, whereas
S1943A NMHC-IIA expression reduced MMP-9 secretion by 4-fold. In
experimental metastasis assays in SCID mice, S1943A NMHC-IIA cells rarely
formed lung metastases as compared to wild type NMHC-IIA cells, which
formed poorly differentiated metastatic foci with some pleural
localization. The S1943E NMHC-IIA cells also produced poorly
differentiated carcinomas, which primarily localized along the pleural
lining. Overall, S1943A NMHC-IIA cells produced approximately 2-fold
fewer and S1943E NMHC-IIA cells produced 2-fold greater metastases than
wild type NMHC-IIA cells. Together, these observations indicate that
NMHC-IIA S1943 phosphorylation contributes to tumor cell invasion and
metastasis via the regulation of extracellular matrix degradation.

