Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Actionable mutations and mutational burden in renal cell carcinoma


Clear cell renal cell carcinoma (CCRCC), the most common subtype of renal
cell carcinoma, is a heterogeneous cancer with variable outcomes and
molecular aberrations. Further elucidation of mutational profiles and
actionable mutations may improve patient outcomes in CCRCC. Somatic
mutational profiling via next-generation sequencing was conducted on 30
CCRCC whole section FFPE patient samples to determine the mutational
burden as compared to other solid tumor types. The sequencing failure
rate for these samples was 20% (6/30). A 358-gene panel was also run on
an additional 57 non-CCRCC solid tumor FFPE patient samples (81 samples
in total). FASTQ files generated from Illumina's CASAVA software were
submitted to the JAX Clinical Genome Analytics (CGA) data analysis
pipeline to perform automated read quality assessment, alignment, and
variant calling. Identified variants were then submitted for clinical
curation using the JAX Clinical Knowledgebase (CKB) for actionable
mutational analysis and overall mutational burden. Of the CCRCC sample
set, 33% had one or more actionable mutations. This was low compared to
actionable mutations in colon (16/16, 100% actionable), TNBC (18/20, 90%
actionable), squamous lung (8/9, 89% actionable), and pancreatic (8/12,
67% actionable). Furthermore, the CCRCC set had a low overall mutational
burden with 22 6.7 nonsynonymous SNV's as compared to colon (29 11),
squamous lung (43 17), and TNBC (31.5 12). However, the pancreatic set
had even lower SNV's at 12.7 3.4. The number of indels was comparable
across the five sets, except for colon, which averaged 6.9 8.3.
Significant copy number variations (CNVs; amplification validated at
greater than or equal to 6 copies) also had a wide range with squamous
lung at the highest (11 11), followed by TNBC (5.6 5.0), and then colon
(2.3 3.0). Both the CCRCC and pancreatic sets had few CNV's at 0.8 1.5
and 0.17 0.40, respectively. Common mutations identified in the CCRCC set
included EPHB6 duplications near S166, which were identified in 25% of
samples. Gene specific mutations in CCRCC were also identified in VHL
(54%) and SETD2 (21%). These three genes, EPHB6, VHL, and SETD2 have been
previously implicated in CCRCC pathogenesis. Six variants identified in
VHL were C77*, P86R, Q132fs, A149D, R177fs, and L184fs. Due to the low
mutational burden and/or actionable mutations in CCRCC, even large NGS
panels may not be adequate to profile somatic mutations and whole exome
or whole genome may be more conducive for molecular subtyping of renal
cell carcinoma.

