Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ki-67 serves as a prognostic marker in early gastric cancer, but
not in advanced gastric cancer


Ki-67 protein is a cellular marker for proliferation. The role of Ki-67
as a prognostic factor has not been established in gastric cancer. We
previously demonstrated that CD44v plays an important role in EThe
present study was performed toinvestigate the significance of Ki-67
expression as a biomarker in early gastric cancer (EGC), but not advanced
gastric cancer (AGC). With the study, we foundthat there is correlation
between CD44v and Ki67. Here, evaluated the clinical significance with
tissue microarray of gastric cancer by performing immunohistochemical
staining for Ki-67. Its clinical significance was analyzed with
adjustment via the propensity score-matching. The median follow-up
duration was 72 months (range: 3 - 120 months). Ki-67 positive group
showed worse prognosis than Ki-67-negative group in EGC (5-YSR, 78.9% vs.
92.0%, p = 0.018), but not in advanced gastric cancer (AGC) (5-YSR, 58.5%
vs. 59.2%, p = 0.951). Interestingly, in the patients with
well-differentiated histology, prognosis for Ki-67-positive group was
considerably worse than that for Ki-67-negative group (5-YSR, 67.0% vs.
94.4%, p = 0.012), but not in those with moderately differentiated (p =
0.504) and poorly-differentiated histology (p = 0.905). In this cohort,
there was a strong correlation between the proportion of EGC and
well-differentiated histology (r = 0.215, p = 0.002). Multivariate
analysis also revealed that the positive-Ki- 67 expression serve as a
poor prognostic factor in EGC (HR 4.346, 95% CI 1.397 - 13.515, p =
0.011), but not in all the patients (p = 0.171). With bootstrap
resampling, we internally validated these results (p = 0.011). In
conclusion, this study suggests that Ki-67 expression may be a good
biomarker for prognosis prediction for EGC, but not for AGC. [This study
was supported by a grant from the National R&D Program for Cancer
Control, Ministry for Health, Welfare & Family Affairs, Republic of
Korea.(0820050).]

