Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel method to identify radiosensitizers targeting hypoxic
cancer cells by high-throughput screening


Tumor hypoxia correlates radioresistance and poor clinical outcomes after
radiotherapy. Radiosensitizers have been studied for a long time
especially to overcome the problem of hypoxic tumor cells. Until now,
however, radiosensitizers for hypoxic tumors have had only limited
success in clinic. High throughput screening is popular method to
identify candidate compounds from a large number of compounds for drug
discovery, but have not been established method to study new
radiosensitizers. The aim of this study was to identify radiosensitizers
targeting hypoxic cancer cells by high throughput screening and validate
the efficacy of this method. We performed cell-based high throughput
screening by using 384 well plates and 1280 compounds. After exposing
compounds to HeLa cells, gamma-irradiation was delivered under hypoxic
condition and incubated for 4 days. To identify candidate compounds, cell
counting was performed by MTS assay. Then, radiosensitizing effect of
these compounds was validated by clonogenic survival assay. We performed
high throughput screening and identified 22 compounds as candidates. We
selected Ro90-7501 and dicyclomine hydrochloride which were not reported
as radiosensitizers. Clonogenic survival assay showed their significant
radiosensitizing effect in hypoxic condition. In conclusion, we
identified novel radiosensitizers by high throughput screening. This
method may be useful for identifying radiosensitizers targeting hypoxic
cancer cells.

