Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Isolation and characterization of cancer stem cells from the human
medulloblastoma cell line DAOY: adherent vs. suspension in vitro cell
cultures


Brain tumor stem cells (BTSC) in vitro cultures have been made possible
by the formation of neurospheres in suspension conditions with the use of
serum free medium supplemented with specific growth factors, as B27, EGF,
or b-FGF. In this work, we tested a more recent alternative method for
the culture of BTSC, using laminin pre-coated flasks and the same medium
used for the neurosphere growth, which leads to BTSC expansion attached
to a layer.BTSC cultures in adherence conditions by the use of laminin
can afford a more homogeneous exposition to growth factors than sphere
cultures do, which promotes a higher enrichment in stem-like cells. Also,
it is known that the laminin interactions with integrines or other
components of the cell matrix can lead to inhibition signals of cell
differentiation. Moreover, the monolayer conditions can support a higher
number of cells in the flask.The medulloblastoma cell line DAOY was
cultured in different conditions of normoxia and hypoxia, and several
cell populations were obtained for in vitro and molecular experiments.An
increase in the stem features was shown when cells were successively
cultured in hypoxia conditions. By contrast, a reduction in these
properties was appreciated when cells were exposed to differentiation. In
addition, the CD133+ and CD133- subpopulations were isolated from cells
grown in laminin pre-coated flasks, and in vitro experiments showed that
the CD133+ fraction represented the stem population and it could have
BTSC with a higher probability than the CD133- fraction.The colony
formation assay presented similar results for the two cultured methods,
but clonogenicity in soft agar was higher in the laminin culture cells.
In the cell migration assay, medullospheres migrated similarly to the
laminin cultured cells, since both cell populations lost their adherence
capacity after being cultured with serum free medium. Gene expression of
CD133, CD15 and EZH2 was compared as well, and significant differences
were not detected between the two cell populations.We can conclude that
the laminin culture method in adherent conditions and the medullosphere
traditional culturing method in suspension are similarly good for
obtaining BTSC in DAOY medulloblastoma cell line.

