Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Time to first morning cigarette and lung cancer in National Lung
Screening Trial


In the National Lung Screening Trial (NLST), the effectiveness of lung
cancer screening by low-dose computed tomography (CT) depended on
individual lung cancer risk. Time to fist cigarette (TTFC) is an easily
assessed component of nicotine dependency that may be an independent
predictor of lung cancer risk. We validated the independent association
of TTFC with lung cancer and assessed whether including TTFC into risk
prediction models might improve CT screening effectiveness.We examined
associations between TTFC and lung cancer incidence and mortality in the
18,729 participants of the ACRIN component of the NLST, which included
773 lung cancer diagnoses and 299 lung cancer deaths. Multivariable
cox-proportional hazard regression models, adjusted for other metrics of
smoking use and lung cancer risk factors, were used. In terms of
screening effectiveness, we predicted each participant's 5-year
cumulative lung cancer death risk using multivariable models that
excluded or included TTFC. We then investigated 3 possible screening
strategies based on risk scores from each model (for a total of six
strategies): in each model scenario, those with a 5-year risk score above
one of three thresholds (0.5%, 0.75%, and 1%) would be screened, whereas
others would not. For each risk threshold, we compared screening
sensitivities (the percentage who would have been screened among smokers
who died of lung cancer) and specificities (the percentages who would not
have been screened among smokers without lung cancer) between models
without and with TTFC. We also estimated the absolute reduction in lung
cancer death risk, due to screening, within each TTFC group (In the
National Lung Screening Trial (NLST), the effectiveness of lung cancer
screening by low-dose computed tomography (CT) depended on individual
lung cancer risk. Time to fist cigarette (TTFC) is an easily assessed
component of nicotine dependency that may be an independent predictor of
lung cancer risk. We validated the independent association of TTFC with
lung cancer and assessed whether including TTFC into risk prediction
models might improve CT screening effectiveness.We examined associations
between TTFC and lung cancer incidence and mortality in the 18,729
participants of the ACRIN component of the NLST, which included 773 lung
cancer diagnoses and 299 lung cancer deaths. Multivariable
cox-proportional hazard regression models, adjusted for other metrics of
smoking use and lung cancer risk factors, were used. In terms of
screening effectiveness, we predicted each participant's 5-year
cumulative lung cancer death risk using multivariable models that
excluded or included TTFC. We then investigated 3 possible screening
strategies based on risk scores from each model (for a total of six
strategies): in each model scenario, those with a 5-year risk score above
one of three thresholds (0.5%, 0.75%, and 1%) would be screened, whereas
others would not. For each risk threshold, we compared screening
sensitivities (the percentage who would have been screened among smokers
who died of lung cancer) and specificities (the percentages who would not
have been screened among smokers without lung cancer) between models
without and with TTFC. We also estimated the absolute reduction in lung
cancer death risk, due to screening, within each TTFC group (<15, 15-59,
60 minutes (min)).Compared to smokers with TTFC60 min, smokers with
shorter TTFC had higher lung cancer incidence [hazard ratios (HR) and 95%
confidence intervals (CI) for TTFC 30-59 min = 1.69(1.19-2.41),
HR15-29min = 1.72(1.22-2.43), HR6-14min = 2.05(1.48-2.84), HRIn the
National Lung Screening Trial (NLST), the effectiveness of lung cancer
screening by low-dose computed tomography (CT) depended on individual
lung cancer risk. Time to fist cigarette (TTFC) is an easily assessed
component of nicotine dependency that may be an independent predictor of
lung cancer risk. We validated the independent association of TTFC with
lung cancer and assessed whether including TTFC into risk prediction
models might improve CT screening effectiveness.We examined associations
between TTFC and lung cancer incidence and mortality in the 18,729
participants of the ACRIN component of the NLST, which included 773 lung
cancer diagnoses and 299 lung cancer deaths. Multivariable
cox-proportional hazard regression models, adjusted for other metrics of
smoking use and lung cancer risk factors, were used. In terms of
screening effectiveness, we predicted each participant's 5-year
cumulative lung cancer death risk using multivariable models that
excluded or included TTFC. We then investigated 3 possible screening
strategies based on risk scores from each model (for a total of six
strategies): in each model scenario, those with a 5-year risk score above
one of three thresholds (0.5%, 0.75%, and 1%) would be screened, whereas
others would not. For each risk threshold, we compared screening
sensitivities (the percentage who would have been screened among smokers
who died of lung cancer) and specificities (the percentages who would not
have been screened among smokers without lung cancer) between models
without and with TTFC. We also estimated the absolute reduction in lung
cancer death risk, due to screening, within each TTFC group (<15, 15-59,
60 minutes (min)).Compared to smokers with TTFC60 min, smokers with
shorter TTFC had higher lung cancer incidence [hazard ratios (HR) and 95%
confidence intervals (CI) for TTFC 30-59 min = 1.69(1.19-2.41),
HR15-29min = 1.72(1.22-2.43), HR6-14min = 2.05(1.48-2.84), HR<5min =
2.19(1.59-3.02), p-trendIn the National Lung Screening Trial (NLST), the
effectiveness of lung cancer screening by low-dose computed tomography
(CT) depended on individual lung cancer risk. Time to fist cigarette
(TTFC) is an easily assessed component of nicotine dependency that may be
an independent predictor of lung cancer risk. We validated the
independent association of TTFC with lung cancer and assessed whether
including TTFC into risk prediction models might improve CT screening
effectiveness.We examined associations between TTFC and lung cancer
incidence and mortality in the 18,729 participants of the ACRIN component
of the NLST, which included 773 lung cancer diagnoses and 299 lung cancer
deaths. Multivariable cox-proportional hazard regression models, adjusted
for other metrics of smoking use and lung cancer risk factors, were used.
In terms of screening effectiveness, we predicted each participant's
5-year cumulative lung cancer death risk using multivariable models that
excluded or included TTFC. We then investigated 3 possible screening
strategies based on risk scores from each model (for a total of six
strategies): in each model scenario, those with a 5-year risk score above
one of three thresholds (0.5%, 0.75%, and 1%) would be screened, whereas
others would not. For each risk threshold, we compared screening
sensitivities (the percentage who would have been screened among smokers
who died of lung cancer) and specificities (the percentages who would not
have been screened among smokers without lung cancer) between models
without and with TTFC. We also estimated the absolute reduction in lung
cancer death risk, due to screening, within each TTFC group (<15, 15-59,
60 minutes (min)).Compared to smokers with TTFC60 min, smokers with
shorter TTFC had higher lung cancer incidence [hazard ratios (HR) and 95%
confidence intervals (CI) for TTFC 30-59 min = 1.69(1.19-2.41),
HR15-29min = 1.72(1.22-2.43), HR6-14min = 2.05(1.48-2.84), HR<5min =
2.19(1.59-3.02), p-trend<0.001] and mortality [HR30-59min =
2.10(1.11-3.96), HR15-29min = 1.91(1.02-3.59), HR6-14min =
2.59(1.43-4.69), HRIn the National Lung Screening Trial (NLST), the
effectiveness of lung cancer screening by low-dose computed tomography
(CT) depended on individual lung cancer risk. Time to fist cigarette
(TTFC) is an easily assessed component of nicotine dependency that may be
an independent predictor of lung cancer risk. We validated the
independent association of TTFC with lung cancer and assessed whether
including TTFC into risk prediction models might improve CT screening
effectiveness.We examined associations between TTFC and lung cancer
incidence and mortality in the 18,729 participants of the ACRIN component
of the NLST, which included 773 lung cancer diagnoses and 299 lung cancer
deaths. Multivariable cox-proportional hazard regression models, adjusted
for other metrics of smoking use and lung cancer risk factors, were used.
In terms of screening effectiveness, we predicted each participant's
5-year cumulative lung cancer death risk using multivariable models that
excluded or included TTFC. We then investigated 3 possible screening
strategies based on risk scores from each model (for a total of six
strategies): in each model scenario, those with a 5-year risk score above
one of three thresholds (0.5%, 0.75%, and 1%) would be screened, whereas
others would not. For each risk threshold, we compared screening
sensitivities (the percentage who would have been screened among smokers
who died of lung cancer) and specificities (the percentages who would not
have been screened among smokers without lung cancer) between models
without and with TTFC. We also estimated the absolute reduction in lung
cancer death risk, due to screening, within each TTFC group (<15, 15-59,
60 minutes (min)).Compared to smokers with TTFC60 min, smokers with
shorter TTFC had higher lung cancer incidence [hazard ratios (HR) and 95%
confidence intervals (CI) for TTFC 30-59 min = 1.69(1.19-2.41),
HR15-29min = 1.72(1.22-2.43), HR6-14min = 2.05(1.48-2.84), HR<5min =
2.19(1.59-3.02), p-trend<0.001] and mortality [HR30-59min =
2.10(1.11-3.96), HR15-29min = 1.91(1.02-3.59), HR6-14min =
2.59(1.43-4.69), HR<5min = 2.77(1.54-4.97), p-trendIn the National Lung
Screening Trial (NLST), the effectiveness of lung cancer screening by
low-dose computed tomography (CT) depended on individual lung cancer
risk. Time to fist cigarette (TTFC) is an easily assessed component of
nicotine dependency that may be an independent predictor of lung cancer
risk. We validated the independent association of TTFC with lung cancer
and assessed whether including TTFC into risk prediction models might
improve CT screening effectiveness.We examined associations between TTFC
and lung cancer incidence and mortality in the 18,729 participants of the
ACRIN component of the NLST, which included 773 lung cancer diagnoses and
299 lung cancer deaths. Multivariable cox-proportional hazard regression
models, adjusted for other metrics of smoking use and lung cancer risk
factors, were used. In terms of screening effectiveness, we predicted
each participant's 5-year cumulative lung cancer death risk using
multivariable models that excluded or included TTFC. We then investigated
3 possible screening strategies based on risk scores from each model (for
a total of six strategies): in each model scenario, those with a 5-year
risk score above one of three thresholds (0.5%, 0.75%, and 1%) would be
screened, whereas others would not. For each risk threshold, we compared
screening sensitivities (the percentage who would have been screened
among smokers who died of lung cancer) and specificities (the percentages
who would not have been screened among smokers without lung cancer)
between models without and with TTFC. We also estimated the absolute
reduction in lung cancer death risk, due to screening, within each TTFC
group (<15, 15-59, 60 minutes (min)).Compared to smokers with TTFC60 min,
smokers with shorter TTFC had higher lung cancer incidence [hazard ratios
(HR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) for TTFC 30-59 min =
1.69(1.19-2.41), HR15-29min = 1.72(1.22-2.43), HR6-14min =
2.05(1.48-2.84), HR<5min = 2.19(1.59-3.02), p-trend<0.001] and mortality
[HR30-59min = 2.10(1.11-3.96), HR15-29min = 1.91(1.02-3.59), HR6-14min =
2.59(1.43-4.69), HR<5min = 2.77(1.54-4.97), p-trend<0.001]. With regards
to lung cancer screening, fewer lung cancer deaths would be avoided by
screening smokers with TTFC60 min compared to screening smokers with TTFC
15-59 min or TTFCIn the National Lung Screening Trial (NLST), the
effectiveness of lung cancer screening by low-dose computed tomography
(CT) depended on individual lung cancer risk. Time to fist cigarette
(TTFC) is an easily assessed component of nicotine dependency that may be
an independent predictor of lung cancer risk. We validated the
independent association of TTFC with lung cancer and assessed whether
including TTFC into risk prediction models might improve CT screening
effectiveness.We examined associations between TTFC and lung cancer
incidence and mortality in the 18,729 participants of the ACRIN component
of the NLST, which included 773 lung cancer diagnoses and 299 lung cancer
deaths. Multivariable cox-proportional hazard regression models, adjusted
for other metrics of smoking use and lung cancer risk factors, were used.
In terms of screening effectiveness, we predicted each participant's
5-year cumulative lung cancer death risk using multivariable models that
excluded or included TTFC. We then investigated 3 possible screening
strategies based on risk scores from each model (for a total of six
strategies): in each model scenario, those with a 5-year risk score above
one of three thresholds (0.5%, 0.75%, and 1%) would be screened, whereas
others would not. For each risk threshold, we compared screening
sensitivities (the percentage who would have been screened among smokers
who died of lung cancer) and specificities (the percentages who would not
have been screened among smokers without lung cancer) between models
without and with TTFC. We also estimated the absolute reduction in lung
cancer death risk, due to screening, within each TTFC group (<15, 15-59,
60 minutes (min)).Compared to smokers with TTFC60 min, smokers with
shorter TTFC had higher lung cancer incidence [hazard ratios (HR) and 95%
confidence intervals (CI) for TTFC 30-59 min = 1.69(1.19-2.41),
HR15-29min = 1.72(1.22-2.43), HR6-14min = 2.05(1.48-2.84), HR<5min =
2.19(1.59-3.02), p-trend<0.001] and mortality [HR30-59min =
2.10(1.11-3.96), HR15-29min = 1.91(1.02-3.59), HR6-14min =
2.59(1.43-4.69), HR<5min = 2.77(1.54-4.97), p-trend<0.001]. With regards
to lung cancer screening, fewer lung cancer deaths would be avoided by
screening smokers with TTFC60 min compared to screening smokers with TTFC
15-59 min or TTFC<15 min (2.03 vs. 4.99 vs. 7.38 lung cancer deaths
avoided per 10000 person-years, respectively). Adding TTFC to the
multivariable risk prediction algorithm increased the specificity of
screening for all three risk thresholds by 1.6-2% (pIn the National Lung
Screening Trial (NLST), the effectiveness of lung cancer screening by
low-dose computed tomography (CT) depended on individual lung cancer
risk. Time to fist cigarette (TTFC) is an easily assessed component of
nicotine dependency that may be an independent predictor of lung cancer
risk. We validated the independent association of TTFC with lung cancer
and assessed whether including TTFC into risk prediction models might
improve CT screening effectiveness.We examined associations between TTFC
and lung cancer incidence and mortality in the 18,729 participants of the
ACRIN component of the NLST, which included 773 lung cancer diagnoses and
299 lung cancer deaths. Multivariable cox-proportional hazard regression
models, adjusted for other metrics of smoking use and lung cancer risk
factors, were used. In terms of screening effectiveness, we predicted
each participant's 5-year cumulative lung cancer death risk using
multivariable models that excluded or included TTFC. We then investigated
3 possible screening strategies based on risk scores from each model (for
a total of six strategies): in each model scenario, those with a 5-year
risk score above one of three thresholds (0.5%, 0.75%, and 1%) would be
screened, whereas others would not. For each risk threshold, we compared
screening sensitivities (the percentage who would have been screened
among smokers who died of lung cancer) and specificities (the percentages
who would not have been screened among smokers without lung cancer)
between models without and with TTFC. We also estimated the absolute
reduction in lung cancer death risk, due to screening, within each TTFC
group (<15, 15-59, 60 minutes (min)).Compared to smokers with TTFC60 min,
smokers with shorter TTFC had higher lung cancer incidence [hazard ratios
(HR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) for TTFC 30-59 min =
1.69(1.19-2.41), HR15-29min = 1.72(1.22-2.43), HR6-14min =
2.05(1.48-2.84), HR<5min = 2.19(1.59-3.02), p-trend<0.001] and mortality
[HR30-59min = 2.10(1.11-3.96), HR15-29min = 1.91(1.02-3.59), HR6-14min =
2.59(1.43-4.69), HR<5min = 2.77(1.54-4.97), p-trend<0.001]. With regards
to lung cancer screening, fewer lung cancer deaths would be avoided by
screening smokers with TTFC60 min compared to screening smokers with TTFC
15-59 min or TTFC<15 min (2.03 vs. 4.99 vs. 7.38 lung cancer deaths
avoided per 10000 person-years, respectively). Adding TTFC to the
multivariable risk prediction algorithm increased the specificity of
screening for all three risk thresholds by 1.6-2% (p<0.01) while
maintaining sensitivity.We confirmed the independent inverse association
between TTFC and lung cancer in NLST. Smokers with a TTFC greater than 60
min had less benefit from CT screening than smokers with a shorter TTFC.
By increasing specificity and maintaining sensitivity, including TTFC in
risk prediction models may more precisely identify those who benefit less
from CT lung screening.

