Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Parental coping to retinoblastoma at the onset of diagnosis: A
global study


Introduction:Retinoblastoma is the most common ocular malignancy of
childhood. At the onset of retinoblastoma diagnosis, parents must learn
about retinoblastoma and its complex management, while managing concerns
around their child's health and wellbeing. Coping methods are
action-oriented efforts to manage, master, tolerate, reduce or minimize
the demands of a stressful environment, such as a cancer diagnosis in the
family. The purpose of this study was to assess parental coping to the
diagnosis of retinoblastoma in their child. The study also aimed to
identify factors that assist and/or detract from parental ability to
cope.Methodology:Eligible study participants included parents or
guardians of children diagnosed with retinoblastoma who were present
during the child's retinoblastoma diagnosis and treatment.Study
participants completed a print (China, Mandarin language) or online
(North America, English language) questionnaire that collected: 1) basic
demographic information and information pertaining to the child's
retinoblastoma diagnosis; 2) responses to the Mini Mental Adjustment to
Cancer Scale (Mini-MAC), a validated scale that assesses coping by
measuring levels of helplessness/hopelessness, anxious preoccupation,
fighting spirit, avoidance and fatalism; 3) responses to the Hospital
Anxiety and Depression Scale (HADS), a validated scale that determines
the levels of anxiety and depression experienced by the participant; and
4) additional information on health literacy, self-determination and
social support.Coping strategies assessed by the Mini-MAC that correlated
with low HADS scores were deemed adaptive (i.e. factors that aided in
coping), while methods that correlated with high HADS scores were
maladaptive (i.e. factors that detracted from coping). All models were
analyzed with multivariate linear regression and significance was set at
pIntroduction:Retinoblastoma is the most common ocular malignancy of
childhood. At the onset of retinoblastoma diagnosis, parents must learn
about retinoblastoma and its complex management, while managing concerns
around their child's health and wellbeing. Coping methods are
action-oriented efforts to manage, master, tolerate, reduce or minimize
the demands of a stressful environment, such as a cancer diagnosis in the
family. The purpose of this study was to assess parental coping to the
diagnosis of retinoblastoma in their child. The study also aimed to
identify factors that assist and/or detract from parental ability to
cope.Methodology:Eligible study participants included parents or
guardians of children diagnosed with retinoblastoma who were present
during the child's retinoblastoma diagnosis and treatment.Study
participants completed a print (China, Mandarin language) or online
(North America, English language) questionnaire that collected: 1) basic
demographic information and information pertaining to the child's
retinoblastoma diagnosis; 2) responses to the Mini Mental Adjustment to
Cancer Scale (Mini-MAC), a validated scale that assesses coping by
measuring levels of helplessness/hopelessness, anxious preoccupation,
fighting spirit, avoidance and fatalism; 3) responses to the Hospital
Anxiety and Depression Scale (HADS), a validated scale that determines
the levels of anxiety and depression experienced by the participant; and
4) additional information on health literacy, self-determination and
social support.Coping strategies assessed by the Mini-MAC that correlated
with low HADS scores were deemed adaptive (i.e. factors that aided in
coping), while methods that correlated with high HADS scores were
maladaptive (i.e. factors that detracted from coping). All models were
analyzed with multivariate linear regression and significance was set at
p<0.05.Results:A total of 153 retinoblastoma parents participated in the
study; 30.7% (47/153) were from North America and 69.3% (106/153) were
from China.Chinese parents tended to have a lower correlation with
anxiety and depression (R = 0.51) than North American parents (R = 0.71).
For the North American cohort, high scores for helplessness/hopelessness
and anxious preoccupation appeared to be maladaptive, as they correlated
with increased anxiety and depression. In contrast, the Chinese cohort
demonstrated that feelings of helplessness/hopelessness and anxious
preoccupation were adaptive, as they correlated with reduced anxiety and
depression. For the Chinese cohort, anxious preoccupation was also
positively correlated higher parental health literacy.Conclusions:We
observed significant differences in coping between North American and
Chinese parents of children with retinoblastoma, which may be explained
by cultural differences. The results of this study may help healthcare
teams better care for the psychosocial needs of families affected by
retinoblastoma.

