Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: deBouganin conjugated to trastuzumab overcomes multiple mechanisms
of T-DM1 drug resistance


DeBouganin is a T-cell epitope-depleted variant of the type I Ribosome
Inactivating Protein (RIP) plant toxin Bouganin. DeBouganin binds and
deadenylates the sarcin/ricin loop of the 28S subunit of the ribosomal
RNA leading to protein synthesis inhibition and apoptosis. To demonstrate
the potential advantages of deBouganin over current small molecule
payloads, deBouganin was randomly chemically conjugated to trastuzumab
with a DAR of approximately 2 and compared to T-DM1 both in vitro and in
vivo. The trastuzumab-deBouganin conjugate (T-deB) demonstrated a tighter
IC50 range of killing and an overall greater potency in vitro against
most cells lines with high levels of Her2 expression as compared to
T-DM1. In addition, unlike T-DM1, T-deB was unaffected by inhibitors of
multidrug resistance (MDR) and overexpression of Bcl-2 family members.
Moreover, T-deB potency was unchanged by Her2-Her3 dimerization in the
presence of heregulin. Contrary to T-DM1 which showed only minimal
cytotoxicity, T-deB was highly potent in vitro against tumor cells with
cancer stem cell (CSC) properties by preventing the formation of
tumorspheres. Furthermore, in a BT-474 xenograft study, T-deB was more
efficacious than T-DM1 resulting in increased survival of the T-deB
treated mice. Overall, the results demonstrate the potency and efficacy
of deBouganin and emphasize the importance of using payloads with
different MOAs. The data suggest that deBouganin used alone or in
combination with other payloads could be a highly effective cancer
therapeutic that would provide prolonged clinical benefit.

