Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A mouse GITRL fusion protein drives T-cell activation and
antitumor activity in preclinical mouse models of cancer


GITR is a member of the TNFR superfamily of proteins and is expressed on
resting regulatory T-cells and on other T-cells following activation.
Signals through GITR have been shown to drive increased T-cell activity
and reduced regulatory T-cell function. In order to explore the potential
of therapeutically targeting GITR in a cancer setting, we generated a
mouse GITRL fusion protein (mGITRL FP) consisting of the extracellular
domain of mGITRL linked to a structural domain and an IgG Fc domain. The
antitumor activity and pharmacodynamic effects of this molecule were then
explored in the colorectal syngeneic model of cancer (CT26). Treatment of
mice with mGITRL FP mediated anti-tumor activity that was dependent on
isotype and exposure. The anti-tumor activity could be attributed at
least in part to the increased activation and proliferation status of
CD8+ and CD4+ T-cells, as evidenced by increases in Ki67 expression and
ICOS upregulation. Intratumourally we observed a significant decrease in
the frequency of CD4+ T-cells (including T regs), but a corresponding
increase in cytotoxic CD8+ T-cells. OX40 is another member of the TNFR
superfamily, that has similar expression and functions to GITR. In order
to better understand the potential differences between targeting of these
two pathways, the activity and pharmacodynamic effects of the mGITRL FP
were additionally compared and contrasted to those of a mOX40L FP and the
observed differences will be discussed.

