Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The MUC1 membrane-bound mucin increases tumor cell properties and
chemoresistance in renal clear cell carcinoma


Introduction: MUC1, an O-glycoprotein membrane-bound mucin, is
overexpressed in renal clear-cell carcinomas (CRCC) with correlation to
two major prognostic factors, Tumor-Node-Metastasis stage and nuclear
Frhman grade. Previously, we have shown that (i) MUC1 was significantly
overexpressed in metastatic CRCC vs non-metastatic CRCC and (ii) MUC1 is
a target gene of HIF-1 transcription factor which is a part of the
hypoxia pathway, the main renal carcinogenetic pathway. Furthermore, CRCC
is highly resistant to common systemic chemotherapies.Material and
method: To better understand the roles of MUC1 in CRCC, we used two renal
cell lines expressing MUC1 (786-O cells) or not (ACHN cells). 786-O cells
were stably transfected with shRNA targeting MUC1 while ACHN cells with
full-length MUC1. Proliferation, drug resistance, migration and invasion
properties were studied in vitro in the different cellular clones using
MTS cell proliferation assay, wound healing assay and Boyden chambers
coated with Matrigel, respectively. Signaling pathways were screened by
proteome profiler and western blot.Results and discussion: We showed that
MUC1 expression was associated with increased invasion and migration
properties of renal carcinomatous cells and a decrease of cell-cell
interactions. MUC1 overexpressing cells (i) expressed higher levels of
anti-apoptotic factors and MDR genes involved in chemoresistance
processes and (ii) were more resistant to chemotherapeutic
drugs.Conclusion: Our results show that MUC1 plays a role in biological
properties of renal cancer cells suggesting important function for this
mucin in tumour progression and chemo-resistance. Our data confirm its
potential as a therapeutic target in this type of cancer.

