Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Reproducible spheroid formation using functionalized hyaluronan 3D
scaffolds


Extracellular matrix (ECM) characteristics, including stiffness,
porosity, composition and spatial interaction with the surrounding cells
and soluble factors are key components for cell growth in a tissue
microenvironment. However, poor performance of 2D in vitro systems and
animal models demands physiologically relevant well controlled 3D
platforms for mechanistic assays, drug resistant phenotypes, new drug
efficacy, toxicity assessment.Technical limitations in the current use of
multicellular spheroids prevent their widespread use in cancer research
and drug development. Existing systems for spheroid formation require
lengthy processing times, and make simple tasks like media exchange, cell
retrieval and microscopy analysis challenging. An ideal 3D cell culture
system would form spheroids in an in vivo like microenvironment, while
being easy to handle and compatible with all analytical methods.To
address this unmet needs, we use a controlled hyaluronic acid-based
scaffolds for spheroid formation. We have enriched 2 hyaluronan scaffolds
with other components of the ECM such as collagen I, collagen IV,
collagen VI, RGDs motif or galactosamine. Functionalised scaffolds
overpass the 2D flat culture limitations by recreating cell/cell
interactions and cell/matrix interaction to recreate a more
physiologically authentic 3D architecture. The 2 functionalized scaffolds
recapitulate the microenvironment for Hepatocyte and Adipocyte
growth.Once formed, the spheroids can be cultured long-term, the scaffold
is transparent allowing reproducible High Content Screening, the
spheroids and the cells can be retrieve, avoiding the technical issues of
other 3D systems to retain samples. Moreover, the scaffold is compatible
with fluorescence/luminescent kit and immunofluorescent microscopy.We
demonstrated this technology using cell lines, primary cells (adipocytes,
hepatocytes). We assayed the spheroids over time using various endpoint
spheroid morphology, growth and viability, resistance to anti-cancer
drug, relevant cell organization formation and toxicity endpoint.Thus,
this study introduces functionalized HA scaffold for the use of in vitro
culture model as that represent native cell environments is ready to
ready to use and compatible with HTS and all analytical methods for drug
development and compound screening.

