Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel and selective MELK kinase inhibitors active in breast cancer
cell lines


Maternal Embryonic Leucine zipper Kinase (MELK) is a serine-threonine
kinase implicated in stem cell renewal, override of cell cycle
checkpoints, pre-mRNA splicing and resistance to apoptosis, while MELK
gene expression levels correlate inversely with poor prognosis in breast
cancer, prostate cancer and glioblastoma patients. Moreover, recent
findings underlie the oncogenic role of this kinase in triple negative
breast cancer (TNBC), a category of high-grade, invasive tumors which
lack expression of estrogen receptor (ER) and progesterone receptor (PR)
and HER2 amplification and which is resistant to current cytotoxic and
targeted therapies. Furthermore, they are highly heterogeneous with
respect to genomic alterations, and common therapeutic targets are
lacking, although substantial evidence implicates dysregulated kinase
signaling.Here, we describe the preclinical characterization of novel,
potent and selective ATP-competitive MELK kinase inhibitors identified by
means of high-throughput screening of the NMS proprietary compound
collection. Leading compounds possess biochemical activity against MELK
in the nanomolar range with high selectivity against a panel of 60
further kinases representative of the human kinome. Amongst human tumor
cell lines tested in 2-dimensional colony outgrowth assays, marked
sensitivity was observed in breast cancer cell lines, with sub-micromolar
anti-proliferative activity. This effect was accompanied by
dose-dependent induction of apoptosis and by modulation of cellular
biomarkers, consistent with a MELK-dependent mechanism of action.Overall,
these data provide further evidence that MELK is a promising biological
target for the development of novel anticancer therapies.

