Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Rational combination of targeted agents and BH3 mimetics to
improve cancer treatment


Background: In the clinic is often observed that melanoma cancer patients
first respond to targeted therapeutic agents like dabrafenib showing
tumor burden shrinkage, but subsequently relapse with tumors that are
more aggressive, no longer responsive to therapy and showing acquired
metastatic capacity. Most chemotherapeutic agents kill via the
mitochondrial pathway of apoptosis, but unfortunately tumors frequently
are able to survive, often adapting their antiapoptotic strategy. We used
a variant of the functional predictive test dynamic BH3 profiling (DBP)
to determine the tumor's antiapoptotic defense adaptation over time, and
rationally identify combination of therapies to restore programmed cell
death.Hypothesis: By using different BH3 peptides in DBP we can determine
the adaptive tumor's antiapoptotic defense and adjust therapy to improve
cancer cell death.Results: In BRAF mutant melanoma, cKIT mutant GIST and
HER2 overexpressing breast cancer cell lines, we performed DBP over time
using different BH3 peptides: BIM, BAD, PUMA, MS1 and NOXA. We observed
that when they are treated with specific targeted agents against their
oncogenic drivers, there is an increase in MCL-1 dependence over time.
This observation points to a possible tumor defense mechanism conferring
resistance against anticancer drugs. Based on these observations, we
exploited these altered dependencies by pretreating the cancer cells with
these targeted agents and combining them with novel BH3 mimetics
targeting MCL-1 to synergistically enhance cell death.Exploiting DBP's
capacity to measure changes in priming without the requirement for
prolonged ex vivo culture, we assessed if this antiapoptotic evolution
was also present in primary melanoma samples. Using FACS-based DBP to
select for specific tumor populations, we tested the possible use of BH3
mimetics in combination with targeted agents to improve cancer treatment
in the clinic.Conclusions: Our preliminary results reveal the use of
dynamic BH3 profiling to be used not only as a powerful real-time tool to
predict chemotherapy response but also to evaluate the rational
combination of targeted agents with BH3 mimetics in vitro and in the
clinic.[R.H. and A.L. contributed equally to this work.]

