Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phenethyl isothiocyanate hampers growth and progression of
HER2-positive breast cancers


Background: Almost 90% of all breast cancers (BCs) express a splice
variant of HER2 lacking exon 16 (d16HER2), which promotes the generation
of stable and active d16HER2 homodimers on the tumor cell surface.
Comparison of the tumorigenic potential of human d16HER2 and the
full-length HER2 (WTHER2) in transgenic mice revealed a significantly
shorter latency period and a higher incidence of tumors in the d16HER2
line, suggesting enrichment of this variant in HER2+ BC stem cells. Based
on reports that cruciferous vegetable-derived compounds such as
isothiocyanates (ITCs) mediate strong anti-tumorigenic effects on
numerous oncotypes and target BC stem cells, we tested the effect of the
phenethyl ITC (PEITC), alone or together with Trastuzumab (T), which
reportedly targets HER2+ BC stem cells, on d16HER2-positive tumor growth
and progression in transgenic mice.Methods: The percentage of tumor cells
expressing high levels of CD29 and CD24 and low levels of SCA-1
(CD29high/CD24+/SCA-1low) murine stem cell markers was evaluated by
multiparametric flow cytometry in cell models derived from spontaneous
d16HER2 and WTHER2 transgenic lesions. Mammosphere forming efficiency
(MFE%) was calculated in d16HER2- and WTHER2-positive tumor cells. The
therapeutic activity of PEITC, T and their combination was assessed in
vitro based on their ability to decrease the MFE% and the expression of
stem cell markers in d16HER2- vs. WTHER2-positive tumor cells, and in
vivo in d16HER2 transgenic mice. Analyses by western blot,
histology/immunohistochemistry and magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS)
are ongoing to assess apoptosis, necrosis and metabolomic profiles of
treated tumors vs. controls.Results: d16HER2 tumor cells showed a
significantly higher MFE% and higher expression of stem cell markers than
did WTHER2 tumor cells. PEITC and T significantly reduced MFE% as
compared to controls (p = 0.0342 and p = 0.0083, respectively), and their
combination exerted significantly stronger inhibition than T (p = 0.001)
or PEITC (p = 0.0003) alone only in d16HER2 cells. The percentage of
tumor cells expressing CD29high/CD24+/SCA-1low in d16HER2 tumor cells
after treatment with T, PEITC or both was also reduced. Whereas PEITC
monotherapy did not significantly reduce mammary tumor incidence compared
to controls, while T effectively suppressed d16HER2-driven tumor growth
(p = 0.0002), the combination of PEITC and T significantly heightened the
impairment of mammary lesion development compared to T alone (p =
0.0046). Ex vivo metabolomic analyses by MRS of d16HER2-positive murine
and human BC cell lines showed an increase in glycolytic pathway as
compared to the respective WTHER2 cells.Conclusions: Our results provide
in vivo evidence that the combination of T and PEITC mediates a
significantly greater anti-tumor effect than either alone, most likely
targeting BC stem cells.Supported by the Italian Ministry of Health and
AIRC.

