Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel refinements for the autochthonous mouse model of cancer


There are many levels of genetic regulation at play in autochthonous
mouse models of cancer. For instance, mouse models can be programed to
knockout tumor suppressor genes and enable transcription of oncogenes in
order to cause normal cells to transform into cancer cells that can
eventually form tumors and metastasize. Concurrently to this, a gene of
interest (GOI) under the control of a tetracycline-response element (TRE)
promoter can be studied in a doxycycline-dependent fashion. The GOI under
the control of the TRE promoter will be transcribed only in the presence
of a transcriptional activator fusion protein, rtTA, and a chemical
compound, doxycycline. Unfortunately, it is extremely difficult to limit
the doxycycline-dependent expression of the GOI only to cancer cells, so
normal cells will invariably express the GOI. This inaccuracy can limit
the translation of results from mouse model to human patient. In the
interest of engineering models that closely recapitulate the disease in
question, we propose to limit the expression of rtTA and the GOI to
cancer cells by linking rtTA expression to cell cycle regulation. The
cell cycle is leveraged because rapid division and proliferation are
characteristics intrinsic to proliferative cancer cells, and some cell
cycle proteins are abundantly expressed in cancer cells but not expressed
in normal cells. By fusing rtTA to cell cycle proteins that are expressed
in cycling cancer cells, we hope to improve the accuracy and capabilities
of the autochthonous mouse model of cancer.

