Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Overexpression of Emi1 causes chromosomal instability and cancer


Chromosomal Instability (CIN) is a common occurrence in solid cancer
associated with poor survival in patients. A significant percentage of
these tumors show abnormal chromosomes with near-triploid or tetraploid
numbers exhibiting numerical CIN (nCIN). nCIN is caused mainly due to
deregulation of cell cycle proteins. Early Mitotic Inhibitor 1 (Emi1) is
a cell cycle protein that regulates the activity of E3 ubiquitin ligase,
Anaphase Promoting Complex/Cyclosome (APC/C), which targets many cell
cycle proteins for degradation. Emi1 is overexpressed in many solid
tumors but not blood cancers.Unpublished data from our lab has shown that
Emi1 overexpression in mouse models causes more penetrant and metastatic
tumor than control tumors. Breast cancer tissues show significantly high
expression of Emi1 at protein level as compared to control breast tissue
samples, in agreement with the microarray data from The Cancer Genome
Atlas (TCGA). In addition, Emi1 expression from breast cancer TCGA data
strongly correlated with the chromosomal instability signature than many
of the well-established genes known to promote CIN phenotype. To
understand the mechanisms of CIN due to Emi1 overexpression, we
overexpressed Emi1 in HeLa cells expressing GFP-tagged histone protein to
monitor the cells during mitosis by live cell imaging.HeLa cells
overexpressing Emi1 show CIN following delays in both chromosome
alignment at the metaphase plate and, subsequently, anaphase onset (p =
0.0008 and p = 0.0028). There is a significant increase in CIN phenotypes
and abnormal mitoses such as anaphase bridges/lagging chromosomes,
mitotic arrest and cell death. These results indicate that Emi1
overexpression actively drives tumorigenesis.

