Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: INCAGN01949: an anti-OX40 agonist antibody with the potential to
enhance tumor-specific T-cell responsiveness, while selectively depleting
intratumoral regulatory T cells


OX40 (CD134, TNFRSF4) is a T cell co-stimulatory receptor that
potentiates T cell receptor (TCR) signaling during CD4+ and CD8+ T cell
priming, effector cell differentiation and memory T cell recall
responses. In preclinical mouse tumor models, surrogate anti-OX40 agonist
antibodies have shown remarkable single agent anti-tumor efficacy, as
well as the ability to combine effectively with other immunomodulatory
antibodies and immune education strategies, such as therapeutic cancer
vaccines. Agonistic antibodies targeting OX40 are predicted to counteract
the immunosuppressive tumor microenvironment and promote tumor-specific T
cell immunity via two primary mechanisms: 1) binding and activating OX40
signaling in tumor-specific effector and memory T cells, thereby
enhancing their responsiveness to tumor-associated antigens, and 2)
co-engaging Fc receptors expressed by tumor-associated effector cells,
and facilitating the selective depletion of intratumoral regulatory T
cells.INCAGN01949 is a novel fully human IgG1 monoclonal antibody
identified using the Retrocyte Display platform that is being developed
for the treatment of advanced malignancies. INCAGN01949 recognizes human
and cynomolgus monkey OX40 with comparable binding affinity. INCAGN01949
has been optimized to potently mediate receptor forward signaling under
conditions of suboptimal TCR stimulation, leading to features like
enhanced production of TNF and IFN, and concomitant suppression of IL-10.
INCAGN01949 achieves this functionality through OX40 clustering and
downstream activation of the NFB pathway in T cells, which is sustained
across a broad range of antibody concentrations. Consistent with mouse
preclinical tumor models, OX40 was found to be selectively overexpressed
by intratumoral regulatory T cells from a variety of primary human tumor
samples. Commensurate with its human IgG1 Fc region, INCAGN01949 can
effectively co-engage activating Fc receptors on immune effector cells,
including natural killer cells and macrophages. Therefore INCAGN01949 has
the potential to mediate selective effector cell activity toward
intratumoral populations of regulatory T cells.The biophysical and
functional attributes of INCAGN01949 make it suited for clinical
development, both as a single agent and in combination with other
immunomodulatory antibodies or immune education strategies.

