Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gene-based analysis of the IGF signaling pathway and risk of
breast cancer in African American women: The AMBER consortium


Dysregulation of the IGF (insulin-like growth factor) signaling pathway
plays a key role in cancer development. It is still unclear whether
germline variation in genes in the IGF pathway may affect risk of breast
cancer. We conducted a gene-based analysis of 184 genes in the IGF
signaling pathway to identify genes carrying genetic variation affecting
risk of breast cancer and the specific estrogen receptor (ER) subtypes.
Tagging single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) for each gene were
selected and genotyped on a customized Illumina Exome Array. Imputation
was carried out using 1000 Genomes haplotypes. The analysis included
91,627 SNPs in 3,663 breast cancer cases (including 1,983 ER
positive,1,098 ER-negative) and 4,687 controls from the African American
Breast Cancer Epidemiology and Risk (AMBER) consortium, a collaborative
project of four large studies of breast cancer in African American women
(Carolina Breast Cancer Study, Black Women's Health Study, Women's Circle
of Health Study, and Multiethnic Cohort). We used a multi-locus adaptive
joint (AdaJoint) test to determine the association of each gene in the
IGF signaling pathway with overall breast cancer and ER subtypes. None of
the 184 tested genes, including IGF, IGF binding protein (IGFBP), and IGF
receptor (IGFR) genes were associated with disease after adjustment for
multiple testing. At the nominal level of P0.01, BAIAP2 (P = 0.003), and
CALM2 (P = 0.009) genes were associated with overall breast cancer;
BAIAP2 (P = 0.001), and CSNK2A1 (P = 0.01) with ER+ breast cancer; and
BRAF (P = 0.003), BAD (P = 0.005), and MAPK3 (P = 0.009) with ER- breast
cancer. The intronic rs9913477 SNP in the BAIPA2 gene was significantly
associated with overall (P = 3.2107) and ER+ (P = 4.4107) breast cancer
at the pathway-wide level after adjusting for the total number of tested
SNPs. Odds ratios and 95% confidence intervals of the risk G-allele were
1.44 (1.25, 1.66), and 1.53 (1.30, 1.81) for overall and ER+ breast
cancer, respectively. BAIAP2 codes an adaptor protein, IRSp53, which
functions as a substrate of the insulin receptor and IGF-1 receptor
tyrosine kinases and links Rho-family small GTPases such as Rac. In vitro
studies have shown that activation of Rac promotes metastatic behavior of
breast cancer cells. In conclusion, we identified a SNP in BAIAP2
associated with overall and ER+ breast cancer.These results highlight the
importance of the IGF signaling pathway in the pathogenesis of breast
cancer.

