Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: IL-15 superagonist/IL-15RSushi-Fc fusion complex
(IL-15SA/IL-15RSu-Fc; ALT-803) markedly enhances specific subpopulations
of NK and memory CD8+ T cells, and mediates potent anti-tumor activity of
murine breast and colon carcinomas


Interleukin (IL)-15-N72D superagonist-complexed with IL-15RSushi-Fc
fusion protein (IL-15SA/IL-15RSu-Fc; ALT-803) has been reported to
exhibit significant anti-tumor activity in murine myeloma, rat bladder
cancer, and murine glioblastoma models. In this study, we examined the
immunomodulatory and anti-tumor effects of IL-15SA/IL-15RSu-Fc in
tumor-free and highly metastatic tumor-bearing mice. Here,
IL-15SA/IL-15RSu-Fc significantly expanded NK and CD8+ T cells. In
examining natural killer (NK) cell subsets, the greatest significant
increase was in highly cytotoxic and migrating (CD11b+, CD27hi; high
effector) NK cells, leading to enhanced function on a per-cell basis.
CD8+ T cell subset analysis determined that IL-15SA/IL-15RSu-Fc
significantly increased IL-15 responding memory (CD122+, CD44+) CD8+ T
cells, in particular those having the innate (NKG2D+, PD1-) phenotype. In
4T1 breast tumor-bearing mice, IL-15SA/IL-15RSu-Fc induced significant
anti-tumor activity against spontaneous pulmonary metastases, depending
on CD8+ T and NK cells, and resulting in prolonged survival. Similar
anti-tumor activity was seen in the experimental pulmonary metastasis
model of CT26 colon carcinoma cells, particularly when
IL-15SA/IL-15RSu-Fc was combined with a cocktail of checkpoint
inhibitors, anti-CTLA-4 and anti-PD-L1. Altogether, these studies showed
for the first time that IL-15SA/IL-15RSu-Fc (1) promoted the development
of high effector NK cells, (2) enhanced function of NK cells, and (3)
played a vital role in reducing tumor metastasis and ultimately survival,
especially in combination with checkpoint inhibitors.

