Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterizing the metabolic dependencies of rhabdomyosarcoma and
Ewing's sarcoma cells


Sarcomas represent a diverse group of malignancies with unique molecular
and pathological characteristics. In order to improve sarcoma treatment,
a better understanding of the alterations associated with specific
sarcoma subtypes is critically important. Renewed interest in the altered
metabolic properties of cancer cells has led to an exploration of
targeting metabolic dependencies as a novel therapeutic strategy. In this
study, we have characterized the dependency of rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) and
Ewing's sarcoma (EWS) cells on key metabolic substrates by examining cell
proliferation and bioenergetic properties under varying concentrations of
glucose and glutamine. We utilized two alveolar RMS cell lines, one
embryonal RMS cell line, and five EWS cell lines. While all cell lines
tested were completely growth-inhibited by lack of glucose, individual
RMS and EWS cell lines were differentially sensitive to removal of
glutamine. Furthermore, glutamine deprivation significantly reduced
mitochondrial bioenergetic function, as demonstrated by Seahorse
metabolic flux analysis. The observed effects of glutamine deprivation on
proliferation and mitochondrial bioenergetics were rescued by the
re-introduction of glutamine into the culture media. Our findings suggest
that metabolic dependencies of RMS and EWS cells should be further
investigated in order to identify metabolic vulnerabilities that could be
targeted for potential therapeutic benefit.

