Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ABBV-075, a novel BET family inhibitor, disrupts critical
transcription programs that drive prostate cancer growth to induce potent
anti-tumor activity in vitro and in vivo


The novel bromodomain inhibitor, ABBV-075, is being tested in a Phase I
study for the treatment of solid tumors. Here, we show that potent
inhibition of the BET (bromodomain and extra-terminal) family with
ABBV-075 is a highly efficacious therapy in pre-clinical models of
prostate cancer. The single-digit to low nanomolar anti-proliferative
IC50s and potent in vivo tumor growth inhibition of ABBV-075 is mediated
in part via inhibition of androgen receptor (AR)-dependent transcription.
Prostate tumor incidence and CRPC clinical progression are driven by
aberrant activation of the AR transcription program. Gene expression
profiling and qPCR results indicate that ABBV-075 inhibited
DHT-stimulated transcription of AR target genes without significant
effect on AR protein expression. Further, ABBV-075 disrupted
DHT-stimulated recruitment of the BET family member BRD4 to gene
regulatory regions co-occupied by AR, including the well-established PSA
and TMPRSS2 enhancers. Persistent BET inhibition led to the disassembly
of AR occupied enhancers as measured by a reduction in AR and H3K27Ac
ChIP signal and additionally downregulated enhancer RNA (eRNA)
transcription. ABBV-075 displayed potent anti-proliferative activity in
multiple models of resistance to the second generation anti-androgen
Enzalutamide, including the F876L, L702H AR ligand binding domain
mutations and the AR-V7 splicing variant. In addition to blocking the
transcription activation downstream of AR, ABBV-075 is also a potent
inhibitor of MYC and the TMPRSS2-ETS fusion proteins. Thus, we propose
that ABBV-075 may provide a promising therapeutic option for CRPC
patients who have developed resistance to second-generation
anti-androgens.

