Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Fusogenic targeted liposomes as next-generation nanomedicine for
prostate cancer


Metastatic or castrate-resistant is the second-leading cause of cancer
mortality in males. In the past 3 years, chemotherapies have extended
survival, but efficacy is limited by dose-limiting toxicities due to
suboptimal biodistribution. We address the lack of specificity and
accumulation in Castrate Resistant Prostate Cancer (CRPC) by developing a
unique nano-carrier for drug delivery: targeted fusogenic liposomes.We
have developed a platform whereby liposomes are formulated with fusion
associated small transmembrane protein p14 displaying targeting ligands.
The p14 protein catalyzes mixing of the liposomal bilayer with cell
membranes to deliver the cargo directly into the cytoplasm, while the
targeting ligand bombesin, allows for targeting to the Gastrin-releasing
Peptide (GRPR) that is overexpressed in prostate cancer.We hypothesized
that this novel targeted fusogenic liposome formulation would
significantly improve the biodistribution and efficacy of chemotherapy.A
clinical liposomal doxorubicin formulation (DOXIL) was modified to
incorporate targeted fusogenic p14 protein.We then evaluated the efficacy
and biodistribution of these new formulations using in vitro and in vivo
models of CRPC. In PC3 cells, compared to conventional liposomes,
intracellular levels of doxorubicin are increased by 15 and 25 times when
p14 or p14-bombesin liposomes are used. Additionally, the IC50 is reduced
from 85mM to 2mM. In mice bearing PC3 tumors treated with targeted
fusogenic liposomal doxorubicin, we observed tumor growth inhibition of
57% (vs control).This establishes a proof of concept for an innovative
targeted drug delivery system that may improve the outcome of patients
with CRPC by enhancing the effect of approved drugs.

