Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Peripheral CD8+CD28-suppressive T lymphocytes act as a
prognosticator among breast cancer patients with adoptive T-cell
immunotherapy


Introduction: This study aimed to assess the prognostic value of CD8+CD28
T lymphocyte in peripheral blood among breast cancer patients treated
with adoptive T lymphocytes immunotherapy.Methods: 217 patients
participated in the follow-up study. CD8+CD28 proportion was measured by
flow cytometry in peripheral T cells. The median survival was estimated
by Kaplan-Meier curve, Log-rank test and Cox hazard proportion regression
model, between groups of CD8+CD28 proportion more than 24.2% and less
than or equal to 24.2% in peripheral T cells.ResultsThe median follow-up
period was 15 months. Median time to progression was 11.8 months among
patients with CD8+CD28 proportion less than or equal to 24.2% and 7.1
months among patients with CD8+CD28 proportion more than 24.2%
(pIntroduction: This study aimed to assess the prognostic value of
CD8+CD28 T lymphocyte in peripheral blood among breast cancer patients
treated with adoptive T lymphocytes immunotherapy.Methods: 217 patients
participated in the follow-up study. CD8+CD28 proportion was measured by
flow cytometry in peripheral T cells. The median survival was estimated
by Kaplan-Meier curve, Log-rank test and Cox hazard proportion regression
model, between groups of CD8+CD28 proportion more than 24.2% and less
than or equal to 24.2% in peripheral T cells.ResultsThe median follow-up
period was 15 months. Median time to progression was 11.8 months among
patients with CD8+CD28 proportion less than or equal to 24.2% and 7.1
months among patients with CD8+CD28 proportion more than 24.2% (p<0.05).
With further adjustments, CD8+CD28 proportion of more than 24.2% produced
a HR being 2.13 (95%CI 1.45, 3.12) for progression. Patients with
CD8+CD28 proportion of less than or equal to 24.2% had median overall
survival of 36.2 months, 10.6-month longer than patients with higher
CD8+CD28 proportion (pIntroduction: This study aimed to assess the
prognostic value of CD8+CD28 T lymphocyte in peripheral blood among
breast cancer patients treated with adoptive T lymphocytes
immunotherapy.Methods: 217 patients participated in the follow-up study.
CD8+CD28 proportion was measured by flow cytometry in peripheral T cells.
The median survival was estimated by Kaplan-Meier curve, Log-rank test
and Cox hazard proportion regression model, between groups of CD8+CD28
proportion more than 24.2% and less than or equal to 24.2% in peripheral
T cells.ResultsThe median follow-up period was 15 months. Median time to
progression was 11.8 months among patients with CD8+CD28 proportion less
than or equal to 24.2% and 7.1 months among patients with CD8+CD28
proportion more than 24.2% (p<0.05). With further adjustments, CD8+CD28
proportion of more than 24.2% produced a HR being 2.13 (95%CI 1.45, 3.12)
for progression. Patients with CD8+CD28 proportion of less than or equal
to 24.2% had median overall survival of 36.2 months, 10.6-month longer
than patients with higher CD8+CD28 proportion (p<0.05). With further
adjustments, CD8+CD28 proportion of more than 24.2% produced a 86% higher
risk for death (HR = 1.86, 95%CI 1.07, 3.24).ConclusionPeripheral
CD8+CD28 proportion had a negative association with progression-free and
overall survival among breast cancer patients receiving adoptive T cell
immunotherapy. CD8+CD28 suppressive T cell was a potential biomarker for
breast cancer patients prognosis.

