Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CD133 attenuates ROS accumulation via a steady increase in the
expression of the cystine/glutamate transporter xCT: Consequence on
chemoresistance in hepatocellular carcinoma


CD133+ cells in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) exhibit cancer stem cell
(CSC)-like properties as well as resistance to chemotherapeutic agents
and ionizing radiation; however, their function remains unknown. In this
study, we tried to define new target and compound for enhancement of
chemotherapy efficiency in HCC through elucidation of mechanism of
CD133-induced chemoresistance.Here, we show that CD133+ HCC cells exhibit
strong resistance to reactive oxygen species (ROS) via persistent
maintenance of the ROS-induced increase in xCT expression that
upregulates glutathione (GSH) levels, and thereby play a central role in
resistance to liver cancer therapy.ROS are generally known to act as
mediators of apoptosis induced by various anti-cancer drugs. We found
that increased CD133 expression enhanced the capacity for ROS defense by
enhancing cellular GSH levels, and ablation of CD133 attenuated not only
the capacity for defense against ROS, but also chemoresistance, in HCC.
Sulfasalazine, a potent xCT inhibitor, impaired the ROS defense system
and increased the therapeutic efficacy of anticancer therapies in CD133+
HCC but not CD133HCC in vivo and in vitro. Furthermore, we found that
CD133 sustained the ROS stress-induced increase in the expression of xCT,
a cystine/glutamate transporter that plays an important role in
maintaining GSH levels, and thereby in preventing cell death via
anticancer therapies. These results strongly indicate functional roles
for CD133 in ROS defense and in evading anticancer therapies in HCC, and
suggest that sulfasalazine, administered in combination with conventional
chemotherapy, might be an effective treatment for CD133-targeted liver
cancer therapy.

