Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Precision cancer risk diagnosis by accumulation of epigenetic
alterations


Background and Aim: Aberrant DNA methylation is induced by chronic
inflammation, and can be accumulated in normal-appearing tissues
[reviewed in Ushijima and Hattori, Clin Cancer Res, 2:143, 2012].
Cross-sectional studies have shown that the degree of accumulation of
aberrant DNA methylation was correlated with cancer risk, especially
inflammation-associated cancers. In this study, we aimed to demonstrate
that cancer risk can be predicted by an epigenetic cancer risk marker by
a multicenter prospective cohort study.Methods: We enrolled 826 patients
with early gastric cancer, aged 40-80 years, who had undergone endoscopic
resection. If a patient had active Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori)
infection, the patient was enrolled after eradication of H. pylori. At
the time of enrollment, one gastric biopsy was taken, and methylation
levels of three preselected genes, miR-124a-3, EMX1 and NKX6-1, were
measured by quantitative methylation-specific PCR. The patients were
followed up annually by endoscopy to detect metachronous gastric cancer.
To exclude cancers undetected at the time of enrollment, authentic
metachronous gastric cancers were defined as those developed 1 year after
enrollment.Results: With a median follow-up of 2.97 years, 782 of 826
patients had at least one follow-up. Authentic metachronous gastric
cancers developed in 66 patients: 29, 16 and 21 patients at 1-2, 2-3 and
3 years after the enrollment, respectively. The highest quartile of the
miR-124a-3 methylation level had a significantly high HR in univariate
analysis (95% CI) [2.17 (1.07 - 4.41); p = 0.032] and adjusted HR in
multivariate analysis [2.30 (1.03 - 5.10); p = 0.042] [Asada et al, Gut,
64:388, 2015]. More importantly, with a median follow-up of 4.84 years, a
multivariate analysis yielded a larger HR [2.79 (1.34 - 5.81)] with a
smaller p value (0.0061).Conclusions: This study, for the first time,
demonstrated the usefulness of an epigenetic cancer risk marker by a
multicenter prospective cohort study. DNA methylation accumulated in
normal-appearing tissues was considered to be highly useful for precision
cancer risk diagnosis.

