Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hypoxia-induced EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor resistance is
associated with epithelial-mesenchymal transition in NSCLC


The development of small molecule inhibitors specific for epidermal
growth factor receptors (EGFR) with activating mutations has led to a
dramatic shift in the treatment of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
patients. Patients with NSCLC carrying such EGFR mutations often show
prolonged responses when treated with first or second generation EGFR
tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs). However, most patients eventually
develop resistance to EGFR TKIs. Hypoxia is a key micro-environmental
stress in solid tumors that is associated with poor prognosis. Studies
have linked hypoxia to therapy resistance, including radiation therapy
and chemotherapy. In this study, we show that long-term, moderate hypoxia
induces gefitinib resistance in the NSCLC cell line, HCC827, that harbors
an activating EGFR mutation. The hypoxia-induced gefitinib resistance is
associated with reduced BIM induction after gefitinib treatment when
compared to normoxic HCC827 cells. In addition, in hypoxic HCC827 cells,
gefitinib treatment induces N-cadherin expression, a mesenchymal marker,
accompanied by downregulation of E-cadherin, an epithelial maker. These
results suggest that epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) may be
involved in hypoxia induced gefitinib resistance. Wound healing migration
assays further support that hypoxia induces HCC827 cell migration after
gefitinib treatment. These results suggest that hypoxia may be a driving
force for EGFR TKIs resistance potentially through EMT in NSCLC.

