Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dissection of the major hematopoietic quantitative trait locus in
chromosome 6q23.3 identifies miR-3662 as a player in hematopoiesis and AML


Background: Over 15 genome-wide association studies (GWASs) have
identified a narrow region in chromosome 6q23.3 as a major hematopoietic
quantitative trait locus (QTL) for many hematologic traits. The
associated phenotypes have yet to be fully explained by genes in the
region, including MYB. We noted a newly annotated microRNA within the
QTL, miR-3662, and sought to characterize its role in the QTL by
exploring its function in normal and malignant hematopoiesis,
specifically acute myeloid leukemia (AML).Results: To assess the
association between the QTL-defining SNPs and miR-3662 abundance, we
genotyped 10 GWAS SNPs in 200 blood samples from non-leukemic
individuals. The risk alleles of all 10 SNPs associated with higher
miR-3662 abundance. Homozygosity for rs66650371, a three base pair (bp)
deletion, showed the strongest association (PBackground: Over 15
genome-wide association studies (GWASs) have identified a narrow region
in chromosome 6q23.3 as a major hematopoietic quantitative trait locus
(QTL) for many hematologic traits. The associated phenotypes have yet to
be fully explained by genes in the region, including MYB. We noted a
newly annotated microRNA within the QTL, miR-3662, and sought to
characterize its role in the QTL by exploring its function in normal and
malignant hematopoiesis, specifically acute myeloid leukemia
(AML).Results: To assess the association between the QTL-defining SNPs
and miR-3662 abundance, we genotyped 10 GWAS SNPs in 200 blood samples
from non-leukemic individuals. The risk alleles of all 10 SNPs associated
with higher miR-3662 abundance. Homozygosity for rs66650371, a three base
pair (bp) deletion, showed the strongest association (P<.0001).
Reinserting the three bp in cells homozygous for rs66650371 with
CRISPR/Cas9 technology lowered miR-3662 abundance by 20%, suggesting
rs66650371 directly affects miR-3662 transcription. MiR-3662 was nearly
absent in primitive hematopoietic progenitor cells (HPCs) cells,
whereafter its abundance increased throughout differentiation. MiR-3662
overexpression increased cell growth and colony formation of HPCs,
particularly of the erythroid lineage.To explore the role of miR-3662 in
malignant hematopoiesis, we overexpressed miR-3662 in AML cell lines
(Kasumi1, KG1a, MV4-11) and primary AML patient blasts (n = 12).
Overexpression of miR-3662 reduced cell growth and viability in vitro,
and significantly reduced tumor size in a murine xenograft model
(scramble vs. miR-3662; n = 9 mice/group).We used targeted RNA sequencing
to identify differentially expressed genes between forced
miR-3662-expresssing- and control AML patient blasts using a panel of 361
candidate genes (TruSeq RNA platform, Illumina). IKBKB was identified as
a promising target, and direct regulation of IKBKB's 3-UTR by miR-3662
was confirmed via luciferase assay. MiR-3662 overexpression lowered IKBKB
mRNA and protein expression in both HPCs and AML patient blasts. As IKBKB
promotes activation and nuclear localization of NF-B, overexpression of
miR-3662 led to decreased NF-B transactivation potential via luciferase
assay. Confocal microscopy of HPCs and AML cells, as well as subcellular
fraction immunoblots, revealed decreased NF-B nuclear localization upon
miR-3662 overexpression. Re-introduction of IKBKB partly rescued
miR-3662's phenotype by increasing nuclear localization of NF-B,
decreasing growth of HPCs, and increasing viability of AML
cells.Conclusion: The risk alleles of the 6q23.3 region associated with
higher miR-3662 abundance, and miR-3662 abundance was functionally linked
to rs66650371. We characterized miR-3662 as an agent in normal and
malignant hematopoiesis, and demonstrated that miR-3662 reduces NF-B
activity by targeting IKBKB.

