Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: IL-18 induces an anti-apoptotic effect through stabilizing COX-2
mRNA expression in leukemia


Leukemia is a cancer of bone marrow or blood cells. The acute myeloid
leukemia (AML) is a common subtype occurred in adults to result in death.
Forcing malignant cells to undergo differentiation instead of killing
cancer cells is one of AML therapeutic strategy. However, the AML
patients with poor outcome due to drug resistance is still a challenge.
In this study, the abundances of the pro-inflammatory cytokine IL-18 and
its receptor (IL-18R) were found to be correlated with the occurrence of
drug resistance in AML patients. Importantly, we found that IL-18 induced
an anti-apoptotic effect on U937 and THP-1 cells. Cyclooxygenase 2
(COX-2) has been suggested to have an anti-apoptotic role in
chemo-resistant cancer cells. IL-18 increased COX-2 expression through
post-transcriptional regulation in differentiated U937 cells. We found
that two RNA binding proteins, HuR and IMP-3, stabilized COX-2 mRNA
expression. In addition, IL-18 induced their interaction and facilitated
this complex shuttle from nucleus to cytoplasm. Subsequently, HuR and
IMP-3 bound to COX-2 mRNA 3UTR. Two chemical inhibitors of JNK and ERK1/2
attenuated IL-18-enhanced COX-2 transcripts and the shuttle of HuR from
nucleus to cytoplasm. These results suggested that IL-18 stabilized COX-2
mRNA through the JNK- and/or ERK1/2-regulated HuR nucleocytoplasmic
shuttling and contributed to an anti-apoptotic effect in AML.

