Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of radiolabelled drug carrier systems for molecularly
targeted radiotherapy


IntroductionTagging of radioisotopes to targeting moieties such as
peptides, antibodies and nucleotides aids in more precise delivery of
these isotopes to cancer cells for treatment. However some of the
obstacles to successful delivery of these radiolabelled molecules include
poor circulation half-life and inefficient tumour extravasation and
penetration. Liposomal drug carrier systems have extended circulation
profiles but would benefit from enhanced binding and entry into target
cancer cells. To address some of these challenges, liposomes
encapsulating a chemotherapeutic agent (doxorubicin) and tagged with
radiolabelled targeting moieties were designed, formulated and then
tested for specific binding to and killing of cancer cell
lines.Experimental ProceduresDistearoylphosphatidylethanolamine-poly
ethylene glycol (DSPE-PEG) based liposomes were developed and surface
modified with epidermal growth factor-diethylenetriamine pentaacetate
(EGF-DTPA) followed by 111In radiolabelling. The EGF-tagged liposomes
were characterised using zetasizer and transmission electron microscopy
(TEM). Direct particle cytotoxicity was assessed using the MTT assay and
uptake kinetics was determined by treating EGF+ve MDA-MB-468 (1.3 106
EGFR/cell) and EGFR-ve MCF7 cells (1.5 104 EGFR/cell) with Nile
red-containing liposomes and quantifying Nile red fluorescence in the
cell lysates. Payload delivery capabilities were studied by exposing
EGFR+ve luciferase-expressing MDA-MB-231 or EGFR-ve luciferase expressing
MCF7 breast cancer cells to EGF-tagged or non-tagged particles containing
the model drug luciferin. Therapeutic efficacy of Doxorubicin-containing
EGF-tagged liposomes to MDA-MB-468 and MCF7 cells was then assessed by
the MTT assay.ResultsThe particles were spherical in morphology with a
diameter of 140-160 nm. More than 95% of the 111In added was tagged to
the particles. The liposomes did not show intrinsic cytotoxicity and were
taken up by cells in a dose-dependent manner with greater uptake observed
in MDA-MB-468 than in MCF7s. Greater delivery (2-fold increase,
pIntroductionTagging of radioisotopes to targeting moieties such as
peptides, antibodies and nucleotides aids in more precise delivery of
these isotopes to cancer cells for treatment. However some of the
obstacles to successful delivery of these radiolabelled molecules include
poor circulation half-life and inefficient tumour extravasation and
penetration. Liposomal drug carrier systems have extended circulation
profiles but would benefit from enhanced binding and entry into target
cancer cells. To address some of these challenges, liposomes
encapsulating a chemotherapeutic agent (doxorubicin) and tagged with
radiolabelled targeting moieties were designed, formulated and then
tested for specific binding to and killing of cancer cell
lines.Experimental ProceduresDistearoylphosphatidylethanolamine-poly
ethylene glycol (DSPE-PEG) based liposomes were developed and surface
modified with epidermal growth factor-diethylenetriamine pentaacetate
(EGF-DTPA) followed by 111In radiolabelling. The EGF-tagged liposomes
were characterised using zetasizer and transmission electron microscopy
(TEM). Direct particle cytotoxicity was assessed using the MTT assay and
uptake kinetics was determined by treating EGF+ve MDA-MB-468 (1.3 106
EGFR/cell) and EGFR-ve MCF7 cells (1.5 104 EGFR/cell) with Nile
red-containing liposomes and quantifying Nile red fluorescence in the
cell lysates. Payload delivery capabilities were studied by exposing
EGFR+ve luciferase-expressing MDA-MB-231 or EGFR-ve luciferase expressing
MCF7 breast cancer cells to EGF-tagged or non-tagged particles containing
the model drug luciferin. Therapeutic efficacy of Doxorubicin-containing
EGF-tagged liposomes to MDA-MB-468 and MCF7 cells was then assessed by
the MTT assay.ResultsThe particles were spherical in morphology with a
diameter of 140-160 nm. More than 95% of the 111In added was tagged to
the particles. The liposomes did not show intrinsic cytotoxicity and were
taken up by cells in a dose-dependent manner with greater uptake observed
in MDA-MB-468 than in MCF7s. Greater delivery (2-fold increase, p<0.05)
of EGF-tagged luciferin-containing particles was observed in MDA-MB-231
cells than in MCF7 cells, this was not the case for non-tagged particles.
EGF-tagged particles also gave better delivery (3.5-fold increase,
pIntroductionTagging of radioisotopes to targeting moieties such as
peptides, antibodies and nucleotides aids in more precise delivery of
these isotopes to cancer cells for treatment. However some of the
obstacles to successful delivery of these radiolabelled molecules include
poor circulation half-life and inefficient tumour extravasation and
penetration. Liposomal drug carrier systems have extended circulation
profiles but would benefit from enhanced binding and entry into target
cancer cells. To address some of these challenges, liposomes
encapsulating a chemotherapeutic agent (doxorubicin) and tagged with
radiolabelled targeting moieties were designed, formulated and then
tested for specific binding to and killing of cancer cell
lines.Experimental ProceduresDistearoylphosphatidylethanolamine-poly
ethylene glycol (DSPE-PEG) based liposomes were developed and surface
modified with epidermal growth factor-diethylenetriamine pentaacetate
(EGF-DTPA) followed by 111In radiolabelling. The EGF-tagged liposomes
were characterised using zetasizer and transmission electron microscopy
(TEM). Direct particle cytotoxicity was assessed using the MTT assay and
uptake kinetics was determined by treating EGF+ve MDA-MB-468 (1.3 106
EGFR/cell) and EGFR-ve MCF7 cells (1.5 104 EGFR/cell) with Nile
red-containing liposomes and quantifying Nile red fluorescence in the
cell lysates. Payload delivery capabilities were studied by exposing
EGFR+ve luciferase-expressing MDA-MB-231 or EGFR-ve luciferase expressing
MCF7 breast cancer cells to EGF-tagged or non-tagged particles containing
the model drug luciferin. Therapeutic efficacy of Doxorubicin-containing
EGF-tagged liposomes to MDA-MB-468 and MCF7 cells was then assessed by
the MTT assay.ResultsThe particles were spherical in morphology with a
diameter of 140-160 nm. More than 95% of the 111In added was tagged to
the particles. The liposomes did not show intrinsic cytotoxicity and were
taken up by cells in a dose-dependent manner with greater uptake observed
in MDA-MB-468 than in MCF7s. Greater delivery (2-fold increase, p<0.05)
of EGF-tagged luciferin-containing particles was observed in MDA-MB-231
cells than in MCF7 cells, this was not the case for non-tagged particles.
EGF-tagged particles also gave better delivery (3.5-fold increase,
p<0.05) than non-tagged particles in MDA-MB-231 cells, this was not the
case in MCF7 cells. Doxorubicin-loaded EGF-tagged liposomes had an IC50
of 0.02 mg/ml with MDA-MB-468 and 0.04 mg/ml with MCF7s.ConclusionsThis
work, using 111In- and EGF-tagged liposomes has shown promising in vitro
targeted cellular uptake and drug delivery. Receptor binding kinetics and
the feasibility of using these systems in vivo for ultrasound-assisted
radiopharmaceutical delivery will follow.

