Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression analysis of adamantinomatous craniopharyngioma suggests
two subtypes associated with CTNNB1 mutational frequency and highlights
potential therapeutic targets


We conducted RNA-sequencing analysis of Adamantinomatous
Craniopharnygioma (ACP), including Laser capture micro-dissection (LCM)
of individual cellular compartments, to characterise both disease
heterogeneity and targetable deregulated molecular pathways.RNA
sequencing was performed on 18 samples of ACP (17 pediatric, 1 adult) and
six control samples (three fetal pituitaries, three non-functioning
pituitary adenomas). LCM and RNA sequencing were performed on a subset of
cases selecting nuclear catenin accumulating clusters, and paired
non-cluster tumour tissue (palisading epithelium). Mouse ACP models
indicate that these clusters initiate tumorigenesis in a non-cell
autonomous manner.Consensus clustering analysis revealed two subgroups of
human ACP, one associated with a high CTNNB1 mutational frequency (>30%),
a relatively high tumour content and fibrous reactive tissue (Group H)
and another with a lower mutation frequency (We conducted RNA-sequencing
analysis of Adamantinomatous Craniopharnygioma (ACP), including Laser
capture micro-dissection (LCM) of individual cellular compartments, to
characterise both disease heterogeneity and targetable deregulated
molecular pathways.RNA sequencing was performed on 18 samples of ACP (17
pediatric, 1 adult) and six control samples (three fetal pituitaries,
three non-functioning pituitary adenomas). LCM and RNA sequencing were
performed on a subset of cases selecting nuclear catenin accumulating
clusters, and paired non-cluster tumour tissue (palisading epithelium).
Mouse ACP models indicate that these clusters initiate tumorigenesis in a
non-cell autonomous manner.Consensus clustering analysis revealed two
subgroups of human ACP, one associated with a high CTNNB1 mutational
frequency (>30%), a relatively high tumour content and fibrous reactive
tissue (Group H) and another with a lower mutation frequency (<30%) and
glial reactive tissue (Group L).The meta-gene signature of Group H
defined by non-negative matrix factorization included secreted factors,
such as Sonic Hedgehog (SHH) and Fibroblast Growth Factors (FGFs) 3, 4
and 19, Keratins and Matrix Metalloproteinases and was enriched for genes
related to odontogenesis. Weighted gene co-expression network analysis
independently showed correlation of expression of such genes with
mutational frequency. Glial markers and neural differentiation genes were
up-regulated in Group L tumors. Differential expression showed
up-regulation in ACPs of potential therapeutic targets including SHH
(32x), EGFR (8.9x) and TNF (10x).Similarly, differential expression
analysis of LCM dissected nuclear catenin accumulating clusters
identified up-regulation of SHH, FGFs and other secreted factors
including as WNTs and BMPs.Analysis of the SHH pathway found that SHH is
over expressed in clusters (9x) whilst its downstream targets Ptch1
(1.7x), Gli1 (2.1x), Gli3 (2.9x) are over expressed in palisading
epithelium, indicating the presence of paracrine signaling. These
findings were independently confirmed by in situ hybridisation in human
samples and the mouse model.Clustering of murine expression data with
those genes differentially expressed in the human clusters revealed
murine and human clusters group together, suggesting they are similar
structures functionally and biologically.Together, these results suggest
that a subset of cells, carrying CTNNB1 mutations and showing nuclear
-catenin accumulation, express secreted pro-oncogenic factors and the
response may be observed in neighboring cell types. Targeting such
signalling offers an attractive therapeutic opportunity, for which the
results suggest the mouse model is wellplaced for testing. The clinical
significance of the two putative ACP subgroups remains to be determined.

