Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Covalent Flt3-Cys828 inhibition represents a novel therapeutic
approach for the treatment of Flt3-ITD and Flt3-D835 mutant acute myeloid
leukemia


Inhibition of Flt3 kinase activity is a promising strategy for the
treatment of Flt3 mutant acute myeloid leukemia (AML). However, clinical
studies with Flt3 kinase inhibitors have shown that mutations of the gate
keeper or an activation loop residue in the Flt3 catalytic domain limits
the duration of response. Such mutations generally reduce kinase domain
binding affinity and residence time of the kinase inhibitor, and
consequently its efficacy. We therefore investigated whether covalent,
irreversible binding to Flt3 could overcome some of the limitations of
classic non-covalent Flt3 inhibitors. Here, we report for the first time
on the high-affinity Cys828-covalent binding mode of a resorcylic acid
lactone to the isolated Flt3 kinase domain using X-ray crystallography
and kinetic binding assays. In a cellular context (Ba/F3-Flt3-ITD),
mutation of Cys828 to Ala reduces potency (IC50) from low nM to microM,
demonstrating all relevant Flt3 inhibition in cells critically depends on
Cys828. Consistently, the molecule is a low nM inhibitor of both Flt3-ITD
and Flt3D835Y in vitro and in BaF3 cells, translating to potent nM
inhibition of Flt3-ITD driven AML cell line proliferation, with only
microM antiproliferative activity in non-Flt3 driven AML and unrelated
leukemia cell lines. Finally, in spite of its fast clearance when dosed
to MV4-11 (Flt3-ITD AML) xenograft bearing mice, robust anti-tumor
activity was observed using a once-daily treatment schedule. These data
demonstrate the feasibility of covalent Flt3 inhibition, and suggest it
represents an attractive novel therapeutic approach for the treatment of
Flt3-driven AML.

