Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Histone deacetylase 2 is a potential determinant of the
sensitivity of hepatocellular carcinoma cells to sorafenib


Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the fifth frequently diagnosed cancer
and is the second leading cause of cancer death worldwide. Many groups
have suggested possible clinical applications for liver cancer therapy
but sorafenib, an orally-available kinase inhibitor, is the only standard
systematic therapeutics for treatment of hepatocellular carcinoma.
However, survival benefit of sorafenib is unsatisfactory due to high
level heterogeneity of individual response. We previously reported that
histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2) was deregulated in HCC, and thereby
contributed to liver tumorigenesis by enhancing mitotic and metastatic
potential of transformed cells. Targeted-disruption of HDAC2 suppressed
in vitro and in vivo tumorgigenic potential of HDAC2 in liver cancer. The
goal of this study was to investigate whether both sorafenib treatment
and HDAC2 inhibition elicit synergistic anti-tumor effect against HCC
cells. Here, we showed that sorafenib effectively blocked ERK/MEK and AKT
signaling pathway upon EGF stimulation in liver cancer cell lines. Also,
we found that valproic acid (VPA), a selective inhibitor of histone
deacetylase family I, and sorafenib treatment synergistically evoked
liver cancer cell growth retardation. This effect was recapitulated by
HDAC2 knockdown with sorafenib treatment and exhibited synergistic effect
on apoptotic cell death of liver cancer cell lines, Hep3B and Huh7,
compared to single treatment of sorafenib. Our data suggest that combined
sorafenib treatment with HDAC2 targeting may provide more benefits toward
HCC therapy providing a novel approach for future application in patients
with advanced HCC.

