Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dinaciclib, a CDK inhibitor promotes proteasomal degradation of
Mcl-1 and enhances ABT-737 mediated cell death in malignant human glioma
cell lines


The prognosis of malignant glioma, the most common brain tumor, is still
poor, thus underscoring the need to develop novel treatment strategies.
Because glioma cells commonly exhibit genomic alterations involving genes
that regulate cell cycle control, there is a strong rationale to examine
the potential efficacy of strategies to counteract this process. In this
study, we examined the antiproliferative effects of the cyclin-dependent
kinase inhibitor dinaciclib in malignant human glioma cell lines, with
intact or deleted or mutated p53 or PTEN or p14ARF, or EGFR amplification
status. Dinaciclib was found to inhibit cell proliferation and induce
cell cycle arrest at the G2/M checkpoint, independent of p53 mutational
status. In a standard 72 h MTS assay, at clinically relevant
concentrations, dose-dependent antiproliferative effects were observed
but cell death was not induced. Moreover, the combination of conventional
chemotherapeutic agents and various growth signaling inhibitors with
dinaciclib did not yield synergistic cytotoxicity. In contrast,
combination of the Bcl-2/Bcl-xL inhibitor ABT-263 or ABT-737 with
dinaciclib potentiated the apoptotic response induced by each single
drug. The synergistic killing by ABT-737 with dinaciclib led to cell
death accompanied by the hallmarks of apoptosis, including an early loss
of the mitochondrial transmembrane potential, the release of cytochrome
c, smac/DIABLO and apoptosis-inducing factor (AIF), phosphatidylserine
exposure on the plasma membrane surface and activation of caspases and
PARP. Mechanistic studies revealed that dinaciclib promoted proteasomal
degradation of Mcl-1.

