Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Strong immune responses to pancreatic cancer cells induced by
human tumor lysate vaccine remodeled to express -gal epitopes and their
implication for a universal vaccine


Pancreatic cancer (PC) is a lethal disease that remains one of the most
resistant to traditional therapies. We are in urgent need of other
therapies. Immunotherapy designed to target tumor-associated antigens
(TAAs) is a promising treatment approach for PC. But vaccination against
a single TAA seems to be insufficient. In our previous study, we showed
effectiveness vaccination by whole PC cells, engineered to express -gal
epitopes (Cancer Res, 2010). Subsequently we investigated strong immune
response of tumor lysate vaccine engineered to express -gal epitopes (Int
J Oncol, 2015). In this study, for developing clinical application of
this immunotherapy, we investigated the effects of vaccination with human
PC tumor lysate obtained from PC patients, expressing -gal epitopes.Tumor
specimens were obtained from 11 PC patients at the time of surgical
resection. To express -gal epitopes, we cloned the
1,3galactosyltransferas (1,3GT) from a New World Monkey and expressed it
in a soluble form in the yeast expression system of Pichia pastoris.
1,3GT KO mice were immunized with pig tissue to generate anti-Gal Ab in
their sera. These high anti-Gal KO mice were vaccinated intraperitoneally
by either unsynthesized (control group; group C) or -gal tumor lysate
(-gal group; group A).Vaccination with -gal PC tumor lysate elicited
strong immune responses of anti-PC cell IgG and anti-PC TAAs, including
MUC1 and Mesothelin. Productions of anti-PC cell IgG in group A were
832-fold higher than those of group C. Furthermore, productions of
anti-MUC1 and of ant-Mesothelin Ab in group A were 48-fold higher than
those of group C. Expansion of TAAs (MUC1 and Mesothelin)-specific B
cells was significantly higher [MUC1: spots of group A vs. C = 151 vs. 28
(pPancreatic cancer (PC) is a lethal disease that remains one of the most
resistant to traditional therapies. We are in urgent need of other
therapies. Immunotherapy designed to target tumor-associated antigens
(TAAs) is a promising treatment approach for PC. But vaccination against
a single TAA seems to be insufficient. In our previous study, we showed
effectiveness vaccination by whole PC cells, engineered to express -gal
epitopes (Cancer Res, 2010). Subsequently we investigated strong immune
response of tumor lysate vaccine engineered to express -gal epitopes (Int
J Oncol, 2015). In this study, for developing clinical application of
this immunotherapy, we investigated the effects of vaccination with human
PC tumor lysate obtained from PC patients, expressing -gal epitopes.Tumor
specimens were obtained from 11 PC patients at the time of surgical
resection. To express -gal epitopes, we cloned the
1,3galactosyltransferas (1,3GT) from a New World Monkey and expressed it
in a soluble form in the yeast expression system of Pichia pastoris.
1,3GT KO mice were immunized with pig tissue to generate anti-Gal Ab in
their sera. These high anti-Gal KO mice were vaccinated intraperitoneally
by either unsynthesized (control group; group C) or -gal tumor lysate
(-gal group; group A).Vaccination with -gal PC tumor lysate elicited
strong immune responses of anti-PC cell IgG and anti-PC TAAs, including
MUC1 and Mesothelin. Productions of anti-PC cell IgG in group A were
832-fold higher than those of group C. Furthermore, productions of
anti-MUC1 and of ant-Mesothelin Ab in group A were 48-fold higher than
those of group C. Expansion of TAAs (MUC1 and Mesothelin)-specific B
cells was significantly higher [MUC1: spots of group A vs. C = 151 vs. 28
(p<0.001), Mesothelin: 97 vs. 36 (p = 0.03)]. The number of spots of IFN-
secreting T cells in the presence of MUC1 and Mesothelin peptide
stimulation was significantly higher in group A than in group C [MUC1:
828 vs. 146 (pPancreatic cancer (PC) is a lethal disease that remains one
of the most resistant to traditional therapies. We are in urgent need of
other therapies. Immunotherapy designed to target tumor-associated
antigens (TAAs) is a promising treatment approach for PC. But vaccination
against a single TAA seems to be insufficient. In our previous study, we
showed effectiveness vaccination by whole PC cells, engineered to express
-gal epitopes (Cancer Res, 2010). Subsequently we investigated strong
immune response of tumor lysate vaccine engineered to express -gal
epitopes (Int J Oncol, 2015). In this study, for developing clinical
application of this immunotherapy, we investigated the effects of
vaccination with human PC tumor lysate obtained from PC patients,
expressing -gal epitopes.Tumor specimens were obtained from 11 PC
patients at the time of surgical resection. To express -gal epitopes, we
cloned the 1,3galactosyltransferas (1,3GT) from a New World Monkey and
expressed it in a soluble form in the yeast expression system of Pichia
pastoris. 1,3GT KO mice were immunized with pig tissue to generate
anti-Gal Ab in their sera. These high anti-Gal KO mice were vaccinated
intraperitoneally by either unsynthesized (control group; group C) or
-gal tumor lysate (-gal group; group A).Vaccination with -gal PC tumor
lysate elicited strong immune responses of anti-PC cell IgG and anti-PC
TAAs, including MUC1 and Mesothelin. Productions of anti-PC cell IgG in
group A were 832-fold higher than those of group C. Furthermore,
productions of anti-MUC1 and of ant-Mesothelin Ab in group A were 48-fold
higher than those of group C. Expansion of TAAs (MUC1 and
Mesothelin)-specific B cells was significantly higher [MUC1: spots of
group A vs. C = 151 vs. 28 (p<0.001), Mesothelin: 97 vs. 36 (p = 0.03)].
The number of spots of IFN- secreting T cells in the presence of MUC1 and
Mesothelin peptide stimulation was significantly higher in group A than
in group C [MUC1: 828 vs. 146 (p<0.001), Mesothelin: 988 vs. 384 (p =
0.02)].To demonstrate in vivo tumor destruction, an animal experiment was
performed. Splenocytes from vaccinated KO mice were prepared, and then
transferred intraperitoneally into NOD/SCID mice. Followed by
transferring, mice were challenged with 1107 of live PANC-1 cells. In
mice from group A, regrowth of tumors was significantly prevented and
survival period was significantly prolonged [group A vs. C = 95.0 vs.
45.0 days (pPancreatic cancer (PC) is a lethal disease that remains one
of the most resistant to traditional therapies. We are in urgent need of
other therapies. Immunotherapy designed to target tumor-associated
antigens (TAAs) is a promising treatment approach for PC. But vaccination
against a single TAA seems to be insufficient. In our previous study, we
showed effectiveness vaccination by whole PC cells, engineered to express
-gal epitopes (Cancer Res, 2010). Subsequently we investigated strong
immune response of tumor lysate vaccine engineered to express -gal
epitopes (Int J Oncol, 2015). In this study, for developing clinical
application of this immunotherapy, we investigated the effects of
vaccination with human PC tumor lysate obtained from PC patients,
expressing -gal epitopes.Tumor specimens were obtained from 11 PC
patients at the time of surgical resection. To express -gal epitopes, we
cloned the 1,3galactosyltransferas (1,3GT) from a New World Monkey and
expressed it in a soluble form in the yeast expression system of Pichia
pastoris. 1,3GT KO mice were immunized with pig tissue to generate
anti-Gal Ab in their sera. These high anti-Gal KO mice were vaccinated
intraperitoneally by either unsynthesized (control group; group C) or
-gal tumor lysate (-gal group; group A).Vaccination with -gal PC tumor
lysate elicited strong immune responses of anti-PC cell IgG and anti-PC
TAAs, including MUC1 and Mesothelin. Productions of anti-PC cell IgG in
group A were 832-fold higher than those of group C. Furthermore,
productions of anti-MUC1 and of ant-Mesothelin Ab in group A were 48-fold
higher than those of group C. Expansion of TAAs (MUC1 and
Mesothelin)-specific B cells was significantly higher [MUC1: spots of
group A vs. C = 151 vs. 28 (p<0.001), Mesothelin: 97 vs. 36 (p = 0.03)].
The number of spots of IFN- secreting T cells in the presence of MUC1 and
Mesothelin peptide stimulation was significantly higher in group A than
in group C [MUC1: 828 vs. 146 (p<0.001), Mesothelin: 988 vs. 384 (p =
0.02)].To demonstrate in vivo tumor destruction, an animal experiment was
performed. Splenocytes from vaccinated KO mice were prepared, and then
transferred intraperitoneally into NOD/SCID mice. Followed by
transferring, mice were challenged with 1107 of live PANC-1 cells. In
mice from group A, regrowth of tumors was significantly prevented and
survival period was significantly prolonged [group A vs. C = 95.0 vs.
45.0 days (p<0.001)]. In the immunohistochemical analysis, the tumor
created in NOD/SCID mice from group A was shown severe central necrosis
and strong infiltration of CD4+ and CD8+ T cells and macrophages into the
periphery. In contrast, the tumor obtained from NOD/SCID mice of group C
indicated no lymphocytic infiltration.We conclude that the use of human
PC tumor lysate vaccine, remodeled to express -gal epitopes can elicited
strong immune responses to pancreatic cancer.

