Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dual inhibition of the MEK5 and PI3K pathways most effectively
reduces proliferation and migration in triple negative breast cancer cells


Aberrations in the MAPK/extracellular signal-regulated kinase (MEK/ERK)
and phosphoinositide-3-kinase (PI3K) pathways have been linked to
increased proliferation and survival in triple negative breast cancer
(TNBC) cells. It has been proposed that these survival characteristics
are enhanced through compensatory signaling and crosstalk mechanisms.
Promising combinations of MEK and PI3K inhibition have been evaluated in
phase I clinical trials for various cancer types. However, these clinical
trials have had limited efficacy and have yet to encompass the MEK5/ERK5
pathway, which has been shown to promote cell survival. The goal of this
study was to examine the crosstalk between the MEK1/2, MEK5, and PI3K
pathways and determine the most promising combination of the MEK1/2,
ERK5, and PI3K inhibitors, U0126, XMD8-92, and LY294002, respectively, in
a diverse panel of triple negative breast cancer cell lines: BT549,
MDA-MB-231, and MDA-MB-468. Our results indicate that dual inhibition of
the MEK5 and PI3K pathways significantly reduced both proliferation
(45.53%) and migration (39.37%) in MDA-MB-231 TNBC cells. In contrast,
inhibition of ERK1/2 alone or in combination with PI3K or ERK5 inhibition
yielded mixed responses. Interestingly, dual inhibition of the MEK5 and
PI3K pathways increased the activity of the MEK1/2 pathway. These data
suggest that crosstalk between these kinases occurs and dual inhibition
of PI3K and ERK5 may be a novel therapeutic approach for treating TNBC.

