Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: c-Myc is a novel target of prostate cancer cell growth inhibition
by honokiol


Honokiol (HNK) has been shown to inhibit human prostate cancer cell
growth in vitro and in vivo, but the underlying mechanism is not fully
understood. The present study demonstrates that c-Myc, a key mediator of
prostate cancer growth, is a novel target of HNK. Exposure of prostate
cancer cells to plasma achievable concentrations of HNK resulted in a
marked decrease in levels of total and/or phosphorylated c-Myc.
HNK-mediated suppression of c-Myc protein level was due in part to
repression of its transcription or protein degradation. We also observed
down-regulation of c-Myc in tumors from PC-3 xenografted mice upon oral
administration of HNK when compared with control; although the difference
was not significant. Stable overexpression of c-Myc conferred protection
against HNK-mediated inhibition of colony formation and G0-G1 cell cycle
arrest in PC-3 cells. Moreover, HNK suppressed the expression of c-Myc
downstream target genes (Cyclin D1 and EZH2) and these effects were
restored in Myc-overexpressing PC-3 cells. Consistent with these results,
cells with stable knockdown of EZH2 were more sensitive to growth
inhibition by HNK compared with control cells. Because androgen receptor
(AR) is implicated in regulation of c-Myc expression, we explored the
possibility whether AR could affect the expression of c-Myc and its
target genes. Indeed, AR overexpression in PC-3 cells enhanced the
expression of both c-Myc and its target genes. In conclusion, it is
reasonable to postulate that HNK may be effective in retarding growth of
c-Myc-driven prostate cancer. This study was supported by the grants
CA101753 and CA115498 awarded by the National Cancer Institute.

