Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) as molecular marker for bladder,
ovarian, and glioblastoma cancers


Background: BNP has been reported as molecular marker for ovarian cancer.
This study evaluated BNP as a molecular marker for bladder, ovarian,
glioblastoma, and pancreatic cancers. Methods: Serum samples collected at
the time of diagnosis were tested using rapid and quantitative
point-of-care (POC) devices for BNP blood biomarkers and the data was
evaluated using JMP 11.2.1 statistical analysis software. Samples were
collected from bladder cancer patients (48 transitional cell carcinoma of
the bladder), glioblastoma patients (51), pancreatic cancer patients (39
adenocarcinoma, 1 mucinous adenocarcinoma), ovarian cancer patients (24
serous adenocarcinoma, 20 serous papillary adenocarcinoma, 7 endometrioid
adenocarcinoma, 3 clear cell carcinoma, 1 endometrial adenocarcinoma, 1
endometrioid papillary carcinoma, 1 serous papillary carcinoma), and
normal subjects (n = 60). Results: Compared to normal subjects, bladder
patients are more likely to be smokers (p = 0.0064). All four patient
groups were more likely to be hypertensive (bladder, p = 0.0165;
glioblastoma, pBackground: BNP has been reported as molecular marker for
ovarian cancer. This study evaluated BNP as a molecular marker for
bladder, ovarian, glioblastoma, and pancreatic cancers. Methods: Serum
samples collected at the time of diagnosis were tested using rapid and
quantitative point-of-care (POC) devices for BNP blood biomarkers and the
data was evaluated using JMP 11.2.1 statistical analysis software.
Samples were collected from bladder cancer patients (48 transitional cell
carcinoma of the bladder), glioblastoma patients (51), pancreatic cancer
patients (39 adenocarcinoma, 1 mucinous adenocarcinoma), ovarian cancer
patients (24 serous adenocarcinoma, 20 serous papillary adenocarcinoma, 7
endometrioid adenocarcinoma, 3 clear cell carcinoma, 1 endometrial
adenocarcinoma, 1 endometrioid papillary carcinoma, 1 serous papillary
carcinoma), and normal subjects (n = 60). Results: Compared to normal
subjects, bladder patients are more likely to be smokers (p = 0.0064).
All four patient groups were more likely to be hypertensive (bladder, p =
0.0165; glioblastoma, p<0.0001, ovarian, p = 0.0002; pancreatic, p
Background: BNP has been reported as molecular marker for ovarian cancer.
This study evaluated BNP as a molecular marker for bladder, ovarian,
glioblastoma, and pancreatic cancers. Methods: Serum samples collected at
the time of diagnosis were tested using rapid and quantitative
point-of-care (POC) devices for BNP blood biomarkers and the data was
evaluated using JMP 11.2.1 statistical analysis software. Samples were
collected from bladder cancer patients (48 transitional cell carcinoma of
the bladder), glioblastoma patients (51), pancreatic cancer patients (39
adenocarcinoma, 1 mucinous adenocarcinoma), ovarian cancer patients (24
serous adenocarcinoma, 20 serous papillary adenocarcinoma, 7 endometrioid
adenocarcinoma, 3 clear cell carcinoma, 1 endometrial adenocarcinoma, 1
endometrioid papillary carcinoma, 1 serous papillary carcinoma), and
normal subjects (n = 60). Results: Compared to normal subjects, bladder
patients are more likely to be smokers (p = 0.0064). All four patient
groups were more likely to be hypertensive (bladder, p = 0.0165;
glioblastoma, p<0.0001, ovarian, p = 0.0002; pancreatic, p < 0.0001). No
significant differences among the groups versus normal for weight were
observed. Significant differences between the groups versus normal for
BMI (ovarian, p = 0.0061), age (bladder, p = 0.0006; pancreatic =
0.0085), BNP (ovarian, p = 0.0012; glioblastoma, p = 0.0016; bladder, p =
0.0112) were noted. There was positive correlation between age and BNP
level among all four cancer groups (bladder, p = 0.0133; glioblastoma, p
= 0.0629; ovarian, p = 0.0304; pancreatic, p = 0.0172); whereas there was
a negative correlation between age and BNP level among normal controls (p
= 0.0109). Age-adjusted BNP level was highly significant different versus
normal (bladder, p Background: BNP has been reported as molecular marker
for ovarian cancer. This study evaluated BNP as a molecular marker for
bladder, ovarian, glioblastoma, and pancreatic cancers. Methods: Serum
samples collected at the time of diagnosis were tested using rapid and
quantitative point-of-care (POC) devices for BNP blood biomarkers and the
data was evaluated using JMP 11.2.1 statistical analysis software.
Samples were collected from bladder cancer patients (48 transitional cell
carcinoma of the bladder), glioblastoma patients (51), pancreatic cancer
patients (39 adenocarcinoma, 1 mucinous adenocarcinoma), ovarian cancer
patients (24 serous adenocarcinoma, 20 serous papillary adenocarcinoma, 7
endometrioid adenocarcinoma, 3 clear cell carcinoma, 1 endometrial
adenocarcinoma, 1 endometrioid papillary carcinoma, 1 serous papillary
carcinoma), and normal subjects (n = 60). Results: Compared to normal
subjects, bladder patients are more likely to be smokers (p = 0.0064).
All four patient groups were more likely to be hypertensive (bladder, p =
0.0165; glioblastoma, p<0.0001, ovarian, p = 0.0002; pancreatic, p <
0.0001). No significant differences among the groups versus normal for
weight were observed. Significant differences between the groups versus
normal for BMI (ovarian, p = 0.0061), age (bladder, p = 0.0006;
pancreatic = 0.0085), BNP (ovarian, p = 0.0012; glioblastoma, p = 0.0016;
bladder, p = 0.0112) were noted. There was positive correlation between
age and BNP level among all four cancer groups (bladder, p = 0.0133;
glioblastoma, p = 0.0629; ovarian, p = 0.0304; pancreatic, p = 0.0172);
whereas there was a negative correlation between age and BNP level among
normal controls (p = 0.0109). Age-adjusted BNP level was highly
significant different versus normal (bladder, p <0.0001; ovarian, p =
0.0013; glioblastoma, p = 0.0047). Neither BNP nor age-adjusted BNP level
was significantly different from normal for pancreatic cancer patients.
Hypertensive condition had no impact on BNP or age-adjusted BNP.
Conclusions: Bladder, ovarian, and glioblastoma cancers are associated
with significant reduction in BNP and age-adjusted BNP blood levels.
Pancreatic cancer was an exception. BNP level could be useful in the
monitoring of treatment efficacy in which the BNP POC device described
here would be highly appropriate due to its ease in deployment at the
patient's home or doctor's office.

