Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel derivative of benzoxazole enhances radiosensitivity of
human colon cancer cells through p53-mediated G2/M arrest and
mitochondrial apoptotic pathway


The tumor suppressor p53 plays a critical role in cell cycle regulation
and apoptotic cell death, and its activation can sensitize cancer cells
to radio- or chemotherapy. To identify small molecules that induce
apoptotic cell death via increasing p53 transcriptional activity, we
designed and synthesized 44 benzoxazole derivative small molecule
compounds. Using a cell-based screening with p53-responsive luciferase
reporter assay system of benzoxazole derivatives, we found AU14022, which
significantly increased p53 transcriptional activity in a concentration
dependent manner. Treatment of AU14022 increased p53 protein expression,
its phosphorylation on serine 15 and its target p21 gene/protein
expression and induced apoptotic cell death measured by FACS analysis
using Annexin V/PI double staining in wild-type p53 HCT116 human colon
cancer cells but not in p53 knockout HCT116 cells. Furthermore, treatment
of HCT116 cells with AU14022 exhibited mitochondrial dysfunction
including bcl-2 family modulation and cytochrome c release. Combination
treatment of AU14022 and ionizing radiation (IR) synergistically induced
apoptotic cell death, compared to IR or AU14022 alone. Further
investigation demonstrated that cell cycles are significantly arrested at
G2/M phase, and marked inductions of p21 protein expression and
phosphorylation of Chk1 protein and a decrease of cyclin B1 protein
expression were observed by treatment of AU14022 alone and combination
treatment with AU14022 and IR. Our findings indicate that AU14022 induced
apoptosis through p53-mediated cell cycle arrest with mitochondrial
dysfunction, leading to enhanced radiosensitivity of colon cancer cells.
These results provide a basis for the further investigations required for
its assessment as a promising anticancer agent.

