Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effect of voluntary running on metastasis in a mouse model of
breast cancer


Introduction: Emerging evidence states that regular physical exercise
provides a risk reduction for breast cancer by approximately 25%. In
addition, recent studies suggest that physical activity may also have an
effect on recurrence and mortality. Mouse models are suitable tools to
study anti-neoplastic mechanisms.Aim: to evaluate the effect of voluntary
running on tumor initiation, growth and metastasis in the Polyoma Middle
T (PyMT) model of breast cancer.Methods: PyMT mice were housed with
access either to wirelessly recording running wheels or locked control
wheels. Running distances and tumor volumes were recorded. At 12 weeks,
mice were sacrificed. Mammary glands were histologically staged and
pulmonary metastases were quantified. In a follow up study, pre-trained
mice were injected intravenously with tumor cells derived from the PyMT
model and after an additional 10 weeks of voluntary running, pulmonary
metastases were quantified.Results: PyMT mice ran significantly more than
wildtype mice (6.4 vs 3.4 km/day). No significant effects of voluntary
running on tumor- initiation, volume or stage were found. However, a
trend for reduced metastasis was observed. After intravenous injections
of tumor cells, runners had a significantly lower pulmonary metastasis
frequency than non-runners.Conclusion: In this aggressive breast cancer
model, an average of 6 km/day of voluntary running did not induce any
effect on tumor formation or growth. However, the findings suggest that
physical activity has impact on the metastatic process.

