Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: WAC: A candidate tumor suppressor gene in colorectal cancer


Our lab recently performed a DNA transposon forward genetic screen in
mice that was designed to identify low-frequency mutations that
contribute to colorectal cancer (CRC) initiation and progression. Results
from this screen identified the WW domain-containing adaptor with
coiled-coil (WAC) gene as a top DNA transposon insertion site. WAC has
previously been implicated in several cellular processes including amino
acid starvation-induced autophagy, golgi biogenesis, and transcription
associated histone modification but has never before been linked to
tumorigenesis. Transposon mutagenesis screens performed by others (Takeda
et al. Nature Genetics 2015) have also identified Wac as a common
insertion site, a result that further implicates WAC as a candidate CRC
driver gene. Analyses of transposon insertion patterns within Wac predict
loss of gene function and a role as a tumor suppressor. Soft agar colony
formation assays reveal that shRNA mediated silencing of Wac cooperates
with Apc mutations in mouse colorectal cells to promote cellular
transformation. Additional colony formation assays using immortalized
human colonic epithelial cells and the adenoma derived AAC1 cell line
also shows that silencing WAC is protumorigenic. Using a zebrafish model
we demonstrated that overexpression of wild type but not
cancer-associated mutant forms of WAC induce expression of the cell cycle
inhibitor p21, which suggests that loss of WAC may lead to uncontrolled
cellular proliferation. Finally, using publicly available mutation data
we determined that WAC is somatically mutated in both breast and lung
cancers; a finding that indicates WAC may serve a critical tumor
suppressive role in several tissues. Currently we are developing a
conditional knockout mouse to further investigate the role of WAC in CRC
tumor formation.

