Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Lipid tethering to enable real-time imaging of breast tumor cell
cytoskeletal dynamics and rapid drug testing in free-floating metastatic
microenvironments


Free-floating tumor cells located in the peripheral circulation of cancer
patients, known as circulating tumor cells (CTCs), play an important role
in cancer and have become key targets for studying metastasis. The
presence of CTCs in the bloodstream or lymphatics correlates with
decreased cancer patient survival and provides a minimally invasive
method to study disease progression and treatment response. Understanding
the molecular characteristics and functional properties of CTCs have been
impeded by the challenges of imaging CTCs under conditions that model the
free-floating microenvironments of the circulation. Upon
extracellular-matrix (ECM) detachment, breast tumor cells form
tubulin-based protrusions known as microtentacles (McTNs) that play a
role in the aggregation and re-attachment of tumor cells to increase
their metastatic efficiency. In this study, we have designed a strategy
to spatially immobilize ECM-detached tumor cells within a microfluidic
device while maintaining their free-floating character. We use cytophobic
polyelectrolyte multilayers deposited on microfluidic substrates to
prevent tumor cell adhesion and the addition of lipid moieties to tether
tumor cells to these surfaces through interactions with the cell
membrane. This approach enables high-resolution time-lapse microscopy of
McTNs on viable free-floating tumor cells and real-time analysis of
dynamic cellular features. In addition, tethering makes it now possible
to rapidly measure drug responses of tumor cells in free-floating
microenvironments to select effective therapies and avoid drugs that
could inadvertently increase metastasis. The ability to image tumor cells
in the absence of ECM attachment can immensely enhance our understanding
of CTCs under conditions that better recapitulate the free-floating
microenvironments that tumor cells encounter during metastasis.

