Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bumped kinase inhibitors: A novel therapy for castration-resistant
prostate cancer


BACKGROUND: Prostate cancer (PCa) is the second most common cancer in men
and one of the leading causes of cancer death. Resistance to current PCa
therapies, including androgen deprivation, occurs in almost all patients
leading to development of castration resistant prostate cancer (CRPC).
Resistance is associated with expression of splice variants of the
androgen receptor (AR-Vs) that are constitutively active. Therapies that
indirectly target AR by inhibiting factors important in regulating AR
levels and activity may be the most successful against these
constitutively active variants. We originally designed bumped kinase
inhibitors (BKIs) to inhibit Cryptosporidium sp. Further examination
demonstrated that this class of BKIs also inhibits members of the
mammalian protein kinase D (PKD) family. In prostate cancer, expression
of all PKD isoforms has been shown to increase with cancer progression.
Further, PKDs are implicated in PCa replication, migration, invasion, and
progression. In regard to AR activity, studies suggest that PKDs in
conjunction with heat shock protein 27 (Hsp27) are regulators of AR
transport into and out of the nucleus as well as AR transcriptional
activity. Such studies, suggest that targeting PKDs would affect AR
signaling and thus be a promising anti-prostate cancer therapy.OBJECTIVE:
To demonstrate that BKIs targeting PKD isoforms inhibit CRPC.RESULTS:
Immunohistochemical staining of a tissue microarray (representing 50+
patients) with a PKD antibody demonstrated that PKD expression increased
with tumor progression. On a screen of over 80 human protein kinases our
BKIs inhibited members of the PKD family at low nM concentrations.
Furthermore, several optimized BKI compounds, including BKI-1553, were
screened against >360 human protein kinases using Cellzomes inhibitor
profiling methodology and only PKDs were found to be targeted
significantly. This is unique from previously published BKIs, which are
PKD inhibitors but also inhibit other human protein kinases such as
mutated Src. In vitro our BKIs decreased proliferation of AR positive PCa
cell lines but not AR negative lines. We next examined the effects of our
lead compound, BKI-1553, on AR transactivation using the LNCaP cell line.
BKI-1553 treated cells had decreased ARE-luciferase reporter activity.
Interestingly, we also found that BKI-1553 decreased mRNA and protein
levels of AR-FL and AR-V7 in these cells. In toxicity studies, BKI-1553
was non-toxic in three species at oral doses that achieved therapeutic
levels. In vivo BKI-1553 significantly decreased growth of two PCa
xenografts (LNCaP95, p BACKGROUND: Prostate cancer (PCa) is the second
most common cancer in men and one of the leading causes of cancer death.
Resistance to current PCa therapies, including androgen deprivation,
occurs in almost all patients leading to development of castration
resistant prostate cancer (CRPC). Resistance is associated with
expression of splice variants of the androgen receptor (AR-Vs) that are
constitutively active. Therapies that indirectly target AR by inhibiting
factors important in regulating AR levels and activity may be the most
successful against these constitutively active variants. We originally
designed bumped kinase inhibitors (BKIs) to inhibit Cryptosporidium sp.
Further examination demonstrated that this class of BKIs also inhibits
members of the mammalian protein kinase D (PKD) family. In prostate
cancer, expression of all PKD isoforms has been shown to increase with
cancer progression. Further, PKDs are implicated in PCa replication,
migration, invasion, and progression. In regard to AR activity, studies
suggest that PKDs in conjunction with heat shock protein 27 (Hsp27) are
regulators of AR transport into and out of the nucleus as well as AR
transcriptional activity. Such studies, suggest that targeting PKDs would
affect AR signaling and thus be a promising anti-prostate cancer
therapy.OBJECTIVE: To demonstrate that BKIs targeting PKD isoforms
inhibit CRPC.RESULTS: Immunohistochemical staining of a tissue microarray
(representing 50+ patients) with a PKD antibody demonstrated that PKD
expression increased with tumor progression. On a screen of over 80 human
protein kinases our BKIs inhibited members of the PKD family at low nM
concentrations. Furthermore, several optimized BKI compounds, including
BKI-1553, were screened against >360 human protein kinases using
Cellzomes inhibitor profiling methodology and only PKDs were found to be
targeted significantly. This is unique from previously published BKIs,
which are PKD inhibitors but also inhibit other human protein kinases
such as mutated Src. In vitro our BKIs decreased proliferation of AR
positive PCa cell lines but not AR negative lines. We next examined the
effects of our lead compound, BKI-1553, on AR transactivation using the
LNCaP cell line. BKI-1553 treated cells had decreased ARE-luciferase
reporter activity. Interestingly, we also found that BKI-1553 decreased
mRNA and protein levels of AR-FL and AR-V7 in these cells. In toxicity
studies, BKI-1553 was non-toxic in three species at oral doses that
achieved therapeutic levels. In vivo BKI-1553 significantly decreased
growth of two PCa xenografts (LNCaP95, p < 0.005 and LuCaP35, p
BACKGROUND: Prostate cancer (PCa) is the second most common cancer in men
and one of the leading causes of cancer death. Resistance to current PCa
therapies, including androgen deprivation, occurs in almost all patients
leading to development of castration resistant prostate cancer (CRPC).
Resistance is associated with expression of splice variants of the
androgen receptor (AR-Vs) that are constitutively active. Therapies that
indirectly target AR by inhibiting factors important in regulating AR
levels and activity may be the most successful against these
constitutively active variants. We originally designed bumped kinase
inhibitors (BKIs) to inhibit Cryptosporidium sp. Further examination
demonstrated that this class of BKIs also inhibits members of the
mammalian protein kinase D (PKD) family. In prostate cancer, expression
of all PKD isoforms has been shown to increase with cancer progression.
Further, PKDs are implicated in PCa replication, migration, invasion, and
progression. In regard to AR activity, studies suggest that PKDs in
conjunction with heat shock protein 27 (Hsp27) are regulators of AR
transport into and out of the nucleus as well as AR transcriptional
activity. Such studies, suggest that targeting PKDs would affect AR
signaling and thus be a promising anti-prostate cancer therapy.OBJECTIVE:
To demonstrate that BKIs targeting PKD isoforms inhibit CRPC.RESULTS:
Immunohistochemical staining of a tissue microarray (representing 50+
patients) with a PKD antibody demonstrated that PKD expression increased
with tumor progression. On a screen of over 80 human protein kinases our
BKIs inhibited members of the PKD family at low nM concentrations.
Furthermore, several optimized BKI compounds, including BKI-1553, were
screened against >360 human protein kinases using Cellzomes inhibitor
profiling methodology and only PKDs were found to be targeted
significantly. This is unique from previously published BKIs, which are
PKD inhibitors but also inhibit other human protein kinases such as
mutated Src. In vitro our BKIs decreased proliferation of AR positive PCa
cell lines but not AR negative lines. We next examined the effects of our
lead compound, BKI-1553, on AR transactivation using the LNCaP cell line.
BKI-1553 treated cells had decreased ARE-luciferase reporter activity.
Interestingly, we also found that BKI-1553 decreased mRNA and protein
levels of AR-FL and AR-V7 in these cells. In toxicity studies, BKI-1553
was non-toxic in three species at oral doses that achieved therapeutic
levels. In vivo BKI-1553 significantly decreased growth of two PCa
xenografts (LNCaP95, p < 0.005 and LuCaP35, p < 0.01).SUMMARY: Since we
found that the PKD inhibitor BKI-1553 selectively inhibits AR positive
prostate cancers, and it is thought that the majority of CRPC are AR
driven, BKI-1553 could be a novel therapy for cancers that are resistant
to currently available therapies.

