Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: External validation of lysyl oxidase-like 2 (LOXL2) as a novel
prognostic marker for gastro-entero-pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors
(GEP-NET)


Aims: LOXL2 is a protein with a key role in epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition (EMT). EMT was established as an early event in GEP-NET. LOXL2
emerged as a new prognostic marker in the analysis of a 115 GEP-NET cases
(training cohort (TC); Barriuso et al, ASCO 2014). Our main objective was
to validate LOXL2 expression by immunohistochemistry (IHC) in an
independent cohort.Methods: Formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded samples
(FFPEs) of consecutive GEP-NET patients from 1999 to 2010 who underwent
surgery and their clinical data were collected from a different Spanish
institution (validation cohort (VC)). Tissue microarrays were constructed
from two non-necrotic areas of tumour foci. LOXL2 expression was studied
by IHC and classified as presence (P) vs absence (A). Log rank test and
cox regression were used to study Disease Free Survival (DFS) and Overall
Survival (OS) in the VC and the combined series (TC+VC; n = 206).
Univariate (UVA) and multivariable analysis (MVA) were performed.Results:
A total of 91 FFPE samples were included in the VC. Median follow up was
77 months. Tumor grade was differently distributed between the TC and the
VC (pAims: LOXL2 is a protein with a key role in
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT). EMT was established as an
early event in GEP-NET. LOXL2 emerged as a new prognostic marker in the
analysis of a 115 GEP-NET cases (training cohort (TC); Barriuso et al,
ASCO 2014). Our main objective was to validate LOXL2 expression by
immunohistochemistry (IHC) in an independent cohort.Methods:
Formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded samples (FFPEs) of consecutive GEP-NET
patients from 1999 to 2010 who underwent surgery and their clinical data
were collected from a different Spanish institution (validation cohort
(VC)). Tissue microarrays were constructed from two non-necrotic areas of
tumour foci. LOXL2 expression was studied by IHC and classified as
presence (P) vs absence (A). Log rank test and cox regression were used
to study Disease Free Survival (DFS) and Overall Survival (OS) in the VC
and the combined series (TC+VC; n = 206). Univariate (UVA) and
multivariable analysis (MVA) were performed.Results: A total of 91 FFPE
samples were included in the VC. Median follow up was 77 months. Tumor
grade was differently distributed between the TC and the VC (p<0.001)
while stage was not (p = 0.195). LOXL2 P was associated with better OS (p
= 0.023) and showed a trend for better DFS (p = 0.066) in the VC. DFS at
3 years was 85% in LOXL2-P group vs 45% in LOXL2-A group. OS at 5 years
was 82% vs 51% respectively. LOXL2 P was associated with better DFS and
OS (pAims: LOXL2 is a protein with a key role in
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT). EMT was established as an
early event in GEP-NET. LOXL2 emerged as a new prognostic marker in the
analysis of a 115 GEP-NET cases (training cohort (TC); Barriuso et al,
ASCO 2014). Our main objective was to validate LOXL2 expression by
immunohistochemistry (IHC) in an independent cohort.Methods:
Formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded samples (FFPEs) of consecutive GEP-NET
patients from 1999 to 2010 who underwent surgery and their clinical data
were collected from a different Spanish institution (validation cohort
(VC)). Tissue microarrays were constructed from two non-necrotic areas of
tumour foci. LOXL2 expression was studied by IHC and classified as
presence (P) vs absence (A). Log rank test and cox regression were used
to study Disease Free Survival (DFS) and Overall Survival (OS) in the VC
and the combined series (TC+VC; n = 206). Univariate (UVA) and
multivariable analysis (MVA) were performed.Results: A total of 91 FFPE
samples were included in the VC. Median follow up was 77 months. Tumor
grade was differently distributed between the TC and the VC (p<0.001)
while stage was not (p = 0.195). LOXL2 P was associated with better OS (p
= 0.023) and showed a trend for better DFS (p = 0.066) in the VC. DFS at
3 years was 85% in LOXL2-P group vs 45% in LOXL2-A group. OS at 5 years
was 82% vs 51% respectively. LOXL2 P was associated with better DFS and
OS (p<0.001) when the combined series was analysed. LOXL2 remained as an
independent prognostic factor for OS adjusted for grade and stage in the
MVA in both settings.Conclusion: Our results validated LOXL2 as a novel
prognostic biomarker candidate for GEP-NETs in an independent cohort.
Further testing in prospective studies to depict its potential value in
the clinic is warranted. LOXL2 could also represent an actionable target
in this scenario.
Cox regression for LOXL2. MVA adjusted for grade and stage. Hazard
ratios, 95% confidence intervals and p values. *statistically significant
differences.

