Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Using multiplex immunoassays for profiling the circulating and
tissue angiogenic biomarkers in mouse and human cancer


Monitoring the expression levels of multiple pro- and anti-angiogenic
factors in circulation and tumor microenvironment is crucial in examining
the role of angiogenesis in cancer pathological processes or in
identifying potential biomarkers for oncology drug development. The
Luminex xMAP technology allows simultaneous detection of multiple
proteins in a single sample and has been used widely in cancer biomarker
discovery. Using the Luminex xMAP technology, we developed two Human
Angiogenesis Panels (17-plex and 20-plex) and a Mouse Angiogenesis Panel
(27-plex) for the simultaneous detection of multiple angiogenic
biomarkers in less than 50 L of human or mouse samples. We report here
the protein biomarker profiles of these 37 human angiogenic factors in 1)
serum samples, collected from breast cancer and colorectal cancer
patients and normal donors, 2) tumor extracts, collected from breast
tumor and colorectal tumor extracts and their matched adjacent normal
tissue, 3) conditioned media in cultured tumor cells and stromal cells,
and in addition, the protein biomarker profiles of 27 mouse angiogenic
factors in the conditioned media of various mouse tumor cells and stromal
cells. For example, of the 37 human angiogenesis serum protein markers
tested, 16 biomarkers [angiopoietin-2 (ANGPT-2), EGF, endoglin,
follistatin, G-CSF, HGF, PLGF, sAXL, PDGF-AB/BB, osteopontin (OPN),
sHGFR/c-Met, suPAR, sTie-2, sHer2, soluble neuropilin-1 (sNRP-1), and
tenascin-C] showed significant difference in expression levels between
normal and breast cancer serum samples (pMonitoring the expression levels
of multiple pro- and anti-angiogenic factors in circulation and tumor
microenvironment is crucial in examining the role of angiogenesis in
cancer pathological processes or in identifying potential biomarkers for
oncology drug development. The Luminex xMAP technology allows
simultaneous detection of multiple proteins in a single sample and has
been used widely in cancer biomarker discovery. Using the Luminex xMAP
technology, we developed two Human Angiogenesis Panels (17-plex and
20-plex) and a Mouse Angiogenesis Panel (27-plex) for the simultaneous
detection of multiple angiogenic biomarkers in less than 50 L of human or
mouse samples. We report here the protein biomarker profiles of these 37
human angiogenic factors in 1) serum samples, collected from breast
cancer and colorectal cancer patients and normal donors, 2) tumor
extracts, collected from breast tumor and colorectal tumor extracts and
their matched adjacent normal tissue, 3) conditioned media in cultured
tumor cells and stromal cells, and in addition, the protein biomarker
profiles of 27 mouse angiogenic factors in the conditioned media of
various mouse tumor cells and stromal cells. For example, of the 37 human
angiogenesis serum protein markers tested, 16 biomarkers [angiopoietin-2
(ANGPT-2), EGF, endoglin, follistatin, G-CSF, HGF, PLGF, sAXL,
PDGF-AB/BB, osteopontin (OPN), sHGFR/c-Met, suPAR, sTie-2, sHer2, soluble
neuropilin-1 (sNRP-1), and tenascin-C] showed significant difference in
expression levels between normal and breast cancer serum samples (p<0.05)
and 13 biomarkers [ANGPT-2, EGF, PLGF, sAXL, sHer3, OPN, thrombospondin-2
(TSP-2), sHGFR/c-Met, suPAR, sTie-2, sNRP-1, sIL-6R, and tenascin-C]
showed differential expression levels between normal and colorectal
cancer serum samples (pMonitoring the expression levels of multiple pro-
and anti-angiogenic factors in circulation and tumor microenvironment is
crucial in examining the role of angiogenesis in cancer pathological
processes or in identifying potential biomarkers for oncology drug
development. The Luminex xMAP technology allows simultaneous detection of
multiple proteins in a single sample and has been used widely in cancer
biomarker discovery. Using the Luminex xMAP technology, we developed two
Human Angiogenesis Panels (17-plex and 20-plex) and a Mouse Angiogenesis
Panel (27-plex) for the simultaneous detection of multiple angiogenic
biomarkers in less than 50 L of human or mouse samples. We report here
the protein biomarker profiles of these 37 human angiogenic factors in 1)
serum samples, collected from breast cancer and colorectal cancer
patients and normal donors, 2) tumor extracts, collected from breast
tumor and colorectal tumor extracts and their matched adjacent normal
tissue, 3) conditioned media in cultured tumor cells and stromal cells,
and in addition, the protein biomarker profiles of 27 mouse angiogenic
factors in the conditioned media of various mouse tumor cells and stromal
cells. For example, of the 37 human angiogenesis serum protein markers
tested, 16 biomarkers [angiopoietin-2 (ANGPT-2), EGF, endoglin,
follistatin, G-CSF, HGF, PLGF, sAXL, PDGF-AB/BB, osteopontin (OPN),
sHGFR/c-Met, suPAR, sTie-2, sHer2, soluble neuropilin-1 (sNRP-1), and
tenascin-C] showed significant difference in expression levels between
normal and breast cancer serum samples (p<0.05) and 13 biomarkers
[ANGPT-2, EGF, PLGF, sAXL, sHer3, OPN, thrombospondin-2 (TSP-2),
sHGFR/c-Met, suPAR, sTie-2, sNRP-1, sIL-6R, and tenascin-C] showed
differential expression levels between normal and colorectal cancer serum
samples (p<0.05). Altogether, the results of this study demonstrate the
utility of these human and mouse angiogenesis multiplex panels as a
useful tool in studying circulating and tissue protein biomarker profiles
in cancer research.

