Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Krppel-like factor 8 activates the transcription of C-X-C cytokine
receptor type 4 to promote breast cancer cell invasion, transendothelial
migration and metastasis


Krppel-like factor 8 (KLF8) has been strongly implicated in breast cancer
metastasis. However, the underlying mechanisms remain largely unknown.
Here we report a novel signaling from KLF8 to C-X-C cytokine receptor
type 4 (CXCR4) in breast cancer. Overexpression of KLF8 in MCF-10A cells
induced CXCR4 expression at both mRNA and protein levels, as determined
by quantitative real-time PCR and immunoblotting. This induction was well
correlated with increased Boyden chamber migration, matrigel invasion and
transendothelial migration (TEM) of the cells towards the ligand CXCL12.
On the other hand, knockdown of KLF8 in MDA-MB-231 cells reduced CXCR4
expression associated with decreased cell migration, invasion and TEM
towards CXCL12. Histological and database mining analyses of independent
cohorts of patient tissue microarrays revealed a correlation of aberrant
co-elevation of KLF8 and CXCR4 with metastatic potential. Promoter
analysis indicated that KLF8 directly binds and activates the human CXCR4
gene promoter. Interestingly, a CXCR4-dependent activation of focal
adhesion kinase (FAK), a known upregulator of KLF8, was highly induced by
CXCL12 treatment in KLF8-overexpressing, but not KLF8 deficient cells.
This activation of FAK in turns induced a further increase in KLF8
expression. Xenograft studies showed that overexpression of CXCR4, but
not a dominant-negative mutant of it, in the MDA-MB-231 cells prevented
the invasive growth of primary tumor and lung metastasis from inhibition
by knockdown of KLF8. These results collectively suggest a critical role
for a previously unidentified feed-forward signaling wheel made of KLF8,
CXCR4 and FAK in promoting breast cancer metastasis and shed new light on
potentially more effective anti-cancer strategies.

