Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cancer stem cell survival postradiation in medulloblastomas
requires YAP, YB1, and IGF2


Sonic hedgehog (Shh)-mediated medulloblastoma growth requires IGF2
(Insulin-like Growth Factor 2) and we recently showed that Yes Associated
Protein (YAP1) induces IGF2 expression by Y-box protein 1(YB1) in
Shh-stimulated cerebellar granule neural precursors (CGNPs), proposed
cells-of-origin for the Shh molecular subclass of medulloblastoma, and
mouse Shh-medulloblastoma cells. We found elevated levels of YAP1, YB1
and IGF2 in tumor cells occupying the peri-vascular niche, a
microenvironmental niche proposed to house so-called tumor re-populating
cells that survive radiation and contribute to medulloblastoma
recurrence, which is fatal. We have developed an ex vivo approach using
organotypic brain tumor slice cultures to better understand how YAP1,
YB1, and IGF2 regulate peri-vascular niche cell survival post-radiation.
We observed that the perivascular niche cell population expressing stem
cell markers increases markedly following exposure to radiation.
Additionally, on targeting any component of the YAP1-YB1-IGF2 axis we
observed increased level of cell death within the niche and compromised
cancer stem cell niche expansion post-radiation. These findings strongly
indicate that therapeutic approaches intended to impair the function of
this pathway could be used to reduce the use of cranio-spinal radiation
of medulloblastoma patients, which causes life-long side effects that
drastically impair quality of life.

