Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mechanism-based combination strategies for BET inhibitors in NUT
midline carcinoma


NUT midline carcinoma (NMC) is a highly aggressive squamous cell cancer
that responds poorly to standard chemotherapuetic approaches. NMC is
characterized by translocations involving the NUT (nuclear protein in
testes) protein, which in a majority of cases is fused to the BET
(bromodomain and extra-terminal) protein family members BRD3 or BRD4. BET
proteins (BRD2, BRD3, BRD4, BRDT) are epigenetic readers that modulate
expression of genes involved in cell growth and oncogenesis. Selective
small molecule inhibitors of BET proteins, such as the GSK I-BETs
(I-BET762, I-BET151), abrogate binding of BET proteins to acetylated
chromatin and inhibit the expression of BET target genes. Here we
describe the activity in I-BET762 and other BET inhibitors in
pre-clinical models of NMC. Consistent with previous reports, we observe
profound growth inhibition and cytotoxicity in NMC cell lines in vitro,
as well as significant tumor growth inhibition or tumor regression in
cell line xenografts of NMC. I-BET762 treatment in NMC cell lines results
in transcriptional changes affecting MYC and other pathways critical for
cancer cell growth. We explore the contribution of these changes to the
anti-proliferative effects observed in NMC models, and identify rational
combinations to improve upon the efficacy of I-BET762 as a monotherapy.
Taken together, our data highlight novel mechanisms through which BET
inhibitors impact NMC cell growth and survival, and suggest potential
treatment strategies to improve response in this highly aggressive
disease. All studies were conducted in accordance with the GSK Policy on
the Care, Welfare and Treatment of Laboratory Animals and were reviewed
by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee either at GSK or by
the ethical review process at the institution where the work was
performed.

