Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Creating the tumor microenvironment for effective immunotherapy:
Antitumor activity of intratumoral IMO-2125, a TLR9 agonist is further
enhanced by inhibition of indoleamine-pyrrole 2,3-dioxygenase (IDO)


In recent years, understanding of tumor immunology has led to significant
advances in cancer immunotherapy. New approaches include selective
blockade of checkpoints, harnessing tumor infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs)
and use of intratumoral oncolytic viruses. Evolving data has continued to
provide evidence that the tumor microenvironment (TME) is critical for
effective immunotherapy. In preclinical studies, intratumoral delivery
(i.t.) of the Toll-like receptor (TLR) 9 agonist IMO-2125 resulted in
increased IFN, IL-12, Th1 responses, TIL infiltration and dose-dependent
antitumor activity against treated and distant tumors. However, gene
expression analysis of the treated tumors showed that levels of IDO1 was
increased, thereby hampering the optimal TME. We hypothesized that
combination of i.t. IMO-2125 and an IDO1 inhibitor would lead to
modulation of the TME and more potent antitumor activity versus either
agent alone.In the present study, we evaluated the antitumor activity of
i.t. IMO-2125 in combination with an IDO1 inhibitor in a murine syngeneic
colon carcinoma CT26 model. Each BALB/c mouse was implanted with two
tumors: subcutaneous solid tumor and lung metastatic tumor by s.c. (1107)
and i.v. (3106) inoculation with CT26 cells. Treatment was initiated when
tumor nodules reached 100-200 mm3 with 2.5 mg/kg intratumoral IMO-2125
and 75 mg/kg oral IDO1 inhibitor. All treatments were well tolerated. In
the placebo-treated group, the tumor volume was 1039 262 mm3 (mean SD).
In groups treated with IMO-2125 and IDO1 inhibitor, the tumor volume was
369 216 mm3 (64% tumor growth inhibition, TGI) and 745 252 mm3 (27% TGI),
respectively. In the group treated with the combination of IMO-2125 and
IDO1 inhibitor, the tumor volume was 45 75 mm3, showing 95% tumor growth
inhibition. Similar treatment-related results were observed in the lung
nodules, with the combination group showing a 76% reduction in the number
of lung tumor nodules over PBS control. Tumors treated with IMO-2125
alone showed 90-fold increase in IDO1 expression which was inhibited 47%
in tumors treated with a combination of IMO-2125 and IDO1 inhibitor. The
inhibition of IDO1 in combination with i.t. IMO-2125 also resulted in
increased TILs.Overall, these preclinical data showed that combination of
i.t. IMO-2125 and an IDO1 inhibitor stimulated systemic immune responses
and primed the TME to enable potent antitumor activity. In previous
preclinical studies IMO-2125 has shown potent antitumor activity in
multiple tumor models in combination with anti-CTLA4 and anti-PD1 agents.

