Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of ACMG guideline classified variants in 180 cancer and
incidental non-cancer genes in families with breast/ovarian cancer


Sequencing tests assaying panels of genes or whole exomes are widely
available for cancer risk evaluation. However, methods for classification
of variants resulting from this testing are not well studied. We
evaluated the ability of American College of Medical Genetics and
Genomics (ACMG) guidelines to define the rate of mutations and variants
of uncertain significance (VUS) in 180 medically relevant genes,
including all ACMG designated reportable cancer and non-cancer genes, in
individuals who met guidelines for hereditary cancer risk evaluation. We
performed whole exome sequencing in 404 individuals in 257 families and
classified 1640 variants from these genes. Potentially clinically
actionable (likely-pathogenic/pathogenic, LP/P) versus nonactionable
(VUS/likely-benign/benign) calls were 92% and 88% concordant with locus
specific databases and Clinvar, respectively. LP/P mutations were
identified in 11 of 25 breast cancer susceptibility genes in 27 BRCA1/2
negative families (11%). Evaluation of 84 additional autosomal dominant
cancer susceptibility genes identified LP/P mutations in only four
additional families (1.7%), suggesting they do not influence risk in this
cohort. However, individuals from nine of 257 families (3.5%) had
incidental LP/P mutations in 32 non-cancer disease genes, and 7% of
individuals were monoallelic carriers of an LP/P mutation in 39 autosomal
recessive cancer syndrome genes. Furthermore, 90% of individuals had at
least one VUS. In summary, these data support the clinical utility of
ACMG variant classification guidelines. In addition, evaluation of
extended panels of cancer genes in breast/ovarian cancer families leads
to only an incremental clinical benefit but substantially increases the
complexity of the results.

