Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Adaptive mechanisms upon LRP1 repression: Impact on
sphingosine-1-phosphate-mediated signalling and migration of brain
endothelial cells


Switches in the sphingolipid metabolism have recently been associated
with oncogenic transformation, and a role for the low density lipoprotein
receptor related protein (LRP1) in the sphingosine-1-phosphate (S1P)
proangiogenic signalling inferred. Although S1P is a key determinant of
blood-brain barrier (BBB) permeability, the interdependent signalling
crosstalk with LRP1 in brain endothelial cells (EC) remains unclear.
Here, we tested whether any adaptive LRP1/S1P interdependence mechanisms
are required in a SV40-immortalized human brain microvascular EC (HBMEC)
model which closely mimics the brain tumor endothelium phenotype.
Transient LRP1 silencing and stable LRP1-/- HBMEC were generated and
increased expression of CCAAT/enhancer binding protein (C/EBP), a
transcription factor which regulates the transcription of all five S1P
receptors members, was observed upon stable but not transient LRP1
repression. Migration of EC isolated from Lrp1(EC)-/- mice and of stable
LRP1-/- HBMEC became unresponsive to S1P, in part explained by altered
ERK and p38 MAPK pathways, whereas it remained unaltered in transient in
vitro LRP1 repression. Adaptive diminished expressions of S1P1, S1P3, and
S1P5, and increased S1P2 were observed in stable LRP1-/- HBMEC and in
brain EC isolated from Lrp1(EC)-/- mice. Finally, gene silencing
strategies highlighted the need for S1P3 for proper S1P-mediated HBMEC
migration. Collectively, our study highlights an unexpected adaptive
transcriptional crosstalk between LRP1 and specific S1P receptors which
accounts for S1P signalling in brain EC. Targeting of the LRP1/S1P
signalling axis at the BBB may thus be considered in future therapeutic
strategies.

