Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combination of TRAIL and Chal-24 synergistically kills lung cancer
cells through autophagy-mediated degradation of IAPs and c-FLIPL


Combination chemotherapy is an effective strategy for increasing
anticancer efficacy, reducing side effects and alleviating drug
resistance. Here we report that combination of the recently identified
novel chalcone derivative, chalcone-24 (Chal-24), and TNF-related
apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL) significantly increases cytotoxicity in
lung cancer cells. Chal-24 treatment significantly enhanced TRAIL-induced
activation of caspase-8 and caspase-3, and the cytotoxicity induced by
combination of these agents was effectively suppressed by the pan-caspase
inhibitor z-VAD-fmk. Chal-24 and TRAIL combination suppressed expression
of cellular FLICE (FADD-like IL-1-converting enzyme)-inhibitory protein
large (c-FLIPL) and cellular inhibitor of apoptosis proteins (c-IAPs),
and ectopic expression of c-FLIPL and c-IAPs inhibited the potentiated
cytotoxicity. In addition, TRAIL and Chal-24 cooperatively activated
autophagy. Suppression of autophagy effectively attenuated cytotoxicity
induced by the Chal-24 and TRAIL combination, which was associated with
attenuation of c-FLIPL and c-IAPs degradation. Altogether, these results
suggest that Chal-24 potentiates the anticancer activity of TRAIL through
autophagy-mediated degradation of c-FLIPL and c-IAPs, and that
combination of Chal-24 and TRAIL could be an effective approach in
improving chemotherapy efficacy.

