Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Suppression of miR-101a contributes to leukemogenesis by
regulating epigenetic and pro-survival pathways in MLL AML stem cells


The occurrence of relapse in acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is attributed
to the persistence of leukemic stem cells (LSCs), which possess
self-renewal and proliferative ability and contributes to the initiation
and maintenance of leukemia (Nature 2001, 414:105-111). LSCs are also
inherently drug-resistant (Oncotarget 2010, 1: 552-566). Recently,
microRNAs (miRNAs), a class of small noncoding RNAs, have been implicated
in regulation of cancer stem cells (CSCs). Several studies have shown
that depletion of miRNAs leads to cancer and miRNA overexpression
represents a promising strategy for cancer treatment (Nature Rev. 2010,
9: 775-789). Our study aims to develop an LSC-targeted therapeutic
strategy by identifying miRNAs regulating gene and epigenetic pathways
activated in Mixed-Lineage Leukemia (MLL)-mediated AML stem cells.We
performed miRNA microarray analysis of MLL-AF9 mediated pre-leukemic stem
cells (pre-LSCs) compared to Hoxa9/Meis1a-derived pre-LSCs and identified
a novel tumor suppressor, miR-101a, that is downregulated in MLL-AF9
pre-LSCs (P1.25). Quantitative real-time PCR confirmed the results and
further analysis revealed that miR-101a is suppressed in LSCs compared to
normal hematopoietic stem cells, suggesting a tumor suppressor role of
miR-101a. Serial replating assay showed that overexpressing miR-101a in
MLL-AF9 pre-LSCs impaired proliferation as we have observed 60-70%
reduction in cell and colony number (p1.25). Quantitative real-time PCR
confirmed the results and further analysis revealed that miR-101a is
suppressed in LSCs compared to normal hematopoietic stem cells,
suggesting a tumor suppressor role of miR-101a. Serial replating assay
showed that overexpressing miR-101a in MLL-AF9 pre-LSCs impaired
proliferation as we have observed 60-70% reduction in cell and colony
number (p<0.01). Our preliminary in vivo survival studies also showed
that primary transplantation of miR-101a overexpressed pre-LSCs in
C57BL/6 mice causes a significant delay of MLL AML development. Annexin V
and 7-AAD staining followed by flow cytometric analysis revealed a
significant increase in apoptosis (p 1.25). Quantitative real-time PCR
confirmed the results and further analysis revealed that miR-101a is
suppressed in LSCs compared to normal hematopoietic stem cells,
suggesting a tumor suppressor role of miR-101a. Serial replating assay
showed that overexpressing miR-101a in MLL-AF9 pre-LSCs impaired
proliferation as we have observed 60-70% reduction in cell and colony
number (p<0.01). Our preliminary in vivo survival studies also showed
that primary transplantation of miR-101a overexpressed pre-LSCs in
C57BL/6 mice causes a significant delay of MLL AML development. Annexin V
and 7-AAD staining followed by flow cytometric analysis revealed a
significant increase in apoptosis (p <0.001). To explain the marked
reduction in colony forming ability and concomitant increase in
apoptosis, we examined the expression of several apoptosis-associated
proteins by Western blotting and found a decrease in expression of
pro-survival proteins, Myeloid Cell Leukemia 1 (Mcl-1) and B-cell
lymphoma 2 (Bcl-2). We also investigated whether miR-101a regulates
epigenetic pathways as epigenetic events in cancer lead to aberrant
expression of miRNAs. Strikingly, our result revealed a significant
reduction in Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (Ezh2), a crucial epigenetic
regulator in maintenance of MLL AML and a known target of miR-101a. This
finding is also accompanied by a global decrease of histone H3K27Me3
mark, implicating that miR-101a may contribute to leukemogenesis via
regulating epigenetic pathways in LSCs.Our data show that miR-101a is
supressed in MLL AML stem cells and its forced expression impairs LSC
functions via reversing the epigenetic landscape and inhibiting
pro-survival pathways, leading to apoptotic cell death. Overexpression of
miR-101a may provide a means to eradicate drug-resistant LSCs.

