Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor-microenvironment-dependent imprinting of endothelial cells
in human colorectal carcinoma


The tumor microenvironment (TME) and tumor cell heterogeneity contribute
significantly to tumor pathogenesis. In contrast, potential stromal cell
heterogeneity induced by the TME and its impact on human tumorigenesis
has not been conclusively investigated. Therefore, pure tumor endothelial
cells (TECs) from human colorectal carcinomas (CRCs) with differential
TMEs (favorable Th1-TME and worse control-TME) were isolated and
significantly different gene clusters reflecting the tumorigenic and
angiogenic impact attributed to the respective TMEs were identified by
transcriptome analysis. SPARCL1 - the most strongly upregulated gene in
Th1-TME-derived TECs - was analyzed to prove this concept. SPARCL1 was
expressed by endothelial cells (EC) in colon tissues, most prominently in
mature normal vessels, similarly in CRC with Th1-TME and lost towards
more aggressive and angiogenic control tumors. SPARCL1 was induced in
confluent, quiescent EC in culture but absent or resolved in
angiogenically active EC. SPARCL1 inhibited proliferation, migration and
sprouting of cultivated EC in vitro. In human CRC tissues SPARCL1
expressing vessels were highly covered by mural cells and of larger
vessel size (perimeter and area), indicting more progressed maturation.
Similarly the vessels in the colon of wild type mice as compared to
SPARCL1/Sc1 knockout mice exhibited a more mature vessel structure. In
conclusion, exploiting cellular memory processes we demonstrated
TME-dependent intratumoral TEC heterogeneity in CRC and identified
SPARCL1 as novel EC-derived protein regulating vessel maturation and
homeostasis.

