Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TRPM8 is avidly targeted for degradation in prostate cancer


Transient receptor potential melastatin 8 (TRPM8) is a cold-sensing
receptor and a hallmark Ca2+ channel of the prostate epithelium. The
TRPM8 mRNA is overexpressed in early prostate tumors with high androgen
levels, while anti-androgen therapy greatly reduces its expression. Thus,
androgens, which are at the crossroads of several signaling pathways,
appear to be associated with TRPM8-mediated Ca2+ signaling. Although,
TRPM8 mRNA levels are upregulated during prostate cancer progression,
this upregulation is not adequately translated to the TRPM8 protein
levels. We identified that the lower TRPM8 protein abundance and
activation in LNCaP cells is associated with increased ubiquitination and
loss of TRPM8 from the plasma membrane (PM). The mass-spectrometry
analysis of TRPM8, immunoprecipitated from LNCaP cells identified
ubiquitin-like modifier-activating enzyme 1 (UBA1). PYR-41, a potent
inhibitor of the initial enzyme in the ubiquitination cascade, UBA1,
increased TRPM8 activity on the PM of LNCaP cells. Our data indicate that
PMTRPM8 plays a protective role in prostate cancer progression
accompanied by enhanced activation of p53 and Caspase-9. In addition, we
found that the promoter region of trpm8 possesses putative binding sites
for p53 and that the overexpression of p53 increased the TRPM8 mRNA
levels. Our findings support previous studies that suggest the fine
balance between AR and p53 expression that regulates androgen-dependent
growth of prostate cancer. Thus, we hypothesize that TRPM8 activity
significantly contributes to anti-tumor defense mechanism and may serve
as a novel therapeutic target in prostate cancer.

