Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chemical exposures and risk of acute myeloid leukemia and
myelodysplastic syndromes in a population-based study


Background Myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) are a group of clonal
hematologic disorders that result in ineffective hematopoiesis.
Individuals with MDS have a high risk of progressing to leukemia, with
approximately 30% expected to develop acute myeloid leukemia (AML).
Benzene exposure is one of the few well-established risk factors for AML,
and recent studies suggest it is also a risk factor for MDS. Exposure to
other occupational and residential chemicals has been inconsistently
associated with hematologic malignancies. In this analysis, we evaluated
occupational and residential chemical exposures as risk factors for AML
and MDS using population-based data. Methods AML and MDS cases were
identified by rapid case ascertainment through the Minnesota Cancer
Surveillance System (MCSS). Centralized pathology and cytogenetics
reviews were conducted to confirm diagnosis and classify by subtypes.
Controls were identified through the Minnesota State driver's
license/identification card list. Chemical exposures were measured by
self-report and included occupational and residential exposure to a
variety of chemicals. Unconditional logistic regression with adjustment
for age, sex, previous cancer treatment, income, and farm or rural
residence was used to calculate crude and adjusted odds ratios (ORs) and
95% confidence intervals (CI). Smoking, obesity and physical activity
were considered as potential confounders but did not change effect
estimates by 10% or more. Results We included 265 MDS cases, 420 AML
cases, and 1388 controls in this analysis. As expected, we observed
significant associations between benzene and both MDS and AML (OR = 1.77,
95% CI 1.17, 2.67 and OR = 2.03, 95% CI 1.45, 2.83, respectively).
Exposure to vinyl chlorides was associated with MDS (OR = 2.25, 95% CI
1.32, 3.81) but not with AML (OR = 1.36, 95% CI 0.83, 2.21). Exposure to
fertilizers (OR = 1.70, 95% CI 1.11, 2.59), soot (OR = 2.64, 95% CI 1.59,
4.39), creosote (OR = 1.95, 95% CI 1.08, 3.51), inks, dyes and tanning
solutions (OR = 1.63, 95% 1.02, 2.60), and coal dust (2.64, 95% CI 1.30,
5.39) were associated with AML, while no association was seen between any
of these exposures and MDS (range ORs = 0.78-1.25). No significant
associations were observed for occupational pesticide exposures in either
group. Discussion These data confirm the importance of benzene as a risk
factor for myeloid malignancy and provide risk estimates in a
population-based sample. A number of other significant associations with
occupational and residential chemicals were observed for AML; however,
all exposures were reported by only a small percentage of cases (10%).
While chemical exposures play a clear role in the etiology of myeloid
malignancy, these exposures do not account for the majority of cases.

