Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A prospective study of smoking habit and risk of synchronous
colorectal cancers


Background: Synchronous colorectal cancers (CRC) (2 or more distinct
primary carcinomas simultaneously identified in one patient) may arise as
a result of a field effect or shared etiologic factors. Synchronous CRC
has been associated with somatic epigenetic changes; cigarette smoking
has been associated with DNA methylation in CRC. Thus, we examined the
association between cigarette smoking and risk of synchronous
CRC.Methods: Among men and women enrolled in the Health Professionals
Follow-up Study and Nurses Health Study over 24 and 32 years,
respectively, we examined the association of smoking with CRC. We
examined the differential risk of developing synchronous CRC compared
with solitary CRC, classified based on review of pathology reports,
through duplication-method Cox proportional hazards regression.Results:
During 3,477,211 person-years of follow-up of 45,691 men and 88,614
women, we documented 1,960 individuals with solitary CRC and 45
individuals with synchronous CRC. The association of smoking with CRC
differed significantly according to the presence of synchronous compared
with solitary tumors (Pheterogeneity = 0.0008). Compared with never
smokers, current smokers experienced a higher risk of synchronous CRC
(multivariable HR = 5.26; 95% CI, 2.08-13.32). In contrast, current
smokers did not experience an elevated risk of solitary cancer
(multivariable HR = 0.97; 95% CI, 0.83-1.13). Similar differences in the
association of cumulative pack-years smoked with CRC according to tumor
synchronicity status were also observed (Pheterogeneity = 0.006). Smoking
cessation for 10 years was significantly associated with reduced risk of
synchronous tumors (multivariable HR = 0.44; 95% CI, 0.20-1.00), but not
solitary tumors (multivariable HR = 1.07; 95% CI, 0.91-1.25)
(Pheterogeneity = 0.003).Conclusion: Current cigarette smoking is
associated with an increased risk of synchronous but not solitary CRC.
These data support a model in which smoking contributes to an etiologic
field effect predisposing individuals to the development of synchronous
CRC.

