Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combined targeting of MET and PI3K improves efficacy in breast
cancer models with concurrent MET/PI3K aberrations


Introduction: Detailed understanding of the genetic abnormalities that
drive subsets of cancer has led to the development of highly specific
inhibitors targeting key oncogenic pathways. Growing evidence implicates
aberrations of both mesenchymal epithelial transition receptor (MET) and
its key downstream phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) signaling with
poorer prognosis in breast cancer. Co-targeting MET/PI3K and identifying
mechanisms of response and resistance could ultimately inform a novel
therapeutic strategy for breast cancer treatment. Based on these finding,
we hypothesized that concurrent aberrations in PI3K and MET will render
breast cancers resistant to therapies targeting each pathway, and that
combination therapy targeting the PI3K and MET pathway will improve the
efficacy by preventing the acquisition of resistance.Methods: We
established cell models that stably express human wild type (WT) MET or
MET-T1010I, a functional germline single nucleotide polymorphism, or
mutant PI3K-H1047R alone, or variable concurrent aberrations in PI3K and
MET using MCF-10A, a non-transformed mammary epithelial cell line, and
HCC1954, a breast cancer cell line with an endogenous PI3KCA-H1047R
mutation. Cell behaviors, including survival, invasion and response to
MET one arm monoclonal antibody onartuzumab (MetMAb, Genentech Inc)
and/or pan class I PI3K inhibitor GDC 941 (pictilisib, Genentech Inc),
were detected. HCC1954 expressing WT MET or MET-T1010I along with
PI3K-H1047R were transplanted into the mammary fat pad of hepatocyte
growth factor-transgenic mice on a severe combined immunodeficiency
background. Statistical analyses were carried out using the ANOVA and the
Student t test.Result: Expression WT MET or MET-T1010I act coordinately
with PI3K-H1047R to increase colony formation (P Introduction: Detailed
understanding of the genetic abnormalities that drive subsets of cancer
has led to the development of highly specific inhibitors targeting key
oncogenic pathways. Growing evidence implicates aberrations of both
mesenchymal epithelial transition receptor (MET) and its key downstream
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) signaling with poorer prognosis in
breast cancer. Co-targeting MET/PI3K and identifying mechanisms of
response and resistance could ultimately inform a novel therapeutic
strategy for breast cancer treatment. Based on these finding, we
hypothesized that concurrent aberrations in PI3K and MET will render
breast cancers resistant to therapies targeting each pathway, and that
combination therapy targeting the PI3K and MET pathway will improve the
efficacy by preventing the acquisition of resistance.Methods: We
established cell models that stably express human wild type (WT) MET or
MET-T1010I, a functional germline single nucleotide polymorphism, or
mutant PI3K-H1047R alone, or variable concurrent aberrations in PI3K and
MET using MCF-10A, a non-transformed mammary epithelial cell line, and
HCC1954, a breast cancer cell line with an endogenous PI3KCA-H1047R
mutation. Cell behaviors, including survival, invasion and response to
MET one arm monoclonal antibody onartuzumab (MetMAb, Genentech Inc)
and/or pan class I PI3K inhibitor GDC 941 (pictilisib, Genentech Inc),
were detected. HCC1954 expressing WT MET or MET-T1010I along with
PI3K-H1047R were transplanted into the mammary fat pad of hepatocyte
growth factor-transgenic mice on a severe combined immunodeficiency
background. Statistical analyses were carried out using the ANOVA and the
Student t test.Result: Expression WT MET or MET-T1010I act coordinately
with PI3K-H1047R to increase colony formation (P < 0.01, respectively).
Concurrent MET-T1010I, but not WT MET, acts coordinately with PI3K-H1047R
to increase cell invasion (P Introduction: Detailed understanding of the
genetic abnormalities that drive subsets of cancer has led to the
development of highly specific inhibitors targeting key oncogenic
pathways. Growing evidence implicates aberrations of both mesenchymal
epithelial transition receptor (MET) and its key downstream
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) signaling with poorer prognosis in
breast cancer. Co-targeting MET/PI3K and identifying mechanisms of
response and resistance could ultimately inform a novel therapeutic
strategy for breast cancer treatment. Based on these finding, we
hypothesized that concurrent aberrations in PI3K and MET will render
breast cancers resistant to therapies targeting each pathway, and that
combination therapy targeting the PI3K and MET pathway will improve the
efficacy by preventing the acquisition of resistance.Methods: We
established cell models that stably express human wild type (WT) MET or
MET-T1010I, a functional germline single nucleotide polymorphism, or
mutant PI3K-H1047R alone, or variable concurrent aberrations in PI3K and
MET using MCF-10A, a non-transformed mammary epithelial cell line, and
HCC1954, a breast cancer cell line with an endogenous PI3KCA-H1047R
mutation. Cell behaviors, including survival, invasion and response to
MET one arm monoclonal antibody onartuzumab (MetMAb, Genentech Inc)
and/or pan class I PI3K inhibitor GDC 941 (pictilisib, Genentech Inc),
were detected. HCC1954 expressing WT MET or MET-T1010I along with
PI3K-H1047R were transplanted into the mammary fat pad of hepatocyte
growth factor-transgenic mice on a severe combined immunodeficiency
background. Statistical analyses were carried out using the ANOVA and the
Student t test.Result: Expression WT MET or MET-T1010I act coordinately
with PI3K-H1047R to increase colony formation (P < 0.01, respectively).
Concurrent MET-T1010I, but not WT MET, acts coordinately with PI3K-H1047R
to increase cell invasion (P < 0.0001). Expression MET-T1010I or WT MET
induced cells resistance to GDC941, with MET-T1010I stronger than WT MET.
Combined targeting MET with onartuzumab and targeting PI3K with GDC941
significantly inhibited cell growth in matrigel, dose dependently than
each monotherapy (P Introduction: Detailed understanding of the genetic
abnormalities that drive subsets of cancer has led to the development of
highly specific inhibitors targeting key oncogenic pathways. Growing
evidence implicates aberrations of both mesenchymal epithelial transition
receptor (MET) and its key downstream phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase
(PI3K) signaling with poorer prognosis in breast cancer. Co-targeting
MET/PI3K and identifying mechanisms of response and resistance could
ultimately inform a novel therapeutic strategy for breast cancer
treatment. Based on these finding, we hypothesized that concurrent
aberrations in PI3K and MET will render breast cancers resistant to
therapies targeting each pathway, and that combination therapy targeting
the PI3K and MET pathway will improve the efficacy by preventing the
acquisition of resistance.Methods: We established cell models that stably
express human wild type (WT) MET or MET-T1010I, a functional germline
single nucleotide polymorphism, or mutant PI3K-H1047R alone, or variable
concurrent aberrations in PI3K and MET using MCF-10A, a non-transformed
mammary epithelial cell line, and HCC1954, a breast cancer cell line with
an endogenous PI3KCA-H1047R mutation. Cell behaviors, including survival,
invasion and response to MET one arm monoclonal antibody onartuzumab
(MetMAb, Genentech Inc) and/or pan class I PI3K inhibitor GDC 941
(pictilisib, Genentech Inc), were detected. HCC1954 expressing WT MET or
MET-T1010I along with PI3K-H1047R were transplanted into the mammary fat
pad of hepatocyte growth factor-transgenic mice on a severe combined
immunodeficiency background. Statistical analyses were carried out using
the ANOVA and the Student t test.Result: Expression WT MET or MET-T1010I
act coordinately with PI3K-H1047R to increase colony formation (P < 0.01,
respectively). Concurrent MET-T1010I, but not WT MET, acts coordinately
with PI3K-H1047R to increase cell invasion (P < 0.0001). Expression
MET-T1010I or WT MET induced cells resistance to GDC941, with MET-T1010I
stronger than WT MET. Combined targeting MET with onartuzumab and
targeting PI3K with GDC941 significantly inhibited cell growth in
matrigel, dose dependently than each monotherapy (P < 0.0001,
respectively). Invasion assay showed similar pattern. Combined
onartuzumab and GDC941 significantly inhibited invasion, dose dependently
(P Introduction: Detailed understanding of the genetic abnormalities that
drive subsets of cancer has led to the development of highly specific
inhibitors targeting key oncogenic pathways. Growing evidence implicates
aberrations of both mesenchymal epithelial transition receptor (MET) and
its key downstream phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) signaling with
poorer prognosis in breast cancer. Co-targeting MET/PI3K and identifying
mechanisms of response and resistance could ultimately inform a novel
therapeutic strategy for breast cancer treatment. Based on these finding,
we hypothesized that concurrent aberrations in PI3K and MET will render
breast cancers resistant to therapies targeting each pathway, and that
combination therapy targeting the PI3K and MET pathway will improve the
efficacy by preventing the acquisition of resistance.Methods: We
established cell models that stably express human wild type (WT) MET or
MET-T1010I, a functional germline single nucleotide polymorphism, or
mutant PI3K-H1047R alone, or variable concurrent aberrations in PI3K and
MET using MCF-10A, a non-transformed mammary epithelial cell line, and
HCC1954, a breast cancer cell line with an endogenous PI3KCA-H1047R
mutation. Cell behaviors, including survival, invasion and response to
MET one arm monoclonal antibody onartuzumab (MetMAb, Genentech Inc)
and/or pan class I PI3K inhibitor GDC 941 (pictilisib, Genentech Inc),
were detected. HCC1954 expressing WT MET or MET-T1010I along with
PI3K-H1047R were transplanted into the mammary fat pad of hepatocyte
growth factor-transgenic mice on a severe combined immunodeficiency
background. Statistical analyses were carried out using the ANOVA and the
Student t test.Result: Expression WT MET or MET-T1010I act coordinately
with PI3K-H1047R to increase colony formation (P < 0.01, respectively).
Concurrent MET-T1010I, but not WT MET, acts coordinately with PI3K-H1047R
to increase cell invasion (P < 0.0001). Expression MET-T1010I or WT MET
induced cells resistance to GDC941, with MET-T1010I stronger than WT MET.
Combined targeting MET with onartuzumab and targeting PI3K with GDC941
significantly inhibited cell growth in matrigel, dose dependently than
each monotherapy (P < 0.0001, respectively). Invasion assay showed
similar pattern. Combined onartuzumab and GDC941 significantly inhibited
invasion, dose dependently (P < 0.001). The effects were confirmed using
PI3K/mTOR inhibitor, GDC980. Consistently, combination of
onartuzumab/GDC941 significantly inhibited tumor growth (P Introduction:
Detailed understanding of the genetic abnormalities that drive subsets of
cancer has led to the development of highly specific inhibitors targeting
key oncogenic pathways. Growing evidence implicates aberrations of both
mesenchymal epithelial transition receptor (MET) and its key downstream
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) signaling with poorer prognosis in
breast cancer. Co-targeting MET/PI3K and identifying mechanisms of
response and resistance could ultimately inform a novel therapeutic
strategy for breast cancer treatment. Based on these finding, we
hypothesized that concurrent aberrations in PI3K and MET will render
breast cancers resistant to therapies targeting each pathway, and that
combination therapy targeting the PI3K and MET pathway will improve the
efficacy by preventing the acquisition of resistance.Methods: We
established cell models that stably express human wild type (WT) MET or
MET-T1010I, a functional germline single nucleotide polymorphism, or
mutant PI3K-H1047R alone, or variable concurrent aberrations in PI3K and
MET using MCF-10A, a non-transformed mammary epithelial cell line, and
HCC1954, a breast cancer cell line with an endogenous PI3KCA-H1047R
mutation. Cell behaviors, including survival, invasion and response to
MET one arm monoclonal antibody onartuzumab (MetMAb, Genentech Inc)
and/or pan class I PI3K inhibitor GDC 941 (pictilisib, Genentech Inc),
were detected. HCC1954 expressing WT MET or MET-T1010I along with
PI3K-H1047R were transplanted into the mammary fat pad of hepatocyte
growth factor-transgenic mice on a severe combined immunodeficiency
background. Statistical analyses were carried out using the ANOVA and the
Student t test.Result: Expression WT MET or MET-T1010I act coordinately
with PI3K-H1047R to increase colony formation (P < 0.01, respectively).
Concurrent MET-T1010I, but not WT MET, acts coordinately with PI3K-H1047R
to increase cell invasion (P < 0.0001). Expression MET-T1010I or WT MET
induced cells resistance to GDC941, with MET-T1010I stronger than WT MET.
Combined targeting MET with onartuzumab and targeting PI3K with GDC941
significantly inhibited cell growth in matrigel, dose dependently than
each monotherapy (P < 0.0001, respectively). Invasion assay showed
similar pattern. Combined onartuzumab and GDC941 significantly inhibited
invasion, dose dependently (P < 0.001). The effects were confirmed using
PI3K/mTOR inhibitor, GDC980. Consistently, combination of
onartuzumab/GDC941 significantly inhibited tumor growth (P < 0.01 versus
GDC941; P Introduction: Detailed understanding of the genetic
abnormalities that drive subsets of cancer has led to the development of
highly specific inhibitors targeting key oncogenic pathways. Growing
evidence implicates aberrations of both mesenchymal epithelial transition
receptor (MET) and its key downstream phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase
(PI3K) signaling with poorer prognosis in breast cancer. Co-targeting
MET/PI3K and identifying mechanisms of response and resistance could
ultimately inform a novel therapeutic strategy for breast cancer
treatment. Based on these finding, we hypothesized that concurrent
aberrations in PI3K and MET will render breast cancers resistant to
therapies targeting each pathway, and that combination therapy targeting
the PI3K and MET pathway will improve the efficacy by preventing the
acquisition of resistance.Methods: We established cell models that stably
express human wild type (WT) MET or MET-T1010I, a functional germline
single nucleotide polymorphism, or mutant PI3K-H1047R alone, or variable
concurrent aberrations in PI3K and MET using MCF-10A, a non-transformed
mammary epithelial cell line, and HCC1954, a breast cancer cell line with
an endogenous PI3KCA-H1047R mutation. Cell behaviors, including survival,
invasion and response to MET one arm monoclonal antibody onartuzumab
(MetMAb, Genentech Inc) and/or pan class I PI3K inhibitor GDC 941
(pictilisib, Genentech Inc), were detected. HCC1954 expressing WT MET or
MET-T1010I along with PI3K-H1047R were transplanted into the mammary fat
pad of hepatocyte growth factor-transgenic mice on a severe combined
immunodeficiency background. Statistical analyses were carried out using
the ANOVA and the Student t test.Result: Expression WT MET or MET-T1010I
act coordinately with PI3K-H1047R to increase colony formation (P < 0.01,
respectively). Concurrent MET-T1010I, but not WT MET, acts coordinately
with PI3K-H1047R to increase cell invasion (P < 0.0001). Expression
MET-T1010I or WT MET induced cells resistance to GDC941, with MET-T1010I
stronger than WT MET. Combined targeting MET with onartuzumab and
targeting PI3K with GDC941 significantly inhibited cell growth in
matrigel, dose dependently than each monotherapy (P < 0.0001,
respectively). Invasion assay showed similar pattern. Combined
onartuzumab and GDC941 significantly inhibited invasion, dose dependently
(P < 0.001). The effects were confirmed using PI3K/mTOR inhibitor,
GDC980. Consistently, combination of onartuzumab/GDC941 significantly
inhibited tumor growth (P < 0.01 versus GDC941; P < 0.0001 versus
onartuzumab alone).Conclusions: Concurrent aberrations of MET and PI3K
render breast cancer cells resistant to therapies blocking either
pathway. Targeting both MET and PI3K increases inhibitory efficacy.

