Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: EGFR copy number alterations in primary tumors, metastatic lymph
nodes and recurrent tumors in areca-quid associated oral squamous cell
carcinoma


EGFR and downstream signaling pathway plays important roles in the
tumorigenesis in oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC). Gene copy number
alteration is one the mechanism overexpressing the EGFR protein. We
previously demonstrated that EGFR gene amplification was related with
lymph node metastasis, tumor invasion and perineural invasion. We
appraise the hypothesis that the EGFR gene copy number alteration in the
primary tumor can predict that in recurrent tumors or in lymph node
metastatic foci. Of 167 primary OSCCs, fluorescence in-situ hybridization
(FISH) study showed EGFR polysomy in 19 (11.4%) patients and
amplification in 33 (19.8%) patients. EGFR gene amplification was related
with lymph node metastasis (2 trend test: P = 0.018) Of 57 metastatic
lymph nodes, 9 (15.8%) had EGFR polysomy and 14 (24.6%) had EGFR gene
amplification. The concordance rate of EGFR gene copy number in primary
tumor and lymph node metastasis was 68.4% (McNemar test: P = 0.389). Of
41 recurrent tumors, 5 (12.2%) had EGFR polysomy and 5 (12.2%) had gene
amplification. The concordance rate of EGFR gene copy number between
primary tumor and recurrence tumor was 65.9% (McNemar test: P = 0.510).
From our results, we can predict two-thirds of the EGFR gene copy number
alteration in the lymph node metastasis or the recurrent tumor from the
analysis of primary tumor. In clinical scenario, for OSCC patients that
the lymph nodes or the recurrent tumors are unavailable for EGFR gene
copy number analysis, studies from the primary tumors could provide part
of the EGFR clonal information in the metastatic or recurrent lesions.

