Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation of 53BP1 by the structural nuclear protein NuMA


DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs) can cause genomic instability and cancer
through point mutations and genomic translocations if they are not
properly repaired. DSBs are repaired by two major pathways: homologous
recombination (HR) or nonhomologous end joining (NHEJ). The cellular
choice between these two pathways is critical to cell survival and is
altered in cancers. 53BP1, which promotes NHEJ by blocking CtIP-dependent
DNA resection, is a key protein mediating repair pathway choice. Here, we
present a new negative regulation mechanism of 53BP1 that relies on the
structural nuclear protein NuMA. Apart from its role in mitotic spindle
assembly, NuMA influences chromatin organization during the interphase
and modulates the chromatin response to DNA damage. We identified an
interaction between NuMA and 53BP1 by proteomics analysis of a 53BP1
pull-down and confirmed this interaction by NuMA immunoprecipitation. We
measured greater than 50% decreased 53BP1-NuMA binding in response to
DSB, which suggest that, in the absence of DNA damage, NuMA may restrain
53BP1 diffusion. This hypothesis is supported by fluorescence correlation
spectroscopy (FCS) measurements in cells expressing GFP-tagged 53BP1, as
well as by microirradiation experiments in which NuMA overexpression or
silencing inhibited or promoted 53BP1 recruitment at DNA damage sites,
respectively. 53BP1 has an essential role in B cell class switch
recombination (CSR) and mediates PARPi sensitivity in BRCA1-null cells.
We will present how modulating NuMA expression affects both aspects of
53BP1 function. The results from our work will help to understand how
53BP1 is controlled, and shed light on the mechanisms regulating this
modulator of PARPi sensitivity in the presence or absence of DNA damage.

