Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Disruption of a TGF--CTCF regulated pathway leads to cancer stem
cells


Background: Sporadic cancer formation from stem cells, and molecular
switches leading to this remain poorly understood. Beckwith-Wiedemann
syndrome (BWS) is a human stem cell disorder with an 800-fold increased
risk of developing tumors. Imprinting of the IGF2/H19 and the
CDKN1C/KCNQ1 loci on chromosome 11p15.5 is mediated by the chromatin
insulator CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF). This regulation is lost in BWS,
leading to aberrant overexpression of the growth promoting genes.
Epigenetic silencing of 2-spectrin (2SP, gene SPTBN1), a SMAD adaptor for
Transforming Growth Factor-beta (TGF-) signaling, is causally associated
with BWS. With this new model for BWS, the mechanisms though which
disruption of TGF- signaling leads to tumorigenesis could be elucidated
further. We further sought to determine the roles of the TGF--mediated
2SP/SMAD3/CTCF complex in stem cell biological function.Experimental
procedures: 1. Tumorigenesis analysis in Sptbn1+/ /Smad3+/ mice. 2.
Whole-transcriptome sequencing were performed in the BWS cells and
Sptbn1+/; Sptbn1/; Smad3+/; and Sptbn1+//Smad3+/ MEFs. 3.
Tumor-initiating-cell (TIC) tumorigenesis, sphere formation assays were
performed for stem cell like characteristics.Results: 1. We observed that
double heterozygous Sptbn1+//Smad3+/ mice with defective TGF- signaling
develop multiple tumors phenotypically similar to those of BWS. 2. CTCF
is TGF--inducible and facilitates TGF--mediated repression of hTERT
transcription via 2SP/SMAD3/CTCF interactions. This regulation is
abrogated in the TGF- defective mice and BWS, causing hTERT
overexpression. 3. Whole-transcriptome RNA sequencing of MEFs isolated
from these three TGF--deficient strains displayed increased levels of
stem cell-associated genes, including PDPN, EPAS1, CXCL1 and ALDH2. 4.
CTCF, 2SP, and SMAD3, and modulate stem cell like characteristics such as
CD133+/CD49+ TIC tumorigenesis, sphere formation and nanog expression. 5.
Further, knock-down of 2SP, Smad3, or CTCF in HepG2 cells resulted in an
increase of sphere formation, further supporting a role of these elements
in regulating stemness.Conclusions: Loss of CTCF-dependent imprinting of
tumor promoter genes such as IGF2 and TERT is caused by a defective TGF-
pathway, giving new insight into BWS-associated tumorigenesis and
sporadic human cancers that are associated with mutations in SPTBN1 and
SMAD3. Dysfunction of the 2SP/SMAD3/CTCF complex increases stem-like
properties and enhances TICs. Our analysis provides important insight
into the switches involved in sporadic cancer formation, particularly
those associated with this human stem cell disorder.

