Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mist1+ secretory progenitor cells can give rise to cancer in the
intestine and colon


Intestinal crypts are maintained by long-lived intestinal stem cells
(ISCs) which reside near the base of glands. Above the ISC pool, there
are short-lived progenitors that can supply lineage-specific
differentiated cell types into the villus. Notch and Wnt pathways play a
key role for determining the stem/progenitor cell function and their cell
fate, and regulating cancer development in the gastrointestine. Although
it has been well established that ISCs are a major origin of intestinal
cancer, it remains unknown whether intestinal progenitor population can
give rise to cancer. We use Mist1-CreERT mice and induce Notch and Wnt
activation by mating with LSL-Notch1-IC mice and/or Apc flox mice. We
found that a bHLH transcriptional factor Mist1 is expressed in Paneth
cells (Lysozyme+CD24high) as well as short-lived secretory progenitors
(Lysozyme-CD24low) in the intestine. Mist1+ secretory progenitors are
radio- and chemo-resistant, but do not show stem cell interconversion
even after intestinal injury or Lgr5 ablation. However, aberrant Notch
activation changes Mist1+ cells to Lgr5+ long-lived enterocyte
progenitors, with loss of secretory lineage differentiation.
Mist1+CD24low progenitor population can form intestinal organoids with
Notch activation in vitro. Mist1+ secretory progenitors can give rise to
intestinal cancer by simultaneous Notch and Wnt activation by loss of Apc
gene, while loss of Apc in Mist1 lineage alone does not develop cancer.
In the colon, Mist1 marks colonic secterory progenitors that become to
lineage trace and can be a cancer-initiating cell after Notch activation
or DSS-induced colonic injury. These results provide the clear evidence
of cellular plasticity dependent on Notch signaling in the gut, and
suggest short-lived progenitors as another cellular origin of cancer
besides ISC pool.

