Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RPS3 regulates melanoma growth and sensitivity to DNA damage and
predicts a poor prognosis by targeting ADT3


Melanoma, a malignant skin cancer, is resistant to DNA damage-mediated
therapy. Discovering and identifying novel therapeutic targets for
melanoma is urgently required. In this study, we found that ribosome
protein S3 (RPS3) regulated melanoma growth and the sensitivity of
melanoma to DNA damage by targeting ADP/ATP translocase 3 (ADT3).
Knockdown of RPS3 inhibited cell proliferation and sensitized melanoma
cells to DNA damage. RPS3 knockdown also promoted ADT3 translocation to
mitochondrial of melanoma cells when exposed to DNA damage. RPS3
interacted with ADT3 in melanoma cells. Knockdown of ADT3 reduced its
co-localization with RPS3. RPS3 could not obviously sensitize melanoma
cells to DNA damage with ADT3 knockdown. In addition, we found that Lys18
in the death-induce-domain of RPS3 protein played a critical role in the
interaction between RPS3 and ADT3. Mutation at Lys18 site could deadlock
ADT3 and attenuate cell apoptosis in melanoma cells. Knockdown of RPS3
also inhibited tumor growth in a melanoma mouse model in vivo, but
overexpression of the RPS3-18 mutation rescued the growth. Furthermore,
we showed that the patients with higher expressed RPS3 had a much shorter
median survival, whereas the patients with higher levels of ADT3 had a
much longer median survival. Collectively, our results indicate that RPS3
cooperates with ADT3 to regulate the sensitivity of melanoma to DNA
damage and suggest that the RPS3/ADT3 pathway is a potential therapeutic
target for human melanoma. Grant support: This work was supported by the
funds from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (81472178,
81272195) and the State 973 Program of China (2014CB542005).

