Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Recent incidence trends of lymphoid malignancies in Hong Kong,
2001-2010


Incidence trends of lymphoid malignancies in the United States (U.S.)
have been well-characterized based on analyses of data from the
Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results Program. These analyses
showed marked increases in incidence rates of non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL)
in the early to mid-1990s, with some evidence that rates have begun to
level off in the recent decade. In contrast, there are limited published
data on trends in rates of lymphoid malignancies in the Chinese
population, particularly for subtypes. Such analyses may provide insight
into geographic differences in the descriptive epidemiological patterns
of these neoplasms as well as etiological hypotheses. To explore recent
trends in incidence rates in HK, yearly age-adjusted incidence rates and
annual percent changes (APCs) were calculated using available data over
the period 2001-2010 for overall lymphoid malignancies, overall B-cell
neoplasms not including Hodgkin lymphoma (HL), overall NK or T-cell
tumors, HL, plasma cell neoplasms (PCN), and specific NHL B-cell subtypes
that were most common in the HK population over this time period,
including diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL), marginal zone lymphoma
(MZL), and follicular lymphoma (FL). The incidence of overall lymphoid
malignancies showed a steady increase in HK over the period 2001-2010
with an APC of +1.4% (95% CI = + 0.4%, + 2.3%). A steady rate of increase
was further observed over the ten year period for overall B-cell
neoplasms not including HL (APC = +1.6%, 95% CI = + 0.4%, + 2.9%),
whereas the incidence of overall T- and NK/T cell neoplasms showed no
significant fluctuation over the ten year period (APC = -1.1%, 95% CI =
-3.5%, +1.5%). For the most common subtypes diagnosed in HK during the
study period, an increasing trend of HL was observed over the years
2004-2010 only (APC = + 10.5%, 95% CI = + 4.9%, + 16.4%) based on the
best-fitting model that included one joinpoint, and stable but
non-significant rates of increase for DLBCL (APC = + 1.5%, 95% CI = -
0.7%, + 3.6%), PCN (APC = + 1.2%, 95% CI = -0.2%, + 2.6%), and FL (APC =
+ 2.7%, 95% CI -0.5%, 6.0%) were also observed, all over the period
2001-2010. Conversely, incidence rates of MZL showed no significant
fluctuation over the study period (APC = -1.0%, 95% CI = -2.9%, +0.8%).
The overall trends observed during even this relatively short time-period
suggest that the rate of several lymphoid malignancies in HK may be
beginning to shift in the direction of rates that were observed among
individuals living in the U.S. Additional analyses of population-based
registry data from other regions in East Asia, especially over longer
time-periods, are needed to replicate and extend these findings. Further,
our results support the need for etiological studies of lymphoid
malignancies in this population, particularly as it relates to
environmental, occupational and lifestyle risk factors that might
influence disease rates and the genetic risk factors that potentially
interact with them.

