Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovery of selective PI3Kb inhibitors for PTEN-deficient tumors
and other indications


PTEN somatic mutations occur in a large percentage of human cancers, from
breast to prostate. Deletions of PTEN e.g. in prostate cancers are
associated with tumor aggression and poor outcome, and up to 70 percent
of prostate cancer patients have lost one copy of the PTEN gene at the
time of diagnosis. Recent pharmacologic and genetic studies have
identified the isoform of PI3K to be required for growth of
PTEN-deficient tumors in vivo and highly potent compounds are currently
being explored in the clinic. These clinical candidates, however, are
either limited by poor bioavailability or moderate selectivity against
the delta isoform, thus warranting more selective compounds with better
exposure. We have undertaken a comprehensive knowledge-based discovery of
selective inhibitors of PI3K with admissible pharmacokinetic and drug
like properties. We have successfully identified a chemical series with
potency ranging as low as 2.5 nM for PI3K with >100 - fold selectivity
for PI3K. The and isoform selectivity was around 1000 and 500 fold
respectively. Compounds did not decrease insulin sensitivity and T cell
proliferation thus mitigating the PI3K and PI3K mediated side effects of
nonselective inhibitors. In vitro biochemical potency translated into
cell survival assay and pAKT target engagement in recombinant and wild
type mammalian cell lines. In vivo tumor regression was observed in
xenograft models of prostate cancer. The series did not show any
observable hERG or CYP liabilities. The considerable potency, high
selectivity and good bioavailability of this novel class of compounds not
only makes them attractive for prostate cancer, but also for rare disease
indications like hamartoma and other drug resistant cancers that are
dependent on PTEN deletions.

