Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The function role of Brf1 in alcohol-induced human and mouse
hepatocellular carcinoma*


Brf1 (TFIIB-related factor 1) specifically regulates the transcription of
Pol III genes (RNA polymerase III-dependent genes), including tRNAs and
5S rRNAs, which are elevated in both transformed and tumor cells,
suggesting that they play a crucial role in tumorigenesis. Our recent
studies have demonstrated that alcohol consumption increases Brf1
expression and Pol III gene transcription to promote tumor development.
However, it remains to be investigated that Brf1 is expressed in human
cancers. At the present studies, we have determined the significance of
Brf1 overexpression in human hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and the
impaction of repressing Brf1 expression in alcohol-promoted cell
transformation. Biopsies of human HCC, liver tumor samples of mice and
cell lines of normal and tumor liver were utilized to determine
alteration of Brf1 expression using cytological and molecular biological
approaches. The result indicates that Brf1 expression is increased in
human cases of HCC. High expression of Brf1 displays shorter overall
survival period. Levels of Brf1 and Pol III gene transcription in HCC
patients with alcohol consumption show an additional increase, compared
with the cases of non-HCC with or without alcohol intake. Induction of
Brf1 and Pol III genes by ethanol in hepatoma cells is higher than in
non-tumor cells. Ethanol increases the rate of cell transformation.
Repression of Brf1 inhibits alcohol-promoted cell transformation.
Together, these studies demonstrate that Brf1 is overexpressed in HCC
cases and liver tumor cell lines. High level of Brf1 in human HCC is
correlated with short survival time. Alcohol consumption enhances Brf1
expression to promote cell transformation. Brf1 is a new biomarker of
diagnosis and prognosis of HCC.*: The project is supported by NIH grants:
AA017288, AA021114 and AA02324 to Shuping Zhong

