Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development and validation of NGS-based clinical cancer panels for
precision medicine in Asian and Caucasian adult cancers


In the new era of precision medicine, comprehensive cancer panels are
needed to identify actionable cancer genes and match patients to
personalized therapies. Here, we report a Pan-Cancer NGS Panel designed
by leaders in the field that comprises of all exon coding and selected
hotspots of critical cancer genes in the most common cancer types for
both Asian and Caucasian cohorts, including but not limited to lung,
colon, breast and prostate cancer. The panel allows detection of known
and novel variants in indication-specific signaling pathways, disease
biology, DNA repair, and in particular drug resistance, to advance
research into personalized cancer treatment and for use in clinical
trials to help the development of new targeted therapies. Technical
validation was performed to characterize point mutations, indels, copy
number variations and fusions across clinically relevant, actionable
cancer genes in both liquid biopsies and formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded
(FFPE) clinical specimens. Assay sensitivity, specificity and accuracy
were tested using reference samples with known genetic profiling and
further validated on a variety of orthogonal platforms such as digital
PCR, allele-specific PCR and Sanger sequencing. To the best of our
knowledge, this is the first ethnic-specific NGS diagnostic test designed
specifically for Asian and Caucasian adult cancer patients.

