Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cancer-associated fibroblasts transcriptional pattern reveals
common changes in extracellular matrix-related genes across different
cancer types


Interactions between cancer cells and the surrounding microenvironment
are crucial determinants of cancer progression. Fibroblasts isolated from
carcinomas (cancer associated fibroblasts, CAF) have been shown to fuel
the neoplastic process. While normal fibroblasts from different organs
generally present very specific transcriptional programs, CAF from
different tumors display a similar phenotype reminiscent of
myofibroblasts found at sites of wound healing, indicating that common
transcriptional programs could be induced by cancer cells on the
surrounding microenvironment.To investigate the existence of common
mechanisms in fibroblast activation across different cancer types, gene
expression profiles of tumor stroma or cancer associated fibroblasts
(CAF) derived from breast, prostate and lung cancer were previously
evaluated performing an inter-pathology bio-informatics analysis. For
each comparison, genes were ranked and subjected to Gene Set Enrichment
Analysis to identify Canonical Pathways significantly enriched. Most of
commonly enriched gene sets were related to extracellular matrix (ECM)
structure and remodeling, cytoskeletal organization and cell-cell
adhesion. We specifically evaluated a previously identified ECM-related
signature (ECM3) defining a breast cancer subtype likely to progress. We
found that ECM3 signature was significantly enriched (p-value
Interactions between cancer cells and the surrounding microenvironment
are crucial determinants of cancer progression. Fibroblasts isolated from
carcinomas (cancer associated fibroblasts, CAF) have been shown to fuel
the neoplastic process. While normal fibroblasts from different organs
generally present very specific transcriptional programs, CAF from
different tumors display a similar phenotype reminiscent of
myofibroblasts found at sites of wound healing, indicating that common
transcriptional programs could be induced by cancer cells on the
surrounding microenvironment.To investigate the existence of common
mechanisms in fibroblast activation across different cancer types, gene
expression profiles of tumor stroma or cancer associated fibroblasts
(CAF) derived from breast, prostate and lung cancer were previously
evaluated performing an inter-pathology bio-informatics analysis. For
each comparison, genes were ranked and subjected to Gene Set Enrichment
Analysis to identify Canonical Pathways significantly enriched. Most of
commonly enriched gene sets were related to extracellular matrix (ECM)
structure and remodeling, cytoskeletal organization and cell-cell
adhesion. We specifically evaluated a previously identified ECM-related
signature (ECM3) defining a breast cancer subtype likely to progress. We
found that ECM3 signature was significantly enriched (p-value < 0.05) in
cancer associated fibroblasts compared to the normal counterpart across
different pathologies supporting the implication of ECM-related genes in
fibroblasts with activated status. Furthermore increased expression of
some of the most ECM3 genes (COL10A1, COMP and COL11A1) was detected in
fibroblasts co-cultured with breast cancer cells, both in cellular
extracts and in the conditioned medium (CM), suggesting their potential
importance as circulating markers for early detection and risk
assessment. To explore the significance of ECM-related molecules also in
lung, we finally selected some of enriched ECM3-related molecules in lung
fibroblasts (SPARC, COL11A1, MMP11, FN1, COMP, COL10A1) and we evaluated
their presence in the conditioned medium. The analysis showed that the
ECM molecules could be detected in medium conditioned by lung fibroblasts
and generally enriched in CAF_CM compared to NF_CM (SPARC p = 0.004, COMP
p = 0.003, MMP11 p = 0.012). Interestingly, analysis of de-cellularized
extracellular matrix showed that Fibronectin 1 (FN1) was preferentially
deposited by CAFs compared to NFs (p = 0.003) denoting a possible role of
this molecule in the modulation of extracellular matrix during tumor
development and/or progression.These findings support the hypothesis that
identification of common factors responsible for proficient tumor-stroma
cross-talk could be instrumental in novel strategies for risk assessment
in different diseases.

