Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PI3K-directed metabolic reprogramming in thyroid cancer


Tumor cells reprogram their metabolic pathway to meet their energetic
needs during tumor progression. Highly proliferating or transformed cells
are able to switch their metabolism from oxidative phosphorylation-based
energy production to aerobic glycolysis. This switch called Warburg
effect is recognized as a bioenergetic signature of cancer cells.The PI3K
pathway is one of the most commonly altered signaling in human cancers
and plays a primary role in the establishment of the Warburg effect by
inducing the transcriptional activation of glycolytic genes, increasing
the surface expression of glucose transporters, stimulating lipid
synthesis.Using a novel, clinically relevant, mouse model in which
thyrocyte-specific deletion of Pten constitutively activates the PI3K
signaling cascade, we have identified a previously unrecognized in vivo
mechanism through which PI3K activation subverts energy metabolism in
thyroid cells by repressing oxidative phosphorylation well before full
neoplastic transformation takes place, leading to the coordinated
downregulation of the expression of genes encoding for members of both
the TCA cycle and oxidative phosphorylation pathways.We have now extended
our analysis to mice carrying the cancer-associated, constitutively
active Pik3caH1047R allele, and have observed the same downregulation of
TCA and oxidative phosphorylation genes in the thyroid of Pik3caH1047R
heterozygous mice, suggesting that the phenotype observed in the
Ptenthyr-/ mice is solely due to the activation of the PI3K
pathway.Lactate dehydrogenase is a tetrameric enzyme comprising two major
subunits, A and/or B, and catalyzes the forward and backward conversion
of pyruvate to lactate.Previous data from our lab showed an increase of
lactate levels in thyroids from both young, tumor-free and older
Ptenthyr-/ mice, indicating an increase in glycolysis metabolic flux even
before full transformation.To test the therapeutic value of Lactate
dehydrogenase inhibition both in tumor initiation and in tumor
maintenance, we have undertaken a combined pharmacological and genetic
approach.Interestingly, our data suggest that pharmaceutical and genetic
LDHA inhibition results in a significant reduction in the proliferation
rate of different thyroid cancer cell lines.Moreover, to test the
hypothesis that the glycolytic switch is necessary for full neoplastic
transformation of Pten/ thyroids and to prove that the LDHA enzyme plays
a crucial rule in this process, we have generated a new (Pten,Ldha)thyr-/
mouse model that is being currently phenotypically and molecularly
characterized to assess the effect of Ldha deficiency on thyroid
hyperplasia, proliferation index, lactate content, and TCA cycle/OXPHOS
gene expression.Taken together, these data pave the way to the full
understanding of the metabolic landscape induced by the activation of the
PI3K pathway, and to the possibility of exploring therapeutic approaches
targeting metabolic deregulation in vivo.

