Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Downregulation of TMPRSS11B in squamous cell carcinoma


[Background] Esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) is one of the most
malignant cancers. The molecular mechanism of ESCC development has not
been fully elucidated. [Aim] The aim of this study is to identify
responsible genes for ESCC development. [Materials and Methods] Firstly,
we performed transcriptome sequence (RNA-seq) analysis of surgically
resected tumor and corresponding normal tissues form 3 ESCC patients with
different tumor locus, histrogical differentiation, and TNM stage.by
RNA-seq analysis: (Case 1) upper thoracic esophagus, well differentiated
SCC, TNM, Stage I; (Case 2) middle thoracic esophagus, poorly
differentiated SCC, T3N0M0, Stage II; and (Case 3) lower thoracic
esophagus, moderately differentiated SCC, T3N1M0, Stage III. Next, we
validated the expression status of the candidate gene in 64 clinical
samples and 10 ESCC cell lines (KYSE150, KYSE270, KYSE410, KYSE450,
KYSE510, TE1, TE6, TE8, TE9, and TE10) using quantitative real-time PCR
(qRT-PCR). [Results] In RNA-seq analysis, 34 genes showed more than
30-fold decrease in tumor samples compared to normal tissues, and the
most downregulated gene was transmembrane protease serine 11B
(TMPRSS11B). Amon these 34 genes, other 5 genes of TMPRSS11 family
(TMPRSS11A, TMPRSS11BNL, TMPRSS11D, TMPRSS11E, and TMPRSS11F) were
included. qRT-PCR analysis revealed that TMPRSS11B expression in ESCC
samples were lower than those in normal samples (p [Background]
Esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) is one of the most malignant
cancers. The molecular mechanism of ESCC development has not been fully
elucidated. [Aim] The aim of this study is to identify responsible genes
for ESCC development. [Materials and Methods] Firstly, we performed
transcriptome sequence (RNA-seq) analysis of surgically resected tumor
and corresponding normal tissues form 3 ESCC patients with different
tumor locus, histrogical differentiation, and TNM stage.by RNA-seq
analysis: (Case 1) upper thoracic esophagus, well differentiated SCC,
TNM, Stage I; (Case 2) middle thoracic esophagus, poorly differentiated
SCC, T3N0M0, Stage II; and (Case 3) lower thoracic esophagus, moderately
differentiated SCC, T3N1M0, Stage III. Next, we validated the expression
status of the candidate gene in 64 clinical samples and 10 ESCC cell
lines (KYSE150, KYSE270, KYSE410, KYSE450, KYSE510, TE1, TE6, TE8, TE9,
and TE10) using quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR). [Results] In
RNA-seq analysis, 34 genes showed more than 30-fold decrease in tumor
samples compared to normal tissues, and the most downregulated gene was
transmembrane protease serine 11B (TMPRSS11B). Amon these 34 genes, other
5 genes of TMPRSS11 family (TMPRSS11A, TMPRSS11BNL, TMPRSS11D, TMPRSS11E,
and TMPRSS11F) were included. qRT-PCR analysis revealed that TMPRSS11B
expression in ESCC samples were lower than those in normal samples (p <
0.001). Downregulation of TMPRSS11B in tumor samples compared to
corresponding normal samples were observed in 51 cases out of 64 (79.7%).
Patients with expression levels of TMPRSS11B that were below the median
value were assigned to the low expression group (n = 32), whereas those
with expression values above the median were assigned to the high
expression group (n = 32). Significant difference was not observed
between two groups regarding clinicopathological data, including age,
gender, TNM stage, and lymphatic/venous invasion. TMPRSS11B expression
was not detected in all of ESCC cell lines and noncancerous esophageal
epithelial cell line, HET1A. [Conclusion] Our results suggest that
downreguration of TMPRSS11B expression occurs in early stage of the ESCC
oncogenesis and that TMPRSS11B has tumor suppressive roles in ESCC
development.

