Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Urinary cell-free microRNA panel in detection of urothelial
carcinoma of the urinary bladder


Urothelial carcinoma of the urinary bladder (UCUB) is the most common
malignancy of the urinary system. Although about 80% of cases is a
non-muscle invasive form of UCUB a high rate of local recurrence and
progression to invasive form is observed. Early-stage tumors have very
good prognosis, but current diagnostic methods (cystoscopy and urine
cytology) suffer from low sensitivity. This reflects a large number of
relapse, which occurs in almost 70% of superficial UCUB. This has led to
the development of multiple molecular urinary biomarkers, but none are
sufficiently robust to enter clinical practice. In this study we aimed to
develop a clinically applicable, specific and sensitive panel of urine
microRNAs enabling early detection of UCUB and prediction of risk of
progression to muscle-invasive form.In the first phase of study we have
analyzed expression profiles of 1733 miRNAs in urine supernatant of 16
UCUB patients (6 invasive, 5 high-grade non-invasive, 5 low-grade
non-invasive), 17 controls, 10 RCC patients and 4 urinary tract
infections (UTI) using Affymetrix miRNA microarrays. MicroRNAs able
distinguish between UCUB and control groups were further validated using
specific TaqMan assays and qRT-PCR method on independent cohort of 100
UCUB patients, 40 controls and 25 RCC patients (training phase - 40 UCUB,
15 controls, 10 RCC; validation phase - 60 UCUB, 25 controls, 15 RCC, 20
UTI).Global expression profiling revealed set of 76 miRNAs significantly
differentially expressed in urine of UCUB patients (P Urothelial
carcinoma of the urinary bladder (UCUB) is the most common malignancy of
the urinary system. Although about 80% of cases is a non-muscle invasive
form of UCUB a high rate of local recurrence and progression to invasive
form is observed. Early-stage tumors have very good prognosis, but
current diagnostic methods (cystoscopy and urine cytology) suffer from
low sensitivity. This reflects a large number of relapse, which occurs in
almost 70% of superficial UCUB. This has led to the development of
multiple molecular urinary biomarkers, but none are sufficiently robust
to enter clinical practice. In this study we aimed to develop a
clinically applicable, specific and sensitive panel of urine microRNAs
enabling early detection of UCUB and prediction of risk of progression to
muscle-invasive form.In the first phase of study we have analyzed
expression profiles of 1733 miRNAs in urine supernatant of 16 UCUB
patients (6 invasive, 5 high-grade non-invasive, 5 low-grade
non-invasive), 17 controls, 10 RCC patients and 4 urinary tract
infections (UTI) using Affymetrix miRNA microarrays. MicroRNAs able
distinguish between UCUB and control groups were further validated using
specific TaqMan assays and qRT-PCR method on independent cohort of 100
UCUB patients, 40 controls and 25 RCC patients (training phase - 40 UCUB,
15 controls, 10 RCC; validation phase - 60 UCUB, 25 controls, 15 RCC, 20
UTI).Global expression profiling revealed set of 76 miRNAs significantly
differentially expressed in urine of UCUB patients (P < 0,01) compared to
healthy controls, thereof 64 highly up-regulated and 12 down-regulated.
These miRNAs showed specificity for UCUB even when compared to other
examined cohorts (RCC, UTI). Moreover 23 miRNAs were able distinguish
invasive and non-invasive forms of UCUB (P Urothelial carcinoma of the
urinary bladder (UCUB) is the most common malignancy of the urinary
system. Although about 80% of cases is a non-muscle invasive form of UCUB
a high rate of local recurrence and progression to invasive form is
observed. Early-stage tumors have very good prognosis, but current
diagnostic methods (cystoscopy and urine cytology) suffer from low
sensitivity. This reflects a large number of relapse, which occurs in
almost 70% of superficial UCUB. This has led to the development of
multiple molecular urinary biomarkers, but none are sufficiently robust
to enter clinical practice. In this study we aimed to develop a
clinically applicable, specific and sensitive panel of urine microRNAs
enabling early detection of UCUB and prediction of risk of progression to
muscle-invasive form.In the first phase of study we have analyzed
expression profiles of 1733 miRNAs in urine supernatant of 16 UCUB
patients (6 invasive, 5 high-grade non-invasive, 5 low-grade
non-invasive), 17 controls, 10 RCC patients and 4 urinary tract
infections (UTI) using Affymetrix miRNA microarrays. MicroRNAs able
distinguish between UCUB and control groups were further validated using
specific TaqMan assays and qRT-PCR method on independent cohort of 100
UCUB patients, 40 controls and 25 RCC patients (training phase - 40 UCUB,
15 controls, 10 RCC; validation phase - 60 UCUB, 25 controls, 15 RCC, 20
UTI).Global expression profiling revealed set of 76 miRNAs significantly
differentially expressed in urine of UCUB patients (P < 0,01) compared to
healthy controls, thereof 64 highly up-regulated and 12 down-regulated.
These miRNAs showed specificity for UCUB even when compared to other
examined cohorts (RCC, UTI). Moreover 23 miRNAs were able distinguish
invasive and non-invasive forms of UCUB (P < 0,01) and 18 miRNAs
high-grade and low-grad non-invasive (p Urothelial carcinoma of the
urinary bladder (UCUB) is the most common malignancy of the urinary
system. Although about 80% of cases is a non-muscle invasive form of UCUB
a high rate of local recurrence and progression to invasive form is
observed. Early-stage tumors have very good prognosis, but current
diagnostic methods (cystoscopy and urine cytology) suffer from low
sensitivity. This reflects a large number of relapse, which occurs in
almost 70% of superficial UCUB. This has led to the development of
multiple molecular urinary biomarkers, but none are sufficiently robust
to enter clinical practice. In this study we aimed to develop a
clinically applicable, specific and sensitive panel of urine microRNAs
enabling early detection of UCUB and prediction of risk of progression to
muscle-invasive form.In the first phase of study we have analyzed
expression profiles of 1733 miRNAs in urine supernatant of 16 UCUB
patients (6 invasive, 5 high-grade non-invasive, 5 low-grade
non-invasive), 17 controls, 10 RCC patients and 4 urinary tract
infections (UTI) using Affymetrix miRNA microarrays. MicroRNAs able
distinguish between UCUB and control groups were further validated using
specific TaqMan assays and qRT-PCR method on independent cohort of 100
UCUB patients, 40 controls and 25 RCC patients (training phase - 40 UCUB,
15 controls, 10 RCC; validation phase - 60 UCUB, 25 controls, 15 RCC, 20
UTI).Global expression profiling revealed set of 76 miRNAs significantly
differentially expressed in urine of UCUB patients (P < 0,01) compared to
healthy controls, thereof 64 highly up-regulated and 12 down-regulated.
These miRNAs showed specificity for UCUB even when compared to other
examined cohorts (RCC, UTI). Moreover 23 miRNAs were able distinguish
invasive and non-invasive forms of UCUB (P < 0,01) and 18 miRNAs
high-grade and low-grad non-invasive (p < 0,01). Set of 12 miRNAs with
highest specificity and expression level was validated in training phase
of study. Based on training phase results the panel of 3 miRNAs was
profiled. Validation phase confirmed diagnostic potential and ability of
this urine miRNA-based panel to differentiate between UCUB patients and
controls with high sensitivity and specificity (AUC = 0,857, sensitivity
= 82%, specificity = 80%).Our data have shown that urinary microRNAs
could serve as sensitive and specific biomarkers of UCUB and could be
useful tool to increase sensitivity of standard cytological examination
and to decrease high costs for long-term follow-up of UCUB patients. This
work was supported by Ministry of Health of the Czech Republic, grant nr.
15-33158A, 15-34553A, 15-31627A and 15-34678A. All rights reserved.

