Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Notch4 mediates mesenchymal-epithelial-like transition in melanoma


In melanoma Notch signaling is a well-established oncogenic factor and
presumably driver of disease progression. Here we report that
overexpression of the constitutively active intracellular domain of
Notch4 (N4ICD) directs a mesenchymal-epithelial-like transition that
results in an epithelial, low migratory, invasive and proliferative
phenotype with decreased tumorigenicity in-vivo. Investigating the
expression profile of 50 EMT markers in N4ICD overexpressing cells
revealed an epithelial-like gene signature with major EMT markers,
including Vimentin, MMP2, Snail1, Snail2 and Twist1, significantly
decreased and several epithelial markers, including E-cadherin,
Desmoplakin and Occludin significantly increased. N4ICD suppresses the
expression of Snail2 and Twist1 in a non-canonical fashion by inducing
transcription factors Hey-1 and Hey-2 which directly bind to promoter
regions of Snail2 and Twist1 as determined by EMSA and luciferase assays.
N4ICD overexpression also results in increased beta-catenin protein
levels exclusively limited to the cytoplasm. Immunohistochemical
stainings of primary melanomas and subcutaneous metastasis showed a
correlation between Notch4, E-cadherin and beta-catenin expression. Our
results demonstrate that overexpression of Notch4 ICD results in the
emergence of an epithelial-like phenotype with increased E-cadherin and
cytoplasmic beta catenin potentially steering the reformation of adherens
junctions. This indicates that Notch4 supports a
mesenchymal-epithelial-like transition trapping cancer cells in a low
proliferative, invasive and migratory epithelial state, suggesting Notch4
to be a tumor suppressor in melanoma.

