Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Drug combinations for breast cancer based on synthetic lethality
screens in yeast


Synthetic lethality describes an interdependent relationship between two
genes, where the loss of either one alone can be compensated, while the
simultaneous loss of both genes causes a non-viable phenotype. In recent
years, first therapeutics based on this concept entered the clinic, most
notably the PARP inhibitors for BRCA1/2-mutated cancers.In the present
study, we analyzed synthetic lethal interactions in yeast to identify new
and potentially synergistic drug combinations for breast cancer therapy.
We were able to confirm significantly enhanced cytotoxicity for predicted
drug pairs in breast cancer cell lines in vitro.First, a predictor built
from publicly available yeast genetic interactions in the Data Repository
of Yeast Genetic INteraction (DRYGIN) was used to predict potential
synthetic lethal genetic interactions in human. Independently, a data set
containing all pharmacological approaches, targeted or cytostatic, in
breast cancer therapy was created. These drug combinations and their
respective targets were then analyzed regarding their coverage of
predicted synthetic lethal interactions. New drug combinations,
previously unused in breast cancer therapy, were identified in silico by
combining drugs already in use for breast cancer therapy (individually or
in other combinations) in such a manner that their combination covers one
or more potential synthetic lethal gene pairs. From this set of new drug
combination and their synthetic lethal gene pairs we further pursued the
predicted interdependencies between farnesyl diphosphate synthase (FDPS)
and tubulin, beta 1 (TUBB1) and between FDPS and
phosphoinositide-dependent kinase-1 (PDPK1) as well as
prostaglandin-endoperoxide synthase 2 (PTGS2). Drugs targeting these
genes are celecoxib (PDPK1, PTGS2), an anti-inflammatory drug, and
zoledronic acid (FDPS), a bone degradation inhibitor, as well as the
cytotoxic agent paclitaxel (TUBB1).We performed cell viability and
cytotoxicity assays to determine therapeutic effects of celecoxib,
zoledronic acid and paclitaxel alone and in combination on selected
breast cancer cell lines.Our results showed statistically significant
decreases in cell viability for the combinational treatment with
zoledronic acid and paclitaxel as well as with the per se non-cytotoxic
combination of zoledronic acid and celecoxib when compared to single
agent treatment.In conclusion, we present a bioinformatics approach to
predict potentially synergistic gene interactions based on synthetic
lethality found in yeast and a strategy for utilizing these interactions
for identifying new potentially synergistic drug combinations.

