Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A renal CpG island methylator phenotype (R-CIMP) in kidney tumors
associated with germline mutations of FH and SDHB


Germline mutations of the genes encoding the Krebs cycle enzymes fumarate
hydratase (FH) and succinate dehydrogenase (SDHB, SDHC, SDHD) have both
been associated with an increased risk of renal cell carcinoma (RCC).
These renal tumors demonstrate complete loss of enzyme activity and
significantly increased levels of intracellular fumarate or succinate
that are predicted to infer with the actions of multiple cellular
processes primarily through the inhibition of 2-oxoglutarate-dependent
dioxygenases, such as the prolyl hydroxylases that regulate the HIF
pathway and the TET enzymes that regulate DNA methylation.This study
evaluated and compared the genome-wide methylation profiles of 33 tumor
samples (including 9 FH -/- and 7 SDHB -/- tumors), 10 associated normal
samples and 13 cell-lines (including cell-line models derived from FH -/-
and SDHB -/- tumors) using the Illumina HumanMethylation450 BeadChip
arrays. Tumors derived from patientswith germline FH or SDHB mutations
demonstrated a distinct pattern of hypermethylation across the genome
with enrichment for hypermethylation within the CpG island regions. SDHB
mutation associated tumors demonstrated that was more variable and less
extensive pattern of hypermethylation than the tumors associated with
germline FH mutations. Cell-line models derived from HLRCC or SDHB tumors
demonstrated patterns of hypermethylation similar to the patterns
observed in the tumors, yet re-expression of either wild-type FH or SDHB
within these cell-line models did not alter the methylation profiles. All
the HLRCC and SDHB-RCC cell lines, including the cell-line re-expressing
of either wild-type FH or SDHB, demonstrated growth inhibition and
reduced invasion rates in response to treatment with
5-aza-2-deoxycytidine.Thus, renal cell carcinomas associated with FH or
SDHB germline mutation demonstrate a specific R-CIMP hypermethylation
profile that differentiates these tumors from tumors derived from other
RCC susceptibility syndromes. These tumors represent the most
aggressivetypes of familial-associated RCC and this could provide a
useful biomarker for identifying these tumors and de-methylating agents,
such as 5-aza-2-deoxycytidine, may be effective as part of a therapeutic
regime for the treatment of these tumors.

