Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel tumor-suppressor role for squalene epoxidase in human
colorectal metastasis


Malignancy cancer cells are reported to develop mechanisms to resist
anoikis (apoptotic cell death from deprivation of cell-cell/matrix
interactions), thereby enhancing the survival of cancer cells and
secondary tumor formation in distant organs, which is responsible for 90%
of cancer-related fatalities. A high serum level of cholesterol
(hypercholesterolemia) in patients with colorectal cancers (CRCs)
metastasis is reported, but the underlying relationship were never
elucidated. Human CRC tissues revealed that the expression of squalene
epoxidase (SqE), the rate-limiting enzyme in cholesterol synthesis, is
significantly reduced in the advanced stages of CRC. Here we report that
the knockdown/degradation of SqE by either the application of
small-interfering RNA against SqE or a high-level of cholesterol
significantly potentiates CRC cell survival/metastasis via the induction
of an epithelial-mesenchymal transition as well as of anoikis resistance.
We identified the interactions of SqE with glycogen synthase kinase 3
(GSK3) and/or p53: SqE knockdown induced the dissociation of GSK3 and
p53, thereby resulting in the downregulation of E-cadherin via the
inhibition of GSK3 activity and of -catenin degradation, as well as the
p53 degradation by the hdm2 upregulation. Overall, the present study
demonstrates SqE is a key negative regulator of cancer cell survival and
of CRC metastasis.

