Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Male pattern baldness and risk of incident skin cancer in a cohort
of men


Background: Male pattern baldness (androgenic alopecia) has been
associated with scalp skin cancer in case-control studies. A potential
androgen basis of melanoma has been hypothesized and baldness has been
associated with higher levels of androgens. We examined the association
between male pattern baldness and risk of skin cancer, including
melanoma, squamous cell carcinoma (SCC), and basal cell carcinoma (BCC)
in a prospective cohort study.Methods: We included 36,032 participants
from the Health Professionals Follow-up Study. In 1992, participants
reported their status of male-pattern baldness at age 45 years by
choosing from five crown-view pictograms based on Norwood's
classification. Diagnosis of skin cancers was reported in the
self-reported questionnaires biennially and report on melanoma and SCC
was pathologically confirmed. Cox proportional hazard models were used to
compute the hazard ratios (HR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI).Results:
We identified 327 cases of melanoma, 1324 cases of SCC, and 8438 cases of
BCC during the follow-up. Male-pattern baldness at age 45 was not
associated with risk of incident melanoma, but was significantly
associated with increased risk of both SCC and BCC. The
multivariate-adjusted HR (95% CI) for the highest category of baldness
(frontal plus severe vertex baldness) was 1.33 (1.06-1.68) for SCC
(Ptrend = 0.001) and 1.23 (1.12-1.35) for BCC (PtrendBackground: Male
pattern baldness (androgenic alopecia) has been associated with scalp
skin cancer in case-control studies. A potential androgen basis of
melanoma has been hypothesized and baldness has been associated with
higher levels of androgens. We examined the association between male
pattern baldness and risk of skin cancer, including melanoma, squamous
cell carcinoma (SCC), and basal cell carcinoma (BCC) in a prospective
cohort study.Methods: We included 36,032 participants from the Health
Professionals Follow-up Study. In 1992, participants reported their
status of male-pattern baldness at age 45 years by choosing from five
crown-view pictograms based on Norwood's classification. Diagnosis of
skin cancers was reported in the self-reported questionnaires biennially
and report on melanoma and SCC was pathologically confirmed. Cox
proportional hazard models were used to compute the hazard ratios (HR)
and 95% confidence intervals (CI).Results: We identified 327 cases of
melanoma, 1324 cases of SCC, and 8438 cases of BCC during the follow-up.
Male-pattern baldness at age 45 was not associated with risk of incident
melanoma, but was significantly associated with increased risk of both
SCC and BCC. The multivariate-adjusted HR (95% CI) for the highest
category of baldness (frontal plus severe vertex baldness) was 1.33
(1.06-1.68) for SCC (Ptrend = 0.001) and 1.23 (1.12-1.35) for BCC
(Ptrend<0.0001), compared with no baldness. Analyses by body sites of
tumors found significant associations between frontal plus moderate to
severe vertex baldness and risk of melanoma (HR = 1.83, 95% CI:
1.01-3.34) and SCC (HR = 1.30, 95% CI: 1.02-1.66) at head and neck. The
associations were particularly stronger for scalp melanoma (HR = 7.15,
95% CI: 1.29-39.42) and scalp SCC (HR = 7.09, 95% CI: 3.84-13.08), but
not for non-scalp head and neck sites.Conclusion: Male pattern baldness
was positively associated with increased risk of skin cancer. The
associations may only exist for skin cancer at head and neck,
particularly those occurring at scalp.

