Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Camalexin, an indole phytoalexin from Arabidopsis thaliana,
displays activity against ovarian cancer stem cells


Ovarian cancer is the most lethal of all gynecological cancers. Current
treatment of advanced ovarian cancers, which includes debulking surgery
and chemotherapy, is initially effective in majority of patients;
however, 70-90% of them eventually develop disease recurrence with
limited treatment options. This recurrence can be attributed to
therapy-resistant cancer stem cells (CSC), which represent a subset of
all malignant cells that form the bulk of ovarian cancers. CSC may remain
as a minimal residual disease after the bulk of ovarian tumor mass has
been removed by surgery and/or chemotherapy; therefore, there is
considerable current interest in the development of new therapies that
can effectively target this insidious subpopulation of tumor cells. Here
we report on the anticancer activity of camalexin, a major indole
phytoalexin of Arabidopsis thaliana, against ovarian cancer stem cells.
We demonstrate that camalexin inhibits proliferation and induces cell
death in ovarian cancer stem cells that exhibit various molecular
mechanisms of anticancer drug resistance. Furthermore, we present the
mode of action of this prospective anticancer agent identified by
combined approach that included in silico predictions, comprehensive
analysis of whole-genome gene expression data and target-specific assays.
Lastly, we demonstrate the relevance of the identified mode of action in
context of ovarian cancer cell signaling.

