Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Apoptosis and proliferation in micropapillary structures of
colorectal polyps and carcinomas


Background: Micropapillary structures (MIP) can be defined as focal piles
of epithelial cells in columnar epithelium. MIP's are found in many
cancers, but they are characteristic for serrated colorectal carcinomas.
Suprabasal cells of MIP show no contact with extracellular matrix
(unpublished).Objective: To evaluate whether MIP cells in colorectal
polyps and cancers would show evidence for anoikis inhibition we assessed
proliferation and apoptosis indexes (PI and AI, respectively) in MIP and
non-MIP epithelium.Materials and methods: We stained human colorectal
lesions: non-serrated adenomas (n = 15), serrated polyps (n = 29),
conventional adenocarcinomas (n = 32), and serrated adenocarcinomas (n =
30) with antibodies to Ki67 and M30. To obtain PI and AI two independent
observers counted proportions of positive cells separately in the cells
of MIP and in non-MIP epithelium.Results: In carcinomas, AI was lower in
the cells of MIP (M30; median 0, range 0-40) than in the non-MIP cells
(median 2, range 0-40; pBackground: Micropapillary structures (MIP) can
be defined as focal piles of epithelial cells in columnar epithelium.
MIP's are found in many cancers, but they are characteristic for serrated
colorectal carcinomas. Suprabasal cells of MIP show no contact with
extracellular matrix (unpublished).Objective: To evaluate whether MIP
cells in colorectal polyps and cancers would show evidence for anoikis
inhibition we assessed proliferation and apoptosis indexes (PI and AI,
respectively) in MIP and non-MIP epithelium.Materials and methods: We
stained human colorectal lesions: non-serrated adenomas (n = 15),
serrated polyps (n = 29), conventional adenocarcinomas (n = 32), and
serrated adenocarcinomas (n = 30) with antibodies to Ki67 and M30. To
obtain PI and AI two independent observers counted proportions of
positive cells separately in the cells of MIP and in non-MIP
epithelium.Results: In carcinomas, AI was lower in the cells of MIP (M30;
median 0, range 0-40) than in the non-MIP cells (median 2, range 0-40;
p<0.001, Wilcoxon). Similarly, PI was lower in the MIP cells (Ki67; MIP:
median 17, range 0-93; non-MIP: median 30, range 1-93; pBackground:
Micropapillary structures (MIP) can be defined as focal piles of
epithelial cells in columnar epithelium. MIP's are found in many cancers,
but they are characteristic for serrated colorectal carcinomas.
Suprabasal cells of MIP show no contact with extracellular matrix
(unpublished).Objective: To evaluate whether MIP cells in colorectal
polyps and cancers would show evidence for anoikis inhibition we assessed
proliferation and apoptosis indexes (PI and AI, respectively) in MIP and
non-MIP epithelium.Materials and methods: We stained human colorectal
lesions: non-serrated adenomas (n = 15), serrated polyps (n = 29),
conventional adenocarcinomas (n = 32), and serrated adenocarcinomas (n =
30) with antibodies to Ki67 and M30. To obtain PI and AI two independent
observers counted proportions of positive cells separately in the cells
of MIP and in non-MIP epithelium.Results: In carcinomas, AI was lower in
the cells of MIP (M30; median 0, range 0-40) than in the non-MIP cells
(median 2, range 0-40; p<0.001, Wilcoxon). Similarly, PI was lower in the
MIP cells (Ki67; MIP: median 17, range 0-93; non-MIP: median 30, range
1-93; p<0.001). Similar patterns were evident in subsets of serrated
lesions, in both carcinomas (pBackground: Micropapillary structures (MIP)
can be defined as focal piles of epithelial cells in columnar epithelium.
MIP's are found in many cancers, but they are characteristic for serrated
colorectal carcinomas. Suprabasal cells of MIP show no contact with
extracellular matrix (unpublished).Objective: To evaluate whether MIP
cells in colorectal polyps and cancers would show evidence for anoikis
inhibition we assessed proliferation and apoptosis indexes (PI and AI,
respectively) in MIP and non-MIP epithelium.Materials and methods: We
stained human colorectal lesions: non-serrated adenomas (n = 15),
serrated polyps (n = 29), conventional adenocarcinomas (n = 32), and
serrated adenocarcinomas (n = 30) with antibodies to Ki67 and M30. To
obtain PI and AI two independent observers counted proportions of
positive cells separately in the cells of MIP and in non-MIP
epithelium.Results: In carcinomas, AI was lower in the cells of MIP (M30;
median 0, range 0-40) than in the non-MIP cells (median 2, range 0-40;
p<0.001, Wilcoxon). Similarly, PI was lower in the MIP cells (Ki67; MIP:
median 17, range 0-93; non-MIP: median 30, range 1-93; p<0.001). Similar
patterns were evident in subsets of serrated lesions, in both carcinomas
(p<0.001) and polyps (pBackground: Micropapillary structures (MIP) can be
defined as focal piles of epithelial cells in columnar epithelium. MIP's
are found in many cancers, but they are characteristic for serrated
colorectal carcinomas. Suprabasal cells of MIP show no contact with
extracellular matrix (unpublished).Objective: To evaluate whether MIP
cells in colorectal polyps and cancers would show evidence for anoikis
inhibition we assessed proliferation and apoptosis indexes (PI and AI,
respectively) in MIP and non-MIP epithelium.Materials and methods: We
stained human colorectal lesions: non-serrated adenomas (n = 15),
serrated polyps (n = 29), conventional adenocarcinomas (n = 32), and
serrated adenocarcinomas (n = 30) with antibodies to Ki67 and M30. To
obtain PI and AI two independent observers counted proportions of
positive cells separately in the cells of MIP and in non-MIP
epithelium.Results: In carcinomas, AI was lower in the cells of MIP (M30;
median 0, range 0-40) than in the non-MIP cells (median 2, range 0-40;
p<0.001, Wilcoxon). Similarly, PI was lower in the MIP cells (Ki67; MIP:
median 17, range 0-93; non-MIP: median 30, range 1-93; p<0.001). Similar
patterns were evident in subsets of serrated lesions, in both carcinomas
(p<0.001) and polyps (p<0.001), and in non-serrated carcinomas
(pBackground: Micropapillary structures (MIP) can be defined as focal
piles of epithelial cells in columnar epithelium. MIP's are found in many
cancers, but they are characteristic for serrated colorectal carcinomas.
Suprabasal cells of MIP show no contact with extracellular matrix
(unpublished).Objective: To evaluate whether MIP cells in colorectal
polyps and cancers would show evidence for anoikis inhibition we assessed
proliferation and apoptosis indexes (PI and AI, respectively) in MIP and
non-MIP epithelium.Materials and methods: We stained human colorectal
lesions: non-serrated adenomas (n = 15), serrated polyps (n = 29),
conventional adenocarcinomas (n = 32), and serrated adenocarcinomas (n =
30) with antibodies to Ki67 and M30. To obtain PI and AI two independent
observers counted proportions of positive cells separately in the cells
of MIP and in non-MIP epithelium.Results: In carcinomas, AI was lower in
the cells of MIP (M30; median 0, range 0-40) than in the non-MIP cells
(median 2, range 0-40; p<0.001, Wilcoxon). Similarly, PI was lower in the
MIP cells (Ki67; MIP: median 17, range 0-93; non-MIP: median 30, range
1-93; p<0.001). Similar patterns were evident in subsets of serrated
lesions, in both carcinomas (p<0.001) and polyps (p<0.001), and in
non-serrated carcinomas (p<0.004). Apoptosis/proliferation (AI/PI) ratio
was lower in the MIP cells than in the non-MIP epithelium in both cancers
and their precursor lesions (PBackground: Micropapillary structures (MIP)
can be defined as focal piles of epithelial cells in columnar epithelium.
MIP's are found in many cancers, but they are characteristic for serrated
colorectal carcinomas. Suprabasal cells of MIP show no contact with
extracellular matrix (unpublished).Objective: To evaluate whether MIP
cells in colorectal polyps and cancers would show evidence for anoikis
inhibition we assessed proliferation and apoptosis indexes (PI and AI,
respectively) in MIP and non-MIP epithelium.Materials and methods: We
stained human colorectal lesions: non-serrated adenomas (n = 15),
serrated polyps (n = 29), conventional adenocarcinomas (n = 32), and
serrated adenocarcinomas (n = 30) with antibodies to Ki67 and M30. To
obtain PI and AI two independent observers counted proportions of
positive cells separately in the cells of MIP and in non-MIP
epithelium.Results: In carcinomas, AI was lower in the cells of MIP (M30;
median 0, range 0-40) than in the non-MIP cells (median 2, range 0-40;
p<0.001, Wilcoxon). Similarly, PI was lower in the MIP cells (Ki67; MIP:
median 17, range 0-93; non-MIP: median 30, range 1-93; p<0.001). Similar
patterns were evident in subsets of serrated lesions, in both carcinomas
(p<0.001) and polyps (p<0.001), and in non-serrated carcinomas (p<0.004).
Apoptosis/proliferation (AI/PI) ratio was lower in the MIP cells than in
the non-MIP epithelium in both cancers and their precursor lesions
(P<0.01).Conclusion: Apoptosis rate was lower in MIP's than in other
tumor epithelium indicating ability of these cells to survive without
matrix contact, i.e. Anoikis is inhibited in them. Lower PI could suggest
that cells in the MIP are in some kind of quiescent stage. However,
significantly lower AI/PI ratio in the MIP infers that these structures
may form a fast growing subpopulation of tumor cells. Further studies are
in progress to dissect mechanism of formation of MIP and matrix
independent survival of tumor cells in them.

