Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Graduate public health students as health educators: A pilot
project to promote cancer health in Puerto Rico


Introduction: Community health workers, known as promotores de salud in
Spanish, have been recognized as an effective communication channel to
promote health education among marginalized groups. However, cancer
education programs often cease efforts when funding ends. This can be
particularly problematic in Puerto Rico (PR), where cancer is the leading
cause of death. In an effort to identify new ways to provide sustainable
cancer health education programs, the NCI-funded PACHE partnership
between Moffitt Cancer Center and Ponce Health Sciences University (PSHU)
trained graduate public health students to disseminate cancer education
to PR communities. This was achieved by developing a culturally adapted
version of Cancer 101: A Cancer Education and Training Program (Cancer
101) to the PR community. A pilot study was conducted to test students
ability to: I) deliver the educational intervention, charlas, in the
community; II) utilize a specific module from the curriculum, Cancer in
PR, which focused on current island data and statistics, and definitions
of the cancer and its various types; and III) to measure community
members cancer knowledge before and after the charla.Methods: Students
enrolled in the class Principles of Health Education in Practice (n = 15)
participated in a two-day Cancer 101 training session. Upon completion,
students were divided into 5 teams (n = 3 per team), each delivering the
Cancer in PR charla to a community group of their selection. Cancer
knowledge was assessed before and after the charla via a 10-item true or
false questionnaire. Items were summed to create an overall knowledge
score (range: 0-10).Results: A total of 201 participants attended the
community educational intervention at 10 different locations in PR
(Salinas Elderly, Guancha, Hogar San Jose, etc.). Participants pre and
post-test mean score (SD) were 4.54 (2.31) and 7.65 (2.28) respectively,
with a 3.1 (2.79) point increase in overall cancer knowledge
(pIntroduction: Community health workers, known as promotores de salud in
Spanish, have been recognized as an effective communication channel to
promote health education among marginalized groups. However, cancer
education programs often cease efforts when funding ends. This can be
particularly problematic in Puerto Rico (PR), where cancer is the leading
cause of death. In an effort to identify new ways to provide sustainable
cancer health education programs, the NCI-funded PACHE partnership
between Moffitt Cancer Center and Ponce Health Sciences University (PSHU)
trained graduate public health students to disseminate cancer education
to PR communities. This was achieved by developing a culturally adapted
version of Cancer 101: A Cancer Education and Training Program (Cancer
101) to the PR community. A pilot study was conducted to test students
ability to: I) deliver the educational intervention, charlas, in the
community; II) utilize a specific module from the curriculum, Cancer in
PR, which focused on current island data and statistics, and definitions
of the cancer and its various types; and III) to measure community
members cancer knowledge before and after the charla.Methods: Students
enrolled in the class Principles of Health Education in Practice (n = 15)
participated in a two-day Cancer 101 training session. Upon completion,
students were divided into 5 teams (n = 3 per team), each delivering the
Cancer in PR charla to a community group of their selection. Cancer
knowledge was assessed before and after the charla via a 10-item true or
false questionnaire. Items were summed to create an overall knowledge
score (range: 0-10).Results: A total of 201 participants attended the
community educational intervention at 10 different locations in PR
(Salinas Elderly, Guancha, Hogar San Jose, etc.). Participants pre and
post-test mean score (SD) were 4.54 (2.31) and 7.65 (2.28) respectively,
with a 3.1 (2.79) point increase in overall cancer knowledge (p<.000).
Students reported the Cancer 101 toolkit was feasible and appropriate for
each of the communities in which they delivered the
intervention.Conclusion: Results from this pilot project suggest public
health students are an innovative and sustainable way to improve cancer
health communication and a novel strategy for reducing cancer health
disparities.

