Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exosome-derived microRNAs contributes to prostate cancer
chemoresistance


Accumulating evidence has demonstrated that certain miRNAs play important
roles in cancer cell chemoresistance. However, the pleotropic functions
of exosome-derived miRNAs on developing chemoresistance remain unknown.
In this study, we aimed to build potential networks of miRNAs, which
derived from the exosome of chemoresistant prostate cancer (PCa) cells,
with their known target genes using miRNA expression profiling and
bioinformatic tools. Global miRNA expression profiles were measured by
microarray. Twelve miRNAs were initially selected and validated by
qRT-PCR. Known targets of deregulated miRNAs were utilized using
DIANA-TarBase database v6.0. The incorporation of deregulated miRNAs and
target genes into KEGG pathways were utilized using DIANA-mirPath
software. To construct potential miRNA regulatory networks, the
overlapping parts of two selected KEGG pathways were visualized by
Cytoscape software. We identified 29 deregulated miRNAs, including 19 up
and 10 down, in exosome samples derived from two kinds of paclitaxel
resistance PCa cells (PC3-TXR and DU145-TXR) compared with their parental
cells (PC3 and DU145). The enrichment results of deregulated miRNAs and
known target genes showed that a few pathways were correlated with
several critical cell signaling pathways. We found that hub hsa-16-5p,
hsa-miR-3915, hsa-miR-488-3p, hsa-miR-5004-5p, hsa-miR-23c, hsa-miR-3673,
hsa-miR-3654, and hsa-miR-32-5p were potential targets to hub androgen
receptor (AR) and phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN). Hub TCF4 target
genes were mainly regulated by hub hsa-miR3176, hsa-miR-141-3p,
hsa-miR-606, hsa-miR381, and hsa-miR-429 miRNAs. These results may
provide a linkage between PCa chemoresistance and exosome regulatory
networks and thus lead us to propose that PTEN and TCF4 genes may be the
important genes which regulated by exosome miRNAs in chemoresistance
cancer cells. Supported by NSFC Key Project 81130046; NSFC Project
81171993 and NSFC81272415; Guangxi Key Projects 2013GXNSFEA053004 and
2012GXNSFCB053004; Guangxi Ministry of Education grants 201202ZD022 and
201201ZD004.

