Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Alternative polyadenylation of eukaryotic initiation factor 5A-2
(eIF5A-2) mRNAs examined by quadruplex single molecule RNA fluorescence
in situ hybridization (smRNA-FISH)


Normal expression of the minor oncogene EIF5A2 in the hypusine pathway is
restricted to brain and testis. However aberrant expression has been
noted in multiple cancers, including ovarian gastric, colorectal and
pancreatic, and artificial overexpression causes tumor growth in naked
mice. Unlike cDNAs from the homologous gene EIF5A1, which are readily
translated into protein upon transient transfection, EIF5A2-mRNAs only
associate with monosomes without production of eIF5A-2 protein.Here we
present data from multiple EIF5A2-positive cell lines on the steady state
levels of the four different EIF5A2-mRNAs that arise through differential
polyadenylation. While considering qPCR and RNA-Seq, we chose to apply
Stellaris single molecule RNA fluorescence in situ hybridization with
four unique probe sets, each reporting on the dependent A, B, C, or D
segments. The probe sets were designed with multiple tiled singly labeled
18-22-mer oligonucleotides with balanced GC content, and hence similar
hybridization characteristics, which in turn enabled the simultaneous
quadruplex smRNA FISH.Stellaris RNA FISH leaves the cell intact, and also
does not require RNA isolation or nucleic acid amplification that may
introduce an otherwise hidden experimental bias. The single molecule
spots revealed by widefield microscopy and subsequent image analysis
co-localized with a high degree of confidence. Taking advantage of the
added spatial dimension that RNA FISH affords, we also determined the
localization of each mRNA variant and recorded the cell-to-cell
variability and the actual range of mRNA copy numbers per cell.Our data
is consistent with previous gene expression analysis data, but also
provide actual counts of each mRNA variant.The results presented here
have direct applications for the expression of the minor oncogene EIF5A2,
and the regulated protein synthesis of its mRNAs, as well as of other
mRNAs in polyamine and hypusine pathways. Further, the techniques and
probes developed here can be directly transferred to the analysis of
other mRNA variants that may arise through alternative transcription
start site use, alternative splicing or alternative 3 end processing in
normal and aberrant cells.

