Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SOCRATES: integrating ex vivo and in silico analysis to identify
optimal drug combinations for patients


Recent work on cancer heterogeneity and evolution has greatly enhanced
our understanding of drivers of drug resistance, but this has also
highlighted the need to move away from generic, one-size-fits-all
treatment regimes. It is clear that we should tailor therapy to
individual patients at different stages of disease based on the current
behaviour of their tumour cells, yet detailed experimental
characterisation and analysis of patient tissue is impractical and
costly. Predictive computational models that can produce patient-specific
recommendations of drug combinations would therefore be of great value to
the field of personalised medicine. In silico modelling has already been
used to successfully predict synergistic drug combinations in single cell
lines in the lab, but such approaches have not yet been translated to
dynamic, real patient data in the clinic.The SOCRATES project (Signalling
output to rationalise combinations of targeted anticancer therapies)
integrates experimental data and computational analysis to predict
context-specific synergistic drug combinations. Here we present ambitious
computational modelling of dynamic signalling network changes in response
to ex vivo exposure of seven targeted drugs used singly at clinically
appropriate concentrations. We also apply our adaptive modelling to
genomics and proteomics data from 54 proteins in over 30 non small-cell
lung cancer cell lines and ten patient samples to predict and
experimentally validate personalised, context specific drug combinations.
We will describe our adaptive, in silico modelling for predicting
response to drug combinations, including novel methods utilizing network
topology. We have predicted over 50 synergistic drug combinations and
will present our predictions alongside initial results of experimental
validation in the lab. We will also illustrate the differences observed
in various cell lines and patient derived cells depending on genetic
context.SOCRATES is, to our knowledge, the first project of its kind and
is a prototype for the future of adaptive, individualised cancer
treatment.

