Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gingerol, paradol and shogaol overcome colorectal cancer cell
resistance to sorafenib via enhancing its cellular uptake, entrapment and
intracellular metabolism


Sorafenib is tyrosine kinase inhibitor used for the treatment of
hepatocellular and renal carcinomas but suffers from resistance in some
tumors such as colorectal cancer. Colorectal cancer multi-drug resistance
might be attributed to over-expression/over-activation of P-glycoprotein
(P-gp) efflux pump and/or intracellular metabolism. Gingerol, paradol and
shogaol are naturally occurring major compounds within the family
Zingiberaceae. Gingerol and its related hydroxyphenylalkanones are known
for their potential interference with P-gp function as well as
intracellular drug metabolism. In the present study, we investigated the
influence of gingerol, paradol and shogaol on the cytotoxic profile of
sorafenib in colorectal cancer cell lines (HT-29, HCT-116, LS-174T and
CaCo-2) via their influence on sorafenib cellular accumulation and
intracellular metabolism. Sorafenib alone showed considerable cytotoxic
activity against all testes colorectal cell lines with IC50 ranging from
2.00.3 to 11.100.8 M. Gingerol, paradol and shogaol significantly
enhanced the cytotoxicity of sorafenib against HT-29 cells and decreased
its IC50 from 9.20.4 M to 6.60.7, 3.80.4 and 4.7 0.4 M, respectively.
Similarly in HCT-116, gingerol, paradol and shogaol significantly
decreased sorafenib IC50 from 11.30.8 M to 5.70.7, 5.90.4 and 7.7 0.5 M,
respectively. Using DNA cytometric analysis, combination of gingerol,
paradol or shogaol with sorafenib significantly decreased the
proliferating cell fractions from 16.91.1% to 11.61.1%, 14.71.1% and
9.161.8%, respectively. In parallel, combination of gingerol, paradol or
shogaol with sorafenib significantly increased the c-PARP concentration
from 60.020.0 pg/cell to 256.525.8, 24461.4, and 202.937.2 pg/cell,
respectively. Gingerol and paradol, but not shogaol increased the
intracellular accumulation of the P-gp probe, rhodamine at concentration
range (3-100 M). However, using recombinant ATPase attached p-gp
molecules, shogaol and paradol significantly inhibited the ATPase
activity. Gingerol, paradol and shogaol increased sorafenib uptake and
decreased its extracellular concentration from 1491.7132.0 ng/ml to
511.016.0, 216.039.0 and 256.415.6 ng/ml, respectively. Only gingerol and
paradol increased sorafenib intracellular accumulation and increased its
level from 239.016.0 pg/cell to 297.032.6 and 327.012.0 pg/cell,
respectively. Both paradol and shogaol enhanced the intracellular
metabolism of sorafenib to its N-oxide active metabolite and entrapped it
within cellular compartment. In conclusion, gingerol, paradol and shogaol
significantly enhanced the anti-cancer profile of sorafenib via
influencing its cellular pharmacokinetics.

