Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A physiological model of the tumor microenvironment for screening
drug delivery systems


Tumor drug delivery is a complex phenomenon affected by several elements
in addition to drug or delivery vehicle's physico-chemical properties.
Tumor microvasculature has many unique features including unusual
transport characteristics, high interstitial pressure, and enhanced
permeability and retention (EPR) effect. Current in vitro models of tumor
drug delivery are oversimplified and, as a result, show poor correlation
with in vivo performance. The objective of this study is to develop and
characterize a synthetic 3D solid tumor - endothelium model in a novel
microfluidic platform that mimics the tumor microenvironment observed in
vivo.The novel synthetic tumor model consists of a vascular network of
tumor derived endothelial cells forming a complete lumen in communication
with 3D solid tumors. Primary human breast tumor associated endothelial
cells (HBTAECs) were co-cultured under physiological fluid flow
conditions with 3D tumor cells from metastastic (MDA-MB-231) or
non-metastatic (MCF-7) origins to study the effect of metastatic
potential on the integrity of the adjacent endothelial cell lining.
Extravasation of fluorescently labeled liposomes across the endothelium
to the tumors was measured following HBTAECs treatment with normal media,
tumor conditioned media (TCM), or TNF-. Tight junction formation was
characterized using ZO-1 immunostaining.MDA-MB-231 cells quickly invaded
into the vascular network from their primary culture location whereas
MCF-7 cells rarely grew beyond the boundary of tumor origin. Permeability
of liposomes across the endothelium was significantly higher with TCM
treatment compared to both control and TNF- treated cells (P Tumor drug
delivery is a complex phenomenon affected by several elements in addition
to drug or delivery vehicle's physico-chemical properties. Tumor
microvasculature has many unique features including unusual transport
characteristics, high interstitial pressure, and enhanced permeability
and retention (EPR) effect. Current in vitro models of tumor drug
delivery are oversimplified and, as a result, show poor correlation with
in vivo performance. The objective of this study is to develop and
characterize a synthetic 3D solid tumor - endothelium model in a novel
microfluidic platform that mimics the tumor microenvironment observed in
vivo.The novel synthetic tumor model consists of a vascular network of
tumor derived endothelial cells forming a complete lumen in communication
with 3D solid tumors. Primary human breast tumor associated endothelial
cells (HBTAECs) were co-cultured under physiological fluid flow
conditions with 3D tumor cells from metastastic (MDA-MB-231) or
non-metastatic (MCF-7) origins to study the effect of metastatic
potential on the integrity of the adjacent endothelial cell lining.
Extravasation of fluorescently labeled liposomes across the endothelium
to the tumors was measured following HBTAECs treatment with normal media,
tumor conditioned media (TCM), or TNF-. Tight junction formation was
characterized using ZO-1 immunostaining.MDA-MB-231 cells quickly invaded
into the vascular network from their primary culture location whereas
MCF-7 cells rarely grew beyond the boundary of tumor origin. Permeability
of liposomes across the endothelium was significantly higher with TCM
treatment compared to both control and TNF- treated cells (P < 0.01,
one-way ANOVA). ZO-1 staining indicated strong tight junction formation
when HBTAECs were treated with normal media as compared to TCM or TNF-.We
have successfully established an in vitro 3D tumor - endothelial cell
co-culture model in a novel microfluidic platform that closely mimics the
tumor microenvironment in vivo. This system reproduces the tumor
permeability and retention (EPR) effect on a chip. This realistic in
vitro model can have great potential in applications such as
cell-cell/cell-drug carrier interaction studies, drug delivery carrier
screening, and drug efficacy testing.

