Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Photopreventive effect and mechanism of AZD4547 and curcumin C3
complex on UVB-induced epidermal hyperplasia


Aggressive cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma (cSCC) of the skin is the
second most common type of skin cancer in the USA due to high exposure to
ultraviolet-B (UVB) radiation. In our previous studies Curcumin C3
complex (C3), a standardized preparation of three curcumonoids, delayed
UVB-induced tumor incidence and inhibited multiplicity. Exposure to UVB
activates mTOR and FGFR signaling both of which play a key role in skin
tumorigenesis. The purpose of this study was to investigate the efficacy
of C3 complex to afford protection against UVB-induced hyper
proliferation by targeting the mTOR and FGFR signaling pathways.
Pre-treatment with C3 complex significantly inhibited UVB-induced FGF-2
induction, FGF-2-induced colony formation, mTORC1 and mTORC2 activation
and FGFR2 phosphorylation in promotion sensitive JB6 epithelial cells.
Further, FGFR2 was required for UVB-induced mTOR activation suggesting an
important role of FGFR2 in UVB-induced mTOR signaling. SKH-1 mice
pre-treated with C3 (15mg/kg/b.w) for 2 weeks followed by a single
exposure to UVB (50mj/cm2) significantly attenuated UVB-induced mTOR and
FGFR activation. To further assess the role of FGFR in UVB-induced hyper
proliferation, SKH-1 mice were pre-treated with AZD4547; a selective
pan-FGFR kinase inhibitor followed by single exposure to UVB (50mj/cm2).
AZD4547 significantly inhibited UVB-induced mTORC1 and mTORC2 activation,
epidermal hyperplasia and hyper proliferation. Our studies underscore the
importance of FGFR signaling in UVB-induced acute skin changes and the
role of FGFR/mTOR pathway in mediating the effects of C3 complex in the
pathogenesis of skin cancer.

