Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exploring the oncolytic potential of Newcastle Disease Virus


Oncolytic viruses are live, replication-competent viruses that infect
and/or replicate selectively in tumour cells leading to the destruction
of the infected cell. Cell death occurs as a natural consequence of the
viral life cycle and newly produced virions can infect and kill
neighbouring tumour cells leading to an amplified therapeutic effect.
Oncolysis has the added benefit of potentially producing novel tumour
antigens that can induce an immune-mediated therapeutic
response.Newcastle Disease Virus (NDV) is an avian paramyxovirus, which
has proven safety and demonstrated efficacy against a variety of
mammalian cancers in PhI clinical studies. Using reverse genetics, we
generated a recombinant strain of NDV that overcomes environmental and
regulatory concerns uncoupling oncolytic potency and avian pathogenicity.
We have additionally inserted the GM-CSF gene in order to maximize
anti-tumour immune response and provide an in situ, patient/tumour-
specific vaccine, combined with potent oncolysis. We have evaluated the
biological characteristics of recNDVGM-CSF in vivo and in vitro. In vitro
recNDVGM-CSF selectively replicates in and kills a wide variety of tumour
cell types. In vivo, using a fibrosarcoma model that supports viral
replication, a single administration (intra-tumoural or systemic) was
able to cure 80% of tumour bearing mice. Additionally, following IV
administration recNDVGM-CSF localises to and replicates within the tumour
leading to a localised GM-CSF production within the tumour. The inherent
properties of NDV (self-propagation, tumour-selective replication, immune
activation) coupled with the ability to genetically engineer NDV to
express therapeutic transgenes may provide a multi-modal attack on the
tumour, delivering greater benefit to patients.

