Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prognostic significance of plasma ghrelin in patients with gastric
cancer


Background: Different prognosis observed for patients of the same
clinical stage in gastric cancer, emphasizes the fact that new biological
prognostic factors are needed to complement clinical staging. We aimed to
investigate the prognostic significance of plasma ghrelin in gastric
cancer patients.Methods: In this prospective study, we included 83
gastric cancer patients from Cancer institute of Tehran, Iran. All the
patients were candidates for gastrectomy with or without preoperative
neoadjuvant chemotherapy (PNC). The patients were followed for three
years. Demographic, clinical and para clinical data were registered.
Using an ELISA based assay plasma levels of total and active ghrelin were
assessed prior to and one week after the operation. Univariate and
multivariate COX analyses were used to investigate the independent
predictors of patients overall survival.Results: The mean (SD) age of the
patients was 60.313.6. Sixty-five (78.3%) patients were male. Majority of
the patients had gastric adenocarcinoma (95.2%). Thirty-seven (44.6%)
patients had TNM stage II or I. Poorly differentiated grade was detected
in 29 (34.9%) of the patients. Forty-eight (57.8%) patients received PNC
before the operation. Mean (SD) survival was 529 373 days. Mean level of
the plasma total ghrelin was 269.8268.7 and 108.791.2 (pg/ml) before and
after the operation, respectively (PBackground: Different prognosis
observed for patients of the same clinical stage in gastric cancer,
emphasizes the fact that new biological prognostic factors are needed to
complement clinical staging. We aimed to investigate the prognostic
significance of plasma ghrelin in gastric cancer patients.Methods: In
this prospective study, we included 83 gastric cancer patients from
Cancer institute of Tehran, Iran. All the patients were candidates for
gastrectomy with or without preoperative neoadjuvant chemotherapy (PNC).
The patients were followed for three years. Demographic, clinical and
para clinical data were registered. Using an ELISA based assay plasma
levels of total and active ghrelin were assessed prior to and one week
after the operation. Univariate and multivariate COX analyses were used
to investigate the independent predictors of patients overall
survival.Results: The mean (SD) age of the patients was 60.313.6.
Sixty-five (78.3%) patients were male. Majority of the patients had
gastric adenocarcinoma (95.2%). Thirty-seven (44.6%) patients had TNM
stage II or I. Poorly differentiated grade was detected in 29 (34.9%) of
the patients. Forty-eight (57.8%) patients received PNC before the
operation. Mean (SD) survival was 529 373 days. Mean level of the plasma
total ghrelin was 269.8268.7 and 108.791.2 (pg/ml) before and after the
operation, respectively (P<0.001). Mean level of the plasma active
ghrelin was 68.0 63.8 and 44.0 29.6 (pg/ml) before and after the
operation, respectively (PBackground: Different prognosis observed for
patients of the same clinical stage in gastric cancer, emphasizes the
fact that new biological prognostic factors are needed to complement
clinical staging. We aimed to investigate the prognostic significance of
plasma ghrelin in gastric cancer patients.Methods: In this prospective
study, we included 83 gastric cancer patients from Cancer institute of
Tehran, Iran. All the patients were candidates for gastrectomy with or
without preoperative neoadjuvant chemotherapy (PNC). The patients were
followed for three years. Demographic, clinical and para clinical data
were registered. Using an ELISA based assay plasma levels of total and
active ghrelin were assessed prior to and one week after the operation.
Univariate and multivariate COX analyses were used to investigate the
independent predictors of patients overall survival.Results: The mean
(SD) age of the patients was 60.313.6. Sixty-five (78.3%) patients were
male. Majority of the patients had gastric adenocarcinoma (95.2%).
Thirty-seven (44.6%) patients had TNM stage II or I. Poorly
differentiated grade was detected in 29 (34.9%) of the patients.
Forty-eight (57.8%) patients received PNC before the operation. Mean (SD)
survival was 529 373 days. Mean level of the plasma total ghrelin was
269.8268.7 and 108.791.2 (pg/ml) before and after the operation,
respectively (P<0.001). Mean level of the plasma active ghrelin was 68.0
63.8 and 44.0 29.6 (pg/ml) before and after the operation, respectively
(P<0.001). Patients in the upper half or highest quartile of
postoperative total ghrelin had better survival compared to the
corresponding subgroups (Log rank test P = 0.02 and PBackground:
Different prognosis observed for patients of the same clinical stage in
gastric cancer, emphasizes the fact that new biological prognostic
factors are needed to complement clinical staging. We aimed to
investigate the prognostic significance of plasma ghrelin in gastric
cancer patients.Methods: In this prospective study, we included 83
gastric cancer patients from Cancer institute of Tehran, Iran. All the
patients were candidates for gastrectomy with or without preoperative
neoadjuvant chemotherapy (PNC). The patients were followed for three
years. Demographic, clinical and para clinical data were registered.
Using an ELISA based assay plasma levels of total and active ghrelin were
assessed prior to and one week after the operation. Univariate and
multivariate COX analyses were used to investigate the independent
predictors of patients overall survival.Results: The mean (SD) age of the
patients was 60.313.6. Sixty-five (78.3%) patients were male. Majority of
the patients had gastric adenocarcinoma (95.2%). Thirty-seven (44.6%)
patients had TNM stage II or I. Poorly differentiated grade was detected
in 29 (34.9%) of the patients. Forty-eight (57.8%) patients received PNC
before the operation. Mean (SD) survival was 529 373 days. Mean level of
the plasma total ghrelin was 269.8268.7 and 108.791.2 (pg/ml) before and
after the operation, respectively (P<0.001). Mean level of the plasma
active ghrelin was 68.0 63.8 and 44.0 29.6 (pg/ml) before and after the
operation, respectively (P<0.001). Patients in the upper half or highest
quartile of postoperative total ghrelin had better survival compared to
the corresponding subgroups (Log rank test P = 0.02 and P<0.001,
respectively). Multivariate COX model revealed that late TNM stage (HR =
2.93, 95% CI: 1.37-6.27), no PNC (HR = 2.18, 95% CI: 1.08-4.37), history
of significant weight-loss (HR = 2.32, 95% CI: 1.04-5.00) and lower
quartile (38 pg/ml) of postoperative plasma total ghrelin (HR = 3.74, 95%
CI: 1.45-9.63) predicted poor survival of patients. The level of other
ghrelins did not show independent prediction of survival.Conclusion: Our
findings showed that low level of plasma total ghrelin after the
gastrectomy could independently predict poor survival in gastric cancer
patients. This emphasizes both prognostic and therapeutic significance of
this biomarker in gastric cancer.

