Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of 1- and 3-phosphohistidine monoclonal antibodies
utilized as novel tools to study histidine phosphorylation


Phosphorylation of proteins is one of the most common forms of
post-translational modification (PTMs) and is a mechanism for regulating
enzyme activity or protein function. There are several amino acids that
can be phosphorylated but despite its importance in cancer and tumor
metastasis histidine phosphorylation (pHis) has been highly overlooked.
One of the key reasons is the inherent challenge associated with studying
pHis legitimately, due largely in part to the lack in availability of
specific antibodies. Unlike serine, threonine, and tyrosine which all
form acid-stable phosphoester (P-O) bonds upon phosphorylation, histidine
forms heat and acid-labile phosphoramidate (P-N) bonds. Because of the
instability of the P-N bond, it is nearly impossible to assess the
prevalence of pHis accurately.Here, we outline the development of
selective, sequence independent anti-1-pHis and anti-3-pHis monoclonal
antibodies which have addressed this current need for specific antibodies
to detect the phosphorylation of histidine. The antibodies developed
specifically recognize 1-pHis and 3-pHis and are isomer specific. In
addition, they do not cross-react with phospho-tyrosine (pTyr), whereas,
the first and second generation pan-pHis polyclonal antibodies against
3-pHis have been reported to do so. Moreover, it has been suggested that
pHis could be as abundant as pTyr, comprising of approximately 1% of all
known phosphorylation in cells, making specific monoclonal antibodies for
detection highly desirable.Validation data of the four monoclonal
phospho-Histidine antibodies developed (clones SC50-3 and SC1-1 for
assessment of 1-pHis activities; clones SC56-2 and SC39-6 for assessment
of 3-pHis activities) demonstrate the specificity and broad utility of
these monoclonal antibodies when identifying pHis substrates, making them
useful tools in a variety of immunological and biological assays.

