Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Opposite roles of CD11b+ myeloid cells in primary and recurrent
brain tumors


Malignant glioma is one of the toughest tumors to be treated at present
due to the complexity of the tumor microenvironment and the intrinsic
resistant to irradiation. Previous studies have shown that CD11b+ myleoid
cells play essential role in brain tumor recurrence following radiation
therapy. Here we used the CD11b-diphtheria toxin receptor (CD11b-DTR)
transgenic mouse model to evaluate the role of CD11b+ myleoid cells in
TK/GCV suicide gene therapy for brain tumor in a murine astrocytomal
tumor model, ALTS1C1-TK. Using this transgenic mouse model, the depletion
of peritoneal macrophages (CD11b+F4/80+) and blood monocyte
(CD11b+Ly6GLy6c) could be achieved after two injections of DT, but the
neutrophil (CD11b+Gr-1+) were increased transiently. Results found that
the depletion of CD11b+ myleoid cells enhanced the efficacy of TK/GCV
therapy as shown by the increase of median surviving time of GCV-treated
ALTS1C1-TK tumor-bearing mice from 30.6 days to 37.5 days. Interestingly,
the depletion of CD11b+ myleoid cells enhanced tumor growth as shown that
tumor-bearing mice had shorter surviving days and larger tumor size after
receiving two doses of DT injections compared to the control PBS group
(22.4 days vs 25.0 days, respectively). This indicates that depleted
CD11b+ myleoid cells might have anti-tumor function for control tumor,
but have pro-tumor activity during TK/GCV therapy. This study also found
the effect of CD11b+ myleoid cells was only seen when the depletion was
performed during the administration of GCV, but not before or after GCV
treatment. Collectively, above findings suggest that CD11b+ myleoid cells
might have different roles on primary and recurrent brain tumors.

