Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Alternative treatment strategies to overcome MAPK inhibitor
resistance in melanoma


Inhibitors of the BRAF/MEK/ERK pathway have promise in the treatment of
BRAF mutant melanoma and other MAPK activated cancers. Treatment of
metastatic melanoma patients with the combination of RAF + MEK inhibitor
has extended progression free survival over single agent therapy.
However, in a large subset of patients, resistance invariably develops.
Most clinical models show reactivation of the MAPK pathway in resistant
samples, suggesting further downregulation of MAPK signaling might be
beneficial. Therefore, we took BRAF mutant melanoma grown to resistance
by continuous culture in dabrafenib plus trametinib (RAF + MEK inhibitor)
or SCH772984 (ERK inhibitor), and treated them with a triple combination
of RAF+MEK+ERK inhibitors. We found cells resistant to RAF+MEK inhibitors
were cross-resistant to ERK inhibitor, but sensitive to RAF+MEK+ERK
inhibitors. Conversely, cells resistant to the ERK inhibitor were
cross-resistant to RAF+MEK inhibitor, but sensitive to the triple
combination. However, given the possible deleterious side effects of a
triple combination in patients, we explored whether alternative dosing
and timing strategies could delay development of resistance. We compared
chronic dosing of RAF+MEK or ERK inhibitors to weekly exposures
alternating between RAF+MEK and ERK inhibitors. This alternative dosing
strategy delayed development of resistance in vitro over chronic dosing,
while also resulting in a slower proliferation rate in resistant cells.
In addition, cells exposed to a higher dose of inhibitor for a shorter
period of time was equivalent to chronic exposure. These studies suggest
that alternative dosing strategies (other than chronic exposure) may
prevent development of resistance, and allow for treatment of patients
with higher order combinations and less side effects.

