Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Treatment with trabedersen, an anti-TGF-beta 2 antisense, primed
tumors to subsequent chemotherapies


Background: Overexpression of transforming growth factor-beta 2 (TGF-2)
is associated with poor prognosis and plays a key role in malignant
progression of various tumors by inducing proliferation, metastasis,
angiogenesis and immunosuppression. Previously reported P-001 trial of
Trabedersen - Safety and Tolerability of AP 12009, Administered I.V. in
Patients With Advanced Tumors Known to Overproduce TGF-beta 2 was
evaluated to determine if treatment with Trabedersen primed the tumors to
subsequent chemotherapy.Methods: A total of 37 patients with advanced
pancreatic cancer were treated with Trabedersen by intravenous infusion
in escalating doses of 2 treatment schedules (initial schedule: 7-days
on, 7-days off; modified schedule: 4-days on, 10-days off; two cycles as
core study and up to 10 cycles for expanded study). Blood samples from 18
patients were taken at the screening/baseline (BSL) visit, after
completion of the first 2 treatment cycles at Day 29 (D29) and during
follow-up (FU) visits, which were conducted every 8 weeks after start of
the 1st Trabedersen cycle for the tumor markers of cancer antigen 19.9
(CA19.9) and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA).Results: Maximum tolerated
dose (MTD) for 7/7 regimen (N = 11) was 160 mg/m2/d; whereas MTD was not
reached on 4/10 regimen (N = 27) even at highest dose of 330 mg/m2/d.
There were16 2nd line patients and 11 3rd line and beyond on 4/10
regimen. The progression free survival/overall survival (PFS/OS) of these
2nd line patients in months (mos) were: 1.87/5.60 (N = 6), 1.87/9.93 (N =
11) and 2.72/11.80 (N = 5) at increasing mean dose of 140, 167, and 196
mg/m2/d, respectively. The OS of 9.93 and 11.80 mos are higher than the
highest reported OS in the 65 trials reported in the literature during
1997-2015 (range = 2.50-9.20/median = 5.50 mos). The corresponding PFS
values were in line with reported literature (range = 0.00-7.65/median =
2.43 mos). The OS of this 4/10 cohort treated with subsequent
chemotherapies was 14.7 and 2.93 mos with and without subsequent
chemotherapies, p = 0.0023. Chemotherapy on 2nd line followed with
subsequent Trabedersen 4/10 regimen as third line was ineffective with OS
of 2.80 mos (N = 9) versus 9.93 mos (N = 11), p = 0.046. CA19.9 and CEA
biomarker data were consistent with OS data.Conclusion: Trabedersen
treatment was characterized by outstanding OS which was not supported by
PFS. The effect was seen primarily when chemotherapies were used as third
line after Trabedersen treatment; OS benefit was not observed for the
converse- chemotherapies used first followed by Trabedersen. The data
supports the enhancement of subsequent chemotherapies following
Trabedersen treatment, suggesting a combination trial of Trabedersen and
chemotherapies with sequencing.

