Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Altering the balance between immune activation versus regulation
in the skin to promote CD8 T-cell activity within epithelial cancers


The Human Papilloma Virus (HPV) 16 is a high-risk HPV known to be a
causative agent in numerous cancers including cervical cancer. While
prophylactic vaccines exist to combat the spread of HPV16, successful
therapeutic vaccines to combat established HPV16-associcated disease
remain elusive. The expression, in a mouse model (E7), of the HPV16 E7
gene in keratinocytes under the control of the K14 promoter, leads to a
local immune suppressive environment, as evidenced by the lack of graft
rejection when E7 skin grafts are placed on WT recipient mice.
Furthermore, well healed (>30 days) E7 skin grafts are not rejected when
mice are immunised with E7 peptide in combination with Quil A- or
CASAC-based adjuvants. This is despite a substantial increase in E7
peptide/H-2Db pentamer staining in the blood, and marked killing of
E7-peptide expressing TC-1 cells when injected i.v., confirming that CD8
T-cells respond to vaccination and differentiate into CTL capable of
killing E7-expressing target cells. We hypothesised that the removal of
regulatory T-cells (T-reg) might lead to E7 graft rejection in immunised
mice. The co-administration of an anti-CD4-depeting antibody at the time
of immunisation led to rejection of 50% of grafts. To confirm a role for
T-reg, E7-grafted T-reg-deficient Rag1-/- mice received purified donor
CD8 T-cells from E7-vaccinated WT mice. FACS staining of Rag1-/- lymph
nodes 30 days post CD8+ T-cell transfer confirmed the absence of
classical CD4+FoxP3+ Treg, however the E7 grafts did not reject. As in
the WT mice however, rejection could be induced through the
co-administration of an anti-CD4 antibody. The data suggest that the
removal of a CD4+, non T-reg cell, leads to CD8+ T-cell activity in the
skin as evidenced by E7 skin graft destruction.

