Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Co-targeting polo-like kinase 1(Plk1) and the Wnt/-catenin
signaling pathway in castration-resistant prostate cancer


The Wnt/-catenin signaling pathway has been identified as one of the
predominantly upregulated pathways in castration-resistant prostate
cancer (CRPC). However, whether targeting the -catenin pathway will prove
effective as a CRPC treatment remains unknown. Polo-like kinase 1 (Plk1)
is a critical regulator in many cell cycle events and is significantly
elevated upon castration of mice carrying xenograft prostate tumors.
Indeed, inhibition of Plk1 has been shown to inhibit tumor growth in
several in vivo studies. Here, we show that Plk1 is a negative regulator
of Wnt/-catenin signaling. Plk1 inhibition or depletion enhances the
level of cytosolic and nuclear -catenin in human prostate cancer cells.
Furthermore, inhibition of Wnt/-catenin signaling significantly
potentiates the anti-neoplastic activity of the Plk1 inhibitor BI2536 in
both cultured prostate cancer cells and CRPC xenograft tumors.
Mechanistically, Axin2, a negative regulator of the -catenin pathway,
serves as a substrate of Plk1 and Plk1 phosphorylation of Axin2
facilitates the degradation of -catenin by enhancing the binding between
GSK3 and -catenin. Plk1 phosphorylated Axin2 also exhibits resistance to
Cdc20-mediated degradation. Overall, this study identifies a novel
Plk1-Wnt signaling axis in prostate cancer, offering a promising new
therapeutic option to treat CRPC.

