Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Matrix-depleting anti-hypertensives decompress tumor blood vessels
and improve perfusion in patients with glioblastomas receiving
anti-angiogenic therapy


Introduction: Impaired tumor perfusion is associated with poor drug
delivery, hypoxia and metastatic behavior that effectively make cancers
difficult to treat [1]. A main driver of impaired perfusion in permeable
and impermeable tumor vessels is solid stress caused by proliferating
tumor cells and the extracellular matrix that squeeze vessels shut [2].
Here, we demonstrate improved vascular function in glioblastoma patients
who receive hypertension treatments with an anti-cancer cell,
matrix-depleting effect as part of anti-angiogenic therapy.Methods: We
retrospectively assessed data from 40 patients with newly diagnosed
glioblastomas (nGBM) and 30 with recurrent glioblastomas (rGBM) receiving
cediranib, an oral pan-VEGFR inhibitor, with- (NCT00662506) and without
(NCT00305656) chemoradiation, respectively. After cediranib onset, for
nGBM, 12/40 patients received matrix-depleting angiotensin II receptor
blockers (Valsartan), 1 receptor antagonists (Atenolol) or
angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (Lisinopril), while 8/40
patients received non-depleting calcium antagonists (Norvasc, Amlodipine)
[3, 4]. For rGBM, 15/30 patients received Atenolol and 7/30 patients
Norvasc. Perfusion and vessel caliber MRI were performed at baseline and
repeated weekly (nGBM) or monthly (rGBM) [5, 6]. Tumor values were
normalized to healthy tissue to account for patient-level systemic
effects and variations in hypertension.Results: In the total tumor bed
(enhancing + edematous regions), the matrix-depleting alternatives
significantly improved the perfused vessel fraction (% of tumor values >
the value of healthy tissue) from 81% to 93% in nGBM (Wilcoxon:
PIntroduction: Impaired tumor perfusion is associated with poor drug
delivery, hypoxia and metastatic behavior that effectively make cancers
difficult to treat [1]. A main driver of impaired perfusion in permeable
and impermeable tumor vessels is solid stress caused by proliferating
tumor cells and the extracellular matrix that squeeze vessels shut [2].
Here, we demonstrate improved vascular function in glioblastoma patients
who receive hypertension treatments with an anti-cancer cell,
matrix-depleting effect as part of anti-angiogenic therapy.Methods: We
retrospectively assessed data from 40 patients with newly diagnosed
glioblastomas (nGBM) and 30 with recurrent glioblastomas (rGBM) receiving
cediranib, an oral pan-VEGFR inhibitor, with- (NCT00662506) and without
(NCT00305656) chemoradiation, respectively. After cediranib onset, for
nGBM, 12/40 patients received matrix-depleting angiotensin II receptor
blockers (Valsartan), 1 receptor antagonists (Atenolol) or
angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (Lisinopril), while 8/40
patients received non-depleting calcium antagonists (Norvasc, Amlodipine)
[3, 4]. For rGBM, 15/30 patients received Atenolol and 7/30 patients
Norvasc. Perfusion and vessel caliber MRI were performed at baseline and
repeated weekly (nGBM) or monthly (rGBM) [5, 6]. Tumor values were
normalized to healthy tissue to account for patient-level systemic
effects and variations in hypertension.Results: In the total tumor bed
(enhancing + edematous regions), the matrix-depleting alternatives
significantly improved the perfused vessel fraction (% of tumor values >
the value of healthy tissue) from 81% to 93% in nGBM (Wilcoxon: P<0.05)
and from 70% to 78% in rGBM (PIntroduction: Impaired tumor perfusion is
associated with poor drug delivery, hypoxia and metastatic behavior that
effectively make cancers difficult to treat [1]. A main driver of
impaired perfusion in permeable and impermeable tumor vessels is solid
stress caused by proliferating tumor cells and the extracellular matrix
that squeeze vessels shut [2]. Here, we demonstrate improved vascular
function in glioblastoma patients who receive hypertension treatments
with an anti-cancer cell, matrix-depleting effect as part of
anti-angiogenic therapy.Methods: We retrospectively assessed data from 40
patients with newly diagnosed glioblastomas (nGBM) and 30 with recurrent
glioblastomas (rGBM) receiving cediranib, an oral pan-VEGFR inhibitor,
with- (NCT00662506) and without (NCT00305656) chemoradiation,
respectively. After cediranib onset, for nGBM, 12/40 patients received
matrix-depleting angiotensin II receptor blockers (Valsartan), 1 receptor
antagonists (Atenolol) or angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors
(Lisinopril), while 8/40 patients received non-depleting calcium
antagonists (Norvasc, Amlodipine) [3, 4]. For rGBM, 15/30 patients
received Atenolol and 7/30 patients Norvasc. Perfusion and vessel caliber
MRI were performed at baseline and repeated weekly (nGBM) or monthly
(rGBM) [5, 6]. Tumor values were normalized to healthy tissue to account
for patient-level systemic effects and variations in
hypertension.Results: In the total tumor bed (enhancing + edematous
regions), the matrix-depleting alternatives significantly improved the
perfused vessel fraction (% of tumor values > the value of healthy
tissue) from 81% to 93% in nGBM (Wilcoxon: P<0.05) and from 70% to 78% in
rGBM (P<0.05). In permeable tumor vessels (enhancing area), the increase
in perfusion for nGBM was associated with a 19% higher fraction of small
caliber vessels (Introduction: Impaired tumor perfusion is associated
with poor drug delivery, hypoxia and metastatic behavior that effectively
make cancers difficult to treat [1]. A main driver of impaired perfusion
in permeable and impermeable tumor vessels is solid stress caused by
proliferating tumor cells and the extracellular matrix that squeeze
vessels shut [2]. Here, we demonstrate improved vascular function in
glioblastoma patients who receive hypertension treatments with an
anti-cancer cell, matrix-depleting effect as part of anti-angiogenic
therapy.Methods: We retrospectively assessed data from 40 patients with
newly diagnosed glioblastomas (nGBM) and 30 with recurrent glioblastomas
(rGBM) receiving cediranib, an oral pan-VEGFR inhibitor, with-
(NCT00662506) and without (NCT00305656) chemoradiation, respectively.
After cediranib onset, for nGBM, 12/40 patients received matrix-depleting
angiotensin II receptor blockers (Valsartan), 1 receptor antagonists
(Atenolol) or angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (Lisinopril),
while 8/40 patients received non-depleting calcium antagonists (Norvasc,
Amlodipine) [3, 4]. For rGBM, 15/30 patients received Atenolol and 7/30
patients Norvasc. Perfusion and vessel caliber MRI were performed at
baseline and repeated weekly (nGBM) or monthly (rGBM) [5, 6]. Tumor
values were normalized to healthy tissue to account for patient-level
systemic effects and variations in hypertension.Results: In the total
tumor bed (enhancing + edematous regions), the matrix-depleting
alternatives significantly improved the perfused vessel fraction (% of
tumor values > the value of healthy tissue) from 81% to 93% in nGBM
(Wilcoxon: P<0.05) and from 70% to 78% in rGBM (P<0.05). In permeable
tumor vessels (enhancing area), the increase in perfusion for nGBM was
associated with a 19% higher fraction of small caliber vessels (< the
size of healthy tissue) compared to baseline (PIntroduction: Impaired
tumor perfusion is associated with poor drug delivery, hypoxia and
metastatic behavior that effectively make cancers difficult to treat [1].
A main driver of impaired perfusion in permeable and impermeable tumor
vessels is solid stress caused by proliferating tumor cells and the
extracellular matrix that squeeze vessels shut [2]. Here, we demonstrate
improved vascular function in glioblastoma patients who receive
hypertension treatments with an anti-cancer cell, matrix-depleting effect
as part of anti-angiogenic therapy.Methods: We retrospectively assessed
data from 40 patients with newly diagnosed glioblastomas (nGBM) and 30
with recurrent glioblastomas (rGBM) receiving cediranib, an oral
pan-VEGFR inhibitor, with- (NCT00662506) and without (NCT00305656)
chemoradiation, respectively. After cediranib onset, for nGBM, 12/40
patients received matrix-depleting angiotensin II receptor blockers
(Valsartan), 1 receptor antagonists (Atenolol) or angiotensin-converting
enzyme inhibitors (Lisinopril), while 8/40 patients received
non-depleting calcium antagonists (Norvasc, Amlodipine) [3, 4]. For rGBM,
15/30 patients received Atenolol and 7/30 patients Norvasc. Perfusion and
vessel caliber MRI were performed at baseline and repeated weekly (nGBM)
or monthly (rGBM) [5, 6]. Tumor values were normalized to healthy tissue
to account for patient-level systemic effects and variations in
hypertension.Results: In the total tumor bed (enhancing + edematous
regions), the matrix-depleting alternatives significantly improved the
perfused vessel fraction (% of tumor values > the value of healthy
tissue) from 81% to 93% in nGBM (Wilcoxon: P<0.05) and from 70% to 78% in
rGBM (P<0.05). In permeable tumor vessels (enhancing area), the increase
in perfusion for nGBM was associated with a 19% higher fraction of small
caliber vessels (< the size of healthy tissue) compared to baseline
(P<0.01) and for rGBM a 20% higher fraction compared to cediranib alone
(PIntroduction: Impaired tumor perfusion is associated with poor drug
delivery, hypoxia and metastatic behavior that effectively make cancers
difficult to treat [1]. A main driver of impaired perfusion in permeable
and impermeable tumor vessels is solid stress caused by proliferating
tumor cells and the extracellular matrix that squeeze vessels shut [2].
Here, we demonstrate improved vascular function in glioblastoma patients
who receive hypertension treatments with an anti-cancer cell,
matrix-depleting effect as part of anti-angiogenic therapy.Methods: We
retrospectively assessed data from 40 patients with newly diagnosed
glioblastomas (nGBM) and 30 with recurrent glioblastomas (rGBM) receiving
cediranib, an oral pan-VEGFR inhibitor, with- (NCT00662506) and without
(NCT00305656) chemoradiation, respectively. After cediranib onset, for
nGBM, 12/40 patients received matrix-depleting angiotensin II receptor
blockers (Valsartan), 1 receptor antagonists (Atenolol) or
angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (Lisinopril), while 8/40
patients received non-depleting calcium antagonists (Norvasc, Amlodipine)
[3, 4]. For rGBM, 15/30 patients received Atenolol and 7/30 patients
Norvasc. Perfusion and vessel caliber MRI were performed at baseline and
repeated weekly (nGBM) or monthly (rGBM) [5, 6]. Tumor values were
normalized to healthy tissue to account for patient-level systemic
effects and variations in hypertension.Results: In the total tumor bed
(enhancing + edematous regions), the matrix-depleting alternatives
significantly improved the perfused vessel fraction (% of tumor values >
the value of healthy tissue) from 81% to 93% in nGBM (Wilcoxon: P<0.05)
and from 70% to 78% in rGBM (P<0.05). In permeable tumor vessels
(enhancing area), the increase in perfusion for nGBM was associated with
a 19% higher fraction of small caliber vessels (< the size of healthy
tissue) compared to baseline (P<0.01) and for rGBM a 20% higher fraction
compared to cediranib alone (P<0.01). For matrix-depleting drugs only,
the absolute number of small vessels increased relative to that of larger
vessels, suggestive of vascular decompression of small caliber vessels by
increased open lumen fractions. These effects were not observed with
non-depleting calcium antagonists.Conclusion: In line with theoretical
[7] and pre-clinical [3] findings, we here present human data
demonstrating that adding matrix-depleting anti-hypertensives, safe and
inexpensive drugs with decades of use, improve vascular function in
glioblastoma patients receiving anti-cancer therapy. Vascular MRI can
help refine matrix-depleting drugs by directly assessing mechanisms of
action in vivo.References:1: Science 2005; 307, 58-622: PNAS 2012; 109,
15101-83: Nat Commun 2013; 4, 25164: Blood Press 2006; 15, 198-2065: PNAS
2013; 110, 19059-646: Nat Med 2013; 19, 1178-837: PNAS 2013;110:18632-37

