Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: miR-211 directly targets pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase 4 to
inhibit cellular growth and glucose metabolism in triple negative breast
cancer


Deregulated metabolism and aerobic glycolysis are common to many kinds of
tumors including, breast cancers driven by a plethora of transcription
factors. One such is hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1) known to drive
the expression of glycolytic target genes. Here, we identifyPDK4
(pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase 4) as a key regulator of HIF-1 signaling.
In triple-negative human breast cancer (TNBC) cell lines, we investigated
the contribution of PDK4 and HIF-1 to experimental tumor growth, core
glucose metabolism and ionizing radiation effects. When these TNBC cells
were exposed to 4, 6 and 8Gy treatment, we observed a linear increase in
the expression levels of PDK4 and HIF-1 genes. In this study we also
report that miR-211, a microRNA predicted to target PDK4 is suppressed in
TNBC patient specimens as evidenced by in situ hybridization analysis.
The expression levels of PDK4, HIF-1 and RICTOR were reduced with miR-211
over expression while the levels of PDH and FH were observed to be
increased. Further, we observed that miR-211 conjugated to cerium oxide
nanoparticles (nanoceria) showed increased cytotoxicity. Similar effects
were observed when these TNBCs were treated with 5mM DCA, a potent
metabolic inhibitor of PDK. Combinatory suppression of PDK4 and HIF-1
exerted synergistic inhibition of lactate released suggesting of reversal
of aerobic glycolysis. Alternatively, TCGA datasets were predictive of
patient survival, with a PDK4/miR-211 signature robustly predicting poor
patient prognosis. Overall, our findings suggest that combined targeting
of PDK4 signaling cascade with miR-211 and DCA in combination
specifically regulate core glucose metabolism in TNBC.

