Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MARVELD1 regulates hypoxia-induced oxidative stress response and
tumor growth


Nuclear factor MARVELD1 (MARVEL domain-containing 1) is a potential tumor
suppressor, which negatively regulates tumor cell proliferation. It is
widely expressed in human normal tissues, but down-regulated in multiple
primary carcinomas. In this study, we show that MARVELD1 acts as tumor
suppressor via its ability to inhibit reative oxygen species (ROS) in
response to hypoxic condition. Data showed that overexpression of
MARVELD1 in uterine cancer cells significantly suppressed tumor growth,
while MARVELD1 silencing promoted colony formation of tumor cells in
hypoxic environment. Furthermore, we found that ROS production in
hypoxia-treated cancer cells was elevated by MARVELD1 silencing.
Mitochondria function assay showed that compared to RL952/vector cells, a
decrease in oxygen consumption and derived mitochondrial ATP production
was observed in hypoxia-treated RL952/MARVELD1 cells. Moreover,
considering that ROS that induced by hypoxia promoted tumor cell
proliferation, our data further indicated ROS generation that inhibited
by MARVELD1 alleviated the growth of uterine tumor cells. Taken together,
MARVELD1 regulated hypoxia-induced oxidative stress response and cell
growth through inhibiting ROS generation in uterine cancer, suggesting
that targeting MARVELD1 might be a novel strategy to cancer
therapy.Keywords: MARVELD1, Hypoxia, Oxidative stress, ROS

