Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: FRY Inhibits progression and metastasis of breast cancer through
activating Hippo signaling pathway


Background: Recently, we reported that using quantitative trait locus
(QTL) mapping in differentially susceptible rat strains, we identified
Fry, the mammalian ortholog of the furry gene in Drosophila
melanoganster, as a candidate mammary carcinoma susceptibility gene
(Mcs30). Preliminary studies of rat Fry gene suggest that Fry may play a
key role in epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), tumor progression
and metastasis.Methods: In the present study, we modified and established
multiple breast cancer cell lines with enhanced expression of either
wildtype or mutated human FRY gene. We examined the anti-tumorigenic and
anti-metastatic effects of enhanced FRY expression on these cell lines in
vitro and in vivo. We also utilized RNA-seq and proteomic approach to
dissect FRY-regulated signaling molecules and pathways.Results: Ectopic
expression of wild-type FRY significantly diminished tumorigenicity and
metastasis of breast cancer cells both in vitro and in animal studies,
particularly in the triple negative breast cancer cell line, MDA-MB-231
cells. Relative to the rapidly tumors growth of MDA-MB-231 cells in vitro
and in nude mice assay, the growth of MDA-MB-231 cells ectopically
expressing the FRY significantly reduced. In comparison, the
anti-tumorigenic effects of mutated FRY were compromised but remained
significant. Further, we showed that FRY's effects in suppressing
proliferation, invasion, and metastasis of breast cancer cells were
partially through the activation of Hippo signaling pathway.Conclusions:
These results provide direct evidence in supporting the important role of
FRY in breast cancer progression and metastasis, and first time reveal a
connection between FRY and the Hippo signaling pathway.

