Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Selective inhibition of MYC expression by a small molecule
G-quadruplex stabilizer


MYC overexpression or amplification is commonly seen in a wide variety of
tumor types, including multiple myeloma. Although MYC appears to be an
important driver of the oncogenic phenotype, the helix-loop-helix
topology, short half-life, and rapid replenishment of its encoded protein
make it a particularly challenging drug target. However, the promoter
region of the MYC gene contains a G-quadruplex (G4) DNA secondary
structure that can be stabilized to block transcription. Recently, we
reported the identification of a compound from a small molecule
microarray screen that selectively binds the MYC G4, compared with other
oncogenes that also contain G4s, and inhibits MYC mRNA and protein
expression, leading to cell cycle arrest in human multiple myeloma cell
lines (ACS Chem Biol. 2015). Here we describe the in vitro and in vivo
evaluation of a more potent analog that retains the selectivity of the
original compound for the MYC G4 sequence. After observing strong growth
inhibitory activity of this new compound in a diverse panel of human
cancer cell lines, we evaluated its pharmacokinetic and toxicity profiles
in mice. Preliminary pharmacokinetic studies showed promising serum
bioavailability and exposure properties when administered either
intravenously or intraperitoneally. The compound was well tolerated in a
month long, dose-escalation toxicity study in mice receiving daily
administration of the compound. No adverse effects were observed during
the study. In an assessment of short term in vivo activity, MYC
expression was inhibited in multiple myeloma xenografts. More long-term
studies to evaluate the anti-tumor activity of the compound are currently
in progress. Thus, our data provide evidence that small molecule
stabilization of the MYC G4 can drive transcriptional silencing of
oncogenic MYC expression both in vitro and in vivo.

