Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anti-tumor effect and destabilization of R175H-mutant p53 by
CB002, a p53-pathway restoring small molecule that stimulates autophagy


Tumor suppressor p53 is a master regulator of genotoxic and cellular
stress signals, controlling cell fate by transcriptionally activating
genes involved in DNA repair, cell cycle arrest, and apoptosis. p53 is
mutated in over half of human cancers and this is associated with tumor
development and chemotherapy resistance. TP53 gene mutations can result
in the abolishment of p53 contact with DNA and disruption of p53
structural conformation. These mutations not only prevent p53 to exert
its normal tumor suppressive functions but can result in gain-of-function
activity, acquiring oncogenic characteristics. Therefore, altering the
stability of mutant p53 protein is an attractive therapeutic strategy in
cancer cells. We investigated small molecules that modulate mutant p53
stability and restore the p53-signaling pathway. We identified a small
molecule, CB002, as a candidate for restoration of the p53 pathway in
mutant p53-bearing cancer cells. Three colorectal cancer cell lines:
SW480, DLD-1, HCT116-R175H and the RXF393 renal cancer cell line, were
treated with different concentrations of CB002 at various time points.
Cell lines exposed to CB002 showed an increase in apoptotic and cell
death markers, such as NOXA/DR5 induction, cleaved caspases and PARP, as
early as 16 hrs. CB002 decreased mutant p53 stability in structural
conformation-mutant bearing cells (HCT116 R175H and RXF393). Our data
suggests that CB002 stimulates an increase of p53 target genes and
promotes expression of pro-apoptotic proteins. R175H p53 mutant protein
expression was largely rescued by the co-treatment with MG132, a
proteasomal inhibitor, implicating a role for the ubiquitin proteasome
system. Furthermore, we observed significant autophagy induction upon
CB002 treatment, as indicated by LC3 conversion and p62 levels. Autophagy
inhibition decreased levels of cell death markers and increased the
stability of the R175H-mutant p53, suggesting that autophagy might be
required for CB002-induced cell death and mutant p53 turnover. Therefore,
we hypothesize that CB002 is capable of degrading mutant p53 and
restoring the p53 pathway through p53 family members in colorectal cancer
cells. Currently we are investigating p53 degradation mechanism by CB002,
the role of p53 family members in the restoration of the pathway and
autophagy on mutant p53 stability. Hence, our results provide an insight
on effective p53 pathway activation through the use of small molecules.

