Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeted sequencing revealed distinctive and pathogenic mutations
in African Americans with colorectal cancer


Background & Aim: We recently analyzed 12 pairs of African American CRC
tumors and their matched normal tissue using whole exome sequencing and
established a panel of novel mutations that are potentially useful for
the detection of CRC in this population. In this study, we examined APC,
MSH3, and MSH6 mutations using targeted exome sequencing (TES) to
determine distinctive mutations frequencies and their chronology in the
neoplastic transformation.Materials & Methods: A total of 140 colon
samples: (30 normal, 21 adenomas, 33 advanced adenomas & 56 tumors
collected from African Americans were used as our discovery set on an Ion
Torrent platform. A subset of 36 samples were used as validation set on
an Illumina platform. Bioinformatic analysis was performed on both sets
of data. Common mutations were considered validated.Results: Two novel
MSH6 mutations were validated. Four known mutations in MSH3 were
validated and were located in nonsynonymous (exon 10) and 1synonomous
mutation (exon 18). As for the APC, 20 mutations were validated include 4
novel mutations. The novel mutations were 3 stopgain and 1 nonsynonymous
located at the EB1 binding site, in the mutational cluster region (MCR),
and at the 15 Amino Acid repeat.Conclusion: We here defined novel
mutations that target DNA MMR and APC genes in African Americans with
colorectal lesions. Greater frequency of mutations in cells defective for
DNA repair and APC genes is an advantage in cell growth and genetic
instability and relevant to the initiating events of colon tumorigenesis.

