Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Glycodelin expression in endometrial carcinoma


Glycodelin is a lipocalin protein mainly expressed in well-differentiated
epithelial cells in reproductive tissues, including endometrium and
seminal vesicles. Previously, glycodelin has been shown to induce
differentiation of endometrial carcinoma cells, which was associated with
reduced xenograft tumor growth. Glycodelin is highly expressed in
secretory endometrium, but not in proliferative or postmenopausal
endometrium. While glycodelin is weakly, if at all, expressed in cancer
tissues and, when expressed, associated with better prognosis, results
regarding the expression of glycodelin in endometrial carcinoma are
discordant. Therefore, we studied the expression of glycodelin in
endometrial carcinoma and hyperplasia by immunohistochemical staining
using highly validated antibody developed in house. Furthermore, the
levels of mRNA were addressed utilizing in silico transcriptomics
databases.Glycodelin transcripts were more abundant in normal uterus than
in uterine carcinomas. Glycodelin staining in endometrial carcinoma
sections was also much lower than that in secretory phase endometrium.
Interestingly, in some endometrial hyperplasia samples glycodelin levels
were much lower in hyperplastic regions of the sample as compared to
those having normal histology.In conclusion, our data show that
glycodelin is not highly expressed, if at all, in endometrial carcinoma
tissues. This is in keeping with the reduced expression of glycodelin in
postmenopausal endometrium and association of glycodelin in epithelial
differentiation.

