Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Slit2 inhibits breast cancer growth and metastasis by modulating
tumor microenvironment


Breast cancer (BC) continues to be a major health issue particularly in
developed countries. The Slit2 gene is hyper-methylated in BC and acts
through Roundabout Homolog1 (Robo1) receptor. Slit2/Robo1 signaling has
been shown to inhibit the migration of a variety of cells including BC
cells. Recently, it has also been reported to improve chemotherapy
outcome in intestinal cancer. However, Slit2/Robo1-mediated mechanisms
that regulate tumor growth and metastasis are not well known. Using
syngeneic mouse model, we report that the over-expression of Slit2 using
Adeno-Slit2 transduction successfully restrains tumor growth and also
restrict the metastasis to lung, compared to Adeno-null control. To
explore the Slit2 mediated cellular events, we analyzed the stromal cells
recruitment to the tumor and observed reduced number of tumor associated
macrophages (TAMs) in the Adeno-Slit2 group compared to Adeno-null group.
We further analyzed the underlying molecular mechanisms and found that
the soluble Slit2 inhibits TGF-1 mediated alternative activation of
macrophages to TAMs. Treatment with TGF-1 significantly enhances the
markers of TAMs by upregulating -catenin levels. Interestingly, we
observed that Soluble Slit2 inhibits TGF-1 mediated activation of TAMs by
inhibiting downstream signaling molecules Smad2 and -catenin. We also
analyzed Slit2 expression in human breast cancer TMA and an inverse
correlation of Slit2 expression was observed with the incidence of breast
cancer, metastasis and macrophage recruitment. This study highlights the
ability of Slit2 to prevent macrophage alternative activation to TAMs,
thereby restrict tumor growth and lung metastasis. Anti-cancer activity
of Adeno-Slit2 suggests therapeutic potential of Slit2 to treat advanced
breast cancer.

