Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Classification of patients with lung cancer and benign lung
disease via assessment of DNA methylation of SHOX2 and PTGER4 in plasma


Introduction:Annual screening for lung cancer (LC) with low-dose computed
tomography (LDCT) is recommended in the US for specific high risk
patients. Despite this, LC patients are frequently symptomatic at time of
presentation and are often diagnosed with advanced stage disease
associated with poor prognosis. At the same time the substantial rate of
false positive findings of LDCT raised controversy about the risk profile
of the groups eligible for LDCT screening. Non-invasive diagnostic tools
may contribute to further risk stratification for screening candidates or
patients with findings in LDCT. Aberrant DNA methylation detected in cell
free-floating DNA has been shown to be clinically useful. Specifically, a
DNA methylation panel of the genes SHOX2 and PTGER4 has been evaluated in
three independent case-control studies comprising a total of 330 plasma
specimens from LC patients and healthy individuals with promising results
(AUC = 91 to 95%). Here, we report on further evaluation of the
methylation marker panel in patients with malignant (LC) or benign lung
disease (BLD).Material and Methods:For this case-control study 116 plasma
specimen were collected from patients in Bulgaria and the US. The
majority of patients were either diagnosed with LC (30 patients) or a BLD
(50 patients). The remaining 36 subjects were healthy controls. A triplex
real-time PCR assay for methylated DNA of SHOX2 and PTGER4 and the
methylation independent ACTB control assay was developed. Total DNA was
extracted from 3.5ml plasma samples and bisulfite converted utilizing a
commercially available kit. After purification DNA was assayed in PCR
triplicates. Cycle threshold values were aggregated utilizing a
predefined algorithm. Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve and
the area under the ROC curve (AUC) were analysed.Results:The marker panel
showed significant discriminatory power to distinguish LC cases from the
remaining subjects (AUC = 0.84), including BLD patients (AUC = 0.83) and
healthy subjects (AUC = 0.86). At a fixed specificity level of 95% the
sensitivity for LC was 50%, while for a fixed 90% sensitivity the
observed specificity was 53%. BLD and healthy subjects were similar with
respect to the methylation markers (AUC = 0.55, p-value = 0.45). The
clinically important group of COPD patients (18 cases) was significantly
different from the LC group (AUC = 0.76, p-value Introduction:Annual
screening for lung cancer (LC) with low-dose computed tomography (LDCT)
is recommended in the US for specific high risk patients. Despite this,
LC patients are frequently symptomatic at time of presentation and are
often diagnosed with advanced stage disease associated with poor
prognosis. At the same time the substantial rate of false positive
findings of LDCT raised controversy about the risk profile of the groups
eligible for LDCT screening. Non-invasive diagnostic tools may contribute
to further risk stratification for screening candidates or patients with
findings in LDCT. Aberrant DNA methylation detected in cell free-floating
DNA has been shown to be clinically useful. Specifically, a DNA
methylation panel of the genes SHOX2 and PTGER4 has been evaluated in
three independent case-control studies comprising a total of 330 plasma
specimens from LC patients and healthy individuals with promising results
(AUC = 91 to 95%). Here, we report on further evaluation of the
methylation marker panel in patients with malignant (LC) or benign lung
disease (BLD).Material and Methods:For this case-control study 116 plasma
specimen were collected from patients in Bulgaria and the US. The
majority of patients were either diagnosed with LC (30 patients) or a BLD
(50 patients). The remaining 36 subjects were healthy controls. A triplex
real-time PCR assay for methylated DNA of SHOX2 and PTGER4 and the
methylation independent ACTB control assay was developed. Total DNA was
extracted from 3.5ml plasma samples and bisulfite converted utilizing a
commercially available kit. After purification DNA was assayed in PCR
triplicates. Cycle threshold values were aggregated utilizing a
predefined algorithm. Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve and
the area under the ROC curve (AUC) were analysed.Results:The marker panel
showed significant discriminatory power to distinguish LC cases from the
remaining subjects (AUC = 0.84), including BLD patients (AUC = 0.83) and
healthy subjects (AUC = 0.86). At a fixed specificity level of 95% the
sensitivity for LC was 50%, while for a fixed 90% sensitivity the
observed specificity was 53%. BLD and healthy subjects were similar with
respect to the methylation markers (AUC = 0.55, p-value = 0.45). The
clinically important group of COPD patients (18 cases) was significantly
different from the LC group (AUC = 0.76, p-value <
0.01).Conclusions:Combination of DNA methylation markers SHOX2 and PTGER4
can be used to distinguish lung cancer patients from healthy subjects as
well as patients with non-malignant diseases with high sensitivity at a
reasonable false positive rate. The marker panel will be developed into a
blood-based lung cancer diagnostic tool that may ultimately show clinical
utility in combination with current imaging techniques to improve lung
cancer risk stratification.

