Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Automating recovery of spiked tumor cells from blood


The isolation and study of circulating tumor cells (CTC) enables
personalized medicine solutions, monitoring of therapeutics
(theragnostics), and monitoring of minimal residual disease (MRD);
culturing these rare cells is a frequent goal in cancer research, however
the common methods for their isolation (gradient centrifugation, lysis
buffer) are damaging to these cells, and many emerging technologies leave
the cells bound in a consumable, bound to a biomarker or in a state that
is difficult to use in cell culture. Further, the anuclear cells in blood
greatly outnumber nucleated cells and present significant challenges to
the study of the nucleated cells, for example, erythrocytes can absorb
excitation or emission wavelengths in fluorescence studies, and their
shape promotes rouleaux formation which can sequester the cells of
interest; platelets also have a tendency to be activated by physical
handling and cause aggregation that can also sequester and damage the
cells of interest, and these all contain the greatest content of RNA and
other markers that increase background noise in many assays. We
demonstrate a new technology that automates the depletion of
erythrocytes, thrombocytes, and plasma markers from, initially, small
volumes of blood, using a micromachined membrane filter. We spiked small
counts (10 to 1000 estimated from dilution) of tumor cell lines BT474
(breast cancer), DLD1 (colorectal cancer), and K562 (myelogenous
leukemia) and other cell types into aliquots of blood. Using
calcein-AM-loading to distinguish the spiked cells from blood cells, the
recovery rates were determined in a flow cytometer, indicating an average
of 80% 4% (SE, N = 27) recovery of the rare cells after depletion of
anuclear cells and plasma. The technology is amenable to use of beads for
initial negative depletion of common nucleated cells by magnetic beads
and has a recovery capacity of a few to as much as 3 million cells per
specimen. Tumor cell lines alone that were run through this automation
process then seeded for cell culture demonstrated growth rates
indistinguishable from those seeded in similar counts in a regular cell
passage. In further studies we demonstrate depletion of leukocytes with
magnetic beads and of anuclear cells by filtration to handle larger blood
volumes. The filtration system may be used for automated recovery of
nucleated cells or cell clusters from blood or other fluid samples
(liquid biopsies) without use of harsh chemicals or centrifugation,
removing a common barrier for emerging analytical approaches.

