Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: iKnife: Rapid evaporative ionization mass spectrometry (REIMS)
enables real-time chemical analysis of the mucosal lipidome for
diagnostic and prognostic use in colorectal cancer


Background Real time electrospray ionization mass spectrometry (REIMS)
enables detailed analysis of tumour lipid chemistry, based on real time
analysis of electrocautery smoke plumes.Methods: This was a prospective,
observational study performed at St. Mary's Hospital, London, UK.
Patients undergoing elective surgical resections for colorectal cancer
were recruited and fresh samples were analyzed ex-vivo using a typical
electrosurgery hand piece and monopolar diathermy. Sampling was performed
using cutting mode with a standard generator and 30W of output power
(ValleylabTM). The hand piece was modified to allow aspiration of the
electrosurgical aerosol to a Xevo G2-S iKnife QTof mass spectrometer
(Waters Corporation). Raw mass spectrometric data were converted to imzML
format (MSConvert) and imported into MATLAB (R2014a) for pre-processing.
A prospective database of healthy, dysplastic and malignant colorectal
tissues was built and multivariate analysis was performed using principal
component analysis and linear discriminant analysis. Classification of
each individual tissue type was performed using leave-one-patient-out
cross-validation.Results 40 consecutive patients were recruited (22 male,
median age 68y, range 47-90). Of the 23 tumor samples 10 were rectal
adenocarcinoma and 13 colonic adenocarcinoma. TNM staging of the tumour
samples was as follows: T2 (8), T3 (11) T4 (4), N0 (12), N1 (6) N2 (5),
M0 (22), M1 (1). Distinction of healthy and malignant colorectal tissue
for the whole data set demonstrated an overall classification accuracy of
94.4% and a sensitivity of 92.4%, Specificity 96.8% (ROC AUC 0.98). The
diagnostic accuracy for dysplasia was 93.7% (Specificity 95.1%,
sensitivity 85.7%, AUC 0.97). Increases in glycerophospholipids
(pBackground Real time electrospray ionization mass spectrometry (REIMS)
enables detailed analysis of tumour lipid chemistry, based on real time
analysis of electrocautery smoke plumes.Methods: This was a prospective,
observational study performed at St. Mary's Hospital, London, UK.
Patients undergoing elective surgical resections for colorectal cancer
were recruited and fresh samples were analyzed ex-vivo using a typical
electrosurgery hand piece and monopolar diathermy. Sampling was performed
using cutting mode with a standard generator and 30W of output power
(ValleylabTM). The hand piece was modified to allow aspiration of the
electrosurgical aerosol to a Xevo G2-S iKnife QTof mass spectrometer
(Waters Corporation). Raw mass spectrometric data were converted to imzML
format (MSConvert) and imported into MATLAB (R2014a) for pre-processing.
A prospective database of healthy, dysplastic and malignant colorectal
tissues was built and multivariate analysis was performed using principal
component analysis and linear discriminant analysis. Classification of
each individual tissue type was performed using leave-one-patient-out
cross-validation.Results 40 consecutive patients were recruited (22 male,
median age 68y, range 47-90). Of the 23 tumor samples 10 were rectal
adenocarcinoma and 13 colonic adenocarcinoma. TNM staging of the tumour
samples was as follows: T2 (8), T3 (11) T4 (4), N0 (12), N1 (6) N2 (5),
M0 (22), M1 (1). Distinction of healthy and malignant colorectal tissue
for the whole data set demonstrated an overall classification accuracy of
94.4% and a sensitivity of 92.4%, Specificity 96.8% (ROC AUC 0.98). The
diagnostic accuracy for dysplasia was 93.7% (Specificity 95.1%,
sensitivity 85.7%, AUC 0.97). Increases in glycerophospholipids
(p<0.0027), and triacylglycerols (pBackground Real time electrospray
ionization mass spectrometry (REIMS) enables detailed analysis of tumour
lipid chemistry, based on real time analysis of electrocautery smoke
plumes.Methods: This was a prospective, observational study performed at
St. Mary's Hospital, London, UK. Patients undergoing elective surgical
resections for colorectal cancer were recruited and fresh samples were
analyzed ex-vivo using a typical electrosurgery hand piece and monopolar
diathermy. Sampling was performed using cutting mode with a standard
generator and 30W of output power (ValleylabTM). The hand piece was
modified to allow aspiration of the electrosurgical aerosol to a Xevo
G2-S iKnife QTof mass spectrometer (Waters Corporation). Raw mass
spectrometric data were converted to imzML format (MSConvert) and
imported into MATLAB (R2014a) for pre-processing. A prospective database
of healthy, dysplastic and malignant colorectal tissues was built and
multivariate analysis was performed using principal component analysis
and linear discriminant analysis. Classification of each individual
tissue type was performed using leave-one-patient-out
cross-validation.Results 40 consecutive patients were recruited (22 male,
median age 68y, range 47-90). Of the 23 tumor samples 10 were rectal
adenocarcinoma and 13 colonic adenocarcinoma. TNM staging of the tumour
samples was as follows: T2 (8), T3 (11) T4 (4), N0 (12), N1 (6) N2 (5),
M0 (22), M1 (1). Distinction of healthy and malignant colorectal tissue
for the whole data set demonstrated an overall classification accuracy of
94.4% and a sensitivity of 92.4%, Specificity 96.8% (ROC AUC 0.98). The
diagnostic accuracy for dysplasia was 93.7% (Specificity 95.1%,
sensitivity 85.7%, AUC 0.97). Increases in glycerophospholipids
(p<0.0027), and triacylglycerols (p<0.0004) were seen in healthy mucosa
and increased prostaglandin D2 expression was found in malignant tissue
(pBackground Real time electrospray ionization mass spectrometry (REIMS)
enables detailed analysis of tumour lipid chemistry, based on real time
analysis of electrocautery smoke plumes.Methods: This was a prospective,
observational study performed at St. Mary's Hospital, London, UK.
Patients undergoing elective surgical resections for colorectal cancer
were recruited and fresh samples were analyzed ex-vivo using a typical
electrosurgery hand piece and monopolar diathermy. Sampling was performed
using cutting mode with a standard generator and 30W of output power
(ValleylabTM). The hand piece was modified to allow aspiration of the
electrosurgical aerosol to a Xevo G2-S iKnife QTof mass spectrometer
(Waters Corporation). Raw mass spectrometric data were converted to imzML
format (MSConvert) and imported into MATLAB (R2014a) for pre-processing.
A prospective database of healthy, dysplastic and malignant colorectal
tissues was built and multivariate analysis was performed using principal
component analysis and linear discriminant analysis. Classification of
each individual tissue type was performed using leave-one-patient-out
cross-validation.Results 40 consecutive patients were recruited (22 male,
median age 68y, range 47-90). Of the 23 tumor samples 10 were rectal
adenocarcinoma and 13 colonic adenocarcinoma. TNM staging of the tumour
samples was as follows: T2 (8), T3 (11) T4 (4), N0 (12), N1 (6) N2 (5),
M0 (22), M1 (1). Distinction of healthy and malignant colorectal tissue
for the whole data set demonstrated an overall classification accuracy of
94.4% and a sensitivity of 92.4%, Specificity 96.8% (ROC AUC 0.98). The
diagnostic accuracy for dysplasia was 93.7% (Specificity 95.1%,
sensitivity 85.7%, AUC 0.97). Increases in glycerophospholipids
(p<0.0027), and triacylglycerols (p<0.0004) were seen in healthy mucosa
and increased prostaglandin D2 expression was found in malignant tissue
(p< 0.0002). Adenocarcinoma arising in the rectum could be differentiated
from more proximal tumors with an overall accuracy of 87.3%. Short and
long course chemotherapy modified the lipid signature. Anatomically
discrete chemical analysis of rectal cancers was able to provide accurate
descriptions of established histopathological and molecular markers of
poor prognosis: nodal status (AUC 0.97), KRAS mutation (AUC 0.93) and
extramural vascular invasion (EMV) (AUC 0.96).Conclusion REIMS chemical
histology provides near real time diagnostic and prognostic information
for stratifying oncological and surgical therapy.

