Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Semiconductor-based next-generation sequencing analysis of 409
cancer-related genes for mutations and copy-number variations in oral
squamous cell carcinoma


Somatic mutation analysis is standard of practice for human cancers in
order to identify therapeutic sensitizing and resistance mutations. To
better understand the molecular pathogenesis of oral squamous cell
carcinoma (OSCC) patients, we performed comprehensive genomic analyses
that use PCR target enrichment and next-generation sequencing on the Ion
Torrent semiconductor sequencers (PGM and Proton). DNA (40 ng) was
extracted from 45 human OSCC specimens and their corresponding
non-cancerous tissues including FFPE samples. Using the Ion Ampliseq
Comprehensive Cancer Panel, we sequenced 15992 loci from 409 tumor
suppressor genes and oncogenes frequently cited and frequently mutated in
human cancers (covered regions = 95.4% of total, 1.5 megabases of target
sequence). We also detected copy number variations (CNVs) in which
segments of the genome can be duplicated or deleted from sequencing
data.Each sample underwent on average 5.9 million sequencing reads after
quality filtering. The mean read depths were 367.8 x, and >95% of
targeted bases were represented .The number of somatic mutations (SNVs
and indels) in 45 patients with OSCC ranged from 1 to 36 with a median of
7.33 (6.40/Mb). The most frequent mutations were detected on TP53 (28 of
45; 62.2%). Many of the mutations on TP53 were detected in the
DNA-binding domain (23 of 28; 82.1%). NOTCH1 mutations were identified in
10 cases (8 missense, 1 coding frameshift, and 1 essential splice site
mutations). CDKN2A mutations were observed in 8 cases; and PIK3CA were
mutated 3 cases. Although the most common mutations in OSCC were C/G>T/A
transitions, which are consistent with previous reports on head and neck,
lung and oesophageal SCCs, the second most frequent mutations were
C/G>A/T transversions. We also identified a median of 100 significant
CNVs (range of 0-481) per sample. Pathway assessment has shown that
somatic aberrations within OSCC genomes are mainly involved in several
important pathways, including cell cycle regulation (p53 pathway, 84.4%)
and RTK-MAPK-PI3K (62.2%). This targeted next generation sequencing using
low amounts of FFPE DNA is a valuable tool for high-throughput genetic
testing in research and clinical settings.

