Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cancer and all-cause mortality among white and blue collar workers
in middle-aged and elderly chinese women in a prospective cohort study


Inequalities in health and mortality between white and blue collar
workers have been well documented in western countries, particularly
among men. Studies regarding occupation related mortality disparities in
Asian populations including Chinese are limited. We included 74,941 40-70
years old Chinese women from the Shanghai Women's Health Study (SWHS) in
an analysis of occupation and mortality. An in-person interview was
conducted at enrolment to obtain lifetime job history as well as
lifestyle and other potential risk factors for each participant. Each job
title was coded in three digits according to the Chinese National
Standard Occupation and Industry Codes Manual, and the categories of
white and blue collar work were defined based on this coding. The
information on mortality was provided by annual linkage to the Shanghai
Vital Statistics Registry. Cox regression models were applied to evaluate
the hazard ratios (HRs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) of all-cause
and cause-specific mortality. In comparison with lifetime white collar
workers, lifetime blue collar workers had 18% excess in all
cause-mortality (HR = 1.18, 95% CI = 1.04-1.34) and 12% excess in cancer
deaths (HR = 1.12, 95% CI = 0.93-1.35) after adjustment for lifestyle and
other potential risk factors. A significantly increased risk was also
associated with mortality from diabetes (HR = 1.89, 95% CI = 1.06-3.37).
There were no statistically significant differences in mortality between
white and blue collar workers for other causes of death including
circulatory, respiratory, gastrointestinal or other diseases among this
population. Our study provides suggestive evidence that blue collar
workers may have a higher risk of total cancer mortality compared to
white collar workers among women in Shanghai.

