Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The airway field of injury reflects gene expression changes
associated with the presence of lung squamous premalignant lesions


Lung squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) arises in the epithelial layer of the
bronchial airways and is preceded by the development of premalignant
lesions (PMLs). The molecular events involved in the progression of PMLs
to lung SCC are not clearly understood as not all PMLs that develop go on
to form carcinoma. In addition, the majority of lung cancer
chemoprevention agents tested to date are ineffective. Molecular
characterization of the airway field of injury in individuals with PMLs
could provide novel insights into the earliest molecular events
associated with carcinogenesis and identify biomarkers to guide lung
cancer detection and chemoprevention.RNA-sequencing was conducted on
cytologically normal airway brushings from current and former smokers
with (n = 50) and without (n = 25) PMLs as part of the British Columbia
Lung Health Study. Linear modeling strategies were used to identify 280
differentialy expressed genes at FDRLung squamous cell carcinoma (SCC)
arises in the epithelial layer of the bronchial airways and is preceded
by the development of premalignant lesions (PMLs). The molecular events
involved in the progression of PMLs to lung SCC are not clearly
understood as not all PMLs that develop go on to form carcinoma. In
addition, the majority of lung cancer chemoprevention agents tested to
date are ineffective. Molecular characterization of the airway field of
injury in individuals with PMLs could provide novel insights into the
earliest molecular events associated with carcinogenesis and identify
biomarkers to guide lung cancer detection and
chemoprevention.RNA-sequencing was conducted on cytologically normal
airway brushings from current and former smokers with (n = 50) and
without (n = 25) PMLs as part of the British Columbia Lung Health Study.
Linear modeling strategies were used to identify 280 differentialy
expressed genes at FDR<0.002 between subjects with and without PMLs.
Pathway analysis using GSEA and ROAST revealed enrichment of genes
involved in the electron transport chain and oxidative phosphorylation
pathways in subjects with PMLs. These findings were validated by
measuring the cellular bioenergetics of cultured epithelial cells from
biopsies of PMLs and non-lesion areas. Baseline oxygen consumption rates
were 2.5 fold higher (pLung squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) arises in the
epithelial layer of the bronchial airways and is preceded by the
development of premalignant lesions (PMLs). The molecular events involved
in the progression of PMLs to lung SCC are not clearly understood as not
all PMLs that develop go on to form carcinoma. In addition, the majority
of lung cancer chemoprevention agents tested to date are ineffective.
Molecular characterization of the airway field of injury in individuals
with PMLs could provide novel insights into the earliest molecular events
associated with carcinogenesis and identify biomarkers to guide lung
cancer detection and chemoprevention.RNA-sequencing was conducted on
cytologically normal airway brushings from current and former smokers
with (n = 50) and without (n = 25) PMLs as part of the British Columbia
Lung Health Study. Linear modeling strategies were used to identify 280
differentialy expressed genes at FDR<0.002 between subjects with and
without PMLs. Pathway analysis using GSEA and ROAST revealed enrichment
of genes involved in the electron transport chain and oxidative
phosphorylation pathways in subjects with PMLs. These findings were
validated by measuring the cellular bioenergetics of cultured epithelial
cells from biopsies of PMLs and non-lesion areas. Baseline oxygen
consumption rates were 2.5 fold higher (p<0.001) and the spare
respiratory capacity was 1.5 fold higher (pLung squamous cell carcinoma
(SCC) arises in the epithelial layer of the bronchial airways and is
preceded by the development of premalignant lesions (PMLs). The molecular
events involved in the progression of PMLs to lung SCC are not clearly
understood as not all PMLs that develop go on to form carcinoma. In
addition, the majority of lung cancer chemoprevention agents tested to
date are ineffective. Molecular characterization of the airway field of
injury in individuals with PMLs could provide novel insights into the
earliest molecular events associated with carcinogenesis and identify
biomarkers to guide lung cancer detection and
chemoprevention.RNA-sequencing was conducted on cytologically normal
airway brushings from current and former smokers with (n = 50) and
without (n = 25) PMLs as part of the British Columbia Lung Health Study.
Linear modeling strategies were used to identify 280 differentialy
expressed genes at FDR<0.002 between subjects with and without PMLs.
Pathway analysis using GSEA and ROAST revealed enrichment of genes
involved in the electron transport chain and oxidative phosphorylation
pathways in subjects with PMLs. These findings were validated by
measuring the cellular bioenergetics of cultured epithelial cells from
biopsies of PMLs and non-lesion areas. Baseline oxygen consumption rates
were 2.5 fold higher (p<0.001) and the spare respiratory capacity was 1.5
fold higher (p<0.001) in PML cultures. These data suggest that
metabolism-associated gene expression observed in the field of injury of
PMLs is correlated with PMLs. In addition, there is a significant
concordant enrichment (FDRLung squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) arises in
the epithelial layer of the bronchial airways and is preceded by the
development of premalignant lesions (PMLs). The molecular events involved
in the progression of PMLs to lung SCC are not clearly understood as not
all PMLs that develop go on to form carcinoma. In addition, the majority
of lung cancer chemoprevention agents tested to date are ineffective.
Molecular characterization of the airway field of injury in individuals
with PMLs could provide novel insights into the earliest molecular events
associated with carcinogenesis and identify biomarkers to guide lung
cancer detection and chemoprevention.RNA-sequencing was conducted on
cytologically normal airway brushings from current and former smokers
with (n = 50) and without (n = 25) PMLs as part of the British Columbia
Lung Health Study. Linear modeling strategies were used to identify 280
differentialy expressed genes at FDR<0.002 between subjects with and
without PMLs. Pathway analysis using GSEA and ROAST revealed enrichment
of genes involved in the electron transport chain and oxidative
phosphorylation pathways in subjects with PMLs. These findings were
validated by measuring the cellular bioenergetics of cultured epithelial
cells from biopsies of PMLs and non-lesion areas. Baseline oxygen
consumption rates were 2.5 fold higher (p<0.001) and the spare
respiratory capacity was 1.5 fold higher (p<0.001) in PML cultures. These
data suggest that metabolism-associated gene expression observed in the
field of injury of PMLs is correlated with PMLs. In addition, there is a
significant concordant enrichment (FDR<0.05) between the signature and
gene expression in PMLs adjacent to SCC tumors, in SCC tumors, and in the
field of individuals with lung cancer. This concordance led to the
development of a 200-gene biomarker that accurately predicts the presence
of PMLs (AUC = 0.90 n = 17 independent samples). Importantly, this
biomarker was also predictive (AUC -.72) of progression/stability vs.
regression of these premalignant lesions in an independent cohort of
cytologically normal airway brushings collected as part of the RPCI
screening clinic (n = 18).This is the first study to comprehensively
profile gene expression changes in airway epithelial cells in the
presence of PMLs. A subset of these changes reflects the earliest changes
in the process of lung squamous cell carcinogenesis including the genes
involved in cellular metabolism. However, the molecular alterations in
the field of injury are dynamic as bronchial lesions either progress or
regress these changes may be leveraged to monitor efficacy in
chemoprevention trials. In addition monitoring molecular changes in
high-risk smokers may identify smokers with PMLs that should receive lung
cancer screening as well as lay the foundation for personalized lung
cancer chemoprevention.

