Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comprehensive drug testing of patient-derived conditionally
reprogrammed cells from castration-resistant prostate cancer


Culture of human prostate cancer (PCa) progenitor cells would facilitate
the discovery and testing of new, potentially curative therapies for PCa.
Here, we established and characterized patient-derived conditionally
reprogrammed cells (CRCs) from seven patients to determine their
biological properties (genomic, transcriptomic, protein expression) and
to apply these cells to test efficacies of 306 emerging and clinically
approved drugs. The patient samples came from both primary prostate
cancer as well as from advanced Castration-Resistant Prostate Cancer
(CRPC).Patients with primary prostate cancer generated six benign CRC
cultures which all had an androgen receptor (AR)-negative,
basal/transit-amplifying phenotype with few CNAs. In 3D cell culture,
these cells could re-express AR. The CRCs from a CRPC patient (HUB.5)
displayed multiple CNAs, many of which were shared with the parental
tumor. We carried out high-throughput drug-response studies with 306
emerging and clinical cancer drugs. Bcl-2 family inhibitor navitoclax
emerged as the most potent cancer-specific drug for the CRCs from CRPC
patient. Other drug efficacies observed included taxanes, mepacrine and
retinoids, thus covering both existing (and clinically validated) as well
as new drug efficacies.In conclusion, comprehensive
cancer-pharmacopeia-wide drug testing of CRCs from a CRPC patient
highlighted both known and novel drug sensitivities in PCa, including
navitoclax, which is currently tested in clinical trials of CRPC.

