Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Time and regional incidence trends of human
papillomavirus-associated oropharyngeal cancer in Ontario, Canada


Background: Despite the increasing incidence of human papillomavirus
(HPV)-associated oropharyngeal cancer (OPC) in the Western World, there
are little data describing the change in HPV incidence within Ontario,
Canada. We therefore assessed HPV-positivity in a retrospective study of
612 OPC patient samples.Methods: Diagnostic formalin-fixed and paraffin
embedded OPC patient samples belonging to two cohorts were retrieved from
institutions across Ontario, Canada over two time periods: 1998-1999 (n =
245) and 2003-2004 (n = 367). In all samples, HPV status was assessed
initially using p16 immunohistochemistry (IHC). For p16 negative and
equivocal staining samples, HPV in situ hybridization (ISH; using an HPV
subtype 16/18 probe) was performed as the final indicator for HPV
positivity. HPV-positivity rate was then compared over time and
geographic region.Results: Overall, p16-positivity was observed in 52.3%
(320 of 612) of the OPC patients. For the p16-negative (n = 246) and
p16-equivocal (n = 46) samples, 25.3% (n = 74) were positive by HPV16/18
ISH. The HPV infection incidence for the 1998-1999 cohort was 54.3% (133
of 245 samples; 95% CI: 53.9(47.4-60.2)). The HPV infection incidence
increased significantly in the 2003-2004 cohort to 71.1% (261 of 367
samples; 95% CI: 71.4(66.5-76.0)) (pBackground: Despite the increasing
incidence of human papillomavirus (HPV)-associated oropharyngeal cancer
(OPC) in the Western World, there are little data describing the change
in HPV incidence within Ontario, Canada. We therefore assessed
HPV-positivity in a retrospective study of 612 OPC patient
samples.Methods: Diagnostic formalin-fixed and paraffin embedded OPC
patient samples belonging to two cohorts were retrieved from institutions
across Ontario, Canada over two time periods: 1998-1999 (n = 245) and
2003-2004 (n = 367). In all samples, HPV status was assessed initially
using p16 immunohistochemistry (IHC). For p16 negative and equivocal
staining samples, HPV in situ hybridization (ISH; using an HPV subtype
16/18 probe) was performed as the final indicator for HPV positivity.
HPV-positivity rate was then compared over time and geographic
region.Results: Overall, p16-positivity was observed in 52.3% (320 of
612) of the OPC patients. For the p16-negative (n = 246) and
p16-equivocal (n = 46) samples, 25.3% (n = 74) were positive by HPV16/18
ISH. The HPV infection incidence for the 1998-1999 cohort was 54.3% (133
of 245 samples; 95% CI: 53.9(47.4-60.2)). The HPV infection incidence
increased significantly in the 2003-2004 cohort to 71.1% (261 of 367
samples; 95% CI: 71.4(66.5-76.0)) (p<0.0001). When divided based on
geographical region, HPV incidence also increased significantly over time
(Northern Ontario by 49%, p = 0.04; Eastern Ontario by 23%, p = 0.009;
Southern Ontario by 17%, p = 0.009; Central Ontario by 12%, p = 0.05).
There were no significant differences between urban and rural areas over
the two cohort periods (urban p = 0.8; rural, p = 0.6).Conclusions:
HPV-associated OPC increased in incidence in Ontario, Canada, over a
6-year period from 1998 to 2004, which appeared to be applicable across
the entire province, regardless of urban or rural regions. A composite
HPV detection method using p16 in combination with HPV ISH identified an
additional 25% of HPV-positive OPC cases.

