Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Short-course enzalutamide reveals immune activating properties in
patients with biochemically recurrent prostate cancer


Background: Enazalutamide (enz) is an androgen receptor signaling
molecule approved by the FDA for the treatment of patients with
metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer; however, trials are
evaluating this agent in earlier stages of disease. Here, we have
investigated the effect of enz on peripheral immunity in patients with
biochemically recurrent prostate cancer enrolled in a clinical trial of
enz with/without a therapeutic vaccine (NCT01875250).Methods: Patients
from the arm receiving enz alone (160 mg daily for 84 days, without ADT)
were assessed in this study. Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs)
collected from 12 patients pre and post enz (days 14, 28, 84, and 100)
were analyzed by flow cytometry to identify 123 immune cell subsets,
including 9 standard subsets (CD4+ and CD8+ T cells, T-regulatory cells
(Treg), B cells, conventional and plasmacytoid dendritic cells (cDC,
pDC), natural killer cells (NK), natural killer T cells (NKT), and
myeloid derived suppressor cell (MDSC)), and 114 subsets relating to
maturation and function. PBMCs were also assessed for T-cell receptor
excision circles (TREC) to identify recent thymic emigrants, and by
microarray to determine changes in global gene expression.Results:
Treatment with enz induced several notable alterations in peripheral
immune cells, suggesting that it has potential immune activating
properties. These changes occurred early following treatment, and
included an increase of NK cells, decreased frequencies of MDSCs with a
suppressive phenotype (e.g. PDL1+ MDSC, gMDSC, and CD16+ MDSC), and
decreased frequencies of both CD4+ and CD8+ T-lymphocytes expressing the
immune inhibitory checkpoint molecule CTLA4. Additionally, treatment with
enz increased TREC levels by >75% in 7 out of 12 patients compared to
pre-therapy levels (p = 0.012); nave CD4+ and CD8+ T-lymphocytes were
also elevated by >25% in those patients demonstrating the greatest
increase in TREC. Gene expression analysis of PBMCs corroborated these
findings, showing that enz increased activation of interferon-gamma
signaling and related immune activating pathways.Conclusions. These
findings show that short-course enz has immune activating properties in
cancer patients, and support the combination of enz with immunotherapy.

