Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting ASCT2-mediated glutamine uptake and metabolism in breast
cancer


Although a nonessential amino acid in normal cell growth, the demand for
glutamine is dramatically increased throughout malignant transformation
to provide catabolic substrates for ATP production and anabolic
substrates for macromolecule biosynthesis. To maintain glutamine
availability for these metabolic processes, cancer cells overexpress cell
surface transporters that function to exchange amino acids across the
plasma membrane. One such transporter is ASCT2 (alanine, serine,
cysteine-preferring transporter 2; SLC1A5), a sodium-dependent symporter
that mediates uptake of small, neutral amino acids, including
glutamine.Blocking ASCT2 to prevent glutamine uptake and glutaminolysis
has been shown to successfully prevent tumor cell proliferation in
melanoma, non-small cell lung cancer, prostate cancer and acute myeloid
leukaemia. We recently showed that in breast cancer, although ASCT2 is
highly expressed in most tumor subtypes, only aggressive triple-negative
(TN) breast cancer cells require ASCT2-mediated uptake of glutamine to
sustain cell growth in vitro and in vivo. Gene expression analysis of
xenograft-derived tumor tissue and TN patient samples suggested
coordinate regulation of ASCT2 and other glutamine metabolism-related
genes, such as glutaminase (GLS) and glutamate-ammonia ligase (GLUL),
with global activation of glutaminolytic energy production pathways in
these tumors. The metabolism-regulating transcription factors, MYC and
ATF4, were significantly correlated with these genes, suggesting a
dynamic MYC and ATF4-driven transcriptional program in TN breast cancer.
We therefore hypothesized that highly proliferative TN breast cancers
that are sensitive to ASCT2 inhibition may have unique metabolic
signatures that could be additionally exploited for therapeutic
purposes.We developed a targeted metabolomics approach that combined
labelled substrate tracing, liquid chromatography coupled tandem-mass
spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) and gas chromatography mass spectrometry (GC-MS)
to analyze intracellular levels of key tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle
intermediates, glycolytic metabolites, fatty acid precursors, and amino
acids in human breast cancer cell lines. These analyses revealed distinct
metabolic effects when ASCT2 transporter function was blocked in vitro by
pharmacological inhibitors or inducible shRNA knockdown, in combination
with CB-839, a GLS inhibitor in Phase I clinical trials. To confirm the
clinical utility of these findings, we also determined mRNA and protein
expression of glutamine metabolism-related genes in tissue microarrays of
TN patient samples. These data suggest a reliance on glutamine
availability in TN breast cancers and reinforce the link between
increased glutamine metabolism and clinically aggressive breast cancers,
thus highlighting the therapeutic potential of targeting the ASCT2
glutamine uptake and metabolism pathway in these patients.

