Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical combinations of the antibody-drug conjugate SGN-LIV1A
with chemotherapies show increased activity


SGN-LIV1A is an antibody-drug conjugate (ADC) currently being evaluated
in a phase 1 clinical trial for metastatic breast cancer. SGN-LIV1A
consists of the microtubule disrupting agent, monomethyl auristatin E
(MMAE), conjugated to the anti-LIV-1 humanized monoclonal antibody
hLIV22. LIV-1, as a downstream target of STAT3, promotes the epithelial
to mesenchymal transition that is important in the malignant progression
to metastasis. We have previously shown that as a single agent, SGN-LIV1A
displays target specific internalization and cytotoxic activity against a
breast cancer cell line in vitro and also demonstrates antitumor activity
in in vivo preclinical xenograft models with significant delay of tumor
growth. We report here additive and synergistic effects when combining
SGN-LIV1A with current chemotherapeutic modalities used in the treatment
of metastatic breast cancer. Specifically, we show synergy between
SGN-LIV1A in combination with either doxorubicin or Abraxane in MCF-7
breast cancer tumor model. In addition, we show additive effects when
carboplatin or protein kinase inhibitors are dosed in combination with
SGN-LIV1A in this tumor model. These findings support further evaluation
and development of SGN-LIV1A in combination with standard of care
chemotherapeutic agents for the treatment of breast cancer.

