Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regular intake of high-fat diet exacerbates oxidative
stress-mediated DNA hypermethylation and activation of Nrf2-Keap1
signaling in UVB-induced skin tumors in SKH-1 hairless mice


Generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) is an essential metabolic
process for maintaining normal cellular homeostasis; however elevated and
sustained levels of ROS contribute in many human diseases, including
cancer. Sustained and excessive cellular ROS result in genetic as well as
epigenetic alterations, leading to deregulation of oncogenes and tumor
suppressor genes. Nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2 (Nrf2) is a
ubiquitous transcription factor, capable of eliciting the coordinated
induction of cytoprotective genes in response to oxidative stress. Upon
oxidative insult, Nrf2 rapidly translocate to nucleus, activates genes
encoding anti-oxidative enzymes such as heme oxygenase 1 (HO-1) and
superoxide dismutase (SOD). Earlier, we have shown that regular intake of
high-fat diet (HF-diet) enhances tumor development in UV-exposed SKH-1
hairless mouse skin compared to control-diet (C-diet) fed mice.
Administration of HF-diet along with exposure of UVB radiation (180
mJ/cm2, 3x/week for 24 weeks) resulted in sustained oxidative stress as
evident by depletion in antioxidant defense capabilities. The levels of
reduced glutathione (40%, pGeneration of reactive oxygen species (ROS) is
an essential metabolic process for maintaining normal cellular
homeostasis; however elevated and sustained levels of ROS contribute in
many human diseases, including cancer. Sustained and excessive cellular
ROS result in genetic as well as epigenetic alterations, leading to
deregulation of oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes. Nuclear factor
erythroid 2-related factor 2 (Nrf2) is a ubiquitous transcription factor,
capable of eliciting the coordinated induction of cytoprotective genes in
response to oxidative stress. Upon oxidative insult, Nrf2 rapidly
translocate to nucleus, activates genes encoding anti-oxidative enzymes
such as heme oxygenase 1 (HO-1) and superoxide dismutase (SOD). Earlier,
we have shown that regular intake of high-fat diet (HF-diet) enhances
tumor development in UV-exposed SKH-1 hairless mouse skin compared to
control-diet (C-diet) fed mice. Administration of HF-diet along with
exposure of UVB radiation (180 mJ/cm2, 3x/week for 24 weeks) resulted in
sustained oxidative stress as evident by depletion in antioxidant defense
capabilities. The levels of reduced glutathione (40%, p<0.001),
glutathione peroxidase (49%, pGeneration of reactive oxygen species (ROS)
is an essential metabolic process for maintaining normal cellular
homeostasis; however elevated and sustained levels of ROS contribute in
many human diseases, including cancer. Sustained and excessive cellular
ROS result in genetic as well as epigenetic alterations, leading to
deregulation of oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes. Nuclear factor
erythroid 2-related factor 2 (Nrf2) is a ubiquitous transcription factor,
capable of eliciting the coordinated induction of cytoprotective genes in
response to oxidative stress. Upon oxidative insult, Nrf2 rapidly
translocate to nucleus, activates genes encoding anti-oxidative enzymes
such as heme oxygenase 1 (HO-1) and superoxide dismutase (SOD). Earlier,
we have shown that regular intake of high-fat diet (HF-diet) enhances
tumor development in UV-exposed SKH-1 hairless mouse skin compared to
control-diet (C-diet) fed mice. Administration of HF-diet along with
exposure of UVB radiation (180 mJ/cm2, 3x/week for 24 weeks) resulted in
sustained oxidative stress as evident by depletion in antioxidant defense
capabilities. The levels of reduced glutathione (40%, p<0.001),
glutathione peroxidase (49%, p<0.001) and SOD (47%, pGeneration of
reactive oxygen species (ROS) is an essential metabolic process for
maintaining normal cellular homeostasis; however elevated and sustained
levels of ROS contribute in many human diseases, including cancer.
Sustained and excessive cellular ROS result in genetic as well as
epigenetic alterations, leading to deregulation of oncogenes and tumor
suppressor genes. Nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2 (Nrf2) is a
ubiquitous transcription factor, capable of eliciting the coordinated
induction of cytoprotective genes in response to oxidative stress. Upon
oxidative insult, Nrf2 rapidly translocate to nucleus, activates genes
encoding anti-oxidative enzymes such as heme oxygenase 1 (HO-1) and
superoxide dismutase (SOD). Earlier, we have shown that regular intake of
high-fat diet (HF-diet) enhances tumor development in UV-exposed SKH-1
hairless mouse skin compared to control-diet (C-diet) fed mice.
Administration of HF-diet along with exposure of UVB radiation (180
mJ/cm2, 3x/week for 24 weeks) resulted in sustained oxidative stress as
evident by depletion in antioxidant defense capabilities. The levels of
reduced glutathione (40%, p<0.001), glutathione peroxidase (49%, p<0.001)
and SOD (47%, p<0.001) were noted, while the level of lipid peroxidation
was significantly increased (160%, pGeneration of reactive oxygen species
(ROS) is an essential metabolic process for maintaining normal cellular
homeostasis; however elevated and sustained levels of ROS contribute in
many human diseases, including cancer. Sustained and excessive cellular
ROS result in genetic as well as epigenetic alterations, leading to
deregulation of oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes. Nuclear factor
erythroid 2-related factor 2 (Nrf2) is a ubiquitous transcription factor,
capable of eliciting the coordinated induction of cytoprotective genes in
response to oxidative stress. Upon oxidative insult, Nrf2 rapidly
translocate to nucleus, activates genes encoding anti-oxidative enzymes
such as heme oxygenase 1 (HO-1) and superoxide dismutase (SOD). Earlier,
we have shown that regular intake of high-fat diet (HF-diet) enhances
tumor development in UV-exposed SKH-1 hairless mouse skin compared to
control-diet (C-diet) fed mice. Administration of HF-diet along with
exposure of UVB radiation (180 mJ/cm2, 3x/week for 24 weeks) resulted in
sustained oxidative stress as evident by depletion in antioxidant defense
capabilities. The levels of reduced glutathione (40%, p<0.001),
glutathione peroxidase (49%, p<0.001) and SOD (47%, p<0.001) were noted,
while the level of lipid peroxidation was significantly increased (160%,
p<0.001) in skin tumors of HF-diet fed mice compared with C-diet fed
mice. Epigenetic alterations in association with oxidative stress were
analyzed by estimation of global DNA methylation, DNA methyltransferase
(Dnmt) activity and histone modifications. We observed significant
increase of Dnmt activity (3 fold, pGeneration of reactive oxygen species
(ROS) is an essential metabolic process for maintaining normal cellular
homeostasis; however elevated and sustained levels of ROS contribute in
many human diseases, including cancer. Sustained and excessive cellular
ROS result in genetic as well as epigenetic alterations, leading to
deregulation of oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes. Nuclear factor
erythroid 2-related factor 2 (Nrf2) is a ubiquitous transcription factor,
capable of eliciting the coordinated induction of cytoprotective genes in
response to oxidative stress. Upon oxidative insult, Nrf2 rapidly
translocate to nucleus, activates genes encoding anti-oxidative enzymes
such as heme oxygenase 1 (HO-1) and superoxide dismutase (SOD). Earlier,
we have shown that regular intake of high-fat diet (HF-diet) enhances
tumor development in UV-exposed SKH-1 hairless mouse skin compared to
control-diet (C-diet) fed mice. Administration of HF-diet along with
exposure of UVB radiation (180 mJ/cm2, 3x/week for 24 weeks) resulted in
sustained oxidative stress as evident by depletion in antioxidant defense
capabilities. The levels of reduced glutathione (40%, p<0.001),
glutathione peroxidase (49%, p<0.001) and SOD (47%, p<0.001) were noted,
while the level of lipid peroxidation was significantly increased (160%,
p<0.001) in skin tumors of HF-diet fed mice compared with C-diet fed
mice. Epigenetic alterations in association with oxidative stress were
analyzed by estimation of global DNA methylation, DNA methyltransferase
(Dnmt) activity and histone modifications. We observed significant
increase of Dnmt activity (3 fold, p<0.001) and global DNA methylation
level (2 folds, pGeneration of reactive oxygen species (ROS) is an
essential metabolic process for maintaining normal cellular homeostasis;
however elevated and sustained levels of ROS contribute in many human
diseases, including cancer. Sustained and excessive cellular ROS result
in genetic as well as epigenetic alterations, leading to deregulation of
oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes. Nuclear factor erythroid 2-related
factor 2 (Nrf2) is a ubiquitous transcription factor, capable of
eliciting the coordinated induction of cytoprotective genes in response
to oxidative stress. Upon oxidative insult, Nrf2 rapidly translocate to
nucleus, activates genes encoding anti-oxidative enzymes such as heme
oxygenase 1 (HO-1) and superoxide dismutase (SOD). Earlier, we have shown
that regular intake of high-fat diet (HF-diet) enhances tumor development
in UV-exposed SKH-1 hairless mouse skin compared to control-diet (C-diet)
fed mice. Administration of HF-diet along with exposure of UVB radiation
(180 mJ/cm2, 3x/week for 24 weeks) resulted in sustained oxidative stress
as evident by depletion in antioxidant defense capabilities. The levels
of reduced glutathione (40%, p<0.001), glutathione peroxidase (49%,
p<0.001) and SOD (47%, p<0.001) were noted, while the level of lipid
peroxidation was significantly increased (160%, p<0.001) in skin tumors
of HF-diet fed mice compared with C-diet fed mice. Epigenetic alterations
in association with oxidative stress were analyzed by estimation of
global DNA methylation, DNA methyltransferase (Dnmt) activity and histone
modifications. We observed significant increase of Dnmt activity (3 fold,
p<0.001) and global DNA methylation level (2 folds, p<0.001) along with
Dnmt proteins and methylated histone in tumors of HF-diet fed mice
compared with tumors of C-diet fed mice. Oxidative stress disrupts
Nrf2-Keap-1 binding by DNA hypermethylation and epigenetic silencing of
Keap1 gene leading to its inactivation, release and translocation of Nrf2
to nucleus. Our RT-PCR data showed elevated levels of methylated Keap-1
and lower levels of un-methylated Keap-1 gene in skin tumors from HF-diet
fed mice. Disruption of Keap-Nrf2 binding resulted in higher nuclear
translocation of Nrf2 and activation of its target genes NQO-1 and HO-1
as confirmed by western blot analyses. Taken together, this study shows
that chronic exposure to UVB along with administration of HF-diet induces
oxidative stress, causes epigenetic modifications and loss of Keap1
function leading to nuclear accumulation of Nrf2 which creates a
susceptible environment for skin tumor growth.

