Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High-throughput in vivo systems biology using implantable
microdevices


We have developed an implantable device that can perform drug sensitivity
testing of a large number of anti-cancer drugs inside the living tumor.
This device contains reservoirs which release microdoses of single agents
or drug combinations into distinct spatial regions of the tumor in local
concentrations that are representative of concentrations achieved during
systemic drug treatment. The efficacy of each of up to 30 individual
drugs or combinations can be assessed from a single specimen without
systemic drug exposure through minimally invasive biopsy. This assay
takes into consideration physiologic effects that contribute to drug
response by allowing drugs to interact with the living tumor in its
native microenvironment.Using this technology, we have been able to
assess phenotypic drug response for up to 100 therapies in a single
mouse, probing all clinically relevant single and combination treatments
related to the estrogen receptor, CDK4/6 and PI3K pathways in ER+ PDX
mouse models. We also examined a range of targeted and cytotoxic drug
therapies in parallel before, during and after systemic drug treatments
to investigate emerging drug resistance at the phenotypic level in
BRAF-mutant melanoma models. The results demonstrate new patterns of
escape and adaptive signaling mechanisms, and may offer clues for
effective combination therapy.

