Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Single cell imaging of kinase inhibitor-induced effects in breast
cancer cell lines


There is need for improved targeted therapies for the treatment of breast
cancer. Kinase inhibitors are candidates to be used in this context. With
the goal of uncovering specific vulnerabilities in differing cell lines,
we treated five breast cancer cell lines representing triple negative
(BT20, MDAMB231, and Hs578T), hormone receptor positive (MCF7), and Her2
amplified (SKBR3) disease and the non-malignant MCF10A line with a panel
of 105 kinase inhibitors covering a broad range of targets. Cells were
treated with doses between 0.1 and 10 M for 24 hours, at which time they
were stained with DRAQ5 (DNA) and TMRE (mitochondrial membrane
potential). Live-cell images were acquired using a high throughput,
confocal Opera microscope. Cell segmentation, based on the DRAQ5
staining, and feature extraction (intensity, morphology, and texture)
were performed with Acapella software. Over 300 features were extracted
for 1.5 million cells. Analytical methods have been applied to identify
those treatments that induced significant changes to the cells. Over half
of the kinase inhibitors queried had a significant effect within 24 hours
in all cell lines at 10 M. Cell cycle inhibitors had the most common
effects across cell lines. Cell line specific effects were also
uncovered, for example, MDAMB231 cells were the most sensitive to MAPK
inhibitors. These, early time point, results have been compared with the
effects of the same inhibitors on cell growth to better understand the
mechanisms leading to cell line and pathway specific effects.

