Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Multiscale treatment response model for triple-negative breast
cancer linking drug pharmacokinetics to tumor cell population dynamics


IntroductionThe goal of this study is to establish a predictive model of
cytotoxic therapy that incorporates in vitro drug pharmacokinetics and
cell-scale therapy response data, on a cell-line specific basis. We
report on a series of time-resolved fluorescence microscopy experiments
to characterize the uptake of doxorubicin and its effect on the
population dynamics of MDA-MB-231 cells, a model of triple negative
breast cancer.Experimental DesignWe leveraged the intrinsic fluorescence
of doxorubicin to measure its uptake by MDA-MB-231 cells. Cells, labeled
with a fluorescent nuclear marker, were seeded in microtiter plates and
incubated with doxorubicin concentrations ranging from 10 nM to 10 M for
6, 12, or 24 hours. These plates were imaged daily via bright field and
fluorescent microscopy after addition of doxorubicin. Nuclei were
segmented and automatically counted to quantify cell population size.
Counts were normalized to population size at time of treatment and
converted to population doublings. On a separate channel, extracellular,
cytoplasmic, and nuclear doxorubicin fluorescence were quantified. A
compartment model describing the movement of doxorubicin from the
extracellular space into cells was fit to these data. We then constructed
a cell treatment response model and fit it, coupled with the compartment
model, to the population data using MATLAB.ResultsMDA-MB-231 cellular
response to doxorubicin was tightly linked to both drug concentration and
exposure time. Higher doses (> 1 M) invariably induced rapid cell death.
Smaller doses (IntroductionThe goal of this study is to establish a
predictive model of cytotoxic therapy that incorporates in vitro drug
pharmacokinetics and cell-scale therapy response data, on a cell-line
specific basis. We report on a series of time-resolved fluorescence
microscopy experiments to characterize the uptake of doxorubicin and its
effect on the population dynamics of MDA-MB-231 cells, a model of triple
negative breast cancer.Experimental DesignWe leveraged the intrinsic
fluorescence of doxorubicin to measure its uptake by MDA-MB-231 cells.
Cells, labeled with a fluorescent nuclear marker, were seeded in
microtiter plates and incubated with doxorubicin concentrations ranging
from 10 nM to 10 M for 6, 12, or 24 hours. These plates were imaged daily
via bright field and fluorescent microscopy after addition of
doxorubicin. Nuclei were segmented and automatically counted to quantify
cell population size. Counts were normalized to population size at time
of treatment and converted to population doublings. On a separate
channel, extracellular, cytoplasmic, and nuclear doxorubicin fluorescence
were quantified. A compartment model describing the movement of
doxorubicin from the extracellular space into cells was fit to these
data. We then constructed a cell treatment response model and fit it,
coupled with the compartment model, to the population data using
MATLAB.ResultsMDA-MB-231 cellular response to doxorubicin was tightly
linked to both drug concentration and exposure time. Higher doses (> 1 M)
invariably induced rapid cell death. Smaller doses (< 1 M) induced a
concentration-dependent nonlinear response defined by an initial increase
in population size that, depending on exposure time, was followed by a
protracted decrease in cell number. For example, when treated with 156 nM
for 6, 12, and 24 hours, we observed, respectively, an average of 2.6,
2.1, and 0.67 population doublings over the first 150 hours after
treatment (p IntroductionThe goal of this study is to establish a
predictive model of cytotoxic therapy that incorporates in vitro drug
pharmacokinetics and cell-scale therapy response data, on a cell-line
specific basis. We report on a series of time-resolved fluorescence
microscopy experiments to characterize the uptake of doxorubicin and its
effect on the population dynamics of MDA-MB-231 cells, a model of triple
negative breast cancer.Experimental DesignWe leveraged the intrinsic
fluorescence of doxorubicin to measure its uptake by MDA-MB-231 cells.
Cells, labeled with a fluorescent nuclear marker, were seeded in
microtiter plates and incubated with doxorubicin concentrations ranging
from 10 nM to 10 M for 6, 12, or 24 hours. These plates were imaged daily
via bright field and fluorescent microscopy after addition of
doxorubicin. Nuclei were segmented and automatically counted to quantify
cell population size. Counts were normalized to population size at time
of treatment and converted to population doublings. On a separate
channel, extracellular, cytoplasmic, and nuclear doxorubicin fluorescence
were quantified. A compartment model describing the movement of
doxorubicin from the extracellular space into cells was fit to these
data. We then constructed a cell treatment response model and fit it,
coupled with the compartment model, to the population data using
MATLAB.ResultsMDA-MB-231 cellular response to doxorubicin was tightly
linked to both drug concentration and exposure time. Higher doses (> 1 M)
invariably induced rapid cell death. Smaller doses (< 1 M) induced a
concentration-dependent nonlinear response defined by an initial increase
in population size that, depending on exposure time, was followed by a
protracted decrease in cell number. For example, when treated with 156 nM
for 6, 12, and 24 hours, we observed, respectively, an average of 2.6,
2.1, and 0.67 population doublings over the first 150 hours after
treatment (p < 0.05 among groups). These populations then either held
stable or receded out to 400 hours, when we observed net population
doublings of 2.6, 1.7, and 0.037, respectively (p IntroductionThe goal of
this study is to establish a predictive model of cytotoxic therapy that
incorporates in vitro drug pharmacokinetics and cell-scale therapy
response data, on a cell-line specific basis. We report on a series of
time-resolved fluorescence microscopy experiments to characterize the
uptake of doxorubicin and its effect on the population dynamics of
MDA-MB-231 cells, a model of triple negative breast cancer.Experimental
DesignWe leveraged the intrinsic fluorescence of doxorubicin to measure
its uptake by MDA-MB-231 cells. Cells, labeled with a fluorescent nuclear
marker, were seeded in microtiter plates and incubated with doxorubicin
concentrations ranging from 10 nM to 10 M for 6, 12, or 24 hours. These
plates were imaged daily via bright field and fluorescent microscopy
after addition of doxorubicin. Nuclei were segmented and automatically
counted to quantify cell population size. Counts were normalized to
population size at time of treatment and converted to population
doublings. On a separate channel, extracellular, cytoplasmic, and nuclear
doxorubicin fluorescence were quantified. A compartment model describing
the movement of doxorubicin from the extracellular space into cells was
fit to these data. We then constructed a cell treatment response model
and fit it, coupled with the compartment model, to the population data
using MATLAB.ResultsMDA-MB-231 cellular response to doxorubicin was
tightly linked to both drug concentration and exposure time. Higher doses
(> 1 M) invariably induced rapid cell death. Smaller doses (< 1 M)
induced a concentration-dependent nonlinear response defined by an
initial increase in population size that, depending on exposure time, was
followed by a protracted decrease in cell number. For example, when
treated with 156 nM for 6, 12, and 24 hours, we observed, respectively,
an average of 2.6, 2.1, and 0.67 population doublings over the first 150
hours after treatment (p < 0.05 among groups). These populations then
either held stable or receded out to 400 hours, when we observed net
population doublings of 2.6, 1.7, and 0.037, respectively (p < 0.05).
Untreated cells followed a logistic growth pattern, with an average total
of 4.4 population doublings.ConclusionThese time-resolved treatment
protocols replicate clinically observed pharmacokinetics of cytotoxic
therapies more closely than the constant concentrations in previous
dose-response assays. By explicitly considering both drug and population
dynamics, our mathematical model enables exploration, in silico, of
treatment protocols intractable experimentally. Predictions from model
simulations can then be tested experimentally, hopefully allowing for
computationally-optimized and experimentally validated treatment regimens
that maximize cytotoxic effects of doxorubicin.

