Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Multiple PI3K pathway mutations predominate in low stage
endometrial carcinomas


Objectives: Endometrial cancers (ECs) frequently harbor mutations in PI3K
pathway genes. Our objective was to determine the mutation frequency of
the PIK3 pathway in the tumors of EC patients prospectively enrolled on
an IRB-approved institutional tumor sequencing initiative (UNCseq) and
correlate these with clinical factors.Methods: Snap-frozen and FFPE
tissue samples were collected from patients enrolled on UNCseq
(NCT01457196). DNA was isolated using the Puregene DNA purification
system, and Illumina libraries were prepared separately from tumor and a
matched normal sample from each patient. Relevant targets, were enriched
by a custom designed Agilent SureSelect hybrid capture enrichment library
using standard protocols. Samples were sequenced on Illumina HiSeq
machines in a variety of formats. Statistical analysis of clinical
correlates was performed in R (v 3.1.1).Results: Data was collected from
109 EC patients. Thirty-six tumors (33.0%), 34 of which were
endometrioid, had >2 mutations between PIK3CA and PIK3R1. 20 patients had
multiple PIK3CA mutations (18.3%) and 11 had multiple PIK3R1 mutations
(10.1%). In all but 5 cases, multiple mutations of PIK3R1 or PIK3CA were
coincident with PTEN mutation (p = 0.018). There were strong correlations
between PI3K pathway mutations and tumor grade and stage. High stage
tumors (stage >2) were less likely (5/36) than stage 1 tumors (31/73) to
have multiple PI3K mutations (p = 0.0056). Though not reaching
significance, grade 3 tumors (8/37) were less likely than low-grade
tumors (28/72) to demonstrate multiple PI3K mutations (p = 0.11). Of the
10 serous ECs, none exhibited multiple PI3K mutations.Conclusions: There
is a strong relationship between mutated PIK3 pathway genes and
clinically relevant tumor biology in ECs. Multiple mutations in the PIK3
pathway are common, suggesting that PI3K pathway inhibition in EC may
need to be directed against PIK3CA and PIK3R1 simultaneously. These
multiply mutated tumors are strongly linked to lower stage and grade
tumors with concurrent PTEN mutations. We posit that initially PTEN
mutant clones may give rise to subclonal populations with various PI3K
mutations which may be relatively indolent until additional driver
mutations are acquired such that one subpopulation predominates,
resulting in higher grade and stage ECs.

