Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of ribosomal protein L9 expression suppresses
colorectal carcinoma cell growth in vitro and in vivo


Background: Ribosomal protein L9 (RPL9), a component of the 60S subunit,
is upregulated in human colorectal cancer (CRC). We thus hypothesized if
targeting of RPL9 with small interfering (si) RNA could inhibit CRC
progression. We also investigated molecular mechanism to mediate CRC cell
death caused by RPL9 silencing. Methods: HCT116 and HT29 human CRC cells
were transfected with RPL9 siRNA and tested for growth inhibition and
apoptotic induction using MTS, FACS and microscopic analysis. To obtain
insights into the molecular changes in response to RPL9 knockdown, global
changes in gene expression were examined using RNA sequencing. Results:
RPL9 silencing caused inhibition of CRC cell growth through induction of
apoptotic cell death. RNA sequencing revealed that RPL9-specific
knockdown led to dysregulation of 622 genes in HCT116 and 2882 genes in
HT29 cells. Among those, 256 genes showed the same directional regulation
(128 up- and 168 down-regulated genes), including up-regulation of tumor
suppressors such as KLF6 and ATF3, and were considered as a common RPL9
knockdown signature. Western blotting proved that downregulation of RPL9
was accompanied with the decrease in the levels of PARP-1 and pro-caspase
3 delaying cell cycle progression and accelerating apoptotic signaling.
Of importance, targeting RPL9 significantly inhibited CRC growth in a
murine xenograft model. Conclusion: These results suggest that inhibition
of RPL9 expression could be an attractive option for molecular targeted
therapy of colorectal cancer.

