Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel c-Met targeting antibody drug conjugate for NSCLC


c-Met, the proto-oncogene transmembrane receptor tyrosine kinase, is
involved in cell proliferation, survival, motility, and invasion in
normal and tumor cells. It is widely expressed and associated with poor
prognosis in breast, lung, liver, kidney and brain cancers. Hepatocyte
growth factor (HGF) is the only known ligand of c-Met, also found in many
tumors and cancers where activity is driven by the c-Met receptor. c-Met
is accepted as an attractive anti-cancer target, but the development of
cancer therapy targeting c-Met receptor or kinase remain very
challenging. Clinical development of c-Met/HGF targeting antibodies has
shown initial evidence of clinical efficacy but failed in phase III.
Small molecule inhibitors often suffer from selectivity issues. Antibody
drug conjugates (ADCs) which combine an antibody with highly potent
cytotoxic agents, becomes an attractive approach against c-Met
overexpressing cancers such NSCLC. We have identified an anti-c-Met
antibody STI-0602 and generated ADCs from a panel of cytotoxic agents
such as microtubulin inhibitor and DNA damaging agents. ADCs retained the
binding to c-Met receptor and showed potent cell killing in a variety of
c-Met-positive cell lines. ADCs also showed in vivo efficacy in a panel
of c-Met-positive human NSCLC xenograft models like A549, H292, EBC-1,
HCC827 and H1993, which suggest a potential therapy for c-Met
overexpressing lung cancer and other cancers.

