Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: c-Myc-driven lymphomas require calcium-modulating cyclophilin
ligand (CAML) for survival and proliferation


Calcium-modulating cyclophilin ligand (CAML) is an endoplasmic reticulum
(ER) protein that functions in a complex to mediate tail-anchored (TA)
protein insertion into the ER membrane. CAML has also been implicated as
a regulator of endocytic trafficking, modulator of intracellular calcium
signaling, and essential factor for the survival and proliferation of
specialized immune cells. To investigate the role of CAML in cell biology
and cancer, we generated E-Myc transgenic mice that carry a conditional
deletion allele of CAML. From these mice, we derived B cell lymphoma cell
lines driven by c-Myc and induced deletion of the CAML gene by treatment
with tamoxifen to activate Cre-ERT2 in vitro. Homozygous loss of CAML in
multiple independent B cell lymphoma lines activated apoptosis, while
heterozygous deletion led to reduced cell proliferation. Apoptosis was
inhibited by caspase inhibitor Q-VD-OPh or Bcl-2/xL overexpression;
however, blocking apoptosis did not restore cell division. Loss of CAML
did not activate the unfolded protein response, but did induce c-Jun and
JNK phosphorylation. Structure-function studies indicated that lymphoma
cell viability did not depend on interaction of CAML with TRC40, another
component of TA protein insertion machinery. Conversely, expression of a
minimal region of CAML that interacts with the TA insertion co-factor WRB
was sufficient to rescue growth of CAML-deleted cells. In summary, our
study demonstrates an essential pro-survival role for CAML in
c-Myc-driven lymphomas. Future investigations will focus on the
underlying mechanism of apoptosis in this system to advance our
understanding of the biological functions of CAML, and consider
CAML-dependent survival as a potential novel target for anticancer
therapy.

