Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MYCN and TFAP4 promote neuroblastoma malignancy by cooperating in
the regulation a subset of target genes involved in cancer cell growth
and metastasis


Amplification of the MYCN oncogene, a member of the MYC family of
transcriptional regulators, is one of the most powerful prognostic
markers identified for poor outcome in neuroblastoma, the most common
extracranial solid cancer in childhood. While MYCN has been established
as a key driver of malignancy in neuroblastoma, the underlying molecular
mechanisms are poorly understood. Transcription factor activating
enhancer binding protein-4 (TFAP4), which plays important roles in cancer
progression, has been reported to be a direct transcriptional target of
MYC. In this study, we have shown that high expression of TFAP4 in
primary neuroblastoma patients is associated with poor clinical outcome
and furthermore that siRNA-mediated suppression of TFAP4 in
MYCN-expressing neuroblastoma cells impaired migration and colony
formation, and led to an increased proportion of cells in G1/S phase of
the cell cycle. Chromatin immunoprecipitation and luciferase reporter
assays demonstrated that TFAP4 expression is positively regulated by MYCN
through direct promoter binding. In addition, when MYCN was overexpressed
in neuroblastoma cells, TFAP4 was required for the observed increase in
cell migration. Microarray analysis identified genes regulated by both
MYCN and TFAP4 in neuroblastoma cells, including
Phosphoribosyl-pyrophosphate synthetase-2 (PRPS2) and Syndecan-1 (SDC1),
which are involved in cancer cell proliferation and metastasis. Overall
this study unveils a complex regulatory circuit in which MYCN by
elevating TFAP4 expression, cooperates with it to control a specific set
of genes involved in tumor progression. These findings highlight the
existence of a MYCN-TFAP4 axis in MYCN-driven neuroblastoma as well as
identifying relevant therapeutic targets for aggressive forms of this
disease.

