Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovery of potent 2-Indole-acylsulfonamide Mcl-1 inhibitors
using structure guided fragment-based methods


Mcl-1 (Myeloid cell leukemia 1), a member of the Bcl-2 family of
proteins, is overexpressed and amplified in various cancers and is one of
the major acquired resistance mechanisms for many anticancer therapies.
Targeting Mcl-1 with small molecules is very challenging because Mcl-1
exerts its effects through protein-protein interactions. Here we describe
our continuing efforts in the discovery of potent and selective Mcl-1
inhibitors using fragment-based methods and structure-based design. We
previously described the discovery of small-molecule Mcl-1 inhibitors
containing a 2-indole-carboxylic core that primarily bind to the P2
pocket. In order to enhance potency, we extend our molecules to occupy
the entire BH3 binding interface. A number of P4 site hits were
identified using a fragment-based screening while the P2 pocket of Mcl-1
was saturated with our previously reported lead. P4 site ligands were
then linked to our initial lead guided by the ternary Mcl-1 structure
containing both P2 and P4 units using an acylsulfonamide as a synthetic
handle that retained the critical charged-charged interaction with R263.
X-ray co-crystal structures of new inhibitors occupying both P2 and P4
sites bound Mcl-1 provided detailed information on how these
small-molecules bind to the target and guided subsequent potency
optimization. From the efforts, we discovered a novel series of
2-indole-acylsulfonamide containing Mcl-1 inhibitors that exhibit low
nanomolar binding affinities to the target and greater than 500-fold
selectivity over Bcl-xL. These compounds represent useful starting points
for the discovery of clinically useful Mcl-1 inhibitors for the treatment
of a wide variety of cancers.

