Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CXCR4 controls BCL-2 expression and function by regulating
miR-15a/16-1 expression in tumor cells


Background: CXCR4 is overexpressed in the majority of tumor cells and its
degree of expression often correlates with disease severity. Binding of
CXCL12 to the CXCR4 receptor activates signaling pathways which are
crucial for the interaction of hematopoietic cells with the
microenvironment and cell survival. Signaling activated through CXCR4 was
shown to be detrimental by increasing survival of tumor cells and
promoting resistance to therapy in many types of cancer.
CXCR4-antagonists, such as BL-8040, currently in phase II trials, were
shown to selectively inhibit tumor cell growth and to induce apoptosis in
vitro and in vivo. However, the molecular mechanism by which CXCR4
overexpression triggers tumor cell survival and its inhibition leads to
cell death is not fully understood.Objective: To study the mechanism by
which the CXCR4 pathway controls malignant cell survival and death
through regulating miR-15a/16-1 expression.Method: We assessed the effect
of CXCR4 overexpression, its activation and inhibition, on the expression
of miR-15a/16-1 and their target genes, BCL-2, MCL-1 and cyclin D1, in a
variety of tumor cells in vitro and in vivo.Results:We found that
overexpression of CXCR4 in tumor cells or stimulation of cells with its
ligand, CXCL12, lead to up-regulation of miR-15a/16-1, resulting in
down-regulation of their target genes BCL-2, MCL-1 and cyclin D1.
Furthermore, overexpression of CXCR4 in these cells increases
tumorgenesis and shifts their oncogenic dependency from the BCL-2 to the
CXCR4/ERK signaling pathway. Antagonists of CXCR4 such as BL-8040 were
shown to induce apoptotic cell death of malignant cells. BL-8040 was
found to increase the expression of miR-15a/16-1 and reduce the
expression of BCL2, MCL1 and cyclin D1. Importantly, CXCR4 inhibition
using BL-8040 induced apoptosis in vitro and in vivo in AML and
neuroblastoma tumors. This was mediated by inhibition of survival signals
by ERK and down-regulation of BCL-2 expression. In support of these
results overexpression of miR-15a/16-1 in AML and neuroblastoma cells was
shown to induce their apoptosis.Conclusions:Our results demonstrate, for
the first time to the best of our knowledge, that CXCR4 signaling
regulates the expression of miR-15a/16-1 and their target genes. Our
results suggest that overexpression of CXCR4 may override the survival
dependency of tumor cells on BCL-2, MCL-1, and cyclin D1 leading to
resistance of tumor cells to inhibition of these pathways. Furthermore,
these results indicate that ligands of CXCR4 may tip the balance toward
cell death by down- regulating survival signals through miR-15a/16-1
suppression of BCL2, MCL1 and cyclin D1 expression.

