Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: APX005M, a humanized anti-CD40 antibody with strong
immune-modulatory activities capable of tumor eradication in vivo


The success of immune checkpoint inhibitors validates the concept that
immunotherapy is an effective approach for the treatment of solid tumors.
In addition to reversing tumor-induced immune suppression, immune
activating antibodies are being explored as the next generation of
immuno-oncology therapeutics. CD40, which is expressed on antigen
presenting cells such as dendritic and B cells initiates and regulates
both innate and adaptive immunity and is essential for the activation of
antigen-specific T cells. APX005M is a humanized IgG1 CD40 agonistic
antibody developed using Apexigen's APXiMAB discovery platform. APX005M
binds with high affinity to human (Kd = 0.12nM) and monkey (Kd = 0.37nM)
CD40. It recognizes a unique epitope that overlaps with the CD40 ligand
binding sites and thus blocks the binding of CD40 to CD40L. APX005M is a
potent CD40 agonistic antibody capable of activating antigen presenting B
cells (EC50 = 12pM) and dendritic cells (EC50 = 0.49nM). Its CD40
agonistic activity requires crosslinking by Fc-gamma receptors since
F(ab)2 fragment of APX005M loses the agonistic activity. Upon binding to
CD40 expressing tumor cells APX005M induces antibody-dependent cellular
phagocytosis (ADCP) and apoptosis. In vivo APX005M completely eradicates
CD40+ lymphoma tumors and inhibits the growth of rituximab-resistant
tumors. The data suggest that a CD40 agonistic mAb such as APX005M, that
activates CD40 through binding to the CD40L binding site while being
dependent on crosslinking via Fc-gamma receptors, may represent an ideal
immune activating antibody drug candidate for stimulating effective
immune responses against tumors. APX005M is currently being evaluated in
clinical trials for the treatment of patients with solid tumors.

