Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical analysis of combination therapy using radiation and
cellular immunotherapy


Purpose:To optimize the combination of ionizing radiation and cellular
immunotherapy using a preclinical autochthonous model of prostate
cancer.Methods and Materials:Transgenic mice expressing a model antigen
under a prostate-specific promoter were treated using a platform that
integrates cone-beam CT imaging with 3-dimensional conformal therapy.
Using this technology we investigated the immunologic and therapeutic
effects of combining ionizing radiation with granulocyte/macrophage
colonystimulating factor-secreting cellular immunotherapy for prostate
cancer in mice bearing autochthonous prostate tumors.Results:The
combination of ionizing radiation and immunotherapy resulted in a
significant decrease in pathologic tumor grade and gross tumor bulk that
was not evident with either single-modality therapy. Furthermore,
combinatorial therapy resulted in improved overall survival in a
preventive metastasis model and in the setting of established
micrometastases. Mechanistically, combined therapy resulted in an
increase of the ratio of effector-to regulatory T cells for both CD4 and
CD8 tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes.Conclusions:Our preclinical model
establishes a potential role for the use of combined
radiation-immunotherapy in locally advanced prostate cancer, which
warrants further explorationin a clinical setting.

