Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: FTY720 enhances the efficacy of paclitaxel and of carboplatin in
drug-resistant ovarian cancer cells


Objectives: Our long-term goal is to develop effective therapies for
ovarian cancer by targeting molecules that contribute to drug resistance
in this tumor type. Preliminary RNA-seq data were generated using a
patient-derived xenograft model. These data identified the
sphingosine-1-phosphate (S1P) signaling pathway as one of the pathways
most affected by carboplatin and paclitaxel, the current standards of
care for ovarian cancer. We then examined whether a synthetic analog of
sphingosine, FTY720, enhanced the cytotoxicity of platinum and taxane
resistant ovarian cancer cell lines.Methods: To assess the efficacy of
FTY720 + carboplatin and of FTY720 + paclitaxel, we exposed three pairs
of parental and drug resistant human ovarian cancer cell lines to each
combination. The cell lines used were: SKOV3-ip1 and SKOV3-TR (taxane
resistant), A2780 and A2780-CP20 (platinum resistant), and HeyA8 and
HeyA8-MDR (taxane-platinum resistant). We used alamarBlue cell
proliferation assays to determine the efficacy of FTY720 as a single
agent or in combination with paclitaxel or carboplatin, and immunoblots
to assess the expression of proteins involved in the S1P pathway.Results:
FTY720 as a single agent decreased cell viability in a dose-dependent
manner in all three pairs of cell lines, with IC50 values ranging from 5
to 8 M. When cells were exposed to the IC50 of FTY720 + a range of
concentrations of carboplatin or paclitaxel, FTY720 had little effect in
any of the three parental cell lines and in SKOV3-TR cells.
Interestingly, however, FTY720 decreased the IC50 of carboplatin 15- to
16-fold and the IC50 of paclitaxel 20- to 90- fold in A2780-CP20 and
HeyA8-MDR cells, respectively. We also observed that FTY720 altered the
expression of sphingosine kinase2, S1P lyase, and acid ceramidase, each
of which contributes to the ceramide-sphingosine-S1P rheostat that
tightly regulates expression of S1P pathway proteins.Conclusions: Our
data show that FTY720 sensitized drug resistant ovarian cancer cell lines
A2780-CP20 and HeyA8-MDR to carboplatin and to paclitaxel 15- to 90-fold.
The data suggest that the S1P pathway may contribute to carboplatin and
paclitaxel resistance in this cell type. We propose that proteins of the
S1P pathway merit further study as effective molecular targets in drug
resistant ovarian cancer cells.

