Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNA-based diagnosis and therapy in NRF2-stabilized tumor


NRF2 is a master transcriptional regulator that integrates cellular
stress responses and is negatively regulated by KEAP1 at the
posttranslational level. In human cancers, aberrantly stabilized NRF2,
either by mutation of NRF2 or KEAP1, plays a vital role in
chemoresistance and tumor cell growth through the transcriptional
activation of target genes, suggesting that targeted inhibition of NRF2
is a potential therapy for NRF2-stabilized tumors. Some tumor-suppressing
microRNAs (miRNAs) target multiple oncogenes concurrently and therefore
may be useful as cancer therapeutic agents. Further, such miRNAs may be
useful to address chemotherapeutic resistance in cancer, which remains a
primary clinical challenge in need of solutions. Thus, cytoprotective
processes upregulated in cancer cells that are resistant to chemotherapy
are a logical target for investigation.By using a reporter-coupled miRNA
library screening, we have recently identified four miRNAs (miR-507,
-634, -450a, and -129-5p) that negatively regulate the NRF2 activity by
directly targeting. Importantly, downregulation of these miRNAs, in
addition to the somatic mutation of NRF2 or KEAP1, is associated with
stabilized NRF2 and poor prognosis in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma
(ESCC). Interestingly, we found that overexpression of miR-634 activates
the mitochondrial apoptotic pathway by direct concurrent targeting of
genes associated with mitochondrial homeostasis, antiapoptosis, and
autophagy, together with NRF2-mediated antioxidant ability. In
particular, we showed how enforced expression of miR-634 enhanced
chemotherapy-induced cytotoxicity in a model of ESCC, where resistance to
chemotherapy remains clinically problematic. Our findings illustrate how
reversing miRNA-mediated cytoprotective processes may offer a broadly
useful approach to improving cancer therapy.

