Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular heterogeneity and trunk driver mutations in
hepatocellular carcinoma


Background and aims: Molecular heterogeneity in hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC) is ill-defined since trunk drivers (early events; common to all
cells), branch drivers (later events; present in a subset of cells) and
passenger mutations (not relevant), have not been thoroughly described.
Most FDA/EMA approved molecular drugs target trunk drivers. We explored
heterogeneity by analyzing trunk vs branch mutations in different HCC
regions within single and multinodular tumours.Methods: Intra-tumoral
heterogeneity was assessed in 21 patients with single HCCs (size > 4cm; 2
regions/tumour: 42 samples) and inter-tumoral heterogeneity was studied
in 17 patients with multinodular HCCs (2-3 nodules/patient; total: 39
samples). Gene expression profiling, SNP array and deep-sequencing
(coverage 850x) assessing 6 oncodrivers (TERT promoter, TP53, CTNNB1,
ARID1A, AXIN1-2 by TruSeqAmplicon, validated by sanger) were explored.
Clonality differentiating metastatic (clonal) vs synchronic (non-clonal)
tumours was defined by SNP profiles. Trunk mutations were defined as
present in a) all regions of a given tumour, or b) in all nodules of
metastatic-clonal tumours; all other were considered as branch.Results:
Intra-tumoral heterogeneity assessed by sequencing identified at least 1
oncodriver in 19/21 patients with single tumours. Among those, trunk
mutations accounted for 17/19 (90%), and branch for 2/19 cases. Overall
63 mutations were identified, 56 (90%) were identical in different
tumoral regions (i.e. truncal; TERT promoter most prevalent).
Inter-tumoral heterogeneity explored by SNP profiles defined metastases
in 35% (6/17 multinodular cases) and synchronous tumors in 65% (11/17
cases). Genetic proximity confirmed clonality in all metastatic nodules.
Regarding molecular subclasses, half of clonal tumours retained identical
molecular fingerprint, but the other half switched to more aggressive
subclass. All non-clonal tumours belonged to distinct molecular
subclasses. Driver oncogenes were explored in 9 patients (5 metastasis
and 4 synchronic). Metastatic tumours showed 13 mutations, among which 11
(85%) were truncal. Mutations in non-clonal synchronic tumours were
distinct.Conclusions: Single large HCCs shared common trunk drivers at
distinct regions (90%). Similarly, 40% of multinodular tumours were
clonal (metastasis) and shared common trunk oncodrivers, while 60% were
synchronic, with distinct genomic profile/oncodrivers. Further studies at
single-cell sequencing level are recommended.

