Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Serum vitamin B12 and development of non-cardia gastric cancer: a
prospective study


Background: The pathogenesis of non-cardia gastric adenocarcinoma (NCGA)
begins with Helicobacter pylori (Hp) infection, which induces atrophic
gastritis, a pre-neoplastic state characterized by gland loss and
achlorhydria. In parallel, vitamin B12 absorption requires intact gastric
mucosa which can produce acid and intrinsic factor. Several previous
studies have suggested that Hp infection, the primary risk factor for
NCGA, impairs vitamin B12 absorption. Other studies have shown that
previous diagnosis of pernicious anemia, the most common form of vitamin
B12 deficiency and autoimmune atrophic gastritis, predicts later NCGA. We
hypothesized that decreased serum vitamin B12 would predict subsequent
incidence of NCGA in a dose-dependent fashion.Methods: To examine the
relationship between serum vitamin B12 and risk of NCGA, we conducted a
nested case-control study within the prospective Alpha-Tocopherol,
Beta-Carotene Cancer Prevention (ATBC) Study of male Finnish smokers aged
50-69 at baseline (1985-1988). Vitamin B12 concentrations were measured
in serum samples that were collected at study enrollment. Subjects were
followed for 17 years for cancer development (mean time to NCGA diagnosis
= 7.5 years). 177 NCGA cases were matched 1:1 on age and date of serum
collection with cancer-free controls. We calculated odds ratios (OR) and
95% confidence intervals (CI) by conditional logistic regression,
controlling for Hp infection, smoking, fruit and vegetable intake, and
other potential confounders.Results: Baseline mean pre-diagnostic serum
vitamin B12 concentrations were 16% lower in subjects who subsequently
developed NCGA (Cases: 435 pg/mL, SE = 129; Controls: 516 pg/mL, SE =
207; p = 0.0001; serum vitamin B12 levels >200 pg/mL are clinically
normal.) Lower serum vitamin B12 at baseline was associated with
subsequent incidence of NCGA during follow-up (OR = 7.24; 95% CI = 2.12
to 24.73 for lowest quartile compared to highest, p-trend = 0.002). This
association remained after restricting the analysis to subjects who
developed cancer more than 10 years after baseline serum vitamin B12
measurements.Conclusion: Lower serum vitamin B12 concentrations were
associated with an increased risk of NCGA even among subjects who were
diagnosed more than 10 years after their enrollment in the study. Our
findings suggest a possible role for serum vitamin B12 as a biomarker for
the atrophic gastritis that precedes NCGA.

