Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mast cell-derived granzyme b contributes to resistance against
anti-angiogenic therapy


Significance: Targeted therapies have revolutionized the treatment of
cancer. However, efficacy of anti-angiogenic therapies is limited due to
significant resistance.Recent studies showed that the tumor
microenvironment is involved in resistance towards targeted
anti-angiogenic treatment. Based on the correlation of mast cell (MC)
density with tumor growth and angiogenesis we put forward the hypothesis
that MC might be implicated in anti-angiogenic therapy
resistance.Methods: C57BL/6J, NSG or MC-deficient KitW-sh (Wsh) mice were
subcutaneously injected with 5105 (Panc02 and EL4) or 1106 (TD2) cells
+/- bone marrow derived MC. Tumors were treated with 20 mg/kg anti-VEGFR2
antibody (DC101) or 25 mg/kg cromoglicic acid (Cromo). BrdU was injected
12 h before sacrifice.Results: We show that MC alter the proliferative
and organizational state of endothelial cells (EC). MC dose-dependently
induced EC-proliferation (158 12%; *pSignificance: Targeted therapies
have revolutionized the treatment of cancer. However, efficacy of
anti-angiogenic therapies is limited due to significant resistance.Recent
studies showed that the tumor microenvironment is involved in resistance
towards targeted anti-angiogenic treatment. Based on the correlation of
mast cell (MC) density with tumor growth and angiogenesis we put forward
the hypothesis that MC might be implicated in anti-angiogenic therapy
resistance.Methods: C57BL/6J, NSG or MC-deficient KitW-sh (Wsh) mice were
subcutaneously injected with 5105 (Panc02 and EL4) or 1106 (TD2) cells
+/- bone marrow derived MC. Tumors were treated with 20 mg/kg anti-VEGFR2
antibody (DC101) or 25 mg/kg cromoglicic acid (Cromo). BrdU was injected
12 h before sacrifice.Results: We show that MC alter the proliferative
and organizational state of endothelial cells (EC). MC dose-dependently
induced EC-proliferation (158 12%; *p<0.05) and tube formation (290 12%;
*pSignificance: Targeted therapies have revolutionized the treatment of
cancer. However, efficacy of anti-angiogenic therapies is limited due to
significant resistance.Recent studies showed that the tumor
microenvironment is involved in resistance towards targeted
anti-angiogenic treatment. Based on the correlation of mast cell (MC)
density with tumor growth and angiogenesis we put forward the hypothesis
that MC might be implicated in anti-angiogenic therapy
resistance.Methods: C57BL/6J, NSG or MC-deficient KitW-sh (Wsh) mice were
subcutaneously injected with 5105 (Panc02 and EL4) or 1106 (TD2) cells
+/- bone marrow derived MC. Tumors were treated with 20 mg/kg anti-VEGFR2
antibody (DC101) or 25 mg/kg cromoglicic acid (Cromo). BrdU was injected
12 h before sacrifice.Results: We show that MC alter the proliferative
and organizational state of endothelial cells (EC). MC dose-dependently
induced EC-proliferation (158 12%; *p<0.05) and tube formation (290 12%;
*p<0.05). Furthermore, MC increased HUVEC migration by 1.4-fold
(*pSignificance: Targeted therapies have revolutionized the treatment of
cancer. However, efficacy of anti-angiogenic therapies is limited due to
significant resistance.Recent studies showed that the tumor
microenvironment is involved in resistance towards targeted
anti-angiogenic treatment. Based on the correlation of mast cell (MC)
density with tumor growth and angiogenesis we put forward the hypothesis
that MC might be implicated in anti-angiogenic therapy
resistance.Methods: C57BL/6J, NSG or MC-deficient KitW-sh (Wsh) mice were
subcutaneously injected with 5105 (Panc02 and EL4) or 1106 (TD2) cells
+/- bone marrow derived MC. Tumors were treated with 20 mg/kg anti-VEGFR2
antibody (DC101) or 25 mg/kg cromoglicic acid (Cromo). BrdU was injected
12 h before sacrifice.Results: We show that MC alter the proliferative
and organizational state of endothelial cells (EC). MC dose-dependently
induced EC-proliferation (158 12%; *p<0.05) and tube formation (290 12%;
*p<0.05). Furthermore, MC increased HUVEC migration by 1.4-fold (*p<0.05)
and protected them from AAT in vitro. In MC-deficient mice, tumor growth
was reduced by 36% (*pSignificance: Targeted therapies have
revolutionized the treatment of cancer. However, efficacy of
anti-angiogenic therapies is limited due to significant resistance.Recent
studies showed that the tumor microenvironment is involved in resistance
towards targeted anti-angiogenic treatment. Based on the correlation of
mast cell (MC) density with tumor growth and angiogenesis we put forward
the hypothesis that MC might be implicated in anti-angiogenic therapy
resistance.Methods: C57BL/6J, NSG or MC-deficient KitW-sh (Wsh) mice were
subcutaneously injected with 5105 (Panc02 and EL4) or 1106 (TD2) cells
+/- bone marrow derived MC. Tumors were treated with 20 mg/kg anti-VEGFR2
antibody (DC101) or 25 mg/kg cromoglicic acid (Cromo). BrdU was injected
12 h before sacrifice.Results: We show that MC alter the proliferative
and organizational state of endothelial cells (EC). MC dose-dependently
induced EC-proliferation (158 12%; *p<0.05) and tube formation (290 12%;
*p<0.05). Furthermore, MC increased HUVEC migration by 1.4-fold (*p<0.05)
and protected them from AAT in vitro. In MC-deficient mice, tumor growth
was reduced by 36% (*p<0.05) and the efficacy of AAT was increased (WT +
DC101: 1420 134 mg; Wsh + DC101: 599 107 mg; *pSignificance: Targeted
therapies have revolutionized the treatment of cancer. However, efficacy
of anti-angiogenic therapies is limited due to significant
resistance.Recent studies showed that the tumor microenvironment is
involved in resistance towards targeted anti-angiogenic treatment. Based
on the correlation of mast cell (MC) density with tumor growth and
angiogenesis we put forward the hypothesis that MC might be implicated in
anti-angiogenic therapy resistance.Methods: C57BL/6J, NSG or MC-deficient
KitW-sh (Wsh) mice were subcutaneously injected with 5105 (Panc02 and
EL4) or 1106 (TD2) cells +/- bone marrow derived MC. Tumors were treated
with 20 mg/kg anti-VEGFR2 antibody (DC101) or 25 mg/kg cromoglicic acid
(Cromo). BrdU was injected 12 h before sacrifice.Results: We show that MC
alter the proliferative and organizational state of endothelial cells
(EC). MC dose-dependently induced EC-proliferation (158 12%; *p<0.05) and
tube formation (290 12%; *p<0.05). Furthermore, MC increased HUVEC
migration by 1.4-fold (*p<0.05) and protected them from AAT in vitro. In
MC-deficient mice, tumor growth was reduced by 36% (*p<0.05) and the
efficacy of AAT was increased (WT + DC101: 1420 134 mg; Wsh + DC101: 599
107 mg; *p<0.05). Histomorphometric analyses unraveled that MC-deficiency
decreased the numbers of mature pericyte-covered vessels by 80%
(*pSignificance: Targeted therapies have revolutionized the treatment of
cancer. However, efficacy of anti-angiogenic therapies is limited due to
significant resistance.Recent studies showed that the tumor
microenvironment is involved in resistance towards targeted
anti-angiogenic treatment. Based on the correlation of mast cell (MC)
density with tumor growth and angiogenesis we put forward the hypothesis
that MC might be implicated in anti-angiogenic therapy
resistance.Methods: C57BL/6J, NSG or MC-deficient KitW-sh (Wsh) mice were
subcutaneously injected with 5105 (Panc02 and EL4) or 1106 (TD2) cells
+/- bone marrow derived MC. Tumors were treated with 20 mg/kg anti-VEGFR2
antibody (DC101) or 25 mg/kg cromoglicic acid (Cromo). BrdU was injected
12 h before sacrifice.Results: We show that MC alter the proliferative
and organizational state of endothelial cells (EC). MC dose-dependently
induced EC-proliferation (158 12%; *p<0.05) and tube formation (290 12%;
*p<0.05). Furthermore, MC increased HUVEC migration by 1.4-fold (*p<0.05)
and protected them from AAT in vitro. In MC-deficient mice, tumor growth
was reduced by 36% (*p<0.05) and the efficacy of AAT was increased (WT +
DC101: 1420 134 mg; Wsh + DC101: 599 107 mg; *p<0.05). Histomorphometric
analyses unraveled that MC-deficiency decreased the numbers of mature
pericyte-covered vessels by 80% (*p<0.05) rendering them more prone for
therapy. Indeed, an additive anti-angiogenic effect of MC-deficiency and
AAT was observed resulting in reduced microvessel density (MVD) and tumor
cell proliferation. This angiosensitizing effect could be abrogated by
adoptive transfer of bone marrow-derived MC into MC-deficient mice.In WT
mice, AAT only initially reduced the proliferation of tumor vessels by
60% (*pSignificance: Targeted therapies have revolutionized the treatment
of cancer. However, efficacy of anti-angiogenic therapies is limited due
to significant resistance.Recent studies showed that the tumor
microenvironment is involved in resistance towards targeted
anti-angiogenic treatment. Based on the correlation of mast cell (MC)
density with tumor growth and angiogenesis we put forward the hypothesis
that MC might be implicated in anti-angiogenic therapy
resistance.Methods: C57BL/6J, NSG or MC-deficient KitW-sh (Wsh) mice were
subcutaneously injected with 5105 (Panc02 and EL4) or 1106 (TD2) cells
+/- bone marrow derived MC. Tumors were treated with 20 mg/kg anti-VEGFR2
antibody (DC101) or 25 mg/kg cromoglicic acid (Cromo). BrdU was injected
12 h before sacrifice.Results: We show that MC alter the proliferative
and organizational state of endothelial cells (EC). MC dose-dependently
induced EC-proliferation (158 12%; *p<0.05) and tube formation (290 12%;
*p<0.05). Furthermore, MC increased HUVEC migration by 1.4-fold (*p<0.05)
and protected them from AAT in vitro. In MC-deficient mice, tumor growth
was reduced by 36% (*p<0.05) and the efficacy of AAT was increased (WT +
DC101: 1420 134 mg; Wsh + DC101: 599 107 mg; *p<0.05). Histomorphometric
analyses unraveled that MC-deficiency decreased the numbers of mature
pericyte-covered vessels by 80% (*p<0.05) rendering them more prone for
therapy. Indeed, an additive anti-angiogenic effect of MC-deficiency and
AAT was observed resulting in reduced microvessel density (MVD) and tumor
cell proliferation. This angiosensitizing effect could be abrogated by
adoptive transfer of bone marrow-derived MC into MC-deficient mice.In WT
mice, AAT only initially reduced the proliferation of tumor vessels by
60% (*p<0.05), a process that got reverted after long-term treatment as a
result of therapy resistance. Intriguingly, this pro-angiogenic rescue
phenotype did not occur in MC-deficient mice. By blocking MC
degranulation with Cromo we could increase the efficacy of AAT (DC101:
703 48 mg; Cromo + DC101: 386 92 mg; *pSignificance: Targeted therapies
have revolutionized the treatment of cancer. However, efficacy of
anti-angiogenic therapies is limited due to significant resistance.Recent
studies showed that the tumor microenvironment is involved in resistance
towards targeted anti-angiogenic treatment. Based on the correlation of
mast cell (MC) density with tumor growth and angiogenesis we put forward
the hypothesis that MC might be implicated in anti-angiogenic therapy
resistance.Methods: C57BL/6J, NSG or MC-deficient KitW-sh (Wsh) mice were
subcutaneously injected with 5105 (Panc02 and EL4) or 1106 (TD2) cells
+/- bone marrow derived MC. Tumors were treated with 20 mg/kg anti-VEGFR2
antibody (DC101) or 25 mg/kg cromoglicic acid (Cromo). BrdU was injected
12 h before sacrifice.Results: We show that MC alter the proliferative
and organizational state of endothelial cells (EC). MC dose-dependently
induced EC-proliferation (158 12%; *p<0.05) and tube formation (290 12%;
*p<0.05). Furthermore, MC increased HUVEC migration by 1.4-fold (*p<0.05)
and protected them from AAT in vitro. In MC-deficient mice, tumor growth
was reduced by 36% (*p<0.05) and the efficacy of AAT was increased (WT +
DC101: 1420 134 mg; Wsh + DC101: 599 107 mg; *p<0.05). Histomorphometric
analyses unraveled that MC-deficiency decreased the numbers of mature
pericyte-covered vessels by 80% (*p<0.05) rendering them more prone for
therapy. Indeed, an additive anti-angiogenic effect of MC-deficiency and
AAT was observed resulting in reduced microvessel density (MVD) and tumor
cell proliferation. This angiosensitizing effect could be abrogated by
adoptive transfer of bone marrow-derived MC into MC-deficient mice.In WT
mice, AAT only initially reduced the proliferation of tumor vessels by
60% (*p<0.05), a process that got reverted after long-term treatment as a
result of therapy resistance. Intriguingly, this pro-angiogenic rescue
phenotype did not occur in MC-deficient mice. By blocking MC
degranulation with Cromo we could increase the efficacy of AAT (DC101:
703 48 mg; Cromo + DC101: 386 92 mg; *p<0.05), leading to reduced vessel
proliferation, MVD and tumor cell proliferation.Microarray analysis of
tumor-resident MC unraveled increased expression levels of ECM-degrading
granzyme b (gzmb) in response to therapy. MC-specific knock down of gzmb
rendered tumors more susceptible for AAT and lowered the levels of
alternative, pro-angiogenic mediators beside the VEGF-VEGFR2-axis in the
tumor microenvironment.Conclusions: Our results indicate that
tumor-resident MC interfere with AAT. We provide evidence that MC-derived
gzmb liberates ECM-bound pro-angiogenic factors besides the targeted
VEGF-VEGFR2 axis, thereby fine-tuning vessel maturation and
proliferation, which ultimately decreases therapeutic efficacy.
Importantly, knock down of gzmb and pharmacological inhibition of MC
degranulation improved the therapeutic response towards AAT.

