Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting acute myeloid leukemia via anti-IL1RAP antibodies


The current standard of care for Acute Myeloid Leukemia (AML) is largely
ineffective in terms of achieving long term remission. This is mostly due
to inability to remove all of the leukemic cells, and there is
accumulating evidence to support the remaining leukemic cells are
Leukemic Stem Cells (LSC) which are resistant to standard chemotherapy.
We and others (Barreyro L. et. al. 2012) have discovered that IL-1
receptor accessory protein (IL1RAP) is overexpressed on LSC and their
progenitors, but not on normal hematopoietic stem cells (HSC). Moreover,
knockdown/knockout of IL1RAP expression greatly decreases growth/survival
of AML cells. Thus, we have screened anti-IL1RAP therapeutic antibodies
by applying FACS based analysis and Complement-Dependent Cytotoxicity
(CDC) assays on both AML cell lines and primary patient samples. In a
parallel effort, we also applied a functional IL-1-induced NF-B signaling
assay to identify function-blocking anti-IL1RAP antibodies. Colony
Formation Cell (CFC) assay results demonstrated that lead IL1RAP
antibodies can significantly impede growth of both AML blast cells and
leukemic stem cell-like cells. In contrast, normal HSCs are unaffected by
these antibodies. Lead anti-IL1RAP antibodies also showed tumor growth
inhibition in an established EOL-1 orthotopic tumor model. One major
challenge of targeting IL1RAP by an antibody is that a large amount of
IL1RAP protein is secreted into human serum, serving as a potential sink
that inhibits IL1RAP antibody efficacy. We addressed this by developing a
novel IL1RAP antibody that binds preferentially to the membrane-bound
IL1RAP protein as compared to the secreted form. We will discuss
different therapeutic development strategies to further advance the
utilization of these lead anti-IL1RAP therapeutic antibodies for treating
AML and other myeloid leukemic indications.

