Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synergistic effect of combined cdk4/6 inhibitor with docetaxel in
lung cancer cell lines harboring KRAS mutations


Background & Purpose LY2835219(LY), a novel CDK4/6 inhibitor, inhibits
phosphorylation of RB and E2F activation, thereby arresting the cell
cycle in the G1 phase and suppressing the cell proliferation and cell
division. Docetaxel(DTX) is a cytotoxic anti-cancer drug, which inhibits
mitotic cell division, thus induces G2/M arrest and apoptosis of various
cancer cells. In present study, we evaluated the activities of CDK4/6
inhibitor alone or combined with docetaxel on the anti-proliferation,
cell cycle and apoptosis in lung cancer cell lines harboring KRAS
mutations.Methods We measured the anti-proliferative activities of LY or
DTX single and their combinations (DTX+LY 72h and DTX 24h->LY 48h) on
cell proliferation in A549(G12S) and H727(G12V) cells using CCK-8 asssy.
We evaluated the expression of CDK2, CDK4, cPARP and caspase-3 by Western
blot. The cell cycle distribution and apoptosis in subG1 phase were
analyzed by flow cytometry.Results The IC50 values of the LY and DTX
alone were 0.4 0.2 uM and 0.9 0.2 nM in A549 cells and 2.0 0.7 uM and 3.1
0.3 nM in H727 cells, respectively. The CI (Combination index) of the
DTX->LY sequential and the DTX+LY simultaneous treatments were 0.8 and
0.9 (CILY showed decreased cell viability by 60% at very low
concentration of DTX (3.0e5 nM), but DTX+LY showed significantly
decreased cell viability by 40% at higher concentration of DTX (IC50
values can not be measured). In A549 cells, after DTX treatment for 72h,
the cell population in G2/M phase increased by 54.5% relative to control
(24.6%). With LY alone, the fraction of A549 cells in G0/G1 phase
increased compared to control (78.4% vs. 49.5%).In case of DTX+LY
combination, the G2/M fraction of A549 cells significantly increased by
33% vs 24.6% in a dose-dependent manner. Meanwhile, in DTX->LY treatment,
cell fractions in G2/M were increased (44.5% vs 24.6%), especially those
in G0/G1 phases were remarkably reduced (14.7% vs 49.5%). In addition,
the subG1 fraction was accumulated in response to individual drug
treatments. In case of DTX single treatment, the subG1 fractions of both
A549 and H727 cells increased in a dose-dependent manner (0.7% vs. 17.4%
and 2.5% vs. 28.1%, respectively).We were not able to observe the change
of subG1 fraction in DTX+LY combination treatment in A549 cells. However,
in DTX->LY sequential treatment, the subG1 fraction increased in a
dose-dependent manner by relative to control (23.3% vs 10.9%). The
expression of c-PARP and caspase-3 was increased by the DTX alone and two
different combination schedule and CDK2 and CDK4 expressions were
decreased by LY alone and DTX->LY sequential treatment.Conclusions Taken
together, our results suggest that DTX->LY sequential treatment has
enhanced antitumor efficacy with synergistic interaction in lung cancer
cell lines harboring KRAS mutations.

