Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of microRNA profilings in tumor tissues and serum
from myxofibrosarcoma patients


Introduction:Myxofibrosarcoma (MFS) is a common type of soft tissue
sarcoma in elderly patients that exhibits a propensity for local
recurrence. The local recurrence rates of MFS was reported to range from
22% to 79% even after wide resection. Despite difficulty in pathological
diagnosis and evaluation of residual tumor cells after surgery, there are
no useful biomarkers to solve these problems. Emerging reports have
indicated the possibility of microRNAs (miRNAs) as promising novel
biomarkers in malignant tumors. To date, several miRNAs were shown to be
dysregulated in various malignant tissue specimens. However, little has
been known about the miRNA dysregulations of tumor tissues as well as
blood samples in MFS patients. In this study, we investigated miRNA
dysregulations in tumor tissues and serum of MFS patients in order to
develop novel biomarkers for diagnosis and monitoring MFS
progression.Methods:The serum samples were collected from patients
treated at our institute, which included 5 MFS patients, 5 age-matched
non-MFS patients and 9 healthy controls. The tissue samples were
collected from 11 MFS patients and normal tissue (bone, muscle, fat, and
nerve). Human MFS cell lines (NMFH-1, NMFH-2), human mesenchymal stem
cell (hMSC) and human skeletal muscle cell (SKMC) were also included and
used in the validation analysis.Total RNA was isolated using a miRNeay
Serum/plasma Kit (QIAGEN) for serum from MFS patients, and miRNeasy Mini
Kit (QIAGEN) for tissue from MFS patients. Serum levels of miRNA in MFS
patients were compared with those in non-MFS patients and/or healthy
controls by using miRNA microarray analysis, and compared with the
results of tissue samples. The miRNA expressions in serum from MFS
patients and in culture medium from human MFS cell lines, hMSC and SKMC
were profiled by quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR).Results:miRNA
microarray analysis based on the extracted RNA from tumor tissue and
serum collected from MFS patients revealed marked upregulation of five
miRNAs in MFS serum samples compared with non-MFS or healthy controls (p
Introduction:Myxofibrosarcoma (MFS) is a common type of soft tissue
sarcoma in elderly patients that exhibits a propensity for local
recurrence. The local recurrence rates of MFS was reported to range from
22% to 79% even after wide resection. Despite difficulty in pathological
diagnosis and evaluation of residual tumor cells after surgery, there are
no useful biomarkers to solve these problems. Emerging reports have
indicated the possibility of microRNAs (miRNAs) as promising novel
biomarkers in malignant tumors. To date, several miRNAs were shown to be
dysregulated in various malignant tissue specimens. However, little has
been known about the miRNA dysregulations of tumor tissues as well as
blood samples in MFS patients. In this study, we investigated miRNA
dysregulations in tumor tissues and serum of MFS patients in order to
develop novel biomarkers for diagnosis and monitoring MFS
progression.Methods:The serum samples were collected from patients
treated at our institute, which included 5 MFS patients, 5 age-matched
non-MFS patients and 9 healthy controls. The tissue samples were
collected from 11 MFS patients and normal tissue (bone, muscle, fat, and
nerve). Human MFS cell lines (NMFH-1, NMFH-2), human mesenchymal stem
cell (hMSC) and human skeletal muscle cell (SKMC) were also included and
used in the validation analysis.Total RNA was isolated using a miRNeay
Serum/plasma Kit (QIAGEN) for serum from MFS patients, and miRNeasy Mini
Kit (QIAGEN) for tissue from MFS patients. Serum levels of miRNA in MFS
patients were compared with those in non-MFS patients and/or healthy
controls by using miRNA microarray analysis, and compared with the
results of tissue samples. The miRNA expressions in serum from MFS
patients and in culture medium from human MFS cell lines, hMSC and SKMC
were profiled by quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR).Results:miRNA
microarray analysis based on the extracted RNA from tumor tissue and
serum collected from MFS patients revealed marked upregulation of five
miRNAs in MFS serum samples compared with non-MFS or healthy controls (p
< 0.05), which were included as the upregulated miRNAs in MFS tissue
specimens. One of six miRNA expression levels in the serum from MFS
patients were higher than in that from healthy controls, and also
upregulated in the MFS tissues compared with control normal tissues. The
expression of the miRNA was higher in all MFS cell lines than in hMSCs
and SKMCs. Expression of the miRNA was higher in all MFS cell lines than
in hMSCs and SKMCs. The expression of this miRNA in the culture media
from MFS cell lines increased with time (24 and 48 hours) and numbers of
tumor cells, indicating that the detected miRNA are certainly secreted to
the extracellular fluids.

