Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combining tumor glypican-3 expression and CD16 Expression on NK
cells from peripheral blood to identify patients responding to
codrituzumab/GC33/RO5137382


Background & Aims: Codrituzumab (GC33 or RO5137382), a monoclonal
antibody targeting an oncofetal protein glypican-3 (GPC3) expressed on
the cell surface of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), induces
antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC) and inhibits tumor growth
in preclinical studies. Based on this mechanism of codrituzumab, two
biomarkers GPC3 and CD16 of the NK cells, which are the effector cells of
ADCC, were investigated to correlate with clinical efficacy of
codrituzumab in patients with advanced HCC.Methods: Data from a phase II
clinical trial of codrituzumab were used for this analysis. GPC3
expression was determined by immunohistochemistry (IHC) analysis of tumor
biopsies, and CD16 expression on NK cells were quantified by a flow
cytometry analysis of peripheral blood mononuclear cells. Overall
survival of patients with high exposure of codrituzumab or placebo (n =
113) was used to compare different patient subgroups stratified by high
or low expression of GPC3 and CD16.Results: In individual-biomarker
analyses, longer survival after codrituzumab treatment correlates with
either high expression level of GPC3 in tumors (n = 97, HR = 0.39, 95%CI
= 0.21 - 0.70, p = 0.00081) or a relatively high level of CD16 expressed
on NK cells (n = 80, HR = 0.44, 95%CI = 0.23 - 0.83, p = 0.0056) at
baseline. Furthermore, joint analyses of the two biomarkers reveal that
both high levels of GPC3 and CD16 are required for patients to benefit
from codrituzumab treatment (n = 67, HR = 0.29, 95%CI = 0.13 - 0.62, p =
0.00074), and lack of either one of them leads to a loss of codrituzumab
therapeutic effect.Conclusions: The retrospective analysis supports the
mechanism of ADCC, in which the combination of high GPC3 expression in
tumors and high CD16 expression in NK cells from peripheral blood is
associated with prolonged overall survival given treatment of
codrituzumab. This result supports the usage of both GPC3 and CD16 as
potential biomarkers to select HCC patients for codrituzumab treatment.

