Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: miR-34b: A regulator of VEGF-A, Notch1 and Bcl-2 in thyroid
carcinoma


Background: Thyroid cancer is the most common endocrine malignancy
accounting for >91% of endocrine malignancy and 1.8% of all recently
distinguished cancer reports, with an incidence continuing to rise
globally in recent decades and current treatment strategies are not
potent enough for patients. Therefore, novel and more effective treatment
are outstandingly required. New strategy for treatment is target therapy,
which not only hold cancer-specific expression but also limits side
effects. miR-34b as part of p53 tumor suppressor network, plays crucial
role in many physiological and pathological processes including cancer
initiation, tumor progression and cancer angiogenesis process.Objectives:
In this study, we evaluate the functional roles of miR-34b in 2 thyroid
cancer cell lines for its potential in modulating angiogenesis and
proliferation in thyroid malignancies.Methods: Expression levels of
miR-34b was determined in metastasizing human papillary thyroid carcinoma
(B-CPAP) and human undifferentiated thyroid carcinomas (MB-1) cell lines
by qPCR. Exogenous miR-34b was transfected to thyroid cancer cell lines
to investigate its effect on predominant genes involved in angiogenesis,
cell cycle and apoptosis regulation including VEGF-A and Bcl-2 and
Notch1. Confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM) and western blot
techniques were performed to illustrate the protein expression changes.
To demonstrate the perturbation of cell cycle and apoptosis pathways
through exogenous miR-34b, fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) was
performed.Results: Significant underexpression of miR-34b was established
in B-CPAP and MB-1 cell lines while outstanding overexpression of VEGF-A,
Bcl-2 and Notch1 were detected. After transfection with miR-34b,
significant drop in concentration of VEGF-A, Bcl-2 and Notch1 were
noticed compared with controls in CLSM and western blot analysis
(pBackground: Thyroid cancer is the most common endocrine malignancy
accounting for >91% of endocrine malignancy and 1.8% of all recently
distinguished cancer reports, with an incidence continuing to rise
globally in recent decades and current treatment strategies are not
potent enough for patients. Therefore, novel and more effective treatment
are outstandingly required. New strategy for treatment is target therapy,
which not only hold cancer-specific expression but also limits side
effects. miR-34b as part of p53 tumor suppressor network, plays crucial
role in many physiological and pathological processes including cancer
initiation, tumor progression and cancer angiogenesis process.Objectives:
In this study, we evaluate the functional roles of miR-34b in 2 thyroid
cancer cell lines for its potential in modulating angiogenesis and
proliferation in thyroid malignancies.Methods: Expression levels of
miR-34b was determined in metastasizing human papillary thyroid carcinoma
(B-CPAP) and human undifferentiated thyroid carcinomas (MB-1) cell lines
by qPCR. Exogenous miR-34b was transfected to thyroid cancer cell lines
to investigate its effect on predominant genes involved in angiogenesis,
cell cycle and apoptosis regulation including VEGF-A and Bcl-2 and
Notch1. Confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM) and western blot
techniques were performed to illustrate the protein expression changes.
To demonstrate the perturbation of cell cycle and apoptosis pathways
through exogenous miR-34b, fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) was
performed.Results: Significant underexpression of miR-34b was established
in B-CPAP and MB-1 cell lines while outstanding overexpression of VEGF-A,
Bcl-2 and Notch1 were detected. After transfection with miR-34b,
significant drop in concentration of VEGF-A, Bcl-2 and Notch1 were
noticed compared with controls in CLSM and western blot analysis (p<
0.05).Cell cycle analysis demonstrated that 48 hours after ectopic
induction of miR-34b, significant impairment in proliferation of B-CPAP
and MB-1 was induced through arresting cancer cell proliferation in G0-G1
phase (14.27% 3.50 for B-CPAP and 13.61% 0.16 for MB-1) (pBackground:
Thyroid cancer is the most common endocrine malignancy accounting for
>91% of endocrine malignancy and 1.8% of all recently distinguished
cancer reports, with an incidence continuing to rise globally in recent
decades and current treatment strategies are not potent enough for
patients. Therefore, novel and more effective treatment are outstandingly
required. New strategy for treatment is target therapy, which not only
hold cancer-specific expression but also limits side effects. miR-34b as
part of p53 tumor suppressor network, plays crucial role in many
physiological and pathological processes including cancer initiation,
tumor progression and cancer angiogenesis process.Objectives: In this
study, we evaluate the functional roles of miR-34b in 2 thyroid cancer
cell lines for its potential in modulating angiogenesis and proliferation
in thyroid malignancies.Methods: Expression levels of miR-34b was
determined in metastasizing human papillary thyroid carcinoma (B-CPAP)
and human undifferentiated thyroid carcinomas (MB-1) cell lines by qPCR.
Exogenous miR-34b was transfected to thyroid cancer cell lines to
investigate its effect on predominant genes involved in angiogenesis,
cell cycle and apoptosis regulation including VEGF-A and Bcl-2 and
Notch1. Confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM) and western blot
techniques were performed to illustrate the protein expression changes.
To demonstrate the perturbation of cell cycle and apoptosis pathways
through exogenous miR-34b, fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) was
performed.Results: Significant underexpression of miR-34b was established
in B-CPAP and MB-1 cell lines while outstanding overexpression of VEGF-A,
Bcl-2 and Notch1 were detected. After transfection with miR-34b,
significant drop in concentration of VEGF-A, Bcl-2 and Notch1 were
noticed compared with controls in CLSM and western blot analysis (p<
0.05).Cell cycle analysis demonstrated that 48 hours after ectopic
induction of miR-34b, significant impairment in proliferation of B-CPAP
and MB-1 was induced through arresting cancer cell proliferation in G0-G1
phase (14.27% 3.50 for B-CPAP and 13.61% 0.16 for MB-1) (p<0.05).
Apoptosis assay also revealed that miR-34b, induced cell death by
increasing early and late apoptosis events, compared with controls (2.20%
0.16 for B-CPAP and 7.87% 0.92 for MB-1) (pBackground: Thyroid cancer is
the most common endocrine malignancy accounting for >91% of endocrine
malignancy and 1.8% of all recently distinguished cancer reports, with an
incidence continuing to rise globally in recent decades and current
treatment strategies are not potent enough for patients. Therefore, novel
and more effective treatment are outstandingly required. New strategy for
treatment is target therapy, which not only hold cancer-specific
expression but also limits side effects. miR-34b as part of p53 tumor
suppressor network, plays crucial role in many physiological and
pathological processes including cancer initiation, tumor progression and
cancer angiogenesis process.Objectives: In this study, we evaluate the
functional roles of miR-34b in 2 thyroid cancer cell lines for its
potential in modulating angiogenesis and proliferation in thyroid
malignancies.Methods: Expression levels of miR-34b was determined in
metastasizing human papillary thyroid carcinoma (B-CPAP) and human
undifferentiated thyroid carcinomas (MB-1) cell lines by qPCR. Exogenous
miR-34b was transfected to thyroid cancer cell lines to investigate its
effect on predominant genes involved in angiogenesis, cell cycle and
apoptosis regulation including VEGF-A and Bcl-2 and Notch1. Confocal
laser scanning microscopy (CLSM) and western blot techniques were
performed to illustrate the protein expression changes. To demonstrate
the perturbation of cell cycle and apoptosis pathways through exogenous
miR-34b, fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) was
performed.Results: Significant underexpression of miR-34b was established
in B-CPAP and MB-1 cell lines while outstanding overexpression of VEGF-A,
Bcl-2 and Notch1 were detected. After transfection with miR-34b,
significant drop in concentration of VEGF-A, Bcl-2 and Notch1 were
noticed compared with controls in CLSM and western blot analysis (p<
0.05).Cell cycle analysis demonstrated that 48 hours after ectopic
induction of miR-34b, significant impairment in proliferation of B-CPAP
and MB-1 was induced through arresting cancer cell proliferation in G0-G1
phase (14.27% 3.50 for B-CPAP and 13.61% 0.16 for MB-1) (p<0.05).
Apoptosis assay also revealed that miR-34b, induced cell death by
increasing early and late apoptosis events, compared with controls (2.20%
0.16 for B-CPAP and 7.87% 0.92 for MB-1) (p<0.05).Conclusion: These
results pave the way that miR-34b may be involved in balancing tumour
angiogenesis, cell proliferation and apoptosis in thyroid cancer. These
could potentially occur via direct modulation of downstream targets such
as VEGF-A, Bcl-2 and Notch1 for their role in those events. The future of
this research will investigate the regulatory role of miR-34b in
Papillary and undifferentiated thyroid carcinoma through larger scale in
vivo and clinical trial studies which shall potentially improve the
clinical presentation of aggressive malignancies.

