Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Silencing the epigenetic silencer KDM4A for TRAIL and DR5
simultaneous induction and antitumor therapy


Recombinant TRAIL and agonistic antibodies to death receptors (DRs) have
been in clinical trial but displayed limited anti-cancer efficacy. Lack
of functional DR expression in tumors is a major limiting factor. We
report here that chromatin regulator KDM4A/JMJD2A, not KDM4B, plays a
pivotal role in silencing tumor cell expression of both TRAIL and its
receptor DR5. In TRAIL-sensitive and -resistant cancer cells of lung,
breast and prostate, KDM4A small-molecule inhibitor compound 4 (C-4) or
genetic silencing strongly induces TRAIL and DR5 expression, and causes
TRAIL-dependent apoptotic cell death. KDM4A inhibition also strongly
sensitizes cells to TRAIL. C-4 alone potently inhibits tumor growth with
marked induction of TRAIL and DR5 expression in the treated tumors and
effectively sensitizes them to the newly developed TRAIL-inducer
therapeutics ONC201. Mechanistically, C-4 does not appear to act through
the Akt-ERK-FOXO3a pathway. Instead, it switches histone modifying enzyme
complexes at TRAIL and DR5 transcriptional activator CHOP gene promoters
by dissociating KDM4A and NCoR-HDAC corepressor complex, and inducing the
recruitment of histone acetylase CBP. Thus, our results reveal KDM4A as a
key epigenetic silencer of TRAIL and DR5 in tumors and establish
inhibitors of KDM4A as a novel strategy for effectively sensitizing
tumors to TRAIL pathway-based therapeutics.

