Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A moneyball approach to predicting clinical trial toxicity events


Over the past decade, significant strides have been made in the
management and treatment of various diseases. Despite this progress,
clinical attrition rates have continued to substantially rise. Clinical
trials can fail for a variety of reasons, ranging from design issues to
drug efficacy and safety problems. Drug-likeness approaches, as first
proposed by Lipinski almost two decades ago, have become a key tool for
the pre-selection of compounds that are likely to have manageable
toxicity in clinical studies. However all these methods consider
molecular properties of the drug itself alone. In general, these
approaches struggle to simultaneously well-characterize the properties of
both FDA approved drugs (which we term the sensitivity) and drugs that
fail clinical trials (specificity).We introduce an approach that
integrates chemical properties of a compound, along with that of its
targets, to provide a new quantitative measure that helps predict whether
drugs in clinical trials will fail for toxicity reasons. When trained on
failed clinical trials and FDA approved drugs, this method performs at a
high accuracy, specificity and sensitivity (0.75), as well as high area
under the ROC curve (>0.80). In comparison, none of the drug-likeness
approaches were able to successfully maintain both high sensitivity and
specificity. A feature analysis of the model indicates that it is
critical to consider both structural properties and properties of the
drug target, with the target's network connectivity and liver toxicity as
two important features. The approach was further evaluated by testing the
predictions of the trained model on an established independent dataset.
We found that our method was able to significantly distinguish a
representative set of bioavailable drugs from a representative set of
toxic drugs (D = 0.2133, pOver the past decade, significant strides have
been made in the management and treatment of various diseases. Despite
this progress, clinical attrition rates have continued to substantially
rise. Clinical trials can fail for a variety of reasons, ranging from
design issues to drug efficacy and safety problems. Drug-likeness
approaches, as first proposed by Lipinski almost two decades ago, have
become a key tool for the pre-selection of compounds that are likely to
have manageable toxicity in clinical studies. However all these methods
consider molecular properties of the drug itself alone. In general, these
approaches struggle to simultaneously well-characterize the properties of
both FDA approved drugs (which we term the sensitivity) and drugs that
fail clinical trials (specificity).We introduce an approach that
integrates chemical properties of a compound, along with that of its
targets, to provide a new quantitative measure that helps predict whether
drugs in clinical trials will fail for toxicity reasons. When trained on
failed clinical trials and FDA approved drugs, this method performs at a
high accuracy, specificity and sensitivity (0.75), as well as high area
under the ROC curve (>0.80). In comparison, none of the drug-likeness
approaches were able to successfully maintain both high sensitivity and
specificity. A feature analysis of the model indicates that it is
critical to consider both structural properties and properties of the
drug target, with the target's network connectivity and liver toxicity as
two important features. The approach was further evaluated by testing the
predictions of the trained model on an established independent dataset.
We found that our method was able to significantly distinguish a
representative set of bioavailable drugs from a representative set of
toxic drugs (D = 0.2133, p<2.2e-16, Kolmogorov-Smirnov test).
Additionally, we found that the measure is strongly correlated with
severe toxicity events, such as pleural effusion ( = 0.9792) and
neutropenia ( = 0.9613). Altogether, our method provides a novel, broadly
applicable strategy that is able to identify drugs likely to possess
manageable toxicity in clinical trials.

