Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Occupation and the risk of early- and later-onset prostate cancer
in five Nordic countries


The etiology of prostate cancer remains largely unknown. Cases that occur
late in life may have a different etiology than early-onset cases, and
their inclusion in epidemiological studies may obscure associations with
early-onset prostate cancer, which is often more aggressive and
clinically relevant. We evaluated occupation in relation to the risk of
prostate cancer separately for early-onset and later-onset disease in a
large pooled study. We used census data to code occupations among census
participants in five Nordic countries (Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway,
and Sweden) from 1960-1990. We identified prostate cancer cases diagnosed
from 1961-2005 by linkage to national cancer registries and calculated
standardized incidence ratios (SIRs) by occupation separately for men
aged 30-49 and those aged 50 or older. We also conducted separate
analyses by period of cancer follow-up in two categories, 1961-1990 and
1991-2005, based on introduction of the prostate-specific antigen (PSA)
screening test in the Nordic countries in 1990 or later. For early-onset
prostate cancer, the highest SIRs were observed for public safety workers
(e.g., firefighters) [SIR = 1.71, 95% confidence interval (CI):
1.23-2.31] and military personnel (SIR = 1.97, 95% CI: 1.31-2.85). These
SIRs were significantly higher than those observed for later-onset
disease (pheterogeneity = 0.005 and 0.002), with public safety workers
and military personnel demonstrating SIRs of 1.10 (95% CI: 1.07-1.14) and
1.09 (95% CI: 1.05-1.13), respectively. Administrators (SIR = 1.41, 95%
CI: 1.13-1.73) and technical workers (SIR = 1.18, 95% CI: 1.01-1.37) also
demonstrated significantly increased risk for early-onset prostate
cancer, although the SIRs did not significantly differ from those for
later-onset disease (for administrators, SIR = 1.17, 95% CI: 1.15-1.19;
pheterogeneity = 0.08, and for technical workers, SIR = 1.11, 95% CI:
1.09-1.12; pheterogeneity = 0.40). With the exception of public safety
workers, for whom the SIR for early-onset prostate cancer was higher in
the later period (for 1961-1990, SIR = 1.45, 95% CI: 0.79-2.43, and for
1991-2005, SIR = 1.87, 95% CI: 1.25-2.71), the observed associations with
early-onset disease tended to be restricted to the earlier, pre-PSA
period. Our results suggest that occupational exposures among public
safety workers and military personnel may contribute to the risk of
prostate cancer, particularly for early-onset disease.

