Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genistein-AR antagonist conjugate potently induce growth arrest in
both androgen dependent and independent prostate cancer cell lines


The ability of prostate cancer to transition from androgen dependent- to
androgen independent state (castration resistant), during androgen
deprivation therapy, requires that new chemotherapeutic agents be
introduced that will retain activity in the two prostate cancer types.
Though described as androgen independent, castration resistant prostate
cancer (CRPC) still relies heavily on androgen receptor (AR) signaling
for survival. Enzalutamide, an AR antagonist, is probably that most
effective drug used in androgen deprivation therapy for CRPC and AR
dependent prostate cancer. Despite its clinical success, there is the
fear of resistant to enzalutamide due to mutation in the ligand binding
domain of AR. This poses a challenge that requires developing new agents
devoid of resistance, in the event of mutation. One of the approaches
being proposed is to develop new agents that can selectively induce AR
degradation, an approach that was successfully used to develop the
selective estrogen receptor degrader, fulvestrant.In our study, we
incorporate genistein, a soy isoflavone known to perturb multiple
biochemical pathways relevant for cancer survival, into an AR binding
template to give AG-1-33. AG-1-33 was evaluated for growth inhibitory
activity in LNCaP (AR dependent) and DU-145 (AR independent) prostate
cancer cell lines. This compound retained its AR antagonist activity and
also showed low micromolar anti-proliferation activity in the two
prostate cancer cell lines. We also evaluated the effect of AG-1-33 on AR
expression, as well as its ability to act as a selective AR degrader in
LNCaP.

