Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A blood-based neuroendocrine tumor multi-transcript test predicts
and defines PRRT efficacy in neuroendocrine tumors


Background: Peptide receptor radionuclide therapy (PRRT) is an effective
treatment for neuroendocrine tumors (NETs). Somatostatin receptor
expression defines suitability for therapy. Elevated somatostatin
receptor uptake (Krenning scale grade 4) at baseline has 60% predictive
accuracy for efficacy. Increased (>600ng/ml) baseline levels of
chromogranin A (CgA) are also considered as predictive. A blood-based 51
multigene NET transcript analysis (NETest) including gene clusters
defining cell signaling and metabolism directly correlates with tumor
activity. A multialgorithm-derived NETest scale 0-100% (low activity
Background: Peptide receptor radionuclide therapy (PRRT) is an effective
treatment for neuroendocrine tumors (NETs). Somatostatin receptor
expression defines suitability for therapy. Elevated somatostatin
receptor uptake (Krenning scale grade 4) at baseline has 60% predictive
accuracy for efficacy. Increased (>600ng/ml) baseline levels of
chromogranin A (CgA) are also considered as predictive. A blood-based 51
multigene NET transcript analysis (NETest) including gene clusters
defining cell signaling and metabolism directly correlates with tumor
activity. A multialgorithm-derived NETest scale 0-100% (low activity
<40%) defines clinical disease activity.Aim: Assess the effectiveness of
the NETest as a predictive biomarker in PRRT-treated NETs.Methods:
177Lu-based-PRRT treated NETs (n = 54) were followed for 33 months. At
baseline we evaluated: histological grade, somatostatin receptor imaging
(SRI), CgA (ELISA, normal Background: Peptide receptor radionuclide
therapy (PRRT) is an effective treatment for neuroendocrine tumors
(NETs). Somatostatin receptor expression defines suitability for therapy.
Elevated somatostatin receptor uptake (Krenning scale grade 4) at
baseline has 60% predictive accuracy for efficacy. Increased (>600ng/ml)
baseline levels of chromogranin A (CgA) are also considered as
predictive. A blood-based 51 multigene NET transcript analysis (NETest)
including gene clusters defining cell signaling and metabolism directly
correlates with tumor activity. A multialgorithm-derived NETest scale
0-100% (low activity <40%) defines clinical disease activity.Aim: Assess
the effectiveness of the NETest as a predictive biomarker in PRRT-treated
NETs.Methods: 177Lu-based-PRRT treated NETs (n = 54) were followed for 33
months. At baseline we evaluated: histological grade, somatostatin
receptor imaging (SRI), CgA (ELISA, normal <108ng/ml) and NETest (qRT-PCR
with multianalyte algorithmic analyses). A mathematical genomic response
index comprising NETest genes regulating metabolism and growth factor
signaling integrated with grade was developed as a predictive quotient.
RECIST criteria were used to evaluate disease control (responder vs
non-responder). Statistical analyses: multiple regression, Kaplan-Meier
survival, Chi2 analyses.Results: PRRT demonstrated a 72% response with
median PFS not achieved (median follow-up 16 months). The only baseline
clinical characteristic associated with outcome was low grade (G1/G2
[Ki67Background: Peptide receptor radionuclide therapy (PRRT) is an
effective treatment for neuroendocrine tumors (NETs). Somatostatin
receptor expression defines suitability for therapy. Elevated
somatostatin receptor uptake (Krenning scale grade 4) at baseline has 60%
predictive accuracy for efficacy. Increased (>600ng/ml) baseline levels
of chromogranin A (CgA) are also considered as predictive. A blood-based
51 multigene NET transcript analysis (NETest) including gene clusters
defining cell signaling and metabolism directly correlates with tumor
activity. A multialgorithm-derived NETest scale 0-100% (low activity
<40%) defines clinical disease activity.Aim: Assess the effectiveness of
the NETest as a predictive biomarker in PRRT-treated NETs.Methods:
177Lu-based-PRRT treated NETs (n = 54) were followed for 33 months. At
baseline we evaluated: histological grade, somatostatin receptor imaging
(SRI), CgA (ELISA, normal <108ng/ml) and NETest (qRT-PCR with
multianalyte algorithmic analyses). A mathematical genomic response index
comprising NETest genes regulating metabolism and growth factor signaling
integrated with grade was developed as a predictive quotient. RECIST
criteria were used to evaluate disease control (responder vs
non-responder). Statistical analyses: multiple regression, Kaplan-Meier
survival, Chi2 analyses.Results: PRRT demonstrated a 72% response with
median PFS not achieved (median follow-up 16 months). The only baseline
clinical characteristic associated with outcome was low grade (G1/G2
[Ki67<20%] - coefficient 0.60.2, p40% predicted treatment response and a
longer PFS (HR 2.97, p = 0.05). NETest accurately (89%, 2 = 27.4; p =
1.2107) correlated with RECIST-determined treatment response. The
baseline NETest decreased in 88% of responders; and increased in 90% of
non-responders. Baseline gene expression for metabolism and growth factor
signaling had 76% accuracy for predicting PRRT-response. The Predictive
Quotient Index (NETest and grade) accurately predicted responders (97%)
and non-responders (91%). This offered a significantly better prediction
than elevated SRI uptake (94% vs. 38% accuracy: Chi2 = 31.8, p40%
predicted treatment response and a longer PFS (HR 2.97, p = 0.05). NETest
accurately (89%, 2 = 27.4; p = 1.2107) correlated with RECIST-determined
treatment response. The baseline NETest decreased in 88% of responders;
and increased in 90% of non-responders. Baseline gene expression for
metabolism and growth factor signaling had 76% accuracy for predicting
PRRT-response. The Predictive Quotient Index (NETest and grade)
accurately predicted responders (97%) and non-responders (91%). This
offered a significantly better prediction than elevated SRI uptake (94%
vs. 38% accuracy: Chi2 = 31.8, p<0.0001).Conclusions: The blood-based
NETest provided a predictive multi-molecular biomarker for PRRT.
Alterations in levels correlate with RECIST responses and assess real
time treatment efficacy. A predictive quotient index (NETest and grading)
is highly accurate (94%) in predicting efficacy and significantly
outperforms (p40% predicted treatment response and a longer PFS (HR 2.97,
p = 0.05). NETest accurately (89%, 2 = 27.4; p = 1.2107) correlated with
RECIST-determined treatment response. The baseline NETest decreased in
88% of responders; and increased in 90% of non-responders. Baseline gene
expression for metabolism and growth factor signaling had 76% accuracy
for predicting PRRT-response. The Predictive Quotient Index (NETest and
grade) accurately predicted responders (97%) and non-responders (91%).
This offered a significantly better prediction than elevated SRI uptake
(94% vs. 38% accuracy: Chi2 = 31.8, p<0.0001).Conclusions: The
blood-based NETest provided a predictive multi-molecular biomarker for
PRRT. Alterations in levels correlate with RECIST responses and assess
real time treatment efficacy. A predictive quotient index (NETest and
grading) is highly accurate (94%) in predicting efficacy and
significantly outperforms (p<0.0001) SRI assessment. NET multigene
measurement in blood can be used to predict patients responsive to PRRT.

