Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High sensitivity detection of EGFR exon 20 T790M and C797S
mutations using ICE COLD-PCR


Introduction: The EGFR Exon 20 T790M mutation confers resistance to the
first generation tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKI), such as Tarceva. A new
generation of treatments, including AZD9291, targets the T790M mutation
thus allowing a new approach to cancer therapy for NSCLC patients.
Recently EGFR Exon 20 C797S mutations (c.2389T>A and c.2390G>C) have been
identified as resistance mutations to the third generation TKI AZD9291.
High sensitivity detection of these mutations, as well as the T790M
mutation, in patients with acquired resistance to third generation TKI is
an important requirement for best practice NSCLC treatment.Materials and
Methods: ICE COLD-PCR (Improved & Complete Enrichment CO-amplification at
Lower Denaturation temperature PCR) is a technology that preferentially
enriches mutant DNA sequences in an excess of wild-type DNA through
selective amplification of the mutant DNA population using an
oligonucleotide (RS-oligo) complementary to the wild-type sequence. Due
to the inherent sequence characteristics of the region between the codons
of interest (790 and 797), a RS-oligo focusing on the C797S was developed
and is independent of the RS-oligo for T790M, and thus tiling across EGFR
Exon 20 can be performed. The RS-oligo in this assay was designed to
prevent PCR amplification of wild-type sequences while allowing
exponential amplification of any mutations including C797S within the
RS-oligo binding region. Serial dilutions of spiked gBlocks DNA
containing C797S mutations mixed with K562 DNA and samples extracted from
plasma were amplified with ICE COLD-PCR followed by Sanger sequencing
analysis.Result: For mutations c.2389T>A and c.2390G>C, limits of
detection as low as 0.05% were achieved. Forty DNA samples extracted from
plasma were also tested. These indicated that the assay is suitable for
fragmented samples with low quantities of input DNA such as liquid
biopsies.Conclusion: The pre-amplification PCR product covers both codons
790 and 797. This allows ICE COLD-PCR to be used for the analysis of both
T790M and C797S using the same liquid biopsy sample aliquot. This new ICE
COLD-PCR method to detect both C797S mutations c.2389T>A and c.2390G>C
may provide a highly sensitive, simple and cost effective assay for
monitoring acquired resistance to AZD9291 in the liquid biopsies obtained
from patients and clinical trials. Coupled with our existing highly
sensitive assay for T790M, ICE COLD-PCR offers a highly sensitive method
to determine the emergence of resistance mutations, thus potentially
contributing to therapeutic optimization.

