Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNA-137 is a putative predictive biomarker and can inhibit
cell proliferation and induce apoptosis in colorectal cancer


MicroRNA-137 (miR-137) is a potential tumor suppressor in many kinds of
cancers, including colorectal cancer (CRC). However, the role of miR-137
in CRC remains unclear. Our study showed that miR-137 is silenced in
human colorectal cancer tissues and colon polyps. The methylation of
miR-137 promoter is determined by methylation-specific PCR (MSP) and
quantified by pyrosequencing analysis. By bioinformatics analysis and
Q-PCR assay, we confirmed that miR-137 can target COX2, CDC42, CDK6, and
Aurora-A. The negative expression of miR-137 and Aurora-A is confirmed in
human colorectal cancer tissues and colon polyps, as well as colon polyps
from the AOM/DSS-treated mouse model. Enforcing expression of miR-137 in
colorectal cancer cells resulted in G2/M arrest, reduced cell
proliferation, and finally led to apoptosis. Those effects can be rescued
by overexpressed Aurora-A. By xenograft animal model, the growth of
tumors was attenuated in miR-137-overexpressing colorectal cancer cells,
in which the tissues show an increased Annexin V signal. Additionally,
the AOM/DSS-induced colorectal adenocarcinoma can be restored by
demethylation drug treatment. Taken together, our study suggests that
epigenetic silence of miR-137 may contribute to early CRC formation
through inhibiting the expression of Aurora-A, and loss of miR-137
expression in colon polyps may serve as a potential biomarker to predict
the tendency towards to CRC formation. The investigation of the
regulatory mechanism of miR-137 in CRC progression may shed new light on
early prognosis or cancer therapy for CRC in the future.

