Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An investigation to study the role of novel rhenium compounds on
onco miR's and oncogenes involved in epithelial mesenchymal transition of
prostate cancer cell lines derived from African American and Caucasian
patients


In this research, we seek to evaluate the efficacy of novel rhenium
compounds as a novel targeted agent against prostate cancer (PCa) in
pre-clinical model system. Since the incidence and aggressiveness of Pca
is more prevalent in African Americans (AA) patients than Caucasian
Americans (CA), we first assessed the relevance of genes Lin28B, EZH2,
miR-200, and let-7 expression in human PCa tissue specimens for
characterizing tumor aggressiveness, since these genes are involved in
the process and also epithelial-mesenchymal transition(EMT).We also
assessed whether these markers are deregulated by rhenium compounds using
PCa cell lines. We tested the two novel rhenium compounds ie. Rhenium
pentylcarbonato complexes (RPC), fac-(CO)3(-diimine)ReOC(O)OC5H11 (where,
-diimines are 2,2-bipyridyl and neocuproin for anticancer properties on
PCa cell lines for apoptosis and cell death, and their bioactivity for
anti-proliferative, anti-migratory and antispheroid forming capabilities,
respectively on EO6-AA and MDA,Pca cell lines(from AA patients) and
LNCAP,PC3 (from CA patients). We also studied the expression of miR-146
in these cell lines and Pca tissue specimens, since it is reported to be
overexpressed in cancer cells for tumor survival advantage, regulated by
down-regulating iNOS, the nitric oxide synthesizing gene. Our initial
results of Real Time PCR,Western Blotting,MTT assay,smart flare
assay,flow cytometry, in situ cytochemistry(TUNEL) and spheroid forming
assays showed that these drugs have cytotoxic,anti proliferative and anti
spheroid forming properties,can induce apoptosis in the Pca cell lines
tested and can downregulate some of the onco miR's and onco genes
involved in Pca aggressiveness and EMT conversions as tested by the
expression profiles of miRNAs (miR-200b, miR-200c, and let-7 family) by
RT-PCR, and the protein expression of EZH2, Suz12, and Lin-28B by Western
Blots. It is important to emphasize here that an estimated 40,000 men die
of PCa every year in the US and each year about 60,000 men will develop
castrate resistant PCa for which newer drugs are needed. Therefore, our
work will contribute towards the development of a novel therapy that may
translate into an effective treatment regimen against PCa and is highly
relevant to the mission of both basic and translational cancer
researchers.ACKNOWLEDGEMENT: Supported by a NCI disability supplement to
NIH- grant# R01CA164318 and NIH-MARCNIGMS,grant# 5 T34 GM 100831-4.We are
grateful to Dr.Li, Dr.S.Banerjee and Ms.S.Ali of Detroit Medical
Center,MI,USA for their support and help in conducting this research.

