Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The BTK inhibitor ibrutinib modulates T cell immunity in mouse
models and in differentiated human T cells


Ibrutinib inhibits Bruton's tyrosine kinase (BTK) and effectively treats
B-cell malignancies. Ibrutinib also targets IL-2-inducible T-cell kinase
(ITK) and modulates the T-cell receptor signaling pathway. Because
ibrutinib enhanced antitumor immunity when combined with anti-PD-L1 in
various syngeneic solid tumor and lymphoma models (Sajiv-Barfi, PNAS
2015), we sought to determine the effect of ibrutinib on T-cell function
and activation. Using in vitro human primary T-cell activation assays, we
found that ibrutinib did not suppress T-cell proliferation but slightly
inhibited IFN production in CD4 and CD8 effector T cells when human
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were stimulated with anti-CD3
and anti-CD28 antibodies. Ibrutinib also inhibited PD-1 expression on
human CD8 effector T cells. More strikingly, ibrutinib significantly
suppressed nave murine CD4 T-cell differentiation in vitro into Foxp3+
regulatory T cells (Treg) in the presence of TGF-. Further, we evaluated
the immunomodulatory effect of ibrutinib in tumor-bearing mice. In
pancreatic (Pan02) and renal cell carcinoma (Renca) models, we found that
single-agent ibrutinib, as well as in combination with standard-of-care
agents, effectively inhibited tumor growth. In the syngeneic Renca tumor
model, combination ibrutinib treatment significantly reduced CD4+Foxp3+
Treg cells both in the spleen (P Ibrutinib inhibits Bruton's tyrosine
kinase (BTK) and effectively treats B-cell malignancies. Ibrutinib also
targets IL-2-inducible T-cell kinase (ITK) and modulates the T-cell
receptor signaling pathway. Because ibrutinib enhanced antitumor immunity
when combined with anti-PD-L1 in various syngeneic solid tumor and
lymphoma models (Sajiv-Barfi, PNAS 2015), we sought to determine the
effect of ibrutinib on T-cell function and activation. Using in vitro
human primary T-cell activation assays, we found that ibrutinib did not
suppress T-cell proliferation but slightly inhibited IFN production in
CD4 and CD8 effector T cells when human peripheral blood mononuclear
cells (PBMCs) were stimulated with anti-CD3 and anti-CD28 antibodies.
Ibrutinib also inhibited PD-1 expression on human CD8 effector T cells.
More strikingly, ibrutinib significantly suppressed nave murine CD4
T-cell differentiation in vitro into Foxp3+ regulatory T cells (Treg) in
the presence of TGF-. Further, we evaluated the immunomodulatory effect
of ibrutinib in tumor-bearing mice. In pancreatic (Pan02) and renal cell
carcinoma (Renca) models, we found that single-agent ibrutinib, as well
as in combination with standard-of-care agents, effectively inhibited
tumor growth. In the syngeneic Renca tumor model, combination ibrutinib
treatment significantly reduced CD4+Foxp3+ Treg cells both in the spleen
(P < 0.001) and tumor microenvironment (P Ibrutinib inhibits Bruton's
tyrosine kinase (BTK) and effectively treats B-cell malignancies.
Ibrutinib also targets IL-2-inducible T-cell kinase (ITK) and modulates
the T-cell receptor signaling pathway. Because ibrutinib enhanced
antitumor immunity when combined with anti-PD-L1 in various syngeneic
solid tumor and lymphoma models (Sajiv-Barfi, PNAS 2015), we sought to
determine the effect of ibrutinib on T-cell function and activation.
Using in vitro human primary T-cell activation assays, we found that
ibrutinib did not suppress T-cell proliferation but slightly inhibited
IFN production in CD4 and CD8 effector T cells when human peripheral
blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were stimulated with anti-CD3 and
anti-CD28 antibodies. Ibrutinib also inhibited PD-1 expression on human
CD8 effector T cells. More strikingly, ibrutinib significantly suppressed
nave murine CD4 T-cell differentiation in vitro into Foxp3+ regulatory T
cells (Treg) in the presence of TGF-. Further, we evaluated the
immunomodulatory effect of ibrutinib in tumor-bearing mice. In pancreatic
(Pan02) and renal cell carcinoma (Renca) models, we found that
single-agent ibrutinib, as well as in combination with standard-of-care
agents, effectively inhibited tumor growth. In the syngeneic Renca tumor
model, combination ibrutinib treatment significantly reduced CD4+Foxp3+
Treg cells both in the spleen (P < 0.001) and tumor microenvironment (P <
0.05), compared with everolimus alone. Ibrutinib also significantly
reduced the percentage of PD-1hi cells among CD8 tumor-infiltrating
lymphocytes in A20 lymphoma-bearing mice (P Ibrutinib inhibits Bruton's
tyrosine kinase (BTK) and effectively treats B-cell malignancies.
Ibrutinib also targets IL-2-inducible T-cell kinase (ITK) and modulates
the T-cell receptor signaling pathway. Because ibrutinib enhanced
antitumor immunity when combined with anti-PD-L1 in various syngeneic
solid tumor and lymphoma models (Sajiv-Barfi, PNAS 2015), we sought to
determine the effect of ibrutinib on T-cell function and activation.
Using in vitro human primary T-cell activation assays, we found that
ibrutinib did not suppress T-cell proliferation but slightly inhibited
IFN production in CD4 and CD8 effector T cells when human peripheral
blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were stimulated with anti-CD3 and
anti-CD28 antibodies. Ibrutinib also inhibited PD-1 expression on human
CD8 effector T cells. More strikingly, ibrutinib significantly suppressed
nave murine CD4 T-cell differentiation in vitro into Foxp3+ regulatory T
cells (Treg) in the presence of TGF-. Further, we evaluated the
immunomodulatory effect of ibrutinib in tumor-bearing mice. In pancreatic
(Pan02) and renal cell carcinoma (Renca) models, we found that
single-agent ibrutinib, as well as in combination with standard-of-care
agents, effectively inhibited tumor growth. In the syngeneic Renca tumor
model, combination ibrutinib treatment significantly reduced CD4+Foxp3+
Treg cells both in the spleen (P < 0.001) and tumor microenvironment (P <
0.05), compared with everolimus alone. Ibrutinib also significantly
reduced the percentage of PD-1hi cells among CD8 tumor-infiltrating
lymphocytes in A20 lymphoma-bearing mice (P < 0.05). These data
demonstrate that ibrutinib, a BTK inhibitor, can suppress
immune-inhibitory factors and enhance antitumor immunity in vivo.
Ibrutinib may serve as a promising immunomodulatory agent in potentiating
current cancer immunotherapy in solid tumors.

