Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Higher mutation rate is associated with more frequent expression
of cancer/testis antigens in human tumors


Tumors with high mutation rate such as those of melanoma and non-small
cell lung cancers (NSCLC) have shown greatest response to the emerging
immune therapies. These tumors harbor a large number of somatic
mutations, some of which could be translated into neoantigens,
potentially evoking host immune response. To what degree self antigens,
many of which are cancer testis (CT) antigens, contribute to enhanced
immune response in these tumors has never been systematically studied.
Here we show that cancers with higher mutation rate frequently express a
larger number of CT antigens than cancers with fewer mutations. In NSCLC,
tumors with more than 300 non-synonymous mutations (75th percentile, n =
158) express more than 3 times as many CT antigens as those tumors with
fewer than 100 mutations (25th percentile, n = 162), with a P-value of
1.6e-13. In head and neck cancers, tumors with more than 140
non-synonymous mutations (75th percentile, n = 79) express nearly twice
as many CT antigens as those tumors with fewer than 60 mutations (25th
percentile, n = 80), with a P-value of 0.004. Additionally, in NSCLC,
tumors with high mutation rate are associated with higher expression of
CD8B and granzyme B, markers representing cytotoxic lymphocytes. Tumors
with more expressed CT antigens are also associated with higher
expression of these markers. These data suggest that CT antigens, along
with neoantigens, may contribute to a stronger host immune response in
these hypermutative tumors.

