Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genome-wide copy number dependency analysis identifies partial
copy loss of SF3B1 as a novel cancer vulnerability


Genomic instability is a hallmark of cancer resulting in widespread
somatic copy number alterations. We integrated a genome-scale shRNA
viability screen and copy number profiles from 179 cancer cell lines to
perform an unbiased analysis of copy-number associated gene-dependency
interactions. We found most copy-number associated gene dependencies
result from losses of genetic material rather than gains. Strikingly, the
most enriched class of these dependencies was CYCLOPS (Copy-number
alterations Yielding Cancer Liabilities Owing to Partial losS) genes.
Hemizygous loss of CYCLOPS genes sensitizes cancer cells to their further
suppression. One of the top hits from the analysis was the pre-mRNA
splicing factor SF3B1, which is also frequently mutated in cancer. We
then sought to evaluate SF3B1 as a CYCLOPS gene. Cancer cells with
hemizygous SF3B1 copy-loss were uniquely sensitive to partial SF3B1
suppression by RNAi compared to cells with normal SF3B1 gene dosage.
Mechanistically, cancer cells harboring partial SF3B1 copy-loss lack a
reservoir of excess SF3b complex, a precursor complex of the U2 snRNP,
which protects cells with normal SF3B1 copy number from cell death upon
SF3B1 suppression. Our data highlight the prevalence of CYCLOPS
dependencies in cancer and establish the spliceosome as a frequent
CYCLOPS target. Further, these data indicate targeting wild-type SF3B1 as
a novel cancer dependency in cells with hemizygous SF3B1 copy-loss.

