Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Smoking cessation following a limited 5A intervention in a cohort
of patients with head and neck cancer attending for treatment at a
regional cancer program in Ontario, Canada


A smoking cessation intervention at the time of cancer treatment is an
important opportunity to improve patient quality of life, treatment
outcome, and survival in people with cancer. This prospective
observational study was designed to assess intention to quit, motivation
to quit, smoking characteristics and interest in smoking cessation, and
assessment of cessation following a standardized smoking cessation
intervention. The intervention was a limited clinical 5A intervention
offered by trained health professionals and occurred within a dental
oncology clinic that offered regular follow-up and any needed
pharmacotherapy through the course of cancer treatment. The cohort was
composed of head and neck cancer patients who were self-reported
ever-smokers at enrolment and who attended the Northeast Cancer Centre, a
regional cancer centre in Northeastern Ontario, Canada, for cancer
treatment. There were 377 cancer patients who participated in study, with
35.8% (n = 135/377) self-reporting as current smokers. Most current
smokers had high nicotine dependence, with 82.2% (n = 111/135) reporting
a time to first cigarette (TTFC) of 30 minutes or less; 84.4% (n =
114/135) were interested in quitting smoking. By 1 year post intervention
10 patients had died and 28 patients were lost to follow-up; of the
remainder 29 smokers had cessated yielding a cessation rate of 29.9% (n =
29/97); or 23.2% (n = 29/125) conservatively assuming those lost to
follow-up remained current smokers. Offering comprehensive smoking
cessation during the course of cancer treatment yields long term smoking
cessation benefits in a cohort of patients with smoking associated
cancers.

