Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clinical evaluation of streck cell-free DNA blood collection tubes
for liquid profiling in oncology


Liquid profiling based on circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA) extracted from
blood has become a powerful diagnostic approach in oncology. Making ctDNA
analysis broadly available requires shipping whole blood to a clinical
laboratory while ensuring cell-free DNA (cfDNA) and blood cell integrity
to prevent dilution of ctDNA with cellular genomic DNA. Since standard
EDTA blood collection tubes cannot retain this integrity for a prolonged
time, several laboratories have proposed Streck Cell-Free DNA blood
collection tubes (Streck cfDNA BCTs) as an alternative for sample
collection.Qualification data for the use of Streck cfDNA BCTs in
oncology is limited and mainly based on blood collected from healthy
individuals as well as data extrapolated from the prenatal field.
However, the data generated from these samples may not represent the
unique dynamics of clinical oncology specimens and therefore a study of
true clinical oncology samples is required to support the use of Streck
cfDNA BCT tubes in routine practice.In this study, we performed a
clinical evaluation of cfDNA sample integrity from matched Streck cfDNA
BCTs vs standard EDTA tubes from colorectal, pancreatic and non-small
cell lung cancer patients (N > 50). Blood drawn into Streck cfDNA BCTs
was either processed immediately or 3 days after phlebotomy. DNA
quantification was followed by BEAMing digital PCR (OncoBEAM) on KRAS,
NRAS and EGFR mutations and compared to matching specimens collected in
EDTA tubes.Our results suggest that cfDNA yield as well as the genomic
DNA background is not affected by prolonged storage of clinical samples
in Streck cfDNA BCTs for up to 3 days. In all sample sets containing
mutated ctDNA, the detected mutational load was comparable between Streck
cfDNA BCTs and EDTA tubes.In conclusion, this study represents a
comprehensive clinical evaluation of Streck cfDNA BCTs vs EDTA tubes for
ctDNA profiling. In conjunction with the findings of our previously
presented Streck cfDNA BCT shipping condition studies, our data supports
the compatibility of clinical oncology specimens collected in Streck
cfDNA BCTs with the BEAMing technology.

