Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cancer diagnoses and patient use of electronic health records:
results from the health information national trends survey


The increasing adoption of electronic health records (EHRs) in the United
States, spurred largely by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid's EHR
Meaningful Use Incentive Program, has potential to increase patient
engagement and improve quality of healthcare delivered, especially for
those diagnosed with cancer or other chronic conditions. Meaningful Use
Stage 2 criteria require that providers give patients the ability to
view, download and transmit their medical records; this is of particular
importance for cancer patients, whose care is often delivered by teams of
different specialists and for whom accurate communication of medical and
treatment history between patients and providers is critical. To
investigate whether there is a difference in patient access to and
utilization of EHRs based on history of cancer diagnosis, we analyzed
data from the National Cancer Institute's Health Information National
Trends Survey (HINTS 4, Cycle 4). The survey was fielded between July and
November 2014 via postal mail; 3,370 complete surveys were returned
(response rate = 34.4%). Of the respondents, 6.4% reported having a prior
diagnosis of a cancer other than non-melanoma skin cancer. Among those
with a self-reported history of cancer, 48.2% reported being offered
access to their EHRs and 30.8% accessed their EHRs at least once,
compared with those who did not have cancer (41.8% and 27.2%,
respectively; p > 0.05). After adjusting for sociodemographic and
healthcare-related characteristics, no significant difference was found
in the odds of being offered EHR access based on cancer diagnosis status.
Those with a history of cancer had a statistically significantly higher
odds of accessing their EHRs at least once compared to those without a
diagnosis of cancer after adjustment, (OR = 1.75, 95% CI = 1.08-2.81, p =
0.02). Other significant predictive factors included in the model were
age, education, health insurance, having a regular provider, and internet
access (p The increasing adoption of electronic health records (EHRs) in
the United States, spurred largely by the Centers for Medicare and
Medicaid's EHR Meaningful Use Incentive Program, has potential to
increase patient engagement and improve quality of healthcare delivered,
especially for those diagnosed with cancer or other chronic conditions.
Meaningful Use Stage 2 criteria require that providers give patients the
ability to view, download and transmit their medical records; this is of
particular importance for cancer patients, whose care is often delivered
by teams of different specialists and for whom accurate communication of
medical and treatment history between patients and providers is critical.
To investigate whether there is a difference in patient access to and
utilization of EHRs based on history of cancer diagnosis, we analyzed
data from the National Cancer Institute's Health Information National
Trends Survey (HINTS 4, Cycle 4). The survey was fielded between July and
November 2014 via postal mail; 3,370 complete surveys were returned
(response rate = 34.4%). Of the respondents, 6.4% reported having a prior
diagnosis of a cancer other than non-melanoma skin cancer. Among those
with a self-reported history of cancer, 48.2% reported being offered
access to their EHRs and 30.8% accessed their EHRs at least once,
compared with those who did not have cancer (41.8% and 27.2%,
respectively; p > 0.05). After adjusting for sociodemographic and
healthcare-related characteristics, no significant difference was found
in the odds of being offered EHR access based on cancer diagnosis status.
Those with a history of cancer had a statistically significantly higher
odds of accessing their EHRs at least once compared to those without a
diagnosis of cancer after adjustment, (OR = 1.75, 95% CI = 1.08-2.81, p =
0.02). Other significant predictive factors included in the model were
age, education, health insurance, having a regular provider, and internet
access (p < 0.05). A borderline association was also seen between a
previous cancer diagnosis and increased frequency of EHR access (p =
0.08). These findings suggest that, if offered access to their records,
those with a diagnosis of cancer have higher odds of using their EHRs;
further investigation is needed to determine how patients are using EHRs
to help manage their care, the impact of this use on cancer-specific
outcomes, and associations with quality of care.

