Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A long pentraxin-3-derived small molecule FGF trap for the
treatment of multiple myeloma


Despite advances in systemic and supportive therapies, multiple myeloma
(MM) remains incurable because of chemotherapeutic resistance. Fibroblast
growth factor-2 (FGF2) plays a pivotal role in MM acting as an
autocrine/paracrine mitogen on plasma cells, bone marrow-derived
endothelial cells and fibroblasts. In keeping with the pivotal role of
the FGF system in MM, the recurrent chromosomal translocation t(4;14)
identified in MM patients is associated with upregulation of FGF
receptor-3 (FGFR3). Agents able to hamper FGF signaling are therefore of
interest as a novel approach for the treatment of MM. The soluble pattern
recognition receptor long pentraxin-3 (PTX3) owns an unique N-terminal
amino acid domain containing the pentapeptide ARPCA able to bind FGFs
with high affinity and selectivity and to prevent their binding to FGFRs
and their activation. Molecular modeling based on ARPCA structure and
small molecule library fishing have allowed the identification of a novel
orally active 480 Da FGF trap named NSC12. NSC12 has been shown to hamper
tumor growth and vascularization in FGF-driven human lung and prostate
tumor models.Here, the therapeutic potential of NSC12 for MM treatment
was tested on four human MM cell lines harboring (KMS-11 and OPM-2 cells)
or not (U-266 and RPMI8226 cells) the t(4:14) translocation. NSC12
blocked the proliferation of all human MM cell lines with an IC50 3 M.
Western blot and immunofluorescent analyses showed that NSC12 inhibited
the activation of FGFR3 signaling, hampered nuclear translocation of
NF-kB and strongly downregulated the anti-apoptotic protein mcl-1,
leading to an apoptotic response. In addition, co-treatment with the
proteasome inhibitor Bortezomib strongly increased KMS-11 cell death. In
vivo, oral delivery of NSC12 significantly blocked the growth of KMS-11
(286.9 22.4 vs 459.8 27.4 mm3, pDespite advances in systemic and
supportive therapies, multiple myeloma (MM) remains incurable because of
chemotherapeutic resistance. Fibroblast growth factor-2 (FGF2) plays a
pivotal role in MM acting as an autocrine/paracrine mitogen on plasma
cells, bone marrow-derived endothelial cells and fibroblasts. In keeping
with the pivotal role of the FGF system in MM, the recurrent chromosomal
translocation t(4;14) identified in MM patients is associated with
upregulation of FGF receptor-3 (FGFR3). Agents able to hamper FGF
signaling are therefore of interest as a novel approach for the treatment
of MM. The soluble pattern recognition receptor long pentraxin-3 (PTX3)
owns an unique N-terminal amino acid domain containing the pentapeptide
ARPCA able to bind FGFs with high affinity and selectivity and to prevent
their binding to FGFRs and their activation. Molecular modeling based on
ARPCA structure and small molecule library fishing have allowed the
identification of a novel orally active 480 Da FGF trap named NSC12.
NSC12 has been shown to hamper tumor growth and vascularization in
FGF-driven human lung and prostate tumor models.Here, the therapeutic
potential of NSC12 for MM treatment was tested on four human MM cell
lines harboring (KMS-11 and OPM-2 cells) or not (U-266 and RPMI8226
cells) the t(4:14) translocation. NSC12 blocked the proliferation of all
human MM cell lines with an IC50 3 M. Western blot and immunofluorescent
analyses showed that NSC12 inhibited the activation of FGFR3 signaling,
hampered nuclear translocation of NF-kB and strongly downregulated the
anti-apoptotic protein mcl-1, leading to an apoptotic response. In
addition, co-treatment with the proteasome inhibitor Bortezomib strongly
increased KMS-11 cell death. In vivo, oral delivery of NSC12
significantly blocked the growth of KMS-11 (286.9 22.4 vs 459.8 27.4 mm3,
p<0.001) and RPMI8226 (141.5 17.7 vs 245.9 46.4 mm3, pDespite advances in
systemic and supportive therapies, multiple myeloma (MM) remains
incurable because of chemotherapeutic resistance. Fibroblast growth
factor-2 (FGF2) plays a pivotal role in MM acting as an
autocrine/paracrine mitogen on plasma cells, bone marrow-derived
endothelial cells and fibroblasts. In keeping with the pivotal role of
the FGF system in MM, the recurrent chromosomal translocation t(4;14)
identified in MM patients is associated with upregulation of FGF
receptor-3 (FGFR3). Agents able to hamper FGF signaling are therefore of
interest as a novel approach for the treatment of MM. The soluble pattern
recognition receptor long pentraxin-3 (PTX3) owns an unique N-terminal
amino acid domain containing the pentapeptide ARPCA able to bind FGFs
with high affinity and selectivity and to prevent their binding to FGFRs
and their activation. Molecular modeling based on ARPCA structure and
small molecule library fishing have allowed the identification of a novel
orally active 480 Da FGF trap named NSC12. NSC12 has been shown to hamper
tumor growth and vascularization in FGF-driven human lung and prostate
tumor models.Here, the therapeutic potential of NSC12 for MM treatment
was tested on four human MM cell lines harboring (KMS-11 and OPM-2 cells)
or not (U-266 and RPMI8226 cells) the t(4:14) translocation. NSC12
blocked the proliferation of all human MM cell lines with an IC50 3 M.
Western blot and immunofluorescent analyses showed that NSC12 inhibited
the activation of FGFR3 signaling, hampered nuclear translocation of
NF-kB and strongly downregulated the anti-apoptotic protein mcl-1,
leading to an apoptotic response. In addition, co-treatment with the
proteasome inhibitor Bortezomib strongly increased KMS-11 cell death. In
vivo, oral delivery of NSC12 significantly blocked the growth of KMS-11
(286.9 22.4 vs 459.8 27.4 mm3, p<0.001) and RPMI8226 (141.5 17.7 vs 245.9
46.4 mm3, p<0.001) xenografts injected subcutaneously in
immune-compromised NOD/SCID mice. Analysis of KMS-11 xenografts from
NSC12-treated mice showed a significant reduction of CD31-positive tumor
vascularization and a strong increase of TUNEL-positive apoptotic cells
compared to xenografts from vehicle-treated mice.Altogether, these data
suggest that NSC12 affects MM tumor growth through a direct cytotoxic
activity on MM cells and by inhibiting FGF-mediated paracrine/autocrine
crosstalk in tumor stroma/microenvironment. Thus, NSC12 may represent a
novel two compartment inhibitor in MM by hampering FGF-dependent
angiogenic/oncogenic signaling. Finally, combinations of NSC12 with
conventional therapies, such as Bortezomib, may enhance cytotoxicity and
overcome drug resistance, thereby improving MM patient outcome.

