Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Potent in vivo activity of site-specific indolino-benzodiazepine
antibody-drug conjugates (ADCs) generated via engineered cysteine
conjugation


ADCs are widely studied for cancer therapy, with numerous agents in
preclinical and clinical development embodying a wide array of targets,
linker chemistries, and cytotoxic effector classes. A fourth element of
ADC design that has received much attention recently is the site of
conjugation of the cytotoxic molecule to the antibody. Historically,
lysine- or interchain cysteine-directed conjugation has been used, but
site-specific chemistries have become increasingly popular. Our previous
evaluation of site-specific and lysine-linked ADCs utilizing a
tubulin-acting maytansinoid effector molecule found the lysine-linked
version was more active in vivo (Yoder et al., AACR 2015 #645). Here we
present a comparison of engineered cysteine site-specific and
lysine-linked ADCs utilizing the previously described
indolino-benzodiazepine (henceforth referred to as IGN) effector IGN-P1
(Miller et al., AACR 2015 #652) which is designed to undergo proteolytic
cleavage upon cell uptake to release a potently cytotoxic DNA
alkylator.We show that HC-S442C mutants of human IgG1 can be conjugated
via maleimide chemistry to IGN-P1 to give stable, potent, and homogeneous
ADCs with drug to antibody ratio (DAR) of 2. The in vitro potency of
engineered-cysteine IGN-P1 ADCs is largely dependent on the DAR of the
ADC, although some difference is observed between HC-S442C and other
cysteine mutants used for conjugation.Pharmacokinetic study of C442
maleimide conjugates suggests that the chemical linkage between effector
and antibody is stable upon administration in mice. Further, and in
contrast to our previous observations utilizing maytansinoid ADCs, the
site-specific and Lys-linked IGN-P1 ADCs showed comparable efficacy in
vivo on a molar drug basis. This effect was observed across two different
antibodies targeting two different cell surface antigens. These results
suggest that, in certain cases, site-specific conjugation chemistry can
offer comparable activity to heterogeneous conjugation at well-tolerated
doses.

