Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovery, development and characterization of a new class of
therapeutic anti-PD-1 antibody


Blockade of immune checkpoint (IC), such as PD-1, confers durable
clinical benefit to a minority of melanoma and lung cancer patients.
Challengingly, the 5-year survival rate is still below 30% in those
patients, and most other solid tumors are not particularly responsive to
immunotherapy. Therefore, more IC blocking mAbs are under development to
meet clinical needs. Using Enumeral's unique single cell immunoprofiling
platform, we developed a novel class of anti-PD-1 antibodies, named
244C8, with distinct epitope binding site than currently marketed
anti-PD-1 antibodies. To evaluate the function of 244C8 on anti-tumor
immunity, we employed ex vivo methods to determine responsiveness of
tumor infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs), isolated from human lung cancer
biopsies, to various anti-PD-1 antibodies, including our lead anti-PD1
therapeutic candidate 244C8. The results show that all anti-PD-1
antibodies tested reversed T cell exhaustion in tumor microenvironment.
Further, 244C8-treated cells produced increased IFN-y compared to
nivolumab, indicating a stronger anti-tumor immunity. In the settings of
mixed lymphocyte reaction (MLR) and CMV antigen-recall assays, 244C8
treatment also led to higher levels of T cell activation compared to
conventional anti-PD-1 antibodies. Interestingly, in both ex vivo and in
vitro models, we observed a pattern of cytokine production in
244C8-treated cells that is consistently distinct from that produced by
conventional/marketed anti-PD-1 antibodies, suggesting a differentiated
mechanism of action.

