Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Distribution and prognostic relevance of PD-1/PD-L1 immune
checkpoints and tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes in early-stage pulmonary
basaloid squamous cell carcinoma


Background: The activation of immune cells by immune checkpoint
inhibitors showed promising results with increased patient survival in
several types of cancer. Since no data exist for pulmonary basaloid
squamous cell carcinoma (BSCC), we aimed to characterize the expression
of PD-L1 and PD-1 as well as tumor infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) in
operable BSCC.Materials and Methods: We retrospectively included 57
patients with operable stages I-III BSCC. The expression of PD-L1 (clone
SP142, Spring Bioscience), PD-1 (clone NAT105, Ventana) and CD8 (clone
SP57, Ventana) was evaluated by automated immunohistochemical analysis in
FFPE specimens of BSCC. PD-L1 expression was scored on tumor cells
(TC350% positive tumor cells; TC25% but Background: The activation of
immune cells by immune checkpoint inhibitors showed promising results
with increased patient survival in several types of cancer. Since no data
exist for pulmonary basaloid squamous cell carcinoma (BSCC), we aimed to
characterize the expression of PD-L1 and PD-1 as well as tumor
infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) in operable BSCC.Materials and Methods:
We retrospectively included 57 patients with operable stages I-III BSCC.
The expression of PD-L1 (clone SP142, Spring Bioscience), PD-1 (clone
NAT105, Ventana) and CD8 (clone SP57, Ventana) was evaluated by automated
immunohistochemical analysis in FFPE specimens of BSCC. PD-L1 expression
was scored on tumor cells (TC350% positive tumor cells; TC25% but <50%
positive tumor cells; TC11% but Background: The activation of immune
cells by immune checkpoint inhibitors showed promising results with
increased patient survival in several types of cancer. Since no data
exist for pulmonary basaloid squamous cell carcinoma (BSCC), we aimed to
characterize the expression of PD-L1 and PD-1 as well as tumor
infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) in operable BSCC.Materials and Methods:
We retrospectively included 57 patients with operable stages I-III BSCC.
The expression of PD-L1 (clone SP142, Spring Bioscience), PD-1 (clone
NAT105, Ventana) and CD8 (clone SP57, Ventana) was evaluated by automated
immunohistochemical analysis in FFPE specimens of BSCC. PD-L1 expression
was scored on tumor cells (TC350% positive tumor cells; TC25% but <50%
positive tumor cells; TC11% but <5% of positive tumor cells; and
TC0Background: The activation of immune cells by immune checkpoint
inhibitors showed promising results with increased patient survival in
several types of cancer. Since no data exist for pulmonary basaloid
squamous cell carcinoma (BSCC), we aimed to characterize the expression
of PD-L1 and PD-1 as well as tumor infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) in
operable BSCC.Materials and Methods: We retrospectively included 57
patients with operable stages I-III BSCC. The expression of PD-L1 (clone
SP142, Spring Bioscience), PD-1 (clone NAT105, Ventana) and CD8 (clone
SP57, Ventana) was evaluated by automated immunohistochemical analysis in
FFPE specimens of BSCC. PD-L1 expression was scored on tumor cells
(TC350% positive tumor cells; TC25% but <50% positive tumor cells; TC11%
but <5% of positive tumor cells; and TC0<1% positive tumor cells) and
tumor-infiltrating immune cells (IC310% of positive immune cells; IC25%
but Background: The activation of immune cells by immune checkpoint
inhibitors showed promising results with increased patient survival in
several types of cancer. Since no data exist for pulmonary basaloid
squamous cell carcinoma (BSCC), we aimed to characterize the expression
of PD-L1 and PD-1 as well as tumor infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) in
operable BSCC.Materials and Methods: We retrospectively included 57
patients with operable stages I-III BSCC. The expression of PD-L1 (clone
SP142, Spring Bioscience), PD-1 (clone NAT105, Ventana) and CD8 (clone
SP57, Ventana) was evaluated by automated immunohistochemical analysis in
FFPE specimens of BSCC. PD-L1 expression was scored on tumor cells
(TC350% positive tumor cells; TC25% but <50% positive tumor cells; TC11%
but <5% of positive tumor cells; and TC0<1% positive tumor cells) and
tumor-infiltrating immune cells (IC310% of positive immune cells; IC25%
but <10% of positive immune cells; IC1 1% but Background: The activation
of immune cells by immune checkpoint inhibitors showed promising results
with increased patient survival in several types of cancer. Since no data
exist for pulmonary basaloid squamous cell carcinoma (BSCC), we aimed to
characterize the expression of PD-L1 and PD-1 as well as tumor
infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) in operable BSCC.Materials and Methods:
We retrospectively included 57 patients with operable stages I-III BSCC.
The expression of PD-L1 (clone SP142, Spring Bioscience), PD-1 (clone
NAT105, Ventana) and CD8 (clone SP57, Ventana) was evaluated by automated
immunohistochemical analysis in FFPE specimens of BSCC. PD-L1 expression
was scored on tumor cells (TC350% positive tumor cells; TC25% but <50%
positive tumor cells; TC11% but <5% of positive tumor cells; and TC0<1%
positive tumor cells) and tumor-infiltrating immune cells (IC310% of
positive immune cells; IC25% but <10% of positive immune cells; IC1 1%
but <5% of positive immune cells; and IC0Background: The activation of
immune cells by immune checkpoint inhibitors showed promising results
with increased patient survival in several types of cancer. Since no data
exist for pulmonary basaloid squamous cell carcinoma (BSCC), we aimed to
characterize the expression of PD-L1 and PD-1 as well as tumor
infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) in operable BSCC.Materials and Methods:
We retrospectively included 57 patients with operable stages I-III BSCC.
The expression of PD-L1 (clone SP142, Spring Bioscience), PD-1 (clone
NAT105, Ventana) and CD8 (clone SP57, Ventana) was evaluated by automated
immunohistochemical analysis in FFPE specimens of BSCC. PD-L1 expression
was scored on tumor cells (TC350% positive tumor cells; TC25% but <50%
positive tumor cells; TC11% but <5% of positive tumor cells; and TC0<1%
positive tumor cells) and tumor-infiltrating immune cells (IC310% of
positive immune cells; IC25% but <10% of positive immune cells; IC1 1%
but <5% of positive immune cells; and IC0< 1% of positive immune cells).
Survival analysis was determined by Kaplan-Meier analysis and Cox
proportional hazard models.Results: PD-L1 expression on tumor cells
(TC1-3) was observed in 30% of patients (17/57), with high-PD-L1
expressing TC (TC2/3) in 14% of cases (8/57). PD-L1 expression on
tumor-infiltrating immune cells was noticed in 36% of patients (20/57),
with high-PD-L1 expressing IC (IC2/3) in 18% of cases (10/57). PD-L1
expression strongly correlated with CD8+ TILs and PD-1+ expression. CD8+
TILs infiltrated the tumors in three different patterns (stromal,
peritumoral, diffuse). High PD-L1 expression either on TC or IC was
significantly associated with better progression-free survival (PFS)
(TC0, P = 0.024; TC0/IC0, P = 0.03) and overall survival (OS) (TC0, P =
0.01; TC0/IC0, P = 0.007) in BSCC patients. High amounts of TILs and
PD-1+ cells were significantly correlated with improved PFS (TILs, P =
0.035; PD-1+, P = 0.007) and OS (TILs, P = 0.016; PD-1+, P =
0.03).Conclusion: Increased PD-L1 TC and IC levels, TILs density and
PD-1+ infiltrates are associated with better outcome in early-stage BSCC.
Assessment of PD-L1 expression along with PD-1+ and CD8+ TILs could be
useful to predict response to immune checkpoint inhibitors in BSCC. [M.I.
and C.B. contributed equally to this work.]

