Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Detection of aurora kinase A (AURKA) focal amplification in plasma
samples of patients with recurrent ovarian cancer


Purpose: Aurora kinases are associated with acquired resistance to
therapy in human cancers. We hypothesized that AURKA amplification is a
late event in ovarian cancer (OC) progression and that frequency of
amplification might be underestimated if assessed in tumor samples
collected at the time of initial diagnosis. To test this hypothesis, we
determined AURKA amplification levels in patients with recurrent OC
andcompared those to AURKA amplification levels in the same patients at
the time of diagnosis.Methods: Samples were collected from 33 patients
with taxane- and platinum-resistant OC enrolled in a first-in-human (FIH)
study that evaluated monotherapy with AMG 900, an orally administered
pan-aurora kinase inhibitor (NCT00858377). We performed a targeted
analysis ofthe AURKA locus and surrounding regions using next-generation
paired-end sequencing (Illumina HiSeq2500 and 100 bp paired-end reads).
By using extremely high sequence coverage (average coverage of >
2,000-fold), we were able to detect and quantify circulating tumor DNA
(ctDNA) in plasma and to identify chromosomal alterations characteristic
of tumor DNA. Sequencing was performed at Personal Genome Diagnostics
(PGDx, Baltimore, MD). In addition, we performed AURKA (20q13) / 20q11
FISH in archival FFPE sections from the same patients. The AURKA (20q13)
/ 20q11 dual color FISH probe kit was purchased from Kreatech (now Leica
Biosystems, Buffalo Grove, IL). Amplification states were defined as
follows: amplified: AURKA (20q13) / 20q11 signal > 2.0; borderline: AURKA
(20q13) / 20q11 signal 1.5; non-amplified: AURKA (20q13) / 20q11 signal
1.5; non-amplified: AURKA (20q13) / 20q11 signal < 1.5. FISH analyses
were performed at Mosaic Laboratories (Lake Forest, CA). Survival
analysis was performed using the Kaplan-Meier method.Results: Plasma
samples were available from all patients. Analysis of rearrangements
surrounding the AURKA locus in plasma samples identified 11 of the 33
patients as AURKA amplified. Archival FFPEsections were available from 27
of the 33 patients, and 21 of these 27 patients were evaluable by FISH
for AURKA amplification. FISH only identified 1 patient as AURKA
amplified and 1 additional patient as borderline amplified. Patients with
AURKA amplification in plasma had received a median (min, max) of 6
(2,18) prior lines of chemotherapy, while patients without AURKA
amplification had received a median (min, max) of 3 (1, 14) lines of
prior chemotherapy. AURKA amplification as determined in plasma ctDNA at
the time of AMG 900 study entry was an indicator of shorter PFS (median
9.4 vs 19.9 weeks; P = 0.04) and OS (median 9.4 vs 27.6 weeks; P =
0.013).Conclusions: Our results suggest that AURKA amplification is a
late event in ovarian cancer progression,and that monitoring AURKA focal
amplification in plasma ctDNA allows the non-invasive assessment of
acquired resistance to cancer therapy.

