Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor-secreted acids alter macrophage phenotype


Within tumors, tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) usually adopt an M2
phenotype with tumor-promoting characteristics, as opposed to the M1
phenotype responsible for host protection. As acidic pH can affect the
characteristics of immune cells, we aimed to test whether low pH as a
common stress factor in the tumor microenvironment could be partially
responsible for the phenotypic characteristics and/or functional activity
of macrophages in prostate cancer. To test this hypothesis, we allowed
TRAMP (TRansgenic Adenocarcinoma of the Mouse Prostate) mice to develop
neoplastic lesions of variable histologic severity. Thereafter, we
isolated tumor-associated macrophages from control tumors and analyzed
their expression of the M1 and M2 markers; iNos, Il-6, Cd206 and Arg1.
Gene expression analysis confirms previous studies which reported higher
expression of both M1 and M2 markers in TAMs compared with peritoneal
macrophages. Treatment of TRAMP mice with sodium bicarbonate to
continuously buffer acids secreted by neoplastic cells, decreased TAMs
infiltration into the stromal compartment of prostate. In addition,
sodium bicarbonate decreased iNos, Arg1, and Cd206 but not Il-6
expression in TAMs isolated from subcutaneously growing TRAMP-C2 tumors,
a TRAMP-derived prostate tumor cell line injected into syngeneic male
hosts. Since decreased expression of Arg1 and iNos has been shown to
mediate the suppressive activity of myeloid cells, tumor acidity might
promote the suppressive microenvironment by upregulating both enzymes. In
conclusion, extracellular acidosis increases the density of macrophages
and their L-arginine metabolic potential; coincident with delayed tumor
progression in prostate tumors.

