Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovery of dual MNK 1 and 2 and BCR-ABL kinase inhibitors for
the treatment of blast crisis chronic myeloid leukemia


Chronic Phase Chronic Myelogenous Leukemia (CP-CML) is well treated with
tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKI) through BCR-ABL kinase modulation.
However, TKI are ineffective for late-stage or blast crisis (BC) CML in
which phase, granulocyte macrophage progenitors (GMPs) have acquired the
ability to function as leukemic stem cells (LSCs), and are thought to act
as a reservoir for TKI resistance with poor prognosis. An effective
BC-CML therapy will likely have to target the BC-LSC population to ensure
long-term disease control.Recent studies have shown the importance of the
MAP kinase interacting serine/threonine kinase (MNK1/2)-eukaryotic
translation initiation factor 4E (eIF4E) axis in sustaining BC-LSC
self-renewal. Thus, a single agent which inhibits both BCR-ABL and MNK1/2
kinase simultaneously represents a rational approach to target BC-LSCs.
Such an agent should be able to distinguish between normal hematopoietic
stem cells (HSC) and LSCs.Here, we report the discovery of a potential
BC-CML therapy that relies on the inhibition of MNK1/2 and BCR-ABL
kinases using a dual specific MNK/ABL inhibitor. We will also report the
in vitro and in vivo biological data, pharmacokinetic properties, and
biochemical characteristics of such compounds. These compounds are able
to prevent eIF4E phosphorylation, thus selectively inhibiting the
MNK-eIF4E-dependent self-renewal function of BC-LSCs as a single agent
while leaving normal HSCs unscathed.

