Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Rapid harvesting of highly concentrated circulating tumor cells
from bulk human blood with buoyant immuno-microbubbles


Circulating tumor cells (CTCs) are the extremely rare cells shed from
primary tumor during metastatic disease. A technology to quickly and
inexpensively isolate viable CTCs will enable widespread clinical
utilization of CTCs for cancer prognosis and drug testing. The
lipid-shelled microbubble is a biocompatible material that has been used
as ultrasound contrast media. We have previously shown that MB is a
promising vehicle to isolate rare cells from biological fluids by
flotation. Here we investigated the role of lipid composition, MB/cell
ratio, and type of tumor surface marker [epithelial cell adhesion
molecule (EpCAM), receptor tyrosine-protein kinase erbB-2 or human
epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2/neu) and epithelial growth
factor receptor (EGFR)] on MB stability and binding efficiency to breast
cancer cells. Optimized MBs coated with anti-EpCAM antibody showed 95%
binding efficiency to human breast carcinoma SKBR-3 cells. Cells were
able to proliferate in culture with MBs attached to them. We further
developed an inverted setup in order to harvest (skim) highly
concentrated tumor cells in a microliter volume on a nitrocellulose
membrane. Using vacuum-assisted harvesting we demonstrated a high
efficiency (80%) of isolation of rare tumor cells spiked in 7 ml blood by
anti-EpCAM MBs. A blinded study using anti-EpCAM MBs detected epithelial
CTCs in samples of metastatic breast and ovarian cancers with brain
metastases, but not in samples from non-epithelial brain malignancies,
including primary glioblastoma multiforme, hemangioblastoma and
metastatic melanoma. The simple and robust MB approach can be developed
into an inexpensive tool for batch CTC isolation in basic research and
clinical applications.

