Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anti-tumor activity of a MYC-targeting dicer substrate siRNA in
combination with BRD4/CDK7 inhibitors


MYC is a well-characterized driver of numerous tumor types. Since the
protein encoded by this gene is challenging to target via conventional
modalities, progress in new therapeutic agents has been slow despite
decades of research. RNA interference technology has enabled the
inhibition of previously-undruggable genetic targets at the mRNA level,
and has advanced to clinical development for several indications.
DCR-MYC, a lipid nanoparticle (LNP)-formulated Dicer substrate siRNA
(DsiRNA) targeting MYC mRNA, is currently in Phase Ib/II clinical trials
and showing promising results. In this study we used an improved EnCore
LNP and MYC DsiRNA, which demonstrated MYC mRNA silencing activity and
efficacy in mouse models of human hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Small
molecule inhibitors that target BRD4; JQ1 and CDK7; THZ1 has previously
reported anti-proliferative effects in various cancer types and efficacy
in several tumor mouse models including HCC. Treatment with both JQ1 and
THZ1 induced cell cycle arrest and apoptosis in various cancer cells by
repressing MYC expression. Here we observed striking anti-proliferative
effects in vitro when MYC-DsiRNA was combined with THZ1 in cancer cells.
In addition, when mice bearing HCC tumors were treated with MYC-DsiRNA
combined with either THZ1 or JQ1, the antitumor efficacy was additive or
synergistic relative to either single agent alone. We observed
significantly more MYC mRNA knockdown in the tumors that had the
combination treatment compared to the tumors that received either of the
single agent treatment. These preclinical data suggests the possibility
of a significant and practical benefit of combining MYC-DsiRNA and small
molecule inhibitors that target an epigenetic regulator BRD4 (JQ1) and a
global gene regulator CDK7 (THZ1).

