Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PJ34-mediated PARP-1 enzymatic activity inhibition in cervical
cancer modulates the cellular response to cisplatin


BACKGROUND: Manifestation of chemotherapy (Cisplatin) resistance is an
important cause of treatment failure in patients of locally advanced
(FIGO stage, IIB to IVA) cervix cancer. We hypothesised that Cisplatin
(CDDP) resistance might be associated with PARP-1 hyper-activation and
inhibition of PARP-1 enzyme through PJ34 could sensitise cells to
cisplatin mediated cytotoxicity.METHODS: We studied combined effect of
PJ34 (PARP-1 inhibitor) and CDDP in vitro in SiHa and HeLa cell line.
Cytotoxicity and cell cycle progression was determined with MTT assay and
FACS analysis, respectively. Poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation was assessed by
western blotting to determine PARP-1 enzymatic activity inhibition by
PJ34. Statistical analysis was done by two-tailed Student t tests using
GraphPad software and P-values were considered significant at BACKGROUND:
Manifestation of chemotherapy (Cisplatin) resistance is an important
cause of treatment failure in patients of locally advanced (FIGO stage,
IIB to IVA) cervix cancer. We hypothesised that Cisplatin (CDDP)
resistance might be associated with PARP-1 hyper-activation and
inhibition of PARP-1 enzyme through PJ34 could sensitise cells to
cisplatin mediated cytotoxicity.METHODS: We studied combined effect of
PJ34 (PARP-1 inhibitor) and CDDP in vitro in SiHa and HeLa cell line.
Cytotoxicity and cell cycle progression was determined with MTT assay and
FACS analysis, respectively. Poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation was assessed by
western blotting to determine PARP-1 enzymatic activity inhibition by
PJ34. Statistical analysis was done by two-tailed Student t tests using
GraphPad software and P-values were considered significant at
<0.05.RESULTS: In both cell lines, poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation was inhibited
by PJ34 when used at very low concentration ( 3M) and negligible band was
observed at concentrations selected for further experiments. In SiHa
cells, PJ34 significantly potentiated CDDP mediated cytotoxicity as
assessed by MTT assay (pBACKGROUND: Manifestation of chemotherapy
(Cisplatin) resistance is an important cause of treatment failure in
patients of locally advanced (FIGO stage, IIB to IVA) cervix cancer. We
hypothesised that Cisplatin (CDDP) resistance might be associated with
PARP-1 hyper-activation and inhibition of PARP-1 enzyme through PJ34
could sensitise cells to cisplatin mediated cytotoxicity.METHODS: We
studied combined effect of PJ34 (PARP-1 inhibitor) and CDDP in vitro in
SiHa and HeLa cell line. Cytotoxicity and cell cycle progression was
determined with MTT assay and FACS analysis, respectively.
Poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation was assessed by western blotting to determine
PARP-1 enzymatic activity inhibition by PJ34. Statistical analysis was
done by two-tailed Student t tests using GraphPad software and P-values
were considered significant at <0.05.RESULTS: In both cell lines,
poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation was inhibited by PJ34 when used at very low
concentration ( 3M) and negligible band was observed at concentrations
selected for further experiments. In SiHa cells, PJ34 significantly
potentiated CDDP mediated cytotoxicity as assessed by MTT assay (p<0.05).
Compared to CDDP alone, treatment with combination of PJ34 and CDDP lead
to decrease in CDDP IC50 value from 10.8M to 3.6M; 7.7M to 3.2M; 5.3M to
2.2M; 3.9M to 1.3M at 48 h, 72 h, 96 h and 120 h treatment, respectively
(p BACKGROUND: Manifestation of chemotherapy (Cisplatin) resistance is an
important cause of treatment failure in patients of locally advanced
(FIGO stage, IIB to IVA) cervix cancer. We hypothesised that Cisplatin
(CDDP) resistance might be associated with PARP-1 hyper-activation and
inhibition of PARP-1 enzyme through PJ34 could sensitise cells to
cisplatin mediated cytotoxicity.METHODS: We studied combined effect of
PJ34 (PARP-1 inhibitor) and CDDP in vitro in SiHa and HeLa cell line.
Cytotoxicity and cell cycle progression was determined with MTT assay and
FACS analysis, respectively. Poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation was assessed by
western blotting to determine PARP-1 enzymatic activity inhibition by
PJ34. Statistical analysis was done by two-tailed Student t tests using
GraphPad software and P-values were considered significant at
<0.05.RESULTS: In both cell lines, poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation was inhibited
by PJ34 when used at very low concentration ( 3M) and negligible band was
observed at concentrations selected for further experiments. In SiHa
cells, PJ34 significantly potentiated CDDP mediated cytotoxicity as
assessed by MTT assay (p<0.05). Compared to CDDP alone, treatment with
combination of PJ34 and CDDP lead to decrease in CDDP IC50 value from
10.8M to 3.6M; 7.7M to 3.2M; 5.3M to 2.2M; 3.9M to 1.3M at 48 h, 72 h, 96
h and 120 h treatment, respectively (p <0.01). In HeLa cells, treatment
with low concentration of PJ34 (for 24 h) increased survival as well as
CDDP IC50 value compared to CDDP alone. However, increase in incubation
time decreased both cell survival and CDDP IC50 value. At its higher
concentration, PJ34 significantly decreased cell survival (pBACKGROUND:
Manifestation of chemotherapy (Cisplatin) resistance is an important
cause of treatment failure in patients of locally advanced (FIGO stage,
IIB to IVA) cervix cancer. We hypothesised that Cisplatin (CDDP)
resistance might be associated with PARP-1 hyper-activation and
inhibition of PARP-1 enzyme through PJ34 could sensitise cells to
cisplatin mediated cytotoxicity.METHODS: We studied combined effect of
PJ34 (PARP-1 inhibitor) and CDDP in vitro in SiHa and HeLa cell line.
Cytotoxicity and cell cycle progression was determined with MTT assay and
FACS analysis, respectively. Poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation was assessed by
western blotting to determine PARP-1 enzymatic activity inhibition by
PJ34. Statistical analysis was done by two-tailed Student t tests using
GraphPad software and P-values were considered significant at
<0.05.RESULTS: In both cell lines, poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation was inhibited
by PJ34 when used at very low concentration ( 3M) and negligible band was
observed at concentrations selected for further experiments. In SiHa
cells, PJ34 significantly potentiated CDDP mediated cytotoxicity as
assessed by MTT assay (p<0.05). Compared to CDDP alone, treatment with
combination of PJ34 and CDDP lead to decrease in CDDP IC50 value from
10.8M to 3.6M; 7.7M to 3.2M; 5.3M to 2.2M; 3.9M to 1.3M at 48 h, 72 h, 96
h and 120 h treatment, respectively (p <0.01). In HeLa cells, treatment
with low concentration of PJ34 (for 24 h) increased survival as well as
CDDP IC50 value compared to CDDP alone. However, increase in incubation
time decreased both cell survival and CDDP IC50 value. At its higher
concentration, PJ34 significantly decreased cell survival (p<0.01), also
decrease in CDDP IC50 value was observed from 10M to 3.4M; 8.9M to 3.75M;
6.1uM to 2M and 5.2M to 1.1M at 24 h, 48 h, 72 h and 96 h treatment
respectively (p BACKGROUND: Manifestation of chemotherapy (Cisplatin)
resistance is an important cause of treatment failure in patients of
locally advanced (FIGO stage, IIB to IVA) cervix cancer. We hypothesised
that Cisplatin (CDDP) resistance might be associated with PARP-1
hyper-activation and inhibition of PARP-1 enzyme through PJ34 could
sensitise cells to cisplatin mediated cytotoxicity.METHODS: We studied
combined effect of PJ34 (PARP-1 inhibitor) and CDDP in vitro in SiHa and
HeLa cell line. Cytotoxicity and cell cycle progression was determined
with MTT assay and FACS analysis, respectively. Poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation
was assessed by western blotting to determine PARP-1 enzymatic activity
inhibition by PJ34. Statistical analysis was done by two-tailed Student t
tests using GraphPad software and P-values were considered significant at
<0.05.RESULTS: In both cell lines, poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation was inhibited
by PJ34 when used at very low concentration ( 3M) and negligible band was
observed at concentrations selected for further experiments. In SiHa
cells, PJ34 significantly potentiated CDDP mediated cytotoxicity as
assessed by MTT assay (p<0.05). Compared to CDDP alone, treatment with
combination of PJ34 and CDDP lead to decrease in CDDP IC50 value from
10.8M to 3.6M; 7.7M to 3.2M; 5.3M to 2.2M; 3.9M to 1.3M at 48 h, 72 h, 96
h and 120 h treatment, respectively (p <0.01). In HeLa cells, treatment
with low concentration of PJ34 (for 24 h) increased survival as well as
CDDP IC50 value compared to CDDP alone. However, increase in incubation
time decreased both cell survival and CDDP IC50 value. At its higher
concentration, PJ34 significantly decreased cell survival (p<0.01), also
decrease in CDDP IC50 value was observed from 10M to 3.4M; 8.9M to 3.75M;
6.1uM to 2M and 5.2M to 1.1M at 24 h, 48 h, 72 h and 96 h treatment
respectively (p <0.005). It is reported that CDDP causes cell cycle
arrest at late S, early G2/M phase and death at even higher dose, cell
cycle analysis revealed that PJ34 increased this late S, early G2/M block
and an increased cell death as evaluated by sub G0 peak, in both the cell
lines. PJ34, itself had minimum cytotoxic effect at concentrations used
in the study; IC50 value was determined to be 24.8M (24 h, p = 0.0068)
for HeLa and 60M (48 h, p = 0.00067) for SiHa.CONCLUSION: Suppression of
PARP-1 enzymatic activity makes cervix cancer cells more sensitive toward
CDDP induced toxicity. It seems to be a plausible mechanism for
CDDP-resistant cancer cells to develop a dependency to PARP-1. Thus,
PARP-1 enzyme inhibition could be explored as a potential therapy for
treating CDDP resistance in cancer cervix.

