Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Upregulated superoxide dismutase 2 by specificity protein 1
mediates temozolomide resistance in glioma stem cells


The resisitant mechanism of glioblastoma mutliforme (GBM) to the standard
chemotherapy temozolomide (TMZ) can be attributed to methylguanine
methyltransferase (MGMT) expression in only half of the clinical cases.
For the other half, it is not fully understood. To elucidate the
mechanism, MGMT-negative GBM cell lines, U87MG and A172, were used to
develop the TMZ-resistant variants. The variants showed reduced reactive
oxygen species (ROS) accumulation by TMZ treatment comparing to the
parental one. Further analysis of the cells revealed enhanced expression
of superoxide dismutases 2 (SOD2), an antioxidative enzyme, as well as
the stem cell-like properties. The protein was shown to associate with
glioma stem cells (GSC). Notably, inhibition of SOD2 by
diethyldithiocarbamate attenuated the stemness properties and the
viability of the resistant variants. Further investigation of the
promotor binding study suggested specificity protein 1 (Sp1) as the key
factor of the SOD2 response. Moreover, Sp1 expression was even enhanced
in the spheroid cells and the TMZ-resistant U87MG cell line. Conversely,
treatment with Sp1 inhibitor mithramycin A attenuates SOD2 expression and
the stemness properties of the resistant variants. In summary, our
results suggested a novel role of SOD2 in TMZ resistant mechanism of GBM.
Further study of Sp1-SOD2 pathway as a therapeutic target to restore
susceptibility of chemotherapy is therefore warranted.

