Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Legumain-contained exosomes mediate remodeling of tumor
extracellular matrix and protumor effects of TAMs


It has been recognized that tumor associated macrophages (TAMs) in tumor
microenvironment play a variety of pro-tumor effects during the tumor
progression, while the role of extracellular matrix in mediating these
effects is still unclear.In this study, we focus on elucidating the way
as well as the underlying mechanism about the involvement of an
asparaginyl endopeptidase, legumain in the crosstalk between TAMs and
ECM. Our data showed that co-culture of breast cancer cells 4T1 with
macrophages Raw 264.7 promoted asparaginyl endopeptidase, legumain,
expression with the introduction of markers of M2 - polarized macrophage.
Legumain was detected in the condition medium (CM) collected from RAW
264.7 co-cultured with 4T1 cells by western blotting, with the existence
of asparagine endopeptide enzyme activity assessed by enzyme activity
assay. Result of western blotting showed that adding the CM of RAW 264.7
co-cultured with 4T1 cells depleted extracellular matrix (ECM) contents,
fibronectin and collagen I. Transwell assay showed increased infiltration
of 4T1 cells through the ECM contents after treatment with the CM of RAW
264.7 co-cultured with 4T1 cells. Furthermore, treatment with CM of RAW
264.7 co-cultured with 4T1 suppressed the adhesion of endothelial cells
with ECM, promoting tube formation of endothelial cells compared with
control. All the above results could be abolished by synthesized legumain
inhibitor, RR-11a. Interestingly, legumain was also detected in the
exosomes isolated from CM of RAW 264.7 co-cultured with 4T1. Applying
legumain contained exosomes could replicate the effect of CM of RAW 264.7
co-cultured with 4T1 on the depletion of ECM contents, promotion of 4T1
infiltration and suppression of endothelial cell adhesion with
ECM.Altogether, our results suggest that legumain is overexpressed and
secreted out by TAMs; TAMs exosomes contain legumain and help delivering
legumain to the ECM thus exert its effect on the depletion of ECM,
pro-infiltration and angiogenesis.

