Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: LncRNA LINC00668 predicts a poor prognosis of gastric cancer and
promotes cell proliferation through epigenetically silencing of CKIs


Recently, long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) have been shown to have important
regulatory roles in human cancer biology. By utilizing publicly available
lncRNAs expression profiling data of gastric cancer and integrating
analyses, we screened out LINC00668, whose expression is significantly
increased and is correlated with outcomes in gastric cancer (GC). Further
experiments revealed that LINC00668 knockdown significantly repressed the
proliferation both in vitro and in vivo. Mechanistic investigations
showed that LINC00668 was a direct transcriptional target of E2F
transcription factor 1 (E2F1). Moreover, we also found that LINC00668
plays a key role in G0/G1 arrest, and further demonstrated that LINC00668
was associated with PRC2 and that this association was required for the
epigenetic repression of cyclin-dependent protein kinase inhibitors
(CKIs), including p15, p16, p21, p27 and p57, thus contributing to the
regulation of gastric cancer cell cycle. To our knowledge, this is the
first report showed that the role and molecular mechanism of LINC00668 in
cancer. Together, our results suggest that E2F1-regulated LINC00668, as a
cell cycle regulator, enriches a mechanistic link between lncRNA and
E2F1-mediated cell cycle regulation pathway and may serve as a candidate
prognostic biomarker and target for new therapies in human gastric
cancer.Key words: E2F1; LINC00668; cell cycle; proliferation; gastric
cancerAcknowledgements: The work was partly supported by the National 973
Basic Research Program of China (Grant No. 2013CB911300) grants from the
National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 81272469,
81502071 and 81572928) and the clinical special project for Natural
Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province (Grant No. BL2012016), and the
grant from Nanjing 12th Five-Year key Scientific Project of medicine to
Dr. Jinfei Chen.

