Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sann-Joong-Kuey-Jian-Tang can inhibit human breast cancer cells
through dural- blocking both the Ras/Raf/MEK/ERK and Ras/PI3K/Akt/mTOR
pathways


Sann-Joong-Kuey-Jian-Tang (SJKJT) consists of 17 species of medicinal
herbs, is a traditional Chinese medicine prescription, and has been used
as complementary medication for a number of types of solid cancer in
Taiwan. Transmembrane tyrosine kinase has been strongly implicated in the
growth, survival, and metastasis of a wide variety of human tumors. The
phosphoinositide-3-kinase (PI3K)/AKT/ mammalian target of rapamycin
(mTOR) and RAS/RAF/MEK/ERK pathways are two of the most frequently
dysregulated kinase cascades in human cancer were well documented. Both
pathways represent important signal transduction mechanisms that
facilitate the proliferation and survival of cancers driven by growth
factor receptors, such as vascular endothelial growth factor receptor
(VEGFR), insulin-like growth factor-I receptor (IGF-IR), human epidermal
growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) or epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR).The individual downstream components of these signaling cascades
either through somatic mutation or epigenetic modification, are also
known to be frequently altered in cancer, thus contributing to
tumorigenesis and resistance to anticancer therapies. Targeting both the
Ras/Raf/MEK/ERK and Ras/PI3K/Akt/mTOR Pathways for suppressing Inhibitor
Resistant Cells is necessary. In the present study, the human breast
cancer BT-20 and MCF-7 cells were treated with SJKJT in vitro. The
cytotoxicity of SJKJT were evaluated by
3(4,5dimethylthiazol2y1)2,5diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) assay. The
effects of SJKJT on the protein expressions of VEGFR, IGF-IR, PI3K, AKT,
mTOR, Ras, Raf, MEK and ERK and -actin in the BT-20 and MCF-7 cells were
examined by western blot analysis. The results showed that SJKJT can
induce the proliferation inhibition with time and dose dependent. As a
potential mechanism, it was noted that SJKJT treatment significantly
inhibited the activity of the Ras/Raf/MEK/ERK and Ras/PI3K/Akt/mTOR
pathways, which played a protective role against the cytotoxicity. In
addition, it was demonstrated that SJKJT treatment inhibited the protein
expressions of VEGFR, EGFR and IGF-IR significantly. These results
suggest that one of the molecular mechanisms for SJKJT to inhibit breast
cancer BT-20 and MCF-7 cells maybe through inhibiting the protein
expressions of VEGFR, EGFR, IGF-IR and both Ras/Raf/MEK/ERK and
Ras/PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathways. The use of traditional chinese medicine
prescription SJKJT may become a feasible novel therapy option. Further
studies are warranted to fully elucidate its mechanisms of action.

