Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Long lasting CR status of stage IV gall bladder cancer and colon
cancer after combined treatment including autologous formalin-fixed tumor
vaccine (AFTV)


(INTRODUCTION) The prognosis of advanced (stage IV) cancer is very poor.
However, we have already reported two cases of eradication of advanced
breast cancer with bone metastasis (AACR 2013 and AACR 2015) after
combined treatments including AFTV. We here additionally report
successful cases of gall bladder cancer (stage IV, liver metastasis) and
colon cancer (stage IV, lung metastasis).(CASE 1) A 61-year-old female
with stage IV gall bladder cancer (T3N1M1: liver metastasis) was operated
in May 2011 including partial resection of liver. She was treated with,
as the first-line adjuvant therapy, AFTV followed with conventional
chemotherapy. This patient is still alive without any recurrence
confirmed by CT etc.(CASE 2) A 60 year-old male with stage IV (N3, H0,
P1, M1: lung, lt. adrenal gland, abdominal wall) was operated in August
2009. Then conventional chemotherapy, 2 courses of AFTV and radiation
were applied sequentially. No recurrence was observed for more than 5
years.(DISCUSSION) We diagnosed both patients staying at long lasting
complete remission. The prognoses of stage IV gall bladder cancer and
abdominal wall-metastasized colon cancer are very poor despite of
conventional treatments. Adverse effects of AFTV were less than grade 2,
therefore combination therapies including AFTV are worth to consider,
although larger scale clinical trial is essential.

