Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genome-wide mistargeting of oncogenic SWI/SNF(BAF) complexes in
SMARCB1(BAF47)-deficient sarcomas


SMARCB1/BAF47/INI1 is a core subunit of the mammalian SWI/SNF (BAF)
family of ATP-dependent chromatin remodeling complexes, which remodel
nucleosome architecture to achieve coordinated regulation of gene
expression. Genetic loss of SMARCB1 has been identified in several cancer
types, including malignant rhabdoid tumor (MRT, 98%) and epithelioid
sarcoma (EpS, 90%), strongly implicating this event as the oncogenic
driver in these malignancies. However, the precise mechanism underpinning
the tumor suppressive function of BAF47 to date remains unclear. In order
to elucidate the underlying mechanism and to identify direct genetic
targets of aberrant BAF complexes in this context, we comprehensively
evaluated the effects of BAF47 reintroduction in BAF47-deficient sarcomas
with respect to complex subunit and associated protein factor composition
and stability, global chromatin structure, and gene
regulation.Reintroduced BAF47 stably integrated into BAF complexes, and
remarkably, stabilized a highly specific set of BAF subunits, resulting
in an increased complex molecular weight and stoichiometric nuclear
abundance. These biochemical changes inducing the formation of wild-type
complexes in MRT and EpS cell settings were directly linked to
reproducible changes in BAF complex localization genome-wide,
particularly, in the targeting to H3K4me3-marked promoter regions of
direct target genes to establish DNA accessibility. Importantly, changes
in BAF47-dependent BAF complex targeting between oncogenic and induced
wild-type conditions were reproducibly associated with differential
chromatin architecture and gene expression signatures hallmark to both
MRT and EpS, and uniformly resulted in proliferative senescence of MRT
and EpS cell lines in culture.These studies highlight, for the first
time, the full spectrum of structural and functional contributions of the
BAF47 subunit, implicating its role as a keystone in heteromorphic BAF
complex assembly; BAF47 is required for the stable integration of several
BAF subunits and novel interacting factors, which we determine govern
specific genome-wide targeting mechanisms and chromatin-templated
activities. These results reveal the mechanisms underlying the
oncogenesis of BAF47-deficient sarcomas and point toward novel
therapeutic strategies for this group of human sarcomas.

