Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Intra-tumoral accumulation of NK1.1/CD3+ cells and anti-metastasis
effects of dose-intensified ONC201 in tumor-bearing mice


ONC201, a novel first-in-class, orally active anti-tumor agent that
upregulates the cytotoxic ligand TRAIL (Allen et al., Sci. Trans. Med.,
2013; Wagner et al., Oncotarget, 2014), activates the integrated stress
response leading to tumor cell upregulation of TRAIL death receptor 5
(Kline et al., Sci. Sig., in press). ONC201 is active against bulk tumor
and cancer stem cells (Prabhu et al., Can. Res., 2015). ONC201 is under
clinical development by Oncoceutics, and is being evaluated in multiple
phase I/II clinical trials. Results of the first-in-human ONC201 study
presented at the 2015 AACR-NCI-EORTC meeting (Stein et al., Abstract
C138) demonstrated ONC201 to be safe in humans, to exhibit predicted PK
and sustained PD characteristics, and revealed a preliminary efficacy
signal. As patients were dosed on an every 3-week schedule, based on
supportive preclinical data, we investigated dose-intensification of
ONC201 to determine whether a higher dose/frequency schedule might impact
efficacy with limited toxicity. We hypothesized that ONC201 may be
effective in dose-intensified schedule and may inhibit metastases. We
tested a range of ONC201 doses including 25, 50, and 100 mg/kg and
frequencies including every 4, 3, 2, 1 week as well as twice a week
dosing. In colon and triple-negative breast cancer we observed that
ONC201 exerts a dose- and schedule-dependent effect on tumor progression
in vivo. Frequency effects were more pronounced at lower doses and
dose-dependency was more impactful with less frequent schedules. We noted
a potent anti-metastasis effect of ONC201 in vivo, not previously
reported, as a function of both increased ONC201 dose and frequency of
administration. ONC201 inhibits cancer cell migration and invasion in
vitro in a TRAIL-dependent manner. We found ONC201 more potently
suppresses Akt and ERK in tumors in vivo in a dose- and
frequency-dependent manner, whereas its effect on TRAIL serum levels
appeared to be impacted by frequency. We observed accumulation of
CD3+/NK1.1+ cells within ONC201-treated tumors in athymic nude mice that
lack T-cells. Accumulation of CD3+/NK1.1 cells within ONC201-treated
tumors was more pronounced with dose intensification that correlated with
superior efficacy. In summary, we have uncovered a potent anti-metastasis
effect of ONC201 coupled with the appearance of CD3+/NK1.1+ cells within
ONC201-treated tumors. We are further evaluating the biomarker
characteristics and immune function of the CD3+/NK1.1+ cells and the
relationship of their intra-tumoral accumulation to observed anti-tumor
effects of ONC201, including in fully immunocompetent mice. Our results
suggest that clinical investigation of both dose and frequency of ONC201
administration is warranted and is being evaluated in an ongoing clinical
trial (NCT02609230).

