Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combination treatments with retinoic acid and the synthetic
retinoid ST1926 in 2D and 3D breast cancer models overcome retinoic acid
resistance and eradicate breast cancer stem/progenitor cells


Despite recent advances in breast cancer therapy, achieving complete
remission in metastatic breast cancer patients remains a challenge.
Retinoids are crucial regulators of cellular proliferation,
differentiation, and cell death, and have shown potent chemotherapeutic
and chemopreventive properties. The major drawback of the use of
all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) in cancer therapy is acquired resistance.
Therefore, synthetic retinoids such as ST1926 emerged as potent
anti-cancer agents. Here, we investigated the anti-tumor activities of
ATRA, ST1926, and their combination treatments in 2D and 3D human breast
cancer models and their targeting of breast cancer stem cells
(CSCs)/progenitor cells. We have shown that in 2D culture models, MCF-7
and MDA-MB-231 cells are resistant to ATRA while being sensitive to
ST1926 at sub-micromolar (M) concentrations in an irreversible manner.
Importantly, ST1926 had no effect on the normal-like MCF-10A breast
epithelial cells. ST1926 induced massive apoptosis in MCF-7 cells and it
resulted in S-phase arrest and necrosis in the triple negative and
metastatic MDA-MB-231 cells. Furthermore, ST1926 caused early DNA damage,
increased the expression of the tumor suppressors p53 and p21,
downregulated the Wnt/-catenin pathway, and modulated the expression
levels of the different retinoid receptors. Interestingly, combination
treatments as low as 0.1 M ST1926 and 0.5 M ATRA synergistically
inhibited the proliferation in 2D models of MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 cells,
independently of retinoid receptor signaling, while sparing the normal
breast epithelial cells. Anchorage-independent growth of MCF-7 and
MDA-MB-231 cells was examined using the soft agar colony formation assay
where sub-M concentrations of ST1926 or M concentrations of ATRA were
shown to reduce the size and the number of breast cancer colonies. ST1926
drastically induced cell death in 3D Matrigel on-top assay cultures of
breast cancer cells while the lumen of the normal-like breast epithelial
cell line S1 was maintained. Finally, treatment with 0.01 M ST1926 alone
or 0.001 M ST1926 in combination with 0.1 M ATRA abrogated sphere
formation and the self-renewal ability of breast CSCs in the 3D sphere
formation assay. In summary, ST1926, ATRA, and their combination
treatments were shown to display more potent anti-tumor properties in 3D
versus 2D human breast cancer models. Our results also demonstrate the
therapeutic potential of ST1926 in sensitizing breast cancer cells to
ATRA and in targeting the population of breast CSCs. As 3D culture models
are more representative of the tumor microenvironment and serve as valid
tools in drug discovery, our results highlight the promising use of
ATRA/ST1926 combinations in metastatic and triple negative breast cancers.

