Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phosphoproteomic-based identification of CDK8/CDK19 substrates in
colorectal cancer


IntroductionCDK8 is an oncogenic cyclin-dependent kinase that exists as
part of the kinase module within the Mediator complex. This complex
interacts with the transcription machinery to regulate transcription;
signal transduction pathways, including the WNT pathway; and biological
processes, such as cell cycle progression. Recently, we identified a
series of 3,4,5-trisubstituted pyridines as inhibitors of CDK8 and, its
paralogue, CDK19 in colorectal cancer (CRC). Until now, there have been
few validated substrates of CDK8/19. Here, we describe a motif-based
phospho-proteomic approach, utilizing our 3,4,5-trisubstituted pyridine
inhibitors that we have used to identify substrates of CDK8/19. These
substrates could represent useful biomarkers for future drug discovery
research.Experimental OutlineWe used a COLO205 cell line (COLO205 C4)
carrying a TCF/LEF reporter construct responsive to CDK8/19 inhibition
and CCT251545, a compound we have previously shown to be a potent and
selective inhibitor of CDK8/19. Cells were treated with 350 nM CCT251545
(10 x EC50) for 2 or 6 hours. Proteins were then extracted from treated
and control cells, trypsin-digested and immunoprecipitated for
phospho-peptide enrichment using proline-directed motifs: PXS*P, S*PXR/K,
PXS*PXR/K + T*PE + ST*P + K/HS*P. Potential substrates were identified by
LC-MS/MS and validated by immunoprecipitation and western blotting.
Substrates were validated in another CRC cell line, SW620, which harbors
CRISPR knockouts for CDK8/19.Summary of ResultsLC-MS/MS analyses of
COLO205 C4 cell extracts revealed a number of potential CDK8/19
substrates, including some Mediator complex subunits such as MED13,
transcriptional coactivators such as HCFC1, and transcription factors
such as STAT1. Phosphorylation of STAT1SER727 was the top ranked hit and
follow-up studies, in COLO205 C4 cells and xenografts, confirmed
repression of STAT1SER727 phosphorylation in the presence of CCT251545.
An inactive analogue, CCT251099, and other kinase inhibitors
(flavopiridol, KN-93, PD 0325901 and SB 202190) did not block STAT1SER727
phosphorylation. Repression of STAT1SER727 phosphorylation upon treatment
with CCT251545 was also observed in SW620 and LS174T CRC cells and
xenografts.ConclusionA motif-driven, mass spectroscopy-based
phospho-proteomic study identified candidate substrates of CDK8/19.
Phosphorylation of STAT1SER727 was validated as a useful marker of target
engagement in CRC cell lines both in vitro and in vivo.

