Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Src mediates acquired resistance to ALK inhibitor in
ALK-rearranged non-small cell lung cancers


ALK tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) play a significant role in the
treatment of ALK-rearranged non-small cell lung cancer patients.After the
significant initial response to ALK-TKIs, the emergence of acquired
resistance ultimately occur for all patients.Understanding the origin of
resistance mechanisms within a patient is crucial to guide treatment and
developing drugs/combinations to circumvent resistance.There are reported
that some of the tyrosine kinases are involving by bypassing ALK
signaling, but comprehensive identification of proteins that are
significant for acquired resistance in ALK-TKIs is still
required.Quantitative proteomic analysis provides a powerful approach in
screening for alterations in protein levels. An analysis of the
differential proteins expression between original cancer cell and
acquired resistance cell would be useful for identification of proteins
drug resistance.To investigate the changes of chaperon holding proteins,
ALK rearranged-cell line H3122 were used. ALK-TKI Alectinib resistant
cell lines were established by exposing increased dose of alectinib to
ALK rearranged H3122 cell line (AFR). Luminespib (AUY922, Novartis
Pharm.) was used as HSP90 inhibitor and Saracatinib (Selleck Chemicals.)
was used as Src inhibitor in this study.We used iTRAQ (isobaric tags for
relative and absolute quantitation) technology using nano-LC-MS/MS
analysis, to identify alterations in H3122 protein levels of pre/post
HSP90 inhibitor treatment. For further analysis, protein expression was
measured by western blot. To assess the cancer cell growth inhibition for
ALK and/or Src inhibitors, we used colony formation assay.Our results
revealed that Crk-Src related proteins were overexpressed in ALK TKI
resistance cells and had a significant protein expression changes after
HSP90 inhibitor treatment. To address the impact of overcoming resistance
by blocking Crk-Src pathway, Drugs/combinations with ALK inhibitor and/or
Src inhibitors showed that significant treatment effect in vitro and in
vivo study using tumor-bearing mouse model.ConclusionSrc is one of the
significant signaling pathways in the ALK-rearranged NSCLCs resistant to
ALK-TKIs including alectinib, and inhibiting Src signaling could be a
potential target for ALK-rearranged NSCLC after ALK-TKI resistance.

