Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pan-cancer analysis of fusion gene druggability and neoantigen
potential


Fusion genes are a well known type of oncogenic mutation, in which a
genomic rearrangement, such as e.g. a translocation, inversion or
deletion, joins together parts of two genes, which normally are not
located adjacent to each other. In the context of cancer driver
mutations, the result of this rearrangement is a novel chimeric gene with
oncogenic potential. While fusion genes have been known longest in
hematological malignancies, over the last years they have been shown to
occur in nearly all types of cancers studied. Notable examples include
ETS-family fusions, such as TMPRSS2-ERG, in prostate cancer.In previous
work, we have used our FusionSCOUT fusion gene detection pipeline to
analyze over 8000 cancer samples from 28 different TCGA cancer types. In
this study, we extend this target discovery to further characterize the
genomic alteration contexts in which gene fusions occur, both by
examining the copy number states at inferred rearrangement breakpoints,
as well as by correlating the numbers of fusion genes identified in
tumors with the level of genomic instability in the tumors. We also
analyze the frequency at which different druggable protein domains occur
in fusion genes, comparing these to the expected random distribution.
Finally, we predict, for each tumor, the neoantigen potential of the
identified fusion proteins and compare this to the same predictions for
simple somatic mutations, in order to characterize the contribution of
fusion proteins to neoantigen load.In summary, we extend our pan-cancer
fusion gene identification analysis with a detailed characterization of
the genomic alteration contexts at which fusion genes occur. We also
report on the drug treatment potential of fusion genes, both in terms of
small molecule drugs, as well as highlight the degree to which fusion
gene derived chimeric proteins should be taken into account when
estimating the neoantigen load of tumors.

