Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Patient-derived tumor xenografts in humanized NSG-SGM3 mice: a new
immuno-oncology platform


Humanized mice engrafted with tumors enable in vivo investigation of the
interactions between the human immune system and human cancer. We have
recently found that humanized NOD-scid IL2Rnull (NSG) mice bearing
patient-derived xenografts (PDX) allow efficacy studies of check-point
inhibitors. Next generation NSG strains include triple transgenic NSG
mice expressing human cytokines KITLG, CSF2, and IL-3 (NSG-SGM3). Here we
provide a direct comparison of check-point inhibitors evaluation in NSG
and NSG-SGM3 mice engrafted with CD34+ human hematopoietic progenitor
cells (HPCs) from the same donor and implanted with PDX tumors.
Corroborating earlier studies, reconstitution of human immune system in
the blood was faster and more robust in NSG-SGM3 compared to NSG
recipients throughout the course of the study (18 weeks). Human CD45+
cells reached 25% of total blood cells at week 4 in hu-NSG-SGM3 mice and
at week 9 in hu-NSG mice. A majority of blood hCD45+ cells in hu-NSG-SGM3
at week 4 were CD33+ myeloid cells. Circulating hCD3+ T cells reached 10%
at week 9 and included regulatory T cells (Tregs), consistent with
earlier studies. Hu-NSG mice displayed comparable hCD3+ T cells in the
blood only at 12-15 weeks and did not contain Tregs. PDX tumors were then
engrafted into partially HLA-matched hu-NSG-SGM3 mice at 9 weeks post
engraftment. Two PDX models previously shown to respond to anti-PD1
therapy in hu-NSG mice, BR1126 and LG1306, were used. Treatment with the
anti-PD-1 receptor antibody pembrolizumab (Keytruda) significantly
reduced tumor growth in both models. Thus, PDX-bearing hu-NSG-SGM3 mice
might serve as a new and improved platform for preclinical
immuno-oncology efficacy studies.

