Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Flow cytometry multiplexing used to analyze metabolic activity and
assess pharmaceutical compound toxicity as a high throughput screening
tool


High throughput screening (HTS) is an extremely effective method for
allowing researchers to identify putative active compounds for
therapeutics. Recently, flow cytometry has emerged as a powerful HTS tool
with the added benefit of cell-by-cell analysis. Flow cytometry allows a
researcher to study protein-protein interactions, metabolic activities,
as well as DNA content in a single or multiplexed assay format. For this
study, we screened the Tocriscreen Total compound library and compared
HTS using a plate reader with flow cytometer multiplexing.Peripheral
blood mononuclear (PBMCs) and Jurkat cells were used as cell models.
Cells were cultured under standard conditions and either at normoxic (5%)
or hyperoxic (19%) oxygen levels. We also varied length of time the cells
were treated with compound library (24, 48, or 72 hrs). Membrane
integrity and metabolic activity were measured as an output for
evaluating cellular viability. To further assess cellular activity,
post-screening analysis was implemented to establish EC50s of hits from
compound library.Screening analysis identified target drugs that were
further analyzed using cell health readouts with different mechanisms of
action to assess compound toxicity. Results indicate that compound hits
and potency differed in the screen depending on cell type, the
mechanistic readout, length of compound exposure, and mode of readout
used to perform the HTS experiments.

