Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Improved delivery of paclitaxel to prostate tumors: a
membrane-type matrix metalloproteinase (MT-MMP)-targeted approach


Introduction : Membrane-type matrix metalloproteinases (MT-MMPs) are
highly active in prostate tumours, but absent or inactive in normal
tissues. MT-MMPs are also known to be elevated in the majority of solid
human tumours and to be central to tumor invasion and angiogenesis. Our
objective has been to design inactive prodrugs of paclitaxel that are
converted to the active drug by selected MMPs within the prostate tumor
microenvironment.Methods and Results : We report the synthesis and
biological evaluation of a new series of peptide-based conjugates of
paclitaxel designed to be selectively cleaved by MT-MMPs in the tumour
microenvironment. Paclitaxel is conjugated to the peptide C-terminus via
a self-immolative linker, while the N-terminus is protected from
non-specific exopeptidase cleavage through the use of a masking group.The
relative importance of individual amino acids within the MT-MMP peptide
recognition sequence has been investigated following extensive ex vivo
metabolic studies. These studies employed tissue homogenates to assess
activation of prodrug conjugates in tumour (PC-3) tissues and stability
in normal tissues (liver kidney lung). ICTTax5 emerged as our lead agent,
demonstrating in vitro stability in normal tissue with differential
release of free paclitaxel in tumour tissue.Further in vivo murine
pharmacokinetic studies monitoring paclitaxel release in liver, lung,
kidney heart and plasma revealed a substantial increase in tumour
exposure to paclitaxel following ICTTax5 prodrug administration (20mg/kg)
compared to the molar equivalent dose of paclitaxel alone (7mg/kg). AUC
(uM.h) ratios of paclitaxel released from ICTTax5 compared to paclitaxel
administered alone were 16.2 for tumour and in the range of 0.05-0.99 for
normal tissues. Similar highly significant changes in Cmax were
demonstrated with a 10-fold (9.77) increase in tumour concentrations and
a substantially decreased Cmax ratio (0.02 - 0.19) in other tissues when
administered as ICTTax5.Anti-tumour efficacy studies (PC3 xenografts)
resulted in a highly significant growth delay following single dose
administration of ICTTax5 [20mg/kg] with paclitaxel alone (7mg/kg; the
molar equivalent dose to the paclitaxel released from ICTTax5) having no
significant anti-tumour effect.Conclusion : A series of peptide-based
prodrug conjugates of paclitaxel were synthesized. ICTTax5 was identified
as the lead molecule, enabling selective delivery of active paclitaxel to
PC3 prostate tumours resulting in superior pharmacokinetics and efficacy
when compared to delivery of paclitaxel alone.

