Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development and clinical application of an integrative genomic
approach to personalized cancer therapy


We implemented a personalized cancer therapy (PCT) program in a clinical
setting, applying an integrative genomics approach to maximally elucidate
the complexity of each tumor. For patients in the study, we performed
whole exome sequencing and SNP microarrays on tumor and patient-matched
normal samples, as well as RNA sequencing on available frozen samples, to
identify somatic mutations, copy number alterations, gene fusions, and
gene expression alterations in the tumor. Ion AmpliSeq Cancer Hotspot
Panel v2 (CHPv2) was used to ensure high sensitivity in cancer mutation
hotspots. Genomics results were integrated with cancer knowledge
databases and for each cancer type a specific workflow was developed to
optimize data interpretation. We returned genomics findings to 46
patients and their physicians, characterizing somatic alterations and
predicting drug response, toxicity, and prognosis. Mean 17.3
cancer-relevant somatic mutations per patient were identified, 13.3-,
6.9-, and 4.7-fold more than could have been detected using CHPv2,
Oncomine Cancer Panel (OCP), and FoundationOne, respectively. Our
approach delineated the underlying genetic drivers at the pathway level
and provided meaningful predictions of therapeutic efficacy and toxicity.
Actionable alterations were found in 91% of patients (mean 4.9 per
patient, including somatic mutations, copy number alterations, gene
expression alterations, and germline variants), a 7.5-fold, 2.0-fold, and
1.9-fold increase over what could have been uncovered by CHPv2, OCP, and
FoundationOne, respectively. The findings altered the course of treatment
in 4 cases. These results show that a comprehensive, integrative genomic
approach as outlined above significantly enhanced genomics-based
personalized cancer therapy strategies.

