Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: E2F1 impairs all-trans retinoic acid-induced osteogenic
differentiation of osteosarcoma by promoting ubiquitination-mediated
degradation of RARa


Objective: All-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) is a widely-used
differentiation drug that can effectively induce osteogenic
differentiation of osteosarcoma cells, but the underlying mechanism
remains elusive, which limits the clinical application for ATRA in
osteosarcoma patients. In this study, we identified E2F1 as a novel
regulator involved in ATRA induced osteogenic differentiation of
osteosarcoma cells.Methods: Osteosarcoma cell lines were used as our
research models. (1) Protein levels were detected by Western blotting;
(2) The interactions between E2F1 and RARalpha were determined by
immunofluorescence, immunoprecipitation and GST pull-down assay; (3) The
mRNA levels were determined by RT-PCR; (4) Related proteins and genes
were investigated via transfection; (5) RARE activity were detected by
luciferase reporter assay. (6) Alkaline phosphatase activity was assessed
by colorimetric assay using BCIP/NBT Alkaline Phosphatase Color
Development kit. Results: We observed that osteosarcoma cells are coupled
with individual differences in the expression levels of E2F1 in patients,
and E2F1 impairs ATRA-induced differentiation of osteosarcoma cells.
Moreover, remarkable anti-proliferative and differentiation-inducing
effects of ATRA treatment are only observed in E2F1 low to negative
expressed primary osteosarcoma cultures. These results strongly suggested
that E2F1 may serve as a potent indicator for the effectiveness of ATRA
treatment in osteosarcoma. Interestingly, E2F1 is found to down-regulate
retinoic acid receptor (RAR), a key factor determines the effectiveness
of ATRA. E2F1 specifically binds to RAR and promotes its
ubiquitination-mediated degradation; as a consequence, RAR-mediated
differentiation is inhibited in osteosarcoma.Conclusion: E2F1 may serve
as a potent biomarker as well as a therapeutic target for ATRA-based
differentiation therapeutics, and raise the hope of using
differentiation-based approaches for osteosarcoma patients.

