Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prostate cancer risk factor profiles in black and white men in the
NIH-AARP Diet and Health Study


Background: Few well-established prostate cancer risk factors exist, and
associations with modifiable factors, such as diet/nutrient intake and
other health-related parameters, have primarily been identified in
non-Hispanic white populations. In this study we examined whether prior
associations explain prostate cancer risk in non-Hispanic black men
and/or underlie some of the black-white difference in risk.Methods:
Race-specific associations between diet, nutrient intake, and other
factors and prostate cancer risk in black (N = 7,030) and white (N =
230,968) men in the NIH-AARP cohort were examined. During an average of
9.4 years of follow-up, there were 1,049 incident cases among black men
(156 advanced stage), and 21,301 cases among white men (2,677 advanced).
Cox proportional hazards regression models estimated prostate cancer
hazard ratios (HR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI). We also evaluated
the change in the HR for black race following addition of each factor to
the model.Results: Race-specific parsimonious prostate cancer models
showed similar black and white associations only for history of diabetes
(black men HR = 0.79, 95%CI: 0.65-0.95; and white men HR = 0.72, 95% CI:
0.68-0.77). For all other risk factors examined, the associations were
either similar but did not reach statistical significance in black men
(i.e., for body mass index, smoking status, and tomato intake), or
differed by race. For example, in white men we observed a null
association with non-advanced disease for height (per 10 cm increase, HR
= 1.01, 95% CI: 0.99-1.03), and an inverse association in black men (HR =
0.91, 95% CI: 0.82-0.996; p for interaction = 0.03). Similarly, a
positive association was evident between dietary vitamin D intake and
non-advanced disease in white men (highest versus lowest quintile, HR =
1.11, 95% CI: 1.05-1.18), with an inverse association in black men (HR =
0.88, 95% CI: 0.71-1.10; p for interaction = 0.04). Risk of advanced
disease showed a null association with alcohol consumption in white men (
6 drinks/day versus never drinkers, HR = 0.96, 95% CI: 0.78-1.20) and a
statistically significant direct relation in black men (HR = 2.19, 95%
CI: 1.04-4.59; p for interaction = 0.15). Overall, adjustment for the
risk factors increased the hazard ratio for black race by 23% (1.73 to
1.90) for non-advanced and 13% (2.03 to 2.16) for advanced
disease.Conclusions: Our data suggest that many factors thought to
influence prostate cancer risk in predominantly non-Hispanic white
populations explain only a small proportion of black male risk, or the
black-white difference in risk. Dietary vitamin D intake, height, and
alcohol consumption associations with prostate cancer risk may vary
between black and white men.

