Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MiRNA and piRNA expression profiles in renal cell carcinoma tissue
detected by next generation sequencing


MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are the class of small non-coding RNAs, about 21-25
nucleotides in length, that play an important role in regulation of
transcription. They affect gene expression at post-transcriptional levels
through binding to complementary mRNAs and mediate their degradation in
RISC complex. Piwi-interacting RNAs (piRNAs) is newly discovered class of
non-coding RNA. PiRNAs are short single-stranded RNAs with 26-31
nucleotides in length. They are involved in silencing of transposable
elements and it is assumed that also participate in sequence-specific
chromatin modifications. It was repeatedly shown that piRNAs are present
also in somatic cells and are dysregulated in kidney, bladder, gastric,
breast, pancreatic and liver cancers. According to small non-coding RNA
databases there are about 2600 mature miRNAs and more than 24 000 piRNAs
in humans. There were extensive studies aiming to discover miRNAs and to
analyze their functions. However, there are only few published studies of
miRNA and piRNA profiles in renal cell carcinoma (RCC) using next
generation sequencing (NGS) technology.In our study we used the tumor
tissue and the paired adjacent non-tumor renal parenchyma of 12 patients
(8 males and 4 females) with RCC treated in Masaryk Memorial Cancer
Institute (Brno, Czech Republic). RNA was isolated with mirVana miRNA
Isolation Kit. For preparing RNA library was used TruSeq Small RNA Sample
Preparation Kit from Illumina and then the miSeq sequencing technology
was employed to detect small RNAs.In our 12 paired samples of tumor
tissue and the paired adjacent non-tumor renal parenchyma we detected 283
miRNAs with over 1 read in at least 7 samples. Expression levels of 55
miRNAs were significantly different expressed (p MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are
the class of small non-coding RNAs, about 21-25 nucleotides in length,
that play an important role in regulation of transcription. They affect
gene expression at post-transcriptional levels through binding to
complementary mRNAs and mediate their degradation in RISC complex.
Piwi-interacting RNAs (piRNAs) is newly discovered class of non-coding
RNA. PiRNAs are short single-stranded RNAs with 26-31 nucleotides in
length. They are involved in silencing of transposable elements and it is
assumed that also participate in sequence-specific chromatin
modifications. It was repeatedly shown that piRNAs are present also in
somatic cells and are dysregulated in kidney, bladder, gastric, breast,
pancreatic and liver cancers. According to small non-coding RNA databases
there are about 2600 mature miRNAs and more than 24 000 piRNAs in humans.
There were extensive studies aiming to discover miRNAs and to analyze
their functions. However, there are only few published studies of miRNA
and piRNA profiles in renal cell carcinoma (RCC) using next generation
sequencing (NGS) technology.In our study we used the tumor tissue and the
paired adjacent non-tumor renal parenchyma of 12 patients (8 males and 4
females) with RCC treated in Masaryk Memorial Cancer Institute (Brno,
Czech Republic). RNA was isolated with mirVana miRNA Isolation Kit. For
preparing RNA library was used TruSeq Small RNA Sample Preparation Kit
from Illumina and then the miSeq sequencing technology was employed to
detect small RNAs.In our 12 paired samples of tumor tissue and the paired
adjacent non-tumor renal parenchyma we detected 283 miRNAs with over 1
read in at least 7 samples. Expression levels of 55 miRNAs were
significantly different expressed (p < 0.05) in tumor tissue and adjacent
non-tumor parenchyma. Among miRNAs with the most significantly altered
expression (p MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are the class of small non-coding RNAs,
about 21-25 nucleotides in length, that play an important role in
regulation of transcription. They affect gene expression at
post-transcriptional levels through binding to complementary mRNAs and
mediate their degradation in RISC complex. Piwi-interacting RNAs (piRNAs)
is newly discovered class of non-coding RNA. PiRNAs are short
single-stranded RNAs with 26-31 nucleotides in length. They are involved
in silencing of transposable elements and it is assumed that also
participate in sequence-specific chromatin modifications. It was
repeatedly shown that piRNAs are present also in somatic cells and are
dysregulated in kidney, bladder, gastric, breast, pancreatic and liver
cancers. According to small non-coding RNA databases there are about 2600
mature miRNAs and more than 24 000 piRNAs in humans. There were extensive
studies aiming to discover miRNAs and to analyze their functions.
However, there are only few published studies of miRNA and piRNA profiles
in renal cell carcinoma (RCC) using next generation sequencing (NGS)
technology.In our study we used the tumor tissue and the paired adjacent
non-tumor renal parenchyma of 12 patients (8 males and 4 females) with
RCC treated in Masaryk Memorial Cancer Institute (Brno, Czech Republic).
RNA was isolated with mirVana miRNA Isolation Kit. For preparing RNA
library was used TruSeq Small RNA Sample Preparation Kit from Illumina
and then the miSeq sequencing technology was employed to detect small
RNAs.In our 12 paired samples of tumor tissue and the paired adjacent
non-tumor renal parenchyma we detected 283 miRNAs with over 1 read in at
least 7 samples. Expression levels of 55 miRNAs were significantly
different expressed (p < 0.05) in tumor tissue and adjacent non-tumor
parenchyma. Among miRNAs with the most significantly altered expression
(p < 0.01) were for example, miR-129, miR-138, miR-142, miR-149, miR-154,
miR-155, miR-200b, miR-210, miR-218, miR-340, miR-584, miR-885, miR-891a,
miR-1270, miR-3690 and miR-7641. After analyzing piRNA sequences we found
440 piRNAs with over 1 read in at least 7 samples. From these piRNAs were
38 piRNAs significantly deregulated (pMicroRNAs (miRNAs) are the class of
small non-coding RNAs, about 21-25 nucleotides in length, that play an
important role in regulation of transcription. They affect gene
expression at post-transcriptional levels through binding to
complementary mRNAs and mediate their degradation in RISC complex.
Piwi-interacting RNAs (piRNAs) is newly discovered class of non-coding
RNA. PiRNAs are short single-stranded RNAs with 26-31 nucleotides in
length. They are involved in silencing of transposable elements and it is
assumed that also participate in sequence-specific chromatin
modifications. It was repeatedly shown that piRNAs are present also in
somatic cells and are dysregulated in kidney, bladder, gastric, breast,
pancreatic and liver cancers. According to small non-coding RNA databases
there are about 2600 mature miRNAs and more than 24 000 piRNAs in humans.
There were extensive studies aiming to discover miRNAs and to analyze
their functions. However, there are only few published studies of miRNA
and piRNA profiles in renal cell carcinoma (RCC) using next generation
sequencing (NGS) technology.In our study we used the tumor tissue and the
paired adjacent non-tumor renal parenchyma of 12 patients (8 males and 4
females) with RCC treated in Masaryk Memorial Cancer Institute (Brno,
Czech Republic). RNA was isolated with mirVana miRNA Isolation Kit. For
preparing RNA library was used TruSeq Small RNA Sample Preparation Kit
from Illumina and then the miSeq sequencing technology was employed to
detect small RNAs.In our 12 paired samples of tumor tissue and the paired
adjacent non-tumor renal parenchyma we detected 283 miRNAs with over 1
read in at least 7 samples. Expression levels of 55 miRNAs were
significantly different expressed (p < 0.05) in tumor tissue and adjacent
non-tumor parenchyma. Among miRNAs with the most significantly altered
expression (p < 0.01) were for example, miR-129, miR-138, miR-142,
miR-149, miR-154, miR-155, miR-200b, miR-210, miR-218, miR-340, miR-584,
miR-885, miR-891a, miR-1270, miR-3690 and miR-7641. After analyzing piRNA
sequences we found 440 piRNAs with over 1 read in at least 7 samples.
From these piRNAs were 38 piRNAs significantly deregulated (p<0.01) in
RCC tissue, whereas the most significantly different expression levels
were determined in piR-1207, piR-2107, piR-2155, piR-12487, piR-12488,
piR-21508, piR-23230, piR-26525, piR-26527and piR-28131.In our pilot
study we found altered expression patterns of miRNAs and piRNAs in tumor
tissue of RCC and paired adjacent non-tumor renal parenchyma. For the
first time, we have described piRNAs expression profile in RCC tissue by
NGS approach.This work was supported by Ministry of Health of the Czech
Republic, grant nr. 15-33158A, 15-34553A, 15-31627A and 15-34678A. All
rights reserved.

