Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Galectin-4 interferes with the integrin 4/Src/FAK cascade and
attenuates metastasis in urothelial carcinoma


Galectin-4 (Gal-4), a multifunctional lectin, is presented at both
intracellular and extracellular sites. Recent studies have shown that
Gal-4 plays certain role in attenuating cancer progression and
metastasis. We have also observed that patients with urothelial carcinoma
(UC) with the lower Gal-4 expression were at higher grade and stage. In
addition, the Gal-4 expression is inversely associated with lymph node
invasion and prognosis. Since how Gal-4 attenuates the cancer metastasis
in UC has not been well investigated, the goal of the present study is to
understand the role of Gal-4 in UC progression. We ectopically expressed
Gal-4 in UC cells and found that increased Gal-4 significantly inhibits
cell proliferation, colony formation, migration, and invasion. We also
demonstrated that Gal-4 overexpression leads to a significant decrease
the adhesion of UC cells to the basement membrane substrate laminin.
Mechanistically, we found that Gal-4 overexpression significantly reduces
the expression of the laminin receptor integrin 64. Besides to
downregulation of integrin 4, Gal-4 overexpression also reduces
phosphorylation of Src and focal adhesion kinase (FAK) and promotes
anoikis. Together, the present results revealed that Gal-4 reduces the
metastasis activity of UC cells by interfering integrin 4/Src/FAK
cascade, which are of essential to prevent the suspended cells from
anoikis. These results suggest that Gal-4 could be considered as a
pivotal factor in the migration and invasion of UC cells.Key words:
Galectin-4, integrin 4, migration, invasion, metastasis, anoikis,
urothelial cancer

