Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Unveiling the relationship between the SWI/SNF chromatin
remodeling complex and noncoding RNAs


Chromatin remodeling complexes are crucial for the viability of the cells
due to their role in regulating interactions between DNA and histones
and, therefore, modifying the accessibility of the genetic information to
the transcriptional machinery. This relevance can also been seen in the
SWI/SNF complex that has been associated with cancer in the last
deep-sequencing efforts on tumoral genomes.BRG1 is the helicase/ATPase
catalytic subunit of the SWI/SNF complex and it is frequently lost in
NSCLC cell lines with a high mutation rate. In primary tumors, the loss
of expression of BRG1 is also frequent, however it cannot be explained by
mutations or by promoter hypermethylation.In this study we have focused
on the regulation of the expression of BRG1 by microRNAs. These are small
RNA molecules that do not code for any protein but they have key roles in
gene expression regulation by binding to the 3UTR of the transcripts. In
addition, their levels have been found altered in several diseases
including cancer. Our hypothesis is that the deregulation observed in
BRG1 levels in primary tumors can be associated with changes in the
microRNAs that control its expression.We have studied the 3UTR of BRG1 by
performing a Rapid Amplification of 3 cDNA Ends (3 RACE) and we have
cloned the resulting 3UTRs after a luciferase coding sequence of a
plasmid in other to use the luminescence signal as a method to analyze
the binding of the microRNAs tested to the 3UTR of BRG1. Previous
bioinformatic analyses were performed to choose the best microRNAs that
could potentially regulate BRG1.Our preliminary results indicate that
some microRNAs are able to bind to the 3UTRs and successfully repress the
expression of catalytic subunit of SWI/SNF. Importantly, one of these
microRNAs is well known for developing oncogenic activities in lung
cancer and it has been related with poor prognosis.In conclusion, the
activity of the SWI/SNF complex can be regulated by microRNAs and this
regulation may be relevant during lung carcinogenesis. From the other
perspective, SWI/SNF complex could also impact in lung carcinogenesis
regulating microRNAs expression, an aspect that we are currently
evaluating.

