Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Developing an online tool to validate survival-associated miRNAs
utilizing expression data from 2,061 breast cancer patients


Background. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small non-coding RNAs capable of
simultaneously regulating multiple gene networks, and affecting breast
cancer patients outcome. Here we present the development of an online
tool for the real-time meta-analysis of published miRNA datasets to
identify novel prognostic biomarkers in breast cancer.Methods. First, a
comprehensive database was set up by searching GEO, TCGA, and PubMed
repositories to identify datasets with published miRNA expression and
clinical data. Due to platform differences, each dataset was processed
separately. Kaplan-Meier and Cox regression analyses were performed to
investigate the prognostic value of a set of dysregulated miRNAs in
breast cancer. The complete analysis tool can be accessed online at:
www.kmplot.com/mirna.Results. Overall, 2,061 samples from four
independent datasets were integrated into the tool including the
expression signature of 1,302 distinct miRNAs. In addition to overall
survival data, ER status (n = 2,039), histological grade (n = 1,396) and
lymph node status (n = 1,933) are also available. By using our online
tool, we demonstrated the prognostic value of some of the previous
reported miRNAs implicated in breast cancer. For instance, miR-29c,
miR-34c, miR-101, miR-125, and miR-190b, showed a consistent prognostic
value in at least three out of four breast cancer datasets.Discussion. In
summary, we established the first online integrated platform for the
rapid identification of the prognostic value of miRNAs in breast cancer.

