Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combined 3D quantitative imaging and 3D cell culture for cancer
drug discovery


Monitoring drug activity in multicellular tumor spheroid in vitro models
is an important challenge as these 3D models have demonstrated their
major relevance in pharmacological screening and anticancer drugs
evaluation (1). Optical microscopy coupled to the selective plane
illumination microscopy (SPIM)3D microscopy, and, and automatic automated
images processing and quantitative analysis are promising approaches to
process optimizes the evaluation of drug response in a 3D cell culture
models with, in a high/mediumhigh throughput screening
waycapabilities.BIOMIMESYS used as a 3D cell model is based on hyaluronic
to provide an in vivo like environment to the cells.The In this study the
effects of the topoisomerase I inhibitor Topotecan were investigated on
colon adenocarcinoma HCT-116 3D cell culture. Spheroids were prepared and
grown in BIOMIMESYS used as a 3D cell model isa matrix based on
hyaluronic acid tothat provides an in vivo like environment to the
cells.was monitored and coupled with mMorphometric parameters and with
nuclei fluorescence markers were used to monitor analysis for drug
activity. Data provideand to characterization characterize of both
cytostatic and cytotoxic effects of this drug withon the basis of both
quantitative 3D and imaging of the mechanisms.These data highlight the
relevance of combining a biomimetic microenvironment for 3D cell culture
recreating the the in vivo features of a tumor cell population biology,
together with and high resolution content microscopy-based quantification
for drug screening.This biomimetic model provides an innovative platform
for the in-depth analysis of tumor development and for the discovery or
the characterization of novel therapeutic targets.Ref:1) Breslin S,
ODriscoll L. Drug Discov Today.18: 240-249 (2013)

