Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Psychosocial functioning in research participants at enrollment in
a Li-Fraumeni syndrome study


Background: Li Fraumeni Syndrome (LFS) is an autosomal dominant cancer
predisposition syndrome in which about 90% of individuals develop cancer
by age 60. Approximately 70% of individuals with LFS have germline TP53
mutation. We hypothesized that this high level of cancer risk may be
associated with increased emotional distress, cancer risk perceptions and
cancer worry in individuals from LFS families.Methods: Data from 276
adult (18 years old) TP53 mutation carriers (TP53+), mutation negative
(TP53-) and untested (UT) participants enrolled in an IRB-approved study
at the Clinical Genetics Branch, NCI were obtained between January 2011
and June 2014.. Using questionnaires at baseline, we assessed emotional
distress (global distress, somatization, anxiety and depression) as
measured by the BSI-18, cancer risk perceptions (comparative: scores 1-5;
1 = much less than other people your age to 5 = much more than other
people your age and absolute: 10-point scale; 1 = no chance; 5 = may or
may not; 10 = almost certainly) and cancer worry scales (frequency of
cancer thoughts, interference with mood and daily activity, scores 1-4; =
not at all or rarely to 4 = several times a day).Results: TP53+ estimated
their comparative lifetime risk of cancer as higher than TP53- and UT;
[4.9 (SD = 0.5) vs. 3.8 (SD = 1) and 3.2 (SD = 1.3) pBackground: Li
Fraumeni Syndrome (LFS) is an autosomal dominant cancer predisposition
syndrome in which about 90% of individuals develop cancer by age 60.
Approximately 70% of individuals with LFS have germline TP53 mutation. We
hypothesized that this high level of cancer risk may be associated with
increased emotional distress, cancer risk perceptions and cancer worry in
individuals from LFS families.Methods: Data from 276 adult (18 years old)
TP53 mutation carriers (TP53+), mutation negative (TP53-) and untested
(UT) participants enrolled in an IRB-approved study at the Clinical
Genetics Branch, NCI were obtained between January 2011 and June 2014..
Using questionnaires at baseline, we assessed emotional distress (global
distress, somatization, anxiety and depression) as measured by the
BSI-18, cancer risk perceptions (comparative: scores 1-5; 1 = much less
than other people your age to 5 = much more than other people your age
and absolute: 10-point scale; 1 = no chance; 5 = may or may not; 10 =
almost certainly) and cancer worry scales (frequency of cancer thoughts,
interference with mood and daily activity, scores 1-4; = not at all or
rarely to 4 = several times a day).Results: TP53+ estimated their
comparative lifetime risk of cancer as higher than TP53- and UT; [4.9 (SD
= 0.5) vs. 3.8 (SD = 1) and 3.2 (SD = 1.3) p<0.01], respectively]. TP53+
also estimated their absolute cancer risk as significantly higher than
TP53- and UT on a [8.6(SD = 1.5) vs. 6.3 (SD = 1.6) and 5.7 (SD = 2.1),
pBackground: Li Fraumeni Syndrome (LFS) is an autosomal dominant cancer
predisposition syndrome in which about 90% of individuals develop cancer
by age 60. Approximately 70% of individuals with LFS have germline TP53
mutation. We hypothesized that this high level of cancer risk may be
associated with increased emotional distress, cancer risk perceptions and
cancer worry in individuals from LFS families.Methods: Data from 276
adult (18 years old) TP53 mutation carriers (TP53+), mutation negative
(TP53-) and untested (UT) participants enrolled in an IRB-approved study
at the Clinical Genetics Branch, NCI were obtained between January 2011
and June 2014.. Using questionnaires at baseline, we assessed emotional
distress (global distress, somatization, anxiety and depression) as
measured by the BSI-18, cancer risk perceptions (comparative: scores 1-5;
1 = much less than other people your age to 5 = much more than other
people your age and absolute: 10-point scale; 1 = no chance; 5 = may or
may not; 10 = almost certainly) and cancer worry scales (frequency of
cancer thoughts, interference with mood and daily activity, scores 1-4; =
not at all or rarely to 4 = several times a day).Results: TP53+ estimated
their comparative lifetime risk of cancer as higher than TP53- and UT;
[4.9 (SD = 0.5) vs. 3.8 (SD = 1) and 3.2 (SD = 1.3) p<0.01],
respectively]. TP53+ also estimated their absolute cancer risk as
significantly higher than TP53- and UT on a [8.6(SD = 1.5) vs. 6.3 (SD =
1.6) and 5.7 (SD = 2.1), p<0.01].Cancer worry was higher in TP53+ than
TP53-or UT. TP53+ also indicated they thought about their cancer risk
more frequently thanTP53- and UT [2.3 (SD = 0.9) vs. 1.3 (0.6) and 1.3
(SD = 0.6), pBackground: Li Fraumeni Syndrome (LFS) is an autosomal
dominant cancer predisposition syndrome in which about 90% of individuals
develop cancer by age 60. Approximately 70% of individuals with LFS have
germline TP53 mutation. We hypothesized that this high level of cancer
risk may be associated with increased emotional distress, cancer risk
perceptions and cancer worry in individuals from LFS families.Methods:
Data from 276 adult (18 years old) TP53 mutation carriers (TP53+),
mutation negative (TP53-) and untested (UT) participants enrolled in an
IRB-approved study at the Clinical Genetics Branch, NCI were obtained
between January 2011 and June 2014.. Using questionnaires at baseline, we
assessed emotional distress (global distress, somatization, anxiety and
depression) as measured by the BSI-18, cancer risk perceptions
(comparative: scores 1-5; 1 = much less than other people your age to 5 =
much more than other people your age and absolute: 10-point scale; 1 = no
chance; 5 = may or may not; 10 = almost certainly) and cancer worry
scales (frequency of cancer thoughts, interference with mood and daily
activity, scores 1-4; = not at all or rarely to 4 = several times a
day).Results: TP53+ estimated their comparative lifetime risk of cancer
as higher than TP53- and UT; [4.9 (SD = 0.5) vs. 3.8 (SD = 1) and 3.2 (SD
= 1.3) p<0.01], respectively]. TP53+ also estimated their absolute cancer
risk as significantly higher than TP53- and UT on a [8.6(SD = 1.5) vs.
6.3 (SD = 1.6) and 5.7 (SD = 2.1), p<0.01].Cancer worry was higher in
TP53+ than TP53-or UT. TP53+ also indicated they thought about their
cancer risk more frequently thanTP53- and UT [2.3 (SD = 0.9) vs. 1.3
(0.6) and 1.3 (SD = 0.6), p<0.01]. There was a small but statistically
significant difference between TP53+, TP53- and UT in their appraisal of
whether cancer worry affected their mood over the past month [1.6 (SD =
0.6) vs. 1.2 (SD = 0.6) and 1.1 (SD = 0.2), p = Background: Li Fraumeni
Syndrome (LFS) is an autosomal dominant cancer predisposition syndrome in
which about 90% of individuals develop cancer by age 60. Approximately
70% of individuals with LFS have germline TP53 mutation. We hypothesized
that this high level of cancer risk may be associated with increased
emotional distress, cancer risk perceptions and cancer worry in
individuals from LFS families.Methods: Data from 276 adult (18 years old)
TP53 mutation carriers (TP53+), mutation negative (TP53-) and untested
(UT) participants enrolled in an IRB-approved study at the Clinical
Genetics Branch, NCI were obtained between January 2011 and June 2014..
Using questionnaires at baseline, we assessed emotional distress (global
distress, somatization, anxiety and depression) as measured by the
BSI-18, cancer risk perceptions (comparative: scores 1-5; 1 = much less
than other people your age to 5 = much more than other people your age
and absolute: 10-point scale; 1 = no chance; 5 = may or may not; 10 =
almost certainly) and cancer worry scales (frequency of cancer thoughts,
interference with mood and daily activity, scores 1-4; = not at all or
rarely to 4 = several times a day).Results: TP53+ estimated their
comparative lifetime risk of cancer as higher than TP53- and UT; [4.9 (SD
= 0.5) vs. 3.8 (SD = 1) and 3.2 (SD = 1.3) p<0.01], respectively]. TP53+
also estimated their absolute cancer risk as significantly higher than
TP53- and UT on a [8.6(SD = 1.5) vs. 6.3 (SD = 1.6) and 5.7 (SD = 2.1),
p<0.01].Cancer worry was higher in TP53+ than TP53-or UT. TP53+ also
indicated they thought about their cancer risk more frequently thanTP53-
and UT [2.3 (SD = 0.9) vs. 1.3 (0.6) and 1.3 (SD = 0.6), p<0.01]. There
was a small but statistically significant difference between TP53+, TP53-
and UT in their appraisal of whether cancer worry affected their mood
over the past month [1.6 (SD = 0.6) vs. 1.2 (SD = 0.6) and 1.1 (SD =
0.2), p = <0.01] and whether thoughts of cancer affected their ability to
perform daily activities [1.2 (SD = 0) vs. 1.1 (SD = 0.4) and 1 (SD =
0.2), p = Background: Li Fraumeni Syndrome (LFS) is an autosomal dominant
cancer predisposition syndrome in which about 90% of individuals develop
cancer by age 60. Approximately 70% of individuals with LFS have germline
TP53 mutation. We hypothesized that this high level of cancer risk may be
associated with increased emotional distress, cancer risk perceptions and
cancer worry in individuals from LFS families.Methods: Data from 276
adult (18 years old) TP53 mutation carriers (TP53+), mutation negative
(TP53-) and untested (UT) participants enrolled in an IRB-approved study
at the Clinical Genetics Branch, NCI were obtained between January 2011
and June 2014.. Using questionnaires at baseline, we assessed emotional
distress (global distress, somatization, anxiety and depression) as
measured by the BSI-18, cancer risk perceptions (comparative: scores 1-5;
1 = much less than other people your age to 5 = much more than other
people your age and absolute: 10-point scale; 1 = no chance; 5 = may or
may not; 10 = almost certainly) and cancer worry scales (frequency of
cancer thoughts, interference with mood and daily activity, scores 1-4; =
not at all or rarely to 4 = several times a day).Results: TP53+ estimated
their comparative lifetime risk of cancer as higher than TP53- and UT;
[4.9 (SD = 0.5) vs. 3.8 (SD = 1) and 3.2 (SD = 1.3) p<0.01],
respectively]. TP53+ also estimated their absolute cancer risk as
significantly higher than TP53- and UT on a [8.6(SD = 1.5) vs. 6.3 (SD =
1.6) and 5.7 (SD = 2.1), p<0.01].Cancer worry was higher in TP53+ than
TP53-or UT. TP53+ also indicated they thought about their cancer risk
more frequently thanTP53- and UT [2.3 (SD = 0.9) vs. 1.3 (0.6) and 1.3
(SD = 0.6), p<0.01]. There was a small but statistically significant
difference between TP53+, TP53- and UT in their appraisal of whether
cancer worry affected their mood over the past month [1.6 (SD = 0.6) vs.
1.2 (SD = 0.6) and 1.1 (SD = 0.2), p = <0.01] and whether thoughts of
cancer affected their ability to perform daily activities [1.2 (SD = 0)
vs. 1.1 (SD = 0.4) and 1 (SD = 0.2), p = <0.01]. No statistically
significant differences were observed on measures of emotional distress
between TP53+, TP53- or UT somatization [46.7 (SD = 8.1) vs. 45.9 (SD =
9.3) and 45.9 (SD = 7.6); depression [50.1 (SD 9.7) vs. 49.6 (SD - 9.3)
and 45.9 (SD = 7.6); anxiety [48.2 (SD = 9.1) vs. 45.4 (SD = 9.7) and
45.8 (SD = 7.9) or global distress [47.9(SD = 9.9); vs. 45.1(12.1) and
44.9 (SD = 9.5)].Conclusions: Participants in the LFSS do not demonstrate
high levels of emotional distress. TP53+ appropriately identify their
comparative and absolute cancer risk as high, but have levels of cancer
worry that appears to be only slightly affecting their mood or ability to
perform daily activities. Future research will focus on longitudinal
changes in risk perception, cancer worry and emotional well-being while
enrolled in a cancer screening study.

