Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Estrogen receptor-negative breast cancer cell lines exhibit
hypersensitivity to the CHK1 inhibitor LY2606368


Checkpoint kinase 1 (CHK1) inhibitors are currently under investigation
as chemopotentiating agents due to the role of CHK1 in establishing DNA
damage checkpoints in the cell cycle. A novel CHK1/CHK2 inhibitor,
LY2606368, as a single agent causes replication catastrophe, DNA double
strand breaks and apoptosis (King C et al. Mol Cancer Ther. 2015).
Accordingly, LY2606368 is currently in clinical development as a single
agent and in combination with both cytotoxic and targeted agents. As
subsets of breast cancers exhibit genomic instability and DNA repair
deficiencies, we assessed the effect of LY2606368 as a single agent on
breast cancer cell lines. We characterized the IC50's for growth
inhibition by LY2606368 of a large panel of cell lines assembled on the
basis of estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR), and HER2
expression status. Triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) is a subtype of
breast cancer that is pathologically negative for expression of ER/PR and
HER2 protein. As previously reported for other CHK1 inhibitors (Bryant C
et al. BMC Cancer. 2014; Albiges L et al. Breast. 2014), TNBC cell lines
exhibited high sensitivity to LY2606368. Interestingly, hypersensitivity
to LY2606368 was observed in ER-negative cells, regardless of HER2
status. In addition, ER-positive cells were comparatively resistant
suggesting that high sensitivity to LY2606368 occurs in the absence of ER
and is not restricted to TNBC. No correlation was found between TP53
mutational status and sensitivity to LY2606368. Consistent with the
observed hypersensitivity, ER-negative cell lines exposed to LY2606368
exhibited high levels of H2AX and phospho-Ser1981-ATM demonstrating
appearance of DNA double strand breaks. The concomitant appearance of
phospho-Ser345-Chk1 marked aborted checkpoint activation by upstream
detector/effector kinases (e.g. ATR, ATM). ER-positive cells did not
engage in initiation of the DNA damage response or significant checkpoint
activation when exposed to comparable doses of LY2606368. Collectively,
these results suggest that the CHK1 inhibitor LY2606368 is likely to be
more cytotoxic in ER-negative breast cancer types. Homologous
recombination and other DNA repair deficiencies can explain the need for
CHK1-dependent checkpoint activation during each replication cycle. On
the other hand, ER-positive breast cancers might be less sensitive to
monotherapy because of the absence of unresolved DNA damaging events that
create checkpoint dependency.In summary, triple negative status does not
directly determine the sensitivity of breast cancer cell lines to the
CHK1 inhibitor LY2606368, although TNBC cells are in general
hypersensitive. The absence of ER might be a more promising marker of
sensitivity to LY2606368 as a monotherapy in breast cancer.

