Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of exosome-mediated cell-cell communication in inducing
phenotypic changes


A new class of intercellular communication has recently emerged that
involves transfer of exosomes, especially during the interactions between
tumor and the immune system. However, the advantage of exosome-mediated
cell-cell communication over direct cell to cell communication mechanisms
or through soluble factors is unclear. We have performed mass
spectrometry based proteomic profiling of exosomes isolated from
pancreatic cancer cell lines, for the exosome cell surface and for the
protein cargo. The resulting profiles were compared with proteomic
profiles of corresponding cell lysates. We uncovered substantial
enrichment in protein pairs in exosomes across cell lines but not in cell
lysates, suggestive of a mechanism of exosome-based protein sorting and
packaging that favor specific protein combinations. Stochastic
simulations and analytical analysis provide supportive evidence that
exosomes enable recipient cells to rewire gene regulatory networks to
induce robust phenotypic transitions among different gene states.
Moreover, from the simulation of two-way exosome-mediated communication
of two cell types, we show that cells could achieve synchronized decision
making through exosomes. Our integrative approach provides new insights
into unique features of exosome-mediated cell-cell communication.

