Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BAY 1143572, a first-in-class, highly selective, potent and orally
available inhibitor of PTEFb/CDK9 currently in Phase I, shows convincing
anti-tumor activity in preclinical models of acute myeloid leukemia (AML)


PTEFb/CDK9 mediated transcription of short-lived anti-apoptotic survival
proteins like Mcl-1 and Myc, plays a critical role in cancer cell growth
and survival in various tumor entities including AML. In addition, these
survival proteins exhibit important functions in the development of
resistance to chemotherapy.In contrast to pan-CDK inhibitors, to our
knowledge PTEFb selective inhibitors have not been explored for clinical
utility. We report the preclinical activity of BAY 1143572, a novel
selective PTEFb/CDK9 inhibitor (AACR; Cancer Res 2015;75(15
Suppl):Abstract nr DDT02-02) currently being investigated in Phase I
clinical trials in advanced cancer (NCT01938638) and acute leukemia
(NCT02345382) in various in vitro, ex vivo and in vivo models of AML.BAY
1143572 inhibited the proliferation of 7 MLL-rearrangements positive and
negative AML cell lines with a median IC50 of 385 nM (range 230-1100 nM)
and induced apoptosis. Furthermore, BAY 1143572 showed potent in vitro
activity in 8 out of 10 non-MLL-rearranged patient derived AML samples
incl. NPM1 mutant and Flt3-ITD positive samples derived from intermediate
and high risk patients. Moreover, we elucidated the dynamic changes of
the cellular proteome/phosphoproteome upon pharmacological and genetic
PTEFb inhibition and identified PTEFb interaction partners in various AML
in vitro models. These analyses uncover the oncogenic PTEFb-dependent
signaling networks and substantiate the molecular rationale for the use
of PTEFb inhibitors in this indication.When applied in vivo, BAY 1143572
exhibited single agent efficacy at tolerated doses in 4 out of 5 AML
xenograft tumor models in mice and in 2 out of 2 AML xenograft tumor
models in rats upon once daily oral administration. Of note, partial or
even complete remissions could be achieved in several models.
Furthermore, intermittent dosing schedules with up to 4 days treatment
pauses were feasible in terms of efficacy and tolerability.Using MOLM-13
xenografts in mice and rats to address the in vivo MoA of BAY 1143572, a
transient inhibition of RNA polymerase II phosphorylation, MYC mRNA and
protein levels, MCL-1 mRNA and protein levels, and an induction of
apoptosis was documented.In conclusion, our data provide the rationale
for the initiation of clinical development of BAY 1143572 as a potent and
highly selective inhibitor of PTEFb/CDK9 with first-in-class potential
for the treatment of AML patients. A phase I clinical trial to determine
the safety, tolerability and recommended Phase 2 dose in this indication
is ongoing (NCT02345382).

