Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of novel candidate of driver genes on chromosome 7
in colorectal cancer


BackgroundColorectal cancer(CRC) is one of the most common types of
cancer worldwide. Its high mortality rate is serious problems. Hence it
is urgently necessary to identify novel molecular target to improve it.
Gain of chromosome 7 is frequently found in CRC, and it has been
considered to harbour driver genes that promote tumorigenesis or tumor
progression by the gain of function. The aim of this study is to identify
novel candidate driver genes on chromosome 7 and to clarify the clinical
significance of their expression in CRC.Material and Methods1. We have
selected the candidate genes which satisfied the following criteria using
CRC data from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA), 1) their DNA copy number
and the mRNA expression is positively correlated with each other, 2)
overexpressed in tumor tissues compared to normal tissues.2. We measured
the mRNA expression of the candidate genes in 125 surgically-resected
primary CRC tissues and the paired normal colon tissues in our hospital
by quantitative RT-PCR. Difference of mRNA expression between CRC tissues
and normal colon tissues was analyzed by Mann Whitney U-test.3. Survival
analysis between high and low expression group of the candidate genes was
performed by Kaplan-Meier method. Correlation between the mRNA expression
of the candidate genes and clinicopathological factors were analyzed by
Fisher's exact test.4. We performed Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA)
in CRC data from TCGA to elucidate the correlation between the candidate
genes and gene sets that are associated with tumorigenesis or tumor
progression.ResultsWe focused on phosphoserine phosphatase(PSPH), the
rate-limiting enzyme in serine biosynthesis pathway(SSP), as a novel
candidate driver gene on chromosome 7 in CRC. PSPH expression was
significantly higher in CRC tissues than in normal colon tissues
(pBackgroundColorectal cancer(CRC) is one of the most common types of
cancer worldwide. Its high mortality rate is serious problems. Hence it
is urgently necessary to identify novel molecular target to improve it.
Gain of chromosome 7 is frequently found in CRC, and it has been
considered to harbour driver genes that promote tumorigenesis or tumor
progression by the gain of function. The aim of this study is to identify
novel candidate driver genes on chromosome 7 and to clarify the clinical
significance of their expression in CRC.Material and Methods1. We have
selected the candidate genes which satisfied the following criteria using
CRC data from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA), 1) their DNA copy number
and the mRNA expression is positively correlated with each other, 2)
overexpressed in tumor tissues compared to normal tissues.2. We measured
the mRNA expression of the candidate genes in 125 surgically-resected
primary CRC tissues and the paired normal colon tissues in our hospital
by quantitative RT-PCR. Difference of mRNA expression between CRC tissues
and normal colon tissues was analyzed by Mann Whitney U-test.3. Survival
analysis between high and low expression group of the candidate genes was
performed by Kaplan-Meier method. Correlation between the mRNA expression
of the candidate genes and clinicopathological factors were analyzed by
Fisher's exact test.4. We performed Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA)
in CRC data from TCGA to elucidate the correlation between the candidate
genes and gene sets that are associated with tumorigenesis or tumor
progression.ResultsWe focused on phosphoserine phosphatase(PSPH), the
rate-limiting enzyme in serine biosynthesis pathway(SSP), as a novel
candidate driver gene on chromosome 7 in CRC. PSPH expression was
significantly higher in CRC tissues than in normal colon tissues
(p<0.005). PSPH expression positively correlated with depth of invasion
(pBackgroundColorectal cancer(CRC) is one of the most common types of
cancer worldwide. Its high mortality rate is serious problems. Hence it
is urgently necessary to identify novel molecular target to improve it.
Gain of chromosome 7 is frequently found in CRC, and it has been
considered to harbour driver genes that promote tumorigenesis or tumor
progression by the gain of function. The aim of this study is to identify
novel candidate driver genes on chromosome 7 and to clarify the clinical
significance of their expression in CRC.Material and Methods1. We have
selected the candidate genes which satisfied the following criteria using
CRC data from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA), 1) their DNA copy number
and the mRNA expression is positively correlated with each other, 2)
overexpressed in tumor tissues compared to normal tissues.2. We measured
the mRNA expression of the candidate genes in 125 surgically-resected
primary CRC tissues and the paired normal colon tissues in our hospital
by quantitative RT-PCR. Difference of mRNA expression between CRC tissues
and normal colon tissues was analyzed by Mann Whitney U-test.3. Survival
analysis between high and low expression group of the candidate genes was
performed by Kaplan-Meier method. Correlation between the mRNA expression
of the candidate genes and clinicopathological factors were analyzed by
Fisher's exact test.4. We performed Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA)
in CRC data from TCGA to elucidate the correlation between the candidate
genes and gene sets that are associated with tumorigenesis or tumor
progression.ResultsWe focused on phosphoserine phosphatase(PSPH), the
rate-limiting enzyme in serine biosynthesis pathway(SSP), as a novel
candidate driver gene on chromosome 7 in CRC. PSPH expression was
significantly higher in CRC tissues than in normal colon tissues
(p<0.005). PSPH expression positively correlated with depth of invasion
(p<0.05), venous invasion (pBackgroundColorectal cancer(CRC) is one of
the most common types of cancer worldwide. Its high mortality rate is
serious problems. Hence it is urgently necessary to identify novel
molecular target to improve it. Gain of chromosome 7 is frequently found
in CRC, and it has been considered to harbour driver genes that promote
tumorigenesis or tumor progression by the gain of function. The aim of
this study is to identify novel candidate driver genes on chromosome 7
and to clarify the clinical significance of their expression in
CRC.Material and Methods1. We have selected the candidate genes which
satisfied the following criteria using CRC data from The Cancer Genome
Atlas (TCGA), 1) their DNA copy number and the mRNA expression is
positively correlated with each other, 2) overexpressed in tumor tissues
compared to normal tissues.2. We measured the mRNA expression of the
candidate genes in 125 surgically-resected primary CRC tissues and the
paired normal colon tissues in our hospital by quantitative RT-PCR.
Difference of mRNA expression between CRC tissues and normal colon
tissues was analyzed by Mann Whitney U-test.3. Survival analysis between
high and low expression group of the candidate genes was performed by
Kaplan-Meier method. Correlation between the mRNA expression of the
candidate genes and clinicopathological factors were analyzed by Fisher's
exact test.4. We performed Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) in CRC
data from TCGA to elucidate the correlation between the candidate genes
and gene sets that are associated with tumorigenesis or tumor
progression.ResultsWe focused on phosphoserine phosphatase(PSPH), the
rate-limiting enzyme in serine biosynthesis pathway(SSP), as a novel
candidate driver gene on chromosome 7 in CRC. PSPH expression was
significantly higher in CRC tissues than in normal colon tissues
(p<0.005). PSPH expression positively correlated with depth of invasion
(p<0.05), venous invasion (p<0.05), and distant metastasis
(pBackgroundColorectal cancer(CRC) is one of the most common types of
cancer worldwide. Its high mortality rate is serious problems. Hence it
is urgently necessary to identify novel molecular target to improve it.
Gain of chromosome 7 is frequently found in CRC, and it has been
considered to harbour driver genes that promote tumorigenesis or tumor
progression by the gain of function. The aim of this study is to identify
novel candidate driver genes on chromosome 7 and to clarify the clinical
significance of their expression in CRC.Material and Methods1. We have
selected the candidate genes which satisfied the following criteria using
CRC data from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA), 1) their DNA copy number
and the mRNA expression is positively correlated with each other, 2)
overexpressed in tumor tissues compared to normal tissues.2. We measured
the mRNA expression of the candidate genes in 125 surgically-resected
primary CRC tissues and the paired normal colon tissues in our hospital
by quantitative RT-PCR. Difference of mRNA expression between CRC tissues
and normal colon tissues was analyzed by Mann Whitney U-test.3. Survival
analysis between high and low expression group of the candidate genes was
performed by Kaplan-Meier method. Correlation between the mRNA expression
of the candidate genes and clinicopathological factors were analyzed by
Fisher's exact test.4. We performed Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA)
in CRC data from TCGA to elucidate the correlation between the candidate
genes and gene sets that are associated with tumorigenesis or tumor
progression.ResultsWe focused on phosphoserine phosphatase(PSPH), the
rate-limiting enzyme in serine biosynthesis pathway(SSP), as a novel
candidate driver gene on chromosome 7 in CRC. PSPH expression was
significantly higher in CRC tissues than in normal colon tissues
(p<0.005). PSPH expression positively correlated with depth of invasion
(p<0.05), venous invasion (p<0.05), and distant metastasis (p<0.05). The
high PSPH expression group had a significantly poorer prognosis than the
low expression group (pBackgroundColorectal cancer(CRC) is one of the
most common types of cancer worldwide. Its high mortality rate is serious
problems. Hence it is urgently necessary to identify novel molecular
target to improve it. Gain of chromosome 7 is frequently found in CRC,
and it has been considered to harbour driver genes that promote
tumorigenesis or tumor progression by the gain of function. The aim of
this study is to identify novel candidate driver genes on chromosome 7
and to clarify the clinical significance of their expression in
CRC.Material and Methods1. We have selected the candidate genes which
satisfied the following criteria using CRC data from The Cancer Genome
Atlas (TCGA), 1) their DNA copy number and the mRNA expression is
positively correlated with each other, 2) overexpressed in tumor tissues
compared to normal tissues.2. We measured the mRNA expression of the
candidate genes in 125 surgically-resected primary CRC tissues and the
paired normal colon tissues in our hospital by quantitative RT-PCR.
Difference of mRNA expression between CRC tissues and normal colon
tissues was analyzed by Mann Whitney U-test.3. Survival analysis between
high and low expression group of the candidate genes was performed by
Kaplan-Meier method. Correlation between the mRNA expression of the
candidate genes and clinicopathological factors were analyzed by Fisher's
exact test.4. We performed Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) in CRC
data from TCGA to elucidate the correlation between the candidate genes
and gene sets that are associated with tumorigenesis or tumor
progression.ResultsWe focused on phosphoserine phosphatase(PSPH), the
rate-limiting enzyme in serine biosynthesis pathway(SSP), as a novel
candidate driver gene on chromosome 7 in CRC. PSPH expression was
significantly higher in CRC tissues than in normal colon tissues
(p<0.005). PSPH expression positively correlated with depth of invasion
(p<0.05), venous invasion (p<0.05), and distant metastasis (p<0.05). The
high PSPH expression group had a significantly poorer prognosis than the
low expression group (p<0.001). On multivariate analysis, high PSPH
expression was an independent prognostic factor affecting 5-years OS
(pBackgroundColorectal cancer(CRC) is one of the most common types of
cancer worldwide. Its high mortality rate is serious problems. Hence it
is urgently necessary to identify novel molecular target to improve it.
Gain of chromosome 7 is frequently found in CRC, and it has been
considered to harbour driver genes that promote tumorigenesis or tumor
progression by the gain of function. The aim of this study is to identify
novel candidate driver genes on chromosome 7 and to clarify the clinical
significance of their expression in CRC.Material and Methods1. We have
selected the candidate genes which satisfied the following criteria using
CRC data from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA), 1) their DNA copy number
and the mRNA expression is positively correlated with each other, 2)
overexpressed in tumor tissues compared to normal tissues.2. We measured
the mRNA expression of the candidate genes in 125 surgically-resected
primary CRC tissues and the paired normal colon tissues in our hospital
by quantitative RT-PCR. Difference of mRNA expression between CRC tissues
and normal colon tissues was analyzed by Mann Whitney U-test.3. Survival
analysis between high and low expression group of the candidate genes was
performed by Kaplan-Meier method. Correlation between the mRNA expression
of the candidate genes and clinicopathological factors were analyzed by
Fisher's exact test.4. We performed Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA)
in CRC data from TCGA to elucidate the correlation between the candidate
genes and gene sets that are associated with tumorigenesis or tumor
progression.ResultsWe focused on phosphoserine phosphatase(PSPH), the
rate-limiting enzyme in serine biosynthesis pathway(SSP), as a novel
candidate driver gene on chromosome 7 in CRC. PSPH expression was
significantly higher in CRC tissues than in normal colon tissues
(p<0.005). PSPH expression positively correlated with depth of invasion
(p<0.05), venous invasion (p<0.05), and distant metastasis (p<0.05). The
high PSPH expression group had a significantly poorer prognosis than the
low expression group (p<0.001). On multivariate analysis, high PSPH
expression was an independent prognostic factor affecting 5-years OS
(p<0.005) with hazard ratios (95% CI) of 4.85(1.77-16.2) among
conventional clinicopathological factors. The high PSPH expression group
in TCGA data set also had poorer prognosis than the low expression group
(pBackgroundColorectal cancer(CRC) is one of the most common types of
cancer worldwide. Its high mortality rate is serious problems. Hence it
is urgently necessary to identify novel molecular target to improve it.
Gain of chromosome 7 is frequently found in CRC, and it has been
considered to harbour driver genes that promote tumorigenesis or tumor
progression by the gain of function. The aim of this study is to identify
novel candidate driver genes on chromosome 7 and to clarify the clinical
significance of their expression in CRC.Material and Methods1. We have
selected the candidate genes which satisfied the following criteria using
CRC data from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA), 1) their DNA copy number
and the mRNA expression is positively correlated with each other, 2)
overexpressed in tumor tissues compared to normal tissues.2. We measured
the mRNA expression of the candidate genes in 125 surgically-resected
primary CRC tissues and the paired normal colon tissues in our hospital
by quantitative RT-PCR. Difference of mRNA expression between CRC tissues
and normal colon tissues was analyzed by Mann Whitney U-test.3. Survival
analysis between high and low expression group of the candidate genes was
performed by Kaplan-Meier method. Correlation between the mRNA expression
of the candidate genes and clinicopathological factors were analyzed by
Fisher's exact test.4. We performed Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA)
in CRC data from TCGA to elucidate the correlation between the candidate
genes and gene sets that are associated with tumorigenesis or tumor
progression.ResultsWe focused on phosphoserine phosphatase(PSPH), the
rate-limiting enzyme in serine biosynthesis pathway(SSP), as a novel
candidate driver gene on chromosome 7 in CRC. PSPH expression was
significantly higher in CRC tissues than in normal colon tissues
(p<0.005). PSPH expression positively correlated with depth of invasion
(p<0.05), venous invasion (p<0.05), and distant metastasis (p<0.05). The
high PSPH expression group had a significantly poorer prognosis than the
low expression group (p<0.001). On multivariate analysis, high PSPH
expression was an independent prognostic factor affecting 5-years OS
(p<0.005) with hazard ratios (95% CI) of 4.85(1.77-16.2) among
conventional clinicopathological factors. The high PSPH expression group
in TCGA data set also had poorer prognosis than the low expression group
(p<0.05). GSEA showed that PSPH expression was positively correlated with
expression of gene set of c-Myc-downstream.ConclusionsWe identified PSPH
as a promising candidate driver gene on chromosome 7. Moreover, PSPH
expression was a prognostic factor in CRC. It has been reported that
c-Myc upregulates expression of SSP enzymes including PSPH. Therefore,
PSPH is suggested to be involved in tumorigenesis or tumor progression as
a downstream molecule of c-Myc in CRC. PSPH should be an important gene
on chromosome 7 to promote the progression of CRC.

