Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Stat3 inhibitor (BBI-608) with radiation therapy is promising in
malignant pleural mesothelioma


Background:The prognosis of Malignant pleural mesothelioma (MPM) is very
poor, the new drug for MPM is need. IL-6 in serum with MPM patients is
high, IL-6/Stat3 pathway is activated. We investigated that Stat3 is the
potential target for the treatment of MPM.Methods:Cell viability was
assayed with Cell Counting Kit-8 (CCK-8: WST-8 Dojindo). MPM cells
(NCI-H28, NCI-H226, NCI-H2052, NCI-H2452, MSTO-211H) were seeded into
96-wellplates. After the treatment with Stat3 inhibitor (BBI-608). Cell
Counting Kit-8 solution was added to each well of the plate and measured
the absorbance using a microplate reader. The levels of phosphorylated
Stat3 (p-Stat3) were measured in cell lysates using an InstantOne ELISA
assays (eBioscience). The translocated p-Stat3, c-Myc were analyzed by
Confocal immunofluorescent. In vivo study, H226 cells were injected into
the subcutaneous over the flank region of nude mice. Mice were randomly
assigned into four groups (5 mice each group) 1) vehicle control 2)
treated with BBI-608 3) Radiation 4) BBI608/RT. Tumor is measured twice
per week.Results:BBI-608 inhibited MPM cell lines (NCI-H28, NCI-H226,
NCI-H2052, NCI-H2452, MSTO-211H) viability in a dose-dependent manner.
The level of p-Stat3 was decreased 90% by BBI-608 10M treatment in H226.
Untreated H226, p-stat3 was observed in cytoplasma and localized in the
nucleus. As compared with untreated cells, p-stat3, c-Myc were decrease
in cytoplasma and was not localized in the nucleus with BBI-608 treated
cells. BBI-608 suppressed tumor growth (pBackground:The prognosis of
Malignant pleural mesothelioma (MPM) is very poor, the new drug for MPM
is need. IL-6 in serum with MPM patients is high, IL-6/Stat3 pathway is
activated. We investigated that Stat3 is the potential target for the
treatment of MPM.Methods:Cell viability was assayed with Cell Counting
Kit-8 (CCK-8: WST-8 Dojindo). MPM cells (NCI-H28, NCI-H226, NCI-H2052,
NCI-H2452, MSTO-211H) were seeded into 96-wellplates. After the treatment
with Stat3 inhibitor (BBI-608). Cell Counting Kit-8 solution was added to
each well of the plate and measured the absorbance using a microplate
reader. The levels of phosphorylated Stat3 (p-Stat3) were measured in
cell lysates using an InstantOne ELISA assays (eBioscience). The
translocated p-Stat3, c-Myc were analyzed by Confocal immunofluorescent.
In vivo study, H226 cells were injected into the subcutaneous over the
flank region of nude mice. Mice were randomly assigned into four groups
(5 mice each group) 1) vehicle control 2) treated with BBI-608 3)
Radiation 4) BBI608/RT. Tumor is measured twice per week.Results:BBI-608
inhibited MPM cell lines (NCI-H28, NCI-H226, NCI-H2052, NCI-H2452,
MSTO-211H) viability in a dose-dependent manner. The level of p-Stat3 was
decreased 90% by BBI-608 10M treatment in H226. Untreated H226, p-stat3
was observed in cytoplasma and localized in the nucleus. As compared with
untreated cells, p-stat3, c-Myc were decrease in cytoplasma and was not
localized in the nucleus with BBI-608 treated cells. BBI-608 suppressed
tumor growth (p<0.05) and completely suppressed tumor growth with
radiation in mouse model.Conclusion:In this study, we have shown that
BBI-608 inhibited the proliferation of all MPM cell (epithelial,
biphasic, sarcomatoid) lines and inhibited Stat3 phosphorylation and
blocked the translocation to the nucleus. We also demonstrated that
BBBI-608 completely suppressed tumor growth with radiation in mouse
model. Furthermore, Stat3 inhibitor with Radiation Therapy (START) is
promising in MPM therapy.

