Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Primate-specific estrogen-induced long noncoding RNAs as targets
for breast cancer treatment


Purpose: Estrogen is a proliferative hormone that regulates the growth of
estrogen receptor positive cells, including breast cancer cells. Although
estrogen is a global regulator of protein-coding genes as well as
non-coding RNA (ncRNA) genes, its effects on long ncRNA (lncRNA) genes,
the most abundant class of human ncRNAs, remain poorly understood. We
previously used custom microarrays and Taqman qRTPCR to identify 127
estrogen-responsive lncRNAs, and demonstrated a direct role for 25 of
these in breast cancer cell viability and proliferation: estrogen-induced
lncRNAs cause cell proliferation (reversed upon siRNA knockdown of these
lncRNAs) and estrogen-repressed lncRNAs cause cell death (induced upon
overexpression of those lncRNAs).Furthermore, since over 60% of human
lncRNAs, including CR593775, are primate-specific, eight additional
primate-specific lncRNAs were used in functional assays to determine
whether primate-specific lncRNAs are functional in breast
cancer.Methods/Results: We ablated two new estrogen-induced
primate-specific lncRNAs with two independent siRNAs each and validated
the knockdowns by qRTPCR. Post-transfection MTT and crystal violet cell
proliferation assays revealed that for one lncRNA, both knockdowns
reduced cell viability and proliferation. We also used Stellaris RNA
fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) to determine that the
primate-specific estrogen-repressed cell death inducer lncRNA BC041455 is
cytoplasmic in MCF7 cells. In addition, CR593775, our top
estrogen-induced lncRNA, does not regulate the viability and
proliferation of nonmalignant MCF10A breast cells as compared to breast
cancer cells that are estrogen receptor positive (T47D, MCF7) and
negative (MDA-MB-231).Conclusion: The primate-specific estrogen-induced
lncRNAs are cytoplasmic targets for breast cancer treatment that leads to
reduced proliferation and cell viability.

