Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PIN1 protects GLI1 from ubiquitination and promotes
Hedgehog-driven medulloblastoma tumorigenesis


Medulloblastoma is the most common malignant brain tumor of childhood.
Therapeutic approaches to medulloblastoma have led to significant
improvements, but are achieved at a high cost to quality of life.
Aberrant upregulation of the hedgehog (Hh) pathway drives cerebellar
tumorigenesis in 30% of medulloblastoma patients. Hh pathway inhibitors
such as the SMO antagonist Vismodegib are currently being tested in
Hh-activated medulloblastoma and the preliminary results are encouraging.
However, resistance to SMO inhibition can be acquired, leading to
relapse. Alternative therapeutic approaches are needed. We aim to uncover
novel Hh signal modulators that are essential in medulloblastoma to
maintain tumorigenic potential. Using our proteomic platform for
systematic protein interaction mapping, we discovered a novel interaction
between GLI1, a key transcription factor for the mediation of Hh signals,
and PIN1, a peptidylprolyl cis/trans isomerase that regulates the
post-phosphorylation conformation of its substrates. Our results support
a molecular model in which PIN1 protects GLI1 from proteasomal
degradation, thus contributing to the positive regulation of Hh signals.
Most importantly, our in vivo functional analyses of PIN1 in mouse models
of Hh-driven medulloblastoma demonstrate that the loss-of-PIN1 impairs
tumor development and increases survival by 3 fold, from 57 to 158 days
(P Medulloblastoma is the most common malignant brain tumor of childhood.
Therapeutic approaches to medulloblastoma have led to significant
improvements, but are achieved at a high cost to quality of life.
Aberrant upregulation of the hedgehog (Hh) pathway drives cerebellar
tumorigenesis in 30% of medulloblastoma patients. Hh pathway inhibitors
such as the SMO antagonist Vismodegib are currently being tested in
Hh-activated medulloblastoma and the preliminary results are encouraging.
However, resistance to SMO inhibition can be acquired, leading to
relapse. Alternative therapeutic approaches are needed. We aim to uncover
novel Hh signal modulators that are essential in medulloblastoma to
maintain tumorigenic potential. Using our proteomic platform for
systematic protein interaction mapping, we discovered a novel interaction
between GLI1, a key transcription factor for the mediation of Hh signals,
and PIN1, a peptidylprolyl cis/trans isomerase that regulates the
post-phosphorylation conformation of its substrates. Our results support
a molecular model in which PIN1 protects GLI1 from proteasomal
degradation, thus contributing to the positive regulation of Hh signals.
Most importantly, our in vivo functional analyses of PIN1 in mouse models
of Hh-driven medulloblastoma demonstrate that the loss-of-PIN1 impairs
tumor development and increases survival by 3 fold, from 57 to 158 days
(P < 0.0001), establishing PIN1 as a key factor in Hh-driven
medulloblastoma tumorigenesis. Finally, in human medulloblastoma tumor
samples, the GLI1 and PIN1 proteins are correlated in their expression,
supporting the relevance of the GLI1/PIN1 interaction in this disease
context. In summary, the discovery of the GLI1/PIN1 interaction uncovers
PIN1 as a novel therapeutic target in medulloblastoma tumorigenesis. If
our hypothesis is validated, i.e., PIN1 inhibitors can improve survival
in mouse models of Hh-driven medulloblastoma, our project will strongly
justify testing the clinical relevance of PIN1 blockade in
medulloblastoma patients.

