Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clinico-pathological and molecular features associated with TP53
mutation in 3457 molecularly-profiled colorectal cancers (CRCs)


Deregulation of the p53 tumor suppressor gene (TP53) is a key event
contributing to transformation and aggressive metastatic features of CRC.
Patients with TP53 mutation are often resistant to therapy and carry a
poor prognosis. We investigated TP53 mutation in a cohort of 3457 CRCs to
identify molecular features specific to TP53-mutated CRC tumors. The 3457
CRC clinical samples were evaluated for tumor profiling (Caris Life
Sciences, Phoenix, AZ). Tests included Sanger or next generation
sequencing (NGS), protein expression by immunohistochemistry (IHC) and
gene amplification by in situ hybridization (ISH). TP53 mutation was
observed in 2106 or 61% of CRCs analyzed. 2018 or 96% of these mutant
TP53 tumors carried one TP53 mutation, 83 (4%) carried 2 mutations, 4
carried 3 and 1 tumor carried 4 mutations. Among the 2200 mutations found
in TP53, 37% were found at one of the six hotspots within the DNA binding
domain (R175, G245, R248, R249, R273 and R282). Overall, 1554 (71%) were
missense mutations, 367 (17%) nonsense, 209 (9.5%) frameshift, 45 (2%)
small in-frame in-dels, and 25 (1.1%) mutations that affect splicing. In
this cohort, TP53 mutation was more prevalent in male patients (64% vs.
57%, PDeregulation of the p53 tumor suppressor gene (TP53) is a key event
contributing to transformation and aggressive metastatic features of CRC.
Patients with TP53 mutation are often resistant to therapy and carry a
poor prognosis. We investigated TP53 mutation in a cohort of 3457 CRCs to
identify molecular features specific to TP53-mutated CRC tumors. The 3457
CRC clinical samples were evaluated for tumor profiling (Caris Life
Sciences, Phoenix, AZ). Tests included Sanger or next generation
sequencing (NGS), protein expression by immunohistochemistry (IHC) and
gene amplification by in situ hybridization (ISH). TP53 mutation was
observed in 2106 or 61% of CRCs analyzed. 2018 or 96% of these mutant
TP53 tumors carried one TP53 mutation, 83 (4%) carried 2 mutations, 4
carried 3 and 1 tumor carried 4 mutations. Among the 2200 mutations found
in TP53, 37% were found at one of the six hotspots within the DNA binding
domain (R175, G245, R248, R249, R273 and R282). Overall, 1554 (71%) were
missense mutations, 367 (17%) nonsense, 209 (9.5%) frameshift, 45 (2%)
small in-frame in-dels, and 25 (1.1%) mutations that affect splicing. In
this cohort, TP53 mutation was more prevalent in male patients (64% vs.
57%, P<0.0001) and was more likely to occur in tumors that originated
from the left colon (69%) as compared to the right colon (45%,
pDeregulation of the p53 tumor suppressor gene (TP53) is a key event
contributing to transformation and aggressive metastatic features of CRC.
Patients with TP53 mutation are often resistant to therapy and carry a
poor prognosis. We investigated TP53 mutation in a cohort of 3457 CRCs to
identify molecular features specific to TP53-mutated CRC tumors. The 3457
CRC clinical samples were evaluated for tumor profiling (Caris Life
Sciences, Phoenix, AZ). Tests included Sanger or next generation
sequencing (NGS), protein expression by immunohistochemistry (IHC) and
gene amplification by in situ hybridization (ISH). TP53 mutation was
observed in 2106 or 61% of CRCs analyzed. 2018 or 96% of these mutant
TP53 tumors carried one TP53 mutation, 83 (4%) carried 2 mutations, 4
carried 3 and 1 tumor carried 4 mutations. Among the 2200 mutations found
in TP53, 37% were found at one of the six hotspots within the DNA binding
domain (R175, G245, R248, R249, R273 and R282). Overall, 1554 (71%) were
missense mutations, 367 (17%) nonsense, 209 (9.5%) frameshift, 45 (2%)
small in-frame in-dels, and 25 (1.1%) mutations that affect splicing. In
this cohort, TP53 mutation was more prevalent in male patients (64% vs.
57%, P<0.0001) and was more likely to occur in tumors that originated
from the left colon (69%) as compared to the right colon (45%, p<0.0001).
TP53 mutation rate was not correlated with patient age, histology or
whether the tumor sample was taken from the primary or metastatic sites.
When the molecular features of TP53-mutated tumors were compared to those
of wild-type TP53, mutated tumors carried significantly higher Her2 IHC
expression (2.5% vs. 1.0%, p = 0.0039) and gene amplification (3.7% vs.
1.4%, p = 0.0002), as well as higher MGMT (61% vs. 53%, pDeregulation of
the p53 tumor suppressor gene (TP53) is a key event contributing to
transformation and aggressive metastatic features of CRC. Patients with
TP53 mutation are often resistant to therapy and carry a poor prognosis.
We investigated TP53 mutation in a cohort of 3457 CRCs to identify
molecular features specific to TP53-mutated CRC tumors. The 3457 CRC
clinical samples were evaluated for tumor profiling (Caris Life Sciences,
Phoenix, AZ). Tests included Sanger or next generation sequencing (NGS),
protein expression by immunohistochemistry (IHC) and gene amplification
by in situ hybridization (ISH). TP53 mutation was observed in 2106 or 61%
of CRCs analyzed. 2018 or 96% of these mutant TP53 tumors carried one
TP53 mutation, 83 (4%) carried 2 mutations, 4 carried 3 and 1 tumor
carried 4 mutations. Among the 2200 mutations found in TP53, 37% were
found at one of the six hotspots within the DNA binding domain (R175,
G245, R248, R249, R273 and R282). Overall, 1554 (71%) were missense
mutations, 367 (17%) nonsense, 209 (9.5%) frameshift, 45 (2%) small
in-frame in-dels, and 25 (1.1%) mutations that affect splicing. In this
cohort, TP53 mutation was more prevalent in male patients (64% vs. 57%,
P<0.0001) and was more likely to occur in tumors that originated from the
left colon (69%) as compared to the right colon (45%, p<0.0001). TP53
mutation rate was not correlated with patient age, histology or whether
the tumor sample was taken from the primary or metastatic sites. When the
molecular features of TP53-mutated tumors were compared to those of
wild-type TP53, mutated tumors carried significantly higher Her2 IHC
expression (2.5% vs. 1.0%, p = 0.0039) and gene amplification (3.7% vs.
1.4%, p = 0.0002), as well as higher MGMT (61% vs. 53%, p<0.0001) and
TOPO2A expression (92% vs. 81%, pDeregulation of the p53 tumor suppressor
gene (TP53) is a key event contributing to transformation and aggressive
metastatic features of CRC. Patients with TP53 mutation are often
resistant to therapy and carry a poor prognosis. We investigated TP53
mutation in a cohort of 3457 CRCs to identify molecular features specific
to TP53-mutated CRC tumors. The 3457 CRC clinical samples were evaluated
for tumor profiling (Caris Life Sciences, Phoenix, AZ). Tests included
Sanger or next generation sequencing (NGS), protein expression by
immunohistochemistry (IHC) and gene amplification by in situ
hybridization (ISH). TP53 mutation was observed in 2106 or 61% of CRCs
analyzed. 2018 or 96% of these mutant TP53 tumors carried one TP53
mutation, 83 (4%) carried 2 mutations, 4 carried 3 and 1 tumor carried 4
mutations. Among the 2200 mutations found in TP53, 37% were found at one
of the six hotspots within the DNA binding domain (R175, G245, R248,
R249, R273 and R282). Overall, 1554 (71%) were missense mutations, 367
(17%) nonsense, 209 (9.5%) frameshift, 45 (2%) small in-frame in-dels,
and 25 (1.1%) mutations that affect splicing. In this cohort, TP53
mutation was more prevalent in male patients (64% vs. 57%, P<0.0001) and
was more likely to occur in tumors that originated from the left colon
(69%) as compared to the right colon (45%, p<0.0001). TP53 mutation rate
was not correlated with patient age, histology or whether the tumor
sample was taken from the primary or metastatic sites. When the molecular
features of TP53-mutated tumors were compared to those of wild-type TP53,
mutated tumors carried significantly higher Her2 IHC expression (2.5% vs.
1.0%, p = 0.0039) and gene amplification (3.7% vs. 1.4%, p = 0.0002), as
well as higher MGMT (61% vs. 53%, p<0.0001) and TOPO2A expression (92%
vs. 81%, p<0.0001). On the other hand, lower EGFR expression (57.4% vs.
70%, pDeregulation of the p53 tumor suppressor gene (TP53) is a key event
contributing to transformation and aggressive metastatic features of CRC.
Patients with TP53 mutation are often resistant to therapy and carry a
poor prognosis. We investigated TP53 mutation in a cohort of 3457 CRCs to
identify molecular features specific to TP53-mutated CRC tumors. The 3457
CRC clinical samples were evaluated for tumor profiling (Caris Life
Sciences, Phoenix, AZ). Tests included Sanger or next generation
sequencing (NGS), protein expression by immunohistochemistry (IHC) and
gene amplification by in situ hybridization (ISH). TP53 mutation was
observed in 2106 or 61% of CRCs analyzed. 2018 or 96% of these mutant
TP53 tumors carried one TP53 mutation, 83 (4%) carried 2 mutations, 4
carried 3 and 1 tumor carried 4 mutations. Among the 2200 mutations found
in TP53, 37% were found at one of the six hotspots within the DNA binding
domain (R175, G245, R248, R249, R273 and R282). Overall, 1554 (71%) were
missense mutations, 367 (17%) nonsense, 209 (9.5%) frameshift, 45 (2%)
small in-frame in-dels, and 25 (1.1%) mutations that affect splicing. In
this cohort, TP53 mutation was more prevalent in male patients (64% vs.
57%, P<0.0001) and was more likely to occur in tumors that originated
from the left colon (69%) as compared to the right colon (45%, p<0.0001).
TP53 mutation rate was not correlated with patient age, histology or
whether the tumor sample was taken from the primary or metastatic sites.
When the molecular features of TP53-mutated tumors were compared to those
of wild-type TP53, mutated tumors carried significantly higher Her2 IHC
expression (2.5% vs. 1.0%, p = 0.0039) and gene amplification (3.7% vs.
1.4%, p = 0.0002), as well as higher MGMT (61% vs. 53%, p<0.0001) and
TOPO2A expression (92% vs. 81%, p<0.0001). On the other hand, lower EGFR
expression (57.4% vs. 70%, p<0.0001), PTEN expression (47.9% vs. 61%,
pDeregulation of the p53 tumor suppressor gene (TP53) is a key event
contributing to transformation and aggressive metastatic features of CRC.
Patients with TP53 mutation are often resistant to therapy and carry a
poor prognosis. We investigated TP53 mutation in a cohort of 3457 CRCs to
identify molecular features specific to TP53-mutated CRC tumors. The 3457
CRC clinical samples were evaluated for tumor profiling (Caris Life
Sciences, Phoenix, AZ). Tests included Sanger or next generation
sequencing (NGS), protein expression by immunohistochemistry (IHC) and
gene amplification by in situ hybridization (ISH). TP53 mutation was
observed in 2106 or 61% of CRCs analyzed. 2018 or 96% of these mutant
TP53 tumors carried one TP53 mutation, 83 (4%) carried 2 mutations, 4
carried 3 and 1 tumor carried 4 mutations. Among the 2200 mutations found
in TP53, 37% were found at one of the six hotspots within the DNA binding
domain (R175, G245, R248, R249, R273 and R282). Overall, 1554 (71%) were
missense mutations, 367 (17%) nonsense, 209 (9.5%) frameshift, 45 (2%)
small in-frame in-dels, and 25 (1.1%) mutations that affect splicing. In
this cohort, TP53 mutation was more prevalent in male patients (64% vs.
57%, P<0.0001) and was more likely to occur in tumors that originated
from the left colon (69%) as compared to the right colon (45%, p<0.0001).
TP53 mutation rate was not correlated with patient age, histology or
whether the tumor sample was taken from the primary or metastatic sites.
When the molecular features of TP53-mutated tumors were compared to those
of wild-type TP53, mutated tumors carried significantly higher Her2 IHC
expression (2.5% vs. 1.0%, p = 0.0039) and gene amplification (3.7% vs.
1.4%, p = 0.0002), as well as higher MGMT (61% vs. 53%, p<0.0001) and
TOPO2A expression (92% vs. 81%, p<0.0001). On the other hand, lower EGFR
expression (57.4% vs. 70%, p<0.0001), PTEN expression (47.9% vs. 61%,
p<0.0001), microsatellite instability (2.5% vs. 11.5%, pDeregulation of
the p53 tumor suppressor gene (TP53) is a key event contributing to
transformation and aggressive metastatic features of CRC. Patients with
TP53 mutation are often resistant to therapy and carry a poor prognosis.
We investigated TP53 mutation in a cohort of 3457 CRCs to identify
molecular features specific to TP53-mutated CRC tumors. The 3457 CRC
clinical samples were evaluated for tumor profiling (Caris Life Sciences,
Phoenix, AZ). Tests included Sanger or next generation sequencing (NGS),
protein expression by immunohistochemistry (IHC) and gene amplification
by in situ hybridization (ISH). TP53 mutation was observed in 2106 or 61%
of CRCs analyzed. 2018 or 96% of these mutant TP53 tumors carried one
TP53 mutation, 83 (4%) carried 2 mutations, 4 carried 3 and 1 tumor
carried 4 mutations. Among the 2200 mutations found in TP53, 37% were
found at one of the six hotspots within the DNA binding domain (R175,
G245, R248, R249, R273 and R282). Overall, 1554 (71%) were missense
mutations, 367 (17%) nonsense, 209 (9.5%) frameshift, 45 (2%) small
in-frame in-dels, and 25 (1.1%) mutations that affect splicing. In this
cohort, TP53 mutation was more prevalent in male patients (64% vs. 57%,
P<0.0001) and was more likely to occur in tumors that originated from the
left colon (69%) as compared to the right colon (45%, p<0.0001). TP53
mutation rate was not correlated with patient age, histology or whether
the tumor sample was taken from the primary or metastatic sites. When the
molecular features of TP53-mutated tumors were compared to those of
wild-type TP53, mutated tumors carried significantly higher Her2 IHC
expression (2.5% vs. 1.0%, p = 0.0039) and gene amplification (3.7% vs.
1.4%, p = 0.0002), as well as higher MGMT (61% vs. 53%, p<0.0001) and
TOPO2A expression (92% vs. 81%, p<0.0001). On the other hand, lower EGFR
expression (57.4% vs. 70%, p<0.0001), PTEN expression (47.9% vs. 61%,
p<0.0001), microsatellite instability (2.5% vs. 11.5%, p<0.0001), ERCC1
(18% vs. 24%, pDeregulation of the p53 tumor suppressor gene (TP53) is a
key event contributing to transformation and aggressive metastatic
features of CRC. Patients with TP53 mutation are often resistant to
therapy and carry a poor prognosis. We investigated TP53 mutation in a
cohort of 3457 CRCs to identify molecular features specific to
TP53-mutated CRC tumors. The 3457 CRC clinical samples were evaluated for
tumor profiling (Caris Life Sciences, Phoenix, AZ). Tests included Sanger
or next generation sequencing (NGS), protein expression by
immunohistochemistry (IHC) and gene amplification by in situ
hybridization (ISH). TP53 mutation was observed in 2106 or 61% of CRCs
analyzed. 2018 or 96% of these mutant TP53 tumors carried one TP53
mutation, 83 (4%) carried 2 mutations, 4 carried 3 and 1 tumor carried 4
mutations. Among the 2200 mutations found in TP53, 37% were found at one
of the six hotspots within the DNA binding domain (R175, G245, R248,
R249, R273 and R282). Overall, 1554 (71%) were missense mutations, 367
(17%) nonsense, 209 (9.5%) frameshift, 45 (2%) small in-frame in-dels,
and 25 (1.1%) mutations that affect splicing. In this cohort, TP53
mutation was more prevalent in male patients (64% vs. 57%, P<0.0001) and
was more likely to occur in tumors that originated from the left colon
(69%) as compared to the right colon (45%, p<0.0001). TP53 mutation rate
was not correlated with patient age, histology or whether the tumor
sample was taken from the primary or metastatic sites. When the molecular
features of TP53-mutated tumors were compared to those of wild-type TP53,
mutated tumors carried significantly higher Her2 IHC expression (2.5% vs.
1.0%, p = 0.0039) and gene amplification (3.7% vs. 1.4%, p = 0.0002), as
well as higher MGMT (61% vs. 53%, p<0.0001) and TOPO2A expression (92%
vs. 81%, p<0.0001). On the other hand, lower EGFR expression (57.4% vs.
70%, p<0.0001), PTEN expression (47.9% vs. 61%, p<0.0001), microsatellite
instability (2.5% vs. 11.5%, p<0.0001), ERCC1 (18% vs. 24%, p<0.0001) and
TS expression (31% vs. 38%, pDeregulation of the p53 tumor suppressor
gene (TP53) is a key event contributing to transformation and aggressive
metastatic features of CRC. Patients with TP53 mutation are often
resistant to therapy and carry a poor prognosis. We investigated TP53
mutation in a cohort of 3457 CRCs to identify molecular features specific
to TP53-mutated CRC tumors. The 3457 CRC clinical samples were evaluated
for tumor profiling (Caris Life Sciences, Phoenix, AZ). Tests included
Sanger or next generation sequencing (NGS), protein expression by
immunohistochemistry (IHC) and gene amplification by in situ
hybridization (ISH). TP53 mutation was observed in 2106 or 61% of CRCs
analyzed. 2018 or 96% of these mutant TP53 tumors carried one TP53
mutation, 83 (4%) carried 2 mutations, 4 carried 3 and 1 tumor carried 4
mutations. Among the 2200 mutations found in TP53, 37% were found at one
of the six hotspots within the DNA binding domain (R175, G245, R248,
R249, R273 and R282). Overall, 1554 (71%) were missense mutations, 367
(17%) nonsense, 209 (9.5%) frameshift, 45 (2%) small in-frame in-dels,
and 25 (1.1%) mutations that affect splicing. In this cohort, TP53
mutation was more prevalent in male patients (64% vs. 57%, P<0.0001) and
was more likely to occur in tumors that originated from the left colon
(69%) as compared to the right colon (45%, p<0.0001). TP53 mutation rate
was not correlated with patient age, histology or whether the tumor
sample was taken from the primary or metastatic sites. When the molecular
features of TP53-mutated tumors were compared to those of wild-type TP53,
mutated tumors carried significantly higher Her2 IHC expression (2.5% vs.
1.0%, p = 0.0039) and gene amplification (3.7% vs. 1.4%, p = 0.0002), as
well as higher MGMT (61% vs. 53%, p<0.0001) and TOPO2A expression (92%
vs. 81%, p<0.0001). On the other hand, lower EGFR expression (57.4% vs.
70%, p<0.0001), PTEN expression (47.9% vs. 61%, p<0.0001), microsatellite
instability (2.5% vs. 11.5%, p<0.0001), ERCC1 (18% vs. 24%, p<0.0001) and
TS expression (31% vs. 38%, p<0.0001) were associated with TP53-mutated
tumors. TP53-mutated CRCs carried higher rates of APC mutation (63% vs.
53%, pDeregulation of the p53 tumor suppressor gene (TP53) is a key event
contributing to transformation and aggressive metastatic features of CRC.
Patients with TP53 mutation are often resistant to therapy and carry a
poor prognosis. We investigated TP53 mutation in a cohort of 3457 CRCs to
identify molecular features specific to TP53-mutated CRC tumors. The 3457
CRC clinical samples were evaluated for tumor profiling (Caris Life
Sciences, Phoenix, AZ). Tests included Sanger or next generation
sequencing (NGS), protein expression by immunohistochemistry (IHC) and
gene amplification by in situ hybridization (ISH). TP53 mutation was
observed in 2106 or 61% of CRCs analyzed. 2018 or 96% of these mutant
TP53 tumors carried one TP53 mutation, 83 (4%) carried 2 mutations, 4
carried 3 and 1 tumor carried 4 mutations. Among the 2200 mutations found
in TP53, 37% were found at one of the six hotspots within the DNA binding
domain (R175, G245, R248, R249, R273 and R282). Overall, 1554 (71%) were
missense mutations, 367 (17%) nonsense, 209 (9.5%) frameshift, 45 (2%)
small in-frame in-dels, and 25 (1.1%) mutations that affect splicing. In
this cohort, TP53 mutation was more prevalent in male patients (64% vs.
57%, P<0.0001) and was more likely to occur in tumors that originated
from the left colon (69%) as compared to the right colon (45%, p<0.0001).
TP53 mutation rate was not correlated with patient age, histology or
whether the tumor sample was taken from the primary or metastatic sites.
When the molecular features of TP53-mutated tumors were compared to those
of wild-type TP53, mutated tumors carried significantly higher Her2 IHC
expression (2.5% vs. 1.0%, p = 0.0039) and gene amplification (3.7% vs.
1.4%, p = 0.0002), as well as higher MGMT (61% vs. 53%, p<0.0001) and
TOPO2A expression (92% vs. 81%, p<0.0001). On the other hand, lower EGFR
expression (57.4% vs. 70%, p<0.0001), PTEN expression (47.9% vs. 61%,
p<0.0001), microsatellite instability (2.5% vs. 11.5%, p<0.0001), ERCC1
(18% vs. 24%, p<0.0001) and TS expression (31% vs. 38%, p<0.0001) were
associated with TP53-mutated tumors. TP53-mutated CRCs carried higher
rates of APC mutation (63% vs. 53%, p<0.0001), but lower rates of KRAS
(46% vs. 54%, pDeregulation of the p53 tumor suppressor gene (TP53) is a
key event contributing to transformation and aggressive metastatic
features of CRC. Patients with TP53 mutation are often resistant to
therapy and carry a poor prognosis. We investigated TP53 mutation in a
cohort of 3457 CRCs to identify molecular features specific to
TP53-mutated CRC tumors. The 3457 CRC clinical samples were evaluated for
tumor profiling (Caris Life Sciences, Phoenix, AZ). Tests included Sanger
or next generation sequencing (NGS), protein expression by
immunohistochemistry (IHC) and gene amplification by in situ
hybridization (ISH). TP53 mutation was observed in 2106 or 61% of CRCs
analyzed. 2018 or 96% of these mutant TP53 tumors carried one TP53
mutation, 83 (4%) carried 2 mutations, 4 carried 3 and 1 tumor carried 4
mutations. Among the 2200 mutations found in TP53, 37% were found at one
of the six hotspots within the DNA binding domain (R175, G245, R248,
R249, R273 and R282). Overall, 1554 (71%) were missense mutations, 367
(17%) nonsense, 209 (9.5%) frameshift, 45 (2%) small in-frame in-dels,
and 25 (1.1%) mutations that affect splicing. In this cohort, TP53
mutation was more prevalent in male patients (64% vs. 57%, P<0.0001) and
was more likely to occur in tumors that originated from the left colon
(69%) as compared to the right colon (45%, p<0.0001). TP53 mutation rate
was not correlated with patient age, histology or whether the tumor
sample was taken from the primary or metastatic sites. When the molecular
features of TP53-mutated tumors were compared to those of wild-type TP53,
mutated tumors carried significantly higher Her2 IHC expression (2.5% vs.
1.0%, p = 0.0039) and gene amplification (3.7% vs. 1.4%, p = 0.0002), as
well as higher MGMT (61% vs. 53%, p<0.0001) and TOPO2A expression (92%
vs. 81%, p<0.0001). On the other hand, lower EGFR expression (57.4% vs.
70%, p<0.0001), PTEN expression (47.9% vs. 61%, p<0.0001), microsatellite
instability (2.5% vs. 11.5%, p<0.0001), ERCC1 (18% vs. 24%, p<0.0001) and
TS expression (31% vs. 38%, p<0.0001) were associated with TP53-mutated
tumors. TP53-mutated CRCs carried higher rates of APC mutation (63% vs.
53%, p<0.0001), but lower rates of KRAS (46% vs. 54%, p<0.0001), PIK3CA
(11.6% vs. 22%, pDeregulation of the p53 tumor suppressor gene (TP53) is
a key event contributing to transformation and aggressive metastatic
features of CRC. Patients with TP53 mutation are often resistant to
therapy and carry a poor prognosis. We investigated TP53 mutation in a
cohort of 3457 CRCs to identify molecular features specific to
TP53-mutated CRC tumors. The 3457 CRC clinical samples were evaluated for
tumor profiling (Caris Life Sciences, Phoenix, AZ). Tests included Sanger
or next generation sequencing (NGS), protein expression by
immunohistochemistry (IHC) and gene amplification by in situ
hybridization (ISH). TP53 mutation was observed in 2106 or 61% of CRCs
analyzed. 2018 or 96% of these mutant TP53 tumors carried one TP53
mutation, 83 (4%) carried 2 mutations, 4 carried 3 and 1 tumor carried 4
mutations. Among the 2200 mutations found in TP53, 37% were found at one
of the six hotspots within the DNA binding domain (R175, G245, R248,
R249, R273 and R282). Overall, 1554 (71%) were missense mutations, 367
(17%) nonsense, 209 (9.5%) frameshift, 45 (2%) small in-frame in-dels,
and 25 (1.1%) mutations that affect splicing. In this cohort, TP53
mutation was more prevalent in male patients (64% vs. 57%, P<0.0001) and
was more likely to occur in tumors that originated from the left colon
(69%) as compared to the right colon (45%, p<0.0001). TP53 mutation rate
was not correlated with patient age, histology or whether the tumor
sample was taken from the primary or metastatic sites. When the molecular
features of TP53-mutated tumors were compared to those of wild-type TP53,
mutated tumors carried significantly higher Her2 IHC expression (2.5% vs.
1.0%, p = 0.0039) and gene amplification (3.7% vs. 1.4%, p = 0.0002), as
well as higher MGMT (61% vs. 53%, p<0.0001) and TOPO2A expression (92%
vs. 81%, p<0.0001). On the other hand, lower EGFR expression (57.4% vs.
70%, p<0.0001), PTEN expression (47.9% vs. 61%, p<0.0001), microsatellite
instability (2.5% vs. 11.5%, p<0.0001), ERCC1 (18% vs. 24%, p<0.0001) and
TS expression (31% vs. 38%, p<0.0001) were associated with TP53-mutated
tumors. TP53-mutated CRCs carried higher rates of APC mutation (63% vs.
53%, p<0.0001), but lower rates of KRAS (46% vs. 54%, p<0.0001), PIK3CA
(11.6% vs. 22%, p<0.0001), PTEN (2% vs. 5.2%, pDeregulation of the p53
tumor suppressor gene (TP53) is a key event contributing to
transformation and aggressive metastatic features of CRC. Patients with
TP53 mutation are often resistant to therapy and carry a poor prognosis.
We investigated TP53 mutation in a cohort of 3457 CRCs to identify
molecular features specific to TP53-mutated CRC tumors. The 3457 CRC
clinical samples were evaluated for tumor profiling (Caris Life Sciences,
Phoenix, AZ). Tests included Sanger or next generation sequencing (NGS),
protein expression by immunohistochemistry (IHC) and gene amplification
by in situ hybridization (ISH). TP53 mutation was observed in 2106 or 61%
of CRCs analyzed. 2018 or 96% of these mutant TP53 tumors carried one
TP53 mutation, 83 (4%) carried 2 mutations, 4 carried 3 and 1 tumor
carried 4 mutations. Among the 2200 mutations found in TP53, 37% were
found at one of the six hotspots within the DNA binding domain (R175,
G245, R248, R249, R273 and R282). Overall, 1554 (71%) were missense
mutations, 367 (17%) nonsense, 209 (9.5%) frameshift, 45 (2%) small
in-frame in-dels, and 25 (1.1%) mutations that affect splicing. In this
cohort, TP53 mutation was more prevalent in male patients (64% vs. 57%,
P<0.0001) and was more likely to occur in tumors that originated from the
left colon (69%) as compared to the right colon (45%, p<0.0001). TP53
mutation rate was not correlated with patient age, histology or whether
the tumor sample was taken from the primary or metastatic sites. When the
molecular features of TP53-mutated tumors were compared to those of
wild-type TP53, mutated tumors carried significantly higher Her2 IHC
expression (2.5% vs. 1.0%, p = 0.0039) and gene amplification (3.7% vs.
1.4%, p = 0.0002), as well as higher MGMT (61% vs. 53%, p<0.0001) and
TOPO2A expression (92% vs. 81%, p<0.0001). On the other hand, lower EGFR
expression (57.4% vs. 70%, p<0.0001), PTEN expression (47.9% vs. 61%,
p<0.0001), microsatellite instability (2.5% vs. 11.5%, p<0.0001), ERCC1
(18% vs. 24%, p<0.0001) and TS expression (31% vs. 38%, p<0.0001) were
associated with TP53-mutated tumors. TP53-mutated CRCs carried higher
rates of APC mutation (63% vs. 53%, p<0.0001), but lower rates of KRAS
(46% vs. 54%, p<0.0001), PIK3CA (11.6% vs. 22%, p<0.0001), PTEN (2% vs.
5.2%, p<0.0001), GNAS (1% vs. 8.3%, pDeregulation of the p53 tumor
suppressor gene (TP53) is a key event contributing to transformation and
aggressive metastatic features of CRC. Patients with TP53 mutation are
often resistant to therapy and carry a poor prognosis. We investigated
TP53 mutation in a cohort of 3457 CRCs to identify molecular features
specific to TP53-mutated CRC tumors. The 3457 CRC clinical samples were
evaluated for tumor profiling (Caris Life Sciences, Phoenix, AZ). Tests
included Sanger or next generation sequencing (NGS), protein expression
by immunohistochemistry (IHC) and gene amplification by in situ
hybridization (ISH). TP53 mutation was observed in 2106 or 61% of CRCs
analyzed. 2018 or 96% of these mutant TP53 tumors carried one TP53
mutation, 83 (4%) carried 2 mutations, 4 carried 3 and 1 tumor carried 4
mutations. Among the 2200 mutations found in TP53, 37% were found at one
of the six hotspots within the DNA binding domain (R175, G245, R248,
R249, R273 and R282). Overall, 1554 (71%) were missense mutations, 367
(17%) nonsense, 209 (9.5%) frameshift, 45 (2%) small in-frame in-dels,
and 25 (1.1%) mutations that affect splicing. In this cohort, TP53
mutation was more prevalent in male patients (64% vs. 57%, P<0.0001) and
was more likely to occur in tumors that originated from the left colon
(69%) as compared to the right colon (45%, p<0.0001). TP53 mutation rate
was not correlated with patient age, histology or whether the tumor
sample was taken from the primary or metastatic sites. When the molecular
features of TP53-mutated tumors were compared to those of wild-type TP53,
mutated tumors carried significantly higher Her2 IHC expression (2.5% vs.
1.0%, p = 0.0039) and gene amplification (3.7% vs. 1.4%, p = 0.0002), as
well as higher MGMT (61% vs. 53%, p<0.0001) and TOPO2A expression (92%
vs. 81%, p<0.0001). On the other hand, lower EGFR expression (57.4% vs.
70%, p<0.0001), PTEN expression (47.9% vs. 61%, p<0.0001), microsatellite
instability (2.5% vs. 11.5%, p<0.0001), ERCC1 (18% vs. 24%, p<0.0001) and
TS expression (31% vs. 38%, p<0.0001) were associated with TP53-mutated
tumors. TP53-mutated CRCs carried higher rates of APC mutation (63% vs.
53%, p<0.0001), but lower rates of KRAS (46% vs. 54%, p<0.0001), PIK3CA
(11.6% vs. 22%, p<0.0001), PTEN (2% vs. 5.2%, p<0.0001), GNAS (1% vs.
8.3%, p<0.0001) and AKT1 (0.6% vs. 1.7%, p = 0.0016) mutation. In this
cohort of 3457 molecularly profiled CRCs, TP53 mutation was more
prevalent in males and tumors that originated from the left colon.
Distinct molecular features associated with TP53 mutation in CRC included
lower frequency of PI3K/Akt/mTor pathway activation and were more likely
to be microsatellite stable.. Our findings suggest differential presence
of therapeutic targets in CRC tumors based on TP53 mutation status.

