Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epigenetic silencing of miR-199a-3p is associated with increased
cell survival, enhanced cell motility, and sensitivity to tivantinib
through regulation of c-Met expression in hepatocellular carcinoma


Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the third leading cause of cancer death
worldwide. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small non-coding RNAs that regulate
gene expression and can act as tumor suppressors or oncogenes. To
identify miRNA involved in the development of HCC, we performed a
genome-wide miRNA gene expression analysis using the human miRNA
microarray (Agilent) in paired tumor and non-tumor tissues from patients
with primary HCC. The array-based miRNA expression profiles were
validated by quantitative PCR. We also screened for genes with promoter
DNA hypermethylation using a genome-wide DNA methylation microarray
analysis (the Illumina HumanMethylation27 BeadChip) in primary HCCs. We
found that miR-214-3p, miR-199a-5p, and miR-199a-3p were significantly
down-regulated by aberrant promoter hypermethylation in HCC tumors. The
c-Met gene was identified as the direct target of miR-199a-3p. Our study
showed that reduced expression of miR-199a-3p was associated with
increased cell survival through the c-Met/Akt pathway and enhanced cell
motility through phosphorylation of FAK. The transfection of miR-199a-3p
mimic reduced the expression of c-Met and enhanced the sensitivity to the
c-Met inhibitor tivantinib in HCC cells. In conclusion, our results
suggest that epigenetic silencing of tumor suppressor miR-199a-3p may be
involved in hepatocarcinogenesis through regulation of c-Met
expressionand and be associated with the sensitivity to tivantinib.

