Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A therapeutic antibody that inhibits CD73 activity by dual
mechanisms


CD73 has a central role in dictating the adenosine concentration within
the tumor as it is the final step in converting extracellular ATP to
adenosine. Thus, substantial reduction of CD73 enzymatic activity has the
potential to reduce immunosuppression of effector immune cells within the
tumor. We present data describing an anti-human CD73 antibody that
suppresses CD73 by two mechanisms: 1. direct inhibition of enzymatic
activity upon binding to CD73 and 2. rapid, near-complete internalization
of the enzyme. Durable reduction of cell-surface CD73 was observed in
multiple tumor cell lines both in vitro and in vivo. The unique
properties of this antibody are a result of the use of a human IgG2-IgG1
hybrid antibody with effector function eliminated by specific mutations
of the Fc. The IgG2 sequence of this antibody drives superior
internalization of CD73 and enhanced CD73 inhibition. Syngeneic tumor
models demonstrate that CD73 contributes to resistance to anti-tumor
therapy. Combination therapy with PD-1 blockade and a surrogate
anti-mouse-CD73 antibody resulted in a better anti-tumor efficacy than
either treatment alone. Finally, we demonstrate a novel technique for
assessing CD73 enzymatic activity in situ that has potential for clinical
application. These data support antibody-based anti-CD73 therapy in
cancer and highlight a novel mechanism for inhibition of CD73 enzymatic
activity.

