Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DEC1 negatively regulates AMPK activity via LKB1


Basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor DEC1
(bHLHE40/Stra13/Sharp2) is one of the clock genes that show a circadian
rhythm in various tissues. AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) activity
plays important roles in metabolism and in cell death induced by glucose
depletion. Recent reports have shown that AMPK activity exhibited a
circadian rhythm. However, how the circadian rhythm of AMPK activity is
regulated is not known. The aim of this study is the direct correlation
between DEC1 expression and AMPK activity. DEC1 protein and AMPK activity
showed a circadian rhythm in the mouse liver with different peak levels.
A medium change and serum shock led to rhythmic patterns of DEC1 protein
and AMPK activity levels in WI-38 cells, and their peak levels occurred
at different times. However, changing the medium did not induce circadian
rhythms of DEC1 protein or AMPK activity levels in MCF-7 and U2OS cells,
in which the intensities of these levels had inversely correlated
patterns. Knocking down DEC1 expression increased AMPK activity, whereas
DEC1 overexpression decreased it. DEC1 bound to the E-box of the LKB1
promoter, decreasing the LKB1 activity and total protein levels. In
addition, knocking down DEC1 expression inhibited cell death under the
condition of glucose depletion, increasing the activity of both AMPK and
LKB1. Taken together, our results showed that the levels of DEC1 protein
and AMPK activity were affected even long after the medium change and
that the rhythmic patterns of these levels were inversely correlated. We
concluded that DEC1 negatively regulated AMPK activity via LKB1.

