Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CYC065, a novel CDK2/9 inhibitor, is an effective inducer of cell
death and synergizes with BCL2 and BET inhibitors in B-cell lymphoma,
including double-hit lymphomas


Introduction: Double-hit lymphomas (DHL), defined by concurrent MYC and
BCL2 rearrangements, have poor prognosis compared to standard-risk
diffuse large B cell lymphomas (DLBCL). Current treatment regimens
involve multiple chemotherapies, but do not specifically exploit these
molecular features of the disease.Several studies have established that:
(i) DLBCL show frequent overexpression of Mcl-1, an anti-apoptotic member
of the Bcl-2 family (30% and 50% in the ABC and GCB subtypes,
respectively), (ii) MYC-driven lymphomas are highly sensitive to
depletion of Mcl-1, (iii) MYC overexpression and inhibition of CDK
activity are synthetically lethal and (iv) resistance to BH3 mimetics
targeting Bcl-2 can be conferred by upregulation of Mcl-1.CYC065 is a
specific and potent CDK2/9 inhibitor, currently in a Phase 1 trial in
patients with advanced cancer (NCT02552953). The mechanism of action of
CYC065 involves rapid reduction of the levels of both Mcl-1 and MYC,
suggesting a therapeutic rationale for investigating this agent in DLBCL.
This preclinical study explored the single agent activity of CYC065 in B
cell lymphoma, and its potential to combine with other molecularly
targeted agents of interest, including venetoclax (ABT-199, a Bcl-2
inhibitor), and BET inhibitors.Methods: Single agent activity of CYC065
was explored using short pulse treatments (6-8 h) in B cell lymphoma cell
lines. Viability and total cell number were assessed 24, 48 or 72 h
following treatment. Levels of MYC, Bcl-2 and Mcl-1 were determined by
Western blotting at baseline and following treatment with CYC065. Cell
fate was examined by flow cytometry. CYC065 was combined with venetoclax
or BET inhibitors ((+)-JQ-1, GSK525762 and OTX-015), which were
administered concomitantly for a 6 h pulse or up to 72 h. Combination
data were analyzed by the Chou & Talalay method.Results: The median IC50
for CYC065 in 13 B cell lymphoma cell lines was 0.43 M. No obvious
difference was observed between ABC and GCB subtypes of DLBCL, and DHL
DLBCL lines had similar IC50 values to non-DHL DLBCL lines (median 0.47 M
vs 0.29 M; p = 0.95). As expected from the target inhibitory profile,
CYC065 caused a rapid decrease in the phosphorylation of S2 of the CTD of
RNA polymerase II followed by downregulation of Mcl-1 and MYC, and rapid
induction of apoptosis in sensitive cell lines. CYC065 had no impact on
Bcl-2 levels. Combining CYC065 with venetoclax was highly synergistic in
DHL lines (median CI values range from 0.1-0.8), and resulted in >90%
cell death. The combination of CYC065 and BET inhibitors was also highly
synergistic.Conclusions: CYC065 targets key oncogenic and survival
pathways in DLBCL. CYC065 is a potent and effective inducer of cell death
and combines synergistically with Bcl-2 or BET inhibitors in B cell
lymphoma cell lines, including DHLs, which represent an unmet clinical
need.

