Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PF-06840003: a highly selective IDO-1 inhibitor that shows good in
vivo efficacy in combination with immune checkpoint inhibitors


Tumors use tryptophan-catabolizing enzymes such as Indoleamine
2,3-dioxygenase-1 (IDO-1) to induce an immunosuppressive
microenvironment. IDO-1 expression is upregulated in many cancers and
described to be a resistance mechanism to immune checkpoint therapies.
IDO-1 is induced in response to inflammatory stimuli such as IFN- and
promotes immune tolerance through the catabolism of tryptophan and
accumulation of tryptophan catabolites including kynurenine. IDO-1
activity leads to effector T-cell anergy and enhanced Treg function
through upregulation of FoxP3. As such, IDO1 is a nexus for the induction
of key immunosuppressive mechanisms and represents an important
immunotherapeutic target in oncology. We have identified and
characterized a new IDO-1 inhibitor. PF-06840003 is a highly selective
orally bioavailable IDO-1 inhibitor. PF-06840003 reversed IDO-1-induced
T-cell anergy in vitro. In vivo, PF-06840003 reduced intratumoral
kynurenine levels in mice by >80% and inhibited tumor growth in multiple
preclinical syngeneic models in mice, in combination with immune
checkpoint inhibitors. PF-0684003 has favorable predicted human
pharmacokinetic properties, including a predicted t1/2 of 16-19 hours.
These studies highlight the strong potential of PF-06840003 as a clinical
candidate in Immuno-Oncology.

