Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: S49076, a novel kinase inhibitor of MET, AXL and FGFR,
demonstrates marked in vitro and in vivo efficacy in hepatocellular
carcinoma


Introduction: Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the second cause of
cancer-related deaths worldwide. While sorafenib may improve overall
survival in advanced HCC, new therapies are needed. Both preclinical and
clinical data support a role of MET and AXL receptor tyrosine kinases in
HCC progression. We thus evaluated S49076, a novel MET/AXL/FGFR inhibitor
in HCC cell lines in vitro and in a transgenic mouse model of
HCC.Materials and Methods: MET and AXL expressions were assessed in a
panel of HCC cell lines by western blot. Downstream signaling pathways
were investigated in the presence of HGF, GAS6 and S49076. Cell invasion
was evaluated on matrigel assay. Transgenic mice developing stage-defined
HCC were treated with S49076 (50mg/kg). Tumor response was evaluated
measuring liver volume by echo-doppler and the number of tumor nodules at
intermediary (12weeks) and final sacrifice (16 weeks).Results: Both MET
and AXL are expressed in the majority of HCC lines screened. Notably, a
high level of AXL was observed in the SK-HEP1 cells which were therefore
selected for further investigation. MET and AXL pathways were strongly
stimulated by their respective ligands, HGF and GAS6. Combination of HGF
and GAS6 led to marked activation of ERK. S49076 inhibited MET and AXL
pathway activation and HGF- and GAS6- induced invasion at nanomolar
concentrations. In vivo anti-tumor efficacy of S49076 was demonstrated in
a transgenic MET-expressing mouse model of HCC.Conclusion: S49076
displayed strong MET and AXL pathway inhibition and anti-invasive
properties in SK-HEP1 HCC cells. Moreover, S49076 demonstrated antitumor
activity in a mouse model of HCC. Together, these results would support
development of S49076 as an innovative treatment in HCC patients.

