Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oncogenic SOX2 signaling in bladder cancer


The intriguing phenomenon that cancer cells have biological features
similar to stem cells suggests that cancer and stem cells may share the
same regulatory signaling pathway. We found that SOX2, a master
transcriptional factor controlling self-renewal of stem cells, was highly
expressed in a subgroup of transitional cell carcinoma of bladder cancer,
correlating with the advanced pathological grade. Moreover, SOX2
expression was associated with poor overall survival and recurrence-free
survival outcomes in patients with bladder cancer. Knockdown of SOX2 in
SOX2-high 5637 bladder cancer cells attenuated cell growth. Consistently,
ectopic expression of SOX2 in SOX2-low T24 bladder cancer cells endowed
cells with increased cell proliferation. Spheroid assay showed that SOX2
expression encouraged spheroid-forming ability of bladder cancer cells in
low serum condition, demonstrating the involvement of SOX2 signaling in
the maintenance of stemness in bladder cancer cells. Immunoblotting
revealed that the expression of SOX2 induced phosphorylation of AKT in
the serum-free condition, supporting that SOX2 regulates bladder cancer
cell survival. Gene expression microarray analysis showed that SOX2
expression induced IGF2, which was further confirmed by Q-PCR analysis in
bladder cancer cells. Chi-square test assay showed that IGF2 expression
correlated with the advanced tumor stages in bladder cancer.
Pharmacological inhibition of IGF2 signaling attenuated cell growth in
SOX2-postive bladder cancer cells. Our findings support the notion that
SOX2-IGF2 signaling axis confers aggressiveness in bladder cancer cells
with potentials as biomarkers and therapeutic targets for bladder cancer
intervention.

