Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Crown-like structures and adipocyte size in fat tissue adjacent to
breast tumor reflect parameters of obesity, dyslipidemia and serum
high-sensitivity C-reactive protein


Background: Adult weight gain and obesity have consistently been
associated with breast cancer development but the biological mechanisms
operating remain unclear. Adipose tissue may develop low-grade
inflammation, observed as apoptotic adipocytes surrounded by macrophages
forming characteristic crown-like structures (CLS). We questioned whether
CLS and adipocyte size in breast fat tissue are biomarkers of patient's
body fat distribution, dyslipidemia and serum high-sensitivity C-reactive
protein (hs-CRP), factors associated with breast cancer
development.Material and Methods: Among 55 women, aged 35-75 years, with
newly diagnosed invasive breast cancer (stage I/II), measurements of body
composition: waist to hips ratio (WHR), body mass index (BMI, kg/m2) and
total fat percentage (DEXA,%) were assessed. Concentrations of lipids
(cholesterol, triglycerides) and hs-CRP were determined in fasting serum
blood samples. Surgical specimens of breast tumours with surrounding fat
tissue were examined in Haematoxylin Eosin and CD68 stained slides to
assess the size of adipocytes (m) and CLS density (CLS/cm2). We used
linear regression models to study the association between mammary adipose
tissue parameters, body composition, serum lipids and inflammatory
markers.Results: The breast cancer patients had the following means: age
at diagnosis, 55.2 years, BMI, 25.2 kg/m2, WHR, 0.88, truncal fat, 38.1%,
total cholesterol, 5.76 mmol/l, triglycerides, 1.19 mmol/l and hs-CRP
1.75 mg/L. The mean tumour size was 16.3 mm, 93% of tumors were estrogen
receptor positive and 82% were progesterone receptor positive. Mean
adipocyte size was 68.0 m and mean CLS density was 0.12 CLS/cm2.
Adipocyte size and CLS density were positively associated with BMI
(padipocytes = 0.004, pCLS-density = 0.008), WHR (padipocytes = 0.003,
pCLS-density = 0.009) and truncal fat (padipocytesBackground: Adult
weight gain and obesity have consistently been associated with breast
cancer development but the biological mechanisms operating remain
unclear. Adipose tissue may develop low-grade inflammation, observed as
apoptotic adipocytes surrounded by macrophages forming characteristic
crown-like structures (CLS). We questioned whether CLS and adipocyte size
in breast fat tissue are biomarkers of patient's body fat distribution,
dyslipidemia and serum high-sensitivity C-reactive protein (hs-CRP),
factors associated with breast cancer development.Material and Methods:
Among 55 women, aged 35-75 years, with newly diagnosed invasive breast
cancer (stage I/II), measurements of body composition: waist to hips
ratio (WHR), body mass index (BMI, kg/m2) and total fat percentage
(DEXA,%) were assessed. Concentrations of lipids (cholesterol,
triglycerides) and hs-CRP were determined in fasting serum blood samples.
Surgical specimens of breast tumours with surrounding fat tissue were
examined in Haematoxylin Eosin and CD68 stained slides to assess the size
of adipocytes (m) and CLS density (CLS/cm2). We used linear regression
models to study the association between mammary adipose tissue
parameters, body composition, serum lipids and inflammatory
markers.Results: The breast cancer patients had the following means: age
at diagnosis, 55.2 years, BMI, 25.2 kg/m2, WHR, 0.88, truncal fat, 38.1%,
total cholesterol, 5.76 mmol/l, triglycerides, 1.19 mmol/l and hs-CRP
1.75 mg/L. The mean tumour size was 16.3 mm, 93% of tumors were estrogen
receptor positive and 82% were progesterone receptor positive. Mean
adipocyte size was 68.0 m and mean CLS density was 0.12 CLS/cm2.
Adipocyte size and CLS density were positively associated with BMI
(padipocytes = 0.004, pCLS-density = 0.008), WHR (padipocytes = 0.003,
pCLS-density = 0.009) and truncal fat (padipocytes<0.001, pCLS-density =
0.005). Overweight/obese patients (BMI 25 kg/m2) compared with normal
weighted patients, had higher of cholesterol (p = 0.016), triglyceride
(pBackground: Adult weight gain and obesity have consistently been
associated with breast cancer development but the biological mechanisms
operating remain unclear. Adipose tissue may develop low-grade
inflammation, observed as apoptotic adipocytes surrounded by macrophages
forming characteristic crown-like structures (CLS). We questioned whether
CLS and adipocyte size in breast fat tissue are biomarkers of patient's
body fat distribution, dyslipidemia and serum high-sensitivity C-reactive
protein (hs-CRP), factors associated with breast cancer
development.Material and Methods: Among 55 women, aged 35-75 years, with
newly diagnosed invasive breast cancer (stage I/II), measurements of body
composition: waist to hips ratio (WHR), body mass index (BMI, kg/m2) and
total fat percentage (DEXA,%) were assessed. Concentrations of lipids
(cholesterol, triglycerides) and hs-CRP were determined in fasting serum
blood samples. Surgical specimens of breast tumours with surrounding fat
tissue were examined in Haematoxylin Eosin and CD68 stained slides to
assess the size of adipocytes (m) and CLS density (CLS/cm2). We used
linear regression models to study the association between mammary adipose
tissue parameters, body composition, serum lipids and inflammatory
markers.Results: The breast cancer patients had the following means: age
at diagnosis, 55.2 years, BMI, 25.2 kg/m2, WHR, 0.88, truncal fat, 38.1%,
total cholesterol, 5.76 mmol/l, triglycerides, 1.19 mmol/l and hs-CRP
1.75 mg/L. The mean tumour size was 16.3 mm, 93% of tumors were estrogen
receptor positive and 82% were progesterone receptor positive. Mean
adipocyte size was 68.0 m and mean CLS density was 0.12 CLS/cm2.
Adipocyte size and CLS density were positively associated with BMI
(padipocytes = 0.004, pCLS-density = 0.008), WHR (padipocytes = 0.003,
pCLS-density = 0.009) and truncal fat (padipocytes<0.001, pCLS-density =
0.005). Overweight/obese patients (BMI 25 kg/m2) compared with normal
weighted patients, had higher of cholesterol (p = 0.016), triglyceride
(p<0.001), hs-CRP (p = 0.001) and had higher levels of CLS density (p =
0.002) and larger adipocytes (p = 0.003).Conclusion: Breast adipose
tissue markers such as adipocyte size and CLS, reflecting local low-grade
inflammation, were positively associated with excess weight, truncal fat,
dyslipidemia and a high level of hs-CRP. In addition to the systemic
effect, it is conceivable that fat tissue inflammation in the vicinity of
the breast cancer can influence events in a paracrine manner. These
findings point to important biomarkers in breast tissue that may co-exist
with serum biomarkers associated with breast cancer development.

