Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combination of ONC201 and bevacizumab significantly impacts
colorectal cancer growth and metastasis in vivo


ONC201 is a first-in-class small molecule anti-tumor agent (Allen et al.,
2013; Wagner et al., 2014; Prabhu et al., 2015; Kline et al., 2015) that
upregulates endogenous TRAIL and activates the integrated stress response
leading to increased DR5 expression, among other anti-tumor effects.
ONC201 recently completed a phase I clinical trial in advanced solid
tumors and is currently in multiple phase I/II clinical trials in select
advanced cancers (NCT02250781, NCT02324621, NCT02420795, NCT02392572,
NCT02609230, NCT02525692, NCT02038699). Colorectal cancer (CRC) remains
one of the leading causes of death from cancer worldwide; predominantly
due to its metastatic nature. Increasing clinical evidence including
randomized clinical trials has demonstrated that there is an increased
efficacy from certain cytotoxic chemotherapeutic agents when placed in
combination with molecular agents that target the vascular endothelial
growth factor (VEGF) pathway. Bevacizumab (Avastin), a monoclonal
antibody that targets VEGF, has become an important therapeutic option
for patients with advanced metastatic CRC. The single agent activity of
ONC201 in preclinical models of colorectal cancer have been well
documented, however a combinatorial regimen for this investigational
agent has not been prioritized for this indication. We investigated the
efficacy of ONC201 in combination with bevacizumab in preclinical models
of colorectal cancer based on the previously reported cooperative
efficacy with this combination in preclinical GBM models. While each
agent showed efficacy as a single agent, the combination of ONC201 with
bevacizumab appeared synergistic in the suppression of CRC xenograft
growth including a significant impact on tumor regression and occasional
complete tumor regressions. The ONC201 combination with bevacizumab also
suppressed metastasis from xenografted human colorectal cancer cells.
Mechanistic studies and angiogenesis imaging studies are ongoing to
demonstrate the importance of this combination on both tumor growth,
migration, and invasion. Our results demonstrate that combining
anti-angiogenic bevacizumab with ONC201 enhances anti-tumor efficacy in
preclinical models of colorectal cancer and suggest that further testing
of the combination is warranted in the clinic.

