Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sox10 regulates stem- and mesenchymal-like features in mammary
cells


To discover mechanisms that mediate the initiation and progression of
aggressive and stem-like breast cancers, we characterized signaling
networks that are present in the mammary stem cells responsible for fetal
and adult mammary development. These analyses identified a signaling axis
between FGF signaling and the transcription factor, Sox10. Here we report
that Sox10 is specifically expressed in mammary cells that exhibit the
highest levels of stem/progenitor activity. This includes fetal and adult
mammary cells in vivo and mammary organoids in vitro. Sox10 is
functionally relevant, as its deletion reduces stem/progenitor
competence, while its overexpression increases stem/progenitor activity.
Intriguingly, we also discover that Sox10 overexpression elicits
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in mammary organoids in an FGF
signaling-dependent manner. Further, modulation of Sox10 levels can
induce sequential EMT, migratory, and clonogenic behaviors that
strikingly resemble proposed mechanisms of metastasis. Consistent with
these findings, we report that Sox10 is preferentially expressed in the
most stem- and EMT-like triple negative breast cancer subtypes, which
suggest that Sox10 may reprise these same functions during tumorigenesis.
Indeed, we find that in an autochthonous mouse model of basal-like breast
cancer, Sox10 is expressed at high levels and that these Sox10+ tumor
cells exhibit characteristics that are similar to mammary cells in which
Sox10 is ectopically expressed. Collectively, these results demonstrate a
signaling mechanism through which stem and mesenchymal-like states are
acquired in mammary cells, and indicate possible therapeutic targets to
counter these functions in breast cancers for which targeted therapies
are currently unavailable.

