Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Incidence and mortality trends of prostate cancer in southern
Thailand


Background: Prostate cancer is one of the most commonly diagnosed cancers
in men worldwide. In Asia, the incidence of prostate cancer is expected
to increase in the next decades as the population ages and as developing
Asian countries undergo the epidemiologic transition. There is a scarcity
of studies on the epidemiology of prostate cancer in Thailand. The
characterization and projection of the burden of prostate cancer are
important to design cost-effective strategies for the prevention and
control of this disease. The purpose of this study is to examine
incidence and mortality trends of prostate cancer in southern
Thailand.Methods: Incident prostate cancer cases from the Songkhla cancer
registry were used to analyze incidence and mortality trends; complete
data on incidence was available from 1990-2013 and data on mortality was
available from 1990-2010. Characteristics of the cases on
sociodemographic factors and tumor characteristics were collected, as was
vital status. Joinpoint analysis was used to examine the incidence and
mortality trends and calculate the annual percent change (APC). The
number of joinpoints, slope of the trends, and their significance was
determined by permutation tests. Incidence and mortality rates were
standardized to the Segi's world standard population.Results: Eight
hundred fifty-five prostate cancer cases were diagnosed from 1990 to
2013. The median age at diagnosis was 74 and 89.6% of the diagnosed cases
were Buddhist, with the remainder being Muslim. The majority (79.8%) of
prostate cancers were unstaged. However, among those cases whose tumors
were staged, the distribution was as follows: 3.5% stage I, 17.9% stage
II, 2.9% stage III, 75.7% stage IV. The proportion of unstaged tumors
decreased during the period 2005-2009 compared to earlier periods, and
there was an increase in the proportion of stage II tumors for the same
period. The overall prostate cancer incidence rates increased
significantly at an APC of 5.1% (95%CI: 3.8, 6.4) from 1990 to 2013.
Among Buddhist men, the APC was very similar to the overall incidence
(APC: 5.2%, 95%CI: 4.0, 6.5), while we observed a very low incidence rate
and no evidence of an increasing trend in Muslim men. As of 2010, 72.7%
of the cases had died. Similar to incidence rates, prostate cancer
mortality rates have significantly increased at and APC of 3.2% (95CI%:
1.7, 4.8) from 1990 to 2010.Conclusion: This analysis showed that there
has been a significant increase in prostate cancer incidence and
mortality in Southern Thailand during the period 1990-2013. Next steps
include assessing the effects of age, calendar year, and birth-cohort on
the incidence and mortality of prostate cancer and projection of the
incidence and mortality rates over the next fifteen years in order to
fully characterize this cancer and help to design strategies to reduce
the future burden of prostate cancer in Thailand.

