Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Orthotopic syngeneic tumor models for preclinical evaluation of
cancer immunotherapy strategies


Background: The recent successes of cancer immunotherapies have
stimulated interest in the potential application of these approaches in
many solid and hematologic tumors. Syngeneic tumor models have been
widely used in cancer immunotherapy assessment. However, most of these
experimental models were established as subcutaneous models, while there
may be significant difference in immune microenvironment comparing
orthotopic vs. subcutaneous tumors. In addition, drug delivery and
metabolism are different in orthotopic tumors vs. subcutaneous tumors. To
address this unmet need, we set out to validate a panel of orthotopic
syngeneic models for anti-cancer therapeutics (mainly immunotherapeutics)
evaluation.Results: A large collection of orthotopic syngeneic models
covering breast cancer, liver cancer and various hematological cancers
were established in immunocompetent mice. Survival curves were
established and the responsiveness to anti-PD1, anti-PDL1 and anti-CTLA4
antibodies were evaluated in the orthotopic models. Orthotopic liver
tumors were monitored with ultrasound imaging to obtain longitudinal
growth curves. The correlation in drug efficacy between the orthotopic
model and its subcutaneous counterpart was analyzed. The role of NK cells
in the development of a panel of systemic hematological tumor models was
investigated with NK depleting antibodies.Conclusion: Despite the obvious
difficulties, orthotopic syngeneic models represent closer model systems
to human diseases and may be a valuable tool to the evaluation of cancer
immunotherapies and their combination strategies.

