Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Upregulation of glutathione S-transferase P1 by green tea
polyphenols: A novel transcriptional target of p53 tumor suppressor gene


Green tea polyphenols (GTPs) and its major constituent
(-)-epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG) reactivate epigenetically silenced
genes in cancer cells. Glutathione S-transferase P1 (GSTP1), an enzyme
involved in detoxification process, is frequently inactivated in prostate
cancer due to epigenetic modifications. The mechanisms underlying the
re-expression of GSTP1 expression by GTP/EGCG in prostate cancer is
currently not well understood. Earlier we demonstrated the ability of
GTP/EGCG to increase p53 transcriptional activity through suppression of
class I histone deacetylases (Carcinogenesis 33(2):377-84, 2012). Here we
report that the GSTP1 gene is an unrecognized downstream transcriptional
target of the tumor suppressor p53, and that GTP/EGCG has ability to
increase GSTP1 expression mediated through p53. Treatment of human
prostate cancer LNCaP cells with 5g/ml GTP and 20M EGCG, activate p53
through acetylation at the Lys373 and Lys382 residues along with
consequent increase in GSTP1 protein expression in time-dependent manner.
To study the possible interaction between GSTP1 and p53, LNCaP cells
stably-transfected with short hairpin-RNA against p53 (LNCaPshp53) and
control vector (LNCaPshV) for generation of p53 knockout cells. GTP/EGCG
treatment induced p53 activation and acetylation at p53 Lys373 and Lys382
specifically in LNCaPshV cells in time-dependent manner, but not in
LNCaPshp53. This increase in p53 acetylation led to activation of GSTP1
in LNCaPshV cells both at protein and message levels. GTP/EGCG-mediated
increase in GSTP1 expression is caused by increase binding of p53 to its
consensus binding site on the intron 4 of GSTP1 gene as analyzed by
electrophoretic mobility shift binding assay. Furthermore, this
association was validated by ChIP assay where GTP/EGCG treatment led to
an increase in the amount of acetylated p53-Lys373 associated within the
intron site of GSTP1, compared to untreated controls. Taken together, our
findings indicate the ability of p53 to transcriptionally activate the
human GSTP1 gene, which defines a novel mechanism of protection of the
genome by green tea polyphenols.

