Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analysis of a novel gene in relation to bladder cancer GWAS
signals within the 20p12.2 region


Background: Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) of bladder cancer risk
recently identified several signals on chromosome 20p12.2 marked by
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) rs6104690, rs62185668 and
rs6108803 (Figueroa et al, HMG, 2015). Interestingly, associations of
SNPs rs62185668 and rs6108803 were significantly stronger for the risk of
muscle-invasive (stages T2-T4) compared to non-muscle-invasive (stages Ta
and T1) bladder cancer, suggesting that detailed analysis of these
signals could further our understanding of aggressive bladder
cancer.Methods: We used data from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) bladder
cancer set (n = 412) and an independent RNA-seq dataset for 12 bladder
tissues. qRT-PCR analysis was performed with custom TaqMan assays in an
additional set of 40 tumor and 40 adjacent normal bladder tissue samples.
RNAscope in situ hybridization analysis with custom probes was used to
evaluate mRNA expression in bladder tissue microarrays that included 7
pairs of normal-tumor bladder tissues.Results: At a distance of more than
300 and 800 Kb, JAG1 and BTD3 are the closest genes to the GWAS signals
in the 20p12.2 region. Analysis of TCGA data did not show significant
association of JAG1 and BTD3 expression with genotypes of 20p12.2 GWAS
markers analyzed through TCGA-genotyped proxies SNPs rs6040291 and
rs6074214. Using RNA-seq data in an independent set of 12 bladder tissue
samples, we discovered a novel putative gene in the 20p12.2 region.
Cloning of this gene from bladder tumor tissue and annotation by several
methods showed two alternative splicing forms, designated as major and
minor transcripts. Expression of the major transcript in bladder tumors
was significantly increased with the rs6104690-A allele (P = 0.014),
which is associated with increased risk of bladder cancer. SNPs with
stronger association with muscle-invasive bladder cancer (rs62185668 and
rs6108803) showed weaker or non-significant associations with expression
of this novel transcript (P = 0.037 and P = 0.42, respectively). This
transcript might be protein-coding as it is predicted to have several
open reading frames for short peptides, or it may be a long non-coding
RNA (lncRNA). RNAscope analysis in bladder tumors showed nuclear
expression of the major transcript. Functional analysis of this novel
gene in relation to bladder cancer is underway.Conclusions: A novel gene
might be related to the GWAS signals within the 20p12.2 region and the
risk of bladder cancer.

