Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exosomal miR-6126 as a novel tumor suppressor in ovarian cancer


Tumor microenvironment has been known to play a key role in cancer by the
development of drug resistance, epithelial-mesenchymal transition,
metastasis and angiogenesis. There is emerging evidence that cancer
originated exosomes may contribute to the tumor microenvironment to
promote tumorigenesis. Exosomes are nano-sized vesicles that contain
non-coding RNAs such as miRNAs or siRNAs. Non-coding RNAs are involved in
the pathogenesis of the majority of cancer and reveals a new layer of
complexity in the molecular architecture of tumorigenicity. The purpose
of this study is to identify miRNA content of both sensitive and
resistant ovarian cancer-cell derived exosomes for the identification of
exosomal RNA-mediated tumorigenesis in ovarian cancer. Using miRNA
microarray profiling, we identified differentially expressed exosomal
miRNAs in three sensitive (Heya8, Skov3, A2780) and resistant (Heya8-MDR,
Skov3-TR, A2780-CP20) isogenic ovarian cancer cell lines. miR-6126 was
found to be only miRNA significantly up-regulated in all cancer cell
exosomes released to tumor microenvironment. In vitro functional assays
showed that miR-6126 act as a tumor suppressor by inhibiting
proliferation, migration, invasion and tube formation. miR-6126 acts as a
novel potential tumor suppressor through targeting integrin beta-1,
leading to inhibition of PI3K/AKT and Ras/Raf signaling. In vivo
experiments also demonstrated that administration of miR-6126 into the
nude mice with established tumors inhibited tumor weight.
Immunohistochemistry results showed that miR-6126 treatment inhibits many
oncogenic functions such as proliferation and angiogenesis of ovarian
cancer. We believe that these findings help the identification of
exosomal RNA-mediated tumorigenesis in ovarian cancer.

