Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Association between tumor necrosis factor alpha -308 G/A
polymorphism and risk of bladder cancer in Asian population: a
meta-analysis


Previous studies have investigated the association between TNF--308 G/A
polymorphism and bladder cancer risk in various populations. However,
these findings remain inconclusive. Therefore, we performed a
meta-analysis to explore the relationship between TNF--308 G/A
polymorphism and bladder cancer risk. A literature search in PubMed was
performed to select eligible studies regarding the association between
TNF--308 G/A polymorphism and bladder cancer risk. The strength of risk
under fixed- and random- effects models were estimated using the odds
ratios (ORs) with 95% confidence intervals (CIs). We identified 7
case-control studies including 1153 cases and 1587 controls were included
in the present meta-analysis. Compared with subjects carrying the G/G
genotype of TNF--308 G/A polymorphism, those with the A/A and G/A
genotypes had non-significant bladder cancer risks under the fixed
effects model (OR = 1.037) and the random effects model (OR = 1.012). In
the recessive model, subjects with the A/A genotype had an increased
bladder cancer risk (OR = 1.875) compared with those carrying the G/A and
G/G genotypes of TNF--308 G/A polymorphism. The major finding of this
meta-analysis suggest that TNF--308 G/A polymorphism is correlated with
the risk of bladder cancer in Asian population under the recessive model.
We should further investigate the joint effects of environmental risk
factors and TNF--308 G/A polymorphism on bladder cancer risk.

