Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Upregulation of PD-L1 expression by cisplatin in esophageal
squamous cell carcinoma cells is independent of interferon/JAK/STAT
pathway


IntroductionBlockade of immune check points, especially the program cell
death 1 (PD-1) and its major ligand PD-L1 signaling, has become an
important mode of therapy against cancers. The upregulation of PD-L1
expression in cancer cells is an important mechanism contributing to
immune evasion of cancers. The PD-L1 upregulation in cancer cells could
be mediated by intrinsic genetic or signaling alterations, or could be
induced in response to specific cytokines, in particular interferon
(IFN)-gamma, produced by tumor-infiltrating immune cells. Whether
chemotherapy per se has direct impact on PD-L1 expression in cancer cells
is currently unclear.Materials and MethodsFour esophageal squamous cell
carcinoma (ESCC) cell lines, TE5, KYSE70, KYSE270, KYSE510, were
included. The expression of PD-L1 in ESCC cells, treated with various
concentrations of cisplatin, were evaluated by flow cytometry, Western
blotting, and qRT-PCR. To study the potential signaling pathways involved
in the PD-L1 upregulation induced by cisplatin, we evaluated the nuclear
expression of p-STAT1 and IRF1 (for IFN/JAK/STAT pathway), and p65 and
p50 (for NF-kB pathway). Finally, we used BAY-11-7082, an irreversible
inhibitor of IKK, to validate the significance of NF- kB pathway in
mediating the PD-L1 upregulation induced by cisplatin.ResultsCisplatin at
the doses of 5 10 M increased the proportions of PD-L1-expressing cells
detected by flow cytometry in all tested ESCC cells. The folds of
increase were 19.292.27, 10.138.42, 23.1910.12, 6.200.81 for TE5, KYSE70,
KYSE270, and KYSE510 treated with 10 M of cisplatin, respectively. The
kinetics of this cisplatin- induced PD-L1 expression, evaluated in TE5
cells, was: after exposure to cisplatin for 24 hours, the PD-L1
expression peaked at 48 hours, and remained elevated at 144 hours after
drug exposure. In multiple ESCC cells, exposure to cisplatin did not
increase the expression of p-STAT1 and IRF1, suggesting that IFN/JAK/STAT
pathway did not involve in the PD-L1 upregulation induced by cisplatin.
In co-culture experiments with cisplatin-treated TE5 cells or with
condition medium from cisplatin-treated TE5 cells, we confirmed that the
PD-L1 upregulation in ESCC cells was not through paracrine manners. In
TE5 cells, cisplatin treatment induced nuclear translocation of p65,
suggesting that NF-kB pathway was activated. The cotreatment of
BAY11-7082 could partially abrogate the PD-L1 upregulation induced by
cisplatin in TE5 cells.ConclusionPD-L1 expression in ESCC cancer cells
can be up-regulated by cisplatin. Our data indicated that this activation
is not mediated through the IFN/JAK/STAT pathway, but may involve in
activation of NF-B signaling. (The study was supported by the grant NTUH
104-M2891 and the grant MOST 104-2314-B-002-111)

