Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vitro and in vivo characterization of E7090, a novel and
selective FGFR inhibitor, for the treatment of endometrial cancer


Genetic abnormalities (gene fusion, mutation and amplification) of
Fibroblast Growth Factor Receptor (FGFR) family members are known to
cause constitutive activation of their signaling pathways, which play an
important role in proliferation, survival and migration of cancer cells,
tumor angiogenesis, and drug resistance. FGFR2 is mutated in about 10% of
endometrial cancer patients and is associated with a higher risk of
recurrence. E7090, an oral available FGFR1, 2, and 3 inhibitor that the
chemical-structure and basic kinase inhibitory activity of this compound
have been presented at AACR2015, is currently under a first-in-human
study (NCT02275910) in Japan. In this presentation, the efficacy of E7090
against human endometrial cancer was examined.E7090 exhibited selective
potent antiproliferative activity against 3 human endometrial cancer cell
lines harboring FGFR2 mutation with IC50 values of approximately 10 nM
among 8 endometrial cancer cell lines. These cell lines harbor S252W
mutation (extracellular domain mutation; MFE280) or N549K mutation
(kinase domain mutation; AN3CA and MFE296), that are the most common
mutations of FGFR2 in endometrial cancer. E7090 also showed
antiproliferative activity against Ba/F3 cells expressing mutated type of
FGFR2, confirming the inhibitory activity of E7090 against mutated FGFR2.
The antiproliferative activity of E7090 against these cell lines was
based on inhibition of phosphorylated FRS2 and ERK1/2 as downstream
molecules of FGF/FGFR signaling. Especially, the antiproliferative
activities of E7090 against AN3CA and MFE296 harboring N550K mutation
were more potent compared to these of other FGFR specific inhibitors. In
addition, oral administration of E7090 resulted in significant tumor
growth inhibition in MFE280, AN3CA and MFE296 xenograft models in mice.
Especially, E7090 showed tumor regression in AN3CA xenograft model with a
delta T/C value of -66% at a dose of 50 mg/kg.These results indicated
that E7090 showed potent inhibitory activity against mutated type of
FGFR2 both in vitro and in vivo, and suggest that E7090 may provide
therapeutic opportunities for endometrial cancer harboring FGFR2
mutations.

