Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: c-Met hyperactivation is an universal resistance mechanism to both
first and third generation EGFR inhibitors


c-Met amplification and acquisition of a second T790M mutation are key
mechanisms accounting for majority of resistant cases to first generation
EGFR-tyrosine kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKIs; i.e., erlotinib). The third
generation EGFR-TKIs (e.g., AZD9291), which selectively and irreversibly
inhibit EGFR activating and T790M mutants while sparing wild-type EGFR,
represent very promising therapeutic options for NSCLC patients who have
become resistant to 1st generation EGFR-TKIs due to T790M mutation.
However, eventual resistance to the 3rd generation EGFR-TKIs has already
been described in the clinic, resulting in disease progression.
Therefore, there is a great challenge and urgent need to understand how
this resistance occurs and to develop effective strategies to delay or
overcome the resistance. We show that c-Met amplification and
hyperactivation is an universal mechanism to both 1st and 3rd generation
EGFR-TKIs since both erlotinib- and AZD9291-resistant HCC827 cell lines
possessed elevated levels of c-Met (due to gene amplification) and
p-c-Met and were cross-resistant to AZD9291 or erlotinib. Both chemical
and genetic inhibition of c-Met overcame the resistance of these cell
lines to AZD9291 including enhancement of apoptosis or G1 cell cycle
arrest. Consistently the combination of AZD9291 and c-Met inhibition
effectively inhibited the growth of both erlotinib- and AZD9291-resistant
HCC827 xenografts in nude mice. Hence, we suggest that inhibition of
c-Met is also an effective strategy to overcome resistance of
EGFR-mutated NSCLCs with c-Met amplification or hyperactivation to
AZD9291, providing the rationale for clinical development of this novel
combination strategy. (SSR, TKO and SYS are Georgia Research Alliance
Distinguished Cancer Scientists)

