Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A prognostic model for pulmonary carcinoid tumors based on large
chromosomal alterations


PURPOSE: Previous mutational analyses have failed to identify a
predictive or prognostic marker for pulmonary carcinoid tumors (PCT). The
heterogeneity of PCTs coupled with a lack of detailed information about
the tumor biology, impedes patient stratification into groups based on
tumor phenotypes or treatment response. We sought to use high-throughput
next-generation sequencing to improve prognostication.METHODS: We
stratified 37 patients with resected PCTs as low risk (n = 17) and high
risk (n = 20) based on a 5 year long follow up for recurrence. Patients
with no recurrence within 5 years from initial treatment were deemed low
risk. Macrodissection was followed by genomic DNA isolation and
next-generation sequencing was performed using an Illumina Mate Pair
library protocol. Sequence reads were mapped to the human genome, and
primers spanning the fusion junctions were used for validation polymerase
chain reaction.RESULTS:Carcinoids commonly harbor rearrangements (median
3.5, range 1-167). Large chromosomal gains or losses were found in 24 of
the cases (64.8%). We developed a prognostic score that included the
total amount of genetic alterations (deletions and translocations). ROC
analysis revealed an AUC of 0.76. High risk patients had a mean score of
20 and low risk patients had a mean score of 5.45 (p value = 0.03, Welch
Two Sample t-test). Further analysis of the specific genetic alterations
harbored by high and low risk PCTs and correlation with the pathologic
and immunohistochemical information is currently
underway.CONCLUSION:Large chromosomal rearrangements and aneuploidy
portend a poor prognosis for patients with PCTs. Mate Pair sequencing of
PCTs provides valuable prognostic information for this highly
heterogeneous group of cancers.

