Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PIN1 expression level is maintained by a negative feedback loop
through regulation of Myc and miRNAs


Introduction: PIN1 is a peptidyl-prolyl-isomerase (PPIase) that binds
specific motifs (serine/threonine preceding a proline) in proteins,
thereby catalyzing cis/trans isomerization of the peptide bond between
the phosphorylated serine/threonine and proline. As a result of such
conformational changes, stability, sub-cellular localization, functional
activity as well as protein-protein interactions of the PIN1-bound
proteins may be altered. PIN1 has been demonstrated to play an important
role in controlling various cellular processes such as cell
proliferation, apoptosis and migration. Consequently, its expression has
to be tightly controlled. Previously, we found that two miRNAs,
miR-296-5p and miR-874-3p, served as negative regulators of PIN1.
However, the mechanism regulating these two miRNAs remains to be
defined.Methods: The online database-UCSC Genome Bioinformatics
(NCBI/hg18) was used to search for the upstream regulator of miR-296-5p
and miR-874-3p. Luciferase reporter assay was conducted to examine the
effect of the identified regulator on the promoter regions of miR-296 and
miR-874-3p. Quantitative polymerase chain reaction (Q-PCR) was used to
detect the expression levels of miR-296-5p and miR-874-3p. Protein
expression levels of the identified regulator and PIN1 were examined by
western immunoblotting.Results: By screening the online database-UCSC,
Myc was identified as a potential transcription factor for the miRNAs,
miR-296-5p and miR-874-3p. As demonstrated by luciferase reporter assay,
expression of Myc activated the promoters of miR-296-5p and miR-874-3p.
Myc over-expression also increased the expression levels of these two
miRNAs, which in turn led to down-regulation of PIN1. Interestingly, we
found that over-expression of PIN1 increased the expression of Myc,
miR-296-5p and miR-874-3p. We therefore hypothesized that PIN1 expression
is maintained via a negative feedback loop of Myc-miRNAs-PIN1. Consistent
with this hypothesis, we demonstrated that over-expression of exogenous
EGFP-tagged PIN1 led to the enhancement of Myc, miR-296-5p and miR-874-3p
expression, and thereby subsequently decrease the endogenous PIN1
level.Conclusion: Taken together, our results suggested that the
expression level of PIN1 is maintained by a negative feedback loop
through the regulation of Myc, miR-296-5p and miR-874-3p.

