Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel biomarkers for VEGFR inhibitors in metastatic renal cell
carcinoma: BIM expression, and germline polymorphisms of BIM and PIK3R1


Molecular targeted therapy, especially VEGFR tyrosine-kinase inhibitors
(TKIs) including sunitinib, pazopanib and sorafenib has been the most
efficacious therapy for metastatic renal cell carcinoma (mRCC). However,
approximately 35% of mRCC patients do not get the benefit from TKIs
treatment, due to resistance and/or drug induced toxicities.Pro-apoptotic
Bcl-2 family member (BIM) is a particularly critical mediator of targeted
therapy-induced apoptosis in solid tumors. In previous, it had known that
TKIs induced to BIM upregulation and then accelerated to apoptosis of
tumor. However, according to recent several studies, BIM germline
deletion polymorphism was identified as one of the primary resistant
mechanisms of various TKIs in EGFR mutated NSCLC or CML. In addition, the
alteration of phosphoinositide 3 kinase(PIK3)/protein kinase B(AKT)
pathway has also been found as important mechanism in various cancer cell
growth, proliferation and survival. PI3KR1 encodes the p85 subunit,
regulatory subunits of Class IA PIK3s. Germline PIK3R1 variant
M326I(c.978G>A) might affect the sensitivity of receptor tyrosine kinase
(RTK) inhibitors and its downstream pathway inhibitors.We evaluated the
possibility of BIM, PIK3R1 as a potential biomarker for VEGFR TKIs in
mRCC. BIM deletion polymorphism status of gDNA from formalin fixed
paraffin embedded (FFPE) tumor tissues and peripheral blood mononucleated
cells (PBMC) of mRCC patients was determined by separated PCR. And we
evaluated BIM protein expression by immunohistochemistry. We also
evaluated PIK3R1 germline mutation by pyrosequencing in PBMC of mRCC
patients.Germline BIM deletion accounted for 17.8% of total 124 mRCC
patients. Unlike with previous other studies, our data suggested that BIM
wild type showed tendency to poor prognosis with sunitinib or sorafenib
treatments for clear cell type RCC (median OS of BIM wild and deleted
type: 44.9 vs 67.3 months, p = 0.279), and high expression of BIM (median
OS of BIM low(50%) respectively: 76.5 vs 60.0 vs 21.3 months, p = 0.005).
In addition, we found 26% (19/71) of the germline PIK3R1 variant in mRCC.
Patients with PIK3R1 germline variant showed a tendency of poor prognosis
to 1st line VEGFR TKI treatment than wild type (median PFS: 7.78 vs
15.87months, p = 0.342). Especially PFS of 1st line sunitinib treatment
was significantly shorter in PIK3R1 variant compared to wild type (median
PFS 7.78 vs 16.33 months, p = 0.004). But, there is no difference in mTOR
inhibitor sensitivity both with PIK3R1 or BIM polymorphism.In conclusion,
BIM expression and germline variants of BIM and PIK3R1 might be candidate
biomarkers for VEGFR TKIs in mRCC.

