Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analysis of tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) reveals
biologically different subgroups of breast ductal carcinoma in situ


Background: Treatment of breast ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) aims to
prevent invasive recurrence. Recent studies have shown an important
impact of TILs on the outcome of invasive breast cancer, however their
influence on breast DCIS prognosis has not been fully explored. In this
study we investigated whether the amount and/or phenotype of TILs can
help recognizing DCIS subgroups of different biology and recurrence
risk.Methods: The study included 134 patients, diagnosed and treated for
a DCIS from 2001 to 2005 in our institution. Formalin-fixed and
paraffin-embedded (FFPE) cancer tissue samples, taken before any
treatment, were retrospectively collected. H&E whole tissue sections
served for assessment of the cancer size, grade, histotype, architecture,
mitotic index and amount of stromal lymphocytic (Ly) infiltrate. The
latter was semi-quantitatively graded into 4 grades (0 - absent, 1 -
mild, 2 - moderate, 3 - intense). Ly-phenotype was assessed by
immunohistochemistry (IHC) on tissue microarrays (TMAs), constructed by
sampling each case at the area of the densest Ly-infiltration (3 cores of
0.6 mm diameter per case). The number/mm2 of the CD8+, CD4+, FOXP3+,
CD20+ and CD38+ mononuclear cells was determined. TMAs served also for
estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR), HER2 and Ki67 IHC
staining, as well as for HER2 amplification status.Results: There were 97
DCIS and 37 microinvasive DCIS (micDCIS). The micDCIS displayed
significantly more diffuse architecture, frequent HER2 amplification
(HER2amp), higher grade, lower ER expression (0.029Background: Treatment
of breast ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) aims to prevent invasive
recurrence. Recent studies have shown an important impact of TILs on the
outcome of invasive breast cancer, however their influence on breast DCIS
prognosis has not been fully explored. In this study we investigated
whether the amount and/or phenotype of TILs can help recognizing DCIS
subgroups of different biology and recurrence risk.Methods: The study
included 134 patients, diagnosed and treated for a DCIS from 2001 to 2005
in our institution. Formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded (FFPE) cancer
tissue samples, taken before any treatment, were retrospectively
collected. H&E whole tissue sections served for assessment of the cancer
size, grade, histotype, architecture, mitotic index and amount of stromal
lymphocytic (Ly) infiltrate. The latter was semi-quantitatively graded
into 4 grades (0 - absent, 1 - mild, 2 - moderate, 3 - intense).
Ly-phenotype was assessed by immunohistochemistry (IHC) on tissue
microarrays (TMAs), constructed by sampling each case at the area of the
densest Ly-infiltration (3 cores of 0.6 mm diameter per case). The
number/mm2 of the CD8+, CD4+, FOXP3+, CD20+ and CD38+ mononuclear cells
was determined. TMAs served also for estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone
receptor (PR), HER2 and Ki67 IHC staining, as well as for HER2
amplification status.Results: There were 97 DCIS and 37 microinvasive
DCIS (micDCIS). The micDCIS displayed significantly more diffuse
architecture, frequent HER2 amplification (HER2amp), higher grade, lower
ER expression (0.029<pBackground: Treatment of breast ductal carcinoma in
situ (DCIS) aims to prevent invasive recurrence. Recent studies have
shown an important impact of TILs on the outcome of invasive breast
cancer, however their influence on breast DCIS prognosis has not been
fully explored. In this study we investigated whether the amount and/or
phenotype of TILs can help recognizing DCIS subgroups of different
biology and recurrence risk.Methods: The study included 134 patients,
diagnosed and treated for a DCIS from 2001 to 2005 in our institution.
Formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded (FFPE) cancer tissue samples, taken
before any treatment, were retrospectively collected. H&E whole tissue
sections served for assessment of the cancer size, grade, histotype,
architecture, mitotic index and amount of stromal lymphocytic (Ly)
infiltrate. The latter was semi-quantitatively graded into 4 grades (0 -
absent, 1 - mild, 2 - moderate, 3 - intense). Ly-phenotype was assessed
by immunohistochemistry (IHC) on tissue microarrays (TMAs), constructed
by sampling each case at the area of the densest Ly-infiltration (3 cores
of 0.6 mm diameter per case). The number/mm2 of the CD8+, CD4+, FOXP3+,
CD20+ and CD38+ mononuclear cells was determined. TMAs served also for
estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR), HER2 and Ki67 IHC
staining, as well as for HER2 amplification status.Results: There were 97
DCIS and 37 microinvasive DCIS (micDCIS). The micDCIS displayed
significantly more diffuse architecture, frequent HER2 amplification
(HER2amp), higher grade, lower ER expression (0.029<p<0.044 for each) and
more peritumoral Ly-infiltrate (grades 2+3, micDCIS vs DCIS, 51.5% vs.
39.0%, p = 0.036). All but CD20+ cells were more numerous in micDCIS than
in DCIS (0.0016Background: Treatment of breast ductal carcinoma in situ
(DCIS) aims to prevent invasive recurrence. Recent studies have shown an
important impact of TILs on the outcome of invasive breast cancer,
however their influence on breast DCIS prognosis has not been fully
explored. In this study we investigated whether the amount and/or
phenotype of TILs can help recognizing DCIS subgroups of different
biology and recurrence risk.Methods: The study included 134 patients,
diagnosed and treated for a DCIS from 2001 to 2005 in our institution.
Formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded (FFPE) cancer tissue samples, taken
before any treatment, were retrospectively collected. H&E whole tissue
sections served for assessment of the cancer size, grade, histotype,
architecture, mitotic index and amount of stromal lymphocytic (Ly)
infiltrate. The latter was semi-quantitatively graded into 4 grades (0 -
absent, 1 - mild, 2 - moderate, 3 - intense). Ly-phenotype was assessed
by immunohistochemistry (IHC) on tissue microarrays (TMAs), constructed
by sampling each case at the area of the densest Ly-infiltration (3 cores
of 0.6 mm diameter per case). The number/mm2 of the CD8+, CD4+, FOXP3+,
CD20+ and CD38+ mononuclear cells was determined. TMAs served also for
estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR), HER2 and Ki67 IHC
staining, as well as for HER2 amplification status.Results: There were 97
DCIS and 37 microinvasive DCIS (micDCIS). The micDCIS displayed
significantly more diffuse architecture, frequent HER2 amplification
(HER2amp), higher grade, lower ER expression (0.029<p<0.044 for each) and
more peritumoral Ly-infiltrate (grades 2+3, micDCIS vs DCIS, 51.5% vs.
39.0%, p = 0.036). All but CD20+ cells were more numerous in micDCIS than
in DCIS (0.0016<pBackground: Treatment of breast ductal carcinoma in situ
(DCIS) aims to prevent invasive recurrence. Recent studies have shown an
important impact of TILs on the outcome of invasive breast cancer,
however their influence on breast DCIS prognosis has not been fully
explored. In this study we investigated whether the amount and/or
phenotype of TILs can help recognizing DCIS subgroups of different
biology and recurrence risk.Methods: The study included 134 patients,
diagnosed and treated for a DCIS from 2001 to 2005 in our institution.
Formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded (FFPE) cancer tissue samples, taken
before any treatment, were retrospectively collected. H&E whole tissue
sections served for assessment of the cancer size, grade, histotype,
architecture, mitotic index and amount of stromal lymphocytic (Ly)
infiltrate. The latter was semi-quantitatively graded into 4 grades (0 -
absent, 1 - mild, 2 - moderate, 3 - intense). Ly-phenotype was assessed
by immunohistochemistry (IHC) on tissue microarrays (TMAs), constructed
by sampling each case at the area of the densest Ly-infiltration (3 cores
of 0.6 mm diameter per case). The number/mm2 of the CD8+, CD4+, FOXP3+,
CD20+ and CD38+ mononuclear cells was determined. TMAs served also for
estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR), HER2 and Ki67 IHC
staining, as well as for HER2 amplification status.Results: There were 97
DCIS and 37 microinvasive DCIS (micDCIS). The micDCIS displayed
significantly more diffuse architecture, frequent HER2 amplification
(HER2amp), higher grade, lower ER expression (0.029<p<0.044 for each) and
more peritumoral Ly-infiltrate (grades 2+3, micDCIS vs DCIS, 51.5% vs.
39.0%, p = 0.036). All but CD20+ cells were more numerous in micDCIS than
in DCIS (0.0016<p<0.05). Within the entire cohort, the cases having the
(CD8+/CD4+):(CD20+/CD38+) ratio higher than 1 had a significantly greater
risk of containing a microinvasive component (OR 3.47 (1.26-9.57), p =
0.029). Interestingly, that ratio was significantly higher (p = 0.012) in
micDCIS than in the DCIS with grade 2 or 3 Ly-infiltrate (Ly-DCIS, n =
38). On the other side, there was no difference between micDCIS and
Ly-DCIS in architecture, histograde, HER2amp rate and ER expression.
Cluster analysis further confirmed significant similarities between
micDCIS and Ly-DCIS, putting them both apart from non-Ly-DCIS (p =
0.0034).The overall 10-year recurrence rate was 13% (18/134 pts). No
parameter significantly correlated with recurrence risk, however the
micDCIS have received significantly more treatment than DCIS (axillary
lymphadenectomy (pBackground: Treatment of breast ductal carcinoma in
situ (DCIS) aims to prevent invasive recurrence. Recent studies have
shown an important impact of TILs on the outcome of invasive breast
cancer, however their influence on breast DCIS prognosis has not been
fully explored. In this study we investigated whether the amount and/or
phenotype of TILs can help recognizing DCIS subgroups of different
biology and recurrence risk.Methods: The study included 134 patients,
diagnosed and treated for a DCIS from 2001 to 2005 in our institution.
Formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded (FFPE) cancer tissue samples, taken
before any treatment, were retrospectively collected. H&E whole tissue
sections served for assessment of the cancer size, grade, histotype,
architecture, mitotic index and amount of stromal lymphocytic (Ly)
infiltrate. The latter was semi-quantitatively graded into 4 grades (0 -
absent, 1 - mild, 2 - moderate, 3 - intense). Ly-phenotype was assessed
by immunohistochemistry (IHC) on tissue microarrays (TMAs), constructed
by sampling each case at the area of the densest Ly-infiltration (3 cores
of 0.6 mm diameter per case). The number/mm2 of the CD8+, CD4+, FOXP3+,
CD20+ and CD38+ mononuclear cells was determined. TMAs served also for
estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR), HER2 and Ki67 IHC
staining, as well as for HER2 amplification status.Results: There were 97
DCIS and 37 microinvasive DCIS (micDCIS). The micDCIS displayed
significantly more diffuse architecture, frequent HER2 amplification
(HER2amp), higher grade, lower ER expression (0.029<p<0.044 for each) and
more peritumoral Ly-infiltrate (grades 2+3, micDCIS vs DCIS, 51.5% vs.
39.0%, p = 0.036). All but CD20+ cells were more numerous in micDCIS than
in DCIS (0.0016<p<0.05). Within the entire cohort, the cases having the
(CD8+/CD4+):(CD20+/CD38+) ratio higher than 1 had a significantly greater
risk of containing a microinvasive component (OR 3.47 (1.26-9.57), p =
0.029). Interestingly, that ratio was significantly higher (p = 0.012) in
micDCIS than in the DCIS with grade 2 or 3 Ly-infiltrate (Ly-DCIS, n =
38). On the other side, there was no difference between micDCIS and
Ly-DCIS in architecture, histograde, HER2amp rate and ER expression.
Cluster analysis further confirmed significant similarities between
micDCIS and Ly-DCIS, putting them both apart from non-Ly-DCIS (p =
0.0034).The overall 10-year recurrence rate was 13% (18/134 pts). No
parameter significantly correlated with recurrence risk, however the
micDCIS have received significantly more treatment than DCIS (axillary
lymphadenectomy (p<10-7), chemotherapy (p = 0.031) or hormonal therapy (p
= 5.410-6)).Conclusion: These results indicate that Ly-DCIS might be
biologically and immunologically similar to micDCIS. TILs in DCIS are
worth investigating in larger studies, as they could be a marker of
microinvasion and help tailoring the initial treatment of the disease.

