Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of MicroRNA Expression during the Development of
Resistance to a mTOR-Inhibitor in renal cell carcinoma


Introduction:Second line therapy of metastatic renal cell carcinoma (RCC)
using the mTOR inhibitor RAD001 (everolimus) is hampered by the
appearance of drug resistance. The cellular mechanisms leading to drug
resistance are not yet clarified. Although the influence of miRNAs is
proven for other systemic treatments, their impact on mTOR inhibitors is
not investigated. Therefore, we analyzed miRNA alterations in correlation
to development of resistance to RAD001 in RCC cell culture
models.Material and Methods:The RCC cell line 786-O was treated with 1M
RAD001 for up to 20 passages after developing sunitinib resistance.
TotalRNA was isolated at defined intervals. Resistance-development as
well as drug efficacy during the treatment was monitored by proliferation
assays. MiRNA Microarrays (Agilent Technologies) were performed using
RAD001 sensitive and RAD001 resistant cells to identify differently
expressed miRNAs. Results were validated by qRT PCR. Functional analyses
are performed after transfection of RAD001 sensitive cells with miRNA
candidates.Results:The Microarray analyses revealed a miRNA signature
including 9 differently expressed miRNAs in RAD001 resistant cells
compared to sensitive cells. QRT-PCR results showed that especially
miR-302e was strongly up-regulated by the factor of four. At present,
functional analyses of miR-302e are ongoing.Conclusion:To our knowledge
this is the first study analyzing miRNA alterations during the
development of resistance to mTOR inhibitors. We have shown that miR-302e
expression is associated with RAD001 resistance in RCC cells. Since
miR-302e is a known tumor suppressor modulating radio sensitivity and
drug sensitivity in several tumors we are proving now if miR-302e can
regulate the mTOR inhibitor resistance of RCC.

