Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epigenetic priming potentiates immune checkpoints inhibitors in
ovarian cancer


Background: Ovarian cancer (OC) progression is accompanied by the
establishment of stable and transcriptionally repressive epigenetic
modifications. An important mechanism of immune evasion is represented by
epigenetic silencing of tumor antigens (NY-ESO-1, Muc16 and MAGE). We
hypothesize that by reversing DNA methylation, DNA methyl transferase
inhibitors (DNMTIs) restore the expression of such antigens, potentiating
anti-tumor immune response. The targeting of immune checkpoints regulated
by programmed cell death protein-1(PD-1) signaling represents a novel
therapeutic strategy in cancer, including in OC. Here we set out to
measure the anti-tumor effects of epigenetic priming in combination with
PD-1/PDL-1 blockade in OC preclinical models.Methods: The ID8
intraperitoneal (ip) immunocompetent syngeneic mouse model was used to
measure the effects of the novel DNMTI guadecitabine (SGI-110, Astex
Pharmaceuticals Inc) and PDL1 blockade. The experimental groups consisted
of non-specific IgG (control), guadecitabine 2mg/m2 sq bi-weekly, murine
anti-PDL1 inhibitory antibody (10mg/kg) bi-weekly and combination of
guadecitabine with anti-PDL1 antibody (n = 6 mice/group, 3 week
treatment). Immune cells collected from the ascites and spleens of tumor
bearing mice were either directly processed or co-cultured with ID8 cells
for 48 hours. Cells were immuno-phenotyped by flow cytometry. In OC cells
treated with guadecitabine, changes in gene expression were analyzed by
real time-PCR.Results: In ID8 tumors bearing mice, the combination of
PDL1 blockade with guadecitabine significantly decreased primary tumor
formation (PBackground: Ovarian cancer (OC) progression is accompanied by
the establishment of stable and transcriptionally repressive epigenetic
modifications. An important mechanism of immune evasion is represented by
epigenetic silencing of tumor antigens (NY-ESO-1, Muc16 and MAGE). We
hypothesize that by reversing DNA methylation, DNA methyl transferase
inhibitors (DNMTIs) restore the expression of such antigens, potentiating
anti-tumor immune response. The targeting of immune checkpoints regulated
by programmed cell death protein-1(PD-1) signaling represents a novel
therapeutic strategy in cancer, including in OC. Here we set out to
measure the anti-tumor effects of epigenetic priming in combination with
PD-1/PDL-1 blockade in OC preclinical models.Methods: The ID8
intraperitoneal (ip) immunocompetent syngeneic mouse model was used to
measure the effects of the novel DNMTI guadecitabine (SGI-110, Astex
Pharmaceuticals Inc) and PDL1 blockade. The experimental groups consisted
of non-specific IgG (control), guadecitabine 2mg/m2 sq bi-weekly, murine
anti-PDL1 inhibitory antibody (10mg/kg) bi-weekly and combination of
guadecitabine with anti-PDL1 antibody (n = 6 mice/group, 3 week
treatment). Immune cells collected from the ascites and spleens of tumor
bearing mice were either directly processed or co-cultured with ID8 cells
for 48 hours. Cells were immuno-phenotyped by flow cytometry. In OC cells
treated with guadecitabine, changes in gene expression were analyzed by
real time-PCR.Results: In ID8 tumors bearing mice, the combination of
PDL1 blockade with guadecitabine significantly decreased primary tumor
formation (P<0.05) and malignant ascites accumulation (PBackground:
Ovarian cancer (OC) progression is accompanied by the establishment of
stable and transcriptionally repressive epigenetic modifications. An
important mechanism of immune evasion is represented by epigenetic
silencing of tumor antigens (NY-ESO-1, Muc16 and MAGE). We hypothesize
that by reversing DNA methylation, DNA methyl transferase inhibitors
(DNMTIs) restore the expression of such antigens, potentiating anti-tumor
immune response. The targeting of immune checkpoints regulated by
programmed cell death protein-1(PD-1) signaling represents a novel
therapeutic strategy in cancer, including in OC. Here we set out to
measure the anti-tumor effects of epigenetic priming in combination with
PD-1/PDL-1 blockade in OC preclinical models.Methods: The ID8
intraperitoneal (ip) immunocompetent syngeneic mouse model was used to
measure the effects of the novel DNMTI guadecitabine (SGI-110, Astex
Pharmaceuticals Inc) and PDL1 blockade. The experimental groups consisted
of non-specific IgG (control), guadecitabine 2mg/m2 sq bi-weekly, murine
anti-PDL1 inhibitory antibody (10mg/kg) bi-weekly and combination of
guadecitabine with anti-PDL1 antibody (n = 6 mice/group, 3 week
treatment). Immune cells collected from the ascites and spleens of tumor
bearing mice were either directly processed or co-cultured with ID8 cells
for 48 hours. Cells were immuno-phenotyped by flow cytometry. In OC cells
treated with guadecitabine, changes in gene expression were analyzed by
real time-PCR.Results: In ID8 tumors bearing mice, the combination of
PDL1 blockade with guadecitabine significantly decreased primary tumor
formation (P<0.05) and malignant ascites accumulation (P<0.0001) compared
with the control group. Treatments were well tolerated without detectable
weight changes attributable to toxicity. CD8+ cell fractions expressing
the exhaustion markers (PD1+ or CTL4+) isolated from the ascites and
spleens of control mice were diminished by guadecitabine, PD-L1
inhibitory antibody, and the combination treatment. Guadecitabine and the
combination regimen increased CD8+/MHC1+ and CD8+/CD40+ cell populations.
Treatment with DNMTIs significantly increased the expression of tumor
antigens Muc16, Mage A2, A11, and NY-ESO 1 (pBackground: Ovarian cancer
(OC) progression is accompanied by the establishment of stable and
transcriptionally repressive epigenetic modifications. An important
mechanism of immune evasion is represented by epigenetic silencing of
tumor antigens (NY-ESO-1, Muc16 and MAGE). We hypothesize that by
reversing DNA methylation, DNA methyl transferase inhibitors (DNMTIs)
restore the expression of such antigens, potentiating anti-tumor immune
response. The targeting of immune checkpoints regulated by programmed
cell death protein-1(PD-1) signaling represents a novel therapeutic
strategy in cancer, including in OC. Here we set out to measure the
anti-tumor effects of epigenetic priming in combination with PD-1/PDL-1
blockade in OC preclinical models.Methods: The ID8 intraperitoneal (ip)
immunocompetent syngeneic mouse model was used to measure the effects of
the novel DNMTI guadecitabine (SGI-110, Astex Pharmaceuticals Inc) and
PDL1 blockade. The experimental groups consisted of non-specific IgG
(control), guadecitabine 2mg/m2 sq bi-weekly, murine anti-PDL1 inhibitory
antibody (10mg/kg) bi-weekly and combination of guadecitabine with
anti-PDL1 antibody (n = 6 mice/group, 3 week treatment). Immune cells
collected from the ascites and spleens of tumor bearing mice were either
directly processed or co-cultured with ID8 cells for 48 hours. Cells were
immuno-phenotyped by flow cytometry. In OC cells treated with
guadecitabine, changes in gene expression were analyzed by real
time-PCR.Results: In ID8 tumors bearing mice, the combination of PDL1
blockade with guadecitabine significantly decreased primary tumor
formation (P<0.05) and malignant ascites accumulation (P<0.0001) compared
with the control group. Treatments were well tolerated without detectable
weight changes attributable to toxicity. CD8+ cell fractions expressing
the exhaustion markers (PD1+ or CTL4+) isolated from the ascites and
spleens of control mice were diminished by guadecitabine, PD-L1
inhibitory antibody, and the combination treatment. Guadecitabine and the
combination regimen increased CD8+/MHC1+ and CD8+/CD40+ cell populations.
Treatment with DNMTIs significantly increased the expression of tumor
antigens Muc16, Mage A2, A11, and NY-ESO 1 (p<0.01) in several OC cell
lines.Conclusions: Guadecitabine in combination with anti-PDL1 antibody
induced striking anti-tumor effects in an immunocompetent OC syngeneic
model by activating cytotoxic T-cells. These data support clinical
strategies utilizing epigenetic priming using DNMTI in combination with
immune checkpoints inhibitors.

