Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Multiplatform molecular profiling of invasive lobular breast cancer


Introduction: Invasive lobular breast cancer (ILC) is the second most
common subtype of invasive breast cancer accounting for 10% of breast
cancer diagnosis. ILC has particular histological and clinical
characteristics and a distinct response to therapy. Characterizing the
molecular alterations in ILC may lead to an improved understanding of its
biology and provide new therapeutic options. The purpose of this study is
to describe the molecular profile of ILC and compare it to the one of
invasive ductal cancer (IDC).Methods: Three-hundred and thirty nine pure
ILC specimens profiled from January 2012 - November 2015 were evaluated
(Caris Life Sciences, Phoenix, AZ). Multiplatform profiling consisted of
gene sequencing (next generation sequencing [NGS]), gene amplification
(CISH or FISH), and protein expression (immunohistochemistry [IHC]).
Molecular characteristics of estrogen receptor (ER) positive and human
epidermal growth receptor factor 2 (HER2) negative pure ILC (n = 236) and
IDC (n = 286) were compared.Results: By IHC, ER expression was present in
87.7% (277/316), progesterone receptor in 59.6% (198/313), HER2 in 3.5%
(11/313), androgen receptor in 87% (262/301), PD-L1 in 8.1% (12/148) and
PTEN in 63.3% (198/313). Amplifications were detected in MYC (7.7%,
2/26), EGFR (8.3%, 2/24), ERBB2 (4.5%, 13/290) and TOP2A (1.3%, 3/236).
Mutations were detected in AKT1 (4.7%, 9/191), ATM (3.7%, 7/190), BRCA1
(4.2%, 4/96), BRCA2 (9.5%, 9/95), ERBB2 (7.5%, 14/186), PIK3CA (54.5%,
103/189), PTEN (7.9%, 15/189), and TP53 (13.4%, 25/186). A comparison of
ER-positive/HER2-negative invasive lobular and ductal carcinomas revealed
significant differences in AR expression (89.7% vs 79.6%, p = 0.0022),
and mutations in CDH1 (10.1% vs 0.0%, p = 0.0001), ERBB2 (8.2% vs 2.1%, p
= 0.0079), and TP53 (10.3% vs 31.8%, 0.0001).Conclusions: Multiplatform
testing of this large series of ILC reveals recurrent alterations and a
distinct molecular profile when compared to IDC. These support the
definition of ILC as biologically distinct entity. High AR expression and
high rates of dysregulation along the PIK3CA/AKT/mTOR pathway are
consistent with recent reports in the literature.

