Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Aspirin, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) and the
risk of glioma: Results from the Glioma International Case Control Study


Background: Numerous epidemiologic studies have examined the association
between aspirin (ASA), non-steroid anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) and
the development of glioma, but the results have been inconsistent. The
goal of this study was to evaluate the relationship between the intake of
these drugs and glioma risk in a large, international case-control
study.Methods: Between 2010 and 2015, the Glioma International
Case-Control Study (GICC) recruited newly diagnosed glioma cases and
matched controls in 14 different sites across five countries. Each
subject was interviewed using a standardized questionnaire to obtain
NSAIDs and ASA use. We examined the associations between ever use (at
least > 6 months), duration of drug use and glioma histology. Ever use
data on 4533 glioma cases and 4171 controls was combined using maximum
likelihood estimation/restricted maximum likelihood meta-analysis
methods. Furthermore, based on a priori hypotheses, we performed subgroup
analyses based on gender and glioma histological grades.Results: Use of
ASA for > 6 months was associated with a 33% lower glioma risk compared
to those who never took it (adjusted Meta-OR 0.67, 95% CI 0.54-0.83).
Duration of intake showed a significant trend test (p 6 months was not
associated with glioma risk (adjusted meta-OR 0.87, 95% CI 0.71-1.07).
However, NSAIDs use was protective for women (adjusted meta-OR 0.72, 95%
CI 0.55-0.93) in subgroup analyses but not for men (adjusted meta-OR
1.03; 95% CI 0.86-1.23). The interaction between gender, NSAIDs and
glioma risk was significant (p-value 0.0076).. Sensitivity analyses
excluding those who took ASA or NSAIDs within the past 12 months for
headache, and the removal of proxy respondents did not change our
results.Conclusion: ASA was associated with a significant protective
effect for glioma, but NSAIDs were only associated with reduced glioma
risk in women. Given the possibility of recall bias in case-control
studies of brain tumors, we may verify dosage and duration of drug intake
in those countries with electronic pharmacy records within the GICC.

