Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ABBV-075 exhibits robust in vitro and in vivo activities against
the ABC and GCB subtypes of DLBCL


Diffuse Large B-Cell Lymphoma (DLBCL) consists of activated B-cell-like
(ABC), germinal center B cell-like (GCB), and primary mediastinal B cell
lymphoma (PMBL) subtypes. Among these, the ABC subtype of DLBCL often
harbors mutations that cause abnormal NF-B activation, which subsequently
activates genes important for cell survival and disease progression in
ABC DLBCL. The bromodomain and extraterminal domain (BET) protein BRD4
binds acetylated NF-B and regulates NF-B dependent transcription.
Accordingly, targeting BET family proteins using small molecule
inhibitors such as ABBV-075 might provide therapeutic benefit in ABC
DLBCL by blocking the NF-B pathway. In this study, we examined the
activity of ABBV-075 in both the ABC and GCB subtypes of DLBCL. As
expected, ABBV-075 diminished NF-B reporter activity, down-regulated NF-B
target genes, inhibited proliferation and survival of ABC DLBCL cells in
vitro, and delayed the growth of ABC DLBCL tumors in vivo. Interestingly,
ABBV-075 also exhibited robust anti-proliferative activities in GCB DLBCL
cells in vitro and inhibited the growth of GCB DLBCL tumors in vivo.
Further characterization of the responses of GCB DLBCL cells to ABBV-075
indicated that ABBV-075 induced strong apoptosis in GCB DLBCL cells that
are resistant to the Bcl-2 inhibitor venetoclax (ABT-199), but rarely in
venetoclax-sensitive GCB DLBCL cell lines. Our results indicate that
ABBV-075 could be active against both the ABC and GCB subtypes of DLBCL.
The complementary activity of ABBV-075 and ABT-199 further suggests that
ABBV-075 maybe an interesting option for ABT-199 resistant/refractory
DLBCL patients.

