Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The impact of RHOA mutation related with invasion in diffuse-type
gastric cancer


Background: Gastric cancer (GC) is one of the most general causes of
cancer related death, especially in East Asia and is divided into
intestinal type and diffuse type by Lauren classification. Five-year
survival rate of diffuse-type gastric cancer (DGC) is poor compared with
the Intestinal-type gastric cancer (IGC). To improve the prognosis of
advanced GC patients, molecularly targeted drugs against gastric cancer
have been developed including trastuzumab, a recombinant monoclonal
antibody against HER2. But, HER2 gene amplification rate is about 10% in
DGC, though 30% in IGC. DGC-specific molecular carcinogenic mechanisms
have still remained unclear. Recently, some studies revealed RHOA
mutations occur specifically in DGCs. They also demonstrated that
proliferation and organoid formation are related with RHOA mutations in
DGC. However, there is no report in terms of the functional difference
among RHOA mutational hotspots in DGCs.Aim: To investigate the functional
difference among RHOA mutations and the impact on prognosis in
DGCs.Method: We prepared RHOA wild type vector and three RHOA mutation
vectors (G17E, Y42C, and L57V). We introduced these RHOA vectors into DGC
cell lines and examined invasion assay. In invasion assay of RHOA
introduced DGC cell lines, we conducted experiments with or without TGF1
(RHOA activator).Result: RHOA overexpression in DGC cells did not exhibit
significant upregulation of invasiveness compared with empty vector
introduced DGC cells. However, all RHOA mutation introduced DGC cells
acquired more significant elevation of invasiveness as well as wild type
after treatment with TGF-1. (wild:p = 0.0001, G17E:p = 0.0001, Y42C:p =
0.0001, L57V: pBackground: Gastric cancer (GC) is one of the most general
causes of cancer related death, especially in East Asia and is divided
into intestinal type and diffuse type by Lauren classification. Five-year
survival rate of diffuse-type gastric cancer (DGC) is poor compared with
the Intestinal-type gastric cancer (IGC). To improve the prognosis of
advanced GC patients, molecularly targeted drugs against gastric cancer
have been developed including trastuzumab, a recombinant monoclonal
antibody against HER2. But, HER2 gene amplification rate is about 10% in
DGC, though 30% in IGC. DGC-specific molecular carcinogenic mechanisms
have still remained unclear. Recently, some studies revealed RHOA
mutations occur specifically in DGCs. They also demonstrated that
proliferation and organoid formation are related with RHOA mutations in
DGC. However, there is no report in terms of the functional difference
among RHOA mutational hotspots in DGCs.Aim: To investigate the functional
difference among RHOA mutations and the impact on prognosis in
DGCs.Method: We prepared RHOA wild type vector and three RHOA mutation
vectors (G17E, Y42C, and L57V). We introduced these RHOA vectors into DGC
cell lines and examined invasion assay. In invasion assay of RHOA
introduced DGC cell lines, we conducted experiments with or without TGF1
(RHOA activator).Result: RHOA overexpression in DGC cells did not exhibit
significant upregulation of invasiveness compared with empty vector
introduced DGC cells. However, all RHOA mutation introduced DGC cells
acquired more significant elevation of invasiveness as well as wild type
after treatment with TGF-1. (wild:p = 0.0001, G17E:p = 0.0001, Y42C:p =
0.0001, L57V: p<0.0001). Among these RHOA mutations, G17E and Y42C RHOA
mutation introduced DGC cells exhibited remarkable upregulation of
invasiveness compared with wild type RHOA introduced DGCs
(G17E:pBackground: Gastric cancer (GC) is one of the most general causes
of cancer related death, especially in East Asia and is divided into
intestinal type and diffuse type by Lauren classification. Five-year
survival rate of diffuse-type gastric cancer (DGC) is poor compared with
the Intestinal-type gastric cancer (IGC). To improve the prognosis of
advanced GC patients, molecularly targeted drugs against gastric cancer
have been developed including trastuzumab, a recombinant monoclonal
antibody against HER2. But, HER2 gene amplification rate is about 10% in
DGC, though 30% in IGC. DGC-specific molecular carcinogenic mechanisms
have still remained unclear. Recently, some studies revealed RHOA
mutations occur specifically in DGCs. They also demonstrated that
proliferation and organoid formation are related with RHOA mutations in
DGC. However, there is no report in terms of the functional difference
among RHOA mutational hotspots in DGCs.Aim: To investigate the functional
difference among RHOA mutations and the impact on prognosis in
DGCs.Method: We prepared RHOA wild type vector and three RHOA mutation
vectors (G17E, Y42C, and L57V). We introduced these RHOA vectors into DGC
cell lines and examined invasion assay. In invasion assay of RHOA
introduced DGC cell lines, we conducted experiments with or without TGF1
(RHOA activator).Result: RHOA overexpression in DGC cells did not exhibit
significant upregulation of invasiveness compared with empty vector
introduced DGC cells. However, all RHOA mutation introduced DGC cells
acquired more significant elevation of invasiveness as well as wild type
after treatment with TGF-1. (wild:p = 0.0001, G17E:p = 0.0001, Y42C:p =
0.0001, L57V: p<0.0001). Among these RHOA mutations, G17E and Y42C RHOA
mutation introduced DGC cells exhibited remarkable upregulation of
invasiveness compared with wild type RHOA introduced DGCs (G17E:p<0.0001
Y42C:p = 0.009).These results indicate particular RHOA mutations cause
higher response to TGF-1 compared with wild type.Conclusion: We evaluated
the functional difference among RHOA mutations in DGC. These results
suggest particular RHOA mutation might have possibility to cause invasion
in DGCs. A large cohort study across RHOA mutations in DGCs will be
required to identify the clinical significance between hotspot RHOA
mutations.

