Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Kidneys of VHL patients reveal the origin of renal clear cell
carcinoma


VHL disease is a classic tumor suppressor gene syndrome characterized by
development of specific types of tumors in selective organs with nervous
system and kidney being most consistently affected. Detailed studies on
human spinal cord and cerebellum have previously revealed earliest stages
of CNS tumorigenesis and the morphologic sequence resulting in
development of frank tumors.To elucidate earliest stages of renal clear
cell carcinoma, we performed a similar approach in kidney tissues of four
VHL patients and three sporadic control cases. From all cases, blocks of
interest were procured, followed by serial sectioning and 3dimensional
reconstruction of potential precursor lesions. The results reveal an
abundance of foci with aberrant mesonephric clear cell proliferations
that initially develop along the tubular lining, but have the potential
to aggregate within individual tubules. This stage is followed by
microscopic invasive clear cell aggregations which represent tumor
precursor structures.This study presents evidence for a consistent
morphologic sequence for renal clear cell carcinogenesis. Molecular
analysis of early steps within this sequence will allow for
identification of earliest genetic and proteomic changes in the future.
Therapeutic targeting of earliest changes may allow to develop preventive
strategies for renal cancer development for VHL patients, potentially
also for the non-VHL population.

