Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Compound heterozygous Sf3b1-K700E mutation and Atm deletion in B
cells leads to CLL in mice


Unbiased next-generation sequencing using primary samples has identified
SF3B1 as among the most frequently mutated genes in chronic lymphocytic
leukemia (CLL). These mutations localize to a restricted gene region,
with more than 50% at the K700E site. The presence of mutation is
associated with poor clinical outcomes. These lines of evidence together
emphasize the high priority for gaining an understanding of role of SF3B1
in CLL. However, the mechanistic basis for how mutated SF3B1 impacts CLL
remains unknown. Prior transcriptomic studies using primary CLL samples
have led to the appreciation of altered RNA splicing induced by this
mutated gene, but studies of the functional impact of mutated SF3B1 in
primary human samples have been complicated by its variable mutant allele
frequency across samples as well as its common co-occurrence with other
diverse gene mutations. We therefore generated a mouse line that
conditionally expressed heterozygous Sf3b1-K700E mutation in B lineage
cells.We sought to characterize the effects of Sf3b1-K700E on RNA
splicing and B cell function in this in vivo model. By RNA-sequencing of
splenic B cells from wild-type and mutant mice (n = 3, each), we
detected, classified, and quantified 54 differentially spliced
transcripts (p10%) using the tool JuncBASE. Consistent with prior
findings in human CLL samples, the splice variants in our mouse model
were highly enriched with altered selection of 3 splice sites (49 of 54
events, pUnbiased next-generation sequencing using primary samples has
identified SF3B1 as among the most frequently mutated genes in chronic
lymphocytic leukemia (CLL). These mutations localize to a restricted gene
region, with more than 50% at the K700E site. The presence of mutation is
associated with poor clinical outcomes. These lines of evidence together
emphasize the high priority for gaining an understanding of role of SF3B1
in CLL. However, the mechanistic basis for how mutated SF3B1 impacts CLL
remains unknown. Prior transcriptomic studies using primary CLL samples
have led to the appreciation of altered RNA splicing induced by this
mutated gene, but studies of the functional impact of mutated SF3B1 in
primary human samples have been complicated by its variable mutant allele
frequency across samples as well as its common co-occurrence with other
diverse gene mutations. We therefore generated a mouse line that
conditionally expressed heterozygous Sf3b1-K700E mutation in B lineage
cells.We sought to characterize the effects of Sf3b1-K700E on RNA
splicing and B cell function in this in vivo model. By RNA-sequencing of
splenic B cells from wild-type and mutant mice (n = 3, each), we
detected, classified, and quantified 54 differentially spliced
transcripts (p10%) using the tool JuncBASE. Consistent with prior
findings in human CLL samples, the splice variants in our mouse model
were highly enriched with altered selection of 3 splice sites (49 of 54
events, p<0.001), suggesting that Sf3b1-K700E mutation in the mouse lines
cause altered RNA splicing in vivo and functions in a manner faithful to
the human leukemia. B cell characterization of the mutant mice revealed
that expression of Sf3b1-K700E caused subtle impairments in B cell
development and function, and induced a state of cellular senescence
based on gene expression and secretome characterization. Mice with
heterozygous Sf3b1-K700E did not develop evidence of CLL-associated
immunopathologic changes, even with prolonged aging to 24 months.
Nevertheless, expression of Sf3b1-K700E with heterozygous deletion of Atm
in B cells led to the overcoming of cellular senescence and resulted in
the accumulation of clonal B220+CD5+ cells in peripheral blood, marrow,
and spleen of elderly mice. We thus dissect the impact of mutated SF3B1
individually and in combination with Atm deletion on paving the path
towards B cell leukemogenesis. This novel murine model faithfully
recapitulates features of human CLL and has the potential to shed light
on mechanisms of cooperation between Atm deletion and SF3B1 mutation in
the pathogenesis of CLL.

