Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: OPB-51602: a novel STAT3 inhibitor that targets mitochondrial
respiratory chain and triggers STAT3 dependent ROS production


Signal transducer and activator of Transcription (STAT) proteins are
activated upon extracellular signals resulting in their phosphorylation
and nuclear translocation. Once in the nucleus, STAT proteins, in
specific STAT3 activates gene transcription of factors involved in a
myriad of cellular processes, including proliferation and survival. By
implication, increased expression and activity of STAT3 are associated
with human cancers, which argue strongly for the development of STAT
inhibitors as a promising chemotherapeutic strategy. We are working with
a novel STAT3 inhibitor, OPB-51602, that not only block STAT3
phosphorylation but also inhibits growth and colony formation in a
variety of human cancer cell lines. Of note, in addition to targeting
STAT3, the compound inhibits mitochondrial respiratory chain and triggers
a significant increase in mitochondrial superoxide (O2-) production
(within 1 hour of exposure) in NSCLC cell line H1975. Using functional
mutants of pY705 and pS727 STAT3, the growth inhibitory activity of the
compound could be compromised, however, only S727 mutant rescued the
mitochondrial effects. In addition, exposure of cells to OPB-51602
resulted in extracellular acidification (ECAR) together with a complete
shutdown of mitochondrial ATP production. Interestingly, these effects
could be rescued by 2-deoxyglucose. These data provide evidence that the
pharmacological inhibition of STAT3 not only blocks cell proliferation
but also induces mitochondrial redox catastrophe and bio-energetic
crisis, which could have potential therapeutic implications against
cancers that are rendered drug resistant due to the activation of
surrogate STAT3 signaling axis.

