Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of novel single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs)
associated with risk and prognosis in patients with castration-resistant
prostate cancer (CRPC)


Background: Liver metabolism plays a major role in life-long exposure to
endogenous and exogenous carcinogens. We therefore explored associations
between polymorphisms in genes involved in absorption, distribution,
metabolism, and elimination (ADME) and the risk and prognosis of
castration resistant prostate cancer (CRPC).Methods: DNA samples from 47
patients (43 Caucasians) with CRPC were genotyped using the Drug
Metabolizing Enzymes and Transporters platform v1.0, which tests 1,243
genetic variations in 169 ADME genes. First, the frequency of SNPs in
genes previously reported to correlate with PCa risk (CYP17, CYP1A1,
NAT2, and PPARgamma) were determined and compared to controls. Second,
SNP variants in all tested genes were screened for an association with
survival using a Cox regression model and subsequent Kaplan-Meier plot
evaluations and comparisons between groups with the log-rank
test.Results: Overall 634 genotypes were ascertained. The rs743572 T>C in
CYP17 was associated with decreased risk of CRPC (Fisher's exact test, P
= 0.009, odds ratio 0.165, 95% confidence limits, 0.03-0.69), and we
found no evidence that any other SNPs were strongly related to risk in
this study. A combination of Cox model screening and graphical evaluation
using Kaplan-Meier plots revealed that 5 were worthy of further
consideration for survival. Of these, there was evidence that three SNPs
were associated with CRPC prognosis in Caucasians (log-rank test p-values
and hazard ratios): ABCB11 rs7602171 G>A (P = 0.003, adjusted P = 0.006,
HR 0.307, 95% CI 0.149-0.714, n = 30), GSTP1 rs1799811 C>T (P = 0.001, HR
0.254, 95% CI 0.094-0.690, n = 38), and SLC5A6 rs1395 (P = 0.004,
adjusted P = 0.008, HR 3.15, 95% CI 1.39-7.09, n = 35). Two other
polymorphisms were considered interesting trends: ABCB4 rs2302387 C>T (P
= 0.039), and ABCC5 rs939339 A>G (P = 0.036).Conclusion: This exploratory
pilot study is the first to show that polymorphisms in transporters
involved in sterol disposition, ABCB11 and ABCB4, may be related to CRPC
prognosis. Other potential associations were found in genes that regulate
glutathione conjugation of carcinogens (GSTP1), vitamin uptake (SLC5A6),
and nucleotide efflux (ABCC5). We also found evidence that CYP17 rs743572
is related to CRPC risk.

