Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of histone deacetylase induces miR-320-mediated
androgen receptor suppression in prostate cancer


Targeting androgen receptor (AR) by pharmacological intervention is one
of the effective approaches for treatment of malignant prostate cancers.
Histone deacetylase (HDAC) alters epigenetic status of tumor-associated
genes, including microRNAs (miRNAs), and affects the behavior of cancers.
Here we examined molecular effects of a HDAC inhibitor, OBP-801, on AR
expression and tumor cell growth in prostate cancers. Treatment of
OBP-801 efficiently suppressed cell growth of three prostate cancer lines
(22Rv1, VCaP, and LNCaP), together with AR downregulation, regardless of
their hormone sensitivity. Intriguingly, this effect by OBP-801 is not
due to downregulation of transcriptional activity of the AR gene, but due
to post-transcriptional regulation, namely miRNA-mediated suppression.
Among the upregulated miRNAs after OBP-801 treatment in three prostate
cancer cell lines, miR-320a, of which expression was significantly
correlated with prognosis of prostate cancers (P = 0.0185), was the most
closely associated with AR expression. miR-320a mimic suppressed AR
protein expression together with growth suppression, while anti-miR320a
significantly abrogated the growth suppression by OBP-801 treatment.
Fluorescent in situ hybridization analysis revealed that miR-320a was
highly expressed in human normal prostate luminal cells but rarely
expressed in prostate cancer cells. In AR-dependent prostate tumorigenic
rat model, OBP-801 treatment profoundly increased the miR-320 expression
and repressed prostate tumorigenesis. Our data demonstrated that OBP-801
effectively suppressed AR activity via epigenetic upregulation of
miR-320a, which resulted in tumor cell growth suppression of prostate
cancers. OBP-801 may be a potent drug as an AR targeting therapy in AR
positive prostate cancer regardless of androgen dependency.

