Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of novel BRCA founder mutations in middle eastern
breast cancer patients using capture and sanger sequencing analysis


Ethnic differences of breast cancer genomics have prompted us to
investigate the spectra of BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations in different
populations. The prevalence and effect of BRCA 1 and BRCA 2 mutations in
Saudi population is not fully explored. We conducted this study to
characterize the prevalence of BRCA mutations in Middle Eastern breast
cancer patients from Saudi Arabia. A total of 486 clinically high risk
breast cancer patients were recruited from the King Faisal Specialist
Hospital & Research Centre from 1990 and 2011. Comprehensive BRCA1 and
BRCA2 mutation screening was performed using capture sequencing and/or
Sanger Sequencing of all coding exons of BRCA1 and BRCA2 in 190 cases.
Thereafter, the validation was done using a panel of detected mutations
in an additional 296 high risk breast cancer cases. Among the total 486
cases analyzed, 9 deleterious BRCA mutations were identified in 28 (5.8%)
cases, comprising 25 cases in BRCA 1 and three cases in BRCA 2. The six
BRCA 1 recurrent mutations (c. 1140dupG, c.4065_4068delTCAA,
c.4136_4137delCT, c.4524G>A, c.5251C>T and c.5530delC) accounted for 96%
(24/25) of all BRCA 1 mutant cases in this cohort. The one recurrent BRCA
2mutation (c.7007G>A) accounted for 66.6% (2/3) of all BRCA2 mutant
cases. Haplotype analysis was performed to confirm two BRCA1 recurrent
mutations are novel putative founder mutation. In this study our findings
suggest that BRCA mutations account for substantial proportion of high
risk breast cancer cases in Middle Eastern population. Knowing the
spectrum and frequency of founder mutation in this population will help
in developing cost-effective rapid screening assay which can facilitate
genetic testing and counseling for breast cancer risk assessment.

