Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mutant GATA3 actively promotes the growth of normal and malignant
mammary cells


GATA3 is a transcription factor expressed in luminal breast epithelial
cells and is required for mammary gland development. Analysis of TCGA
data reveals that somatic heterozygous mutations in GATA3 occur in up to
15% of estrogen receptor positive breast tumors, and that these tumors
are diagnosed a median of eight years earlier than other estrogen
receptor positive tumors, suggesting a more aggressive phenotype. These
mutants have been proposed to be null alleles resulting in
haploinsufficiency, however the mutation spectrum of GATA3 in breast
cancer is in sharp contrast to that found in HDR syndrome, a true GATA3
haploinsufficiency disease. Based on this disparity, we propose that
there is a selective pressure to mutate and retain a portion of the GATA3
in breast cancer. Here we focus on the GATA3 mutants which lack the
second zinc finger which is responsible for GATA motif binding.
Expression of these mutants accelerated xenograft tumor growth by ZR751
cells, and transgenic expression in mouse mammary glands promoted
precocious lobuloalveolar development. We have used integrated gene
expression and ChIP-Seq profiling to demonstrate that these zinc-finger
deleted proteins retain the ability to associate with the genome by
tethering to complexes associated with FOXA1 and AP-2gamma recognition
motifs, where they modulate the expression of adjacent genes. These data
support a model in which the GATA3 mutations recently observed in breast
cancer encode for active transcription factors which elicit proliferative
phenotypes in normal mammary epithelium and promote the growth of
estrogen receptor positive breast cancer cell lines.

