Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Validation of Trastuzumab immunohistochemistry as a predictive and
prognostic biomarker in gastric cancer patients


Although HER2 immunohistochemistry (IHC) is widely used to assess the
HER2 status, not all patients could be clarified with HER2 IHC positivity
for Trastuzumab treatment. Here, we introduce a novel IHC method
utilizing Trastuzumab itself; compared to conventional HER2 IHC, the new
method evaluates the extracellular epitope which is the target of action
for Trastuzumab. The purpose of this study is to test whether this new
method has better performance in predicting treatment outcome of
Trastuzumab therapy, and whether it is the significant prognostic factor
in consecutive gastric cancer patients.From two individual institutions,
37 and 32 GC patients treated with Trastuzumab were enrolled
respectively, the former as the training cohort and the latter for
validation, and progression free survivals (PFS) were compared according
to the results of Trastuzumab IHC. To validate the prognostic
significance of Trastuzumab IHC in consecutive GC, we constructed tissue
microarrays (TMA) from 536 consecutive cases and Trastuzumab IHC, HER2
IHC, and HER2 silver in situ hybridization (SISH) were performed.In
training cohort (n = 37), all cases were HER2 IHC 2+ (n = 11) or 3+ (n =
26), but 2+ in 3 cases (8.1%) and 3+ in 10 cases (27.0%) by Trastuzumab
IHC. Similar results were observed in validation cohort, 17 of 32 cases
(53.1%) were 2+ or 3+ by Trastuzumab IHC. Trastuzumab 2+ group in the
training cohort had significantly better PFS than Trastuzumab Although
HER2 immunohistochemistry (IHC) is widely used to assess the HER2 status,
not all patients could be clarified with HER2 IHC positivity for
Trastuzumab treatment. Here, we introduce a novel IHC method utilizing
Trastuzumab itself; compared to conventional HER2 IHC, the new method
evaluates the extracellular epitope which is the target of action for
Trastuzumab. The purpose of this study is to test whether this new method
has better performance in predicting treatment outcome of Trastuzumab
therapy, and whether it is the significant prognostic factor in
consecutive gastric cancer patients.From two individual institutions, 37
and 32 GC patients treated with Trastuzumab were enrolled respectively,
the former as the training cohort and the latter for validation, and
progression free survivals (PFS) were compared according to the results
of Trastuzumab IHC. To validate the prognostic significance of
Trastuzumab IHC in consecutive GC, we constructed tissue microarrays
(TMA) from 536 consecutive cases and Trastuzumab IHC, HER2 IHC, and HER2
silver in situ hybridization (SISH) were performed.In training cohort (n
= 37), all cases were HER2 IHC 2+ (n = 11) or 3+ (n = 26), but 2+ in 3
cases (8.1%) and 3+ in 10 cases (27.0%) by Trastuzumab IHC. Similar
results were observed in validation cohort, 17 of 32 cases (53.1%) were
2+ or 3+ by Trastuzumab IHC. Trastuzumab 2+ group in the training cohort
had significantly better PFS than Trastuzumab <2+ group (p = 0.016), and
survival analysis of PFS in validation cohort and combined cohort also
showed favorable PFS in Trastuzumab 2+ group (p = 0.031 and 0.001,
respectively). By Cox regression analysis in training cohort, Trastuzumab
IHC 2+ was proved to be the independent predictive factor for PFS in
patients receiving Trastuzumab. Of 536 consecutive cases of GC, 23 (4.3%)
were HER2 IHC 3+, and among these patients, only 5 (21.7%) were also 3+
by Trastuzumab IHC. Disease specific survival (DSS) and overall survival
(OS) in Trastuzumab IHC 2+ group were shorter compared to Trastuzumab IHC
Although HER2 immunohistochemistry (IHC) is widely used to assess the
HER2 status, not all patients could be clarified with HER2 IHC positivity
for Trastuzumab treatment. Here, we introduce a novel IHC method
utilizing Trastuzumab itself; compared to conventional HER2 IHC, the new
method evaluates the extracellular epitope which is the target of action
for Trastuzumab. The purpose of this study is to test whether this new
method has better performance in predicting treatment outcome of
Trastuzumab therapy, and whether it is the significant prognostic factor
in consecutive gastric cancer patients.From two individual institutions,
37 and 32 GC patients treated with Trastuzumab were enrolled
respectively, the former as the training cohort and the latter for
validation, and progression free survivals (PFS) were compared according
to the results of Trastuzumab IHC. To validate the prognostic
significance of Trastuzumab IHC in consecutive GC, we constructed tissue
microarrays (TMA) from 536 consecutive cases and Trastuzumab IHC, HER2
IHC, and HER2 silver in situ hybridization (SISH) were performed.In
training cohort (n = 37), all cases were HER2 IHC 2+ (n = 11) or 3+ (n =
26), but 2+ in 3 cases (8.1%) and 3+ in 10 cases (27.0%) by Trastuzumab
IHC. Similar results were observed in validation cohort, 17 of 32 cases
(53.1%) were 2+ or 3+ by Trastuzumab IHC. Trastuzumab 2+ group in the
training cohort had significantly better PFS than Trastuzumab <2+ group
(p = 0.016), and survival analysis of PFS in validation cohort and
combined cohort also showed favorable PFS in Trastuzumab 2+ group (p =
0.031 and 0.001, respectively). By Cox regression analysis in training
cohort, Trastuzumab IHC 2+ was proved to be the independent predictive
factor for PFS in patients receiving Trastuzumab. Of 536 consecutive
cases of GC, 23 (4.3%) were HER2 IHC 3+, and among these patients, only 5
(21.7%) were also 3+ by Trastuzumab IHC. Disease specific survival (DSS)
and overall survival (OS) in Trastuzumab IHC 2+ group were shorter
compared to Trastuzumab IHC <2 group (p = 0.015 and 0.063, respectively),
while both HER2 IHC and HER2 SISH failed to discriminate significant
survival differences between subgroups.In this study, we demonstrated
that Trastuzumab IHC is a significant predictive factor for PFS in
Trastuzumab-treated GC patients, and poor prognostic factor of DSS in
consecutive GC, even better than conventional HER2 IHC and HER2 SISH. We
believe that Trastuzumab IHC is a very promising, relatively
easy-to-implement, novel method to assess HER2 status in routine clinical
practice.

