Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Total lesion glycolysis (TLG) as an imaging biomarker of
regorafenib treatment in metastatic colorectal cancer (mCRC)


Introduction: Regorafenib is an oral multikinase inhibitor with
anti-angiogenic activity. Decrease in tumor density without significant
decrease in tumor volume is often observed after treatment with the drug,
suggesting the necessity of further means of response evaluation in
addition to size criteria. This study was planned to evaluate whether
metabolic imaging with 18-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission
tomography (PET) could predict outcome in mCRC patient treated with
regorafenib.Methods: Patients were enrolled into a main study entitled
Identification of Predictive Biomarker of Regorafenib in Refractory
Colorectal Cancer: A Prospective Explorative Study (NCT01996969). mCRC
patients (N = 117) were treated with regorafenib, 160mg orally once
daily, on days 1-21 of a 28-day cycle, and treatment outcome was
evaluated according to the Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors
1.1. For this imaging sub-study, the results of 18-FDG PET scans obtained
at baseline and after 2 cycles of treatment were analyzed. Total lesion
glycolysis (TLG) of each patient was calculated by multiplying the volume
exceeding the threshold of 40% of maximum standardized uptake value (SUV)
by the mean SUV of the lesion, and the percentage changes of TLG after
treatment were calculated. The association between the changes of the
metabolic imaging and treatment outcome was analyzed.Results: A total of
44 patients were evaluable for 18-FDG PET scan results. The best overall
response in the 44 patients were, partial response in 3 (6.8%), stable
disease in 23 (52.3%) and progressive disease in 18 (40.9%). The median
progression-free survival (PFS) and the median overall survival (OS) were
5.4 and 14.1 months, respectively. The median of TLG at baseline was
187.4 (range 18.3 to 8893.2). After 2 cycles of regorafenib, 50.0% of
patients had a decrease in TLG. Median change in TLG was 1.7% (range,
-75.7 to 251.6%). Changes in TLG were modestly associated with size
changes (Pearson's r = 0.51, p = 0.001). Patients with lower baseline TLG
(Introduction: Regorafenib is an oral multikinase inhibitor with
anti-angiogenic activity. Decrease in tumor density without significant
decrease in tumor volume is often observed after treatment with the drug,
suggesting the necessity of further means of response evaluation in
addition to size criteria. This study was planned to evaluate whether
metabolic imaging with 18-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission
tomography (PET) could predict outcome in mCRC patient treated with
regorafenib.Methods: Patients were enrolled into a main study entitled
Identification of Predictive Biomarker of Regorafenib in Refractory
Colorectal Cancer: A Prospective Explorative Study (NCT01996969). mCRC
patients (N = 117) were treated with regorafenib, 160mg orally once
daily, on days 1-21 of a 28-day cycle, and treatment outcome was
evaluated according to the Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors
1.1. For this imaging sub-study, the results of 18-FDG PET scans obtained
at baseline and after 2 cycles of treatment were analyzed. Total lesion
glycolysis (TLG) of each patient was calculated by multiplying the volume
exceeding the threshold of 40% of maximum standardized uptake value (SUV)
by the mean SUV of the lesion, and the percentage changes of TLG after
treatment were calculated. The association between the changes of the
metabolic imaging and treatment outcome was analyzed.Results: A total of
44 patients were evaluable for 18-FDG PET scan results. The best overall
response in the 44 patients were, partial response in 3 (6.8%), stable
disease in 23 (52.3%) and progressive disease in 18 (40.9%). The median
progression-free survival (PFS) and the median overall survival (OS) were
5.4 and 14.1 months, respectively. The median of TLG at baseline was
187.4 (range 18.3 to 8893.2). After 2 cycles of regorafenib, 50.0% of
patients had a decrease in TLG. Median change in TLG was 1.7% (range,
-75.7 to 251.6%). Changes in TLG were modestly associated with size
changes (Pearson's r = 0.51, p = 0.001). Patients with lower baseline TLG
(< 324.49) showed significantly longer OS (1 year survival rate 75.6 vs.
33.5%, p = 0.008). Moreover, patients showing higher decrease in TLG
(change Introduction: Regorafenib is an oral multikinase inhibitor with
anti-angiogenic activity. Decrease in tumor density without significant
decrease in tumor volume is often observed after treatment with the drug,
suggesting the necessity of further means of response evaluation in
addition to size criteria. This study was planned to evaluate whether
metabolic imaging with 18-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission
tomography (PET) could predict outcome in mCRC patient treated with
regorafenib.Methods: Patients were enrolled into a main study entitled
Identification of Predictive Biomarker of Regorafenib in Refractory
Colorectal Cancer: A Prospective Explorative Study (NCT01996969). mCRC
patients (N = 117) were treated with regorafenib, 160mg orally once
daily, on days 1-21 of a 28-day cycle, and treatment outcome was
evaluated according to the Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors
1.1. For this imaging sub-study, the results of 18-FDG PET scans obtained
at baseline and after 2 cycles of treatment were analyzed. Total lesion
glycolysis (TLG) of each patient was calculated by multiplying the volume
exceeding the threshold of 40% of maximum standardized uptake value (SUV)
by the mean SUV of the lesion, and the percentage changes of TLG after
treatment were calculated. The association between the changes of the
metabolic imaging and treatment outcome was analyzed.Results: A total of
44 patients were evaluable for 18-FDG PET scan results. The best overall
response in the 44 patients were, partial response in 3 (6.8%), stable
disease in 23 (52.3%) and progressive disease in 18 (40.9%). The median
progression-free survival (PFS) and the median overall survival (OS) were
5.4 and 14.1 months, respectively. The median of TLG at baseline was
187.4 (range 18.3 to 8893.2). After 2 cycles of regorafenib, 50.0% of
patients had a decrease in TLG. Median change in TLG was 1.7% (range,
-75.7 to 251.6%). Changes in TLG were modestly associated with size
changes (Pearson's r = 0.51, p = 0.001). Patients with lower baseline TLG
(< 324.49) showed significantly longer OS (1 year survival rate 75.6 vs.
33.5%, p = 0.008). Moreover, patients showing higher decrease in TLG
(change < 1.7%) showed significantly longer PFS (median 8.4 vs. 1.9
months, pIntroduction: Regorafenib is an oral multikinase inhibitor with
anti-angiogenic activity. Decrease in tumor density without significant
decrease in tumor volume is often observed after treatment with the drug,
suggesting the necessity of further means of response evaluation in
addition to size criteria. This study was planned to evaluate whether
metabolic imaging with 18-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission
tomography (PET) could predict outcome in mCRC patient treated with
regorafenib.Methods: Patients were enrolled into a main study entitled
Identification of Predictive Biomarker of Regorafenib in Refractory
Colorectal Cancer: A Prospective Explorative Study (NCT01996969). mCRC
patients (N = 117) were treated with regorafenib, 160mg orally once
daily, on days 1-21 of a 28-day cycle, and treatment outcome was
evaluated according to the Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors
1.1. For this imaging sub-study, the results of 18-FDG PET scans obtained
at baseline and after 2 cycles of treatment were analyzed. Total lesion
glycolysis (TLG) of each patient was calculated by multiplying the volume
exceeding the threshold of 40% of maximum standardized uptake value (SUV)
by the mean SUV of the lesion, and the percentage changes of TLG after
treatment were calculated. The association between the changes of the
metabolic imaging and treatment outcome was analyzed.Results: A total of
44 patients were evaluable for 18-FDG PET scan results. The best overall
response in the 44 patients were, partial response in 3 (6.8%), stable
disease in 23 (52.3%) and progressive disease in 18 (40.9%). The median
progression-free survival (PFS) and the median overall survival (OS) were
5.4 and 14.1 months, respectively. The median of TLG at baseline was
187.4 (range 18.3 to 8893.2). After 2 cycles of regorafenib, 50.0% of
patients had a decrease in TLG. Median change in TLG was 1.7% (range,
-75.7 to 251.6%). Changes in TLG were modestly associated with size
changes (Pearson's r = 0.51, p = 0.001). Patients with lower baseline TLG
(< 324.49) showed significantly longer OS (1 year survival rate 75.6 vs.
33.5%, p = 0.008). Moreover, patients showing higher decrease in TLG
(change < 1.7%) showed significantly longer PFS (median 8.4 vs. 1.9
months, p<0.001) and trend towards longer OS (1 year survival rate 67.6%
vs. 50.9%, p = 0.068).Conclusions: Lower baseline TLG is associated with
better OS and higher decrease in TLG after treatment predicted better PFS
in mCRC patients treated with regorafenib.

