Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of human telomerase by new purine analogs


Telomeres are the end caps of linear chromosomes that help to ensure
genomic stability. Because of the inability of DNA polymerases to
synthesize the extreme ends of the lagging strand, telomeres get slightly
shorter each time a cell divides. When telomeres get extremely short, a
state of senescence is triggered which halts cell division. Some cells
that require an extended lifespan (e.g. embryonic cells, germ lines and
stem cells) use an enzyme called telomerase to maintain telomeres at a
length that is sufficient to escape senescence. Whereas telomerase is
undetectable, in adult somatic tissue, it is upregulated in 85-90% of all
metastatic tumors; enabling cancer cells to divide indefinitely. Due to
this unique property of cancer cells, targeting telomerase is a viable
chemotherapeutic approach. Nucleotide analogs have been shown to inhibit
telomerase activity (e.g. azidothymidine or AZT), albeit modestly, to
promote telomere shortening in cancer cell lines. Also, most of these
nucleotide analogs are limited by requirement of high dosage (e.g. The
IC50 of AZT varies from 0.25 to 1.35 mM). Therefore, while promising,
there is a need to develop other nucleotide analogs that are more potent
in inhibiting telomerase activity. We have screened a series of new
purines analogs using a direct in vitro telomerase assay. These
nucleotide analogs were developed to have different chemical
modifications around the indole group of the nucleobase. We have
identified two purine analogs (5-MeCITP and 6-NITP) that inhibit
telomerase activity in vitro. 5-MeCITP was measured to have an inhibition
constant (ki) of 45M, which is significantly efficient. Future efforts
will include evaluation of the lead nucleoside analogs in telomerase
positive cancer cell lines to determine their effect on telomere length
and cell survival.

