Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A comprehensive analysis of proteins involved in innate and
acquired resistance to molecularly-targeted drugs in breast cancer cells


Cancer is the second leading cause of death among Americans, and despite
advances in diagnosis, new technologies for early detection, and
development of potent molecularly-targeted drugs, survival rates in
advanced disease have not been improving at desired rates. Perseverance
of cancer cells seem to rely both on their significant heterogeneity at
the onset of treatment, and the inherent plasticity (genetic instability)
to adopt to environmental conditions and exogenous agents. Cancer is
known as a heterogeneous disease. In fact, extensive genetic diversity
has been revealed not only between different types of cancer, but also
within a single tumor (as diversity in the expression of protein
biomarkers). This intra-tumor heterogeneity could be a major obstacle in
cancer treatment due to a wide range of responsivity to any specific
anticancer agent. This study aims to analyze the heterogeneity and
plasticity among a small panel of breast cancer cell lines as a reaction
to exposure to a variety of molecularly-targeted agents, which could lead
us to identification of the proteins that play major roles in drug
resistance in cancer cells.After initial evaluation of the LC50, we
exposed five different breast cancer cell lines to high doses of
erlotinib (selective ErbB1/EGFR-inhibitor), vemurafenib (pan Raf
inhibitor), everolimus (selective mTORC1 inhibitor), and ruxolitinib (pan
JAK inhibitor), an collected the survivors. Using an in-house designed
microarray and real-time PCR analysis, we analyzed the protein expression
profile of the survivors compared to the untreated population, which
revealed proteins involved in innate resistance and the heterogeneity
among the population. In an alternative approach, we exposed the cells to
gradually increasing doses of these selected agents, affording the cells
the opportunity to adapt to the treatment. The resistant cells were then
analyzed in a similar fashion to reveal proteins involved in acquired
resistance.

