Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SPOP mutation drives tumorigenesis in mouse prostate - a novel
model of ETS negative prostate cancer


Background: Recurrent mutations in SPOP are the most common point
mutations in prostate cancer, occurring in about 10% of cases across
multiple independent cohorts. F133V is the most frequently (50%) mutated
residue. SPOP mutation defines a distinct molecular subclass of prostate
cancer, universally negative for ETS rearrangements. No available
prostate cancer cell lines harbor endogenous SPOP mutations, making model
systems a critical need. Here, we describe a new mouse model with
conditional transgenic expression of SPOP-F133V in the mouse
prostate.Experimental Design: We generated a conditional mouse with the
SPOP-F133V transgene knocked in to the Rosa26 locus (R26F133V); these
mice were crossed with Pb-Cre4 mice to express SPOP-F133V specifically in
the prostate. Since PTEN deletion is known to drive prostate cancer
progression, we crossed Pb-Cre4; R26F133V mice with Ptenf/f mice to study
the impact of SPOP mutation in the background of conditional heterozygous
(f/+) and homozygous (f/f) loss of Pten. Organoid lines were derived from
transgenic mouse prostates and infected with inducible Cre-ERT2 to serve
as in vitro platforms, 2D as well as 3D, for additional studies. RNA-Seq
was performed on independently induced samples.Results: Pb-Cre4;R26F133V
mouse prostates showed a minimal histological phenotype, with rare
cytological changes of atypical nuclei (pBackground: Recurrent mutations
in SPOP are the most common point mutations in prostate cancer, occurring
in about 10% of cases across multiple independent cohorts. F133V is the
most frequently (50%) mutated residue. SPOP mutation defines a distinct
molecular subclass of prostate cancer, universally negative for ETS
rearrangements. No available prostate cancer cell lines harbor endogenous
SPOP mutations, making model systems a critical need. Here, we describe a
new mouse model with conditional transgenic expression of SPOP-F133V in
the mouse prostate.Experimental Design: We generated a conditional mouse
with the SPOP-F133V transgene knocked in to the Rosa26 locus (R26F133V);
these mice were crossed with Pb-Cre4 mice to express SPOP-F133V
specifically in the prostate. Since PTEN deletion is known to drive
prostate cancer progression, we crossed Pb-Cre4; R26F133V mice with
Ptenf/f mice to study the impact of SPOP mutation in the background of
conditional heterozygous (f/+) and homozygous (f/f) loss of Pten.
Organoid lines were derived from transgenic mouse prostates and infected
with inducible Cre-ERT2 to serve as in vitro platforms, 2D as well as 3D,
for additional studies. RNA-Seq was performed on independently induced
samples.Results: Pb-Cre4;R26F133V mouse prostates showed a minimal
histological phenotype, with rare cytological changes of atypical nuclei
(p<0.005) in one year old mice. In combination with Ptenf/+, SPOP-F133V
expression resulted HG-PIN in 80% (n = 6) of mice, age 6 month, compared
to only 20% (n = 8) in control mice. In addition, the HG-PIN in
R26F133V;Ptenf/+ mice showed a distinct phenotype with strong nuclear
atypia absent in controls. In the background of Ptenf/f, SPOP-F133V leads
to poorly differentiated, invasive cancer (n = 8 out of 9) compared to
control mice (Ptenf/f), which displayed only HG-PIN (n = 6). Organoids
with expression of SPOP-F133V showed increased proliferation and
increased ki67 staining. To define signaling pathways controlled by
mutant SPOP in the prostate, we performed RNA-seq on mouse organoids
expressing SPOP-F133V and controls. We interrogated the gene space
nominated by the mouse F133V mutation to the human prostate cancer TCGA
transcriptome. Unsupervised clustering demonstrated a highly significant
enrichment of ETS negative human prostate cancer (pBackground: Recurrent
mutations in SPOP are the most common point mutations in prostate cancer,
occurring in about 10% of cases across multiple independent cohorts.
F133V is the most frequently (50%) mutated residue. SPOP mutation defines
a distinct molecular subclass of prostate cancer, universally negative
for ETS rearrangements. No available prostate cancer cell lines harbor
endogenous SPOP mutations, making model systems a critical need. Here, we
describe a new mouse model with conditional transgenic expression of
SPOP-F133V in the mouse prostate.Experimental Design: We generated a
conditional mouse with the SPOP-F133V transgene knocked in to the Rosa26
locus (R26F133V); these mice were crossed with Pb-Cre4 mice to express
SPOP-F133V specifically in the prostate. Since PTEN deletion is known to
drive prostate cancer progression, we crossed Pb-Cre4; R26F133V mice with
Ptenf/f mice to study the impact of SPOP mutation in the background of
conditional heterozygous (f/+) and homozygous (f/f) loss of Pten.
Organoid lines were derived from transgenic mouse prostates and infected
with inducible Cre-ERT2 to serve as in vitro platforms, 2D as well as 3D,
for additional studies. RNA-Seq was performed on independently induced
samples.Results: Pb-Cre4;R26F133V mouse prostates showed a minimal
histological phenotype, with rare cytological changes of atypical nuclei
(p<0.005) in one year old mice. In combination with Ptenf/+, SPOP-F133V
expression resulted HG-PIN in 80% (n = 6) of mice, age 6 month, compared
to only 20% (n = 8) in control mice. In addition, the HG-PIN in
R26F133V;Ptenf/+ mice showed a distinct phenotype with strong nuclear
atypia absent in controls. In the background of Ptenf/f, SPOP-F133V leads
to poorly differentiated, invasive cancer (n = 8 out of 9) compared to
control mice (Ptenf/f), which displayed only HG-PIN (n = 6). Organoids
with expression of SPOP-F133V showed increased proliferation and
increased ki67 staining. To define signaling pathways controlled by
mutant SPOP in the prostate, we performed RNA-seq on mouse organoids
expressing SPOP-F133V and controls. We interrogated the gene space
nominated by the mouse F133V mutation to the human prostate cancer TCGA
transcriptome. Unsupervised clustering demonstrated a highly significant
enrichment of ETS negative human prostate cancer (p<2.21016), supporting
the relevance of our transgenic models to human prostate cancer.Summary:
Mutation in SPOP causes an early onset of HG-PIN in the prostate of
Ptenf/+ mice, and progression to poorly differentiated invasive cancer in
Ptenf/f mice. HG-PIN shows a very distinct histological phenotype with
strong nuclear atypia. Gene expression in murine prostate organoids
expressing SPOP-F133V strongly correlates with human tumors, providing
relevance for this novel mouse model in defining the biology and
therapeutic vulnerability of this subclass of prostate cancer.

