Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Notch1 signaling determines melanoma-regulating role of tumor
stromal fibroblasts


Objectives. Tumor stromal fibroblasts are crucial in regulating tumor
growth, invasion and metastasis, yet the molecular mechanisms that
determine the tumor regulatory role of stromal fibroblasts remains
unknown. Here, we uncover the Notch1 signaling pathway as a molecular
determinant that controls the tumor regulatory role of tumor stromal
fibroblasts in melanoma growth and invasion. Methods. Murine melanoma
cells B16-F10, stably transduced with Luciferase 2 (Luc2)/lentivirus,
were xenografted on the skin of two new mouse lines: the Gain-Of-Function
of Notch1 (GOFNotch1: Fsp1.Cre+/-;ROSALSL-N1IC+/+) and Loss-Of-Function
of Notch1 (LOFNotch1: Fsp1.Cre+/-;Notch1LoxP/LoxP+/+), respectively.
GOFctrl (FSP1.Cre-/-;ROSALSL-N1IC+/+) and LOFctrl (FSP1.Cre-/-;
Notch1LoxP/LoxP+/+) mice were used as control. Tumor growth was measured
based on tumor weight and melanoma local invasion were examined by H&E
staining of resected tumor tissue.Results. Using a mouse melanoma model
in which exogenous melanoma cells were grafted on the skin of two lines
of mice where the genetic activation or inactivation of Notch1 signaling
specifically occurs in natural host stromal fibroblasts, we demonstrated
that Notch1 pathway activity could determine the tumor-promoting or
tumor-suppressing phenotype in tumor stromal fibroblasts. Tumor stromal
fibroblasts carrying elevated Notch1 activity significantly inhibited
melanoma growth and invasion, while those with a null Notch1 promoted
melanoma invasion.Conclusions. These findings identify the Notch1 pathway
as a molecular determinant that controls the regulatory role of tumor
stromal fibroblasts in melanoma skin growth and invasion, unveiling
Notch1 signaling as a potential therapeutic target for melanoma and
potentially other solid tumors.

