Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Low-molecular-mass secretome profiling identifies prognostic
biomarkers for oral cavity squamous cell carcinomas


The profiling of cancer cell secretomes is considered to be a good
strategy for identifying cancer- related biomarkers, but few studies have
focused on identifying low-molecular-mass (LMr) proteins (The profiling
of cancer cell secretomes is considered to be a good strategy for
identifying cancer- related biomarkers, but few studies have focused on
identifying low-molecular-mass (LMr) proteins (<15 kDa) in cancer cell
secretomes. Here, we used tricine-SDS-gel-assisted fractionation and
LC-MS/MS to systemically identify LMr proteins in the secretomes of five
oral cavity squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) cell lines. Cross-matching of
these results with nine OSCC tissue transcriptome datasets allowed us to
identify 33 LMr genes/ proteins that were highly upregulated in OSCC
tissues and secreted/released from OSCC cells. Immunohistochemistry and
quantitative real-time PCR were used to verify the overexpression of two
candidates, HMGA2 and MIF, in OSCC tissues. The overexpressions of both
proteins were associated with cervical metastasis, perineural invasion,
deeper tumor invasion, higher overall stage, and a poorer prognosis for
post-treatment survival. Functional assays further revealed that both
proteins promoted the migration and invasion of OSCC cell lines in vitro.
Collectively, our data indicate that the tricine-SDS-gel/LC-MS/MS
approach can be used to efficiently identify LMr proteins from OSCC cell
secretomes, and suggest that HMGA2 and MIF could be potential tissue
biomarkers for OSCC.

