Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Endostatin regulates androgen receptor-mediated metabolic and
oxido-reductive pathways in prostate cancer cells


Endostatin (ES) has been recognized for decades as an endogenous protein
with antiangiogenic function. Recent findings, however, indicate the
pleiotropic effects of ES in different tissue and cell types, ensuing
further investigation on unidentified molecular mechanisms of action.
Previously, we have shown that ES exerts a direct role in suppressing
prostate cancer cell proliferation by inhibiting androgen receptor (AR)
activity, signifying therapeutic potential of ES for targeting both tumor
epithelia and endothelia. Subsequent to this finding, we identified
robust glucose influx and significant reduction of intracellular ROS
levels in LNCaP cells upon ES treatment. The ES mutants with low AR
binding did not promote glucose uptake through GLUT1 augmentation,
suggesting that AR-targeted effects of ES include modulation of
downstream metabolic pathways. Surprisingly, global proteome analysis
showed that the levels of major metabolic enzymes either in glycolytic
pathway or TCA cycle were not changed upon ES treatment. Instead, ES
markedly increased the levels of G6PD (5-fold), NAMPT (2.5-fold), and
NAPRT (5-fold), indicating upregulation of the late-limiting steps in NAD
biosynthesis and pentose phosphate pathway (PPP). Further proteome
analysis of ES-treated LNCaP cells strongly indicated upregulation of ROS
scavenging machinery, including SOD2 (3- fold), CAT (2-folds), GSS
(2-fold), GSR (1.8-fold), and POR (4.6-fold). Overall, these data suggest
that ES can modulate intracellular ROS levels by augmenting glucose
uptake, NAD biosynthesis, and the NADPH levels by shunting metabolic
pathways to PPP. Given that basal ROS levels are known to increase upon
disease progression to higher grade prostate tumors, ES effect of
promoting ROS scavenging machinery can be employed as an adjuvant to
re-sensitize prostate cancer cells to ROS-inducing chemo- and radiation
therapies.Abbreviations: CAT: catalase, GLUT1: glucose transporter
isoform 1, G6PD: glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase, GSS: glutathione
synthase, GSR: glutathione reductase, NAMPT: nicotinamide
phosphoribosyltransferase, NAPRT: nicotinate phosphoribosyltransferase,
POR: NADPH-cytochrome P450 reductase, ROS: reactive oxygen species, SOD2:
manganese superoxide dismutase, TCA: tricarboxylic acid

