Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The codon 389 polymorphism of PICT-1 is a risk factor for human
cervical cancer


The uterine cervical cancers profoundly involve in the infection with
human papillomavirus (HPV), and cause the deaths of more than 250,000
women all over the world. To date, the carcinogenesis of uterine cervical
cancers was not fully understood, then we have to investigate more
precise genetic and molecular events to develop early diagnosis and
identify new therapeutic targets. The PICT-1 (Protein Interacting with
Carboxyl Terminus-1), one of the nucleolar proteins, has tumor suppressor
functions, but its association with uterine cervical carcinogenesis has
been unknown. So we investigate PICT-1 gene mutations, polymorphism on
codon 389 (rs184994), and protein expression levels to investigate the
association with pathogenesis of uterine cervical cancers. Firstly we
found missense mutations of functionally important regions of PICT-1 in
one of seven uterine cervical cancer cell lines (14%) and one of 10
surgical samples (10%). Next we focused on codon 389 polymorphism (Gln to
Arg) which located in important regions of PICT-1 function. In result
there was a statistically significant association between PICT-1 codon
389 polymorphism and the risk of uterine cervical cancers: A/G (odds
ratio 6.48, 95% confidence interval 1.98-21.22, P = 0.0012), G/G (odds
ratio 3.15, 95% confidence interval 1.03-9.61, P = 0.0403), and A/G or
G/G (odds ratio 4.44, 95% confidence interval 1.62-12.23, P = 0.0026). We
also identified PICT-1 protein level was reduced in uterine cervical
cancer cell lines by Western blotting and cervical cancer tissues by
immunohistochemistry staining (IHC). In IHC analysis, expression of
PICT-1 in adjacent normal cervix was found in nucleus, especially
nucleolus, but in differentiating cells layers located upper parabasal
cell layer, PICT-1 also expressed in cytoplasm and gradually reduced the
expression of nucleolus. In patient tissues, compared to normal
epithelium, we found reduction of PICT-1 expression in most samples found
even in uterine cervical cancers at early invasive lesions, and weaker
PICT-1 expression was observed in more invasive lesions. Interestingly,
we also detected high expressed and/or re-expressed PICT-1 in cytoplasm
and/or nucleolus of keratinized lesions of cervical cancers. Our results
indicate that disruption of PICT-1 by gene mutation and/or reduction of
protein level may associate with the pathogenesis of uterine cervical
cancers, and its codon 389 polymorphism may increase the risk of uterine
cervical cancers. And also we suggested that PICT-1 located in cytoplasm
may be important to squamous cell differentiation, and we speculated the
further study of association between PICT-1 and cell differentiation
would be of value to the field of the differentiation-inducing therapy
for many hard-to-treat patients of many cancers, including uterine
cervical cancers.

