Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Atm expression predicts ABT-888 and CPT-11 sensitivity in gastric
cancer cells by mediating p53 independent regulation of cell cycle and
apoptosis


Background: Identification of synthetically lethal cellular targets and
synergistic drug combinations are important in cancer chemo therapy as
they help to overcome treatment resistance and increase efficacy. The
Ataxia Telangiectasia Mutated (ATM) kinase is a nuclear protein that
plays a major role in the initiation of DNA repair signalling and cell
cycle check points during DNA damage. Although ATM was shown to be
associated with poor prognosis in gastric cancer, its potential
implication as a predictive biomarker for cancer chemotherapy remains
unexplored. The present study evaluated ATM induced synthetic lethality
and its role in sensitization of gastric cancer cells to PARP and TOP1
inhibitors, ABT-888 and CPT-11 respectively.Methods: ATM expression in a
panel of 10 gastric cancer cells were detected by immunohistochemistry
and the IC50 against ABT-888 and CPT-11 was determined by MTS cell
proliferation assay. The synergistic effect of ABT-888 and CPT-11 in
gastric cancer cells was determined by cell cycle and DNA damage assays.
ATM expression was knocked down using siRNA and its effect in P53 induced
cell cycle regulation and apoptosis was determined by immunoblot
analysis.Results and Conclusion: ATM deficiency was found to be
associated with enhanced sensitivity to ABT-888 and CPT-11 monotherapy,
hence suggesting a mechanism of synthetic lethality. Cells with high ATM
expression showed reduced sensitivity to monotherapy, however showed a
higher synergistic effect towards ABT-888 and CPT-11 combinational
therapy that predisposed cells to enhanced drug sensitivity. Furthermore,
ATM expression was shown to play a major role in cellular homeostasis by
regulating cell cycle progression and apoptosis in a P53 independent
manner. The present study highlights the clinical utility of ATM
expression as a predictive marker for sensitivity of gastric cancer cell
to PARP and TOP1 inhibition and provides a deeper mechanistic insight
into ATM dependent regulation of cellular processes.

