Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PDLIM2 phosphorylation in determining breast cancer phenotype


Several genes that are involved in cancer progression are induced by
Insulin-like Growth Factor-1 (IGF-1). One of them encodes the PDZ-LIM
protein PDLIM2, which is localized at the cytoskeleton and nucleus in
epithelial and hematopoietic cells. PDLIM2 is repressed in certain
cancers including breast cancers, but it is highly expressed in invasive
cancer cells in triple negative breast cancer (TNBC), where it has also
been associated with poor survival. PDLIM2 regulates the stability and
activity of transcription factors including beta catenin, STATs, NFB and
IRFs and has been associated with ubiquitination and destabilization of
proteins such as NF-B, E-cadherin, and p27KIP1. However, PDLIM2 itself is
also regulated by posttranslational modifications, but how this controls
PDLIM2 activity is still largely unclear.Therefore, this study aimed to
investigate PDLIM2 phosphorylation and its effect on PDLIM2 sub-cellular
location and function in transcription factor regulation. The PDLIM2
protein sequence includes multiple potential phosphorylation sites and it
migrates as several distinct phosphatase-sensitive species in SDS PAGE
and 2D electrophoresis, indicating phosphorylation at several residues.
Using cellular fractionation and immunofluorescence we show that PDLIM2
accumulates in the nucleus in response to cell stimulation with IGF-1 or
TGF. Moreover, we show that inhibitors of Rho Kinases suppress PDLIM2
phosphorylation in response to these stimuli. In addition, we demonstrate
that mutation of the predicted Rho Kinase phosphorylation sites in PDLIM2
reduce protein stability, an effect that can be reversed by application
of proteasomal inhibitor.Overall, our results indicate that
phosphorylation by Rho kinases plays an important role in the subcellular
location and regulation of PDLIM2 function, which opens a new avenue in
targeting PDLIM2 activity in invasive cancer cells.

