Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of genetic polymorphisms associated with
myelodysplastic syndromes by genome-wide association study


Background: The myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) are senescence-dependent
stem cell malignancies. Although germ line mutations in RUNX1, CEBPA,
ETV6, or GATA2 may underlie familial cases, inherited genetic
polymorphisms influencing MDS susceptibility has not been evaluated. We
performed the first genome-wide association study (GWAS) to identify
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) linked to MDS
predisposition.Methods: DNA from 1361 MDS patients from 9 international
centers was genotyped on the Affymetrix Genome-Wide Human SNP Array 6.0;
all patients signed informed consent. Data on 4597 healthy controls
genotyped on the same platform were obtained from the Database of
Genotypes and Phenotypes (dbGaP). Applying standard quality control
metrics and limiting to individuals of European ancestry, we analysed 999
MDS patients and 4,309 controls at 545,924 markers. We used logistic
regression to determine associations with MDS after appropriate
adjustment assuming an additive genetic model.Results: We identified 15
SNPs at 9 loci associated with MDS, including rs6780298 (3q13; p =
5.010-6) and rs1206819 (20q13; p = 1.5410-6) that mapped to the
intragenic regions of MORC1 and EYA2, respectively; and rs2473784 (1p31;
p = 3.3210-7) that mapped downstream of DEPDC1. Other hits (p510-6) at
4q28, 5p14, 9p22, 6p22, 10q21 are in or near SLC7A11, GUSBP1, SH3GL2, MOG
and TRIM27, respectively. Using publicly available gene expression
profiling data, we confirmed all of these genes are expressed in the
hematopoietic compartment and MORC1, EYA2, DEPDC1, and SH3GL2 are
increased in leukemic samples suggesting that variation in these genes
may be functionally relevant in myeloid malignancies. Notably, EYA2
(20q13) flanks the commonly deleted region in del(20q) MDS and has
oncogenic properties in solid tumors. SH3GL2 is very highly upregulated
in leukemic samples and interacts with Dynamin-1, a GTP-binding protein
involved in cellular trafficking and is similarly associated with solid
tumorigenesis. To validate our observed associations, we analysed the 15
SNP markers in an independent set of 12,385 individuals of whom 117
developed hematologic malignancy (including MDS) during follow up. The
markers at 1p31 including rs2473784 and 4 others in strong linkage
disequilibrium were associated with individuals who developed hematologic
malignancy (pBackground: The myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) are
senescence-dependent stem cell malignancies. Although germ line mutations
in RUNX1, CEBPA, ETV6, or GATA2 may underlie familial cases, inherited
genetic polymorphisms influencing MDS susceptibility has not been
evaluated. We performed the first genome-wide association study (GWAS) to
identify single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) linked to MDS
predisposition.Methods: DNA from 1361 MDS patients from 9 international
centers was genotyped on the Affymetrix Genome-Wide Human SNP Array 6.0;
all patients signed informed consent. Data on 4597 healthy controls
genotyped on the same platform were obtained from the Database of
Genotypes and Phenotypes (dbGaP). Applying standard quality control
metrics and limiting to individuals of European ancestry, we analysed 999
MDS patients and 4,309 controls at 545,924 markers. We used logistic
regression to determine associations with MDS after appropriate
adjustment assuming an additive genetic model.Results: We identified 15
SNPs at 9 loci associated with MDS, including rs6780298 (3q13; p =
5.010-6) and rs1206819 (20q13; p = 1.5410-6) that mapped to the
intragenic regions of MORC1 and EYA2, respectively; and rs2473784 (1p31;
p = 3.3210-7) that mapped downstream of DEPDC1. Other hits (p510-6) at
4q28, 5p14, 9p22, 6p22, 10q21 are in or near SLC7A11, GUSBP1, SH3GL2, MOG
and TRIM27, respectively. Using publicly available gene expression
profiling data, we confirmed all of these genes are expressed in the
hematopoietic compartment and MORC1, EYA2, DEPDC1, and SH3GL2 are
increased in leukemic samples suggesting that variation in these genes
may be functionally relevant in myeloid malignancies. Notably, EYA2
(20q13) flanks the commonly deleted region in del(20q) MDS and has
oncogenic properties in solid tumors. SH3GL2 is very highly upregulated
in leukemic samples and interacts with Dynamin-1, a GTP-binding protein
involved in cellular trafficking and is similarly associated with solid
tumorigenesis. To validate our observed associations, we analysed the 15
SNP markers in an independent set of 12,385 individuals of whom 117
developed hematologic malignancy (including MDS) during follow up. The
markers at 1p31 including rs2473784 and 4 others in strong linkage
disequilibrium were associated with individuals who developed hematologic
malignancy (p<0.05). One other SNP (rs404660) showing an association in
both the MDS GWAS analysis and the hematologic malignancy dataset is also
currently under further investigation.Conclusions: These data provide the
first genome-wide identification of germline variants associated with
MDS. Current work is underway to replicate these findings in an
independent sample set of MDS patients and healthy controls. If
confirmed, these SNPs may serve as biomarkers to identify individuals at
risk for MDS and potentially support new prevention strategies.

