Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Specific chromosomic alterations confer therapy resistance in a
cohort of 49 patients with newly diagnosed acute myeloid leukemia treated
with intensive chemotherapy


Introduction. Intensive induction chemotherapy in non-M3 young Acute
Myeloid Leukemia (AML) patients is represented by the association of an
antracycline and Cytarabine. Some treatment regimens including
fludarabine or the addition of Gemtuzumab Ozogamicin (GO) as a third or
fourth drug, proved to give a benefit in terms of CR rates.Aims of the
study. In a group of 49 patients treated with intensive chemotherapy, we
evaluated chromosomal abnormalities with SNP 6.0 and Cytoscan HD
(Affymetrix) in order to improve conventional cytogenetic analysis and
discover novel chromosomic aberrations related to clinical data and
therapy response.Patients and Methods. From 2001 to 2014, 489 patients
were treated in our Institution. Among those, in 49 newly diagnosed AML
patients (median age 54 (range 19-71)), SNP microarray based-genotyping
were performed and then analyzed by Nexus Copy Number v7.5 (BioDiscovery)
and R Development Core Team.According to karyotype, FLT3 and NPM1
mutational status, 55.9% of the patients were considered at High Risk
(HR) and 4.1% at low risk (LR). Ten patients had secondary AML. Patients
were treated with induction schemes including MyFLAI, MyAIE, FLAI, FLAN,
FLAG, 3+7 or DAE.Results. The CR rate after induction was 87.8% (43/49
patients). Deaths during induction (DDI), occurring in the first 50 days
from 1st line therapy, were 1/49. The median OS was 135 months, the
5-years OS in our patients was 55,1%. Patients treated with GO showed a
non-statistical trend toward a better OS than patients treated with other
regimens (median OS not reached vs 133 months, respectively).We explored
the alterations found by SNP array in our patients searching for novel
markers of therapy resistance. We found a median of 192,5 total copy
number aberrations (range 72- 1071): a median of 145,5 total copy number
aberrations in responding patients group (RPG), and a median of 361 total
copy number aberrations (p = ns) in non-responding patients group
(NRPG).We compared the frequency of detected aberrations in RPG and in
NRPG with Fisher's exact test. We found that PIK3CA, Gain
chr3:178,927,088-178,929,550 (p = 0,0016), SMAD4, Gain
chr18:48,573,154-48,573,255 (p = 0,0166) and several other gene's loci
(CASC18, TCF12, UTY, GRB10, ZFY) are significant aberrations in NRPG
compared with RPG.Conclusions. We identified a number of genes with
significant aberrations in NRPG, particularly PIK3CA, a protein-coding
gene involved in cell proliferation and metabolic pathway with
interaction with HRAS/KRAS and EGF, and SMAD4, a transcription factor
activated by TGF-beta. Those 2 genes were found overexpressed in other
solid tumors.We suppose that those genes may be involved in a
hyper-proliferative pathway that underlies a mechanism of
chemo-resistance.Acknowledgments Work supported by ELN, AIL, AIRC,
Progetto Regione-Universit 2010-12 (L.Bolondi), FP7 NGS-PTL project.

