Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Citral reduces breast tumor growth by inhibiting cancer stem cell
marker ALDH1A3


Breast cancer stem cells (CSCs) can be identified by increased Aldefluor
activity which is primarily due to aldehyde dehydrogenase 1A3 (ALDH1A3)
expression. In addition to being a CSC marker, ALDH1A3 regulates genes
expression via inducing retinoic acid (RA) signaling and plays an
important role in mediating progression of cancers, including breast,
melanoma, lung and glioblastoma. Therefore, ALDH1A3 represents a novel
druggable anti-cancer target of interest. There are no currently
characterized inhibitors of the ALDH1A3 isoform, so twelve general ALDH
inhibitors were tested for their effectiveness in targeting ALDH1A3
activity. Ability to directly inhibit ALDH activity was quantified with
the Aldefluor assay on a patient tumor xenograft and on breast cancer
cell lines with known ALDH isoform activity. Inhibition of RA signaling
was quantified by measuring expression of the RA-inducible genes RARRES1
and RAR. To investigate the anti-cancer properties of these compounds,
apoptosis was quantified with the annexin V assay. Citral significantly
reduced ALDH1A3- and ALDH2-associated Aldefluor activity in breast cancer
cell lines and also reduced Aldefluor activity of a patient-derived
xenograft. Citral reduced expression of RA-inducible genes through
reducing ALDH1A3 activity. Citral induced apoptosis in vitro in an
ALDH-independent manner in breast cancer cell lines and reduced
proliferation in the MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cell line. Nanoparticle
(NP)-encapsulated citral was generated for in vivo use and administered
intravenously to female NOD/SCID mice harbouring MDA-MB-231
ALDH1A3-overexpression tumors. 10mg/kg NP-citral significantly decreased
the growth of ALDH1A3-driven MDA-MB-231 tumors. Nanoparticle-encapsulated
citral shows promise as an adjuvant therapy for patients with tumors that
have a large population of high-ALDH1A3 CSCs.

