Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A muscle specific protein myoferlin modulates IL-6/STAT3 signaling
by chaperoning activated STAT3 to nucleus


Recently, we made a provocative and novel discovery in our laboratory
that a muscle-specific protein, myoferlin, is markedly upregulated in
head and neck cancer cells. Myoferlin is a member of ferlin family of
membrane proteins and most of the studies related to myoferlin's
biological and molecular function(s) were carried out on muscle cells, as
it was assumed that myoferlin is predominantly present only in the muscle
cells. Recent studies have shown that myoferlin is also expressed in
endothelial and cancer cells and it modulates VEGFR-2 and EGFR stability
and function. Based on these reports, we hypothesized that myoferlin
might be regulating IL-6 signaling by modulating IL-6R stabilization and
recycling. However, in our immunoprecipitation (IP) experiments, we did
not observe myoferlin binding with IL-6R. Instead, we observed that
myoferlin is bound to EHD2 protein in the resting cells and when the
cells are treated with IL-6, myoferlin dissociates from EHD2 and binds to
activated STAT3. Interestingly, myoferlin knock-down did not affect STAT3
phosphorylation, but completely blocked STAT3 translocation to nucleus
and expression of its target proteins including Snail and Nanog. In
addition, inhibition of STAT3 phosphorylation by phosphorylation
defective STAT3 mutants or JAK inhibitor blocked STAT3 binding to
myoferlin and nuclear translocation. Myoferlin knockdown significantly
decreased IL-6-mediated tumor cell migration, tumorsphere formation and
ALDH positive cancer stem cell population, in vitro. Furthermore,
myoferlin knockdown significantly decreased IL-6-meditated tumor growth
and tumor metastasis, in vivo. Based on these results, we have proposed a
novel model for the role of myoferlin in chaperoning phosphorylated STAT3
to the nucleus.

