Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular insights into OGG1 gene, a modifier of cancer risk in
BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations carriers


Oxidative stress is a source of DNA damage which can lead to genomic
instability and telomere shortening. The OGG1 glycosidase plays an
important role in the Base Excision Repair (BER) pathway that counteracts
the oxidative DNA damage caused by endogenous cell stress. Recently, we
have demonstrated that a single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in the OGG1
gene can modify cancer risk in carriers of germline mutations in the
BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes1. Hence, we aimed to explore the possible role of
this variant in DNA damage and telomere shortening to explain the
association of this cancer risk variant.We used 2 independent set of
samples with a heterogeneous BRCA mutational status.First of all, a
familiar breast and ovarian cancer (FBOC) set of 154 BRCA patients
(BRCA1, BRCA2 and BRCAX) and 68 controls, were used to measure the mRNA
OGG1 expression levels in blood and the leukocyte telomere length
(TL).Second, we used a panel of 23 Lymphoblastoid Cell Lines (LCL) from
patients harboring germline mutations in BRCA1 and non-carrier controls
to validate previous results regarding OGG1 mRNA expression levels and
telomere shortening. Additionally we measured gammaH2AX intensity levels
in LCL to evaluate the role of the SNP on DNA damage.In the FBOC series,
we found that the carriers of the variant had significant decreased
expression levels of the OGG1 transcript compared with the non-carriers
(p = 0.013). Regarding TL studies, we found that the variant may exert a
synergistic effect together with BRCA1/2 mutations on telomere shortening
(pOxidative stress is a source of DNA damage which can lead to genomic
instability and telomere shortening. The OGG1 glycosidase plays an
important role in the Base Excision Repair (BER) pathway that counteracts
the oxidative DNA damage caused by endogenous cell stress. Recently, we
have demonstrated that a single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in the OGG1
gene can modify cancer risk in carriers of germline mutations in the
BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes1. Hence, we aimed to explore the possible role of
this variant in DNA damage and telomere shortening to explain the
association of this cancer risk variant.We used 2 independent set of
samples with a heterogeneous BRCA mutational status.First of all, a
familiar breast and ovarian cancer (FBOC) set of 154 BRCA patients
(BRCA1, BRCA2 and BRCAX) and 68 controls, were used to measure the mRNA
OGG1 expression levels in blood and the leukocyte telomere length
(TL).Second, we used a panel of 23 Lymphoblastoid Cell Lines (LCL) from
patients harboring germline mutations in BRCA1 and non-carrier controls
to validate previous results regarding OGG1 mRNA expression levels and
telomere shortening. Additionally we measured gammaH2AX intensity levels
in LCL to evaluate the role of the SNP on DNA damage.In the FBOC series,
we found that the carriers of the variant had significant decreased
expression levels of the OGG1 transcript compared with the non-carriers
(p = 0.013). Regarding TL studies, we found that the variant may exert a
synergistic effect together with BRCA1/2 mutations on telomere shortening
(p<0.0045). TL was not associated to higher cancer risk in our FBOC
series, pointing to this phenotype not as the cause of the cancer risk
association, but maybe as a hallmark of a higher DNA damage environment
when both genetic events are present in the cell.Using the LCL panel we
were able to detect OGG1 mRNA down regulation due to the presence of the
variant and a significant telomere shortening exclusively in the BRCA1
defective cells harboring the OGG1 SNP after 55 passages. The DNA damage
studies, confirmed significant higher intensity levels of gammaH2AX in
the damaged LCL harboring the SNP compared to those not harboring it
(pOxidative stress is a source of DNA damage which can lead to genomic
instability and telomere shortening. The OGG1 glycosidase plays an
important role in the Base Excision Repair (BER) pathway that counteracts
the oxidative DNA damage caused by endogenous cell stress. Recently, we
have demonstrated that a single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in the OGG1
gene can modify cancer risk in carriers of germline mutations in the
BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes1. Hence, we aimed to explore the possible role of
this variant in DNA damage and telomere shortening to explain the
association of this cancer risk variant.We used 2 independent set of
samples with a heterogeneous BRCA mutational status.First of all, a
familiar breast and ovarian cancer (FBOC) set of 154 BRCA patients
(BRCA1, BRCA2 and BRCAX) and 68 controls, were used to measure the mRNA
OGG1 expression levels in blood and the leukocyte telomere length
(TL).Second, we used a panel of 23 Lymphoblastoid Cell Lines (LCL) from
patients harboring germline mutations in BRCA1 and non-carrier controls
to validate previous results regarding OGG1 mRNA expression levels and
telomere shortening. Additionally we measured gammaH2AX intensity levels
in LCL to evaluate the role of the SNP on DNA damage.In the FBOC series,
we found that the carriers of the variant had significant decreased
expression levels of the OGG1 transcript compared with the non-carriers
(p = 0.013). Regarding TL studies, we found that the variant may exert a
synergistic effect together with BRCA1/2 mutations on telomere shortening
(p<0.0045). TL was not associated to higher cancer risk in our FBOC
series, pointing to this phenotype not as the cause of the cancer risk
association, but maybe as a hallmark of a higher DNA damage environment
when both genetic events are present in the cell.Using the LCL panel we
were able to detect OGG1 mRNA down regulation due to the presence of the
variant and a significant telomere shortening exclusively in the BRCA1
defective cells harboring the OGG1 SNP after 55 passages. The DNA damage
studies, confirmed significant higher intensity levels of gammaH2AX in
the damaged LCL harboring the SNP compared to those not harboring it
(p<0.0001).These results, may explain the molecular insights behind this
modifier variant. Under the prism of a deleterious interaction, in cells
harboring mutations in BRCA genes, the presence of the SNP itself, seems
to affect OGG1 mRNA down regulation. This could lead to a defective
performance of the BER pathway that may lead to genome instability,
characterized by higher gammaH2AX intensity in damaged cells and telomere
shortening when both genetic events are present, and as consequence,
higher cancer risk.1. Osorio A, et al (2014) PLoS GenetFunding:J.B's
laboratory, INNPRONTA 2012, Spanish Ministry of Health (PI12/00070) and
(CIBERER). C.B is granted by PI12/00070M.A.B.'s laboratory, Spanish
Ministry of Science and Innovation (SAF2008-05384;2007-A-200950)
(TELOMARKER), ERCA (GA#232854)

