Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Timing of PD-1 blockade is critical to successful synergy with
OX40 costimulation in preclinical mammary tumor models


With the recent success of cancer immunotherapies targeting specific
inhibitory receptors like PD-1 and CTLA-4, there is great interest in how
to combine these drugs with other novel therapies targeting costimulatory
receptors that could further augment an anti-tumor response. Recently, we
observed that orthotopically-transplanted MMTV-PyMT tumor-bearing mice
that received anti-OX40 treatment saw a significant delay in tumor growth
(p With the recent success of cancer immunotherapies targeting specific
inhibitory receptors like PD-1 and CTLA-4, there is great interest in how
to combine these drugs with other novel therapies targeting costimulatory
receptors that could further augment an anti-tumor response. Recently, we
observed that orthotopically-transplanted MMTV-PyMT tumor-bearing mice
that received anti-OX40 treatment saw a significant delay in tumor growth
(p < 0.001) compared to untreated mice. However when combined
concurrently with anti-PD-1 blockade, instead of a synergistic effect, we
noted no additive benefit, and in fact saw a significant attenuation (p
With the recent success of cancer immunotherapies targeting specific
inhibitory receptors like PD-1 and CTLA-4, there is great interest in how
to combine these drugs with other novel therapies targeting costimulatory
receptors that could further augment an anti-tumor response. Recently, we
observed that orthotopically-transplanted MMTV-PyMT tumor-bearing mice
that received anti-OX40 treatment saw a significant delay in tumor growth
(p < 0.001) compared to untreated mice. However when combined
concurrently with anti-PD-1 blockade, instead of a synergistic effect, we
noted no additive benefit, and in fact saw a significant attenuation (p <
0.05) in survival. These results fit a similar pattern to what we have
seen in the 4T1 tumor model, where the anti-tumor effect provided by
vaccine plus anti-OX40, was significantly attenuated (p With the recent
success of cancer immunotherapies targeting specific inhibitory receptors
like PD-1 and CTLA-4, there is great interest in how to combine these
drugs with other novel therapies targeting costimulatory receptors that
could further augment an anti-tumor response. Recently, we observed that
orthotopically-transplanted MMTV-PyMT tumor-bearing mice that received
anti-OX40 treatment saw a significant delay in tumor growth (p < 0.001)
compared to untreated mice. However when combined concurrently with
anti-PD-1 blockade, instead of a synergistic effect, we noted no additive
benefit, and in fact saw a significant attenuation (p < 0.05) in
survival. These results fit a similar pattern to what we have seen in the
4T1 tumor model, where the anti-tumor effect provided by vaccine plus
anti-OX40, was significantly attenuated (p < 0.001) when anti-PD-1 was
added concurrently.We hypothesized that treating with anti-PD-1 antibody
would be more effective during the contraction phase of the T cell boost
generated by anti-OX40. Thus we delayed anti-PD-1 treatment until after
anti-OX40 dosing was complete and saw a significant delay (p With the
recent success of cancer immunotherapies targeting specific inhibitory
receptors like PD-1 and CTLA-4, there is great interest in how to combine
these drugs with other novel therapies targeting costimulatory receptors
that could further augment an anti-tumor response. Recently, we observed
that orthotopically-transplanted MMTV-PyMT tumor-bearing mice that
received anti-OX40 treatment saw a significant delay in tumor growth (p <
0.001) compared to untreated mice. However when combined concurrently
with anti-PD-1 blockade, instead of a synergistic effect, we noted no
additive benefit, and in fact saw a significant attenuation (p < 0.05) in
survival. These results fit a similar pattern to what we have seen in the
4T1 tumor model, where the anti-tumor effect provided by vaccine plus
anti-OX40, was significantly attenuated (p < 0.001) when anti-PD-1 was
added concurrently.We hypothesized that treating with anti-PD-1 antibody
would be more effective during the contraction phase of the T cell boost
generated by anti-OX40. Thus we delayed anti-PD-1 treatment until after
anti-OX40 dosing was complete and saw a significant delay (p < 0.01) in
tumor growth and subsequent increase (p With the recent success of cancer
immunotherapies targeting specific inhibitory receptors like PD-1 and
CTLA-4, there is great interest in how to combine these drugs with other
novel therapies targeting costimulatory receptors that could further
augment an anti-tumor response. Recently, we observed that
orthotopically-transplanted MMTV-PyMT tumor-bearing mice that received
anti-OX40 treatment saw a significant delay in tumor growth (p < 0.001)
compared to untreated mice. However when combined concurrently with
anti-PD-1 blockade, instead of a synergistic effect, we noted no additive
benefit, and in fact saw a significant attenuation (p < 0.05) in
survival. These results fit a similar pattern to what we have seen in the
4T1 tumor model, where the anti-tumor effect provided by vaccine plus
anti-OX40, was significantly attenuated (p < 0.001) when anti-PD-1 was
added concurrently.We hypothesized that treating with anti-PD-1 antibody
would be more effective during the contraction phase of the T cell boost
generated by anti-OX40. Thus we delayed anti-PD-1 treatment until after
anti-OX40 dosing was complete and saw a significant delay (p < 0.01) in
tumor growth and subsequent increase (p < 0.01) in survival in the PyMT
transplant model (compared to anti-OX40 alone), with some of the tumors
reaching full regression. We had also previously seen a similar
significant antitumor effect (p With the recent success of cancer
immunotherapies targeting specific inhibitory receptors like PD-1 and
CTLA-4, there is great interest in how to combine these drugs with other
novel therapies targeting costimulatory receptors that could further
augment an anti-tumor response. Recently, we observed that
orthotopically-transplanted MMTV-PyMT tumor-bearing mice that received
anti-OX40 treatment saw a significant delay in tumor growth (p < 0.001)
compared to untreated mice. However when combined concurrently with
anti-PD-1 blockade, instead of a synergistic effect, we noted no additive
benefit, and in fact saw a significant attenuation (p < 0.05) in
survival. These results fit a similar pattern to what we have seen in the
4T1 tumor model, where the anti-tumor effect provided by vaccine plus
anti-OX40, was significantly attenuated (p < 0.001) when anti-PD-1 was
added concurrently.We hypothesized that treating with anti-PD-1 antibody
would be more effective during the contraction phase of the T cell boost
generated by anti-OX40. Thus we delayed anti-PD-1 treatment until after
anti-OX40 dosing was complete and saw a significant delay (p < 0.01) in
tumor growth and subsequent increase (p < 0.01) in survival in the PyMT
transplant model (compared to anti-OX40 alone), with some of the tumors
reaching full regression. We had also previously seen a similar
significant antitumor effect (p < 0.001) in the 4T1 tumor model. These
results were reproduced using delayed treatment with an anti-PD-L1
antibody combined with anti-OX40, demonstrating that blocking either side
of the PD-1-PD-L1 interaction is sufficient. Also supporting this
hypothesis, we noted a significant increase (p With the recent success of
cancer immunotherapies targeting specific inhibitory receptors like PD-1
and CTLA-4, there is great interest in how to combine these drugs with
other novel therapies targeting costimulatory receptors that could
further augment an anti-tumor response. Recently, we observed that
orthotopically-transplanted MMTV-PyMT tumor-bearing mice that received
anti-OX40 treatment saw a significant delay in tumor growth (p < 0.001)
compared to untreated mice. However when combined concurrently with
anti-PD-1 blockade, instead of a synergistic effect, we noted no additive
benefit, and in fact saw a significant attenuation (p < 0.05) in
survival. These results fit a similar pattern to what we have seen in the
4T1 tumor model, where the anti-tumor effect provided by vaccine plus
anti-OX40, was significantly attenuated (p < 0.001) when anti-PD-1 was
added concurrently.We hypothesized that treating with anti-PD-1 antibody
would be more effective during the contraction phase of the T cell boost
generated by anti-OX40. Thus we delayed anti-PD-1 treatment until after
anti-OX40 dosing was complete and saw a significant delay (p < 0.01) in
tumor growth and subsequent increase (p < 0.01) in survival in the PyMT
transplant model (compared to anti-OX40 alone), with some of the tumors
reaching full regression. We had also previously seen a similar
significant antitumor effect (p < 0.001) in the 4T1 tumor model. These
results were reproduced using delayed treatment with an anti-PD-L1
antibody combined with anti-OX40, demonstrating that blocking either side
of the PD-1-PD-L1 interaction is sufficient. Also supporting this
hypothesis, we noted a significant increase (p < 0.05 compared to
untreated) in PD-1 expression on CD4+ T cells during and after anti-OX40
treatment.Investigating the effects of the concurrent combination, we
noticed a striking increase in IFN- in the serum compared to treatment
with single agent (p With the recent success of cancer immunotherapies
targeting specific inhibitory receptors like PD-1 and CTLA-4, there is
great interest in how to combine these drugs with other novel therapies
targeting costimulatory receptors that could further augment an
anti-tumor response. Recently, we observed that
orthotopically-transplanted MMTV-PyMT tumor-bearing mice that received
anti-OX40 treatment saw a significant delay in tumor growth (p < 0.001)
compared to untreated mice. However when combined concurrently with
anti-PD-1 blockade, instead of a synergistic effect, we noted no additive
benefit, and in fact saw a significant attenuation (p < 0.05) in
survival. These results fit a similar pattern to what we have seen in the
4T1 tumor model, where the anti-tumor effect provided by vaccine plus
anti-OX40, was significantly attenuated (p < 0.001) when anti-PD-1 was
added concurrently.We hypothesized that treating with anti-PD-1 antibody
would be more effective during the contraction phase of the T cell boost
generated by anti-OX40. Thus we delayed anti-PD-1 treatment until after
anti-OX40 dosing was complete and saw a significant delay (p < 0.01) in
tumor growth and subsequent increase (p < 0.01) in survival in the PyMT
transplant model (compared to anti-OX40 alone), with some of the tumors
reaching full regression. We had also previously seen a similar
significant antitumor effect (p < 0.001) in the 4T1 tumor model. These
results were reproduced using delayed treatment with an anti-PD-L1
antibody combined with anti-OX40, demonstrating that blocking either side
of the PD-1-PD-L1 interaction is sufficient. Also supporting this
hypothesis, we noted a significant increase (p < 0.05 compared to
untreated) in PD-1 expression on CD4+ T cells during and after anti-OX40
treatment.Investigating the effects of the concurrent combination, we
noticed a striking increase in IFN- in the serum compared to treatment
with single agent (p < 0.001 after 3 doses). Serum levels of other
cytokines TNF, IL-4, IL-6, and IL-10 were also elevated in the
combination treated group compared to anti-OX40 alone. Interestingly, we
observed a large increase in PD-L1 expression on both CD4+ and CD8+ T
cells and we also noted significant increases (p With the recent success
of cancer immunotherapies targeting specific inhibitory receptors like
PD-1 and CTLA-4, there is great interest in how to combine these drugs
with other novel therapies targeting costimulatory receptors that could
further augment an anti-tumor response. Recently, we observed that
orthotopically-transplanted MMTV-PyMT tumor-bearing mice that received
anti-OX40 treatment saw a significant delay in tumor growth (p < 0.001)
compared to untreated mice. However when combined concurrently with
anti-PD-1 blockade, instead of a synergistic effect, we noted no additive
benefit, and in fact saw a significant attenuation (p < 0.05) in
survival. These results fit a similar pattern to what we have seen in the
4T1 tumor model, where the anti-tumor effect provided by vaccine plus
anti-OX40, was significantly attenuated (p < 0.001) when anti-PD-1 was
added concurrently.We hypothesized that treating with anti-PD-1 antibody
would be more effective during the contraction phase of the T cell boost
generated by anti-OX40. Thus we delayed anti-PD-1 treatment until after
anti-OX40 dosing was complete and saw a significant delay (p < 0.01) in
tumor growth and subsequent increase (p < 0.01) in survival in the PyMT
transplant model (compared to anti-OX40 alone), with some of the tumors
reaching full regression. We had also previously seen a similar
significant antitumor effect (p < 0.001) in the 4T1 tumor model. These
results were reproduced using delayed treatment with an anti-PD-L1
antibody combined with anti-OX40, demonstrating that blocking either side
of the PD-1-PD-L1 interaction is sufficient. Also supporting this
hypothesis, we noted a significant increase (p < 0.05 compared to
untreated) in PD-1 expression on CD4+ T cells during and after anti-OX40
treatment.Investigating the effects of the concurrent combination, we
noticed a striking increase in IFN- in the serum compared to treatment
with single agent (p < 0.001 after 3 doses). Serum levels of other
cytokines TNF, IL-4, IL-6, and IL-10 were also elevated in the
combination treated group compared to anti-OX40 alone. Interestingly, we
observed a large increase in PD-L1 expression on both CD4+ and CD8+ T
cells and we also noted significant increases (p < 0.05) in inhibitory
receptors LAG3, TIM3 and CTLA4 on CD4+ and CD8+ splenic T cells. These
may provide additional escape mechanisms for the tumor to evade immune
destruction and potentially offer other targets to enhance combination
therapy.Our results demonstrate that the sequence of antibody treatment
targeting both costimulatory and inhibitory receptors is critical to
success of the combined therapy. These data offer a strong rationale for
delaying PD-1 blockade until after costimulation has provided an initial
immune boost.

