Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of growth factors that promote the proliferation
and drug resistance of human primary acute B lymphoblastic cells


Bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells (BMMSCs) contribute the survival,
expansion, and drug resistance of leukemic cells. However, how BMMSCs
promote the proliferation and drug resistance of leukemia remains to be
poorly understood. Here, we derived a BM-derived stromal cell line that
supported unlimited growth of human primary acute B lymphoblastic
leukemic cells (B-ALL) by physical contacts with B-ALL cells and
secreting growth factors. Nevertheless, its capacity of promoting primary
B-ALL proliferation was abolished once the cell line was induced to
differentiate into adipocytes. In xenograft models, we demonstrate that
the presence of adipocytes suppressed the engraftment of primary B-ALL
cells while the decrease of adipocytes enhanced the reconstitution of
B-ALL. Consistently, we observed that the increase of numbers and
diameters of adipocytes was correlated with remission after chemotherapy
treatments in B-ALL patients. By comparing the global transcription
profiles between the BM stromal cells and the adipocytes that were
derived from the cell line, we identified a combination of cytokines and
adherent proteins that were able to support the long-term growth of human
primary B-ALL cells and desensitize them to chemotherapy drugs in a
stromal-free culture condition. Furthermore, we showed that the PI3K/AKT
pathways were involved in chemotherapy-induced resistance because
targeting these signaling pathways increased the chemotherapy sensitivity
of B-ALL in xenografts. Collectively, our results uncovered the
mechanisms of BMMSCs supporting the survival, expansion, and drug
resistance of human B-ALL cells.

