Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Detection of HER2-HER3 heterodimers in patient circulating tumor
cells using proximity ligation assay


BACKGROUND: The HER2 protein is a key oncogene in approximately 20% of
breast cancers, and preferentially forms heterodimers with other members
of the HER family (such as HER3) to activate its signaling cascade. Dual
HER2 signaling blockade by using both trastuzumab and pertuzumab (a HER2
dimerization inhibiting monoclonal antibody) yields superior clinical
benefit in HER2+ patients compared to trastuzumab monotherapy. A phase
1/2 clinical trial is ongoing to assess the safety and efficacy of the
combination of gemcitabine with trastuzumab and pertuzumab in metastatic
HER2+ pretreated patients. (NCT02139358) One of the correlative
experiments is looking at the feasibility of detecting HER2-HER3
heterodimers using a proximity ligation assay on circulating tumor cells
isolated from patients on treatment as a possible pharmcodynamic
marker.METHODS: Whole blood was collected in two 10cc Cellsave tubes
(Veridex, Cat#: 7900005) at baseline, week 4, 7, 10. Samples were drawn
before treatment was administered, to avoid contamination of the samples
with cytotoxic agents. The blood was subjected to red cell lysis with
1XRBC lysis buffer (Santa Cruz). The lysed cells were fixed with 4%
paraformaldehyde followed by negative selection utilizing CD45+ magnetic
beads (EasySep CD45 depletion kit, cat#18259). The CD45 depleted cell
suspension was re-fixed with 4% PFA on coated glass slides following
cytospin. These cells were then stained for PLA to test for HER2-HER3
using Sigma Aldrich DuoLink PLA kit + DAPI fluorescence mounting medium
(DUO92013) with anti-HER2 (PA5, Thermo Scientific, diluted 1:50) and
anti-HER3 (MA5-12675, Thermo Scientific diluted 1:50) as primary
antibodies plus cytokeratin (CK) and CD45 antibodies. A set of HER2+ and
HER2- PLA controls using SKBR3 were included in the analysis. Control
samples using SKBR3 cells were used to optimize the method.RESULTS: Using
the spiked SKBR3 HER2+ blood samples it was possible to isolate CK+ CD45-
DAPI+ CTCs demonstrating HER2-HER3 heterodimers following optimization of
the PLA method. Using this method in the first four patients we
successfully collected CTCs in 7/11 samples processed. In those 7 CTC+
samples, 4 contained CTCs with positive HER2-HER3 PLA
signals.CONCLUSIONS: We have demonstrated a feasible methodology for the
detection of HER2-HER3 heterodimers on the surface of circulating tumor
cells from HER2+ metastatic breast cancer patients. This can provide
investigators with a non-invasive method to monitor the pharmacodynamics
of pertuzumab therapy on tumor cells. The collection of these samples is
ongoing and correlation with benefit from therapy will be analyzed in the
phase 2 portion of the study.

