Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterizing histologic subtypes in lung cancer using principal
component analysis


Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer death in the United States and
worldwide. The two major forms of lung cancer are small-cell lung
carcinoma (SCLC) and non-SCLC (NSCLC). NSCLC is divided into three major
histologic subtypes: Squamous-cell carcinoma, adenocarcinoma, and
large-cell. Histological subtypes of cancers vary with respect to the
genes that shows altered regulation, compared to normal
bronchioepithelial cells. Lung cancer histologic diagnosis is clinically
relevant because there are histology-specific treatment indications and
contradictions.Principal component analysis (PCA) is one of the useful
statistical tools for analyzing multivariate data and recently
high-dimensional data in genetics and genomics. We demonstrated the
classification between two major subtypes of lung cancer: 488 squamous
cell carcinoma and 788 adenocarcinoma cases. We selected the top 20k
significant SNPs using logistic regression and then conducted PCA as the
unsupervised approach.We observed a distinct pattern between two major
subtypes of NSCLC in genome-wide association study (GWAS). There were
several publications to classify the subtypes of histology in lung cancer
using gene expression data. This enables to understand the patterns for
other subtypes of lung cancer in GWAS.

