Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: S49076, a kinase inhibitor of AXL, MET and FGFR with strong,
selective preclinical activity against tumor cells with acquired
resistance to EGFR inhibitors not carrying the T790M mutation


Background: Aberrant activity of MET, FGFR1 and AXL has been associated
with development of resistance to EGFR inhibitors in EGFR-mutated
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients. S49076 is a potent
ATP-competitive tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) of MET, AXL/MER,
FGFR1/2/3 currently in phase I clinical trials.Methods: We obtained six
resistant lines by treating EGFR-mutated, TKI-sensitive PC9 cells with
increasing concentrations of gefitinib (GR1-5) or erlotinib (ER). The six
resistant cell lines conserved the exon 19 deletion but the T790M
resistance mutation only emerged in two (GR1, GR4), which remained
sensitive to AZD9291, a third generation EGFR TKI. Six new
AZD9291-resistant cell lines were derived from GR1 and GR4 by exposure to
increasing concentrations of the inhibitor. Three of the AZD9291
resistant cell lines lost the exon 19 and T790M mutations, one conserved
only the sensitizing mutation and two kept both mutations but with the
T790M dropping to very low allelic fractions (1% and 0.03%). All
resistant cell lines were characterized for AXL, MET, MER, FGFR1 and
FGFR2 expression by Q-RT-PCR, immunohistochemistry and Western blotting.
The effects of S49076 on the parental and resistant cell lines were
analyzed by MTT, colony formation, basal membrane invasion and migration
assays. Western blotting of key signal transduction proteins was used to
gain insight in the drug's mechanism of action.Results: AXL
overexpression was the most common event related to gefitinib/erlotinib
resistance in the panel of cell lines, with T790M mutation, FGFR1 or
BCL-2 overexpression and MET activation being less frequent events.
Regarding AZD9291 resistance, AXL upregulation was again widespread, with
loss of EGFR mutations as the second most frequent event. In
proliferation assays, S49076 showed strong antitumor activity against all
PC9-derived cell lines with acquired resistance to EGFR TKIs (erlotinib,
gefitinib or AZD9291) and not carrying the T790M mutation, with IC50 of
0.2-1.2 M and less than 10% surviving cells at 1 M of drug in most cases.
In contrast, S49076 was less active against the parental PC9 cells and
the T790M positive resistant lines, with more than 50% of surviving cells
at 50 M of drug. S49076 also inhibited the anchorage-independent growth
and migration of the resistant cell lines. A correlation was found
between mRNA and protein levels of AXL and sensitivity to S49076. Also,
PARP cleavage and moderate but reproducible inhibition of AKT
phosphorylation by S49076 were observed exclusively in the non-T790M
resistant cell lines.Conclusions: S49076 shows strong activity in
preclinical assays against EGFR mutated cell lines resistant to EGFR TKIs
not harboring EGFR T790M mutation and overexpressing AXL. A clinical
trial of S49076 in non-T790M patients progressing to EGFR TKI and
overexpressing AXL or MET has been initiated.

