Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel selective estrogen receptor downregulators developed using
endocrine-independent breast cancer cell lines


Approximately 70% of breast cancer patients are estrogen receptor
positive (ER+). Aromatase inhibitors and the selective estrogen receptor
modulator (SERM), tamoxifen, are the first line treatments for these
patients; however, almost 50% of patients either do not respond or
acquire resistance. Multiple mechanisms, including mutations of the ESR1
gene, contribute to resistance via ligand-independent constitutive
activation of ER. Selective estrogen down-regulators (SERDs) that block
ligand-dependent and independent ER signaling by ablation of ER, offer a
therapeutic approach to treatment-resistant, advanced stage and early
stage ER+ breast cancer. Therapeutic use of the first generation SERD,
fulvestrant (Faslodex), has largely remained 2nd and 3rd line, because of
poor physiochemical/pharmacokinetic properties. Novel benzothiophene
based SERDs were designed, synthesized, and optimized and assayed in
three tamoxifen-resistant (TR), endocrine-independent ER+ MCF-7 and T-47D
cell lines. Cell viability, ERE-luciferase response, and ER degradation
was measured and compared to parent endocrine-dependent MCF-7 and T-47D
cell lines in 2D and/or 3D spheroid cell cultures and compared to SERDs,
fulvestrant and GDC-0810. Pharmacokinetic analysis was used to select
novel SERDs for xenograft studies.

