Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analytical performance and validation of an enhanced TAm-Seq
circulating tumor DNA sequencing assay


Circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA) is becoming established as a tool to
supplement conventional biopsies for molecular characterization and
monitoring of solid cancers, especially for cancers where tumor tissue is
difficult to obtain or is only available at limiting quantity. This
requires reliable identification, in patient plasma, of tumor-specific
DNA alterations that in some cases may be present as a small fraction of
the total cell-free DNA molecules. To overcome these technical
challenges, we have developed an enhanced platform for tagged-amplicon
deep sequencing (TAm-Seq). Using a combination of efficient library
preparation and statistically-based analysis algorithms, this platform
can be used to sequence, identify and quantify cancer mutations across a
gene panel including both cancer hotspots, as well as entire coding
regions of selected genes.This poster will present validated performance
specifications of this multi-gene ctDNA sequencing assay. To perform
analytical validation, we used reference standards and plasma DNA
controls to demonstrate the sensitivity, specificity and quantitative
accuracy of this ctDNA analysis platform. We found that our workflow,
using 4 mL input plasma, yields very high sensitivity for variants that
are present at allele fraction 0.25% or higher in plasma, and retains
substantial sensitivity at allele fractions as low as 0.1%. Using
dilution mixtures of well-characterised reference samples, we show that
the assay accurately quantifies allele fractions with precision
predominantly limited by stochastic sampling. Analysis of plasma samples
from control individuals demonstrates a low false positive rate. The
assay also detects DNA amplifications (including in ERBB2, MYC, KRAS,
EGFR, MET, FGFR1, FGFR2) when the ctDNA are sufficiently high.Together,
these data demonstrate the analytical validity and robustness of the
TAm-Seq assay and support its use as a basis for clinical applications.

