Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mir-223-5p works as an oncomir in vulvar carcinoma by TP63
regulation


Recently, miR-223-5p was associated with metastasis in HPV negative
vulvar samples and in several other tumor types. In the present study, we
hypothesized that this microRNA would have a potential impact on in vitro
vulvar cancer behavior. We artificially mimicked microRNA expression in
vulvar cancer cell line, SW962, derived from lymph node metastasis of
vulvar carcinoma, and performed in vitro assays as follows in the result
section. Impaired cell proliferation (pRecently, miR-223-5p was
associated with metastasis in HPV negative vulvar samples and in several
other tumor types. In the present study, we hypothesized that this
microRNA would have a potential impact on in vitro vulvar cancer
behavior. We artificially mimicked microRNA expression in vulvar cancer
cell line, SW962, derived from lymph node metastasis of vulvar carcinoma,
and performed in vitro assays as follows in the result section. Impaired
cell proliferation (p<0.01) and migration (pRecently, miR-223-5p was
associated with metastasis in HPV negative vulvar samples and in several
other tumor types. In the present study, we hypothesized that this
microRNA would have a potential impact on in vitro vulvar cancer
behavior. We artificially mimicked microRNA expression in vulvar cancer
cell line, SW962, derived from lymph node metastasis of vulvar carcinoma,
and performed in vitro assays as follows in the result section. Impaired
cell proliferation (p<0.01) and migration (p<0.001) were observed when
miR-223-5p was overexpressed. In contrast, increased invasive potential
of the cells was observed (pRecently, miR-223-5p was associated with
metastasis in HPV negative vulvar samples and in several other tumor
types. In the present study, we hypothesized that this microRNA would
have a potential impact on in vitro vulvar cancer behavior. We
artificially mimicked microRNA expression in vulvar cancer cell line,
SW962, derived from lymph node metastasis of vulvar carcinoma, and
performed in vitro assays as follows in the result section. Impaired cell
proliferation (p<0.01) and migration (p<0.001) were observed when
miR-223-5p was overexpressed. In contrast, increased invasive potential
of the cells was observed (p<0.004). By Luciferase assay we provide
evidence that miR-223-5p targets TP63 through its 3UTR direct ligation
(pRecently, miR-223-5p was associated with metastasis in HPV negative
vulvar samples and in several other tumor types. In the present study, we
hypothesized that this microRNA would have a potential impact on in vitro
vulvar cancer behavior. We artificially mimicked microRNA expression in
vulvar cancer cell line, SW962, derived from lymph node metastasis of
vulvar carcinoma, and performed in vitro assays as follows in the result
section. Impaired cell proliferation (p<0.01) and migration (p<0.001)
were observed when miR-223-5p was overexpressed. In contrast, increased
invasive potential of the cells was observed (p<0.004). By Luciferase
assay we provide evidence that miR-223-5p targets TP63 through its 3UTR
direct ligation (p<0.05). We also demonstrate that this microRNA is
capable to decrease levels of p63 at both mRNA and protein levels
(pRecently, miR-223-5p was associated with metastasis in HPV negative
vulvar samples and in several other tumor types. In the present study, we
hypothesized that this microRNA would have a potential impact on in vitro
vulvar cancer behavior. We artificially mimicked microRNA expression in
vulvar cancer cell line, SW962, derived from lymph node metastasis of
vulvar carcinoma, and performed in vitro assays as follows in the result
section. Impaired cell proliferation (p<0.01) and migration (p<0.001)
were observed when miR-223-5p was overexpressed. In contrast, increased
invasive potential of the cells was observed (p<0.004). By Luciferase
assay we provide evidence that miR-223-5p targets TP63 through its 3UTR
direct ligation (p<0.05). We also demonstrate that this microRNA is
capable to decrease levels of p63 at both mRNA and protein levels
(p<0.001, and pRecently, miR-223-5p was associated with metastasis in HPV
negative vulvar samples and in several other tumor types. In the present
study, we hypothesized that this microRNA would have a potential impact
on in vitro vulvar cancer behavior. We artificially mimicked microRNA
expression in vulvar cancer cell line, SW962, derived from lymph node
metastasis of vulvar carcinoma, and performed in vitro assays as follows
in the result section. Impaired cell proliferation (p<0.01) and migration
(p<0.001) were observed when miR-223-5p was overexpressed. In contrast,
increased invasive potential of the cells was observed (p<0.004). By
Luciferase assay we provide evidence that miR-223-5p targets TP63 through
its 3UTR direct ligation (p<0.05). We also demonstrate that this microRNA
is capable to decrease levels of p63 at both mRNA and protein levels
(p<0.001, and p<0.0001; respectively). We further demonstrated that low
p63 protein expression in samples from patients was correlated with
deeper tumor (pRecently, miR-223-5p was associated with metastasis in HPV
negative vulvar samples and in several other tumor types. In the present
study, we hypothesized that this microRNA would have a potential impact
on in vitro vulvar cancer behavior. We artificially mimicked microRNA
expression in vulvar cancer cell line, SW962, derived from lymph node
metastasis of vulvar carcinoma, and performed in vitro assays as follows
in the result section. Impaired cell proliferation (p<0.01) and migration
(p<0.001) were observed when miR-223-5p was overexpressed. In contrast,
increased invasive potential of the cells was observed (p<0.004). By
Luciferase assay we provide evidence that miR-223-5p targets TP63 through
its 3UTR direct ligation (p<0.05). We also demonstrate that this microRNA
is capable to decrease levels of p63 at both mRNA and protein levels
(p<0.001, and p<0.0001; respectively). We further demonstrated that low
p63 protein expression in samples from patients was correlated with
deeper tumor (p<0.0345) invasion and lower overall survival (pRecently,
miR-223-5p was associated with metastasis in HPV negative vulvar samples
and in several other tumor types. In the present study, we hypothesized
that this microRNA would have a potential impact on in vitro vulvar
cancer behavior. We artificially mimicked microRNA expression in vulvar
cancer cell line, SW962, derived from lymph node metastasis of vulvar
carcinoma, and performed in vitro assays as follows in the result
section. Impaired cell proliferation (p<0.01) and migration (p<0.001)
were observed when miR-223-5p was overexpressed. In contrast, increased
invasive potential of the cells was observed (p<0.004). By Luciferase
assay we provide evidence that miR-223-5p targets TP63 through its 3UTR
direct ligation (p<0.05). We also demonstrate that this microRNA is
capable to decrease levels of p63 at both mRNA and protein levels
(p<0.001, and p<0.0001; respectively). We further demonstrated that low
p63 protein expression in samples from patients was correlated with
deeper tumor (p<0.0345) invasion and lower overall survival (p<0.0494).
Our study highlights the complexity surrounding p63 biological mechanisms
and the importance of this protein as a prognostic factor in vulvar
cancer. We also point out miR-223-5p overexpression as a putative
pathological mechanism of tumor invasion and a promising therapeutic
target. Also, it is plausible that the evaluation of p63 expression in
vulvar cancer at the biopsy level may bring important contribution on
prognostic establishment and in elaborating better surgical approaches
for vulvar cancer patients.

