Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effect of 1,25-Dihydroxyvitamin D in regulating
glutamic-oxaloacetic transaminase 1 (GOT1) and redox balance during
breast cancer progression


Breast cancer is the second most common cancer among women in the US. The
active form of vitamin D, 1,25 dihydroxyvitamin D (1,25(OH)2D), is
proposed to inhibit cellular processes that may prevent breast cancer.
Possible pro-oxidative effects of 1,25(OH)2D in breast cancer cells which
may selectively promote cell death have been proposed.
Glutamic-oxaloacetic transaminase 1 (GOT1) is an essential transaminase
in glutamine metabolism. GOT1 converts aspartate into oxaloacetate in the
cytoplasm, which is then subsequently converted to malate and pyruvate.
NADPH is produced during the last step of this process and increased
NADPH/NADP+ ratio has the potential to maintain cellular redox balance.
Therefore, it is of interest to study 1,25(OH)2D regulation of GOT1
during cancer progression to understand the role of vitamin D in
regulating oxidative stress as a mechanism to prevent breast cancer. We
employed untransformed MCF10A human breast epithelial cells (MCF10A), as
well as Harvey ras-oncogene or ErbB2 (HER-2/neu) oncogene transformed
cells (MCF10A-ras and MCF10A-ErbB2) as cell models for early cancer
progression. Results showed that 1,25(OH)2D significantly decreased GOT1
mRNA expression at 48 hours in MCF10A-ras cells and MCF10A-ErbB2 cells by
35 8.8% and 49 10%, respectively, and GOT1 protein expression at 72 hours
by 51 4.9% and 51 16%, respectively. The susceptibility of MCF10A-ras
cells to hydrogen peroxide induced cell death was significantly increased
by 1,25(OH)2D, as determined by measuring viable cell number using MTT
assay. We further showed that 96-hour 1,25(OH)2D treatment significantly
reduced cellular NADPH/NADP+ ratio by 30 2.8% and GSH/GSSG ratio by 34
2.7% in MCF10A-ras cells. Collectively, these results support that
1,25(OH)2D inhibits GOT1 expression and has pro-oxidative effects in
oncogene transformed MCF10A cell lines, which may contribute to its role
in preventing breast cancer development.

