Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrated molecular characterization of uterine carcinosarcoma in
The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) project


We used array- and sequencing-based technologies to perform an integrated
genomic, epigenomic, transcriptomic, and proteomic characterization of
the rare tumor type uterine carcinosarcoma (UCS) within the context of
The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) project using 57 cases that had stringent
histopathologic review. Cohort samples had extensive copy number
alterations and highly recurrent somatic mutations. Nearly all (91%)
cases had TP53 mutations, similar to ovarian and serous uterine
carcinomas, and frequent mutations were also found in PTEN, PIK3CA,
PPP2R1A, FBXW7, and KRAS, similar to endometrioid and serous uterine
carcinomas. Transcriptome sequencing identified a strong EMT gene
signature in a subset of 17 (30%) cases, and cases with EMT signatures
had decreased expression of mir-200 family members that was attributable
to epigenetic alterations at miRNA promoters. The range of EMT signatures
scores in UCS was the largest among all the TCGA tumor types studied. UCS
shared proteomic features with both gynecologic carcinomas and
non-gynecologic mesenchymal-like tumors. Our results indicate that UCS
tumors share many features with serous-like endometrial carcinomas,
including frequent TP53 mutations and extensive somatic copy number
alterations, though with greater EMT features. Multiple somatic mutations
and copy number alterations in genes that are therapeutic targets were
identified. There was a high degree of mutational clonality, consistent
with tumors being derived from a single cell of origin. Taken together,
these data suggest that while some UCS tumors develop from an
endometrioid lineage, the majority likely de-differentiate from a serous
precursor, potentially accounting for their clinical aggressiveness and
poor response to treatment.

