Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The identification of serum cytokine inflammatory markers as
classifiers of lung cancer mortality for stage I lung adenocarcinoma: a
retrospective cohort study


Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer-related mortality worldwide.
Low-dose CT (LDCT) imaging is now recommended to screen high-risk lung
cancer individuals in the USA. The sensitivity of LDCT has resulted in
increased detection of stage I lung cancer and a 20% reduction in lung
cancer mortality. The current standard of care for stage 1 lung cancer
patients is surgery alone. However, between 20% and 30% of these patients
will develop recurrence and therefore are in need of further treatment
upon diagnosis.This study aims to explore and validate biomarkers to
identify patients at high-risk of mortality so that additional treatment
modalities can be offered at time of diagnosis. Our recent work on a
small panel of circulating cytokines identified elevated levels of IL-6,
a pro-inflammatory cytokine, as an indicator of poor survival. To further
examine the potential of inflammatory biomarkers as prognostic
indicators, 125 stage I lung adenocarcinoma cases were selected from the
National Cancer Institute-Maryland lung cancer case-control study. This
is an on-going prospective study of non-small cell lung cancer based in
the greater Baltimore region of the USA.A panel of 33 inflammatory
markers was measured for each case using the Mesoscale V-Plex assay. The
magnitude of association between serum inflammatory marker expression
levels and lung cancer-specific survival was tested using multivariable
Cox proportional hazards regression modeling (Stata 12.0 statistical
software). All calculations were adjusted for age, gender, stage and
smoking status. Maximum follow up time was 15 years.Five analytes were
significantly associated with shorter survival. In concordance with the
previous study, IL-6 was again associated with shorter survival (HR,
2.63; 95% CI, 1.25-5.56). Other cytokines associated with shorter
survival included CRP (HR, 2.25; 95% CI, 1.09-4.65), Eotaxin-3 (HR, 2.20;
95% CI, 0.97-4.86), IL-12p40 (HR 1.98; 95% C.I. 1.00 - 3.91), and IL-17
(HR, 2.22; 95% CI, 1.08-4.58). Although IL6 and CRP were positively
correlated (Rho = 0.451, PLung cancer is the leading cause of
cancer-related mortality worldwide. Low-dose CT (LDCT) imaging is now
recommended to screen high-risk lung cancer individuals in the USA. The
sensitivity of LDCT has resulted in increased detection of stage I lung
cancer and a 20% reduction in lung cancer mortality. The current standard
of care for stage 1 lung cancer patients is surgery alone. However,
between 20% and 30% of these patients will develop recurrence and
therefore are in need of further treatment upon diagnosis.This study aims
to explore and validate biomarkers to identify patients at high-risk of
mortality so that additional treatment modalities can be offered at time
of diagnosis. Our recent work on a small panel of circulating cytokines
identified elevated levels of IL-6, a pro-inflammatory cytokine, as an
indicator of poor survival. To further examine the potential of
inflammatory biomarkers as prognostic indicators, 125 stage I lung
adenocarcinoma cases were selected from the National Cancer
Institute-Maryland lung cancer case-control study. This is an on-going
prospective study of non-small cell lung cancer based in the greater
Baltimore region of the USA.A panel of 33 inflammatory markers was
measured for each case using the Mesoscale V-Plex assay. The magnitude of
association between serum inflammatory marker expression levels and lung
cancer-specific survival was tested using multivariable Cox proportional
hazards regression modeling (Stata 12.0 statistical software). All
calculations were adjusted for age, gender, stage and smoking status.
Maximum follow up time was 15 years.Five analytes were significantly
associated with shorter survival. In concordance with the previous study,
IL-6 was again associated with shorter survival (HR, 2.63; 95% CI,
1.25-5.56). Other cytokines associated with shorter survival included CRP
(HR, 2.25; 95% CI, 1.09-4.65), Eotaxin-3 (HR, 2.20; 95% CI, 0.97-4.86),
IL-12p40 (HR 1.98; 95% C.I. 1.00 - 3.91), and IL-17 (HR, 2.22; 95% CI,
1.08-4.58). Although IL6 and CRP were positively correlated (Rho = 0.451,
P<0.0001), the association between IL-6 and survival was independent of
CRP (HR, 2.46; 95% CI, 1.19-5.09).These results support the potential of
cytokine markers as a prognostic tool to further classify stage I lung
cancer and thus identify patients in need of additional treatment. The
associations identified here justify further investigation of a novel,
combined cytokine prognostic classifier to serve as a robust predictor of
stage I lung adenocarcinoma survival.

