Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeted delivery of chemotherapeutic agents to solid tumors via
systemic Nano-diamino-tetrac


Covalently bound to a poly (lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA) polymer via a
linker, tetraiodothyroacetic acid (tetrac) as Nano-diamino-tetrac (NDAT)
targets a specific cell surface receptor on the extracellular domain of
integrin v3. The integrin is primarily expressed by cancer cells and
rapidly dividing endothelial cells. The conjugation of tetrac and linker
to a 120 nm PLGA nanoparticles prohibits cell entry of NDAT and offers an
opportunity to load the nanoparticle with a generic cancer
chemotherapeutic agent for cancer-targeted delivery. Even without a
payload, NDAT has anticancer and anti-angiogenesis properties. For the
current studies, xenografts of human urinary bladder cancer (263JBV)
cells and of human pancreatic cancer (SUIT-2) cells were established in
the nude mouse. Tumor growth and tumor content of cisplatin (263JBV
xenografts) and of paclitaxel (SUIT-2 xenografts) were compared in the
following animal cohorts: 1) untreated controls; 2) controls treated with
void PLGA nanoparticles (NPs), 3) daily treatment with chemotherapeutic
agent (cisplatin, 1 mg/kg, or paclitaxel, 0.3 mg/kg), alone, 4) daily
treatment with sub-maximal NDAT, alone (0.3 mg tetrac equivalent/kg), 5)
daily treatment with chemotherapeutic agent encapsulated into PLGA NPs
(no tetrac), and 6) daily treatment with chemotherapeutic agent loaded
into NDAT. NDAT dose in group 5 was 0.3 mg tetrac/kg. Daily drug
treatments were continued for 3 weeks after establishment of xenografts.
Urinary bladder tumor weight at animal sacrifice decreased
insignificantly vs. controls in animals that received cisplatin or
cisplatin + PLGA. Submaximal dosing of NDAT, alone, induced a small, but
significant, decreased in tumor weight. Tumors in animals treated with
NDAT bearing a payload of cisplatin decreased in weight by 50% (P
Covalently bound to a poly (lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA) polymer via a
linker, tetraiodothyroacetic acid (tetrac) as Nano-diamino-tetrac (NDAT)
targets a specific cell surface receptor on the extracellular domain of
integrin v3. The integrin is primarily expressed by cancer cells and
rapidly dividing endothelial cells. The conjugation of tetrac and linker
to a 120 nm PLGA nanoparticles prohibits cell entry of NDAT and offers an
opportunity to load the nanoparticle with a generic cancer
chemotherapeutic agent for cancer-targeted delivery. Even without a
payload, NDAT has anticancer and anti-angiogenesis properties. For the
current studies, xenografts of human urinary bladder cancer (263JBV)
cells and of human pancreatic cancer (SUIT-2) cells were established in
the nude mouse. Tumor growth and tumor content of cisplatin (263JBV
xenografts) and of paclitaxel (SUIT-2 xenografts) were compared in the
following animal cohorts: 1) untreated controls; 2) controls treated with
void PLGA nanoparticles (NPs), 3) daily treatment with chemotherapeutic
agent (cisplatin, 1 mg/kg, or paclitaxel, 0.3 mg/kg), alone, 4) daily
treatment with sub-maximal NDAT, alone (0.3 mg tetrac equivalent/kg), 5)
daily treatment with chemotherapeutic agent encapsulated into PLGA NPs
(no tetrac), and 6) daily treatment with chemotherapeutic agent loaded
into NDAT. NDAT dose in group 5 was 0.3 mg tetrac/kg. Daily drug
treatments were continued for 3 weeks after establishment of xenografts.
Urinary bladder tumor weight at animal sacrifice decreased
insignificantly vs. controls in animals that received cisplatin or
cisplatin + PLGA. Submaximal dosing of NDAT, alone, induced a small, but
significant, decreased in tumor weight. Tumors in animals treated with
NDAT bearing a payload of cisplatin decreased in weight by 50% (P <0.01)
and mean cisplatin content (LC/MS/MS) of tumors (ng/gm of tissue) was
5-fold more than in animals treated with cisplatin, alone, and 3-fold
more than in animals treated with PLGA NPs with encapsulated cisplatin.
Animals receiving cisplatin, alone, developed neurotoxicity (inability to
use the hind limbs). In pancreatic cancer xenografts, paclitaxel
encapsulated into PLGA NPs, NDAT, alone, and NDAT bearing a payload of
paclitaxel caused significant decreases in tumor weight. The greatest
reduction in tumor weight (60%, PCovalently bound to a poly
(lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA) polymer via a linker,
tetraiodothyroacetic acid (tetrac) as Nano-diamino-tetrac (NDAT) targets
a specific cell surface receptor on the extracellular domain of integrin
v3. The integrin is primarily expressed by cancer cells and rapidly
dividing endothelial cells. The conjugation of tetrac and linker to a 120
nm PLGA nanoparticles prohibits cell entry of NDAT and offers an
opportunity to load the nanoparticle with a generic cancer
chemotherapeutic agent for cancer-targeted delivery. Even without a
payload, NDAT has anticancer and anti-angiogenesis properties. For the
current studies, xenografts of human urinary bladder cancer (263JBV)
cells and of human pancreatic cancer (SUIT-2) cells were established in
the nude mouse. Tumor growth and tumor content of cisplatin (263JBV
xenografts) and of paclitaxel (SUIT-2 xenografts) were compared in the
following animal cohorts: 1) untreated controls; 2) controls treated with
void PLGA nanoparticles (NPs), 3) daily treatment with chemotherapeutic
agent (cisplatin, 1 mg/kg, or paclitaxel, 0.3 mg/kg), alone, 4) daily
treatment with sub-maximal NDAT, alone (0.3 mg tetrac equivalent/kg), 5)
daily treatment with chemotherapeutic agent encapsulated into PLGA NPs
(no tetrac), and 6) daily treatment with chemotherapeutic agent loaded
into NDAT. NDAT dose in group 5 was 0.3 mg tetrac/kg. Daily drug
treatments were continued for 3 weeks after establishment of xenografts.
Urinary bladder tumor weight at animal sacrifice decreased
insignificantly vs. controls in animals that received cisplatin or
cisplatin + PLGA. Submaximal dosing of NDAT, alone, induced a small, but
significant, decreased in tumor weight. Tumors in animals treated with
NDAT bearing a payload of cisplatin decreased in weight by 50% (P <0.01)
and mean cisplatin content (LC/MS/MS) of tumors (ng/gm of tissue) was
5-fold more than in animals treated with cisplatin, alone, and 3-fold
more than in animals treated with PLGA NPs with encapsulated cisplatin.
Animals receiving cisplatin, alone, developed neurotoxicity (inability to
use the hind limbs). In pancreatic cancer xenografts, paclitaxel
encapsulated into PLGA NPs, NDAT, alone, and NDAT bearing a payload of
paclitaxel caused significant decreases in tumor weight. The greatest
reduction in tumor weight (60%, P<0.01) was in animals exposed to NDAT
bearing a drug payload and mean concentration of paclitaxel in these
tumors (ng/gm tissue) exposed to an NDAT/paclitaxel payload was 5-fold
more than in xenografts exposed to paclitaxel, alone, or paclitaxel
encapsulated into PLGA NPs. Thus, the payload capacity of NDAT for cancer
chemotherapeutic agents and tumor-specific delivery of cancer
chemotherapeutic agents significantly increased bladder and pancreatic
cancer content of, respectively, cisplatin and paclitaxel. Enhanced tumor
size reduction and deceased systemic toxicity were achieved with this
targeted approach.

