Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: LY3127804, a novel anti-Angiopoietin-2 antibody in combination
with an anti-VEGFR2 antibody potently inhibits angiogenesis, tumor growth
and metastasis


Angiopoeitin-2 (Ang2) is released from endothelial cells only in response
to stimulus (e.g. wound healing, tumor growth) and facilitates blood
vessel sprouting and inhibits pericyte-endothelial cell interaction via
Tie2 signaling. Combination of an anti-Ang2 antibody and aflibercept, a
VEGF trap, has been shown to inhibit tumor growth and decrease tumor
vascularity in mouse xenograft tumor models (Daly et al., Cancer Res
(2013) 73(1):108). Multiple investigational anti-Ang2 antibody therapies
are currently in clinical trials. LY3127804 is a humanized and engineered
IgG4 isotype antibody that selectively binds to Ang2 with high affinity
and neutralizes Ang2 induced phospho-Tie2. LY3127804 inhibits sprouting
angiogenesis and increases pericyte coverage in a mouse developmental
retinal angiogenesis model and in mice bearing PC3 xenograft tumors.
Combination of LY3127804 and DC101, a potent anti-VEGFR2 antibody,
exhibits enhanced efficacy when compared to monotherapy in multiple
patient derived xenograft models including NSCLC and ovarian cancers.
Anti-Ang2 antibody monotherapy alone resulted in marginal reduction of
tumor growth and improved overall survival, while DC101monotherapy had
greater reduction in tumor volume with no survival benefit in MDA-MB-231
breast orthotopic model. Combination of anti-Ang2 antibody with
anti-VEGFR2 antibody shows reduction in tumor volume and improved overall
survival. This robust pre-clinical evidence supports testing the
combination of anti-Ang2 and anti-VEGFR2 antibodies in the clinic.
LY3127804 is currently in Phase 1 clinical trials (NCT02597036)

