Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of genes with age-dependent expressions in breast
cancer patients


Age is the number one risk factor for breast cancer development. The
breast cancer incidence rate increases with age, following beta
distribution, which is approximately linear in range from 30 to 70 years
old [1]. Transcriptome alterations have been shown to promote
tumorigenesis for many types of cancers. Therefore, we hypothesize that
the genes with altered expression during aging may promote breast cancer
development. Using TCGA data, we extracted whole transcriptome profiling
data of matched normal tissues from 82 female patients with age at
diagnosis and menopausal status available. The RSEM estimated raw reads
counts data were normalized by library sizes, log2 transformed and
further normalized by quantile normalization. Removal of 25% of genes
with lowest mean expressions resulted in subsequent analyses on 15,398
genes. We applied simple linear regression to study the association
between gene expression level and age at diagnosis on all the 82
patients, and on the 54 post-menopausal patients to reduce the leverage
effect of pre-menopausal patients with limited age range. The genes with
significant correlation are filtered by the criteria: 1) R2 value is
among the highest 5%, 2) absolute value of slope for age is among the
highest 5% and 3) adjusted p value for the slope is among the lowest 5%.
We identified 210 upregulated and 98 downregulated genes in all patients,
as well as 103 upregulated and 164 downregulated genes in post-menopausal
patients only. The unions of these genes (258 upregulated and 240
downregulated) are considered as genes affected by age. A combination of
methods using moderate hierarchical t test (R/limma) and moderate fitting
based on negative binomial distribution (R/DESeq2), with and without
Surrogate Variable Analysis for potential confounders (R/SVA), results in
identification of 498 upregulated and 256 downregulated genes altered by
menopause by comparing post-menopausal to pre-menopausal patients (FDR
Age is the number one risk factor for breast cancer development. The
breast cancer incidence rate increases with age, following beta
distribution, which is approximately linear in range from 30 to 70 years
old [1]. Transcriptome alterations have been shown to promote
tumorigenesis for many types of cancers. Therefore, we hypothesize that
the genes with altered expression during aging may promote breast cancer
development. Using TCGA data, we extracted whole transcriptome profiling
data of matched normal tissues from 82 female patients with age at
diagnosis and menopausal status available. The RSEM estimated raw reads
counts data were normalized by library sizes, log2 transformed and
further normalized by quantile normalization. Removal of 25% of genes
with lowest mean expressions resulted in subsequent analyses on 15,398
genes. We applied simple linear regression to study the association
between gene expression level and age at diagnosis on all the 82
patients, and on the 54 post-menopausal patients to reduce the leverage
effect of pre-menopausal patients with limited age range. The genes with
significant correlation are filtered by the criteria: 1) R2 value is
among the highest 5%, 2) absolute value of slope for age is among the
highest 5% and 3) adjusted p value for the slope is among the lowest 5%.
We identified 210 upregulated and 98 downregulated genes in all patients,
as well as 103 upregulated and 164 downregulated genes in post-menopausal
patients only. The unions of these genes (258 upregulated and 240
downregulated) are considered as genes affected by age. A combination of
methods using moderate hierarchical t test (R/limma) and moderate fitting
based on negative binomial distribution (R/DESeq2), with and without
Surrogate Variable Analysis for potential confounders (R/SVA), results in
identification of 498 upregulated and 256 downregulated genes altered by
menopause by comparing post-menopausal to pre-menopausal patients (FDR <
0.05). Exclusion of these menopause affected genes from those genes
affected by age (258 upregulated and 240 downregulated) results in 148
upregulated and 189 downregulated genes during aging. Ingenuity Pathway
Analysis shows that these genes are significantly enriched for functions
associated with tumorigenesis and functions in cancer. In summary, the
transcriptome profiling alterations during aging are associated with
development of cancer. Functional analyses of some of the age-associated
genes are currently underway.Funding: CPRIT Research Training Award
(RP140105)Reference: 1. Francesco Pompei and Richard Wilson (2001). Age
Distribution of Cancer: The incidence Turnover at Old Age. Human and
Ecological Risk Assessment: Vol. 7, No. 6, pp. 1619-1650.

