Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Immune infiltration and PD-L1 expression in the tumor
microenvironment are prognostic in osteosarcoma


Purpose: Over the past four decades, osteosarcoma (OS) survival rates
have remained stagnant. There is a need to identify novel therapies to
target OS. In this study we examined the expression of Programed Death
Ligand 1 (PD-L1) and defined the tumor microenvironment in OS in order to
assess the feasibility of utilizing immune checkpoint inhibitors as a
treatment modality.Experimental Design: PD-L1 expression in OS was
examined in two patient cohorts using immunohistochemistry (IHC) (n = 48,
n = 59) and expression was validated using quantitative real time PCR
(qRT-PCR) (n = 21) and western blotting (n = 9). IHC was used to
determine presence of tumor infiltrating lymphocytes and antigen
presenting cells (APCs) in the tumor. Expression of PD-L1 was correlated
with the presence of immune cells and with event free survival in
OS.Results: PD-L1 is expressed in up to 25% of primary OS tumors. Of the
PD-L1 positive tumors the majority were also PD-1 positive (92% vs 8%, p
= 0.002). In addition, the presence of immune cells in the tumor mass was
significantly associated with PD-L1 expression. Although all immune cell
types examined were present in OS, only infiltration by APCs,
specifically CD1a positive dendritic cells (48.6% vs. 51.4%, p = 0.0010)
and CD68 positive macrophages (70.3% vs. 29.7%, p = 0.0316), was
associated with worse outcomes. PD-L1 expression was significantly
associated with worsened survival (21.6% pos. vs. 78.4% neg., p =
0.0146).Conclusions: For the first time we have identified PD-L1
expression or presence of CD1a or CD68 positive antigen presenting cells
as prognostic markers for worsened outcome in OS. Furthermore, we show
that IHC is a valid detection method for PD-L1 in OS. With up to 25% of
OS patients expressing PD-L1, this study provides rational for targeting
the PD-L1:PD-1 axis for immunotherapy in OS.

