Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Multiple myeloma with a clonal del17p aberration is characterized
by somatic TP53 mutations, which negatively affect prognosis in this
cytogenetic subgroup


BackgroundMultiple myeloma (MM) is a malignant plasma cell disorder, in
which at diagnosis circa 10% of tumors are characterized by a deletion of
chromosome 17p (del17p). Previously, others and we reported that this
aberration is associated with a significantly inferior prognosis,
classifying it as high-risk disease. As TP53 is located on chromosome 17p
(Chr17p), most research has thus far been focused on this gene. However,
only in a minority of del17p MM patients a mutation could be detected
(Lod et al. - Haematologica 2010, Kortm et al. - Br J Haematol 2015). We
therefore hypothesized that other relevant mutations might be present in
TP53, its surrounding genes, or disease relevant pathways.AimWith this
study, we sought to identify commonly mutated genes in del17p MM, which
could explain its aggressive clinical behavior.Material and MethodsWe
obtained high molecular DNA from CD138+ purified MM cells and matched
peripheral blood from patients with a del17p in 50% of plasma cells, as
detected with fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH). Libraries were
generated using a custom capture of 111 Mb (SeqCap EZ Exome Plus,
Nimblegen), comprising the whole exome, Chr17p and the IgH, Igk, IgL and
MYC regions. Paired-end sequencing was performed on a HiSeq2500 platform,
followed by data-analysis using an in-house bioinformatics pipeline at
Erasmus MC.ResultsMatched tumor and germline DNA was sequenced from 54
patients, with sequential tumor samples available from 12 patients. This
resulted in an average coverage of 88x and overall coverage of 94%. Of 44
del17p patients, tumor DNA was obtained before treatment start. Clinical
data were collected from 40/44 patients, with a median follow-up time of
18 months.We found TP53 to be mutated most frequently. 31/54 (57%)
patients had a somatic nonsynonymous mutation, insertion or deletion (71%
missense, 19% stopgain/frameshift, 10% splicing). Although no hotspot
mutations were detected, most TP53 mutations resided in the DNA binding
domain. Of note, most TP53wt/- patients had no clonal somatic
nonsynonymous mutations in other p53 pathway genes, or on Chr17p.To
assess the prognostic impact of TP53 mutations in del17p MM, we focused
on the 40 chemotherapy-naive patients and stratified for age 65 years (n
= 25) and >65 years (n = 15). TP53mut/- patients had a significantly
worse overall survival (OS) than TP53wt/- patients (p = 0.002).
Strikingly, TP53 missense mutations showed the worst OS
(pBackgroundMultiple myeloma (MM) is a malignant plasma cell disorder, in
which at diagnosis circa 10% of tumors are characterized by a deletion of
chromosome 17p (del17p). Previously, others and we reported that this
aberration is associated with a significantly inferior prognosis,
classifying it as high-risk disease. As TP53 is located on chromosome 17p
(Chr17p), most research has thus far been focused on this gene. However,
only in a minority of del17p MM patients a mutation could be detected
(Lod et al. - Haematologica 2010, Kortm et al. - Br J Haematol 2015). We
therefore hypothesized that other relevant mutations might be present in
TP53, its surrounding genes, or disease relevant pathways.AimWith this
study, we sought to identify commonly mutated genes in del17p MM, which
could explain its aggressive clinical behavior.Material and MethodsWe
obtained high molecular DNA from CD138+ purified MM cells and matched
peripheral blood from patients with a del17p in 50% of plasma cells, as
detected with fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH). Libraries were
generated using a custom capture of 111 Mb (SeqCap EZ Exome Plus,
Nimblegen), comprising the whole exome, Chr17p and the IgH, Igk, IgL and
MYC regions. Paired-end sequencing was performed on a HiSeq2500 platform,
followed by data-analysis using an in-house bioinformatics pipeline at
Erasmus MC.ResultsMatched tumor and germline DNA was sequenced from 54
patients, with sequential tumor samples available from 12 patients. This
resulted in an average coverage of 88x and overall coverage of 94%. Of 44
del17p patients, tumor DNA was obtained before treatment start. Clinical
data were collected from 40/44 patients, with a median follow-up time of
18 months.We found TP53 to be mutated most frequently. 31/54 (57%)
patients had a somatic nonsynonymous mutation, insertion or deletion (71%
missense, 19% stopgain/frameshift, 10% splicing). Although no hotspot
mutations were detected, most TP53 mutations resided in the DNA binding
domain. Of note, most TP53wt/- patients had no clonal somatic
nonsynonymous mutations in other p53 pathway genes, or on Chr17p.To
assess the prognostic impact of TP53 mutations in del17p MM, we focused
on the 40 chemotherapy-naive patients and stratified for age 65 years (n
= 25) and >65 years (n = 15). TP53mut/- patients had a significantly
worse overall survival (OS) than TP53wt/- patients (p = 0.002).
Strikingly, TP53 missense mutations showed the worst OS (p<0.001), as
well as progression free survival (PFS) (p = 0.006).Conclusions(1) In
contrast with previous reports, we find TP53 to be somatically mutated in
the majority of MM patients with a clonal del17p aberration.(2)
Particularly TP53 missense mutations have a significantly negative impact
on both PFS and OS in del17p MM patients.This study was supported by the
Plaisier Foundation, Erasmus MC Grant and the Dutch CTMM Project.

