Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bouvardinis a radiation modulator with a novel mechanism of action


Protein synthesis is essential for growth, proliferation and survival of
cells. Translation factors are overexpressed in many cancers and their
experimental inhibition curbs cancer growth in preclinical models.
Differential regulation of translation also occurs upon exposure to
cancer-relevant stresses such as hypoxia and ionizing radiation (IR). The
failure to regulate translation has been shown to interfere with recovery
after genotoxic stress. These findings suggest that modulation of
translation, alone or in conjunction with genotoxins, may be therapeutic
in oncology. Yet, only two drugs that directly inhibit translation are
FDA-approved for oncology use today. We described before the
identification of protein synthesis inhibitor bouvardin in a screen for
small molecule enhancers of IR in Drosophila melanogaster. Bouvardin was
independently identified in a screen for selective inhibitors of
engineered human breast cancer stem cells. Here we report the effect of
bouvardin in preclinical models of head and neck cancer (HNC) and glioma,
two cancer types for which IR is a key therapy choice. Our data show for
the first time that bouvardin blocked translation elongation on human
ribosomes and suggest that it did so by blocking the dissociation of
elongation factor 2 from the ribosome. Bouvardin enhanced the induction
of clonogenic death by IR in HNC and glioma cells, although by different
mechanisms. Bouvardin enhanced the anti-tumor effect of IR in HNC tumor
xenografts in mice. These data suggest that inhibition of translation
elongation, particularly in combination with IR, may be a promising
treatment option for cancer.

