Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical characterization of AMG 900, a pan-aurora kinase
inhibitor, alone and in combination with taxanes in ovarian cancer


BACKGROUND: Aurora kinases (AK) A and B play essential roles in multiple
stages of mitosis and are frequently overexpressed in a subset of human
cancers, including ovarian cancer (OC). AMG 900, a potent and highly
selective small molecule inhibitor of AKs, showed promising single-agent
activity in heavily pretreated patients with advanced OC in a Phase 1b
clinical trial. In this study, we report the preclinical effects of AMG
900 in a panel of well-characterized human cancer cell lines representing
clinically-relevant OC subtypes. METHODS: The anti-proliferative effects
of AMG 900 were evaluated using a 5-day cell count assay. Cell lines were
classified as sensitive to AMG 900 when lethality was > 15% at 10 nM.
Molecular markers were profiled including TP53 mutation status, AURKA,
CCNE1, MYC copy number, and p53, p21 and cyclin E1 protein by reverse
phase protein array. Flow cytometry and imaging methods were used to
evaluate the mechanism of action of AMG 900 alone and in combination with
chemotherapy. The combination of AMG 900 plus docetaxel was evaluated in
an IGROV-1 ovarian endometrioid carcinoma xenograft model. RESULTS: One
third of the cell lines (11 of 35) were classified as sensitive to AMG
900 and showed enrichment for TP53 mutations and serous OC subtype.
However, 10 of 24 resistant cell lines harbored TP53 mutations,
indicating that TP53 mutational status alone was not sufficient for
predicting AMG 900 sensitivity. Inhibition of AK activity by AMG 900 in
OC cells resulted in aborted cell division leading to polyploidy and cell
death (suggestive of aurora-B dominant phenotype). Re-plating of remnant
cells after AMG 900 treatment showed an attenuation of cell regrowth,
where TP53mut IGROV-1 cells showed minimal regrowth compared to TP53wt
OVCAR-5 cells. AMG 900 inhibited proliferation at low nanomolar
concentrations in the majority of OC cell lines and enhanced the effects
of paclitaxel, carboplatin, and doxorubicin in IGROV-1 cells. In
tumor-bearing mice, administration of AMG 900 at 7.5 mg/kg (PO) for two
days per week or docetaxel at 10 mg/kg (IP) weekly for four cycles
significantly inhibited the growth of IGROV-1 tumor xenografts (P
BACKGROUND: Aurora kinases (AK) A and B play essential roles in multiple
stages of mitosis and are frequently overexpressed in a subset of human
cancers, including ovarian cancer (OC). AMG 900, a potent and highly
selective small molecule inhibitor of AKs, showed promising single-agent
activity in heavily pretreated patients with advanced OC in a Phase 1b
clinical trial. In this study, we report the preclinical effects of AMG
900 in a panel of well-characterized human cancer cell lines representing
clinically-relevant OC subtypes. METHODS: The anti-proliferative effects
of AMG 900 were evaluated using a 5-day cell count assay. Cell lines were
classified as sensitive to AMG 900 when lethality was > 15% at 10 nM.
Molecular markers were profiled including TP53 mutation status, AURKA,
CCNE1, MYC copy number, and p53, p21 and cyclin E1 protein by reverse
phase protein array. Flow cytometry and imaging methods were used to
evaluate the mechanism of action of AMG 900 alone and in combination with
chemotherapy. The combination of AMG 900 plus docetaxel was evaluated in
an IGROV-1 ovarian endometrioid carcinoma xenograft model. RESULTS: One
third of the cell lines (11 of 35) were classified as sensitive to AMG
900 and showed enrichment for TP53 mutations and serous OC subtype.
However, 10 of 24 resistant cell lines harbored TP53 mutations,
indicating that TP53 mutational status alone was not sufficient for
predicting AMG 900 sensitivity. Inhibition of AK activity by AMG 900 in
OC cells resulted in aborted cell division leading to polyploidy and cell
death (suggestive of aurora-B dominant phenotype). Re-plating of remnant
cells after AMG 900 treatment showed an attenuation of cell regrowth,
where TP53mut IGROV-1 cells showed minimal regrowth compared to TP53wt
OVCAR-5 cells. AMG 900 inhibited proliferation at low nanomolar
concentrations in the majority of OC cell lines and enhanced the effects
of paclitaxel, carboplatin, and doxorubicin in IGROV-1 cells. In
tumor-bearing mice, administration of AMG 900 at 7.5 mg/kg (PO) for two
days per week or docetaxel at 10 mg/kg (IP) weekly for four cycles
significantly inhibited the growth of IGROV-1 tumor xenografts (P < .0001
vs. vehicle alone). Notably, co-administration of AMG 900 with docetaxel
enhanced efficacy and induced a delay in tumor regrowth compared to
docetaxel alone. Single-agent-treated mice showed minimal body weight
loss (BWL), whereas combination-treated mice showed moderate BWL (average
BACKGROUND: Aurora kinases (AK) A and B play essential roles in multiple
stages of mitosis and are frequently overexpressed in a subset of human
cancers, including ovarian cancer (OC). AMG 900, a potent and highly
selective small molecule inhibitor of AKs, showed promising single-agent
activity in heavily pretreated patients with advanced OC in a Phase 1b
clinical trial. In this study, we report the preclinical effects of AMG
900 in a panel of well-characterized human cancer cell lines representing
clinically-relevant OC subtypes. METHODS: The anti-proliferative effects
of AMG 900 were evaluated using a 5-day cell count assay. Cell lines were
classified as sensitive to AMG 900 when lethality was > 15% at 10 nM.
Molecular markers were profiled including TP53 mutation status, AURKA,
CCNE1, MYC copy number, and p53, p21 and cyclin E1 protein by reverse
phase protein array. Flow cytometry and imaging methods were used to
evaluate the mechanism of action of AMG 900 alone and in combination with
chemotherapy. The combination of AMG 900 plus docetaxel was evaluated in
an IGROV-1 ovarian endometrioid carcinoma xenograft model. RESULTS: One
third of the cell lines (11 of 35) were classified as sensitive to AMG
900 and showed enrichment for TP53 mutations and serous OC subtype.
However, 10 of 24 resistant cell lines harbored TP53 mutations,
indicating that TP53 mutational status alone was not sufficient for
predicting AMG 900 sensitivity. Inhibition of AK activity by AMG 900 in
OC cells resulted in aborted cell division leading to polyploidy and cell
death (suggestive of aurora-B dominant phenotype). Re-plating of remnant
cells after AMG 900 treatment showed an attenuation of cell regrowth,
where TP53mut IGROV-1 cells showed minimal regrowth compared to TP53wt
OVCAR-5 cells. AMG 900 inhibited proliferation at low nanomolar
concentrations in the majority of OC cell lines and enhanced the effects
of paclitaxel, carboplatin, and doxorubicin in IGROV-1 cells. In
tumor-bearing mice, administration of AMG 900 at 7.5 mg/kg (PO) for two
days per week or docetaxel at 10 mg/kg (IP) weekly for four cycles
significantly inhibited the growth of IGROV-1 tumor xenografts (P < .0001
vs. vehicle alone). Notably, co-administration of AMG 900 with docetaxel
enhanced efficacy and induced a delay in tumor regrowth compared to
docetaxel alone. Single-agent-treated mice showed minimal body weight
loss (BWL), whereas combination-treated mice showed moderate BWL (average
< 10%) that was largely reversible (2 of 12 animals removed due to
toxicity). CONCLUSIONS: AMG 900 alone or in combination with chemotherapy
such as paclitaxel may be a promising clinical strategy to treat patients
with ovarian cancer.

