Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Blockade of TGF signaling enhances anticancer effect of
chemotherapeutics in gynecologic cancers


Chemoresistance is a significant clinical challenge in the management of
gynecologic malignancies. Previous studies have showed that TGF-
signaling pathway can mediate chemotherapy resistance. However, the
underlying mechanisms of how TGF- pathway is activated and causes
chemoresistance are not well understood. Here, we found that ovarian
cancer patients displayed an increased RNA transcripts of genes
associated with TGF- signaling after chemotherapy. In vitro, treatment
with four commonly used drugs for gynecologic malignancies, including
cisplatin, doxorubicin, paclitaxel and camptothecin, activated TGF
signaling by stimulating phosphorylation of Smad2 and Smad3, two
intracellular mediators of TGF signaling pathway in ovarian and cervical
cancer cell lines. Furthermore, cisplatin and doxorubicin can induced
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and promote migration. Blockade
of TGF signaling abrogated chemotherapeutics-stimulated Smad
phosphorylation, epithelial-mesenchymal transition, and migration. These
observations suggest that chemotherapy-mediated activation of TGF
signaling may be a mechanism of chemoresistance, and that TGF pathway
inhibitor may prevent the development of chemoresistant. We are currently
testing the anti-tumor efficacy of the combination therapy with a novel
pan-TGF inhibitor and cisplatin in a mouse xenograft model of ovarian
cancer and whether the treatment with TGF inhibitor can alleviate
symptoms of nephrotoxicity, which is known to be caused by cisplatin. Our
studies may reveal new strategies for the treatment of gynecologic
malignancies.

