Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A BRCA1 deficient, NFB driven immune signal predicts good outcome
in triple negative breast cancer


Triple negative (TNBCs) and the closely related Basal-like (BLBCs) breast
cancers are a loosely defined collection of cancers with poor clinical
outcomes. Both show strong similarities with BRCA1-mutant breast cancers
and BRCA1 dysfunction, or BRCAness, is observed in a large proportion of
sporadic BLBCs. BRCA1 expression and function has been shown in vitro to
modulate responses to radiation and chemotherapy. Exploitation of this
knowledge in the treatment of BRCA1-mutant patients has had varying
degrees of success. This reflects the significant problem of accurately
detecting those patients with BRCA1 dysfunction. Moreover, not all BRCA1
mutations/loss of function result in the same histology/pathology or
indeed have similar effects in modulating therapeutic responses. Given
the poor clinical outcomes and lack of targeted therapy for these
subtypes, a better understanding of the biology underlying these diseases
is required in order to develop novel therapeutic strategies.We have
discovered a consistent NFB hyperactivity associated with BRCA1
dysfunction as a consequence of increased Reactive Oxygen Species (ROS).
This biology is found in a subset of BRCA1-mutant and triple negative
breast cancer cases and confers good outcome. The increased NFB
signalling results in an anti-tumour microenvironment which may allow
CD8+ cytotoxic T cells to suppress tumour progression. However, tumours
lacking this NFB-driven biology have a more tumour-promoting environment
and so are associated with poorer prognosis. Tumour-derived gene
expression data and cell line models imply that these tumours may benefit
from alternative treatment strategies such as reprogramming the
microenvironment and targeting the IGF and AR signalling pathways.

