Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NOTCH1 inactivating mutation mediates sensitivity to PI3K/mTOR
inhibitors in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma


Recently published whole exome sequencing studies in head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) tumors revealed that few had
therapeutically targetable alterations using current strategies. This
finding defines translational gap between genomics and HNSCC treatment.
One potential targetable alteration is PIK3CA mutations. However,
clinical trials testing PI3K/mTOR pathway inhibitors have had limited
success and these inhibitors only lead to cell cycle arrest in PIK3CA
mutant HNSCC cell lines. Thus, there is a critical need to identify
therapeutic vulnerabilities for common mutation groups, including tumor
suppressors, in HNSCC. One of these molecular subgroups is NOTCH1 which
is the second most frequently mutated gene in HNSCC, with a 10-15%
prevalence of inactivating mutations. Although there are several studies
underscoring the importance of NOTCH1 as a tumor suppressor in HNSCC,
none has identified a therapy that targets NOTCH1 mutant (mut) HNSCC. Our
objective was to identify predictive biomarkers of sensitivity to
PI3K/mTOR inhibitors by integrating drug and multiple-omics data.Cell
viability with six PI3K/mTOR inhibitors in 68 HNSCC lines was measured by
the CellTiter Glo assay. The peak plasma concentration of each drug was
used as the cut-off to determine sensitivity. We observed a striking
correlation between NOTCH1mut and sensitivity to PI3K/mTOR pathway
inhibitors. When fisher's exact test was performed, NOTCH1mut lines were
more sensitive to GSK2126458 (PRecently published whole exome sequencing
studies in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) tumors revealed
that few had therapeutically targetable alterations using current
strategies. This finding defines translational gap between genomics and
HNSCC treatment. One potential targetable alteration is PIK3CA mutations.
However, clinical trials testing PI3K/mTOR pathway inhibitors have had
limited success and these inhibitors only lead to cell cycle arrest in
PIK3CA mutant HNSCC cell lines. Thus, there is a critical need to
identify therapeutic vulnerabilities for common mutation groups,
including tumor suppressors, in HNSCC. One of these molecular subgroups
is NOTCH1 which is the second most frequently mutated gene in HNSCC, with
a 10-15% prevalence of inactivating mutations. Although there are several
studies underscoring the importance of NOTCH1 as a tumor suppressor in
HNSCC, none has identified a therapy that targets NOTCH1 mutant (mut)
HNSCC. Our objective was to identify predictive biomarkers of sensitivity
to PI3K/mTOR inhibitors by integrating drug and multiple-omics data.Cell
viability with six PI3K/mTOR inhibitors in 68 HNSCC lines was measured by
the CellTiter Glo assay. The peak plasma concentration of each drug was
used as the cut-off to determine sensitivity. We observed a striking
correlation between NOTCH1mut and sensitivity to PI3K/mTOR pathway
inhibitors. When fisher's exact test was performed, NOTCH1mut lines were
more sensitive to GSK2126458 (P<0.027), BYL719 (PRecently published whole
exome sequencing studies in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC)
tumors revealed that few had therapeutically targetable alterations using
current strategies. This finding defines translational gap between
genomics and HNSCC treatment. One potential targetable alteration is
PIK3CA mutations. However, clinical trials testing PI3K/mTOR pathway
inhibitors have had limited success and these inhibitors only lead to
cell cycle arrest in PIK3CA mutant HNSCC cell lines. Thus, there is a
critical need to identify therapeutic vulnerabilities for common mutation
groups, including tumor suppressors, in HNSCC. One of these molecular
subgroups is NOTCH1 which is the second most frequently mutated gene in
HNSCC, with a 10-15% prevalence of inactivating mutations. Although there
are several studies underscoring the importance of NOTCH1 as a tumor
suppressor in HNSCC, none has identified a therapy that targets NOTCH1
mutant (mut) HNSCC. Our objective was to identify predictive biomarkers
of sensitivity to PI3K/mTOR inhibitors by integrating drug and
multiple-omics data.Cell viability with six PI3K/mTOR inhibitors in 68
HNSCC lines was measured by the CellTiter Glo assay. The peak plasma
concentration of each drug was used as the cut-off to determine
sensitivity. We observed a striking correlation between NOTCH1mut and
sensitivity to PI3K/mTOR pathway inhibitors. When fisher's exact test was
performed, NOTCH1mut lines were more sensitive to GSK2126458 (P<0.027),
BYL719 (P<0.004) and PQR309 (PRecently published whole exome sequencing
studies in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) tumors revealed
that few had therapeutically targetable alterations using current
strategies. This finding defines translational gap between genomics and
HNSCC treatment. One potential targetable alteration is PIK3CA mutations.
However, clinical trials testing PI3K/mTOR pathway inhibitors have had
limited success and these inhibitors only lead to cell cycle arrest in
PIK3CA mutant HNSCC cell lines. Thus, there is a critical need to
identify therapeutic vulnerabilities for common mutation groups,
including tumor suppressors, in HNSCC. One of these molecular subgroups
is NOTCH1 which is the second most frequently mutated gene in HNSCC, with
a 10-15% prevalence of inactivating mutations. Although there are several
studies underscoring the importance of NOTCH1 as a tumor suppressor in
HNSCC, none has identified a therapy that targets NOTCH1 mutant (mut)
HNSCC. Our objective was to identify predictive biomarkers of sensitivity
to PI3K/mTOR inhibitors by integrating drug and multiple-omics data.Cell
viability with six PI3K/mTOR inhibitors in 68 HNSCC lines was measured by
the CellTiter Glo assay. The peak plasma concentration of each drug was
used as the cut-off to determine sensitivity. We observed a striking
correlation between NOTCH1mut and sensitivity to PI3K/mTOR pathway
inhibitors. When fisher's exact test was performed, NOTCH1mut lines were
more sensitive to GSK2126458 (P<0.027), BYL719 (P<0.004) and PQR309
(P<0.014) than NOTCH1 wild type cell lines. NOTCH1 was also identified as
an upstream regulator in sensitive cell lines by Ingenuity Pathway
Analysis. Basal NOTCH1 protein expression was higher in HNSCC lines
resistant to PI3K/mTOR inhibition using unsupervised hierarchical
clustering of Reverse Phase Protein Array data.NOTCH1mut lines underwent
more apoptosis after GSK2126458 treatment compared to NOTCH1wt lines
(PCI15B- 48.1 fold; PRecently published whole exome sequencing studies in
head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) tumors revealed that few
had therapeutically targetable alterations using current strategies. This
finding defines translational gap between genomics and HNSCC treatment.
One potential targetable alteration is PIK3CA mutations. However,
clinical trials testing PI3K/mTOR pathway inhibitors have had limited
success and these inhibitors only lead to cell cycle arrest in PIK3CA
mutant HNSCC cell lines. Thus, there is a critical need to identify
therapeutic vulnerabilities for common mutation groups, including tumor
suppressors, in HNSCC. One of these molecular subgroups is NOTCH1 which
is the second most frequently mutated gene in HNSCC, with a 10-15%
prevalence of inactivating mutations. Although there are several studies
underscoring the importance of NOTCH1 as a tumor suppressor in HNSCC,
none has identified a therapy that targets NOTCH1 mutant (mut) HNSCC. Our
objective was to identify predictive biomarkers of sensitivity to
PI3K/mTOR inhibitors by integrating drug and multiple-omics data.Cell
viability with six PI3K/mTOR inhibitors in 68 HNSCC lines was measured by
the CellTiter Glo assay. The peak plasma concentration of each drug was
used as the cut-off to determine sensitivity. We observed a striking
correlation between NOTCH1mut and sensitivity to PI3K/mTOR pathway
inhibitors. When fisher's exact test was performed, NOTCH1mut lines were
more sensitive to GSK2126458 (P<0.027), BYL719 (P<0.004) and PQR309
(P<0.014) than NOTCH1 wild type cell lines. NOTCH1 was also identified as
an upstream regulator in sensitive cell lines by Ingenuity Pathway
Analysis. Basal NOTCH1 protein expression was higher in HNSCC lines
resistant to PI3K/mTOR inhibition using unsupervised hierarchical
clustering of Reverse Phase Protein Array data.NOTCH1mut lines underwent
more apoptosis after GSK2126458 treatment compared to NOTCH1wt lines
(PCI15B- 48.1 fold; P<0.05, HN31- 46.9 fold; PRecently published whole
exome sequencing studies in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC)
tumors revealed that few had therapeutically targetable alterations using
current strategies. This finding defines translational gap between
genomics and HNSCC treatment. One potential targetable alteration is
PIK3CA mutations. However, clinical trials testing PI3K/mTOR pathway
inhibitors have had limited success and these inhibitors only lead to
cell cycle arrest in PIK3CA mutant HNSCC cell lines. Thus, there is a
critical need to identify therapeutic vulnerabilities for common mutation
groups, including tumor suppressors, in HNSCC. One of these molecular
subgroups is NOTCH1 which is the second most frequently mutated gene in
HNSCC, with a 10-15% prevalence of inactivating mutations. Although there
are several studies underscoring the importance of NOTCH1 as a tumor
suppressor in HNSCC, none has identified a therapy that targets NOTCH1
mutant (mut) HNSCC. Our objective was to identify predictive biomarkers
of sensitivity to PI3K/mTOR inhibitors by integrating drug and
multiple-omics data.Cell viability with six PI3K/mTOR inhibitors in 68
HNSCC lines was measured by the CellTiter Glo assay. The peak plasma
concentration of each drug was used as the cut-off to determine
sensitivity. We observed a striking correlation between NOTCH1mut and
sensitivity to PI3K/mTOR pathway inhibitors. When fisher's exact test was
performed, NOTCH1mut lines were more sensitive to GSK2126458 (P<0.027),
BYL719 (P<0.004) and PQR309 (P<0.014) than NOTCH1 wild type cell lines.
NOTCH1 was also identified as an upstream regulator in sensitive cell
lines by Ingenuity Pathway Analysis. Basal NOTCH1 protein expression was
higher in HNSCC lines resistant to PI3K/mTOR inhibition using
unsupervised hierarchical clustering of Reverse Phase Protein Array
data.NOTCH1mut lines underwent more apoptosis after GSK2126458 treatment
compared to NOTCH1wt lines (PCI15B- 48.1 fold; P<0.05, HN31- 46.9 fold;
P<0.05). There was also increased accumulation of cells in G1 after
GSK2126458 treatment in NOTCH1mut lines (PCI15B-1.3 fold, PRecently
published whole exome sequencing studies in head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma (HNSCC) tumors revealed that few had therapeutically targetable
alterations using current strategies. This finding defines translational
gap between genomics and HNSCC treatment. One potential targetable
alteration is PIK3CA mutations. However, clinical trials testing
PI3K/mTOR pathway inhibitors have had limited success and these
inhibitors only lead to cell cycle arrest in PIK3CA mutant HNSCC cell
lines. Thus, there is a critical need to identify therapeutic
vulnerabilities for common mutation groups, including tumor suppressors,
in HNSCC. One of these molecular subgroups is NOTCH1 which is the second
most frequently mutated gene in HNSCC, with a 10-15% prevalence of
inactivating mutations. Although there are several studies underscoring
the importance of NOTCH1 as a tumor suppressor in HNSCC, none has
identified a therapy that targets NOTCH1 mutant (mut) HNSCC. Our
objective was to identify predictive biomarkers of sensitivity to
PI3K/mTOR inhibitors by integrating drug and multiple-omics data.Cell
viability with six PI3K/mTOR inhibitors in 68 HNSCC lines was measured by
the CellTiter Glo assay. The peak plasma concentration of each drug was
used as the cut-off to determine sensitivity. We observed a striking
correlation between NOTCH1mut and sensitivity to PI3K/mTOR pathway
inhibitors. When fisher's exact test was performed, NOTCH1mut lines were
more sensitive to GSK2126458 (P<0.027), BYL719 (P<0.004) and PQR309
(P<0.014) than NOTCH1 wild type cell lines. NOTCH1 was also identified as
an upstream regulator in sensitive cell lines by Ingenuity Pathway
Analysis. Basal NOTCH1 protein expression was higher in HNSCC lines
resistant to PI3K/mTOR inhibition using unsupervised hierarchical
clustering of Reverse Phase Protein Array data.NOTCH1mut lines underwent
more apoptosis after GSK2126458 treatment compared to NOTCH1wt lines
(PCI15B- 48.1 fold; P<0.05, HN31- 46.9 fold; P<0.05). There was also
increased accumulation of cells in G1 after GSK2126458 treatment in
NOTCH1mut lines (PCI15B-1.3 fold, P<0.05; HN31- 1.4 fold, PRecently
published whole exome sequencing studies in head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma (HNSCC) tumors revealed that few had therapeutically targetable
alterations using current strategies. This finding defines translational
gap between genomics and HNSCC treatment. One potential targetable
alteration is PIK3CA mutations. However, clinical trials testing
PI3K/mTOR pathway inhibitors have had limited success and these
inhibitors only lead to cell cycle arrest in PIK3CA mutant HNSCC cell
lines. Thus, there is a critical need to identify therapeutic
vulnerabilities for common mutation groups, including tumor suppressors,
in HNSCC. One of these molecular subgroups is NOTCH1 which is the second
most frequently mutated gene in HNSCC, with a 10-15% prevalence of
inactivating mutations. Although there are several studies underscoring
the importance of NOTCH1 as a tumor suppressor in HNSCC, none has
identified a therapy that targets NOTCH1 mutant (mut) HNSCC. Our
objective was to identify predictive biomarkers of sensitivity to
PI3K/mTOR inhibitors by integrating drug and multiple-omics data.Cell
viability with six PI3K/mTOR inhibitors in 68 HNSCC lines was measured by
the CellTiter Glo assay. The peak plasma concentration of each drug was
used as the cut-off to determine sensitivity. We observed a striking
correlation between NOTCH1mut and sensitivity to PI3K/mTOR pathway
inhibitors. When fisher's exact test was performed, NOTCH1mut lines were
more sensitive to GSK2126458 (P<0.027), BYL719 (P<0.004) and PQR309
(P<0.014) than NOTCH1 wild type cell lines. NOTCH1 was also identified as
an upstream regulator in sensitive cell lines by Ingenuity Pathway
Analysis. Basal NOTCH1 protein expression was higher in HNSCC lines
resistant to PI3K/mTOR inhibition using unsupervised hierarchical
clustering of Reverse Phase Protein Array data.NOTCH1mut lines underwent
more apoptosis after GSK2126458 treatment compared to NOTCH1wt lines
(PCI15B- 48.1 fold; P<0.05, HN31- 46.9 fold; P<0.05). There was also
increased accumulation of cells in G1 after GSK2126458 treatment in
NOTCH1mut lines (PCI15B-1.3 fold, P<0.05; HN31- 1.4 fold, P<0.05). To
check if inhibition of NOTCH1 pathway inhibition sensitizes NOTCH1wt
lines to PI3K/mTOR inhibition, resistant NOTCH1wt lines were treated with
Gamma secretase inhibitors and GSK2126458. The combination led to
significantly decreased cell viability (DAPT- 1.5 fold and YO010227- 1.7
fold). The combination studies will be further expanded to 38 NOTCH1wt
lines. On-going studies include assessment of drug sensitivity in vivo,
mechanistic studies and the effect of genetic manipulation of NOTCH1
signaling on sensitivity to PI3K/mTOR inhibitors.Our data suggests that
loss of active NOTCH1 signaling confers sensitivity to PI3K/mTOR
inhibition. If the combination of NOTCH1 and PI3K/mTOR inhibition leads
to apoptosis, this combination could be translated into the clinic.

