Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of the PD-1/PDL-1 pathway in resistance of patients with
metastatic breast cancer to treatment with radiotherapy and TGF
neutralization


Experimental data and clinical observations indicate that local radiation
therapy (RT) converts the irradiated tumor into an in situ vaccine and
improves responses to immunotherapy. Preclinical breast cancer models
show that TGFb neutralization was required to achieve CD8+ T cell priming
specific for multiple tumor antigens, and rejection of the irradiated
tumor and non-irradiated metastases (Vanpouille-Box et al., Cancer Res
2015). Tumor response and survival were improved by PD-1 blockade. We
explored the role of the PD-1/PDL-1 pathway in resistance to combined RT
+ TGF neutralizing antibody (fresolimumab) in metastatic breast cancer
patients (pts).22 pts were treated in a prospective trial at NYU and UCLA
(NCT01401062, supported by DOD MTA BC100481). Pts were randomly assigned
to 2 doses of fresolimumab (freso) (1mg/kg and 10 mg/kg, q 3 weeks).
Image guided RT was delivered to one metastasis on weeks 2 and 7, 7.5
GyX3. 1 pt achieved objective response, with 28% reduction of tumor
burden. The response lasted 11 months, anthracycline-induced acute
myelogenous leukemia developed. Pts randomized to the higher freso dose
had a hazard ratio of 2.17 (95% CI: 0.753-6.272) for risk of death at 1
year follow up. Currently, at a median follow up of 2 years, 20/22 pts
have died.To explore reasons for the limited response, peripheral blood
mononuclear cells collected at baseline, 5 and 15 weeks into treatment,
were analyzed. Responses to survivin, as a tumor antigen, were assessed
using tetramers. Single cell network profiling (SCNP) was used to
evaluate expression of 6 immunomodulatory receptors plus immune signaling
in T cells collected from 7 healthy donors (HD) and 15 breast cancer pts
(6 at 1mg/kg, 9 at 10mg/kg fresolimumab). In vitro activation of p-AKT
and p-Erk was quantified following in vitro T cell receptor (TCR)
modulation with anti-CD3/nti-CD28.6/12 HLA-A2.1+ pts had pre-existing
survivin-specific CD8+ T cells, and 3 showed an increase over time. 2 pts
who were negative generated modest responses after RT and 10 mg/kg freso.
Prior to treatment, PDL-1 expression was increased in monocytes (p =
0.01) and CD4+ T cells (p = 0.037) compared to HD. Elevated PD-1 (p =
0.054) and OX-40 (p = 0.014) expression were identified on CD4+ T cells
of pts. Upon TCR modulation, CD4+ and CD8+ T cells from pts showed
reduced signaling through p-AKT and, to a lesser extent, p-Erk, compared
to HD. Signaling was lower in PD-1+ vs PD-1- CD8+ and CD4+ T cells.
Addition of anti-PD-1 pembrolizumab partially restored TCR-mediated
signaling through p-AKT and p-Erk in PD-1+ but not PD-1- T cells.Overall,
data indicate impaired T cell signaling in PD-1+ T cells of metastatic
breast cancer pts, which may explain the inability to respond to RT + TGF
blockade. In vitro addition of anti-PD-1 improved T cell signaling
through p-AKT and p-Erk. Together with the preclinical data, this
supports adding anti-PD-1 to the combination of RT +TGF blockade.

