Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transcriptome characterization of high grade serous and
endometrioid epithelial ovarian cancer tumors


Background: Little transcriptomic research has compared epithelial
ovarian cancer (EOC) histological subtypes. We set out to characterize
the transcriptomes of high-grade serous carcinomas (HGSC) and
endometrioid carcinomas (EC), which make up around 70% and 20% of EOC
tumors, respectively, and have some histopathological
similarities.Methods: Fresh frozen tumors from EOC patients seen at the
Mayo Clinic (30 EC and 62 HGSC) were used. 1ug RNA riboZero was used for
library preparation using the Illumina TruSeq kit and sequenced on a
HiSeq 2000 machine. Reads were aligned using TopHat2 followed by
quantification of abundances using RSEM and differential expression
analysis with edgeR. We analyzed transcriptomes, conducted pathway
analyses, and summarized key candidate gene sets. Expressed SNVs (eSNVs)
from the RNA-seq data were determined using GATK and RVboost.Results: The
analysis found 699 genes with FDR Background: Little transcriptomic
research has compared epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) histological
subtypes. We set out to characterize the transcriptomes of high-grade
serous carcinomas (HGSC) and endometrioid carcinomas (EC), which make up
around 70% and 20% of EOC tumors, respectively, and have some
histopathological similarities.Methods: Fresh frozen tumors from EOC
patients seen at the Mayo Clinic (30 EC and 62 HGSC) were used. 1ug RNA
riboZero was used for library preparation using the Illumina TruSeq kit
and sequenced on a HiSeq 2000 machine. Reads were aligned using TopHat2
followed by quantification of abundances using RSEM and differential
expression analysis with edgeR. We analyzed transcriptomes, conducted
pathway analyses, and summarized key candidate gene sets. Expressed SNVs
(eSNVs) from the RNA-seq data were determined using GATK and
RVboost.Results: The analysis found 699 genes with FDR < 110-5 for
differential expression between HGSC and EC, with most genes being
up-regulated in EC. The top most associated genes were TPH1, MAP2K6,
KLK2, ADAM23, TESC and TRAF3IP2 (pBackground: Little transcriptomic
research has compared epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) histological
subtypes. We set out to characterize the transcriptomes of high-grade
serous carcinomas (HGSC) and endometrioid carcinomas (EC), which make up
around 70% and 20% of EOC tumors, respectively, and have some
histopathological similarities.Methods: Fresh frozen tumors from EOC
patients seen at the Mayo Clinic (30 EC and 62 HGSC) were used. 1ug RNA
riboZero was used for library preparation using the Illumina TruSeq kit
and sequenced on a HiSeq 2000 machine. Reads were aligned using TopHat2
followed by quantification of abundances using RSEM and differential
expression analysis with edgeR. We analyzed transcriptomes, conducted
pathway analyses, and summarized key candidate gene sets. Expressed SNVs
(eSNVs) from the RNA-seq data were determined using GATK and
RVboost.Results: The analysis found 699 genes with FDR < 110-5 for
differential expression between HGSC and EC, with most genes being
up-regulated in EC. The top most associated genes were TPH1, MAP2K6,
KLK2, ADAM23, TESC and TRAF3IP2 (p<10-22). Pathway analysis of the genes
up-regulated in EC revealed enrichment of the basal cell carcinoma
signaling pathway (p = 1.210-5). Within 1 Mb of the 25 known EOC risk
loci, we observed higher expression in HGSC for RSPO1 and HPSE (p
Background: Little transcriptomic research has compared epithelial
ovarian cancer (EOC) histological subtypes. We set out to characterize
the transcriptomes of high-grade serous carcinomas (HGSC) and
endometrioid carcinomas (EC), which make up around 70% and 20% of EOC
tumors, respectively, and have some histopathological
similarities.Methods: Fresh frozen tumors from EOC patients seen at the
Mayo Clinic (30 EC and 62 HGSC) were used. 1ug RNA riboZero was used for
library preparation using the Illumina TruSeq kit and sequenced on a
HiSeq 2000 machine. Reads were aligned using TopHat2 followed by
quantification of abundances using RSEM and differential expression
analysis with edgeR. We analyzed transcriptomes, conducted pathway
analyses, and summarized key candidate gene sets. Expressed SNVs (eSNVs)
from the RNA-seq data were determined using GATK and RVboost.Results: The
analysis found 699 genes with FDR < 110-5 for differential expression
between HGSC and EC, with most genes being up-regulated in EC. The top
most associated genes were TPH1, MAP2K6, KLK2, ADAM23, TESC and TRAF3IP2
(p<10-22). Pathway analysis of the genes up-regulated in EC revealed
enrichment of the basal cell carcinoma signaling pathway (p = 1.210-5).
Within 1 Mb of the 25 known EOC risk loci, we observed higher expression
in HGSC for RSPO1 and HPSE (p <510-7). For genes functionally related to
EOC, we observed in HGSC up-regulation (*p Background: Little
transcriptomic research has compared epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC)
histological subtypes. We set out to characterize the transcriptomes of
high-grade serous carcinomas (HGSC) and endometrioid carcinomas (EC),
which make up around 70% and 20% of EOC tumors, respectively, and have
some histopathological similarities.Methods: Fresh frozen tumors from EOC
patients seen at the Mayo Clinic (30 EC and 62 HGSC) were used. 1ug RNA
riboZero was used for library preparation using the Illumina TruSeq kit
and sequenced on a HiSeq 2000 machine. Reads were aligned using TopHat2
followed by quantification of abundances using RSEM and differential
expression analysis with edgeR. We analyzed transcriptomes, conducted
pathway analyses, and summarized key candidate gene sets. Expressed SNVs
(eSNVs) from the RNA-seq data were determined using GATK and
RVboost.Results: The analysis found 699 genes with FDR < 110-5 for
differential expression between HGSC and EC, with most genes being
up-regulated in EC. The top most associated genes were TPH1, MAP2K6,
KLK2, ADAM23, TESC and TRAF3IP2 (p<10-22). Pathway analysis of the genes
up-regulated in EC revealed enrichment of the basal cell carcinoma
signaling pathway (p = 1.210-5). Within 1 Mb of the 25 known EOC risk
loci, we observed higher expression in HGSC for RSPO1 and HPSE (p
<510-7). For genes functionally related to EOC, we observed in HGSC
up-regulation (*p < 10-5, pBackground: Little transcriptomic research has
compared epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) histological subtypes. We set
out to characterize the transcriptomes of high-grade serous carcinomas
(HGSC) and endometrioid carcinomas (EC), which make up around 70% and 20%
of EOC tumors, respectively, and have some histopathological
similarities.Methods: Fresh frozen tumors from EOC patients seen at the
Mayo Clinic (30 EC and 62 HGSC) were used. 1ug RNA riboZero was used for
library preparation using the Illumina TruSeq kit and sequenced on a
HiSeq 2000 machine. Reads were aligned using TopHat2 followed by
quantification of abundances using RSEM and differential expression
analysis with edgeR. We analyzed transcriptomes, conducted pathway
analyses, and summarized key candidate gene sets. Expressed SNVs (eSNVs)
from the RNA-seq data were determined using GATK and RVboost.Results: The
analysis found 699 genes with FDR < 110-5 for differential expression
between HGSC and EC, with most genes being up-regulated in EC. The top
most associated genes were TPH1, MAP2K6, KLK2, ADAM23, TESC and TRAF3IP2
(p<10-22). Pathway analysis of the genes up-regulated in EC revealed
enrichment of the basal cell carcinoma signaling pathway (p = 1.210-5).
Within 1 Mb of the 25 known EOC risk loci, we observed higher expression
in HGSC for RSPO1 and HPSE (p <510-7). For genes functionally related to
EOC, we observed in HGSC up-regulation (*p < 10-5, p<0.003) for FOXM1,
CDKN2A, CCNE1*, CCND2, PIK3CA*, BRCA2, BIRC5, MMP9, FANCD2, and MAML2. In
contrast, we found up-regulation in EC for MDM2*, KLK4*, BCL2, CCND1*,
ANXA4*, CDH1, MMP7, and MAML3. We also identified 204 eSNVs (44
non-synonymous) associated with EC v HGSC subtype (pBackground: Little
transcriptomic research has compared epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC)
histological subtypes. We set out to characterize the transcriptomes of
high-grade serous carcinomas (HGSC) and endometrioid carcinomas (EC),
which make up around 70% and 20% of EOC tumors, respectively, and have
some histopathological similarities.Methods: Fresh frozen tumors from EOC
patients seen at the Mayo Clinic (30 EC and 62 HGSC) were used. 1ug RNA
riboZero was used for library preparation using the Illumina TruSeq kit
and sequenced on a HiSeq 2000 machine. Reads were aligned using TopHat2
followed by quantification of abundances using RSEM and differential
expression analysis with edgeR. We analyzed transcriptomes, conducted
pathway analyses, and summarized key candidate gene sets. Expressed SNVs
(eSNVs) from the RNA-seq data were determined using GATK and
RVboost.Results: The analysis found 699 genes with FDR < 110-5 for
differential expression between HGSC and EC, with most genes being
up-regulated in EC. The top most associated genes were TPH1, MAP2K6,
KLK2, ADAM23, TESC and TRAF3IP2 (p<10-22). Pathway analysis of the genes
up-regulated in EC revealed enrichment of the basal cell carcinoma
signaling pathway (p = 1.210-5). Within 1 Mb of the 25 known EOC risk
loci, we observed higher expression in HGSC for RSPO1 and HPSE (p
<510-7). For genes functionally related to EOC, we observed in HGSC
up-regulation (*p < 10-5, p<0.003) for FOXM1, CDKN2A, CCNE1*, CCND2,
PIK3CA*, BRCA2, BIRC5, MMP9, FANCD2, and MAML2. In contrast, we found
up-regulation in EC for MDM2*, KLK4*, BCL2, CCND1*, ANXA4*, CDH1, MMP7,
and MAML3. We also identified 204 eSNVs (44 non-synonymous) associated
with EC v HGSC subtype (p<10-4); this included an exonic TRAF3IP2 eSNV
(66% EC, 13% HGSC, p = 410-7, chr6:111877117).Discussion: Using one of
the largest sets of identically processed fresh-frozen EOC tumors, some
patterns emerged among the numerous EC v HGSC transcriptomic differences.
TPH1, up-expressed in EC, is regulated by SOX4 which was also
up-regulated in EC. Two sets of genes related to Kallikreins serine
proteases were differentially expressed, including KLK2 which is known to
regulate EGFR and pro-inflammatory cytokines and is regulated by MYC.
Lastly, TRAF3IP2 encodes for a protein involved in regulating cytokines
through members of the NFKB pathway.Conclusions: These findings suggest
important biological insights into one of the rarer EOC histologies and
may aid in the development of targeted treatment options. Research is
on-going to incorporate additional features (e.g., DNA methylation, copy
number) into a systems biology framework to better understand the
molecular differences between EOC histologies.

