Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tyrosine kinase discoidin domain receptor-1 (DDR1) regulates
cytotoxicity of recombinant immunotoxin for cancer therapy


Discoidin domain receptor 1 (DDR1) is a collagen-activated tyrosine
kinase that facilitates cell adhesion, migration, proliferation and
matrix remodeling. The collagen/DDR1 axis is also thought to modulate
tumor-stromal interaction and potentially affects tumor response to
therapy. Mesothelin is a cell-surface protein over-expressed in several
human cancers including mesothelioma, ovarian, lung, breast, and
pancreatic cancers with limited expression on normal cells. RG7787 is a
clinically optimized recombinant immunotoxin (RIT) consisting of a
humanized anti-mesothelin Fab fused to domain III of Pseudomonas exotoxin
A in which immunogenic B cell epitopes are silenced. To enhance
therapeutic efficacy of RITs we conducted a kinome RNAi sensitization
screen which identified DDR1 as a potential target. We hypothesized that
DDR1 regulates RIT activity and its inhibition might enhance cell killing
by RG7787. Knockdown of DDR1 by siRNA or treatment with inhibitor, 7rh,
greatly enhanced the cytotoxic activity of RG7787 in several cancer cell
lines. Investigation into the mechanism of action showed DDR1 silencing
was associated with a decrease in several ribosomal proteins and enhanced
inhibition of protein synthesis. Induction of DDR1 expression or
stimulation of DDR1 activity by collagen protected cancer cells from
RG7787 killing, while DDR1 inhibition enhanced killing by RG7787.
Moreover, the combination of immunotoxin and DDR1 inhibitor caused
significantly more shrinkage of epithelial A431/H9 and pancreatic KLM1
tumor xenografts than either agent alone. These data demonstrate that
DDR1 has a critical role in modulating immunotoxin activity. Inhibition
of DDR1 represents a novel strategy to enhance therapeutic efficacy of
RITs targeting mesothelin-expressing cancers.

