Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Endothelin causes transactivation of the EGFR and Her-2/Neu in
non-small cell lung cancer cells


Endothelin-1 (ET-1) is a 23 amino acid peptide which is present in many
lung cancer cell lines (Ahmed et al., Am. J. Respir. Cell Mol. Biol.
2000; 22: 422). Expression of ET-1 or the ETA receptor is associated with
poor prognosis of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients (Boldrini
et al., Eur. J. Cancer 2005; 41: 2828). ET-1 stimulates whereas the ETA
antagonist ZD4054 inhibits the proliferation of cancer cells (Bagnato et
al., Br. J. Pharmacol. 2011: 163; 220). Here the effects of ET-1 on the
transactivation of the EGFR and Her-2/Neu were investigated in NSCLC
cells. Twelve of 13 NSCLC cell lines tested had both ETA and ETB mRNA.
Addition of ET-1 to adenocarcinoma cell line NCI-H838, which had both ETA
and ETB mRNA, elevated cytosolic Ca2+, increased tyrosine phosphorylation
of the ERK, EGFR and Her-2/Neu and increased colony number. The ability
of ET-1 to increase cytosolic Ca2+, tyrosine phosphorylation of ERK, EGFR
and Her-2/Neu and colony number was inhibited by ZD4054 or BQ123 (ETA
antagonists). The transactivation of EGFR and Her-2/Neu by ET-1 was
inhibited by lapatinib (EGFR and Her-2/Neu TKI), GM6001 (matrix
metalloprotease inhibitor), PP2 (Src inhibitor) or N-acetylcysteine
(anti-oxidant). ET-1 stimulated whereas lapatinib and ZD4054 inhibited
the clonal growth of NSCLC cells. The results indicate that ET-1 may
regulate the proliferation of NSCLC cells in an EGFR and
Her-2/Neu-dependent manner.

