Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: miR-301 expression is deregulated in rhabdomyosarcoma


Rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) is an aggressive pediatric soft tissue sarcoma of
myogenic derivation. Conversely to normal myoblasts, RMS cells are unable
to differentiate, thus they proliferate indefinitely. MicroRNAs (miRNAs)
are short (20-24 nt) non-coding RNAs that are involved in
post-transcriptional regulation of gene expression by affecting both the
stability and translation of mRNAs. They are fundamental regulators of
myogenesis and their deregulation has been involved in the pathogenesis
of RMS. We evaluate here the expression and regulation of miR-301, which
has been related to tumorigenesis in other types of cancers. We report
here that the expression of miR-301 is upregulated in primary samples of
both the alveolar RMS, which bears the fusion protein PAX3-FOXO1 (P3F)
(ARMS), and the fusion-negative embryonal RMS (ERMS) compared to normal
muscle tissues. Similarly, it appears higher in RMS cell lines versus
normal skeletal myoblasts. Using an inhibitor of miR-301 (CONTRAmiR) we
demonstrate that this miRNA favors RMS cell mobility and down-regulates
p21Cip1, PTEN and DICER1 levels. However, the inhibition of miR-301 with
the CONTRAmiR does not reduce tumor cell proliferation suggesting that
the regulation of cell cycle is not under the control of this miRNA in
RMS. Interestingly, the expression of SKA2 (Spindle And Kinetochore
Associated Complex Subunit 2), whose gene hosts miR-301, is also
upregulated in our setting. Experiments are ongoing to determine whether
miR-301 and SKA2 are associated with RMS pathogenesis and could be
targets for an anti-RMS therapy.This work was supported by the
Associazione Italiana per la Ricerca sul Cancro (AIRC).

