Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Black raspberries show potent activity in prevention of
experimental squamous cell esophageal cancer compared to a combination of
selective COX-2 and iNOS inhibitors


Esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) remains a major health threat
worldwide and preventive strategies are needed. We previously reported
that overexpression of inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) and
cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) are correlated with nitrosamine-induced squamous
carcinogenesis of the esophagus and the selective iNOS and COX-2
inhibitors significantly inhibit incidence and progression. We also
demonstrated anti-cancer activity of black raspberries (BRB) in a rodent
model of esophageal SCC. The objective of the current study was to
compare the impact of BRB versus the combination of celecoxib, a
selective COX-2 inhibitor, and
S,S-1,4-phenylene-bis(1,2-ethanediyl)bis-isothiourea (PBIT), a selective
iNOS inhibitor, in inhibition of SCC of the esophagus, and to elucidate
molecular mechanism of an effective cancer prevention. We found that BRB
is superior to the combination of two drugs in suppression of
premalignant tissue growth in the rat esophagi. Moreover, rats fed BRB
have lower tumor multiplicity than those fed celcecoxib + PBIT. Our data
indicated that BRB also shows a potent inhibitory effect on esophageal
iNOS and COX-2, in addition to modulating several associated oncogenic
cell signaling pathways. We further conducted parallel mechanistic
studies in vitro using BRB anthocyanins and the above two drugs. Our
findings demonstrated that dietary BRB is superior to the combination of
two chemopreventive pharmaceutical agents in prevention of experimental
squamous cell esophageal cancer, suggesting the potential value of
additional translational studies in developing food-based products using
BRB for the prevention of esophageal SCC carcinogenesis in humans
(Supported by NIH/NCI R01 CA131073).

