Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Heterozygous deletion of RUNX3 promotes vasculogenesis by
enhancing endothelial progenitor cells function


Endothelial progenitor cells (EPCs) are bone marrow (BM) -derived stem
cells to be committed and differentiated into mature endothelial cells.
Runt-related transcription factor 3 (RUNX3) is a tumor suppressor
involved in TGF- signaling pathway and participate in cell cycle arrest
and anti-angiogenesis. RUNX3 is frequently deleted or transcriptionally
silenced in a variety of cancers by epigenetic mechanisms. The aim of
study was to determine the role of RUNX3 in EPC function and
vasculogenesis. Here we found that RUNX3 homozygous knockout (Rx3-/-)
embryos had vascular defects in embryonic day (ED) 10 and developmental
abnormalities in ED 16.5 organs. The number of EPC colonies and
circulating EPCs (CD34+/VEGFR2+ cells), migration and tube formation
capacity of EPCs derived from RUNX3 heterozygous (Rx3+/-) mice were
increased in compared to those wild type (WT) mice, suggesting that
deletion of RUNX3 can enhance vasculogenesis. Expression level of VEGF,
VEGFR2, SDF-1, CXCR4 and endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS) mRNA
was significantly up-regulated in Rx3+/- EPCs. Protein expression of
VEGF, p-VEGFR2, p-Akt, p-ERK, p-SAPK/JNK and p-eNOS was also augmented in
Rx3+/- EPCs. Finally, we found that recovery of blood flow was highly
stimulated in Rx3+/- mice using hindlimb ischemia mouse models. Taken
together, our study revealed that RUNX3 might inhibit vasculogenic
processes in physiological ischemia by inhibition of EPC functions.

