Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression of FGF19/FGFR4 related biomarkers in hepatocellular
carcinoma


Background:Fibroblast growth factor 19 (FGF19) and fibroblast growth
factor receptor 4 (FGFR4) signaling play critical roles in
hepatocarcinogenesis. This study explored the expression and clinical
significance of FGF19/FGFR4 related signaling molecules in hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC).Method:We examined the mRNA expression of FGF19, FGFR4,
klotho-beta (KLB), cyclin D1 (CCND1), and FGF4 in 151 surgically
resected, primary unifocal HCC using quantitative real-time PCR analysis.
The correlation of gene amplification and mRNA overexpression for FGF19
and FGF4 was investigated using a real-time PCR based copy number assay.
FGF19 amplification was verified using fluorescence in situ
hybridization. Univariate and multivariate analyses were performed to
evaluate the prognostic value of these biomarkers for tumor recurrence
and survival of patients.Results:Overexpression of FGF19, FGFR4, KLB,
CCND1, and FGF4 mRNA was detected in 40%, 32%, 26%, 15%, and 35% of 151
tumors, respectively. In multivariate analyses, large tumor size (> 12.7
cm) and advanced tumor stage (stage II) independently predict worse
patient survival. Using generalized additive models, we found mRNA
expression of FGFR4 and KLB was significantly associated large tumor size
(> 12.7 cm); mRNA expression of FGF19 and KLB was significantly
associated advanced tumor stage (stage II). Furthermore, gene
amplification of FGF19 and FGF4 significantly correlated to their mRNA
overexpression (P = 0.006 for FGF19; P = 0.039 for
FGF4).Conclusions:Overexpression of FGF19/FGFR4 related biomarkers is
frequently found in HCC. Overexpression of FGF19 and FGF4 mRNA
significantly correlates to their gene amplification. Expression status
of FGFR4, KLB, and FGF19 may determine patient survival through their
impact on tumor size (FGFR4 and KLB) and tumor stage (FGF19 and KLB).

