Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Curcumin enhances the efficacy of docetaxel- induced apoptosis of
prostate cancer cell


Despite the different prostate cancer (PCa) treatment therapies it
continues to be one of the leading causes of death in men. Docetaxel is a
well-established chemotherapeutic agent used to target metastatic PCa,
however long-term treatment with docetaxel results in drug resistant and
toxicity in PCa cells. Combining agents is common to improve outcomes,
but the combination should not significantly increase toxicity. Curcumin
is a non-toxic natural compound with multifaceted chemo preventive
potential. In current study we evaluated whether curcumin can reinforce
the effect of docetaxel on PCa cell lines (RWPE-1, C4-2b, DU145 and PC3).
PCa cell lines were treated with curcumin or docetaxel alone or in
combination followed by cell viability (MTT assay) and apoptosis assay
(TUNEL assay and flow-cytometric analysis of annexin V/propidium
iodide-stained cells). The expressions of pro- and anti-apoptotic markers
were quantitated with real-time PCR and western blot assay. Our results
indicate that curcumin combined with docetaxel led to lower cell
viability than treatment with docetaxel or curcumin alone. Annexin V
staining followed by flow cytometric analysis demonstrated that curcumin
treatment enhanced the docetaxel-induced apoptosis of PCa cells, which
was further confirmed by TUNEL assay. The down-regulation of the
anti-apoptotic proteins (Bcl2, Mcl-1) and upregulation of pro-apoptotic
proteins (Bax, Bid etc.) further confirm that we can considerably reduce
docetaxel dose using synergistic combination therapy with curcumin. Thus,
our results strongly suggest that we can reduce dose levels of docetaxel
and compensate it with non-toxic curcumin and it could be a potential
therapeutic contender in enhancing the efficacy of docetaxel in PCa
treatment.

