Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovery of novel and potent inhibitors of
indoleamine-2,3-dioxygenase (IDO1) for cancer immunotherapy


Indoleamine-2,3-dioxygenase (IDO1) is an immune regulatory enzyme that
oxidizes tryptophan to kynurenine. IDO1 is overexpressed in numerous
tumor cells that block T-cell activation, induce T-cell apoptosis and
increase regulatory T cells, which create an environment in which
tumor-specific cytotoxic T lymphocytes are no longer able to attack a
patient's cancer cells. IDO1 inhibition reverses the immune suppression
at the tumor site and allows the generation of an effective anticancer
immune response. Preclinical and clinical studies have shown that IDO1
inhibitors increase the anticancer immune response and dramatically
increase the efficacy of various therapeutic agents especially the immune
checkpoint antibodies targeting PD-1, PD-L1 and CTLA-4.Via
structure-based design, we have discovered a series of novel and potent
IDO1 inhibitors that demonstrate strong IDO1 on-target activity with IC50
values ranging from 10 nM to 50 nM against human IDO1 enzyme. These
compounds potently inhibit IDO1 in tumor-bearing mice as well as in Hela
cells with lower single-digit to lower double digit nM IC50. The lead
compound selected for clinical development shows good ADME profile, low
serum binding, and good efficacy in various murine animal models when
dosed orally and subcutaneously alone or in combination with immune
checkpoint inhibitors. Preclinical evaluation of the compound will be
presented in details.

