Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The effect of heme influx on initiation and tumorigenesis of NSCLC


Heme is a central molecule for mitochondrial function and for all
processes involved in oxygen utilization. Heme serves as a prosthetic
group or as a cofactor for a number of oxidative phosphorylation enzymes
and other oxygen-utilizing hemoproteins. Heme also directly regulates the
synthesis, translocation and assembly of these enzyme complexes. Most, if
not all, human cells can synthesize and uptake heme from the circulation.
A number of epidemiological studies have shown that high heme intake is
associated with increased risk of cancer, including lung cancer. Recent
studies carried out in our lab showed intensified mitochondrial
respiration and increased levels of heme and hemoproteins in
non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cells. Together, these experimental
and epidemiological studies strongly suggest that heme is an
oncometabolite. To assess the status of heme metabolism in cancer cells,
we performed a series of experiments in NSCLC cells and compared the
results with an immortalized normal lung cell line, HBEC30KT. We used
Zinc protoporphyrin, an analogue of heme to measure the level of heme
uptake. We found that heme uptake as well as heme synthesis are
significantly elevated in all NSCLC cells compared to HBEC. The rate of
heme degradation was also measured in these cell lines. Previously, our
lab demonstrated that lowering intracellular heme levels selectively
decreases oxygen consumption in NSCLC cells and inhibits cell migration
and colony formation. Experiments are underway to test ways to alter
intracellular heme availability and characterize their effects on NSCLC
tumor growth and metastasis.

