Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential prognostic effect of smoking and multivitamin use on
lung cancer survival by sex


Incidence of lung cancer is decreasing among men and increasing among
women in developed countries and also in Korea. However, mortality of
lung cancer is still the highest among male cancers. Smoking is one of
the group 1 carcinogens for lung cancer development, but its prognostic
effect on lung cancer survival is not well established. Beta-carotene
supplement increased the risk of lung cancer among smokers but the role
of multivitamin supplement on the risk and survival of lung cancer is
unclear either. We aimed to evaluate the association between smoking and
multivitamin use on lung cancer survival by sex. We interviewed 910
pathologically confirmed lung cancer patients who were diagnosed between
2010 and 2012 in Samsung Medical Center. Questionnaire included current
smoking status, age at first smoking, daily smoking amount, alcohol
intake, past medical history, and multivitamin use. Pathological type,
stage, and treatment information was collected from the electronic
medical records. We followed the patients until December 31, 2012. Hazard
Ratios (HR) and 95% Confidence Intervals (CI) were estimated using Cox's
proportional hazard model (SAS9.4). We found significant difference in
age at diagnosis, pathological type and stage between male and female
patients; Female patients were younger, smoked less, used more
multivitamin, and had more adenocarcinoma and earlier stage cancer than
male patients. Smoking increased the risk of lung cancer mortality among
female patients only. HR for lung cancer mortality for those who smoked
more than 40 pack-years compared to those who never smoked was 5.64
(95%CI = 1.43, 22.28) in women and 1.17 (95%CI = 0.61, 2.26) in men
(p-interaction = 0.01) when adjusted for age, stage, and pathologic type.
Multivitamin use also increased the risk of lung cancer mortality among
female patients only. HR for lung cancer mortality for multivitamin users
was 4.14(95%CI = 1.77, 9.73) in women and 1.46 (95%CI = 0.71, 3.00) in
men (p-interaction = 0.17). The association between multivitamin use and
lung cancer mortality was strongest among female non-smokers (HR = 4.10,
95%CI = 1.72, 9.77). In conclusion, smoking and multivitamin use worsen
the survival of female lung cancer. Prognostic effect of multivitamin use
may be stronger among non-smokers.

