Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comparison of [124I]-FIAC and [18F]-FAC as potential biomarkers to
predict response to gemcitabine therapy in pancreatic cancers


Pancreatic cancer (PaCa) is one of the most lethal kinds of cancers
because it is virtually symptom free in early stages, metastasizes
rapidly and is difficult to resect. Gemcitabine (GEM) as a single agent
or in conjunction with radiation is the most commonly used in the
management of PaCa. But GEM has shown efficacy only in a small but select
group of patients. While the role of key transporters and enzymes has
been implicated in sensitizing or conferring resistance to gemcitabine,
no clear correlation has been establishe. Currently, there is no a priori
way to determine invasively or non-invasively which PaCa patients stand
to benefit from GEM therapy. Any biomarker that can act as a prognostic
indicator of GEM response will greatly aid in optimizing treatment
regimen, reducing unnecessary side effects and subjecting resistant
patients to aggressive therapies. Our goal is to develop a PET imaging
based biomarker to predict response to GEM therapy in pancreatic cancer
patients non-invasively. [18F]-FAC was evaluated as biomarker for GEM
response in leukemia models but the short half life (t1/2 = 110 min)
combined with background gut activity can complicate image analysis.
Therefore our goal was to develop a longer lived analog of GEM that can
act as a surrogate marker. Based on modeling studies and ability to label
with longer lived isotope (Iodine-124; t1/2 = 4.18 d) we concentrated our
efforts on evaluating I-124 labeled
1-(2-Deoxy-2-fluoro--D-arabinofuranosyl)-5-iodocytosine ([124I]-FIAC) as
a positron emission tomography (PET) biomarker of GEM
response.[124I]-FIAC was synthesized by iodination of
1-(2-Deoxy-2-fluoro--D-arabinofuranosyl)-cytosine (FAC) with [124I]-NaI
using chloramine-T as an oxidant. In vitro phosphorylation efficacy
studies were carried out on GEM, FAC and FIAC using recombinant
deoxycytidine kinase (dCK) enzyme. In vitro kinetic uptake assay was
performed on representattive pancreatic cancer cells lines AsPc-1 and
MiaPaCa-2. Subcutaneous tumor xenografts were established in athymic nude
mice. [124I]-FIAC was administered intravenously via tail vein and its
uptake was studied by PET imaging and sacrificial biodistribution studies
at 4, 24, 48 and 72 h. Imaging and biodistribution studies using
[18F]-FAC were also performed in tumor bearing mice at 1 and 4
h.[124I]-FIAC was synthesized in >17% yields with >99% radiochemical
purity. The efficiency of phosphorylation was in the following order GEM
FAC > FIAC. Cellular uptake assays showed that [124I]-FIAC was taken up
preferentially (4X) by AsPc-1 in comparison to MiaPaCa-2.[124I]-FIAC and
[18F]-FAC were synthesized and compared for their efficacy to serve as
potential biomarker for gemcitabine response in pancreatic cancer models
in vitro and in vivo. Preliminary studies indicated that [124I]-FIAC and
[18F]-FAC behave differently in these models with former showing
preferential uptake in AsPC-1 cells and xenografts.

