Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Efficacy of combination chemotherapy using a novel oral
chemotherapeutic agent, TAS-102, with nintedanib on human colorectal
cancer xenografts


Background:TAS-102 (also named TFTD) is a novel antitumor nucleoside.
This is a combination of an antineoplastic thymidine-based nucleoside
analog, trifluridine (FTD), and tipiracil hydrochloride (TPI) at a molar
ratio 1:0.5. FTD is the active antitumor component of TAS-102 and its
triphosphate form is incorporated into DNA in tumor cells. TPI is an
inhibitor of thymidine phosphorylase, which strongly inhibits the
biodegradation of FTD. In a recent global, multicenter, randomized,
double-blind Phase III study (RECOURSE), TAS-102 showed to significantly
improve overall survival and progression-free survival and had a
favorable safety profile in comparison to those achieved with placebo in
patients with metastatic colorectal cancer refractory to standard
chemotherapies. Nintedanib is an oral triple angiokinase inhibitor that
simultaneously inhibits vascular endothelial growth factor receptors,
platelet-derived growth factor receptors, and fibroblast growth factor
receptors. It is currently being investigated in Phase III studies of
advanced non-small cell lung cancer, colorectal cancer, and ovarian
cancer. In this study, we evaluated the antitumor effects of TAS-102 in
combination with nintedanib on human colorectal tumor xenografts in a
nude mouse model.Method:Drug cytotoxicity was determined by the crystal
violet staining method using DLD-1, HT-29, and HCT116 colorectal cancer
cell lines. Drug interaction was evaluated by performing isobologram
analysis. Furthermore, the human colorectal cancer cell lines were
implanted into nude mice subcutaneously, and TAS-102 (150 mg/kg/day)
and/or nintedanib (20 or 40 mg/kg/day) were orally administered twice
daily from Days 1 to 14. Growth inhibitory activity was evaluated based
on tumor volume.Results:The combination of TAS-102 and nintedanib exerted
an additive effect on growth inhibition of DLD-1 and HT-29, and a
sub-additive effect on HCT116 in vitro. TAS-102 and nintedanib
monotherapies were both active on all of the evaluated colorectal cancers
in vivo. Tumor growth inhibition by combination therapy (150 mg/kg/day
TAS-102 plus 40 mg/kg/day nintedanib) was 61.5%, 67.6%, and 67.5% for
DLD-1, HT-29, and HCT116 xenografts, and that was significantly superior
to that of either monotherapy for all evaluated cancer xenografts (P
Background:TAS-102 (also named TFTD) is a novel antitumor nucleoside.
This is a combination of an antineoplastic thymidine-based nucleoside
analog, trifluridine (FTD), and tipiracil hydrochloride (TPI) at a molar
ratio 1:0.5. FTD is the active antitumor component of TAS-102 and its
triphosphate form is incorporated into DNA in tumor cells. TPI is an
inhibitor of thymidine phosphorylase, which strongly inhibits the
biodegradation of FTD. In a recent global, multicenter, randomized,
double-blind Phase III study (RECOURSE), TAS-102 showed to significantly
improve overall survival and progression-free survival and had a
favorable safety profile in comparison to those achieved with placebo in
patients with metastatic colorectal cancer refractory to standard
chemotherapies. Nintedanib is an oral triple angiokinase inhibitor that
simultaneously inhibits vascular endothelial growth factor receptors,
platelet-derived growth factor receptors, and fibroblast growth factor
receptors. It is currently being investigated in Phase III studies of
advanced non-small cell lung cancer, colorectal cancer, and ovarian
cancer. In this study, we evaluated the antitumor effects of TAS-102 in
combination with nintedanib on human colorectal tumor xenografts in a
nude mouse model.Method:Drug cytotoxicity was determined by the crystal
violet staining method using DLD-1, HT-29, and HCT116 colorectal cancer
cell lines. Drug interaction was evaluated by performing isobologram
analysis. Furthermore, the human colorectal cancer cell lines were
implanted into nude mice subcutaneously, and TAS-102 (150 mg/kg/day)
and/or nintedanib (20 or 40 mg/kg/day) were orally administered twice
daily from Days 1 to 14. Growth inhibitory activity was evaluated based
on tumor volume.Results:The combination of TAS-102 and nintedanib exerted
an additive effect on growth inhibition of DLD-1 and HT-29, and a
sub-additive effect on HCT116 in vitro. TAS-102 and nintedanib
monotherapies were both active on all of the evaluated colorectal cancers
in vivo. Tumor growth inhibition by combination therapy (150 mg/kg/day
TAS-102 plus 40 mg/kg/day nintedanib) was 61.5%, 67.6%, and 67.5% for
DLD-1, HT-29, and HCT116 xenografts, and that was significantly superior
to that of either monotherapy for all evaluated cancer xenografts (P <
0.05). These results demonstrate that combination therapy with TAS-102
and nintedanib is significantly more effective than either monotherapy in
colorectal cancer xenografts. This combination therapy appeared to be
well tolerated because neither a reduction in body weight of more than
20% nor drug-related death was observed.Conclusion:Combination therapy of
TAS-102 and nintedanib is significantly more effective than either
monotherapy in preclinical models and should be considered for
investigation in metastatic colorectal cancer patients.

