Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulatory T cells and its impact on prostate cancer development
and clearance


Prostate Cancer (PCa) is the most common non-skin malignancy and the most
commonly diagnosed cancer in men in United States. The immunotherapeutic
role of immune cells in regulation of PCa have been studied but still the
specific roles of regulatory T cells needs further investigation. In this
study, the role of immune cells, particularly the role of regulatory T
cells, in tumor development and progression was analyzed using TRAMP
(transgenic adenocarcinoma of mouse prostate) model system. TRAMP cells
(TRAMP C1, C2 and C3) were used to induce tumor in C57/B6 mouse.
Interestingly, the TRAMP-C3 is non-tumorigenic whileTRAMP-C1 and TRAMP-C2
are tumorigenic. Briefly, tumor induction studies were performed on
different groups of mice. Mice were inoculated with these three cell
lines, tumors were analyzed at different time points, and the percentage
and absolute number of different immune cells (CD4, CD8, NK, NKT,
Macrophages, regulatory T cells, and Dendritic cells) were analyzed. Our
data demonstrated that the capacity of TRAMP-C1 and TRAMP-C2 cells to
form tumors and the inability of TRAMP-C3 cells to induce tumors is
mediated by number of regulatory T cells in the tumor microenvironment.
Therefore, the data suggest an understanding of function and effect of
regulatory T cells during tumor progression and clearance is needed to
successfully develop a targeted therapy to modulate the number of immune
cells in the tumor microenvironment.

