Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comprehensive sequencing analyses of uterine and ovarian
carcinosarcoma


Carcinosarcoma (CS) of the uterus or the ovary, known as malignant mixed
Muellerian tumor, is a biphasic neoplasm composed of malignant epithelial
(carcinoma) and mesenchymal (sarcoma) elements. CS is a rare disease (two
per 100,000 women) and exhibits poor prognosis (5-year survival rates:
uterus and ovary; 31 and 7.5%, respectively). Treatment regimen for CS
follows to that for endometrioid adenocarcinoma (EC) since CS has been
considered as an aggressive form of high-grade EC. However, CS has a
significantly worse prognosis than EC. Identification of a molecular
target and/or a molecular mechanism in tumorigenesis from a large cohort
study may improve unfavorable outcomes. Toward this aim, we perform
targeted resequencing analysis with a panel of 596 genes, which were
previously implicated as critical not only for uterine, ovarian or
sarcomatus oncogenesis but also for molecular targets in therapeutics.
Through analyses of 84 cases of uterine and ovarian CS, consensus
clustering with deregulated pattern of CS genome identified four genomic
subtypes that correlate with genetic or epigenetic alterations,
histopathology and patient outcomes. Moreover, potentially actionable
alterations were found in a substantial number of genes (including
PIK3CA, MTOR, KRAS and CCNE1). This study would provide deep insights
into the development of novel diagnostic and personalized treatment for
CS patients.

