Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Deubiquitinase Usp9x controls tumorigenicity through regulation of
the Ets-1 transcription factor in melanoma


Transcription factors are frequently deregulated in cancer cells and may
be good therapeutic targets, but few successful targeting strategies have
been reported. Deubiquitinases (DUBs) are specialized enzymes that
regulate the ubiquitin (Ub) content on many proteins and DUB expression
and activity are elevated in a number of cancers where they can act to
alter tumor suppressor and/or oncoprotein levels. We previously described
Usp9x activity and expression in melanoma; here we sought to investigate
its role in primary melanoma and metastatic disease. Usp9x was
upregulated in tumor cells compared to normal melanocytes and Usp9x
expression and activity were found to be essential for 3D growth and
melanoma tumor expansion in vivo. We defined the Usp9x ubiquitinated
protein landscape and demonstrate that Usp9x regulates Ets-1, a
cancer-promoting transcription factor. Usp9x binds, deubiquitinates and
thereby stabilizes Ets-1 protein, and primary tissue and tumor analysis
demonstrated elevated and coincident Usp9x/Ets-1 protein expression in
melanoma compared to normal skin or benign nevi. Usp9x knockdown or Usp9x
inhibition with small molecule G9 reduced Ets-1 protein levels and
blocked tumor growth in vitro and in vivo. Conversely, Usp9x
overexpression in melanoma cells increased Ets-1 protein levels and
enhanced 3D tumor growth in vitro and in vivo, which were all reversible
by treatment with G9. We conclude that Usp9x is essential for Ets-1
protein stability and may be therapeutically exploited with small
molecule Usp9x inhibitors to reduce Ets-1-dependent gene expression and
tumorigenicity.

