Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Plitidepsin targets the GTP-bound form of eEF1A2 in cancer cells


Plitidepsin (APL), an antitumor agent originally isolated from the marine
tunicate Aplidium albicans, is being tested in multiple myeloma (MM)
patients in a phase III pivotal trial in combination with dexamethasone
and a phase I trial in combination with bortezomib and dexamethasone.
eEF1A2 is one of two isoforms of the alpha subunit of the eEF1 complex.
In mammals, eEF1A2 has a selective pattern of expression in those tissues
that do not express the A1 isoform, namely brain and muscle. Nonetheless,
eEF1A2 is aberrantly expressed in many cancers, including solid tumors
(1-3) and MM (4), and has been shown to hold pro-oncogenic activities
(5). Here we analyze the interaction of plitidepsin with its target,
eEF1A2. DARTS assays, either with whole cell extracts or with purified
eEF1A2 protein, indicate that plitidepsin binds to eEF1A2 and protects it
from digestion by subtilisin (EC 3.4.21.62). Moreover, a [14C]-APL
binding-guided fractionation of K562 cell extracts through differential
centrifugation and three chromatographic steps demonstrated that eEF1A2
is the only cellular protein that can be retrieved through specific
binding to plitidepsin. A saturation binding experiment with [14C]-APL
and purified GTP-bound eEF1A2 (from rabbit muscle) allowed us to
calculate a Kd of around 80 nM for the interaction, while a dissociation
experiment revealed a residence time of around 9 minutes. Indeed, we have
found that plitidepsin exclusively binds to the GTP-bound form of eEF1A2.
HeLa-APL-R cells, 1000 fold more resistant to plitidepsin than parental
HeLa wt cells (6), are now shown to have lower eEF1A2 mRNA and protein
levels than parental cells. Furthermore, when eEF1A2 levels were restored
to normal in HeLa-APL-R cells through ectopic expression of an eEF1A2-GFP
construct, they were rendered partially sensitive to plitidepsin.
Interestingly, transfected cells recovered most of the signaling events
typically induced by the drug in HeLa wt cells. NCI-H460 (lung) and
HGC-27 (stomach) cancer cell lines were rendered resistant to plitidepsin
following the same procedure described in (6) for HeLa-APL-R cells. When
we analyzed the levels of eEF1A2 in this two new cell lines we observed
that both of them were lacking eEF1A2. Altogether, our results
demonstrate that plitidepsin targets the pro-oncogenic eEF1A2 protein, a
new druggable target for anticancer therapy.(1)Sun et al, 2014, Biochem
Biophys Res Commun 450:1-6(2)Xu et al, 2013, Clin Exp Metastasis
30:933-44(3)Anand et al, 2002, Nat Genet 31:301-5(4)Li et al, 2010, PLOS
One 5, e10755(5)Lee and Surh, 2009, Ann N Y Acad Sci 1171:87-93(6)Losada
et al., 2004, Br J Cancer 91:1405-13

