Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prognostic significance of copy number alteration burden in
unfavorable intermediate-risk prostate cancers harboring intraductal
carcinoma and cribriform architecture


Aim: Men with intermediate-risk prostate cancer represent a heterogeneous
group of patients with varying prognoses. Intraductal carcinoma (IDC),
cribriform architecture (CA), and high copy number alteration burden are
novel pathological and genomic indices that predict aggressive disease
and inferior clinical outcomes in patients with localised prostate
cancer. We aimed to test the independent prognostic effect of these
indices in a cohort of intermediate-risk prostate cancers.Experimental
methods: We defined a set of clinical and genomic indices to test for
their prognostic significance in a cohort of individuals with
NCCN-defined intermediate-risk prostate cancer, who were treated with
radical prostatectomy (RadP) or radiotherapy (RT) (N = 173, RadP; N =
358, RT). Clinical indices include primary T-category, pre-treatment PSA
level, Gleason's score and pattern, and presence of IDC and/or CA.
Pathological features were reviewed centrally by two expert pathologists.
Copy number alteration burden was assessed in 215 tumours of the cohort
using SNP array profiling (Affymetrix Oncoscan), and reported as percent
genome aberration (PGA). Our primary endpoint was to test if a model
incorporating IDC/CA and PGA stratifies patients with intermediate-risk
disease for risk of biochemical relapse after primary treatment.Results:
Biochemical relapse was associated with PGA on univariable and
multivariable analysis for the sub-cohort of 215 patients (HR of High vs
Low PGA defined by median = 1.61, 95% CI = 1.04-2.49, Wald's p = 0.033).
Based on modelling of the clinical indices, presence of IDC/CA was
associated with biochemical relapse-free rate (bRFR) on univariable and
multivariable analyses (HR = 1.90, 95% CI = 1.34-2.69, p = 0.00034),
along with PSA level. Risk stratification considering both IDC/CA and PGA
indicated an additive prognostic effect of IDC/CA to PGA for early
biochemical relapse, with 18-month bRFR of 83% in High PGA, present
IDC/CA vs 94% in Low PGA, absent IDC/CA subgroups (HR = 2.55, 95% CI =
1.49-4.39, p = 0.00069). A comparison of risk stratification models
revealed that inclusion of PGA to IDC/CA yielded the strongest model for
predicting 18-month bRFR in patients with intermediate-risk prostate
cancer following treatment (area under the curve, AUC = 0.580, 95% CI =
0.456-0.675 [T-category, PSA, and IDC/CA] vs 0.649, 95% CI = 0.476-0.776
[T-category, PSA, IDC/CA, and PGA]).Conclusions: We herein demonstrate
for the first time a novel risk stratification model integrating
pathological (IDC/CA) and genomic (PGA) indices to identify patients with
unfavourable intermediate-risk prostate cancer, who may benefit from
intensification to conventional definitive treatment.

