Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Intestine-specific homeobox (ISX) upregulates E2F1 expression and
related oncogenic activities in HCC


Intestine-specific homeobox (ISX), a newly identified proto-oncogene, is
known to regulate cell proliferation and drive hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC) formation; however, the underlying mechanisms linking gene
expression and tumor formation remain obscure. In this study, we showed
that ISX transcriptionally activates E2F1 expression and related
oncogenic activity by directly binding to its promoter region.
Mechanistically, forced ISX expression upregulated the expression and
nucleus translocation of the E2F1-DP1 complex phosphorylated by the
cyclin D1-CDKs complex, which promoted oncogenic activities of ISX-E2F1
axis in hepatoma cells. In addition, co-expression of both ISX and E2F1
significantly promoted cell proliferation and anti-apoptotic signals
instead of apoptosis and autophagy induced by the tumor suppressors p53
and RB1. In contrast, short hairpin RNA-mediated attenuation of ISX and
E2F1, respectively, in hepatoma cells decreased cell proliferation and
malignant transformation in vitro and in vivo. The mRNA expression was
compared in 238 paired specimens of HCC and adjacent normal tissues, and
E2F1, as an expression of ISX, pathologically exhibited a tumor-specific
expression pattern and was highly correlated with ISX expression, patient
survival time, progression stage, and poor prognosis. Taken together, our
results highlight that E2F1 is an important downstream gene of ISX in
hepatoma progression.

