Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TRAF2 protects mammary epithelial and cancer cells from
endoplasmic reticulum stress-induced apoptosis


TRAF2 plays a key role in the immune response and cell survival by
regulating the NF-B and JNK pathways in response to most members of the
TNF superfamily. TRAF2 has also been shown in cell culture systems to
mediate IRE1-induced activation of the ASK1-JNK pathway to promote
apoptosis under conditions of acute endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress.
Gene knockout studies revealed that mice deficient for RANKL or NF-B
display defects in osteoclastogenesis and lactating mammary-gland
development. Here, we report that TNF and TRAF2 double knockout (DKO)
mice develop with normal bone morphology and density, but the female mice
display a severe lactation defect due to significantly increased
apoptosis of cells in the lobuloalveolar tree. Unexpectedly,
RANKL-induced activation of the canonical NF-B pathway is not only normal
in DKO mammary epithelial cells (MECs), but the expression of the NF-B
target genes is significantly enhanced due to constitutive activation of
the non-canonical NF-B pathway in the absence of TRAF2. On the other
hand, cytotoxicity assays revealed that DKO MECs exhibit significantly
increased susceptibility to apoptosis induced by chronic ER stress, but
not by death receptor or DNA damage. In addition, siRNA-mediated
knockdown of TRAF2 in breast cancer cells significantly sensitized the
cells to chronic ER stress-induced apoptosis in a RIP1-dependent manner.
These data suggest that the physiological function of TRAF2 is to protect
the cells from apoptosis under conditions of pathologically relevant
chronic ER stress. Given that the lactating MECs and rapidly growing
cancer cells have high demands for protein syntheses and ER stress
responses, our findings suggest that inhibition of the IRE1-TRAF2 pathway
could be used as a novel adjuvant therapy to treat rapidly proliferating
cancer cells.

