Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Somatic mutation of STAT3 leads to the preferential Th17
differentiation in human nave CD4-positive cells and favor TCR-mediated
proliferation


Intro: Mature Th17 lymphocytes play a key role in the host defenses
against bacteria and fungi although unchecked Th17 activation can lead to
autoimmune disorders, inflammation and cancer. The engagement of CD4+
nave T-cells via IL6 and TGF favors a Th17 differentiation program, which
requires the presence of IL21 and IL23 to reach a complete maturation and
the maintenance of Th17 phenotype. The Th17 differentiation requires
multiple lineage defining transcription factors (i.e. ROR, RORt, and
STAT3) and the activation of STAT3 signaling, which regulates a plethora
of factors (i.e. RORt, IL23R), is required for the full execution of the
Th17 program. We have recently shown that JAK1/STAT3 activating mutations
in Anaplastic Large cell Lymphomas (ALCL) are oncogenic, but it is
unknown their protumorigenic contribution in modulating/derailing the
host microenviroment and the host responses.Methods: 50 FFPE ALCLs were
investigated with pSTAT3, GATA3, ROR and T-Bet antibodies using a dual
color approach. CD4+ CD62L+ CD25- CD45RAhi CD4+ nave cells of healthy
donor were sorted and cultured (7 days) in KBM (IL23 (25ng/ml), IL6
(25ng/ml), IL21 (25ng/ml), IL1 (12,5ng/ml), TGF (5ng/ml) + 1% FBS and
anti-CD3/CD28 beads (1:50). Forced expressions of WT or mutated Y640F
(YF) STAT3 were achieved via lentiviral transduction. STAT3 qRTPCR,
luciferase assay, ATPlite, and ELISA were used as readouts on samples
collected at day 7 post-transduction.Results: IHC stains showed that
pSTAT3+ ALCL preferentially co-expressed nuclear ROR (pIntro: Mature Th17
lymphocytes play a key role in the host defenses against bacteria and
fungi although unchecked Th17 activation can lead to autoimmune
disorders, inflammation and cancer. The engagement of CD4+ nave T-cells
via IL6 and TGF favors a Th17 differentiation program, which requires the
presence of IL21 and IL23 to reach a complete maturation and the
maintenance of Th17 phenotype. The Th17 differentiation requires multiple
lineage defining transcription factors (i.e. ROR, RORt, and STAT3) and
the activation of STAT3 signaling, which regulates a plethora of factors
(i.e. RORt, IL23R), is required for the full execution of the Th17
program. We have recently shown that JAK1/STAT3 activating mutations in
Anaplastic Large cell Lymphomas (ALCL) are oncogenic, but it is unknown
their protumorigenic contribution in modulating/derailing the host
microenviroment and the host responses.Methods: 50 FFPE ALCLs were
investigated with pSTAT3, GATA3, ROR and T-Bet antibodies using a dual
color approach. CD4+ CD62L+ CD25- CD45RAhi CD4+ nave cells of healthy
donor were sorted and cultured (7 days) in KBM (IL23 (25ng/ml), IL6
(25ng/ml), IL21 (25ng/ml), IL1 (12,5ng/ml), TGF (5ng/ml) + 1% FBS and
anti-CD3/CD28 beads (1:50). Forced expressions of WT or mutated Y640F
(YF) STAT3 were achieved via lentiviral transduction. STAT3 qRTPCR,
luciferase assay, ATPlite, and ELISA were used as readouts on samples
collected at day 7 post-transduction.Results: IHC stains showed that
pSTAT3+ ALCL preferentially co-expressed nuclear ROR (p<000.1).
Conversely, GATA3+ ALK- ALCL samples were preferentially STAT3-/ROR-
(12/14). Forced expression of STAT3 led to a higher expression of IL23R,
RORt and IL17, compared to controls cells. No statistically differences
were seen in cell proliferation or metabolic levels in these conditions.
Nave YF STAT3 CD4 cells, when cultured w/o IL2 (100U/ml) + IL6 +
anti-CD3/CD28 beads, were able to efficiently proliferate up to 20 days
overcome controls and WT STAT3 cells. Lastly, transfection of HEK293T
cells with YF STAT3 in the presence of an IL17 promoter reporter
cassette, led to a significant higher luciferase expression levels than
control or WT STAT3 transfected cells.Conclusions: Our data demonstrated
that the ectopic expression of STAT3 leads to a robust Th17
differentiation of CD4 nave T-cells and YF STAT3 sustains their growth
overtime in the presence of TCR signaling. The preferential expression of
ROR in pSTAT3+ ALCL (ALK+ and mutated STAT3 ALK-ALCL) suggest that the
deregulated activation of STAT3 can regulate the plasticity of the
neoplastic cells favoring the recruitment of inflammatory host cells
within the neoplastic lesions. Additional studies are underway to define
the lymphoma-host interactions and the role of JAK TKI in controlling the
lymphoma growth and in modulating the pro-tumorigenic inflammatory
phenotype of Patient Derived Tumor Xenograft

