Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comparison of subtype-specific incidence rates of lymphoid
malignancies in Hong Kong and the United States


Clinical studies of lymphoid malignancies (LMs) have suggested that the
descriptive patterns of these neoplasms differ in East Asia compared to
Western populations. However, there are very limited available data on
population-based, subtype-specific incidence rates of LMs in the East
Asian population, particularly in Chinese. Using data from the Hong Kong
(HK) Cancer Registry and the United States (U.S.) Surveillance,
Epidemiology, and End Results Program, we calculated and compared
age-adjusted incidence rates of LM subtypes in HK to those in Whites and
Asians living in the U.S. Overall and sex-specific rates were calculated
for the period 2001-2010. In order to formally compare the incidence
rates between HK and the U.S., standardized rate ratios (SRRs) were
calculated comparing the age-adjusted rates of each subtype for U.S.
Whites and U.S. Asians in the SEER 13 database to HK. The incidence of
most subtypes was low in the HK population, with rates Clinical studies
of lymphoid malignancies (LMs) have suggested that the descriptive
patterns of these neoplasms differ in East Asia compared to Western
populations. However, there are very limited available data on
population-based, subtype-specific incidence rates of LMs in the East
Asian population, particularly in Chinese. Using data from the Hong Kong
(HK) Cancer Registry and the United States (U.S.) Surveillance,
Epidemiology, and End Results Program, we calculated and compared
age-adjusted incidence rates of LM subtypes in HK to those in Whites and
Asians living in the U.S. Overall and sex-specific rates were calculated
for the period 2001-2010. In order to formally compare the incidence
rates between HK and the U.S., standardized rate ratios (SRRs) were
calculated comparing the age-adjusted rates of each subtype for U.S.
Whites and U.S. Asians in the SEER 13 database to HK. The incidence of
most subtypes was low in the HK population, with rates <1 case per
100,000 for all subtypes except for diffuse large B-cell lymphoma
(3.26/100,000) and plasma cell neoplasms (1.99/100,000). Age-adjusted
incidence rates of all evaluated B-cell subtypes were significantly
higher in U.S. Whites compared to HK, with SRRs ranging from 1.6 (Burkitt
lymphoma) to 9.1 (chronic lymphocytic leukemia/small lymphocytic lymphoma
(CLL/SLL)). Rates in U.S. Asians were generally intermediate to those in
U.S. Whites and HK, with SRRs for B-cell subtypes ranging from 1.0
(Burkitt) to 2.0 (CLL/SLL) comparing Asians in the U.S. to HK. For T or
NK-cell subtypes, rates of extranodal NK/T-cell lymphoma were
significantly lower in both U.S. Whites (SRR = 0.2) and U.S. Asians (SRR
= 0.5) compared to HK. However, incidence rates of other evaluated T-cell
subtypes were comparable or slightly higher in the U.S. population
compared to HK. Our findings, which are based on data from
population-based disease registries, provide new insight into the
subtype-specific patterns of LMs in the Chinese population, and suggest
the need for etiological studies of LMs in the East Asian population to
elucidate the factors responsible for these differences in the geographic
incidence patterns.

