Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of anti-nucleolin antibodies with broad spectrum
anticancer activity and negligible toxicity to normal cells


Nucleolin has multiple, unique functions in cancer cells, including the
shuttling of ligands from the cell surface to the cytoplasm and the
stabilization of oncogene and cytokine mRNAs that have an AU-rich
nucleolin binding element in their 3-UTRs. We developed a panel of
anti-nucleolin antibodies that exploit the temperature-dependent
shuttling function of nucleolin to gain access to the cytoplasm of human
tumor cells and induce oncogene mRNA destabilization. Several lines of
evidence indicate that our fully human monoclonal IgG1 antibody,
CP101.2C8, targets nucleolin and penetrates tumor cells. CP101.2C8 bound
tightly to human recombinant nucleolin (Kd = 26 7 nM, SEM.) and to plasma
membrane nucleolin of human tumor cells. Confocal microscopy of Panc-1
and DU-145 tumor cells incubated at 37 0C with CP101.2C8 revealed
punctate localization of the antibody in the plasma membranes of these
cells and internalization of the antibody into the cytoplasm. The
localization of the antibody within foci in the plasma membrane suggested
that the antibody was bound to nucleolin that was incorporated into lipid
rafts within the plasma membrane. MCF-7 human breast cancer cells were
made more than 100-fold resistant to CP101.2C8 by growing the cells in
increasing concentrations of the antibody. The resistant cells regained
contact inhibition and had a 10-fold lower level of cytoplasmic nucleolin
compared to the parental MCF-7 cells. CP101.2C8 is a potent inhibitor of
tumor cell viability in vitro. IC50 values of less than 1 g/ml were
obtained for CP101.2C8 versus MV4-11 AML cells, colon, prostate, and lung
cancer cells as well as CD33+-CD24- stem cells from MDA-MD-231 breast
cancer cells. In contrast, the IC50 concentrations of CP101.2C8 versus
normal human B and myeloid cells, breast epithelial cells and lung
fibroblasts were greater than 10 g/ml. Unlike the tumor cells, these
normal cells did not express detectable levels of nucleolin in either the
plasma membrane or cytoplasm. A fully human recombinant CP101.2C8 is also
potent in reducing the viability of MV4-11 cells (IC50 = 0.4 g/ml).
Groups of 10 nu/nu mice bearing SC MV4-11 tumor xenografts were injected
IV (every 3 days x 6) with either 10 mg/kg CP101.2C8 or 10 mg/kg of a
human IgG1 isotype control antibody. Tumor progression to the 2,000 mm3
endpoint was observed between 24-41 days in all mice treated with the
control antibody, while 3/10 of the CP101.2C8-treated mice were long-term
survivors that did not reach the endpoint by day 76. The hazard ratio
calculated from the Kaplan-Meier plot was 0.22. CP101.2C8 was well
tolerated by all the mice; the only adverse event observed was a
transient loss in mean body weight of 16%. The widespread and aberrant
expression of the multi-functional protein nucleolin in human tumor
cells, in contrast to the corresponding normal cells, explains both the
broad-spectrum anticancer activity and tumor selectivity of antibody
CP101.2C8.

