Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Small molecule Axl Ig1-Gas6 inhibitors block Gas6-inducible Axl
signaling and suppress tumorigenicity


TAM receptors (Tyro-3, Axl, and Mer) are a family of three homologous
receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) expressed predominantly on
myeloid-derived hematopoietic cells and epithelial cells which function
as inhibitory receptors that dampen inflammatory responses and maintain
tissue tolerance. Additionally, all three TAMs have been implicated in
various human malignancies, where level of expression is often associated
with more aggressive staging of the cancers, poorer predicted patient
survival, as well as drug-resistant cancers. Over the past several years,
considerable effort has been made to generate small molecule tyrosine
kinase inhibitors and biological therapeutics (such as monoclonal
antibodies and soluble extracellular receptor traps) targeting TAM
receptors in human cancers. Early preclinical studies show promising
anti-tumor activities using either kinase inhibitors or monoclonal
antibodies against Axl and Mer, although cross-reactivity with other
tyrosine kinase inhibitors is associated with off-target specificities.
Here, we report the development and characterization of a series of small
molecule inhibitors that target the interface between the Ig1 domain of
Axl and Gas6, and inhibit native receptors and Axl reporter lines with
sub-micro-molar affinities. Additionally, these compounds inhibit Gas6
inducible motility and invasion in Axl-expressing cell lines, and
suppress tumor growth in xenograft models of non small cell lung cancer.
Together, these observations demonstrate that Axl can be targeted by
small molecules that bind to the Ig1 domain/Gas6 interaction, and
validate Ig1 inhibitors as novel agents for treatment of cancer.

