Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNA profiling by a next generation sequencing approach in
urine and plasma samples: from genomics to diagnostics and prognostics of
bladder cancer


Bladder cancer (BC) is one of the leading causes of cancer-related death
worldwide.Most BCs are non-muscle invasive (NMIBC), which generally have
a good prognosis but frequently recur or progress to muscle invasion
(MIBC) within 5 years. By contrast, MIBC has a poor prognosis and
treatment requires a multidisciplinary approach with radical surgery,
radiotherapy, and chemotherapy. BC is among the most expensive cancer per
patient because it requires frequent surveillance and repeated treatments
over many years.Reliable predictors of disease and progression for BC are
lacking so developing novel noninvasive diagnostics is imperative to both
improve patient outcomes and decrease health costs.MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are
aberrantly expressed in many cancers, including BC, and may be isolated
from various biological specimens, including plasma and urine.Next
generation sequencing (NGS) technology provides novel information about
miRNA expression and is likely to become the gold standard method for
comprehensive miRNA analysis in cancer genomics. So far, only few studies
investigated miRNA signatures in BC by NGS and only on tissues. To
investigate miRNA signatures in surrogate tissues may be a useful
alternative to reduce invasiveness of biopsies, allowing repetitive
samplings during follow-up and reducing health care costs for detection,
monitoring of progression and treatment.We aim to identify specific miRNA
signatures in urine and plasma samples from 20 NMIBC, 20 MIBC patients
and 40 healthy controls using a NGS approach able to accurately
distinguish BC patients and predict disease outcome. The measurement of
miRNA levels in both urine and plasma samples from the same patients will
allow us to compare the levels of promising biomarkers in two surrogate
tissues. Urine is the best and closest surrogate tissue for BC, since it
is in direct contact with the tissue of tumor origin; while plasma is one
of the best surrogate tissue for distant metastasis and advanced cancer
detection.In plasma samples, 5 miRNAs were differentially expressed among
cases and controls (miR-222, miR-146b, miR-126, miR221 upregulated and
miR-5096 downregulated). However, after repetition of the analyses
stratifying cases for NMIBC (the most represented group in BC cases),
only 2 of the previously described miRNAs (miR-222 and miR-126) resulted
dysregulated among NMIBC and controls.In urine, 31 miRNAs were
differentially expressed among BC cases and controls (adjusted p-value
ranging from 0.0007 to 0.05). On the other hand, 26 and 31 miRNAs
resulted differentially expressed among NMIBC and controls and MIBC and
controls, respectively (for NMIBC: adjusted p-value from 0.0009 to 0.04;
for MIBC adjusted p-value from 7.210-9 to 0.04).Interestingly, miRNAs
differentially expressed among cases and controls were able to
discriminate not only BC cases from controls, but also NMIBC and MIBC.

