Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: FAK inhibition resensitizes platinum-resistant serous ovarian
cancer


Platinum and taxol administration is standard of care chemotherapy for
serous ovarian cancer. Tumor recurrence occurs in a high percentage of
patients, and this is directly related to poor overall survival. Ovarian
cancer stem cell (CSC) resistance to chemotherapy treatment can give rise
to tumor recurrence. Focal adhesion kinase (FAK), an intracellular
tyrosine kinase, has been linked to mesothelioma and breast CSC survival.
Here, we find that FAK activation is elevated in platinum (CP)-resistant
ovarian cancer cells and that FAK tyrosine phosphorylation is increased
after CP treatment of CP-sensitive ovarian cancer cells. Nanomolar levels
of FAK inhibitor (VS-4718) selectively blocked CP-resistant ovarian
carcinoma methylcellulose colony growth via cell cycle inhibition but not
apoptosis. Oral VS-4718 administration to mice reduces CP-resistant
orthotopic tumor burden with a concomitant decrease in tumor-associated
aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH) activity, a marker of ovarian CSCs.
Residual ovarian tumor cells from VS-4718-treated mice exhibit reduced
ALDH activity and secondary tumor initiating capacity. CRISPR-mediated
FAK knockout or VS-4718 treated ovarian carcinoma cells exhibit
diminished Oct-4 transcription factor and ALDH-1A1 CSC-associated protein
marker expression. Co-administration of VS-4718 with CP-taxol
chemotherapy reduced CP-resistant tumor burden and exhibited additive
inhibitory effects on ovarian carcinoma spheroid growth. As we find that
CP activates FAK and that FAK activity sustains ovarian carcinoma CSC
phenotypes, our results support the testing of FAK inhibitors in
combination with CP to prevent recurrent and chemo-resistant ovarian
cancer.

