Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Low concordance with CEA tumor marker monitoring in colorectal
cancer survivors


Purpose: To assess providers concordance with surveillance and risk
reduction recommendations for colorectal cancer (CRC) survivors after
completion of their curative treatment.Patients and Methods:This was a
longitudinal study of survivors who met the following eligibility
criteria: diagnosed with a primary colon or rectal cancer before their
first visit (V) to the CRC Survivorship Clinic, adult survivor 18 years
old, no evidence of disease, alive at the time of data abstraction, and
1-3 clinic visits between 9/01/2011 and 8/31/2014. Data were collected at
V1 scheduled between 9/1/2011 and 8/31/2012. V2 was scheduled 9-15 months
after the first visit. V3 was also scheduled 9-15 months after V2. Data
sources were survivorship care plans, electronic medical records, and CRC
survivorship algorithms. For an annual visit, CRC algorithms recommended
history/physical exams (H & PEs), carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) testing
when previously elevated, and colonoscopies for surveillance of cancer
recurrence. Concordance rates (CR) were measured as the percent of yes/no
responses to whether the providers followed minimum standards for the 3
procedures. Demographic and clinical characteristics were also collected.
Descriptive statistics were used to summarize all data.Results:81 of 117
CRC survivors who met all eligibility criteria were included in this
sub-analysis. The number of survivors visits varied across time, V1 = 81,
V2 = 56, and V3 = 36. Most survivors were male (51.9%) and Caucasian
(66.7%). 67.9% reported being 5-8 years post-treatment. 58% were
diagnosed with colon cancer and of those 61.7% were Stage IIIA-IV
compared to 55.8% of rectal cancer survivors with advanced disease. Table
1 summarizes the percentage of CR rates across the 3
visits.Conclusion:CRs for H & PEs and colonoscopies remained high across
the 3 visits. CRs were lowest for CEA recommendations. These low rates
suggest further work is needed to determine barriers in clinical practice
that limit use of CEA tumor marker monitoring in CRC survivors.
Percent of Providers Concordance

