Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The novel, rationally-designed, ALK/SRC inhibitor TPX-0005
overcomes multiple acquired resistance mechanisms to current ALK
inhibitors


Non-small cell lung cancers harboring rearrangements involving the ALK
gene are sensitive to treatment with the ALK inhibitor crizotinib.
However, the emergence of drug resistance is universal and limits
clinical applicability. The mechanisms of resistance include ALK gene
amplification, acquired ALK missense mutations, bypass activation, and
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). More than ten acquired ALK
mutations have been identified from patients and preclinical cell lines
resistant to crizotinib. Although the second generation of ALK inhibitors
(ceritinib and alectinib) overcome some of the crizotinib resistant
mutations, they are plagued by a different spectrum of ALK resistant
mutations. For example, the ALK G1202R mutation confers resistance to
crizotinib, ceritinib, and alectinib. None of the current ALK inhibitors
approved or in clinical trials can overcome bypass and EMT resistance
mechanisms. SRC kinase has been identified to contribute broadly to
primary intrinsic resistance to ALK inhibitor treatment, the development
of bypass resistance and EMT during ALK inhibitor treatment. Saracatinib,
a selective SRC inhibitor, can re-sensitize ALK inhibitor-resistant cell
lines, suggesting a therapeutic role. There are currently no available
ALK/SRC dual inhibitors, and we designed a novel ALK and SRC inhibitor
TPX-0005 to address the need to overcome resistance. TPX-0005 is a novel
three-dimensional macrocycle with a much smaller size (MW Non-small cell
lung cancers harboring rearrangements involving the ALK gene are
sensitive to treatment with the ALK inhibitor crizotinib. However, the
emergence of drug resistance is universal and limits clinical
applicability. The mechanisms of resistance include ALK gene
amplification, acquired ALK missense mutations, bypass activation, and
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). More than ten acquired ALK
mutations have been identified from patients and preclinical cell lines
resistant to crizotinib. Although the second generation of ALK inhibitors
(ceritinib and alectinib) overcome some of the crizotinib resistant
mutations, they are plagued by a different spectrum of ALK resistant
mutations. For example, the ALK G1202R mutation confers resistance to
crizotinib, ceritinib, and alectinib. None of the current ALK inhibitors
approved or in clinical trials can overcome bypass and EMT resistance
mechanisms. SRC kinase has been identified to contribute broadly to
primary intrinsic resistance to ALK inhibitor treatment, the development
of bypass resistance and EMT during ALK inhibitor treatment. Saracatinib,
a selective SRC inhibitor, can re-sensitize ALK inhibitor-resistant cell
lines, suggesting a therapeutic role. There are currently no available
ALK/SRC dual inhibitors, and we designed a novel ALK and SRC inhibitor
TPX-0005 to address the need to overcome resistance. TPX-0005 is a novel
three-dimensional macrocycle with a much smaller size (MW <370) than
current ALK inhibitors designed to efficiently target the center of the
ATP binding site and circumvent the steric interference from mutations
outside the ATP binding boundary. As expected, TPX-0005 potently
inhibited WT ALK (IC50 1.01 nM) and mutant ALKs including ALK G1202R
(1.26 nM) and ALK L1196M (1.08 nM). Moreover, TPX-0005 effectively
inhibited tumor growth in vivo in ALK WT and ALK G1202R xenografts.
TPX-0005 is also a potent SRC inhibitor (IC50 5.3 nM). The elevated SRC
kinase activity in H2228 lung cancer cell line confers resistance to
crizotinib (IC50 1200 nM) and ceritinib (IC50 1000 nM) in cell
proliferation assays. TPX-0005 effectively overcame this primary
resistance (IC50 100 nM in cell proliferation assay) with strong
inhibition of the phosphorylation of EML4-ALK (IC50 13 nM) and the SRC
substrate paxillin (IC50 107 nM), along with other downstream signaling
targets. TPX-0005 inhibited H2228 cell migration in a wound healing assay
with similar activity to saracatinib. Taken together, TPX-0005 was able
to not only inhibit the wild-type and a broad spectrum of mutant ALKs,
but also overcome primary resistance and suppress metastatic features by
inhibiting SRC. Overall, TPX-0005 has a highly favorable profile with
ability to overcome multiple ALK resistance mechanisms including
secondary mutations, bypass signaling activation, EMT, and warrants
clinical investigation.

