Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cytotoxic activity of enantia chlorantha, nauclea latifolia, and
citrus medica extracts on carcinoma cells


Over 562,340 Americans are expected to die of cancer, more than 1500
people a day. Cancer is the second most common cause of death in the US,
exceeded only by heart disease. In the US, cancer accounts for nearly 1
of every 4 deaths. Our study focuses primarily on three plants never
before investigated for antitumor activity. They were chosen based upon
native ethno medicinal usages. Indigenous primarily to the southwestern
region of Nigeria; Enantia chlorantha, Nauclea latifolia, and Citrus
medica have all been traditionally used and studies have proven their
noteworthy antibacterial, antimicrobial, and anti parasitical activities.
These important characteristics provide the rationale behind studying
these plants further for potential antitumor agents. Experimental:
Methanolic leaf and bark extracts in a series of concentrations were
taken from the previously stated plants and exposed to two breast and two
colorectal cancer cells for 24 hours. Growth analysis is determined using
a cell viability indicator alamar blue and a florescent plate reader.
Results: Enantia chlorantha and Citrus medica demonstrated the most
potential for containing novel antitumor compounds. However, E.
chlorantha proved to be exceedingly toxic to the cellular proliferation
of all four tumors cell lines at all concentrations. In addition to this,
Nauclea latifolia extracts illustrated the least potential for antitumor
activity. In most cases this extract showed little or no effect in
reducing cellular proliferation. Conclusion: We conclude that leaf
extracts from E. chlorantha and C. medica should be studied further to
characterize their antitumor potential, investigate their main active
compounds, and to better understand their mechanisms of action.

