Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genetic analysis of tumors from a phase II trial evaluating
AZD1775, carboplatin and paclitaxel in patients with TP53-mutant ovarian
cancer


Background: AZD1775 (formerly MK-1775) is a selective inhibitor of WEE1
kinase, which has been shown to sensitize TP53-mutant cancer cells to
genotoxic agents such as platinum-based chemotherapies. Mutation of TP53
abrogates the G1/S checkpoint in cells, which may enhance their
dependency on the G2/M checkpoint and WEE1 kinase activity for control of
the cell cycle and effective repair of DNA damage. The results from a
randomized Phase II trial (NCT01357161) evaluating the effects of adding
AZD1775 to carboplatin and paclitaxel in patients with TP53-mutant
ovarian cancer showed an increase in progression-free survival (PFS) for
the AZD1775 arm versus placebo (enhanced RECIST: median PFS 34.14 vs
31.86 weeks; HR = 0.63, 80% CI: 0.45-0.89, P = 0.080; RECIST 1.1: median
PFS 42.86 vs 34.86 weeks; HR = 0.55, 80% CI 0.39-0.79, P = 0.030; Oza et
al, ASCO 2015). We investigated whether particular genetic factors were
associated with an increased response to the combination of AZD1775 and
chemotherapy in this trial.Methods: A retrospective analysis was
performed to determine whether any specific subtype of TP53 alteration
was associated with a greater response to the AZD1775 combination
compared with placebo. In addition, next-generation sequencing (NGS) was
performed on archival tumors from a subset of patients who provided
consent in an effort to identify additional genetic alterations that may
predict increased clinical benefit following the addition of AZD1775 to
chemotherapy.Results: TP53 data were available for 136 patients (15
patients from an initial open-label safety run-in and 121 patients from
the randomized trial) and 133 patients were evaluable for response.
Fifty-five patients provided additional consent for NGS of tumor samples.
The genetic aberrations observed in the NGS subset of tumors from this
trial were heterogeneous, and the total mutational load in cancer-related
genes was also variable across tumors. Although the small number of
patients with a tumor BRCA mutation limited the statistical power of the
comparison between randomized arms, the median PFS was longer in those
patients treated with AZD1775 (53.86 weeks, 95% CI 24.43-66.57) versus
placebo (45.86 weeks, 95% CI 35.71-55.86) in this BRCA-mutated subgroup.
TP53 subgroup analyses showed a similar benefit for patients with
missense mutations compared to those with splice site, nonsense and
frameshift TP53 mutations. The heterogeneity of the G1/S checkpoint gene
aberrations limited the statistical power of the subgroup analysis, but
specific genes that warrant further investigation were
identified.Conclusions: These results highlight a number of potential
candidate genes for increased response to AZD1775 and chemotherapy
compared with chemotherapy alone.

