Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Adipose tissues derived exosomal microRNAs and their variants in
ovarian cancer progression


Most ovarian cancers are diagnosed at an advanced stage when the tumor is
widely metastatic. The 5-year survival drops to 50% for the cancer cases
that spread beyond the pelvis to the omentum. However, the mechanisms
underlying the effect of omental adipose tissue on ovarian cancer
progression are poorly understood. Recent studies showed that exosomes
also contain non-coding RNAs such as microRNAs (miRNAs). Thus, we
hypothesize that the transfer of microRNAs and their variants from
ovarian cancer-associated omental adipose tissues to ovarian cancer cells
via exosomes may contribute to the nearby microenvironment for ovarian
cancer metastasis and cancer progression.Ion Torrent next generation
sequencing was performed on miRNAs isolated and enriched from exosomes
and cell lysates of ovarian cancer cell lines (OVCA), the epithelial
component of microdissected omental ovarian cancer tissues (CT), normal
omental adipose tissues (OMN) and ovarian cancer-associated omental
adipose tissues (OMT). By integrating the miRNA expression profiles, 65
miRNAs were expressed at significant higher levels in OMT-derived
exosomes compared with those in OMN-derived exosomes and OVCA-derived
exosomes. A set of miRNAs (miR-32a, miR-221 and miR320a), which had been
implicated in controlling cell growth and chemoresistance, was
identified. Also, the Ion Torrent results were validated and exosomal
transfer of OMT-derived miRNAs was confirmed in vitro. The exosomal
communication between adipose tissues and ovarian cancer cells in the
omental tumor microenvironment is verified. The transferable miRNAs and
their variants may remain functional in the recipient ovarian cancer
cells and confer more aggressive phenotypes in these cells.

