Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of glucose metabolism in neuroendocrine tumors by
lanreotide, sunitinib, and rapamycin


Background: Neuroendocrine tumors (NETs) represent a heterogeneous family
of neoplasms, which may develop from different endocrine glands or
endocrine cells dispersed throughout the digestive and respiratory
tracts. Lanreotide is a somatostatin analog approved for the treatment of
NETs. While Lanreotide extends survival of patients and slows tumor
growth, controversy exists regarding its mechanism of action. We
hypothesized that lanreotide can interfere with the metabolic activity of
NETs, and compared its effect to that of rapamycin and sunitinib.Methods:
The pancreatic carcinoid BON-1 cells and pulmonary carcinoid NCI-H727
cells were used. Viability was tested using colony formation assay. mRNA
levels of the glycolytic enzymes hexokinase 2 (HK2), lactate
dehydrogenase (LDH) and pyruvate kinase M2 (PKM2) was tested using
real-time PCR. Phosphorylation levels of AMP-activated kinase (AMPK) and
acetyl CoA carboxylase (ACC) were tested using Western blot. The activity
of HK2 was tested using HK enzymatic assay. Lactate secretion was tested
in the routine biochemistry laboratory of our institution.Results:
Lanreotide, rapamycin and sunitinib significantly decreased colony
formation. They also reduced relative expression levels of HK2, LDH and
PKM2 24 and 48h after treatment and decreased HK2 activity after 24h. An
increase in the phosphorylation levels of AMPK and ACC was observed
shortly after treating the cells with lanreotide and rapamycin. All three
agents also decreased lactate concentration in the media.Conclusions:
These data indicate tumor metabolism as an attractive target for
therapies against NET, and a novel mechanism of action of somatostatin
analogs, namely, alteration of tumor metabolism.

