Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pin1 is a novel target of withaferin A, a mammary cancer
chemopreventative steroidal lactone from Withania somnifera


We have shown previously that naturally occurring steroidal lactone
withaferin A (WA) inhibits breast cancer development in a transgenic
mouse model. Mammary cancer chemoprevention by WA in vivo was associated
with suppression of peptidyl-prolyl isomerase Pin1 protein. Pin1 is known
to regulate diverse cellular processes including cell proliferation, cell
cycle progression, apoptosis, and migration. Moreover, Pin1 is
overexpressed in breast tumor and its expression is positively correlated
with tumor grade. Thus, we studied functional significance of Pin1
downregulation by WA. Consistent with in vivo observations, Pin1 protein
and mRNA expression was decreased upon WA treatment in human breast
cancer cells irrespective of ER, HER-2 or p53 status. Overexpression of
Pin1 partly reversed the growth inhibitory effect of WA in both MCF-7
(wild-type p53) and SUM159 (mutant p53) cells. However, WA-induced
mitotic arrest and apoptosis were partly abrogated only in MCF-7 cells
upon ectopic expression of Pin1 perhaps due to p53 stabilization.
Molecular docking suggested covalent binding of WA with Cys113 of Pin1,
which was confirmed by mass spectrometry. Overexpression of mutant
(C113A) Pin1 augmented WA-mediated inhibition of cell survival as well as
mitotic arrest and apoptosis in MCF-7 cells indicating that decreased
catalytic activity of Pin1 is essential for growth inhibition by WA in
breast cancer cells. Taken together, the present study suggests a
critical role for Pin1 in WA-mediated growth inhibition of breast cancer.
This study was supported by the grant CA142604 awarded by the National
Cancer Institute.

