Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sedentary behavior and breast cancer in the Black Women's Health
Study


Background: Rates of breast cancer incidence among African American women
are increasingly similar to rates among Caucasian American women.
Lifestyle behaviors, such as sedentary time, may contribute to
differences in breast cancer incidence, but have not been well studied
among African American women. Sedentary activities (physically inactive
tasks that require little to no additional energy expenditure beyond
basal metabolic rate) account for a large proportion of time per day in
the United States and are more prevalent among African American women.
Sedentary behavior may contribute to cancer risk independently of
physical activity, but has not been well studied among African American
women.Objective: The objective of this study was to evaluate the
association between sedentary behaviors over time on breast cancer
incidence in the Black Women's Heath Study.Methods: In this ongoing
prospective cohort of African American women (analytic cohort N =
55,629), 2,482 incident breast cancer cases were diagnoses between
baseline (1995) and 2013. Questionnaire data (collected every two years
since 1995) was used to calculate time spent sitting. Time spent sitting
at work and sitting doing recreational activities (watching TV, using
internet) was summed to total sedentary time. A time-varying analytic
approach was utilized (Anderson-Gill method) to reduce within-person
variation and better represent long-term habits.Results: Among women in
this cohort, 23.8% reported spending Background: Rates of breast cancer
incidence among African American women are increasingly similar to rates
among Caucasian American women. Lifestyle behaviors, such as sedentary
time, may contribute to differences in breast cancer incidence, but have
not been well studied among African American women. Sedentary activities
(physically inactive tasks that require little to no additional energy
expenditure beyond basal metabolic rate) account for a large proportion
of time per day in the United States and are more prevalent among African
American women. Sedentary behavior may contribute to cancer risk
independently of physical activity, but has not been well studied among
African American women.Objective: The objective of this study was to
evaluate the association between sedentary behaviors over time on breast
cancer incidence in the Black Women's Heath Study.Methods: In this
ongoing prospective cohort of African American women (analytic cohort N =
55,629), 2,482 incident breast cancer cases were diagnoses between
baseline (1995) and 2013. Questionnaire data (collected every two years
since 1995) was used to calculate time spent sitting. Time spent sitting
at work and sitting doing recreational activities (watching TV, using
internet) was summed to total sedentary time. A time-varying analytic
approach was utilized (Anderson-Gill method) to reduce within-person
variation and better represent long-term habits.Results: Among women in
this cohort, 23.8% reported spending <5 hours/day in sedentary
activities, while 8.2% reported spending 10 or more hours. A majority
reported spending more than 5 hours/day sitting at work, while most women
reported Background: Rates of breast cancer incidence among African
American women are increasingly similar to rates among Caucasian American
women. Lifestyle behaviors, such as sedentary time, may contribute to
differences in breast cancer incidence, but have not been well studied
among African American women. Sedentary activities (physically inactive
tasks that require little to no additional energy expenditure beyond
basal metabolic rate) account for a large proportion of time per day in
the United States and are more prevalent among African American women.
Sedentary behavior may contribute to cancer risk independently of
physical activity, but has not been well studied among African American
women.Objective: The objective of this study was to evaluate the
association between sedentary behaviors over time on breast cancer
incidence in the Black Women's Heath Study.Methods: In this ongoing
prospective cohort of African American women (analytic cohort N =
55,629), 2,482 incident breast cancer cases were diagnoses between
baseline (1995) and 2013. Questionnaire data (collected every two years
since 1995) was used to calculate time spent sitting. Time spent sitting
at work and sitting doing recreational activities (watching TV, using
internet) was summed to total sedentary time. A time-varying analytic
approach was utilized (Anderson-Gill method) to reduce within-person
variation and better represent long-term habits.Results: Among women in
this cohort, 23.8% reported spending <5 hours/day in sedentary
activities, while 8.2% reported spending 10 or more hours. A majority
reported spending more than 5 hours/day sitting at work, while most women
reported <5 hours sitting watching TV (or related activities). Total time
spent sitting was significantly associated with breast cancer incidence
overall (10 vs. Background: Rates of breast cancer incidence among
African American women are increasingly similar to rates among Caucasian
American women. Lifestyle behaviors, such as sedentary time, may
contribute to differences in breast cancer incidence, but have not been
well studied among African American women. Sedentary activities
(physically inactive tasks that require little to no additional energy
expenditure beyond basal metabolic rate) account for a large proportion
of time per day in the United States and are more prevalent among African
American women. Sedentary behavior may contribute to cancer risk
independently of physical activity, but has not been well studied among
African American women.Objective: The objective of this study was to
evaluate the association between sedentary behaviors over time on breast
cancer incidence in the Black Women's Heath Study.Methods: In this
ongoing prospective cohort of African American women (analytic cohort N =
55,629), 2,482 incident breast cancer cases were diagnoses between
baseline (1995) and 2013. Questionnaire data (collected every two years
since 1995) was used to calculate time spent sitting. Time spent sitting
at work and sitting doing recreational activities (watching TV, using
internet) was summed to total sedentary time. A time-varying analytic
approach was utilized (Anderson-Gill method) to reduce within-person
variation and better represent long-term habits.Results: Among women in
this cohort, 23.8% reported spending <5 hours/day in sedentary
activities, while 8.2% reported spending 10 or more hours. A majority
reported spending more than 5 hours/day sitting at work, while most women
reported <5 hours sitting watching TV (or related activities). Total time
spent sitting was significantly associated with breast cancer incidence
overall (10 vs. <5 hours/day HR = 1.38, 95% CI: 1.16-1.65). Associations
were similar for both premenopausal (10 vs. Background: Rates of breast
cancer incidence among African American women are increasingly similar to
rates among Caucasian American women. Lifestyle behaviors, such as
sedentary time, may contribute to differences in breast cancer incidence,
but have not been well studied among African American women. Sedentary
activities (physically inactive tasks that require little to no
additional energy expenditure beyond basal metabolic rate) account for a
large proportion of time per day in the United States and are more
prevalent among African American women. Sedentary behavior may contribute
to cancer risk independently of physical activity, but has not been well
studied among African American women.Objective: The objective of this
study was to evaluate the association between sedentary behaviors over
time on breast cancer incidence in the Black Women's Heath Study.Methods:
In this ongoing prospective cohort of African American women (analytic
cohort N = 55,629), 2,482 incident breast cancer cases were diagnoses
between baseline (1995) and 2013. Questionnaire data (collected every two
years since 1995) was used to calculate time spent sitting. Time spent
sitting at work and sitting doing recreational activities (watching TV,
using internet) was summed to total sedentary time. A time-varying
analytic approach was utilized (Anderson-Gill method) to reduce
within-person variation and better represent long-term habits.Results:
Among women in this cohort, 23.8% reported spending <5 hours/day in
sedentary activities, while 8.2% reported spending 10 or more hours. A
majority reported spending more than 5 hours/day sitting at work, while
most women reported <5 hours sitting watching TV (or related activities).
Total time spent sitting was significantly associated with breast cancer
incidence overall (10 vs. <5 hours/day HR = 1.38, 95% CI: 1.16-1.65).
Associations were similar for both premenopausal (10 vs. <5 hours/day HR
= 1.44, 95% CI: 1.07-1.93) and postmenopausal (10 vs. Background: Rates
of breast cancer incidence among African American women are increasingly
similar to rates among Caucasian American women. Lifestyle behaviors,
such as sedentary time, may contribute to differences in breast cancer
incidence, but have not been well studied among African American women.
Sedentary activities (physically inactive tasks that require little to no
additional energy expenditure beyond basal metabolic rate) account for a
large proportion of time per day in the United States and are more
prevalent among African American women. Sedentary behavior may contribute
to cancer risk independently of physical activity, but has not been well
studied among African American women.Objective: The objective of this
study was to evaluate the association between sedentary behaviors over
time on breast cancer incidence in the Black Women's Heath Study.Methods:
In this ongoing prospective cohort of African American women (analytic
cohort N = 55,629), 2,482 incident breast cancer cases were diagnoses
between baseline (1995) and 2013. Questionnaire data (collected every two
years since 1995) was used to calculate time spent sitting. Time spent
sitting at work and sitting doing recreational activities (watching TV,
using internet) was summed to total sedentary time. A time-varying
analytic approach was utilized (Anderson-Gill method) to reduce
within-person variation and better represent long-term habits.Results:
Among women in this cohort, 23.8% reported spending <5 hours/day in
sedentary activities, while 8.2% reported spending 10 or more hours. A
majority reported spending more than 5 hours/day sitting at work, while
most women reported <5 hours sitting watching TV (or related activities).
Total time spent sitting was significantly associated with breast cancer
incidence overall (10 vs. <5 hours/day HR = 1.38, 95% CI: 1.16-1.65).
Associations were similar for both premenopausal (10 vs. <5 hours/day HR
= 1.44, 95% CI: 1.07-1.93) and postmenopausal (10 vs. <5 hours/day HR =
1.39, 95% CI: 1.09-1.78) breast cancer incidence. Associations remained
regardless of leisure time physical activity levels and body
size.Conclusions: Our findings suggest that high sedentary time may
increase risk for breast cancer among African American women.
Additionally, leisure time physical activity levels and body size did not
change associations, suggesting sedentary time may confer additional
risk. Previously reported frequent sedentary behavior among African
Americans could contribute to breast cancer disparities and should be
explored further in future studies.

