Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Calcium to magnesium intake ratio and colorectal carcinogenesis,
results from the Prostate, Lung, Colorectal, and Ovarian cancer screening
trial


BackgroundA recent randomized trial found no effect of calcium
supplementation on reducing risk of colorectal adenoma recurrence.
However, the role of calcium in carcinogenesis is yet unconfirmed. An
earlier trial found calcium treatment only reduced recurrence when the
baseline calcium: magnesium intake ratio was BackgroundA recent
randomized trial found no effect of calcium supplementation on reducing
risk of colorectal adenoma recurrence. However, the role of calcium in
carcinogenesis is yet unconfirmed. An earlier trial found calcium
treatment only reduced recurrence when the baseline calcium: magnesium
intake ratio was <2.6. Nor is it clear whether calcium intake is
differentially related to risks of different stages of colorectal
carcinogenesis (incident adenoma, adenoma recurrence and incident
colorectal cancer). Further, it is unclear if calcium intake or
supplementation confers additional protection against incident colorectal
cancer in individuals receiving endoscopic screenings. To address these
important scientific inquiries, we have conducted analyses within the
Prostate, Lung, Colorectal, and Ovarian (PLCO) cancer screening
trial.MethodsThe PLCO is a large, multicenter, population-based
randomized trial designed to determine the effects of screening on
cancer-related mortality with a median of 12.5 years of follow up. We
evaluated the associations between calcium intake and the risks of
incident colorectal adenoma (1,147 cases), recurrent adenoma (855 cases)
and incident colorectal cancer (697 and 578 cases in intervention and
control arms, respectively) among 108,563 PLCO participants aged 55 to 74
years. Odds ratios (OR) and 95% confidence intervals (95%CIs) for
incident adenoma and recurrent adenoma, and hazard ratios (HR) and 95%CIs
for colorectal cancer incidence were calculated using unconditional
logistic regression models and Cox proportional hazard models after
adjusting covariates.ResultsCompared to low calcium intake (BackgroundA
recent randomized trial found no effect of calcium supplementation on
reducing risk of colorectal adenoma recurrence. However, the role of
calcium in carcinogenesis is yet unconfirmed. An earlier trial found
calcium treatment only reduced recurrence when the baseline calcium:
magnesium intake ratio was <2.6. Nor is it clear whether calcium intake
is differentially related to risks of different stages of colorectal
carcinogenesis (incident adenoma, adenoma recurrence and incident
colorectal cancer). Further, it is unclear if calcium intake or
supplementation confers additional protection against incident colorectal
cancer in individuals receiving endoscopic screenings. To address these
important scientific inquiries, we have conducted analyses within the
Prostate, Lung, Colorectal, and Ovarian (PLCO) cancer screening
trial.MethodsThe PLCO is a large, multicenter, population-based
randomized trial designed to determine the effects of screening on
cancer-related mortality with a median of 12.5 years of follow up. We
evaluated the associations between calcium intake and the risks of
incident colorectal adenoma (1,147 cases), recurrent adenoma (855 cases)
and incident colorectal cancer (697 and 578 cases in intervention and
control arms, respectively) among 108,563 PLCO participants aged 55 to 74
years. Odds ratios (OR) and 95% confidence intervals (95%CIs) for
incident adenoma and recurrent adenoma, and hazard ratios (HR) and 95%CIs
for colorectal cancer incidence were calculated using unconditional
logistic regression models and Cox proportional hazard models after
adjusting covariates.ResultsCompared to low calcium intake (<600 mg/day),
higher intakes of calcium were not related to a reduced risk of incidence
adenoma, but significantly associated with a reduced risk of
advanced/multiple adenomas (p for trend, BackgroundA recent randomized
trial found no effect of calcium supplementation on reducing risk of
colorectal adenoma recurrence. However, the role of calcium in
carcinogenesis is yet unconfirmed. An earlier trial found calcium
treatment only reduced recurrence when the baseline calcium: magnesium
intake ratio was <2.6. Nor is it clear whether calcium intake is
differentially related to risks of different stages of colorectal
carcinogenesis (incident adenoma, adenoma recurrence and incident
colorectal cancer). Further, it is unclear if calcium intake or
supplementation confers additional protection against incident colorectal
cancer in individuals receiving endoscopic screenings. To address these
important scientific inquiries, we have conducted analyses within the
Prostate, Lung, Colorectal, and Ovarian (PLCO) cancer screening
trial.MethodsThe PLCO is a large, multicenter, population-based
randomized trial designed to determine the effects of screening on
cancer-related mortality with a median of 12.5 years of follow up. We
evaluated the associations between calcium intake and the risks of
incident colorectal adenoma (1,147 cases), recurrent adenoma (855 cases)
and incident colorectal cancer (697 and 578 cases in intervention and
control arms, respectively) among 108,563 PLCO participants aged 55 to 74
years. Odds ratios (OR) and 95% confidence intervals (95%CIs) for
incident adenoma and recurrent adenoma, and hazard ratios (HR) and 95%CIs
for colorectal cancer incidence were calculated using unconditional
logistic regression models and Cox proportional hazard models after
adjusting covariates.ResultsCompared to low calcium intake (<600 mg/day),
higher intakes of calcium were not related to a reduced risk of incidence
adenoma, but significantly associated with a reduced risk of
advanced/multiple adenomas (p for trend, <0.05). Further, the significant
inverse association only appeared when calcium:magnesiuim intake ratios
between 1.7 and 2.5. No significant association was observed between Ca
intake and risk of adenoma recurrence. In the control arm, we found,
compared to low calcium intake, higher intakes of calcium were associated
with significantly reduced risks of incident colorectal cancer, primarily
distal cancer. Again, we found the inverse association may primarily
appear in those with calcium:magnesiuim intake ratios between 1.7 and
2.5. In contrast, in the intervention arm (i.e. screening with flexible
sigmoidoscopy), overall, we did not find any significant
associations.ConclusionIntake of calcium may be more strongly related to
reduced risks of incident advanced/multiple adenoma and incident
colorectal cancer among those without active screening with flexible
sigmoidoscopy than to recurrent adenoma and incident colorectal cancer
risks among those with active screening with flexible sigmoidoscopy.

