Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of a CD123xCD3 bispecific antibody to treat acute
myeloid leukemia (AML)


AML is a heterogeneous disease characterized by uncontrolled clonal
expansion of leukemic stem cells (LSCs). Current therapies for AML are
not curative, in part due to their inability to eradicate LSCs from the
bone marrow. T cell redirection has been shown to be effective in heme
malignancies and represents a promising approach to treat AML by
targeting markers differentially expressed on the cell surface of cancer
cells. One marker, CD123 (-chain of the interleukin-3 receptor) is often
present on AML LSCs and blasts. We developed a human bispecific antibody
(CD123xCD3; Ab-178) capable of binding to the extracellular domain of
CD123 and the chain of CD3 on T cells to induce T cellmediated tumor cell
killing. This bispecific IgG4 antibody can recruit T cells to CD123+ AML
cells (MOLM-13, KG-1 and OCI-AML5) and induce T cell activation as
evidenced by CD69 and CD25 up-regulation on T cells. Ab-178 potently
killed these CD123+ AML cell lines in vitro (EC50 = 0.51-0.91 nM) but not
a CD123 cell line (JIM3). Ab-178 was also able to induce tumor inhibition
(MOLM-13 cells) and regression (KG-1 cells) in murine xenograft CD123+
AML models in the presence of human PBMCs. Furthermore, this antibody was
able to kill AML blasts in primary AML blood samples ex vivo in the
absence of exogenous T cells (autologous setting; EC50 = 0.83 nM).
Related bispecific antibodies directed against a viral epitope (nullxCD3
or CD123xnull) did not activate T cells or cause tumor cell killing in
the various assays tested. Ab-178 had no impact on T cell activation when
incubated with T cells alone. These results indicate that Ab-178 can
potently and specifically activate T cells in the presence of CD123+ AML
cells and induce their killing. Furthermore, because of the antibody
format, this molecule is expected to have a longer half-life compared to
smaller bispecific biologic scaffolds. Ab-178 is currently being
evaluated pre-clinically for its potential to treat patients with AML.

