Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ewing sarcoma gene, EWS, role in mitochondrial homeostasis


Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor coactivator (PGC-1) is a
central regulator of mitochondria biogenesis, function and cellular
energy metabolism. PGC-1 protein is intrinsically unstable but the
mechanism by which PGC-1 stability is regulated is not well understood.
Here, we report that a multifunctional protein EWS (Ewing sarcoma) is
critical for PGC-1 protein stability and mitochondrial homeostasis. EWS
inactivation results in a rapid degradation of PGC-1 via
ubiquitin-dependent proteasome pathway and reduces mitochondrial
abundance. Re-introduction of EWS in Ews-deficient cells restores PGC-1
expression and mitochondrial anomalies. In the absence of Ews, expression
of E3 ubiquitin ligase, FBXW7 (F-box/WD40 domain protein 7), is increased
and depletion of Fbxw7 in Ews-null cells restores PGC-1 expression and
mitochondrial density. Consistent with these findings, mitochondrial
abundance and activity are significantly reduced in brown fat and
skeletal muscles of Ews-deficient mice and expression of slow myosin
heavy chain is significantly decreased in skeletal muscles of Ews-/- mice
compared to controls. Furthermore, Ews-null mice display reduced
expression of mitochondrial biogenesis, respiration and fatty acid
-oxidation genes in the liver and abnormally high serum lactate levels.
These results demonstrate a novel role of EWS in mitochondrial and
cellular energy homeostasis by controlling PGC-1 protein stability.

