Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Circulating tumor DNA assay performance for detection and
monitoring of KRAS mutations in urine from patients with advanced cancers


Introduction: Non-invasive urinary ctDNA-based liquid biopsy approach can
be used to detect and track cancer driver mutations for rapid diagnosis
and disease monitoring. Using highly sensitivity ctDNA mutation detection
platform, we examined the detection of KRAS G12/13 mutations in urine
obtained from advanced cancer patients, assessed urine sample
requirements, and compared the results with matched tumor tissue in
patients with advanced cancers.Methods: 41 patients with advanced solid
cancer with KRAS mutations on archival tumor from CLIA laboratory testing
were prospectively enrolled with informed consent (colorectal cancer, n =
29; non-small cell lung cancer, n = 6; pancreatic cancer, n = 2; ovarian
cancer, n = 2; other, n = 2). Urine was collected before and during
experimental therapies. Urinary DNA was isolated using a method that
enriches for highly fragmented, systemically derived cell-free DNA. KRAS
G12/13 analysis was performed using mutation enrichment PCR coupled with
next generation sequencing (MiSeq). Analytical sensitivity of the KRAS
G12/13 assay is 0.006% mutant alleles in the background of 60 ng
wild-type (wt) DNA and 0.002% mutant alleles in 360 ng wt DNA. Clinical
data was collected retrospectively from the electronic medical
record.Results: For 41 patients enrolled on a study, urine volumes in
pretreatment samples ranged from 13 to 120 mL (median, 55 mL). Urinary
DNA yields were 151 to 23059 ng (median, 1039 ng). Using tissue as the
reference, the positive percent agreement (PPA) between urine and tumor
KRAS G12/13 test results was 54% (22/41) for urine samples with all
volumes (13-120 mL) and any DNA input amount (2-360 ng) and 92% (12/13)
for urine samples with volumes 50 mL and DNA input amount 60 ng. For
metastatic CRC patient cohort, the PPA between urine and tumor KRAS
G12/13 test result was 60% (18/30) for urine samples with all volumes and
any DNA input amount (20-120 mL, 2-360 ng) and 100% (10/10) for urine
samples with volumes 50 mL and DNA input amount 60 ng. Feasibility of
longitudinal monitoring KRAS G12/13 mutational burden in urine of
patients treated with experimental therapies was demonstrated.Conclusion:
KRAS G12/13 mutational status can be assess in urinary DNA with highest
PPA amongst patients with urine volume 50 mL and DNA input amount 60 ng
(92%). KRAS mutation detection from urine should be considered as a
viable approach, particularly when tumor tissue is not available.

