Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The novel tubulin-binding tumor checkpoint controller BAL101553
has anti-cancer activity alone and in combination treatments across a
panel of GBM patient-derived xenografts


Microtubule-targeting agents (MTA) have been employed in the treatment of
many cancers for decades. BAL101553 is a highly soluble prodrug of
BAL27862, a novel, small molecule, microtubule-depolymerizing agent that
induces tumor cell death by activating the spindle assembly checkpoint.
Given intravenously or orally, the drug penetrates the brain and has
anti-cancer activity in diverse tumor models refractory to standard MTA
or radiotherapy (RT). In this study, BAL101553 was evaluated in
orthotopic xenografts from 16 GBM PDX models; 7 of 16 lines demonstrated
significant (pMicrotubule-targeting agents (MTA) have been employed in
the treatment of many cancers for decades. BAL101553 is a highly soluble
prodrug of BAL27862, a novel, small molecule, microtubule-depolymerizing
agent that induces tumor cell death by activating the spindle assembly
checkpoint. Given intravenously or orally, the drug penetrates the brain
and has anti-cancer activity in diverse tumor models refractory to
standard MTA or radiotherapy (RT). In this study, BAL101553 was evaluated
in orthotopic xenografts from 16 GBM PDX models; 7 of 16 lines
demonstrated significant (p<0.01) increases in median survival with
BAL101553 versus placebo (range in median survival extension 24-87%). The
combination of BAL101553 with conventional therapies for GBM (RT and
temozolomide (TMZ) was then evaluated in select lines. In the MGMT
methylated GBM12 line, combination of RT with TMZ increased survival
compared to placebo (median survival 80 days vs. 23 days, respectively;
pMicrotubule-targeting agents (MTA) have been employed in the treatment
of many cancers for decades. BAL101553 is a highly soluble prodrug of
BAL27862, a novel, small molecule, microtubule-depolymerizing agent that
induces tumor cell death by activating the spindle assembly checkpoint.
Given intravenously or orally, the drug penetrates the brain and has
anti-cancer activity in diverse tumor models refractory to standard MTA
or radiotherapy (RT). In this study, BAL101553 was evaluated in
orthotopic xenografts from 16 GBM PDX models; 7 of 16 lines demonstrated
significant (p<0.01) increases in median survival with BAL101553 versus
placebo (range in median survival extension 24-87%). The combination of
BAL101553 with conventional therapies for GBM (RT and temozolomide (TMZ)
was then evaluated in select lines. In the MGMT methylated GBM12 line,
combination of RT with TMZ increased survival compared to placebo (median
survival 80 days vs. 23 days, respectively; p<0.001). Extended BAL101553
monotherapy provided a short but significant extension in survival
(median survival 31 days, pMicrotubule-targeting agents (MTA) have been
employed in the treatment of many cancers for decades. BAL101553 is a
highly soluble prodrug of BAL27862, a novel, small molecule,
microtubule-depolymerizing agent that induces tumor cell death by
activating the spindle assembly checkpoint. Given intravenously or
orally, the drug penetrates the brain and has anti-cancer activity in
diverse tumor models refractory to standard MTA or radiotherapy (RT). In
this study, BAL101553 was evaluated in orthotopic xenografts from 16 GBM
PDX models; 7 of 16 lines demonstrated significant (p<0.01) increases in
median survival with BAL101553 versus placebo (range in median survival
extension 24-87%). The combination of BAL101553 with conventional
therapies for GBM (RT and temozolomide (TMZ) was then evaluated in select
lines. In the MGMT methylated GBM12 line, combination of RT with TMZ
increased survival compared to placebo (median survival 80 days vs. 23
days, respectively; p<0.001). Extended BAL101553 monotherapy provided a
short but significant extension in survival (median survival 31 days,
p<0.001), while extended BAL101553 dosing during and after RT/TMZ (median
survival 85 days) did not extend survival relative to RT/TMZ alone (p =
0.56). In contrast, in the MGMT unmethylated GBM6 line, combination of RT
and extended BAL101553 increased survival (median 90 days,
pMicrotubule-targeting agents (MTA) have been employed in the treatment
of many cancers for decades. BAL101553 is a highly soluble prodrug of
BAL27862, a novel, small molecule, microtubule-depolymerizing agent that
induces tumor cell death by activating the spindle assembly checkpoint.
Given intravenously or orally, the drug penetrates the brain and has
anti-cancer activity in diverse tumor models refractory to standard MTA
or radiotherapy (RT). In this study, BAL101553 was evaluated in
orthotopic xenografts from 16 GBM PDX models; 7 of 16 lines demonstrated
significant (p<0.01) increases in median survival with BAL101553 versus
placebo (range in median survival extension 24-87%). The combination of
BAL101553 with conventional therapies for GBM (RT and temozolomide (TMZ)
was then evaluated in select lines. In the MGMT methylated GBM12 line,
combination of RT with TMZ increased survival compared to placebo (median
survival 80 days vs. 23 days, respectively; p<0.001). Extended BAL101553
monotherapy provided a short but significant extension in survival
(median survival 31 days, p<0.001), while extended BAL101553 dosing
during and after RT/TMZ (median survival 85 days) did not extend survival
relative to RT/TMZ alone (p = 0.56). In contrast, in the MGMT
unmethylated GBM6 line, combination of RT and extended BAL101553
increased survival (median 90 days, p<0.001) relative to either treatment
alone (median survival BAL101553 63 days; RT 69 days) or placebo (46
days). Additionally, the combination of BAL101553 with TMZ (median
survival 70 days) was more effective than TMZ alone (median survival 60
days; p = 0.009). Consistent with the unmethylated MGMT status, the
TMZ/RT combination (median survival 66 days) was similar to RT alone (p =
0.62), but the combination of extended BAL101553 with RT/TMZ (median
survival 101 days; pMicrotubule-targeting agents (MTA) have been employed
in the treatment of many cancers for decades. BAL101553 is a highly
soluble prodrug of BAL27862, a novel, small molecule,
microtubule-depolymerizing agent that induces tumor cell death by
activating the spindle assembly checkpoint. Given intravenously or
orally, the drug penetrates the brain and has anti-cancer activity in
diverse tumor models refractory to standard MTA or radiotherapy (RT). In
this study, BAL101553 was evaluated in orthotopic xenografts from 16 GBM
PDX models; 7 of 16 lines demonstrated significant (p<0.01) increases in
median survival with BAL101553 versus placebo (range in median survival
extension 24-87%). The combination of BAL101553 with conventional
therapies for GBM (RT and temozolomide (TMZ) was then evaluated in select
lines. In the MGMT methylated GBM12 line, combination of RT with TMZ
increased survival compared to placebo (median survival 80 days vs. 23
days, respectively; p<0.001). Extended BAL101553 monotherapy provided a
short but significant extension in survival (median survival 31 days,
p<0.001), while extended BAL101553 dosing during and after RT/TMZ (median
survival 85 days) did not extend survival relative to RT/TMZ alone (p =
0.56). In contrast, in the MGMT unmethylated GBM6 line, combination of RT
and extended BAL101553 increased survival (median 90 days, p<0.001)
relative to either treatment alone (median survival BAL101553 63 days; RT
69 days) or placebo (46 days). Additionally, the combination of BAL101553
with TMZ (median survival 70 days) was more effective than TMZ alone
(median survival 60 days; p = 0.009). Consistent with the unmethylated
MGMT status, the TMZ/RT combination (median survival 66 days) was similar
to RT alone (p = 0.62), but the combination of extended BAL101553 with
RT/TMZ (median survival 101 days; p<0.001 compared to other combination
groups) was significantly more effective. To further evaluate whether
BAL101553 is a true radiosensitizer, a second GBM6 study was performed.
Also here, combination of RT (20Gy, 2wks) with extended BAL101553 dosing
(median survival 66 days) significantly extended survival compared to RT
alone (median survival 54 days; p = 002). Interestingly, when BAL101553
dosing was limited to 2 weeks with RT, there was no increase in median
survival (58 days; p = 0.16). To evaluate effects on tumor repopulation
during RT, the efficacy of an extended RT schedule (36 Gy, 6 wks) with or
without 6 weeks of BAL101553 was evaluated. In this case, BAL101553 given
during the RT schedule (median survival 78 days) extended median survival
as compared to RT alone (61 days; pMicrotubule-targeting agents (MTA)
have been employed in the treatment of many cancers for decades.
BAL101553 is a highly soluble prodrug of BAL27862, a novel, small
molecule, microtubule-depolymerizing agent that induces tumor cell death
by activating the spindle assembly checkpoint. Given intravenously or
orally, the drug penetrates the brain and has anti-cancer activity in
diverse tumor models refractory to standard MTA or radiotherapy (RT). In
this study, BAL101553 was evaluated in orthotopic xenografts from 16 GBM
PDX models; 7 of 16 lines demonstrated significant (p<0.01) increases in
median survival with BAL101553 versus placebo (range in median survival
extension 24-87%). The combination of BAL101553 with conventional
therapies for GBM (RT and temozolomide (TMZ) was then evaluated in select
lines. In the MGMT methylated GBM12 line, combination of RT with TMZ
increased survival compared to placebo (median survival 80 days vs. 23
days, respectively; p<0.001). Extended BAL101553 monotherapy provided a
short but significant extension in survival (median survival 31 days,
p<0.001), while extended BAL101553 dosing during and after RT/TMZ (median
survival 85 days) did not extend survival relative to RT/TMZ alone (p =
0.56). In contrast, in the MGMT unmethylated GBM6 line, combination of RT
and extended BAL101553 increased survival (median 90 days, p<0.001)
relative to either treatment alone (median survival BAL101553 63 days; RT
69 days) or placebo (46 days). Additionally, the combination of BAL101553
with TMZ (median survival 70 days) was more effective than TMZ alone
(median survival 60 days; p = 0.009). Consistent with the unmethylated
MGMT status, the TMZ/RT combination (median survival 66 days) was similar
to RT alone (p = 0.62), but the combination of extended BAL101553 with
RT/TMZ (median survival 101 days; p<0.001 compared to other combination
groups) was significantly more effective. To further evaluate whether
BAL101553 is a true radiosensitizer, a second GBM6 study was performed.
Also here, combination of RT (20Gy, 2wks) with extended BAL101553 dosing
(median survival 66 days) significantly extended survival compared to RT
alone (median survival 54 days; p = 002). Interestingly, when BAL101553
dosing was limited to 2 weeks with RT, there was no increase in median
survival (58 days; p = 0.16). To evaluate effects on tumor repopulation
during RT, the efficacy of an extended RT schedule (36 Gy, 6 wks) with or
without 6 weeks of BAL101553 was evaluated. In this case, BAL101553 given
during the RT schedule (median survival 78 days) extended median survival
as compared to RT alone (61 days; p<0.001). Collectively, these data
demonstrate that BAL101553 has broad single agent activity across a panel
of GBM PDX models and suggests that combination with RT/TMZ therapy may
provide additional benefits for survival extension.

