Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Project Survival: Interrogative Biology platform mediated
discovery of molecular markers for detection, stratification and outcomes
in pancreatic cancer


Pancreatic adenocarcinoma generally presents with a poor prognosis and an
extremely low response rate to first line therapies. There is a critical
unmet need to discover and implement effective diagnostic panels to
stratify outcomes and tailor treatment strategies to improve survival.
The BERG Interrogative Biology platform utilizes Artificial Intelligence
to analyze and integrate multi-omic profiles with clinical annotation to
define novel biomarkers and improve treatment interventions. Herein, we
analyzed the serum proteome, signaling lipidome, structural lipidome, and
metabolome of 163patients at multiple timepoints (pancreatic cancer: 115;
pancreatitis: 15; and age-matched healthy controls: 33). Utilizing the
power of the Bayesian Network learner, bAIcis (BERG Artificial
Intelligence Clinical Information System), multi-omic profiles were
aligned to the longitudinal clinical information and subjected to
AI-algorithms to infer probabilistic cause-and-effect relationships among
molecular and clinical variables explicitly explaining pancreatic cancer
status, cancer progression, and survival, and defining the
interconnectivity of molecular features with clinical phenotype. Network
features linking into clinical endpoints and key network pressure points
were identified as molecular drivers. The drivers of clinical endpoints
were analyzed to rank potential biomarkers. Novel biomarkers were
discovered that demonstrate diagnostic potential for pancreatic cancer
detection, disease prognosis including metastatic disease progression,
patient stratification associated with survival, and response to standard
chemotherapy agents like Gemcitibine. A prospective study is underway to
validate the biomarkers and discover additional diagnostic and
therapeutic molecules to improve the outcomes for patients affected by
adenocarcinoma of the pancreas.

