Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Elucidating metastatic signaling networks in TNBC by investigating
RKIP-regulated kinome


Metastatic progression of tumors is the major cause of death in patients
with triple negative breast cancer (TNBC), the most aggressive subtype of
breast cancer. However, since metastasis is a multi-step process,
unraveling its complexity is a major challenge. One effective way of
tackling this question is to study natural blockers of the metastatic
process, metastasis suppressors, and identify the mechanisms by which
they regulate metastasis. Raf kinase inhibitory protein (RKIP), a protein
that regulates kinase activity, is a suppressor of TNBC metastasis.
Although RKIP inhibits the activity of key kinases such as Raf-1, GRK2,
NIK/IKK in cultured cells, the kinase targets of RKIP in tumors are not
known. To address this question, we used a mass spectrometry approach
involving inhibitor-conjugated beads to identify kinases that are
down-regulated by RKIP in human TNBC xenograft tumors. Our results
identified novel targets of RKIP whose kinase activity is either
down-regulated or up-regulated by RKIP. We used bioinformatics analysis
to build RKIP-regulated signaling networks based upon RKIP-induced
changes in kinase activity and related gene expression. Elucidating RKIP
function at a systems level reveals the interplay between key metastatic
signaling cascades, particularly in relation to cell migration and
invasion, and can potentially identify novel anti-metastatic target
combinations in TNBCs.

