Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: IDH mutant gliomas escape natural killer cell immune surveillance
by downregulation of NKG2D ligands


Background: Diffuse gliomas are fatal primary brain tumors that are
poorly immunogenic. The basis for insufficient anti-tumor immunity in
diffuse gliomas is not understood. Gain of function mutations in
isocitrate dehydrogenases (IDH1 and IDH2) promote diffuse glioma
formation through epigenetic reprogramming of a number of genes,
including immune-related genes. Here, we identify epigenetic
dysregulation of natural killer (NK) cell ligand genes as significant
contributors to immune escape in glioma. Methods: We analyzed the TCGA
database for immune gene expression patterns in IDH mutant or wild-type
gliomas and identified differentially expressed immune genes. NKG2D
ligands expression levels and NK cell-mediated lysis were measured in IDH
mutant and wild-type patient-derived glioma stem cells and in genetically
engineered astrocytes. Finally, we assessed the impact of hypomethylating
agent 5-aza- 2deoxycytodine (Decitabine) as a potential NK cell
sensitizing agent in IDH mutant cells. Results: All IDH mutant glioma
stem-like cell lines exhibited significantly lower expression of NKG2D
ligands compared with IDH wild-type cells. Consistent with these
findings, IDH mutant glioma cells and astrocytes were resistant to NK
cell- mediated lysis. The hypomethylating agent Decitabine increased
NKG2D ligand expression, and restored NK-mediated lysis of IDH mutant
cells in an NKG2D- dependent manner. Conclusions: IDH mutant glioma cells
acquire resistance to NK cells through epigenetic silencing of NKG2D
ligands ULBP1 and ULPB3. Decitabine-mediated hypomethylation restores
ULBP1 and ULBP3 expression in IDH mutant glioma cells and may provide a
clinically useful method to sensitize IDH mutant gliomas to NK cell-
mediated immune surveillance in patients with IDH mutated diffuse gliomas.

