Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The relationship between UHRF1 overexpression and LINE-1
hypomethylation in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma


Background: Global DNA hypomethylation contributes to oncogenesis through
multiple mechanism. The level of long interspersed nucleotide element-1
(LINE-1) methylation is regarded as a surrogate marker of global DNA
methylation, and is drawing interest as a good indicator for predicting
cancer prognosis. However, the mechanism by which LINE-1 (global DNA)
methylation is controlled in cancer cells remains to be fully explored.
Ubiquitin-like with PHD and RING finger domain 1 (UHRF1) plays an
essential role in DNA methylation. Previous studies have demonstrated
that UHRF1 overexpression might be a mechanism of underlying DNA
hypomethylation in hepatocellular carcinoma, and contribute to poor
prognosis. Nonetheless, the epigenetic role of UHRF1 in esophageal
squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) remains unclear.Methods: Using 16 frozen
tissues (matched pairs of cancer and normal epithelium), and 160
curatively resected esophageal cancer specimens, we analyzed the
relationship between UHRF1 expression, LINE-1 methylation levels and
patient outcome. We measured UHRF1 expression by real-time PCR and
immunohistochemistry, and LINE-1 methylation levels by bisulfite-
pyrosequencing technology. In addition, to investigate the relationships
between UHRF1 expression and LINE-1 methylation level (i.e., global DNA
methylation level) using UHRF1 overexpression vector and siRNA for UHRF1
with ESCC tissues and ESCC cell lines.Results: In ESCC tissues, UHRF1
expression were significantly associated with LINE-1 methylation levels,
and UHRF1 overexpression correlated with poor prognosis in our cohort of
160 ESCC patients. Furthermore, UHRF1 vector-mediated overexpression
caused LINE-1 (global DNA) hypomethylation, and conversely, UHRF1
knockdown using siRNA increased DNA methylation in ESCC cell
lines.Conclusion: These results may suggest that UHRF1 is an epigenetic
key regulator of DNA methylation, moreover, can be applicable to
attractive cancer therapies.

