Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oxaliplatin-induced immune factors and long-term disease control
in rectal cancer - a reflection of immunogenic tumor cell death


Purpose: In contemporary cancer therapy, the ability of the immune system
to recognize and destroy tumor cells is increasingly acknowledged.
Following cytotoxic damage of tumor cells, the priming of tumor-targeting
T lymphocytes via presentation of shed tumor antigens by dendritic cells
may ultimately result in systemic anti-tumor activity, a concept referred
to as immunogenic cell death (ICD). Recent preclinical studies have
highlighted oxaliplatin as an ICD-inducing agent. In a prospective study
(NCT00278694) of curatively intended treatment of locally advanced rectal
cancer (LARC), oxaliplatin-containing induction neoadjuvant chemotherapy
(NACT; two cycles of the Nordic FLOX regimen) was administered prior to
chemoradiotherapy (CRT) and surgery. Within the spectrum of possible ICD
responses to NACT, we analyzed circulating osteoprotegerin (OPG) and
fms-related tyrosine kinase 3 ligand (FLT3LG), both of which are factors
implicated in activation of the antigen-specific interaction between
dendritic cells and cytotoxic T lymphocytes.Experimental procedures:
Immunoassay measurements of OPG and FLT3LG were performed in serum
samples collected from study patients at baseline and following the
induction NACT. Estimated 5-year progression-free survival (PFS) and
overall survival (OS) were assessed using the log-rank test.Results:
Fifty-six patients (38 T2-3 cases and 18 T4 cases) with median follow-up
time of 65 months were included in the analysis. During follow-up, 18
patients (nine in each of the T2-3 and T4 groups) experienced metastatic
progression as a PFS event. For the entire study population, significant
increases in serum levels of both OPG and FLT3LG (from median baseline
values of 46.1 pg/ml and 66.7 pg/ml to median post-NACT values of 53.6
pg/ml and 140 pg/ml, respectively) were observed. Patients were separated
into cases with (n = 37) or without (n = 19) increase in circulating OPG
levels and more (n = 30) or less (n = 26) than two-fold increase in
circulating FLT3LG levels. When grouped together, patients with the
designated increases in both factors (n = 25) or in either of OPG or
FLT3LG values (n = 21) during NACT had significantly better PFS rates
than the remaining cases (n = 10) (86%, 72%, and 20%, respectively; p
Purpose: In contemporary cancer therapy, the ability of the immune system
to recognize and destroy tumor cells is increasingly acknowledged.
Following cytotoxic damage of tumor cells, the priming of tumor-targeting
T lymphocytes via presentation of shed tumor antigens by dendritic cells
may ultimately result in systemic anti-tumor activity, a concept referred
to as immunogenic cell death (ICD). Recent preclinical studies have
highlighted oxaliplatin as an ICD-inducing agent. In a prospective study
(NCT00278694) of curatively intended treatment of locally advanced rectal
cancer (LARC), oxaliplatin-containing induction neoadjuvant chemotherapy
(NACT; two cycles of the Nordic FLOX regimen) was administered prior to
chemoradiotherapy (CRT) and surgery. Within the spectrum of possible ICD
responses to NACT, we analyzed circulating osteoprotegerin (OPG) and
fms-related tyrosine kinase 3 ligand (FLT3LG), both of which are factors
implicated in activation of the antigen-specific interaction between
dendritic cells and cytotoxic T lymphocytes.Experimental procedures:
Immunoassay measurements of OPG and FLT3LG were performed in serum
samples collected from study patients at baseline and following the
induction NACT. Estimated 5-year progression-free survival (PFS) and
overall survival (OS) were assessed using the log-rank test.Results:
Fifty-six patients (38 T2-3 cases and 18 T4 cases) with median follow-up
time of 65 months were included in the analysis. During follow-up, 18
patients (nine in each of the T2-3 and T4 groups) experienced metastatic
progression as a PFS event. For the entire study population, significant
increases in serum levels of both OPG and FLT3LG (from median baseline
values of 46.1 pg/ml and 66.7 pg/ml to median post-NACT values of 53.6
pg/ml and 140 pg/ml, respectively) were observed. Patients were separated
into cases with (n = 37) or without (n = 19) increase in circulating OPG
levels and more (n = 30) or less (n = 26) than two-fold increase in
circulating FLT3LG levels. When grouped together, patients with the
designated increases in both factors (n = 25) or in either of OPG or
FLT3LG values (n = 21) during NACT had significantly better PFS rates
than the remaining cases (n = 10) (86%, 72%, and 20%, respectively; p <
0.001). Corresponding OS rates were 100%, 88%, and 60% (p Purpose: In
contemporary cancer therapy, the ability of the immune system to
recognize and destroy tumor cells is increasingly acknowledged. Following
cytotoxic damage of tumor cells, the priming of tumor-targeting T
lymphocytes via presentation of shed tumor antigens by dendritic cells
may ultimately result in systemic anti-tumor activity, a concept referred
to as immunogenic cell death (ICD). Recent preclinical studies have
highlighted oxaliplatin as an ICD-inducing agent. In a prospective study
(NCT00278694) of curatively intended treatment of locally advanced rectal
cancer (LARC), oxaliplatin-containing induction neoadjuvant chemotherapy
(NACT; two cycles of the Nordic FLOX regimen) was administered prior to
chemoradiotherapy (CRT) and surgery. Within the spectrum of possible ICD
responses to NACT, we analyzed circulating osteoprotegerin (OPG) and
fms-related tyrosine kinase 3 ligand (FLT3LG), both of which are factors
implicated in activation of the antigen-specific interaction between
dendritic cells and cytotoxic T lymphocytes.Experimental procedures:
Immunoassay measurements of OPG and FLT3LG were performed in serum
samples collected from study patients at baseline and following the
induction NACT. Estimated 5-year progression-free survival (PFS) and
overall survival (OS) were assessed using the log-rank test.Results:
Fifty-six patients (38 T2-3 cases and 18 T4 cases) with median follow-up
time of 65 months were included in the analysis. During follow-up, 18
patients (nine in each of the T2-3 and T4 groups) experienced metastatic
progression as a PFS event. For the entire study population, significant
increases in serum levels of both OPG and FLT3LG (from median baseline
values of 46.1 pg/ml and 66.7 pg/ml to median post-NACT values of 53.6
pg/ml and 140 pg/ml, respectively) were observed. Patients were separated
into cases with (n = 37) or without (n = 19) increase in circulating OPG
levels and more (n = 30) or less (n = 26) than two-fold increase in
circulating FLT3LG levels. When grouped together, patients with the
designated increases in both factors (n = 25) or in either of OPG or
FLT3LG values (n = 21) during NACT had significantly better PFS rates
than the remaining cases (n = 10) (86%, 72%, and 20%, respectively; p <
0.001). Corresponding OS rates were 100%, 88%, and 60% (p < 0.001),
suggesting that even patients who experienced metastatic progression had
reasonably good OS.Conclusion: Increase in circulating OPG and FLT3LG
following oxaliplatin-containing induction chemotherapy was associated
with favorable long-term outcome in LARC patients given curatively
intended neoadjuvant treatment consisting of CRT and surgery. These
immune effectors may have mediated systemic anti-tumor immunity invoked
by ICD-inducing oxaliplatin effects.

