Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exosomes isolated from ovarian cancer cells transfer oncogenic
features to the target cells promoting epithelial to mesenchymal
transition


Introduction: Recent studies establish the role of exosomes in cell-cell
communication in cancer. As adaptation to hypoxia is a critical step in
tumor progression, the aim of this study was to test the hypotheses that
hypoxia promotes epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) and that
exosomes isolated from hypoxic cancer cells transfer oncogenic properties
to target cells.Methods: CaOV-3 cell line was used as model of ovarian
cancer. Cells were cultured under 8% O2 (normoxia) and 1% O2 (hypoxia)
for 48 hours. Exosomes were isolated from cell-conditioned media by
differential and buoyant density centrifugation. Exosomes were
characterised by the presence of TSG101 using Western Blot, size
distribution (Nanosight) and morphology by electron microscopy. Exosomal
protein and miRNA content were determined using liquid chromatography
mass spectrometry (5600 Triple TOF, AB Sciex,) and an Illumina NextSeq
500 Platform, respectively. The effects of exosomes released from CaOV-3
incubated under 1% O2 on EMT induction in CaOV-3 cells cultured under 8%
O2 were assessed by the measuring the ratio of E-cadherin (epithelial
marker) to N-cadherin (mesenchymal marker) by Wester Blot and the
expression of 84 key genes involve in the EMT (RT2 Profiler PCR Array,
QIAGEN).Results: Exosomes were identified as spherical vesicles with a
typical cup-shape, diameters ranging from 50 to 100 nm with the
expression of TSG101. Exosome release from ovarian cancer cells was
4-fold higher under hypoxic than normoxic conditions (p Introduction:
Recent studies establish the role of exosomes in cell-cell communication
in cancer. As adaptation to hypoxia is a critical step in tumor
progression, the aim of this study was to test the hypotheses that
hypoxia promotes epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) and that
exosomes isolated from hypoxic cancer cells transfer oncogenic properties
to target cells.Methods: CaOV-3 cell line was used as model of ovarian
cancer. Cells were cultured under 8% O2 (normoxia) and 1% O2 (hypoxia)
for 48 hours. Exosomes were isolated from cell-conditioned media by
differential and buoyant density centrifugation. Exosomes were
characterised by the presence of TSG101 using Western Blot, size
distribution (Nanosight) and morphology by electron microscopy. Exosomal
protein and miRNA content were determined using liquid chromatography
mass spectrometry (5600 Triple TOF, AB Sciex,) and an Illumina NextSeq
500 Platform, respectively. The effects of exosomes released from CaOV-3
incubated under 1% O2 on EMT induction in CaOV-3 cells cultured under 8%
O2 were assessed by the measuring the ratio of E-cadherin (epithelial
marker) to N-cadherin (mesenchymal marker) by Wester Blot and the
expression of 84 key genes involve in the EMT (RT2 Profiler PCR Array,
QIAGEN).Results: Exosomes were identified as spherical vesicles with a
typical cup-shape, diameters ranging from 50 to 100 nm with the
expression of TSG101. Exosome release from ovarian cancer cells was
4-fold higher under hypoxic than normoxic conditions (p <0.001).
Hypoxia-specific exosomal proteins and miRNAs were identified. Hypoxia
induced EMT (increased N-cadherin/E-cadherin ratio) on CaOV-3 cells
compared to cells cultured under 8% O2. Interestingly, exosomes isolated
from hypoxic conditions mimic the effect of hypoxia on cells cultured
under 8% O2, involving the unregulated of a set of transcription factors
associated with EMT such as SNAIL1/SNAIL2, bHLH (E47, E2-2, and
TWIST1/TWIST2), and ZEB1/ZEB2.Conclusion: The data obtained is consistent
with the hypothesis that exosomes released from cancer cells modify the
phenotype of target cells by transferring pro-oncogenic molecules
inducing cancerous phenotype of receipt cells, contributing to tumour
growth and metastasis.

