Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: miRNA expression as potential biomarker for leiomyosarcoma and
undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcoma


Rare and highly aggressive adult soft tissue sarcomas (STS),
leiomyosarcoma (LMS) and undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcoma (UPS), have
complex genomics characterized by a multitude of rearrangements,
amplifications and deletions. Our previous data (Guled et al., Genes
Chromosomes Cancer, 2014) showed 21 common differentially expressed
miRNAs in UPS and LMS samples when compared to mesenchymal stem cells. On
the base of these results, we performed target analysis by using
bioinformatic tools (Diana-microt v3.0, Targetscan Vert release 5.2 and
Pictar-Vert) and we identified 12 miRNAs potentially implicated in tumor
development and progression.The expression of the selected miRNAs was
evaluated by TaqMan microRNA Array in 59 high grade STS primary samples
(27 LMS and 32 UPS) stored at Rizzoli biobank. Ten tissues from non
oncologic patients were used as control. Our results showed a significant
lower expression of miR-1, miR-133b and miR-152 (respectively p = 0.0045,
p = 0.0027 and p = 0.0016) in tumors when compared to nontumor tissue.
Three different target prediction databases (miRBase, TargetScan,
miRanda) recognized MET as common target gene of miR-1, mir-133b and
miR-152 and KIT as target of miR-152. MET and KIT gene expression was
validated in our series of STS by RT-PCR by using 2CT comparative method.
The data demonstrated higher mean expression levels in STS than in
control (respectively 2.08 and 0.15 for KIT; 18527.9 and 2324.9 for MET)
without significant differences between two histotypes.Our preliminary
results confirmed MET and KIT as miRNA targets. Correlation with clinical
data and in vitro studies with miRNA precursor transfected cell lines are
on-going to better investigate their role as potential prognostic and
therapeutic markers.

