Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prediction of the 5-year risk of hepatocellular carcinoma during
long-term antiviral therapy in the general Korean population


Oral antiviral therapy using nucleos(t)ide analogues can decrease risk
for hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) in patients with chronic hepatitis B.
However, wide use of antiviral therapy is limited by stringent treatment
indications in many countries. We compared preventive effect of antiviral
therapy on HCC development between current and new extended indication
for the treatment. We established Korean cohort with chronic hepatitis B
virus (HBV) infection using the fifth National Health and Nutrition
Examination Survey (KNHANES). The cohort represented 993,872 subjects
with chronic HBV infection more than 40 years in Korea. We estimated
five-year risk of HCC before and after antiviral therapy using a HCC
prediction score (REACH-B). The National Health Insurance (NHI) in Korea,
the European Association for the Study of the Liver (EASL) guideline, and
a new extended indication were compared. During a 5-year period,
predicted HCC cases were 2,725 per 100,000 individuals (0.55% / year).
When the cohort was treated under the Korean NHI indication, EASL, and
new extended indication, HCC risk decreased to 2,531 (-7.1%), 2,089
(-23.3%), and 1,122 (-58.8%) cases per 100,000 individuals, respectively
(P Oral antiviral therapy using nucleos(t)ide analogues can decrease risk
for hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) in patients with chronic hepatitis B.
However, wide use of antiviral therapy is limited by stringent treatment
indications in many countries. We compared preventive effect of antiviral
therapy on HCC development between current and new extended indication
for the treatment. We established Korean cohort with chronic hepatitis B
virus (HBV) infection using the fifth National Health and Nutrition
Examination Survey (KNHANES). The cohort represented 993,872 subjects
with chronic HBV infection more than 40 years in Korea. We estimated
five-year risk of HCC before and after antiviral therapy using a HCC
prediction score (REACH-B). The National Health Insurance (NHI) in Korea,
the European Association for the Study of the Liver (EASL) guideline, and
a new extended indication were compared. During a 5-year period,
predicted HCC cases were 2,725 per 100,000 individuals (0.55% / year).
When the cohort was treated under the Korean NHI indication, EASL, and
new extended indication, HCC risk decreased to 2,531 (-7.1%), 2,089
(-23.3%), and 1,122 (-58.8%) cases per 100,000 individuals, respectively
(P < 0.0001). As participation rate in antiviral therapy among eligible
patients increased every 10%, HCC risk decreased to -0.74%, -2.39%, and
-5.87%, respectively. New extended indication could decrease HCC risk
eight times more than the current Korean NHI indication. Prediction of
HCC development among chronic HBV infection is feasible in the virtual
population level. Considering the large preventive effect of antiviral
therapy, the treatment indications should be revised to increase eligible
patients.
Indications for antiviral treatment used in this study and predicted
reduction of HCC risk

