Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: IGFBP5-derived peptide as a novel angiogenesis inhibitor for
treatment of ovarian cancer


Insulin-like growth factor-binding protein 5 (IGFBP5) plays a role in
cell growth, differentiation, and apoptosis. We found that IGFBP5 was
markedly downregulated in ovarian cancer tissue, and that its
overexpression in cancer cells induced cell death. In this study, we
undertook to evaluate the functional significance of each region of
IGFBP5 as a tumor suppressor of ovarian cancer. We found that the
C-terminal region of IGFBP5 inhibited tumor growth in a 2774 cell
xenograft mouse model, and that expression of VEGF, IL-6, and TNF- were
inhibited in 2774 cells stably expressing the C-terminus of IGFBP5. In
order to evaluate its effects on tumor suppression, a peptide derived
from the C-terminus of IGFBP5 (BP5-C) was synthesized. As a control, a
peptide mutated in the IGF-binding site of BP5-C (BP5-Cmut), as well as
peptides derived from the IGFBP2 C-terminus and heparin-binding site were
also synthesized. Of these peptides, BP5-C and BP5-Cmut inhibited VEGF
expression and NF-kB activity. Furthermore, BP5-C inhibited angiogenesis
in an in vitro and an ex vivo system, consisting of HUVEC tube formation
and rat aortic ring blood vessel sprouting, respectively. The in vivo
effect of BP5-C on tumor growth was studied using i.p. injection of
ovarian cancer 2774 cells into mice, as well as with a patient-derived
xenograft mouse model. BP5-C peptide significantly inhibited tumor
growth, angiogenesis, and VEGF expression in both xenograft models. These
results suggest that the C-terminus of IGFBP5 exerts an anti-cancer
activity by inhibiting angiogenesis via downregulation of VEGF in an
IGF-independent manner, and may be considered as a novel angiogenesis
inhibitor for the treatment of ovarian cancer.

