Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A screen of breast and colon cancers with HER2 antibody clone
UMAB36 does not exhibit the cross-reactivity of clone 4B5 with HER4
protein


Increased sensitivity and specificity of immunohistochemical (IHC)
detection of HER2 expression is crucial as the role of Trastuzumab have
expanded in the treatment of HER2 positive non-breast cancer patients
such as gastric cancer patients. Non-specific nuclear and cytoplasmic
staining of the HER2 antibody clone 4B5 has been reported by other labs.
In this study, we evaluated the specificity of HER2 clone 4B5 and a new
HER2 antibody clone UMAB36 using a suite of methods including protein
lysate arrays, western blots, FISH and IHC correlation screens on 129
breast and 158 colon cancer cases for HER2 expression. The protein lysate
array and western results revealed that clone 4B5 recognizes three
proteins: HER2, HER4, and ZSCAN18, a nuclear transcription protein. In
comparison, clone UMAB36 recognized only HER2 protein in the same protein
lysate array and western screen as clone 4B5. False negative results,
based on correlation of IHC with FISH HER2 positives, were generated
using clone 4B5 in 1 breast and 5 gastric of the total 287 cancer cases
screened. Comparatively, no false negative results were observed using
clone UMAB36 in which there was a 100% correlation between IHC and FISH
screen. In this study, areas of normal gastric tissue often stained
positive by HER2 clone 4B5, so we performed further analysis of 470
normal gastric cases using Ventana's BenchMark instrument. The results
show that 278 normal gastric cases had positive stain with clone 4B5
compared to 3 cases with clone UMAB36. The high background by clone 4B5
may be due HER4 being upregulated in adjacent normal gastric tissue. Our
results indicate clone UMAB36 has higher specificity and sensitivity than
clone 4B5 in screening gastric tumors.

