Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combining Toca 511 and 5-fluorocytosine with PD-1 or CTLA-4
antibody significantly reduces tumor burden compared to either checkpoint
inhibitor alone or in combination in a subcutaneous mouse glioma model


Toca 511 (vocimagene amiretrorepvec), a retroviral replicating vector
encoding an optimized yeast cytosine deaminase (CD) protein, selectively
replicates and spreads in malignant cells. In infected cells, CD enzyme
is expressed and converts 5-FC (5-fluorocytosine, an oral anti-fungal
drug) to 5-FU, leading to both direct tumor cytotoxicity and extended
immunotherapeutic effects. As of 9/25/2015, 116 patients with recurrent
high grade glioma have been treated with Toca 511 & Toca FC in 3 ongoing
Phase 1 clinical trials (NCT01156584, NCT01470794, NCT01985256), in which
potential benefits were found, including extended overall survival and a
favorable safety profile. The purpose of this study was to determine if
combinations of Toca 511+5-FC with PD-1, CTLA-4, or both, are
therapeutically useful in a syngeneic mouse model, and for which
combinations we could see meaningful variations in tumor infiltrating
immune cells.2106 Tu-2449SC glioma cells (2% pretransduced with Toca 511
to provide a uniform starting inoculum) were implanted on the right
flanks of B6C3F1 mice and treatment initiated when tumors reached 100mm3.
5-FC treated mice received 500 mg/kg/day IP (5 days per week). PD-1 was
administered at 300g/mouse IP followed by 3 maintenance doses every 3
days of 200g/mouse. CTLA-4 (100g/mouse, IP) was administered every 3 days
(total of 6 treatments). Isotype antibodies were administered to control
groups. The study was terminated after 3 cycles of 5-FC. Tumors and
spleens were collected and analyzed by flow cytometry for 26 unique
immune cell populations.Tumor burden was significantly reduced with the
addition of Toca 511+5-FC to either antibody treatment alone or in
combination compared to antibody treatment groups. Treatment with Toca
511 and 5-FC alone was highly effective at controlling tumor growth,
therefore, additive treatment with PD-1, CTLA-4, or PD-1 + CTLA-4 did not
significantly further reduce tumor burden. The combination of PD-1 and
CTLA-4, but not either antibody alone, significantly reduced tumor
burden. Treatment with 5-FC significantly reduced tumor associated
macrophages as well as myeloid derived suppressor cells and increased
CD4+ T cell populations. Of the T cell populations that were increased in
the tumors, a greater percentage of T cells were producing IFN.Combining
Toca 511+5-FC with PD-1, CTLA-4 or the combination of antibodies
significantly reduced tumor growth compared to antibody treatments alone.
Tumor associated immune cell population analysis also revealed that Toca
511+5-FC altered the immune cell populations in the tumor to generate a
more permissive environment for immune activation and anti-tumor immune
response. Toca 511 & Toca FC may be broadly applicable in combination
with checkpoint inhibitors to help activate the immune system.

