Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The atomic basis for paclitaxel sensitization following loss of
CRMP2 phosphorylation in ovarian cancer cells


The chemotherapeutic agent paclitaxel increases cancer cell microtubule
stability, induces mitotic arrest and cancer cell death and improves
survival of cancer patients. However, in ovarian and other cancers, it
only elicits a response in less than half of patients who receive it. We
have previously shown that enhancing microtubule stability in cells prior
to paclitaxel treatment, further increases paclitaxel-induced microtubule
stability and cancer cell death (Ahmed et al., Cancer Cell, 2007;12:514
and Ahmed et al., Cancer Research 2011;71:5806). We now report that the
microtubule-associated protein CRMP2, and FER kinase are expressed in
almost half of high-grade serous ovarian cancers and that inhibiting the
phosphorylation of CRMP2 by FER is sufficient for enhancing
paclitaxel-induced microtubule stability and cytotoxicity in multiple
ovarian cancer cell lines.We are also able propose a detailed mechanism
underlying these observations. A combination of biochemistry,
super-resolution fluorescence microscopy, total internal reflection
fluorescence (TIRF) microscopy and electron microscopy reveals that CRMP2
induces microtubule nucleation, elongation, bundling and stability.
Moreover, FER phosphorylates CRMP2 at 6 tyrosine residues, two of which
(Tyr479 and Tyr499) are critical for modulating CRMP2 function; this
agrees with site-directed mutagenesis in cancer cells which points to
Tyr479 as a critical site for association between CRMP2 and microtubules.
A comparison of the crystal structures of wild-type CRMP2 and
Tyr479Glu/Tyr499Glu phosphomimetic mutants indicate that phosphorylation
of these sites induces significant conformational changes that prevent
CRMP2 from forming tetramers that are known to be critical for its
microtubule bundling activity.This then leads us to propose a molecular
model of how CRMP2 associates with microtubules, explaining how targeting
CRMP2 phosphorylation can be exploited for enhancing the therapeutic
efficacy of paclitaxel.

