Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BRAF inhibitor resistance reprograms metabolic and survival
pathways to sensitize melanoma cells to arginine deprivation


The combination of BRAF inhibitor (BRAFi) and MEK inhibitor (MEKi) has
been FDA approved to treat melanomas harboring (V600E) mutation. Although
most BRAF mutant melanomas are highly responsive to these treatments,
they all relapse ultimately. In this study, we found a unique mechanism
which can be used to treat BRAFi resistant patients. Five BRAFi resistant
(BR) cells were established from known BRAF mutant cell lines A375,
MEL-1220, A2058, UACC-62, and SK-MEL28 by long-term exposure to BRAFi.
These BR cells are hypersensitive to ADI-PEG20, an enzyme which degrades
arginine to citrulline. ADI-PEG20 treatment resulted in a 2-3-fold
decrease in BR cell viability (MTT assay) and 10-30% increase in
apoptosis (Annexin V/PI) in BR cells compared to their paternal cells.
The mechanisms involved are as follows: All BR cells express very low
levels or do not express argininosuccinate synthetase (ASS, a key enzyme
to generate arginine from citrulline). Thus, these BR cells rely
primarily on exogenous arginine. Furthermore, these BR cells also have
attenuation of glucose uptake which makes them rely mainly on amino
acids. Importantly, their ability to undergo autophagy upon nutritional
stress is also impaired. The underlying mechanism for low levels of ASS
is due to diminished c-Myc expression which is a positive regulator for
ASS. Additionally, AMPK-1, which possesses phosphorylation site at Thr172
governing autophagy and glucose uptake, was attenuated in BR cells.
Overexpression of AMPK-1 using plasmid transfection in A2058BR and
MEL-1220BR cells rescued 8-28% ADI-PEG20-induced apoptosis and enhanced
autophagosome formation (detected by LysoTacker). Conversely, knockdown
of AMPK-1 using siRNA significantly enhanced ADI-PEG20-reduced cell
viability (compared to non-targeting siRNA) in A2058 and MEL-1220 cells
through attenuation of autophagy and glucose uptake. This is evidenced by
decreased GLUT1 and LC3-II expression, and low activity of 2-NBDG uptake,
which also can be seen in most BR cells. The xenograft model also showed
that ADI-PEG20 aborted tumor growth of A2058BR and A375BR cells but
retarded growth of A2058 and A375 cells. Immunohistochemical staining
further confirmed lower levels of ASS and AMPK-1 in A2058BR xenograft and
in tumor tissues from 10 BR patients relative to their parental
counterparts (average H-scores of ASS and AMPK in parental tissues vs. BR
tissues are 58.2 vs. 7.8, and 146 vs. 78.3, respectively, p The
combination of BRAF inhibitor (BRAFi) and MEK inhibitor (MEKi) has been
FDA approved to treat melanomas harboring (V600E) mutation. Although most
BRAF mutant melanomas are highly responsive to these treatments, they all
relapse ultimately. In this study, we found a unique mechanism which can
be used to treat BRAFi resistant patients. Five BRAFi resistant (BR)
cells were established from known BRAF mutant cell lines A375, MEL-1220,
A2058, UACC-62, and SK-MEL28 by long-term exposure to BRAFi. These BR
cells are hypersensitive to ADI-PEG20, an enzyme which degrades arginine
to citrulline. ADI-PEG20 treatment resulted in a 2-3-fold decrease in BR
cell viability (MTT assay) and 10-30% increase in apoptosis (Annexin
V/PI) in BR cells compared to their paternal cells. The mechanisms
involved are as follows: All BR cells express very low levels or do not
express argininosuccinate synthetase (ASS, a key enzyme to generate
arginine from citrulline). Thus, these BR cells rely primarily on
exogenous arginine. Furthermore, these BR cells also have attenuation of
glucose uptake which makes them rely mainly on amino acids. Importantly,
their ability to undergo autophagy upon nutritional stress is also
impaired. The underlying mechanism for low levels of ASS is due to
diminished c-Myc expression which is a positive regulator for ASS.
Additionally, AMPK-1, which possesses phosphorylation site at Thr172
governing autophagy and glucose uptake, was attenuated in BR cells.
Overexpression of AMPK-1 using plasmid transfection in A2058BR and
MEL-1220BR cells rescued 8-28% ADI-PEG20-induced apoptosis and enhanced
autophagosome formation (detected by LysoTacker). Conversely, knockdown
of AMPK-1 using siRNA significantly enhanced ADI-PEG20-reduced cell
viability (compared to non-targeting siRNA) in A2058 and MEL-1220 cells
through attenuation of autophagy and glucose uptake. This is evidenced by
decreased GLUT1 and LC3-II expression, and low activity of 2-NBDG uptake,
which also can be seen in most BR cells. The xenograft model also showed
that ADI-PEG20 aborted tumor growth of A2058BR and A375BR cells but
retarded growth of A2058 and A375 cells. Immunohistochemical staining
further confirmed lower levels of ASS and AMPK-1 in A2058BR xenograft and
in tumor tissues from 10 BR patients relative to their parental
counterparts (average H-scores of ASS and AMPK in parental tissues vs. BR
tissues are 58.2 vs. 7.8, and 146 vs. 78.3, respectively, p <0.03).
Importantly, these findings also apply to cell lines and tumor samples
from patients who failed both BRAF and MEK inhibitor. In summary, our
data suggest that attenuated AMPK-1 mediated autophagy and glucose uptake
and decreased c-Myc mediated ASS re-expression sensitize BR cells to
arginine deprivation. Thus, ADI-PEG20 is a potential salvage therapy for
BR patients (Supported by R01CA152197).

