Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Myriocin, an inhibitor of serine palmitoyltransferase activity,
has the anti-angiogenic effect by attenuating VEGF-induced angiogenesis
signaling pathway


Myriocin is a powerful serine palmitoyl transferase inhibitor, by
inhibiting of sphingosine biosynthesis. Myriocin is also known to have
immunosuppressive activity. Here, we demonstrate the anti-angiogenic
effect of myriocin. Myriocin decreased vascular endothelial cell growth
factor (VEGF)-induced angiogenic process, that include proliferation,
migration, invasion, tube formation and cell adhesion in human umbilical
vein endothelial cells (HUVECs). Myriocin down-regulated VEGF-induced
VEGFR2, focal adhesion kinase, AKT kinase, rho-associated
coiled-coil-containing protein kinase 1 (ROCK1) and matrix
metalloproteinase-2 (MMP2) expression. Myriocin greatly reduced new
vessel formation in chick chorioallantoic membrane and vessel sprouting
in mouse aortic ring assay. Furthermore, VEGF-induced phalloidin
expression was inhibited by miyriocin in HUVECs. Our result indicated
that myriocin inhibited VEGF-induced proliferation, migration, invasion,
tube formation and cell adhesion in vitro by inhibiting VEGFR2-mediated
activation of FAK, AKT, ROCK1 and MMP2. Taken together, we suggest that
myriocin may act as significant angiogenic inhibitor by inhibiting
VEGF-induced signaling pathway.

