Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DNA-damaging reagent -0404 effectively inhibits hepatocellular
carcinoma through p53-dependent autophagy


BackgroundOn a worldwide basis, the prevalence of hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC) is twice as much in the past two decades, which is the
third most common cause in cancer deaths. Therefore there is still an
urgent need for new drugs with greater validity against HCC. Autophagy,
which is essential in the intracellular clearance of many proteins and
organelles, has been closely related to cancer generation and
development. Generally, p53 is recognized as a pro-autophagic factor in a
transcription-dependent pattern and also an important factor in the
progress of HCC. As a selective substrate for autophagy, p62 is a key
factor in tumorigenesis on account of its crucial roles in the control of
cellular events. Now that small molecule compound-0404 was defined as a
DNA-damaging reagent by the p53 pathway, our work aims to examine whether
0404 can affect p53-dependent autophagy and its positive effect in the
treatment of HCC.MethodsThe anti-cancer activity of 0404 was examined in
vitro. In the HepG2 cells and Huh7 cells, the apoptosis was detected by
Flow Cytometry, while cell viability was measured by the CCK8 Assay. The
Hela eGFP-LC3 cells, which express fusion protein combined light chain 3
(LC3) with enhanced Green Fluorescent Protein (eGFP), were treated with
0404 at various concentrations for various time points. HepG2 cells were
treated with 0404 at various concentrations (5.0 nM, 20 nM, and 50 nM)
for 24h. Autophagy was identified by eGFP-labeled LC3. And the expression
levels of autophagy-associated proteins, such as mammalian target of
rapamycin (mTOR), phospho-mTOR (p-mTOR), p62 and LC3B, were tested by
Western Blotting.ResultsWe confirmed that 0404 could inhibit the
proliferation of HepG2 and Huh7 in a dose-dependent manner, and compared
to Huh7 cells with mutant p53, HepG2 cells with wild-type p53 were more
sensitive to 0404 treatment for apoptosis. We also found that 0404
promoted the development of autophagy in a dose- and time-dependent
manner. Compared with untreated group, LC3 in 0404-treated groups resided
primarily in the cytoplasm including cytoplasmic puncta indicative of
autophagosomes. Simultaneously, the expression levels of mTOR and p62
were down-regulation, while the LC3B expression level was up-regulation
by 0404-treatment. And the expression level of p-mTOR was down-regulation
in a dose-dependent in HepG2 cells.ConclusionThese results show clearly
that DNA-damaging reagent-0404 can effectively inhibit HCC through
p53-dependent autophagy.AcknowledgmentThis work was supported by the
National Natural Science Foundation of China (81272679) and the Major
national S&T Projects (2013ZX09041003).

