Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A blueprint of androgen receptor splice variant transactivation


Constitutively active androgen receptor splice variants (AR-Vs) have been
implicated as one driver of castration-resistant progression of prostate
cancer. However, the critical steps leading to AR-V transactivation
remain largely unknown. AR-V7 and ARv567es are two major AR-Vs expressed
in human prostate cancer specimens. We found that disruption of AR-V7 and
ARv567es homodimerization did not affect their nuclear localization,
indicating that they can enter the nucleus as monomers. On the other
hand, disrupting the heterodimerization between AR-V7 or ARv567es and
AR-FL abolished AR-V7 and ARv567es-induced nuclear translocation of
AR-FL, indicating that the heterodimerization is required for AR-FL to be
piggy bagged into the nucleus. AR-V7 chromatin immunoprecipitation assay
further showed that mutating the dimerization interface of AR-V7 did not
decrease the ability of AR-V7 to bind to the promoter of its target
genes, UBE2C and CCNA2, indicating that dimerization is not required for
AR-Vs to bind to DNA. Moreover, mutating the DNA-binding interface of
AR-V7 only partially inhibited AR-V7 homodimerization and had no effect
on AR-FL/AR-V7 dimerization, suggesting that DNA binding may not be
necessary for AR-V/AR-V or AR-FL/AR-V dimerization. Nonetheless, both the
dimerization and the DNA-binding mutants of AR-V7 lost trans-activating
activity. Taken together, our data suggests that AR-V DNA binding and
dimerization are two independent but indispensable steps for AR-V
transactivation. AR-V can enter the nucleus as a monomer, and then either
forms a dimer before binding to DNA or binds to DNA as a monomer and then
forms a dimer to trans-activate gene transcription. Our study may provide
insights into developing more precisely targeted strategies to overcome
AR-V-driven castration resistance.

