Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combined inhibition of pan-RAF and VEGFR-2 mediates antitumor
activity in KRAS mutant non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) through
enhanced inhibition of tumor angiogenesis and growth


Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer death worldwide. MAPK
activation via KRAS mutation is present in up to 30% of lung cancer
patients. NSCLC patients with KRAS mutation is associated with poor
prognosis and represents an unmet medical need. LY3009120, a pan-RAF and
RAF dimer inhibitor which is in phase I clinical trial, was previously
demonstrated to have anti-tumor activities in BRAF or RAS mutant tumor
cells in vitro and in vivo. Ramucirumab, a fully-human antagonist
monoclonal antibody to human VEGFR-2 was recently approved as an
anti-angiogenic treatment for several cancer indications including
second-line NSCLC. Combination strategies in cancer including targeting
both tumor cells and the surrounding stroma cells have been shown to be
effective in various disease subtypes. In this study, the combination
effect of LSN3074753 (a surrogate and an analogue of LY3009120) with
VEGFR-2 inhibitor DC101 (a monoclonal antibody specific for murine
VEGFR-2 and a surrogate for ramucirumab) were evaluated in KRAS mutant
NSCLC models, including NCI-H2122 (G-12C), A549 (G-12S) and NCI-H441
(G-12V). LSN3074753 treatment alone resulted in 66.9% and 82.4% tumor
growth inhibition in H2122 and A549 xenograft tumors, respectively; and
41.4% tumor regression in H441 xenograft tumors. DC101 treatment alone
resulted in 64.5%, 75% and 102.2% tumor growth inhibition in H2122, A549
and H441, respectively. The combination of LSN3074753 and DC101 led to
more significant tumor growth inhibition (87.2% of tumor growth
inhibition for H2122, pLung cancer is the leading cause of cancer death
worldwide. MAPK activation via KRAS mutation is present in up to 30% of
lung cancer patients. NSCLC patients with KRAS mutation is associated
with poor prognosis and represents an unmet medical need. LY3009120, a
pan-RAF and RAF dimer inhibitor which is in phase I clinical trial, was
previously demonstrated to have anti-tumor activities in BRAF or RAS
mutant tumor cells in vitro and in vivo. Ramucirumab, a fully-human
antagonist monoclonal antibody to human VEGFR-2 was recently approved as
an anti-angiogenic treatment for several cancer indications including
second-line NSCLC. Combination strategies in cancer including targeting
both tumor cells and the surrounding stroma cells have been shown to be
effective in various disease subtypes. In this study, the combination
effect of LSN3074753 (a surrogate and an analogue of LY3009120) with
VEGFR-2 inhibitor DC101 (a monoclonal antibody specific for murine
VEGFR-2 and a surrogate for ramucirumab) were evaluated in KRAS mutant
NSCLC models, including NCI-H2122 (G-12C), A549 (G-12S) and NCI-H441
(G-12V). LSN3074753 treatment alone resulted in 66.9% and 82.4% tumor
growth inhibition in H2122 and A549 xenograft tumors, respectively; and
41.4% tumor regression in H441 xenograft tumors. DC101 treatment alone
resulted in 64.5%, 75% and 102.2% tumor growth inhibition in H2122, A549
and H441, respectively. The combination of LSN3074753 and DC101 led to
more significant tumor growth inhibition (87.2% of tumor growth
inhibition for H2122, p<0.001) or tumor regression (16.3% and 51.5% tumor
regression for A549 and H441, respectively, pLung cancer is the leading
cause of cancer death worldwide. MAPK activation via KRAS mutation is
present in up to 30% of lung cancer patients. NSCLC patients with KRAS
mutation is associated with poor prognosis and represents an unmet
medical need. LY3009120, a pan-RAF and RAF dimer inhibitor which is in
phase I clinical trial, was previously demonstrated to have anti-tumor
activities in BRAF or RAS mutant tumor cells in vitro and in vivo.
Ramucirumab, a fully-human antagonist monoclonal antibody to human
VEGFR-2 was recently approved as an anti-angiogenic treatment for several
cancer indications including second-line NSCLC. Combination strategies in
cancer including targeting both tumor cells and the surrounding stroma
cells have been shown to be effective in various disease subtypes. In
this study, the combination effect of LSN3074753 (a surrogate and an
analogue of LY3009120) with VEGFR-2 inhibitor DC101 (a monoclonal
antibody specific for murine VEGFR-2 and a surrogate for ramucirumab)
were evaluated in KRAS mutant NSCLC models, including NCI-H2122 (G-12C),
A549 (G-12S) and NCI-H441 (G-12V). LSN3074753 treatment alone resulted in
66.9% and 82.4% tumor growth inhibition in H2122 and A549 xenograft
tumors, respectively; and 41.4% tumor regression in H441 xenograft
tumors. DC101 treatment alone resulted in 64.5%, 75% and 102.2% tumor
growth inhibition in H2122, A549 and H441, respectively. The combination
of LSN3074753 and DC101 led to more significant tumor growth inhibition
(87.2% of tumor growth inhibition for H2122, p<0.001) or tumor regression
(16.3% and 51.5% tumor regression for A549 and H441, respectively,
p<0.001) when compared to single agent treatment. The molecular mechanism
was further investigated in H2122 and H441 tumor xenografts in terms of
MAPK signaling and its gene signatures, tumor vascularization, cell
proliferation and apoptosis. Treatment with LSN3074753 or DC101 alone
reduced the tumor vessels and pericytes, but the combination treatment
showed better effects. Similarly, the analysis of multiple cell cycle
markers indicated that the combination treatment inhibited cell
proliferation more than the single agent alone. Moreover, the combination
effect of LSN3074753 with ramucirumab was also investigated in vitro,
including endothelial cell sprouting, cord formation and tumor cell
driven cord formation assays to further understand the molecular
mechanisms underlying the combination benefit on different tumor
compartments including tumor and stroma cells. Overall, combined
inhibition of pan-RAF and VEGFR-2 enhanced both antiangiogenesis and
antitumor effects, and the data support that combining a panRAF inhibitor
with ramucirumab represents a promising strategy for the treatment of
KRAS mutant NSCLC.

