Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Association of periodontal disease and breast health in women
undergoing screening mammography


It is well established that chronic and persistent inflammation
contributes to cancer development. Chronic inflammation is often
associated with periodontal disease, or gum disease. Periodontal disease,
which can be prevented or ameliorated by following proper oral hygiene,
is known to be associated with various systemic disorders including
coronary heart disease and some cancers, including head and neck cancer
and pancreatic cancer. However, little is known about its potential
association with breast cancer, with only one report in which periodontal
disease was a positive predictor for breast cancer in a Swedish cohort.
To examine if a potential link exists between periodontal disease and
breast cancer in a separate cohort, mammography patients from the UC
Irvine Athena Breast Health Network cohort were recruited to participate
in a survey that included questions about their periodontal health.
Diagnosis of invasive breast cancer, DCIS, and benign breast diseases was
determined through data extraction from electronic medical records. There
was no association between periodontal disease and DCIS or invasive
breast cancer. However, there was a significant difference in the
frequency of breast cysts among women with periodontal disease compared
to women without periodontal disease (pIt is well established that
chronic and persistent inflammation contributes to cancer development.
Chronic inflammation is often associated with periodontal disease, or gum
disease. Periodontal disease, which can be prevented or ameliorated by
following proper oral hygiene, is known to be associated with various
systemic disorders including coronary heart disease and some cancers,
including head and neck cancer and pancreatic cancer. However, little is
known about its potential association with breast cancer, with only one
report in which periodontal disease was a positive predictor for breast
cancer in a Swedish cohort. To examine if a potential link exists between
periodontal disease and breast cancer in a separate cohort, mammography
patients from the UC Irvine Athena Breast Health Network cohort were
recruited to participate in a survey that included questions about their
periodontal health. Diagnosis of invasive breast cancer, DCIS, and benign
breast diseases was determined through data extraction from electronic
medical records. There was no association between periodontal disease and
DCIS or invasive breast cancer. However, there was a significant
difference in the frequency of breast cysts among women with periodontal
disease compared to women without periodontal disease (p<0.01). Women
with periodontal disease were at least 4-fold more likely to have breast
cysts, even after adjusting for potential confounders including age,
race/ethnicity, and smoking history (pIt is well established that chronic
and persistent inflammation contributes to cancer development. Chronic
inflammation is often associated with periodontal disease, or gum
disease. Periodontal disease, which can be prevented or ameliorated by
following proper oral hygiene, is known to be associated with various
systemic disorders including coronary heart disease and some cancers,
including head and neck cancer and pancreatic cancer. However, little is
known about its potential association with breast cancer, with only one
report in which periodontal disease was a positive predictor for breast
cancer in a Swedish cohort. To examine if a potential link exists between
periodontal disease and breast cancer in a separate cohort, mammography
patients from the UC Irvine Athena Breast Health Network cohort were
recruited to participate in a survey that included questions about their
periodontal health. Diagnosis of invasive breast cancer, DCIS, and benign
breast diseases was determined through data extraction from electronic
medical records. There was no association between periodontal disease and
DCIS or invasive breast cancer. However, there was a significant
difference in the frequency of breast cysts among women with periodontal
disease compared to women without periodontal disease (p<0.01). Women
with periodontal disease were at least 4-fold more likely to have breast
cysts, even after adjusting for potential confounders including age,
race/ethnicity, and smoking history (p<0.05). To our knowledge, this is
the first report on an association between periodontal disease and breast
cysts. Our data suggest that further studies on potential links between
periodontal disease and breast health are warranted.

