Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Paracrine c-MET/HGF HCC PDX: evaluation of a biologics targeting
c-MET


The interaction between the c-MET tyrosine kinase receptor (RTK) on the
surface of cancer cells with its ligand, hepatocyte growth factor (HGF)
secreted from surrounding tumor stroma, results in paracrine signal
transduction in cancer cells to promote growth, invasion, angiogenesis
and metastases. c-MET gene amplification/over-expression, or activating
mutations, frequently function as oncogenic driver in several types of
cancers. c-MET is thus considered a key target(1) for both TKIs or
biologics. However, lack of suitable animal models has represented an
obstacle for the development of new cMET inhibitors. While patient
derived xenografts (PDXs) mirror patients histopathological/genetic
profiles(2-6), they usually lose human stroma, the source of HGF;
moreover the HGF originated from murine stroma is incapable of triggering
a paracrine signaling because of lack of cross reactivity with the human
c-MET. Some PDX grow independent of paracrine mechanisms because of their
constitutive c-MET activation by the presence of activating mutations,
gene amplification or autocrine signaling, and can be used to evaluate
the efficacy of TKIs(5, 7, 8). However they are not suitable to assess
biologics, e.g. antibodies disrupting receptor-ligand interaction.
Alternatively it is possible to grow tumors in hu-HGF-transgenic
immunocompromised mice (humanization) where an artificial paracrine
signaling is created. Interestingly, we have identified a unique HCC-PDX,
LI0801, which maintains human stroma throughout passages, as demonstrated
by immunochemistry staining for human vimentine and human HGF, both
markers of stromal components(7, 8). The mechanisms of human stroma
maintenance in this PDXremain unclear. We showed that LI0801 responds to
different TKIs(7, 8). In addition we evaluated the efficacy of an
anti-human c-MET monoclonal antibody in reducing tumor burden in LI0801,
and we were able to demonstrate great tumor response to anti-human c-MET
antibody, which is significantly more effective than crizotinib. To the
best of our knowledge, LI0801 is the first paracrine c-MET PDX reported,
and represents an important model to study paracrine cMET/HGF signaling
and to evaluate new c-MET inhibitors, both TKIs, and
biologics.References1. Comoglio PM, et al. Nat Rev Drug Discov.
2008;7:504-16.2. Ding L, et al. Nature. 2010;464:999-1005.3.Marangoni E,
et al. A new model of patient tumor-derived breast cancer xenografts for
preclinical assays. Clin Cancer Res. 2007;13:3989-98.4.Chen D,
Oncotarget. 2015.5. Yang M, et al. International journal of cancer
Journal international du cancer. 2013;132:E74-84.6. Zhang L, et al. A
subset of gastric cancers with EGFR amplification and overexpression
respond to cetuximab therapy. Sci Rep. 2013;3:2992.7. Bladt F, et al.
Cancers (Basel). 2014;6:1736-52.8. Chen D. AACR Annual Meeting 2012.
2012;Poster.

