Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combined inhibition of WEE1 and PARP1 radiosensitizes KRAS mutant
non-small cell lung cancers via inhibition of DSB repair


Mutant KRAS is found in approximately 30% of non-small cell lung cancers
(NSCLC) and is associated with poor prognosis. Despite the use of
radiation (RT) therapy for the treatment of locally advanced disease,
local recurrence remains an issue. The observation that mutations in KRAS
lead to both replication stress and DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs)
suggests these cancers may have a greater reliance on DNA damage response
pathways and therefore may be preferentially radiosensitized by therapies
targeting DNA repair. In this study, we investigated the combined
inhibition of WEE1 and PARP1 using the small molecule inhibitors, AZD1775
and olaparib, respectively as a radiosensitizing strategy in KRAS mutant
NSCLC. We began by comparing radiosensitization by AZD1775+olaparib, in
KRAS isogenic H1703 lung cancer cells and found that KRAS mutant cells
were preferentially radiosensitized (ER, enhancement ratio 1.8) compared
to KRAS wild type cells (ER 1.4). Combined WEE1 and PARP1 inhibition also
radiosensitized KRAS mutant Calu-6 and NCI-H23 lung cancer cells (ER 1.9
and 1.5, respectively). These findings were further confirmed in vivo:
Calu-6 tumor xenografts were significantly radiosensitized by
AZD1775+olaparib, as evidenced by an 11 day delay in tumor volume
doubling time relative to RT treatment. Given that WEE1 and PARP1
function to prevent and manage replication stress, respectively, we
hypothesized that radiosensitization by AZD1775+olaparib results from
persistent replication stress. While replication stress did contribute to
AZD1775-mediated radiosensitization in Calu-6 cells, as evidenced by
pan-nuclear H2AX staining, and the ability of exogenous nucleosides to
protect cells from radiosensitization by AZD1775 alone, nucleosides had
little effect on radiosensitization by AZD1775+olaparib. These results
suggest that replication stress is not required for radiosensitization by
AZD1775+olaparib. As WEE1 and PARP1 both promote repair of
radiation-induced DNA damage, we hypothesized that radiosensitization by
AZD1775+olaparib results from persistent, unrepaired DSBs. Assessment of
the kinetics of DSB repair by H2AX flow cytometry demonstrated that while
total H2AX levels in cells treated with RT alone had returned to control
levels within 24 h, AZD1775+olaparib treatment significantly delayed the
resolution of H2AX following RT, with 44.8% or 46.2% of Calu-6 or KRAS
mutant H1703 cells, respectively remaining H2AX-positive 24 h post-RT.
This delay corresponded with the inhibition of radiation-induced RAD51
foci by AZD1775, indicating inhibition of homologous recombination
repair. Taken together these data demonstrate the efficacy of combined
inhibition of WEE1 and PARP1 with radiation in KRAS mutant lung cancer.
Furthermore, these results suggest that although replication stress
occurs in response to AZD1775 and olaparib, persistent DSBs are the cause
of radiosensitization.

