Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Trends in fatal prostate cancer incidence by race among US men


Background: Prostate-specific antigen testing (PSA) has dramatically
changed the composition of prostate cancer, making it difficult to assess
incidence trends. By defining fatal prostate cancer as the underlying
cause of death from disease within 10 years of diagnosis, we have been
able to conduct an in-depth analysis of clinically relevant prostate
cancer incidence trends.Methods: We extracted incident prostate cancer
cases, causes of death and survival among men aged 45-84 years using the
US Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) database
(1975-2002). In addition to standard descriptive analyses, the ability to
distinguish prostate cancer cases that were ultimately fatal enabled us
to fit age-period-cohort models.Results: Among 51,682 fatal prostate
cancer cases, incidence increased 1% per year prior to 1992, declined 15%
per year from 1992-1995, and further declined by 5% per year through
2002. Age-specific incidence rates of fatal disease decreased over 2% per
year among men aged 55 years and older, yet increased up to 1% per year
among younger men. Fatal disease rates were more than 2-fold higher in
black men compared with white men, a racial disparity that increased to
3-6 fold among younger men.Conclusion: In the United States, after
widespread use of PSA screening and advances in prostate cancer
treatment, fatal prostate cancer rates have substantially declined. Yet,
rates of fatal prostate cancer among younger men have remained relatively
stable, suggesting the need for additional attention to early-onset
prostate cancer that has the potential to result in death. This study
also highlights the persistent black-to-white racial disparity in fatal
prostate cancer, underscoring the need for a greater understanding of the
causes of this difference so that strategies may be implemented to
reduce, and ultimately eliminate, racial disparities in prostate cancer.

