Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metabolic rewiring in Rb deficient cells during cancer progression


Tumor suppressors control critical steps of cellular metabolism and its
inactivation induces cancer specific-metabolic features including aerobic
glycolysis. Glycolysis contributes to energy generation and supplying
precursors of biomass, e.g., nucleotide, amino sugar, amino acid and
lipids. These macromolecules were required for proliferation and cancer
survival. Although aerobic glycolysis is now widely accepted as a
metabolic feature of cancer, its causal relationship with cancer
progression is still unclear.In common type cancers, inactivation of RB
tumor suppressor is prevalently observed during tumor progression.
Previous studies demonstrated RB inactivation induces inflammation,
angiogenesis, drug resistance, etc., as well as cell cycle progression.
We currently focus on the impact of RB deficiency on the central carbon
metabolism, e.g., glycolysis, TCA cycle and glutamine metabolism. To
address this point, we established a mouse model in which RB depletion in
p53-null soft tissue sarcoma cells induced undifferentiated phenotype
associated with glycolytic to glutaminolytic switch (metabolic rewiring)
most probably due to down-regulation of Pgam2 activity. Up-regulation of
Pgam2 in these cells antagonized the metabolic rewiring, and suppressed
spherogenic and tumorigenic activities of RB deficient cells, however did
not affect cell proliferation in 2D culture conditions. Moreover, Pgam2
depletion suppressed RB-dependent myogenic differentiation. These
findings suggest that RB controls tumorigenicity and differentiation by
influencing central carbon metabolism via Pgam2.

