Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ERK-dependent IL-6 autocrine signaling mediates adaptive
resistance to pan-PI3K inhibitor in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma


Purpose: To investigate resistant mechanisms to NVP-BKM120, a pan-PI3K
inhibitor, and potential combination therapies in head and neck squamous
cell carcinoma (HNSCC).Experimental Design: A panel of 10 human HNSCC
cell lines including NVP-BKM120-resistant HNSCC patient-derived cell
lines were used to evaluate the antitumor activity of NVP-BKM120.
Patient-derived tumor xenograft (PDTX) models were established from
recurrent/metastatic HNSCC patients treated with and resistant to
NVP-BKM120.Results: Treatment of NVP-BKM120 led to upregulation of
interleukin 6 (IL-6) and subsequent activation of either extracellular
signal-regulated kinase (ERK) or signal transducers and activators of
transcription 3 (STAT3), resulting in a modest antitumor effects on HNSCC
cells. In a subset of cell lines, blockade of IL-6 autocrine signaling
with IL-6 receptor (IL-6R) siRNA or IL-6R neutralizing antibody
completely abolished constitutive or NVP-BKM120-induced activation of ERK
and STAT3 as well as expression of oncogenic factors including Bcl2 and
cMYC, resulting in the enhanced sensitivity to NVP-BKM120 with a marked
reduction of S phase and significant increment of G0/G1 arrest.
Interestingly, trametinib, a MEK inhibitor, significantly reduced
NVP-BKM120-induced IL-6 and cMYC upregulation, whereas it had no effect
on STAT3 inhibition. Moreover, combination of NVP-BKM120 with trametinib
yielded more potent anti-tumor effects than combination with a
pharmacologic inhibitor of STAT3 or siSTAT3. Furthermore, combination of
NVP-BKM120 with trametinib or tocilizumab, a humanised anti-IL-6 receptor
antibody, synergistically suppressed the growth of NVP-BKM120-resistant
PDTX models as compared with either agent alone, which was confirmed in
two PDTX-derived cell lines.Conclusions: Collectively, these results
suggested that IL-6/ERK signaling contributes to intrinsic and adaptive
resistance to NVP-BKM120 in HNSCC, providing a rationale for a novel
therapeutic strategy to overcome resistance to pan-PI3K inhibitors.

