Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Circulating tumor cells from in vitro 3D culture systems have
tumor-initiating capacity in vivo


Circulating tumor cells (CTCs) are cells that have detached from the
primary tumor and entered the bloodstream with the potential to seed
metastatic tumors in distal sites. High CTC numbers correlate with
aggressive disease, increased metastasis, and decreased time to relapse.
It has also been shown that cancer stem cells (CSCs) represent a
proportion of the CTCs present in patients. Given that CSCs are resistant
to chemotherapy and are responsible for tumor initiation, it is posited
that the CSCs are the seeds of metastasis. However, direct evidence for
this hypothesis is limited because there are few methods for culturing
and studying these rare cells. We are using a 3D culture chamber system
(RealBio D4) to establish long-term cultures of human-derived breast and
pancreatic tumors. We observed that the system's 3D matrix supported
culture development and incorporation of tissue organization and
microenvironment. Further, the chamber design allowed CTCs generated
within the cultures to migrate out of the cell mass into the circulating
nutrient medium where they were collected for characterization. The
isolated CTCs displayed CSC properties via CellSearch (CD44+,CD24-;
CD44+,CD24+ for breast and pancreas respectively). In addition, these
isolated CTCs displayed tumor-initiating capacity when implanted into
mice. Future studies will compare CTCs isolated from 3D culture with
cells from tumors, blood, and tissue grown on scaffold through RT-PCR,
histology, and gene expression assays.

