Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: microRNA regulation of Nrf2 and the antioxidant response in breast
cancer cells following redox therapy


Mitoquinone (MitoQ), a redox-active mitochondrially targeted
chemotherapy, activates autophagy through the production of reactive
oxygen species (ROS) in breast cancer cells. Studies have also shown a
concomitant activation of Nrf2 and the antioxidant response with MitoQ
treatment. Nrf2 (nuclear factor (erythroid-derived 2)-like 2) is a
transcription factor that regulates the antioxidant response element.
Drugs that stimulate Nrf2 are ideal for the treatment of diseases induced
by oxidative stress; however, over-activation of Nrf2 may promote tumor
growth and diminish the effects of redox active chemotherapies.
Therefore, understanding the relationship between autophagy and oxidative
stress is crucial for determining the fate of cancer cells exposed to
redox-active oncology agents. The aim of this study was to evaluate
microRNA (miRNA) as a link between oxidative stress and autophagy through
modulation of Nrf2 activity. microRNA are endogenous small (18-22 base
pairs long) double stranded RNA that bind to the 3 UTR of target mRNA.
miRNA function through translational repression via mRNA recycling and
degradation. To this aim we set out on finding miRNA that suppress the
antioxidant response, modulated by Nrf2, in cancer cells after redox
therapy with the goal of inducing a death response. After 24 hours of
non-target pool or Nrf2 silencing, using small interfering RNAs,
MDA-MB-231 cells were treated with DMSO or MitoQ for 18 hours. RNA was
extracted and miRNAs were identified using Illumina RNA sequencing. DEseq
revealed 97 miRNAs that were differentially expressed at Mitoquinone
(MitoQ), a redox-active mitochondrially targeted chemotherapy, activates
autophagy through the production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) in
breast cancer cells. Studies have also shown a concomitant activation of
Nrf2 and the antioxidant response with MitoQ treatment. Nrf2 (nuclear
factor (erythroid-derived 2)-like 2) is a transcription factor that
regulates the antioxidant response element. Drugs that stimulate Nrf2 are
ideal for the treatment of diseases induced by oxidative stress; however,
over-activation of Nrf2 may promote tumor growth and diminish the effects
of redox active chemotherapies. Therefore, understanding the relationship
between autophagy and oxidative stress is crucial for determining the
fate of cancer cells exposed to redox-active oncology agents. The aim of
this study was to evaluate microRNA (miRNA) as a link between oxidative
stress and autophagy through modulation of Nrf2 activity. microRNA are
endogenous small (18-22 base pairs long) double stranded RNA that bind to
the 3 UTR of target mRNA. miRNA function through translational repression
via mRNA recycling and degradation. To this aim we set out on finding
miRNA that suppress the antioxidant response, modulated by Nrf2, in
cancer cells after redox therapy with the goal of inducing a death
response. After 24 hours of non-target pool or Nrf2 silencing, using
small interfering RNAs, MDA-MB-231 cells were treated with DMSO or MitoQ
for 18 hours. RNA was extracted and miRNAs were identified using Illumina
RNA sequencing. DEseq revealed 97 miRNAs that were differentially
expressed at < 0.05. Biologically significant miRNAs were then
distinguished by using a Log2 fold change cut off of -1.0 Mitoquinone
(MitoQ), a redox-active mitochondrially targeted chemotherapy, activates
autophagy through the production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) in
breast cancer cells. Studies have also shown a concomitant activation of
Nrf2 and the antioxidant response with MitoQ treatment. Nrf2 (nuclear
factor (erythroid-derived 2)-like 2) is a transcription factor that
regulates the antioxidant response element. Drugs that stimulate Nrf2 are
ideal for the treatment of diseases induced by oxidative stress; however,
over-activation of Nrf2 may promote tumor growth and diminish the effects
of redox active chemotherapies. Therefore, understanding the relationship
between autophagy and oxidative stress is crucial for determining the
fate of cancer cells exposed to redox-active oncology agents. The aim of
this study was to evaluate microRNA (miRNA) as a link between oxidative
stress and autophagy through modulation of Nrf2 activity. microRNA are
endogenous small (18-22 base pairs long) double stranded RNA that bind to
the 3 UTR of target mRNA. miRNA function through translational repression
via mRNA recycling and degradation. To this aim we set out on finding
miRNA that suppress the antioxidant response, modulated by Nrf2, in
cancer cells after redox therapy with the goal of inducing a death
response. After 24 hours of non-target pool or Nrf2 silencing, using
small interfering RNAs, MDA-MB-231 cells were treated with DMSO or MitoQ
for 18 hours. RNA was extracted and miRNAs were identified using Illumina
RNA sequencing. DEseq revealed 97 miRNAs that were differentially
expressed at < 0.05. Biologically significant miRNAs were then
distinguished by using a Log2 fold change cut off of -1.0 < and
Mitoquinone (MitoQ), a redox-active mitochondrially targeted
chemotherapy, activates autophagy through the production of reactive
oxygen species (ROS) in breast cancer cells. Studies have also shown a
concomitant activation of Nrf2 and the antioxidant response with MitoQ
treatment. Nrf2 (nuclear factor (erythroid-derived 2)-like 2) is a
transcription factor that regulates the antioxidant response element.
Drugs that stimulate Nrf2 are ideal for the treatment of diseases induced
by oxidative stress; however, over-activation of Nrf2 may promote tumor
growth and diminish the effects of redox active chemotherapies.
Therefore, understanding the relationship between autophagy and oxidative
stress is crucial for determining the fate of cancer cells exposed to
redox-active oncology agents. The aim of this study was to evaluate
microRNA (miRNA) as a link between oxidative stress and autophagy through
modulation of Nrf2 activity. microRNA are endogenous small (18-22 base
pairs long) double stranded RNA that bind to the 3 UTR of target mRNA.
miRNA function through translational repression via mRNA recycling and
degradation. To this aim we set out on finding miRNA that suppress the
antioxidant response, modulated by Nrf2, in cancer cells after redox
therapy with the goal of inducing a death response. After 24 hours of
non-target pool or Nrf2 silencing, using small interfering RNAs,
MDA-MB-231 cells were treated with DMSO or MitoQ for 18 hours. RNA was
extracted and miRNAs were identified using Illumina RNA sequencing. DEseq
revealed 97 miRNAs that were differentially expressed at < 0.05.
Biologically significant miRNAs were then distinguished by using a Log2
fold change cut off of -1.0 < and < 1.0, which identified 39 microRNAs.
Since miRNA should be high when their target is low we were predominantly
interested in the 15 miRNAs that were down-regulated (DMSO:MitoQ). 7 of
the 15 down-regulated miRNAs were also down-regulated in the presence of
Nrf2 silencing in both the DMSO and MitoQ treatments. We are currently
investigating these 7 miRNAs in terms of the specific effect they have on
the Nrf2 pathway during redox therapy.

