Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PEGylated recombinant hyaluronidase PH20 (PEGPH20) enhances
pemetrexed antitumor efficacy in a human nonsquamous NSCLC xenograft model


Introduction: Hyaluronan (HA) is an extracellular matrix
glycosaminoglycan that has been shown to accumulate at high levels in
several cancers, including non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). The
accumulation of HA in NSCLC is associated with a more aggressive
phenotype and shortened overall survival. In a prevalence analysis using
tissue microarrays of archival human specimens (N = 194) stained by
affinity histochemistry, we demonstrated that 55% of adenocarcinomas, 74%
of squamous cell carcinomas and 83% of large cell carcinomas accumulated
HA. The engineered enzyme PEGylated recombinant human hyaluronidase PH20
(PEGPH20) removes HA from the tumor microenvironment. PEGPH20-based
therapies are being evaluated in clinical studies of several solid
tumors, including NSCLC (NCT02346370, NCT02563548). Herein, we evaluated
the hypothesis that PEGPH20 combination therapy could enhance the
efficacy of pemetrexed (PEM), a folate antimetabolite approved by FDA as
a first-line treatment in combination with cisplatin, against locally
advanced and metastatic NSCLC in patients with non-squamous
histology.Methods: We evaluated PEGPH20 plus PEM in a NSCLC xenograft
model. First, the human NSCLC adenocarinoma cell line A549 was transduced
with hyaluronan synthase-3 (HAS3) to generate the A549/HAS3 cell line.
Next, A549/HAS3 cells were inoculated adjacent to the tibial periosteum
of nude mice and tumor growth was monitored via ultrasonography. When
tumors size reached 250 mm3, mice were staged into six groups: (1)
vehicle; (2) PEGPH20, (3) PEM daily, (4) PEM weekly, (5) PEGPH20+PEM
daily or (6) PEGPH20+PEM weekly. Vascular volume, hypoxia and tumor
growth inhibition (TGI) were assessed using conventional methods.
Affinity histochemical staining for HA was performed on formalin-fixed
paraffin-embedded tissue sections after harvest.Results: A549/HAS3 tumors
grew faster than parental A549 tumors in vivo. PEGPH20 monotherapy
significantly reduced tumoral HA, increased vascular volume and reduced
hypoxia in tumors. Further, TGI with PEGPH20+PEM, weekly or daily, was
29.7 or 31.1%, respectively, whereas in either PEGPH20 alone or PEM
alone, both were Introduction: Hyaluronan (HA) is an extracellular matrix
glycosaminoglycan that has been shown to accumulate at high levels in
several cancers, including non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). The
accumulation of HA in NSCLC is associated with a more aggressive
phenotype and shortened overall survival. In a prevalence analysis using
tissue microarrays of archival human specimens (N = 194) stained by
affinity histochemistry, we demonstrated that 55% of adenocarcinomas, 74%
of squamous cell carcinomas and 83% of large cell carcinomas accumulated
HA. The engineered enzyme PEGylated recombinant human hyaluronidase PH20
(PEGPH20) removes HA from the tumor microenvironment. PEGPH20-based
therapies are being evaluated in clinical studies of several solid
tumors, including NSCLC (NCT02346370, NCT02563548). Herein, we evaluated
the hypothesis that PEGPH20 combination therapy could enhance the
efficacy of pemetrexed (PEM), a folate antimetabolite approved by FDA as
a first-line treatment in combination with cisplatin, against locally
advanced and metastatic NSCLC in patients with non-squamous
histology.Methods: We evaluated PEGPH20 plus PEM in a NSCLC xenograft
model. First, the human NSCLC adenocarinoma cell line A549 was transduced
with hyaluronan synthase-3 (HAS3) to generate the A549/HAS3 cell line.
Next, A549/HAS3 cells were inoculated adjacent to the tibial periosteum
of nude mice and tumor growth was monitored via ultrasonography. When
tumors size reached 250 mm3, mice were staged into six groups: (1)
vehicle; (2) PEGPH20, (3) PEM daily, (4) PEM weekly, (5) PEGPH20+PEM
daily or (6) PEGPH20+PEM weekly. Vascular volume, hypoxia and tumor
growth inhibition (TGI) were assessed using conventional methods.
Affinity histochemical staining for HA was performed on formalin-fixed
paraffin-embedded tissue sections after harvest.Results: A549/HAS3 tumors
grew faster than parental A549 tumors in vivo. PEGPH20 monotherapy
significantly reduced tumoral HA, increased vascular volume and reduced
hypoxia in tumors. Further, TGI with PEGPH20+PEM, weekly or daily, was
29.7 or 31.1%, respectively, whereas in either PEGPH20 alone or PEM
alone, both were <9%. Staining of A549/HAS3 tumors showed increased
accumulation of HA as compared with the parental A549
xenografts.Conclusion: These data suggest that addition of PEGPH20 to
pemetrexed increases the efficacy of PEM and support further
investigation of PEGPH20 plus PEM treatment in NSCLC tumors of
non-squamous histology that accumulate HA.

