Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pretreatment carcinoembryonic antigen levels predict survival in
patients with rectal adenocarcinoma


Background: Population-based studies have reported elevated
Carcinoembryonic Antigen (CEA) level as an independent prognostic factor
in patients with colon cancer, thus supporting inclusion of CEA-based C
stage in classical TNM staging for colon cancer. However, the effect of
C-stage incorporation on outcomes for patients with rectal adenocarcinoma
is unknown.Methods: The Surveillance, Epidemiology and End Result (SEER)
database was used to collect data from 2004 to 2007 for patients with
rectal adenocarcinoma by topography code C20.9 and histology codes
8140-8144, 8210-8211, 8220-8221, 8260-8263, 8440, 8480-8481, and 8490.
CEA stage C0 = normal CEA or C1 = elevated CEA was assigned to patients
with known pretreatment CEA levels. Observed survival (OS) by American
Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) stages I-IV and CEA stage C0 or 1 was
determined using Kaplan Meier method. Relative survival (RS) as a net
measure of cancer survival adjusted for sex, race, age and date was
calculated in addition to observed survival (OS). Log-rank was used to
compare observed survival. Z-test with corresponding p values was used to
compare 5-year relative survival.Results: We identified 25,241 patients
with a record of histologically confirmed invasive rectal adenocarcinoma.
Approximately half (N = 13,151) of these patients had records of
pretreatment CEA levels: N = 6,360 stage C1, N = 6,690 stage C0 and a
small number (101) with borderline CEA levels. Mean age at diagnosis was
similar in both groups, 64.2 for C0 and 64.7 for C1. Among patients with
C1 disease the leading AJCC stage was distant metastatic, stage IV
(33.8%) followed by 25.8% stage III, 20.7% stage II, 13.8% stage I, and
5.9% unknown stage. In contrast to CI disease, the most common stage for
C0 was stage I (35.2%), and only 6.3% of patients with C0 were diagnosed
with stage IV disease. Observed survival by each of I-IV AJCC TNM stages
was decreased for C1 stage relative to C0, pBackground: Population-based
studies have reported elevated Carcinoembryonic Antigen (CEA) level as an
independent prognostic factor in patients with colon cancer, thus
supporting inclusion of CEA-based C stage in classical TNM staging for
colon cancer. However, the effect of C-stage incorporation on outcomes
for patients with rectal adenocarcinoma is unknown.Methods: The
Surveillance, Epidemiology and End Result (SEER) database was used to
collect data from 2004 to 2007 for patients with rectal adenocarcinoma by
topography code C20.9 and histology codes 8140-8144, 8210-8211,
8220-8221, 8260-8263, 8440, 8480-8481, and 8490. CEA stage C0 = normal
CEA or C1 = elevated CEA was assigned to patients with known pretreatment
CEA levels. Observed survival (OS) by American Joint Committee on Cancer
(AJCC) stages I-IV and CEA stage C0 or 1 was determined using Kaplan
Meier method. Relative survival (RS) as a net measure of cancer survival
adjusted for sex, race, age and date was calculated in addition to
observed survival (OS). Log-rank was used to compare observed survival.
Z-test with corresponding p values was used to compare 5-year relative
survival.Results: We identified 25,241 patients with a record of
histologically confirmed invasive rectal adenocarcinoma. Approximately
half (N = 13,151) of these patients had records of pretreatment CEA
levels: N = 6,360 stage C1, N = 6,690 stage C0 and a small number (101)
with borderline CEA levels. Mean age at diagnosis was similar in both
groups, 64.2 for C0 and 64.7 for C1. Among patients with C1 disease the
leading AJCC stage was distant metastatic, stage IV (33.8%) followed by
25.8% stage III, 20.7% stage II, 13.8% stage I, and 5.9% unknown stage.
In contrast to CI disease, the most common stage for C0 was stage I
(35.2%), and only 6.3% of patients with C0 were diagnosed with stage IV
disease. Observed survival by each of I-IV AJCC TNM stages was decreased
for C1 stage relative to C0, p<0.001. The 5-year OS by AJCC TNM stage for
C1 was as follows: 56.7% for IC1 (CI = 53.3-59.9), 55.4% for IIC1 (CI =
52.7-58.1), and 53.4% for IIIC1 (CI = 51.0-55.8). The 5-year OS by AJCC
TNM stage for C0 was 75.8% for IC0 (CI = 74.1-77.5), 68.8% for IIC0 (CI =
66.5-71.0), 65.4% for IIIC0 (63.3-67.5). Stage shifting was observed with
IIIC0 disease, which had superior OS as compared to stage IIC1 and IC1
(pBackground: Population-based studies have reported elevated
Carcinoembryonic Antigen (CEA) level as an independent prognostic factor
in patients with colon cancer, thus supporting inclusion of CEA-based C
stage in classical TNM staging for colon cancer. However, the effect of
C-stage incorporation on outcomes for patients with rectal adenocarcinoma
is unknown.Methods: The Surveillance, Epidemiology and End Result (SEER)
database was used to collect data from 2004 to 2007 for patients with
rectal adenocarcinoma by topography code C20.9 and histology codes
8140-8144, 8210-8211, 8220-8221, 8260-8263, 8440, 8480-8481, and 8490.
CEA stage C0 = normal CEA or C1 = elevated CEA was assigned to patients
with known pretreatment CEA levels. Observed survival (OS) by American
Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) stages I-IV and CEA stage C0 or 1 was
determined using Kaplan Meier method. Relative survival (RS) as a net
measure of cancer survival adjusted for sex, race, age and date was
calculated in addition to observed survival (OS). Log-rank was used to
compare observed survival. Z-test with corresponding p values was used to
compare 5-year relative survival.Results: We identified 25,241 patients
with a record of histologically confirmed invasive rectal adenocarcinoma.
Approximately half (N = 13,151) of these patients had records of
pretreatment CEA levels: N = 6,360 stage C1, N = 6,690 stage C0 and a
small number (101) with borderline CEA levels. Mean age at diagnosis was
similar in both groups, 64.2 for C0 and 64.7 for C1. Among patients with
C1 disease the leading AJCC stage was distant metastatic, stage IV
(33.8%) followed by 25.8% stage III, 20.7% stage II, 13.8% stage I, and
5.9% unknown stage. In contrast to CI disease, the most common stage for
C0 was stage I (35.2%), and only 6.3% of patients with C0 were diagnosed
with stage IV disease. Observed survival by each of I-IV AJCC TNM stages
was decreased for C1 stage relative to C0, p<0.001. The 5-year OS by AJCC
TNM stage for C1 was as follows: 56.7% for IC1 (CI = 53.3-59.9), 55.4%
for IIC1 (CI = 52.7-58.1), and 53.4% for IIIC1 (CI = 51.0-55.8). The
5-year OS by AJCC TNM stage for C0 was 75.8% for IC0 (CI = 74.1-77.5),
68.8% for IIC0 (CI = 66.5-71.0), 65.4% for IIIC0 (63.3-67.5). Stage
shifting was observed with IIIC0 disease, which had superior OS as
compared to stage IIC1 and IC1 (p<0.001). For stage IV disease, the
5-year OS for C0 was more than double the 5 year OS for C1, 20.8
(17.1-24.9) vs. 7.9 (6.8-9.1), pBackground: Population-based studies have
reported elevated Carcinoembryonic Antigen (CEA) level as an independent
prognostic factor in patients with colon cancer, thus supporting
inclusion of CEA-based C stage in classical TNM staging for colon cancer.
However, the effect of C-stage incorporation on outcomes for patients
with rectal adenocarcinoma is unknown.Methods: The Surveillance,
Epidemiology and End Result (SEER) database was used to collect data from
2004 to 2007 for patients with rectal adenocarcinoma by topography code
C20.9 and histology codes 8140-8144, 8210-8211, 8220-8221, 8260-8263,
8440, 8480-8481, and 8490. CEA stage C0 = normal CEA or C1 = elevated CEA
was assigned to patients with known pretreatment CEA levels. Observed
survival (OS) by American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) stages I-IV
and CEA stage C0 or 1 was determined using Kaplan Meier method. Relative
survival (RS) as a net measure of cancer survival adjusted for sex, race,
age and date was calculated in addition to observed survival (OS).
Log-rank was used to compare observed survival. Z-test with corresponding
p values was used to compare 5-year relative survival.Results: We
identified 25,241 patients with a record of histologically confirmed
invasive rectal adenocarcinoma. Approximately half (N = 13,151) of these
patients had records of pretreatment CEA levels: N = 6,360 stage C1, N =
6,690 stage C0 and a small number (101) with borderline CEA levels. Mean
age at diagnosis was similar in both groups, 64.2 for C0 and 64.7 for C1.
Among patients with C1 disease the leading AJCC stage was distant
metastatic, stage IV (33.8%) followed by 25.8% stage III, 20.7% stage II,
13.8% stage I, and 5.9% unknown stage. In contrast to CI disease, the
most common stage for C0 was stage I (35.2%), and only 6.3% of patients
with C0 were diagnosed with stage IV disease. Observed survival by each
of I-IV AJCC TNM stages was decreased for C1 stage relative to C0,
p<0.001. The 5-year OS by AJCC TNM stage for C1 was as follows: 56.7% for
IC1 (CI = 53.3-59.9), 55.4% for IIC1 (CI = 52.7-58.1), and 53.4% for
IIIC1 (CI = 51.0-55.8). The 5-year OS by AJCC TNM stage for C0 was 75.8%
for IC0 (CI = 74.1-77.5), 68.8% for IIC0 (CI = 66.5-71.0), 65.4% for
IIIC0 (63.3-67.5). Stage shifting was observed with IIIC0 disease, which
had superior OS as compared to stage IIC1 and IC1 (p<0.001). For stage IV
disease, the 5-year OS for C0 was more than double the 5 year OS for C1,
20.8 (17.1-24.9) vs. 7.9 (6.8-9.1), p<0.001. In concordance with this OS
data, the 5-year relative survival analysis also showed a significant
difference between C1 and C0 stages of rectal adenocarcinoma in the
respective AJCC TNM stages, pBackground: Population-based studies have
reported elevated Carcinoembryonic Antigen (CEA) level as an independent
prognostic factor in patients with colon cancer, thus supporting
inclusion of CEA-based C stage in classical TNM staging for colon cancer.
However, the effect of C-stage incorporation on outcomes for patients
with rectal adenocarcinoma is unknown.Methods: The Surveillance,
Epidemiology and End Result (SEER) database was used to collect data from
2004 to 2007 for patients with rectal adenocarcinoma by topography code
C20.9 and histology codes 8140-8144, 8210-8211, 8220-8221, 8260-8263,
8440, 8480-8481, and 8490. CEA stage C0 = normal CEA or C1 = elevated CEA
was assigned to patients with known pretreatment CEA levels. Observed
survival (OS) by American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) stages I-IV
and CEA stage C0 or 1 was determined using Kaplan Meier method. Relative
survival (RS) as a net measure of cancer survival adjusted for sex, race,
age and date was calculated in addition to observed survival (OS).
Log-rank was used to compare observed survival. Z-test with corresponding
p values was used to compare 5-year relative survival.Results: We
identified 25,241 patients with a record of histologically confirmed
invasive rectal adenocarcinoma. Approximately half (N = 13,151) of these
patients had records of pretreatment CEA levels: N = 6,360 stage C1, N =
6,690 stage C0 and a small number (101) with borderline CEA levels. Mean
age at diagnosis was similar in both groups, 64.2 for C0 and 64.7 for C1.
Among patients with C1 disease the leading AJCC stage was distant
metastatic, stage IV (33.8%) followed by 25.8% stage III, 20.7% stage II,
13.8% stage I, and 5.9% unknown stage. In contrast to CI disease, the
most common stage for C0 was stage I (35.2%), and only 6.3% of patients
with C0 were diagnosed with stage IV disease. Observed survival by each
of I-IV AJCC TNM stages was decreased for C1 stage relative to C0,
p<0.001. The 5-year OS by AJCC TNM stage for C1 was as follows: 56.7% for
IC1 (CI = 53.3-59.9), 55.4% for IIC1 (CI = 52.7-58.1), and 53.4% for
IIIC1 (CI = 51.0-55.8). The 5-year OS by AJCC TNM stage for C0 was 75.8%
for IC0 (CI = 74.1-77.5), 68.8% for IIC0 (CI = 66.5-71.0), 65.4% for
IIIC0 (63.3-67.5). Stage shifting was observed with IIIC0 disease, which
had superior OS as compared to stage IIC1 and IC1 (p<0.001). For stage IV
disease, the 5-year OS for C0 was more than double the 5 year OS for C1,
20.8 (17.1-24.9) vs. 7.9 (6.8-9.1), p<0.001. In concordance with this OS
data, the 5-year relative survival analysis also showed a significant
difference between C1 and C0 stages of rectal adenocarcinoma in the
respective AJCC TNM stages, p<0.001.Conclusion: Our study suggests that
pretreatment CEA levels predict survival in patients with rectal
adenocarcinoma, in accordance with previous data in colon cancer.
Therefore, our study supports C-stage inclusion in AJCC TNM staging for
this neoplasm. Further prospective confirmatory studies are warranted.

