Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tip110-mediated regulation of NF-B activity is key to tumorigenesis


HIV-1 Tat-interacting protein (Tip110), also known as squamous cell
carcinoma antigen recognized by T cells 3 (SART3), is a multifaceted
nuclear protein and has been shown to function in tumor antigenicity.
Tip110 protein expression is very low in normal tissues and
non-proliferating cells but becomes highly elevated in a number of
malignant tumor cell lines and cancerous tissues, pointing to its
possible role in tumorigenesis. Our previous studies have shown that
Tip110 specifically interacted with oncogenic deubiquitinating enzyme,
USP15, and that ectopic expression of the Tip110 protein led to
re-distribution of USP15 from the cytoplasm to the nucleus. USP15 is
known to inhibit TNF--induced NF-B activity by modulation of IB-
ubiquitination. In the current study, we demonstrated that Tip110
augmented TNF--induced transcription activity of NF-B, and that deletion
of the nuclear localization domain in Tip110 obliterated the observed
enhancement of TNF--induced NF-B activity, providing the very first
evidence to support the specific role of Tip110 in NF-B activation. In
addition, we found that Tip110 expression modulated IB- phosphorylation
and that activation of NF-B by Tip110 was mediated through the p38/MAPK
pathway. Moreover, we showed that ectopic expression of Tip110 induced
translocation of NF-B p65 from the cytoplasm to the nucleus, reminiscent
of the aforementioned translocation of USP15, in the absence of direct
interaction of Tip110 with either p65 or IB-. Taken together, these
results indicate that opposing regulation of TNF-induced NF-B activity by
Tip110 and USP15 could be pivotal for modulation of tumorigenesis.
Further delineation of the underlying signaling cascades will likely
provide new insights into development of anti-tumor agents.

