Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comprehensive evaluation of promising biomarkers for lung cancer
risk prediction


Introductory sentence indicating the purposes of the study:Lung cancer
will remain the number one cancer killer worldwide for the foreseeable
future (Globocan 2012). Although low-dose CT screening has been shown to
reduce mortality, there is an urgent need to improve risk prediction
models to identify those subjects at high risk and most likely to benefit
from screening in order its improve the screening efficacy (PMID:
23697514, 25372087).Brief description of pertinent experimental
procedures:We have assembled a compendium of promising blood-based risk
biomarkers for lung cancer that are currently being validated in order to
identify a panel of validated risk markers for use in lung cancer risk
assessment. Using pre-diagnostic serum samples from CARET cohort
participants (current or former heavy smokers) we have recently validated
pro-surfactant protein B (Pro-SFTPB) and Diacetyl spermine (DAS) as risk
markers for non-small cell lung cancer (PMID: 26282655). Validation of
additional markers from the compendium using Pro-SFTPB and DAS as anchor
markers with further refinement of the risk prediction models is
currently being performed in two large independent cohort studies (EPIC
and NSHDS). Biospecimens from these cohorts include pre-diagnostic plasma
from 550 former and current smoking lung cancer cases that were diagnosed
within 5 years of blood draw, along with 1,100 matched controls.Summary
of the new, unpublished data and conclusion:Preliminary data indicate
that blood-based biomarkers of lung cancer risk have a strong potential
to improve on questionnaire-based risk prediction models for lung cancer
(PMID: 26282655). During the meeting we will present detailed results of
the individual risk biomarkers and their associations with lung cancer
risk up to 2 years prior to diagnosis, as well as an assessment of the
extent to which they can improve traditional risk prediction models.

