Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cell type-specific deconvolution of heterogeneous tumor samples
with immune infiltration using expression data


Tumor tissue samples comprise a mixture of cancerous and surrounding
stromal cells. Understanding tumor heterogeneity is crucial to analyzing
gene signatures associated with cancer prognosis and treatment decisions.
Compared with the experimental approach of using laser micro-dissection
to isolate different tissue components, in silico dissection of mixed
cell samples is faster and cheaper. Numerous computational approaches
previously developed have limited ability to deconvolute heterogeneous
tumor samples. We have developed a deconvolution model, DeMix-T, that can
explicitly account for a third component such as infiltrating immune
cells, and address this challenging problem when the observed signals are
assumed to come from a mixture of three cell compartments, infiltrating
immune cells, the tumor microenvironment and cancerous tissues. The
optimization-based algorithm for DeMix-T finds a local optimum for our
estimation problem and is computationally feasible when it needs to
compute high-dimensional integrals. DeMix-T therefore involves a novel
two-stage filtering method that yields accurate estimates of cell
purities and compartment-specific expression profiles. Simulations and
real data analyses have demonstrated the good performance of our method.
Compared with other deconvolution tools, DeMix-T can be applied more
widely and provides deeper insight for cancer biomarker studies. It
allows for a further understanding of immune cell infiltration in cancer
and assists in the development of novel prognostic markers and
therapeutic strategies.

