Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Multiple genes on chromosome 17q25 were involved in sporadic
esophageal squamous cell carcinoma development


[Background] Tylosis is an autosomal dominant skin disorder that is
associated with the early onset of esophageal squamous cell carcinoma
(ESCC) in several families. The tylosis esophageal cancer (TOC) gene
locus has been mapped to chromosome 17q25.1 using linkage analyses. This
region is also frequently lost in sporadic ESCC. [Materials and Methods]
Gene expression profiles on 17q25 in tumor samples from 3 ESCC patients
were analyzed using RNA-seq. We validated the expression status of
candidate genes in samples from 90 ESCC patients using qRT-PCR. Direct
sequence, microsatellite LOH analysis, and methylation assay were also
performed in the candidate gene, ST6GALNAC1. Mutation profiles of genes
on 17q were also evaluated by exome sequence analysis from 144 ESCC
patients. [Result] EVPL and ST6GALNAC1 were found to be significantly
downregulated in tumor samples using RNA-seq. Significant downregulation
of ST6GALNAC1 and EVPL expression in cancer tissues was confirmed by
qRT-PCR in 90 ESCC samples. Although direct sequence of ST6GALNAC1
demonstrated missense mutations in 7 out of 46 (15%) cases, these
mutations were not tumor specific. ST6GALNAC1 expression was
significantly upregulated in 5-aza-dC treatment groups compared with
control in the 5 ESCC cell lines. LOH in ST6GALNAC1 gene locus were
identified 18 of 27 informative cases (67%). On chromosome 17q, exome
sequence revealed that recurrent mutations were observed only in ZNF750
(14.5%) on 7q25.3. Recently, missense mutations in RHBDF2 were identified
tylosis familys. However, RHBDF2 mutation was not observed in sporadic
ESC samples by exome sequence analysis. [Conclusion] Our results suggest
that ST6GALNAC1 is a putative tumor suppressor gene for ESCC.
Furthermore, recent studies on tylosis families and our results on
sporadic ESC suggest that multiple genes on chromosome 17q25 are involved
in ESCC development.

