Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Baseline molecular markers and risk of distant relapse in the
NeoSphere study


Background We investigated the association between gene-expression (GEP)
based markers and distant event free survival (DEFS) in HER2+ breast
cancer patients (pts) in the NeoSphere study.Methods In NeoSphere HER2+
pts were randomized to neoadjuvant HD, PHD, PH or PD (H = trastuzumab, P
= pertuzumab, D = docetaxel). Affymetrix-based GEPs were generated in
367/417 pts (88%). We evaluated the association with DEFS of 10
biomarkers in all patients with arms pooled and by each arm, and
separately by ER status: six immune-related metagenes (CD8, IGG and MHC2,
related to T cells, plasma cells and antigen presenting cells,
respectively; MHC1, STAT1 and IF.I related to HLA cass I genes, and to
genes modulated by interferons), ESR1 and an ER-related score (ERS), a
proliferation marker (MKS) and ERBB2 expression. We re-assessed findings
in GEPs derived from ER-/HER2+ pts of the NOAH trial treated with
neoadjuvant chemotherapy (CT) or CT and trastuzumab (CTH).Results Median
follow-up was 5 years. Overall none of the markers was significant, but
an interaction test for biomarkers and ER status was significant for
MHC1, MHC2, STAT1, and marginally for MKS.In ER+/HER2+ tumors, immune
markers were not significant, but higher proliferation (MKS; HR 2.12
[1.07-4.19], p = 0.03) was linked to higher risk, with a similar trend
for low ERS (p = 0.097). In ER-/HER2+ tumors higher MHC2 (HR 0.53
[0.36-0.79]; p = 0.002), MHC1 (HR 0.41 [0.22-0.77], p = 0.005) and STAT1
(HR 0.69 [0.49-0.97], p = 0.036) were linked to better DEFS. Outcome for
high MHC1 tertile was excellent and similar in all treatment arms.
Low/int MHC1 pts treated with PHD had a trend for better DEFS compared to
other treatments (HR 0.41 (0.14-1.21), p = 0.11). In cases reaching pCR
higher MHC1 (p = 0.009), MHC2 (p = 0.006), IGG (p = 0.027) and STAT1 (p =
0.008) were linked to better DEFS. For instance, the 5 yrs DEFS for high
and low MHC1 tertiles was 100% and 74.6%, respectively.Similarly, in
ER-/HER2+ pts from NOAH, the 5-yrs DEFS in high, int and low MHC1
tertiles was 88.1%, 68.4% and 48.1%, respectively (p = 0.015). Prognosis
was similar and good in patients with high MHC1 receiving CT or CTH (p =
0.674). Instead, in low/int MHC1 groups, CTH compared to CT significantly
improved DEFS (HR 0.39 [0.16-0.93], p = 0.035). Also in NOAH, the 5 yrs
DEFS of pCR cases was influenced by baseline MCH1 (100% and 76.2% with
high and low/int MHC1, respectively).Conclusions In this exploratory
analysis of NeoSphere, different biological functions were linked to DEFS
in ER+ (proliferation and ER-related genes) and ER- (immune related)
cases. In particular outcome of ER-/HER2+ with high MHC1 was good.
However, in this group the benefit from adding trastuzumab to CT or
pertuzumab in the PHD regimen was relatively small. Instead, the benefit
seemed significant and large in cases of low/int MHC1, who had higher
relapse risk. Of note, baseline immune markers of ER-/HER2+ tumors were
linked to different DEFS also for cases achieving pCR.

