Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effects of a CDK 4/6 inhibitor, G1T38, in androgen receptor
sensitive and resistant models of castrate resistant prostate cancer


Introduction: Resistance to endocrine therapies, via expression of
mutations or variants of the androgen receptor (AR), remains an
impediment to enduring therapeutic responses in advanced castration
resistant prostate cancer (CRPC). AR-dependent upregulation of cyclins
leads to activation of the Cyclin D1-cyclin dependent kinase 4/6 (CDK
4/6) complex and cell proliferation, suggesting that targeting of this
axis may be effective in CRPC. We have developed a series of potent and
selective CDK 4/6 inhibitors, of which G1T38 has an IC50 in the low
nanomolar range, and >3000 fold selectivity for CDK4/6 over CDK 2/cyclin
A/E complexes. The efficacy of G1T38 was evaluated using models of CRPC;
the results of which have significant clinical implications.Methods: For
proliferation assays, cells were treated for 5-10 days with G1T38 or
standard of care comparators prior to quantitation of cell
number/viability. Cell cycle progression and apoptosis were assayed by
flow cytometry using propidium iodide or Annexin V/Sytox red staining,
respectively. Orchiectomized Nu/Nu or NOD SCID Gamma mice bearing 22rV1
or LnCAP-AR-F876L xenograft tumors, respectively, were treated with G1T38
or clinically relevant comparators.Results: G1T38 inhibited the growth of
prostate cancer cell lines expressing wild type AR (LnCAP and VCAP),
resistance associated AR variant AR v7 (22rV1 and LnCAP95), and LnCAP
cells overexpressing the MDV3100 resistant AR mutation F876L.
Corresponding decreases in cell cycle G0/G1 progression and in Rb
phosphorylation (S807/811) were observed in all cell lines tested,
whereas no changes were observed in Cyclin D1, E or Cdk2, 4, or 6
expression. Growth inhibition by G1T38 was dependent on Rb, and not AR,
status as DU145 (AR-/Rb-) cells were not growth inhibited by G1T38, while
PC3 (AR-/Rb+) were growth arrested. Treatment of G1T38 in combination
with the anti-androgen MDV3100 increased the sensitivity of VCAP and
22RV1 cells to growth inhibition. Interestingly, MDV3100 in combination
with G1T38 at high doses produced a synergistic apoptotic effect in
LnCAP, VCAP, and 22rV1 cells, which could be attenuated by the caspase
inhibitor Q-VD-OPH. The growth of 22rV1 cells and LnCAP AR F876L cells
were assessed when propagated as xenografts. In 22RV1 cells,
pharmacologic CDK 4/6 inhibition, significantly resulted in tumor
regression compared to vehicle or docetaxel. In the LnCAP-AR-F876L
xenograft model, tumor growth and doubling time was significantly
decreased by low and high dose G1T38 treatment compared to control and
MDV3100.Conclusions: The CDK 4/6 inhibitor G1T38 exerts
anti-proliferative effects in relevant models of CRPC when used as a
stand-alone agent or when tested in combination with MDV3100. G1T38
inhibited xenograft tumor growth to a greater extent than other available
therapies, highlighting the utility of CDK 4/6 inhibition in prostate
cancer and a potential new paradigm in CRPC treatment.

