Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Saturated fat intake and prostate cancer aggressiveness: Results
from the population-based North Carolina-Louisiana prostate cancer project


Introduction: Epidemiologic data support a positive association between
hypercholesterolemia and aggressive prostate cancer, and an inverse
association between statin use and aggressive prostate cancer. Saturated
fat intake is an important dietary determinant of serum cholesterol
levels. However, epidemiologic evidence supporting a role for saturated
fat in prostate cancer aggressiveness is mixed. We hypothesized that high
saturated fat intake would be associated with increased prostate cancer
aggressiveness, and that this association would be modified by statin
use.Methods: Of 1,854 prostate cancer cases in the North
Carolina-Louisiana Prostate Cancer Project (PCaP), 321 (17%) were
classified as high aggressive based on clinical criteria. Saturated fat
intake was adjusted for total fat intake using the residual method, and
categorized into tertiles based on the distribution among all research
subjects. Using low and intermediate aggressive cases as the reference
group, logistic regression was used to examine the association between
tertiles of saturated fat intake and prostate cancer aggressiveness,
overall and stratified by race and by statin use. In addition to
demographic and screening variables, energy-adjusted total fat intake and
energy intake were included as covariates in our models. In secondary
analysis, we examined associations for total fat, monounsaturated and
polyunsaturated fatty acids (MUFA and PUFA, respectively), trans fat, and
cholesterol intake.Results: High saturated fat intake was associated with
an elevated odds ratio (OR) for aggressive prostate cancer (ORupper
tertile (T3) vs. lower (T1) 1.44; 95% CI 1.06-1.96; p-trend = 0.020). The
magnitude of this association was weaker in statin users (ORT3 vs. T1
1.10; 95% CI 0.63-1.91; p-trend = 0.790) compared to men not using
statins (ORT3 vs. T1 1.63; 95% CI 1.11-2.37; p-trend = 0.015). There was
a suggestion of a positive association between high cholesterol intake
and aggressive prostate cancer among all men (ORT3 vs. T1 1.28; 95% CI
0.94-1.75; p-trend = 0.074), and this association was more pronounced in
European Americans (ORT3 vs. T1 1.82; 95% CI 1.15-2.88; p-trend = 0.012).
Elevated PUFA intake was inversely associated with prostate cancer
aggressiveness (ORT3 vs. T1 0.66; 95% CI 0.48-0.90; p-trend = 0.009),
with similar effect estimates in both races. There were no associations
between trans fat or MUFA and prostate cancer aggressiveness.Conclusions:
Elevated intake of saturated fat was positively associated, while high
intake of PUFA was inversely associated, with aggressive prostate cancer.
Weaker associations between saturated fat and prostate cancer
aggressiveness in statin users suggest that the impact of saturated fat
on serum cholesterol levels may be one potential mechanism by which
saturated fat impacts prostate cancer aggressiveness.

