Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical evaluation of the CDK4/6 inhibitor LEE011 in
nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) cell lines


LEE011 is a specific CDK4/6 inhibitor that induces G1 cycle arrest by
blocking the formation of cyclin D1-CDK4/6 complex and inhibiting Rb
phosphorylation. Cyclin D1 is overexpressed in > 90% of NPC and CCND1
gene activation is implicated in pathogenesis. The preclinical activity
of LEE011 was evaluated in 4 NPC cell lines (C666-1, HK1, HK1-LMP1,
HONE-1) and the immortalized nasopharyngeal epithelial cell line NP69.
Under basal condition, phosphorylated (p) Rb was strongly expressed in
HK1 and HK1-LMP1, moderately in HONE-1 and NP69, and weakly in C666-1.
Cyclin D1, CDK4 and 6 were expressed in all cell lines. The IC50
concentrations for cell growth inhibition after 72 hours of exposure to
LEE011 in the respective cell lines were: HK1-LMP1 = 4.101.12M; HK1 =
5.071.37M, C666-1 = 12.251.63M, NP69 = 15.231.93M, HONE-1 = 19.581.54M.
LEE011 could induce over 95% cell growth inhibition in all NPC cell
lines. Three representative cell lines (HK1 as the most sensitive to
LEE011, and C666-1 and HONE-1 as less sensitive) were chosen to evaluate
the effect of LEE011 on kinase signaling, apoptosis and cell cycle.
Treatment of these cell lines at or above their respective IC50
concentrations for up to 48 hrs showed a dose-dependent reduction in p-
and total Rb expression. A slight increase in the expression of CDK4,
CDK6 and cyclinD1 were observed in HK1 and HONE1 cells, but not in C666-1
cells. G0/G1 population was increased by more than 20% in C666-1 and HK-1
cells at up to 48 hrs of exposure to LEE011. The effect of combining
LEE011 with the alpha-specific PI3K inhibitor BYL719 on cell growth was
studied in C666-1, HK1 and HONE-1 cells. A strong synergistic effect on
growth inhibition was seen in C666-1 and HK1, but not HONE-1 at 72hrs,
with the respective combination index (CI) of ED50 less than 0.5.
Additionally, the combination of LEE011 and cisplatin at different
sequences was investigated on their effect on cell growth. The sequential
administration of cisplatin followed by LEE011 was the most optimal
sequence on cell growth inhibition in C666-1 and HONE-1, but not in HK1
cells. Preliminary result suggests that this schedule was associated with
better pRB inhibition than other schedules in C666-1 cells. The IC50 of
LEE011 for a cisplatin-resistant HK1-LMP1-cis cell line at 72 hr was
similar to its parental HK1-LMP1 cell line. In summary, LEE011 displayed
dose- and time-dependent growth inhibitory effect in over 95% of NPC
cells examined. A synergistic inhibitory effect on cancer cell growth was
observed when LEE011 was combined with BYL719 in vitro and sequential
administration of cisplatin followed by LEE011 has shown an optimal
inhibitory effect. These results should be confirmed in xenograft models
of NPC.

