Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gene-environment interactions and the risk of Barrett's esophagus
in three US cohorts


Background: Several single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) have been
associated with Barrett's esophagus (BE) risk. Additionally,
environmental factors including smoking, alcohol consumption and
heartburn have been shown to increase BE risk. However, no studies have
evaluated whether interactions between these genetic and environmental
factors influence BE risk. Understanding how genes and environmental risk
factors interact may provide key insight into the pathophysiology of
BE.Objectives: To examine the main effects and the potential
effect-modification between known genetic loci (SNPS) and established
environmental risk factors for BE.Patients and Methods: We performed a
nested case-control study using data on 401 incident BE cases and 436
age-matched controls from the Nurses Health Study, Nurses Health Study
II, and Health Professionals Follow-up Study cohorts, who gave blood and
completed biennial questionnaires. We genotyped SNPs identified in
previous BE GWAS as well as SNPs in candidate genes related to BE
susceptibility (i.e., related to excess body fat, fat distribution,
factors associated with insulin resistance, and inflammatory mediators).
A genetic risk score (GRS) was constructed to evaluate the combined
effect of the selected SNPs on BE risk. Interactions between SNPs and BE
risk factors were also assessed.Results and Conclusions: We found a
borderline association between our GRS and BE risk: a one-allele increase
in the unweighted GRS increased the risk of Barrett's esophagus by a
factor of 1.20 (95%CI = 1.00-1.44; p = 0.057). We observed a significant
interaction between smoking and BE genotypes (p-interaction = 0.016).
However, while alcohol consumption and heartburn duration were strongly
associated with BE, we did not observe any significant gene-environment
interactions.

