Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of a novel maytansinoid-antibody-drug conjugate
targeting LAMP1 expressed at the surface of tumor cells


Lysosome-associated membrane protein 1 (LAMP1), one of the most abundant
protein expressed at the membrane of lysosomes, is a type I transmembrane
protein involved in the maintenance of lysosome membrane integrity and
phagolysosome formation. In activated lymphocytes LAMP1 is described as a
marker of degranulation.Unexpectedly, by immunizing mice with a colon
patient-derived xenograft (PDX) followed by a screening of monoclonal
antibodies (mAb) by immunohistochemistry (IHC) for selection of
antibodies that specifically stain tumor plasma membrane and de-orphaning
by Immunoprecipitation-Mass spectrometry, we identified LAMP1 as the
target of several antibodies. One of them, Ab-1, showed binding to the
luminal domain of human LAMP1 with nM affinity. Crystal structure of its
Fab with LAMP1 extracellular domain, showed that the epitope was
non-linear, not a glycotope and spanned between position 29 to195.LAMP1
expression was further documented by IHC with Ab-1, showing limited cell
surface expression in normal tissues while moderate to high plasma
membrane expression was found in a number of breast, including TNBC,
colorectal, gastric, prostate, lung and ovary tumors.The humanized Ab-1
mAb, humAb-1, was shown to display rapid cycling after binding to LAMP1
at the surface of colo205 cell line, allowing internalization and
processing of a number of LAMP1/antibody complex 10 folds higher than the
number of LAMP1 molecules at the cell surface.humAb-1 was conjugated to
DM4 maytansinoid derivative using an SPDB cleavable linker to generate a
new antibody-drug conjugate, SAR428926, for the treatment of patients
with cell surface LAMP1-positive tumors.Conjugated and naked antibody
displayed similar affinities for LAMP1. SAR428926 killed tumor cell lines
(engineered to express cell surface LAMP1) in the sub-nM range. In
contrast, no target-mediated cytotoxicity was observed when SAR428926 was
incubated with normal cells, including resting or activated
lymphocytes.PDX models reflecting the pattern and level of LAMP1
expression at the surface of human tumors were selected to evaluate
SAR428926 in vivo efficacy. Outstanding in vivo activity was observed in
different indications, including TNBC, lung and colon PDXs, with complete
regressions after a single administration at 5 mg/kg.These encouraging
preclinical data have prompted the initiation of IND-enabling studies
with the goal to progress humAb-1-ADC to the clinic in patients with
tumors expressing LAMP1 at the cell surface. The First-In-Human trial has
been initiated in October 2015.

