Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of the evolution of immune response in lung
squamous carcinogenesis


Molecular profiling of from pre-invasive bronchial lesions, and
particularly the evolution of immune response, may identify promising new
biomarkers for early detection and targets for chemoprevention/treatment
of lung cancer.mRNA expression was analyzed (Agilent microarrays) from
fresh frozen human bronchial biopsies (N = 122, 77 patients) at
successive morphological stages of lung squamous carcinogenesis. Modules
of co-expressed genes were identified among the stage associated genes,
selected using a linear mixed-effects model adjusting for smoking status,
gender, and history of cancer as fixed effects and patient as a random
effect. Cell type specific signatures were applied to the genes
co-expressed in these modules in order to identify the immune response
signal through the stages of lung carcinogenesis.Genes expression
alterations were grouped into 4 successive molecular steps. Based on
their behavior across the 4 steps, 8 modules of genes with different
patterns were observed: gene modules primarily up-regulated among the
early or late steps, up-regulated in a linearly across the 4 steps, as
well as down- then up-regulated (biphasic). Genes signing the presence of
activating CD8 and CD4 T cells, as well as some memory B cells were
progressively and linearly up-regulated from metaplasia through all
stages of carcinogenesis. At the later stages, the transition to
high-grade dysplasia, the most significant gene expression changes
included immune/inflammatory response genes. At this stage a very strong
adaptive immune response is noted involving T cells - mainly Th1 and T
regulators - and dendritic cells. In addition, immunosuppressive signals,
corresponding to negative co-inhibitory molecules, also significantly
appears at the high-grade dysplasia stage.The adaptive CD4/CD8 related
immune response starts from the earlier stages (metaplasia) of lung
carcinogenesis. The significant modification of inflammatory/immune
response genes in association with high-grade lesions suggests, at this
critical stage of carcinogenesis, a major role of the surrounding
microenvironment with an adaptive immune response, driven by Th1 and Treg
cells, and but also, before tumor invasion across the basal membrane, a
tumor versus host immunosuppressive response.

