Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of c-Myc in prostate cancer stem-like cell inhibition by
sulforaphane


Chemopreventive efficacy of D,L-sulforaphane (SFN) against prostate
cancer has been shown in a transgenic mouse model but the underlying
mechanism is not fully understood. The present study demonstrates that
c-Myc, which is an oncogenic transcription factor frequently upregulated
in human prostate cancer, is a molecular target of SFN. Exposure of human
prostate cancer cells (LNCaP, C4-2, and PC-3) and a cell line derived
from prostate adenocarcinoma of a transgenic mouse (Myc-CaP) to SFN
resulted in a marked decrease in c-Myc protein level. Naturally-occurring
thio, sulfinyl, and sulfonyl analogues of SFN were also effective in
causing suppression of c-Myc protein level. The c-Myc is a known
regulator of cellular metabolism but basal glycolysis was not altered by
SFN treatment in empty vector transfected or in c-Myc overexpressing PC-3
cells. The effect of SFN treatment on prostate cancer stem-like cells
(pCSC) was also determined as c-Myc is implicated in their maintenance.
Analysis of aldehyde dehydrogenase 1 activity, CD49f+ fraction, and
sphere forming efficiency revealed dose-dependent inhibition of pCSC in
SFN-treated cells. The pCSC inhibition by SFN was partially but
significantly attenuated by overexpression of c-Myc. Expression profiling
revealed upregulation of a set of stemness genes by c-Myc overexpression
but their downregulation by SFN treatment. Finally, oral administration
of SFN to Transgenic Adenocarcinoma of Mouse Prostate (TRAMP) mice
resulted in a marked decrease in c-Myc protein expression in the
adenocarcinoma. In conclusion, this study indicates that c-Myc
downregulation contributes to pCSC inhibition by SFN. This investigation
was supported by grant CA115498 awarded by the National Cancer Institute.

