Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The highly specific CSF1R inhibitor DCC-3014 exhibits
immunomodulatory and anti-invasive activities in cancer models


The role of tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) in promoting an invasive
and immunosuppressed tumor microenvironment is well established. TAMs
mediate tumor growth, angiogenesis, invasiveness, and immunosuppression
through the secretion and response to a variety of factors. There are few
highly specific small molecule inhibitors of CSF1R kinase in clinical
development. Such specific CSF1R inhibitors are sought for use in
combination with other oncology immune checkpoint inhibitors and/or
chemotherapeutic agents. DCC-3014, a highly specific CSF1R inhibitor, was
developed based on Deciphera's switch control inhibitor platform.
Experimental procedures: DCC-3014 was evaluated in human kinase assays,
including CSF1R, highly related kinases FLT3, KIT, and PDGFRa/b, and 300
additional kinases. Cellular studies included evaluation in the monocytic
cell lines THP-1, MNFS-60, and a human whole blood assay. DCC-3014 was
also evaluated in a human osteoclast TRAP assay. In vivo, DCC-3014 was
evaluated in the murine cFOS PK/PD model. DCC-3014 was evaluated as a
single agent and in combination with a murine anti-PD1 antibody in the
murine syngeneic MC38 colorectal cancer model, a model characterized by
high TAM infiltration. Results: DCC-3014 exhibited nanomolar (IC50 5 nM)
potency for inhibition of CSF1R, sparing highly related kinases FLT3,
KIT, PDGFRa, and PDGFRb, by > 100-fold, and sparing other kinases by >
1,000 fold. Cellular inhibition of CSF1R was resilient to high levels of
the CSF1R ligand MCSF (10-1,000 ng/mL), due to its high residency time
for binding to CSF1R and its binding mode which maintains CSF1R in a
switch off state. DCC-3014 inhibited CSF1R in THP-1 monocytes (IC50 11
nM), MNFS-60 monocytes (IC50 4 nM), human osteoclasts (IC50 9 nM), and in
a human whole blood monocyte/pERK assay (IC50 260 nM). In vivo, DCC-3014
exhibited sustained inhibition of CSF1R in the murine cFOS PK/PD model,
affording 90+% inhibition at 15 mg/kg through 24 h post dose. At steady
state (6 days of dosing), DCC-3014 robustly inhibited CSF1R at 3 mg/kg
daily. In the MC38 colorectal cancer model, DCC-3014 (10 mg/kg daily)
inhibited infiltrating TAMs, repolarized the adaptive immune cell
population to an anti-tumoral profile, and depleted circulating CD16+
monocyte populations. Additionally, DCC-3014 was evaluated in combination
with a murine anti-PD1 antibody and demonstrated additive effects
compared to single agent cohorts. DCC-3014 exhibits optimized
biopharmaceutical properties, including a favorable ADME and PK profile
in preclinical studies. Conclusion: DCC-3014 is a highly specific CSF1R
inhibitor and finds potential utility as a macrophage immunomodulatory
agent for clinical evaluation in combination with other immune checkpoint
inhibitors or chemotherapeutic agents. DCC-3014 is undergoing
IND-enabling activities with a FIH study targeted for 2016.

