Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel cell cycle-associated lncRNA, HOXA11-AS, is transcribed
from 5-prime end of HOXA transcript and a biomarker of progression in
glioma


The comprehensive lncRNA expression signature in glioma remains fully
unknown. We performed a high throughput microarray to detect ncRNA
expression profile in 225 human glioma tissues. One novel lncRNA,
HOXA11-AS with unknown function, is the antisense transcript of HOX11
gene. The results showed that HOXA11-AS was closely associated with
glioma grade and poor prognosis. Multivariate cox regression analysis
revealed that HOXA11-AS was an independent prognostic factor in
glioblastoma multiforme patients and its expression was correlated with
glioma molecular subtype of the Cancer Genome Atlas. Gene set enrichment
analysis indicated that gene sets most correlated with HOXA11-AS
expression involved in cell cycle progression. Overexpression of
HOXA11-AS transcript promoted cell proliferation in vitro while knockdown
of HOXA11-AS expression manifested a repressive function during these
cellular processes via regulating cell cycle progress. The growth
promoting and inhibiting effect of HOXA11-AS was also demonstrated in a
xenograft mouse model. For the first time, our data confirms that
HOXA11-AS is an important long non-coding RNA that primarily serves as a
prognostic factor for glioma patient survival, a biomarker for
identifying glioma molecular subtypes, and therapeutic target for glioma
patient.

