Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Live cell detection of intracellular biomarkers maintains cancer
stem cells for further experimentation


Cancer stem cells are widely studied as a potential therapeutic target in
cancer research. Their expression of cell surface biomarkers such as
EpCAM, CD44, and CD133 have been well characterized as a method for
identification and enrichment from heterogeneous populations. Additional
biomarkers with more functional relevance to self-renewal such as the
transcription factors Sox-2 and Nanog, are intracellular and
traditionally require fixation and permeabilization of the sample. Here
we describe a method for identification and enrichment of live cancer
stem cells based on intracellular biomarker expression.Live human head
and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) cell lines, UM-SCC-47 and
UM-SCC-104 were used as a model for Cancer stem cells in a mixed
population. They were assayed for their expression of EpCAM, CD44, and
CD133 by flow cytometry. Additionally, Aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH)
activity was also detected in a population of the HNSCC cell lines
further corroborating the presence of a cancer stem cell population. Live
cell probes specific to Nanog and Sox-2 were used to enrich for cells
expressing the targets of interest through Fluorescent Activated Cell
Sorting (FACS).This live cell biomarker approach was also recently
demonstrated on solid tumors which were digested and cultured as single
cells where they were then incubated with the live cell probes. FACS
sorting was utilized to enrich for a cancer stem cell population. More
importantly after detection these cells remain live and intact allowing
them to be returned to culture and further studied.

