Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Radiogenomics of breast cancer using DCE-MRI and gene expression
profiling


The utilization of radiomics (high-throughput extraction and analysis of
imaging features) to abstract underlying genomic features of an evolving
malignancy is an emerging field that has the potential to detail
biological information of a tumor in a non-invasive and more accessible
manner. Furthermore, applying radiomics confers a comprehensive spatial
view of the tumor, a potential advantage over the limitations of sampling
a small region of tissue that may not accurately represent the underlying
complexity of the entire tumor. Most studies to date that incorporate
radiogenomics in the analysis of breast cancers have focused on few basic
clinical data or individual genetic mutations such as BRCA or HER2
status.Here, we use an automated quantitative radiomics analysis platform
developed at the University of Chicago that enables computerized feature
extraction of tumors to analyze magnetic resonant imaging scans of 50
breast cancer patients (mean age of diagnosis [range]: 54 [24-89];
receptor status: HER2+: 14, Triple negative: 7; stage [1 through 4]: 10%,
40%, 42%, 8%) who have had comprehensive gene expression profiling
performed using Agilent Human Gene Expression arrays. Our imaging
platform extracts 38 features across six major phenotypes (size, shape,
morphology, enhancement texture, kinetic curve assessment, and
enhancement variance kinetics) (see Table for listing of 24 selected
features). Existing radiomic analysis derived from a TCGA/TCIA dataset
suggests that there are many correlations between imaging phenotypes and
various genetic pathways, such as VEGF signaling and volume of enhancing
voxels, base excision repair and enhancement texture entropy, and
TGF-beta signaling and enhancement texture variance. We confirm these
relationships as well as establish novel associations using a robust
imaging dataset. By associating specific radiomic features with gene
expression profile of tumors, we have the opportunity to extract detailed
biological information non-invasively through clinical imaging.
Selected imaging phenotypes extracted from MRI scans

