Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synergistic effects of promoter associated DNA methylation and
genetic alterations to better understand oncogenic gene expression
profiles


The emergence of Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) along with
computational biology has broadened the scope in which diverse cellular
processes can be interrogated. While there has been considerable progress
in understanding the impact of genetic and epigenetic mechanisms in
tumorigenesis using whole genomic, epigenomic and transcriptional
analysis by NGS, there has been little consideration of the importance of
interplay between these processes. We performed a comparative analysis of
array and NGS technologies to identify differentially methylated CpG
sites in colorectal cancer cell lines. NGS had more specificity in
addition to profiling more CpG sites relative to Illumina 450K
arrays.Base-level resolution of sequencing data can identify any strand
specific methylation bias. Our analysis shows that methylation frequency
between the sense and antisense strand are highly correlated (average R2
0.81), and coefficient of variance (CV) between the strands is generally
low (about half of observed sites have T genomic variants. This data is
being analyzed to evaluate effects of genetic mutations in promoter
binding sites on gene expression in colorectal cancers. Comparative
analysis of genetic and epigenetic regulation of gene expression will
allow better understanding of gene regulatory networks in colorectal
cancer.

