Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The BET family bromodomain inhibitor ABBV-075 is a promising
therapeutic agent for acute myeloid leukemia and myelodysplastic syndrome


Small molecule inhibitors of the bromodomain and extraterminal domain
(BET) proteins exhibit interesting activities in preclinical models of
various cancer indications, and several of these inhibitors are currently
under clinical investigation. ABBV-075 is a potent and selective BET
family bromodomain inhibitor that recently entered Phase 1 studies. Upon
characterizing cellular responses to BET inhibitors across a large panel
of cancer cell lines, we identified AML/MDS as one of the few cancer
indications where BET inhibitors triggered robust apoptosis in cancer
cell lines and in patient-derived cancer cells. The induction of
apoptosis by BET inhibitors in AML/MDS cells may be partly attributed to
their abilities to down regulate Bcl-XL and Bcl-2, and combining BET
inhibitors with the Bcl-2 inhibitor venetoclax (ABT-199) resulted in
robust cytotoxicity in AML/MDS cells. ABBV-075 exhibited significant
antitumor efficacy as a monotherapy in flank xenograft models of AML and
MDS. Furthermore, combining low doses of ABBV-075 with the standard of
care agent azacitidine in the SKM1 model led to significant tumor
regression, and the combination regimen was better tolerated than BETi
monotherapy at doses that produced a similar degree of therapeutic
benefit. Expression profiling of SKM1 tumors from mice treated with the
ABBV-075/azacitidine combination or each of these agents as monotherapies
revealed that ABBV-075 and azacitidine regulated a common set of biologic
pathways. The combination of ABBV-075/azacitidine led to a more robust
impact on these common pathways, which may partially contribute to the
enhanced efficacy of the ABBV-075/azacitidine combination in the SKM-1
model.

