Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNA-1290 promotes tumor progression and acts as a novel
biomarker for poor prognosis in human colorectal cancer


Background:MicroRNA (miRNA)-1290 is known to activate Wnt signaling
pathway and increase the reprogramming-related transcript factors c-Myc
and Nanog. Additionally, miR-1290 promotes the epithelial-mesenchymal
transition and interferes with cellular differentiation. Previous report
demonstrated that overexpressing miR-1290 shows extensive atrophy and
intestinal metaplasia of the gastric mucosa, indicating that miR-1290 is
involved in the precancerous lesions of the gastric epithelial cells.
However, to the best of our knowledge, miR-1290 expression pattern, its
clinical significance and molecular mechanism in colorectal cancer (CRC)
have not been investigated.Materials and Methods:We screened miR-1290
expression in a subset of 36 tissue samples from normal colonic mucosa (n
= 12), adenoma (n = 12) and CRC (n = 12). Next, we further validated
miR-1290 expression in a larger, independent cohort, which included
normal colonic mucosa (n = 21), adenoma (n = 26) and CRC (n = 179), and
investigated the clinical significance of miR-1290 in CRC. In addition,
CRC cell lines were transfected with anti-miR against miR-1290 for the
assessment of its function.Results:In screening step, miR-1290 expression
stepwise increased according to adenoma-carcinoma sequence, and its
expression in adenoma and CRC was significantly higher than that in
normal colonic mucosa, respectively (adenoma: pBackground:MicroRNA
(miRNA)-1290 is known to activate Wnt signaling pathway and increase the
reprogramming-related transcript factors c-Myc and Nanog. Additionally,
miR-1290 promotes the epithelial-mesenchymal transition and interferes
with cellular differentiation. Previous report demonstrated that
overexpressing miR-1290 shows extensive atrophy and intestinal metaplasia
of the gastric mucosa, indicating that miR-1290 is involved in the
precancerous lesions of the gastric epithelial cells. However, to the
best of our knowledge, miR-1290 expression pattern, its clinical
significance and molecular mechanism in colorectal cancer (CRC) have not
been investigated.Materials and Methods:We screened miR-1290 expression
in a subset of 36 tissue samples from normal colonic mucosa (n = 12),
adenoma (n = 12) and CRC (n = 12). Next, we further validated miR-1290
expression in a larger, independent cohort, which included normal colonic
mucosa (n = 21), adenoma (n = 26) and CRC (n = 179), and investigated the
clinical significance of miR-1290 in CRC. In addition, CRC cell lines
were transfected with anti-miR against miR-1290 for the assessment of its
function.Results:In screening step, miR-1290 expression stepwise
increased according to adenoma-carcinoma sequence, and its expression in
adenoma and CRC was significantly higher than that in normal colonic
mucosa, respectively (adenoma: p<0.0001, CRC: pBackground:MicroRNA
(miRNA)-1290 is known to activate Wnt signaling pathway and increase the
reprogramming-related transcript factors c-Myc and Nanog. Additionally,
miR-1290 promotes the epithelial-mesenchymal transition and interferes
with cellular differentiation. Previous report demonstrated that
overexpressing miR-1290 shows extensive atrophy and intestinal metaplasia
of the gastric mucosa, indicating that miR-1290 is involved in the
precancerous lesions of the gastric epithelial cells. However, to the
best of our knowledge, miR-1290 expression pattern, its clinical
significance and molecular mechanism in colorectal cancer (CRC) have not
been investigated.Materials and Methods:We screened miR-1290 expression
in a subset of 36 tissue samples from normal colonic mucosa (n = 12),
adenoma (n = 12) and CRC (n = 12). Next, we further validated miR-1290
expression in a larger, independent cohort, which included normal colonic
mucosa (n = 21), adenoma (n = 26) and CRC (n = 179), and investigated the
clinical significance of miR-1290 in CRC. In addition, CRC cell lines
were transfected with anti-miR against miR-1290 for the assessment of its
function.Results:In screening step, miR-1290 expression stepwise
increased according to adenoma-carcinoma sequence, and its expression in
adenoma and CRC was significantly higher than that in normal colonic
mucosa, respectively (adenoma: p<0.0001, CRC: p<0.0001). In validation
step, we confirmed miR-1290 expression in both adenoma and CRC was
significantly higher than that in normal colonic mucosa (adenoma:
pBackground:MicroRNA (miRNA)-1290 is known to activate Wnt signaling
pathway and increase the reprogramming-related transcript factors c-Myc
and Nanog. Additionally, miR-1290 promotes the epithelial-mesenchymal
transition and interferes with cellular differentiation. Previous report
demonstrated that overexpressing miR-1290 shows extensive atrophy and
intestinal metaplasia of the gastric mucosa, indicating that miR-1290 is
involved in the precancerous lesions of the gastric epithelial cells.
However, to the best of our knowledge, miR-1290 expression pattern, its
clinical significance and molecular mechanism in colorectal cancer (CRC)
have not been investigated.Materials and Methods:We screened miR-1290
expression in a subset of 36 tissue samples from normal colonic mucosa (n
= 12), adenoma (n = 12) and CRC (n = 12). Next, we further validated
miR-1290 expression in a larger, independent cohort, which included
normal colonic mucosa (n = 21), adenoma (n = 26) and CRC (n = 179), and
investigated the clinical significance of miR-1290 in CRC. In addition,
CRC cell lines were transfected with anti-miR against miR-1290 for the
assessment of its function.Results:In screening step, miR-1290 expression
stepwise increased according to adenoma-carcinoma sequence, and its
expression in adenoma and CRC was significantly higher than that in
normal colonic mucosa, respectively (adenoma: p<0.0001, CRC: p<0.0001).
In validation step, we confirmed miR-1290 expression in both adenoma and
CRC was significantly higher than that in normal colonic mucosa (adenoma:
p<0.0001, CRC: p40mm), high grade of T stage (T3/4), lymphatic and venous
invasion positive, lymph node metastasis and liver metastasis. In
addition, Kaplan-Meier survival curves revealed that the CRC patients
with high miR-1290 expression were significantly poorer overall survival
than that with low expression, respectively (p = 0.0082). Our in vitro
study demonstrated that attenuated miR-1290 expression resulted in
inhibition of proliferation, invasion and migration capacity of CRC cell
lines.Conclusions:We, for the first time, demonstrated that miR-1290 in
CRC acts as onco-miRNAs that is supported by several evidences from our
in vitro analysis and clinical data. MiR-1290 is significantly associated
with malignant potential of CRC and can be the biomarker for predicting
poor prognosis in patients with CRC.

