Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Acquired tamoxifen resistance sensitises breast cancer cells to
bisphosphonates


Acquisition of resistance to endocrine therapies is a major limiting
factor to their clinical effectiveness, resulting in disease relapse and
poor prognosis. This may be due in part to the observations that acquired
resistance to agents such as tamoxifen is accompanied by a gain in
aggressive cellular features likely to promote disease spread and
survival at metastatic sites. Bisphosphonates (BPs) are potent
antiresorptive drugs used to treat osteoporosis and bone metastasis.
Recent evidence also suggests that these agents may possess anti-tumour
properties independently of their action on osteoclasts in a range of
different tumours including breast cancers resulting in suppression of
proliferation and migration and an induction of apoptosis. Here we have
explored the potential of the bisphosphonate, zoledronic acid (ZOL) to
suppress the aggressive phenotype of acquired endocrine-resistant breast
cancer models versus their endocrine-sensitive counterparts.ER+,
endocrine-sensitive MCF7 cells and their highly-proliferative, ER+,
tamoxifen-resistant (TamR) counterparts were exposed to increasing
concentrations of ZOL (1-160M) for 3 days and changes in growth
determined by MTT assay and cell counting. Immunohistochemical analysis
of Ki67 confirmed cell growth effects whilst cell cycle analysis was
performed using FACS and propidium iodide. Changes in signalling pathways
were investigated by Western blotting.The proliferative capacity of TamR
cells was greatly suppressed by ZOL in a dose dependent manner in
contrast to MCF7, where the effect was minimal (IC50 SD: 30 4 M (TamR)
versus 150 15 M (MCF7); pAcquisition of resistance to endocrine therapies
is a major limiting factor to their clinical effectiveness, resulting in
disease relapse and poor prognosis. This may be due in part to the
observations that acquired resistance to agents such as tamoxifen is
accompanied by a gain in aggressive cellular features likely to promote
disease spread and survival at metastatic sites. Bisphosphonates (BPs)
are potent antiresorptive drugs used to treat osteoporosis and bone
metastasis. Recent evidence also suggests that these agents may possess
anti-tumour properties independently of their action on osteoclasts in a
range of different tumours including breast cancers resulting in
suppression of proliferation and migration and an induction of apoptosis.
Here we have explored the potential of the bisphosphonate, zoledronic
acid (ZOL) to suppress the aggressive phenotype of acquired
endocrine-resistant breast cancer models versus their endocrine-sensitive
counterparts.ER+, endocrine-sensitive MCF7 cells and their
highly-proliferative, ER+, tamoxifen-resistant (TamR) counterparts were
exposed to increasing concentrations of ZOL (1-160M) for 3 days and
changes in growth determined by MTT assay and cell counting.
Immunohistochemical analysis of Ki67 confirmed cell growth effects whilst
cell cycle analysis was performed using FACS and propidium iodide.
Changes in signalling pathways were investigated by Western blotting.The
proliferative capacity of TamR cells was greatly suppressed by ZOL in a
dose dependent manner in contrast to MCF7, where the effect was minimal
(IC50 SD: 30 4 M (TamR) versus 150 15 M (MCF7); p<0.05). This was
confirmed with Ki67 analysis which showed a reduction in Ki67 positivity
of 40% (TamR) versus 25% (MCF7); pAcquisition of resistance to endocrine
therapies is a major limiting factor to their clinical effectiveness,
resulting in disease relapse and poor prognosis. This may be due in part
to the observations that acquired resistance to agents such as tamoxifen
is accompanied by a gain in aggressive cellular features likely to
promote disease spread and survival at metastatic sites. Bisphosphonates
(BPs) are potent antiresorptive drugs used to treat osteoporosis and bone
metastasis. Recent evidence also suggests that these agents may possess
anti-tumour properties independently of their action on osteoclasts in a
range of different tumours including breast cancers resulting in
suppression of proliferation and migration and an induction of apoptosis.
Here we have explored the potential of the bisphosphonate, zoledronic
acid (ZOL) to suppress the aggressive phenotype of acquired
endocrine-resistant breast cancer models versus their endocrine-sensitive
counterparts.ER+, endocrine-sensitive MCF7 cells and their
highly-proliferative, ER+, tamoxifen-resistant (TamR) counterparts were
exposed to increasing concentrations of ZOL (1-160M) for 3 days and
changes in growth determined by MTT assay and cell counting.
Immunohistochemical analysis of Ki67 confirmed cell growth effects whilst
cell cycle analysis was performed using FACS and propidium iodide.
Changes in signalling pathways were investigated by Western blotting.The
proliferative capacity of TamR cells was greatly suppressed by ZOL in a
dose dependent manner in contrast to MCF7, where the effect was minimal
(IC50 SD: 30 4 M (TamR) versus 150 15 M (MCF7); p<0.05). This was
confirmed with Ki67 analysis which showed a reduction in Ki67 positivity
of 40% (TamR) versus 25% (MCF7); p<0.05. ZOL treatment of TamR cells
resulted in a significant loss of cells in G1 phase and an accumulation
of the cells in S phase. ZOL treatment of TamR cells also resulted in
loss of AKT activity, whilst AKT was unaffected in MCF7 cells.Our data
suggests that acquisition of resistance to tamoxifen confers a
sensitivity to BPs where treatment of resistant cells with agents such as
zoledronic acid results in suppression of proliferation and modulation of
AKT signalling. These data suggest that BPs may exert direct anti-tumour
effects on breast cancers which have relapsed on endocrine treatment.

