Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular profile of a GM-CSF overexpressing breast cancer
whole-cell vaccine with systemic anti-tumor activity


BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE OF STUDY: The allogeneic whole-cell cancer vaccine
BriaVax(TM) (formerly SV-BR-1-GM) is an ER/PR negative, HER2/neu positive
breast cancer cell line (SV-BR-1) we engineered to stably overexpress
GM-CSF. BriaVax, rendered proliferation incompetent by irradiation, has
thus far been applied to 4 advanced stage cancer patients (3 subjects
with breast cancer, 1 subject with ovarian cancer). One breast cancer
subject responded to BriaVax with complete remission of a measurable lung
lesion and near complete remission of multiple breast lesions after only
3 inoculations. Nevertheless, she relapsed 3 months after completing the
protocol, with brain metastases as well as multiple breast lesions. We
obtained FDA permission to resume vaccinations, and, upon doing so, all
metastatic sites responded with a prompt tumor regression after only 3
inoculations. To prospectively identify patients with a high likelihood
of benefiting from BriaVax therapy we began a program to identify
molecular factors of diagnostic potential. Here, we describe a gene
expression signature that might both be informative about BriaVax
mechanism of action and helpful for developing diagnostic or monitoring
biomarkers.METHODS: To prospectively identify patients with tumors
responsive to BriaVax we began a molecular analysis of both the BriaVax
cell line and cells obtained from the special clinical responder's blood.
BriaVax gene expression profiles were obtained through Illumina BeadArray
and NanoString nCounter technologies and compared to gene expression data
sets publically available through the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO;
National Center for Biotechnology Information) portal.RESULTS: BriaVax
expresses a gene signature consistent with a mechanism of action
involving not only the activation of cytotoxic T cells but also the
induction of a humoral response. In addition, BriaVax expresses known
cancer antigens. Notably, blood-derived cells of the special clinical
responder expressed genes complementing BriaVax gene expression
signature, thus possibly explaining the unusually prompt and robust
clinical response to BriaVax.CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that
BriaVax exerts its therapeutic effects via multiple modes. We identified
both candidate immunogens overexpressed in BriaVax compared to normal
breast cells and unraveled a potential mechanism of action explaining the
encouraging clinical response observed.

