Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Multiregional RNA sequencing identifies intratumor transcriptomic
heterogeneity in a subset of early-stage hepatocellular carcinoma


BACKGROUND: Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is known to have histological
intra-tumor heterogeneity. Little is known about the underlying molecular
contributions to this observation, or its potential impact on resistance
to therapies.AIMS: 1) To evaluate intra-tumoral molecular heterogeneity
of primary HCCs using multi-regional RNA-seq; 2) to correlate molecular
alterations with histological features at distinct areas.METHODS: We
analyzed 55 fresh-frozen tissues from 10 patients with BCLC-A HCC treated
with surgical resection. Multi-regional sampling included 38 HCCs and 16
adjacent non-tumoral tissues (average 5.4 samples per patient). We
performed H&E staining and RNA-seq on all samples. Each sequenced section
was evaluated for a panel of 11 histological features. Data analyses
included clustering (consensus and multidimensional scaling (MDS)),
sample ordering via linear graph modeling of expression, pathogen
quantitation, gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA), and nearest template
method (NTP) for gene signature prediction.RESULTS: Patients enrolled
were mostly males (70%), with an average age of 59, all with
single-nodule HCC, and a median tumor size of 5.3 cm (range 3-16 cm).
Background liver disease was HBV in 50% of cases without histological
cirrhosis in 80%. MDS and consensus clustering identified heterogeneity
in 40% (4/10) of patients as defined by at least one sample not
clustering with their counterparts. Sample ordering uncovered dominant
tumor heterogeneity evolution paths, including HBV specific ones. GSEA
revealed differential enrichment (FDRBACKGROUND: Hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC) is known to have histological intra-tumor heterogeneity. Little is
known about the underlying molecular contributions to this observation,
or its potential impact on resistance to therapies.AIMS: 1) To evaluate
intra-tumoral molecular heterogeneity of primary HCCs using
multi-regional RNA-seq; 2) to correlate molecular alterations with
histological features at distinct areas.METHODS: We analyzed 55
fresh-frozen tissues from 10 patients with BCLC-A HCC treated with
surgical resection. Multi-regional sampling included 38 HCCs and 16
adjacent non-tumoral tissues (average 5.4 samples per patient). We
performed H&E staining and RNA-seq on all samples. Each sequenced section
was evaluated for a panel of 11 histological features. Data analyses
included clustering (consensus and multidimensional scaling (MDS)),
sample ordering via linear graph modeling of expression, pathogen
quantitation, gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA), and nearest template
method (NTP) for gene signature prediction.RESULTS: Patients enrolled
were mostly males (70%), with an average age of 59, all with
single-nodule HCC, and a median tumor size of 5.3 cm (range 3-16 cm).
Background liver disease was HBV in 50% of cases without histological
cirrhosis in 80%. MDS and consensus clustering identified heterogeneity
in 40% (4/10) of patients as defined by at least one sample not
clustering with their counterparts. Sample ordering uncovered dominant
tumor heterogeneity evolution paths, including HBV specific ones. GSEA
revealed differential enrichment (FDR<0.05) of Cancer Hallmark Gene Sets
in the 4 heterogeneous tumors. Indeed, these 4 tumors showed concordant
gene set enrichment (FDRBACKGROUND: Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is
known to have histological intra-tumor heterogeneity. Little is known
about the underlying molecular contributions to this observation, or its
potential impact on resistance to therapies.AIMS: 1) To evaluate
intra-tumoral molecular heterogeneity of primary HCCs using
multi-regional RNA-seq; 2) to correlate molecular alterations with
histological features at distinct areas.METHODS: We analyzed 55
fresh-frozen tissues from 10 patients with BCLC-A HCC treated with
surgical resection. Multi-regional sampling included 38 HCCs and 16
adjacent non-tumoral tissues (average 5.4 samples per patient). We
performed H&E staining and RNA-seq on all samples. Each sequenced section
was evaluated for a panel of 11 histological features. Data analyses
included clustering (consensus and multidimensional scaling (MDS)),
sample ordering via linear graph modeling of expression, pathogen
quantitation, gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA), and nearest template
method (NTP) for gene signature prediction.RESULTS: Patients enrolled
were mostly males (70%), with an average age of 59, all with
single-nodule HCC, and a median tumor size of 5.3 cm (range 3-16 cm).
Background liver disease was HBV in 50% of cases without histological
cirrhosis in 80%. MDS and consensus clustering identified heterogeneity
in 40% (4/10) of patients as defined by at least one sample not
clustering with their counterparts. Sample ordering uncovered dominant
tumor heterogeneity evolution paths, including HBV specific ones. GSEA
revealed differential enrichment (FDR<0.05) of Cancer Hallmark Gene Sets
in the 4 heterogeneous tumors. Indeed, these 4 tumors showed concordant
gene set enrichment (FDR<.05) in all regions only 19% of the time
compared to 83% in homogenous tumors on average. NTP further confirmed
heterogeneity in molecular classification predictions in 2/4
heterogeneous tumors (e.g., Proliferation class). There were no
significant differences in size or regions sequenced between
heterogeneous and homogenous tumors. Molecular outliers show distinct
histological features such as high mitotic rate and poorer
differentiation.CONCLUSION: Transcriptomic intra-tumor heterogeneity is
frequent in a subset of surgically resected HCC, and it correlates with
histological features. Integrative analysis of CNVs, expressed mutations,
allele specific expression, and gene fusions is ongoing.

