Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The identification of p53 target genes and noncoding RNAs through
the combined analysis of RNA-seq and ChIP-seq data


p53 is inactivated in approximately half of human cancers. p53 execute
various functions by modulating transcriptional regulation. To identify
direct p53 transcriptional targets including non-coding RNAs, we
performed gene expression analysis with next-generation sequencing
(RNA-seq) in osteosarcoma U2OS cells treated with Nutlin-3a which
activates endogenous p53. We identified 261 genes increased more than
4-fold and 373 long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) increased more than 2-fold.
Next, we analyzed the data of chromatin immunoprecipitation with
next-generation sequencing (ChIP-seq) and then searched for p53 binding
sites in the whole human genome. p53 binding sites were located in the
neighborhood of 126/261 (48.3%) genes including 28 known target genes and
122/373 (32.7%) lncRNAs including 7 lncRNAs we already identified in
previous study. Recent reports have revealed that lncRNAs play an
important role in various biological and pathological processes such as
development, differentiation, stemness and carcinogenesis. Although all
functions of lncRNAs have not been elucidated, many lncRNAs are involved
in transcriptional regulation like transcriptional factors. Therefore, we
performed a gene network analysis of cancer transcriptome including
lncRNAs using public RNA-seq data of cancer tissues. As a result, we
identified several hub lncRNAs which regulate the transcription of many
downstream genes. Our results suggest that p53 and lncRNAs comprise a
complex transcriptional network for various biological functions and
tumor suppression.

