Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Usefulness of exosome quantification by cholesteryl ester transfer
protein activity as a biomarker for human esophageal squamous cell
carcinoma (ESCC)


Exosomes are small membrane vesicles (30-100 nm) and are thought to play
an important role in tumor progression, chemoresistance, dormancy etc.
However, the exosome dynamics and transportation between cancer cells and
the other cells are still unclear. In addition, although it is common
method to quantify exosomes using standard protein quantification
methods, it is actually incorrect.In this study, we assessed the exosome
dynamics with mouse model and quantify plasma exosome by cholesteryl
ester transfer protein activity, which is known to be enriched within
exosomes. We analyzed the relationship between exosome quantification and
clinical characters in ESCC patients.In order to image and analyze the
movement of cancer cell-derived exosomes, green fluorescent protein
(GFP)-tagged CD63, which is a general marker of exosomes, was expressed
in human esophageal squamous cancer cell line TE2. Mouse model of human
ESCC were then established by s.c. injection of TE2-CD63-GFP or TE2 cell
lines. Eight weeks after injection, the tumor, blood and other organs
were harvested and imaged with fluorescence. Our data indicates tumor
derived exosome can emitted from the tumor and circulate in the blood
flow.Quantification of plasma exosome in ESCC patients (n = 64) and no
malignant patient (n = 10) were performed by measurement of cholesteryl
ester protein activity, and then analyzed the relationship between the
exosome number and the patients clinical characteristics, such as age,
sex, TNM classification, prognosis, tumor marker. Our data indicates the
exosome number was higher in ESCC patients than no malignant patients (P
= 0.0014). Althogh there were no difference in tumor depth, lymph node
status, distant metastasis, the exosome number can be a prognostic marker
for ESCC (P = 0.04).

