Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chemotherapy and inflammation show a p65- and STAT3-dependent
pro-tumorigenic potential


Tumor microenvironment (TME) plays a critical role in cancer progression
and response to therapies. Therapeutic intervention strategies for cancer
treatment can induce inflammation, resulting in changes in the TME. To
investigate the response of cancer cells to chemotherapy in the context
of an inflammatory microenvironment, we studied the effects driven by the
chemotherapeutic drug doxorubicin, and the inflammatory cytokine TNF.We
previously demonstrated using expression microarrays experiments
(validated also through qPCR) that the Doxo+TNF combined treatment
determined a strong up-regulation of migration-related genes as well as
increased motility in breast cancer cells (MCF7).We confirmed the
synergistic activation of a group of 6 different genes upon Doxo+TNF
combined treatment in different cell line models coming from different
cancer types (A549-lung, U2OS-osteosarcoma). Moreover, we demonstrated
that this effect was only partially p53-depenedent but strongly
Doxo-dependent using p53 mutated MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells or
knocking-out p53 in MCF7 or U2OS cells through the cutting edge
technology CRISPR/Cas9.We also demonstrated that the combined Doxo+TNF
treatment was not only able to disrupt the 3D architecture of mammary
acini observed with MCF10A primary cells grown within matrigel, but also
to stimulate the tube-forming potential of Human Umbilical Vein
Endothelial Cells (HUVEC).Furthermore, a signature of Doxo+TNF highly
synergistic genes (DT-29) was shown to exhibit prognostic value for
luminal breast cancer patients, with adverse outcome correlating with
higher relative expression (based on Kaplan-Meier plotter tool). We
further used available experimental data sets (RNA-seq measurements from
Gene Expression Omnibus) both from breast cancer cell lines (luminal-like
vs basal-like breast cancer cells) and breast cancer patients (ER
positive vs Triple Negative Breast Cancer, TNBC and vs healthy adjacent
tissues). The expression of DT-29 gene signature was analyzed and
compared among the different groups of samples. The most statistically
relevant genes differentially expressed among the different groups were
involved in the STAT3-driven pathways and were prevalently highly
expressed in TNBC patients and cell lines.In order to demonstrate a
STAT3-dependent regulation of up-regulated genes upon Doxo+TNF combined
treatment, we pharmacologically inhibited STAT3 using Stattic or we
knocked-out STAT3 using CRISPR/Cas9 in MCF7, MDA-MB-231 and U2OS cells.
Results demonstrated a STAT3-dependent up-regulation for some of the
selected genes and STAT3 inhibition resulted also in a reduced migration
potential particularly in U2OS cells.We propose that the combined
treatment with Doxo+TNF can lead to the activation of specific gene
expression programs that may impact on cancer phenotypes and potentially
modify the efficacy of cancer therapy.

