Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metastasis suppression by KP54 and non-KP54 kisspeptins


The KISS1 metastasis suppressor blocks metastasis by inhibiting
colonization at secondary sites. In order to suppress metastasis, KISS1
must be secreted and cleaved by furin into kisspeptins. Kisspeptin-54
(KP54, K67 to F121) binds a G-protein coupled receptor, KISS1R, and the
mechanism of metastasis suppression has been assumed to be through KP54
binding with KISS1R. However, since KISS1 is cleaved extracellularly, and
since none of the cells tested express KISS1R, an alternate hypothesis is
required - another kisspeptin is responsible for suppressing metastasis.
To test this hypothesis, we engineered all ten of the possible
kisspeptins based upon predicted dibasic cleavage sites (M1-Q145; M1-R56;
M1-R67; M1-R124; R56-R66; R67-F121; R56-F121; R56-Q145; R67-Q145;
R124-Q145). The (KISS1 Manufactured Peptides, or KMP) each contained the
same secretion signal as nascent KISS1 and were designated KMP1 to KMP10
respectively. Each KMP was expressed individually in B16-F10 melanoma
cells. Following intravenous injection, experimental lung metastases were
quantified. While KP54 expression suppressed metastasis, other KMP
lacking the KISS1R binding motif also suppressed metastasis as or more
effectively (pThe KISS1 metastasis suppressor blocks metastasis by
inhibiting colonization at secondary sites. In order to suppress
metastasis, KISS1 must be secreted and cleaved by furin into kisspeptins.
Kisspeptin-54 (KP54, K67 to F121) binds a G-protein coupled receptor,
KISS1R, and the mechanism of metastasis suppression has been assumed to
be through KP54 binding with KISS1R. However, since KISS1 is cleaved
extracellularly, and since none of the cells tested express KISS1R, an
alternate hypothesis is required - another kisspeptin is responsible for
suppressing metastasis. To test this hypothesis, we engineered all ten of
the possible kisspeptins based upon predicted dibasic cleavage sites
(M1-Q145; M1-R56; M1-R67; M1-R124; R56-R66; R67-F121; R56-F121; R56-Q145;
R67-Q145; R124-Q145). The (KISS1 Manufactured Peptides, or KMP) each
contained the same secretion signal as nascent KISS1 and were designated
KMP1 to KMP10 respectively. Each KMP was expressed individually in
B16-F10 melanoma cells. Following intravenous injection, experimental
lung metastases were quantified. While KP54 expression suppressed
metastasis, other KMP lacking the KISS1R binding motif also suppressed
metastasis as or more effectively (p<0.05). In vitro, cell lines
expressing suppressor KMP inhibited motility, increased mitochondrial
biomass, and elevated levels of oxidative phosphorylation (phenotypes
previously correlated with KISS1 function). In particular, KMP2 (M1 -
R56) completely suppressed metastasis. Collectively, these data
demonstrate that the mechanism of action for metastasis suppression by
KISS1 does not necessarily require activation of KISS1R, and also
suggests the existence of additional receptors.Support: CA134981, Natl
Fndn Cancer Res, Komen SAC11037, KS Bioscience Auth, P30-CA168524,
Steiner Family Fund for Metastasis Research.

