Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Optimizing cervical cancer screening for HIV-infected women: A
risk-based approach


Background: Women living with HIV (WLHIV) have increased cervical cancer
risk. Guidelines suggest screening WLHIV with negative cervical cytology
annually, and managing WLHIV with ASC-US cytology by general population
(GP) guidelines (1 year return if HPV testing unavailable).Methods: We
used risk benchmarking to compare cervical precancer risk in WLHIV to the
GP. For WLHIV ages 21-65 years in the Women's Interagency HIV Study
(WIHS), we evaluated the first cytology result from 2000 or later. We
used parametric survival models to calculate HSIL risks after negative or
ASC-US cytology, overall and by CD4 cell count. Separately, we
synthesized HSIL risk estimates among GP women in 13 published studies
using mixed-effects models. We then benchmarked risks in WLHIV to the
3-year GP risks, which for negative cytology represent the threshold for
re-screening.Results: Among 2,653 WLHIV, 1,982 (75%) had negative
cytology and 377 (14%) had ASC-US cytology. Most WLHIV with negative
(72%) and ASC-US (52%) cytology had CD4350 cells/L. We observed 95 cases
of HSIL (CIN2+; 44 were CIN3+ including 1 cancer) within 5 years of
cytology. After negative cytology, 3-year GP risk benchmarks were 0.83%
(CIN2+) and 0.60% (CIN3+). WLHIV with CD4350 met both benchmarks by 2
years (1.1% and 0.68% respectively), while WLHIV with CD4Background:
Women living with HIV (WLHIV) have increased cervical cancer risk.
Guidelines suggest screening WLHIV with negative cervical cytology
annually, and managing WLHIV with ASC-US cytology by general population
(GP) guidelines (1 year return if HPV testing unavailable).Methods: We
used risk benchmarking to compare cervical precancer risk in WLHIV to the
GP. For WLHIV ages 21-65 years in the Women's Interagency HIV Study
(WIHS), we evaluated the first cytology result from 2000 or later. We
used parametric survival models to calculate HSIL risks after negative or
ASC-US cytology, overall and by CD4 cell count. Separately, we
synthesized HSIL risk estimates among GP women in 13 published studies
using mixed-effects models. We then benchmarked risks in WLHIV to the
3-year GP risks, which for negative cytology represent the threshold for
re-screening.Results: Among 2,653 WLHIV, 1,982 (75%) had negative
cytology and 377 (14%) had ASC-US cytology. Most WLHIV with negative
(72%) and ASC-US (52%) cytology had CD4350 cells/L. We observed 95 cases
of HSIL (CIN2+; 44 were CIN3+ including 1 cancer) within 5 years of
cytology. After negative cytology, 3-year GP risk benchmarks were 0.83%
(CIN2+) and 0.60% (CIN3+). WLHIV with CD4350 met both benchmarks by 2
years (1.1% and 0.68% respectively), while WLHIV with CD4<350 exceeded
the CIN2+ benchmark at only 1 year (1.1%). After ASC-US cytology, 3-year
GP benchmarks were 8.7% (CIN2+) and 4.4% (CIN3+). For WLHIV with CD4350,
3-year risks were similar to the benchmarks (9.4% and 4.0%), but WLHIV
with CD4Background: Women living with HIV (WLHIV) have increased cervical
cancer risk. Guidelines suggest screening WLHIV with negative cervical
cytology annually, and managing WLHIV with ASC-US cytology by general
population (GP) guidelines (1 year return if HPV testing
unavailable).Methods: We used risk benchmarking to compare cervical
precancer risk in WLHIV to the GP. For WLHIV ages 21-65 years in the
Women's Interagency HIV Study (WIHS), we evaluated the first cytology
result from 2000 or later. We used parametric survival models to
calculate HSIL risks after negative or ASC-US cytology, overall and by
CD4 cell count. Separately, we synthesized HSIL risk estimates among GP
women in 13 published studies using mixed-effects models. We then
benchmarked risks in WLHIV to the 3-year GP risks, which for negative
cytology represent the threshold for re-screening.Results: Among 2,653
WLHIV, 1,982 (75%) had negative cytology and 377 (14%) had ASC-US
cytology. Most WLHIV with negative (72%) and ASC-US (52%) cytology had
CD4350 cells/L. We observed 95 cases of HSIL (CIN2+; 44 were CIN3+
including 1 cancer) within 5 years of cytology. After negative cytology,
3-year GP risk benchmarks were 0.83% (CIN2+) and 0.60% (CIN3+). WLHIV
with CD4350 met both benchmarks by 2 years (1.1% and 0.68% respectively),
while WLHIV with CD4<350 exceeded the CIN2+ benchmark at only 1 year
(1.1%). After ASC-US cytology, 3-year GP benchmarks were 8.7% (CIN2+) and
4.4% (CIN3+). For WLHIV with CD4350, 3-year risks were similar to the
benchmarks (9.4% and 4.0%), but WLHIV with CD4<350 approximated these
risks at only 1 year (8.8% and 3.9%).Conclusions: For WLHIV with CD4350,
these data suggest that the interval for re-screening after negative
cervical cytology can be lengthened from 1 to 2 years, and that inclusion
in GP guidelines for managing ASC-US cytology is appropriate. In
contrast, WLHIV with CD4Background: Women living with HIV (WLHIV) have
increased cervical cancer risk. Guidelines suggest screening WLHIV with
negative cervical cytology annually, and managing WLHIV with ASC-US
cytology by general population (GP) guidelines (1 year return if HPV
testing unavailable).Methods: We used risk benchmarking to compare
cervical precancer risk in WLHIV to the GP. For WLHIV ages 21-65 years in
the Women's Interagency HIV Study (WIHS), we evaluated the first cytology
result from 2000 or later. We used parametric survival models to
calculate HSIL risks after negative or ASC-US cytology, overall and by
CD4 cell count. Separately, we synthesized HSIL risk estimates among GP
women in 13 published studies using mixed-effects models. We then
benchmarked risks in WLHIV to the 3-year GP risks, which for negative
cytology represent the threshold for re-screening.Results: Among 2,653
WLHIV, 1,982 (75%) had negative cytology and 377 (14%) had ASC-US
cytology. Most WLHIV with negative (72%) and ASC-US (52%) cytology had
CD4350 cells/L. We observed 95 cases of HSIL (CIN2+; 44 were CIN3+
including 1 cancer) within 5 years of cytology. After negative cytology,
3-year GP risk benchmarks were 0.83% (CIN2+) and 0.60% (CIN3+). WLHIV
with CD4350 met both benchmarks by 2 years (1.1% and 0.68% respectively),
while WLHIV with CD4<350 exceeded the CIN2+ benchmark at only 1 year
(1.1%). After ASC-US cytology, 3-year GP benchmarks were 8.7% (CIN2+) and
4.4% (CIN3+). For WLHIV with CD4350, 3-year risks were similar to the
benchmarks (9.4% and 4.0%), but WLHIV with CD4<350 approximated these
risks at only 1 year (8.8% and 3.9%).Conclusions: For WLHIV with CD4350,
these data suggest that the interval for re-screening after negative
cervical cytology can be lengthened from 1 to 2 years, and that inclusion
in GP guidelines for managing ASC-US cytology is appropriate. In
contrast, WLHIV with CD4<350 remain at increased risk and should be
screened annually after negative cervical cytology and referred to
colposcopy after ASC-US.
Cervical precancer risk after normal or ASC-US cytology in WLHIV compared
to the general population

