Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Defining the role of macrophage mediated trogocytosis in the
clearance of antibody-opsonized tumor cells


Understanding the complex behavior of effector cells such as monocytes or
macrophages in regulating cancerous growth is of central importance for
cancer immunotherapy. Earlier studies using CD20-specific antibodies have
demonstrated that the Fc receptor (FcR)-mediated transfer of the targeted
receptors from tumor cells to these effector cells through trogocytosis
can enable escape from antibody therapy, leading to the viewpoint that
this process is pro-tumorigenic. However, there is limited information
concerning the role of trogocytosis in antibody-based treatment of solid
tumors such as breast cancer.We have used advanced microscopy methods and
quantitative flow cytometric assays to study the effect of
antibody-mediated trogocytosis on breast cancer cells and whether they
can lead to tumor cell death.Our results show that long-term coculture
with macrophages can reduce cancer cell numbers in an antibody-dependent
manner even at low effector:target ratios. Quantitation from simultaneous
long-term imaging of macrophage:cancer cell interactions reveals that
this cell death is caused by both macrophage-mediated phagocytosis and
trogocytosis, with the contribution of each process differing by the
phenotype of the effector macrophages.Together, our results add to our
understanding of the numerous interactions macrophages can have with
cancer cells, and how therapeutic antibodies modulate their effects. Our
recent observations in this area will be presented.

