Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting monoclonal antibodies to the tumor microenvironment for
cancer immunotherapy


Therapeutic antibodies and immune checkpoint inhibitors can be delivered
more efficiently to the tumor microenvironment (TME) by targeting the
exposed collagenous (XC) proteins at the site/s of tumor invasion, stroma
formation, and neoangiogenesis.Purpose: To assess the ability of
bifunctional fusion polypepetides (mAb-Tropins) to selectively deliver
monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) to the TME in tumor-bearing nude
mice.Materials and Methods: Synthetic peptide probes and polypeptide
aptamers (25-45 aa), fluorescein-labeled IgGs, and an anti-VEGF human mAb
were tested in vitro in exposed collagen (XC)-agarose binding assays, in
HUVEC cultures, and in vivo in a human xenograft model of pancreatic
cancer in nude mice.Results: The XC-targeted mAb-Tropins, bound
non-covalently to FITC-labeled IgGs [but not to truncated F(Ab)2
fragments], exhibited selectivity for XC-agarose over control agarose
matrices. Importantly, the biological activity of the XC/mAb-Tropin-bound
anti-VEGF mAbs was fully preserved, as demonstrated by inhibition of
endothelial cell proliferation in HUVEC cultures. In vivo, intense
fluorescence was observed in tumors of mice injected with mAb-Tropin
targeted IgGs at 15 and 60 minutes after intravenous injection, but not
in non-targeted IgG-treated mice (see Figure below).Conclusions: Tumor
XC-targeted mAb-Tropins are an effective method of delivering therapeutic
mAbs precisely to the tumor compartments, with meaningful implications
for cancer immunotherapy.FigureFigure Legend: The performance of
mAb-Tropin 277 is evaluated in vitro in XC-binding assays and in vivo in
a murine xenograft model of metastatic cancer. XC-agarose chromatography
using mAb-Tropin 277 and FITC-IgGs, followed by stringent washing and
analysis of column eluates and retentates (A,B), demonstrates
aptamer-dependent binding of IgGs to XC-proteins (retentates), as well as
depletion of the fluorescent IgGs from solution (column pass-through).
The mAb-Tropin 277 dependent targeting of fluorescent IgGs (via the
systemic circulation) to tumors is demonstrated in a murine metastatic
cancer model (C). Taken together with the in vitro binding datawhich
showed that the bifunctional mAb-targeting onco-aptamers efficiently
sequester IgGs (A) and concentrate the bound IgGs on collagen matrices
(B)this in vivo data indicates that mAb-Tropins concentrate and
compartmentalize IgGs/mAbs within the TME (C).

