Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Loss of ARID1A expression leads to sensitivity to ROS-inducing
agents in ovarian cancer cells


AT-rich interactive domain-containing protein 1A (ARID1A) is frequently
inactivated by mutations in a broad spectrum of cancer types, including
ovarian and endometrial cancers. However, therapeutic strategies
targeting ARID1A-mutant cancers remain limited. In this study, we aimed
to identify drugs that selectively target ARID1A-mutant ovarian cancer
cells. To this end, we compared the drug sensitivities of ARID1A-mutant
and ARID1A-wildtype cancer cell lines using the Genomics of Drug
Sensitivity in Cancer database. We found that ARID1A-mutant cancer cell
lines were more sensitive to treatment with the reactive oxygen species
(ROS)-inducing agent elesclomol compared to ARID1A-wildtype cancer cell
lines. We validated this finding in a panel of ovarian and endometrial
cancer cell lines, observing that treatment with elesclomol inhibited
growth and induced apoptosis more potently in ARID1A-mutant cells than in
ARID1A-wildtype cells. Knockdown of ARID1A expression in ARID1A-wildtype
cells resulted in increased sensitivity to ROS-inducing agents, whereas
re-expression of ARID1A in ARID1A-mutant cells resulted in decreased
sensitivity. Finally, we found that knockdown of ARID1A expression
resulted in increased intracellular ROS levels and subsequently promoted
cell growth. In summary, we identified a novel role for ARID1A in
protecting cells from oxidative stress and that ROS-inducing agents may
be used to target ARID1A-mutant ovarian cancer cells.

