Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RNA-sequencing analysis implicates novel non-coding RNAs in human
papillomavirus-associated head and neck squamous cell carcinoma


Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is an aggressive disease
marked by frequent recurrence and metastasis and stagnant survival rates.
Given the recent emergence of human papillomavirus (HPV) as a major
etiological factor in head and neck cancers, there exists a pressing need
to better resolve the molecular heterogeneity of HNSCCs, define more
precise diagnostic and prognostic tools, and develop a wider repertoire
of targeted therapies. Non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs), including long
non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) and microRNAs (miRNAs), have been increasingly
viewed as promising sources of insight into cancer onset and progression,
with their diverse regulatory roles, tissue specificity, and aberrant
expression in various human diseases now established by a multitude of
studies. Using RNA-sequencing data from 466 HNSCC patients in The Cancer
Genome Atlas (TCGA), we sought to investigate the transcriptome-wide
dysregulation of both classes of ncRNAs in HPV-associated HNSCCs.
Differential expression analyses controlled for patient smoking status
revealed 5 lncRNAs and 9 miRNAs exhibiting significantly altered
regulation between HPV-negative and HPV-positive HNSCC tumors (FDR Head
and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is an aggressive disease marked
by frequent recurrence and metastasis and stagnant survival rates. Given
the recent emergence of human papillomavirus (HPV) as a major etiological
factor in head and neck cancers, there exists a pressing need to better
resolve the molecular heterogeneity of HNSCCs, define more precise
diagnostic and prognostic tools, and develop a wider repertoire of
targeted therapies. Non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs), including long non-coding
RNAs (lncRNAs) and microRNAs (miRNAs), have been increasingly viewed as
promising sources of insight into cancer onset and progression, with
their diverse regulatory roles, tissue specificity, and aberrant
expression in various human diseases now established by a multitude of
studies. Using RNA-sequencing data from 466 HNSCC patients in The Cancer
Genome Atlas (TCGA), we sought to investigate the transcriptome-wide
dysregulation of both classes of ncRNAs in HPV-associated HNSCCs.
Differential expression analyses controlled for patient smoking status
revealed 5 lncRNAs and 9 miRNAs exhibiting significantly altered
regulation between HPV-negative and HPV-positive HNSCC tumors (FDR < 1
10-10). Among these, 8 ncRNAs were additionally correlated with HNSCC
tumor stage, invasion, and anatomic site, among other clinical
characteristics (Kruskal-Wallis, p Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma
(HNSCC) is an aggressive disease marked by frequent recurrence and
metastasis and stagnant survival rates. Given the recent emergence of
human papillomavirus (HPV) as a major etiological factor in head and neck
cancers, there exists a pressing need to better resolve the molecular
heterogeneity of HNSCCs, define more precise diagnostic and prognostic
tools, and develop a wider repertoire of targeted therapies. Non-coding
RNAs (ncRNAs), including long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) and microRNAs
(miRNAs), have been increasingly viewed as promising sources of insight
into cancer onset and progression, with their diverse regulatory roles,
tissue specificity, and aberrant expression in various human diseases now
established by a multitude of studies. Using RNA-sequencing data from 466
HNSCC patients in The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA), we sought to
investigate the transcriptome-wide dysregulation of both classes of
ncRNAs in HPV-associated HNSCCs. Differential expression analyses
controlled for patient smoking status revealed 5 lncRNAs and 9 miRNAs
exhibiting significantly altered regulation between HPV-negative and
HPV-positive HNSCC tumors (FDR < 1 10-10). Among these, 8 ncRNAs were
additionally correlated with HNSCC tumor stage, invasion, and anatomic
site, among other clinical characteristics (Kruskal-Wallis, p < 0.05). We
subsequently validated the dysregulation of several candidate
HPV-associated ncRNAs in vitro after ectopically expressing HPV16 E6/E7
in a panel of normal oral epithelial and HPV-negative HNSCC cell lines.
To explore the functional consequences of our identified HPV-associated
ncRNAs, we further investigated lnc-SP9-1:1, an lncRNA upregulated by
73.89 fold in HPV-positive compared to HPV-negative HNSCCs (FDR Head and
neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is an aggressive disease marked by
frequent recurrence and metastasis and stagnant survival rates. Given the
recent emergence of human papillomavirus (HPV) as a major etiological
factor in head and neck cancers, there exists a pressing need to better
resolve the molecular heterogeneity of HNSCCs, define more precise
diagnostic and prognostic tools, and develop a wider repertoire of
targeted therapies. Non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs), including long non-coding
RNAs (lncRNAs) and microRNAs (miRNAs), have been increasingly viewed as
promising sources of insight into cancer onset and progression, with
their diverse regulatory roles, tissue specificity, and aberrant
expression in various human diseases now established by a multitude of
studies. Using RNA-sequencing data from 466 HNSCC patients in The Cancer
Genome Atlas (TCGA), we sought to investigate the transcriptome-wide
dysregulation of both classes of ncRNAs in HPV-associated HNSCCs.
Differential expression analyses controlled for patient smoking status
revealed 5 lncRNAs and 9 miRNAs exhibiting significantly altered
regulation between HPV-negative and HPV-positive HNSCC tumors (FDR < 1
10-10). Among these, 8 ncRNAs were additionally correlated with HNSCC
tumor stage, invasion, and anatomic site, among other clinical
characteristics (Kruskal-Wallis, p < 0.05). We subsequently validated the
dysregulation of several candidate HPV-associated ncRNAs in vitro after
ectopically expressing HPV16 E6/E7 in a panel of normal oral epithelial
and HPV-negative HNSCC cell lines. To explore the functional consequences
of our identified HPV-associated ncRNAs, we further investigated
lnc-SP9-1:1, an lncRNA upregulated by 73.89 fold in HPV-positive compared
to HPV-negative HNSCCs (FDR < 1 10-10). Cell proliferation, migration,
and matrigel invasion assays were performed to evaluate the effects of
siRNA-mediated lnc-SP9-1:1 knockdown in E6/E7 overexpressing cell lines.
While the specific roles of the vast majority of non-coding transcripts
remain unknown, their consistent dysregulation in HPV-positive HNSCCs,
coupled with their ongoing functional characterization, promises to
unravel new layers of understanding of the molecular underpinnings of
HPV-associated HNSCCs and nominate new biomarkers and therapeutic
candidates for this specific disease.

