Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Polarity and tumor development: Regulation by adenomatous
polyposis coli


The process of epithelial polarity is tightly regulated by multiple
complexes including aPKC, PAR, and Crumbs proteins. Our laboratory has
recently investigated loss of Adenomatous Polyposis Coli (APC) in the
MDCK 3D culture system. We have observed a lack of hollow lumens and
mislocalization of podocalyxin (gp135) to the basal surface, both of
which are independent of the canonical Wnt/-catenin signaling pathway. We
further showed that the c-terminus of APC, which contains binding domains
for polarity proteins (Dlg and Scrib) and cytoskeletal proteins
(microtubules and actin), is responsible for the observed phenotypes. In
the current study, we have investigated the molecular mechanisms required
for the inversion of polarity and the potential impact on tumorigenesis.
We have made the novel observation that different mechanisms are
responsible for the increased size versus altered polarity observed in
cysts derived from APC-KD cells. Alterations in size, although
independent of changes in proliferation and/or apoptosis, are regulated
by the c-terminal domain, focal adhesion kinase (FAK), Src, and
1-integrin. Despite this, the mis-localization of gp135 is only rescued
by the c-terminal domain of APC, suggesting a unique molecular mechanism.
As loss of epithelial polarity is an early marker for tumor development,
we investigated tumor-associated phenotypes. APC-KD cells were found to
grow larger colonies in soft agar, and have increased migration in
wound-filling assays, which appeared to be regulated through similar
molecular mechanisms. These data suggest that APC regulates polarity and
associated disease phenotypes (including kidney development,
cardiovascular disease, and cancer) through pathways independent of Wnt
signaling.

