Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BVES dependent regulation of YAP1 in colorectal cancer cells


Colorectal cancer (CRC) has a US incidence rate of almost 150,000 cases
and accounts for over 10% of new cancer diagnoses. Dysfunction of
epithelial adherens junctions and tight junctions (TJs) have long been
implicated in CRC growth and metastasis The Popeye domain containing
family of proteins are TJ-associated and appear to nucleate TJ formation.
BVES or POPDC1 is one member of this family and is under-expressed in all
stages of human colorectal carcinoma (CRC). On the other hand, YAP1 a
novel oncogene in the Hippo pathway is up-regulated in many cancers
including colon cancer. In the present study, we report an inverse
correlation between tumor suppressor protein BVES and oncogene YAP1 in
human colorectal carcinoma tumor samples and human colon cancer cell
lines. We demonstrate that ectopic expression of BVES in BVES deficient
cells decreases YAP1 protein while knocking down BVES in cells expressing
BVES increases YAP1 levels. Cycloheximide (CHX) experiments indicate that
this is likely occurring at the level of protein stability. CDK6 is a
cell cycle regulator and YAP1 transcriptional target, and its levels are
increased in the setting of BVES-knockdown in CACO2 cells. Concurrent
with this there is increased cell growth. Conversely, when BVES is
overexpressed, CDK6 transcription is reduced. Further knocking down of
YAP1 in BVES knocked down cells reverses the cell growth advantage
suggesting that BVES regulation of cell growth in part is dependent upon
YAP1 protein levels. Co-immunoprecipitation (Co-IP) and yeast-2-hybrid
(Y2H) assay also shows a direct interaction of BVES and YAP1. In sum,
these findings suggest a novel mechanism underlying BVES
tumor-suppressive function through regulation of a potential growth
modulator, YAP1 in colorectal cancer.

