Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Arachidonate 12-lipoxygenase contributes to radiation-induced type
II pneumocyte senescence and fibrosis


Introduction: Ionizing radiation (IR) is commonly used in the treatment
of thoracic malignancies. Exposure of adjacent normal lung may result in
lung injury and fibrosis. Recently, we reported that accelerated
senescence of type II pneumocytes, the alveolar stem cell, results in
parynchymal depletion and precedes pulmonary fibrosis. Arachidonate
12-lipoxygenase (12-LOX) oxidizes arachidonic acid to form
12-Hydroxyeicosatetraeonic acid (12-HETE), a pro-inflammatory mediator.
Increased expression of ALOX-12 has previously been associated with
aging. We hypothesized that mice deficient in ALOX-12 would be resistant
to IR induced fibrosis and senescence.Methods: C57/Bl6J (WT) and Alox12
homozygous knockout (Alox12-KO) mice (n>3 per group) were exposed to
thoracic IR (0Gy, 5Gy, 17.5Gy, 55Gy, or 65Gy). Fibrotic foci were
identified with aniline blue staining of fixed lung sections. Levels of
12-LOX mRNA and protein were assessed in WT lungs after IR with
microarray, quantitative PCR, and western blotting. In vitro studies with
primary murine pneumocyte cultures and A549 cells included staining for
senescence associated -galactosidase activity and western blotting for
NOX4, p21, and PML following IR and 12-HETE treatment.Results: A
significant increase in 12-LOX mRNA and protein was observed in murine
lungs exposed to fibrogenic doses of IR (17.5 Gy, 55 Gy and 56 Gy)
compared to low dose IR (5 Gy) or controls (0 Gy). 12-LOX deficiency
significantly reduced fibrotic foci in murine lungs receiving fibrogenic
doses of thoracic IR (65 Gy) at 18 weeks. Treatment of murine primary
pneumocytes with 12-HETE (1 and 150 nM) increased the rate of pneumocyte
senescence (2.1 fold). Treatment of murine primary pneumocytes with
12-HETE increased the expression of NOX4 (a mediator of superoxide
generation), p21, and PML (senescence markers), paralleling increases
observed after IR. Similarly, human type II pneumocyte A549 cells
exhibited increased 12-LOX expression in -galactosidase-stained senescent
cells at 3 days after IR.Conclusion: These studies identify 12-LOX as a
critical mediator in radiation lung fibrosis and type II pneumocyte
senescence. 12-LOX may serve as a novel therapeutic target in mitigating
IR-induced lung fibrosis.

