Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gene expression microarray analysis identifies association of
genes in the integrin/fak signaling pathway with claudin-7 in human colon
cancer tissue


The role and mechanism of the integrin/focal adhesion kinase (FAK)/ERK
signaling pathway in the progression of many malignant tumor types,
including colon cancer, have been widely reported. The claudin family of
proteins is integral to the structure and function of tight junctions.
The role of claudin-7 (Cldn-7, CLDN7) in the regulation of the
integrin/FAK/ERK signaling pathway remains poorly understood. Therefore,
we investigated differences in gene expression, primarily focusing on
CLDN7 and integrin/FAK/ERK signaling pathway genes, in colon cancer and
adjacent normal tissues. Quantitative real-time RT-PCR verified the
results for mRNA expression, and immunohistochemistry verified the
results for protein expression. In silico analysis was used to predict
co-regulation between Cldn-7 and integrin/FAK/ERK signaling pathway
members. Our results showed marked cancer stage-specific decreases in the
protein expression of Cldn-7, Gelsolin, MAPK1 and MAPK3 in colon cancer
samples. The observed changes in the expression of all proteins except
Cldn-7 were in agreement with the changes in the corresponding mRNA
levels. Cldn-7 was predicted not to directly regulate any genes in the
integrin/FAK/ERK signaling pathway, but these factors may participate in
a common network that regulates cancer progression, in which the MAPK
pathway is the central node.

