Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Membranous expression of programmed cell death-ligand 1 (PDL1) on
cancer cells is induced by cisplatin in an ATR dependent manner


Cancer cells frequently develop strategies allowing to escape potential
immune attacks by the host. One central component of this defense
mechanism is the PDL1-PD1 axis with PDL1 expression on the surface of
antigen presenting cells. DNA damaging chemotherapeutic are known to have
suppressive effect on the immune system. Possible effects on immune
checkpoints, however, are poorly understood. We investigated if
Cisplatin, a widely used chemotherapeutic for treatment of ovarian and
lung carcinomas, might influence expression of PDL1 on cancer cells of
these pathologies. Treatment of cell lines as well as precision-cut
tissue slices from patient tumors with clinically relevant dosages of
cisplatin led to a significant induction of PDL1 protein in cancer cells
as revealed by Western Blot and IHC analyses. This effect was independent
on ATR or ATM activity since pre-treatment with ATR or ATM inhibitors had
no significant effect on cisplatin induced total PDL1 protein levels.
Interestingly, however, we observed an almost complete inhibition of
cisplatin-induced membranous PDL1 upon ATR but not ATM inhibition as
revealed by FACS analysis in unfixed cells. The role of the ATR axis was
further corroborated by the finding that presentation of PDL1 at the cell
surface was paralleled by phosphorylation of CHK1.Together our data
indicate an important role of DNA damage induced ATR/CHK1 activity on the
localization of PDL1 at the surface of cancer cells. These data implicate
that combination of cisplatin with either anti-PD1 or anti-PDL1
antibodies or ATR/CHK1 inhibitors should reduce immunosuppressive
mechanisms and enhance chemotherapy efficacy.

