Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Soy isoflavones modulate global methylation in head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC)


Soy intake has been associated with improved survival in HNSCC and soy
isoflavones have been suggested as potential chemopreventive agents with
a favorable therapeutic index and safety profile. Multiple in vivo and in
vitro anti-cancer effects have been postulated including modulation of
gene methylation. To determine if high dose soy isoflavone treatment
changes methylation of genes associated with cancer outcomes, we measured
genomic and gene-specific methylation in tumor tissue collected as a part
of a multi-institutional neoadjuvant soy isoflavone clinical trial in
HNSCC patients undergoing definitive surgical management.Methods:
Thirty-nine patients participated in this clinical trial. Patients were
scheduled to receive 2 weeks (range 7-39 days, median = 15.2) of soy
isoflavone supplements (300 mg/day G-2535; DCP, NCI, NIH) orally prior to
surgery. Levels of methylation of LINE-1 (global methylation), and 6
other candidate genes previously associated with HNSCC (p16, DCC, NDN,
CD1a, CCNA1 and Gadd45) were measured by pyrosequencing in biopsy,
resection and whole blood specimens. Twelve patients were stage I/II, 27
were stage III/IV. Thirty one patients had cancer of the oral cavity, 4
had larynx and 4 had oropharynx cancer. Mean age of the patients was 60.1
(sd = 12.5). Changes in methylation were tested using paired t-tests and
clinical associations explored using ANOVA.Results: LINE-1 methylation
increased significantly (mean increase 4.9%; range -34.8% to +20.9%) in
tumor specimens after soy isoflavone (pSoy intake has been associated
with improved survival in HNSCC and soy isoflavones have been suggested
as potential chemopreventive agents with a favorable therapeutic index
and safety profile. Multiple in vivo and in vitro anti-cancer effects
have been postulated including modulation of gene methylation. To
determine if high dose soy isoflavone treatment changes methylation of
genes associated with cancer outcomes, we measured genomic and
gene-specific methylation in tumor tissue collected as a part of a
multi-institutional neoadjuvant soy isoflavone clinical trial in HNSCC
patients undergoing definitive surgical management.Methods: Thirty-nine
patients participated in this clinical trial. Patients were scheduled to
receive 2 weeks (range 7-39 days, median = 15.2) of soy isoflavone
supplements (300 mg/day G-2535; DCP, NCI, NIH) orally prior to surgery.
Levels of methylation of LINE-1 (global methylation), and 6 other
candidate genes previously associated with HNSCC (p16, DCC, NDN, CD1a,
CCNA1 and Gadd45) were measured by pyrosequencing in biopsy, resection
and whole blood specimens. Twelve patients were stage I/II, 27 were stage
III/IV. Thirty one patients had cancer of the oral cavity, 4 had larynx
and 4 had oropharynx cancer. Mean age of the patients was 60.1 (sd =
12.5). Changes in methylation were tested using paired t-tests and
clinical associations explored using ANOVA.Results: LINE-1 methylation
increased significantly (mean increase 4.9%; range -34.8% to +20.9%) in
tumor specimens after soy isoflavone (p<0.005). Amount of change
correlated positively with days of isoflavone taken (p = .009). Increases
in LINE-1 methylation in tumor were greatest in patients with normal BMI
(pSoy intake has been associated with improved survival in HNSCC and soy
isoflavones have been suggested as potential chemopreventive agents with
a favorable therapeutic index and safety profile. Multiple in vivo and in
vitro anti-cancer effects have been postulated including modulation of
gene methylation. To determine if high dose soy isoflavone treatment
changes methylation of genes associated with cancer outcomes, we measured
genomic and gene-specific methylation in tumor tissue collected as a part
of a multi-institutional neoadjuvant soy isoflavone clinical trial in
HNSCC patients undergoing definitive surgical management.Methods:
Thirty-nine patients participated in this clinical trial. Patients were
scheduled to receive 2 weeks (range 7-39 days, median = 15.2) of soy
isoflavone supplements (300 mg/day G-2535; DCP, NCI, NIH) orally prior to
surgery. Levels of methylation of LINE-1 (global methylation), and 6
other candidate genes previously associated with HNSCC (p16, DCC, NDN,
CD1a, CCNA1 and Gadd45) were measured by pyrosequencing in biopsy,
resection and whole blood specimens. Twelve patients were stage I/II, 27
were stage III/IV. Thirty one patients had cancer of the oral cavity, 4
had larynx and 4 had oropharynx cancer. Mean age of the patients was 60.1
(sd = 12.5). Changes in methylation were tested using paired t-tests and
clinical associations explored using ANOVA.Results: LINE-1 methylation
increased significantly (mean increase 4.9%; range -34.8% to +20.9%) in
tumor specimens after soy isoflavone (p<0.005). Amount of change
correlated positively with days of isoflavone taken (p = .009). Increases
in LINE-1 methylation in tumor were greatest in patients with normal BMI
(p<0.03). Similar changes for LINE-1 were not seen in corresponding whole
blood samples. No other significant changes in tumor or blood methylation
levels were seen in the other candidate genes. Baseline tumor methylation
and change in methylation were also studied with respect to nutrition
(BMI), drinking, tumor site, tumor stage, nodal status and prior
treatment. Baseline CD1a methylation was lowest in current smokers (pSoy
intake has been associated with improved survival in HNSCC and soy
isoflavones have been suggested as potential chemopreventive agents with
a favorable therapeutic index and safety profile. Multiple in vivo and in
vitro anti-cancer effects have been postulated including modulation of
gene methylation. To determine if high dose soy isoflavone treatment
changes methylation of genes associated with cancer outcomes, we measured
genomic and gene-specific methylation in tumor tissue collected as a part
of a multi-institutional neoadjuvant soy isoflavone clinical trial in
HNSCC patients undergoing definitive surgical management.Methods:
Thirty-nine patients participated in this clinical trial. Patients were
scheduled to receive 2 weeks (range 7-39 days, median = 15.2) of soy
isoflavone supplements (300 mg/day G-2535; DCP, NCI, NIH) orally prior to
surgery. Levels of methylation of LINE-1 (global methylation), and 6
other candidate genes previously associated with HNSCC (p16, DCC, NDN,
CD1a, CCNA1 and Gadd45) were measured by pyrosequencing in biopsy,
resection and whole blood specimens. Twelve patients were stage I/II, 27
were stage III/IV. Thirty one patients had cancer of the oral cavity, 4
had larynx and 4 had oropharynx cancer. Mean age of the patients was 60.1
(sd = 12.5). Changes in methylation were tested using paired t-tests and
clinical associations explored using ANOVA.Results: LINE-1 methylation
increased significantly (mean increase 4.9%; range -34.8% to +20.9%) in
tumor specimens after soy isoflavone (p<0.005). Amount of change
correlated positively with days of isoflavone taken (p = .009). Increases
in LINE-1 methylation in tumor were greatest in patients with normal BMI
(p<0.03). Similar changes for LINE-1 were not seen in corresponding whole
blood samples. No other significant changes in tumor or blood methylation
levels were seen in the other candidate genes. Baseline tumor methylation
and change in methylation were also studied with respect to nutrition
(BMI), drinking, tumor site, tumor stage, nodal status and prior
treatment. Baseline CD1a methylation was lowest in current smokers
(p<0.04) and increases in CD1a after soy intake were associated with
increasing pack years (pSoy intake has been associated with improved
survival in HNSCC and soy isoflavones have been suggested as potential
chemopreventive agents with a favorable therapeutic index and safety
profile. Multiple in vivo and in vitro anti-cancer effects have been
postulated including modulation of gene methylation. To determine if high
dose soy isoflavone treatment changes methylation of genes associated
with cancer outcomes, we measured genomic and gene-specific methylation
in tumor tissue collected as a part of a multi-institutional neoadjuvant
soy isoflavone clinical trial in HNSCC patients undergoing definitive
surgical management.Methods: Thirty-nine patients participated in this
clinical trial. Patients were scheduled to receive 2 weeks (range 7-39
days, median = 15.2) of soy isoflavone supplements (300 mg/day G-2535;
DCP, NCI, NIH) orally prior to surgery. Levels of methylation of LINE-1
(global methylation), and 6 other candidate genes previously associated
with HNSCC (p16, DCC, NDN, CD1a, CCNA1 and Gadd45) were measured by
pyrosequencing in biopsy, resection and whole blood specimens. Twelve
patients were stage I/II, 27 were stage III/IV. Thirty one patients had
cancer of the oral cavity, 4 had larynx and 4 had oropharynx cancer. Mean
age of the patients was 60.1 (sd = 12.5). Changes in methylation were
tested using paired t-tests and clinical associations explored using
ANOVA.Results: LINE-1 methylation increased significantly (mean increase
4.9%; range -34.8% to +20.9%) in tumor specimens after soy isoflavone
(p<0.005). Amount of change correlated positively with days of isoflavone
taken (p = .009). Increases in LINE-1 methylation in tumor were greatest
in patients with normal BMI (p<0.03). Similar changes for LINE-1 were not
seen in corresponding whole blood samples. No other significant changes
in tumor or blood methylation levels were seen in the other candidate
genes. Baseline tumor methylation and change in methylation were also
studied with respect to nutrition (BMI), drinking, tumor site, tumor
stage, nodal status and prior treatment. Baseline CD1a methylation was
lowest in current smokers (p<0.04) and increases in CD1a after soy intake
were associated with increasing pack years (p<0.02). CD1a methylation was
also higher in patients with T1,2 tumors (pSoy intake has been associated
with improved survival in HNSCC and soy isoflavones have been suggested
as potential chemopreventive agents with a favorable therapeutic index
and safety profile. Multiple in vivo and in vitro anti-cancer effects
have been postulated including modulation of gene methylation. To
determine if high dose soy isoflavone treatment changes methylation of
genes associated with cancer outcomes, we measured genomic and
gene-specific methylation in tumor tissue collected as a part of a
multi-institutional neoadjuvant soy isoflavone clinical trial in HNSCC
patients undergoing definitive surgical management.Methods: Thirty-nine
patients participated in this clinical trial. Patients were scheduled to
receive 2 weeks (range 7-39 days, median = 15.2) of soy isoflavone
supplements (300 mg/day G-2535; DCP, NCI, NIH) orally prior to surgery.
Levels of methylation of LINE-1 (global methylation), and 6 other
candidate genes previously associated with HNSCC (p16, DCC, NDN, CD1a,
CCNA1 and Gadd45) were measured by pyrosequencing in biopsy, resection
and whole blood specimens. Twelve patients were stage I/II, 27 were stage
III/IV. Thirty one patients had cancer of the oral cavity, 4 had larynx
and 4 had oropharynx cancer. Mean age of the patients was 60.1 (sd =
12.5). Changes in methylation were tested using paired t-tests and
clinical associations explored using ANOVA.Results: LINE-1 methylation
increased significantly (mean increase 4.9%; range -34.8% to +20.9%) in
tumor specimens after soy isoflavone (p<0.005). Amount of change
correlated positively with days of isoflavone taken (p = .009). Increases
in LINE-1 methylation in tumor were greatest in patients with normal BMI
(p<0.03). Similar changes for LINE-1 were not seen in corresponding whole
blood samples. No other significant changes in tumor or blood methylation
levels were seen in the other candidate genes. Baseline tumor methylation
and change in methylation were also studied with respect to nutrition
(BMI), drinking, tumor site, tumor stage, nodal status and prior
treatment. Baseline CD1a methylation was lowest in current smokers
(p<0.04) and increases in CD1a after soy intake were associated with
increasing pack years (p<0.02). CD1a methylation was also higher in
patients with T1,2 tumors (p<0.03). Pretreatment NDN methylation was
lower (pSoy intake has been associated with improved survival in HNSCC
and soy isoflavones have been suggested as potential chemopreventive
agents with a favorable therapeutic index and safety profile. Multiple in
vivo and in vitro anti-cancer effects have been postulated including
modulation of gene methylation. To determine if high dose soy isoflavone
treatment changes methylation of genes associated with cancer outcomes,
we measured genomic and gene-specific methylation in tumor tissue
collected as a part of a multi-institutional neoadjuvant soy isoflavone
clinical trial in HNSCC patients undergoing definitive surgical
management.Methods: Thirty-nine patients participated in this clinical
trial. Patients were scheduled to receive 2 weeks (range 7-39 days,
median = 15.2) of soy isoflavone supplements (300 mg/day G-2535; DCP,
NCI, NIH) orally prior to surgery. Levels of methylation of LINE-1
(global methylation), and 6 other candidate genes previously associated
with HNSCC (p16, DCC, NDN, CD1a, CCNA1 and Gadd45) were measured by
pyrosequencing in biopsy, resection and whole blood specimens. Twelve
patients were stage I/II, 27 were stage III/IV. Thirty one patients had
cancer of the oral cavity, 4 had larynx and 4 had oropharynx cancer. Mean
age of the patients was 60.1 (sd = 12.5). Changes in methylation were
tested using paired t-tests and clinical associations explored using
ANOVA.Results: LINE-1 methylation increased significantly (mean increase
4.9%; range -34.8% to +20.9%) in tumor specimens after soy isoflavone
(p<0.005). Amount of change correlated positively with days of isoflavone
taken (p = .009). Increases in LINE-1 methylation in tumor were greatest
in patients with normal BMI (p<0.03). Similar changes for LINE-1 were not
seen in corresponding whole blood samples. No other significant changes
in tumor or blood methylation levels were seen in the other candidate
genes. Baseline tumor methylation and change in methylation were also
studied with respect to nutrition (BMI), drinking, tumor site, tumor
stage, nodal status and prior treatment. Baseline CD1a methylation was
lowest in current smokers (p<0.04) and increases in CD1a after soy intake
were associated with increasing pack years (p<0.02). CD1a methylation was
also higher in patients with T1,2 tumors (p<0.03). Pretreatment NDN
methylation was lower (p<.008) and LINE-1 higher (pSoy intake has been
associated with improved survival in HNSCC and soy isoflavones have been
suggested as potential chemopreventive agents with a favorable
therapeutic index and safety profile. Multiple in vivo and in vitro
anti-cancer effects have been postulated including modulation of gene
methylation. To determine if high dose soy isoflavone treatment changes
methylation of genes associated with cancer outcomes, we measured genomic
and gene-specific methylation in tumor tissue collected as a part of a
multi-institutional neoadjuvant soy isoflavone clinical trial in HNSCC
patients undergoing definitive surgical management.Methods: Thirty-nine
patients participated in this clinical trial. Patients were scheduled to
receive 2 weeks (range 7-39 days, median = 15.2) of soy isoflavone
supplements (300 mg/day G-2535; DCP, NCI, NIH) orally prior to surgery.
Levels of methylation of LINE-1 (global methylation), and 6 other
candidate genes previously associated with HNSCC (p16, DCC, NDN, CD1a,
CCNA1 and Gadd45) were measured by pyrosequencing in biopsy, resection
and whole blood specimens. Twelve patients were stage I/II, 27 were stage
III/IV. Thirty one patients had cancer of the oral cavity, 4 had larynx
and 4 had oropharynx cancer. Mean age of the patients was 60.1 (sd =
12.5). Changes in methylation were tested using paired t-tests and
clinical associations explored using ANOVA.Results: LINE-1 methylation
increased significantly (mean increase 4.9%; range -34.8% to +20.9%) in
tumor specimens after soy isoflavone (p<0.005). Amount of change
correlated positively with days of isoflavone taken (p = .009). Increases
in LINE-1 methylation in tumor were greatest in patients with normal BMI
(p<0.03). Similar changes for LINE-1 were not seen in corresponding whole
blood samples. No other significant changes in tumor or blood methylation
levels were seen in the other candidate genes. Baseline tumor methylation
and change in methylation were also studied with respect to nutrition
(BMI), drinking, tumor site, tumor stage, nodal status and prior
treatment. Baseline CD1a methylation was lowest in current smokers
(p<0.04) and increases in CD1a after soy intake were associated with
increasing pack years (p<0.02). CD1a methylation was also higher in
patients with T1,2 tumors (p<0.03). Pretreatment NDN methylation was
lower (p<.008) and LINE-1 higher (p<0.0001) in oral cavity cancer
compared to oropharynx or larynx cancers. Toxicity from soy isoflavones
was negligible and patient compliance was excellent.Conclusions: This is
the first demonstration of significant increases in tissue-specific
global methylation associated with soy isoflavone intake, indicating
increased genomic stability. The association of hypomethylation of LINE-1
with genetic instability, carcinogenesis and poor treatment outcomes
suggests that soy isoflavones should be studied further as a potential
chemopreventive agent in HNSCC.

