Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Functional validation of microRNA activity inferred by ActMiR in
bladder cancer


Background: MicroRNAs (miRs) play a key role in cancer, both in
tumorigenesis and tumor progression. In the past years, miR expression
signatures have been reported as prognostic biomarkers in different tumor
types including bladder cancer (BC). However, miR's expression does not
always correlate with activity. We recently developed a novel
computational method, named ActMiR, for explicitly inferring the activity
of miRs based on the changes in expression levels of target genes. The
main objective of this study was to validate the inferred miRs activity
using BC as a model.Design: We applied ActMiR in 405 BC cases from The
Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) database for which information from both mRNA
and miR expression was available. Different BC cell lines (5637 and
HT1376 for basal BC, SW780 and HT1197 for p53-like BC, and RT4 and RT112
for luminal BC) as well as the immortalized urothelial cell line [Human
Urothelium cell (HUC)] were used to perform the in vitro functional
validation. RNA was extracted from these cells basally and after
inhibition of miR106-5p with specific anti-miR inhibitor (Taqman, Life
Technologies); miR and target genes expression was assessed by
qRT-PCR.Results: ActMir analyses revealed that a subset of 306 out of
1044 miRNAs were differentially expressed between tumor and normal
samples at p-valueBackground: MicroRNAs (miRs) play a key role in cancer,
both in tumorigenesis and tumor progression. In the past years, miR
expression signatures have been reported as prognostic biomarkers in
different tumor types including bladder cancer (BC). However, miR's
expression does not always correlate with activity. We recently developed
a novel computational method, named ActMiR, for explicitly inferring the
activity of miRs based on the changes in expression levels of target
genes. The main objective of this study was to validate the inferred miRs
activity using BC as a model.Design: We applied ActMiR in 405 BC cases
from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) database for which information from
both mRNA and miR expression was available. Different BC cell lines (5637
and HT1376 for basal BC, SW780 and HT1197 for p53-like BC, and RT4 and
RT112 for luminal BC) as well as the immortalized urothelial cell line
[Human Urothelium cell (HUC)] were used to perform the in vitro
functional validation. RNA was extracted from these cells basally and
after inhibition of miR106-5p with specific anti-miR inhibitor (Taqman,
Life Technologies); miR and target genes expression was assessed by
qRT-PCR.Results: ActMir analyses revealed that a subset of 306 out of
1044 miRNAs were differentially expressed between tumor and normal
samples at p-value<10-4. More importantly, at p-valueBackground:
MicroRNAs (miRs) play a key role in cancer, both in tumorigenesis and
tumor progression. In the past years, miR expression signatures have been
reported as prognostic biomarkers in different tumor types including
bladder cancer (BC). However, miR's expression does not always correlate
with activity. We recently developed a novel computational method, named
ActMiR, for explicitly inferring the activity of miRs based on the
changes in expression levels of target genes. The main objective of this
study was to validate the inferred miRs activity using BC as a
model.Design: We applied ActMiR in 405 BC cases from The Cancer Genome
Atlas (TCGA) database for which information from both mRNA and miR
expression was available. Different BC cell lines (5637 and HT1376 for
basal BC, SW780 and HT1197 for p53-like BC, and RT4 and RT112 for luminal
BC) as well as the immortalized urothelial cell line [Human Urothelium
cell (HUC)] were used to perform the in vitro functional validation. RNA
was extracted from these cells basally and after inhibition of miR106-5p
with specific anti-miR inhibitor (Taqman, Life Technologies); miR and
target genes expression was assessed by qRT-PCR.Results: ActMir analyses
revealed that a subset of 306 out of 1044 miRNAs were differentially
expressed between tumor and normal samples at p-value<10-4. More
importantly, at p-value<10-4, 155 out of 556 miRNAs were functionally
active. From these, only four (miR106b, miR532, mir556, and mir134) were
significantly differentially expressed, functionally active and showed
prognostic significance. We chose to further analyze mir106b because it
showed the biggest and most significant difference in activity between
normal and cancer cells (p-valueBackground: MicroRNAs (miRs) play a key
role in cancer, both in tumorigenesis and tumor progression. In the past
years, miR expression signatures have been reported as prognostic
biomarkers in different tumor types including bladder cancer (BC).
However, miR's expression does not always correlate with activity. We
recently developed a novel computational method, named ActMiR, for
explicitly inferring the activity of miRs based on the changes in
expression levels of target genes. The main objective of this study was
to validate the inferred miRs activity using BC as a model.Design: We
applied ActMiR in 405 BC cases from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA)
database for which information from both mRNA and miR expression was
available. Different BC cell lines (5637 and HT1376 for basal BC, SW780
and HT1197 for p53-like BC, and RT4 and RT112 for luminal BC) as well as
the immortalized urothelial cell line [Human Urothelium cell (HUC)] were
used to perform the in vitro functional validation. RNA was extracted
from these cells basally and after inhibition of miR106-5p with specific
anti-miR inhibitor (Taqman, Life Technologies); miR and target genes
expression was assessed by qRT-PCR.Results: ActMir analyses revealed that
a subset of 306 out of 1044 miRNAs were differentially expressed between
tumor and normal samples at p-value<10-4. More importantly, at
p-value<10-4, 155 out of 556 miRNAs were functionally active. From these,
only four (miR106b, miR532, mir556, and mir134) were significantly
differentially expressed, functionally active and showed prognostic
significance. We chose to further analyze mir106b because it showed the
biggest and most significant difference in activity between normal and
cancer cells (p-value<2*10-11). As inferred by ActMir, mir106-5p was
significantly overexpressed in all cancer cells when compared to HUC.
Basal cells showed the highest fold increase (mean of 39; range: 31-47),
followed by luminal (mean of 19; range: 5-32) and p53-like cells (mean of
8; range: 3-13). Inhibition of mir106b-5p was performed to assess whether
the predicted target genes were consequently upregulated.Conclusion: Our
results underscore the value of ActMir for inferring miR activity in BC
from a systems biology perspective. It endorses ActMir as a promising
tool for studying casual effects of miR activity on target genes, and
ultimately for determining survival outcomes of BC patients.

