Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Disruption of mucin synthesis by targeting GCNT3 inhibits
pancreatic cancer progression


Pancreatic cancer (PC) is a lethal disease, and its management is an
ongoing challenge. PC is the fourth leading cause of deaths due to cancer
in the United States. It is a highly aggressive cancer that is usually
diagnosed at an advanced stage, and has the worst prognosis of any
malignancy, with a five year survival of Pancreatic cancer (PC) is a
lethal disease, and its management is an ongoing challenge. PC is the
fourth leading cause of deaths due to cancer in the United States. It is
a highly aggressive cancer that is usually diagnosed at an advanced
stage, and has the worst prognosis of any malignancy, with a five year
survival of <7% due to high chemoresistance. This chemoresistance is due
in part to altered expressions of mucins, which form a mesh that makes
target sites inaccessible to drugs. Clinical and preclinical studies have
shown aberrant expression of mucins during PC development. The mucins may
prevent drugs from accessing their sites of action. Although several
mucins that lead to chemoresistance have been targeted, to date, no mucin
synthesizing genes have been identified as targets. Using human
pancreatic cancer patient survival data (90 cases of tumor and matched
normal adjacent tissue), next-generation sequencing (NGS) of genetically
engineered Kras mouse pancreatic tumors (N = 6/group), human PC cells, we
identified novel core mucin synthesizing gene target GCNT3 (core 2 beta
1,6 N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase). NGS revealed that GCNT3
upregulation (103-fold; pPancreatic cancer (PC) is a lethal disease, and
its management is an ongoing challenge. PC is the fourth leading cause of
deaths due to cancer in the United States. It is a highly aggressive
cancer that is usually diagnosed at an advanced stage, and has the worst
prognosis of any malignancy, with a five year survival of <7% due to high
chemoresistance. This chemoresistance is due in part to altered
expressions of mucins, which form a mesh that makes target sites
inaccessible to drugs. Clinical and preclinical studies have shown
aberrant expression of mucins during PC development. The mucins may
prevent drugs from accessing their sites of action. Although several
mucins that lead to chemoresistance have been targeted, to date, no mucin
synthesizing genes have been identified as targets. Using human
pancreatic cancer patient survival data (90 cases of tumor and matched
normal adjacent tissue), next-generation sequencing (NGS) of genetically
engineered Kras mouse pancreatic tumors (N = 6/group), human PC cells, we
identified novel core mucin synthesizing gene target GCNT3 (core 2 beta
1,6 N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase). NGS revealed that GCNT3
upregulation (103-fold; p<0.0001) was correlated with increased mucins
Muc4 (50-fold; pPancreatic cancer (PC) is a lethal disease, and its
management is an ongoing challenge. PC is the fourth leading cause of
deaths due to cancer in the United States. It is a highly aggressive
cancer that is usually diagnosed at an advanced stage, and has the worst
prognosis of any malignancy, with a five year survival of <7% due to high
chemoresistance. This chemoresistance is due in part to altered
expressions of mucins, which form a mesh that makes target sites
inaccessible to drugs. Clinical and preclinical studies have shown
aberrant expression of mucins during PC development. The mucins may
prevent drugs from accessing their sites of action. Although several
mucins that lead to chemoresistance have been targeted, to date, no mucin
synthesizing genes have been identified as targets. Using human
pancreatic cancer patient survival data (90 cases of tumor and matched
normal adjacent tissue), next-generation sequencing (NGS) of genetically
engineered Kras mouse pancreatic tumors (N = 6/group), human PC cells, we
identified novel core mucin synthesizing gene target GCNT3 (core 2 beta
1,6 N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase). NGS revealed that GCNT3
upregulation (103-fold; p<0.0001) was correlated with increased mucins
Muc4 (50-fold; p<0.04), Muc5ac (87-fold; pPancreatic cancer (PC) is a
lethal disease, and its management is an ongoing challenge. PC is the
fourth leading cause of deaths due to cancer in the United States. It is
a highly aggressive cancer that is usually diagnosed at an advanced
stage, and has the worst prognosis of any malignancy, with a five year
survival of <7% due to high chemoresistance. This chemoresistance is due
in part to altered expressions of mucins, which form a mesh that makes
target sites inaccessible to drugs. Clinical and preclinical studies have
shown aberrant expression of mucins during PC development. The mucins may
prevent drugs from accessing their sites of action. Although several
mucins that lead to chemoresistance have been targeted, to date, no mucin
synthesizing genes have been identified as targets. Using human
pancreatic cancer patient survival data (90 cases of tumor and matched
normal adjacent tissue), next-generation sequencing (NGS) of genetically
engineered Kras mouse pancreatic tumors (N = 6/group), human PC cells, we
identified novel core mucin synthesizing gene target GCNT3 (core 2 beta
1,6 N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase). NGS revealed that GCNT3
upregulation (103-fold; p<0.0001) was correlated with increased mucins
Muc4 (50-fold; p<0.04), Muc5ac (87-fold; p<0.01), Muc6 (67-fold;
pPancreatic cancer (PC) is a lethal disease, and its management is an
ongoing challenge. PC is the fourth leading cause of deaths due to cancer
in the United States. It is a highly aggressive cancer that is usually
diagnosed at an advanced stage, and has the worst prognosis of any
malignancy, with a five year survival of <7% due to high chemoresistance.
This chemoresistance is due in part to altered expressions of mucins,
which form a mesh that makes target sites inaccessible to drugs. Clinical
and preclinical studies have shown aberrant expression of mucins during
PC development. The mucins may prevent drugs from accessing their sites
of action. Although several mucins that lead to chemoresistance have been
targeted, to date, no mucin synthesizing genes have been identified as
targets. Using human pancreatic cancer patient survival data (90 cases of
tumor and matched normal adjacent tissue), next-generation sequencing
(NGS) of genetically engineered Kras mouse pancreatic tumors (N =
6/group), human PC cells, we identified novel core mucin synthesizing
gene target GCNT3 (core 2 beta 1,6 N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase). NGS
revealed that GCNT3 upregulation (103-fold; p<0.0001) was correlated with
increased mucins Muc4 (50-fold; p<0.04), Muc5ac (87-fold; p<0.01), Muc6
(67-fold; p<0.008), Muc1 (5-fold; pPancreatic cancer (PC) is a lethal
disease, and its management is an ongoing challenge. PC is the fourth
leading cause of deaths due to cancer in the United States. It is a
highly aggressive cancer that is usually diagnosed at an advanced stage,
and has the worst prognosis of any malignancy, with a five year survival
of <7% due to high chemoresistance. This chemoresistance is due in part
to altered expressions of mucins, which form a mesh that makes target
sites inaccessible to drugs. Clinical and preclinical studies have shown
aberrant expression of mucins during PC development. The mucins may
prevent drugs from accessing their sites of action. Although several
mucins that lead to chemoresistance have been targeted, to date, no mucin
synthesizing genes have been identified as targets. Using human
pancreatic cancer patient survival data (90 cases of tumor and matched
normal adjacent tissue), next-generation sequencing (NGS) of genetically
engineered Kras mouse pancreatic tumors (N = 6/group), human PC cells, we
identified novel core mucin synthesizing gene target GCNT3 (core 2 beta
1,6 N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase). NGS revealed that GCNT3
upregulation (103-fold; p<0.0001) was correlated with increased mucins
Muc4 (50-fold; p<0.04), Muc5ac (87-fold; p<0.01), Muc6 (67-fold;
p<0.008), Muc1 (5-fold; p<0.009), Muc16 (5-fold; pPancreatic cancer (PC)
is a lethal disease, and its management is an ongoing challenge. PC is
the fourth leading cause of deaths due to cancer in the United States. It
is a highly aggressive cancer that is usually diagnosed at an advanced
stage, and has the worst prognosis of any malignancy, with a five year
survival of <7% due to high chemoresistance. This chemoresistance is due
in part to altered expressions of mucins, which form a mesh that makes
target sites inaccessible to drugs. Clinical and preclinical studies have
shown aberrant expression of mucins during PC development. The mucins may
prevent drugs from accessing their sites of action. Although several
mucins that lead to chemoresistance have been targeted, to date, no mucin
synthesizing genes have been identified as targets. Using human
pancreatic cancer patient survival data (90 cases of tumor and matched
normal adjacent tissue), next-generation sequencing (NGS) of genetically
engineered Kras mouse pancreatic tumors (N = 6/group), human PC cells, we
identified novel core mucin synthesizing gene target GCNT3 (core 2 beta
1,6 N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase). NGS revealed that GCNT3
upregulation (103-fold; p<0.0001) was correlated with increased mucins
Muc4 (50-fold; p<0.04), Muc5ac (87-fold; p<0.01), Muc6 (67-fold;
p<0.008), Muc1 (5-fold; p<0.009), Muc16 (5-fold; p<0.0003) and Muc20
(17-fold; pPancreatic cancer (PC) is a lethal disease, and its management
is an ongoing challenge. PC is the fourth leading cause of deaths due to
cancer in the United States. It is a highly aggressive cancer that is
usually diagnosed at an advanced stage, and has the worst prognosis of
any malignancy, with a five year survival of <7% due to high
chemoresistance. This chemoresistance is due in part to altered
expressions of mucins, which form a mesh that makes target sites
inaccessible to drugs. Clinical and preclinical studies have shown
aberrant expression of mucins during PC development. The mucins may
prevent drugs from accessing their sites of action. Although several
mucins that lead to chemoresistance have been targeted, to date, no mucin
synthesizing genes have been identified as targets. Using human
pancreatic cancer patient survival data (90 cases of tumor and matched
normal adjacent tissue), next-generation sequencing (NGS) of genetically
engineered Kras mouse pancreatic tumors (N = 6/group), human PC cells, we
identified novel core mucin synthesizing gene target GCNT3 (core 2 beta
1,6 N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase). NGS revealed that GCNT3
upregulation (103-fold; p<0.0001) was correlated with increased mucins
Muc4 (50-fold; p<0.04), Muc5ac (87-fold; p<0.01), Muc6 (67-fold;
p<0.008), Muc1 (5-fold; p<0.009), Muc16 (5-fold; p<0.0003) and Muc20
(17-fold; p<0.007)]. Aberrant GCNT3 expression was associated with
increased mucin production and aggressive tumorigenesis and reduced
patient survival. Patients with low expression of GCNT3 had a longer
survival time than patients with high expression of GCNT3 (median
survival: 17.5 vs. 10.5 months, p = 0.036). Further, using in-silico
approaches of small molecular docking simulations, we identified
talniflumate as a novel inhibitor that specifically binds to GCNT3. Our
blind docking simulations reveal that talniflumate binds to GNTC3 with a
docking affinity of -8.3 kcal/mol and deeper in the pocket of GCNT3. The
docking predictions suggest three notable hydrogen bonds between
talniflumate and GCNT3: Arg192 (3.0 Angstroms), Try288 (3.5 Angstroms),
and Ala287 (2.9 Angstroms). Pancreata from 6-week-old Kras mice treated
with talniflumate for 1 week showed a significant decrease in GCNT3 and
mucin expression in PanIN lesions. mRNA expression of GCNT3 was also
observed to be lower in pancreatic tissues from talniflumate-treated
mice. CRISPR knock-out of GCNT3 in PC cells reduced proliferation and
spheroid formation. Further, talniflumate alone and in combination with
low-dose gefitinib reduced GCNT3 leading to disruption of mucins in vivo
and in vitro. Hence, mucin disruption might enhance targeted therapy.
These findings suggest a prominent role for Kras activation and aberrant
mucin synthesis leading to PC pathogenesis, and warrant consideration of
GCNT3 and EGFR inhibitors as a combination treatment for PC. (Grant
Support: COMAA, Kerley-Cade Endowed Fund).

