Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An evidence-based software tool for personalized cancer medicine
to recommend therapeutic options and avoid toxicity


Background. For many tumors, therapeutic options are sparse beyond the
guidelines, especially for pancreatic cancer. At the same time, more and
more biomarkers are known, informing about or supporting treatment
decisions. Finally, tumor DNA analysis with next generation sequencing
(NGS) is quickly becoming a routine test, at least for tumors. However,
to analyse the vast amount of data and provide concrete, evidence-based
treatment recommendations has been a challenge.Methods. Applying NGS in a
quality controlled set-up together with the newly developed
evidence-based software tool EngineusGUIDETM (CE-marked).Results. During
the time from Oct 2013 until Oct 2015, 87 patients were analysed with
EngineusGUIDE. In 7 cases, more than one tumor was investigated. NGS was
performed (WXS = 48; panel/paired = 16, panel = 23). Sequencing could be
performed in all but one patient (Whole Exome; bone metastasis).
Sequencing quality was insufficient for analysis in 3 cases (paired
panel), sequencing revealed insufficient tumor content in the sample for
one patient (Whole Exome) leaving 82 patients. The indication was:
Pancreatic Neoplasms = 21 cases; Colorectal Neoplasms = 12; Breast
Neoplasms = 5; CUP = 6; NSCLC = 3; 2 cases each for Bronchial Neoplasms,
Adenoid Cystic Carcinoma, Common Bile Duct Neoplasms, Glioblastoma,
Multiple Myeloma, Prostatic Neoplasms and 1 case each for Adenocarcinoma,
Duodenal Neoplasms, Endometrial Neoplasms, Hemangiosarcoma,
Hypopharyngeal Neoplasms, Leukemia (Lymphocytic, Chronic, B-Cell),
Liposarcoma, Liver Neoplasms, Lung Neoplasms, B-Cell Lymphoma,
Mantle-Cell Lymphoma, Meningioma, Oropharyngeal Neoplasms, Ovarian
Neoplasms, Paranasal Sinus Neoplasms, Parathyroid Neoplasms, Sarcoma,
Sigmoid Neoplasms, Squamous Cell Neoplasms, Stomach Neoplasms, Thyroid
Neoplasms, Urinary Bladder Neoplasms, Uveal melanoma.In 67/82 patients,
druggable targets (response biomarkers) could be identified (range 0-8;
median 2). In 45/82 patients (range 0-5; median 1) biomarkers indicated
lack of efficacy (e.g. KRAS mutation in CRC). In 65/82 patients,
biomarkers indicated increased toxicity (range 0-7; median 2), in 19/82
patients FDA-approved biomarkers for toxicity were detected (28
biomarkers).Of the positive biomarkers, 40 biomarkers in 26 patients
indicated drugs approved in the indication, 75 biomarkers in 45 patients
indicated approved drugs, and 58 biomarkers in 39 patients indicated
experimental drugs (pre-clinical and phase I - III). Six patients have
already received drugs recommended by EngineusGUIDE. In 11 patients,
toxicity markers may explain observed toxicity during previous
treatment.We are currently collecting the outcome parameters of
EngineusGUIDE recommendations.

