Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analysis of the extracellular vesicles content present in the
plasma of patients with head and neck squamous cell carcinoma for
identification of molecular markers for treatment response


Previous data showed that induction chemotherapy (IC) with cisplatin and
paclitaxel followed by chemoradiotherapy (CRT) based on cisplatin is
safe, well tolerated and improves overall survival for patients with
locally advanced head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) (stage III
-IV). However, approximately 30% of these patients have incomplete
response to IC and CRT and there is no clinical marker able to segregate
these patients from those that respond to the treatment. The recent
discovery of extracellular vesicles (EVs) in different body fluids
carrying proteins and nucleic acids may indicate an alternative route for
new specific markers present in the plasma of patients with HNSCC. In
this study, Cholera toxin B chain (CTB) and Annexin V (AV) which
respectively binds GM1 ganglioside and phosphatidylserine, were used to
isolate EVs from plasma of HNSCC patients that respond and not respond to
IC and CRT. The proteins in the vesicles were identified using antibody
array through a pool of 6 responders patients (R) in comparison to 6
patients with incomplete response (IR). A total of 327 proteins were
identified into CTB-EVs, from which 54 and 20 proteins were exclusive to
R and IR patients, respectively. Beside this, 271 proteins were
identified into AV-EVs, from which 20 proteins were present in R patients
and other 20 proteins were present only in IR ones. A preliminary
analysis of this data revealed that HNSCC resistant patients have
elevated levels of TGF3 in CTB-EVs while patients with incomplete
response have elevated levels of HSP90AB1 in AV-EVs. This study
demonstrated the successful use of CTB and AV to isolate circulating
plasma EVs for biomarker discovery in HNSCC and represents a novel
technology that can be applied to segregate patients that may respond or
not to IC or CRT.

