Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification and optimization of the first highly selective
GLUT-1 inhibitors


Increased glycolysis rates combined with an insufficient cellular
respiration in tumor cells have been known for decades as the Warburg
effect (1930). One of the key players in this metabolic alteration of
cancer cells is glucose transporter 1 (or GLUT-1), which facilitates the
transport of glucose across the plasma membranes of mammalian cells. Many
tumor biopsies underline the crucial importance of GLUT-1 overexpression
for the vitality of many tumor entities. Moreover the glucose uptake
dependency of cancer cells can be visualized by the widespread clinical
application of 18fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) uptake in PET tumor imaging.
Therefore, inhibition of glucose uptake for the treatment of cancer seems
to be an interesting approach.Based on our first identified GLUT-1
inhibitors (1H-pyrazolo[3,4-d]pyrimidines) with modest selectivity
profile, a high throughput screen (HTS) was performed to identify new
potent lead structures with unique selectivity against the other members
of the GLUT-1 family (GLUT-2,-3 and -4). Among several lead structures we
identified from the HTS the quinoline carboxamides with the most
promising selectivity profile. Extensive SAR elaboration by synthesizing
more than 1600 new derivatives of the lead structure clearly revealed the
essential moieties for high activity, potency, and selectivity.
Additionally, we were able to improve the in vitro and in vivo PK
properties permitting in vivo animal studies. We are able to report for
the first time the preclinical profile and structure of the very potent
and highly selective GLUT-1 inhibitor BAY-876 representing an ideal tool
to further evaluate the scope and limitations of GLUT-1 inhibition as new
therapeutic option.

