Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Large scale whole genome sequencing with imputation into GWAS
improves our understanding of the genetic architecture of colorectal
cancer


Whole-genome sequencing (WGS) has started a new era in human genetics in
which data can be used to more fully understand the role of genetic
variation in common complex diseases, including the role of less frequent
and rare variants and structural variation. To explore the impact of
these variants on colorectal cancer risk we conducted the first large
scale WGS study for colorectal cancer (CRC) including 1,961 CRC cases and
981 controls. These WGS data as well as those from the Haplotype
Reference Consortium were imputed in 13,104 CRC cases and 15,521 controls
with genome-wide association study (GWAS) data that are part of the
Colorectal Cancer Family Registry (CCFR) and the Genetics and
Epidemiology of Colorectal Cancer Consortium (GECCO). Focusing on rare
and less frequent variants, insertions and deletions we observed
potentially novel variants: a less frequent variant (MAF = 0.026) on
chromosome 5 located in NREP/STARD4-AS1 (p = value 4E-08); and a novel
rare multi-allelic variant (MAF = 0.003) on chromosome 9 near KLF9 and
TRPM3 (p-value 2E-09; the other allele of this multi-allelic variant had
a MAF of 0.0003 and p-value of 0.55). Furthermore, we observed an
independent locus close to the known region 8q24 that was located
upstream of GSDMC (MAF = 0.16, p-value 5E-08). Within the known region
8q23/EIF3H we identified several low frequency variants with similar MAF
(0.0181 to 0.0204) including a 6bp deletion with p-values between 4E-08
and 1E-09 that were independent of the common variant signal in this
region. In addition, we identified statistically significant
(pWhole-genome sequencing (WGS) has started a new era in human genetics
in which data can be used to more fully understand the role of genetic
variation in common complex diseases, including the role of less frequent
and rare variants and structural variation. To explore the impact of
these variants on colorectal cancer risk we conducted the first large
scale WGS study for colorectal cancer (CRC) including 1,961 CRC cases and
981 controls. These WGS data as well as those from the Haplotype
Reference Consortium were imputed in 13,104 CRC cases and 15,521 controls
with genome-wide association study (GWAS) data that are part of the
Colorectal Cancer Family Registry (CCFR) and the Genetics and
Epidemiology of Colorectal Cancer Consortium (GECCO). Focusing on rare
and less frequent variants, insertions and deletions we observed
potentially novel variants: a less frequent variant (MAF = 0.026) on
chromosome 5 located in NREP/STARD4-AS1 (p = value 4E-08); and a novel
rare multi-allelic variant (MAF = 0.003) on chromosome 9 near KLF9 and
TRPM3 (p-value 2E-09; the other allele of this multi-allelic variant had
a MAF of 0.0003 and p-value of 0.55). Furthermore, we observed an
independent locus close to the known region 8q24 that was located
upstream of GSDMC (MAF = 0.16, p-value 5E-08). Within the known region
8q23/EIF3H we identified several low frequency variants with similar MAF
(0.0181 to 0.0204) including a 6bp deletion with p-values between 4E-08
and 1E-09 that were independent of the common variant signal in this
region. In addition, we identified statistically significant (p<5E-08)
deletions, insertions, and an essential splice site within known GWAS
loci that present interesting candidates for functional studies. We will
follow up these findings in independent samples from the Colorectal
Cancer Transdisciplinary Study (CORECT) and CCFR, as well as additional
samples currently genotyped in GECCO. In conclusion, next generation
sequencing combined with imputation in large GWAS data sets has the
potential to identify novel low frequency and rare genetic variants, aid
fine-mapping of known CRC susceptibility loci and point to interesting
functional candidates.

