Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ADAM17: a common effector for RAS and MET-driven transformation of
primary keratinocytes


The purpose of the current study is to determine the contribution of the
metalloproteinase ADAM17 (a disintegrin and metalloprotease 17) to the
transformation driven by activated MET or oncogenic RAS in primary
keratinocytes. Transgenic keratinocytes overexpressing HGF (MT-HGF) to
activate MET and keratinocytes transduced with an oncogenic RAS share
identical phenotypic and biochemical features of transformation and
produce squamous tumors in vivo. In both keratinocyte populations, these
common features arise from autocrine activation of EGFR through elevated
expression and release of EGFR ligands. Amphiregulin (AREG) blockade in
MT-HGF keratinocytes decreases MET-mediated EGFR transactivation.
Inhibition of EGFR ablates the initiated signature of MT-HGF
keratinocytes in vitro and causes regression of tumors from MT-HGF
keratinocytes tranplanted in vivo. Deletion or knock-down of ADAM17
decreases EGFR activation in both RAS and MT-HGF keratinocytes and
reverses the transformation associated gene signature in RAS
keratinocytes. Using AREG release as an indicator of ADAM17 activity, we
determined that knock-down of either the SRC kinase or inactive Rhomboid
2 (iRhom2) reduces the ability of keratinocytes to release AREG upon HGF
stimulation. Collectively our data suggest that MET-mediated
transformation of keratinocytes occurs through EGFR transactivation and
that ADAM17 is a necessary effector for RAS and MET-driven transformation.

