Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metabolic regulation of mutant p53 stability by the mevalonate
pathway


Introduction: Mutations in the p53 gene are mostly missense mutations and
result in accumulation of dysfunctional p53 protein in tumors with
oncogenic gain-of-function activities. Increasing evidence indicates that
stabilization of mutant p53 (mutp53) in tumors is crucial for its
oncogenic activities including tumor progression and drug resistance,
while downregulation of mutp53 reduces oncogenicity of cancer cells.
These observations suggest that malignant properties of cancer cells are
dependent on the presence of mutp53, thus providing a rationale to
identify compounds that deplete mutant p53 with little impact on
wild-type p53.Experimental procedures: Toward this goal, we performed
high throughput screens of chemical libraries (9,000 compounds) with
Saos2 (p53 null) cells expressing a fusion protein of p53R175H and
luciferase, using luciferase as a reporter.Summary of data: This
screening led us to identify statins, a class of cholesterol-lowering
medications, as compounds that induced degradation of p53R175H. We found
that other inhibitors of the mevalonate pathway, such as
6-fluoromevalonate and zoledronic acid, failed to induce p53R175H
degradation, while statin-mediated inhibition of HMG-CoA reductase and
subsequent reduction in mevalonte-5-phosphate triggered p53R175H
degradation. These results suggest that statin's effect on p53R175H is
specific and independent of protein prenylation/lipidation or cholesterol
synthesis. Moreover, nuclear export of p53R175H was required for the
statin-mediated degradation, which was mediated through an E3 ubiquitin
ligase CHIP, but not MDM2. Interestingly, statins induced degradation of
mainly conformational p53 mutants with minimal effects on the levels of
wild-type p53 and DNA contact mutants.Conclusions: This is the first
study demonstrating that mutp53 stability is regulated through a specific
process of the mevalonate pathway, thereby providing a novel regulatory
mechanism of mutp53 degradation. Our findings suggest that p53 mutation
status in tumors may have an impact on efficacy of statins in cancer
therapy.

