Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analysis of expression MHC class I chain-related gene A and B
(MICA/B) in normal and tumor tissue


MHC class I chain-related gene A and B (MICA and MICB) are highly
polymorphic proteins that are induced upon stress, damage or
transformation of cells which act as a kill me signal through the NKG2D
receptor expressed on Natural Killer, CD8+ and T cells.Experimentally,
the MIC/NKG2D axis has been shown to be important for the recognition of
tumour cells by cytotoxic cells of the immune system and many tumours
have evolved strategies to evade the detection by NKG2D expressing cells,
e.g. by shedding MIC from the cell surface.Expression of MIC has been
reported for most tumour types and in normal gastrointestinal tract
epithelium but the published data is often difficult to interpret.
Additionally, it is not clear how much of the protein is expressed on the
cell surface as MIC cell surface expression is known to be regulated
tightly on multiple levels.A validated MICA/B IHC assay was developed
using an in-house tool antibody to profile multiple frozen human normal
and tumour tissue microarrays (TMAs) by both standard and confocal
microscopy techniques.Using a stringently characterised novel antibody
that detects MICA as well as MICB this study describes the expression
patterns in a wide range of tumours and normal tissues. With this method
we generated data with unprecedented resolution, which enabled us to
analyse the expression of MICA and MICB not only on the cellular but also
on the sub-cellular level.

