Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel syngeneic mouse gastric cancer models identified Sca-1 as a
gastric cancer stem cell marker


Genetically well-defined syngeneic mouse models for gastric cancer are
not available in the scientific community, but critical for the
development of immunotherapeutic agents. We generated primary mouse
gastric cancer cell line NCC-S1 (S1) established from a
Villin-cre;Smad4F/F;Trp53F/F;Cdh1F/wt mouse and its metastatic variant
cell line NCC-S1M (S1M). These cells closely recapitulated human diffuse
type gastric cancers in histology and molecular profiles. S1M cells
showed enhanced in vivo growth and metastatic potentials compared with S1
cells, and developed orthotopic and heterotopic tumors in immunocompetent
mice in predictable manner. S1M allograft model was useful for testing
the efficacy of an immunotherapeutic agent, anti-4-1BB. Sca-1 was
overexpressed in S1M cells compared with S1 cells. Approximately 7% of
gastric cancer cells in primary tumors expressed Sca-1. Sca-1high cells
were more tumorigenic according to the in vivo limiting dilution assay,
and more resistant to cisplatin and fluorouracil. Sca-1high cells
overexpressed CD133, CD44, EPCAM and Bcl-xL. A chromatin
immunoprecipitation analysis demonstrated that Sca-1 was a -catenin/LEF1
target gene. Expression profiles of 85 genes overexpressed in Sca-1high
S1 cells clustered 123 pretreatment gastric cancer patient samples
according to the overall survival following cisplatin/fluorouracil
chemotherapy. Thus, our novel metastatic gastric cancer cell lines are
useful resources for drug development, and identified Sca-1 as a novel
gastric cancer stem cell marker that mediates -catenin signaling.

