Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TMPRSS4 induces invasion and proliferation of prostate cancer
cells through induction of Slug and cyclin D1


TMPRSS4 is a novel type II transmembrane serine protease found at the
cell surface that is highly expressed in pancreatic, colon, and other
cancer tissues. Previously, we demonstrated that TMPRSS4 mediates tumor
cell invasion, migration, and metastasis. We also found that TMPRSS4
activates the transcription factor activating protein-1 (AP-1) to induce
cancer cell invasion. Here, we explored TMPRSS4-mediated cellular
functions and the underlying mechanisms. TMPRSS4 induced Slug, an
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT)-inducing transcription factor,
and cyclin D1 through activation of AP-1, composed of c-Jun and
activating transcription factor (ATF)-2, which resulted in enhanced
invasion and proliferation of PC3 prostate cancer cells. In PC3 cells,
not only c-Jun but also Slug was required for TMPRSS4-mediated
proliferation and invasion. Interestingly, Slug induced phosphorylation
of c-Jun and ATF-2 to activate AP-1, establishing a positive feedback
loop between Slug and AP-1, and thus induced cyclin D1, leading to
enhanced proliferation. Using data from The Cancer Genome Atlas, we found
that Slug expression positively correlated with that of c-Jun and cyclin
D1 in human prostate cancers. This study demonstrates that TMPRSS4
modulates both invasion and proliferation via Slug and cyclin D1, which
is a previously unrecognized pathway that may regulate metastasis and
cancer progression.

