Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metabolomics analysis reveals distinct profiles of non-muscle
invasive and muscle-invasive bladder cancer


Background: Bladder cancer affects >70,000 patients annually in the
United States. Despite its high incidence, therapeutic options are
limited in early or late stage. We wanted to identify key metabolic
pathways that were altered in bladder cancer development and
progression.Experimental Design: We performed global metabolomics
profiling of benign urothelium, high-grade non-muscle invasive bladder
cancer and advanced, muscle-invasive bladder cancer using GC-MS and LC-MS
platforms. This analysis was coupled with publicly available data on
transcriptomics of key enzymes, to determine pathways that may be
suitable for future therapeutics development.Results: Categorical
pathways globally dysregulated in cancer relative to benign urothelium
included glucose, TCA cycle, lipid, amino acid and nucleotide pathways.
Bladder cancers demonstrated Warburg metabolism, with elevated glucose
utilization todrive glycolysis and sorbitol pathway intermediates.
Elevated late TCA cycle intermediates, coupled with higher levels of
amino acids and dipeptides, suggest the possibility of anaplerotic
activity in bladder cancer as a mechanism to sustain energy production.
Medium and long chain fatty acids were produced at the expense of
dicarboxylic fatty acids. Muscle-invasive bladder cancers showed enhanced
use of COX and LOX metabolomics pathways and a possible role for
inflammation in regulating NAD+ synthesis in muscle-invasive bladder
cancer. Transcriptomic profiling validated that the majority of
metabolomics pathway alterations corresponded to gene expression changes
of enzymes responsible for metabolite production.Conclusions: This study
identifies multiple parallel metabolomics changes unique to non-muscle
invasive and muscle-invasive bladder cancer that can be used to justify
testing novel therapeutics targeting metabolic pathways in bladder cancer.

