Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Developing 384-well and 1536-well cell growth inhibition assay
workflow for screening drug-drug combination in tumor cell lines


Drug combination has been widely used in treating the most debilitating
diseases such as cancer. The ideal drug-drug combination will broaden
and/or deepen therapeutic efficacy while overcoming resistance and
unwanted off-target effects. We have developed a 384-well combination
compound plating method in 87 format (8 dilutions of Drug A and 7
dilutions of Drug B), and screened a number of compound pairs that showed
synergistic effect in inhibiting tumor cell growth in either suspension
or solid tumor lines. Compound vehicle DMSO was used as negative control
and puromycin treatment as positive control for calculating% inhibition,
and both HSA and Bliss independence synergy models were applied for
calculating synergy scores. As 384-well 87 format contains one compound
pair per plate, we aimed to increase the throughput by developing
384-well 55 format (5 dilutions of Drug A and 5 dilutions of Drug B)
which contains 3 drug pairs per plate, and 1536-well 87 and 55 format
which contains 4 and 12 drug pairs per plate, respectively. We compared
EC50s and synergy scores generated from 384-well and 1536-well with both
87 and 55 formats, single agent EC50s within combination pairs were
generally within 3 fold difference and synergy scores are largely
consistent. Therefore, we have validated and enabled higher throughput
drug-drug combination screen by using 384-well 55, 1536-well 87, or 55
format. The high-throughput method presented here can be readily adopted
for combination studies in other disease areas.

