Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epigenome landscape of human normal purified hepatocytes: analysis
by the International Human Epigenome Consortium (IHEC)


As a research group participating in the International Human Epigenome
Consortium, we have performed whole-genome bisulfite sequencing (WGBS)
using post-bisulfite adaptor tagging, chromatin immunoprecipitation
(ChIP)-sequencing (seq), RNA-seq and whole-genome sequencing (WGS) using
normal hepatocytes purified from partial hepatectomy specimens of 6
Japanese patients without hepatitis virus infection, chronic liver
disease or hepatocellular carcinoma.DNA methylation profiles such as low
CpG methylation levels in the region 200 bp upstream from the
transcription start site (TSS200), the first coding exon and CpG island
were obtained. CHH methylation was observed more frequently on the
anti-sense strands than on the sense strands in the 5 untranslated region
(UTR), first intron, gene body and 3 UTR. non-CpG methylation was
inversely correlated with gene expression levels.Personal differentially
methylated regions (pDMRs) were observed less frequently in TSS200, the
first coding exon, TSS1500, and CpG island where CpG methylation levels
were low, indicating that the regions important for expression regulation
may be protected from personal variations of CpG methylation. Histone
modification profiles of pDMRs differed considerably among samples. pDMRs
were observed around the TSSs of genes whose expression levels are
reportedly regulated by CpG methylation, such as LRP1B, RASGRF2 and TFF1.
pDMRs were located more frequently in the vicinity of loci showing
genetic variation (single-nucleotide variations [SNVs] and/or
insertions/deletions [indels]) than on all autosomes. Although further
study is needed to clarify the molecular background of such
genome-epigenome interaction, we speculate that SNVs and indels may
affect the binding of non-coding RNAs and/or protein complexes that
induce histone modification or CpG methylation alterations around the SNV
and indel loci. MetaCore pathway analysis revealed that genes showing
both genetic (SNVs and indels) and epigenetic (pDMRs) variations in
multiple samples were significantly accumulated in signaling pathways
participating in hepatocyte function and disease susceptibility.Our data
suggest that genetic variations may induce epigenetic variations and
generate individual differences in the phenotypes of normal hepatocytes
and/or determine disease susceptibility through variations in expression.
After accumulation of numerous reference epigenome profile data in the
IHEC database, comparison between IHEC data for normal cells and cancer
cells may facilitate the accurate identification of cancer-specific
epigenome profiles, which would be indispensable to the development of
biomarkers and molecular targeted therapies.

