Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Urine cf-DNA SNPs as early biomarkers of prostate cancer


Background: The current strategies of prostate cancer (PC) detection,
such as serum PSA, digital rectal examination (DRE) and prostate biopsy
have been hampered by many limitations, including the degree of
aggressiveness, invasiveness, non-specificity to PCa, over diagnosis and
over treatment. Recent studies have proposed the use of cell-free
circulating DNA (cf-DNA) as non-invasive biomarkers for cancer diagnosis,
prediction of tumor burden and prognosis. We hypothesize that a selective
subset of PC associated Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms (SNPs) in urine
cf-DNA detects PCa with high specificity and sensitivity.Aim: To identify
PC specific SNPs in urine cf-DNA from prostate cancer (PC) patients and
further validate their clinical utilities as non-invasive biomarkers for
early detection of PC in comparison to other genitourinary conditions,
such as benign prostate hyperplasia (BPH) and prostatitis.Method and
Results: A protocol was optimized for collection, processing and storage
of urine samples and isolation of urine cf-DNA. Our discovery dataset was
constructed by comparative Illumina HiSeq next generation sequencing
(NGS) of urine cf-DNA from three different cohorts of patients presenting
with PC (Gleason score 6), benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) or
prostatitis. The data was analyzed by SNAPE-pooled and annotated using
ANNOVAR; revealing 24 PC-specific non-synonymous SNPs. The selective
detection of urine cf-DNAs in PC patients was verified by conventional
PCR using primers flanking their genomic sites. Our validation analysis
was performed in patients (n = 50/group) diagnosed with PC (Gleason score
3+4), Gleason score than 4 + 3, or patients deemed as no cancer seen.
This was performed by Droplet Digital PCR (ddPCR) targeting wild-type
versus variant (SNP) DNA in each patient sample. The results have
revealed detection of two PC specific SNPs in urine cf-DNA (>60% for SNP1
and >75% SNP2 in 91 patients; patent pending).Conclusion: Our study
brings forth the potential clinical utility for two novel urine cf-DNA
SNPs as early biomarkers for prostate cancer.

