Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Salinomycin possesses anti-tumor activity and inhibits breast
cancer stem-like cells via inhibition of STAT3 activation in
triple-negative breast cancer cells


Cancer stem cells (CSCs) play important roles in the formation, growth
and recurrence of tumors, particularly following therapeutic
intervention. Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) is an aggressive tumor
subtype with an enriched CD44+/CD24- stem-like population. Salinomycin
has received recent attention for its ability to target breast cancer
stem cells (BCSCs), but the mechanisms of action involved are not fully
understood. The objective of the present study was to investigate the
effect of salinomycin on cell death, migration, and invasion, as well as
CSC-like properties in TNBC. Salinomycin significantly induced
anoikis-sensitivity, accompanied by caspase-3 and caspase-8 activation
and PARP cleavage, during anchorage-independent growth. Salinomycin
treatment also caused a marked suppression of cell migration and invasion
with concomitant downregulation of MMP-9 and MMP-2 mRNA levels. Notably,
salinomycin inhibited the formation of mammospheres and effectively
reduced the CD44+/CD24- stem-like population during anchorage-independent
growth. These observations were associated with the inhibition of STAT3
phosphorylation (Tyr705). Furthermore, interleukin-6 (IL-6)-induced STAT3
activation was strongly suppressed by salinomycin challenge. TUNEL
analysis of MDA-MB-231-derived xenografts revealed that salinomycin
administration elicited a significant reduction in tumor growth with a
marked downregulation of CD44, ALDH1 and phopspho-STAT3 levels, but
seemingly without the induction of apoptosis. Our findings shed further
light on the mechanisms responsible for salinomycin's effects on
triple-negative breast cancer stem cells.

