Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeted disruption of T-cell protein tyrosine phosphatase in
mouse epidermis reveals its critical role in chemically-induced skin
carcinogenesis


Environmental factors such as chemical toxicants contribute to the
development of skin cancer by creating mutations in housekeeping genes
and proto-oncogenes which disrupt intracellular signaling mechanisms. One
vital signaling mechanism is tyrosine phosphorylation signaling.
Phosphotyrosine signaling is regulated by the counter-activities of
protein tyrosine kinases (PTKs) and protein tyrosine phosphatases (PTPs).
Recently we reported TC-PTP (PTPN2) is critical regulator of STAT3
signaling in mouse keratinocytes. To assess the role of TC-PTP in skin
carcinogenesis, we generated epidermal-specific TC-PTP-deficient
(K14Cre.PTPN2fl/fl) transgenic mice. Loss of TC-PTP led to a
desensitization to tumor initiator 7,12-dimethylbenz[a]anthracene
(DMBA)-induced apoptosis both in vivo epidermis and in vitro
keratinocytes. TC-PTP deficiency in epidermis resulted in a significant
increase in epidermal thickness and hyperproliferation (assessed by
bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU) labeling index) compared to control mice
following treatment with the tumor promoter,
12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA). Consistently, primary
keratinocytes derived from TC-PTP-deficient mice showed a faster growth
rate. To further investigate the role of TC-PTP in skin carcinogenesis,
TC-PTP-deficient mice were subjected to two-stage skin carcinogenesis
analysis. TC-PTP-deficient mice showed a shortened latency of tumor
development and significantly increased numbers of tumors compared to
control mice, demonstrating TC-PTP deficiency predisposes mice to skin
carcinogenesis. The data reveals TC-PTP may be a novel potential target
for the prevention of skin cancer due to its role in the regulation of
proliferation and apoptosis in epidermis.

