Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combined genetic and genealogic studies uncover a large BAP1
cancer syndrome kindred, tracing back nine generations to a common
ancestor from the 1700s


Germline BAP1 mutations cause a cancer syndrome characterized by high
incidence of mesothelioma (MM), uveal melanoma and other cancers, and by
very high penetrance, as all individuals carrying BAP1 mutations
developed at least one, and usually several, malignancies throughout
their lives. Through screening MM patients with histories of multiple
cancers, we found four supposedly unrelated patients that shared an
identical germline BAP1 mutation. We investigated whether this BAP1
mutation occurred in a hot-spot for de novo mutations or whether these
four MM patients shared a common ancestor. Using molecular genomics
analyses we found that they are related. By genealogic studies we traced
their ancestor to a couple that emigrated from Germany to North America
in the early 1700s; we traced the subsequent migration of their
descendants, who are now living in at least three different US States.
Our findings demonstrate that BAP1 mutations are transmitted among
subsequent generations over the course of centuries. This knowledge and
methodology is being used to identify additional branches of the family
carrying BAP1 mutations. Our study shows that the application of modern
genomic analyses, coupled with classical family histories collected by
the treating physician, and with genealogical searches, offer a powerful
strategy to identify high-risk germline BAP1 mutation carriers that will
benefit from genetic counseling and early detection cancer screening.

