Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synthesis and anticancer activity of novel prodigiosin analogs


We recently reported that Prodigiosin is a potent p53 pathway restoring
small molecule that acts through p73 and by interfering with p73:mutant
p53 protein interaction (Hong et al., Cancer Research, 2014). Prodigiosin
is the parent member of the tripyrrole alkaloid family of natural
products that shows potent anti-cancer activity against tumors with
mutated p53. To improve pharmacological and medicinal properties of
Prodigiosin including p73 induction and restoration of the p53 pathway in
tumors with mutated p53, two new series of analogs were synthesized. We
introduced carboxylic group substituents either directly on the C-ring or
on the side-chain of the C-ring. Carboxylic group allowed for further
derivatization of Prodigiosin. A number of new analogs have been prepared
and tested for their anticancer activity. Preliminary biological activity
assay showed that new compounds inhibited cancer cell proliferation from
0.1 M to 10 M both in p53 mutated SW480 and wild-type HCT116 colorectal
cancer cell lines. Some of the newly synthesized compounds can induce p53
transcriptional reporter activity in p53 mutated SW480 colorectal cancer
cells. Our ongoing experiments are focused on the signaling mechanism of
apoptosis induced by the new analogs, identification of molecular targets
of the compounds, and in vivo studies of Prodigiosin analogues as single
agents or in combination with chemotherapy or targeted therapy.

