Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Proscillaridin A effects on chromatin modifications and oncogene
degradation in acute lymphoblastic leukemia


Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) represents approximately 25% of all
pediatric cancers diagnosed every year. In about 80% of cases, pediatric
patients will attain an event-free 5-year survival. Unfortunately,
patients who are resistant to treatment or who relapse have a poor
prognosis. Hence, novel therapeutic approaches are necessary to increase
survival rates. Epigenetic alterations, such as DNA methylation and
histone modifications, are involved in disease development, progression,
and in particular, resistance to treatment. These reversible alterations
represent additional targets in ALL. Recently, we discovered candidate
epigenetic drugs in FDA-approved drug libraries. We hypothesize that one
drug in particular, the cardiac glycoside proscillaridin A, has both
epigenetic and anti-cancerous properties in preclinical models of ALL and
can therefore be repositioned for the treatment of the disease. To test
our hypothesis, we treated two ALL cell lines Nalm-6 (pre-B ALL) and
Molt-4 (T-ALL) in vitro with clinically relevant concentrations of
proscillaridin A and analyzed cell growth, cell cycle, gene expression
and chromatin modifications. We observed dose-dependent growth inhibition
in all cell lines, with IC50 values of 3.0 and 2.3 nM in Nalm-6 and
Molt-4, respectively. Our results using BrdU staining indicate a block in
the G2/M phase of the cell cycle. By western blot, we detected a
reduction in histone acetylation levels and in histone modifying enzymes
CBP and Tip60, as well as the c-myc oncogene. These promising results
illustrate the perspective of using the cardiac glycoside proscillaridin
A as a novel epigenetic drug for the treatment of relapsed or refractory
ALL.

