Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exposure of lymphatic endothelial cells to ionizing radiation
increases the surface expression levels of integrin ligands


Radiotherapy has been proven an efficacious tool to combat cancer by
directly destroying tumor cells. However, effects of radiotherapy have
been also described that occur through the re-education of the immune
tumor microenvironment, being leukocyte traffic regulation across the
tumor vasculature of key importance.Here, we address the effects that
radiotherapy may be causing on the adhesive properties of the tumor
lymphatic vasculature. To study this, we irradiated primary and
immortalized human and murine lymphatic endothelial cells grown in vitro,
and fresh tumor explants obtained from colon cancer patients. As a
result, we observed dose- and time- dependent increases in the expression
of the integrin counter-receptors ICAM-1 and VCAM on the surface of the
tumor lymphatic endothelial cells. These effects are also observed in
vivo on colon (MC38) and melanoma (B16) tumors transplanted into
syngeneic mice and irradiated with a single dose of 20 Gy. These findings
are consistent with increased ICAM-1 and VCAM expression levels on
Lymphatic endothelial cells in tumor biopsies from cancer patients which
were taken before and four weeks after fractionated radiotherapy,
including head and neck, colon and oropharyngeal human carcinomas. While
the TGF pathway was found to be involved in these effects, NF-B
inhibitors did not hamper ICAM-1 or VCAM induction.In summary, these
results show ICAM-1 and VCAM surface expression was enhanced on lymphatic
vessels after radiotherapy and may explain differential leukocyte traffic
following irradiation.

