Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mechanism of the AMPK-dependent activation of eukaryotic
elongation factor 2 kinase (eEF-2K)


Eukaryotic elongation factor 2 kinase (eEF-2K) negatively regulates the
rate of protein translation by phosphorylating and inactivating
elongation factor 2 (eEF-2). Activation of eEF-2K by AMP-activated
protein kinase (AMPK) contributes to the adaptive response of cancer
cells to nutrient deprivation, promoting cancer cell survival and tumor
progression. However, the mechanism by which AMPK activates eEF-2K is
poorly described. Using LC-MS/MS, we confirmed previous findings that
AMPK phosphorylates eEF-2K on three sites in vitro: Ser78, Ser366, and
Ser398. Previous reports indicate that only Ser398 is phosphorylated by
AMPK in cells, suggesting phosphorylation of Ser78 and Ser366 (which are
known to inhibit eEF-2K via other kinases) are in vitro artifacts. To
test the notion that phosphorylation of Ser398 activates eEF-2K, we
purified recombinant eEF-2K S78/S366A, which cannot be phosphorylated at
Ser78 or Ser366. Incubation of eEF-2K S78/S366A with AMPK led to
significant phosphorylation of eEF-2K after four hours but did not alter
eEF-2K activity against a peptide substrate. We then purified a form of
eEF-2K S78/S366A in which Ser398 is 90% phosphorylated (eEF-2K
SSA-pS398), as shown by LC-MS/MS and Western blot. The activity of eEF-2K
SSA-pS398 against a peptide substrate was unchanged compared to a
non-phosphorylated control, as was its activity against full-length
eEF-2. Similarly, the EC50 and affinity of eEF-2K S78/S366A for
Ca2+/calmodulin (CaM), which eEF-2K requires for activity, were unchanged
by Ser398 phosphorylation. Phosphorylation of Ser398 did not alter the
rate of autophosphorylation of eEF-2K S78/S366A at Thr348 or Ser500,
which modulate its activity and dependence on Ca2+/CaM, respectively.
Overall, our in vitro data suggests that AMPK may not directly regulate
eEF-2K through phosphorylation of Ser398. In cells, mTOR activates
several kinases, including p70S6K, that phosphorylate and inactivate
eEF-2K. AMPK inhibits mTOR through phosphorylation of TSC2 and Raptor,
suggesting AMPK could relieve eEF-2K from mTOR-mediated inhibition by
suppressing mTOR activity. In line with this notion, we found that
treatment of MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells with Torin1 (a selective
inhibitor of mTOR) or AICAR (an AMP-mimetic that activates AMPK) led to
similar levels of eEF-2K activation, and activation of AMPK with AICAR
reduced levels of mTOR activity. Combined application of Torin1 and AICAR
resulted in levels of eEF-2K activity similar to those obtained with
either compound separately. Taken together, our data suggests that the
AMPK-dependent activation of eEF-2K likely involves the ability of AMPK
to inhibit mTOR and relieve eEF-2K from mTOR-mediated inhibition, and
questions the role of Ser398 phosphorylation in activating eEF-2K
directly.

