Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mapping mechanisms of radiotherapy resistance in prostate cancer


Cancer cells that acquire radio-resistance are major problem for
treatment outcome. We aimed at identifying mechanisms and networks that
control ionizing radiation (IR)-resistance in prostate cancer cells. To
this end, we applied to cancer cell lines an identical radiotherapy
regiment as performed in the clinic, i.e. a total dose of 78 Gy in steps
of 2 Gy per day for 5 consecutive days followed by 2 days rest. We
observed that radio-resistance occurs early during treatment as seen in
colony survival assays in which 100% of cells that can form colonies are
resistant up to 8 Gy. Remarkably, a two-week period of culturing without
radiotherapy completely sensitized these resistant cancer cell lines,
indicating that resistance is not acquired by permanent mutations or
chromosomal rearrangements. Currently, we are characterizing these
extreme resistant cancer cell cultures by comparing these to their
sensitive parental cancer cell lines and the two-week re-sensitized
cancer cell lines. We observe changes in DNA repair pathway utilization,
DNA damage checkpoint activation and energy metabolism parameters, but
not in PI3-kinase signalling and cancer stem cell markers. We also
performed genome-wide gene expression analysis by next generation
sequencing and isolated gene signatures that correlate with resistance.
Based on our results we applied inhibitors to sensitize these
IR-resistant cells. Notably, application of single inhibitors did not
lead to sensitivity. Combinations of small molecule inhibitors however,
were able to sensitize these cancer cell lines, indicating that
IR-resistance is a multi-factorial process. In summary, mapping gene
networks and mechanisms will uncover new pathways associated with
IR-resistance.

