Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Final results of the pharmacodynamic (PD) data of PQR309-001, a
first-in-human trial of a combined PI3K/mTOR inhibitor in advanced solid
tumors


Background: PQR309 is a novel, oral, balanced pan-class 1 PI3K, mTORC1
and mTORC2 inhibitor. PQR309-001 was a first-in-man dose escalation study
evaluating PQR309 in patients with advanced solid tumours.The primary
objective of the study was to establish the maximum tolerated dose (MTD)
of PQR309, its safety and tolerability. Secondary objectives included
characterization of PQR309 pharmacokinetics (PK) and pharmacodynamics
(PD).Methods: We investigated PQR309 treatment-induced PD, including
changes of 16 PI3K-mTOR and MAPK associated phospho-proteins, and 84
mRNAs in serial tumor biopsies obtained from patients enrolled in study
PQR309-001. 13 patients were eligible for PD analysis after histologic
evaluation of fresh-frozen tissue. A solid-phase assay with
phospho-specific antibodies was used for the investigation of PI3K/mTOR
and MAPK signalling. RNA analysis was performed with an RTK/PI3K-specific
RNA array.Results: Under treatment with PQR309, phospho-Akt (p_T308 and
p_S473), phospho-mTOR and phospho-S6 were significantly downregulated
compared to baseline (pBackground: PQR309 is a novel, oral, balanced
pan-class 1 PI3K, mTORC1 and mTORC2 inhibitor. PQR309-001 was a
first-in-man dose escalation study evaluating PQR309 in patients with
advanced solid tumours.The primary objective of the study was to
establish the maximum tolerated dose (MTD) of PQR309, its safety and
tolerability. Secondary objectives included characterization of PQR309
pharmacokinetics (PK) and pharmacodynamics (PD).Methods: We investigated
PQR309 treatment-induced PD, including changes of 16 PI3K-mTOR and MAPK
associated phospho-proteins, and 84 mRNAs in serial tumor biopsies
obtained from patients enrolled in study PQR309-001. 13 patients were
eligible for PD analysis after histologic evaluation of fresh-frozen
tissue. A solid-phase assay with phospho-specific antibodies was used for
the investigation of PI3K/mTOR and MAPK signalling. RNA analysis was
performed with an RTK/PI3K-specific RNA array.Results: Under treatment
with PQR309, phospho-Akt (p_T308 and p_S473), phospho-mTOR and phospho-S6
were significantly downregulated compared to baseline (p<0.05, Wilcoxon
signed-rank test). Moreover, patients with radiographic tumor shrinkage
(n = 7) had significantly stronger phospho-Akt (p_T308), phospho-mTOR and
phospho-S6 reduction than patients whose tumor was growing (n = 6)
(pBackground: PQR309 is a novel, oral, balanced pan-class 1 PI3K, mTORC1
and mTORC2 inhibitor. PQR309-001 was a first-in-man dose escalation study
evaluating PQR309 in patients with advanced solid tumours.The primary
objective of the study was to establish the maximum tolerated dose (MTD)
of PQR309, its safety and tolerability. Secondary objectives included
characterization of PQR309 pharmacokinetics (PK) and pharmacodynamics
(PD).Methods: We investigated PQR309 treatment-induced PD, including
changes of 16 PI3K-mTOR and MAPK associated phospho-proteins, and 84
mRNAs in serial tumor biopsies obtained from patients enrolled in study
PQR309-001. 13 patients were eligible for PD analysis after histologic
evaluation of fresh-frozen tissue. A solid-phase assay with
phospho-specific antibodies was used for the investigation of PI3K/mTOR
and MAPK signalling. RNA analysis was performed with an RTK/PI3K-specific
RNA array.Results: Under treatment with PQR309, phospho-Akt (p_T308 and
p_S473), phospho-mTOR and phospho-S6 were significantly downregulated
compared to baseline (p<0.05, Wilcoxon signed-rank test). Moreover,
patients with radiographic tumor shrinkage (n = 7) had significantly
stronger phospho-Akt (p_T308), phospho-mTOR and phospho-S6 reduction than
patients whose tumor was growing (n = 6) (p<0.05, Mann-Whitney test).
Importantly, ERK1/2 phosphorylation, as the readout of MAPK activity, was
decreased overall with no statistically significant difference between
shrinking and growing tumors. The analysis of mRNAs showed a trend
towards upregulation of PDGFRA (3.2 times, not statistically significant)
after 21 days of therapy with PQR309. Intriguingly, no consistent changes
of other PI3K-related RNAs was observed.Conclusion: PD assessments in
tumour tissue samples from patients treated with PQR309 demonstrated a
reduction of phosphorylation of direct targets for PQR309 (PI3K and mTOR)
as well as downstream effectors of mTOR. Furthermore, the data indicate
that downregulation of phospho-Akt (p_T308) and mTORC1 activity may be
predictive of tumor shrinkage while upregulation of PDGFRA may represent
a mechanism of resistance against PI3K/mTOR inhibition.

