Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Solidago virga-aurea extract induced apoptosis of breast cancer
cells through FOXO3 mediated bim expression


Solidago virga-aurea (European goldenrod or woundwort) is an herbaceous
perennial plant of the family Asteraceae. It is used for medical system
with astringent, diuretic, antiseptic and homeopathic properties. And the
studies about Solidago virga-aurea are in progress for the other
functions.Recently, we found that Solidago virga-aurea extract induces
apoptosis of breast cancer cells. MTT assay showed that cellular
viability was decreased in Solidago virga-aurea extract treated
MDA-MB-231 and MCF-7 breast cancer cell lines by dose and time dependent
manner. And apoptotic protein, especially bim, was increased in Solidago
virga-aurea extract treated MCF-7 cell line. However, anti-apoptotic
protein, Bcl-xL, does not changed by Solidago virga-aurea extract. In
order to find out positive regulator of bim expression, we tested whether
FOXO (forkhead-box transcription factor, group O) 3a and AMPK (5
AMP-activated protein kinase) protein expression. In immunoblot analysis
showed that FOXO3a expression level was dramatically increased in
Solidago virga-aurea treated MCF-7 cells without changes of AMPK
expression. Moreover, immunostaining showed that Solidago virga-aurea
induces co-localization of FOXO3a and bim proteins in MCF-7 and MB-231
cells.Taken together, Solidago virga-aurea induces apoptosis by FOXO3a
mediated up-regulation of bim protein. The mechanisms of Solidago
virga-aurea mediated FOXO3a regulation is not fully elucidated yet, but
further studies about this molecular mechanism between two proteins will
give some ideas for cancer therapies for certain breast cancer patients.

