Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High-fat diet enhances and monocyte chemoattractant protein-1
deficiency reduces bone loss in mice with pulmonary metastases of Lewis
lung carcinoma


Bone is adversely affected by metastasis and metastasis-associated
complications. Obesity is a risk factor for both bone and cancer. Adipose
tissue is an endocrine organ that produces pro-inflammatory adipokines,
such as monocyte chemotactic protein-1 (MCP-1), that contribute to
obesity and obesity-related diseases. This study (22 factorial design)
investigated the effects of a high-fat diet (45% of energy from corn oil)
and MCP-1 deficiency on bone micro-structural changes, analyzed by
micro-computed tomography, in male C57BL/6 mice bearing lung metastases
of Lewis lung carcinoma (LLC). Subcutaneous injection of LLC cells
resulted in lung metastasis which was significantly enhanced by the
high-fat diet and attenuated by MCP-1 deficiency. Micro-computed
tomographic measurement showed significant reductions in bone volume
fraction (BV/TV), trabecular number (Tb.N) and bone mineral density (BMD)
in right femurs and vertebrae of LLC-bearing mice compared to
non-tumor-bearing controls. In LLC-bearing mice, compared to the low-fat
diet (16% of energy from corn oil), the high-fat diet significantly
reduced BV/TV, Tb.N and BMD in femurs but not in vertebrae. Furthermore,
compared to wild-type mice, MCP-1 deficiency significantly increased
BV/TV and Tb.N in both femurs and vertebrae and BMD in vertebrae in
LLC-bearing mice. These results demonstrate that metastasis causes bone
loss which is enhanced by the high-fat diet and attenuated by MCP-1
deficiency. Overall, it indicates that the high-fat diet and MCP-1
contribute positively to metastasis-associated bone deterioration.

