Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor COX-2 expression is associated with less aggressive tumors
and better five-year prognosis in breast cancer patients


Introduction: Cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) is a mediator of inflammation and
regulates aromatase expression, suggesting a potentially important role
in breast cancer. The prognostic role of COX-2 expression in breast
cancer is still debated. The aim of this study was to analyze tumor COX-2
expression in relation to age and tumor characteristics, and to elucidate
whether COX-2 expression was associated with breast cancer
prognosis.Materials and methods: COX-2 expression was evaluated in
invasive tumors from 984 primary breast cancer patients from a
population-based prospective cohort from Lund, Sweden. The patients were
included as of 2002 and were followed for up to 11 years. The median
follow-up time for patients still at risk was five years. Disease-free
survival was assessed by Kaplan-Meier and LogRank test. Adjusted Hazard
Ratios (HR) were obtained by Cox regression and adjusted for invasive
tumor size, axillary lymph node involvement, histological grade, estrogen
receptor (ER) status, and age at inclusion.Results: Immunohistochemical
COX-2 expression was available for 911 patients and the intensity was
classified as negative (n = 82; 9.0%) /weak or moderate (n = 723; 79.4%)
/strong (n = 106; 11.6%). Patients 50 years or older at inclusion had
higher COX-2 expression compared to younger patients (Ptrend = 0.05).
Overall, higher COX-2 tumor expression was also observed among patients
with ER+ tumors (PtrendIntroduction: Cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) is a
mediator of inflammation and regulates aromatase expression, suggesting a
potentially important role in breast cancer. The prognostic role of COX-2
expression in breast cancer is still debated. The aim of this study was
to analyze tumor COX-2 expression in relation to age and tumor
characteristics, and to elucidate whether COX-2 expression was associated
with breast cancer prognosis.Materials and methods: COX-2 expression was
evaluated in invasive tumors from 984 primary breast cancer patients from
a population-based prospective cohort from Lund, Sweden. The patients
were included as of 2002 and were followed for up to 11 years. The median
follow-up time for patients still at risk was five years. Disease-free
survival was assessed by Kaplan-Meier and LogRank test. Adjusted Hazard
Ratios (HR) were obtained by Cox regression and adjusted for invasive
tumor size, axillary lymph node involvement, histological grade, estrogen
receptor (ER) status, and age at inclusion.Results: Immunohistochemical
COX-2 expression was available for 911 patients and the intensity was
classified as negative (n = 82; 9.0%) /weak or moderate (n = 723; 79.4%)
/strong (n = 106; 11.6%). Patients 50 years or older at inclusion had
higher COX-2 expression compared to younger patients (Ptrend = 0.05).
Overall, higher COX-2 tumor expression was also observed among patients
with ER+ tumors (Ptrend<0.0001) and among patients with tumors of lower
histological grade (PtrendIntroduction: Cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) is a
mediator of inflammation and regulates aromatase expression, suggesting a
potentially important role in breast cancer. The prognostic role of COX-2
expression in breast cancer is still debated. The aim of this study was
to analyze tumor COX-2 expression in relation to age and tumor
characteristics, and to elucidate whether COX-2 expression was associated
with breast cancer prognosis.Materials and methods: COX-2 expression was
evaluated in invasive tumors from 984 primary breast cancer patients from
a population-based prospective cohort from Lund, Sweden. The patients
were included as of 2002 and were followed for up to 11 years. The median
follow-up time for patients still at risk was five years. Disease-free
survival was assessed by Kaplan-Meier and LogRank test. Adjusted Hazard
Ratios (HR) were obtained by Cox regression and adjusted for invasive
tumor size, axillary lymph node involvement, histological grade, estrogen
receptor (ER) status, and age at inclusion.Results: Immunohistochemical
COX-2 expression was available for 911 patients and the intensity was
classified as negative (n = 82; 9.0%) /weak or moderate (n = 723; 79.4%)
/strong (n = 106; 11.6%). Patients 50 years or older at inclusion had
higher COX-2 expression compared to younger patients (Ptrend = 0.05).
Overall, higher COX-2 tumor expression was also observed among patients
with ER+ tumors (Ptrend<0.0001) and among patients with tumors of lower
histological grade (Ptrend<0.0001) compared to patients with ER- tumors
or higher histological grade. COX-2 tumor expression was not associated
with tumor size or axillary lymph node status. Higher COX-2 expression
was associated with lower risk for any breast cancer event in the
univariable (LogRank Ptrend = 0.02), but not in the multivariable model,
adjusted HR 0.73 (95% CI: 0.49-1.09) per category. However, higher COX-2
expression was associated with lower risk for events during the first
five years of follow-up (LogRank Ptrend = 0.0003), adjusted HR 0.60 (95%
CI: 0.37-0.97) per category.Conclusion: Higher COX-2 expression was
associated with less aggressive tumor characteristics and lower risk for
any breast cancer event during the first five years of follow-up but not
thereafter, in this population-based cohort of breast cancer patients.
This study indicates that COX-2 expression in breast cancer may carry
short-term prognostic information independently of established clinical
and tumor characteristics.

