Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Predicting response to Mcl-1 targeting agents in NSCLC and
multiple myeloma


Mcl-1 is an anti-apoptotic member of the Bcl-2 family of proteins and is
frequently amplified or over-expressed in both solid tumors and
hematological malignancies, suggesting that its activity may be important
for the survival of cancer cells. CDK9 inhibition results in the down
regulation of Mcl-1 mRNA and subsequent protein levels by inhibiting
transcription and represents an indirect approach to targeting Mcl-1.
Mcl-1 can also be targeted directly using an inhibitor that disrupts the
Mcl-1 complexes to induce apoptosis.Using both molecular and
pharmacological approaches, we sought to identify predictive biomarkers
of Mcl1 dependency in sensitive NSCLC and multiple myeloma cell lines.
Here we demonstrate that NSCLC cell lines lacking MCL1 gene copy number
gains are not sensitive to siRNA mediated knockdown of Mcl-1 or Mcl-1
inhibition (cell line sensitivity to CDK9 or Mcl-1 inhibition is defined
by potency and extent of caspase activation). However, the presence of a
copy number alteration does not predict sensitivity to Mcl-1 inhibition.
To better understand what the drivers of sensitivity are, we developed
quantitative assays on the Peggy platform (a capillary based immunoassay
platform by Protein Simple) to measure both Mcl-1 and Bcl-xL protein
levels. Using these assays, we show a correlation between sensitivity to
a CDK9 or Mcl1 inhibitor and Mcl-1 levels, as well as to the ratio of
Mcl-1 to Bcl-xL protein in a NSCLC cell line panel.These findings were
then extended into a panel of multiple myeloma cell lines. While somewhat
broad activity for CDK9 or Mcl-1 inhibition is seen across the cell lines
tested, a subset of the sensitive lines have MCL1 amplification and
express high levels of Mcl-1 protein. Mcl-1 levels alone, however, do not
predict for sensitivity across the panel and, similar to NSCLC, the ratio
of Mcl1 to Bcl-xL expression has greater positive predictive value.These
results provide the rationale for exploring Mcl-1 copy number alterations
and Mcl-1 and Bcl-xL protein levels as predictive biomarkers for tumor
response when treating with a CDK9 or Mcl-1 inhibitor in both NSCLC and
multiple myeloma.

