Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mechanism of the anterograde transport of the androgen receptor


Androgen receptor (AR) is a ligand-activated nuclear receptor that plays
a critical role in normal prostate physiology, as well as in the
development and progression of prostate cancer. In addition to the
classical paradigm in which AR exerts its biological effects by
activating the transcription of its target genes, there is considerable
evidence to support a rapid, non-genomic action mediated by
membrane-associated AR, which facilitates the activation of kinase
signaling cascades, leading to cell proliferation. While the nuclear
translocation of AR is well studied, the molecular events controlling the
recruitment of AR to the plasma membrane remain poorly understood. In
this study, we set out to elucidate the mechanism underlying AR transport
to the membrane. We found that a subpopulation of AR was localized to the
membrane fraction shortly after androgen stimulation. Treatment with
microtubule-targeting agents, but not actin inhibitors, blocked
androgen-induced AR membrane localization, suggesting that AR transport
to the membrane is mediated by the microtubule cytoskeleton. By utilizing
dominant negative mutants, we identified the KIF5B, a member of the
kinesin 1 family of motor proteins, is involved in the anterograde
transport of AR. We further demonstrated that AR interacts directly with
KIF5B, and such interaction is enhanced by androgens. Through a series of
deletion constructs, a region includes the N-terminal and DNA binding
domains of AR was determined to be involved in the association with
KIF5B. Disruption of AR membrane transport decreased AKT phosphorylation.
Together, our data suggest that KIF5B mediates AR membrane transport and
regulates the non-genomic function of AR. Disruption of AR membrane
translocation may represent a novel strategy to target AR signaling in
prostate cancer.

