Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Using HuTrial to aid in predicting a patient population of
responders


One of the biggest challenges in drug discovery is directing drug
treatment to the correct population. Crown Bioscience currently has over
1,800 Patient derived xenograft models in >70 indications. These models,
HuPrime human surrogate mouse models, are reflective of the diversity of
genetics, tumor heterogeneity and response in patient populations.
HuPrime models are searchable in the HuBase database by the expression
data, copy number, mutational analysis as well as patient clinical data
including diagnosis, pathology and IHC information. The vast number of
models available allows one to perform surrogate clinical trials in a
Phase II-like trial utilizing one patient sample per tumor bearing animal
per treatment group (n = 1 studies). In this study we show
reproducibility of n = 1 studies compared to the traditional preclinical
mouse studies with multiple animals with the same tumor being treating
with the same test agent. Further we show, the use of one patient sample
per treatment allows for the expansion of the study utilizing multiple
patient samples thereby reducing cost of preclinical studies. One can
leverage the HuPrime models to discover biomarkers, identify patient
responder and non-responder profiles to accelerate drug development and
improve chances of success in the clinic.

