Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The 3D chromatin structure of the PTHLH region comprises a dynamic
hierarchical looping complex that approximates the protein-coding genes
and facilitates promoter and enhancer promiscuity


Parathyroid Hormone-Like Hormone (PTHLH) is an important regulatory gene
encoding the product Parathyroid Hormone-related Protein (PTHrP). Among
many biological roles, it has been demonstrated to be essential to the
development of multiple tissue-types, the regulation of foetal calcium
levels, and the metastasis of breast cancer to bone. Its region has GWAS
associations with breast cancer, breast size, height, type 2 diabetes
mellitis, neural development, cardiac arrest, and several immunological
phenotypes. They extend both up- and down-stream of PTHLH, however their
driving molecular mechanisms remain obscure.Analysis of datasets
including Hi-C, ChIA-PET, IM-PET and ChIP-seq suggests PTHLH sits within
a 1.3Mb Topologically Associating Domain (TAD) containing 4 other
protein-coding genes (pc-genes) CCDC91, MRPS35, MANSC4 and KLHL42. PTHLH
itself rests between two 220kb inducible sub-TADs that likely comprise
regulatory archipelagos directed primarily at its regulation. There are
several other inducible loops in the TAD.All protein-coding genes within
the TAD feature an Activated Chromatin Hub (ACH) nearby their 5. The
3D-structure of the TAD appears to be supported by a system of permanent
and dynamic tether points producing primary and inducible chromatin
loops. These result in all pc-genes ACHs being 30 to 60kb from each
other. RNA Pol II (RNAPII) ChIA-PET data suggests there is an inclusive
hierarchical regulatory structure within the TAD, with substantial
interaction between the ACHs of respective pc-genes that is likely
facilitated by the 3D conformation.

