Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: JP4-039/F14 treatment of E13 pregnant mice 24 hours after total
body irradiation (TBI) improves survival, growth and development of fetal
mice


Purpose: A practical radiation mitigator must be safe in pregnant
females. Irradiation during pregnancy can induce fetal death, stunt
growth, and/or lead to teratogenic and carcinogenic effects dependent on
stage of gestation. We evaluated the mitochondrial targeted GS-nitroxide
mitigator JP4-039 for effects on total body irradiated (TBI) pregnant
mice.Methods: Timed pregnant C57Bl/6NHsd mice at E13 were irradiated to 3
Gy, subgroups were injected IV 24 hr later (E14) with JP4-039 in F14
emulsion (4 ug JP4-039 in 100 ul of F14). Mice were followed for number
of pups born, weight of pups at day 5 after birth, and for number of
survivors at time of weaning. In other studies of irradiation effects,
new- born pups, on the day of delivery, were euthanized, fixed, sectioned
and examined microscopically.Results: Nonirradiated mice showed 97 2% of
newborn surviving until weaning. Pups born to 3 Gy irradiated E13
pregnant mice had decreased survival (8.3 8.7%) (p Purpose: A practical
radiation mitigator must be safe in pregnant females. Irradiation during
pregnancy can induce fetal death, stunt growth, and/or lead to
teratogenic and carcinogenic effects dependent on stage of gestation. We
evaluated the mitochondrial targeted GS-nitroxide mitigator JP4-039 for
effects on total body irradiated (TBI) pregnant mice.Methods: Timed
pregnant C57Bl/6NHsd mice at E13 were irradiated to 3 Gy, subgroups were
injected IV 24 hr later (E14) with JP4-039 in F14 emulsion (4 ug JP4-039
in 100 ul of F14). Mice were followed for number of pups born, weight of
pups at day 5 after birth, and for number of survivors at time of
weaning. In other studies of irradiation effects, new- born pups, on the
day of delivery, were euthanized, fixed, sectioned and examined
microscopically.Results: Nonirradiated mice showed 97 2% of newborn
surviving until weaning. Pups born to 3 Gy irradiated E13 pregnant mice
had decreased survival (8.3 8.7%) (p < 0.0001). Control nonirradiated
pregnant mice receiving JP4-039/F14 or F14 alone showed no effect on pup
survival (85 10% at weaning) (p = 0.1453). The survival of pups from 3 Gy
irradiated E13 pregnant mice that received JP4-039/F14 24 hr after
irradiation was significantly decreased (45 16.4% compared to
nonirradiated controls (p = 0.0230). All newborn pups were weighed at 5
days after birth: those surviving 3 Gy in utero had significantly
decreased weight of 1.64 0.04 g compared to 2.73 0.08 g for nonirradiated
controls (p Purpose: A practical radiation mitigator must be safe in
pregnant females. Irradiation during pregnancy can induce fetal death,
stunt growth, and/or lead to teratogenic and carcinogenic effects
dependent on stage of gestation. We evaluated the mitochondrial targeted
GS-nitroxide mitigator JP4-039 for effects on total body irradiated (TBI)
pregnant mice.Methods: Timed pregnant C57Bl/6NHsd mice at E13 were
irradiated to 3 Gy, subgroups were injected IV 24 hr later (E14) with
JP4-039 in F14 emulsion (4 ug JP4-039 in 100 ul of F14). Mice were
followed for number of pups born, weight of pups at day 5 after birth,
and for number of survivors at time of weaning. In other studies of
irradiation effects, new- born pups, on the day of delivery, were
euthanized, fixed, sectioned and examined microscopically.Results:
Nonirradiated mice showed 97 2% of newborn surviving until weaning. Pups
born to 3 Gy irradiated E13 pregnant mice had decreased survival (8.3
8.7%) (p < 0.0001). Control nonirradiated pregnant mice receiving
JP4-039/F14 or F14 alone showed no effect on pup survival (85 10% at
weaning) (p = 0.1453). The survival of pups from 3 Gy irradiated E13
pregnant mice that received JP4-039/F14 24 hr after irradiation was
significantly decreased (45 16.4% compared to nonirradiated controls (p =
0.0230). All newborn pups were weighed at 5 days after birth: those
surviving 3 Gy in utero had significantly decreased weight of 1.64 0.04 g
compared to 2.73 0.08 g for nonirradiated controls (p < 0.0001). In
contrast, while the 3 Gy TBI E13 irradiated pups from mothers that
received JP4-039/F14 showed no significant weight change compared to
control nonirradiated pups (2.44 0.15 and 2.73 0.08, respectively, p =
0.0799). Their weight was significantly increased compared to the 3 Gy
irradiated group (2.44 0.15 and 1.64 0.04 g, respectively, p = 0.0433).
Pups from nonirradiated mothers that were administered JP4-039/F14 had a
significantly increased weight on day 5 compared to nonirradiated mice
(3.32 0.10 and 2.73 0.08 g, respectively, p Purpose: A practical
radiation mitigator must be safe in pregnant females. Irradiation during
pregnancy can induce fetal death, stunt growth, and/or lead to
teratogenic and carcinogenic effects dependent on stage of gestation. We
evaluated the mitochondrial targeted GS-nitroxide mitigator JP4-039 for
effects on total body irradiated (TBI) pregnant mice.Methods: Timed
pregnant C57Bl/6NHsd mice at E13 were irradiated to 3 Gy, subgroups were
injected IV 24 hr later (E14) with JP4-039 in F14 emulsion (4 ug JP4-039
in 100 ul of F14). Mice were followed for number of pups born, weight of
pups at day 5 after birth, and for number of survivors at time of
weaning. In other studies of irradiation effects, new- born pups, on the
day of delivery, were euthanized, fixed, sectioned and examined
microscopically.Results: Nonirradiated mice showed 97 2% of newborn
surviving until weaning. Pups born to 3 Gy irradiated E13 pregnant mice
had decreased survival (8.3 8.7%) (p < 0.0001). Control nonirradiated
pregnant mice receiving JP4-039/F14 or F14 alone showed no effect on pup
survival (85 10% at weaning) (p = 0.1453). The survival of pups from 3 Gy
irradiated E13 pregnant mice that received JP4-039/F14 24 hr after
irradiation was significantly decreased (45 16.4% compared to
nonirradiated controls (p = 0.0230). All newborn pups were weighed at 5
days after birth: those surviving 3 Gy in utero had significantly
decreased weight of 1.64 0.04 g compared to 2.73 0.08 g for nonirradiated
controls (p < 0.0001). In contrast, while the 3 Gy TBI E13 irradiated
pups from mothers that received JP4-039/F14 showed no significant weight
change compared to control nonirradiated pups (2.44 0.15 and 2.73 0.08,
respectively, p = 0.0799). Their weight was significantly increased
compared to the 3 Gy irradiated group (2.44 0.15 and 1.64 0.04 g,
respectively, p = 0.0433). Pups from nonirradiated mothers that were
administered JP4-039/F14 had a significantly increased weight on day 5
compared to nonirradiated mice (3.32 0.10 and 2.73 0.08 g, respectively,
p < 0.0001). Microscopic examination of irradiated pups dying at day of
birth, revealed: 1) increased number of hematopoietic precursors in liver
and decreased glycogen stores in the hepatocytes; 2)adrenal glands were
enlarged and contain severely hypertrophied cortical cells; 3) brain,
showed necrosis and loss of parenchyma within the intermediate zone of
white matter and cell debris in the lateral ventricles. These changes
were not observed in pups from JP4-039/F14 treated mothers, sacrificed on
the day of birth.Conclusions: Treatment of total body irradiated E13
pregnant mice at E14 with JP4-039/F14 was safe and effective as a
radiation mitigator, led to increased numbers of surviving newborns,
improved growth and development, and after weaning over 21 days, and
increased body weight with no late deaths.Supported by NIAID/NIH
U19-AI068021

