Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel way to sensitize pancreatic cancer cells for gemcitabine
treatment


Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is one of the most lethal human
malignancies, with a dismal median survival of 6 months. While combining
albumin-bound paclitaxel with gemcitabine has shown clear therapeutic
advantage, numerous attempts using novel targeted therapies did not yield
clinical benefits. Gemcitabine is still the first-line treatment for
patients with PDAC. We hypothesize that strategies to increase
gemcitabine sensitivity may be effective in PDAC treatment. In this
study, we report that cancer stem cell regulator Sox2 is highly induced
in acquired gemcitabine resistant pancreatic cell lines, and
down-regulation of Sox2 sensitizes cancer cells to gemcitabine treatment
both in the cultured cells and in mouse models. Down-regulation of Gli1/2
was associated with reduced Sox2 expression, decreased expression of
cancer stem cell markers. We found Gli1/2 proteins in association with a
Sox2 promoter sequence with a putative Gli binding site, suggesting a
direct regulation of Sox2 by Gli1/2. We further showed that
down-regulation of Gli1 or Gli2 was as effective as Sox2 knockdown in
sensitizing cancer cells to gemcitabine treatment. The relevance of
Gli1/2-Sox2 signaling axis to PDAC was suggested by association of high
Sox2 expression with poor survival in stage II PDAC patients. Taken
together, our data indicate an important role of non-canonical hedgehog
signaling in regulation of gemcitabine sensitivity, and down-regulation
of Gli1/2 transcription factors, together with gemcitabine, may be
effective in pancreatic cancer treatment.

