Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Activities of in vitro prepared recombinant wnt inhibitory
factor-1 (Wif-1)


Wnt Inhibitory Factor-1 (Wif-1) is a secreted modular protein that
inhibits the activities of Wnt signaling pathway. The latter is involved
in many aspects of cancer and embryonic development. Many studies have
shown that reduced WIF-1 expression is associated with the development of
cancer. Since WIF-1 acts in extracellular space, it is possible to use in
vitro expressed WIF-1 as a therapeutic agent for cancer treatment. We
tested whether in vitro expressed recombinant WIF-1 could elicit
inhibitory effects on Wnt pathway in 3T3 cells by examining the
expression of insulin-like growth factor II (Igf2), Wnt1 inducible
signaling pathway protein 2 (Wisp2), (C/EBP), and peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR) which has been implicated as a
suppressor in numerous cancer types including human breast, lung, and
colon cancer. 3T3 cells were treated with 0, 1, 5 and 20 ng/ml of
recombinant mouse Wif-1 protein. Total RNA was isolated after 24-48 hours
of treatment. The levels of Igf2, Wisp2, C/EBP, and PPAR mRNA were
analyzed with reverse transcription quantitative polymerase chain
reaction. Results are being analyzed to determine whether the in vitro
expressed recombinant Wif-1 protein can modulate the expression of these
genes and regulate cancer to have a significant inclusion in the field of
cancer biology.

