Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The CD40 agonistic antibody APX005M licenses antigen presenting
cells to promote tumor-specific T-cell responses


Modulation of co-stimulatory and co-inhibitory molecules on immune cells
has become a promising approach for cancer immunotherapy. CD40 engagement
on antigen presenting cells (APCs) by its ligand CD154 leads to
maturation and expression of co-stimulatory molecules such as CD80, CD86,
OX-40L, and 4-1BBL that are requisite for optimal antigen-specific T-cell
activation, an essential component of the anti-tumor immune response. To
evaluate the therapeutic potential of targeting the CD40-CD154 pathway,
Apexigen has developed APX005M - a humanized IgG1 CD40 agonistic antibody
that binds with high affinity to human CD40. APX005M mimics CD154, has
potent CD40 agonistic activity and promotes activation of APCs.
Monocyte-derived dendritic cells treated with APX005M display a mature
phenotype characterized by upregulation of CD80, CD86 and HLA-DR and
increased secretion of IL-12. In mixed lymphocyte reaction and viral
antigen recall assays, APX005M significantly enhances proliferation of
and IFN- secretion from both nave and memory T cells. Since CD40-CD154
signaling is involved in the priming phase of T cell activation and acts
upstream of many critical costimulatory pathways, CD40 agonistic
antibodies may represent an essential component of combination
immunotherapy. In support of this, we show that APX005M synergizes with
checkpoint inhibitors to promote antigen-specific T-cell responses.
Importantly, in an ex vivo tumor assay APX005M induces T-cell
proliferation and cytokine secretion. These data demonstrate that APX005M
binds to APCs and induces their activation and maturation to ultimately
drive a potent tumor-specific T-cell response. T cell activation in
cancer patients receiving APX005M will be assessed in current and future
clinical studies.

