Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The effect of MazF, Escherichia coli ribonuclease, on gastric
adenocarcinoma (AGS cells)


Apoptosis is a gene-directed program that could be inhibited by several
factors such as the disruption of the balance between pro-apoptotic and
anti-apoptotic proteins, the impaired death receptor signalling or the
reduced caspase functions. Several studies have shown that ribonucleases
or antibiotics can induce apoptosis in mammalian cells through the
shutoff of the protein synthesises. MazF produced by E. coli is a
ribonuclease protein that cleaves mRNAs at ACA sequence sites and
inhibits their translation. Thus, we hypothesized that the overexpression
of MazF proteins in cancer cells could lead to the induction of
apoptosis. In the present study, the ACA-less mazF gene was inserted into
pSF-T7-EMCV T7 IRES expression plasmid. The mRNAs of mazF gene were
synthesized in in vitro conditions, and one g/ml of the mRNA was
transferred into AGS (Gastric adenocarcinoma) cell line. The incidence of
apoptosis was detected by conducting caspase 3/7 and Annexin-V assays.
The results showed that 99.83% of cells were detached after 18 hours,
0.0086% of cells remained attached without apparent apoptosis, but 0.101%
of attached cells were under apoptotic conditions. The results suggest
that MazF protein has an ability to induce apoptosis in AGS cells. Since
this protein can cleave mRNAs at ACA sites, it could inhibit protein
synthesis, reduce the growth rate, and induce apoptosis in cancer cells.
This finding is the first report of the application of MazF as an
anti-cancer agent for the induction of apoptosis in AGS cell line.

