Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: System analysis of adapted and quiescent/dormancy(QD) models of
drug resistance in melanoma cell lines


The biological basis for inherent and acquired drug resistance in
melanoma is a prominent issue, highlighted by the recent discovery of
various pathways leading to acquired resistance to the mutant BRAF
inhibitor Vemurafenib (Plx4032). In order to dissect patterns of drug
resistance, we treated 3 melanoma cell lines (A375, 1205Lu and SK-Mel28)
under 2 diverse conditions: (1) Increasing drug concentrations over
time(4 months)- Melanoma cells treated with increasing concentrations of
Plx4032 (initial and increasing concentrations of 0.1, 0.5, 1 and 5 M
PLx4032) exhibited an adaptation response. After an initial pause in
proliferation, these cells proliferated in the continuing presence of the
drug. Cells able to grow in the presence of 10 or 20 M of Plx4032 were
cultured as pools. RNA-Seq profiling and system biology analysis
comparing the gene expression in the parental SK-Mel28 cells and adapted
A2-1 revealed three major altered pathways: the PDGF-MAPK-DUSP-HIF2,
TGF--SMAD9-FGF1 and EDNRB-GNAI2-PLCB4-PKA-MITF pathway. Our qRT-PCR and
western blot experiments have confirmed an up-regulation of PDGF which
by-passed the BRAF gene and activated ERK1/2 kinases. These changes were
accompanied by increase of NRAS accumulation in the adapted cells. (2)
Using high initial drug concentrations of PLx4032 (>10 M), > 99.9 of
cells were killed, but some single cells (Q/D) survived for at least 4
weeks in the continuous presence of drug. After the drug was removed
cellular proliferation reoccured 2-3 weeks later (designated post-dormant
cells 1, PD1 cells). These cells did not show increased IC50s to Plx4032
after 72 hour of retreatment. However, when treated with high dose of
drug again, the PD1 cells produced more dormant cells (PD2 cells),
suggesting inheritance of the DQ trait. RNA-Seq profiling studies of the
DQ cells are underway. The drug-induced dormancy/quiescence and adaptive
response represent 2 different pathways of how cells survive treatment
and develop resistance and provide a beginning to understanding the
biological basis of the well established clinical phenomenon of long term
clinical dormancy of melanoma and potentially other cancers.

