Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Therapeutic index prediction of the agonistic aglycosylated TWEAK
receptor binding antibody BAY-356


BAY-356 is a novel aglycosylated anti-TWEAK receptor antibody with potent
agonistic activity evaluated for cancer therapy. In order to predict an
efficacious therapeutic dose of BAY-356 in man, we sought to determine a
therapeutic index where the exposure related to therapeutic efficacy was
compared with the exposure obtained following doses tested in toxicology
studies.BAY-356 (1 mg/kg) was administered intravenously to healthy
Cynomolgus monkeys and plasma concentrations measured in order to
determine pharmacokinetic (PK) parameters. Using allometric scaling, the
PK in humans was predicted. Efficacy data of BAY-356 in WiDr, HN10321,
A253 and SCaBER xenograft models representing colorectal, head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma and bladder cancer, were used to derive
exposure-response models for each tumor model where the plasma exposure
of BAY-356 is assumed to have an effect on the tumor size in a tumor
growth model. NONMEM 7.3 was used in the estimations.The tolerability of
BAY-356 was tested in monkeys at doses of 10, 20 and 40 mg/kg by weekly
intravenous injections over 4 weeks. Treatment resulted in slight to
moderate toxicity in liver, kidneys and pancreas and 10 mg/kg was set to
be an exposure dose well tolerated and not to be exceeded by therapeutic
exposure. A dosing strategy in humans predicted to result in the same
exposure as 10 mg/kg weekly in monkey is 18 mg/kg every third weeks
(Q3W).Using the estimated exposure-response in xenograft models, human
tumor doubling times of 8 weeks (A253 and HN10321), 24 weeks (WiDr) and
12 and 24 weeks (SCaBER) in combination with human predicted PK
parameters, tumor reduction over time in humans was predicted based on a
human dosing strategy of 18 mg/kg BAY-356 Q3W. For the A253 tumor model,
stable disease in humans was predicted while the results from HN10321 and
SCaBER models predicted a 13-60% decrease in tumor size in humans
following 12 weeks treatment. For WiDr, this dosing strategy was
predicted to not be efficacious in humans.The results based on modelling
of xenograft data indicate that 18 mg/kg BAY-356 dosed Q3W is predicted
to be efficacious in humans for certain tumor cells.

