Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The immune modulatory roles of IAP inhibitor, LCL161, and its
connection to immune-checkpoint molecules


Tumor immunotherapy is a unique therapeutic modality in our fight against
human cancers. The recent success of immune-checkpoint therapies
highlights the value and potential of this approach. Previous studies
have demonstrated positive immune-modulatory activities of the IAP
inhibitor, NVP-LCL161. In this study, we sought to further explore the
immune-modulatory activities of NVP-LCL161 in connection with
immune-checkpoint molecules.In PBMC stimulation assays, NVP-LCL161
potently induced IFN and enhanced proliferation, while down-modulating
IL-10 production. Additionally, the role of NVP-LCL161 on
immune-checkpoint modulation was revealed in CyTOF analysis of in vitro
stimulated PBMCs. NVP-LCL161 treatment led to increases in TIM-3
expression on multiple T cell subsets, and on cells of the myeloid
lineage. These observations illustrate potential modulation of specific
immune-checkpoint molecule by NVP-LCL161, thus suggesting possible
synergy between TIM-3 immunecheckpoint blockade and NVP-LCL161.
NVP-LCL161 was further combined in vivo with anti-PD1 antibody in the
murine syngeneic tumor model, MC38. At multiple dosing schedules, synergy
was observed with this combination, which appeared to be independent of
single agent efficacy. Expression profiling of MC38 tumor tissues by a
customized Nanostring panel revealed elevation of gene signatures in T
cells, dendritic cells, cytokines and chemokines, amongst others.In
summary, the preclinical data support the hypothesis that NVP-LCL161 is
an active immune modulator. Its combination activity with
immune_checkpoint inhibitors would warrant further exploration in both
preclinical and clinical setting.

