Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Reproducibility of efficacy results for chemopreventive agents in
the methylnitrosourea-induced rat mammary cancer model


Perhaps the greatest question in biological science is: Can results be
reproduced? This problem is of particular concern for a group whose
primary mission is to screen for potentially effective agents and rank
results by activity. The reproducibility of testing specific agents for
chemopreventive activity, testing the same agent in various protocols,
and testing multiple agents of a given mechanistic class in the
MNU-induced model of ER+ breast cancer in Sprague-Dawley rats is
presented. The model employs female virgin Sprague-Dawley rats on a
standard 4% Teklad diet which develop ER+ mammary cancers
(adenocarcinomas) following MNU injection at 50 days of age (DOA).
Preventive agents were given by gavage or diet starting at 55 DOA, and
animals monitored for tumor development until approximately 170 DOA.
Seven agents which we had previously studied and which were strongly
positive [tamoxifen, vorozole (an aromatase inhibitor), Targretin,
gefitinib] or strongly negative (naproxen, Lipitor, metformin) were
examined in the assays presented. These study results confirmed our
previous data. We next tested these same agents in animals given a
Western diet (high fat, low calcium) and again obtained the same results.
We had thought that the altered physiology and potentially altered
pharmacokinetics of rats on a Western diet might alter the observed
chemopreventive efficacy. These studies show that the direct repetition
of clearly positive and negative agents can be achieved and, in fact,
repeated with a significant variation in diet. Importantly, in terms of
reproducibility, we find that multiple agents of the same mechanistic
class give similar results. Thus, various SERMs (tamoxifen, toremifene,
Arzoxifene), RXR agonists (targretin, UAB-30, 4Me-UAB-30), EGFR
inhibitors (gefitinib, Erlotinib, lapatinib) are all highly positive
(70-95% reduction of cancer multiplicity). In contrast, the negative
classes COX inhibitors (naproxen, sulindac, aspirin) or statins
(atorvastatin or simvastatin) have been consistently negative (Perhaps
the greatest question in biological science is: Can results be
reproduced? This problem is of particular concern for a group whose
primary mission is to screen for potentially effective agents and rank
results by activity. The reproducibility of testing specific agents for
chemopreventive activity, testing the same agent in various protocols,
and testing multiple agents of a given mechanistic class in the
MNU-induced model of ER+ breast cancer in Sprague-Dawley rats is
presented. The model employs female virgin Sprague-Dawley rats on a
standard 4% Teklad diet which develop ER+ mammary cancers
(adenocarcinomas) following MNU injection at 50 days of age (DOA).
Preventive agents were given by gavage or diet starting at 55 DOA, and
animals monitored for tumor development until approximately 170 DOA.
Seven agents which we had previously studied and which were strongly
positive [tamoxifen, vorozole (an aromatase inhibitor), Targretin,
gefitinib] or strongly negative (naproxen, Lipitor, metformin) were
examined in the assays presented. These study results confirmed our
previous data. We next tested these same agents in animals given a
Western diet (high fat, low calcium) and again obtained the same results.
We had thought that the altered physiology and potentially altered
pharmacokinetics of rats on a Western diet might alter the observed
chemopreventive efficacy. These studies show that the direct repetition
of clearly positive and negative agents can be achieved and, in fact,
repeated with a significant variation in diet. Importantly, in terms of
reproducibility, we find that multiple agents of the same mechanistic
class give similar results. Thus, various SERMs (tamoxifen, toremifene,
Arzoxifene), RXR agonists (targretin, UAB-30, 4Me-UAB-30), EGFR
inhibitors (gefitinib, Erlotinib, lapatinib) are all highly positive
(70-95% reduction of cancer multiplicity). In contrast, the negative
classes COX inhibitors (naproxen, sulindac, aspirin) or statins
(atorvastatin or simvastatin) have been consistently negative (<20%
reduction). Therefore, reproducibility of efficacy results appears to be
quite solid in our chemoprevention agent development program for rat
mammary cancer testing, and we can, with significant certainty, trust our
results.

