Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Association between pre-diagnostic circulating 25-hydroxyvitamin D
and cancer survival


Background: Vitamin D has many anti-cancer properties such as reducing
angiogenesis, inflammation, and cell proliferation, and enhancing
apoptosis and cellular differentiation. Epidemiological studies are
inconsistent across cancer sites, showing inverse, positive, and null
associations with 25-hydroxyvitamin D [25(OH)D] blood concentrations
(i.e., the accepted biomarker of vitamin D status). We previously
reported that higher 25(OH)D status was related to improved prostate
cancer survival, yet few other studies have examined pre-diagnostic
vitamin D concentrations and survival after a cancer diagnosis.Methods:
Based on measured prospective circulating 25(OH)D from several
case-control sets nested within the Alpha-Tocopherol, Beta-Carotene
Cancer Prevention (ATBC) Study of Finnish men, we examined serum 25(OH)D
(DiaSorin LIAISON 25(OH)D TOTAL assay) in relation to overall and
site-specific cancer survival among 3,740 men and 1,946 cancer deaths
occurring through December, 2013. Multivariate-adjusted proportional
hazard regression models were used to estimate hazard ratios (HR) and 95%
confidence intervals (CI) for the association between 25(OH)D and
survival from malignant melanoma, non-Hodgkin lymphoma, and cancers of
the colorectum, lung, prostate, kidney, stomach, oropharynx, larynx,
bladder, esophagus, liver, and pancreas.Results: Baseline serum 25(OH)D
concentrations were significantly higher among men who were alive at the
end of follow-up compared with men who died from their cancer (medians
35.0 vs. 32.1 nmol/L, respectively; p = 0.003). Higher baseline 25(OH)D
was associated with lower overall cancer death (HR = 0.75, 95% CI
0.65-0.87 for highest vs. lowest quintile, p-trend 0.0001). Excluding the
prostate cancer cases did not materially alter this association (HR =
0.79, 95% CI 0.67-0.82 for highest vs. lowest quintile, p-trend 0.006).
Organ site-specific survival showed higher 25(OH)D to be associated with
lower risk of death from the following cancers: prostate (Q5 vs. Q1 HR =
0.74, 95% CI 0.53-1.03), renal (Q5 vs. Q1 HR = 0.58, 95% CI 0.32-1.04),
stomach (Q5 vs. Q1 HR = 0.49, 95% CI 0.30-0.82), oropharynx/larynx (Q5
vs. Q1 HR = 0.55, 95% CI 0.28-1.06), and melanoma (T3 vs. T1 HR = 0.41,
95% CI 0.18-0.94), and higher risk of death from esophageal cancer
(higher vs. below median HR = 1.80, 95% CI 1.04-3.12).Conclusion: Higher
pre-diagnostic serum 25(OH)D concentrations were associated with improved
overall cancer survival, as well as improved survival for prostate,
renal, stomach, oropharyngeal and laryngeal cancers and malignant
melanoma, but poorer esophageal cancer survival. The apparent paradox of
higher vitamin D status being associated with improved survival, but not
necessarily reduced incidence, of these particular cancers deserves
further study in other prospective populations.

