Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The anti-CD47 antibody Hu5F9-G4 activates macrophages and inhibits
ovarian cancer xenografts, alone and in combination with chemotherapy or
immunotherapy


Macrophage activation by inhibition of CD47 signaling is a new
therapeutic approach to cancers. Binding of CD47 to its receptor SIRP on
macrophages initiates a signal cascade that inhibits phagocytosis.
Blocking CD47 from interaction with SIRP by the CD47 antibody Hu5F9-G4
results in phagocytosis of cancer cells, and anticancer activity in
xenografts of human cancers. We developed taxane resistant variants from
human ovarian carcinoma (OC) cell lines (ES-2, MES-OV and OVCAR-3) by
step-wise exposure to paclitaxel (Ptx) and the transport inhibitor
valspodar (6x resistance in ES-2/TP, 9x in MES-OV/TP, and 30x in
OVCAR-3/TP). These 6 lines were transduced to establish stable luciferase
expression for OC xenograft (OCX) imaging. All express CD47 by
immunoblotting and flow cytometry, and all express calreticulin (CRT).
CRT is a prophagocytic signal that promotes phagocytosis in the presence
of CD47 blockade. CRT levels are lower in the Ptx-resistant variants
(pMacrophage activation by inhibition of CD47 signaling is a new
therapeutic approach to cancers. Binding of CD47 to its receptor SIRP on
macrophages initiates a signal cascade that inhibits phagocytosis.
Blocking CD47 from interaction with SIRP by the CD47 antibody Hu5F9-G4
results in phagocytosis of cancer cells, and anticancer activity in
xenografts of human cancers. We developed taxane resistant variants from
human ovarian carcinoma (OC) cell lines (ES-2, MES-OV and OVCAR-3) by
step-wise exposure to paclitaxel (Ptx) and the transport inhibitor
valspodar (6x resistance in ES-2/TP, 9x in MES-OV/TP, and 30x in
OVCAR-3/TP). These 6 lines were transduced to establish stable luciferase
expression for OC xenograft (OCX) imaging. All express CD47 by
immunoblotting and flow cytometry, and all express calreticulin (CRT).
CRT is a prophagocytic signal that promotes phagocytosis in the presence
of CD47 blockade. CRT levels are lower in the Ptx-resistant variants
(p<0.01). We are assessing the efficacy of Hu5F9-G4: (1) as a single
agent in drug sensitive and resistant OCX; (2) combined with Ptx and
carboplatin (Carbo); and (3) combined with cetuximab (Cetux) or
trastuzumab (Trastuz) in OCX that express EGFR and/or HER2. We found that
EGFR and HER2 are highly expressed in the ovarian cancer TCGA database.
All 6 OC lines express EGFR by immunoblotting, and 4 express HER2.
Blocking CD47 in vitro induces phagocytosis of parental and
drug-resistant OC cell lines by murine macrophages derived from
NOD/SCIDgamma (NSG) mice. Hu5F9-G4 has single agent activity in MES-OV
OCX, with 89% growth inhibition at 9 weeks (T/C 11%) vs untreated
controls (p = 0.03). Ptx alone produced a T/C of 29%, and the combination
of Ptx/Hu5F9-G4 3% (p = 0.03 vs Hu5F9-G4; p = 0.0002 vs Ptx). The Carbo
experiment was terminated at 5 weeks because of toxicity in the Carbo
groups, but at that time point the T/C for Carbo was 59%, Hu5F9-G4 20%,
and the antibody combination/carboplatin combination 4% (pMacrophage
activation by inhibition of CD47 signaling is a new therapeutic approach
to cancers. Binding of CD47 to its receptor SIRP on macrophages initiates
a signal cascade that inhibits phagocytosis. Blocking CD47 from
interaction with SIRP by the CD47 antibody Hu5F9-G4 results in
phagocytosis of cancer cells, and anticancer activity in xenografts of
human cancers. We developed taxane resistant variants from human ovarian
carcinoma (OC) cell lines (ES-2, MES-OV and OVCAR-3) by step-wise
exposure to paclitaxel (Ptx) and the transport inhibitor valspodar (6x
resistance in ES-2/TP, 9x in MES-OV/TP, and 30x in OVCAR-3/TP). These 6
lines were transduced to establish stable luciferase expression for OC
xenograft (OCX) imaging. All express CD47 by immunoblotting and flow
cytometry, and all express calreticulin (CRT). CRT is a prophagocytic
signal that promotes phagocytosis in the presence of CD47 blockade. CRT
levels are lower in the Ptx-resistant variants (p<0.01). We are assessing
the efficacy of Hu5F9-G4: (1) as a single agent in drug sensitive and
resistant OCX; (2) combined with Ptx and carboplatin (Carbo); and (3)
combined with cetuximab (Cetux) or trastuzumab (Trastuz) in OCX that
express EGFR and/or HER2. We found that EGFR and HER2 are highly
expressed in the ovarian cancer TCGA database. All 6 OC lines express
EGFR by immunoblotting, and 4 express HER2. Blocking CD47 in vitro
induces phagocytosis of parental and drug-resistant OC cell lines by
murine macrophages derived from NOD/SCIDgamma (NSG) mice. Hu5F9-G4 has
single agent activity in MES-OV OCX, with 89% growth inhibition at 9
weeks (T/C 11%) vs untreated controls (p = 0.03). Ptx alone produced a
T/C of 29%, and the combination of Ptx/Hu5F9-G4 3% (p = 0.03 vs Hu5F9-G4;
p = 0.0002 vs Ptx). The Carbo experiment was terminated at 5 weeks
because of toxicity in the Carbo groups, but at that time point the T/C
for Carbo was 59%, Hu5F9-G4 20%, and the antibody combination/carboplatin
combination 4% (p<0.005 vs either single agent). In the combined antibody
experiment, Hu5F9-G4 T/C was 23%, Cetux 84%, Trastuz 37%, Hu5F9-G4/Cetux
13%, and Hu5F9-G4/Trastuz 12% (p = 0.05 vs Hu5F9-G4 alone). Thus,
Hu5F9-G4 has substantial efficacy in MES-OV OCX, and at least additive
effects with chemotherapy (Ptx and Carbo) and immunotherapy (Cetux and
Trastuz). Experiments with other xenografts are continuing. These results
support CD47 as a therapeutic target in OC, and suggest that it may be
successfully combined with chemotherapies and other antibodies.

