Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ending the endless acquired tyrosine kinase resistance mutations
Design of TPX-0005, a multi-target ALK/ROS1/TRK inhibitor with broad
spectrum activity against wild-type and mutants including ALK G1202R,
ROS1 G2032R and TRKA G595R


The enormous success of kinase inhibitors in the treatment of cancer is
being rapidly overshadowed by the emergence of drug resistance.
Drug-resistant mutations increase the kinases binding affinity with ATP,
shifting them to the active conformation, and/or introduce new steric
hindrance that interferes with the inhibitor structural motifs outside
the highly conserved ATP binding boundary. Most kinase inhibitors are
oversized, and often have motifs close to or across the gatekeeper to the
hydrophobic back pocket to gain high potency, rendering them vulnerable
to the clinical gatekeeper mutations, such as ALK L1196M, EGFR T790M, and
ABL T315I. Another common vulnerability of kinase inhibitors is
interaction with the conserved glycine residue at the hinge C-terminal
that forms a hydrophobic sandwich with the kinase 1 sheet. Kinase
inhibitors often use an aromatic ring or a flat motif to go through this
narrow sandwich to the solvent exposure area. Alterations at the
conserved glycine commonly referred to as solvent-front mutations clash
with the inhibitor motif inside the sandwich, underlying clinical
resistance. For example, ALK G1202R confers a common resistance to
crizotinib and other ALK inhibitors, ROS1 G2032R and TRKA G595R render
resistances to crizotinib and entrectinib, respectively. Overall, the
traditionally designed, oversized kinase inhibitors are destined to
develop many different resistance profiles in the clinic. Continuously
introducing new inhibitors to overcome new evolving mutations is becoming
increasingly hard to sustain. Here, we propose targeting
resistance-driven kinase active conformation with a compact molecule that
is completely located inside the ATP binding boundary as a novel strategy
to tackle the ever evolving mutation resistances. We designed TPX-0005, a
novel three-dimensional macrocycle with a much smaller size (MW The
enormous success of kinase inhibitors in the treatment of cancer is being
rapidly overshadowed by the emergence of drug resistance. Drug-resistant
mutations increase the kinases binding affinity with ATP, shifting them
to the active conformation, and/or introduce new steric hindrance that
interferes with the inhibitor structural motifs outside the highly
conserved ATP binding boundary. Most kinase inhibitors are oversized, and
often have motifs close to or across the gatekeeper to the hydrophobic
back pocket to gain high potency, rendering them vulnerable to the
clinical gatekeeper mutations, such as ALK L1196M, EGFR T790M, and ABL
T315I. Another common vulnerability of kinase inhibitors is interaction
with the conserved glycine residue at the hinge C-terminal that forms a
hydrophobic sandwich with the kinase 1 sheet. Kinase inhibitors often use
an aromatic ring or a flat motif to go through this narrow sandwich to
the solvent exposure area. Alterations at the conserved glycine commonly
referred to as solvent-front mutations clash with the inhibitor motif
inside the sandwich, underlying clinical resistance. For example, ALK
G1202R confers a common resistance to crizotinib and other ALK
inhibitors, ROS1 G2032R and TRKA G595R render resistances to crizotinib
and entrectinib, respectively. Overall, the traditionally designed,
oversized kinase inhibitors are destined to develop many different
resistance profiles in the clinic. Continuously introducing new
inhibitors to overcome new evolving mutations is becoming increasingly
hard to sustain. Here, we propose targeting resistance-driven kinase
active conformation with a compact molecule that is completely located
inside the ATP binding boundary as a novel strategy to tackle the ever
evolving mutation resistances. We designed TPX-0005, a novel
three-dimensional macrocycle with a much smaller size (MW <370) than
current ALK, ROS1, and TRK inhibitors in the clinic. Efficiently
targeting the center of the ATP binding site avoids the steric
interference with mutations outside the ATP binding boundary. As
expected, TPX-0005 potently inhibited WT ALK (IC50 1.01 nM) and mutant
ALKs including ALKG1202R (1.26 nM) and ALKL1196M (1.08 nM). TPX-0005
demonstrated even stronger potency against the closely related kinases
ROS1 (ROS1 WT 0.07 nM and ROS1 G2032R 0.456 nM), and TRK family (TRKA
0.826 nM, TRKB 0.052 nM, and TRKC 0.096 nM). TPX-0005 potently inhibited
the phosphorylation of LMNA-TRKA G595R (IC50 The enormous success of
kinase inhibitors in the treatment of cancer is being rapidly
overshadowed by the emergence of drug resistance. Drug-resistant
mutations increase the kinases binding affinity with ATP, shifting them
to the active conformation, and/or introduce new steric hindrance that
interferes with the inhibitor structural motifs outside the highly
conserved ATP binding boundary. Most kinase inhibitors are oversized, and
often have motifs close to or across the gatekeeper to the hydrophobic
back pocket to gain high potency, rendering them vulnerable to the
clinical gatekeeper mutations, such as ALK L1196M, EGFR T790M, and ABL
T315I. Another common vulnerability of kinase inhibitors is interaction
with the conserved glycine residue at the hinge C-terminal that forms a
hydrophobic sandwich with the kinase 1 sheet. Kinase inhibitors often use
an aromatic ring or a flat motif to go through this narrow sandwich to
the solvent exposure area. Alterations at the conserved glycine commonly
referred to as solvent-front mutations clash with the inhibitor motif
inside the sandwich, underlying clinical resistance. For example, ALK
G1202R confers a common resistance to crizotinib and other ALK
inhibitors, ROS1 G2032R and TRKA G595R render resistances to crizotinib
and entrectinib, respectively. Overall, the traditionally designed,
oversized kinase inhibitors are destined to develop many different
resistance profiles in the clinic. Continuously introducing new
inhibitors to overcome new evolving mutations is becoming increasingly
hard to sustain. Here, we propose targeting resistance-driven kinase
active conformation with a compact molecule that is completely located
inside the ATP binding boundary as a novel strategy to tackle the ever
evolving mutation resistances. We designed TPX-0005, a novel
three-dimensional macrocycle with a much smaller size (MW <370) than
current ALK, ROS1, and TRK inhibitors in the clinic. Efficiently
targeting the center of the ATP binding site avoids the steric
interference with mutations outside the ATP binding boundary. As
expected, TPX-0005 potently inhibited WT ALK (IC50 1.01 nM) and mutant
ALKs including ALKG1202R (1.26 nM) and ALKL1196M (1.08 nM). TPX-0005
demonstrated even stronger potency against the closely related kinases
ROS1 (ROS1 WT 0.07 nM and ROS1 G2032R 0.456 nM), and TRK family (TRKA
0.826 nM, TRKB 0.052 nM, and TRKC 0.096 nM). TPX-0005 potently inhibited
the phosphorylation of LMNA-TRKA G595R (IC50 < 1 nM) in NIH3T3 LMNA-TRKA
G595R cells. Taken together, TPX-0005 is a novel ALK/ROS1/TRK inhibitor
and can effectively overcome a broad spectrum of acquired resistance
mutations, especially the solvent front mutants ALK G1202R, ROS1 G2032R
and TRKA G595R.

