Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prostate cancer in WTC respondents


Background: Ten years following the 9/11/2001 attacks on the World Trade
Center (WTC), an increased incidence of prostate cancer was reported in
two separate cohorts of WTC rescue and recovery workers. Whether this
increase is due to WTC-related exposures or increased surveillance is
uncertain.Methods: Prostate cancer cases and Gleason scores diagnosed
after 9/11 from 2002 to 2014 were obtained from the WTC Health Program (n
= 180). Differences in proportions of Gleason scores 7+ (moderate to
high-grade cancer) in WTC respondents and New York State were calculated
based on the NYS Cancer Registry (NYSCR). An age-adjusted rate for
Gleason scores of 7 was calculated using the indirect method based on
NYSCR. Age- and race-matched prostate cancer non-WTC respondent controls
(n = 253) were obtained from Mount Sinai Hospital. We evaluated the
effects of WTC-respondent status, exposure level, age, race,
prostate-specific antigen (PSA) concentrations, and clinical stage on
Gleason scores using log-linear regression. WTC exposure was analyzed by
four categorical levels and continuously using a relative rank of
potential carcinogen-related post-9/11 exposures. Differences in mean
numbers of PSA screening visits were assessed using Student's
t-test.Results: The age-adjusted rate for a Gleason score 7 was 1.15 for
WTC respondents (95% Confidence Interval (CI): 0.94, 1.36) compared to
the NYSCR. WTC respondents Background: Ten years following the 9/11/2001
attacks on the World Trade Center (WTC), an increased incidence of
prostate cancer was reported in two separate cohorts of WTC rescue and
recovery workers. Whether this increase is due to WTC-related exposures
or increased surveillance is uncertain.Methods: Prostate cancer cases and
Gleason scores diagnosed after 9/11 from 2002 to 2014 were obtained from
the WTC Health Program (n = 180). Differences in proportions of Gleason
scores 7+ (moderate to high-grade cancer) in WTC respondents and New York
State were calculated based on the NYS Cancer Registry (NYSCR). An
age-adjusted rate for Gleason scores of 7 was calculated using the
indirect method based on NYSCR. Age- and race-matched prostate cancer
non-WTC respondent controls (n = 253) were obtained from Mount Sinai
Hospital. We evaluated the effects of WTC-respondent status, exposure
level, age, race, prostate-specific antigen (PSA) concentrations, and
clinical stage on Gleason scores using log-linear regression. WTC
exposure was analyzed by four categorical levels and continuously using a
relative rank of potential carcinogen-related post-9/11 exposures.
Differences in mean numbers of PSA screening visits were assessed using
Student's t-test.Results: The age-adjusted rate for a Gleason score 7 was
1.15 for WTC respondents (95% Confidence Interval (CI): 0.94, 1.36)
compared to the NYSCR. WTC respondents < 40 years old had an 8-time
higher proportion of aggressive cancers than expected based on NYSCR
age-specific rates. The proportion of Gleason scores 7 was 0.33 (95% CI:
-0.06, 0.12) higher in WTC respondents than NYSCR. WTC respondents had
lower Gleason scores (Odds Ratio (OR): 0.90 (95% CI: 0.82, 0.99)), PSA
values (OR: 0.79; 95% CI: 0.71, 0.89), but higher clinical stage (OR:
1.04; 95% CI: 0.92, 1.16) than controls. When Gleason score was adjusted
for PSA and clinical stage, the OR for PSA testing was 1.04; 95% CI:
0.88, 1.23 and clinical stage was lower (OR: 0.82; 95% CI: 0.69, 0.98) in
WTC-respondent cases. The mean numbers of PSA-screening visits were not
different between WTC respondents and controls (t = 0.64; P = 0.52) and
were not associated with Gleason scores 7 (OR: 1.0; 95% CI: 0.88, 1.13).
Four-level exposure categories (OR: 0.99; 95% CI: 0.99, 1.00) and
continuous rank (OR: 0.88; 95% CI: 0.73, 1.06) showed no associations
with Gleason scores. Days spent at WTC (OR: 1.00; 95% CI: 1.00, 1.03) and
working on the WTC debris pile (OR: 0.95; 95% CI: 0.86, 1.05) showed
similar results.Conclusions: Young WTC respondents had higher Gleason
scores than the NYSCR. Number of PSA screening visits did not
significantly differ between WTC respondents and controls and PSA values
of WTC respondents were lower than controls. Aggressive prostate cancer
was not associated with WTC exposure levels. Considering the high grade
of prostate cancer in younger men and the long latency for prostate
cancer development, continued monitoring is needed to determine
alternative causes of elevated prostate cancer in the WTC population.

