Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pro-chemotherapeutic effects of antibody against extracellular
domain of claudin-4 in bladder cancer


Bladder cancer displays an aggressive phenotype in the muscle-invasive
phase, and is associated with a high mortality rate. Therefore, novel
molecular therapeutic targets are needed to improve patient survival. A
monoclonal antibody against the extracellular domain of the claudin-4
(CLDN4) tight junction protein was established by immunizing rats with a
plasmid vector encoding human CLDN4. A hybridoma clone, producing a rat
monoclonal antibody recognizing CLDN4 (clone 4D3), was obtained.
Immunohistochemistry by using the 4D3 antibody showed that CLDN4
expression was associated with local invasion, nodal metastasis, distant
metastasis, and advanced stage in 86 cases of bladder cancer. The 4D3
antibody inhibited growth, invasion, and survival, associated with
abrogation of the intratumoral microenvironment; lowered concentrations
of epidermal growth factor and vascular endothelial growth factor were
found in 3-dimentional cultures of T24 and RT4 cells. In combination with
cisplatin therapy, 4D3 enhanced cisplatin cytotoxicity by increasing
cellular permeability, leading to increased intracellular cisplatin
concentrations. In mouse models of subcutaneous tumors and lung
metastasis, 4D3 enhanced tumor growth inhibition, alone and with
concurrent cisplatin treatment. The anti-tumor activity of the newly
established 4D3 antibody suggests that it may be a powerful tool in
CLDN4-targeting therapy, and in combination with chemotherapy.

