Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A mouse model of allelic loss of the core autophagy gene BECN1 in
ovarian cancer


Autophagy, a process of protein and organelle recycling, can both
suppress and promote tumors. Gliomas, KRAS mutant, and BRAF driven tumor
models require functional autophagy for maximal tumorigenicity and/or
tumor progression. Inhibition of autophagy is able to eliminate many
human cancer cell lines. However, allelic loss of the autophagy gene
BECN1 is present in the majority of ovarian cancers, and BECN1 loss
incurs early tumorigenesis in mouse models free of other oncogenic
stimuli. Recent sequencing efforts and analyses, depending on the study,
have both supported and refuted the relevance of BECN1 allelic loss in
ovarian and breast cancers. To directly address the role of BECN1 allelic
loss in ovarian cancer, we crossed BECN1 heterozygous knockout dams with
MISIIR-TAg sires. In this model, the MISIIR promoter induces expression
of large T antigen specifically in the ovarian and fallopian epithelium,
inhibiting p53 activity and driving ovarian cancers in a manner befitting
its human analogue. Here we present our pre-publication findings relating
to the oncogenesis and progression of this murine BECN1 allelic loss
model of ovarian cancer. We compare the in vivo murine results to those
of in vitro human cell line models of beclin depletion, which exhibit
higher basal dsDNA break repair signaling, mitochondrial stress, and
reactive oxygen species generation.

