Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Candidate gene analysis of exome sequencing data in smokers
susceptible and resistant to chronic obstructive pulmonary disease


Background: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a major
comorbidity for Lung cancer (LC), the presence of COPD conferring a
three- to 10-fold increased risk of LC. Therefore, we employed an
extreme-phenotype approach, focused on exome sequencing of 109
susceptibility loci identified in recent genome-wide association studies
(GWAS) of LC, COPD, lung function and smoking behavior, to search for
COPD disease-causing rare germline mutations.Methods: We selected two
extreme categories of smokers from COPDGene: 1) Resistant long-term
smokers with normal lung function defined as post-bronchodilator FEV1 80%
predicted, FEV1/FVC 0.7, with smoking histories of 15+ pack-years,
considered as resistant to the effects of smoking, n = 318; 2)
Susceptible smokers with severe COPD defined as GOLD spirometry grades
III-IV (post-bronchodilator FEV1 Background: Chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) is a major comorbidity for Lung cancer (LC), the
presence of COPD conferring a three- to 10-fold increased risk of LC.
Therefore, we employed an extreme-phenotype approach, focused on exome
sequencing of 109 susceptibility loci identified in recent genome-wide
association studies (GWAS) of LC, COPD, lung function and smoking
behavior, to search for COPD disease-causing rare germline
mutations.Methods: We selected two extreme categories of smokers from
COPDGene: 1) Resistant long-term smokers with normal lung function
defined as post-bronchodilator FEV1 80% predicted, FEV1/FVC 0.7, with
smoking histories of 15+ pack-years, considered as resistant to the
effects of smoking, n = 318; 2) Susceptible smokers with severe COPD
defined as GOLD spirometry grades III-IV (post-bronchodilator FEV1 < 50%
predicted and FEV1/FVC Background: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD) is a major comorbidity for Lung cancer (LC), the presence of COPD
conferring a three- to 10-fold increased risk of LC. Therefore, we
employed an extreme-phenotype approach, focused on exome sequencing of
109 susceptibility loci identified in recent genome-wide association
studies (GWAS) of LC, COPD, lung function and smoking behavior, to search
for COPD disease-causing rare germline mutations.Methods: We selected two
extreme categories of smokers from COPDGene: 1) Resistant long-term
smokers with normal lung function defined as post-bronchodilator FEV1 80%
predicted, FEV1/FVC 0.7, with smoking histories of 15+ pack-years,
considered as resistant to the effects of smoking, n = 318; 2)
Susceptible smokers with severe COPD defined as GOLD spirometry grades
III-IV (post-bronchodilator FEV1 < 50% predicted and FEV1/FVC < 0.7),
with smoking histories of 10+ pack-years, n = 309. We performed whole
exome sequencing and analyzed rare (minor allele frequency [MAF]
Background: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a major
comorbidity for Lung cancer (LC), the presence of COPD conferring a
three- to 10-fold increased risk of LC. Therefore, we employed an
extreme-phenotype approach, focused on exome sequencing of 109
susceptibility loci identified in recent genome-wide association studies
(GWAS) of LC, COPD, lung function and smoking behavior, to search for
COPD disease-causing rare germline mutations.Methods: We selected two
extreme categories of smokers from COPDGene: 1) Resistant long-term
smokers with normal lung function defined as post-bronchodilator FEV1 80%
predicted, FEV1/FVC 0.7, with smoking histories of 15+ pack-years,
considered as resistant to the effects of smoking, n = 318; 2)
Susceptible smokers with severe COPD defined as GOLD spirometry grades
III-IV (post-bronchodilator FEV1 < 50% predicted and FEV1/FVC < 0.7),
with smoking histories of 10+ pack-years, n = 309. We performed whole
exome sequencing and analyzed rare (minor allele frequency [MAF] < 0.01
in reference exome databases) variants predicted to be functional in the
109 susceptibility loci previously identified by GWAS. We tested our
results using two independent series including the Boston Early-Onset
pedigrees sequencing study (n = 350) and the Exome Sequencing Project
(ESP)-COPDGene study (n = 400).Results: Our analysis revealed two genes
with multiple rare non-synonymous substitution variants significantly
associated with COPD risk. We identified six rare variants in 10q23.33
Myoferlin (MYOF: p.Arg572Gln, p.Phe1400Leu, p.Tyr1163His, p.Glu1339Lys,
p.Leu1582Pro, and p.Arg1630Gln) occurring in 12 susceptible smokers with
severe COPD, and three rare variants in 15q15.2 Transglutaminase 5 (TGM5:
p.Thr42Asn, Pro136Leu, and p.Val202Ile) occurring in nine susceptible
smokers with severe COPD, compared with none of these variants identified
in resistant smokers. MAF of these mutations were very rare (range from 0
to 0.003) in the 1000 Genomes and ESP databases. All of these mutations
were predicted to be protein damaging and deleterious by bioinformatics
algorithms (SIFT, PolyPhen2, Mutation Taster, etc.). We also observed
three suggestive rare mutations, 6p21.32 ZBTB9 p.Leu43Val, 9q34.2 DBH
p.Gly482Arg, and 10q23.33 IFIT3 p.Leu390Arg, each of which were present
in three susceptible smokers and none in resistant smokers. However, we
were not able to validate these abovementioned candidate variants in the
two replication datasets. This could due to potential false positive
results or difference of exome sequencing depth and coverage of the
target regions from different platforms.Conclusion: Our results
demonstrated potentially disruptive COPD risk-conferring MYOF and TGM5
rare germline mutations that are associated with susceptibility to COPD
in one population of smokers, but additional replication of these results
in larger populations will be required.

