Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cytokine-induced killer cells redirected with anti-CD44v6 chimeric
antigen receptor against soft tissue sarcomas


Purpose of our study is to explore the anti-sarcoma activity of
cytokine-induced killer (CIK) cells engineered with a chimeric antigen
receptor (CAR) against the isoform variant 6 of adhesive receptor CD44
(CD44v6). CD44v6 may be an ideal target for immunotherapy as it is a
tumor-promoting antigen, associated with the metastatic process and tumor
initiating cells. Advanced and metastatic soft tissue sarcomas (STS) are
currently incurable and in great need for new therapeutic strategies.CIK
cells are ex vivo expanded T lymphocytes endowed with MHC-independent
antitumor activity.CIK cells are active against STS (Sangiolo et al.
Cancer Research 2014) but their function decreases at low effector/target
(E/T) ratios with limitations in clinical perspective. We hypothesized
that CIK cells may be effective candidates for CAR-based strategies,
considering their intense ex vivo expansibility and innate antitumor
activity.Experimental procedures and results. CIK cells were expanded
from 9 STS patients and engineered with a lentiviral vector encoding for
anti-CD44v6 CAR containing a CD28 signaling domain (Casucci et al, Blood
2013) and the HSV-TK suicide switch. Tumor killing was assessed in vitro
against 10 STS (undifferentiated pleomorphic n = 5; Liposarcoma n = 2;
Fibrosarcoma n = 1; GIST n = 2), in 2 cases STS targets were
autologous.All 10 STS expressed CD44v6 (Relative Fluorescence Intensity =
4, SE = 1). Mean transduction efficiency was 60% (SE = 6%). Expansion
rates and phenotype of CAR-CIK were comparable with unmodified controls
(CD3+CD56+ = 50%; CD8 = 66%; NKG2D = 85%).Anti-CD44v6 CAR-CIK cells
efficiently killed STS in vitro. Mean tumor-specific killing, at low E/T
ratios, was significantly higher compared with unmodified CIK cells: 98%
vs 84% (E/T = 10:1, p>0.05), 89% vs 41% (E/T = 1:1, p = 0.0001), 65% vs
26% (E/T = 1:4 p = 0.0001).In vitro treatment with Ganciclovir (10 M)
significantly inhibited tumor killing activity of CAR-CIK from 70% to 10%
(E/T 1:1, n = 3, p = 0.008).Blocking experiments (n = 2) with anti-CD44v6
antibody against the same epitope recognized by the CAR (VFF-18)
decreased tumor-specific killing from 96% to 43% (E/T = 1:1) and 27% (E/T
= 1:2). Adoptive infusion of anti-CD44v6 CAR-CIK cells significantly
delayed tumor growth (p = 0.01) and reduced proliferative index (p =
0.001) of established subcutaneous fibrosarcoma xenografts in NOD/SCID
mice (n = 3) compared to untreated controls (n = 3) without any sign of
toxicity.Conclusions. Ours is the first report of CAR-engineered CIK
cells against solid tumors. This approach significantly potentiates the
innate tumor killing ability of CIK cells with a new redirected antitumor
specificity. CIK cells may be appealing alternative candidates to
conventional T cells for future CAR-based strategies against solid
tumors. Our findings support CD44v6 as a valuable target for adoptive
cell therapies against currently incurable sarcomas.

