Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cell cycle regulation influences the phenotype of breast and
prostate cancer stem cells in vitro


The dissemination of metastases from the primary tumor accounts for over
90% of cancer-associated mortality. Despite advances on treatment
modalities involving chemotherapeutic drugs, radiotherapy, and surgery,
metastasis almost invariably arises by persistence of unresolved cancer
cells following initial treatment. One intriguing explanation for this
resiliency is the cancer stem-cell (CSC) hypothesis. According to the CSC
model, phenotypic heterogeneity exists within the tumor, and a minority
fraction of cells are able to reconstitute the tumor following ablation
by current treatments. In like manner to their normal stem-cell
counterparts, CSCs are capable of unlimited self-renewal, and the ability
to differentiate to reconstitute the phenotypic heterogeneity of the
initial tumor. Recent studies have sought to identify cancer stem cells
in numerous types of solid tumors, including breast and prostate. Among
the cell surface antigens utilized to identify the CSC subpopulations are
CD24, CD44, CD133, and other factors associated with
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT).In this study, we sought to
investigate the phenotypic changes associated with cell-cycle in breast
(BCa-SC) and prostate (PCa-SC) cancer. We characterized in vitro the
malignant and osteolytic human breast cancer cell line MDA-MB-231 and
human prostate cancer cell line PC3, with the goal of identifying an
optimal checkpoint where the CSC subpopulation would be most vulnerable
to subsequent targeted chemotherapy. We found that common CSC markers are
expressed in a time-dependent manner due to changes in the cell cycle.
Our hypothesis is that temporal inhibition of the cell cycle when the CSC
phenotype is least prominent will circumvent the chemo-resistance
inherent to CSC.

