Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Extracellularly secreted APE1/Ref-1 triggers apoptosis in
triple-negative breast cancer cells via RAGE binding, which is mediated
through acetylation


The present study evaluated the mechanism of apoptosis caused by
posttranslational modification, hyperacetylation in triple-negative
breast cancer (TNBC) cells. We previously showed that trichostatin A
(TSA) induced secretion of acetylated apurinic apyrimidinic endonuclease
1/redox factor-1 (Ac-APE1/Ref-1). This is the first report showing that
Ac-APE1/Ref-1 initiates apoptosis in TNBC cells by binding to the
receptor for advanced glycation end products (RAGE). The functional
significance of secreted Ac-APE1/Ref-1 was studied by induction of
intracellular hyperacetylation through co-treatment with acetylsalicylic
acid and TSA in MDA-MB-231 cells. In response to hyperacetylation,
secretion of Ac-APE1/Ref-1 in vesicles was observed, resulting in
significantly decreased cell viability and induction of apoptosis with
increased expression of RAGE. The hyperacetylation-induced apoptosis was
similar in two other TNBC cell lines: BT-459 and MDA-MB-468. Therefore,
hyperacetylation may be a therapeutic target for treatment of TNBCs. This
study introduces a novel paradigm whereby posttranslational modification
induces apoptotic cell death in breast cancer cells resistant to standard
chemotherapeutic agents through secretion of auto- or paracrine molecules
such as Ac-APE1/Ref-1.

