Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effects of Dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) treatment on serum
methylation, oxidative and nitrosative stress biomarkers in an obesity
model of mammary carcinogenesis


Free oxygen and free nitrogen radicals, commonly named as reactive oxygen
species (ROS) and reactive nitrogen species (RNS) play an important role
in cancer promotion. The cumulative effect of ROS/RNS termed oxidative
and nitrosative stress is commonly seen in the development of several
cancers. Obesity has been also linked with the risk of development of
various cancers, including breast cancer. DHEA is a dietary supplement
used as an anti-cancer agent and anti-obesity supplement. Previously, we
reported that obese rats fed DHEA had lower body weight gain and
developed no mammary tumor in DMBA model. The effect of DHEA on
development of oxidative/nitrosative stress is not known. The objectives
of this study were to investigate the possible mechanism of DHEA tumor
protection by determining the DHEA effects on serum concentration of
methylation cycle metabolites, oxidative and nitrosative stress
biomarkers. Twenty (20) six-week-old obese female Zucker rats were
randomly assigned ad libitum to water and a diet of either chow as a
control diet or chow with the addition of DHEA at a concentration of 6
g/kg of chow as a DHEA diet. All rats were orally gavaged at age 50 days
with 65 mg DMBA/kg body weight and were sacrificed 155 days later. Serum
concentration of Methionine, S-sdenosylmethionine (SAM),
S-adenosylhomocysteine (SAH), homocysteine, free reduced glutathione
(fGSH), oxidized glutathione (GSSG), nitroglutathione (GSNO), free
Cysteine, Cystine and 3-nitroTyrosine (3NT) were measured by HPLC method
with electrochemical detection or LC-MS method. There were no significant
differences in serum concentration of fGSH between control and DHEA
fed-rats. However, DHEA-fed rats had lower (PFree oxygen and free
nitrogen radicals, commonly named as reactive oxygen species (ROS) and
reactive nitrogen species (RNS) play an important role in cancer
promotion. The cumulative effect of ROS/RNS termed oxidative and
nitrosative stress is commonly seen in the development of several
cancers. Obesity has been also linked with the risk of development of
various cancers, including breast cancer. DHEA is a dietary supplement
used as an anti-cancer agent and anti-obesity supplement. Previously, we
reported that obese rats fed DHEA had lower body weight gain and
developed no mammary tumor in DMBA model. The effect of DHEA on
development of oxidative/nitrosative stress is not known. The objectives
of this study were to investigate the possible mechanism of DHEA tumor
protection by determining the DHEA effects on serum concentration of
methylation cycle metabolites, oxidative and nitrosative stress
biomarkers. Twenty (20) six-week-old obese female Zucker rats were
randomly assigned ad libitum to water and a diet of either chow as a
control diet or chow with the addition of DHEA at a concentration of 6
g/kg of chow as a DHEA diet. All rats were orally gavaged at age 50 days
with 65 mg DMBA/kg body weight and were sacrificed 155 days later. Serum
concentration of Methionine, S-sdenosylmethionine (SAM),
S-adenosylhomocysteine (SAH), homocysteine, free reduced glutathione
(fGSH), oxidized glutathione (GSSG), nitroglutathione (GSNO), free
Cysteine, Cystine and 3-nitroTyrosine (3NT) were measured by HPLC method
with electrochemical detection or LC-MS method. There were no significant
differences in serum concentration of fGSH between control and DHEA
fed-rats. However, DHEA-fed rats had lower (P<0.03) serum concentration
of GSSG which led to higher (PFree oxygen and free nitrogen radicals,
commonly named as reactive oxygen species (ROS) and reactive nitrogen
species (RNS) play an important role in cancer promotion. The cumulative
effect of ROS/RNS termed oxidative and nitrosative stress is commonly
seen in the development of several cancers. Obesity has been also linked
with the risk of development of various cancers, including breast cancer.
DHEA is a dietary supplement used as an anti-cancer agent and
anti-obesity supplement. Previously, we reported that obese rats fed DHEA
had lower body weight gain and developed no mammary tumor in DMBA model.
The effect of DHEA on development of oxidative/nitrosative stress is not
known. The objectives of this study were to investigate the possible
mechanism of DHEA tumor protection by determining the DHEA effects on
serum concentration of methylation cycle metabolites, oxidative and
nitrosative stress biomarkers. Twenty (20) six-week-old obese female
Zucker rats were randomly assigned ad libitum to water and a diet of
either chow as a control diet or chow with the addition of DHEA at a
concentration of 6 g/kg of chow as a DHEA diet. All rats were orally
gavaged at age 50 days with 65 mg DMBA/kg body weight and were sacrificed
155 days later. Serum concentration of Methionine, S-sdenosylmethionine
(SAM), S-adenosylhomocysteine (SAH), homocysteine, free reduced
glutathione (fGSH), oxidized glutathione (GSSG), nitroglutathione (GSNO),
free Cysteine, Cystine and 3-nitroTyrosine (3NT) were measured by HPLC
method with electrochemical detection or LC-MS method. There were no
significant differences in serum concentration of fGSH between control
and DHEA fed-rats. However, DHEA-fed rats had lower (P<0.03) serum
concentration of GSSG which led to higher (P<0.02) glutathione
intracellular oxidative ratio (fGSH/GSSG) compared to control rats.
Despite higher (PFree oxygen and free nitrogen radicals, commonly named
as reactive oxygen species (ROS) and reactive nitrogen species (RNS) play
an important role in cancer promotion. The cumulative effect of ROS/RNS
termed oxidative and nitrosative stress is commonly seen in the
development of several cancers. Obesity has been also linked with the
risk of development of various cancers, including breast cancer. DHEA is
a dietary supplement used as an anti-cancer agent and anti-obesity
supplement. Previously, we reported that obese rats fed DHEA had lower
body weight gain and developed no mammary tumor in DMBA model. The effect
of DHEA on development of oxidative/nitrosative stress is not known. The
objectives of this study were to investigate the possible mechanism of
DHEA tumor protection by determining the DHEA effects on serum
concentration of methylation cycle metabolites, oxidative and nitrosative
stress biomarkers. Twenty (20) six-week-old obese female Zucker rats were
randomly assigned ad libitum to water and a diet of either chow as a
control diet or chow with the addition of DHEA at a concentration of 6
g/kg of chow as a DHEA diet. All rats were orally gavaged at age 50 days
with 65 mg DMBA/kg body weight and were sacrificed 155 days later. Serum
concentration of Methionine, S-sdenosylmethionine (SAM),
S-adenosylhomocysteine (SAH), homocysteine, free reduced glutathione
(fGSH), oxidized glutathione (GSSG), nitroglutathione (GSNO), free
Cysteine, Cystine and 3-nitroTyrosine (3NT) were measured by HPLC method
with electrochemical detection or LC-MS method. There were no significant
differences in serum concentration of fGSH between control and DHEA
fed-rats. However, DHEA-fed rats had lower (P<0.03) serum concentration
of GSSG which led to higher (P<0.02) glutathione intracellular oxidative
ratio (fGSH/GSSG) compared to control rats. Despite higher (P<0.004)
serum concentration of free Cysteine in control rats, DHEA-fed rats had
lower (PFree oxygen and free nitrogen radicals, commonly named as
reactive oxygen species (ROS) and reactive nitrogen species (RNS) play an
important role in cancer promotion. The cumulative effect of ROS/RNS
termed oxidative and nitrosative stress is commonly seen in the
development of several cancers. Obesity has been also linked with the
risk of development of various cancers, including breast cancer. DHEA is
a dietary supplement used as an anti-cancer agent and anti-obesity
supplement. Previously, we reported that obese rats fed DHEA had lower
body weight gain and developed no mammary tumor in DMBA model. The effect
of DHEA on development of oxidative/nitrosative stress is not known. The
objectives of this study were to investigate the possible mechanism of
DHEA tumor protection by determining the DHEA effects on serum
concentration of methylation cycle metabolites, oxidative and nitrosative
stress biomarkers. Twenty (20) six-week-old obese female Zucker rats were
randomly assigned ad libitum to water and a diet of either chow as a
control diet or chow with the addition of DHEA at a concentration of 6
g/kg of chow as a DHEA diet. All rats were orally gavaged at age 50 days
with 65 mg DMBA/kg body weight and were sacrificed 155 days later. Serum
concentration of Methionine, S-sdenosylmethionine (SAM),
S-adenosylhomocysteine (SAH), homocysteine, free reduced glutathione
(fGSH), oxidized glutathione (GSSG), nitroglutathione (GSNO), free
Cysteine, Cystine and 3-nitroTyrosine (3NT) were measured by HPLC method
with electrochemical detection or LC-MS method. There were no significant
differences in serum concentration of fGSH between control and DHEA
fed-rats. However, DHEA-fed rats had lower (P<0.03) serum concentration
of GSSG which led to higher (P<0.02) glutathione intracellular oxidative
ratio (fGSH/GSSG) compared to control rats. Despite higher (P<0.004)
serum concentration of free Cysteine in control rats, DHEA-fed rats had
lower (P<0.04) serum concentration of Cystine (PFree oxygen and free
nitrogen radicals, commonly named as reactive oxygen species (ROS) and
reactive nitrogen species (RNS) play an important role in cancer
promotion. The cumulative effect of ROS/RNS termed oxidative and
nitrosative stress is commonly seen in the development of several
cancers. Obesity has been also linked with the risk of development of
various cancers, including breast cancer. DHEA is a dietary supplement
used as an anti-cancer agent and anti-obesity supplement. Previously, we
reported that obese rats fed DHEA had lower body weight gain and
developed no mammary tumor in DMBA model. The effect of DHEA on
development of oxidative/nitrosative stress is not known. The objectives
of this study were to investigate the possible mechanism of DHEA tumor
protection by determining the DHEA effects on serum concentration of
methylation cycle metabolites, oxidative and nitrosative stress
biomarkers. Twenty (20) six-week-old obese female Zucker rats were
randomly assigned ad libitum to water and a diet of either chow as a
control diet or chow with the addition of DHEA at a concentration of 6
g/kg of chow as a DHEA diet. All rats were orally gavaged at age 50 days
with 65 mg DMBA/kg body weight and were sacrificed 155 days later. Serum
concentration of Methionine, S-sdenosylmethionine (SAM),
S-adenosylhomocysteine (SAH), homocysteine, free reduced glutathione
(fGSH), oxidized glutathione (GSSG), nitroglutathione (GSNO), free
Cysteine, Cystine and 3-nitroTyrosine (3NT) were measured by HPLC method
with electrochemical detection or LC-MS method. There were no significant
differences in serum concentration of fGSH between control and DHEA
fed-rats. However, DHEA-fed rats had lower (P<0.03) serum concentration
of GSSG which led to higher (P<0.02) glutathione intracellular oxidative
ratio (fGSH/GSSG) compared to control rats. Despite higher (P<0.004)
serum concentration of free Cysteine in control rats, DHEA-fed rats had
lower (P<0.04) serum concentration of Cystine (P<0.003) compared to
control rats which led to a lower (PFree oxygen and free nitrogen
radicals, commonly named as reactive oxygen species (ROS) and reactive
nitrogen species (RNS) play an important role in cancer promotion. The
cumulative effect of ROS/RNS termed oxidative and nitrosative stress is
commonly seen in the development of several cancers. Obesity has been
also linked with the risk of development of various cancers, including
breast cancer. DHEA is a dietary supplement used as an anti-cancer agent
and anti-obesity supplement. Previously, we reported that obese rats fed
DHEA had lower body weight gain and developed no mammary tumor in DMBA
model. The effect of DHEA on development of oxidative/nitrosative stress
is not known. The objectives of this study were to investigate the
possible mechanism of DHEA tumor protection by determining the DHEA
effects on serum concentration of methylation cycle metabolites,
oxidative and nitrosative stress biomarkers. Twenty (20) six-week-old
obese female Zucker rats were randomly assigned ad libitum to water and a
diet of either chow as a control diet or chow with the addition of DHEA
at a concentration of 6 g/kg of chow as a DHEA diet. All rats were orally
gavaged at age 50 days with 65 mg DMBA/kg body weight and were sacrificed
155 days later. Serum concentration of Methionine, S-sdenosylmethionine
(SAM), S-adenosylhomocysteine (SAH), homocysteine, free reduced
glutathione (fGSH), oxidized glutathione (GSSG), nitroglutathione (GSNO),
free Cysteine, Cystine and 3-nitroTyrosine (3NT) were measured by HPLC
method with electrochemical detection or LC-MS method. There were no
significant differences in serum concentration of fGSH between control
and DHEA fed-rats. However, DHEA-fed rats had lower (P<0.03) serum
concentration of GSSG which led to higher (P<0.02) glutathione
intracellular oxidative ratio (fGSH/GSSG) compared to control rats.
Despite higher (P<0.004) serum concentration of free Cysteine in control
rats, DHEA-fed rats had lower (P<0.04) serum concentration of Cystine
(P<0.003) compared to control rats which led to a lower (P<0.04)
Cystine/fCysteine extacellular oxidative ratio. Concentration of
biomarkers for nitrosative stress were lower for 3NT (PFree oxygen and
free nitrogen radicals, commonly named as reactive oxygen species (ROS)
and reactive nitrogen species (RNS) play an important role in cancer
promotion. The cumulative effect of ROS/RNS termed oxidative and
nitrosative stress is commonly seen in the development of several
cancers. Obesity has been also linked with the risk of development of
various cancers, including breast cancer. DHEA is a dietary supplement
used as an anti-cancer agent and anti-obesity supplement. Previously, we
reported that obese rats fed DHEA had lower body weight gain and
developed no mammary tumor in DMBA model. The effect of DHEA on
development of oxidative/nitrosative stress is not known. The objectives
of this study were to investigate the possible mechanism of DHEA tumor
protection by determining the DHEA effects on serum concentration of
methylation cycle metabolites, oxidative and nitrosative stress
biomarkers. Twenty (20) six-week-old obese female Zucker rats were
randomly assigned ad libitum to water and a diet of either chow as a
control diet or chow with the addition of DHEA at a concentration of 6
g/kg of chow as a DHEA diet. All rats were orally gavaged at age 50 days
with 65 mg DMBA/kg body weight and were sacrificed 155 days later. Serum
concentration of Methionine, S-sdenosylmethionine (SAM),
S-adenosylhomocysteine (SAH), homocysteine, free reduced glutathione
(fGSH), oxidized glutathione (GSSG), nitroglutathione (GSNO), free
Cysteine, Cystine and 3-nitroTyrosine (3NT) were measured by HPLC method
with electrochemical detection or LC-MS method. There were no significant
differences in serum concentration of fGSH between control and DHEA
fed-rats. However, DHEA-fed rats had lower (P<0.03) serum concentration
of GSSG which led to higher (P<0.02) glutathione intracellular oxidative
ratio (fGSH/GSSG) compared to control rats. Despite higher (P<0.004)
serum concentration of free Cysteine in control rats, DHEA-fed rats had
lower (P<0.04) serum concentration of Cystine (P<0.003) compared to
control rats which led to a lower (P<0.04) Cystine/fCysteine extacellular
oxidative ratio. Concentration of biomarkers for nitrosative stress were
lower for 3NT (P<0.04) and GSNO (PFree oxygen and free nitrogen radicals,
commonly named as reactive oxygen species (ROS) and reactive nitrogen
species (RNS) play an important role in cancer promotion. The cumulative
effect of ROS/RNS termed oxidative and nitrosative stress is commonly
seen in the development of several cancers. Obesity has been also linked
with the risk of development of various cancers, including breast cancer.
DHEA is a dietary supplement used as an anti-cancer agent and
anti-obesity supplement. Previously, we reported that obese rats fed DHEA
had lower body weight gain and developed no mammary tumor in DMBA model.
The effect of DHEA on development of oxidative/nitrosative stress is not
known. The objectives of this study were to investigate the possible
mechanism of DHEA tumor protection by determining the DHEA effects on
serum concentration of methylation cycle metabolites, oxidative and
nitrosative stress biomarkers. Twenty (20) six-week-old obese female
Zucker rats were randomly assigned ad libitum to water and a diet of
either chow as a control diet or chow with the addition of DHEA at a
concentration of 6 g/kg of chow as a DHEA diet. All rats were orally
gavaged at age 50 days with 65 mg DMBA/kg body weight and were sacrificed
155 days later. Serum concentration of Methionine, S-sdenosylmethionine
(SAM), S-adenosylhomocysteine (SAH), homocysteine, free reduced
glutathione (fGSH), oxidized glutathione (GSSG), nitroglutathione (GSNO),
free Cysteine, Cystine and 3-nitroTyrosine (3NT) were measured by HPLC
method with electrochemical detection or LC-MS method. There were no
significant differences in serum concentration of fGSH between control
and DHEA fed-rats. However, DHEA-fed rats had lower (P<0.03) serum
concentration of GSSG which led to higher (P<0.02) glutathione
intracellular oxidative ratio (fGSH/GSSG) compared to control rats.
Despite higher (P<0.004) serum concentration of free Cysteine in control
rats, DHEA-fed rats had lower (P<0.04) serum concentration of Cystine
(P<0.003) compared to control rats which led to a lower (P<0.04)
Cystine/fCysteine extacellular oxidative ratio. Concentration of
biomarkers for nitrosative stress were lower for 3NT (P<0.04) and GSNO
(P<0.02) in serum of DHEA-fed rats compared to control rats. Also,
DHEA-fed rats had a lower (PFree oxygen and free nitrogen radicals,
commonly named as reactive oxygen species (ROS) and reactive nitrogen
species (RNS) play an important role in cancer promotion. The cumulative
effect of ROS/RNS termed oxidative and nitrosative stress is commonly
seen in the development of several cancers. Obesity has been also linked
with the risk of development of various cancers, including breast cancer.
DHEA is a dietary supplement used as an anti-cancer agent and
anti-obesity supplement. Previously, we reported that obese rats fed DHEA
had lower body weight gain and developed no mammary tumor in DMBA model.
The effect of DHEA on development of oxidative/nitrosative stress is not
known. The objectives of this study were to investigate the possible
mechanism of DHEA tumor protection by determining the DHEA effects on
serum concentration of methylation cycle metabolites, oxidative and
nitrosative stress biomarkers. Twenty (20) six-week-old obese female
Zucker rats were randomly assigned ad libitum to water and a diet of
either chow as a control diet or chow with the addition of DHEA at a
concentration of 6 g/kg of chow as a DHEA diet. All rats were orally
gavaged at age 50 days with 65 mg DMBA/kg body weight and were sacrificed
155 days later. Serum concentration of Methionine, S-sdenosylmethionine
(SAM), S-adenosylhomocysteine (SAH), homocysteine, free reduced
glutathione (fGSH), oxidized glutathione (GSSG), nitroglutathione (GSNO),
free Cysteine, Cystine and 3-nitroTyrosine (3NT) were measured by HPLC
method with electrochemical detection or LC-MS method. There were no
significant differences in serum concentration of fGSH between control
and DHEA fed-rats. However, DHEA-fed rats had lower (P<0.03) serum
concentration of GSSG which led to higher (P<0.02) glutathione
intracellular oxidative ratio (fGSH/GSSG) compared to control rats.
Despite higher (P<0.004) serum concentration of free Cysteine in control
rats, DHEA-fed rats had lower (P<0.04) serum concentration of Cystine
(P<0.003) compared to control rats which led to a lower (P<0.04)
Cystine/fCysteine extacellular oxidative ratio. Concentration of
biomarkers for nitrosative stress were lower for 3NT (P<0.04) and GSNO
(P<0.02) in serum of DHEA-fed rats compared to control rats. Also,
DHEA-fed rats had a lower (P<0.02) Methionine concentration which was
accompanied with increased serum SAM concentration (PFree oxygen and free
nitrogen radicals, commonly named as reactive oxygen species (ROS) and
reactive nitrogen species (RNS) play an important role in cancer
promotion. The cumulative effect of ROS/RNS termed oxidative and
nitrosative stress is commonly seen in the development of several
cancers. Obesity has been also linked with the risk of development of
various cancers, including breast cancer. DHEA is a dietary supplement
used as an anti-cancer agent and anti-obesity supplement. Previously, we
reported that obese rats fed DHEA had lower body weight gain and
developed no mammary tumor in DMBA model. The effect of DHEA on
development of oxidative/nitrosative stress is not known. The objectives
of this study were to investigate the possible mechanism of DHEA tumor
protection by determining the DHEA effects on serum concentration of
methylation cycle metabolites, oxidative and nitrosative stress
biomarkers. Twenty (20) six-week-old obese female Zucker rats were
randomly assigned ad libitum to water and a diet of either chow as a
control diet or chow with the addition of DHEA at a concentration of 6
g/kg of chow as a DHEA diet. All rats were orally gavaged at age 50 days
with 65 mg DMBA/kg body weight and were sacrificed 155 days later. Serum
concentration of Methionine, S-sdenosylmethionine (SAM),
S-adenosylhomocysteine (SAH), homocysteine, free reduced glutathione
(fGSH), oxidized glutathione (GSSG), nitroglutathione (GSNO), free
Cysteine, Cystine and 3-nitroTyrosine (3NT) were measured by HPLC method
with electrochemical detection or LC-MS method. There were no significant
differences in serum concentration of fGSH between control and DHEA
fed-rats. However, DHEA-fed rats had lower (P<0.03) serum concentration
of GSSG which led to higher (P<0.02) glutathione intracellular oxidative
ratio (fGSH/GSSG) compared to control rats. Despite higher (P<0.004)
serum concentration of free Cysteine in control rats, DHEA-fed rats had
lower (P<0.04) serum concentration of Cystine (P<0.003) compared to
control rats which led to a lower (P<0.04) Cystine/fCysteine extacellular
oxidative ratio. Concentration of biomarkers for nitrosative stress were
lower for 3NT (P<0.04) and GSNO (P<0.02) in serum of DHEA-fed rats
compared to control rats. Also, DHEA-fed rats had a lower (P<0.02)
Methionine concentration which was accompanied with increased serum SAM
concentration (P<0.005) and lower (PFree oxygen and free nitrogen
radicals, commonly named as reactive oxygen species (ROS) and reactive
nitrogen species (RNS) play an important role in cancer promotion. The
cumulative effect of ROS/RNS termed oxidative and nitrosative stress is
commonly seen in the development of several cancers. Obesity has been
also linked with the risk of development of various cancers, including
breast cancer. DHEA is a dietary supplement used as an anti-cancer agent
and anti-obesity supplement. Previously, we reported that obese rats fed
DHEA had lower body weight gain and developed no mammary tumor in DMBA
model. The effect of DHEA on development of oxidative/nitrosative stress
is not known. The objectives of this study were to investigate the
possible mechanism of DHEA tumor protection by determining the DHEA
effects on serum concentration of methylation cycle metabolites,
oxidative and nitrosative stress biomarkers. Twenty (20) six-week-old
obese female Zucker rats were randomly assigned ad libitum to water and a
diet of either chow as a control diet or chow with the addition of DHEA
at a concentration of 6 g/kg of chow as a DHEA diet. All rats were orally
gavaged at age 50 days with 65 mg DMBA/kg body weight and were sacrificed
155 days later. Serum concentration of Methionine, S-sdenosylmethionine
(SAM), S-adenosylhomocysteine (SAH), homocysteine, free reduced
glutathione (fGSH), oxidized glutathione (GSSG), nitroglutathione (GSNO),
free Cysteine, Cystine and 3-nitroTyrosine (3NT) were measured by HPLC
method with electrochemical detection or LC-MS method. There were no
significant differences in serum concentration of fGSH between control
and DHEA fed-rats. However, DHEA-fed rats had lower (P<0.03) serum
concentration of GSSG which led to higher (P<0.02) glutathione
intracellular oxidative ratio (fGSH/GSSG) compared to control rats.
Despite higher (P<0.004) serum concentration of free Cysteine in control
rats, DHEA-fed rats had lower (P<0.04) serum concentration of Cystine
(P<0.003) compared to control rats which led to a lower (P<0.04)
Cystine/fCysteine extacellular oxidative ratio. Concentration of
biomarkers for nitrosative stress were lower for 3NT (P<0.04) and GSNO
(P<0.02) in serum of DHEA-fed rats compared to control rats. Also,
DHEA-fed rats had a lower (P<0.02) Methionine concentration which was
accompanied with increased serum SAM concentration (P<0.005) and lower
(P<0.02) concentration of SAH and homocysteine (PFree oxygen and free
nitrogen radicals, commonly named as reactive oxygen species (ROS) and
reactive nitrogen species (RNS) play an important role in cancer
promotion. The cumulative effect of ROS/RNS termed oxidative and
nitrosative stress is commonly seen in the development of several
cancers. Obesity has been also linked with the risk of development of
various cancers, including breast cancer. DHEA is a dietary supplement
used as an anti-cancer agent and anti-obesity supplement. Previously, we
reported that obese rats fed DHEA had lower body weight gain and
developed no mammary tumor in DMBA model. The effect of DHEA on
development of oxidative/nitrosative stress is not known. The objectives
of this study were to investigate the possible mechanism of DHEA tumor
protection by determining the DHEA effects on serum concentration of
methylation cycle metabolites, oxidative and nitrosative stress
biomarkers. Twenty (20) six-week-old obese female Zucker rats were
randomly assigned ad libitum to water and a diet of either chow as a
control diet or chow with the addition of DHEA at a concentration of 6
g/kg of chow as a DHEA diet. All rats were orally gavaged at age 50 days
with 65 mg DMBA/kg body weight and were sacrificed 155 days later. Serum
concentration of Methionine, S-sdenosylmethionine (SAM),
S-adenosylhomocysteine (SAH), homocysteine, free reduced glutathione
(fGSH), oxidized glutathione (GSSG), nitroglutathione (GSNO), free
Cysteine, Cystine and 3-nitroTyrosine (3NT) were measured by HPLC method
with electrochemical detection or LC-MS method. There were no significant
differences in serum concentration of fGSH between control and DHEA
fed-rats. However, DHEA-fed rats had lower (P<0.03) serum concentration
of GSSG which led to higher (P<0.02) glutathione intracellular oxidative
ratio (fGSH/GSSG) compared to control rats. Despite higher (P<0.004)
serum concentration of free Cysteine in control rats, DHEA-fed rats had
lower (P<0.04) serum concentration of Cystine (P<0.003) compared to
control rats which led to a lower (P<0.04) Cystine/fCysteine extacellular
oxidative ratio. Concentration of biomarkers for nitrosative stress were
lower for 3NT (P<0.04) and GSNO (P<0.02) in serum of DHEA-fed rats
compared to control rats. Also, DHEA-fed rats had a lower (P<0.02)
Methionine concentration which was accompanied with increased serum SAM
concentration (P<0.005) and lower (P<0.02) concentration of SAH and
homocysteine (P<0.03) compared to control rats. These changes lead to an
increase (PFree oxygen and free nitrogen radicals, commonly named as
reactive oxygen species (ROS) and reactive nitrogen species (RNS) play an
important role in cancer promotion. The cumulative effect of ROS/RNS
termed oxidative and nitrosative stress is commonly seen in the
development of several cancers. Obesity has been also linked with the
risk of development of various cancers, including breast cancer. DHEA is
a dietary supplement used as an anti-cancer agent and anti-obesity
supplement. Previously, we reported that obese rats fed DHEA had lower
body weight gain and developed no mammary tumor in DMBA model. The effect
of DHEA on development of oxidative/nitrosative stress is not known. The
objectives of this study were to investigate the possible mechanism of
DHEA tumor protection by determining the DHEA effects on serum
concentration of methylation cycle metabolites, oxidative and nitrosative
stress biomarkers. Twenty (20) six-week-old obese female Zucker rats were
randomly assigned ad libitum to water and a diet of either chow as a
control diet or chow with the addition of DHEA at a concentration of 6
g/kg of chow as a DHEA diet. All rats were orally gavaged at age 50 days
with 65 mg DMBA/kg body weight and were sacrificed 155 days later. Serum
concentration of Methionine, S-sdenosylmethionine (SAM),
S-adenosylhomocysteine (SAH), homocysteine, free reduced glutathione
(fGSH), oxidized glutathione (GSSG), nitroglutathione (GSNO), free
Cysteine, Cystine and 3-nitroTyrosine (3NT) were measured by HPLC method
with electrochemical detection or LC-MS method. There were no significant
differences in serum concentration of fGSH between control and DHEA
fed-rats. However, DHEA-fed rats had lower (P<0.03) serum concentration
of GSSG which led to higher (P<0.02) glutathione intracellular oxidative
ratio (fGSH/GSSG) compared to control rats. Despite higher (P<0.004)
serum concentration of free Cysteine in control rats, DHEA-fed rats had
lower (P<0.04) serum concentration of Cystine (P<0.003) compared to
control rats which led to a lower (P<0.04) Cystine/fCysteine extacellular
oxidative ratio. Concentration of biomarkers for nitrosative stress were
lower for 3NT (P<0.04) and GSNO (P<0.02) in serum of DHEA-fed rats
compared to control rats. Also, DHEA-fed rats had a lower (P<0.02)
Methionine concentration which was accompanied with increased serum SAM
concentration (P<0.005) and lower (P<0.02) concentration of SAH and
homocysteine (P<0.03) compared to control rats. These changes lead to an
increase (P<0.0001) in SAM/SAH methylation ratio in DHEA-fed rats
compared to control rats. In summary, our results suggest that DHEA
fed-rats are capable of reducing body weight gain and protecting mammary
tumors formation by improving methylation environment conditions and
decreasing damaging effect oxidative and nitrosative stress. Supported by
ABI and ACHRI to RH and SM.

