Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Glucose supports EGFR-mutated lung adenocarcinoma survival by
sustaining EGFR stability


Tumor cells are genetically unstable, driven by genetic mutations that
stimulate cancer cell proliferation and survival. These genetic mutations
are generally linked to particular types of cancer. Oncogenic epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR) is frequently mutated in non-small cell
lung cancer (NSCLC), which is essential for NSCLC development and growth.
However, the precise roles of EGFR in lung cancer metabolism are still
unclear. Here we show that glucose (Glc) metabolism is critical for EGFR
stability required for tumor growth and survival. EGFR mutation leads to
a robust increase in Glc uptake, lactate production and glycolytic flux.
Moreover, EGFR-mutated NSCLC cell lines are much more sensitive than EGFR
WT to inhibition of Glc metabolism through EGFR degradation, suggesting
that EGFR mutant NSCLCs rely more heavily than EFGR WT on aerobic
glycolysis. Knockdown of EGFR in EGFR-mutated NSCLCs results in a
decrease in expression level of genes that encode glycolysis enzymes,
indicating that EGFR mutation leads to an increase in Glc metabolism and
Glc dependence for growth and survival. Furthermore, inhibition of Glc
metabolism shows a significant decrease in intracellular ATP, oxygen
consumption and level of TCA cycle intermediates. Indeed, the addition of
pyruvate dramatically rescues apoptotic cell death caused by EGFR
degradation upon inhibition of Glc metabolism, suggesting that Glc to
fuel the TCA cycle is essential for tumor survival. In addition, the
inhibition of Glc metabolism overcomes T790M-mediated resistance to
EGFR-TKIs. Together, our data suggest that the EGFR mutation mediates the
reprogramming of Glc metabolism and this metabolic alteration represents
an attractive target for new therapy of EGFR-mutated NSCLC.

