Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel putative diagnostic methylation biomarkers for prostate
cancer identified by whole genome DNA methylation profiling


BACKGROUNDAberrant patterns of DNA methylation is a typical hallmark of
cancer. Several studies have reported DNA hypermethylation of a
significant number of genes in various malignancies. This suggests a role
of hypermethylation in the initiation and progression of cancer. In this
study, we investigated genome-wide alterations in DNA methylation in
prostate cancer (PCa). We compared alterations between tumor (Tu) and
adjacent epithelial (Ep) tissues in order to identify hypermethylated
genes in promoter regions associated with initiation and progression of
prostate cancer.METHODSThe study included 33 tumor samples including 21
paired Tu and Ep samples from 21 radical prostatectomy patients. Genomic
DNA was isolated from FFPE tissue blocks. Genome-wide DNA methylation
profiling was performed using the Infinium Illumina 450K array. A mixed
linear model, with a random effect for patient, main effect of tissue,
and covariate of array batch, was employed to identify probes that
differed in methylation between tissue types. Multiple comparison
adjustment was performed using the FDR (false discovery rate)
method.RESULTSIn total, 8791 hypermethylated CpG sites in the promoter
regions were identified in Tu versus Ep tissue with FDR adjusted P
BACKGROUNDAberrant patterns of DNA methylation is a typical hallmark of
cancer. Several studies have reported DNA hypermethylation of a
significant number of genes in various malignancies. This suggests a role
of hypermethylation in the initiation and progression of cancer. In this
study, we investigated genome-wide alterations in DNA methylation in
prostate cancer (PCa). We compared alterations between tumor (Tu) and
adjacent epithelial (Ep) tissues in order to identify hypermethylated
genes in promoter regions associated with initiation and progression of
prostate cancer.METHODSThe study included 33 tumor samples including 21
paired Tu and Ep samples from 21 radical prostatectomy patients. Genomic
DNA was isolated from FFPE tissue blocks. Genome-wide DNA methylation
profiling was performed using the Infinium Illumina 450K array. A mixed
linear model, with a random effect for patient, main effect of tissue,
and covariate of array batch, was employed to identify probes that
differed in methylation between tissue types. Multiple comparison
adjustment was performed using the FDR (false discovery rate)
method.RESULTSIn total, 8791 hypermethylated CpG sites in the promoter
regions were identified in Tu versus Ep tissue with FDR adjusted P <0.05.
Hypermethylation status of our top-ranked hypermethylated genes (with an
estimated mean absolute difference 0.3 or greater) between tumor and
epithelial tissue was also observed in publicly available methylation
data in PCa. To find out if promoter hypermethylation was associated with
the regulation of gene expression, we analyzed gene expression of the 20
top-ranked hypermethylated genes using publicly available mRNA expression
data in PCa. Several genes exhibited reduced expression in PCa samples.
Similar observation was also noted in in vitro studies as significant (P
BACKGROUNDAberrant patterns of DNA methylation is a typical hallmark of
cancer. Several studies have reported DNA hypermethylation of a
significant number of genes in various malignancies. This suggests a role
of hypermethylation in the initiation and progression of cancer. In this
study, we investigated genome-wide alterations in DNA methylation in
prostate cancer (PCa). We compared alterations between tumor (Tu) and
adjacent epithelial (Ep) tissues in order to identify hypermethylated
genes in promoter regions associated with initiation and progression of
prostate cancer.METHODSThe study included 33 tumor samples including 21
paired Tu and Ep samples from 21 radical prostatectomy patients. Genomic
DNA was isolated from FFPE tissue blocks. Genome-wide DNA methylation
profiling was performed using the Infinium Illumina 450K array. A mixed
linear model, with a random effect for patient, main effect of tissue,
and covariate of array batch, was employed to identify probes that
differed in methylation between tissue types. Multiple comparison
adjustment was performed using the FDR (false discovery rate)
method.RESULTSIn total, 8791 hypermethylated CpG sites in the promoter
regions were identified in Tu versus Ep tissue with FDR adjusted P <0.05.
Hypermethylation status of our top-ranked hypermethylated genes (with an
estimated mean absolute difference 0.3 or greater) between tumor and
epithelial tissue was also observed in publicly available methylation
data in PCa. To find out if promoter hypermethylation was associated with
the regulation of gene expression, we analyzed gene expression of the 20
top-ranked hypermethylated genes using publicly available mRNA expression
data in PCa. Several genes exhibited reduced expression in PCa samples.
Similar observation was also noted in in vitro studies as significant (P
<0.05) increase in gene expression following 5-Azacytidine treatment was
detected only in PCa cell lines but not in normal prostate cell
line.CONCLUSIONSThis study identified promoter hypermethylation of
several genes in PCa. These newly identified hypermethylated genes are
potential biomarker candidates for PCa diagnosis. Currently we are
evaluating the functional significance of these hypermethylated genes in
prostate cancer.This work was supported by R01CA108633 (To AC),
1RC2CA148190 (To AC) U10CA180850-01 (To AC), 1R01CA169368 (To AC) from
the National Cancer Institute (NCI), Brain Tumor Funders Collaborative
Grant (To AC), Ohio State University Comprehensive Cancer Center Award
(To AC).

