Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vivo targeted silencing of CCR1 and CCR5 repolarizes
pro-tumoral myeloid cells in retinoblastoma positive neutrophils with a
strong anti-tumor activity


Introduction: Depending on their polarization, myeloid cells can either
promote or restrain tumor progression. By secreting myelopoietic factors
tumours promote myeloid cells polarization toward a phenotype that
provides immune protection and that stimulate neoplastic cells growth,
invasiveness, and metastasis. Chemokines and their cognate receptors are
thought to play a key role in myeloid cell trafficking, however, their
study in vivo is hindered by their signal redundancy and
integration.Methods: By taking advantage of a newly developed
nanoplatform that allows the in vivo preferential transfection of tumor
infiltrating myeloid cells (TIMC, aka Myeloid derived suppressor cells,
MDSC, and tumor associated macrophages, TAM), we evaluated the effect of
CCR-1, CCR-2, CCR-4, CCR-5 and/or CCR-7 silencing on TAMC trafficking,
phenotype, and function.Results: While CCR-4 and -7 targeted silencing
did not affect tumor progression, simultaneous silencing of CCR-1 and
CCR-5 significantly restrained tumor growth and greatly modifies tumor
micro-environment. Mechanistic in vivo and in vitro analysis surprisingly
indicate that myeloid cell trafficking was not altered whereas myeloid
cell polarization was. In particular, CCR-1 and CCR-5 blockade restrained
MDSC differentiation and promote the accumulation of retinoblastoma
positive, neutrophil-like cells with a strong tumoricidal
activity.Discussion: Our data indicate that CCR-1 and CCR-5 engagement
(most likely via CCL-3 and CCL-4) is necessary for the pro-tumoral
polarization of myeloid cells in cancer. Our findings not only improve
our understanding of myeloid cells differentiation in cancer but, also,
strongly suggest that targeted inhibition of CCR1 and CCR5 on TIMC can be
a new and effective anti-tumor immune-therapeutic strategy that convert
pro-tumoral MDSCs into tumoricidal neutrophils.

