Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting a MAPK-miR-124-Sox9 axis radiosensitizes human
glioblastoma cells


Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most common and aggressive malignant primary
brain tumor. Although genetic alterations and overexpression of genes in
the RTK/RAS/MEK/ERK pathway (MAPK) is known to drive GBM aggressiveness,
less is known about down-stream effector genes. We confirmed that EGFR
amplified human GBMs display high levels of the transcription factor
SOX9, a known barrier to neurogenesis and target of microRNA-124
(miR-124). Surprisingly, a subpopulation of SOX9-negative tumor cells
expressed markers of mature neurons. Here, we demonstrate that the MEK
inhibitor PD325901 depletes SOX9, reduces proliferation, and induces
neurogenesis in a mouse GBM model and human GBM cells. We find that MAPK
signaling regulates a large cluster of miRNAs in mouse neurosphere
cultures, including miR-124. In addition, PD325901 effectively induced
miR-124 levels in SOX9-expressing human GBMs. Using a
doxycycline-regulable approach, we demonstrate that miR-124
overexpression depletes SOX9 levels and induces neurogenesis in a
concentration- and time-dependent manner in human GBM tumorsphere
cultures. Doxycycline treatment of athymic nude mice intracranially
xenografted with human GBM cells resulted in reduced tumor growth, robust
neuronal differentiation, and increased overall survival. Finally, we
demonstrate that a brief 3-day treatment with PD325901 or doxycycline
effectively radiosensitizes human GBM cells and extends overall survival
of xenografted mice. Our work shows that the miR-124-SOX9 axis is a
down-stream effector pathway that drives GBM aggressiveness. Long-term
exposure to PD325901 is associated with adverse side-effects in patients.
We propose that a priming regimen of the clinically relevant MEK
inhibitor PD325901 should radiosensitize SOX9-expressing tumors in
patients and result in reduced side-effects compared to continuous
treatment protocols.

