Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Humanized mouse models for evaluation of cancer therapies


Mice with a humanized immune system, so called humanized mouse models,
have been established to study the complex interaction of the human
immune system during human disorders. In case of cancer research, the in
vivo model ideally should recapitulate the biological characteristics of
the human tumor and of the related tumor microenvironment in patient such
as immune system.Human immune system is reconstituted in immunodeficient
mice using either human PBMCs or hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs).
Humanized mice bearing human target tumor cells constitute relevant
models for evaluation of cancer therapeutics such as bispecific
antibodies, immune cell targeting antibodies.In vivo proof of concept
studies were performed with humanized mice xenografted with either human
disseminated lymphoma or with human solid tumors (tumor cell line and
Patient Derived Xenograft model, Her2 positive breast, colon, ovarian and
lung cancers) and treated with therapeutic antibodies.Biomarkers of
response to immune cell targeting therapies were evaluated by flow
cytometry as well as immunohistochemistry analyses. In case of
disseminated B-cell lymphoma grafted into mice reconstituted with human
PBMC, efficacy of antibody was evidenced by an increased survival and a
high decrease of human B cells in mouse bone marrow. Lung and ovarian PDX
developed in HSC reconstituted BRGS mice induced an increase in Tregs and
a change in T/B ratio in blood and spleen samples. Furthermore, we
evidenced the presence of Tregs within human PDX tumor by
immunohistochemistry.

