Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Establishment of a realistic patient-derived xenograft (PDX) model
for prostate cancer bone metastasis


Bone metastases are frequent and fatal outcome of advanced prostate
cancer. Many of the currently used preclinical models lack typical
characteristics of the heterogenic human disease. We improved existing
methodology by using fresh patient-derived material in a xenograft model
of bone metastasis.Clinical prostate tumor specimens were collected from
robotic-assisted laparoscopic radical prostatectomy operations in Turku
University Hospital (Turku, Finland). Patient-derived tumor tissue of
Gleason grade 8-10 tumors (n = 5) were cut into small pieces, digested
overnight, and then cell suspension was intratibially inoculated into the
bone marrow cavity of nude mice (n = 8-10/patient). X-ray pictures were
taken and blood samples were collected once a month. Mice were sacrificed
6 months after tumor cell inoculation, and hind limbs and lungs were
collected for histological and immunohistochemical analysis. PSA was
measured from serum using commercial kit.X-rays demonstrated
osteosclerotic bone lesions. Immunohistochemical analysis showed that 80%
of tumors in bone expressed similar characteristics compared with
original tumor (androgen receptor AR, prostate specific antigen PSA,
proliferation marker Ki67). However, no changes were seen in serum PSA.
Lung metastases were detected in 50% of tumor-bearing mice.
Interestingly, the most of lung metastases were negative for AR and PSA,
which indicates that the cell population that forms metastases may be
undifferentiated clone of heterogenic tumor and therefore the most
aggressive.Our platform provides new tools for prostate cancer research.

