Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: -Lipoic acid inhibits human hepatoma cell proliferation by
Grb2-mediated downregulation of EGFR activity


Background: It has been reported that -Lipoic acid (-LA) as a naturally
occurring anti-oxidant, suppresses the growth of hepatoma cells, but the
mechanisms remains unclear.Aims: To investigated whether -LA inhibited
hepatoma cells proliferation through EGFR-Grb2.Methods and Results: The
results showed that Hu7, Bel7402 and HepG2 proliferation were
dramatically decreased after -LA (2 mM) treatment for 24 and 48 hours,
which were measured by CCK8 assay. Moreover, phosphorylation levels of
EGFR was decreased by -LA treatment, and its associated with an
inhibition in cell-cycle transition. Next, we found that growth factor
receptor bound protein 2 (Grb2), which is adaptor protein, was also
significantly reduced by RT-PCR and western blot after -LA treatment at
24 and 48 hours. Consistent with previous report, silenced of Grb2
dramatically blocked cell proliferation. To test whether the
downregulation of Grb2 mediates -LA induced proliferation inhibition,
Grb2 was transfected into hepatoma cells to recover the reduction of Grb2
induced by -LA. It was showed that overexpression of Grb2 also
successfully inhibited -LA induced decrease of cell proliferation. In
addition, the data showed that phosphorylation levels of ERK1/2 was
decreased by cell treated with -LA. These results suggested that the Grb2
through binds to phosphorylated site in EGFR medicated -LA suppress cell
proliferation.Conclusion: Our study showed -LA inhibited cell
proliferation through Grb2 suppressed phosphorylation levels of EGFR,
ERK1/2 was involved in this pathway.

