Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression of ABCF1 with stem cell markers CD133/GEP/beta-catenin
in fetal liver and liver cancer cells


Understanding stem cell biology in relation to cancer is of growing
importance with the cancer stem cells (CSCs) notion and recurring
deregulated stem cell pathways reported in cancers. ATP-binding cassette
(ABC) transporter ABCB1 (also named P-glycoprotein and MDR1) has shown to
be CSC marker, mediate multidrug-resistance in model systems though with
controversial clinical relevance. We have systemically examined the
expression profiles of ABC genes in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC)
clinical samples. ABCF1 was significantly over-expressed in HCCs compared
to the adjacent non-tumor liver tissues (PUnderstanding stem cell biology
in relation to cancer is of growing importance with the cancer stem cells
(CSCs) notion and recurring deregulated stem cell pathways reported in
cancers. ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporter ABCB1 (also named
P-glycoprotein and MDR1) has shown to be CSC marker, mediate
multidrug-resistance in model systems though with controversial clinical
relevance. We have systemically examined the expression profiles of ABC
genes in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) clinical samples. ABCF1 was
significantly over-expressed in HCCs compared to the adjacent non-tumor
liver tissues (P<0.001) and associated with recurrence-free survival
after curative partial hepatectomy (log rank, P = 0.010). Recurrences
have conventionally been attributed to aggressive cancer features and,
recently, CSC features, as CSCs in small load could grow to tumor bulk.
We therefore further explored the significance of ABCF1 in both fetal
liver and liver cancer cells in respect to stem cell signaling.
Expression of ABCF1 in fetal, neonatal and adult mouse livers were
examined by immunohistochemistry, western blot and flow cytometry.
Consistently, elevated ABCF1 expression was demonstrated in early
embryonic stages [embryonic day 13 (E13): 42.4%; E15: 24.6%] but rarely
in neonates and adult livers [1.5% and 1.2%, respectively]. Also, ABCF1
co-stained with stem cell-related marker -catenin and hepatic CSC markers
CD133 and GEP in fetal hepatocytes and in HCC cells (Table 1). ABCF1
suppression by siRNA enhanced chemo-sensitivity of the HCC cells Hep3B
compared to control cells on cisplatin (cell apoptosis 7.5% vs 1.7%,
PUnderstanding stem cell biology in relation to cancer is of growing
importance with the cancer stem cells (CSCs) notion and recurring
deregulated stem cell pathways reported in cancers. ATP-binding cassette
(ABC) transporter ABCB1 (also named P-glycoprotein and MDR1) has shown to
be CSC marker, mediate multidrug-resistance in model systems though with
controversial clinical relevance. We have systemically examined the
expression profiles of ABC genes in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC)
clinical samples. ABCF1 was significantly over-expressed in HCCs compared
to the adjacent non-tumor liver tissues (P<0.001) and associated with
recurrence-free survival after curative partial hepatectomy (log rank, P
= 0.010). Recurrences have conventionally been attributed to aggressive
cancer features and, recently, CSC features, as CSCs in small load could
grow to tumor bulk. We therefore further explored the significance of
ABCF1 in both fetal liver and liver cancer cells in respect to stem cell
signaling. Expression of ABCF1 in fetal, neonatal and adult mouse livers
were examined by immunohistochemistry, western blot and flow cytometry.
Consistently, elevated ABCF1 expression was demonstrated in early
embryonic stages [embryonic day 13 (E13): 42.4%; E15: 24.6%] but rarely
in neonates and adult livers [1.5% and 1.2%, respectively]. Also, ABCF1
co-stained with stem cell-related marker -catenin and hepatic CSC markers
CD133 and GEP in fetal hepatocytes and in HCC cells (Table 1). ABCF1
suppression by siRNA enhanced chemo-sensitivity of the HCC cells Hep3B
compared to control cells on cisplatin (cell apoptosis 7.5% vs 1.7%,
P<0.001) and 5-Fluorouracil (11.7% vs 4.7%, PUnderstanding stem cell
biology in relation to cancer is of growing importance with the cancer
stem cells (CSCs) notion and recurring deregulated stem cell pathways
reported in cancers. ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporter ABCB1 (also
named P-glycoprotein and MDR1) has shown to be CSC marker, mediate
multidrug-resistance in model systems though with controversial clinical
relevance. We have systemically examined the expression profiles of ABC
genes in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) clinical samples. ABCF1 was
significantly over-expressed in HCCs compared to the adjacent non-tumor
liver tissues (P<0.001) and associated with recurrence-free survival
after curative partial hepatectomy (log rank, P = 0.010). Recurrences
have conventionally been attributed to aggressive cancer features and,
recently, CSC features, as CSCs in small load could grow to tumor bulk.
We therefore further explored the significance of ABCF1 in both fetal
liver and liver cancer cells in respect to stem cell signaling.
Expression of ABCF1 in fetal, neonatal and adult mouse livers were
examined by immunohistochemistry, western blot and flow cytometry.
Consistently, elevated ABCF1 expression was demonstrated in early
embryonic stages [embryonic day 13 (E13): 42.4%; E15: 24.6%] but rarely
in neonates and adult livers [1.5% and 1.2%, respectively]. Also, ABCF1
co-stained with stem cell-related marker -catenin and hepatic CSC markers
CD133 and GEP in fetal hepatocytes and in HCC cells (Table 1). ABCF1
suppression by siRNA enhanced chemo-sensitivity of the HCC cells Hep3B
compared to control cells on cisplatin (cell apoptosis 7.5% vs 1.7%,
P<0.001) and 5-Fluorouracil (11.7% vs 4.7%, P<0.001). Subcellular
fractionation analysis on HCC cells showed that ABCF1 protein was present
in both the cytoplasmic and membrane fractions. The current study
highlighted the functional significance of ABCF1 in liver development and
liver cancer as stem cell-related molecule regulating chemo-resistance.
Co-expression of ABCF1 and hepatic stem cell markers in mouse fetal
livers and HCC cells

