Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nonsynonymous functional variants in DNA repair genes in sporadic
colorectal cancer: searching for predictive and prognostic markers


Colorectal cancer (CRC) has one of the highest mortality due to the late
diagnosis and a lack of proper predictive and prognostic markers.
According to the current knowledge, DNA repair processes are involved
both in the onset of CRC and in the treatment efficacy.In the present
study, we analyzed the link between functional genetic polymorphisms
(SNPs) in DNA repair genes covering the main DNA repair pathways
(relevant for therapy response) in relation with the risk of CRC and
clinical outcomes. Our set of candidate polymorphisms was selected
according to different functional and genomic databases (FSNP, GAD,
Linkage Disequilibrium, Gerp++, SiPhy). FSNP database provides integrated
information about the functional effects of SNPs which are predicted and
indicated at several levels (protein coding, splicing regulation,
transcriptional regulation, post translation). We have focused on those
affecting protein coding. We hypothesize that these modified proteins
modulate the function/efficiency of DNA repair, and thus may have an
effect on CRC.Sixteen polymorphisms in twelve DNA repair genes (C19orf40,
EME1, FANCI, MUS81, NEIL3, POLE, POLN, POLQ, RAD51D, REV1, REV3L, RPA1)
were analyzed in DNA samples of 1080 cases and 1442 controls from the
Czech Republic. Clinical data at diagnosis and complete information on
follow up were provided for all patients.Genetic variations in several
DNA repair genes were associated with clinical outcome. In particular,
CRC patients carrying the AG heterozygous genotype for rs5030755 in RPA1
gene displayed a longer survival and decreased recurrence risk (Overall
Survival (OS): HR 0.74; 95% CI 0.56-0.98; p = 0.04 and Event-Free
Survival (EFS): HR 0.72; 95% CI 0.54-0.95; p = 0.02). This association
with better OS was more pronounced in individuals with colon and
sigmoideum cancer (HR 0.58; 95% CI 0.4-0.83; p = 0.0035).Understanding
the SNPs effect on the treatment response, resulting ultimately into
low-cost and low-invasive markers, is regarded as very important for the
possibility to tailor patient specific treatment strategy. Individualized
therapy will eventually help to improve therapeutic efficacy and to
minimize toxicities. The present results identified plausible candidate
DNA repair gene variants potentially affecting clinical outcome in
relation to CRC patient's survival.Supported by grant GA UK 112515, GA CR
15-14789S

