Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epithelial-stromal interactions are altered at the earliest stages
of colon cancer development


While progression of nonmalignant colonic cells carrying somatic
mutations to early malignancy is dependent upon interactions between
mutated epithelium and surrounding stroma, the nature of these
interactions is poorly understood. Here we report the development of an
ultra-sensitive laser capture microdissection/RNA-seq approach for
profiling the epithelial and stromal compartments of mutated aberrant
crypt foci (ACF). ACF are the earliest detectable pre-neoplastic lesion
found in human colon and were identified using high-definition endoscopy
with contrast dye-spray. We focused on epithelial and stromal cells of
ACF carrying somatic mutations to either KRAS, BRAF or APC, and compared
these to control samples from each patient. By comparing the gene
expression from each group, we identified an increase in a number of
pro-inflammatory NF-B target genes that are specific to ACF epithelium
(including TIMP1, RELA and RELB). We confirmed distinct transcriptional
changes associated with each somatic mutation and demonstrate that a
subset of ACF display a BRAFV600E-mediated senescence-associated
transcriptome, characterized by increased expression of CDKN2A (p16).
Furthermore, ACF-associated stroma is transcriptionally distinct from
adjacent normal stroma and genes related to immune cell infiltration and
activation of fibroblasts are up-regulated. Immunofluorescence analysis
confirms the abundance of activated fibroblasts in ACF stroma regardless
of mutational status. These results provide new insight into the cellular
interplay that occurs at the very early stages of colon cancer
development, highlighting the role of activated stromal fibroblasts and
inflammation.

