Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Diet stamps on bugs: early life dietary energy intake impacts gut
microbiota


The complex and dynamic interactions between diet, gut microbiota (GM)
structure and function, and colon carcinogenesis are only beginning to be
elucidated. We examined the colonic microbiota and aberrant crypt foci
(ACF) in C57BL/6N female mice fed various dietary interventions (control,
energy restricted and high-fat) provided during two phases (initiation
and progression) of azoxymethane (AOM)-induced early colon
carcinogenesis. During progression (wks. 22- 60), a high-fat diet
enhanced ACF formation compared to a control or energy restricted diet.
In contrast, energy restriction during initiation phase (wks. 3-21)
enhanced ACF burden at 60 weeks, regardless of the diet in progression
phase. Alterations in GM structure during the initiation phase diet were
partially maintained after changing diets during the progression phase.
However, diet during the progression phase had major effects on the
mucosal GM that energy restriction in progression phase increased
Firmicutes and reduced Bacteroidetes compared to a high-fat diet,
regardless of initiation phase diet, suggesting that diet may have both
transient effects as well as a lasting impact on GM composition.
Integration of early life and adult dietary impacts on the colonic
microbial structure and function with host molecular processes involved
in colon carcinogenesis will be key to defining preventive strategies.

