Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Intratumoral injection of G100 (TLR4 agonist glycopyranosyl lipid
A) modulates tumor microenvironment and induces CD8 T cell-dependent,
systemic anti-tumor immunity


The tumor microenvironment (TME) plays a critical role in controlling the
balance between tumor progression and immune surveillance. Increased
infiltration of T cells, especially CD8 T cells has been associated with
a good prognosis. We hypothesized that G100, a novel synthetic TLR4
agonist, can modulate TME when directly injected into the tumor and
trigger both a local and systemic effective immune response. Balb/c mice
with implanted syngeneic A20 lymphoma received intratumoral (IT)
injection of G100 (10 g) or control PBS three times a week. This
treatment significantly inhibited tumor growth and resulted in complete
tumor regression in approximately 60% of treated mice. To investigate the
effects of G100 on TME, tumors were collected after three IT G100
injections for gene expression analysis by Nanostring and immune
phenotyping analysis by FACS. Out of the 770 immune response genes
included in the mouse PanCancer Immune Profiling panel, 295 genes were
significantly upregulated in G100 treated tumors. The upregulated genes
include DC function-related genes (CD40, CD83, CD86, and Ly96) and T cell
and NK cell function genes and multiple chemokines and cytokines (IL1b,
IL12A, IL18, IL6, IFN, FcR4, ICOS, GZMB, CCL3, CCL5, CCL7, CXCL1, CXCL2,
CXCL11, CCR5, CCR6, and CCR7). T cell exhaustion markers (CTLA4 and LAG3)
and CD274 (PD-L1) were also induced. G100-induced inflammation is also
reflected at the cellular level as shown by increased T cells and NK
cells in tumor via FACS analysis. To determine the immune cells that
mediated tumor rejection, mice were selectively depleted of CD4 or CD8 T
cells during G100 treatment. Results showed that the anti-tumor effect of
G100 is dependent on CD8 T cells. G100-induced tumor protection was
durable as mice surviving the first tumor challenge rejected a secondary
tumor challenge without additional G100 treatment. Altogether, our
results showed that IT G100 induces a proinflammatory cytokine and
chemokine milieu that changes a cold tumor to a hot tumor, which
facilitates the development of a CD8 T cell-dependent potent and durable
anti-tumor effect. The induction of PD-L1 also suggests the potential
synergy between G100 and checkpoint blockade therapy. These preclinical
data support an on-going clinical trial of IT G100 in patients with
follicular non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NCT02501473), alone and in combination
with anti-PD-1 therapy (pembrolizumab).

