Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Methylation in benign prostate and risk of disease progression in
men subsequently diagnosed with prostate cancer


In DNA from prostate cancer tumors, methylation patterns in gene promoter
regions can be a biomarker for disease progression. It remains unclear
whether methylation patterns in benign prostate tissueprior to malignant
transformationmay provide similar prognostic information. To determine
whether early methylation events predict prostate cancer outcomes, we
evaluated histologically benign prostate specimens from 353 men who
eventually developed prostate cancer and received definitive treatment
(radical prostatectomy [58%] or radiation therapy [42%]). Cases were
drawn from a large hospital-based cohort of men with benign prostate
biopsy specimens collected between 1990 and 2002. Risk of disease
progression associated with methylation was estimated using time-to-event
analyses. Average follow-up was over 5 years; biochemical recurrence
(BCR) occurred in 91 cases (26%). In White men, methylation of the APC
gene was associated with increased risk of BCR, even after adjusting for
standard clinical risk factors for prostate cancer progression (adjusted
hazard ratio (aHR) = 2.26; 95%CI 1.23-4.16). APC methylation was most
strongly associated with a significant increased risk of BCR in White men
with low prostate specific antigen at cohort entry (HR = 3.66; 95%CI
1.51-8.85). In additional stratified analyses, we found that methylation
of the RARB gene significantly increased risk of BCR in African American
cases who demonstrated methylation of at least one of the other four
genes under study (HR = 3.80; 95%CI 1.07-13.53). These findings may have
implications in the early identification of aggressive prostate cancer as
well as reducing unnecessary medical procedures and emotional distress
for men who present with markers of indolent disease.

