Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of CD73 in promoting metastasis and resistance to
5-fluorouracil of colorectal cancer


Background and aim: Our previous study showed that high expression of
CD73 (ecto-5-nucleotidase) was a poor prognostic biomarker in patients
with colorectal cancer (CRC). However, the underlying mechanism is
unclear. Metastasis and chemo-resistance are among the main causes for
the poor outcomes of CRC. The aim of this study is to evaluate the role
of CD73 in the metastasis and chemo-resistance in CRC.Methods: The
expression levels of CD73 were detected using quantitative RT-PCR and
Western blot in 9 CRC cell lines and 3 5-FU-resistant cell lines
(HCT8-FR, HCT116-FR, and RKO-FR). CD73 was overexpressed via lentiviral
vector system and silenced using specific small interference RNA
(si-CD73) in HCT8 and RKO. We then performed migration, invasion and MTS
assays and wound healing assessment to evaluate the function of CD73 in
cell progression and chemo-resistance. We conducted Cignal Finder
Reporter Array to assess the main downstream signaling pathways of
CD73.Results: Increased expression of CD73 was found in all 3
5-FU-resistant cell lines. Inhibition of CD73 expression in HCT8 and RKO
by si-CD73 attenuated the capacity of cell migration and invasion but
increased the sensitivity to 5-FU. On the other hand, overexpression of
CD73 in HCT8 and RKO increased the capacity for cell migration but
decreased the sensitivity to 5-FU. CD73-induced migration and
chemo-resistance was found to be associated with the activation of
MAPK/ERK pathway.Conclusions: High expression of CD73 was found to be
associated with the metastasis and resistance to 5-FU via the activation
of MAPK/ERK signaling pathway. This finding provides a molecular basis
for the role of CD73 in the progression of CRC, suggesting a novel target
for the treatment of CRC.

