Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Activating mutations in EGFR abrogate hypoxia-associated radiation
resistance in non-small cell lung cancer


Hypoxic tumors tend to be 3-5 times more resistant to ionizing radiation
relative to well-oxygenated tumors in part because oxygen is required to
stabilize radiation-induced DNA damage. Tumor-adaptive responses also
contribute to hypoxia-associated radioresistance but the precise
mechanisms are not fully understood. Here we test our evidence-based
hypothesis that the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), which is
frequently over-expressed in non-small cell lung carcinomas (NSCLCs), has
critical roles in a tumor adaptive DNA damage response (DDR) pathway in
hypoxic tumors. We find that, despite elevated EGFR activity and
pro-survival signaling, hypoxia-associated radioresistance is
dramatically reduced in a biologically distinct class of NSCLCs harboring
activating mutations, L858R and E746-E750 in EGFR. Hypoxic NSCLCs with
EGFR mutations exhibit a unique spectrum of basal and hypoxia-induced
DSBs not found in hypoxic wild type EGFR-expressing NSCLCs. These lesions
dominate the S-phase of the cell cycle and are linked to collapsed
replication forks in hypoxic cells. Replication fork-associated DSBs are
repaired in wild type, but not in mutant, EGFR expressing NSCLCs.
Microarray gene expression analysis revealed that mutant, but not wild
type, EGFR expression results in an altered DDR characterized by dramatic
down-regulation of several key components of the HR pathway within 24
hours of exposure to 0.1% oxygen. Our model predicts that NHEJ, not HR,
dominates an altered DDR in hypoxic tumors. Elevated EGFR signaling may
contribute to this altered DDR state where the EGFR-NHEJ axis becomes
critical for hypoxia associated radioresistance and could be a potential
target for hypoxic tumor radiosensitization.

