Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Disparities in pediatric leukemia incidence and survival: a
population-based cancer registry analysis comparing Thailand and the
United States


Background: Pediatric leukemia incidence and survival varies worldwide.
This variability may be due to differences in genetics, environmental
factors, and access to treatment and diagnosis. However, more work is
needed to elucidate patterns of pediatric leukemia in developing
countries including Thailand. Therefore, we analyzed pediatric leukemia
incidence and survival trends in children age 0-19 years from 1990-2011
in Thailand and compared these results to United States (US) data. We
evaluated the following pediatric leukemia subtypes: acute lymphoblastic
leukemia (ALL) and acute myeloid leukemia (AML).Methods: We extracted
pediatric leukemia cases from five provincial population-based cancer
registries in Thailand (n = 1,245). Cases from the US were obtained from
the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results program (n = 6,738). We
computed age-standardized incidence rates (ASIR) using the WHO 2000
standard population and relative survival using the Ederer II method and
estimated survival functions using the Kaplan-Meier method. We evaluated
temporal changes in incidence and survival by year of diagnosis and
estimated annual percent changes using joinpoint regression.Results:
While the ASIR of ALL was lower in Thailand compared to the US (21.1 vs.
31.2 cases per million), the ASIR of AML was similar between Thailand and
the US (7.7 vs. 7.7 cases per million). The proportion of ALL and AML
diagnosed in Thailand was 60% (n = 746) and 23% (n = 284), respectively,
vs. 75% (n = 5,080) and 19% (n = 1,267) in the US (pBackground: Pediatric
leukemia incidence and survival varies worldwide. This variability may be
due to differences in genetics, environmental factors, and access to
treatment and diagnosis. However, more work is needed to elucidate
patterns of pediatric leukemia in developing countries including
Thailand. Therefore, we analyzed pediatric leukemia incidence and
survival trends in children age 0-19 years from 1990-2011 in Thailand and
compared these results to United States (US) data. We evaluated the
following pediatric leukemia subtypes: acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL)
and acute myeloid leukemia (AML).Methods: We extracted pediatric leukemia
cases from five provincial population-based cancer registries in Thailand
(n = 1,245). Cases from the US were obtained from the Surveillance,
Epidemiology, and End Results program (n = 6,738). We computed
age-standardized incidence rates (ASIR) using the WHO 2000 standard
population and relative survival using the Ederer II method and estimated
survival functions using the Kaplan-Meier method. We evaluated temporal
changes in incidence and survival by year of diagnosis and estimated
annual percent changes using joinpoint regression.Results: While the ASIR
of ALL was lower in Thailand compared to the US (21.1 vs. 31.2 cases per
million), the ASIR of AML was similar between Thailand and the US (7.7
vs. 7.7 cases per million). The proportion of ALL and AML diagnosed in
Thailand was 60% (n = 746) and 23% (n = 284), respectively, vs. 75% (n =
5,080) and 19% (n = 1,267) in the US (p<0.001). The mean age at diagnosis
was significantly older in Thailand compared to the US for both ALL (7.2
vs. 6.5 years, p Background: Pediatric leukemia incidence and survival
varies worldwide. This variability may be due to differences in genetics,
environmental factors, and access to treatment and diagnosis. However,
more work is needed to elucidate patterns of pediatric leukemia in
developing countries including Thailand. Therefore, we analyzed pediatric
leukemia incidence and survival trends in children age 0-19 years from
1990-2011 in Thailand and compared these results to United States (US)
data. We evaluated the following pediatric leukemia subtypes: acute
lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) and acute myeloid leukemia (AML).Methods: We
extracted pediatric leukemia cases from five provincial population-based
cancer registries in Thailand (n = 1,245). Cases from the US were
obtained from the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results program (n
= 6,738). We computed age-standardized incidence rates (ASIR) using the
WHO 2000 standard population and relative survival using the Ederer II
method and estimated survival functions using the Kaplan-Meier method. We
evaluated temporal changes in incidence and survival by year of diagnosis
and estimated annual percent changes using joinpoint regression.Results:
While the ASIR of ALL was lower in Thailand compared to the US (21.1 vs.
31.2 cases per million), the ASIR of AML was similar between Thailand and
the US (7.7 vs. 7.7 cases per million). The proportion of ALL and AML
diagnosed in Thailand was 60% (n = 746) and 23% (n = 284), respectively,
vs. 75% (n = 5,080) and 19% (n = 1,267) in the US (p<0.001). The mean age
at diagnosis was significantly older in Thailand compared to the US for
both ALL (7.2 vs. 6.5 years, p <0.001) and AML (9.9 vs. 9.0 years, p =
0.047). ALL incidence increased by 1.5% per year in Thailand (p = 0.015)
while it increased by 0.9% per year in the US (p = 0.003). AML incidence
increased by 2.3% per year in Thailand (p = 0.047) while it remained
constant in the US. Five-year survival significantly improved in Thailand
between the first (1990-2000) and second half (2001-2011) of our study
period for both AML (19% to 29%, p = 0.009) and ALL (45% to 55%, p =
0.001). ALL and AML five-year survival was 86% and 54% in the US. ALL
survival increased by 1.5% per year in Thailand (p = 0.022) while it
increased by 0.7% per year in the US (p Background: Pediatric leukemia
incidence and survival varies worldwide. This variability may be due to
differences in genetics, environmental factors, and access to treatment
and diagnosis. However, more work is needed to elucidate patterns of
pediatric leukemia in developing countries including Thailand. Therefore,
we analyzed pediatric leukemia incidence and survival trends in children
age 0-19 years from 1990-2011 in Thailand and compared these results to
United States (US) data. We evaluated the following pediatric leukemia
subtypes: acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) and acute myeloid leukemia
(AML).Methods: We extracted pediatric leukemia cases from five provincial
population-based cancer registries in Thailand (n = 1,245). Cases from
the US were obtained from the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results
program (n = 6,738). We computed age-standardized incidence rates (ASIR)
using the WHO 2000 standard population and relative survival using the
Ederer II method and estimated survival functions using the Kaplan-Meier
method. We evaluated temporal changes in incidence and survival by year
of diagnosis and estimated annual percent changes using joinpoint
regression.Results: While the ASIR of ALL was lower in Thailand compared
to the US (21.1 vs. 31.2 cases per million), the ASIR of AML was similar
between Thailand and the US (7.7 vs. 7.7 cases per million). The
proportion of ALL and AML diagnosed in Thailand was 60% (n = 746) and 23%
(n = 284), respectively, vs. 75% (n = 5,080) and 19% (n = 1,267) in the
US (p<0.001). The mean age at diagnosis was significantly older in
Thailand compared to the US for both ALL (7.2 vs. 6.5 years, p <0.001)
and AML (9.9 vs. 9.0 years, p = 0.047). ALL incidence increased by 1.5%
per year in Thailand (p = 0.015) while it increased by 0.9% per year in
the US (p = 0.003). AML incidence increased by 2.3% per year in Thailand
(p = 0.047) while it remained constant in the US. Five-year survival
significantly improved in Thailand between the first (1990-2000) and
second half (2001-2011) of our study period for both AML (19% to 29%, p =
0.009) and ALL (45% to 55%, p = 0.001). ALL and AML five-year survival
was 86% and 54% in the US. ALL survival increased by 1.5% per year in
Thailand (p = 0.022) while it increased by 0.7% per year in the US (p
<0.001). AML survival increased by 1.8% per year in the US (p Background:
Pediatric leukemia incidence and survival varies worldwide. This
variability may be due to differences in genetics, environmental factors,
and access to treatment and diagnosis. However, more work is needed to
elucidate patterns of pediatric leukemia in developing countries
including Thailand. Therefore, we analyzed pediatric leukemia incidence
and survival trends in children age 0-19 years from 1990-2011 in Thailand
and compared these results to United States (US) data. We evaluated the
following pediatric leukemia subtypes: acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL)
and acute myeloid leukemia (AML).Methods: We extracted pediatric leukemia
cases from five provincial population-based cancer registries in Thailand
(n = 1,245). Cases from the US were obtained from the Surveillance,
Epidemiology, and End Results program (n = 6,738). We computed
age-standardized incidence rates (ASIR) using the WHO 2000 standard
population and relative survival using the Ederer II method and estimated
survival functions using the Kaplan-Meier method. We evaluated temporal
changes in incidence and survival by year of diagnosis and estimated
annual percent changes using joinpoint regression.Results: While the ASIR
of ALL was lower in Thailand compared to the US (21.1 vs. 31.2 cases per
million), the ASIR of AML was similar between Thailand and the US (7.7
vs. 7.7 cases per million). The proportion of ALL and AML diagnosed in
Thailand was 60% (n = 746) and 23% (n = 284), respectively, vs. 75% (n =
5,080) and 19% (n = 1,267) in the US (p<0.001). The mean age at diagnosis
was significantly older in Thailand compared to the US for both ALL (7.2
vs. 6.5 years, p <0.001) and AML (9.9 vs. 9.0 years, p = 0.047). ALL
incidence increased by 1.5% per year in Thailand (p = 0.015) while it
increased by 0.9% per year in the US (p = 0.003). AML incidence increased
by 2.3% per year in Thailand (p = 0.047) while it remained constant in
the US. Five-year survival significantly improved in Thailand between the
first (1990-2000) and second half (2001-2011) of our study period for
both AML (19% to 29%, p = 0.009) and ALL (45% to 55%, p = 0.001). ALL and
AML five-year survival was 86% and 54% in the US. ALL survival increased
by 1.5% per year in Thailand (p = 0.022) while it increased by 0.7% per
year in the US (p <0.001). AML survival increased by 1.8% per year in the
US (p <0.001). Due to variability in survival by year, no trend was
identified in Thailand.Conclusion: The incidence of both ALL and AML
increased more rapidly in Thailand than in the US from 1990-2011. While
five-year survival for pediatric leukemia improved in Thailand, it was
much lower than in the US. These disparities in incidence and survival
warrant: 1) investigating novel population risk factors for pediatric
leukemia, especially AML, in Thailand and 2) identifying diagnostic and
treatment disparities to address the survival gap between Thailand and
the US.

