Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel biomarkers and multiplexed NGS to stratify FFPE NSCLC by
tumor infiltrating lymphocytes and histopathology phenotypes


There is increasing evidence supporting the association of tumor
infiltrating lymphocytes (TIL) and drug sensitivity of solid tumors. In
particular, primary and meta-analyses have reported a positive
correlation between TIL level and outcome in advanced non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) treated with checkpoint inhibitors such as PD-1 and PD-L1.
Recent trials with immunotherapies have started including TIL assessment
in the study protocol in recognition of this metric as a predictive and
prognostic biomarker. TIL levels are typically quantified by visual
assessment of H&E-stained tumor sections. While this approach is
generally accepted as the standard, there is an increased recognition
that visual assessment of H&E-stained slides lacks precision and is
relatively subjective (Salgado R, 2015; Schalper KA, 2015). Furthermore,
as investigators are often also interested in measurements of additional
biomarkers such as IFNg as well as the drug targets, a gene panel
approach offers a convenient solution to objectively quantify expression
levels of these informative markers. Here we report the discovery and
verification of a unique gene expression signature that is capable of
stratifying FFPE samples of NSCLC tumors by TIL levels and histopathology
phenotypes (adenocarcinoma vs. squamous cell carcinoma). Gene expression
was measured by an RNA Ion AmpliSeq Gene Expression research panel*
containing 200 assays. Each research sample was measured with replicates
at library generation step and sequencing step. Technical replicates were
found to have >0.99 correlation among each other. Assays on the panels
were also found to be robust with respect to low input amount (1-10 ng
RNA). *For Research Use Only. Not for use in diagnostic procedures.

