Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vitro characterization of novel inhibitors of ROCK and MRCK
kinases as anticancer agents


Metastatic cancers are the second leading cause of deaths in the USA.
RhoA and Cdc42 play critical roles in the regulation of plasticity of
cancer cell migration/invasion and cell proliferation. ROCK1/2 and MRCK/
are downstream kinases in the signaling pathways associated with cancer
cell migration and invasion. Hence, we hypothesized that simultaneous
targeting of these two kinase families would be an effective therapeutic
strategy to block migration, invasion, and growth of metastatic cancers.
We have identified DJ4 as a novel inhibitor of ROCK and MRCK kinases. In
the cellular functional assays, DJ4 treatment significantly blocked
stress fiber formation, and inhibited migration and invasion of multiple
cancer cell lines in a concentration dependent manner. To study the
critical functional groups required for its activity, we have modified
the chemical structure of DJ4 at various functional groups and
synthesized several analogs of DJ4 to perform the structural activity
relationship (SAR) study for their ROCK1 inhibition. The effectiveness of
these compounds were further investigated using National Cancer
Institute's drug screening program in 60 human cancer cell lines
representing nine different cancer types. These compounds effectively
inhibit migration and invasion of multiple cancer cell types. Selected
analogs were tested for their anti migration, pro-apoptotic, and
anti-proliferative effects in breast cancer cells. Our studies strongly
indicate that DJ4 and its analog, DJ110, are potent inhibitors of ROCK1,
ROCK2, MERK and MRCK. The results of our finding will be discussed.

