Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The CARRIERS consortium: Establishing refined breast cancer risk
estimates in known predisposition genes


Breast cancer is the most common type of cancer, and has a strong
heritable component, with approximately 15 percent of new cases having
family history of breast cancer. Genetic panel testing for patients with
a family history of breast cancer has become a popular clinical resource.
However, the risk of breast cancer associated with inactivating mutations
in the predisposition genes is largely undefined, creating critical
limitations in the interpretations of the results from panel testing and
subsequent medical management. The Cancer Risk Estimates Related to
Susceptibility Genes (CARRIERS) consortium was established to determine
the risk of cancers associated with truncating mutations in the known
predisposition genes and to extend these studies to the clinical
classification of variants of uncertain significance (VUS) in the
relevant genes.CARRIERS involves screening of approximately 30,000
population-based breast cancer cases and 30,000 study matched controls
for mutations in 28 established or proposed breast cancer predisposition
genes. Population-based risks for breast cancer associated with mutations
in each gene will be estimated. In parallel, 10,000 breast cancer cases
from moderate and high-risk breast cancer families will be similarly
screened for mutations and the penetrance of the mutations in high-risk
families will be estimated. Furthermore, VUS identified by mutation
screening will be characterized by functional and family-based studies
and models for classification of the clinical relevance of VUS in each
gene will be developed. These data are expected to lead to improvements
in cancer risk assessment and improved management of patients found to
carry mutations or VUS in breast cancer predisposition.

