Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pre-clinical studies of a highly potent folate receptor targeted
DNA crosslinking agent


Folate receptor (FR) targeted small molecule drug conjugates (SMDC) have
shown promising results in early stage clinical trials with Vintafolide
and EC1456. In our effort to develop FR targeted SMDCs with varying
mechanisms of action, we have now built a folate conjugate of a DNA
crosslinking agent based on a novel DNA-alkylating moiety. This agent was
found to be extremely potent with an in vitro IC50 100 x lower than any
other folate SMDC we have created to date. Treatment of nude mice bearing
FR positive human xenografts led to cures in 100% of the mice at very low
doses (> 500 nmol/kg) and a convenient once a week schedule. The observed
activity was not accompanied by any noticeable weight loss (up to 20
weeks post end of dosing) or major organ tissue degeneration. In
contrast, no significant anti-tumor activity (0% CRs) was observed in
treated animals that were co-dosed with an excess of a benign folate
ligand, thus demonstrating its target-specific activity. Complete
responses were also observed in other FR positive drug resistant
(paclitaxel and cisplatin) models. Taken together, these studies
demonstrated that this SMDC with a distinct DNA reacting mechanism has
significant anti-tumor growth activity and tolerability, thus lending
support to future clinical development of this novel FR-targeted agent.

