Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Loss of SLFN11 or gain of TWIST1 promote chemotherapy resistance
in small cell lung cancer


The majority of patients with small cell lung cancer (SCLC) who are
treated with first-line platinum/etoposide chemotherapy develop
therapeutic resistance, but little is mechanistically understood how
resistance develops in patients. This is partly due to limited access to
historic paired tissue samples, few investigational re-biopsy programs
and the aggressive nature of this disease.In this study we used a
collection of 10 treatment-nave, patient-derived xenograft (PDX) models
of SCLC to determine how resistance to chemotherapy can be acquired in
vivo, by cycling weekly cisplatin and etoposide, followed by serial
passaging of tumor cells capable of surviving and proliferating through
treatment. Applying whole transcriptome (RNAseq), exome and high-depth
targeted sequencing approaches to paired parental and resistant
populations revealed minimal recurrent mutations; however, two consistent
gene expression changes were observed, implicating either a decrease in
SLFN11 or an increase in TWIST1 transcript levels may promote resistance.
We validated both mechanisms in vitro using conditional gain and loss of
function experiments in SCLC cell lines of human and mouse origin. Where
suppression of SLFN11 was associated with resistance to select classes of
DNA damaging agents, gaining TWIST1 produced a broad resistance
phenotype, consistent with an epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition.Increased sensitivity to chemotherapy through overexpression
of SLFN11 was observed only in cell lines with low levels of TWIST1.
Importantly, TWIST1 knockdown or knockout did not dramatically change the
sensitivity to chemotherapy in multiple TWIST1-high cell lines tested,
suggesting that directly targeting TWIST1 may be of limited utility in
SCLC. We extended these results by modeling acquired resistance to
cisplatin and etoposide in a triple knockout (p53/Rb/p130) mouse
allograft model of SCLC, finding that increased expression of TWIST1 was
associated with chemotherapy resistance, but did not confer a greater
metastatic potential in a tumor type with an already high predilection
for metastasis. Understanding the relative expression of SLFN11 and
TWIST1 at baseline and upon clinical relapse may be informative in
determining therapeutic options for SCLC patients that no longer respond
to platinum and etoposide.

