Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential expression of PD-L1 on circulating tumor cells among
patients with advanced lung cancer


Background and purpose:Immune-checkpoint blockade with anti-programmed
death-1 (PD-1) antibodies is rapidly emerging for the treatment of human
malignancies including lung cancer. Although programmed death-ligand 1
(PD-L1) has been studied as a predictive biomarker, detection and
evaluation of PD-L1 expression level on tissue samples remain challenging
due to its dynamic and unstable expression. Thus the diagnostic tool for
real-time monitoring of PD-L1 expression is critically needed. Here, we
assessed the expression pattern of PD-L1 on circulating tumor cells
(CTCs) by using microcavity array (MCA) system in patients with advanced
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and small cell lung cancer
(SCLC).Experimental procedure:PD-L1 staining on CTCs was established
using NSCLC cell lines H820, H441, A549 and H23 expressing varying levels
of PD-L1 spiked in the peripheral blood obtained from healthy donors. For
clinical evaluation, 3 ml of peripheral whole blood was collected from 20
advanced lung cancer patients prior to the initiation of chemotherapy and
from 10 healthy donors. Cells were captured and immuno-stained by using
the automated MCA system (Hitachi Chemical Co., Ltd). CTCs were defined
as those positive for DAPI and cytokeratin (CK) and negative for CD45.
PD-L1 expression level on CTCs was visualized by addition of PD-L1
immunocytochemistry procedure. High-resolution fluorescent images were
obtained using fluorescence microscope (Carl Zeiss Microscopy Co.,
Ltd).Results:Characteristics of 20 lung cancer patients enrolled in
clinical study were as follows: median age 74 (range, 48 to 84); male
60%; stage III/IV, 10/90%; NSCLC/SCLC, 70/30%. More than 2 CTCs were
identified in 14 patients (median 22.5; range, 4 to 71), and PD-L1
positive CTCs were detected in 12 patients (median 5; range, 2 to 15). No
correlation was detected between the number of total CTCs and that of
PD-L1 positive CTCs in each patient (R2 = 0.05). We found a total of 25
CTC clusters from 20 patients, of which PD-L1 expression was both
homogenous and heterogeneous. It is noteworthy that clustered CTCs have
larger proportion of PD-L1 positive CTCs per whole clustered CTCs than
that of non-clustered CTCs (24/54, 44% versus 51/347, 15%, respectively).
We further focused on CTC-interacting white blood cells, which
intensively bound with aggregated CTCs rather than single CTC (12/54, 22%
versus 43/337, 13%, respectively). Our data implicate that PD-L1
expression on CTC correlates with aggregation of CTCs (p Background and
purpose:Immune-checkpoint blockade with anti-programmed death-1 (PD-1)
antibodies is rapidly emerging for the treatment of human malignancies
including lung cancer. Although programmed death-ligand 1 (PD-L1) has
been studied as a predictive biomarker, detection and evaluation of PD-L1
expression level on tissue samples remain challenging due to its dynamic
and unstable expression. Thus the diagnostic tool for real-time
monitoring of PD-L1 expression is critically needed. Here, we assessed
the expression pattern of PD-L1 on circulating tumor cells (CTCs) by
using microcavity array (MCA) system in patients with advanced non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and small cell lung cancer (SCLC).Experimental
procedure:PD-L1 staining on CTCs was established using NSCLC cell lines
H820, H441, A549 and H23 expressing varying levels of PD-L1 spiked in the
peripheral blood obtained from healthy donors. For clinical evaluation, 3
ml of peripheral whole blood was collected from 20 advanced lung cancer
patients prior to the initiation of chemotherapy and from 10 healthy
donors. Cells were captured and immuno-stained by using the automated MCA
system (Hitachi Chemical Co., Ltd). CTCs were defined as those positive
for DAPI and cytokeratin (CK) and negative for CD45. PD-L1 expression
level on CTCs was visualized by addition of PD-L1 immunocytochemistry
procedure. High-resolution fluorescent images were obtained using
fluorescence microscope (Carl Zeiss Microscopy Co.,
Ltd).Results:Characteristics of 20 lung cancer patients enrolled in
clinical study were as follows: median age 74 (range, 48 to 84); male
60%; stage III/IV, 10/90%; NSCLC/SCLC, 70/30%. More than 2 CTCs were
identified in 14 patients (median 22.5; range, 4 to 71), and PD-L1
positive CTCs were detected in 12 patients (median 5; range, 2 to 15). No
correlation was detected between the number of total CTCs and that of
PD-L1 positive CTCs in each patient (R2 = 0.05). We found a total of 25
CTC clusters from 20 patients, of which PD-L1 expression was both
homogenous and heterogeneous. It is noteworthy that clustered CTCs have
larger proportion of PD-L1 positive CTCs per whole clustered CTCs than
that of non-clustered CTCs (24/54, 44% versus 51/347, 15%, respectively).
We further focused on CTC-interacting white blood cells, which
intensively bound with aggregated CTCs rather than single CTC (12/54, 22%
versus 43/337, 13%, respectively). Our data implicate that PD-L1
expression on CTC correlates with aggregation of CTCs (p <
0.05).Conclusions:Our results showed that PD-L1 expression on CTCs was
detectable and there is intrapatient heterogeneity of its expression in
patients with advanced lung cancer. Further investigation is warranted to
better understand the biological importance of the correlation between
PD-1 expression and CTC aggregation and CTC bound to white blood cells.

