Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Highly specific ATR inhibitors as a therapeutic approach for a
broad spectrum of cancers


Ataxia Telangiectasia and Rad3-related (ATR) and Checkpoint kinase 1
(CHK1) stabilize stalled replication forks and prevent their collapse
into DNA double strand breaks (DSBs). Inhibition of ATR in cells
experiencing oncogenic stress or harboring other cancer-associated
defects synergistically increases the formation of DSBs and causes
synthetic lethality. Thus specific targeting of ATR represents an
emerging strategy to treat a broad spectrum of cancers, most notably
those that currently lack effective treatments.Atrin Pharmaceuticals has
synthesized a novel series of small molecules that inhibit ATR at low
nanomolar concentrations in cultured cells. These compounds have the
highest known potency for inhibiting ATR and maintain >800-fold lower
cellular activity towards other kinases of the same family (ATM, DNA-PKcs
and mTOR), which are substantially off-targeted by previously reported
ATR inhibitors. Atrin's lead compound (ATRN-119), as a single agent,
selectively kills cancer cells subjected to oncogenic stress, alternative
lengthening of telomeres (ALT) or loss of double strand break (DSB)
homologous recombination repair mechanism (BRCA1 or BRCA2 deficiency).
Furthermore, ATRN-119 cytotoxicity is synergistically enhanced when
combined with conventional chemotherapeutics, such as etoposide,
cisplatin and olaparib. Therefore, this inhibitor can be used in
combination with other therapeutics to potentiate its anti-tumor
activity.In vivo studies of RAS oncogene driven HCT116 p53-null flank
tumors in mice demonstrate the ability of our lead compound to slow tumor
progression, with minimal toxicity to tissues under normal proliferative
control, including the bone marrow and intestine. Additionally, mice
engrafted with BRCA2-mutant patient-derived ovarian tumors show a
significant reduction in progression after 5 weeks treatment (100 mg/kg
BID) of ATRN-119, and display no toxicity or significant weight loss.
Thus, ATRN-119 is highly efficacious in suppressing tumor growth in
multiple murine models, including suppression of patient-derived
BRCA2-mutant ovarian cancer, suggesting that the clinical application of
the ATRN series will provide a new and effective treatment for human
malignancies with fewer side effects than conventional chemotherapies.

