Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: New JAK2 heterozygous loss: A role in overall survival in acute
myeloid leukemia patients


Acute Myeloid Leukemia (AML) is a clonal hematopoietic disorder
characterized by an abnormal proliferation and differentiation of
immature blast cells in the bone marrow.SNP microarray approach has
resulted in genome-wide screening for genomic alterations with
information not previously achievable and also it allows to map all the
genes involved in these alterations which may plays a role in
oncogenesis.Our objective is to evaluate the prognostic impact of these
genetic alterations on clinical outcome.We analyzed 285 AML samples at
diagnosis of which 221 by SNP Array 6.0 (Affymetrix) (Affymetrix), while
64 by by CytoScan HD Array (Affymetrix). The results obtained were
analyzed by Chromosome Analysis Suite (ChAS) v1.2 (Affymetrix Inc.) and
Nexus Copy Number v7.5 softwares (BioDiscovery).The 285 AML patients
(pts) analyzed are equally distributed between both sexes, they have a
median age of 60 years, include miscellaneous cytogenetic abnormalities
and normal karyotype. The 44% of pts are treated with chemotherapy (CHT),
the 16% of pts with low-dose cytosine arabinoside, the 20% of pts with
5-azacytidine and the 19% of pts are not treated or had only supportive
therapy. The ratio between responders and non responders pts was 57/43.
Each pt presented an average of 1448 events so distributed: 31% of
homozygous deletions, 32% of homozygous amplifications, while irrelevant
events are related to heterozygous deletions and amplifications. We also
found 36% of uniparental disomy (UPD)events.Among all these macroscopic
and submicroscopic alterations, we focused on JAK2 gene, which is located
on human chromosome 9 at p24.1 locus. It is composed of 25 exons and
encodes a 1132 amino-acid protein of 130.7 kDa.This gene was amplified in
12/285 pts (4%) and deleted in 13/285 (5%). All these pts are treated
with CHT but only those characterized by JAK2 deletion are responsive in
first line. We showed that the group of pts which present this deletion
had a better overall survival rate than the group with the amplification
of this gene (p-value Acute Myeloid Leukemia (AML) is a clonal
hematopoietic disorder characterized by an abnormal proliferation and
differentiation of immature blast cells in the bone marrow.SNP microarray
approach has resulted in genome-wide screening for genomic alterations
with information not previously achievable and also it allows to map all
the genes involved in these alterations which may plays a role in
oncogenesis.Our objective is to evaluate the prognostic impact of these
genetic alterations on clinical outcome.We analyzed 285 AML samples at
diagnosis of which 221 by SNP Array 6.0 (Affymetrix) (Affymetrix), while
64 by by CytoScan HD Array (Affymetrix). The results obtained were
analyzed by Chromosome Analysis Suite (ChAS) v1.2 (Affymetrix Inc.) and
Nexus Copy Number v7.5 softwares (BioDiscovery).The 285 AML patients
(pts) analyzed are equally distributed between both sexes, they have a
median age of 60 years, include miscellaneous cytogenetic abnormalities
and normal karyotype. The 44% of pts are treated with chemotherapy (CHT),
the 16% of pts with low-dose cytosine arabinoside, the 20% of pts with
5-azacytidine and the 19% of pts are not treated or had only supportive
therapy. The ratio between responders and non responders pts was 57/43.
Each pt presented an average of 1448 events so distributed: 31% of
homozygous deletions, 32% of homozygous amplifications, while irrelevant
events are related to heterozygous deletions and amplifications. We also
found 36% of uniparental disomy (UPD)events.Among all these macroscopic
and submicroscopic alterations, we focused on JAK2 gene, which is located
on human chromosome 9 at p24.1 locus. It is composed of 25 exons and
encodes a 1132 amino-acid protein of 130.7 kDa.This gene was amplified in
12/285 pts (4%) and deleted in 13/285 (5%). All these pts are treated
with CHT but only those characterized by JAK2 deletion are responsive in
first line. We showed that the group of pts which present this deletion
had a better overall survival rate than the group with the amplification
of this gene (p-value < 0,01).The deletion event of JAK2 gene involved
two different regions: the first region had a length of 7.429 bp
involving the intron 4 and was found in the database genome variant
(DGV); the second deletion presented a variable length between different
pts: the smallest deleted region had a length of 3342 bp and included the
exons 17, 18, 19, while the largest one had a length of 76903 bp which
included the portion from exon 9 to exon 19. This second deletion has not
been described in DGV and it involved the pseudokinase and kinase domain
of JAK2 protein.We have identified Copy Number Variation involving
important cancer genes in AML. We have identified a new JAK2 deletion
involving its Pseudokinase and Kinase domain and we observed that this
deletion of JAK2 correleted with overall survival.ELN, AIL, AIRC, PRIN,
progetto Regione-Universit 2010-12 (L. Bolondi), FP7 NGS-PTL project

