Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ionizing radiation-induced DNA damage response decreases during
induced pluripotent and embryonic stem cell differentiation


Embryonic as well as induced pluripotent stem cells (ESC/iPSC) have a
robust DNA damage response to facilitate efficient repair of DNA strand
breaks as well as interstrand cross-links (ICLs). Stem cell abundance in
tumors can impact the efficacy of the therapeutic agents, and such agents
also have an impact on the normal tissue toxicity. Therefore, it is
important to compare DNA damage repair in progenitor stem cells and their
differentiated lineages since the normal tissues surrounding the tumor
predominantly contain differentiated cells. We therefore asked whether
the DNA damage response is altered during differentiation of embryonic as
well as induced pluripotent stem cells and found that sensing of ionizing
radiations, interstrand cross-linking or hydroxyurea induced DNA damage
was minimally altered by cellular differentiation. Furthermore, DNA DSB
repair by non-homologous end joining was minimally impacted. However, the
homologous recombination of DSB repair or ICL repair was significantly
reduced in differentiated cells. In addition, differentiated cells showed
a reduction in the frequency of new origins of replication and increased
stalled replication forks. Interestingly, similar to ESC or iPSC lines,
breast tumor stem cells also exhibited a decrease in DNA damage repair by
homologous recombination in differentiated cells. The defect in DNA
damage repair by homologous recombination was reversed in
de-differentiated cells, supporting the argument that differentiation can
influence homologous recombination repair of DSBs as well as repair of
ICLs. These studies have implications in modulating the therapeutic
efficacy of DNA damage inducing tumor-killing agents.

