Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An anti-CD4 antibody protects mice from anti-PD-1/PDL-1
antibody-induced fatal anaphylaxis and shows potent anti-metastatic
activity in the 4T1 spontaneous metastasis model


[Introduction]We previously reported that an -CD4 depleting monoclonal
antibody (mAb) has very potent anti-tumor effects in several murine tumor
models, particularly when combined with -PD-1/L1 mAbs (Cancer Immunol.
Res. 3: 631-640; 2015). Here we examined the effect of this -CD4 mAb on
4T1 murine mammary tumors, which undergo spontaneous metastasis from an
orthotopically transplanted site to the lung.[Methods]4T1 tumor cells (1
105) were injected into the mammary fat pad of female BALB/c mice and
primary tumor volume was measured every 2-3 days. Spontaneous lung
metastasis was quantitated by removing the lungs, fixing them in Bouin's
fixative, and counting the number of metastatic nodules on the surface of
lung.[Results]Administration of -CD4 mAb (clone GK1.5; days 5 and 9 after
tumor inoculation) significantly inhibited 4T1 lung metastasis (n = 10)
without affecting primary tumor size. -PD-1 and -PD-L1 mAbs had minimal
effects on primary tumor growth and metastasis. However, administration
of -PD-1 or -PD-L1 mAbs triggered an IgG1-mediated fatal anaphylactic
reaction upon the third or fourth administration. Interestingly, the
anaphylactic reaction was completely prevented by co-administration of
the -CD4 mAb.[Discussion]Based on these results, -CD4 mAb may be useful
for preventing metastasis associated with advanced cancer. In addition,
-CD4 mAb appeared to be protective against the IgG-mediated anaphylactic
reaction and autoimmune-like side effects that are associated with
-PD-1/-PD-L antibody administration-induced enhanced B-cell immunity.
Increased myelopoiesis due to high G-CSF production by 4T1 cells may have
contributed to the anaphylactic reaction.

