Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNA 10b, 27a and 27b are involved in the resistance to
treatment with epidermal growth factor tyrosine inhibitor (EGFR-TKI) in
EGFR mutant lung cancer cell line


EGFR TKIs are now standard of care in lung cancer patients with EGFR
mutation. Invariably, these patients develop resistance and require
treatment with another EGFR TKI or chemotherapy. The gate-keeper mutation
T790M is responsible for about 50% of resistance. Rocelitinib(R) is a
third generation EGFR TKI active in lung cancer cells with T790M
mutation. Other mechanisms may also confer resistance in these patients.
High expression of microRNA (miR)-10 is associated with worse prognosis
in resected lung cancer patients with EGFR mutation. Both miR-27a and 27b
are associated with increased expression of c-met which is a potential
mechanism of resistance to EGFR TKI. We hypothesized that miR 10b and 27a
and 27b modulate resistance in E-resistant lung cancer cells.Material and
MethodsLung cancer cell lines with EGFR mutation HCC827 and HCC4006 were
treated with 5 nM of Erlotinib (E) for 72 hours. E-resistant cells were
then treated with R at 21.5 nM for 72h. The cells were harvested and
microRNA profiling was performed by real time PCR. HTB177 cell line
without EGFR mutation was used as control.ResultsWe observed increased
expression of miR-10b and miR-27a in HCC4006 compared to control cells
HTB 177 cells; miR-27b is upregulated in HCC827 cell line. The increased
expression of miR-10b and miR 27a were higher in CRL-2871 than the
control cells 9-fold and 8-fold, respectively. MicroRNA- 27b was
increased 300-fold in HCC827 compared with control.Treatment with R
reduced the proliferation in HCC827 to 30% and in HCC4006 to 50% compared
to control. It did not inhibit the proliferation of HTB177 cells. R
increase miR-10b in HCC4006 by 3-fold, miR-27a by 1.5-fold; in HCC827 it
reduced miR-10b to 0.4, miR-27a to 0.4 and miR-27B 0.5.ConclusionWe
observed upregulation of miR-10b, 27a and 27b in lung cancer cells lines
with EGFR mutation that were resistant to E treatment. Treatment of E
resistant cells with R reduced proliferation and changed the expression
of miR-10b, 27a and 27b. Our results suggest an epigenetic mechanism of
resistance in addition to the T790M mutation. MicroRNAs may be studied as
targets for developing novel approach for to treating patients with EGFR
TKI resistance.

