Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical evaluation of HER3 mutations and rational combinations
with AKT inhibition in enhancing anti-tumor activity of HER3 inhibition
in gastric cancer


Molecular activating events involving the ERBB RTK family members (EGFR
(ERBB1), HER2 (ERBB2), HER3 (ERBB3), HER4 (ERBB4)) drive oncogenesis by
inducing proliferation, invasion and survival primarily through RAS/MAPK
and PI3K/AKT signaling pathways in several cancers. The clinical
successes of HER2 directed therapies are well known in breast cancer and
more recently, in gastric cancer. However, resistance develops invariably
and gastric cancer continues to be a largely unmet disease necessitating
novel therapeutic interventions. Recent reports have highlighted HER3 as
an emerging target as it is frequently overexpressed, mutated,
preferentially dimerizes with HER2 to activate signaling and is induced
as a result of de novo or acquired resistance to PI3K-AKT, MAPK and RTK
pathway inhibitors. We explored the utility of an ADCC and CDC enhanced
potent anti-HER3 therapeutic antibody (GSK2849330) as a single agent or
in combination with a selective small molecule AKT inhibitor (GSK2110183)
in patient-derived xenograft (PDX) models of gastric cancer.A panel of 15
HER3 mutant and 4 HER3 wildtype PDX models was screened in vivo for
responses to GSK2849330 as measured by% tumor growth inhibition (%TGI).
Several models were characterized for other molecular alterations (e.g.
HER2, PTEN, HER3, etc.) and represented various subsets of gastric
cancer. As a single agent administered at 25mg/kg IP BIW, GSK2849330 was
modestly effective (TGI 50%) in 2/15 mutant and 2/4 wildtype models.
While context is likely to matter to drive dependence on HER3, no obvious
predictive markers were observed. Furthermore, we evaluated the effect of
combination therapy with an AKT inhibitor (GSK2110183) administered at
60mg/kg PO QD in a HER3 wildtype, PTEN deficient model. This resulted in
significant durable tumor growth inhibition (94% TGI) with improved
survival and noticeable tumor regression in a few mice in the combination
treatment group relative to either single agent groups. Tumor samples
collected at the end of the study showed pronounced pharmacodynamic
modulation of p-AKT and p-HER3, demonstrating on target activity of these
agents.Taken together, our findings suggest that modest anti-tumor
activity was elicited by GSK2849330 as monotherapy in select gastric PDX
models with no clear associations between response and HER3 mutations or
other known markers. However, robust durable activity was observed upon
combination with GSK2110183. To our knowledge, this is the first in vivo
evidence supporting the rational combination of a selective AKT inhibitor
(GSK2110183) and an anti-HER3 therapeutic antibody (GSK2849330), both of
which are actively undergoing clinical trials and warrant further
investigation in gastric cancer.

