Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combination therapy with a liver selective acetyl-CoA carboxylase
inhibitor ND-654 and sorafenib improves efficacy in the treatment of
cirrhotic rats with hepatocellular carcinoma


Background: Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is increasing in incidence
worldwide. Current treatment options for HCC are limited, and as such,
prognosis is extremely poor with a 5-year survival less than 12%.
Sorafenib is the only FDA-approved drug for the treatment of HCC but its
effects are marginal as it only extends survival by a few months.
Therefore, new treatment options are urgently needed. Metabolic
attenuation is a promising approach to cancer therapy, and rate-limiting
steps in key biosynthetic pathways are particularly attractive targets.
We recently identified ND-654, a hepatoselective (3000:1 liver to muscle
exposure), allosteric ACC inhibitor that binds to the ACC subunit
dimerization site and inhibits the enzymatic activity of both ACC1 (IC50
= 3 nM) and ACC2 (IC50 = 8 nM). Daily oral administration of 10 mg/kg
ND-654 reduced tumor incidence by 55% and significantly improved median
survival time in a rat model of cirrhosis and HCC. Here, we examine the
effects of ND-654 alone and in combination with sorafenib on HCC
development in cirrhotic rats. Methods: Male Wistar rats were treated
once weekly with 50 mg/kg diethylnitrosamine (DEN) for 18 weeks to induce
sequential development of fibrosis, cirrhosis and HCC. After
establishment of cirrhosis and when HCCs are first developing (13 weeks),
rats were treated daily by oral gavage with either 1) vehicle control, 2)
10 mg/kg ND-654, 3) 10 mg/kg sorafenib, or 4) 10 mg/kg ND-654 and 10
mg/kg sorafenib. After 18 weeks, tumor nodules were counted and liver and
tumor tissue was harvested for analysis. Results: Similar to our previous
study, simultaneous inhibition of ACC1 and ACC2 significantly reduced HCC
incidence by 41% (p Background: Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is
increasing in incidence worldwide. Current treatment options for HCC are
limited, and as such, prognosis is extremely poor with a 5-year survival
less than 12%. Sorafenib is the only FDA-approved drug for the treatment
of HCC but its effects are marginal as it only extends survival by a few
months. Therefore, new treatment options are urgently needed. Metabolic
attenuation is a promising approach to cancer therapy, and rate-limiting
steps in key biosynthetic pathways are particularly attractive targets.
We recently identified ND-654, a hepatoselective (3000:1 liver to muscle
exposure), allosteric ACC inhibitor that binds to the ACC subunit
dimerization site and inhibits the enzymatic activity of both ACC1 (IC50
= 3 nM) and ACC2 (IC50 = 8 nM). Daily oral administration of 10 mg/kg
ND-654 reduced tumor incidence by 55% and significantly improved median
survival time in a rat model of cirrhosis and HCC. Here, we examine the
effects of ND-654 alone and in combination with sorafenib on HCC
development in cirrhotic rats. Methods: Male Wistar rats were treated
once weekly with 50 mg/kg diethylnitrosamine (DEN) for 18 weeks to induce
sequential development of fibrosis, cirrhosis and HCC. After
establishment of cirrhosis and when HCCs are first developing (13 weeks),
rats were treated daily by oral gavage with either 1) vehicle control, 2)
10 mg/kg ND-654, 3) 10 mg/kg sorafenib, or 4) 10 mg/kg ND-654 and 10
mg/kg sorafenib. After 18 weeks, tumor nodules were counted and liver and
tumor tissue was harvested for analysis. Results: Similar to our previous
study, simultaneous inhibition of ACC1 and ACC2 significantly reduced HCC
incidence by 41% (p < 0.05) which was comparable to results with
sorafenib (57% reduction, p Background: Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is
increasing in incidence worldwide. Current treatment options for HCC are
limited, and as such, prognosis is extremely poor with a 5-year survival
less than 12%. Sorafenib is the only FDA-approved drug for the treatment
of HCC but its effects are marginal as it only extends survival by a few
months. Therefore, new treatment options are urgently needed. Metabolic
attenuation is a promising approach to cancer therapy, and rate-limiting
steps in key biosynthetic pathways are particularly attractive targets.
We recently identified ND-654, a hepatoselective (3000:1 liver to muscle
exposure), allosteric ACC inhibitor that binds to the ACC subunit
dimerization site and inhibits the enzymatic activity of both ACC1 (IC50
= 3 nM) and ACC2 (IC50 = 8 nM). Daily oral administration of 10 mg/kg
ND-654 reduced tumor incidence by 55% and significantly improved median
survival time in a rat model of cirrhosis and HCC. Here, we examine the
effects of ND-654 alone and in combination with sorafenib on HCC
development in cirrhotic rats. Methods: Male Wistar rats were treated
once weekly with 50 mg/kg diethylnitrosamine (DEN) for 18 weeks to induce
sequential development of fibrosis, cirrhosis and HCC. After
establishment of cirrhosis and when HCCs are first developing (13 weeks),
rats were treated daily by oral gavage with either 1) vehicle control, 2)
10 mg/kg ND-654, 3) 10 mg/kg sorafenib, or 4) 10 mg/kg ND-654 and 10
mg/kg sorafenib. After 18 weeks, tumor nodules were counted and liver and
tumor tissue was harvested for analysis. Results: Similar to our previous
study, simultaneous inhibition of ACC1 and ACC2 significantly reduced HCC
incidence by 41% (p < 0.05) which was comparable to results with
sorafenib (57% reduction, p < 0.01). Remarkably, the combination of
ND-654 and sorafenib significantly reduced HCC incidence by 81% (p
Background: Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is increasing in incidence
worldwide. Current treatment options for HCC are limited, and as such,
prognosis is extremely poor with a 5-year survival less than 12%.
Sorafenib is the only FDA-approved drug for the treatment of HCC but its
effects are marginal as it only extends survival by a few months.
Therefore, new treatment options are urgently needed. Metabolic
attenuation is a promising approach to cancer therapy, and rate-limiting
steps in key biosynthetic pathways are particularly attractive targets.
We recently identified ND-654, a hepatoselective (3000:1 liver to muscle
exposure), allosteric ACC inhibitor that binds to the ACC subunit
dimerization site and inhibits the enzymatic activity of both ACC1 (IC50
= 3 nM) and ACC2 (IC50 = 8 nM). Daily oral administration of 10 mg/kg
ND-654 reduced tumor incidence by 55% and significantly improved median
survival time in a rat model of cirrhosis and HCC. Here, we examine the
effects of ND-654 alone and in combination with sorafenib on HCC
development in cirrhotic rats. Methods: Male Wistar rats were treated
once weekly with 50 mg/kg diethylnitrosamine (DEN) for 18 weeks to induce
sequential development of fibrosis, cirrhosis and HCC. After
establishment of cirrhosis and when HCCs are first developing (13 weeks),
rats were treated daily by oral gavage with either 1) vehicle control, 2)
10 mg/kg ND-654, 3) 10 mg/kg sorafenib, or 4) 10 mg/kg ND-654 and 10
mg/kg sorafenib. After 18 weeks, tumor nodules were counted and liver and
tumor tissue was harvested for analysis. Results: Similar to our previous
study, simultaneous inhibition of ACC1 and ACC2 significantly reduced HCC
incidence by 41% (p < 0.05) which was comparable to results with
sorafenib (57% reduction, p < 0.01). Remarkably, the combination of
ND-654 and sorafenib significantly reduced HCC incidence by 81% (p <
0.001). We are currently examining the effects of combining ND-654 and
sorafenib on markers of tumor proliferation and apoptosis. Conclusions:
These results provide further evidence that de novo lipogenesis is an
important mediator of hepatic carcinogenesis and that selective
inhibition of hepatic ACC is a viable cancer metabolism therapeutic
strategy for treating HCC that could be combined with sorafenib.

