Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chemoprevention of colorectal cancer by LFA-9, a novel dual
mPGES-1/5-LOX inhibitor: safer approaches to chemoprevention


Colorectal cancer (CRC) protective effects of NSAIDs and COX-2 inhibitors
are well established; however, they are associated with gastrointestinal
(GI) bleeding and cardiovascular risk. Mechanistic studies suggest that
sparing COX-1/2, prostaglandin (PG)I2 synthase and selectively targeting
microsomal PG synthase-1 (mPGES-1) and 5-lipoxygenase (5-LOX) would
inhibit PGE2 and Leukotrienes (LTs), respectively. To design and develop
selective inhibitors of mPGES-1/5-LOX, we used insilico small molecular
docking simulation approaches, and identified LFA-9 as a novel selective
dual mPGES-1/5-LOX inhibitor among >20 analogs. Azoxymethane
(AOM)-induced rat colonic tumors were utilized to assess inhibitory
effects of LFA-9 on mPGES-1 and 5-LOX ex-vivo. At 7.5 M, LFA-9 inhibited
the mPGES-1 and 5-LOX activities by 57% and 68%, respectively. Maximum
tolerable dose (100 -1,600ppm) of LFA-9 in AIN-76A diet on male C57Bl/6
mice were tested and observed that Colorectal cancer (CRC) protective
effects of NSAIDs and COX-2 inhibitors are well established; however,
they are associated with gastrointestinal (GI) bleeding and
cardiovascular risk. Mechanistic studies suggest that sparing COX-1/2,
prostaglandin (PG)I2 synthase and selectively targeting microsomal PG
synthase-1 (mPGES-1) and 5-lipoxygenase (5-LOX) would inhibit PGE2 and
Leukotrienes (LTs), respectively. To design and develop selective
inhibitors of mPGES-1/5-LOX, we used insilico small molecular docking
simulation approaches, and identified LFA-9 as a novel selective dual
mPGES-1/5-LOX inhibitor among >20 analogs. Azoxymethane (AOM)-induced rat
colonic tumors were utilized to assess inhibitory effects of LFA-9 on
mPGES-1 and 5-LOX ex-vivo. At 7.5 M, LFA-9 inhibited the mPGES-1 and
5-LOX activities by 57% and 68%, respectively. Maximum tolerable dose
(100 -1,600ppm) of LFA-9 in AIN-76A diet on male C57Bl/6 mice were tested
and observed that <1,600 ppm dietary LFA-9 to be safe and free from
liver, GI and hematological toxicities. In AOM/DSS-induced colonic
inflammation in rat, LFA-9 at 200ppm abolished the inflammation and
suppressed mPGES-1 and 5-LOX activities in a dose-response
manner.Potential CRC preventive efficacy of LFA-9 was assessed in AOM-rat
carcinogenesis with colonic Aberrant Crypt Foci, (ACF) as surrogate
marker in male F344 rats and intestinal tumor inhibition in APCMin/+
mice. In rats, colonic ACF were induced by AOM/DSS treatment and two week
after the AOM/DSS treatment, LFA-9 (200, 400, and 600ppm) was fed by diet
and ACF were evaluated after six-weeks. LFA-9 showed dose-response (P60%
(P60% (P<0.0001). In APCMin/+ mice study, six-week-old male and female
mice (10/group) were fed diet containing 0, 350, and 700 ppm LFA-9 for 14
weeks. Male and female APCMin/+ mice fed control diet developed 583.8
(MeanSEM) and 595.9 polyps, respectively. LFA-9 administration at 350 and
700ppm in APCMin/+ mice significantly (p 80% suppression of polyps with
>2mm size. Mice fed 350ppm LFA9 showed colon tumor inhibition of 60%
(male) and 90% (female). It is noteworthy that both male and female mice
fed 700ppm LFA-9 showed 91% inhibition of colon tumors. LFA-9 showed
significant suppression of markers of proliferation and inflammation.
Overall, above results suggest LFA-9 as a novel dual mPGES-1/5-LOX
inhibitor, a safer agent than other NSAIDs and has a potential for
prevention of CRC in high-risk patients.(Grant Support: NCI N01-CN
25001-26).

