Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of tumor immune microenvironment in response to
PD-L1 therapy initiated at different time points post inoculation in
syngeneic mouse models


The tumor microenvironment is an important aspect of cancer biology that
contributes to tumor initiation, progression and responses to therapy.
Cells and molecules of the immune system are fundamental components of
the tumor microenvironment which have been known to vary widely and are
important in determining the anti-tumor immune response. The approval of
immune checkpoint inhibitors like PD-1 and CTLA-4 antibodies has resulted
in a lot of research activity in immune-oncology. Syngeneic mouse models
have been utilized to understand the preclinical immune response as a
surrogate to the clinical response. The timing of immune checkpoint
inhibitor dosing is supposed to play an important role on the tumor
growth in mouse models. In order to understand the correlation of tumor
regression, survival and immune response in a preclinical mouse model, we
evaluated the effect of different times of treatment initiation with
Program Death Ligand-1 (PD-L1) on tumor volume, survival and tumor
infiltrating leukocytes (TILs). Various dosing regimens evaluated
included initiation of PD-L1 therapy on the day of inoculation, 6 and 12
days post inoculation. Tumors were collected from three different
syngeneic mouse models (CT26, RENCA and B16F10) and profiled for the
presence of tumor infiltrating leukocytes (TILs) using flow cytometry.
Major sub-population of TIL's examined included T-regulatory cells
(Tregs), Tumor Associated Macrophages (TAMs) and Myeloid Derived
Suppressor Cells (MDSCs). Finally, an attempt was made to identify any
correlation or lack thereof between tumor growth and tumor immune
microenvironment.

