Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PD-L1 expression and its relationship with other driver genes in
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)


Aims: In order to understand the potential patient population who could
benefit from anti PD-1/PD-L1 mono or combinational therapies, this study
aimed to profile a panel of immune-mediated therapy for cancer (IMT-C)
related biomarkers (CD8, PD-1, PD-L1 and CTLA-4) and molecular targeted
therapy biomarkers (EGFRmut, KRASmut, ALK, ROS1 and MET) in NSCLC
patients.Methods: Tumor samples from 356 Chinese NSCLC patients including
191 adenocarcinomas (AD) and 142 squamous carcinomas (SCC) were analyzed
in this study. There were 221 early stage (I to IIIa) and 113 late stage
(IIIb and IV) patients.PD-L1, PD-1, CTLA-4 and MET expression were
detected using immunohistochemical (IHC) staining on formalin fixed
paraffin embedded (FFPE) tissues. PD-L1 and CD8 expression were also
simultaneously observed using a dual-color immunofluorescence (IF) assay.
EGFR and KRAS mutations were detected by sequencing analysis. ALK and
ROS1 gene rearrangements were defined by break-apart FISH assays, and MET
gene amplification was also detected using a FISH assay.Results: Among
356 NSCLC patient samples, 145 (40.7%) had PD-L1 positive staining on 5%
tumor cells (TC). The PD-L1 positive rate on TC was significantly higher
in SCC than in AD (47.9% vs 34.0%, p = 0.011). In AD patients, PD-L1
expression was significantly elevated in males (p = 0.0059), smokers (p =
0.0003), higher tumor grade (pAims: In order to understand the potential
patient population who could benefit from anti PD-1/PD-L1 mono or
combinational therapies, this study aimed to profile a panel of
immune-mediated therapy for cancer (IMT-C) related biomarkers (CD8, PD-1,
PD-L1 and CTLA-4) and molecular targeted therapy biomarkers (EGFRmut,
KRASmut, ALK, ROS1 and MET) in NSCLC patients.Methods: Tumor samples from
356 Chinese NSCLC patients including 191 adenocarcinomas (AD) and 142
squamous carcinomas (SCC) were analyzed in this study. There were 221
early stage (I to IIIa) and 113 late stage (IIIb and IV) patients.PD-L1,
PD-1, CTLA-4 and MET expression were detected using immunohistochemical
(IHC) staining on formalin fixed paraffin embedded (FFPE) tissues. PD-L1
and CD8 expression were also simultaneously observed using a dual-color
immunofluorescence (IF) assay. EGFR and KRAS mutations were detected by
sequencing analysis. ALK and ROS1 gene rearrangements were defined by
break-apart FISH assays, and MET gene amplification was also detected
using a FISH assay.Results: Among 356 NSCLC patient samples, 145 (40.7%)
had PD-L1 positive staining on 5% tumor cells (TC). The PD-L1 positive
rate on TC was significantly higher in SCC than in AD (47.9% vs 34.0%, p
= 0.011). In AD patients, PD-L1 expression was significantly elevated in
males (p = 0.0059), smokers (p = 0.0003), higher tumor grade (p<0.00001)
and late stage (p = 0.0009) patients. In addition, we found that 53.1%
(113/213) patient samples had PD-L1 expression on tumor infiltrating
immune cells (IC). Again, the PD-L1 positive rate on IC was higher in SCC
than in AD (66.0% vs 36.6%, pAims: In order to understand the potential
patient population who could benefit from anti PD-1/PD-L1 mono or
combinational therapies, this study aimed to profile a panel of
immune-mediated therapy for cancer (IMT-C) related biomarkers (CD8, PD-1,
PD-L1 and CTLA-4) and molecular targeted therapy biomarkers (EGFRmut,
KRASmut, ALK, ROS1 and MET) in NSCLC patients.Methods: Tumor samples from
356 Chinese NSCLC patients including 191 adenocarcinomas (AD) and 142
squamous carcinomas (SCC) were analyzed in this study. There were 221
early stage (I to IIIa) and 113 late stage (IIIb and IV) patients.PD-L1,
PD-1, CTLA-4 and MET expression were detected using immunohistochemical
(IHC) staining on formalin fixed paraffin embedded (FFPE) tissues. PD-L1
and CD8 expression were also simultaneously observed using a dual-color
immunofluorescence (IF) assay. EGFR and KRAS mutations were detected by
sequencing analysis. ALK and ROS1 gene rearrangements were defined by
break-apart FISH assays, and MET gene amplification was also detected
using a FISH assay.Results: Among 356 NSCLC patient samples, 145 (40.7%)
had PD-L1 positive staining on 5% tumor cells (TC). The PD-L1 positive
rate on TC was significantly higher in SCC than in AD (47.9% vs 34.0%, p
= 0.011). In AD patients, PD-L1 expression was significantly elevated in
males (p = 0.0059), smokers (p = 0.0003), higher tumor grade (p<0.00001)
and late stage (p = 0.0009) patients. In addition, we found that 53.1%
(113/213) patient samples had PD-L1 expression on tumor infiltrating
immune cells (IC). Again, the PD-L1 positive rate on IC was higher in SCC
than in AD (66.0% vs 36.6%, p<0.0001). Comparing the two cell types, 70%
of the total cases had consistent PD-L1 staining status (positive or
negative) on TC and tumor infiltrating IC (pAims: In order to understand
the potential patient population who could benefit from anti PD-1/PD-L1
mono or combinational therapies, this study aimed to profile a panel of
immune-mediated therapy for cancer (IMT-C) related biomarkers (CD8, PD-1,
PD-L1 and CTLA-4) and molecular targeted therapy biomarkers (EGFRmut,
KRASmut, ALK, ROS1 and MET) in NSCLC patients.Methods: Tumor samples from
356 Chinese NSCLC patients including 191 adenocarcinomas (AD) and 142
squamous carcinomas (SCC) were analyzed in this study. There were 221
early stage (I to IIIa) and 113 late stage (IIIb and IV) patients.PD-L1,
PD-1, CTLA-4 and MET expression were detected using immunohistochemical
(IHC) staining on formalin fixed paraffin embedded (FFPE) tissues. PD-L1
and CD8 expression were also simultaneously observed using a dual-color
immunofluorescence (IF) assay. EGFR and KRAS mutations were detected by
sequencing analysis. ALK and ROS1 gene rearrangements were defined by
break-apart FISH assays, and MET gene amplification was also detected
using a FISH assay.Results: Among 356 NSCLC patient samples, 145 (40.7%)
had PD-L1 positive staining on 5% tumor cells (TC). The PD-L1 positive
rate on TC was significantly higher in SCC than in AD (47.9% vs 34.0%, p
= 0.011). In AD patients, PD-L1 expression was significantly elevated in
males (p = 0.0059), smokers (p = 0.0003), higher tumor grade (p<0.00001)
and late stage (p = 0.0009) patients. In addition, we found that 53.1%
(113/213) patient samples had PD-L1 expression on tumor infiltrating
immune cells (IC). Again, the PD-L1 positive rate on IC was higher in SCC
than in AD (66.0% vs 36.6%, p<0.0001). Comparing the two cell types, 70%
of the total cases had consistent PD-L1 staining status (positive or
negative) on TC and tumor infiltrating IC (p<0.0001). Among 117 cases
detected using dual-color IF, all had CD8 positive lymphocytes in the
tumor samples while 54 cases were PD-L1 TC positive. The most interesting
finding was CD8 and PD-L1 double stained lymphocytes were mainly located
in the tumor center in 37 out of 42 cases. Furthermore, combined analysis
of the eight biomarkers studied in this cohort of NSCLC samples showed
that tumor PD-L1 positive staining (on 5% tumor cells) had overlaps with
the other NSCLC driver genes alterations in 28% of SCC and 69% of AD
samples.Conclusion: This study showed almost half of NSCLC patients have
PD-L1 positive expression on TC, which to some extent overlaps with
EGFR/KRAS mut, ALK/ROS1 rearrangement and MET alteration. As a potential
patient selection biomarker, the PD-L1 positive prevalence in NSCLC TC
and/or tumor infiltrating IC provides a strong evidence for PD-1/PD-L1
immune therapy in single agent or in combination with the molecular
targeted agents. Furthermore, CD8+ lymphocyte infiltration in the tumor
center and its PD-L1 expression status might also be considered as part
of patient selection biomarker strategy.

