Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Protein kinase C beta II suppresses colorectal cancer by
regulating IGF1 mediated cell survival


Despite extensive efforts, cancer therapies directed at the Protein
Kinase C (PKC) family of serine/threonine kinases have failed in clinical
trials. These therapies have been directed at inhibiting PKC and have, in
some cases, worsened disease outcome. Here we examine colon cancer
patients and show not only that PKC Beta II is a tumour suppressor, but
patients with low levels of this isozyme have significantly decreased
disease free survival. Specifically, analysis of gene expression levels
of all PKC genes in matched normal and cancer tissue samples from colon
cancer patients revealed a striking down-regulation of the gene coding
PKC Beta in the cancer tissue (n = 21). Tissue microarray analysis
revealed a dramatic down-regulation of PKC Beta II protein levels in both
the epithelial and stromal diseased tissue (n = 166). Of clinical
significance, low levels of the protein in the normal tissue of patients
is associated with a low (10%) 10 year survival compared with a much
higher (60%) survival in patients with relatively high levels of the
protein. Consistent with PKC Beta II levels protecting against colon
cancer, overexpression of PKC Beta II in colon cancer cell lines reveals
that PKC Beta II reverses transformation in cell based assays. Further to
this, activation of PKC Beta II in an IGF-1 dependent manor showed a
downregulation of AKT, indicating a role for PKCs in regulating IGF-1
mediated cell survival. Thus, PKC Beta II is a tumour suppressor in colon
cancer and low levels serve as a predictor for poor survival outcome.

