Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovery of a novel peptide for improvement of radiotherapeutic
efficacy and development of prognotic diagnosis


Cancer can be treated by the various modalities including surgery,
chemotherapy, radiotherapy, among which the radiotherapy is the most
important therapeutics in the cancer treatment. Despite the progression
of modalities, cancer therapy has been constrained by impasse of
prediction of treatment outcome and direction of cancer therapeutics
because of diagnosis date, metastasis and genetic diversity of the
individual patients.In this study, we discovered specific tumor targeting
peptides and radiotherapy-responding peptides suitable to apply to cancer
therapy and monitoring of radiotherapy response. For a non-invasive
imaging for potential cancer diagnosis system, we screened peptides using
the phage display technique. Phage display is used in various
pharmaceutical biotechnologies, and the one of the most powerful
technologies to identify novel peptides regulating carcinogenesis. To
emphasize the function of peptide ligands in a living body and consider
the tumoral microenvironment, we used the patient-derived xenograft (PDX)
tumor models for in vivo peptide displayed phage screening. It is
warranted that the peptides specifically targeting in vivo human cancer
xenografts with radiation treatment or not in colorectal cancer PDXs. We
performed in vivo peptide screening in the two different cases of
colorectal cancer PDX mouse models, and selected peptides were confirmed
to radiation responding peptides and radiation resistant peptides. The
results suggested that selected peptides were a promising diagnostic lead
molecule for rapid and accurate detection for the radiotherapy
response.Taken together, we described a strategy to identify the peptides
by in vivo phage display, and peptides possessed the specific targeting
ability which would be potentially feasible for the development of
personalized precision treatment. Its might be potential IR-guided probe
and prognostic diagnosis in radiotherapy for colorectal cancer.Keywords:
Peptide, Colorectal cancer, Patient-derived xenograft (PDX), Radiation,
In vivo peptide screening

