Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of a unique subpopulation of mesenchymal-like
colorectal cancers associated with better survival


The epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) has been well-recognized as
an important mechanism promoting cancer cell invasion and stemness,
metastasis and therapeutic resistance. Various types of cancers with
high-EMT (mesenchymal-like) features have been correlated with poorer
survival. For example, recently, an international consortium (Guinney et
al, Nature Medicine, 2015) has coalesced six independent classification
systems of colorectal cancers into four consensus molecular subtypes
(CMSs), among which only CMS4 (mesenchymal, 23%) was associated with
worse overall survival and worse relapse free survival.Here we report an
analysis of 458 colorectal tumors that identified a subpopulation (n =
31, 6.8%) of mesenchymal-like colorectal cancers with unique molecular
features. Surprisingly, these tumors were significantly associated with
better survival. All samples underwent targeted exome sequencing of 1,321
cancer-related genes, global gene expression profiling and microsatellite
instability (MSI) analysis, and were evaluated for the Kaplan-Meier
survival and various additional correlation analyses. We explored gene
expression signatures to measure EMT, RAS/MAPK, growth factor signaling,
and mucinous characteristics.While we recently found that colorectal
tumors with wild-type APC (n = 151, 33.0%) were associated with worse
outcome, we identified a mucinous subpopulation of these tumors (n = 31,
20.7%) which were associated with better overall survival (p = 0.004).
This subpopulation of wt APC tumors were mesenchymal-like, as indicated
by its significantly higher mRNA expression of the mesenchymal marker VIM
(p = 0.0001) along with a robustly higher EMT signature scores (pThe
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) has been well-recognized as an
important mechanism promoting cancer cell invasion and stemness,
metastasis and therapeutic resistance. Various types of cancers with
high-EMT (mesenchymal-like) features have been correlated with poorer
survival. For example, recently, an international consortium (Guinney et
al, Nature Medicine, 2015) has coalesced six independent classification
systems of colorectal cancers into four consensus molecular subtypes
(CMSs), among which only CMS4 (mesenchymal, 23%) was associated with
worse overall survival and worse relapse free survival.Here we report an
analysis of 458 colorectal tumors that identified a subpopulation (n =
31, 6.8%) of mesenchymal-like colorectal cancers with unique molecular
features. Surprisingly, these tumors were significantly associated with
better survival. All samples underwent targeted exome sequencing of 1,321
cancer-related genes, global gene expression profiling and microsatellite
instability (MSI) analysis, and were evaluated for the Kaplan-Meier
survival and various additional correlation analyses. We explored gene
expression signatures to measure EMT, RAS/MAPK, growth factor signaling,
and mucinous characteristics.While we recently found that colorectal
tumors with wild-type APC (n = 151, 33.0%) were associated with worse
outcome, we identified a mucinous subpopulation of these tumors (n = 31,
20.7%) which were associated with better overall survival (p = 0.004).
This subpopulation of wt APC tumors were mesenchymal-like, as indicated
by its significantly higher mRNA expression of the mesenchymal marker VIM
(p = 0.0001) along with a robustly higher EMT signature scores
(p<0.0001). This is in contrast to another mucinous colorectal
subpopulation, MSI tumors that are epithelial-like, also with a good
survival. Moreover, unlike hyper-mutated MSI tumors, the subpopulation
identified appears to be correlated with the least-mutated tumors that
lack common drivers (e.g. TP53, KRAS and BRAF). Compared to other wt APC
tumors, this subpopulation had lower mRNA expression of a number of
canonical Wnt/beta-catenin targeted genes including MYC (p = 0.009), MET
(pThe epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) has been well-recognized as
an important mechanism promoting cancer cell invasion and stemness,
metastasis and therapeutic resistance. Various types of cancers with
high-EMT (mesenchymal-like) features have been correlated with poorer
survival. For example, recently, an international consortium (Guinney et
al, Nature Medicine, 2015) has coalesced six independent classification
systems of colorectal cancers into four consensus molecular subtypes
(CMSs), among which only CMS4 (mesenchymal, 23%) was associated with
worse overall survival and worse relapse free survival.Here we report an
analysis of 458 colorectal tumors that identified a subpopulation (n =
31, 6.8%) of mesenchymal-like colorectal cancers with unique molecular
features. Surprisingly, these tumors were significantly associated with
better survival. All samples underwent targeted exome sequencing of 1,321
cancer-related genes, global gene expression profiling and microsatellite
instability (MSI) analysis, and were evaluated for the Kaplan-Meier
survival and various additional correlation analyses. We explored gene
expression signatures to measure EMT, RAS/MAPK, growth factor signaling,
and mucinous characteristics.While we recently found that colorectal
tumors with wild-type APC (n = 151, 33.0%) were associated with worse
outcome, we identified a mucinous subpopulation of these tumors (n = 31,
20.7%) which were associated with better overall survival (p = 0.004).
This subpopulation of wt APC tumors were mesenchymal-like, as indicated
by its significantly higher mRNA expression of the mesenchymal marker VIM
(p = 0.0001) along with a robustly higher EMT signature scores
(p<0.0001). This is in contrast to another mucinous colorectal
subpopulation, MSI tumors that are epithelial-like, also with a good
survival. Moreover, unlike hyper-mutated MSI tumors, the subpopulation
identified appears to be correlated with the least-mutated tumors that
lack common drivers (e.g. TP53, KRAS and BRAF). Compared to other wt APC
tumors, this subpopulation had lower mRNA expression of a number of
canonical Wnt/beta-catenin targeted genes including MYC (p = 0.009), MET
(p<0.0001), CDKN2A (p = 0.03), LGR5 (p = 0.0015), HNF1A (p = 0.003), and
SOX9 (p = 0.01), while expression of other targeted genes TCF4 (pThe
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) has been well-recognized as an
important mechanism promoting cancer cell invasion and stemness,
metastasis and therapeutic resistance. Various types of cancers with
high-EMT (mesenchymal-like) features have been correlated with poorer
survival. For example, recently, an international consortium (Guinney et
al, Nature Medicine, 2015) has coalesced six independent classification
systems of colorectal cancers into four consensus molecular subtypes
(CMSs), among which only CMS4 (mesenchymal, 23%) was associated with
worse overall survival and worse relapse free survival.Here we report an
analysis of 458 colorectal tumors that identified a subpopulation (n =
31, 6.8%) of mesenchymal-like colorectal cancers with unique molecular
features. Surprisingly, these tumors were significantly associated with
better survival. All samples underwent targeted exome sequencing of 1,321
cancer-related genes, global gene expression profiling and microsatellite
instability (MSI) analysis, and were evaluated for the Kaplan-Meier
survival and various additional correlation analyses. We explored gene
expression signatures to measure EMT, RAS/MAPK, growth factor signaling,
and mucinous characteristics.While we recently found that colorectal
tumors with wild-type APC (n = 151, 33.0%) were associated with worse
outcome, we identified a mucinous subpopulation of these tumors (n = 31,
20.7%) which were associated with better overall survival (p = 0.004).
This subpopulation of wt APC tumors were mesenchymal-like, as indicated
by its significantly higher mRNA expression of the mesenchymal marker VIM
(p = 0.0001) along with a robustly higher EMT signature scores
(p<0.0001). This is in contrast to another mucinous colorectal
subpopulation, MSI tumors that are epithelial-like, also with a good
survival. Moreover, unlike hyper-mutated MSI tumors, the subpopulation
identified appears to be correlated with the least-mutated tumors that
lack common drivers (e.g. TP53, KRAS and BRAF). Compared to other wt APC
tumors, this subpopulation had lower mRNA expression of a number of
canonical Wnt/beta-catenin targeted genes including MYC (p = 0.009), MET
(p<0.0001), CDKN2A (p = 0.03), LGR5 (p = 0.0015), HNF1A (p = 0.003), and
SOX9 (p = 0.01), while expression of other targeted genes TCF4
(p<0.0001), TNC (p = 0.04) and NOTCH2 (p = 0.0006) were upregulated.
Furthermore, these tumors were also characterized by attenuated
activation of RAS/MAPK and growth factor-mediated signaling.Taken
together, we have identified a specific subpopulation of colorectal
cancers with distinct biological and prognostic features, indicating that
a fine-tune classification of colorectal cancers is necessary to improve
resolution of appropriate therapy.

