Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Therapeutic opportunities of RANK pathway in breast cancer


RANK pathway, key in bone remodeling and metastasis, is essential for
mammary gland development. Using genetic mouse models we have previously
shown that RANKL is the main mediator of the protumorigenic role of
progesterone in the mouse mammary gland. RANK overexpression in
non-transformed human mammary cell lines induces epithelial to
mesenchymal transition and stemness, and promotes tumorigenesis and
metastasis in breast cancer lines. RANK is expressed in a subset of basal
and luminal human adenocarcinomas.Our goal is to determine a putative
association of RANK and RANKL expression in breast adenocarcinomas with
clinical parameters and to evaluate the functional role of RANK signaling
using patient derived orthoxenografts of breast cancer. We have analyzed
RANK and RANKL expression levels in an extensive collection of human
breast adenocarcinomas collected from multiple centers, enriched in
metastatic tumor samples. From the 318 patients with breast
adenocarcinomas 138 developed metastasis. RANK expression is found on
tumor cells but also on stromal cells, including tumor associated
macrophages. RANKL is strongly expressed in some tumors, although the
frequency is low. Analyses of RANK and RANKL mRNA and protein expression
has been performed in multiple models of patient derived breast
orthoxenografts. Several models with variable levels of RANK as well as
RANKL expression have been identified and established in the laboratory.
Functionality of the pathway was corroborated analyzing NF-kB activation
upon in vitro and in vivo treatments with RANKL, in order to activate
RANK signaling, or with RANK-Fc to inhibit it. We found that RANKL
treatment induced NF-kB activation even in tumor cells with low levels of
RANK expression.

