Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Multivalent peptoid conjugates suppress enzalutamide-resistant
prostate cancer cellular proliferation


Development of resistance to latest anti-androgens treatment for advanced
prostate cancer is a growing concern. New strategies to block androgen
receptor (AR) function in castration resistant prostate cancer are
therefore required. Here we report the characterization of a multivalent
conjugate presenting two spatially defined bioactive ethisterone ligands
as spatially defined pendant groups on a peptoid oligomer. The conjugate,
termed Multivalent Peptoid Conjugate 6 (MPC6), suppressed the
proliferation of multiple AR-expressing prostate cancer cell lines
including those that failed to respond to enzalutamide and ARN509. The
structure-activity relationships of MPC6 variants were evaluated,
revealing that increased spacing between ethisterone moieties and changes
in peptoid topology eliminated its anti-proliferative effect.
Mechanistically, MPC6 blocked AR coactivator-peptide interaction, and
decreased AR protein half-life. Pharmacological studies revealed that
MPC6 was metabolically stable and displayed a low plasma clearance rate.
Importantly, MPC6 treatment reduced tumor growth and decreased Ki67 and
AR expression in mouse xenograft models of enzalutamide-resistant
LNCaP-abl cells. Thus, MPC6 represents a new class of compounds with the
potential to combat treatment-resistant prostate cancer.

