Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Functional group elaboration of a low molecular weight fragment to
yield the novel BET family bromodomain inhibitor ABBV-075


Phenotypic cell-based screening assays combined with affinity
chromatography and mass-spectrometry identified the BET family of
bromodomains as potential targets for blocking proliferation in a variety
of cancer cell lines. Lead-finding investigations included screening a
library of compounds with an average molecular weight of 225 for binding
to the 13C-labeled 2nd bromodomain of BRD4 using 2-dimensional NMR. A
pyridazinone fragment emerged from this effort that possessed weak
binding affinity (Kd = 130 uM). The binding affinity was improved by
roughly 100,000-fold through an X-ray structure enabled medicinal
chemistry program that included moving to a pyrrolopyridone core along
with judicious placement of additional functional groups.
Antiproliferative potencies strongly correlated with potencies in a
cell-based target engagement assay, suggesting that the antiproliferative
effects resulted from the inhibition of BRD4/BET protein function. In
vitro metabolite ID studies in rat liver microsomes helped identify sites
of oxidative metabolism. The addition of fluorine atoms at these
locations improved rat in vitro microsomal stability that translated to
low in vivo clearance and high oral exposure in rat. The final molecule,
ABBV-075, exhibited long half-lives and low unbound clearances in rat,
mouse, dog and monkey. ABBV-075 demonstrated significant tumor growth
inhibition in mouse flank xenograft studies representing diverse
hematological and solid tumor malignancies and recently entered Phase I
clinical studies.Disclosures:All authors are employees of AbbVie. The
design, study conduct, and financial support for this research were
provided by AbbVie. AbbVie participated in the interpretation of data,
review, and approval of the publication.

