Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Joint somatic mutation and germline variant identification and
scoring from tumor molecular profiling and ct-DNA monitoring of cancer
patients by high-throughput sequencing


Cancer tumor profiling by targeted resequencing of actionable cancer
genes is rapidly becoming the standard approach for selecting targeted
therapies and clinical trials in refractory cancer patients. In this
clinical scenario, a tumor sample is obtained from an FFPE block and
sequenced by targeted next-generation sequencing (NGS) to uncover
actionable somatic mutations in relevant cancer genes. Some of the
challenges that arise in analyzing tumor-derived NGS data include
distinguishing between somatic and germline variants in the absence of
normal tissue data, recognizing pathogenic germline variants, and
identifying sequencing errors (which occur at about 0.5% rate).
Additional challenges arise when considering other clinical applications
of NGS such as sequencing cell-free tumor DNA (cf-DNA) from plasma
samples to monitor disease response or disease recurrence. Here we
present a principled approach to identify both single-nucleotide and
small insertion/deletion somatic mutations and germline variants from NGS
data of tumor tissue that leverages the allelic fraction patterns in
tumors and prior information from external databases through the use of a
Bayesian Network algorithm. Our approach allows us to score each putative
mutation or variant with respect to its probability of belonging to each
variant class, versus classification as a sequencing error. The method
enables the joint calling of related samples form the same patient, such
as cases where a cf-DNA sample and primary tumor sample are both profiled
improving sensitivity and specificity. We validated our method by
analyzing data obtained with the TOMA OS-Seq targeted sequencing RUO
assay for 98 cancer genes from a mixture of well-known genomes, patient
case triads (where normal, tumor and cf-DNA are available), and a
retrospective analysis of tumor patient data that underwent clinical
tumor profiling for therapy selection.

