Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Reactive oxygen species and ERK2 phosphorylation are required for
NSC59984 to induce mutant p53 protein degradation and restore p53
signaling


Tumor suppressor p53 is mutated in over 50% of human cancers. p53
mutation abolishes wild-type p53 function and also endows mutant p53 with
a gain-of-function (GOF) that drives tumor growth and drug resistance.
Targeting mutant p53 is an attractive strategy for cancer therapy. We
recently reported (Zhang et al., Cancer Research, 2015) a small-molecule
NSC59984 with dual capabilities to restore p53 signaling and destabilize
mutant p53 protein (depleting GOF). We now demonstrate the role of
reactive oxygen species (ROS) and ERK2 in the mechanism of action of
NSC59984. We observe a sustained-phosphorylation of ERK2 in cancer cells
treated with NSC59984. Blockade of ERK2 rescues mutant p53 from
NSC59984-mediated degradation, and inhibits restoration of p53 signaling
in mutant p53-expressing cells. Thus, sustained ERK2 phosphorylation is
required for NSC59984-induced degradation of mutant p53 protein, and
depletion of mutant p53 contributes to the restoration of p53 pathway.
NSC59984 induces MDM2 phosphorylation that correlates with ERK2
phosphorylation. The effect of NSC59984 on MDM2 phosphorylation is
blocked by U0126 and knockdown of ERK2. NSC59984-mediated mutant p53
protein degradation is inhibited by MDM2 knockdown, and enhanced by MDM2
overexpression. Thus, ERK2-dependent MDM2 phosphorylation is a major
determinant of NSC59984-mediated mutant p53 degradation. We investigated
the role of ROS in the effect of NSC59984 on ERK2 phosphorylation. ROS is
induced by NSC59984 and a decrease in ROS by NAC inhibits
NSC59984-induced ERK2 phosphorylation, and mutant p53 protein
degradation. Increased ROS by BSO treatment enhances the NSC59984 effect
on ERK2 phosphorylation, mutant p53 protein degradation and restoration
of p53 signaling. We conclude that ROS is required for NSC59984 to
sustain ERK2 phosphorylation, which, in turn, is required for
NSC59984-induced mutant p53 protein degradation via MDM2. The combination
of NSC59984 and BSO synergistically induces cell death in colorectal
cancer cells. ROS and ERK2 are two important factors required for
NSC59984 to degrade mutant p53 protein, restore p53 signaling and induce
cell death. These results provide a rationale for clinical testing of
NSC59984 in tumors with high ROS.

