Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dislodgement of K-Ras from plasma membranes, induction of
apoptosis and tumor regression by PCAIs, a novel class of
polyisoprenylated small molecules


Although mutation-induced dysregulation of Ras signaling constitutes the
biochemical change that drives some of the most difficult-to-manage
cancers, directly targeting the constitutively active mutant Ras GTPases
has not resulted in clinically useful drugs. Therefore, modulating Ras
activity for targeted treatment of cancer remains an urgent healthcare
need. In the current study, we investigated a novel class of compounds,
the polyisoprenylated cysteinyl amide inhibitors (PCAIs), for their
anticancer molecular mechanisms using the NSCLC cell panel with K-Ras
and/or other mutant genes. Treatment of the lung cancer cells with PCAIs,
NSL-RD-035, NSL-BA-036, NSL-BA-040, NSL-BA-055 and NSL-BA-040 resulted in
concentration-dependent cell death in both K-Ras mutant (A549 and
NCI-H1573), N-Ras mutant (NCI-H1299) and other (NCI-H661, NCI-H460,
NCI-H1975, NCI-H1563) NSCLC cells. The PCAIs at sub- to low micromolar
1.0 -10 M concentrations induced the degeneration of 3D spheroid
cultures, inhibited, clonogenic cell growth, and induced marked apoptosis
and cell cycle arrest, together with a significant increase in active
caspase 3 (pAlthough mutation-induced dysregulation of Ras signaling
constitutes the biochemical change that drives some of the most
difficult-to-manage cancers, directly targeting the constitutively active
mutant Ras GTPases has not resulted in clinically useful drugs.
Therefore, modulating Ras activity for targeted treatment of cancer
remains an urgent healthcare need. In the current study, we investigated
a novel class of compounds, the polyisoprenylated cysteinyl amide
inhibitors (PCAIs), for their anticancer molecular mechanisms using the
NSCLC cell panel with K-Ras and/or other mutant genes. Treatment of the
lung cancer cells with PCAIs, NSL-RD-035, NSL-BA-036, NSL-BA-040,
NSL-BA-055 and NSL-BA-040 resulted in concentration-dependent cell death
in both K-Ras mutant (A549 and NCI-H1573), N-Ras mutant (NCI-H1299) and
other (NCI-H661, NCI-H460, NCI-H1975, NCI-H1563) NSCLC cells. The PCAIs
at sub- to low micromolar 1.0 -10 M concentrations induced the
degeneration of 3D spheroid cultures, inhibited, clonogenic cell growth,
and induced marked apoptosis and cell cycle arrest, together with a
significant increase in active caspase 3 (p<0.001). NSL-BA-040 at 5 M
prominently dislodged YFP-tagged K-Ras, but not H-Ras and N-Ras from the
plasma membranes of transfected A549 and NCI-H661 cells. NSL-RD-035
attenuated the tumor growth of A549 cells in xenografted athymic mice in
vivo. Taken together, PCAIs likely suppress NSCLC cell growth by
disrupting growth signaling through the dislodgement of K-Ras the plasma
membrane.

