Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dual conditional loss of BLIMP-1 and p53 in B-cells drives B-cell
lymphomagenesis


The transcription factor p53 is a well defined tumor suppressor involved
in the modulation of cell proliferation, cell cycle progression and
programmed cell death. BLIMP-1 plays a crucial role in modulating B-cell
terminal differentiation towards Ig-secreting plasma cells, and it also
acts as a tumor suppressor, as documented in both diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma and Burkitt lymphoma. Whether B-cell specific loss of both p53
and BLIMP-1 may favor a B-cell lymphoma phenotype remains unanswered.
Therefore, we aimed to define the functional relevance of both p53 and
BLIMP-1 n B-cell lymphomagenesis in vivo, and generated dual
p53/BLIMP-1-floxed conditional inactivation in B-cells, using mice
expressing Cre recombinase under the control of CD19 promoter. 100% of
the generated CD19Cre/Cre/BLIMPF/F/p53F/F transgenic mice (referred as
CD19/Bl-/p53-) presented with diffuse lymphadenomegalies, marked
splenomegaly, and hepatomegaly, observed in 90.3% and 77.4% of the cases,
respectively. Other clinical manifestations included presence of ascites
and hind lymb paralysis that were documented in 12.9% and 19.3% of the
cases. The CD19/Bl-/p53- showed worse survival compared to
BLIMPF/F/p53F/F mice non-expressing the CD19/Cre recombinase,
CD19Cre/Cre/p53F/F, or CD19Cre/Cre/BLIMPF/F (363, 469.5, 460.5, and 770
days, respectively).H.E. staining of CD19/Bl-/p53derived lymph nodes,
defined a nodal architecture completely effaced by a relatively
monomorphic population of large sized atypical lymphoid cells with finely
clumped and dispersed chromatin, and multiple basophilic medium sized,
paracentrally situated nucleoli. A starry sky pattern was also observed.
Overall, these features are compatible with a BL-like or high-grade
lymphomas. IHC analysis confirmed a marked positivity for B220 staining,
whit negativity for TdT, Bcl6, CD138 and CD4, CD8. Tumors were confirmed
to be B220+/IgM+, with either Igk- or Ig-lambda-restriction as
demonstrated by flow cytometry. Moreover, tumors were shown to be either
mono- or bi-clonal, as demonstrated by Southern blotting, thus further
confirming the clonal transformation induced by dual BLIMP/p53 deletion
in B cells.Whole exome sequencing was performed from B220-selected cells
obtained from pathological lymph nodes of CD19/Bl-/p53- mice (n: 3) and
from matched tail-derived tissues, used as germline. Agilent SureSelectXT
was used for library prep. WES was performed on the Illumina HiSeq 2500
platform. Tumor and matched normal DNA sequencing data were processed
using the Broad Institute best practices pipeline. We have identified 213
SNVs. Among them, somatic mutations were mapped on genes involved in the
regulation of focal adhesion, PDGF singaling, p53-downstream pathway, and
lipoprotein metabolism.These studies demonstrate that the specific dual
inactivation of p53 and BLIMP in B-cells promotes oncogenic
transformation, resulting in aggressive B-cell lymphoma development.

