Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Germline genetic variants in GATA3 and breast cancer treatment
outcomes in SWOG 8897 trial


Purpose: GATA3 is involved in estrogen signaling and mammary cell
differentiation, and is frequently mutated in breast cancer. Germline
variations of GATA3 are prognostic in childhood acute lymphoblastic
leukemia (ALL). Thus, we sought to examine their prognostic and
predictive role in breast cancer.Methods: SWOG S8897 comprised two groups
of breast cancer patients. In the first high-risk group, women were
randomly assigned to CAF vs. CMF, and secondarily randomized to tamoxifen
or not. In the second low risk group, women did not receive any adjuvant
therapy after surgery. Germline DNA was extracted from uninvolved
axillary lymph nodes and 12 candidate GATA3 SNPs were genotyped.
Associations of genotypes with treatment outcomes were evaluated in 441
women in the treated and 799 in the untreated groups separately. Hazard
ratio (HR) for disease free (DFS) and overall survival (OS) for each SNP
was estimated using multivariate Cox hazard regression. Further
stratified analyses by tamoxifen were performed in the treated
group.Results: After correcting for multiple testing, we identified
significant associations of two variants (rs3802604 and rs568727) with
DFS and OS for patients who received adjuvant chemotherapy. Women
carrying the variant GG genotype at rs3802604 had significantly poorer
DFS (HR = 1.95, 95% CI: 1.27-2.99, p = 0.002) and OS (HR = 2.45, 95% CI:
1.48-4.05, p = 0.0005), compared to women carrying the common AA
genotype. Associations of similar magnitude were found for rs568727. In
contrast, no association with either SNP was found in the untreated
group. Subgroup analysis suggested that these two SNPs more strongly
influenced treatment outcomes in the patients who also received
tamoxifen. Seven additional variants were also associated with OS and DFS
in the tamoxifen treated group. Only 3 of the 12 SNPs analyzed in GATA3
were not associated with survival in this subgroup; however, these three
SNPs (rs3781093, rs3824662, and rs3802600) associated with OS in the
group not treated with tamoxifen. Functional annotation revealed that
several GATA3 SNPs, e.g., rs3802604, rs369421, and rs3824662, are likely
to function by affecting transcription factor binding and/or altering
regulatory chromatin states at this locus.Conclusions: GATA3 harbors
common germline genetic variants that are related to survival following
adjuvant chemotherapy and endocrine therapy in breast cancer patients.

