Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular imaging of EGFR-expressing tumors with novel targeted
protein scaffold, anti-EGFR repebody


Repebody is a binding scaffold based on variable lymphocyte receptors
which are nonimmunoglobulin antibodies composed of leucine-rich repeat
modules in jawless vertebrates. Repebody can be developed against variety
of epitopes by module engineering. In this study, EGFR-specific repebody
(RBEGFR) was developed to visualize the status of receptor expression and
to prevent ligand binding that may inhibit autophosphorylation and
downstream intracellular signaling.We developed RBEGFR by phage display.
H1650, HCC827, A549 (human non-small cell lung cancer) and HT29 (human
colon cancer) were selected as EGFR expressing cell lines. MDA-MB-435
(human melanoma) and SW620 (human colon cancer) was selected as a
negative control. Specific binding of RBEGFR to cells and cancer tissue
was determined by immunofluorescence (IF) staining and/or FACS analysis.
In vivo imaging was done by i.v. injection of FNR-675 labeled RBEGFR (30
g/mouse) or 64Cu-NOTA- RBEGFR (7.4 MBq/mouse) in H1650, HCC827 and
HT29-bearing mouse models using cooled CCD camera or microPET,
respectively. Orthotopic colon cancer mice were generated by i.p.
injection of Azoxymethane (AOM; 10 mg/kg) and oral administration of 2%
dextran sulfate sodium (DSS). In vivo imaging was done by i.v. injection
FNR-675 labeled RBEGFR (30 g/mouse) in AOM/DSS mouse models using cooled
CCD camera or fluorescence microendoscopy.In vitro and in vivo IF
staining demonstrated that strong binding of RBEGFR to H1650, HCC827 and
HT29, but not to MDA-MB-435 and SW620. In vivo near infrared (NIR)
imaging demonstrated specific targeting of FNR-675-RBEGFR to grafted
H1650, HCC827 and HT29 tumor in mice. The 64Cu-NOTA- RBEGFR was detected
at the implanted tumor from 1 h (SUVmax: 1.340.12) after the injection,
peaked at 6 h (1.750.18), maintained to 24 h (1.330.17). The
radioactivity significantly decreased by blocking with cold form of 50 M
nave RBEGFR 1 day before injection of 64Cu-NOTA- RBEGFR, indicating
specific binding of RBEGFR to EGFR in vivo. Optical NIR imaging after
i.v. injection of FNR-675-RBEGFR showed specific signal in the abdomen of
AOM/DSS mice, but not in control mice. Correlation with surgical/necropsy
imaging, fluorescence endoscopy and pathology revealed strong
accumulation of FNR-675-RBEGFR in malignant dysplasia, but weak or no
accumulation in low grade tumor or benign lesion.In conclusion, the
RBEGFR could be developed for specific targeting of cancer overexpressing
EGFR. The fluorescence-labeled RBEGFR could be developed for imaging
agent for detecting colonic dysplasia and assessing EGFR status. In
particular, this agent may have a potential as an imaging companion
diagnostics to predict therapeutic outcome of targeted therapy with
monoclonal antibody for EGFR through pre-therapeutic visualization of
EGFR status. Our work provides a basis to develop potential strategy of
targeted immune-detection of cancers which may replace monoclonal
antibodies.

