Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Circulating fibroblast growth factor 21 (FGF21) as diagnostic and
prognostic biomarker in renal cancer


Clear-cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC), the most frequent renal
parenchyma malignant neoplasm, is considered a cell metabolic disease.
The finding of new biomarkers is needed for better sub-classification of
renal cell tumors as well as reliable predictors of outcome and therapy
response. Fibroblast Growth Factor 21 (FGF21) is a hepatokine that
regulates glucose, energy and lipid metabolism during stress-induced
pathologies. Despite the beneficial effects of FGF21 in diabetes and
obesity; up to date, the clinical implication of FGF21 as a cancer
biomarker was not investigated. Our main goal was to evaluate the role of
circulating FGF21 as a diagnostic and prognostic biomarker for ccRCC.
Initially, we measured the levels of circulating FGF21 in human healthy
controls (HC, n = 51) using a quantitative ELISA test (R&D Systems,
Inc.). No associations were observed between FGF21 serum concentration
and gender or age. FGF21 levels significantly correlated only with
triglycerides levels (Spearman's test: p Clear-cell renal cell carcinoma
(ccRCC), the most frequent renal parenchyma malignant neoplasm, is
considered a cell metabolic disease. The finding of new biomarkers is
needed for better sub-classification of renal cell tumors as well as
reliable predictors of outcome and therapy response. Fibroblast Growth
Factor 21 (FGF21) is a hepatokine that regulates glucose, energy and
lipid metabolism during stress-induced pathologies. Despite the
beneficial effects of FGF21 in diabetes and obesity; up to date, the
clinical implication of FGF21 as a cancer biomarker was not investigated.
Our main goal was to evaluate the role of circulating FGF21 as a
diagnostic and prognostic biomarker for ccRCC. Initially, we measured the
levels of circulating FGF21 in human healthy controls (HC, n = 51) using
a quantitative ELISA test (R&D Systems, Inc.). No associations were
observed between FGF21 serum concentration and gender or age. FGF21
levels significantly correlated only with triglycerides levels
(Spearman's test: p <0.01). Interestingly, we found that ccRCC patients
(n = 98) have higher levels of serum FGF21 compared to HC (KW test:
pClear-cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC), the most frequent renal
parenchyma malignant neoplasm, is considered a cell metabolic disease.
The finding of new biomarkers is needed for better sub-classification of
renal cell tumors as well as reliable predictors of outcome and therapy
response. Fibroblast Growth Factor 21 (FGF21) is a hepatokine that
regulates glucose, energy and lipid metabolism during stress-induced
pathologies. Despite the beneficial effects of FGF21 in diabetes and
obesity; up to date, the clinical implication of FGF21 as a cancer
biomarker was not investigated. Our main goal was to evaluate the role of
circulating FGF21 as a diagnostic and prognostic biomarker for ccRCC.
Initially, we measured the levels of circulating FGF21 in human healthy
controls (HC, n = 51) using a quantitative ELISA test (R&D Systems,
Inc.). No associations were observed between FGF21 serum concentration
and gender or age. FGF21 levels significantly correlated only with
triglycerides levels (Spearman's test: p <0.01). Interestingly, we found
that ccRCC patients (n = 98) have higher levels of serum FGF21 compared
to HC (KW test: p<0.0001). FGF21 serum levels were not associated with
BMI or other metabolic parameters. Using 130.64 pg/ml of serum FGF21 as a
cut-off value, the sensitivity was 80.61% and the specificity was 64.61%.
Serum FGF21 was increased since the earliest stages of the disease
without differences among the various ccRCC stages. To analyze the
associations between FGF21 and clinico-pathological parameters; FGF21
values were dichotomized into low or high using 219.57 pg/ml (50th
percentile) as cut-off point. No significant association was observed
with age, sex, obesity, triglycerides and known risk factors (Chi square
test, NS). The prognostic value of FGF21 was analyzed in terms of
disease-free survival (DFS) and overall survival (OS). No significant
association was found between serum FGF21 levels and 5- years OS.
Kaplan-Meier plots of DFS showed that high levels of serum FGF21 were
associated with worse prognosis with a borderline significance. However,
multivariate analysis showed that FGF21 expression is a significant
independent prognostic factor when adding the variables Fuhrman grade and
stage (Cox Regression test). We also collected a second serum sample in
30 patients after successful surgery and we observed that the levels of
serum FGF21 decreased in 41.4% of ccRCC patients. In addition, we showed
that serum FGF21 levels were significantly increased in 14 patients with
chromophobe renal cancer respect to HC (MW test: pClear-cell renal cell
carcinoma (ccRCC), the most frequent renal parenchyma malignant neoplasm,
is considered a cell metabolic disease. The finding of new biomarkers is
needed for better sub-classification of renal cell tumors as well as
reliable predictors of outcome and therapy response. Fibroblast Growth
Factor 21 (FGF21) is a hepatokine that regulates glucose, energy and
lipid metabolism during stress-induced pathologies. Despite the
beneficial effects of FGF21 in diabetes and obesity; up to date, the
clinical implication of FGF21 as a cancer biomarker was not investigated.
Our main goal was to evaluate the role of circulating FGF21 as a
diagnostic and prognostic biomarker for ccRCC. Initially, we measured the
levels of circulating FGF21 in human healthy controls (HC, n = 51) using
a quantitative ELISA test (R&D Systems, Inc.). No associations were
observed between FGF21 serum concentration and gender or age. FGF21
levels significantly correlated only with triglycerides levels
(Spearman's test: p <0.01). Interestingly, we found that ccRCC patients
(n = 98) have higher levels of serum FGF21 compared to HC (KW test:
p<0.0001). FGF21 serum levels were not associated with BMI or other
metabolic parameters. Using 130.64 pg/ml of serum FGF21 as a cut-off
value, the sensitivity was 80.61% and the specificity was 64.61%. Serum
FGF21 was increased since the earliest stages of the disease without
differences among the various ccRCC stages. To analyze the associations
between FGF21 and clinico-pathological parameters; FGF21 values were
dichotomized into low or high using 219.57 pg/ml (50th percentile) as
cut-off point. No significant association was observed with age, sex,
obesity, triglycerides and known risk factors (Chi square test, NS). The
prognostic value of FGF21 was analyzed in terms of disease-free survival
(DFS) and overall survival (OS). No significant association was found
between serum FGF21 levels and 5- years OS. Kaplan-Meier plots of DFS
showed that high levels of serum FGF21 were associated with worse
prognosis with a borderline significance. However, multivariate analysis
showed that FGF21 expression is a significant independent prognostic
factor when adding the variables Fuhrman grade and stage (Cox Regression
test). We also collected a second serum sample in 30 patients after
successful surgery and we observed that the levels of serum FGF21
decreased in 41.4% of ccRCC patients. In addition, we showed that serum
FGF21 levels were significantly increased in 14 patients with chromophobe
renal cancer respect to HC (MW test: p<0.0001), although similar to RCC
patients. Our results indicated that serum FGF21 is useful as a
diagnostic ccRCC biomarker in combination with other clinical or
molecular parameters. Moreover, in our cohort of ccRCC patients, high
levels of FGF21 showed to be an independent prognostic biomarker,
associated with worse disease-free survival.

