Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A high-throughput siRNA screen identifies Nucleoside Diphosphate
Kinase (NME3) as a novel host regulator of NF-B signaling in response to
Salmonella-induced activation of TLR-5


Bacterial flagellin is a potent activator of NF-B signaling, inflammation
and host innate immunity. In comparison to TNF, perhaps the most studied
NF-B-inducing ligand, flagellin elicits an overlapping, yet unique
downstream transcriptional response by host cells. In contrast to the
pro-oncogenic functions of TNF, recent data indicate that flagellin may
represent a novel anti-tumor ligand that acts through TLR5 and the NF-B
pathway to induce host immunity and to aid in the clearance of tumor
xenografts. To begin to characterize the molecular basis for the
anti-tumor effect of flagellin and to identify downstream innate
signaling components of NF-B that are responsible for the
pro-inflammatory program necessary for these anti-tumor effects, we
employed a high throughput screen. Utilizing HCT116 colon carcinoma cells
expressing a dynamic NF-B bioluminescent reporter and Salmonella
typhimurium expressing flagellin, we performed a live cell screen of a
siRNA library targeting 691 known and predicted human kinases to identify
novel modulators of flagellin-induced NF-B activation. This screen
uncovered nucleoside diphosphate kinase (NME3) as a previously
unrecognized, positive regulator of NF-B signaling in response to
flagellin. Targeted knockdown and overexpression assays confirmed the
regulatory contribution of NME3. Furthermore, Kaplan-Meier survival
analysis for breast, lung and ovarian cancer patients showed that high
level expression of NME3 correlated with increased overall survival.
Together, these data identify a novel pro-inflammatory role for NME3 in
NF-B signaling that may potentially be exploited to optimize cancer
immunotherapy.

