Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integration of targeted RNA sequencing to targeted DNA sequencing
for the characterization of clinically relevant variants in a population
of thousands of patients treated on clinical trial


Background: Targeted sequencing has become common in the care of some
patients with cancer, both for the detection of standard of care clinical
mutations as well as in the care of patients with advanced disease who
are looking for clinical trials or other non-standard therapies. Many
patients have mutations detected, although many variants are of unknown
significance, and many patients have no mutations at all. We added RNA
targeted sequencing along with DNA targeted sequencing to add utility of
targeted sequencing strategy in cancer genomics and assessed the
performances of RNA sequencing analysis.Methods: Genomic sequencing of
investigative biomarkers was prospectively offered to selected patients.
DNA and RNA libraries were prepared separately from a retrieved archival
FFPE tumor sample or a fresh frozen tumor sample from each patient.
Relevant targets were enriched by custom designed Agilent SureSelect
hybrid capture baits using standard protocols. Samples were sequenced on
Illumina HiSeq 2000/2500 platforms. We compared somatic variants detected
by DNA alone to those detected by DNA plus RNA using the UNCeqR algorithm
and software.Results: From a population of 2200 patients consented as
part of LCCC1108 (NCT01457196), a subset of 300 patients was selected at
random for RNA profiling. Selected patients were 7 to 83 years old
(median, 54) and the cases included more than 20 cancer types including
uterus, breast, ovary, and thyroid etc. And stages of cancers were as
follows; I, 34.6%, II, 16.8%, III, 25.2%, and IV, 23.4% respectively.
Sequencing of RNA was successful in 90% of specimens using 2.5 ug of RNA.
RNA sequencing could detect 97.5% of sequence variants called by DNA
sequencing and detect 20% more variants than DNA sequencing. Also 97.9%
of variants showed higher mutant allele fraction (MAF) in RNA sequencing
than DNA sequencing. We further interrogated the impact of certain
classes of mutations on transcript structure and abundance. Specifically,
we observed that splice site mutations and indels were associated with
detectable alterations in the full length transcripts of their respective
genes as well as overall gene abundance, with nonsense and frameshift
mutations associated with decreased relative expression of the transcript
relative to controls. We also observed that gene amplification of EGFR
and ERBB2 was reflected in the RNA sequencing as increased gene
expression with statistical significance by Fishers exact test (P
Background: Targeted sequencing has become common in the care of some
patients with cancer, both for the detection of standard of care clinical
mutations as well as in the care of patients with advanced disease who
are looking for clinical trials or other non-standard therapies. Many
patients have mutations detected, although many variants are of unknown
significance, and many patients have no mutations at all. We added RNA
targeted sequencing along with DNA targeted sequencing to add utility of
targeted sequencing strategy in cancer genomics and assessed the
performances of RNA sequencing analysis.Methods: Genomic sequencing of
investigative biomarkers was prospectively offered to selected patients.
DNA and RNA libraries were prepared separately from a retrieved archival
FFPE tumor sample or a fresh frozen tumor sample from each patient.
Relevant targets were enriched by custom designed Agilent SureSelect
hybrid capture baits using standard protocols. Samples were sequenced on
Illumina HiSeq 2000/2500 platforms. We compared somatic variants detected
by DNA alone to those detected by DNA plus RNA using the UNCeqR algorithm
and software.Results: From a population of 2200 patients consented as
part of LCCC1108 (NCT01457196), a subset of 300 patients was selected at
random for RNA profiling. Selected patients were 7 to 83 years old
(median, 54) and the cases included more than 20 cancer types including
uterus, breast, ovary, and thyroid etc. And stages of cancers were as
follows; I, 34.6%, II, 16.8%, III, 25.2%, and IV, 23.4% respectively.
Sequencing of RNA was successful in 90% of specimens using 2.5 ug of RNA.
RNA sequencing could detect 97.5% of sequence variants called by DNA
sequencing and detect 20% more variants than DNA sequencing. Also 97.9%
of variants showed higher mutant allele fraction (MAF) in RNA sequencing
than DNA sequencing. We further interrogated the impact of certain
classes of mutations on transcript structure and abundance. Specifically,
we observed that splice site mutations and indels were associated with
detectable alterations in the full length transcripts of their respective
genes as well as overall gene abundance, with nonsense and frameshift
mutations associated with decreased relative expression of the transcript
relative to controls. We also observed that gene amplification of EGFR
and ERBB2 was reflected in the RNA sequencing as increased gene
expression with statistical significance by Fishers exact test (P <
0.05), which suggests that RNA can be used as a surrogate for known
protein and nucleic quantitative assays.Conclusion: Using clinical
samples, including relatively small quantities, we were able to confirm
that nucleotide variants detected at DNA level leads to significant
alteration at the transcription level and to have additional information
potentially helpful for better management of cancer patients.

