Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BRD4-FOXO axis maintains differentiated mammary epithelial
phenotype by regulating p63 and GRHL3 expression


Bromodomain-containing protein 4 (BRD4) is an important epigenetic reader
which promotes gene transcription to modulate cell-specific functions and
is under intensive investigation for its potential as an anti-tumor
therapeutic target. However, the role of BRD4 in non-transformed cells
remains unclear. Using RNA sequencing and chromatin
immunoprecipitation-sequencing analyses in normal basal-like breast
epithelial cells, we demonstrate that BRD4 is required for the expression
of epithelial-specific genes and suppression of stem cell-like properties
by binding to the distal regions of epithelial-related genes. Moreover,
BRD4 occupancy correlates with enhancer activity and enhancer RNA (eRNA)
transcription of these genes. Interestingly, we show that BRD4
perturbation regulates the expression of p63 and Grainy Head-like
transcription factor-3, GRHL3, whose depletion partially mimics BRD4
inhibition and impairs a differentiated phenotype. By binding to the
distal regions of p63 and GRHL3, BRD4 promotes RNA polymerase-II
occupancy and thus affects eRNA transcription. Motif analyses on
cell-specific BRD4 binding sites predict the involvement of FOXO
transcription factors. Consistently, inhibition of EGFR-AKT signalling
activates FOXO1 function and promotes the expression of p63 and GRHL3.
Activation of Src kinase signaling decreases RNA polymerase-II occupancy
on BRD4 target genes and enhancers. Altogether, these findings provide
evidence that BRD4 promotes a differentiated epithelial phenotype in
non-transformed mammary cells at least in part through the activation of
p63 and GRHL3 expression by associating with FOXO factors.

