Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Paired box 2 promotes progression of endometrial cancer via cell
cycle pathway


Human paired box 2 (PAX2) plays a key role in cell fate, early patterning
and organogenesis. To investigate the function of PAX2 on the biological
behavior of endometrial cancer and the regulation mechanism, stable
knocking-down and over-expression PAX2 endometrial cancer cell lines were
established. CCK-8 and transwell assays were applied to determine
proliferation, invasion and migration ability. Cell cycle distribution
was analyzed by flow cytometry. Nude mice were used for in vivo
experiments and Affymetrix GeneChip human Exon 1.0 ST arrays was used to
screen the downstream target genes of PAX2. The upstream regulation
mechanism of PAX2 was explored by dual luciferase reporter gene assay and
bioinformatics analysis.Results showed that,no matter in vivo or in
vitro,PAX2 significantly enhanced tumorigenicity and invasiveness of
endometrial cancer cells, and promoted liver metastasis in vivo. In
addition, PAX2 influenced the expression of cyclin-dependent kinase
1(CDK1) and YWHAZ, which play pivotal roles in cell cycle pathway.
Knocking down CDK1 in PAX2 over-expressing cells attenuated cell
viability.A myeloid zinc finger gene-1(MZF-1)binding site was found in a
negative regulation region of PAX2 upstream and down-regulation of MZF-1
reduced the transcriptional activity of PAX2, as well as its protein
level.Together, PAX2, through influencing the activity of CDK1 and YWHAZ,
promotes proliferation,invasion and progression of endometrial cancer and
can be regulated by MZF-1. PAX2 may be a target therapeutic site for
endometrial cancer.

