Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pharmacological characterization of BAY-876, a novel highly
selective inhibitor of glucose transporter (GLUT)-1 in vitro and in vivo


One hallmark of cancer is the accelerated metabolism, high energy
requirements, and increased glucose uptake by the tumor cells, the latter
being the first and rate-limiting step for glucose metabolism. Glucose
transport into the tumor cell is mediated by facilitative high-affinity
glucose transporter (GLUT) proteins. Among the 14 GLUT proteins,
expression of GLUT1 in normal organs is nearly exclusively restricted to
the blood brain barrier, while other GLUTs are also expressed in a wide
variety of vital organs such as liver and heart. Interestingly, GLUT1
expression is highly regulated by hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF)-1, a key
driver of tumor progression. In line with this finding, GLUT1
over-expression was found to be associated with tumor progression and
poor overall survival in various tumor indications. Consequently, GLUT1
represents a potential target for cancer treatment. Therefore, we have
developed a highly-selective GLUT1 inhibitor, namely BAY-876, with
selectivity over GLUT2, 3, and 4 of 4700-, 800-, and 135-fold,
respectively. We here show for the first time the pharmacological
characterization of BAY-876, comprising inhibition of glucose-uptake,
anti-proliferative activity in vitro, and anti-tumor efficacy in vivo in
models of different tumor indications in monotherapy as well as first
results on the combinability of BAY-876. Furthermore, at the therapeutic
dose, BAY-876 treatment did not show any relevant finding on the behavior
of treated mice in the Irwin test, assuming no or only minor effects on
brain function. In conclusion, BAY-876 is the first GLUT1-selective
inhibitor which reduces glucose uptake and growth of tumor cells with
sufficient tolerability at the efficacious dose in preclinical models.

