Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Familial risk of upper gastrointestinal cancers by tumor location


Background: Upper gastrointestinal (UGI) cancers are within the most
common malignancies worldwide. Familial clustering of UGI cancers and the
significance of family history have been addressed in the past. We aimed
to further elucidate the familial risk based on specified tumor
locations.Methods: Using the Swedish Family-Cancer Database, we
determined the familial risk of UGI cancer patients diagnosed between
1958 and 2012. Standardized incidence ratio (SIR) was used for
calculating concordant and discordant familial cancers risks, stratified
by tumor locations. All results were adjusted for sex, age group, period,
and socioeconomic status.Results: Risk of esophageal cancer in
first-degree relatives (FDRs) of esophageal cancer patients was 24-fold
higher than that in those without such a family history. Familial risk
for concordant cancer in upper and middle third of esophagus was 32- and
56-fold, respectively. Family history of esophageal cancer in lower part
was associated with increased risk of gastric cardia cancer in FDRs and
vice versa. Family history of both adenocarcinoma and SCC of esophageal
cancer increased the familial risk of concordant (similar) and discordant
subtypes. Occurrence of gastric cancer in the body and the antrum of
stomach in a FDR were associated with an increased risk of gastric cancer
6- to 7-fold in the same location in family members,
respectively.Conclusion: Family history of UGI cancers in some specific
locations like upper and middle third of esophagus, body and antrum of
stomach can be considered as an important predictive evidence for the
same cancers in relatives.

