Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BPM 31510-induced alteration in Complex II activity is
functionally linked to cell death activation pathway in a preclinical
model of triple-negative breast cancer


Although only 15-20% of total breast cancer diagnoses are of the
triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) subtype, they account for a
significant portion of the mortality rate due to their more aggressive
phenotype and a high risk of reoccurrence. Metabolic rewiring supports
breast cancer progression and metastasis, particularly in ER-negative and
triple-negative (TNBC) breast tumors. Thus, we examined the effects of
BPM 31510, a metabolic-modulating agent in clinical trials for solid
tumors, in in vitro and in vivo ER-negative and TNBC models. BPM 31510
EC50/EC>90 values were determined for a panel of the breast cancer cell
lines and compared to non-tumorigenic MCF12A cells in vitro, and the
MDA-MB231 and SkBr-3, TNBC and ER-negative models respectively, were
found to be the most sensitive to BPM 31510. Treatment with BPM 31510
(EC50 and EC>90 doses) resulted in a time- and dose-dependent decrease
the viable cell population (PI- and Annexin V-negative) and a concomitant
increase in cells in early and late apoptosis (PI-negative and
PI-positive Annexin V-positive cells, respectively), suggesting that BPM
31510 activates regulated cell death pathways. Consistent with the in
vitro data, MDA-MB231 tumor-bearing mice had smaller tumors after 30 days
of treatment with BPM 31510 and increased cleaved caspase 3 staining in
resected tumors. In vitro, BPM 31510-dependent breast cancer cell death
was preceded by mitochondrial membrane potential depolarization (TMRE
flow cytometry) and alterations in mitochondrial respiration
characterized by a consistent, dose-dependent decrease in succinate
(Complex II)-fueled respiration with more varied responses to BPM 31510
in cells provided the Complex I substrates (pyruvate or palmitoyl
carnitine). To investigate the role of Complex II in BPM 31510-mediated
cell death, pharmacological inhibitors of the dicarboxylate site
(malonate) and Qp site (atpenin A5) of Complex II were used in
combination with BPM 31510 to assess the resultant effects on cell death
in MDA-MB231 cells. Co-treatment with malonate significantly attenuated
BPM 31510-mediated cell death while atpenin A5 did not affect BPM
31510-induced cell death, indicating succinate oxidation at the
dicarboxylate site of Complex II is required, in part, for induction of
cell death by BPM 31510. Together, these data demonstrate BPM 31510 has a
potent anti-cancer activity in preclinical breast cancer models and
define a functional link between Complex II activity and the mechanism of
action for BPM 31510.

