Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Lipolysis-stimulated lipoprotein receptor (LSR) can be a novel
therapeutic target of ovarian cancer


Objective:Ovarian cancer is the most lethal gynecological malignancy.
Five-year survival of advanced ovarian cancer patients remains less than
50% and the mortality rate has not changed in recent years. This study is
aimed to screen for novel ovarian cancer therapeutic targets using
quantitative proteomic approach and to develop antibody-based medicine
targeting novel ovarian cancer antigens.Method:Exhaustive quantitative
proteome analysis focused on cell surface membrane proteins were
performed by isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation(iTRAQ)
using a normal ovarian surface epithelial cell line and 7 ovarian cancer
cell lines. By this approach, ovarian cancer-specific membrane proteins
were identified. We confirmed the expression of lipolysis-stimulated
lipoprotein receptor (LSR) using immunohistochemical staining, western
blotting method, and flow cytometry. By modified MTT assay, cell growth
inhibition was performed in LSR-knock down cells compared with control
cells. Cell adhesion assay was also performed in vitro. Anti-LSR
monoclonal antibody (anti-LSR mAb) was generated to evaluate the efficacy
of the LSR targeted antibody therapy in vivo. For subcutaneous xenograft
experiments, ovarian cancer cell line (RMG-1) was injected subcutaneously
into the CB17/SCID mice. Mice were then randomly divided into two groups
and administrated intraperitoneally anti-LSR mAb or control IgG antibody
twice a week for 6 times. In addition, luciferase transfected ovarian
cancer cell line (A2780-luc) was implanted intraperitoneally into the
CB17/SCID mice. Mice were administrated anti-LSR mAb or control IgG
antibody intraperitoneally twice a week for 5 times.Result:By iTRAQ
analysis, we identified 1685 proteins and one of the ovarian cancer
candidates protein, LSR was identified. We confirmed the expression of
LSR in 8 out of 11 ovarian cancer cell lines and all of ovarian cancer
clinical specimens. We performed proliferation assay using siRNA against
ovarian cancer cell lines. When expression of LSR was suppressed, a tumor
growth was significantly inhibited at day 4(pObjective:Ovarian cancer is
the most lethal gynecological malignancy. Five-year survival of advanced
ovarian cancer patients remains less than 50% and the mortality rate has
not changed in recent years. This study is aimed to screen for novel
ovarian cancer therapeutic targets using quantitative proteomic approach
and to develop antibody-based medicine targeting novel ovarian cancer
antigens.Method:Exhaustive quantitative proteome analysis focused on cell
surface membrane proteins were performed by isobaric tags for relative
and absolute quantitation(iTRAQ) using a normal ovarian surface
epithelial cell line and 7 ovarian cancer cell lines. By this approach,
ovarian cancer-specific membrane proteins were identified. We confirmed
the expression of lipolysis-stimulated lipoprotein receptor (LSR) using
immunohistochemical staining, western blotting method, and flow
cytometry. By modified MTT assay, cell growth inhibition was performed in
LSR-knock down cells compared with control cells. Cell adhesion assay was
also performed in vitro. Anti-LSR monoclonal antibody (anti-LSR mAb) was
generated to evaluate the efficacy of the LSR targeted antibody therapy
in vivo. For subcutaneous xenograft experiments, ovarian cancer cell line
(RMG-1) was injected subcutaneously into the CB17/SCID mice. Mice were
then randomly divided into two groups and administrated intraperitoneally
anti-LSR mAb or control IgG antibody twice a week for 6 times. In
addition, luciferase transfected ovarian cancer cell line (A2780-luc) was
implanted intraperitoneally into the CB17/SCID mice. Mice were
administrated anti-LSR mAb or control IgG antibody intraperitoneally
twice a week for 5 times.Result:By iTRAQ analysis, we identified 1685
proteins and one of the ovarian cancer candidates protein, LSR was
identified. We confirmed the expression of LSR in 8 out of 11 ovarian
cancer cell lines and all of ovarian cancer clinical specimens. We
performed proliferation assay using siRNA against ovarian cancer cell
lines. When expression of LSR was suppressed, a tumor growth was
significantly inhibited at day 4(p<0.01). In adhesion assay, we observed
significant inhibition of cell adhesion in LSR knockdown cells. These
results suggested that LSR is related to cell proliferation and adhesion.
A significant anti-tumour effect with 78% was observed in the anti-LSR
mAb antibody administrated group compared with control IgG antibody
administrated group after 25 days (p Objective:Ovarian cancer is the most
lethal gynecological malignancy. Five-year survival of advanced ovarian
cancer patients remains less than 50% and the mortality rate has not
changed in recent years. This study is aimed to screen for novel ovarian
cancer therapeutic targets using quantitative proteomic approach and to
develop antibody-based medicine targeting novel ovarian cancer
antigens.Method:Exhaustive quantitative proteome analysis focused on cell
surface membrane proteins were performed by isobaric tags for relative
and absolute quantitation(iTRAQ) using a normal ovarian surface
epithelial cell line and 7 ovarian cancer cell lines. By this approach,
ovarian cancer-specific membrane proteins were identified. We confirmed
the expression of lipolysis-stimulated lipoprotein receptor (LSR) using
immunohistochemical staining, western blotting method, and flow
cytometry. By modified MTT assay, cell growth inhibition was performed in
LSR-knock down cells compared with control cells. Cell adhesion assay was
also performed in vitro. Anti-LSR monoclonal antibody (anti-LSR mAb) was
generated to evaluate the efficacy of the LSR targeted antibody therapy
in vivo. For subcutaneous xenograft experiments, ovarian cancer cell line
(RMG-1) was injected subcutaneously into the CB17/SCID mice. Mice were
then randomly divided into two groups and administrated intraperitoneally
anti-LSR mAb or control IgG antibody twice a week for 6 times. In
addition, luciferase transfected ovarian cancer cell line (A2780-luc) was
implanted intraperitoneally into the CB17/SCID mice. Mice were
administrated anti-LSR mAb or control IgG antibody intraperitoneally
twice a week for 5 times.Result:By iTRAQ analysis, we identified 1685
proteins and one of the ovarian cancer candidates protein, LSR was
identified. We confirmed the expression of LSR in 8 out of 11 ovarian
cancer cell lines and all of ovarian cancer clinical specimens. We
performed proliferation assay using siRNA against ovarian cancer cell
lines. When expression of LSR was suppressed, a tumor growth was
significantly inhibited at day 4(p<0.01). In adhesion assay, we observed
significant inhibition of cell adhesion in LSR knockdown cells. These
results suggested that LSR is related to cell proliferation and adhesion.
A significant anti-tumour effect with 78% was observed in the anti-LSR
mAb antibody administrated group compared with control IgG antibody
administrated group after 25 days (p <0.001). Furthermore, in
intraperitoneal xenograft model, anti-LSR antibody administration group
significantly decreased signal intensities compared with the control
antibody administration group at day 22 after implantation.Conclusion:We
showed that the LSR is related to cell proliferation and adhesion in
vitro in ovarian cancer cells and proved the antitumor effect of anti-LSR
mAb. These results suggested that LSR can be a new therapeutic target of
ovarian cancer.

