Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The melanoma-enriched microRNA miR-4731 regulates genes involved
in cell cycle and the melanosome


We previously identified miR-4731-5p (miR-4731) as a melanoma-enriched
microRNA following comparison of melanoma with other cell lines from
solid malignancies. Additionally, miR-4731 has been found in serum from
melanoma patients and expressed less abundantly in metastatic melanomas
from stage IV patients relative to stage III patients. As miR-4731 has no
known function, we used biotin-labelled miRNA duplex pull-down to
identify binding targets of miR-4731 in three melanoma cell lines. Using
the miRanda miRNA binding algorithm, all pulled-down transcripts common
to the three cell lines (n = 1092) were predicted to be targets of
miR-4731 and gene-set enrichment analysis of these (via STRING v9.1)
highlighted significantly associated genes related to the cell cycle and
melanosome pathways. Following miR-4731 overexpression, a selection (n =
81) of pull-down transcripts underwent validation using a custom qRT-PCR
array. These data revealed that miR-4731 regulates multiple genes
associated with the cell cycle (e.g. CCNA2, ORC5L, and PCNA) and
melanosome (e.g. RAB7A, CTSD, and GNA13). Furthermore, members of the
synovial sarcoma X breakpoint family (SSX) (melanoma growth promoters)
were also down-regulated (e.g. SSX2, SSX4, and SSX4B) as result of
miR-4731 overexpression. We therefore speculate that loss of miR-4731
expression supports melanoma growth by, in part; reducing its regulatory
control of SSX expression levels together with members of the cell cycle
pathway, which warrants further investigation.

