Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vivo efficacy of BET inhibitor BAY 1238097 in preclinical
models of melanoma and lung cancer


Bromodomain and extra terminal domain (BET) family proteins which bind to
acetylated lysines of histones and regulate gene transcription are
promising targets in oncology. We have previously shown that the BET
inhibitor BAY 1238097 possesses strong activity in a number of
hematological models, both in vitro and in vivo (AACR 2015). Here we show
that BAY 1238097 is also able to inhibit the growth of solid tumors such
as melanoma and lung tumors.BAY 1238097 was evaluated in vitro against a
panel of melanoma cell lines and was effective in BRAF wild-type as well
as BRAF mutant models. When given to C57BL/6 mice at the maximum
tolerated dose (MTD) of 15 mg/kg, p.o., qd, BAY 1238097 showed efficacy
against the B16/F10 syngeneic model with a T/C of 31% on day 12 post
tumor inoculation (T/C42% = active according to NCI criteria). In this
study, dacarbazine was less active than BAY 1238097 with a T/C of 44%.
This was also the case in a patient-derived melanoma model resistant to
dacarbazine where BAY 1238097 was found active with 39% T/C. Potent
efficacy of BAY 1238097 was also observed against the human LOX-IMVI
model in SCID mice either using a daily dose of 15 mg/kg or a q3d
schedule at 45 mg/kg (MTD), leading to 10% and 13% T/C, respectively on
day 12. Dose-dependent down-regulation of the MYC oncogene was
demonstrated ex vivo in B16/F10 tumors as well as in mice peripheral
blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) with maximal effect observed between 3 to
6h post oral treatment with BAY1238097. In addition, strong up-regulation
of HEXIM1 mRNA was observed in tumors and PBMCs from the mice.BAY 1238097
was also evaluated in a number of in vitro and in vivo studies in lung
cancer cell lines. It was strongly active in KRAS mutant non-small cell
lung cancer (NSCLC) (DV-90, NCI-H1373, LCLC-97TM1) and small cell lung
cancer (SCLC) models (NCI-H69, NCI-H146, NCI-H526) with IC50 values below
1 M. Down-regulation of c-Myc protein expression upon treatment with 1 M
was observed in all three sensitive NSCLC models. In the NCI-H1373 model,
an induction of caspase 3/7 activity was observed upon 24h of treatment
in vitro. In the same model implanted in vivo, a strong reduction of
tumor growth was observed following daily oral application of BAY 1238097
(12 mg/kg). The treatment was well tolerated with a T/C of 16% at day 15
after start of treatment. A similar antitumor activity was obtained by
applying the compound intravenously twice a week at 100 mg/kg and ex vivo
analysis revealed time-dependent regulation of MYC and HEXIM1 after
treatment. In vivo efficacy was not limited to NSCLC as daily oral
application of BAY 1238097 (10 mg/kg) to the SCLC xenograft model
NCI-H526 resulted in high efficacy with 7% T/C on day 21.Taken together,
these positive results in preclinical models of melanoma and lung tumors
warrant further evaluation of BET inhibition in solid tumors in the
clinic.

