Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of CD47 expression and effects of CD47-SIRP fusion
protein in patients with osteosarcoma


CD47 is a commonly expressed trans-membrane protein which binds to signal
regulatory protein (SIRP) expressed on the surface of the macrophages
resulting in inhibition of phagocytosis and cell clearance. Several
malignancies demonstrate high expression of CD47 and recent studies
suggest interfering with the CD47-macrophage interaction may be
therapeutic. A prior expression analysis performed on osteosarcoma (OS)
patient samples reported marked expression of CD47. The current study
evaluated the utility of targeting CD47 in Osteosarcoma by determining
the prevalence of CD47 expression and the prognostic value of CD47
expression in patients with Osteosarcoma. An immunofluorescence
phagocytosis assay is being performed to directly assess the therapeutic
potential of the CD47-SIRP fusion protein.A previously created and
described tissue microarray (TMA) was stained with a murine monoclonal
anti-CD47 (B6H12) antibody. The intensity and location of tissue staining
were assessed by a comparison between the positive and negative control
slides. 81 specimens were evaluated on the TMA. Overall, CD47 was
expressed in 87.7% of specimens, with 28.4%, 27.2%, and 32.1%
demonstrating high, intermediate, and low expression, respectively.
Almost all metastatic tumor specimens (85.7%) expressed CD47. To evaluate
CD47 expression quantitatively, a real time PCR was performed on OS
patient-derived primary samples, and cell lines. 71.4% of patient derived
cell lines (n = 15) showed higher level of CD47 expression compared to
that of mesenchymal stem cells and an osteoblast cell line. Furthermore,
flow cytometry was performed on human OS xenografts and cell lines to
determine the surface expression level of CD47 prior to treatment with
CD47-SIRP fusion protein. 85% of the OS cell lines (n = 13) showed levels
of CD47 expression comparable to that of the positive control, leukemia
cell line HL60. Survival analyses suggested that increased expression of
CD47 may be associated with poorer 5 year event free survival (69.3% vs
42.4%, p = 0.6 and 49.5% vs. 33.6%, p = 0.16) when using thresholds of
intermediate/high expression of CD47 and high expression of CD47,
respectively. Results of an in-vitro phagocytosis assay assessing
cytotoxicity of a CD47-SIRP fusion protein on OS cell lines using laser
scanning cytometry at present show some inhibition of phagocytosis upon
adding 500 ug/ml of CD47-SIRP fusion protein, but it does not reach the
statistical significance. These findings demonstrate that CD47 is highly
prevalent in Osteosarcoma and suggest CD47 has potential utility as a
novel target for anti-cancer therapy in Osteosarcoma. Although the
immunofluorescence assays have not demonstrated marked augmentation of
activity with the CD47-SIRP fusion protein, this may be attributable to
limitations of the method with clinical trials necessary to define its
true level of activity in treating patients with Osteosarcoma.

