Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Validation of qBiomarker as an accurate and efficient mutation
detection method in a comprehensive analysis of patient-derived tumor
xenografts


Screening of patients for cancer-driving mutations is now used for cancer
prognosis, remission scoring and treatment selection. Although recently
emerged targeted Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) - based approaches
provide accurate results and offer promising diagnostic capabilities,
there are still limitations which impede their adoption for large-scale
population-based screening. There is a pressing clinical need for a
well-validated, rapid, cost-effective and accurate mutation profiling
system with optimal analytical performance in patient specimens. Given
their speed, and cost-effectiveness, real-time, quantitative qPCR
mutation detection techniques are well suited for the clinical
environment. The novel qBiomarker somatic mutation PCR array has high
sensitivity and shorter turnaround times compared to other methods.
However a direct comparison to existing viable alternatives is required
to assess its true potential and limitations. In this study, we
extensively evaluated a panel of 117 patient-derived tumor xenografts
(PDX) by the qBiomarker array and directly compared its efficacy with
that of other routinely used methods for mutation detection, including
Ion AmpliSeq sequencing, whole exome sequencing (WES), and
ultra-sensitive droplet digital PCR (ddPCR) genotyping. Our comprehensive
analysis demonstrates that qBiomarker's performance is on par with that
of other routinely used but more complex, labor-intensive and expensive
methods of cancer mutation detection, and provides a foundation for
advancing the adoption of qBiomarker assay for cancer driving mutation
profiling in clinical diagnostics. Furthermore, a large-scale direct
comparison of different mutation detection approaches will lead to
informed choice of screening methodologies, especially in lower budget
conditions or timeframe limitations.

