Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mena at the nexus of chemotaxis and haptotaxis during tumor
progression


Directed-cell migration is key step in the metastatic cascade, and
multiple cues can promote local invasion. The most well studied mode of
cell motility for metastasizing tumor cells is chemotaxis, the
directional movement of cells attracted to a source of soluble cues. In
contrast, haptotaxis, migration of cells on gradients of substrate-bound
factors, remains poorly understood. Mena, an actin regulatory protein,
plays an important role in cell motility and is upregulated in various
cancers, driving migration in response to chemotactic and haptotactic
cues. We have recently shown expression of the pro-metastatic isoform of
Mena, MenaINV, increases sensitivity to growth factors (EGF, HGF and IGF)
via dysregulation of the phosphatase PTP1B, as well as high
concentrations of fibronectin (FN) via its interaction with the integrin
51. We hypothesized that MenaINV may also promote crosstalk between these
two pathways to drive metastasis. First, we show that MenaINV-driven
haptotaxis on FN gradients and FN-driven invasion requires crosstalk
between 51 and EGFR. Indeed, we show evidence that MenaINV expression is
associated high phosphorylation of EGFR in high FN environments in vitro
and in human breast cancer databases. Second, we find that MenaINV
promotes synergy between EGF and FN in vitro and in vivo, leading to
hyper-invasive phenotypes that drive more invasion than which each cue
alone. Finally, we show that MenaINV-driven haptotaxis, ECM
reorganization and 3D invasion requires RCP-dependent recycling of 51 and
EGFR. Together, our data demonstrate that MenaINV is a shared component
of the machinery that mediates both haptotactic responses to FN and
chemotactic responses to EGF, two pathways that promote tumor progression.

