Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: miRNA combination therapy: In vitro anticancer synergy between
miR-34a mimic and next generation EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs)
in NSCLC


Background: miRNAs play a critical role in regulating key biological
processes by modulating the expression of up to several hundred genes
across multiple cellular pathways. miR-34a, one of the most widely
studied miRNAs, is lost or expressed at reduced levels in many tumors,
and normally functions as a natural tumor suppressor by down-regulating
expression of >30 different oncogenes, as well as genes involved in tumor
immune evasion, including PD-L1. MRX34 is a potential first-in-class
liposome-encapsulated miR-34a mimic in Phase 1 study (NCT01829971) as
monotherapy in patients with advanced malignancies. The ability of
miR-34a to regulate the expression of key oncogenes across multiple
oncogenic pathways makes MRX34 a rational candidate to combine with other
anticancer therapies which are frequently subject to primary and acquired
resistance in the clinic. Previous studies showed that miR-34a greatly
sensitizes both EGFR wild-type and mutant NSCLC cell lines, as well as
hepatocellular carcinoma cell lines, to the first generation EGFR TKI
erlotinib. Here we report research combining miR-34a and the next
generation EGFR TKIs afatinib (Gilotrif) and rociletinib (CO-1686) in
NSCLC cell lines.Methods: Combination studies using single-drug ratios
(IC50 ratio of miR-34a and TKI) and multiple ratios above and below were
performed in a panel of EGFR wild-type (A549, H460, H1299, H226) and EGFR
mutant (H1975, HCC827 parent and HCC827 erl res) NSCLC cell lines. Cells
were transfected with miR-34a and incubated 24 hrs later with afatinib or
rociletinib for 72 hrs, with cellular proliferation then determined by
AlamarBlue. Synergistic, additive, or antagonistic effects were
determined by combination index (CI) values (based on Loewe's concept of
additivity), isobolograms, and curve-shift analyses.Results: Strong
synergy was observed between miR-34a and both TKIs in all EGFR-mutant
cell lines tested (CI Background: miRNAs play a critical role in
regulating key biological processes by modulating the expression of up to
several hundred genes across multiple cellular pathways. miR-34a, one of
the most widely studied miRNAs, is lost or expressed at reduced levels in
many tumors, and normally functions as a natural tumor suppressor by
down-regulating expression of >30 different oncogenes, as well as genes
involved in tumor immune evasion, including PD-L1. MRX34 is a potential
first-in-class liposome-encapsulated miR-34a mimic in Phase 1 study
(NCT01829971) as monotherapy in patients with advanced malignancies. The
ability of miR-34a to regulate the expression of key oncogenes across
multiple oncogenic pathways makes MRX34 a rational candidate to combine
with other anticancer therapies which are frequently subject to primary
and acquired resistance in the clinic. Previous studies showed that
miR-34a greatly sensitizes both EGFR wild-type and mutant NSCLC cell
lines, as well as hepatocellular carcinoma cell lines, to the first
generation EGFR TKI erlotinib. Here we report research combining miR-34a
and the next generation EGFR TKIs afatinib (Gilotrif) and rociletinib
(CO-1686) in NSCLC cell lines.Methods: Combination studies using
single-drug ratios (IC50 ratio of miR-34a and TKI) and multiple ratios
above and below were performed in a panel of EGFR wild-type (A549, H460,
H1299, H226) and EGFR mutant (H1975, HCC827 parent and HCC827 erl res)
NSCLC cell lines. Cells were transfected with miR-34a and incubated 24
hrs later with afatinib or rociletinib for 72 hrs, with cellular
proliferation then determined by AlamarBlue. Synergistic, additive, or
antagonistic effects were determined by combination index (CI) values
(based on Loewe's concept of additivity), isobolograms, and curve-shift
analyses.Results: Strong synergy was observed between miR-34a and both
TKIs in all EGFR-mutant cell lines tested (CI <0.5 at effect levels 50%).
Synergy was also observed for miR-34a + rociletinib in most EGFR
wild-type cell lines (CI Background: miRNAs play a critical role in
regulating key biological processes by modulating the expression of up to
several hundred genes across multiple cellular pathways. miR-34a, one of
the most widely studied miRNAs, is lost or expressed at reduced levels in
many tumors, and normally functions as a natural tumor suppressor by
down-regulating expression of >30 different oncogenes, as well as genes
involved in tumor immune evasion, including PD-L1. MRX34 is a potential
first-in-class liposome-encapsulated miR-34a mimic in Phase 1 study
(NCT01829971) as monotherapy in patients with advanced malignancies. The
ability of miR-34a to regulate the expression of key oncogenes across
multiple oncogenic pathways makes MRX34 a rational candidate to combine
with other anticancer therapies which are frequently subject to primary
and acquired resistance in the clinic. Previous studies showed that
miR-34a greatly sensitizes both EGFR wild-type and mutant NSCLC cell
lines, as well as hepatocellular carcinoma cell lines, to the first
generation EGFR TKI erlotinib. Here we report research combining miR-34a
and the next generation EGFR TKIs afatinib (Gilotrif) and rociletinib
(CO-1686) in NSCLC cell lines.Methods: Combination studies using
single-drug ratios (IC50 ratio of miR-34a and TKI) and multiple ratios
above and below were performed in a panel of EGFR wild-type (A549, H460,
H1299, H226) and EGFR mutant (H1975, HCC827 parent and HCC827 erl res)
NSCLC cell lines. Cells were transfected with miR-34a and incubated 24
hrs later with afatinib or rociletinib for 72 hrs, with cellular
proliferation then determined by AlamarBlue. Synergistic, additive, or
antagonistic effects were determined by combination index (CI) values
(based on Loewe's concept of additivity), isobolograms, and curve-shift
analyses.Results: Strong synergy was observed between miR-34a and both
TKIs in all EGFR-mutant cell lines tested (CI <0.5 at effect levels 50%).
Synergy was also observed for miR-34a + rociletinib in most EGFR
wild-type cell lines (CI <0.6 at effect levels of 50-80%), but not for
miR-34a + afatinib. Best synergies overall were observed in EGFR-mutant
cells with acquired erlotinib resistance. The effects were observed
across a range of different dose levels and drug ratios, with maximal
synergy providing a high level of inhibition (80%) at doses likely
achievable in the clinic and well below those projected to be required
for similar inhibition by the single agents alone.Conclusions:
Complementing previous results with miR-34a + erlotinib, the data
demonstrate strongly synergistic anticancer effects between miR-34a and
next generation EGFR TKIs in combination against a range of EGFR
wild-type and mutant NSCLC cell lines. The results support clinical study
of MRX34 + EGFR TKI combinations in patients with advanced NSCLC,
including those with EGFR-mutant NSCLC that has progressed on EGFR TKI
monotherapy.

