Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oligomerization status of p53 serves as an indicator of
sensistivity of p53 wildtype tumors to the therapeutic combination of DNA
damaging agent and checkpoint inhibitor


It is well established that cell cycle arrest in response to treatment
with DNA damaging agents can be abrogated in p53-defective cells by
treatment with the Chk1 inhibitors, but our more recent studies have
shown that some p53 wild-type tumors are also sensitive to checkpoint
abrogation. Two possible explanations are cytoplasmic sequestration of
p53 or a defect in p53 oligomerization. In this study, we investigated
the DNA damage response and UCN-01 sensitivity of two p53 wildtype
neuroblastoma cell lines: SK-N-SH, and SH-SY5Y. In order to determine the
responses of these cells to DNA damage, the cells were treated with
concentrations of SN38 ranging from 0-30 ng/ml. Both lines arrested in
G2, S, or G1 depending upon SN38 concentration and displayed an increase
in p53 levels with increasing SN38. Additionally, p53 was phosphorylated
on serine 15 and serine 20 following SN38 treatment in all three cell
lines, suggesting that p53 is active. In order to determine whether these
cells are susceptible to UCN-01-mediated abrogation of cell cycle arrest,
cell were treated with 3 ng/ml SN38 for 24 hours, followed by 25 nM
UCN-01 for 6 and 24 hours. The SK-N-SH showed now sensitivity to UCN-01
treatment whereas the SH-SY5Y abrogated S arrest within 6 hours and
abrogated G2 arrest within 24 hours. We also analyzed the oligomerization
status of p53 using glutaraldehyde crosslinking. The SK-N-SH cells
possessed levels of p53 dimers and tetramers similar to what has
previously been reported in p53 wildtype MCF10A cells. The SH-SY5Y,
however, had extremely low levels of dimers and tetramers. Consistent
with this, only SK-N-SH showed activation of p21waf1 and repression of
cyclin B in response to SN38 treatment. Previous studies have reported
cytoplasmic sequestration as a mechanism of p53 inactivation in p53
wildtype neuroblastomas. In order to determine the sub-cellular
distribution of p53, we prepared nuclear and cytoplasmic extracts. Both
the SK-N-SH and SH-SY5Y had primarily nuclear p53. The results of this
study suggest that oligomerization status may serve as an indicator of
sensitivity of p53 wildtype tumors to the therapeutic combination of DNA
damage agent and checkpoint inhibitor.

