Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA) and circulating tumor cells (CTCs)
are superior to CA 15-3 in predicting tumor burden, patients response to
treatment and overall survival (OS) rates in metastatic breast cancer
patients from Egypt


Background: Monitoring of tumor burden in patients with metastatic breast
cancer (mBC) is crucial to determine response to treatment. In addition
to radiological procedures and serological biomarkers, circulating, tumor
cells (CTCs) are now used to assess the tumor burden and patients
response to treatment. The circulating cell-free tumor DNA (ctDNA)
harboring tumor-specific aberrations has not been properly assessed
yet.Methods: 100 Egyptian patients with locally mBC were assessed for CA
15-3 levels, CTCs number by flowcytometry (FCM) confirmed by RT-PCR (CK
and mammaglobin expression), and for ctDNA. The results of the three
techniques were compared to the radiographic imaging of tumors, patients
response to treatment and overall survival (OS) rates. Paraffin blocks
for 40 tumor samples, obtained from the studied patients (20
non-responders and 20 responders) were used to detect p53 gene mutations
exons 5-9. CA 15-3 levels and CTC numbers were measured at the same time
intervals.Results: Somatic mutations of p53 were detected in 23/40
(57.5%) sequenced tumors. ctDNA showing the identified mutations in tumor
samples, was detected in 78 cases (78%) with high dynamic range.
CTCs>4/7.5ml blood were present in 57 out of the 78 (73.1%) ctDNA
positive cases, and CA 15-3 was detected in 30 (38.5%) cases. Changes in
ctDNA levels and CTCs>4 correlated significantly with the tumor burden (p
= 0.034), patients response to treatment (pBackground: Monitoring of
tumor burden in patients with metastatic breast cancer (mBC) is crucial
to determine response to treatment. In addition to radiological
procedures and serological biomarkers, circulating, tumor cells (CTCs)
are now used to assess the tumor burden and patients response to
treatment. The circulating cell-free tumor DNA (ctDNA) harboring
tumor-specific aberrations has not been properly assessed yet.Methods:
100 Egyptian patients with locally mBC were assessed for CA 15-3 levels,
CTCs number by flowcytometry (FCM) confirmed by RT-PCR (CK and
mammaglobin expression), and for ctDNA. The results of the three
techniques were compared to the radiographic imaging of tumors, patients
response to treatment and overall survival (OS) rates. Paraffin blocks
for 40 tumor samples, obtained from the studied patients (20
non-responders and 20 responders) were used to detect p53 gene mutations
exons 5-9. CA 15-3 levels and CTC numbers were measured at the same time
intervals.Results: Somatic mutations of p53 were detected in 23/40
(57.5%) sequenced tumors. ctDNA showing the identified mutations in tumor
samples, was detected in 78 cases (78%) with high dynamic range.
CTCs>4/7.5ml blood were present in 57 out of the 78 (73.1%) ctDNA
positive cases, and CA 15-3 was detected in 30 (38.5%) cases. Changes in
ctDNA levels and CTCs>4 correlated significantly with the tumor burden (p
= 0.034), patients response to treatment (p<0.01), and lower OS rates (p
= 0.034&p = 0.01; respectively). CTCs number and ctDNA levels showed
higher correlation with changes in tumor burden, compared to CA 15-3
(pBackground: Monitoring of tumor burden in patients with metastatic
breast cancer (mBC) is crucial to determine response to treatment. In
addition to radiological procedures and serological biomarkers,
circulating, tumor cells (CTCs) are now used to assess the tumor burden
and patients response to treatment. The circulating cell-free tumor DNA
(ctDNA) harboring tumor-specific aberrations has not been properly
assessed yet.Methods: 100 Egyptian patients with locally mBC were
assessed for CA 15-3 levels, CTCs number by flowcytometry (FCM) confirmed
by RT-PCR (CK and mammaglobin expression), and for ctDNA. The results of
the three techniques were compared to the radiographic imaging of tumors,
patients response to treatment and overall survival (OS) rates. Paraffin
blocks for 40 tumor samples, obtained from the studied patients (20
non-responders and 20 responders) were used to detect p53 gene mutations
exons 5-9. CA 15-3 levels and CTC numbers were measured at the same time
intervals.Results: Somatic mutations of p53 were detected in 23/40
(57.5%) sequenced tumors. ctDNA showing the identified mutations in tumor
samples, was detected in 78 cases (78%) with high dynamic range.
CTCs>4/7.5ml blood were present in 57 out of the 78 (73.1%) ctDNA
positive cases, and CA 15-3 was detected in 30 (38.5%) cases. Changes in
ctDNA levels and CTCs>4 correlated significantly with the tumor burden (p
= 0.034), patients response to treatment (p<0.01), and lower OS rates (p
= 0.034&p = 0.01; respectively). CTCs number and ctDNA levels showed
higher correlation with changes in tumor burden, compared to CA 15-3
(p<0.001 versus p = 0.046). However, ctDNA provided the earliest measure
of treatment response in most of the patients (53%).Conclusions: ctDNA is
an informative, highly sensitive and specific biomarker that could be
used to monitor tumor burden in mBC. Together with enumeration of CTCs
they can predict tumor response and OS in mBC patients with high accuracy.

