Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: AMD070, a novel orally bioavailable CXCR4 inhibitor, inhibits the
metastases of oral cancer via SDF-1/CXCR4 system


We have demonstrated that the stromal cell-derived factor (SDF)-1/CXCR4
system is involved in metastatic processes in oral cancer. Moreover, we
have also reported that blocking CXCR4 with AMD3100, a CXCR4 antagonist,
may be a potent anti-metastatic therapy for CXCR4-related head and neck
cancer. Recently, AMD070 has been described as a novel orally
bioavailable inhibitor of CXCR4, being minimally invasive than AMD3100.
In this study, we examined the effect of AMD070 on the SDF-1/CXCR4
dependent-metastases in oral cancer cells, B88-SDF-1, which express high
levels of SDF-1 and CXCR4.We examined the effect of CXCR4-specific
antagonists, AMD3100 and AMD070 on the cell growth, cell migration and
cell invasion of B88-SDF-1 cells. Both antagonists did not affect the
anchorage-dependent growth of B88-SDF-1 cells, but did inhibit the
SDF-1/CXCR4 dependent-migration of the cells. Moreover, AMD070
significantly suppressed anchorage-independent growth and invasion of
B88-SDF-1 cells. Next we examined the effect of AMD070 to distant
metastasis in vivo. Daily administration of AMD070 per os significantly
inhibited the metastasis of B88-SDF-1 cells to the lungs of nude mice.
These results indicated that AMD070 might be a novel orally bioavailable
inhibitor on the metastases of oral cancer by the SDF-1/CXCR4 system.

