Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrated high-throughput screen to identify treatment leads for
pediatric AML


While dramatic improvements in survival have been achieved for children
and adolescents with acute myeloid leukemia (AML), some subtypes are
associated with event free survival of 8000 compounds. Compounds with
>50% activity (N = 285) in the primary screen and known clinical
candidates were prioritized for a secondary HTS performed in a
dose-response manner (10 point curve, 0-10M). Screening was performed
using a 348-well plate format and a Biomek automation workstation for
drug delivery. At 72 h cell viability was determined using Cell Titer Glo
and automated Envision plate reader. Multiple drug classes had broad
activity including: anti-malarials, cytotoxics (antimicrotubules,
purine/pyrimidine antimetabolites, floxuridine, trimetrexate, topoI/II
inhibitors), epigenetic modifiers (BET, DNMT and HDAC inhibitors), and
agents targeting Bcl-2, Chk1, Parp, Hsp90, NF-B, NAMPT, p53, proteasome,
and Wee1. We validated 13 compounds from select drug classes (artesunate,
cytarabine, gemcitabine, cabazitaxel, depsipeptide, panobinostat,
vorinostat, ABT-199, RG117, bortezomib, carfilizomab, BMN673, MK-1775)
using primary blast samples representing 3 high-risk groups
(FLT3-ITD-positive, MLL-rearranged, FAB M7). Given the broad activity of
gemcitabine and cabazitaxel across AML subtypes and the ability for
repurposing in childhood AML, we further evaluated these agents alone and
in combination in vitro. After 72h exposure, cabazitaxel was a potent
inhibitor of viability in AML cell lines (IC50, 3-11nM) and primary blast
samples (IC50, 3.4nM to >10M); gemcitabine had similar activity (IC50,
3-62nM and 102nM to >10M, respectively). The combination was evaluated
using continuous and sequential administration schedules for up to 72h of
treatment in several cell lines; simultaneous treatments were synergistic
(CI, 0.2-0.45) and sequential treatments were additive to synergistic
(CI, 0.82-0.95). Tolerable combination regimens were identified in NSG
mice (5mg/kg cabazitaxel + 50mg/kg gemcitabine q3d x 4 weeks or q4d x 3
weeks) and efficacy studies in AML xenografts and primagrafts are
ongoing. Further studies will aim to determine the underlying mechanisms
of AML sensitivity to gemcitabine, cabazitaxel, and the combination. Our
comprehensive approach to identify treatment leads provide advances in
understanding the biology of a heterogeneous disease and development of
novel treatment strategies with potential clinical benefit for pediatric
AML.

