Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Deletions of 18q characterizes a subset of aggressive prostate
cancers with metastatic potential


Large chromosomal deletions and rearrangements of the TMPRSS:ERG locus
are hallmarks of prostate cancer. Deletion of 18q is recurrently found in
prostate cancer, but the prevalence and clinical significance of this
alteration have not been studied in detail as to yet. We took advantage
of our large prostate cancer prognosis tissue microarray (TMA) containing
more than 12,000 prostate cancers with clinical follow-up data and
performed fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis using an
18q21 probe. A total of 6,881 prostate cancers were interpretable by
FISH. Deletion of 18q was found in 7.5% of cancers, and was linked to
advanced tumor stage (pLarge chromosomal deletions and rearrangements of
the TMPRSS:ERG locus are hallmarks of prostate cancer. Deletion of 18q is
recurrently found in prostate cancer, but the prevalence and clinical
significance of this alteration have not been studied in detail as to
yet. We took advantage of our large prostate cancer prognosis tissue
microarray (TMA) containing more than 12,000 prostate cancers with
clinical follow-up data and performed fluorescence in situ hybridization
(FISH) analysis using an 18q21 probe. A total of 6,881 prostate cancers
were interpretable by FISH. Deletion of 18q was found in 7.5% of cancers,
and was linked to advanced tumor stage (p<0.0001), high Gleason grade (p
= 0.0013) and biochemical recurrence (BCR, pLarge chromosomal deletions
and rearrangements of the TMPRSS:ERG locus are hallmarks of prostate
cancer. Deletion of 18q is recurrently found in prostate cancer, but the
prevalence and clinical significance of this alteration have not been
studied in detail as to yet. We took advantage of our large prostate
cancer prognosis tissue microarray (TMA) containing more than 12,000
prostate cancers with clinical follow-up data and performed fluorescence
in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis using an 18q21 probe. A total of
6,881 prostate cancers were interpretable by FISH. Deletion of 18q was
found in 7.5% of cancers, and was linked to advanced tumor stage
(p<0.0001), high Gleason grade (p = 0.0013) and biochemical recurrence
(BCR, p<0.0001). Comparison with data from TMPRSS:ERG fusion and ERG
protein expression revealed that deletions of 18q were only marginally
related to an ERG-fusion negative phenotype (p = 0.0063). Multivariate
analysis showed that the prognostic value of 18q deletion was independent
from the established prognostic factors in all cancers (p = 0.0004) as
well as in the subsets of ERG-fusion negative (p = 0.0148) and ERG-fusion
positive cancers (p = 0.0264). From the clinical data attached to our
TMA, we defined additional clinical endpoints beyond BCR, which represent
the four hallmarks (local, local invasive, occult systemic and
metastatic) of tumor growth and dissemination in prostate cancer.
Deletion of 18q was linked to unfavorable outcome also according to these
alternative clinical endpoints. For example, the fraction of cancers with
occult systemic or metastatic dissemination increased from 33.6% in
patients whose tumors lacked 18q deletion to 41.8% in patients with
tumors harboring 18q deletion (p = 0.0458). In summary, the results of
our study demonstrate a pivotal role of 18q deletions for prognosis in
prostate cancer independent of the established prognosticators.

