Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Utilization of podoplanin as a chemotherapeutic target for oral
squamous cell carcinoma


Oral cancer is diagnosed in over 300 thousand people, and kills over 100
thousand people, around the world each year. Current treatments rely on
radiation and surgery procedures that often decrease the quality of life
for oral cancer survivors. There is a clear need to improve treatments
for these patients. Over 90% of oral cancers are formed by oral squamous
cell carcinoma (OSCC). Most OSCC cells express the transmembrane receptor
podoplanin (PDPN), which has emerged as a promising target for OSCC
treatment. The PDPN receptor promotes tumor cell invasion and metastasis
which leads to the vast majority of cancer deaths. Here, we describe
efforts to target PDPN intracellularly and extracellularly in order to
prevent and treat oral cancer. PDPN contains intracellular serine
residues that can be phosphorylated by protein kinases including CDK5 and
PKA to decrease cell migration. Additionally, the extracellular portion
of PDPN can be targeted with Maackia amurensis seed lectin (MASL) to
inhibit tumor cell migration and viability. Previous studies suggest that
PDPN induces RhoA GTPase activity to promote cell migration. However, we
show here that MASL dynamically binds PDPN to downregulate Cdc42 GTPase
activity, but not RhoA or Rac1 GTPase activity. These data suggest that
MASL suppresses Cdc42 GTPase activity to disrupt cell polarity and
inhibit cell migration. Taken together, these data indicate that PDPN can
serve as a functionally relevant target to prevent and combat oral cancer.

