Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: p16INK4A negatively regulates Leptin through miR-141 and
miR-146b-5p in breast stromal adipocytes


Obesity, a disease linked to increased number of adipocytes in various
tissues, is increasingly recognized as a risk factor for the development
of breast cancer. Obesity has been reported to be associated with the
occurrence of larger, more advanced tumors and aggressive cancer
pathological features, including lymph node metastasis, advanced tumor
stage, and high grade. Accumulating recent evidence highlights the
tumor-surrounding adipose tissue as a key component of breast cancer
progression. However, the molecular basis of adipocyte-related breast
carcinogenesis remains elusive. To shed light on this important
phenomenon, we investigated the autocrine and paracrine roles of the
tumor suppressor p16 INK4A protein in adipocytes. We have found that
down-regulation of p16INK4A by specific shRNA in breast adipocytes
enhanced their migration/invasion abilities and increased the
expression/secretion levels of various adipokines including leptin. In
addition, we have shown that p16INK4A protein inhibits the
pro-carcinogenic effects of breast stromal adipocytes in vitro and in
tumor xenografts through repressing the expression/secretion of Leptin.
Indeed, p16INK4A suppresses Leptin at the mRNA level. This effect is
mediated trough miR-141 and miR-146b-5p, which inhibits Leptin expression
through a specific sequence at the Leptin 3UTR. In addition, we present
clear evidence that down-regulation of p16INK4A is sufficient to
trans-activate breast stromal adipocytes, which promote
epithelial-to-mesenchymal-transition in normal breast luminal cells in a
leptin-dependent manner.These results provide the first indication that
p16INK4A and miR-141 and miR-146b-5p represses Leptin and its
procarcinogenic effects in breast stromal adipocytes. This indicates that
p16 pathway has non-cell-autonomous tumor suppressor function.

