Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor and immune cell infiltration are enhanced by irradiation of
normal tissues in immunocompromised mice


Breast cancer recurrence remains high in triple-negative cases despite
aggressive surgical, radiological, and chemotherapeutic intervention.
Recent studies suggest that circulating tumor cell re-seeding of primary
tumors may facilitate recurrence. However, the tumor microenvironment's
role in recurrence is not well understood. We hypothesize that the
irradiated tumor stroma and microenvironment may influence tumor cell
migration. In this study, we characterize the effects of normal tissue
irradiation on tumor and immune cell migration to evaluate how
tumor-stromal interactions modulate recurrence after therapy. This work
represents the first step toward elucidating how stromal tissue radiation
response contributes to tumor and immune cell recruitment.Mouse embryonic
fibroblasts (MEF) were irradiated to 20 Gy with a cesium source.
Supernatant was collected after 2 or 7 d incubation to be used as a
chemoattractant in a transwell assay to investigate the induction of 4T1
murine or MDA-MB-231 human mammary carcinoma cell invasion. An orthotopic
breast cancer model was used to evaluate the effect of radiation on tumor
cell migration to normal tissues. Nude mice were inoculated with
luciferase labeled 4T1 or MDA-MB-231 cells in the mammary fat pad (MFP),
and BALB/c mice with depleted CD4 and CD8+ T cells were inoculated with
4T1 MFP tumors. The contralateral normal MFP was irradiated to a dose of
20 Gy with a 250 kVp cabinet x-ray machine when tumors were palpable.
Cell migration was monitored with bioluminescence imaging (BLI) 10 d
after irradiation. Irradiated and control tissues were evaluated using
immunohistochemistry (IHC). Tissue sections were stained with F4/80 to
determine the extent of macrophage infiltration. Flow cytometry was also
performed on dissociated irradiated and control tissues to characterize
immune cell populations. Of particular interest were CD11b+F4/80+
macrophages and CD11b+GR1+ myeloid-derived suppressor cells
(MDSCs).Radiation enhanced tumor cell migration to normal tissues both in
vitro and in vivo. 4T1 and MDA-MB-231 cells exhibited an increase in
invasion (pBreast cancer recurrence remains high in triple-negative cases
despite aggressive surgical, radiological, and chemotherapeutic
intervention. Recent studies suggest that circulating tumor cell
re-seeding of primary tumors may facilitate recurrence. However, the
tumor microenvironment's role in recurrence is not well understood. We
hypothesize that the irradiated tumor stroma and microenvironment may
influence tumor cell migration. In this study, we characterize the
effects of normal tissue irradiation on tumor and immune cell migration
to evaluate how tumor-stromal interactions modulate recurrence after
therapy. This work represents the first step toward elucidating how
stromal tissue radiation response contributes to tumor and immune cell
recruitment.Mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEF) were irradiated to 20 Gy
with a cesium source. Supernatant was collected after 2 or 7 d incubation
to be used as a chemoattractant in a transwell assay to investigate the
induction of 4T1 murine or MDA-MB-231 human mammary carcinoma cell
invasion. An orthotopic breast cancer model was used to evaluate the
effect of radiation on tumor cell migration to normal tissues. Nude mice
were inoculated with luciferase labeled 4T1 or MDA-MB-231 cells in the
mammary fat pad (MFP), and BALB/c mice with depleted CD4 and CD8+ T cells
were inoculated with 4T1 MFP tumors. The contralateral normal MFP was
irradiated to a dose of 20 Gy with a 250 kVp cabinet x-ray machine when
tumors were palpable. Cell migration was monitored with bioluminescence
imaging (BLI) 10 d after irradiation. Irradiated and control tissues were
evaluated using immunohistochemistry (IHC). Tissue sections were stained
with F4/80 to determine the extent of macrophage infiltration. Flow
cytometry was also performed on dissociated irradiated and control
tissues to characterize immune cell populations. Of particular interest
were CD11b+F4/80+ macrophages and CD11b+GR1+ myeloid-derived suppressor
cells (MDSCs).Radiation enhanced tumor cell migration to normal tissues
both in vitro and in vivo. 4T1 and MDA-MB-231 cells exhibited an increase
in invasion (p<0.05) in vitro when exposed to irradiated MEF media. Ex
vivo BLI analysis revealed that normal tissue irradiation attracted tumor
cells to the MFP and surrounding tissues, including the peritoneum and
muscle (pBreast cancer recurrence remains high in triple-negative cases
despite aggressive surgical, radiological, and chemotherapeutic
intervention. Recent studies suggest that circulating tumor cell
re-seeding of primary tumors may facilitate recurrence. However, the
tumor microenvironment's role in recurrence is not well understood. We
hypothesize that the irradiated tumor stroma and microenvironment may
influence tumor cell migration. In this study, we characterize the
effects of normal tissue irradiation on tumor and immune cell migration
to evaluate how tumor-stromal interactions modulate recurrence after
therapy. This work represents the first step toward elucidating how
stromal tissue radiation response contributes to tumor and immune cell
recruitment.Mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEF) were irradiated to 20 Gy
with a cesium source. Supernatant was collected after 2 or 7 d incubation
to be used as a chemoattractant in a transwell assay to investigate the
induction of 4T1 murine or MDA-MB-231 human mammary carcinoma cell
invasion. An orthotopic breast cancer model was used to evaluate the
effect of radiation on tumor cell migration to normal tissues. Nude mice
were inoculated with luciferase labeled 4T1 or MDA-MB-231 cells in the
mammary fat pad (MFP), and BALB/c mice with depleted CD4 and CD8+ T cells
were inoculated with 4T1 MFP tumors. The contralateral normal MFP was
irradiated to a dose of 20 Gy with a 250 kVp cabinet x-ray machine when
tumors were palpable. Cell migration was monitored with bioluminescence
imaging (BLI) 10 d after irradiation. Irradiated and control tissues were
evaluated using immunohistochemistry (IHC). Tissue sections were stained
with F4/80 to determine the extent of macrophage infiltration. Flow
cytometry was also performed on dissociated irradiated and control
tissues to characterize immune cell populations. Of particular interest
were CD11b+F4/80+ macrophages and CD11b+GR1+ myeloid-derived suppressor
cells (MDSCs).Radiation enhanced tumor cell migration to normal tissues
both in vitro and in vivo. 4T1 and MDA-MB-231 cells exhibited an increase
in invasion (p<0.05) in vitro when exposed to irradiated MEF media. Ex
vivo BLI analysis revealed that normal tissue irradiation attracted tumor
cells to the MFP and surrounding tissues, including the peritoneum and
muscle (p<0.001), in nude and BALB/c mice with depleted CD4 and CD8+ T
cells. An increase in macrophage infiltration was found in irradiated
tissue sections. Flow cytometry confirmed increases in macrophage and
MDSC infiltration in irradiated areas.This study establishes that normal
tissue radiation response may play a role in modulating tumor and immune
cell migration after radiation. The increase in macrophage and MDSC
infiltration after irradiation indicates the immune contribution in tumor
cell migration. These results suggest that the tumor stroma may
facilitate tumor cell invasion and tumor regrowth following radiotherapy.

