Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Circulating vitamin D2 and D3 levels and single nucleotide
polymorphism associations with lung cancer status: A case-control study


Vitamin D is an essential micronutrient, required for normal
physiological function and classically recognized for its role regulating
calcium metabolism. Recent work is beginning to demonstrate a role of
vitamin D in chronic illnesses, such as cancer, but questions addressing
how depletion of this nutrient affects cancer risk remain largely
unanswered. In 2011, the Institute of Medicine report highlighted the
need for more research to explore the role of vitamin D in non-skeletal
health outcomes. Previously, vitamin D has largely been measured using
radio- and chemiluminescence immunoassays, unable to distinguish between
D2 (from plant dietary sources and supplements) and D3 forms. We measured
circulating serum levels of both, inactive (25(OH)D), and active
(1,25(OH)2D) forms of D2 and D3 using sensitive liquid chromatography
coupled to mass spectrometry in 406 lung cancer cases and 437 controls.
We observed that levels of inactive D3 are associated with decreased lung
cancer risk across quartiles, after adjustment for age, gender, race,
smoking status, pack years, interview year and blood collection month
(ORadjusted = 0.5 (95% CI = 0.2, 0.9), P Vitamin D is an essential
micronutrient, required for normal physiological function and classically
recognized for its role regulating calcium metabolism. Recent work is
beginning to demonstrate a role of vitamin D in chronic illnesses, such
as cancer, but questions addressing how depletion of this nutrient
affects cancer risk remain largely unanswered. In 2011, the Institute of
Medicine report highlighted the need for more research to explore the
role of vitamin D in non-skeletal health outcomes. Previously, vitamin D
has largely been measured using radio- and chemiluminescence
immunoassays, unable to distinguish between D2 (from plant dietary
sources and supplements) and D3 forms. We measured circulating serum
levels of both, inactive (25(OH)D), and active (1,25(OH)2D) forms of D2
and D3 using sensitive liquid chromatography coupled to mass spectrometry
in 406 lung cancer cases and 437 controls. We observed that levels of
inactive D3 are associated with decreased lung cancer risk across
quartiles, after adjustment for age, gender, race, smoking status, pack
years, interview year and blood collection month (ORadjusted = 0.5 (95%
CI = 0.2, 0.9), P < 0.02; Ptrend Vitamin D is an essential micronutrient,
required for normal physiological function and classically recognized for
its role regulating calcium metabolism. Recent work is beginning to
demonstrate a role of vitamin D in chronic illnesses, such as cancer, but
questions addressing how depletion of this nutrient affects cancer risk
remain largely unanswered. In 2011, the Institute of Medicine report
highlighted the need for more research to explore the role of vitamin D
in non-skeletal health outcomes. Previously, vitamin D has largely been
measured using radio- and chemiluminescence immunoassays, unable to
distinguish between D2 (from plant dietary sources and supplements) and
D3 forms. We measured circulating serum levels of both, inactive
(25(OH)D), and active (1,25(OH)2D) forms of D2 and D3 using sensitive
liquid chromatography coupled to mass spectrometry in 406 lung cancer
cases and 437 controls. We observed that levels of inactive D3 are
associated with decreased lung cancer risk across quartiles, after
adjustment for age, gender, race, smoking status, pack years, interview
year and blood collection month (ORadjusted = 0.5 (95% CI = 0.2, 0.9), P
< 0.02; Ptrend <0.0001), compared with the lowest quartile. The observed
associations remained significant upon stratifications on race, with
ORadjusted ranging from 0.4 to 0.3 (95% CI = 0.1, 0.9), P Vitamin D is an
essential micronutrient, required for normal physiological function and
classically recognized for its role regulating calcium metabolism. Recent
work is beginning to demonstrate a role of vitamin D in chronic
illnesses, such as cancer, but questions addressing how depletion of this
nutrient affects cancer risk remain largely unanswered. In 2011, the
Institute of Medicine report highlighted the need for more research to
explore the role of vitamin D in non-skeletal health outcomes.
Previously, vitamin D has largely been measured using radio- and
chemiluminescence immunoassays, unable to distinguish between D2 (from
plant dietary sources and supplements) and D3 forms. We measured
circulating serum levels of both, inactive (25(OH)D), and active
(1,25(OH)2D) forms of D2 and D3 using sensitive liquid chromatography
coupled to mass spectrometry in 406 lung cancer cases and 437 controls.
We observed that levels of inactive D3 are associated with decreased lung
cancer risk across quartiles, after adjustment for age, gender, race,
smoking status, pack years, interview year and blood collection month
(ORadjusted = 0.5 (95% CI = 0.2, 0.9), P < 0.02; Ptrend <0.0001),
compared with the lowest quartile. The observed associations remained
significant upon stratifications on race, with ORadjusted ranging from
0.4 to 0.3 (95% CI = 0.1, 0.9), P < 0.04 in 2nd and 3rd quartiles,
respectively, in African Americans, and ORadjusted = 0.5, P = 0.04 in 4th
quartile in European Americans. Increasing levels of active D3 were
associated with decreased lung cancer risk (ORadjusted ranging from 0.2
to 0.04 (95% CI = 0.01, 0.7), P Vitamin D is an essential micronutrient,
required for normal physiological function and classically recognized for
its role regulating calcium metabolism. Recent work is beginning to
demonstrate a role of vitamin D in chronic illnesses, such as cancer, but
questions addressing how depletion of this nutrient affects cancer risk
remain largely unanswered. In 2011, the Institute of Medicine report
highlighted the need for more research to explore the role of vitamin D
in non-skeletal health outcomes. Previously, vitamin D has largely been
measured using radio- and chemiluminescence immunoassays, unable to
distinguish between D2 (from plant dietary sources and supplements) and
D3 forms. We measured circulating serum levels of both, inactive
(25(OH)D), and active (1,25(OH)2D) forms of D2 and D3 using sensitive
liquid chromatography coupled to mass spectrometry in 406 lung cancer
cases and 437 controls. We observed that levels of inactive D3 are
associated with decreased lung cancer risk across quartiles, after
adjustment for age, gender, race, smoking status, pack years, interview
year and blood collection month (ORadjusted = 0.5 (95% CI = 0.2, 0.9), P
< 0.02; Ptrend <0.0001), compared with the lowest quartile. The observed
associations remained significant upon stratifications on race, with
ORadjusted ranging from 0.4 to 0.3 (95% CI = 0.1, 0.9), P < 0.04 in 2nd
and 3rd quartiles, respectively, in African Americans, and ORadjusted =
0.5, P = 0.04 in 4th quartile in European Americans. Increasing levels of
active D3 were associated with decreased lung cancer risk (ORadjusted
ranging from 0.2 to 0.04 (95% CI = 0.01, 0.7), P < 0.01; Ptrend Vitamin D
is an essential micronutrient, required for normal physiological function
and classically recognized for its role regulating calcium metabolism.
Recent work is beginning to demonstrate a role of vitamin D in chronic
illnesses, such as cancer, but questions addressing how depletion of this
nutrient affects cancer risk remain largely unanswered. In 2011, the
Institute of Medicine report highlighted the need for more research to
explore the role of vitamin D in non-skeletal health outcomes.
Previously, vitamin D has largely been measured using radio- and
chemiluminescence immunoassays, unable to distinguish between D2 (from
plant dietary sources and supplements) and D3 forms. We measured
circulating serum levels of both, inactive (25(OH)D), and active
(1,25(OH)2D) forms of D2 and D3 using sensitive liquid chromatography
coupled to mass spectrometry in 406 lung cancer cases and 437 controls.
We observed that levels of inactive D3 are associated with decreased lung
cancer risk across quartiles, after adjustment for age, gender, race,
smoking status, pack years, interview year and blood collection month
(ORadjusted = 0.5 (95% CI = 0.2, 0.9), P < 0.02; Ptrend <0.0001),
compared with the lowest quartile. The observed associations remained
significant upon stratifications on race, with ORadjusted ranging from
0.4 to 0.3 (95% CI = 0.1, 0.9), P < 0.04 in 2nd and 3rd quartiles,
respectively, in African Americans, and ORadjusted = 0.5, P = 0.04 in 4th
quartile in European Americans. Increasing levels of active D3 were
associated with decreased lung cancer risk (ORadjusted ranging from 0.2
to 0.04 (95% CI = 0.01, 0.7), P < 0.01; Ptrend < 0.0001). High levels of
inactive D2 were associated with decreased lung cancer risk only in the
highest when compared to the lowest quartile (ORadjusted = 0.5 (95% CI =
0.2, 0.9), P = 0.05); no significant observations were seen for the
active D2. Additionally, we conducted comprehensive genotyping of single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the genes from the vitamin D
metabolism pathway (CYP2R1, CYP27A1, CYP27B1, CYP24A1, and VDR), with a
minor allele frequency of 5%, using a Fluidigm platform. Of 261 SNPs, 21
were associated with lung cancer risk. Four SNPs in VDR were found to
modulate vitamin D3 levels in the controls: alleles associated with
increased risk were associated with decreased vitamin D levels and vice
versa, suggesting their functional significance in the context of lung
cancer. We are the first group to investigate physiological levels of
both, inactive and active forms of D2 and D3 in cancer patients. Our
findings suggest a protective role of vitamin D in lung cancer, with
stronger associations observed for D3, and reinforce the importance of
maintaining optimal levels of this crucial vitamin for human health.
Additional research to illuminate the mechanism through which vitamin D
contributes to lung cancer carcinogenesis is warranted.

