Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Improved clinical variant calling and HLA genotyping with GRCh38


The Genome Reference Consortium released human genome build 38 (hg38,
GRCh38) two years ago and it offers major improvements over the six year
old previous build, 37 (hg19, GRCh37). The new build reflects our
increased understanding of the heterogeneity within human
sub-populations, contains a large number of alternative genomic loci that
better capture our knowledge of genome structure, and includes highly
diverse human leukocyte antigen (HLA) regions enabling HLA typing.To help
with the migration of clinical sequencing workflows we provide support
for variant calling on build 38, validate methods using truth sets from
the Genome in a Bottle consortium and Illumina's Platinum Genome and show
that feature projection approaches are a viable intermediate approach to
port existing annotation resources. We show how the refined genomic
representation improves mapping and variant calling by reducing the
number of false positive SNP calls and improving InDel detection, and how
post-processing of sequence reads mapping to HLA regions enables accurate
HLA genotyping from targeted panels, exome- and WGS data. Using Omixon
HLA validation data, integrated OptiType HLA calling achieved 100%
accuracy on 8 targeted panels and better than 90% accuracy on 1000 genome
exome samples.This work provides a freely available, validated, ready to
run pipeline making use of the improved heterogeneity representation in
build 38 and demonstrating the value of moving towards a more accurate,
graph-based representation of human genomes.

