Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comprehensive genomic analysis of human papillomavirus-associated
oral cancers


Human papillomavirus-associated oral cancers comprise a distinct disease
that is increasing in frequency in Western countries. Recent genomic
landscape studies of oral cancers and of HPV-associated cervical cancers
identified the most commonly mutated genes in each. Here we report a
comprehensive analysis of 83 HPV-positive oropharyngeal cancers studied
by whole genome sequencing (WGS), and an additional 46 tumors evaluated
by the Cancer Genome Atlas project (TCGA) by exome sequencing. We
confirmed recurrent mutations in previously reported, frequently mutated
candidate driver genes including PIK3CA, as well as several novel gene
targets, each occurring recurrently at frequencies of more than
approximately 3%. Our WGS data demonstrated recurrent focal genomic
instability associated with HPV insertional mutagenesis. We observed
dramatic changes in genomic copy number variants (CNVs) at chromosome 3q
as well as numerous other chromosomal regions that are recurrently gained
or lost in HPV-positive tumors. RNA-Seq data from this collection of oral
cancers defined differentially expressed transcript levels and other
molecular alterations associated with single nucleotide variants (SNVs),
CNVs and other genomic structural variants in the tumors. Together, our
results reveal a unique pattern of somatic variants that distinguishes
HPV+ oral cancers both from HPV- oral cancers as well as other HPV+
tumors arising in distinct tissues including the uterine cervix. These
data shed new light on the molecular pathogenesis of oral cancers, and
provide new opportunities for development of diagnostic and therapeutic
strategies for affected patients.

