Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Promoter DNA methylation patterns in breast tumor and matched
adjacent non-tumor tissues in the breast cancer family registry


Alterations in DNA methylation occur frequently in breast carcinogenesis,
but little is known about the DNA methylation changes in familial breast
tumors. To examine whether the DNA methylation profiles in breast cancer
tissues from high risk women from breast cancer families are similar to
breast tumor tissues from The Cancer Genome Atlas project (TCGA), we
measured DNA methylation by next generation sequencing in 48 genes
identified in TCGA in 40 formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tumor tissues,
and the corresponding adjacent non-tumor tissues from women with invasive
breast cancer at the New York site of the Breast Cancer Family Registry
(BCFR). We observed differences in DNA methylation patterns between tumor
and normal adjacent tissue for five of the selected genes (RYR2, C1orf14,
SLC7A14, SEPW1, and RPTOR). The methylation levels in tumor and adjacent
tissues, respectively were 24% and 14% for RYR2, (p = 0.01), 55% and 29%
for C1orf14 (p = 0.01), 32% and 21% for SLC7A14 (p = 0.002), 53% and 28%
for RPTOR (p = 0.01) and 74% and 38% SEPW1 (pAlterations in DNA
methylation occur frequently in breast carcinogenesis, but little is
known about the DNA methylation changes in familial breast tumors. To
examine whether the DNA methylation profiles in breast cancer tissues
from high risk women from breast cancer families are similar to breast
tumor tissues from The Cancer Genome Atlas project (TCGA), we measured
DNA methylation by next generation sequencing in 48 genes identified in
TCGA in 40 formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tumor tissues, and the
corresponding adjacent non-tumor tissues from women with invasive breast
cancer at the New York site of the Breast Cancer Family Registry (BCFR).
We observed differences in DNA methylation patterns between tumor and
normal adjacent tissue for five of the selected genes (RYR2, C1orf14,
SLC7A14, SEPW1, and RPTOR). The methylation levels in tumor and adjacent
tissues, respectively were 24% and 14% for RYR2, (p = 0.01), 55% and 29%
for C1orf14 (p = 0.01), 32% and 21% for SLC7A14 (p = 0.002), 53% and 28%
for RPTOR (p = 0.01) and 74% and 38% SEPW1 (p<0.0001). We only confirmed
5 of the 48 loci identified in TCGA in our sample of high risk women,
suggesting genes identified from TCGA may be different than those in
high-risk women. As tissue-specific methylation may prove to have strong
prognostic significance, this suggests a critical need to engage in
large-scale studies examining genome-wide DNA methylation profiles in
high risk women in order to understand the etiology of familial breast
cancer.

