Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ibrutinib, a BTK inhibitor, impairs the generation and function of
myeloid derived suppressor cells


Myeloid derived suppressor cells (MDSC) interfere with anti tumor immune
responses. MDSC have also been shown to antagonize the effectiveness of
immune based therapies including immune checkpoint blockade. As a result,
MDSC have received attention as potential targets for immune based
combination therapies. There has been limited success in the
identification of clinically active agents with the ability to inhibit
the function or generation of MDSC. Ibrutinib is an orally available
irreversible inhibitor of Bruton's tyrosine kinase (BTK) that is FDA
approved for the treatment of B cell malignancies. In addition to B
cells, cells of the myeloid lineage including monocytes and macrophages
express BTK, and treatment with ibrutinib has been shown to alter their
function and differentiation. As a result, it was hypothesized that
ibrutinib would interfere with the function or generation of MDSC in the
setting of cancer. MDSC isolated from the spleens of multiple murine
tumor models (EMT6, 4T1, and C26) as well as MDSC from patients with
metastatic melanoma expressed BTK. Treatment with ibrutinib at doses
ranging from 0.1-5 M inhibited the phosphorylation of BTK in both murine
and human MDSC. Ibrutinib treatment of murine and human MDSC resulted in
a significant reduction in nitric oxide (NO) production (pMyeloid derived
suppressor cells (MDSC) interfere with anti tumor immune responses. MDSC
have also been shown to antagonize the effectiveness of immune based
therapies including immune checkpoint blockade. As a result, MDSC have
received attention as potential targets for immune based combination
therapies. There has been limited success in the identification of
clinically active agents with the ability to inhibit the function or
generation of MDSC. Ibrutinib is an orally available irreversible
inhibitor of Bruton's tyrosine kinase (BTK) that is FDA approved for the
treatment of B cell malignancies. In addition to B cells, cells of the
myeloid lineage including monocytes and macrophages express BTK, and
treatment with ibrutinib has been shown to alter their function and
differentiation. As a result, it was hypothesized that ibrutinib would
interfere with the function or generation of MDSC in the setting of
cancer. MDSC isolated from the spleens of multiple murine tumor models
(EMT6, 4T1, and C26) as well as MDSC from patients with metastatic
melanoma expressed BTK. Treatment with ibrutinib at doses ranging from
0.1-5 M inhibited the phosphorylation of BTK in both murine and human
MDSC. Ibrutinib treatment of murine and human MDSC resulted in a
significant reduction in nitric oxide (NO) production (p< 0.05), but had
only modest effects on MDSC levels of IDO and arginase. Ibrutinib was
also able to inhibit murine MDSC migration in response to EMT6 cell line
conditioned media and the chemokine CXCL12 (pMyeloid derived suppressor
cells (MDSC) interfere with anti tumor immune responses. MDSC have also
been shown to antagonize the effectiveness of immune based therapies
including immune checkpoint blockade. As a result, MDSC have received
attention as potential targets for immune based combination therapies.
There has been limited success in the identification of clinically active
agents with the ability to inhibit the function or generation of MDSC.
Ibrutinib is an orally available irreversible inhibitor of Bruton's
tyrosine kinase (BTK) that is FDA approved for the treatment of B cell
malignancies. In addition to B cells, cells of the myeloid lineage
including monocytes and macrophages express BTK, and treatment with
ibrutinib has been shown to alter their function and differentiation. As
a result, it was hypothesized that ibrutinib would interfere with the
function or generation of MDSC in the setting of cancer. MDSC isolated
from the spleens of multiple murine tumor models (EMT6, 4T1, and C26) as
well as MDSC from patients with metastatic melanoma expressed BTK.
Treatment with ibrutinib at doses ranging from 0.1-5 M inhibited the
phosphorylation of BTK in both murine and human MDSC. Ibrutinib treatment
of murine and human MDSC resulted in a significant reduction in nitric
oxide (NO) production (p< 0.05), but had only modest effects on MDSC
levels of IDO and arginase. Ibrutinib was also able to inhibit murine
MDSC migration in response to EMT6 cell line conditioned media and the
chemokine CXCL12 (p< 0.05). In addition, ibrutinib inhibited human MDSC
migration in response to GM CSF (pMyeloid derived suppressor cells (MDSC)
interfere with anti tumor immune responses. MDSC have also been shown to
antagonize the effectiveness of immune based therapies including immune
checkpoint blockade. As a result, MDSC have received attention as
potential targets for immune based combination therapies. There has been
limited success in the identification of clinically active agents with
the ability to inhibit the function or generation of MDSC. Ibrutinib is
an orally available irreversible inhibitor of Bruton's tyrosine kinase
(BTK) that is FDA approved for the treatment of B cell malignancies. In
addition to B cells, cells of the myeloid lineage including monocytes and
macrophages express BTK, and treatment with ibrutinib has been shown to
alter their function and differentiation. As a result, it was
hypothesized that ibrutinib would interfere with the function or
generation of MDSC in the setting of cancer. MDSC isolated from the
spleens of multiple murine tumor models (EMT6, 4T1, and C26) as well as
MDSC from patients with metastatic melanoma expressed BTK. Treatment with
ibrutinib at doses ranging from 0.1-5 M inhibited the phosphorylation of
BTK in both murine and human MDSC. Ibrutinib treatment of murine and
human MDSC resulted in a significant reduction in nitric oxide (NO)
production (p< 0.05), but had only modest effects on MDSC levels of IDO
and arginase. Ibrutinib was also able to inhibit murine MDSC migration in
response to EMT6 cell line conditioned media and the chemokine CXCL12 (p<
0.05). In addition, ibrutinib inhibited human MDSC migration in response
to GM CSF (p< 0.05). Ibrutinib reduced the expression of the myeloid
adhesion molecules CD11a (pMyeloid derived suppressor cells (MDSC)
interfere with anti tumor immune responses. MDSC have also been shown to
antagonize the effectiveness of immune based therapies including immune
checkpoint blockade. As a result, MDSC have received attention as
potential targets for immune based combination therapies. There has been
limited success in the identification of clinically active agents with
the ability to inhibit the function or generation of MDSC. Ibrutinib is
an orally available irreversible inhibitor of Bruton's tyrosine kinase
(BTK) that is FDA approved for the treatment of B cell malignancies. In
addition to B cells, cells of the myeloid lineage including monocytes and
macrophages express BTK, and treatment with ibrutinib has been shown to
alter their function and differentiation. As a result, it was
hypothesized that ibrutinib would interfere with the function or
generation of MDSC in the setting of cancer. MDSC isolated from the
spleens of multiple murine tumor models (EMT6, 4T1, and C26) as well as
MDSC from patients with metastatic melanoma expressed BTK. Treatment with
ibrutinib at doses ranging from 0.1-5 M inhibited the phosphorylation of
BTK in both murine and human MDSC. Ibrutinib treatment of murine and
human MDSC resulted in a significant reduction in nitric oxide (NO)
production (p< 0.05), but had only modest effects on MDSC levels of IDO
and arginase. Ibrutinib was also able to inhibit murine MDSC migration in
response to EMT6 cell line conditioned media and the chemokine CXCL12 (p<
0.05). In addition, ibrutinib inhibited human MDSC migration in response
to GM CSF (p< 0.05). Ibrutinib reduced the expression of the myeloid
adhesion molecules CD11a (p< 0.05) and CD49D (pMyeloid derived suppressor
cells (MDSC) interfere with anti tumor immune responses. MDSC have also
been shown to antagonize the effectiveness of immune based therapies
including immune checkpoint blockade. As a result, MDSC have received
attention as potential targets for immune based combination therapies.
There has been limited success in the identification of clinically active
agents with the ability to inhibit the function or generation of MDSC.
Ibrutinib is an orally available irreversible inhibitor of Bruton's
tyrosine kinase (BTK) that is FDA approved for the treatment of B cell
malignancies. In addition to B cells, cells of the myeloid lineage
including monocytes and macrophages express BTK, and treatment with
ibrutinib has been shown to alter their function and differentiation. As
a result, it was hypothesized that ibrutinib would interfere with the
function or generation of MDSC in the setting of cancer. MDSC isolated
from the spleens of multiple murine tumor models (EMT6, 4T1, and C26) as
well as MDSC from patients with metastatic melanoma expressed BTK.
Treatment with ibrutinib at doses ranging from 0.1-5 M inhibited the
phosphorylation of BTK in both murine and human MDSC. Ibrutinib treatment
of murine and human MDSC resulted in a significant reduction in nitric
oxide (NO) production (p< 0.05), but had only modest effects on MDSC
levels of IDO and arginase. Ibrutinib was also able to inhibit murine
MDSC migration in response to EMT6 cell line conditioned media and the
chemokine CXCL12 (p< 0.05). In addition, ibrutinib inhibited human MDSC
migration in response to GM CSF (p< 0.05). Ibrutinib reduced the
expression of the myeloid adhesion molecules CD11a (p< 0.05) and CD49D
(p< 0.01) by MDSC, which could explain the reduction in migration.
Importantly, ibrutinib significantly reduced the ability of MDSC to
suppress CD8+ T cell proliferation compared to DMSO (21.98% vs. 12.49%
proliferation, pMyeloid derived suppressor cells (MDSC) interfere with
anti tumor immune responses. MDSC have also been shown to antagonize the
effectiveness of immune based therapies including immune checkpoint
blockade. As a result, MDSC have received attention as potential targets
for immune based combination therapies. There has been limited success in
the identification of clinically active agents with the ability to
inhibit the function or generation of MDSC. Ibrutinib is an orally
available irreversible inhibitor of Bruton's tyrosine kinase (BTK) that
is FDA approved for the treatment of B cell malignancies. In addition to
B cells, cells of the myeloid lineage including monocytes and macrophages
express BTK, and treatment with ibrutinib has been shown to alter their
function and differentiation. As a result, it was hypothesized that
ibrutinib would interfere with the function or generation of MDSC in the
setting of cancer. MDSC isolated from the spleens of multiple murine
tumor models (EMT6, 4T1, and C26) as well as MDSC from patients with
metastatic melanoma expressed BTK. Treatment with ibrutinib at doses
ranging from 0.1-5 M inhibited the phosphorylation of BTK in both murine
and human MDSC. Ibrutinib treatment of murine and human MDSC resulted in
a significant reduction in nitric oxide (NO) production (p< 0.05), but
had only modest effects on MDSC levels of IDO and arginase. Ibrutinib was
also able to inhibit murine MDSC migration in response to EMT6 cell line
conditioned media and the chemokine CXCL12 (p< 0.05). In addition,
ibrutinib inhibited human MDSC migration in response to GM CSF (p< 0.05).
Ibrutinib reduced the expression of the myeloid adhesion molecules CD11a
(p< 0.05) and CD49D (p< 0.01) by MDSC, which could explain the reduction
in migration. Importantly, ibrutinib significantly reduced the ability of
MDSC to suppress CD8+ T cell proliferation compared to DMSO (21.98% vs.
12.49% proliferation, p< 0.05). Daily treatment with ibrutinib
effectively inhibited the in vitro generation of human MDSC from
monocytes by promoting HLA DR expression (pMyeloid derived suppressor
cells (MDSC) interfere with anti tumor immune responses. MDSC have also
been shown to antagonize the effectiveness of immune based therapies
including immune checkpoint blockade. As a result, MDSC have received
attention as potential targets for immune based combination therapies.
There has been limited success in the identification of clinically active
agents with the ability to inhibit the function or generation of MDSC.
Ibrutinib is an orally available irreversible inhibitor of Bruton's
tyrosine kinase (BTK) that is FDA approved for the treatment of B cell
malignancies. In addition to B cells, cells of the myeloid lineage
including monocytes and macrophages express BTK, and treatment with
ibrutinib has been shown to alter their function and differentiation. As
a result, it was hypothesized that ibrutinib would interfere with the
function or generation of MDSC in the setting of cancer. MDSC isolated
from the spleens of multiple murine tumor models (EMT6, 4T1, and C26) as
well as MDSC from patients with metastatic melanoma expressed BTK.
Treatment with ibrutinib at doses ranging from 0.1-5 M inhibited the
phosphorylation of BTK in both murine and human MDSC. Ibrutinib treatment
of murine and human MDSC resulted in a significant reduction in nitric
oxide (NO) production (p< 0.05), but had only modest effects on MDSC
levels of IDO and arginase. Ibrutinib was also able to inhibit murine
MDSC migration in response to EMT6 cell line conditioned media and the
chemokine CXCL12 (p< 0.05). In addition, ibrutinib inhibited human MDSC
migration in response to GM CSF (p< 0.05). Ibrutinib reduced the
expression of the myeloid adhesion molecules CD11a (p< 0.05) and CD49D
(p< 0.01) by MDSC, which could explain the reduction in migration.
Importantly, ibrutinib significantly reduced the ability of MDSC to
suppress CD8+ T cell proliferation compared to DMSO (21.98% vs. 12.49%
proliferation, p< 0.05). Daily treatment with ibrutinib effectively
inhibited the in vitro generation of human MDSC from monocytes by
promoting HLA DR expression (p< 0.05). Using the EMT6 mammary carcinoma
model in vivo, ibrutinib treatment resulted in a significant reduction of
MDSC in both the spleen and tumor (pMyeloid derived suppressor cells
(MDSC) interfere with anti tumor immune responses. MDSC have also been
shown to antagonize the effectiveness of immune based therapies including
immune checkpoint blockade. As a result, MDSC have received attention as
potential targets for immune based combination therapies. There has been
limited success in the identification of clinically active agents with
the ability to inhibit the function or generation of MDSC. Ibrutinib is
an orally available irreversible inhibitor of Bruton's tyrosine kinase
(BTK) that is FDA approved for the treatment of B cell malignancies. In
addition to B cells, cells of the myeloid lineage including monocytes and
macrophages express BTK, and treatment with ibrutinib has been shown to
alter their function and differentiation. As a result, it was
hypothesized that ibrutinib would interfere with the function or
generation of MDSC in the setting of cancer. MDSC isolated from the
spleens of multiple murine tumor models (EMT6, 4T1, and C26) as well as
MDSC from patients with metastatic melanoma expressed BTK. Treatment with
ibrutinib at doses ranging from 0.1-5 M inhibited the phosphorylation of
BTK in both murine and human MDSC. Ibrutinib treatment of murine and
human MDSC resulted in a significant reduction in nitric oxide (NO)
production (p< 0.05), but had only modest effects on MDSC levels of IDO
and arginase. Ibrutinib was also able to inhibit murine MDSC migration in
response to EMT6 cell line conditioned media and the chemokine CXCL12 (p<
0.05). In addition, ibrutinib inhibited human MDSC migration in response
to GM CSF (p< 0.05). Ibrutinib reduced the expression of the myeloid
adhesion molecules CD11a (p< 0.05) and CD49D (p< 0.01) by MDSC, which
could explain the reduction in migration. Importantly, ibrutinib
significantly reduced the ability of MDSC to suppress CD8+ T cell
proliferation compared to DMSO (21.98% vs. 12.49% proliferation, p<
0.05). Daily treatment with ibrutinib effectively inhibited the in vitro
generation of human MDSC from monocytes by promoting HLA DR expression
(p< 0.05). Using the EMT6 mammary carcinoma model in vivo, ibrutinib
treatment resulted in a significant reduction of MDSC in both the spleen
and tumor (p< 0.05). Ibrutinib also reduced the frequency of splenic MDSC
in wild type B16F10 tumor bearing mice, but not in BTK mutant XID mice.
In addition, both murine and human MDSC did not express significant
levels of alternative ibrutinib targets including ITK, Bmx, and Blk.
These results suggest that inhibition of BTK is the primary driver behind
the observed effects of ibrutinib on MDSC function and generation.
Finally, the combination of ibrutinib and anti PDL1 therapy was
significantly more effective than either agent alone (pMyeloid derived
suppressor cells (MDSC) interfere with anti tumor immune responses. MDSC
have also been shown to antagonize the effectiveness of immune based
therapies including immune checkpoint blockade. As a result, MDSC have
received attention as potential targets for immune based combination
therapies. There has been limited success in the identification of
clinically active agents with the ability to inhibit the function or
generation of MDSC. Ibrutinib is an orally available irreversible
inhibitor of Bruton's tyrosine kinase (BTK) that is FDA approved for the
treatment of B cell malignancies. In addition to B cells, cells of the
myeloid lineage including monocytes and macrophages express BTK, and
treatment with ibrutinib has been shown to alter their function and
differentiation. As a result, it was hypothesized that ibrutinib would
interfere with the function or generation of MDSC in the setting of
cancer. MDSC isolated from the spleens of multiple murine tumor models
(EMT6, 4T1, and C26) as well as MDSC from patients with metastatic
melanoma expressed BTK. Treatment with ibrutinib at doses ranging from
0.1-5 M inhibited the phosphorylation of BTK in both murine and human
MDSC. Ibrutinib treatment of murine and human MDSC resulted in a
significant reduction in nitric oxide (NO) production (p< 0.05), but had
only modest effects on MDSC levels of IDO and arginase. Ibrutinib was
also able to inhibit murine MDSC migration in response to EMT6 cell line
conditioned media and the chemokine CXCL12 (p< 0.05). In addition,
ibrutinib inhibited human MDSC migration in response to GM CSF (p< 0.05).
Ibrutinib reduced the expression of the myeloid adhesion molecules CD11a
(p< 0.05) and CD49D (p< 0.01) by MDSC, which could explain the reduction
in migration. Importantly, ibrutinib significantly reduced the ability of
MDSC to suppress CD8+ T cell proliferation compared to DMSO (21.98% vs.
12.49% proliferation, p< 0.05). Daily treatment with ibrutinib
effectively inhibited the in vitro generation of human MDSC from
monocytes by promoting HLA DR expression (p< 0.05). Using the EMT6
mammary carcinoma model in vivo, ibrutinib treatment resulted in a
significant reduction of MDSC in both the spleen and tumor (p< 0.05).
Ibrutinib also reduced the frequency of splenic MDSC in wild type B16F10
tumor bearing mice, but not in BTK mutant XID mice. In addition, both
murine and human MDSC did not express significant levels of alternative
ibrutinib targets including ITK, Bmx, and Blk. These results suggest that
inhibition of BTK is the primary driver behind the observed effects of
ibrutinib on MDSC function and generation. Finally, the combination of
ibrutinib and anti PDL1 therapy was significantly more effective than
either agent alone (p< 0.01 and pMyeloid derived suppressor cells (MDSC)
interfere with anti tumor immune responses. MDSC have also been shown to
antagonize the effectiveness of immune based therapies including immune
checkpoint blockade. As a result, MDSC have received attention as
potential targets for immune based combination therapies. There has been
limited success in the identification of clinically active agents with
the ability to inhibit the function or generation of MDSC. Ibrutinib is
an orally available irreversible inhibitor of Bruton's tyrosine kinase
(BTK) that is FDA approved for the treatment of B cell malignancies. In
addition to B cells, cells of the myeloid lineage including monocytes and
macrophages express BTK, and treatment with ibrutinib has been shown to
alter their function and differentiation. As a result, it was
hypothesized that ibrutinib would interfere with the function or
generation of MDSC in the setting of cancer. MDSC isolated from the
spleens of multiple murine tumor models (EMT6, 4T1, and C26) as well as
MDSC from patients with metastatic melanoma expressed BTK. Treatment with
ibrutinib at doses ranging from 0.1-5 M inhibited the phosphorylation of
BTK in both murine and human MDSC. Ibrutinib treatment of murine and
human MDSC resulted in a significant reduction in nitric oxide (NO)
production (p< 0.05), but had only modest effects on MDSC levels of IDO
and arginase. Ibrutinib was also able to inhibit murine MDSC migration in
response to EMT6 cell line conditioned media and the chemokine CXCL12 (p<
0.05). In addition, ibrutinib inhibited human MDSC migration in response
to GM CSF (p< 0.05). Ibrutinib reduced the expression of the myeloid
adhesion molecules CD11a (p< 0.05) and CD49D (p< 0.01) by MDSC, which
could explain the reduction in migration. Importantly, ibrutinib
significantly reduced the ability of MDSC to suppress CD8+ T cell
proliferation compared to DMSO (21.98% vs. 12.49% proliferation, p<
0.05). Daily treatment with ibrutinib effectively inhibited the in vitro
generation of human MDSC from monocytes by promoting HLA DR expression
(p< 0.05). Using the EMT6 mammary carcinoma model in vivo, ibrutinib
treatment resulted in a significant reduction of MDSC in both the spleen
and tumor (p< 0.05). Ibrutinib also reduced the frequency of splenic MDSC
in wild type B16F10 tumor bearing mice, but not in BTK mutant XID mice.
In addition, both murine and human MDSC did not express significant
levels of alternative ibrutinib targets including ITK, Bmx, and Blk.
These results suggest that inhibition of BTK is the primary driver behind
the observed effects of ibrutinib on MDSC function and generation.
Finally, the combination of ibrutinib and anti PDL1 therapy was
significantly more effective than either agent alone (p< 0.01 and p<
0.05) producing complete tumor regression in 50% of EMT6 tumor being
mice. The results support further investigation of ibrutinib in
combination with immune based therapies for solid tumors.

