Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CITED2, an emerging regulator in hypoxia- and anoikis- mediated
cancer cell growth


In solid tumors, hypoxia and anoikis are two common phenomena occurred in
the central of region, inducing a series of genes to switch metabolic
pathways, prevent apoptosis and promote continuous growth of cancer
cells. Herein, we reported that CITED2 (CBP/p300-interacting
transactivators with glutamic acid (E)/aspartic acid (D)-rich C-terminal
domain 2) responded to hypoxia and anoikis induction, preventing lung
cancer cells from cell cycle arrest. We found that hypoxia induced CITED2
through a HIF2 dependent pathway; moreover, three-dimensional (3D) growth
of lung cancer cells induced the expression of CITED2. 3D growth
condition elicited anoikis-mediated cell cycle arrest, which was further
potentiated by hypoxia stimulation. Knockdown of CITED2 or HIF2 in lung
cancer cells enhanced anoikis, causing G1/S cell cycle arrest. Soft agar
analysis displayed that both HIF2 and CITED2 are necessary for
anchorage-independent cell growth under the hypoxic condition. Spheroid
assay indicated that HIF2-CITED2 signaling axis plays an important role
in spheroid formation. Pearson correlation analysis showed that CITED2
was associated with HIF2 expression in lung adenocarcinoma. Kaplan Meier
analysis revealed that CITED2 expression was correlated with poor
survival outcomes in patients with lung adenocarcinoma. Thus, our
findings support the notion that CITED2 plays a critical role in hypoxia-
and anokis- mediated cancer cell growth with the potential as a
prognostic biomarker for predicting lung cancer progression.

