Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Capture of EpCAM-negative mesothelioma cells with a universal
CTC-chip: Sensitivity test and comparison with EpCAM-based standard method


Backgrounds: Circulating tumor cells (CTCs), as a surrogate of distant
metastasis, can be potentially useful in early diagnosis and monitoring
therapeutic effects for patients with malignant tumors. Among a variety
of systems for detection of CTCs, an epithelial cell adhesion molecule
(EpCAM)-based immuno-magnetic separation system CellSearch is the only
system approved for clinical use. Our previous study showed that CTC
detected by CellSearch was useful in the diagnosis or the prognosis of
epithelioid-type malignant pleural mesothelioma, however, the sensitivity
was insufficient. Because EpCAM-negative tumor cells, such as those
originating from non-epithelial cells and those undergoing
epithelial-mesenchymal transition, cannot be captured using the
CellSearch. Therefore, we have developed a novel polymeric microfluidic
device system universal CTC-chip that can capture a variety of CTCs with
or without EpCAM expression (AACR 2015). In the present study, we
assessed its sensitivity for capturing mesothelioma cells and compare
with CellSearch.Methods: PC-9, human lung cancer cell line and
ACC-MESO-4, human mesothelioma cell line were used in this study.
Antibodies were coated on the chip in two steps, first with anti-mouse
IgG antibody (base-antibody) and then as a capture-antibody, either mouse
anti-human EpCAM antibody to capture EpCAM-positive cells (EpCAM chip) or
mouse anti-human podoplanin antibody to capture podoplanin-positive
mesothelioma cells (podoplanin chip). For sensitivity test, each cell
line was suspended as concentration 500, 100, 50, 10cells/mL in phosphate
buffered saline (PBS) or in blood. After 1ml of sample was flowed, we
counted cells and calculated capture efficiency (number of capture cells
/flowed cell). For comparison with CellSearch (CS), each cell line was
suspended as concentration 50 or 10 cells /mL in blood and calculated
detection efficiency (number of detected cells/ suspended cell).Results:
In sensitivity test, capture efficiency of PC-9 or ACC-MESO-4 was 101.1%,
90.7% (500 cells/mL), 94.8%, 95.9% (100 cells/mL), 104.7%, 97.9% (50
cells/mL), 114.3%, 113.75% (10 cells/mL), respectively in PBS. In the
blood sample, capture efficiency of PC-9 or MESO-4 was 99.2%, 50% (50
cells/mL), 115.5%, 80.55% (10 cells/mL), respectively. On the other hand,
detection efficiency of PC-9 (EpCAM chip, CS) was 110%, 121.3% at 50
cells/mL, 195%, 126% at 10 cells/mL in blood. In case of MESO-4,
detection efficiency (podoplanin chip, CS) was 55%, 1.1% at 50 cells/mL,
70%, 0% at 10 cells/mL in blood.Conclusion: The novel universal CTC-chip
can be a promising CTC detection system.

