Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The effects of Berberis vulgaris on bacterial inhibition and the
p53 gene in cancerous Caenorhabditis elegans


Recently, there has been an interest in the use of natural products to
inhibit bacterial growth rather than manufactured antibiotics due to the
problem of bacterial resistance. This study aims at finding the most
effective natural antibacterial remedy. The disk diffusion method was
used to compare the antibacterial properties of manuka honey, barberry,
aloe vera, and colloidal silver. After a 48-hour incubation period, the
zone of inhibition was measured for the following bacteria: Bacillus
megaterium, Serratia marcescens, Pseudomonas fluorescens, Rhodospirillum
rubrum, and Escherichia coli. Barberry was the most efficient natural
product (p = 0.02). Further tests were performed to determine whether
barberry contained strong anticancer properties. Barberry was tested on
Caenorhabditis elegans (C.elegans), strain JR1279, exposed to
ultraviolet-C radiation and the population was counted daily. Prior to
this experiment, barberry had never before been tested on a model
organism. The purpose of this experiment would determine if barberry
could increase the lifespan of the C.elegans by the addition of this
reagent. It was shown that the C.elegans exposed to barberry had a longer
lifespan than those that were not exposed to barberry (p = 0.01),
indicating that barberry could be a potential anticancer supplement.

