Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Radiation therapy delay and risk of ipsilateral breast tumors in
women with ductal carcinoma in situ


Objectives: To examine the relationship between radiation therapy delay
and risk of subsequent breast events in the ipsilateral breast and to
identify factors that are associated with delay in women with ductal
carcinoma in situ (DCIS).Methods: From the Missouri Cancer Registry, we
identified the women who were diagnosed with first primary DCIS between
1996 and 2011 and treated with breast conserving surgery (BCS). Radiation
therapy delay was defined as the first radiation therapy that was
delivered greater than eight weeks after BCS. Propensity scores were
calculated for radiation therapy delay and no radiation therapy during
the first course of treatment. A propensity score-adjusted Cox
proportional hazards regression analysis was conducted to estimate the
hazard ratio (HR) of ipsilateral breast tumors. Logistic regression
analysis was conducted to identify factors associated with delay.Results:
Among 5,916 patients, 1,053 (17.8%) received radiation therapy greater
than eight weeks after BCS and 1,702 (28.8%) did not receive radiation
therapy during the first course of treatment. During the 72- month
follow-up, 182 (3.1%) developed ipsilateral breast tumors. After
adjustment for propensity scores, the HR of ipsilateral breast tumors was
1.26 (95% CI, 1.00-1.59; p = 0.049) for radiation therapy delay and 1.35
(95% CI, 1.03-1.76; p = 0.03) for no radiation therapy compared with
timely radiation therapy. Radiation therapy delay was associated with
black race, being non-married and on Medicaid, later years of diagnosis,
larger tumor size micropapillary architecture, and positive surgical
margin.Conclusions: Receipt of radiation therapy greater than eight weeks
after BCS was associated with a significantly increased risk of
ipsilateral breast tumors in women with DCIS. Timeliness of radiation
therapy should be improved, particularly for black and Medicaid patients.

