Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The antidiabetic drug metformin increases pro-apoptotic effect of
TRAIL therapy by reducing X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis protein (XIAP)
levels in triple-negative breast cancer cells


Most metastatic tumors, such as triple negative breast cancer (TNBC)
respond poorly to conventional chemotherapy. We have previously
demonstrated that targeting TNF-related apoptosis-inducing ligand
receptor-2 (TRAIL-R2) might be an effective pathway against metastatic
TNBC. However, many TNBCs are resistant to TRAIL receptor agonists. Here
we demonstrate that diabetes drug metformin, previously linked to
preventing and treating several types of cancer, enhances sensitivity of
TNBC cells to recombinant TRAIL and TRAIL-R2 agonistic humanized
monoclonal antibody (lexatumumab)-induced apoptosis. We have demonstrated
that combination of metformin with lexatumumab or TRAIL augments response
to TRAIL therapy and reduce cancer cell viability via induction of
apoptosis and inhibiting long-term survival of three different metastatic
TNBC cell lines. Intriguingly, metformin treatment also sensitized
transformed MCF10A-RasV12 cells, but not untransformed MCF10A-Vector
cells, to TRAIL agonist therapy. This effect was associated with
reduction of X-linked Inhibitor of Apoptosis Protein (XIAP) levels after
metformin treatment. Similar to metformin treatment, inhibition of XIAP
by small interfering RNA sensitized breast cancer cells to TRAIL-induced
apoptosis. Moreover, metformin treatment in combination with TRAIL more
efficiently inhibited primary tumor growth and lung metastases in
orthotopic model of TNBC. Overall, our results demonstrate that metformin
treatment in combination with targeting TRAIL receptors may be a good
strategy to augment the antitumor effects of TRAIL receptors agonistic
therapy and provide the foundation for a clinical trial combining dietary
metfomin and TRAIL agonists.

