Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Coordinated upregulation of peroxiredoxins in breast cancer


Peroxiredoxins (Prdxs) are a group of thiol-specific antioxidant proteins
that are involved in many cellular processes, including growth,
proliferation, differentiation, and the stress response. The family
includes six proteins in humans, which show differences in substrate
specificity, tissue expression, and cellar localization and distribution.
Cancer cells commonly exhibit aberrantly regulated expression of
antioxidants, which can support cancer cell survival in the face of
elevated levels of reactive oxygen species. Breast cancers exhibit
significantly elevated Prdx levels of Prdx. We previously reported
overexpression of many Prdx proteins in the MCF-7 breast cancer line, and
further demonstrated their importance in cell survival and
doxorubicin-resistance in this line. To further investigate the
misregulation of these proteins in human breast cancer, we compared Prdx
levels between breast tumor and adjacent normal breast tissue from 20
breast cancer patients. We showed that most patients exhibited elevated
levels of several Prdx proteins in the tumor tissue. We have gone on to
analyze the promoters of these genes in an effort to identify potential
mechanisms of coordinate regulation, as well as downstream targets that
may mediate their role in cell survival. Together, we feel that this
family of proteins may be useful biomarkers, and also targets, in breast
cancer biology.

