Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of miR-601 in prostate cancer progression


Prostate cancer (PCa) is the second most common cancer among men
worldwide. In order to advance treatment options for these men, it is
crucial to understand the molecular underpinning behind this cancer.
Previously, our group identified miR-601 as a predictive biomarker in
PCa. Few studies to date have functionally validated molecular biomarkers
and currently nothing is known about the function of miR-601 in PCa.
Based on our previous publication, we hypothesized that miR-601 is
playing a role in PCa progression. In order to assess this, in vitro
experiments were conducted in three PCa cell lines, DU-145, PC-3, and
LNCaP. miR-601 was over-expressed and knocked down in each cell line and
assays were performed evaluating cell proliferation, colony formation,
and apoptosis. Additionally, to provide more information regarding
miR-601-associated pathways, we identified putative gene targets of
miR-601 using in silico prediction programs, microrna.org and
TargetScan.org and evaluated top gene targets in vitro. The results of
our experiments indicate that miR-601 is playing a role of a tumor
suppressor. Over-expression of miR-601 in cell lines resulted in a
significant reduction in cell viability. This was confirmed both by MTS
as well as colony formation assays. We looked into the mechanism behind
the reduction in cell viability and found that cells over-expressing
miR-601 had reduced levels of full-length caspase-3, signifying that
these cells are undergoing apoptosis. Two putative gene targets of
miR-601 were identified and investigated in vitro, SIRT1, a histone
deacetylase known to be both an oncogene and tumor suppressor, and
BCL2L2, an anti-apoptotic gene known to be an oncogene. SIRT1 and BCL2L2
had strong scores on both online prediction programs as likely targets of
miR-601. Our in vitro results confirmed this. We saw reduced mRNA and
protein expression of these targets in cells over-expressing miR-601. Our
data thus far suggest that miR-601 is acting as a tumor suppressor in
PCa. Targeted therapies for miR-601 and/or its targets may be promising
in the treatment of PCa, however additional work is needed to warrant
this.This work was supported by R01CA108633 (To AC), 1RC2CA148190 (To AC)
U10CA180850-01 (To AC), 1R01CA169368 (To AC) from the National Cancer
Institute (NCI), Brain Tumor Funders Collaborative Grant (To AC), Ohio
State University Comprehensive Cancer Center Award (To AC).

