Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: EGFR-mediated activation of RET in ASCL1+ lung adenocarcinoma


Lung cancer accounts for about 27% of the cancer related deaths in the
USA annually. Pathologically, it is a very complex disease broadly
classified into small cell lung cancer (SCLC) and non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC). NSCLCs are further classified into squamous cell
carcinoma, large cell carcinoma and adenocarcinoma. Achaete-scute homolog
1 (ASCL1), an important transcription factor essential in the development
of neuroendocrine cells (NE) in lungs is shown to be specifically
expressed in lung NE cancers and 10-20% of adenocarcinomas (AD) with NE
differentiation (NED), thus suggesting a role in the pathogenesis of
these tumors. Our previous study showed that ASCL1 is a regulator of the
RET oncogene in AD with NED. RET is a receptor tyrosine kinase with two
isoforms in humans: RET9 (short) and RET51 (long). We performed survival
analysis to study implications of RET isoforms in ASCL1+ tumors and found
that elevated expression of the long RET mRNA was associated with poor
survival. Subsequent in vitro experiments demonstrated that treatment
with EGF robustly induced phosphorylation of RET in HCC1833 and H1755
cell lines which have high endogenous levels of ASCL1 and RET but not in
VMRC-LCD cell line which has high level of ASCL1 but low level of RET.
EGF induced phosphorylation of RET was diminished by gefitinib and by
EGFR siRNA. Immunoprecipitation results indicated direct binding between
EGFR and RET in presence of EGF. Furthermore, a high throughput drug
screening found 8 EGFR inhibitors that were 10 - 250 fold more cytotoxic
in ASCL1+ compared with ASCL1- AD cells. These results implicate EGFR as
a key regulator of RET activation in ASCL1+ AD and suggest that EGFR
inhibitors may be therapeutic for this population of patients.

