Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metastasis-associated protein 1 drives prostate cancer progression
and metastasis through regulation of onco-epimicroRNAs


Our recent studies in prostate-specific tumor suppressor Pten gene
compromised transgenic mice, revealed a strategic role for Metastasis
Associated protein 1 (MTA1), a component of the chromatin remodeling NuRD
complex and a key regulator of metastasis, in the progression of prostate
cancer. Chromatin Immunoprecipitation Sequencing (ChIP-Seq) analyses from
the mouse prostate tissues showed MTA1 occupancy of several potential
oncogenic miRNA target promoters including miR-22. Retrospective
investigation of microRNA microarray experiments revealed downregulation
of these candidate miRNAs in LNCaP cells silenced for MTA1 expression
(shMTA1). Real time PCR evaluation of shMTA1 cell lines, LNCaP, DU145 and
PC3M attested the microarray findings. Using miRNA-mRNA target prediction
algorithms, miRanda, miRDB and Targetscan, E-cadherin (CDH1) was
identified as a potential target with high context score for miR-22.
Interestingly, E-cadherin, which has a pivotal role in preventing
Epithelial to Mesenchymal Transition (EMT) of tumor cells was also
identified as a MTA1 target gene by ChIP-Seq analysis. Further, qRT-PCR
and western blot experiments validated that MTA1 levels had an inverse
correlation with E-cadherin expression in these cell lines. Transient
transfection of miR-22 mimics diminished E-cadherin levels while this
expression was restored by miR-22 sponge inhibitors showing that miR-22
can control E-cadherin expression. Ongoing experiments aim to address the
direct targeting of E-cadherin 3UTR by miR-22 using Dual-Glo luciferase
reporter assay and the functional consequences of miR-22 promoter
regulation by MTA1 utilizing chromatin and RNA immunoprecipitation
assays. Our studies reveal a novel and previously unrecognized role for
MTA1-mediated miR-22 regulation of E-cadherin.

