Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Survivin downregulation by -santalol is not mediated through
PI3K-Akt pathway in human breast cancer cells


-Santalol, a terpenoid found in sandalwood oil, has been shown to inhibit
cancer cell growth in vitro by inducing apoptosis. This study was
performed to investigate the anticancer properties of -santalol
associated with the induction of apoptosis in cultured MCF-7 (estrogen
receptor (ER) positive, and wild type p53) and MDA-MB-231 (ER-negative
and mutant p53) breast cancer cells. Expression of major proteins
examined in the study were determined using standard Western blot
protocol and analyzed by LICOR-Odyssey infra-red scanner. Total protein
levels of survivin were confirmed by survivin ELISA kit. Cell viability
was assessed by trypan blue dye exclusion assay, and caspase-3 activity
was determined by caspase-3 (active) ELISA kit. Treatment of breast
cancer cells for 6 and 9 hour time intervals with -santalol (20, 40 M)
resulted in statistically significant concentration-dependent
downregulation of survivin. pAkt levels were found to be slightly
upregulated despite the downregulation of survivin. Pharmacological
inhibition of the PI3K-Akt pathway did not result in a
synergistic/additive increase in cell death or caspase-3 activity caused
by -santalol. The study reveals that survivin downregulation by -santalol
in breast cancer cells is not mediated through the PI3K-Akt pathway.

