Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Breast cancer risk factor associations by loss of E-cadherin tumor
tissue expression: A pooled analysis of 5,896 cases in 12 studies from
the Breast Cancer Association Consortium (BCAC)


Purpose: Expression of the tumor suppressor gene E-cadherin is diminished
in lobular breast cancers and has been implicated in epithelial
mesenchymal transition. We assessed risk factor associations for breast
cancer stratified by low vs. high E-cadherin protein expression in a
pooled analysis within the Breast Cancer Association Consortium (BCAC)
studies.Methods: E-cadherin tumor tissue staining was performed centrally
at the NCI on formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue microarray (TMA)
sections representing 6,010 breast cancer patients from 12 US and
European BCAC studies. TMAs were digitally scanned and scored using the
SlidePath Digital Image Hub (Leica Biosystems, Wetzlar, Germany). For
5,896 cancers with evaluable tumors, E-cadherin was visually scored as
estimated percent of positive cells times stain intensity (0, 1+, 2+, 3+)
(score range 0-300). E-cadherin low was defined as tumors with a score
2cm in size, and HER2-negative status (2, P 2cm in size, and
HER2-negative status (2, P < 0.003 for all factors). E-cadherin low
status was associated with family history of breast cancer (FH) (OR =
1.32, 95% CI = 1.09-1.60, P-het = 0.005) and ever use of menopausal
hormones (OR = 1.26, 95% CI = 1.02-1.56, P-het = 0.03). Study specific
meta-plots showed consistent effects across studies for menopausal
hormone therapy (I2 = 0.0%, p = 0.64); however, E-cadherin loss by FH did
show evidence of heterogeneity by study (I2 = 54%, P = 0.03). Differences
in E-cadherin expression remained significant for FH, and menopausal
hormone use when further adjusted for ER (P 2cm in size, and
HER2-negative status (2, P < 0.003 for all factors). E-cadherin low
status was associated with family history of breast cancer (FH) (OR =
1.32, 95% CI = 1.09-1.60, P-het = 0.005) and ever use of menopausal
hormones (OR = 1.26, 95% CI = 1.02-1.56, P-het = 0.03). Study specific
meta-plots showed consistent effects across studies for menopausal
hormone therapy (I2 = 0.0%, p = 0.64); however, E-cadherin loss by FH did
show evidence of heterogeneity by study (I2 = 54%, P = 0.03). Differences
in E-cadherin expression remained significant for FH, and menopausal
hormone use when further adjusted for ER (P < 0.05). We also found
relationships with E-cadherin loss to vary by BMI, number of live births,
age at first birth, and oral contraceptive use in stratified analysis by
ER status and histologic subtype.Conclusion: This large pooled analysis
shows that breast cancer risk factor associations may differ by
E-cadherin expression independent of ER status, suggesting that it may
represent a marker of etiologic heterogeneity.

