Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical evaluation of targeting Notch-3 in breast cancer


Introduction: Notch-3 overexpression has been implicated in the
development of breast cancer (BC) and is associated with poor outcomes. A
critical challenge to eliminating treatment resistance in breast cancer
likely relates to the presence of cancer stem cells (CSCs) that maintain
the ability to differentiate and divide indefinitely. We postulate that
targeted eradication of CSCs is possible using a Notch3 antibody drug
conjugate (ADC) without irreversibly reducing stem cell viability in
vital normal tissues. PF-06650808, is an ADC comprised of a humanized
anti-Notch-3 antibody linked to an auristatin-based cytotoxic agent. To
better understand the therapeutic index of targeting Notch-3, we
evaluated PF-06650808 across a large panel of BC lines and normal cells
and correlated response with Notch-3 levels. PF-06650808 was also
evaluated in a murine BC xenograft model.Methods: Response to PF-06650808
and control ADC was evaluated across a panel of BC and normal cell lines
by a 2D proliferation assay. Notch-3 mRNA expression was measured by flow
cytometry (FC) and RPPA. MDA-MB-468 (triple negative BC, TNBC) tumor
bearing mice were randomized into 4 arms of 8 mice and treated with 3
mg/kg PF-06650808 or control-ADC (days 0, 4, 8 & 12), 10 mg/kg docetaxel
(q week) or vehicle control.Results: High expression of Notch-3 was
detected in multiple BC cell lines by RPPA and FC. BC cell lines with
elevated levels of Notch-3 were sensitive to PF-06650808 (HCC1187,
MDA-MB-468, HCC1143, HCC70, EFM-19, HCC202). Responders were also
enriched for TNBC. All normal cell lines were resistant to PF-06650808
ADC. When treated with a control ADC against a non-relevant target, all
cell lines exhibited IC50s between 5-50ug/ml, indicating that the
sub-0.5ug/ml responses seen with the Notch-3 ADC were target-dependent.
Durable complete tumor regressions were observed in PF-06650808-treated
mice bearing MDA-MB-468 TNBC cell line xenografts.Conclusions:
Sensitivity to a novel anti-Notch-3-ADC is associated with high
expression of Notch-3 in BC cell lines. Normal cells are resistant to
PF-06650808, possibly predicting a better therapeutic index than seen
with other Notch inhibitors. Xenograft studies evaluating the in vivo
efficacy of PF-06650808 in a panel of xenografts with varying levels of
Notch-3 expression will be presented. Ongoing experiments are exploring
the potency of PF-06650808 on CSCs. Our data will help identify breast
cancer subtypes most likely to respond to a Notch3-ADC based on high
tumor/normal target concentration as well as its effects on CSCs.

