Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PD-L1 expressing circulating tumor cells (CTCs) in patients with
breast cancer


Background: Programmed cell Death receptor Ligand 1 (PD-L1) is a very
promising biomarker for the selection of patients for cancer
immunotherapy. We recently developed a highly sensitive, specific and
robust RT-qPCR assay for PD-L1 mRNA. The aim of the present study was to
study the expression of PD-L1 in CTCs from breast cancer patients with
verified metastasis.Methods: We quantified the expression of PD-L1 mRNA
transcripts in EpCAM-positive CTCs, by using our recently developed
RT-qPCR assay, based on the following procedure: i) immunomagnetic
enrichment of EpCAM-positive CTCs from 20mL of peripheral blood, ii)
total RNA isolation iii) cDNA synthesis and iv) RT-qPCR for PD-L1. PD-L1
expression in respect to the expression of B2M as a reference gene, was
normalized using the 2-Ct approach. Peripheral blood samples (20mL) were
obtained from 22 breast cancer patients with verified metastasis and 14
healthy donors.Results: According to our results, 11/22 (50%) of
metastasis-verified breast cancer patients were found to be positive for
PD-L1 overexpression in CTCs. These are preliminary results and these
percentages may change, since the number of samples that we are analyzing
is continuously increasing. Our results are in concordance with a recent
study by Mazel et al (Mol Oncol 2015), that by using the CellSearch()
system found PD-L1((+)) CTCs in 11/16(68.8%) patients with metastatic
breast cancer.Conclusion: This is the first time that a quantitative
RT-qPCR molecular assay is used for the evaluation of PD-L1expression
levels in EpCAM-positive CTCs in metastatic breast cancer patients. The
assay is closed-tube, quantitative, highly specific and sensitive, and
high-throughput. We are currently evaluating the assay in a large number
of clinical samples.

