Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ultra-deep next generation sequencing (NGS) of plasma cell-free
DNA (cfDNA) from patients with advanced lung cancers: results from the
Actionable Genome Consortium


Introduction: Noninvasive genotyping using plasma cfDNA from cancer
patients has the potential to obviate the need for some biopsies while
also characterizing disease heterogeneity. This study was undertaken to
develop an ultra-deep plasma NGS panel for patients with non-small cell
lung cancers (NSCLC).Methods / Results: Plasma was prospectively
collected from 51 patients with advanced, progressive NSCLC and a known
oncogenic driver from prior tumor genotyping. We performed ultra-deep NGS
on extracted cfDNA using a customized Illumina library preparation,
hybrid capture panel covering 37 lung cancer related genes (complete
exons and partial introns), and ultra-deep sequencing (HiSeq4000). Mean
sequencing depth was 50,000X (150 million, 150bp reads per sample). After
specialized consensus-based error correction for low allele frequency
(AF) genomic alterations, the median unique DNA molecules per position
were 3,500. The mean sequence error rate was reduced by 20-fold to
0.002%, enabling the confident call of a driver mutation as low as 0.03%.
In a subset of cases, paired plasma droplet digital PCR (ddPCR) was
performed for common EGFR and KRAS mutations using a validated
assay.Blinded to tumor genotype, plasma NGS detected SNVs (EGFR, KRAS,
BRAF), indels (EGFR, ERBB2), and fusions (ALK, ROS1) as well as
significant copy number gains (CNG) (ERBB2, MET). Sensitivity of cfDNA
for the detection of known oncogenic drivers was 88% (45/51). A single
false positive driver mutation was identified in a case with a known EGFR
mutation in tumor; plasma NGS found both EGFR exon 19 del (0.88% AF) and
KRAS G12D (2.65% AF), and plasma ddPCR confirmed the presence of both
mutations (2.2% and 2.0% AF). Evaluation for an occult second primary is
ongoing. In 22 EGFR, ALK, or ROS1 cases with acquired resistance to
targeted therapy, plasma genotyping detected a range of potential
resistance mechanisms: EGFR T790M and C797S, ALK F1174C, ERBB2 CNG, MET
CNG. In 16 cases with paired resistance biopsies, concordance for EGFR
T790M status was 94% (15/16).18 cases with known EGFR or KRAS mutations
underwent paired ddPCR. In 14 cases the driver mutation was detected
using both assays with high concordance of the%AF (r = 0.91). The
remaining 4 cases were negative with ddPCR but 3 were positive with NGS
at low AF (0.04%, 0.08%, and 0.29%), and the specificity for each driver
was 100%.Conclusions: Ultra-deep plasma NGS can detect a wide range of
oncogenic drivers in NSCLC and may be more sensitive than established
ddPCR assays. In the setting of acquired resistance to targeted therapy,
plasma NGS reliably captured EGFR T790M and additional somatic
alterations as potential resistance mechanisms.

