Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High throughput siRNA screens uncover a high rate of USP8 and
ESCRT pathway dependency in squamous carcinoma cell lines


USP8 and the ESCRT pathway (endosomal sorting complex required for
transport) are required for cellular homeostasis through key functions in
shuttling ubiquitinated proteins towards lysosomal degradation, and
through regulating the maturation of autophagosomal structures. In
large-scale siRNA screens, the vast majority of cancer cell lines do not
demonstrate dependency on USP8 or ESCRT pathway components for viability.
However, we identified three cell lines (HCC70, HCC1954 and PFSK1) that
are acutely dependent on USP8 and other ESCRT components (HGS, TSG101)
for viability. Using a transcriptome-wide association approach, we found
that these three USP8-dependent cell lines also had in common the
expression of SerpinB3, also known as SCCA1 (Squamous Cell Carcinoma
Antigen 1). After selecting additional Squamous Cell Carcinoma cell lines
for further validation of USP8-dependency by siRNA screening, we found
that Squamous Carcinoma cell lines, irrespective of their SerpinB3
expression status, were far more likely to be dependent on USP8 for
viability (23%; N = 22) than cancer cell lines of non-Squamous epithelial
origin (4.5%; N = 67). To unravel possible molecular mechanisms
underpinning the requirement of USP8 for the viability of USP8-dependent
Squamous Carcinoma cell lines (including SCABER, BICR22, CALU1 and EBC1),
we conducted additional transcriptome association studies and genetic
interaction screens to uncover genes that are synthetic lethal with USP8
knock-down.

