Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential expression of neurogenes among breast cancer subtypes
identifies high risk patients


The nervous system is now recognized to be a relevant component of the
tumor microenvironment. Receptors for neuropeptides and neurotransmitters
have been identified in breast cancer. However, very little is known
about the role of neurogenes in regulating breast cancer progression. Our
purpose was to identify neurogenes associated with breast cancer
tumorigenesis with a potential to be used as biomarker and/or targets for
treatment. We used three databases of human genes: GeneGo, GeneCards and
Eugenes to generate a list of 1266 relevant neurogenes. Then we used
bioinformatics tools to interrogate two published breast cancer databases
SAGE and MicMa (n = 96) and generated a list of 7 neurogenes that are
differentially express among breast cancer subtypes. The clinical
potential was further investigated using the GOBO database (n = 1881). We
identified 6 neurogenes that are differentially expressed among breast
cancer subtypes and whose expression correlates with prognosis. Histamine
receptor1 (HRH1), neuropilin2 (NRP2), ephrin-B1 (EFNB1), neuralgrowth
factor receptor (NGFR) and amyloid precursor protein (APP) were
differentially overexpressed in basal and HER2-enriched tumor samples and
syntaxin 1A (STX1A) was overexpressed in HER2-enriched and luminal B
tumors. Analysis of HRH1, NRP2, and STX1A expression using the GOBO
database showed that their expression significantly correlated with a
shorter overall survival (pThe nervous system is now recognized to be a
relevant component of the tumor microenvironment. Receptors for
neuropeptides and neurotransmitters have been identified in breast
cancer. However, very little is known about the role of neurogenes in
regulating breast cancer progression. Our purpose was to identify
neurogenes associated with breast cancer tumorigenesis with a potential
to be used as biomarker and/or targets for treatment. We used three
databases of human genes: GeneGo, GeneCards and Eugenes to generate a
list of 1266 relevant neurogenes. Then we used bioinformatics tools to
interrogate two published breast cancer databases SAGE and MicMa (n = 96)
and generated a list of 7 neurogenes that are differentially express
among breast cancer subtypes. The clinical potential was further
investigated using the GOBO database (n = 1881). We identified 6
neurogenes that are differentially expressed among breast cancer subtypes
and whose expression correlates with prognosis. Histamine receptor1
(HRH1), neuropilin2 (NRP2), ephrin-B1 (EFNB1), neuralgrowth factor
receptor (NGFR) and amyloid precursor protein (APP) were differentially
overexpressed in basal and HER2-enriched tumor samples and syntaxin 1A
(STX1A) was overexpressed in HER2-enriched and luminal B tumors. Analysis
of HRH1, NRP2, and STX1A expression using the GOBO database showed that
their expression significantly correlated with a shorter overall survival
(p<0.0001) and distant metastasis-free survival (pThe nervous system is
now recognized to be a relevant component of the tumor microenvironment.
Receptors for neuropeptides and neurotransmitters have been identified in
breast cancer. However, very little is known about the role of neurogenes
in regulating breast cancer progression. Our purpose was to identify
neurogenes associated with breast cancer tumorigenesis with a potential
to be used as biomarker and/or targets for treatment. We used three
databases of human genes: GeneGo, GeneCards and Eugenes to generate a
list of 1266 relevant neurogenes. Then we used bioinformatics tools to
interrogate two published breast cancer databases SAGE and MicMa (n = 96)
and generated a list of 7 neurogenes that are differentially express
among breast cancer subtypes. The clinical potential was further
investigated using the GOBO database (n = 1881). We identified 6
neurogenes that are differentially expressed among breast cancer subtypes
and whose expression correlates with prognosis. Histamine receptor1
(HRH1), neuropilin2 (NRP2), ephrin-B1 (EFNB1), neuralgrowth factor
receptor (NGFR) and amyloid precursor protein (APP) were differentially
overexpressed in basal and HER2-enriched tumor samples and syntaxin 1A
(STX1A) was overexpressed in HER2-enriched and luminal B tumors. Analysis
of HRH1, NRP2, and STX1A expression using the GOBO database showed that
their expression significantly correlated with a shorter overall survival
(p<0.0001) and distant metastasis-free survival (p<0.0001). In contrast,
elevated co-expression of NGFR, EFNB1 and APP was associated with longer
overall (pThe nervous system is now recognized to be a relevant component
of the tumor microenvironment. Receptors for neuropeptides and
neurotransmitters have been identified in breast cancer. However, very
little is known about the role of neurogenes in regulating breast cancer
progression. Our purpose was to identify neurogenes associated with
breast cancer tumorigenesis with a potential to be used as biomarker
and/or targets for treatment. We used three databases of human genes:
GeneGo, GeneCards and Eugenes to generate a list of 1266 relevant
neurogenes. Then we used bioinformatics tools to interrogate two
published breast cancer databases SAGE and MicMa (n = 96) and generated a
list of 7 neurogenes that are differentially express among breast cancer
subtypes. The clinical potential was further investigated using the GOBO
database (n = 1881). We identified 6 neurogenes that are differentially
expressed among breast cancer subtypes and whose expression correlates
with prognosis. Histamine receptor1 (HRH1), neuropilin2 (NRP2), ephrin-B1
(EFNB1), neuralgrowth factor receptor (NGFR) and amyloid precursor
protein (APP) were differentially overexpressed in basal and
HER2-enriched tumor samples and syntaxin 1A (STX1A) was overexpressed in
HER2-enriched and luminal B tumors. Analysis of HRH1, NRP2, and STX1A
expression using the GOBO database showed that their expression
significantly correlated with a shorter overall survival (p<0.0001) and
distant metastasis-free survival (p<0.0001). In contrast, elevated
co-expression of NGFR, EFNB1 and APP was associated with longer overall
(p<0.0001) and metastasis-free survival (pThe nervous system is now
recognized to be a relevant component of the tumor microenvironment.
Receptors for neuropeptides and neurotransmitters have been identified in
breast cancer. However, very little is known about the role of neurogenes
in regulating breast cancer progression. Our purpose was to identify
neurogenes associated with breast cancer tumorigenesis with a potential
to be used as biomarker and/or targets for treatment. We used three
databases of human genes: GeneGo, GeneCards and Eugenes to generate a
list of 1266 relevant neurogenes. Then we used bioinformatics tools to
interrogate two published breast cancer databases SAGE and MicMa (n = 96)
and generated a list of 7 neurogenes that are differentially express
among breast cancer subtypes. The clinical potential was further
investigated using the GOBO database (n = 1881). We identified 6
neurogenes that are differentially expressed among breast cancer subtypes
and whose expression correlates with prognosis. Histamine receptor1
(HRH1), neuropilin2 (NRP2), ephrin-B1 (EFNB1), neuralgrowth factor
receptor (NGFR) and amyloid precursor protein (APP) were differentially
overexpressed in basal and HER2-enriched tumor samples and syntaxin 1A
(STX1A) was overexpressed in HER2-enriched and luminal B tumors. Analysis
of HRH1, NRP2, and STX1A expression using the GOBO database showed that
their expression significantly correlated with a shorter overall survival
(p<0.0001) and distant metastasis-free survival (p<0.0001). In contrast,
elevated co-expression of NGFR, EFNB1 and APP was associated with longer
overall (p<0.0001) and metastasis-free survival (p<0.0001). We propose
that HRH1, NRP2, and STX1A can be used as prognostic biomarkers and
therapeutic targets for basal and HER2-enriched breast cancer subtypes.

