Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MEK and PI3K signaling cooperate through mTORC1/2 to promote
PIK3CA mutant melanoma cell proliferation


Oncogenic transformation of mutationally activated BRAF or NRAS
melanocytes often requires the cooperation of genetic aberrations in the
phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) pathway to promote melanomagenesis.
Activating point mutations in the p110 catalytic subunit of PI3K are
detected at a low frequency in both BRAF and NRAS mutant melanomas, yet
the principle mechanism of this cooperation remains elusive. Thus, using
BRAFV600E/PIK3CAH1047R, NRASQ61H/PIK3CAH1047R, and PIK3CAE545K mutant
melanoma cells derived from metastatic melanoma patients treated with
pathway-targeted inhibitors, we examined the contribution of mutational
activation of PIK3CA to melanoma maintenance and signaling and the
consequential response of these PIK3CA mutant cells to -specific PI3K
inhibition. Combined MEK and isoform-selective PI3K inhibition elicited
more potent anti-proliferative effects and greater suppression of S-phase
progression of the cell cycle compared to single-agent inhibition of
either pathway. Analysis of signaling downstream of MEK or PI3K revealed
that these pathways cooperated to regulate PIK3CA cell proliferation
through mTORC1-mediated effects on ribosomal protein S6 and 4E-BP1
phosphorylation in an AKT-dependent manner. Despite the profound
anti-proliferative and biochemical effects of -specific or PI3K-sparing
class I PI3K inhibition in vitro, these agents elicited largely
cytostatic effects on PIK3CA xenograft tumors. However, combined
inhibition of PI3K-sparing class I PI3K and MEK did significantly
cooperate to reduce tumor growth compared to the corresponding
monotherapies. Furthermore, this study provides a biochemical mechanism
to explain how mTORC1/2 moderates the cooperation of MEK and PI3K
signaling for the maintenance of PIK3CA mutant melanoma cell
proliferation.

