Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SMARCAD1 depletion enhances hyperthermia-mediated
radiosensitization by decreasing resection and enhancing stalled
replication forks


Hyperthermia is the most effective chemo- and radio-sensitizer in use
clinically for containing tumor growth. Hyperthermia is proposed to
induce degradation of BRCA2, the protein involved in homologous
recombination (HR) repair of DNA double strand breaks and, thus
sensitizes cells to poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP)-1 inhibition. We
and other laboratories have reported that hyperthermia inhibits DNA
damage repair. Since HR includes single-strand annealing, gene conversion
and break-induced replication, it is critical for DNA replication during
recovery of stalled replication forks, but it is not yet clear how
hyperthermia affects these important steps in HR.Here we report that
SMARCAD1 depletion increases hyperthermia induced cell death and
chromosome damage in irradiated S-phase cells. Combined SMARCAD1
depletion and hyperthermia treatment decreased repair and recruitment of
repairosome proteins to ISce-1 induced DSBs as well as decreased
IR-induced repairosome foci formation. This effect was limited to S-phase
cells, where homologous recombination is up regulated and the predominant
pathway of DSB repair. Hyperthermia decreased the quantity of 5 single
stranded DNA intermediates at endonuclease-generated DNA break sites, an
effect that was further decreased by SMARCAD1 depletion. Consistent with
these results, simultaneous SMARCAD1 depletion and hyperthermia increased
replication fork stalling and affected firing of new replication origins.
The results presented here support a mechanism by which SMARCAD1
depletion and hyperthermia mediate radiosensitization through inhibition
of the DNA resection step that precedes strand homology search during HR
repair of IR-induced DSBs.

