Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Blood epigenetic age may predict cancer incidence and mortality


Biological measures of aging are important for understanding age-related
cancers as the population ages. Since the epigenome is closely related to
aging, epigenetics may help predict these and other age-related diseases.
We aimed to prospectively examine whether blood age (the discrepancy
between epigenetic and chronological age) can predict cancer
incidence/mortality. In a prospective cohort (the Normative Aging Study),
age and its rate of change over time were calculated using Illumina Human
Methylation 450K array data in 834 blood leukocyte samples longitudinally
collected from 442 participants free of cancer at the blood draw. About
3-5 years before cancer onset or death, age was associated with cancer
risks in a dose-responsive manner (test for trend P = 0.02) and
time-dependent Cox models showed a one-year increase in age was
associated with all-cancer incidence (HR (hazard ratio): 1.06, 95% CI:
1.02-1.10) and mortality (HR: 1.17, 95% CI: 1.07-1.28). Participants with
smaller age and decelerated epigenetic aging over time had the lowest
risks of cancer incidence (log-rank P = 0.003) and mortality (log-rank P
= 0.02). Spline analysis suggested age was associated with cancer
incidence in a J-shaped manner, and with cancer mortality in a
time-varying manner. We conclude that blood epigenetic age may mirror
epigenetic abnormalities related to cancer early development or the
immune response to it. Those with older epigenetic age relative to their
chronological age have an elevated risk of cancer events within 3-5
years. Thus, epigenetic age could potentially serve as a novel, minimally
invasive biomarker for cancer prediction.

