Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Lumipulse G HE4 assay for monitoring of ovarian cancer recurrence
and progression


Human epididymis protein 4 (HE4), a member of Whey acidic four-disulfide
core protein (WFDC) family, was demonstrated as one of the most useful
biomarkers for ovarian cancer (Hellstrm I, et al. 2003; Drapkin R, et al.
2005; Moore RG, et al. 2007).This study was to evaluate the use of
Lumipulse G HE4 assay with patient serum for monitoring recurrence and
progression of epithelial ovarian cancer. Recently, Lumipulse G HE4 assay
was cleared by US FDA as an aid in monitoring recurrence or progressive
disease in patients with epithelial ovarian cancer. Methods: Lumipulse G
HE4 is a Chemiluminescent Enzyme Immunoassay (CLEIA) for the quantitative
determination of HE4 in human serum and plasma on the Lumipulse G System
by a two-step sandwich immunoassay method. In the assay, serum was added
to and incubated with an anti-HE4 monoclonal antibody (MAb)-linked
magnetic particles. The particles were then washed and rinsed to remove
unbound materials. Alkaline phosphatase-labeled 2nd anti-HE4 MAb was
added to and incubated with the HE4-bound particles. The particles were
then washed and rinsed again to remove unbound materials. Substrate
3-(2-spiroadamantane)-4-methoxy-4-(3-phosphoryloxy) phenyl-1, 2-dioxetane
disodium salt (AMPPD) solution was then added to and mixed with the
particles. Luminescence signals were thus generated by the cleavage of
dephosphorylated AMPPD and converted into the amount of HE4 in the serum.
Results: In the monitoring study, changes in HE4 levels in serial serum
samples collected in SST tubes from 72 subjects with epithelial ovarian
cancer were compared to changes in disease status, that is, progression
or no progression. A total of 330 observations were undertaken with an
average number of 5.6 observations per subject. A positive change in the
HE4 value was defined as an increase in the observation value that was at
least 18% greater than the previous observation value. Of the 61 samples
with a positive change, 49% of them correlated with the progression of
epithelial ovarian cancer while 80% of the 269 subject serial samples
with no significant change in the HE4 value correlated with no
progression. The total concordance was 74%, positive predictive values
(PPV) 35%, and negative predictive value (NPV) 87%. In addition, a
comparison of Lumipulse G HE4 with the predicate device, HE4 EIA, was
carried out using specimens consistent with CLSI Protocol EP09-A3 and
weighted Deming regression analysis. The slope and correlation
coefficient (r) obtained were 1.03 and 0.9891, respectively, for the
tested specimens (n = 143) which ranged from 33.4 - 969.5 pmol/L, and
slope and r of 1.03 and 0.9917, respectively, for the tested specimens (n
= 168) ranged from 33.4 - 4602.0 pmol/L. Conclusion: The Lumipulse G HE4
assay has demonstrated to be useful in monitoring the course of disease
in women with epithelial ovarian cancer and well correlated with the
predicate device HE4 EIA.

