Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: FDG PET quantification for prediction of early recurrence in
patients with stage I and II non small cell lung cancer


Background: Although surgical resection remains the optimal treatment for
early-stage NSCLC, up to 50% of patients with stage I and II relapse and
die within 5 years after curative resection. Therefore prognostic markers
are important as these patients might benefit from adjuvant therapy. The
goal of this study was to evaluate established PET quantification metrics
including: maximal standard uptake volume (SUVmax), metabolic tumor
volume (MTV) and total lesion glycolysis (TLG) as prognostic markers for
early recurrence and overall survival in resected early stage lung
cancer.Methods: Between January 2003 and December 2010 182 surgically
resected patients with stage I-II NSCLC who underwent 18 F FDG PET/CT
less than one month prior to surgery have been evaluated. All patients
had at least 5 years of follow-up. Cox proportional hazard model was used
to determine the association between variables and survival respectively
time to recurrence. For the multivariate analysis the following variables
have been included: tumor size on CT, age tumor stage, histology, SUVmax,
TLG (for TLG42% (threshold at 42% SUVmax) and TLG2.5 (cut-off at SUV 2.5)
and MTV42% and MTV2.5).Results: 133 patients were included, 71 with adeno
carcinoma, 62 with squamous cell carcinoma. TLG2.5 and MTV2.5 values have
been a significant prognostic factor for recurrence (PBackground:
Although surgical resection remains the optimal treatment for early-stage
NSCLC, up to 50% of patients with stage I and II relapse and die within 5
years after curative resection. Therefore prognostic markers are
important as these patients might benefit from adjuvant therapy. The goal
of this study was to evaluate established PET quantification metrics
including: maximal standard uptake volume (SUVmax), metabolic tumor
volume (MTV) and total lesion glycolysis (TLG) as prognostic markers for
early recurrence and overall survival in resected early stage lung
cancer.Methods: Between January 2003 and December 2010 182 surgically
resected patients with stage I-II NSCLC who underwent 18 F FDG PET/CT
less than one month prior to surgery have been evaluated. All patients
had at least 5 years of follow-up. Cox proportional hazard model was used
to determine the association between variables and survival respectively
time to recurrence. For the multivariate analysis the following variables
have been included: tumor size on CT, age tumor stage, histology, SUVmax,
TLG (for TLG42% (threshold at 42% SUVmax) and TLG2.5 (cut-off at SUV 2.5)
and MTV42% and MTV2.5).Results: 133 patients were included, 71 with adeno
carcinoma, 62 with squamous cell carcinoma. TLG2.5 and MTV2.5 values have
been a significant prognostic factor for recurrence (P<0.0001). Patients
with a MTV2.5 above 42 cm3 had a mean recurrence time of 0.80.9 years,
while patients with MTV2.5 42 cm3 recurred within 2.81.3 years. TLG2.5
and MTV2.5 PET volume metrics have not been predictable for overall
survival in adenocarcinoma patients, recurrence or overall survival in
squamous cell cancer. SUVmax, TLG42% and MTV42 were not predictable for
early recurrence or survival for both histologies.Conclusions: TLG2.5 and
MTV2.5 may be useful prognostic variables in stage I-II NSCLC depending
on the tumor type. Using a cut-off at 42 cm3 for early stage
adenocarcinoma patients a high risk of recurrence within one year might
be identified and adjuvant therapy following surgical resection could
improve outcome for those patients.

