Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: IL-18 is associated with the onset and progression of gastric
cancer


INTRODUCTION: Gastric cancer (GC) is the fourth most prevalent, and the
third most common cause of cancer-related death worldwide. The disease is
generally asymptomatic, and consequently is often diagnosed at an
advanced stage when metastasis is present, and limited treatment options
are available. Chronic inflammation is recognized as an integral
component in the development and progression of GC, and is associated
with increased infiltration of immune cells into the tumor
microenvironment. The production of pro-inflammatory cytokines by these
cells may contribute to tumor progression through activation of pathways
promoting tumor cell survival and proliferation. Previous work from our
lab has shown that therapeutic inhibition of the inflammatory cytokine
interleukin (IL)-11 is effective in ameliorating disease progression in
gastrointestinal cancer, however, it is unclear what role other
pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as IL-18, might have in disease
progression.METHODS: To characterize the role of different
pro-inflammatory cytokines in GC, we first analyzed microarray and
qRT-PCR data of from human GC specimens and adjacent non-tumor tissue.
Following the generation of a candidate list of cytokines deregulated in
human GC, the role of individual cytokines in disease progression was
examined using a validated mouse model of intestinal-type GC, referred to
as gp130Y757F, by crossing into cytokine knock-out strains and monitoring
tumor burden and the expression of genes and proteins classically
associated with tumorigenesis.RESULTS: We found that the expression
pro-inflammatory cytokines including IL-1 and IL-18 were significantly
elevated in the tumors of human GC patients compared to non-tumor tissue.
In gp130Y757F mice, genetic ablation of IL-18, but not of IL-1
significantly reduced gastric tumor burden, which was associated with a
reduction in the number of intratumoral macrophages, but not lymphocytes.
This observation correlated with decreased expression of pro-inflammatory
(Ifng, Tgfb1), antimicrobial (Reg3b, Reg3g), and tissue remodeling (Mmp9)
genes, and a reduction in apoptosis in the gastric lesions in these
mice.CONCLUSION: Our results demonstrate that IL-18 has an important role
in GC disease progression, and may serve as a potential therapeutic
target.

