Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CT179: A novel small molecule Olig2 inhibitor for the treatment of
glioblastoma


Glioblastoma (GBM) is an orphan disease with a high unmet medical need.
Despite optimal treatment, the median survival is only 12 to 15 months in
GBM patients of which only 4% achieve 5-year survival. OLIG2 is a
transcription factor that is almost exclusively expressed in the CNS that
has been linked to the tumorigenesis of GBM cells and their resistance to
radiotherapy. Importantly OLIG2 is a key transcription factor that
maintains the stemness of the glial stem cells, drives proliferation and
invasion and recurrent tumor growth. Inhibitors of this pathway are
therefore of interest as potential treatments for this unmet need.CT-179
is a small molecule inhibitor that was initially designed to prevent
homodimerization of Olig2. CT-179 is highly cytotoxic to OLIG2 expressing
GBM cells with a high therapeutic index for non-OLIG2 expressing cell
types. This inhibitor demonstrates functional inhibition of the OLIG2
pathway through specific reduction in nuclear Olig2 protein levels in
treated cells. A cell pathway analysis indicates that CT-179 impacts GBM
proliferation through cell cycle arrest and induction of apoptosis.
Secondarily an immunosuppression mechanism-of-action may also be
relevant. CT-179 penetrates the CNS to attain high brain concentrations
at levels far in excess of its cytotoxicity to GBM cells. Efficacy
studies reveal dose dependent reductions of tumor growth which is
enhanced with radiotherapy. CT-179 demonstrates impressive extension of
survival in orthotopic human PDX GBM. Safety studies indicate that there
is a large therapeutic window. The compound has a long half-life, low
metabolism and has excellent formulation properties and PK supporting
once per day oral dosing. CT-179 show promise as both a cytotoxic agent
and as potential radiosensitizer for use in the treatment of GBM.

