Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Protection of tocopherols against estrogen-induced breast cancer
via mechanisms targeting cancer stem cells


Estrogens have been implicated to be complete carcinogens through
mechanisms involving increased proliferation, oxidative stress and DNA
damage. Although the importance of estrogen in breast cancer is well
established, the effects of estrogen on breast cancer stem cells are not
fully understood. Due to the role of breast cancer stem cells in tumor
initiation, maintenance, and progression, targeting cancer stem cells has
become important for understanding estrogen-mediated breast
carcinogenesis. The vitamin E family, which is consisted of four
different forms of tocopherols and tocotrienols, has been shown to exert
anti-tumor effects in animal models of various cancers. In the present
study, we examined the protective effects of -, -, -tocopherol as well as
a natural -tocopherol rich mixture of tocopherols (-TmT) against
estrogen-induced expansion of cancer stem-like cells and
estrogen-mediated tumor growth. To determine the effects of tocopherols
on breast cancer stem cells, the MCF-7 mammosphere cell culture system,
which enriches for mammary progenitor cells and putative breast cancer
stem cells, was utilized. Treatment of MCF-7 mammosphere with estrogen
for six days resulted in an increase in CD44+/CD24- stem-like cell
populations as well as the number and size of mammosphere. -, -,
-Tocopherol, and most significantly -TmT, inhibited estrogen-induced
mammosphere formation, indicating that tocopherols reverse
estrogen-induced expansion of breast cancer stem cells. In MCF-7
xenograft tumor study, MCF-7 cells (5 106 cells/mouse) were injected into
the mammary fat pad in immunodeficient mice after subcutaneous
implantation with 0.72 mg of estrogen pellet. Mice were then administered
with diets containing 0.2% -, -, -tocopherol and -TmT for 5 weeks.
Treatment of -, -, -tocopherol or -TmT reduced the tumor volume by 71%
(pEstrogens have been implicated to be complete carcinogens through
mechanisms involving increased proliferation, oxidative stress and DNA
damage. Although the importance of estrogen in breast cancer is well
established, the effects of estrogen on breast cancer stem cells are not
fully understood. Due to the role of breast cancer stem cells in tumor
initiation, maintenance, and progression, targeting cancer stem cells has
become important for understanding estrogen-mediated breast
carcinogenesis. The vitamin E family, which is consisted of four
different forms of tocopherols and tocotrienols, has been shown to exert
anti-tumor effects in animal models of various cancers. In the present
study, we examined the protective effects of -, -, -tocopherol as well as
a natural -tocopherol rich mixture of tocopherols (-TmT) against
estrogen-induced expansion of cancer stem-like cells and
estrogen-mediated tumor growth. To determine the effects of tocopherols
on breast cancer stem cells, the MCF-7 mammosphere cell culture system,
which enriches for mammary progenitor cells and putative breast cancer
stem cells, was utilized. Treatment of MCF-7 mammosphere with estrogen
for six days resulted in an increase in CD44+/CD24- stem-like cell
populations as well as the number and size of mammosphere. -, -,
-Tocopherol, and most significantly -TmT, inhibited estrogen-induced
mammosphere formation, indicating that tocopherols reverse
estrogen-induced expansion of breast cancer stem cells. In MCF-7
xenograft tumor study, MCF-7 cells (5 106 cells/mouse) were injected into
the mammary fat pad in immunodeficient mice after subcutaneous
implantation with 0.72 mg of estrogen pellet. Mice were then administered
with diets containing 0.2% -, -, -tocopherol and -TmT for 5 weeks.
Treatment of -, -, -tocopherol or -TmT reduced the tumor volume by 71%
(p<0.05), 55% (pEstrogens have been implicated to be complete carcinogens
through mechanisms involving increased proliferation, oxidative stress
and DNA damage. Although the importance of estrogen in breast cancer is
well established, the effects of estrogen on breast cancer stem cells are
not fully understood. Due to the role of breast cancer stem cells in
tumor initiation, maintenance, and progression, targeting cancer stem
cells has become important for understanding estrogen-mediated breast
carcinogenesis. The vitamin E family, which is consisted of four
different forms of tocopherols and tocotrienols, has been shown to exert
anti-tumor effects in animal models of various cancers. In the present
study, we examined the protective effects of -, -, -tocopherol as well as
a natural -tocopherol rich mixture of tocopherols (-TmT) against
estrogen-induced expansion of cancer stem-like cells and
estrogen-mediated tumor growth. To determine the effects of tocopherols
on breast cancer stem cells, the MCF-7 mammosphere cell culture system,
which enriches for mammary progenitor cells and putative breast cancer
stem cells, was utilized. Treatment of MCF-7 mammosphere with estrogen
for six days resulted in an increase in CD44+/CD24- stem-like cell
populations as well as the number and size of mammosphere. -, -,
-Tocopherol, and most significantly -TmT, inhibited estrogen-induced
mammosphere formation, indicating that tocopherols reverse
estrogen-induced expansion of breast cancer stem cells. In MCF-7
xenograft tumor study, MCF-7 cells (5 106 cells/mouse) were injected into
the mammary fat pad in immunodeficient mice after subcutaneous
implantation with 0.72 mg of estrogen pellet. Mice were then administered
with diets containing 0.2% -, -, -tocopherol and -TmT for 5 weeks.
Treatment of -, -, -tocopherol or -TmT reduced the tumor volume by 71%
(p<0.05), 55% (p<0.05), 59% (pEstrogens have been implicated to be
complete carcinogens through mechanisms involving increased
proliferation, oxidative stress and DNA damage. Although the importance
of estrogen in breast cancer is well established, the effects of estrogen
on breast cancer stem cells are not fully understood. Due to the role of
breast cancer stem cells in tumor initiation, maintenance, and
progression, targeting cancer stem cells has become important for
understanding estrogen-mediated breast carcinogenesis. The vitamin E
family, which is consisted of four different forms of tocopherols and
tocotrienols, has been shown to exert anti-tumor effects in animal models
of various cancers. In the present study, we examined the protective
effects of -, -, -tocopherol as well as a natural -tocopherol rich
mixture of tocopherols (-TmT) against estrogen-induced expansion of
cancer stem-like cells and estrogen-mediated tumor growth. To determine
the effects of tocopherols on breast cancer stem cells, the MCF-7
mammosphere cell culture system, which enriches for mammary progenitor
cells and putative breast cancer stem cells, was utilized. Treatment of
MCF-7 mammosphere with estrogen for six days resulted in an increase in
CD44+/CD24- stem-like cell populations as well as the number and size of
mammosphere. -, -, -Tocopherol, and most significantly -TmT, inhibited
estrogen-induced mammosphere formation, indicating that tocopherols
reverse estrogen-induced expansion of breast cancer stem cells. In MCF-7
xenograft tumor study, MCF-7 cells (5 106 cells/mouse) were injected into
the mammary fat pad in immunodeficient mice after subcutaneous
implantation with 0.72 mg of estrogen pellet. Mice were then administered
with diets containing 0.2% -, -, -tocopherol and -TmT for 5 weeks.
Treatment of -, -, -tocopherol or -TmT reduced the tumor volume by 71%
(p<0.05), 55% (p<0.05), 59% (p<0.05) and 42% (pEstrogens have been
implicated to be complete carcinogens through mechanisms involving
increased proliferation, oxidative stress and DNA damage. Although the
importance of estrogen in breast cancer is well established, the effects
of estrogen on breast cancer stem cells are not fully understood. Due to
the role of breast cancer stem cells in tumor initiation, maintenance,
and progression, targeting cancer stem cells has become important for
understanding estrogen-mediated breast carcinogenesis. The vitamin E
family, which is consisted of four different forms of tocopherols and
tocotrienols, has been shown to exert anti-tumor effects in animal models
of various cancers. In the present study, we examined the protective
effects of -, -, -tocopherol as well as a natural -tocopherol rich
mixture of tocopherols (-TmT) against estrogen-induced expansion of
cancer stem-like cells and estrogen-mediated tumor growth. To determine
the effects of tocopherols on breast cancer stem cells, the MCF-7
mammosphere cell culture system, which enriches for mammary progenitor
cells and putative breast cancer stem cells, was utilized. Treatment of
MCF-7 mammosphere with estrogen for six days resulted in an increase in
CD44+/CD24- stem-like cell populations as well as the number and size of
mammosphere. -, -, -Tocopherol, and most significantly -TmT, inhibited
estrogen-induced mammosphere formation, indicating that tocopherols
reverse estrogen-induced expansion of breast cancer stem cells. In MCF-7
xenograft tumor study, MCF-7 cells (5 106 cells/mouse) were injected into
the mammary fat pad in immunodeficient mice after subcutaneous
implantation with 0.72 mg of estrogen pellet. Mice were then administered
with diets containing 0.2% -, -, -tocopherol and -TmT for 5 weeks.
Treatment of -, -, -tocopherol or -TmT reduced the tumor volume by 71%
(p<0.05), 55% (p<0.05), 59% (p<0.05) and 42% (p<0.01) as well as tumor
weight by 80%, 63% (pEstrogens have been implicated to be complete
carcinogens through mechanisms involving increased proliferation,
oxidative stress and DNA damage. Although the importance of estrogen in
breast cancer is well established, the effects of estrogen on breast
cancer stem cells are not fully understood. Due to the role of breast
cancer stem cells in tumor initiation, maintenance, and progression,
targeting cancer stem cells has become important for understanding
estrogen-mediated breast carcinogenesis. The vitamin E family, which is
consisted of four different forms of tocopherols and tocotrienols, has
been shown to exert anti-tumor effects in animal models of various
cancers. In the present study, we examined the protective effects of -,
-, -tocopherol as well as a natural -tocopherol rich mixture of
tocopherols (-TmT) against estrogen-induced expansion of cancer stem-like
cells and estrogen-mediated tumor growth. To determine the effects of
tocopherols on breast cancer stem cells, the MCF-7 mammosphere cell
culture system, which enriches for mammary progenitor cells and putative
breast cancer stem cells, was utilized. Treatment of MCF-7 mammosphere
with estrogen for six days resulted in an increase in CD44+/CD24-
stem-like cell populations as well as the number and size of mammosphere.
-, -, -Tocopherol, and most significantly -TmT, inhibited
estrogen-induced mammosphere formation, indicating that tocopherols
reverse estrogen-induced expansion of breast cancer stem cells. In MCF-7
xenograft tumor study, MCF-7 cells (5 106 cells/mouse) were injected into
the mammary fat pad in immunodeficient mice after subcutaneous
implantation with 0.72 mg of estrogen pellet. Mice were then administered
with diets containing 0.2% -, -, -tocopherol and -TmT for 5 weeks.
Treatment of -, -, -tocopherol or -TmT reduced the tumor volume by 71%
(p<0.05), 55% (p<0.05), 59% (p<0.05) and 42% (p<0.01) as well as tumor
weight by 80%, 63% (p<0.05), 61% (pEstrogens have been implicated to be
complete carcinogens through mechanisms involving increased
proliferation, oxidative stress and DNA damage. Although the importance
of estrogen in breast cancer is well established, the effects of estrogen
on breast cancer stem cells are not fully understood. Due to the role of
breast cancer stem cells in tumor initiation, maintenance, and
progression, targeting cancer stem cells has become important for
understanding estrogen-mediated breast carcinogenesis. The vitamin E
family, which is consisted of four different forms of tocopherols and
tocotrienols, has been shown to exert anti-tumor effects in animal models
of various cancers. In the present study, we examined the protective
effects of -, -, -tocopherol as well as a natural -tocopherol rich
mixture of tocopherols (-TmT) against estrogen-induced expansion of
cancer stem-like cells and estrogen-mediated tumor growth. To determine
the effects of tocopherols on breast cancer stem cells, the MCF-7
mammosphere cell culture system, which enriches for mammary progenitor
cells and putative breast cancer stem cells, was utilized. Treatment of
MCF-7 mammosphere with estrogen for six days resulted in an increase in
CD44+/CD24- stem-like cell populations as well as the number and size of
mammosphere. -, -, -Tocopherol, and most significantly -TmT, inhibited
estrogen-induced mammosphere formation, indicating that tocopherols
reverse estrogen-induced expansion of breast cancer stem cells. In MCF-7
xenograft tumor study, MCF-7 cells (5 106 cells/mouse) were injected into
the mammary fat pad in immunodeficient mice after subcutaneous
implantation with 0.72 mg of estrogen pellet. Mice were then administered
with diets containing 0.2% -, -, -tocopherol and -TmT for 5 weeks.
Treatment of -, -, -tocopherol or -TmT reduced the tumor volume by 71%
(p<0.05), 55% (p<0.05), 59% (p<0.05) and 42% (p<0.01) as well as tumor
weight by 80%, 63% (p<0.05), 61% (p<0.05) and 48% (pEstrogens have been
implicated to be complete carcinogens through mechanisms involving
increased proliferation, oxidative stress and DNA damage. Although the
importance of estrogen in breast cancer is well established, the effects
of estrogen on breast cancer stem cells are not fully understood. Due to
the role of breast cancer stem cells in tumor initiation, maintenance,
and progression, targeting cancer stem cells has become important for
understanding estrogen-mediated breast carcinogenesis. The vitamin E
family, which is consisted of four different forms of tocopherols and
tocotrienols, has been shown to exert anti-tumor effects in animal models
of various cancers. In the present study, we examined the protective
effects of -, -, -tocopherol as well as a natural -tocopherol rich
mixture of tocopherols (-TmT) against estrogen-induced expansion of
cancer stem-like cells and estrogen-mediated tumor growth. To determine
the effects of tocopherols on breast cancer stem cells, the MCF-7
mammosphere cell culture system, which enriches for mammary progenitor
cells and putative breast cancer stem cells, was utilized. Treatment of
MCF-7 mammosphere with estrogen for six days resulted in an increase in
CD44+/CD24- stem-like cell populations as well as the number and size of
mammosphere. -, -, -Tocopherol, and most significantly -TmT, inhibited
estrogen-induced mammosphere formation, indicating that tocopherols
reverse estrogen-induced expansion of breast cancer stem cells. In MCF-7
xenograft tumor study, MCF-7 cells (5 106 cells/mouse) were injected into
the mammary fat pad in immunodeficient mice after subcutaneous
implantation with 0.72 mg of estrogen pellet. Mice were then administered
with diets containing 0.2% -, -, -tocopherol and -TmT for 5 weeks.
Treatment of -, -, -tocopherol or -TmT reduced the tumor volume by 71%
(p<0.05), 55% (p<0.05), 59% (p<0.05) and 42% (p<0.01) as well as tumor
weight by 80%, 63% (p<0.05), 61% (p<0.05) and 48% (p<0.05), respectively.
Our results suggest that tocopherols significantly repress the expansion
of breast cancer stem cell-like population and tumor development.
Tocopherols, in particular a naturally occurring tocopherol mixture rich
in and -tocopherols, could thus be effective natural agents for the
prevention and treatment of estrogen-induced breast cancer.(This work was
supported by NIH R01 AT007036)

