Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The impact of preoperative hydroxyprogesterone on serial levels of
circulating tumor cells [CTCs] in patients undergoing surgery for
operable breast cancer


Introduction: Assessment of Circulating Tumour Cells [CTCs] from the
peripheral blood of patients diagnosed with cancer is emerging as a
valuable biomarker for prognostication and tailoring therapy. A previous
study demonstrated that a single depot injection of hydroxyprogesterone
prior to surgery improved the DFS of patients with large tumours or
positive nodes, forming the basis for this investigation, designed to
assess effects of this drug on serial levels of CTCs on patients with
operable breast cancer.Methods: Seventy patients were enrolled,
randomized, and as previously described a single depot injection of
hydroxyprogesterone was administered prior to surgery in patients in the
experimental arm. Peripheral blood samples were obtained at three time
points during surgery; prior to inductionof anaesthesia, intra operative
and at completion. Peripheral Blood Mononuclear Cell [PBMC] fractions
separated on Ficoll hypaque were enriched for tumour cells with double
positive immunomagnetic selection for EpCAM [Epithelial Cell Adhesion
Molecule]. Half the enriched fraction was routed for multistep sequential
labelling of cell-surface markers; EpCAM and CD45, cytoplasmic
Cytokeratin and staining with DAPI for the nucleus, facilitating
acquisition with multi parametric flow cytometry and imaging using
confocal microscopy. With pre-amplification of other half of the enriched
fraction, a quantitative expression analysis for a panel of epithelial
genes was performed.Results:With multi parametric flow analysis, events
that were CD45-/ EpCAM+/ CK+ with DAPI positivity weredefined as CTCs,
reported as events/ml blood and in all samples were in the range of 0 to
155 /ml of blood with no significant difference observed between the two
arms. Detailed analysis with pooled data of all time points, in
premenopausal patients, using the Mann Whitney test, showed that the mean
number of CTCs is significantly lower[p = 0.005] in the experimental
arm[n = 30] as compared to the control arm[n = 36] .Analysis within the
hydroxyprogesterone group using the Wilcoxon signed rank test showed that
the mean number of CTCs is lower in the post-surgery time point when
compared to the pre surgery time point, in patients with positive nodes[n
= 16][p = 0.044], large tumours [n = 18] [NS; p = 0.085] and
post-menopausal node positive group [n = 7] [NS; p = 0.063] The
expression analysis for the selected markers and confocal images
validated the identity of tumour cells.Conclusions: Patient follow-up
will ascertain the benefits of reduced numbers observed and establish
CTCs as a surrogate marker for prognostication.

