Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dietary tomato reduces castration-resistant prostate cancer
progression in TRAMP mice


Epidemiological data support the hypothesis that consumption of diets
rich in tomato products are associated with a reduced risk of prostate
cancer. Castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) represents the late
and lethal phase of human prostate carcinogenesis, and is defined as
cancer progression after surgical castration or pharmacologic reduction
of serum testosterone through androgen deprivation therapy. Mechanisms
involved in the transition to CRPC include cancer cells acquired capacity
for androgen synthesis or activation of ligand-independent signaling. We
have previously shown that dietary tomato can inhibit prostatic androgen
signaling and expression of androgen biosynthetic genes, as well as
reduce primary cancer incidence in the transgenic adenocarcinoma of the
mouse prostate (TRAMP) model. Therefore, we examined whether dietary
tomato might be an effective inhibitor of CRPC progression in mice. We
hypothesized that lifelong dietary intake of tomato, as well as dietary
tomato intervention following castration, would reduce tumor burden and
growth rate in a mouse model of CRPC. TRAMP mice were fed an AIN-93G diet
(CON) for one week and then randomized to the CON diet (n = 28) or a
similar diet with 10% w/w lyophilized tomato paste (TP; n = 27) from 4
wks of age until euthanization. A third group, modeling dietary
intervention, consumed CON from 4 to 12 wks of age, and the 10% w/w
lyophilized tomato paste diet from wk 12 until euthanization (TP-I; n =
25). All animals were castrated at 12 wks of age. Beginning at 10 wks of
age, mice were monitored longitudinally with ultrasound for tumor
detection, tumor volume estimation, and calculation of tumor growth rate.
Serial 2D image slices were used to generate a 3D volume estimate. Mice
were euthanized after 5 consecutive tumor scans, or if no tumor had been
detected by 30 weeks of age. Tumor growth area under the curve (AUC) was
reduced approximately 46% by tomato intervention (TP-I) and 27% by
lifelong tomato consumption (TP). At euthanization, TP-I reduced tumor
weight by approximately 26%. Additionally, incidence of gross metastases
to distant organs (lung, liver, kidney) was strongly inhibited by TP-I,
compared to CON (0% and 26%, respectively). TP diet reduced incidence of
distant organ gross metastasis to Epidemiological data support the
hypothesis that consumption of diets rich in tomato products are
associated with a reduced risk of prostate cancer. Castration-resistant
prostate cancer (CRPC) represents the late and lethal phase of human
prostate carcinogenesis, and is defined as cancer progression after
surgical castration or pharmacologic reduction of serum testosterone
through androgen deprivation therapy. Mechanisms involved in the
transition to CRPC include cancer cells acquired capacity for androgen
synthesis or activation of ligand-independent signaling. We have
previously shown that dietary tomato can inhibit prostatic androgen
signaling and expression of androgen biosynthetic genes, as well as
reduce primary cancer incidence in the transgenic adenocarcinoma of the
mouse prostate (TRAMP) model. Therefore, we examined whether dietary
tomato might be an effective inhibitor of CRPC progression in mice. We
hypothesized that lifelong dietary intake of tomato, as well as dietary
tomato intervention following castration, would reduce tumor burden and
growth rate in a mouse model of CRPC. TRAMP mice were fed an AIN-93G diet
(CON) for one week and then randomized to the CON diet (n = 28) or a
similar diet with 10% w/w lyophilized tomato paste (TP; n = 27) from 4
wks of age until euthanization. A third group, modeling dietary
intervention, consumed CON from 4 to 12 wks of age, and the 10% w/w
lyophilized tomato paste diet from wk 12 until euthanization (TP-I; n =
25). All animals were castrated at 12 wks of age. Beginning at 10 wks of
age, mice were monitored longitudinally with ultrasound for tumor
detection, tumor volume estimation, and calculation of tumor growth rate.
Serial 2D image slices were used to generate a 3D volume estimate. Mice
were euthanized after 5 consecutive tumor scans, or if no tumor had been
detected by 30 weeks of age. Tumor growth area under the curve (AUC) was
reduced approximately 46% by tomato intervention (TP-I) and 27% by
lifelong tomato consumption (TP). At euthanization, TP-I reduced tumor
weight by approximately 26%. Additionally, incidence of gross metastases
to distant organs (lung, liver, kidney) was strongly inhibited by TP-I,
compared to CON (0% and 26%, respectively). TP diet reduced incidence of
distant organ gross metastasis to <10%. The consumption of tomato
products following castration inhibits CRPC progression in the TRAMP
model. Our findings support the development of human studies of dietary
tomato interventions in combination with anti-androgen therapy for men
with advanced prostate cancer.

