Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combined disulfiram and radiation therapy against atypical
teratoid/rhabdoid tumor


Disulfiram (DSF) has been studied as an anticancer drug and
radiosensitizer. In our previous study, the therapeutic potential of DSF
against atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumor (AT/RT), one of the most
aggressive forms of childhood cancer, had been confirmed using in vitro
and in vivo studies. To develop more effective and safer therapy in
AT/RT, we evaluated the sensitizing potential of DSF on radiation therapy
(RT). The effect of DSF in low concentration alone and in combination
with RT was investigated in vitro and vivo. Clonogenic assay, western
blot analysis, autophagy assay and -H2AX foci staining were performed
using several primary cultured AT/RT cells and cell lines. Also, in vivo
study was performed using AT/RT orthotopic xenograft mouse model.
Combination therapy with DSF and RT potently reduced clonogenicity and
down-regulated protein expression of survivin and BCL2. The combination
treatment strongly promoted the autophagic cell death and produced
abundant -H2AX foci in all AT/RT cells. Moreover, the combination
treatment significantly reduced the tumor growth and prolonged the
survival rate compared to single treatment in AT/RT mouse model. Taken
together, our results demonstrated that the combination therapy with DSF
and RT has a synergistic therapeutic effect on AT/RT, suggesting a
potential clinical application for AT/RT patients.

