Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Biological significance of the wild-type p53-induced phosphatase
1(Wip1) expression in invasive breast cancer


Backgrounds The wild-type p53-induced phosphatase 1(Wip1) is a member of
the serine/threonine protein phosphatases, and plays an important role in
the nucleus as one of the key components in the DNA damage response (DDR)
network. Wip1 is encoded by the protein phosphatase magnesium dependent 1
delta (PPM1D), sited on locus 17q23. PPM1D amplification has been
reported in breast cancer.Aims We evaluated the expression of Wip1 mRNA,
Wip1 protein and PPM1D DNA copy number to clarify the relationship
between Wip1 expression and the clinicopathological features and
prognosis to determine the biological significance of Wip1.Materials and
Methods Breast cancer cells (MCF7, T47D, MDA-MB231, HCC1937, HS578T, BT20
and SKBr3) were used for Wip1 expression analysis and copy number
analysis. Primary invasive ductal carcinoma specimens were obtained from
Japanese patients who underwent surgery without neoadjuvant chemotherapy
or endocrine therapy. Wip1 mRNA expression was evaluated in 140 cases by
quantitative reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and
Wip1 protein expression was evaluated in 192 cases by
immunohistochemistry (IHC). The PPM1D DNA copy number was analyzed by
genomic PCR in 33 breast cancer cases and by the single-nucleotide
polymorphism-Comparative Genomic Hybridization (SNP-CGH) array in 12
cases. The effects on the cell growth of the Wip1 inhibitor (GSK2830371)
was analyzed by the viability assay in MCF7.Results Wip1 mRNA expression
was significantly higher in MCF7, luminal type cell line. Wip1 mRNA
expression was divided into four groups, very high, high, low and very
low. The very high Wip1 mRNA expression was significantly associated with
positive estrogen receptor (ER) expression (p = 0.02). There was no
significant correlation between Wip1 mRNA expression and the prognosis.
Wip1 protein nuclear expression was positive in 21 cases (10.9%). There
was no significant association between the Wip1 protein expression levels
and the clinicopathological factors and the prognosis. PPM1D DNA copy
number significantly correlated with Wip1 protein expression (p =
0.0035). Amplification at 17q23 was detected in 6 cases by SNP-CGH array,
and all of these six cases showed positive nuclear Wip1 expression. PPM1D
amplification was not observed in Wip1 negative cases. In the cell
viability assay, the suppression of the MCF7 cell growth was observed by
Wip1 inhibitor.Conclusions Wip1 nuclear protein expression may be
regulated by PPM1D amplification, and the Wip1 inhibitor may have the
therapeutic effects for the breast cancer with PPM1D amplification or
high Wip1 protein expression.

