Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Modulating function of tumor associated macrophages by CSF1R
inhibitor suppressed tumor growth in hepatocellular carcinoma


Aims: To investigate the effect of colony stimulating factor 1 receptor
(CSF1R) inhibitor on macrophages and tumor pathogenesis.Methods: CSF1 and
CSF2 stimulated macrophages were obtained from mouse bone marrow derived
monocytes cultured with CSF1 and CSF2. Mouse hepatoma cell line Hepa 1-6,
and human hepatoma cell lines, HCCLM3 and HepG2 were used to established
a allograft or xenograft tumor models to examine the effect of CSF1R
inhibitor on tumor growth and distribution of macrophages. The
characteristics of macrophages were determined by flow cytometry,
immunohistochemistry, cell motility and Western blotting assays.Results:
CSF1R inhibitor suppressed tumor growth in the tumor models derived from
three hepatoma cell lines, and prolonged hosts survival, but CSF1R
inhibitor did not decreased the number of macrophages in Hepa1-6
allograft tumors. in vitro study showed CSF1R inhibitor suppressed
proliferation and motility of CSF1 stimulated macrophages but not CSF2
stimulated macrophages. Furthermore, we found CSF1R inhibitor treatment
decreased the ability of THP-1 macrophages to promote migration and
invasion of tumor cells.Conclusions: CSF1R inhibitor suppressed tumor
growth in hepatoma animal models by modulating function of tumor
associating macrophages.

