Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development and characterization of novel CD40 antibody agonists
for cancer immunotherapy


CD40 is a key molecule in the regulation of immune responses and its
activity can be modulated using antibodies. In particular, agonist CD40
antibodies are highly effective in preclinical tumor models either
through direct interaction with CD40-expressing lymphomas, or indirectly
through the activation of an adaptive anti-tumor immune response. To
date, limited clinical data have been reported with strong CD40 agonist
antibodies; nonetheless it seems likely that targeting this pathway will
require a balance between the benefits of immune stimulation to drive
anti-tumor responses, and the damage that can result from non-specific
immune cell activation. We set out to develop novel human anti-CD40
antibodies with different levels of agonist activity to identify a lead
candidate for systemic application.Anti-CD40 monoclonal antibodies (mAbs)
were generated by immunization of human Ig transgenic mice with
recombinant and cell surface expressed human CD40. Hybridomas developed
from these mice were screened using CD40 binding assays and activity on a
reporter cell line engineered to express CD40 and NFB-responsive
luciferase. The variable regions of lead antibodies that displayed
differential activity were cloned into vectors containing human IgG1 or
IgG2 constant domains and expressed in CHO cells.These human CD40 mAbs
were further characterized by analysis of binding affinity, CD40L
blocking activity, B cell and dendritic cell activation, and anti-tumor
activity in xenograft tumor models. We found a wide range of activities
among the CD40 mAbs that is linked to epitope specificity as well as the
isotype. In general, the IgG2 isotype mAbs had greater signaling activity
than their IgG1 counterparts. The lead candidate mAbs are undergoing
additional testing related to functional and toxicity parameters before a
final candidate is nominated for clinical development.

