Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RNA-binding protein FXR1 negatively regulates senescence by
destabilizing mRNA CDKN1A and stabilizing noncoding RNA telomerase RNA
component


RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) regulate numerous aspects of co- and
post-transcriptional gene expression. RBP fragile X-related protein 1
(FXR1) belongs to a family of RNA-binding proteins that includes
functionally similar Fragile X mental retardation 1 (FMR1) and Fragile
X-related 2 (FXR2). FMR1 is significantly studied in Fragile X Syndrome
(FXS) where the gene is non-functional due to mutation or aberrant
methylation. FXR1 protein is highly expressed in multiple cancers
including lung and oral cancers. Here, we demonstrate that RBP FXR1 plays
an essential role in the growth of head and neck squamous cell carcinomas
(HNSCC) by blocking cellular senescence. FXR1 MEF cells were stained
positive for senescence associated beta-galactosidase straining. We
report a major function of FXR1 as it promotes the stability of
Telomerase RNA Component (TERC), a non-coding RNA and simultaneously
destabilizes CDKN1A mRNA, and blocks cellular senescence. FXR1-deficient
HNSCC cells show an increase in different cyclin dependent kinase
inhibitors (p21, p27), a decrease in p-AKT, and these cells also undergo
a G0/G1 cell cycle arrest which are the early onsets of cellular
senescence. FXR1 binds and stabilizes TERC RNA for telomere maintenance.
On the contrary, FXR1 binds and destabilizes CDKN1A mRNA. By an
independent assay we also show that the senescence phenomenon was only
observed by a combined up and downregulation of CDKN1A and TERC,
respectively which was only obtained by FXR1 knockdown. Thus, FXR1 forms
a molecular link between CDKN1A and TERC for cell cycle control and
telomere length, respectively, to repress cellular senescence in HNSCC.

