Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Treatment outcome under cetuximab-based therapy and individual
ADCC capability in head and neck cancer


IntroductionCetuximab is a IgG1 monoclonal antibody against epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR) used for head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma (HNSCC) treatment. In addition to EGFR targeting, cetuximab is
able to develop an antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC),
triggered by Fc receptors (Fc-R) on Natural Killer cells, macrophages and
polymorphonucleated leukocytes.This prospective study examined the
possible prognostic value of cetuximab-mediated ADCC response in a cohort
of HNSCC patients.Patients and MethodsThere were 63 patients treated with
curative intent with chemo-radiotherapy (CT-RT), associated (N = 39) or
not (N = 24) with cetuximab. Peripheral blood samples were collected at
start of therapy. Intrinsic ADCC was evaluated from ex vivo NK-dependent
activity measuring LDH release through the Cytotox 96 non radioactive
cytotoxicity assay, previously standardized in our laboratory (Crit Rev
Oncol Hematol, 2015). EGFR tumoral expression was analyzed by
immunohistochemistry.ResultsMedian ADCC response at treatment start for
all patients was 56.1% (range 5-99%). Analysing the whole population,
patients with ADCC above the median value (high) showed a better OS as
compared to patients with ADCC below the median (low), HR = 0.3827 (95%
CI, 0.1464 to 1.000), p = 0.05 (Long-rank Mantel-Cox Test). A sub-group
analysis confirmed a possible link between high ADCC and a better OS
(CT-RT group, p = 0.223 and CT-RT+cetuximab group, p =
0.244).Importantly, considering CT-RT+cetuximab treatment and EGFR
tumoral expression (N = 21), patients with EGFR 3+ status and high ADCC
showed an improved OS as compared to patients with ADCC below median
value, HR = 0.09031 (95% CI, 0.009983 to 0.8170), p = 0.032 (Long-rank
Mantel-Cox Test). Median OS values for patients with high EGFR expression
were 34.8 months (range 9.1-53.7) and 13.1 months (range 2.1-39.5) for
patients with respectively high ADCC and low ADCC.ConclusionADCC is shown
to be a strong driver of cetuximab-based therapy outcome in HNSCC. High
tumoral EGFR expression and high ADCC confer a particularly long overall
survival. These data suggest an ADCC-based and EGFR expression-based
precision therapy under cetuximab in HNSCC and open perspectives for NK
boosting.

