Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Carbonate prodrugs derived from triterpenoids with high cytotoxic
activity


Number of active anticancer compounds failed in the drug development due
to unfavorable pharmacological properties. Design of pro-drugs is
plausible approach to improve drug-like properties of biologically active
compounds. Betulinic acid is a well-known representative of triterpenes,
which possess a moderate cytotoxic activity and high selectivity towards
the tumor cells. However, its pharmacological properties, particularly
solubility and bioavailability, are poor. In order to improve
pharmacology of betulinic acid derivatives, we have synthesized and
tested activities of above 40 carbonate based prodrugs. We have developed
methods for activation of pro-drug derivatives of betulinic acid by
primary rat hepatocytes. Cytotoxicity of pro-drugs and activated
metabolites was measured on the sensitive tumor cell line CCRF-CEM (human
T-lymphoblastic leukemia). We have identified 21 prodrugs >10 times more
cytotoxic to CCRF-CEM cells after pre-incubation with rat hepatocytes.
The best candidate pro-drug showed >100 fold increase of cytotoxicity due
to metabolic activation and it was cytotoxic to cancer cells in
sub-micromolar concentrations. Our concept and predicted mechanisms of
pro-drug activation were verified by HPLC-MS/MS where the pro-drugs and
corresponding active compounds were identified and quantified. For the
most active derivatives we have tested ADME characteristics and in vivo
pharmacokinetics which showed significantly improved drug-like
properties. Analysis of anti-cancer activities of the pro-drugs is
currently being performed. This work was supported by grants LF_2015_031
and by the National Sustainability Program (LO1304).

