Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SOCS-1 inhibits tumor growth by enhancing T cell mediated
antitumor immunity related to PD-L1


[Background]In many solid cancers, constitutive activation of JAK/ signal
transducers and activators of transcription (STAT) signaling pathway is
associated with poor prognosis. Constitutive JAK/STAT signaling enhances
the expression of cyclins and anti-apoptosis proteins, leads to the
increased tumor cell proliferation and survival. Furthermore, one of the
immune checkpoint molecules programmed cell death 1 ligand 1 (PD-L1),
which is involved in the suppression of T cell mediated antitumor
immunity, is induced by STATs. Suppressor of cytokine signaling (SOCS)-1
is a negative feedback molecule, which is induced by JAK/STAT signaling
and inhibits the JAK activity, resulted in the suppression of JAK/STAT
signaling. This study aimed to reveal the antitumor effects by SOCS-1 in
vitro and in vivo.[METHODS]Five human OC cell lines (OVCAR-3, SKOV-3,
RMG-1, A2780, ES-2) and 4 murine cancer cell lines (B16F10, LLC, 4T1,
CT26) were assessed. SOCS-1 or LacZ were overexpressed by adenoviral
vector. Anti-proliferative effect was assessed by WST-8 assay. Female
BALB/c mice were injected with CT26 for subcutaneous xenograft
experiments. AdSOCS-1 or AdLacZ was intra-tumorally administered every
other day and PD-L1 expression in tumor cells and activation levels of
tumor infiltrated T cells were analyzed by flow
cytometry.[RESULT]Overexpression of SOCS-1 inhibited proliferation of all
cancer cell lines. Three OC (OVCAR-3, SKOV-3, ES2) and all murine cancer
constitutively expressed PD-L1. Expression levels of PD-L1 in OVCAR-3 and
CT26 cells were downregulated about 30% compared with control by
overexpressed SOCS-1 in vitro. In CT26 allografted model, SOCS-1
treatment significantly inhibited tumor growth (62.25.2%, P[Background]In
many solid cancers, constitutive activation of JAK/ signal transducers
and activators of transcription (STAT) signaling pathway is associated
with poor prognosis. Constitutive JAK/STAT signaling enhances the
expression of cyclins and anti-apoptosis proteins, leads to the increased
tumor cell proliferation and survival. Furthermore, one of the immune
checkpoint molecules programmed cell death 1 ligand 1 (PD-L1), which is
involved in the suppression of T cell mediated antitumor immunity, is
induced by STATs. Suppressor of cytokine signaling (SOCS)-1 is a negative
feedback molecule, which is induced by JAK/STAT signaling and inhibits
the JAK activity, resulted in the suppression of JAK/STAT signaling. This
study aimed to reveal the antitumor effects by SOCS-1 in vitro and in
vivo.[METHODS]Five human OC cell lines (OVCAR-3, SKOV-3, RMG-1, A2780,
ES-2) and 4 murine cancer cell lines (B16F10, LLC, 4T1, CT26) were
assessed. SOCS-1 or LacZ were overexpressed by adenoviral vector.
Anti-proliferative effect was assessed by WST-8 assay. Female BALB/c mice
were injected with CT26 for subcutaneous xenograft experiments. AdSOCS-1
or AdLacZ was intra-tumorally administered every other day and PD-L1
expression in tumor cells and activation levels of tumor infiltrated T
cells were analyzed by flow cytometry.[RESULT]Overexpression of SOCS-1
inhibited proliferation of all cancer cell lines. Three OC (OVCAR-3,
SKOV-3, ES2) and all murine cancer constitutively expressed PD-L1.
Expression levels of PD-L1 in OVCAR-3 and CT26 cells were downregulated
about 30% compared with control by overexpressed SOCS-1 in vitro. In CT26
allografted model, SOCS-1 treatment significantly inhibited tumor growth
(62.25.2%, P<0.01)and suppressed expression of PD-L1 on CT26 cells in the
tumor (65.28.4%, P[Background]In many solid cancers, constitutive
activation of JAK/ signal transducers and activators of transcription
(STAT) signaling pathway is associated with poor prognosis. Constitutive
JAK/STAT signaling enhances the expression of cyclins and anti-apoptosis
proteins, leads to the increased tumor cell proliferation and survival.
Furthermore, one of the immune checkpoint molecules programmed cell death
1 ligand 1 (PD-L1), which is involved in the suppression of T cell
mediated antitumor immunity, is induced by STATs. Suppressor of cytokine
signaling (SOCS)-1 is a negative feedback molecule, which is induced by
JAK/STAT signaling and inhibits the JAK activity, resulted in the
suppression of JAK/STAT signaling. This study aimed to reveal the
antitumor effects by SOCS-1 in vitro and in vivo.[METHODS]Five human OC
cell lines (OVCAR-3, SKOV-3, RMG-1, A2780, ES-2) and 4 murine cancer cell
lines (B16F10, LLC, 4T1, CT26) were assessed. SOCS-1 or LacZ were
overexpressed by adenoviral vector. Anti-proliferative effect was
assessed by WST-8 assay. Female BALB/c mice were injected with CT26 for
subcutaneous xenograft experiments. AdSOCS-1 or AdLacZ was
intra-tumorally administered every other day and PD-L1 expression in
tumor cells and activation levels of tumor infiltrated T cells were
analyzed by flow cytometry.[RESULT]Overexpression of SOCS-1 inhibited
proliferation of all cancer cell lines. Three OC (OVCAR-3, SKOV-3, ES2)
and all murine cancer constitutively expressed PD-L1. Expression levels
of PD-L1 in OVCAR-3 and CT26 cells were downregulated about 30% compared
with control by overexpressed SOCS-1 in vitro. In CT26 allografted model,
SOCS-1 treatment significantly inhibited tumor growth (62.25.2%,
P<0.01)and suppressed expression of PD-L1 on CT26 cells in the tumor
(65.28.4%, P<0.05). Granzyme B and CD107a expression of intratumorally
infiltrated CD8 T cells were increased more than 50% (P[Background]In
many solid cancers, constitutive activation of JAK/ signal transducers
and activators of transcription (STAT) signaling pathway is associated
with poor prognosis. Constitutive JAK/STAT signaling enhances the
expression of cyclins and anti-apoptosis proteins, leads to the increased
tumor cell proliferation and survival. Furthermore, one of the immune
checkpoint molecules programmed cell death 1 ligand 1 (PD-L1), which is
involved in the suppression of T cell mediated antitumor immunity, is
induced by STATs. Suppressor of cytokine signaling (SOCS)-1 is a negative
feedback molecule, which is induced by JAK/STAT signaling and inhibits
the JAK activity, resulted in the suppression of JAK/STAT signaling. This
study aimed to reveal the antitumor effects by SOCS-1 in vitro and in
vivo.[METHODS]Five human OC cell lines (OVCAR-3, SKOV-3, RMG-1, A2780,
ES-2) and 4 murine cancer cell lines (B16F10, LLC, 4T1, CT26) were
assessed. SOCS-1 or LacZ were overexpressed by adenoviral vector.
Anti-proliferative effect was assessed by WST-8 assay. Female BALB/c mice
were injected with CT26 for subcutaneous xenograft experiments. AdSOCS-1
or AdLacZ was intra-tumorally administered every other day and PD-L1
expression in tumor cells and activation levels of tumor infiltrated T
cells were analyzed by flow cytometry.[RESULT]Overexpression of SOCS-1
inhibited proliferation of all cancer cell lines. Three OC (OVCAR-3,
SKOV-3, ES2) and all murine cancer constitutively expressed PD-L1.
Expression levels of PD-L1 in OVCAR-3 and CT26 cells were downregulated
about 30% compared with control by overexpressed SOCS-1 in vitro. In CT26
allografted model, SOCS-1 treatment significantly inhibited tumor growth
(62.25.2%, P<0.01)and suppressed expression of PD-L1 on CT26 cells in the
tumor (65.28.4%, P<0.05). Granzyme B and CD107a expression of
intratumorally infiltrated CD8 T cells were increased more than 50%
(P<0.05) in the AdSOCS-1 injected group compared with AdLacZ injected
group. PD-L1 Fc fusion protein significantly inhibited antitumor effect
of SOCS-1.[Conclusion]SOCS-1 mediated inhibition of JAK/STAT signaling
shows not only direct antitumor effect against tumor cells but also
enhances T cell mediated anti-tumor immunity in vivo by downregulating
the expression of PD-L1 on tumor cells and preventing the interaction of
PD-1/ PD-L1.

