Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of peritoneal dissemination-related genes in
gastric cancer


INTRODUCTION:Peritoneal dissemination (PD) is highly frequent and
incurable metastasis in gastric cancer (GC). The mechanism causing PD is
still poorly understood. In this study, we aimed to identify the genes
responsible for PD using several large-scale public microarray
databases.MATERIALS AND METHODS:First, we identified the candidate genes,
which satisfied the all-4 outlines using microarray data as follow: 1)
overexpressed in GC cell lines with high potential of PD; 2)
overexpressed in GC patients with PD in Singapore from Duke-NUS Graduate
Medical School; 3) overexpressed in tumor tissues in GC from TCGA
database; 4) poor prognostic factor in GC from TCGA database.Next, we
measured the expression of candidate genes by Quantitative reverse
transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR), and performed
clinicopathological studies of the expression in 146 Japanese GC patients
who underwent surgery in our hospital.Finally, we performed gene set
enrichment analysis (GSEA) with TCGA database to elucidate the
correlation between candidate genes and gene sets that are associated
with tumorigenesis or tumor progression in GC. Then, we examined the
correlation between the candidate genes and one of the gene sets that
were identified through GSEA by qRT-PCR in 5 GC cell lines (MKN7, KATO3,
AGS, HSC39, 39As).RESULTS:1. We identified Arl4c (ADP-ribosylation
factor-like 4c) as a PD candidate gene by above our screening system.2.
The expression of Arl4c was significantly higher in tumor tissues than in
corresponding normal tissues in Japanese GC patients
(pINTRODUCTION:Peritoneal dissemination (PD) is highly frequent and
incurable metastasis in gastric cancer (GC). The mechanism causing PD is
still poorly understood. In this study, we aimed to identify the genes
responsible for PD using several large-scale public microarray
databases.MATERIALS AND METHODS:First, we identified the candidate genes,
which satisfied the all-4 outlines using microarray data as follow: 1)
overexpressed in GC cell lines with high potential of PD; 2)
overexpressed in GC patients with PD in Singapore from Duke-NUS Graduate
Medical School; 3) overexpressed in tumor tissues in GC from TCGA
database; 4) poor prognostic factor in GC from TCGA database.Next, we
measured the expression of candidate genes by Quantitative reverse
transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR), and performed
clinicopathological studies of the expression in 146 Japanese GC patients
who underwent surgery in our hospital.Finally, we performed gene set
enrichment analysis (GSEA) with TCGA database to elucidate the
correlation between candidate genes and gene sets that are associated
with tumorigenesis or tumor progression in GC. Then, we examined the
correlation between the candidate genes and one of the gene sets that
were identified through GSEA by qRT-PCR in 5 GC cell lines (MKN7, KATO3,
AGS, HSC39, 39As).RESULTS:1. We identified Arl4c (ADP-ribosylation
factor-like 4c) as a PD candidate gene by above our screening system.2.
The expression of Arl4c was significantly higher in tumor tissues than in
corresponding normal tissues in Japanese GC patients (p<0.0002). In
clinicopathological analysis, the high expression group of Arl4c was
significantly associated with depth of invasion (pINTRODUCTION:Peritoneal
dissemination (PD) is highly frequent and incurable metastasis in gastric
cancer (GC). The mechanism causing PD is still poorly understood. In this
study, we aimed to identify the genes responsible for PD using several
large-scale public microarray databases.MATERIALS AND METHODS:First, we
identified the candidate genes, which satisfied the all-4 outlines using
microarray data as follow: 1) overexpressed in GC cell lines with high
potential of PD; 2) overexpressed in GC patients with PD in Singapore
from Duke-NUS Graduate Medical School; 3) overexpressed in tumor tissues
in GC from TCGA database; 4) poor prognostic factor in GC from TCGA
database.Next, we measured the expression of candidate genes by
Quantitative reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR),
and performed clinicopathological studies of the expression in 146
Japanese GC patients who underwent surgery in our hospital.Finally, we
performed gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) with TCGA database to
elucidate the correlation between candidate genes and gene sets that are
associated with tumorigenesis or tumor progression in GC. Then, we
examined the correlation between the candidate genes and one of the gene
sets that were identified through GSEA by qRT-PCR in 5 GC cell lines
(MKN7, KATO3, AGS, HSC39, 39As).RESULTS:1. We identified Arl4c
(ADP-ribosylation factor-like 4c) as a PD candidate gene by above our
screening system.2. The expression of Arl4c was significantly higher in
tumor tissues than in corresponding normal tissues in Japanese GC
patients (p<0.0002). In clinicopathological analysis, the high expression
group of Arl4c was significantly associated with depth of invasion
(p<0.01) and PD (pINTRODUCTION:Peritoneal dissemination (PD) is highly
frequent and incurable metastasis in gastric cancer (GC). The mechanism
causing PD is still poorly understood. In this study, we aimed to
identify the genes responsible for PD using several large-scale public
microarray databases.MATERIALS AND METHODS:First, we identified the
candidate genes, which satisfied the all-4 outlines using microarray data
as follow: 1) overexpressed in GC cell lines with high potential of PD;
2) overexpressed in GC patients with PD in Singapore from Duke-NUS
Graduate Medical School; 3) overexpressed in tumor tissues in GC from
TCGA database; 4) poor prognostic factor in GC from TCGA database.Next,
we measured the expression of candidate genes by Quantitative reverse
transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR), and performed
clinicopathological studies of the expression in 146 Japanese GC patients
who underwent surgery in our hospital.Finally, we performed gene set
enrichment analysis (GSEA) with TCGA database to elucidate the
correlation between candidate genes and gene sets that are associated
with tumorigenesis or tumor progression in GC. Then, we examined the
correlation between the candidate genes and one of the gene sets that
were identified through GSEA by qRT-PCR in 5 GC cell lines (MKN7, KATO3,
AGS, HSC39, 39As).RESULTS:1. We identified Arl4c (ADP-ribosylation
factor-like 4c) as a PD candidate gene by above our screening system.2.
The expression of Arl4c was significantly higher in tumor tissues than in
corresponding normal tissues in Japanese GC patients (p<0.0002). In
clinicopathological analysis, the high expression group of Arl4c was
significantly associated with depth of invasion (p<0.01) and PD (p<0.05).
Multivariate analysis indicated that high expression of Arl4c was an
independent prognostic factor (hazard ratio 2.20; 95% CI 1.06-4.97;
pINTRODUCTION:Peritoneal dissemination (PD) is highly frequent and
incurable metastasis in gastric cancer (GC). The mechanism causing PD is
still poorly understood. In this study, we aimed to identify the genes
responsible for PD using several large-scale public microarray
databases.MATERIALS AND METHODS:First, we identified the candidate genes,
which satisfied the all-4 outlines using microarray data as follow: 1)
overexpressed in GC cell lines with high potential of PD; 2)
overexpressed in GC patients with PD in Singapore from Duke-NUS Graduate
Medical School; 3) overexpressed in tumor tissues in GC from TCGA
database; 4) poor prognostic factor in GC from TCGA database.Next, we
measured the expression of candidate genes by Quantitative reverse
transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR), and performed
clinicopathological studies of the expression in 146 Japanese GC patients
who underwent surgery in our hospital.Finally, we performed gene set
enrichment analysis (GSEA) with TCGA database to elucidate the
correlation between candidate genes and gene sets that are associated
with tumorigenesis or tumor progression in GC. Then, we examined the
correlation between the candidate genes and one of the gene sets that
were identified through GSEA by qRT-PCR in 5 GC cell lines (MKN7, KATO3,
AGS, HSC39, 39As).RESULTS:1. We identified Arl4c (ADP-ribosylation
factor-like 4c) as a PD candidate gene by above our screening system.2.
The expression of Arl4c was significantly higher in tumor tissues than in
corresponding normal tissues in Japanese GC patients (p<0.0002). In
clinicopathological analysis, the high expression group of Arl4c was
significantly associated with depth of invasion (p<0.01) and PD (p<0.05).
Multivariate analysis indicated that high expression of Arl4c was an
independent prognostic factor (hazard ratio 2.20; 95% CI 1.06-4.97; p<
0.03) among all clinicalpathological factors in GC.3. GSEA revealed that
the expression of Arl4c positively correlated with epithelial-mesenchymal
transformation (EMT) gene set. In the 5 GC cell lines, the expression of
Arl4c negatively correlated with the expression of cdh1, which was well
known as a down-regulated gene in EMT.CONCLUSION:Arl4c is a member of the
ADP-ribosylation factor family of GTP-binding proteins and plays a role
in cholesterol transport. Recent study revealed that Arl4c regulates
YAP/TAZ pathway that is well known to induce EMT and promotes
tumorigenesis in lung or colorectal cancer. Our results suggest that
Arl4c should be involved in PD via EMT induced by the YAP/TAZ pathway,
resulting in a poor prognostic marker in GC. Arl4c may be a novel
biomarker and a therapeutic target for PD in GC.

