Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Acquisition of chemoresistance in tumor cells requires crosstalk
between dying and remnant live tumor cells via HMGB1


Chemoresistance often develops during drug treatment in cancer patients
but its mechanism remains unclear. To understand acquisition of drug
resistance, we investigated whether tumor cells dying during drug
treatment might signal to neighboring live cells to program themselves
for survival in the drug-containing environment. The experimental design
was to identify a factor in the supernatants of docetaxel (DTX)-treated
human DU145 and PC3 prostate tumor cells that could cause live tumor
cells to resist apoptosis and cell death under docetaxel. We discovered
that dying cells release HMGB1 which can bind TLR4 or RAGE on live tumor
cells causing the induction of cytoplasmic Clusterin (CLU). We
demonstrated that CLU is a potent prosurvival protein that can trap Bax
from translocating to the mitochondria to cause caspade 3 activation and
subsequent apoptosis. Proof of this pathway came from the ability of
anti-HMGB1to prevent supernatants from dying cells to induce CLU in
newly-plated tumor cells. The receptors for HMGB1 were identified by use
of anti-TLR4 and anti-RAGE, which prevented recombinant HMGB1 or dying
cell supernatants from inducing CLU in newly-plated tumor cells, causing
them to subsequently succumb to DTX toxicity. Moreover, overexpression of
anti-sense CLU in tumor cells abrogated their ability to respond to
recombinant HMGB1 or dying cell supernatants to induce drug resistance.
Most importantly, standard chemotherapeutic agents including gemcitabine,
taxol, Ara-C, doxorubicin, cisplatin, etoposide and carboplatin, can
cause the release of HMGB1 from dying tumor cells, implicating this
crosstalk between dying and live tumor cells as a common pathway towards
multi-drug resistance.

