Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mutational and copy number profiling of cancer-related genes in 26
human tumor xenografts and their correlations with antitumor drug
sensitivities


Background: Tumor responses to antitumor drugs are variable, but
predicting these responses is important when selecting effective
chemotherapy treatments. Our aim was to identify variations or
alterations in gene copy number that influence cancer cells
susceptibilities to standard chemotherapeutic agents. Methods: Twenty-six
human cancer cell lines representing the five main tumor types were
subcutaneously implanted into nude mice and tested for sensitivity to
fluorinated pyrimidines (UFT, TS-1, 5-DFUR, and capecitabine), CDDP,
CPT-11, and paclitaxel. The cell lines included lung (AOI, LC-11, Lu-99,
LX-1, LC-6, Lu-134, Lu-130), colon (KM12C, KM12C/FU, HCT-15, COL-1,
CO-3), pancreas (PAN-3, PAN-4, PAN-12, H-48, MIAPaCa-2, BxPC-3), gastric
(SC-2, ST-40, 4-1ST, SC-4) and breast (MC-2, MX-1, MDA-MB-435SHM,
MDA-MD-231). Genomic DNA was prepared from frozen tumor tissues.
Mutations in 48 genes from the TruSeq Amplicon Cancer Panel were screened
using the MiSeq system (Illumina, San Diego, CA). Somatic copy number
alterations were analyzed by high-density SNP arrays (Affymetrix, Santa
Clara, CA). Results: Of the 225 amplicons (187 non-overlapping regions)
in the cancer panel, 86% achieved a minimum average sequencing depth of
1000X and the average coverage across all target regions was 5374X. In 26
tumors, sequencing detected 55 somatic mutations in 18 out of 48 cancer
related genes of high prognostic or therapeutic significance, such as
TP53, APC, PTEN, and SMAD4. Mutation frequencies across 26 xenografts
were 73.1% (TP53), 38.5% (KRAS), 15.4% (APC), 11.5% (SMAD4 and RET), 7.7%
(BRAF, GNAS, and PTEN), and 3.8% (CTNNB1, GNAQ, HNF1A, HRAS, IDH1, KIT,
NOTCH1, PIK3CA, SMO, and STK11). Tumor xenografts with TP53 mutations
were significantly less sensitive to CDDP and CPT-11 than wild-type cell
lines (PBackground: Tumor responses to antitumor drugs are variable, but
predicting these responses is important when selecting effective
chemotherapy treatments. Our aim was to identify variations or
alterations in gene copy number that influence cancer cells
susceptibilities to standard chemotherapeutic agents. Methods: Twenty-six
human cancer cell lines representing the five main tumor types were
subcutaneously implanted into nude mice and tested for sensitivity to
fluorinated pyrimidines (UFT, TS-1, 5-DFUR, and capecitabine), CDDP,
CPT-11, and paclitaxel. The cell lines included lung (AOI, LC-11, Lu-99,
LX-1, LC-6, Lu-134, Lu-130), colon (KM12C, KM12C/FU, HCT-15, COL-1,
CO-3), pancreas (PAN-3, PAN-4, PAN-12, H-48, MIAPaCa-2, BxPC-3), gastric
(SC-2, ST-40, 4-1ST, SC-4) and breast (MC-2, MX-1, MDA-MB-435SHM,
MDA-MD-231). Genomic DNA was prepared from frozen tumor tissues.
Mutations in 48 genes from the TruSeq Amplicon Cancer Panel were screened
using the MiSeq system (Illumina, San Diego, CA). Somatic copy number
alterations were analyzed by high-density SNP arrays (Affymetrix, Santa
Clara, CA). Results: Of the 225 amplicons (187 non-overlapping regions)
in the cancer panel, 86% achieved a minimum average sequencing depth of
1000X and the average coverage across all target regions was 5374X. In 26
tumors, sequencing detected 55 somatic mutations in 18 out of 48 cancer
related genes of high prognostic or therapeutic significance, such as
TP53, APC, PTEN, and SMAD4. Mutation frequencies across 26 xenografts
were 73.1% (TP53), 38.5% (KRAS), 15.4% (APC), 11.5% (SMAD4 and RET), 7.7%
(BRAF, GNAS, and PTEN), and 3.8% (CTNNB1, GNAQ, HNF1A, HRAS, IDH1, KIT,
NOTCH1, PIK3CA, SMO, and STK11). Tumor xenografts with TP53 mutations
were significantly less sensitive to CDDP and CPT-11 than wild-type cell
lines (P<0.05). The APC mutation conferred resistance to paclitaxel. Copy
number gain was observed at 23.1% (KRAS), 15.1% (EGFR), and 11.5% (JAK2
and CDK2NA). Copy number loss was observed at 30.8% (CDK2NA), 19.2%
(SMAD4), and 15.4% (PTEN). Cell lines with more copies of CDK2NA and JAK2
were more sensitive to CDDP, while cell lines with fewer copies of PTEN
were more sensitive to CDDP. Similarly, copy number gain of CDH1
conferred resistance to UFT, while copy number gain of KRAS sensitized
tumors to 5-DFUR. The copy number of 48 genes determined by the GeneChip
array moderately agreed with those estimated by local GC-content adjusted
coverage profiles in the sequencing analysis (average Pearson's
correlation coefficient = 0.66, 95%CI = 0.54-0.69). Conclusions:
Integrated analysis of mutational profiling and gene copy number may be
useful to elucidate candidate genes influencing susceptibility of cancer
cells to antitumor drugs.

