Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chromatin remodeling gene ARID1B is linked to familial lung cancer


Several papers have implicated mutations in the AT-rich interactive
domain containing protein 1B (ARID1B) in carcinoma formation in multiple
tissue types, including the lung. The ARID1B protein functions as part of
SWI/SNF, a multi-subunit chromatin remodeling complex that repositions
nucleosomes and may act as a tumor suppressor in cancer. ARID1B is
located in a region in 6q that was previously shown to have strong
evidence of linkage with lung cancer risk. As it is one of the more
promising candidates within the target region, this study presents the
viability of ARID1B as a candidate gene for familial lung cancer. Here,
we chose individuals from families in our previous linkage study that
showed the strongest linkage signal on 6q. 75 individuals from 9 families
were sequenced for 37Mb of chromosome 6 from 130Mb to 167Mb using
Illumina technology and a custom Agilent kit. Genotypes were imported
into GoldenHelix SVS 7 for quality control and dropped if read depth
Several papers have implicated mutations in the AT-rich interactive
domain containing protein 1B (ARID1B) in carcinoma formation in multiple
tissue types, including the lung. The ARID1B protein functions as part of
SWI/SNF, a multi-subunit chromatin remodeling complex that repositions
nucleosomes and may act as a tumor suppressor in cancer. ARID1B is
located in a region in 6q that was previously shown to have strong
evidence of linkage with lung cancer risk. As it is one of the more
promising candidates within the target region, this study presents the
viability of ARID1B as a candidate gene for familial lung cancer. Here,
we chose individuals from families in our previous linkage study that
showed the strongest linkage signal on 6q. 75 individuals from 9 families
were sequenced for 37Mb of chromosome 6 from 130Mb to 167Mb using
Illumina technology and a custom Agilent kit. Genotypes were imported
into GoldenHelix SVS 7 for quality control and dropped if read depth <
10, quality score Several papers have implicated mutations in the AT-rich
interactive domain containing protein 1B (ARID1B) in carcinoma formation
in multiple tissue types, including the lung. The ARID1B protein
functions as part of SWI/SNF, a multi-subunit chromatin remodeling
complex that repositions nucleosomes and may act as a tumor suppressor in
cancer. ARID1B is located in a region in 6q that was previously shown to
have strong evidence of linkage with lung cancer risk. As it is one of
the more promising candidates within the target region, this study
presents the viability of ARID1B as a candidate gene for familial lung
cancer. Here, we chose individuals from families in our previous linkage
study that showed the strongest linkage signal on 6q. 75 individuals from
9 families were sequenced for 37Mb of chromosome 6 from 130Mb to 167Mb
using Illumina technology and a custom Agilent kit. Genotypes were
imported into GoldenHelix SVS 7 for quality control and dropped if read
depth < 10, quality score < 10 or a quality score to read depth ratio 0.7
were found in the intergenic region between these two genes. Two are
transcription factor binding sites; two are conserved genomic elements.
We also observed two linked intronic variants of ARID1B in this family;
an enhancer (LOD = 0.89) and a transcribed region (LOD = 0.73). Two other
families (47 and 59) displayed evidence of linkage in ARID1B. Here, the
interest is not the value of the LOD scores (top scores were 0.64 and
0.54), but the centering of the linked haplotype around the gene. Family
47 has 60 variants with LODs between 0.64 and 0.61; 45 located within
ARID1B or known regulatory regions. Family 59 has 61 variants with LODs
between 0.54 and 0.51; 29 located within ARID1B or known regulatory
regions The variants appear to be spread evenly throughout ARID1B,
suggesting the presence of linked haplotypes. Analyses are currently
underway to reconstruct possible haplotypes in these families. The
results of this study show that variants in the ARID1B gene at least
partially account for the linkage signal on 6q in three of the nine most
strongly linked families in our cohort and thus we believe that ARID1B is
a plausible candidate gene for further studies involving familial lung
cancer. Replication studies using 27 new extended families are currently
underway to confirm this initial result.

