Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High-throughput,purification-free, multiplexed profiling of
circulating miRNA for discovery,validation, and diagnostics


To address the needs for circulating miRNA biomarker validation, we
developed the Multiplexed Circulating microRNA assay. This assay enables
the detection of up to 68 microRNA targets per sample in 96-well format
with readout on standard flow cytometers and analysis with an included
bioinformatics software package. The Circulating microRNA assay combines
particle-based multiplexing, using patented Firefly hydrogel particles,
with single-step RT-PCR signal amplification using universal primers.
Thus, the Circulating microRNA assay leverages PCR sensitivity while
eliminating the need for separate reverse transcription reactions and
mitigating amplification biases introduced by target-specific qPCR.
Furthermore, the ability to multiplex targets in each well eliminates the
need to split valuable samples into multiple reactions. Results from the
Circulating microRNA assay are displayed and interpreted using our
included Firefly Analysis Workbench, which allows visualization,
normalization, and export of experimental data with only a few mouse
clicks. To aid discovery and validation of biomarkers, we have generated
fixed panels for Oncology, Cardiology, Neurology, Immunology, and Liver
Toxicology. These carefully curated panels include hemolysis markers to
assess sample quality, as well as critical normalization factors. Here we
present the data from several studies investigating circulating and tumor
microRNA profiles using the Firefly Circulating microRNA Assay Fixed
Panels.Together, this novel combination of bioinformatics tools and
multiplexed, high-sensitivity assays enables rapid discovery and
validation of microRNA biomarker signatures from fluid specimens.

