Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovery of potent and selective inhibitors of ERK1/2 with a
unique mechanism of action


Activation of the RAS/MAPK pathway occurs via a cascade of protein
phosphorylation events which culminate in the phosphorylation &
activation of ERK 1/2. Aberrant activation of this pathway has been
demonstrated in several human tumor types. Inhibitors of this pathway in
clinical development target upstream kinases, BRAF or MEK. Only a few ERK
1/2 has been reported. The goal of the ERK program was to develop a
targeted therapy that is guided by a clear patient selection / responder
identification plan based on BRAF and K/NRAS mutations.Utilizing an
affinity based high-throughput screening strategy (ALIS), we discover a
novel class of small molecule ERK 1/2 inhibitors. Optimization of this
chemical series led to the discovery of SCH 772984, which is highly
selective ERK1/2 inhibitor, inhibiting cell proliferation selectively in
tumor cell lines with an activated MAPK pathway and causes significant
tumor regression in vivo in BRAF & RAS mutant xenograft models. Based on
insights gained through crystallographic analysis, SCH 772984 and related
compounds have a unique ERK binding mode which results in a novel dual
mechanism of inhibition, blocking ERK phosphorylation by MEK as well as
inhibiting ERK kinase activity. This novel mechanism enables the use of
ERK phosphorylation as a target engagement biomarker. Biological
differences between pathway inhibition at the level or ERK vs. inhibition
of upstream kinases are being examined. The SAR and crystal structures of
this series ERK inhibitors will be reported.

