Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Conserved region 2 of Human Papilloma Virus 18 protein E7 is
required for E7 binding to centromere protein C


The molecular genetics of cervical cancer have not been thoroughly
elucidated, despite the fact that cervical cancer is responsible for the
deaths of over 250,000 women annually worldwide. Infection with human
papillomaviruses (HPVs) is linked to the pathogenesis of a variety of
human diseases, including genital warts, laryngeal papillomas, and most
notably, cervical cancer. Recently HPV infection was reported to be
associated with head and neck cancers.High-risk human papillomaviruses
(HPVs) are etiologically linked to human cervical and oral cancers. HPV
infection leads to aneuploidy, a numerical chromosomal aberration caused
by dysregulation of chromosomal segregation. We found that high-risk
HPV18 and HPV58 E7 proteins bind to centromere protein C (CENP-C), a
component of the kinetochore that is essential for proper chromosomal
segregation. Low-risk HPV4, HPV6, and HPV11 E7s do not bind to CENP-C.
The PxDLLCxE sequence in conserved region 2 (CR2) of HPV18 E7 is required
for E7 binding to CENP-C. Our results indicate that differences in the
ability of high- and low-risk HPV E7s to bind to CENP-C reflect the
different oncogenic potentials of high- and low-risk type HPVs.We
demonstrated that the E7 proteins from low-risk HPVs do not bind to
CENP-C, and that the PxDLLCxE sequence in conserved region 2 of the HPV18
E7 protein is required for E7 binding to CENP-C. CENP-C is a component of
the inner kinetochore, and as such, it plays an essential role in proper
chromosome segregation, mitotic checkpoint function, and kinetochore
assembly. Therefore, we hypothesize that differences in the capability of
various E7s from low- and high-risk type HPVs to bind to CENP-C reflect
the different oncogenic potential of high- and low-risk type HPVs.

