Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel anti-PDL1 x anti-VEGFR2 bispecific antibody for enhanced
antitumor immunity


The importance of VEGF/VEGFR2 signaling in cancer growth and metastasis
has been clearly highlighted by the therapeutic benefits of bevacizumab
(Avastin), a humanized antibody to VEGF, and Cyramza, a fully human
antibody to VEGFR2, in multiple cancer treatment modalities. Recently,
immune checkpoint antagonistic antibodies to PD1 and PDL1 have shown some
success in a variety of clinical settings across multiple cancer types.
The overall clinical efficacy of these individual antibody therapies has
been, however, rather limited and, only evident in a fraction of
patients. To this end, combinations of antibodies against both
VEGF/VEGFR2 and PD1/PDL1 may represent promising approaches to further
enhance the antitumor efficacy of individual antibody therapies. In this
study, we engineered a bispecific anti-PDL1 x anti-VEGFR2 antibody using
two fully human antibodies derived from antibody phage display libraries.
In this bispecific format, a high affinity single chain antibody to PDL1
was genetically fused to the C-terminus of the heavy chain of a
conventional IgG antibody against VEGFR2. The bispecific antibody was
efficiently expressed in mammalian cells and could be purified to
homogeneity via single step affinity chromatography. The bispecific
antibody retained the binding activity of its parental antibodies to PDL1
and VEGFR2, and strongly blocked both VEGF/VEGFR2 and PDL1/PD1
interaction. Further, the bispecific antibody inhibited VEGF-stimulated
VEGFR2 phosphorylation and proliferation of endothelial cells, and
promoted proliferation of human T cells and secretion of cytokine such as
IL2 and INF. The bispecific antibody is currently being evaluated in vivo
in relevant animal models.

