Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Patient-derived tumor microenvironment models uncover
non-autonomous TKI resistance mechanisms in NSCLC


Background: Tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKI) have yielded great responses
in non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) with EGFR mutations and ALK
translocations, however these and other targeted therapies are limited by
intrinsic and acquired drug resistance. Previous studies looking into
relapsed samples largely expanded our understanding of tumor autonomous
resistance mechanisms. In this study, we aimed to decipher the
non-autonomous mechanisms in vitro by recapitulating the in vivo tumor
microenvironment from patient-derived models.Method: Cancer-associated
fibroblast cells are isolated directly from EGFR mutant and ALK
translocated NSCLC biopsies. Over 20 patient-derived fibroblast (PDF)
models have been established for studying the tumor microenvironment's
effect on TKI response.Result: We found that many, but not all, PDF cells
exert significant resistance to TKIs. Furthermore, there is considerable
variability in the degree and secreted factor / mechanism by which they
are protecting the tumor cells. These variations are further correlated
with patient in vivo response.Conclusion: Together, our results indicate
that PDFs are clinically relevant models for deciphering non-autonomous
resistance mechanisms, that they are heterogeneous in protecting cancer
cells from TKI treatment, and that the resistance mediated by PDFs can be
overcome by specific therapeutic combinations.

