Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PGE2/HuR/CEBPD axis in macrophages contributes to
immunosuppression and inhibits phagocytosisof nasopharyngeal carcinoma


The association of inflammation and cancer progression via modulation of
phagocytosis and suppression of adaptive immunity by tumor-associated
macrophages (TAM) to promote tumorigenesis has been implicated in a
number of recent studies. To date, the underlying mechanisms involving
the interactions of these two cellular processes remain elusive,
particularly in the involvement of posttranscriptional regulation. In
this study, we demonstrate that prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) activates
transcription factor CCAAT/enhancer binding protein delta (CEBPD) in
macrophages by inducing nucleocytoplasmic shuttling of RNA binding
protein Hu antigen R (HuR), which plays a direct role in stabilizing
CEBPD mRNA in macrophages. Increase of CEBPD resulted in elevated
expression of IL-10, a well-studied immunosuppressor, and PTX3, which
contribute to suppression of phagocytosis of cancer cells by macrophages.
In addition, the conditioned medium of CEBPD-transfected macrophages
showed an immunosuppressive effect to attenuate phagocytosis of cancer
cells by macrophages, suggesting an autocrine mode of regulation.
Immunohistochemistry studies demonstrated that the cytosolic level of HuR
protein correlates with increased CEBPD in TAM and malignant
nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC). Collectively, these results provide new
evidences that the inflammatory PGE2/HuR/CEBPD axis in macrophages plays
protumor roles in controlling immunosuppression and attenuating
phagocytosis of cancer cells by macrophages.

