Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Associations of dietary inflammation scores with incident,
sporadic adenoma


It is now well-accepted that inflammation is causal in colorectal
carcinogenesis and that reducing inflammation reduces risk for colorectal
neoplasms. The ability to characterize specific dietary components as
having pro- or anti-inflammatory effects is a promising area of cancer
prevention. To assess associations of diet with inflammation and
diet-associated inflammation with cancer risk, we created a new
food-based inflammation (FBI) score based on associations of whole food
dietary components (processed meats, red meat, white meat, fish, nuts,
coffee, tea, high- and low-fat dairy products, refined and whole grains,
and 10 botanical categories) with a panel of biomarkers of inflammation
(plasma C-reactive protein [CRP] and interleukins-6, -8, and -10) among
590 chronic disease diagnosis-free participants (47% male, 53% female,
57% white, 43% black) in the REasons for Geographic and Racial
Differences in Stroke (REGARDS) cohort study. A previously reported
Dietary Inflammation Index (DII) is a primarily nutrient-based score
developed for the same purposes. We investigated associations of our new
FBI score, a DII that includes contributions from foods and nutritional
supplements (Food + Supplements DII), and a DII that includes
contributions only from foods (Food-only DII) with incident, sporadic
adenoma in a case-control study (CPRU; n = 2,195) conducted in the Twin
Cities area of Minnesota from 1990 - 1994. Diet was assessed using a
Willett food frequency questionnaire. Associations of the scores with
adenoma were estimated using unconditional logistic regression models
adjusted for age, sex, hormone replacement therapy use, family history of
colorectal cancer, regular non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID)
use, total energy intake, smoking, physical activity level, alcohol
consumption, and body mass index (BMI). The multivariable-adjusted odds
ratios (OR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) for those in the highest
relative to those in the lowest score quartiles were 1.28 (95% CI 0.95,
1.72) for the FBI, 1.23 (95% CI 0.82, 1.85) for the Food + Supplements
DII, and 1.14 (95% CI 0.85, 1.53) for the Foods-only DII. These results
suggest that 1) a more pro-inflammatory diet may be associated with
higher risk of colorectal adenoma, and 2) support further development and
investigation of a food-based inflammation score for investigating
associations of diet-related contributions to systemic inflammation with
colorectal and other cancers and chronic diseases.

