Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Myc vs. Akt therapy in RapidCap, a GEM model for metastatic
prostate cancer


We describe our efforts to determine the effect of MYC and PI3K
inhibition in a genetically engineered mouse model of nave and
castration-resistant metastatic prostate cancer. Metastasis is a major
driver of mortality and morbidity in prostate cancer, the most common
cancer type in men and the second leading cause of cancer-related deaths
in the western world. To recapitulate the metastatic process in
genetically engineered mice, we have developed the RapidCaP system, which
uses prostate-directed viral infection to trigger focal loss of Pten and
Trp53. Using luminescence and fluorescence, the RapidCaP system allows us
to track disease progression in real-time and isolate metastases in
distant tissues. This system provides a powerful platform for the
identification and validation of candidate driver genes and for the
efficient testing of novel therapeutics. Using this system, we have
recently identified Myc as a critical, spontaneously activated driver in
Pten-negative metastatic prostate cancer. Preliminary trials indicate
that the Myc-suppressing Brd4 inhibitor JQ1 is ineffective towards
primary disease, but induces metastatic regression. This specificity
correlates with a switch from AKT-driven primary disease to MYC-driven
metastatic disease. Our current efforts seek to determine how, when and
why targeting of Myc using JQ1 and the PI 3-Kinase pathway using
NVP-BKM120 can be best used to treat nave and castration-resistant
metastatic prostate cancer. In addition, we are examining changes to the
transcriptome and epigenetic alterations that characterize Pten-negative
metastatic prostate cancer, with the goal of understanding the mechanisms
of progression toward a metastatic state and establishing new therapeutic
targets.

