Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: 22(S)-Hydroxycholesterol, an antagonist of LXR, inhibits breast
cancer cell migration


The Liver X Receptor (LXR) is a well-established ligand-regulated
transcription factor involved in cholesterol homeostasis, lipid
metabolism, and inflammation. Recent studies have reported a strong
antiproliferative effect of LXRs in multiple types of cancer including
prostate, colon, lung, and breast cancer. However, little is known about
its association with cancer metastasis. Therefore we aimed to investigate
the potential of LXR ligands in the context of breast cancer cell
migration, and its underlying molecular mechanism. We first performed
2D-migration assay in 4T1 breast cancer cells. Treatment of an LXR
antagonist significantly reduced the rate of 4T1 cell migration. However,
LXR agonists such as T0901317, GW3965 did not have much effect. Next, we
investigated the molecular mechanism of cell migration. Since the degree
of invasion and metastasis of breast carcinoma is well correlated with
elevated expression of metastasis-associated protein 1 (MTA1), we
examined whether MTA1 expression could be regulated by LXR ligands.
Interestingly, when LXR agonists were treated, increased protein
expression of MTA1 and its downstream target protein HIF-1 was observed
in MCF7, MDA-MB-231, and 4T1-Luc breast cancer cell lines. Transient
expression of LXR demonstrated the same results as well. Furthermore, the
treat of 22(S)-HC down-regulated MTA1 and HIF-1 protein expressions.
Together, our findings indicate that LXR influences migratory pattern of
breast cancer cells, which may affect metastatic property of breast
cancer cells via LXR-dependent regulation of MTA1 and HIF-1 expression.

