Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Single nucleotide polymorphisms in ARHGAP17 are associated with
pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia in 2401 autopsied elderly patients


Background: Aging, obesity, smoking, alcohol consumption, diabetes, and
pancreatitis have been reported to be the risk factors for pancreatic
cancer. There is much evidence showing that single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs), especially those in BCAR1, PDX1, ZNRF3, or TERT,
influence one's predisposition to pancreatic cancers and survival.
However, the association between SNP and pancreatic precancerous lesions
is not yet clarified. In the present study, we clarified the
clinicopathological features of precancerous lesions of the pancreas by
examining autopsied elderly cases. Methods: We analyzed serial autopsy
cases (men, 1326; women, 1075; mean age, 80.6) of pancreatic
intraepithelial neoplasia (PanIN) and performed a comparative analysis
based on the sex, age, and body mass index (BMI) of the patients. The
SNPs were analyzed using HumanExome BeadChip. Results: The occurrence of
PanIN increased with advanced age. Approximately, 60% of the elderly
patients showed low-grade PanIN. The autopsy cases showed that the
occurrence of low-grade PanIN was positively correlated with the female
sex, advanced age, and increase in BMI. The SNPs of the ARHGAP17 gene,
p.G782D (rs28365822) and rs1106576, were risk factors for PanIN (Table,
PBackground: Aging, obesity, smoking, alcohol consumption, diabetes, and
pancreatitis have been reported to be the risk factors for pancreatic
cancer. There is much evidence showing that single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs), especially those in BCAR1, PDX1, ZNRF3, or TERT,
influence one's predisposition to pancreatic cancers and survival.
However, the association between SNP and pancreatic precancerous lesions
is not yet clarified. In the present study, we clarified the
clinicopathological features of precancerous lesions of the pancreas by
examining autopsied elderly cases. Methods: We analyzed serial autopsy
cases (men, 1326; women, 1075; mean age, 80.6) of pancreatic
intraepithelial neoplasia (PanIN) and performed a comparative analysis
based on the sex, age, and body mass index (BMI) of the patients. The
SNPs were analyzed using HumanExome BeadChip. Results: The occurrence of
PanIN increased with advanced age. Approximately, 60% of the elderly
patients showed low-grade PanIN. The autopsy cases showed that the
occurrence of low-grade PanIN was positively correlated with the female
sex, advanced age, and increase in BMI. The SNPs of the ARHGAP17 gene,
p.G782D (rs28365822) and rs1106576, were risk factors for PanIN (Table,
P<0.0001, *adjusted with age and gender). Discussion: A high incidence of
low-grade PanIN in the elderly might be related to the increased risk of
pancreatic cancer in the elderly. Further studies are needed to clarify
the role of SNPs of ARHGAP17 in the carcinogenesis of pancreatic cancer.
Association between SNPs in ARHGAP17 and pancreatic intraepithelial
neoplasias

