Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epithelial-mesenchymal transition does not require transcriptional
repression of the epithelial program in vivo


Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), the process by which an
epithelial cell loses its adhesion to neighboring cells and acquires a
motile, fibroblast-like phenotype, is critical for many aspects of
embryogenesis and has been strongly implicated in tumor cell invasion and
metastasis. EMT is thought to be primarily regulated at the
transcriptional level through repression of epithelial genes by
transcription factors such as Snail, Zeb and Twist. To date, the
mechanisms driving EMT have been parsed out almost exclusively in vitro
under pre-defined conditions (ie, using TGF as an EMT inducer), but it
remains to be seen whether the machinery that regulates in vitro EMT is
physiologically relevant. Using a lineage labeled mouse model of
pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC), we isolated tumor cells that
have spontaneously undergone EMT to interrogate the molecular mechanisms
driving this process in vivo. By comparing the transcriptomes of
epithelial (E-cadherin+) and mesenchymal (E-cadherin-) tumor cells, we
found that for a majority of PDAC tumors, EMT does not require
transcriptional repression of the epithelial program. These cells were
fully capable of upregulating a mesenchymal program, as evidenced by the
increased expression of collagens, SPARC, MMP2, PDPN, and PRRX1; however,
despite the loss of E-cadherin protein, we detected no change in
transcript levels of E-cadherin or other epithelial genes after EMT. Our
results suggest that in vivo, cells that undergo EMT retain epithelial
gene transcription, which may confer the ability to rapidly oscillate
between epithelial and mesenchymal states.

