Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High-throughput mutational analysis in cell-free DNA by targeted
next-generation sequencing


Circulating cell-free DNA (cfDNA) in plasma offers a non-invasive
approach to monitor tumor molecular profiling in real-time at multiple
time-points, detection of emerging genomic alterations associated with
drug resistance and clarifying cancer prognosis and diagnosis of cancer
recurrence or progression. We developed a robust, multiplexed and
PCR-based targeted next-generation sequencing approach to detect
actionable mutations in cfDNA with low DNA input (1-5 ng). We employed
the latest Ion TorrentTM S5/XL bench-top sequencer with Ion ChefTM
Automation System and successfully automated the entire 2-day workflow
from libraries preparation to semi-conducting chip sequencing. The
hands-on time has been reduced to only 30 min.We will present data
showing validation of this NGS platform using commercially available DNA
control, archival FFPE tissue and cfDNA matched samples and demonstrate
robust sensitivity and specificity by using the off-the-shelf Ion
AmpliSeq Cancer Hotspot Panel v2 that covers 50 oncogenes. We also
compared this approach to other orthogonal technologies, including
quantitative PCR (qPCR) and droplet digital PCR (ddPCR) and achieved 100%
concordance across these platforms. NGS can detect mutations down to 1%
allelic frequency with 100% sensitivity and specificity.This robust and
automated NGS platform is being routinely used in our lab to analyze
cell-free DNA samples from multiple clinical trials. These efforts enable
the development of a non-invasive method to overcome existing challenges
to provide molecular understanding of patient's tumor evolution in real
time, and aid in the development of personalized therapies for cancer
patients.

