Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tissue-specific blockage of DNA damage responses sensitizes breast
cancer chemotherapy


Systemic chemotherapy is not effective at eradicating metastatic breast
cancer, and approaches to improve the outcomes for these patients are
urgently needed. The ideal method to enhance chemotherapy would involve
targeting a protein that is differentially or exclusively expressed in
cancer compared to normal tissue; however, such targets are rare. We
sought to target the actively dividing breast cancer cells in the distant
metastatic organs with tumor tissue-specific delivery of therapeutic
siRNA that suppresses the expression of key DNA damage response (DDR)
genes such as CHK1 and RAD51 in order to sensitize chemotherapy.
Knockdown of CHK1 and RAD51 expression by the gene-specific siRNA oligos
was confirmed in vitro in MDA-MB-231 human breast cancer cells. Treatment
of nude mice bearing lung metastatic MDA-MB-231 tumors with
tumor-enriched nanoparticle-packaged CHK1 or RAD5 siRNA did not
significantly suppress tumor growth. Single agent treatment with biweekly
6 mg/kg doxorubicin treatment did not slow down growth of the metastatic
tumors either. In contrast, combination treatment with 6 mg/kg
doxorubicin and 15 g CHK1 or RAD51 siRNA in nanoparticles dramatically
inhibited tumor growth and extended animal survival. Our result supports
the development of tumor tissue-enriched siRNA therapeutics targeting the
DDR pathways to sensitize breast cancer therapy.

