Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SCAP links glucose to lipids for tumor growth


Increased glucose consumption and elevated lipogenesis are co-occurred in
malignancies. But the molecular mechanism of the link between glucose and
lipid metabolism remains elusive. Our previous studies have uncovered
that sterol regulatory element-binding protein (SREBP-1), an endoplasmic
reticulum-bound transcription factor with a central role in lipid
metabolism, is highly upregulated in glioblastoma (GBM), the most deadly
brain tumor. In the current study, we found that SREBP-cleavage
activating protein (SCAP), a key player regulating SREBP trafficking from
ER to the Golgi and subsequent SREBP activation, links oncogenic
signaling and glucose consumption to lipid metabolism. Our data showed
that glucose is a critical activator for SREBP function via
N-glycosylation of SCAP. N-glycosylation is a key signal to promote
SCAP/SREBP complex move from ER to the Golgi and SREBP activation.
Moreover, we found that EGFR/PI3K/Akt signaling activates SREBP-1 via
upregulation of SCAP N-glycosylation and its protein levels through
enhancing glucose uptake. Genetically silencing SCAP or mutation of the
N-glycosylation sites on SCAP downregulates SREBP-1 activity and impairs
GBM tumor growth. Taken together, our study revealed that glucose is a
critical activator for SREBP-1 function and lipid metabolism, and SCAP
integrates oncogenic signaling and fuel availability to SREBP-1-mediated
lipogenesis for tumor growth. Our study also demonstrated that targeting
SCAP N-glycosylation represents a promising therapeutic strategy to treat
malignancies.

