Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sequential tracking of PD-L1 expression and RAD50 induction in
CTCs and circulating stromal cells of lung cancer patients during
treatment with radiotherapy


Background: PD-L1 expression can be induced by radiotherapy (RT) and may
be an immune escape mechanism after RT, and has the potential to predict
for responsiveness to immune checkpoint blockade immunotherapy. However,
repetitive biopsies for monitoring PD-L1 expression in tumor and/or
stroma are not feasible. Sequential assessment of PD-L1 expression on
cancer associated circulating cells during treatment may be a way to
measure the efficacy of combining RT and immunotherapy. RAD50 is a DNA
repair gene that can be used in tracking tumor cell response to
radiation. We therefore evaluated PD-L1 expression and RAD50 induction in
CTCs and Cancer Associated Macrophage-Like Cells (CAMLs) in lung cancer
patients (pts) before and during RT to track expression changes of these
markers.Methods: Twenty-nine pts with stage I-IV lung cancer were
included in this prospective pilot study. Four pts received radiation
therapy for stage I disease and 25 other pts received chemoradiation for
stage II-IV disease. A baseline blood sample (7.5 ml) was drawn prior to
the start of RT (T0), and a second blood sample was drawn at a treatment
visit during RT (T1) for a total of 58 samples. Blood was processed using
CellSieve microfiltration (Creatv MicroTech), stained for cytokeratin 8,
18 & 19 and CD45, and imaged. Using the QUASR (Quench, Underivatize,
Amine-Strip and Restain) technique to remove fluoresce signal, all cells
were restained for RAD50-AlexaFluor550 and PD-L1-AlexaFluor 488, along
with DAPI nuclear stain. The RAD50 foci were quantified within nuclear
regions and PD-L1 pixel intensity measured and grouped into 4 IHC groups:
0-negative (pixel average 0-215), 1-low (pixel average 216-300), 2-medium
(pixel average 301-750), and 3-high (pixel average 751+).Results: There
was at least one cytokeratin positive cell (i.e. CTC or CAMLs) found in
all but 2 samples (97%). CTCs were found in 69% of T0 and 72% of T1
samples, and CAMLs in 79% of T0 and 97% of T1 samples. PD-L1 expression
ranged from 34-2552 pixel intensity, with an average of 285 at T0 and 525
at T1 (p = 0.07). Interestingly, 9 pts had no PD-L1 expression at T0 but
an increase to 2 to 3+ at T1, 12 pts with low/no PD-L1 expression
remained low at T1, and 8 pts had high PD-L1 expression that remained
high or decreased at T1. RAD50 foci ranged from 0-16 per cell, with an
average of 0.56 at T0 that increased to 4.68 at T1 (pBackground: PD-L1
expression can be induced by radiotherapy (RT) and may be an immune
escape mechanism after RT, and has the potential to predict for
responsiveness to immune checkpoint blockade immunotherapy. However,
repetitive biopsies for monitoring PD-L1 expression in tumor and/or
stroma are not feasible. Sequential assessment of PD-L1 expression on
cancer associated circulating cells during treatment may be a way to
measure the efficacy of combining RT and immunotherapy. RAD50 is a DNA
repair gene that can be used in tracking tumor cell response to
radiation. We therefore evaluated PD-L1 expression and RAD50 induction in
CTCs and Cancer Associated Macrophage-Like Cells (CAMLs) in lung cancer
patients (pts) before and during RT to track expression changes of these
markers.Methods: Twenty-nine pts with stage I-IV lung cancer were
included in this prospective pilot study. Four pts received radiation
therapy for stage I disease and 25 other pts received chemoradiation for
stage II-IV disease. A baseline blood sample (7.5 ml) was drawn prior to
the start of RT (T0), and a second blood sample was drawn at a treatment
visit during RT (T1) for a total of 58 samples. Blood was processed using
CellSieve microfiltration (Creatv MicroTech), stained for cytokeratin 8,
18 & 19 and CD45, and imaged. Using the QUASR (Quench, Underivatize,
Amine-Strip and Restain) technique to remove fluoresce signal, all cells
were restained for RAD50-AlexaFluor550 and PD-L1-AlexaFluor 488, along
with DAPI nuclear stain. The RAD50 foci were quantified within nuclear
regions and PD-L1 pixel intensity measured and grouped into 4 IHC groups:
0-negative (pixel average 0-215), 1-low (pixel average 216-300), 2-medium
(pixel average 301-750), and 3-high (pixel average 751+).Results: There
was at least one cytokeratin positive cell (i.e. CTC or CAMLs) found in
all but 2 samples (97%). CTCs were found in 69% of T0 and 72% of T1
samples, and CAMLs in 79% of T0 and 97% of T1 samples. PD-L1 expression
ranged from 34-2552 pixel intensity, with an average of 285 at T0 and 525
at T1 (p = 0.07). Interestingly, 9 pts had no PD-L1 expression at T0 but
an increase to 2 to 3+ at T1, 12 pts with low/no PD-L1 expression
remained low at T1, and 8 pts had high PD-L1 expression that remained
high or decreased at T1. RAD50 foci ranged from 0-16 per cell, with an
average of 0.56 at T0 that increased to 4.68 at T1 (p<0.001) during
radiotherapy. There was no correlation between RAD50 induction and PD-L1
expression.Conclusions PD-L1 expression and RAD 50 foci were quantifiable
in both CTCs and CAMLs, and a correlative response to radiotherapy +/-
chemotherapy was quantified. This data suggests that sequential tracking
of CTCs and immune-related cells from the primary lung tumor is feasible
using microfiltration and may potentially serve as a predictive biomarker
for cancer therapy sensitivity.

