Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mapping lysine acetyltransferase-metabolite interactions in
complex proteomes: a window into the metabolic regulation of epigenetic
signaling


Substantial evidence indicates that chromatin modifiers are sensitive to
changes in the cellular concentration of metabolites and cofactors. These
findings potentially connect metabolism and gene expression, and have
major implications for the regulation of cell signaling in cancer.
However, missing from many of these studies has been the direct
identification of the specific chromatin modifiers that sense change in
metabolic state. Their identification is critical to our basic
understanding of how metabolism regulates epigenetically-driven
phenotypes, and may inform novel strategies to combat pathologies
characterized by aberrant metabolism, including cancer. Towards this
goal, here we report a chemical proteomic strategy to globally map
chromatin modifier-metabolite interactions in complex proteomes. Our
initial efforts have focused on lysine acetyltransferases (KATs), a
central class of chromatin modifiers responsible for histone acetylation.
First, we validate an optimized chemical proteomic method and demonstrate
its ability to globally profile members of the KAT enzyme superfamily at
endogenous expression levels. Then we apply this approach to rapidly
profile KAT-ligand interactions, and identify novel candidate metabolic
regulators of protein acetylation, including acyl-CoAs cofactors and
metabolites, as well as new metabolically-sensitive KAT enzymes. By
defining the molecular interactions linking metabolism and gene
expression, these studies have the potential to illuminate our
understanding of biology and inspire new therapeutic strategies targeting
acetylation in disease.

