Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Overcoming mTOR resistance mutations with a new generation mTOR
inhibitor


First generation mTOR inhibitors (rapalogs) have modest activity in some
tumors. We sought to delineate the likely resistance mechanisms to
existing mTOR inhibitors as a guide for next generation therapies. We
identified FRB domain and kinase domain mutations as causing
acquired-resistance to rapamycin and mTOR kinase inhibitor
respectively.Resistance to rapamycin was due to loss of binding of the
FKBP12-rapamycin complex to the FRB domain of mTOR mutant protein.
Resistance to the mTOR kinase inhibitor was not due to a gatekeeper
mutation but rather to an increase in the intrinsic kinase activity of
the mTOR kinase domain mutant. These and similar mutations have also been
identified in tumors from untreated patients. These findings suggest that
these mutations are gain of function mutants but also that tumors with
these activating mutations will be intrinsically resistant to second
generation mTOR kinase inhibitors.We have designed a new class of mTOR
inhibitor, RapaLink-1, that takes advantage of the juxtaposition of two
drug binding pockets to create a bivalent interaction. This compound
potently inhibits mTOR activation in cells with mTOR wild-type and
overcomes resistance to existing first and second generation inhibitors.
Moreover, intermittent dosing of RapaLink-1 effectively suppresses
mTOR-dependent tumor growth in vivo. Thus, such third generation mTOR
inhibitors could be useful for treating tumors with activating mutations
of mTOR and for tumors with acquired-resistance to current mTOR
inhibitors.[N.R. and K.S. contributed equally to this work.]

