Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrated analysis of ibrutinib resistance in chronic lymphocytic
leukemia


BACKGROUND: Ibrutinib covalently binds to Bruton's tyrosine kinase,
inhibits B-cell receptor signaling, and is active in chronic lymphocytic
leukemia (CLL). Progressive disease (PD) on ibrutinib has been reported
due to histologic transformation or mutations of BTK or PLCG2. Here we
report integrated analysis of the clinical and molecular characteristics
of CLL pts who progressed on ibrutinib (PD group).METHODS: Under a phase
II investigator-initiated trial (ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT01500733) 84 CLL
pts with TP53 aberration (deletion 17p or TP53 mutation) or age 65 were
treated with ibrutinib 420mg daily. Samples from the PD group were tested
for mutations of BTK and PLCG2 by a high-sensitivity assay using branched
and locked nucleic acids. In pts with mutations at PD, stored samples
from earlier time-points were also sequenced.RESULTS: 13 (15.5%) of 84
pts progressed at a median follow up of 24 months. 3 of 4 early PDs (12
months) were due to histologic transformation, while 8 of 9 late PDs
(median 34.9 months) were due to CLL. PFS was inferior in subgroups with
TP53 aberration, unmutated IGHV, advanced Rai stage, high -2
microglobulin and relapsed/refractory disease (log-rank p0.05). At PD,
tumor burden increased by 2 to 32-fold from nadir based on PB flow
cytometry.CONCLUSION: Most pts with progressive CLL on ibrutinib carry
BTK and/or PLCG2 mutations. Concurrent mutations of BTK and PLCG2 are
common at progression, and either or both of these mutations can be
acquired many months before clinical progression. In cases with
detectable mutations but without clinical progression, pts can benefit
from prolonged treatment with ibrutinib until clinical progression
occurs. Upon clinical progression with CLL, pts can still show responses
to alternative targeted agents.

