Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oncogenic BRAF and concomitant RAS or PTEN/PI3K mutations
determine together the response to RAS/RAF/PI3K signaling network
inhibition


Background: BRAF is key component in the growth factor signaling cascade
that is often impaired in tumors. Although oncogenic BRAF mutation is
considered to be the driver mutation in a variety of malignancies, the
response to RAS/RAF/PI3K signaling network inhibition is not uniform
among BRAF mutant tumors. Accordingly, we investigated the in vitro
effect of RAS/RAF/PI3K signaling network inhibitors (panRAF, mutant BRAF
specific, MEK and PI3K/mTOR inhibitors) in relation with BRAF concomitant
RAS or PTEN/PI3K mutations in a panel of human cancer cell lines.Methods:
Altogether 12 human cancer cell lines were investigated in vitro to
assess the effect of inhibitors acting at the different levels of the
RAS/RAF signaling network. The seven melanoma, two colon, two lung and
one breast cancer cell lines were divided into 3 groups according to
their mutational status: BRAF-mutant with no PTEN/PI3K/RAS mutations
(A375, WM35, SK-MEL-28, CRL5885), BRAF + PTEN-PI3K (A2058, WM239, HT29,
SW1417) and BRAF + RAS double mutant (WM3629, WM3670, MDA-MB-231,
CRL5922). Effect of inhibitors on proliferation, clonogenic potential and
migration were investigated SRB and clonogenic assays and videomicroscopy
measurements, respectively. Both single agent and combination treatments
were applied.Results: In single agent treatments panRAF and PI3K/mTOR
inhibitors did not show mutation dependent differences in proliferation,
however, mutant-BRAF and MEK specific inhibitors were more effective in
cells without concomitant PTEN/PI3K or RAS mutations. Interestingly, not
only the combination of BRAF and MEK inhibitors but the combination of
PI3K/mTOR and MEK inhibition showed additive inhibitory effect on
proliferation in all subgroups. Importantly, a distinct pattern emerged
for the mutational subgroup specific migration inhibitory effects in
comparison to the inhibition of proliferation.Conclusion: BRAF mutant
cells carrying various concomitant PTEN/PI3K/RAS alterations display
distinct response to RAS/RAF/PI3K network inhibition in terms of
proliferation as well as migration. Our data suggests that combination
treatments acting concurrently on different targets of the RAS/RAF/PI3K
network can be more effective as single therapies.

