Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metabolic profiling of bladder cancer cell lines reveals molecular
alterations involved in methylation and novel epigenetic phenotype


Background: Bladder cancer (BCa) is primarily carcinogen driven cancer.
Epidemiological studies indicate environmental factors play a major
causative role compared to genetic factors. Xenobiotic metabolism is
highly perturbed and precise mechanisms involved are poorly understood
during BCa progression. We identified metabolic signature that can
distinguish bladder cancer from controls and reveals major alterations in
phaseI/II enzymes involved in xenobiotic metabolism and suggest a key
role for epigenetic modifications.Material and Methods:In this study, we
used mass spectrometry based metabolomics profiling coupled with
enrichment-based bioprocess mapping to obtain insight into biochemical
alterations in bladder cancer cell lines. We further validated related
gene expression using real time quantitative PCR (qPCR) and proteins
using western blotting.Results:In this study, we used high-throughput
mass spectrometry to measure over 350 compounds in seven bladder cell
lines, identifying 91 metabolites which exhibited significant changes in
bladder Cancer. Most importantly, methylated, hydroxylated and acetylated
metabolites are altered. Interestingly, S-Adenosyl methionine (SAM) is
the most prominent pathway upregulated corroborated with our previous
findings obtained using patient derived metabolomic data from two
independent cohorts. Second, we observe many of phaseI/phaseII metabolic
enzymes including aldehyde oxidase (AOX1), cytochrome P450 1A1 (CYP1A1),
CYP1B1, Glutathione S-transferase T1 (GSTT1), Glutathione S-transferase
M2 (GSTM2), N-acetyl transferase I NAT1 and NAT2 are transcriptionally
repressed in BCa cell line compared to benign indicating the pivotal role
of methylation in gene silencing. Interestingly, we observe differential
expression of polycomb group of proteins (Pcg) associated with PRC2 and
PRC1 complex. Specifically, histone-lysine N-methyl transferase (EZH2)
protein, which is SAM dependent histone methyl transferase and
concomitant 3meHK27 trimethylated histone K27, is highly expressed in
metastatic UMUC3 BCa cell line further indicating prominence of
epigenetic modifications.Conclusion:We present an integrative pathway
analysis of a metabolic gene signature which has not been previously
described in the context of bladder cancer cell lines. Further
mechanistic analyses reveals prominent role for methylation status and
associated epigenetic modifications being played in the transcriptional
repression of key xenobiotic enzymes. Collectively, our novel findings
provide an opportunity for development of efficient biomarker
implications and epigenetic therapy targeting BCa progression.

