Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Silibinin exhibits anti-cachectic and anti-cancerous property by
modulating metabolic properties of pancreatic cancer cells


Cancer cachexia is a systemic syndrome characterized by progressive
weight loss of the patient due to muscle wasting and fat depletion with
or without anorexia. About 80% of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC)
patients exhibits cachectic phenotype and it significantly contributes in
mortality and morbidity of the disease. In present study we have
evaluated the effect of bioactive molecule silibinin on pancreatic cancer
progression and cachectic properties by utilizing in vitro as well as in
vivo models of PDAC. We observed that silibinin inhibits growth and
induces apoptosis in multiple pancreatic cancer cell lines in a
dose-dependent manner. We also observed silibinin-mediated reduction in
the expression of key glycolytic genes and inhibition of glucose uptake
and lactate secretion. By performing LC-MS/MS based metabolomics, we
observed that silibinin treatment leads to global metabolic alterations
in pancreatic cancer cells. Pancreatic cancer cells treated with
silibinin exhibited reduced expression of c-MYC level, a key metabolic
regulator. Furthermore, we observed that silibinin-mediated STAT3
inhibition leads to reduced c-MYC expression. Ectopic expression of
constitutively active STAT3 significantly attenuated the effect of
silibinin on c-MYC expression and metabolic phenotype of pancreatic
cancer cells. Silibinin treatment also inhibited tumor growth and
progression of cachexia. Silibinin treatment to tumor-bearing mice also
lead to increased food intake, increased grip strength and body
coordination. Overall, our results demonstrate that silibinin exhibits
anti-cachectic and anti-cancerous properties by inducing metabolic
reprogramming in pancreatic cancer cells.

