Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Elucidation of the different roles of CDK8 and CDK19 in colorectal
cancer (CRC) using CRISPR gene editing technology


BackgroundCDK8 and CDK19 are two highly homologous cyclin-dependent
kinases involved in gene transcription via the Mediator complex.
Individual kinase module paralogs (CDK8 or CDK19) in complex with cyclin
C, Med13 and Med12 regulate transcription through phosphorylation of the
C-terminal domain of RNAPol II. Despite their structural similarities,
emerging data suggest possible distinct transcriptional regulatory
functions. There are few studies of CDK19 function, but CDK8 has been
described as an oncogene in CRC, required for -catenin mediated
transcription and tumor cell proliferation. In addition, CDK8 knock down
reportedly inhibited the growth of HT29 and Colo205 CRC
xenografts.ResultsRecently, we identified a series of
3,4,5-trisubstituted pyridines (exemplified by CCT251545) as small
molecule chemical probes of CDK8 and CDK19.1 Although our compounds bind
selectively to these closely related biochemical targets, it is not known
whether both are equally inhibited, whether inactivation of one (or both)
is required for tumor growth control or if there is compensation in terms
of kinase function and/or other roles in the Mediator complex. Using
single and double CRISPR/Cas9 knockout clones, we aim to elucidate the
roles of CDK8 and CDK19 in human CRC cells. We used the SW620 CRC cell
line due to its sensitivity in vivo to our CDK8/19 inhibitor CCT251921.
Single and double homozygous knockout (KO) clones were generated after
CRISPR/Cas9 transfection of plasmids targeting CDK8 and CDK19. KO clones
were identified by western blotting and validated by qPCR and exome
sequencing analyses. Functional assays were performed in vitro and PD/PK
and efficacy studies with CCT251921 in vivo using selected single and
double KO clones. Substrates including pRNAIISer5, E2F1Ser375 and
pSTAT1Ser727were also quantified by several independent assay platforms
in in vitro and ex vivo tumor samples. mRNA profiling of ex vivo samples
from PD/PK and efficacy studies was also undertaken.CRISPR deletion of
neither CDK8 (in contrast to literature reports using RNAi in different
CRC xenografts) nor CDK19 inhibited the growth of SW620 CRC cells in
vitro or in vivo. Interestingly, the CDK19 knockout cells remained
responsive to two chemically distinct probes in vitro and/or in vivo,
with clear inhibition of the pSTAT1Ser727 engagement biomarker, whereas
the CDK8 and CDK8/19 knockouts were far less responsive and showed
significantly lower levels of pSTAT1Ser727. Our data suggest that there
are certain independent functions of CDK8 and CDK19 that might not be
simply interchangeable and that the presence or absence of one may also
impact on the behaviour of the other.References1.Dale, T. et. al.
Identification of a potent and selective chemical probe for exploring the
role of Mediator complex-associated protein kinases CDK8 and CDK19 in
human disease. 2015, Nat. Chem. Biol., 11, 973-980.

