Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of FXR1-associated protein complexes in lung cancer


RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) are the master regulators of mRNA processing
and translation and are often aberrantly expressed in cancer. We have
recently identified Fragile X Mental Retardation-Related 1 (FXR1) as a
novel cancer gene in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and its
expression is correlated with poor prognosis in multiple human cancers.
FXR1 encodes an RNA binding protein (RBP) that belongs to the family of
fragile X-related proteins including the fragile X mental retardation
protein (FMR1) and FXR2. Inactivation of FMR1 expression is the cause of
the Fragile X syndrome in humans. Little is known for the function of
FXR1 in human cancers. In this study, endogenous FXR1 or a Flag-tagged
FXR1 was immunoprecipitated from H520, a lung squamous carcinoma cell
line, and analyzed by shotgun proteomics. The Flag-tagged FXR1 was also
transfected into human HEK293 cells and followed by
co-immunoprecipitation and shotgun proteomic analysis. In total we found
206 proteins enriched in H520 with more than two-fold change spectral
counts over the IgG control. Of the 206 proteins, 49 were detected in
HEK293 cells as well and 157 were only detected in H520. KEGG pathway
analysis indicated enrichment of proteins involved in ribosomal function,
RNA transport and proteasome. To identify lung cancer related proteins,
we interrogated the mRNA expression of 206 proteins in The Cancer Genome
Atlas (TCGA) lung cancer dataset (1013 tumors,109 normal), in a combined
NSCLC dataset (1392 tumors, 240 normal) from the Gene Expression Omnibus
(GEO) and in a previously reported dataset of putative FXR1 target mRNAs
and found 75 altered genes in common. Among these, we found that 24 genes
were not only unregulated in all NSCLC samples (n = 2405, FDRRNA-binding
proteins (RBPs) are the master regulators of mRNA processing and
translation and are often aberrantly expressed in cancer. We have
recently identified Fragile X Mental Retardation-Related 1 (FXR1) as a
novel cancer gene in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and its
expression is correlated with poor prognosis in multiple human cancers.
FXR1 encodes an RNA binding protein (RBP) that belongs to the family of
fragile X-related proteins including the fragile X mental retardation
protein (FMR1) and FXR2. Inactivation of FMR1 expression is the cause of
the Fragile X syndrome in humans. Little is known for the function of
FXR1 in human cancers. In this study, endogenous FXR1 or a Flag-tagged
FXR1 was immunoprecipitated from H520, a lung squamous carcinoma cell
line, and analyzed by shotgun proteomics. The Flag-tagged FXR1 was also
transfected into human HEK293 cells and followed by
co-immunoprecipitation and shotgun proteomic analysis. In total we found
206 proteins enriched in H520 with more than two-fold change spectral
counts over the IgG control. Of the 206 proteins, 49 were detected in
HEK293 cells as well and 157 were only detected in H520. KEGG pathway
analysis indicated enrichment of proteins involved in ribosomal function,
RNA transport and proteasome. To identify lung cancer related proteins,
we interrogated the mRNA expression of 206 proteins in The Cancer Genome
Atlas (TCGA) lung cancer dataset (1013 tumors,109 normal), in a combined
NSCLC dataset (1392 tumors, 240 normal) from the Gene Expression Omnibus
(GEO) and in a previously reported dataset of putative FXR1 target mRNAs
and found 75 altered genes in common. Among these, we found that 24 genes
were not only unregulated in all NSCLC samples (n = 2405, FDR<0.007) but
also positively correlated with FXR1 (pRNA-binding proteins (RBPs) are
the master regulators of mRNA processing and translation and are often
aberrantly expressed in cancer. We have recently identified Fragile X
Mental Retardation-Related 1 (FXR1) as a novel cancer gene in non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and its expression is correlated with poor
prognosis in multiple human cancers. FXR1 encodes an RNA binding protein
(RBP) that belongs to the family of fragile X-related proteins including
the fragile X mental retardation protein (FMR1) and FXR2. Inactivation of
FMR1 expression is the cause of the Fragile X syndrome in humans. Little
is known for the function of FXR1 in human cancers. In this study,
endogenous FXR1 or a Flag-tagged FXR1 was immunoprecipitated from H520, a
lung squamous carcinoma cell line, and analyzed by shotgun proteomics.
The Flag-tagged FXR1 was also transfected into human HEK293 cells and
followed by co-immunoprecipitation and shotgun proteomic analysis. In
total we found 206 proteins enriched in H520 with more than two-fold
change spectral counts over the IgG control. Of the 206 proteins, 49 were
detected in HEK293 cells as well and 157 were only detected in H520. KEGG
pathway analysis indicated enrichment of proteins involved in ribosomal
function, RNA transport and proteasome. To identify lung cancer related
proteins, we interrogated the mRNA expression of 206 proteins in The
Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) lung cancer dataset (1013 tumors,109 normal),
in a combined NSCLC dataset (1392 tumors, 240 normal) from the Gene
Expression Omnibus (GEO) and in a previously reported dataset of putative
FXR1 target mRNAs and found 75 altered genes in common. Among these, we
found that 24 genes were not only unregulated in all NSCLC samples (n =
2405, FDR<0.007) but also positively correlated with FXR1 (p<0.05). Gene
ontology analysis revealed 22 genes were enriched in cellular
macromolecule metabolic process including six genes in cell cycle
regulation and seven genes in mRNA processing (p = 0.0017). Disease
association analysis showed six genes were enriched in immunologic
deficiency syndromes (p = 0.002), consistent with post-transcriptional
suppression of tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF) by FXR1 and further
implying a role for FXR1-associated complex in the suppressed immune
response pathway we previously identified in squamous cell carcinoma of
the lung. Lastly, survival analysis indicated that this 25-gene signature
(BUB3,CSNK2A1,DARS,DHX9,FXR1,HDAC2,HNRNPAB,HSP90AA1,KPNB1,LMNB1,MCM4,MSH6,N
UP205,PRKDC,PSMC5,PSMD3,SFPQ,SMARCC1,SMC4,SNRPD1,STK38L,TNPO1,UCK2,XPO1
and XRCC5) was significantly associated with worse overall survival in
NSCLC (HR = 1.84, p = 0.01, adjusted for age, gender, stage and smoking
history). Together, these data suggest the 24 proteins/mRNAs are closely
associated with FXR1 in lung cancer and may form critical core complexes
that are associated with NSCLC tumorigenesis. This work was supported by
RO1 CA102353 to PPM.

