Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A genetic variation in microRNA target site of ETS2 is associated
with clinical outcomes of paclitaxel-cisplatin chemotherapy in non-small
cell lung cancer


Background: Recently, crosslinking, ligation, and sequencing of hybrids
(CLASH) provided direct observation of transcriptome-wide miRNA-target
pairs. The present study was performed to investigate the association of
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) located in the miRNA target sites,
which were experimentally verified by CLASH, with the clinical outcome of
first line paclitaxel-cisplatin chemotherapy in advanced non-small cell
lung cancer (NSCLC).Methods: Eighty SNPs in miRNA target sites of cancer
related genes selected from 18,500 miRNA:target interactions in CLASH
data were investigated in 379 advanced NSCLC patients using a sequenom
mass spectrometry-based genotype assay. Quantitative reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction and luciferase assay were
conducted to examine functional relevance of potentially functional SNPs
in miRNA target sites.Results: Of the 80 SNPs analyzed, 16 SNPs were
significantly associated with the clinical outcome after chemotherapy.
Among these, ANAPC1 rs3814026C>T, ETS2 rs461155A>G, SORBS1 rs7081076C>A
and POLR2A rs2071504C>T were found to be significantly associated with
both chemotherapy response and survival. Notably, the relative expression
level of ETS2 was significantly associated with rs461155A>G genotypes in
both tumor and paired normal lung tissues (Ptrend = 4
10-7,and310-4,respectively). Consistently, a decreased expression of the
reporter gene for the G allele of rs461155 compared with the A allele was
observed by luciferase assay.Conclusion: These findings suggest that the
four SNPs, especially ETS2 rs461155A>G, could be used as biomarkers
predicting the response and survival of NSCLC patients treated with
first-line paclitaxel-cisplatin chemotherapy.

