Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TRAC, a novel time and cost saving gene expression analysis
technology with improved efficacy


Gene expression analysis in the oncology space is largely performed with
the classic and widely accepted methods real-time RT-PCR, microarray and
next generation sequencing. These technologies are, however, too time
consuming and expensive to be used in large scale screens with high
sample numbers. TRAC (Transcription analysis with the aid of Affinity
Capture) technology provides a solution for focused gene expression
screening with unique combination of multiplex analysis, high-throughput
sample processing, high precision and flexibility. Lysates of cells or
tissues are directly applicable as sample material in TRAC assay without
RNA extraction or cDNA conversion. The assay enables detection of up to
30 targets per sample and 96 samples per assay with 3-4h run time. In
TRAC assay, each target mRNA of interest is recognized by a specific
labeled ssDNA probe. Probes with different lengths and labels can be used
for high-level of multiplexing. Hybridization of probes and targets takes
place in solution, after which the probe-transcript complexes are
captured by streptavidin coated magnetic beads. Unbound material is
washed off and the probes are eluted for detection. The probes are then
detected and quantified by capillary electrophoresis, which resolves the
probes according to both size and fluorescence. The aim of this study was
to apply TRAC assay to analyze the expression fingerprints of 20 gene
markers related to angiogenesis, cell adhesion, protease activity and
plasminogen activation, in cultured cells treated with different drug
candidates. The expression of the target genes was analyzed from four
different colon cancer cell lines (COLO, HT-29, CaCo2, DLD) to study
culture age dependent effects and responses to drug candidates. Out of
the 20 genes analyzed, curcumin caused consistent variation to
cyclooxygenase-1 (COX-1) gene expression as a function of time in all
tested cell lines. By comparison of expression fingerprints between
non-treated cell line cultures, altogether four genes were identified as
being expressed at higher level in one or two of the cell lines compared
to the others. These genes were trypsinogen (PRSS1-3) in COLO, Serine
protease inhibitor (SPINK) in HT-29, Protease Cathepsin B (CTSB) in COLO
and cyclin D1 (CCDN1) in DLD and CaCo2 cell lines. The data showed good
correlation with real-time RT-PCR results and reproducibility (CV Gene
expression analysis in the oncology space is largely performed with the
classic and widely accepted methods real-time RT-PCR, microarray and next
generation sequencing. These technologies are, however, too time
consuming and expensive to be used in large scale screens with high
sample numbers. TRAC (Transcription analysis with the aid of Affinity
Capture) technology provides a solution for focused gene expression
screening with unique combination of multiplex analysis, high-throughput
sample processing, high precision and flexibility. Lysates of cells or
tissues are directly applicable as sample material in TRAC assay without
RNA extraction or cDNA conversion. The assay enables detection of up to
30 targets per sample and 96 samples per assay with 3-4h run time. In
TRAC assay, each target mRNA of interest is recognized by a specific
labeled ssDNA probe. Probes with different lengths and labels can be used
for high-level of multiplexing. Hybridization of probes and targets takes
place in solution, after which the probe-transcript complexes are
captured by streptavidin coated magnetic beads. Unbound material is
washed off and the probes are eluted for detection. The probes are then
detected and quantified by capillary electrophoresis, which resolves the
probes according to both size and fluorescence. The aim of this study was
to apply TRAC assay to analyze the expression fingerprints of 20 gene
markers related to angiogenesis, cell adhesion, protease activity and
plasminogen activation, in cultured cells treated with different drug
candidates. The expression of the target genes was analyzed from four
different colon cancer cell lines (COLO, HT-29, CaCo2, DLD) to study
culture age dependent effects and responses to drug candidates. Out of
the 20 genes analyzed, curcumin caused consistent variation to
cyclooxygenase-1 (COX-1) gene expression as a function of time in all
tested cell lines. By comparison of expression fingerprints between
non-treated cell line cultures, altogether four genes were identified as
being expressed at higher level in one or two of the cell lines compared
to the others. These genes were trypsinogen (PRSS1-3) in COLO, Serine
protease inhibitor (SPINK) in HT-29, Protease Cathepsin B (CTSB) in COLO
and cyclin D1 (CCDN1) in DLD and CaCo2 cell lines. The data showed good
correlation with real-time RT-PCR results and reproducibility (CV <12%)
and functioned as proof-of-concept for suitability of TRAC for screening
purposes. Multiplex detection with TRAC from lysates offered high
efficiency and significant cost and time savings compared to single-plex
qPCR assay in large scale evaluation of drug candidates.

