Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synergistic anti-tumor effect of the combination of amrubicin and
erlotinib in non-small cell lung cancer with wild type EGFR


Background: Standard second-line chemotherapy against advanced
non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is a single agent such as docetaxel,
pemetrexed, or erlotinib (Erl). We recently reported that the combination
of amrubicin (AMR) and Erl was clinically safe and effective for
previously treated NSCLC patients. The purpose of this research is to
confirm the experimental effectiveness of the combination and to
investigate mechanism of the action.Methods: We perform to evaluate the
NSCLC cell lines proliferation inhibition by using XTT assay and to make
two-dimension isobolograms for assessment of the combination effect.
Flowcytemetry analysis (FACS) and Western blot analysis (WB) is also done
in vitro. In vivo growth inhibition assay using subcutaneous model on
SCID mice is performed. In addition, we measure intracellular
concentration of amrubicinol(AMR-OH) which is converted as active
metabolite from AMR in both cells treated with AMR alone and the
combination.Results: The combination of AMR and Erl had significant
synergistic effect on EGFR wild type NSCLC cell line A549, while additive
effect on EGFR mutant cell line PC-9. Sub G0-G1 population on FACS was
significantly increased in A549 cells treated with combination. The
combination activated apoptosis related proteins in WB. The strong growth
inhibition of subcutaneous tumors on SCID mice was observed in the
combination cohort. Intracellular concentration of AMR-OH was
significantly increased in the combination than in AMR
monotherapy.Conclusion: The combination of AMR and Erl is synergistically
induced apoptosis and growth inhibition on A549 cells via increasing
intracellular concentration of AMR-OH. This combination may be a
promising therapeutic option against advanced NSCLC with wild type EGFR.

