Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The feasibility study of a randomized cancer screening trial in
China


Lung cancer has been the leading cause of cancer death in China since the
1990s and the disease burden likely will increase. The US National Lung
Screening Trial (NLST) showed a 16-20% mortality reduction in a high-risk
population that had undergone Low-Dose Computed Tomography (LDCT). China
would like to confirm the main result from the US NLST in the Chinese
population. The aim of this study is to obtain necessary information on
performance of the organizations involved in designing, conducting,
monitoring and managing the study. Another goal is to test colorectal
cancer screening strategies in China. This is a first randomized trial on
lung and colorectal cancer screening in China. The feasibility study will
aid in the development of a practical design for the Randomized Cancer
Screening Trial in China.This study has been carried out in three cites
(Changsha city, Hunan province; Lanzhou city, Gansu province; and Haining
city, Zhejiang province) since August, 2014. Individuals at elevated risk
of lung cancer were randomized into three arms: annual low-dose helical
CT exams for three years (T0, T1, T2) and baseline colonoscopy (T0); two
low-dose helical CT exams (T0, T2) plus annual faecal immunochemical test
(OC-faecal immunochemical tests at T0, T1, T2); and annual InSure-faecal
immunochemical tests combined with Septin 9 test (T0, T1, T2). All
participants will be followed for at least three years from randomization
to yield data relevant to answering the study objectives.As of March 31,
2015, a total of 2696 eligible participants were enrolled at 3 cancer
hospitals and randomly assigned to three study arms (894 in arm 1, 902 in
arm 2, and 900 in arm 3). The gender distribution is 53% male and 47%
female. Baseline characteristics of the study population by age, gender
and total pack-year exposure were balanced. The rate of adherence to LDCT
screening at the first round (T0) was 89.0%. 1598 participants received
LDCT in the first round. The rate of abnormality was 77.4% with LDCT and
6.5% and 6.1% with suspicious for lung cancer for arm 1 and arm 2
respectively at T0. 2150 participants received colorectal cancer
screening. The positivity was 34.1% with colonoscopy screening, 8.0% with
OC-FIT test, 4.5% with InsureFIT test, and 5.8% with Septin9 test.

