Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MiR-222 accelerates the progression of inflammatory breast cancer
by targeting tumor suppressor gene p27kip1 (CDKN1B)


MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small non-coding RNAs about 18-22 nucleotides in
length, whose main role is to regulate gene expression by altering mRNA
stability and translation. MicroRNAs have been shown to play a role in
many types of cancer, including breast cancer by targeting tumor
suppressor genes such as p53, p27, PTEN, BRCA1, BRCA2 and many others.
The goal of this study was to investigate the role of miRNAs in
inflammatory breast cancer (IBC). IBC is the most aggressive and
metastatic form of breast cancer, that is characterized by very rapid
progression, poor prognosis, with a 5 year survival outcome of 30-40%.
The mechanism that underlies the rapid progression of IBC is currently
under intense investigation, and novel approaches are needed to better
understand this disease. To understand the role that microRNAs might play
in IBC, we conducted next generation sequencing of the miRNAs from two
IBC cell line, SUM149 which is a triple negative IBC (ER-, PR-, HER2-),
and SUM190 which is HER2 overexpressing, but ER and PR negative (ER-,
PR-, HER2+). We found that 463 miRNAs were differentially expressed in
the two cell lines, with 243 miRNAs being overexpressed in SUM149
compared to SUM190, while 220 miRNAs were overexpressed in SUM190.
Notably, our qPCR analysis confirmed the raw read counts, showing that
miR-155, miR-221, and miR-222 were overexpressed in SUM149 as compared to
SUM190 cells by 15, 10, and 3 fold respectively. Furthermore, the
inhibition of miR-222 in SUM149 resulted in significant reduction in cell
proliferation, tumorsphere formation, and migration in these cells as
compared to SUM190 cells. Our flow cytometry data showed that there was
cell cycle arrest at the G1 phase in SUM149 cells due to miR-222
inhibition, while SUM190 cells showed little or no change. Additionally,
Western blot and immunofluorescence analyses showed that the protein
levels of p27, which is one of the targets of miR-222, significantly
increased in SUM149 cells, but not in SUM190 cells when miR-222 inhibitor
was used in these cells. These results suggest that miR-222 may
accelerate the progression of some IBCs by targeting tumor suppressor
genes, resulting in rapid cell proliferation, and may be a potential
therapeutic target for triple negative inflammatory breast cancers.

