Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ATF4 is a putative tumor suppressor gene in medullary thyroid
cancer


Medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC) is derived from the
calcitonin-producing C-cells of the thyroid gland. Oncogenic mutations of
the RET proto-oncogene are found in all hereditary MTC and 45% of the
sporadic cases. However, it is clear that additional genetic lesions
contribute to the development of both RET-dependent and RET independent
MTC. We analyzed 30 primary medullary thyroid cancer (MTC) tumors by
comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) arrays (Agilent 244K) and a
subset of those tumors by ultra-high-resolution SNP arrays (Affymetrix
SNP6.0). A consistent finding with both arrays was a loss localized to
22q13.1 in 40% of tumors. This region contains the ATF4 gene and loss of
this gene was validated by real time PCR.ATF4 is a central mediator of
integrated stress response pathway and activates expression of a cohort
of downstream target genes known to be involved in cell survival,
apoptosis, autophagy and senescence. We hypothesize that the loss of ATF4
expression contributes to MTC progression through mechanisms involving
aberrant proliferation and escape from apoptosis. We present several
findings to support this. First, ATF4 protein levels were found
downregulated in 50% MTC tumor tissues (n = 43) and low ATF4 expression
was associated with poor overall survival in MTC patients (HR = 5.015,
95% CI: 1.38-10.64), P = 0.013). A negative correlation was observed
between RET and ATF4 protein expression in MTC tumors (r = -0.89, R
square = 0.799, pMedullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC) is derived from the
calcitonin-producing C-cells of the thyroid gland. Oncogenic mutations of
the RET proto-oncogene are found in all hereditary MTC and 45% of the
sporadic cases. However, it is clear that additional genetic lesions
contribute to the development of both RET-dependent and RET independent
MTC. We analyzed 30 primary medullary thyroid cancer (MTC) tumors by
comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) arrays (Agilent 244K) and a
subset of those tumors by ultra-high-resolution SNP arrays (Affymetrix
SNP6.0). A consistent finding with both arrays was a loss localized to
22q13.1 in 40% of tumors. This region contains the ATF4 gene and loss of
this gene was validated by real time PCR.ATF4 is a central mediator of
integrated stress response pathway and activates expression of a cohort
of downstream target genes known to be involved in cell survival,
apoptosis, autophagy and senescence. We hypothesize that the loss of ATF4
expression contributes to MTC progression through mechanisms involving
aberrant proliferation and escape from apoptosis. We present several
findings to support this. First, ATF4 protein levels were found
downregulated in 50% MTC tumor tissues (n = 43) and low ATF4 expression
was associated with poor overall survival in MTC patients (HR = 5.015,
95% CI: 1.38-10.64), P = 0.013). A negative correlation was observed
between RET and ATF4 protein expression in MTC tumors (r = -0.89, R
square = 0.799, p<0.0001). Second, we showed that targeted heterozygote
and homozygous deletion of Atf4 in mice causes C cell hyperplasia, a
precancerous lesion preceding MTC. Third, ATF4 overexpression inhibits
proliferation and survival of MTC derived cell lines. ATF4 decreases RET
protein levels by inducing ubiquitination and degradation of activated
RET. In contrast, ATF4 depletion upregulates RET protein levels as well
as RET autophosphorylation. Finally, combination treatment of tyrosine
kinase inhibitor (sunitinib) and eeyarestatin that stimulates ATF4
transcription, induces apoptosis of the MTC cells in a synergistic manner
through activation of ATF4 and its target genes NOXA and PUMA as well.
These results suggest ATF4 as a potential tumor suppressor gene in MTC.
We postulate that inactivation of ATF4 is a central impediment to
induction of apoptosis in MTC tumors. Therefore, strategies to upregulate
ATF4 during TKI therapy would render tumor cells exquisitely sensitive to
stress induced apoptosis, offering a novel synergistic treatment.

