Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The selective class I HDAC inhibitor entinostat enhances the
antitumor effect of PD-1 inhibition in a syngeneic orthotopic murine
model of renal cell carcinoma


Background: Recent advances in immunotherapy have highlighted the
antitumor effects of immune checkpoint inhibition. Novel anti-PD-1/PD-L1
immunotherapies have been shown to effectively overcome tumor avoidance
of immune surveillance in several tumor types including renal cell
carcinoma. Our group has recently shown that the selective class I HDAC
inhibitor entinostat is effective in suppressing regulatory T cells and
enhancing immunotherapies in murine renal and prostate models, RENCA and
Myc-Cap respectively. In this study we have evaluated the combination of
entinostat with an anti-PD-1 antibody in the RENCA renal cell carcinoma
model.Methods: 32 BALB/c female mice were implanted with the syngenic,
orthotopic, renal cell carcinoma mouse model, RENCA - luciferase tagged -
at day -8. Treatment (8 mice /group) with anti-mouse-PD-1 (aPD-1; 10mg/kg
twice a week, I.P.), entinostat (5mg/kg 5 days a week), or combination of
the two was begun at day 1. Bioluminescence imaging was performed at days
-1, 9 and 19 to assess the orthotopic tumor growth. End point tumor
weights were taken to assess the effect of combination treatment.Results:
Analysis of tumor growth showed a reduction of bioluminescence across the
three time points in the combination group as compared to the vehicle and
single agent treatments. Additionally, end point analysis of tumor
weights revealed an overall reduction in the size of the tumors in the
entinostat/anti-mPD-1 combination group (88% inhibition) as compared to
the vehicle (p = 0.0002), aPD-1 alone (25% inhibition)(p = 0.0181), and
entinostat alone (63% inhibition)(p = 0.0481) groups. Examination of the
status of the infiltrating immune cells of the tumor microenvironment via
flow cytometry, qRT-PCR, immunohistochemistry, and/or immunofluorescence
analysis is ongoing.Conclusions: Our preliminary results suggest that the
immunomodulatory activity of the selective class I HDAC inhibitor
entinostat may enhance the antitumor effect of PD-1/PD-L1 inhibition and
provide the rationale for the clinical testing of this novel combination
in patients with RCC.

