Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting a variety of cancers with NOTA-derivatized pH (low)
insertion peptide (pHLIP) complexes with 64Cu and 18F: What cancers are
targetable


Introduction: Although heterogeneous, the extracellular tumor environment
is generally marked by decreased pH relative to nontumor tissues due to
cancer cell metabolism. Using a pH-sensitive peptide to deliver
diagnostic PET isotopes can provide clinicians with improved diagnostic
tools for cancer-specific imaging and an alternative to receptor-based
cancer targeting. pH (low) Insertion Peptides (pHLIPs) have previously
been shown to target cancerous tissues and are able to deliver PET metals
to the cancer site utilizing a NOTA-based chelator.Methods: The
thiol-containing cysteine moiety on the pHLIP peptide sequence was
conjugated to the NOTA chelator. The NOTA-derivatized peptides were
labeled with 64CuCl2 in 100 mM NH4OAc (pH 5) solution; the [18F]-fluoride
was reacted with AlCl3 before forming the [18F]-AlF-NOTA-pHLIP complexes
in NH4OAc buffered reaction mixtures (pH 4.1). After purification and
formulation, the radiolabeled peptides were injected intravenously into
4T1 breast, PC-3 prostate, LNCaP prostate, or B16-F10 melanoma
tumor-bearing mice.Results: The 4T1 tumor-bearing mice showed significant
uptake > 10%ID/g by 4 h p.i. and continued to show increased uptake of
the 64Cu-NOTA-cysVar3 over 20 h. Tumors were visible in the 4T1
tumor-bearing mice as early as 2 h, but had the greatest
tumor-to-background ratios at 24 h. Initial studies with B16-F10
tumor-bearing mice showed > 9%ID/g uptake in the tumor by 4 h p.i. with
slight increase of 64Cu-NOTA-cysVar3 uptake over 24 h. Due to the
placement of the melanoma tumors away from internal organs, tumors were
visible by 1 h p.i. Additionally, the size of the melanoma tumors did not
affect the%ID/g of radiotracer uptake.Conclusions: Our studies indicate
that the NOTA-cys(pHLIP), specifically NOTA-cysVar3, radiolabeled with
64Cu or 18F is a viable imaging tool for detecting highly metabolic
tumors in preclinical mouse models.Funding: NIH F32 CA186721 (D.W.D.),
NIH R01 CA138468 (J.S.L.), NIH MSKCC Center Grant (P30-CA08748).

