Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Body mass index, physical activity and risk of colorectal cancer
in the Korean Multi-center Cancer Cohort (KMCC)


Objectives: To examine the association between body mass index (BMI),
physical activity and colorectal cancer risk among Korean adults.Methods:
Data from the Korean Multi-center Cancer Cohort (KMCC) between 1993 and
2005 were analyzed. The study population comprised 12,379 subjects aged
above 20 years old. The subjects were followed until December 31, 2011
(median follow-up of 10.1 years). Measured weight and height values was
used to calculate BMI and self-reported total time spent for physical
activity were used. The Cox proportional hazard model was used to
estimate the hazard ratio (HR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) of BMI
and physical activity for colorectal cancer risk.Results: Men who did
moderate physical activity showed a lower risk for colorectal cancer (HR
0.35, 95% CI: 0.19-0.65 for 30-419 minutes compared to who spend less
than 30 minutes a week doing moderate activities). We did not find any
association between the total time of vigorous activities and
muscle-strengthening activities and colorectal cancer risk in both men
and women. Men with BMI of 25 or higher showed an increased risk for
colorectal cancer compared to men with BMI of 18.5 to 22.9 (HR 1.64, 95%
CI 0.94-2.88 for 25.0-29.9 kg/m2; HR 1.64, 95% CI 0.94-2.88 for greater
than 30.0 kg/m2).Conclusions: Moderate physical activities were
associated with lower colorectal cancer risk among Korean men.

