Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The transcription factor BCL6 is a rational target in non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC)


BCL6 is a transcription factor that promotes lymphomagenesis by
repressing target genes involved in DNA damage sensing and response. In
NSCLC patients, BCL6 is amplified in 40% of Squamous Cell Carcinomas
(197/501, TCGA) and in 2.2% of Adenocarcinomas (5/230, TCGA), suggesting
a potential oncogenic role for BCL6 in lung cancer.To determine whether
BCL6 plays a role in sustaining NSCLC, we first measured the expression
of BCL6 in a panel of 15 NSCLC cell lines and found BCL6 expression in
15/15 cell lines. Furthermore, in 7/15 cells lines (46%) we found BCL6
gene amplification. To gain insight into BCL6 function, we engineered two
NSCLC cell lines with BCL6 amplification (H1299 and H838) to stably
express BCL6-shRNA. BCL6 silencing resulted in 3-5 fold mRNA increase of
key DNA damage response genes such as ATR, Chek1, p21 and p53.
BCL6-mediated repression of DNA damage response genes has functional
effects as BCL6 silencing resulted into i) G1 cell-cycle arrest as
determine by flow cytometry analysis, ii) 1.5-2 fold increase in cell
doubling time, iii) 40-60% reduction in colony formation. These results
suggest that a major role of BCL6 in lung cancer could be to enable
proliferation under genotoxic stress, a function that BCL6 exerts
physiologically in B-cells during antibody generation. Under these
premises, BCL6 inhibition should preferentially affect the proliferation
of cells with elevated genomic instability. Thus, we measured the amount
of chromosomal aberration harbored by the proliferating fractions of
BCL6-shRNA cells compared to the isogenic parental cells using
micronuclei assay. BCL6 silencing resulted in 30-40% reduction of
micronuclei amount in the proliferating fraction of cells, supporting our
hypothesis. Moreover, exposing NSCLC cells to DNA damaging agents leads
to 2-3 fold increase in BCL6 expression regardless the presence of BCL6
amplification.In lymphomas, BCL6 represses genes by recruiting
co-repressors to form repressosome complexes in gene promoters and
enhancers. In particular, repression of DNA damage response genes is
achieved by the recruitment of three co-repressors (SMRT, N-CoR, and
BCOR) to the BTB-domain of BCL6. To determine whether the BTB-domain of
BCL6 is mediating the repression of DNA damage genes in NSCLC, we
employed FX1085, a small molecule that specifically interacts with the
BCL6 BTB domain and prevents the formation of the repressosome complex.
Exposure to FX1085 resulted in 3-10 fold increase in ATR, Chek1, p21 and
p53 mRNA levels and prevented the proliferation of NSCLC cells with
elevated genomic instability. Moreover, FX1085 affected the survival of
6/15 NSCLC cell lines (40%) at GI50 doses comparable to those effective
in lymphoma cells, indicating that BCL6 maybe a suitable therapeutic
target in NSCLC.Overall, our data indicate a role for BCL6 in sustaining
NSCLC genomic instability and suggest that this protein may be a
potential therapeutic target in this disease.

