Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anti-tumor and anti-metastasis efficacy of a novel Notch inhibitor
(PF-03084014) in hepatocellular carcinoma


Hepatocellular Carcinoma (HCC) is well-known for its aggressive growth
and highly metastatic potential. Efficacy of current therapy is limited
by fast tumor growth and rapid metastasis. Cancer stem cells (CSCs)
represent a distinct population that can be prospectively isolated from
tumor tissues and have long-term clonal repopulation and self-renewal
capacity. They are highly tumorigenic, metastatic, and resistance to
conventional radiation and chemotherapy. Therefore, it is essential to
identify effective therapy to target CSCs. In our prior study, Notch
deregulation was correlated with poor outcome in HCC. In this study, we
investigated anti-tumor and anti-metastatic efficacy of a novel Notch
inhibitor (PF-03084014) in liver cancer spherical cells in vitro and
sphere cell-derived orthotropic model in vivo. PF-03084014 significantly
suppressed liver CSCs spheroid formation (derived from 97H HCC cells),
with survival rate less than 20% by higher dose of PF-03084014. In
accordance, CD90+, EpCAM+ and Oct4+ liver CSC populations significantly
decreased, so as down-regulation the stem cell genes expression such as
Sox2 and Nanog. These results suggest a suppressive effect of PF-03084014
on liver CSC self-renewal ability. Low dose PF-03084014 induced cancer
spheroid cell differentiation leading to chemosensitization. Moreover,
Notch inhibitor (PF-03084014) altered liver CSCs stemness properties and
blocked spherogenesis of CSCs in vitro, leading to decrease
tumorigenicity in vivo. In HCC spherical cell- and non-spherical
cell-derived orthotropic model, PF-03084014 effectively inhibited tumor
growth, with tumor size was 2570690 mm3 in vehicle group vs. 800500 mm3
in Notch inhibitor group (p Hepatocellular Carcinoma (HCC) is well-known
for its aggressive growth and highly metastatic potential. Efficacy of
current therapy is limited by fast tumor growth and rapid metastasis.
Cancer stem cells (CSCs) represent a distinct population that can be
prospectively isolated from tumor tissues and have long-term clonal
repopulation and self-renewal capacity. They are highly tumorigenic,
metastatic, and resistance to conventional radiation and chemotherapy.
Therefore, it is essential to identify effective therapy to target CSCs.
In our prior study, Notch deregulation was correlated with poor outcome
in HCC. In this study, we investigated anti-tumor and anti-metastatic
efficacy of a novel Notch inhibitor (PF-03084014) in liver cancer
spherical cells in vitro and sphere cell-derived orthotropic model in
vivo. PF-03084014 significantly suppressed liver CSCs spheroid formation
(derived from 97H HCC cells), with survival rate less than 20% by higher
dose of PF-03084014. In accordance, CD90+, EpCAM+ and Oct4+ liver CSC
populations significantly decreased, so as down-regulation the stem cell
genes expression such as Sox2 and Nanog. These results suggest a
suppressive effect of PF-03084014 on liver CSC self-renewal ability. Low
dose PF-03084014 induced cancer spheroid cell differentiation leading to
chemosensitization. Moreover, Notch inhibitor (PF-03084014) altered liver
CSCs stemness properties and blocked spherogenesis of CSCs in vitro,
leading to decrease tumorigenicity in vivo. In HCC spherical cell- and
non-spherical cell-derived orthotropic model, PF-03084014 effectively
inhibited tumor growth, with tumor size was 2570690 mm3 in vehicle group
vs. 800500 mm3 in Notch inhibitor group (p < 0.001). More importantly,
under PF-03084014 treatment, HCC tumor metastasis to lung was
significantly reduced (87.5% metastasis rate in vehicle group vs. 18.75%
in PF-03084014 group). To explore the potential mechanism, we found
PF-03084014 was able to suppress phosphorylation of STAT3 and AKT, the
kinases involving in self-renewal of stem cells. PF-03084014 also
reversed endothelial mesenchymal transition (EMT) shown by
down-regulation of Snail-1 and up-regulation of E-cadherin. Together,
PF-03084014 shows a strong anti-cancer and anti-metastasis effect on HCC
spherical cell derived in vitro and in vivo model, which provides a
preclinical rational of the PF-03084014 to serve as a new novel drug in
liver cancer therapy.

