Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gallotannin induces senescence and autophagy leading to cell death
via SIRT1 inhibition and AMPK activation in hepatocellular carcinoma cells


Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the most fatal malignancies with
high mortality rate worldwide. In the present study, the underlying
antitumor mechanism of gallotannin, a hydrolysable tannic acid, was
elucidated in HepG2 and SKHep1 HCC cells. Gallotannin suppressed growth
and colony formation and also induced senescence via upregulation of p21,
G0 / G1 arrest and higher senescence-associated -galactosidase (SA--gal)
activity within 24 h culture in HepG2 and SKHep1 cells. Of note,
gallotannin also induced autophagy by increasing the number of
protein-cytosol-associated protein light chain 3 (LC3) punctae, LC3B-II
conversion and SQSTM1/p62, autophagic vacuoles (AVOs) by transmission
electron microscopy (TEM) and decreasing the of Beclin1 in HepG2 and
SKHep1 cells. A tandem fluorescent-tagged LC3 reporter plasmid
(GFP-mRFP-LC3) transfection revealed that gallotannin increased the
number of yellow colored LC3 punctae through the co-localization of GFP
and mRFP punctae and yellow colored LC3 punctae were increased by CQ or
NH4Cl with accumulation of autophagosomes, LC3B-II and SQSTM1/p62 in
HepG2 and SKHep1 cells. Additionally, gallotannin attenuated the of
sirtuin1 (SIRT1) and mTOR and activated the phosphorylation of 5-AMP
activated protein kinase (AMPK) in two HCC cells. Furthermore, AMPK
activator AICAR significantly enhanced SA--gal activity and
antiproliferation induced by gallotannin, while AMPK inhibitor compound C
did not in two HCC cells. Of note, gallotannin time dependently activated
caspase 8 / 3 and time/concentration dependently increased sub G1 portion
along with weak cleavages of PARP in two HCC cells. Collectively,
gallotannin induces senescence and inhibits late autophagy flux, finally
leading to apoptotic cell death in HepG2 and SKHep1 cells via inhibition
of SIRT1 and activation of p-AMPK as a potent antitumor agent for HCC
treatment.

