Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Correlation of FAP(fibroblast activation protein)-expressing
cancer associated fibroblasts (CAFs) and tumor metastasis in esophageal
carcinoma


Background: The tumor and its microenvironment have dynamic interactions
and signaling that strongly affect tumor progression. Cancer associated
fibroblasts (CAFs) are activated fibroblasts and thought to be an
important player in the tumor microenvironment. Although there are
several indicators of CAF, fibroblast activation protein (FAP) is unique
in its selectivity for CAFs in comparison with other markers. The aim of
this study is to investigate CAFs expressing FAP and its relationship to
cancer metastasis in esophageal cancer.Methods: Sections of
paraffin-embedded resected primary human esophageal cancer specimens from
2008 through 2010 in Okayama University hospital were stained with
antibody directed against FAP. Overall percentage of stromal FAP staining
of the primary tumor was assessed semi-quantitatively (0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5)
and staining intensity was also graded (none, weak, intermediate,
strong). Survival time and time to recurrence data were analyzed using
Kaplan-Meier plots, log-rank tests, and Cox proportional hazards
models.Results: 49 patients with resected specimens were available for
study with 26 (53.1%) stage I, 8 (16.3%) stage II, 14 (28.6%) stage III,
and 1 (2.0%) stage IV patients. All patients were divided to 2 groups,
FAP high group and FAP low group, which are 25 patients (51%) and 24
(49%) respectively. The cutoff for subgroups was defined at the median
value. FAP (immune) expression at tumoral stroma was a significant
predictive factor for lymph node metastasis (pBackground: The tumor and
its microenvironment have dynamic interactions and signaling that
strongly affect tumor progression. Cancer associated fibroblasts (CAFs)
are activated fibroblasts and thought to be an important player in the
tumor microenvironment. Although there are several indicators of CAF,
fibroblast activation protein (FAP) is unique in its selectivity for CAFs
in comparison with other markers. The aim of this study is to investigate
CAFs expressing FAP and its relationship to cancer metastasis in
esophageal cancer.Methods: Sections of paraffin-embedded resected primary
human esophageal cancer specimens from 2008 through 2010 in Okayama
University hospital were stained with antibody directed against FAP.
Overall percentage of stromal FAP staining of the primary tumor was
assessed semi-quantitatively (0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5) and staining intensity
was also graded (none, weak, intermediate, strong). Survival time and
time to recurrence data were analyzed using Kaplan-Meier plots, log-rank
tests, and Cox proportional hazards models.Results: 49 patients with
resected specimens were available for study with 26 (53.1%) stage I, 8
(16.3%) stage II, 14 (28.6%) stage III, and 1 (2.0%) stage IV patients.
All patients were divided to 2 groups, FAP high group and FAP low group,
which are 25 patients (51%) and 24 (49%) respectively. The cutoff for
subgroups was defined at the median value. FAP (immune) expression at
tumoral stroma was a significant predictive factor for lymph node
metastasis (p<0.01) and vessel invasion (pBackground: The tumor and its
microenvironment have dynamic interactions and signaling that strongly
affect tumor progression. Cancer associated fibroblasts (CAFs) are
activated fibroblasts and thought to be an important player in the tumor
microenvironment. Although there are several indicators of CAF,
fibroblast activation protein (FAP) is unique in its selectivity for CAFs
in comparison with other markers. The aim of this study is to investigate
CAFs expressing FAP and its relationship to cancer metastasis in
esophageal cancer.Methods: Sections of paraffin-embedded resected primary
human esophageal cancer specimens from 2008 through 2010 in Okayama
University hospital were stained with antibody directed against FAP.
Overall percentage of stromal FAP staining of the primary tumor was
assessed semi-quantitatively (0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5) and staining intensity
was also graded (none, weak, intermediate, strong). Survival time and
time to recurrence data were analyzed using Kaplan-Meier plots, log-rank
tests, and Cox proportional hazards models.Results: 49 patients with
resected specimens were available for study with 26 (53.1%) stage I, 8
(16.3%) stage II, 14 (28.6%) stage III, and 1 (2.0%) stage IV patients.
All patients were divided to 2 groups, FAP high group and FAP low group,
which are 25 patients (51%) and 24 (49%) respectively. The cutoff for
subgroups was defined at the median value. FAP (immune) expression at
tumoral stroma was a significant predictive factor for lymph node
metastasis (p<0.01) and vessel invasion (p<0.01). In survival analysis of
DFS (disease free survival) and OS (overall survival), FAP high stroma
was associated with shorter period to recurrence (pBackground: The tumor
and its microenvironment have dynamic interactions and signaling that
strongly affect tumor progression. Cancer associated fibroblasts (CAFs)
are activated fibroblasts and thought to be an important player in the
tumor microenvironment. Although there are several indicators of CAF,
fibroblast activation protein (FAP) is unique in its selectivity for CAFs
in comparison with other markers. The aim of this study is to investigate
CAFs expressing FAP and its relationship to cancer metastasis in
esophageal cancer.Methods: Sections of paraffin-embedded resected primary
human esophageal cancer specimens from 2008 through 2010 in Okayama
University hospital were stained with antibody directed against FAP.
Overall percentage of stromal FAP staining of the primary tumor was
assessed semi-quantitatively (0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5) and staining intensity
was also graded (none, weak, intermediate, strong). Survival time and
time to recurrence data were analyzed using Kaplan-Meier plots, log-rank
tests, and Cox proportional hazards models.Results: 49 patients with
resected specimens were available for study with 26 (53.1%) stage I, 8
(16.3%) stage II, 14 (28.6%) stage III, and 1 (2.0%) stage IV patients.
All patients were divided to 2 groups, FAP high group and FAP low group,
which are 25 patients (51%) and 24 (49%) respectively. The cutoff for
subgroups was defined at the median value. FAP (immune) expression at
tumoral stroma was a significant predictive factor for lymph node
metastasis (p<0.01) and vessel invasion (p<0.01). In survival analysis of
DFS (disease free survival) and OS (overall survival), FAP high stroma
was associated with shorter period to recurrence (p<0.05) and death
(pBackground: The tumor and its microenvironment have dynamic
interactions and signaling that strongly affect tumor progression. Cancer
associated fibroblasts (CAFs) are activated fibroblasts and thought to be
an important player in the tumor microenvironment. Although there are
several indicators of CAF, fibroblast activation protein (FAP) is unique
in its selectivity for CAFs in comparison with other markers. The aim of
this study is to investigate CAFs expressing FAP and its relationship to
cancer metastasis in esophageal cancer.Methods: Sections of
paraffin-embedded resected primary human esophageal cancer specimens from
2008 through 2010 in Okayama University hospital were stained with
antibody directed against FAP. Overall percentage of stromal FAP staining
of the primary tumor was assessed semi-quantitatively (0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5)
and staining intensity was also graded (none, weak, intermediate,
strong). Survival time and time to recurrence data were analyzed using
Kaplan-Meier plots, log-rank tests, and Cox proportional hazards
models.Results: 49 patients with resected specimens were available for
study with 26 (53.1%) stage I, 8 (16.3%) stage II, 14 (28.6%) stage III,
and 1 (2.0%) stage IV patients. All patients were divided to 2 groups,
FAP high group and FAP low group, which are 25 patients (51%) and 24
(49%) respectively. The cutoff for subgroups was defined at the median
value. FAP (immune) expression at tumoral stroma was a significant
predictive factor for lymph node metastasis (p<0.01) and vessel invasion
(p<0.01). In survival analysis of DFS (disease free survival) and OS
(overall survival), FAP high stroma was associated with shorter period to
recurrence (p<0.05) and death (p<0.05) than those of FAP low
stroma.Conclusions: Our clinicopathological analysis indicates that
patients whose esophageal carcinoma have high levels of stromal FAP
expression are more likely to have an aggressive disease progression and
a potential development of metastases and recurrence. Although
therapeutic strategies targeting the tumor cells have been generally
inadequate in esophageal carcinomas yet, here we announce that a
stroma-targeted therapy should be considered. Now we are ongoing to
evaluate metastatic potential of CAFs in vitro and vivo, in order to
elucidate the function of FAP expressing CAFs and, in future to establish
a novel therapeutic strategy.

