Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Alginate-based 3D system for the enrichment and culture of cancer
stem cells


Cancer stem cells (CSCs)cancer cells which have the ability to undergo
self-renewal are considered to be responsible for the recurrence and
metastasis of tumors. The development of a culture system which can mimic
aspects of the tumor microenvironment within the cancer stem cell niche
is important to elucidate the mechanisms that underlie the growth and
survival of CSCs and to identify compounds that can target and eliminate
this highly malignant cell population.Here we demonstrate the use of an
alginate-based 3D cell culture as an in vitro system for enriching and
maintaining the stemness properties of cancer cell lines. In this work,
we used alginate gels as a three-dimensional (3D) matrix to culture
cancer cell lines. Alginate is an ideal system for CSC because of its
inertness and ability to provide a hypoxic environment essential for
maintaining the stem-like properties of these cells. We found that cells
cultured in the alginate 3D matrix have increased CSC-related gene
expression and alterations in metabolic-related gene expression that are
consistent with changes reported to occur in CSC that help them to
maintain their drug resistant and invasive properties.In order to be
useful as a drug screening platform to identify CSC targeting agents, we
verified that the high stemness characteristics of the cells cultured in
the alginate 3D matrix can be maintained over multiple passages and many
months of continuous culture. The CSC cultures in the alginate 3D matrix
were found to be resistant to both conventional chemotherapy and targeted
therapeutics, while remaining sensitive to CSC targeting agents BB608 and
BB503. These results support the potential of the alginate 3D culture
system in the enrichment and expansion of CSCs, and provide a reliable in
vitro system for the development and evaluation of CSC-targeting agents.

