Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of phosphorylation in Lmtk3 activation and its contribution
in breast cancer progression


LMTK3 is an oncogenic receptor tyrosine kinase implicated in various
types of cancer including breast, lung, gastric and colorectal. We have
already demonstrated the contribution of LMTK3 in invasion, migration and
transcriptional regulation as well as its involvement in endocrine
resistance in breast cancer. Despite the significant progress in
understanding the role of LMTK3 in human tumourogenesis, the signalling
pathways implicated in LMTK3 regulation still remain to be
elucidated.Protein phosphorylation play an essential role in regulating
intracellular signal transduction pathways involving almost every aspect
of cell activity. In silico phosphoproteomic analysis predicted several
potential LMTK3 phosphorylation sites targeted by different kinases
including Cyclin-dependent kinase 5 (CDK5), a cytoplasmic
proline-directed serine/threonine kinase that is commonly overexpressed
in many solid tumours. Interestingly, recent work performed by two
different groups showed that CDK5 is a regulator of LMTK1 and LMTK2 in
neuronal cells, resulting in axonal outgrowth and potentially influencing
a number of neurophysiological processes.By performing a variety of
molecular/cellular and biochemical experiments we confirmed the ability
of CDK5 to phosphorylate LMTK3 in vitro and identified its exact
phosphorylation sites. Moreover, we investigated the consequences of CDK5
phosphorylation on various LMTK3 processes, amongst which its stability,
sub-cellular localization, its ability to interact with chromatin and
others. In addition, the clinical correlation of CDK5 and LMTK3
expression in cell lines and patients samples were assessed. In
aggregate, we describe a new cellular pathway encompassing CDK5 and LMTK3
that results in breast cancer tumour progression.Our data will be
presented.

