Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Racial/ethnic differences in endometrioid endometrial cancer
survival among cases identified through the National Cancer Database


OBJECTIVES: Past research suggests that at the local level, Non-Hispanic
whites (NHW) have better survival when diagnosed with endometrioid
endometrial cancer (EEC) than non-Hispanic blacks (NHB), Hispanics, and
American Indians; however, little is known about survival differences at
a national level and among other minorities. This study examined whether
racial and ethnic differences in 5-year survival are present in U.S.
women (NHW, NHB, Hispanics, non-Hispanic Asians (NHA), non-Hispanic
Pacific Islanders/Hawaiians (NHPI), non-Hispanic American
Indians/Aleutians or Eskimos (NHAI/AN) and non-Hispanics Others
(NHO).METHODS: EEC cases from the National Cancer Database were analyzed
to evaluate racial/ethnic differences in 5-year survival among women
diagnosed with EEC between 1998 and 2007. Chi-Square test was used to
examine whether differences in demographic, clinical, institutional, and
treatment variables varied by race/ethnicity. Multivariable Cox
proportional hazard regression models were fit to estimate the adjusted
hazard ratio (HR) and 95% confidence interval (95% CI) between
race/ethnicity and survival.RESULTS: A total of 178,310 women were
diagnosed with EEC between 1998 and 2007. Of these; 74.8% were NHW, 8.3%
were NHB, 13.9% were Hispanic, 1.8% were NHA, 0.2% were NHPI, 0.2% were
NHAI/AN and 0.8% were NHO. Adjusting for covariates, NHB (HR = 1.29;
95%CI 1.24-1.34) and NHPI (HR = 1.59; 95%CI 1.50-1.67) had poorer
survival than NHW. Yet results show that NHA (HR = 0.83; 95%CI 0.74-0.92)
and NHO (HR = 0.81; 95%CI 0.69-0.94) had a better survival when compared
to NHW. No survival differences were detected between Hispanics, NHAI/AN
and NHW.CONCLUSIONS: Results identify racial/ethnic differences in 5-year
survival among women diagnosed with EEC cancer in the U.S. between 1998
and 2007. NHA and NHO had a better and NHB and NHPI had a poorer survival
when compared to NHW.

