Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of PD-L1 expression on circulating tumor cells
(CTCs) isolated with a label-free inertial microfluidic system from
advanced non-small cell lung cancer patients (NSCLC pts)


Background: NSCLC exhibits intratumor heterogeneity, with subpopulations
of cells undergoing epithelial-mesenchymal transition. Such CTCs from
NSCLC pts may be missed by the EpCAM-based CELLSEARCH system (CS). The
label-free ClearCell FX inertial microfluidic system (FX) isolates CTCs
based on size and inertia and may lead to more accurate CTC capture.
PD-1/PD-L1 inhibitors have shown benefit in PD-L1+ NSCLC pts, but
responses are still seen in PD-L1- pts, suggesting limitations in tumor
PD-L1 testing. Also, PD-L1 testing on CTCs may be more practical than
tumor rebiopsies and may provide insights into cancer
heterogeneity.Methods: FX was validated with EpCAM-high and EpCAM-low
cancer cell lines labeled with CellTracker dyes spiked into healthy
volunteer (HV) blood for repeatability and reliability. Enriched cells
were detected with the automated Bioview Duet imaging system for recovery
(%). Identical spiking studies were conducted on CS for comparison.
Antibodies for 5-color immunofluorescence (IF) (CK, CD45, DAPI, TTF1 [to
detect lung adenocarcinoma cells], PD-L1) were optimized on EpCAM-high
and EpCAM-low cell lines. 8ml of blood from NSCLC pts were enriched with
FX for 5-color IF characterization. 7.5ml of blood from the same pts
taken at identical timepoints were enumerated with CS for comparison.
Blood was obtained from HV for CTC enumeration on FX and CS as
controls.Results: Cell recovery of EpCAM-high cancer cell lines using FX
produced similar counts to CS, e.g. lung NCI-H2066 cells: FX 64.9%4.5 vs
CS 74.4%9.2 (p = 0.05); lung H1975 cells: FX 74.1%11.9 vs CS 74.7%10.7 (p
= 0.91). In contrast, for EpCAM-low cells, a significant difference in
cell recovery between FX and CS was seen, e.g. lung A549 cells: FX
59.3%5.8 vs CS 26.1%7.6 (pBackground: NSCLC exhibits intratumor
heterogeneity, with subpopulations of cells undergoing
epithelial-mesenchymal transition. Such CTCs from NSCLC pts may be missed
by the EpCAM-based CELLSEARCH system (CS). The label-free ClearCell FX
inertial microfluidic system (FX) isolates CTCs based on size and inertia
and may lead to more accurate CTC capture. PD-1/PD-L1 inhibitors have
shown benefit in PD-L1+ NSCLC pts, but responses are still seen in PD-L1-
pts, suggesting limitations in tumor PD-L1 testing. Also, PD-L1 testing
on CTCs may be more practical than tumor rebiopsies and may provide
insights into cancer heterogeneity.Methods: FX was validated with
EpCAM-high and EpCAM-low cancer cell lines labeled with CellTracker dyes
spiked into healthy volunteer (HV) blood for repeatability and
reliability. Enriched cells were detected with the automated Bioview Duet
imaging system for recovery (%). Identical spiking studies were conducted
on CS for comparison. Antibodies for 5-color immunofluorescence (IF) (CK,
CD45, DAPI, TTF1 [to detect lung adenocarcinoma cells], PD-L1) were
optimized on EpCAM-high and EpCAM-low cell lines. 8ml of blood from NSCLC
pts were enriched with FX for 5-color IF characterization. 7.5ml of blood
from the same pts taken at identical timepoints were enumerated with CS
for comparison. Blood was obtained from HV for CTC enumeration on FX and
CS as controls.Results: Cell recovery of EpCAM-high cancer cell lines
using FX produced similar counts to CS, e.g. lung NCI-H2066 cells: FX
64.9%4.5 vs CS 74.4%9.2 (p = 0.05); lung H1975 cells: FX 74.1%11.9 vs CS
74.7%10.7 (p = 0.91). In contrast, for EpCAM-low cells, a significant
difference in cell recovery between FX and CS was seen, e.g. lung A549
cells: FX 59.3%5.8 vs CS 26.1%7.6 (p<0.0001); and prostate PC3 cells: FX
68.6%7.4 vs CS 35.5%6.9 (pBackground: NSCLC exhibits intratumor
heterogeneity, with subpopulations of cells undergoing
epithelial-mesenchymal transition. Such CTCs from NSCLC pts may be missed
by the EpCAM-based CELLSEARCH system (CS). The label-free ClearCell FX
inertial microfluidic system (FX) isolates CTCs based on size and inertia
and may lead to more accurate CTC capture. PD-1/PD-L1 inhibitors have
shown benefit in PD-L1+ NSCLC pts, but responses are still seen in PD-L1-
pts, suggesting limitations in tumor PD-L1 testing. Also, PD-L1 testing
on CTCs may be more practical than tumor rebiopsies and may provide
insights into cancer heterogeneity.Methods: FX was validated with
EpCAM-high and EpCAM-low cancer cell lines labeled with CellTracker dyes
spiked into healthy volunteer (HV) blood for repeatability and
reliability. Enriched cells were detected with the automated Bioview Duet
imaging system for recovery (%). Identical spiking studies were conducted
on CS for comparison. Antibodies for 5-color immunofluorescence (IF) (CK,
CD45, DAPI, TTF1 [to detect lung adenocarcinoma cells], PD-L1) were
optimized on EpCAM-high and EpCAM-low cell lines. 8ml of blood from NSCLC
pts were enriched with FX for 5-color IF characterization. 7.5ml of blood
from the same pts taken at identical timepoints were enumerated with CS
for comparison. Blood was obtained from HV for CTC enumeration on FX and
CS as controls.Results: Cell recovery of EpCAM-high cancer cell lines
using FX produced similar counts to CS, e.g. lung NCI-H2066 cells: FX
64.9%4.5 vs CS 74.4%9.2 (p = 0.05); lung H1975 cells: FX 74.1%11.9 vs CS
74.7%10.7 (p = 0.91). In contrast, for EpCAM-low cells, a significant
difference in cell recovery between FX and CS was seen, e.g. lung A549
cells: FX 59.3%5.8 vs CS 26.1%7.6 (p<0.0001); and prostate PC3 cells: FX
68.6%7.4 vs CS 35.5%6.9 (p<0.0001). CTCs were detected in 19/21 pts with
progressing stage IV NSCLC (adenocarcinoma) (mean 57; range 4-304) using
FX, vs 7/21 pts (mean 7; range 1-38) using CS. CTC counts were higher
with FX vs CS in 19/21 (90%) NSCLC pts, p = 0.012. No CTCs were detected
in HV with FX (n = 10) and CS (n = 5). After FX enrichment, CTCs from
17/21 NSCLC pts were available for 5-color IF testing. Of these 17 pts,
15 had TTF1+ CTCs. All 15 pts with TTF1+ CTCs had 1 PD-L1+ CTC. 6/15
(40%) pts only had PD-L1+ TTF1+ CTCs, with no PD-L1- TTF1+ CTCs. PD-L1
CTC heterogeneity was seen in the other 9/15 pts, with co-existing PD-L1+
and PD-L1- TTF1+ CTCs. 6 of these 9 pts had more PD-L1+ TTF1+ CTCs than
PD-L1- TTF1+ CTCs.Conclusions: FX resulted in consistently high cell
recovery rates regardless of EpCAM status. Higher CTC counts were
isolated with FX vs CS in 90% of NSCLC pts. 40% of NSCLC adenocarcinoma
pts had PD-L1+ TTF1+ CTCs, but PD-L1 CTC heterogeneity was seen in other
pts, which may in part explain differences in responses to PD-1/PD-L1
inhibitors in NSCLC.

