Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HHLA2, a novel member of the B7 family of inhibitory ligands, is
highly expressed in osteosarcoma


Purpose: Over the past four decades there have been minimal improvements
in outcomes for patients with osteosarcoma (OS). New targets and novel
therapies are needed to improve outcomes for these patients. In this
study, we sought to evaluate the prevalence and prognostic utility of the
immune checkpoint inhibitor HHLA2 in OS.Experimental Design: HHLA2
expression was evaluated in two cohorts of OS patients using a tumor
microarray (TMA) (n = 62) and whole slides (n = 48). HHLA2 expression was
assessed in primary tumor specimens and metastatic disease, and
correlated with the presence of tumor infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs),
and event free survival.Results: HHLA2 was expressed in 68% of OS tumors
in the TMA and in 54% in the second cohort. HHLA2 was expressed in almost
all metastatic disease specimens and was more prevalent than in primary
specimens without known metastases (93% vs 53%, p = 0.02). TILs were
present in 75% of all osteosarcoma specimens. Patients whose tumors were
25% or 50% HHLA2 positive had significantly worse five-year
event-free-survival (33% vs 64%, p = 0.03 and 14% vs 59%, p =
0.02).Conclusions: HHLA2 is expressed in the majority of OS tumors, is
associated with metastatic disease, and is associated with poorer
survival. Further studies are needed assessing the effect of HHLA2
expression on the function of the immune microenvironment, as well as
assessing the feasibility and utility of targeting HHLA2 in OS.

