Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NTRK1/TRKA as a therapeutic target in castration resistant
prostate cancer


Treatment options remain limited for men with castration resistant
prostate cancer, with current chemotherapy offering mainly palliative
benefits. Thus, there is an urgent need to identify new targets for
therapeutic intervention in men who have progressed on anti-androgen
therapy. We have compiled a panel of 20 prostate cancer cell lines that
has been extensively characterized at the molecular level that enables us
to perform high throughput drug and siRNA screens to identify novel
therapeutic targets. We performed an siRNA screen targeting kinases using
eight representative lines, both in the presence and absence of the
anti-androgen MDV3100. Knockdown of NTRK1 (TRKA) significantly inhibited
growth in 4/8 of the cell lines tested. To confirm this, we screened the
entire panel of cell lines with the inhibitor CEP-701, which targets
FLT3, JAK2, and TRK-A/B/C. CEP-701 showed GI50 values (dose required to
inhibit growth by 50%) less than 400 nM in 8/20 cell lines. Since this
drug had already been tested in clinical trials for prostate cancer and
the trials were discontinued due to lack of PSA decline, we looked for
other drugs that also inhibit TRKA. Both BIBF-1120 and GSK-1363089 are
also known to inhibit TRKA, but neither have been tested in prostate
cancer expressing TRKA. We tested GSK-136089 in a subset of 9 prostate
cell lines, and found that 4/9 lines reached GI50 at 1 uM or less,
including AR mutant or null lines such as 22rv1 and PC3 that are
non-responsive to MDV3100. Additional tests with BIBF-1120 and
GSK-1363089 are underway. These data suggest that NTRK1 may be a
potential target for patients with castration resistant prostate cancer.

