Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DNA repair mutations are associated with mutational burden and
T-cell activation signature in lung adenocarcinoma


DNA repair deficiencies have been linked to the generation of immunogenic
neo-antigens and increased efficacy of immunotherapies.To determine the
impact of mutations in DNA repair genes, specifically those involved in
homologous recombination (HR) and mismatch repair (MMR), on infiltrating
immune cells in lung adenocarcinoma, we analyzed the expression of immune
metagenes linked to specific cell types (Angelova et al. 2015) utilizing
RNAseq values from TCGA (515 patients, 230 sequenced).Tumors infiltrated
by activated CD4 and CD8, all combined T cells, and all combined cell
types contained a higher somatic mutation count, while tumors infiltrated
by Th17, NK56 bright, and mast cells were linked to lower mutation count
(Table 1, * = pDNA repair deficiencies have been linked to the generation
of immunogenic neo-antigens and increased efficacy of immunotherapies.To
determine the impact of mutations in DNA repair genes, specifically those
involved in homologous recombination (HR) and mismatch repair (MMR), on
infiltrating immune cells in lung adenocarcinoma, we analyzed the
expression of immune metagenes linked to specific cell types (Angelova et
al. 2015) utilizing RNAseq values from TCGA (515 patients, 230
sequenced).Tumors infiltrated by activated CD4 and CD8, all combined T
cells, and all combined cell types contained a higher somatic mutation
count, while tumors infiltrated by Th17, NK56 bright, and mast cells were
linked to lower mutation count (Table 1, * = p<0.05). Patients with high
mutational burden displayed a significant increase in infiltrating
activated CD4 and CD8, effector memory CD4, all combined T cells, mature
dendritic cells, and all combined cell types, as well as significantly
increased mutations in HR genes, specifically BRCA2 and PALB2, and MMR
genes, specifically MLH1, MSH4, MSH5, EXO1, RFC1, and RFC4. Tumors with
HR mutations contained a significant 1.9-fold higher average mutation
count with increased infiltrating activated CD4, neutrophils, and NKT
cells, as well as decreased activated B cells. Similarly, MMR mutations
were associated with a 2.7-fold increase in mutational burden and
infiltration by all combined T cells. Further, the degree of alterations
in DNA repair genes corresponded to escalating mutational burden, as
tumors with 0, 1, or 2-3 mutated HR genes contained an average 188, 330,
and 472 mutations, respectively, and those with 0, 1, or 2-3 MMR
mutations contained 118, 439, and 639 mutations, respectively.Our
characterization revealed significant links between DNA repair
deficiencies, mutational burden, and tumor infiltration by activated T
cells, thereby identifying potential biomarkers to aid in patient
selection for immunotherapy.[J.A. and Y.C. contributed equally to this
work.]
Association between tumor infiltrating immune cell types and mutational
burden

