Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Neuropilin-1 expressing macrophages promote neuropilin-1
expression on lymphocytes by direct interaction and exert antitumor
activity in HER2 positive breast cancer


Tumor-infiltrating immune cells (TIIs) in HER2+ breast cancer (BC) play
an important role in treatment with anti-HER2 therapy. However, the
precise mechanisms of how TIIs exert anti-tumor activity remain unclear.
Neuropilin-1 (NRP-1) on macrophages regulates immune functions in various
cancers and thus we explored the role of NRP-1 expressing macrophages in
anti-tumor activity in HER2+ BC. We show that NRP-1 on macrophages
regulated the migration of and chemokine secretion from macrophages in
vitro. Furthermore, in vivo studies using a humanized mouse model showed
that NRP-1 knockdown of macrophages in adoptively transferring peripheral
blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) suppressed anti-tumor activity and
infiltration of CD45+ immune cells into tumors. Interestingly, NRP-1
expressing TIIs were mainly CD4+ T cells, despite little expression of
NRP-1 on CD4+ T cells in PBMCs. We found that NRP-1 expression on CD4+ T
cells was induced by NRP-1 transfer from macrophages to T cells. In HER2+
BC patients, NRP-1 expressing TIIs correlated with better clinical
outcomes. These results demonstrate that NRP-1 expressing macrophages are
key subsets of immune cells in trastuzumab-mediated anti-tumor activity
and may predict better outcomes for HER2+ BC patients. In conclusion,
NRP-1 expression is required for differentiation and activation of
macrophages. NRP-1 expressing macrophages promote NRP-1 expression on
CD4+ T cells by direct interaction and contribute to anti-tumor immune
responses in HER2+ BC.

