Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The association between alcohol, physical activity and breast
cancer subtypes in a nested case-control study from the Norwegian Breast
Cancer Screening Program


Background:Breast cancer (BC) is a complex disease, consisting of
molecular subtypes with different prognosis and possibly different
etiology. We and others have previously reported that hormonal factors
such as hormone therapy and pregnancies predominantly affect luminal-like
BC, but it is unclear whether alcohol and physical activity are
associated only with certain subtypes.Methods:We conducted a case-control
study nested within a cohort of 457,036 women who participated in the
Norwegian Breast Cancer Screening Program (NBCSP) in 2006-2012, and who
completed a questionnaire at baseline screening. In all, 5,554 BC cases
with information on risk factors and hormone receptor status (i.e.
estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR) and human epidermal
growth factor 2 (HER2) occurred during the follow-up. For each case, 5
controls were randomly selected from among participants who did not
develop BC, frequency-matched to the cases on year of birth and year of
screening. The following surrogate definitions of BC subtypes were used:
ER+PR+HER2- (luminal A-like), ER+PR-HER2- (luminal B-like, HER2
negative), ER+HER2+ (luminal B-like, HER2 positive), ER-PR-HER2+ (HER2
positive) and ER-PR-HER2- (triple negative). We used multinomial logistic
regression to estimate odds ratios (ORs), with 95% confidence intervals
(CIs), adjusted for age, body mass index (BMI), education, age at
menarche, number of pregnancies and menopausal status.Results:Weekly
amount of alcohol intake was associated with an increased risk of BC
overall (p for trend = 0.001). Analysis by subtype revealed a positive
association between alcohol intake and BC risk for several subtypes,
albeit it was statistically significant only for luminal A-like cancer.
Compared to never drinkers, women who reported an alcohol intake >6
glasses/week had a moderately increased risk of luminal A-like (OR =
1.41, 95% CI 1.14-1.73, p for trend = 0.0001), luminal B-like Her2
positive (OR = 1.55, 0.87-2.75) and triple negative BC (OR = 1.39,
0.81-2.37). In contrast, physical activity (low and high intensity
exercise) was inversely associated with risk of breast cancer overall (p
for trend = 0.002). Relative to women who reported doing no exercise,
those who reported physical activity of 4 hours/week were at reduced risk
for luminal-A like (OR = 0.76, 95% CI 0.63-1.01, p for trend = 0.01),
luminal B-like Her2 positive (OR = 0.84, 0.46-1.54), and triple negative
BC (OR = 0.80, 95% CI 0.45-1.44). The risk estimates for the other
subtypes were close to 1.Conclusions:Alcohol intake was positively
associated, and physical activity negatively associated, with BC overall.
Although these associations were statistically significant only for
luminal A-like BC, their direction and magnitude were rather similar
across several subtypes.

