Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel MET-EGFR bispecific antibody LY3164530 shows advantage
over combining MET and EGFR antibodies in tumor inhibition and overcome
resistance


The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and the
mesenchymal-epithelial transition factor (MET) are receptor tyrosine
kinases that each plays a key role in cancer signaling.Co-expression and
activation of MET and EGFR are found in a number of tumor types,
including non-small cell lung, colorectal, gastric, and head and neck
cancers (Nanjo et al. 2013). Blocking one receptor tends to up-regulate
the other, leading to resistance to single-agent treatment (Engelman et
al. 2007). Amplification of MET and/or high levels of HGF expression has
been observed in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients with
intrinsic or acquired resistance to tyrosine kinase inhibitors of EGFR
(Engelman et al. 2007; Yano et al. 2011). Conversely, MET-amplified lung
cancer cells exposed to MET-inhibiting agents for a prolonged period
develop resistance via the EGFR pathway (McDermott et al. 2010). The
crosstalk between the MET and EGFR pathways suggests that dual inhibition
of these targets may lead to improved outcomes for patients with MET- and
EGFR-positive cancers, and that simultaneous inhibition may overcome or
delay resistance compared to the blockade of just a single pathway.
LY3164530 is an engineered mAb-scFv bispecific antibody that consists of
an immunoglobulin G4 (IgG4) antibody to MET and a single-chain variable
fragment (scFv) to EGFR fused to the N-terminus of each heavy chain (HC).
LY3164530 binds to extracellular domains of MET and EGFR with high
affinity and inhibits signaling via both MET and EGFR receptors by
blocking ligand binding and internalizing and degrading both receptors.
In tumor cells, it binds and co-immunoprecipitates both receptors.
LY3164530 has increased avidity binding to MET in cells expressing higher
level of EGFR. This increased avidity binding leads to better
neutralization of HGF compared to parental MET antibody in these cells.
Surprisingly, LY3164530 has superior activity in internalizing/degrading
EGFR (wild type and mutant forms) in vitro and in vivo relative to the
combination of LY2875358 (i.e., emibetuzumab) and cetuximab in cells
expressing high MET and EGFR. In addition, LY3164530 has superior
activity in overcoming HGF-mediated resistance to erlotinib, gefitinib,
lapatinib, or vemurafenib as compared to the combination of individual
monoclonal antibodies targeting these receptors in cell-based assays. In
vivo, administration of LY3164530 results in dose-dependent antitumor
activity in multiple cell line-derived NSCLC and gastric xenografts. The
antitumor activity of LY3164530 is equivalent, and in some cases superior
to the combination of emibetuzumab and cetuximab in NSCLC and gastric
tumor models. The Phase 1 study with LY3164530 is on-going (NCT02221882).

