Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genetic subtype-specific prognostic significance of genetic
alterations in lower-grade gliomas


BACKGROUND:Lower-grade gliomas (WHO grade II and III gliomas) are usually
slowly progressive but rarely curable brain caners, for which optimal
therapy is still controversial. Recently, we have delineated a
comprehensive picture of genetic alterations in lower-grade gliomas and
revealed that they could be clearly classified into three genetic
subtypes characterized by distinct genetic and clinical features: IDH1/2
mutated tumors with 1p/19q co-deletion (TypeI), IDH1/2 mutated tumors
without 1p/19q co-deletion (TypeII) and IDH1/2 wild-type tumors
(TypeIII). Median survival of each genetic subtype is 16.4, 7.77, and
2.12 years in TypeI, II, and III tumors, respectively. Given a higher
layer of inter-tumor heterogeneity inferred from the presence of
additional genetic lesions on each subtype, there still remains a
possibility that within each subtype, we could find one or more subgroups
showing distinct biological behaviors and clinical outcomes. In the
current study, we analyzed a large data set of patients with lower-grade
gliomas fully genotyped for major genetic lesions to determine the
prognostic significance of additional genetic alterations..METHODS:We
analyzed genetic alterations detected by exome and/or targeted sequencing
as well as SNP-array karyotyping obtained from clinically well-annotated
724 patients aged 18 years with supratentorial lower-grade gliomas from
the Japan and The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) cohorts. We performed
univariate and multivariate Cox hazard proportional analyses for overall
survival; multivariate models incorporated age at the time of surgery (60
vs. BACKGROUND:Lower-grade gliomas (WHO grade II and III gliomas) are
usually slowly progressive but rarely curable brain caners, for which
optimal therapy is still controversial. Recently, we have delineated a
comprehensive picture of genetic alterations in lower-grade gliomas and
revealed that they could be clearly classified into three genetic
subtypes characterized by distinct genetic and clinical features: IDH1/2
mutated tumors with 1p/19q co-deletion (TypeI), IDH1/2 mutated tumors
without 1p/19q co-deletion (TypeII) and IDH1/2 wild-type tumors
(TypeIII). Median survival of each genetic subtype is 16.4, 7.77, and
2.12 years in TypeI, II, and III tumors, respectively. Given a higher
layer of inter-tumor heterogeneity inferred from the presence of
additional genetic lesions on each subtype, there still remains a
possibility that within each subtype, we could find one or more subgroups
showing distinct biological behaviors and clinical outcomes. In the
current study, we analyzed a large data set of patients with lower-grade
gliomas fully genotyped for major genetic lesions to determine the
prognostic significance of additional genetic alterations..METHODS:We
analyzed genetic alterations detected by exome and/or targeted sequencing
as well as SNP-array karyotyping obtained from clinically well-annotated
724 patients aged 18 years with supratentorial lower-grade gliomas from
the Japan and The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) cohorts. We performed
univariate and multivariate Cox hazard proportional analyses for overall
survival; multivariate models incorporated age at the time of surgery (60
vs. <60 years old), WHO grade (grade II vs. III), and extent of resection
(gross total resection vs. partial resection or biopsy) with
stratification of cohorts (Japan or TCGA) and were performed with
stepwise selection of variables based on the Akaike information
criterion.RESULTS:In the multivariate Cox proportional-hazards regression
analysis, we revealed that several genetic alterations have
subtype-specific prognostic significance: NOTCH1 mutation in Type-I
[hazard ratio (HR) = 2.57, 95% confidence interval (CI) = 1.40-4.70],
high-level focal amplification of CDK4 [HR = 9.40, 95% CI = 3.08-28.7],
PIK3R1 mutation [HR = 8.13, 95% CI = 2.70-24.52], and loss of chromosome
9p [HR = 1.98, 95% CI = 1.16-3.38] in Type-II, and loss of chromosome 10
[HR = 2.26, 95% CI = 1.28-3.97] in Type-III tumors. In Type-III tumors,
WHO grade [HR = 5.79, 95% CI = 2.79-12.0] showed a much higher prognostic
value than other prognostic factors. Most of these genetic alterations
are components of three major signaling pathways or copy number
variations frequently affected in glioblastomas, suggesting a close link
of disease progression to glioblastoma
pathophysiology.CONCLUSIONS:Subtype-specific genetic lesions can be used
to further stratify patients in each genetic subtype for overall survival
to improve management of lower-grade gliomas.

