Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Selective inhibitor of nuclear export (SINE) compounds prevent
migration and proliferation of triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) cells
by restoring expression of ARRDC3


Arrestin-related domain-containing protein-3 (ARRDC3) is one of 6
mammalian arrestins, which has been shown to possess tumor suppressor
activity by inducing degradation of phosphorylated 2-adrenergic receptor
(2 AR) and integrin 4 (ITG 4). Our previous studies demonstrated that
Sirt2 epigenetically silenced expression of ARRDC3 in TNBC cells and
overexpression of ARRDC3 significantly reduced their invasive potential.
Therefore, we hypothesized that compounds, which restore ARRDC3
expression levels could serve as novel therapeutic options for TNBC. To
test this, we examined the ability of SINE compounds: KPT-185 and KPT-330
(selinexor), to effectively restore ARRDC3 expression. We observed that
KPT-185 and selinexor significantly induced ARRDC3 expression and
inhibited the proliferation and the invasiveness of the TNBC cell lines
MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-468 in vitro. In vivo, selinexor inhibited the
tumor growth of MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-468 xenografts by nearly 100%
compared with vehicle treated animals. Furthermore, immunohistochemical
analysis of TNBC tumors from selinexor treated mice revealed increased
ARRDC3 expression versus vehicle treated animals. Our results suggest
that restoration of ARRDC3 expression is an important antineoplastic
mechanism of SINE compounds in TNBC and suggest that selinexor could be
an effective treatment against tumors with downregulated ARRDC3.

