Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bioinformatic analysis of RNA-Seq data to search for novel
diagnostic/prognostic biomarkers of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma


Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is one of the most deadly human
malignancies. The only curative treatment available is the surgical
removal of the tumor in early stages of the disease. Current methods for
early detection and treatment are poor, justifying more studies in this
field. We aim to generate a high-resolution catalog of the PDAC
transcriptome, to reveal transcriptional alterations associated with the
malignant phenotype of PDAC. To that end 28 patient matched samples of
PDAC and nontumor adjacent pancreatic tissue were processed for the
production of rRNA subtracted cDNAs libraries and subsequently sequenced
in the Illumina HiSeq platform producing 17 million 100 nt paired-end
reads per sample on average. We are implementing an informatics pipeline
to detect and evaluate the differential expression in PDAC of
well-annotated genes, including long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs). In
addition, we will search for novel lncRNAs and alternative splicing
isoforms of protein-coding genes expressed in pancreatic tissues.
Following the initial quality control (FastQC) and trimming of low
quality regions (Trimmomatic), reads from each sample were aligned to the
human genome (TopHat2) and a count table with the number of reads per
gene for each sample was created (HTSeq). For evidence of changes across
experimental conditions we use DESeq2, identifying 310 genes up-regulated
and 354 down-regulated (p-adjustedPancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC)
is one of the most deadly human malignancies. The only curative treatment
available is the surgical removal of the tumor in early stages of the
disease. Current methods for early detection and treatment are poor,
justifying more studies in this field. We aim to generate a
high-resolution catalog of the PDAC transcriptome, to reveal
transcriptional alterations associated with the malignant phenotype of
PDAC. To that end 28 patient matched samples of PDAC and nontumor
adjacent pancreatic tissue were processed for the production of rRNA
subtracted cDNAs libraries and subsequently sequenced in the Illumina
HiSeq platform producing 17 million 100 nt paired-end reads per sample on
average. We are implementing an informatics pipeline to detect and
evaluate the differential expression in PDAC of well-annotated genes,
including long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs). In addition, we will search for
novel lncRNAs and alternative splicing isoforms of protein-coding genes
expressed in pancreatic tissues. Following the initial quality control
(FastQC) and trimming of low quality regions (Trimmomatic), reads from
each sample were aligned to the human genome (TopHat2) and a count table
with the number of reads per gene for each sample was created (HTSeq).
For evidence of changes across experimental conditions we use DESeq2,
identifying 310 genes up-regulated and 354 down-regulated
(p-adjusted<0.001 and lfcPancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is one
of the most deadly human malignancies. The only curative treatment
available is the surgical removal of the tumor in early stages of the
disease. Current methods for early detection and treatment are poor,
justifying more studies in this field. We aim to generate a
high-resolution catalog of the PDAC transcriptome, to reveal
transcriptional alterations associated with the malignant phenotype of
PDAC. To that end 28 patient matched samples of PDAC and nontumor
adjacent pancreatic tissue were processed for the production of rRNA
subtracted cDNAs libraries and subsequently sequenced in the Illumina
HiSeq platform producing 17 million 100 nt paired-end reads per sample on
average. We are implementing an informatics pipeline to detect and
evaluate the differential expression in PDAC of well-annotated genes,
including long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs). In addition, we will search for
novel lncRNAs and alternative splicing isoforms of protein-coding genes
expressed in pancreatic tissues. Following the initial quality control
(FastQC) and trimming of low quality regions (Trimmomatic), reads from
each sample were aligned to the human genome (TopHat2) and a count table
with the number of reads per gene for each sample was created (HTSeq).
For evidence of changes across experimental conditions we use DESeq2,
identifying 310 genes up-regulated and 354 down-regulated
(p-adjusted<0.001 and lfc<|3.3|), including 156 lncRNAs. The
differentially expressed genes detected are involved in pathways related
to cancer, regulation of cell cycle process, membrane and secreted
proteins. De novo transcript assembly (Trinity) revealed a number of yet
unannotated transcripts and isoforms expressed in pancreatic tissues.
Altogether, the transcript catalog generated herein provides a valuable
resource for the identification of novel putative candidate biomarkers to
improve the early detection or evaluation of therapeutic response in
PDAC.Work supported by FAPESP, CNPq and CAPES.

