Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Altered catalytic properties of a subset of Met cytoplasmic domain
variants occurring in renal cell carcinoma


TCGA provisional data of papillary renal cell carcinoma (PRCC) kidney
cancer, a malignant hereditary cancer syndrome, reveals that 23% of
patients (n = 161) have MET gene amplification and/or mRNA up-regulation
(2-fold or greater; RNA-Seq V2) and 10% of patients possess MET
mutations. The Met tyrosine kinase is the cell surface receptor for
hepatocyte growth factor (HGF). HGF stimulation induces Met protein
autophosphorylation and consequently enhances epithelial cell motility,
morphogenesis, and proliferation. Chronic and/or overstimulation of Met
contributes to tumor growth and metastasis. We determined Km and Vmax for
ATP binding to full-length Met protein isolated from the PRCC derived
cell line ACHN, which possesses the MET mutation T992I (numbered per
SWISSPROT accession P08581) in the juxtamembrane domain, and the clear
cell RCC derived cell line Caki-1, which possesses the MET V1220I
mutation in the kinase domain. Catalytic constants were determined using
two-site immunoassays for total Met and phospho-Met. Both variants were
associated with increased Vmax relative to wild type Met protein isolated
from B5/589 breast epithelial cells. The observed increased catalytic
activity of receptor variants may confer a higher overall rate of
signaling at lower ATP concentrations, potentially contributing to
enhanced tumor cell motility and proliferation in both papillary and
clear cell RCC.

