Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combination effect of afatinib and BI836845, a humanized IGF
ligand-neutralizing antibody, on EGFR-TKI-resistant NSCLC cells


Insulin-like growth factor (IGF) signaling is thought to have a role in
the cancer progression and survival, and many carcinomas are known to
overexpress IGF-1 receptor (IGF1R). Furthermore, it was clarified that
IGF1R signaling contributes to EGFR-TKI resistance in NSCLC. IGF1R is
thought to be a therapeutic target for cancer chemotherapy. Previously,
we screened the combination effect of afatinib and various anticancer
drugs on a panel of NSCLC cell lines including gefitinib-resistant and
afatinib-resistant PC-9 cells which we established. As the result, the
combination of afatinib and small molecule IGF1R-TKIs (BMS754807,
NVP-ADW742) has shown the most cytotoxicity on wide variety cancer cells.
However, these IGF1R-TKIs have cross-reactivity to insulin receptor and,
as a result, are known to cause hyperglycemia. Moreover, a phase III
trial of the combination chemotherapy between erlotinib and IGF1R
specific antibody, figitumumab, in advanced nonadenocarcinoma NSCLC
patients (ADVIGO 1018)was closed early because of futility and an
increased incidence of serious adverse events.BI836845 is a humanized IGF
ligand-neutralizing antibody which is neutralizing both IGF-1 and IGF-2.
The proliferation of several cell lines was reported to be potently
inhibited by BI 836845 with lower than 100 g/ml EC50 values. This
antibody is thought to be a substitute approach to inhibit IGF1R
signaling pathway other than previous IGF1R-TKIs. We evaluated the
combination effect of afatinib and BI836845 on the same NSCLC panel by
MTS assay. BI836845 had only a limited cytotoxicity by itself. The
combination of afatinib and BI836845 had additive or synergistic
cytotoxicity on most of the NSCLC cell lines including
EGFR-TKIs-resistant cells except the cells overexpressing c-Met or
expressing K-ras mutation. This combination significantly inhibited both
EGFR and IGF1R autophosphorylation and their downstream signaling,
especially Akt/mTOR pathway, as compared with each singular usage. These
combination effects were attenuated when BI836845 combined with
erlotinib. Since BI836845 cross-react to rodent IGFs, we examined
pharmacological activity of this combination using SCID mice xenograft
mode. The mice bearing tumor were given 6 mg/kg afatinib (5 times/week,
p.o.) and 200 mg/kg BI836845 (1 time/week, i.p.) for 8 weeks. This
combination synergistically inhibited afatinib-resistant tumor (PC-9Afa1,
PC-9Afa2) and gefitinib-resistant tumor (PC-9ZD, expressed T790M mutant
EGFR). This BI836845 administration completely inhibited IGFs activity in
the mice serum without alteration of blood sugar level and insulin
concentration. Though growth rate of the treated mice was slightly
reduced, body weight loss and other serious adverse events were not
observed.From these observations, this combination chemotherapy is
thought to be a potential therapeutic strategy for NSCLC.

