Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synergistic effect with APR-246 and standard chemotherapy in small
cell lung cancer cells carrying smoking-associated TP53 mutations


Background: Although smoking increases risk for many tumor types, no
malignancy is more closely linked to tobacco exposure than small cell
lung cancer (SCLC); 90% of SCLC patients are smokers. Carcinogenic
compounds in cigarettes increase cancer susceptibility due to formation
of DNA adducts, leading to oncogenic mutations. Etoposide in combination
with cisplatin or carboplatin is the standard chemotherapy for SCLC.
However, most SCLC patients eventually die of chemotherapy-refractory
disease. Mutation in the tumor suppressor gene TP53 is one of the main
causes for resistance, and occurs in more than 70% of SCLC patients
(http://p53.free.fr). APR-246 (PRIMA-1MET) is the first clinical-stage
small molecule that reactivates mutant p53 by inducing its wild-type
conformation triggering apoptosis. It has been tested in a First in Human
clinical trial in hematological malignancies with encouraging results
(Lehmann et al. J Clin Oncol 30, 2012), and a Phase Ib/II study in
combination with platinum-based therapy in recurrent ovarian cancer is
ongoing (AACR abstract #CT204, 2015). We have previously observed strong
synergy with APR-246 and platinum compounds in TP53-mutant drug-resistant
ovarian cancer cells (Mohell et al. Cell Death and Disease 6, 2015). The
aim of the present study was to investigate whether APR-246 synergizes
with standard chemotherapy in SCLC cells carrying smoking-associated
and/or lung cancer-specific TP53 mutations. Methods: Cell viability was
tested using CellTiter-Glo assay, TP53 status with Sanger sequencing and
single strand conformation analysis, and p53 protein level with Western
blotting. Combination Index (CI) was calculated according to Additive
model. Results: We observed synergistic (CIBackground: Although smoking
increases risk for many tumor types, no malignancy is more closely linked
to tobacco exposure than small cell lung cancer (SCLC); 90% of SCLC
patients are smokers. Carcinogenic compounds in cigarettes increase
cancer susceptibility due to formation of DNA adducts, leading to
oncogenic mutations. Etoposide in combination with cisplatin or
carboplatin is the standard chemotherapy for SCLC. However, most SCLC
patients eventually die of chemotherapy-refractory disease. Mutation in
the tumor suppressor gene TP53 is one of the main causes for resistance,
and occurs in more than 70% of SCLC patients (http://p53.free.fr).
APR-246 (PRIMA-1MET) is the first clinical-stage small molecule that
reactivates mutant p53 by inducing its wild-type conformation triggering
apoptosis. It has been tested in a First in Human clinical trial in
hematological malignancies with encouraging results (Lehmann et al. J
Clin Oncol 30, 2012), and a Phase Ib/II study in combination with
platinum-based therapy in recurrent ovarian cancer is ongoing (AACR
abstract #CT204, 2015). We have previously observed strong synergy with
APR-246 and platinum compounds in TP53-mutant drug-resistant ovarian
cancer cells (Mohell et al. Cell Death and Disease 6, 2015). The aim of
the present study was to investigate whether APR-246 synergizes with
standard chemotherapy in SCLC cells carrying smoking-associated and/or
lung cancer-specific TP53 mutations. Methods: Cell viability was tested
using CellTiter-Glo assay, TP53 status with Sanger sequencing and single
strand conformation analysis, and p53 protein level with Western
blotting. Combination Index (CI) was calculated according to Additive
model. Results: We observed synergistic (CI<0.8) or strong synergist
effect (CIT transversion) and/or lung cancer specific homozygous TP53
mutations, including NCI-H2195 (V157F, 4.3% of all SCLC tumors),
NCI-H1048 (R273C, 1.78%) and NCI-H889 (C242S, 1.07%). Synergy was also
observed in H196 cells with hotspot R175H mutation (2.14%), while
additive effect (CI = 0.8-1.2) was found in NCI-H1882 (R273L, 1.78%) and
NCI-H187 (S241C, 0.36%) cells. Synergy was also observed with etoposide
in NCI-H2195 cells. Moreover, APR-246 sensitized the NCI-H2195 cells to
cisplatin; the IC50 value decreased about 2-fold at clinically relevant
concentration of APR-246. All tested SCLC cell lines had medium or high
level of p53. Further studies with other conventional drugs are ongoing.
Conclusions: Treatment with APR-246 in combination with cisplatin or
etoposide resulted in synergy or strong synergy in SCLC cells carrying
lung cancer-specific and/or smoking-related TP53 mutations. Our results
suggest that combination treatment with APR-246 and standard chemotherapy
can provide significantly improved treatment of TP53-mutant SCLC.

