Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrin v3-targeted lipase-labile docetaxel-prodrug micelles
preferentially treat breast cancer bone metastases


Background: Bone metastases occur in 70% of metastatic breast cancer
patients and are a leading cause of morbidity. Current therapies are
often palliative, in part due to a lack of specificity for tumor targets
within the bone. Integrin v3 is overexpressed on neo-angiogenic blood
vessels, tumor-promoting macrophages, osteoclasts, and more aggressive
breast cancer cells, making it an attractive therapeutic
target.Objective: The goal of this study was to use Sn2 lipase-labile
docetaxel-prodrug nanoparticle, targeted against activated integrin v3,
to attenuate breast cancer metastases.Methods: A novel phospholipid-based
micelle (12.5 nm) was functionalized with a peptidomimetic for activated
integrin v3, and designed to carry either rhodamine for fluorescent
labeling or Sn2 lipase-labile prodrug of docetaxel (DTX-PD) for drug
delivery. For microscopic localization studies, fluorescently labeled
micelles were prepared with or without integrin v3-targeting. C57BL/6
female mice received MMTV-PyMT breast cancer cell line
(luciferase-labeled) via intracardiac (IC) injection to achieve tumor
metastasis in all major organs. On day 8 post-IC injection, micelle
preparations were administered i.v. and circulated within C57BL/6 mice
for 3 hours prior to sacrifice and tissue collection. For drug efficacy
studies, Sn2 lipase-labile docetaxel-prodrug was incorporated into
v3-micelles (v3-DTX-PD). C57BL/6 female mice IC injected with MMTV-PyMT
cells (luciferase-labeled) were treated with v3-DTX-PD, or molar
equivalent dose of free-DTX, or saline. Beginning on day 4 post-IC
injection, mice were treated 3 times, once every 3 days (1.85mg/kg DTX
per treatment). On day 12 post-IC injection, metastatic burden in the
major organs was analyzed via ex vivo bioluminescent imaging.Results:
Fluorescent histological analysis of the tibiofemoral bone region showed
significant colocalization of v3-micelles with breast cancer bone
metastases, as compared with non-targeted micelles (6.5-fold increase,
pBackground: Bone metastases occur in 70% of metastatic breast cancer
patients and are a leading cause of morbidity. Current therapies are
often palliative, in part due to a lack of specificity for tumor targets
within the bone. Integrin v3 is overexpressed on neo-angiogenic blood
vessels, tumor-promoting macrophages, osteoclasts, and more aggressive
breast cancer cells, making it an attractive therapeutic
target.Objective: The goal of this study was to use Sn2 lipase-labile
docetaxel-prodrug nanoparticle, targeted against activated integrin v3,
to attenuate breast cancer metastases.Methods: A novel phospholipid-based
micelle (12.5 nm) was functionalized with a peptidomimetic for activated
integrin v3, and designed to carry either rhodamine for fluorescent
labeling or Sn2 lipase-labile prodrug of docetaxel (DTX-PD) for drug
delivery. For microscopic localization studies, fluorescently labeled
micelles were prepared with or without integrin v3-targeting. C57BL/6
female mice received MMTV-PyMT breast cancer cell line
(luciferase-labeled) via intracardiac (IC) injection to achieve tumor
metastasis in all major organs. On day 8 post-IC injection, micelle
preparations were administered i.v. and circulated within C57BL/6 mice
for 3 hours prior to sacrifice and tissue collection. For drug efficacy
studies, Sn2 lipase-labile docetaxel-prodrug was incorporated into
v3-micelles (v3-DTX-PD). C57BL/6 female mice IC injected with MMTV-PyMT
cells (luciferase-labeled) were treated with v3-DTX-PD, or molar
equivalent dose of free-DTX, or saline. Beginning on day 4 post-IC
injection, mice were treated 3 times, once every 3 days (1.85mg/kg DTX
per treatment). On day 12 post-IC injection, metastatic burden in the
major organs was analyzed via ex vivo bioluminescent imaging.Results:
Fluorescent histological analysis of the tibiofemoral bone region showed
significant colocalization of v3-micelles with breast cancer bone
metastases, as compared with non-targeted micelles (6.5-fold increase,
p<0.001). v3-micelles did not localize within tumor-free bones. In drug
efficacy analysis, v3-DTX-PD micelles significantly attenuated bone
metastases (3-fold, p = 0.007) and significantly reduced osteolytic bone
destruction as assessed by x-ray analysis (3.5-fold, p = 0.021). Serum
chemistry analysis of enzymes indicative of liver damage were elevated in
the DTX treated group, but not in v3-DTX-PD or saline treated groups.
Interestingly, v3-DTX-PD micelles did not attenuate breast cancer
metastases within the liver, lungs, or kidneys. Histological examination
of metastatic tumor tissue demonstrated elevated integrin 3 expression in
bone metastases, as compared to the other sites.Conclusion: These
findings suggest that the unique elevated expression of integrin v3
within breast cancer bone metastases could be exploited with v3-DTX-PD
micelles for effective therapy.

