Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Lysosomal acid phosphatase 2 is an unfavorable prognostic factor
associated with better survival in colorectal cancer patients receiving
chemotherapy


Colorectal cancer (CRC) is one of leading malignancies worldwide. The
therapeutic modality for advanced CRC including stage III and IV, is
operation following by chemotherapy. For stage II CRC, surgery is the
main therapeutic modality but the usage of adjuvant chemotherapy is still
controversial and there is no reliable indicator for their purpose. In
this study, we found that the expression of lysosomal acid phosphatase 2
(ACP2) in the tumor tissue of CRC was elevated and was correlated with
poor outcome in stage II CRC patients, especially. In addition, in CRC
patients with high ACP2 expression tended to have more sensitive for 5-FU
treatment in our cohort. In CRC of stage II patients, multivariate Cox
proportion hazard model analysis revealed that ACP2 expression and T
stage are independent prognostic factor for overall survival (HR: 3.274,
CI: 1.413-7.586, p = 0.006; HR: 3.742, CI: 1.058-13.233, p = 0.041). Our
data indicated that high expression of ACP2 was a negative prognosticator
and could predict 5-FU chemotherapy response in stage II CRC. Moreover,
we used HCT116 cells transfected with ACP2 lentivirus to create stable
shACP2-HCT116 clone. Our results showed knockdown ACP2 could induce
chemoresistance and more mesenchymal-like phenotype of CRC cell line.
Therefor, targeting ACP2 might be a novel chemotherapy factor and might a
new strategy in stage II CRC patients.

