Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Critical roles of FRS2beta, a feedback inhibitor of ErbB-ERK
signaling, for communication between cancer stem cells and their niche
during mammary tumorigenesis


Inflammatory microenvironment contributes to tumorigenesis. Although it
is thought that breast cancer stem cells (CSCs) appear and grow in the
inflammatory microenvironment that is called CSC niche, it remains
largely unclear how it occurs. Here, we uncovered FRS2beta, a feed-back
inhibitor of ERK activity in progenitor cells, plays critical roles for
various cytokine production to increase progenitor cell- and CSC- state,
and create the CSC niche. Expression levels of FRS2beta were increased in
mammary tumors of MMTV-ErbB2 mice than in normal mammary tissues.
Deficiency of FRS2beta greatly delayed mammary tumorigenesis, decreased
mammosphere-forming ability and tumor stroma, a component of the CSC
niche. Expression levels of various cytokines, including IGF1 and CXCL12,
stemness- and stroma-inducing cytokines, respectively, were reduced in
FRS2beta-mutant mammospheres, pre-cancerous mammary and tumor tissues.
Furthermore, expression levels of FRS2beta were higher in CD44highCD24low
CSCs-enriched population in patient-derived breast cancer tissues. Thus
the mechanisms to maintain progenitor cell-state by prevention of excess
ERK activity may permit production of various cytokines to create CSC
niche, and allow appearance and growth of CSCs. These results suggest
that treatment with MEK inhibitors may allow survival of CSCs, raising
the risk of recurrence. We provide a rationale of combination therapy
targeting both FRS2beta and MEK inhibitors to eradicate tumors.

