Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ST7612AA1: focus on a drug candidate, front-runner of a new
generation of HDAC inhibitors


After more than 20 years of research in the field of HDAC inhibitors, the
oncological armamentarium has significantly enriched with new approved
drugs. Currently, four drugs, Vorinostat (Zolinza; 2006), Romidepsin
(Istodax; 2009) Belinostat (Beleodaq; 2014) and Panobinostat (Farydak;
2015) have been approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
for the treatment of cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (CTCL), peripheral T-cell
lymphoma (PTCL), and multiple myeloma, respectively. A fifth, Chidamide
(Epidaza; 2015), has been recently approved by the China Food and Drug
Administration for the treatment of PTCL.Beyond them, more than twenty
are currently under pre-clinical and clinical investigation as single
agent and in combination therapies against different cancers and in other
several novel therapeutic indications. However, it is to emphasize a
feature: among all these, no one, with the exception of the natural
product Romidepsin, is a thiol derivative.After efforts lasted years, now
we have selected ST7612AA1 - a new thiol-(-lactam amide) SAHA analogues,
potential front-runner of a new generation of HDAC inhibitors, [1] highly
competitive respect to other HDAC inhibitors drugs, orally administered
with a negligible toxicity.ST7612AA1 displays low-nanomolar inhibitor
activity on HDACs, being especially powerful on HDAC6 isoform, associated
to a wide spectrum of antitumor activity, both in vitro and in vivo [2];
it can be industrially developed with a quick and easy synthetic process
[3]. Moreover, it has also been investigated as an enhancer in
antiretroviral therapy against HIV, aimed to eradicate the viral
reservoirs [4].All these results encouraged further enrichment
experiments with ST7612AA1 as a drug candidate, which is currently in a
phase of pre-clinical evaluation.The overall profile of ST7612AA1,
including synthesis and a comprehensive pharmacological characterization,
will be presented.[1] G. Giannini et al. J Med Chem. 2014, 57,
8358-8377[2] L. Vesci et al. Oncotarget 2015, 6, 5735-48[3] G.
Battistuzzi, G. Giannini. Bioorg. Med. Chem .Lett. 2015, submitted[4] R.
Badia Antiviral Research 2015, 123, 62-69

