Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The effects of NT-1044, a novel AMPK activator, on endometrial
cancer cell proliferation, apoptosis, cell stress, and tumor growth


Objectives: Obesity and diabetes are associated with increased risk and
worse outcomes in endometrial cancer (EC). Anti-diabetic biguanide drugs
such as metformin may have anti-tumorigenic effects by behaving as AMPK
activators and mTOR inhibitors. Metformin requires organic cation
transporters (OCTs) for entry into cells, and NT-1044 (NovaTarg
Therapeutics) is an AMPK activator designed to have greater affinity for
two of these transporters, OCT1 and 3. We sought to compare the effects
of NT-1044 on cell proliferation in human EC cell lines and on tumor
growth in an endometrioid EC mouse model.Methods: Cell proliferation was
assessed in two EC cell lines, ECC-1 and Ishikawa, by MTT assay after
exposure to NT-1044. Apoptosis was analyzed by Annexin V-FITC assay. Cell
cycle progression was evaluated by flow cytometry. Reactive oxygen
species (ROS) were measured using a DCFH-DA assay. Western immunoblotting
was performed to evaluate the effects of NT-1044 on the downstream
targets of the AMPK/mTOR pathway and proteins related to cell cycle and
cellular stress. For in vivo studies, we utilized the LKB1f/f/p53f/f
mouse model of endometrioid endometrial cancer. Mice were treated with
placebo or NT-1044 (200 mg/kg/day, oral gavage) following tumor onset for
4 weeks.Results: NT-1044 significantly inhibited proliferation in a
dose-dependent manner in both EC cell lines after 72 hours of exposure
(IC50 218 uM for ECC-1; 87 uM for Ishikawa). Treatment with NT-1044
resulted in G1 cell cycle arrest, induced apoptosis and increased ROS
production in both cell lines. NT-1044 increased phosphorylation of AMPK
and decreased phosphorylation of S6, a key downstream target of the mTOR
pathway. Expression of the cell cycle proteins CDK4, CDK6 and cyclin D1
decreased in a dose dependent-fashion while cellular stress protein
expression was induced in both cell lines. As compared to placebo,
NT-1044 inhibited endometrial tumor weight in the LKB1f/f/p53f/f mice by
56% (p = 0.031).Conclusions: NT-1044 suppressed EC cell growth through G1
cell cycle arrest, induction of apoptosis, cellular stress and inhibition
of the AMPK/mTOR pathway. In addition, NT-1044 inhibited EC tumor growth
in vivo. More work is needed to determine if this novel biguanide will be
beneficial in the treatment of women with EC, a disease strongly impacted
by obesity and diabetes.

