Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BRAF mutation analysis in cell free tumoral DNA (cfDNA) of
melanoma patients: results from the prospective study GEM1304 (Spanish
Melanoma Group)


Backgroud: Tumor-derived circulating cell-free DNA (cfDNA) is a dynamic
source for determination of tumor mutation status. We have previously
demonstrated the prognostic value of BRAFV600 mutation status in
pretreatment cfDNA (BRAF pre-cfDNA) in advanced melanoma patients (p)
treated with BRAF inhibitors (median overall survival [OS] 7 months [m]
vs 22m for BRAF pre-cfDNA positive and negative p, respectively p =
0.017)1. Based on these results, the Spanish Melanoma Group conducted a
prospective study in 13 centers to determine the prognostic value of
BRAFV600 mutation in pre-cfDNA, the change in mutation status at time of
first evaluation (BRAF early-cfDNA), and the correlation of BRAF cfDNA
dynamics with clinical evolution (GEM1304) (ClinicalTrials.gov
Identifier: NCT01960634).Methods: One hundred and fifty nine plasma and
serum samples from 66 stage IV BRAF mutant melanoma p were collected
before and during treatment, until disease progression.A quantitative
5-nuclease PCR based assay was used to determine BRAFV600 mutation status
in cfDNA.Results: Most p were stage M1c (62%), treated with BRAF
inhibitors (53%), and not previously treated (67%). BRAF pre-cfDNA was
positive in 42 p (64%). Median OS was 6.4 m (95% CI: 10.9-23.6) and 17 m
(95% CI: 3.5-9.2) for p with positive and negative BRAF pre-cfDNA,
respectively (p = 0.06). Significant differences in OS were observed
according to BRAF early-cfDNA negativization: 4.7 m (95%CI: 1.2-8.1) in
those with persistence of BRAF in cfDNA (12 p), not reached (NR) in p
with BRAF early-cfDNA negativization (11 p), and 22 m (95%CI:0.6-43.9) in
those who continued to be negative (17 p) (pBackgroud: Tumor-derived
circulating cell-free DNA (cfDNA) is a dynamic source for determination
of tumor mutation status. We have previously demonstrated the prognostic
value of BRAFV600 mutation status in pretreatment cfDNA (BRAF pre-cfDNA)
in advanced melanoma patients (p) treated with BRAF inhibitors (median
overall survival [OS] 7 months [m] vs 22m for BRAF pre-cfDNA positive and
negative p, respectively p = 0.017)1. Based on these results, the Spanish
Melanoma Group conducted a prospective study in 13 centers to determine
the prognostic value of BRAFV600 mutation in pre-cfDNA, the change in
mutation status at time of first evaluation (BRAF early-cfDNA), and the
correlation of BRAF cfDNA dynamics with clinical evolution (GEM1304)
(ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT01960634).Methods: One hundred and
fifty nine plasma and serum samples from 66 stage IV BRAF mutant melanoma
p were collected before and during treatment, until disease progression.A
quantitative 5-nuclease PCR based assay was used to determine BRAFV600
mutation status in cfDNA.Results: Most p were stage M1c (62%), treated
with BRAF inhibitors (53%), and not previously treated (67%). BRAF
pre-cfDNA was positive in 42 p (64%). Median OS was 6.4 m (95% CI:
10.9-23.6) and 17 m (95% CI: 3.5-9.2) for p with positive and negative
BRAF pre-cfDNA, respectively (p = 0.06). Significant differences in OS
were observed according to BRAF early-cfDNA negativization: 4.7 m (95%CI:
1.2-8.1) in those with persistence of BRAF in cfDNA (12 p), not reached
(NR) in p with BRAF early-cfDNA negativization (11 p), and 22 m
(95%CI:0.6-43.9) in those who continued to be negative (17 p) (p<0.001).
Median progression free survival (PFS) was 3.4 m (95% CI: 2.1-4.6), 16.8
m (95% CI: 6.9-26.8) and 15.3 (95%CI: 1.1-29.6), respectively
(pBackgroud: Tumor-derived circulating cell-free DNA (cfDNA) is a dynamic
source for determination of tumor mutation status. We have previously
demonstrated the prognostic value of BRAFV600 mutation status in
pretreatment cfDNA (BRAF pre-cfDNA) in advanced melanoma patients (p)
treated with BRAF inhibitors (median overall survival [OS] 7 months [m]
vs 22m for BRAF pre-cfDNA positive and negative p, respectively p =
0.017)1. Based on these results, the Spanish Melanoma Group conducted a
prospective study in 13 centers to determine the prognostic value of
BRAFV600 mutation in pre-cfDNA, the change in mutation status at time of
first evaluation (BRAF early-cfDNA), and the correlation of BRAF cfDNA
dynamics with clinical evolution (GEM1304) (ClinicalTrials.gov
Identifier: NCT01960634).Methods: One hundred and fifty nine plasma and
serum samples from 66 stage IV BRAF mutant melanoma p were collected
before and during treatment, until disease progression.A quantitative
5-nuclease PCR based assay was used to determine BRAFV600 mutation status
in cfDNA.Results: Most p were stage M1c (62%), treated with BRAF
inhibitors (53%), and not previously treated (67%). BRAF pre-cfDNA was
positive in 42 p (64%). Median OS was 6.4 m (95% CI: 10.9-23.6) and 17 m
(95% CI: 3.5-9.2) for p with positive and negative BRAF pre-cfDNA,
respectively (p = 0.06). Significant differences in OS were observed
according to BRAF early-cfDNA negativization: 4.7 m (95%CI: 1.2-8.1) in
those with persistence of BRAF in cfDNA (12 p), not reached (NR) in p
with BRAF early-cfDNA negativization (11 p), and 22 m (95%CI:0.6-43.9) in
those who continued to be negative (17 p) (p<0.001). Median progression
free survival (PFS) was 3.4 m (95% CI: 2.1-4.6), 16.8 m (95% CI:
6.9-26.8) and 15.3 (95%CI: 1.1-29.6), respectively (p<0.001). There were
also significant differences according to BRAF early-cfDNA among p
treated with BRAF inhibitors: in p with persistence of BRAF in cfDNA
(8p), median OS was 4.7 m (95% CI:16-7.8), NR for those with BRAF
early-cfDNA negativization (9p), and 22 m (95%CI: 7.9-36.6) for those who
continued to be negative (8 p) (pBackgroud: Tumor-derived circulating
cell-free DNA (cfDNA) is a dynamic source for determination of tumor
mutation status. We have previously demonstrated the prognostic value of
BRAFV600 mutation status in pretreatment cfDNA (BRAF pre-cfDNA) in
advanced melanoma patients (p) treated with BRAF inhibitors (median
overall survival [OS] 7 months [m] vs 22m for BRAF pre-cfDNA positive and
negative p, respectively p = 0.017)1. Based on these results, the Spanish
Melanoma Group conducted a prospective study in 13 centers to determine
the prognostic value of BRAFV600 mutation in pre-cfDNA, the change in
mutation status at time of first evaluation (BRAF early-cfDNA), and the
correlation of BRAF cfDNA dynamics with clinical evolution (GEM1304)
(ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT01960634).Methods: One hundred and
fifty nine plasma and serum samples from 66 stage IV BRAF mutant melanoma
p were collected before and during treatment, until disease progression.A
quantitative 5-nuclease PCR based assay was used to determine BRAFV600
mutation status in cfDNA.Results: Most p were stage M1c (62%), treated
with BRAF inhibitors (53%), and not previously treated (67%). BRAF
pre-cfDNA was positive in 42 p (64%). Median OS was 6.4 m (95% CI:
10.9-23.6) and 17 m (95% CI: 3.5-9.2) for p with positive and negative
BRAF pre-cfDNA, respectively (p = 0.06). Significant differences in OS
were observed according to BRAF early-cfDNA negativization: 4.7 m (95%CI:
1.2-8.1) in those with persistence of BRAF in cfDNA (12 p), not reached
(NR) in p with BRAF early-cfDNA negativization (11 p), and 22 m
(95%CI:0.6-43.9) in those who continued to be negative (17 p) (p<0.001).
Median progression free survival (PFS) was 3.4 m (95% CI: 2.1-4.6), 16.8
m (95% CI: 6.9-26.8) and 15.3 (95%CI: 1.1-29.6), respectively (p<0.001).
There were also significant differences according to BRAF early-cfDNA
among p treated with BRAF inhibitors: in p with persistence of BRAF in
cfDNA (8p), median OS was 4.7 m (95% CI:16-7.8), NR for those with BRAF
early-cfDNA negativization (9p), and 22 m (95%CI: 7.9-36.6) for those who
continued to be negative (8 p) (p<0.001). Median PFS was 3.6 m (95% CI:
2.2-5.1), 16.9 m (95% CI: 6.9-26.9) and 18 m (95% CI: 0.6-35.3),
respectively (p = 0.001). In those p with serial samples taken during
treatment, BRAF mutation disappeared from cfDNA in all cases who
responded (18). Those with persistence of mutation during follow up had
rapid progression and death (10). BRAF mutation had relapsed in cfDNA at
time of progression in 6/15 cases.Conclusions: Patients with early
negativization of BRAFV600 in cfDNA have excellent prognosis, at least as
good as those with negative BRAF in pre-cfDNA.Gonzlez-Cao et al. Mel Res
2015; 25:486

