Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Adiponectin, Leptin, IGF1 and TNF serum biomarker as noninvasive
diagnosis of colon adenoma


Background and Aim: The potential role of Adiponectin, Leptin, IGF1 and
TNF as biomarker in colon adenoma has not been studied. Therefore, we
investigated the blood serum levels of these biomarkers in colorectal
adenoma.Method: The case-control study consisted of 198 African American
patients with colon adenoma (cases) and 198 healthy individuals
(controls) at Howard University Hospital. We used Elisa for biomarkers
detection. Statistical analysis was performed by t-test and multivariate
logistic regression.Results: The differences in median leptin,
Adiponectin, IGF1 and TNF levels between control and case groups (6.7
vs.16.4), (11.3 vs.46.0), (4.5 vs.12.9) and (71.4 vs. 130.8) were
statistically significant (pBackground and Aim: The potential role of
Adiponectin, Leptin, IGF1 and TNF as biomarker in colon adenoma has not
been studied. Therefore, we investigated the blood serum levels of these
biomarkers in colorectal adenoma.Method: The case-control study consisted
of 198 African American patients with colon adenoma (cases) and 198
healthy individuals (controls) at Howard University Hospital. We used
Elisa for biomarkers detection. Statistical analysis was performed by
t-test and multivariate logistic regression.Results: The differences in
median leptin, Adiponectin, IGF1 and TNF levels between control and case
groups (6.7 vs.16.4), (11.3 vs.46.0), (4.5 vs.12.9) and (71.4 vs. 130.8)
were statistically significant (p<0.05), respectively. In a multivariate
model, the odds ratio (ORs) for Adiponectin, TNF and IGF1 were 2.0 (95%
CI = 1.6-2.5; P0.001), 1.5 (95% CI = 1.5- 2.0; P 0.004) and 1.6 (95% CI =
1.3-2.0; P 0.001), respectively. There were positive correlations between
serum Adiponectin and IGF1 concentrations with age (r = 0.17, P 0.001 and
r = 0.13, P = 0.009), also between TNF, IGF1 and Leptin concentration
with Body Mass Index (BMI) (r = 0.44, P 0.001 and r = 0.11, P = 0.03; r =
0.48, P0.001), respectively. There was a negative correlation between
Adiponectin concentration and BMI (r = -0.40, P0.001),
respectively.Conclusion: These data support the hypothesis that serum
Adiponectin, IGF1 and TNF are risk biomarkers for noninvasive detection
of colorectal adenomas.

