Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: AIRE is expressed and associated with good prognosis in breast
cancer


The transcription factor Autoimmune Regulator (AIRE) gene plays a
fundamental role in tolerance process by promoting the ectopic expression
of thousands of genes encoding for tissue-specific antigens (TSAs) in
medullary thymic epithelial cells (mTECs). Beside the high expression of
AIRE in mTECs, there are few evidences of AIRE expression in other
lymphoid organs and very recently, AIRE was described to be expressed in
human and mouse keratinocytes and in tumors originating in stratified and
pseudostratified epithelia. Therefore, we evaluated the hypothesis that
AIRE could be expressed by epithelial tumors and we focused on breast
cancer, for which large public datasets are available.Our analysis on the
TCGA, the largest public breast cancer RNA-seq dataset, revealed that
AIRE is expressed in 33% of the cases, and Aire protein expression was
confirmed in 26% of 115 human primary breast cancer specimens by
immunohistochemistry analysis. AIRE expression was revealed associated to
a better relapse-free survival in the TCGA patients and also in two
public gene expression microarray-based dataset developed on Agilent and
Illumina platform (NKI-295 and KM-plotter). In all the datasets analyzed,
AIRE expression resulted an independent strong prognostic factor for
relapse-free survival, particularly in ER-positive tumors. Ingenuity
Pathway Analysis (IPA) showed that AIRE-expressing tumors were enriched
in translation-related pathways, accordingly with AIRE's described
function in mTECs. Moreover, in breast cancer luminal cell lines MCF-7
and MDA-MB-361 transfected with AIRE-expressing vector, a significant
increase of cell in G1 phase and activation of caspases cascade were
observed, supporting the hypothesis that genotoxic stress, induced by
AIRE-mediated proteins over-translation, leads to cycle arrest and
apoptosis.These data highlight for the first time AIRE expression in
breast cancer and an association with a better prognosis was revealed.
Imbalance of cellular homeostasis, caused by AIRE transcriptional
function, is a new unusual mechanisms to trigger apoptosis in breast
cancer cells.

