Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effects of lenvatinib mesilate in combination with everolimus on
VEGF and FGF-driven angiogenesis and tumor growth


Lenvatinib mesilate (lenvatinib) is an orally available inhibitor for
multiple receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) that selectively inhibits the
kinase activities of VEGFR1, 2, and 3, in addition to other proangiogenic
and oncogenic pathway-related RTKs including FGFR1, 2, 3, and 4; PDGFR;
KIT; and RET. Recently, lenvatinib in combination with everolimus has
shown longer progression free survival compared to lenvatinib or
everolimus alone in renal cell carcinoma in a Phase 2 study. In this
study, we evaluated the effect of lenvatinib in combination with
everolimus on VEGF and bFGF-driven angiogenesis to elucidate the
mechanism of combination action in preclinical models. Preclinical
studies provide a plausible biologic rationale for the significant
clinical benefit observed in RCC with the combination of lenvatinib and
everolimus.Effects of lenvatinib, everolimus, and its combination on VEGF
or bFGF activated intracellular signaling were analyzed in HUVEC by
western blotting. Combination effects of lenvatinib and everolimus on
VEGF and bFGF-induced proliferation or tube formation of HUVEC were
examined using combination indexes (CI). Antitumor activities were tested
in the KP-1/VEGF or KP-1/FGF models, where VEGF or FGF-induced tumor
angiogenesis and tumor growth were enhanced in nude mice due to
overexpressed VEGF or FGF in human pancreatic cancer KP-1
cells.Lenvatinib inhibited the VEGF or bFGF-driven phosphorylation of
Erk1/2 (Thr202/Tyr204), S6K (Thr389), and S6K (Thr421/Ser424), and S6
(Ser235/Ser236), indicating the inhibition of both the MAPK pathway and
the mTOR-S6K-S6 pathway. Everolimus inhibited the phosphorylation of S6K
(Thr389), S6K (Thr421/Ser424), and S6 (Ser235/Ser236), but not Erk1/2.
The combination showed greater inhibition for the phosphorylation of S6K
(Thr421/Ser424) and S6 (Ser235/Ser236) than each single agent. Inhibitory
activity of the combination at several molar ratios was mostly additive
for VEGF-driven proliferation (CI: 0.799-1.167) and mostly synergistic
for bFGF-driven tube formation (CI: 0.469-0.741). In the KP-1/VEGF or
KP-1/FGF xenogtaft models, lenvatinib, everolimus, and the combination
(p.o., qd x 14) significantly inhibited tumor growth compared to vehicle.
In addition the combination of lenvatinib (7.5 mg/kg) and everolimus (15
mg/kg) showed significantly greater antitumor activity than higher dose
of either lenvatinib (10 mg/kg) or everolimus (30 mg/kg)
monotherapy.These results demonstrated enhancement of the inhibitory
activity against VEGF and FGF-induced angiogenesis by the combination of
lenvatinib with everolimus, and the synergistic enhancement against
bFGF-induced angiogenesis unlike other VEGFR2 TKIs. The vertical
inhibition of angiogenic signaling pathways with lenvatinib (RTK) and
everolimus (mTOR) may contribute to enhanced antiangiogenic activity by
dual targeting of the mTOR-S6K-S6 pathway.

