Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: bcl-2 expression in HER2-positive breast carcinoma subtypes


Background: HER2-positive breast cancers comprise 20-30% of all breast
cancers; amplification of HER2 confers a poorer prognosis. While
treatment with anti-HER2 targeted therapies has dramatically improved
outcomes in this group, a significant subset of patients develops
resistance, highlighting the need for novel therapeutic options. In
addition, like triple negative breast carcinomas, HER2-positive invasive
carcinomas also consist of different intrinsic subtypes with different
responses to therapy and different overall prognosis. Finally, recent
reports suggest that bcl-2 expression contributes to resistance to
anti-HER2 therapies. In this study, we evaluated expression of bcl-2 in
HER2-positive breast tumors and correlated the expression of bcl-2 with
HER2 subtype, patient demographics and histologic and molecular
characteristics.Design: The study population consisted of 114 patients
with HER2-positive invasive breast carcinoma treated with surgical
excision or mastectomy at Northwestern Memorial Hospital (2009-14) (mean
age 53, range 18-80). Electronic medical records were reviewed for
patient demographics. Pathologic tumor characteristics (histologic type,
size, grade, lymph node status) and tumor marker profile (ER, PR, p53 and
Ki-67) were evaluated. Tissue microarrays were constructed (3 cores from
each case to account for tumor heterogeneity) for immunohistochemical
evaluation of bcl-2 (Dako, clone 124).Results: Overall, these HER2-pos
breast carcinomas were almost exclusively of ductal histologic type
(101/114, 88.6%). Almost of the cases were poorly differentiated, grade 3
carcinomas (83/114, 73%), while the other 31 were grade 2 tumors. No
grade 1 tumors were seen. bcl-2 was expressed in 64/114 (56%) of the
HER2-pos carcinomas. No association of the bcl-2 expression with age,
race, tumor size, lymph node status, p53 expression, or Ki-67
proliferation index was seen. Of interest, this sample of HER2-pos
carcinomas was almost equally balanced between ER-neg/HER2-pos (HER2
subtype) and ER-pos/HER2-pos (Luminal B subtype), 54 vs 60 cases
respectively. bcl-2 was differentially expressed in these two HER2-pos
tumor subtypes: only 9/54 (14%) of the HER2 subtype expressed bcl-2
compared to 55/64 (85.9%) of the Luminal B subtype (pBackground:
HER2-positive breast cancers comprise 20-30% of all breast cancers;
amplification of HER2 confers a poorer prognosis. While treatment with
anti-HER2 targeted therapies has dramatically improved outcomes in this
group, a significant subset of patients develops resistance, highlighting
the need for novel therapeutic options. In addition, like triple negative
breast carcinomas, HER2-positive invasive carcinomas also consist of
different intrinsic subtypes with different responses to therapy and
different overall prognosis. Finally, recent reports suggest that bcl-2
expression contributes to resistance to anti-HER2 therapies. In this
study, we evaluated expression of bcl-2 in HER2-positive breast tumors
and correlated the expression of bcl-2 with HER2 subtype, patient
demographics and histologic and molecular characteristics.Design: The
study population consisted of 114 patients with HER2-positive invasive
breast carcinoma treated with surgical excision or mastectomy at
Northwestern Memorial Hospital (2009-14) (mean age 53, range 18-80).
Electronic medical records were reviewed for patient demographics.
Pathologic tumor characteristics (histologic type, size, grade, lymph
node status) and tumor marker profile (ER, PR, p53 and Ki-67) were
evaluated. Tissue microarrays were constructed (3 cores from each case to
account for tumor heterogeneity) for immunohistochemical evaluation of
bcl-2 (Dako, clone 124).Results: Overall, these HER2-pos breast
carcinomas were almost exclusively of ductal histologic type (101/114,
88.6%). Almost of the cases were poorly differentiated, grade 3
carcinomas (83/114, 73%), while the other 31 were grade 2 tumors. No
grade 1 tumors were seen. bcl-2 was expressed in 64/114 (56%) of the
HER2-pos carcinomas. No association of the bcl-2 expression with age,
race, tumor size, lymph node status, p53 expression, or Ki-67
proliferation index was seen. Of interest, this sample of HER2-pos
carcinomas was almost equally balanced between ER-neg/HER2-pos (HER2
subtype) and ER-pos/HER2-pos (Luminal B subtype), 54 vs 60 cases
respectively. bcl-2 was differentially expressed in these two HER2-pos
tumor subtypes: only 9/54 (14%) of the HER2 subtype expressed bcl-2
compared to 55/64 (85.9%) of the Luminal B subtype
(p<0.0001).Conclusions: 1. bcl-2 is expressed in just over half of the
HER2-pos carcinomas. 2. bcl-2 expression is far more common in Luminal B
compared to the HER2-pos subtype of breast carcinomas. 3. bcl-2
expression does not appear to have a differential expression between age
or racial groups and does not correlate with tumor size or lymph node
status. Our findings add to the understanding of the molecular mechanisms
that drive the different subtypes of HER2-pos breast carcinomas and raise
the possibility that bcl-2 targeted therapies may lead to novel
therapeutic approaches for the management of subgroups of patients with
HER2-pos breast tumors.

