Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting tumor growth in a medullary thyroid carcinoma mouse
model using a combinatorial treatment with a tyrosine kinase inhibitor
and histone deacetylase inhibitor


Neuroendocrine tumors are rare forms of cancers arising from
hormone-producing cells that are scattered throughout the body. Medullary
thyroid carcinoma (MTC) originates from the thyroid gland parafollicular
cells. Treatment options for progressive, metastatic MTC patients are
limited to the recently FDA-approved tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs),
Vandetanib and Cabozantinib, which target multiple receptor tyrosine
kinases, including VEGFR2. However, the efficacy of TKIs is limited and
development of TKI resistance is common.Here we examined, the effect of a
combinatorial drug therapy using the TKI, Nintedanib, and the histone
deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor, Romidepsin, on MTC growth in the
NSE/p25-gfp bi-transgenic mouse line, an inducible MTC mouse model (see
Pozo et al. 2013). The TKI- and HDAC inhibitors were administered
intraperitoneally for 3 weeks and tumor growth progression was monitored
using a T2 weighted magnetic resonance imaging on a 7 Tesla system. Tumor
tissues were analyzed for oncogenic signaling pathways by immunoblotting
and immunohistochemistry.We find that co-administration of Nintedanib and
Romidepsin stops tumor growth and increases the number of necrotic foci
within the tumor tissue. Interestingly, Nintedanib treatment alone
reduced tumor vascularization as shown by decreased density of the
vascular marker, CD31, but did not stop parafollicular cell
proliferation. Taken together, these results suggest that a combinatorial
drug therapy with a TKI- and an HDAC inhibitor may be a more efficient
strategy to target MTC progression and overcome recurrence.

