Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Midkine-raised oral cancer growth, migration and invasion is
required for RBPJk modulation


Oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) represents 95% of all forms of head
and neck cancer, and its incidence has increased by 50% during the past
decade. Despite the nowadays available therapeutic managements, such as
surgery, radiotherapy, chemotherapy or in combination, the five-year
survival rate is still improved. The current view is to present that the
accumulations of genetic and epigenetic alterations in OSCC lead to the
progression of cancer. Our previous study indicated that midkine,
heparin-binding growth factor, was overexpressed in tumor tissues of head
and neck cancer patients and its expression also correlated with poor
5-year survival. In this study, we tried to explore the biological
functions and mechanisms of midkine in vitro and in vivo. Established
gain-of-function of midkine in two oral cancer cell lines not only
promoted cell growth by MTT, soft agar and BrdU assays, but also induced
tumor growth in xenograft model. Midkine-overexpressing cells induced
cell migration and invasion by wound healing and Transwell assays.
Conversely, cell growth, migration and invasion were also inhibited;
while endogenous midkine was abolished by midkine-mediated siRNA in oral
cancer cells. By using bioinformatics, Q-RT-PCR, Western blotting,
promoter assay and ChIP assay, we identified that RBP-Jk, a
transcriptional factor, could bind to the promoter regions of midkine and
to induce midkine expression in oral cancer cells. In the specimens of
oral cancer patients, the expressions of midkine and RBP-Jk had a
positive correlation by immunohistochemistry. Taken together, these
results demonstrated that RBP-Jk regulates midkine expression and
involves in midkine-elicited tumor formation in oral cancer.

