Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Multimodal therapy with a potent vaccine, metronomic
cyclophosphamide and anti-PD-1 enhances immunotherapy of advanced tumors
by increasing activation and clonal expansion of tumor infiltrating T
cells


Future cancer immunotherapies will combine multiple treatments to improve
immune responses to cancer through synergistic, multi-modal mechanisms.
In Phase 1 and 1b clinical trials, we found that metronomic
cyclophosphamide (mCPA; 50 mg BID) enhanced the immunogenicity of a
DepoVaxTM (DPX) based cancer vaccine (DPX-Survivac) in ovarian cancer
patients. We reproduced these results in preclinical transplantable tumor
models which allowed us to study the underlying mechanisms of
cyclophosphamide induced immune modulation, as well as explore additional
combinations to enhance the therapeutic effect. Using a HPV-expressing
murine tumor model (C3), we found that treatment with mCPA (20 mg/kg/day
PO) in combination with a DPX peptide vaccine caused selective enrichment
of antigen-specific CD8+ T cells, resulting in increased immune responses
detected by IFN- ELISPOT and in vivo cytotoxicity assay. The combination
provided long term-control of tumors when initiated within one week of
tumor implantation, however efficacy was limited in mice bearing advanced
tumors. Antigen-specific CD8+ T cells could be detected infiltrating
advanced tumors by flow cytometry, along with increased expression of
PD-1 on the T cells and PD-L1 on the tumor cells, suggesting that the
tumor microenvironment (TME) was mediating immune suppression through
increased PD-1:PD-L1 signaling. Treatment of tumor bearing mice with
vaccine, mCPA and PD-1 blockade (with anti-PD-1 or anti-PD-L1) resulted
in tumor control of established tumors which were not successfully
treated with antibody monotherapy. Analysis of tumor infiltrating
leukocytes by flow cytometry demonstrated that anti-PD-1 treatment did
not further enhance tumor infiltration with antigen-specific CD8+ T cells
induced by the vaccine/ mCPA treatment. However, RT-qPCR analysis of the
tumor detected an increase in expression of cytotoxic T cell gene
signatures within the tumor in combination with anti-PD-1 treatment.
Clonal analysis was performed of the total TCR sequences using gDNA
extracted from the tumors. Vaccine and mCPA treatment resulted in
selective expansion of clones, as the top 10 clones accounted for 35% of
the total TCR sequences; tri-therapy including anti-PD-1 significantly
enhanced the expansion of T cells within the TME so that the top 10
clones accounted for 46% of the total TCR sequences (pFuture cancer
immunotherapies will combine multiple treatments to improve immune
responses to cancer through synergistic, multi-modal mechanisms. In Phase
1 and 1b clinical trials, we found that metronomic cyclophosphamide
(mCPA; 50 mg BID) enhanced the immunogenicity of a DepoVaxTM (DPX) based
cancer vaccine (DPX-Survivac) in ovarian cancer patients. We reproduced
these results in preclinical transplantable tumor models which allowed us
to study the underlying mechanisms of cyclophosphamide induced immune
modulation, as well as explore additional combinations to enhance the
therapeutic effect. Using a HPV-expressing murine tumor model (C3), we
found that treatment with mCPA (20 mg/kg/day PO) in combination with a
DPX peptide vaccine caused selective enrichment of antigen-specific CD8+
T cells, resulting in increased immune responses detected by IFN- ELISPOT
and in vivo cytotoxicity assay. The combination provided long
term-control of tumors when initiated within one week of tumor
implantation, however efficacy was limited in mice bearing advanced
tumors. Antigen-specific CD8+ T cells could be detected infiltrating
advanced tumors by flow cytometry, along with increased expression of
PD-1 on the T cells and PD-L1 on the tumor cells, suggesting that the
tumor microenvironment (TME) was mediating immune suppression through
increased PD-1:PD-L1 signaling. Treatment of tumor bearing mice with
vaccine, mCPA and PD-1 blockade (with anti-PD-1 or anti-PD-L1) resulted
in tumor control of established tumors which were not successfully
treated with antibody monotherapy. Analysis of tumor infiltrating
leukocytes by flow cytometry demonstrated that anti-PD-1 treatment did
not further enhance tumor infiltration with antigen-specific CD8+ T cells
induced by the vaccine/ mCPA treatment. However, RT-qPCR analysis of the
tumor detected an increase in expression of cytotoxic T cell gene
signatures within the tumor in combination with anti-PD-1 treatment.
Clonal analysis was performed of the total TCR sequences using gDNA
extracted from the tumors. Vaccine and mCPA treatment resulted in
selective expansion of clones, as the top 10 clones accounted for 35% of
the total TCR sequences; tri-therapy including anti-PD-1 significantly
enhanced the expansion of T cells within the TME so that the top 10
clones accounted for 46% of the total TCR sequences (p<0.05). We conclude
that anti-PD-1 therapy can enhance the efficacy of vaccine immunotherapy
by promoting the activity and expansion of antigen-specific T cells
within the TME. These results provide a rationale for clinical testing of
checkpoint blockade therapy in combination with our highly immunogenic
combination of mCPA and DPX-Survivac. Assessment of T cell clonality
within the tumor may be an important biomarker for immunomodulatory
treatments.

