Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epigenetic silencing of tumor suppressor long non-coding RNA
BM742401 in chronic lymphocytic leukemia


Background: B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) is the most common
adult leukemia in the western countries. Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs)
emerge as a new class of ncRNAs measuring longer than 200 nucleotides in
length, and implicated in a wide range of biological processes including
normal development, differentiation or carcinogenesis [1]. Recently,
deregulated expression of lncRNAs has been found in many human cancers,
indicating its potential oncogenic or tumor suppressor role in
carcinogenesis [2]. However, data on the role of lncRNA in CLL is scanty.
BM742401 is a tumor suppressor lncRNA downregulated in gastric cancer
[3]. As the promoter region and the entire transcript are embedded in a
CpG island, we postulated that BM742401 is a tumor suppressor lncRNA
inactivated by DNA methylation in CLL.Methods: Methylation of BM742401
was studied by methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction (MSP) in
nine healthy donor normal controls including three bone marrow, three
peripheral blood buffy coats, and three CD19-sorted peripheral B-cells,
in addition to seven CLL cell lines, and ninety-eight diagnostic CLL
marrow samples.Results: By MSP, promoter of BM742401 was unmethylated in
normal controls, but methylated in four out of seven (57%) CLL cell
lines. MSP statuses, including complete methylation (MM), partial
methylation (MU), and complete unmethylation (UU), were verified by
quantitative bisulfite pyrosequencing. Methylation of BM742401 was
inversely correlated with expression. In the completely methylated
WAC3CD5+ CLL cells, treatment with 5-Aza-2-deoxycytidine led to promoter
demethylation and re-expression of BM742401 transcript. Functionally,
stable overexpression of BM742401 by lentiviral transduction resulted in
inhibition of cellular proliferation and enhanced apoptosis through
caspase-9-dependent intrinsic apoptosis pathway, suggesting a tumor
suppressor role of BM742401 in CLL. In primary CLL samples, methylation
of BM742401 was detected in 43/98 (44%) of patients. Moreover, among CLL
patients with standard-risk cytogenetic aberrations, methylation of
BM742401 correlated with advanced Rai stage ( stage 2) (P = 0.002).
Furthermore, methylation of BM742401 was significantly associated with
methylation of miR-129-2 (P = 0.034).Conclusions: BM742401 is a tumor
suppressor lncRNA frequently methylated in CLL. The functional mechanism
of BM742401 in triggering tumor suppressive phenotype and regulation of
other protein-coding genes warrant further studies.References:1.
Esteller, M., Non-coding RNAs in human disease. Nature Reviews Genetics,
2011. 12(12): p. 861-874.2. Prensner, J.R. and A.M. Chinnaiyan, The
emergence of lncRNAs in cancer biology. Cancer discovery, 2011. 1(5): p.
391-407.3. Park, S.-M., et al., A known expressed sequence tag, BM742401,
is a potent lincRNA inhibiting cancer metastasis. Experimental &
Molecular Medicine, 2013. 45(7): p. e31.

