Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Perceived role of family for Hispanic/Latino lung cancer patients:
A qualitative study


Healthcare decisions are not made by the patients alone, but rather the
result of collaborative efforts between healthcare professionals and,
more importantly, family members who become significant because of the
various roles they perform throughout the process. The purpose of this
study was to examine the role of family in the care of Hispanic/Latinos
patients with lung cancer. Inconsistent expectations of the role of
family affect how patients view family support throughout the diagnosis
and treatment process. Therefore, it is important to examine what
patients perceive to be an appropriate role for family members that
assist in their healthcare. Twenty-four patients self-identified as
Hispanic/Latino and treated at Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center
(MSKCC) for lung cancer stage I-IV participated in semi-structured
face-to-face interviews. The four major themes of the role of family
identified in this study include: general support, navigation of
healthcare system, communications, and lack of family support. It is
important to understand that family roles change as the patients needs
change over the course of the disease. Nonetheless, identifying the
various forms of support provided by family is essential to understanding
the benefits of family presence in the diagnosis and treatment of lung
cancer, particularly among Latinos.

