Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Disruption of the CD39 immune checkpoint pathway increases the
efficacy of various anticancer therapies in syngeneic mouse models


The CD39-CD73-adenosine pathway is an emerging regulator of the immune
antitumor response. CD39 is expressed within tumors and the tumor
microenvironment by several cell population including immune and cancer
cells. In tumor tissues, the pathway leads to the accumulation of
immunosuppressive adenosine together with decreased levels of
immunoactivating peritumoral ATP. We reported previously that CD39
blockade increased T cell and NK cell-mediated cytotoxic activity in
vitro and disclose, during this meeting, the development of the first
human-CD39-blocking humanized antibody (S. Augier et al., Preclinical
development of a humanized blocking antibody targeting the CD39 immune
checkpoint for cancer immunotherapy). Here we demonstrated that this
pathway is involved in tumor-induced resistance to various cancer
therapies in syngeneic mouse melanoma, colon cancer and fibrosarcoma
models. We used therapy-resistant mouse models or inefficacious treatment
regimens in the CD39 knockout mice to assess the capacity of CD39 to
affect the response to chemotherapies, tumor associated antigen
(TAA)-targeting antibodies and immunomodulators such as anti-PD1
antibodies. We achieved increased response rates, increased response
duration and some complete and long lasting tumor regressions in the CD39
deficient context. These preclinical proof-of-concept studies highlight
the role of the CD39 immune checkpoint pathway in limiting the efficacy
of various anticancer therapies in syngeneic mouse models and thereby
support the potential clinical value of the humanized CD39-neutralizing
antibody under development.

