Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Different stimulation conditions affect the immune phenotype of
GD2-specific chimeric antigen receptor-expressing T cells


The in vivo persistence of chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) modified T
cells is a major prerequisite for their antitumor activity and was found
to be associated with a less differentiated immune phenotype. Here, we
compared two in vitro T cell stimulation conditions: coated anti-CD3/CD28
antibodies [3/28], and Dynabead stimulation of enriched CD3+ T cells
[DB]. Peripheral blood T cells from three healthy donors were stimulated
with either of the two methods, retrovirally transduced with the
GD2-specific CAR GD2-BBz on day 2 or 3, and expanded in RPMI/AIMV medium
with 50 IU/ml recombinant human interleukin-2 for 13 days. T cell
expansion rates were comparable between the two stimulation conditions
and independent of CAR gene expression. Transduction efficiencies,
determined by staining with the GD2-CAR-specific antibody Ganglidiomab,
were also comparable. The immune phenotype by expression of CD3, CD4,
CD8, CD45RO and CD197 was determined by flow cytometry analysis on day 13
or 14 after initial stimulation. The proportions of central memory (TCM),
effector memory (TEM) or nave T cells (TN) within the two types of
cultures were noticeably different (Table 1), with a higher proportion of
non-transduced CD8+ T cells with a TCM phenotype after DB compared to
CD3/CD28 stimulation (p = 0.005 for DB d2, p = 0.01 for DB d3). Compared
to non-transduced T cells, CAR-expressing cells of all types of cultures
had higher proportions of TCM cells (p = 0.02 for CD4+ T cells, pThe in
vivo persistence of chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) modified T cells is a
major prerequisite for their antitumor activity and was found to be
associated with a less differentiated immune phenotype. Here, we compared
two in vitro T cell stimulation conditions: coated anti-CD3/CD28
antibodies [3/28], and Dynabead stimulation of enriched CD3+ T cells
[DB]. Peripheral blood T cells from three healthy donors were stimulated
with either of the two methods, retrovirally transduced with the
GD2-specific CAR GD2-BBz on day 2 or 3, and expanded in RPMI/AIMV medium
with 50 IU/ml recombinant human interleukin-2 for 13 days. T cell
expansion rates were comparable between the two stimulation conditions
and independent of CAR gene expression. Transduction efficiencies,
determined by staining with the GD2-CAR-specific antibody Ganglidiomab,
were also comparable. The immune phenotype by expression of CD3, CD4,
CD8, CD45RO and CD197 was determined by flow cytometry analysis on day 13
or 14 after initial stimulation. The proportions of central memory (TCM),
effector memory (TEM) or nave T cells (TN) within the two types of
cultures were noticeably different (Table 1), with a higher proportion of
non-transduced CD8+ T cells with a TCM phenotype after DB compared to
CD3/CD28 stimulation (p = 0.005 for DB d2, p = 0.01 for DB d3). Compared
to non-transduced T cells, CAR-expressing cells of all types of cultures
had higher proportions of TCM cells (p = 0.02 for CD4+ T cells, p<0.01
for CD8+ T cells). In conclusion, we found that the stimulation
conditions have a strong impact on the T cell phenotype and that
retroviral CAR gene transduction can also affect T cell differentiation.
The optimal T cell culture conditions for a product with sustained
persistence in vivo will ultimately emerge from clinical trials.
Proportions of T cell subpopulations on day 13 or 14 (medians and ranges)

