Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of nischarin in the breast tumor microenvironment


Women with denser breasts, have a higher risk of developing breast
cancer. Breast density reflects the amount of connective tissue and
collagen present. During metastasis, tumor cells move through tracks of
extracellular matrix (ECM). A stiff and ordered tissue microenvironment
is necessary for tumor cell invasiveness. Matrix stiffness is mediated by
ECM fiber organization and cell-matrix adhesions. Our lab is
investigating a tumor suppressor that contributes to ECM organization.
The protein Nischarin interacts with a number of signaling proteins such
as integrin 5, PAK1, LIMK1, LKB1, MLCK, ERK and Rac1 to prevent cancer
cell migration. Our data shows that spontaneous breast tumors from
wild-type (WT) animals have reduced ECM fiber expression and organization
compared to those from homozygous Nischarin Null mice. Furthermore, we
have found Nischarin to alter integrin and focal adhesion signaling,
therefore affecting cell-matrix adhesions. We hypothesize that the
absence of Nischarin in the breast tumor leads to increased matrix
stiffness, through increased fiber organization, and altered cell-matrix
adhesions. Since no breast tumor suppressors have been linked to collagen
and fibronectin ECM remodeling, we present a novel role for Nischarin in
organizing the ECM. By integrating cell signaling with optical and
computational instrumentation, we will assess the role of Nischarin in
the bidirectional cellular/matrix crosstalk, which will add to our
understanding of the metastatic process in breast cancer.

