Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel targeting all-in-one nanoporphyrin platform against bladder
cancer


We have developed an extremely versatile and highly innovative
theranostic nanoporphyrin (NP) platform for the integration of a broad
range of clinical relevant imaging and therapeutic functions, including
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), positron emission tomography,
fluorescence optical tomography, photodynamic therapy, photothermal
therapy and targeted drug delivery. NPs exhibit architecture-dependent
fluorescence- and magnetic resonance- properties, which could
significantly increase the sensitivity of optical imaging and MRI for
tumor detection. We recently integrated the NP platform into our
previously reported bladder cancer targeted nanoparticles that were
coated with a bladder cancer-specific ligand named PLZ4, resulting in a
novel bladder cancer targeting and multifunctional PLZ4-nanoporphyrin
(PNP) platform. PNP selectively delivered photosensitizer and
chemotherapy into bladder cancer cells 30-50 times more than to adjacent
normal urothelial cells, compared to only 2-3 times with reported
photosensitizer, 5-aminolevulinic acid (ALA). Photodynamic therapy with
PNP generated reactive oxygen species was over 100 times more potent than
5-ALA in vitro. PNP-mediated intravesical photo-therapy completely
eliminated orthotopic patient-derived bladder cancer xenografts (PDXs).
Image-guided photodynamic and photothermal therapies synergized with
targeted chemotherapy of doxorubicin and significantly prolonged overall
survival of mice carrying PDXs. This uniquely engineered targeting PNP
platform has tremendous potential to improve the management of bladder
cancer in clinic.

