Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phosphorylation of the intrinsically disordered cancer/testis
antigen PAGE4 by HIPK1 and CLK2 in prostate cancer


Prostate-associated gene 4 (PAGE4) is an intrinsically disordered
cancer/testis antigen that is typically restricted to the normal testis
but is aberrantly expressed in prostate cancer (PCa). Furthermore, PAGE4
is developmentally regulated with dynamic expression patterns in the
fetal prostate and is also a stress-response protein that is up-regulated
in response to cellular stress. PAGE4 interacts with c-Jun and plays an
important role in the development and pathology of the prostate gland.
HIPK1, a component of the stress-response pathway, and CLK2, a dual
specificity kinase are kinases that phosphorylate PAGE4 at predominantly
at T51 and at multiple S/T residues, respectively. While phosphorylation
at T51 is critical in potentiating c-Jun, the functional significance of
the multisite phosphorylation by CLK2 is not known. The aim of this study
was to determine the expression levels of HIPK1 and CLK2 in PCa cell
lines, and in a set of 80 paired cases of PCa and benign adjacent tissue.
Protein levels of HIPK1 and CLK2 were evaluated in cell lines and tissue
samples by Western Blotting (WB) and immunohistochemistry (IHC),
respectively. WB was performed with whole cell lysates from BPH1, DU145,
LNCAP and PC3 cells using a fluorescence approach. IHC was performed with
TMAs containing paired tumor and benign samples and after scanning
(Aperio ScanScope), data were quantified using the ImageScope software.
WB showed that HIPK1 is expressed in all cell lines selected with no
significant changes in expression levels, while CLK2 was expressed only
in BPH1 and LNCAP, suggesting this protein is expressed in cells
displaying a less aggressive phenotype. Protein expression analysis by
IHC in PCa and benign samples showed that CLK2 is more commonly expressed
in PCa than HIPK1 when compared to non-cancer cases. CLK2 expression was
positive in 81.7% of the cancer cases and HIPK1 was expressed in 72.2%.
When compared to benign cases these differences are significant with
pProstate-associated gene 4 (PAGE4) is an intrinsically disordered
cancer/testis antigen that is typically restricted to the normal testis
but is aberrantly expressed in prostate cancer (PCa). Furthermore, PAGE4
is developmentally regulated with dynamic expression patterns in the
fetal prostate and is also a stress-response protein that is up-regulated
in response to cellular stress. PAGE4 interacts with c-Jun and plays an
important role in the development and pathology of the prostate gland.
HIPK1, a component of the stress-response pathway, and CLK2, a dual
specificity kinase are kinases that phosphorylate PAGE4 at predominantly
at T51 and at multiple S/T residues, respectively. While phosphorylation
at T51 is critical in potentiating c-Jun, the functional significance of
the multisite phosphorylation by CLK2 is not known. The aim of this study
was to determine the expression levels of HIPK1 and CLK2 in PCa cell
lines, and in a set of 80 paired cases of PCa and benign adjacent tissue.
Protein levels of HIPK1 and CLK2 were evaluated in cell lines and tissue
samples by Western Blotting (WB) and immunohistochemistry (IHC),
respectively. WB was performed with whole cell lysates from BPH1, DU145,
LNCAP and PC3 cells using a fluorescence approach. IHC was performed with
TMAs containing paired tumor and benign samples and after scanning
(Aperio ScanScope), data were quantified using the ImageScope software.
WB showed that HIPK1 is expressed in all cell lines selected with no
significant changes in expression levels, while CLK2 was expressed only
in BPH1 and LNCAP, suggesting this protein is expressed in cells
displaying a less aggressive phenotype. Protein expression analysis by
IHC in PCa and benign samples showed that CLK2 is more commonly expressed
in PCa than HIPK1 when compared to non-cancer cases. CLK2 expression was
positive in 81.7% of the cancer cases and HIPK1 was expressed in 72.2%.
When compared to benign cases these differences are significant with
p<0.0001. To further evaluate the importance of these two proteins as
biomarkers for PCa, we performed ROC curve analysis to verify if the
expression profile could be used to separate cancer from non-cancer
cases. Both, CLK2 and HIPK1 can discriminate PCa from the benign tissue
(AUC = 0.81 and 0.70, respectively). CLK2 as a biomarker for PCa is more
specific than HIPK1, with specificity of 78.4% for the first vs. 64.4%
for the last. Since CLK2 is expressed in cell lines with a less
aggressive phenotype, we evaluated whether CLK2 expression correlates
with Gleason score (GS) in an attempt to determine their utility as
outcome predictors. However, no association was observed with GS and CLK2
and HIPK1 expression patterns. In summary, our results suggest that CLK2
may be a potential biomarker for PCa.

