Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Early detection of pemetrexed-induced inhibition of thymidylate
synthase in non-small lung cancer with FLT-PET imaging


Introduction: Successful inhibition of thymidylate synthase (TS) can be
imaged with FLT ([18F]thymidine)-positron emission tomography (PET)
thereby providing a measure of therapy response on day 1 of therapy. Here
we characterize this imaging strategy for implementation into 1st line
therapy with pemetrexed and cisplatin for NSCLC.Materials and Methods:
The kinetics of pemetrexed-mediated TS inhibition mediated DNA salvage
pathway flare in DNA was first characterized in vitro using 3H-thymidine
DNA incorporation assays, analysis of TK1 protein expression and
mobilization of the equilibrative nucleoside transporter 1 to the cell
surface membrane. Kinetics of the pemetrexed-mediated flare in the
salvage pathway was then confirmed in an in vivo mouse model of NSCLC.
Finally, a proof-of-principle clinical trial was performed to demonstrate
feasibility of imaging of pemetrexed-mediated TS inhibition in human
subjects with NSLC.Results: In vitro examination of pemetrexed-induced
changes in the salvage pathway revealed a burst in DNA activity that
peaked at 2 hrs following the administration of pemetrexed. The addition
of cisplatin did not impact the amplitude or timing of the
pemetrexed-induced flare in the salvage pathway. In vivo imaging of TS
inhibition with FLT-PET confirmed a peak in salvage pathway activity at 2
hrs. Imaging of pemetrexed-induced TS inhibition in a human clinical
trial demonstrated feasibility with imaging at the 2 hr time
point.Conclusion: FLT-PET measured efficacy of pemetrexed-induced TS
inhibition is optimal at 2 hrs from the start of therapy. This timing of
FLT-PET imaging is feasible in human clinical trials.

