Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bistable switching of c-KIT by estrogen-mediated ceRNA and
epigenetic silencing of miR-193a predicts survival in ovarian cancer


Ovarian cancer is one of the most lethal cancers in the female
reproductive system. Our previous study has shown that ovarian cancer may
be initiated by ovarian cancer initiating cells (OCIC) characterized by
the surface antigen CD44 and c-KIT (CD117). Previous study also suggested
that long term treatment of estrogen such as hormonal replacement therapy
(HRT) may increase the risk of ovarian cancer, however the role of
estrogen in ovarian carcinogenesis is still controversial. To unravel
this complexity, we propose a mathematical model to explore how the ER
signaling pathway contribute to c-KIT expression during ovarian
carcinogenesis: one through a ceRNA competition of an ER target,E2F6 and
c-KIT for their targeted miRNA, miR-193a; second by binding of E2F6
protein, in association with the polycomb complex, to the promoter of
miR-193a to downregulate miR-193a transcription by epigenetic
modifications. Our model found that epigenetic silencing of miR-193a
generates a bistable switching of c-KIT during ovarian carcinogenesis
based on the level of EZH2. To confirm our results, we performed ectopic
expression of miR-193a and 3UTR luciferase in ovarian cancer cell lines
and confirmed that E2F6 and c-KIT are the targets of miR-193a.
Importantly, treatment of E2 or bisphenol A (BPA) resulted in the
up-regulation of E2F6 and c-kit mRNA in IOSE cells in which no or low
methylation at the promoter CpG island of miR-193a was found. On the
contrary, promoter hypermethylation of miR193a could be observed in
miR-193a-underexpressed CP70 ovarian cancer cells but not in HeyC2 cells
which showed similar expression level of miR-193a as in IOSE cells.
Treatment of demethylating agent (5azaDC) or EZH2 inhibitor (GSK343)
resulted in a reexpression of miR-193a in CP70 ovarian cancer cells.
Overexpression of miR-193a inhibited tumor growth in vitro and in an
animal model. Further ChIP-PCR assay also found that open chromatin mark
H3K4me3 was enriched in the promoter region of miR-193a in HeyC2 but not
in CP70 cells. On the contrary, repressive chromatin marks H3K9me3 and
H3K27me3 were only enriched in CP70 cells. Clinically, ovarian cancer
patients (n = 109) with higher promoter methylation of miR-193a were
associated with poor survival (p>0.05). Additional analysis of the TCGA
ovarian cancer dataset demonstrated that ovarian cancer patients with low
expression of EZH2, a polycomb-group protein, showed positive correlation
(p Ovarian cancer is one of the most lethal cancers in the female
reproductive system. Our previous study has shown that ovarian cancer may
be initiated by ovarian cancer initiating cells (OCIC) characterized by
the surface antigen CD44 and c-KIT (CD117). Previous study also suggested
that long term treatment of estrogen such as hormonal replacement therapy
(HRT) may increase the risk of ovarian cancer, however the role of
estrogen in ovarian carcinogenesis is still controversial. To unravel
this complexity, we propose a mathematical model to explore how the ER
signaling pathway contribute to c-KIT expression during ovarian
carcinogenesis: one through a ceRNA competition of an ER target,E2F6 and
c-KIT for their targeted miRNA, miR-193a; second by binding of E2F6
protein, in association with the polycomb complex, to the promoter of
miR-193a to downregulate miR-193a transcription by epigenetic
modifications. Our model found that epigenetic silencing of miR-193a
generates a bistable switching of c-KIT during ovarian carcinogenesis
based on the level of EZH2. To confirm our results, we performed ectopic
expression of miR-193a and 3UTR luciferase in ovarian cancer cell lines
and confirmed that E2F6 and c-KIT are the targets of miR-193a.
Importantly, treatment of E2 or bisphenol A (BPA) resulted in the
up-regulation of E2F6 and c-kit mRNA in IOSE cells in which no or low
methylation at the promoter CpG island of miR-193a was found. On the
contrary, promoter hypermethylation of miR193a could be observed in
miR-193a-underexpressed CP70 ovarian cancer cells but not in HeyC2 cells
which showed similar expression level of miR-193a as in IOSE cells.
Treatment of demethylating agent (5azaDC) or EZH2 inhibitor (GSK343)
resulted in a reexpression of miR-193a in CP70 ovarian cancer cells.
Overexpression of miR-193a inhibited tumor growth in vitro and in an
animal model. Further ChIP-PCR assay also found that open chromatin mark
H3K4me3 was enriched in the promoter region of miR-193a in HeyC2 but not
in CP70 cells. On the contrary, repressive chromatin marks H3K9me3 and
H3K27me3 were only enriched in CP70 cells. Clinically, ovarian cancer
patients (n = 109) with higher promoter methylation of miR-193a were
associated with poor survival (p>0.05). Additional analysis of the TCGA
ovarian cancer dataset demonstrated that ovarian cancer patients with low
expression of EZH2, a polycomb-group protein, showed positive correlation
(p<0.05) between E2F6 and c-KIT which resembles the ceRNA phenomenon
between these two mRNAs. Importantly, ovarian cancer patients with low
expression of EZH2 tended to have lower expression of c-KIT. In
conclusion, our mathematical model and experimental data suggests that
miR-193a can be epigenetically regulated by both ceRNA and promoter
methylation. Simultaneous EZH2 inhibition and anti-estrogen therapy can
constitute an effective combined therapeutic strategy against ovarian
cancer.

