Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epicatechin protects from doxorubicin induced cardiotoxicity
without affecting its cytotoxic profile in breast cancer cells


Doxorubicin is an effective anthracycline anticancer agent for breast
cancer despite its dose-limiting cardiovascular toxicity. Epicatechin is
a flavonoid compound with potent antioxidant activity.. The purpose of
this study is to investigate the influence of epicatechin on the
cytotoxic profile of doxorubicin in breast cancer cell lines on the top
of ameliorating doxorubicin induced cardiotoxicity. Rats received
doxorubicin (12 mg/kg, single iv injection) with or without epicatechin
(12 mg/kg, daily, oral) for 6 days then cardiac electrocardiographic was
recorded. Doxorubicin administration induced cardiac ischemia which was
reflected by increased QT and QTc intervals (1.76 and 1.8 folds,
respectively); and increased heart rate. Epicatechin co-administration
completely blocked doxorubicin induced ECG abnormalities. Epicatechin
combination significantly decreased the IC50 of doxorubicin from 0.550.03
to 0.240.01; from 0.70.036 to 0.560.017, and from 0.07 0.017 to 0.040.014
M in MCF-7, T47D and MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cell lines, respectively.
In addition, epicatechin significantly increased doxorubicin cytotoxicity
against MCF-7 cells under hypoxic condition and decreased its IC50 from
8.91.2 to 6.01.2 M. In MDA-MB-231, epicatechin significantly blocked p-gp
efflux activity and enhanced intracellular accumulation of p-gp probe
(rhodamine) by 3-4 folds at concentration range (3-100 M). Further
investigation showed that the combination of doxorubicin with epicatechin
significantly increased the concentration of pro-caspase 3 compared to
doxorubicin alone in T47D and MDA-MB231 cell lines. Cell death mechanism
was further investigated using annexin-V/PI differential staining.
Epicatechin combination did not significantly increase the percent of
apoptotic or necrotic cells compared to treatment with doxorubicin alone
in MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 cells. In T47D, epicatechin combination with
doxorubicin significantly increased cell apoptosis and necrosis compared
to doxorubicin treatment alone from 1.50.5 to 4.60.7% and 8.01.7 to 12.8
7.9%, respectively. In addition, epicatechin combination with doxorubicin
decreased pro-caspase-3 concentration from 16.71.1 fg/cell to 9.22.6
fg/cell. Finally, epicatechin did not affect cell cycle distribution
induced by doxorubicin. In conclusion, epicatechin significantly
protected from doxorubicin induced cardiotoxicity and marginally improved
its cytotoxicity against breast cancer cells.

