Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular epidemiological studies of germinal center-associated
nuclear protein (ganp) in the development of human sporadic breast cancers


[Introduction]The altered expression of germinal center-associated
nuclear protein (GANP), a member of mammalian TREX2 complex, has been
observed in various tumors. Previously, we demonstrated that deficiency
of GANP developed mammary gland tumors resembling human breast cancers in
two mouse models. In addition, we showed that decreased expression of
GANP was an independent prognostic factor of human breast cancer in a
retrospective cohort study. These results suggested that GANP might be
associated with breast cancer development. Although a little is know
about functional significance of ganp polymorphisms, we explored possible
association.[Methods]We conducted a case-control study to examine
association between ganp polymorphisms and risk of breast cancer among
Japanese population within the framework of the Hospital-based
Epidemiologic Research Program at Aichi Cancer Center (HERPACC). Cases
are 694 incident cases who had been diagnosed as breast cancer at Aichi
Cancer Center Hospital (ACCH) during 2001-2005. A total of 1,376
non-cancer controls were patients who visited ACCH at same period as
cases and were confirmed to have no evidence of cancer. Controls were
individually matched for age and menopausal status with cases. ganp
polymorphisms were assessed by iCOGS chip (Reference: Michailidou K et
al. Nat. Genet. 2013;45:353-361). Multivariable conditional logistic
regression models were applied to estimate odds ratios (ORs) and 95%
confidence intervals (CIs) for each locus.[Results]Ten out of 13
polymorphisms, in high linkage disequilibrium, showed statistically
significant associations with breast cancer risk. For instance, in
rs2839186, the OR for those with AA alleles compared with those with GG
alleles is 0.41 (95% CI, 0.23-0.72, p = 0.002) in genotype model. As
compared with those with G allele, the OR for those without was 0.40 (95%
CI, 0.23-0.71, p = 0.002) in recessive model. On the other hand, in
dominant model, the OR for those with A allele was 0.95 (95% CI,
0.78-1.16, p = 0.635) in comparison to those without that.[Conclusion]In
this study, we clearly show that mutant SNPs in rs2839186 decrease breast
cancer risk. We are currently analyzing if the ganp SNPs affect the
prognosis of breast cancer patients.

