Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Contribution of miR-199a to subtype switching of the SW13
adrenocortical carcinoma cell line


The human adrenocortical carcinoma SW13 cell line has two subtypes that
are phenotypically distinct. The SW13- subtype is highly proliferative
and epithelial-like, while the SW13+ subtype is slow growing, motile, and
mesenchymal-like. These differences are mediated in part by the
post-transcriptional regulation of BRM, which is expressed in SW13+
cells, and not detectable in SW13- cells. While treatment with histone
deacetylase inhibitors (HDACi) can force cells to transition from SW13-
to SW13+, the epigenetic mechanisms involved in the subtype switch are
unknown. Recently, it was shown that miR-199a is a potent negative
regulator of BRM expression in many epithelial tumor cell lines. Given
this, we examined the expression of miR-199a in the two SW13 subtypes,
and indeed found that miR-199a expression was significantly higher in the
BRM-deficient SW13- cells than the BRM-expressing SW13+ cells. To begin
to further assess the involvement of miR-199a in the SW13 subtype switch,
SW13+ and SW13- cells were treated with either a miR-199a mimic or
miR-199a inhibitor, respectively and assessed for differences in BRM mRNA
and protein expression, as well changes in cell-type morphology. Our
results indicate that although miR-199a can mediate differences in BRM
expression, miR-199a alone is not sufficient to induce a full subtype
conversion as evidenced by retention of subtype morphology following
miR-199a inhibition and over-expression. We are currently investigating
the role of miR-199a in HDACi mediated subtype conversion, as well as the
expression of other miRNA and their targets that are differentially
expressed between the two SW13 subtypes.

