Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clinical significance of p63/miR-138 deregulation in tongue
squamous cell carcinoma


BACKGROUND and AIMS: p63 is critical for the development and maintenance
of stratified epithelial tissues. The role of p63 in tumorigenesis
remains poorly defined. This study aims to determine the levels of p63
and miR-138 expression both in vitro and in vivo, and further to analyze
their correlation with the clinicopathological parameters and prognosis
in patients with tongue squamous cell carcinoma (TSCC).METHODS: Levels of
p63 and miR-138 in TSCC and paired para-cancerous tissues were
investigated by immunohistochemistry (IHC) and in situ hybridization
(ISH), respectively. The correlations of p63 and miR-138 expression with
the clinico- pathological parameters and prognosis of patients with TSCC
were analyzed using SPSS 13.0 software package. Expression of p63 and
miR-138 in TSCC cell lines (n = 5) was measured using immunoblot analysis
and qRT-PCR, respectively. p63 was expressed transgenically, or knocked
down with shRNAs in SCC9, SCC25, SCC15 and UM1 cell lines, and effects on
cell invasion and migration were evaluated.RESULTS: Elevated level of p63
and reduced level of miR-138 was observed in TSCC tissues in comparison
with paired para-cancerous tissues (p BACKGROUND and AIMS: p63 is
critical for the development and maintenance of stratified epithelial
tissues. The role of p63 in tumorigenesis remains poorly defined. This
study aims to determine the levels of p63 and miR-138 expression both in
vitro and in vivo, and further to analyze their correlation with the
clinicopathological parameters and prognosis in patients with tongue
squamous cell carcinoma (TSCC).METHODS: Levels of p63 and miR-138 in TSCC
and paired para-cancerous tissues were investigated by
immunohistochemistry (IHC) and in situ hybridization (ISH), respectively.
The correlations of p63 and miR-138 expression with the clinico-
pathological parameters and prognosis of patients with TSCC were analyzed
using SPSS 13.0 software package. Expression of p63 and miR-138 in TSCC
cell lines (n = 5) was measured using immunoblot analysis and qRT-PCR,
respectively. p63 was expressed transgenically, or knocked down with
shRNAs in SCC9, SCC25, SCC15 and UM1 cell lines, and effects on cell
invasion and migration were evaluated.RESULTS: Elevated level of p63 and
reduced level of miR-138 was observed in TSCC tissues in comparison with
paired para-cancerous tissues (p < 0.05). In particular, a more elevated
expression for p63 appeared in the invasive tumor front compared with
superficial or central parts of the primary tissues (p BACKGROUND and
AIMS: p63 is critical for the development and maintenance of stratified
epithelial tissues. The role of p63 in tumorigenesis remains poorly
defined. This study aims to determine the levels of p63 and miR-138
expression both in vitro and in vivo, and further to analyze their
correlation with the clinicopathological parameters and prognosis in
patients with tongue squamous cell carcinoma (TSCC).METHODS: Levels of
p63 and miR-138 in TSCC and paired para-cancerous tissues were
investigated by immunohistochemistry (IHC) and in situ hybridization
(ISH), respectively. The correlations of p63 and miR-138 expression with
the clinico- pathological parameters and prognosis of patients with TSCC
were analyzed using SPSS 13.0 software package. Expression of p63 and
miR-138 in TSCC cell lines (n = 5) was measured using immunoblot analysis
and qRT-PCR, respectively. p63 was expressed transgenically, or knocked
down with shRNAs in SCC9, SCC25, SCC15 and UM1 cell lines, and effects on
cell invasion and migration were evaluated.RESULTS: Elevated level of p63
and reduced level of miR-138 was observed in TSCC tissues in comparison
with paired para-cancerous tissues (p < 0.05). In particular, a more
elevated expression for p63 appeared in the invasive tumor front compared
with superficial or central parts of the primary tissues (p < 0.05). A
negative correlation between p63 and miR-138 expression can be observed
in the TSCC tissues. Statistical analysis revealed that p63 and miR-138
expression level are associated with cell differentiation, cervical lymph
node metastasis status and clinical stage as well in patients with TSCC.
COX regression analysis shows that p63 over-expression was correlated
with reduced overall survival. P63 can be served as an independent
prognostic factor for patients with TSCC. These observations were
confirmed in vitro, in which Np63 is the predominant p63 isoform
expressed in the TSCC cell lines, and a negative correlation between p63
and miR-138 expression can be observed (p BACKGROUND and AIMS: p63 is
critical for the development and maintenance of stratified epithelial
tissues. The role of p63 in tumorigenesis remains poorly defined. This
study aims to determine the levels of p63 and miR-138 expression both in
vitro and in vivo, and further to analyze their correlation with the
clinicopathological parameters and prognosis in patients with tongue
squamous cell carcinoma (TSCC).METHODS: Levels of p63 and miR-138 in TSCC
and paired para-cancerous tissues were investigated by
immunohistochemistry (IHC) and in situ hybridization (ISH), respectively.
The correlations of p63 and miR-138 expression with the clinico-
pathological parameters and prognosis of patients with TSCC were analyzed
using SPSS 13.0 software package. Expression of p63 and miR-138 in TSCC
cell lines (n = 5) was measured using immunoblot analysis and qRT-PCR,
respectively. p63 was expressed transgenically, or knocked down with
shRNAs in SCC9, SCC25, SCC15 and UM1 cell lines, and effects on cell
invasion and migration were evaluated.RESULTS: Elevated level of p63 and
reduced level of miR-138 was observed in TSCC tissues in comparison with
paired para-cancerous tissues (p < 0.05). In particular, a more elevated
expression for p63 appeared in the invasive tumor front compared with
superficial or central parts of the primary tissues (p < 0.05). A
negative correlation between p63 and miR-138 expression can be observed
in the TSCC tissues. Statistical analysis revealed that p63 and miR-138
expression level are associated with cell differentiation, cervical lymph
node metastasis status and clinical stage as well in patients with TSCC.
COX regression analysis shows that p63 over-expression was correlated
with reduced overall survival. P63 can be served as an independent
prognostic factor for patients with TSCC. These observations were
confirmed in vitro, in which Np63 is the predominant p63 isoform
expressed in the TSCC cell lines, and a negative correlation between p63
and miR-138 expression can be observed (p < 0.05). Ectopic transfection
of p63 led to reduce miR-138 expression and enhanced cell invasion and
migration. On the contrary, knockdown of p63 enhanced miR-138 expression
and suppressed cell invasion and migration. Furthermore, transfection of
miR-138 partly reversed cell invasion and migration induced by p63
overexpression.CONCLUSION: The dysregulation of p63 and miR-138 are
common molecular events in TSCC progression. These findings suggest that
p63 and miR-138 may collaboratively play a role in tongue carcinogenesis.

