Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Melatonin action in xenograft model of breast cancer, comparing
radiopharmaceuticals in the detection of intratumor heterogeneity by
PET/CT confirmed by immunohistochemical markers


Breast cancer is the most common cancer among women and has a high
mortality rate. The rapid tumor growth makes difficult the perfusion of
O2 mainly in the tumor center, and this hypoxia in tumor microenvironment
can exerts selective pressure on the tumor cells, selecting
subpopulations with advantage for survival in adverse conditions,
characterizing the intratumor heterogeneity. In this context, melatonin,
a hormone naturally produced by the pineal gland, has shown antitumor
activity, as immunomodulatory, antioxidant, pro-apoptotic,
anti-proliferative, antimetastatic, antiangiogenic and with potencial
effects in intratumor heterogeneity. The aims of this study was to
evaluate the effectiveness of melatonin in a xenograft model of breast
cancer, focusing on intratumor heterogeneity verified by PET/CT and by
immunohistochemical markers of hypoxia. The tumors were developed by the
implantation of 5 million triple-negative breast cancer cells
(MDA-MB-231) into the flank of female Balb/c nude mice (n = 14).
Treatment with melatonin (n = 7) or vehicle (n = 7) was initiated 10 days
after tumor implantation and continued for 14 days. At the end,
micro-PET/CT scanning was performed with 18F-FDG, which is an analogue of
glucose, and with 18F-FAZA, a specific radiopharmaceutical for hypoxia
detection. The radiopharmaceuticals were injected by retro-orbital via
and the images were acquired using Albira PET/SPECT/CT Carestream
Molecular Imaging. Then, markers of hypoxia were evaluated by
immunohistochemistry in mammary tumors. The results showed that tumor
growth in animals treated with melatonin was lower than those treated
with vehicle (pBreast cancer is the most common cancer among women and
has a high mortality rate. The rapid tumor growth makes difficult the
perfusion of O2 mainly in the tumor center, and this hypoxia in tumor
microenvironment can exerts selective pressure on the tumor cells,
selecting subpopulations with advantage for survival in adverse
conditions, characterizing the intratumor heterogeneity. In this context,
melatonin, a hormone naturally produced by the pineal gland, has shown
antitumor activity, as immunomodulatory, antioxidant, pro-apoptotic,
anti-proliferative, antimetastatic, antiangiogenic and with potencial
effects in intratumor heterogeneity. The aims of this study was to
evaluate the effectiveness of melatonin in a xenograft model of breast
cancer, focusing on intratumor heterogeneity verified by PET/CT and by
immunohistochemical markers of hypoxia. The tumors were developed by the
implantation of 5 million triple-negative breast cancer cells
(MDA-MB-231) into the flank of female Balb/c nude mice (n = 14).
Treatment with melatonin (n = 7) or vehicle (n = 7) was initiated 10 days
after tumor implantation and continued for 14 days. At the end,
micro-PET/CT scanning was performed with 18F-FDG, which is an analogue of
glucose, and with 18F-FAZA, a specific radiopharmaceutical for hypoxia
detection. The radiopharmaceuticals were injected by retro-orbital via
and the images were acquired using Albira PET/SPECT/CT Carestream
Molecular Imaging. Then, markers of hypoxia were evaluated by
immunohistochemistry in mammary tumors. The results showed that tumor
growth in animals treated with melatonin was lower than those treated
with vehicle (p<0.05). There was tumor regression in one animal treated
with melatonin, showing 18.72 mm3 at start of treatment and no longer
being detected after seven days of treatment. 18F-FDG can be used as
hypoxia marker, however, studies show that can occurs overlapping areas
of aerobic and anaerobic glycolysis in the tumor, difficulting the
identification of hypoxic areas. 18F-FAZA has a hypoxia-specific uptake
mechanism and a better spread by the tumor. Results of PET/CT showed that
18F-FDG had homogeneous uptake in breast tumors. In some tumors with high
volume, there was no uptake in the tumor center, corresponding to areas
of necrosis. In addition, there was an intratumor 18F-FAZA uptake
heterogeneity, indicating possible hypoxic areas. Also, PET/CT results
showed that there was less hypoxic areas in animals treated with
melatonin, which was confirmed by immunohistochemical markers. Taken
together, our results showed an important action of melatonin, in control
of mammary tumor growth, decreasing hypoxia areas and controlling cancer
progression. Financial support: Fundao de Amparo Pesquisa do Estado de So
Paulo

