Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Structure-activity relationship studies, synthesis, and biological
evaluation of PQR620, a highly potent and selective mTORC1/2 inhibitor


Mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) signaling pathway plays a
fundamental role in cell proliferation, differentiation, growth and
survival.[1] As a consequence, various tumors and central nervous system
(CNS) disorders share aberrant activation of the mTOR pathway. Drugs
targeting the mTOR pathway represent therefore a valuable path to address
multiple therapeutic areas.[1-2] Here, we report the lead optimization of
PQR620, a novel potent and selective brain penetrant inhibitor of
mTORC1/2.The development of selective mTOR inhibitors is particularly
challenging due to extensively conserved amino acid residues in the ATP
binding pocket within the PI3K and PI3K-related protein kinase family.
Here, we present a detailed ligand-based structure activity relationship
study allowing selective targeting of mTOR kinase activity without the
interference of other PI3K family members. Systematic variation of the
hinge region and affinity binding motifs led to the identification of
PQR620, a morpholino-triazinyl derivative, as potent and selective mTOR
inhibitor. Substitution of the morpholine binding to the hinge region and
introduction of a 2-aminopyridine, substituted with a difluoromethyl
group, induced a >1000-fold selectivity towards mTOR over PI3K in
enzymatic binding assays.In A2058 melanoma cells PQR620 demonstrated
inhibition of protein kinase B (pSer473) and ribosomal protein S6
(pSer235/236) phosphorylation with IC50 values of 0.2 M and 0.1 M,
respectively. The physico-chemical properties of PQR620 result in good
oral bioavailability and excellent brain penetration. PQR620 showed
excellent selectivity over a wide panel of kinases, as well as excellent
selectivity versus unrelated receptor enzymes and ion channels. Moreover,
PQR620 demonstrated its potency to prevent cancer cell growth in an NTRC
44 cancer cell line panel, resulting in a 10log(IC50) of 2.86 (nM).
Further pharmacological properties and in vivo efficacy of PQR620 are
presented in detail in Ref. [3].The preparation of PQR620 was optimized
towards a robust synthetic route involving only 4 steps, allowing for a
rapid access to quantities required for pre-clinical testing. In
conclusion, PQR620 inhibits mTOR potently and selectively, and shows
anti-tumor effects in vitro and in vivo. PQR620 is currently in
pre-clinical development.[1] M. Laplante, D. Sabatini, Cell 2012, 149,
274-293.[2] Z. Z. Chong, Y. C. Shang, L. Zhang, S. Wang, K. Maiese, Oxid.
Med. Cell. Longev. 2010, 3, 374391.[3] F. Beaufils, D. Rageot, A. Melone,
A. M. Sele, M. Lang, J. Mestan, R. A. Ettlin, P. Hillmann, V.
Cmiljanovic, C. Walter, E. Singer, H. P. Nguyen, P. Hebeisen, D. Fabbro,
M. P. Wymann, Pharmacological characterization of the selective, orally
bioavailable, potent mTORC1/2 inhibitor PQR620 presented at AACR Annual
Meeting 2016, April 16-20, New Orleans, Louisiana, USA.

