Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation of cytokinesis by polo-like kinase 4


Introduction. The serine/threonine mitotic kinase, polo-like kinase 4
(PLK4), is known to play a critical role in centrosome duplication in
preparation for cell division. Based on our preliminary observations with
a PLK4 kinase inhibitor, we investigated the possibility that PLK4 may
also play a role in regulation of cytokinesis.Experimental Procedures.
Immunofluorescence was used to localize PLK4 and phospho-PLK4 in cultured
human breast, ovarian, and colorectal cancer cell lines throughout the
cell cycle without and with CFI-400945 PLK4 inhibitor and MG-115 protease
inhibitor. Flow cytometry and videomicroscopy were used to analyze the
consequences of PLK4 inhibition on cytokinesis.Results. Using
immunofluorescence, PLK4 was localized to centrosomes; however, we also
found that phospho-PLK4 was cleaved and distributed to kinetochores
(metaphase and anaphase), cleavage furrow (telophase), and middle body
(cytokinesis) during cell division in colorectal, ovarian, and breast
cancer cells. Distribution of phospho-PLK4 to the cleavage furrow and
middle body raised the possibility that this kinase plays a functional
role in cytokinesis. Using either CFI-400945 PLK4 kinase inhibitor or the
MG-115 protease inhibitor, we found that PLK4 accumulated in centrosomes
with inhibition of translocation of PLK4 to the middle body. This change
in subcellular distribution of PLK4 was associated with generation of
large, multi-nucleated tumor cells or tumor cells with polyploidy.
Videomicroscopy confirmed that treatment with CFI-400945 PLK4 inhibitor
was associated with prevention of cellular abscission in treated
cells.Conclusions. These observations demonstrate a role for phospho-PLK4
in facilitation of cytokinesis. A regulatory role for PLK4 in cytokinesis
makes it a potential target for therapeutic intervention in appropriately
selected cancers.

