Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The relationship of Procollagen alpha 1 type 1 (Col1A1) / DDR2
signaling in malignant glioma and sensitivity to STAT 3/5 inhibitor


We have previously shown that Procollagen alpha 1 type 1 (Col1A1) is
found in low and intermediate grade glioma and in less aggressive
glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) (Cancer Invest. 23:577, 2005). However,
these tumor cells are more prone to ER stress -inducing agents such as
Befeldine (BFA) which block the transport of Procollagen to the cell
surface. We also found that GBM cells which possess Col1A1 also express
DDR2. The role of Col1A1/ DDR2 signaling in glioma is not known. We have
used three GBM cell lines: Glioma1 established in our laboratory from a
patient who progressed from grade 3 to grade 4, U-118, A-172 and U-373 to
study this signaling pathway. Both Glioma1 and U-118 express Col1A1 and
DDR1 and 2. A-172 and U-373 do not express Col1A1 but express both DDR2.
U-373 does not express HSP47 which is an essential protein to fold
collagen. In order to define the function of DDR2/ Col1A1 in GBM, we have
used knock down COL1A1 and DDR2. Silencing Col1A1 leads to a significant
increase in invasiveness by Matrigel assay which indicated that Col1A1 is
important in preventing invasion in GBM and hence is found more in low
and intermediate grade glioma. However, it has minimal effect on cell
cycle or cell proliferation. Next, we have silenced DDR2 in all 4 cell
lines and studied the biochemical changes. We found that silencing DDR2
does not affect cell proliferation, cell death or cell cycle. However, it
does affect the sensitivity to BFA. In cell lines which possess Col1A1,
the cell viability increased by 20 -30% (p We have previously shown that
Procollagen alpha 1 type 1 (Col1A1) is found in low and intermediate
grade glioma and in less aggressive glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) (Cancer
Invest. 23:577, 2005). However, these tumor cells are more prone to ER
stress -inducing agents such as Befeldine (BFA) which block the transport
of Procollagen to the cell surface. We also found that GBM cells which
possess Col1A1 also express DDR2. The role of Col1A1/ DDR2 signaling in
glioma is not known. We have used three GBM cell lines: Glioma1
established in our laboratory from a patient who progressed from grade 3
to grade 4, U-118, A-172 and U-373 to study this signaling pathway. Both
Glioma1 and U-118 express Col1A1 and DDR1 and 2. A-172 and U-373 do not
express Col1A1 but express both DDR2. U-373 does not express HSP47 which
is an essential protein to fold collagen. In order to define the function
of DDR2/ Col1A1 in GBM, we have used knock down COL1A1 and DDR2.
Silencing Col1A1 leads to a significant increase in invasiveness by
Matrigel assay which indicated that Col1A1 is important in preventing
invasion in GBM and hence is found more in low and intermediate grade
glioma. However, it has minimal effect on cell cycle or cell
proliferation. Next, we have silenced DDR2 in all 4 cell lines and
studied the biochemical changes. We found that silencing DDR2 does not
affect cell proliferation, cell death or cell cycle. However, it does
affect the sensitivity to BFA. In cell lines which possess Col1A1, the
cell viability increased by 20 -30% (p <0.05). In contrast, cell lines
which do not express Col1A1, the cell viability decreased by 25-30% (pWe
have previously shown that Procollagen alpha 1 type 1 (Col1A1) is found
in low and intermediate grade glioma and in less aggressive glioblastoma
multiforme (GBM) (Cancer Invest. 23:577, 2005). However, these tumor
cells are more prone to ER stress -inducing agents such as Befeldine
(BFA) which block the transport of Procollagen to the cell surface. We
also found that GBM cells which possess Col1A1 also express DDR2. The
role of Col1A1/ DDR2 signaling in glioma is not known. We have used three
GBM cell lines: Glioma1 established in our laboratory from a patient who
progressed from grade 3 to grade 4, U-118, A-172 and U-373 to study this
signaling pathway. Both Glioma1 and U-118 express Col1A1 and DDR1 and 2.
A-172 and U-373 do not express Col1A1 but express both DDR2. U-373 does
not express HSP47 which is an essential protein to fold collagen. In
order to define the function of DDR2/ Col1A1 in GBM, we have used knock
down COL1A1 and DDR2. Silencing Col1A1 leads to a significant increase in
invasiveness by Matrigel assay which indicated that Col1A1 is important
in preventing invasion in GBM and hence is found more in low and
intermediate grade glioma. However, it has minimal effect on cell cycle
or cell proliferation. Next, we have silenced DDR2 in all 4 cell lines
and studied the biochemical changes. We found that silencing DDR2 does
not affect cell proliferation, cell death or cell cycle. However, it does
affect the sensitivity to BFA. In cell lines which possess Col1A1, the
cell viability increased by 20 -30% (p <0.05). In contrast, cell lines
which do not express Col1A1, the cell viability decreased by 25-30%
(p<0.01). However, there is no difference in sensitivity to the DNA
damaging agent cisplatin. Thus, DDR2 may function differently depending
on the presence of Col1A1. To explore this further, we have performed a
limited phoshoprotein kinase array in Glioma 1 with siCol1A1 or siDDR2.
We found increase in STAT3, 5 and STAT6 upon silencing either Col1A1 or
DDR2 which is further confirmed by immunoblot in Glioma 1 for pSTAT 3 and
5. We then tested the antitumor effect of STAT3/5 inhibitor (SH4-54) a
benzoic acid based inhibitor (provided by Dr. James Turkson) which
interferes with the SH2 and DNA binding domains as well as tyr705
phosphorylation in Glioma1 and U-118 w/wo SiCol1A1. At 0.5 uM the cell
viability in Glioma 1 is 55.65 + 1.35 and 74.2 + 4.6 in U-118 while
SiCol1A1 it decreased to 44.5 + 3.53% in Glioma 1 and 58.2+ 1.9,
respectively, with minimal activity in A-172 which does not possess
Col1A1. In contrast, there is no effect with another commercially
available STAT 3 inhibitor S31-201 which only interferes with DNA binding
domain. Overall, our data suggest that Col1A1/DDR2/ STAT signaling may be
important in certain GBM cell lines and can be exploited for future
treatment in brain tumor (Supported by Wanfang Hospital-Taipei Medical
University Fellowship and VA Research Fund).

