Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Interaction between cutaneous human papillomavirus infection and
telomere length in association with cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma


Background: We previously reported that cutaneous human papillomavirus
(HPV) infection was associated with significantly increased risk of
cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma (SCC), while longer telomeres were
associated with significantly reduced risk of SCC. We conducted further
research to evaluate the interaction between cutaneous HPV and telomere
length in association with SCC. Methods: Previously, a clinic based
case-control (173 SCC cases and 300 controls) study was conducted,
between 2007-2008, at the University of South Florida and Moffitt Cancer
Center. HPV seropositivity (33 types) and DNA positivity (25 beta-HPV
types) in eyebrow hairs (EB) and SCC tumors were measured using multiplex
assays. Using quantitative PCR, relative telomere length was measured in
peripheral blood leukocytes by determining the ratio of telomere repeat
copy number to a single-copy gene copy number for each sample. For the
present analyses, subjects with available data on telomere length and a)
HPV serology (135 cases and 201 controls), b) HPV DNA in EB (130 SCC
cases and 195 controls) and c) HPV DNA in SCC tumors (117 cases), were
included. Association between telomere length and SCC was examined after
stratification by HPV serostatus and HPV DNA status in EB, and odds
ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) were estimated using
logistic regression, adjusting for age and gender. Results: Telomere
length did not differ significantly between beta-HPV seronegative (mean =
1.16, standard deviation (SD) = 0.57) and seropositive controls [mean
(SD) = 1.24(0.75), P value = 0.56], or by tumor HPV DNA status (P value =
0.93). Longer telomere length was associated with significantly reduced
risk of SCC among subjects seronegative to all HPV types or seropositive
to a single beta1 HPV type (OR = 0.01, 95% CI = 0.001-0.10), while no
association was observed among those seropositive to >1 beta1 HPV types
(OR = 1.01, 95% CI = 0.95-1.07, Pinteraction = = 1 beta-HPV types in EB
in association with SCC (OREB DNA negative = 0.003, 95% CI = 1 beta1 or
beta2 types (OR = 1.02, 95% CI = 0.98-1.07 for both groups). In summary,
multiple beta-HPV infections showed significant statistical interaction
with telomere length in association with SCC. Conclusion: Presence of
cutaneous HPV infection may attenuate the protective effect of longer
telomeres on the risk of SCC.

