Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Do disseminated tumor cells with stem cell character after therapy
predict prognosis in primary ovarian cancer


Background: We recently showed that the presence of disseminated tumor
cells (DTCs) in the bone marrow (BM) of primary ovarian cancer patients
(pts) significantly correlated with reduced progression free survival
(PFS) and overall survival (OS). Here we analyzed whether the negative
prognostic impact a) was related to the persistence of DTCs after
platinum based chemotherapy and/or b) may arise from a cellular
phenotype, being associated with stem cell character.Patients and
Methods: 79 pts were studied for DTCs before (BT) and after therapy (AT)
using immunocytochemistry applying the pan cytokeratin (CK) antibody
A45-B/B3. Eight pts harboring at least five DTCs AT were analyzed on two
additional cytospin slides by four immunofluorescence staining for DAPI,
CK (FITC), SOX-2 or LIN-28 (TRITC), CD45 and CD43 (Cy5), respectively. A
DTC was classified as a stem-like tumor cell in case of Dapipos, CD45neg,
CD34neg, SOX-2pos/LIN-28pos and Ckpos or Ckneg as evaluated by
microscopy.Results: DTCs were detected in 33/79 pts (42%) with a median
number of four DTCs (range 1-37) BT and in 32/79 pts (41%) AT, median
cell number eight DTCs (range 1-100), respectively. A persistence of DTCs
was found in 13 pts, 20 pts were only positive before therapy, 19 pts
after therapy and in 27 pts, no DTCs were detected at any time. Whereas
the presence of DTCs BT significantly correlated with reduced OS (p =
0.024), pts initially DTCneg BT but DTCpos AT had a significant shorter
PFS (p = 0.025). The persistence of DTCs resulted in a shorter PFS and OS
reaching borderline significance (p = 0.06; p = 0.07). AT,
Ckpos/LIN-28pos cells were detected in 9/10 patients [median two cells
(range 1-5)] and Ckneg/LIN-28pos cells in 7/10 patients [median three
cells (range 1-11)], respectively. For SOX-2, the results were 6/8
patients [median two cells (range-0-4)] and 7/8 patients [median four
cells (range 1-11)], respectively. Interestingly, two further pts
characterized as DTCneg AT but positive BT harbored 1-2 LIN-28pos and
SOX-2pos cells in their BM AT. In cases vice versa, a few LIN-28 as well
as SOX-2-positive cells were also present even BT.Conclusion: DTCs
present AT express stem cell associated proteins and seem to be
correlated with worse outcome. Furthermore, these cells were also
detected in some cases BT which might explain worse outcome of pts who
changed from DTCneg to DTCpos. Thus, additional therapeutic regimens may
be necessary to eliminate these cells.

