Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeted sequencing of 409 cancer-related genes for somatic
mutations and copy number variations in human cancer using the
semiconductor sequencers


Next-generation sequencing technologies have revolutionized cancer
genomics research by providing a comprehensive method of detecting
somatic cancer genome alterations. In this study, we describe a
next-generation semiconductor sequencing protocol for rapid (2 days),
standardized, and cost-effective gene analysis for human cancer specimens
including FFPE samples. DNA was extracted from 19 human cancer cell lines
and 61 human cancer specimens and their corresponding non-cancerous
tissues, including oral squamous cell carcinomas and multiple myelomas.
Using the Ion Ampliseq Comprehensive Cancer Panel, we sequenced 15992
loci from 409 tumor suppressor genes and oncogenes frequently cited and
frequently mutated in human cancers (covered regions = 95.4% of total).
Each sample underwent on average 8.3 million sequencing reads after
quality filtering. The mean read depths were 461x, and >95% of targeted
bases were represented by at least 20 reads. We also detected copy number
variations in which segments of the genome can be duplicated or deleted
from sequencing data. We found several genetic alterations that may have
been associated with the poor prognosis and poor response to chemotherapy
of cancer patients. Pathway assessment has shown that somatic aberrations
within myeloma genomes are mainly involved in several important pathways,
including cell cycle regulation, RTK-MAPK-PI3K and NF-kB. This study
demonstrates the utility of using a semiconductor-based sequencing to
efficiently identify human cancer mutations. The targeted next generation
sequencing using low amounts of FFPE DNA is a valuable tool for
high-throughput genetic testing in research and clinical settings.

