Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Supplement use and chemotherapy-induced peripheral neuropathy in
breast cancer patients treated on SWOG study S0221


Introduction. Chemotherapy-induced peripheral neuropathy (CIPN) is a
common side effect of paclitaxel treatment. There is conflicting data on
the benefits and harms of supplement use for the treatment and prevention
of CIPN. We examined dietary supplement use before diagnosis and during
treatment in relation to CIPN among breast cancer patients registered to
a clinical trial (SWOG 0221; ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT00070564)
before diagnosis and during treatment in relation to CIPN.Methods. At
trial registration (baseline), breast cancer patients (n = 1,225)
completed questionnaires to capture use before and at diagnosis of
multivitamins and other dietary supplements. Of these patients, 1,068
completed a 6-month follow-up questionnaire to capture use during
treatment. We examined the use of multivitamins, vitamins C, D, E, B6,
and B12, folic acid, iron, calcium, glucosamine, and combined fish oil,
eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA), omega-3, flaxseed and cod liver oil at these
timepoints in relation to CIPN. CIPN was assessed via the National Cancer
Institute Common Toxicity Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE) and the
Functional Assessment of Cancer Therapy/Gynecologic Oncology Group
Neurotoxicity (FACT/GOG-Ntx) subscale. Odds ratios and 95% confidence
intervals were computed using unconditional logistic regression.Results.
Multivitamin use before diagnosis was associated with reduced symptoms of
CIPN (CTCAE adjusted OR = 0.60, 95% CI = 0.42-0.87; FACT/GOG-Ntx adjusted
OR = 0.78, 95% CI = 0.61-1.00). Although in a similar direction as use
prior to diagnosis, multivitamin use during treatment was less strongly
associated with CIPN (CTCAE adjusted OR = 0.73, 95% CI = 0.49-1.08;
FACT/GOG-Ntx 0.77, 95% CI = 0.60-0.99). Other supplement use, either
before diagnosis or during treatment, was not associated with
CIPN.Conclusions. Our results indicate that supplement use during
treatment may not appreciably affect experience of CIPN symptoms. Future
analyses of the relationships between supplement use and survival
outcomes will better inform patient decision making.Acknowledgments:
supported by R01 CA116395 (CBA); S0221 supported, in part, by National
Cancer Institute/Division of Cancer Prevention SWOG NCORP Research Base
grant 5UG1CA189974-02; National Cancer Institute (NCI), National Clinical
Trials Network (NCTN): CA180888, CA180819; and in part by Amgen, Inc.

