Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combination of PLK1 and PI3K inhibitors shows strong synergy in
anaplastic thyroid cancer


Anaplastic thyroid cancer (ATC) is the most aggressive thyroid cancer
with median of 6 months of survival from diagnosis. Molecular alterations
are well defined recently. p53 mutations, and activation of PI3K, RAS and
BRAF are among the most common alterations. PLK1 overexpression has also
been identified in ATC.We have previously shown that PLK1 inhibitors are
effective in ATC cell lines. However PLK1 inhibition in cell lines with
PI3K activation resulted in escaping growth arrest and subsequent mitotic
catastrophe through mitotic slippage. Since the PI3K activation is common
in ATC, there is risk of generating polyploid, genetically unstable cell
populations by targeting these tumors with a PLK1 inhibitor. So we tested
the effect of combining PLK1 and PI3K inhibitors in ATC cell lines.We
combined PLK1 inhibitor BI6727 and PI3K inhibitor BKM120 and measured the
cell viability using Alamar Blue. Combination of these two drugs resulted
in significant synergy in mouse derived PTEN deleted ATC cell lines. We
observed the same synergy in the human ATC cell lines with PIK3CA
mutations.BI6727 showed significant G2/M arrest in the cell lines. The
combination two drugs enhanced the G2/M arrest. In a low dose that the
single drugs showed no inhibition in cell cycle, combination resulted in
G2/M arrest.We treated the cells with a dual PI3K and PLK1 inhibitor
Rigosertib. Although we have seen some sensitivity of the cells with
PIK3CA mutation, the cell lines with PTEN were strongly resistant to
Rigosertib.Our results show that combination of PLK1 and PI3K inhibitors
is an effective treatment for ATC cells with PI3K activation. This
combination results in cell cycle arrest suggesting the role of using
combination therapies in this aggressive cancer.

