Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Loss of 4E-BP1 function promotes EMT and metastasis via
translational activation of snail


The cap-dependent translation is frequently deregulated in a variety of
cancers associated with tumor progression. However, the molecular
mechanisms underlying the translational activation for cancer metastatic
progression remains largely elusive. Here, we demonstrate that activation
of cap-dependent translation by silencing the translational repressor
4E-BP1 causes cancer epithelial cells to undergo epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT), which is associated with selective upregulation of the
EMT inducer snail followed by repression of E-cadherin expression and
promotion of cell migration and invasion as well as metastasis.
Conversely, inhibition of cap-dependent translation by a dominant active
mutant 4E-BP1 effectively downregulates snail expression and inhibits
cell migratory/invasive capacities and metastasis. Furthermore,
dephosphorylation of 4E-BP1 by mTORC1 inhibition or directly targeting
the eIF4F translation initiation also profoundly attenuates snail
translation/expression and cell motility, whereas knockdown of 4E-BP1 or
overexpression of snail significantly rescues the inhibitory effects.
Importantly, 4E-BP1-regulated snail expression is not associated with its
changes in the level of transcription or protein stability. Together,
these findings reveal a novel role of 4E-BP1 in the regulation of EMT and
metastasis through translational control of snail expression and
activity, and suggest that targeting cap-dependent translation may
provide a promising approach for blocking snail-mediated metastatic
potential of cancer.

