Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Enhanced in vitro and in vivo targeting of rituximab-sensitive and
-resistant Burkitt lymphoma (BL) by anti-CD20 chimeric antigen receptor
(CAR)-modified expanded natural killer cells in combination with a
histone deacetylase inhibitor, romidepsin


Background: For BL patients who relapse, the prognosis is dismal due to
chemo-immunotherapy resistance (Cairo et al, JCO, 2012, Goldman/Cairo et
al, Leukemia, 2013). Our group has successfully modified expanded
peripheral blood Natural killer cells (exPBNK) with an anti-CD20 CAR to
target rituximab sensitive/resistant CD20+ BL cells in vitro and in NSG
mice (Chu/Cairo, et al, Can Imm Res 2015). Romidepsin is a histone
deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor that increases the expression of NKG2D
ligands in BL (Chu/Cairo, et al, Cytotherapy, 2014).Objective: We
investigated the effect of romidepsin alone and in combination with
anti-CD20 CAR modified exPBNK cells against CD20+ BL cells in vitro and
in humanized BL NSG mice.Methods: Anti-CD20 CAR modified exPBNK cells
were produced as we have described (Chu/Cairo, et al, Can Imm Res 2015).
HDACs levels in BL cells were examined by western blot. Raji, Raji-2R and
Raji-4RH cells were treated with 10ng/ml romidepsin, generously provided
by Celgene. Raji-Luc engrafted mice were injected i.p. with romidepsin
(2.2mg/kg) or PBS once a week for 3 consecutive weeks followed by
anti-CD20 CAR exPBNK cell or mock exPBNK cell injections 24hrs later.
Tumor regression and/or progression were monitored weekly by tumor volume
measurement and by in vivo bioluminescent imaging (Chu/Cairo, et al, Can
Imm Res 2015).Results: HDAC 1, 3, 6 levels were significantly increased
in Raji, Raji-2R, Raji-4RH, Ramos, and Daudi compared to white blood
cells. Total H3K9 acetylation was enhanced in Raji, Raji-2R, and Raji-4RH
following romidepsin. More importantly, romidepsin significantly
inhibited BL cell proliferation (pBackground: For BL patients who
relapse, the prognosis is dismal due to chemo-immunotherapy resistance
(Cairo et al, JCO, 2012, Goldman/Cairo et al, Leukemia, 2013). Our group
has successfully modified expanded peripheral blood Natural killer cells
(exPBNK) with an anti-CD20 CAR to target rituximab sensitive/resistant
CD20+ BL cells in vitro and in NSG mice (Chu/Cairo, et al, Can Imm Res
2015). Romidepsin is a histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor that
increases the expression of NKG2D ligands in BL (Chu/Cairo, et al,
Cytotherapy, 2014).Objective: We investigated the effect of romidepsin
alone and in combination with anti-CD20 CAR modified exPBNK cells against
CD20+ BL cells in vitro and in humanized BL NSG mice.Methods: Anti-CD20
CAR modified exPBNK cells were produced as we have described (Chu/Cairo,
et al, Can Imm Res 2015). HDACs levels in BL cells were examined by
western blot. Raji, Raji-2R and Raji-4RH cells were treated with 10ng/ml
romidepsin, generously provided by Celgene. Raji-Luc engrafted mice were
injected i.p. with romidepsin (2.2mg/kg) or PBS once a week for 3
consecutive weeks followed by anti-CD20 CAR exPBNK cell or mock exPBNK
cell injections 24hrs later. Tumor regression and/or progression were
monitored weekly by tumor volume measurement and by in vivo
bioluminescent imaging (Chu/Cairo, et al, Can Imm Res 2015).Results: HDAC
1, 3, 6 levels were significantly increased in Raji, Raji-2R, Raji-4RH,
Ramos, and Daudi compared to white blood cells. Total H3K9 acetylation
was enhanced in Raji, Raji-2R, and Raji-4RH following romidepsin. More
importantly, romidepsin significantly inhibited BL cell proliferation
(p<0.001), induced apoptosis only in rituximab sensitive BL cells with
increased active caspase 3, and induced cell cycle arrest in resistant BL
cells (pBackground: For BL patients who relapse, the prognosis is dismal
due to chemo-immunotherapy resistance (Cairo et al, JCO, 2012,
Goldman/Cairo et al, Leukemia, 2013). Our group has successfully modified
expanded peripheral blood Natural killer cells (exPBNK) with an anti-CD20
CAR to target rituximab sensitive/resistant CD20+ BL cells in vitro and
in NSG mice (Chu/Cairo, et al, Can Imm Res 2015). Romidepsin is a histone
deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor that increases the expression of NKG2D
ligands in BL (Chu/Cairo, et al, Cytotherapy, 2014).Objective: We
investigated the effect of romidepsin alone and in combination with
anti-CD20 CAR modified exPBNK cells against CD20+ BL cells in vitro and
in humanized BL NSG mice.Methods: Anti-CD20 CAR modified exPBNK cells
were produced as we have described (Chu/Cairo, et al, Can Imm Res 2015).
HDACs levels in BL cells were examined by western blot. Raji, Raji-2R and
Raji-4RH cells were treated with 10ng/ml romidepsin, generously provided
by Celgene. Raji-Luc engrafted mice were injected i.p. with romidepsin
(2.2mg/kg) or PBS once a week for 3 consecutive weeks followed by
anti-CD20 CAR exPBNK cell or mock exPBNK cell injections 24hrs later.
Tumor regression and/or progression were monitored weekly by tumor volume
measurement and by in vivo bioluminescent imaging (Chu/Cairo, et al, Can
Imm Res 2015).Results: HDAC 1, 3, 6 levels were significantly increased
in Raji, Raji-2R, Raji-4RH, Ramos, and Daudi compared to white blood
cells. Total H3K9 acetylation was enhanced in Raji, Raji-2R, and Raji-4RH
following romidepsin. More importantly, romidepsin significantly
inhibited BL cell proliferation (p<0.001), induced apoptosis only in
rituximab sensitive BL cells with increased active caspase 3, and induced
cell cycle arrest in resistant BL cells (p<0.001). Romidepsin
significantly inhibited in vivo Raji and Raji-2R cells growth in
xenografted NSG mice with reduced tumor size (pBackground: For BL
patients who relapse, the prognosis is dismal due to chemo-immunotherapy
resistance (Cairo et al, JCO, 2012, Goldman/Cairo et al, Leukemia, 2013).
Our group has successfully modified expanded peripheral blood Natural
killer cells (exPBNK) with an anti-CD20 CAR to target rituximab
sensitive/resistant CD20+ BL cells in vitro and in NSG mice (Chu/Cairo,
et al, Can Imm Res 2015). Romidepsin is a histone deacetylase (HDAC)
inhibitor that increases the expression of NKG2D ligands in BL
(Chu/Cairo, et al, Cytotherapy, 2014).Objective: We investigated the
effect of romidepsin alone and in combination with anti-CD20 CAR modified
exPBNK cells against CD20+ BL cells in vitro and in humanized BL NSG
mice.Methods: Anti-CD20 CAR modified exPBNK cells were produced as we
have described (Chu/Cairo, et al, Can Imm Res 2015). HDACs levels in BL
cells were examined by western blot. Raji, Raji-2R and Raji-4RH cells
were treated with 10ng/ml romidepsin, generously provided by Celgene.
Raji-Luc engrafted mice were injected i.p. with romidepsin (2.2mg/kg) or
PBS once a week for 3 consecutive weeks followed by anti-CD20 CAR exPBNK
cell or mock exPBNK cell injections 24hrs later. Tumor regression and/or
progression were monitored weekly by tumor volume measurement and by in
vivo bioluminescent imaging (Chu/Cairo, et al, Can Imm Res 2015).Results:
HDAC 1, 3, 6 levels were significantly increased in Raji, Raji-2R,
Raji-4RH, Ramos, and Daudi compared to white blood cells. Total H3K9
acetylation was enhanced in Raji, Raji-2R, and Raji-4RH following
romidepsin. More importantly, romidepsin significantly inhibited BL cell
proliferation (p<0.001), induced apoptosis only in rituximab sensitive BL
cells with increased active caspase 3, and induced cell cycle arrest in
resistant BL cells (p<0.001). Romidepsin significantly inhibited in vivo
Raji and Raji-2R cells growth in xenografted NSG mice with reduced tumor
size (p<0.05) and bioluminescence (pBackground: For BL patients who
relapse, the prognosis is dismal due to chemo-immunotherapy resistance
(Cairo et al, JCO, 2012, Goldman/Cairo et al, Leukemia, 2013). Our group
has successfully modified expanded peripheral blood Natural killer cells
(exPBNK) with an anti-CD20 CAR to target rituximab sensitive/resistant
CD20+ BL cells in vitro and in NSG mice (Chu/Cairo, et al, Can Imm Res
2015). Romidepsin is a histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor that
increases the expression of NKG2D ligands in BL (Chu/Cairo, et al,
Cytotherapy, 2014).Objective: We investigated the effect of romidepsin
alone and in combination with anti-CD20 CAR modified exPBNK cells against
CD20+ BL cells in vitro and in humanized BL NSG mice.Methods: Anti-CD20
CAR modified exPBNK cells were produced as we have described (Chu/Cairo,
et al, Can Imm Res 2015). HDACs levels in BL cells were examined by
western blot. Raji, Raji-2R and Raji-4RH cells were treated with 10ng/ml
romidepsin, generously provided by Celgene. Raji-Luc engrafted mice were
injected i.p. with romidepsin (2.2mg/kg) or PBS once a week for 3
consecutive weeks followed by anti-CD20 CAR exPBNK cell or mock exPBNK
cell injections 24hrs later. Tumor regression and/or progression were
monitored weekly by tumor volume measurement and by in vivo
bioluminescent imaging (Chu/Cairo, et al, Can Imm Res 2015).Results: HDAC
1, 3, 6 levels were significantly increased in Raji, Raji-2R, Raji-4RH,
Ramos, and Daudi compared to white blood cells. Total H3K9 acetylation
was enhanced in Raji, Raji-2R, and Raji-4RH following romidepsin. More
importantly, romidepsin significantly inhibited BL cell proliferation
(p<0.001), induced apoptosis only in rituximab sensitive BL cells with
increased active caspase 3, and induced cell cycle arrest in resistant BL
cells (p<0.001). Romidepsin significantly inhibited in vivo Raji and
Raji-2R cells growth in xenografted NSG mice with reduced tumor size
(p<0.05) and bioluminescence (p<0.05).In vitro cytotoxicity of anti-CD20
CAR exPBNK cells was significantly enhanced against romidepsin treated BL
cells compared to the untreated at E:T = 3:1 (PBackground: For BL
patients who relapse, the prognosis is dismal due to chemo-immunotherapy
resistance (Cairo et al, JCO, 2012, Goldman/Cairo et al, Leukemia, 2013).
Our group has successfully modified expanded peripheral blood Natural
killer cells (exPBNK) with an anti-CD20 CAR to target rituximab
sensitive/resistant CD20+ BL cells in vitro and in NSG mice (Chu/Cairo,
et al, Can Imm Res 2015). Romidepsin is a histone deacetylase (HDAC)
inhibitor that increases the expression of NKG2D ligands in BL
(Chu/Cairo, et al, Cytotherapy, 2014).Objective: We investigated the
effect of romidepsin alone and in combination with anti-CD20 CAR modified
exPBNK cells against CD20+ BL cells in vitro and in humanized BL NSG
mice.Methods: Anti-CD20 CAR modified exPBNK cells were produced as we
have described (Chu/Cairo, et al, Can Imm Res 2015). HDACs levels in BL
cells were examined by western blot. Raji, Raji-2R and Raji-4RH cells
were treated with 10ng/ml romidepsin, generously provided by Celgene.
Raji-Luc engrafted mice were injected i.p. with romidepsin (2.2mg/kg) or
PBS once a week for 3 consecutive weeks followed by anti-CD20 CAR exPBNK
cell or mock exPBNK cell injections 24hrs later. Tumor regression and/or
progression were monitored weekly by tumor volume measurement and by in
vivo bioluminescent imaging (Chu/Cairo, et al, Can Imm Res 2015).Results:
HDAC 1, 3, 6 levels were significantly increased in Raji, Raji-2R,
Raji-4RH, Ramos, and Daudi compared to white blood cells. Total H3K9
acetylation was enhanced in Raji, Raji-2R, and Raji-4RH following
romidepsin. More importantly, romidepsin significantly inhibited BL cell
proliferation (p<0.001), induced apoptosis only in rituximab sensitive BL
cells with increased active caspase 3, and induced cell cycle arrest in
resistant BL cells (p<0.001). Romidepsin significantly inhibited in vivo
Raji and Raji-2R cells growth in xenografted NSG mice with reduced tumor
size (p<0.05) and bioluminescence (p<0.05).In vitro cytotoxicity of
anti-CD20 CAR exPBNK cells was significantly enhanced against romidepsin
treated BL cells compared to the untreated at E:T = 3:1 (P<0.001; n = 4),
or compared to the mock exPBNK (PBackground: For BL patients who relapse,
the prognosis is dismal due to chemo-immunotherapy resistance (Cairo et
al, JCO, 2012, Goldman/Cairo et al, Leukemia, 2013). Our group has
successfully modified expanded peripheral blood Natural killer cells
(exPBNK) with an anti-CD20 CAR to target rituximab sensitive/resistant
CD20+ BL cells in vitro and in NSG mice (Chu/Cairo, et al, Can Imm Res
2015). Romidepsin is a histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor that
increases the expression of NKG2D ligands in BL (Chu/Cairo, et al,
Cytotherapy, 2014).Objective: We investigated the effect of romidepsin
alone and in combination with anti-CD20 CAR modified exPBNK cells against
CD20+ BL cells in vitro and in humanized BL NSG mice.Methods: Anti-CD20
CAR modified exPBNK cells were produced as we have described (Chu/Cairo,
et al, Can Imm Res 2015). HDACs levels in BL cells were examined by
western blot. Raji, Raji-2R and Raji-4RH cells were treated with 10ng/ml
romidepsin, generously provided by Celgene. Raji-Luc engrafted mice were
injected i.p. with romidepsin (2.2mg/kg) or PBS once a week for 3
consecutive weeks followed by anti-CD20 CAR exPBNK cell or mock exPBNK
cell injections 24hrs later. Tumor regression and/or progression were
monitored weekly by tumor volume measurement and by in vivo
bioluminescent imaging (Chu/Cairo, et al, Can Imm Res 2015).Results: HDAC
1, 3, 6 levels were significantly increased in Raji, Raji-2R, Raji-4RH,
Ramos, and Daudi compared to white blood cells. Total H3K9 acetylation
was enhanced in Raji, Raji-2R, and Raji-4RH following romidepsin. More
importantly, romidepsin significantly inhibited BL cell proliferation
(p<0.001), induced apoptosis only in rituximab sensitive BL cells with
increased active caspase 3, and induced cell cycle arrest in resistant BL
cells (p<0.001). Romidepsin significantly inhibited in vivo Raji and
Raji-2R cells growth in xenografted NSG mice with reduced tumor size
(p<0.05) and bioluminescence (p<0.05).In vitro cytotoxicity of anti-CD20
CAR exPBNK cells was significantly enhanced against romidepsin treated BL
cells compared to the untreated at E:T = 3:1 (P<0.001; n = 4), or
compared to the mock exPBNK (P<0.05; n = 4).In humanized Raji xenograft
NSG mice, survival time in romidepsin+CAR exPBNK treated mice was
significantly extended compared to the untreated mice (median 28 days,
PBackground: For BL patients who relapse, the prognosis is dismal due to
chemo-immunotherapy resistance (Cairo et al, JCO, 2012, Goldman/Cairo et
al, Leukemia, 2013). Our group has successfully modified expanded
peripheral blood Natural killer cells (exPBNK) with an anti-CD20 CAR to
target rituximab sensitive/resistant CD20+ BL cells in vitro and in NSG
mice (Chu/Cairo, et al, Can Imm Res 2015). Romidepsin is a histone
deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor that increases the expression of NKG2D
ligands in BL (Chu/Cairo, et al, Cytotherapy, 2014).Objective: We
investigated the effect of romidepsin alone and in combination with
anti-CD20 CAR modified exPBNK cells against CD20+ BL cells in vitro and
in humanized BL NSG mice.Methods: Anti-CD20 CAR modified exPBNK cells
were produced as we have described (Chu/Cairo, et al, Can Imm Res 2015).
HDACs levels in BL cells were examined by western blot. Raji, Raji-2R and
Raji-4RH cells were treated with 10ng/ml romidepsin, generously provided
by Celgene. Raji-Luc engrafted mice were injected i.p. with romidepsin
(2.2mg/kg) or PBS once a week for 3 consecutive weeks followed by
anti-CD20 CAR exPBNK cell or mock exPBNK cell injections 24hrs later.
Tumor regression and/or progression were monitored weekly by tumor volume
measurement and by in vivo bioluminescent imaging (Chu/Cairo, et al, Can
Imm Res 2015).Results: HDAC 1, 3, 6 levels were significantly increased
in Raji, Raji-2R, Raji-4RH, Ramos, and Daudi compared to white blood
cells. Total H3K9 acetylation was enhanced in Raji, Raji-2R, and Raji-4RH
following romidepsin. More importantly, romidepsin significantly
inhibited BL cell proliferation (p<0.001), induced apoptosis only in
rituximab sensitive BL cells with increased active caspase 3, and induced
cell cycle arrest in resistant BL cells (p<0.001). Romidepsin
significantly inhibited in vivo Raji and Raji-2R cells growth in
xenografted NSG mice with reduced tumor size (p<0.05) and bioluminescence
(p<0.05).In vitro cytotoxicity of anti-CD20 CAR exPBNK cells was
significantly enhanced against romidepsin treated BL cells compared to
the untreated at E:T = 3:1 (P<0.001; n = 4), or compared to the mock
exPBNK (P<0.05; n = 4).In humanized Raji xenograft NSG mice, survival
time in romidepsin+CAR exPBNK treated mice was significantly extended
compared to the untreated mice (median 28 days, P<0.001), the mock exPBNK
treated mice (median 29 days, PBackground: For BL patients who relapse,
the prognosis is dismal due to chemo-immunotherapy resistance (Cairo et
al, JCO, 2012, Goldman/Cairo et al, Leukemia, 2013). Our group has
successfully modified expanded peripheral blood Natural killer cells
(exPBNK) with an anti-CD20 CAR to target rituximab sensitive/resistant
CD20+ BL cells in vitro and in NSG mice (Chu/Cairo, et al, Can Imm Res
2015). Romidepsin is a histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor that
increases the expression of NKG2D ligands in BL (Chu/Cairo, et al,
Cytotherapy, 2014).Objective: We investigated the effect of romidepsin
alone and in combination with anti-CD20 CAR modified exPBNK cells against
CD20+ BL cells in vitro and in humanized BL NSG mice.Methods: Anti-CD20
CAR modified exPBNK cells were produced as we have described (Chu/Cairo,
et al, Can Imm Res 2015). HDACs levels in BL cells were examined by
western blot. Raji, Raji-2R and Raji-4RH cells were treated with 10ng/ml
romidepsin, generously provided by Celgene. Raji-Luc engrafted mice were
injected i.p. with romidepsin (2.2mg/kg) or PBS once a week for 3
consecutive weeks followed by anti-CD20 CAR exPBNK cell or mock exPBNK
cell injections 24hrs later. Tumor regression and/or progression were
monitored weekly by tumor volume measurement and by in vivo
bioluminescent imaging (Chu/Cairo, et al, Can Imm Res 2015).Results: HDAC
1, 3, 6 levels were significantly increased in Raji, Raji-2R, Raji-4RH,
Ramos, and Daudi compared to white blood cells. Total H3K9 acetylation
was enhanced in Raji, Raji-2R, and Raji-4RH following romidepsin. More
importantly, romidepsin significantly inhibited BL cell proliferation
(p<0.001), induced apoptosis only in rituximab sensitive BL cells with
increased active caspase 3, and induced cell cycle arrest in resistant BL
cells (p<0.001). Romidepsin significantly inhibited in vivo Raji and
Raji-2R cells growth in xenografted NSG mice with reduced tumor size
(p<0.05) and bioluminescence (p<0.05).In vitro cytotoxicity of anti-CD20
CAR exPBNK cells was significantly enhanced against romidepsin treated BL
cells compared to the untreated at E:T = 3:1 (P<0.001; n = 4), or
compared to the mock exPBNK (P<0.05; n = 4).In humanized Raji xenograft
NSG mice, survival time in romidepsin+CAR exPBNK treated mice was
significantly extended compared to the untreated mice (median 28 days,
P<0.001), the mock exPBNK treated mice (median 29 days, P<0.001), the CAR
exPBNK treated mice (median 42.5 days, PBackground: For BL patients who
relapse, the prognosis is dismal due to chemo-immunotherapy resistance
(Cairo et al, JCO, 2012, Goldman/Cairo et al, Leukemia, 2013). Our group
has successfully modified expanded peripheral blood Natural killer cells
(exPBNK) with an anti-CD20 CAR to target rituximab sensitive/resistant
CD20+ BL cells in vitro and in NSG mice (Chu/Cairo, et al, Can Imm Res
2015). Romidepsin is a histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor that
increases the expression of NKG2D ligands in BL (Chu/Cairo, et al,
Cytotherapy, 2014).Objective: We investigated the effect of romidepsin
alone and in combination with anti-CD20 CAR modified exPBNK cells against
CD20+ BL cells in vitro and in humanized BL NSG mice.Methods: Anti-CD20
CAR modified exPBNK cells were produced as we have described (Chu/Cairo,
et al, Can Imm Res 2015). HDACs levels in BL cells were examined by
western blot. Raji, Raji-2R and Raji-4RH cells were treated with 10ng/ml
romidepsin, generously provided by Celgene. Raji-Luc engrafted mice were
injected i.p. with romidepsin (2.2mg/kg) or PBS once a week for 3
consecutive weeks followed by anti-CD20 CAR exPBNK cell or mock exPBNK
cell injections 24hrs later. Tumor regression and/or progression were
monitored weekly by tumor volume measurement and by in vivo
bioluminescent imaging (Chu/Cairo, et al, Can Imm Res 2015).Results: HDAC
1, 3, 6 levels were significantly increased in Raji, Raji-2R, Raji-4RH,
Ramos, and Daudi compared to white blood cells. Total H3K9 acetylation
was enhanced in Raji, Raji-2R, and Raji-4RH following romidepsin. More
importantly, romidepsin significantly inhibited BL cell proliferation
(p<0.001), induced apoptosis only in rituximab sensitive BL cells with
increased active caspase 3, and induced cell cycle arrest in resistant BL
cells (p<0.001). Romidepsin significantly inhibited in vivo Raji and
Raji-2R cells growth in xenografted NSG mice with reduced tumor size
(p<0.05) and bioluminescence (p<0.05).In vitro cytotoxicity of anti-CD20
CAR exPBNK cells was significantly enhanced against romidepsin treated BL
cells compared to the untreated at E:T = 3:1 (P<0.001; n = 4), or
compared to the mock exPBNK (P<0.05; n = 4).In humanized Raji xenograft
NSG mice, survival time in romidepsin+CAR exPBNK treated mice was
significantly extended compared to the untreated mice (median 28 days,
P<0.001), the mock exPBNK treated mice (median 29 days, P<0.001), the CAR
exPBNK treated mice (median 42.5 days, P<0.05), the romidepsin treated
mice (median 30 days, PBackground: For BL patients who relapse, the
prognosis is dismal due to chemo-immunotherapy resistance (Cairo et al,
JCO, 2012, Goldman/Cairo et al, Leukemia, 2013). Our group has
successfully modified expanded peripheral blood Natural killer cells
(exPBNK) with an anti-CD20 CAR to target rituximab sensitive/resistant
CD20+ BL cells in vitro and in NSG mice (Chu/Cairo, et al, Can Imm Res
2015). Romidepsin is a histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor that
increases the expression of NKG2D ligands in BL (Chu/Cairo, et al,
Cytotherapy, 2014).Objective: We investigated the effect of romidepsin
alone and in combination with anti-CD20 CAR modified exPBNK cells against
CD20+ BL cells in vitro and in humanized BL NSG mice.Methods: Anti-CD20
CAR modified exPBNK cells were produced as we have described (Chu/Cairo,
et al, Can Imm Res 2015). HDACs levels in BL cells were examined by
western blot. Raji, Raji-2R and Raji-4RH cells were treated with 10ng/ml
romidepsin, generously provided by Celgene. Raji-Luc engrafted mice were
injected i.p. with romidepsin (2.2mg/kg) or PBS once a week for 3
consecutive weeks followed by anti-CD20 CAR exPBNK cell or mock exPBNK
cell injections 24hrs later. Tumor regression and/or progression were
monitored weekly by tumor volume measurement and by in vivo
bioluminescent imaging (Chu/Cairo, et al, Can Imm Res 2015).Results: HDAC
1, 3, 6 levels were significantly increased in Raji, Raji-2R, Raji-4RH,
Ramos, and Daudi compared to white blood cells. Total H3K9 acetylation
was enhanced in Raji, Raji-2R, and Raji-4RH following romidepsin. More
importantly, romidepsin significantly inhibited BL cell proliferation
(p<0.001), induced apoptosis only in rituximab sensitive BL cells with
increased active caspase 3, and induced cell cycle arrest in resistant BL
cells (p<0.001). Romidepsin significantly inhibited in vivo Raji and
Raji-2R cells growth in xenografted NSG mice with reduced tumor size
(p<0.05) and bioluminescence (p<0.05).In vitro cytotoxicity of anti-CD20
CAR exPBNK cells was significantly enhanced against romidepsin treated BL
cells compared to the untreated at E:T = 3:1 (P<0.001; n = 4), or
compared to the mock exPBNK (P<0.05; n = 4).In humanized Raji xenograft
NSG mice, survival time in romidepsin+CAR exPBNK treated mice was
significantly extended compared to the untreated mice (median 28 days,
P<0.001), the mock exPBNK treated mice (median 29 days, P<0.001), the CAR
exPBNK treated mice (median 42.5 days, P<0.05), the romidepsin treated
mice (median 30 days, P<0.001), and the romidepsin+mock exPBNK treated
mice (median 34.5 days, PBackground: For BL patients who relapse, the
prognosis is dismal due to chemo-immunotherapy resistance (Cairo et al,
JCO, 2012, Goldman/Cairo et al, Leukemia, 2013). Our group has
successfully modified expanded peripheral blood Natural killer cells
(exPBNK) with an anti-CD20 CAR to target rituximab sensitive/resistant
CD20+ BL cells in vitro and in NSG mice (Chu/Cairo, et al, Can Imm Res
2015). Romidepsin is a histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor that
increases the expression of NKG2D ligands in BL (Chu/Cairo, et al,
Cytotherapy, 2014).Objective: We investigated the effect of romidepsin
alone and in combination with anti-CD20 CAR modified exPBNK cells against
CD20+ BL cells in vitro and in humanized BL NSG mice.Methods: Anti-CD20
CAR modified exPBNK cells were produced as we have described (Chu/Cairo,
et al, Can Imm Res 2015). HDACs levels in BL cells were examined by
western blot. Raji, Raji-2R and Raji-4RH cells were treated with 10ng/ml
romidepsin, generously provided by Celgene. Raji-Luc engrafted mice were
injected i.p. with romidepsin (2.2mg/kg) or PBS once a week for 3
consecutive weeks followed by anti-CD20 CAR exPBNK cell or mock exPBNK
cell injections 24hrs later. Tumor regression and/or progression were
monitored weekly by tumor volume measurement and by in vivo
bioluminescent imaging (Chu/Cairo, et al, Can Imm Res 2015).Results: HDAC
1, 3, 6 levels were significantly increased in Raji, Raji-2R, Raji-4RH,
Ramos, and Daudi compared to white blood cells. Total H3K9 acetylation
was enhanced in Raji, Raji-2R, and Raji-4RH following romidepsin. More
importantly, romidepsin significantly inhibited BL cell proliferation
(p<0.001), induced apoptosis only in rituximab sensitive BL cells with
increased active caspase 3, and induced cell cycle arrest in resistant BL
cells (p<0.001). Romidepsin significantly inhibited in vivo Raji and
Raji-2R cells growth in xenografted NSG mice with reduced tumor size
(p<0.05) and bioluminescence (p<0.05).In vitro cytotoxicity of anti-CD20
CAR exPBNK cells was significantly enhanced against romidepsin treated BL
cells compared to the untreated at E:T = 3:1 (P<0.001; n = 4), or
compared to the mock exPBNK (P<0.05; n = 4).In humanized Raji xenograft
NSG mice, survival time in romidepsin+CAR exPBNK treated mice was
significantly extended compared to the untreated mice (median 28 days,
P<0.001), the mock exPBNK treated mice (median 29 days, P<0.001), the CAR
exPBNK treated mice (median 42.5 days, P<0.05), the romidepsin treated
mice (median 30 days, P<0.001), and the romidepsin+mock exPBNK treated
mice (median 34.5 days, P<0.05).Conclusion: These results suggest the
therapeutic potential of the combination of anti-CD20 CAR modified exPBNK
cells and romidepsin against chemo-immunotherapy resistant BL.

