Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting nitric oxide signaling with nNOS inhibitors as a novel
strategy for the therapy and prevention of human melanoma


The incidence of cutaneous melanoma (CM) has increased markedly over the
past four decades although there have been some dramatic advances
recently in the treatment of advanced melanoma. The development of novel
therapeutic interventions blocking melanoma progression would be of high
impact. Recently, our group has identified that neuronal NO synthase
(nNOS) activated by UV radiation and growth factor plays an important
role in melanoma progression, in parallel with generating constitutive NO
stress. Knockdown of nNOS significantly reduced tumor growth and lung
metastasis in vivo.The newly developed nNOS inhibitors HHs (HH044 and
HH045) exhibited potent anti-melanoma activity both in vitro and in vivo.
The IC50s of HH compounds in human melanoma cells are less than 10 M,
which are comparable or even better than that of chemotherapeutic drug
cisplatin (4.2M and 14.3M in A375 and Sk-Mel28 cells, respectively).
Notably, the inhibition by HHs is more predominant in metastatic melanoma
A375 cells compared to primary early stage Wm3211 cells, which supports
our hypothesis that nNOS/NO signaling is more critical to melanoma
progression than in the initiation phase. In a melanoma xenograft tumor
model, we further determined the effects of HH044 and HH045 in tumor
growth in vivo. Treatments with HH044 and HH045 (50mg/kg i.p for 21 days)
significantly reduced the tumor size to 12% and 19% of control
respectively with no apparent systematic toxicities observed. The body
weight in treated mice was even moderately higher than the controls.
Taken together, these results are consistent with our hypothesis that
targeting nNOS is an efficient and practicable approach for human
melanoma therapy.

