Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cardiac glycosides affect miRNA expression profiles in renal cell
carcinoma cell lines


Background: Renal Cell Carcinoma (RCC) is the ninth most common cancer
worldwide, with about 338,000 new cases diagnosed in 2012. Especially
metastatic renal cell carcinoma has still despite surgical cytoreduction,
VEGF-tyrosine kinase inhibitors, mTOR inhibitors and first promising
results of immunotherapies a very poor prognosis what implies an urgent
need for additional therapies. Cardiac glycosides have come into the
focus as potential cancer treatment option. They can have
anti-proliferative and apoptotic characteristics in several cancer cell
lines but affect only in a much lesser extent normal cell lines.
MicroRNAs are small non-coding RNAs of 17-25 nucleotides length that
widely exist and they play an important regulating role in many normal
and pathophysiological cellular processes, as cell proliferation,
differentiation, induction of apoptosis, tumorigenesis and tumor
progression.Material and Methods: Four renal cell carcinoma cell lines
were treated with three different cardiac glycosides in the IC50
concentrations during 72h. For the investigation of miRNA expression
miRNA microarray expression analyses were performed. In silico target
gene and pathway enrichment analyses were performed.Results: An overlap
between all treatments and all cell lines could be detected for two
mature miRNAs and two premature miRNAs. Pathway enrichment analysis
identified MAPK and axon guidance pathways. Moreover, we looked for genes
predicted to be regulated by the deregulated miRNAs in all cell lines at
all treatments in the MAPK and the axon guidance pathways.Conclusion: The
identification and characterization of deregulated miRNAs after cardiac
glycoside treatment could give insight in their gene regulation and thus
help to clarify the molecular basis of their anti-proliferative and
apoptotic effects.

