Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comprehensive catalog of culture-derived exosomal microRNA cargo
from 4 discrete head and neck carcinoma cell lines


Background: Exosomes are nano-sized (40-100 nm), membrane encapsulated
vesicles that are released by cells into the extracellular space and
function as intercellular signaling vectors through the horizontal
transfer of biologic molecules, including non-coding RNA. MicroRNA
(miRNA) are small (18-25 nucleotides in length), evolutionarily
conserved, non-coding RNA molecules that are involved in regulation of
gene expression in essentially all eukaryotic organisms through
post-transcriptional degradation and translational inhibition of
messenger RNA (mRNA). The purpose of this study was to catalog exosomal
miRNA cargo that are differentially secreted from head and neck squamous
cell carcinoma (HNSCC) cells in vitro using Next Generation
miRNA-sequencing.Methods: We obtained 4 commercially available HNSCC cell
lines: (1) H413 (female, buccal); (2) Detroit 562 (female, pharynx
metastatic to pleura); (3) FaDu (male, hypopharynx) and (4) Cal 27 (male,
tongue). We additionally obtained HGEPp primary human gingival epithelial
cells (pooled from 3 healthy female donors) for comparison. Cells were
cultivated in supplier-recommended media with 10% fetal bovine serum
(FBS) that was super-depleted of exosomes via 18 hour ultracentrifugation
at 100,000g and 1% penicillin/streptomycin at 37C with 5% CO2 in 150 cm2
flasks with 25mL media. To achieve adequate volume for exosome isolation
(50mL), cells were cultured in 2-pair sets of flasks in triplicate (6
flasks total per cell line). Media was collected when cells reached
80-90% confluence. Exosomes were isolated and purified from
exosome-depleted cell culture media by differential ultracentrifugation
and the presence of purified exosomes was verified via nanoparticle
tracking analysis (NTA) using a NanoSight NS300 instrument. Total RNA was
extracted from each exosome pellet using the miRNeasy Micro kit, and Next
Generation miRNA-sequencing was subsequently performed by the University
of Cincinnati Genomics, Epigenomics and Sequencing Core (Cincinnati, OH)
using the Illumina HiSeq platform. Differential exosomal miRNA secretion
was assessed between each HNSCC cell line and the non-pathologic gingival
epithelial control cells, adjusting for false-discovery rate using the
Benjamini and Hochberg method.Results: We observed 93 miRNA transcripts
that were differentially secreted (Q Background: Exosomes are nano-sized
(40-100 nm), membrane encapsulated vesicles that are released by cells
into the extracellular space and function as intercellular signaling
vectors through the horizontal transfer of biologic molecules, including
non-coding RNA. MicroRNA (miRNA) are small (18-25 nucleotides in length),
evolutionarily conserved, non-coding RNA molecules that are involved in
regulation of gene expression in essentially all eukaryotic organisms
through post-transcriptional degradation and translational inhibition of
messenger RNA (mRNA). The purpose of this study was to catalog exosomal
miRNA cargo that are differentially secreted from head and neck squamous
cell carcinoma (HNSCC) cells in vitro using Next Generation
miRNA-sequencing.Methods: We obtained 4 commercially available HNSCC cell
lines: (1) H413 (female, buccal); (2) Detroit 562 (female, pharynx
metastatic to pleura); (3) FaDu (male, hypopharynx) and (4) Cal 27 (male,
tongue). We additionally obtained HGEPp primary human gingival epithelial
cells (pooled from 3 healthy female donors) for comparison. Cells were
cultivated in supplier-recommended media with 10% fetal bovine serum
(FBS) that was super-depleted of exosomes via 18 hour ultracentrifugation
at 100,000g and 1% penicillin/streptomycin at 37C with 5% CO2 in 150 cm2
flasks with 25mL media. To achieve adequate volume for exosome isolation
(50mL), cells were cultured in 2-pair sets of flasks in triplicate (6
flasks total per cell line). Media was collected when cells reached
80-90% confluence. Exosomes were isolated and purified from
exosome-depleted cell culture media by differential ultracentrifugation
and the presence of purified exosomes was verified via nanoparticle
tracking analysis (NTA) using a NanoSight NS300 instrument. Total RNA was
extracted from each exosome pellet using the miRNeasy Micro kit, and Next
Generation miRNA-sequencing was subsequently performed by the University
of Cincinnati Genomics, Epigenomics and Sequencing Core (Cincinnati, OH)
using the Illumina HiSeq platform. Differential exosomal miRNA secretion
was assessed between each HNSCC cell line and the non-pathologic gingival
epithelial control cells, adjusting for false-discovery rate using the
Benjamini and Hochberg method.Results: We observed 93 miRNA transcripts
that were differentially secreted (Q < 0.05) in exosomes derived from at
least one of the HNSCC cell lines relative to the non-pathologic
epithelial control cells; 23 miRNA transcripts were differentially
secreted by all 4 cell-lines.Conclusions: This provides evidence for
differential secretion of miRNA in HNSCC-derived exosomes. These exosomal
miRNA warrant further evaluation as potential biomarkers for HNSCC.

