Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combination of radiofrequency ablation and Sunitinib in the
treatment of experimental hepatocellular cancer


Radiofrequency Ablation (RFA) is one of current clinical option in the
treatment of hepatocellular cancer (HCC); however, RFA monotherapy is
often not curative as a consequence of tumor micro-metastases and
recurrence. Thus, induction of systemic response with additive treatment
is required. In the present study, we are exploring the combination of
RFA and sunitinib, an FDA-approved multiple tyrosine kinase inhibitor, in
the treatment of HCC. Using our established strategy a clinically
relevant murine model of HCC is prepared which mimics human disease and
reflect its typical features. The follow-up magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) is applied to monitor tumor progression until the cumulative tumor
volume reaches 2000 mm3. Size-matched tumor-bearing mice are assigned
into 3 groups and receive the following treatments: no treatment, RFA
alone with our improved machine and optimized parameters, combination of
sunitinib and RFA. The therapeutic efficacy is evaluated by measuring
tumor volume with MRI every twice weeks. We demonstrate that tumors grow
substantially in the mice without treatment. RFA alone effectively
destroys tumors, but unable to prevent tumor recurrence and
micro-metastasis. In contrast, > 50% size reduction in tumor size is
detected in the combined group compared to that in control mice, even no
detectable tumors are observed in some treated mice. In conclusion,
combination of sunitinib and RFA powerfully suppress tumor growth and
could be translate into clinic practice.

