Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Vitamin E delta-tocotrienol targets human colon cancer stem cells
and inhibits colon cancer metastasis and induces apoptosis


Background: Colon cancer is the most commonly diagnosed cancer both in
men and women and cause of cancer related deaths worldwide. Treatment for
the recurrent and metastatic colon cancer remains a center of clinical
attention. Cancer stem cells (CSCs) are suggested to be the only cells
within tumor with tumorigenic capacity and implicated in metastasis. We
have shown that vitamin E delta-tocotrienol (VEDT) is the most bioactive
tocotrienols against cancers. This study aimed to evaluate the effect of
VEDT on colon cancer growth, metastatic epithelial to mesenchymal
transition (EMT), migration/ invasion/angiogenesis and colon CSCs growth
and apoptosis.Methods: Human colon cancer cells HCT-116 and metastatic
colon cancer cells SW-620 and colon CSCs were treated with VEDT (10-100
M) for 72 h and cell viability recorded. VEDT (50 M) was used for
malignant transformation; migration/invasion, CSCs spheroid formation,
and pluripotency were determined. Azoxymethane treated Fisher 344 rats
were used as colon carcinogenesis model. They were treated with 1)
vehicle control and 2) VEDT (200 mg/kg, orally twice a day) for 20 weeks.
After 20 weeks the polyps and tumor formation were recorded.Results: VEDT
significantly inhibited the anchorage-dependent and independent cancer
cell growth, migration/invasion and induced apoptosis compared to
control. VEDT inhibited the CSC spheroid formation EMT (E-cadherin to
vimentin), metastasis (MMP9), angiogenesis (VEGF), CSCs transcription
factors (Nanog, Oct4, Sox2 and KLF4) compared to control.Conclusion:
Vitamin E delta-tocotrienol inhibited colon cancer growth and metastasis
through inhibition of cancer stem cell pluripotency, EMT, migration,
invasion, angiogenesis and induction of apoptosis.

