Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Influence of MDR1 and CYP3A5 genetic polymorphisms on trough
levels and therapeutic response of imatinib in patients with chronic
myeloid leukemia


Introduction:Genetic polymorphisms in the genes coding for imatinib
transporters & metabolizing enzymes might be responsible for marked
inter-individual pharmacokinetic variability seen with imatinib & might
result in altered therapeutic response.Methodology:Newly diagnosed
patients with chronic phase CML started on imatinib therapy were enrolled
& followed up for 24 months. The following single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) were genotyped - C1236T, C3435T, G2677T & G2677A in
MDR1 gene and A6986G in CYP3A5 gene. Genotyping was done using PCR-RFLP
method & validated by direct gene sequencing. Plasma trough levels of
imatinib were measured using LC-MS/MS. Patients who attained complete
cytogenetic response by 12 months after imatinib therapy were called
responders while those who failed to do so were called non-responders.
Molecular response was assessed by quantitative RTPCR using international
scale.Results:A total of 173 chronic phase CML patients were included in
this study, out of which 71 were responders. Mean age at diagnosis was
35.914.3 years. All the alleles, except those for MDR1-C1236T, followed
Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. Marked variability in trough levels of
imatinib was seen in patients with different genotypes (table1). The
frequency of GG genotype for CYP3A5-A6986G and TT genotype for
MDR1-C1236T, C3435T & G2677T/A was higher in responders; while the
frequency of AA genotype for CYP3A5-A6986G, CC genotype for MDR1-C1236T &
C3435T and GG genotype for MDR1-G2677T/A was higher in non-responders
(table1).Conclusions:Genetic polymorphisms in MDR1 & CYP3A5 genes have a
significant role in determining imatinib levels & therapeutic response in
patients with CML. Genotyping of CPY3A5 & MDR1 genes may be considered in
patients with CML to individualize the therapy & optimize the outcomes.
Trough levels of Imatinib in patients with different genotypes and
frequency of different genotypes in imatinib responders and non-responders


