Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: S100A4 is post-transcriptionally inhibited by miR-505-5p and
miR-520c-3p in colorectal cancer


The calcium binding protein S100A4 induces epithelial mesenchymal
transition (EMT), migration, invasion, angiogenesis and metastasis. Its
induced expression is reported in several cancer types and correlates
with poor prognosis. S100A4 is transcriptionally regulated by Sp1, AP1
and CCAAT/enhancer binding protein transcription factors and its
regulation epigenetically controlled by CpG hyper methylation. However,
apart from S100A4 functional and transcriptional regulatory aspects,
post-transcriptional regulation is not yet elucidated. In this study, we
show that specific microRNAs (miR) target the 3UTR of S100A4.
Luciferase-reporter assays with wild-type and mutated miR-505-5p and
miR-520c-3p seed sequences of S100A4-3UTR confirmed the specificity of
targeting. Similarly, overexpression of these miRs reduced the S100A4 and
inhibition of these miRs function increased the S100A4 protein
significantly. Moreover, co-transfection of either S100A4 expressing
vector or siRNA-S100A4 along with the miR-505-5p and miR-520c-3p
significantly altered the S100A4 mediated migration and invasion in
colorectal cancer (CRC) cell lines (p = 0.05). Both these miRs were
down-regulated in CRC cell lines and 5 Aza treatment increased these miRs
expression and reduced the S100A4 protein amounts. Moreover, in a panel
of CRC resected patient tissues (n = 59), miR-520c-3p significantly down
regulated (p = 0.03). miR-520c (located in Chr 19, in a big cluster)
upstream region was checked for methylation status using methylation
specific PCR and combined bisulfite restriction analysis (COBRA) in CRC
cell lines, metastatic and non-metastatic CRC resected tissues. We found
the upstream promoter region hyper methylated irrespective of metastasis
status of patients and in all CRC cell lines checked. 5 Aza treatment of
S100A4 less or no expressing cells line Colo206 and Colo320 showed
induced miR-520c expression and reduced S100A4 protein in Colo320.
Colo206 cells did not show any alternations in expression of S100A4.
Taken together, our findings demonstrate that S100A4 is
post-transcriptionally regulated by tumor suppressor genes miR-505c and
miR-520c and especially miR-520c expression is epigenetically silenced in
CRC.

