Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel role of CB2R in tuning breast tumor microenvironment,
EGF/EGFR and IGF-I/IGF-IR pathways


Cannabinoid receptor-2 (CB2R) is an integral part of the endocannabinoid
system. It is upregulated in the primary breast cancer lesions and in
different types of immune cells however; its functional role in breast
tumorigenesis is not well understood. The present study was aimed at
evaluating the mechanistic anti-tumor role of CB2R activation on breast
cancer cells and immune cells within the breast tumor microenvironment.
First, we analyzed the anti-tumorigenic mechanisms of CB2R activation in
ER- and ER+ breast cancer cells. Our studies showed that CB2R specific
agonist (JWH-015) inhibits EGF and IGF-I-induced migration and invasion
of ER+ and ER- breast cancer cells. At the molecular level, JWH-015
inhibits EGFR and IGF-IR activation and their downstream targets STAT3,
AKT, ERK, NF-kB and MMP-9/MMP-2. Interestingly, We found that JWH-015
significantly reduces breast cancer growth in vivo and the tumors that
were derived from CB2R agonist treatment showed reduced activation of
EGFR and IGF-IR and their downstream targets compared to control group.
Since CB2R is overexpressed in immune cells, we assessed for the role of
CB2R activation on modulation of immune cells present in tumor stroma. We
observed increased tumor weight, more myeloid derived suppressor cells
(MDSCs) (CD11b+/Gr-1+) and less CD3+/CD8+ cells in orthotopically
injected CB2R knock out mice compared to wild type mice. Furthermore, we
found that JWH-015-treated wild type mice have reduced tumor growth and
metastasis, more CD3+/CD8+ cells and less MDSCs within the tumor stroma.
For the first time, we show that CB2R activation might suppress breast
tumor growth and metastasis through novel mechanisms of inhibiting EGFR
and IGF-IR signaling axes on tumor cells and modulating the immune cells
compositions within the breast tumor microenvironment.

