Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Non-invasive imaging of tumor cell death induced by a TRAILR2
agonist


Imaging tumour cell death can give an early indication of treatment
efficacy. Tumour necrosis factor (TNF)-related apoptosis-inducing ligand
receptor2 (TRAILR2) is a member of the TNF receptor superfamily, which
interacts with death receptors (DRs) and induces apoptosis in a broad
range of cancer cells but not normal cells[1]. MEDI3039, a newly
described agonist of TRAILR2, was used to induce tumour cell death. A
NIRF fluorophore-labelled phosphatidylserine (PS)-binding protein
(15kDa), the C2A domain of Synaptotagmin-I (C2Am-750), which binds to the
PS exposed by apoptotic and necrotic cells, was used to image
MEDI3039-induced cell death[2]. Non-specific binding was assessed using a
site-directed mutant that is inactive in PS binding, which was conjugated
to a different fluorophore (iC2Am-680).Binding of C2Am-750 to
MEDI3039-treated human colon and breast adenocarcinoma cells in vitro
(Colo205 and MDA-Dual respectively) was assessed by flow cytometry and
confocal microscopy. Both methods showed that C2Am-750 labelled
MEDI3039-treated Colo205 cells, while the inactive iC2Am-680 showed only
low non-specific binding. C2Am-750 and iC2Am-680 were also used to
monitor the effect of treatment in a Colo205 xenograft model. One cohort
of mice (n = 5) received a single dose of MEDI3039 (0.4 mg/kg), while
another untreated cohort (n = 5) served as a control group. All mice
received a single i.v. injection of a 1:1 mixture of 0.1 mole/kg C2Am-750
and iC2Am-680 at 16 h after drug treatment, followed by whole body
fluorescence imaging (FLI) measurements using an IVIS200 camera at 0 and
3 h post probe injection. FLI measurements in MEDI3039-treated Colo205
tumours showed significant increases in the uptake of C2Am-750 relative
to iC2Am-680, both in vivo (4-9 fold, P value Imaging tumour cell death
can give an early indication of treatment efficacy. Tumour necrosis
factor (TNF)-related apoptosis-inducing ligand receptor2 (TRAILR2) is a
member of the TNF receptor superfamily, which interacts with death
receptors (DRs) and induces apoptosis in a broad range of cancer cells
but not normal cells[1]. MEDI3039, a newly described agonist of TRAILR2,
was used to induce tumour cell death. A NIRF fluorophore-labelled
phosphatidylserine (PS)-binding protein (15kDa), the C2A domain of
Synaptotagmin-I (C2Am-750), which binds to the PS exposed by apoptotic
and necrotic cells, was used to image MEDI3039-induced cell death[2].
Non-specific binding was assessed using a site-directed mutant that is
inactive in PS binding, which was conjugated to a different fluorophore
(iC2Am-680).Binding of C2Am-750 to MEDI3039-treated human colon and
breast adenocarcinoma cells in vitro (Colo205 and MDA-Dual respectively)
was assessed by flow cytometry and confocal microscopy. Both methods
showed that C2Am-750 labelled MEDI3039-treated Colo205 cells, while the
inactive iC2Am-680 showed only low non-specific binding. C2Am-750 and
iC2Am-680 were also used to monitor the effect of treatment in a Colo205
xenograft model. One cohort of mice (n = 5) received a single dose of
MEDI3039 (0.4 mg/kg), while another untreated cohort (n = 5) served as a
control group. All mice received a single i.v. injection of a 1:1 mixture
of 0.1 mole/kg C2Am-750 and iC2Am-680 at 16 h after drug treatment,
followed by whole body fluorescence imaging (FLI) measurements using an
IVIS200 camera at 0 and 3 h post probe injection. FLI measurements in
MEDI3039-treated Colo205 tumours showed significant increases in the
uptake of C2Am-750 relative to iC2Am-680, both in vivo (4-9 fold, P value
<0.0001) and ex vivo (7-11 fold, P value Imaging tumour cell death can
give an early indication of treatment efficacy. Tumour necrosis factor
(TNF)-related apoptosis-inducing ligand receptor2 (TRAILR2) is a member
of the TNF receptor superfamily, which interacts with death receptors
(DRs) and induces apoptosis in a broad range of cancer cells but not
normal cells[1]. MEDI3039, a newly described agonist of TRAILR2, was used
to induce tumour cell death. A NIRF fluorophore-labelled
phosphatidylserine (PS)-binding protein (15kDa), the C2A domain of
Synaptotagmin-I (C2Am-750), which binds to the PS exposed by apoptotic
and necrotic cells, was used to image MEDI3039-induced cell death[2].
Non-specific binding was assessed using a site-directed mutant that is
inactive in PS binding, which was conjugated to a different fluorophore
(iC2Am-680).Binding of C2Am-750 to MEDI3039-treated human colon and
breast adenocarcinoma cells in vitro (Colo205 and MDA-Dual respectively)
was assessed by flow cytometry and confocal microscopy. Both methods
showed that C2Am-750 labelled MEDI3039-treated Colo205 cells, while the
inactive iC2Am-680 showed only low non-specific binding. C2Am-750 and
iC2Am-680 were also used to monitor the effect of treatment in a Colo205
xenograft model. One cohort of mice (n = 5) received a single dose of
MEDI3039 (0.4 mg/kg), while another untreated cohort (n = 5) served as a
control group. All mice received a single i.v. injection of a 1:1 mixture
of 0.1 mole/kg C2Am-750 and iC2Am-680 at 16 h after drug treatment,
followed by whole body fluorescence imaging (FLI) measurements using an
IVIS200 camera at 0 and 3 h post probe injection. FLI measurements in
MEDI3039-treated Colo205 tumours showed significant increases in the
uptake of C2Am-750 relative to iC2Am-680, both in vivo (4-9 fold, P value
<0.0001) and ex vivo (7-11 fold, P value <0.0001). Uptake of iC2Am-680
was low in both treated and untreated groups. Subsequent histological
analyses showed that the C2Am-750 signal was strongly correlated with
both cleaved caspase-3 and TUNEL staining of dead cells.NIRF
fluorophore-labelled C2Am showed a favourable biodistribution profile,
with good tumour penetration and quick clearance of unbound material in
vivo. The probe can be used to investigate the efficacy of targeted
therapy, or other anti-tumour therapies, at an early stage following
treatment.1. Prasad, S., Kim, J.H., Gupta, S.C. & Aggarwal, B.B.
Targeting death receptors for TRAIL by agents designed by Mother Nature.
Trends in pharmacological sciences 35, 520-536 (2014).2. Alam, I.S.,
Neves, A.A., Witney, T.H., Boren, J. & Brindle, K.M. Comparison of the
C2A domain of synaptotagmin-I and annexin-V as probes for detecting cell
death. Bioconjugate chemistry 21, 884-891 (2010).

