Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Silencing PTGER3 enhances chemotherapeutic responses


Inflammation is involved in the pathogenesis of cancer and inflammatory
mediators such as prostaglandins (PGs) are abundantly present in the
tumor microenvironment. Prostaglandin E(2) (PGE(2))-prostaglandin E2
receptor (EP)3 (PTGER3) signaling appears critical for tumor-associated
angiogenesis, tumor growth and chemoresistance. However, the precise
mechanism of this phenomenon in ovarian cancer remains unknown. In this
study we hypothesized that down modulation of PTGER3 regulates drug
resistance through the regulation of Ras-MAPK/Erk-Est-ELK1 axis in OC
cells, resulting in decreased migration, proliferation and increased
apoptosis. We analyzed a PTGER3 data set of OC patients from the Cancer
Genome Atlas. Furthermore, the analysis of a panel of ovarian cancer cell
lines showed that PTGER3 at mRNA and protein levels were higher in
cisplatin-resistant cells when compared with their cisplatin sensitive
counterparts. In vitro cell viability, growth, cell-cycle progression,
migration, invasion and apoptosis, as well as in vivo therapeutic
effectiveness in murine xenograft models, were also assessed following
siRNA-mediated PTGER3 silencing in cisplatin-resistant ovarian cancer
cells. The experimental validation identifies PTGER3 associated with OC
survival. Significant inhibition of cell growth and viability, cell-cycle
arrest, and activation of apoptosis were observed upon siRNA-mediated
PTGER3 suppression. Furthermore, combination treatment with
MSV/DOPC-siRNA-PTGER3 and cisplatin inhibited growth of A2780-CP20
tumors, which were otherwise resistant to cisplatin treatment. These
findings identify PTGER3 as a potential therapeutic target in ovarian
chemo-resistant cancers expressing high levels of this oncogenic protein.

