Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Microenvironment modulation and enhancement of cytotoxic therapy
by the heparanase inhibitor Roneparstat against human B-non Hodgkin
lymphomas


Background: The standard chemotherapy treatment for Non-Hodgkin lymphoma
(NHL) consists in the combination of cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin,
vincristine and prednisone (CHOP). Because of the relevant
treatment-related toxicity and the minor therapeutic effectiveness of
CHOP therapy variants, the development of novel therapeutic approaches
represents an urgent clinical need. Despite treatment with the anti-CD20
monoclonal antibody Rituximab and CHOP has led to favourable results for
CD20+ lymphoma, many patients experienced drug resistance. Based on
studies indicating that the malignant behaviour of tumors depends on the
interactions between tumor and its microenvironment, we tested the effect
of the novel heparanase inhibitor Roneparstat (sigma-tau Research
Switzerland) in combination with various clinically relevant agents
against B-cell lymphoma models, poorly responsive to conventional
agents.Methods: We assessed the CD20 cell surface expression by flow
cytometry, the heparanase (HPA-1) expression levels by immunoblotting,
the VEGF spontaneous release in cell supernatant by proteome array in
B-NHL models. The therapeutic activity was evaluated in SCID mice
xenografted with CD20+ and VEGF+ B-NHL models. The efficacy of the drug
treatment was estimated as tumor volume inhibition percentage (TVI%),
log10 cell kill (LCK) and complete regression (CR). To gain insight the
mechanisms underlying the anti-tumor activity of Roneparstat plus
rituximab histopathological/immunoistochemical analyses were performed on
treated tumors versus controls.Results: In a model of aggressive diffuse
large B-cell NHL, except for doxorubicin, the combinations
cyclophosphamide, dexamethasone and rituximab exhibited significantly
superior efficacy over single-agent therapy. The most impressive
enhancement of anti-tumor activity was observed with Roneparstat plus
rituximab, with a high rate of complete tumor regressions and no evidence
of disease at the end of the experiment in 50% of treated animals.
Histological analysis revealed inflammatory cell infiltration, stromal
destructuration, most pronounced apoptotic changes in Roneparstat plus
rituximab-treated tumors versus controls; stromal architecture analysis
showed signs of an altered, incomplete reticulin network suggestive of
impaired stromal scaffolding that might have promoted the recruitment of
complement components (C1q, C5) within tumors increasing the cytotoxic
effect of rituximab. This interpretation was also supported by the
favourable interaction of Roneparstat with bevacizumab in a Burkitt's
lymphoma model characterized by high levels of VEGF..Conclusion: Our
results provide evidence that targeting the tumor microenvironment with
Roneparstat may have therapeutic potential in combination with various
agents against aggressive lymphoma subtypes.

