Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Overcoming resistance to HER2 inhibitors through cell based
screening


Signaling from the human epidermal growth factor receptor (HER) family of
proteins is dependent on a well-orchestrated series of interactions
between family members to form either homo- or heterodimers. The
heterodimeric complex formed by HER2 and HER3 is a particularly potent
oncogenic signaling unit that can act as a driver of cancer growth and
has also been shown to rescue a large number of cancers from a variety of
targeted agents. The currently available therapies targeting HER2, such
as Lapatinib or ado-trastuzumab emtansine, have dramatically improved
patient outcomes in the clinic but preferentially target the protein in
its monomeric state. Because of this, increasing the concentration of the
HER2/HER3 heterodimer, either by growth factors or increasing the
concentrations of HER2 and HER3 at the membrane, significantly diminishes
their activity. In order to find a next generation inhibitor of the
active HER2/HER3 oncogenic complex we screened 1 million small molecules
against an engineered Ba/F3 cell line dependent on ligand stimulated
HER2/HER3 signaling for survival. The removal of non-selective inhibitors
using alternative Ba/F3 cell lines resulted in the identification of a
single core scaffold hit. A medicinal chemistry campaign enabled by a
co-crystal structure of a hit compound complexed to EGFR led to the
development of a molecule capable of inhibiting the active state of HER2.
As a result, this next generation HER2 inhibitor is capable of inhibiting
growth factor stimulated HER2/HER3 heterodimers and mutationally
activated forms of HER2, which are resistant to current clinical small
molecule HER2 inhibitors.

