Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Amphiregulin promotes vascular endothelial growth factor-dependent
angiogenesis in human chondrosarcoma cells


Chondrosarcoma is the second most common sarcoma in bone malignancy and
is characterized by a high metastatic potential. Angiogenesis has been
considered an important role in the cancer metastasis. Therefore, a
better understanding of angiogenic and metastatic pathways are needed.
Amphiregulin (AR) has been implicated in tumor metastasis and
angiogenesis. However, the relationship of amphiregulin with vascular
endothelial growth factor A (VEGF-A) expression and angiogenesis in human
chondrosarcoma cells is mostly unknown. In this study, we found that the
expression of amphiregulin and VEGF-A were correlated with tumor stage
and were significantly higher than that in the normal cartilage. VEGF-A
expression increased which depend on time and dose dependent of
amphiregulin. Exogenous amphiregulin with chondrosarcoma cells promoted
VEGF-A expression and subsequently increased migration, proliferation and
tube formation in endothelial progenitor cells (EPCs) and human umbilical
vein endothelial cells (HUVECs). We also found that amphiregulin
increased VEGF-A expression and angiogenesis through focal adhesion
kinase (FAK), Src and protein kinase C (PKC) signaling pathway. Knockdown
of amphiregulin decreased VEGF-A expression in chondrosarcoma cells. The
angiogenesis effects in Matrigel plug nude mice model in vivo was also
abolished in amphiregulin-knockdown cells. Taken together, these results
indicate that amphiregulin occurs through FAK, Src, and PKC pathway,
resulting in the activation of VEGF-A expression and contributing to the
angiogenesis of human chondrosarcoma cells.

