Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: USP37 promote oncogenesis by stabilizing protein involved in DNA
damage repair pathway and provides a novel way to modulate Chk1 activity


Dysregulation of the Ubiquitin proteasome system (UPS), which comprises
nearly 1000 different components is associated with many aspects of
oncogenesis and has emerged as a novel therapeutic target. We have
previously shown that USP37 (Ubiquitin specific peptidase 37) antagonizes
the tumor suppressor APCCDH1and it promotes S phase entry while data from
other groups have shown that it stabilizes oncoproteins, such as c-Myc.
We have found USP37 protein levels to be high in many cancerous cell
lines as compared to untransformed cells and it appears to help tumor
survive the high level of replication stress associated with oncogene
expression. It was found that USP37 over expression confers survival
advantage to cancer cells while its depletion enhances chemo
sensitization in response to variety of replication stresses. USP37 over
expressing cells were able to resolve -H2AX foci much more effectively
then the wild type or cells in which USP37 was depleted. Our data
indicate that USP37 binds and stabilizes the active form of CHK1 as
evident by its protein levels when USP37 over expressing or depleted
cells were exposed to replication stress. Mechanistically, our analyses
indicate that USP37 stabilizes CHK1 by its deubiquitination, preventing
its degradation. As CHK1 has been pursued as a therapeutic target with
limited success our work defines a novel way to modulate activity of CHK1
while simultaneously targeting multiple oncogenes and thereby providing a
rationale to evaluate USP37 inhibitor over CHK1 inhibitor as a potential
therapeutic target in different cancers.

