Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Stat3 regulates supernumerary centrosome clustering in cancer
cells via Stathmin/PLK1


Centrosome amplification and supernumerary centrosomal content are common
features of cancer cells. Such cells must cluster their centrosomes to
form a bipolar spindle and achieve productive mitosis. Targeting the
mechanisms that allow cells to cluster extra centrosomes is considered a
promising cancer therapeutic strategy. We have now identified Stat3, a
protein that is frequently activated in many types of cancers and also
regulates stem cell function, as a regulator of centrosome clustering in
cancer cells. A high content chemical screen for the identification of
inhibitors of centrosome clustering identified Stattic, a Stat3
inhibitor, as a centrosome clustering inhibitor. Stat3 depletion in cell
lines as well as in tumors in vivo resulted in significant inhibition of
centrosome clustering and in decreased tumor viability and growth.
Interestingly, we identify a novel, transcription-independent mechanism
for Stat3-mediated centrosome clustering that requires activities of
Stathmin, a Stat3 interactor involved in microtubule depolymerisation,
and polo-like kinase1 (PLK1). Furthermore, stem cell function in
PLK4-driven centrosome amplified breast tumor cells is highly sensitive
to Stat3 inhibitors, reflected in higher inhibitor sensitivity of tumors
derived from these cells in vivo.We have therefore identified a novel
role of Stat3 in the regulation of centrosome clustering, and this role
of Stat3 may be critical in identifying tumor types that are sensitive to
Stat3 inhibitors.

