Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: UK lung cancer screening trial (UKLS) cost effectiveness:
similarities with the NLST high-risk quintiles


Introduction: The pilot UK lung cancer RCT screening trial recruited
around 4,000 individuals, using the LLPv2 risk model (5% risk over 5
years). The cost effectiveness of the UKLS trial has been modelled and
compared with that of the US National Lung Screening Trial (NLST), which
has published an estimate of $81,000 per quality-adjusted life-year
(QALY) as its mean incremental cost-effectiveness ratio
(ICER).Methodology: All UKLS cost estimates were based on 2011-12 NHS
tariffs (Costs provided in $: 1 = $1.5 on 30-11-15). Owing to the brief
duration of the trial, observations relevant to economic evaluation were
limited to cost-incurring events associated with screening and the
initial management of screen-detected cancers. Expected outcomes of the
cancers detected were simulated on the basis of both life tables and
published survival data from other studies.The costs incurred from UKLS
are those of baseline and repeat screens ($424,072), diagnostic workup
($113,478), and treatment ($449,243), which totalled $1,036794 (95% CI,
$719,332 to $1,350,766). Recruitment costs ($15) per person for
invitation and selection) were modelled from the UK colorectal screening
programme and we assumed a participation rate of 30% of those invited.
The gross current costs of the programme amounted to $1,133,217 (CI
$817,887 to $1,450,610).Summary of findings: The ICER of screen-detection
compared with symptomatic detection was estimated at $9495 per life-year
gained. Using data from previous studies, we associated quality of life
weights with the estimated survival gains, enabling us to report outcomes
as QALYs. On this basis, the ICER equalled $12,709 per QALY gained (CI $
8280 to $18966).The difference in cost effectiveness between NLST and
UKLS as suggested by the estimated ICERs is more apparent than real. Most
of the discrepancy can be explained by differences between settings in
(i) local unit costs, (ii) intensity of resource use, (iii) number of
screening rounds and (iv) disease prevalence in the target population.
Thus, UKLS selected high-risk subjects only whereas NLST screened a
general population, yet the latter reported an ICER as low as $32,000 for
its highest-risk quintile. Expected QALY gains from screen-detection were
similar in both trials.Conclusion: Other things remaining equal, ICERs
will be higher in programmes where (i) unit costs of detection and
management are higher, (ii) lower-risk subjects are invited to be
screened, (iii) screens are repeated at frequent intervals. The
convention for cost effectiveness acceptability in the UK is
$30,000-45,000 per QALY gained, and we conclude that a lung cancer
screening programme based on the UKLS protocol would be likely to offer
acceptable value for money to the NHS.

