Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: FGFR-selective inhibitor Debio 1347 induces tumor regressions in
FGFR2-altered gastric cancer PDX models


Dysregulation of the fibroblast growth factor receptor (FGFR) signaling
pathway due to receptor overexpression, gene amplification, point
mutations or fusions/chromosomal translocations is associated with cancer
development and progression. In gastric cancer, alterations of FGFR2 are
observed in a subset of patients, overexpression being more frequently
observed as compared to FGFR2 amplifications. In addition, FGFR2
amplification and ERBB2, EGFR, MET and KRAS amplifications are mutually
exclusive suggesting that FGFR targeted therapy would be most effective
in the FGFR2-amplified subgroup of patients. Debio 1347 (CH5183284) is an
oral selective FGFR inhibitor currently in clinical development. The aim
of the study was to investigate the preclinical activity of Debio 1347 in
patient derived xenograft (PDX) mouse models harboring diverse FGFR
alterations in multiple indications, including gastric cancer.The mouse
trial was conducted in 39 different PDX models selected according to
FGFR1, 2 and 3 alterations status. Debio 1347 was administered orally
once daily and tumor volume was monitored for 14 consecutive days. PDX
tumors were extensively characterized using FISH, RNAseq, nCounter Gene
Expression and immunohistochemistry (IHC), and FGFR molecular alterations
were correlated with Debio 1347 efficacy. The level of tumor
heterogeneity for FGFR2 amplification and expression and its impact on
drug response were also assessed.In gastric cancer, Debio 1347 induced
tumor regression in models harboring the commonly found FGFR2
amplification. Interestingly, Debio 1347 was also highly effective in
models with high FGFR2 expression but without FGFR2 amplification,
indicating that not only gene amplification drives the activity of Debio
1347 in this indication, but also the expression level of
FGFR2.Altogether, these data demonstrate that Debio 1347 could be highly
effective in gastric cancer patients harboring FGFR2 amplification and/or
high FGFR2 expression. Debio 1347 is currently investigated in a Phase I
trial in selected patients harboring FGFR alterations (NCT01948297).

