Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exhaustive scanning of mutation hotspot regions using a new tool:
The MHS-ddPCR


Background: Recent progress in the liquid biopsy field in combination
with the development of the droplet digital PCR (ddPCR) technology now
enables non-invasive monitoring of cancer-related genomic alterations
with high detection accuracy. Current ddPCR techniques represent the gold
standard for the detection of point mutations that have been previously
characterized on tumor tissues. However, ddPCR screen for only one
mutation (or a few mutations, with multicolor ddPCR) per reaction. This
is a clear limitation to use it as a discovery tool, to detect
resistance-associated mutations that may appear during therapy (e.g. ESR1
activating mutations in breast cancer) or when tumor tissue is not
available (e.g. EGFR activating mutations in lung cancers).Methods:We
developed the Multiple Hotspot mutations detection by Single droplet
digital PCR (MHS-ddPCR) method, a variant of the conventional ddPCR
technique, which detects all genomic alterations within a hotspot region,
using a unique couple of Taqman oligo-probes. We first established two
specific assays covering KRAS and EGFR mutation hotspot regions, which
are of clinical importance in the context of colorectal cancer. The assay
for KRAS scans for the 7 most common mutations in codons 12 and 13 of the
gene as well as all other mutations with lower frequency (Background:
Recent progress in the liquid biopsy field in combination with the
development of the droplet digital PCR (ddPCR) technology now enables
non-invasive monitoring of cancer-related genomic alterations with high
detection accuracy. Current ddPCR techniques represent the gold standard
for the detection of point mutations that have been previously
characterized on tumor tissues. However, ddPCR screen for only one
mutation (or a few mutations, with multicolor ddPCR) per reaction. This
is a clear limitation to use it as a discovery tool, to detect
resistance-associated mutations that may appear during therapy (e.g. ESR1
activating mutations in breast cancer) or when tumor tissue is not
available (e.g. EGFR activating mutations in lung cancers).Methods:We
developed the Multiple Hotspot mutations detection by Single droplet
digital PCR (MHS-ddPCR) method, a variant of the conventional ddPCR
technique, which detects all genomic alterations within a hotspot region,
using a unique couple of Taqman oligo-probes. We first established two
specific assays covering KRAS and EGFR mutation hotspot regions, which
are of clinical importance in the context of colorectal cancer. The assay
for KRAS scans for the 7 most common mutations in codons 12 and 13 of the
gene as well as all other mutations with lower frequency (<1%). The EGFR
assay screens for all in-frame deletions of exon 19, which are frequent
activating events in EGFR.Results:Sensitivity and specificity of
MHS-ddPCR were assessed on decreasing fractions of tumor DNA mutated for
KRAS. The KRAS assay reaches a sensitivity of 0.02% and was validated on
plasma and tumor samples harboring a panel of different KRAS mutations.
Similarly, the EGFR assay can detect numerous exon 19 deletions from
patient samples and with limited amounts of tumor DNA.Conclusions:The
MHS-ddPCR is extremely sensitive, works for numerous hotspot regions with
different types of alterations (SNV, deletion) and is cost-effective as
it combines multiple assays in one reaction.

