Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Structural basis of recognition of farnesylated and methylated
KRAS4b by PDE


KRAS is the most frequently mutated member of RAS superfamily in all
human cancers. Post-translational farnesylation and methylation of KRAS
at its C-terminal end plays an important role in its trafficking to
proper subcellular compartments for cell signaling events. PDE acts as a
chaperone for farnesylated members of the RAS superfamily and plays a key
role in their trafficking from the place of biosynthesis or
post-translational modification to a transport vesicle or plasma
membrane. We solved the structures of wild-type full-length KRAS4b
(farnesylated and methylated) in complex with PDE in two different
crystal forms at 2 Ang resolution. Our structure showed that only the
last six amino acids of hypervariable region (and not the G-domain) of
KRAS4b interact with PDE. Farnesyl and methyl groups present on Cys185
bind tightly in the central hydrophobic pocket present in PDE. In crystal
form II, we could see all amino acids present in the hypervariable region
of KRAS4b, thus providing atomic details of hypervariable region of
KRAS4b for the first time. Comparison of the two crystal forms suggests
how PDE could bind to both farnesylated as well as geranylgeranylated
KRAS4b. The structure provides the rationale for nucleotide-independent
binding of KRAS4b to PDE and its interaction with other farnesylated but
not palmitoylated members of RAS superfamily.

