Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Therapeutic potential of blocking CCR5 by maraviroc in breast
cancer bone metastasis


Introduction:Bone metastasis is a highly unfavorable condition observed
in up to 70% of the patients with breast cancer. Treatment options for
this condition are not curative, but palliative, only, which highlights
the need for exploring new therapeutic options. In this study, we propose
that targeting a chemokine receptor (CCR5), often upregulated in primary
and secondary breast cancers, can contribute to a more successful
treatment of breast cancer bone metastasis.Methodology:Following the
blockage of CCR5 by maraviroc, cytotoxic effects were measured by MTT
assay, while the migratory effects were determined by migration and
scratch healing assays. Apoptosis related activities were investigated by
nuclear staining and western blot analysis. Maraviroc mediated cytostatic
changes were analyzed by a ready-made Human Cell Cycle Regulation Panel
(Roche, Germany). In vivo experiments were performed by implanting
MDA-MB-231 cells via the saphenous artery to the left hind limb of male
nude rats (RNU strain) for inducing bone metastasis. Treatment with
maraviroc was started from 2nd and 7th day of transplantation in two
groups of rats (n = 6/group) designated as A and B, respectively, and was
compared with an untreated control group (n = 8 rats).Results:CCR5
blockage by maraviroc (concentration > 100M) induced concentration
dependent cytotoxicity in MDA-MB-231 and MCF-7 cells. Maraviroc exposure
also showed significant inhibition of migration of the cells, while
nuclear staining indicated the condensation/fragmentation of nuclear
content. Maraviroc exposure induced significant expression of cleaved
caspase 7 and PARP, while real time RT-PCR showed pronounced inhibition
of multiple genes (2fold) including cyclins, CDKs and their down-stream
targets. Treatment of tumor bearing animals, with intra-peritoneal
injections of maraviroc (25mg/kg, 3-4 weeks daily), reduced the tumor
burden significantly (p Introduction:Bone metastasis is a highly
unfavorable condition observed in up to 70% of the patients with breast
cancer. Treatment options for this condition are not curative, but
palliative, only, which highlights the need for exploring new therapeutic
options. In this study, we propose that targeting a chemokine receptor
(CCR5), often upregulated in primary and secondary breast cancers, can
contribute to a more successful treatment of breast cancer bone
metastasis.Methodology:Following the blockage of CCR5 by maraviroc,
cytotoxic effects were measured by MTT assay, while the migratory effects
were determined by migration and scratch healing assays. Apoptosis
related activities were investigated by nuclear staining and western blot
analysis. Maraviroc mediated cytostatic changes were analyzed by a
ready-made Human Cell Cycle Regulation Panel (Roche, Germany). In vivo
experiments were performed by implanting MDA-MB-231 cells via the
saphenous artery to the left hind limb of male nude rats (RNU strain) for
inducing bone metastasis. Treatment with maraviroc was started from 2nd
and 7th day of transplantation in two groups of rats (n = 6/group)
designated as A and B, respectively, and was compared with an untreated
control group (n = 8 rats).Results:CCR5 blockage by maraviroc
(concentration > 100M) induced concentration dependent cytotoxicity in
MDA-MB-231 and MCF-7 cells. Maraviroc exposure also showed significant
inhibition of migration of the cells, while nuclear staining indicated
the condensation/fragmentation of nuclear content. Maraviroc exposure
induced significant expression of cleaved caspase 7 and PARP, while real
time RT-PCR showed pronounced inhibition of multiple genes (2fold)
including cyclins, CDKs and their down-stream targets. Treatment of tumor
bearing animals, with intra-peritoneal injections of maraviroc (25mg/kg,
3-4 weeks daily), reduced the tumor burden significantly (p < 0.05) in
group A (50-75%), while the effects were minimal in group B
(Introduction:Bone metastasis is a highly unfavorable condition observed
in up to 70% of the patients with breast cancer. Treatment options for
this condition are not curative, but palliative, only, which highlights
the need for exploring new therapeutic options. In this study, we propose
that targeting a chemokine receptor (CCR5), often upregulated in primary
and secondary breast cancers, can contribute to a more successful
treatment of breast cancer bone metastasis.Methodology:Following the
blockage of CCR5 by maraviroc, cytotoxic effects were measured by MTT
assay, while the migratory effects were determined by migration and
scratch healing assays. Apoptosis related activities were investigated by
nuclear staining and western blot analysis. Maraviroc mediated cytostatic
changes were analyzed by a ready-made Human Cell Cycle Regulation Panel
(Roche, Germany). In vivo experiments were performed by implanting
MDA-MB-231 cells via the saphenous artery to the left hind limb of male
nude rats (RNU strain) for inducing bone metastasis. Treatment with
maraviroc was started from 2nd and 7th day of transplantation in two
groups of rats (n = 6/group) designated as A and B, respectively, and was
compared with an untreated control group (n = 8 rats).Results:CCR5
blockage by maraviroc (concentration > 100M) induced concentration
dependent cytotoxicity in MDA-MB-231 and MCF-7 cells. Maraviroc exposure
also showed significant inhibition of migration of the cells, while
nuclear staining indicated the condensation/fragmentation of nuclear
content. Maraviroc exposure induced significant expression of cleaved
caspase 7 and PARP, while real time RT-PCR showed pronounced inhibition
of multiple genes (2fold) including cyclins, CDKs and their down-stream
targets. Treatment of tumor bearing animals, with intra-peritoneal
injections of maraviroc (25mg/kg, 3-4 weeks daily), reduced the tumor
burden significantly (p < 0.05) in group A (50-75%), while the effects
were minimal in group B (<25%). Concomitantly, no signs of toxicity were
observed in rats of the two groups.Conclusion:CCR5 blockage by maraviroc
induces significant anti-neoplastic effects in breast cancer cells. At
mechanistic level, these effects included induction of apoptosis and
alterations in cell cycle. Considerable inhibition in group A, but
minimal inhibition of tumor burden in group B indicates that targeting
CCR5 by maraviroc during early stages of breast cancer bone metastasis is
a promising treatment option which should be further explored.

