Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bladder cancer GWAS signal at 4p16.3 affects response of TMEM129
to chemically-induced endoplasmic reticulum stress


Background: SNP rs798766 within the 4p16.3 region was associated with
bladder cancer risk in several GWAS. This SNP is located within a linkage
disequilibrium block that includes TMEM129, TACC3, FGFR3 and SLBP. We
aimed to explore molecular mechanisms of this GWAS signal.Methods:
Expression analysis of all isoforms of TMEM129, TACC3, FGFR3 and SLBP was
performed in the Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) bladder cancer dataset (N =
412). Expression was analyzed by linear regression in relation to
rs798766 genotypes adjusting for age, sex, race, DNA CpG methylation
status and copy number variation (CNV). Expression in additional bladder
tumors (N = 42) was tested with TaqMan expression assays and with
splicing form-specific in situ hybridization (ISH) assays in a tissue
microarray that included 7 normal-tumor bladder tissue pairs.
Allele-specific TMEM129 exontrap assays in 5 bladder cancer cell lines
were used to evaluate alternative splicing. TMEM129 isoforms were cloned
and overexpressed in cell lines for functional characterization by
confocal microscopy, reporter assays, RNA-seq and qRT-PCR arrays to
explore their effects on cell signaling and cell viability. Endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) stress was induced by treating bladder cancer cell lines
with chemicals dithiothreitol (DTT), tunicamycin and MG132.Results: Of
all the isoforms of four genes tested the strongest association with
rs798766 genotypes was observed for TMEM129-b transcript (padj =
1.65E-06); expression was decreased with bladder cancer risk allele.
Exontrap analysis revealed that allele G of a SNP rs2236786 located
within exon 3 of TMEM129 (r2 = 1.0 with GWAS SNP rs798766) is responsible
for alternative splicing of TMEM129. Allele-specific alternative splicing
also results in lower expression of TMEM129-b and creation of a new
TMEM129-a2 transcript. TMEM129-a2 is predicted to undergo nonsense
mediated decay (NMD) except when under ER stress. TMEM129 is an E3 ligase
and its protein isoforms are predicted to be functionally different.
Confocal imaging showed that all isoforms are located in ER and thus can
compete with each other. Overexpression of TMEM129 isoforms resulted in
differential activation of genes from the main ER stress response
pathways - IRE1, PERK and ATF6. Chemically-induced ER stress increased
expression of all TMEM129 isoforms, although the induction was lower in
cell lines with risk G allele of rs2236786.Conclusions: The risk of
bladder cancer is known to be increased by environmental exposures. Our
results suggest that bladder cancer risk could be modulated by a genetic
variant that affects the function of TMEM129, an E3 ligase. This
mechanism could be important for response to environmentally-induced ER
stress and subsequent development of bladder cancer.

