Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of FOXO1 in oncogenic program of B cell precursor acute
lymphoblastic leukemia (BCP-ALL)


Although treatment of B cell precursor acute lymphoblastic leukemia
(BCP-ALL) in children has shown eminent progress over the past decades,
about 15% of patients can still not be cured, however. Therefore, new
therapeutic strategies are warranted.FOXO1 together with other
transcription factors including EBF1, PAX5 and TCF3 plays a central role
in differentiation of pre-B-cells. In cooperation with PAX5 and other
B-cell transcription factors, FOXO1 induces expression of SYK, BLNK,
RAG1, RAG2, AICDA and IL7RA genes. Of note, SYK and IL7RA signaling
contribute to the oncogenic program of BCP-ALL, which utilize pre-B cell
survival and proliferation program.In this study, we demonstrate that
FOXO1 is highly expressed in most of the BCP-ALL cell lines. By using
immunofluorescence assays we show that FOXO1 is localized in the nucleus
of BCP-ALL cells. Overexpression of constitutively active AKT1
(inactivating FOXO1) negatively regulates the growth of BCP-ALL cells.
Inhibition of FOXO1 by shRNA results in cell death in the RS4;11 BCP-ALL
cell line. BCP-ALL cells are more sensitive to growth arrest and
apoptosis induced by a small molecular FOXO1 inhibitor AS1842856 than
other classical Hodgkin lymphoma and non-Hodgkin lymphoma cell lines.
Gene expression profiling of BCP-ALL cells after treatment with the FOXO1
inhibitor for 24h shows the significantly down-regulation of FOXO target
genes including VPREB3, IL1B, KLHL24 and BNIP3L. Interestingly, at the
same time, some FOXO targets like NOXA, RUNX2 and PRDM1 were found
upregulated, indicating a complex effect of the FOXO1 inhibitor.We
conclude that FOXO1 expression is critical for the BCP-ALL oncogenic
program and its targeting represents a novel therapeutic approach.

