Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Detection of HBV-host junction DNA sequences in urine of patients
with hepatocellular carcinoma


Human urine has been shown to contain DNA from circulation. In this
study, we aim to provide unambiguous evidence that urine contains
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC)-derived DNA, and thus can be used for
detecting HCC-associated DNA markers. We used novel hepatitis B virus
(HBV)-host junction sequences (HBV-JSs), created by viral integration in
the human genome, as unique markers to track the HBV-integrated DNA from
tumor tissues to their corresponding urine samples. An HBV DR1-2 enriched
Next-Generation sequencing (NGS) assay was developed to identify the
major HBV-JSs in 15 HBV-HCC tissues. Upon validation of the major HBV-JSs
by Sanger sequencing, a short-amplicon PCR assay tailed for each HBV-JS
was developed to test the junctions existence in the corresponding urine
DNA. 15 major HBV-JSs were identified by the HBV DR1-2 enriched NGS assay
from 15 HBV related HCC (HBV-HCC) tissues, 13 of which were validated by
Sanger sequencing. By using HBV-JS specific short-amplicon junction PCR
assays, we detected and confirmed six of nine HBV-JSs for which there
were matching urine samples. Urine contains detectable major HBV-JSs
derived from HCC, and thus can be used for liquid biopsies to study not
only the complexities of HBV-JS species during chronic HBV infection and
carcinogenesis, but also other HCC-related DNA modifications for the
early detection of HCC and disease management.

