Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An ultra-sensitive cell free DNA liquid biopsy assay for cancer
treatment monitoring


In order to take advantage of the narrow time window for optimal
treatment efficacy, highly sensitive disease monitoring is critical in
the successful management of cancer. Currently, treatment efficacy is
assessed by using a combination of protein cancer biomarkers and imaging.
However, both methods present limitations with regard to specificity or
sensitivity due to their dependency on tumor size. Recently, a number of
studies have suggested that monitoring cell free DNA (cfDNA) may provide
a more specific alternative for tracking cancer treatment with greatly
improved sensitivity. Here we introduce a novel next-generation
sequencing based mutation detection system aimed at improving the
sensitivity, reliability, and clinical utility of cancer treatment
monitoring. Our system, comprised of Nebula, a whole genome amplification
technology that is capable of amplifying nanogram quantities of cfDNA
>1000-fold, and Firefly, a proprietary technology combining molecular
biology and computational algorithm for error-suppression, has reduced
the rate of random sequencing errors to 10-6. As a result, we are able to
detect 1.5 variant copies from 10ng of input cfDNA with a detection rate
of 46%. We have validated the Nebula-Firefly assay on a patient cohort
with either colorectal (CRC) or lung cancer. Here we report the
successful detection of drug resistant mutations and various genomic
alterations associated with minimal residual detection (MRD) in sample
cfDNA. These initial findings have led to the exploration of
Nebula-Firefly as the technological backbone for a noninvasive, scalable
approach for the early detection, treatment, and monitoring of cancer.

