Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Optimal PEGylation of an auristatin linker provides ADCs with
improved pharmacological properties


As antibody-drug conjugates (ADCs) continue to emerge as an important
therapeutic modality for the treatment of cancer, there is an increased
effort to elucidate critical design parameters and devise improved linker
technologies. The impact of drug-to-antibody ratio (DAR) on conjugate
plasma pharmacokinetics (PK) is known to be an important attribute, and
accelerated clearance induced by high levels of drug loading has served
as a barrier to translating increased in vitro potency to in vivo
xenografts. We have recently demonstrated that the incorporation of a
discrete PEG24 unit into an auristatin drug-linker can greatly diminish
the impact of drug loading on ADC PK. In an effort to optimize the
antibody-mediated delivery of monomethylauristatin E (MMAE) as a
homogeneous DAR 8 conjugate, we prepared a series of MMAE linkers using
PEG units of varying lengths to identify constructs that preserve
antibody PK properties and provide enhanced in vivo activity. The extent
of PEGylation and linker chemistry was found to impact conjugate PK
properties, biodistribution, antitumor activity, and tolerability. From
that effort, a cleavable MMAE linker incorporating the glucuronide-based
trigger, a self-stabilizing maleimide, and 12 PEG units emerged as the
optimal design. ADCs prepared with this linker have now undergone further
preclinical characterization in activity and toxicology models in which
they have demonstrated an increase in therapeutic index relative to other
MMAE-based ADCs.

