Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ACVRIB-dependent regulation of extracellular matrix protein in
squamous cell carcinoma progression


Squamous cell carcinomas (SCC) of the head and neck and esophagus pose a
substantial public health risk globally. As SCC is often diagnosed in
late stage, therapeutic options are limited. A more thorough
understanding of the mechanisms involved their progression is needed. One
potential mode by which SCCs progress is via Activin A signaling. The
downstream effects of Activin A signaling have been primarily
characterized as growth inhibiting and anti-angiogenic. However, Activin
A is commonly overexpressed in SCC. Therefore, we hypothesized that SCC
become insensitive to Activin A stimulation through the dysregulation of
the signaling pathway. To model this dysregulation we utilized
CRISPR-mediated regulation of ACVRIB (ACVRIB-kd), the necessary type IB
receptor to transduce Activin A signaling in three SCC cell lines.
Downregulation of ACVRIB enhanced invasiveness in the OSC19 SCC
three-dimensional organotypic cultures. Additionally, ACVRIB-kd cells
showed significant changes in protein expression, when compared to
control. In particular, the correlative markers of SCC aggressiveness and
putative downstream Activin A targets, podoplanin and fibronectin, were
substantially altered in ACVRIB-kd cells. Integrin expression,
particularly integrins 3, 5, and v, was markedly changed in ACVRIB-kd
cells, indicating additional ACVRIB-mediated effects to ECM proteins. We
are currently analyzing ACVRIB-kd SCC tumor growth and metastasis in vivo
using tongue orthotopic xenografts and subcutaneous flank injections. In
conclusion, SCC-specific disruption of Activin A signaling promotes an
aggressive phenotype. Re-activation of the canonical Activin A pathway
may provide a novel therapeutic strategy to combat SCC.

