Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Variations in the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) program
by non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) circulating tumor cells (CTCs) do
not influence survival


BackgroundBy definition, CTCs must undergo the EMT to enter the
bloodstream where they can be isolated from cancer patients for
translational and biological study. Here we examined survival patterns in
relation to CTC EMT expression in different molecular subgroups of
NSCLC.Methods125 patients (pts) with advanced treatment-nave stage IIb-IV
NSCLC were prospectively included for CellSearch CTC analysis as part of
the Gustave-Roussy MSN study. Patients signed an informed consent for one
CellSave tube prior to chemotherapy. Anti-vimentin (vim) antibody was
added to the free channel in the CellSearch system for examination of
EMT. Association of CTC number with clinical characteristics were
assessed using Fisher's exact, Mann-Whitney and chi-squared tests.
Kaplan-Meier method and log-rank tests were used to analyse
progression-free survival (PFS) and overall survival (OS) of
vimentin-expression in molecular subgroups of NSCLC.Results51/125 pts
(40.8%) were CTC-positive by CellSearch (2 CTC), and 29/125 (23.2%)
patient samples contained at least 1 vimentin-positive (+) CTC. 19/76
(25%) adenocarcinomas were KRAS mutated. In the KRAS subgroup, 0/19
patient samples (0%) from pts with mutated KRAS contained vim+ CTC,
compared to 17/48 pts (35.4%) with wild-type (WT) KRAS (p = 0.0027).
There was also a significantly higher overall number of vim+ CTCs in pts
with KRAS WT cancer compared to KRAS mutated cancer (mean 0 vs 1.63,
respectively, p = 0.0035). For KRAS WT pts, no survival difference was
evident between vim+ and vim- subgroups in terms of PFS or OS. 21/89
adenocarcinomas were EGFR mutated (23.6%). In this subgroup,
statistically higher numbers of EGFR mutated pts with both vim+ and total
CTCs were observed compared to EGFR WT pts (vim+ CTC: 9/21 EGFR mutated
vs 9/56 EGFR WT, p = 0.0134; total CTC: 12/21 EGFR mutated vs 18/56 EGFR
WT, p = 0.0451). Similarly, there was a significantly higher overall
number of vim+ CTCs in pts with EGFR mutated cancer compared to pts with
EGFR WT cancer (mean 1.24 vs 0.91, respectively, p = 0.0189), but no PFS
or OS difference was evident between vim+ and vim- subgroups in EGFR
mutated pts. 14/71 (19.7%) adenocarcinomas were ALK rearranged, with
further results pending.ConclusionsAt baseline stage IIIb-IV disease,
there are statistically fewer vim+ CTCs (and pts with vim+ CTCs) in KRAS
mutated NSCLC, while vim+ CTC (and vim+ CTC pts) are statistically higher
in EGFR mutated NSCLC. Despite this differential CTC vimentin expression
between molecular subgroups, no PFS or OS difference is evident between
vim+ and vim- patients. This biological variation coupled to a lack of
overall clinical impact favours the hypothesis that each individual CTC
is a highly plastic cell that can cover a range of EMT expression.

