Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dynactin dysregulation-induced increase in EGFR on basal-like
breast cancer cells


Aggressive triple-negative basal-like breast cancer (BLBC) cells are
often characterized with overabundance of the epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR). Major objective of our research is to explore the
possibility that dysregulation of the function of the dynactin complex as
a mechanism of over-abundance of EGFR on BLBC cell surface. Our notion is
that molecular defects in the dynactin-mediated retrograde EGFR recycling
pathway in the BLBC cells causes the accumulation of this receptor on
their cell surface making them hyper-responsive to EGF signaling. Our
comparative transcriptome analysis between BLBC cells with higher levels
of EGFR and the non-BLBC cells with lower levels of EGFR revealed that
the expression of dynactin complex subunits 1, 2, 3, 4 and 6 (DCTN1, 2,
3, 4, 6), are significantly reduced in the EGFR-high aggressive BLBC
cells. In addition, EGFR-high BLBC cells also have lower levels of two
other dynactin-associated proteins, CLIP1 and LRRK1. Interestingly,
elevation of surface EGFR levels in BLBC cells are associated with higher
levels of the long non-coding RNA PVT1. Six miRNAs are generated from the
precursor of PVT1 RNA during cis-splicing. They are miR-1204, miR-1205,
miR-1206, miR-1207-3p, miR-1207-5p and miR-1208. We found that relative
levels of these miRNAs are significantly higher in EGFR-high BLBC cells
and tissues in comparison to the non-aggressive EGFR-low BLBC cells.
Bioinformatics analysis followed by experimental validation revealed that
miR-1207-5p inhibits DCTN1, DCTN3 and ACTR1A; DCTN2 is inhibited by
miR-1205 and miR-1208. MiR-1208 also inhibits DCTN6 and CLIP1 whereas
LRRK1 and CAPZA1 are inhibited by miR-1207-3p and miR-1206, respectively.
Moreover beta-spectrin (SPTB), a protein associated with dynactin
complex, is also inhibited by miR-1205 and miR-1207-3p. Treatment of the
cells with the antagomirs of the miRNAs increased the levels of their
respective target proteins with concomitant decrease in the surface level
of EGFR. Our data suggest that BLBC cells maintain a robust level of EGFR
on the cell surface by repressing the retrograde transport of EGFR
through the repression of the proteins in the dynactin complex and thus
sustain their higher growth rates. This research is supported in part by
DOD-CDMRP IDEA Expansion Grant# BC103645 and NIH/NCI grant
1R21CA181920-01 to GC.

