Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pan-cancer analysis of programmed death-ligand 1 (PD-L1)
amplifications


PD-L1, located in the chromosomal region 9p28, is a ligand of programmed
cell death protein 1 (PD-1) and has been described as immune checkpoint
regulator that allows cancers to evade the host immune system. To
stratify patients for treatment with PD-1 inhibitors, PD-L1 expression is
currently intensively studied on RNA and protein levels. However, no
comprehensive study of PD-L1 amplifications including many cancer types
has been performed so far.We investigated PD-L1 amplifications in
eighteen cancer types that were copy number profiled, gene expression
profiled and clinically characterized by the TCGA consortium: Acute
Myeloid Leukemia (LAML), Bladder Urothelial Carcinoma (BLCA), Brain Lower
Grade Glioma (LGG), Breast invasive carcinoma (BRCA), Cervical squamous
cell carcinoma and endocervical adenocarcinoma (CESC), Colorectal
adenocarcinoma (COADREAD), Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM), Head and Neck
squamous cell carcinoma (HNSC), Kidney renal clear cell carcinoma (KIRC),
Liver hepatocellular carcinoma (LIHC), Lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD), Lung
squamous cell carcinoma (LUSC), Ovarian serous cystadenocarcinoma (OV),
pancreatic adenocarcinoma (PAAD), Sarcoma (SARC), Skin Cutaneous Melanoma
(SKCM), Stomach adenocarcinoma (STAD) and Uterine Corpus Endometrial
Carcinoma (UCEC).We found a diverse landscape of focal PD-L1
amplification, 9p chromosome arm amplifications and polysomy 9. Focal
amplifications had the highest incidence in OV (10.7%), LUSC (9.8%), HNSC
(8.6%), BLCA (8.3%), SARC (8.2%), CESC (7.1%), STAD (6.8%) and BRCA
(5.3%). 9p amplifications were most frequently found in OV (12.6%), BLCA
(7.4%), BRCA (6.8%) and LUAD (5.2%). Polysomy 9 had the highest incidence
in COADREAD (14.0%), HNSC (13.6%), CESC (11.2%), SARC (9.4%) and STAD
(7.2%), BLCA (5.9%) and GBM (5.5%). In a pooled analysis of focal and
non-focal alterations, PD-L1 amplifications positively correlated with
gene expression in nine cancer types and significantly (p PD-L1, located
in the chromosomal region 9p28, is a ligand of programmed cell death
protein 1 (PD-1) and has been described as immune checkpoint regulator
that allows cancers to evade the host immune system. To stratify patients
for treatment with PD-1 inhibitors, PD-L1 expression is currently
intensively studied on RNA and protein levels. However, no comprehensive
study of PD-L1 amplifications including many cancer types has been
performed so far.We investigated PD-L1 amplifications in eighteen cancer
types that were copy number profiled, gene expression profiled and
clinically characterized by the TCGA consortium: Acute Myeloid Leukemia
(LAML), Bladder Urothelial Carcinoma (BLCA), Brain Lower Grade Glioma
(LGG), Breast invasive carcinoma (BRCA), Cervical squamous cell carcinoma
and endocervical adenocarcinoma (CESC), Colorectal adenocarcinoma
(COADREAD), Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM), Head and Neck squamous cell
carcinoma (HNSC), Kidney renal clear cell carcinoma (KIRC), Liver
hepatocellular carcinoma (LIHC), Lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD), Lung
squamous cell carcinoma (LUSC), Ovarian serous cystadenocarcinoma (OV),
pancreatic adenocarcinoma (PAAD), Sarcoma (SARC), Skin Cutaneous Melanoma
(SKCM), Stomach adenocarcinoma (STAD) and Uterine Corpus Endometrial
Carcinoma (UCEC).We found a diverse landscape of focal PD-L1
amplification, 9p chromosome arm amplifications and polysomy 9. Focal
amplifications had the highest incidence in OV (10.7%), LUSC (9.8%), HNSC
(8.6%), BLCA (8.3%), SARC (8.2%), CESC (7.1%), STAD (6.8%) and BRCA
(5.3%). 9p amplifications were most frequently found in OV (12.6%), BLCA
(7.4%), BRCA (6.8%) and LUAD (5.2%). Polysomy 9 had the highest incidence
in COADREAD (14.0%), HNSC (13.6%), CESC (11.2%), SARC (9.4%) and STAD
(7.2%), BLCA (5.9%) and GBM (5.5%). In a pooled analysis of focal and
non-focal alterations, PD-L1 amplifications positively correlated with
gene expression in nine cancer types and significantly (p < 0.05)
shortened overall survival in five cancer types.In summary, PD-L1
amplifications represent a frequent genetic alteration that occurs in
many cancer types and could potentially be exploited for patient
stratification and immune therapy.

