Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cancer in first-degree relatives of women with early-onset breast
cancer: a comparison of self-reported and cancer registry data


BackgroundBreast cancer (BC) is the most common cancer in women, both
world-wide and in Sweden. However, only about 2% occur in women 35 years
of age. The aim of this study was to compare self-reported and registry
data of family history of cancer, tumor characteristics and BRCA germline
mutation status in women with early-onset BC.Materials and methodsBetween
January 1st 1990 and December 31st 2013, a total of 779 women aged 35
years were diagnosed with BC in the South Swedish Health Care Region. Of
these women, 231 women sought, or were referred for, genetic counseling
at the Oncogenetic Clinic, Lund, Sweden, and were included in the study.
Subsequently, 224 women were screened for germline mutations.
Self-reported information about family history of cancer in first-degree
relatives (parents, siblings and children) was obtained from the
participants and was compared with data from the Swedish Cancer Registry.
When available, hormone receptor (ER and PR) and HER2 status of the
tumors was collected from pathology reports. Fisher's Exact Test was
performed to estimate odds ratios (ORs) with 95% confidence intervals
(CIs).ResultsMutation analyses revealed 143 (63.8%) cases without
mutations (BRCAX), 46 (20.5%) with BRCA1, 19 (8.5%) with BRCA2 and 16
(7.1%) with other mutations (TP53, CHEK2, PTEN, PALB2, CDH1 and
MSH2/MSH6). Family history of BC and ovarian cancer (OvC) in first-degree
relatives was self-reported in equal numbers as registry data. Family
history of BC was found in 30% of the cases, and of OvC in 3%. However,
family history of other types of cancer was self-reported in 13 (5.6%)
and registry-reported in 58 (25.1%) cases (OR, 18.8; 95% CI, 3.91-180;
pBackgroundBreast cancer (BC) is the most common cancer in women, both
world-wide and in Sweden. However, only about 2% occur in women 35 years
of age. The aim of this study was to compare self-reported and registry
data of family history of cancer, tumor characteristics and BRCA germline
mutation status in women with early-onset BC.Materials and methodsBetween
January 1st 1990 and December 31st 2013, a total of 779 women aged 35
years were diagnosed with BC in the South Swedish Health Care Region. Of
these women, 231 women sought, or were referred for, genetic counseling
at the Oncogenetic Clinic, Lund, Sweden, and were included in the study.
Subsequently, 224 women were screened for germline mutations.
Self-reported information about family history of cancer in first-degree
relatives (parents, siblings and children) was obtained from the
participants and was compared with data from the Swedish Cancer Registry.
When available, hormone receptor (ER and PR) and HER2 status of the
tumors was collected from pathology reports. Fisher's Exact Test was
performed to estimate odds ratios (ORs) with 95% confidence intervals
(CIs).ResultsMutation analyses revealed 143 (63.8%) cases without
mutations (BRCAX), 46 (20.5%) with BRCA1, 19 (8.5%) with BRCA2 and 16
(7.1%) with other mutations (TP53, CHEK2, PTEN, PALB2, CDH1 and
MSH2/MSH6). Family history of BC and ovarian cancer (OvC) in first-degree
relatives was self-reported in equal numbers as registry data. Family
history of BC was found in 30% of the cases, and of OvC in 3%. However,
family history of other types of cancer was self-reported in 13 (5.6%)
and registry-reported in 58 (25.1%) cases (OR, 18.8; 95% CI, 3.91-180;
p<0.001). Of the registry-reported cancers, cervical and skin cancers
were the most common when diagnosed before the genetic counseling
sessions, and when diagnosed after, prostate and skin cancers were the
most common. When comparing tumor characteristics of BRCA1 with BRCAX
cases, mutation carriers more often showed receptor negative tumors: ER-
(OR, 13.4; 95% CI, 3.77-73.5; pBackgroundBreast cancer (BC) is the most
common cancer in women, both world-wide and in Sweden. However, only
about 2% occur in women 35 years of age. The aim of this study was to
compare self-reported and registry data of family history of cancer,
tumor characteristics and BRCA germline mutation status in women with
early-onset BC.Materials and methodsBetween January 1st 1990 and December
31st 2013, a total of 779 women aged 35 years were diagnosed with BC in
the South Swedish Health Care Region. Of these women, 231 women sought,
or were referred for, genetic counseling at the Oncogenetic Clinic, Lund,
Sweden, and were included in the study. Subsequently, 224 women were
screened for germline mutations. Self-reported information about family
history of cancer in first-degree relatives (parents, siblings and
children) was obtained from the participants and was compared with data
from the Swedish Cancer Registry. When available, hormone receptor (ER
and PR) and HER2 status of the tumors was collected from pathology
reports. Fisher's Exact Test was performed to estimate odds ratios (ORs)
with 95% confidence intervals (CIs).ResultsMutation analyses revealed 143
(63.8%) cases without mutations (BRCAX), 46 (20.5%) with BRCA1, 19 (8.5%)
with BRCA2 and 16 (7.1%) with other mutations (TP53, CHEK2, PTEN, PALB2,
CDH1 and MSH2/MSH6). Family history of BC and ovarian cancer (OvC) in
first-degree relatives was self-reported in equal numbers as registry
data. Family history of BC was found in 30% of the cases, and of OvC in
3%. However, family history of other types of cancer was self-reported in
13 (5.6%) and registry-reported in 58 (25.1%) cases (OR, 18.8; 95% CI,
3.91-180; p<0.001). Of the registry-reported cancers, cervical and skin
cancers were the most common when diagnosed before the genetic counseling
sessions, and when diagnosed after, prostate and skin cancers were the
most common. When comparing tumor characteristics of BRCA1 with BRCAX
cases, mutation carriers more often showed receptor negative tumors: ER-
(OR, 13.4; 95% CI, 3.77-73.5; p<0.001), PR- (OR, 47.9; 95% CI, 7.34-2011;
pBackgroundBreast cancer (BC) is the most common cancer in women, both
world-wide and in Sweden. However, only about 2% occur in women 35 years
of age. The aim of this study was to compare self-reported and registry
data of family history of cancer, tumor characteristics and BRCA germline
mutation status in women with early-onset BC.Materials and methodsBetween
January 1st 1990 and December 31st 2013, a total of 779 women aged 35
years were diagnosed with BC in the South Swedish Health Care Region. Of
these women, 231 women sought, or were referred for, genetic counseling
at the Oncogenetic Clinic, Lund, Sweden, and were included in the study.
Subsequently, 224 women were screened for germline mutations.
Self-reported information about family history of cancer in first-degree
relatives (parents, siblings and children) was obtained from the
participants and was compared with data from the Swedish Cancer Registry.
When available, hormone receptor (ER and PR) and HER2 status of the
tumors was collected from pathology reports. Fisher's Exact Test was
performed to estimate odds ratios (ORs) with 95% confidence intervals
(CIs).ResultsMutation analyses revealed 143 (63.8%) cases without
mutations (BRCAX), 46 (20.5%) with BRCA1, 19 (8.5%) with BRCA2 and 16
(7.1%) with other mutations (TP53, CHEK2, PTEN, PALB2, CDH1 and
MSH2/MSH6). Family history of BC and ovarian cancer (OvC) in first-degree
relatives was self-reported in equal numbers as registry data. Family
history of BC was found in 30% of the cases, and of OvC in 3%. However,
family history of other types of cancer was self-reported in 13 (5.6%)
and registry-reported in 58 (25.1%) cases (OR, 18.8; 95% CI, 3.91-180;
p<0.001). Of the registry-reported cancers, cervical and skin cancers
were the most common when diagnosed before the genetic counseling
sessions, and when diagnosed after, prostate and skin cancers were the
most common. When comparing tumor characteristics of BRCA1 with BRCAX
cases, mutation carriers more often showed receptor negative tumors: ER-
(OR, 13.4; 95% CI, 3.77-73.5; p<0.001), PR- (OR, 47.9; 95% CI, 7.34-2011;
p<0.001) and HER2- (OR, 17.1; 95% CI, 1.81-inf; pBackgroundBreast cancer
(BC) is the most common cancer in women, both world-wide and in Sweden.
However, only about 2% occur in women 35 years of age. The aim of this
study was to compare self-reported and registry data of family history of
cancer, tumor characteristics and BRCA germline mutation status in women
with early-onset BC.Materials and methodsBetween January 1st 1990 and
December 31st 2013, a total of 779 women aged 35 years were diagnosed
with BC in the South Swedish Health Care Region. Of these women, 231
women sought, or were referred for, genetic counseling at the Oncogenetic
Clinic, Lund, Sweden, and were included in the study. Subsequently, 224
women were screened for germline mutations. Self-reported information
about family history of cancer in first-degree relatives (parents,
siblings and children) was obtained from the participants and was
compared with data from the Swedish Cancer Registry. When available,
hormone receptor (ER and PR) and HER2 status of the tumors was collected
from pathology reports. Fisher's Exact Test was performed to estimate
odds ratios (ORs) with 95% confidence intervals (CIs).ResultsMutation
analyses revealed 143 (63.8%) cases without mutations (BRCAX), 46 (20.5%)
with BRCA1, 19 (8.5%) with BRCA2 and 16 (7.1%) with other mutations
(TP53, CHEK2, PTEN, PALB2, CDH1 and MSH2/MSH6). Family history of BC and
ovarian cancer (OvC) in first-degree relatives was self-reported in equal
numbers as registry data. Family history of BC was found in 30% of the
cases, and of OvC in 3%. However, family history of other types of cancer
was self-reported in 13 (5.6%) and registry-reported in 58 (25.1%) cases
(OR, 18.8; 95% CI, 3.91-180; p<0.001). Of the registry-reported cancers,
cervical and skin cancers were the most common when diagnosed before the
genetic counseling sessions, and when diagnosed after, prostate and skin
cancers were the most common. When comparing tumor characteristics of
BRCA1 with BRCAX cases, mutation carriers more often showed receptor
negative tumors: ER- (OR, 13.4; 95% CI, 3.77-73.5; p<0.001), PR- (OR,
47.9; 95% CI, 7.34-2011; p<0.001) and HER2- (OR, 17.1; 95% CI, 1.81-inf;
p<0.004).ConclusionThe main findings in this study of early-onset BC were
that cases with germline mutations in the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes were
exceptional high, that cervical cancer was the most common not
self-reported cancer in first-degree relatives diagnosed before the
genetic counseling, and that BRCA1 carriers had a higher rate of ER, PR
and HER2 negative tumors, which tends to indicate a less favorable
prognosis. When assessing the need for mutation screening, as shown
previously by others, oncologists and genetic counselors need to consider
both early-onset BCs and receptor negative tumors as predictors for BRCA1
mutations, and when obtaining information about family history of
cancers, patients might lack information about cervical cancers in
relatives.

