Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Puma/pBcl-2 axis influences sensitivity of cancer cells to
multiple stimuli


Bcl-2 is a central regulator of cell survival that is overexpressed in
the majority of cancers cells.Previous reports indicated that Bcl-2
phosphorylation (S70) may provide a switch by which cellscan regulate the
pro-survival functions of Bcl-2. But there is still controversy over the
function of phosphorylatedBcl-2 (pBcl-2).In the presentstudy, Puma/pBcl-2
axis was found to play a key role in regulating the sensitivity of cancer
cells to multiple stimuli.Based on immunoprecipitation, weobserved that
the pro-apoptoticBH3-only protein Puma which was induced by paclitaxel
competitively bound pBcl-2 (S70) and displaced Bim and Bax from
pBcl-2(S70) in Hela and HL60 cells.Further study showed thatdepletion of
Puma (siRNA), but not other BH3 only proteins, significantlydecreased
paclitaxel-induced apoptosis.Bim/pBcl-2 and Bax/pBcl-2 complexeswere
largely maintained when Pumawas reduced. These data indicated that the
phosphorylation of Bcl-2(S70) enhancedits anti-apoptotic function and the
induction of Puma could neutralize this effect. Similarly,the induced
Puma was also responsible for Bim and Bax displacement from pBcl-2 (S70)
when Hela and HL60 cellswere treated with DNA damage agents(cisplatin and
etoposide).However, Pumacannot displace Bax or Bim when pBcl-2 (S70) was
redundant in the cells expressedphospho-mimetic S70E-Bcl-2. It
demonstrated that DNA damage induced apoptosis could be inhibit by pBcl-2
(S70) and the induction of Puma could antagonize pBcl-2 (S70). In a cell
free system, mitochondria from Hela and HL60 cells which expressing the
S70E-Bcl-2 wereincubated with different BH3 peptides. Cytochrome c
release couldbe induced by a low concentration of Puma-BH3 peptide, but a
higher concentrationwas necessary during Bimengagement.By contrast,
Bad-BH3 and Noxa-BH3cannot initiate the release of cytochrome c.In
conclusion, multiple stimuli activates the mitochondrial apoptoticpathway
in cancer cells, in which Puma/pBcl-2(S70) axisplay a key role in a novel
mechanism involving the displacement of Bim and Bax from pBcl-2 (S70)by
Puma. In contrast with the debatable function of Bcl-2 phosphorylation
(S70), this study provided evidence that the phosphorylation of Bcl-2 at
S70 enhanced cell survivalin multiplestimuli triggered apoptosis.

