Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pleiotrophin is a marker of poor prognosis in Middle Eastern
papillary thyroid carcinoma


Pleiotrophin (PTN) is a heparin binding growth factor known to have role
in neuronal development. It is highly expressed in embryo but has a very
limited expression in adult tissues. PTN is considered a proto-oncogene
and has been hypothesized to play role in oncogenesis as its expression
is found to be increased in many different cancer subtypes. Its role in
cell transformation, cell growth, survival, migration and angiogenesis
has also been shown in various different types of cancers. The function
of PTN is hypothesized to be carried out by its interaction with cell
surface proteoglycans or binding to its selective cell surface receptor,
protein tyrosine phosphatase receptor Z1 (PTPRZ1). The significance of
role of PTN in pathogenesis of thyroid cancer has not been explored
especially with the fact that papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC)
originating in this ethnic population is the second most common female
malignancy, after breast. So in search for novel druggable molecular
target we sought for PTN expression in a large cohort of Saudi PTC. We
analysed PTN alteration in more than 1000 primary papillary thyroid
carcinoma in a tissue microarray format with clinical follow up data. We
found that PTN was overexpressed in 65.5% (658/1006) of PTC and was
significantly associated with aggressive clinical parameters such as tall
cell variant histological subtype (p = 0.0333), extrathyroidal extension
(p = 0.0292), lymphovascular invasion (p = 0.0182) and large tumour size
(p = 0.0160). Important significant molecular association was seen with
PTPRZ-1 (p = 0.0316), Midkine (p = 0.0008) and pSTAT-3 (pPleiotrophin
(PTN) is a heparin binding growth factor known to have role in neuronal
development. It is highly expressed in embryo but has a very limited
expression in adult tissues. PTN is considered a proto-oncogene and has
been hypothesized to play role in oncogenesis as its expression is found
to be increased in many different cancer subtypes. Its role in cell
transformation, cell growth, survival, migration and angiogenesis has
also been shown in various different types of cancers. The function of
PTN is hypothesized to be carried out by its interaction with cell
surface proteoglycans or binding to its selective cell surface receptor,
protein tyrosine phosphatase receptor Z1 (PTPRZ1). The significance of
role of PTN in pathogenesis of thyroid cancer has not been explored
especially with the fact that papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC)
originating in this ethnic population is the second most common female
malignancy, after breast. So in search for novel druggable molecular
target we sought for PTN expression in a large cohort of Saudi PTC. We
analysed PTN alteration in more than 1000 primary papillary thyroid
carcinoma in a tissue microarray format with clinical follow up data. We
found that PTN was overexpressed in 65.5% (658/1006) of PTC and was
significantly associated with aggressive clinical parameters such as tall
cell variant histological subtype (p = 0.0333), extrathyroidal extension
(p = 0.0292), lymphovascular invasion (p = 0.0182) and large tumour size
(p = 0.0160). Important significant molecular association was seen with
PTPRZ-1 (p = 0.0316), Midkine (p = 0.0008) and pSTAT-3 (p<0.0001).
Finally patients showing PTN overexpression have worse disease free
survival compared to patients showing low or absent PTN expression (p =
0.0218). On multivariate analysis PTN is found to be an independent
marker of poor prognosis taking into consideration parameters such as
Age, Stage, Lymph node status and Extrathyroidal extension (p = 0.0430).
This study highlights the importance of PTN as druggable molecular target
which can be therapeutically exploited by its inhibitors in treatment of
PTC.Keywords: Papillary Thyroid Cancer; Pleiotrophin; Pleiotrophin
Receptor

