Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Disrupted integrity in IB kinase alpha promotes lung
adenocarcinoma progression via an oxidative stress-inflammation circuitry


Recent advanced research has highlighted that multiple drivers and
somatic aberrations drive intratumor heterogeneity. Multiple hits in
different nucleotides of a single critical gene and diverse deregulatory
mechanisms in one tumor have challenged to understand how these various
forms of a single gene cooperate with other drivers in cancer
development. IB kinase alpha (IKK) down-or-up-regulation and mutations
have been detected in many human cancers; however, the function of IKK in
lung adenocarcinoma (ADC), a major type of human lung cancers, has not
been explored. To study how the different mutant forms of IKK regulate
KrasG12D-induced lung ADC development, we crossed KrasG12D mice with Ikk
floxed mice and two Ikk knock-in mice and found that a lung specific IKK
deletion (IkkLung) and two different IKK point mutants (IkkKA/KA: KA at
amino acid 44 and IkkAA/AA: SA at amino acids 176 and 180) promote the
progression of KrasG12D-induced lung ADCs. The IKK mutants integrate into
the KrasG12D-mediated diverse oncogenic pathways; additionally the
mutants increase levels of pulmonary macrophage infiltration, ROS, and
DNA damage compared to KrasG12D-induced lung ADCs. IKK deficiency results
in decreased levels of Nrf2, a transcription factor that regulates
expression of genes encoding many anti-oxidants, and increased levels of
NADPH oxidase 2 (Nox2), which form an oxidative stress-inflammation
circuitry partially regulated by a new identified pathway of IKK, aryl
hydrocarbon receptor and Nox2. Treatment with a Nox inhibitor (apocynin)
or a ROS scavenger (N-acetyl cysteine), and/or Nox2 null bone marrow
transplant inhibits the pathogenesis of ADCs. Also, we observed various
aberrations of IKK in human lung ADCs. The study not only demonstrates
that IKK serves as a gatekeeper to suppress oncogenic oxidative stress in
lung ADC development, but also provides an advanced model that explains
how the different mutant forms of a signal gene integrate into distinct
signalings to enhance the crucial driver KrasG12D-induced lung cancer
development.

