Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of anti-5T4 antibody-drug conjugates, ZV05-ADCs for
targeted cancer therapy in different type of cancers


5T4 is an N-glycosylated transmembrane 72 kDa glycoprotein expressed in a
number of carcinomas, and has been explored as a target for cancer
therapy in different type of cancers, including NSCLC, RCC, colorectal,
ovarian, pancreatic and gastric cancers. The expression of 5T4 in normal
tissue is very limited, but widespread in malignant tumors throughout
their development, making it an attractive target for antibody-drug
conjugate (ADC). In this aspect, a 5T4-MMAF ADC from Pfizer is under
clinical investigation in phase I/II trials.We have developed novel
anti-5T4 ADCs, using our proprietary conjugation technologies. A highly
potent anti-5T4 antibody ZV05 was conjugated to a variety of internally
developed linkers and toxins and purified to populations containing
defined DAR (Drug-Antibody Ratio) numbers. The ADCs were studied both in
vitro and in vivo for their activity against a variety of tumors. The
results showed that the lead ZV05 ADCs were potent towards a bunch of
cancer cell lines that express 5T4, and also dramatically inhibited tumor
growth in several models in vivo. In the xenograft studies, a single dose
of the lead ZV05 ADCs completely wiped out the tumors and kept the tumor
volume down for the whole period of studies. ZV05 ADCs are currently
under further evaluation to select a candidate for clinical treatment of
5T4-positive cancers.

