Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development and characterization of synthetic antibodies with a
human framework that directly link metabolism to immune system in cancer
cells


Deregulated cellular energetics and evasion of immune system are two
hallmark features of cancer cells. In fact, increased uptake of glucose
and glutamine by cancer cells elevates flux of a minor glucose pathway
known as the hexosamine biosynthetic pathway (HBP), resulting in
alteration of glycosylation. Addition of sugar moieties to proteins plays
an important role in sensing cellular metabolism, growth factors,
signaling molecules, nutrient flux and stress. Since many of these
processes are de-regulated in tumorigenesis, global alterations in
glycosylation via HBP flux are likely to play an important role in
cancer. We hypothesize that cancer cells can sense stress through the HBP
pathway, and, consequently, reprogram the cell surface and adapt to
tougher conditions. Neo-epitopes on the cell surface that emerge from
tuning the HBP pathway activity may be prime candidates as readouts that
reliably report the status of metabolic reprogramming.In order to advance
the understanding of metabolic reprogramming from the perspective of the
cell surface, we combined genetics and advanced protein engineering using
phage-displayed synthetic human antibody libraries to generate
recombinant antibodies (rAbs) that respond to changes in the activity of
the HBP. Our method for discovery of surface and nutrient-associated
protein sensors (SNAPS) has allowed us to identify multiple human
synthetic rAbs whose activity is potentiated under different metabolic
states. More specifically, these rAbs recognize cell surface features
that discriminate cancer cells with increased HBP flux and effectively
recruit components of the immune system to initiate tumor cell lysis. Our
findings suggest that the nutrient-dependent cell surface epitopes may
have functional roles in defining cancer cell identity and may link
multiple cancer hallmarks.

