Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Overexpression of TSH and ERBB2 (HER2) receptors is associated
with sharply decreased survival in high grade serous ovarian cancer


Objective. To test if hormone or growth factor receptor expression is
associated with survival among patients with high grade serous ovarian
cancer (HGS OvCa) we analyzed tumor mRNA expression microarray and
clinical data from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA).Methods. HGS OvCa
patients were surgically staged prior to treatment with IP (n = 90) or
IV-only (n = 398) chemotherapy. Multivariate Cox proportional-hazards
regression tested associations of expression of 9 hormone or growth
factor receptors with progression free survival (PFS) and overall
survival (OS). Hazard ratios are hazard per each one standard deviation
increase in gene expression. Expression was analyzed as a continuous
variable by restricted mean survival analysis. Mean PFS or OS were
compared between IP and IV groups by permutation testing stratified by
expression. P-values were two-tailed.Results. Expression of ESR1, PGR,
FSHR, LHCGR, MET, and EGFR were not associated with PFS or OS. TSHR
expression was associated with decreased OS (HR 1.22 (1.06-1.41), p =
0.005) and PFS (HR 1.18 (1.05-1.33), p = 0.006) among IV-only treated
patients. ERBB2 expression was associated with decreased OS (HR 1.48
(1.05-2.10), p = 0.027) among patients who received IP chemotherapy.
Using multigene (ESR2, PGR, TSHR, and ERBB2) analysis, among the IP
group, ERBB2 (HR 1.76 (1.11-2.79), p = 0.015) and ESR2 (HR 0.28
(0.08-0.93), p = 0.037) were associated with OS. Only TSHR expression was
associated with decreased OS (HR 1.22 (1.06-1.41), p = 0.005) and
decreased PFS (HR 1.18 (1.05-1.33), p = 0.007) on multigene analysis of
IV-only treated patients. OS and PFS decreased steeply at high expression
of TSHR and ERBB2. Among patients with upper 10th percentile TSHR
expression, no significant difference in mean OS or PFS was observed
between patients treated with IP versus IV-only chemotherapy. Patients
with lower TSHR expression (Objective. To test if hormone or growth
factor receptor expression is associated with survival among patients
with high grade serous ovarian cancer (HGS OvCa) we analyzed tumor mRNA
expression microarray and clinical data from The Cancer Genome Atlas
(TCGA).Methods. HGS OvCa patients were surgically staged prior to
treatment with IP (n = 90) or IV-only (n = 398) chemotherapy.
Multivariate Cox proportional-hazards regression tested associations of
expression of 9 hormone or growth factor receptors with progression free
survival (PFS) and overall survival (OS). Hazard ratios are hazard per
each one standard deviation increase in gene expression. Expression was
analyzed as a continuous variable by restricted mean survival analysis.
Mean PFS or OS were compared between IP and IV groups by permutation
testing stratified by expression. P-values were two-tailed.Results.
Expression of ESR1, PGR, FSHR, LHCGR, MET, and EGFR were not associated
with PFS or OS. TSHR expression was associated with decreased OS (HR 1.22
(1.06-1.41), p = 0.005) and PFS (HR 1.18 (1.05-1.33), p = 0.006) among
IV-only treated patients. ERBB2 expression was associated with decreased
OS (HR 1.48 (1.05-2.10), p = 0.027) among patients who received IP
chemotherapy. Using multigene (ESR2, PGR, TSHR, and ERBB2) analysis,
among the IP group, ERBB2 (HR 1.76 (1.11-2.79), p = 0.015) and ESR2 (HR
0.28 (0.08-0.93), p = 0.037) were associated with OS. Only TSHR
expression was associated with decreased OS (HR 1.22 (1.06-1.41), p =
0.005) and decreased PFS (HR 1.18 (1.05-1.33), p = 0.007) on multigene
analysis of IV-only treated patients. OS and PFS decreased steeply at
high expression of TSHR and ERBB2. Among patients with upper 10th
percentile TSHR expression, no significant difference in mean OS or PFS
was observed between patients treated with IP versus IV-only
chemotherapy. Patients with lower TSHR expression (< 90% percentile)
experienced a mean 13.7-month increased OS and 16.4-month increased PFS
associated with IP chemotherapy (p Objective. To test if hormone or
growth factor receptor expression is associated with survival among
patients with high grade serous ovarian cancer (HGS OvCa) we analyzed
tumor mRNA expression microarray and clinical data from The Cancer Genome
Atlas (TCGA).Methods. HGS OvCa patients were surgically staged prior to
treatment with IP (n = 90) or IV-only (n = 398) chemotherapy.
Multivariate Cox proportional-hazards regression tested associations of
expression of 9 hormone or growth factor receptors with progression free
survival (PFS) and overall survival (OS). Hazard ratios are hazard per
each one standard deviation increase in gene expression. Expression was
analyzed as a continuous variable by restricted mean survival analysis.
Mean PFS or OS were compared between IP and IV groups by permutation
testing stratified by expression. P-values were two-tailed.Results.
Expression of ESR1, PGR, FSHR, LHCGR, MET, and EGFR were not associated
with PFS or OS. TSHR expression was associated with decreased OS (HR 1.22
(1.06-1.41), p = 0.005) and PFS (HR 1.18 (1.05-1.33), p = 0.006) among
IV-only treated patients. ERBB2 expression was associated with decreased
OS (HR 1.48 (1.05-2.10), p = 0.027) among patients who received IP
chemotherapy. Using multigene (ESR2, PGR, TSHR, and ERBB2) analysis,
among the IP group, ERBB2 (HR 1.76 (1.11-2.79), p = 0.015) and ESR2 (HR
0.28 (0.08-0.93), p = 0.037) were associated with OS. Only TSHR
expression was associated with decreased OS (HR 1.22 (1.06-1.41), p =
0.005) and decreased PFS (HR 1.18 (1.05-1.33), p = 0.007) on multigene
analysis of IV-only treated patients. OS and PFS decreased steeply at
high expression of TSHR and ERBB2. Among patients with upper 10th
percentile TSHR expression, no significant difference in mean OS or PFS
was observed between patients treated with IP versus IV-only
chemotherapy. Patients with lower TSHR expression (< 90% percentile)
experienced a mean 13.7-month increased OS and 16.4-month increased PFS
associated with IP chemotherapy (p < 0.0001).Conclusions. Among HGS OvCa
patients treated with IV-only chemotherapy, increased tumor TSHR
expression was associated with decreased OS and PFS. High TSHR expression
characterized patients who did not benefit from IP chemotherapy.

