Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Circulating biomarker miRNA-150 promotes tumor cell proliferation
and progression by targeting SRC kinase signaling inhibitor 1 (SRCIN1) in
non-small cell lung cancer


Circulating microRNAs (c-miRNAs) expression ratio (ER) signatures were
evaluated as prognostic biomarkers and therapeutic targets in early stage
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients. In a population study with
171 stage I and II NSCLC patients, the miR-150 and associated ER
signature miR27A/miR-150 (ER 0.86, HR = 3.92, p = 1.46E-4) were
significantly associated with 5-year survival. The upregulated expression
of miR-150 was detected in primary tissue samples (n = 245) by miRNA
microarray profiling analysis and significantly associated with cancer
recurrence (p = 0.027) and overall survival (HR = 0.88, p = 0.04).
Ectopic expression of miR-150 in NSCLC H1299, A549, and H2023 cells
transfected by miR-150 expression plasmids promoted tumor cell
proliferation, tumor cell-induced colony formation and
migration/invasion, while blocking the action of miR-150 with a synthetic
miR-150 inhibitor or transduction with a miRZip-150 inhibitor expressed
by a lentiviral vector significantly inhibited these biological
activities. The SRC kinase signaling inhibitor 1 (SRCIN1) was predicted
to be a potential target of miR-150 by bioinformatics
tools.miR-150-targeted binding and cleavage in the 3-UTR of SRCIN1 mRNA
were confirmed by a novel stem-loop array-reverse transcription-PCR
assay. Both SRCIN1 gene and protein expression were significantly
downregulated by ectopic expression of miR-150 and upregulated by miR-150
inhibitors in H1299 and H2023 NSCLC cells, as demonstrated by qRT-PCR and
Western-blotting assays, respectively. Modulation of key elements in the
SRCIN1 signaling pathway by ectopic expression or inhibition of miR-150
were further determined by qRT-PCR and predicted by ingenuity pathway
analysis. Our findings suggest that circulating miR-150 and its
associated ER signatures could serve as novel prognostic biomarkers for
early stage NSCLC and function as an oncogenic miRNA that promotes lung
cancer cell proliferation, invasion, and metastasis by direct targeting
SRCIN1signaling pathway thus identifying SRCIN1 as a potential
therapeutic target.

