Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Toll-like receptors 1, 2, 4 and 6 expression levels in diffusely
infiltrative astrocytomas


Toll-like receptors (TLRs) are the first receptors of the immune system
that identify disturbances in homeostasis, capable of recognizing
molecules associated to cell and tissue damage. TLRs signaling pathway
activates inflammatory transcription factors, mainly Nuclear Factor-kappa
B (NF-kB) and Interferon Regulatory Factors (IRF3/7). Due to their
importance in inflammatory process, TLRs are research hot targets for
therapy in several diseases, including cancer. This study aims to analyze
TLRs (1, 2, 4 and 6) expressions in human diffusely infiltrative
astrocytomas, WHO grades II to IV of malignancy (AGII-AGIV), and
correlate their expressions among them and with the clinical outcome of
AGIV (glioblastoma, GBM) patients. TLRs mRNA levels were evaluated by
qRT-PCR in 143 astrocytoma samples and 22 non-neoplastic (NN) brain
specimens from epilepsy surgery. Upregulated mRNA levels of all studied
TLRs were observed in astrocytomas compared to NN cases (pToll-like
receptors (TLRs) are the first receptors of the immune system that
identify disturbances in homeostasis, capable of recognizing molecules
associated to cell and tissue damage. TLRs signaling pathway activates
inflammatory transcription factors, mainly Nuclear Factor-kappa B (NF-kB)
and Interferon Regulatory Factors (IRF3/7). Due to their importance in
inflammatory process, TLRs are research hot targets for therapy in
several diseases, including cancer. This study aims to analyze TLRs (1,
2, 4 and 6) expressions in human diffusely infiltrative astrocytomas, WHO
grades II to IV of malignancy (AGII-AGIV), and correlate their
expressions among them and with the clinical outcome of AGIV
(glioblastoma, GBM) patients. TLRs mRNA levels were evaluated by qRT-PCR
in 143 astrocytoma samples and 22 non-neoplastic (NN) brain specimens
from epilepsy surgery. Upregulated mRNA levels of all studied TLRs were
observed in astrocytomas compared to NN cases (p<0.05), except for TLR2
in AGII. TLR1 and TLR2 median expression values increased according to
astrocytoma malignancy. TLRs mRNA expressions presented positive
correlation with significance (pToll-like receptors (TLRs) are the first
receptors of the immune system that identify disturbances in homeostasis,
capable of recognizing molecules associated to cell and tissue damage.
TLRs signaling pathway activates inflammatory transcription factors,
mainly Nuclear Factor-kappa B (NF-kB) and Interferon Regulatory Factors
(IRF3/7). Due to their importance in inflammatory process, TLRs are
research hot targets for therapy in several diseases, including cancer.
This study aims to analyze TLRs (1, 2, 4 and 6) expressions in human
diffusely infiltrative astrocytomas, WHO grades II to IV of malignancy
(AGII-AGIV), and correlate their expressions among them and with the
clinical outcome of AGIV (glioblastoma, GBM) patients. TLRs mRNA levels
were evaluated by qRT-PCR in 143 astrocytoma samples and 22
non-neoplastic (NN) brain specimens from epilepsy surgery. Upregulated
mRNA levels of all studied TLRs were observed in astrocytomas compared to
NN cases (p<0.05), except for TLR2 in AGII. TLR1 and TLR2 median
expression values increased according to astrocytoma malignancy. TLRs
mRNA expressions presented positive correlation with significance
(p<0.05) in all grades of astrocytoma, except for TLR2 and TLR4 in AGIII.
Strong associations (rToll-like receptors (TLRs) are the first receptors
of the immune system that identify disturbances in homeostasis, capable
of recognizing molecules associated to cell and tissue damage. TLRs
signaling pathway activates inflammatory transcription factors, mainly
Nuclear Factor-kappa B (NF-kB) and Interferon Regulatory Factors
(IRF3/7). Due to their importance in inflammatory process, TLRs are
research hot targets for therapy in several diseases, including cancer.
This study aims to analyze TLRs (1, 2, 4 and 6) expressions in human
diffusely infiltrative astrocytomas, WHO grades II to IV of malignancy
(AGII-AGIV), and correlate their expressions among them and with the
clinical outcome of AGIV (glioblastoma, GBM) patients. TLRs mRNA levels
were evaluated by qRT-PCR in 143 astrocytoma samples and 22
non-neoplastic (NN) brain specimens from epilepsy surgery. Upregulated
mRNA levels of all studied TLRs were observed in astrocytomas compared to
NN cases (p<0.05), except for TLR2 in AGII. TLR1 and TLR2 median
expression values increased according to astrocytoma malignancy. TLRs
mRNA expressions presented positive correlation with significance
(p<0.05) in all grades of astrocytoma, except for TLR2 and TLR4 in AGIII.
Strong associations (r<0.7) were detected with TLR1-TLR2 mRNA expressions
among AGII, AGIII and AGIV, TLR1-TLR4 in AGIII, and TLR6-TLR1 in AGII. In
GBM patients, TLR2 upregulation was associated to better outcome with
longer overall survival (pToll-like receptors (TLRs) are the first
receptors of the immune system that identify disturbances in homeostasis,
capable of recognizing molecules associated to cell and tissue damage.
TLRs signaling pathway activates inflammatory transcription factors,
mainly Nuclear Factor-kappa B (NF-kB) and Interferon Regulatory Factors
(IRF3/7). Due to their importance in inflammatory process, TLRs are
research hot targets for therapy in several diseases, including cancer.
This study aims to analyze TLRs (1, 2, 4 and 6) expressions in human
diffusely infiltrative astrocytomas, WHO grades II to IV of malignancy
(AGII-AGIV), and correlate their expressions among them and with the
clinical outcome of AGIV (glioblastoma, GBM) patients. TLRs mRNA levels
were evaluated by qRT-PCR in 143 astrocytoma samples and 22
non-neoplastic (NN) brain specimens from epilepsy surgery. Upregulated
mRNA levels of all studied TLRs were observed in astrocytomas compared to
NN cases (p<0.05), except for TLR2 in AGII. TLR1 and TLR2 median
expression values increased according to astrocytoma malignancy. TLRs
mRNA expressions presented positive correlation with significance
(p<0.05) in all grades of astrocytoma, except for TLR2 and TLR4 in AGIII.
Strong associations (r<0.7) were detected with TLR1-TLR2 mRNA expressions
among AGII, AGIII and AGIV, TLR1-TLR4 in AGIII, and TLR6-TLR1 in AGII. In
GBM patients, TLR2 upregulation was associated to better outcome with
longer overall survival (p<0.007). The same was verified for concomitant
upregulation of TLR1, 2 and 4 (pToll-like receptors (TLRs) are the first
receptors of the immune system that identify disturbances in homeostasis,
capable of recognizing molecules associated to cell and tissue damage.
TLRs signaling pathway activates inflammatory transcription factors,
mainly Nuclear Factor-kappa B (NF-kB) and Interferon Regulatory Factors
(IRF3/7). Due to their importance in inflammatory process, TLRs are
research hot targets for therapy in several diseases, including cancer.
This study aims to analyze TLRs (1, 2, 4 and 6) expressions in human
diffusely infiltrative astrocytomas, WHO grades II to IV of malignancy
(AGII-AGIV), and correlate their expressions among them and with the
clinical outcome of AGIV (glioblastoma, GBM) patients. TLRs mRNA levels
were evaluated by qRT-PCR in 143 astrocytoma samples and 22
non-neoplastic (NN) brain specimens from epilepsy surgery. Upregulated
mRNA levels of all studied TLRs were observed in astrocytomas compared to
NN cases (p<0.05), except for TLR2 in AGII. TLR1 and TLR2 median
expression values increased according to astrocytoma malignancy. TLRs
mRNA expressions presented positive correlation with significance
(p<0.05) in all grades of astrocytoma, except for TLR2 and TLR4 in AGIII.
Strong associations (r<0.7) were detected with TLR1-TLR2 mRNA expressions
among AGII, AGIII and AGIV, TLR1-TLR4 in AGIII, and TLR6-TLR1 in AGII. In
GBM patients, TLR2 upregulation was associated to better outcome with
longer overall survival (p<0.007). The same was verified for concomitant
upregulation of TLR1, 2 and 4 (p<0.05). Aiming to analyze the
distribution of these receptors in different cells present in the tumor,
we performed immunofluorescence staining of GBM cell lines (A172 and
U87MG). All TLRs were detected in both cell lines, indicating that their
expression were not limited to immune cells. The current literature has
described controversial roles for the TLRs in cancer, either activating
an anti-inflammatory condition leading to tumor progression or a
pro-inflammatory state leading to tumor abrogation. TLRs distribution
among different cells in the tumor environment might be relevant for the
inflammatory process. Our findings of TLRs on tumor cells may suggest a
tendency towards an anti-inflammatory state. The comprehension of TLRs
role in each cell type, that compose the tumor, may help to determine the
signaling pathways involved in diffusely infiltrative astrocytoma
progression, and potential new therapeutic strategies.

