Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Beyond AKT: Critical pathways for PI3K-dependent transformation


Genetic alterations activating the PI3K/AKT pathway have been identified
in most human cancers, including those originating in the thyroid gland,
particularly follicular thyroid cancer (FTC) and anaplastic thyroid
cancer (ATC).However, although PI3K and AKT represent relevant targets
for therapeutic purposes, the number of essential roles played by this
pathway in normal cells poses the problem of reaching therapeutic
efficacy without harming healthy tissues. Ideally, the toxicity
associated with wide-range inhibitors could be reduced by targeting only
molecules directly involved in the transformation process.The PDK1 kinase
is a master regulator of PI3K downstream effectors belonging to the AGC
kinases family, such as AKT and S6K1. Additional AGC kinases are
controlled by PDK1 independently of PI3K activity. If PDK1-controlled AGC
kinases contribute to PI3K-dependent transformation, they would clearly
represent novel important therapeutic targets.PDK1 possesses a
substrate-docking site, the PIF pocket, required for the phosphorylation
of most AGC kinases (including S6K, PKC, SGK, and RSK) but not of AKT.
The L155E mutation in PDK1disrupts the PIF pocket, without affecting AKT
activation.This differential mechanism of substrate selection allows us
to clearly define the relative contribution of AKT and other PDK1 targets
to the neoplastic transformation process.Using in vivo as well as ex vivo
and in vitro genetic and pharmacological approaches, we have shown that
Akt activation is not sufficient to transform thyroid epithelial
cells.Mice in which the PI3K pathway is constitutively activated in the
thyroid epithelium through loss of Pten show thyroid hyperplasia at birth
that progresses to invasive and metastatic follicular carcinoma. While
Pdk1 deletion, as expected, completely rescue the phenotype observed in
Pten/- thyroids, we found that the simple impairment of the PIF-pocket is
able to completely abrogate neoplastic transformation, despite AKT and
mTOR being constitutively activated.We show that members of two families
of AGC kinases, SGK (1and 3) and RSK (1-3) are essential components of
this PDK1-dependent pathway required for PI3K-dependent
transformation.Genetic and pharmacological SGK and RSK inhibition
strongly reduces cell proliferation in Pten/ as well as Pik3ca mutant
cell lines, both in 2d and in 3D systems, with SGK1 and RSK3 being the
most critical isoforms. Furthermore, genetic inhibition of SGK and RSK
drastically impairs tumor growth in syngeneic allograft and metastasis
models.Taken together, our data identify two new signaling cascades that
are essential for neoplastic transformation of thyroid epithelial cells,
and thus novel strong candidates for drug development.

