Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Polysialyltransferase ST8SiaII as a target for neuroblastoma
dissemination


Polysialic acid (polySia) is expressed on the surface of NCAM (neuronal
cell adhesion molecule) on neuroendocrine tumours, notably neuroblastoma
and small cell lung cancer, where it modulates cell-cell and cell-matrix
adhesion, migration, invasion and metastasis. PolySia expression is
strongly associated with poor prognosis and aggressive disease in
neuroblastoma patients in the clinic[1]. SiRNA knockdown of
polysialyltransferase (polyST) ST8SiaII, the enzyme primarily responsible
for polySia synthesis in tumours, abrogates tumour cell migration and
invasion. Besides brain regions with persistent neuronal plasticity,
polySia is essentially absent from the body post-embryogenesis. PolyST is
thus a selective and largely unexplored therapeutic target for
neuroblastoma dissemination [1].We have established a highly sensitive
HPLC-based polyST inhibition assay, amenable to high-throughput
screening. We report our efforts to further optimise this cell-free
assay, and include details of our novel methodology to quantify
cell-surface polySia expression. Having demonstrated in vitro that
inhibition of polyST by a small molecule leads to a reduction in tumour
cell migration [2], we designed and synthesised ST8SiaII inhibitors.
Using isogenic cell lines (C6-STX: polySia+/polyST+ and C6-WT:
polySia-/polyST-) and naturally polySia expressing human neuroblastoma
cells (SH-SY5Y, IMR-32) these compounds were evaluated for their ability
to reduce polySia expression, to modulate tumour cell migration and
invasion in vitro. We have identified novel agents which significantly
reduce polySia expression, tumour cell migration and invasion. These
effects were only found in cell lines expressing ST8SiaII and polySia.
Specificity of agents for polySTs over other members of the
sialyltransferase (ST) family (i.e. -2,3-ST and -2,6-ST) was subsequently
investigated using lectin differential labelling probes. Agents did not
inhibit sialyltransferase activity.We have investigated effects of agents
on key intracellular signalling pathways. We demonstrated the effects of
polyST inhibition on the dynamics of FAK and on ERK1/2, AKT, CREB and
VEGFR-3 signalling. Furthemore, we have explored the behaviour of
polySia-expressing cells under hypoxic conditions. Our data suggest that
polySia is associated with a resistant phenotype, with C6-STX
polySia-expressing cells demonstrating a survival advantage and
additionally maintaining their migratory capacity under hypoxia (compared
to WT cells, where migration is dramatically reduced).In summary, we have
demonstrated that polyST inhibition dramatically decreases cell-surface
polysialylation, migration and invasion in vitro, under both normoxic and
hypoxic conditions. This work paves the way for development of a novel
therapeutic for the treatment of neuroblastoma.[1] Falconer, R.A. et al.,
Curr. Cancer Drug Targets, 2012, 12, 925-939; [2] Al-Saraireh YMJ et al.,
PLoS ONE, 2013, 8:e73366.

