Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical investigation of the HSP90 inhibitor, ganetespib, in
combination with FDA-approved cytotoxic agents for their potential
anti-tumor effects on human neuroendocrine tumors


The gastroenteropancreatic neuroendocrine tumor (GEP-NET) system is
comprised of a heterogeneous group of tumors with increasing incidence.
Current standard of care cytotoxic agents have limited efficacy, which
necessitates the need for innovative therapeutic approaches. Heat shock
protein 90 (HSP90) is overexpressed in a wide range of tumor types
including human pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors (PanNETs). Ganetespib is
a second-generation HSP90 inhibitor that is well tolerated in cancer
patients (dosed into >1500 patients) and is currently being evaluated in
several investigator sponsored clinical trials including acute myeloid
leukemia (AML), ovarian cancer, breast cancer, and other tumor
types.Here, we show that ganetespib inhibits the proliferation of NET
cells and induces apoptosis in vitro with potency comparable to another
second-generation HSP90 inhibitor (NVP-AUY922), but with potency two- to
seven-fold more than first generation inhibitors (17-AAG, IPI-504) in
BON-1, CM and H727 cell lines, and thirty-fold more in QGP-1 cell line.
In mice bearing PanNET tumor xenografts, single agent ganetespib reduced
the growth of tumors without signs of toxicity. Tumors from ganetespib
treated animals demonstrated reduced phospho-AKT and phospho-ERK
expression, and elevated HSP70 expression, supportive of exposures
necessary for functional activity. In an effort to identify clinically
meaningful agents that could further potentiate the antitumor activity of
ganetespib, we performed in vitro combination screens evaluating
proliferation in four NET cell lines with ganetespib and forty FDA
approved anticancer agents. Ganetespib showed synergistic effects when
combined with inhibitors of mTOR, topoisomerase I or II, or DNA
synthesis. Results from our ongoing in vivo combination studies with
ganetespib and these three classes of anticancer agents will be presented.

