Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Efficacy of EGFR/HER2 duel-kinase inhibitors in PDX models
harboring known and novel HER2-mutations


Background: Neratinib and afatinib are small molecule therapies that
irreversibly bind to the kinase domain of the epidermal growth factor
receptors 1 (HER1/EGFR) and 2 (HER2/ERBB2). Afatinib is currently
approved for non-small-cell lung cancers harboring acquired EGFR
mutations; however both agents have recently reported clinical activity
in HER2-mutated breast cancer. HER2 mutations have also been reported in
melanoma and colorectal cancer and at least two mutations (S310F/V777L)
have been shown to affect EGFR/HER2 signaling. Whether other reported or
novel mutations are important in EGFR/HER2 signaling in colorectal and
other cancer types is unclear. To better understand effects of HER2
mutations we characterized a panel of patient-derived xenograft tumor
models representing colorectal, ovary, pancreas and endometrial cancers
using RNA- and DNA-based sequencing. EGFR and HER2 expression was also
quantitated using immunohistochemistry (IHC). Models identified positive
for HER2 mutation by sequencing were evaluated in vivo, testing antitumor
activity of neratinib, afatinib and other targeted therapies.Methods:
START-PDX models were established from tissue or fluid samples as
previously described. DNA or RNA were extracted and subjected to NGS and
HER2 and other cancer-related mutations reported; growth factor receptor
densities were interrogated using standard IHC. Drug studies were
performed evaluating sensitivity of models to single agent neratinib,
afatinib, lapatinib, trastuzumab and T-DM1 administered on standard
treatment regimens. Study endpoints included tumor volume and time from
treatment initiation with T/C values and tumor regression reported at
study completion.Results: DNA and RNA sequence analysis of 300 models
identified eleven HER2 mutations including six previously reported in
COSMIC (S310F, A386D, H473R, D582N, V777L, R678Q) and five novel variants
(R330Q, G366R, Q398K, I628T, A1216D) in thirteen total models. High EGFR
staining was reported in two colorectal models: ST427 (HER2V777L) and
ST428 (HER2A1216D) while high EGFR and HER2 staining was reported in a
lung model designated ST1243 (HER2S310F). In vivo treatment with
neratinib or afatinib resulted in tumor growth inhibition in some tested
models including ST022 (HER2G366R/R678Q) ovary and ST204 (HER2A386D)
pancreas and tumor regressions were reported with either agent in the
ST427 (HER2V777L) colorectal line. Neratinib or afatinib were also found
active in one each of four tested endometrial models. Lapatinib,
trastuzumab and T-DM1 were inactive in all tested HER2-mutant
models.Conclusion: We have sequenced a panel of PDX models and identified
six previously reported and five novel HER-2 mutations in thirteen models
which we screened in vivo for sensitivity to EGFR/HER2 duel kinase
inhibitors and HER2-targeting therapies with the colorectal model ST427
(HER2V777L) identified as most sensitive to neratinib and afatinib.

