Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of IL-8/CXCR2 network in the tumor cell proliferation of
esophageal squamous cell carcinoma


Background: IL-8, a pro-inflammatory cytokine, and its receptor, CXCR2,
are expressed invarious cancer cells. The IL-8/CXCR2 network is believed
to be involved in angiogenesis, tumor cell proliferation and invasion.
However, its role inesophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) remains
unclear. In this study, we investigated the role of the IL-8/CXCR2
network in the tumor microenvironment of ESCC.Methods: IL-8 and CXCR2
expression was investigated immunohistochemically in 63 primary ESCCs
with R0 resection but without any preoperative treatment. We evaluated
the intensity of the staining in four grades; grades 3 (strong) and 2
(medium) were deemed positive, and 1 (weak) and 0 (negative) as negative.
The concentration of IL-8 andCXCR2 were investigated using the human ESCC
cell lines TE1, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 14 and 15. IL-8/CXCR2 signaling
was stimulated by IL-8 addition, and suppressed by SB225002 (Cayman
Chemical) treatment, a selective antagonist of CXCR2, and IL-8 specific
siRNA. Stable IL-8 over-expressing TE4 cells were established, and cell
proliferation assays were performed. To evaluate tumor growth in vivo, we
subcutaneously inoculated 1.0106 TE4 cells or transfectant into nude
mice, and half of thetransfectant-inoculated mice received 1mg/kg of
SB225002 by intraperitoneal injection thrice weekly. The size and
incidence of subcutaneous tumors were recorded.Result: Eight (12.7%)
patients were positive for IL-8/CXCR2 network immunostaining. IL-8/CXCR2
network expression was significantlyrelated to poor survival in ESCC
patients (PBackground: IL-8, a pro-inflammatory cytokine, and its
receptor, CXCR2, are expressed invarious cancer cells. The IL-8/CXCR2
network is believed to be involved in angiogenesis, tumor cell
proliferation and invasion. However, its role inesophageal squamous cell
carcinoma (ESCC) remains unclear. In this study, we investigated the role
of the IL-8/CXCR2 network in the tumor microenvironment of ESCC.Methods:
IL-8 and CXCR2 expression was investigated immunohistochemically in 63
primary ESCCs with R0 resection but without any preoperative treatment.
We evaluated the intensity of the staining in four grades; grades 3
(strong) and 2 (medium) were deemed positive, and 1 (weak) and 0
(negative) as negative. The concentration of IL-8 andCXCR2 were
investigated using the human ESCC cell lines TE1, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11,
14 and 15. IL-8/CXCR2 signaling was stimulated by IL-8 addition, and
suppressed by SB225002 (Cayman Chemical) treatment, a selective
antagonist of CXCR2, and IL-8 specific siRNA. Stable IL-8 over-expressing
TE4 cells were established, and cell proliferation assays were performed.
To evaluate tumor growth in vivo, we subcutaneously inoculated 1.0106 TE4
cells or transfectant into nude mice, and half of
thetransfectant-inoculated mice received 1mg/kg of SB225002 by
intraperitoneal injection thrice weekly. The size and incidence of
subcutaneous tumors were recorded.Result: Eight (12.7%) patients were
positive for IL-8/CXCR2 network immunostaining. IL-8/CXCR2 network
expression was significantlyrelated to poor survival in ESCC patients
(P<0.05). IL-8 concentration was high in TE4, 5, 10 and 14 supernatant,
and low in that of TE1, 6, 8, 9, 11 and 15. CXCR2 expression was high in
TE1, 4, 5, 6, 8, and 9 cells, and low in TE10, 11, 14, and 15. We chose
TE1 and TE4 cells for further investigation. Stimulation or inhibition of
the IL-8/CXCR2 network resulted in significant enhancement or suppression
of cell proliferation in both cell lines (PBackground: IL-8, a
pro-inflammatory cytokine, and its receptor, CXCR2, are expressed
invarious cancer cells. The IL-8/CXCR2 network is believed to be involved
in angiogenesis, tumor cell proliferation and invasion. However, its role
inesophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) remains unclear. In this
study, we investigated the role of the IL-8/CXCR2 network in the tumor
microenvironment of ESCC.Methods: IL-8 and CXCR2 expression was
investigated immunohistochemically in 63 primary ESCCs with R0 resection
but without any preoperative treatment. We evaluated the intensity of the
staining in four grades; grades 3 (strong) and 2 (medium) were deemed
positive, and 1 (weak) and 0 (negative) as negative. The concentration of
IL-8 andCXCR2 were investigated using the human ESCC cell lines TE1, 4,
5, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 14 and 15. IL-8/CXCR2 signaling was stimulated by
IL-8 addition, and suppressed by SB225002 (Cayman Chemical) treatment, a
selective antagonist of CXCR2, and IL-8 specific siRNA. Stable IL-8
over-expressing TE4 cells were established, and cell proliferation assays
were performed. To evaluate tumor growth in vivo, we subcutaneously
inoculated 1.0106 TE4 cells or transfectant into nude mice, and half of
thetransfectant-inoculated mice received 1mg/kg of SB225002 by
intraperitoneal injection thrice weekly. The size and incidence of
subcutaneous tumors were recorded.Result: Eight (12.7%) patients were
positive for IL-8/CXCR2 network immunostaining. IL-8/CXCR2 network
expression was significantlyrelated to poor survival in ESCC patients
(P<0.05). IL-8 concentration was high in TE4, 5, 10 and 14 supernatant,
and low in that of TE1, 6, 8, 9, 11 and 15. CXCR2 expression was high in
TE1, 4, 5, 6, 8, and 9 cells, and low in TE10, 11, 14, and 15. We chose
TE1 and TE4 cells for further investigation. Stimulation or inhibition of
the IL-8/CXCR2 network resulted in significant enhancement or suppression
of cell proliferation in both cell lines (P<0.05) in a dose-dependent
manner. IL-8 over-expressing TE4 cells showed significantly higher
proliferative activity than the parental line (PBackground: IL-8, a
pro-inflammatory cytokine, and its receptor, CXCR2, are expressed
invarious cancer cells. The IL-8/CXCR2 network is believed to be involved
in angiogenesis, tumor cell proliferation and invasion. However, its role
inesophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) remains unclear. In this
study, we investigated the role of the IL-8/CXCR2 network in the tumor
microenvironment of ESCC.Methods: IL-8 and CXCR2 expression was
investigated immunohistochemically in 63 primary ESCCs with R0 resection
but without any preoperative treatment. We evaluated the intensity of the
staining in four grades; grades 3 (strong) and 2 (medium) were deemed
positive, and 1 (weak) and 0 (negative) as negative. The concentration of
IL-8 andCXCR2 were investigated using the human ESCC cell lines TE1, 4,
5, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 14 and 15. IL-8/CXCR2 signaling was stimulated by
IL-8 addition, and suppressed by SB225002 (Cayman Chemical) treatment, a
selective antagonist of CXCR2, and IL-8 specific siRNA. Stable IL-8
over-expressing TE4 cells were established, and cell proliferation assays
were performed. To evaluate tumor growth in vivo, we subcutaneously
inoculated 1.0106 TE4 cells or transfectant into nude mice, and half of
thetransfectant-inoculated mice received 1mg/kg of SB225002 by
intraperitoneal injection thrice weekly. The size and incidence of
subcutaneous tumors were recorded.Result: Eight (12.7%) patients were
positive for IL-8/CXCR2 network immunostaining. IL-8/CXCR2 network
expression was significantlyrelated to poor survival in ESCC patients
(P<0.05). IL-8 concentration was high in TE4, 5, 10 and 14 supernatant,
and low in that of TE1, 6, 8, 9, 11 and 15. CXCR2 expression was high in
TE1, 4, 5, 6, 8, and 9 cells, and low in TE10, 11, 14, and 15. We chose
TE1 and TE4 cells for further investigation. Stimulation or inhibition of
the IL-8/CXCR2 network resulted in significant enhancement or suppression
of cell proliferation in both cell lines (P<0.05) in a dose-dependent
manner. IL-8 over-expressing TE4 cells showed significantly higher
proliferative activity than the parental line (P<0.05), which was
markedly suppressed by inhibition of the IL-8/CXCR2network using SB225002
(PBackground: IL-8, a pro-inflammatory cytokine, and its receptor, CXCR2,
are expressed invarious cancer cells. The IL-8/CXCR2 network is believed
to be involved in angiogenesis, tumor cell proliferation and invasion.
However, its role inesophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) remains
unclear. In this study, we investigated the role of the IL-8/CXCR2
network in the tumor microenvironment of ESCC.Methods: IL-8 and CXCR2
expression was investigated immunohistochemically in 63 primary ESCCs
with R0 resection but without any preoperative treatment. We evaluated
the intensity of the staining in four grades; grades 3 (strong) and 2
(medium) were deemed positive, and 1 (weak) and 0 (negative) as negative.
The concentration of IL-8 andCXCR2 were investigated using the human ESCC
cell lines TE1, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 14 and 15. IL-8/CXCR2 signaling
was stimulated by IL-8 addition, and suppressed by SB225002 (Cayman
Chemical) treatment, a selective antagonist of CXCR2, and IL-8 specific
siRNA. Stable IL-8 over-expressing TE4 cells were established, and cell
proliferation assays were performed. To evaluate tumor growth in vivo, we
subcutaneously inoculated 1.0106 TE4 cells or transfectant into nude
mice, and half of thetransfectant-inoculated mice received 1mg/kg of
SB225002 by intraperitoneal injection thrice weekly. The size and
incidence of subcutaneous tumors were recorded.Result: Eight (12.7%)
patients were positive for IL-8/CXCR2 network immunostaining. IL-8/CXCR2
network expression was significantlyrelated to poor survival in ESCC
patients (P<0.05). IL-8 concentration was high in TE4, 5, 10 and 14
supernatant, and low in that of TE1, 6, 8, 9, 11 and 15. CXCR2 expression
was high in TE1, 4, 5, 6, 8, and 9 cells, and low in TE10, 11, 14, and
15. We chose TE1 and TE4 cells for further investigation. Stimulation or
inhibition of the IL-8/CXCR2 network resulted in significant enhancement
or suppression of cell proliferation in both cell lines (P<0.05) in a
dose-dependent manner. IL-8 over-expressing TE4 cells showed
significantly higher proliferative activity than the parental line
(P<0.05), which was markedly suppressed by inhibition of the
IL-8/CXCR2network using SB225002 (P<0.05). In vivo, tumor sizes were
smaller in the SB225002-treated group than in the untreated
group.Conclusion: Our results demonstrated that stimulation of the
IL-8/CXCR2 network clearly enhanced ESCC cell proliferation, while its
inhibition obviously suppressed ESCC cell proliferation in vitro. These
results indicate that control of IL-8/CXCR2 network signaling may be a
new therapeutic strategy for ESCC.

