Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Advanced neoplasia detection in colorectal cancer screening using
multiple stool DNA markers and haemoglobin


Purpose of the study: Molecular tests have the potential to improve
current non-invasive faecal immunochemical test (FIT) screening for
colorectal cancer (CRC) and advanced precancerous lesions. We examined
the performance of a panel of faecal DNA (sDNA) markers and FIT in
archival samples from an invitational CRC screening population.Methods:
Whole stool samples were prospectively collected from individuals
participating an invitational primary colonoscopy-screening program
(COCOS trial). Only participants that provided stool, performed FIT
(OC-Sensor) and underwent colonoscopy were selected. The sDNA panel
included quantitative molecular assays for KRAS mutations and for
aberrant NDRG4 and BMP3 methylation. The performance of the sDNA plus FIT
panel was compared to the FIT results alone, by Receiver Operator
Characteristic (ROC) analyses.Results: A total of 1047 individuals (51%
male) with a median age of 60 years (range 50-75) were included, of which
7 (0.7%) had colorectal cancer and 104 (9.9%) had advanced precancerous
lesions (advanced adenomas or sessile serrated polyps 1 cm).The
combination of sDNA and FIT was more sensitive than FIT alone for
detecting advanced precancerous lesions (49% (50/102) and 25% (26/102),
respectively). Specificities among individuals with non-advanced or
negative findings (controls) were 89% and 96% for sDNA and FIT testing,
respectively.ROC analysis of CRC and advanced precancerous lesions
compared to controls revealed an Area Under the Curve (AUC) of 0.75 for
the sDNA plus FIT test, compared to 0.68 for FIT alone. At an equal
specificity of 95%, advanced precancerous lesions were detected with a
higher sensitivity by the sDNA plus FIT test compared to FIT alone (36%
vs 28%, p = 0.08).Conclusions: In an invitational colorectal cancer
screening cohort, combining stool DNA markers with FIT detected more
advanced neoplasia than FIT alone, primarily due to detecting more
advanced adenomas.

