Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Functional characterization of P58IPK-PERK pathway in prostate
cancer cells


Androgen signaling is important for the normal development and function
of the prostate as well as for prostate cancer (PCa). We recently found
that androgens activated the IRE1-XBP1 arm of the canonical unfolded
protein response (UPR) pathways and simultaneously inhibited PERK-eIF2
signaling. Activation of the IRE1-XBP1 arm was mediated by direct binding
of the androgen receptor (AR) in the vicinity of IRE1, as well as XBP1s
target genes, and increase in their expression. Consistently, AR and IRE1
pathway gene expression are correlated in human PCa samples and XBP1s
protein expression is significantly increased in cancer compared to
normal prostate. However, the mechanisms behind androgen mediated
inhibition of PERK-eIF2 signaling are not clear at present. One possible
mediator in this regard is P58IPK, an XBP1s target gene that can interact
with and inhibit PERK and eIF2 phosphorylation. Here, we show that P58IPK
expression is increased by androgens in a time-dependent manner and that
it plays a pro-survival role in PCa cells. P58IPK knockdown activated
PERK expression as well as subsequent eIF2 phosphorylation when induced
with the UPR activator thapsigargin. These findings suggest that P58IPK
mediates, at least in part, the differential androgen effects between the
IRE1 and PERK signaling in PCa and may be a potential therapeutic target.

