Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of multiple EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors against
clinically relevant EGFR mutants using in vitro modeling


Purpose:We are able to use multiple EGFR-TKIs to treat patients with lung
cancer harboring EGFR mutations. However, there is no clear guideline
regarding which EGFR-TKIs should be used for which mutations. The purpose
of this study is to establish an in vitro model to determine the
therapeutic window of EGFR-TKIs against various types of EGFR mutations,
including several EGFR exon 20 insertion mutations.Experimental design:We
evaluated drug sensitivity and downstream signaling of human lung cancer
cell lines harboring EGFR mutations (PC9, H3255, PC9-ER, BID007 and
H1975) and Ba/F3 cells exogenously expressing mutated or wild type EGFR
for the 1st (erlotinib), 2nd (afatinib), and 3rd (osimertinib and
rociletinib) generation EGFR-TKIs using MTS assay, apoptosis assay and
western blotting, simultaneously.An in vitro model of mutation
specificity was created by calculating the ratio of IC50 values between
mutated and wild type EGFRs.Results:The model of mutation specificity
identified wide therapeutic windows of afatinib for exon 19 deletions and
L858R and those of osimertinib and rociletinib for T790M positive
mutations in human cell lines and Ba/F3 cells. In human cell lines and
Ba/F3 cells harboring exon 19 deletions or L858R, afatinib showed the
lowest IC50 and most potently inhibited the phosphorylation of EGFR, AKT,
and ERK. Afatinib and 3rd generation EGFR-TKIs (osimertinib and
rociletinib), effectively inhibited the cell growth and the
phosphorylation of downstream signaling of EGFR in T790M positive cells.
For EGFR exon 20 insertion mutations, osimertinib was potent and
presented the most wide therapeutic window.Conclusion:This model will
provide a preclinical rationale for proper selection of EGFR-TKIs against
clinically-relevant EGFR mutations including EGFR exon 20 insertions.

