Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TOLD MRI validation of reversal of tumor hypoxia in glioblastoma
with a novel oxygen therapeutic


Background: Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is known to be a hypoxic tumor
and hypoxia adversely affects response to radiation therapy.
Dodecafluoropentane emulsion (DDFPe) on a weight basis, delivers over
100x as much oxygen as other higher molecular weight fluorocarbons and is
under study as an oxygen therapeutic in GBM patients treated with
chemo-irradiation. Tissue oxygen level dependent (TOLD) MRI is an oxygen
sensitive imaging technique that is being used to study tumor
re-oxygenation in these patients.Methods: With informed consent and IRB
approval adult patients with GBM with residual tumor post-surgery were
enrolled into the dose escalation phase of the study. Patients received
DDFPe (2%w/vol DDFPe) at doses of 0.05 cc/kg, 0.1 cc/kg or 0.17 cc/kg
I.V. 30-60 minutes prior to each fraction of radiation (2-Gy each, 30
fractions over 6 weeks). Temozolomide chemotherapy was given
concurrently. Radiation was performed while the patients were breathing
carbogen via a non-rebreathing circuit; the post-radiation MRI was
performed while the patients were breathing oxygen. All patients
underwent standard MR imaging at 1.5 Tesla. TOLD MRI was performed on
patients at the higher two dose levels pre and post DDFPe on two separate
occasions, days #1 and days #5 or 10 after initiation of radiation.
Steady state free precession (SSFP) Look-Locker was used to obtain T1
maps. T1 maps were calculated from 3 axial slices obtained through tumor
from either 3 or 4 repetitions.Results: TOLD MRI showed substantial
decreases in T1 of tumor tissue after dosing with DDFPe and breathing
oxygen (mean T1 decreased from 1501454 ms to 137135 ms on day one and
1459326 ms to 1183271 ms on day 5 for the patient receiving 0.1 cc/kg
DDFPe; from 151193 ms to 125085 ms on day 1 and from 145475 ms to 128177
ms on day 10 for the patient receiving 0.17cc/kg DDFPe), while
inconsistent changes were found in contralateral normal brain (ranging
from 863 to 1144 ms for both patients at all time points). The two
different doses of DDFPe showed similar effect. Patients had second
surgeries following completion of RT showing radiation necrosis
consistent with enhanced effect of RT due to tumor
re-oxygenation.Discussion and conclusion: The change in T1 (TOLD) with
oxygen breathing after DDFPe administration indicated improved tumor
oxygenation. The utility of TOLD MRI as a potential non-invasive
prognostic imaging biomarker holds promise for precision medicine in
terms of assessing tissue reoxygenation of hypoxic tumors. The ability to
alter tumor oxygenation in GBM patients pre-treated with DDFPe could have
important therapeutic implications. Dose expansion is currently underway
with the dose of 0.1-cc/kg DDFPe.Figure: Representative T1 maps of two
patients pre (air breathing) and post (oxygen breathing) DDFPe injection
and radiation treatments. Arrows indicate tumors.

