Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Investigation of ITAF's role in the pathophysiology of breast
cancer


A subset of cellular mRNAs can initiate cap-independent translation via
internal ribosome entry sites (IRES) structures, thus maintaining
translation when cap-dependent translation is compromised. Many of these
IRES harboring mRNAs encode canonical oncoproteins such as c-MYC, VEGF
and EGFR. Cells use IRES-mediated translation under conditions that are
common to the tumor microenvironment, including nutrient deprivation,
hypoxia, inflammation, and DNA damage, leading to the hypothesis that
cancer cells use cap-independent translation to survive pro-apoptotic
pressure. To investigate this possibility, we profiled IRES
trans-activating factors (ITAFs), which are accessory proteins that
regulate IRES activity in the cells. ITAFs are members of the
heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein (hnRNP) family that participate
in diverse nuclear functions, including RNA splicing, DNA repair, and
transcription. During cap-independent translation, ITAFs egress into the
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) to form a complex with the 40S ribosome and
other accessory proteins to regulate translation of client IRES harboring
mRNAs. We hypothesize that ITAFs could influence the pathophysiology of
breast cancer by controlling the translation of onco-and antiapoptotic
proteins. In this study, we profiled the expression of two ITAFs,
interleukin enhancer binding protein 2 (ILF2) and splicing factor
proline/glutamine-rich (SFPQ) in normal and breast cancer specimens, and
investigated the biological effects of these ITAFs in both cancer cell
lines and preclinical in vivo models using knockout studies.
Additionally, we investigated the impact of their subcellular
localization in cancer cells and the translation of their client mRNAs
under ER stress using immunoblots as well as polysome and
immunofluorescence analysis. Finally, we investigated the impact of
inhibiting nuclear pore translocation on the function of ITAFs in breast
cancer cells, using a selective inhibitor of nuclear export (SINE)
compound.Analysis of microarray datasets from cancer and normal tissue
specimens (The Cancer Genome Atlas, METABRIC, and University of North
Carolina datasets) revealed that expression of several ITAFs is
upregulated in malignant tissues compared to normal controls (pA subset
of cellular mRNAs can initiate cap-independent translation via internal
ribosome entry sites (IRES) structures, thus maintaining translation when
cap-dependent translation is compromised. Many of these IRES harboring
mRNAs encode canonical oncoproteins such as c-MYC, VEGF and EGFR. Cells
use IRES-mediated translation under conditions that are common to the
tumor microenvironment, including nutrient deprivation, hypoxia,
inflammation, and DNA damage, leading to the hypothesis that cancer cells
use cap-independent translation to survive pro-apoptotic pressure. To
investigate this possibility, we profiled IRES trans-activating factors
(ITAFs), which are accessory proteins that regulate IRES activity in the
cells. ITAFs are members of the heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein
(hnRNP) family that participate in diverse nuclear functions, including
RNA splicing, DNA repair, and transcription. During cap-independent
translation, ITAFs egress into the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) to form a
complex with the 40S ribosome and other accessory proteins to regulate
translation of client IRES harboring mRNAs. We hypothesize that ITAFs
could influence the pathophysiology of breast cancer by controlling the
translation of onco-and antiapoptotic proteins. In this study, we
profiled the expression of two ITAFs, interleukin enhancer binding
protein 2 (ILF2) and splicing factor proline/glutamine-rich (SFPQ) in
normal and breast cancer specimens, and investigated the biological
effects of these ITAFs in both cancer cell lines and preclinical in vivo
models using knockout studies. Additionally, we investigated the impact
of their subcellular localization in cancer cells and the translation of
their client mRNAs under ER stress using immunoblots as well as polysome
and immunofluorescence analysis. Finally, we investigated the impact of
inhibiting nuclear pore translocation on the function of ITAFs in breast
cancer cells, using a selective inhibitor of nuclear export (SINE)
compound.Analysis of microarray datasets from cancer and normal tissue
specimens (The Cancer Genome Atlas, METABRIC, and University of North
Carolina datasets) revealed that expression of several ITAFs is
upregulated in malignant tissues compared to normal controls (p<0.05) and
associated with survival outcome (pA subset of cellular mRNAs can
initiate cap-independent translation via internal ribosome entry sites
(IRES) structures, thus maintaining translation when cap-dependent
translation is compromised. Many of these IRES harboring mRNAs encode
canonical oncoproteins such as c-MYC, VEGF and EGFR. Cells use
IRES-mediated translation under conditions that are common to the tumor
microenvironment, including nutrient deprivation, hypoxia, inflammation,
and DNA damage, leading to the hypothesis that cancer cells use
cap-independent translation to survive pro-apoptotic pressure. To
investigate this possibility, we profiled IRES trans-activating factors
(ITAFs), which are accessory proteins that regulate IRES activity in the
cells. ITAFs are members of the heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein
(hnRNP) family that participate in diverse nuclear functions, including
RNA splicing, DNA repair, and transcription. During cap-independent
translation, ITAFs egress into the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) to form a
complex with the 40S ribosome and other accessory proteins to regulate
translation of client IRES harboring mRNAs. We hypothesize that ITAFs
could influence the pathophysiology of breast cancer by controlling the
translation of onco-and antiapoptotic proteins. In this study, we
profiled the expression of two ITAFs, interleukin enhancer binding
protein 2 (ILF2) and splicing factor proline/glutamine-rich (SFPQ) in
normal and breast cancer specimens, and investigated the biological
effects of these ITAFs in both cancer cell lines and preclinical in vivo
models using knockout studies. Additionally, we investigated the impact
of their subcellular localization in cancer cells and the translation of
their client mRNAs under ER stress using immunoblots as well as polysome
and immunofluorescence analysis. Finally, we investigated the impact of
inhibiting nuclear pore translocation on the function of ITAFs in breast
cancer cells, using a selective inhibitor of nuclear export (SINE)
compound.Analysis of microarray datasets from cancer and normal tissue
specimens (The Cancer Genome Atlas, METABRIC, and University of North
Carolina datasets) revealed that expression of several ITAFs is
upregulated in malignant tissues compared to normal controls (p<0.05) and
associated with survival outcome (p<0.03). Silencing of ITAFs led to
significant proliferation impairment in breast cancer cells in 2-D
culture (pA subset of cellular mRNAs can initiate cap-independent
translation via internal ribosome entry sites (IRES) structures, thus
maintaining translation when cap-dependent translation is compromised.
Many of these IRES harboring mRNAs encode canonical oncoproteins such as
c-MYC, VEGF and EGFR. Cells use IRES-mediated translation under
conditions that are common to the tumor microenvironment, including
nutrient deprivation, hypoxia, inflammation, and DNA damage, leading to
the hypothesis that cancer cells use cap-independent translation to
survive pro-apoptotic pressure. To investigate this possibility, we
profiled IRES trans-activating factors (ITAFs), which are accessory
proteins that regulate IRES activity in the cells. ITAFs are members of
the heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein (hnRNP) family that
participate in diverse nuclear functions, including RNA splicing, DNA
repair, and transcription. During cap-independent translation, ITAFs
egress into the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) to form a complex with the 40S
ribosome and other accessory proteins to regulate translation of client
IRES harboring mRNAs. We hypothesize that ITAFs could influence the
pathophysiology of breast cancer by controlling the translation of
onco-and antiapoptotic proteins. In this study, we profiled the
expression of two ITAFs, interleukin enhancer binding protein 2 (ILF2)
and splicing factor proline/glutamine-rich (SFPQ) in normal and breast
cancer specimens, and investigated the biological effects of these ITAFs
in both cancer cell lines and preclinical in vivo models using knockout
studies. Additionally, we investigated the impact of their subcellular
localization in cancer cells and the translation of their client mRNAs
under ER stress using immunoblots as well as polysome and
immunofluorescence analysis. Finally, we investigated the impact of
inhibiting nuclear pore translocation on the function of ITAFs in breast
cancer cells, using a selective inhibitor of nuclear export (SINE)
compound.Analysis of microarray datasets from cancer and normal tissue
specimens (The Cancer Genome Atlas, METABRIC, and University of North
Carolina datasets) revealed that expression of several ITAFs is
upregulated in malignant tissues compared to normal controls (p<0.05) and
associated with survival outcome (p<0.03). Silencing of ITAFs led to
significant proliferation impairment in breast cancer cells in 2-D
culture (p<0.001), soft agar assays (pA subset of cellular mRNAs can
initiate cap-independent translation via internal ribosome entry sites
(IRES) structures, thus maintaining translation when cap-dependent
translation is compromised. Many of these IRES harboring mRNAs encode
canonical oncoproteins such as c-MYC, VEGF and EGFR. Cells use
IRES-mediated translation under conditions that are common to the tumor
microenvironment, including nutrient deprivation, hypoxia, inflammation,
and DNA damage, leading to the hypothesis that cancer cells use
cap-independent translation to survive pro-apoptotic pressure. To
investigate this possibility, we profiled IRES trans-activating factors
(ITAFs), which are accessory proteins that regulate IRES activity in the
cells. ITAFs are members of the heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein
(hnRNP) family that participate in diverse nuclear functions, including
RNA splicing, DNA repair, and transcription. During cap-independent
translation, ITAFs egress into the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) to form a
complex with the 40S ribosome and other accessory proteins to regulate
translation of client IRES harboring mRNAs. We hypothesize that ITAFs
could influence the pathophysiology of breast cancer by controlling the
translation of onco-and antiapoptotic proteins. In this study, we
profiled the expression of two ITAFs, interleukin enhancer binding
protein 2 (ILF2) and splicing factor proline/glutamine-rich (SFPQ) in
normal and breast cancer specimens, and investigated the biological
effects of these ITAFs in both cancer cell lines and preclinical in vivo
models using knockout studies. Additionally, we investigated the impact
of their subcellular localization in cancer cells and the translation of
their client mRNAs under ER stress using immunoblots as well as polysome
and immunofluorescence analysis. Finally, we investigated the impact of
inhibiting nuclear pore translocation on the function of ITAFs in breast
cancer cells, using a selective inhibitor of nuclear export (SINE)
compound.Analysis of microarray datasets from cancer and normal tissue
specimens (The Cancer Genome Atlas, METABRIC, and University of North
Carolina datasets) revealed that expression of several ITAFs is
upregulated in malignant tissues compared to normal controls (p<0.05) and
associated with survival outcome (p<0.03). Silencing of ITAFs led to
significant proliferation impairment in breast cancer cells in 2-D
culture (p<0.001), soft agar assays (p< 0.01) and pre-clinical in vivo
models (pA subset of cellular mRNAs can initiate cap-independent
translation via internal ribosome entry sites (IRES) structures, thus
maintaining translation when cap-dependent translation is compromised.
Many of these IRES harboring mRNAs encode canonical oncoproteins such as
c-MYC, VEGF and EGFR. Cells use IRES-mediated translation under
conditions that are common to the tumor microenvironment, including
nutrient deprivation, hypoxia, inflammation, and DNA damage, leading to
the hypothesis that cancer cells use cap-independent translation to
survive pro-apoptotic pressure. To investigate this possibility, we
profiled IRES trans-activating factors (ITAFs), which are accessory
proteins that regulate IRES activity in the cells. ITAFs are members of
the heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein (hnRNP) family that
participate in diverse nuclear functions, including RNA splicing, DNA
repair, and transcription. During cap-independent translation, ITAFs
egress into the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) to form a complex with the 40S
ribosome and other accessory proteins to regulate translation of client
IRES harboring mRNAs. We hypothesize that ITAFs could influence the
pathophysiology of breast cancer by controlling the translation of
onco-and antiapoptotic proteins. In this study, we profiled the
expression of two ITAFs, interleukin enhancer binding protein 2 (ILF2)
and splicing factor proline/glutamine-rich (SFPQ) in normal and breast
cancer specimens, and investigated the biological effects of these ITAFs
in both cancer cell lines and preclinical in vivo models using knockout
studies. Additionally, we investigated the impact of their subcellular
localization in cancer cells and the translation of their client mRNAs
under ER stress using immunoblots as well as polysome and
immunofluorescence analysis. Finally, we investigated the impact of
inhibiting nuclear pore translocation on the function of ITAFs in breast
cancer cells, using a selective inhibitor of nuclear export (SINE)
compound.Analysis of microarray datasets from cancer and normal tissue
specimens (The Cancer Genome Atlas, METABRIC, and University of North
Carolina datasets) revealed that expression of several ITAFs is
upregulated in malignant tissues compared to normal controls (p<0.05) and
associated with survival outcome (p<0.03). Silencing of ITAFs led to
significant proliferation impairment in breast cancer cells in 2-D
culture (p<0.001), soft agar assays (p< 0.01) and pre-clinical in vivo
models (p<0.05). In cancer cell lines, treatment with an ER stressor led
ITAFs to egress to the ER, with increased translation of client
IRES-harboring mRNAs despite impaired global cap-dependent translation.
Finally, the SINE compound prevented ITAFs from translocating to the ER
and decreased translation of client mRNAs. These data suggest that ITAFs
impact the pathophysiology of breast cancer, and may represent novel
therapeutic or diagnostic targets.

