Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Beta-hairpin peptide hydrogels as scaffolds for 3D high-throughput
cancer drug discovery


High-throughput screening (HTS) remains a promising initial step in
discovering novel lead compounds for cancer therapy, but its value is
limited by the poor predictability of clinical effectiveness of candidate
compounds. One compelling reason for this lack of reliability to predict
in vivo efficacy is the fact that most HTS is done using traditional
two-dimensional (2D) cell cultures. While 2D cultures are convenient and
can easily be automated, compelling evidence suggests that cells cultured
in these non-physiological conditions differ from cells grown in the more
in vivo like three-dimensional (3D) systems that better mimic
microenvironments. Thus, a 3D culture model is expected to be a better
platform for cancer drug discovery. Here we demonstrate the feasibility
of a beta-hairpin hydrogel as a novel platform for 3D HTS. MAX8 forms a
bonded fibrillar hydrogel network under physiological conditions and
moreover, due to its unique shear-thinning abilities can be incorporated
into standard HTS equipment. MAX8 is biocompatible with a variety of
cancer cell lines, can be tuned for porosity, permeability and stiffness,
and can be functionalized with common and cell-type specific ligands to
more closely resemble an in vivo-like tumor environment. Using
medulloblastoma cells that are known to display more immature, tumor-like
features in 3D and that were automatically dispensed onto 384-well plates
we have developed a robust assay to measure cell viability on a HTS
platform that will have broad applicability for other cancers for which
3D HTS is desirable.

