Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting E-selectin/CXCR4 with GMI-1359 effectively mobilizes
bone marrow leukemia cells and enhances FLT3 inhibitor-induced
anti-leukemia efficacy in a murine acute myeloid leukemia model


FLT3 internal tandem duplication (ITD) mutations are the most common
alterations in acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and are associated with poor
disease prognosis. Targeted therapy using FLT3-ITD inhibitors showed
limited effect in reducing leukemia blasts in bone marrow (BM) than that
in peripheral blood. The BM microenvironment is enriched with cytokines
and adhesion molecules, such as CXCR4 and E-selectin, which are believed
to provide AML cells protection against chemotherapeutic agents.
Therefore, blocking CXCR4 and E-selectin concomitantly with FLT3
inhibition could theoretically eliminate the protection in FLT3-mutant
AML patients. We recently reported that targeting CXCR4/E-selectin with
the dual inhibitor GMI-1359 showed significant prolongation of survival
of mice engrafted with FLT3-ITD mutant MV4-11 leukemia cells. In the
present study, we further investigated anti-leukemia effects of dual
CXCR4/E-selectin inhibition. Results indicate efficient mobilization of
leukemia cells into the circulation by GMI-1359 in a MOLM14-engrafted
murine model 2h after drug treatment, which was 3.3-fold ( 0.3) higher
compared with the CXCR4 antagonist plerixafor, and 7.4-fold ( 2.7) higher
compared with controls. In addition, GMI-1359 also mobilized normal
murine leukocytes from the BM, suggesting that GMI-1359 may block
interactions of leukemia cells with various BM components. Combination
therapy of GMI-1359 and sorafenib significantly reduced leukemia burden
(1.9e7 vs. 2.3e9, 1.0e9 and 8.5e7 photons/sec in the combination group
versus control, GMI-1359 and sorafenib groups, respectively, at day 20 as
determined by Xenogen IVIS bioluminescence Imaging; p FLT3 internal
tandem duplication (ITD) mutations are the most common alterations in
acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and are associated with poor disease
prognosis. Targeted therapy using FLT3-ITD inhibitors showed limited
effect in reducing leukemia blasts in bone marrow (BM) than that in
peripheral blood. The BM microenvironment is enriched with cytokines and
adhesion molecules, such as CXCR4 and E-selectin, which are believed to
provide AML cells protection against chemotherapeutic agents. Therefore,
blocking CXCR4 and E-selectin concomitantly with FLT3 inhibition could
theoretically eliminate the protection in FLT3-mutant AML patients. We
recently reported that targeting CXCR4/E-selectin with the dual inhibitor
GMI-1359 showed significant prolongation of survival of mice engrafted
with FLT3-ITD mutant MV4-11 leukemia cells. In the present study, we
further investigated anti-leukemia effects of dual CXCR4/E-selectin
inhibition. Results indicate efficient mobilization of leukemia cells
into the circulation by GMI-1359 in a MOLM14-engrafted murine model 2h
after drug treatment, which was 3.3-fold ( 0.3) higher compared with the
CXCR4 antagonist plerixafor, and 7.4-fold ( 2.7) higher compared with
controls. In addition, GMI-1359 also mobilized normal murine leukocytes
from the BM, suggesting that GMI-1359 may block interactions of leukemia
cells with various BM components. Combination therapy of GMI-1359 and
sorafenib significantly reduced leukemia burden (1.9e7 vs. 2.3e9, 1.0e9
and 8.5e7 photons/sec in the combination group versus control, GMI-1359
and sorafenib groups, respectively, at day 20 as determined by Xenogen
IVIS bioluminescence Imaging; p < 0.001). Moreover, the combination
treatment profoundly reduced leukemia burden in the BM of leukemic mice
after a 15-day treatment (1.7e7 vs. 1.6e9, 6.3e8 and 7.0e7 photons/sec, p
FLT3 internal tandem duplication (ITD) mutations are the most common
alterations in acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and are associated with poor
disease prognosis. Targeted therapy using FLT3-ITD inhibitors showed
limited effect in reducing leukemia blasts in bone marrow (BM) than that
in peripheral blood. The BM microenvironment is enriched with cytokines
and adhesion molecules, such as CXCR4 and E-selectin, which are believed
to provide AML cells protection against chemotherapeutic agents.
Therefore, blocking CXCR4 and E-selectin concomitantly with FLT3
inhibition could theoretically eliminate the protection in FLT3-mutant
AML patients. We recently reported that targeting CXCR4/E-selectin with
the dual inhibitor GMI-1359 showed significant prolongation of survival
of mice engrafted with FLT3-ITD mutant MV4-11 leukemia cells. In the
present study, we further investigated anti-leukemia effects of dual
CXCR4/E-selectin inhibition. Results indicate efficient mobilization of
leukemia cells into the circulation by GMI-1359 in a MOLM14-engrafted
murine model 2h after drug treatment, which was 3.3-fold ( 0.3) higher
compared with the CXCR4 antagonist plerixafor, and 7.4-fold ( 2.7) higher
compared with controls. In addition, GMI-1359 also mobilized normal
murine leukocytes from the BM, suggesting that GMI-1359 may block
interactions of leukemia cells with various BM components. Combination
therapy of GMI-1359 and sorafenib significantly reduced leukemia burden
(1.9e7 vs. 2.3e9, 1.0e9 and 8.5e7 photons/sec in the combination group
versus control, GMI-1359 and sorafenib groups, respectively, at day 20 as
determined by Xenogen IVIS bioluminescence Imaging; p < 0.001). Moreover,
the combination treatment profoundly reduced leukemia burden in the BM of
leukemic mice after a 15-day treatment (1.7e7 vs. 1.6e9, 6.3e8 and 7.0e7
photons/sec, p < 0.01; and 1.76% vs. 70.96%, 72.8% and 33.8%.leukemia
cell engraftment measured as GFP positive leukemic cells in BM by flow
cytometry, in the combination group vs. vehicle, GMI-1359 and Sorafenib
groups, respectively, p FLT3 internal tandem duplication (ITD) mutations
are the most common alterations in acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and are
associated with poor disease prognosis. Targeted therapy using FLT3-ITD
inhibitors showed limited effect in reducing leukemia blasts in bone
marrow (BM) than that in peripheral blood. The BM microenvironment is
enriched with cytokines and adhesion molecules, such as CXCR4 and
E-selectin, which are believed to provide AML cells protection against
chemotherapeutic agents. Therefore, blocking CXCR4 and E-selectin
concomitantly with FLT3 inhibition could theoretically eliminate the
protection in FLT3-mutant AML patients. We recently reported that
targeting CXCR4/E-selectin with the dual inhibitor GMI-1359 showed
significant prolongation of survival of mice engrafted with FLT3-ITD
mutant MV4-11 leukemia cells. In the present study, we further
investigated anti-leukemia effects of dual CXCR4/E-selectin inhibition.
Results indicate efficient mobilization of leukemia cells into the
circulation by GMI-1359 in a MOLM14-engrafted murine model 2h after drug
treatment, which was 3.3-fold ( 0.3) higher compared with the CXCR4
antagonist plerixafor, and 7.4-fold ( 2.7) higher compared with controls.
In addition, GMI-1359 also mobilized normal murine leukocytes from the
BM, suggesting that GMI-1359 may block interactions of leukemia cells
with various BM components. Combination therapy of GMI-1359 and sorafenib
significantly reduced leukemia burden (1.9e7 vs. 2.3e9, 1.0e9 and 8.5e7
photons/sec in the combination group versus control, GMI-1359 and
sorafenib groups, respectively, at day 20 as determined by Xenogen IVIS
bioluminescence Imaging; p < 0.001). Moreover, the combination treatment
profoundly reduced leukemia burden in the BM of leukemic mice after a
15-day treatment (1.7e7 vs. 1.6e9, 6.3e8 and 7.0e7 photons/sec, p < 0.01;
and 1.76% vs. 70.96%, 72.8% and 33.8%.leukemia cell engraftment measured
as GFP positive leukemic cells in BM by flow cytometry, in the
combination group vs. vehicle, GMI-1359 and Sorafenib groups,
respectively, p < 0.01). Of note, the combination therapy profoundly
extended the median survival of the leukemia-bearing mice from 27 days in
the control group to 46.5 days in the combination treatment groups (p
FLT3 internal tandem duplication (ITD) mutations are the most common
alterations in acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and are associated with poor
disease prognosis. Targeted therapy using FLT3-ITD inhibitors showed
limited effect in reducing leukemia blasts in bone marrow (BM) than that
in peripheral blood. The BM microenvironment is enriched with cytokines
and adhesion molecules, such as CXCR4 and E-selectin, which are believed
to provide AML cells protection against chemotherapeutic agents.
Therefore, blocking CXCR4 and E-selectin concomitantly with FLT3
inhibition could theoretically eliminate the protection in FLT3-mutant
AML patients. We recently reported that targeting CXCR4/E-selectin with
the dual inhibitor GMI-1359 showed significant prolongation of survival
of mice engrafted with FLT3-ITD mutant MV4-11 leukemia cells. In the
present study, we further investigated anti-leukemia effects of dual
CXCR4/E-selectin inhibition. Results indicate efficient mobilization of
leukemia cells into the circulation by GMI-1359 in a MOLM14-engrafted
murine model 2h after drug treatment, which was 3.3-fold ( 0.3) higher
compared with the CXCR4 antagonist plerixafor, and 7.4-fold ( 2.7) higher
compared with controls. In addition, GMI-1359 also mobilized normal
murine leukocytes from the BM, suggesting that GMI-1359 may block
interactions of leukemia cells with various BM components. Combination
therapy of GMI-1359 and sorafenib significantly reduced leukemia burden
(1.9e7 vs. 2.3e9, 1.0e9 and 8.5e7 photons/sec in the combination group
versus control, GMI-1359 and sorafenib groups, respectively, at day 20 as
determined by Xenogen IVIS bioluminescence Imaging; p < 0.001). Moreover,
the combination treatment profoundly reduced leukemia burden in the BM of
leukemic mice after a 15-day treatment (1.7e7 vs. 1.6e9, 6.3e8 and 7.0e7
photons/sec, p < 0.01; and 1.76% vs. 70.96%, 72.8% and 33.8%.leukemia
cell engraftment measured as GFP positive leukemic cells in BM by flow
cytometry, in the combination group vs. vehicle, GMI-1359 and Sorafenib
groups, respectively, p < 0.01). Of note, the combination therapy
profoundly extended the median survival of the leukemia-bearing mice from
27 days in the control group to 46.5 days in the combination treatment
groups (p < 0.001). Mechanistically, we demonstrated that direct blockade
of the interaction of E-selectin-CXCR4/SDF-1 with GMI-1359 was critical
for leukemic cell mobilization via the disruption of adhesion to stromal
cells. Furthermore, the presence of GMI-1359 enhanced sorafenib-induced
apoptosis in FLT3-ITD mutated leukemic cells co-cultured with stromal
cells. This effect occurred even under hypoxia, which is characteristic
for the leukemic BM microenvironment. These findings provide the
pre-clinical basis for the evaluation of GMI-1359 in patients with
FLT3-mutant AML.

