Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combination therapy with immune checkpoint inhibitor and
CCK-receptor blockade increases survival of pancreatic cancer


Introduction: Advanced pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) has
typically been resistant to chemotherapy and immune therapy; therefore,
novel strategies are needed to enhance therapeutic response.
Cholecystokinin receptors (CCKRs) are present on pancreatic cancer
epithelial cells, fibroblasts of the microenvironment, and lymphocytes.
We hypothesized that CCK receptor blockade would improve response to
immune checkpoint blockade and survival by promoting influx of tumor
infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) and reducing fibrosis.Methods:
Subcutaneous tumors were established using Panc02 murine pancreatic
cancer cells (1.0- or 2.0 x10E6) in a syngeneic immune competent mouse
model. Three separate experiments were performed with 40 mice each. Mice
(C57BL/6) were divided into 4 groups (N = 10 mice each) and treated with
PBS (control), a CCKR antagonist (L364,718 or proglumide), an immune
checkpoint blockade antibody (PD-1 or CTLA-4; Im-Ab), or the combination
of CCKR antagonist and immune checkpoint blockade antibody (combination).
Tumor growth and animal survival were evaluated. Tumors were subjected to
immunohistochemical staining for TILs, trichrome staining, and flow
cytometry.Results: On day 50 after inoculation of 10E6 cells all control
mice had died while 42%, 42% and 71% of L364,718, CTLA-4 mice, or
combination-treated mice, respectively were alive (p = 0.02). By day 90
all mice died except one in the combination-treated group. In the
experiment where mice were injected with 210E6 Panc02 cells, survival was
also increased in mice receiving a proglumide and PD-1 antibody
combination (p = 0.0009). CD8+TILs increased by 3-,6.3-,and 7.5-fold in
CCKR antagonist, Im-Ab, and combination therapy, respectively compared to
controls (pIntroduction: Advanced pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC)
has typically been resistant to chemotherapy and immune therapy;
therefore, novel strategies are needed to enhance therapeutic response.
Cholecystokinin receptors (CCKRs) are present on pancreatic cancer
epithelial cells, fibroblasts of the microenvironment, and lymphocytes.
We hypothesized that CCK receptor blockade would improve response to
immune checkpoint blockade and survival by promoting influx of tumor
infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) and reducing fibrosis.Methods:
Subcutaneous tumors were established using Panc02 murine pancreatic
cancer cells (1.0- or 2.0 x10E6) in a syngeneic immune competent mouse
model. Three separate experiments were performed with 40 mice each. Mice
(C57BL/6) were divided into 4 groups (N = 10 mice each) and treated with
PBS (control), a CCKR antagonist (L364,718 or proglumide), an immune
checkpoint blockade antibody (PD-1 or CTLA-4; Im-Ab), or the combination
of CCKR antagonist and immune checkpoint blockade antibody (combination).
Tumor growth and animal survival were evaluated. Tumors were subjected to
immunohistochemical staining for TILs, trichrome staining, and flow
cytometry.Results: On day 50 after inoculation of 10E6 cells all control
mice had died while 42%, 42% and 71% of L364,718, CTLA-4 mice, or
combination-treated mice, respectively were alive (p = 0.02). By day 90
all mice died except one in the combination-treated group. In the
experiment where mice were injected with 210E6 Panc02 cells, survival was
also increased in mice receiving a proglumide and PD-1 antibody
combination (p = 0.0009). CD8+TILs increased by 3-,6.3-,and 7.5-fold in
CCKR antagonist, Im-Ab, and combination therapy, respectively compared to
controls (p<0.0001). CD4+ TILs also significantly increased (p = 0.001)
in the tumors of mice treated with the combination. Trichrome stain
analysis revealed 50% less fibrosis in mice treated with CCKR antagonist
compared to PBS controls (p = 0.017).Conclusions: The combination of CCKR
antagonism and immune checkpoint blockade antibodies significantly
improve survival in a murine model of PDAC. The mechanism is associated
with decreased fibrosis in the microenvironment and an accompanying
influx of CD8+ and CD4+ TILs.Supported by NCI CA50633, CA51008, and
CA194745

