Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antizyme inhibitor regulates the expression of proteins involved
in mitosis and affects prostate cancer cell growth


Upregulation of polyamine biosynthesis is a requirement for cell growth
and proliferation. Increases in polyamine levels are mediated by the
enzyme ornithine decarboxylase (ODC), which is inhibited by antizyme
(AZ). Rescue of ODC activity is accomplished by expression of antizyme
inhibitor (AZI), which prevents binding of AZ to ODC. Increases in AZI
gene copy number, mRNA transcripts, protein expression and AZI nuclear
localization are all associated with prostate cancer. Furthermore,
knockdown of AZI expression prevents prostate cancer cell growth in vitro
and in vivo. To determine if AZI regulation affects prostate cancer cell
growth via mechanisms that are independent of polyamide levels, we
conducted a proteomic analysis of the AZI interactome by co-IP and MS/MS.
This resulted in the identification of 29 high-confidence interacting
proteins (HCIPs), 10 of which are associated with microtubules or with
the mitotic spindle including TPX2 and KIFC1. Constitutive overexpression
of AZI in PC3M-LN4 prostate cancer cells leads to a decrease in
expression of the microtubule associated protein KIFC1, further
supporting an interaction between AZI and KIFC1. Silencing of AZI gene
expression using siRNA nanoparticles results in a decrease in prostate
cancer cell proliferation and altered expression of proteins involved in
mitosis. Taken together, this data suggests that AZI may influence
prostate cancer cell proliferation via mechanisms that are independent of
polyamine regulation.

