Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vitro evaluation of combination chemotherapy/targeted
radiotherapy for translation to an in vivo model of prostate cancer


Introduction: We have previously shown that radiosensitizing chemotherapy
when used in combination with targeted radiotherapy agents can result in
improved tumor growth inhibition in preclinical xenograft mouse models of
prostate cancer (PC). The challenge is determining optimum drug
combinations to achieve therapeutic synergy. Herein we performed in vitro
studies to determine if synergism existed and then optimize effective
drug combination levels to maintain synergism for the treatment of
PC.Methods: The Lu-177 radiolabeled peptide
(DOTA-4-amino-1-carboxymethyl-piperidine-D-Phe-Gln-Trp-Ala-Val-Gly-His-Sta-
Leu-NH2) was prepared using an Eckert & Ziegler automated system.
Cultured PC-3 cells were allowed to adhere overnight in a standard tissue
culture environment after plating. Docetaxel chemotherapy was prepared in
culture media without supplements and added to wells containing fresh
growth media to achieve a final concentration of docetaxel of 0, 1.25,
2.5, and 5 nM. After 24 hrs, all media was removed and replaced with
fresh growth media (non-chemo containing) prior to treatment with 0, 5,
10, 20, or 40 uCi/well of Lu-177 labeled peptide receptor targeted
radiotherapy (TRT) to each well. At 72hrs post TRT addition, all media
was removed and fresh growth media was added. MTT reagent was added to
each well at pre-determined time points. Plates were incubated in a
standard tissue culture environment for 4 hours prior to removal of all
liquid from the wells followed by addition of 200uL of DMSO to each well.
Plates were read at 540nm and data was normalized to non-treated
controls. Calcusyn software was used to calculate CI values to determine
if synergy was achieved. Cell cycle experiments were performed after
docetaxel treatment at 0, 2.5, 5, 10, 20, 40, and 80 nM. After 6, 24, 48,
and 72 hrs of treatment, cells were collected from each well, fixed in
70% ethanol, and stained with propidium iodide prior to cell cycle
analysis (5,000 events).Results: Cell cycle analysis confirmed a
sustained shift (> 50%) of docetaxel treated cells to the radio-sensitive
G2/M phase of the cell cycle after 24, 48, and 72hrs of treatment.
Synergy was observed when docetaxel at 1.25 and 2.5 nM was combined with
20 and 40 uCi of Lu-177 TRT. At concentrations of docetaxel >2.5nM only
additive effects of combination therapy were observed. At concentrations
of Lu-177 TRT Introduction: We have previously shown that
radiosensitizing chemotherapy when used in combination with targeted
radiotherapy agents can result in improved tumor growth inhibition in
preclinical xenograft mouse models of prostate cancer (PC). The challenge
is determining optimum drug combinations to achieve therapeutic synergy.
Herein we performed in vitro studies to determine if synergism existed
and then optimize effective drug combination levels to maintain synergism
for the treatment of PC.Methods: The Lu-177 radiolabeled peptide
(DOTA-4-amino-1-carboxymethyl-piperidine-D-Phe-Gln-Trp-Ala-Val-Gly-His-Sta-
Leu-NH2) was prepared using an Eckert & Ziegler automated system.
Cultured PC-3 cells were allowed to adhere overnight in a standard tissue
culture environment after plating. Docetaxel chemotherapy was prepared in
culture media without supplements and added to wells containing fresh
growth media to achieve a final concentration of docetaxel of 0, 1.25,
2.5, and 5 nM. After 24 hrs, all media was removed and replaced with
fresh growth media (non-chemo containing) prior to treatment with 0, 5,
10, 20, or 40 uCi/well of Lu-177 labeled peptide receptor targeted
radiotherapy (TRT) to each well. At 72hrs post TRT addition, all media
was removed and fresh growth media was added. MTT reagent was added to
each well at pre-determined time points. Plates were incubated in a
standard tissue culture environment for 4 hours prior to removal of all
liquid from the wells followed by addition of 200uL of DMSO to each well.
Plates were read at 540nm and data was normalized to non-treated
controls. Calcusyn software was used to calculate CI values to determine
if synergy was achieved. Cell cycle experiments were performed after
docetaxel treatment at 0, 2.5, 5, 10, 20, 40, and 80 nM. After 6, 24, 48,
and 72 hrs of treatment, cells were collected from each well, fixed in
70% ethanol, and stained with propidium iodide prior to cell cycle
analysis (5,000 events).Results: Cell cycle analysis confirmed a
sustained shift (> 50%) of docetaxel treated cells to the radio-sensitive
G2/M phase of the cell cycle after 24, 48, and 72hrs of treatment.
Synergy was observed when docetaxel at 1.25 and 2.5 nM was combined with
20 and 40 uCi of Lu-177 TRT. At concentrations of docetaxel >2.5nM only
additive effects of combination therapy were observed. At concentrations
of Lu-177 TRT <10uCi/well in combination with docetaxel only slight
synergy or antagonism was observed. Conclusions: Effectively optimizing
combination chemotherapy and Lu-177 TRT in an in vivo model of prostate
cancer remains challenging. These initial results demonstrate a
synergistic window where chemotherapy and Lu-177 TRT can potentially
yield optimum results however achieving synergy requires further detailed
drug combination optimization both in vitro and in vivo.

