Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clinical characteristics of breast cancer xenograft models


Purpose: We have expertise in breast cancer xenograft models and have
previously published data on clonal dynamics. Our aim was to explore
clinical characteristics of those patients (pts) whose breast cancer
tumours engrafted versus those that did not.Methods: Tissue from pts
enrolled in a locally advanced/metastatic (MBC) study and a breast tumour
tissue repository between Sept. 2008 and July 2014 underwent xenografting
using NodScid/IL2rgKO (NSG) mice. Xenografts were passaged when tumour
volume reached 1 cm3. Mice were sacrificed if no engraftment by 12 months
(mos). Pt charts were reviewed to determine biomarker status (hormone
receptor [HR], HER2), grade, LVI, time free from disease/progression, and
pathologic complete response (pCR) for pts receiving neoadjuvant
therapy.Results: A total of 64 pts had known xenograft status: 32
engrafters, 32 non-engrafters. Biomarker status did not predict
likelihood of engraftment (p = .0695) and is shown in Table 1 along with
site/timing of biopsy for tissue engraftment within biomarker groups.
When HER2+ cases are excluded from analysis, the HR-/HER2- phenotype
yields a 72% probability of engraftment compared to 39% for the HR+/HER2-
group (p = .0418). For engrafters, 22/32 (68%) of pts had or went on to
have relapsed or de novo MBC. For non-engrafters, 7/32 (22%) had or went
on to have relapsed disease (p = .0004). Grade and LVI did not predict
engraftment (p = .1806 and p = .8657 respectively). No grade 1 tumours
engrafted (n = 3). There were 25 pts who received neoadjuvant
chemotherapy: 14 engrafters, 11 non-engrafters. None of the engrafters
achieved a pCR; 3 non-engrafters achieved a pCR. Median time to
engraftment was 5 mos for pts with relapsed/advanced disease vs 9.8 mos
for pts who did not relapse however, treatment was variable.Conclusion:
This preliminary study highlights potential differences in clinical
characteristics of engrafters vs non-engrafters in breast cancer
xenograft models and warrants further exploration. (Funded by CBCRA, BCCF)
Biomarker status, tissue site/type in attempted xenografts.

