Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RNAi and CRISPR/Cas9 based in vivo models for drug discovery


With the advent of CRISPR-Cas9 technology, the speed and precision in
which genetically engineered mouse models can be created is
unprecedented. We now have at our disposal a genetic toolbox that will
enable the rapid generation of sophisticated mouse models of cancer.
Recently, an inducible CRISPR-Cas9 (iCRISPR) system was described that
enables doxycycline-regulated Cas9 induction of widespread gene
mutagenesis in multiple tissues. Previously, we also demonstrated how
inducible RNA interference (RNAi) can be exploited experimentally to
effectively and reversibly silence nearly any gene target not only in
vitro but also in live mice. Here, we take advantage of these powerful
technologies and combine both tet-inducible CRISPR-Cas9 and inducible
RNAi-mediated gene silencing to develop animal models in which both de
novo tumorigenesis can be induced by Cas9-mediated genome editing and
therapeutic strategies assessed downstream via RNA interference-mediated
gene silencing. By using this combination of CRISPR/Cas9 and RNAi
technologies, we are able to not only model disease pathogenesis, but
also mimic drug therapy in the same mice, giving us exceptional
capabilities to perform preclinical studies in vivo. Using our robust
flexible system, we have created a cost-effective and scalable platform
for the production of complex genetically engineered mouse models of
cancer with RNAi silencing of nearly any gene - mice with enormous
predictive power that will shape our development of better tolerated
therapies.

