Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of autophagosome closure promotes iDISC-mediated
apoptosis in AML cells


Macroautophagy (hereafter referred to as autophagy) is a lysosomal
degradation process whereby cellular components, such as damaged
organelles, are enclosed in double-membrane structures called
autophagosomes and delivered to lysosomes for degradation and recycling.
Autophagy is known to be essential for cancer pathogenesis and
progression through its intimate crosstalk with programed cell death
machinery, apoptosis. However, the role of autophagy in apoptosis pathway
remains highly controversial and context-dependent, which makes
developing autophagy-targeted anti-cancer treatments hard to achieve. We
have previously reported that autophagosomal membranes can serve as a
platform for caspase-8 activation through the assembly of an
intracellular Death-Inducing Signaling Complex (iDISC). In the present
study, we demonstrate that inhibition of phagophore closure by depleting
Atg2A/B stabilizes iDISCs and induces caspase-8-initiated apoptosis in
acute myeloid leukemia (AML) cells. We found that knockout of Atg2A/B,
but not Atg7, promotes the oligomerization of caspase-8 on Atg16L- and
LC3-positive phagophore membranes upon nutrient starvation.
Starvation-induced capase-8 activation and apoptosis induction in
Atg2A/B-deficient cells were strongly suppressed by the inhibition of
caspase-8. These results suggest that autophagy inhibition at the
phagophore closure step can shift cytoprotective autophagy to a pro-death
mechanism and thus may be a promising strategy to enhance the efficacy of
anticancer therapy.

