Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A unified and streamlined targeted sequencing system for the
quantification of DNA mutations and RNA expression markers in lung cancer


Introduction: The promise of precision medicine relies on the
identification of DNA and RNA markers that can individualize patient
management. Methods such as next-generation sequencing (NGS) can deduce
DNA or RNA sequences, but both types of nucleic acid have not been
efficiently and effectively combined into a single NGS workflow. We
describe a comprehensive methodology for targeted clinical NGS that
reports DNA and RNA variants, provides a streamlined workflow, and
accommodates low-input total nucleic acid (TNA) from challenging clinical
specimens.Methods: Sample QC was performed using a novel qPCR assay that
quantifies discrete populations of amplifiable DNA and RNA from TNA
material. PCR-based target enrichment was performed using QuantideX NGS
reagents (Asuragen) and sequenced on the MiSeq System (Illumina).
Bioinformatic analyses were conducted using QuantideX Reporter
(Asuragen), a software suite that directly incorporates pre-analytical QC
information into the variant calling.Results: Targeted DNA- and RNA-seq
panels were developed that query 54 lung cancer DNA targets and 135 RNA
targets, including >100 gene fusions and mRNA expression markers
associated with clinical actionability. Gene-specific primers were
formulated as multiplex PCR or RT-PCR reactions to independently
interrogate DNA or RNA variants, respectively, from TNA or combined into
a 189-plex RT-PCR to report multi-categorical nucleic acid variants.
Integration of the bioinformatics pipeline and variant caller with
wet-lab QC results enhanced mutation call sensitivity at Introduction:
The promise of precision medicine relies on the identification of DNA and
RNA markers that can individualize patient management. Methods such as
next-generation sequencing (NGS) can deduce DNA or RNA sequences, but
both types of nucleic acid have not been efficiently and effectively
combined into a single NGS workflow. We describe a comprehensive
methodology for targeted clinical NGS that reports DNA and RNA variants,
provides a streamlined workflow, and accommodates low-input total nucleic
acid (TNA) from challenging clinical specimens.Methods: Sample QC was
performed using a novel qPCR assay that quantifies discrete populations
of amplifiable DNA and RNA from TNA material. PCR-based target enrichment
was performed using QuantideX NGS reagents (Asuragen) and sequenced on
the MiSeq System (Illumina). Bioinformatic analyses were conducted using
QuantideX Reporter (Asuragen), a software suite that directly
incorporates pre-analytical QC information into the variant
calling.Results: Targeted DNA- and RNA-seq panels were developed that
query 54 lung cancer DNA targets and 135 RNA targets, including >100 gene
fusions and mRNA expression markers associated with clinical
actionability. Gene-specific primers were formulated as multiplex PCR or
RT-PCR reactions to independently interrogate DNA or RNA variants,
respectively, from TNA or combined into a 189-plex RT-PCR to report
multi-categorical nucleic acid variants. Integration of the
bioinformatics pipeline and variant caller with wet-lab QC results
enhanced mutation call sensitivity at <10% abundance, improved PPV for
low-input specimens, and achieved absolute quantification of RNA.The NGS
panels were assessed with cell-line and synthetic controls and a residual
clinical cohort of 97 NSCLC FFPE specimens. Mutations were accurately
detected from as few as 5-10 DNA templates and down to Introduction: The
promise of precision medicine relies on the identification of DNA and RNA
markers that can individualize patient management. Methods such as
next-generation sequencing (NGS) can deduce DNA or RNA sequences, but
both types of nucleic acid have not been efficiently and effectively
combined into a single NGS workflow. We describe a comprehensive
methodology for targeted clinical NGS that reports DNA and RNA variants,
provides a streamlined workflow, and accommodates low-input total nucleic
acid (TNA) from challenging clinical specimens.Methods: Sample QC was
performed using a novel qPCR assay that quantifies discrete populations
of amplifiable DNA and RNA from TNA material. PCR-based target enrichment
was performed using QuantideX NGS reagents (Asuragen) and sequenced on
the MiSeq System (Illumina). Bioinformatic analyses were conducted using
QuantideX Reporter (Asuragen), a software suite that directly
incorporates pre-analytical QC information into the variant
calling.Results: Targeted DNA- and RNA-seq panels were developed that
query 54 lung cancer DNA targets and 135 RNA targets, including >100 gene
fusions and mRNA expression markers associated with clinical
actionability. Gene-specific primers were formulated as multiplex PCR or
RT-PCR reactions to independently interrogate DNA or RNA variants,
respectively, from TNA or combined into a 189-plex RT-PCR to report
multi-categorical nucleic acid variants. Integration of the
bioinformatics pipeline and variant caller with wet-lab QC results
enhanced mutation call sensitivity at <10% abundance, improved PPV for
low-input specimens, and achieved absolute quantification of RNA.The NGS
panels were assessed with cell-line and synthetic controls and a residual
clinical cohort of 97 NSCLC FFPE specimens. Mutations were accurately
detected from as few as 5-10 DNA templates and down to <5% abundance, and
RNA translocations could be observed in sub-nanogram quantities of
fusion-positive FFPE TNA. The unified DNA/RNA panel identified
clinically-relevant DNA and RNA variants and maintained similar coverage
uniformity to the separate DNA and RNA panels. Analysis of 61 lung
adenocarcinoma and 36 squamous cell carcinoma specimens revealed mutation
distributions in driver genes and RNA fusions consistent with the known
spectrum of variants from each tumor type as previously reported by TCGA
and other groups.Conclusions: QuantideX targeted NGS chemistries can
unify the analysis of DNA and RNA markers associated with lung cancer and
report SNVs, indels, fusions, and aberrantly expressed mRNA transcripts
from a single NGS run. This novel technology offers reliable, accurate
and comprehensive molecular characterizations of challenging tumor
specimens by integrating wet-bench and dry-bench methods and improving
the efficacy of routine laboratory testing.

