Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The efficiency of anti-tumor effect of metformin for
gemcitabine-resistant pancreatic adenocarcinoma


Metformin (MET) is the first-line treatment for type 2 diabetes mellitus.
Several epidemiological studies have revealed the anti-cancer effects of
metformin (MET), including against pancreatic ductal carcinoma (PDC).
Gemcitabine (GEM) has become the standard chemotherapy for PDC but
tolerance to GEM becomes an important issue.We evaluated the anti-tumor
effects of MET for GEM-resistant PDC in a xenograft mouse model. For this
in vivo study, wild-type BxPC-3 was implanted into both flanks of female
BALB/c nude mice. Mice were divided into four groups: (i) control
(without any treatment); (ii) GEM-treated group (100 mg/kg); (iii)
MET-treated group (600 mg/kg); and (iv) combined treatment group (G+M).
Mice were fed for 4 weeks. Estimated tumor volumes and body weights were
measured each week. Treatments were initiated 2 weeks after implantation.
MET was administrated orally every day. GEM was given by intraperitoneal
injection every week.In the final tumor volumes, the two groups treated
with GEM had significantly reduced tumors compared with control, but
there were no differences between control and MET groups. The anti-tumor
effect of MET for BxG30 (the cell line for GEM-resistant PDC) was
evaluated using the method described above. Tumor volumes were decreased
significantly in GEM+MET groups compared with control. The treated
control ratio (T/C%) was calculated: GEM, 80.2%; MET, 54.0%; GEM+MET,
47.2%. The anti-tumor effect of GEM for BxG30 was limited. The MET group
showed satisfactory anti-tumor effects, but T/C% was Metformin (MET) is
the first-line treatment for type 2 diabetes mellitus. Several
epidemiological studies have revealed the anti-cancer effects of
metformin (MET), including against pancreatic ductal carcinoma (PDC).
Gemcitabine (GEM) has become the standard chemotherapy for PDC but
tolerance to GEM becomes an important issue.We evaluated the anti-tumor
effects of MET for GEM-resistant PDC in a xenograft mouse model. For this
in vivo study, wild-type BxPC-3 was implanted into both flanks of female
BALB/c nude mice. Mice were divided into four groups: (i) control
(without any treatment); (ii) GEM-treated group (100 mg/kg); (iii)
MET-treated group (600 mg/kg); and (iv) combined treatment group (G+M).
Mice were fed for 4 weeks. Estimated tumor volumes and body weights were
measured each week. Treatments were initiated 2 weeks after implantation.
MET was administrated orally every day. GEM was given by intraperitoneal
injection every week.In the final tumor volumes, the two groups treated
with GEM had significantly reduced tumors compared with control, but
there were no differences between control and MET groups. The anti-tumor
effect of MET for BxG30 (the cell line for GEM-resistant PDC) was
evaluated using the method described above. Tumor volumes were decreased
significantly in GEM+MET groups compared with control. The treated
control ratio (T/C%) was calculated: GEM, 80.2%; MET, 54.0%; GEM+MET,
47.2%. The anti-tumor effect of GEM for BxG30 was limited. The MET group
showed satisfactory anti-tumor effects, but T/C% was <50% only in the
GEM+MET group. This result revealed that combination therapy had
excellent anti-tumor effects even for GEM-resistant PDC.Western blot
analysis was performed to confirm mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR)
expression level was surely inhibited. The results revealed that the
expression level of mTOR treated with MET was significantly decreased,
but no in GEM group. The expression level of hypoxia-inducible factor 1
(HIF-1) was evaluated by western blot analysis also. The results showed
significant inhibition of HIF-1 expression by MET treatment, but not by
GEM, again. Then the expression of VEGF mRNA, downstream of HIF-1
signaling pathway, was evaluated by qRT-PCR. The result showed inhibition
of VEGF mRNA expression by MET treatment.Our results showed that MET has
a partial anti-tumor effect for PDC. Combination therapy has an excellent
effect not only for wild-type PDC but also for GEM-resistant PDC. The
mechanism of anti-tumor effect of MET seems to be, at least partly, the
inhibition of HIF-1/mTOR signaling pathway. These data suggest that MET
could be used to treat PDC.

