Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Correlation of PD-L1 expression and HPV status among primary and
metastasized HNSCC tumors


Dysregulation of the immune checkpoints has been identified as one of the
mechanisms tumor cells employ for immune escape. Human papillomavirus
(HPV) plays an important role in the etiology of one subset of Head and
Neck Squamous Cell Carcinomas (HNSCC). Recent studies reported that
PD-1/PD-L1 pathway may be correlated with HPV-associated HNSCC. The
degree of PD-L1 expression has been reported to be increased in those
patients with HPV-positive disease. Also, PD-L1 expression in HNSCC was
observed in the primary, recurrent, and metastatic disease setting.
However, the clinicopathological implications associated with PD-L1 in
HNSCC, as well as in disease metastasis, remain largely unclear.Using
immunohistochemistry (IHC) and In situ hybridization (ISH) on VENTANA
BenchMark ULTRA automated stainers, 40 cases of HNSCC, with matching
primary and metastatic cancer stages, were evaluated for expression of
PD-L1, p16, a surrogate marker of transforming HPV infections, and
presence of HPV. Formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tumor samples were
subjected to PD-L1- and p16-IHC as well as HPV-ISH. A potential
association between PD-L1 expression and HPV status among primary tumors
and matched metastases was analyzed.Our data show that expression of
PD-L1 or p16 is concordant in the majority of HNSCC primary vs metastatic
tumor cases tested. Agreement rate of p16 expression among 40 case pairs
of primary vs metastatic tumor was 88.2% with a 95% Confidence Interval
(CI) of (73.4-95.3). PD-L1 expression was 76.9% (61.7-87.4) concordant
among the 40 case pairs. Agreement rate between PD-L1 and p16 was 77.1%
(61.0-87.9) in primary cases and 51.3% (35.9-66.6) in metastatic cases.
No obvious association between PD-L1 and p16 expression was observed.

