Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Trends in the incidence of retinoblastoma in the United States
from 1973-2012


Background: Retinoblastoma is a rare form of eye cancer that usually
develops in early childhood, typically before the age of 5. This study
aims to determine the incidence of retinoblastoma in the United States
over a 40-year period from 1973 to 2012 using a review of existing
databases.Methods: 882 patients with retinoblastoma (International
Classification of Diseases for Oncology (ICD-O-3) codes C69.2 (retina)
and C69.9 (eye, NOS)) were derived from the Surveillance, Epidemiology,
and End Results (SEER) program database in the United States from 1973 to
2012, using the nine historical SEER registries with the earliest
observation collections. Incidence rates were calculated per 1,000,000
children and age-adjusted using the United States Census Bureau data as
the standard population. The significance of trend in the incidence rate
over time was determined using the Chi-Square test, and 95% CIs were
calculated. Descriptive statistics evaluated differences in incidence in
terms of age group, gender, race and laterality. Surveillance was
evaluated by analysis of diagnosis confirmation and reporting
source.Results: There were a total of 882 cases of retinoblastoma,
representing 6.1% of all childhood cancers under age 5 years. 49.1% of
cases were males and 96% of all cases were children aged 0-4 years. The
mean incidence of retinoblastoma was 12.14 cases per million children
aged 0-4 years (95% CI 11.32 to 12.96) and 0.49 cases per million
children aged 5-9 years (95% CI 0.36 to 0.65). There was no significant
trend in the incidence for children aged 0-4 years old (Xsup2 = 35.455 p
= 0.6324) or 5-9 years old (Xsup2 = 32.247 p = 0.7695) for all
races/genders. The proportion of bilateral cases (28.9%) versus
unilateral cases (71.1%) remained stable over the 40-year period. 85.6%
of the cases were confirmed microscopically and hospitals represent 98.8%
of the reporting sources.Conclusions: The incidence rate of
retinoblastoma in the United States has remained stable for the last 40
years. The majority of the cases are unilateral, and hospitals are the
main reporting source.

