Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BaP induces chromosome missegregation through mitotic spindle
defects in normal lung epithelial cells


Lung cancer remains the leading cause of cancer related deaths in the
United States. Cancer results from an accumulation of multiple genetic
events leading to genomic instability that is a crucial early event in
carcinogenesis. Aneuploidy is the most frequently identified genomic
abnormality in cancer. We have previously reported a significantly higher
level of aneuploidy in smokers who developed lung cancer as compared to
smoker controls. Benzo(a)pyrene [B(a)P], a polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbon, is a pulmonary carcinogen and one of 60 different
carcinogens found in tobacco smoke. In this study, we hypothesize that
B(a)P disrupts mitotic spindle assembly that impairs the fidelity of
mitosis leading to chromosome missegregation and aneuploidy.To test our
hypothesis, we use confocal imaging in combination with traditional
molecular biology techniques to dissect the precise mechanism by which
B[a]P induces chromosome missegregation and aneuploidy. Mitotic spindle
defects in the form of chromosome lags and bridges, monopolar and
multipolar spindles, were assessed in normal lung epithelial cells after
treatment with 10M B[a]P for 6 hrs. Spindle defects were assessed at 24,
48, 72 and 96 hours after treatment. Immunofluorescence revealed abnormal
mitosis in the prometaphase through the telophase stage of mitosis. Our
result show that B[a]P exposure induced abnormal spindles in the form of
monopolar (14%) and multipolar (4%) spindles. High resolution confocal
images further revealed that B[a]P exposure led to misoriented mitotic
spindles with an abnormal spindle angle [-380] relative to normal plane
[180]. Chromosome lagging at both metaphase (17%) and anaphase (9%) has
also been recorded in response to B[a]P exposure, observations that
result from defects in the mitotic apparatus and kinetochores.
Furthermore, we assessed the extent of B[a]P induced genetic instability
[in the form of double strand DNA breaks] using gama-H2AX in order to
elucidate the underlying mechanism associated with accumulated genetic
damage and chromosome missegregation. Our data indicate that B[a]P
results in accumulation of mitotic abnormalities and gama-H2AX foci (22%)
peaks at 48 hr compared to other time points.Taken together, our data
show that B[a]P potently induces mitotic abnormalities by disrupting
kinetochore microtubules. The induction of mitotic abnormalities by B[a]P
leading to chromosome missegregation and aneuploidy, would unravel a
novel targetable molecular mechanism of cigarette smoke induced lung
tumorigenesis.

