Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation of mitochondrial biogenesis in primary human clear cell
renal cell carcinoma cells


Clear cell renal cell carcinoma, ccRCC, is the most prevalent type of
kidney cancer. In over 90% of ccRCCs the tumor suppressor protein von
Hippel Lindau is inactivated, leading to a pseudohypoxic phenotype with
vast effects on angiogenesis as well as energy metabolism. In accordance
with the Warburg effect, aerobic glycolysis increases, while
mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation is decreased.We have previously
published data showing that also the number and activity of mitochondria
is strikingly reduced in primary human ccRCC cells compared to normal
kidney epithelial cells. This was not seen in any of the established RCC
cell lines included in the study. We are now continuing these studies by
investigating the regulation of mitochondrial biogenesis in primary human
ccRCC cells, and how the number and activity of mitochondria influences
the tumorigenic properties of these cells.RNA has been isolated from
ccRCC tissue areas identified as mitochondria high or low. The expression
profile in these samples will be analyzed by RNA sequencing.Human primary
ccRCC cells obtained from patient nephrectomies are kept in culture and
the regulation of mitochondrial biogenesis in these cells is
investigated. How the mitochondrial content affects tumorigenic
properties such as proliferation, migration and resistance to apoptosis
is also investigated.Preliminary data indicate that primary ccRCC cells
have an absent or severly limited capability to increase the number of
mitochondria on metabolic demand, and that the regulation of mitogenesis
is defective.These results point towards a malfunctioning energy sensing
and mitochondrial biogenesis in ccRCC cells that might be part of the
explanation to the very low mitochondrial content in these cells.

