Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Modulation of doxorubicin actions on HCC cells by insulin-like
growth factor-I


Tumor microenvironment is increasingly understood to influence tumor
biology in many tumor types, including HCC. We recently showed that
platelets could modulate Doxorubicin (Dox)-mediated HCC growth inhibition
(Refolo MG et al. Modulation of doxorubicin mediated growth inhibition of
hepatocellular carcinoma cells by platelet lysates. Anticancer Agents Med
Chem. 2014;14:1154-60). Platelets contain cytokines and growth factors,
including IGF-1, PDGF, FGF, EGF and serotonin. We found that Insulin-like
growth factor-1 (IGF-1) shifted the Dox growth-inhibitory dose-response
in the range of 0.1-1.0 M on Hep3B, HepG2, PLC/PRF/5 human HCC lines, all
of which became less sensitive to both Dox-mediated inhibition of growth
and apoptosis. Similar antagonism by IGF-1 was found for Dox-mediated
inhibition of cell migration (scratch assay) and invasion (Boyden
chamber). This antagonism of Dox effects on cell growth, migration and
apoptosis by IGF1, was blocked by GSK1838705A, an IGF-1R inhibitor.
Furthermore, when platelet extracts were used to antagonize Dox
inhibition of growth and migration, the platelet effects were also
blocked by addition of GSK1838705A to the cultures, showing that the
platelet effects were largely mediated by IGF-1. Dox caused a decrease in
the levels of anti-apoptosis markers Bcl-2, Bcl-xL and survivin as seen
on WB, whereas levels of all three anti-apoptosis markers were increased
by IGF-1 action. These actions of IGF-1 were also blocked by GSK
1838705A. Furthermore, Dox caused a decrease in the levels of P-ERK,
P-p38 and P-STAT3 (ser727). These signaling molecule decreases were also
reversed by the presence of IGF-1.Conclusions. Dox actions on HCC cells
can be antagonized by platelets and specifically by platelet-associated
IGF-1. IGF-1 antagonists appear to be attractive enhancers of sensitivity
to Dox actions.

