Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical development of a combination inhibitor strategy to
block K-Ras effector signaling and autophagy for pancreatic cancer
treatment


Pancreatic cancer is the 4th leading cause of cancer deaths in the US and
the 5-year survival rate is a dismal 6%. The KRAS oncogene is mutated in
95% of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) and targeting KRAS is one
of four key priorities for pancreatic cancer research, as outlined by the
NCI. We hypothesize that inhibition of K-Ras effector signaling is the
most promising approach to achieve this goal, and that concurrent
inhibition of mutant KRAS-mediated metabolic reprogramming, in particular
upregulated autophagy, is needed to disrupt resistance mechanisms that
render PDAC cells unaffected by inhibition of either pathway alone. Our
preliminary data show that PDAC cells increase levels of autophagic
signaling upon KRAS silencing as a compensatory mechanism for the cell to
maintain anabolic processes, particularly due to the loss of upregulated
glycolytic signaling and macropincytotic scavenging. Furthermore, we show
that ERK inhibitor treatment, just like KRAS silencing, increases
autophagic flux in PDAC cells. Additionally, we have demonstrated in
vitro that chloroquine (CQ), an inhibitor of autophagy, synergistically
enhances the anti-proliferative capacity of two different ERK inhibitors,
one of which is under clinical evaluation. Finally, we show that
signaling pathways that promote resistance to ERK inhibitor treatment
alone are incapable of promoting resistance to the combination treatment
with CQ. Overall, our studies support the further clinical evaluation of
duel ERK and autophagy inhibition as a treatment for PDAC.

