Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of obesity on inflammation markers in the prostate tumor
microenvironment


Background: Obesity reflects a chronic inflammatory environment that may
contribute to prostate cancer progression and poor treatment outcomes.
However, it is not clear which mechanisms drive this association within
the tumor microenvironment. The aim of this pilot study was to examine
prostatic inflammation via tumor infiltrating lymphocytes and macrophages
characterized by obesity and cancer severity.Methods: We studied
paraffin-embedded prostatectomy tissue from 99 participants (63 non-obese
and 36 obese) from the Study of Clinical Outcomes, Risk and Ethnicity
(University of Pennsylvania) Pathologists analyzed the tissue for type
and count of lymphocytes and macrophages, including CD3, CD8, FOXP3, and
CD68. Pathology data were linked to clinical and demographic variables.
Statistical analyses included frequency tables, Kruskal-Wallis tests,
Spearman correlations, and multivariable models.Results: We observed
positive univariate associations between the number of CD68 cells and
tumor grade (p = 0.019), as well as biochemical failure (p = 0.033). In
multivariable analysis, CD3 and CD8 counts were associated with time to
biochemical failure (HR = 0.93, 95% CI = 0.88-0.99; HR = 1.08, 95% CI =
1.01-1.17, respectively.) Preliminary results suggested differences in
lymphocytes by race. There were no differences in lymphocytes or
macrophages by obesity status or BMI.Conclusions: The number of
lymphocytes and macrophages in the tumor microenvironment did not differ
by obesity status. However, these inflammation markers were associated
with poor prostate cancer outcomes. Further examination of underlying
mechanisms that influence obesity-related effects on prostate cancer
outcomes is warranted. Such research will guide immunotherapy protocols
and weight management as they apply to diverse patient populations and
phenotypes.

