Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The stress response mediator ATF3 stabilizes p53 by competing with
it for MDM2-mediated ubiquitination


While the tumor suppressor p53 is crucial for the maintenance of genetic
integrity upon DNA damage and oncogenic stresses, its level and activity
are tightly controlled by a complex network largely mediated by the E3
ubiquitin ligase MDM2. MDM2 catalyzes the addition of ubiqutin chains to
the C-terminus of p53 and is the major ubiquitin ligase to promote
proteosomal degradation of p53. We previously demonstrated that ATF3, a
common stress response mediator, can bind p53 and prevent it from
MDM2-mediated ubiquitination. As a consequence, ATF3 can stabilize p53
upon DNA damage and prevent cells from oncogene-induced transformation by
promoting p53-mediated senescence, in line with accumulating evidence
supporting that ATF3 can act as a tumor suppressor. Interestingly, ATF3
is also a bona fide substrate of MDM2, and thus, the ATF3-MDM2
interaction can fine tune p53 activity in the DNA damage response.
However, the mechanism by which ATF3 blocks p53 ubiquitination to
activate the latter protein remains largely undefined. Efficient
ubiquitination of p53 requires the binding of MDM2 to the N-terminus of
p53, and the MDM2 binding to MDMX. Here we show that neither the p53-MDM2
interaction nor the MDM2-MDMX interaction is disrupted by the binding of
ATF3 to p53 or MDM2. As both ATF3 and p53 are substrates of MDM2, we
explored a possibility that ATF3 competes with p53 for MDM2-mediated
ubiquitination. By in-vitro ubiquitination assays, we identified that the
5 lysine residues clustering in aa 100-115 of ATF3 are required for
MDM2-mediated ubiquitination. Site-specific mutagenesis indicates that
MDM2 mainly ubiquitinates ATF3 at lysine 107 (K107) and lysine 108 (K108)
as MDM2 fails to add ubiquitin chains to ATF3 when these two residues
were mutated to arginine. Importantly, while mutations at these two
residues do not affect the ATF3 binding to MDM2 or p53, the ATF3 mutant
devoid of ubiquitination fails to stabilize p53 and prevent p53 from
MDM2-mediated ubiquitination. These results thus demonstrate that ATF3
can activate p53 by competing with the tumor suppressor for MDM2-mediated
ubiquitination.

