Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel methoxyflavanone from a Chinese medicinal herb (Perilla
frutescens) induces G2/M cell cycle arrest and apoptosis in A549 human
lung adenocarcinoma cells


Background: Perilla frutescens is a common traditional Chinese medicinal
herb used for a variety of diseases, e.g. allergic asthma, cough and
intestinal disorders. Flavonoids isolated from P. frutescens such as
rosmarinic acid, caffeic acid and apigenin have been reported to inhibit
proliferation of a variety of cancer cell lines. We recently identified a
novel methoxyflavanone named PDMF (Perilla-derived methoxyflavanone) from
P. frutescens as a candidate for anti-allergic drug. The objective of the
study is to investigate antitumor potency of PDMF on A549 human lung
adenocarcinoma and to elucidate its carcinostatic mechanisms.Methods:
Effect of PDMF on cell proliferation and viability of A549 cells were
assessed by BrdU incorporation assay and trypan blue dye exclusion test.
Cell cycle and apoptosis analyses were carried out by flow cytometry. To
elucidate antitumor mechanisms of PDMF, expression and activation status
of cell cycle/apoptosis regulators (p53/p21/BAX/caspases) were thoroughly
analyzed by immunoblotting.Results: Stimulation with PDMF not only
triggered G2/M cell cycle arrest but also induced apoptosis of A549 cells
in a dose-dependent manner. Mechanistically, PDMF stimulation
significantly induced protein levels of p53 and its phosphorylated active
forms (pSer15) accompanied by induction of p21 and BAX. We also found
that proapoptotic caspase molecules (caspase 3, 8, and 9) were all
activated upon stimulation with PDMF.Conclusion: These results suggest
that this Perilla-derived methoxyflavanone represents a useful
cancer-preventive phytochemical that triggers G2/M arrest, apoptosis, and
activation of p53 pathway.

