Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Iron control is a novel therapeutic target of cancer stem cells


Background: Iron overload is known to cause cancer. Iron depletion
treatment has been reported to have an anti-cancer effect. However, it is
unclear whether iron depletion treatment is also effective in cancer stem
cells (CSCs) or not. Recently, new CSCs model, miPS-LLCcm, was
epigenetically established from murine induced pluripotent stem cells
(miPS cells) in Okayama university (Chen at el. PLOS ONE 2012). In this
model, Green Fluorescent Protein (GFP) was designed under Nanog promoter
lesion. Therefore, GFP positive cells indicated the undifferentiated
cancer progenitor cells. The tumor tissue derived from miPS-LLCcm cells
involved glandular structure, angiogenesis, and cytokeratin positive
lesion in immunostaining. We hypothesized that CSCs depended on iron in
proliferation and differentiation. Thus, we also hypothesized iron
depletion treatment might have a novel therapeutic effect.Methods: We
used miPS-LLCcm cells as CSCs, colon26 and 4T1 cells as differentiated
cancer cells. Iron depleted condition was simulated by iron free medium
with 1% fetal bovine serum. Transferrin (Holo) and iron chelators
(Deferoxamine and Deferasirox) additional examinations were done to
reveal the dependency of iron. Cell viability was examined by XTT assay
48 hours after administration of transferrin and iron chelators. Western
blot analysis was done to examine the effect of iron depletion on iron
related markers and stemness markers including TfR-1, DMT-1, Nanog, SOX2,
c-Myc, Oct3/4, Klf-4, E-cadherin. Subcutaneous tumor model of miPS-LLCcm
cells was used in vivo. Deferoxamine (30mg/kg/day) and deferasirox
(30mg/kg/day) were administrated directly into the tumor. Tumors were
collected for immunostaining.Results: Transferrin strongly promoted cell
proliferation of miPS-LLCcm in iron depleted condition. However,
Transferrin did not promote proliferation of colon26 and 4T1 in the
condition. Iron depletion by iron chelators suppressed miPS-LLCcm
proliferation and the expression of stemness markers including Nanog,
SOX2, c-Myc, Oct3/4, Klf-4, and E-cadherin in vitro study. Deferasirox
more strongly suppressed the expression of stemness markers than
deferoxamine. Iron depletion by iron chelators suppressed subcutaneous
tumor growth. The average tumor volume of the control group was 1270.8
411.2 mm3 while that of deferoxamine treatment group was 502.5 207.5 mm3
(pBackground: Iron overload is known to cause cancer. Iron depletion
treatment has been reported to have an anti-cancer effect. However, it is
unclear whether iron depletion treatment is also effective in cancer stem
cells (CSCs) or not. Recently, new CSCs model, miPS-LLCcm, was
epigenetically established from murine induced pluripotent stem cells
(miPS cells) in Okayama university (Chen at el. PLOS ONE 2012). In this
model, Green Fluorescent Protein (GFP) was designed under Nanog promoter
lesion. Therefore, GFP positive cells indicated the undifferentiated
cancer progenitor cells. The tumor tissue derived from miPS-LLCcm cells
involved glandular structure, angiogenesis, and cytokeratin positive
lesion in immunostaining. We hypothesized that CSCs depended on iron in
proliferation and differentiation. Thus, we also hypothesized iron
depletion treatment might have a novel therapeutic effect.Methods: We
used miPS-LLCcm cells as CSCs, colon26 and 4T1 cells as differentiated
cancer cells. Iron depleted condition was simulated by iron free medium
with 1% fetal bovine serum. Transferrin (Holo) and iron chelators
(Deferoxamine and Deferasirox) additional examinations were done to
reveal the dependency of iron. Cell viability was examined by XTT assay
48 hours after administration of transferrin and iron chelators. Western
blot analysis was done to examine the effect of iron depletion on iron
related markers and stemness markers including TfR-1, DMT-1, Nanog, SOX2,
c-Myc, Oct3/4, Klf-4, E-cadherin. Subcutaneous tumor model of miPS-LLCcm
cells was used in vivo. Deferoxamine (30mg/kg/day) and deferasirox
(30mg/kg/day) were administrated directly into the tumor. Tumors were
collected for immunostaining.Results: Transferrin strongly promoted cell
proliferation of miPS-LLCcm in iron depleted condition. However,
Transferrin did not promote proliferation of colon26 and 4T1 in the
condition. Iron depletion by iron chelators suppressed miPS-LLCcm
proliferation and the expression of stemness markers including Nanog,
SOX2, c-Myc, Oct3/4, Klf-4, and E-cadherin in vitro study. Deferasirox
more strongly suppressed the expression of stemness markers than
deferoxamine. Iron depletion by iron chelators suppressed subcutaneous
tumor growth. The average tumor volume of the control group was 1270.8
411.2 mm3 while that of deferoxamine treatment group was 502.5 207.5 mm3
(p<0.05) and deferasirox treatment group was 360.2 148.8 mm3
(pBackground: Iron overload is known to cause cancer. Iron depletion
treatment has been reported to have an anti-cancer effect. However, it is
unclear whether iron depletion treatment is also effective in cancer stem
cells (CSCs) or not. Recently, new CSCs model, miPS-LLCcm, was
epigenetically established from murine induced pluripotent stem cells
(miPS cells) in Okayama university (Chen at el. PLOS ONE 2012). In this
model, Green Fluorescent Protein (GFP) was designed under Nanog promoter
lesion. Therefore, GFP positive cells indicated the undifferentiated
cancer progenitor cells. The tumor tissue derived from miPS-LLCcm cells
involved glandular structure, angiogenesis, and cytokeratin positive
lesion in immunostaining. We hypothesized that CSCs depended on iron in
proliferation and differentiation. Thus, we also hypothesized iron
depletion treatment might have a novel therapeutic effect.Methods: We
used miPS-LLCcm cells as CSCs, colon26 and 4T1 cells as differentiated
cancer cells. Iron depleted condition was simulated by iron free medium
with 1% fetal bovine serum. Transferrin (Holo) and iron chelators
(Deferoxamine and Deferasirox) additional examinations were done to
reveal the dependency of iron. Cell viability was examined by XTT assay
48 hours after administration of transferrin and iron chelators. Western
blot analysis was done to examine the effect of iron depletion on iron
related markers and stemness markers including TfR-1, DMT-1, Nanog, SOX2,
c-Myc, Oct3/4, Klf-4, E-cadherin. Subcutaneous tumor model of miPS-LLCcm
cells was used in vivo. Deferoxamine (30mg/kg/day) and deferasirox
(30mg/kg/day) were administrated directly into the tumor. Tumors were
collected for immunostaining.Results: Transferrin strongly promoted cell
proliferation of miPS-LLCcm in iron depleted condition. However,
Transferrin did not promote proliferation of colon26 and 4T1 in the
condition. Iron depletion by iron chelators suppressed miPS-LLCcm
proliferation and the expression of stemness markers including Nanog,
SOX2, c-Myc, Oct3/4, Klf-4, and E-cadherin in vitro study. Deferasirox
more strongly suppressed the expression of stemness markers than
deferoxamine. Iron depletion by iron chelators suppressed subcutaneous
tumor growth. The average tumor volume of the control group was 1270.8
411.2 mm3 while that of deferoxamine treatment group was 502.5 207.5 mm3
(p<0.05) and deferasirox treatment group was 360.2 148.8 mm3 (p<0.01) on
day 19. The expression of stemness markers was also more strongly
suppressed in the deferasirox treatment group than deferoxamine treatment
group.Conclusions: Iron is a key element of the proliferation and
stemness in CSCs model. Iron control therapy including iron chelators is
a novel therapeutic target of CSCs.

