Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of the diagnostic value of serum anti-cyclin B1
autoantibody as a biomarker in lung cancer


To detect the diagnostic value of cancer-associated autoantibodies in
lung cancer, a panel of 9 tumor-associated antigens (TAAs) were used in
this study. The TAAs were composed of p62, p16, Koc, p53, Cyclin B1,
Cyclin E, Survivin, HCC1, and Rol-A full-length recombinant proteins.
Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay and immunoblotting were used to detect
antibodies in 50 lung cancer sera with clinicopathological
characteristics and 42 sera from normal individuals. Following,
antibodies to Cyclin B1, survivin, p53 and HCC1 were selected and
confirmed in another 62 sera from patients with lung cancer but without
clinical date and evaluate the diagnostic value of these TAAs. The
results showed that the positive rate of autoantibodies against nine
selected TAAs (cyclin B1, survivin, HCC1,p53, KOC,p16,p62, RalA and
cyclin E) reached 36%, 36%, 26%, 12%, 8%, 6%, 6%, 2%, 0% in 50 lung
cancer sera and 4.8%, 2.4%, 0%, 0%, 2.4%, 4.8%, 2.4%, 2.4%, 4.8% in 42
normal sera, respectively. The AUC values for distinguishing lung cancers
from normal sera were 0.767, 0.400, 0.567, 0.395, 0.230, 0.517, 0.635,
0.194, 0.411, respectively. These data suggest that cyclin B1, survivin,
HCC1 and p53 has higher clinical diagnostic quality and value than other
TAAs in lung cancer. In the confirmation group with 62 lung cancer sear,
autoantibodies against these four TAAs were also significantly higher in
patients with lung cancer (AUC values of 0.764,0.653,0.623 and 0.622, pTo
detect the diagnostic value of cancer-associated autoantibodies in lung
cancer, a panel of 9 tumor-associated antigens (TAAs) were used in this
study. The TAAs were composed of p62, p16, Koc, p53, Cyclin B1, Cyclin E,
Survivin, HCC1, and Rol-A full-length recombinant proteins. Enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay and immunoblotting were used to detect antibodies in
50 lung cancer sera with clinicopathological characteristics and 42 sera
from normal individuals. Following, antibodies to Cyclin B1, survivin,
p53 and HCC1 were selected and confirmed in another 62 sera from patients
with lung cancer but without clinical date and evaluate the diagnostic
value of these TAAs. The results showed that the positive rate of
autoantibodies against nine selected TAAs (cyclin B1, survivin, HCC1,p53,
KOC,p16,p62, RalA and cyclin E) reached 36%, 36%, 26%, 12%, 8%, 6%, 6%,
2%, 0% in 50 lung cancer sera and 4.8%, 2.4%, 0%, 0%, 2.4%, 4.8%, 2.4%,
2.4%, 4.8% in 42 normal sera, respectively. The AUC values for
distinguishing lung cancers from normal sera were 0.767, 0.400, 0.567,
0.395, 0.230, 0.517, 0.635, 0.194, 0.411, respectively. These data
suggest that cyclin B1, survivin, HCC1 and p53 has higher clinical
diagnostic quality and value than other TAAs in lung cancer. In the
confirmation group with 62 lung cancer sear, autoantibodies against these
four TAAs were also significantly higher in patients with lung cancer
(AUC values of 0.764,0.653,0.623 and 0.622, p<0.05). Evaluation of the
diagnostic value of these four TAAs in 50 sera from lung cancer patients
with clinical characteristics, and results revealed that serum
anti-cyclin B1, anti-survivin and anti-p53 autoantibodies significantly
increased in patients with stage I but only serum anti-cyclin B1
increased in stage II and III lung cancer (p To detect the diagnostic
value of cancer-associated autoantibodies in lung cancer, a panel of 9
tumor-associated antigens (TAAs) were used in this study. The TAAs were
composed of p62, p16, Koc, p53, Cyclin B1, Cyclin E, Survivin, HCC1, and
Rol-A full-length recombinant proteins. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
and immunoblotting were used to detect antibodies in 50 lung cancer sera
with clinicopathological characteristics and 42 sera from normal
individuals. Following, antibodies to Cyclin B1, survivin, p53 and HCC1
were selected and confirmed in another 62 sera from patients with lung
cancer but without clinical date and evaluate the diagnostic value of
these TAAs. The results showed that the positive rate of autoantibodies
against nine selected TAAs (cyclin B1, survivin, HCC1,p53, KOC,p16,p62,
RalA and cyclin E) reached 36%, 36%, 26%, 12%, 8%, 6%, 6%, 2%, 0% in 50
lung cancer sera and 4.8%, 2.4%, 0%, 0%, 2.4%, 4.8%, 2.4%, 2.4%, 4.8% in
42 normal sera, respectively. The AUC values for distinguishing lung
cancers from normal sera were 0.767, 0.400, 0.567, 0.395, 0.230, 0.517,
0.635, 0.194, 0.411, respectively. These data suggest that cyclin B1,
survivin, HCC1 and p53 has higher clinical diagnostic quality and value
than other TAAs in lung cancer. In the confirmation group with 62 lung
cancer sear, autoantibodies against these four TAAs were also
significantly higher in patients with lung cancer (AUC values of
0.764,0.653,0.623 and 0.622, p<0.05). Evaluation of the diagnostic value
of these four TAAs in 50 sera from lung cancer patients with clinical
characteristics, and results revealed that serum anti-cyclin B1,
anti-survivin and anti-p53 autoantibodies significantly increased in
patients with stage I but only serum anti-cyclin B1 increased in stage II
and III lung cancer (p <0.05, respectively), ROC curve analysis has shown
that anti-cyclin B1 and anti-p53 autoantibodies can discriminate stage I
lung cancer from normal controls with AUC value of 0.757,0.697,
respectively (pTo detect the diagnostic value of cancer-associated
autoantibodies in lung cancer, a panel of 9 tumor-associated antigens
(TAAs) were used in this study. The TAAs were composed of p62, p16, Koc,
p53, Cyclin B1, Cyclin E, Survivin, HCC1, and Rol-A full-length
recombinant proteins. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay and
immunoblotting were used to detect antibodies in 50 lung cancer sera with
clinicopathological characteristics and 42 sera from normal individuals.
Following, antibodies to Cyclin B1, survivin, p53 and HCC1 were selected
and confirmed in another 62 sera from patients with lung cancer but
without clinical date and evaluate the diagnostic value of these TAAs.
The results showed that the positive rate of autoantibodies against nine
selected TAAs (cyclin B1, survivin, HCC1,p53, KOC,p16,p62, RalA and
cyclin E) reached 36%, 36%, 26%, 12%, 8%, 6%, 6%, 2%, 0% in 50 lung
cancer sera and 4.8%, 2.4%, 0%, 0%, 2.4%, 4.8%, 2.4%, 2.4%, 4.8% in 42
normal sera, respectively. The AUC values for distinguishing lung cancers
from normal sera were 0.767, 0.400, 0.567, 0.395, 0.230, 0.517, 0.635,
0.194, 0.411, respectively. These data suggest that cyclin B1, survivin,
HCC1 and p53 has higher clinical diagnostic quality and value than other
TAAs in lung cancer. In the confirmation group with 62 lung cancer sear,
autoantibodies against these four TAAs were also significantly higher in
patients with lung cancer (AUC values of 0.764,0.653,0.623 and 0.622,
p<0.05). Evaluation of the diagnostic value of these four TAAs in 50 sera
from lung cancer patients with clinical characteristics, and results
revealed that serum anti-cyclin B1, anti-survivin and anti-p53
autoantibodies significantly increased in patients with stage I but only
serum anti-cyclin B1 increased in stage II and III lung cancer (p <0.05,
respectively), ROC curve analysis has shown that anti-cyclin B1 and
anti-p53 autoantibodies can discriminate stage I lung cancer from normal
controls with AUC value of 0.757,0.697, respectively (p<0.01), and
anti-survivin and anti-HCC1 autoantibodies failed to discriminate stage I
lung cancer from normal controls. Our results suggest that these four
TAAs has higher clinical diagnostic quality and value than other TAAs in
lung cancer and serum cyclin-B1 may have the potential to serve as novel
non-invasive diagnostic biomarkers in patients with lung cancer,
especially in early stage lung cancer.

