Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNA-211 enhances the oncogenicity of oral carcinoma through
targeting TCF12 and up-regulating FAM213A expression


To address the oncogenic roles of miR-211, we generated K14-EGFP-miR-211
transgenic mouse lines. Upon the 4-nitroquinoline 1-oxide (4NQO)
induction, the transgenic mice exhibited more extensive and severe
tumorigenesis in tongue compared to the controls. 4NQO up-regulated
miR-211 expression in oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) cells. miR-211
directly targeted transcription factor 12 (TCF12), which mediated
suppressor activities and was drastically down-regulated in OSCC tumors.
GeneChip analysis, bioinformatic algorithm, reporter assay and ChIP assay
pinpointed that Family with Sequence Similarity 213, Member A (FAM213A),
an anti-oxidative molecule, was transcriptionally repressed by TCF12.
Knockdown of FAM213A decreased oncogenic activity and ALDH1-positive cell
population, and increased oxygen stress in OSCC cells. The expression of
TCF12 and FAM213A was inversely correlated in head and neck carcinoma
samples according to The Cancer Genome Atlas. OSCC patients carrying
tumors with high FAM213A expression tended to have worse survival.
Furthermore, 4NQO treatment down-regulated TCF12 and up-regulated FAM213A
through modulating miR-211. The transgenic mouse model recaptures the
molecular and histopathological changes as seen in human OSCC
pathogenesis. This study highlights that miR-211 responds to oncogenic
stimuli to promote the neoplastic process of OSCC by targeting TCF12 and
up-regulating FAM213A.

