Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SOX2 silencing upregulates CDKN1A and suppresses growth of lung
squamous cell carcinoma


SOX2 is a master pluripotency controller that was recently identified as
a novel major oncogene, recurrently amplified and activated in lung
squamous cell carcinoma (lung SCC). Then, transcriptional downstream
targets of SOX2 have been actively investigated; however, such targets
are often cell line specific. Here, in order to identify highly consensus
SOX2 downstream genes in lung SCC cells, we used RNA-seq data from 178
lung SCC specimens (containing tumor and tumor-associated cells) and
analyzed the correlation between SOX2 and previously-reported
SOX2-controlled genes in lung SCC. In addition, we used another RNA-seq
dataset from 105 non-small cell lung cancer cell lines (NSCLC; including
lung SCC cells) and again analyzed the correlation between SOX2 and the
reported SOX2-controlled genes in the NSCLC cell lines (no
tumor-associated cells). We combined the two analyses and identified
genes commonly correlated with SOX2 in both datasets. Among the 99 genes
reported as SOX2 downstream and/or correlated genes, we found 4
negatively-correlated (e.g., CDKN1A) and 11 positively-correlated genes
with SOX2. We used biological studies to demonstrate that CDKN1A was
suppressed by SOX2 in lung SCC cells. G1 cell cycle arrest induced by
SOX2 siRNA was rescued by CDKN1A siRNA. These results indicate that the
tumorigenic effect of SOX2 in lung SCC cells is mediated in part by
suppression of CDKN1A.

