Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The tumor-permissive role of KHSRP in colorectal cancer:
Mechanistic insights from a gene expression study


Inflammation plays a key role in the development of Colorectal Cancer
(CRC), but the underlying regulatory mechanisms are yet to be fully
elucidated. The K-homology splicing regulatory protein (KHSRP) is a
multifunctional RNA-binding protein which regulates translation of
transcripts containing ARE sequences in their 3-UTR, affecting RNA fate
at different levels. KHSRP has been implicated in different functions
associated with cancer cell biology, such as inflammation and cell-fate
determination. Importantly, KHSRP regulates expression of pro-tumorigenic
and anti-inflammatory cytokines, potentially impacting on the tumor
microenvironment. We have previously shown that knockdown of KHSRP
expression in CRC cell lines regulates cell proliferation and clonogenic
survival. KHSRP is also required for the secretion of the pro-angiogenic
cytokines, IL-8 and VEGF, impacting on endothelial tube formation. To
understand the global impact of KHSRP in regulation of CRC cell function
we used Affimetrix Human Transcriptome array to investigate gene
expression upon KHSRP silencing in SW480 CRC cells. A total of 210 genes
were differentially expressed, 155 of which were up-regulated (100 coding
and 55 non-coding genes) and 55 were down-regulated (34 coding and 21
non-coding genes). Among these were genes involved in RNA biology,
inflammation, immunity, cell signaling and tumor-stroma interaction,
shedding light on the potential mechanisms of action of KHSRP in
epithelial cells. Representative targets have been selected for
validation and further mechanistic studies. These data builds upon our
previous findings suggesting a role for KHSRP in creating a
tumor-permissive microenvironment in CRC.

