Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A homogeneous bioluminescent succinate assay for detection of
jumonjiC domain-containing histone demethylase activities


JumonjiC domain-containing histone lysine demethylases (JMJCs) play a
pivotal role in determining the epigenetic status of the genome, leading
to either transcriptional repression or activation of target genes by
counteracting the activities of histone lysine methyltransferases.
Because of their implication in cancer, they have become validated drug
targets. Therefore, assays for this enzyme subfamily are desirable in
order to facilitate the identification of selective and potent inhibitors
for drug discovery and as basic research tools. Since succinate is one of
the products of the demethylation reaction catalyzed by these enzymes, an
assay that detects succinate would be suitable for monitoring all JMJC
activities as well as other succinate-forming enzymes (i.e.:
dioxygenases). Thus, a bioluminescent and homogenous succinate detection
assay for measuring JMJC activity was developed, and it is performed in a
two-step format that relies on converting the succinate product to ATP,
and then to light in a robust luciferase reaction. The light output is
proportional to succinate concentration from low nM to 15M, and the assay
is highly sensitive and robust, two features that are highly desirable
and essential for measuring the activity of the majority of JMJC
demethylase subfamilies. Therefore, the succinate detection assay is a
simple-to-use method that does not require antibodies or modified
substrates. Examples of various applications of this succinate detection
assay will be presented, including studies on specificity of different
substrates by diverse JMJCs, as well as mode of action studies using
specific inhibitors. The development of this succinate detection assay
will make it possible to investigate a large number of JMJC demethylases
and could have significant impact on diverse areas of Epigenetics
research.

