Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The dual mTOR inhibitor, AZD2014, and castration increase
intra-tumoral immune cell infiltration and anti-tumour activity in a
genetically engineered mouse model of prostate cancer


Background: Medical therapy for men with prostate cancer (PCa) is
evolving, including recent evidence to support the use of chemotherapy
for men with hormone sensitive disease. PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway aberrations
are common in patients with primary PCa and almost universal in
metastatic tumours. The mTOR pathway acts as a central regulator of
tumour cell metabolism, proliferation, cell cycle progression and immune
regulation. The aim of this study was to investigate the effects of mTOR
inhibitor AZD2014 on tumour growth and immune infiltration in a
genetically engineered mouse model of PCa.Methods: PtenL/L;PB-Cre4 mice,
which developed invasive hormone-sensitive prostate tumours between 10-14
months of age, were enrolled (n = 13-15 per group) and treated with
AZD2014 (15mg/Kg) or vehicle orally for 14 doses (QD 5/7) with or without
castration. Tumour volumes were assessed by ultrasound imaging. Tumour
samples were collected within 4 hours post 14th dose for histological and
molecular analysis.Results: AZD2014 was well tolerated, no overt toxicity
was observed. Mean plasma concentrations of AZD2014 were 4.42.1M at time
of tumour sampling. AZD2014 alone or AZD2014+castration inhibited mTORC1
and mTORC2 activity as demonstrated by reduced p4EBP1(Thr37/46) 48%27%
(PBackground: Medical therapy for men with prostate cancer (PCa) is
evolving, including recent evidence to support the use of chemotherapy
for men with hormone sensitive disease. PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway aberrations
are common in patients with primary PCa and almost universal in
metastatic tumours. The mTOR pathway acts as a central regulator of
tumour cell metabolism, proliferation, cell cycle progression and immune
regulation. The aim of this study was to investigate the effects of mTOR
inhibitor AZD2014 on tumour growth and immune infiltration in a
genetically engineered mouse model of PCa.Methods: PtenL/L;PB-Cre4 mice,
which developed invasive hormone-sensitive prostate tumours between 10-14
months of age, were enrolled (n = 13-15 per group) and treated with
AZD2014 (15mg/Kg) or vehicle orally for 14 doses (QD 5/7) with or without
castration. Tumour volumes were assessed by ultrasound imaging. Tumour
samples were collected within 4 hours post 14th dose for histological and
molecular analysis.Results: AZD2014 was well tolerated, no overt toxicity
was observed. Mean plasma concentrations of AZD2014 were 4.42.1M at time
of tumour sampling. AZD2014 alone or AZD2014+castration inhibited mTORC1
and mTORC2 activity as demonstrated by reduced p4EBP1(Thr37/46) 48%27%
(P<0.001) and 37%11% (PBackground: Medical therapy for men with prostate
cancer (PCa) is evolving, including recent evidence to support the use of
chemotherapy for men with hormone sensitive disease. PI3K/AKT/mTOR
pathway aberrations are common in patients with primary PCa and almost
universal in metastatic tumours. The mTOR pathway acts as a central
regulator of tumour cell metabolism, proliferation, cell cycle
progression and immune regulation. The aim of this study was to
investigate the effects of mTOR inhibitor AZD2014 on tumour growth and
immune infiltration in a genetically engineered mouse model of
PCa.Methods: PtenL/L;PB-Cre4 mice, which developed invasive
hormone-sensitive prostate tumours between 10-14 months of age, were
enrolled (n = 13-15 per group) and treated with AZD2014 (15mg/Kg) or
vehicle orally for 14 doses (QD 5/7) with or without castration. Tumour
volumes were assessed by ultrasound imaging. Tumour samples were
collected within 4 hours post 14th dose for histological and molecular
analysis.Results: AZD2014 was well tolerated, no overt toxicity was
observed. Mean plasma concentrations of AZD2014 were 4.42.1M at time of
tumour sampling. AZD2014 alone or AZD2014+castration inhibited mTORC1 and
mTORC2 activity as demonstrated by reduced p4EBP1(Thr37/46) 48%27%
(P<0.001) and 37%11% (P<0.001), pS6(Ser235/236) 74%43% (PBackground:
Medical therapy for men with prostate cancer (PCa) is evolving, including
recent evidence to support the use of chemotherapy for men with hormone
sensitive disease. PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway aberrations are common in
patients with primary PCa and almost universal in metastatic tumours. The
mTOR pathway acts as a central regulator of tumour cell metabolism,
proliferation, cell cycle progression and immune regulation. The aim of
this study was to investigate the effects of mTOR inhibitor AZD2014 on
tumour growth and immune infiltration in a genetically engineered mouse
model of PCa.Methods: PtenL/L;PB-Cre4 mice, which developed invasive
hormone-sensitive prostate tumours between 10-14 months of age, were
enrolled (n = 13-15 per group) and treated with AZD2014 (15mg/Kg) or
vehicle orally for 14 doses (QD 5/7) with or without castration. Tumour
volumes were assessed by ultrasound imaging. Tumour samples were
collected within 4 hours post 14th dose for histological and molecular
analysis.Results: AZD2014 was well tolerated, no overt toxicity was
observed. Mean plasma concentrations of AZD2014 were 4.42.1M at time of
tumour sampling. AZD2014 alone or AZD2014+castration inhibited mTORC1 and
mTORC2 activity as demonstrated by reduced p4EBP1(Thr37/46) 48%27%
(P<0.001) and 37%11% (P<0.001), pS6(Ser235/236) 74%43% (P<0.001) and
44%13% (PBackground: Medical therapy for men with prostate cancer (PCa)
is evolving, including recent evidence to support the use of chemotherapy
for men with hormone sensitive disease. PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway aberrations
are common in patients with primary PCa and almost universal in
metastatic tumours. The mTOR pathway acts as a central regulator of
tumour cell metabolism, proliferation, cell cycle progression and immune
regulation. The aim of this study was to investigate the effects of mTOR
inhibitor AZD2014 on tumour growth and immune infiltration in a
genetically engineered mouse model of PCa.Methods: PtenL/L;PB-Cre4 mice,
which developed invasive hormone-sensitive prostate tumours between 10-14
months of age, were enrolled (n = 13-15 per group) and treated with
AZD2014 (15mg/Kg) or vehicle orally for 14 doses (QD 5/7) with or without
castration. Tumour volumes were assessed by ultrasound imaging. Tumour
samples were collected within 4 hours post 14th dose for histological and
molecular analysis.Results: AZD2014 was well tolerated, no overt toxicity
was observed. Mean plasma concentrations of AZD2014 were 4.42.1M at time
of tumour sampling. AZD2014 alone or AZD2014+castration inhibited mTORC1
and mTORC2 activity as demonstrated by reduced p4EBP1(Thr37/46) 48%27%
(P<0.001) and 37%11% (P<0.001), pS6(Ser235/236) 74%43% (P<0.001) and
44%13% (P<0.001), pAKT(Ser473) 36%8% (PBackground: Medical therapy for
men with prostate cancer (PCa) is evolving, including recent evidence to
support the use of chemotherapy for men with hormone sensitive disease.
PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway aberrations are common in patients with primary PCa
and almost universal in metastatic tumours. The mTOR pathway acts as a
central regulator of tumour cell metabolism, proliferation, cell cycle
progression and immune regulation. The aim of this study was to
investigate the effects of mTOR inhibitor AZD2014 on tumour growth and
immune infiltration in a genetically engineered mouse model of
PCa.Methods: PtenL/L;PB-Cre4 mice, which developed invasive
hormone-sensitive prostate tumours between 10-14 months of age, were
enrolled (n = 13-15 per group) and treated with AZD2014 (15mg/Kg) or
vehicle orally for 14 doses (QD 5/7) with or without castration. Tumour
volumes were assessed by ultrasound imaging. Tumour samples were
collected within 4 hours post 14th dose for histological and molecular
analysis.Results: AZD2014 was well tolerated, no overt toxicity was
observed. Mean plasma concentrations of AZD2014 were 4.42.1M at time of
tumour sampling. AZD2014 alone or AZD2014+castration inhibited mTORC1 and
mTORC2 activity as demonstrated by reduced p4EBP1(Thr37/46) 48%27%
(P<0.001) and 37%11% (P<0.001), pS6(Ser235/236) 74%43% (P<0.001) and
44%13% (P<0.001), pAKT(Ser473) 36%8% (P<0.001) and 20%3% (PBackground:
Medical therapy for men with prostate cancer (PCa) is evolving, including
recent evidence to support the use of chemotherapy for men with hormone
sensitive disease. PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway aberrations are common in
patients with primary PCa and almost universal in metastatic tumours. The
mTOR pathway acts as a central regulator of tumour cell metabolism,
proliferation, cell cycle progression and immune regulation. The aim of
this study was to investigate the effects of mTOR inhibitor AZD2014 on
tumour growth and immune infiltration in a genetically engineered mouse
model of PCa.Methods: PtenL/L;PB-Cre4 mice, which developed invasive
hormone-sensitive prostate tumours between 10-14 months of age, were
enrolled (n = 13-15 per group) and treated with AZD2014 (15mg/Kg) or
vehicle orally for 14 doses (QD 5/7) with or without castration. Tumour
volumes were assessed by ultrasound imaging. Tumour samples were
collected within 4 hours post 14th dose for histological and molecular
analysis.Results: AZD2014 was well tolerated, no overt toxicity was
observed. Mean plasma concentrations of AZD2014 were 4.42.1M at time of
tumour sampling. AZD2014 alone or AZD2014+castration inhibited mTORC1 and
mTORC2 activity as demonstrated by reduced p4EBP1(Thr37/46) 48%27%
(P<0.001) and 37%11% (P<0.001), pS6(Ser235/236) 74%43% (P<0.001) and
44%13% (P<0.001), pAKT(Ser473) 36%8% (P<0.001) and 20%3% (P<0.01),
respectively compared to vehicle-treated mice. Proliferation (Ki67+) was
reduced in AZD2014-treated tumours by 70%45% (PBackground: Medical
therapy for men with prostate cancer (PCa) is evolving, including recent
evidence to support the use of chemotherapy for men with hormone
sensitive disease. PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway aberrations are common in
patients with primary PCa and almost universal in metastatic tumours. The
mTOR pathway acts as a central regulator of tumour cell metabolism,
proliferation, cell cycle progression and immune regulation. The aim of
this study was to investigate the effects of mTOR inhibitor AZD2014 on
tumour growth and immune infiltration in a genetically engineered mouse
model of PCa.Methods: PtenL/L;PB-Cre4 mice, which developed invasive
hormone-sensitive prostate tumours between 10-14 months of age, were
enrolled (n = 13-15 per group) and treated with AZD2014 (15mg/Kg) or
vehicle orally for 14 doses (QD 5/7) with or without castration. Tumour
volumes were assessed by ultrasound imaging. Tumour samples were
collected within 4 hours post 14th dose for histological and molecular
analysis.Results: AZD2014 was well tolerated, no overt toxicity was
observed. Mean plasma concentrations of AZD2014 were 4.42.1M at time of
tumour sampling. AZD2014 alone or AZD2014+castration inhibited mTORC1 and
mTORC2 activity as demonstrated by reduced p4EBP1(Thr37/46) 48%27%
(P<0.001) and 37%11% (P<0.001), pS6(Ser235/236) 74%43% (P<0.001) and
44%13% (P<0.001), pAKT(Ser473) 36%8% (P<0.001) and 20%3% (P<0.01),
respectively compared to vehicle-treated mice. Proliferation (Ki67+) was
reduced in AZD2014-treated tumours by 70%45% (P<0.001) and
AZD2014+castration by 42%16% (PBackground: Medical therapy for men with
prostate cancer (PCa) is evolving, including recent evidence to support
the use of chemotherapy for men with hormone sensitive disease.
PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway aberrations are common in patients with primary PCa
and almost universal in metastatic tumours. The mTOR pathway acts as a
central regulator of tumour cell metabolism, proliferation, cell cycle
progression and immune regulation. The aim of this study was to
investigate the effects of mTOR inhibitor AZD2014 on tumour growth and
immune infiltration in a genetically engineered mouse model of
PCa.Methods: PtenL/L;PB-Cre4 mice, which developed invasive
hormone-sensitive prostate tumours between 10-14 months of age, were
enrolled (n = 13-15 per group) and treated with AZD2014 (15mg/Kg) or
vehicle orally for 14 doses (QD 5/7) with or without castration. Tumour
volumes were assessed by ultrasound imaging. Tumour samples were
collected within 4 hours post 14th dose for histological and molecular
analysis.Results: AZD2014 was well tolerated, no overt toxicity was
observed. Mean plasma concentrations of AZD2014 were 4.42.1M at time of
tumour sampling. AZD2014 alone or AZD2014+castration inhibited mTORC1 and
mTORC2 activity as demonstrated by reduced p4EBP1(Thr37/46) 48%27%
(P<0.001) and 37%11% (P<0.001), pS6(Ser235/236) 74%43% (P<0.001) and
44%13% (P<0.001), pAKT(Ser473) 36%8% (P<0.001) and 20%3% (P<0.01),
respectively compared to vehicle-treated mice. Proliferation (Ki67+) was
reduced in AZD2014-treated tumours by 70%45% (P<0.001) and
AZD2014+castration by 42%16% (P<0.001). Apoptosis (CC3+) was increased in
AZD2014 and AZD2014+castration groups by 3.3-fold (both, PBackground:
Medical therapy for men with prostate cancer (PCa) is evolving, including
recent evidence to support the use of chemotherapy for men with hormone
sensitive disease. PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway aberrations are common in
patients with primary PCa and almost universal in metastatic tumours. The
mTOR pathway acts as a central regulator of tumour cell metabolism,
proliferation, cell cycle progression and immune regulation. The aim of
this study was to investigate the effects of mTOR inhibitor AZD2014 on
tumour growth and immune infiltration in a genetically engineered mouse
model of PCa.Methods: PtenL/L;PB-Cre4 mice, which developed invasive
hormone-sensitive prostate tumours between 10-14 months of age, were
enrolled (n = 13-15 per group) and treated with AZD2014 (15mg/Kg) or
vehicle orally for 14 doses (QD 5/7) with or without castration. Tumour
volumes were assessed by ultrasound imaging. Tumour samples were
collected within 4 hours post 14th dose for histological and molecular
analysis.Results: AZD2014 was well tolerated, no overt toxicity was
observed. Mean plasma concentrations of AZD2014 were 4.42.1M at time of
tumour sampling. AZD2014 alone or AZD2014+castration inhibited mTORC1 and
mTORC2 activity as demonstrated by reduced p4EBP1(Thr37/46) 48%27%
(P<0.001) and 37%11% (P<0.001), pS6(Ser235/236) 74%43% (P<0.001) and
44%13% (P<0.001), pAKT(Ser473) 36%8% (P<0.001) and 20%3% (P<0.01),
respectively compared to vehicle-treated mice. Proliferation (Ki67+) was
reduced in AZD2014-treated tumours by 70%45% (P<0.001) and
AZD2014+castration by 42%16% (P<0.001). Apoptosis (CC3+) was increased in
AZD2014 and AZD2014+castration groups by 3.3-fold (both, P<0.001) or
castration only group by 2-fold (PBackground: Medical therapy for men
with prostate cancer (PCa) is evolving, including recent evidence to
support the use of chemotherapy for men with hormone sensitive disease.
PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway aberrations are common in patients with primary PCa
and almost universal in metastatic tumours. The mTOR pathway acts as a
central regulator of tumour cell metabolism, proliferation, cell cycle
progression and immune regulation. The aim of this study was to
investigate the effects of mTOR inhibitor AZD2014 on tumour growth and
immune infiltration in a genetically engineered mouse model of
PCa.Methods: PtenL/L;PB-Cre4 mice, which developed invasive
hormone-sensitive prostate tumours between 10-14 months of age, were
enrolled (n = 13-15 per group) and treated with AZD2014 (15mg/Kg) or
vehicle orally for 14 doses (QD 5/7) with or without castration. Tumour
volumes were assessed by ultrasound imaging. Tumour samples were
collected within 4 hours post 14th dose for histological and molecular
analysis.Results: AZD2014 was well tolerated, no overt toxicity was
observed. Mean plasma concentrations of AZD2014 were 4.42.1M at time of
tumour sampling. AZD2014 alone or AZD2014+castration inhibited mTORC1 and
mTORC2 activity as demonstrated by reduced p4EBP1(Thr37/46) 48%27%
(P<0.001) and 37%11% (P<0.001), pS6(Ser235/236) 74%43% (P<0.001) and
44%13% (P<0.001), pAKT(Ser473) 36%8% (P<0.001) and 20%3% (P<0.01),
respectively compared to vehicle-treated mice. Proliferation (Ki67+) was
reduced in AZD2014-treated tumours by 70%45% (P<0.001) and
AZD2014+castration by 42%16% (P<0.001). Apoptosis (CC3+) was increased in
AZD2014 and AZD2014+castration groups by 3.3-fold (both, P<0.001) or
castration only group by 2-fold (P<0.001). Tumour volumes were
significantly reduced (54%, pBackground: Medical therapy for men with
prostate cancer (PCa) is evolving, including recent evidence to support
the use of chemotherapy for men with hormone sensitive disease.
PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway aberrations are common in patients with primary PCa
and almost universal in metastatic tumours. The mTOR pathway acts as a
central regulator of tumour cell metabolism, proliferation, cell cycle
progression and immune regulation. The aim of this study was to
investigate the effects of mTOR inhibitor AZD2014 on tumour growth and
immune infiltration in a genetically engineered mouse model of
PCa.Methods: PtenL/L;PB-Cre4 mice, which developed invasive
hormone-sensitive prostate tumours between 10-14 months of age, were
enrolled (n = 13-15 per group) and treated with AZD2014 (15mg/Kg) or
vehicle orally for 14 doses (QD 5/7) with or without castration. Tumour
volumes were assessed by ultrasound imaging. Tumour samples were
collected within 4 hours post 14th dose for histological and molecular
analysis.Results: AZD2014 was well tolerated, no overt toxicity was
observed. Mean plasma concentrations of AZD2014 were 4.42.1M at time of
tumour sampling. AZD2014 alone or AZD2014+castration inhibited mTORC1 and
mTORC2 activity as demonstrated by reduced p4EBP1(Thr37/46) 48%27%
(P<0.001) and 37%11% (P<0.001), pS6(Ser235/236) 74%43% (P<0.001) and
44%13% (P<0.001), pAKT(Ser473) 36%8% (P<0.001) and 20%3% (P<0.01),
respectively compared to vehicle-treated mice. Proliferation (Ki67+) was
reduced in AZD2014-treated tumours by 70%45% (P<0.001) and
AZD2014+castration by 42%16% (P<0.001). Apoptosis (CC3+) was increased in
AZD2014 and AZD2014+castration groups by 3.3-fold (both, P<0.001) or
castration only group by 2-fold (P<0.001). Tumour volumes were
significantly reduced (54%, p<0.05) in AZD2014+castration group.
Castration induced increased infiltration of T cells (CD3+, 2-fold,
PBackground: Medical therapy for men with prostate cancer (PCa) is
evolving, including recent evidence to support the use of chemotherapy
for men with hormone sensitive disease. PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway aberrations
are common in patients with primary PCa and almost universal in
metastatic tumours. The mTOR pathway acts as a central regulator of
tumour cell metabolism, proliferation, cell cycle progression and immune
regulation. The aim of this study was to investigate the effects of mTOR
inhibitor AZD2014 on tumour growth and immune infiltration in a
genetically engineered mouse model of PCa.Methods: PtenL/L;PB-Cre4 mice,
which developed invasive hormone-sensitive prostate tumours between 10-14
months of age, were enrolled (n = 13-15 per group) and treated with
AZD2014 (15mg/Kg) or vehicle orally for 14 doses (QD 5/7) with or without
castration. Tumour volumes were assessed by ultrasound imaging. Tumour
samples were collected within 4 hours post 14th dose for histological and
molecular analysis.Results: AZD2014 was well tolerated, no overt toxicity
was observed. Mean plasma concentrations of AZD2014 were 4.42.1M at time
of tumour sampling. AZD2014 alone or AZD2014+castration inhibited mTORC1
and mTORC2 activity as demonstrated by reduced p4EBP1(Thr37/46) 48%27%
(P<0.001) and 37%11% (P<0.001), pS6(Ser235/236) 74%43% (P<0.001) and
44%13% (P<0.001), pAKT(Ser473) 36%8% (P<0.001) and 20%3% (P<0.01),
respectively compared to vehicle-treated mice. Proliferation (Ki67+) was
reduced in AZD2014-treated tumours by 70%45% (P<0.001) and
AZD2014+castration by 42%16% (P<0.001). Apoptosis (CC3+) was increased in
AZD2014 and AZD2014+castration groups by 3.3-fold (both, P<0.001) or
castration only group by 2-fold (P<0.001). Tumour volumes were
significantly reduced (54%, p<0.05) in AZD2014+castration group.
Castration induced increased infiltration of T cells (CD3+, 2-fold,
P<0.001) and macrophages (F4/80+, 1.6-fold, PBackground: Medical therapy
for men with prostate cancer (PCa) is evolving, including recent evidence
to support the use of chemotherapy for men with hormone sensitive
disease. PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway aberrations are common in patients with
primary PCa and almost universal in metastatic tumours. The mTOR pathway
acts as a central regulator of tumour cell metabolism, proliferation,
cell cycle progression and immune regulation. The aim of this study was
to investigate the effects of mTOR inhibitor AZD2014 on tumour growth and
immune infiltration in a genetically engineered mouse model of
PCa.Methods: PtenL/L;PB-Cre4 mice, which developed invasive
hormone-sensitive prostate tumours between 10-14 months of age, were
enrolled (n = 13-15 per group) and treated with AZD2014 (15mg/Kg) or
vehicle orally for 14 doses (QD 5/7) with or without castration. Tumour
volumes were assessed by ultrasound imaging. Tumour samples were
collected within 4 hours post 14th dose for histological and molecular
analysis.Results: AZD2014 was well tolerated, no overt toxicity was
observed. Mean plasma concentrations of AZD2014 were 4.42.1M at time of
tumour sampling. AZD2014 alone or AZD2014+castration inhibited mTORC1 and
mTORC2 activity as demonstrated by reduced p4EBP1(Thr37/46) 48%27%
(P<0.001) and 37%11% (P<0.001), pS6(Ser235/236) 74%43% (P<0.001) and
44%13% (P<0.001), pAKT(Ser473) 36%8% (P<0.001) and 20%3% (P<0.01),
respectively compared to vehicle-treated mice. Proliferation (Ki67+) was
reduced in AZD2014-treated tumours by 70%45% (P<0.001) and
AZD2014+castration by 42%16% (P<0.001). Apoptosis (CC3+) was increased in
AZD2014 and AZD2014+castration groups by 3.3-fold (both, P<0.001) or
castration only group by 2-fold (P<0.001). Tumour volumes were
significantly reduced (54%, p<0.05) in AZD2014+castration group.
Castration induced increased infiltration of T cells (CD3+, 2-fold,
P<0.001) and macrophages (F4/80+, 1.6-fold, P<0.001) in the tumour
tissues. These effects were more pronounced when combined with AZD2014
(CD3+, 2.8-fold, PBackground: Medical therapy for men with prostate
cancer (PCa) is evolving, including recent evidence to support the use of
chemotherapy for men with hormone sensitive disease. PI3K/AKT/mTOR
pathway aberrations are common in patients with primary PCa and almost
universal in metastatic tumours. The mTOR pathway acts as a central
regulator of tumour cell metabolism, proliferation, cell cycle
progression and immune regulation. The aim of this study was to
investigate the effects of mTOR inhibitor AZD2014 on tumour growth and
immune infiltration in a genetically engineered mouse model of
PCa.Methods: PtenL/L;PB-Cre4 mice, which developed invasive
hormone-sensitive prostate tumours between 10-14 months of age, were
enrolled (n = 13-15 per group) and treated with AZD2014 (15mg/Kg) or
vehicle orally for 14 doses (QD 5/7) with or without castration. Tumour
volumes were assessed by ultrasound imaging. Tumour samples were
collected within 4 hours post 14th dose for histological and molecular
analysis.Results: AZD2014 was well tolerated, no overt toxicity was
observed. Mean plasma concentrations of AZD2014 were 4.42.1M at time of
tumour sampling. AZD2014 alone or AZD2014+castration inhibited mTORC1 and
mTORC2 activity as demonstrated by reduced p4EBP1(Thr37/46) 48%27%
(P<0.001) and 37%11% (P<0.001), pS6(Ser235/236) 74%43% (P<0.001) and
44%13% (P<0.001), pAKT(Ser473) 36%8% (P<0.001) and 20%3% (P<0.01),
respectively compared to vehicle-treated mice. Proliferation (Ki67+) was
reduced in AZD2014-treated tumours by 70%45% (P<0.001) and
AZD2014+castration by 42%16% (P<0.001). Apoptosis (CC3+) was increased in
AZD2014 and AZD2014+castration groups by 3.3-fold (both, P<0.001) or
castration only group by 2-fold (P<0.001). Tumour volumes were
significantly reduced (54%, p<0.05) in AZD2014+castration group.
Castration induced increased infiltration of T cells (CD3+, 2-fold,
P<0.001) and macrophages (F4/80+, 1.6-fold, P<0.001) in the tumour
tissues. These effects were more pronounced when combined with AZD2014
(CD3+, 2.8-fold, P<0.001; F4/80+, 2.3-fold, PBackground: Medical therapy
for men with prostate cancer (PCa) is evolving, including recent evidence
to support the use of chemotherapy for men with hormone sensitive
disease. PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway aberrations are common in patients with
primary PCa and almost universal in metastatic tumours. The mTOR pathway
acts as a central regulator of tumour cell metabolism, proliferation,
cell cycle progression and immune regulation. The aim of this study was
to investigate the effects of mTOR inhibitor AZD2014 on tumour growth and
immune infiltration in a genetically engineered mouse model of
PCa.Methods: PtenL/L;PB-Cre4 mice, which developed invasive
hormone-sensitive prostate tumours between 10-14 months of age, were
enrolled (n = 13-15 per group) and treated with AZD2014 (15mg/Kg) or
vehicle orally for 14 doses (QD 5/7) with or without castration. Tumour
volumes were assessed by ultrasound imaging. Tumour samples were
collected within 4 hours post 14th dose for histological and molecular
analysis.Results: AZD2014 was well tolerated, no overt toxicity was
observed. Mean plasma concentrations of AZD2014 were 4.42.1M at time of
tumour sampling. AZD2014 alone or AZD2014+castration inhibited mTORC1 and
mTORC2 activity as demonstrated by reduced p4EBP1(Thr37/46) 48%27%
(P<0.001) and 37%11% (P<0.001), pS6(Ser235/236) 74%43% (P<0.001) and
44%13% (P<0.001), pAKT(Ser473) 36%8% (P<0.001) and 20%3% (P<0.01),
respectively compared to vehicle-treated mice. Proliferation (Ki67+) was
reduced in AZD2014-treated tumours by 70%45% (P<0.001) and
AZD2014+castration by 42%16% (P<0.001). Apoptosis (CC3+) was increased in
AZD2014 and AZD2014+castration groups by 3.3-fold (both, P<0.001) or
castration only group by 2-fold (P<0.001). Tumour volumes were
significantly reduced (54%, p<0.05) in AZD2014+castration group.
Castration induced increased infiltration of T cells (CD3+, 2-fold,
P<0.001) and macrophages (F4/80+, 1.6-fold, P<0.001) in the tumour
tissues. These effects were more pronounced when combined with AZD2014
(CD3+, 2.8-fold, P<0.001; F4/80+, 2.3-fold, P<0.001). Multi-channel flow
cytometry has confirmed increased proliferation of CD45+, CD3+ and CD8+
cells in tumours from the AZD2014+castration group.Conclusion: These data
confirm the anti cancer effect of AZD2014 in this PCa model. Furthermore,
AZD2014+castration was more effective than either treatment as a single
agent. The increased intra-tumoral T cell infiltration observed may have
contributed to the anti-tumour effect. Further studies are ongoing to
maximise this therapeutic effect and will inform current clinical studies
in men with hormone sensitive, high risk prostate cancer.

