Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel chromene analogs as small-molecule microtubule destabilizers
for the treatment of chemo-resistant ovarian cancer


Ovarian cancer is the most lethal gynecological malignancy with a 5-year
survival rate of less than 40%, primarily because of treatment failure
due to emergence of chemo-resistance to standard agents. This indicates a
dire need for new treatments to improve survival rates. The tubulin
dynamics is a promising target for new chemotherapeutic agents. In
continuation of our efforts, using medicinal chemistry approach, we
recently identified small molecular inhibitors of tubulin polymerization
called chromenes, as new ovarian anti-cancer agents. A set of chromene
compounds were screened for anti-cancer effect on cisplatin sensitive
(A2780, SKOV-3, TOV112D) and cisplatin resistant (OVCAR-3, A2780-cisR,
TOV112D-cisR) ovarian cancer cells. In vitro cell viability was assessed
by fluorescence based Alamar Blue assay. Our preliminary studies
identified SP-6-27 (IC50 range: 0.102 0.006 - 2.240.056 M) and SP-6-37
(IC50 range: 0.258 0.159 - 3.610.049 M) as most potent chromene analogs.
Both compounds exhibited a potent anticancer activity towards both
cisplatin sensitive (SP-6-27 IC50: 0.14 0.03 M; SP-6-37 IC50: 1.35 0.88
M) and cisplatin resistant (SP-6-27 IC50: 0.81 1.2 M; SP-6-37 IC50: 2.09
1.7 M) cell lines. The compounds exhibited least cytotoxicity towards
normal ovarian epithelial cells (SP-6-27- IC50: 83.35 9.47 M; SP-6-37-
IC50: 75.77 5.37 M). Additionally, the analysis of apoptotic changes as
determined by Annexin-V assay revealed an enhanced apoptosis in both
cisplatin sensitive and resistant cells upon treatment with compounds
SP-6-27 or SP-6-37. Together, the data demonstrates that ovarian cancer
cell lines respond sensitively to SP-6-27 and SP-6-37, demonstrating that
the chromene scaffold is effective in suppressing ovarian cancer cell
growth. The findings indicate that the novel chromene analogs are a new
class of chemotherapeutic agents that will offer advantages for the
treatment of ovarian cancer.

