Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Modulating the function of multidrug resistance ABCG2 transporter
by tyrosine kinases receptor inhibitor cabozantinib


Cabozantinib (XL184) is an oral tyrosine kinases receptor inhibitor which
inhibits MET and vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 2 (VEGFR2).
Cabozantinib has been approved by Food and Drug Administration for
treating advanced medullary thyroid cancer and it is also tested in
clinical trials on other solid tumors, including prostate, bladder,
ovarian and breast cancer. In the present study, we evaluated the ability
of cabozantinib in modulating the function of ABCG2 transporter in
drug-selected H460/MX20 cell line and ABCG2 stable transfected cell lines
ABCG2-482-R2, ABCG2-482-G2 and ABCG2-482-T7. Cabozantinib at non-toxic
level can sensitize the ABCG2-overexpressing cells to antineoplastic
drugs mitoxantrone, SN-38 and topotecan. Our results indicated that
cabozantinib reversed ABCG2 mediated multi-drug resistance by
antagonizing the drug efflux function of ABCG2. However, this reversal
effect was not attributed to reduced expression of ABCG2 protein, because
ABCG2 protein level was unchanged after treatment of 4M cabozantinib for
72 hours. Immunofluorescence result showed that cabozantinib did not
alter the cellular localization of ABCG2 transporter. Docking analysis
indicated that cabozantinib binds to the drug-binding site of ABCG2
transporter. Finally, cabozantinib at 4M did not significantly change the
resistance of ABCB1 overexpressing cell line SW620/AD300 to
antineoplastic drug paclitaxel. Overall, our finding demonstrated that
cabozantinib potentiates the cytotoxic effects of various antineoplastic
drugs that are substrates of ABCG2 and that this is due to modulating the
function of ABCG2 transporter.Keyword: Cabozantinib; ABCG2; Multidrug
resistance;

