Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pan-cancer analysis of alternative splicing patterns and
association to genomic aberrations


Alternative splicing of pre-messenger RNA is responsible for the
diversity of transcriptome and proteome, with the majority of multi exon
genes producing multiple transcripts. Aberrations in regulative factors
of alternative splicing are known to produce transcript isoforms
associated with cancer progression and prognosis. Both mutations in the
proximity of spliced regions and mutations in and regulation of
previously identified splicing factor genes are known to alter splicing
patterns.In this study, we utilized publicly available TCGA data to study
association patterns between alternative splicing and its regulatory
elements across multiple cancer tissue types. We collected evidence of
splicing patterns of annotated isoforms in addition to novel patterns
identified using our previously developed tools using RNA-seq data. We
mined for associations between somatic mutations and changes of splicing
patterns as well as genome and transcriptome level changes in splicing
factors. Selective transcriptome assembly was done in loci with
differentially expressed patterns and novel patterns with sufficient
evidence to identify transcript isoforms and quantify isoform specific
expression.In our study we compiled a catalogue of splicing patterns and
their changes across multiple cancer types. Integration of this
comprehensive set of quantified splicing patterns with data on proximal
mutations and aberrations in splicing factors resulted in statistically
relevant associations with clinical phenotypes. Our analysis enables
identification of mechanisms behind splicing aberrations common to all
cancers and cancer specific splicing patterns.

