Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Second generation 2,3-dihydroimidazo[1,2-c]quinazoline PI3K
inhibitors: development of BAY 1082439, a novel balanced PI3K / PI3K
inhibitor


The phosphoinositide-3 kinase (PI3K) pathway plays critical roles in
cancer cell growth and survival, as well as in intrinsic and acquired
resistance to both chemotherapy and targeted agents. These essential
roles of PI3K in human cancer have led to the clinical development of
PI3K pathway inhibitors. Due to the complexity derived from the existence
of various PI3K isoforms (, , , ), and their differential roles in signal
transduction as well as cancer pathology, investigation of PI3K
inhibitors with differential isoform activity profiles would allow
potential use in novel indications. Mutation or amplification of PIK3CA
and/or activation of PI3K (e.g., through oncogenic RTKs) are found
frequently in a variety of cancers, making this isoform a prime target
for anti-cancer therapy. In addition, the role of PI3K in PTEN-deficient
tumors, as well as in acquired resistance to PI3K, has been described.
This led to the hypothesis that development of a dual PI3K / PI3K
inhibitor might provide a unique efficacy profile.The discovery of a
novel class of 2,3-dihydroimidazo[1,2]quinazoline PI3K inhibitors, and
its optimization to afford the i.v. PI3K/ inhibitor copanlisib (IC50
ratio of 1:7 in biochemical assays of PI3K vs. PI3K) has been reported
recently. Herein is described the structure-activity relationship (SAR)
leading to potent oral 2,3-dihydroimidazo[1,2]quinazoline PI3K inhibitors
with balanced PI3K and PI3K activity, and to the selection of BAY
1082439, as a clinical candidate.BAY 1082439 has an IC50 ratio of 1:3 in
biochemical assays of PI3K (4.9 nM) vs. PI3K (15.0 nM). In addition, BAY
1082439 has unique pharmacokinetic (PK) properties with very high plasma
free fractions across all species tested (33-50%), large Vss, high
clearance and intermediate T1/2. Thus, BAY 1082439 represents a PI3K
inhibitor with a novel pharmacological profile, warranting exploration in
clinical development. BAY 1082439 is currently being studied in a phase I
trial for subjects with advanced malignancies (NCT01728311).

