Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Myc-induced suppression of the RNA-binding protein ZAR2 in breast
cancer cells


Our objective is to verify the hypothesis that c-Myc-regulated oncomiR
miR-130a-5p suppresses the level of the RNA-binding tumor suppressor
protein ZAR2 in the cMyc-high aggressive breast cancer cells. We
experimentally validated the binding of miR130a-5p miRISC to ZAR2 mRNA in
vivo and inhibition of the translation of this mRNA by this binding. We
used three commercially available c-Myc-high ZAR2-low breast cancer cell
lines BT549, MDA-MB-453 and MDA-MB-231 and two c-Myc-low ZAR2-high breast
cancer cells MCF7 and HCC38 for our studies. We cloned the full length
3-UTR (179 bp) of human ZAR2 mRNA immediately downstream of the firefly
luciferase open reading frame sequence contained in the reporter plasmid.
We also have created different mutants of the 3-UTR, each having mutation
in each of the putative miR130a-5p binding sites. We transiently
transfected the recombinant plasmid and miR130a-5p miRNA mimic into
breast cancer cells and assessed luciferase activity or fluorescence
24-48 hours after transfection. We also have transfected just the
reporter construct into breast cancer cells which express the endogenous
miR130a-5p miRNAs, along with vectors which express mutant versions of
the miRNA binding sites. In this experimental system the wild-type
reporters had less activity than their respective mutants. To evaluate
the functional importance of miR130a-5p miRNA/ZAR2 mRNA pair, we
transiently over-expressed a miR130a-5p miRNA mimic in the cMyc-low
breast cancer breast cancer cells and subsequently analyzed the level of
ZAR2 protein levels. Our data showed that ZAR2 protein levels are
decreased by the mimic increasing the in vitro invasiveness of these
cells. Our results thus reveal a novel mechanism for the induction of
aggressiveness by cMyc in the breast cancer cells. This research is
supported in part by DOD-CDMRP IDEA Expansion Grant# BC103645 and NIH/NCI
grant 1R21CA181920-01 to GC and NIH grant 1U54RR026140 TO SM

