Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RP6530, a dual PI3K / inhibitor attenuates cancer stem cell
proliferation in serous adenocarcinoma of ovary


The overall survival of patients with advanced serous adenocarcinoma of
the ovary (EOC) has not significantly improved for the past 3 decades
despite advances in treatment. In part, this is due to resistance of
malignant cells and it is currently hypothesized that this could be due
to persistence of cancer stem cells (CSC). Elimination of these cells may
improve the survival of patients. RP6530 is a novel, potent, and
selective PI3K / inhibitor that demonstrated high potency against PI3K
(IC50 = 25 nM) and (IC50 = 33 nM) enzymes with selectivity over
(>300-fold) and (>100-fold) isoforms. A Phase-1 dose-escalation study to
evaluate the safety and efficacy of RP6530 in patients with hematological
malignancies in currently underway at several sites in Europe. The
objective of this study was to test the efficacy of RP6530 against the
CSC of EOC. A spheroid assay enriched for CSC was employed for this
study. Initially, we have analyzed 3 cell lines (PEO4, OVCAR-5 and
CAOV-2) with and without addition of 5 M RP6530. In addition, MTT assay
for cell viability was performed for the molecule to evaluate for
non-selective cytotoxicity. To confirm that the target was CSC, we
performed analysis of Side population (SP) based on H33342 dye exclusion.
In the screening assay (triplicate and repeated thrice), RP6530
significantly inhibited spheroid formation in PEO4 and OVCAR-5 (pThe
overall survival of patients with advanced serous adenocarcinoma of the
ovary (EOC) has not significantly improved for the past 3 decades despite
advances in treatment. In part, this is due to resistance of malignant
cells and it is currently hypothesized that this could be due to
persistence of cancer stem cells (CSC). Elimination of these cells may
improve the survival of patients. RP6530 is a novel, potent, and
selective PI3K / inhibitor that demonstrated high potency against PI3K
(IC50 = 25 nM) and (IC50 = 33 nM) enzymes with selectivity over
(>300-fold) and (>100-fold) isoforms. A Phase-1 dose-escalation study to
evaluate the safety and efficacy of RP6530 in patients with hematological
malignancies in currently underway at several sites in Europe. The
objective of this study was to test the efficacy of RP6530 against the
CSC of EOC. A spheroid assay enriched for CSC was employed for this
study. Initially, we have analyzed 3 cell lines (PEO4, OVCAR-5 and
CAOV-2) with and without addition of 5 M RP6530. In addition, MTT assay
for cell viability was performed for the molecule to evaluate for
non-selective cytotoxicity. To confirm that the target was CSC, we
performed analysis of Side population (SP) based on H33342 dye exclusion.
In the screening assay (triplicate and repeated thrice), RP6530
significantly inhibited spheroid formation in PEO4 and OVCAR-5 (p<0.05)
and CAOV-2 (pThe overall survival of patients with advanced serous
adenocarcinoma of the ovary (EOC) has not significantly improved for the
past 3 decades despite advances in treatment. In part, this is due to
resistance of malignant cells and it is currently hypothesized that this
could be due to persistence of cancer stem cells (CSC). Elimination of
these cells may improve the survival of patients. RP6530 is a novel,
potent, and selective PI3K / inhibitor that demonstrated high potency
against PI3K (IC50 = 25 nM) and (IC50 = 33 nM) enzymes with selectivity
over (>300-fold) and (>100-fold) isoforms. A Phase-1 dose-escalation
study to evaluate the safety and efficacy of RP6530 in patients with
hematological malignancies in currently underway at several sites in
Europe. The objective of this study was to test the efficacy of RP6530
against the CSC of EOC. A spheroid assay enriched for CSC was employed
for this study. Initially, we have analyzed 3 cell lines (PEO4, OVCAR-5
and CAOV-2) with and without addition of 5 M RP6530. In addition, MTT
assay for cell viability was performed for the molecule to evaluate for
non-selective cytotoxicity. To confirm that the target was CSC, we
performed analysis of Side population (SP) based on H33342 dye exclusion.
In the screening assay (triplicate and repeated thrice), RP6530
significantly inhibited spheroid formation in PEO4 and OVCAR-5 (p<0.05)
and CAOV-2 (p<0.0005). In the cell viability assay, RP6530 had no
cytotoxic effect in any of the cell lines. To evaluate the effect of the
compound on CSC, we performed analysis of SP cells with Hoechst 33342 at
355 nm by flow cytometry. RP6530 either caused a reduction in the
fraction of SP cells (PEO4 and CAOV-2) or was neutral (OVCAR-5)
indicating that the compound preferentially targets CSC in ovarian cancer
cell lines. Further in vitro and in vivo experiments are ongoing to
conclusively prove this effect.

