Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The regulation by kinases of the expression of human major
histocompatibility class I molecules


The major histocompatability complex (MHC) is a central receptor in the
adaptive immune response and is the underlying target of several
effective therapies for cancer. Druggable kinases may provide the
opportunity to modulate the immune response toward MHC. However, the
regulation of MHC-I by kinases is largely unstudied, even though many
patients with cancer are receiving therapeutic kinase inhibitors. The
entire human kinome was screened using a pooled shRNA interference-based
approach in a human mesothelioma cell line to uncover kinase regulators
of MHC-I. Negative and positive regulators of cell surface HLA levels
were discovered. A subset of highly scoring positive and negative kinase
hits were subsequently validated by additional RNAi, and pharmacologic
inhibitors when available. MAP2K1 (MEK), EGFR, and RET were validated as
negative regulators of HLA expression in multiple cancer types. We mapped
the pathways responsible for increased HLA upon kinase inhibition.
Interestingly, inhibition of the MAP Kinase pathway broadly influenced
expression of other components of the antigen presentation machinery.
Moreover, DDR2 and MINK1 were shown to positively regulate HLA-A*02:01.
This had therapeutic relevance, as shown with a therapeutic TCR mimic
antibody to a MHC/peptide complex. Druggable kinases may thus serve as
immediately applicable targets for modulating immunotherapy for many
diseases.

