Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nitric oxide-releasing naproxen prevents muscle invasive bladder
cancer


Bladder cancer is the second most common and a leading cause of death
among genitourinary cancers worldwide. Particularly, untreated muscle
invasive bladder cancer has high mortality (>85% patients) leading to
death within 2 years of diagnosis. Preventing this deadly form is highly
imperative since the currently available options to patients with
invasive disease remained essentially unchanged and no effective drugs
have been approved in past two decades. Several non-steroidal
anti-inflammatory agents (NSAIDs) have shown promising chemopreventive
activity in many cancers. The common adverse events with NSAIDs,
especially gastrointestinal (GI) morbidities, including complications in
both upper and lower GI tract drives the need for development of safer
agents. To overcome this various nitric oxide (NO)-linked NSAIDs have
been synthesized. Here we investigated the NO-releasing Naproxen
(NO-Naproxen) with proven anti-inflammatory and GI protecting effects for
its efficacy in preventing bladder cancer. Transgenic mouse model
(UPII-SV40T; n = 30/group) that develop muscle invasive urothelial tumors
were generated, genotyped and fed modified AIN-76A diet containing
NO-naproxen (0, 300 and 600 ppm) starting at 6 weeks of age. At 40 weeks
age, control (0 ppm) and experimental diet (300 and 600 ppm) fed mice
were euthanized and urinary bladders were analyzed. Control diet fed male
and female transgenic mice developed high grade, invasive transitional
cell carcinoma (TCC) of bladder resulting in significant increase in
bladder weights (140.29.8 mg; pBladder cancer is the second most common
and a leading cause of death among genitourinary cancers worldwide.
Particularly, untreated muscle invasive bladder cancer has high mortality
(>85% patients) leading to death within 2 years of diagnosis. Preventing
this deadly form is highly imperative since the currently available
options to patients with invasive disease remained essentially unchanged
and no effective drugs have been approved in past two decades. Several
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents (NSAIDs) have shown promising
chemopreventive activity in many cancers. The common adverse events with
NSAIDs, especially gastrointestinal (GI) morbidities, including
complications in both upper and lower GI tract drives the need for
development of safer agents. To overcome this various nitric oxide
(NO)-linked NSAIDs have been synthesized. Here we investigated the
NO-releasing Naproxen (NO-Naproxen) with proven anti-inflammatory and GI
protecting effects for its efficacy in preventing bladder cancer.
Transgenic mouse model (UPII-SV40T; n = 30/group) that develop muscle
invasive urothelial tumors were generated, genotyped and fed modified
AIN-76A diet containing NO-naproxen (0, 300 and 600 ppm) starting at 6
weeks of age. At 40 weeks age, control (0 ppm) and experimental diet (300
and 600 ppm) fed mice were euthanized and urinary bladders were analyzed.
Control diet fed male and female transgenic mice developed high grade,
invasive transitional cell carcinoma (TCC) of bladder resulting in
significant increase in bladder weights (140.29.8 mg; p<0.0001 and
34.2+0.8 mg; pBladder cancer is the second most common and a leading
cause of death among genitourinary cancers worldwide. Particularly,
untreated muscle invasive bladder cancer has high mortality (>85%
patients) leading to death within 2 years of diagnosis. Preventing this
deadly form is highly imperative since the currently available options to
patients with invasive disease remained essentially unchanged and no
effective drugs have been approved in past two decades. Several
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents (NSAIDs) have shown promising
chemopreventive activity in many cancers. The common adverse events with
NSAIDs, especially gastrointestinal (GI) morbidities, including
complications in both upper and lower GI tract drives the need for
development of safer agents. To overcome this various nitric oxide
(NO)-linked NSAIDs have been synthesized. Here we investigated the
NO-releasing Naproxen (NO-Naproxen) with proven anti-inflammatory and GI
protecting effects for its efficacy in preventing bladder cancer.
Transgenic mouse model (UPII-SV40T; n = 30/group) that develop muscle
invasive urothelial tumors were generated, genotyped and fed modified
AIN-76A diet containing NO-naproxen (0, 300 and 600 ppm) starting at 6
weeks of age. At 40 weeks age, control (0 ppm) and experimental diet (300
and 600 ppm) fed mice were euthanized and urinary bladders were analyzed.
Control diet fed male and female transgenic mice developed high grade,
invasive transitional cell carcinoma (TCC) of bladder resulting in
significant increase in bladder weights (140.29.8 mg; p<0.0001 and
34.2+0.8 mg; p<0.0001 respectively) compared with wild type mice (27.30.8
mg and 14.80.53 mg). These tumors had a significant disregulation of
proliferation, cell cycle markers and antioxidant enzymes similar to
human tumors. NO-Naproxen administered mice had normal body weight gain;
and gross tissue analysis and showed no signs of overt toxicities.
Treatment of transgenic mice with NO-Naproxen led to significant
suppression of bladder weight in both genders (up to 58% in males,
pBladder cancer is the second most common and a leading cause of death
among genitourinary cancers worldwide. Particularly, untreated muscle
invasive bladder cancer has high mortality (>85% patients) leading to
death within 2 years of diagnosis. Preventing this deadly form is highly
imperative since the currently available options to patients with
invasive disease remained essentially unchanged and no effective drugs
have been approved in past two decades. Several non-steroidal
anti-inflammatory agents (NSAIDs) have shown promising chemopreventive
activity in many cancers. The common adverse events with NSAIDs,
especially gastrointestinal (GI) morbidities, including complications in
both upper and lower GI tract drives the need for development of safer
agents. To overcome this various nitric oxide (NO)-linked NSAIDs have
been synthesized. Here we investigated the NO-releasing Naproxen
(NO-Naproxen) with proven anti-inflammatory and GI protecting effects for
its efficacy in preventing bladder cancer. Transgenic mouse model
(UPII-SV40T; n = 30/group) that develop muscle invasive urothelial tumors
were generated, genotyped and fed modified AIN-76A diet containing
NO-naproxen (0, 300 and 600 ppm) starting at 6 weeks of age. At 40 weeks
age, control (0 ppm) and experimental diet (300 and 600 ppm) fed mice
were euthanized and urinary bladders were analyzed. Control diet fed male
and female transgenic mice developed high grade, invasive transitional
cell carcinoma (TCC) of bladder resulting in significant increase in
bladder weights (140.29.8 mg; p<0.0001 and 34.2+0.8 mg; p<0.0001
respectively) compared with wild type mice (27.30.8 mg and 14.80.53 mg).
These tumors had a significant disregulation of proliferation, cell cycle
markers and antioxidant enzymes similar to human tumors. NO-Naproxen
administered mice had normal body weight gain; and gross tissue analysis
and showed no signs of overt toxicities. Treatment of transgenic mice
with NO-Naproxen led to significant suppression of bladder weight in both
genders (up to 58% in males, p<0.0001; up to 21% in females, pBladder
cancer is the second most common and a leading cause of death among
genitourinary cancers worldwide. Particularly, untreated muscle invasive
bladder cancer has high mortality (>85% patients) leading to death within
2 years of diagnosis. Preventing this deadly form is highly imperative
since the currently available options to patients with invasive disease
remained essentially unchanged and no effective drugs have been approved
in past two decades. Several non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents
(NSAIDs) have shown promising chemopreventive activity in many cancers.
The common adverse events with NSAIDs, especially gastrointestinal (GI)
morbidities, including complications in both upper and lower GI tract
drives the need for development of safer agents. To overcome this various
nitric oxide (NO)-linked NSAIDs have been synthesized. Here we
investigated the NO-releasing Naproxen (NO-Naproxen) with proven
anti-inflammatory and GI protecting effects for its efficacy in
preventing bladder cancer. Transgenic mouse model (UPII-SV40T; n =
30/group) that develop muscle invasive urothelial tumors were generated,
genotyped and fed modified AIN-76A diet containing NO-naproxen (0, 300
and 600 ppm) starting at 6 weeks of age. At 40 weeks age, control (0 ppm)
and experimental diet (300 and 600 ppm) fed mice were euthanized and
urinary bladders were analyzed. Control diet fed male and female
transgenic mice developed high grade, invasive transitional cell
carcinoma (TCC) of bladder resulting in significant increase in bladder
weights (140.29.8 mg; p<0.0001 and 34.2+0.8 mg; p<0.0001 respectively)
compared with wild type mice (27.30.8 mg and 14.80.53 mg). These tumors
had a significant disregulation of proliferation, cell cycle markers and
antioxidant enzymes similar to human tumors. NO-Naproxen administered
mice had normal body weight gain; and gross tissue analysis and showed no
signs of overt toxicities. Treatment of transgenic mice with NO-Naproxen
led to significant suppression of bladder weight in both genders (up to
58% in males, p<0.0001; up to 21% in females, p<0.005) compared to
control group. While there was no dose-dependent increase in tumor
inhibition, mice on NO-Naproxen diet had developed significantly less
muscle invasive tumors suggesting inhibitory effect of treatment on
disease progression. Urothelial tumor progression to invasive TCC was
inhibited in both male (up to 54%; pBladder cancer is the second most
common and a leading cause of death among genitourinary cancers
worldwide. Particularly, untreated muscle invasive bladder cancer has
high mortality (>85% patients) leading to death within 2 years of
diagnosis. Preventing this deadly form is highly imperative since the
currently available options to patients with invasive disease remained
essentially unchanged and no effective drugs have been approved in past
two decades. Several non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents (NSAIDs) have
shown promising chemopreventive activity in many cancers. The common
adverse events with NSAIDs, especially gastrointestinal (GI) morbidities,
including complications in both upper and lower GI tract drives the need
for development of safer agents. To overcome this various nitric oxide
(NO)-linked NSAIDs have been synthesized. Here we investigated the
NO-releasing Naproxen (NO-Naproxen) with proven anti-inflammatory and GI
protecting effects for its efficacy in preventing bladder cancer.
Transgenic mouse model (UPII-SV40T; n = 30/group) that develop muscle
invasive urothelial tumors were generated, genotyped and fed modified
AIN-76A diet containing NO-naproxen (0, 300 and 600 ppm) starting at 6
weeks of age. At 40 weeks age, control (0 ppm) and experimental diet (300
and 600 ppm) fed mice were euthanized and urinary bladders were analyzed.
Control diet fed male and female transgenic mice developed high grade,
invasive transitional cell carcinoma (TCC) of bladder resulting in
significant increase in bladder weights (140.29.8 mg; p<0.0001 and
34.2+0.8 mg; p<0.0001 respectively) compared with wild type mice (27.30.8
mg and 14.80.53 mg). These tumors had a significant disregulation of
proliferation, cell cycle markers and antioxidant enzymes similar to
human tumors. NO-Naproxen administered mice had normal body weight gain;
and gross tissue analysis and showed no signs of overt toxicities.
Treatment of transgenic mice with NO-Naproxen led to significant
suppression of bladder weight in both genders (up to 58% in males,
p<0.0001; up to 21% in females, p<0.005) compared to control group. While
there was no dose-dependent increase in tumor inhibition, mice on
NO-Naproxen diet had developed significantly less muscle invasive tumors
suggesting inhibitory effect of treatment on disease progression.
Urothelial tumor progression to invasive TCC was inhibited in both male
(up to 54%; p<0.005) and females mice (up to 85%; pBladder cancer is the
second most common and a leading cause of death among genitourinary
cancers worldwide. Particularly, untreated muscle invasive bladder cancer
has high mortality (>85% patients) leading to death within 2 years of
diagnosis. Preventing this deadly form is highly imperative since the
currently available options to patients with invasive disease remained
essentially unchanged and no effective drugs have been approved in past
two decades. Several non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents (NSAIDs) have
shown promising chemopreventive activity in many cancers. The common
adverse events with NSAIDs, especially gastrointestinal (GI) morbidities,
including complications in both upper and lower GI tract drives the need
for development of safer agents. To overcome this various nitric oxide
(NO)-linked NSAIDs have been synthesized. Here we investigated the
NO-releasing Naproxen (NO-Naproxen) with proven anti-inflammatory and GI
protecting effects for its efficacy in preventing bladder cancer.
Transgenic mouse model (UPII-SV40T; n = 30/group) that develop muscle
invasive urothelial tumors were generated, genotyped and fed modified
AIN-76A diet containing NO-naproxen (0, 300 and 600 ppm) starting at 6
weeks of age. At 40 weeks age, control (0 ppm) and experimental diet (300
and 600 ppm) fed mice were euthanized and urinary bladders were analyzed.
Control diet fed male and female transgenic mice developed high grade,
invasive transitional cell carcinoma (TCC) of bladder resulting in
significant increase in bladder weights (140.29.8 mg; p<0.0001 and
34.2+0.8 mg; p<0.0001 respectively) compared with wild type mice (27.30.8
mg and 14.80.53 mg). These tumors had a significant disregulation of
proliferation, cell cycle markers and antioxidant enzymes similar to
human tumors. NO-Naproxen administered mice had normal body weight gain;
and gross tissue analysis and showed no signs of overt toxicities.
Treatment of transgenic mice with NO-Naproxen led to significant
suppression of bladder weight in both genders (up to 58% in males,
p<0.0001; up to 21% in females, p<0.005) compared to control group. While
there was no dose-dependent increase in tumor inhibition, mice on
NO-Naproxen diet had developed significantly less muscle invasive tumors
suggesting inhibitory effect of treatment on disease progression.
Urothelial tumor progression to invasive TCC was inhibited in both male
(up to 54%; p<0.005) and females mice (up to 85%; p<0.0001) of the
experimental diet groups. Molecular analysis of urothelial tumors via
real-time PCR, IHC and/or western blotting showed inhibitory effect of
NO-Naproxen on proliferation and inflammatory markers (PCNA, Cyclins,
COX2, and IL1b) and showed modulation of antioxidant enzymes (CAT, GPx,
GST, NQO1, and SOD3). Our results suggest that NO-Naproxen may be a
promising agent for preventing urothelial TCC and warrants further
investigation. (Supported in part by NCI-CN53300)

