Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Kinase-independent function of focal adhesion kinase in lung
metastasis of breast cancer


Focal adhesion kinase (FAK) has been shown to promote mammary
tumorigenesis, lung metastasis and the maintenance of cancer stem cells
in the MMTV-PyMT breast cancer model. Using mammary epithelial cell
(MaEC)-specific FAK knockout and kinase-defective (KD) knockin mouse
models, we recently demonstrated that loss of FAK kinase activity in
MaECs specifically impaired luminal progenitor proliferation and
alveologenesis, whereas FAK kinase-independent function was sufficient to
support ductal invasion and basal mammary stem cell activity. To further
elucidate this kinase-independent role of FAK in mammary tumorigenesis
and lung metastasis, we established and analyzed three cohorts of PyMT
mice expressing wild type FAK (Ctl-MT), KD-FAK (cKD-MT) and FAK-null
(cKO-MT) in MaECs. This study revealed that both FAK deletion and KD
knockin mutation in MaECs significantly suppressed mammary tumorigenesis
and the content of stem-like tumor cells (CD24+CD29+CD61+). However, in
contrast to cKO-MT mice that displayed diminished metastatic nodule
formation in the lungs, loss of FAK kinase activity by KD knockin
mutation did not affect lung metastatic nodule formation. Using a Boyden
chamber assay, we further demonstrated that, unlike cKO-MT tumor cells
that displayed diminished cell migration induced by fibronectin or TGF1
(as compared to Ctl-MT tumor cells), cKD-MT tumor cells exhibited strong
fibronectin-, but not TGF1-induced migratory activity. Immunofluorescence
of primary tumor sections also revealed that both Ctl-MT and cKD-MT
tumors displayed strong ERK activation at tumor periphery, whereas cKO-MT
tumors had weak ERK activation in this region. Lastly, when treated with
or without paclitaxel in culture, we found that paclitaxel was able to
induce strong expression of cleaved caspase 3 and p21 in cKO-MT but not
Ctl-MT and cKD-MT tumor cells, suggesting a role for FAK
kinase-independent function in the suppression of p21 expression and
protection of apoptosis. Together, this study strongly implicates a role
for FAK kinase-independent function in promoting lung metastasis.

