Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression of Olfactomedin 4 is regulated by methylation in the
benign prostate epithelial cell-RWPE1 and PC-3 prostate cancer cells


Expression of Olfactomedin 4 gene (OLFM4) plays a critical tumor
suppressor role in human and murine prostate cancer. We have previously
reported that loss or reduced OLFM4 expression is associated with the
progression of human prostate cancer. We and others have further
determined that deletions within the OLFM4 gene are present in about 10
to 25% of human prostate cancer samples. However, we have observed that
loss of expression of OLFM4 were found in more than 58% of the samples
obtained from advanced prostate cancer patients. Therefore, we sought to
study the role of epigenetic factors in the regulation of OLFM4 gene
expression in normal and prostate cancer cell lines. Methylation of CpG
sites in the promoter region of key genes is an important epigenetic
mechanism in cancer development. We examined the methylation status of
CpG sites in the OLFM4 promoter region in the benign immortalized
prostate epithelial cell line (RWPE1), androgen-responsive cancer cells
(LNCaP, VCaP), and androgen-independent cancer cells (PC-3 and
DU145).There are eight CpG sites (-681, -666, -562, -486, -91, +4, +34)
in the promoter regions of OLFM4 gene. The pattern of methylation status
was detected and compared between RWPE1 cell and cancer cell lines LNCaP,
VCaP, PC-3 and Du145. To test whether hypermethylation of CpG sites of
OLFM4 gene can block the expression of OLFM4 gene, RWPE1 cells were
treated with 5-azadeoxycytidine (5-Aza.) (5 M) from 24h to 96h and PC-3
cells were treated with 5-azadeoxycytidine (5-Aza.) (5 M) for 3 days and
7 days. The methylation status of CpG sites was compared in the presence
or absence of 5-Aza. at different time points. The addition of 5-Aza.
consistently reduced the percent methylation of the CpG sites.
Correspondingly, the expression of the OLFM4 gene was induced after
treatment with 5-Aza. in both RWPE1 and PC-3 cells. These results suggest
that expression of OLFM4 is regulated by the methylation status of OLFM4
gene in the RWPE1 and PC-3 prostatic cell lines.

