Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CellMiner, a systems pharmacological web-application for the
NCI-60 cancerous cell-lines: Updates, data integration, and
translationally relevant results


Understanding the influences of molecular alterations on pharmacological
responses in the omic sense is at the fore of the effort to make oncology
more effective and specific. At present, however, this remains a field in
its infancy. The NCI-60 cancerous cell lines provide a premier set of
databases for systems molecular pharmacological studies. This is due to
the availability of both the robust, high-quality activity profiles
generated by the Developmental Therapeutics Program
(https://dtp.cancer.gov), and the panoply of molecular and phenotypic
information available. The CellMiner web-application
(http://discover.nci.nih.gov/cellminer) provides the user access to both
of these. Activity data is available for 20,861 compounds, including 159
Food and Drug Administration (FDA)-approved, 85 clinical trial, and 443
known mechanism-of-action drugs. The molecular data includes transcript
expression for 25,772 genes, genetic variants for 16,568 genes,
transcript expression for 360 microRNAs, protein levels for 94 genes, DNA
copy number (from aCGH) for 23,413 genes, and soon DNA methylation levels
for 17,559 genes. Cell line signatures are provided for each of these
data types, facilitating their comparison. It also provides Pattern
comparisons for any input pattern of interest to 87,419 activity,
molecular and phenotypic patterns (For CellMiner 1.7).Here we present our
CellMiner updates, examples of data integration, and translationally
relevant results.

