Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of microfilament-directed cytochalasins as novel
antineoplastic agents


Despite inherent differences between the cytoskeletal networks of
malignant and normal cells, and the clinical antineoplastic activity of
microtubule-directed agents, there has yet to be a microfilament-directed
agent approved for clinical use. Cytochalasins are mycotoxins known to
potently inhibit the polymerization of filamentous (F)-actin, and have
long been used in vitro to examine the importance of microfilaments in
fundamental cellular processes. It has previously been demonstrated that
cytochalasins preferentially multinucleate malignant cells, suggesting
that the congeners may exert novel antineoplastic activity. We have taken
these findings, and further expanded upon their potential importance. We
have shown in vitro efficacy with multiple congeners, including
cytochalasin B, which potentiates substantial sensitivity to clinically
approved antineoplastic agents, X-radiation, and low frequency
ultrasound. Further, we have shown that cytochalasin B is more cytotoxic
against neoplastic cells selected for high metastatic propensity than are
their less invasive counterparts. Interestingly, we have also
demonstrated that nine cytochalasin congeners may be substantially less
affected by drug efflux due to overexpression of ATP-binding cassette
(ABC) transporters than are doxorubicin, paclitaxel, or vinblastine, as
demonstrated with SK human ovarian carcinoma cell lines of varying levels
of drug resistance. Finally, we have shown that cytochalasins B and D
elicit substantial antitumor and antimetastatic activity in numerous
preclinical mammalian models of malignancy, suggesting that the novel
mechanisms by which these congeners exert antineoplastic activity is
worth further examination.

