Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Androgen receptor expression on circulating tumor cells in
metastatic breast cancer


Background: Androgen receptor (AR) is a nuclear transcription factor and
a member of the steroid hormone receptor superfamily that can be detected
by immunohistochemical staining in all three subtypes of invasive breast
cancer with frequency of >70% of estrogen receptor-positive tumors (ER+),
>60% of HER2-positive tumors (HER2+), and 40-50% of triple-negative
breast cancers (TNBC) respectively. AR-target therapies are showing early
activity in AR+ breast cancer. Given early evidence of activity with
agents targeting AR, it is desirable to improve our understanding of the
AR biology in breast cancer. Although circulating tumor cells (CTCs) have
been proposed as a liquid biopsy for biomarker detection in multiple
cancer types, the rate and heterogeneity of AR expression in CTCs in
breast cancer is still unclear. In this study, we determine the rate and
heterogeneity of AR expression in CTCs of patients with metastatic breast
cancer.Methods: Blood samples from patients with metastatic breast cancer
were smeared onto glass slides and subjected to nuclear staining with
DAPI and reacted with fluorescent-labeled antibodies to detect CD45 on
leukocytes and cytokeratin and AR on epithelial cells; the slides were
scanned on the Epic Sciences CTC platform and the data analyzed using
established algorithms.Results: Among the 59 patients analyzed, 25
(42.4%) had ER+/HER2-, 12 (20.3%) had ER+/HER2+, 6 (10.2%) had ER-/HER2+,
and 16 (27.1%) had TNBC based on the most recent staining. CTCs were
detected in 50 of 59 (84.7%) patients. Characterization of CTCs
identified CK+ CTCs (45 of 59, 76.3%), CK-negative CTCs (16 of 59,
27.1%), CK+ CTC clusters (16 of 59, 27.1%), and apoptotic CTCs (45 of 59,
76.3%), respectively. Number of CTCs per patient ranged from 0 to 282.1
per mL (median = 4.4). Six of the 50 patients (12%) with CTCs had AR+
CTCs. The number of AR+ CTCs per patient ranged from 0.3 to 52.6 per mL
(median = 1.15). Among the patients with AR+ CTCs, the percentage of CTCs
that were AR+ ranged from 5% to 50% (median = 21%). Among the six
patients with AR+ CTCs, five patients had ER+ breast cancer and one had
TNBC.Conclusions: We demonstrated that the Epic Sciences non-enriching or
selecting platform can detect AR expression in CTCs in breast cancer.
These preliminary results suggest the need for clinical validation of CTC
AR expression as a potential test to stratify and identify patients who
might benefit from AR therapy. The heterogeneity of intra-patient CTC AR
expression leads us to another hypothesis that patients with AR+ CTCs
might have heterogeneous disease with multiple drivers. Further studies
are warranted to allow serial monitoring of changes in AR and to
investigate the clinical applicability of AR+ CTCs and their
heterogeneity.

