Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cancer stem cell markers (ALDH1 and CD133) expression could be
associated with a poor prognosis in the patients with lung adenocarcinoma


[Introduction and Purpose] Cancer stem cells (CSCs) may have abilities of
self-renewal and multi-potent differentiation and be responsible for
tumor initiation, progression, metastasis and highly resistant to
radiation or chemotherapy. Aldehyde dehydrogenase 1 (ALDH1) enzymes are a
family of intracellular enzymes that participate in cellular
detoxification, differentiation and drug resistance through the oxidation
of cellular aldehydes. The biochemical function of CD133 currently
remains unclear, but its expression on the cell surface has been
demonstrated to be a specific marker for CSCs in many malignant tumors.
ALDH1 and CD133 have been identified as putative CSCs marker in patients
with lung adenocarcinoma (ad patients) (Miyata et al, 2015). In this
study, we investigated the relationship CSCs markers (ALDH1 and CD133
expression) and various clinical parameters in ad patients. We also
showed that the expression of CSCs markers (ALDH1 and CD133 expression)
related with prognostic potential in ad patients. [Materials and Methods]
We examined 92 of 154 (59.7%) in Japanese ad patients, who underwent
surgical resection in Fukuoka-Wajiro Hosp. Those 92 ad sections were
performed immunohistochemical (IHC) staining for ALDH1 and CD133 using a
standard immunoperoxidase technique. The staining intensity of
cytoplasmic staining of ALDH1 was scored as 0, 1, 2, or 3, corresponding
to negative, weak, intermediate, or strong immunoreactivity,
respectively. Percentage of cells with positive ALDH1 was graded as 0 to
100%. The ALDH1-score was assigned to each case by multiplying the
intensity score by the each percentage of cells staining. The ALDH1-score
was calculated as follows: H = (% of cells that stained at intensity
category 1 1) + (% of cells that stained at intensity category 2 2) + (%
of cells that stained at intensity category 3 3). We defined as positive
cases when more than 100 of the ALDH1-score were calculated. We also
defined as CD133 positive cases when more than 10% of tumor was stained
(negative cases; > 10% positivity, positive cases; [Introduction and
Purpose] Cancer stem cells (CSCs) may have abilities of self-renewal and
multi-potent differentiation and be responsible for tumor initiation,
progression, metastasis and highly resistant to radiation or
chemotherapy. Aldehyde dehydrogenase 1 (ALDH1) enzymes are a family of
intracellular enzymes that participate in cellular detoxification,
differentiation and drug resistance through the oxidation of cellular
aldehydes. The biochemical function of CD133 currently remains unclear,
but its expression on the cell surface has been demonstrated to be a
specific marker for CSCs in many malignant tumors. ALDH1 and CD133 have
been identified as putative CSCs marker in patients with lung
adenocarcinoma (ad patients) (Miyata et al, 2015). In this study, we
investigated the relationship CSCs markers (ALDH1 and CD133 expression)
and various clinical parameters in ad patients. We also showed that the
expression of CSCs markers (ALDH1 and CD133 expression) related with
prognostic potential in ad patients. [Materials and Methods] We examined
92 of 154 (59.7%) in Japanese ad patients, who underwent surgical
resection in Fukuoka-Wajiro Hosp. Those 92 ad sections were performed
immunohistochemical (IHC) staining for ALDH1 and CD133 using a standard
immunoperoxidase technique. The staining intensity of cytoplasmic
staining of ALDH1 was scored as 0, 1, 2, or 3, corresponding to negative,
weak, intermediate, or strong immunoreactivity, respectively. Percentage
of cells with positive ALDH1 was graded as 0 to 100%. The ALDH1-score was
assigned to each case by multiplying the intensity score by the each
percentage of cells staining. The ALDH1-score was calculated as follows:
H = (% of cells that stained at intensity category 1 1) + (% of cells
that stained at intensity category 2 2) + (% of cells that stained at
intensity category 3 3). We defined as positive cases when more than 100
of the ALDH1-score were calculated. We also defined as CD133 positive
cases when more than 10% of tumor was stained (negative cases; > 10%
positivity, positive cases; < 10% positivity). [Results] The mean of the
ALDH1-score from 92 cases was 52.1. The ALDH1-score of stage II-IV
disease (59.1) seemed to be higher than that of stage I disease (48.7).
ALDH1-score positive cases seemed to be associated with a poorer survival
according to a survival curve (p = 0.06). CD133 positive cases were
significantly associated with a poorer survival according to a survival
curve (p[Introduction and Purpose] Cancer stem cells (CSCs) may have
abilities of self-renewal and multi-potent differentiation and be
responsible for tumor initiation, progression, metastasis and highly
resistant to radiation or chemotherapy. Aldehyde dehydrogenase 1 (ALDH1)
enzymes are a family of intracellular enzymes that participate in
cellular detoxification, differentiation and drug resistance through the
oxidation of cellular aldehydes. The biochemical function of CD133
currently remains unclear, but its expression on the cell surface has
been demonstrated to be a specific marker for CSCs in many malignant
tumors. ALDH1 and CD133 have been identified as putative CSCs marker in
patients with lung adenocarcinoma (ad patients) (Miyata et al, 2015). In
this study, we investigated the relationship CSCs markers (ALDH1 and
CD133 expression) and various clinical parameters in ad patients. We also
showed that the expression of CSCs markers (ALDH1 and CD133 expression)
related with prognostic potential in ad patients. [Materials and Methods]
We examined 92 of 154 (59.7%) in Japanese ad patients, who underwent
surgical resection in Fukuoka-Wajiro Hosp. Those 92 ad sections were
performed immunohistochemical (IHC) staining for ALDH1 and CD133 using a
standard immunoperoxidase technique. The staining intensity of
cytoplasmic staining of ALDH1 was scored as 0, 1, 2, or 3, corresponding
to negative, weak, intermediate, or strong immunoreactivity,
respectively. Percentage of cells with positive ALDH1 was graded as 0 to
100%. The ALDH1-score was assigned to each case by multiplying the
intensity score by the each percentage of cells staining. The ALDH1-score
was calculated as follows: H = (% of cells that stained at intensity
category 1 1) + (% of cells that stained at intensity category 2 2) + (%
of cells that stained at intensity category 3 3). We defined as positive
cases when more than 100 of the ALDH1-score were calculated. We also
defined as CD133 positive cases when more than 10% of tumor was stained
(negative cases; > 10% positivity, positive cases; < 10% positivity).
[Results] The mean of the ALDH1-score from 92 cases was 52.1. The
ALDH1-score of stage II-IV disease (59.1) seemed to be higher than that
of stage I disease (48.7). ALDH1-score positive cases seemed to be
associated with a poorer survival according to a survival curve (p =
0.06). CD133 positive cases were significantly associated with a poorer
survival according to a survival curve (p<0.01), although there were no
relationship between CD133 expression and ALDH1-score. [Conclusion] ALDH1
and CD133 can act as a prognostic marker for stem cells in human lung
adenocarcinoma. To determine the ALDH1 and CD133 expression in human lung
adenocarcinoma is helpful for targeted therapies against stem cells.

