Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: FBW7 induces S-phase arrest caused by DNA double strand breaks
through targeting SOX9 for proteasomal degradation


SOX9 encodes a transcription factor that governs cell fate specification
throughout development and tissue homeostasis. Elevated SOX9 is
implicated in the genesis or progression of many human tumors through
increasing cell proliferation and epithelial-mesenchymal transition. We
observed that, in response to UV irradiation or certain chemotherapeutic
agents, SOX9 is actively and rapidly degraded by a ubiquitin pathway
dependent mechanism across several different tumor types including lung
cancer, colon cancer, osteosarcoma and melanoma, as well as normal human
bronchial epithelial cells. We found that SOX9 is phosphorylated by GSK3
at Ser-236, facilitating the direct binding and degradation of SOX9 via
the F box protein, FBW7. We also determined that the de-ubiquitinase,
USP28, stabilizes SOX9 under normal conditions by sequestering FBW7, but
is released from FBW7 after UV irradiation, allowing FBW7 to bind SOX9
and target it for destruction. DNA damage-induced SOX9 degradation was
independent of p53, ATM, ATR and MAPK pathways. Failure to deplete SOX9
attenuated the DNA damage-induced intra-S-phase checkpoint and increased
long-term cell survival. Moreover, mutations within the FBW7
phosphodegron binding site of SOX9 prevented SOX9 degradation after DNA
damage, and incurred resistance of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
cells to cisplatin in vivo. We found that cancer patients with tumors
expressing high Sox9 and low Fbw7 levels exhibit inferior survival. Our
discovery reveals a novel function of SOX9 in the cellular response to
DNA damage. Induced degradation of SOX9 may be part of the protection
mechanisms to maintain genomic stability. This new regulatory mechanism
of the FBW7-SOX9 axis in cancer could have diagnostic and therapeutic
implications.

