Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Incorporation of natural compounds into biomaterials to prevent
breast cancer recurrence


Numerous studies have demonstrated that naturally occurring
phytochemicals such as Tannic acid (TA) possess anti-cancer properties.
Apoptotic activity is increased in breast cancer and prostate cancer
cells in response to exposure to tannin extracts. Collagen type I is a
biomaterial routinely used for cosmetic and reconstructive surgeries,
including breast reconstruction following breast cancer mandated
surgeries. TA functions as a collagen crosslinking agent through both
hydrogen bonding and hydrophobic effects. Thus, if TA-crosslinked
collagen type I is used for breast reconstruction procedures, the
crosslinked collagen will be remodeled by growing breast epithelial cells
and adipocytes where the incorporated TA will be released killing nearby
residual cancer cells preventing recurrence. When adipocytes are grown on
TA-crosslinked collagen beads the measureable released TA induces
caspase-mediated apoptosis in ER+ and HER2+ breast cancer cells but has
no effect on triple negative breast cancer cells and reduced
apoptotic-inducing activity in normal breast epithelial cells. We are
developing an injectable matrix comprised of TA-crosslinked collagen
beads and adipocytes to serve as a tissue regeneration platform in
patients post-lumpectomy. Variables such as collagen temperature, syringe
pump rate, and drop distance have been studied to determine ideal method
for producing beads of the desired size and shape. These promising
results will lead to the construction of a matrix designed to not only
promote tissue regeneration but also simultaneously help to prevent tumor
recurrence. This matrix provides protection in breast cancer patients and
holds promise for patients suffering from other soft tissue cancers.

