Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Trust in health information source and colorectal cancer screening
uptake among U.S. adults


Background: In order to promote positive health behavior of the
population, public health outreach is often carried out in various forms
to reach the target stakeholders. However, the effectiveness of these
outreach programs is unclear.Aim: To determine up-to-date adherence to
colorectal cancer (CRC) screening guidelines among US adults according to
the trust they have in various sources of health information.Methods: We
used the 2007 Health Information National Trends Survey (HINTS) and
identified 4342 respondents (weighted population size = 82,811,829) who
were at least 50 years old. Respondents expressed the degree of trust
they have in various sources of health related information. We considered
a source as trusted when it is trusted a lot or had some trust and
regarded as not trusted if it was trusted a little or not at all. We
defined being current with CRC screening as the use of fecal occult blood
testing (FOBT) within 1 year, sigmoidoscopy within 5 years, or
colonoscopy within 10 years. We used logistic regression models to
calculate odds ratios (OR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI). Survey
weights were used in all analyses. Results: Approximately 94.3% of
respondents trusted their doctors, 59.3% trusted family or friends, 50.2%
trusted newsmagazines, 32.7% trusted radio, 66.2% trusted internet, 40.6%
trusted television, 68.5% trusted government sources, 44.3% trusted
charity organization and 34.5% trusted religious organizations. When
compared with those who did not trust the source of health information,
trust in radio (64.7% vs 60.7%; OR = 1.24; 95%CI: 1.01-1.52), internet
(64.0% vs 58.3%; OR = 1.26; 95%CI: 1.04-1.53), television (64.4% vs
60.9%; OR = 1.23; 95%CI: 1.02-1.48), and government sources (64.0% vs
58.2%; OR = 1.32; 95%CI: 1.09-1.60) were associated with being up-to-date
with colorectal cancer screening whereas trust in doctors (63.2% vs
49.2%; OR = 1.53; 95%CI: 0.92-2.55), family or friends (61.5% vs 63.1%;
OR = 0.98; 95%CI: 0.84-1.15), newsmagazines (64.0% vs 60.8%; OR = 1.14;
95%CI: 0.98-1.32), charity organizations (62.0% vs 62.1%; OR = 1.04;
95%CI: 0.86-1.24) and religious organizations (59.7% vs 63.3%; OR = 0.90;
95%CI: 0.74-1.09) were not.Conclusion: Even with modest trust in the
source of health information, outreach modalities which engage people
repeatedly and those that they can readily access over and over again may
exert substantial influence on the uptake of colorectal cancer screening.
Multiple outreach methods should be used to promote colorectal cancer
screening.

