Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical analysis and characterization of abemaciclib using
three-dimensional patient-derived colorectal cancer organoid cultures


Proper patient-tailoring strategy and the validation of novel therapeutic
targets remain enormous challenges during drug discovery processes.
Patient-derived three-dimensional organoid cell culture models possess
great potential to associate compound sensitivity and disease complexity
in order to provide a key missing link between compound screening and
clinical trials. Abemaciclib is a reversible, ATP competitive, selective
inhibitor of the kinase activity of both CDK4 and CDK6 and is currently
undergoing advanced clinical testing.In this study, we established and
characterized three-dimensional organoid cultures from primary colorectal
cancer patients and validated their use as drug sensitivity models. We
aimed to explore the antitumor activity of abemaciclib in colon cancer
organoid cultures by assessing markers for cell viability, proliferation,
cell cycle, senescence and apoptosis. Single cell suspension of
patient-derived samples were precultured for four days to allow for
complete morphogenesis of three-dimensional organoid structures.
Subsequently, the cultures were treated for at least two population
doubling times and analyzed by luminescent cell viability,
immunohistochemistry and flow cytometry assays.Our data suggest that
abemaciclib treatment decreased the cell viability of patient-derived
colorectal cancer organoid cultures characterized by G1 cell cycle arrest
and reduced Ki-67-positive cells. Furthermore, treated cultures showed
elevated levels of reactive oxygen species and increased markers for
early and late apoptosis. In summary, complex organoid models have the
potential to further evaluate the antitumor activity of abemaciclib in
various tumor types by enabling mechanistic studies in a patient-specific
preclinical setting.

