Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Application of target enrichment combined with unique molecular
identifiers to determine allelic frequencies of human cancers


Existing target enrichment and library preparation for next-generation
sequencing typically utilize PCR amplification steps that introduce
substantial bias and sequencing of duplicate reads, which in turn affect
the quantification accuracy of somatic allele frequencies. Unique
molecular identifiers (UMIs) are random molecular tags that uniquely
label each molecule prior to library amplification and aid in the
identification of true PCR duplicates and thereby improve the accuracy in
estimating the relative molecular copy number of the original sample.
Here, we applied a target enrichment method for hybridization-based
capture of regions of interest, combined with unique molecule labeling
and next-generation sequencing to determine allelic frequencies of select
cancer targets. Target enrichment and library preparation can be
performed in just under seven hours, and our UMI method is compatible
with sample indexing using separate barcodes. To demonstrate the
robustness and accuracy of our method, we present the detection and
assessment of allelic frequencies of multiple cancer genes across
multiple reference standards. The result is a fast and cost-efficient
method that enables the determination of even low allelic frequencies
with high confidence.

