Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chromothripsis in AML patients: A new mechanism of cancer
initiation and progression


Introduction: Genomic rearrangements can drive the development of cancer
through different mechanisms: chromothripsis, a catastrophic mechanism of
genomic instability, could be relevant for hematological disease.Aim: To
discover the mechanisms underlying the pathogenesis of Acute Myeloid
Leukemia (AML), we studied chromothripsis in our cohort of patients
(pts).Methods: We perform SNP Array 6.0 or Cytoscan HD Array (Affymetrix)
in a cohort of 104 AML pts at diagnosis. SNP Array data were analyzed by
Nexus Copy Number v7.5 (BioDiscovery).Results: Seven/104 pts (6.7%)
showed chromothripsis events involving different chromosomes (8, 17, 11,
5 and 16). These pts had median age of 68.5 years (range 56-76), complex
karyotype and high risk disease according to ELN definition. Among the
pts showing chromothripsis, we compared chromosomic abnormalities of pts
with de novo (5/7) and secondary (2/7) AML. De novo AML showed a
prevalence of trisomy of chromosome 8 in a non-statistical way (4/5 vs
0/2), due to the low number of cases. However, we identified significant
differences in the pattern of genes altered in the two groups. De novo
AML had copy number gain of PEX1, ANK1, NCOA2, ESRP1, TPD52, ESRP1, ZFPM2
and MITF (p Introduction: Genomic rearrangements can drive the
development of cancer through different mechanisms: chromothripsis, a
catastrophic mechanism of genomic instability, could be relevant for
hematological disease.Aim: To discover the mechanisms underlying the
pathogenesis of Acute Myeloid Leukemia (AML), we studied chromothripsis
in our cohort of patients (pts).Methods: We perform SNP Array 6.0 or
Cytoscan HD Array (Affymetrix) in a cohort of 104 AML pts at diagnosis.
SNP Array data were analyzed by Nexus Copy Number v7.5
(BioDiscovery).Results: Seven/104 pts (6.7%) showed chromothripsis events
involving different chromosomes (8, 17, 11, 5 and 16). These pts had
median age of 68.5 years (range 56-76), complex karyotype and high risk
disease according to ELN definition. Among the pts showing
chromothripsis, we compared chromosomic abnormalities of pts with de novo
(5/7) and secondary (2/7) AML. De novo AML showed a prevalence of trisomy
of chromosome 8 in a non-statistical way (4/5 vs 0/2), due to the low
number of cases. However, we identified significant differences in the
pattern of genes altered in the two groups. De novo AML had copy number
gain of PEX1, ANK1, NCOA2, ESRP1, TPD52, ESRP1, ZFPM2 and MITF (p
<0.047). In the secondary AML group we detected amplification of APC and
deletions of FOXO1 and APP (p Introduction: Genomic rearrangements can
drive the development of cancer through different mechanisms:
chromothripsis, a catastrophic mechanism of genomic instability, could be
relevant for hematological disease.Aim: To discover the mechanisms
underlying the pathogenesis of Acute Myeloid Leukemia (AML), we studied
chromothripsis in our cohort of patients (pts).Methods: We perform SNP
Array 6.0 or Cytoscan HD Array (Affymetrix) in a cohort of 104 AML pts at
diagnosis. SNP Array data were analyzed by Nexus Copy Number v7.5
(BioDiscovery).Results: Seven/104 pts (6.7%) showed chromothripsis events
involving different chromosomes (8, 17, 11, 5 and 16). These pts had
median age of 68.5 years (range 56-76), complex karyotype and high risk
disease according to ELN definition. Among the pts showing
chromothripsis, we compared chromosomic abnormalities of pts with de novo
(5/7) and secondary (2/7) AML. De novo AML showed a prevalence of trisomy
of chromosome 8 in a non-statistical way (4/5 vs 0/2), due to the low
number of cases. However, we identified significant differences in the
pattern of genes altered in the two groups. De novo AML had copy number
gain of PEX1, ANK1, NCOA2, ESRP1, TPD52, ESRP1, ZFPM2 and MITF (p
<0.047). In the secondary AML group we detected amplification of APC and
deletions of FOXO1 and APP (p <0.047)with enrichment of WNT signaling
pathway proteins (p Introduction: Genomic rearrangements can drive the
development of cancer through different mechanisms: chromothripsis, a
catastrophic mechanism of genomic instability, could be relevant for
hematological disease.Aim: To discover the mechanisms underlying the
pathogenesis of Acute Myeloid Leukemia (AML), we studied chromothripsis
in our cohort of patients (pts).Methods: We perform SNP Array 6.0 or
Cytoscan HD Array (Affymetrix) in a cohort of 104 AML pts at diagnosis.
SNP Array data were analyzed by Nexus Copy Number v7.5
(BioDiscovery).Results: Seven/104 pts (6.7%) showed chromothripsis events
involving different chromosomes (8, 17, 11, 5 and 16). These pts had
median age of 68.5 years (range 56-76), complex karyotype and high risk
disease according to ELN definition. Among the pts showing
chromothripsis, we compared chromosomic abnormalities of pts with de novo
(5/7) and secondary (2/7) AML. De novo AML showed a prevalence of trisomy
of chromosome 8 in a non-statistical way (4/5 vs 0/2), due to the low
number of cases. However, we identified significant differences in the
pattern of genes altered in the two groups. De novo AML had copy number
gain of PEX1, ANK1, NCOA2, ESRP1, TPD52, ESRP1, ZFPM2 and MITF (p
<0.047). In the secondary AML group we detected amplification of APC and
deletions of FOXO1 and APP (p <0.047)with enrichment of WNT signaling
pathway proteins (p <0.001). The pathways recurrently targeted by
chromosomal alteration in de novo AML pts were protein acetylation,
transcription factor and histone acetiltrasferase (p Introduction:
Genomic rearrangements can drive the development of cancer through
different mechanisms: chromothripsis, a catastrophic mechanism of genomic
instability, could be relevant for hematological disease.Aim: To discover
the mechanisms underlying the pathogenesis of Acute Myeloid Leukemia
(AML), we studied chromothripsis in our cohort of patients (pts).Methods:
We perform SNP Array 6.0 or Cytoscan HD Array (Affymetrix) in a cohort of
104 AML pts at diagnosis. SNP Array data were analyzed by Nexus Copy
Number v7.5 (BioDiscovery).Results: Seven/104 pts (6.7%) showed
chromothripsis events involving different chromosomes (8, 17, 11, 5 and
16). These pts had median age of 68.5 years (range 56-76), complex
karyotype and high risk disease according to ELN definition. Among the
pts showing chromothripsis, we compared chromosomic abnormalities of pts
with de novo (5/7) and secondary (2/7) AML. De novo AML showed a
prevalence of trisomy of chromosome 8 in a non-statistical way (4/5 vs
0/2), due to the low number of cases. However, we identified significant
differences in the pattern of genes altered in the two groups. De novo
AML had copy number gain of PEX1, ANK1, NCOA2, ESRP1, TPD52, ESRP1, ZFPM2
and MITF (p <0.047). In the secondary AML group we detected amplification
of APC and deletions of FOXO1 and APP (p <0.047)with enrichment of WNT
signaling pathway proteins (p <0.001). The pathways recurrently targeted
by chromosomal alteration in de novo AML pts were protein acetylation,
transcription factor and histone acetiltrasferase (p <0.001). Moreover,
by comparing pts with and without chromothripsis, we identified several
genes differentially altered between the 2 groups (pIntroduction: Genomic
rearrangements can drive the development of cancer through different
mechanisms: chromothripsis, a catastrophic mechanism of genomic
instability, could be relevant for hematological disease.Aim: To discover
the mechanisms underlying the pathogenesis of Acute Myeloid Leukemia
(AML), we studied chromothripsis in our cohort of patients (pts).Methods:
We perform SNP Array 6.0 or Cytoscan HD Array (Affymetrix) in a cohort of
104 AML pts at diagnosis. SNP Array data were analyzed by Nexus Copy
Number v7.5 (BioDiscovery).Results: Seven/104 pts (6.7%) showed
chromothripsis events involving different chromosomes (8, 17, 11, 5 and
16). These pts had median age of 68.5 years (range 56-76), complex
karyotype and high risk disease according to ELN definition. Among the
pts showing chromothripsis, we compared chromosomic abnormalities of pts
with de novo (5/7) and secondary (2/7) AML. De novo AML showed a
prevalence of trisomy of chromosome 8 in a non-statistical way (4/5 vs
0/2), due to the low number of cases. However, we identified significant
differences in the pattern of genes altered in the two groups. De novo
AML had copy number gain of PEX1, ANK1, NCOA2, ESRP1, TPD52, ESRP1, ZFPM2
and MITF (p <0.047). In the secondary AML group we detected amplification
of APC and deletions of FOXO1 and APP (p <0.047)with enrichment of WNT
signaling pathway proteins (p <0.001). The pathways recurrently targeted
by chromosomal alteration in de novo AML pts were protein acetylation,
transcription factor and histone acetiltrasferase (p <0.001). Moreover,
by comparing pts with and without chromothripsis, we identified several
genes differentially altered between the 2 groups (p<0.001), including
deletion of CYFIP2, TBCA, CRHBP, FNDC9, IQGAP2, TUB3 and GAS8 and
amplification of ZFPM2 in pts with chromothripsis, with 5q being the main
altered chromosomic region. The most significantly affected pathways in
the chromothripsis group were cytoskeleton, microtubules formation,
histone acetyltransferase and immune and antigen presentation response
pathways (pIntroduction: Genomic rearrangements can drive the development
of cancer through different mechanisms: chromothripsis, a catastrophic
mechanism of genomic instability, could be relevant for hematological
disease.Aim: To discover the mechanisms underlying the pathogenesis of
Acute Myeloid Leukemia (AML), we studied chromothripsis in our cohort of
patients (pts).Methods: We perform SNP Array 6.0 or Cytoscan HD Array
(Affymetrix) in a cohort of 104 AML pts at diagnosis. SNP Array data were
analyzed by Nexus Copy Number v7.5 (BioDiscovery).Results: Seven/104 pts
(6.7%) showed chromothripsis events involving different chromosomes (8,
17, 11, 5 and 16). These pts had median age of 68.5 years (range 56-76),
complex karyotype and high risk disease according to ELN definition.
Among the pts showing chromothripsis, we compared chromosomic
abnormalities of pts with de novo (5/7) and secondary (2/7) AML. De novo
AML showed a prevalence of trisomy of chromosome 8 in a non-statistical
way (4/5 vs 0/2), due to the low number of cases. However, we identified
significant differences in the pattern of genes altered in the two
groups. De novo AML had copy number gain of PEX1, ANK1, NCOA2, ESRP1,
TPD52, ESRP1, ZFPM2 and MITF (p <0.047). In the secondary AML group we
detected amplification of APC and deletions of FOXO1 and APP (p
<0.047)with enrichment of WNT signaling pathway proteins (p <0.001). The
pathways recurrently targeted by chromosomal alteration in de novo AML
pts were protein acetylation, transcription factor and histone
acetiltrasferase (p <0.001). Moreover, by comparing pts with and without
chromothripsis, we identified several genes differentially altered
between the 2 groups (p<0.001), including deletion of CYFIP2, TBCA,
CRHBP, FNDC9, IQGAP2, TUB3 and GAS8 and amplification of ZFPM2 in pts
with chromothripsis, with 5q being the main altered chromosomic region.
The most significantly affected pathways in the chromothripsis group were
cytoskeleton, microtubules formation, histone acetyltransferase and
immune and antigen presentation response pathways (p<0.001).Conclusion:
Our data suggest that different pathways and genomic alterations are
involved in chromothripsis events in de novo and secondary AML, which
could be explained by the repeated rounds of stress underwent by leukemic
cells in secondary AML cases. Cytoskeleton and microtubules formation
pathways appear to be the main cellular processes implicated in
chromothripsis genesis, while alterations of histone acetyltransferase,
immune response and antigen presentation pathways could sustain leukemic
cells after chromothripsis.Acknowledgement: ELN, AIL, AIRC, PRIN,
progetto Regione-Universit 2010-12(L. Bolondi), FP7 NGS-PTL project.

