Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anti-cancer activity of a stable, orally active angiotensin-(1-7)
analog


Angiotensin-(1-7) [Ang-(1-7)] is an endogenous, peptide hormone that
reduces tumor growth through effects on proliferation, inflammation,
angiogenesis, fibrosis and metastasis. Ang-(1-7) mediates biological
responses by activating mas, a unique G protein-coupled receptor, thereby
providing specific targeted actions when used as a therapeutic agent.
Unfortunately, Ang-(1-7) has unfavorable pharmacokinetic properties,
resulting in a plasma half-life of about 30 min. In this study, TCAng05,
a modified cyclic analog of Ang-(1-7), was compared to the parent
compound Ang-(1-7) for efficacy, stability, and oral bioavailability.
Ang-(1-7) or TCAng05 was incubated with human A549 lung or MDA-MB-231
breast cancer cells for 6 to 10 days, to assess the effect on tumor cell
growth. A single dose of TCAng05 significantly reduced the growth of both
MDA-MB-231 and A549 cells, while daily doses of Ang-(1-7) were required
due to rapid degradation. Growth inhibition by either compound was
blocked by the Ang-(1-7) receptor antagonist D-Ala7-Ang-(1-7) [Dala],
showing a receptor-mediated response. Ang-(1-7) was rapidly degraded
following incubation in rat plasma with a half-life of about 30 min,
while TCAng05 was stable under the same conditions for approximately 50
h. The oral efficacy of TCAng05 to inhibit tumor growth in vivo was
assessed by injecting 4T1 cells into the mammary fat pad of BALB/C mice.
Once the tumors reached 100 mm3, the mice received daily gavage of
TCAng05 at 12 g/kg/day (low), 60 g/kg/day (medium) or 300 g/kg/day
(high). Tumors in mice with no treatment continued to grow until
sacrifice at day 19, reaching a size of 671.2 127.2 mm3. Oral treatment
with TCAng05 at the medium or high dose reduced tumor volume, by 56.8%
and 43.6%, respectively, to final tumor volumes of 289.7 64.2 mm3 and
378.3 151.2 mm3. Tumor weight was also reduced by treatment with the
medium or high dose of oral TCAng05. TCAng05 had no effect on mouse
weight, heart or kidney weight, indicating that oral administration of
the Ang-(1-7) analog was well-tolerated. TCAng05 caused a dose-dependent
decrease in Ki67 immunoreactivity in tumor tissue sections from mice
treated with the analog, suggesting reduced tumor cell proliferation.
TCAng05 administration to mice with breast tumors also caused a
significant decrease in tumor blood vessel density, as measured by CD34
labeling, suggesting that the analog inhibits angiogenesis to decrease
tumor size. Collagen staining with Picrosirius red was markedly decreased
in human breast tumor xenografts by oral administration of TCAng05,
demonstrating that the analog reduces tumor associated fibrosis. These
results indicate that oral administration of TCAng05 to mice with breast
tumors reduced tumor size, by decreasing tumor cell proliferation,
angiogenesis and fibrosis, as previously observed with the native
Ang-(1-7), and suggest that the modified analog may serve as an
effective, orally active, targeted chemotherapeutic.

