Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Garcinone inhibits nasopharyngeal carcinoma cell growth and
arrests cell cycle via modulating the expression of ATR/Stat3/4E-BP1


Nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) is one of the common head and neck
malignancies. Radiotherapy and chemotherapy are the standard treatments
for NPC. Garcinone, a natural compound isolated from Garcinia
oblongifolia Champ., is a xanthone derivative and has been shown to have
potential cytotoxic effects on certain cancer types. However, there have
been limited studies performed on its effects on NPC cells and the
mechanisms of these effects remain unknown. In this study, we firstly
found that garcinone significantly inhibited cell viability of human NPC
cell lines CNE1, CNE2, HK1, and HONE1. This inhibition was in a time- and
dose-dependent manner. Then, flow cytometry analysis was performed on
cell cycle analysis. We observed that garcinone arrested cell cycle at S
phase. With 10M of high-dose garcinone treatment, the cells exhibited
necrotic morphology changes including cell swelling, rough endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) degranulation, ER dilatation, mitochondria swelling, and
vacuolar degeneration. Finally, we found that garcinone stimulated the
expression levels of ATR and 4E-BP1, while efficiently inhibited the
expression levels of Cyclin B1, Cyclin D1, Cyclin E2, cdc2, CDK7, and
Stat3. Collectively, the ability of garcinone to inhibit NPC in vitro
suggested that garcinone might be a novel agent for the management of
NPC. Supported by NSFC Key Project 81130046; NSFC Project 81171993 and
NSFC81272415; Guangxi Key Projects 2013GXNSFEA053004 and
2012GXNSFCB053004; Guangxi Ministry of Education 201202ZD022 and
201201ZD004.

