Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mechanistic basis of Palbociclib combinatorial activity in ER+
breast cancer and non-breast indications


Phosphorylation of the retinoblastoma protein (Rb) by cyclin-dependent
kinases 4 and 6 (CDK4/6) is a critical checkpoint for G1/S cell cycle
progression and commitment to cellular proliferation. Human malignancies
often subvert these control mechanisms through a range of genetic and
biochemical adaptations. Accordingly, tumors that depend on CDK4/6
activity for proliferation and survival are particularly sensitive to
inhibition of this pathway by palbociclib (IbranceTM), a highly selective
inhibitor of CDK4/6 kinase activities. Treatment regimen of palbociclib
with letrozole significantly improved progression-free survival in a
randomized phase 2 study of women with advanced estrogen
receptor-positive (ER+), HER2-negative breast cancer. Likewise, in ER+
breast cancer models palbociclib and estrogen antagonists combine for
greater anti-proliferative activity, increased hallmarks of cellular
senescence and prolonged durability of response following drug removal.
Dual inhibition of CDK4/6 and ER signaling demonstrated robust anti-tumor
activity in xenograft studies. The addition of Palbociclib to other
targeted therapeutics elicits improved activity in pre-clinical models of
several non-breast indications and these effects also manifest through
modulation of cellular proliferation, senescence and growth arrest. Data
will be presented on the molecular basis of combination benefit with
Palbociclib in ER+ breast and other oncology indications.

