Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Erlotinib derivative, devoid of EGFR kinase inhibiting effect,
induced apoptosis of triple-negative breast cancer cells through
modulating Elk-1/CIP2A signaling pathway


Background:Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC), a subgroup of breast
cancer, is characterized by its aggressive nature and poor prognosis.
Therefore, the discovery and identification of new therapeutic molecule
is currently one of urgent issues. Previous studies have suggested an
oncoprotein, cancerous inhibitor of protein phosphatase 2A (CIP2A), is a
potential therapeutic determinant that mediates the anti-cancer effects
of several new agents. We have developed an erlotinib analogue TD-19 that
is devoid of EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibition effect, and demonstrated its
anti-tumor effects through the suppression of CIP2A-mediated pathway in
non-small-cell lung cancer cells (J Pharmacol Exp Ther 2014). In this
study, we tested the apoptotic effect of TD-19 in TNBC cells and examined
the drug mechanism upstream of CIP2A.Methods:TNBC cell lines were used
for in vitro studies. Cell viability was examined by MTT assay. Apoptosis
was examined by flow cytometry and western blot. Signal transduction
pathways in cells were assessed by western blot. In vivo efficacy of
TD-19 was tested in nude mice with breast cancer xenografts.Results:TD-19
triggered significant apoptosis in MDA-MB-231, MDA-MB-468, MDA-MB-468 and
BT-20 cell lines, as well as in non-TNBC cell lines (SK-BR3 and MCF-7).
The induced apoptotic effects are associated with CIP2A and p-Akt
downregulation in both dose- and time-dependent manners. Overexpression
of CIP2A protected MDA-MB-468 from the induced apoptosis of TD-19. In
addition, PP2A activity was increased in TD-19 treated MDA-MB-468 cells.
Moreover, forskolin, a protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A) activator, enhanced
the cell death induced by TD-19, whereas okadaic acid, a PP2A antagonist,
attenuated the apoptosis. Mechanistically, we demonstrated that TD-19
downregulated CIP2A mRNA expression through affecting the total amount of
Elk-1 in nucleus. Chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments showed TD-19
disturbed the binding of Elk-1 to the proximal CIP2A-promotor.
Furthermore, TD-19 showed anti-tumor activity in mice bearing MDA-MB-468
xenograft tumors, and downregulated CIP2A as well as p-Akt in these
xenografted tumors. Interestingly, combining TD-19 with cisplatin
demonstrated enhanced anti-proliferative and apoptotic effects in
association with CIP2A downregulation in vitro.Conclusions:Our results
suggest that the novel erlotinib derivative (TD-19) induced apoptosis
through inhibiting Elk1/CIP2A/PP2A/p-Akt signaling in TNBC cells.
Pharmacological modulation of Elk-1/CIP2A signaling may be a therapeutic
strategy for TNBC.(Supported by Yen Tjing Ling Medical Foundation
(CI-104-07); MOST 104-2628-B-075-001-MY3; Yang-Ming Branch of Taipei City
Hospital; and from the Ministry of Health and Welfare, Executive Yuan,
Taiwan, MOHW104-TDU-B-211-124-001; and MOHW103TDU-212-114002).

