Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeted therapy of precancerous fields in the mucosal linings of
the head and neck


Primary head and neck squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCC) and local relapses
develop in preneoplastic fields in the mucosal linings of the upper
aerodigestive tract. These fields are characterized by tumor-associated
genetic changes, show frequently dysplastic features and are occasionally
macroscopically visible as lesions. Currently, there are no adequate
treatment options for these fields to prevent tumor development. To
develop a targeted therapeutic approach we established four unique
preneoplastic cell lines, derived from fields adjacent to HNSCCs. Next,
we performed a screen with a selective panel of small interfering RNAs
(siRNAs) that are lethal for HNSCC cells, to identify genes essential for
survival of preneoplastic cells and not for normal cells. One of these
selective essential genes was Polo-like kinase 1 (PLK1). Inhibition of
PLK1, both with siRNAs as well as small molecule inhibitors, caused cell
death of preneoplastic and HNSCC tumor cells, while primary fibroblasts
and keratinocytes were hardly affected. Targeting PLK1 caused a strong
G2/M cell cycle arrest in preneoplastic cells accompanied by formation of
monopolar spindles during mitosis. Hence, PLK1 is a promising therapeutic
target for chemopreventive eradication of preneoplastic fields in
patients at high risk of developing HNSCC and local relapses.

