Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MiR expression profiles can predict response to systemic treatment
in patients with advanced colorectal cancer


Background and aim: Patients with advanced colorectal cancer (mCRC) are
commonly treated with systemic treatment consisting of
fluoropyrimidine-based regimens being ineffective in 20-25% of the
patients. Currently, selection criteria for patients to predict who will
respond to this treatment is lacking. The aim of this study is to
identify which patients will respond to first line fluoropyrimidine-based
treatment based using microRNA (miR) expression profiles in order to
avoid ineffective treatment.Material and methods: Total RNA was isolated
from 88 fresh frozen colorectal cancer tissue samples consisting of 70%
tumor cells, collected from patients with mCRC. MiR expression profiles
were generated by next generation sequencing using the Illumina High Seq
2000 platform. Of all patients clinical and pathological data, including
treatment response based on RECIST criteria, were collected. Class
prediction and miR selection were performed using the GRidge package in
R. Penalized selection and internal cross validation were used to select
miRs predictive for treatment response.RESULTS: Next generation
sequencing resulted in a mean of 10.087.107 (range 6.114.932 to
74.313.067) reads per sample corresponding to 2567 unique mature miR
sequences, including 457 novel candidate and 2110 known miRs sequences
(miRbase version 19). Penalized regression analysis on tumor specific
miRs identified an expression profile which was predictive for clinical
benefit (defined as response and stable disease) from first line
treatment.Conclusion: With miR profiling of CRC tissue samples response
prediction to first line fluoropyrimidine-based treatment in patients
with mCRC is possible. We foresee that selection of treatment using miR
expression profiling will avoid unnecessary treatment related toxicity
and improve outcome for patients with mCRC

