Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Talazoparib enhances low-dose temozolomide efficacy in flank
glioblastoma models, but intracranial efficacy is constrained by limited
brain distribution


BACKGROUND: Talazoparib (TAL) is a potent poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase
(PARP) inhibitor that robustly enhances in vitro sensitivity to
temozolomide (TMZ) in several tumor models. We assessed the in vitro and
in vivo efficacy of TAL combined with TMZ in glioblastoma (GBM)
models.METHODS: Established glioma cell lines (T98G, U251) and the GBM12
patient derived xenograft (PDX) line were treated in vitro with TAL (1-10
nM) TMZ (2-300 M). Antitumor efficacy was assessed with CyQUANT,
clonogenic and primary neurosphere assays; cell cycle analysis with flow
cytometry; DNA damage signaling with phospho-specific western blots for
pKap1, pChk1, pChk2 and fluorescent immunocytochemistry for H2AX and
replication protein A foci. Brain and plasma concentrations of TAL in
wild-type (WT), Mdr1a/b(-/-), Bcrp(-/-) and Mdr1a/b(-/-)Bcrp(-/-)
knockout (KO) mice were assessed with LC-MS/MS. The tolerability of TAL
(0.05 - 0.30 mg/kg/day orally, divided twice daily (div. bid)) and TMZ
(5-50 mg/kg/day orally) was tested in athymic nude mice. Subsequently, in
vivo combination TAL/TMZ efficacy was assessed with survival analyses in
intracranial and flank GBM12 PDX models.RESULTS: TAL 1-3 nM sensitizes
the TMZ resistant T98G glioma cell line to TMZ at high TMZ concentrations
(30-300 M) and is associated with G2 cell cycle arrest and enhanced DNA
damage signaling. TAL 1-3 nM also enhances the cytotoxic efficacy of
lower concentrations of TMZ (10-30 M) in the TMZ sensitive U251 cell
line. At least 3 nM TAL is required to enhance the in vitro efficacy of
low TMZ concentrations (2-10 M) in the TMZ sensitive GBM12 PDX line. PK
studies in non-tumor bearing WT FVB mice treated with a single dose of
TAL 0.15 mg/kg revealed mean brain and plasma concentrations of 0.49 ng/g
(1.3 nM) and 25.5 ng/ml (67.1 nM) respectively at 2 hours. The mean
brain/plasma ratio at 2 hours was unchanged in Bcrp(-/-) KO mice compared
to WT mice (1.2% vs. 2.0%), but was significantly increased in
Mdr1a/b(-/-) KO mice (22.8%) and Mdr1a/b(-/-)Bcrp(-/-) KO mice (23.9%).
Standard doses of TMZ (50 mg/kg/day, days 1-5) combined with low doses of
TAL (0.05 mg/kg/day, div. bid) were toxic in nude mice. Higher doses of
TAL (0.30 mg/kg/day, div. bid) required substantial TMZ dose reductions
(5 mg/kg/day, days 1-5) for tolerability. The addition of TAL (0.30
mg/kg/day, div. bid) to low-dose TMZ (5 mg/kg/day) prolonged tumor stasis
in flank GBM12 xenografts (median time to endpoint 76 vs. 50 days, p =
0.005). However this regimen was ineffective in intracranial GBM12
xenografts (median survival 37 vs. 30 days, p = 0.93).CONCLUSIONS: TAL is
a potent PARP inhibitor that enhances the efficacy of TMZ in both in
vitro GBM models and flank GBM12 PDX models, but not in the corresponding
GBM12 intracranial xenografts. This lack of intracranial efficacy is
associated with limited brain distribution due to active efflux mediated
by Mdr1 at the blood-brain barrier.

