Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The H1047R point mutation in p110 alpha of PI3K down-regulates
INPP4B expression in human colon cancer HCT116 cells


INTRODUCTION: Phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate 3-kinase (PI3K) and
Inositol polyphosphate-4-phosphatase, type II (INPP4B) are two important
enzymes maintaining homeostasis of phosphoinositides in cells. Class IA
PI3K produces Phosphatidylinositol-3,4,5-bisphosphate (PIP3) by
phosphorylation of Phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate (PI(4,5)P2) at
D3 position, while INPP4B dephosphorylate
Phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate (PI(3,4)P2) at the D4 position to
generate Phosphatidylinositol 3-phosphate (PI(3)P). All of these
phospholipids are important second messengers. PI3K activates its
downstream substrate Protein Kinase B (Akt) by PIP3. INPP4B, however,
blocks Akt activities in epithelial cells through the turnover of
PI(3,4)P2. PI3K/Akt pathway is involved in cell adhesion, cytoskeletal
rearrangement, invadopodia formation and cell motility. Gain of function
mutations in the catalytic subunit p110 of PI3K occur in up to 1/3 of
human colorectal cancers (CRC). The kinase domain mutation H1047R is the
most frequent cancer-specific mutation in p110. Our previous report
showed that this mutation in p110 results in an increase in cellular
levels of PIP3 and in turn an enhancement of Akt activity. Since the
H1047R mutation and INPP4B have an opposite effect on Akt activities, the
interesting question is if there is crosstalk between the two or if
H1047R mutation can affect cellular INPP4B expression. We hypothesize
that H1047R mutated p110 down-regulates INPP4B and therefore results in
increased Akt activity.METHODS: HCT116 cells engineered to contain either
the H1047R mutant (MUT) or wild type (WT) PI3KCA allele were used in this
study. Endogenous protein expression level of INPP4B was detected by
immune-blotting analysis in parental, WT and MUT HCT116 cells. To further
investigate the effect on INPP4B of the H1047R mutation, we conducted
RNA-sequencing for profiling, quantifying RNA transcripts in WT and MUT
HCT116 cells, and compared RNA transcript level of INPP4B between the two
isogenic cell lines of HCT116 cells.RESULTS: 1) Endogenous expression
level of INPP4B protein in HCT116WT cells was over 10-times higher than
in HCT116MUT cells. 2) INPP4B RNA was down regulated by the H1047R
mutation in p110 (PIK3CA) of Class 1A PI3K.CONCLUSION: Our results
suggested that hyperactivity of Akt in H1047R mutation bearing cells may
be also related to low level of cellular INPP4B, and that the H1047R
mutated p110 may increase cell migration and cancer metastasis through
down regulation of tumor suppressor gene INPP4B. Although further studies
are needed to reveal the mechanism of H1047R mutated PI3K mediated
INPP4B-regulation, INPP4B expression level may be a potential maker to
predict PI3K mutation induced CRC metastasis.

