Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Investigation of the germline mutational landscape of GBA in
general cancer patients and its role in the tumorigenesis


IntroductionGaucher disease (GD) is an autosomal recessive disease
resulting from defective enzymatic activity of acid -glucosidase
(-glucocerebrosidase). Approximately 400 point mutations in GBA, located
in 1q21, have been described and genotype-phenotype correlation was
revealed. Previous studies have shown the association of type 1 GD and
development of various types of cancers. However, the mutational
landscape of GBA and its clinical implication in general cancer patients
have not been systematically explored.MethodsWe used publicly available
data obtained from ICGC and TCGA data portal (sftp://dccsftp.nci.nih.gov)
for the analysis of single nucleotide variants (SNVs) in GBA in general
cancer patients. GenBank reference sequence NM_001005741 was used for SNP
identification.ResultsA total of 2124 cancer patients comprising 29
cancer types were included. Mutations with allele frequency lower than
0.3 or coverage depth lower than 15 were filtered out from analysis.
Overall, 7% (151 out of 2124) were GBA mutation carriers, including 1
nonsense (involving exon 1) and 153 missense mutations, including 5
homozygous alternate. The most frequently detected SNVs included
rs2230288 (c.1093G>A:p.E365K, 3 homozygous alternate), rs75548401
(c.1223C>T:p.T408M), rs143187997 (c.58A>G:p.I20V, 1 homozygous
alternate), rs150466109 (c.38A>G:p.K13R, 1 homozygous alternate),
rs76763715 (c.A1226G:p.N409S), and rs421016 (c.1448T>C, p.L483P),
accounting for 1.88%, 1.55%, 1.27%, 1.04%, 0.85%, and 0.28% of the entire
cancer population, respectively. We compared our data with 1000 Genomes
data of 2504 normal subjects
(ftp://ftp.1000genomes.ebi.ac.uk/vol1/ftp/release/20130502), which
revealed that the prevalence of rs2230288, rs75548401, and rs76763715
carriers was significantly higher in the cancer group than 1000 Genomes
population (p = 0.01, IntroductionGaucher disease (GD) is an autosomal
recessive disease resulting from defective enzymatic activity of acid
-glucosidase (-glucocerebrosidase). Approximately 400 point mutations in
GBA, located in 1q21, have been described and genotype-phenotype
correlation was revealed. Previous studies have shown the association of
type 1 GD and development of various types of cancers. However, the
mutational landscape of GBA and its clinical implication in general
cancer patients have not been systematically explored.MethodsWe used
publicly available data obtained from ICGC and TCGA data portal
(sftp://dccsftp.nci.nih.gov) for the analysis of single nucleotide
variants (SNVs) in GBA in general cancer patients. GenBank reference
sequence NM_001005741 was used for SNP identification.ResultsA total of
2124 cancer patients comprising 29 cancer types were included. Mutations
with allele frequency lower than 0.3 or coverage depth lower than 15 were
filtered out from analysis. Overall, 7% (151 out of 2124) were GBA
mutation carriers, including 1 nonsense (involving exon 1) and 153
missense mutations, including 5 homozygous alternate. The most frequently
detected SNVs included rs2230288 (c.1093G>A:p.E365K, 3 homozygous
alternate), rs75548401 (c.1223C>T:p.T408M), rs143187997 (c.58A>G:p.I20V,
1 homozygous alternate), rs150466109 (c.38A>G:p.K13R, 1 homozygous
alternate), rs76763715 (c.A1226G:p.N409S), and rs421016 (c.1448T>C,
p.L483P), accounting for 1.88%, 1.55%, 1.27%, 1.04%, 0.85%, and 0.28% of
the entire cancer population, respectively. We compared our data with
1000 Genomes data of 2504 normal subjects
(ftp://ftp.1000genomes.ebi.ac.uk/vol1/ftp/release/20130502), which
revealed that the prevalence of rs2230288, rs75548401, and rs76763715
carriers was significantly higher in the cancer group than 1000 Genomes
population (p = 0.01, <0.001, and IntroductionGaucher disease (GD) is an
autosomal recessive disease resulting from defective enzymatic activity
of acid -glucosidase (-glucocerebrosidase). Approximately 400 point
mutations in GBA, located in 1q21, have been described and
genotype-phenotype correlation was revealed. Previous studies have shown
the association of type 1 GD and development of various types of cancers.
However, the mutational landscape of GBA and its clinical implication in
general cancer patients have not been systematically explored.MethodsWe
used publicly available data obtained from ICGC and TCGA data portal
(sftp://dccsftp.nci.nih.gov) for the analysis of single nucleotide
variants (SNVs) in GBA in general cancer patients. GenBank reference
sequence NM_001005741 was used for SNP identification.ResultsA total of
2124 cancer patients comprising 29 cancer types were included. Mutations
with allele frequency lower than 0.3 or coverage depth lower than 15 were
filtered out from analysis. Overall, 7% (151 out of 2124) were GBA
mutation carriers, including 1 nonsense (involving exon 1) and 153
missense mutations, including 5 homozygous alternate. The most frequently
detected SNVs included rs2230288 (c.1093G>A:p.E365K, 3 homozygous
alternate), rs75548401 (c.1223C>T:p.T408M), rs143187997 (c.58A>G:p.I20V,
1 homozygous alternate), rs150466109 (c.38A>G:p.K13R, 1 homozygous
alternate), rs76763715 (c.A1226G:p.N409S), and rs421016 (c.1448T>C,
p.L483P), accounting for 1.88%, 1.55%, 1.27%, 1.04%, 0.85%, and 0.28% of
the entire cancer population, respectively. We compared our data with
1000 Genomes data of 2504 normal subjects
(ftp://ftp.1000genomes.ebi.ac.uk/vol1/ftp/release/20130502), which
revealed that the prevalence of rs2230288, rs75548401, and rs76763715
carriers was significantly higher in the cancer group than 1000 Genomes
population (p = 0.01, <0.001, and <0.001 by chi-square test,
respectively). Regarding somatic mutational profile of tumor samples of
151 germline GBA mutation carriers, the most frequently mutated genes
included TP53, PIK3CA, and KRAS, accounting for 28.5%, 7.9%, and 7.9%,
respectively.ConclusionAlthough overall prevalence of germline GBA
mutation carriers was not significantly different between cancer patients
and general population collected from 1000 Genomes data, SNVs in some
specific positions showed statistically significant difference in
prevalence between 2 groups, implying association between specific
mutational loci of GBA and cancer-developing mechanism, even in
heterozygous carriers.

