Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Benefit of low-dose tamoxifen in a large, single-institution
cohort of high-risk ER-positive DCIS


Background: Low dose tamoxifen has shown comparable antiproliferative
activity to 20 mg/day in biomarker trials, but its clinical efficacy is
unclear. We assessed the effect of low dose tamoxifen, 10 mg on alternate
day in most, on ipsilateral recurrence in high risk DCIS patients treated
in a single institution.Methods: Following breast conserving surgery,
women with DCIS received radiotherapy and/or low dose tamoxifen as per
clinical judgment and patient preference. Multivariate Cox regression
analyses adjusted for potential confounding variables were
performed.Results: In a cohort of 1,091 women, median age was 53 years
(IQR 46-62), 544 received radiotherapy versus 547 no radiotherapy. Of
these, 883 had ER-positive DCIS, 467 received low-dose tamoxifen versus
416 no tamoxifen. After 7.7 years of median follow-up (IQR, 5.1-9.7), 235
ipsilateral recurrences and 62 contralateral tumors were observed. Low
dose tamoxifen decreased any breast event (HR = 0.70, 95% CI, 0.54-0.91)
and ipsilateral DCIS recurrence (HR = 0.66, 95% CI, 0.49-0.88), but not
ipsilateral invasive recurrence (HR = 0.78, 95% CI, 0.56-1.09) or
contralateral tumors (HR = 0.89, 95% CI, 0.51-1.55). Radiotherapy
decreased any breast event (HR = 0.55, 95% CI, 0.42-0.72). Low dose
tamoxifen was more effective in women aged >50 years for all events (HR =
0.51, 95% CI, 0.33-0.77) and ipsilateral recurrences (HR = 0.43, 95% CI,
0.26-0.72) than in women aged 50 or younger (HR = 0.84, 95% CI, 0.60-1.18
and HR = 0.80, 95% CI, 0.55-1.16, respectively, p-interaction = 0.03).
Young age or premenopausal status, positive margins, high Ki67, high
grade and low BMI were independent predictors of ipsilateral recurrence.
No increase in endometrial cancers was observed and fewer deaths occurred
in women on low dose tamoxifen.Conclusions: In high risk ER-positive
DCIS, low-dose tamoxifen seems to be safe and effective in reducing
ipsilateral recurrence, and represents a valuable option in women aged
>50 years. A randomized clinical trial is underway to confirm these
results.Supported by Lega Italiana per la Lotta contro i Tumori, AIRC,
Italian Ministry of Health (RFPS-2006-1-339898), Gruppo bancario Credito
Valtellinese.

