Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Toxicity, bioavailability, pharmacokinetics, tissue distribution
and metabolism of a novel small molecule inhibitor of IL-6-induced STAT3
activation


Introduction: The oncogenic transcription factor STAT3 is frequently
hyper-activated in head and neck cancer and promotes gene transcription
involved in cancer development, maintenance and progression. Several
selective small molecule inhibitors of IL-6-induced STAT3 activation were
identified in a screening campaign, and four analogs from a lead
optimization series were analyzed. Compound UPCDC10205 was prioritized
for in vivo testing to evaluate its toxicity, pharmacokinetics (PK) and
metabolism in mice.Methods: The four inhibitors of IL-6-induced STAT3
activation were incubated with liver microsomes from Foxn1 +/nu mice up
to 90 min. An LC-MS/MS assay was developed to quantify substrate
depletion. Single IV dose toxicity was determined in male and female
Foxn1 +/nu mice at the maximum soluble dose of 4 mg/kg of compound
UPCDC10205 in 10% Solutol. In the multiple IV dose study in female mice
UPCDC10205 was dosed QDx5 at 4, 2.7, and 1.3 mg/kg/day. During toxicity
studies clinical health status was observed daily and body weight was
recorded twice weekly for 14 days after treatment, followed by necropsy.
To evaluate PK, single doses of UPCDC10205 IV 4 mg/kg, PO IV 4 mg/kg, or
PO 30 mg/kg UPCDC10205 suspension in 1% CMC, were administered to groups
of female mice. Mice were euthanized from 5 min to 24 h after dosing (n =
3). RBCs, plasma and tissues were collected and stored at -80 C.
UPCDC10205 concentrations were quantified by LC-MS/MS. Non-compartmental
PK were evaluated. LC-MS/MS was used to screen for metabolites in plasma
and urine.Results: Approximately 80% of compound UPCDC10205 remained
after a 90 min microsomal incubation compared to Introduction: The
oncogenic transcription factor STAT3 is frequently hyper-activated in
head and neck cancer and promotes gene transcription involved in cancer
development, maintenance and progression. Several selective small
molecule inhibitors of IL-6-induced STAT3 activation were identified in a
screening campaign, and four analogs from a lead optimization series were
analyzed. Compound UPCDC10205 was prioritized for in vivo testing to
evaluate its toxicity, pharmacokinetics (PK) and metabolism in
mice.Methods: The four inhibitors of IL-6-induced STAT3 activation were
incubated with liver microsomes from Foxn1 +/nu mice up to 90 min. An
LC-MS/MS assay was developed to quantify substrate depletion. Single IV
dose toxicity was determined in male and female Foxn1 +/nu mice at the
maximum soluble dose of 4 mg/kg of compound UPCDC10205 in 10% Solutol. In
the multiple IV dose study in female mice UPCDC10205 was dosed QDx5 at 4,
2.7, and 1.3 mg/kg/day. During toxicity studies clinical health status
was observed daily and body weight was recorded twice weekly for 14 days
after treatment, followed by necropsy. To evaluate PK, single doses of
UPCDC10205 IV 4 mg/kg, PO IV 4 mg/kg, or PO 30 mg/kg UPCDC10205
suspension in 1% CMC, were administered to groups of female mice. Mice
were euthanized from 5 min to 24 h after dosing (n = 3). RBCs, plasma and
tissues were collected and stored at -80 C. UPCDC10205 concentrations
were quantified by LC-MS/MS. Non-compartmental PK were evaluated.
LC-MS/MS was used to screen for metabolites in plasma and urine.Results:
Approximately 80% of compound UPCDC10205 remained after a 90 min
microsomal incubation compared to <50% for the other analogs. Mice
exhibited no signs of toxicity after single or multiple doses of 4 mg/kg
IV. Exposure in liver, lungs, kidney, skeletal muscle and brain were
1.6-3.2-fold that of plasma. Plasma AUC after IV 4 mg/kg (1022 ng/mL*h)
compared to PO 4 mg/kg dosing (53 ng/mL*h) yielding a bioavailability of
5%. Compound UPCDC10205 was not detected beyond 6 h in any tissue. The
plasma half-life was 0.6 h, clearance 3.9 L/h/kg and distribution volume
3.4 L/kg. The major metabolite identified in both plasma and urine was
UPCDC10205 N-glucuronideConclusion: In vitro, UPCDC10205 was
metabolically stable. No gross toxicity was observed in mice administered
the maximum soluble dose. UPCDC10205 was widely distributed into tissues
and cleared rapidly. Bioavailability was 5%. In vivo metabolism of
UPCDC10205 was by direct glucuronidation, explaining why microsomal
stability (reflective of phase I metabolism) did not translate to in vivo
metabolic stability.Support: P30CA047904; P50CA097190

