Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The dual PI3K/MTOR inhibitor PQR309 is active in mature B cell
lymphoma cell lines bearing resistance to the PI3K-delta inhibitor
idelalisib and specific gene expression features


Introduction The PI3K-delta idelalisib is among the most promising novel
agents for lymphomas, but certain patients present a primary resistant
disease or relapse after an initial response. Here, we studied the dual
PI3K/MTOR inhibitor PQR309 in lymphoma cell lines that were resistant to
idelalisib.Methods IC50 values were calculated with the MTT assay (72h)
for 40 lymphoma cell lines. Gene expression profiling was done with
Illumina HumanHT12 Expression BeadChips, data mining with Limma, GSEA and
LINCSCLOUD.Results PQR309 and idelalisib showed only a partially
overlapping pattern of activity (R = 0.6). While no cell line was
sensitive to idelalisib and not to PQR309, 10 cell lines were sensitive
to both compounds and 7 were sensitive only to PQR309. Idelalisib median
IC50 was 28 nM (95%CI; 13-147) in the PQR309/idelalisib group and 13.4 M
(7.2-16.7 M) in the PQR309-only (P 0.0006). PQR309 median IC50 was 113 nM
(33-166 nM) in PQR309/idelalisib sensitive and 193 nM (111-372 nM) in the
PQR309-only sensitive cells (P 0.03). No differences between the two
groups were observed in terms of histology, diffuse large B cell lymphoma
cell of origin, MYC deregulation, TP53 inactivation, BCL6 or BCL2
translocations. The gene expression signature of the PQR309/idelalisib
sensitive cell lines was enriched of genes involved in IFN signaling,
IL6/Jak/Stat3 signaling, oxidative phosphorylation, PI3K/MTOR signaling,
chemokines signaling and proteasome (GSEA FDR Introduction The PI3K-delta
idelalisib is among the most promising novel agents for lymphomas, but
certain patients present a primary resistant disease or relapse after an
initial response. Here, we studied the dual PI3K/MTOR inhibitor PQR309 in
lymphoma cell lines that were resistant to idelalisib.Methods IC50 values
were calculated with the MTT assay (72h) for 40 lymphoma cell lines. Gene
expression profiling was done with Illumina HumanHT12 Expression
BeadChips, data mining with Limma, GSEA and LINCSCLOUD.Results PQR309 and
idelalisib showed only a partially overlapping pattern of activity (R =
0.6). While no cell line was sensitive to idelalisib and not to PQR309,
10 cell lines were sensitive to both compounds and 7 were sensitive only
to PQR309. Idelalisib median IC50 was 28 nM (95%CI; 13-147) in the
PQR309/idelalisib group and 13.4 M (7.2-16.7 M) in the PQR309-only (P
0.0006). PQR309 median IC50 was 113 nM (33-166 nM) in PQR309/idelalisib
sensitive and 193 nM (111-372 nM) in the PQR309-only sensitive cells (P
0.03). No differences between the two groups were observed in terms of
histology, diffuse large B cell lymphoma cell of origin, MYC
deregulation, TP53 inactivation, BCL6 or BCL2 translocations. The gene
expression signature of the PQR309/idelalisib sensitive cell lines was
enriched of genes involved in IFN signaling, IL6/Jak/Stat3 signaling,
oxidative phosphorylation, PI3K/MTOR signaling, chemokines signaling and
proteasome (GSEA FDR <0.05; core enrichment genes including among others:
PIK3CD, PTPN6, CCL3, CXCR4, CXCL10, JAK2, MYD88, STAT3, BAX, CDKN1A,
AKT1, CDK2, PRKCB, PSMC4, PSMC2, MX1, MX2). Conversely, gene expression
profiles of the PQR309-only sensitive cell lines were enriched of genes
involved in hypoxia, IL2/STAT5 and glycolysis (GSEA FDR Introduction The
PI3K-delta idelalisib is among the most promising novel agents for
lymphomas, but certain patients present a primary resistant disease or
relapse after an initial response. Here, we studied the dual PI3K/MTOR
inhibitor PQR309 in lymphoma cell lines that were resistant to
idelalisib.Methods IC50 values were calculated with the MTT assay (72h)
for 40 lymphoma cell lines. Gene expression profiling was done with
Illumina HumanHT12 Expression BeadChips, data mining with Limma, GSEA and
LINCSCLOUD.Results PQR309 and idelalisib showed only a partially
overlapping pattern of activity (R = 0.6). While no cell line was
sensitive to idelalisib and not to PQR309, 10 cell lines were sensitive
to both compounds and 7 were sensitive only to PQR309. Idelalisib median
IC50 was 28 nM (95%CI; 13-147) in the PQR309/idelalisib group and 13.4 M
(7.2-16.7 M) in the PQR309-only (P 0.0006). PQR309 median IC50 was 113 nM
(33-166 nM) in PQR309/idelalisib sensitive and 193 nM (111-372 nM) in the
PQR309-only sensitive cells (P 0.03). No differences between the two
groups were observed in terms of histology, diffuse large B cell lymphoma
cell of origin, MYC deregulation, TP53 inactivation, BCL6 or BCL2
translocations. The gene expression signature of the PQR309/idelalisib
sensitive cell lines was enriched of genes involved in IFN signaling,
IL6/Jak/Stat3 signaling, oxidative phosphorylation, PI3K/MTOR signaling,
chemokines signaling and proteasome (GSEA FDR <0.05; core enrichment
genes including among others: PIK3CD, PTPN6, CCL3, CXCR4, CXCL10, JAK2,
MYD88, STAT3, BAX, CDKN1A, AKT1, CDK2, PRKCB, PSMC4, PSMC2, MX1, MX2).
Conversely, gene expression profiles of the PQR309-only sensitive cell
lines were enriched of genes involved in hypoxia, IL2/STAT5 and
glycolysis (GSEA FDR <0.05; core enrichment genes including, among
others, ENO2, AKAP12, PRKCA, VEGFA, XBP1). The gene expression signature
derived from genetic silencing of SOX4 in different cancer cells
overlapped with the differences observed between our groups (connectivity
score = -0.5) and the transcription factor itself, a positive-regulator
of the PI3K/AKT pathway, was more expressed in the PQR309-only cells (log
ratio 0.99 P 0.036). The cell surface marker CD24, involved in PI3K
signaling, was the most up-regulated gene in the PQR309/idelalisib
sensitive group (log ratio -2.1 P 0.02). Transcripts more expressed in
the PQR309-only sensitive cells overlapped with genes down-regulated by
PI3K and MTOR inhibitors in cancer cell lines (connectivity scores
Introduction The PI3K-delta idelalisib is among the most promising novel
agents for lymphomas, but certain patients present a primary resistant
disease or relapse after an initial response. Here, we studied the dual
PI3K/MTOR inhibitor PQR309 in lymphoma cell lines that were resistant to
idelalisib.Methods IC50 values were calculated with the MTT assay (72h)
for 40 lymphoma cell lines. Gene expression profiling was done with
Illumina HumanHT12 Expression BeadChips, data mining with Limma, GSEA and
LINCSCLOUD.Results PQR309 and idelalisib showed only a partially
overlapping pattern of activity (R = 0.6). While no cell line was
sensitive to idelalisib and not to PQR309, 10 cell lines were sensitive
to both compounds and 7 were sensitive only to PQR309. Idelalisib median
IC50 was 28 nM (95%CI; 13-147) in the PQR309/idelalisib group and 13.4 M
(7.2-16.7 M) in the PQR309-only (P 0.0006). PQR309 median IC50 was 113 nM
(33-166 nM) in PQR309/idelalisib sensitive and 193 nM (111-372 nM) in the
PQR309-only sensitive cells (P 0.03). No differences between the two
groups were observed in terms of histology, diffuse large B cell lymphoma
cell of origin, MYC deregulation, TP53 inactivation, BCL6 or BCL2
translocations. The gene expression signature of the PQR309/idelalisib
sensitive cell lines was enriched of genes involved in IFN signaling,
IL6/Jak/Stat3 signaling, oxidative phosphorylation, PI3K/MTOR signaling,
chemokines signaling and proteasome (GSEA FDR <0.05; core enrichment
genes including among others: PIK3CD, PTPN6, CCL3, CXCR4, CXCL10, JAK2,
MYD88, STAT3, BAX, CDKN1A, AKT1, CDK2, PRKCB, PSMC4, PSMC2, MX1, MX2).
Conversely, gene expression profiles of the PQR309-only sensitive cell
lines were enriched of genes involved in hypoxia, IL2/STAT5 and
glycolysis (GSEA FDR <0.05; core enrichment genes including, among
others, ENO2, AKAP12, PRKCA, VEGFA, XBP1). The gene expression signature
derived from genetic silencing of SOX4 in different cancer cells
overlapped with the differences observed between our groups (connectivity
score = -0.5) and the transcription factor itself, a positive-regulator
of the PI3K/AKT pathway, was more expressed in the PQR309-only cells (log
ratio 0.99 P 0.036). The cell surface marker CD24, involved in PI3K
signaling, was the most up-regulated gene in the PQR309/idelalisib
sensitive group (log ratio -2.1 P 0.02). Transcripts more expressed in
the PQR309-only sensitive cells overlapped with genes down-regulated by
PI3K and MTOR inhibitors in cancer cell lines (connectivity scores <
-0.55).Conclusions. The dual PI3K/MTOR inhibitor PQR309 was active in a
subset of mature B cell lymphoma cell lines bearing a primary resistance
to the PI3K-delta inhibitor idelalisib and specific gene expression
features. Expression of SOX4 and CD24 appear worth of validation on
clinical specimens derived from prospectively treated patients.

