Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Macrophage PI3Kgamma signaling promotes cancer immune suppression


Innate immune cells can switch from a pro-inflammatory state that defends
against pathogens and to an anti-inflammatory state that repairs damaged
tissue. Pro-inflammatory myeloid cells activate cytotoxic T cells to
eliminate pathogens, but anti-inflammatory myeloid cells inhibit T cell
mediated immunity, stimulate angiogenesis, and stimulate fibrosis, all of
which promote tumor progression. The predominant isoform of PI(3)Kinase
in myeloid cells, PI3Kgamma, controls the switch between immune
stimulation and immune suppression during inflammation and cancer.
Myeloid cell PI3Kgamma and its effectors Akt1, mTor, and S6Kinase
stimulate C/EBPbeta-dependent expression of immunosuppressive factors,
including Arginase and TGFbeta, but suppress NFkappaB-dependent
expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines such as IL12 and IFNgamma,
thereby inducing tumor immune suppression and consequent tumor growth and
metastasis.In contrast, inhibition of PI3Kgamma activity by genetic or
pharmacological means suppresses C/EPBbeta-mediated transcription of
anti-inflammatory factors and stimulates NFkappaB-mediated transcription
of the pro-inflammatory cytokines IL12 and IFNgamma, thereby restoring
CD8+ T cell-dependent cytotoxicity that inhibits tumor growth and
metastasis. Therefore, inhibitory targeting of PI3Kgamma indirectly
restores cytotoxic T cell immune responses that elicit tumor suppression
without unwanted side effects. Our studies highlight the strong
therapeutic potential of targeting this kinase to control inflammation
and cancer.This work was supported by grants to JAV from the NIH
(5R01CA126820), the Landon Foundation-AACR (12-60-27-VARN), the
Lustgarten Foundation for Pancreatic Research and the Whitworth
Foundation for Cancer Research.

