Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TSLP expression and high serum TSLP level indicate a poor
prognosis in gastric cancer patients


Purpose: Thymic stromal lymphopoietin (TSLP) plays an important role in
promoting tumor survival, by manipulating the immune response and
angiogenesis. However, the clinical significance of TSLP in gastric
cancer is unclear.Method: Immunohistochemistry was used to investigate
TSLP expression in non-cancerous gastric mucosa and gastric cancer tissue
from patients with gastric cancer. Serum TSLP levels were measured using
an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay.Results: Tumors with TSLP expression
were significantly larger than those without TSLP expression. TSLP
expression was observed more frequently in advanced (T2/T3/T4) than in
early (T1) gastric cancer and in stage 3/4 than in stage 1/2. Lymph node
metastasis, liver metastasis, positive peritoneal lavage cytology,
lymphaticinvasion, and vascular invasion occurred significantly more
often in TSLP-expressing than in non-expressing tumors. The prognosis of
patients with TSLP-positive tumors was significantly worse than that of
patients with TSLP-negative tumors. Patients with high serum TSLP
concentrations also had a significantly worse prognosis than those with
low concentrations. Multivariate analysis identified serum TSLP level as
an independent prognostic indicator.Conclusion: TSLP is closely related
to the progression of gastric cancer and may predictsurvival in these
patients.

