Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Vemurafenib regulates miRNA-211 expression in melanoma - effects
on extracellular vesicle RNA cargo and function


In melanoma, more than 50% of the patients harbor BRAF somatic missense
mutations, most affecting the V600 region. Vemurafenib, a potent BRAF
inhibitor used for the treatment of late stage melanoma, has shown
promising results by causing programmed cell death in melanoma cells.
Recently, extracellular vesicles including apoptotic bodies,
microvesicles and exosomes has been shown to contain genetic information
especially RNA with distinct repertoire of RNA, which could be
transferred from one cell to another. Here we investigate the effects of
Vemurafenib on melanoma cells and the RNA content in their subsets of
extracellular vesicles. Upon vemurafenib treatment, we found that the
melanoma cells harboring the BRAF mutation significantly increases the
RNA and protein cargo in the different subsets of extracellular vesicles.
The RNA profile also changes substantially in apoptotic bodies and
microvesicles with significant changes in the ribosomal RNA ratio.
Further, using small RNA sequencing, we found that extracellular vesicles
from treated cells harbor unique miRNAs. The significantly different
miRNA detected with sequencing analysis was validated in vitro with PCR
and confirmed that miR-211 is upregulated in cells as well as subsets of
extracellular vesicles after treatment. Furthermore, miR-211 was
validated to be significantly upregulated in tumors tissues harvested
from patient derived xenograft (PDX) as well as cell line derived
xenograft and its vesicular subsets. This shows that vemurafenib induces
miR-211 upregulation in BRAF mutant cells and PDX especially in the
subsets of extracellular vesicles. miR-211 induction upon oncogene
treatment could be potentially used as a biomarker in melanoma patients
with BRAF mutation.

