Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Reversal of BRCA-1 CpG hyperthylation by genistein and
(-)-epigallocatechin-3-gallate in human breast cancer cells with
activated AhR


Sporadic breast cancers, which represent the vast majority (90%) of
breast tumor cases, do not have mutations in the tumor suppressor gene,
BRCA-1 but have absent or markedly reduced levels of BRCA-1 similar to
those observed in hereditary BRCA-1 tumors. Therefore, understanding the
non-mutational mechanisms that contribute to repression of BRCA-1 has
important implications for the prevention of both hereditary and sporadic
breast tumors. Agonists of the aromatic hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) are
ubiquitous in the environment and include dietary compounds, metabolites
of fatty acids, industrial pollution, and photoproducts generated in the
skin from ultraviolet radiation. In cultured estrogen-receptor
(ER)-positive MCF-7 breast cancer cells, we found that activation of the
AhR with the prototype ligand 2, 3, 7, 8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin
(TCDD) repressed by 50% estradiol-induced BRCA-1 expression. Conversely,
the post-treatment with the soy isoflavone genistein and tea
(-)-epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG) at physiological doses (1 M)
rescued within 24 to 48 h BRCA-1 expression to levels 2.0 to 3.0-fold
higher than those measured in cells treated with estradiol alone.
Genistein and EGCG reversed BRCA-1 promoter hypermethylation in
AhR-activated MCF-7 cells. In ER-negative and AhR-overexpressing
UACC-3199 breast cancer cells, genistein (1 M) reactivated BRCA-1
expression. The post-treatment of AhR-activated MCF-7 cells with
genistein and EGCG antagonized the recruitment of DNA-methyl
transferase-1 (DNMT-1) enzyme to the BRCA-1 promoter. These results
suggest the involvement of epigenetic mechanisms in the repression of
BRCA-1 and reversal effects of genistein and EGCG against breast
tumorigenesis associated with activation of the AhR.

