Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HMGB1-mediated RAGE activation mechanism in M2 macrophages


Tumor-associated macrophages display M2 phenotype and promote
immunosuppression, tumor growth, angiogenesis and metastasis. We have
previously reported that M2 macrophages express the receptor of advanced
glycation end-products (RAGE) and their protumoral activities enhanced by
HMGB1, a RAGE ligand highly abundant at the cancer microenvironment.
However, RAGE is highly expressed by M1 macrophages and it is unknown if
proinflammatory and antitumor cytotoxicity of M1 macrophages become
skewed from classical antitumor activities to a tumor permissive profile
when M2 macrophages are induced by HMGB1.In order to clarify whether RAGE
contributes to inflammatory response inhibition in M2 macrophages, we
look at some microRNAs, a tolerance-like state as well as to some
epigenetic changes. Polarized M1 and M2 macrophages were derived from
wild-type and RAGE-targeted knock-down THP-1 cells and treated with HMGB1
at different times. NFkB activation was assessed by p65, IKBalpha western
blots, and p50 and p65 Transcription Factor Assay. Additionally, we
analyzed changes of chromatin activity related to HMGB1 treatment by
quantitative chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) with antibodies against
acetylated or methylated histone H3 at the IL-10 promoter.We showed that
RAGE activation by HMGB1 did not produce NFkB activation, as assessed by
either IKB alpha and phospho p65 western blots or by p65 and p50
trascription factor assays. In addition, HMGB1 did not modify M2
macrophage expression profile of relevant microRNAs for macrophage
polarization such as miR-155, miR-21 and miR-125b. However, ChIP analysis
showed that HMGB1 induced a transcription-prone histone modification at
the IL-10 promoter in M2 macrophages and this epigenetic imprinting
correlated with HMGB1-induced IL-10 production, leading to
immunosupression. These results demonstrate that RAGE activation on M2
macrophages did not induce NFkB activation and suggest that epigenetic
changes are a major mechanism by which activities described for M1
macrophages upon RAGE activation have become skewed during macrophage
polarization.

