Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The oncolytic peptide LTX-315 enhances tumor-specific immune
responses and tumor regression in murine 4T1 breast cancer when combined
with doxorubicin


The oncolytic effect of LTX-315 involves perturbation of the plasma
membrane and distortion of the mitochondrial membrane with subsequent
release of DAMPs (Damage-Associated Molecular Pattern molecules) such as
ATP, cytochrome C and HMGB1 (1,2). Also multidomain proteins from the
BCL-2 family seem to be partially involved in LTX-315 mediated killing
(3). In addition, LTX-315 induces the hallmarks of immunogenic cell death
(4). Preclinical studies have demonstrated that LTX-315 is able to induce
complete tumour regression after intra-tumoral treatment (5,6). In this
study the effect of combining intratumoral administration of LTX-315 and
systemic treatment with Doxorubicin was investigated in the murine 4T1
breast cancer model. The combination treatment was investigated both in
s.c. tumors and in tumors established in the mammary fat pad. The 4T1
cell were labeled with mcherry reporter gene in order to assess tumor
growth by whole body imaging. LTX-315 (1 mg in 50 l) was injected
intratumorally for three consecutive days. Doxorubicin (8mg/kg) was
injected into the tail vein as a single dose together with the first
injection of LTX-315. Tumor growth was assessed by caliper measurements
and whole body luminescence. The combination of local administration of
LTX-315 and systemic Doxorubicin, demonstrated significant synergy in
both s.c. tumors and in tumors growing in the mammary fat pad.
Furthermore, the combination induced a systemic tumour specific immune
response since tumors did not develop in cured animals when re-challenged
with tumor cells. The tolerable safety profile and novel mode of action
of LTX-315 indicate a rationale for combining LTX-315 with other
immunotherapies, targeted agents, and chemotherapy.References:1)
Forveille et al., Cell Cycle (2015)2) Eike et al., Oncotarget (2015)3)
Zhou et al., Oncotarget (2015)4) Zhou et al. Cell Death & Differentiation
(In rev)5) Camilio et al., Cancer Immunol Immunother (2014)6) Camilio et
al., Oncoimmunology (2014)

