Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Leptin-induced NILCO in endometrial cancer is linked to obesity


Background: Endometrial cancer (EmCa) Type I is estrogen dependent
whereas Type II is estrogen independent and usually associated with
endometrial atrophy. Type II is the more aggressive form with a poor
prognosis. Obesity is a growing epidemic and is a major risk factor for
EmCa. African-American women have higher incidence of obesity, and are
more likely to die from EmCa even though the risk of developing EmCa is
lower in Caucasian women. Obesity is characterized by high serum leptin
levels, which are associated cancer incidence, metastasis and poor
prognosis. Leptin's effects in breast cancer are related to the induction
of a crosstalk between Notch, IL-1 and leptin (NILCO). It is hypothesize
that there is a positive correlation between Type II EmCa, NILCO and
obesity.Methods: The expression of NILCO components was determined by
immunohistochemistry in Type I vs Type II EmCa biopsies from obese
African American and lean tissue array from Chinese patients.
Additionally, the effects of leptin on cell proliferation and NILCO
expression were determined in cell lines derived from Type I and Type II
EmCa (Ishikawa, Hec1a, An3ca and KLE), respectively.Results: NILCO
components were expressed higher in Type II EmCa, more advanced disease,
and correlated with obesity. Also, leptin induction of NILCO was more
prominent in Type II EmCa cells.Conclusions: Obesity signals (i.e.,
leptin) could induce NILCO in EmCa. Leptin could play a significant role
in EmCa progression, especially in Type II EmCa. Therefore, NILCO could
represent a novel biomarker for the more aggressive Type II EmCa. These
observations could be more relevant for obese EmCa patients.

