Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterizing PAX3-FOXO1 dependent cell death in alveolar
rhabdomyosarcoma reveals novel strategies for combination therapy


Rhabdomyosarcoma is the most common soft tissue sarcoma in children. The
aggressive alveolar subtype (aRMS) is characterized by chromosomal
translocations, most often by t(2;13) resulting in the expression of the
oncogenic fusion protein PAX3-FOXO1. Expression of this chimaeric
transcription factor is critical for tumorigenesis and cell survival.
However, the exact mechanism of cell death after loss of PAX3-FOXO1
activity has not been determined so far.Our aim was thus to characterize
the cell death pathways activated upon silencing of PAX3-FOXO1. In
addition, we aimed at finding drugs further sensitizing aRMS cells to
this mode of cell death.We used combined shRNA and CRISPR approaches, as
well as a small molecule screen to demonstrate that after shRNA-mediated
silencing of PAX3-FOXO1 expression, aRMS cells undergo intrinsic
apoptosis in a NOXA-dependent manner. In accordance, we can show that the
BH3-mimetic ABT-263 sensitizes aRMS cells to PAX3-FOXO1 silencing via
this cell death pathway. Interestingly, ABT-199 was less effective,
suggesting that Bcl-xl plays a major anti-apoptotic role in aRMS.
Furthermore, induction of cell death is dependent on PI3K activity and
antagonized by GSK3, suggesting that inhibition of PI3K in this sarcoma
might have an anti-apoptotic impact. In contrast, combination of ABT-263
or GSK-3 inhibitors with small molecule drugs affecting PAX3-FOXO1
activity such as PLK1 and aurora kinase inhibitors can cooperate to
enhance cell death in aRMS cells. These studies demonstrate the
importance of elucidating biological mechanisms to guide development of
rational drug combinations.

