Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting the protein kinase Hunk in HER2+ resistant breast cancer


Despite the initial success of common HER2 inhibitors used in the clinic,
including trastuzumab and lapatinib, HER2 positive (HER2+) breast cancer
cells often acquire resistance through mechanisms that continue to remain
poorly understood. A number of signaling molecules, which act downstream
of HER2, including PI3K, Akt, JNK, and Hormonally-Upregulated
Neu-associated Kinase (Hunk), are thought to contribute to resistance.
Our recent studies indicate that targeting Hunk via shRNA in HER2+breast
cancer cells that are sensitive to HER2 inhibitors (BT474) and cells that
are resistant (JIMT) leads to increased caspase-3 activity in vitro and
impaired tumor growth in vivo. In addition, we find that targeting Hunk
not only sensitizes HER2+ cells to apoptosis, but also impairs autophagy,
as indicated by decreased LC3BII expression, the lipidated form of LC3B
which signifies active autophagy. Because elevated Hunk protein
expression correlates with poorer prognosis, and since Hunk knockdown
impairs autophagy, it is possible that Hunk acts to upregulate autophagy
thereby contributing to the development of resistance. We have also found
that the kinase JNK plays a role in resistance in HER2+ breast cancer
cells, and demonstrate that JNK inhibition via a pan-JNK inhibitor
impairs tumor growth of JIMT cells. We further show that co-targeting of
JNK and HUNK results in greater cell death and significantly reduced
tumor growth than either individual treatment in the JIMT-1, HER2+
resistant cell line, as well as a HER2+ line that was engineered to be
lapatinib resistant, BT474-LR. Overall, our results indicate that
targeting Hunk in HER2+ breast cancer not only alters autophagy and
impairs tumor growth, but that co-targeting Hunk and JNK shows greater
therapeutic effects on reducing tumor growth and inducing cell death.

