Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A comparison study of the disparities of cervical cancer excess
mortality between Black and Caucasian women in Alabama and the US


Background: The main purpose of this study was to assess the disparity of
cervical cancer (CerCancer) mortality rates change through time between
Black and Caucasian women residing in Alabama and the US.Methods: The
CerCancer behavioral risk factors and utilization of screening tests data
were obtained from CDC's Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System
(BRFSS) database. Baseline data and target objectives of utilization of
CerCancer screening and mortality rates were obtained from Healthy People
2020. The CerCancer mortality rates data were obtained from the
Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER). Mortality rates,
percentage difference, percentage change and annual percentage change for
trends were calculated and compared with the US baseline. Data were
stratified by age, gender, race, and geography, using SEER*Stat version
8.4.1 in conjunction with Linear Trendlines analysis to model the racial
changes of CerCancer mortality rates through time in Alabama and the
US.Results: Our results depicted in general, that although Blacks had
higher CerCancer mortality rates at all times, a decreasing trend in
CerCancer mortality rates was noted for both races. However, the degree
of disparities in mortality rates fluctuated over time and differed by
age. In Alabama, Blacks aged 65 years and older have not experienced
significant decline in CerCancer mortality rates in recent years, despite
a high screening rate compared to Whites. In contrast, between 2002 and
2012, Whites in Alabama and the US made a significant progress toward the
Healthy People 2020 goal.Conclusions: Conclusively in Alabama, a
disparity still exists for the high CerCancer mortality rates in Blacks
despite the higher rates of screening for CerCaner as would otherwise be
expected. Additionally, the state has not yet achieved the Healthy People
2020 goal. Thus, although the gap in mortality rates in Alabama has
narrowed, however the disparity remains, but if the dismal narrowing is
sustained, it will reduce the racial disparities in CerCancer mortality
though at a very slow rate. Therefore, Public health officials should
monitor progress toward reduction and/or elimination of these disparities.

