Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Multiplexed gene expression profiling of resected intrahepatic
cholangiocarcinoma: Implication of FGFR4-FGF19 as a novel treatment target


Background: The fibroblast growth factor receptor 4 (FGFR4) pathway is an
essential regulatory component of bile acid synthesis and its
relationship with hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) has been reported. We
investigated the gene expression and clinical significance of FGFR4 and
related pathways in intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma (IH-CCa).Methods: We
assessed the expression of 98 genes in formalin-fixed paraffin embedded
tumor tissue specimens from 46 patients with IH-CCa surgically resected
using the NanoString platform. This included 10 FGF pathway genes (e.g.
FGFR1-4, KLB, FGF3, 4, 19, 21, 23), 19 distal marker genes (e.g. CYP7A1,
CYP17A1) and 31 genes relevant to HCC and CCa (e.g. AFP, TS) and 18 CNV
matched genes and 20 control genes. Log-transformation of the gene
expression was done for normalization and statistical analysis. Overall
survival of 44/46 patients was correlated with gene expression
(Background: The fibroblast growth factor receptor 4 (FGFR4) pathway is
an essential regulatory component of bile acid synthesis and its
relationship with hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) has been reported. We
investigated the gene expression and clinical significance of FGFR4 and
related pathways in intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma (IH-CCa).Methods: We
assessed the expression of 98 genes in formalin-fixed paraffin embedded
tumor tissue specimens from 46 patients with IH-CCa surgically resected
using the NanoString platform. This included 10 FGF pathway genes (e.g.
FGFR1-4, KLB, FGF3, 4, 19, 21, 23), 19 distal marker genes (e.g. CYP7A1,
CYP17A1) and 31 genes relevant to HCC and CCa (e.g. AFP, TS) and 18 CNV
matched genes and 20 control genes. Log-transformation of the gene
expression was done for normalization and statistical analysis. Overall
survival of 44/46 patients was correlated with gene expression (< median
vs median) using a log-rank test. Two patients were excluded from
analysis, due to death from postoperative complications and
metastasectomy respectively.Results: The median age of our patient cohort
was 56 years (range 30-78) and 34 patients (74%) were male. All but one
tumor specimen (98%) were from the primary tumor resection and
microscopic complete resection (R0) was achieved in 37 patients (80%).
Six patients (13%) had hepatitis B virus infection with or without liver
cirrhosis. FGFR4 was expressed 100 times over background in IH-CCa, the
expression of FGF19, FGF21, CYP7A1, CYP17A1, AFP and KLB was lower.
Overall survival was significantly stratified according to the expression
of FGFR4 (p = 0.004), FGF19 (p = 0.046), FGF21 (p = 0.04), KLB (p =
0.03), CYP8B1 (p = 0.02), ADH1B (p = 0.045), CDKN1B (p = 0.005), NCOR1 (p
= 0.03), NF1 (p = 0.006), NROB2 (p = 0.001), MAP2K3 (p = 0.009), MYC (p =
0.04), CYP2E1 (pBackground: The fibroblast growth factor receptor 4
(FGFR4) pathway is an essential regulatory component of bile acid
synthesis and its relationship with hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) has
been reported. We investigated the gene expression and clinical
significance of FGFR4 and related pathways in intrahepatic
cholangiocarcinoma (IH-CCa).Methods: We assessed the expression of 98
genes in formalin-fixed paraffin embedded tumor tissue specimens from 46
patients with IH-CCa surgically resected using the NanoString platform.
This included 10 FGF pathway genes (e.g. FGFR1-4, KLB, FGF3, 4, 19, 21,
23), 19 distal marker genes (e.g. CYP7A1, CYP17A1) and 31 genes relevant
to HCC and CCa (e.g. AFP, TS) and 18 CNV matched genes and 20 control
genes. Log-transformation of the gene expression was done for
normalization and statistical analysis. Overall survival of 44/46
patients was correlated with gene expression (< median vs median) using a
log-rank test. Two patients were excluded from analysis, due to death
from postoperative complications and metastasectomy respectively.Results:
The median age of our patient cohort was 56 years (range 30-78) and 34
patients (74%) were male. All but one tumor specimen (98%) were from the
primary tumor resection and microscopic complete resection (R0) was
achieved in 37 patients (80%). Six patients (13%) had hepatitis B virus
infection with or without liver cirrhosis. FGFR4 was expressed 100 times
over background in IH-CCa, the expression of FGF19, FGF21, CYP7A1,
CYP17A1, AFP and KLB was lower. Overall survival was significantly
stratified according to the expression of FGFR4 (p = 0.004), FGF19 (p =
0.046), FGF21 (p = 0.04), KLB (p = 0.03), CYP8B1 (p = 0.02), ADH1B (p =
0.045), CDKN1B (p = 0.005), NCOR1 (p = 0.03), NF1 (p = 0.006), NROB2 (p =
0.001), MAP2K3 (p = 0.009), MYC (p = 0.04), CYP2E1 (p<0.001), and LGR5 (p
= 0.03).Conclusions: Our results indicate that FGFR4 might have a crucial
role in IH-CCa, and its overexpression was associated with better
prognosis, supporting that FGFR4 may define a subset of IH-CCa and be
used as a promising target for therapeutic interventions.

