Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Association between variants in genes involved in the immune
response and prostate cancer risk in men randomized to finasteride in the
Prostate Cancer Prevention Trial


Background: We reported that some, but not all single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) in select immune response genes are associated with
prostate cancer in the Prostate Cancer Prevention Trial* (PCPT) placebo
arm. Here, we investigated whether these same SNPs are associated with
risk in men randomized to finasteride, which is known to increase
intraprostatic inflammation. Methods: 16 candidate SNPs in IL1, IL2, IL4,
IL6, IL8, IL10, IL12(p40), IFNG, MSR1, RNASEL, TLR4, and TNFA and 7
tagSNPs in IL10 were genotyped in 625 prostate cancer cases, and 532
controls negative for cancer on an end-of-study biopsy nested in the PCPT
finasteride arm. Cases and controls were non-Hispanic white men. We used
logistic regression to estimate log-additive odds ratios (OR) and 95%
confidence intervals (CI) adjusting for age and family history (matching
factors). Results: Minor alleles of rs2243250 (T) in IL4 (OR = 1.46, 95%
CI 1.03-2.08, P-trend = 0.03), rs1800896 (G) in IL10 (OR = 0.77, 95% CI
0.61-0.96, P-trend = 0.02), rs2430561 (A) in IFNG (OR = 1.33, 95% CI
1.02-1.74; P-trend = 0.04), rs3747531 (C) in MSR1 (OR = 0.55, 95% CI
0.32-0.95; P-trend = 0.03), and possibly rs4073 (A) in IL8 (OR = 0.81,
95% CI 0.64-1.01, P-trend = 0.06) were associated with higher- (Gleason
7-10; N = 222), but not lower- (Gleason 2-6; N = 380) grade prostate
cancer. In men with low PSA (Background: We reported that some, but not
all single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in select immune response
genes are associated with prostate cancer in the Prostate Cancer
Prevention Trial* (PCPT) placebo arm. Here, we investigated whether these
same SNPs are associated with risk in men randomized to finasteride,
which is known to increase intraprostatic inflammation. Methods: 16
candidate SNPs in IL1, IL2, IL4, IL6, IL8, IL10, IL12(p40), IFNG, MSR1,
RNASEL, TLR4, and TNFA and 7 tagSNPs in IL10 were genotyped in 625
prostate cancer cases, and 532 controls negative for cancer on an
end-of-study biopsy nested in the PCPT finasteride arm. Cases and
controls were non-Hispanic white men. We used logistic regression to
estimate log-additive odds ratios (OR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI)
adjusting for age and family history (matching factors). Results: Minor
alleles of rs2243250 (T) in IL4 (OR = 1.46, 95% CI 1.03-2.08, P-trend =
0.03), rs1800896 (G) in IL10 (OR = 0.77, 95% CI 0.61-0.96, P-trend =
0.02), rs2430561 (A) in IFNG (OR = 1.33, 95% CI 1.02-1.74; P-trend =
0.04), rs3747531 (C) in MSR1 (OR = 0.55, 95% CI 0.32-0.95; P-trend =
0.03), and possibly rs4073 (A) in IL8 (OR = 0.81, 95% CI 0.64-1.01,
P-trend = 0.06) were associated with higher- (Gleason 7-10; N = 222), but
not lower- (Gleason 2-6; N = 380) grade prostate cancer. In men with low
PSA (<2 ng/mL), these associations were attenuated and/or no longer
significant, whereas inverse associations with higher-grade disease were
apparent for minor alleles of rs1800795 (C: OR = 0.70, 95% CI 0.51-0.94,
P-trend = 0.02) and rs1800797 (A: OR = 0.72, 95% CI 0.53-0.98, P-trend =
0.04) in IL6. While some IL10 tagSNPs were associated with lower- and
higher-grade prostate cancer, distributions of IL10 haplotypes did not
differ from controls, except possibly among those with low PSA (P =
0.07). Conclusion: In the PCPT finasteride arm, variation in genes
involved in the immune response, including possibly IL8 and IL10 as in
the placebo arm, may be associated with prostate cancer, especially
higher-grade disease, but we cannot rule out PSA-associated detection
bias or chance due to multiple testing.Funding: P01 CA108964, U10
CA37429, UM1 CA182883, T32 CA009314. *A SWOG-Coordinated Study S9217

