Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tissue tranglutaminase-2 promotes gastric cancer progression via
ERK1/2 pathway


Gastric cancer is one of the most common tumors worldwide with extensive
local tumor invasion, metastasis and poor prognosis. Thus, understanding
the mechanisms regulating progression of gastric cancer is the key for
developing effective therapeutic strategies. Tissue tranglutaminase-2
(TG2), a multifunctional member of the transglutaminase (TGase) family,
has already been proved to play an important role in tumor initiation and
progression. However, the specific role and underlying molecular
mechanisms of TG2 in the progression of gastric cancer (GC) remain
unknown. Here we showed that TG2 was highly expressed in GC tissues and
positively associated with depth of tumor invasion and late TNM stage.
With gain and lose-of function approaches, we found that TG2 promotes GC
cell proliferation, migration and invasion, as well as tumorigenesis and
peritoneal metastasis in vivo. These events were associated with
activating of ERK1/2 pathway, and ERK1/2 inhibitor U0126 inhibited cell
proliferation, migration and invasion induced by overexpression of TG2.
Taken together, these findings suggest that TG2 contributes to
tumorigenesis and progression of GC by activating the ERK1/2 signaling
pathway and is a potential therapeutic target of metastatic gastric
cancer.

