Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: GSK-3 inhibitor 9ING41 potentiates the antitumor effects of CPT-11
in human breast cancer


Glycogen Synthase Kinase-3beta (GSK-3beta), a serine/threonine protein
kinase, has been demonstrated to be potential therapeutic target in human
breast cancer. Our objective was to evaluate novel GSK-3 inhibitors alone
and in combination with chemotherapeutic drugs for the targeted therapy
of breast cancer. Using a short-term treatment, we found that the GSK-3
inhibitor 9ING41 significantly potentiates the antitumor effects of
CPT-11, cisplatin and 5-FU to inhibit breast cancer cell growth. We
established hormone-refractory BC-1 and BC-2 patient-derived xenograft
(PDX) tumor models from metastatic pleural effusions that were obtained
from breast cancer patients. We considered BC-1 and BC-2 PDX tumors as
chemoresistant, because metastatic disease progressed in both cases in
despite of the fact that patients received many cycles of chemotherapy.
Although we found that BC-1 and BC-2 PDX tumors express estrogen receptor
(ER), both PDX tumors carried activating mutations in ESR1. These
mutations confer ligand-independent activity of the ER in
tamoxifen-resistant breast tumors. We found that BC-1 and BC-2 PDX tumors
grew without estradiol supplementation in immunodeficient mice, which
suggests a hormone-refractory nature of these tumors. We found that GSK-3
inhibitor 9ING41 potentiates the effects of chemotherapeutic drug CPT-11,
and leads to the regression of BC-1 and BC-2 breast PDX tumors. Our
results demonstrate inhibition of GSK-3 as a promising therapeutic
approach to overcome breast cancer chemoresistance, and identify GSK-3
inhibitor 9ING41 as a drug candidate for the targeted therapy of human
breast cancer.

