Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular cytogenetic characterization of HPV types 16 and 18
cervical cancers: Acquired genomic instability by E6 and E7 oncoproteins


Human Papillomavirus (HPV) high-risk types 16 and 18 are directly
associated with approximately 90% incidence of invasive cervical
carcinoma. Epithelial cells infected with HPV become transformed and
acquire genomic instability. As a result of this transformation, E6 and
E7 oncogenes are perpetually expressed. E6 degrades the tumor suppressor
p53; E7 inhibits tumor suppressor pRB, leading to disproportionate target
cell growth and proliferation. While there have been studies exploring
genomic instability induced by HPV oncoproteins E6/E7, the full scope of
the genomic damage has not been clearly characterized. Three HPV positive
cervical cancer cell lines, HeLa (HPV18), SiHa (HPV16) and CaSki (HPV16),
were studied using Spectral Karyotyping (SKY) and Giemsa banding
(G-banding). Our results using SKY and G-banding analysis showed HeLa
cells exhibited frequent translocations on chromosomes 4 and 11, and
deletions on chromosomes 11 and 20. The SiHa cells exhibited
translocations primarily on chromosomes 9 and 20, with deletions on
chromosome 10. CaSki revealed translocations on chromosomes 10 and 4,
with deletions on chromosome 21. All three cell lines gained copies on
chromosome 5. The aforementioned aneuploidy is demonstrative of the
induced genomic instability acquired from HPV infection, which include
tumor suppressor genes; p53 and pRB disruptions caused by E6 and E7
oncoproteins. HeLa cells showed extensive genomic instability on
chromosome 11q22-23, where the ATM gene is located. Acquired genomic
instability to the ATM chromosome region may further increase the rate of
cervical cancer.

