Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluating the role of durotactic migration in the tumor
microenvironment


Durotaxis is a mechanism of directional migration in which cells respond
to a stiffness gradient in their local microenvironment. While durotaxis
has been characterized primarily in cells of mesenchymal origin, its role
in cancer biology has not been clearly defined. At a cellular and
molecular level, evidence suggests cancer cells sense and respond to the
stiffening tumor microenvironment in a manner that promotes malignant and
invasive characteristics. Given the gradual stiffening of tumors, it is
interesting to speculate how durotaxis might contribute to cell flux to
and from primary tumors and metastatic sites. We hypothesize that a
durotactic mechanism may, in part, contribute to the dissemination of
cancer cells into the stiffened microenvironment associated with primary
tumors and also possibly with pre-metastatic sites.To directly
characterize the impact of local stiffness on directional migration,
cancer cells were cultured on a hydrogel possessing a stiffness gradient,
then imaged by time-lapse microscopy and tracked using custom automated
tracking software. Automated cell tracking allows for unbiased, accurate,
and high-speed generation of large migratory datasets not feasible with
conventional manual tracking and enables more robust analysis of cell
populations. Preliminary data reveal that multiple cancer cell lines
respond to a stiffness gradient with directed migration towards the
stiffer part of the gel. The strength of the directional migratory
response to stiffness gradients was found to depend on the magnitude of
stiffness a cell encounters. By manipulating stiffness gradients to
accurately reflect stiffness encountered by cancer subtypes, we will
better understand if a durotactic mechanism has a global or
cancer-specific impact on disease progression.

