Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Intermittent exposure to EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors selects
less EGFR T790M mutant clones than continuous exposure in lung cancer
cell lines


Background: Drug-resistant cell lines are essential tools for
investigating the mechanisms of resistance to molecular-targeted
anti-cancer drugs. However, little is known about how to establish
clinically relevant drug-resistant cell lines. Our study examined the
impact of a drug-free period on the establishment of a cell line with
clinically relevant resistance to molecular-targeted drugs.Methods: We
used PC-9 cells, a lung cancer cell line carrying EGFR mutation, because
this is a validated target for EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKI).
PC-9 cells were intermittently or continuously exposed to increasing
concentrations of gefitinib (0.01 M to 1.0 M) and the emergence of the
most common acquired resistance mutation in EGFR, T790M, was
determined.Results: T790M was detected at a 25-fold lower drug
concentration in cells continuously exposed to gefitinib (PC-9/GRc) than
in cells intermittently exposed to gefitinib (PC-9/GRi) (0.04 M vs 1.0 M,
respectively). The mutation frequencies at those drug concentrations were
19.8% and 8.0% in PC-9/GRc and PC-9/GRi cells, respectively. After
drug-free culture for 8 weeks, resistance to gefitinib decreased in the
PC-9/GRi cells but not in the PC-9/GRc cells. In the PC-9/GRc cells, the
frequency of the T790M mutation was consistently about 20% from 0.04 M to
1.0 M of gefitinib. In the PC-9/GRc cells, the T790M mutation was
detected in all single-cell clones, at frequencies ranging from 7.0% to
37.0%, with a median of 19.5% (95% confidence interval,
17.3%-20.9%).Conclusion: Intermittent exposure to EGFR-TKIs reduces the
emergence of the EGFR T790M mutation in a lung cancer cell line.

