Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PI3K/Akt/mTOR signaling and plasma membrane proteins are
implicated in responsiveness to adjuvant dendritic cell vaccination for
metastatic colorectal cancer


Purpose: We have previously demonstrated that metastatic colorectal
cancer patients who exhibit immune responses to a dendritic cell (DC)
vaccine have superior recurrence-free survival following surgery,
compared to patients in whom immune responses do not occur. We sought to
characterize the patterns of T lymphocyte infiltration and somatic
mutations in metastases that are associated with and predictive of
response to the DC vaccine.Methods: Cytotoxic, memory, and regulatory T
cells in resected metastases and in surrounding normal liver tissue from
22 patients (11 responders and 11 non-responders) were enumerated by
immunohistochemistry prior to vaccine administration. In conjunction with
tumor sequencing, the Combined Multivariate and Collapsing method was
used to identify gene mutations that are associated with vaccine
response. We also derived a response prediction score for each patient
using his/her tumor genotype data and variant association effect sizes
computed from the other 21 patients; greater weighting was placed on
genes that encode plasma membrane proteins.Results: There was no
relationship between vaccine response and intra-tumor, peri-tumor, or
hepatic densities of T cell subpopulations. Associated genes were found
to be statistically enriched in PI3K, Akt, and mTOR signaling pathways (P
Purpose: We have previously demonstrated that metastatic colorectal
cancer patients who exhibit immune responses to a dendritic cell (DC)
vaccine have superior recurrence-free survival following surgery,
compared to patients in whom immune responses do not occur. We sought to
characterize the patterns of T lymphocyte infiltration and somatic
mutations in metastases that are associated with and predictive of
response to the DC vaccine.Methods: Cytotoxic, memory, and regulatory T
cells in resected metastases and in surrounding normal liver tissue from
22 patients (11 responders and 11 non-responders) were enumerated by
immunohistochemistry prior to vaccine administration. In conjunction with
tumor sequencing, the Combined Multivariate and Collapsing method was
used to identify gene mutations that are associated with vaccine
response. We also derived a response prediction score for each patient
using his/her tumor genotype data and variant association effect sizes
computed from the other 21 patients; greater weighting was placed on
genes that encode plasma membrane proteins.Results: There was no
relationship between vaccine response and intra-tumor, peri-tumor, or
hepatic densities of T cell subpopulations. Associated genes were found
to be statistically enriched in PI3K, Akt, and mTOR signaling pathways (P
< 0.001). With respect to prediction, applying a consistent score cutoff
over the 22 rounds of leave-one-out cross-validation correctly inferred
vaccine response in 21 of 22 patients (95%).Conclusions: Adjuvant
dendritic cell vaccination has shown promise as a form of immunotherapy
for patients with metastatic colorectal cancer. Its efficacy may be
influenced by somatic mutations that affect pathways involving PI3K, Akt,
and mTOR, as well as neoantigens on tumor cell surfaces.

