Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Enhanced cytotoxicity in primary human metastatic melanoma cells
via inhibition of the transient receptor potential melastatin-2 (TRPM2)
channel


The transient receptor potential melastatin-2 (TRPM2) cation channel was
previously identified as a potential target in various cancers, where its
pharmacologic inhibition caused increased DNA damage and the selective
eradication of cancer cells. In this study, we utilized several human
primary metastatic melanoma cell lines, in which we analyzed TRPM2 and
its isoforms, and evaluated the ability of TRPM2 inhibition to modulate
cell death.As TRPM2 is known to exist as a plasma membrane cation channel
in noncancerous cells, we investigated the localization of TRPM2 in
melanoma cells. In three lines of primary human metastatic melanoma
cells, TRPM2 was localized in the nucleus, as compared to an
extra-nuclear localization in noncancerous primary epidermal
keratinocyes. Because TRPM2 exists in several isoforms in cancer cells,
we investigated the cellular localization of these isoforms. Subcellular
fractionations demonstrated that only full-length TRPM2 was localized to
the nucleus in primary human metastatic melanoma cells, whereas two
smaller isoforms were localized exclusively in the cytoplasmic
fraction.Treatment with the TRPM2 inhibitor, clotrimazole, caused
decreased proliferation in all three lines of primary human metastatic
melanoma cells. Further, treatment with the DNA alkylating agent,
temozolomide (TMZ), led to increased levels of cell death in melanoma
cells pretreated with clotrimazole, but not in noncancerous primary
epidermal keratinocyes after pretreatment. Similar increases in cell
death were observed after RNAi silencing of TRPM2 followed by TMZ
treatment.Taken together, this study demonstrated that TRPM2 inhibition
selectively increases cell death in primary human metastatic melanoma
cells. Further, the data suggests that, similar to our previous results
in breast adenocarcinoma cells, full-length TRPM2 appears to have a novel
role in melanoma cell growth and survival. The results therefore suggest
that TRPM2 is a potential target in melanoma, where its inhibition may
cause the selective eradication of metastatic melanoma.

