Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: FGFR3 mutations as novel oncogenic targets


Fibroblast growth factors (FGFs) are a family of homologous secreted
glycoproteins involved in signaling pathways responsible for embryonic
development, cell proliferation, survival, and migration. FGF activity is
mediated by four transmembrane fibroblast growth factor receptors (FGFRs)
which are receptor tyrosine kinases. Typically, FGF binding induces FGFR
dimerization, leading to phosphorylation of the intracellular tyrosine
kinase domain. This leads to downstream activation of multiple signaling
pathways, including the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK),
PI3K/AKT, signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT), and
phospholipase-C- cascades. Deregulated FGFR activity, through mutations
or translocations, is often associated with oncogenic events. Aberrations
in FGFR genes have been observed in several tumor types including
bladder, gastric, colorectal, ovarian, and hematologic cancers. To date,
several FGFR3 mutations have been identified in bladder cancer. In this
study, we developed a TaqMan qRT-PCR-based approach to detect four FGFR3
mutations in formalin-fixed paraffin embedded tissue (FFPET) samples.
Cell lines overexpressing FGFR3 mutations were generated to determine
impact on cell signaling, and sensitivity to the small-molecule pan-FGFR
inhibitor JNJ-42756493. To determine the role and significance of these
FGFR3 mutations in cancer, mutation expression constructs were designed
and individually transfected into normal rat kidney epithelial cells.
Cells harboring the FGFR3 mutations exhibited anchorage-independent
growth, increased proliferation, and showed increased sensitivity to the
FGFR inhibitor JNJ-42756493 in vitro compared to parental lines. These
findings underline the oncogenic potential of the FGFR3 mutation genes
and highlight their unique potential as predictive biomarkers in the
selection of patients for FGFR-targeted therapy.

