Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of BAG3 in human leukemia cells response to the
experimental anticancer drug laromustine


The experimental anticancer drug laromustine, which demonstrates moderate
clinical efficacy against acute myelogenous leukemia and glioblastoma
multiforme, yields two reactive electrophiles in situ. Therapeutic
cytotoxicity is principally due to a 2-chloroethylating species that can
cause lethal DNA crosslinks. However, the second electrophile, methyl
isocyanate, triggers acute toxicity in cultured cancer cells and
synergizes with the cogenerated 2-chloroethylating activity. The
mechanism by which laromustine kills cancer cells likely includes
apoptosis. We measured changes in transcription for 88 genes relating to
this cell death pathway cultured human promyelocytic (HL-60) cells using
quantitative real-time reverse transcriptase PCR. Cultured cells were
treated with drug for six hours before harvesting mRNA for analysis. Of
these genes, the expression of BAG3, whose encoded protein is also known
as CAIR-1 or Bis, was increased by more than 300 fold in cells exposed to
laromustine. By forming a complex with heat shock protein 70 (Hsp70), it
is thought that BAG3 promotes anti-apoptotic activity by interfering with
protein chaperones and release of cytochrome-c. We are also examining
effects on the entire transcriptome upon treatment with laromustine using
GeneChip Microarrays. Finally, we have created a stable BAG3 knockdown
cell line using an shRNA construct via lentiviral transfection.
Substantial differences in laromustine-induced cytotoxicity in differing
BAG3 backgrounds would suggest a mechanistic role in a cell's defense
against laromustine and possibly an improved clinical approach.

