Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transcription down-regulation of c-Myc through nucleic acid
clamp-mediated stabilization of the promoter G-quadruplex


MYC overexpression occurs in up to 80% of all cancers. Down-regulating
MYC's expression is an effective therapeutic strategy for the treatment
of many of these cancers, and particularly for non-Hodgkin's lymphoma
(NHL). NHL is the fifth most common cancer type, accounting for 5% of all
cancers and 4% of all cancer deaths. Developing MYC-targeting
therapeutics will be very impactful to NHL patients. In the current
study, we have developed a nucleic acid clamp to transcriptionally
down-regulate MYC expression by stabilizing the G-quadruplex (G4) formed
in the nuclease hypersensitivity element III1 promoter region. The clamps
complement nucleotides on the 5- and 3- regions flanking the G4-forming
sequence, linked together with an 18 angstrom abasic moiety. To date, the
binding affinity and specificity, G4 structure stabilizing ability, MYC
down-regulation capability, and the selective cytotoxicity on cancerous
vs non-cancerous cell lines of these clamps have been confirmed by EMSA
and electronic circular dichroism, DMS footprinting, luciferase reporter
assay, and MTS viability assay respectively. Recently, various
replacements have been explored to replace the abasic moiety with
non-complementary nucleic acids and to optimize the phosphate backbone
with peptide nucleic acids. In addition, complexation with block
co-polymers is under investigation to develop a functionalizable
nanotherapeutic for NHL. The highly selective G4 stabilizing ability of
the clamps used in the current approach offers an advantage over
traditional G4 stabilizing small molecules. This novel approach is a
promising therapeutic for the treatment of MYC related malignancies, and
provides a framework for future G4-therapeutic development for other
high-value genes, such as kRAS, VEGF, c-KIT and many more.

