Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Systematic in vivo analysis of PI3K pathway aberrations in a mouse
model of invasive lobular carcinoma


Invasive lobular carcinoma (ILC) is the second most prevalent breast
cancer subtype, which develops in the milk-producing glands (lobules) and
metastasizes to distant organs. A key feature of ILC is loss of the CDH1
gene, encoding the E-cadherin cell-cell adhesion receptor. Though
E-cadherin is thought to be a tumour suppressor, it is interesting to
note that mammary-gland specific deletion of E-cadherin does not lead to
tumour development indicating that other factors are necessary for the
induction of ILC. Recent data from the cancer genome atlas reveals that
besides E-cadherin loss, mutations in PIK3CA, and to a lesser extent
PTEN, TBX3, and FOXA1 were found as ILC enriched features. These data
implicate PI3K signaling as a driving force in ILC development. Using our
in-house established GEMM-ESC strategy, we have developed innovative
mouse models for ILC to study novel aspects of the functional interplay
between E-cadherin and PI3K in ILC development. We have discovered an
intriguing new interplay between these components in which E-cadherin
loss suppresses growth of normal mammary epithelium, which appears to
involve senescence, whereas it effectively accelerates tumor growth in a
PIK3CAmutant background. Therapeutically, PIK3CAE545K and AKTE17K ILCs
were sensitive to AZD8055, an mTOR inhibitor, and BKM120, a PI3K 110
inhibitor in vivo, indicating that PI3K signaling is required for their
tumor maintenance. Currently, we are dissecting the sensitivity of ILCs
displaying PIK3CAE545K or AKTE17K mutations, and PTEN loss, to a large
panel of inhibitors, which will likely provide new clinical options.

