Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: KD06 is a novel anti-cancer drug that causes cell death in
triple-negative breast cancer cell lines and tumor xenografts


Development and screening of small molecule compounds for anti-cancer
activity has been of prime interest to the scientific community following
the success of targeted, large anti-cancer molecules such as therapeutic
antibodies. Small molecules pass more easily through cell membranes and
may cross the blood-brain barrier. KD06 is a small molecule triptan-like
compound whose parent molecule binds and inhibits serotonin receptors.
This compound increases apoptosis of the triple-negative breast cancer
cell lines MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-157 via caspase activation. Treatment
with KD06 also causes increased autophagy as well as activation of ER
stress responses. The growth of tumor xenografts of MDA-MB-231 cells in
nude mice are significantly inhibited by twice weekly treatment with
30mg/kg KD06. Analysis of signaling changes by KD06 using reverse phase
protein array (RPPA) revealed significant decreases in Akt/mTOR signaling
leading to decreased activation of the translation initiation factor
4E-BP1. Other notable changes included decreased expression of proteins
important for mitosis such as Cyclin B1, Aurora B and PLK1, and increased
phosphorylation of EGFR and increased expression of PDGFR. Analysis of
PIP3 and ATP levels showed no change after treatment with KD06,
indicating that decreased signaling through Akt/mTOR is not likely due to
PI3K inhibition or AMPK activation. Immunofluorescence with KD06 treated
cells revealed a change in cell shape after 4 hours of treatment that was
reminiscent of cells treated with microtubule binding drugs. Akt
localization was affected. These results imply that KD06 may have
anti-cancer activity through its effect on microtubule dynamics,
inhibiting proper localization and signaling of molecules important for
survival and protein translation such as Akt and mTOR.

