Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mitochondrial haplotype alters metastasis in a non-cell autonomous
manner


Mitochondrial Nuclear Exchange (MNX) mice, created by transferring the
nucleus from an oocyte from strain x into an enucleated oocyte of strain
y, showed that mammary tumor formation and metastasis can be regulated by
inherited mitochondrial polymorphisms (PMID26471915). Besides genetic
(cell autonomous) changes observed, we asked whether mitochondrial
polymorphisms in non-cancer compartments could exert effects on tumor
formation or metastasis. Tumor cells were injected into syngeneic wild
type mice and tumor growth and metastasis were compared to similarly
injected cells into MNX mice sharing the same nuclear but different mtDNA
backgrounds. Orthotopic tumor growth rates were equal for all of the cell
lines tested. However, the ability to form experimental lung metastases
following i.v. injection were dramatically altered. Compared to
injections into wild-type, syngeneic mice, E0771 mammary carcinoma and
B16-F10 melanoma cells (both syngeneic to C57BL/6J), formed significantly
(P10 mice per experiment. Interestingly, C57BL/6J mitochondria confer
resistance to metastasis in both cell autonomous and non-cell autonomous
experiments. Basal metabolic differences comparing mouse embryonic
fibroblasts isolated from wild-type and MNX mice are among mechanisms
being explored. Together, our findings highlight the striking influences
that mitochondrial haplotypes can exert on tumorigenicity and metastasis
via both intrinsic and extrinsic mechanisms. Support: Susan G. Komen for
the Cure (SAC11037), Natl Fndn Cancer Res, Steiner Family Fund for
Metastasis Research, Kansas Bioscience Authority, CA134981, P30-CA168524

