Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Macrophage inflammatory protein-1 and interleukin 15 modulate gene
expression patterns associated with prostate cancer progression


Prostate Cancer (PCa) is the second-leading cause of cancer-related
deaths in the United States. Inflammation is associated with PCa
development and progression. Cytokines such as macrophage inflammatory
protein-1 (MIP1 or CCL4) and Interleukin 15 (IL-15) are differentially
expressed in prostate cancer patients with recurrent disease (MIP1) or
recurrence-free survival (IL-15). However, the specific pathway by which
these cytokines affect PCa progression is unknown. We evaluated the
changes in gene expression patterns using in vivo models of prostate
cancer and microarray analysis. To generate prostate tumors in vivo we
used a mouse orthotopic xenograft model. Androgen-receptor-positive (AR+)
cells, 22RV1, were orthotopically injected in the anterior prostate
lobes. MIP1 and IL-15 were administered bi-weekly with intraperitoneal
injections during 4 weeks. Tumor tissue was collected and snap frozen for
RNA extraction, and microarray analysis with the Affymetrix Human Gene
2.0 Gene Array. Differences in gene expression were analyzed with
Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) software and confirmation was done via
real-time PCR. Microarray analysis showed 179 genes differentially
expressed between MIP1 and control. In addition, 952 genes were
differentially expressed between IL-15 and control. Ingenuity Pathway
Analysis revealed that MIP1 affected networks associated with cell
development, proliferation and movement while IL-15 affected networks
involved in lymphocyte development and movement, cell death, and the
inhibition of cancer cell invasion. Knowledge of the role of MIP1 and
IL-15 in the alteration of gene expression patterns is pertinent to
elucidate the significance of these cytokines in prostate cancer
progression.

