Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of the taurine transporter SLC6A6 in promoting
prosurvival activity and multidrug resistance of colorectal cancer


The identification of a novel therapeutic target is desired to improve
the treatment of colorectal cancer (CRC). In a comprehensive gene
expression analysis, we found that the taurine transporter SLC6A6 was
highly expressed in CRC. In the functional analysis, SLC6A6-knocked down
(KD) CRC cells showed attenuated cell-survival activity accompanying
enhanced sensitivity of the drugs (5-FU, DOX and SN-38). Moreover, the
number of side population (SP) cells and their cancer stem cell
(CSC)-like properties such as tumor-initiation were abrogated by
SLC6A6-KD. Conversely, increased the cell-survival activity, the fraction
of SP cells and enhancement of multidrug resistance (MDR) were observed
in SLC6A6-overexpressed cells. Furthermore, SLC6A6-siRNA treatment
enhanced the cytotoxic effect of all 3 drugs as distinct from ABCG2-siRNA
treatment, the efficacy of which was limited to its 2 substrate-drug, DOX
and SN-38. Finally, we clarified the prosurvival and anti-apoptotic
effects of the taurine transporter SLC6A6 in CRC cells. Moreover, we
found that SLC6A6 plays an important role in the maintenance of CSC
characteristics promoting cell survival signal and MDR. Our findings
indicate that the SLC6A6 may be a novel therapeutic target for refractory
CRC.

