Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Aberrant expression of CD33 is associated with poor prognosis in
patients with multiple myeloma and tumor progression


Background: Aberrant antigen expressions of plasma cells in patients with
multiple myeloma (MM) have used for diagnosis and monitoring residual
disease during treatment. Here, we evaluated prognostic impact of
aberrant antigens expression and identify functional roles of CD33 in
MM.Methods: Patient characteristics and immunophenotype from bone marrow
aspiration samples of 99 newly diagnosed MM patients in National Cancer
Center of Korea were analyzed. Samples were stained with 12 antibodies
using 4-color panel for flow cytometry with CD138 gated cells measuring
CD38, CD19, CD117, CD45, CD20, CD33, CD13, CD56, CD28, cytoplasmic and
cytoplasmic . Prognostic impact of antigen expressions was evaluated
using Kaplan-Meier and log-rank test. To investigate the functional role
of CD33 in MM, we evaluated immunophenotype of MM cell lines and
performed in vitro experiment on CD33 expression. Transient CD33
knockdown was performed by using small interfering RNA (siRNA) through
Amaxa nucleofector device. CD33 knockdown was evaluated using flow
cytometry and quantitative real-time PCR. Proliferation was evaluated
using IncuCyte Zoom live cell imaging and cell counting kit 8 (CCK-8).
The role of CD33 in migration was studied using transwell assay following
with IncuCyte Zoom and CCK-8 for quantification of the migrated
cells.Results: The frequencies of antigen expression in newly diagnosed
patients with MM were observed as following; expression of CD20, CD19,
CD33, CD117, CD13, CD56 and CD38 were 3%, 6%, 15%, 19%, 33%, 66%, and
92%, respectively. CD33 and CD13 expression were associated with lower
overall survival (OS; P = 0.014 and P = 0.036) in Kaplan-Meier analysis.
When comparing clinical characteristics according to antigens expression,
the level of anemia showed correlation with CD33 expression. Moreover,
multivariate analysis showed that CD33 was independently prognostic of
shorter progression free survival (PFS; P = 0.009) and OS (P = 0.024)
with correction of clinical prognostic factors. Then we checked CD33
expression level in myeloma cell lines (H929, RPMI-8226, IM-9, and
KMS-12-PE) and RPMI-8226 showed high expression of CD33. After knockdown
of CD33 in RPMI-8226 by transient transfection, it showed significantly
attenuated proliferation and decreased migration.Conclusion: Clinical and
experimental data from our results showed that CD33 might be a prognostic
marker, which was associated with tumor progression via increased
proliferation and migration in MM.[This work was supported by a grant
from the National Research Foundation (NRF) of Korea funded by the Korean
government (MSIP; No. 2014R1A2A2A01002553).]

