Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Vortex technology for label-free enrichment of CTC from mouse
xenograft models


BackgroundNon-invasive liquid biopsies, such as CTCs, have been of
growing interest due to their potential use in cancer detection,
prognosis, and monitoring of therapeutic resistance [1]. Beyond
enumeration, characterization of CTCs could help guide treatment
selection and the development of targeted cancer therapy. Here, we show
that Vortex technology can be used successfully for the size-based
capture of CTCs in a preclinical mouse model of breast cancer.MethodTo
establish that human epithelial cancer cells can be reliably detected in
small volumes of mice blood, 50-100 MDA-MB231 and MCF7 breast cancer
cells were spiked in 500 L mice blood, diluted 20 fold, and processed
through Vortex chip [2]. Recovered cells were immunostained (CK, CD45,
DAPI), and enumerated. For breast cancer xenograft model, 8106
MDA-MB-231-fLuc/GFP cells were implanted orthotopically into the mammary
fat pad of NOD-SCID Gamma mice (n = 35). Tumors were measured in 2
dimensions 3 times/week and tumor volume calculated. Blood from cardiac
puncture (500 l) and lateral saphenous vein (100 l) was collected
starting 1 week post implantation, diluted 40X and processed. Mice were
euthanized, organs harvested, formalin fixed, paraffin embedded and H&E
stained.ResultsSpiking of MCF7 cells in mouse blood resulted in a capture
efficiency of 56.913% and a purity of 80.1 9% (n = 3), with the
flow-through from each cycle being re-processed for a total of 4 cycles.
Recycling the flow-through led to capture efficiency of 36.7%, 23.4%,
5.2% and 7.9% during cycles 1, 2, 3 and 4 respectively. Similar results
were obtained for MDA-MB-231, with a capture efficiency of 54.4% and a
purity of 41.3%. In an orthotopic tumor xenograft model of breast cancer,
CTCs were successfully recovered from cardiac puncture as early as day 7.
CTC counts, ranging from 0.4-3649 CTCs/100 l, increased over time and
correlated with tumor burden. CTC clusters were also captured from day 7
(6 clusters/100 l; frequency 1/3), with number and frequency increasing
over time up to 147-485 clusters/100 l by day 42. No CTC were recovered
from lateral saphenous vein blood until day 28 post implantation, and
their number remained low (mean 2.150.65). Microscopic metastases were
evident in lung of all mice starting at day 28 and in liver of all mice
starting at day 35.ConclusionCTCs were isolated in a label-free manner
from mice blood with both high capture efficiency and purity. In a
preclinical model of metastatic breast cancer, CTC counts correlated well
with primary tumor volume and metastases occurrence. Thus the Vortex chip
appears to be well suited for the enrichment of CTCs from murine
xenograft models. Future works will focus on mice implanted with patient
derived xenograft (PDX) and their therapeutic response. Information
gathered from these studies should facilitate discovery of new
therapeutic targets and the development of personalized medicine.[1]
Ignatiadis et al. Clin Cancer Res 2015.[2] Sollier et al. Lab Chip
2014.[K.H. and M.T. contributed equally to this work.]

