Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A discovery study to identify clinical and genetic risk factors
for bevacizumab (BEV)-related gastrointestinal (GI) hemorrhage (HEM) in
metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer (mCRPC) patients (pts)
treated on CALGB 90401 (Alliance)


Background: Treatment-related GI HEM is a major health concern with few
known predictive risk factors. The objective of this analysis was to
discover clinical and genetic factors that modulate GI HEM risk in a
large randomized phase III study.Methods: Chemotherapy-nave mCRPC pts
were randomized 1:1 to receive docetaxel and prednisone BEV once every 21
days for up to two years (N = 1008). Cause-specific time-to-event
analysis using a Cox regression model was used to investigate the
association between grade 2+ GI HEM (designated as at least probably
related to therapy) and BEV, age, history (hx) of peptic ulcer disease
(PUD), hx of HEM, antiplatelet/anticoagulant use, hx of smoking, and
hemoglobin. Genetically-defined Caucasian pts who provided consent for
the genomic companion study (CALGB 60404) were genotyped using the
Illumina HumanHap610-Quad platform (N = 616). Log rank test was used to
investigate the association of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and
GI HEM, and results were adjusted for significant clinical
covariates.Results: The overall incidence of grade 2+ GI HEM was 9.5%
(48/503) and 3.8% (19/505) in the BEV and placebo arms, respectively. Of
the clinical covariates, only BEV (HR = 5.77; 95% CI 2.20-15.11;
PBackground: Treatment-related GI HEM is a major health concern with few
known predictive risk factors. The objective of this analysis was to
discover clinical and genetic factors that modulate GI HEM risk in a
large randomized phase III study.Methods: Chemotherapy-nave mCRPC pts
were randomized 1:1 to receive docetaxel and prednisone BEV once every 21
days for up to two years (N = 1008). Cause-specific time-to-event
analysis using a Cox regression model was used to investigate the
association between grade 2+ GI HEM (designated as at least probably
related to therapy) and BEV, age, history (hx) of peptic ulcer disease
(PUD), hx of HEM, antiplatelet/anticoagulant use, hx of smoking, and
hemoglobin. Genetically-defined Caucasian pts who provided consent for
the genomic companion study (CALGB 60404) were genotyped using the
Illumina HumanHap610-Quad platform (N = 616). Log rank test was used to
investigate the association of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and
GI HEM, and results were adjusted for significant clinical
covariates.Results: The overall incidence of grade 2+ GI HEM was 9.5%
(48/503) and 3.8% (19/505) in the BEV and placebo arms, respectively. Of
the clinical covariates, only BEV (HR = 5.77; 95% CI 2.20-15.11; P<0.001)
and age (HR = 1.06; 95% CI 1.01-1.11; P = 0.01) were significantly
associated with GI HEM in the multivariable analysis, while a trend was
noted for hx of PUD (P = 0.08). Of 498,081 SNPs tested, one intergenic
SNP (rs1478947; HR 6.26; 95% CI 3.00-14.4; P = 9.40 10-8) surpassed
Bonferroni-corrected significance (1.0 10-7) for association with GI HEM
(minor allele frequency = 0.06). The incidence of GI HEM in the BEV arm
was 33.3% (13/39) and 6.2% (17/275) for pts with the AA/AG and GG
genotypes, while the incidence in the placebo arm was 2.9% (1/35) and
1.9% (5/267), respectively.Conclusion: BEV, age, and one putative
intergenic SNP (rs1478947) were associated with cause-specific GI HEM
risk in CALGB 90401. The effect of rs1478947 appears to be specific to
pts receiving BEV. Although the mechanism by which rs1478947 increases GI
HEM risk remains unclear, rs1478947 is in complete LD (r2 = 1) with
rs1478948, variations of which may alter the binding motif for
transcription factor hepatocyte nuclear factor-4 (HNF4). HNF4 exerts a
major regulatory effect on clotting factor VII (fVII) expression and
function. Altered binding of HNF4 to fVII promoter may result in reduced
fVII function and an increased risk of bleeding. It is unclear how much
weight each identified risk factor contributes to the overall incidence
of GI HEM, which in absolute terms was not dramatically different between
arms. Exploratory studies from large trials of BEV-treated pts are needed
to better understand the genetic contribution to and biological basis of
GI HEM. Support: U10CA180821

