Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Addiction to chaperones: Investigating the role of HSP70 isoforms
in cancer


The heat shock protein 70kDa (HSP70) family of molecular chaperones are
critical for the survival of cancer cells due to their antiapoptotic
activity and role in protein homeostasis. Our laboratory has previously
shown that silencing two members of this family (HSP72 and HSC70) causes
tumour cell specific apoptosis and also sensitises cancer cells to HSP90
inhibitors. HSP70 has therefore become an appealing therapeutic target.
The human HSP70 family comprises 17 genes and the individual roles of the
isoforms in cancer are poorly understood. Here we use a systematic
approach to determine the importance of HSP70 isoforms, and a selection
of HSP70 binding partners, for the growth of cancer cells under stress.
It was hypothesised that cancer cells are more dependent on HSP70
proteins when under stressed conditions, as encountered in the tumour
environment. We used RNA interference (RNAi) to determine the effect of
silencing HSP70 isoforms and binding partners on cancer cell viability,
as measured by CellTiter-Blue. The siRNA screens were carried out in
human colon (RKO) and breast (BT474) cancer cells under serum
deprivation, oxidative stress and hypoxia. The silencing of several HSP70
genes, including the HSP70 isoform HSPA5 (also known as BiP/Grp78), were
found to cause a reduction in cancer cell viability under stress.
Detailed validation of hits has been carried out to confirm their
importance for cancer cell survival and validated hits may provide
potentially important therapeutic targets for cancer drug discovery.

