Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The miR-424/503 cluster is a breast cancer tumor suppressor with a
role in chemoresistance


Recently, we have identified the miR-424(322)/503 cluster as an important
regulator of mammary epithelial homeostasis. The miR-424(322)/503 cluster
was identified as one of the few miRNAs significantly upregulated during
involution after pregnancy. By generating a knock-out mouse model, we
found that regression of the mammary epithelium after pregnancy was
compromised in the absence of miR-424(322)/503. Mechanistically, our
studies unveiled that miR-424(322)/503 is induced by the canonical
TGF--SMAD pathway, and that it orchestrates changes in the mammary
epithelium by downregulating the expression of key components of signal
transduction (IGF1R) and apoptosis (BCL2) Llobet et al. Genes&Development
2014).Remarkably, our new studies have revealed that miR-424(322)/503-/-
female mice develop hyperplasia and mammary tumors that are promoted by
pregnancy. Thus, we investigated the status of this cluster in human
breast cancers. For this we analyzed the METABRIC dataset. These studies
revealed that the miR-424(322)503 cluster was heterozygously deleted in
16% of breast cancers and that its deletion correlates with lower
expression levels of the mature miRNA forms. Importantly,
miR-424(322)/503 is located on the X-chromosome and we have confirmed
that is monoallelically expressed due to X-chromosome inactivation. Thus,
the mutation of the active allele strongly impacts the expression of the
miR-cluster. Deletions of the miR-424(322)/503 locus were more frequent
in molecular subtypes with aggressive behavior (Luminal B, HER2+ and
Basal) and both deletions and low expression of the cluster were
associated with poor prognosis and reduced survival.Some of the
miR-424(322)/503 targets that we have previously validated (BCL2 and
IGF1R) are involved in resistance to chemotherapy. Importantly, primary
breast tumors presenting deletion of this miR-cluster locus presented
significantly worse response to chemotherapy than the rest of tumors.
Thus, we investigated in vivo, utilizing our knock-out mouse model, if
loss of miR-424(322)/503 induces resistance to chemotherapeutic drugs.
For this we crossed our miR-424(322)/503-/- animals with the HER2+ model
FVB/N-Tg(MMTVneu)202Mul/J. Tumors emerging in HER2+/miR-424(322)/503-/-
animals presented higher levels of BCL2 and hyperactivation of the
IGF1R-AKT signaling compared to HER2+/miR-424(322)/503+/+ counterparts.
Furthermore, these tumors were resistant to standard chemotherapy.
Importantly, inhibition of BCL2 with ABT-199 and IGF1R with BMS-754807,
two compounds currently in clinical trial, completely reverted
chemotherapy resistance.Overall, our data present evidence supporting a
tumor suppressor role for miR-424(322)/503 cluster and its implication in
resistance to chemotherapy.

