Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BEZ235 efficacy in 3D-cancer cell line screening


In vitro efficacy assessment of drugs in panels of tumor-derived cell
lines has proven to be a powerful tool for predictive biomarker
discovery. However, in the last few years it has become evident that
particularly for tumor cell lines derived from solid tumors, the results
do not always correlate with what is seen in xenografts as well as
clinically. One of the reason is that traditionally these type of studies
are done in monolayers (2D), which lack the complexity normally seen in
vivo. 3D cultures offer the ability to carry out the same type of studies
with the added benefit of incorporating 3-dimensional cellular
interactions and physiological gradients, normally seen in a tumor
microenvironment. In this study, we evaluated the efficacy of BEZ235, an
imidazoquinoline, targeting the phosphatidylinositol 3 kinase (PI3K) and
the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR). BEZ235 was evaluated in a panel
of 60 cell lines grown as spheroids, and this information was used to
investigate genes associated with sensitivity. Cell lines grown as
spheroids proved to be highly sensitive to the drug, where 45 of 60 cell
lines showed an IC50 lower than 1 M. Biomarker association analysis
identified two mutated genes associated to BEZ235 sensitivity. The first
biomarker was the phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN) a tumor
suppressor gene, that when deregulated plays an important role in the
development of several cancers. The second biomarker was AXIN1, a
negative regulator of the WNT signaling pathway, and its deregulation has
been associated with hepatocellular carcinoma. Since both PTEN and AXIN1
are thought to play a role in tissue invasion and metastasis, we studied
the ability of BEZ235 to inhibit cellular invasion, and the results are
discussed.

