Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel proteasome inhibitor, bis-Benzylidine Piperidone (RA190),
control hepatocellular carcinoma effectively through inhibiting STAT3


Hepatocellular carcinoma(HCC) is one of the most common malignancy,
especially in the HBV endemic Asia area. However, there is still lack of
effective chemotherapy drug to treat HCC, expect Sorafenib, tyrosine
kinase inhibitor, the only FDA approved chemotherapy drug to treat HCC.In
this study, we explore the chemotherapeutic properties of a novel
proteasome inhibitor, bis-Benzylidine Piperidone (RA190), and its ability
to manipulate the tumor microenvironment. Unlike the marketed proteasome
inhibitor Bortezomib, a chemotherapeutic drug used to treat relapsed
multiple myeloma, which inhibits the 20S catalytic core of the 26S
proteasome, RA190 irreversibly binds to the ubiquitin receptor
RPN13/ADRM1 on the 19S regulatory cap of the 26S proteasome. RA190
inhibits proteasome function and triggers accumulation of polyubiquinated
proteins, and has been shown to induce endoplasmic reticulum
stress-related apoptosis in HepG2 and Hepa3B hepatoma cell lines. We also
found RA190 We observed a significant apoptosis of cancer cells after
treatment of RA190. These changes in cancer cell lines were caused by
reduction of STAT3 activity. We also proved the treatment effect of RA190
in orthotropic HCC animal models. The initial study of this novel
proteasome inhibitor demonstrates its potential as an effective HCC
therapy.

