Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TMPRSS2-ERG drives global mistargeting of mammalian SWI/SNF (BAF)
complexes in prostate cancer


Prostate cancer remains one of the leading causes of cancer-related death
in men. Chromosomal rearrangements resulting in the fusion of the
androgen regulated gene TMPRSS2 and the ETS-family transcription factor
ERG occur in over 50% of all prostate cancer cases. Recent studies
enabled by genome-wide methodologies have implicated altered epigenomic
landscapes and changes in DNA accessibility as major contributors to
ERG-driven oncogenesis, however the precise mechanism underlying the ERG
transcriptional signature has to date remained unclear. Here we performed
the first endogenous purification and SILAC-mass spectrometric analysis
of ERG in TMPRSS2-ERG prostate cancer cells. Remarkably, we demonstrate
that ERG directly interacts with the mammalian SWI/SNF (BAF)
ATP-dependent chromatin remodeling complex, which was recently shown to
be mutated in >20% of human malignancies. ERG co-localizes with BAF
complexes genome-wide, resulting in specific ERG-dependent BAF complex
targeting to sites enriched in known ERG, FOXA1, and HOXB13 motifs;
additionally, loss of ERG in TMPRSS2-ERG driven cell lines results in
dramatic retargeting of BAF complexes away from ERG-dependent sites, to
sites enriched in known AR and CTCF motifs. Importantly, ERG-driven BAF
complex retargeting contributes to activation of TMPRSS2-ERG prostate
cancer gene expression signatures. We map the ERG-BAF interaction to a
specific region within the ERG amino acid sequence and find that this
region is required to bind BAF complexes. These studies reveal a novel,
unexpected mechanism of action of ERG-driven oncogenesis and offers new
strategies for therapeutic intervention.

