Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ninjurin1, a target of p53, modulates p53-dependent tumor
suppression in vivo


The nerve injury-induced protein 1 (Ninjurin1, Ninj1), a homophilic
adhesion molecule, is involved in nerve regeneration, inflammation and
vascular regression. Ninj1 is found to be overexpressed in human cancers
including hepatocellular carcinoma and acute lymphoblastic leukemia.
However, the role of Ninj1 in tumorigenesis has not been elucidated.
Recently, we found that Ninj1 is transcriptionally regulated by p53,
which in turn regulates p53 expression through mRNA translation. Thus,
the mutual regulation between p53 and Ninj1 represents a novel loop in
the p53 pathway. To examine the biological significance of the p53-Ninj1
loop, we generated and monitored 4 cohorts of mice: (i) WT, (ii)
Ninj1-het, (iii) p53-null, (iv) Ninj1-het; p53-null. We found that
Ninj1-het mice were highly prone to skin lesions. We also found that
Ninj1 deficiency shortened the life-span but decreased the incidence of
sarcoma in mice without p53. Additionally, we found that Ninj1-het;
p53-null mice were prone to hydrocephalus and kidney abnormality. To
examine the association of Ninj1 with mutant p53, we generated and
characterized Ninj1+/-; p53 R270H/- and p53 R270H/- mice. We found that
Ninj1 deficiency shortened the life-span and promoted the frequency and
aggressiveness of tumors in p53 R270H/- mice. Together, we conclude that
Ninj1 differently regulates the tumor susceptibility in a p53-dependent
manner in vivo and that the Ninj1-p53 loop plays a pivotal role in tumor
suppression and longevity.

