Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A comparative descriptive study of cutaneous malignant melanoma


Objectives: Incidence of cutaneous malignant melanoma has increased
worldwide in the past several decades, particularly in developed
countries. Melanoma is believed to be a multifactorial condition, with
exposure to ultraviolet radiation (UVR) as a major environmental risk
factor. We matched five provinces in Iran with five states in the United
States (US) based on measurements of solar UVB exposure and conducted a
comparison of population-based incidence rates of melanoma in each
province and state.Methods: Solar UVB exposure was measured using data
from NASA's Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer (TOMS) for the period
between January 1, 1997 and December 31, 2000 at a geographic resolution
of one degree. UV exposures (in mW/m2) for each state and province were
calculated by averaging the values of the grid points within each state
and province. Population-based incidence data for five Iranian provinces
(Ardabil, Golestan, Mazandaran, Gilan and Kerman) were obtained from
their respective cancer registries. Incidence rates among white
non-Hispanic individuals in the five US states (Kentucky, Utah, Texas,
Oklahoma, and Hawaii) with matching average UVB exposure to the Iranian
provinces were obtained from the North American Association of Central
Cancer Registries. Furthermore, population-based incidence rates of
melanoma for the overall U.S. population were obtained from the
Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) program for the 13
SEER areas (1996-2000). All incidence rates were calculated per 100,000
person-years and were age-adjusted using the 2000 standard
populations.Results: Annual UVB exposure from 1996-2000 ranged from an
average of 138.52 in Ardabil to 227.44 in Kerman. The exposures of the
corresponding US states ranged from 124.95 in Kentucky to 246.34 in
Hawaii during the same period. The overall male and female rates of
melanoma were 0.59 and 0.46, respectively, for Iran and 14.9 (95%CI:
14.7-15.2) and 10.5 (95%CI: 10.4-10.7), respectively, for the US.
Age-standardized rates (ASR) of melanoma among males for the five Iranian
provinces in comparison to their UVR-matched US states were as follows:
0.30 (22.6) for Ardabil (Kentucky), 1.20 (26.6) for Golestan (Utah), 0.73
(18.1) for Mazandaran (Texas), 0.17 (15.8) for Gilan (Oklahoma), and 0.90
(75.3) for Kerman (Hawaii). ASR of melanoma among females were as
follows: 0.20 (16.0) for Ardabil (Kentucky), 0.60 (17.5) for Golestan
(Utah), 0.47 (10.6) for Mazandaran (Texas), 0.17 (8.9) for Gilan
(Oklahoma), and 0.90 (36.5) for Kerman (Hawaii).Conclusion: The markedly
higher incidence rates of melanoma in selected US states compared to
Iranian provinces with similar UVR exposure patterns may be due to
differences in lifestyle, pigmentation, or genetic profiles, as well as
under-reporting in Iran compared to the US. Our findings underscore the
need for additional studies to decipher the multitude of extrinsic and
intrinsic factors involved in the etiology of this multifactorial
condition.

