Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Compound gene mutations in the methylation pathway contribute to
the chronic health problems and colorectal cancer: A family-based
case-control study


The purpose of this project is to examine compound gene mutations in the
methylation pathway for their contributions to the development of chronic
health conditions and colorectal cancer (CRC) in a family-based case
control study.Fifty four cancer patients and matched 54 family controls
were recruited from southern California areas by accessing California
Cancer Registry data, with racial ethnic groups representing the
proportions of population distributions in the communities. Home visits
were conducted for interviews and collection of biological samples
(buccal and/or blood) for genotyping. Blood plasma samples were processed
within 30 minutes of collection, transported on ice, and stored in -80C
for metabolite analyses. Family-Based Association Tests using the
FBAT-toolkit, taking account of familial correlations due to shared
genes, were performed. The test p-values and beta coefficients were
reported.New Data FindingsPlasma total homocysteine (tHcy) levels were
highest in the advanced cancer group than the early stage cancer group,
and control groups with chronic health problems and healthy control (p =
0.0066). For SNP analyses on five selected genes including
methylenetetrahydro-folate reductase (MTHFR) 677 and 1298, methionine
synthase (MTR) 2756, methionine synthase reductase (MTRR) 66, and
dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR) 19 bp deletion, the advanced cancer group
had the highest mutation rates for these genes combined, than other
groups (p = 0.032), and the most MTHFR mutations (p = 0.016). Among the
ethnic groups, the methylation status represented by the SAM/SAH ratio,
were lower in African American (AA) and Asian than in Hispanics and
Caucasian (p = 0.0199). Caucasian and Hispanics had higher MTHFR
mutations than Asian, and AA had the lowest MTHFR mutations (p The
purpose of this project is to examine compound gene mutations in the
methylation pathway for their contributions to the development of chronic
health conditions and colorectal cancer (CRC) in a family-based case
control study.Fifty four cancer patients and matched 54 family controls
were recruited from southern California areas by accessing California
Cancer Registry data, with racial ethnic groups representing the
proportions of population distributions in the communities. Home visits
were conducted for interviews and collection of biological samples
(buccal and/or blood) for genotyping. Blood plasma samples were processed
within 30 minutes of collection, transported on ice, and stored in -80C
for metabolite analyses. Family-Based Association Tests using the
FBAT-toolkit, taking account of familial correlations due to shared
genes, were performed. The test p-values and beta coefficients were
reported.New Data FindingsPlasma total homocysteine (tHcy) levels were
highest in the advanced cancer group than the early stage cancer group,
and control groups with chronic health problems and healthy control (p =
0.0066). For SNP analyses on five selected genes including
methylenetetrahydro-folate reductase (MTHFR) 677 and 1298, methionine
synthase (MTR) 2756, methionine synthase reductase (MTRR) 66, and
dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR) 19 bp deletion, the advanced cancer group
had the highest mutation rates for these genes combined, than other
groups (p = 0.032), and the most MTHFR mutations (p = 0.016). Among the
ethnic groups, the methylation status represented by the SAM/SAH ratio,
were lower in African American (AA) and Asian than in Hispanics and
Caucasian (p = 0.0199). Caucasian and Hispanics had higher MTHFR
mutations than Asian, and AA had the lowest MTHFR mutations (p < 0.001).
Hispanics had the lowest mutations (8.7%) on MTR gene (p = 0.069) than
Asian (29.3%), Caucasian (41.2%), and AA (50%); and Hispanics had the
lowest mutations (26.1%) on MTRR gene (p The purpose of this project is
to examine compound gene mutations in the methylation pathway for their
contributions to the development of chronic health conditions and
colorectal cancer (CRC) in a family-based case control study.Fifty four
cancer patients and matched 54 family controls were recruited from
southern California areas by accessing California Cancer Registry data,
with racial ethnic groups representing the proportions of population
distributions in the communities. Home visits were conducted for
interviews and collection of biological samples (buccal and/or blood) for
genotyping. Blood plasma samples were processed within 30 minutes of
collection, transported on ice, and stored in -80C for metabolite
analyses. Family-Based Association Tests using the FBAT-toolkit, taking
account of familial correlations due to shared genes, were performed. The
test p-values and beta coefficients were reported.New Data FindingsPlasma
total homocysteine (tHcy) levels were highest in the advanced cancer
group than the early stage cancer group, and control groups with chronic
health problems and healthy control (p = 0.0066). For SNP analyses on
five selected genes including methylenetetrahydro-folate reductase
(MTHFR) 677 and 1298, methionine synthase (MTR) 2756, methionine synthase
reductase (MTRR) 66, and dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR) 19 bp deletion,
the advanced cancer group had the highest mutation rates for these genes
combined, than other groups (p = 0.032), and the most MTHFR mutations (p
= 0.016). Among the ethnic groups, the methylation status represented by
the SAM/SAH ratio, were lower in African American (AA) and Asian than in
Hispanics and Caucasian (p = 0.0199). Caucasian and Hispanics had higher
MTHFR mutations than Asian, and AA had the lowest MTHFR mutations (p <
0.001). Hispanics had the lowest mutations (8.7%) on MTR gene (p = 0.069)
than Asian (29.3%), Caucasian (41.2%), and AA (50%); and Hispanics had
the lowest mutations (26.1%) on MTRR gene (p < 0.001) than Asian (50%),
AA (70%), and Caucasian (79.4%). Hispanic samples had the lowest
mutations (47.8%) for DHFR 19bp deletion than Caucasian (55.9%), AA
(80%), and Asian (85.4%) (p The purpose of this project is to examine
compound gene mutations in the methylation pathway for their
contributions to the development of chronic health conditions and
colorectal cancer (CRC) in a family-based case control study.Fifty four
cancer patients and matched 54 family controls were recruited from
southern California areas by accessing California Cancer Registry data,
with racial ethnic groups representing the proportions of population
distributions in the communities. Home visits were conducted for
interviews and collection of biological samples (buccal and/or blood) for
genotyping. Blood plasma samples were processed within 30 minutes of
collection, transported on ice, and stored in -80C for metabolite
analyses. Family-Based Association Tests using the FBAT-toolkit, taking
account of familial correlations due to shared genes, were performed. The
test p-values and beta coefficients were reported.New Data FindingsPlasma
total homocysteine (tHcy) levels were highest in the advanced cancer
group than the early stage cancer group, and control groups with chronic
health problems and healthy control (p = 0.0066). For SNP analyses on
five selected genes including methylenetetrahydro-folate reductase
(MTHFR) 677 and 1298, methionine synthase (MTR) 2756, methionine synthase
reductase (MTRR) 66, and dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR) 19 bp deletion,
the advanced cancer group had the highest mutation rates for these genes
combined, than other groups (p = 0.032), and the most MTHFR mutations (p
= 0.016). Among the ethnic groups, the methylation status represented by
the SAM/SAH ratio, were lower in African American (AA) and Asian than in
Hispanics and Caucasian (p = 0.0199). Caucasian and Hispanics had higher
MTHFR mutations than Asian, and AA had the lowest MTHFR mutations (p <
0.001). Hispanics had the lowest mutations (8.7%) on MTR gene (p = 0.069)
than Asian (29.3%), Caucasian (41.2%), and AA (50%); and Hispanics had
the lowest mutations (26.1%) on MTRR gene (p < 0.001) than Asian (50%),
AA (70%), and Caucasian (79.4%). Hispanic samples had the lowest
mutations (47.8%) for DHFR 19bp deletion than Caucasian (55.9%), AA
(80%), and Asian (85.4%) (p < 0.001). FBAT analyses revealed that SAH
levels were associated with MTRR mutation (p = 0.077), but betaine and
choline levels were associated with MTR mutations (p The purpose of this
project is to examine compound gene mutations in the methylation pathway
for their contributions to the development of chronic health conditions
and colorectal cancer (CRC) in a family-based case control study.Fifty
four cancer patients and matched 54 family controls were recruited from
southern California areas by accessing California Cancer Registry data,
with racial ethnic groups representing the proportions of population
distributions in the communities. Home visits were conducted for
interviews and collection of biological samples (buccal and/or blood) for
genotyping. Blood plasma samples were processed within 30 minutes of
collection, transported on ice, and stored in -80C for metabolite
analyses. Family-Based Association Tests using the FBAT-toolkit, taking
account of familial correlations due to shared genes, were performed. The
test p-values and beta coefficients were reported.New Data FindingsPlasma
total homocysteine (tHcy) levels were highest in the advanced cancer
group than the early stage cancer group, and control groups with chronic
health problems and healthy control (p = 0.0066). For SNP analyses on
five selected genes including methylenetetrahydro-folate reductase
(MTHFR) 677 and 1298, methionine synthase (MTR) 2756, methionine synthase
reductase (MTRR) 66, and dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR) 19 bp deletion,
the advanced cancer group had the highest mutation rates for these genes
combined, than other groups (p = 0.032), and the most MTHFR mutations (p
= 0.016). Among the ethnic groups, the methylation status represented by
the SAM/SAH ratio, were lower in African American (AA) and Asian than in
Hispanics and Caucasian (p = 0.0199). Caucasian and Hispanics had higher
MTHFR mutations than Asian, and AA had the lowest MTHFR mutations (p <
0.001). Hispanics had the lowest mutations (8.7%) on MTR gene (p = 0.069)
than Asian (29.3%), Caucasian (41.2%), and AA (50%); and Hispanics had
the lowest mutations (26.1%) on MTRR gene (p < 0.001) than Asian (50%),
AA (70%), and Caucasian (79.4%). Hispanic samples had the lowest
mutations (47.8%) for DHFR 19bp deletion than Caucasian (55.9%), AA
(80%), and Asian (85.4%) (p < 0.001). FBAT analyses revealed that SAH
levels were associated with MTRR mutation (p = 0.077), but betaine and
choline levels were associated with MTR mutations (p <
0.05).ConclusionBased on the findings from these analyses, tHcy levels
and common gene mutations in the OCM methylation pathways are associated
with the development of chronic health problems and advanced stages of
CRC. Ethnic groups present different mutation patterns on the genes in
the methylation pathways for population health. These findings warrant
personalized healthcare based on gene mutations and enzyme deficiency in
the OCM methylation pathways.

