Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Forerunner genes contribute to bladder carcinogenesis by altering
the basal to luminal urothelial transition program


Background: The idea that microscopically recognizable dysplasia and
carcinoma in situ act as precursor conditions for invasive cancer is the
prevailing view of how many common epithelial malignancies develop.
However, new evidence suggests that these are not the initiating events
of carcinogenesis but represent the evolution of pre-existing occult
disease, caused by the field effects of carcinogens and/or chronic
inflammation, which shows minimal phenotypic deviation from normal
tissue. These effects may form large plaques in the mucosa of the
affected organ but the mechanisms driving their developments are
unknown.Design: We developed a strategy that combines histologic and
genetic mapping that permits interrogation of the chronology of genetic
changes associated with cancer development on a whole-organ scale. By
using this approach, we analyzed the sequence of genetic alterations
contiguous to the tumor suppressor RB1 and identified a set of
alternative target genes that we term forerunner (FR) genes (ITM2B,
LPAR6, MLNR, CAB39L, and ARL11) whose silencing was associated with
development of clonal plaque-like mucosal field effects initiating
bladder carcinogenesis. We focused on two model FR genes, LPAR6 and
CAB39L, and validated their involvement in the development of mucosal
field effects by in vitro mechanistic studies and in vivo models.Results:
We provide evidence that silencing of prototypic FR genes by
hypermethylation (LPAR6 and CAB39L) and less frequently by mutations
(LPAR6) is associated with the initial expansion of intraurothelial
neoplasia and sets the stage for subsequent events of carcinogenesis. We
also found that LPAR6 and CAB39L control cell survival and proliferation
consistent with the loss of function being contributory to tumorigenesis.
We validated their involvement in three large independent cohorts of
bladder cancer, which were profiled according to a novel molecular
taxonomy and show that they distinctively contribute to the development
of luminal (LPAR6) and basal (CAB39L) subtypes. The in vitro studies
using cell lines and their ability to form urospheres showed that these
genes contribute to carcinogenesis by altering the transition from basal
to luminal phenotypes. Consistent with these observations the BBN induced
cancers in Lpar6/ mice were of luminal type while the cancers induced in
Lpar6+/+ mice were of basal type.Conclusion: Loss of prototypic FR genes
contributes to the development of mucosal field effects initiating
bladder carcinogenesis by altering the basal to luminal urothelial
transition program.

