Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Reduced Pak1 activity sensitizes FA/BRCA-proficient breast cancer
cells to PARP inhibition


Cells that are deficient in homologous recombination, such as those that
have mutations in any of the Fanconi Anemia (FA)/BRCA pathway genes, are
hypersensitive to inhibition of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP).
However, FA/BRCA-deficient tumors represent only a small fraction of
breast cancers, which might restrict the therapeutic utility of PARP
inhibitor monotherapy. p21-activated kinase 1 (Pak1) is a
serine/threonine protein kinase located in the chromosome 11q13 and is
amplified and/or overexpressed in several human cancer types including
25-30% of breast tumors. This enzyme controls many cellular processes by
phosphorylating its downstream substrates; in addition to its role in the
cytoplasm, Pak1 also affects gene transcription due to its nuclear
localization and association with chromatin. It is now recognized that
Pak1 activation is a component of the DNA damage response. Here, we show
that depletion or inhibition of Pak1 down-regulated the expression of
several genes involved in the FA/BRCA pathway and compromised the ability
of cells to repair DNA by homologous recombination, induced cell cycle
arrest, promoted apoptosis and resulted in reduced colony formation.
Combined inhibition of Pak1 and PARP in pak1 amplified breast cancer
cells had a synergistic effect, enhanced apoptosis, resulted in reduced
colony formation and delayed tumor growth in a xenograft setting.
Inhibition of Pak1 did not sensitize non-transformed or Pak1
non-amplified cells to inhibition of PARP. Because reduced Pak1 activity
impaired FA/BRCA function and consequently, repair by homologous
recombination, inhibition of this kinase in pak1 amplified and/or
overexpressing breast cancer cells represents a plausible strategy for
expanding the utility of PARP inhibitors to FA/BRCA-proficient cancers.

