Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Collaborative regulation of cell cycle progression by Chk1 and
E2F1 in small cell lung cancer cells


IntroductionSmall cell lung cancer (SCLC) harbors very frequent mutations
in p53 and Rb, key cell cycle regulators in normal cells. In absence of
such tumor suppressors, SCLC cells rely on Chk1 for cell cycle arrest in
the event of DNA damage. High expression of E2F1 and Chk1 have been found
in SCLCs, which is associated with poor prognosis in various solid
tumors. In human SCLC cell lines, Chk1 inhibition sensitizes chemotherapy
agents. The interaction between Chk1 and E2F1 is understudied. Here, we
report a collaborative role of Chk1 and E2F1 in the cell cycle regulation
in SCLC cells.MethodsThree Rb-mutated human SCLC cell lines (GLC4,
NCI-H128, and NCI-H209) were used. GLC4 carries mutant p53; H209 and H128
are wild type. Chk1 inhibition was achieved by either siRNA knockdown or
LY2940930; E2F1 was knocked down by siRNA. Ectopic overexpression of Chk1
or E2F1 was achieved using Lonza electroporation kit. Cell viability was
measured by Cell-Titer Glo assay. Cell cycle analysis was assayed by PI
staining and FACS. Western blotting was used to evaluate caspase
activation and other signaling proteins.ResultsChk1 inhibition by siRNA
knockdown or LY2940930 treatment enhanced cisplatin cytotoxicity in SCLC
cell lines, regardless of p53 status. Also, a significant decrease of
E2F1 protein was observed following Chk1 inhibition in these cells.
Knockdown of E2F1 by siRNA enhanced the cytotoxic activity of cisplatin
in the GLC4 and H209 cells. In GLC4 cells, Chk1 siRNA combined with
cisplatin treatment caused activation of caspase-2 and caspase-3 as well
as the cleavage of BID. Interestingly, knocking down caspase-2 reversed
caspase-3 activation resulting from the combination of Chk1 siRNA and
cisplatin, and restored the level of E2F1 protein. In contrast, ectopic
overexpression of Chk1 resulted in an increase of E2F1, while increase of
Chk1 expression was also noticeable upon E2F1 overexpression. It has been
shown that Chk1 inhibition can abrogate cell cycle arrest and increase
phospho-histone H3 expression (mitotic marker). We found that
E2F1-overexpressing GLC4 and H128 cells displayed higher levels of
phospho-histone H3 when treated with LY2940930, compared to that of
Mock-transfected controls. Furthermore, exogenous E2F1 overexpression
significantly reduced the IC50 of cisplatin (1331nM vs. 3698nM; p =
0.0028 by paired t-test) in GLC4 cells, but not that of LY2940930 (14nM
vs. 19nM; p = 0.25).ConclusionsEither downregulation of Chk1 or
overexpression of E2F1 leads to cell cycle progression, resulting in more
cell death when combined with DNA damaging agents. Decrease of E2F1 by
Chk1 inhibition might represent a mechanism of self-protection to avoid
excessive mitosis after DNA damage, and this regulation is likely
involving caspase-2. Further exploration of Chk1 and E2F1 regulatory
mechanisms is warranted in SCLC.

