Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CD39+ Treg cooperate with a CD73-expressing Th1/Th17 subset for
Adenosine-mediated immunosuppression in human breast tumors


Our group and others have previously reported that Treg infiltrating
(Ti-Treg) breast tumors have a negative impact on patients outcome. We
further reported their selective recruitment in the tumor environment
through CCL22 secretion and expansion upon ICOS engagement by plasmacytod
dendritic cells.Here, we investigated the mechanism of Ti-Treg mediated
suppression and observed that Ti-Treg express high CD39 levels. CD39 is
an ectonucleotidase that cooperates with CD73 to degrade the danger
signal ATP into immunosuppressive Adenosine (Ado). The potency of Ado
mediated suppression is illustrated in Adenosine-Deaminase
(ADA)-deficient patients unable to degrade Ado and developing severe
immunodeficiency.We further show that, in contrast to murine Treg, human
CD39+Treg do not express CD73 enabling them only to degrade ATP into AMP.
Within T cells, CD73 expression was mainly associated with nave CD8+ T
cells and a subset of memory conventional CD4+ T cells (Tconv) that
exhibit Th1/Th17 characteristics (CXCR3+CCR6+CCR4negIFNhighIL17+). CD39+
Treg isolated from healthy donor blood, in presence of exogenous ATP,
potently inhibit purified CD73+ but not CD73neg Tconv, proliferation and
cytokine production (IFN, TNF). By using enzymatic inhibitors, we
demonstrated the involvement of CD39 and CD73 through Treg/Tconv
cooperation for Ado mediated immunosuppression. Of importance, when
integrated in [Treg-CD4+CD73+] high density coculture, CD4+CD73neg T
cells expressing similar levels of Ado receptors (A2A, A2B) are also
inhibited.In conclusion, our findings support the existence of an Ado
mediated immunosuppression loop in the tumor through cooperation between
CD39highTreg and CD73-expressing Th1/Th17 subsets in the breast tumor
environment.The research leading to these results has received funding
from the European Community's Seventh Framework Program (FP7/2007-2013)
under grant agreement n602200.

