Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ADA3, a cell cycle regulator, regulates chromosome segregation


The RNA polymerase II mediated transcription requires the higher degree
structure of chromatin to be relieved so that general transcription
machinery can access the DNA. The acetylation of DNA bound histones at
specific loci is the major epigenetic modification by which opening of
chromatin is achieved. HATs (Histone Acetyl Transferase) are the enzymes
that catalyze the acetylation of histones and require association with
mediator proteins for their function. One such mediator protein is ADA3
(Alteration/Deficiency in Activation 3), which was initially discovered
as a component of multi-protein complex that contains either GCN5
(General Control Non-repressed 5) or PCAF (p300/CBP Associated Factor) as
HAT and subsequent studies showed that ADA3 associates with another HAT,
p300. As a HAT interacting protein, ADA3 enhances the acetylation of
histones as well as non-histone proteins, such as p53.We have recently
shown that ADA3 is a cell cycle regulatory protein and is important for
both G1 to S phase transition as well as mitosis. Conditional deletion of
Ada3 from Ada3FL/FL MEFs (Mouse Embryonic Fibroblasts) causes cell cycle
arrest and severe mitotic defects. To further explore the mechanism of
ADA3 mediated mitosis, we performed ChIP-seq analyses and found that ADA3
bound to higher order repeat region of the centromere across most of the
chromosomes. Further studies showed ADA3 interaction with centromere was
mediated by a centromeric protein CENP-B. More importantly, siRNA
mediated knockdown of ADA3 decreases the occupancy of CENP-B at
centromere and causes chromosomal segregation defects during mitosis.
These studies demonstrate a novel function of ADA3 in cell cycle
regulation. Our current studies are focused on defining the exact
mechanism of recruitment of ADA3 complex to CENP-B to regulate mitosis
and its effect on genomic stability.

