Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting alternative DNA repair pathways for cancer cell killing
with heavy ion particles


Heavy ion therapy is a promising approach for cancer treatment,
particularly for locally advanced solid tumors. High linear energy
transfer (LET) radiation induces greater lesions density in close
proximity (clusters) compared that in low-LET radiation. Such clustered
DNA damage is thought to be more difficult to repair than isolated DNA
damage produced by equivalent doses of low-LET radiation and persist
longer in irradiated cells. It has been known that homologous combination
contributes to the repair of clustered DNA damage other than classic
non-homologous end-joining (NHEJ). DNA double-strand breaks are also
repaired by an alternative NHEJ pathway with PARP1, DNA ligase III and
Mre11. This alternative pathway is error prone and contributes to genomic
instability, such as chromosomal translocation and telomere fusion.
Genetic analysis of tumors in TCGA database revealed that these genes are
amplified in human tumors and their overexpression is correlated with
poor overall survival of cancer patients. However, influence of
alternative NHEJ pathways on the relative biological effectiveness (RBE)
of heavy ions remains unclear. Here we investigated the effect of PARP-1
and DNA ligase III on RBE of heavy ion particles on cell survival and
chromosomal aberration in breast cancer cells and pancreatic cancer
cells. Cells were irradiated with X-ray, Carbon (290 MeV/n, 13 KeV/M) and
Iron (1 GeV/n, 150 KeV/M). We found that overexpression of PARP-1 and DNA
ligase III increased RBE of carbon and iron. PARP inhibitor reduced
chromosomal aberration induced by heavy ions. This study may provide
predictor of radiation responsive of tumor cells from cancer patients
that would lead to patient stratification for heavy ion therapy selection

