Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mechanism and role of SOX2 repression in human germline
specification


The core pluripotency regulatory master transcription factor SOX2 is
repressed in human primordial germ cells (PGCs) and in the seminoma (SEM)
subset of human germ cell tumors (GCTs), which arises by transformation
of PGCs. Neither the mechanism of this repression not its significance to
GC and GCT development have so far been clarified. Here we show that SOX2
repression in TCam-2 SEM cells is mediated by the presence of the
Polycomb repressive complex (PcG) and by the H3K27me3 chromatin mark at
the SOX2 transcription start site. Moreover, repression can be abrogated
by recruitment of the H3K27 demethylase UTX to the SOX2 promoter through
retinoid signaling. SOX2-activated TCam-2 cells express neuronal and
other lineage genes, consistent with the gene's function as a
neurectodermal effector. Based on the recent discovery that SOX17
initiates human PGC specification, with its downstream target PRDM1
acting to suppress mesendodermal genes, we propose that SOX2 repression
is required for PGC specification to suppress neuroectodermal genes.
Overt pluripotency is initiated in latently pluripotent transformed PGCs
presenting as the SOX2 upregulated embryonal carcinoma (EC) subset of
GCTs; by gene expression profiling analysis we characterize the
functional pathways that distinguish PGC-like unipotent SEM from
blastocyst-like pluripotent EC.

