Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pacritinib reduces human myeloid leukemia stem cell maintance in a
defined niche


IntroductionPacritinib, a potent clinical small molecule inhibitor of
JAK2, it also suppresses signaling through wild-type and mutant FLT3,
IRAK1, and CSF1R. Pacritinib does not cause marrow suppression and has
demonstrated single agent activity preclinically in myelofibrosis and
other myeloid neoplasms including AML and CMML. Stromal protection was
not observed. However, the capacity of pacritinib to eradicate therapy
resistant leukemia stem cells (LSC), residing in the bone marrow niche,
had not been examined. Thus, we investigated the impact of pacritinib
alone or in combination with standard of care therapy on primary blast
crisis chronic myeloid leukemia (BC CML), myelofibrosis (MF) and AML LSC
survival and self-renewal in a stem cell supportive
niche.MethodsGenetically engineered mouse bone marrow fibroblasts
producing human SCF, IL3 and G-CSF were used as stromal monolayers to
support LSC survival and self-renewal. Human primary CD34+ cells were
selected from BC CML (n = 5), MF (n = 5) and relapsed AML (n = 4) before
and after clinical treatment with azacitidine. As a control, CD34+ cells
from age matched normal bone marrow (a-NBM, n = 4) were used for the
co-culture. Survival and self-renewal of the cells were investigated by
colony forming and replating assays. Pacritinib was used at
concentrations ranging from 10 to 50 nM alone and in combination with 1
nM dasatinib.ResultsPacritinib alone induced dose-dependent inhibition of
self-renewal in a-NBM, AML, MF and CML-BC, with the optimal concentration
of 20nM leading to IC50 diversity in the response between normal and
leukemia progenitors. AML and MF responded uniformly and inhibition
reached 50% at 10nM concentration. BC CML cells were more divergent: 40%
demonstrated >50% inhibition, in another 40% it was 20-50% and in 20%
inhibition was IntroductionPacritinib, a potent clinical small molecule
inhibitor of JAK2, it also suppresses signaling through wild-type and
mutant FLT3, IRAK1, and CSF1R. Pacritinib does not cause marrow
suppression and has demonstrated single agent activity preclinically in
myelofibrosis and other myeloid neoplasms including AML and CMML. Stromal
protection was not observed. However, the capacity of pacritinib to
eradicate therapy resistant leukemia stem cells (LSC), residing in the
bone marrow niche, had not been examined. Thus, we investigated the
impact of pacritinib alone or in combination with standard of care
therapy on primary blast crisis chronic myeloid leukemia (BC CML),
myelofibrosis (MF) and AML LSC survival and self-renewal in a stem cell
supportive niche.MethodsGenetically engineered mouse bone marrow
fibroblasts producing human SCF, IL3 and G-CSF were used as stromal
monolayers to support LSC survival and self-renewal. Human primary CD34+
cells were selected from BC CML (n = 5), MF (n = 5) and relapsed AML (n =
4) before and after clinical treatment with azacitidine. As a control,
CD34+ cells from age matched normal bone marrow (a-NBM, n = 4) were used
for the co-culture. Survival and self-renewal of the cells were
investigated by colony forming and replating assays. Pacritinib was used
at concentrations ranging from 10 to 50 nM alone and in combination with
1 nM dasatinib.ResultsPacritinib alone induced dose-dependent inhibition
of self-renewal in a-NBM, AML, MF and CML-BC, with the optimal
concentration of 20nM leading to IC50 diversity in the response between
normal and leukemia progenitors. AML and MF responded uniformly and
inhibition reached 50% at 10nM concentration. BC CML cells were more
divergent: 40% demonstrated >50% inhibition, in another 40% it was 20-50%
and in 20% inhibition was <20%. Combined treatment with the low dose of
dasatinib and pacritinib doses of 10 or 20 nM resulted in a significant
(pIntroductionPacritinib, a potent clinical small molecule inhibitor of
JAK2, it also suppresses signaling through wild-type and mutant FLT3,
IRAK1, and CSF1R. Pacritinib does not cause marrow suppression and has
demonstrated single agent activity preclinically in myelofibrosis and
other myeloid neoplasms including AML and CMML. Stromal protection was
not observed. However, the capacity of pacritinib to eradicate therapy
resistant leukemia stem cells (LSC), residing in the bone marrow niche,
had not been examined. Thus, we investigated the impact of pacritinib
alone or in combination with standard of care therapy on primary blast
crisis chronic myeloid leukemia (BC CML), myelofibrosis (MF) and AML LSC
survival and self-renewal in a stem cell supportive
niche.MethodsGenetically engineered mouse bone marrow fibroblasts
producing human SCF, IL3 and G-CSF were used as stromal monolayers to
support LSC survival and self-renewal. Human primary CD34+ cells were
selected from BC CML (n = 5), MF (n = 5) and relapsed AML (n = 4) before
and after clinical treatment with azacitidine. As a control, CD34+ cells
from age matched normal bone marrow (a-NBM, n = 4) were used for the
co-culture. Survival and self-renewal of the cells were investigated by
colony forming and replating assays. Pacritinib was used at
concentrations ranging from 10 to 50 nM alone and in combination with 1
nM dasatinib.ResultsPacritinib alone induced dose-dependent inhibition of
self-renewal in a-NBM, AML, MF and CML-BC, with the optimal concentration
of 20nM leading to IC50 diversity in the response between normal and
leukemia progenitors. AML and MF responded uniformly and inhibition
reached 50% at 10nM concentration. BC CML cells were more divergent: 40%
demonstrated >50% inhibition, in another 40% it was 20-50% and in 20%
inhibition was <20%. Combined treatment with the low dose of dasatinib
and pacritinib doses of 10 or 20 nM resulted in a significant (p<0.001,
Anova) difference in self-renewal of all BC CML cells, raising a
possibility of an additive/synergistic mechanisms. AML cells collected
before and after clinical treatment with azacitidine uniformly showed a
significant decrease in self-renewal starting with 10 nM pacritinib alone
and combined treatment with dasatinib did not enhance the inhibition,
suggesting a prospect of using pacritinib as a single agent in the
treatment of relapsed AML.ConclusionsTogether these data indicate that
possibly through inhibition of CSF1 and IRAK1 signaling in addition to
suppression of JAK2, even in the presence of a LSC supportive niche,
readily clinically achievable low nM concentrations of pacritinib alone
are effective in reducing self-renewal of MF and relapsed AML. However, a
combination of dasatinib and pacritinib is required to eliminate
self-renewing LSC in BC CML with minimal toxicity toward normal
progenitors. Targeting niche-dependent signaling could represent a robust
avenue for treatment of refractory myeloid leukemia.

