Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: GDNF family receptor alpha 4 (GFRa4)-targeted adoptive T-cell
immunotherapy for medullary thyroid carcinoma


Metastatic medullary thyroid cancer (MTC) is a rare, but often
aggressive, thyroid malignancy with a 5-year survival rate of 28% and few
effective therapeutic options. Adoptive T-cell immunotherapy using
chimeric antigen receptor (CAR)-modified T cells (CARTs) is showing
encouraging results in the treatment of cancer, but development is
challenged by the availability of suitable target antigens. We identified
glial-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF) family receptor alpha 4 (GFR4),
which associates with the RET receptor tyrosine kinase, as a putative
antigenic target for CAR-based therapy of MTC. Using RNA in situ
hybridization (RNAscope) and quantitative RT-PCR, we show that GFR4 is
highly expressed in MTC. Normal tissue expression of GFR4 mRNA is
restricted to parafollicular cells (C-cells) within the thyroid, the
normal cell type from which MTC originates, and normal thymus.Based upon
the highly restricted expression, we generated two high affinity single
chain variable fragments (scFvs) targeting GFR4 isoforms a and b by
selecting a nave rabbit antibody library by phage display. Second
generation CARs bearing the CD137 costimulatory domain were constructed
using these GFR4-specific scFvs. GFR4-specific CARTs trigger
antigen-dependent cytotoxicity and cytokine production in vitro, and they
are able to control pre-established TT cell tumors in an immunodeficient
mouse xenograft model of MTC. These data demonstrate the feasibility of
targeting GFR4 by CARTs, and support this molecule as a promising target
for adoptive T cell immunotherapy and other antibody-based therapy of MTC.

