Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differences in pancreatic cancer incidence across five
racial/ethnic populations in the Multiethnic Cohort


Background: The pancreatic cancer incidence is steadily increasing and
the death-to-incidence ratio approaches one. While disparity in
pancreatic cancer incidence between US blacks and whites has been
observed, no study has been conducted to examine disparity in other
populations. We examined racial/ethnic differences in pancreatic cancer
incidence and assessed the extent to which known risk factors for
pancreatic cancer account for differences in risk among African
Americans, Native Hawaiians, Japanese Americans, Latinos and whites in
the Multiethnic Cohort Study.Methods: During a 16.2 year follow up
period, 1,415 incident pancreatic cancer cases were identified among
183,269 at risk participants. Data on risk factors were obtained from the
baseline questionnaire (1993-1996). Cox regression was used to calculate
the age- and sex-adjusted relative risks (RRs) and 95% confidence
intervals (CIs) for pancreatic cancer associated with risk factors and
race/ethnicity.Results: Current smoking status (RRBackground: The
pancreatic cancer incidence is steadily increasing and the
death-to-incidence ratio approaches one. While disparity in pancreatic
cancer incidence between US blacks and whites has been observed, no study
has been conducted to examine disparity in other populations. We examined
racial/ethnic differences in pancreatic cancer incidence and assessed the
extent to which known risk factors for pancreatic cancer account for
differences in risk among African Americans, Native Hawaiians, Japanese
Americans, Latinos and whites in the Multiethnic Cohort Study.Methods:
During a 16.2 year follow up period, 1,415 incident pancreatic cancer
cases were identified among 183,269 at risk participants. Data on risk
factors were obtained from the baseline questionnaire (1993-1996). Cox
regression was used to calculate the age- and sex-adjusted relative risks
(RRs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) for pancreatic cancer associated
with risk factors and race/ethnicity.Results: Current smoking status
(RR<20 pack-years = 1.40; 95% CI: 1.15, 1.71; RR20 pack-years = 1.72; 95%
CI: 1.42, 2.09, P trendBackground: The pancreatic cancer incidence is
steadily increasing and the death-to-incidence ratio approaches one.
While disparity in pancreatic cancer incidence between US blacks and
whites has been observed, no study has been conducted to examine
disparity in other populations. We examined racial/ethnic differences in
pancreatic cancer incidence and assessed the extent to which known risk
factors for pancreatic cancer account for differences in risk among
African Americans, Native Hawaiians, Japanese Americans, Latinos and
whites in the Multiethnic Cohort Study.Methods: During a 16.2 year follow
up period, 1,415 incident pancreatic cancer cases were identified among
183,269 at risk participants. Data on risk factors were obtained from the
baseline questionnaire (1993-1996). Cox regression was used to calculate
the age- and sex-adjusted relative risks (RRs) and 95% confidence
intervals (CIs) for pancreatic cancer associated with risk factors and
race/ethnicity.Results: Current smoking status (RR<20 pack-years = 1.40;
95% CI: 1.15, 1.71; RR20 pack-years = 1.72; 95% CI: 1.42, 2.09, P
trend<0.0001), obesity (BMI 30 kg/m2) (RR = 1.26; 95% CI: 1.08, 1.47),
history of diabetes (RR = 1.38; 95% CI: 1.18, 1.60), family history of
pancreatic cancer (RR = 1.91; 95% CI: 1.44, 2.54), and intake of red meat
(RR highest vs. lowest quartile = 1.26; 95% CI: 1.08, 1.48, P trend =
0.025) were associated with increased risk of pancreatic cancer. The RRs
for pancreatic cancer (vs. whites) were 1.76 (95% CI: 1.42, 2.18) for
Native Hawaiians, 1.34 (95% CI: 1.13, 1.58) for African Americans, 1.28
(95% CI: 1.11, 1.48) for Japanese Americans, and 0.93 (95% CI: 0.79,
1.11) for Latinos. After further adjustment for the risk factors above,
the RRs were 1.56 (95% CI: 1.26, 1.95) for Native Hawaiians, 1.20 (95%
CI: 1.01, 1.43) for African Americans, 1.29 (95% CI: 1.10, 1.50) for
Japanese Americans, and 0.87 (95% CI: 0.73, 1.04) for
Latinos.Conclusions: In the MEC, Native Hawaiians were at the highest
risk of developing pancreatic cancer, followed by African Americans,
Japanese Americans, whites, and Latinos. Interethnic differences in
pancreatic cancer risk do not appear to be explained by differences in
the distribution of known risk factors. The greater risks in Native
Hawaiians and Japanese Americans compared to whites are new important
findings and elucidating the causes of these high rates may improve our
understanding of the disease.

