Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: KCNQ1 expression is a strong prognostic biomarker for disease
recurrence in stage II and III colon cancer


Background: Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the third most common cancer
worldwide. Accurately identifying stage II CRC patients at high risk of
recurrence and stage III patients at low risk of recurrence are key unmet
clinical needs. We previously identified KCNQ1 as a tumour suppressor
gene of which loss of expression was associated with poor survival in
patients with CRC liver metastases. The present study aimed to examine
the prognostic value of KCNQ1 in stage II and III colon cancer
patients.Methods: KCNQ1 mRNA expression was assessed in 90 stage II colon
cancer patients (AMC-AJCCII-90) using microarray gene expression data.
KCNQ1 protein expression was evaluated by immuno-histochemistry on tissue
microarrays of 386 stage II and III colon cancer patients.Results: Low
KCNQ1 mRNA expression in microsatellite stable (MSS) stage II colon
cancers was associated with poor disease free survival (DFS) (HR 3.35;
95% CI 1.16-9.66; pBackground: Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the third most
common cancer worldwide. Accurately identifying stage II CRC patients at
high risk of recurrence and stage III patients at low risk of recurrence
are key unmet clinical needs. We previously identified KCNQ1 as a tumour
suppressor gene of which loss of expression was associated with poor
survival in patients with CRC liver metastases. The present study aimed
to examine the prognostic value of KCNQ1 in stage II and III colon cancer
patients.Methods: KCNQ1 mRNA expression was assessed in 90 stage II colon
cancer patients (AMC-AJCCII-90) using microarray gene expression data.
KCNQ1 protein expression was evaluated by immuno-histochemistry on tissue
microarrays of 386 stage II and III colon cancer patients.Results: Low
KCNQ1 mRNA expression in microsatellite stable (MSS) stage II colon
cancers was associated with poor disease free survival (DFS) (HR 3.35;
95% CI 1.16-9.66; p<0.05). Loss of KCNQ1 protein expression from
epithelial cells was strongly associated with poor DFS in MSS stage II
(HR 3.82; 95% CI 2.04-7.14; pBackground: Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the
third most common cancer worldwide. Accurately identifying stage II CRC
patients at high risk of recurrence and stage III patients at low risk of
recurrence are key unmet clinical needs. We previously identified KCNQ1
as a tumour suppressor gene of which loss of expression was associated
with poor survival in patients with CRC liver metastases. The present
study aimed to examine the prognostic value of KCNQ1 in stage II and III
colon cancer patients.Methods: KCNQ1 mRNA expression was assessed in 90
stage II colon cancer patients (AMC-AJCCII-90) using microarray gene
expression data. KCNQ1 protein expression was evaluated by
immuno-histochemistry on tissue microarrays of 386 stage II and III colon
cancer patients.Results: Low KCNQ1 mRNA expression in microsatellite
stable (MSS) stage II colon cancers was associated with poor disease free
survival (DFS) (HR 3.35; 95% CI 1.16-9.66; p<0.05). Loss of KCNQ1 protein
expression from epithelial cells was strongly associated with poor DFS in
MSS stage II (HR 3.82; 95% CI 2.04-7.14; p<0.0001), MSS stage III (HR
2.93; 95% CI 1.70-5.02; p = 0.0001) and MSI stage III colon cancers (HR
5.06; 95% CI 1.07-23.89; pBackground: Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the
third most common cancer worldwide. Accurately identifying stage II CRC
patients at high risk of recurrence and stage III patients at low risk of
recurrence are key unmet clinical needs. We previously identified KCNQ1
as a tumour suppressor gene of which loss of expression was associated
with poor survival in patients with CRC liver metastases. The present
study aimed to examine the prognostic value of KCNQ1 in stage II and III
colon cancer patients.Methods: KCNQ1 mRNA expression was assessed in 90
stage II colon cancer patients (AMC-AJCCII-90) using microarray gene
expression data. KCNQ1 protein expression was evaluated by
immuno-histochemistry on tissue microarrays of 386 stage II and III colon
cancer patients.Results: Low KCNQ1 mRNA expression in microsatellite
stable (MSS) stage II colon cancers was associated with poor disease free
survival (DFS) (HR 3.35; 95% CI 1.16-9.66; p<0.05). Loss of KCNQ1 protein
expression from epithelial cells was strongly associated with poor DFS in
MSS stage II (HR 3.82; 95% CI 2.04-7.14; p<0.0001), MSS stage III (HR
2.93; 95% CI 1.70-5.02; p = 0.0001) and MSI stage III colon cancers (HR
5.06; 95% CI 1.07-23.89; p<0.05). Multivariate analysis demonstrated
KCNQ1 to have independent prognostic value in addition to established
clinicopathological parameters such as angioinvasion, nodal stage en
MSI-status.Conclusion: We conclude that KCNQ1 is a strong prognostic
biomarker for prediction of disease recurrence (HR4) and may aid
stratification of patients with stage II MSS colon cancer and stage III
MSI CRC for adjuvant chemotherapy. Because KCNQ1 protein expression is
determined by immuno-histochemistry, this biomarker can be implemented in
standard clinical care using existing workflows.

