Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combined detection of serum Dickkopf-1 and its autoantibodies to
diagnose esophageal squamous cell carcinoma


Esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) can be treated effectively if
diagnosed at an early stage. We evaluated whether measurement of
Dickkopf-1 (DKK1) in combination of DKK1 autoantibodies in serum may
benefit early diagnosis of ESCC. Serum DKK1 and DKK1 autoantibodies were
measured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay in a training cohort (185
ESCC samples vs. 97 normal controls) and validated in a validation cohort
(104 ESCC samples vs. 53 normal controls). Receiver operating
characteristics (ROC) was applied to calculate diagnostic accuracy. The
serum levels of DKK1 and DKK1 autoantibody were significantly higher in
ESCC patients than in controls, respectively (PEsophageal squamous cell
carcinoma (ESCC) can be treated effectively if diagnosed at an early
stage. We evaluated whether measurement of Dickkopf-1 (DKK1) in
combination of DKK1 autoantibodies in serum may benefit early diagnosis
of ESCC. Serum DKK1 and DKK1 autoantibodies were measured by
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay in a training cohort (185 ESCC samples
vs. 97 normal controls) and validated in a validation cohort (104 ESCC
samples vs. 53 normal controls). Receiver operating characteristics (ROC)
was applied to calculate diagnostic accuracy. The serum levels of DKK1
and DKK1 autoantibody were significantly higher in ESCC patients than in
controls, respectively (P<0.0001). Measurement of serum DKK1 demonstrated
an area under curve (AUC) of 0.709 [95% confidence interval (CI),
0.647-0.771], 37.3% sensitivity, and 90.7% specificity in the training
set and an AUC of 0.697 (95% CI, 0.613-0.780), 41.3% sensitivity, and
84.9% specificity in the validation set. Testing of DKK1 and DKK1
autoantibodies together effectively improved the diagnostic accuracy for
ESCC versus normal controls compared with either test alone (AUC 0.769,
95% CI 0.715-0.823, 50.3% sensitivity, and 90.7% specificity in the
training cohort; AUC 0.752, 95% CI 0.675-0.829, 50.0% sensitivity, and
84.9% specificity in the validation cohort). Importantly, the diagnostic
performance of the combination of DKK1 and DKK1 autoantibodies persisted
in early ESCC patients (AUC 0.780, 95% CI, 0.699-0.862, 50.0%
sensitivity, and 90.7% specificity in the training cohort; AUC 0.745, 95%
CI, 0.626-0.865, 53.8% sensitivity, and 84.9% specificity in the
validation cohort). Furthermore, the levels of serum DKK1 or DKK1
autoantibody after surgical resection were lower, respectively, compared
with the corresponding preoperative samples (PEsophageal squamous cell
carcinoma (ESCC) can be treated effectively if diagnosed at an early
stage. We evaluated whether measurement of Dickkopf-1 (DKK1) in
combination of DKK1 autoantibodies in serum may benefit early diagnosis
of ESCC. Serum DKK1 and DKK1 autoantibodies were measured by
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay in a training cohort (185 ESCC samples
vs. 97 normal controls) and validated in a validation cohort (104 ESCC
samples vs. 53 normal controls). Receiver operating characteristics (ROC)
was applied to calculate diagnostic accuracy. The serum levels of DKK1
and DKK1 autoantibody were significantly higher in ESCC patients than in
controls, respectively (P<0.0001). Measurement of serum DKK1 demonstrated
an area under curve (AUC) of 0.709 [95% confidence interval (CI),
0.647-0.771], 37.3% sensitivity, and 90.7% specificity in the training
set and an AUC of 0.697 (95% CI, 0.613-0.780), 41.3% sensitivity, and
84.9% specificity in the validation set. Testing of DKK1 and DKK1
autoantibodies together effectively improved the diagnostic accuracy for
ESCC versus normal controls compared with either test alone (AUC 0.769,
95% CI 0.715-0.823, 50.3% sensitivity, and 90.7% specificity in the
training cohort; AUC 0.752, 95% CI 0.675-0.829, 50.0% sensitivity, and
84.9% specificity in the validation cohort). Importantly, the diagnostic
performance of the combination of DKK1 and DKK1 autoantibodies persisted
in early ESCC patients (AUC 0.780, 95% CI, 0.699-0.862, 50.0%
sensitivity, and 90.7% specificity in the training cohort; AUC 0.745, 95%
CI, 0.626-0.865, 53.8% sensitivity, and 84.9% specificity in the
validation cohort). Furthermore, the levels of serum DKK1 or DKK1
autoantibody after surgical resection were lower, respectively, compared
with the corresponding preoperative samples (P<0.05). Our results suggest
that measurement of DKK1 combined with DKK1 autoantibodies is a
potentially valuable tool for the early detection of ESCC.

