Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combination of HSP90 and proteasome inhibitor is effective in
pancreatic cancer


Background: Heat shock protein (HSP90) and proteasome play an important
role in cellular protein trafficking and degradation in pancreatic cancer
(PC). Given the overlap in the mechanism of action, we investigated the
effects of the combination of pharmacological inhibitors of HSP90
(Ganetespib) and proteasome (Carfilzomib) on PC cells in vitro and in
vivo.Methods: The combined effects of ganetespib and carfilzomib were
evaluated in MIA PaCa-2 and HPAC cell lines using a cell
proliferationassay. Effects on the expression of survival (PI3K/AKT, and
ERK), cell cycle (Cdc-2 and cyclin B1), angiogenesis (HIF-1 and VEGF) and
autophagy (LC3 A/B, and Atg7) pathways were examined by Western blot.
Cell cycle analysis was performed by FACS assay. HPAC cell lines were
tested for efficacy to ganetespib, carfilzomib, alone and in combination,
using an in vivo tumor xenograft model.Results: The combination of
ganetespib and carfilzomib significantly decreased cell proliferation,
induced G2-M cell cycle arrest and induced autophagy in both MIA PaCa-2
and HPAC cell lines. Ganetespib and carfilzomib also decreased the
activation of ERK, PI3K/AKT, and autophagy signaling molecules (LC3 A/B,
and Atg7). In animal models, ganetespib potentiated the effects of
carfilzomib, as measured by tumorvolume. Western blot analysis from
tumors removed from animals confirmed the effects of ganetespib and
carfilzomib on survival, cell cycle, autophagy and
angiogenesis.Conclusion: These observations provide preclinical
proof-of-principle that combinatorial targeting of HSP90 and proteasome
is a rational approach for development in PC clinical trials.

