Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The BET inhibitor BAY 1238097 shows efficacy in BRAF wild-type and
mutant melanoma models


BET proteins recognize histone acetylation marks and play an essential
role in transcription elongation. BRD4, the best studied family member,
binds to the regulatory regions of oncogenes such as MYC, thereby
controlling its expression and that of the downstream transcriptome.
Following the identification of the first selective inhibitors, BET
proteins have been shown to play essential roles in hematological and,
more recently, in solid tumors. Here we studied the efficacy of the novel
BET inhibitor BAY 1238097 in melanoma models.BAY 1238097 was a potent BET
inhibitor with IC50 values of 47 and 295 nM for BRD4 BD1 and BD2,
respectively. In NanoBRET assays, the interaction between BRD4, BRD3 or
BRD2 with histone H4 was blocked in intact cells with IC50 values of 65
nM, 294 nM and 642 nM, respectively. In addition to its strong
anti-proliferative activity in several hematological tumor models, BAY
1238097 was also effective in several melanoma cell lines with GI50
values below 500 nM in BRAF wild-type (CHL-1, COLO-792, B16F10, IPC-298,
MeWo) as well as BRAF mutant (A375, G-361, SK-MEL-30, LOX-IMVI, SK-MEL-5,
MEL-HO) models. Resistant cell lines with GI50 values above 10 M were
identified in both the BRAF wild-type and mutant groups. ChIP analysis
performed in BRAF wild-type CHL-1 cells showed that BAY 1238097 displaced
BRD4 from regulatory regions of oncogenes such as MYC, leading to loss of
expression. The oxygen consumption rates of the melanoma cell lines were
measured and we found that cell lines sensitive to BAY 1238097 depended
on oxidative phosphorylation rather than glycolysis for energy
production.In vivo efficacy was determined for BAY 1238097 in three
patient-derived melanoma models harboring the wild-type BRAF gene. Daily,
oral treatment with 7.5 mg/kg BAY 1238097 led to significantly reduced
tumor growth (39% T/C) in one model. Interestingly, this model was
resistant to dacarbazine given i.p. at 100 mg/kg daily. No biologically
significant anti-tumor activity was observed for the two other models
treated with the same conditions (62% and 70% T/C,
respectively).Altogether the results show BAY 1238097 to be a potent
inhibitor of BRD4 binding to histones. The compound has strong
anti-proliferative activity in different melanoma models, regardless of
the BRAF mutation status but related to the metabolic activity. One out
of three patient-derived melanoma models with wild-type BRAF responded to
BAY 1238097 treatment in vivo. Future studies will help to better
characterize the impact of BET inhibition on melanoma.

