Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CPAP contributes to HCC malignancy through regulating inflammatory
pathways


Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the most common malignancies,
and the third most prevalent cause of cancer-related death worldwide. Its
curative treatments are limited to liver resection and liver
transplantation. In addition, HCC is characterized by hypervascular tumor
which is described as a formation of many blood vessels during tumor
growth. It has been shown that the transcription factors NF-B and STAT3,
both of which play an important role in the inflammatory pathway, are
activated in HCC. Centrosomal P4.1-associated protein (CPAP) plays a
vital role in centrosomal function and is identified as a transcriptional
co-activator of NF-B or STAT5. Our studies indicated that CPAP is
overexpressed in HCC and involved in regulating the TNF--NF-B and
IL-6/STAT3 pathways. By reporter assay, Q-PCR, immunoblotting and ELISA
analysis, we found that the activity of NF-B or STAT3 is increased in HCC
cells with CPAP overexpression upon TNF- or IL-6 stimulation.
Overexpressed GFP-CPAP significantly enhances NF-B or STAT3-driven
transcriptional activation and increases the expression of NF-B or
STAT3-targeted genes in response to TNF- or IL-6 treatment. Furthermore,
by immuoprecipitation and in situ PLA, CPAP could form a complex with
NF-B or STAT3. Expression of CPAP and NF-B or STAT3 had a positive
correlation in clinical HCC tissues. Interestingly, overexpression of
GFP-CPAP augmented the expressions of pro-inflammatory cytokines and
promoted tumor growth and metastasis in the orthotopic and splenic mouse
models. The expression of CPAP was positively correlated with plasma
proinflammatory cytokines expression in HCC patients. Our results suggest
that CPAP participates in activating the TNF--NF-B and IL-6/STAT3
pathways, which contributes to HCC malignancy.

