Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Downregulation of let 7a 5p predicts lymph node metastasis and
prognosis in colorectal cancer: implications for chemotherapy


Background. Colorectal cancer guidelines recommend adjuvant chemotherapy
is based on the number of lymph nodes metastasis. Let-7a-5p is a microRNA
which could inhibits migration, invasion and epithelial-mesenchymal
transition by targeting HMGA2. The aim of this study was to investigate
the role of let-7a-5p in clinical impact of colorectal cancer
(CRC).Methods. One hundred ninety-two CRC patients were enrolled. The
expression of let-7a-5p and HMGA2 in serums and tumor tissues were
analyzed by real-time PCR and immunohistochemistry. Univariate
(Kaplan-Meier) analysis was used to analyze primary outcomes included
5-year overall survival and tumor recurrence.Results. The expression of
let-7a-5p in tumor tissues was significantly negative correlated with
tumor size, stage, and lymph node metastasis in CRC patients (p = 0.024
for tumor size, p = Background. Colorectal cancer guidelines recommend
adjuvant chemotherapy is based on the number of lymph nodes metastasis.
Let-7a-5p is a microRNA which could inhibits migration, invasion and
epithelial-mesenchymal transition by targeting HMGA2. The aim of this
study was to investigate the role of let-7a-5p in clinical impact of
colorectal cancer (CRC).Methods. One hundred ninety-two CRC patients were
enrolled. The expression of let-7a-5p and HMGA2 in serums and tumor
tissues were analyzed by real-time PCR and immunohistochemistry.
Univariate (Kaplan-Meier) analysis was used to analyze primary outcomes
included 5-year overall survival and tumor recurrence.Results. The
expression of let-7a-5p in tumor tissues was significantly negative
correlated with tumor size, stage, and lymph node metastasis in CRC
patients (p = 0.024 for tumor size, p = <0.0001 for stage, and
pBackground. Colorectal cancer guidelines recommend adjuvant chemotherapy
is based on the number of lymph nodes metastasis. Let-7a-5p is a microRNA
which could inhibits migration, invasion and epithelial-mesenchymal
transition by targeting HMGA2. The aim of this study was to investigate
the role of let-7a-5p in clinical impact of colorectal cancer
(CRC).Methods. One hundred ninety-two CRC patients were enrolled. The
expression of let-7a-5p and HMGA2 in serums and tumor tissues were
analyzed by real-time PCR and immunohistochemistry. Univariate
(Kaplan-Meier) analysis was used to analyze primary outcomes included
5-year overall survival and tumor recurrence.Results. The expression of
let-7a-5p in tumor tissues was significantly negative correlated with
tumor size, stage, and lymph node metastasis in CRC patients (p = 0.024
for tumor size, p = <0.0001 for stage, and p<0.0001 for lymph node
metastasis). There was a negative correlation between levels of let-7a-5p
and the HMGA2 gene (p Background. Colorectal cancer guidelines recommend
adjuvant chemotherapy is based on the number of lymph nodes metastasis.
Let-7a-5p is a microRNA which could inhibits migration, invasion and
epithelial-mesenchymal transition by targeting HMGA2. The aim of this
study was to investigate the role of let-7a-5p in clinical impact of
colorectal cancer (CRC).Methods. One hundred ninety-two CRC patients were
enrolled. The expression of let-7a-5p and HMGA2 in serums and tumor
tissues were analyzed by real-time PCR and immunohistochemistry.
Univariate (Kaplan-Meier) analysis was used to analyze primary outcomes
included 5-year overall survival and tumor recurrence.Results. The
expression of let-7a-5p in tumor tissues was significantly negative
correlated with tumor size, stage, and lymph node metastasis in CRC
patients (p = 0.024 for tumor size, p = <0.0001 for stage, and p<0.0001
for lymph node metastasis). There was a negative correlation between
levels of let-7a-5p and the HMGA2 gene (p <0.0001), especially in CRC
patients with wildtype APC gene. Patients with let-7a-5p low / HMGA2 high
had poorer overall survival (OS) and disease-free survival (DFS) rates
than those with let-7a-5p high / HMGA2 high, let-7a-5p high / HMGA2 low,
and let-7a-5p low /HMGA2 low groups. In addition, the expression levels
of let-7a-5p in PBMCs were positive correlated with in tumor tissues of
CRC patients.Conclusion. We suggest that down-regulation of let-7a-5p in
PBMCs and tumor tissues patients could be used to predicts lymph node
metastasis and prognosis impact on chemotherapy of colorectal cancer

