Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Elucidate the functions of TBX3 in AR positive prostate cancer


TBX3 is a transcriptional repressor belonging to the T-box gene family.
It is involved in lineage specification in mammary gland, limb and heart
during embryonic development. Mutations in TBX3 can cause ulnar-mammary
syndrome, affecting limb, apocrine gland, tooth, hair and genital
development. TBX3 is amplified/mutated in a variety of cancers, including
melanoma, bladder, breast and prostate cancer. Recent findings suggest
there is a strict correlation between estrogen receptor and TBX3
expression in mammary gland and TBX3 is mutated in 9% of invasive lobular
breast cancer. However, little is known about the functions of TBX3 in
hormone-dependent tumors. Here we screened several AR+ and AR- prostate
cancer cell line and we found that the expression of TBX3 and AR is
positively correlated. Moreover, in benign human prostate tissue, TBX3
localization is overlapped with that of AR. Knocking down TBX3 by siRNA
resulted in decreased cell proliferation and cell cycle arrest in AR+
cell line Lncap and Vcap, but there was no effect on AR- cell line PC3
and DU14 upon TBX3 knock-down. TBX3 ChIP-seq in both Lncap and Vcap
revealed co-binding of TBX3, ETS transcriptional factors and FOXA1 on AR
targeted genes. Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) of RNA-seq data from
Lncap cells infected with lentivirus expressing siSCR or siTBX3 indicated
that TBX3 suppresses AR and ETV1 signaling. In conclusion, our data
suggests that TBX3 is essential for AR+ prostate cancer cell growth and
may play a role in regulating androgen signaling.

