Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Quantification of murine lung tumor pH in vivo by acidoCEST MRI


Introduction: Our objective was to accurately measure the extracellular
pH (pHe) of lung tumors in vivo using an innovative, non-invasive imaging
method known as acidoCEST MRI, to potentially improve the early detection
of lung tumors via molecular imaging.Methods: A spontaneous murine lung
tumor model was initiated through orthotopic injections of urethane in
seven A/J mice to induce formation of lung adenocarcinomas. Starting at 8
weeks post injection, we performed coronal anatomical scans to monitor
tumor growth with Bruker BioSpin 7T small animal MRI instrument.
AcidoCEST MRI was then performed when tumors reached a diameter of 1 mm
in one dimension at approximately 17 weeks post injection, followed by
additional scans each month. For all MRI scans, mice were anesthetized
with 2.0% isofluorane, the respiration rate was monitored, and body
temperature was maintained at 37 C. Respiration-triggering (gating) was
used in all imaging sequences to compensate for motion artifacts in the
lung. For optimal gating, the mouse's respiration rate was maintained at
Introduction: Our objective was to accurately measure the extracellular
pH (pHe) of lung tumors in vivo using an innovative, non-invasive imaging
method known as acidoCEST MRI, to potentially improve the early detection
of lung tumors via molecular imaging.Methods: A spontaneous murine lung
tumor model was initiated through orthotopic injections of urethane in
seven A/J mice to induce formation of lung adenocarcinomas. Starting at 8
weeks post injection, we performed coronal anatomical scans to monitor
tumor growth with Bruker BioSpin 7T small animal MRI instrument.
AcidoCEST MRI was then performed when tumors reached a diameter of 1 mm
in one dimension at approximately 17 weeks post injection, followed by
additional scans each month. For all MRI scans, mice were anesthetized
with 2.0% isofluorane, the respiration rate was monitored, and body
temperature was maintained at 37 C. Respiration-triggering (gating) was
used in all imaging sequences to compensate for motion artifacts in the
lung. For optimal gating, the mouse's respiration rate was maintained at
< 40 breaths per minute. Each mouse was scanned with acidoCEST MRI using
370 mg/mL iopamidol (200 L IV bolus, 400 L/hr IV infusion), using a 6 sec
saturation period at 3.5 T power, 300 ms acquisition time, with 468468 m
spatial resolution, updated with improved respiration gating. Parametric
maps of pixel-wise pHe values of the tumor were produced by fitting the
Bloch-McConnell equations in Matlab 2014a. The average tumor pHe and
concentration of iopamidol agent in the tumor tissue were
recorded.Results: AcidoCEST MRI was successfully applied to the in vivo
imaging of murine lung tumors. Our innovative, respiration-gated pulse
sequence and Bloch-McConnell fitting method were essential to overcome
the noise created by motion artifacts inherent in lung imaging. Lung
tumors demonstrated successful uptake of the iopamidol contrast agent,
with an average concentration of approximately 40 mM. The pH values in
the tumor ranged from 6.5 to 7.0 with an average value of 6.64,
demonstrating tumor acidosis. Anatomical MRI was used to monitor tumor
growth from 1 mm diameter at 17 weeks post injection, to 4 mm diameter at
36 weeks post-injection.Conclusion: Our study has established that
acidoCEST MRI can be used to quantify the pH of murine lung tumors in
vivo, showing that this method is promising for improved early detection
of lung tumors. These pHe measurements can be compared with tumor growth
rates to determine how tumor acidosis correlates with aggressive
phenotype. Tumor pHe measurements can also be related to concentration of
the agent as a biomarker of vascular perfusion. Furthermore, the spatial
heterogeneity of lung tumor pHe can be assessed with this noninvasive
imaging method. Further pre-clinical studies are also warranted to
determine if the acidoCEST MRI method is suitable for early therapy
response monitoring.

