Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TPX2 overexpression is essential for the survival of MYC-driven
triple negative breast cancer


Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) presents the most challenging
subtype with the poorest clinical outcome and no targeted therapy. Our
lab previously showed that oncogenic MYC pathways are deregulated in
human TNBC tumors and predict patients poor prognosis. However, clinical
development of small molecule inhibitors for MYC has not been successful
yet. We identified a synthetic-lethal interaction in which inhibition of
cyclin-dependent kinase 1 (CDK1) resulted in the selective killing of MYC
overexpressing cancer cells. CDK1 is a mitotic kinase that regulates a
large number of substrates and its inhibition causes proliferation arrest
in all cells, which may be associated with toxicity. We hypothesize that
the MYC-CDK1 synthetic lethality can be attributed to the loss of
function of only one or a handful of CDK1 substrates. To identify those
substrates, we combined bioinformatics analysis of gene expression data
from patient samples and cell based screening approaches. We identified
TPX2 depletion to efficiently kill MYC overexpressing cells, while
sparing normal cells. Using analog-sensitive CDK1 we confirmed that TPX2
is a direct substrate of CDK1. TPX2 is highly overexpressed in TNBC and
predicts patients poor prognosis. Its loss of function efficiently kills
TNBC cells in a MYC dependent manner.We hypothesize that TPX2 is a novel
synthetic lethal interaction partner of MYC. Our studies will help
elucidate the biology of MYC-driven cancer such as TNBC, which will
eventually lead to the development of less toxic and more efficacious
targeted therapies.

