Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chloroquine and vitamin D3 modulate proliferation in early stage
breast cancer models


The defining feature of premalignant mammary lesions is proliferation of
cells within the intraductal niche. Survival in this stressful duct
microenvironment requires sophisticated mechanisms to avoid apoptosis
caused by hypoxia, nutrient deprivation, metabolic acidosis, and
intracellular calcium overload. Two major survival mechanisms of breast
ductal carcinoma cells (DCIS) are 1) the upregulation of autophagy and 2)
the enhanced export of calcium via plasma membrane calcium-ATPase isoform
2 (PMCA2) efflux pumps. We hypothesize that calcium efflux, through
PMCA2, and activation of autophagic catabolism are critical
interdependent mechanisms for the survival of pre-invasive human breast
neoplastic cells.To assess the proteomic response to autophagy inhibition
and/or elevated intracellular calcium, 41 signal transduction
proteins/post-translationally modified proteins related to proliferation,
autophagy, and calcium pathways were quantified by reverse phase protein
microarrays (RPPA) in time course studies of T-47D metastatic ductal
breast cancer cell line, and MCF-10A non-tumorigenic breast cell line,
both of which express low basal levels of PMCA2, and in human primary
DCIS organoid cultures. Cell lines were treated with chloroquine (50M),
or 1,25 dihydroxyvitamin D3 (Calcitriol) (50nM or 100nM), or chloroquine
+ Calcitriol, and harvested at periodic intervals over 197 hours.
Stoichiometric time course studies (24 hours) were evaluated for
Calcitriol as a single agent in both T-47D and MCF-10A cell lines. Cell
morphology, adhesion, proliferation and autophagic flux in the DCIS
organoids were assessed by Immunohistochemistry and RPPA.Calcitriol alone
did not increase proliferation based on PCNA expression within DCIS
ducts. Chloroquine markedly increased Cleaved PARP (Chi Sq p = 0.004) and
CAMKinase II (p = 0.0068). Chloroquine (50M) plus Calcitriol (100nM)
increased E-Cadherin (p = 0.0379) and phosphoPAK1/2 (p = 0.0163), while
PMCA2 levels were not significantly different between treatment
groups.Autophagy inhibition and calcium efflux may be exploited
therapeutically by co-administration of chloroquine and Calcitrol, to
inhibit lysosomal catabolism and increase intracellular calcium levels,
respectively, switching them from autophagic survival into apoptotic
death.

