Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The expression of CD20 on malignant B cells is regulated by
chemokine signaling through the CXCR4/SDF-1 axis: implications for
targeting the microenvironmental interactions


The introduction of anti-CD20 antibodies has significantly improved the
outcome of patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) and B-cell
non-Hodgkin lymphomas. The aim of this study was to analyze molecular
pathways that influence expression of CD20 since this is largely unknown.
This is of a great clinical interest, as combinatorial therapy of novel
BCR-signaling inhibitors ibrutinib and idelalisib currently focuses
mainly on the use with anti-CD20 antibodies.Firstly, we analyzed samples
obtained from CLL patients treated with ibrutinib and showed that
administration of ibrutinib in vivo leads to CD20 down-modulation (PThe
introduction of anti-CD20 antibodies has significantly improved the
outcome of patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) and B-cell
non-Hodgkin lymphomas. The aim of this study was to analyze molecular
pathways that influence expression of CD20 since this is largely unknown.
This is of a great clinical interest, as combinatorial therapy of novel
BCR-signaling inhibitors ibrutinib and idelalisib currently focuses
mainly on the use with anti-CD20 antibodies.Firstly, we analyzed samples
obtained from CLL patients treated with ibrutinib and showed that
administration of ibrutinib in vivo leads to CD20 down-modulation
(P<0.0001). That implies that CD20 expression might be regulated by a yet
unknown mechanism in the context of immune niches. Therefore, we focused
on determining the effect of microenvironmental interactions on CD20
expression on malignant B cells. We co-cultured primary CLL cells with
the bone marrow stromal cell line HS-5. This revealed that CLL cells
co-cultured with HS-5 had higher surface CD20 expression compared to
control cells cultured on plastic (PThe introduction of anti-CD20
antibodies has significantly improved the outcome of patients with
chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) and B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphomas. The
aim of this study was to analyze molecular pathways that influence
expression of CD20 since this is largely unknown. This is of a great
clinical interest, as combinatorial therapy of novel BCR-signaling
inhibitors ibrutinib and idelalisib currently focuses mainly on the use
with anti-CD20 antibodies.Firstly, we analyzed samples obtained from CLL
patients treated with ibrutinib and showed that administration of
ibrutinib in vivo leads to CD20 down-modulation (P<0.0001). That implies
that CD20 expression might be regulated by a yet unknown mechanism in the
context of immune niches. Therefore, we focused on determining the effect
of microenvironmental interactions on CD20 expression on malignant B
cells. We co-cultured primary CLL cells with the bone marrow stromal cell
line HS-5. This revealed that CLL cells co-cultured with HS-5 had higher
surface CD20 expression compared to control cells cultured on plastic
(P<0.01). Moreover, CLL cells that have been recently released from the
lymph node microenvironment to the peripheral blood (CXCR4dimCD5bright)
had 2-fold higher surface CD20 expression when compared to CLL cells
circulating in blood of the same patient for a longer time
(CXCR4brightCD5dim cells; PThe introduction of anti-CD20 antibodies has
significantly improved the outcome of patients with chronic lymphocytic
leukemia (CLL) and B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphomas. The aim of this study
was to analyze molecular pathways that influence expression of CD20 since
this is largely unknown. This is of a great clinical interest, as
combinatorial therapy of novel BCR-signaling inhibitors ibrutinib and
idelalisib currently focuses mainly on the use with anti-CD20
antibodies.Firstly, we analyzed samples obtained from CLL patients
treated with ibrutinib and showed that administration of ibrutinib in
vivo leads to CD20 down-modulation (P<0.0001). That implies that CD20
expression might be regulated by a yet unknown mechanism in the context
of immune niches. Therefore, we focused on determining the effect of
microenvironmental interactions on CD20 expression on malignant B cells.
We co-cultured primary CLL cells with the bone marrow stromal cell line
HS-5. This revealed that CLL cells co-cultured with HS-5 had higher
surface CD20 expression compared to control cells cultured on plastic
(P<0.01). Moreover, CLL cells that have been recently released from the
lymph node microenvironment to the peripheral blood (CXCR4dimCD5bright)
had 2-fold higher surface CD20 expression when compared to CLL cells
circulating in blood of the same patient for a longer time
(CXCR4brightCD5dim cells; P<0.0001). Further, sorted CXCR4dimCD5bright
CLL cells had also 2 times higher CD20 mRNA expression (P = 0.002)
suggesting that changes in CD20 expression were rather due to changes in
its mRNA levels than surface modulation. As CD20 expression was
decreasing with the transition from CXCR4dim to CXCR4bright CLL cells, we
hypothesized that the CXCR4/SDF-1 axis is directly implicated in CD20
regulation. Indeed, CLL cells treated with SDF-1 (CXCL12), a ligand for
CXCR4 produced by stromal cells, significantly up-regulated surface CD20
(PThe introduction of anti-CD20 antibodies has significantly improved the
outcome of patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) and B-cell
non-Hodgkin lymphomas. The aim of this study was to analyze molecular
pathways that influence expression of CD20 since this is largely unknown.
This is of a great clinical interest, as combinatorial therapy of novel
BCR-signaling inhibitors ibrutinib and idelalisib currently focuses
mainly on the use with anti-CD20 antibodies.Firstly, we analyzed samples
obtained from CLL patients treated with ibrutinib and showed that
administration of ibrutinib in vivo leads to CD20 down-modulation
(P<0.0001). That implies that CD20 expression might be regulated by a yet
unknown mechanism in the context of immune niches. Therefore, we focused
on determining the effect of microenvironmental interactions on CD20
expression on malignant B cells. We co-cultured primary CLL cells with
the bone marrow stromal cell line HS-5. This revealed that CLL cells
co-cultured with HS-5 had higher surface CD20 expression compared to
control cells cultured on plastic (P<0.01). Moreover, CLL cells that have
been recently released from the lymph node microenvironment to the
peripheral blood (CXCR4dimCD5bright) had 2-fold higher surface CD20
expression when compared to CLL cells circulating in blood of the same
patient for a longer time (CXCR4brightCD5dim cells; P<0.0001). Further,
sorted CXCR4dimCD5bright CLL cells had also 2 times higher CD20 mRNA
expression (P = 0.002) suggesting that changes in CD20 expression were
rather due to changes in its mRNA levels than surface modulation. As CD20
expression was decreasing with the transition from CXCR4dim to
CXCR4bright CLL cells, we hypothesized that the CXCR4/SDF-1 axis is
directly implicated in CD20 regulation. Indeed, CLL cells treated with
SDF-1 (CXCL12), a ligand for CXCR4 produced by stromal cells,
significantly up-regulated surface CD20 (P<0.05). On the contrary, the
treatment with plerixafor, CXCR4 antagonist, inhibited this SDF-1
mediated up-regulation of CD20 which proves that SDF-1 binding to CXCR4
is directly involved in CD20 regulation.Altogether, the CD20 levels are
up-regulated within the context of microenvironmental interactions
through the CXCR4/SDF-1 axis, and the impairment of microenvironmental
interactions mediated by ibrutinib down-regulates CD20 expression. This
study reveals a novel regulation of CD20 expression in the context of
immune niches, which has important implications for CD20-targeting
antibodies and the use of BCR-inhibitors in combination.Supported by:
SoMoPro II-no.4SGA8684; NGS-PTL(306242); EHA Fellowship award; Ministry
of Health of CR (16-29622A); Academy of Sciences of CR (16-13334Y);
Ministry of Education, Youth and Sports, grant LD15144 (COST CZ);
MUNI/A/1028/2015; CZ.1.05/1.1.00/02.0068; G.P. is supported by Ostrava
city.

