Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical characterization of DCR-BCAT as a component of
combination therapy


Dicer-substrate siRNAs (DsiRNAs) are a potent class of RNA interference
(RNAi) triggers capable of silencing any expressed mRNA with high
specificity. DCR-MYC, a first-in-class DsiRNA targeting the MYC oncogene
is currently in Phase 1b/II clinical trials [ASCO 2015, abstract 11006].
DCR-BCAT is an advanced preclinical development candidate that targets
CTNNB1, the gene which encodes -catenin. The -catenin/Wnt pathway is
consistently activated in human tumors, including >50% of hepatocellular
carcinomas (HCC) and >80% of colorectal cancers (CRC). Robust preclinical
and genetic evidence strongly suggests that inhibiting -catenin function
would yield broad therapeutic benefit in oncology, but efforts to target
it using conventional drug modalities have been unsuccessful to-date. We
have previously reported extensive preclinical pharmacology for DCR-BCAT
in mouse tumor models of diverse origin. Here, we explore DCR-BCAT as a
monotherapy and in combination with both standard-of-care and
experimental therapeutics. Interestingly, when mice bearing HCC tumors
were treated with a combination of CTNNB1 and MYC DsiRNAs, the antitumor
efficacy was additive or synergistic relative to either single agent
alone. Additionally, since up to 50% of colorectal tumors have both
activated Wnt signaling and mutant KRAS, we also explored combination
therapy of DCR-BCAT and FDA-approved MEK inhibitors. A major advantage of
DCR-BCAT is that the improved nanoparticle formulation is more selective
for siRNA delivery to tumors over liver and other normal tissues. These
data support continued development of DCR-BCAT as a first-in-class RNAi
therapeutic, and highlight the potential for use in combination with
other promising agents.

