Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: T cell mediated immunity after combination therapy with
intralesional PV-10 and co-inhibitory blockade in a melanoma model


PV-10 is a 10% solution of Rose Bengal, a xanthene dye that was
originally developed for ophthalmic use and later used in liver function
studies. PV-10 was formulated for intralesional (IL) injection and is
currently being investigated as a novel cancer therapeutic. In murine
studies, we have previously shown that intralesional (IL) injection of
PV-10 leads to a regression of both injected tumors and untreated
bystander tumors. We have also shown that combination therapy of IL PV-10
with blockade of PD-1 and PDL-1 leads to increased anti-tumor immunity.
In this study, we have examined the role played by specific immune cell
populations in eliciting this response in a murine melanoma model. We
first investigated the antigen specificity of CD8+ T cells in the spleens
of mice treated with the combination therapy of IL PV-10 and systemic
co-inhibitory blockade. We found that splenocytes from mice treated with
the combination of IL PV-10 and anti PD-1 antibody have an increased mean
percentage of OVA antigen-specific CD8+ T cells (5.77%) compared to
single treatment with anti PD-1 antibody (3.8%) or IL PV-10 (3.60%) alone
in OVA-expressing B16 tumor bearing mice. To investigate the role of T
cell subsets in mediating an immune response, OVA-expressing B16 tumor
bearing mice were treated with IL PV-10 followed by intraperitoneal
injection of anti-PD-1 antibody. In addition, mice were given either 2.43
antibody to deplete CD8+ T cells, GK1.5 antibody to deplete CD4+ T cells,
or PC61 to deplete regulatory T cells (Tregs). We found that depletion of
CD4+ T cells in combination with IL PV-10 and anti-PD-1 antibody
treatment resulted in an enhanced anti-tumor effect, with an average
tumor size of 52.8 mm2 on day 25 compared to the control group (173.7
mm2), and depletion of Tregs resulted in an even greater anti-tumor
effect, with an average tumor size of 1.2 mm2 on day 25 (pPV-10 is a 10%
solution of Rose Bengal, a xanthene dye that was originally developed for
ophthalmic use and later used in liver function studies. PV-10 was
formulated for intralesional (IL) injection and is currently being
investigated as a novel cancer therapeutic. In murine studies, we have
previously shown that intralesional (IL) injection of PV-10 leads to a
regression of both injected tumors and untreated bystander tumors. We
have also shown that combination therapy of IL PV-10 with blockade of
PD-1 and PDL-1 leads to increased anti-tumor immunity. In this study, we
have examined the role played by specific immune cell populations in
eliciting this response in a murine melanoma model. We first investigated
the antigen specificity of CD8+ T cells in the spleens of mice treated
with the combination therapy of IL PV-10 and systemic co-inhibitory
blockade. We found that splenocytes from mice treated with the
combination of IL PV-10 and anti PD-1 antibody have an increased mean
percentage of OVA antigen-specific CD8+ T cells (5.77%) compared to
single treatment with anti PD-1 antibody (3.8%) or IL PV-10 (3.60%) alone
in OVA-expressing B16 tumor bearing mice. To investigate the role of T
cell subsets in mediating an immune response, OVA-expressing B16 tumor
bearing mice were treated with IL PV-10 followed by intraperitoneal
injection of anti-PD-1 antibody. In addition, mice were given either 2.43
antibody to deplete CD8+ T cells, GK1.5 antibody to deplete CD4+ T cells,
or PC61 to deplete regulatory T cells (Tregs). We found that depletion of
CD4+ T cells in combination with IL PV-10 and anti-PD-1 antibody
treatment resulted in an enhanced anti-tumor effect, with an average
tumor size of 52.8 mm2 on day 25 compared to the control group (173.7
mm2), and depletion of Tregs resulted in an even greater anti-tumor
effect, with an average tumor size of 1.2 mm2 on day 25 (p<0.05). In
contrast, mice treated with the CD8+ depleting antibody exhibited
diminished anti-tumor immunity compared to the control group, with an
average tumor size of 200 mm2 on day 25. Together, these studies indicate
that the effect of combination therapy with IL PV-10 and co-inhibitory
blockade is mediated by CD8+ T cells, and that depletion of both CD4+ T
cells and CD25+ Tregs significantly enhances anti-tumor immunity in a
melanoma model.

