Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Probing mitotic functions of BUB1 kinase using the small molecule
inhibitors BAY-320 and BAY-524


The maintenance of correct chromosome number (euploidy) during cell
division is ensured by a highly conserved surveillance mechanism termed
spindle assembly checkpoint which safeguards correct chromosome
segregation by delaying anaphase onset until all chromosomes are properly
bi-oriented on the spindle apparatus. The mitotic kinase BUB1 (budding
uninhibited by benzimidazoles 1) was reported to contribute to both
chromosome congression and checkpoint function, yet the role of BUB1
catalytic activity in these processes remains a matter of debate.To
differentiate between catalytic and non-catalytic functions of BUB1 we
compared phenotypes provoked by BUB1 protein depletion with specific BUB1
kinase inhibition using two novel small molecule inhibitors of BUB1,
termed BAY-320 and BAY-524.BAY-320 and BAY-524 were highly potent and
selective ATP-competitive inhibitors of BUB1 kinase activity with IC50
values in the single digit nanomolar range (at 10 micromolar ATP
concentration). By monitoring phosphorylation of Thr120 in histone H2A,
we showed that both compounds acted as potent BUB1 kinase inhibitors both
biochemically and in human cells. We found that BUB1 inhibition
substantially altered the chromosomal association of Shugoshin and the
chromosomal passenger complex without major effects on global Aurora B
function. Consequently, inhibition of BUB1 kinase clearly impaired
chromosome arm resolution but, in stark contrast to depletion of BUB1
protein, only had a minor effect on cell cycle and SAC function.
Importantly, BAY-320 and BAY-524 treatment sensitized cells to low doses
of paclitaxel, synergistically affecting chromosome segregation and cell
proliferation.These findings are highly relevant to both our
understanding of BUB1 kinase function during mitosis and the prospects of
BUB1 as a target of anti-cancer therapies. In this regard, BAY-320 and
BAY-524 are first-in-class inhibitors of BUB1 kinase and their potential
utility as anti-cancer agents is being explored.

