Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Fast and accurate fusion transcript detection using the Trinity
Cancer Transcriptome Analysis Toolkit


Chromosomal rearrangements leading to fusion transcripts represent a
class of oncogenic aberrations that are of high interest for
understanding cancer biology, treating cancer patients, and as targets
for the development of new therapies. Transcriptome sequencing via
RNA-Seq coupled with downstream bioinformatics software applications
offers an effective method for identifying candidate fusion transcripts,
and is more targeted and cost-effective than whole genome sequencing.
Although many such fusion detection software tools have recently been
made available, they often differ greatly in prediction accuracy,
execution times, computational requirements, installation complexity, and
in not being readily accessible to non-bioinformatician cancer
researchers.Here we present the Trinity Cancer Transcriptome Analysis
Toolkit (CTAT), a newly developed suite of RNA-Seq targeted fusion
detection tools leveraging a combination of reference genome read-mapping
and de novo transcriptome assembly, coupled to in silico fusion
transcript validation, annotation, and visualization. We show that
components of our Trinity CTAT fusion detection toolkit, including
STAR-Fusion and FusionInspector, yield improved accuracy and run times as
compared to alternative leading tools. As a demonstration of the utility
of Trinity CTAT, we explore fusion transcript discovery in a large cohort
of 300 chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) patient samples. We identify
several novel recurrent fusions that may represent drivers of CLL
etiology and provide new avenues to therapies.In addition to fusion
transcript identification, Trinity CTAT aims to provide cancer
researchers with easy access to methods for analyzing cancer RNA-Seq,
including transcript reconstruction, identification of mutations,
expression analysis, and tumor heterogeneity. Trinity CTAT is freely
available open source software and readily accessible to all cancer
researchers via our public Galaxy web portal:
https://galaxy.ncgas-trinity.indiana.edu/.

