Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Single-cell transcriptome analysis guides tailored combinatorial
therapeutics in refractory kidney cancer


Metastatic renal cell carcinoma (mRCC) evolves from primary RCC (pRCC)
and harbors multiple subpopulations with distinct molecular and
phenotypic features. Such underlying intratumoral heterogeneity (ITH)
imposes difficulties in designing marker-based clinical trials because
targeted mono-therapy eliminates a specific subpopulation of tumor cells
while leaving others unharmed. Accordingly, a rational combination
strategy that minimizes the survival of the drug-resistant subpopulation
in a given heterogeneous tumor is essential for long-term therapeutic
efficacy. Here, we examined the ITH of a paired mRCC and pRCC using
single-cell mRNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) to identify specific tumor cell
populations with drug target pathway activation. From the single cell
expression profiles, we found the highly activated status of the EGFR and
Src signaling pathways in the mRCC compared to the pRCC, with supporting
in vitro high-throughput drug screening results. Distinct features of
intratumoral expression variability across mRCC single cells that were
masked in the bulk measurement prompted us to test the co-targeting
strategy for the EGFR and Src pathways with increased likelihood for
complete response. This combinatorial strategy showed significantly
better treatment effects on mRCC-derived xenograft platforms in vitro and
in vivo than monotherapies. Taken together, our findings show clinical
implications of scRNA-seq in designing effective treatment regimens for
overcoming treatment failure to conventional monotherapies, and also
provide novel insights to the unmet clinical needs in effective
personalized treatments.

