Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MiRNA profiling of dogs with transitional cell carcinoma of the
bladder using blood and urine samples


Early symptoms of canine transitional cell carcinoma (TCC) are frequently
assumed to be caused by other lower urinary tract diseases (LUTD) such as
urinary tract infections, resulting in late diagnosis of TCC and
decreased rates of survival. To determine whether miRNA can be used as
non-invasive diagnostic biomarkers in this setting, we assessed miRNA
expression in RNA extracted from urine and blood from dogs with
clinically normal bladders (n = 28), LUTD (n = 25), and TCC (n = 18).
Expression levels of 5 miRNA associated with TCC pathophysiology
(miR-34a, let-7c, miR-16, miR-103, and miR-106b) were assessed by
quantitative real-time PCR. Statistical analyses using ranked ANOVA
identified significant differences in miR-103 and miR-16 levels between
urine samples from LUTD and TCC patients (miR-103, fold change = 2.55, p
= 0.015; and miR-16, fold change = 3.02, p = 0.002). However, logistic
regression analyses determined miR-103, but not miR-16, can distinguish
between canine LUTD and TCC patients (OR = 0.78 p = 0.031, AUC = 0.85).
No statistically significant differences in miRNA levels were observed
between blood samples from LUTD versus TCC patients. Expression levels of
miR-34a trended with miR-16, let-7c, and miR-103 levels in normal urine
samples, however, this coordination was completely lost in TCC urine
samples. In contrast, cooordination of miR-34a, miR-16, let-7c, and
miR-103 expression levels was maintained in blood samples from TCC
patients. Our combined data indicate further investigation of miR-103 as
a diagnostic urine biomarker for TCC, and investigation of the role of
miR-103 as well as dysregulation of coordinated miRNA expression in
bladder carcinogenesis, is warranted.

