Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SNPs in vitamin D-related genes are associated with prostate
cancer aggressiveness in the North Carolina-Louisiana Prostate Cancer
Project (PCaP)


Introduction: African Americans have higher incidence of, and mortality
from, prostate cancer (PCa) compared to other racial/ethnic groups.
Frequency of polymorphisms in genes involved in vitamin D metabolism,
transport, and activity differ by race/ethnicity. Examining the
association between polymorphisms in vitamin D-related genes and PCa
aggressiveness may explain differing susceptibility to aggressive PCa
among individuals and across different racial/ethnic groups.Methods:
TagSNPs (n = 315) in 13 genes (VDR, GC, CYP24A1, CYP27A1, CYP27B1,
CYP2R1, CYP3A4, DHCR7, CASR, NADSYN1, RXRA, RXRB, RXRG) were genotyped
using Illumina GoldenGate or Sequenom assays in 524 African-American and
657 European-American men with newly-diagnosed PCa from PCaP. DNA
extracted from blood samples collected at enrollment was stored at -80C
prior to analyses. Research subjects were classified as high aggressive
if Gleason sum 8, or Gleason score (4+3), or PSA >20 ng/ml, or Gleason
score (3+4) AND clinical stage = T3-T4. The comparison group (low
aggressive) included research subjects with Gleason sum Introduction:
African Americans have higher incidence of, and mortality from, prostate
cancer (PCa) compared to other racial/ethnic groups. Frequency of
polymorphisms in genes involved in vitamin D metabolism, transport, and
activity differ by race/ethnicity. Examining the association between
polymorphisms in vitamin D-related genes and PCa aggressiveness may
explain differing susceptibility to aggressive PCa among individuals and
across different racial/ethnic groups.Methods: TagSNPs (n = 315) in 13
genes (VDR, GC, CYP24A1, CYP27A1, CYP27B1, CYP2R1, CYP3A4, DHCR7, CASR,
NADSYN1, RXRA, RXRB, RXRG) were genotyped using Illumina GoldenGate or
Sequenom assays in 524 African-American and 657 European-American men
with newly-diagnosed PCa from PCaP. DNA extracted from blood samples
collected at enrollment was stored at -80C prior to analyses. Research
subjects were classified as high aggressive if Gleason sum 8, or Gleason
score (4+3), or PSA >20 ng/ml, or Gleason score (3+4) AND clinical stage
= T3-T4. The comparison group (low aggressive) included research subjects
with Gleason sum <7 AND Stage T1-T2 AND PSA Introduction: African
Americans have higher incidence of, and mortality from, prostate cancer
(PCa) compared to other racial/ethnic groups. Frequency of polymorphisms
in genes involved in vitamin D metabolism, transport, and activity differ
by race/ethnicity. Examining the association between polymorphisms in
vitamin D-related genes and PCa aggressiveness may explain differing
susceptibility to aggressive PCa among individuals and across different
racial/ethnic groups.Methods: TagSNPs (n = 315) in 13 genes (VDR, GC,
CYP24A1, CYP27A1, CYP27B1, CYP2R1, CYP3A4, DHCR7, CASR, NADSYN1, RXRA,
RXRB, RXRG) were genotyped using Illumina GoldenGate or Sequenom assays
in 524 African-American and 657 European-American men with
newly-diagnosed PCa from PCaP. DNA extracted from blood samples collected
at enrollment was stored at -80C prior to analyses. Research subjects
were classified as high aggressive if Gleason sum 8, or Gleason score
(4+3), or PSA >20 ng/ml, or Gleason score (3+4) AND clinical stage =
T3-T4. The comparison group (low aggressive) included research subjects
with Gleason sum <7 AND Stage T1-T2 AND PSA < 9 ng/ml. Odds ratios (OR)
and 95% confidence intervals (95%CI) were calculated for high aggressive
PCa for each SNP using logistic regression with adjustment for age and
proportion of African ancestry. Associations were considered
statistically significant at pIntroduction: African Americans have higher
incidence of, and mortality from, prostate cancer (PCa) compared to other
racial/ethnic groups. Frequency of polymorphisms in genes involved in
vitamin D metabolism, transport, and activity differ by race/ethnicity.
Examining the association between polymorphisms in vitamin D-related
genes and PCa aggressiveness may explain differing susceptibility to
aggressive PCa among individuals and across different racial/ethnic
groups.Methods: TagSNPs (n = 315) in 13 genes (VDR, GC, CYP24A1, CYP27A1,
CYP27B1, CYP2R1, CYP3A4, DHCR7, CASR, NADSYN1, RXRA, RXRB, RXRG) were
genotyped using Illumina GoldenGate or Sequenom assays in 524
African-American and 657 European-American men with newly-diagnosed PCa
from PCaP. DNA extracted from blood samples collected at enrollment was
stored at -80C prior to analyses. Research subjects were classified as
high aggressive if Gleason sum 8, or Gleason score (4+3), or PSA >20
ng/ml, or Gleason score (3+4) AND clinical stage = T3-T4. The comparison
group (low aggressive) included research subjects with Gleason sum <7 AND
Stage T1-T2 AND PSA < 9 ng/ml. Odds ratios (OR) and 95% confidence
intervals (95%CI) were calculated for high aggressive PCa for each SNP
using logistic regression with adjustment for age and proportion of
African ancestry. Associations were considered statistically significant
at p<0.05. A polygenic score based on a previous study of SNP predictors
of serum 25-hydroxy-vitamin D levels was calculated utilizing SNPs in the
GC, CYP24A1, CYP2R1, and NADSYN1 genes.Results: Among African Americans,
21 SNPs were associated with PCa aggressiveness. The variant allele was
associated negatively or positively with high aggressive PCa in eleven
and ten SNPs, respectively. For example, two SNPs in the vitamin D
binding protein gene known as GC, were inversely associated (rs222054:
OR, 0.55, 95%CI, 0.38-0.80; and rs16847028: OR, 0.61, 95%CI, 0.39-0.94).
Among European Americans, the variant allele was inversely associated
with high aggressive PCa for four SNPs in three genes (CASRrs3863977;
CYP24A1rs4809960; RXRArs1007971; and RXRArs3118526), and positively
associated with high aggressive PCa for three SNPs in the CYP27B1 gene
(rs703842, rs4646536, and rs10877013). There was no association between
higher number of low vitamin D alleles in the four SNPs that comprised
the polygenic score and PCa aggressiveness for either race.Conclusions:
Polymorphisms in genes involved in vitamin D etabolism and activity, the
vitamin D binding protein and calcium sensing receptor were associated
with PCa aggressiveness, and there was no overlap in SNPs between race
groups. Our ongoing work will examine interaction between polymorphisms
of vitamin D-related genes and vitamin D metabolite levels on PCa
aggressiveness.

