Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Progress in light activatable prodrug for the combinational
treatment of PDT and site-specific chemotherapy: paclitaxel prodrugs


We developed the photoactivatable prodrug of Paclitaxel (PTX) for the
combinational treatment of chemo and photodynamic therapy (PDT). PTX
causes dose-limiting side effects as other anticancer drugs when
administered systemically. On the other hand, PDT suffers from incomplete
ablation and subsequent reoccurrence in part due to the short half-life
and poor diffusion rate of singlet oxygen. We prepared a conjugate of PTX
with phthalocyanine via a singlet oxygen cleavable linker, as a unique
prodrug of PTX, to overcome the problems of PDT and systemic
chemotherapy. The PTX prodrug was evaluated for tubulin polymerization,
the release rate of PTX from prodrug upon illumination at 690 nm,
stability in complete media, and the combination effect in killing
ovarian cancer cells in vitro (SKOV-3). The PTX prodrug did not enhance
the tubulin polymerization unlike PTX. While it was stable in the media
under dark, it rapidly released PTX upon illumination with far-red light:
> 90% release in 30 min. The prodrug showed much lower dark toxicity
compared to PTX. When illuminated with 690 nm at 5.6 mW/cm2, the prodrug
showed very potent phototoxicity: IC50 = 3.9 nM, through the
combinational effect of PDT and PTX. In conclusion, we found that the PTX
prodrug have desired properties as light-activatable prodrug expressing
the combinational effect of PDT and local PTX chemotherapy. Animal study
is underway to evaluate the antitumor effect of the PTX prodrug.

