Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preventing the progression of estrogen
receptor-negative/HER2-overexpressing early stage breast disease by
lapatinib


Tamoxifen and aromatase inhibitors (AIs) have shown efficacy to prevent
estrogen receptor positive (ER+) breast cancer; however, there is no
effective prevention strategy for ER- breast cancer. HER2 overexpression
(HER2+) can be detected in up to 40% of ER- breast cancers and it has
been reported to promote the progression of early stage breast cancer.
Here, we tested the feasibility of lapatinib to prevent ER-/HER2+ early
stage breast disease. Our data showed that lapatinib reduced the
proliferation and increased the apoptosis in an in vitro ER-/HER2+ early
breast disease model. Furthermore, lapatinib treatment in the HER2-driven
MMTV-neu mouse model from early stage of disease development (atypia, at
10 weeks of age) significantly delayed tumor initiation and progression
as detected by mammary gland biopsy and fiber optic micro-endoscope
(FOME) imaging. Mechanistically, we found that lapatinib inhibited GLUT4
upregulation and increased glucose up-taking in HER2-overexpressing
cells. These results suggested that lapatinib is a promising agent for
the prevention/intervention of ER- and HER2+ breast cancers. Our study
brings better understanding of the mechanism underlying ER-/HER2+ early
stage breast disease progression to cancer and our strategy of cancer
prevention with low-dose kinase inhibitor could be rapidly translated
into the clinic for other cancer types in the near future.

