Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genetic deletion of macrophage migration inhibitory factor reduces
oral carcinogenesis


Oral cancer kills about 1 person every hour, each day in the United
States and is the 6th most prevalent cancer worldwide. The
pro-inflammatory cytokine macrophage migration inhibitory factor (MIF)
has been shown to be expressed in oral cancer patients, yet its precise
role in oral carcinogenesis is not clear. In this study, we examined the
impact of global Mif deletion on the cellular and molecular process
occurring during oral carcinogenesis using a well-established mouse model
of oral cancer with the carcinogen 4-nitroquinoline-1-oxide (4NQO).
C57BL/6 Wild-type (WT) and Mif knock-out mice were administered with 4NQO
in drinking water for 16 weeks, then regular drinking water for 8 weeks.
Mif knock-out mice displayed fewer oral tumor incidence and multiplicity,
accompanied by a significant reduction in the expression of
pro-inflammatory cytokines Il-1, Tnf-, chemokines Cxcl1, Cxcl6, Cxcl8 and
Ccl3 and other molecular biomarkers of oral carcinogenesis Mmp1 and
Ptgs2. Further, recruitment of myeloid-derived tumor promoting immune
cells was inhibited in Mif knock-out mice. Our results demonstrate that
genetic Mif deletion reduces the incidence and severity of oral
carcinogenesis, by inhibiting the expression inflammatory cytokines and
infiltration of tumor promoting immune cells. Thus, targeting MIF is a
promising strategy for the prevention or therapy of oral cancer.

