Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNA analysis paired with a novel live cell viability assay: a
complete epigenetic workflow in human cancer cell lines


The requirements for nucleic acid purification for use in RNA profiling
have expanded with the growing interest in the role of microRNAs (miRNAs)
and other small non-coding RNAs in cancer cell growth and metastasis.
This evolution of expression analysis has highlighted the need for more
sophisticated tools for total RNA isolation from cancer cells and
tissues, beyond traditional translated messenger RNAs (mRNA). To address
this need, we describe tools to isolate total RNA, for mRNA and miRNA
analyses, in the context of an epigenetic workflow with cancer cell
lines.In these experiments, histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor
treatment of different cancer cell lines was performed and expression of
miRNA and mRNAs measured in parallel with assays for cell viability,
cytotoxicity, and HDAC activity. This workflow multiplexes RNA and miRNA
expression profiling with assays for viability and cytotoxicity to
efficiently capture a more complete understanding of expression
results.With this improved cell viability workflow, one experiment from
the same well can yield information about cell health, cytotoxicity, HDAC
activity, and mRNA plus miRNA expression profiling. Our workflow
incorporates monitoring of cell health in real-time during experimental
treatments, simple and effective total RNA purification, and robust
quantitative PCR reagents for a comprehensive experimental design.

