Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Long noncoding RNA CCAT2 cooperates with miR-145 and miR-21 to
regulate colon cancer stem cells


Colon cancer-associated transcript-2 (CCAT2), a long noncoding RNA
(lncRNA), has been reported to be over-expressed in colorectal cancer to
promote tumor growth and metastasis and also reduces sensitivity to
chemotherapy, a property related to cancer stem cells (CSCs). MicroRNAs,
small endogenous noncoding RNAs, negatively control the expression of
target genes by cleaving mRNA or through translation repression. We have
recently reported cooperation of miR-21 and miR-145 to regulate colon
CSCs proliferation and differentiation. Down-regulation of miR-21
enhances CSC enriched chemo-resistant colon cancer cells susceptibility
to chemo- therapeutic regimens. Although both CCAT2 and miR-21 increase
WNT signaling activity and reduce chemosensitivity to 5-FU, a critical
evidence on how CCAT2 regulates stemness leading to chemo-resistance is
lacking. The primary goal of this investigation was to examine whether
CCAT2 associates with miR-145 and miR-21 and whether this association
plays a role in regulating stemness of colon cancer cells. We have
observed that CCAT2 transcript level is dependent on p53 expression and
activity, as evidenced by a marked increase in CCAT2 expression in p53
wild type harboring HCT-116 colon cancer cells compared with p53 null
HCT-116 and p53 mutant HT-29 cells. We further revealed that knockdown of
CCAT2 increased the expression of miR-145 and negatively regulates miR-21
in HCT-116 cells and impairs proliferation and differentiation of these
cells. On the other hand, upregulation of CCAT2 induces proliferation of
HCT-116 cells and also increases the expression of CSC markers CD44 and
CD166. We have also observed that miR-145 and miR-21 cooperation plays a
role in regulating colon cancer stem cells by down-regulating Sox2 and
increased activity of Wnt/-catenin pathway. Our current results suggest
that lncRNA CCAT2 cooperates with miR-145 and miR-21 to regulate colon
cancer stem cells, which provides a potential therapeutic target for
chemoresistance in colorectal cancer.

