Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HDAC6, new role as master regulator of PD-L1 and immune-related
pathways


Histone deacetylases (HDACs), originally described as histone modifiers,
have more recently been demonstrated to modify a variety of other
proteins involved in diverse cellular processes unrelated to the
chromatin environment, including the modulation of proteins related to
cell cycle/apoptosis and immune regulation. In contrast to the
well-documented effects of HDAC inhibitors (HDACi) in the control of cell
cycle and apoptosis, their role in immunobiology is still not completely
understood, and the reported immunological outcomes when using HDACi are
heterogeneous. Our group recently reported that the pharmacological or
genetic abrogation of a single HDAC, HDAC6, modulates the expression of
immuno-regulatory proteins, including PD-L1, PD-L2, MHC class I, B7-H4
and TRAIL-R1. We primarily focused in PD-L1, which is an important
negative regulator of T-cell function and often over-expressed in cancer
cells. In a mechanistic point of view, we have found that the
pharmacological inhibition and genetic abrogation of HDAC6 inactivates
the STAT3 pathway, impairs the nuclear translocation and the recruitment
of STAT3 to the PD-L1 promoter and subsequently down-regulates the
expression of PD-L1. Moreover, the in vivo abrogation of HDAC6 reduces
tumor growth in melanoma models, effect that is enhanced in the presence
of the immune check-point blocking antibodies anti-PD-1 and anti-CTLA4.
These results provide a key pre-clinical rationale and justification to
further study isotype selective HDAC6 inhibitors as potential
immunomodulatory agents in cancer.

