Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Obesity and associated lifestyles modify the effect of glucose
metabolism-related genetic variants on impaired glucose homeostasis among
postmenopausal women


Background: Impaired glucose metabolism-related genetic variants likely
interact with obesity-modifiable factors in response to glucose
intolerance, yet their interconnected pathways have not been fully
characterized. We assessed in postmenopausal women whether obesity,
physical activity, and high dietary fat intake interact with the
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs)-glucose variations.Methods: We
used data from 1,027 postmenopausal participants of the Genomics and
Randomized Trials Network study and 15 SNPs associated with glucose
homeostasis. We used regression analysis plus stratification and graphic
approaches.Results: Fasting levels of glucose, insulin, and homeostatic
model assessment-insulin resistance (HOMA-IR) were higher in obese,
inactive, and high fat-diet women than in their respective counterparts.
Carriers within subgroups differently demonstrated the direction and/or
magnitude of the variants effect on glucose-relevant traits. Variants in
GCKR, GCK, DGKB/TMEM195 (P for interactions = 0.02, 0.02, and 0.01),
especially, showed interactions with obesity: obese, inactive, and high
fat-diet women had greater increases in fasting glucose, insulin, and
HOMA-IR levels. Obese carriers at TCF7L2 variant had greater increases in
fasting glucose levels than non-obese carriers (P for interaction =
0.04), whereas active women had greater decreases in insulin and HOMA-IR
levels than inactive women (P for interaction = 0.02 in both
levels).Conclusions: Our data support the important role of obesity in
modifying glucose homeostasis in response to glucose metabolism-relevant
variants. These findings may inform research on the role of glucose
homeostasis in the etiology of disease, particularly obesity-related
cancer, and the development of intervention strategies to reduce risk in
postmenopausal women.

