Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comprehensive delineation of stromal proteins implicated in the
multistage carcinogenesis and identification of Tenascin-C as stromal
marker for metastasis of colon carcinoma


Colon carcinoma (CC) is one of the most common malignancies threatening
the human health. Early diagnosis or effective biomarker for intervention
is still a challenge in clinical application for CC. The stroma in human
cancer provides the microenvironment for cancer initiation and
development, and furthermore, the stroma has been regarded as a
therapeutic target for cancer. However, little is known about the
dynamics of proteins within the stroma during the carcinogenic process.
To discover the involvement of stroma in carcinogenesis and identify the
biomarker candidates, the stromal components at the various stages of
colonic carcinogenesis were purified by laser capture microdissection
(LCM) and iTRAQ-based quantitative proteomic analysis was used for
identifying the differentially expressed stromal proteins at different
stages. In total, 222 differentially expressed proteins were identified.
The expression of two of the top ranked proteins, extracellular matrix
protein TNC and S100 family protein S100A9, was further confirmed by
immunohistochemical analysis. Further analysis revealed that TNC was
highly expressed in the stroma of metastasis and also abundantly secreted
by the high metastatic cells. These results suggested that TNC was
potential stromal marker for metastasis of colon carcinoma. Our results
will contribute to investigating the role of stroma in the colonic
carcinogenesis and might provide clues for pathogenesis, early diagnosis,
and clinical therapy of CC.

