Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The anti-EGFR antibody mixture Sym004 overcomes acquired
resistance to cetuximab in colorectal cancer


The anti-EGFR monoclonal antibodies (MoAbs) cetuximab and panitumumab are
used to treat RAS wild type metastatic colorectal cancer (MCRC),
providing significant clinical benefit in patients. However, all patients
ultimately develop disease progression, driven by acquisition of
mutations in downstream effectors and in the extracellular domain (ECD)
of EGFR, in approximately 25% of the cases. Sym004 is a novel 1:1 mixture
of two non-overlapping anti-EGFR MoAbs that has recently shown promising
clinical activity in a phase I trial in MCRC. Our aim was to determine
the efficacy of Sym004 to circumvent cetuximab resistance driven by EGFR
ECD mutations. Functional studies were performed to assess drug-receptor
binding as well as ligand-dependent activation of individual EGFR mutants
in the presence of cetuximab, panitumumab and Sym004. Cell viability and
molecular effects of the drugs were assayed in cetuximab-resistant cell
lines and in tumor xenograft models. Efficacy of Sym004 was evaluated in
patients progressing to cetuximab that harbored an EGFR mutation in the
post-cetuximab tumor sample. Sym004 effectively bound and abrogated
ligand-induced phosphorylation of all individual EGFR mutants. Cells
resistant to cetuximab harboring EGFR ECD mutations maintained
sensitivity to Sym004, which was consistent with an effective suppression
of EGFR downstream signaling, translating into profound and sustained
tumor regression in the xenograft model. As a proof of principle, a
patient with a tumor harboring an EGFR mutation (G465R) following
cetuximab therapy benefited from Sym004 therapy. These data suggest that
Sym004 is an active drug in MCRC resistant to cetuximab/panitumumab
mediated by EGFR mutations. Overall, EGFR mutations are potential
biomarkers of response to Sym004 to be evaluated in ongoing large
clinical trials.

