Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular mechanisms orchestrating intratumoral heterogeneity in
Kras-driven carcinomas


The considerable variability within tissue microenvironments as well as
the multiclonality of cancers leads to intratumoral heterogeneity. This
increases the probablility of cellular states that promote resistance to
therapy and eventually lead to reconstitution of the tumor by
treatment-resistant cancer cells, which in some cases have properties of
normal tissue stem cells. Wnt signals are important in the maintenance of
stem cells in various epithelial tissues, including in lung development
and regeneration. We hypothesized that Wnt signals contribute to tumor
heterogeneity in genetically engineered KrasG12D; Tp53/ (KP) mouse lung
adenocarcinomas (LUAD). We observed that a subpopulation of LUAD cells
exhibited high Wnt reporter activity and had increased tumor forming
ability, which could be suppressed by silencing of Wnt signaling pathway
components or by small molecule Wnt inhibitors in vitro and in vivo. KP
LUAD cells show hierarchical features with two distinct populations, one
with increased Wnt reporter activity and another forming a niche that
provides the Wnt signal. Lineage-tracing experiments in the autochthonous
KP tumors demonstrated that Wnt responder cells have increased tumor
propagation ability in vivo. Strikingly, selective ablation of the Wnt
responder cells resulted in tumor stasis. CRISPR-based targeting or small
molecules targeting Wnt signaling reduced tumor growth and prolonged
survival in the autochthonous KP mouse lung cancer model. Interestingly,
we found that a similar Wnt-driven mechanism operates to establish an
intratumoral hierarchy also in other Kras-driven carcinomas. These
results indicate that maintenance of heterogeneity within tumors may be
advantageous for the tumor cell population collectively, which may be
utilized as a therapeutic target to homogenize cancer cell phenotypes
within tumors.

