Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Selinexor, a selective inhibitor of nuclear export (SINE),
enhances the in vivo efficacy of checkpoint blockade with antibodies
targeting CTLA4 or PD-1/PD-L1 in melanoma


Selinexor is a SINE (Selective Inhibitor of Nuclear Export) compound that
has been administered to >1000 cancer patients in Phase I and II trials
to date, with evidence of efficacy and tolerability. This small molecule
targets exportin-1 (XPO1), a key nuclear export protein with >200 cargo
proteins which include both tumor suppressors and cell cycle modulators.
As a result, selinexor blocks nuclear export of proteins including IB,
NFAT1c, STAT1 and STAT3, which regulate expression of the inhibitory T
cell receptors CTLA4, PD1 and its ligand, PD-L1. We hypothesized that
selinexor would upregulate T cell checkpoint molecule expression, and
thereby enhance the anti-tumor activity of antibodies targeting
PD-1/PD-L1 or CTLA4. Human (A375, CHL-1) and murine (B16F10) melanoma
cell lines expressed high levels of PD-L1 protein at baseline, and PD-L1
expression was induced following selinexor treatment in numerous other
tumor cell lines (including HCT-116, MDA-MB-468, MV-4-11, OVCAR-8, and
PC-3). Examination of lymphocytes revealed that selinexor also increased
expression of PD-1 and CTLA4 by 2-fold. Mice bearing syngeneic B16F10
melanoma tumors treated with selinexor (15 mg/kg 2 x weekly) and
anti-CTLA4 (250 g, 2 x weekly) demonstrated a significant reduction in
tumor growth rate (p = 0.0065) while monotherapy had no significant
effect on tumor growth. Similar results were obtained in mice bearing
B16F10 melanoma treated with the combination of selinexor + anti-PD-1
(200 g, 2 x weekly, p Selinexor is a SINE (Selective Inhibitor of Nuclear
Export) compound that has been administered to >1000 cancer patients in
Phase I and II trials to date, with evidence of efficacy and
tolerability. This small molecule targets exportin-1 (XPO1), a key
nuclear export protein with >200 cargo proteins which include both tumor
suppressors and cell cycle modulators. As a result, selinexor blocks
nuclear export of proteins including IB, NFAT1c, STAT1 and STAT3, which
regulate expression of the inhibitory T cell receptors CTLA4, PD1 and its
ligand, PD-L1. We hypothesized that selinexor would upregulate T cell
checkpoint molecule expression, and thereby enhance the anti-tumor
activity of antibodies targeting PD-1/PD-L1 or CTLA4. Human (A375, CHL-1)
and murine (B16F10) melanoma cell lines expressed high levels of PD-L1
protein at baseline, and PD-L1 expression was induced following selinexor
treatment in numerous other tumor cell lines (including HCT-116,
MDA-MB-468, MV-4-11, OVCAR-8, and PC-3). Examination of lymphocytes
revealed that selinexor also increased expression of PD-1 and CTLA4 by
2-fold. Mice bearing syngeneic B16F10 melanoma tumors treated with
selinexor (15 mg/kg 2 x weekly) and anti-CTLA4 (250 g, 2 x weekly)
demonstrated a significant reduction in tumor growth rate (p = 0.0065)
while monotherapy had no significant effect on tumor growth. Similar
results were obtained in mice bearing B16F10 melanoma treated with the
combination of selinexor + anti-PD-1 (200 g, 2 x weekly, p < 0.034) or
selinexor + anti-PD-L1 (100-200 g, 2 x weekly, p Selinexor is a SINE
(Selective Inhibitor of Nuclear Export) compound that has been
administered to >1000 cancer patients in Phase I and II trials to date,
with evidence of efficacy and tolerability. This small molecule targets
exportin-1 (XPO1), a key nuclear export protein with >200 cargo proteins
which include both tumor suppressors and cell cycle modulators. As a
result, selinexor blocks nuclear export of proteins including IB, NFAT1c,
STAT1 and STAT3, which regulate expression of the inhibitory T cell
receptors CTLA4, PD1 and its ligand, PD-L1. We hypothesized that
selinexor would upregulate T cell checkpoint molecule expression, and
thereby enhance the anti-tumor activity of antibodies targeting
PD-1/PD-L1 or CTLA4. Human (A375, CHL-1) and murine (B16F10) melanoma
cell lines expressed high levels of PD-L1 protein at baseline, and PD-L1
expression was induced following selinexor treatment in numerous other
tumor cell lines (including HCT-116, MDA-MB-468, MV-4-11, OVCAR-8, and
PC-3). Examination of lymphocytes revealed that selinexor also increased
expression of PD-1 and CTLA4 by 2-fold. Mice bearing syngeneic B16F10
melanoma tumors treated with selinexor (15 mg/kg 2 x weekly) and
anti-CTLA4 (250 g, 2 x weekly) demonstrated a significant reduction in
tumor growth rate (p = 0.0065) while monotherapy had no significant
effect on tumor growth. Similar results were obtained in mice bearing
B16F10 melanoma treated with the combination of selinexor + anti-PD-1
(200 g, 2 x weekly, p < 0.034) or selinexor + anti-PD-L1 (100-200 g, 2 x
weekly, p < 0.001). Importantly, no weight loss or signs of toxicity were
evident in any in vivo study. Further immunophenotypic analyses have been
completed in animals receiving selinexor alone or in combination with
anti-PD-L1. In combination treated mice, we observed a significantly
increased percentage of splenic NK cells (p 0.050), and a significantly
increased percentage of splenic Th1 T cells (p0.011), all compared to
vehicle treated mice. Interestingly, combining selinexor with anti-PD-L1
significantly decreased the percentage of splenocytes that expressed
PD-L1 (pSelinexor is a SINE (Selective Inhibitor of Nuclear Export)
compound that has been administered to >1000 cancer patients in Phase I
and II trials to date, with evidence of efficacy and tolerability. This
small molecule targets exportin-1 (XPO1), a key nuclear export protein
with >200 cargo proteins which include both tumor suppressors and cell
cycle modulators. As a result, selinexor blocks nuclear export of
proteins including IB, NFAT1c, STAT1 and STAT3, which regulate expression
of the inhibitory T cell receptors CTLA4, PD1 and its ligand, PD-L1. We
hypothesized that selinexor would upregulate T cell checkpoint molecule
expression, and thereby enhance the anti-tumor activity of antibodies
targeting PD-1/PD-L1 or CTLA4. Human (A375, CHL-1) and murine (B16F10)
melanoma cell lines expressed high levels of PD-L1 protein at baseline,
and PD-L1 expression was induced following selinexor treatment in
numerous other tumor cell lines (including HCT-116, MDA-MB-468, MV-4-11,
OVCAR-8, and PC-3). Examination of lymphocytes revealed that selinexor
also increased expression of PD-1 and CTLA4 by 2-fold. Mice bearing
syngeneic B16F10 melanoma tumors treated with selinexor (15 mg/kg 2 x
weekly) and anti-CTLA4 (250 g, 2 x weekly) demonstrated a significant
reduction in tumor growth rate (p = 0.0065) while monotherapy had no
significant effect on tumor growth. Similar results were obtained in mice
bearing B16F10 melanoma treated with the combination of selinexor +
anti-PD-1 (200 g, 2 x weekly, p < 0.034) or selinexor + anti-PD-L1
(100-200 g, 2 x weekly, p < 0.001). Importantly, no weight loss or signs
of toxicity were evident in any in vivo study. Further immunophenotypic
analyses have been completed in animals receiving selinexor alone or in
combination with anti-PD-L1. In combination treated mice, we observed a
significantly increased percentage of splenic NK cells (p 0.050), and a
significantly increased percentage of splenic Th1 T cells (p0.011), all
compared to vehicle treated mice. Interestingly, combining selinexor with
anti-PD-L1 significantly decreased the percentage of splenocytes that
expressed PD-L1 (p<0.001). These changes are indicative of increased
anti-tumor immune activity; however, they were accompanied by
significantly increased percentages of myeloid cell subsets in
combination treated mice (p 0.050). The immunologic significance of this
myeloid cell expansion is currently under investigation. These data
indicate that the efficacy of selinexor may be enhanced by disrupting
immune checkpoints in effector cells (T and NK cells). This provides data
in support of novel, evidenced-based combinations involving immunotherapy
with XPO1 inhibition that deserve further investigation for advanced
cancer.

