Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A signature of rejection in colorectal cancer: immune markers and
their epigenetic regulation


BackgroundThe immune system plays a pivotal role in the development and
progression of colorectal cancer (CRC). Tumor immune rejection has been
previously linked to activation of the interferon stimulated genes (ISG)
pathway including STAT1, IRF5 and IRF1. Here, we tested the associations
of ISG pathway genes with cytotoxic T cell (CTL) infiltration, granzymeB
and perforin secretion, tumor expression of intercellular adhesion
molecule 1 (ICAM-1), and clinicopathological factors. Further, we
investigated the poorly understood regulation of STAT1 and IRF1 by
miR-34a and miR-93 using sequential in situ hybridization (ISH)
/immunohistochemistry and digital image analysis.MethodsResection
specimens from 244 CRC patients with full clinicopathological data were
included in this study. ngTMA (next generation tissue microarray) slides
containing 8 punches of tumor and normal tissue from each case were
immunostained for proteins of interest. The expression of the miRNAs was
visualized on consecutive slides by ISH. Precise correlation analysis of
miRNA expression and the target proteins was performed using digital
image analysis.ResultsActive interferon signaling in the tumor
microenvironment negatively correlated with the presence of distant
metastasis (STAT1: p = 0.013, OR = 0.98, 95%CI = 0.96-0.99; IRF1: p =
0.014, OR = 0.96, 95%CI = 0.940.99; IRF5: p = 0.009, OR = 0.96, HR =
0.93-0.99). High miR-34a and miR-93 expression corresponded to a 22.5
fold decrease of STAT1 and IRF1 (p = 0.006, OR = 0.39, 95%CI = 0.20-0.77;
p = 0.058, OR: 0.48 95%CI = 0.231.02). Finally, a combined score was
generated from the three protein markers, representing an immune
activated and a quiescent phenotype. The activated phenotype was
associated with elevated CD8+ CTL infiltration (p = 0.007, HR = 2.07,
95%CI = 1.22-3.52), an increase in granzymeB (pBackgroundThe immune
system plays a pivotal role in the development and progression of
colorectal cancer (CRC). Tumor immune rejection has been previously
linked to activation of the interferon stimulated genes (ISG) pathway
including STAT1, IRF5 and IRF1. Here, we tested the associations of ISG
pathway genes with cytotoxic T cell (CTL) infiltration, granzymeB and
perforin secretion, tumor expression of intercellular adhesion molecule 1
(ICAM-1), and clinicopathological factors. Further, we investigated the
poorly understood regulation of STAT1 and IRF1 by miR-34a and miR-93
using sequential in situ hybridization (ISH) /immunohistochemistry and
digital image analysis.MethodsResection specimens from 244 CRC patients
with full clinicopathological data were included in this study. ngTMA
(next generation tissue microarray) slides containing 8 punches of tumor
and normal tissue from each case were immunostained for proteins of
interest. The expression of the miRNAs was visualized on consecutive
slides by ISH. Precise correlation analysis of miRNA expression and the
target proteins was performed using digital image analysis.ResultsActive
interferon signaling in the tumor microenvironment negatively correlated
with the presence of distant metastasis (STAT1: p = 0.013, OR = 0.98,
95%CI = 0.96-0.99; IRF1: p = 0.014, OR = 0.96, 95%CI = 0.940.99; IRF5: p
= 0.009, OR = 0.96, HR = 0.93-0.99). High miR-34a and miR-93 expression
corresponded to a 22.5 fold decrease of STAT1 and IRF1 (p = 0.006, OR =
0.39, 95%CI = 0.20-0.77; p = 0.058, OR: 0.48 95%CI = 0.231.02). Finally,
a combined score was generated from the three protein markers,
representing an immune activated and a quiescent phenotype. The activated
phenotype was associated with elevated CD8+ CTL infiltration (p = 0.007,
HR = 2.07, 95%CI = 1.22-3.52), an increase in granzymeB (p<0.001, HR =
3.22, 95%CI = 1.70-6.08), perforin (p = 0.020, OR = 1.90, 95%CI =
1.10-3.26) and ICAM-1 expression (p = 0.006, OR = 0.2.17, 95%CI =
1.263.85). Patients with immune activated CRC had a considerably reduced
risk of developing distant metastases (p = 0.001, OR = 0.034, 95%CI =
0.006-0.183).ConclusionHere, we describe a combined marker phenotype that
can help to differentiate between patients with an activated and
quiescent immune phenotype of CRC. The score is based on a quantitative
assessment of STAT1, IRF1 and IRF5 expression by digital image analysis.
Increased tumor infiltrating CTLs, granzymeB, perforin and tumor ICAM-1
expression, as well as a lower risk of distant metastases characterize
the immune activated phenotype. Targeted inhibition of miR34a and miR-93
may be a promising strategy to activate the anti-tumoral immune response
and will be validated in future experimental studies.

