Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Breast cancer stem cell culture and enrichment using
poly(-caprolactone) 3D scaffolds


Introduction: Cancer stem cell (CSC) population displays self-renewal
capabilities, resistance to conventional therapies and a tendency for
post-treatment recurrence. Increasing knowledge about CSCs phenotype and
functions is needed to investigate new therapeutic strategies against CSC
population. Poly(-CaproLactone) (PCL) as biocompatible and free toxic dye
polymer, have been used to manufacture scaffolds, solid structures
suitable for 3D cancer cell culture. It has been described that scaffold
cell culture enhances the CSCs population.Experimental procedures: A
RepRap BCN3D+ printer and 3.5 mm PCL wire were used to fabricate circular
scaffolds. PCL design and fabrication parameters were first determined
and then optimized considering several product features of the resulting
scaffolds. MCF7 breast carcinoma cell line was used to assess scaffolds
adequacy for 3D cell culture. To evaluate CSC enrichment the Mammosphere
Forming Index (MFI) was performed in 2D and 3D MCF7 cultures.Summary of
the new, unpublished data: Results shown that the 60 scaffolds were more
suitable for 3D culture than the 45 and 90 ones. Moreover, 3D culture
experiments both, in adherent and non-adherent conditions, showed a
significant increase on MFI compared to 2D cultures (control). Thus, 3D
cell culture with PCL scaffolds could be useful to improve cancer cell
culture and to enrich the CSCs population. Basically cells population
growth with a 3D culture better and higher in value as it is demonstrated
within the work.Conclusions: Thus, 3D cell culture with PCL scaffolds
could be useful to improve cancer cell culture and to enrich the CSCs
population for further pre-clinical studies on CSC molecular
characterization and treatment.

