Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PTEN expression, cholesterol metabolism, and lethal prostate cancer


BACKGROUND: We previously showed that mRNA expression of squalene
monooxygenase (SQLE), part of the cholesterol synthesis pathway, is
associated with lethal prostate cancer. In-vitro studies suggest that
loss of PTEN expression and resulting PI3K pathway activation drive
cholesterol ester accumulation in aggressive prostate cancers through
sterol regulatory element-binding protein (SREBP) and acyl coenzyme
A-cholesterol acyltransferase (ACAT1) activity. In two prospective
cohorts, we studied whether lower PTEN expression is associated with
cholesterol metabolism and how this relates to lethal prostate
cancer.METHODS: We analyzed men with prostate cancer from the prospective
prostatectomy Health Professionals Follow-up Study and Physicians Health
Study. 105 men had lethal cancer and 284 men non-lethal disease without
metastases at 8 years of follow-up. Whole-transcriptome mRNA expression
profiling data was available from diagnostic prostate tumor specimens.
Linear regression models were used to assess continuous and categorical
associations, and Pearson correlation coefficients were calculated.
Logistic regression was used to obtain odds ratios (ORs) and 95%
confidence intervals (CIs) of lethal prostate cancer.RESULTS: Both lower
PTEN and higher SQLE expression were associated with higher Gleason grade
(p trend BACKGROUND: We previously showed that mRNA expression of
squalene monooxygenase (SQLE), part of the cholesterol synthesis pathway,
is associated with lethal prostate cancer. In-vitro studies suggest that
loss of PTEN expression and resulting PI3K pathway activation drive
cholesterol ester accumulation in aggressive prostate cancers through
sterol regulatory element-binding protein (SREBP) and acyl coenzyme
A-cholesterol acyltransferase (ACAT1) activity. In two prospective
cohorts, we studied whether lower PTEN expression is associated with
cholesterol metabolism and how this relates to lethal prostate
cancer.METHODS: We analyzed men with prostate cancer from the prospective
prostatectomy Health Professionals Follow-up Study and Physicians Health
Study. 105 men had lethal cancer and 284 men non-lethal disease without
metastases at 8 years of follow-up. Whole-transcriptome mRNA expression
profiling data was available from diagnostic prostate tumor specimens.
Linear regression models were used to assess continuous and categorical
associations, and Pearson correlation coefficients were calculated.
Logistic regression was used to obtain odds ratios (ORs) and 95%
confidence intervals (CIs) of lethal prostate cancer.RESULTS: Both lower
PTEN and higher SQLE expression were associated with higher Gleason grade
(p trend < 0.001 each). Correlations of PTEN with SREBF1 (r = -0.08, p =
0.1), SREBF2 (r = -0.09, p = 0.07), and ACAT1 (r = 0.04, p = 0.4) were
weak. SREBF2 was correlated with SQLE (r = 0.33, p BACKGROUND: We
previously showed that mRNA expression of squalene monooxygenase (SQLE),
part of the cholesterol synthesis pathway, is associated with lethal
prostate cancer. In-vitro studies suggest that loss of PTEN expression
and resulting PI3K pathway activation drive cholesterol ester
accumulation in aggressive prostate cancers through sterol regulatory
element-binding protein (SREBP) and acyl coenzyme A-cholesterol
acyltransferase (ACAT1) activity. In two prospective cohorts, we studied
whether lower PTEN expression is associated with cholesterol metabolism
and how this relates to lethal prostate cancer.METHODS: We analyzed men
with prostate cancer from the prospective prostatectomy Health
Professionals Follow-up Study and Physicians Health Study. 105 men had
lethal cancer and 284 men non-lethal disease without metastases at 8
years of follow-up. Whole-transcriptome mRNA expression profiling data
was available from diagnostic prostate tumor specimens. Linear regression
models were used to assess continuous and categorical associations, and
Pearson correlation coefficients were calculated. Logistic regression was
used to obtain odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) of
lethal prostate cancer.RESULTS: Both lower PTEN and higher SQLE
expression were associated with higher Gleason grade (p trend < 0.001
each). Correlations of PTEN with SREBF1 (r = -0.08, p = 0.1), SREBF2 (r =
-0.09, p = 0.07), and ACAT1 (r = 0.04, p = 0.4) were weak. SREBF2 was
correlated with SQLE (r = 0.33, p < 0.001) but not with ACAT1 (r = -0.01,
p = 0.8). Low PTEN was associated with lethal cancer (OR, 1.50 per 1
standard deviation [SD] decrease; 95% CI, 1.20 to 1.87; p = 0.001). High
SQLE was associated with lethal cancer (OR 2.13 per 1 SD increase, 95%
CI, 1.63 to 2.79; p 0.05). Adjusting for PTEN mildly attenuated the
association of SQLE with lethal cancer (OR, 2.07; 95% CI, 1.57 to 2.73),
as did additional adjustment for age, Gleason grade, and stage (SQLE: OR,
1.75; 95% CI, 1.29 to 2.40). In the lowest quartile of PTEN expression,
SQLE was less strongly associated with lethal cancer (OR 1.74; 95% CI,
1.20 to 2.52) compared to the upper three quartiles (OR 2.47; 95% CI,
1.69 to 3.60; p interaction = 0.2).CONCLUSION: Low PTEN mRNA expression
and high SQLE are features of aggressive prostate cancers. However, at
the time of prostatectomy, SREBF1/2 expression and resulting ACAT1
expression do not appear to be major characteristics of prostate cancers
with lethal outcomes.

