Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Associations of immune-related conditions with squamous cell and
basal cell skin cancer risk


Elevated risk of squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) and basal cell carcinoma
(BCC) of the skin has been identified in a number of clinical populations
with conditions affecting the immune system, such as organ transplant
recipients and non-Hodgkin lymphoma patients. However, because many other
immune-related conditions are rare, their relationships with SCC and BCC
have not been studied. We used Medicare claims to identify SCC and BCC
cases in 2012 and to select controls in 2012 matched on sex and age with
a 10:1 ratio. All subjects were of white race. For cases and controls, we
used Medicare claims during 1999-2011 to identify 44 immune-related
conditions (immunosuppressive conditions, autoimmune diseases,
hematologic malignancies, and allergic diseases). The statistical
significance of associations was determined after Bonferroni correction
for multiple comparisons. In Medicare in 2012, there were a total of
470,756 SCC and 601,863 BCC cases. Of the 44 immune-related conditions
included, SCC was associated with 41 (93%) and BCC was associated with 31
(70%). For most conditions, SCC was more strongly associated than BCC. We
identified significant associations of SCC and BCC risk with
well-characterized conditions, such as HIV, rheumatoid arthritis, and
allergic rhinitis (SCC odds ratios (ORs) of 1.64, 1.29, and 1.29,
respectively; BCC ORs of 1.60, 1.10, and 1.22; Table), as well as with
poorly characterized or rare conditions, such as deficiency of
cell-mediated immunity and polyarteritis nodosa (SCC ORs of 2.87 and
1.92; BCC ORs of 1.55 and 1.49). In conclusion, most immune-related
conditions in our study indicated an elevated risk of non-melanoma skin
cancer, particularly SCC. These findings provide evidence that immune
dysfunction, as manifest across a wide range of conditions, may play an
important role in development of SCC and BCC. Possible mechanisms could
include direct effects of immune-related conditions or their treatments.
*Associations were statistically significant at a Bonferroni adjusted
alpha level of 0.000568 ( = 0.05/88 statistical tests).Results from a
sample of the immune-related conditions assessed

