Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A multi-layered, hydrogel system for automated 3D high throughput
drug screening of cancer-stromal cell co-cultures


Pre-clinical drug screens, involving culturing well-annotated cancer cell
lines on two-dimensional (2D) tissue culture plastic, poorly recapitulate
in vivo tumor characteristics and yield candidate drugs which fail
clinical trials. We created a multi-layer, hyaluronic acid (HA)-based
hydrogel system that incorporates three layers: an acellular cushion
layer; an encapsulated cancer cell layer for growth in three dimensions
(3D); and a collagen-containing layer that supports the growth of stromal
cells on top of the hydrogel (2.5D). Utilizing high-throughput robotic
delivery coupled with automated advanced imaging, this formulation
provides a highly reproducible system for spheroid culture of prostate
(C4-2B) or endometrial (Ishikawa) cancer cell lines in mono- or
co-culture with matched stromal cells (HS27a or ESS-1, respectively).
Both culture systems provided high cancer cell viability over one week of
culture. Cells were treated with drugs from a panel of chemotherapeutic
compounds. Cells cultured in our 3D multi-layer HA-based system responded
to cytotoxic drugs distinctly from cells grown in 2D and 3D-aliginate,
and better predicted the efficacy of chemotherapeutics in clinical
trials. We have also successfully incorporated cells derived from patient
derived xenograft (PDX) models in our 3D culture system. Wider adoption
of 3D automated screening has the potential to speed drug discovery and
increase success of drugs in clinical trials.

