Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The hostile microenvironment developed in 3D culture conditions
induces Trastuzumab resistance involving cancer stem cells


HER2 is overexpressed in 20% invasive breast tumors and correlates with
low free disease survival. Trastuzumab (Tz), monoclonal antibody anti
HER2, is used to treat HER2+ tumors; however more than half of the
patients are resistant or acquire resistance during treatment.
Multicellular tumor spheroids are a 3D cell growth model that mimics the
structure of in vivo avascular tumors, with heterogenic cell
subpopulations developed due to differential oxygen and nutrient supply
through the spheroid. We have previously demonstrated that HER2+ cells
cultured as spheroids are more resistant to Tz than monolayers. We also
observed that in spheroids Tz inhibited basal apoptosis and was capable
of inducing autophagy, leading to Tz resistance. In addition, cancer stem
cells (CSC), widely associated with chemotherapy resistance, were
specifically targeted by Tz.The aim of this study was to analyze the
resistance acquired in 3D and the impact of the CSC developed in these
conditions.Since Tz-treated BT474 (HER2+) spheroids overexpressed the
autophagy marker LC3, correlating with resistance to the treatment, we
first evaluated these cells viability after autophagy inhibition with
3MA. We found that these resistant cells became susceptible to Tz after
autophagy inhibition, decreasing viability by 33% (pHER2 is overexpressed
in 20% invasive breast tumors and correlates with low free disease
survival. Trastuzumab (Tz), monoclonal antibody anti HER2, is used to
treat HER2+ tumors; however more than half of the patients are resistant
or acquire resistance during treatment. Multicellular tumor spheroids are
a 3D cell growth model that mimics the structure of in vivo avascular
tumors, with heterogenic cell subpopulations developed due to
differential oxygen and nutrient supply through the spheroid. We have
previously demonstrated that HER2+ cells cultured as spheroids are more
resistant to Tz than monolayers. We also observed that in spheroids Tz
inhibited basal apoptosis and was capable of inducing autophagy, leading
to Tz resistance. In addition, cancer stem cells (CSC), widely associated
with chemotherapy resistance, were specifically targeted by Tz.The aim of
this study was to analyze the resistance acquired in 3D and the impact of
the CSC developed in these conditions.Since Tz-treated BT474 (HER2+)
spheroids overexpressed the autophagy marker LC3, correlating with
resistance to the treatment, we first evaluated these cells viability
after autophagy inhibition with 3MA. We found that these resistant cells
became susceptible to Tz after autophagy inhibition, decreasing viability
by 33% (p<0.05). In an attempt to recreate the hostile microenvironment
developed in 3D, we treated BT474 cells with CoCl2 to induce a pseudo
hypoxia state, similar to that found on the inner core of spheroids. In
these conditions, cells were resistant to Tz treatment and interestingly,
when we inhibited autophagy, we also re-sensitize these cells to Tz,
being indistinguishable from controls.To further study this 3D-induced
resistance, we analyzed the CSCs subpopulation in spheroids, studying the
CD44+CD24low cell phenotype by flow cytometry. We found that 15 days Tz
treatment increased CD44+CD24low subpopulation by 1.5 fold compared to
controls (pHER2 is overexpressed in 20% invasive breast tumors and
correlates with low free disease survival. Trastuzumab (Tz), monoclonal
antibody anti HER2, is used to treat HER2+ tumors; however more than half
of the patients are resistant or acquire resistance during treatment.
Multicellular tumor spheroids are a 3D cell growth model that mimics the
structure of in vivo avascular tumors, with heterogenic cell
subpopulations developed due to differential oxygen and nutrient supply
through the spheroid. We have previously demonstrated that HER2+ cells
cultured as spheroids are more resistant to Tz than monolayers. We also
observed that in spheroids Tz inhibited basal apoptosis and was capable
of inducing autophagy, leading to Tz resistance. In addition, cancer stem
cells (CSC), widely associated with chemotherapy resistance, were
specifically targeted by Tz.The aim of this study was to analyze the
resistance acquired in 3D and the impact of the CSC developed in these
conditions.Since Tz-treated BT474 (HER2+) spheroids overexpressed the
autophagy marker LC3, correlating with resistance to the treatment, we
first evaluated these cells viability after autophagy inhibition with
3MA. We found that these resistant cells became susceptible to Tz after
autophagy inhibition, decreasing viability by 33% (p<0.05). In an attempt
to recreate the hostile microenvironment developed in 3D, we treated
BT474 cells with CoCl2 to induce a pseudo hypoxia state, similar to that
found on the inner core of spheroids. In these conditions, cells were
resistant to Tz treatment and interestingly, when we inhibited autophagy,
we also re-sensitize these cells to Tz, being indistinguishable from
controls.To further study this 3D-induced resistance, we analyzed the
CSCs subpopulation in spheroids, studying the CD44+CD24low cell phenotype
by flow cytometry. We found that 15 days Tz treatment increased
CD44+CD24low subpopulation by 1.5 fold compared to controls (p<0.05).Then
we analyzed HER2 expression in the spheroids and found 2 populations,
HER2high and HER2low (37% vs 63%, respectively pHER2 is overexpressed in
20% invasive breast tumors and correlates with low free disease survival.
Trastuzumab (Tz), monoclonal antibody anti HER2, is used to treat HER2+
tumors; however more than half of the patients are resistant or acquire
resistance during treatment. Multicellular tumor spheroids are a 3D cell
growth model that mimics the structure of in vivo avascular tumors, with
heterogenic cell subpopulations developed due to differential oxygen and
nutrient supply through the spheroid. We have previously demonstrated
that HER2+ cells cultured as spheroids are more resistant to Tz than
monolayers. We also observed that in spheroids Tz inhibited basal
apoptosis and was capable of inducing autophagy, leading to Tz
resistance. In addition, cancer stem cells (CSC), widely associated with
chemotherapy resistance, were specifically targeted by Tz.The aim of this
study was to analyze the resistance acquired in 3D and the impact of the
CSC developed in these conditions.Since Tz-treated BT474 (HER2+)
spheroids overexpressed the autophagy marker LC3, correlating with
resistance to the treatment, we first evaluated these cells viability
after autophagy inhibition with 3MA. We found that these resistant cells
became susceptible to Tz after autophagy inhibition, decreasing viability
by 33% (p<0.05). In an attempt to recreate the hostile microenvironment
developed in 3D, we treated BT474 cells with CoCl2 to induce a pseudo
hypoxia state, similar to that found on the inner core of spheroids. In
these conditions, cells were resistant to Tz treatment and interestingly,
when we inhibited autophagy, we also re-sensitize these cells to Tz,
being indistinguishable from controls.To further study this 3D-induced
resistance, we analyzed the CSCs subpopulation in spheroids, studying the
CD44+CD24low cell phenotype by flow cytometry. We found that 15 days Tz
treatment increased CD44+CD24low subpopulation by 1.5 fold compared to
controls (p<0.05).Then we analyzed HER2 expression in the spheroids and
found 2 populations, HER2high and HER2low (37% vs 63%, respectively
p<0.05). Interestingly, after 15 days Tz treatment, HER2high
subpopulation increased to 50%.Thus, we decided to study the 3D
architecture in MCF7 cells, with no HER2 amplification and unresponsive
to Tz inhibition. We analyzed HER2 by flow cytometry, observing HER2low
expression in 82% of the cells that was reduced to 61% in Tz treated
spheroids (pHER2 is overexpressed in 20% invasive breast tumors and
correlates with low free disease survival. Trastuzumab (Tz), monoclonal
antibody anti HER2, is used to treat HER2+ tumors; however more than half
of the patients are resistant or acquire resistance during treatment.
Multicellular tumor spheroids are a 3D cell growth model that mimics the
structure of in vivo avascular tumors, with heterogenic cell
subpopulations developed due to differential oxygen and nutrient supply
through the spheroid. We have previously demonstrated that HER2+ cells
cultured as spheroids are more resistant to Tz than monolayers. We also
observed that in spheroids Tz inhibited basal apoptosis and was capable
of inducing autophagy, leading to Tz resistance. In addition, cancer stem
cells (CSC), widely associated with chemotherapy resistance, were
specifically targeted by Tz.The aim of this study was to analyze the
resistance acquired in 3D and the impact of the CSC developed in these
conditions.Since Tz-treated BT474 (HER2+) spheroids overexpressed the
autophagy marker LC3, correlating with resistance to the treatment, we
first evaluated these cells viability after autophagy inhibition with
3MA. We found that these resistant cells became susceptible to Tz after
autophagy inhibition, decreasing viability by 33% (p<0.05). In an attempt
to recreate the hostile microenvironment developed in 3D, we treated
BT474 cells with CoCl2 to induce a pseudo hypoxia state, similar to that
found on the inner core of spheroids. In these conditions, cells were
resistant to Tz treatment and interestingly, when we inhibited autophagy,
we also re-sensitize these cells to Tz, being indistinguishable from
controls.To further study this 3D-induced resistance, we analyzed the
CSCs subpopulation in spheroids, studying the CD44+CD24low cell phenotype
by flow cytometry. We found that 15 days Tz treatment increased
CD44+CD24low subpopulation by 1.5 fold compared to controls (p<0.05).Then
we analyzed HER2 expression in the spheroids and found 2 populations,
HER2high and HER2low (37% vs 63%, respectively p<0.05). Interestingly,
after 15 days Tz treatment, HER2high subpopulation increased to 50%.Thus,
we decided to study the 3D architecture in MCF7 cells, with no HER2
amplification and unresponsive to Tz inhibition. We analyzed HER2 by flow
cytometry, observing HER2low expression in 82% of the cells that was
reduced to 61% in Tz treated spheroids (p<0.05). Despite unresponsiveness
of MCF7 cells to Tz as bulk spheroid, we detected a 30% reduction in the
CD44+CD24low subpopulation after treatment.In conclusion, the hostile
microenvironment in 3D has a key role in the development of resistance to
Tz and could be overcome by autophagy inhibition. These conditions could
favor an increase of CSCs unresponsive to Tz despite HER2 expression.
Moreover, MCF7 results suggest that Tz is able to target CSCs developed
in 3D.

