Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genomic profiling of salivary gland tumors identifies novel and
targetable alterations


BackgroundSalivary gland neoplasms represent a heterogeneous group of
benign and malignant tumors that comprise 6% of all head and neck
cancers. Due to their low incidence, these tumors are poorly understood
and remain a diagnostic and therapeutic challenge.MethodsOut of 182
analyzed salivary gland tumors with various histologies, eight were
positive for ALK immunohistochemistry. The cut-off was 15% positive cells
in either membranous, nuclear or cytoplasmic compartments. The ALK
positive tumors were first subjected to FISH analysis. Subsequently,
these tumors were analyzed using hybrid capture based next generation
sequencing to confirm possible ALK gene fusions or copy number
alterations, and to detect additional genomic alterations of clinical
relevance.ResultsAn in-depth genomic analysis of the samples resulted in
the detection of inactivating mutations in BRAF (p.D594N) and TP53
(p.C238S), as well as amplifications of ERBB2 and ALK. Strikingly, a
novel MYO18A (Exon1-40)-ALK (exon 20-29) gene fusion was detected in a
patient with adenocarcinoma not otherwise specified. This tumor was FISH
positive and 100% of cells showed strong membranous staining for ALK.
MYO18A (Exon1-40)-ALK (exon 20-29) gene fusion resulted in the retention
of the kinase domain of ALK and the coiled-coil domain of MYO18A.
Similarly to other ALK fusions, we hypothesize that the coiled-coil
domain of MYO18A mediates the dimerization and activation of MYO18A-ALK,
thereby resulting in an overexpression of constantly activated
ALK.ConclusionUsing hybrid capture based next generation sequencing, we
identified in salivary gland tumors numerous genomic alterations in
therapeutically relevant genes and a novel gene fusion (MYO18A-ALK).
Patients harboring this fusion may potentially benefit from treatment
with ALK inhibitors.

