Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Abnormal intracytoplasmic accumulation of autophagy-related
protein p62/SQSTM1 characterizes giant cells of giant cell tumor of bone


BackgroundGiant cell tumors of bone (GCTs) are locally aggressive
neoplasms composed of osteoclast-like giant cells and mononuclear cells.
Mononuclear cells are accepted as true neoplastic elements, while
osteoclast-like giant cells are non-neoplastic. However, close
interaction between two cellular populations is indispensable for tumor
formation. Large giant cells with hypermultinucleation of GCT are
distinct from normal osteoclasts; however, their abnormality has not yet
been sufficiently investigated. Recently, a germline mutation of the gene
encoding autophagy-related protein p62/SQSTM1 was reported in Paget
disease of bone, which implicates a role of autophagy in the
differentiation and function of osteoclasts. In order to understand the
relationship between autophagy and osteoclastogenesis in giant cell
lesions, we studied clinical samples of GCTs and related tumors for
immunoexpression of p62 (an autophagy flux marker), LC3 (an autophagosome
marker), and Cathepsin K (a known osteoclastic
marker).DesignFormalin-fixed paraffin-embedded specimens of 46 GCTs, 17
chondroblastomas (CBLs), 3 giant cell reparative granulomata (GRGs), 3
chondromyxoid fibromas (CMFs) and one each of aneurysmal bone cyst (ABC)
and brown tumor (BRT) were retrieved. Immunohistochemistry was performed
by using antibodies against p62, LC3, and Cathepsin K. Results were
scored as 3+ (strongly positive in 50% of cells), 1+ (weakly positive in
BackgroundGiant cell tumors of bone (GCTs) are locally aggressive
neoplasms composed of osteoclast-like giant cells and mononuclear cells.
Mononuclear cells are accepted as true neoplastic elements, while
osteoclast-like giant cells are non-neoplastic. However, close
interaction between two cellular populations is indispensable for tumor
formation. Large giant cells with hypermultinucleation of GCT are
distinct from normal osteoclasts; however, their abnormality has not yet
been sufficiently investigated. Recently, a germline mutation of the gene
encoding autophagy-related protein p62/SQSTM1 was reported in Paget
disease of bone, which implicates a role of autophagy in the
differentiation and function of osteoclasts. In order to understand the
relationship between autophagy and osteoclastogenesis in giant cell
lesions, we studied clinical samples of GCTs and related tumors for
immunoexpression of p62 (an autophagy flux marker), LC3 (an autophagosome
marker), and Cathepsin K (a known osteoclastic
marker).DesignFormalin-fixed paraffin-embedded specimens of 46 GCTs, 17
chondroblastomas (CBLs), 3 giant cell reparative granulomata (GRGs), 3
chondromyxoid fibromas (CMFs) and one each of aneurysmal bone cyst (ABC)
and brown tumor (BRT) were retrieved. Immunohistochemistry was performed
by using antibodies against p62, LC3, and Cathepsin K. Results were
scored as 3+ (strongly positive in 50% of cells), 1+ (weakly positive in
<10% of cells), 2+ (intermediate between 1+ and 2+), or 0 (negative).
Giant cells and mononuclear cells were separately evaluated for nuclear
and cytoplasmic staining.ResultsFor giant cells, p62 was positive in a
dot-like manner in all tumor types. Strong (3+) staining was found in
nuclei and/or cytoplasms in GCTs (27/46, 59%), CBLs (14/17, 82%), GRGs
(2/3, 67%), and other lesions (5/5, 100%). In addition, abnormal
intracytoplasmic coarse aggregates were specifically noted in GCTs
(21/46, 46%) and CBLs (3/17, 18%). In contrast, mononuclear cells showed
a lower prevalence of 3+ p62 positivity in GCTs (2/46, 4%), CBLs (5/17,
29%), and an ABC (1/1), where positive cells were only presumable
osteoclastic precursor cells around giant cells. LC3 showed a limited
cytoplasmic 3+ positivity in giant cells of GCTs (6/46, 13%), CBLs (7/17,
41%), CMFs (1/3, 33%), and BRT (1/1). Cytoplasmic staining of Cathepsin K
was constantly observed in giant cells.ConclusionAbnormal
intracytoplasmic accumulation of p62 in a form of coarse staining
aggregate characterizes giant cells of GCTs and CBLs. This finding may be
a potential diagnostic marker for distinguishing GCTs and CBLs from other
giant cell lesions. The presence of these p62 aggregates and low LC3
expression may indicate disturbance of autophagy-driven protein
clearance. As p62 immunostain recognizes a wider osteoclastic population
than Cathepsin K, p62 may be involved in abnormal osteoclastogenesis.

