Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cancer protection associated with dietary methyl donor deficiency
is characterized by persistent changes to epithelial proliferation and
metabolism


The role of folate one-carbon metabolism in colorectal cancer development
is incompletely understood, and nutritional intervention studies have
produced conflicting results. We previously demonstrated that a diet
deficient in the methyl donors folic acid, methionine, choline and
vitamin B12, and supplemented with homocysteine, reduces intestinal tumor
incidence by greater than 95% in ApcMin/+ mice. Here we extend these
findings to a second mouse tumor model, Apc14, and further show that the
cancer protection afforded by even short-term dietary methyl donor
deficiency (MDD) is long-lasting. Eleven weeks of MDD followed by methyl
donor repletion was sufficient to maintain tumor suppression for at least
7 additional weeks (22.2 3.5 vs 70.2 4.6 intestinal tumors; p The role of
folate one-carbon metabolism in colorectal cancer development is
incompletely understood, and nutritional intervention studies have
produced conflicting results. We previously demonstrated that a diet
deficient in the methyl donors folic acid, methionine, choline and
vitamin B12, and supplemented with homocysteine, reduces intestinal tumor
incidence by greater than 95% in ApcMin/+ mice. Here we extend these
findings to a second mouse tumor model, Apc14, and further show that the
cancer protection afforded by even short-term dietary methyl donor
deficiency (MDD) is long-lasting. Eleven weeks of MDD followed by methyl
donor repletion was sufficient to maintain tumor suppression for at least
7 additional weeks (22.2 3.5 vs 70.2 4.6 intestinal tumors; p < 0.001).
Sustained tumor protection was associated with altered intestinal crypt
homeostasis. MDD increased the proportion of intestinal epithelial cells
undergoing apoptosis in normal crypts and in tumors (4.9- and 3.2-fold,
respectively), while reducing cell proliferation (Ki-67) and mitosis
(PHH3). In addition, metabolomic profiling and metabolite set enrichment
analysis (MSEA) revealed that tumor protection is associated with
persistent alterations to metabolic pathways related to cellular
proliferation, including glutamine metabolism, biogenic amine synthesis,
nucleotide salvage and glutathione synthesis. Taken together, these
results indicate that even a temporary dietary methyl donor restriction
in cancer-prone mice can induce persistent changes to the intestinal
epithelium that provide long-lasting protection in adult mice.

