Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Upregulation of DLEU1 significantly prolongs survival in a
rituximab-treated DLEU1 knockout human Burkitt lymphoma (BL) xenograft
NSG mouse model: DLEU1 may act as a tumor suppressor gene in pediatric BL


BACKGROUND:Burkitt lymphoma (BL) is the most common histological subtype
of non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) in children and adolescents (Cairo et al.,
Blood 2007; Miles/Cairo., BJHaem 2012). We identified that pediatric BL
patients with chromosome 13q deletion, particularly 13q14.3, had
significantly poorer outcome and inferior overall survival despite
aggressive short, intensive multi-agent chemotherapy (Poirel/Cairo et
al., Leuk 2009; Nelson/Cairo/Sanger et al., BJH 2009). Deleted in
lymphocytic leukemia 1 (DLEU1) is a BL classifier gene in the 13q14.3
region (Dave et al., NEJM 2006) and interacts with C-MYC, TUBB2C and UBR1
(Stelzl et al., Cell 2005). We have previously reported a regulated DLEU1
expression significantly associated with changes in BL proliferation in
vitro (Lee/Cairo et al., AACR 2015). We hypothesize that DLEU1 may have
function as a tumor suppressor gene; however, functions and mechanisms
underlying DLEU1 expression in the BL are poorly understood.OBJECTIVES:We
hypothesize that DLEU1 may act as a tumor suppressor gene in BL and
therefore examined whether up-regulation of DLEU1 results in changes in
survival following targeted immunotherapy.METHODS:DLEU1 stably
overexpressing Raji BL cells (Lee/Cairo et al., ASH 2013) were
transfected with a firefly luciferase expression plasmid, kindly provided
by Laurence Cooper MD, PhD. Four- to six- week-old female NSG
(NOD.Cg-Prkdcscid Il2rgtm1Wjl/SzJ) mice from The Jackson Lab. Tumor
burden and tumor progression were monitored by bioluminescence imaging
system. Mice were treated with either rituximab (30 mg/kg) or
cyclophosphamide (25 mg/kg) by intraperitoneal injection at 7 day
intervals. Survival rates were analyzed by the Kaplan-Meier method using
the Prism Version 6.0 software.RESULTS:We observed that DLEU1 stably
overexpressing Raji BL cells xenografted (GFP-DLEU1) mice had
significantly extended survival compared to GFP control mice following
treatment rituximab (59 vs 51 days, pBACKGROUND:Burkitt lymphoma (BL) is
the most common histological subtype of non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) in
children and adolescents (Cairo et al., Blood 2007; Miles/Cairo., BJHaem
2012). We identified that pediatric BL patients with chromosome 13q
deletion, particularly 13q14.3, had significantly poorer outcome and
inferior overall survival despite aggressive short, intensive multi-agent
chemotherapy (Poirel/Cairo et al., Leuk 2009; Nelson/Cairo/Sanger et al.,
BJH 2009). Deleted in lymphocytic leukemia 1 (DLEU1) is a BL classifier
gene in the 13q14.3 region (Dave et al., NEJM 2006) and interacts with
C-MYC, TUBB2C and UBR1 (Stelzl et al., Cell 2005). We have previously
reported a regulated DLEU1 expression significantly associated with
changes in BL proliferation in vitro (Lee/Cairo et al., AACR 2015). We
hypothesize that DLEU1 may have function as a tumor suppressor gene;
however, functions and mechanisms underlying DLEU1 expression in the BL
are poorly understood.OBJECTIVES:We hypothesize that DLEU1 may act as a
tumor suppressor gene in BL and therefore examined whether up-regulation
of DLEU1 results in changes in survival following targeted
immunotherapy.METHODS:DLEU1 stably overexpressing Raji BL cells
(Lee/Cairo et al., ASH 2013) were transfected with a firefly luciferase
expression plasmid, kindly provided by Laurence Cooper MD, PhD. Four- to
six- week-old female NSG (NOD.Cg-Prkdcscid Il2rgtm1Wjl/SzJ) mice from The
Jackson Lab. Tumor burden and tumor progression were monitored by
bioluminescence imaging system. Mice were treated with either rituximab
(30 mg/kg) or cyclophosphamide (25 mg/kg) by intraperitoneal injection at
7 day intervals. Survival rates were analyzed by the Kaplan-Meier method
using the Prism Version 6.0 software.RESULTS:We observed that DLEU1
stably overexpressing Raji BL cells xenografted (GFP-DLEU1) mice had
significantly extended survival compared to GFP control mice following
treatment rituximab (59 vs 51 days, p<0.05, n = 8), cyclophosphamide
(50.5 vs 37.5 days, pBACKGROUND:Burkitt lymphoma (BL) is the most common
histological subtype of non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) in children and
adolescents (Cairo et al., Blood 2007; Miles/Cairo., BJHaem 2012). We
identified that pediatric BL patients with chromosome 13q deletion,
particularly 13q14.3, had significantly poorer outcome and inferior
overall survival despite aggressive short, intensive multi-agent
chemotherapy (Poirel/Cairo et al., Leuk 2009; Nelson/Cairo/Sanger et al.,
BJH 2009). Deleted in lymphocytic leukemia 1 (DLEU1) is a BL classifier
gene in the 13q14.3 region (Dave et al., NEJM 2006) and interacts with
C-MYC, TUBB2C and UBR1 (Stelzl et al., Cell 2005). We have previously
reported a regulated DLEU1 expression significantly associated with
changes in BL proliferation in vitro (Lee/Cairo et al., AACR 2015). We
hypothesize that DLEU1 may have function as a tumor suppressor gene;
however, functions and mechanisms underlying DLEU1 expression in the BL
are poorly understood.OBJECTIVES:We hypothesize that DLEU1 may act as a
tumor suppressor gene in BL and therefore examined whether up-regulation
of DLEU1 results in changes in survival following targeted
immunotherapy.METHODS:DLEU1 stably overexpressing Raji BL cells
(Lee/Cairo et al., ASH 2013) were transfected with a firefly luciferase
expression plasmid, kindly provided by Laurence Cooper MD, PhD. Four- to
six- week-old female NSG (NOD.Cg-Prkdcscid Il2rgtm1Wjl/SzJ) mice from The
Jackson Lab. Tumor burden and tumor progression were monitored by
bioluminescence imaging system. Mice were treated with either rituximab
(30 mg/kg) or cyclophosphamide (25 mg/kg) by intraperitoneal injection at
7 day intervals. Survival rates were analyzed by the Kaplan-Meier method
using the Prism Version 6.0 software.RESULTS:We observed that DLEU1
stably overexpressing Raji BL cells xenografted (GFP-DLEU1) mice had
significantly extended survival compared to GFP control mice following
treatment rituximab (59 vs 51 days, p<0.05, n = 8), cyclophosphamide
(50.5 vs 37.5 days, p<0.0001, n = 12) and in combination treatment (60.5
vs 53 days, pBACKGROUND:Burkitt lymphoma (BL) is the most common
histological subtype of non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) in children and
adolescents (Cairo et al., Blood 2007; Miles/Cairo., BJHaem 2012). We
identified that pediatric BL patients with chromosome 13q deletion,
particularly 13q14.3, had significantly poorer outcome and inferior
overall survival despite aggressive short, intensive multi-agent
chemotherapy (Poirel/Cairo et al., Leuk 2009; Nelson/Cairo/Sanger et al.,
BJH 2009). Deleted in lymphocytic leukemia 1 (DLEU1) is a BL classifier
gene in the 13q14.3 region (Dave et al., NEJM 2006) and interacts with
C-MYC, TUBB2C and UBR1 (Stelzl et al., Cell 2005). We have previously
reported a regulated DLEU1 expression significantly associated with
changes in BL proliferation in vitro (Lee/Cairo et al., AACR 2015). We
hypothesize that DLEU1 may have function as a tumor suppressor gene;
however, functions and mechanisms underlying DLEU1 expression in the BL
are poorly understood.OBJECTIVES:We hypothesize that DLEU1 may act as a
tumor suppressor gene in BL and therefore examined whether up-regulation
of DLEU1 results in changes in survival following targeted
immunotherapy.METHODS:DLEU1 stably overexpressing Raji BL cells
(Lee/Cairo et al., ASH 2013) were transfected with a firefly luciferase
expression plasmid, kindly provided by Laurence Cooper MD, PhD. Four- to
six- week-old female NSG (NOD.Cg-Prkdcscid Il2rgtm1Wjl/SzJ) mice from The
Jackson Lab. Tumor burden and tumor progression were monitored by
bioluminescence imaging system. Mice were treated with either rituximab
(30 mg/kg) or cyclophosphamide (25 mg/kg) by intraperitoneal injection at
7 day intervals. Survival rates were analyzed by the Kaplan-Meier method
using the Prism Version 6.0 software.RESULTS:We observed that DLEU1
stably overexpressing Raji BL cells xenografted (GFP-DLEU1) mice had
significantly extended survival compared to GFP control mice following
treatment rituximab (59 vs 51 days, p<0.05, n = 8), cyclophosphamide
(50.5 vs 37.5 days, p<0.0001, n = 12) and in combination treatment (60.5
vs 53 days, p<0.05, n = 12) whereas there were no significant differences
in survival between WT and DLEU1-KO mice with PBS treatment. We observed
that there were no significant differences of luciferase intensity in
between GFP and GFP-DLEU1 mice following rituximab, cyclophosphamide or
in combination treatment.CONCLUSIONS:We demonstrated that the
upregulation of DLEU1 expression significantly improved the survival in
DLEU1 overexpressing BL cells xenografted NSG mice following rituximab,
cyclophosphamide and in combination treatment. Therefore, the
up-regulation of DLEU1 expression in BL may in part result in sensitizing
to chemoimmunotherapy induced survival and may result in a consideration
of potential therapeutic strategies

