Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Myb-regulated gene networks and signaling pathways in pancreatic
cancer


The MYB proto-oncogene (a cellular progenitor of v-Myb oncogene) encodes
an oncogenic transcription factor that regulates the expression of a wide
array of genes responsible for different cellular functions. We have
recently identified MYB as a key driver of pancreatic cancer (PC)
pathogenesis. Our findings demonstrated that MYB was overexpressed in
majority of PC tissues and cell lines, while remained undetectable in
normal pancreatic cells. In addition, MYB overexpression was shown to be
associated with pancreatic tumor growth and metastasis. To gain further
insight into the molecular mechanisms involved in MYB-potentiated effects
in PC cells, we conducted Next-Generation Sequencing of transcriptome of
control and MYB-silenced MiaPaCa cells on an Illumina HiSeq 2500
platform. By keeping a cut-off of fold change > 1.5 and p 0.05, we
identified a total of 774 genes to be differentially expressed in
MYB-altered MiaPaCa cells. Out of these, 485 genes were downregulated,
while 289 genes exhibited upregulated expression. The
differentially-regulated genes were subsequently analyzed for functions
and cellular pathways alterations using Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA)
software. The top three networks to be affected in MYB knockdown PC cells
included i) RNA post-transcriptional modifications, molecular transport,
RNA trafficking, ii) cellular assembly and organization, cancer, and,
iii) cell cycle, DNA replication, recombination and repair. These
networks are centered on splicing factors, EGFR and NF-B complex,
respectively. IPA predicted pancreatic adenocarcinoma signaling as one of
the most significantly affected canonical pathway upon MYB-silencing.
Altogether, our findings identify novel MYB-regulated gene networks and
signaling pathways in PC and thus suggest potential molecular mechanisms
involved in mediating MYB action in pancreatic tumorigenesis.

