Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Activation of phosphatase toward the retinoblastoma protein
inhibits invasion in MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells


Excessive phosphorylation of the Retinoblastoma protein (Rb) is found in
most cancer tumor types. Several cyclin dependent kinase (cdk) inhibitors
are in development or in clinical trials at the present time. Our
previous studies have focused on the regulation of Rb phosphorylation by
the phosphatase, PP1. In proliferating cells, PP1 is regulated by a
protein called PNUTS (Phosphatase Nuclear Targeting Subunit). PNUTS is a
competitive inhibitor of Rb binding to PP1 and siRNA mediated knockdown
of PNUTS in several cancer cell types (breast, colon, ovarian) leads to
an increase in Rb directed PP1 activity, Rb dephosphorylation on several
sites, and a dramatic induction of apoptosis. In this study we have used
MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells grown in Matrigel. By lentiviral-mediated
doxycycline inducible expression of PNUTS siRNA, expression of PNUTS
protein is blocked and phosphorylation of Rb cells is reduced. Cells
become less invasive and expression of mesenchymal markers N-cadherin,
Zeb and Slug is lost. A reversion to the epithelial phenotype is
suggested by an increase in E-cadherin expression. PNUTS knockdown has no
effect on cells that do not contain highly phosphorylated Rb such as
non-transformed MCF-10A cells or Rb-negative MDA-MB-468 cells. Further
experiments using highly invasive HT-1080 cells show that reduction of Rb
phosphorylation appears to reduce invasiveness in this cell model,
supporting the idea that Rb phosphorylation plays a critical role in the
regulation of invasion.

