Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Isolation and characterization of circulating tumor cells (CTCs)
in breast and prostate cancer: Comparison of Harpoon CTC assay
performance with the CellSearch CTC Test


Circulating tumor cells (CTCs) can provide important information about a
patient's prognosis. Currently, the CELLSEARCH CTC Test (hereafter
referred to as CS) is the only US Food and Drug Administration-cleared
assay for isolating and enumerating CTCs. This technology uses a CTC
antigen-dependent method to isolate CTCs that may limit its ability to
detect CTCs with low or no epithelial cell adhesion molecule (EpCAM)
expression. We evaluated the Harpoon CTC Isolator and Chip, which uses an
antigen-independent, negative depletion method to enrich CTCs from
patient blood samples. As a result of the negative depletion method, the
final Harpoon Product (ie, CTC-enriched cell suspension) contains CTCs
that express cytokeratin (CK) and EpCAM (canonical CTCs) as well as those
with low or no expression of these antigens (non-canonical CTCs). After
isolation, CTCs were spun onto microscope slides and imaged using a
Vectra Multispectral Imaging System. We obtained performance data on an
initial prototype Harpoon assay (Harpoon + Vectra [Hrp+Vec]) and compared
CTC enumeration between Hrp+Vec and CS using blood samples from 36 breast
and prostate cancer patients. From 7.5 mLs of blood, the Hrp+Vec assay
recovered 79.0% to 93.5% of canonical EpCAM+/CK+ CTCs recovered by CS.
The Hrp+Vec assay also successfully detected non-canonical CTCs
(EpCAM-/CK+ or EpCAM+/CK-) in these samples. At the CS clinical cutoff
for prognostic value, where 5 CTCs is associated with poor prognosis, the
Hrp+Vec assay was 97% concordant with CS. Hrp+Vec also detected CTCs in
12.5% (2/16) more patient samples than CS. Finally, a consensus analysis
of all Vectra scan results (including both canonical and non-canonical
CTCs) demonstrated that the Hrp+Vec assay detected between 90.5% and
108.9% of the number of CTCs as identified by CS. These results indicate
that, when compared with CS, the prototype Hrp+Vec assay detected CTCs
with similar efficiency and identified more samples as CTC-positive in
these breast and prostate cancer patients. Importantly, the Hrp+Vec assay
did enrich non-canonical CTCs thought to be missed by CS, and ongoing
efforts are aimed to further characterize these cell populations.

