Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Changes in trends in colorectal cancer incidence rate by anatomic
site between 1978 and 2004 in Japan


Although colorectal cancer (CRC), a major cancer worldwide, has shown a
proximal or right-sided shift in subsite distribution in western
countries, trends in subsite incidence in Asian countries remain unclear.
Here, we evaluated subsite-specific trends in CRC incidence rate between
1978 and 2004 in Japan using large data from 10 population-based cancer
registries. The colorectal sites (C18-20) were categorized into three
groups, proximal colon (C18.0-18.5), distal colon (C18.6-C18.7) and
rectum (C19.9 and C20.9). Trends in age-standardized incidence rates
(ASRs) were characterized by Joinpoint regression analysis. A total of
474,651 colorectal cancer cases were analyzed. Overall, ASRs increased
remarkably until 1993, with an annual percent change (APC) of 4.9%, and
then stabilized thereafter. By subsite, however, ASRs of proximal colon
significantly increased, with APCs of 7.1% (19781991), 3.8% (199196) and
0.9% (19962004); distal colon showed an initial significant increase,
with an APC of 7.6%, but stabilized from 1991 until the end of
observation; and rectal cancer showed an initial significant increase,
with APCs of 1.9% (197888) and 5.6% (198892), but then decreased abruptly
in 1992, the year colorectal cancer screening was introduced nationwide,
with an APC of -1.0%. Thus, we revealed that changes in incidence trends
for the three anatomic sites apparently began to differ in the 1990s, and
this is a first report to our knowledge. We also discuss factors that
could explain these changes in Japanese. Careful monitoring is necessary
to confirm whether these trends are changing in the Japanese population.

