Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Impact of novel CDKN2A/p16INK4a 5UTR variants predisposing to
melanoma on p16 translational regulation


CDKN2A/p16INK4a is an important tumor-suppressor gene whose dysregulation
is associated with melanoma. We have recently demonstrated that the
p16INK4a expression can be modulated by IRES-dependent mRNA translation
and this regulation might have an important role during tumorigenesis. We
also identified YBX1 as RNA binding protein targeting and stimulating p16
mRNA translation efficiency. The identified IRES function was
particularly active in hypoxia and inhibition of mTOR. This
post-transcriptional regulatory mechanism would potentially be a target
for mutational inactivation during melanomagenesis. Indeed, we previously
showed that p16INK4a 5UTR variants found in melanoma patients with a
family predisposition can have a negative effect on p16 translation.
Single Nucleotide Variants (SNVs) have been investigated during routine
testing of CDKN2A/p16INK4a in Italian, English and French melanoma
patients followed by GenoMEL, the International Melanoma Genetics
Consortium and a total of 17 germline variants were identified in a
cohort of nearly 6000 patients. These p16INK4a 5UTR 17 variants were
studied with multiple approaches, that included mono- and bi-cistronic
reporter assays, western blot of endogenous protein, and quantification
of allelic representation after polysomal profiling to investigate their
impact on p16INK4a mRNA translation regulation. We devised a
classification score based on the concordance between functional assays
and the extent of dysfunction displayed by each variant compared to the
wild type. Variants are classified as neutral (score 0) when no
difference was observed in at least 3 assays. This applied to: c.-14C>T,
c.-20A>G, c.-25C>T+c.-180G>A, c.-30G>A, c.-40C>T, c.-45G>A, c.-59C>G,
c.-87T>A, c.-252A>T. Variants were considered as potential mutations when
a defect was measured in either one or two assays (score 1-2; c.-42T>A
and c.-67G>C variants). Finally, we classified variants as causal
mutations when three or more assays showed impairment (score >3). This
applied to: c.-27del23, c.-56G>T, c.-93-91delAGG, as well as to c.-21C>T
and c.-34G>T, which were already considered as a causal mutations. We
have also determined the structure of the wild type p16INK4a 5UTR by
Selective Hydroxyl Acylation or SHAPE assay. The variant c.-42T>A
encompassing the predicted YBX1 binding site was also studied and shown
to induce a local change in conformation. The structure of all p16INK4a
5UTR variants examined so far is being investigated as well as their
impact on the interaction of RNA binding proteins such as YBX1, SRSF1 and
RBM4. Our data indicate that the sequencing of the entire p16INK4a 5UTR
should be included in routine screening of melanoma families as nearly
half of SNVs tested so far displayed a negative impact on the p16 mRNA
translation efficiency.

