Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bayesian multi-endpoint analysis of syngeneic mouse
immunotherapeutic trials


Recent and notable immunotherapeutic successes for the treatments of
melanoma and lung cancer have catalyzed wide-spread development of novel
immunotherapies and combinations for a variety of cancers. While
promising, responses to immunotherapies are a focal point of present
investigations, being as of yet challenging to explain. Amongst the many
translational challenges, pre-clinical in bred syngeneic mouse
experiments often display heterogeneous tumor responses, whereby a
fraction of tumors show resistance, partial, or complete response to the
same immuno-intervention(s) implanted in identical in bred mouse
strains.We mathematically modeled heterogeneous tumor responses in
syngeneic mouse trials with Bayesian statistical methodology. Our
decision criteria for drugs and drug combinations can simultaneously
evaluate two or more endpoints. At the heart of our methodology is
Bayesian learning with prior information that did not compromise
statistical performance; actually, we achieved statistical gains to
identify superior immunotherapies, rendering quantifiable efficiencies by
design. We illustrate an augmented approach to discovery by Bayesian
learning in real syngeneic mouse studies. We propose our powerful
multi-endpoint Bayesian statistical criteria to ascertain superior
pre-clinical immunotherapeutic activity.

