Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Diet-induced obesity promotes tumor aggressiveness in genetically
engineered mouse models of endometrial hyperplasia/cancer


Objective: To determine the effect of diet-induced obesity on the
development of endometrial hyperplasia and cancer in genetically
engineered mouse models.Methods: The PTEN heterozygous mouse model for
endometrial hyperplasia and the LKB1/p53 endometrioid endometrial cancer
mouse model were used. Mice were divided into two dietary groups and fed
either a high-fat diet (HFD, 60% calories from fat, obese) or a low-fat
diet (LFD, 10% calories from fat, lean) beginning at 3 weeks of age until
sacrifice at 32 weeks (PTEN model) and 12 weeks (LKB1/p53 model). At the
time of sacrifice, mouse weight and uterine/tumor size were documented. A
dedicated mouse pathologist reviewed uterine pathology. For the PTEN
heterozygous mouse model, uterine pathology was determined to be simple
hyperplasia (SH) if increased number of simple tubular glands were seen
without atypia. Complex hyperplasia (CH) was defined as branching,
papillary lumenal infoldings, or back-to-back glandular crowding with or
without nuclear atypic.Results: A total of 30 PTEN mice were examined, 14
in the obese group and 16 in the lean group. The HFD-fed mice were larger
than the LFD-fed mice with a mean weight of 38.1 gm compared to 29.7 gm
(pObjective: To determine the effect of diet-induced obesity on the
development of endometrial hyperplasia and cancer in genetically
engineered mouse models.Methods: The PTEN heterozygous mouse model for
endometrial hyperplasia and the LKB1/p53 endometrioid endometrial cancer
mouse model were used. Mice were divided into two dietary groups and fed
either a high-fat diet (HFD, 60% calories from fat, obese) or a low-fat
diet (LFD, 10% calories from fat, lean) beginning at 3 weeks of age until
sacrifice at 32 weeks (PTEN model) and 12 weeks (LKB1/p53 model). At the
time of sacrifice, mouse weight and uterine/tumor size were documented. A
dedicated mouse pathologist reviewed uterine pathology. For the PTEN
heterozygous mouse model, uterine pathology was determined to be simple
hyperplasia (SH) if increased number of simple tubular glands were seen
without atypia. Complex hyperplasia (CH) was defined as branching,
papillary lumenal infoldings, or back-to-back glandular crowding with or
without nuclear atypic.Results: A total of 30 PTEN mice were examined, 14
in the obese group and 16 in the lean group. The HFD-fed mice were larger
than the LFD-fed mice with a mean weight of 38.1 gm compared to 29.7 gm
(p<0.001). There was no difference in uterine weight between the obese
and lean mice, 0.30 versus 0.34 gm, respectively (p = 0.76). The lean
mice were more likely to develop SH, 44% (n = 7) versus 7% (n = 1) in the
obese group (p = 0.04). Of the obese mice, 57% (n = 8) developed CH (
atypia) compared to 31% (n = 5) of the lean mice (p = 0.16). A total of
35 LKB1/p53 mice were examined with 21 in the obese group and 14 in the
lean group. The obese LKB1/p53 mice were larger (32.8 gm) than the lean
mice (24.0 gm) (p = 0.033). The majority of the LKB1/p53 mice developed
endometrioid adenocarcinoma with increased tumor size in the obese group
(2.1 gm) versus lean group (0.79 gm) (p = 0.04).Conclusions: Diet-induced
obesity led to increased mean body weight in both mouse models. In the
PTEN heterozygous mouse model, a trend towards more complex endometrial
hyperplasia was found in the obese group along with a higher rate of
simple hyperplasia in the lean group. Increased endometrial tumor size
was seen in the obese versus lean LKB1/p53 mice, suggesting that obesity
may lead to increased aggressiveness in endometrial cancer.

