Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Macrolide toxin Mycalolide B is a potent inhibitor of HER2 cancer
cell invasion and is the basis of actin targeted therapy for metastatic
cancers


Breast and ovarian cancers are among the leading causes of cancer related
deaths in women worldwide. Human epidermal growth factor receptor 2
(HER2) is highly expressed in a subset of these cancers that show high
rates of progression to metastatic disease. Metastasis is driven by
filamentous actin (F-actin) based protrusions that penetrate and degrade
extracellular matrix (ECM) to facilitate tumor invasion. In this study,
we tested an actin-depolymerizing macrolide toxin Mycalolide B, as a
potential suppressor of highly metastatic HER2+ breast and ovarian cancer
cell models. Dose responses with Mycalolide B in SKBR3 breast cancer and
SKOV3 ovarian cancer cells resulted in similar cytotoxicity (65 nM IC50)
profiles. In addition, Mycalolide B doses well below the IC50 showed
potent suppression of leading edge protrusions, and motility in SKBR3 and
SKOV3 cancer cells. This also correlated with reduced ECM degradation and
Transwell invasion at low nanomolar doses of Mycalolide B. In contrast,
other F-actin based processes such as endocytosis of HER2 and EGFR, were
less sensitive to Mycalolide B treatment. However, Mycalolide B treatment
did skew the size of endocytic vesicles, which may reflect defects in
F-actin based vesicle motility or maturation. Given that HER2 cancers
have been effectively targeted by Trastuzumab and Trastuzumab-based
antibody-drug conjugates, we are currently testing the compatibility of
combined treatments with Mycalolide B and Trastuzumab, for their effects
on F-actin based invasion of HER2+ cancers. This strategy may yield a
novel class of antibody-drug conjugate, and lead to new HER2 targeted
therapies that suppress tumor metastasis by disrupting early steps that
are dependent on efficient F-actin polymerization.

