Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High-throughput chemical screening for sensitization of bladder
cancer to gemcitabine and cisplatin chemotherapy


BackgroundGemcitabine and cisplatin chemotherapy (GC) is the current
standard regimen for locally advanced and metastatic bladder cancer (BC).
Despite a relatively high initial response rate, some cases do not
regress (intrinsic resistance) and the remaining cases often show
regrowth after initial shrinkage (acquired resistance). To identify novel
therapeutic agents for overcoming these resistances, we applied a
high-throughput screening of chemicals administered in combination with
GC.Methods and FindingsAs a high-throughput screening, 2100 compounds
were administered alone or in combination with GC to human BC cell lines
(J82, UMUC-3). Cell viability was determined after 3-day incubation and
chemicals that enhanced inhibitory effect of GC were screened. The
initial screening identified 26 compounds and further validation narrowed
them into the most synergistic agent disulfiram (DSF), an FDA-approved
drug for alcoholism. Combination index assay showed synergistic effects
of DSF with cisplatin but not with gemcitabine in J82, UMUC-3, T24,
HT1197 and HT1376 cells. Co-administration of DSF significantly enhanced
apoptosis by GC treatment in UMUC-3 and T24 cells, with significant
increase of reactive oxygen species (ROS) production. DSF-induced
apoptosis was attenuated in the presence of N-acetyl L-cysteine and
Trolox, ROS scavengers. Use of DSF in combination with GC (GCD)
significantly inhibited tumor growth of UMUC-3 subcutaneous xenograft on
athymic mice (by 39% compared with GC alone, p = 0.02). GCD regimen was
as tolerable as GC and no significant differences were observed in body
weight of treated mice between the two regimen.ConclusionRepositioning of
DSF to a chemotherapy sensitizer is a promising treatment strategy, which
can be translated rapidly in the future.

