Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ABBV-075, a novel BET family bromodomain inhibitor, represents a
promising therapeutic agent for a broad spectrum of cancer indications


Small molecule inhibitors of the bromodomain and extraterminal domain
(BET) proteins have emerged as a promising option for cancer therapy.
ABBV-075 is a potent and selective BET family bromodomain inhibitor that
recently entered Phase 1 clinical trials. It binds bromodomains of
BRD2/4/T with similar affinities (Ki of 1-2.2 nM), but exhibits roughly
10-fold weaker potency towards BRD3 (Ki of 12.2 nM). ABBV-075 is highly
selective for 18 bromodomain proteins tested (Kd > 1 M; more than
600-fold selectivity vs. BRD4) and has moderate activity towards CREBBP
(Kd = 87 M; 54-fold selectivity vs. BRD4). ABBV-075 exhibited robust
single agent activity in cell viability assays across cancer cell lines
derived from solid tumors, leukemia and lymphomas. Further
characterization of cancer cell responses to ABBV-075 indicated that
ABBV-075 manifested diverse mechanisms of action in different cancer
settings. These include 1): disruption of cell cycle control leading to
G1 arrest followed by senescence, 2) inhibition of oncogenesis drivers
leading to apoptosis and 3) potentially targeting tumor microenvironment
to provide additional therapeutic benefit. Consistent with its broad
spectrum of activities in vitro, ABBV-075 has comparable or superior
efficacies to standard of care agents in flank xenograft mouse models of
non-small-cell and small cell lung cancers, pancreatic, breast, prostate,
head & neck cancers, multiple myeloma, diffuse large B cell lymphoma and
leukemia. These results support the development of ABBV-075 in diverse
hematological malignancies and solid tumor indications.

