Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Breast cancer subtypes have distinct microbial and immune
cytolytic transcriptomic signatures


Background: The role of genetic mutations in breast cancer is well
documented and has formed the basis for novel therapies. However, the
impact of viral and bacterial infection in the pathogenesis of breast
cancer is not well understood.Methods: We analyzed RNA sequencing
(RNASeq) data generated by the Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) from over 900
pairs of breast tumor and adjacent normal tissues, using our pathogen
discovery tool, PathSeq. We developed a novel metric for quantifying and
normalizing microbial sequence abundance from RNASeq data by correcting
for both the sequencing coverage and relative genome sizes of bacteria in
the dataset. We also performed linear discriminant analyses (LDA) to test
the hypothesis that the differences between the canonical breast cancer
subtypes can be modeled on microbial abundance data. In addition, we
interrogated the human gene expression data derived from the RNASeq
dataset to determine the relationships between the breast cancer subtypes
and immune cytolytic activity (CYT index; defined as the geometric mean
of the expression levels of perforin and granzyme).Results: Viral
sequences were rare but we identified bacterial sequences to varying
degrees of abundance. Intriguingly, we demonstrated that microbial
abundance data can be used to recapitulate the well-established PAM50
gene expression-based subsets. Comparison of tumors and adjacent normal
tissues also revealed subtype-associated microbial profiles. In addition,
we observed that the basal and Her2 subtypes of breast cancer had a
higher frequency of tumors with high CYT index compared with luminal A
and B subtypes.Conclusion: This study has revealed that the various
breast cancer subtypes have unique microbial transcriptomic signatures as
well as differential immune cytolytic activity profiles. These data
suggest the potential for differential responses of breast cancer subsets
to immunotherapy.

