Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The PAX3-FOXO1 oncogene drives aneuploidy and overrides
aneuploidy-associated proliferative defects in alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma


Alveolar Rhabdomyosarcoma (ARMS) is primarily defined by the
t(2;13)(q35;q14) translocation, which generates the PAX3-FOXO1 oncogene.
Despite the fact that ARMS are frequently aneuploid, like a majority of
other solid tumors, it is unknown whether PAX3-FOXO1 contributes to the
development and/or persistence of aneuploidy. In this study we show that
PAX3-FOXO1 serves as the driver mutation to promote aneuploidy by
globally altering gene regulatory networks essential for maintaining
proper chromosome number and structure. Further, we demonstrate that
PAX3-FOXO1 overrides aneuploid-dependent growth arrest by altering the
expression of growth factor related regulatory networks. Finally, we
present evidence that phosphorylation of PAX3-FOXO1 contributes to these
gene regulatory network changes. This is the one of the first studies
describing how an oncogene and post-translational modifications of the
corresponding oncoprotein drive the acquisition of aneuploidy and
override proliferation defects in malignant transformation. The mechanism
for PAX3-FOXO1 described in this work has implications for other solid
tumors where large-scale genomics studies may elucidate how global
alterations contribute to tumor phenotypes allowing the development of
much needed multi-faceted tumor-specific therapeutic regimens.

