Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A metabolic switch controls cell fate decision-making in
intestinal differentiation downstream of the tumor suppressor adenomatous
polyposis coli (apc)


Mutation in the tumor suppressor Adenomatous Polyposis Coli (APC) is the
primary initiating mutation in a majority of colon tumors. Recent studies
have shown that APC positively correlates with Mitochondrial Pyruvate
Carrier 1 (MPC1), a crucial player in pyruvate metabolism and has been
reported to repress the Warburg effect and growth in colon cancer cells.
Utilizing the zebrafish to examine the relationship between apc and mpc1,
we found that mpc1 expression is reduced in embryos harboring a genetic
mutation (apcmcr) or diminished expression (apc mo) of apc. Antisense
morpholino knockdown of mpc1 in wild type embryos (mpc1 mo) resulted in
an array of developmental defects that recapitulated phenotypes of
impaired apc function including failed intestinal differentiation. This
was accompanied by mitochondrial dysfunction in mpc1 mo as evidenced by a
decrease in metabolic respiration and triglyceride levels. We also
observed altered mitochondrial function and dysregulation of enzymes
involved in pyruvate metabolism in apcmcr and apc mo. Moreover, hMPC1 RNA
rescued intestinal differentiation in both zebrafish models of apc
deficiency. Meta-analyses using TCGA human tumor samples corroborated our
findings in the zebrafish. Our data demonstrate a novel role for apc in
pyruvate metabolism through regulation of mpc1 that drives normal
intestinal differentiation and support the broader idea that metabolic
changes can dictate cell fate programs.

