Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Body powder use and ovarian cancer: the African American Cancer
Epidemiology Study


Findings of epidemiologic studies indicate an increased risk of ovarian
cancer among women who use powders applied to perineal areas. Although
African American (AA) women have a high prevalence of powder use, this
relationship has not been thoroughly investigated in this group of women.
The objective of the present study was to evaluate the relationship
between use of genital and non-genital powder in invasive epithelial
ovarian cancer (EOC). Subjects are women enrolled in the African American
Epidemiology Cancer Study (AACES), an ongoing, population-based
case-control study of EOC in AA women in 11 geographic locations in the
U.S. Newly diagnosed EOC cases were identified by SEER and state cancer
registries, gynecologic oncology departments or hospitals, and were
between the ages of 20-79 years. AA controls were identified through
random digit dialing and frequency matched to cases on state of residence
and five year age groups. Logistic regression was used to calculate odds
ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) for the association
between genital powder and non-genital powder exposure and risk of EOC,
while controlling for several confounders, including age at
diagnosis/interview, study site, education, tubal ligation, parity, BMI,
duration of oral contraceptive use, first degree family history of breast
or ovarian cancer, and interview year. Due to experimental models
suggesting a relationship with inert particulates and estrogen, we also
examined potential effect modification of this relationship by hormone
therapy use among postmenopausal women. Body powder use was common in
this study population (62.8% of cases and 52.9% of controls). Any genital
powder use was associated with a 44% increased risk of EOC (OR = 1.44,
95% CI = 1.11-1.86) and a dose-response relationship was present for
duration of body powder use applied to genital areas, pFindings of
epidemiologic studies indicate an increased risk of ovarian cancer among
women who use powders applied to perineal areas. Although African
American (AA) women have a high prevalence of powder use, this
relationship has not been thoroughly investigated in this group of women.
The objective of the present study was to evaluate the relationship
between use of genital and non-genital powder in invasive epithelial
ovarian cancer (EOC). Subjects are women enrolled in the African American
Epidemiology Cancer Study (AACES), an ongoing, population-based
case-control study of EOC in AA women in 11 geographic locations in the
U.S. Newly diagnosed EOC cases were identified by SEER and state cancer
registries, gynecologic oncology departments or hospitals, and were
between the ages of 20-79 years. AA controls were identified through
random digit dialing and frequency matched to cases on state of residence
and five year age groups. Logistic regression was used to calculate odds
ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) for the association
between genital powder and non-genital powder exposure and risk of EOC,
while controlling for several confounders, including age at
diagnosis/interview, study site, education, tubal ligation, parity, BMI,
duration of oral contraceptive use, first degree family history of breast
or ovarian cancer, and interview year. Due to experimental models
suggesting a relationship with inert particulates and estrogen, we also
examined potential effect modification of this relationship by hormone
therapy use among postmenopausal women. Body powder use was common in
this study population (62.8% of cases and 52.9% of controls). Any genital
powder use was associated with a 44% increased risk of EOC (OR = 1.44,
95% CI = 1.11-1.86) and a dose-response relationship was present for
duration of body powder use applied to genital areas, p<0.05. A 31%
increased EOC risk was observed for non-genital powder use (OR = 1.31,
95% CI = 0.95-1.79), and this relationship was strongest among non-serous
cases (OR = 2.28, 95% CI = 1.39-3.74). Although not statistically
significant, hormone therapy may be a potential modifier of the effect of
body powder use on EOC risk. Among ever users of hormone therapy, any
genital powder use was associated with over a 2-fold increase in risk (OR
= 2.68, 95% CI = 1.33-5.40), while an OR of 1.24 (95% CI = 0.87-1.79) was
present for never users of hormone therapy. Having an upper respiratory
condition was associated with both genital and non-genital powder use
suggesting a systemic inflammatory response may explain the associations
we observed with EOC for non-genital powder use. In conclusion, body
powder use was prevalent among AA women and strongly associated with EOC
risk.

