Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pathological complete response after neoadjuvant chemotherapy
predicts improved survival in all major subtypes of breast cancer:
systematic review and meta-analyses of over 18,000 patients


Introduction:Several randomized clinical trials have shown that
neoadjuvant chemotherapy has similar long-term survival outcomes as
compared to adjuvant chemotherapy. However, the prognostic significance
of pathological complete response (pCR) after neoadjuvant chemotherapy
remains unclear, particularly for HR+ (Hormone Receptor positive) and
HER2+ (Human Epidermal growth factor Receptor-2 positive) breast cancer
where adjuvant therapy after surgery could also have an impact on
survival. The primary objective of this study was to conduct a systematic
review of published neoadjuvant chemotherapy studies to comprehensively
evaluate the association between pCR with subsequent breast cancer
recurrence (BCR) and mortality.Methods:Based on PRISMA guidelines, a
librarian-led search of PubMed from inception until November 2015 was
performed to identify potentially eligible studies. Inclusion criteria
were clinical trials or retrospective studies with at least one arm
featuring neoadjuvant chemotherapy that reported pCR results as well as
recurrence and/or survival stratified by the presence or absence of pCR.
A total of 1,171 citations with associated abstracts were reviewed.
Pooled odds ratios (ORs), 95% confidence intervals (CI), and p values
were estimated for endpoints using the fixed and random effects
statistical model.Results:18,772 patients from 49 studies met inclusion
criteria. The majority of studies featured patients with stage II-III
breast cancer and defined pCR as no residual invasive cancer in breast or
nodes with residual noninvasive breast cancer allowed (ypT0/is ypN0). The
overall pCR rate was 21.5% (range: 5.7-62%), with the highest pCR rates
seen in HER2+ (range: 16.7-76%) and triple negative tumors (range:
14.3-67%). Achievement of pCR, as compared to absence of pCR, was
associated with significantly reduced BCR (OR 0.33, CI: 0.28-0.39, p =
Introduction:Several randomized clinical trials have shown that
neoadjuvant chemotherapy has similar long-term survival outcomes as
compared to adjuvant chemotherapy. However, the prognostic significance
of pathological complete response (pCR) after neoadjuvant chemotherapy
remains unclear, particularly for HR+ (Hormone Receptor positive) and
HER2+ (Human Epidermal growth factor Receptor-2 positive) breast cancer
where adjuvant therapy after surgery could also have an impact on
survival. The primary objective of this study was to conduct a systematic
review of published neoadjuvant chemotherapy studies to comprehensively
evaluate the association between pCR with subsequent breast cancer
recurrence (BCR) and mortality.Methods:Based on PRISMA guidelines, a
librarian-led search of PubMed from inception until November 2015 was
performed to identify potentially eligible studies. Inclusion criteria
were clinical trials or retrospective studies with at least one arm
featuring neoadjuvant chemotherapy that reported pCR results as well as
recurrence and/or survival stratified by the presence or absence of pCR.
A total of 1,171 citations with associated abstracts were reviewed.
Pooled odds ratios (ORs), 95% confidence intervals (CI), and p values
were estimated for endpoints using the fixed and random effects
statistical model.Results:18,772 patients from 49 studies met inclusion
criteria. The majority of studies featured patients with stage II-III
breast cancer and defined pCR as no residual invasive cancer in breast or
nodes with residual noninvasive breast cancer allowed (ypT0/is ypN0). The
overall pCR rate was 21.5% (range: 5.7-62%), with the highest pCR rates
seen in HER2+ (range: 16.7-76%) and triple negative tumors (range:
14.3-67%). Achievement of pCR, as compared to absence of pCR, was
associated with significantly reduced BCR (OR 0.33, CI: 0.28-0.39, p = <
.001) and mortality (OR 0.28, CI: 0.21-0.36, p = Introduction:Several
randomized clinical trials have shown that neoadjuvant chemotherapy has
similar long-term survival outcomes as compared to adjuvant chemotherapy.
However, the prognostic significance of pathological complete response
(pCR) after neoadjuvant chemotherapy remains unclear, particularly for
HR+ (Hormone Receptor positive) and HER2+ (Human Epidermal growth factor
Receptor-2 positive) breast cancer where adjuvant therapy after surgery
could also have an impact on survival. The primary objective of this
study was to conduct a systematic review of published neoadjuvant
chemotherapy studies to comprehensively evaluate the association between
pCR with subsequent breast cancer recurrence (BCR) and
mortality.Methods:Based on PRISMA guidelines, a librarian-led search of
PubMed from inception until November 2015 was performed to identify
potentially eligible studies. Inclusion criteria were clinical trials or
retrospective studies with at least one arm featuring neoadjuvant
chemotherapy that reported pCR results as well as recurrence and/or
survival stratified by the presence or absence of pCR. A total of 1,171
citations with associated abstracts were reviewed. Pooled odds ratios
(ORs), 95% confidence intervals (CI), and p values were estimated for
endpoints using the fixed and random effects statistical
model.Results:18,772 patients from 49 studies met inclusion criteria. The
majority of studies featured patients with stage II-III breast cancer and
defined pCR as no residual invasive cancer in breast or nodes with
residual noninvasive breast cancer allowed (ypT0/is ypN0). The overall
pCR rate was 21.5% (range: 5.7-62%), with the highest pCR rates seen in
HER2+ (range: 16.7-76%) and triple negative tumors (range: 14.3-67%).
Achievement of pCR, as compared to absence of pCR, was associated with
significantly reduced BCR (OR 0.33, CI: 0.28-0.39, p = < .001) and
mortality (OR 0.28, CI: 0.21-0.36, p = < .001) overall. Similar
association of pCR with reduced mortality was seen in all major breast
cancer subtypes. The highest survival differential between pCR and no pCR
was seen among patients who did not receive subsequent adjuvant
chemotherapy.Conclusions:Achieving pCR following neoadjuvant chemotherapy
is associated with significantly improved disease recurrence and survival
across the various breast cancer subtypes, including HR+ and HER2+ breast
cancer. These results provide further support for using pCR as a
surrogate marker for survival outcomes as newer targeted therapies are
evaluated in the neoadjuvant setting and might provide an efficient model
for drug development in early breast cancer, but impact of adjuvant
therapy needs to be carefully weighed in the analytical interpretation.

