Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gastric adenocarcinoma TP53 mutations in an ethnically admixed
population


TP53 protein is one of the most important and studied human tumor
suppressors. Whereas TP53 drives the malignant transformation and is the
most frequently mutated gene in human cancers, the location and the type
of its mutations for specific tumor types in ethnically admixed
populations have not been evaluated. In this study we employed an
amplicon panel to capture and to deep-sequence all the exons of TP53 in a
series of 29 tumor biopsy samples derived from Brazilian individuals
diagnosed with gastric adenocarcinomas (GACs), which were compared to
Asian and Europeans.TP53 sequences were obtained from Brazilian samples
with the Ion Torrent AmpliSeq TP53-panel and determined in the Ion PGM
Torrent and Ion Proton platforms. We generated a mean of 7.25 million
reads per patient, resulting in a median coverage >13,000X. All samples
were covered above 6,400X. The mutations observed here were compared to
those described in patients from different ethnic groups obtained from
TCGA composed for 103 Asians patients (Japan, Hong-Kong, South Korea,
Vietnam) and 78 cases of Europeans. The Asian and European populations
showed higher prevalence of intestinal type GAC (53.7% and 61.6%,
respectively) in contrast to our cohort, in which 69% of the patients had
diffuse-type GACs (pA p.Arg282Trp in the DNA binding domain in exon 8,
was found in all three sample groups studied, suggesting a possible role
for this mutation in GAC pathogenesis. Although TP53 is the most
frequently mutated gene in GACs we found no specific patterns that could
explain the differences in the clinical behavior of this tumor between
Asian and non-Asian patients. Further analyses are being performed trying
to correlate mutations in TP53 and other genes with the different
clinical outcomes observed in GACs from Asians and non-Asians, and in a
setting of high genetic admixture, as observed in Brazil.

