Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular mechanism of resveratrol induced cell death in multidrug
resistance prostate cancer


In order to understanding the molecular mechanisms of drug resistance as
well as enhancing the efficacy of docetaxel we established
docetaxel-resistant prostate cancer (PCa) cells. The IC50 for docetaxel
in PCa resistant cells was about 50-fold higher than parental PCa cells.
In the current study we used resveratrol (RES), a natural compound with
chemo preventive potential to test its ability to enhance the
effectiveness of docetaxel on PCa as well as to explore the mechanism of
acquired docetaxel resistance. PCa (PC3, C4-2B and DU145) cell lines
treated with different dose of RES or DTX alone or in combination
followed by analyzed cell proliferation (MTT assay), apoptosis
(flow-cytometric analysis of annexin V/propidium iodide-stained cells and
western blot methods).The expression of ABC transporter markers in the
development of docetaxel resistance was examined using RT-PCR. Our result
shows that the expression of 18 ABC transporter genes were down regulated
in PCa cells at 48 and 72 hrs in RES treatment group. The up regulations
of pro-apoptotic proteins (Bax, Bad, Bim) and down regulation of
anti-apoptotic protein (Bcl2, Mcl1) further confirmed the effectiveness
of RES or DTX alone or in combination with DTX. In conclusion these
studies suggest that RES inhibits ABC gene expression and resensitizes
docetaxel resistant PCa cells to DTX treatment with enhancing apoptotic
cell death.

