Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Compound Tc inhibits ATG4 to attenuate autophagic flux and
sensitize cancer cells to chemotherapy


Autophagy is induced to protect cancer cells against stresses, including
starvation, hypoxia and chemotherapy. Antimalarial drugs chloroquine and
its derivative hydroxychloroquine are used to inhibit autophagy and being
investigated with clinical trials for certain types of cancer. However,
the tumor suppressive effects of the drugs might be autophagy
independent, which require more specific inhibitors target autophagy
components for clinical uses. Here, we screened FDA-approved drug library
with both biochemical and cellular ATG4 reporter assays and found
compound Tc blocked proteolysis activity of ATG4, essential proteases in
autophagy machinery. Docking and MD simulation results appeared compound
Tc was directly associated with active site of ATG4. Further, compound Tc
obstructed the binding between ATG4 and MAP1LC3 and accumulated
autophagosomes, which in turn reduce autophagic flux in cells. Moreover,
compound Tc suppressed tumor viability and sensitized chemotherapy
efficacy in two-dimensional and sphere culture model. Silencing ATG4 or
overexpression of ATG4 catalytic mutant had no additional effects on
tumor suppression compared to compound Tc alone, indicating compound Tc
inhibited ATG4s activity to diminish tumor viability. In addition,
compound Tc enhanced genotoxic stress-induced apoptosis to synergize
chemotherapy efficacy in vitro and in vivo. Thus, we report that the
clinical drug compound Tc is a potent ATG4 inhibitor, which could
interrogate the role of autophagy in clinical setting and provide
compound Tc as an anticancer drug or chemosensitizer.

