Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Optimization of library construction for massively parallel
sequencing using low-input, FFPE-derived DNA without additional PCR
amplification


Massively parallel sequencing (MPS) is increasingly used in the
laboratory and clinic to identify genomic factors contributing to
tumorigenesis, such as somatic mutations, DNA insertions and deletions,
transcriptome and epigenetic changes, and chromosomal abnormalities.
Because tumor specimens are often quite limited or are from rare and
precious samples, it is necessary to prepare sequencing libraries from
minimal amounts of DNA. Indeed, it can be challenging to extract
sufficient amounts of starting material from fresh-frozen paraffin
embedded (FFPE) samples for library construction, and frequently samples
are not processed because they do not reach minimum requirements.
Therefore, it is of great importance to improve currently available
protocols to process low yield FFPE-derived DNA for MPS. This will allow
for the inclusion of more tumor samples to be sequenced per cohort,
resulting in increased ability to identify genomic factors involved in
tumorigenesis.Here, we optimized the KAPA Library Preparation Kit (Kapa
Biosystems, Wilmington, MA) to successfully perform library construction
from low-yield FFPE and fresh frozen samples. The kit normally requires
an input of at least 100 ng of DNA. However, we were able to modify the
protocol to prepare libraries from as little as 10 ng of starting
material by optimizing the ratio of adapter:input DNA and SPRI-clean-up,
performing low-volume reactions, and using IDT universal blockers during
hybrid capture. Additional library enrichment PCR was not required.
Library yields were sufficient for downstream hybrid capture and
sequencing, and sequencing metrics were comparable to samples that were
prepped using the manufacturer's recommendations. Experiments are
underway to demonstrate that library complexity remains unchanged.

