Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SORBS1-related multiprotein complex regulates metastasis of cancer


Purpose: CAP (Cbl-associated protein), also known as Sorbin and SH3
domain-containing protein 1 is encoded by the SORBS1 gene. These proteins
contain a conserved sorbin homology (SOHO) domain and three SH3 domains.
CAP is an adaptor protein that has been associated with the actin
cytoskeleton, signaling through receptor tyrosine kinases and cell
adhesion. Although, CAP is proven to have many known functions, this
protein is only reported in specific field of signaling pathway. Cell
adhesion and actin dynamics which have been supposed to participate in
CAP are crucial factors of cancer metastasis. The role of CAP has been
described in the literature, although their specific roles remain to be
clarified in cancer.Methods and materials: Colorectal cancer cell lines
were transduced by lentivirus containing shRNA plasmid (shSORBS1
plasmid). To elucidate function of SORBS1 as regulator of cancer
metastasis, western blotting, cell migration assay and
immunoprecipitation assays were performed.Conclusion: According to the
several reports of SORBS1 function, phosphorylation of ERK and mTOR was
identified. Although ERK phosphorylation were not changed in normal
condition, there were different aspects between control group and SORBS1
knockdown group with insulin treatment. Moreover, mTOR phosphorylation of
SORBS1 knockdown group was less in the control group than in the normal
condition.Immunoprecipitation of SORBS1 was performed to search for the
binding compounds. We chose the AHNAK protein as the convincing candidate
protein related with SORBS1. Several studies reported that AHNAK protein
is related to proliferation and EMT by binding of specific signaling
molecules. Indeed, there were remarkable differences of invasiveness
ability between control group and knockdown group.

