Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PI3K inhibitor BAY 1082439 and radium-223 dichloride decrease
tumor burden and tumor-induced bone formation in an established bone
metastatic prostate cancer model in mice


Background and objective: Bone is the most common site of metastasis in
prostate cancer (PCa) and results in significant morbidity and poor
prognosis. Disseminated PCa cells conquer hematopoietic stem cell niches,
and during outgrowth they induce osteoblasts to form new, disorganized
bone. Also osteoclasts are activated at a varying degree. PI3K activation
has important role in survival and proliferation of PCa cells, mediating
critical signaling pathways involving tumor and stromal cell interaction
in the bone microenvironment. BAY 1082439 is a highly selective and
potent PI3K inhibitor currently in Phase I, with equipotent activity
against PI3K and PI3K isoforms. Radium-223 dichloride (ra-223/Xofigo) is
alpha-emitting calcium mimetic that via efficient osteoaffinity provides
targeted radiation therapy against bone metastases. We have previously
reported that BAY 1082439 and ra-223 showed synergistic
anti-proliferative and apoptosis-inductive effects in vitro in LNCaP PCa
cells (Suominen et al, AACR Annual Meeting 2014). Here, we investigated
the effects of BAY 1082439 and ra-223 as single agents and in combination
in the osteoblastic LNCaP tumors in tibia of male nod.scid mice.Methods:
Tumors were established 6 weeks after inoculation of LNCaP cells. Mice
were randomized into four treatment groups (vehicle, ra-223; BAY 1082439
and ra-223 + BAY 1082439) based on serum PSA and bone lesion score.
Treatments were continued for six weeks and the efficacy was assessed by
the following endpoints biweekly and/or at the end of the study: PSA,
bone formation marker PINP, bone lesions and bone volume (measured by
microCT), and tumor and bone area by histological analysis.Results: Both
ra-223 and BAY 1082439 monotherapies inhibited tumor growth (reduction
67.9%, p = 0.029 and 67.4%, p = 0.009, respectively). Furthermore, BAY
1082439 monotherapy treatment group displayed 68.8% of necrotic tumor,
compared to 6.5% in the control group (p = 0.009). In the combination
group, tumor growth was further suppressed (tumor reduction 89%, p =
0.005) and it is noteworthy that 60% of animals had no detectable tumors
in histology. All treatments inhibited the tumor-induced bone formation
compared to vehicle, and the combination treatment inhibited progression
of bone lesions nearly completely. In conclusion, BAY 1082439 and ra-223
as monotherapies decreased tumor burden and tumor-induced bone reaction,
and the observed effects were further enhanced by the combination
treatment.

