Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analysis of putative serum biomarker candidates for cardiotoxicity
prediction in a cohort of early stage breast cancer patients treated with
docetaxel, cyclophosphamide, and bevacizumab


Background: Breast cancer is the leading cause of cancer in women, with
1.8 million patients diagnosed globally each year. In early stage
disease, anthracycline regimens are commonly employed, but the risk of
cardiotoxicity is high. Replacing anthracyclines with taxanes in
combination with cyclophosphamide may improve response [1] and
Bevacizumab (BVZ) may provide addtional benefit. However, as BVZ can
cause hypertension and increased risk of cardiac failure, a rationale
exists for studying biomarkers of cardiotoxicity in this setting.Methods:
We assessed a panel of biomarkers in n = 57 early stage breast cancer
patients whom underwent docetaxel/cyclophosphamide/BVZ therapy on the
TC-Avastin Trial (NCT00911716). Serum was collected prior to treatment
and at 3 months. Cardiotoxicity was defined as decline in left
ventricular ejection fraction 10% to Background: Breast cancer is the
leading cause of cancer in women, with 1.8 million patients diagnosed
globally each year. In early stage disease, anthracycline regimens are
commonly employed, but the risk of cardiotoxicity is high. Replacing
anthracyclines with taxanes in combination with cyclophosphamide may
improve response [1] and Bevacizumab (BVZ) may provide addtional benefit.
However, as BVZ can cause hypertension and increased risk of cardiac
failure, a rationale exists for studying biomarkers of cardiotoxicity in
this setting.Methods: We assessed a panel of biomarkers in n = 57 early
stage breast cancer patients whom underwent
docetaxel/cyclophosphamide/BVZ therapy on the TC-Avastin Trial
(NCT00911716). Serum was collected prior to treatment and at 3 months.
Cardiotoxicity was defined as decline in left ventricular ejection
fraction 10% to <55% over 1 year treatment + 2 year follow-up. Cardiac
troponin I and T [cTnI, cTnT], Endothelin-1, Galectin-3, Placental Growth
Factor [PlGF], Platelet Derived Growth Factor, Vascular Endothelial
Growth Factor receptors 1 and 2, total nitrous oxide NO and
myeloperoxidase [MPO]) were screened by ELISA in a subgroup (n = 16).
Pilot and recently published findings [2] implicated PlGF, cTn1 and MPO,
which were subsequently assessed in the larger cohort.Results: Changes in
serum MPO or cTnI were not related to cardiotoxicity when analysed in the
larger cohort. However, a cut-off PlGF fold change of 0.99 could
differentiate patients who developed cardiotoxicity from those that did
not. 74% of cardiotoxicity patients, compared to only 35% of
non-cardiotoxicity fell below the 0.99 cut-off. Conversely, 65% of
non-cardiotoxicity patients, compared to 25% of cardiotoxicity patients
fell above the cut-off (p = 0.0042).Conclusions: Our data suggest that
decreased PlGF at 3 months may predict cardiotoxicity. These observations
require further validation.This work was funded by AngioTox, an EC FP7
IAPP Marie Curie Award (Grant Agreement 251528). [1]Jones et al., J.
Clin. Oncol.27, 1177-1183 (2009); [2] Putt et al., Clin. Chem 61,
1164-1172 (2015).

