Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Meta-analysis of genome-wide association studies identifies
multiple lung cancer susceptibility loci in never-smoking Asian women


Background: The incidence rates of lung cancer among never-smoking
females in some parts of East Asia are among the highest in the world.
Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) of lung cancer in Asian
never-smoking women have previously identified six susceptibility loci
associated with lung cancer risk including 3q28, 5p15.33, 6p21.32,
6q22.2, 10q25.2 and 17q24.3. This study aims to discover additional lung
cancer susceptibility loci among never-smoking Asian females.Methods: We
imputed data from four GWAS of Asian non-smoking female lung cancer
(6,877 cases and 6,277 controls) using the 1,000 Genomes Project (Phase 1
Release 3) data as the reference and genotyped additional samples (5,878
cases and 7,046 controls) for potential replication.Results: In our
meta-analysis, three new loci achieved genome-wide significance, marked
by the single nucleotide polymorphisms rs7741164 at 6p21.1 (per-allele
odds ratio (OR) = 1.17; P = 5.8 10-13), rs72658409 at 9p21.3 (per-allele
OR = 0.77; P = 1.41 10-10), and rs11610143 at 12q13.13 (per-allele OR =
0.89; P = 4.96 10-9).Conclusions: We identified new genetic
susceptibility alleles for lung cancer in never-smoking women in Asia.
These findings merit follow-up to understand their biological
underpinnings and potential interactions with environmental exposures.

