Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: p53 isoform 133p53 triple negative breast cancer and increased
relapse with neoadjuvant taxanes


Background:Studies of TP53 mutation, protein expression and modifications
of the p53 network in breast cancer yield a complexity which has so far
hindered substantive clinical progress. The effects of p53 mutation and
p53 protein expression in breast cancer is dependent on the breast cancer
subtype and stressors involved. Since identifying differential expression
of p53 isoform mRNAs in breast cancer a decade ago, we have demonstrated
associations between individual p53 isoforms (p53, p53, 133p53, 133p53),
breast cancer cell behaviour and clinical outcomes. Co-expressed
combinations of isoforms may influence canonical p53 (p53), whether
mutant or wild type. Patterns of p53 isoform co-expression may hold the
key to understanding p53 functionality, responses to therapy and disease
behaviour in breast cancer.Methods:Expression of p53, p53, p53, 133p53,
133p53, 133p53 by reverse-transcription PCR was analysed for the EORTC
10994 neoadjuvant breast cancer trial. In 469 available primary breast
tumors, 223 patients had been randomised to a preoperative anthracycline
regimen (fluorouracil, epirubicin, cyclophosphamide [FEC]) and 246
patients to receive a taxane based regimen (three cycles of docetaxel
followed by three cycles of docetaxel + epirubicin [T-ET]). TP53 status
was assessed by use of the yeast functional assay (FASAY) on biopsy
samples that contained at least 20% tumour cells. Breast tumor subtypes:
HER2 positive, triple-negative (TNBC), luminal-A, luminal-B (HER2
negative) and luminal-B (HER2 positive) were determined using the
pathological markers recommended by the St Gallen breast cancer consensus
guidelines. The primary endpoint was progression-free survival (PFS) with
9 years median follow up at the time of analysis.Results:All cancers
expressed multiple p53 isoform mRNAs; none expressed canonical p53 mRNA
(p53) alone. There was a strong association between the p53 isoforms with
4 combinations of co-expressed p53 mRNAs predominated. Expression
patterns included: (a) 285 tumours co-expressed p53, p53, p53, 133p53,
and 133p53; (b) 122 tumours co-expressed p53, p53, p53, 133p53, 133p53
and 133p53 (c) in 25 133p53 negative tumors, p53, p53 and p53 were
co-expressed (d) 22 p53 negative tumors co-expressed p53, p53, 133p53 and
133p53. While no individual p53 isoform expression was associated with
PFS, among the 104 TNBC expressing all p53 isoforms (pattern (b), 133p53
positive tumors), patients had 11.31 times greater risk of relapse when
treated with T-ET than when treated with FEC (95%CI 1.91-66.99,
pBackground:Studies of TP53 mutation, protein expression and
modifications of the p53 network in breast cancer yield a complexity
which has so far hindered substantive clinical progress. The effects of
p53 mutation and p53 protein expression in breast cancer is dependent on
the breast cancer subtype and stressors involved. Since identifying
differential expression of p53 isoform mRNAs in breast cancer a decade
ago, we have demonstrated associations between individual p53 isoforms
(p53, p53, 133p53, 133p53), breast cancer cell behaviour and clinical
outcomes. Co-expressed combinations of isoforms may influence canonical
p53 (p53), whether mutant or wild type. Patterns of p53 isoform
co-expression may hold the key to understanding p53 functionality,
responses to therapy and disease behaviour in breast
cancer.Methods:Expression of p53, p53, p53, 133p53, 133p53, 133p53 by
reverse-transcription PCR was analysed for the EORTC 10994 neoadjuvant
breast cancer trial. In 469 available primary breast tumors, 223 patients
had been randomised to a preoperative anthracycline regimen
(fluorouracil, epirubicin, cyclophosphamide [FEC]) and 246 patients to
receive a taxane based regimen (three cycles of docetaxel followed by
three cycles of docetaxel + epirubicin [T-ET]). TP53 status was assessed
by use of the yeast functional assay (FASAY) on biopsy samples that
contained at least 20% tumour cells. Breast tumor subtypes: HER2
positive, triple-negative (TNBC), luminal-A, luminal-B (HER2 negative)
and luminal-B (HER2 positive) were determined using the pathological
markers recommended by the St Gallen breast cancer consensus guidelines.
The primary endpoint was progression-free survival (PFS) with 9 years
median follow up at the time of analysis.Results:All cancers expressed
multiple p53 isoform mRNAs; none expressed canonical p53 mRNA (p53)
alone. There was a strong association between the p53 isoforms with 4
combinations of co-expressed p53 mRNAs predominated. Expression patterns
included: (a) 285 tumours co-expressed p53, p53, p53, 133p53, and 133p53;
(b) 122 tumours co-expressed p53, p53, p53, 133p53, 133p53 and 133p53 (c)
in 25 133p53 negative tumors, p53, p53 and p53 were co-expressed (d) 22
p53 negative tumors co-expressed p53, p53, 133p53 and 133p53. While no
individual p53 isoform expression was associated with PFS, among the 104
TNBC expressing all p53 isoforms (pattern (b), 133p53 positive tumors),
patients had 11.31 times greater risk of relapse when treated with T-ET
than when treated with FEC (95%CI 1.91-66.99,
p<0.0075).Conclusions:Corroborating the experimental and animal model
data that p53 isoform expression, p53 mutation and p53 protein expression
influence the pluripotent nature of p53, patients bearing 133p53 positive
TNBC may benefit more from treatment with FEC than T-ET in the
neoadjuvant setting.

