Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Quantification of NADPH balance in cancer


NADPH is a key cofactor involved in antioxidant defense and reductive
biosynthesis. The quantitative contribution of different NADPH pathways,
either in normal tissues or in tumors, remains unclear. Here we enable
tracing of NADPH production using deuterium-labeled nutrients and mass
spectrometry, providing methods that for the first time can track each of
the major cytosolic pathways: malic enzyme, isocitrate dehydrogenase,
folate metabolism, and the pentose phosphate pathway. This is achieved
via a battery of different 2H-tracers. A linear algebra method for
deducing the fractional contribution of each pathway, even when a
specific tracer for that pathway is not available, will be described.
Utility of these methods will be illustrated through examples drawn from
both normal cellular physiology and cancer. Specifically, we find that
most NADPH in differentiating adipocytes is made by malic enzyme.
Examining cancer cells, we find that the pentose phosphate pathway is
typically the largest cytosolic NADPH source, but that the collective
contribution of alternative pathways is often larger than the pentose
phosphate pathway. The specific other pathways involved differ strongly
depending on the cancer cell type. We also provide examples where NADPH
production routes in both normal and cancer cells vary with nutrient
availability, including hypoxia. Given the heightened redox stress of
cancer cells, understanding NADPH production routes is likely to
illuminate new avenues for therapeutic intervention.

