Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Improving breast cancer risk prediction models: the addition of a
genetic risk score, mammographic density, and endogenous hormones


Background: Risk prediction models have important public health
implications for targeted disease prevention by identifying women at
higher risk who would most likely benefit from screening,
chemoprevention, or other risk-reducing regimens. Among such models, the
Gail and Rosner-Colditz models have been well validated and used to
identify high-risk women. Each of these models generally includes only
traditional breast cancer risk factors (e.g., parity and family history
of breast cancer). No prior study has examined the joint contribution of
a genetic risk score (GRS), mammographic density (MD), and postmenopausal
endogenous hormone levels to these models.Method: We conducted a
nested-case control study within the Nurses Health Study (NHS, follow-up
1990-2010) and NHS II (1997-2009). We created a breast cancer GRS based
on 67 single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNPs). We measured percent MD as
well as circulating testosterone, estrone sulfate, and prolactin levels
in prediagnostic plasma samples. Using receiver-operating-characteristic
curve analyses, we calculated the area under the curve (AUC), adjusting
for age, as a measure of discrimination for the 5-year risk of invasive
breast cancer and estrogen receptor (ER) and progesterone receptor (PR)
positive disease (ER+PR+) by menopausal status, after adding GRS, MD,
and/or circulating hormones to the modified Gail and Rosner-Colditz
models.Results: We documented 11,880 women (4,006 cases/7,874 controls;
age range: 34-80 yr) for Gail model and 8,210 women (2,665 cases/5,455
controls) for Rosner-Colditz model analyses. In both models, about 45%
women were premenopausal, 25% were postmenopausal women not using
postmenopausal hormone (HT), and 30% were postmenopausal women using HT
at blood draw. The AUC was statistically significantly improved by 7.0
units in premenopausal women (Gail+GRS+MD), 11.8 units in postmenopausal
women not using HT (Gail+GRS+MD+hormones), and 6.1 units in
postmenopausal women using HT (Gail+GRS+MD+prolactin, all
p-valueBackground: Risk prediction models have important public health
implications for targeted disease prevention by identifying women at
higher risk who would most likely benefit from screening,
chemoprevention, or other risk-reducing regimens. Among such models, the
Gail and Rosner-Colditz models have been well validated and used to
identify high-risk women. Each of these models generally includes only
traditional breast cancer risk factors (e.g., parity and family history
of breast cancer). No prior study has examined the joint contribution of
a genetic risk score (GRS), mammographic density (MD), and postmenopausal
endogenous hormone levels to these models.Method: We conducted a
nested-case control study within the Nurses Health Study (NHS, follow-up
1990-2010) and NHS II (1997-2009). We created a breast cancer GRS based
on 67 single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNPs). We measured percent MD as
well as circulating testosterone, estrone sulfate, and prolactin levels
in prediagnostic plasma samples. Using receiver-operating-characteristic
curve analyses, we calculated the area under the curve (AUC), adjusting
for age, as a measure of discrimination for the 5-year risk of invasive
breast cancer and estrogen receptor (ER) and progesterone receptor (PR)
positive disease (ER+PR+) by menopausal status, after adding GRS, MD,
and/or circulating hormones to the modified Gail and Rosner-Colditz
models.Results: We documented 11,880 women (4,006 cases/7,874 controls;
age range: 34-80 yr) for Gail model and 8,210 women (2,665 cases/5,455
controls) for Rosner-Colditz model analyses. In both models, about 45%
women were premenopausal, 25% were postmenopausal women not using
postmenopausal hormone (HT), and 30% were postmenopausal women using HT
at blood draw. The AUC was statistically significantly improved by 7.0
units in premenopausal women (Gail+GRS+MD), 11.8 units in postmenopausal
women not using HT (Gail+GRS+MD+hormones), and 6.1 units in
postmenopausal women using HT (Gail+GRS+MD+prolactin, all p-value<0.001).
For the Rosner-Colditz model, the corresponding AUC improved by 5.4
units, 7.9 units, and 5.4 units (all p-valueBackground: Risk prediction
models have important public health implications for targeted disease
prevention by identifying women at higher risk who would most likely
benefit from screening, chemoprevention, or other risk-reducing regimens.
Among such models, the Gail and Rosner-Colditz models have been well
validated and used to identify high-risk women. Each of these models
generally includes only traditional breast cancer risk factors (e.g.,
parity and family history of breast cancer). No prior study has examined
the joint contribution of a genetic risk score (GRS), mammographic
density (MD), and postmenopausal endogenous hormone levels to these
models.Method: We conducted a nested-case control study within the Nurses
Health Study (NHS, follow-up 1990-2010) and NHS II (1997-2009). We
created a breast cancer GRS based on 67 single-nucleotide polymorphism
(SNPs). We measured percent MD as well as circulating testosterone,
estrone sulfate, and prolactin levels in prediagnostic plasma samples.
Using receiver-operating-characteristic curve analyses, we calculated the
area under the curve (AUC), adjusting for age, as a measure of
discrimination for the 5-year risk of invasive breast cancer and estrogen
receptor (ER) and progesterone receptor (PR) positive disease (ER+PR+) by
menopausal status, after adding GRS, MD, and/or circulating hormones to
the modified Gail and Rosner-Colditz models.Results: We documented 11,880
women (4,006 cases/7,874 controls; age range: 34-80 yr) for Gail model
and 8,210 women (2,665 cases/5,455 controls) for Rosner-Colditz model
analyses. In both models, about 45% women were premenopausal, 25% were
postmenopausal women not using postmenopausal hormone (HT), and 30% were
postmenopausal women using HT at blood draw. The AUC was statistically
significantly improved by 7.0 units in premenopausal women (Gail+GRS+MD),
11.8 units in postmenopausal women not using HT (Gail+GRS+MD+hormones),
and 6.1 units in postmenopausal women using HT (Gail+GRS+MD+prolactin,
all p-value<0.001). For the Rosner-Colditz model, the corresponding AUC
improved by 5.4 units, 7.9 units, and 5.4 units (all p-value<0.001). For
ER+PR+ tumors specifically, among postmenopausal women not using HT, the
AUC was improved by 13.2 units for the Gail model and 9.9 units for the
Rosner-Colditz model (all p-valuesBackground: Risk prediction models have
important public health implications for targeted disease prevention by
identifying women at higher risk who would most likely benefit from
screening, chemoprevention, or other risk-reducing regimens. Among such
models, the Gail and Rosner-Colditz models have been well validated and
used to identify high-risk women. Each of these models generally includes
only traditional breast cancer risk factors (e.g., parity and family
history of breast cancer). No prior study has examined the joint
contribution of a genetic risk score (GRS), mammographic density (MD),
and postmenopausal endogenous hormone levels to these models.Method: We
conducted a nested-case control study within the Nurses Health Study
(NHS, follow-up 1990-2010) and NHS II (1997-2009). We created a breast
cancer GRS based on 67 single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNPs). We measured
percent MD as well as circulating testosterone, estrone sulfate, and
prolactin levels in prediagnostic plasma samples. Using
receiver-operating-characteristic curve analyses, we calculated the area
under the curve (AUC), adjusting for age, as a measure of discrimination
for the 5-year risk of invasive breast cancer and estrogen receptor (ER)
and progesterone receptor (PR) positive disease (ER+PR+) by menopausal
status, after adding GRS, MD, and/or circulating hormones to the modified
Gail and Rosner-Colditz models.Results: We documented 11,880 women (4,006
cases/7,874 controls; age range: 34-80 yr) for Gail model and 8,210 women
(2,665 cases/5,455 controls) for Rosner-Colditz model analyses. In both
models, about 45% women were premenopausal, 25% were postmenopausal women
not using postmenopausal hormone (HT), and 30% were postmenopausal women
using HT at blood draw. The AUC was statistically significantly improved
by 7.0 units in premenopausal women (Gail+GRS+MD), 11.8 units in
postmenopausal women not using HT (Gail+GRS+MD+hormones), and 6.1 units
in postmenopausal women using HT (Gail+GRS+MD+prolactin, all
p-value<0.001). For the Rosner-Colditz model, the corresponding AUC
improved by 5.4 units, 7.9 units, and 5.4 units (all p-value<0.001). For
ER+PR+ tumors specifically, among postmenopausal women not using HT, the
AUC was improved by 13.2 units for the Gail model and 9.9 units for the
Rosner-Colditz model (all p-values<0.001).Conclusion: While each of
genetic markers, percent MD, and hormones independently improved risk
prediction for invasive breast cancer and ER+PR+ disease, incorporating
all of these factors simultaneously improved models the most, especially
among postmenopausal women not using HT. If validated in independent
populations, our findings could help identify women at a higher risk, who
would most benefit from chemoprevention, other risk-reducing regimens or
screening.

