Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of miR-186 and repression of aggressive prostate cancer
phenotype using a metastatic cell model


MicroRNA (miR) dysregulation alters the expression of cancer related
genes and contributes to disease states in many cancers. For example,
ectopic miR-186 expression leads to enhanced cell proliferation and
migration in pancreatic cancer. However, the role of miR-186 in prostate
cancer (PCa) remains unclear. Previously, we observed significant
upregulation of miR-186-5p in PCa patient serum (stage III/IV) compared
to controls. Furthermore, miR-186 was significantly up-regulated in
metastatic PCa (PC-3) compared to normal prostate epithelial cells
(RWPE1). We hypothesized miR-186 inhibition will reduce aggressive PCa in
vitro.Consequently, miR-186 was transiently and stably inhibited in PC-3
cells. Cell proliferation and colony formation were evaluated for 7 and
21 days via Trypan Blue exclusion and soft agar assays. Aberrant gene
expression was evaluated in transfected cells to identify miR-186
targets. Candidate miR-186 targets were selected using published reports
on miR-186 and cancer, availability of robust antibodies, and statistical
filtering (false discovery 0.05 and 1.2 fold change).Mir-186 inhibition
in PC-3 cells significantly repressed proliferation and colony formation
by 34-64%. Following miR-186 inhibition in PC-3 cells, 2,343 identified
mRNA targets were differentially expressed compared to scramble controls
(p MicroRNA (miR) dysregulation alters the expression of cancer related
genes and contributes to disease states in many cancers. For example,
ectopic miR-186 expression leads to enhanced cell proliferation and
migration in pancreatic cancer. However, the role of miR-186 in prostate
cancer (PCa) remains unclear. Previously, we observed significant
upregulation of miR-186-5p in PCa patient serum (stage III/IV) compared
to controls. Furthermore, miR-186 was significantly up-regulated in
metastatic PCa (PC-3) compared to normal prostate epithelial cells
(RWPE1). We hypothesized miR-186 inhibition will reduce aggressive PCa in
vitro.Consequently, miR-186 was transiently and stably inhibited in PC-3
cells. Cell proliferation and colony formation were evaluated for 7 and
21 days via Trypan Blue exclusion and soft agar assays. Aberrant gene
expression was evaluated in transfected cells to identify miR-186
targets. Candidate miR-186 targets were selected using published reports
on miR-186 and cancer, availability of robust antibodies, and statistical
filtering (false discovery 0.05 and 1.2 fold change).Mir-186 inhibition
in PC-3 cells significantly repressed proliferation and colony formation
by 34-64%. Following miR-186 inhibition in PC-3 cells, 2,343 identified
mRNA targets were differentially expressed compared to scramble controls
(p < 0.05). The target list was reduced to 11 up-regulated candidates.
Predicted miR-186 targets are undergoing validation via qRT-PCR, western
blots, and luciferase reporter assays. In addition, other studies are in
progress to evaluate the impact of miR-186 on cellular proliferation,
migration and invasion. Such efforts may lead to the identification of
novel biomarkers to improve detection and clinical management strategies
for aggressive PCa.

