Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combination Azacitidine and histone deacetylase inhibition induces
a multi factorial synergistic anti-tumor response in non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC)


Epigenetic therapy holds much promise as an emerging paradigm for the
treatment of many disparate types of human cancer. However, the data in
solid malignancies, particularly, would suggest further optimization is
required to extract the true potential of these therapies. In our current
study, we have deployed at low, clinically achievable doses, chronic
combinatorial administration of the DNA methyltransferase inhibitor
Azacitidine in conjunction with both benzamide and hydroxyamic acid based
histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACi) in NSCLC. We have developed our
paradigms by sequentially employing chronic HDACi administration after
Azacitidine. This strategy achieves durable alteration of the cell
transcriptome with corresponding induction of both cell cycle arrest and
apoptosis. These events appear driven by alterations, both
transcriptionally and post transcriptionally of Myc and Myc regulatory
proteins. Epigenetic treatment induced perturbation of Myc is facilitated
by Wnt pathway inhibition through induction of Wnt antagonists, namely
DKK proteins. Importantly, as part of this scenario of altering a Myc
regulatory axis, there is a synergistic cytotoxic response mediated at
least in part through downregulation of a critical effector, the Skp2
oncogene. Additionally, we observe significant induction of an interferon
responsive viral defense gene signature as the result of epigenetic
treatment. This gene signature has been shown to correlate with response
to immune checkpoint blockade in the setting of metastatic melanoma. We
propose that this combination of viral defense gene signature
augmentation in conjunction with potent direct epithelial cancer
cytotoxicity holds promise to be a more complete therapeutic paradigm for
the treatment of NSCLC.

