Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MiR-BART9 is a prognostic biomarker associated with PD-1
expression in colon cancer patients


Background:Epstein-Barr Virus (EBV) is widely expressed in the population
in a latent stage. During cancer progression, antiviral immunity is
compromised by the same mechanisms leading to suppression of anticancer
immunity.This study was aimed at developing the expression of miR-BART as
biomarkers to select patients at risk of fast progression for a defect of
the antiviral/anticancer immunity.Methods:We first analyzed the
expression of EBV-miRNAs in a panel of 438 colon cancer (CC) patients of
the TCGA dataset. Analysis was conducted using level 1 miRNA-seq and
level 3 RNA-seq available on the same patients.In order to confirm the
results, we tested the expression of miR-BART9 in an additional set of
271 CC patients using spectral imaging and quantitative fluorescent
immunohistochemistry (PD-1 and PD-L1 antigens at the protein level and
miR-BART9 using a specific designed ISH probe).In order to increase the
clinical applicability of our findings, we also developed a qPCR test to
analyze the expression of miR-BART9 in serum of colon cancer
patients.Results:In the analysis of 438 CC patients of the TCGA dataset,
expression of miR-BART9 was found in 78 patients (18%). Levels of
miR-BART9 were prognostic of poor outcome in a multivariate Cox model
including age and stage (HR = 2.8, CI 1.6-4.7, pBackground:Epstein-Barr
Virus (EBV) is widely expressed in the population in a latent stage.
During cancer progression, antiviral immunity is compromised by the same
mechanisms leading to suppression of anticancer immunity.This study was
aimed at developing the expression of miR-BART as biomarkers to select
patients at risk of fast progression for a defect of the
antiviral/anticancer immunity.Methods:We first analyzed the expression of
EBV-miRNAs in a panel of 438 colon cancer (CC) patients of the TCGA
dataset. Analysis was conducted using level 1 miRNA-seq and level 3
RNA-seq available on the same patients.In order to confirm the results,
we tested the expression of miR-BART9 in an additional set of 271 CC
patients using spectral imaging and quantitative fluorescent
immunohistochemistry (PD-1 and PD-L1 antigens at the protein level and
miR-BART9 using a specific designed ISH probe).In order to increase the
clinical applicability of our findings, we also developed a qPCR test to
analyze the expression of miR-BART9 in serum of colon cancer
patients.Results:In the analysis of 438 CC patients of the TCGA dataset,
expression of miR-BART9 was found in 78 patients (18%). Levels of
miR-BART9 were prognostic of poor outcome in a multivariate Cox model
including age and stage (HR = 2.8, CI 1.6-4.7, p<0.0001). In patients
positive for miR-BART9 we also noticed a significant higher expression of
PD-1, CD3 but not PD-L1 at the gene level. These results suggest that the
expression of miR-BART9 is linked to a T cell infiltrate in the cancer
tissue capable to induce a potent suppression of anticancer and antiviral
immunity.In order to confirm this hypothesis, we performed spectral
imaging in an additional set of 271 CC patients. Expression of miR-BART9
was found in 32 (12%) patients with a prevalent stromal pattern. Also in
this case expression of miR-BART9 was associated with poor outcome in
Cox-multivariate analysis including age and stage (HR = 2.5, CI 1.6-3.4,
pBackground:Epstein-Barr Virus (EBV) is widely expressed in the
population in a latent stage. During cancer progression, antiviral
immunity is compromised by the same mechanisms leading to suppression of
anticancer immunity.This study was aimed at developing the expression of
miR-BART as biomarkers to select patients at risk of fast progression for
a defect of the antiviral/anticancer immunity.Methods:We first analyzed
the expression of EBV-miRNAs in a panel of 438 colon cancer (CC) patients
of the TCGA dataset. Analysis was conducted using level 1 miRNA-seq and
level 3 RNA-seq available on the same patients.In order to confirm the
results, we tested the expression of miR-BART9 in an additional set of
271 CC patients using spectral imaging and quantitative fluorescent
immunohistochemistry (PD-1 and PD-L1 antigens at the protein level and
miR-BART9 using a specific designed ISH probe).In order to increase the
clinical applicability of our findings, we also developed a qPCR test to
analyze the expression of miR-BART9 in serum of colon cancer
patients.Results:In the analysis of 438 CC patients of the TCGA dataset,
expression of miR-BART9 was found in 78 patients (18%). Levels of
miR-BART9 were prognostic of poor outcome in a multivariate Cox model
including age and stage (HR = 2.8, CI 1.6-4.7, p<0.0001). In patients
positive for miR-BART9 we also noticed a significant higher expression of
PD-1, CD3 but not PD-L1 at the gene level. These results suggest that the
expression of miR-BART9 is linked to a T cell infiltrate in the cancer
tissue capable to induce a potent suppression of anticancer and antiviral
immunity.In order to confirm this hypothesis, we performed spectral
imaging in an additional set of 271 CC patients. Expression of miR-BART9
was found in 32 (12%) patients with a prevalent stromal pattern. Also in
this case expression of miR-BART9 was associated with poor outcome in
Cox-multivariate analysis including age and stage (HR = 2.5, CI 1.6-3.4,
p<0.001). Expression of miR-BART9 was again significantly associated with
a PD-1 positive T-cell infiltrate.Based on these results, we have
designed a qPCR test to analyze the expression of miR-BART9 in serum
using an EBV-infected B lymphoma cell line (Raji) as positive control.
The assay was employed for monitoring miR-BART9 expression in serum from
CC patients (n = 89) and healthy controls (n = 95). Human miR-486 and
miR-17 were used as positive controls.MiR-BART9 expression was found in
33 (37%) of CC patients and only in 5 (5%) of the 95 healthy
controls.Conclusions: Our results reveal that expression of miR-BART9 is
associated with aggressive CC. Patients featuring reactivation of latent
EBV-infection have also expression of PD-1+ T cells, which will impact
both anticancer and antiviral immunity. The expression of miR-BART9 can
be detected also in serum and may serve to identify the right timing to
treat CC patients with PD-1/PD-L1 inhibitors in order to restore an
effective anticancer and antiviral immunity.

