Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: scFv antibodies against EphA2 receptor as a therapeutic strategy
for AML


The ephrin (Eph) receptors have been sought as therapeutic targets in
liquid and solid tumors. Eph receptors are a subcategory of receptor
tyrosine kinases and play vital parts in cell survival and function.
Recently, monoclonal antibodies have been designed to bind to the
ligand-binding cavity, that block ephrin to bind to ephrin type-A
receptor 2 (EphA2). The potential clinical importance has been
demonstrated in lymphomas, and the ability of the antibody to reduce
proliferation and induce apoptosis (Goldgur et. al 2014).Acute
myelogenous leukemia (AML) is a disease with dismal outcomes and new
therapeutic targets have been explored. EphA2 has been described to be
critical for the survival in EphA2-positive mouse leukemia models and not
essential for normal hematopoiesis. Thus, we examined cell surface
expression of EphA2 in peripheral blood, and bone marrow samples from AML
patients.We screened 30 primary AML samples and 5 normal samples and
assessed their expression of EphA2 using flow cytometry using the
lymphoma cell line (Raji) as a positive control, as reported to express
EphA2. The EphA2 expression was evaluated under culture conditions as
well as without culture. Prior to culture, 22 (73.3%) of 30 samples were
EphA2 positive in more than 90% of blasts. The mean cell surface
expression of EphA2 in blasts was 95.4% (range: 64.4-99.7%) with a mean
fluorescence intensity (MFI) of 201.5 (range: 18.4-675.0) with a MFI of
4.4 for isotype control. Interestingly, we observed 13.3% increase in
EphA2 expression post-culture, bringing the proportion of EphA2-high
samples from 73.3% to 86.6% of total samples. In addition to the increase
of EphA2-high population, the average MFI of this cohort was also
increased by 47.6% post-culture relative to pre-culture. Furthermore, we
saw a more significant increase in the CD34+ population and little or no
change in the CD34- population. These data shows that many AML express
EphA2, and that culturing with cytokines can induce robust EphA2
expression.After validating EphA2 expression in leukemia cells, we have
tested a set of single-chain antibodies (scFv) against EphA2 that have
shown activity against Raji cells (Goldgur et. al 2014). We tested two
single-chain variable fragments (G2 or D2) on samples with low or high
expression of EphA2. The samples were incubated in the serum free IMDM
medium supplemented with cytokines. The scFv antibodies were tested at
0.5ug and 1.0ug and evaluated after 24hr- or 72hr-culture. We found that
exposure to D2 resulted in a significant decrease in cell number after 72
hr-culture, 52.6% and 99.3% relative to vehicle control treatment for
0.5ug and 1.0ug respectively in EphA2-high AML cells. These data suggests
that the scFv antibodies against EphA2 are lethal to AML cells that
express high level of EphA2.Taken together, our data suggests that more
than 70% of AML cells highly express EphA2 and can be targeted using scFv
antibodies specific to EphA2.

