Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: 15-Lipoxygenase-2 inhibits epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition
(EMT) in metastatic prostate cancer


Introduction15-lipoxygenase-2 (15-LOX-2) is a lipid oxidizing enzyme
which converts the unsaturated fatty acids (Arachidonic and linoleic
acid) to bioactive lipids with anti-inflammatory properties. Abundantly
expressed in normal prostate, 15-LOX-2 expression and activities were
found reduced in prostate tumors. 15-LOX-2 has been suggested as
functional tumor suppressor since restoration of its expression was found
to reduce prostate tumor formation and growth and induce tumor dormancy.
However, it is unknown how 15-LOX-2 modulates prostate tumor progression
and metastasis.MethodsSilico analyses of gene array data, Inducible
Tet-on system to express 15-LOX-2 in PC3MM cells in an inducible manner,
qPCR to check the expressions, western blot, wound healing assay,
immunohistochemistry.ResultThrough in silico analyses of gene array data,
we found 15-LOX-2 expression was markedly reduced in metastatic prostate
tumors when compared to normal or primary prostate tumor tissues. To
determine whether 15-LOX-2 can modulate metastatic potentials of prostate
cancer, we used an Inducible Tet-on system to express 15-LOX-2 in PC3MM
cells. Treatment with 750ng/ml of doxycycline led to induced expression
of 15-LOX-2 in PC3MM cells. Restoration of 15-LOX-2 expression in PC3MM
cells caused re-expression of several epithelial markers including
claudin, desmocollin, desmoglein, Jam, EPCAM, -Catenin molecules involved
in the tight and desmosomal junctions. At mean time, 15-LOX-2 expression
led to a decrease in the levels of mesenchymal markers, vitronectin and
fibronectin, in PC3MM cells. Restoration of 15-LOX-2 expression in PC3MM
cells reduced cell migration and reduced MMP2 and MMP3
expression.ConclusionOur data suggest that 15-LOX-2 is a barrier for
prostate tumor cells to acquire metastatic potentials through inhibiting
epithelial to mesenchymal transition.

