Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metabolic pathways associated with urinary metabolite biomarkers
differentiate bladder cancer patients from healthy controls


Our high-performance liquid chromatography-quadrupole time-of-flight mass
spectrometry study identified bladder cancer (BCA)-specific urine
metabolites, including carnitine, acylcarnitines, and melatonin. The
objective of the current study was to determine which metabolic pathways
are perturbed in BCA based on our previously identified urinary
metabolome. Significant alterations in the carnitine-acylcarnitine and
tryptophan metabolic pathways were detected in urine specimens from BCA
patients compared to those of healthy controls. The expression of eight
genes involved in the carnitine-acylcarnitine metabolic pathway (CPT1A,
CPT1B, CPT1C, CPT2, SLC25A20, and CRAT) or tryptophan metabolism (TPH1
and IDO1) was assessed by RT-PCR in our BCA cohort (n = 135). CPT1B,
CPT1C, SLC25A20, CRAT, TPH1, and IOD1 were significantly downregulated in
tumor tissues compared to adjacent normal bladder tissues (p Our
high-performance liquid chromatography-quadrupole time-of-flight mass
spectrometry study identified bladder cancer (BCA)-specific urine
metabolites, including carnitine, acylcarnitines, and melatonin. The
objective of the current study was to determine which metabolic pathways
are perturbed in BCA based on our previously identified urinary
metabolome. Significant alterations in the carnitine-acylcarnitine and
tryptophan metabolic pathways were detected in urine specimens from BCA
patients compared to those of healthy controls. The expression of eight
genes involved in the carnitine-acylcarnitine metabolic pathway (CPT1A,
CPT1B, CPT1C, CPT2, SLC25A20, and CRAT) or tryptophan metabolism (TPH1
and IDO1) was assessed by RT-PCR in our BCA cohort (n = 135). CPT1B,
CPT1C, SLC25A20, CRAT, TPH1, and IOD1 were significantly downregulated in
tumor tissues compared to adjacent normal bladder tissues (p < 0.05 all)
of patients with non-muscle invasive bladder cancer, whereas CPT1B,
CPT1C, CRAT, and TPH1 were downregulated in those with muscle invasive
bladder cancer (p Our high-performance liquid chromatography-quadrupole
time-of-flight mass spectrometry study identified bladder cancer
(BCA)-specific urine metabolites, including carnitine, acylcarnitines,
and melatonin. The objective of the current study was to determine which
metabolic pathways are perturbed in BCA based on our previously
identified urinary metabolome. Significant alterations in the
carnitine-acylcarnitine and tryptophan metabolic pathways were detected
in urine specimens from BCA patients compared to those of healthy
controls. The expression of eight genes involved in the
carnitine-acylcarnitine metabolic pathway (CPT1A, CPT1B, CPT1C, CPT2,
SLC25A20, and CRAT) or tryptophan metabolism (TPH1 and IDO1) was assessed
by RT-PCR in our BCA cohort (n = 135). CPT1B, CPT1C, SLC25A20, CRAT,
TPH1, and IOD1 were significantly downregulated in tumor tissues compared
to adjacent normal bladder tissues (p < 0.05 all) of patients with
non-muscle invasive bladder cancer, whereas CPT1B, CPT1C, CRAT, and TPH1
were downregulated in those with muscle invasive bladder cancer (p <
0.05), with no changes in IDO1 expression. In this study, alterations in
the expression of genes associated with the carnitine-acylcarnitine and
tryptophan metabolic pathways, the most perturbed pathways in BCA, were
determined. Our findings provide insight into the mechanisms underlying
BCA-associated metabolic flux perturbation.

