Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ovarian cancer stem cell marker ALDH1A2 is a candidate biomarker
for patient selection for intraperitoneal chemotherapy


Objective. To evaluate ovarian cancer stem cells as predictors of
survival we analyzed associations of cancer stem cell markers ALDH1,
CD117 and CD133 with survival outcomes among patients with high grade
serous ovarian cancer (HGS OvCa).Methods. Data from HGS OvCa patients who
were surgically staged prior to treatment with IP (n = 90) or IV-only (n
= 398) chemotherapy was obtained from The Cancer Genome Atlas.
Multivariate Cox proportional-hazards regression tested associations of
tumor mRNA expression of 5 cancer stem cell markers with progression free
survival (PFS) and overall survival (OS). Expression was analyzed as a
continuous variable by restricted mean survival (RMS) analysis. Mean PFS
or OS were compared between IP and IV groups by permutation testing
stratified by expression. P-values were two-tailed.Results. Increased
tumor ALDH1A2 expression was associated with decreased OS among patients
treated with IP chemotherapy, HR 2.36 (1.16-4.80), p = 0.017. IP treated
patients with upper 20th percentile ALDH1A2 expression had decreased OS
compared to bottom 20th percentile expression (30.4 versus 51.1 months,
-20.7 months difference, p = 0.017). RMS curves for PFS and OS of IP
versus IV treated patients crossed at high ALDH1A2 expression, indicating
that IP treated patients had decreased survival compared to IV-only
treated patients. Patients with upper 20th percentile ALDH1A2 expression
treated with IP versus IV-only chemotherapy had no difference in mean PFS
(21.3 versus 21.6 months, -0.3 months difference, p = 0.67) and decreased
OS (30.4 versus 35.3 months, -4.9 months difference, p Objective. To
evaluate ovarian cancer stem cells as predictors of survival we analyzed
associations of cancer stem cell markers ALDH1, CD117 and CD133 with
survival outcomes among patients with high grade serous ovarian cancer
(HGS OvCa).Methods. Data from HGS OvCa patients who were surgically
staged prior to treatment with IP (n = 90) or IV-only (n = 398)
chemotherapy was obtained from The Cancer Genome Atlas. Multivariate Cox
proportional-hazards regression tested associations of tumor mRNA
expression of 5 cancer stem cell markers with progression free survival
(PFS) and overall survival (OS). Expression was analyzed as a continuous
variable by restricted mean survival (RMS) analysis. Mean PFS or OS were
compared between IP and IV groups by permutation testing stratified by
expression. P-values were two-tailed.Results. Increased tumor ALDH1A2
expression was associated with decreased OS among patients treated with
IP chemotherapy, HR 2.36 (1.16-4.80), p = 0.017. IP treated patients with
upper 20th percentile ALDH1A2 expression had decreased OS compared to
bottom 20th percentile expression (30.4 versus 51.1 months, -20.7 months
difference, p = 0.017). RMS curves for PFS and OS of IP versus IV treated
patients crossed at high ALDH1A2 expression, indicating that IP treated
patients had decreased survival compared to IV-only treated patients.
Patients with upper 20th percentile ALDH1A2 expression treated with IP
versus IV-only chemotherapy had no difference in mean PFS (21.3 versus
21.6 months, -0.3 months difference, p = 0.67) and decreased OS (30.4
versus 35.3 months, -4.9 months difference, p < 0.0001). Upper 10th
percentile ALDH1A2 expression was associated with decreased PFS (19.5
versus 22.0 months, -2.5 months, p = 0.005) and OS (27.1 versus 35.2
months, -8.1 months, p Objective. To evaluate ovarian cancer stem cells
as predictors of survival we analyzed associations of cancer stem cell
markers ALDH1, CD117 and CD133 with survival outcomes among patients with
high grade serous ovarian cancer (HGS OvCa).Methods. Data from HGS OvCa
patients who were surgically staged prior to treatment with IP (n = 90)
or IV-only (n = 398) chemotherapy was obtained from The Cancer Genome
Atlas. Multivariate Cox proportional-hazards regression tested
associations of tumor mRNA expression of 5 cancer stem cell markers with
progression free survival (PFS) and overall survival (OS). Expression was
analyzed as a continuous variable by restricted mean survival (RMS)
analysis. Mean PFS or OS were compared between IP and IV groups by
permutation testing stratified by expression. P-values were
two-tailed.Results. Increased tumor ALDH1A2 expression was associated
with decreased OS among patients treated with IP chemotherapy, HR 2.36
(1.16-4.80), p = 0.017. IP treated patients with upper 20th percentile
ALDH1A2 expression had decreased OS compared to bottom 20th percentile
expression (30.4 versus 51.1 months, -20.7 months difference, p = 0.017).
RMS curves for PFS and OS of IP versus IV treated patients crossed at
high ALDH1A2 expression, indicating that IP treated patients had
decreased survival compared to IV-only treated patients. Patients with
upper 20th percentile ALDH1A2 expression treated with IP versus IV-only
chemotherapy had no difference in mean PFS (21.3 versus 21.6 months, -0.3
months difference, p = 0.67) and decreased OS (30.4 versus 35.3 months,
-4.9 months difference, p < 0.0001). Upper 10th percentile ALDH1A2
expression was associated with decreased PFS (19.5 versus 22.0 months,
-2.5 months, p = 0.005) and OS (27.1 versus 35.2 months, -8.1 months, p <
0.0001) comparing IP versus IV groups. Increased CD133 expression was
associated with increased PFS among IV-only patients, HR 0.85
(0.74-0.97), p = 0.016. CD117 and the ALDH1 genes ALDH1A1/3 were not
associated with survival.Conclusions. High primary tumor ALDH1A2
expression was independently associated with significantly decreased OS
among patients treated with IP chemotherapy. High ALDH1A2 was associated
with lack of benefit or decreased survival among patients treated with IP
compared to IV-only adjuvant chemotherapy.

