Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dual targeting of ARK5 and CDK4 pathways with ON 123300 as a
therapeutic strategy for colorectal carcinoma


Introduction: This study describes the development of a novel dual
specificity kinase inhibitor, ON 123300, which exhibits potent activity
against colorectal cancers both in vitro and in vivo. While
overexpression of Cyclin D1 is closely correlated with the proliferative
rate of these tumor cells, metastatic colorectal cancers over-express
ARK5, a member of the AMPK family and mediator of AKT activation. In this
study, we show that ON 123300, which inhibits both CDK4/6 and ARK5, is a
potent inducer of apoptosis of colorectal cancer cells when compared to
palbociclib, a highly selective inhibitor of CDK4/6 kinases that does not
target ARK5.Results & Conclusions: We examined the effects of palbociclib
and ON 123300 on cell cycle progression, modulation of Rb and PI3K/AKT
pathways, and induction of apoptosis in multiple colorectal cancer cell
lines. Comparative kinase inhibition assays showed that while palbociclib
and ON 123300 exhibited equivalent inhibition against CDK4/CDK6, ARK5
activity was inhibited only by ON 123300. When DLD1 and SW480 cells were
incubated with increasing concentrations of palbociclib or ON 123300,
both compounds were equally efficient in their ability to inhibit
phosphorylation of all three members of the Rb family of proteins.
However, when the phosphorylation status of proteins associated with the
PI3K/AKT pathway was measured by western blot, ON 123300 showed
concentration-dependent inhibition of mTOR, AKT, 4EBP1 and S6RB
phosphorylation while palbociclib had little or no effect on the
phosphorylation of these proteins. Cells treated with palbociclib rapidly
accumulated in the G0/G1 stage of the cell cycle with increasing drug
concentrations. Although cells treated with ON 123300 also arrested in
the G0/G1 phase at lower concentrations (01-0.5 uM), with increasing
concentrations of drug there was an accumulation of cells with sub-G1 DNA
content, suggesting induction of apoptosis. ON 123300-treated cells
showed cleavage of PARP and Caspases (3, 7 and 9) as well as inhibition
of FOXO1 phosphorylation, which was not observed in cells treated with
palbociclib. Since ARK5 belongs to the AMPK family of kinases, we next
examined the effects of ON 123300-mediated ARK5 inhibition on metabolic
changes of tumor cells that over-express this gene. Treatment of SW-480
colorectal cancer cells with ON 123300 resulted in an increase in glucose
uptake, profound inhibition of glutamine uptake and reduced ATP
production. A detailed metabolomic study revealed significant alterations
in the levels of metabolites associated with glutamine metabolism. Nude
mouse xenograft assays using Colo-205 cells revealed strong inhibition of
tumor growth following 100 mg/kg of ON 123300 given QD or QOD, with
little evidence of toxicity as measured by change in body weight. Thus,
dual inhibition of ARK5 and CDK4 pathways could be an effective
therapeutic strategy for the treatment of colorectal cancers.

