Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Assays for the selection and functional characterization of
antibody-drug conjugates at the National Research Council of Canada


One of the most promising and fastest growing classes of cancer
therapeutics builds on the molecular targeting abilities of antibodies by
combining them with drugs to generate highly specific antibody-drug
conjugates (ADCs). However, the development of ADCs requires
time-consuming selection of the antibody for every target and cancer
type. Screening technologies based on the use of conjugated secondary
antibodies provide a fast and efficient surrogate assay from which to
identify which antibodies are best internalized and suitable for
immunoconjugate development into ADCs.As part of its integrated antibody
development initiative, NRC has isolated and characterized anti- mouse Fc
and anti-human Fc monoclonal antibodies to serve as very selective
detective reagents for various IgG isoforms. We have shown that these
secondary antibodies are species specific, selective and of high
affinity. Furthermore, they exhibit high specific potency and low
background toxicity after conjugating them to drugs (DM1, MMAE) or
immunotoxins(saporin) in cell viability studies. By combining this
methodology with our proprietary mRNA and DNA expression database for the
selection of appropriate cell lines, we plan on screening thousands of
NRC antibodies generated against variety of cancer associated cell
surface targets for ADC development.In addition to secondary conjugate
cytotoxicity assays, we have developed a suite of assays based on
cellular accumulation, endosomal routing and activation (intracellular
drug release) of antibody drug conjugates. These assays can all
contribute to our mechanistic understanding of ADCs under development.
Combined with our strength in biologic production and characterization,
this expertise promotes the integration and advancement of NRC's
capabilities and strengths in the area of Antibody-Drug Conjugates
(ADCs), and can be used to establish strategic collaborations with other
Canadian or international partners to develop external or internal NRC
antibodies into novel ADC biologics.

