Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: miR-30c blocks tumor cell homotypic aggregation and promotes
anoikis to prevent breast cancer metastasis


Circulating tumor cells (CTCs) are considered the seeds of distant
metastasis, and may be a predictor of poor prognosis in patients with
metastatic breast cancers. Compared to single CTCs, clusters of multiple
CTCs possess higher metastatic capacity in mouse breast cancer models,
indicating that aggregation increases the survival of CTCs in the
circulation. However, the molecular mechanisms by which clustered CTCs
mediate tumor cell survival are unclear. In this study, we found that
miR-30c, which has been identified as an anti-metastatic microRNAs,
inhibited primary breast cancer cell homotypic aggregation in vitro by
real-time monitoring. Interestingly, only aggregated but not single tumor
cells can survive during culture. The death of dissociated primary tumor
cells in vitro is caused by anoikis, a form of programmed cell death
which is induced by detachment of anchorage-dependent cells from the
surrounding extracellular matrix. Therefore, the role of miR-30c in
anoikis was determined by culturing breast cancer cells in poly-hema
coated plates. We found that miR-30c promoted anoikis, evaluated by
Annexin-V staining and caspase3/7 activity. Mechanistic studies indicated
that inhibition of Vimentin (Vim), a positive regulator of
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), was required for miR-30c
induced anoikis. In vivo, lung metastasis was inhibited by miR-30c after
tail vein injection of miR-30c over-expressed cells. In summary, our
findings provide the new insights into the mechanisms of miR-30c-mediated
metastasis inhibition and suggest that targeting CTC clusters could be a
novel strategy to prevent metastasis.

