Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Thymoquinone inhibits bone metastasis in a breast cancer mouse
model by modulating CXCR4/CXCL12 signaling axis


Several lines of evidence(s) indicate that CXCR4 overexpression has been
correlated with distant site metastasis and poor overall survival rate in
patient with breast cancer. The tumor metastasis promoting molecule CXCR4
is considered as a potential therapeutic target for inhibiting breast
cancer metastasis. Thus, novel agents that can down-regulate CXCR4
expression have potential against breast cancer metastasis. In the
present report we investigated the effect of thymoquinone (TQ), derived
from the seeds of medicinal plant Nigella sativa, on the expression and
regulation of CXCR4 in breast cancer cells. In addition, we evaluated the
effect of TQ in a metastasis mouse model established by intracardiac
injection of luciferase tagged MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells that
metastasize to the bones. We observed that TQ could inhibit the
expression of CXCR4 in MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 cells in a dose and time
dependent manner. TQ (2 mg/kg or 4 mg/kg) treatment for four weeks
significantly inhibited tumor growth and significantly reduced metastasis
to multiple vital organs, including lungs, brain and bone.
Immuno-histochemical analysis of the lung and brain tissue showed
significant reduction in CXCR4, Ki67, MMP9, VEGFR2 and COX2 expression
compared to control tissues. TQ treatment also reduced the overall bone
tumor burden. Overall, our results show that TQ exerts its antitumor and
anti-metastatic effects by downregulation of CXCR4 expression both in
vitro and in vivo thus may have possible potential for the treatment of
breast cancer.Acknowledgement: This work was supported by NUHS Basic Seed
Research grant to Prof. Benny Tan.

