Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: IL6 mediated inflammatory loop reprograms normal to highly
metastatic cancer stem cells at pre-HCC liver in 2SP+/- mice


Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), the second-leading cause of
cancer-related death world-wide, displays overexpression of the
pro-inflammatory cytokine interleukin6 (IL6) and inhibition of
transforming growth factor (TGF-) in its early phase. We aimed to
identify the dynamics of liver immune cells under inflammatory conditions
and to characterize early-phase tumor-initiating cells to comprehend
aberrant molecular pathway(s) in HCC progression in a TGF- disrupted
murine model (2SP+/-).Methods: Chronic inflammation was induced in
wild-type (WT) and 2SP+/- mice by hydrodynamic injection of IL6 (pIL6)
encoding Sleeping Beauty transposons twice per month for 3 months. Liver
stem cells were isolated by using CD133 antibody at the end of third
month and cultured with suitable supplements.Results: Culturing of stem
cells enriched from WT and 2SP+/- mice treated with pIL6 showed that the
stem cells derived from 2SP+/- mice were highly tumorigenic and
metastatic in immune-deficient mice. Staining of these cells with EMT
markers Twist and Slug were found in the nucleus. Immunophenotyping
suggested that pIL6 treatment induced significant expansion and
pro-inflammatory phenotypes of liver NKT and suppressed MDSCs in the
2SP+/- mice compared with WT to generate tumorigenic stem cells. By using
numerous pharmacological inhibitors to identify aberrant molecular
signaling event(s), we discovered constitutively activated nuclear factor
B (NF-B) in these cancer stem cells (CSCs). Upon stable knockdown of NF-B
in the CSCs, both EMT phenotype and metastatic ability decreased
significantly both in vitro and in vivo. Furthermore, screening of
putative kinase(s) that could phosphorylate NF-B identified that TGF-
activated kinase-1 (TAK-1) directly phosphorylated NF-B. Staining of HCC
tissue specimens showed that CD133+ liver stem cells expressed
constitutively activated NF-B.Conclusions: Collectively, our data suggest
that IL6, highly expressed in 40% HCC patients, can be considered an
initiation driver to develop metastatic CSCs by constitutively activated
TAK1-NFB pathway at pre-HCC stage.

