Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MEK/ERK and MCL-1 inhibition synergistically reverse apoptosis
resistance in colon cancer cells with BRAF(V600E)-mediated
MCL-1-upregulation


Background. Oncogenic BRAFV600E mutations in colorectal cancer (CRC) are
associated with poor prognosis and treatment resistance. BRAF mutations
activate MAP kinase signaling and may confer apoptosis resistance by
upregulating anti-apoptotic BCL-2/BCL-XL/MCL-1 proteins.Results. Ectopic
expression of mutant BRAFV600E was shown to potently activate MEK/ ERK
that mediated the phosphorylation (T163) and upregulation of MCL-1, but
not BCL-2 or BCL-XL. MEK/ERK-mediated phosphorylation of MCL-1 (T163)
increased its protein stability, shown by an MCL-1 phospho-mimic mutant.
In human colon cancers, mutant vs wild-type BRAF was associated with
increased MCL-1 expression by IHC. MEK/ERK inhibition by cobimetinib
induced pro-apoptotic BIM in BRAF mutant CRC cell lines (HT-29, RKO), and
suppressed phospho-MCL-1/MCL-1 proteins as did ERK siRNA. Suppression of
MCL-1 by shRNA or using a small molecule MCL-1 inhibitor (A-1210477)
synergistically enhanced cobimetinib-induced apoptosis (Table) that was
associated with BAK/BAX activation. A-1210477 antagonized MCL-1 by
disrupting its interaction with BAK and BIM proteins, shown by
immunoprecipitation.Conclusion. BRAF/MEK/ERK induces upregulation of
MCL-1 via phosphorylation/stabilization to confer apoptosis resistance
that can be overcome by combined ERK and MCL-1 inhibition, suggesting a
novel therapeutic strategy against BRAF mutant CRCs.
Drug-induced apoptosis (annexin V) in CRC cell lines

