Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Surgical weight loss via sleeve gastrectomy, but not a low-fat
diet, reverses the pro-tumorigenic effects of obesity


Background: Obesity is associated with increased incidence of basal-like
breast cancer (BLBC), the most aggressive and lethal breast cancer
subtype. Epidemiological data is conflicting regarding whether weight
loss offers protection against BLBC in obese women; only interventions
that typically result in significant sustained weight loss, such as
bariatric surgery, produce a consistent anti-cancer benefit.Purpose: We
sought to determine the differential effects of surgical and non-surgical
weight loss interventions on inflammation, metabolic hormones and tumor
burden in a mouse model of pre-menopausal breast cancer.Methods: Mice
were fed a low fat control or high fat diet-induced obesity (DIO) regimen
for 15 weeks to model chronic obesity. Diet-induced obese mice (n = 75)
were randomized to receive either a surgical weight loss intervention
(sleeve gastrectomy) or dietary weight loss intervention (switch to low
fat control diet), resulting in formerly obese (FOb)-Surg or FOb-Diet
mice, respectively. Additionally, a subset of mice remained on the DIO
diet (Obese, n = 25), with another subset of normoweight control mice
(Con, n = 25) maintained on a low fat diet throughout the study. FOb-Surg
and FOb-Diet mice lost a nearly identical amount of weight and body fat;
both groups had significantly lower weight and percent body fat than Con.
Four weeks after weight stabilized, all mice on study were orthotopically
injected with E0771 mammary tumor cells, which model BLBC.Results: At
study endpoint, the average tumor weight in FOb-Surg mice was
statistically equivalent to normoweight control mice. However, the
average tumor weight in FOb-Diet mice was significantly greater than
controls and statistically equivalent to the Obese mice. Furthermore,
FOb-Surg mice had statistically lower levels of serum interleukin-6 and
insulin compared to FOb-Diet, suggesting that in obese mice sleeve
gastrectomy, relative to diet-induced weight loss, more effectively
reduced obesity-associated inflammation, hyperinsulinemia and mammary
tumor growth.Conclusion: Our results suggest that the strong anti-cancer
benefits seen with bariatric surgery may be related to a significant
reduction in systemic inflammation and growth factor signaling, which did
not occur with non-surgical weight loss despite an equivalent amount of
weight and body fat loss in FOb-Diet mice. Identifying the mechanisms
underlying the protective effects of bariatric surgery against breast
cancer could help identify new targets and strategies for breaking the
obesity-cancer link.

