Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Impact of pre-diagnosis weight loss on outcomes in a prospective
cohort of esophageal cancer patients


Background: Esophageal cancer survival rates remain extremely low and
factors influencing outcomes for this malignancy are not well understood.
Tumor cachexia is a poor prognostic factor for certain tumor types, but
is not well-studied in esophageal cancer. Weight loss in esophageal
cancer is likely multifactorial; it can be due to tumor cachexia as well
as dysphagia from obstructing tumors. In this present study, we aimed to
investigate the relationship between weight loss and overall survival in
a cohort of esophageal cancer patients and to determine whether these
associations differed with tumor size.Methods: We prospectively enrolled
subjects with recently diagnosed esophageal cancer at two tertiary care
centers. Using a baseline questionnaire, we assessed demographics,
medical history, medication use, and lifestyle factors. We recorded
self-reported height and weight one year prior to and at diagnosis, which
we used to calculate body mass index (BMI) and percent weight change,
categorized by tertile. We ascertained from the medical records tumor
characteristics including T stage (T1/2 or T3/4), location, pathology,
and metastasis status, and collected follow-up data on treatment,
imaging, and death. We used Cox regression to assess the association
between percent weight loss and all-cause mortality.Results: We included
134 subjects in the analyses, the majority of whom were male (81.3%) and
had adenocarcinoma (82.1%). The median BMI one year prior to diagnosis
was 28.3 (IQR 24.4 - 31.0) and median percent weight loss was 4.7% (IQR 0
- 10.9%). There was no association between BMI one year prior and
all-cause mortality (HR 0.98, 95% CI 0.93 - 1.03). Increasing percent
weight loss was associated with increased risk of all-cause mortality
(unadjusted HR 2.74 for highest vs. lowest tertile, 95% CI 1.34 - 5.58,
Ptrend = 0.005) and this remained significant when adjusted for BMI one
year prior (HR 2.87 for highest vs. lowest tertile, 95% CI 1.40 - 5.89,
Ptrend = 0.003). We found significant interaction between weight loss and
T stage. Percent weight loss was significantly associated with all-cause
mortality, adjusted for BMI one year prior, among patients with T stages
1 or 2 (HR 6.49 for highest vs. lowest tertile, 95% CI 1.30 - 32.4,
Ptrend = 0.012), but not T stages 3 or 4 (HR 1.42 for highest vs. lowest
tertile, 95% CI 0.54 - 3.71). In the final multivariable model, there
remained a significant association between percent weight loss and
all-cause mortality among patients with T stages 1 or 2 (HR 6.34 for
highest vs. lowest tertile, 95% CI 1.22 - 33.1, Ptrend =
0.022).Conclusions: In this cohort of esophageal cancer patients, we
found that pre-diagnosis weight loss was associated with increased risk
of all-cause mortality in patients with earlier stage tumors, independent
of baseline BMI. We suspect that weight loss in early stage esophageal
cancer may be due to tumor cachexia, a potential marker of more
aggressive disease and worse prognosis.

