Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Broad anti-tumor activity of a novel BET bromodomain inhibitor


Inhibitors against the bromodomain and extra terminal domain (BET) family
of proteins have been pursued as promising oncology agents based on
growing understanding of epigenetic control of disease processes. Through
scaffold-based and crystallography-guided drug design, we discovered
PLX51107, a potent and selective small molecule inhibitor of the BET
family bromodomains. PLX51107 is structurally unrelated to the
benzodiazepines such as JQ1, I-BET762, and OTX015 and other published BET
inhibitors. PLX51107 exhibits low nanomolar potency in blocking
interactions mediated by the four BET family proteins BRD2, BRD3, BRD4,
and BRDT. Pharmacologic inhibition of BET proteins by PLX51107 suppresses
the transcription of genes essential for tumor growth and survival and
leads to selective killing of cancer cell lines across a broad range of
hematologic malignancies (e.g. leukemia, lymphoma and multiple myeloma).
A subset of solid tumors (e.g. melanoma and SCLC) is also sensitive to
growth inhibition by the BET inhibitor PLX51107. Novel biomarkers in
these diseases have been identified. PLX51107 is well tolerated and has
sufficient potency and oral bioavailability to demonstrate in vivo
efficacy in animal models of a variety of tumor types, representing both
hematologic and solid tumors of diverse genetic backgrounds. In
combination studies, PLX51107 showed potential to improve the efficacy
(response rates and duration of response) of other anticancer treatments
without increased toxicity. These results support further development of
PLX51107 as an epigenetic-based therapy for a variety of cancer
indications.

