Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ras association (RalGDS/AF-6) domain family member integrates with
notch signaling to regulate tumor cell migration


Tumor metastasis, the spread of tumor cells to distant tissues from its
site of initiation is a multi-step and multi-factorial process.
Hyperactivation of RAS pathway is reported in >50% of different cancers
and is associated with metastasis and poor prognosis. Since Ras signaling
pathway is essential for normal development, its been difficult to
develop drugs against it in tumors. This led to the identification of
several Ras effectors. Ras association (RalGDS/AF-6) domain family
(RASSF) proteins are non-enzymatic effectors of Ras. RASSF7 is a member
of the less characterized N-terminal RASSFs. Similar to other RASSFs,
RASSF7 also associates with Ras. Several mutations within RASSF7 open
reading frame as well as differential expression pattern were observed in
various tumors. The role of RASSF7 and its downstream signaling is not
yet clearly understood.Microarray analysis for RASSF7 identified several
differentially regulated genes with enrichment for pathways including
cell adhesion, inflammation, actin cytoskeleton and cell-cell
communication suggesting that RASSF7 might regulate cell migration.
Ectopic expression of RASSF7 inhibited cell migration of multiple cancer
cell lines in vitro. RT-qPCR and western blotting analysis suggest that
RASSF7 can transcriptionally upregulate Notch1 expression. Knockdown of
Notch1 abrogated RASSF7 mediated inhibition of cell migration. Our
experiments suggest that RASSF7 alters the localization of Notch1.
Cross-talk Notch signaling is a key signaling pathway regulating tumor
progression across several different cancers. Collectively, our data
suggests that RASSF7 impinges on Notch1 to regulate cell migration.

