Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comprehensive colorectal cancer risk prediction to inform
personalized screening and intervention


Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the second leading cause of cancer deaths in
the United States, despite the fact that it is one of the most
preventable and treatable cancers when detected early via screening. The
current screening guidelines for CRC are based on age, family history of
CRC, and previous screening results. However, multiple environmental and
lifestyle risk factors have been established or suspected for CRC, as
have many common genetic susceptibility loci. It is critical to utilize
this information to better stratify individuals into low- and high-risk
groups for optimized and personalized screening and intervention
recommendations.Using data from two large consortia (8421 CRC cases and
9767 controls): the Genetics and Epidemiology of Colorectal Cancer
Consortium (GECCO) and the Colorectal Transdisciplinary study (CORECT),
we developed risk prediction models for men and women based on family
history, environmental and lifestyle risk factors, and known CRC
susceptibility loci identified through genome-wide association studies.
We constructed an environmental risk score (E-score) as a weighted sum of
19 established or potential environmental and lifestyle risk factors for
CRC with weights obtained from a multivariate logistic regression
analysis. Compared to the model that includes only family history, the
E-score significantly improves the discriminatory accuracy for both men
(AUC = 0.62 vs. 0.53, p-value Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the second
leading cause of cancer deaths in the United States, despite the fact
that it is one of the most preventable and treatable cancers when
detected early via screening. The current screening guidelines for CRC
are based on age, family history of CRC, and previous screening results.
However, multiple environmental and lifestyle risk factors have been
established or suspected for CRC, as have many common genetic
susceptibility loci. It is critical to utilize this information to better
stratify individuals into low- and high-risk groups for optimized and
personalized screening and intervention recommendations.Using data from
two large consortia (8421 CRC cases and 9767 controls): the Genetics and
Epidemiology of Colorectal Cancer Consortium (GECCO) and the Colorectal
Transdisciplinary study (CORECT), we developed risk prediction models for
men and women based on family history, environmental and lifestyle risk
factors, and known CRC susceptibility loci identified through genome-wide
association studies. We constructed an environmental risk score (E-score)
as a weighted sum of 19 established or potential environmental and
lifestyle risk factors for CRC with weights obtained from a multivariate
logistic regression analysis. Compared to the model that includes only
family history, the E-score significantly improves the discriminatory
accuracy for both men (AUC = 0.62 vs. 0.53, p-value < 1e-5) and women
(AUC = 0.60 vs. 0.52, p-value Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the second
leading cause of cancer deaths in the United States, despite the fact
that it is one of the most preventable and treatable cancers when
detected early via screening. The current screening guidelines for CRC
are based on age, family history of CRC, and previous screening results.
However, multiple environmental and lifestyle risk factors have been
established or suspected for CRC, as have many common genetic
susceptibility loci. It is critical to utilize this information to better
stratify individuals into low- and high-risk groups for optimized and
personalized screening and intervention recommendations.Using data from
two large consortia (8421 CRC cases and 9767 controls): the Genetics and
Epidemiology of Colorectal Cancer Consortium (GECCO) and the Colorectal
Transdisciplinary study (CORECT), we developed risk prediction models for
men and women based on family history, environmental and lifestyle risk
factors, and known CRC susceptibility loci identified through genome-wide
association studies. We constructed an environmental risk score (E-score)
as a weighted sum of 19 established or potential environmental and
lifestyle risk factors for CRC with weights obtained from a multivariate
logistic regression analysis. Compared to the model that includes only
family history, the E-score significantly improves the discriminatory
accuracy for both men (AUC = 0.62 vs. 0.53, p-value < 1e-5) and women
(AUC = 0.60 vs. 0.52, p-value < 1e-5). Similarly, we also constructed a
genetic risk score (G-score) using 50 common variants associated with CRC
risk, and the G-score also significantly improves the discriminatory
accuracy for both men (AUC = 0.60 vs. 0.53, p-value Colorectal cancer
(CRC) is the second leading cause of cancer deaths in the United States,
despite the fact that it is one of the most preventable and treatable
cancers when detected early via screening. The current screening
guidelines for CRC are based on age, family history of CRC, and previous
screening results. However, multiple environmental and lifestyle risk
factors have been established or suspected for CRC, as have many common
genetic susceptibility loci. It is critical to utilize this information
to better stratify individuals into low- and high-risk groups for
optimized and personalized screening and intervention
recommendations.Using data from two large consortia (8421 CRC cases and
9767 controls): the Genetics and Epidemiology of Colorectal Cancer
Consortium (GECCO) and the Colorectal Transdisciplinary study (CORECT),
we developed risk prediction models for men and women based on family
history, environmental and lifestyle risk factors, and known CRC
susceptibility loci identified through genome-wide association studies.
We constructed an environmental risk score (E-score) as a weighted sum of
19 established or potential environmental and lifestyle risk factors for
CRC with weights obtained from a multivariate logistic regression
analysis. Compared to the model that includes only family history, the
E-score significantly improves the discriminatory accuracy for both men
(AUC = 0.62 vs. 0.53, p-value < 1e-5) and women (AUC = 0.60 vs. 0.52,
p-value < 1e-5). Similarly, we also constructed a genetic risk score
(G-score) using 50 common variants associated with CRC risk, and the
G-score also significantly improves the discriminatory accuracy for both
men (AUC = 0.60 vs. 0.53, p-value < 1e-5) and women (AUC = 0.59 vs. 0.52,
p-value Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the second leading cause of cancer
deaths in the United States, despite the fact that it is one of the most
preventable and treatable cancers when detected early via screening. The
current screening guidelines for CRC are based on age, family history of
CRC, and previous screening results. However, multiple environmental and
lifestyle risk factors have been established or suspected for CRC, as
have many common genetic susceptibility loci. It is critical to utilize
this information to better stratify individuals into low- and high-risk
groups for optimized and personalized screening and intervention
recommendations.Using data from two large consortia (8421 CRC cases and
9767 controls): the Genetics and Epidemiology of Colorectal Cancer
Consortium (GECCO) and the Colorectal Transdisciplinary study (CORECT),
we developed risk prediction models for men and women based on family
history, environmental and lifestyle risk factors, and known CRC
susceptibility loci identified through genome-wide association studies.
We constructed an environmental risk score (E-score) as a weighted sum of
19 established or potential environmental and lifestyle risk factors for
CRC with weights obtained from a multivariate logistic regression
analysis. Compared to the model that includes only family history, the
E-score significantly improves the discriminatory accuracy for both men
(AUC = 0.62 vs. 0.53, p-value < 1e-5) and women (AUC = 0.60 vs. 0.52,
p-value < 1e-5). Similarly, we also constructed a genetic risk score
(G-score) using 50 common variants associated with CRC risk, and the
G-score also significantly improves the discriminatory accuracy for both
men (AUC = 0.60 vs. 0.53, p-value < 1e-5) and women (AUC = 0.59 vs. 0.52,
p-value < 1e-5) over the family history-only model. Compared to the model
with family history and E-score, the inclusion of the G-score in the
model further improves the discriminatory accuracy for both men (AUC =
0.65 vs. 0.62, p-value = 0.0152) and women (AUC = 0.63 vs. 0.60, p-value
= 0.0005).Our risk prediction models are the first to incorporate both
comprehensive environmental and lifestyle risk factors, and known CRC
common genetic variants. The E- and G-scores are independent risk
predictors for CRC, and models that incorporate both scores improve the
discriminatory accuracy significantly compared to family history-only
models. Using risk-factor distributions available from nationally
representative data (e.g., NHANES), we will provide absolute-risk
estimates of CRC using both the E- and G-scores. We expect our
comprehensive models incorporating both environmental and genetic risk
factors to provide more accurate estimation of CRC, which will be useful
for recommending individually tailored screening and intervention
strategies to prevent this common cancer.

