Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular and cellular effects of individual and combinatorial
silencing of HSP90 paralogs


HSP90 is an ATP-dependent molecular chaperone critical for the folding,
stability and function of over 350 client proteins, including many that
are oncogenic. Pharmacologic inhibition of the essential ATPase domain
inhibits HSP90 function and produces a well-documented molecular and
cellular response comprising depletion of client proteins, induction of
heat shock proteins and reduction of tumor cell proliferation. There are
four paralogs within the HSP90 family, HSP90, HSP90, GRP94 and TRAP1, and
it is not currently clear what precise role each one plays in the
molecular and therapeutic response to HSP90 inhibitors. Here we use an
siRNA approach to selectively reduce the expression of each HSP90
paralog, alone or in combination, in an attempt to dissect the individual
roles of each chaperone in the molecular and cellular response associated
with pharmacologic HSP90 inhibition. In the human cancer models used we
found that by simultaneously silencing HSP90 and HSP90 we could phenocopy
aspects of pharmacologic HSP90 inhibition including reduction of cell
proliferation, induction of HSP72 and other HSF-1 target genes and
depletion of oncogenic client proteins. Through analysing representative
HSP90 client proteins we observed interesting patterns of
paralog-dependence that were related to their overall sensitivity to
pharmacologic HSP90 inhibition. Our results reveal the importance of
HSP90 paralogs in particular aspects of the molecular and cellular
response to pharmacologic HSP90 inhibition.

