Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel regulatory circuit involving STIM1 and HIF-1 mediates
hypoxia-driven hepatocarcinogenesis


Hypoxia and intracellular Ca2+ transient are fundamental traits of
cancer. Signaling cascades initiated or regulated by HIF-1 is essential
for hypoxic responses. Stromalinteraction molecule 1 (STIM1) is well
known as a Ca2+ sensor on endoplasmic reticulum (ER) that mediates SOCE
activation and promotes tumor invasion and migration. However, there was
no general consensus about the relationship between HIF-1 and STIM1.
Also, the significance of STIM1, as well as the Ca2+ mobilization route
in cancer cells during hypoxia remains unknown. Our results show that
STIM1 correlates with elevated hypoxia-inducible factor-1 alpha (HIF-1)
in hypoxic hepatocarcinoma cells (HCC) and is upregulated during
hepatocarcinoma growth. HIF-1 directly transcripts STIM1 and contributes
to store-operated Ca2+ entry (SOCE), while STIM1-mediated SOCE is also
required for HIF-1 accumulation in hypoxic HCC, via activating
Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II and p300. Administration of
YC-1, a HIF-1 inhibitor, or knockdown of HIF1A significantly diminishes
hypoxia-enhanced STIM1 and suppresses tumorigenesis. Moreover, ectopic
expression of STIM1 or HIF-1 partially reverses the impaired growth of
the tumor treated with YC-1. These results suggest a mutual dependency
and regulation of STIM1 and HIF-1 in controlling Ca2+ mobilization and
hypoxic tumor growth, and highlight a potential target for early
hypoxia-related intervention.

