Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression changes of the chromatin modifier PBRM1 in human renal
cell carcinomas in relation to histopathological features


Recent next-generation sequencing studies of clear cell renal cell
carcinoma (ccRCC) have identified point mutations in chromatin-modifying
genes, among them PBRM1 which is now the second most frequently mutated
gene in RCCs (in up to 41% ccRCCs cases) and belongs to the m1 TCGA (The
Cancer Genome Atlas) subset. The occasional presence of PBRM1 mutations
in the absence of VHL mutations indicates, that PBRM1 might be another
driver tumor suppressor gene in ccRCCs. We were interested in examining
PBRM1 expression at mRNA and protein levels and correlated these findings
to histopathological features of RCC patients.Relative gene expression
(RGE) data were obtained by Q-PCR from matched tumor and adjacent normal
fresh frozen ccRCC tissues from 57 patients who underwent radical
nephrectomy at our clinic. Papillary (pRCC) as well as chromophobic cases
(chRCC) were added to analyze the expression of splice variants of PBRM1.
Comparative Western blot analyses as well as semi-quantitative
immuno-histochemical staining (IHC) for PBRM1 and VHL were performed on
all ccRCC cases.In 78.9% of cases (45/57) PBRM1 mRNA was downregulated at
least 1.5-fold, 7% (4/57) showed PBRM1 upregulation, and 14% (8/57)
displayed no obvious expression changes between tumor and corresponding
tumor tissue. Interestingly, 21 of 45 ccRCCs tumor tissues expressed
splice variant 4 more abundantly when compared to normal tissue, whereas
the normal tissue preferentially expressed splice variant 1 that includes
an additional exon. Remarkably, this differential expression picture is
completely reversed in pRCC and chRCC cases.The majority of 57 ccRCCs
displayed weak nuclear PBRM1 staining (52.6%), whereas 31.6% showed
moderate and 15.8% strong staining. However, we were not able to
demonstrate a significant correlation of IHC expression levels, neither
to tumor staging nor to Fuhrman grading.The observed high frequency of
decreased expression of the chromatin-remodeling gene PBRM1 on mRNA
(78.9%) and protein levels (52.6%), respectively, as wells as a high
mutation rate (about 15% in our data set) indicate a substantial role of
PBRM1 in the tumorigenesis of ccRCCs. Preferences in the expression of
different PBRM1 splice variants warrant further investigation with regard
to renal cell carcinoma development.

