Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The cytosolic domain of a disintergrin and metalloprotease (ADAM)
15 promotes non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) invasion and migration


Emerging evidence has indicated that proteins of a disintergrin and
metalloprotease (ADAM) family contribute to cancer progression and
metastasis. One member of this family, ADAM15, has been shown to be
upregulated in multiple cancers, including gastric, lung, breast, and
prostate cancers, and the enzymatic activities of its extracellular
metalloprotrease domain promote breast cancer proliferation and migration
through mediating ErbB signaling pathway. The patients with ADAM15
high-expressing lung tumors have shorter survival time and enzymatic
activity of ADAM15 extracellular domain activates MMP-9 and promotes
NSCLC migration and invasion. We firstly demonstrated other than
extracellular enzymetic activity, the longest isoform of ADAM15 (ADAM15
i6), which contains the most cytoplasmic Src homology 3 (SH3) binding
motifs, significantly upregulated in primary lung cancer tissues and
promoted NSCLC proliferation via growth factor receptor-bound protein 2
(Grb2) and Src homolog 2 domain containing (Shc) association. In this
study, we further explore the roles of ADAM15 cytosolic domain in NSCLC
invasion and migration. Overexpression of ADAM15 i6 promoted CL1-0 cell
invasion and migration according to the transwell and wound healing
assay. Ablation of Ras protein activator (RASA)1 and protein tyrosine
kinase (PTK)6 attenuated the ADAM15 i6-promoted invasion and migration
respectively. Thus, we identified a novel mechanism of the ADAM15
cytoplasmic domain in NSCLC tumor progression, which will shed light on
the molecular mechanisms of ADAM proteins, and facilitate development of
novel therapy in NSCLC.

