Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genetic prediction of VEGF-A plasma levels in cancer patients


ABSTRACTBackground: Angiogenesis is an essential event in tumor growth,
progression and metastasis and is strongly regulated by multiple VEGF
ligands and receptors. We sought to discover genetic variants that could
predict levels of circulating angiogenic proteins in cancer patients
prior to receiving therapy.Methods: EDTA plasma was collected at baseline
(before treatment) in 216 treatment nave pancreatic cancer patients
(CALGB 80303, discovery) and 149 treatment nave colorectal cancer
patients (CALGB 80203, validation). Thirty-one angiogenic factors were
measured by a multiplexed ELISA assay. Genetic variants associated with
levels of each of the 31 proteins were selected from a genome-wide
genotyping of 484,523 common variants in CALGB 80303. Using a cut off of
pABSTRACTBackground: Angiogenesis is an essential event in tumor growth,
progression and metastasis and is strongly regulated by multiple VEGF
ligands and receptors. We sought to discover genetic variants that could
predict levels of circulating angiogenic proteins in cancer patients
prior to receiving therapy.Methods: EDTA plasma was collected at baseline
(before treatment) in 216 treatment nave pancreatic cancer patients
(CALGB 80303, discovery) and 149 treatment nave colorectal cancer
patients (CALGB 80203, validation). Thirty-one angiogenic factors were
measured by a multiplexed ELISA assay. Genetic variants associated with
levels of each of the 31 proteins were selected from a genome-wide
genotyping of 484,523 common variants in CALGB 80303. Using a cut off of
p<108 for association, variants were selected from CALGB 80303, genotyped
in CALGB 80203 and associations tested with the same protein levels. The
Jonckheere-Terpstra test was used. Additionally, mRNA was extracted from
formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded primary tumors from patients in CALGB
80203 and tissue levels of VEGF-A analyzed by RT-PCR.Results: In CALGB
80303, three genetic variants passed the pG) for VEFG-A levels was
validated in CALGB 80203 (p = 1.23105). Patients with the AA genotype
exhibited 2.2-fold higher VEGF-A levels than AG patients, who had
1.2-fold higher levels than GG patients. rs7767396 was not associated
with VEGF-A mRNA levels from the primary tumors of patients in CALGB
80203 (p>0.05). rs7767396 is a common variant (frequency of 49% in
Europeans), is located about 150 Kb 3 to the VEGFA gene, and is predicted
by HaploReg to disrupt the binding motifs of two transcription factors,
NF-AT1 and ZBRK1.Conclusions: A common genetic variant predicts the
levels of circulating VEGF-A in cancer patients. A similar effect has
been also shown in non-cancerous individuals (Debette S et al., Circ Res,
2011). Due to the central role of VEFG-A in the pathophysiology of many
conditions, genetic testing could predict patients who have high versus
low levels, potentially helping to guide the use of anti-angiogenesis
therapies.

