Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: GPR120/FFAR4 activation by fatty acid 16:4(n-3) plays a key role
in resistance to chemotherapy


Although chemotherapy is designed to eradicate tumor cells it also has a
significant impact on normal tissues. These host-responses can have large
effects on the efficacy of treatment and overall survival. Fatty acids
are increasingly recognized to play important signaling roles. 12-S-HHT
and 16:4(n-3) are two platinum-induced fatty acids (PIFAs) that induce
systemic resistance to a broad range of DNA-damaging chemotherapeutics.
PIFAs exert their chemoprotective effect on tumor cells via an indirect
mechanism involving splenic F4/80+/CD11blow macrophages. Here we
identified GPR120 on mouse and human splenic macrophages as the relevant
receptor for 16:4(n-3). GPR120 (FFAR4) is a free fatty acid receptor that
binds medium- to long-chain fatty acids and omega-3 fatty acids and is
involved in anti-inflammatory response and metabolic control. Although
both GPR40 (FFAR1) and GPR120 can be activated by 16:4(n-3) in vitro,
only inhibition or genetic loss of GPR120 was able to block
16:4(n-3)-mediated chemoresistance in vivo. Activation of the
16:4(n-3)-GPR120 axis led to enhanced cPLA2 activity in splenic
macrophages resulting in the production and secretion of
resistance-inducing lysophosphatidylcholine 24:1 (LPC(24:1)). Taken
together, we identified a novel function for GPR120. Activation by
16:4(n-3) leads to enhanced cPLA2 activity and production of LPC(24:1)
resulting in chemotherapy resistance.

