Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential sensitivity of normal liver and hepatocarcinoma
tissues to tBid induced apoptosis is determined by the abundance of VDAC2


A conserved step in extrinsic apoptosis is the outer mitochondrial
membrane (OMM) permeabilization by truncated Bid (tBid) that is generated
from Bid upon cleavage by Caspase-8 activated at death receptors. tBid
directly or indirectly activate proapoptotic proteins i.e. Bak in OMM
and/ or Bax in cytosol which is followed by a change in their
conformation and oligomerization, leading to a pore formation in the OMM.
To better understand the mitochondrial phase of this pathway we applied
tBid to semi-permeabilized cells and isolated mitochondria. We monitored
cytochrome c release, and the ensuing mitochondrial membrane potential
collapse, using immunoblotting and fluorimetry as the markers for
mitochondrial cell death. We found that normal liver tissue and normal
hepatocytes (Rat, Mouse or Human) are unexpectedly resistant to tBid,
whereas hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) tissues and cell lines (e.g. PLC,
Huh7) are greatly sensitized. Considering that the effect of tBid is most
effectively mediated through Bak, its abundance in the mitochondria was
tested. Bak level is significantly higher in tumor tissue/cell lines,
whereas OMM-bound tBid and Bax levels are similar in both cancerous and
normal tissue. Since we have recently found that voltage dependent anion
channel 2 (V2), a pore forming OMM protein, is specifically required for
Bak targeting to OMM, the abundance of V2 was also measured. V2 showed
significant upregulation in HCC tissue/cell lines. Rescue studies using
V2 sensitized normal hepatocytes and liver mitochondria to tBid. We
propose that V2 might be the main regulator for the differential tBid
sensitivity in normal liver and hepatocellular carcinoma.

