Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pretreatment with 1,25 dihydroxyvitamin D3 modulates p73 levels
and activity to increase pro-apoptotic effects of cisplatin in bladder
cancer


Cisplatin-based combination chemotherapy is the standard treatment for
advanced bladder cancer. While there is a substantial initial response
rate and occasional complete response, long term control is uncommon.
There is a substantial need to develop new therapeutic approaches to
bladder cancer. 1,25 dihydroxyvitamin D3 (1,25D3), the active metabolite
of vitamin D, enhances the anti-tumor effects of cisplatin in preclinical
bladder cancer models. We sought to evaluate the mechanism of 1,25D3
potentiation of cisplatin cytotoxicity through in vitro studies in
bladder cancer cell lines. Our studies suggest that enhanced cytotoxicity
is mediated through modulation of p73. In a clonogenic assay, the
surviving fraction after treatment with 1,25D3 (0.1 uM) for 24 hrs
followed by cisplatin (0.1 ug/ml) for 48 hrs increases from 64% to 97% in
T24 cells transfected with shRNA targeting p73. The ratio of the
pro-apoptotic TAp73 isoform to the anti-apoptotic Np73 isoform is
important in determining cellular response to cisplatin. Our studies
demonstrate that pretreatment with 1,25D3 followed by cisplatin
significantly increases the ratio of TA/Np73 mRNA transcripts 2-fold and
increases BAX, the transcriptional target of TAp73, approximately 3-fold.
Protein levels of TAp73 and BAX are also increased 2- and 3-fold,
respectively, as determined by western blot. Protein stability of TAp73
was determined following cycloheximide treatment for 1, 2, and 4 hrs.
After 4 hrs of cycloheximide treatment, protein levels of TAp73 decrease
by approximately 50% in all treatment groups except the 1,25D3 and
cisplatin group, in which the level of TAp73 protein was maintained. This
suggests an increase in TAp73 protein stability after treatment. Using a
TransAm p53 binding assay after p53 immunodepletion, 1,25D3 and cisplatin
treatment increases DNA binding of TAp73 approximately 2-fold. Protein
levels of TAp73 upstream activators, c-Abl and p38, also increase
approximately 2-fold after 1,25D3 treatment, suggesting a mechanism of
action for increased stability and activation of TAp73. Lastly,
pharmacologic inhibition of p38 activation using SB203580 prevents the
synergistic effects of 1,25D3 and cisplatin. Taken together, these data
suggest that the mechanism of synergy for 1,25D3 and cisplatin
combination therapy is through an increase in TAp73 stability and
pro-apoptotic transcriptional activity. These findings suggest that
1,25D3 may have potential to be used in combination with cisplatin to
increase the apoptotic response. Further studies are being performed to
confirm the effects of treatment in an in vivo model, looking both at
short term molecular response and long term therapeutic response to
treatment. Supported by NCI grants CA067267 and CA016056.

