Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel multidrug metronomic chemotherapy significantly delays
tumor growth in mice


The tumor immunosuppressive microenvironment represents a major obstacle
to an effective tumor-specific cellular immune response.We have
previously shown that a novel multi-drug chemotherapy administered in a
metronomic fashion was able to increase immune response to peptides. The
chemotherapy consisted of a cocktail including taxanes (paclitaxel and
docetaxel) and alkylating (cyclophosphamide) agents. The newly designed
strategy was shown to be safe, well tolerated and significantly
efficacious (Tagliamonte et al., CII 2015).In the present study, the
effect on the immunosuppressive tumor microenvironment by the same
multi-drug cocktail was evaluated in a mouse model upon sub-cutaneous
ectopic implantation of B16 melanoma cells.Treated animals showed a
remarkable delay in tumor growth and prolonged survival as compared to
control group. Such an effect was directly correlated with CD4+ T cell
reduction and CD8+ T cell increase. A significant reduction in the
percentage of both CD25+FoxP3+ and CD25+CD127low regulatory T cell
population was found in the spleens as well as in the tumor lesions. An
intrinsic CD8+ T cell response specific to B16 naturally expressed Trp2
TAA was observed. The same metronomic chemotherapy combined to a vaccine
based on mutated antigens, was subsequently shown to increase immune
response to vaccine resulting in a significant delay of B16 tumor growth
as well as animal survival.The novel multi-drug daily metronomic
chemotherapy evaluated in the present study was very effective in
counterbalancing the immunosuppressive tumor microenvironment and
enhancing vaccine efficacy. Consequently, the intrinsic as well as
vaccine-induced anti-tumor T cell immunity could exert its function
containing tumor growth.Overall, the described metronomic chemotherapy
may represent a promising adjuvant approach to enhance anti-tumor
cellular immunity and amplify the biological effects of therapeutic
cancer vaccines.

