Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel synthetic biotinylated microRNA-1207-3p duplex targets the
3UTR of FNDC1 and inhibits proliferation and migration of prostate cancer
cells


Prostate cancer (PCa) is the second leading cause of cancer death in US
men and the dysregulation of microRNAs contributes to its development.
Recently we discovered that miR-1207-3p, encoded at the PVT1 gene locus
on the 8q24 human chromosomal region, is significantly underexpressed in
PCa cell lines and directly targets the 3 untranslated region (UTR) of
Fibronectin type III domain containing 1 (FNDC1). Moreover, using an
oligonucleotide mimic and inhibitor of miR-1207-3p, we established that
miR-1207-3p regulates the proliferation and migration of prostate
epithelial cells. To discover the molecular targets of miR-1207-3p
unbiasedly, a RNA pull-down assay needed to be performed, yet no
biotinylated miR-1207-3p mimic was commercially available. Consequently,
we designed and synthesized a novel synthetic biotinylated miR-1207-3p
duplex, and a novel synthetic biotinylated scramble duplex (patents
pending). Prior to using the novel duplexes for molecular target
discovery, we compared their effects to that of the previously used
commercially available miR-1207-3p mimic and scramble control on the 3UTR
of FNDC1, and PCa cell proliferation and migration. Effects were assessed
using the E006AA mildly tumorigenic PCa cell line and its aggressively
tumorigenic derivative, E006AA-hT. Using these two PCa cell lines
transiently transfected with 3UTR of FNDC1-containing Luc-Pair
Duo-Luciferase expressing vector, we found that the biotinylated
miR-1207-3p duplex directly targets the 3UTR of FNDC1 in comparison to
the biotinylated scramble duplex. MTT assays revealed that the
biotinylated miR-1207-3p duplex significantly decreased the proliferation
of both PCa cell lines in comparison to the control biotinylated scramble
duplex. Interestingly, the biotinylated miR-1207-3p duplex further
decreased the proliferation of the aggressively tumorigenic E006AA-hT by
an extra 25%, compared to the decrease in the proliferation of the
indolent E006AA, suggesting that it may have some selectivity for
aggressive PCa cells. Wound healing assays revealed that the biotinylated
miR-1207-3p duplex significantly inhibited migration of both PCa cell
lines by about 60% in comparison to the control biotinylated scramble
duplex. Notably, the mimic of miR-1207-3p had no effects on the
proliferation or migration of these cell lines when compared to scramble
controls. In conclusion, to our knowledge, we have designed and
synthesized the first synthetic biotinylated miR-1207-3p duplex.
Importantly, unlike the mimic of miR-1207-3p, this novel synthetic
biotinylated miR-1207-3p duplex significantly inhibits proliferation and
migration of PCa cells including those aggressively tumorigenic.
Consequently, the novel synthetic biotinylated miR-1207-3p duplex is a
useful new tool for miR-1207-3p molecular target discovery, and
potentially as a novel therapeutic strategy in PCa.

