Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting carbonic anhydrase IX in multiple pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma models results in tumor growth inhibition and increased
survival


Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is characterized by aggressive
growth, metastatic spread and poor 5 year survival rates of less than 5%.
PDAC tumors develop extensive regions of hypoxia that contribute to its
aggressive behavior and pose a significant hurdle to therapeutic
response. Hypoxia-mediated adaptive responses for tumor cell survival and
metastasis include metabolic reprogramming and pH regulation. Carbonic
anhydrase IX (CAIX) is a membrane-bound, hypoxia-inducible enzyme that is
highly expressed in solid tumors and functions as a critical component of
the pH regulatory machinery required by hypoxic cancer cells for survival
and metastasis. We have recently developed and validated novel small
molecule inhibitors of CAIX and have demonstrated that these inhibitors
are effective at reducing breast tumor growth and metastasis. The lead
compound, SLC-0111, is currently being assessed in a Phase 1 clinical
trial (NCT02215850). In the present study, we have evaluated the efficacy
of targeting CAIX in PDAC using genetic and pharmacologic strategies.
CAIX expression was found to be induced by hypoxia in a panel of human
PDAC cell lines and was also upregulated in cell line-derived xenografts,
patient-derived xenografts as well as the KRASG12D/p53-/- KPCY transgenic
mouse model of PDAC (Rhim, AD et al. Cell, 2012:148;349-361).
shRNA-mediated silencing of CAIX expression in PK-8 PDAC cells
significantly reduced hypoxia-mediated cell proliferation (PPancreatic
ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is characterized by aggressive growth,
metastatic spread and poor 5 year survival rates of less than 5%. PDAC
tumors develop extensive regions of hypoxia that contribute to its
aggressive behavior and pose a significant hurdle to therapeutic
response. Hypoxia-mediated adaptive responses for tumor cell survival and
metastasis include metabolic reprogramming and pH regulation. Carbonic
anhydrase IX (CAIX) is a membrane-bound, hypoxia-inducible enzyme that is
highly expressed in solid tumors and functions as a critical component of
the pH regulatory machinery required by hypoxic cancer cells for survival
and metastasis. We have recently developed and validated novel small
molecule inhibitors of CAIX and have demonstrated that these inhibitors
are effective at reducing breast tumor growth and metastasis. The lead
compound, SLC-0111, is currently being assessed in a Phase 1 clinical
trial (NCT02215850). In the present study, we have evaluated the efficacy
of targeting CAIX in PDAC using genetic and pharmacologic strategies.
CAIX expression was found to be induced by hypoxia in a panel of human
PDAC cell lines and was also upregulated in cell line-derived xenografts,
patient-derived xenografts as well as the KRASG12D/p53-/- KPCY transgenic
mouse model of PDAC (Rhim, AD et al. Cell, 2012:148;349-361).
shRNA-mediated silencing of CAIX expression in PK-8 PDAC cells
significantly reduced hypoxia-mediated cell proliferation (P<0.05) and
invasion (PPancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is characterized by
aggressive growth, metastatic spread and poor 5 year survival rates of
less than 5%. PDAC tumors develop extensive regions of hypoxia that
contribute to its aggressive behavior and pose a significant hurdle to
therapeutic response. Hypoxia-mediated adaptive responses for tumor cell
survival and metastasis include metabolic reprogramming and pH
regulation. Carbonic anhydrase IX (CAIX) is a membrane-bound,
hypoxia-inducible enzyme that is highly expressed in solid tumors and
functions as a critical component of the pH regulatory machinery required
by hypoxic cancer cells for survival and metastasis. We have recently
developed and validated novel small molecule inhibitors of CAIX and have
demonstrated that these inhibitors are effective at reducing breast tumor
growth and metastasis. The lead compound, SLC-0111, is currently being
assessed in a Phase 1 clinical trial (NCT02215850). In the present study,
we have evaluated the efficacy of targeting CAIX in PDAC using genetic
and pharmacologic strategies. CAIX expression was found to be induced by
hypoxia in a panel of human PDAC cell lines and was also upregulated in
cell line-derived xenografts, patient-derived xenografts as well as the
KRASG12D/p53-/- KPCY transgenic mouse model of PDAC (Rhim, AD et al.
Cell, 2012:148;349-361). shRNA-mediated silencing of CAIX expression in
PK-8 PDAC cells significantly reduced hypoxia-mediated cell proliferation
(P<0.05) and invasion (P<0.01) in vitro, and dramatically delayed tumor
growth (PPancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is characterized by
aggressive growth, metastatic spread and poor 5 year survival rates of
less than 5%. PDAC tumors develop extensive regions of hypoxia that
contribute to its aggressive behavior and pose a significant hurdle to
therapeutic response. Hypoxia-mediated adaptive responses for tumor cell
survival and metastasis include metabolic reprogramming and pH
regulation. Carbonic anhydrase IX (CAIX) is a membrane-bound,
hypoxia-inducible enzyme that is highly expressed in solid tumors and
functions as a critical component of the pH regulatory machinery required
by hypoxic cancer cells for survival and metastasis. We have recently
developed and validated novel small molecule inhibitors of CAIX and have
demonstrated that these inhibitors are effective at reducing breast tumor
growth and metastasis. The lead compound, SLC-0111, is currently being
assessed in a Phase 1 clinical trial (NCT02215850). In the present study,
we have evaluated the efficacy of targeting CAIX in PDAC using genetic
and pharmacologic strategies. CAIX expression was found to be induced by
hypoxia in a panel of human PDAC cell lines and was also upregulated in
cell line-derived xenografts, patient-derived xenografts as well as the
KRASG12D/p53-/- KPCY transgenic mouse model of PDAC (Rhim, AD et al.
Cell, 2012:148;349-361). shRNA-mediated silencing of CAIX expression in
PK-8 PDAC cells significantly reduced hypoxia-mediated cell proliferation
(P<0.05) and invasion (P<0.01) in vitro, and dramatically delayed tumor
growth (P<0.001) in vivo, resulting in increased median survival of the
mice from 36 days to 59 days (PPancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is
characterized by aggressive growth, metastatic spread and poor 5 year
survival rates of less than 5%. PDAC tumors develop extensive regions of
hypoxia that contribute to its aggressive behavior and pose a significant
hurdle to therapeutic response. Hypoxia-mediated adaptive responses for
tumor cell survival and metastasis include metabolic reprogramming and pH
regulation. Carbonic anhydrase IX (CAIX) is a membrane-bound,
hypoxia-inducible enzyme that is highly expressed in solid tumors and
functions as a critical component of the pH regulatory machinery required
by hypoxic cancer cells for survival and metastasis. We have recently
developed and validated novel small molecule inhibitors of CAIX and have
demonstrated that these inhibitors are effective at reducing breast tumor
growth and metastasis. The lead compound, SLC-0111, is currently being
assessed in a Phase 1 clinical trial (NCT02215850). In the present study,
we have evaluated the efficacy of targeting CAIX in PDAC using genetic
and pharmacologic strategies. CAIX expression was found to be induced by
hypoxia in a panel of human PDAC cell lines and was also upregulated in
cell line-derived xenografts, patient-derived xenografts as well as the
KRASG12D/p53-/- KPCY transgenic mouse model of PDAC (Rhim, AD et al.
Cell, 2012:148;349-361). shRNA-mediated silencing of CAIX expression in
PK-8 PDAC cells significantly reduced hypoxia-mediated cell proliferation
(P<0.05) and invasion (P<0.01) in vitro, and dramatically delayed tumor
growth (P<0.001) in vivo, resulting in increased median survival of the
mice from 36 days to 59 days (P<0.01), similar to that observed following
treatment with gemcitabine (36 days to 58 days, PPancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is characterized by aggressive growth, metastatic
spread and poor 5 year survival rates of less than 5%. PDAC tumors
develop extensive regions of hypoxia that contribute to its aggressive
behavior and pose a significant hurdle to therapeutic response.
Hypoxia-mediated adaptive responses for tumor cell survival and
metastasis include metabolic reprogramming and pH regulation. Carbonic
anhydrase IX (CAIX) is a membrane-bound, hypoxia-inducible enzyme that is
highly expressed in solid tumors and functions as a critical component of
the pH regulatory machinery required by hypoxic cancer cells for survival
and metastasis. We have recently developed and validated novel small
molecule inhibitors of CAIX and have demonstrated that these inhibitors
are effective at reducing breast tumor growth and metastasis. The lead
compound, SLC-0111, is currently being assessed in a Phase 1 clinical
trial (NCT02215850). In the present study, we have evaluated the efficacy
of targeting CAIX in PDAC using genetic and pharmacologic strategies.
CAIX expression was found to be induced by hypoxia in a panel of human
PDAC cell lines and was also upregulated in cell line-derived xenografts,
patient-derived xenografts as well as the KRASG12D/p53-/- KPCY transgenic
mouse model of PDAC (Rhim, AD et al. Cell, 2012:148;349-361).
shRNA-mediated silencing of CAIX expression in PK-8 PDAC cells
significantly reduced hypoxia-mediated cell proliferation (P<0.05) and
invasion (P<0.01) in vitro, and dramatically delayed tumor growth
(P<0.001) in vivo, resulting in increased median survival of the mice
from 36 days to 59 days (P<0.01), similar to that observed following
treatment with gemcitabine (36 days to 58 days, P<0.01). Interestingly,
gemcitabine treatment in this model increased the fraction of
CAIX-positive tumor cells, and silencing of CAIX expression in
combination with gemcitabine treatment further delayed tumor growth
(PPancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is characterized by aggressive
growth, metastatic spread and poor 5 year survival rates of less than 5%.
PDAC tumors develop extensive regions of hypoxia that contribute to its
aggressive behavior and pose a significant hurdle to therapeutic
response. Hypoxia-mediated adaptive responses for tumor cell survival and
metastasis include metabolic reprogramming and pH regulation. Carbonic
anhydrase IX (CAIX) is a membrane-bound, hypoxia-inducible enzyme that is
highly expressed in solid tumors and functions as a critical component of
the pH regulatory machinery required by hypoxic cancer cells for survival
and metastasis. We have recently developed and validated novel small
molecule inhibitors of CAIX and have demonstrated that these inhibitors
are effective at reducing breast tumor growth and metastasis. The lead
compound, SLC-0111, is currently being assessed in a Phase 1 clinical
trial (NCT02215850). In the present study, we have evaluated the efficacy
of targeting CAIX in PDAC using genetic and pharmacologic strategies.
CAIX expression was found to be induced by hypoxia in a panel of human
PDAC cell lines and was also upregulated in cell line-derived xenografts,
patient-derived xenografts as well as the KRASG12D/p53-/- KPCY transgenic
mouse model of PDAC (Rhim, AD et al. Cell, 2012:148;349-361).
shRNA-mediated silencing of CAIX expression in PK-8 PDAC cells
significantly reduced hypoxia-mediated cell proliferation (P<0.05) and
invasion (P<0.01) in vitro, and dramatically delayed tumor growth
(P<0.001) in vivo, resulting in increased median survival of the mice
from 36 days to 59 days (P<0.01), similar to that observed following
treatment with gemcitabine (36 days to 58 days, P<0.01). Interestingly,
gemcitabine treatment in this model increased the fraction of
CAIX-positive tumor cells, and silencing of CAIX expression in
combination with gemcitabine treatment further delayed tumor growth
(P<0.01) and increased median survival to 86 days (PPancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is characterized by aggressive growth, metastatic
spread and poor 5 year survival rates of less than 5%. PDAC tumors
develop extensive regions of hypoxia that contribute to its aggressive
behavior and pose a significant hurdle to therapeutic response.
Hypoxia-mediated adaptive responses for tumor cell survival and
metastasis include metabolic reprogramming and pH regulation. Carbonic
anhydrase IX (CAIX) is a membrane-bound, hypoxia-inducible enzyme that is
highly expressed in solid tumors and functions as a critical component of
the pH regulatory machinery required by hypoxic cancer cells for survival
and metastasis. We have recently developed and validated novel small
molecule inhibitors of CAIX and have demonstrated that these inhibitors
are effective at reducing breast tumor growth and metastasis. The lead
compound, SLC-0111, is currently being assessed in a Phase 1 clinical
trial (NCT02215850). In the present study, we have evaluated the efficacy
of targeting CAIX in PDAC using genetic and pharmacologic strategies.
CAIX expression was found to be induced by hypoxia in a panel of human
PDAC cell lines and was also upregulated in cell line-derived xenografts,
patient-derived xenografts as well as the KRASG12D/p53-/- KPCY transgenic
mouse model of PDAC (Rhim, AD et al. Cell, 2012:148;349-361).
shRNA-mediated silencing of CAIX expression in PK-8 PDAC cells
significantly reduced hypoxia-mediated cell proliferation (P<0.05) and
invasion (P<0.01) in vitro, and dramatically delayed tumor growth
(P<0.001) in vivo, resulting in increased median survival of the mice
from 36 days to 59 days (P<0.01), similar to that observed following
treatment with gemcitabine (36 days to 58 days, P<0.01). Interestingly,
gemcitabine treatment in this model increased the fraction of
CAIX-positive tumor cells, and silencing of CAIX expression in
combination with gemcitabine treatment further delayed tumor growth
(P<0.01) and increased median survival to 86 days (P<0.01). Similarly,
sequential administration of gemcitabine and the CAIX inhibitor,
SLC-0111, significantly delayed tumor growth (PPancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is characterized by aggressive growth, metastatic
spread and poor 5 year survival rates of less than 5%. PDAC tumors
develop extensive regions of hypoxia that contribute to its aggressive
behavior and pose a significant hurdle to therapeutic response.
Hypoxia-mediated adaptive responses for tumor cell survival and
metastasis include metabolic reprogramming and pH regulation. Carbonic
anhydrase IX (CAIX) is a membrane-bound, hypoxia-inducible enzyme that is
highly expressed in solid tumors and functions as a critical component of
the pH regulatory machinery required by hypoxic cancer cells for survival
and metastasis. We have recently developed and validated novel small
molecule inhibitors of CAIX and have demonstrated that these inhibitors
are effective at reducing breast tumor growth and metastasis. The lead
compound, SLC-0111, is currently being assessed in a Phase 1 clinical
trial (NCT02215850). In the present study, we have evaluated the efficacy
of targeting CAIX in PDAC using genetic and pharmacologic strategies.
CAIX expression was found to be induced by hypoxia in a panel of human
PDAC cell lines and was also upregulated in cell line-derived xenografts,
patient-derived xenografts as well as the KRASG12D/p53-/- KPCY transgenic
mouse model of PDAC (Rhim, AD et al. Cell, 2012:148;349-361).
shRNA-mediated silencing of CAIX expression in PK-8 PDAC cells
significantly reduced hypoxia-mediated cell proliferation (P<0.05) and
invasion (P<0.01) in vitro, and dramatically delayed tumor growth
(P<0.001) in vivo, resulting in increased median survival of the mice
from 36 days to 59 days (P<0.01), similar to that observed following
treatment with gemcitabine (36 days to 58 days, P<0.01). Interestingly,
gemcitabine treatment in this model increased the fraction of
CAIX-positive tumor cells, and silencing of CAIX expression in
combination with gemcitabine treatment further delayed tumor growth
(P<0.01) and increased median survival to 86 days (P<0.01). Similarly,
sequential administration of gemcitabine and the CAIX inhibitor,
SLC-0111, significantly delayed tumor growth (P<0.01) and enhanced
survival (PPancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is characterized by
aggressive growth, metastatic spread and poor 5 year survival rates of
less than 5%. PDAC tumors develop extensive regions of hypoxia that
contribute to its aggressive behavior and pose a significant hurdle to
therapeutic response. Hypoxia-mediated adaptive responses for tumor cell
survival and metastasis include metabolic reprogramming and pH
regulation. Carbonic anhydrase IX (CAIX) is a membrane-bound,
hypoxia-inducible enzyme that is highly expressed in solid tumors and
functions as a critical component of the pH regulatory machinery required
by hypoxic cancer cells for survival and metastasis. We have recently
developed and validated novel small molecule inhibitors of CAIX and have
demonstrated that these inhibitors are effective at reducing breast tumor
growth and metastasis. The lead compound, SLC-0111, is currently being
assessed in a Phase 1 clinical trial (NCT02215850). In the present study,
we have evaluated the efficacy of targeting CAIX in PDAC using genetic
and pharmacologic strategies. CAIX expression was found to be induced by
hypoxia in a panel of human PDAC cell lines and was also upregulated in
cell line-derived xenografts, patient-derived xenografts as well as the
KRASG12D/p53-/- KPCY transgenic mouse model of PDAC (Rhim, AD et al.
Cell, 2012:148;349-361). shRNA-mediated silencing of CAIX expression in
PK-8 PDAC cells significantly reduced hypoxia-mediated cell proliferation
(P<0.05) and invasion (P<0.01) in vitro, and dramatically delayed tumor
growth (P<0.001) in vivo, resulting in increased median survival of the
mice from 36 days to 59 days (P<0.01), similar to that observed following
treatment with gemcitabine (36 days to 58 days, P<0.01). Interestingly,
gemcitabine treatment in this model increased the fraction of
CAIX-positive tumor cells, and silencing of CAIX expression in
combination with gemcitabine treatment further delayed tumor growth
(P<0.01) and increased median survival to 86 days (P<0.01). Similarly,
sequential administration of gemcitabine and the CAIX inhibitor,
SLC-0111, significantly delayed tumor growth (P<0.01) and enhanced
survival (P<0.01) in PK-8 and PK-1 xenografts, compared to gemcitabine
alone. Preliminary data indicate that treatment with SLC-0111, alone and
in combination with gemcitabine inhibits the growth of spontaneous PDAC
tumors in the KPCY transgenic model of PDAC, as assessed by ultrasound
imaging. These results demonstrate that CAIX plays an important role in
PDAC progression and is a potential therapeutic target for pancreatic
cancer. A focused Phase 1b clinical trial of gemcitabine and SLC-0111 in
patients with metastatic PDAC is planned, based on the outcome of the
Phase 1 trial.

