Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synergistic interaction of PIM kinase inhibitor, JP_11646, and
cytotoxic or targeted therapies in acute leukemia models


Standard therapy for acute myeloid leukemia (AML) results in significant
mortality and morbidity with an overall cure rate of only 25%.
Implementation of novel therapeutic options is needed in order to
significantly improve patient survival and outcome. PIM serine/threonine
kinases are overexpressed in hematological malignancies and regulate cell
cycle, survival and drug resistance pathwaysthus providing viable
therapeutic targets. We hypothesized that targeted or cytotoxic therapy
will enhance anti-tumor activity in combination with JP-11646, a novel
PIM2 inhibitor, in preclinical AML models.Preclinical data has shown
JP-11646 exerted potent inhibition of AML cells in vitro and in vivo in
subcutaneous AML xenograft models. An in vitro MTT assay was used to
determine the overall anti-proliferative effects of single and
combination therapies with respect to the downstream effects of PIM
kinase and mechanism of action of JP-11646 in leukemia. First, the single
agent efficacy in human AML (HEL, and MV(4;11)) cell lines were examined
after 72 hours of exposure to JP-11646, rapamycin, daunorubicin and
cytarabine. Overall potency, IC50, (0.17 M (0.15-0.19), 0.003 M
(0.002-0.004), 0.067 M(0.065-0.0699) and 0.31 M (0.294-0.345),
respectively) and maximal inhibition, Imax, of the various therapies was
determined. Potential synergistic effects were first tested by treating
AML cell lines with JP-11646 and daunorubicin, cytarabine, or rapamycin
(an inhibitor of a pathway that regulates downstream molecules of the PIM
kinase pathway). To quantify the synergy or interaction of JP-11646 in
combination, a simple inhibitory non-competitive interaction model with
an interaction parameter () as well as a three dimensional interaction
surface was employed (1 antagonism). The intensity of the interaction ()
of JP-11646 with rapamycin (0.819 (0.395-0.543)), daunorubicin (0.469
(0.665-0.975)) or cytarabine (0.173 (0.118-0.229)) demonstrated
synergistic effects across all combinations.Here, we demonstrate that
novel drug targets and drugs for AML treatment alone, and in combination
with pre-existing therapies, may lead to improved strategies for AML
treatment and these findings support future development of JP-11646 in
novel combinatorial regimens for AML therapy.

