Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of the androgen receptor at two drug-targetable sites
on the DNA-binding domain protein surface


The androgen receptor (AR) is a hormone inducible transcription factor
that continues to be an important drug-target to prevent or slow the
progression of prostate cancer. Current small molecule inhibitors, such
as Enzalutamide (anti-androgens), compete with naturally occurring
steroids that bind to the hormone binding pocket of the AR ligand binding
domain (LBD). In advanced or castration resistant prostate cancer (CRPC),
mutations in the LBD confer drug-resistance by converting anti-androgens
into agonists, prompting research to develop small molecule inhibitors
that target different sites on the AR protein surface. Recently, we
characterized a set of small molecules that could interact with the DNA
binding domain (DBD) of the AR and block its transcriptional activity.
Here, we extend the pioneering observations by clarifying the mechanism
of two classes of compounds that either block AR-chromatin interactions
or reduce AR-dimerization in the cell nucleus. Compound efficacy is
demonstrated across multiple prostate cancer cells lines, including
enzalutamide resistant forms, with respect to AR transactivation, cell
viability and expression of downstream genes. We also characterize the
pharmacological properties of the lead compound and its effects on tumour
xenografts in mice. Collectively, these results lay the foundation for
the development of alternative prostate cancer drugs that interfere with
the biochemical function of the activated, nuclear localized AR.

