Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation of radiation-induced in situ tumor vaccination by TGF
superfamily members


Transforming Growth Factor-beta (TGF) and activin A (actA) are members of
the TGF superfamily with overlapping as well as distinct functions in
many processes including regulation of inflammation and immunity. Similar
to TGF, actA has been shown to promote the conversion of CD4+CD25- T
cells into induced regulatory T cells (iTregs), and to potentiate iTregs
generation by TGF.Many cancer cells produce actA, and we have recently
found that levels of actA released in vitro by breast cancer cells are
enhanced by radiotherapy (RT). Interestingly, prolonged exposure to TGF
inhibitors also resulted in enhanced actA release, consistent with a
compensatory mechanism described in development (Carvalho et al., J Cell
Sci, 2007). Here we tested the hypothesis that actA plays a role in
regulating anti-tumor immunity induced by local tumor RT and TGF blockade
in vivo (Vanpouille-Box et al., Cancer Res 2015).4T1 derivatives with
conditional actA knockdown (4T1shActA) or non-silencing control (4T1shNS)
were engineered using inducible doxycycline (DOX) plasmids and injected
s.c. in BALB/c mice (day 0). ActA gene knockdown (KD) was induced by DOX
at day 8. TGF neutralizing 1D11 or isotype control antibodies were given
i.p. every other day starting on day 12. RT was delivered to the primary
tumor in 6Gy fractions on five consecutive days starting at day 13. Mice
were followed for tumor growth and survival or euthanized at day 22 or 28
for analysis.Consistent with in vitro data, ActA gene expression was
upregulated at day 28 in 4T1 tumors of mice after prolonged TGF blockade
by 1D11. Neither 1D11 nor ActA gene KD by themselves inhibited tumor
growth. However, each intervention significantly improved tumor control
achieved by RT. ActA KD in mice treated with RT+1D11 prevented tumor
recurrence and improved survival (RT+1D11 vs RT+1D11+shActA p = 0.026;
RT+shActA vs RT+1D11+shActA p = 0.0008). Interestingly, blockade of TGF
or actA resulted in increased intratumoral Tregs (Control: 11.6%; 1D11:
26.2%, shActA: 21%) and markedly enhanced the increase in Tregs seen with
RT alone (RT: 15.7%; RT+1D11: 27.5%; RT+shActA: 30.3%). In marked
contrast, when both TGF and actA were inhibited Tregs significantly
decreased in both non-irradiated (1D11+shActA: 13.6%) and irradiated
tumors (RT+1D11+shActA: 7.9% of Tregs). IFN production by CD8+ T cells in
response to the tumor-specific AH1 peptide was significantly higher in
RT+1D11+shActA treated mice compared to RT+1D11 (p = 0.045) and RT+shActA
(p = 0.0147). Additionally, in RT+1D11+shActA mice expression of the
activation marker CD69 was markedly increased in intra-tumoral CD8+ PD-1+
T cells (MFI Control: 187; 1D11: 139.5; shActA: 162; 1D11+shActA: 111;
RT: 138.5; RT+1D11: 379; RT+shActA: 182; RT+1D11+shActA: 498.5).Overall,
data indicate that TGF and actA regulate Tregs numbers in tumors and show
a complex interaction with RT. Combined blockade of TGF and actA during
RT may be required to improve in situ vaccination by RT.

