Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High salt induces anti-inflammatory M2-like phenotype in
peripheral macrophages


Macrophages play a critical role in inflammation and
antigen-presentation. Abnormal macrophage function has been attributed in
autoimmune diseases and cancer progression. Recent evidence suggests that
high salt tissue micro-environment causes changes in macrophage
activation. In our current report, we studied the role of extracellular
sodium chloride (NaCl) on phenotype changes in peripheral circulating
monocyte/macrophages collected from healthy donors. High salt (0.2 M
NaCl) treatment resulted in a decrease in M1 macrophage phenotype
(CD11b+CD14highCD16low) from 77.46.2% (0.1 M) to 29.35.7% (0.2 M,
pMacrophages play a critical role in inflammation and
antigen-presentation. Abnormal macrophage function has been attributed in
autoimmune diseases and cancer progression. Recent evidence suggests that
high salt tissue micro-environment causes changes in macrophage
activation. In our current report, we studied the role of extracellular
sodium chloride (NaCl) on phenotype changes in peripheral circulating
monocyte/macrophages collected from healthy donors. High salt (0.2 M
NaCl) treatment resulted in a decrease in M1 macrophage phenotype
(CD11b+CD14highCD16low) from 77.46.2% (0.1 M) to 29.35.7% (0.2 M,
p<0.05), while there was an increase in M2 macrophage phenotype (CD11b+
CD14lowCD16high) from 17.25.9% (0.1 M) to 67.49.4% (0.2 M, pMacrophages
play a critical role in inflammation and antigen-presentation. Abnormal
macrophage function has been attributed in autoimmune diseases and cancer
progression. Recent evidence suggests that high salt tissue
micro-environment causes changes in macrophage activation. In our current
report, we studied the role of extracellular sodium chloride (NaCl) on
phenotype changes in peripheral circulating monocyte/macrophages
collected from healthy donors. High salt (0.2 M NaCl) treatment resulted
in a decrease in M1 macrophage phenotype (CD11b+CD14highCD16low) from
77.46.2% (0.1 M) to 29.35.7% (0.2 M, p<0.05), while there was an increase
in M2 macrophage phenotype (CD11b+ CD14lowCD16high) from 17.25.9% (0.1 M)
to 67.49.4% (0.2 M, p<0.05). ELISA-based cytokine analysis demonstrated
that high salt treatment induced decreased expression of in the M1
phenotype specific pro-inflammatory cytokine, TNF (3.3 fold), IL-12 (2.3
fold), CCL-10 (2 fold) and CCL-5 (3.8 fold), but conversely induced an
enhanced expression M2 phenotype specific anti-inflammatory cytokine,
IL-10, TGF, CCL-17 (3.7 fold) and CCR-2 (4.3 fold). Further high salt
treatment significantly decreased phagocytic efficiency of macrophages
and inducible nitric oxide synthetase expression. Taken together, these
data suggest that high salt extracellular environment induces an
anti-inflammatory M2 macrophage phenotype with poor phagocytic and
potentially reduced antigen presentation capacity commonly found in tumor
microenvironment.

