Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Trends in a survival of cancer of the coupus uteri in Japan
1993-2006 (J-CANSIS)


The incidence of cancer of the corpus uteri (CC) in Japan is continuously
increasing. To explore the trend in a survival of Japanese CC, we
analyzed the population-based cancer registry data.We obtained data on
8,562 CC cases from six prefectural cancer registries. We defined two
periods as 1993-2001 (1st period) and 2002-2006 (2nd period). Relative
survival (RS) of each period was calculated using cohort analysis, and we
compared them using excess mortality model adjusted for age categories
and extent of disease. We also estimated RS by age group, extent of
disease and histological subtype. For age groups, patients were
classified into those aged 15-54, 55-69 and 70-99. For extent of disease,
patients were classified into those staged localized, regional and
distant group. For histological subgroups, patients were divided into
eight histological categories according to Cancer Incidence in Five
Continents Vol.10 partially modified.The 5-year RS was 78.1% in the 1st
period and 80.1% in the 2nd period. Compared with the RS in the 1st
period, RS in the 2nd period was significantly high [Excess Hazard Ratio
(EHR): 0.805, 95%Confidence Interval (95%CI): 0.723-0.896, PThe incidence
of cancer of the corpus uteri (CC) in Japan is continuously increasing.
To explore the trend in a survival of Japanese CC, we analyzed the
population-based cancer registry data.We obtained data on 8,562 CC cases
from six prefectural cancer registries. We defined two periods as
1993-2001 (1st period) and 2002-2006 (2nd period). Relative survival (RS)
of each period was calculated using cohort analysis, and we compared them
using excess mortality model adjusted for age categories and extent of
disease. We also estimated RS by age group, extent of disease and
histological subtype. For age groups, patients were classified into those
aged 15-54, 55-69 and 70-99. For extent of disease, patients were
classified into those staged localized, regional and distant group. For
histological subgroups, patients were divided into eight histological
categories according to Cancer Incidence in Five Continents Vol.10
partially modified.The 5-year RS was 78.1% in the 1st period and 80.1% in
the 2nd period. Compared with the RS in the 1st period, RS in the 2nd
period was significantly high [Excess Hazard Ratio (EHR): 0.805,
95%Confidence Interval (95%CI): 0.723-0.896, P<0.001]. In the stratified
analysis by age group, the 5-year RS of age group 55-69 significantly
improved from 74.4% to 79.8% (EHR: 0.751, 95%CI: 0.643-0.877, PThe
incidence of cancer of the corpus uteri (CC) in Japan is continuously
increasing. To explore the trend in a survival of Japanese CC, we
analyzed the population-based cancer registry data.We obtained data on
8,562 CC cases from six prefectural cancer registries. We defined two
periods as 1993-2001 (1st period) and 2002-2006 (2nd period). Relative
survival (RS) of each period was calculated using cohort analysis, and we
compared them using excess mortality model adjusted for age categories
and extent of disease. We also estimated RS by age group, extent of
disease and histological subtype. For age groups, patients were
classified into those aged 15-54, 55-69 and 70-99. For extent of disease,
patients were classified into those staged localized, regional and
distant group. For histological subgroups, patients were divided into
eight histological categories according to Cancer Incidence in Five
Continents Vol.10 partially modified.The 5-year RS was 78.1% in the 1st
period and 80.1% in the 2nd period. Compared with the RS in the 1st
period, RS in the 2nd period was significantly high [Excess Hazard Ratio
(EHR): 0.805, 95%Confidence Interval (95%CI): 0.723-0.896, P<0.001]. In
the stratified analysis by age group, the 5-year RS of age group 55-69
significantly improved from 74.4% to 79.8% (EHR: 0.751, 95%CI:
0.643-0.877, P<0.001). The 5-year RS in the other age group did not
improved dramatically, but the 1-year RS of age group 70 years or older
had a trend towards improvement from 81.2% to 83.4% (EHR: 0.777, 95%CI:
0.586-1.029, P = 0.079). The stratified analysis by extent of disease
indicated that the 5-year RS improved significantly in local disease from
93.0% to 95.2% (EHR: 0.717, 95%CI: 0.554-0.927, P = 0.011) and regional
disease from 57.3% to 64.2% (EHR: 0.813, 95%CI: 0.692-0.955, P = 0.012).
Among distant cases, only 1-year RS improved significantly from 46.1% to
57.1% (EHR: 0.715, 95%CI: 0.572-0.895, P = 0.003). According to the
analysis by histological subgroup, the 5-year RS of endometrioid
adenocarcinoma significantly improved from 85.2% in the 1st period to
90.0% in the 2nd period (EHR: 0.700, 95%CI: 0.564-0.870, P = 0.001). In
the cases of other specified adenocarcinoma and carcinoma, 1-year RS
improved significantly from 84.6% in the 1st period to 89.2% in the 2nd
period, but 5-year RS did not.In conclusion, we could reveal the improved
prognosis of Japanese CC from the period of 1993-2001 to the period of
2002-2006, using population-based cancer registry data. The improvement
of short-term RS was observed among elderly, distant or non-endometriod
cases, whereas their long-term prognosis did not change during the study
period. Improved prognosis might be attributed to the progress of
treatment, especially due to chemotherapy or formulation of treatment
guidelines in early 2000s.

