Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prognostic value of obesity-related genes methylation in localized
renal cell carcinoma patients


Obesity is an established risk factor for renal cell carcinoma (RCC):
more than 40% of RCC cases in US are attributed to excessive body weight.
Growing evidence suggests that obesity may also be associated with the
prognosis of RCC. The molecular mechanism linking obesity and RCC is not
well understood. In the present study, we evaluated the association
between promoter CpG island methylation of 20 obesity-related genes and
RCC. A total of 275 newly diagnosed and previously untreated Caucasian
RCC patients were included. For the discovery population, 75 tissue pairs
of RCC tumors and normal adjacent tissues from the surrounding kidney
were used and for the validation population an additional 200 pairs were
included. Pyrosequencing was used to determine CpG site methylation on
bisulfite-treated genomic DNA. We used Cox proportional hazards model to
estimate hazard ratios (HRs) and 95% confident intervals (CIs) for the
association of CpG methylation with recurrence and Kaplan-Meier curve to
plot disease free survival (DFS) time by different CpG site methylation.
The average age of the patients was 59 years and they were largely males;
50% were never smokers. Most of the cases were clear cell RCC (ccRCC) and
clinical stage I. Among the 20 markers, LEP, LEPR and NPY were
significantly hypermethylated in tumor tissues compared to normal tissues
(pObesity is an established risk factor for renal cell carcinoma (RCC):
more than 40% of RCC cases in US are attributed to excessive body weight.
Growing evidence suggests that obesity may also be associated with the
prognosis of RCC. The molecular mechanism linking obesity and RCC is not
well understood. In the present study, we evaluated the association
between promoter CpG island methylation of 20 obesity-related genes and
RCC. A total of 275 newly diagnosed and previously untreated Caucasian
RCC patients were included. For the discovery population, 75 tissue pairs
of RCC tumors and normal adjacent tissues from the surrounding kidney
were used and for the validation population an additional 200 pairs were
included. Pyrosequencing was used to determine CpG site methylation on
bisulfite-treated genomic DNA. We used Cox proportional hazards model to
estimate hazard ratios (HRs) and 95% confident intervals (CIs) for the
association of CpG methylation with recurrence and Kaplan-Meier curve to
plot disease free survival (DFS) time by different CpG site methylation.
The average age of the patients was 59 years and they were largely males;
50% were never smokers. Most of the cases were clear cell RCC (ccRCC) and
clinical stage I. Among the 20 markers, LEP, LEPR and NPY were
significantly hypermethylated in tumor tissues compared to normal tissues
(p<0.0001) in the discovery set. Similar results were obtained in the
validation set. Moreover, LEPR methylation in tumors was associated with
recurrence. When patients were dichotomized into high and low methylation
groups according to the median value of LEPR methylation, high LEPR
methylation was associated with a significantly higher risk of recurrence
(HR = 2.4, 95% CI, 1.03-5.8), adjusted by age, gender, clinical stage,
grade, smoking status, BMI, hypertension and histology. The Kaplan-Meier
analysis showed a shorter 5-year DFS probability for the patients with
high LEPR methylation level (34.7%) compared with low methylation (41.7%)
(LogRank, p = 0.032). The MST was 39 months in high methylation group and
47 months in low methylation. Our results suggest that LEPR
hypermethylation in tumors is associated with recurrence in RCC patients
and thus LEPR may provide a functional link between obesity and RCC.
Future studies are needed to elucidate the biology underlying the
association of LEPR methylation and RCC recurrence. This work was
supported in part by the National Institutes of Health (grant R01
CA170298) and the Center for Translational and Public Health Genomics,
Duncan Family Institute for Cancer Prevention, The University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center.

