Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Automation-enabled 3D tumor chemosensitivity screening by imaging
and flow cytometry analysis


Three-dimensional (3D) cancer cell cultures are being utilized for drug
screening with increasing frequency since they provide a more
physiologically relevant solid tumor model than two-dimensional cell
cultures. Spheroids are a well characterized, in vitro tumor model system
that has been utilized with multiple cancer cell lines. Growth and
manipulation of these cultures in hanging drop plates (HDPs) can be
challenging to manipulate and these challenges are amplified as sample
throughput increases. We automated the culture and compound treatment of
cancer spheroids in HDPs, as well as the preparation of these spheroids
for analysis by high content imaging and flow cytometry. Automated cancer
spheroid cultures showed excellent consistency in size and shape,
providing higher confidence in the screening results. Creating single
cell suspensions from the cancer spheroids for flow cytometry analysis
was another significant challenge overcome through automation. Imaging
provided information such as the location of drug-responding cells within
the cancer spheroid while flow cytometry removed the potential for
spheroid exclusion of staining reagents leading to false negatives.
Automation enabled the use of these complementary analyses, thereby
achieving a more complete understanding of compound sensitivity in solid
tumors and illustrating how spheroids can be utilized to screen for novel
cancer therapeutics.

