Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Visualizing alectinib distribution in mice brain by using MALDI
mass spectrometry imaging technique


[Introduction]In the development of anticancer drug, measurement of drug
concentration in target tissue has been thought to be crucial for
predicting its efficacy and safety. However, measuring homogenized tissue
by using quantitative liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry
(LC-MS/MS) completely loss the spatial information of the compound in a
target tissue. Mass spectrometry imaging (MSI) has been recently applied
as innovative tools to detect pharmaceutical distributions in
heterogeneous targets; however, it still needs to be improved in
quantitative capability or reproducibility.[Purpose]We propose
quantitative approach for MSI (qMSI) that administere matrix-assisted
laser desorption ionization (MALDI)-MSI, concurrently with LC-MS/MS by
using serial sections. We applied qMSI for visualizing spatial
distribution of alectinib, novel ALK inhibitor, in mouse brain and
examined the effect of MDR1 (p-glycoprotein) on the pharmacokinetic
profiles in FVB and Mdr1a/b knockout mice.[Method]Pharmacokinetic study
of alectinib was conducted in FVB and Mdr1a/b KO mice. Plasma,
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and brain tissue were collected at 1, 1.5, 2,
and 4 hours after a single oral administration dose of 4 and 20 mg/kg.
The concentration of alectinib in plasma, CSF and brain tissue sections
was measured by LC-MS/MS. The distribution of alectinib in mice brain
tissue section was visualized by qMSI that we
established.[Results]Developing qMSI showed the brain distribution of
alectinib in the range from 1.2 to 952.6 pg/mm2 per each section, and the
results made with qMSI were in excellent agreement with the complementary
measurements by using laser-micro dissection to verify the exposure
level. While plasma alectinib concentrations had no difference between
both mice, the diffuse alectinib distributions in brain were observed in
Mdr1a/b knockout compared with that in FVB mice. The dominant
localization of alectinib in choroid plexus and brain blood vessels of
FVB mice was observed by 20 m resolution MSI analysis.[Conclusion]Our
qMSI technique is expected to contribute to the development of anticancer
drugs and translational research by visualizing drug distribution in
target organs and tumors.

