Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of S-Adenosylmethionine-dependent methyltransferase
resists TGF-1-induced EMT of pancreatic cancer via microRNA alterations


Identification of epigenetic reversal agents for use in combination
chemotherapies for human pancreatic ductal adenocarcinomas remains an
unmet clinical need. Pharmacological inhibitors of EZH2 are emerging as
potential epigenetic reversal agents in various solid tumors and
leukemia, however, the surprisingly small set of mRNA transcripts
identified with EZH2 knockdown suggests novel mechanisms to govern their
anti-tumorigenic effects. Here, we report 3-deazaneplanocin-A, an
inhibitor of S-adenosyl-L-homocysteine hydrolase and EZH2 histone
lysine-N-methyltransferase, to significantly reprogram the noncoding
miRNA expression, including a subset of PDAC-downregulated miRNAs, to
dampen TGF--induced EMT signals in pancreatic cancer. Particularly, we
identify epigenetic silencing of miR-663a and -4787-5p in PDAC tissues
and cell lines that are reactivated by 3-deazaneplanocin-A to directly
target TGF-1 for RNA interference. Lentiviral overexpression of miR-663a
and -4787-5p partially phenocopied 3-deazaneplanocin-A's EMT resisting
effects in pancreatic cancer cells, whereas locked nucleic acid
antimiR-663a and -4787-5p mitigated them. In vivo, 3-deazaneplanocin-A,
miR-663a and -4787-5p significantly reduced tumor burden and metastasis
in an orthotopic mouse pancreatic tumor model with miR-663a displaying
more potency than miR-4787-5p in curtailing TGF-1 signaling pathway.
These findings reveal tumor miRNA reprogramming as a novel approach for
controlling TGF--induced EMT in human PDAC and uncover a list of putative
miRNA targets that may guide further selection and development of
synthetic histone methylation reversal agents for clinical use.

