Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comparative analysis of small cell lung cancer and other pulmonary
neuroendocrine tumors


Small cell lung cancer (SCLC) is accounting for 15% of all lung cancer
cases and belongs to the family of pulmonary neuroendocrine tumors. This
tumor entity additionally includes large-cell neuroendocrine carcinomas
(LCNEC) and pulmonary carcinoids (PCA), which occur in 3% and 2% of all
lung cancer patients, respectively. Whereas lung carcinoids are
clinically benign, SCLC and LCNEC are characterized as high-grade
malignant tumors, which are associated with heavy smoking and a poor
5-year survival rate of less than 5%.We aimed to characterize the genomic
alterations in neuroendocrine lung tumors and performed whole genome,
whole exome and transcriptome sequencing on up to 110 SCLC cases, over 40
pulmonary carcinoids and over 50 LCNEC tumors.SCLC and LCNEC tumors
reveal high mutation rates with an average of 9.5 and 8.6 mutations per
megabase, respectively. Our sequencing studies have shown that SCLC
tumors are characterized by bi-allelic inactivation of TP53 and RB1 in
almost 100% of the cases. Recurrent significant genomic alterations
affected among others TP73 (13%) and NOTCH family genes (25%). Further
studies in a pre-clinical mouse model confirmed NOTCH as tumor suppressor
and as a regulator of neuroendocrine differentiation in SCLC (George et
al., 2015).LCNEC tumors showed TP53 and RB1 alterations in up to 20% of
the cases. Additionally, LCNECs were found with STK11 and KEAP1
mutations, which occurred mutually exclusive to RB1 alterations (PSmall
cell lung cancer (SCLC) is accounting for 15% of all lung cancer cases
and belongs to the family of pulmonary neuroendocrine tumors. This tumor
entity additionally includes large-cell neuroendocrine carcinomas (LCNEC)
and pulmonary carcinoids (PCA), which occur in 3% and 2% of all lung
cancer patients, respectively. Whereas lung carcinoids are clinically
benign, SCLC and LCNEC are characterized as high-grade malignant tumors,
which are associated with heavy smoking and a poor 5-year survival rate
of less than 5%.We aimed to characterize the genomic alterations in
neuroendocrine lung tumors and performed whole genome, whole exome and
transcriptome sequencing on up to 110 SCLC cases, over 40 pulmonary
carcinoids and over 50 LCNEC tumors.SCLC and LCNEC tumors reveal high
mutation rates with an average of 9.5 and 8.6 mutations per megabase,
respectively. Our sequencing studies have shown that SCLC tumors are
characterized by bi-allelic inactivation of TP53 and RB1 in almost 100%
of the cases. Recurrent significant genomic alterations affected among
others TP73 (13%) and NOTCH family genes (25%). Further studies in a
pre-clinical mouse model confirmed NOTCH as tumor suppressor and as a
regulator of neuroendocrine differentiation in SCLC (George et al.,
2015).LCNEC tumors showed TP53 and RB1 alterations in up to 20% of the
cases. Additionally, LCNECs were found with STK11 and KEAP1 mutations,
which occurred mutually exclusive to RB1 alterations (P<0.05).In light of
these distinct mutational characteristics, we analyzed the transcriptome
sequencing data of neuroendocrine lung tumors in comparison to lung
adenocarcinomas (LUAD) and lung squamous cell carcinomas (LUSQ). An
unsupervised clustering approach led to the identification of five
expression clusters: LUAD, LUSQ and PCA formed distinct transcriptional
classes; the majority of SCLC and LCNEC tumors clustered into two
subgroups. While a few LCNEC tumors clustered with LUAD, LUSQ and PCA,
RB1-mutated LCNEC tumors predominantly clustered with SCLC samples (P
Small cell lung cancer (SCLC) is accounting for 15% of all lung cancer
cases and belongs to the family of pulmonary neuroendocrine tumors. This
tumor entity additionally includes large-cell neuroendocrine carcinomas
(LCNEC) and pulmonary carcinoids (PCA), which occur in 3% and 2% of all
lung cancer patients, respectively. Whereas lung carcinoids are
clinically benign, SCLC and LCNEC are characterized as high-grade
malignant tumors, which are associated with heavy smoking and a poor
5-year survival rate of less than 5%.We aimed to characterize the genomic
alterations in neuroendocrine lung tumors and performed whole genome,
whole exome and transcriptome sequencing on up to 110 SCLC cases, over 40
pulmonary carcinoids and over 50 LCNEC tumors.SCLC and LCNEC tumors
reveal high mutation rates with an average of 9.5 and 8.6 mutations per
megabase, respectively. Our sequencing studies have shown that SCLC
tumors are characterized by bi-allelic inactivation of TP53 and RB1 in
almost 100% of the cases. Recurrent significant genomic alterations
affected among others TP73 (13%) and NOTCH family genes (25%). Further
studies in a pre-clinical mouse model confirmed NOTCH as tumor suppressor
and as a regulator of neuroendocrine differentiation in SCLC (George et
al., 2015).LCNEC tumors showed TP53 and RB1 alterations in up to 20% of
the cases. Additionally, LCNECs were found with STK11 and KEAP1
mutations, which occurred mutually exclusive to RB1 alterations
(P<0.05).In light of these distinct mutational characteristics, we
analyzed the transcriptome sequencing data of neuroendocrine lung tumors
in comparison to lung adenocarcinomas (LUAD) and lung squamous cell
carcinomas (LUSQ). An unsupervised clustering approach led to the
identification of five expression clusters: LUAD, LUSQ and PCA formed
distinct transcriptional classes; the majority of SCLC and LCNEC tumors
clustered into two subgroups. While a few LCNEC tumors clustered with
LUAD, LUSQ and PCA, RB1-mutated LCNEC tumors predominantly clustered with
SCLC samples (P <0.05). KEAP1 and STK11 mutated LCNECs did not segregate
with a particular histological tumor type.Neuroendocrine lung tumors
confirmed high expression levels of neuroendocrine markers. A detailed
comparison of LCNEC and SCLC tumors revealed that the majority of the
SCLC and a few LCNEC tumors were found in a transcriptional group that
showed high expression of the neuroendocrine lineage transcription factor
ASCL1, gastrin releasing peptide (GRP) and DLL3, which was less
pronounced in transcriptional subsets formed by the majority of LCNEC
tumors. Patient tumors that clustered to the transcriptional class marked
by higher ASCL1 expression were identified to have a worse overall
survival (PSmall cell lung cancer (SCLC) is accounting for 15% of all
lung cancer cases and belongs to the family of pulmonary neuroendocrine
tumors. This tumor entity additionally includes large-cell neuroendocrine
carcinomas (LCNEC) and pulmonary carcinoids (PCA), which occur in 3% and
2% of all lung cancer patients, respectively. Whereas lung carcinoids are
clinically benign, SCLC and LCNEC are characterized as high-grade
malignant tumors, which are associated with heavy smoking and a poor
5-year survival rate of less than 5%.We aimed to characterize the genomic
alterations in neuroendocrine lung tumors and performed whole genome,
whole exome and transcriptome sequencing on up to 110 SCLC cases, over 40
pulmonary carcinoids and over 50 LCNEC tumors.SCLC and LCNEC tumors
reveal high mutation rates with an average of 9.5 and 8.6 mutations per
megabase, respectively. Our sequencing studies have shown that SCLC
tumors are characterized by bi-allelic inactivation of TP53 and RB1 in
almost 100% of the cases. Recurrent significant genomic alterations
affected among others TP73 (13%) and NOTCH family genes (25%). Further
studies in a pre-clinical mouse model confirmed NOTCH as tumor suppressor
and as a regulator of neuroendocrine differentiation in SCLC (George et
al., 2015).LCNEC tumors showed TP53 and RB1 alterations in up to 20% of
the cases. Additionally, LCNECs were found with STK11 and KEAP1
mutations, which occurred mutually exclusive to RB1 alterations
(P<0.05).In light of these distinct mutational characteristics, we
analyzed the transcriptome sequencing data of neuroendocrine lung tumors
in comparison to lung adenocarcinomas (LUAD) and lung squamous cell
carcinomas (LUSQ). An unsupervised clustering approach led to the
identification of five expression clusters: LUAD, LUSQ and PCA formed
distinct transcriptional classes; the majority of SCLC and LCNEC tumors
clustered into two subgroups. While a few LCNEC tumors clustered with
LUAD, LUSQ and PCA, RB1-mutated LCNEC tumors predominantly clustered with
SCLC samples (P <0.05). KEAP1 and STK11 mutated LCNECs did not segregate
with a particular histological tumor type.Neuroendocrine lung tumors
confirmed high expression levels of neuroendocrine markers. A detailed
comparison of LCNEC and SCLC tumors revealed that the majority of the
SCLC and a few LCNEC tumors were found in a transcriptional group that
showed high expression of the neuroendocrine lineage transcription factor
ASCL1, gastrin releasing peptide (GRP) and DLL3, which was less
pronounced in transcriptional subsets formed by the majority of LCNEC
tumors. Patient tumors that clustered to the transcriptional class marked
by higher ASCL1 expression were identified to have a worse overall
survival (P<0.05).In summary, these findings point to transcriptional
differences in SCLC and LCNEC tumors and emphasize the precise analysis
of these histological tumor types with respect to their molecular biology
and therapeutic treatment option.

