Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovery of orally bioavailable novel Mcl-1 inhibitors that
exhibit selective anti-proliferative activity in Mcl-1 sensitive cancer
cell lines


Myeloid cell leukemia-1 (Mcl-1) is a member of the Bcl-2 family of
proteins that regulate apoptosis. Amplification of Mcl-1 is found in
various cancers, which causes the evasion of apoptosis and is one of the
major resistance mechanisms for many chemotherapies. Mcl-1 mediates its
effects primarily through high affinity interactions with pro-apoptotic
BH3 containing proteins, Bak and Bax. Thus targeting Mcl-1 with small
molecule inhibitors is a promising strategy but a very challenging task.
Using fragment-based methods and structure-based design, we discovered a
novel class of potent Mcl-1 inhibitors that exhibit selective
anti-proliferative activity. New leads containing a tricyclic indole
lactam scaffold exhibited dissociation constants of 1000-fold selectivity
for Mcl-1 over Bcl-xL and Bcl-2. They also promoted apoptosis only in
Mcl-1 sensitive cancer cell lines by activating caspases in a
dose-dependent manner. These results provide a strong proof of concept
for a selective inhibition of Mcl-1 function as an effective anti-cancer
therapy. Finally, our leads also possess desirable pharmaceutical
properties including in vivo oral bioavailability and represent an ideal
starting point for developing clinically useful Mcl-1 inhibitors for the
treatment of a wide variety of cancers.

