Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Single-cell analysis reveals molecular mechanisms of NRAS-mediated
leukemia stem cell self-renewal in a murine model of AML


Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is frequently fatal because patients who
initially respond to chemotherapy eventually relapse. Most anticancer
therapies are designed to inhibit proliferation. Yet, in hematopoietic
stem cells, the mechanisms of proliferation are distinct from
self-renewal (Li et al., Nature 2013). Consequently, targeting
proliferation may explain the failure of traditional chemotherapy to
eradicate this disease. NRASG12V is required for self-renewal in a murine
AML model (Sachs et al., Blood 2014). To study NRAS-mediated leukemia
self-renewal, we use a transgenic mouse model of AML with an Mll-AF9
fusion and a tetracycline repressible, NRASG12V oncogene (Kim et al.,
Blood 2009). Doxycycline abolishes NRASG12V expression leading to
leukemia remission. We hypothesize that NRAS-activated pathways required
for self-renewal are limited to a subpopulation of LSCs. To identify the
NRASG12V-mediated self-renewing subpopulation, we performed single-cell
RNA sequencing on the LSC-enriched cells from our AML model. Hierarchical
clustering of LSC single-cell data identified three discrete profiles.
Comparing the profiles of NRASG12V-expressing LSCs (RAS-on) to
doxycycline-treated LSCs (RAS-Off) revealed that two of the three
LSC-expression profiles are lost when NRASG12V is withdrawn. These data
suggest that these two profiles are NRASG12V-dependent consistent with an
earlier report that activated NRAS exerts bimodal effects on HSCs (Li et
al., Nature 2013). One of these LSC subpopulations preferentially
expresses genes associated with leukemia self-renewal. On the basis of
this single-cell gene expression data, we identfied cell surface markers
(CD36 and CD69) that delineate the two NRASG12V-responsive
LSC-subpopulations. We sorted LSCs based on CD36 and CD69 status and
found that CD36CD69+ LSCs (the group that expresses self-renewal gene
expression profiles) harbor nearly all of the colony-forming capacity of
the LSCs, forming an average of 13 colonies versus 0.33 colonies for
CD69- LSCs and versus 0.11 colonies for non-LSCs (per 10,000 cells
plated, p Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is frequently fatal because
patients who initially respond to chemotherapy eventually relapse. Most
anticancer therapies are designed to inhibit proliferation. Yet, in
hematopoietic stem cells, the mechanisms of proliferation are distinct
from self-renewal (Li et al., Nature 2013). Consequently, targeting
proliferation may explain the failure of traditional chemotherapy to
eradicate this disease. NRASG12V is required for self-renewal in a murine
AML model (Sachs et al., Blood 2014). To study NRAS-mediated leukemia
self-renewal, we use a transgenic mouse model of AML with an Mll-AF9
fusion and a tetracycline repressible, NRASG12V oncogene (Kim et al.,
Blood 2009). Doxycycline abolishes NRASG12V expression leading to
leukemia remission. We hypothesize that NRAS-activated pathways required
for self-renewal are limited to a subpopulation of LSCs. To identify the
NRASG12V-mediated self-renewing subpopulation, we performed single-cell
RNA sequencing on the LSC-enriched cells from our AML model. Hierarchical
clustering of LSC single-cell data identified three discrete profiles.
Comparing the profiles of NRASG12V-expressing LSCs (RAS-on) to
doxycycline-treated LSCs (RAS-Off) revealed that two of the three
LSC-expression profiles are lost when NRASG12V is withdrawn. These data
suggest that these two profiles are NRASG12V-dependent consistent with an
earlier report that activated NRAS exerts bimodal effects on HSCs (Li et
al., Nature 2013). One of these LSC subpopulations preferentially
expresses genes associated with leukemia self-renewal. On the basis of
this single-cell gene expression data, we identfied cell surface markers
(CD36 and CD69) that delineate the two NRASG12V-responsive
LSC-subpopulations. We sorted LSCs based on CD36 and CD69 status and
found that CD36CD69+ LSCs (the group that expresses self-renewal gene
expression profiles) harbor nearly all of the colony-forming capacity of
the LSCs, forming an average of 13 colonies versus 0.33 colonies for
CD69- LSCs and versus 0.11 colonies for non-LSCs (per 10,000 cells
plated, p < 0.00001 for each comparison). Accordingly, in vivo mouse
reconstituting experiments show that the CD36-CD69+ LSC is the only LSC
subgroup that can reconstitute the leukemia in mice (p Acute myeloid
leukemia (AML) is frequently fatal because patients who initially respond
to chemotherapy eventually relapse. Most anticancer therapies are
designed to inhibit proliferation. Yet, in hematopoietic stem cells, the
mechanisms of proliferation are distinct from self-renewal (Li et al.,
Nature 2013). Consequently, targeting proliferation may explain the
failure of traditional chemotherapy to eradicate this disease. NRASG12V
is required for self-renewal in a murine AML model (Sachs et al., Blood
2014). To study NRAS-mediated leukemia self-renewal, we use a transgenic
mouse model of AML with an Mll-AF9 fusion and a tetracycline repressible,
NRASG12V oncogene (Kim et al., Blood 2009). Doxycycline abolishes
NRASG12V expression leading to leukemia remission. We hypothesize that
NRAS-activated pathways required for self-renewal are limited to a
subpopulation of LSCs. To identify the NRASG12V-mediated self-renewing
subpopulation, we performed single-cell RNA sequencing on the
LSC-enriched cells from our AML model. Hierarchical clustering of LSC
single-cell data identified three discrete profiles. Comparing the
profiles of NRASG12V-expressing LSCs (RAS-on) to doxycycline-treated LSCs
(RAS-Off) revealed that two of the three LSC-expression profiles are lost
when NRASG12V is withdrawn. These data suggest that these two profiles
are NRASG12V-dependent consistent with an earlier report that activated
NRAS exerts bimodal effects on HSCs (Li et al., Nature 2013). One of
these LSC subpopulations preferentially expresses genes associated with
leukemia self-renewal. On the basis of this single-cell gene expression
data, we identfied cell surface markers (CD36 and CD69) that delineate
the two NRASG12V-responsive LSC-subpopulations. We sorted LSCs based on
CD36 and CD69 status and found that CD36CD69+ LSCs (the group that
expresses self-renewal gene expression profiles) harbor nearly all of the
colony-forming capacity of the LSCs, forming an average of 13 colonies
versus 0.33 colonies for CD69- LSCs and versus 0.11 colonies for non-LSCs
(per 10,000 cells plated, p < 0.00001 for each comparison). Accordingly,
in vivo mouse reconstituting experiments show that the CD36-CD69+ LSC is
the only LSC subgroup that can reconstitute the leukemia in mice (p <
0.005). These experiments characterize the NRASG12V-mediated self-renewal
transcriptional signature. Using mass cytometry to query the activation
status of signaling pathways simulteneously with multiple
immunophenotypic markers, we show that Ki67Low LSCs (the putative
self-renewing LSCs) preferentially express increased levels of -catenin
and Myc. These data implicating AML self-renewal pathways can provide
precise molecular targets for treating this deadly disease.

