Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of SENP1 in HBx-induced cell migration and stemness-related
properties in hepatocellular carcinoma


Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the sixth most common cancer, and the
third leading cause of cancer mortality worldwide. Surgical resection can
be curative for early stage HCC, but the risk of tumor recurrence remains
high. Tumor stemness properties have been linked to early recurrence of
HBV-related HCC (HBV-HCC), which continues to be a great challenge in
clinical practice. However, the progress in the strategy of
individualized therapy against HBV-HCC is slow and disappointed. Here we
demonstrate that HBx regulates the cell migration and cancer stemness
properties of HCC cells through Sentrin-specific protease 1 (SENP1)
modification. By a large cohort of HCC patients receiving curative
heptectomy, we found that SENP1 expression level is highly associated
with the gene expression levels of cell migration-related gene
SNAIL/TWIST and pluripotency-related gene OCT4 particularly in HBV-HCC.
Furthermore, SENP1 expression level is significantly associated with
tumor metastasis as well as the early recurrence of HCC using
Kaplan-Meier analysis. Further experiments using cell line model, we
demonstrated that HBx overexpression not only increases the protein
levels of SENP1 and pluripotent transcription factor OCT4, but also
enhances cell migration in HepG2 cells. Inhibition of SENP1 significantly
suppressed the HBx-induced cell migration and cancer stemness in vitro
and in vivo. In summary, in this work, we demonstrate that SENP1 plays a
critical role in HBx-induced cell migration- and cancer stemness-related
properties in HBV-HCC. Findings in this study will facilitate the
potential strategy targeting on SENP1 for individualized adjuvant therapy
against HBV-HCC.

