Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nestin suppression attenuates invasive potential of endometrial
cancer cells by down regulating TGF- signaling pathway


Nestin, an intermediate filament protein and a stem cell marker is
expressed in several cancers. Little is known about the expression level
and role of Nestin in endometrial cancer. Compared to immortalized
endometrial epithelial cell line EM-E6/E7/TERT, endometrial cancer lines
express high to moderate levels of Nestin. Endometrial tumors and tumor
cell lines have a cancer stem-like cells population expressing CD133. The
AN3CA and KLE cells showed more CD133+ cells and expressed Nestin at
higher levels than Ishikawa cells. Knockdown of Nestin in AN3CA and KLE,
and overexpression in Ishikawa cells was associated respectively with
attenuation and enhancement of CD133+ cells. Knockdown of Nestin
increased cells in G0/G1 phase and decreased in S phase, whereas
overexpression decreased cells in G0/G1 phase and increased in S phase of
cell cycle. Nestin knockdown cells showed increased expression of p21,
p27 and PNCA and decreased expression of cyclin-D1 and D3. Nestin
overexpression revealed an inverse expression pattern of cell cycle
regulatory proteins. Nestin knockdown inhibited cancer cell growth and
invasive potential by down regulating TGF- signaling components, MMP-2,
MMP-9, vimentin, SNAIL, SLUG, Twist, N-cadherin, and upregulating
E-cadherin. Conversely, Nestin overexpression enhanced cell invasiveness
by upregulating TGF- signaling components, MMP-2, MMP-9, mesenchymal
markers and downregulaing epithelial marker, E-cadherin. Nestin knockdown
inhibited and overexpression promoted invadopodia formation and pFAK
expression. Knockdown of Nestin significantly reduced tumor volume in
vivo. Finally, progesterone and a nitric oxide donor inhibited Nestin
expression in endometrial cancer cells. These results suggest that Nestin
can be a therapeutic target for cancer treatment.

