Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Vimentin expression as a potential immunomarker of predicting
aggressive disease in clear cell renal cell carcinoma


Vimentin is a type III intermediate filament protein that is expressed in
mesenchymal cells. Overexpression of vimentin has been detected in
prostate cancer, lung cancer, gastrointestinal cancer, and melanoma.
Although vimentin has been used for diagnosing and classifying renal
neoplasms, little is known regarding its prognostic value. This study
examines the prognostic significance of vimentin expression in clear cell
renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC), chromophobe renal cell carcinoma (chRCC)
and oncocytoma. Our patient group (n = 88) consisted of 63 men and 25
women with a mean age of 59 years at the time of diagnosis. Paraffin
embedded specimens from these patients renal tumors were selected for
this study which included ccRCC (n = 66), chRCC (n = 11) and oncocytoma
(n = 11). Vimentin expression was determined by a tissue microarray
technique (TMA) performed by a single pathologist (HL). Tumor staining
results were classified as negative (75%). Clinicopathologic data was
also included tumor histology, tumor size, T stage, grade, presence of
sarcomatoid differentiation, presence of metastasis, and survival outcome
following diagnosis were determined for each patient. Chi square
statistical test analysis was performed in order to test the association
of clinical parameters with vimentin immunoreactivity. Our results show
that positive (>5%) vimentin expression was present in 100% of ccRCC
cases, 9% of oncocytoma, and 0% of chRCC cases. In addition, vimentin
expression in ccRCC was associated with metastasis (p75%).
Clinicopathologic data was also included tumor histology, tumor size, T
stage, grade, presence of sarcomatoid differentiation, presence of
metastasis, and survival outcome following diagnosis were determined for
each patient. Chi square statistical test analysis was performed in order
to test the association of clinical parameters with vimentin
immunoreactivity. Our results show that positive (>5%) vimentin
expression was present in 100% of ccRCC cases, 9% of oncocytoma, and 0%
of chRCC cases. In addition, vimentin expression in ccRCC was associated
with metastasis (p<0.047) but was not significantly associated with
pathologic T stage (P75%). Clinicopathologic data was also included tumor
histology, tumor size, T stage, grade, presence of sarcomatoid
differentiation, presence of metastasis, and survival outcome following
diagnosis were determined for each patient. Chi square statistical test
analysis was performed in order to test the association of clinical
parameters with vimentin immunoreactivity. Our results show that positive
(>5%) vimentin expression was present in 100% of ccRCC cases, 9% of
oncocytoma, and 0% of chRCC cases. In addition, vimentin expression in
ccRCC was associated with metastasis (p<0.047) but was not significantly
associated with pathologic T stage (P<0.185), Fuhrman grade (P75%).
Clinicopathologic data was also included tumor histology, tumor size, T
stage, grade, presence of sarcomatoid differentiation, presence of
metastasis, and survival outcome following diagnosis were determined for
each patient. Chi square statistical test analysis was performed in order
to test the association of clinical parameters with vimentin
immunoreactivity. Our results show that positive (>5%) vimentin
expression was present in 100% of ccRCC cases, 9% of oncocytoma, and 0%
of chRCC cases. In addition, vimentin expression in ccRCC was associated
with metastasis (p<0.047) but was not significantly associated with
pathologic T stage (P<0.185), Fuhrman grade (P<0.636), or the presence of
sarcomatoid differentiation (P75%). Clinicopathologic data was also
included tumor histology, tumor size, T stage, grade, presence of
sarcomatoid differentiation, presence of metastasis, and survival outcome
following diagnosis were determined for each patient. Chi square
statistical test analysis was performed in order to test the association
of clinical parameters with vimentin immunoreactivity. Our results show
that positive (>5%) vimentin expression was present in 100% of ccRCC
cases, 9% of oncocytoma, and 0% of chRCC cases. In addition, vimentin
expression in ccRCC was associated with metastasis (p<0.047) but was not
significantly associated with pathologic T stage (P<0.185), Fuhrman grade
(P<0.636), or the presence of sarcomatoid differentiation (P<0.855). With
a median follow up of 7.2 years, there were 26 deaths in the ccRCC and
none in the chRCC or oncocytoma groups. Positive vimentin staining was
not associated with overall survival in the ccRCC group. Our results
suggest that vimentin may be valuable predictor of metastatic disease in
ccRCC patients.

