Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gene expression analysis of HPV negative and HPV positive penile
cancer


Penile cancer is a disease with a high morbidity and mortality among
developing countries. Although penile cancer is a relatively uncommon
cancer in developed countries, its incidence is nearly four times higher
in Puerto Rico when compared with other racial and ethnic groups in the
United States. Approximately 40% to 45% of penile cancers are
HPV-related. The etiology of penile cancers is not completely understood
and additional research is necessary to fully delineate the sequence of
molecular events involved in both HPV mediated and non-HPV mediated
pathways leading to penile cancer. The objective of this study is to
determine the genome-wide expression profiles in HPV mediated and non-HPV
mediated penile cancer. Penile cancer fresh tissue was obtained from
surgically intervened cases. The global gene expression profile was
identified and analyzed using the Affymetrix GeneChip Human Gene 2.0
array. Microarray analysis showed a total of 158 genes differentially
expressed between HPV mediated and non-HPV mediated penile cancer.
Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) revealed alterations in the celular
movement, cancer, lipid metabolism, carbohydrate metabolism, interleukin,
TGF-B, integrin, PI3-kinase and MMP signaling pathways. The microarray
results were confirmed by quantitative real-time PCR for some
representative genes. Functional and pathway annotation using
bioinformatics tools helped to identify specific pathways. Knowledge of
the biological pathways and networks of the genes that are significantly
expressed or altered are pertinent to understanding the molecular basis
of the penile cancer.

