Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High expression of miR-181c in tumor tissue as a recurrence marker
of Dukes B colorectal cancer


Background & Aims: A standard treatment for Dukes B colorectal cancer
(CRC) which invades deeply through the muscularis propria without lymph
node metastasis and distant metastasis is surgical resection without any
additional chemotherapy. However, tumor recurrence is occurred in
approximately 20% of these patients after curative resection. To date,
there were no biomarkers for detecting the high risk group for tumor
recurrence of Dukes B CRC. In the present study, miRNAs extracted from
both frozen tissues and formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissues
of CRC were investigated for a candidate for detecting the high risk
group in Dukes B CRC.Methods: Patients with histologically confirmed as
Dukes B CRC were enrolled; 10 patients (5 patients with recurrence and 5
patients without recurrence) for preliminary study, 80 patients for
training cohort, and 57 patients for validation cohort. First,
comprehensive analysis of miRNAs was performed to select candidate miRNAs
associated with recurrence using a high-sensitivity miRNA array chip in
the preliminary study. Next, the candidate miRNAs were analyzed by
real-time RT-PCR using miRNA extracted from frozen tissue and FFPE tissue
in the training cohort. Finally, miR-181c was assessed by real-time
RT-PCR using miRNA extracted from FFPE tissue in the validation
cohort.Results: In the preliminary study, 15 miRNAs were expressed
significantly higher in the cancer tissue with recurrence than that
without recurrence (P Background & Aims: A standard treatment for Dukes B
colorectal cancer (CRC) which invades deeply through the muscularis
propria without lymph node metastasis and distant metastasis is surgical
resection without any additional chemotherapy. However, tumor recurrence
is occurred in approximately 20% of these patients after curative
resection. To date, there were no biomarkers for detecting the high risk
group for tumor recurrence of Dukes B CRC. In the present study, miRNAs
extracted from both frozen tissues and formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded
(FFPE) tissues of CRC were investigated for a candidate for detecting the
high risk group in Dukes B CRC.Methods: Patients with histologically
confirmed as Dukes B CRC were enrolled; 10 patients (5 patients with
recurrence and 5 patients without recurrence) for preliminary study, 80
patients for training cohort, and 57 patients for validation cohort.
First, comprehensive analysis of miRNAs was performed to select candidate
miRNAs associated with recurrence using a high-sensitivity miRNA array
chip in the preliminary study. Next, the candidate miRNAs were analyzed
by real-time RT-PCR using miRNA extracted from frozen tissue and FFPE
tissue in the training cohort. Finally, miR-181c was assessed by
real-time RT-PCR using miRNA extracted from FFPE tissue in the validation
cohort.Results: In the preliminary study, 15 miRNAs were expressed
significantly higher in the cancer tissue with recurrence than that
without recurrence (P < 0.05) and selected as candidates for further
study. Regarding let-7a, -7d, -7e, miR-23c, -26b, -128a, -151-5p, and
-181c, tumor recurrence in the high expression group of these miRNAs was
observed significantly higher than that in the low expression group in
the training cohort using frozen tissue (P Background & Aims: A standard
treatment for Dukes B colorectal cancer (CRC) which invades deeply
through the muscularis propria without lymph node metastasis and distant
metastasis is surgical resection without any additional chemotherapy.
However, tumor recurrence is occurred in approximately 20% of these
patients after curative resection. To date, there were no biomarkers for
detecting the high risk group for tumor recurrence of Dukes B CRC. In the
present study, miRNAs extracted from both frozen tissues and
formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissues of CRC were investigated
for a candidate for detecting the high risk group in Dukes B CRC.Methods:
Patients with histologically confirmed as Dukes B CRC were enrolled; 10
patients (5 patients with recurrence and 5 patients without recurrence)
for preliminary study, 80 patients for training cohort, and 57 patients
for validation cohort. First, comprehensive analysis of miRNAs was
performed to select candidate miRNAs associated with recurrence using a
high-sensitivity miRNA array chip in the preliminary study. Next, the
candidate miRNAs were analyzed by real-time RT-PCR using miRNA extracted
from frozen tissue and FFPE tissue in the training cohort. Finally,
miR-181c was assessed by real-time RT-PCR using miRNA extracted from FFPE
tissue in the validation cohort.Results: In the preliminary study, 15
miRNAs were expressed significantly higher in the cancer tissue with
recurrence than that without recurrence (P < 0.05) and selected as
candidates for further study. Regarding let-7a, -7d, -7e, miR-23c, -26b,
-128a, -151-5p, and -181c, tumor recurrence in the high expression group
of these miRNAs was observed significantly higher than that in the low
expression group in the training cohort using frozen tissue (P < 0.05).
According to multivariate analysis including pathological factors, the
high expression of miR-181c was detected as an independent predictive
factor for recurrence (P = 0.001, OR: 9.43, 95%CI: 2.57-34.48). The same
result was observed in the training cohort using FFPE tissue (P = 0.003,
OR: 7.46, 95%CI: 1.97-28.57). In the validation cohort using the FFPE
tissue, the recurrence rates of Dukes B CRC patients with high miR-181c
expression and low miR-181c expression were 4.5% and 38.5%, respectively
(P Background & Aims: A standard treatment for Dukes B colorectal cancer
(CRC) which invades deeply through the muscularis propria without lymph
node metastasis and distant metastasis is surgical resection without any
additional chemotherapy. However, tumor recurrence is occurred in
approximately 20% of these patients after curative resection. To date,
there were no biomarkers for detecting the high risk group for tumor
recurrence of Dukes B CRC. In the present study, miRNAs extracted from
both frozen tissues and formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissues
of CRC were investigated for a candidate for detecting the high risk
group in Dukes B CRC.Methods: Patients with histologically confirmed as
Dukes B CRC were enrolled; 10 patients (5 patients with recurrence and 5
patients without recurrence) for preliminary study, 80 patients for
training cohort, and 57 patients for validation cohort. First,
comprehensive analysis of miRNAs was performed to select candidate miRNAs
associated with recurrence using a high-sensitivity miRNA array chip in
the preliminary study. Next, the candidate miRNAs were analyzed by
real-time RT-PCR using miRNA extracted from frozen tissue and FFPE tissue
in the training cohort. Finally, miR-181c was assessed by real-time
RT-PCR using miRNA extracted from FFPE tissue in the validation
cohort.Results: In the preliminary study, 15 miRNAs were expressed
significantly higher in the cancer tissue with recurrence than that
without recurrence (P < 0.05) and selected as candidates for further
study. Regarding let-7a, -7d, -7e, miR-23c, -26b, -128a, -151-5p, and
-181c, tumor recurrence in the high expression group of these miRNAs was
observed significantly higher than that in the low expression group in
the training cohort using frozen tissue (P < 0.05). According to
multivariate analysis including pathological factors, the high expression
of miR-181c was detected as an independent predictive factor for
recurrence (P = 0.001, OR: 9.43, 95%CI: 2.57-34.48). The same result was
observed in the training cohort using FFPE tissue (P = 0.003, OR: 7.46,
95%CI: 1.97-28.57). In the validation cohort using the FFPE tissue, the
recurrence rates of Dukes B CRC patients with high miR-181c expression
and low miR-181c expression were 4.5% and 38.5%, respectively (P <
0.001).Conclusions: miR-181c expression in CRC tissue (both frozen and
FFPE) may be a useful predictive biomarker for tumor recurrence of Dukes
B CRC.

