Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel inhibitor GZ17-06.12 suppresses pancreatic cancer
tumorigenesis


Purpose: Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) or pancreatic cancer is
one of the most lethal malignancies in humans. The survival rate for two
years is very limited in most of cases (10%) after diagnosis of this
disease. This is because current therapeutic regimens have limited
effectiveness. Novel therapeutic targets are needed to treat this
disease. GZ17-06.12 contains a nutraceutical for its anti-cancer
properties, in several cancers. Crude extracts of the plant Arum
palaestinum Boiss used in traditional Israeli and Palestinian medicine,
have demonstrated cytostatic and cytotoxic activities in colon, prostrate
and lung carcinoma. Therefore, we hypothesize that GZ17-06.12 will
inhibit tumor progression and metastasis in PDAC.Experimental Procedure:
In this study, we have determined cell proliferation, pancosphere
formation and apoptosis following treatment of different doses
oGZ17-06.12 for 24-72 hours using MiaPaCa-2 and S2-007 human pancreatic
cancer cells. Cell cycle distribution and apoptosis were measured using
flow cytometic analysis. Orthotopic pancreatic cancer model in athymic
mice was developed and GZ17-06.12 was given orally for 20 days to those
mice. Proliferative markers, pEGFR/pAkt and apoptotic markers, Bax/Bcl-2,
were monitored following treatment with GZ17-06.12 in both in vivo and in
vitro models. Metastatic markers, MMP-2 and MMP-9 were measured in
metastatic tissues in orthotopic models.Results: GZ17-06.12 inhibited
proliferation of pancreatic cancer cell lines in a dose- and
time-dependent manner. Cell cycle analysis suggested that cells were
arrested in S and G2 phase following treatment. In addition, GZ17-06.12
induced apoptosis in both in vitro and in vivo pancreatic cancer.
Moreover, the compound significantly inhibited epidermal growth factor
receptor and Akt phosphorylation. Furthermore, GZ17-06.12 decreased the
number and size of the pancospheres in S2-007 cells with concomitant
inhibition of pancreatic cancer stem cell markers, DCLK1, Lgr5 and EpCam.
The effect of GZ17-06.12 suppressed tumor growth and metastatic potential
as indicative of MMP-2 and MMP-9 activity in primary and metastatic
tumors.Conclusions: GZ17-06.12 significantly reduces tumorigenesis and
metastasis in both in vitro and in vivo pancreatic cancer models,
inhibiting proliferation with concomitant increase of apoptosis.

