Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Attacking prostate cancer with a prodrug-doped cellular Trojan
horse


Prostate cancer is the second leading cause of cancer-related deaths in
American men. Despite considerable advances in prostate cancer research,
there is a major need for a systemic delivery platform that efficiently
targets anti-cancer drugs to sites of disseminated prostate cancer while
minimizing host toxicity. Human mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) are
excellent candidates for cell-based drug delivery since they display
tropism towards cancer sites and clinical studies have demonstrated that
hundreds of millions of allogeneic human MSCs can be safely administered
intravenously without adverse effects in a variety of pathological
settings. Furthermore, we have previously documented that MSCs can be
detected in radical prostatectomy tissue from men with prostate cancer.
In this proof-of-concept study, human MSCs were loaded with
poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA) microparticles (MPs) encapsulating
the macromolecule G114, a thapsigargin-based prostate specific antigen
(PSA)-activated prodrug. G114-loaded MPs were successfully internalized
by MSCs without impacting MSC viability, followed by sustained release of
G114 as an intact prodrug from loaded cells. Moreover, G114 released from
G114 MP-loaded MSCs is selectively toxic to the PSA-secreting prostate
cancer cell line, LNCaP. Finally, G114 MP-loaded MSCs inhibited tumor
growth when co-inoculated with CWR22 prostate cancer xenografts,
suggesting that cell-based delivery of G114 does not compromise potency
of the prodrug in vitro or in vivo. We envision that this MSC-based
platform may be developed into an effective, systemic Trojan Horse
therapy for the targeted delivery of therapeutic agents to sites of
metastatic prostate cancer.

