Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Immunologic analyses of uveal melanoma patients treated with
radiation therapy


Early stage uveal melanoma is frequently treated by radiation therapy
(RT) alone. Preclinical studies suggest the efficacy of RT in melanoma is
dependent on the immune system. We studied the immune system of patients
with uveal melanoma before and after RT, hypothesizing there would be
associations between these parameters and clinical outcomes. With
institutional review board permission, patient, tumor, peripheral blood
count characteristics were extracted from medical records of 299 patients
with clinically localized uveal melanoma undergoing RT. Similar data was
collected for 16 patients who presented with metastatic uveal melanoma at
initial diagnosis. A subset of 8 patients treated with RT for uveal
melanoma underwent peripheral blood sampling before, one and three months
after RT on a prospective biospecimen collection protocol. Flow cytometry
was performed to characterize leukocyte populations before and after RT.
Serum was analyzed for cytokines and antibody titers before and after RT.
Associations between neutrophil-to-lymphocyte ratio (NLR), leukocyte
subpopulations, cytokines and antibody titers with tumor response to RT
and survival were investigated. NLR was significantly lower in patients
presenting with clinically localized uveal melanoma (mean 2.7), compared
to those presenting with metastatic uveal melanoma at initial diagnosis
(mean 3.4, p60%). In conclusion, several immune system parameters of
patients with uveal melanoma treated with RT appeared to change after
treatment, and may be associated with tumor response and treatment
outcome, including survival. Further study on the development of distant
metastasis in an expanded cohort of patients is planned. Additional
investigations into the capacity of RT to modulate the immune system of
cancer patients are warranted.

