Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Family history of colorectal cancer in half-siblings as important
as in siblings


Background: None of population-based epidemiological studies to date have
investigated the familial risk of colorectal cancer (CRC) in
half-siblings. We aimed to compare lifetime (0-79 years) cumulative risk
(LCR) and relative risk of CRC between siblings and half-siblings of
patients with CRC.Methods: A nationwide cohort of first-degree relatives
and half-siblings of CRC patients diagnosed in 1958-2012 were extracted
from the Swedish Family-Cancer Database, the world's largest of its kind,
with >15.7 million individual records. LCR as a tangible measure of
absolute risk was also calculated. Standardized incidence ratios (SIRs)
were adjusted for age, sex, period at diagnosis, and socioeconomic
status. All family histories reported below are exclusive, meaning that
risk reported for one affected half-sibling does not include those with
both an affected half-sibling and any other first/second-degree
relatives.Results: The overall LCR of CRC in siblings of a patient with
CRC was 7.2% (8.3% in men; 6.0% in women), which represents 1.8-fold
(95%CI = 1.7-1.1.9, n = 1333) increase over the risk in those without any
family history of CRC (men 4.5%; women 3.4%). Similarly, significantly
increased LCR (5.9%) was found among half-siblings of CRC patients (SIR =
1.7, 95%CI = 1.3-2.0, n = 88; maternal half-sibling: 1.6, 95%CI =
1.1-2.1; paternal half-sibling: 1.7, 95%CI = 1.3-2.3). If a parent and a
half-sibling both had CRC, the risk in other half-siblings (SIR = 4.4,
95%CI = 2.8-6.5, n = 24) was closer to that of those with both an
affected parent and an affected sibling (SIR = 3.2, 95%CI = 2.9-3.6, n =
281) rather than an affected parent alone (SIR = 1.6, 95%CI = 1.5-1.7, n
= 4250). Highly increased risk of CRC was also found in those with two
(SIR = 2.4, 95%CI = 1.8-3.1, n = 59) or three (SIR = 9.8, 95%CI = 5.1-17,
n = 12) affected siblings, in twin brothers (SIR = 4.0, 95%CI = 2.2-6.6,
n = 14), and presumably in men with two affected half-siblings (SIR =
5.3, 95%CI = 1.1-16, n = 3). Other second-degree relatives such as
grandparents (SIR = 1.2, 95%CI = 1.1-1.3, n = 318), aunts/uncles (SIR =
1.3, 95%CI = 1.0-1.5, n = 107) without an affected first-degree relative
showed minor contributions to the familial risk of CRC, but we found
higher risks for those with both an affected first-degree relative and a
grandparent (SIR = 3.2, 95%CI = 2.3-4.2, n = 46) or an aunt/uncle (SIR =
2.3, 95%CI = 1.2-4.0, n = 13).Conclusions: This study provides novel
information, which is useful for the genetic counseling. In the cancer
risk estimation for relatives of CRC patients, a family history of CRC in
a half-sibling (even in the absence of an affected first-degree relative)
is as important as a family history of CRC in a sibling.

