Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effect of radiation therapy on breast epithelial cells in BRCA1/2
mutation carriers


Women carrying BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations have significantly elevated risk
of developing breast and ovarian cancers. BRCA1-associated breast cancer
likely originates from progenitors of the luminal epithelial lineage.
Recent studies indicate that radiation therapy (RT) for BRCA1 cancer
patients is associated with lower incidence of developing subsequent
ipsilateral breast cancer. In the current study, we analyzed tumor-free
breast tissue procured via prophylactic bilateral mastectomy from three
BRCA1 and one BRCA2 mutation carriers, who had been previously treated
with RT for unilateral breast cancers. Freshly isolated breast cells from
the irradiated and non-irradiated breasts of the same individuals were
subjected to flow cytometry, using established cell-surface markers. Two
out of the three BRCA1 carriers and the BRCA2 carrier exhibited
significantly diminished luminal cell population in the irradiated breast
versus the non-irradiated side. The remaining BRCA1 carrier showed
similar cell abundance between the two sides. Our finding suggests that
prior RT could result in preferential depletion of the luminal epithelial
compartment and thus reduced incidence of BRCA1-associated breast cancer.
Further investigation may inform development of RT-based preventive
approaches aimed at specifically decimating the source of
BRCA1-associated tumors.

