Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Validation of multiplex immunofluorescence for use in analysis of
tumor infiltrating lymphocytes


Multiplexed immunohistochemistry (IHC) has the potential to improve
conventional IHC staining allowing for analysis of multiple cell
phenotypes while maintaining spatial context. Automated multispectral
image analysis and computer-based cell recognition make the process more
attainable, but stringent validation of multiplex IHC is still required.
Pertinently, multiplex IHC allows for the characterisation and
enumeration of immune cell densities in the tumour micro-environment, of
particular importance for analysis of tumour-infiltrating immune cells
which require multiple co-localised markers for their identification.
However, issues of antibody blocking, cross-reactivity and masking have
caused concern that the results of multiplex staining may not accurately
reflect those of single-plex staining. The Opal workflow from PerkinElmer
uses a heat-induced epitope retrieval step between each antibody detected
which aims to obviate these potential problems and enable single-species
antibody use. In this study we systematically validated multiplex
staining for a range of immune cell markers against single plex staining
for each marker to determine the accuracy of the multiplex
method.Validation of multiplex IHC was undertaken using a multi-tissue
TMA stained in multiplex for CD3, CD4, CD56 and CD20 in a 4-marker
validation and for CD3, CD4, CD8, CD20 and FOXP3 in a 5-marker
validation. The TMA was composed of 72 cores including normal lung,
pancreas, breast, prostate and stomach and malignant prostate, lung and
colon. Spearman correlations measured agreement of immune cell
populations with those of singly stained serial sections on a per-core
basis. Single-stain/single-stain comparisons of corresponding immune cell
populations provided baseline variation of immune cells in subsequent
sections.All validation comparisons showed a highly significant
correlation (PMultiplexed immunohistochemistry (IHC) has the potential to
improve conventional IHC staining allowing for analysis of multiple cell
phenotypes while maintaining spatial context. Automated multispectral
image analysis and computer-based cell recognition make the process more
attainable, but stringent validation of multiplex IHC is still required.
Pertinently, multiplex IHC allows for the characterisation and
enumeration of immune cell densities in the tumour micro-environment, of
particular importance for analysis of tumour-infiltrating immune cells
which require multiple co-localised markers for their identification.
However, issues of antibody blocking, cross-reactivity and masking have
caused concern that the results of multiplex staining may not accurately
reflect those of single-plex staining. The Opal workflow from PerkinElmer
uses a heat-induced epitope retrieval step between each antibody detected
which aims to obviate these potential problems and enable single-species
antibody use. In this study we systematically validated multiplex
staining for a range of immune cell markers against single plex staining
for each marker to determine the accuracy of the multiplex
method.Validation of multiplex IHC was undertaken using a multi-tissue
TMA stained in multiplex for CD3, CD4, CD56 and CD20 in a 4-marker
validation and for CD3, CD4, CD8, CD20 and FOXP3 in a 5-marker
validation. The TMA was composed of 72 cores including normal lung,
pancreas, breast, prostate and stomach and malignant prostate, lung and
colon. Spearman correlations measured agreement of immune cell
populations with those of singly stained serial sections on a per-core
basis. Single-stain/single-stain comparisons of corresponding immune cell
populations provided baseline variation of immune cells in subsequent
sections.All validation comparisons showed a highly significant
correlation (P<0.0001), with strong correlation was observed between
cores for the majority of multiplex stains. Specifically, for the 4-plex
experiment, a high degree of correlation was observed for CD3, CD8 and
CD20 with R2 of 0.835, 0.950 and 0.870 respectively (P = Multiplexed
immunohistochemistry (IHC) has the potential to improve conventional IHC
staining allowing for analysis of multiple cell phenotypes while
maintaining spatial context. Automated multispectral image analysis and
computer-based cell recognition make the process more attainable, but
stringent validation of multiplex IHC is still required. Pertinently,
multiplex IHC allows for the characterisation and enumeration of immune
cell densities in the tumour micro-environment, of particular importance
for analysis of tumour-infiltrating immune cells which require multiple
co-localised markers for their identification. However, issues of
antibody blocking, cross-reactivity and masking have caused concern that
the results of multiplex staining may not accurately reflect those of
single-plex staining. The Opal workflow from PerkinElmer uses a
heat-induced epitope retrieval step between each antibody detected which
aims to obviate these potential problems and enable single-species
antibody use. In this study we systematically validated multiplex
staining for a range of immune cell markers against single plex staining
for each marker to determine the accuracy of the multiplex
method.Validation of multiplex IHC was undertaken using a multi-tissue
TMA stained in multiplex for CD3, CD4, CD56 and CD20 in a 4-marker
validation and for CD3, CD4, CD8, CD20 and FOXP3 in a 5-marker
validation. The TMA was composed of 72 cores including normal lung,
pancreas, breast, prostate and stomach and malignant prostate, lung and
colon. Spearman correlations measured agreement of immune cell
populations with those of singly stained serial sections on a per-core
basis. Single-stain/single-stain comparisons of corresponding immune cell
populations provided baseline variation of immune cells in subsequent
sections.All validation comparisons showed a highly significant
correlation (P<0.0001), with strong correlation was observed between
cores for the majority of multiplex stains. Specifically, for the 4-plex
experiment, a high degree of correlation was observed for CD3, CD8 and
CD20 with R2 of 0.835, 0.950 and 0.870 respectively (P = <0.001); CD56
showed a lower degree of correlation between the multiplex and single
stains with an R2 of 0.584 (P = Multiplexed immunohistochemistry (IHC)
has the potential to improve conventional IHC staining allowing for
analysis of multiple cell phenotypes while maintaining spatial context.
Automated multispectral image analysis and computer-based cell
recognition make the process more attainable, but stringent validation of
multiplex IHC is still required. Pertinently, multiplex IHC allows for
the characterisation and enumeration of immune cell densities in the
tumour micro-environment, of particular importance for analysis of
tumour-infiltrating immune cells which require multiple co-localised
markers for their identification. However, issues of antibody blocking,
cross-reactivity and masking have caused concern that the results of
multiplex staining may not accurately reflect those of single-plex
staining. The Opal workflow from PerkinElmer uses a heat-induced epitope
retrieval step between each antibody detected which aims to obviate these
potential problems and enable single-species antibody use. In this study
we systematically validated multiplex staining for a range of immune cell
markers against single plex staining for each marker to determine the
accuracy of the multiplex method.Validation of multiplex IHC was
undertaken using a multi-tissue TMA stained in multiplex for CD3, CD4,
CD56 and CD20 in a 4-marker validation and for CD3, CD4, CD8, CD20 and
FOXP3 in a 5-marker validation. The TMA was composed of 72 cores
including normal lung, pancreas, breast, prostate and stomach and
malignant prostate, lung and colon. Spearman correlations measured
agreement of immune cell populations with those of singly stained serial
sections on a per-core basis. Single-stain/single-stain comparisons of
corresponding immune cell populations provided baseline variation of
immune cells in subsequent sections.All validation comparisons showed a
highly significant correlation (P<0.0001), with strong correlation was
observed between cores for the majority of multiplex stains.
Specifically, for the 4-plex experiment, a high degree of correlation was
observed for CD3, CD8 and CD20 with R2 of 0.835, 0.950 and 0.870
respectively (P = <0.001); CD56 showed a lower degree of correlation
between the multiplex and single stains with an R2 of 0.584 (P = <0001).
For the 5-plex experiment, a high degree of correlation was observed for
high degree of correlation for CD3, CD8 and CD20 with R2 of 0.87, 0.95
and 0.87 respectively (PMultiplexed immunohistochemistry (IHC) has the
potential to improve conventional IHC staining allowing for analysis of
multiple cell phenotypes while maintaining spatial context. Automated
multispectral image analysis and computer-based cell recognition make the
process more attainable, but stringent validation of multiplex IHC is
still required. Pertinently, multiplex IHC allows for the
characterisation and enumeration of immune cell densities in the tumour
micro-environment, of particular importance for analysis of
tumour-infiltrating immune cells which require multiple co-localised
markers for their identification. However, issues of antibody blocking,
cross-reactivity and masking have caused concern that the results of
multiplex staining may not accurately reflect those of single-plex
staining. The Opal workflow from PerkinElmer uses a heat-induced epitope
retrieval step between each antibody detected which aims to obviate these
potential problems and enable single-species antibody use. In this study
we systematically validated multiplex staining for a range of immune cell
markers against single plex staining for each marker to determine the
accuracy of the multiplex method.Validation of multiplex IHC was
undertaken using a multi-tissue TMA stained in multiplex for CD3, CD4,
CD56 and CD20 in a 4-marker validation and for CD3, CD4, CD8, CD20 and
FOXP3 in a 5-marker validation. The TMA was composed of 72 cores
including normal lung, pancreas, breast, prostate and stomach and
malignant prostate, lung and colon. Spearman correlations measured
agreement of immune cell populations with those of singly stained serial
sections on a per-core basis. Single-stain/single-stain comparisons of
corresponding immune cell populations provided baseline variation of
immune cells in subsequent sections.All validation comparisons showed a
highly significant correlation (P<0.0001), with strong correlation was
observed between cores for the majority of multiplex stains.
Specifically, for the 4-plex experiment, a high degree of correlation was
observed for CD3, CD8 and CD20 with R2 of 0.835, 0.950 and 0.870
respectively (P = <0.001); CD56 showed a lower degree of correlation
between the multiplex and single stains with an R2 of 0.584 (P = <0001).
For the 5-plex experiment, a high degree of correlation was observed for
high degree of correlation for CD3, CD8 and CD20 with R2 of 0.87, 0.95
and 0.87 respectively (P<0.0001). FOXP3 showed a poor correlation of 0.74
and CD4 showed a poor correlation of 0.58 (PMultiplexed
immunohistochemistry (IHC) has the potential to improve conventional IHC
staining allowing for analysis of multiple cell phenotypes while
maintaining spatial context. Automated multispectral image analysis and
computer-based cell recognition make the process more attainable, but
stringent validation of multiplex IHC is still required. Pertinently,
multiplex IHC allows for the characterisation and enumeration of immune
cell densities in the tumour micro-environment, of particular importance
for analysis of tumour-infiltrating immune cells which require multiple
co-localised markers for their identification. However, issues of
antibody blocking, cross-reactivity and masking have caused concern that
the results of multiplex staining may not accurately reflect those of
single-plex staining. The Opal workflow from PerkinElmer uses a
heat-induced epitope retrieval step between each antibody detected which
aims to obviate these potential problems and enable single-species
antibody use. In this study we systematically validated multiplex
staining for a range of immune cell markers against single plex staining
for each marker to determine the accuracy of the multiplex
method.Validation of multiplex IHC was undertaken using a multi-tissue
TMA stained in multiplex for CD3, CD4, CD56 and CD20 in a 4-marker
validation and for CD3, CD4, CD8, CD20 and FOXP3 in a 5-marker
validation. The TMA was composed of 72 cores including normal lung,
pancreas, breast, prostate and stomach and malignant prostate, lung and
colon. Spearman correlations measured agreement of immune cell
populations with those of singly stained serial sections on a per-core
basis. Single-stain/single-stain comparisons of corresponding immune cell
populations provided baseline variation of immune cells in subsequent
sections.All validation comparisons showed a highly significant
correlation (P<0.0001), with strong correlation was observed between
cores for the majority of multiplex stains. Specifically, for the 4-plex
experiment, a high degree of correlation was observed for CD3, CD8 and
CD20 with R2 of 0.835, 0.950 and 0.870 respectively (P = <0.001); CD56
showed a lower degree of correlation between the multiplex and single
stains with an R2 of 0.584 (P = <0001). For the 5-plex experiment, a high
degree of correlation was observed for high degree of correlation for
CD3, CD8 and CD20 with R2 of 0.87, 0.95 and 0.87 respectively (P<0.0001).
FOXP3 showed a poor correlation of 0.74 and CD4 showed a poor correlation
of 0.58 (P<0.0001).Multiplex IHC is comparable to single stain IHC
preserving precious samples and reagents while enhancing the information
gained.

