Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Enhanced antitumor activity of rapamycin and genipin, a UCP-2
inhibitor, in lung cancer


mTOR is constitutively activated in lung cancer. Deletion of TOR1
increases expression of OXPHOS proteins, and mitochondrial uncoupling
proteins 2 (UCP-2) expression promotes chemoresistance. Therefore, we
evaluated whether adding genipin, a UCP-2 inhibitor, to rapamycin has
better antitumor effect in lung cancer. Combined with genipin and
rapamycin have a synergistic effect with more cellular apoptosis in A549,
H460 and CL1-0 cells. The similar phenomenon was found in the combination
treatment with genipin and everolimus or BGT226 (a dual PI3K/mTOR
inhibitor) in this three lung cancer cells. It is said that NrF2 may
affect UCP-2 expression, and we found NrF2 was activated in lung cancer
A549, H460 and CL1-0 cells treated with rapamycin. Everolimus and dual
PI3K/mTOR inhibitor, BGT226, also induced NrF2 nuclear translocation in
these lung cancer cells. It is said that under oxidant stress, p62
activates NrF2 through P62 Ser351-phosphorylation. We found that
rapamycin induced ROS generation, p62 serine phosphorylation and NrF2
downstream mRNA and protein expression, including UCP-2. ROS inhibitor,
NAC, and down-regulation of p62 by siRNA suppressed rapamycin-induced
UCP-2 expression. Overexpression of p62 by cDNA transfection enhanced
NrF2 activation and then UCP-2 expression in lung cancer cells. Moreover,
rapamycin-induced increased UCP-2 expression, leading decreased
mitochondrial membrane potential and mild increased oxygen consumption
rate. Finally in A549 subcutaneous tumor mode in SCID mice, combined
genipin and everolimus also demonstrated the greatest antitumor activity.
Therefore, inhibition UCP-2 by genipin enhances anticancer effect of
rapamycin in lung cancer.

