Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Selective human estrogen receptor partial agonist (ShERPAs) for
treatment of tamoxifen-resistant ER+ breast cancer


Estrogen receptor positive (ER+) breast cancer represents a significant
cause of death among women in the US, which is exacerbated by resistance
to 1st line endocrine therapies, notably tamoxifen, which occurs in 50%
of patients. Estrogen fuels growth of endocrine-dependent cancers and yet
estradiol (E2) and ER agonist, diethylstilbestrol, were used successfully
in the clinic in greats cancer therapy in the 20th century. The side
effects associated with these treatments are considered unacceptable,
spurring the pursuit of safer, alternative therapeutic agents and the
model systems to develop and optimize these agents. Three breast cancer
cell lines that demonstrate resistance to tamoxifen and endocrine
independence in 2D (MCF-7:5C), or 3D (T-47D:PKC and T-47D:TAM1) cell
cultures; and comparison to the parent endocrine-dependent cell lines
provides a set of model systems able to test the hypothesis that a
selective estrogen mimic (SEM) will provide a safe, therapeutic approach
to ER+ endocrine-independent breast cancer overexpressing the PKC
biomarker. A partial agonist at ER was selected as such a therapeutic
approach: The use of partial agonists will allow us to retain the
beneficial properties of E2, while attenuating the unwanted side effects.
Selective human Estrogen Receptor Partial Agonists (ShERPAs) were
designed, synthesized, and validated, using a combination of
time-resolved FRET (TR-FRET) on ER/SRC3 recruitment, isolated ER
affinity, and cell-based assays. ShERPAs were identified containing novel
structures derived from the selective estrogen receptor modulators
(SERMs) bazedoxifene and raloxifene, and their scaffolds, 3-methylindole
and benzothiophene, respectively. Examples with favorable pharmacokinetic
properties were validated in xenograft models of tamoxifen-resistant
breast cancer.

