Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The clinically applicable pan-Pim kinase inhibitor PIM447
sensitizes acute myeloid leukemia cells with FLT3-ITD to induction of
apoptosis by FLT3 inhibitors and by topoisomerase 2 inhibitors


Introduction:Internal tandem duplication of the fms-like tyrosine
kinase-3 receptor (FLT3-ITD) is present in acute myeloid leukemia (AML)
cells in 30% of patients and these patients have short disease-free
survival following chemotherapy. FLT3 inhibitors are clinically active,
but their activity is limited and transient. The oncogenic
serine/threonine kinase Pim-1 is transcriptionally upregulated downstream
of FLT3-ITD, and promotes FLT3 signaling in a positive feedback loop in
FLT3-ITD cells. We have previously demonstrated that inhibiting Pim
kinase sensitizes AML cell lines and primary AML patient blasts with
FLT3-ITD to induction of apoptosis by FLT3 inhibitors and by
topoisomerase 2 inhibitor chemotherapy drugs. Here we studied the effects
of the pan-Pim kinase inhibitor PIM447 (formerly LGH447; Novartis
Pharmaceuticals), currently in clinical trials, on response of
FLT3-ITD-expressing cell lines and AML patient samples to FLT3 inhibitors
and to topoisomerase 2 inhibitors, with the ultimate goal of developing
clinically applicable combination regimens.Methods:Cell lines and AML
patient samples with FLT3-ITD were cultured with FLT3 inhibitors or
topoisomerase 2 inhibitors at clinically applicable concentrations and
PIM447 at a range of concentrations. Apoptosis was measured by Annexin V
labeling and PARP cleavage. Mcl-1 expression was measured by
immunoblotting. Reactive oxygen species (ROS) were measured with the
redox-sensitive dye CM-H2DCFDA and DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs) by
immunoblotting for H2AX.Results:Transfected Ba/F3-ITD and 32D/ITD cells,
MV4-11 and MOLM-14 human AML cells and primary AML patient blasts, all
expressing FLT3-ITD, were treated with FLT3 inhibitors, including 100 nM
midostaurin and 1 nM quizartinib, with 0, 10, 100 and 500 nM PIM447.
Co-treatment with PIM447 produced a concentration-dependent increase in
apoptosis induced by each FLT3 inhibitor (pIntroduction:Internal tandem
duplication of the fms-like tyrosine kinase-3 receptor (FLT3-ITD) is
present in acute myeloid leukemia (AML) cells in 30% of patients and
these patients have short disease-free survival following chemotherapy.
FLT3 inhibitors are clinically active, but their activity is limited and
transient. The oncogenic serine/threonine kinase Pim-1 is
transcriptionally upregulated downstream of FLT3-ITD, and promotes FLT3
signaling in a positive feedback loop in FLT3-ITD cells. We have
previously demonstrated that inhibiting Pim kinase sensitizes AML cell
lines and primary AML patient blasts with FLT3-ITD to induction of
apoptosis by FLT3 inhibitors and by topoisomerase 2 inhibitor
chemotherapy drugs. Here we studied the effects of the pan-Pim kinase
inhibitor PIM447 (formerly LGH447; Novartis Pharmaceuticals), currently
in clinical trials, on response of FLT3-ITD-expressing cell lines and AML
patient samples to FLT3 inhibitors and to topoisomerase 2 inhibitors,
with the ultimate goal of developing clinically applicable combination
regimens.Methods:Cell lines and AML patient samples with FLT3-ITD were
cultured with FLT3 inhibitors or topoisomerase 2 inhibitors at clinically
applicable concentrations and PIM447 at a range of concentrations.
Apoptosis was measured by Annexin V labeling and PARP cleavage. Mcl-1
expression was measured by immunoblotting. Reactive oxygen species (ROS)
were measured with the redox-sensitive dye CM-H2DCFDA and DNA
double-strand breaks (DSBs) by immunoblotting for
H2AX.Results:Transfected Ba/F3-ITD and 32D/ITD cells, MV4-11 and MOLM-14
human AML cells and primary AML patient blasts, all expressing FLT3-ITD,
were treated with FLT3 inhibitors, including 100 nM midostaurin and 1 nM
quizartinib, with 0, 10, 100 and 500 nM PIM447. Co-treatment with PIM447
produced a concentration-dependent increase in apoptosis induced by each
FLT3 inhibitor (p<0.001). FLT3-ITD-expressing cells were also treated
with the topoisomerase 2 inhibitors daunorubicin and etoposide at IC50
concentrations, with 0, 10, 100 and 500 nM PIM447. Co-treatment with
PIM447 also produced a concentration-dependent increase in apoptosis
induced by each topoisomerase 2 inhibitor (pIntroduction:Internal tandem
duplication of the fms-like tyrosine kinase-3 receptor (FLT3-ITD) is
present in acute myeloid leukemia (AML) cells in 30% of patients and
these patients have short disease-free survival following chemotherapy.
FLT3 inhibitors are clinically active, but their activity is limited and
transient. The oncogenic serine/threonine kinase Pim-1 is
transcriptionally upregulated downstream of FLT3-ITD, and promotes FLT3
signaling in a positive feedback loop in FLT3-ITD cells. We have
previously demonstrated that inhibiting Pim kinase sensitizes AML cell
lines and primary AML patient blasts with FLT3-ITD to induction of
apoptosis by FLT3 inhibitors and by topoisomerase 2 inhibitor
chemotherapy drugs. Here we studied the effects of the pan-Pim kinase
inhibitor PIM447 (formerly LGH447; Novartis Pharmaceuticals), currently
in clinical trials, on response of FLT3-ITD-expressing cell lines and AML
patient samples to FLT3 inhibitors and to topoisomerase 2 inhibitors,
with the ultimate goal of developing clinically applicable combination
regimens.Methods:Cell lines and AML patient samples with FLT3-ITD were
cultured with FLT3 inhibitors or topoisomerase 2 inhibitors at clinically
applicable concentrations and PIM447 at a range of concentrations.
Apoptosis was measured by Annexin V labeling and PARP cleavage. Mcl-1
expression was measured by immunoblotting. Reactive oxygen species (ROS)
were measured with the redox-sensitive dye CM-H2DCFDA and DNA
double-strand breaks (DSBs) by immunoblotting for
H2AX.Results:Transfected Ba/F3-ITD and 32D/ITD cells, MV4-11 and MOLM-14
human AML cells and primary AML patient blasts, all expressing FLT3-ITD,
were treated with FLT3 inhibitors, including 100 nM midostaurin and 1 nM
quizartinib, with 0, 10, 100 and 500 nM PIM447. Co-treatment with PIM447
produced a concentration-dependent increase in apoptosis induced by each
FLT3 inhibitor (p<0.001). FLT3-ITD-expressing cells were also treated
with the topoisomerase 2 inhibitors daunorubicin and etoposide at IC50
concentrations, with 0, 10, 100 and 500 nM PIM447. Co-treatment with
PIM447 also produced a concentration-dependent increase in apoptosis
induced by each topoisomerase 2 inhibitor (p<0.001). Increased apoptosis
induced by PIM447 with FLT3 inhibitors was associated with Mcl-1
downregulation, while increased apoptosis induced by PIM447 with
topoisomerase 2 inhibitors was associated with increased generation of
ROS and increased DNA DSBs.Conclusions:The clinically applicable pan-Pim
kinase inhibitor PIM447 sensitizes AML cells with FLT3-ITD to induction
of apoptosis by FLT3 inhibitors and by topoisomerase 2 inhibitors. Our
data support in vivo testing of combination regimens and design of
clinical trials aimed at improving outcomes for patients with AML with
FLT3-ITD.

