Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Low level somatic variant detection by Sanger sequencing of
formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) samples


Deleterious sequence variants play an important role in the initiation
and progression of many different cancer types. The detection of germline
variants by the gold standard Sanger sequencing has been well
established, however, the detection of somatic mutations, especially in
heterogeneous tumor samples where variants may be present at a lower
level, has been more challenging.To facilitate analysis of somatic
mutations in tumor samples, we have developed Sanger sequencing panels
that cover the entire coding regions of specific genes implicated in
tumorigenesis (e.g. TP53, KRAS and NRAS). We have also developed
companion software, Minor Variant Finder (MVF), that facilitates
detection of low levels of somatic mutations in Sanger sequencing
studies. To demonstrate the workflow of these panels with MVF, we
analyzed DNA from lung cancer FFPE samples. We initially determined
variants of TP53 and KRAS in these samples using Ion Torrent Personal
Genome Machine (PGM) next generation sequencing (NGS). We confirmed the
identity and variant allele frequency of these variants by Sanger
sequencing coupled with MVF. Furthermore, we were able to confirm these
results in 1 ng, 0.5 ng or 0.1 ng of DNA from these samples. Finally, we
made serial dilutions of one of these samples to establish limit of
detection (LOD). We show that this workflow can detect as little as 3% of
a minor variant in an FFPE sample.Sanger sequencing is the gold standard
for confirmation of minor variants detected by NGS. In this study, we
show that Sanger sequencing of limited number of targets, in conjunction
with the MVF software, can also be an ideal first line screening choice
for tumor FFPE samples where limited amount of DNA is available.For
Research Use only - Not for use in diagnostic procedures.

