Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Global and targeted metabolomic profiling of colorectal cancer
progression


Background: Colorectal cancer (CRC) is one of the most prevalent and
deadly cancers in the world. The development of improved and robust
biomarkers to enable screening, surveillance, and early detection of CRC
continues to be a challenge. Patients with colorectal adenoma are at
higher risk of developing colon cancer; however, noninvasive methods to
identify these patients are still on demand. The aim of this study was to
identify biomarkers of CRC disease progression by using metabolomic
profiling of human serum samples in a multistep approach.Methods: We
performed global metabolomic profiling on 30 human serum samples from
patients with colorectal adenoma, 30 CRC patients and 30 healthy controls
who were matched by age, gender and ethnicity. For validation, we
measured the three top differentially expressed metabolites in an
additional set of 50 adenoma, 50 CRC and 50 healthy controls.Results:
Global biochemical profiles of 404 metabolites were detected, with 301
metabolites remaining after quality control procedures. In discovery
phase, 50 metabolites had differential levels between colorectal adenoma,
CRC and controls (P for trend Background: Colorectal cancer (CRC) is one
of the most prevalent and deadly cancers in the world. The development of
improved and robust biomarkers to enable screening, surveillance, and
early detection of CRC continues to be a challenge. Patients with
colorectal adenoma are at higher risk of developing colon cancer;
however, noninvasive methods to identify these patients are still on
demand. The aim of this study was to identify biomarkers of CRC disease
progression by using metabolomic profiling of human serum samples in a
multistep approach.Methods: We performed global metabolomic profiling on
30 human serum samples from patients with colorectal adenoma, 30 CRC
patients and 30 healthy controls who were matched by age, gender and
ethnicity. For validation, we measured the three top differentially
expressed metabolites in an additional set of 50 adenoma, 50 CRC and 50
healthy controls.Results: Global biochemical profiles of 404 metabolites
were detected, with 301 metabolites remaining after quality control
procedures. In discovery phase, 50 metabolites had differential levels
between colorectal adenoma, CRC and controls (P for trend <0.05), with 19
metabolites showing increased levels in CRC and adenoma in comparison to
controls and 31 metabolites with decreased levels. Further exploratory
analyses of these metabolites showed a key role for metabolic pathways
involving urea cycle, caffeine and galactose metabolism as associated
with CRC progression. The top 3 differentially expressed metabolites
(Xanthine, Hypoxanthine and D-mannose) were selected for validation.
Consistent with the discovery phase, CRC cases and adenoma had lower
levels of Xanthine than controls (mean SD; 9.95 0.92 mg/ml vs 10.630.97
mg/ml; PBackground: Colorectal cancer (CRC) is one of the most prevalent
and deadly cancers in the world. The development of improved and robust
biomarkers to enable screening, surveillance, and early detection of CRC
continues to be a challenge. Patients with colorectal adenoma are at
higher risk of developing colon cancer; however, noninvasive methods to
identify these patients are still on demand. The aim of this study was to
identify biomarkers of CRC disease progression by using metabolomic
profiling of human serum samples in a multistep approach.Methods: We
performed global metabolomic profiling on 30 human serum samples from
patients with colorectal adenoma, 30 CRC patients and 30 healthy controls
who were matched by age, gender and ethnicity. For validation, we
measured the three top differentially expressed metabolites in an
additional set of 50 adenoma, 50 CRC and 50 healthy controls.Results:
Global biochemical profiles of 404 metabolites were detected, with 301
metabolites remaining after quality control procedures. In discovery
phase, 50 metabolites had differential levels between colorectal adenoma,
CRC and controls (P for trend <0.05), with 19 metabolites showing
increased levels in CRC and adenoma in comparison to controls and 31
metabolites with decreased levels. Further exploratory analyses of these
metabolites showed a key role for metabolic pathways involving urea
cycle, caffeine and galactose metabolism as associated with CRC
progression. The top 3 differentially expressed metabolites (Xanthine,
Hypoxanthine and D-mannose) were selected for validation. Consistent with
the discovery phase, CRC cases and adenoma had lower levels of Xanthine
than controls (mean SD; 9.95 0.92 mg/ml vs 10.630.97 mg/ml; P<0.001 and
9.870.75 vs 10.630.97 mg/ml; PBackground: Colorectal cancer (CRC) is one
of the most prevalent and deadly cancers in the world. The development of
improved and robust biomarkers to enable screening, surveillance, and
early detection of CRC continues to be a challenge. Patients with
colorectal adenoma are at higher risk of developing colon cancer;
however, noninvasive methods to identify these patients are still on
demand. The aim of this study was to identify biomarkers of CRC disease
progression by using metabolomic profiling of human serum samples in a
multistep approach.Methods: We performed global metabolomic profiling on
30 human serum samples from patients with colorectal adenoma, 30 CRC
patients and 30 healthy controls who were matched by age, gender and
ethnicity. For validation, we measured the three top differentially
expressed metabolites in an additional set of 50 adenoma, 50 CRC and 50
healthy controls.Results: Global biochemical profiles of 404 metabolites
were detected, with 301 metabolites remaining after quality control
procedures. In discovery phase, 50 metabolites had differential levels
between colorectal adenoma, CRC and controls (P for trend <0.05), with 19
metabolites showing increased levels in CRC and adenoma in comparison to
controls and 31 metabolites with decreased levels. Further exploratory
analyses of these metabolites showed a key role for metabolic pathways
involving urea cycle, caffeine and galactose metabolism as associated
with CRC progression. The top 3 differentially expressed metabolites
(Xanthine, Hypoxanthine and D-mannose) were selected for validation.
Consistent with the discovery phase, CRC cases and adenoma had lower
levels of Xanthine than controls (mean SD; 9.95 0.92 mg/ml vs 10.630.97
mg/ml; P<0.001 and 9.870.75 vs 10.630.97 mg/ml; P<0.001). The same trend
was observed for Hypoxanthine (mean SD; 10.72 0.62 mg/ml vs 12.291.60;
PBackground: Colorectal cancer (CRC) is one of the most prevalent and
deadly cancers in the world. The development of improved and robust
biomarkers to enable screening, surveillance, and early detection of CRC
continues to be a challenge. Patients with colorectal adenoma are at
higher risk of developing colon cancer; however, noninvasive methods to
identify these patients are still on demand. The aim of this study was to
identify biomarkers of CRC disease progression by using metabolomic
profiling of human serum samples in a multistep approach.Methods: We
performed global metabolomic profiling on 30 human serum samples from
patients with colorectal adenoma, 30 CRC patients and 30 healthy controls
who were matched by age, gender and ethnicity. For validation, we
measured the three top differentially expressed metabolites in an
additional set of 50 adenoma, 50 CRC and 50 healthy controls.Results:
Global biochemical profiles of 404 metabolites were detected, with 301
metabolites remaining after quality control procedures. In discovery
phase, 50 metabolites had differential levels between colorectal adenoma,
CRC and controls (P for trend <0.05), with 19 metabolites showing
increased levels in CRC and adenoma in comparison to controls and 31
metabolites with decreased levels. Further exploratory analyses of these
metabolites showed a key role for metabolic pathways involving urea
cycle, caffeine and galactose metabolism as associated with CRC
progression. The top 3 differentially expressed metabolites (Xanthine,
Hypoxanthine and D-mannose) were selected for validation. Consistent with
the discovery phase, CRC cases and adenoma had lower levels of Xanthine
than controls (mean SD; 9.95 0.92 mg/ml vs 10.630.97 mg/ml; P<0.001 and
9.870.75 vs 10.630.97 mg/ml; P<0.001). The same trend was observed for
Hypoxanthine (mean SD; 10.72 0.62 mg/ml vs 12.291.60; P<0.001 and
10.710.61 vs 12.291.60 mg/ml; P Background: Colorectal cancer (CRC) is
one of the most prevalent and deadly cancers in the world. The
development of improved and robust biomarkers to enable screening,
surveillance, and early detection of CRC continues to be a challenge.
Patients with colorectal adenoma are at higher risk of developing colon
cancer; however, noninvasive methods to identify these patients are still
on demand. The aim of this study was to identify biomarkers of CRC
disease progression by using metabolomic profiling of human serum samples
in a multistep approach.Methods: We performed global metabolomic
profiling on 30 human serum samples from patients with colorectal
adenoma, 30 CRC patients and 30 healthy controls who were matched by age,
gender and ethnicity. For validation, we measured the three top
differentially expressed metabolites in an additional set of 50 adenoma,
50 CRC and 50 healthy controls.Results: Global biochemical profiles of
404 metabolites were detected, with 301 metabolites remaining after
quality control procedures. In discovery phase, 50 metabolites had
differential levels between colorectal adenoma, CRC and controls (P for
trend <0.05), with 19 metabolites showing increased levels in CRC and
adenoma in comparison to controls and 31 metabolites with decreased
levels. Further exploratory analyses of these metabolites showed a key
role for metabolic pathways involving urea cycle, caffeine and galactose
metabolism as associated with CRC progression. The top 3 differentially
expressed metabolites (Xanthine, Hypoxanthine and D-mannose) were
selected for validation. Consistent with the discovery phase, CRC cases
and adenoma had lower levels of Xanthine than controls (mean SD; 9.95
0.92 mg/ml vs 10.630.97 mg/ml; P<0.001 and 9.870.75 vs 10.630.97 mg/ml;
P<0.001). The same trend was observed for Hypoxanthine (mean SD; 10.72
0.62 mg/ml vs 12.291.60; P<0.001 and 10.710.61 vs 12.291.60 mg/ml; P
<0.001) whereas higher levels of D-mannose where observed in both CRC
cases and adenoma when compared to controls (3.320.58 mg/ml vs 2.32
0.90mg/ml; PBackground: Colorectal cancer (CRC) is one of the most
prevalent and deadly cancers in the world. The development of improved
and robust biomarkers to enable screening, surveillance, and early
detection of CRC continues to be a challenge. Patients with colorectal
adenoma are at higher risk of developing colon cancer; however,
noninvasive methods to identify these patients are still on demand. The
aim of this study was to identify biomarkers of CRC disease progression
by using metabolomic profiling of human serum samples in a multistep
approach.Methods: We performed global metabolomic profiling on 30 human
serum samples from patients with colorectal adenoma, 30 CRC patients and
30 healthy controls who were matched by age, gender and ethnicity. For
validation, we measured the three top differentially expressed
metabolites in an additional set of 50 adenoma, 50 CRC and 50 healthy
controls.Results: Global biochemical profiles of 404 metabolites were
detected, with 301 metabolites remaining after quality control
procedures. In discovery phase, 50 metabolites had differential levels
between colorectal adenoma, CRC and controls (P for trend <0.05), with 19
metabolites showing increased levels in CRC and adenoma in comparison to
controls and 31 metabolites with decreased levels. Further exploratory
analyses of these metabolites showed a key role for metabolic pathways
involving urea cycle, caffeine and galactose metabolism as associated
with CRC progression. The top 3 differentially expressed metabolites
(Xanthine, Hypoxanthine and D-mannose) were selected for validation.
Consistent with the discovery phase, CRC cases and adenoma had lower
levels of Xanthine than controls (mean SD; 9.95 0.92 mg/ml vs 10.630.97
mg/ml; P<0.001 and 9.870.75 vs 10.630.97 mg/ml; P<0.001). The same trend
was observed for Hypoxanthine (mean SD; 10.72 0.62 mg/ml vs 12.291.60;
P<0.001 and 10.710.61 vs 12.291.60 mg/ml; P <0.001) whereas higher levels
of D-mannose where observed in both CRC cases and adenoma when compared
to controls (3.320.58 mg/ml vs 2.32 0.90mg/ml; P<0.001 and 3.320.58 mg/ml
vs 2.32 0.90mg/ml; PBackground: Colorectal cancer (CRC) is one of the
most prevalent and deadly cancers in the world. The development of
improved and robust biomarkers to enable screening, surveillance, and
early detection of CRC continues to be a challenge. Patients with
colorectal adenoma are at higher risk of developing colon cancer;
however, noninvasive methods to identify these patients are still on
demand. The aim of this study was to identify biomarkers of CRC disease
progression by using metabolomic profiling of human serum samples in a
multistep approach.Methods: We performed global metabolomic profiling on
30 human serum samples from patients with colorectal adenoma, 30 CRC
patients and 30 healthy controls who were matched by age, gender and
ethnicity. For validation, we measured the three top differentially
expressed metabolites in an additional set of 50 adenoma, 50 CRC and 50
healthy controls.Results: Global biochemical profiles of 404 metabolites
were detected, with 301 metabolites remaining after quality control
procedures. In discovery phase, 50 metabolites had differential levels
between colorectal adenoma, CRC and controls (P for trend <0.05), with 19
metabolites showing increased levels in CRC and adenoma in comparison to
controls and 31 metabolites with decreased levels. Further exploratory
analyses of these metabolites showed a key role for metabolic pathways
involving urea cycle, caffeine and galactose metabolism as associated
with CRC progression. The top 3 differentially expressed metabolites
(Xanthine, Hypoxanthine and D-mannose) were selected for validation.
Consistent with the discovery phase, CRC cases and adenoma had lower
levels of Xanthine than controls (mean SD; 9.95 0.92 mg/ml vs 10.630.97
mg/ml; P<0.001 and 9.870.75 vs 10.630.97 mg/ml; P<0.001). The same trend
was observed for Hypoxanthine (mean SD; 10.72 0.62 mg/ml vs 12.291.60;
P<0.001 and 10.710.61 vs 12.291.60 mg/ml; P <0.001) whereas higher levels
of D-mannose where observed in both CRC cases and adenoma when compared
to controls (3.320.58 mg/ml vs 2.32 0.90mg/ml; P<0.001 and 3.320.58 mg/ml
vs 2.32 0.90mg/ml; P<0.001). Using the median value of controls as a
cut-off point, 94% of the adenoma and CRC cases showed low levels of
Xanthine (Odds Ratio (OR) = 10.47, 95% confidence interval (CI) =
2.63-41.63 for adenoma; OR = 38.76 and 95% CI = 6.58-228.51 for CRC). For
Hypoxanthine, 90% of the adenoma and CRC cases showed low levels (OR =
6.50 and 95% CI = 1.9821.24 for adenoma; OR = 11.19 and 95% CI =
3.28-38.21 for CRC). For D-Mannose, all adenoma cases had high levels (OR
is not available due to 0 count) and 92% of CRC cases (OR = 15.99, 95% Ci
= 4.07-62.88, PBackground: Colorectal cancer (CRC) is one of the most
prevalent and deadly cancers in the world. The development of improved
and robust biomarkers to enable screening, surveillance, and early
detection of CRC continues to be a challenge. Patients with colorectal
adenoma are at higher risk of developing colon cancer; however,
noninvasive methods to identify these patients are still on demand. The
aim of this study was to identify biomarkers of CRC disease progression
by using metabolomic profiling of human serum samples in a multistep
approach.Methods: We performed global metabolomic profiling on 30 human
serum samples from patients with colorectal adenoma, 30 CRC patients and
30 healthy controls who were matched by age, gender and ethnicity. For
validation, we measured the three top differentially expressed
metabolites in an additional set of 50 adenoma, 50 CRC and 50 healthy
controls.Results: Global biochemical profiles of 404 metabolites were
detected, with 301 metabolites remaining after quality control
procedures. In discovery phase, 50 metabolites had differential levels
between colorectal adenoma, CRC and controls (P for trend <0.05), with 19
metabolites showing increased levels in CRC and adenoma in comparison to
controls and 31 metabolites with decreased levels. Further exploratory
analyses of these metabolites showed a key role for metabolic pathways
involving urea cycle, caffeine and galactose metabolism as associated
with CRC progression. The top 3 differentially expressed metabolites
(Xanthine, Hypoxanthine and D-mannose) were selected for validation.
Consistent with the discovery phase, CRC cases and adenoma had lower
levels of Xanthine than controls (mean SD; 9.95 0.92 mg/ml vs 10.630.97
mg/ml; P<0.001 and 9.870.75 vs 10.630.97 mg/ml; P<0.001). The same trend
was observed for Hypoxanthine (mean SD; 10.72 0.62 mg/ml vs 12.291.60;
P<0.001 and 10.710.61 vs 12.291.60 mg/ml; P <0.001) whereas higher levels
of D-mannose where observed in both CRC cases and adenoma when compared
to controls (3.320.58 mg/ml vs 2.32 0.90mg/ml; P<0.001 and 3.320.58 mg/ml
vs 2.32 0.90mg/ml; P<0.001). Using the median value of controls as a
cut-off point, 94% of the adenoma and CRC cases showed low levels of
Xanthine (Odds Ratio (OR) = 10.47, 95% confidence interval (CI) =
2.63-41.63 for adenoma; OR = 38.76 and 95% CI = 6.58-228.51 for CRC). For
Hypoxanthine, 90% of the adenoma and CRC cases showed low levels (OR =
6.50 and 95% CI = 1.9821.24 for adenoma; OR = 11.19 and 95% CI =
3.28-38.21 for CRC). For D-Mannose, all adenoma cases had high levels (OR
is not available due to 0 count) and 92% of CRC cases (OR = 15.99, 95% Ci
= 4.07-62.88, P< 0.001) had high levels of D-Mannose, compared to 50% of
controls having high levels of D-Mannose.Conclusions: Our results suggest
the potential utility of the identified metabolites as new valuable
biomarkers for early detection of CRC.

