Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Assessment of candidate host progression genes in the development
of advanced colorectal cancer


BACKGROUND: The genetic events affecting progression from early-stage to
advanced/metastatic colorectal cancer remain poorly understood. There is
preclinical evidence that germline, rather than tumor somatic, variants
in key mechanistic areas (host immunity, paracrine signaling,
extracellular matrix, and lymphangiogenesis) can affect the ability of an
early lesion to metastasize. This led us to assess these variants in
pooled data from 13 epidemiologic studies within the Genetics and
Epidemiology of Colorectal Cancer Consortium (GECCO).METHODS: Genetic
variants were compared in early-stage (AJCC stage 1-2; n = 4,978) and
advanced (AJCC stage 3-4; n = 3,263) colorectal cancer cases in GECCO.
Both common (minor allele frequency [MAF] >5%) and rare (MAF BACKGROUND:
The genetic events affecting progression from early-stage to
advanced/metastatic colorectal cancer remain poorly understood. There is
preclinical evidence that germline, rather than tumor somatic, variants
in key mechanistic areas (host immunity, paracrine signaling,
extracellular matrix, and lymphangiogenesis) can affect the ability of an
early lesion to metastasize. This led us to assess these variants in
pooled data from 13 epidemiologic studies within the Genetics and
Epidemiology of Colorectal Cancer Consortium (GECCO).METHODS: Genetic
variants were compared in early-stage (AJCC stage 1-2; n = 4,978) and
advanced (AJCC stage 3-4; n = 3,263) colorectal cancer cases in GECCO.
Both common (minor allele frequency [MAF] >5%) and rare (MAF <5%) single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were evaluated in 88 candidate genes
(range: 5kb upstream to 500bp downstream) relevant to the mechanisms of
interest. A log-additive genetic model adjusting for age, sex, study, and
3 principal components was used to assess the association for each common
variant. To improve power for rare variants association, these were
aggregated by gene and gene-level associations were evaluated using the
Mixed effects Score Test (MiST). The Bonferroni correction was used for
multiple testing, resulting in two-sided p-value significance thresholds
of pBACKGROUND: The genetic events affecting progression from early-stage
to advanced/metastatic colorectal cancer remain poorly understood. There
is preclinical evidence that germline, rather than tumor somatic,
variants in key mechanistic areas (host immunity, paracrine signaling,
extracellular matrix, and lymphangiogenesis) can affect the ability of an
early lesion to metastasize. This led us to assess these variants in
pooled data from 13 epidemiologic studies within the Genetics and
Epidemiology of Colorectal Cancer Consortium (GECCO).METHODS: Genetic
variants were compared in early-stage (AJCC stage 1-2; n = 4,978) and
advanced (AJCC stage 3-4; n = 3,263) colorectal cancer cases in GECCO.
Both common (minor allele frequency [MAF] >5%) and rare (MAF <5%) single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were evaluated in 88 candidate genes
(range: 5kb upstream to 500bp downstream) relevant to the mechanisms of
interest. A log-additive genetic model adjusting for age, sex, study, and
3 principal components was used to assess the association for each common
variant. To improve power for rare variants association, these were
aggregated by gene and gene-level associations were evaluated using the
Mixed effects Score Test (MiST). The Bonferroni correction was used for
multiple testing, resulting in two-sided p-value significance thresholds
of p<3.2 10-5 ( = 0.05/1582 SNPs) for common variants and pBACKGROUND:
The genetic events affecting progression from early-stage to
advanced/metastatic colorectal cancer remain poorly understood. There is
preclinical evidence that germline, rather than tumor somatic, variants
in key mechanistic areas (host immunity, paracrine signaling,
extracellular matrix, and lymphangiogenesis) can affect the ability of an
early lesion to metastasize. This led us to assess these variants in
pooled data from 13 epidemiologic studies within the Genetics and
Epidemiology of Colorectal Cancer Consortium (GECCO).METHODS: Genetic
variants were compared in early-stage (AJCC stage 1-2; n = 4,978) and
advanced (AJCC stage 3-4; n = 3,263) colorectal cancer cases in GECCO.
Both common (minor allele frequency [MAF] >5%) and rare (MAF <5%) single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were evaluated in 88 candidate genes
(range: 5kb upstream to 500bp downstream) relevant to the mechanisms of
interest. A log-additive genetic model adjusting for age, sex, study, and
3 principal components was used to assess the association for each common
variant. To improve power for rare variants association, these were
aggregated by gene and gene-level associations were evaluated using the
Mixed effects Score Test (MiST). The Bonferroni correction was used for
multiple testing, resulting in two-sided p-value significance thresholds
of p<3.2 10-5 ( = 0.05/1582 SNPs) for common variants and p<5.7 10-4 ( =
0.05/88 aggregates) for rare variants.RESULTS: 1,582 common variants were
analyzed after linkage disequilibrium-based SNP pruning, with top 5
results in MMP10 (p = 1.24 10-3), EGFR (1.41 10-3), MMP7 (1.45 10-3),
ANGPT2 (2.54 10-3), and VEGFR2 (3.16 10-3). None reached a priori
statistical significance. The most promising aggregated rare variant
candidates were CD247 (p = 3.01 10-3), HGF (4.44 10-3), CD8A (1.57 10-2),
CXCL2 (1.86 10-2), FGFR2 (2.07 10-2), and VEGFB (3.52 10-2), though again
none reached statistical significance.CONCLUSIONS: Despite the
preclinical evidence for these candidate progression genes, large-scale
genomic analysis did not identify statistically significant germline
genetic variation in advanced vs. early-stage colorectal cancer.
Follow-up evaluation will include additional survival and environmental
data.

