Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MiXeno Humanized Mouse Model as an Efficient Tool to Evaluate in
Vivo Activity of Anti-Cancer Immunotherapeutics


Background: Fighting cancer by taking advantage of a patient's own immune
system is showing considerable success in oncology research. Targeting
therapeutic antibodies against tumor-associated antigens or the host
immune system has been shown to prolong survival of patients in various
tumor types. However, the lack of experimental immunotherapy models is a
major obstacle toward better evaluating new immunotherapeutics and
testing their exploratory combination strategies. To address this need,
we set out to validate a new platform MiXenoTM by implanting human PBMC
to immune-deficient mice. The MiXenoTM mice were partially reconstituted
with human immune components. In vivo efficacy of several
immunotherapeutics were evaluated.Results: We have reported before that
several MiXenoTM models could be used to evaluate anti-human PD-1 or
PD-L1 antibodies, where human T cells were well reconstituted in the
mouse system. Here one of our MiXenoTM collection: HCC827 model was
further optimized and identified as a PD-1/PD-L1 inhibitor highly
sensitive model. Involvement of T cells in the tumor microenvironment was
observed in HCC827 tumors. Furthermore, the dynamics of NK cell
population in blood, tumor and other organs (e.g. spleen and lymph nodes)
was established in MiXenoTM models. NK cell function was evaluated as
well.Conclusion: The MiXenoTM model provides an alternative to the full
stem cell reconstitution approach, and may allow various types of
immunotherapies being evaluated in these partially humanized xenograft
models.

