Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dysregulation of lincRNAs is a major driver of aberrant epigenomes
during tumorigenesis


It has now been unequivocally demonstrated that the process of
tumorigenesis is driven by both genetic and epigenetic alterations, but
the mechanisms of epigenetic dysregulations remain to be elucidated. Work
in our laboratory has demonstrated that numerous long intergenic
non-coding RNAs (lincRNAs) become dysregulated in human cancers, and a
significant subset of these lincRNAs are associated with
histone-modifying enzymes and DNA methyltransferases in healthy,
non-tumor cells. Based on these observations, we tested an exceptionally
novel hypothesis that dysregulation of chromatin-associated lincRNAs is a
major mechanism driving cancer-associated aberrant epigenomes. To test
this novel concept, we have performed experiments to modulate the
expression of specific chromatin-associated lincRNAs in cancer cells, and
assessed their impact on the epigenome. Consistent with our hypothesis,
modulating the expression of lincRNAs in cancer cells resulted in massive
reprogramming of their epigenomes. These epigenomic changes impacted the
growth of cancer cells and global gene expression. Mapping the genomic
occupancy sites of lincRNAs, and intersection of those sites with altered
genomic regions in tumors, further supported direct roles of lincRNAs in
modulating chromatin structure. These findings demonstrate key roles of
chromatin-associated lincRNAs in suppressing tumorigenesis in normal
human tissues by regulating the epigenome.

