Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Global microRNA expression analysis of Sox-2 positive and negative
glioblastoma cells


Introduction:Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most frequent
intracranial malignity of astrocytic origin in adults. This tumor is
characterized by infaust prognosis, which is primarily caused by
resistance to the therapy and early relapses relate to the presence of
glioblastoma stem cells (GSCs). These cells form neurospheres in vitro
and express markers of stemness such as Sox-2, Oct-4, and nestin.
Targeting of GSCs could be a novel promising therapeutic approach leading
to the overcome of therapy resistance and better prognosis of GBM
patients. One of the approaches how to successfully regulate GSC is a
targeted regulation of microRNAs (miRNAs). These small non-coding RNA
molecules post-transcriptionally regulate an expression of more than 2/3
of all human genes that are also involved in stem cell associated
signaling pathways. Moreover, deregulated expression of some miRNAs has
been observed in many cancers including GBM.Cell lines and Methods:We
have prepared eleven Sox-2 positive and negative paired primary GBM cell
lines, which have been cultured under DMEM/F12 medium supplemented with
bFGF, EGF, and B12 supplement and DMEM medium supplemented with 10% FBS,
respectively. The global miRNA expression analysis was performed using
GeneChip miRNA 4.0 Array (Affymetrix). Targeted regulation of miRNA
levels have been carried out by the transient transfection of specific
anti-miRNAs or miRNA mimics in GSC cell lines NCH 601 acquired from
Interdisciplinary Center For Neurosciences (Heidelberg, Germany). The
sphere formation assay was analyzed using IncuCyte ZOOM instrument (Essen
BioScience). Sox-2 and nestin expressions were analyzed on both protein
and transcriptional levels using combination of PAGE with Western
blotting and real-time PCR, respectively.Results:Analysis of Sox-2
positive and negative paired GBM cell lines revealed 29 differentially
expressed miRNAs, from which miR-93-3p, miR-95-5p, miR-106b-5p,
miR-22-3p, and miR-3195 showed high significance (adjust. P value
Introduction:Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most frequent
intracranial malignity of astrocytic origin in adults. This tumor is
characterized by infaust prognosis, which is primarily caused by
resistance to the therapy and early relapses relate to the presence of
glioblastoma stem cells (GSCs). These cells form neurospheres in vitro
and express markers of stemness such as Sox-2, Oct-4, and nestin.
Targeting of GSCs could be a novel promising therapeutic approach leading
to the overcome of therapy resistance and better prognosis of GBM
patients. One of the approaches how to successfully regulate GSC is a
targeted regulation of microRNAs (miRNAs). These small non-coding RNA
molecules post-transcriptionally regulate an expression of more than 2/3
of all human genes that are also involved in stem cell associated
signaling pathways. Moreover, deregulated expression of some miRNAs has
been observed in many cancers including GBM.Cell lines and Methods:We
have prepared eleven Sox-2 positive and negative paired primary GBM cell
lines, which have been cultured under DMEM/F12 medium supplemented with
bFGF, EGF, and B12 supplement and DMEM medium supplemented with 10% FBS,
respectively. The global miRNA expression analysis was performed using
GeneChip miRNA 4.0 Array (Affymetrix). Targeted regulation of miRNA
levels have been carried out by the transient transfection of specific
anti-miRNAs or miRNA mimics in GSC cell lines NCH 601 acquired from
Interdisciplinary Center For Neurosciences (Heidelberg, Germany). The
sphere formation assay was analyzed using IncuCyte ZOOM instrument (Essen
BioScience). Sox-2 and nestin expressions were analyzed on both protein
and transcriptional levels using combination of PAGE with Western
blotting and real-time PCR, respectively.Results:Analysis of Sox-2
positive and negative paired GBM cell lines revealed 29 differentially
expressed miRNAs, from which miR-93-3p, miR-95-5p, miR-106b-5p,
miR-22-3p, and miR-3195 showed high significance (adjust. P value < 0.05)
and association with both Sox-2 (Spearman R; p Introduction:Glioblastoma
multiforme (GBM) is the most frequent intracranial malignity of
astrocytic origin in adults. This tumor is characterized by infaust
prognosis, which is primarily caused by resistance to the therapy and
early relapses relate to the presence of glioblastoma stem cells (GSCs).
These cells form neurospheres in vitro and express markers of stemness
such as Sox-2, Oct-4, and nestin. Targeting of GSCs could be a novel
promising therapeutic approach leading to the overcome of therapy
resistance and better prognosis of GBM patients. One of the approaches
how to successfully regulate GSC is a targeted regulation of microRNAs
(miRNAs). These small non-coding RNA molecules post-transcriptionally
regulate an expression of more than 2/3 of all human genes that are also
involved in stem cell associated signaling pathways. Moreover,
deregulated expression of some miRNAs has been observed in many cancers
including GBM.Cell lines and Methods:We have prepared eleven Sox-2
positive and negative paired primary GBM cell lines, which have been
cultured under DMEM/F12 medium supplemented with bFGF, EGF, and B12
supplement and DMEM medium supplemented with 10% FBS, respectively. The
global miRNA expression analysis was performed using GeneChip miRNA 4.0
Array (Affymetrix). Targeted regulation of miRNA levels have been carried
out by the transient transfection of specific anti-miRNAs or miRNA mimics
in GSC cell lines NCH 601 acquired from Interdisciplinary Center For
Neurosciences (Heidelberg, Germany). The sphere formation assay was
analyzed using IncuCyte ZOOM instrument (Essen BioScience). Sox-2 and
nestin expressions were analyzed on both protein and transcriptional
levels using combination of PAGE with Western blotting and real-time PCR,
respectively.Results:Analysis of Sox-2 positive and negative paired GBM
cell lines revealed 29 differentially expressed miRNAs, from which
miR-93-3p, miR-95-5p, miR-106b-5p, miR-22-3p, and miR-3195 showed high
significance (adjust. P value < 0.05) and association with both Sox-2
(Spearman R; p < 0.002) and nestin (Spearman R; p
Introduction:Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most frequent
intracranial malignity of astrocytic origin in adults. This tumor is
characterized by infaust prognosis, which is primarily caused by
resistance to the therapy and early relapses relate to the presence of
glioblastoma stem cells (GSCs). These cells form neurospheres in vitro
and express markers of stemness such as Sox-2, Oct-4, and nestin.
Targeting of GSCs could be a novel promising therapeutic approach leading
to the overcome of therapy resistance and better prognosis of GBM
patients. One of the approaches how to successfully regulate GSC is a
targeted regulation of microRNAs (miRNAs). These small non-coding RNA
molecules post-transcriptionally regulate an expression of more than 2/3
of all human genes that are also involved in stem cell associated
signaling pathways. Moreover, deregulated expression of some miRNAs has
been observed in many cancers including GBM.Cell lines and Methods:We
have prepared eleven Sox-2 positive and negative paired primary GBM cell
lines, which have been cultured under DMEM/F12 medium supplemented with
bFGF, EGF, and B12 supplement and DMEM medium supplemented with 10% FBS,
respectively. The global miRNA expression analysis was performed using
GeneChip miRNA 4.0 Array (Affymetrix). Targeted regulation of miRNA
levels have been carried out by the transient transfection of specific
anti-miRNAs or miRNA mimics in GSC cell lines NCH 601 acquired from
Interdisciplinary Center For Neurosciences (Heidelberg, Germany). The
sphere formation assay was analyzed using IncuCyte ZOOM instrument (Essen
BioScience). Sox-2 and nestin expressions were analyzed on both protein
and transcriptional levels using combination of PAGE with Western
blotting and real-time PCR, respectively.Results:Analysis of Sox-2
positive and negative paired GBM cell lines revealed 29 differentially
expressed miRNAs, from which miR-93-3p, miR-95-5p, miR-106b-5p,
miR-22-3p, and miR-3195 showed high significance (adjust. P value < 0.05)
and association with both Sox-2 (Spearman R; p < 0.002) and nestin
(Spearman R; p < 0.02) expressions. MiR-22-3p and miR-3195 showed lower
expression whereas other miRNAs higher expression in Sox-2 positive GBM
cells. The in vitro analyses also suggest that miR-22-3p and miR-106b-5p
affect the sphere formation potential and Sox-2 expression in GSC
cells.Conclusion:Taken together, our data suggest that miR-22-3p and
miR-106b-5p are probably involved in GSC biology and, thus, should be
promising molecular targets to overcome GBM therapeutic resistance. This
work was supported by Ministry of Health of the Czech Republic, grant nr.
15-33158A, 15-34553A, 15-31627A and 15-34678A. All rights reserved.

