Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ONC212 exhibits increased cytotoxicity relative to ONC201 in a
subset of human pancreatic cancer cell lines


Pancreatic cancer is one of the most deadly types of cancer with
five-year survival rate of 6%. This poor prognosis is attributed to
aggressive growth of the tumor cells, metastasis at an early stage and
resistance to standard chemotherapy. Therefore, finding new treatments
and improving outcomes of pancreatic cancer patients have been high
priorities. ONC201 is a small molecule that selectively targets a broad
range of tumor types tested. It is currently in phase I/II clinical
trials for advanced solid, hematopoietic, and lymphoid tumors. The ONC201
analogue, ONC212, is in preclinical development for certain cancers that
are not lead indications for the parent compound ONC201. We examined the
efficacy of ONC201 and ONC212 in a panel of human pancreatic cancer cell
lines. Among seven cell lines tested, three cell lines were relatively
insensitive to ONC201, with IC50 values of 100 M or greater. However,
these cell lines showed greater sensitivity to ONC212 with IC50 values of
31-56 M. We compared ONC201-resistant PANC-1 cells and ONC201-sensitive
HPAF-II cells. Both ONC201 and ONC212 induced apoptosis in HPAF-II cells,
as assessed by PARP cleavage, while PARP cleavage was detected only when
PANC-1 cells were treated with ONC212 but not ONC201. We are currently
evaluating the efficacy of ONC201 and ONC212 in a panel of
patient-derived low passage pancreatic cancer cell lines. We found a
correlation between high expression levels of RTKs (c-MET, ALK, EGFR,
IGFR, HER2) and decreased sensitivity to ONC201 in pancreatic cancer cell
lines. We investigated the effect of ONC201 on EGFR and IGFR, which are
highly expressed in PANC-1 and found that ONC201 does not inhibit
receptor activation by the specific growth factors. We are studying the
effects of ONC201 and ONC212 on RTKs and their signal transduction
pathways. Lastly, since aggressive drug-resistant pancreatic cancer cells
express high levels of RTKs, we are developing a rationale combining
ONC201/ONC212 with specific small molecule RTK inhibitors such as
crizotinib or lapatinib. We are exploring these combination treatments
using cell lines, organoids and PDX models to unravel specific therapy
options for therapy-refractory pancreatic cancer cells. Our goal is to
provide the preclinical rationale for clinical trials of ONC201 or ONC212
as mono-agents or in combination with other therapies for pancreatic
cancer patients.

