Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of estrogen receptor alpha 1 bound lncRNAs in
aggressive breast cancer


Breast cancer (BC) is the second most common newly diagnosed cancer and
the second leading cause of cancer death among women in the United
States. Around 70% of diagnosed BCs are estrogen receptor positive (ER+).
Despite the proven benefits of adjuvant endocrine therapy in women with
hormone receptor positive breast cancer, relapses still occur even after
initial treatment with endocrine therapy for 5 years, referred to as late
stage relapse. While existing studies have focused on the role of
protein-coding genes, long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) are an emerging and
under-characterized class of transcripts that have been shown to be
dysregulated in breast cancer. Recently, lncRNAs have been shown to
function by interfacing with corresponding RNA binding proteins to play
critical regulatory roles in chromatin remodeling and diverse cellular
processes by acting as decoys, guides, and scaffolds. As estrogen
receptor expression is controlled mostly by epigenetic and
post-transcriptional mechanisms, and very rarely at the genomic level, we
hypothesize that lncRNAs may interact with ER to promote aggressive
disease. To address this, we aimed to identify lncRNAs bound to the
estrogen receptor alpha 1 (ESR1) that promote late stage breast cancer.
To accomplish this, we first used transcriptome sequencing to identify
altered expression levels of lncRNAs between primary tumors and
late-stage relapse breast cancer patients. We detected 2086 altered
lncRNAs when comparing the metastatic to the primary samples with an FDR
Breast cancer (BC) is the second most common newly diagnosed cancer and
the second leading cause of cancer death among women in the United
States. Around 70% of diagnosed BCs are estrogen receptor positive (ER+).
Despite the proven benefits of adjuvant endocrine therapy in women with
hormone receptor positive breast cancer, relapses still occur even after
initial treatment with endocrine therapy for 5 years, referred to as late
stage relapse. While existing studies have focused on the role of
protein-coding genes, long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) are an emerging and
under-characterized class of transcripts that have been shown to be
dysregulated in breast cancer. Recently, lncRNAs have been shown to
function by interfacing with corresponding RNA binding proteins to play
critical regulatory roles in chromatin remodeling and diverse cellular
processes by acting as decoys, guides, and scaffolds. As estrogen
receptor expression is controlled mostly by epigenetic and
post-transcriptional mechanisms, and very rarely at the genomic level, we
hypothesize that lncRNAs may interact with ER to promote aggressive
disease. To address this, we aimed to identify lncRNAs bound to the
estrogen receptor alpha 1 (ESR1) that promote late stage breast cancer.
To accomplish this, we first used transcriptome sequencing to identify
altered expression levels of lncRNAs between primary tumors and
late-stage relapse breast cancer patients. We detected 2086 altered
lncRNAs when comparing the metastatic to the primary samples with an FDR
<0.05, of which 202 were novel. As expected, Gene Set Enrichment Analysis
of differentially expressed protein-coding genes revealed an enrichment
of biological concepts associated with breast cancer and metastasis.
Next, in order to identify ESR1 bound lncRNAs associated with aggressive
disease, we conducted RNA Immunoprecipitation Sequencing (RIP-Seq) of all
transcripts bound to ESR1 as compared to an IgG control in the ER+ T47D
cell line in triplicate. We identified 210 transcripts bound to ESR1,
which we term ESR1 bound lncRNAs (ESRlncs). The identified ESRlncs
consisted of both novel (unannotated) and known (annotated) lncRNAs.
Interestingly we found 50% of ESRlncs had significantly altered
expression in the metastatic samples, with 96% (105) having more than a
two fold increase in expression. Further characterization of these
ESRlncs is ongoing to decipher how they interact with ESR1 to promote
aggressive and metastatic disease. Overall, this is the first study to
discover ESR1 bound lncRNAs that may be contributing to late stage
relapse in breast cancer patients.

