Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ABCC11/MRP8 and ABCB1/MDR1 confer eribulin resistance to breast
cancer cells


Background: Eribulin is a key drug for the patients with metastatic
breast cancer; however, the mechanisms of how breast cancer cells become
resistant to eribulin have not been fully elucidated. The purpose of this
study is to analyze the mechanisms of eribulin resistance in breast
cancer cells.Cell lines:Eribulin resistant cell lines were established
for three estrogen receptor (ER) positive cell lines (MCF7/E,
BT474/E,ZR75-1/E), three triple negative cell lines (MDA-MB-231/E,
Hs578T/E, MDA-MB-157/E), and one HER2 positive cell line (SKBR3/E) by
exposing to stepwise increased doses of eribulin.Results: The mRNA and
protein expressions of both ABCC11 and ABCB1 were increased in all
eribulin resistant cell lines regardless of their subtype. Inhibition of
either ABCC11 or ABCB1 by small interfering RNA (siRNA) partially
restored the sensitivity to eribulin in MCF7/E, BT474/E, and ZR75-1/E
cells. Moreover, dual inhibition of ABCC11 and ABCB1 additively restored
the sensitivity to eribulin in MCF7/E cells. On the other hand,
overexpression of exogenous ABCC11 caused eribulin resistance in MCF7 and
MDA-MB-231 cells (resistance ratio; MCF7; 13.80.85, MDA-MB-231;
11.40.74). Interestingly, inhibition of ER expression by siRNA or down
regulation of ER by fluvestrant decreased ABCC11 expression and increased
the sensitivity to eribulin in MCF7/E cells.Discussion: Our data
demonstrates that ABCC11/MRP8 and ABCB1/MDR1 confer eribulin resistance
to breast cancer cells regardless of their subtype; moreover, our data
suggests the possibility of involvement of ER pathway in the regulation
of ABCC11 expression in the ER positive breast cancer cells. Although
further studies should be required, the expression of ABCC11/ABCB1 may be
used as biomarkers for prediction of response to eribulin in breast
cancer. In addition, the inhibition of ABCC11/ ABCB1 might be of service
in a novel strategy to enhance the antitumor effect of eribulin.

