Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Augmentation of response to therapeutic agents by
(-)-gallocatechin gallate through inhibition of RAD51 nuclear
translocation


Lung cancer is the most common cancer worldwide. Platinum-based
combination chemotherapy is one of first line treatments for patients
with lung cancer. Most of the cytotoxic drugs are targeting DNA,
interfere with DNA synthesis, and triggering DNA damage response (DDR).
Since DDR usually activates important defensive pathways to repair
damaged DNA, DDR is known as a key factor determining the outcome of
chemotherapy. Among them, RAD51, playing a central role in homologous
recombination (HR) DNA repair, has been shown to interfere with the
prognosis of patients treated with chemoradiotherapy. Since we have
demonstrated that inhibition of RAD51 nuclear focus formation
synergistically enhances the anticancer activity of cisplatin, we further
screened purified natural products in order to find products with
activity to inhibit RAD51 nuclear focus formation. In the present study,
we found that a green tea catechin derivative, the (-)-Gallocatechin
gallate (GCG) has potent inhibitory activity against RAD51 nuclear focus
formation in cisplatin-treated H460 cells. The in vitro cytotoxicity
assay showed that the combination of cisplatin or irinotecan with GCG
significantly increases the sensitivity of H460 cells to these DNA damage
agents. We also evaluated the anti-tumor growth activity of cisplatin or
irinotecan in combination with GCG using H460 xenografts. Our results
showed that cisplatin and irinotecan suppresses tumor growth by 17.6% and
33.8%, while in combination with GCG suppresses tumor growth by 52.2% and
68.9%, respectively. We further demonstrated that GCG is able to inhibit
cisplatin-induced ATM and Chk2 phosphorylation. Together, our results
suggest that GCG may interfere with ATM-Chk2 pathway and hence suppress
RAD51 nuclear focus formation and DNA repair activities.

