Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Probing cytochrome P450 activity with benzofuran-based
duocarmycins in a panel of head and neck cancer cell lines and CYP1A1,
1B1 and CYP2W1 transfected cell lines


Background:The cytochrome P450 (CYP) isoforms CYP1A1, 1B1 and 2W1 are
highly expressed in tumour tissue and surrounding stroma compared to
nearby normal tissue, whichprovides an opportunity for development of
selective cancer therapeutics as previously reported by us.1-2 However,
no reagent is available to interrogate CYP2W1 and hence the purpose of
this study was to evaluate a series of novel benzofuran-based
duocarmycins as chemical probes to study the functional activity of
CYP2W1.Materials and methods:Standard materials and methods can be found
in the references below. Briefly, these include route to synthesis of
duocarmycin bioprecursors, use of recombinant CYP bactosomes with LC/MS
for metabolite identification, and cell culture MTT proliferation assay.
CYP expression was measured by RT-PCR and western blot.Results:A panel of
head and neck cancer (HNC) cell lines (SCC4, FaDu, Detroit-562, A-253,
OSC19, UT-SCC5, UT-SCC10, UT-SCC14) were analysed for the expression of
CYP1A1, CYP1B1 and CYP2W1. Significant expression (5-10 fold) was shown
at the gene level while protein expression experiments are currently
underway and will be reported at the meeting. Furthermore, CYP2W1
functional activity was probed with a novel series of benzofuran-based
duocarmycin analogues. The compounds were incubated with recombinant CYP
bactosomes or HEK2932W1-transfected cells and their oxidative metabolism
was studied using LCMS. CYP2W1 was shown to metabolise one chemical
probe, ICT2726, to a unique metabolite not observed for any other CYP
isoform. The compounds were investigated for antiproliferative activity
in a panel of cell lines (CHO, CHO1A1, RT112, HEK293, HEK2932W1, Cal27,
Cal271B1, Cal33, Cal331B1). Obtained IC50 values > 1 M, which for these
ultrapotent (picomolar) duocarmycins, indicated no CYP-bioactivation,
consistent with no active duocarmycin metabolite identified from the LCMS
studies.Conclusion:Our findings support the use of non-toxic ICT2726 as a
chemical tool that can be employed in vitro to probe CYP2W1 functional
activity.[1] Sheldrake et al.Re-engineering of the duocarmycin structural
architecture enables bioprecursordevelopment targeting CYP1A1 and CYP2W1
for biological activity. J Med Chem.2013, 56, 6273-7.[2] Travica et al.
Colon cancer-specificcytochrome P450 2W1 converts duocarmycin analogues
into potent tumorcytotoxins. Clin Cancer Res. 2013, 19, 2952-61.

