Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PRSS8 methylation and its significance in esophageal squamous cell
carcinoma


Esophageal cancer is one of the most common cancers worldwide, and the
incidence and mortality is increasing rapidly in recent years in China,
but the underlying mechanisms are largely unclear. Herein we used
immunohistochemical staining on an esophageal squamous cell carcinoma
(ESCC) tissue microarray (TMA) containing 362 cases of ESCC and found
that the expression of PRSS8, serine protease prostasin, was
significantly decreased in ESCC. Interestingly, the reduction of PRSS8
was well correlated with poor differentiation, less stromal lymphocyte
infiltration, and shorter survival time. PRSS8 mRNA levels were also
significantly reduced in ESCC compared to the adjacent normal esophagus
assayed by quantitative real-time PCR. Methylation specific PCR showed
that PRSS8 promoter region was hypermethylated in ESCC tissues and cell
lines, which was associated with downregulation of PRSS8 expression and
decreased activities of PRSS8 promoter. Promoter deletion and truncation
approaches showed that the CpG island in PRSS8 promoter region played an
important role on the determination of promoter activities.
De-methylation agent decitabine was able to restrore PRSS8 expression in
esophageal cancer cell lines, leading to the inhibition of cancer cell
proliferation, motility, migration and cell cycle arrest. However, the
restoration of PRSS8 and its tumor inhibition could be reversed by small
interfering RNA targeting PRSS8. Immunoblotting results showed that tumor
inhibition of PRSS8 may be associated with proliferation- and
epithelial-mesenchymal transition - related proteins (e.g. upregulation
of E-cadherin and downregulation of Twist and Snail) in ESCC cells. The
findings from current study strongly suggested that PRSS8 acted as a
tumor suppressor and PRSS8 promoter region hypermethylation has clinical
significance of in ESCC.

