Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dual inhibition of PKC and p53-MDM2 or PKC and mTORC1 are novel
efficient therapeutic approaches for uveal melanoma


Uveal melanoma (UM), although rare in incidence, is the most common
cancer of the eye in adults. Many UM patients develop metastases for
which no curative treatment has been identified and therefore novel
therapeutic approaches are urgently needed. UM is characterized by
mutations in the genes GNAQ and GNA11 which activate the PKC pathway.
This has led to the use of PKC inhibitors as a rational targeting
strategy to treat UM tumors. Encouraging clinical activity has been noted
in UM patients treated with PKC inhibitors. However, it is likely that
curative treatment regimens will require a combination of targeted
therapeutic agents. Employing a large panel of UM patient-derived
xenograft models, several PKC inhibitor-based combination studies were
performed using the PKC inhibitor AEB071 (Sotrastaurin). When combined
with AEB071, the targeted agents CGM097 (p53-MDM2 inhibitor), RAD001
(Everolimus, mTORC1 inhibitor) and MEK162 (Binimetinib, a MEK inhibitor)
demonstrated greater activity in the UM patient-derived xenograft models
than their activity as single agents. Importantly, tumor regressions were
observed in several UM models with AEB071 + RAD001 and AEB071 + CGM097
co-treatments. Follow-up in vitro studies in UM cell lines using AEB071
combined with either CGM097 or RAD001 provided a more detailed
mechanistic understanding of their combination activity and confirmed
their ability to induce cell death. Together, these preclinical studies
reveal that combining PKC and p53-MDM2 inhibitors or PKC and mTORC1
inhibitors may provide significant clinical benefit for patients with UM.

