Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Improved colorectal cancer screening by new stool-based protein
markers


BackgroundThe fecal immunochemical test (FIT) is used in many countries
for non-invasive screening for colorectal cancer (CRC), but its
characteristics leave room for improvement. We aimed to identify novel
stool-based protein markers in stool that outperform or complement
hemoglobin in detecting CRC.Materials and methodsA series of large scale
proteomic discovery and validation was conducted on a total of 313 human
stool specimens. A discovery set consisted of 22 stool specimens (12 CRC
and 10 controls), and isolated proteins were analyzed by an in-dept mass
spectrometry GeLC-MS/MS workflow. An external validation set consisted of
291 independent stool specimens (79 CRC, 40 advanced adenoma (AA), 43
nonadvanced adenoma (A) and 129 controls), and isolated proteins were
analyzed by single-shot mass spectrometry (Q-Exactive). As proof of
concept, commercially available meso scale discovery (MSD) assays were
performed on an independent validation set of 72 FIT fluid samples set
including 14 CRC, 16 AA, 18 A and 24 controls.ResultsOf the 468 human
proteins quantified in the discovery set, 93 were significantly enriched
in CRC vs controls (pBackgroundThe fecal immunochemical test (FIT) is
used in many countries for non-invasive screening for colorectal cancer
(CRC), but its characteristics leave room for improvement. We aimed to
identify novel stool-based protein markers in stool that outperform or
complement hemoglobin in detecting CRC.Materials and methodsA series of
large scale proteomic discovery and validation was conducted on a total
of 313 human stool specimens. A discovery set consisted of 22 stool
specimens (12 CRC and 10 controls), and isolated proteins were analyzed
by an in-dept mass spectrometry GeLC-MS/MS workflow. An external
validation set consisted of 291 independent stool specimens (79 CRC, 40
advanced adenoma (AA), 43 nonadvanced adenoma (A) and 129 controls), and
isolated proteins were analyzed by single-shot mass spectrometry
(Q-Exactive). As proof of concept, commercially available meso scale
discovery (MSD) assays were performed on an independent validation set of
72 FIT fluid samples set including 14 CRC, 16 AA, 18 A and 24
controls.ResultsOf the 468 human proteins quantified in the discovery
set, 93 were significantly enriched in CRC vs controls (p<0.05). Of
these, 29 were significantly found enriched in CRC vs controls in the
validation set (qBackgroundThe fecal immunochemical test (FIT) is used in
many countries for non-invasive screening for colorectal cancer (CRC),
but its characteristics leave room for improvement. We aimed to identify
novel stool-based protein markers in stool that outperform or complement
hemoglobin in detecting CRC.Materials and methodsA series of large scale
proteomic discovery and validation was conducted on a total of 313 human
stool specimens. A discovery set consisted of 22 stool specimens (12 CRC
and 10 controls), and isolated proteins were analyzed by an in-dept mass
spectrometry GeLC-MS/MS workflow. An external validation set consisted of
291 independent stool specimens (79 CRC, 40 advanced adenoma (AA), 43
nonadvanced adenoma (A) and 129 controls), and isolated proteins were
analyzed by single-shot mass spectrometry (Q-Exactive). As proof of
concept, commercially available meso scale discovery (MSD) assays were
performed on an independent validation set of 72 FIT fluid samples set
including 14 CRC, 16 AA, 18 A and 24 controls.ResultsOf the 468 human
proteins quantified in the discovery set, 93 were significantly enriched
in CRC vs controls (p<0.05). Of these, 29 were significantly found
enriched in CRC vs controls in the validation set (q<0.05). CART analysis
and exhaustive search revealed a combination of 4 proteins as the most
optimal combination to differentiate CRC from controls. A logistic
regression model of this combination of proteins detected CRC with a
sensitivity of 73% as compared to 43% for hemoglobin (HBA1) alone at a
fixed specificity of 95% (p = 0.00003). Another combination of 4 proteins
was the most optimal combination to differentiate AA from controls, which
showed a sensitivity of 48% vs 8% for hemoglobin (p = 0.0002) at fixed
specificity of 95%. Evaluation of one of the markers on FIT fluid samples
provided proof of concept that these proteins can be detected in FIT
fluid and can significantly discriminate CRC from healthy controls (p
BackgroundThe fecal immunochemical test (FIT) is used in many countries
for non-invasive screening for colorectal cancer (CRC), but its
characteristics leave room for improvement. We aimed to identify novel
stool-based protein markers in stool that outperform or complement
hemoglobin in detecting CRC.Materials and methodsA series of large scale
proteomic discovery and validation was conducted on a total of 313 human
stool specimens. A discovery set consisted of 22 stool specimens (12 CRC
and 10 controls), and isolated proteins were analyzed by an in-dept mass
spectrometry GeLC-MS/MS workflow. An external validation set consisted of
291 independent stool specimens (79 CRC, 40 advanced adenoma (AA), 43
nonadvanced adenoma (A) and 129 controls), and isolated proteins were
analyzed by single-shot mass spectrometry (Q-Exactive). As proof of
concept, commercially available meso scale discovery (MSD) assays were
performed on an independent validation set of 72 FIT fluid samples set
including 14 CRC, 16 AA, 18 A and 24 controls.ResultsOf the 468 human
proteins quantified in the discovery set, 93 were significantly enriched
in CRC vs controls (p<0.05). Of these, 29 were significantly found
enriched in CRC vs controls in the validation set (q<0.05). CART analysis
and exhaustive search revealed a combination of 4 proteins as the most
optimal combination to differentiate CRC from controls. A logistic
regression model of this combination of proteins detected CRC with a
sensitivity of 73% as compared to 43% for hemoglobin (HBA1) alone at a
fixed specificity of 95% (p = 0.00003). Another combination of 4 proteins
was the most optimal combination to differentiate AA from controls, which
showed a sensitivity of 48% vs 8% for hemoglobin (p = 0.0002) at fixed
specificity of 95%. Evaluation of one of the markers on FIT fluid samples
provided proof of concept that these proteins can be detected in FIT
fluid and can significantly discriminate CRC from healthy controls (p <
0.001).ConclusionProteome profiling on stool samples revealed 29
validated proteins significantly enriched in CRC samples compared to
controls. A panel of 4 complementary protein markers outperformed
hemoglobin for detection of CRC as well as AA. Proof of concept for
detecting the proteins in FIT fluids confirmed the high potential of
these markers for screening purposes in a non-invasive and cost-effective
manner.

