Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Risk prediction for stomach cancer using helicobacter pylori
infection and atrophic gastritis, fruits and vegetables, smoking and
GWAS-identified genetic polymorphism (PSCA-rs2294008) in a Japanese
population


[Background] Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori) infection and atrophic
gastritis (AG) following H. pylori infection are well-established risk
factors worldwide. Smoking is a convincing risk factor and fruits and
vegetables intake is a possible protective factor in Japanese
populations. PSCA-rs2294008 is one of single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) with the susceptibility of a stomach cancer risk identified by
Genome-wide association studies in Japanese populations. The advances in
molecular evidence may have a potential to impact cancer prevention.
However, it has never been clear how much it may contribute to cancer
risk of the stomach on a population level in combination with
environmental factors. In this study, we established a risk prediction
model of stomach cancer using these environmental, clinical and genetic
risk factors as a potential practical application in cancer preventive
intervention.[Methods] We conducted two age- and sex- matched
case-control studies, one for model derivation (697 cases and 1,372
controls) and the second (678 cases and 678 controls) for external
validation. Based on data from the derivation study, a prediction model
was developed by fitting a conditional logistic regression model using
the following predictors: age, ABCD category defined by H.pylori
infection and AG, smoking, fruits and vegetable intakes and PSCA
genotype. Performance of the model was assessed in terms of
discrimination (C statistic), calibration (calibration plots and
Hosmer-Lemeshow test) and Integrated discrimination improvement (IDI)
index. Cumulative risks were obtained by combining odds ratios estimated
from the risk model with the age-specific incidence rate and population
size.[Results] The risk model, including a combination of PSCA genotype,
smoking, fruit & vegetable intake and alcohol consumption, provided high
discriminatory accuracy and good calibration in both the derivation and
validation studies: C statistics were 0.78 (95% confidence intervals
0.76-0.80) and 0.80 (0.77-0.82), respectively, and the calibration plots
of both studies stayed close to the ideal calibration line. IDI indices
are 0.11 and 0.12 (p[Background] Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori)
infection and atrophic gastritis (AG) following H. pylori infection are
well-established risk factors worldwide. Smoking is a convincing risk
factor and fruits and vegetables intake is a possible protective factor
in Japanese populations. PSCA-rs2294008 is one of single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) with the susceptibility of a stomach cancer risk
identified by Genome-wide association studies in Japanese populations.
The advances in molecular evidence may have a potential to impact cancer
prevention. However, it has never been clear how much it may contribute
to cancer risk of the stomach on a population level in combination with
environmental factors. In this study, we established a risk prediction
model of stomach cancer using these environmental, clinical and genetic
risk factors as a potential practical application in cancer preventive
intervention.[Methods] We conducted two age- and sex- matched
case-control studies, one for model derivation (697 cases and 1,372
controls) and the second (678 cases and 678 controls) for external
validation. Based on data from the derivation study, a prediction model
was developed by fitting a conditional logistic regression model using
the following predictors: age, ABCD category defined by H.pylori
infection and AG, smoking, fruits and vegetable intakes and PSCA
genotype. Performance of the model was assessed in terms of
discrimination (C statistic), calibration (calibration plots and
Hosmer-Lemeshow test) and Integrated discrimination improvement (IDI)
index. Cumulative risks were obtained by combining odds ratios estimated
from the risk model with the age-specific incidence rate and population
size.[Results] The risk model, including a combination of PSCA genotype,
smoking, fruit & vegetable intake and alcohol consumption, provided high
discriminatory accuracy and good calibration in both the derivation and
validation studies: C statistics were 0.78 (95% confidence intervals
0.76-0.80) and 0.80 (0.77-0.82), respectively, and the calibration plots
of both studies stayed close to the ideal calibration line. IDI indices
are 0.11 and 0.12 (p<0.00001), respectively.[Conclusion] The risk
prediction model that includes these environmental, clinical and genetic
factors could be useful to classify Japanese into relevant risk groups of
stomach cancer for personalized prevention programs.

