Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cell-based screening to identify repressors of wild type and
mutated telomerase reverse transcriptase gene promoter activity


Cellular immortality is a near-universal phenotype of cancer cells with
the central role played by the multicomponent telomerase complex firmly
established. The reactivation of telomerase is found in approximately 85%
of all cancers. Furthermore, frequent activating non-coding mutations in
the hTERT promoter region have been identified in multiple tumour types.
A considerable body of evidence supports the concept of targeting the
signal transduction pathways that contribute to telomerase overexpression
in cancer cells. We have exploited our knowledge in this area to develop
cell-based luciferase reporter gene assays to measure hTERT and hTR gene
promoter activity. To this end we undertook high throughput screening in
the A2780 human ovarian cancer cell line against both hTR and hTERT
promoters. Secondary specificity and cytotoxicity assays reduced the
initial hits to a single chemical series of dual inhibitors which
strongly suppress both hTR and hTERT promoter activity without primary
cytotoxicity, as predicted of telomerase inhibitors. Through a process of
Hit to Lead we have further developed the chemical series. Lead compounds
are active across a panel of cell lines from distinct histological
origins, reduce endogenous hTERT mRNA levels and decrease telomerase
catalytic activity at nM concentrations. Furthermore, these compounds
repress both wild type and mutant C228T and C250T hTERT promoter
activity. In specificity assays no off-target activity has been
identified in an expanded promoter screen against a panel of 15
off-target promoter reporters.

