Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Activity of microRNA replacement reagent, MRX34, in multiple
myeloma in vivo model


Background: Despite recent progress in multiple myeloma (MM) treatment
with the advent of new targeted anticancer agents such as Bortezomib,
Lenalidomide and, Thalidomide MM still remains incurable. To improve
clinical outcome of MM patients, many research have been trying to
develop novel targeted drugs. Recent studies demonstrated that microRNA
Replacement reagent could be a promising therapeutic strategy in patients
with hematologic malignancies. Hence, we tried to examine the efficacy of
MRX34, a microRNA-34 replacement reagent, in MM animal model.Methods: We
examined the anti-tumor activity of a MRX34 against 3MM cell lines (LP1,
MOLP-8, and U266), and investigated the survival effects through which
this novel agent shows anti-MM activity. For an animal study, we used NRG
(NOD-Rag1null IL2rgnull, CB-17 SCID) mice that were injected with MM
cells via tail vein. MOLP-8, LP1 and U266 cells were injected Intravenous
106 cells of NRG. When tumors were measurable, mice were assigned to 3
treatment groups receiving the vehicle alone (control), MRX34 0.3mg/kg
treatment group and, MRX34 1mg/kg treatment group were given Intravenous
5 times a week.Results: Median survival of mice injected with LP1, MOLP-8
and U266 cell lines were 28days, 29 days and 34days respectively without
any treatment. When mice were treated with MRX-34, median survival was
33days, 37days and 42days respectively. There was a significant survival
advantage with MRX-34 treatment in MOLP-8 and U266 cell lines. For
monoclonal proteins, mice treated with MRX34 group are suppressed
M-protein level almost 30% less than M-protein.Summary / Conclusion: Our
data indicated that MRX34 had beneficial effects in multiple myeloma
animal model. Mice treated with MRX34 showed M-protein suppression and
survival advantage. Our results warrant further clinical studies using
this novel agent in MM.

