Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antineoplastic activity of the novel CDK2/9 inhibitor CCT68127
occurs via induced anaphase catastrophe and inhibition of PEA15
phosphorylation in lung cancer


We reported the first generation CDK2/9/7 inhibitor seliciclib
(R-roscovitine, CYC202) exerts antineoplastic effects against lung cancer
by inducing anaphase catastrophe. In anaphase catastrophe, cells with
aneuploidy (a hallmark of cancer) cannot cluster supernumerary
centrosomes, triggering abnormal anaphase and apoptosis. This study now
finds the new CDK2/9 inhibitor CCT68127 (Cyclacel) is a more potent and
selective CDK2 inhibitor than seliciclib. CCT68127 exerted substantial
antineoplastic effects against diverse lung cancer cells. It inhibited
growth, caused cell cycle arrest, and induced apoptosis more than did
seliciclib. Using a high throughput screen platform of 75 (57 KRAS
wild-type and 18 KRAS mutant) lung cancer cell lines, those with KRAS
mutation were significantly (pWe reported the first generation CDK2/9/7
inhibitor seliciclib (R-roscovitine, CYC202) exerts antineoplastic
effects against lung cancer by inducing anaphase catastrophe. In anaphase
catastrophe, cells with aneuploidy (a hallmark of cancer) cannot cluster
supernumerary centrosomes, triggering abnormal anaphase and apoptosis.
This study now finds the new CDK2/9 inhibitor CCT68127 (Cyclacel) is a
more potent and selective CDK2 inhibitor than seliciclib. CCT68127
exerted substantial antineoplastic effects against diverse lung cancer
cells. It inhibited growth, caused cell cycle arrest, and induced
apoptosis more than did seliciclib. Using a high throughput screen
platform of 75 (57 KRAS wild-type and 18 KRAS mutant) lung cancer cell
lines, those with KRAS mutation were significantly (p<0.05) more
sensitive to CCT68127 than were KRAS wild-type cells. Anaphase
catastrophe was triggered by CCT68127 treatment. Expression of 180
critical growth-regulatory proteins was studied before and after 6, 24,
and 48 hours of CCT68127 or vehicle treatments in murine (LKR13; KRAS
mutant and ED1; KRAS wild-type) and human (Hop62; KRAS mutant and H522;
KRAS wild-type) lung cancer cells using a reverse phase protein array
(RPPA). Regulated species included DNA repair, Hippo, and Rab GTPase
proteins. The multifunctional growth regulator PEA15 (phosphoprotein
enriched in astrocytes 15), exhibited marked Ser116 phosphorylation
inhibition after CCT68127 treatment. This was independently confirmed by
immunoblot analysis in murine and human lung cancer cells. When PEA15 was
overexpressed in these cells, CCT68127 growth inhibition was antagonized,
indicating its direct involvement in these effects. PEA15 knockdown using
siRNAs significantly (pWe reported the first generation CDK2/9/7
inhibitor seliciclib (R-roscovitine, CYC202) exerts antineoplastic
effects against lung cancer by inducing anaphase catastrophe. In anaphase
catastrophe, cells with aneuploidy (a hallmark of cancer) cannot cluster
supernumerary centrosomes, triggering abnormal anaphase and apoptosis.
This study now finds the new CDK2/9 inhibitor CCT68127 (Cyclacel) is a
more potent and selective CDK2 inhibitor than seliciclib. CCT68127
exerted substantial antineoplastic effects against diverse lung cancer
cells. It inhibited growth, caused cell cycle arrest, and induced
apoptosis more than did seliciclib. Using a high throughput screen
platform of 75 (57 KRAS wild-type and 18 KRAS mutant) lung cancer cell
lines, those with KRAS mutation were significantly (p<0.05) more
sensitive to CCT68127 than were KRAS wild-type cells. Anaphase
catastrophe was triggered by CCT68127 treatment. Expression of 180
critical growth-regulatory proteins was studied before and after 6, 24,
and 48 hours of CCT68127 or vehicle treatments in murine (LKR13; KRAS
mutant and ED1; KRAS wild-type) and human (Hop62; KRAS mutant and H522;
KRAS wild-type) lung cancer cells using a reverse phase protein array
(RPPA). Regulated species included DNA repair, Hippo, and Rab GTPase
proteins. The multifunctional growth regulator PEA15 (phosphoprotein
enriched in astrocytes 15), exhibited marked Ser116 phosphorylation
inhibition after CCT68127 treatment. This was independently confirmed by
immunoblot analysis in murine and human lung cancer cells. When PEA15 was
overexpressed in these cells, CCT68127 growth inhibition was antagonized,
indicating its direct involvement in these effects. PEA15 knockdown using
siRNAs significantly (p<0.05) repressed growth of lung cancer cells and
enhanced growth inhibition after CCT68127 treatment. PEA15
immunohistochemical detection was explored in 235 human non-small lung
cancers. PEA15 expression was reduced in lung cancers versus adjacent
normal lung. Decreased PEA15 expression was significantly (pWe reported
the first generation CDK2/9/7 inhibitor seliciclib (R-roscovitine,
CYC202) exerts antineoplastic effects against lung cancer by inducing
anaphase catastrophe. In anaphase catastrophe, cells with aneuploidy (a
hallmark of cancer) cannot cluster supernumerary centrosomes, triggering
abnormal anaphase and apoptosis. This study now finds the new CDK2/9
inhibitor CCT68127 (Cyclacel) is a more potent and selective CDK2
inhibitor than seliciclib. CCT68127 exerted substantial antineoplastic
effects against diverse lung cancer cells. It inhibited growth, caused
cell cycle arrest, and induced apoptosis more than did seliciclib. Using
a high throughput screen platform of 75 (57 KRAS wild-type and 18 KRAS
mutant) lung cancer cell lines, those with KRAS mutation were
significantly (p<0.05) more sensitive to CCT68127 than were KRAS
wild-type cells. Anaphase catastrophe was triggered by CCT68127
treatment. Expression of 180 critical growth-regulatory proteins was
studied before and after 6, 24, and 48 hours of CCT68127 or vehicle
treatments in murine (LKR13; KRAS mutant and ED1; KRAS wild-type) and
human (Hop62; KRAS mutant and H522; KRAS wild-type) lung cancer cells
using a reverse phase protein array (RPPA). Regulated species included
DNA repair, Hippo, and Rab GTPase proteins. The multifunctional growth
regulator PEA15 (phosphoprotein enriched in astrocytes 15), exhibited
marked Ser116 phosphorylation inhibition after CCT68127 treatment. This
was independently confirmed by immunoblot analysis in murine and human
lung cancer cells. When PEA15 was overexpressed in these cells, CCT68127
growth inhibition was antagonized, indicating its direct involvement in
these effects. PEA15 knockdown using siRNAs significantly (p<0.05)
repressed growth of lung cancer cells and enhanced growth inhibition
after CCT68127 treatment. PEA15 immunohistochemical detection was
explored in 235 human non-small lung cancers. PEA15 expression was
reduced in lung cancers versus adjacent normal lung. Decreased PEA15
expression was significantly (p<0.05) associated with advanced stage and
overall survival, establishing the translational importance of PEA15
expression in lung cancer. In summary, the novel CDK2/9 inhibitor,
CCT68127, elicits marked antineoplastic effects in lung cancer. This
occurs through mechanisms that engage anaphase catastrophe and reduce
phosphorylation of the growth regulator PEA15.

