Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: microRNA expression in bronchial epithelium for lung cancer
detection


IntroductionWe have previously shown that gene expression alterations in
the cytologically-normal mainstem bronchus can be leveraged as a
biomarker for lung cancer detection (Silvestri et al. NEJM 2015), a test
that is now used clinically. Extending this approach, we hypothesized
that bronchial microRNA (miRNA) expression is altered in patients with
lung cancer and that incorporating miRNA expression into the mRNA
classifier may improve its performance.MethodsUsing bronchial brushes
collected prospectively from current and former smokers undergoing
bronchoscopy for suspect lung cancer across 28 medical centers as part of
the AEGIS 1 and 2 clinical trials, we profiled miRNA expression via small
RNA sequencing of 341 patients for which gene expression data was also
available on the same bronchial brush sample. Patients were followed for
up to one year post-bronchoscopy until a final diagnosis was established.
138 patients from AEGIS 1 (88 cancer-positive and 50 cancer-free) served
as a discovery set, while other 203 patients from AEGIS 1 and 2 (103
cancer-positive and 100 cancer-free) were used as an independent test
set. First, we identified miRNAs whose expression is associated with
cancer by linear modeling in the discovery set. We next explored the
relationships between the expression of these miRNAs and their predicted
mRNA targets. Lastly, using logistic regression, we incorporated a cancer
miRNA feature into our bronchial gene-expression classifier (Silvestri et
al., NEJM 2015) and validated its performance in the test set.ResultsWe
found that expression profiles of 42 miRNAs were associated with cancer
status in the discovery set (pIntroductionWe have previously shown that
gene expression alterations in the cytologically-normal mainstem bronchus
can be leveraged as a biomarker for lung cancer detection (Silvestri et
al. NEJM 2015), a test that is now used clinically. Extending this
approach, we hypothesized that bronchial microRNA (miRNA) expression is
altered in patients with lung cancer and that incorporating miRNA
expression into the mRNA classifier may improve its
performance.MethodsUsing bronchial brushes collected prospectively from
current and former smokers undergoing bronchoscopy for suspect lung
cancer across 28 medical centers as part of the AEGIS 1 and 2 clinical
trials, we profiled miRNA expression via small RNA sequencing of 341
patients for which gene expression data was also available on the same
bronchial brush sample. Patients were followed for up to one year
post-bronchoscopy until a final diagnosis was established. 138 patients
from AEGIS 1 (88 cancer-positive and 50 cancer-free) served as a
discovery set, while other 203 patients from AEGIS 1 and 2 (103
cancer-positive and 100 cancer-free) were used as an independent test
set. First, we identified miRNAs whose expression is associated with
cancer by linear modeling in the discovery set. We next explored the
relationships between the expression of these miRNAs and their predicted
mRNA targets. Lastly, using logistic regression, we incorporated a cancer
miRNA feature into our bronchial gene-expression classifier (Silvestri et
al., NEJM 2015) and validated its performance in the test set.ResultsWe
found that expression profiles of 42 miRNAs were associated with cancer
status in the discovery set (p<0.05, 23 miRNAs expected by chance). The
top four differentially expressed miRNAs (qIntroductionWe have previously
shown that gene expression alterations in the cytologically-normal
mainstem bronchus can be leveraged as a biomarker for lung cancer
detection (Silvestri et al. NEJM 2015), a test that is now used
clinically. Extending this approach, we hypothesized that bronchial
microRNA (miRNA) expression is altered in patients with lung cancer and
that incorporating miRNA expression into the mRNA classifier may improve
its performance.MethodsUsing bronchial brushes collected prospectively
from current and former smokers undergoing bronchoscopy for suspect lung
cancer across 28 medical centers as part of the AEGIS 1 and 2 clinical
trials, we profiled miRNA expression via small RNA sequencing of 341
patients for which gene expression data was also available on the same
bronchial brush sample. Patients were followed for up to one year
post-bronchoscopy until a final diagnosis was established. 138 patients
from AEGIS 1 (88 cancer-positive and 50 cancer-free) served as a
discovery set, while other 203 patients from AEGIS 1 and 2 (103
cancer-positive and 100 cancer-free) were used as an independent test
set. First, we identified miRNAs whose expression is associated with
cancer by linear modeling in the discovery set. We next explored the
relationships between the expression of these miRNAs and their predicted
mRNA targets. Lastly, using logistic regression, we incorporated a cancer
miRNA feature into our bronchial gene-expression classifier (Silvestri et
al., NEJM 2015) and validated its performance in the test set.ResultsWe
found that expression profiles of 42 miRNAs were associated with cancer
status in the discovery set (p<0.05, 23 miRNAs expected by chance). The
top four differentially expressed miRNAs (q<0.2) were all decreased in
the bronchial epithelium of cancer patients. The expression values of
these miRNAs were significantly negatively correlated with the expression
of their predicted mRNA targets (pIntroductionWe have previously shown
that gene expression alterations in the cytologically-normal mainstem
bronchus can be leveraged as a biomarker for lung cancer detection
(Silvestri et al. NEJM 2015), a test that is now used clinically.
Extending this approach, we hypothesized that bronchial microRNA (miRNA)
expression is altered in patients with lung cancer and that incorporating
miRNA expression into the mRNA classifier may improve its
performance.MethodsUsing bronchial brushes collected prospectively from
current and former smokers undergoing bronchoscopy for suspect lung
cancer across 28 medical centers as part of the AEGIS 1 and 2 clinical
trials, we profiled miRNA expression via small RNA sequencing of 341
patients for which gene expression data was also available on the same
bronchial brush sample. Patients were followed for up to one year
post-bronchoscopy until a final diagnosis was established. 138 patients
from AEGIS 1 (88 cancer-positive and 50 cancer-free) served as a
discovery set, while other 203 patients from AEGIS 1 and 2 (103
cancer-positive and 100 cancer-free) were used as an independent test
set. First, we identified miRNAs whose expression is associated with
cancer by linear modeling in the discovery set. We next explored the
relationships between the expression of these miRNAs and their predicted
mRNA targets. Lastly, using logistic regression, we incorporated a cancer
miRNA feature into our bronchial gene-expression classifier (Silvestri et
al., NEJM 2015) and validated its performance in the test set.ResultsWe
found that expression profiles of 42 miRNAs were associated with cancer
status in the discovery set (p<0.05, 23 miRNAs expected by chance). The
top four differentially expressed miRNAs (q<0.2) were all decreased in
the bronchial epithelium of cancer patients. The expression values of
these miRNAs were significantly negatively correlated with the expression
of their predicted mRNA targets (p<0.05). The predicted gene targets of
the top miRNAs were significantly enriched (pIntroductionWe have
previously shown that gene expression alterations in the
cytologically-normal mainstem bronchus can be leveraged as a biomarker
for lung cancer detection (Silvestri et al. NEJM 2015), a test that is
now used clinically. Extending this approach, we hypothesized that
bronchial microRNA (miRNA) expression is altered in patients with lung
cancer and that incorporating miRNA expression into the mRNA classifier
may improve its performance.MethodsUsing bronchial brushes collected
prospectively from current and former smokers undergoing bronchoscopy for
suspect lung cancer across 28 medical centers as part of the AEGIS 1 and
2 clinical trials, we profiled miRNA expression via small RNA sequencing
of 341 patients for which gene expression data was also available on the
same bronchial brush sample. Patients were followed for up to one year
post-bronchoscopy until a final diagnosis was established. 138 patients
from AEGIS 1 (88 cancer-positive and 50 cancer-free) served as a
discovery set, while other 203 patients from AEGIS 1 and 2 (103
cancer-positive and 100 cancer-free) were used as an independent test
set. First, we identified miRNAs whose expression is associated with
cancer by linear modeling in the discovery set. We next explored the
relationships between the expression of these miRNAs and their predicted
mRNA targets. Lastly, using logistic regression, we incorporated a cancer
miRNA feature into our bronchial gene-expression classifier (Silvestri et
al., NEJM 2015) and validated its performance in the test set.ResultsWe
found that expression profiles of 42 miRNAs were associated with cancer
status in the discovery set (p<0.05, 23 miRNAs expected by chance). The
top four differentially expressed miRNAs (q<0.2) were all decreased in
the bronchial epithelium of cancer patients. The expression values of
these miRNAs were significantly negatively correlated with the expression
of their predicted mRNA targets (p<0.05). The predicted gene targets of
the top miRNAs were significantly enriched (p<0.05) for cancer-related
processes including the PDGF signaling pathway, insulin/IGF
pathway-mitogen and activated protein kinase/MAP kinase cascade.
Moreover, we found that the addition of one of the top differentially
expressed miRNAs in the discovery set to the existing gene expression
biomarker significantly improved the classifier's performance (ROC AUC)
in the test set (p = 0.025).ConclusionsWe have established that there are
alterations in miRNA expression in the cytologically normal mainstem
bronchus of smokers with lung cancer. Importantly, we demonstrated the
potential of these miRNA alterations to improve the performance of an
existing bronchial gene expression biomarker for lung cancer detection.

