Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Real-time single-walled nanotube (SWNT)-based imaging system
improves tumor detection and survival in ovarian cancer animal model


Residual tumor detection in advanced stage ovarian cancer (OC) represents
a critical challenge in the treatment of this disease. Optimal abdominal
cytoreduction to reduce tumor to no evidence of macroscopic disease is
the main endpoint of tumor debulking surgery, with demonstrated survival
advantages, but the current clinically available imaging modalities have
shown low tumor detection sensitivity of tumors smaller than 10 mm
diameter. Instead, targeted molecule-based imaging systems offer higher
detection rate and are likely to extend the aim of complete resection to
the microscopic scale. We applied a custom designed imaging system to a
preclinical ovarian cancer tumor model and observed higher microscopic
tumor detection accuracy and survival advantage compared to non-image
guided debulking surgery.A two component imaging system was developed.
The contrast agent is an intra-peritoneal injectable nanomolecular probe,
composed of a single walled carbon nanotube (SWNT) coupled with an
engineered M13-bacteriophage carrying a modified peptide targeting
secreted protein, acidic and rich in cysteine (SPARC), extracellular
protein overexpressed in OC. The imaging device system is capable of
detecting SWNT inherent fluorescence in near-infrared second window
(NIR2) and of displaying real-time images to guide the intraoperative
tumor debulking.In an orthotopic ovarian cancer animal model, the imaging
system detected microscopic tumors in the millimeter and sub-millimeter
scale resolution with a mean tumor diameter of 2.1 vs 3.6 mm (pResidual
tumor detection in advanced stage ovarian cancer (OC) represents a
critical challenge in the treatment of this disease. Optimal abdominal
cytoreduction to reduce tumor to no evidence of macroscopic disease is
the main endpoint of tumor debulking surgery, with demonstrated survival
advantages, but the current clinically available imaging modalities have
shown low tumor detection sensitivity of tumors smaller than 10 mm
diameter. Instead, targeted molecule-based imaging systems offer higher
detection rate and are likely to extend the aim of complete resection to
the microscopic scale. We applied a custom designed imaging system to a
preclinical ovarian cancer tumor model and observed higher microscopic
tumor detection accuracy and survival advantage compared to non-image
guided debulking surgery.A two component imaging system was developed.
The contrast agent is an intra-peritoneal injectable nanomolecular probe,
composed of a single walled carbon nanotube (SWNT) coupled with an
engineered M13-bacteriophage carrying a modified peptide targeting
secreted protein, acidic and rich in cysteine (SPARC), extracellular
protein overexpressed in OC. The imaging device system is capable of
detecting SWNT inherent fluorescence in near-infrared second window
(NIR2) and of displaying real-time images to guide the intraoperative
tumor debulking.In an orthotopic ovarian cancer animal model, the imaging
system detected microscopic tumors in the millimeter and sub-millimeter
scale resolution with a mean tumor diameter of 2.1 vs 3.6 mm (p< 0.01)
compared to eye detected tumors. The imaging system demonstrated
sensitivity of 97.2% and specificity of 69.7%, and a Receiver Operator
Area under the Curve of 0.85 + 0.05. In a survival surgery animal model,
the imaging guided resection surgery compared to non guided surgery
showed a survival advantage for the experimental arm, with median
survival time of 41.0 days vs 28.5 days, respectively (HR 0.22, 95% CI of
ratio 0.04 to 1.08 Log Rank test: p: 0.063).The accuracy of the imaging
system and its survival advantage are promising. The survival outcome
improvement in this preclinical model supports the translation to
first-in-human investigation. Moreover, the imaging system accuracy
suggests further exploitation in targeted delivery therapies.

