Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Optimized plasma collection procedures for liquid biopsy analyses
in cancer


Analyses of genomic alterations in cell-free DNA (cfDNA) shed from tumors
into the blood stream is rapidly advancing as a method to detect and
genotype cancer. Liquid biopsy analyses are a favorable alternative to
invasive tissue approaches, particularly for cancers in organs where
tissue is difficult to obtain. As these methods become a clinical
standard, the method for blood collection and plasma isolation will be an
important consideration to ensure optimal assay performance with limited
degradation of circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA). We compared blood
collection and plasma isolation using both K2EDTA and cell-free DNA
Streck BCT tubes to determine the stability of cfDNA and ctDNA in blood
at room temperature or at 4C. Blood was collected from nine cancer
patients with KRAS mutations using K2EDTA and Streck BCT tubes. Over the
course of seven days, cell lysis occurred in K2EDTA tubes at room
temperature, releasing germline DNA into the blood (1300% increase over
seven days), which significantly increased the number of total genomic
equivalents. Additionally, we found that the volume of plasma collected
from both tube types during blood fractionation decreased over time when
tubes were at room temperature (an average of 3.5 mL vs. 1.0 mL,
respectively). To evaluate the effect of storage conditions on
performance of each tube type, blood was also collected from six cancer
patients with KRAS or EGFR mutations and either maintained at room
temperature or stored at 4C for up to three days. Taken together, K2EDTA
tubes stored at 4C prevented cell lysis and preserved the ctDNA in a
manner equivalent to Streck BCT tubes. These data demonstrate that liquid
biopsies can be collected using either tube type with similar performance
and appropriate consideration of storage conditions.

