Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Optimisation of quinazolinedione sulphonamides as novel inhibitors
of poly(ADP Ribose) glycohydrolase (PARG)


The macrodomain protein poly(ADP ribose) glycohydrolase (PARG) has been
shown to be a critical component in the repair of single stand DNA breaks
and counteracts the function of the ARTD family of poly(ADP ribose)
polymerases, commonly known as the PARPs. As PARG exists as a single
protein, it presents an attractive target for therapeutic intervention in
cancer cells with enhanced dependence upon DNA repair.Inhibitors of this
enzyme have proved difficult to discover and develop. Moreover, intact
cell-active tool compounds which have the propensity to be used as robust
chemical probes to understand PARG pharmacology, are absent from the
literature.This poster will describe our work in this emerging area,
optimising a series of drug-like quinazolinedione derivatives to deliver
molecules with the correct physicochemical and biochemical properties to
function as in vitro cell probe compounds. These unprecedented agents
display potent on-target biochemical (5 nM) and cell (10 nM) activity
with a significant window to acute 3-day cytotoxicity. Moreover, these
agents are selective against PARP family members and the close
glycohydrolase homologue ARH3. The medicinal chemistry optimisation of
the scaffold will be described, alongside the outline pharmacology
demonstrating on-target, selective inhibition of PARG in cells. Such tool
compounds will be of value in revealing the detailed mechanisms of action
of PARG in DNA repair and other PAR chain-mediated cellular processes,
with the ultimate goal of delivering novel and clinically relevant
therapeutic agents.

