Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Varlitinib demonstrates potent antitumor efficacy in
patient-derived gastric cancer xenograft models


Varlitinib is a potent, reversible pan-HER inhibitor of the ATP-binding
site of EGFR (IC50 = 7 nM), HER2 (IC50 = 2 nM) and HER4 (IC50 = 4 nM).
Gastric Cancer is the fifth most common cancer worldwide, with 952,000
cases diagnosed in 2012, constituting 6.8% of total cancer diagnosis.
Prognosis for gastric cancer is poor, with the overall 5-year survival
rate for gastric cancer in the US at 29%. Current clinical guidelines
recommend use of trastuzumab combined with chemotherapy for HER2+
(amplified) patients with advanced gastric cancer. However the majority
of patients (80%) do not have HER2 amplification. Studies have implicated
dysregulation of HER signaling in gastric cancer and there is strong
scientific rationale for testing of pan-HER therapies in Gastric Cancer.
We tested the anti-tumour activity of Varlitinib as a single agent in
patient-derived gastric cancer xenograft in SCID mice (GC22-0808 &
GC11-0414) with over-expression of HER proteins. Varlitinib is very
active in tumour growth inhibition studies, causing dose-dependent
inhibition with tumour stasis observed at dosing of 50 mg/kg BID and
tumour regression observed at dosing of 100 mg/kg BID. Tumour protein
lysates after two-day treatment with Varlitinib and vehicle were also
analysed to elucidate the mechanism of action. Multiple proliferation and
anti-apoptosis pathways were inhibited by Varlitinib, including AKT, PI3K
and Survivin pathways. In view of the robust anti-tumour activity
inhibiting multiple survival and proliferation pathways, as well as the
safe tolerabilty profile of Varlitinib, ASLAN has initiated Phase 2
clinical trials of Varlitinib in gastric cancer.

