Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Automated miRNA purification without the use of organic solvents


MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are endogenous small non-coding RNAs 18-24 nucleotides
in size that play important roles involving gene regulation associated
with cancer, disease control and gene silencing. Because of the impact on
disease progression, miRNA research is rapidly shifting towards biomarker
discovery. Many of the commercially available miRNA purification methods
involve organic extraction during pre-processing. Here, we describe a
novel chemistry that enables total RNA purification including smaller RNA
such as miRNA. This chemistry offers significant advantages with a simple
automated workflow, no organic extraction and minimal pre-processing.In
this study, we successfully show purification of miRNAs from a range of
solid and liquid sample types including frozen tissue, whole blood,
plasma, exosomes, mammalian cell lines, saliva, bone and FFPE samples.
Absorbance yield, absorbance ratios, RINs, and amplification of miRNA
show equivalence with organic solvent-based purification methods. The
miRNA studied included miR-21, let-7a, miR-141, and miR-125b, depending
on starting sample type. Next generation sequencing (NGS) analysis shows
equivalent sequence diversity when compared pairwise with a manual,
organic pre-processing method.This novel chemistry and method enables
purification of small and large RNA from a range of sample types. The
purified RNA has little or no detectable DNA contamination and does not
require phenol extraction, thus improving safety. Also, the automation of
this workflow decreases manual hands on time, saving scientist time and
reducing the risk of RNase contamination.

