Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The WEE1 inhibitor AZD-1775 has synergic activity with trabectedin
or lurbinectedin in ovarian cancer cells


AZD-1775 is a small molecule that selectively inhibits the tyrosine
kinase WEE1, with a reported antineoplastic activity in ovarian cancer.
WEE1 is a tyrosine kinase key regulator of DNA damage surveillance
pathways that controls G2/M transition and ensures faithful DNA
replication. WEE1 is required during normal S phase to avoid deleterious
DNA breakage and prevent loss of genome integrity in the absence of
exogenous DNA damage.Trabectedin is a drug approved in 2007 by EMA and
2015 by FDA for the treatment of soft tissue sarcomas and in 2009 by EMA
for the treatment of ovarian cancer patients, who have relapsed after 6
months from Platinum-based therapy, in combination with pegylated
liposomal doxorubicin. Lurbinectedin (PM01183) is a trabectedin analog
with a similar mechanism of action and, according to ongoing clinical
investigations, less toxic and thus suitable for combinations of
potential clinical interest. Since both trabectedin and lurbinectedin
cause a G2/M block and AZD-1775 is able to inhibit the WEE1 activity with
consequent disruption of G2/M checkpoint, we hypothesized that the
combined treatment with AZD-1775 could be synergistic in ovarian cancer
cells.The sensitivity of the ovarian cancer cell lines OVCAR-5, A2780 and
IGROV-1 to trabectedin, lurbinectedin and AZD-1775 alone or in
combination (72h of continous treatment) was evaluated by a cell
proliferation assay. The cytotoxic effect induced by the simultaneous
administration of trabectedin with AZD-1775 or lurbinectedin with
AZD-1775 was evaluated by a combination index analysis.The results
obtained showed that the combination trabectedin with AZD-1775 or
lurbinectedin with AZD-1775 is synergic in all the ovarian cancer cell
lines analyzed (Combination Index AZD-1775 is a small molecule that
selectively inhibits the tyrosine kinase WEE1, with a reported
antineoplastic activity in ovarian cancer. WEE1 is a tyrosine kinase key
regulator of DNA damage surveillance pathways that controls G2/M
transition and ensures faithful DNA replication. WEE1 is required during
normal S phase to avoid deleterious DNA breakage and prevent loss of
genome integrity in the absence of exogenous DNA damage.Trabectedin is a
drug approved in 2007 by EMA and 2015 by FDA for the treatment of soft
tissue sarcomas and in 2009 by EMA for the treatment of ovarian cancer
patients, who have relapsed after 6 months from Platinum-based therapy,
in combination with pegylated liposomal doxorubicin. Lurbinectedin
(PM01183) is a trabectedin analog with a similar mechanism of action and,
according to ongoing clinical investigations, less toxic and thus
suitable for combinations of potential clinical interest. Since both
trabectedin and lurbinectedin cause a G2/M block and AZD-1775 is able to
inhibit the WEE1 activity with consequent disruption of G2/M checkpoint,
we hypothesized that the combined treatment with AZD-1775 could be
synergistic in ovarian cancer cells.The sensitivity of the ovarian cancer
cell lines OVCAR-5, A2780 and IGROV-1 to trabectedin, lurbinectedin and
AZD-1775 alone or in combination (72h of continous treatment) was
evaluated by a cell proliferation assay. The cytotoxic effect induced by
the simultaneous administration of trabectedin with AZD-1775 or
lurbinectedin with AZD-1775 was evaluated by a combination index
analysis.The results obtained showed that the combination trabectedin
with AZD-1775 or lurbinectedin with AZD-1775 is synergic in all the
ovarian cancer cell lines analyzed (Combination Index <1). The
combination lurbinectedin with AZD-1775 seems to be better than
trabectedin with AZD-1775, in OVCAR5 cell line. The analysis of cell
cycle and apoptosis are in progress in order to investigate the mechanism
of the observed synergism. These positive results prompted us to study
these combinations in vivo, in ovarian cancer xenografts derived from the
cell lines used for the in vitro studies.If the synergism observed in
vitro will be confirmed in vivo, there will be a strong rationale to test
these combinations in ovarian cancer patients.

