Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of novel covalent inhibitors of K-Ras G12C that are
efficacious in a xenograft model of NSCLC


KRAS is the frequently mutated isoform in RAS driven cancers. The G12C
mutation is more predominantly associated with various tumor types over
other changes in K-Ras. Although direct targeting of RAS is very
challenging, it is possible to selectively target G12C mutant K-Ras using
a covalent approach. Mutant specific covalent inhibitors with high
selectivity against wild type K-Ras and other GTPases are expected to
lead to efficacy with a very high degree of tolerability. Here, we report
identification of lead compounds from two distinct chemical series that
selectively target K-Ras G12C. Molecular modeling based on the reported
crystal structures aided in the identification of these compounds.
Covalent binding of the lead compounds to K-Ras G12C was demonstrated by
MALDI-TOF. Lead compounds were potent in selectively inhibiting
proliferation of cell lines with K-Ras G12C mutation but not with wild
type K-Ras. The anti-proliferative activity of the lead compounds
correlated well with their potency in a cellular mechanistic assay. Lead
compounds from both series exhibited excellent drug-like properties
including solubility, metabolic stability, permeability lack of CYP
inhibition and desired exposure in pharmacokinetic studies. In a
xenograft model of NSCLC, the lead compound demonstrated dose-dependent
tumor growth inhibition with excellent tolerability upon oral dosing. In
summary, we have identified a novel, potent and selective K-Ras G12C
inhibitor with optimized drug-like properties including oral
bioavailability and efficacy in a NSCLC derived xenograft model. Toxicity
evaluation is ongoing towards progressing the lead compound to the clinic.

