Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combining CEA-IL2v and FAP-IL2v immunocytokines with PD-L1
checkpoint blockade


Introduction: CEA-IL2v (RG7813, RO6895882) and FAP-IL2v (RG7461,
RO6874281) are novel CEA-/FAP-targeted immunocytokines based on a novel
IL2 variant (IL2v) with abolished CD25 binding that are currently in
clinical phase 1 trials. PD-L1 is found on the surface of cells in
various tumors and is induced by interferon gamma (IFNg). It prevents the
immune system from destroying cancer cells by interacting with the
inhibitory receptors PD-1 and B7.1 on T cells. Atezolizumab blocks the
interaction of PD- L1 with its receptors and is currently being
investigated in pivotal clinical trials for various cancers.Materials and
Methods: PD-L1 expression on A549 tumor cells was analyzed by flow
cytometry after treatment with CEA-IL2v alone or in the presence of PBMCs
at varying E:T ratios. The combination of muCEA-IL2v, a murinized version
of CEA-IL2v, with a muPD-L1 specific surrogate antibody was investigated
in syngeneic stably CEA expressing PancO2 and MC38 cell lines in human
CEA transgenic C57BL/6 mice. As control an untargeted DP47-muIL2v control
immunocytokine was applied in the PancO2-CEA model. The combination of
muFAP-IL2v, a murinized version of FAP-IL2v, with a muPD-L1 specific
surrogate antibody was investigated in a syngeneic stably FAP expressing
MC38 cell line in C57BL/6 mice.Results: In vitro, co-cultures of human
PBMCs and the human A549 lung cancer cell line showed that CEA-IL2v
induces the up-regulation of PD-L1 on A549 tumor cells in a
concentration-dependent manner mediated through release of IFNg. In the
syngeneic s.c. MC38-CEA model in CEA/hCD16 transgenic C57BL/6 mice,
muCEA-muIL2v (0.5 mg/kg, q1wx2) and the muPD-L1 antibody (10 mg/kg,
q1wx2) resulted in superior combined efficacy compared to the respective
single agent therapies with respect to tumor growth inhibition. In the
syngeneic orthotopic Panc02-CEA model in CEA transgenic C57BL/6 mice,
muCEA-muIL2v (0.25 mg/kg, q1wx4) and the muPD-L1 antibody (10 mg/kg,
q1wx4) resulted in superior median and overall survival model compared to
the respective single agent therapies. Notably, the combination of
muCEA-muIL2v was superior to the combination of the untargeted
DP47-muIL2v control immunocytokine (exposure matched dose: 0.2 mg/kg,
q1wx4) with the muPD-L1 antibody. Similarly, in the syngeneic s.c.
MC38-FAP model the combination of muFAP-muIL2v (2 mg/kg, q1w4) and the
muPD-L1 antibody (10 mg/kg, q1w4) resulted in superior combined efficacy
compared to the respective single agent therapies in terms of tumor
growth inhibition as well as median and overall survival.Conclusions:
Taken together these nonclinical combination data support the clinical
testing of combinations of CEA-IL2v and FAP-IL2v with atezolizumab. A
clinical Phase 1b study combining CEA-IL2v and atezolizumab is currently
ongoing (NCT02350673).

