Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A phase Ib pharmacokinetic drug-drug interaction evaluation of
oral buparlisib in combination with lapatinib in HER2+/PI3K-activated,
trastuzumab-resistant locally advanced, recurrent and metastatic breast
cancer (MBC)


Background: A novel combination of oral lapatinib (LPT), a selective dual
ErbB1/ErbB2 targeted drug, + oral buparlisib (B) a pan-class I PI3K
inhibitor, could provide a synergestic antitumor activity in trastuzumab
resistant disease. LPT has been shown to be a potent CYP3A4 inhibitor
which is also mainly involved in BKM120 metabolism. In this study we
investigated the potential pharmacokinetic (PK) drug-drug interactions
(DDI) related to the association of B and LPT. Methods:
Trastuzumab-resistant HER2 + metastatic breast cancer (MBC) patients were
treated with a continuous once daily dosing schedule of LPT + B. Dose
levels [DL, LPT (mg)/B (mg)] ranged from 750/40 to 1,250/80. For PK
analysis, 2 time point samples were collected on D1 and D8 and 10 time
point samples were collected on D15 of cycle 1 for LPT and B assays.
Plasma concentrations of B and LPT, were measured using UPLC coupled with
tandem mass spectrometry validated methods. Population PK was modeled
using a non linear mixed effect model program (Monolix version 4.3s) by
computing the maximum likelihood estimator of the parameters without any
approximation of the model (no linearization). Results: 343 and 322
plasma concentrations were available for PK analysis of LPT and B
respectively. A two-compartment open model adequately described B
concentration versus time courses. The inter-individual variabilities
(ISV) could be well estimated for all stuctural parameters (clearance:
CL, volume of distribution: V, inter-compartmental clearance: Q) except
for absorption constant: Ka. The population PK parameters obtained for
the structural model were: Ka = 0.985 h1, CL/F = 10.5L/h, V1/F = 54.8 L,
Q/F = 46.3 L/h, V2/F = 582 L. Mean AUC0-24h(CV%) values for B were 10130
(34%), 15450 (29%), and 20560 (38%) ng*hr/mL for 40 mg, 60 mg and 80 mg
dose level respectively. A one-compartment model adequately fitted the
LPT plasma concentration-time data. The population PK parameters were
CL/F = 25.7 L/h, V/F = 291 L and the absorption constant, Ka = 0.214 h1.
B has no significant effect on the PK of LPT and vice versa. Conclusions:
B AUC increased proportionally with increasing dose. LPT PK parameters
are consistent with those already published. There is no significant
evidence for drug-drug PK interaction between LPT and B. Intra-occasion
variabilities will be discussed.

