Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Suppressed B7-H3 expression reduces glycolytic capacity and
sensitizes tumor cells to anti-cancer agents


B7 family proteins are important immune response regulators, and can
mediate oncogenicity-related signals and support cancer development. We
have prevously shown that the B7-H3 protein promotes tumor cell invasion,
proliferation and mestastasis, and increases resistance to chemotherapy.
Now we have used human breast and melanoma cancer cell lines with
different expression levels of B7-H3 to further evaluate the role of
B7-H3 on the sensitivity to anticancer compounds. B7-H3 knockdown tumor
cells showed enhanced chemosensitivity compared to their B7-H3 expressing
counterparts, as well as increased inhibition to treatment with compounds
that target proteins in the PI3K/AKT/mTOR- and MAPK-pathways
(Nunes-Xavier et al. in revision). Treatment of control cells with an
anti-B7-H3 monoclonal antibody resulted in similar sensitization, whereas
B7-H3 overexpressing cells and xenografts were less sensitive. Of note,
knockdown of B7-H3 decreased and B7-H3 overexpression increased the
glycolytic capacity of the breast cancer and malignant melanoma cells. In
conclusion, we have demonstrated a previously unknown relationship
between B7-H3 expression and glycolysis in tumor cells, and found that
B7-H3 confers resistance to also to pathway inhibiting agents. The
results provide novel insights into the function of B7-H3 in cancer, and
suggest that targeting of B7-H3 expression may be a promising alternative
to improve current anticancer therapy.

