Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HER2 promotes super enhancer formation in breast cancer


Background. HER2 positive (HER2+) breast cancer (BCa) occurs in 25-30% of
cases and is associated with an aggressive phenotype. Multiple
HER2-stimulated pathways are known but the genes that are specifically
controlled by HER2 are poorly understood. We previously used RNA
polymerase II (POL II) immunoprecipitation (ChIP) to identify 737 genes
that bind POL II in HER2+ but not in HER2- BCa cell lines. 51 of these
genes were differentially expressed in a HER2+ dependent manner and 113
genes were differentially expressed in a HER2-dependent manner in breast
tumors from 812 patients. The 113 genes are not differentially expressed
in cell lines but expressed in BCa cases can be considered poised for
expression, and activated when in the context of a breast tumor.Methods.
The 737 genes were examined using pathway finding tools and the MIT
database for Super-enhancers and the dbSUPER database (2). The expression
of certain genes in attached cell cultures and in mammosphere cultures
were examined by qPCR.Results. Some of the 113 genes that are poised for
expression in cell lines in a HER2-dependent manner, and then expressed
in breast cancers in a HER2-dependent manner, encode proteins that
commonly occur in Super-enhancers, which are a variety of DNA regulatory
structures formed by looping that associate multiple bound transcription
and DNA-modifying factors in proximity to target promoters. Examples
include Mediator12 (MED12) and the Bromdomain protein 2 (BRD2), and DNA
binding factors such as HDAC and CREB1-cofactors. Moreover, many
pluripotency genes are also found in the list of 113 genes; NANOG,
OCT3/4, and SOX2 (NOS genes). These genes commonly interact with SEs as
associated factors and as targets. We confirmed by qPCR that the three
NOS genes exhibit increased expression in mammosphere of HER2+ MCF7 cells
but not in control cells.Using the MIT and dbSUPER (2) database we
determined that 70 genes of the 113 genes (62%) that are located in or
near SEs, including some present in the HER2+ BCa cell line HCC1954.
Similarly, 33 (65%) of the 51 differentially expressed genes in HER2+
cell lines were associated with SEs in many diverse cell types. For
comparison, the class of 573 genes that are bound to POL II in HER2+ cell
lines, but are not differentially expressed in cell lines or breast
cancer tissues, have a much lower fraction of genes, 213 or 37%, that
encode potential members or targets of SE. The difference is highly
significant, p = 0.008.Pathway analyses of the 113 genes indicates that
major pathways enriched in these genes (p Background. HER2 positive
(HER2+) breast cancer (BCa) occurs in 25-30% of cases and is associated
with an aggressive phenotype. Multiple HER2-stimulated pathways are known
but the genes that are specifically controlled by HER2 are poorly
understood. We previously used RNA polymerase II (POL II)
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) to identify 737 genes that bind POL II in
HER2+ but not in HER2- BCa cell lines. 51 of these genes were
differentially expressed in a HER2+ dependent manner and 113 genes were
differentially expressed in a HER2-dependent manner in breast tumors from
812 patients. The 113 genes are not differentially expressed in cell
lines but expressed in BCa cases can be considered poised for expression,
and activated when in the context of a breast tumor.Methods. The 737
genes were examined using pathway finding tools and the MIT database for
Super-enhancers and the dbSUPER database (2). The expression of certain
genes in attached cell cultures and in mammosphere cultures were examined
by qPCR.Results. Some of the 113 genes that are poised for expression in
cell lines in a HER2-dependent manner, and then expressed in breast
cancers in a HER2-dependent manner, encode proteins that commonly occur
in Super-enhancers, which are a variety of DNA regulatory structures
formed by looping that associate multiple bound transcription and
DNA-modifying factors in proximity to target promoters. Examples include
Mediator12 (MED12) and the Bromdomain protein 2 (BRD2), and DNA binding
factors such as HDAC and CREB1-cofactors. Moreover, many pluripotency
genes are also found in the list of 113 genes; NANOG, OCT3/4, and SOX2
(NOS genes). These genes commonly interact with SEs as associated factors
and as targets. We confirmed by qPCR that the three NOS genes exhibit
increased expression in mammosphere of HER2+ MCF7 cells but not in
control cells.Using the MIT and dbSUPER (2) database we determined that
70 genes of the 113 genes (62%) that are located in or near SEs,
including some present in the HER2+ BCa cell line HCC1954. Similarly, 33
(65%) of the 51 differentially expressed genes in HER2+ cell lines were
associated with SEs in many diverse cell types. For comparison, the class
of 573 genes that are bound to POL II in HER2+ cell lines, but are not
differentially expressed in cell lines or breast cancer tissues, have a
much lower fraction of genes, 213 or 37%, that encode potential members
or targets of SE. The difference is highly significant, p = 0.008.Pathway
analyses of the 113 genes indicates that major pathways enriched in these
genes (p < 0.001) include EGFR and Map Kinase signaling, notch pathway
signaling, hedgehog, Wnt, Integrin-mediated cell and cytokine signaling
Interleukin 1 and Interleukin 14.Conclusion. These results suggest that
the pathways associated with HER2 over-expression in BCa include genes
associated with Super-enhancer assembly, as well as many genes encoded
close to the location of Super-enhancers.1.Rahmatpanah et al,. (2015)
Oncotarget2. Aziz Khan, Nucleic Acids Res., 2015

