Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RASAL2 promotes tumor progression and metastasis in colorectal
cancer


Background:Metastatic colorectal cancer (mCRC) is a heterogeneous disease
with a poor prognosis. By using high resolution array comparative genomic
hybridization (aCGH) and mRNA gene expression microarray of mCRC samples,
we found up-regulation of RASAL2, a RAS GAP gene that is located on
chromosome 1q, in colorectal tumors. Oncogenic RAS represents one of the
most common molecular changes in human colorectal adenocarcinoma.
However, the role of RASAL2 in colorectal adenocarcinoma metastasis and
the related mechanisms are still unclear. We analyzed its aberrant
expression, clinical significance and biological effects in colorectal
cancer.Methods:Expression of RASAL2 was examined by QRT-PCR, western blot
and immunohistochemistry in CRC cell lines, primary and metastatic CRC
and the corresponding normal colonic mucosa. The biological effects of
RASAL2 on proliferation, apoptosis, cell cycle, and cell motility and
invasiveness were evaluated by siRNA knock down and RASAL2 reconstitution
in CRC cell lines.Results:Up-regulation of RASAL2 mRNA was observed in
CRC cell lines (n = 9) than normal colon mucosal tissues. Interestingly,
significantly higher RASAL2 mRNA was found in cell lines derived from
advanced stage tumors (n = 4, Dukes C and D) than those from early stage
tumors (n = 5, Dukes A and B) (P = 0.0317). Up-regulation of RASAL2 mRNA
was also found in primary CRCs (n = 77) compared with normal colon mucosa
(n = 18, PBackground:Metastatic colorectal cancer (mCRC) is a
heterogeneous disease with a poor prognosis. By using high resolution
array comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) and mRNA gene expression
microarray of mCRC samples, we found up-regulation of RASAL2, a RAS GAP
gene that is located on chromosome 1q, in colorectal tumors. Oncogenic
RAS represents one of the most common molecular changes in human
colorectal adenocarcinoma. However, the role of RASAL2 in colorectal
adenocarcinoma metastasis and the related mechanisms are still unclear.
We analyzed its aberrant expression, clinical significance and biological
effects in colorectal cancer.Methods:Expression of RASAL2 was examined by
QRT-PCR, western blot and immunohistochemistry in CRC cell lines, primary
and metastatic CRC and the corresponding normal colonic mucosa. The
biological effects of RASAL2 on proliferation, apoptosis, cell cycle, and
cell motility and invasiveness were evaluated by siRNA knock down and
RASAL2 reconstitution in CRC cell lines.Results:Up-regulation of RASAL2
mRNA was observed in CRC cell lines (n = 9) than normal colon mucosal
tissues. Interestingly, significantly higher RASAL2 mRNA was found in
cell lines derived from advanced stage tumors (n = 4, Dukes C and D) than
those from early stage tumors (n = 5, Dukes A and B) (P = 0.0317).
Up-regulation of RASAL2 mRNA was also found in primary CRCs (n = 77)
compared with normal colon mucosa (n = 18, P<0.0001). In 15 cases that
paired primary and metastatic tumors were available, 12 (80%)
demonstrated higher RASAL2 in metastatic tumors than their primary
counterparts. RASAL2 protein was detected in 37% (81 of 219) of CRC by
immunohistochemistry. Whereas in the paired normal colonic mucosa, the
positive rate is 14% (20 of 142, PBackground:Metastatic colorectal cancer
(mCRC) is a heterogeneous disease with a poor prognosis. By using high
resolution array comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) and mRNA gene
expression microarray of mCRC samples, we found up-regulation of RASAL2,
a RAS GAP gene that is located on chromosome 1q, in colorectal tumors.
Oncogenic RAS represents one of the most common molecular changes in
human colorectal adenocarcinoma. However, the role of RASAL2 in
colorectal adenocarcinoma metastasis and the related mechanisms are still
unclear. We analyzed its aberrant expression, clinical significance and
biological effects in colorectal cancer.Methods:Expression of RASAL2 was
examined by QRT-PCR, western blot and immunohistochemistry in CRC cell
lines, primary and metastatic CRC and the corresponding normal colonic
mucosa. The biological effects of RASAL2 on proliferation, apoptosis,
cell cycle, and cell motility and invasiveness were evaluated by siRNA
knock down and RASAL2 reconstitution in CRC cell
lines.Results:Up-regulation of RASAL2 mRNA was observed in CRC cell lines
(n = 9) than normal colon mucosal tissues. Interestingly, significantly
higher RASAL2 mRNA was found in cell lines derived from advanced stage
tumors (n = 4, Dukes C and D) than those from early stage tumors (n = 5,
Dukes A and B) (P = 0.0317). Up-regulation of RASAL2 mRNA was also found
in primary CRCs (n = 77) compared with normal colon mucosa (n = 18,
P<0.0001). In 15 cases that paired primary and metastatic tumors were
available, 12 (80%) demonstrated higher RASAL2 in metastatic tumors than
their primary counterparts. RASAL2 protein was detected in 37% (81 of
219) of CRC by immunohistochemistry. Whereas in the paired normal colonic
mucosa, the positive rate is 14% (20 of 142, P<0.0001).We knocked down
RASAL2 by siRNA in 2 CRC cell lines (DLD1 and HCT116) with high
endogenous RASALs level. Successful knockdown was demonstrated by western
blot analysis. SiRASAL2 significantly inhibited cell proliferation
(PBackground:Metastatic colorectal cancer (mCRC) is a heterogeneous
disease with a poor prognosis. By using high resolution array comparative
genomic hybridization (aCGH) and mRNA gene expression microarray of mCRC
samples, we found up-regulation of RASAL2, a RAS GAP gene that is located
on chromosome 1q, in colorectal tumors. Oncogenic RAS represents one of
the most common molecular changes in human colorectal adenocarcinoma.
However, the role of RASAL2 in colorectal adenocarcinoma metastasis and
the related mechanisms are still unclear. We analyzed its aberrant
expression, clinical significance and biological effects in colorectal
cancer.Methods:Expression of RASAL2 was examined by QRT-PCR, western blot
and immunohistochemistry in CRC cell lines, primary and metastatic CRC
and the corresponding normal colonic mucosa. The biological effects of
RASAL2 on proliferation, apoptosis, cell cycle, and cell motility and
invasiveness were evaluated by siRNA knock down and RASAL2 reconstitution
in CRC cell lines.Results:Up-regulation of RASAL2 mRNA was observed in
CRC cell lines (n = 9) than normal colon mucosal tissues. Interestingly,
significantly higher RASAL2 mRNA was found in cell lines derived from
advanced stage tumors (n = 4, Dukes C and D) than those from early stage
tumors (n = 5, Dukes A and B) (P = 0.0317). Up-regulation of RASAL2 mRNA
was also found in primary CRCs (n = 77) compared with normal colon mucosa
(n = 18, P<0.0001). In 15 cases that paired primary and metastatic tumors
were available, 12 (80%) demonstrated higher RASAL2 in metastatic tumors
than their primary counterparts. RASAL2 protein was detected in 37% (81
of 219) of CRC by immunohistochemistry. Whereas in the paired normal
colonic mucosa, the positive rate is 14% (20 of 142, P<0.0001).We knocked
down RASAL2 by siRNA in 2 CRC cell lines (DLD1 and HCT116) with high
endogenous RASALs level. Successful knockdown was demonstrated by western
blot analysis. SiRASAL2 significantly inhibited cell proliferation
(P<0.05), reduced colony formation (PBackground:Metastatic colorectal
cancer (mCRC) is a heterogeneous disease with a poor prognosis. By using
high resolution array comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) and mRNA
gene expression microarray of mCRC samples, we found up-regulation of
RASAL2, a RAS GAP gene that is located on chromosome 1q, in colorectal
tumors. Oncogenic RAS represents one of the most common molecular changes
in human colorectal adenocarcinoma. However, the role of RASAL2 in
colorectal adenocarcinoma metastasis and the related mechanisms are still
unclear. We analyzed its aberrant expression, clinical significance and
biological effects in colorectal cancer.Methods:Expression of RASAL2 was
examined by QRT-PCR, western blot and immunohistochemistry in CRC cell
lines, primary and metastatic CRC and the corresponding normal colonic
mucosa. The biological effects of RASAL2 on proliferation, apoptosis,
cell cycle, and cell motility and invasiveness were evaluated by siRNA
knock down and RASAL2 reconstitution in CRC cell
lines.Results:Up-regulation of RASAL2 mRNA was observed in CRC cell lines
(n = 9) than normal colon mucosal tissues. Interestingly, significantly
higher RASAL2 mRNA was found in cell lines derived from advanced stage
tumors (n = 4, Dukes C and D) than those from early stage tumors (n = 5,
Dukes A and B) (P = 0.0317). Up-regulation of RASAL2 mRNA was also found
in primary CRCs (n = 77) compared with normal colon mucosa (n = 18,
P<0.0001). In 15 cases that paired primary and metastatic tumors were
available, 12 (80%) demonstrated higher RASAL2 in metastatic tumors than
their primary counterparts. RASAL2 protein was detected in 37% (81 of
219) of CRC by immunohistochemistry. Whereas in the paired normal colonic
mucosa, the positive rate is 14% (20 of 142, P<0.0001).We knocked down
RASAL2 by siRNA in 2 CRC cell lines (DLD1 and HCT116) with high
endogenous RASALs level. Successful knockdown was demonstrated by western
blot analysis. SiRASAL2 significantly inhibited cell proliferation
(P<0.05), reduced colony formation (P<0.05) and repressed cell invasion
and migration ability (PBackground:Metastatic colorectal cancer (mCRC) is
a heterogeneous disease with a poor prognosis. By using high resolution
array comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) and mRNA gene expression
microarray of mCRC samples, we found up-regulation of RASAL2, a RAS GAP
gene that is located on chromosome 1q, in colorectal tumors. Oncogenic
RAS represents one of the most common molecular changes in human
colorectal adenocarcinoma. However, the role of RASAL2 in colorectal
adenocarcinoma metastasis and the related mechanisms are still unclear.
We analyzed its aberrant expression, clinical significance and biological
effects in colorectal cancer.Methods:Expression of RASAL2 was examined by
QRT-PCR, western blot and immunohistochemistry in CRC cell lines, primary
and metastatic CRC and the corresponding normal colonic mucosa. The
biological effects of RASAL2 on proliferation, apoptosis, cell cycle, and
cell motility and invasiveness were evaluated by siRNA knock down and
RASAL2 reconstitution in CRC cell lines.Results:Up-regulation of RASAL2
mRNA was observed in CRC cell lines (n = 9) than normal colon mucosal
tissues. Interestingly, significantly higher RASAL2 mRNA was found in
cell lines derived from advanced stage tumors (n = 4, Dukes C and D) than
those from early stage tumors (n = 5, Dukes A and B) (P = 0.0317).
Up-regulation of RASAL2 mRNA was also found in primary CRCs (n = 77)
compared with normal colon mucosa (n = 18, P<0.0001). In 15 cases that
paired primary and metastatic tumors were available, 12 (80%)
demonstrated higher RASAL2 in metastatic tumors than their primary
counterparts. RASAL2 protein was detected in 37% (81 of 219) of CRC by
immunohistochemistry. Whereas in the paired normal colonic mucosa, the
positive rate is 14% (20 of 142, P<0.0001).We knocked down RASAL2 by
siRNA in 2 CRC cell lines (DLD1 and HCT116) with high endogenous RASALs
level. Successful knockdown was demonstrated by western blot analysis.
SiRASAL2 significantly inhibited cell proliferation (P<0.05), reduced
colony formation (P<0.05) and repressed cell invasion and migration
ability (P<0.05) in both cell lines. Flow cytometry analysis revealed G1
arrest in cells treated with siRASAL2. Ectopic expression of RASAL2 was
performed in 2 CRC cell lines with low endogenous RASAL2 (SW480 and
LoVo). Over expression of RASAL2 did not change the cell proliferation
and anchorage-dependent growth of these cell lines but effectively
enhanced cell invasiveness by transwell invasion
assay.Conclusions:Up-regulation of RASAL2 was frequently found in CRC
cell lines and primary and metastatic tumors. Our experimental findings
suggested that RASAL2 might play an oncogenetic role in CRC and promotes
tumor invasion and metastasis. A better understanding of the molecular
mechanism of RASAL2 in promoting CRC cell metastasis may lead to a more
effective management of mCRC patients.

