Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comparison of nCounter, immunohistochemistry, RT-PCR and FISH to
detect ALK, ROS1 and RET rearrangements in advanced non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC)


Background: Targetable rearrangements in anaplastic lymphoma kinase
(ALK), ROS1, and RET genes are present in approximately 7% of patients
(p) with advanced NSCLC. Current methods for detecting gene fusions are
based on FISH (FDA-approved companion diagnostic test for ALK),
immunohistochemistry (IHC) or RT-PCR. However, these tests have
disadvantages in terms of sensitivity, cost and throughput, and often
show discrepancies. The nCounter platform allows simultaneous detection
with no enzymatic reaction, within 72 hours, of several fusion genes in
formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) samples using a transcript-based
method.Methods: A custom set of 5and 3 probes and fusion-specific probes
to detect ALK, ROS1 and RET fusion transcripts was designed and
evaluated. A panel of ALK-ROS1-RET positive cell lines (H2228, H3122
[EML4-ALK], SUDHL-1 [NPM-ALK], HCC78 [SLC34A2-ROS1], BaF3 pBABE
[CD74-ROS1], LC2/ad [RET]) and negative cell lines (PC9, H1975 [EGFR
mut], H460, H23 [KRAS mut]) was used to validate the technique. Then, a
total of 70 FFPE samples was analyzed, 49 of them positive by FISH, IHC
and/or qRT-PCR for ALK (n = 30), ROS1 (n = 17) and RET (n = 2). Total RNA
was isolated from cell lines and FFPE and 2.0 and 2.0 respectively or/and
(2) a signal for a fusion-specific probe above background. Response to
crizotinib by RECIST criteria was retrospectively collected in p with
ALK-positive NSCLC by any technique.Results: nCounter sensitivity to
detect fusion transcripts ALK, ROS1 and RET in cell lines was 100% using
the two criteria (3/5 and direct probes) and specificity was also 100%.
Among 20 ALK-FISH-positive p, ALK 3-5 scoring was positive in 18 (95%).
One p was non-evaluable (NE) by ALK 3-5 scoring. Among 48
ALK-FISH-negative p, nCounter score was positive in 13 (27%). All p
positive for ALK by nCounter were either positive or NE for ALK by IHC. A
total of 17 p were treated with crizotinib, 16 of whom responded to
treatment and were positive by nCounter. Regarding FISH, five p
responding to crizotinib were negative and one was NE. Finally, one p not
responding to crizotinib was positive by RT-PCR but negative by
nCounter.Conclusion: The ALK/ROS1/RET nCounter-based assay is a highly
sensitive screening assay that identifies ALK-FISH-negative/NE NSCLC
patients who could benefit from treatment with ALK inhibitors.

