Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High-throughput phenotyping of lung cancer somatic mutations


Recent cancer genome sequencing and analysis has identified millions of
somatic mutations in cancer. However, the functional impact of most
variants is poorly understood, limiting the use of this genetic knowledge
for clinical decision-making. Here we describe a new high-throughput
approach, expression-based variant impact phenotyping (eVIP), which uses
gene expression changes to infer somatic mutation impact. We generated a
lentiviral expression library representing 53 genes and 194 somatic
mutations identified in primary lung adenocarcinomas. Next, we introduced
this library into A549 lung adenocarcinoma cells and 96 hours later
performed gene expression profiling using Luminex-based L1000 profiling.
We built a computational pipeline, eVIP, to compare mutant and wild-type
expression signatures to infer whether variants were gain-of-function,
change-of-function, loss-of-function, or neutral. Overall, eVIP
identified 69% of mutations as impactful whereas 31% appeared
functionally neutral. A very high rate, 92%, of missense mutations in the
KEAP1 and STK11 tumor suppressor genes were found to inactivate or
diminish protein function. As a complementary approach, we assessed which
mutations are epistatic to EGFR or capable of initiating xenograft tumor
formation in vivo. A subset of the impactful mutations identified by eVIP
could induce xenograft tumor formation in mice and/or confer resistance
to cellular EGFR inhibition. Among these mutations were 20 rare or
non-canonical somatic variants in clinically-actionable or -relevant
oncogenes including EGFR S645C, ARAF S214C and S214F, ERBB2 S418T, and
PIK3CA E600K. eVIP can, in principle, characterize any genetic variant,
independent of prior knowledge of gene function. Further application of
eVIP should significantly advance the pace of functional characterization
of mutations identified from genome sequencing.

