Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Peptide-linked indolino-benzodiazepine DNA-alkylating agents for
use in antibody-drug conjugates (ADCs)


As part of our efforts to expand the available toolbox of cytotoxic
payloads for use in antibody-drug conjugates (ADCs), we have recently
described the development of the mono-imine-containing
indolino-benzodiazepine dimer, IGN-P1 (Miller, et al., AACR 2014 #652).
IGN-P1 was conjugated via a protease-cleavable peptidic
L-alanine-L-alanine linker to a folate receptor (FR)-binding antibody,
and an EGFR-binding antibody. The resulting ADCs demonstrated high in
vitro potency (IC50 4-100 pM) and specificity towards several cancer cell
lines. In vivo, anti-FR-IGN-P1 induced complete regressions in NCI-H2110
non-small cell lung cancer xenografts following a single dose of 3 g/kg
(linked payload dose, equivalent to 0.18 mg/kg Ab dose).Here we describe
the structure-activity relationship of a number of peptide-linked IGN
ADCs, leading to the selection of Ab-IGN-P1 for further advancement. The
cytotoxic activities of these peptide-IGN conjugates were evaluated in
vitro in cancer cell lines with both high and low target antigen
expression. We also assessed bystander activity and identified in vitro
and in vivo catabolites. We found that the stereochemistry of the peptide
linker was crucial for bystander activity and in vivo efficacy. The
IGN-P1 ADC exhibited strong bystander activity, which we believe is
dictating the strong antitumor activity in vivo. Treatment of low to
moderate antigen-expressing models with Ab-IGN-P1 further resulted in
tumor regressions at doses as low as 3-10 g/kg linked payload.These data
underscore the potential therapeutic benefit of highly active and
specific IGN-P1 conjugates, even for the challenging subset of patients
with solid tumors where the target antigen is expressed at lower levels.

