Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: System-based BCL2 family protein signatures as predictive
biomarkers in triple-negative breast cancer


Breast cancer is a heterogeneous disease. More recently, the molecular
basis for this heterogeneity has started to be analysed at the genomic,
transcriptomic and proteomic level, allowing for the development of more
personalized therapies. Cancer cells showing resistance to therapy
frequently have an intrinsic deficiency in their ability to initiate or
execute apoptosis [1]. The BCL2 (B-cell lymphoma 2) family of proteins
controls the process of Mitochondrial Outer Membrane Permeabilization
(MOMP), which is required for the activation of the mitochondrial
apoptosis pathway [2]. We developed a deterministic systems model of BCL2
protein interactions, DR_MOMP that calculates the sensitivity of cells to
undergo mitochondrial apoptosis [3]. Here we applied DR_MOMP in the
context of triple negative breast cancer to determine whether this
systems model can be used as a prognostic biomarker or patient
stratification tool.To analyze the contribution of BCL2 proteins in
modulating apoptosis in breast cancer we validated DR_MOMP in a panel of
Triple Negative Breast Cancer (TNBC) cell lines. Using quantitative
Western blotting we determined the absolute protein levels of
pro-apoptotic BAX and BAK and anti-apoptotic BCL2, BCL(X)L and MCL1. We
found a significant correlation between cell survival and BCL(X)L levels
( = 0.76) after Cisplatin/Paclitaxel treatment, but protein levels of
BCL2, MCL-1, BAX and BAK did not correlate with cell survival. Using
absolute protein levels as input for DR_MOMP, we found a strongly
improved correlation between model predictions and cells responses to
Cisplatin ( = 0.93) and Paclitaxel treatments ( = 0.97). Next we
performed synergy studies using the selective BCL2 antagonist ABT-199 or
the selective BCL(X)L antagonist WEHI-539 in combination with cisplatin.
We observed differential effects of BCL(X)L and BCL-2 inhibition in
individual cell lines that were remodelled by DR_MOMP. Modelling also
suggested additional effects of BCL2 antagonists independent of MOMP
regulation. BCL2 profiling was also performed in primary tumours of 16
TBNC patients in order to predict the patients risk prospectively.
DR_MOMP predicted a high risk in 37.5% of patients which is in line with
5-year recurrence rates in the literature [4].Our findings provide
evidence that DR_MOMP can be deployed to predict the response of TNBC
breast cancer to genotoxic therapy, and can aid in the choice of the
optimal BCL2 antagonists.This work is supported by Irish Cancer Society
Collaborative Cancer Research Centre BREAST-PREDICT[1] Pillai et al. Am J
Cancer Res. 2013 Jun 20;3(3):312-22. PubMed PMID: 23841030.[2] Lee et al.
BMC Cancer. 2007 Apr 12;7:63. PubMed PMID: 17430582.[3] Lindner et al.
Cancer Res. 2013 Jan 15;73(2):519-28. PubMed PMID: 23329644[4] Haffty et
al. J Clin Oncol. 2006 Dec 20;24(36):5652-7. PubMed PMID: 17116942

