Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epithelial mesenchymal transition and its role in TKI resistant
NSCLC cell lines


NSCLC cells acquire resistance to EGFR and c-Met TKIs after prolonged
use. Our studies indicate that resistance maybe due to upregulation of
alternative signaling pathways such as Wnt and mTOR. We have found that
activation of Wnt/-Catenin is also associated with EMT which results in
loss of cell adhesion properties and gain of motility and invasiveness.
To understand the mechanism of TKI resistance in NSCLC cells with wild
type EGFR, we have developed and used H2170-P (parental) cells and the
TKI resistant H2170-ER (erlotinib resistant) and H2170-SR (SU11274
resistant) cells. We aim to study EMT and determine if inhibition of
-Catenin, a key regulator of transcription by siRNA or inhibition of
ZEB-1 a transcriptional repressor of cell adhesion proteins by inducing
mir-200a will help overcome the TKI resistance in NSCLC cells.Using
immunoblotting, we observed modulations in key EMT-related proteins in
H2170-ER cells which showed upregulation of ZEB-1, N-cadherin, active
beta-catenin, Vimentin, PRMT1 and ZO1 by 1.8, 2.4, 2, 1.8, 2.6 and 2
fold, respectively, and downregulation of E-cadherin (1.8 fold) as
compared to H2170-P cells. Similar results were observed for H2170-SR
cells. These results were verified using qPCR where we show that -catenin
(3.4-3.2 fold) and N-cadherin (2-1.9 fold) have increased gene expression
while E-cadherin (1.7-2.4 fold) has a decreased gene expression in TKI
resistant H2170-ER and SR cells when compared to H2170-P cells. miR-200a
induction in H2170-ER cells showed significant downregulation of ZEB-1 (3
fold) at 72 hr and an upregulation of E-cadherin (2 fold) when compared
to the mock transfected cells. Morphological changes indicative of EMT
were detected using immunofluorescence with Vimentin and E-Cadherin
antibodies, which displayed upregulation of Vimentin filaments (2 fold)
and downregulation of E-Cadherin (3 fold) in H2170-ER and H2170-SR cells
when compared to H2170-P cells. We then conducted experiments where we
suppressed ZEB-1 by inducing miR-200a in TKI resistant cells. The
immunoblotting results suggested recovery of E-Cadherin, and
downregulation of ZEB-1 and N-Cadherin in TKI resistant cells. We also
observed increased sensitivity towards erlotinib and SU11274 by 20-25%.
Additionally, we observed decrease in levels of -Catenin and upon siRNA
knockdown of -Catenin, suppression of levels of ZEB-1. This indicates a
direct correlation between nuclear accumulation of -Catenin and
occurrence of EMT in TKI resistant cells by increase in expression of
ZEB-1.Our results indicate that increased activation of Wnt/-Catenin
pathway in the TKI resistant NSCLC cells is due to the EMT. In NSCLC
patients, L858R and T790M mutations are associated with TKI resistance
which could be responsible for inducing EMT. We are further studying cell
lines with EGFR mutations to determine their role in induction of EMT
this may provide clinicians with novel targets to overcome TKI resistance
in NSCLC patients.

