Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Homeobox B9 (HOXB9) sustains anti-VEGF treatment resistance in
gastrointestinal tumors


Resistance to anti-angiogenic therapies poses one of the greatest
challenges in gastrointestinal tumors research. We recently identified
several proinflammatory secreted factors, including interleukin-1 (IL1),
CXC ligand (CXCL) 1 and 8, Transforming Growth Factor (TGF)1, and
Angiopoietin-like Protein 2 (ANGPTL2), that were overexpressed in murine
models of tumors resistant to the anti-VEGF antibody bevacizumab (BEV).
These factors induced epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and
increased aggressiveness. HOXB9 has been identified as a key
transcription factor in common for these factors. Here, we hypothesized
that HOXB9 might be responsible for BEV resistance in gastrointestinal
tumors.HOXB9 expression and activation were measured in BEV-sensitive
COLO357FG and in their BEV-resistant counterpart FGBR pancreatic cancer
cell lines, and in LOVO, MDST8, LIM2099, CCK81, GP5D, and SNUC4 colon
cancer cell lines by EMSA and DAPA. Serum levels of IL1, CXCL1 and 8,
TGF1 and ANGPTL2 in nude mice bearing tumors were measured by multiplex
xMAP technology. Immunohistochemical analyses were performed in pre- vs.
post-progression biopsies from colorectal cancer patients receiving
BEV.HOXB9 protein was more expressed and activated in FGBR than did in
COLO357FG cells. shRNA to knock down HOXB9 significantly (PResistance to
anti-angiogenic therapies poses one of the greatest challenges in
gastrointestinal tumors research. We recently identified several
proinflammatory secreted factors, including interleukin-1 (IL1), CXC
ligand (CXCL) 1 and 8, Transforming Growth Factor (TGF)1, and
Angiopoietin-like Protein 2 (ANGPTL2), that were overexpressed in murine
models of tumors resistant to the anti-VEGF antibody bevacizumab (BEV).
These factors induced epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and
increased aggressiveness. HOXB9 has been identified as a key
transcription factor in common for these factors. Here, we hypothesized
that HOXB9 might be responsible for BEV resistance in gastrointestinal
tumors.HOXB9 expression and activation were measured in BEV-sensitive
COLO357FG and in their BEV-resistant counterpart FGBR pancreatic cancer
cell lines, and in LOVO, MDST8, LIM2099, CCK81, GP5D, and SNUC4 colon
cancer cell lines by EMSA and DAPA. Serum levels of IL1, CXCL1 and 8,
TGF1 and ANGPTL2 in nude mice bearing tumors were measured by multiplex
xMAP technology. Immunohistochemical analyses were performed in pre- vs.
post-progression biopsies from colorectal cancer patients receiving
BEV.HOXB9 protein was more expressed and activated in FGBR than did in
COLO357FG cells. shRNA to knock down HOXB9 significantly (P<0.01) reduced
proinflammatory factors and EMT markers expression, and migration in FGBR
cells. Mice bearing HOXB9-silenced tumors had significantly (PResistance
to anti-angiogenic therapies poses one of the greatest challenges in
gastrointestinal tumors research. We recently identified several
proinflammatory secreted factors, including interleukin-1 (IL1), CXC
ligand (CXCL) 1 and 8, Transforming Growth Factor (TGF)1, and
Angiopoietin-like Protein 2 (ANGPTL2), that were overexpressed in murine
models of tumors resistant to the anti-VEGF antibody bevacizumab (BEV).
These factors induced epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and
increased aggressiveness. HOXB9 has been identified as a key
transcription factor in common for these factors. Here, we hypothesized
that HOXB9 might be responsible for BEV resistance in gastrointestinal
tumors.HOXB9 expression and activation were measured in BEV-sensitive
COLO357FG and in their BEV-resistant counterpart FGBR pancreatic cancer
cell lines, and in LOVO, MDST8, LIM2099, CCK81, GP5D, and SNUC4 colon
cancer cell lines by EMSA and DAPA. Serum levels of IL1, CXCL1 and 8,
TGF1 and ANGPTL2 in nude mice bearing tumors were measured by multiplex
xMAP technology. Immunohistochemical analyses were performed in pre- vs.
post-progression biopsies from colorectal cancer patients receiving
BEV.HOXB9 protein was more expressed and activated in FGBR than did in
COLO357FG cells. shRNA to knock down HOXB9 significantly (P<0.01) reduced
proinflammatory factors and EMT markers expression, and migration in FGBR
cells. Mice bearing HOXB9-silenced tumors had significantly (P<0.01)
lower serum levels of IL1, CXCL1 and 8, TGF1 and ANGPTL2 than did their
respective controls. BEV significantly reduced tumor burden (P0.0001) and
prolonged survival duration (P = 0.0006) in mice bearing HOXB9-silenced
FGBR tumors, whereas it was ineffective on FGBR scramble tumors.
HOXB9-positive LOVO, MDST8, and LIM2099 cells had significantly higher
expression levels of proinflammatory factors and EMT markers, and
migration rates than did HOXB9-negative CCK81, GP5D, and SNUC4 colon
cancer cell lines. In vivo, BEV significantly reduced tumor burden and
prolonged survival duration in mice bearing CCK81 or GP5D tumors
(PResistance to anti-angiogenic therapies poses one of the greatest
challenges in gastrointestinal tumors research. We recently identified
several proinflammatory secreted factors, including interleukin-1 (IL1),
CXC ligand (CXCL) 1 and 8, Transforming Growth Factor (TGF)1, and
Angiopoietin-like Protein 2 (ANGPTL2), that were overexpressed in murine
models of tumors resistant to the anti-VEGF antibody bevacizumab (BEV).
These factors induced epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and
increased aggressiveness. HOXB9 has been identified as a key
transcription factor in common for these factors. Here, we hypothesized
that HOXB9 might be responsible for BEV resistance in gastrointestinal
tumors.HOXB9 expression and activation were measured in BEV-sensitive
COLO357FG and in their BEV-resistant counterpart FGBR pancreatic cancer
cell lines, and in LOVO, MDST8, LIM2099, CCK81, GP5D, and SNUC4 colon
cancer cell lines by EMSA and DAPA. Serum levels of IL1, CXCL1 and 8,
TGF1 and ANGPTL2 in nude mice bearing tumors were measured by multiplex
xMAP technology. Immunohistochemical analyses were performed in pre- vs.
post-progression biopsies from colorectal cancer patients receiving
BEV.HOXB9 protein was more expressed and activated in FGBR than did in
COLO357FG cells. shRNA to knock down HOXB9 significantly (P<0.01) reduced
proinflammatory factors and EMT markers expression, and migration in FGBR
cells. Mice bearing HOXB9-silenced tumors had significantly (P<0.01)
lower serum levels of IL1, CXCL1 and 8, TGF1 and ANGPTL2 than did their
respective controls. BEV significantly reduced tumor burden (P0.0001) and
prolonged survival duration (P = 0.0006) in mice bearing HOXB9-silenced
FGBR tumors, whereas it was ineffective on FGBR scramble tumors.
HOXB9-positive LOVO, MDST8, and LIM2099 cells had significantly higher
expression levels of proinflammatory factors and EMT markers, and
migration rates than did HOXB9-negative CCK81, GP5D, and SNUC4 colon
cancer cell lines. In vivo, BEV significantly reduced tumor burden and
prolonged survival duration in mice bearing CCK81 or GP5D tumors
(P<0.05), whereas it was ineffective on MDST8 and LIM2099 tumors. HOXB9
shRNA significantly reduced proinflammatory factors and EMT markers
expression, and migration in MDST8 cells. BEV significantly prolonged
survival duration in mice bearing HOXB9-silenced MDST8 tumors (P =
0.0025), but did not on MDST8 scramble tumors. Validation of the
differential expression of HOXB9 in biopsies from colorectal patients
progressing under BEV therapy will be available at the time of the
meeting.In conclusion, we identified HOXB9 as crucial transcription
factor to sustain BEV resistance in gastrointestinal tumors. Silencing of
HOXB9 is a promising approach to modulate this resistance. Our results
candidate HOXB9 as potential biomarker for selecting patients with
colorectal and pancreatic cancer for antiangiogenic therapy.

