Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Syngenomic fingerprint: the biomic characterization of the mouse
syngeneic tumor models


The pre-clinical assessment of immuno-oncology (IO) therapies can be
enabled by the use of murine syngeneic tumors established in
immuno-competent mice. With the aims of selecting relevant models and of
minimizing animal experimentation by reducing the number of models
tested, the full characterisation of syngeneic models at the
transcriptomic and genomic level is a key objective for pre-clinical
scientists.Model characterisation includes global aCGH, exon array
analysis and FACS profiling alongside exome sequencing. The model data is
undergoing hypothesis free and driven analyses which are already
generating valuable insights. Comparison of in vivo tumor samples with
their in vitro equivalents has highlighted enrichment for a number of
immune pathways; as has the comparison of different tumor lines. The
genomic, transcriptomic and proteomic model data are being integrated to
give a functional output which will act as a Syngenomic Fingerprint for
each model.The resulting Syngenomic fingerprints will help pre-clinical
scientists to refine their in vivo plans through an improved
understanding of the limits and advantages as well as the clinical
relevance of some of our preclinical models. It is also supporting the
targeted modification of models to better match specific human cancer
types.

