Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of cytochrome P450 (CYP)1A2 in the molecular regulation of
CYP1A1 by the carcinogen, 3-methylcholanthrene (MC) in mouse heptoma
cells (hepa-1)


Cytochrome P4501A (CYP1A) enzymes play important roles in the activation
of PAHs such as 3-methylcholanthrene (MC) to carcinogenic DNA-binding
metabolites. We reported earlier that MC causes persistent induction of
hepatic and pulmonary CYP1A1 in mice for several weeks after MC
withdrawal, and that the phenomenon of sustained hepatic CYP1A1 induction
is lost in Cyp1a2-null mice. In this study, we tested the hypothesis that
MC elicits induction of persistent CYP1A1 induction in hepa-1 cells, and
that CYP1A2 contributes mechanistically to this phenomenon. Hepa-1 cells
were treated with the MC (2.5 M), or dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO) as control,
and at selected time points, CYP1A1 promoter activity, CYP1A1 enzyme
activities, contents, and CYP1A1 mRNA levels were studied. A 24 h
treatment induced the CYP1A1 promoter activity, CYP1A1 mRNA, and
ethoxyresorufin O-deethylase (EROD) activity by 2-, 1000-, and 15-fold,
respectively. The induction was sustained for 4-5 days. MC persistently
induced CYP1A1 apoprotein level as well. Electrophoretic mobility shift
assay indicated that MC induced a nuclear protein that bound to aryl
hydrocarbon response elements in the CYP1A1 promoter region. Transfection
of CYP1A2 siRNA resulted in knockdown of CYP1A2 mRNA by 70%, but a
statistically significant increase of basal CYP1A1 mRNA by 35-40%. The
induction of CYP1A1 promoter activity, CYP1A1 mRNA, CYP1A1 protein, and
EROD activity by MC were not affected by CYP1A2 siRNA at the 24 h time
point, but was significantly attenuated by CYP1A2 siRNA on day 5. These
results suggest that CYP1A2, possibly via a metabolite, contributes to
the sustained induction of CYP1A1 by MC in hepa-I cells. Further
investigations into the mechanisms of persistent induction of CYP1A1 by
MC could lead to novel preventative/therapeutic strategies against
PAH-mediated carcinogenesis in humans.

