Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Design and biological evaluation of substituted
pyrrolo[3,2-d]pyrimidines as dual acting RTK and microtubule targeting
agents


Combination chemotherapy with antiangiogenic (cytostatic) and microtubule
targeting (cytotoxic) agents (MTA) have shown significant promise and
several studies with such combinations have progressed to the clinic.
Single agents with both antiangiogenic activities as well as cytotoxicity
would circumvent pharmacokinetic problems of multiple agents, might be
effective at lower doses to alleviate toxicity, and delay or prevent
tumor cell resistance. We have designed, synthesized and evaluated single
agents that are novel pyrrolo[3,2-d]pyrimidine MTAs that also inhibit
vascular endothelial growth factor receptor-2 (VEGFR-2), epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR) and platelet-derived growth factor receptor
(PDGFR). Sixteen pyrrolo[3,2-d]pyrimidine analogs were synthesized with
variations on the C-2 and the 4-anilino position. The importance of
various substituents was evaluated based on their abilities to cause
cellular microtubule depolymerization and inhibit proliferation of
MDA-MB-435 cancer cells. Compounds with N5-Me were more potent than the
N5-H analogs indicating that a conformational restriction induced by
N5-Me could mimic the bioactive conformation. In addition, all C2-Cl
compounds afforded 2 to 10-fold more potentIC50 values than their C2-Me
counterparts as illustrated by C2-Cl analog AG336 (IC50 = 18.3 5.0 nM)
compared to its C2-Me analog AG85 (IC50 = 193 39 nM). The most active
antitubulin agents were evaluated against RTKs and demonstrated good
inhibition for EGFR (IC50 = 29.5 - 91.5 nM), VEGFR-2 (182.3 - 543.6 nM)
and PDGFR (IC50 = 204.4 - 450.2 nM), thus demonstrating dual-targeting
ability. Preclinical assessment of AG165 at 75 mg/kg in mice in the
NCI/ADR resistant tumor model demonstrated significant reduction of tumor
volume compared to paclitaxel (10 mg/kg) treated mice [p = 0.0333],
indicating antitumor activity in a multidrug resistant tumor model, in
addition to excellent antitumor activity in MDA-MB-435 and MDA-MB-231
xenograft models. These results demonstrate the viability of these
multitargeted single agents as potential clinically active antitumor
agents.

