Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SW43-DOX - a potential new targeted drug for the treatment of
liver malignancies - An in vitro evaluation of receptor affinity and
tumor internalization


Purpose: The 2-receptor is known to be overexpressed on many rapidly
growing cancer cells, thus represents a tumor biomarker and is
potentially attractive for targeted tumor therapy. We have synthesized
the conjugate SW43-DOX consisting of the 2-receptor agonist SW43 and the
anticancer agent Doxorubicin (DOX). The purpose of this study was to
compare the half maximal effective concentration (EC50) of SW43-DOX and
DOX and to evaluate the receptor affinity and internalization of SW43-DOX
in hepatocellular carcinoma and other cancer cell lines in vitro.Material
& Methods: SW43 was synthesized and conjugated with Doxorubicin (A
Chemtek Inc.) For saturation binding & internalization assays, the
chelator L-NETA was attached & loaded with Lu177. Hep G2, Hep 3B, Panc-1
& HT-29 cell lines were evaluated. EC50 was assessed by treatment with
various concentrations ranging from 0.5-700 M of SW43-DOX/Doxorubicin
(CellTiter-Glo; Promega). Saturation binding assay: 2-receptor blocking
was achieved with 10-100 M SW43 for 15 min. at RT prior to adding 1-300 M
SW43-DOX-Lu177 in HBSS buffer (+0.1% BSA) incubating for 3.5h on ice.
Internalization assay: After receptor blocking (7.5 M SW43; 15 min.),
cells were incubated with 75 nM SW43-DOX-Lu177 for .5, 1 & 2h at 37C/5%
CO2. The cell surface bound fraction from the internalization assay was
scavenged by incubation with HBSS (+20 mM NaOAc; pH4.0; 10 min; 37C/5%
CO2). Cells were lysed with 0.5% SDS, radioactivity measured (Cobra
-counter, Packard Bell) & normalized to whole cell protein. Statistics:
EC50: Dose response non-linear fitting model; Internalization: ANOVA +
Bonferroni post-hoc test, Saturation binding: One site saturation
non-linear regression fit model. Prism V6.0.Results: EC50 showed lower
needed concentration (M) for SW43-DOX compared to Doxorubicin: Hep G2
(12.0 (95%CI: 10.3-13.9) vs. 81.5 (95%CI: 66.7-99.5); pPurpose: The
2-receptor is known to be overexpressed on many rapidly growing cancer
cells, thus represents a tumor biomarker and is potentially attractive
for targeted tumor therapy. We have synthesized the conjugate SW43-DOX
consisting of the 2-receptor agonist SW43 and the anticancer agent
Doxorubicin (DOX). The purpose of this study was to compare the half
maximal effective concentration (EC50) of SW43-DOX and DOX and to
evaluate the receptor affinity and internalization of SW43-DOX in
hepatocellular carcinoma and other cancer cell lines in vitro.Material &
Methods: SW43 was synthesized and conjugated with Doxorubicin (A Chemtek
Inc.) For saturation binding & internalization assays, the chelator
L-NETA was attached & loaded with Lu177. Hep G2, Hep 3B, Panc-1 & HT-29
cell lines were evaluated. EC50 was assessed by treatment with various
concentrations ranging from 0.5-700 M of SW43-DOX/Doxorubicin
(CellTiter-Glo; Promega). Saturation binding assay: 2-receptor blocking
was achieved with 10-100 M SW43 for 15 min. at RT prior to adding 1-300 M
SW43-DOX-Lu177 in HBSS buffer (+0.1% BSA) incubating for 3.5h on ice.
Internalization assay: After receptor blocking (7.5 M SW43; 15 min.),
cells were incubated with 75 nM SW43-DOX-Lu177 for .5, 1 & 2h at 37C/5%
CO2. The cell surface bound fraction from the internalization assay was
scavenged by incubation with HBSS (+20 mM NaOAc; pH4.0; 10 min; 37C/5%
CO2). Cells were lysed with 0.5% SDS, radioactivity measured (Cobra
-counter, Packard Bell) & normalized to whole cell protein. Statistics:
EC50: Dose response non-linear fitting model; Internalization: ANOVA +
Bonferroni post-hoc test, Saturation binding: One site saturation
non-linear regression fit model. Prism V6.0.Results: EC50 showed lower
needed concentration (M) for SW43-DOX compared to Doxorubicin: Hep G2
(12.0 (95%CI: 10.3-13.9) vs. 81.5 (95%CI: 66.7-99.5); p<0.001), Hep 3B
(8.0 (95%CI: 7.2-9) vs. 17.6 (95%CI: 14.1-22); pPurpose: The 2-receptor
is known to be overexpressed on many rapidly growing cancer cells, thus
represents a tumor biomarker and is potentially attractive for targeted
tumor therapy. We have synthesized the conjugate SW43-DOX consisting of
the 2-receptor agonist SW43 and the anticancer agent Doxorubicin (DOX).
The purpose of this study was to compare the half maximal effective
concentration (EC50) of SW43-DOX and DOX and to evaluate the receptor
affinity and internalization of SW43-DOX in hepatocellular carcinoma and
other cancer cell lines in vitro.Material & Methods: SW43 was synthesized
and conjugated with Doxorubicin (A Chemtek Inc.) For saturation binding &
internalization assays, the chelator L-NETA was attached & loaded with
Lu177. Hep G2, Hep 3B, Panc-1 & HT-29 cell lines were evaluated. EC50 was
assessed by treatment with various concentrations ranging from 0.5-700 M
of SW43-DOX/Doxorubicin (CellTiter-Glo; Promega). Saturation binding
assay: 2-receptor blocking was achieved with 10-100 M SW43 for 15 min. at
RT prior to adding 1-300 M SW43-DOX-Lu177 in HBSS buffer (+0.1% BSA)
incubating for 3.5h on ice. Internalization assay: After receptor
blocking (7.5 M SW43; 15 min.), cells were incubated with 75 nM
SW43-DOX-Lu177 for .5, 1 & 2h at 37C/5% CO2. The cell surface bound
fraction from the internalization assay was scavenged by incubation with
HBSS (+20 mM NaOAc; pH4.0; 10 min; 37C/5% CO2). Cells were lysed with
0.5% SDS, radioactivity measured (Cobra -counter, Packard Bell) &
normalized to whole cell protein. Statistics: EC50: Dose response
non-linear fitting model; Internalization: ANOVA + Bonferroni post-hoc
test, Saturation binding: One site saturation non-linear regression fit
model. Prism V6.0.Results: EC50 showed lower needed concentration (M) for
SW43-DOX compared to Doxorubicin: Hep G2 (12.0 (95%CI: 10.3-13.9) vs.
81.5 (95%CI: 66.7-99.5); p<0.001), Hep 3B (8.0 (95%CI: 7.2-9) vs. 17.6
(95%CI: 14.1-22); p<0.001), Panc-1 (21.59 (95%CI: 15.44-30.2) vs. 64.5
(95%CI: 50.3-82.6); p = 0.31), and HT-29 (20.7 (95%CI: 18.3-23.3) vs.
179.8 (95%CI: 65.9-593.5); pPurpose: The 2-receptor is known to be
overexpressed on many rapidly growing cancer cells, thus represents a
tumor biomarker and is potentially attractive for targeted tumor therapy.
We have synthesized the conjugate SW43-DOX consisting of the 2-receptor
agonist SW43 and the anticancer agent Doxorubicin (DOX). The purpose of
this study was to compare the half maximal effective concentration (EC50)
of SW43-DOX and DOX and to evaluate the receptor affinity and
internalization of SW43-DOX in hepatocellular carcinoma and other cancer
cell lines in vitro.Material & Methods: SW43 was synthesized and
conjugated with Doxorubicin (A Chemtek Inc.) For saturation binding &
internalization assays, the chelator L-NETA was attached & loaded with
Lu177. Hep G2, Hep 3B, Panc-1 & HT-29 cell lines were evaluated. EC50 was
assessed by treatment with various concentrations ranging from 0.5-700 M
of SW43-DOX/Doxorubicin (CellTiter-Glo; Promega). Saturation binding
assay: 2-receptor blocking was achieved with 10-100 M SW43 for 15 min. at
RT prior to adding 1-300 M SW43-DOX-Lu177 in HBSS buffer (+0.1% BSA)
incubating for 3.5h on ice. Internalization assay: After receptor
blocking (7.5 M SW43; 15 min.), cells were incubated with 75 nM
SW43-DOX-Lu177 for .5, 1 & 2h at 37C/5% CO2. The cell surface bound
fraction from the internalization assay was scavenged by incubation with
HBSS (+20 mM NaOAc; pH4.0; 10 min; 37C/5% CO2). Cells were lysed with
0.5% SDS, radioactivity measured (Cobra -counter, Packard Bell) &
normalized to whole cell protein. Statistics: EC50: Dose response
non-linear fitting model; Internalization: ANOVA + Bonferroni post-hoc
test, Saturation binding: One site saturation non-linear regression fit
model. Prism V6.0.Results: EC50 showed lower needed concentration (M) for
SW43-DOX compared to Doxorubicin: Hep G2 (12.0 (95%CI: 10.3-13.9) vs.
81.5 (95%CI: 66.7-99.5); p<0.001), Hep 3B (8.0 (95%CI: 7.2-9) vs. 17.6
(95%CI: 14.1-22); p<0.001), Panc-1 (21.59 (95%CI: 15.44-30.2) vs. 64.5
(95%CI: 50.3-82.6); p = 0.31), and HT-29 (20.7 (95%CI: 18.3-23.3) vs.
179.8 (95%CI: 65.9-593.5); p<0.001). Maximal specific cell surface
binding capacity (Bmax; pmol/mg): Hep G2 (21.5; 95%CI: 14.3-28.6), Hep 3B
(35.2; 95%CI: 27.9-42.5), Panc-1 (66.5; 95%CI: 51.6-78.2) & HT-29 (33.4;
95%CI: 8.43-58.5). Specific binding affinity (KD) in nM: Hep G2 (49.2;
95%CI: 2.2-96.3), Hep 3B (40.8; 95%CI: 13.4-68.1), Panc-1 (96.4; 95%CI:
51.4-141.5), HT-29 (31.3; 95%CI: -40.5-84.4). Specific internalization
was evident at all time points for all cell lines (pPurpose: The
2-receptor is known to be overexpressed on many rapidly growing cancer
cells, thus represents a tumor biomarker and is potentially attractive
for targeted tumor therapy. We have synthesized the conjugate SW43-DOX
consisting of the 2-receptor agonist SW43 and the anticancer agent
Doxorubicin (DOX). The purpose of this study was to compare the half
maximal effective concentration (EC50) of SW43-DOX and DOX and to
evaluate the receptor affinity and internalization of SW43-DOX in
hepatocellular carcinoma and other cancer cell lines in vitro.Material &
Methods: SW43 was synthesized and conjugated with Doxorubicin (A Chemtek
Inc.) For saturation binding & internalization assays, the chelator
L-NETA was attached & loaded with Lu177. Hep G2, Hep 3B, Panc-1 & HT-29
cell lines were evaluated. EC50 was assessed by treatment with various
concentrations ranging from 0.5-700 M of SW43-DOX/Doxorubicin
(CellTiter-Glo; Promega). Saturation binding assay: 2-receptor blocking
was achieved with 10-100 M SW43 for 15 min. at RT prior to adding 1-300 M
SW43-DOX-Lu177 in HBSS buffer (+0.1% BSA) incubating for 3.5h on ice.
Internalization assay: After receptor blocking (7.5 M SW43; 15 min.),
cells were incubated with 75 nM SW43-DOX-Lu177 for .5, 1 & 2h at 37C/5%
CO2. The cell surface bound fraction from the internalization assay was
scavenged by incubation with HBSS (+20 mM NaOAc; pH4.0; 10 min; 37C/5%
CO2). Cells were lysed with 0.5% SDS, radioactivity measured (Cobra
-counter, Packard Bell) & normalized to whole cell protein. Statistics:
EC50: Dose response non-linear fitting model; Internalization: ANOVA +
Bonferroni post-hoc test, Saturation binding: One site saturation
non-linear regression fit model. Prism V6.0.Results: EC50 showed lower
needed concentration (M) for SW43-DOX compared to Doxorubicin: Hep G2
(12.0 (95%CI: 10.3-13.9) vs. 81.5 (95%CI: 66.7-99.5); p<0.001), Hep 3B
(8.0 (95%CI: 7.2-9) vs. 17.6 (95%CI: 14.1-22); p<0.001), Panc-1 (21.59
(95%CI: 15.44-30.2) vs. 64.5 (95%CI: 50.3-82.6); p = 0.31), and HT-29
(20.7 (95%CI: 18.3-23.3) vs. 179.8 (95%CI: 65.9-593.5); p<0.001). Maximal
specific cell surface binding capacity (Bmax; pmol/mg): Hep G2 (21.5;
95%CI: 14.3-28.6), Hep 3B (35.2; 95%CI: 27.9-42.5), Panc-1 (66.5; 95%CI:
51.6-78.2) & HT-29 (33.4; 95%CI: 8.43-58.5). Specific binding affinity
(KD) in nM: Hep G2 (49.2; 95%CI: 2.2-96.3), Hep 3B (40.8; 95%CI:
13.4-68.1), Panc-1 (96.4; 95%CI: 51.4-141.5), HT-29 (31.3; 95%CI:
-40.5-84.4). Specific internalization was evident at all time points for
all cell lines (p<0.05). Specific internalization (pmol/mg SD) after 2h
was 29.5 6.6 (Panc-1), 10.3 1.6 (HT-29), 18.2 2.36 (Hep G2) & 30.7 8.2
(Hep 3B).Conclusion: SW43-DOX exerts a higher antitumoral effect than
Doxorubicin & binds specifically onto the cell surface with high affinity
& subsequently specific uptake via the 2-receptor.

