Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Andrographolide prevents prostate cancer by targeting CXCR3/CXCR7
and regulators of cell cycle


Despite state of the art cancer diagnostics and therapies offered in
clinics, prostate cancer (PCa) remains the second leading cause of
cancer-related deaths in men. Hence, more robust therapeutic/preventive
regimes are required to combat this lethal disease. In the current study,
we have tested the efficacy of andrographolide (AG), a bioactive
diterpenoid isolated from Andrographis paniculata, against PCa. This
natural agent selectively affects PCa cell viability in a dose and
time-dependent manner, without affecting primary prostate epithelial
cells. Furthermore, AG showed differential effect on phases of cell cycle
in LNCaP, C4-2b and PC3 cell lines compared to retinoblastoma protein
(RB-/-) lacking DU-145 cells. This agent blocked the G2/M transition in
LNCaP, C4-2b and PC3 whereas DU-145 cells failed to transit G1/S phase.
This difference was primarily due to switching of the activation states
of cell cycle regulators in these cell lines. AG induced its effect
mainly via cyclin A2 and B1 in LNCaP, C4-2b and PC3 cell lines; whereas,
cyclin E related regulation was affected in DU-145 cells. Phosphorylation
status of Wee1, a nuclear kinase belonging to the Ser/Thr family and CDC2
was also affected by AG. Intriguingly, AG affected cell viability and the
ability of PCa cells to migrate via modulating CXCL11 and CXCR3 and CXCR7
expression. The significant impact of AG on cellular and molecular
processes involved in PCa progression suggest this agent has potential to
be used as a therapeutic and/or preventive modality.

