Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anti-tumor effect of DHP107, a mucoadhesive lipid formulae of oral
paclitaxel, in bladder cancer model


Purpose: Paclitaxel is an effective anti-neoplastic agent in many solid
tumors including bladder cancer. With the development of new drug
delivery strategies, novel formulations of Cremophor EL-free paclitaxel
have been developed. Here, we investigated the in vitro and in vivo
anti-tumor effect of a mucoadhesive oral formulation of paclitaxel
(DHP107) in comparison with iv paclitaxel in a human bladder cancer
model.Methods: Four human bladder cancer cell lines (RT4, T24, J82,
HT1376) and one murine bladder cancer cell line (MBT-2) were used in this
study. In vitro antitumor activity and underlying mechanisms were
assessed by 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyl tetrazolium bromide
(MTT) assay, cell-cycle analysis and apoptosis assay. In the in vivo
study, RT4 cell line was implanted subcutaneously in the flank of nu/nu
mice, and treated with iv paclitaxel and 2 doses of DHP107. The effects
were assessed by the tumor growth, body weight and Ki-67 staining in
tumor tissues.Results: The IC50 values of DHP107 ranged from 4.15 to
34.72 g/ml with MTT assay. In RT4 cell line, both drugs induced similar
G2-M arrest and apoptosis. The xenograft experiments showed that both
DHP107 (per os, 50 mg/kg, equivalent of paclitaxel 10 mg/kg) and iv
paclitaxel (intraperitoneal, 10 mg/kg) attenuated the growth of RT4
tumors in mice, equivalently. The higher dose (per os, 100 mg/kg) of
DHP107 resulted in increased efficacy compared with the lower dose (50
mg/kg) without weight loss in mice. However, significant weight loss was
observed in iv paclitaxel (-20% at Day 11) treated group. We observed
significantly decreased proliferation with Ki-67 staining in DHP107 (100
mg/kg) treated group than in DHP107 (50 mg/kg) or iv paclitaxel (10
mg/kg) treated groups.Conclusion: Our findings provide the evidence that
DHP107 showed comparable antitumor effect with iv paclitaxel and is a
promising anti-tumor agent in bladder cancer. Clinical studies in
patients with bladder cancer warrant further investigation.

