Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Verapamil and tamoxifen modulate ABCB1 expression in
multidrug-resistant cells and resensitize them to conventional
chemotherapy


Multidrug-resistant (MDR) tumors are an increasingly important obstacle
in cancer treatment, wherein many cases are associated with the
overexpression of P-glycoprotein 1 (P-gp1, ABCB1). Previous efforts to
sensitize ABCB1-expressing tumor cells to anti-cancer drugs were
associated with severe side effects, so interest in clinical trials using
these drugs has dwindled.Studies have shown P-glycoprotein-overexpressing
cells to be hyper sensitive (or collaterally sensitive) to a diverse
group of non-toxic compounds. Given earlier results demonstrating a
significant increase in ABCB1 expression post-chemotherapeutic treatment
of cancer patients (e.g., breast, ovarian, myeloma, and acute myeloid
leukemia), and the role of ABCB1 in drug resistance, it was determined
that targeting ABCB1-expressing tumor cells with effective collateral
sensitivity drugs should increase the effectiveness of current
chemotherapeutic treatments.In this report, it was of interest to
determine the effect of the collateral sensitivity drugs verapamil and
tamoxifen on P-glycoprotein 1 expression at the level of cells and
individual cell clones. Clones from P-gp1-overexpressing Chinese hamster
ovarian cell lines (CHRC5) or triple negative breast cancer cells
(MDA-MB-231/400 nM doxo) were treated with varying levels of collateral
sensitivity drugs and ABCB1 expression was determined by Western blots
and ELISAs. The sensitivity of each cell clone to anti-cancer or
collateral sensitivity drugs was determined using cytotoxicity assays.Our
results demonstrate a drop in ABCB1 expression in each clone, together
with decreased collateral sensitivity and overall increased sensitivity
to anti-cancer drugs in cell lines selected with verapamil and tamoxifen.
Work is in progress to study the various mechanisms responsible for this
drop in ABCB1 expression and its impact on treatment outcome.

