Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Determining autophagic activity following cannabidiol treatment of
melanoma: a potential new and novel treatment


Introduction:Autophagy is a catabolic pathway utilized for energy
metabolism in nutrient-depleted tumors. Recent studies have reported
autophagy to be a survival mechanism found in cancer during stress
secondary to cancer progression or treatment. In this study we tested for
autophagic activity in malignant melanoma tumors via detection of LC3
antibody following treatment with Cannabidiol (CBD) and cisplatin. The
objective of this study was to investigate the effect of treatment with a
cannabinoid derivative on autophagic activity in malignant
melanoma.Materials and Methods:Murine B16F10 melanoma tumors were
established subcutaneously in C57BL/6 mice. These mice were then
subjected to treatment with local vehicle (PBS) injection (control -
group 1, n = 5), systemic Cisplatin injection (group 2; n = 5), and local
cannabidiol injection (group 3; n = 5). Tumor cells were subsequently
submitted to immunohistochemistry, Brightfield microscopy, and
quantitative analysis (Bioquant) for LC3 expression.Results:The
expression level of LC3 was significantly reduced in groups 2 and 3 when
compared to the control group 1. Quantitative measurement of the slides
using Bioquant software confirmed our immunohistochemistry and
microscopic results.Conclusions:If CBD does indeed decrease autophagic
activity, it may represent a new and novel therapeutic target in the
treatment of malignant melanoma. Additional studies to clarify the
specific relationship between CBD and autophagy are in progress and will
be reported upon completion.

