Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CCR5-CCRL2 regulates CCL5-induced organ specific metastasis: the
in vitro and in vivo studies


Previous studies of soluble factors in the tumor associated stromal cells
demonstrated the elevation of CCL5 expression in prostate cancer patient
sera that correlated wit malignant cancer progression. To evaluate the
expression level of chemokine receptors in response to chemokines
released by reactive stroma, quantitative PCR to evaluate the mRNA level
of chemokine receptors was performed. We noticed the significant
increased of CCRL2 (86-fold) and CXCR4 (45-fold) in androgen independent
prostate cancer (AIPC) cells. This increased of CCRL2 expression also
confirmed in malignant lung, breast and rental cells. Knockdown of CCRL2
declined 75% of migration activities induced by CCL5, suggests CCRL2
involve in CCL5 induce cancer migratory activities (t-test, pPrevious
studies of soluble factors in the tumor associated stromal cells
demonstrated the elevation of CCL5 expression in prostate cancer patient
sera that correlated wit malignant cancer progression. To evaluate the
expression level of chemokine receptors in response to chemokines
released by reactive stroma, quantitative PCR to evaluate the mRNA level
of chemokine receptors was performed. We noticed the significant
increased of CCRL2 (86-fold) and CXCR4 (45-fold) in androgen independent
prostate cancer (AIPC) cells. This increased of CCRL2 expression also
confirmed in malignant lung, breast and rental cells. Knockdown of CCRL2
declined 75% of migration activities induced by CCL5, suggests CCRL2
involve in CCL5 induce cancer migratory activities (t-test, p<0.001). IHC
analysis of CCRL2 in paired prostate cancer patients was performed and
revealed increasing of CCRL2 expression in malignant prostate cancer
locus, whereas no CCRL2 can be detected in the benign region of same
patient. Proximity ligation assays (PLAs) of benign, high grade tumor and
tissues collected from patients less than 5-year survive demonstrated the
PLA signals only in the lethal progression on patients. In vivo xenograft
mice model studies demonstrated the organ specific cancer metastasis can
be enhanced after overexpressed CCRL2 in cancer cells. Molecular analysis
of CCRL2 demonstrated that CCRL2 regulated EZH2 expression in prostate
cancer cells. In summary, out studies indicated the increased expression
of CCRL2 play a central role in cancer cell migration induced by
chemokine CCL5. The released of CCL5, secreted by bone stromal cells
after interaction with dormancy cancer cell, may induce directional
migration and invasion of circulating cancer cells. Clinical analyses
demonstrated increased of CCRL2 in malignant prostate cancer. Inhibition
of these homing mechanisms might significantly decreased cancer cell
metastatic activities of AIPC patients.

