Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrated genomic approaches identify upregulation of SCRN1 as a
novel mechanism associated with acquired resistance to erlotinib in non
small cell lung cancer cells with oncogenic EGFR mutation


Therapies targeting the tyrosine kinase activity of Epidermal Growth
Factor Receptor (EGFR) have been proven to be effective in treating a
subset of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients harboring
activating EGFR mutations. Inevitably these patients develop resistance
to the EGFR-targeted tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs). Here, we
performed integrated genomic analyses using an in vitro system to uncover
alternative genomic alterations responsible for acquired resistance to
EGFR-TKIs. Specifically, we identified 80 genes whose expression is
significantly increased in the resistant clones and RNAi-based systematic
synthetic lethal screening revealed that suppression of one upregulated
transcript, SCRN1, a secernin family member, restores sensitivity to
erlotinib by enhancing inhibition of PI3K/AKT signaling pathway.
Furthermore, we detected increased levels of SCRN1 in 5 of 11 lung tumor
specimens from EGFR-TKIs refractory patients by immunohistochemistry.
Taken together, we propose that upregulation of SCRN1 is an additional
mechanism associated with acquired resistance to EGFR-TKIs in a subset of
lung cancer patients and that its suppression serves as a novel
therapeutic strategy to overcome drug resistance in these patients.

