Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Racial/ethnic disparities of obesity in a breast clinic
population: Consideration for weight loss program in improving clinical
outcomes


Introduction: Accumulating evidence suggest that obesity is associated
with breast cancer diagnosis, recurrence, and mortality. Obese subjects
with genetic predisposition may need more aggressive weight loss
management, such as bariatric surgery. Therefore, the primary aim of this
study was to assess the racial/ethnic disparities in obesity and the
prevalence of breast cancer study participants who may be eligible for
bariatric surgery.Methods: In three clinic-based studies conducted at
University of Miami during 2008 to 2015, we evaluated 462 healthy
controls and 975 breast cancer patients. Genotyping data of two
obesity-related genes (FTO and MC4R) were also evaluated. Race/ethnicity
and obesity-related comorbidities were self- reported. Body Mass Index
(BMI) was calculated as kg/m2. The classification of BMI was: (1)
Introduction: Accumulating evidence suggest that obesity is associated
with breast cancer diagnosis, recurrence, and mortality. Obese subjects
with genetic predisposition may need more aggressive weight loss
management, such as bariatric surgery. Therefore, the primary aim of this
study was to assess the racial/ethnic disparities in obesity and the
prevalence of breast cancer study participants who may be eligible for
bariatric surgery.Methods: In three clinic-based studies conducted at
University of Miami during 2008 to 2015, we evaluated 462 healthy
controls and 975 breast cancer patients. Genotyping data of two
obesity-related genes (FTO and MC4R) were also evaluated. Race/ethnicity
and obesity-related comorbidities were self- reported. Body Mass Index
(BMI) was calculated as kg/m2. The classification of BMI was: (1) < 18.5,
underweight; (2) 18.5-24.9, normal weight; (3) 25.0-29.9, overweight; (4)
30.0-34.9, class I obesity; (5) 35.0-39.9, class II obesity; and (6)
40.0, class III obesity. The NIH eligibility for bariatric surgery was
for class II obese subjects with obesity-related comorbidities and class
III obese subjects.Results: The study consists of 70.0% Hispanic whites
(HW), 21.7% black or African American (AA), and 6.4% non-Hispanic whites
(NHW). Mean and SD of age was 54.1 9.9 years and mean BMI was 29.06.1
kg/m2. Overall, about 11.1% of study participants met criteria for
bariatric surgery and there were significant racial/ethnic disparities
(19.7% AA, 8.5% HW, 8.8% NHW, and 17.2% others; pIntroduction:
Accumulating evidence suggest that obesity is associated with breast
cancer diagnosis, recurrence, and mortality. Obese subjects with genetic
predisposition may need more aggressive weight loss management, such as
bariatric surgery. Therefore, the primary aim of this study was to assess
the racial/ethnic disparities in obesity and the prevalence of breast
cancer study participants who may be eligible for bariatric
surgery.Methods: In three clinic-based studies conducted at University of
Miami during 2008 to 2015, we evaluated 462 healthy controls and 975
breast cancer patients. Genotyping data of two obesity-related genes (FTO
and MC4R) were also evaluated. Race/ethnicity and obesity-related
comorbidities were self- reported. Body Mass Index (BMI) was calculated
as kg/m2. The classification of BMI was: (1) < 18.5, underweight; (2)
18.5-24.9, normal weight; (3) 25.0-29.9, overweight; (4) 30.0-34.9, class
I obesity; (5) 35.0-39.9, class II obesity; and (6) 40.0, class III
obesity. The NIH eligibility for bariatric surgery was for class II obese
subjects with obesity-related comorbidities and class III obese
subjects.Results: The study consists of 70.0% Hispanic whites (HW), 21.7%
black or African American (AA), and 6.4% non-Hispanic whites (NHW). Mean
and SD of age was 54.1 9.9 years and mean BMI was 29.06.1 kg/m2. Overall,
about 11.1% of study participants met criteria for bariatric surgery and
there were significant racial/ethnic disparities (19.7% AA, 8.5% HW, 8.8%
NHW, and 17.2% others; p<0.0001). Subgroup analysis observed increased
BMI at follow up (29.60 vs. 29.16 kg/m2, p = 0.00229). Women with the AA
risk genotype of rs1121980 (FTO gene) had 3.6-fold higher risk of obesity
class II or III compared to those with the GG genotype (p =
0.00393).Conclusion: In addition to cancer risk, obesity is a major risk
factor for cancer treatment-related side effects and worse survival. Our
results suggest that at least 11% of breast cancer patients may be
eligible for bariatric surgery. Considering some other beneficial effects
of bariatric surgery on physical quality of life, metabolic syndrome,
diabetes, and microbiome, future studies will consider weight loss and
bariatric surgery programs in breast cancer patients, particularly in
underserved minorities with higher obesity rate and worse survival.

