Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Multiplexing single cell time lapse imaging of intra-cellular
oxygen in cancer cells


Oxygen plays an important role in aerobic energy metabolism and signal
transduction. The detection of intracellular or subcellular molecular
oxygen (O2) levels is important for the understanding of cell physiology
and mitochondrial energy metabolism, and the alterations correlated with
cancer. Detection of O2 has recently been improved significantly with the
development of live cell time lapse microscopy compatible oxygen
sensitive probes.We here utilized nanoparticle probe MitoImageTM-MM2 with
embedded poly(9,9-dioctylfluorene) (PFO) as an O2-independent component
and Pt(II)-5,10,15,20-tetrakis-(2,3,4,5,6-pentafluorophenyl)-porphyrin
(PtTFPP) to perform time lapse ratiometric measurements of intra-cellular
oxygen levels. Loading of HeLa cervical cancer cells with MM2 enables us
to image kinetics of intracellular O2 concentration in response to the
mitochondrial respiratory chain inhibitors Antimycin A (complex III) or
sodium azide (complex IV). These changes were detected in
respiration-supporting medium equilibrated with 5% (53 M) and 20% (225
M)O2. Also exposing cells to varying extracellular oxygen concentrations
(21 - 225 M) showed strong dependence of the intracellular oxygen levels.
The mitochondrial membrane potential was monitored by simultaneous
imaging of Tetra-Methyl-Rhodamine-Methyl ester (TMRM) in the same sample.
Multiplexing with GFP finally allowed us to monitor intracellular O2
during the apoptotic signaling process of mitochondrial outer membrane
permeabilisation (MOMP) in HeLa expressing cytochrome-c-eGFP and stained
with TMRM.In conclusion, the MitoImageTM-MM2 nanoparticle probe enables
single-cell, time-lapse imaging of alterations in intracellular oxygen
levels in cancer cells, and can be employed in multiplex assays to
investigate alterations in intracellular oxygen levels relative to
protein dynamics and mitochondrial function.Keywords: Intracellular
oxygen; phosphorescent oxygen-sensitive nanoparticles; HeLa cells;
MitoImage ratiometric probes; confocal microscopy.

