Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CDCP1 cleavage is necessary for homodimerization-induced migration
of triple-negative breast cancer


Triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) is a highly aggressive and
metastatic form of breast cancer that lacks the estrogen, progesterone,
and HER2 receptors and is resistant to targeted and hormone therapies.
TNBCs express high levels of the transmembrane glycoprotein, CUB-domain
containing protein 1 (CDCP1), which has been correlated with the
aggressiveness and poor prognosis of multiple carcinomas. Full-length
CDCP1 (flCDCP1) can be proteolytically cleaved, resulting in a cleaved
membrane-bound isoform (cCDCP1). CDCP1 is phosphorylated by Src family
kinases in its full-length and cleaved states, which is important for its
pro-metastatic signaling. We observed that cCDCP1, compared to flCDCP1,
induced a dramatic increase in phosphorylation of the
migration-associated proteins: PKC, ERK1/2, and p38 MAPK in HEK 293T. In
addition, only cCDCP1 induced migration of HEK 293T cells and rescued
migration of the TNBC cell line, MDA-MB-231, expressing shRNA against
CDCP1. Importantly, we found that only cCDCP1 is capable of dimerization,
which can be blocked by expression of the extracellular portion of cCDCP1
(ECC), indicating that dimerization occurs through CDCP1's ectodomain. We
found that ECC inhibited phosphorylation of PKC and migration of TNBC
cells in 2D culture. Furthermore, ECC induced morphological changes,
inhibited proliferation, and stimulated apoptosis of TNBC cells in 3D
culture, indicating that the cCDCP1 dimer is an important contributor to
TNBC aggressiveness. These studies have important implications for
development of a therapeutic to block CDCP1 activity and TNBC metastasis.

