Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development and implementation of a non-invasive NGS-based
diagnostic test for precision medicine in prostate cancer


The growth and survival of prostate cancer tumors relies primarily on the
functioning of the androgen receptor (AR) signaling pathway. Recent
studies suggested that the presence of AR-V7, a c-terminal truncated form
of AR, in circulating tumor cells (CTCs) of patients with
castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) is associated with inherent
and/or acquired resistance to enzalutamide and abiraterone, the stand of
care androgen deprivation therapies in prostate cancer. A series of data
also indicate that AR-Vs (eg, including AR-V7, ARv567es, AR-T878A,
AR-F876L, and Arv567es) may drive resistance in CRPC. Expression of AR-Vs
has been shown to correlate with disease progression and shortened
survival and AR-V7 is most abundant in CRPC specimens. Considering that
truncated ARs with C-terminal loss (splice variants) lack a functional
LBD and are constitutively active, C-terminal AR-directed therapies may
not be effective, and novels agents are needed that target mutated ARs
including AR-Vs. Circulating tumor cell (CTC)-based AR-V7 tests are
currently being tested in the clinic. However, nearly half of the CRPC
patients do not have enough CTCs for AR-V7 test, raising the request for
a complementary, non-CTC platform to detect AR variants as well as other
resistance markers in circulation.Here we report the successful
development of a non-invasive, next generation sequencing-based
diagnostics platform that offers comprehensive profiling of genomic
alterations in prostate cancer, including splicing variants (such as
AR-V7), point mutation, copy number, and translocation using biofluid
samples (blood and urine) from CRPC patients. To the best of our
knowledge, this is the first non-invasive diagnostic test that measures
genetic alterations especially AR-V7 in all patients with prostate
cancer, regardless of their status of CTC enumeration. The successful
development and clinical validation of this test has potential to enable
precision medicine in prostate cancer.

