Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Establishment of a novel mouse model of intrahepatic
cholangiocarcinoma by liver-specific Kras activation and Pten deletion


The mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway and the
phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) pathway are intracellular signaling
pathways that are involved in carcinogenesis. Various studies suggest
that these pathways are important for the development of liver tumors. To
investigate the effect of coactivation of MAPK and PI3K pathways in liver
tumorigenesis, we generated three types of mouse models by crossbreeding
conditional KrasG12D knockin mice and/or conditional Pten knockout mice
with Alb-Cre mice (Alb-Cre KrasG12D/+ Pten flox/flox mice, Alb-Cre
KrasG12D/+ Pten flox/+ mice, and Alb-Cre KrasG12D/+ mice). Among the
three models, mice carrying liver-specific oncogenic Kras knockin and
homozygous Pten deletion (Alb-Cre KrasG12D/+ Pten flox/flox) frequently
demonstrated weight loss, abdominal distension, and jaundice with median
survival of eight weeks. Macroscopic analysis detected diffuse and firm
tumorous lesions mainly in the hepatic hilum. Histological examination of
the Alb-Cre KrasG12D/+ Pten flox/flox mice disclosed bile duct
hyperplasia at four weeks of age, precancerous lesions of intrahepatic
cholangiocarcinoma (ICC) at five weeks of age, and advanced ICC lesions
that resemble human ICC at seven weeks of age. On the other hand, the
Alb-Cre KrasG12D/+ Pten flox/+ mice, the second model, developed ICCs as
well as hepatocellular carcinomas (HCCs), and their average survival was
eight months. The third mice model, the Alb-Cre KrasG12D/+ mice,
developed HCCs but not ICCs, and survived more than one
year.Immunohistochemical analysis of the ICCs in the Alb-Cre KrasG12D/+
Pten flox/flox mice corroborated the activation of the Mapk and the Pi3k
pathways in the tumor cells. These data suggest that activity of Pi3k
pathway might dictate the fate determination of hepatotumorigenesis into
biliary or hepatocyte cell lineage. In addition, oncogenic Kras
expression and homozygous Pten deletion cooperate to induce exclusively
ICCs. Since a limited number of mouse ICC models have been reported, the
Alb-Cre KrasG12D/+ Pten flox/flox mouse model should be a useful tool for
the analysis of molecular mechanism(s) underlying ICC.

