Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epigenetics in doxorubicin and docetaxel-resistant triple negative
breast cancer


Triple negative breast cancers (TNBC) do not express estrogen receptor,
progesterone receptor, or Her2/neu hence there are no targeted therapies
for this type of breast cancer. Chemotherapy is the systemic treatment
option with doxorubicin and docetaxel being the two most commonly used
drugs. It is well known drug resistance can lead to treatment failure in
these patients. It is therefore essential to uncover information on the
mechanism of these resistance pathways, and identify novel molecular
markers for developing potential pathway driven treatment. Our previous
studies have shown that genes, ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM), TGF-,
Bcl-2, NDRG1 and NDRG2 are closely related to cancer stem cell marker
CD24 expression, and drug resistance toward doxorubicin and docetaxel in
TNBC. In this study, two TNBC cell lines HCC1806 and HCC1937 were
epigenetically examined by ChIP-qPCR. The gene promoters of the above
five genes, within a 1kb range were analyzed. Results showed that both
drugs significantly decreased total Histone 3 quantity, which is
representative of total nucleosome density, at ATM and TGFB1 promoters,
and additionally doxorubicin at NDRG1 promoter. Doxorubicin also
decreased histone acetylation and methylation of H3K9 significantly at
NDRG1 and consistently at the other gene promoters, while docetaxel
showed consistent increase of methylation at H3K9. Results suggest that
treatment with the two drugs affects an epigenetic pathway involving one
or several epigenetic cofactors (methyltransferases, acetyltransferases,
nucleosome remodeling complexes, etc.). Elucidating this pathway may
provide valuable information for the treatment of TNBC.

