Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of genetic variation in calcium-activated potassium
channels in breast cancer patients treated with tamoxifen


Potassium channels control membrane voltage and are essential for cell
proliferation. Abnormal regulation and/or expression of these channels
have been reported in cancer and result in dysregulated cell cycle
progression, cell proliferation and migration. In breast cancer, clinical
correlations of potassium channels have been associated with brain
metastases, high stage, high grade, high proliferation, nodal status and
poor prognosis. Interestingly, they have been associated with increased
estrogen receptor (ER) expression. The selective ER modulator, tamoxifen,
blocks estrogen from binding to the ER and is commonly used to treat
patients with ER-positive breast cancer. However, up to 33% of patients
treated with tamoxifen relapse or dies at 15 years of follow up. Both
estrogen and tamoxifen have been demonstrated to activate potassium
channels which then cause an increase in cell proliferation. In
preliminary animal in vivo studies, we observed a better breast cancer
prognosis in those with a knockout in potassium channel genes. Therefore,
any alterations in the potassium channels may help to explain why
patients treated with tamoxifen fail therapy. We hypothesized that
genetic variation in potassium channels may affect breast cancer risk as
well as tamoxifen treatment outcome. Genotyping was conducted on 45,290
breast cancer patients and 41,880 controls of European ancestry from 41
studies with the custom Illumina Infinium array (iCOGS). More than
200,000 SNPs were genotyped with over 11 million SNPs estimated using
genotype imputation with SHAPEIT and IMPUTEv2 and the 1000 Genomes
Project March 2012 release as the reference panel (Michailidou et al.
Nature Genetics 2015). Variants from 13 potassium channels including
KCNMA1, KCNMB1-4, KCNN1-4, LRRC26, LRRC38, LRRC52 and LRRC55 were
analyzed. Of these, 3 imputed SNPs from KCNN4 have shown decreased breast
cancer risk with GWAS significance (rs12463319, rs12609846, rs1685191; OR
0.94, P Potassium channels control membrane voltage and are essential for
cell proliferation. Abnormal regulation and/or expression of these
channels have been reported in cancer and result in dysregulated cell
cycle progression, cell proliferation and migration. In breast cancer,
clinical correlations of potassium channels have been associated with
brain metastases, high stage, high grade, high proliferation, nodal
status and poor prognosis. Interestingly, they have been associated with
increased estrogen receptor (ER) expression. The selective ER modulator,
tamoxifen, blocks estrogen from binding to the ER and is commonly used to
treat patients with ER-positive breast cancer. However, up to 33% of
patients treated with tamoxifen relapse or dies at 15 years of follow up.
Both estrogen and tamoxifen have been demonstrated to activate potassium
channels which then cause an increase in cell proliferation. In
preliminary animal in vivo studies, we observed a better breast cancer
prognosis in those with a knockout in potassium channel genes. Therefore,
any alterations in the potassium channels may help to explain why
patients treated with tamoxifen fail therapy. We hypothesized that
genetic variation in potassium channels may affect breast cancer risk as
well as tamoxifen treatment outcome. Genotyping was conducted on 45,290
breast cancer patients and 41,880 controls of European ancestry from 41
studies with the custom Illumina Infinium array (iCOGS). More than
200,000 SNPs were genotyped with over 11 million SNPs estimated using
genotype imputation with SHAPEIT and IMPUTEv2 and the 1000 Genomes
Project March 2012 release as the reference panel (Michailidou et al.
Nature Genetics 2015). Variants from 13 potassium channels including
KCNMA1, KCNMB1-4, KCNN1-4, LRRC26, LRRC38, LRRC52 and LRRC55 were
analyzed. Of these, 3 imputed SNPs from KCNN4 have shown decreased breast
cancer risk with GWAS significance (rs12463319, rs12609846, rs1685191; OR
0.94, P < 1.0E-08). In particular, these SNPs were significant in
ER-positive breast cancer (OR 0.93, P 0.05). These findings encouraged us
to now further investigate the outcomes of patients with ER-positive
breast cancer treated with tamoxifen. Survival data for 49,751 patients
with a median follow-up of 8 years has been completed and released in
November 2015. Of these, 32,571 were ER-positive and 10,383 have been
treated with tamoxifen. Current efforts are underway in order to
determine the effects of genetic variations in potassium channels on the
survival of patients treated with tamoxifen. Our work will provide a
better understanding of the potential clinical relevance of potassium
channels in tamoxifen treatment in breast cancer.

