Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel role for brachyury as a key regulator of sonic hedgehog
signaling (Shh) and maintenance of stemness in gliomas


Glioblastomas are the most common and aggressive form of adult primary
brain tumors and are associated with a dismal prognosis. Accumulating
evidences suggest that a subset of therapy-resistant cancer stem cells
are responsible for recurrence in tumors targeting which may help in
gliomas. We identified a significant overexpression of Brachyury (T-box
transcription factor) in correlation with glioma histological grade when
compared to non-tumor brain controls, with the highest expression being
in grade IV gliomas. We also observed increased expression of Brachyury
in several glioma cell lines and stem cells (GSCs) when compared to
normal human astrocytes. Serum-induced differentiation of GSCs resulted
in loss of Brachyury expression along with decreased stem-cell marker
levels in these cells, which prompted us to study the potential role of
Brachyury in glioma stemness and to delineate the underlying signaling
mechanisms. Specific shRNA-mediated knockdown of Brachyury significantly
decreased proliferation, migration and invasion in glioma cell lines.
Brachyury suppression led to inhibition of sphere formation of GSCs and
decreased stem cells marker expression including CD133, nestin and Nanog.
Brachyury knockdown also inhibited the activation of sonic hedgehog (Shh)
signaling and decreased Gli1 levels in these cells. On the other hand,
stable overexpression of Brachyury resulted in the activation of Shh
pathway and elevated stem cell marker expression in GSCs. Based on these
in vitro findings, our future studies will be focused on determining the
role of Brachyury in orthotopic tumor growth in vivo. In summary, our
data reveals a novel role for Brachyury in the regulation of tumor
invasiveness and stemness, and indicates a potential for therapeutic
targeting of Brachyury in patients with gliomas.

